ASTRO-METEOROLOGICA, OR APHORISM'S AND DISCOURSES OF THE Bodies Celestial,
THEIR NATURES and INFLUENCES.

DISCOVERED From the Variety of the Alterations of the Air, Tempeperate, or
Intemperate, as to Heat or Cold, Frost, Snow, Hail, Fog, Rain, Wind, Storm,
Lightnings, Thunder, Blasting, Hurricane, Tuffon, Whirlwind, Iris, Chasme,
Parelij, Comets their Original and Duration, Earthquakes, Vulcano's,
Inundations, Sickness Epidemical, Maculae Solis, and other Secrets of Nature.

Collected from the Observation at leisure times, of above Thirty years; by J.
GOAD.

The Lord Reigns, -- Clouds and* Darkness are round about Him, -- A Fire
goes before him, -- His Lightnings enlightened the World, the Earth saw and
TREMBLED, the Hills melted like Wax at the Presence of the Lord.

Psalm. CXVII. Seek ye the Lord, who makes the Seven Stars and Orion, -- That
calls for the Waters of the Sea, and pours them out on the Face of the
Earth,

Amos V. Who removes the Mountains, and they know not; Who shakes the Earth out
of his place, -- Who commands the Sun, and Seals up the Stars, -- Who makes
Arcturus and Orion, and the Pleiades, and the Chambers of the Southern
Constellations, -- Who does GREAT things past finding out; yea, and WONDERS
without number,

Job IX. (...),

Psalm. 19. LONDON, Printed by J. Rawlins, for Obadiah Blagrave at the Black
Bear in St. Paul's Churchyard, over against the Little North-door, 1686.

To the Most Potent and Heroic Prince JAMES the II.
OF Great Britain, France and Ireland, KING, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Most DREAD Sovereign,
AFTER Your Majesty's Miraculous Access to the Imperial Crown of these Realms,
in Peace and Awful Silence; After your Glorious Endeavors to Illustrate your
Crown and Kingdom, and make the English NAME Legible to all our Gazing Friends
and Neighbor Nations; it needs an Apology to interrupt your Great Tendencies
and Designs with a Piece of Paper-Skill, of any pretended Treatises of Science.
But Great SIR, our Argument is as High as the Outward Courts of Heaven, and
Noble withal, since the Greatest Princes Coats of Arms are emblazoned by our
Planets. These Papers, like your Majesty's Royal Mind, are not confined within
the Limits of the Britannick Shore; but to show their Usefulness, they are
bound for the East, for the West, for the South, and for the Frozen Sea. They
aim at the account of a Fair Wind, and a Storm, a Thundering Tempest, and a
Resistless Hurricane, and this, all the World over. They inquire into the
Nature of Vulcano's, Flaming Mountains, which being accompanied often with
Earthquakes, are as so many Sea-Marks, to warn the Mariner that he comes not
Ashore. So the Subject may not be Unworthy of your Majesty's Able Commanders,
that they may bring and re-bring their Cargo's safe to their desired Port.
Specially since we adventure to search the Nature of Currents at Sea, that they
may be no longer Impediments un-accounted for; When the deluded Vessel shall
find she is stolen back so many Leagues of her Voyage, maugre a stiff Gale at
her Stern. What tends to Navigation, leads to Empire, or to Fame at least, and
Remark; in case your Undaunted Royal Spirit shall be content with the
Hereditary Dominions of your Crown. This I reflect on with Comfort, that this
Essay, I cannot say, bask'd in the Sunshine; but, when time was, it had the
Glorious Fate to be enlivened by a Glance at least of your Royal Brother of
most happpy Memory. Nor can I be diffident of your Majesty's Sweetness and good
Liking, when according to my Low Station, under, and with your Royal Scepter, I
aim at the Public Good, Praying the God of Heaven, whom you Religiously and
Devoutly Worship, to impart the Blessings of Heaven, the Blessings of Earth,
and the Blessings of the Deep on your State and Dignity Temporal, and after a
Long and Happy Reign amongst your Loyal Subjects, who only understand the
Blessings of Monarchy, to re-Crown your Royal Head, in the Temple not made with
Hands, his Eternal Kingdom. So Prays your Majesty's most Humbly Devoted
Subject, and Daily Orator,

J. GOAD.

TO THE Favorable Reader.
PHILOSOPHY, I hope, will never be out of date, neither Natural nor Moral,
because they are Lights that lead us, the one, to admire the Divine Nature, the
other to follow it. In Natural Philosophy the Planets and the Meteors teach
their part in Letters writ in Light, (brighter than Gold, as more Noble) and
therefore visible to the Vulgar, who all believe a Celestial Power, because
they see it; This being admitted, They are fairly invited to give heed to the
other more Spiritual Light, which shows Good and Evil in their Colors. I
never found, but that Contemplation of the Heavens conduced to the First, and
therefore must manuduce to the Second. A Shower of Rain, and a Fruitful Season
is a good Proof for a Good God; and a Pealing Storm of Thunder, is a Sermon
from Heaven; the Voice of God, and not of Man: Such a rowsing Lesson may shake
even an Epicurean into a Religious Horror; much more the plainer Vulgar, who
are happy in this, that they have no blind acquired Biass to counter-sway them
from the belief of a Deity. The Holy Text is full of what I say. The Poetic
and the Prophetic Books ring of Astrology, and the Doctrine of the Sphere. I
could have filled my Title Page with Testimonies. The Verses of the Holy Arab
are a Compendium of these Papers. I confess I had a Fancy for these
Contemplations from my Youth, but I hope I should not have followed them,
Recreations though they were, but that the Holy Text enflamed me thereto: For I
always had ((...)) a Love for Holy Writ. The Alteration of the Air comes home
to our Doors, and the Causes sometimes shine in at our Windows; If an Influence
of Sol, Mercury, Mars and Saturn, etc. were as commonly known to the Husbandman
or Seaman, as the Novi^ and Plenilunar Influence, how familiar would our
Resentments be of God's good Providence, how frequent would be the occasions of
Discourse thereon, what Advantages to Religion in its Devotional part, from the
Terrible Meteors, in its Love, Gratitude, Admiration from the more Blessed
Constitution! But the unlucky Principle of Mechanism amongst the Learned, and
of Nature (in the Brutish Notion) amongst the Vulgar, hinders our Wish. But I
hope this our Principle is so much the more prizable, that it clearly ^vacuates
that Intrigue. And is it not pity that a Foreign Mode of Philosophy, though
transient with the Age, should debauch the present Generations, defraud us of
Arguments for God's Illustrious Providence, (urged so many Thousands Years ago)
and unhinge us from the Knowledge of the Creator, who is Visible and Palpable
to us every 24 Hours. Welfare therefore those Philosophers of our Age, who
made it their business to appear against Cartesius, Dr. H. More, Dr. S. Parker,
and Others, to whom, in my poor Opinion, Religion, and the knowledge of the
Creator is indebted. We are Superstitious (forsooth) if we are troubled at a
Comet, because it is Natural; It may Portend, for all that. They deny
Apparitions of Armies; Wherefore? because they can give no account of them.
They may deny as well a Shower of Rain, for any account they can give, why it
falls, with the Circumstances of hic and nunc. Our Philosophy reaches those
very Circumstances; because we study God, and His Motions, the Accesses,
Recesses, Stations, Respects of those Movables which He has Clothed with
Light, least we should say, He hid such Knowledge from us. Therefore, tell me
good Friend why it Rains now, why every quarter of an Hour? (for so it haps
sometimes) Why it Snows in Summer, and Thunders in Winter. Prognosticate by
your Mechanisms what shall be Seven Year hence. Nay, if there be a Natural
Divination, then there is a Providence, then there is a God, then there is a
Law of Nature settled, which he who is Skilled in, obtains the Gift of a kind of
Prescience. So does Hippocrates foretell the Fate of his Patient; an Arab, a
Comet, and Thales, an Eclipse.

This Knowledge I have endeavored to settle, and to render it perspicuous,
which must require some Prolixity, where the Mountain of a Common Prejudice is
to be removed. Yet I will not justify my self, I might have been more contract
perhaps; I may add, that I was never inclined to study the Arabs; I fetched not
this Knowledge from them; When I saw I was engaged to consult them, I knew here
was a Meum and Tuum even among them, so I gave them their due. I have often
apol^gized in the following Papers for the Length of the Diaries inserted. I
labored to find the utmost of the Planetary Communication, which I have shown
to be large. That is the chief thing I pretend to, and I hope, if it brings its
Conviction, it will be kindly accepted. To conclude, I wish the Reader a
discerning Spirit in all Truth he pursues, not only in this, but in a more
Celestial Philosophy. So far am I on all accounts his unfeigned and absolute
Well-Wisher,

J. GOAD.

The Characters, which are made use of in the following Papers, are thus
explained.
Planets.
Saturn -- Jove -- Sol -- Mars -- Venus -- Mercury -- The Moon --
Aspects.
Conjunction -- Sextile -- Quartile -- Trine -- Opposition --
The XII Signs of the Zodiac.
Aries -- Taurus -- Gemini -- Cancer -- Leo -- Virgo -- Libra -- Scorpio --
Sagittary -- Capricorn -- Aquary -- Pisces --
A. l. ante lucem. A. m. ante merid. m. p. most part. d. t. die toto. T.
M.Terrae Motus, or Earthquake. R. Retrograde. Dir. Direct.

ASTRO-METEOROLOGICA.
APHORISMS and Discourses concerning the Natures of the Bodies Celestial, etc.
BOOK I.
CHAP. I.
God the First; His Second Cause the Heavens. Their admirable Power on the
Sublunary World, on the Air especially. The Causes of Meteors ordinary, or
prodigious. Angelick Powers.
. 1. GOD Almighty, the Great and Wise Creator, Blessed for ever, (for no
legitimate Astrology can exclude Him) is not only in Himself, but even in his
Works, Incomprehensible.

2. Amongst His other infinitely various Operations, He is admirably discovered
in the constitution of the Air, and its strange Vicissitudes; which the Divine
Word unquestionably produces by a Second inferior Cause, or Generant.

3. The Theater, on which these Alterations are hourly acted, being the open
Air, Mankind has more easily arrived at some little Apprehension of this
Second Cause, the Region in which they are presented being so near and pervious.

4. As reasonable as it is to believe, that the Sea comprehends all the
Seminal Causes of Her Productions, and the Earth of what is bred in Her Bowels
also; so natural is it to imagine, that the Heavens are not Idle, but rather
give Spirit and Influence to all things under their Convexity, viz. the Air,
and its Regions, with the Globe of Water and Earth, These being but minor Orbs,
all enclosed within the vast Embraces of the major; even as the Foetus is
embraced by the Womb, and the Membranes that are agnate to it.

5. The World therefore in all Ages has been convinced, that the Heavens have
no small Power on the premises, and every Body within their respective
Enclosures.

6. On the Air especially, and its Phenomenon, the Meteors, (as they are
distinguished vulgarly into) Real or Apparent.

7. Of these latter, none go about to deny, that the Heavens are the due
Efficient, whether Halo's, Rainbows, Parelia, Paraselenae, Chasms, Clarities
Nocturnal, the Morning and Evening-Blushes of the Heavens; to which may be
added the rarer appearance of its seeming Conflagration, unless. That prove
gather to be Real.

8. But no less are they the due Effective of the former, the Real ones,
(though some Well-meaners would fain deny it): whether Clouds, Rain, Mist,
Dews, Fiery Trajections, Ignes fatui, Lightning, Thunder, Blasting, Frost,
Snow, Hail, Winds.

9. And of All these, whenever they happen, whether in Measure or Excess,
Ordinary or Prodigious; and they again whether Homogeneous, such as those Dire
Tempests called of old Ecnephiae, Exhydriae Fistulae, Plin. hist. not. II. 48,
49. (known amongst us by the names of Sponts, Huracans, Tornados, Travados,
etc.) or Heterogeneous, as the Rains of Dusts, Ashes, Milk, Blood, etc.

10. No other is the Cause, after all that can be disputed, of that great
phenomenon the Comet, and That not only Sublunar, but Celestial.

11. The same also is most justly acknowledged the Cause of the motion of the
Sea, its Ebbs and Flows, which some great Artists would pin on the motion of
the Earth, others on the inward Principle of the Element.

12. Yea the Heavens (though it may seem to be no less than a Contradiction)
are to be admitted Causes of Earthquakes, Meteors (as they are rightly called)
of the Subterranean Region.

13. Powers Angelical, Good or Evil, are no Causes solitary, or such as do
evacuate the proper Causality of the Heavens.

14. Stormy Winds therefore, which are harmful to Country or Province, are no
Arguments (whatsoever the vulgar are persuaded) of Sorcery or Conjuration.

15. Hereby it is not intended to deny that Spirits can raise or bestow Winds
or Tempests, and that, it may be, by Arbitrary means, though I see some are
willing to excuse Lapland from such Indictment.

16. Showers of Stone, Dust, Ashes, Blood, Corn, etc. which I call Prodigious,
out of kind, 9. are generated first in the Air, (not elevated thither by any
violent natural Spirit, as some think,) so that if they may be fairly imputed
to an Angelick Administration, yet neither can the Heavens be wholly excluded.

17. Concerning prodigious Showers of Creatures Animate, as Frogs, etc.
although the more probable Opinion says they are generated in the Region from
whence they fall, yet here I am not engaged to undertake.

18. Noises and Apparitions of Armies, with Military Equipage and Tumult, can
at no hand exclude an Angelic, and that a Principal Cause.

CHAP. II.
Meteors, their Material Cause, and that there is an Earthy Exhalation. The Air
considered. All Meteors reducible to Heat and Cold, as their Efficient; the
Nicety of their Degrees. An account of the Natural Prognostics of Weather:
they all prove that Heat is the cause of Rain, and the Heavens Dominion over
Moisture. Concerning Hail, Snow, Mist, Lightning, Comet, Blasting. No
phenomenon casual. Wind, its cause is not rarefaction, or condensation, but
celestial Impulse. The Body of the Heaven, as distinguished from the Stars,
signifies nothing.
1. MEteors Real, whether Aerial or Subterrranean, as to their Cause Material,
consist of Water, Earth, (Simple or Compound) Fire, and their Expirations;
these in the depth of the Earth, those in the heights of the Air, as far as the
reach of the Atmosphere.

2. For that the Earth also is resolved into Exhalation, is evinced from the
Thunderbolt, yea from the Nitrous and Sulphurous Ingredients into (the
wild-fires Celestial) Lightnings. Add the forementioned Rains of Stones, Ashes,
Corn, etc. nay every Fog is so fuliginous, as to bear witness, a Fog which
sometimes casts it self into Threads or Ropes, and by the warmth of the Sun
furls up into Gossamere.

3. The Body of the Air seems not to be the Resolution of Terrestrial or Watery
Exhalations, but is rather distinguished from Both as their Subject or medium,
even as the Water is distinguishable from its Impurities, or from the saline
Spirit that inhabits the Ocean.

4. For the whole Expansion, Aerial and Ethereal, is one homogeneous Body,
differing only in Warmth or Cold, Purity or Impurity, according as it is nearer
or remoter from the Earth and Water.

5. Of it self, as it seems neither hot* nor moist, nor cold, etc. but capable
of all:

6. So distinguished is the Air from the Water, that Neither can be converted
into the Other, the four Elements, vulgarly called, being, as I deem,
Incorruptible: in as much as, although God the Creator was pleased, as Moses
seems to say, to make the Air out of Water; yet it may be true notwithstanding,
that no Natural Agent can turn it back into the same.

7. Meteors Real, as to their Efficient Cause, are naturally reducible to Heat
or Cold, and their Activities; Frost, Snow, Hail, to the later: Lightning,
Rain, Clouds to the former.

8. Winds also have no other Aeolus.

9. Here it is to be remembered, that degrees of Heat and Cold are of a minute
and nice disquisition, our grosser Sensories being not always competent Judges;
for we see Rivers in depth of hardest Winters, reserve some Heat, where Fish
subsist, and scalding Liquors admit some degree of Cold, (as when their
Aestuation is calmed by a little cold Infusion,) and yet remain scalding still.

10. As nice also may be the consideration of Dryth and Moisture; for as the
Coals of dry Fuel, taken from the Furnace, burn quick and bright; so from
moist Fuel they glow obscurely, as if they were not as yet rid of their
pristine, though adventitious, Moisture.

11. Warmth is the instrumental Productive of Cloud and Rain. This is witnessed
by the Southern Winds, which bring Both; by Thaws in Winter, which are always
cloudy, seldom dry; by the ungrateful Savors, most hot against moist Seasons;
beside the convincing testimony of the Thermoscope.

12. The Survey of the usual Prognostics of Rain, from Fire, Water, Animates,
Inanimates, do all argue the same Original of Rain, viz. Heat Celestial, and
its Consequent, Moisture, with the secret Impressions of Both on the Creature.

13. In Animals, the usual Noises observed against weather, as in the Raven,
the Crow, Cock, Goose, Owl, Peacock, the Pimlico in the Hist. of Virginia, a
Bird so called from her note, (too sure a Prophet, says Captain Smith, of Wind
and Weather,) Swine, Frog, etc. their crowing, screaming, croaking, etc. argue
not any miraculous Divination in the Creature, but only protest the sensible
disquiet and alterations that are felt by them at such times.

Haud equidem credo, quia sit Divinitus illis
Ingenium, aut rerum fato Prudentia major:
Verum ubi Tempestas etc. Vertuntur species animorum; the Poet himself was so
cunning. Georgic. 1.

14. Further arguments of such Alterations, are the Water-fowls leaving the
Element, flocking together or betaking themselves farther into the Country; the
poor Earth-worm creeping from his bed; the flying or springing of the Loligo
(the Cuttle-fish) they speak of, the playing of the Dolphins in the waters, all
not brooking their own Element, That and their Bodies being alike disturbed.

15. To say little of their Stomachs or Appetites extraordinary, Birds coming
late from Feed, yea the contemptible Fleas or Flies more notably stinging, i.
e. biting or sucking, are hence reckoned for Presages.

16. The forced motions and postures of Creatures argue the same, as when
Cattle are seen skipping odly up and down indecora lascivia, as Pliny calls it,
as if twitch'd or pricked by some shooting or ach in their Limbs, (as vexed by
some pain) tearing their Litter.

17. Which pains some Creatures endeavor to help, the Beast licking the Hoof,
or against the Hair, the Bird picking and pruning its Feathers, some perfusing
themselves with water, or flying so near (the Swallow, and Sea-mew) 'till they
dew their Wings point; the House-cat washing her Head with her moistened Foot,
the Ox snuffing aloft into the Air, all as it were for refrigeration-sake of
their Blood or Spirits, cooling the little Fevers perceived therein.

18. The poor Ant hiding himself or removing his Eggs, the Shelfish sticking
close to the Rocks, or ballasting it self with Sand, show a kind of natural
Prudence, but no Prophetic Divination, in as much as first they find the
Alteration of their bodies, before their Instinct teaches them to provide for
the consequent.

19. And as to Presages from the Water, whatsoever the Ancients speak of the
murmuring of the Sea at hand, or the noise on the Shore side, the bubbling or
swelling of the Sea without noise (witnessed by all Seafaring men,) the
appearance of the Froth broken or divided, these all betray the Dominion of the
Heavens on the Water, and a disturbance raised by the Celestial Warmth.

20. Verily, the Dominion on the Water, is as large as that seen in the Air,
the Prognostics from Animals being grounded principally on the Alterations of
their Natural Moisture. And if any Presages are drawn from Plants, as the
Bristling of the Trefoil etc. hither it may be reduced.

21. I do not mention the Sweating of Walls or Glass, which may arise from the
continual Appulse of the moist Atome floating near the chill superficies; but
Plinie's Instance from the Larder, when a Dish which has been used at Table,
leaves a Sweat on the place whereon it was reposited, argues some consent of
the Ambient's moisture with the moisture of the Esculent; on which account
also* Wood swells, Wainscot cracks, Viol-strings snap asunder, and we also, as
other Animals (no better, nor worse) are disquieted with the Excrescencies of
our Feet, swelling and shooting against Weather, yea the Paroxysmes of the
Gout, and sundry other Ailments observed in the Hospital of our Bodies,
remember us thus of superior Alterations.

22. Yea farther, all the Prognostics taken from the Fire it self, do note
(which may be strange) some Dominion over Moisture, the ^elestial Action
terminating not on the Flame so much as the Fuel, or the Body inflamed: hence
comes the little diminutive sparkling of the Candle, the spitting of the Fire
from under the Embers, the puffing and murmuring of the flaming Coal, the
concretion of Sparks and Knots in the Snuff ( Lucernarum fungi,) the Adhesion
of Embers to the Hearth, of the Live coal to the Pot-side; all betokening some
Alteration of the Moisture, which betrays it self by concretion of things
contiguous, or by that little sparkling at the approach of the Flame, which at
other times burns quiet, and calls for no Observation. He that pleases may
consult Aratus, Virgil, Pliny, Plutarch; of the Neotericks, Fromond. and
Vossius de Idololatr.

23. Rain and Wind therefore, for they are not often severed, or their
existence to Warmth.

24. And it is manifest, whether Hail reduces it self, being the congelation of
Rain. As for Snow, it is of a nice crasis, strangely consisting of a congealed
vapor, and some little degree of a warm Spirit, which helps to resolve the
continued congelation, and make it fall into wafers.

25. Hence what is commonly observed, whenever it snows, the Air remits of
his rigor; and again, the greater is the Fleece, the warmer is the Air, and
more bordering on a Thaw.

26. Next, the Mist also belongs to Cold, seeing it is a vapor, part moist,
part fuliginous, congel'd; just as the breath of our mouth by the Cold of
Winter, is a visible Mist. Mists therefore do not arise from the Rivers brink,
as is commonly reckoned, but the Vapor, which before rose invisibly, being
congel'd, descends, and by continual aggregation or conflux, puts on a visible
consistence.

27. Lightning and Thunder need no Herald to derive their Pedigree from Heat
Celestial.

28. Comets Celestial have their consistence also from Expirations Celestial,
taking it for granted, that the Sublunar consist of Expirations Terrestrial,
mingled with Celestial, and inflamed thereby.

29. Blite and Blasting in some cases proceed from Heat, as when Fruits are
prejudiced by Lightning, or burning Winds, such as the East-winds are reckoned
in Holy Writ.

30. Again, it oftentimes proceeds from Cold and Hoar-frosts, as Pliny rightly
with our Husbandmen define, happening with us about May, June, yea in April,
March, whenever the Spring is obnoxious to the injury by its unhappy
forwardness.

31. Of all these there is not the least piece of a Phenomenon that is casual
in respect of the Heavens, (though the Learned Kepler can allow it,) but the
Heavens are conscious of its Original.

32. Nay, as we shall see, there is not the least puff of Wind (though a
Reflection of a Blast indeed may be termed Casual) but is Heaven-bred, if we
speak of the direct issue.

33. Howbeit so great and various is the inconstancy of the Winds, especially
with us on Shore, that the Knowledge is abstruse and difficult, though neither
so pure a Contingent, but that it may be lured to the Rules of Art.

34. Seeing Wind (that we may come to its Definition) is nothing else but the
motion of an Earthy dry Exhalation, and that moved not by Condensation, or its
own Gravity, but by Impulse from Celestial Heat.

35. Some great Authors philosophize otherwise, That Wind is made by
Rarefaction and a Condensation succeeding, the Air condensed tending downwards,
and acquiring its violence by the heights of its descent. But 1. wheresoever it
happens that there is such Condensation; as in Clouds, Dews, Mists, hazie Air,
Frosts, there would be always some sense of Winds stirring; but many Clouds and
hazie days are calm, yea nothing is more hushed often times than a Frost or Mist,
or more still and silent than the Dew. 2. Winds are indifferent to all Seasons,
Winter, Summer, to all Weathers, to all hours of the Natural Day, none have
their Quietus'es from it, not Sunrise nor Sunset, Midday nor Midnight; it
owes not therefore its Existence to Rarefaction and Condensation, seeing all
Hours, Seasons, are not indifferent thereto; for in a Cloudy day, what place is
there for Rarefaction? In a bright hot Summers day, what condenseth? 3. Here
let the Etesian speak: has not benign Nature provided that refreshing Air for
the Aestival Heat? and does not it rise at 9 in the morning, when the Heat
increases; and cease again at 4 in the Even? 4. Whatsoever may be said in
Spring and Autumn, for the vicissitudes of Rarefaction and Condensation, how
comes Winter, which even has its denomination from Wind, to be so unquiet,
when there are no such sensible vicissitudes? Nay, how does Wind rise in Winter
nights? It cannot be said that the Night condenseth what the Day has rarefied:
Alas! the Day was all benumbed in Frost, and the windy Nights often introduced
a Thaw. How does the colder Season rarifie, how does the warmer Season
condense? 5. Upon this Hypothesis the Wind would blow to, not from the Points
of the Compass, and to many Points at once, viz. coming from the Sun as from
the Center; for the Air, even as Water, rising up in a Conical tumor* when
rarefied, upon the recess of the Sun, while it condenseth and recovereth its
Gravity, must needs fall indifferently from the vertex to all parts of the
Circumference, where it is not hindered: i.e. to the East, North, and South (at
least,) if not to the West; but the Wind blows not several ways at once, nor is
confined in the least, but tends indifferently from the Sun, and to the Sun,
and on each side of the Sun through all the Points of the Compass.

36. Again, Condensation can give no account of the Winds violence, no not the
thousandth part of its rage and fury; as when it is known to rift up Trees,
demolish Buildings: for admit the descent of Air to be as forcible as the
descent of Water, though there is some difference sure, especially if Air be
rarer than the Water by a 1000 degrees; yet this will not prevail, for in
Noah's Flood it self, the Cataracts of Heaven did not beat down the Trees* as
appears by the Story.

37. It Is said, that all Heavy Bodies, the further they descend, the more
violence they acquire; this is true in Bodies that have their fixed Dose of
complete Gravity disproportioned to the medium, as in Stones, Metals, etc. and
this by virtue of their Generation; but in Condensation it is otherwise, the
Body is not condensed at an instant, all at once, but at leisure, and by
gradual alteration. Proportional thereto must the Gravitation be, and as the
body condenseth, so must it subside in the same measure, according as the
Applications of the Causes condensing are gradual: for as for instantaneous
Applications of such Causes, it will be hard to assign any. Again, from whence
should the condensed Air descend? from the lower Region? then we should be to
seek for the Violence, the Term a Quo being so near. If from the upper, the
condensed Air would find its Aequilibrium, as the Clouds do.

38. Nor does the Wind make Overture, that it observes the Laws of Gravity; for
then the latter end of the Blast would be most vehement, as falling from the
greatest height, whilst its prodromi, the antegredient part of the Exhalation
would give notice of the vehemence to be expected by its proportional degree of
force; and men, whose interest it is to observe, would be able to pronounce the
minute of its Approach. But we find it not so: a Fret of Wind is often quick
and sudden, and gives no notice of any such Fear. Truly neither is the Hurry of
the Wind accountable by Gravity or Density, the motion whereof is so arbitrary,
so voluntary, so indefinite, Here, there, every where, right forward, round,
upward, with such stops and pauses, and interruptions of the Spirit, starting
again of a sudden into fresh tumults and riot, unless we can find such infinite
variety of Rarefiers and Condensers, and that as the hypothesis defines it,
from the Sun alone. What if sometimes Wind, however it may gravitate,
descends not, but ascends rather from the Horizon toward the Meridian? and of
this even the Boys Paper-Kite is some evidence, which feels great impulses of
wind upward when in the height, while the Attendants below being becalmed,
almost wonder at the difference.

39. Wind therefore is caused by Impulse, and the Impulse of an Exhalation
distinguished from the Air, as the common Opinion rightly sets it, the Contents
of the Air being distinguished from the Continent: and it is a noble Argument of
Fromond's, that is drawn from the Affinity with the venti procellosi, those
impetuous All-washing Whirlwinds and Hurracans, which have the invincible force
of Lightning in them; and the impetus is the same, instantaneous, not bearing
down things before it (as Floods do Bridges) by perpetual pressure, but all at
once. Now Lightning is an Exhalation to be distinguished from the Air, even as
Light, or Heat, or Odor, or Moisture; nor can the Air be defined a Colluvies,
or Miscellany of all, but must be defined, prescinding from all Admistions that
are extraneous to it. And me thinks our Ear tells us as much, for so like a
Shower does this Exhalation drive on the leaves of Trees, that we often suspect
it rains, when it blows only. Wind being no quantity of continued Air, no more
than a Shower is of continued Water.

40. This Exhalation is most part Terrestrial; for not to urge the Height of
such Mountains as reach beyond all Territory of Wind, by being so remote from
the Vale, Fromond from Acosta asks whence Winds are more vehement on or near
Shore, unless because of the plenty of such Earthy Exhalations, and the
stronger Reflections of the Heat Celestial, agitating (the direct Ray being at
no hand excluded) those dry Eff^uvia. But secondly we argue thus, Wind is a
Dryer, even as Frost a Cooler, Dryer, a Whitener, to this the Laundress will
bear witness. As sure then as Frost is a Terrestrial Exhalation, so sure is
Wind. Hence the more the Wind blows in the Night, the less is the Dew.

41. And Wind is generated in the Macrocosm, as in the Microcosm; what causes
Wind in the Stomach or Intestines, but a crude Spirit raised from the
resolution of the Aliment, driven up and down by the vital Heat? what Meats are
generative of Wind, but such in which a Crude Spirit is predominant? I reckon
therefore the Hot Wines, Seeds, Spices, etc. do expel and banish Winds out of
our bodies.

41. For why we should deny with Fromond, to one contrary the Faculty expulsive
of the other, I see not. I find Fire to spit at the infection of Salt or Water.
A drop of water falling into a Cruse of melted Metal, disperses it about the
Room: and the Apple on the Hearth is a plain and safe Experiment, which having
received the contrary igneous Spirit, ejects its Pulp, and often times with such
a wind as is seen to puff away the adjacent Embers. There can be no strife of
Contraries, no Antipathy explicated, without such Expulsive faculty, or, which
is all one, fuga contrarii.

43. Hence Winds which accompany the Reverse of the Sea, blowing from the West,
such as we are taught are found in Latitude 43, if they have no dependence on
the Heavens (on which all other Blasts are confessed to depend) but on the
Stream, are legitimate no more than the wind of a Cannon-ball, or the Lapland
Gale, or the Reverse of the Water is a legitimate Tide.

44. The four Cardinal Winds are thus defined; the East and West blow from
certain opposite Points or Arches of the Equinox, the North and South not from
their Poles, but from the opposite points of the Meridian.

45. The properties of the four Cardinal Winds cannot be universally stated:
yet on this side of the World in all habitable Climes, where the Division
obtains, and whereabouts they were first denominated, the South and West are
warm, the North chills, the East cools, then the South or West warmer than the
North; and this on the Heavens part.

46. Wind therefore, as all its Fellow-Meteors, depends on the Heavens, and
that in the manner aforesaid. By the Heavens we mean the Glorious Contents* not
one or two but all the Celestial Bodies, yea all the Host of the Fixed Stars
that shine in the Firmament.

47. For the Heavens, as distinguished from the Stars, have no Operation occult
or manifest.

CHAP. III.
The State of the Air not usually uniform. The Difformity is admirable* The
Cause.
. 1. THE State of the Air is not uniform in all places, no not of the same
Kingdom, Province, County; but is strangely different as to all manner of
Weather. Kepler gives notable Instances in the useful Book of his Ephemerides,
Anno Christi 1621, etc. they of Germany seeming most pleased with these
Contemplations.

2. Storm prodigious with Rain at Vienna, at Ratisbon only is a Fog. Fearful
Tempest in Bavaria in Suevia, June 4, 5. and Hail on the other side of the
Rhine, where Spiers is situate, June 6. but at the Rhine it self a perfect
Drought the whole three days. This was Anno 1621. In like manner, Anno 1629,
in May, dieb. 13 and 14. the Corn was lost by Flood in Silesia, contrary in
Poland and Liefland all perished by Drought. More of this nature may be had
from Kepler abovesaid, from Fromond's Etesian Table compared with Kepler's
Ephemeris, from Eichstad, and others. But what need? when common Attestation of
wayfaring men daily witnesses this Difformity. When upon conferring Notes, at
time of year, we had no Snow here says one, no Fog says another at our Town,
no Rain, no Thunder; and as for Hail, you shall seldom hear of two, though
little, Distances of place, that will agree in its Admission.

3. We acknowledge this Variety is admirable, when God Himself has pleased to
give it as a remarque of his Power, that He causes it to rain on one City, and
not on another, that which our Eyes in a beautiful prospect are sometimes
witness of. But sober Philosophy is not confounded at the Contemplation of this
wonder, as the Astrologer Himself was, who observing once at Tubing some Heat,
and a little Rain only, but elsewhere, lower in the Country, Tonitrua
horrida, breaks out into this self-killing Conclusion, frustra istas Meteororum
formationes a positu Astrorum exigas. Kepler. Ephem. Anni 1625, ad men's. Jun.
Philosophy is rather excited to give some account of the Divine Power and
Wisdom, which though invisible in themselves, are, and in all Ages of the world
have been, discoverable by such contemplation and scrutiny.

4. Wiser therefore was the Conclusion of the same good man, who upon the like
collation of the various Constitution of the Heaven, at Lusatia first observing
only black Clouds, and at Glogaw, scarce a days journey from thence, having had
intelligence of terrible Thunder, spoke like Himself, in Wonderment, but not
Confusion, Ecce, quid Coelum, quid Terra, quid Loca possunt! Kepl. ad men's.
Sept. Anni 1629.

5. For without all peradventure, this variety of the Airs Constitutions,
whether permanent or transient, must be referred to the Heavens above, and
their Difference, hereafter to be considered, joined with the Situation of the
Place, together with the Parts adjacent, and the manifold Differences there
also to be alleged. By reason of which, Thebes differs from Athens, Rome from
Tibur; Athenis tenue Coelum, crassum Thebis. Thus the Mountains Acroceraunii in
Epire, famous of old for frequent Thunders, as the Sierra Leona in Africa,
witnessed to this day by the Portuguez Mariners, who hear as much at 50 Miles
distance. Thus in Rome and Campania Winter-Thunders are heard sometimes, in
other parts of Italy never, as Pliny has noted, II. 50. The instance from Peru
is notable, though far fetched, where Acosta tells us, that in the Plains, ten
Leagues breadth from the Sea coast, it never Rains nor Thunders; upon the
Sierra's and Andes, two ridges of Hills, at 50 Leagues distance; running
parallel to each other, it rains sufficiently, on the first from September to
April, on the latter almost continually. But nearer home, the Cities of
Heidelberg in the Palatinate, and the Ancient Triers in Germany, from the
Heavens disposition to Rain, have it seems a like slabby character; so the
German City is by some called, says Dr Heylin, the common Sewer of the
Planets, Cloaca Planetarum.

6. This Diversity, say I, must be referred to the Quality and Site of the
Place, whether it be near the River, Lake, Sea, whether it be Hill or Dale,
Sands, Clay, Mine, and some say Forest, which All contribute to the Individual
Constitution of Hot, Cold, Fresh, Pure, Dry, Gross, Moist, Foggy, by way of
Cause Material, or reduced to the Efficient.

7. First, for the Sea; it is a granted case, the Maritim places are more
subject to Fog, Rain, and Winds, witness the East part of Lincolnshire by
reason of the Fens: and certainly all the prodigious Tempests of this our
Island, noted by our Ancestors, are found to lay their Scene in our Maritim
Countries, as Lancaster, Somerset, Dorset, Hampton in the West, Lincoln, York
to the North-east, but especially the Counties of Essex, Kent, Suffolk,
Norfolk, Cambridge.

8. So gloriously true is That which God Himself taught us long ago by the
mouth of his Holy Prophet, that He gathers the Waters from the Sea, and pours
them on the face of the Earth.

9. The Sea ministers Matter not only for Rain and Wind, but for Thunder also,
if Nitre and Sulphur be ingredients thereto. As for Hail, we know that it falls
at its season in most places; but note it for certain, that all Prodigious
Hailstones, whose ambit reaches five, six, seven Inches, is found to have fallen
on places at no great distance from the Sea: the Cause is obvious.

10. Rivers then must bear their proportion; as Fogs, so Dashes of Rain are the
sorer, by how much the nearer to them. The Shower, the Seamen say, observes the
River, and flows along with it as in its own alveus. The Greater Rivers make
the moister Air, as the Air of Austria, because of the Danow. Kepler ad Sept.
Anno 1627. Upon which account London, I observe, has her share in Chronicle
for Tempest, because of her Thames; and the Southern-side of the City has
complained most, as the Tower, Bow-Church, poor S. Paul's (now Tempest-free I
wis,) Westminster, because of their vicinity to the River: when (what I have
seen my self) tall Spires of Churches have rocked to and fro, as if they were
at liberty, and strong Iron Bars have hung the head like a broken Stalk, by
mere stress of weather.

11. Next the Nature of the Soil. Kepler has admonished us of a certain place
near Vlm in Su^via often struck with Thunder, the Reason he rightly guesses
from the Slate-Quarr^es, and other Minerals there about, which are discerned by
the Mineral-waters there in use. ad men's. Maii Anno 1627. Those about Bath
should inform us of this matter, which, if I misremember not, is performed in
the Transactions Philosophical. For my part I always suspected that Horrible
Thunderbolt, which came into the Church of Wells, Anno 1596, to have owed
somewhat of its Extraction to the Place. This we shall find, that All places
more subject to Lightning, are also subject to Earthquakes; but Earthquakes we
know proceed from Mineral, Sulphur, etc. incensed. Rome and Campania, which
were noted but now for ^inter-thunders, I am sure are Tracts not exempted from
Earthquake.

12. This is so certain, that in those uncouth showers of Milk and Blood, it
becomes probable, that the Mines of Chalk and Vermilion contribute also at
least to the distinction of their borrowed Tincture.

13. The difference of the Hill and Vale is as conspicuous: the Hill
contributing more Cold than the Vale, yiedling therefore for the most part a
later Herbage. In the Mountains of Bohemia, the Corn at S. James tide was
blowing, when in the Plains of Lusatia it was ready for Harvest, says our
constant Kepler. Here note, that in respect of the Heaven, Lusatia lies the
more Northward of the two: therefore the Difference arises from the difformity
of the parts of the Earth amongst themselves, of Hault or Bate. How cold the
Tops of the Alps are is not unknown, of whom it is noted, that the Snow melts
first at the foot of the Hill.

14. In observation of Weather, the Hill many times puts bounds and limits to
the moisture of the Vale. Instance of This I have had the hap to observe, what
I have also heard, from the Chiltern Hills in the County of Bucks, separating
That from its Neighbor Oxfordshire, whose Dust has been scarce laid above,
while Oxfordshire below has been glutted with Wet.

15. That these Considerations exclude not the Heavens, even from hence is
manifest; because this Diversity of Habit or Proneness thereto is bottomed on
the difference of the Influence Celestial, and its Reflection. For if the Solar
Heat be of any Concern in this Affair, the Reflection and Refraction of the Ray,
by which the Heat is multiplied and advanced, are not to be overlooked. See the
Astronomia Optica for this matter, if the common Burning-glass be not Evidence
sufficient. The Vale reflects and refracts the Beams, being the grosser Air;
the Head of the Mountain (for the Descent is reckoned into the Vale) reflects
less, being Drier and Purer. Thus the Pendle in Lancashire, a high Hill, which
when a Cloud sits near the Top, always gives a sure Watchword for Wet
approaching, as Camden also takes notice, is accounted for; the Hill, not as
the Natives will have it in their false Hypothesis, breaking the Cloud, but
rather ripening it.

16. This disposition of the Air to Wet, etc. is yet more evident, where there
is a concurrence of the Premises: as where a Place happens to be situate near a
Hill together with a River. The Acroceraunii are near the Sea, the Sierra Leona
not far from the Ocean. Heidelberg and Triers have Rivers and Hills for their
Neighbors, the former being hemmed in round, as they say, with Hills, only on
one side open.

17. This Observation begets another concerning the Winds, and its Difformity
in respect of the Point of the Compass from whence it blows. In several parts
of the world, from Sea-Journals I have observed the contrary Points possessed.
For in the year 1662, Apr. 9, in England the Wind was found Southwest, and at
Madera North-East. In the year 1668, May 1* the Wind at London Northerly, under
the Equator then was noted a Southern Blast.

18. Yea, and in respect of the Temperature there is a confessed Difformity in
the same species. The East Wind Dry with us, but in most parts of Italy Moist;
Cardan in Ptol. lib. 2. yea, at Virginia, says Captain Smith.

19. The West-wind moist, not so in Italy.

20. The North Wind in most places dry, and fair; therefore called Boreas and
Argestes: in the Netherlands Cloudy and Moist, as Fromond says he has found
by long Experience.

21. The South warm and moist in most places, in Holland notwithstanding it
oftener brings Frost than the North-west says the Learned Isaac Vossius.

22. The Ground is the same, viz. the Difference of Places from which they
breath. The South Wind is serene in Afric says Pliny; good cause why, It blows
from the Desert and the Sands: and the (dry) North is there Rainy, because it
blows from the Seas: all Winds, as the abovesaid Author de Motu Marium, etc.
has taught us, which blow from the Sea are warmer, and from the Land are
cooler.

23. Here a concurrence of Circumstances makes work also: the Circius, the
North-west Wind, so pernicious to the Gascoigners, as elsewhere the Huracan,
ows its Extremity, not to the Mountains only, as Scaliger will have it, but to
the Seas also, which just on the North-west side spread into a vast Bay as I may
call it, between France and Spain, the situation of Gascoign.

24. But what? because of these proper peculiar Dispositions, is there no
Footing for Science? because oft-times we may discover a Shower shadowing a
Village afar off, when the rest of the Hemisphere is bright and serene, are all
Pretenses to a Prescience, grounded on Nature, delusory and impossible? When
Rain falls in one place, is there no nexus in nature which may warrant us to
pronounce it falls also elsewhere? And again, is not the Heaven as often wholly
clouded, the Air close, gross, heavy* settled for Wet, extending it self through
the whole Hundred, Riding, County or Counties? yes verily, a little
Intelligence will acquaint us, that seldom any Rain considerable happens in one
determinate place, but* the like happens elsewhere, Eastward or Westward, to
the North or the South, with difference only in the time or measure, (Niceties
hereafter to be enquired.)

25. The like may be said for Wind, Frosty Air, Remission of Cold, Heat,
Drought, Serenity, seldom confined to one place, and therefore may be called
General Constitutions.

26. The more rare Constitutions General, are Those who produce Lightning,
Thunder, Hail, Fog, in as much as These more visibly are forged, as I may call
it, in the Mold of the Place: yet we find several Days, wherein Lightning and
Thunder have not been confined to one Quarter; several days wherein Fog,
though it chooses to nestle in a by-Vale, yet sometimes it spreads it self like
Egypt's Darkness, and hovers over a whole Province.

27. However it may be, it is not to be passed by, that in case of failure, if
a Fog for Instance happens not in several Quarters, there is something cognate
to it, a little Frost perhaps, or thin Overcast. Where Thunder is not heard, as
in other places, there may be found soultry Air, angry Clouds, sometimes fiery
Trajections, and Passant Meteors at Even. Yea Hail it self, which most rarely
hits, in several places, points to cold Rain or Snow, which are but one Remove,
with chil Evenings, observable elsewhere.

28. To General Constitutions, even in a positive sense so called, the World
can be no stranger, which so often has felt raging Tempests; whose Fury has
by Land rooted up Trees, dem^lished Edifices; which at the same time have
caused fatal Shipwrecks* and vast Inundations, Arguments that will extort
Confession from us* That such General Constitutions are no more to be denied
than prevented. Often I say has the World with impatience felt droughty Summers,
sharp pinching Winters, wet unseasonable Summers, and Harvests, such as brought
a fear at least of Penury. Security or Plenty does evince a Generality of the
Airs Constitution, as to a Kingdom or Country: upon which account we justly
are, upon Tempestuous Winds, concerned for all that navigate on the Seas that
are near us, whether British or Irish.

29. The State of the Air does not, as most think, depend on the shifting of
the Winds, but contrary, the Wind alters or shifts according to the Alteration
of the Air: Hence I find that even in those places where the Brize is constant
and perpetual, yet when the Weather alters, the Wind shifts; there is a
priority of Nature in the Constitution it self, in respect to the Winds that
attend it.

30. When it is said therefore that the South Wind brings Rain, or the
North Wind drives it away, understand it of the Constitution as the Cause of
both; reckoning the Wind only to be a Sign only, or attendant on the Effect.
The North Wind drives away Rain, i. e. Rain is driven away, while the
North Wind blows, and that only for such a Country, Palestine, etc. but not all
places universally, as has been noted already.

31. The precedent Constitution of the Air helps nothing to the Continuation
of the same, unless the Heavens conspire; for the Air being of a thin Body, as
it is of an easy receptivity for all sorts of Impressions, so it easily parts
with them, unless continued or renewed by a Cause permanent, or suppletory.

32. In the defect of which, we perceive oft-times to admiration, the
Constitution vary from one Excess to the other, the Wind blows where it
lists.

CHAP. IV.
A certain Prescience attainable. Prognostics vulgar. The Husbandman's
Prognostics.
1. AS it is the Goodness of God to vouchsafe us Natural Prognostics of
Constitutions, ordinary, and violent; so has he pleased not to deny a more
Noble Artificial Prognostic of the same.

2. For though no finite Knowledge can be comprehensive of an Effect, great, or
small, in every minute Intrigue of Nature, or Providence; yet so certainly has
God suspended the Constitutions of the Air upon the Heavens, that we must
assert, there is more than a Conjectural foreknowledge of the changes of the
Air by Day, or Night, attainable upon Contemplation of Causes Celestial, and
that without Vanity and Superstition, or the least shadow of either; rather
attended with a plerophory of cogent Demonstration.

3. This Kowledge may be exercised in fore-pronouncing the vicissitudes of the
Constitution, yea and of the Winds also, I had almost said to an Hour.

4. The same Knowledge may reach to the Perception of Comets, Earthquakes, and
Pestilences, as having all unquestionable dependence on the Heavenly Bodies,
though these three last deserve Treatises by themselves.

5. Prognostics of Husbandmen, and others, from Birds and Beasts, before
mentioned, as they are useful and delightful, so they do not supersede our
Inquisition, seeing they pronounce from Arguments extrinsecal, Effects or
Signs, and not from Causes.

6. Prognostics from Apparences in the Air, from the Halo, Iris, colors of
the Sunrising, etc. Clouds, and their differences, prognostics from the Moon
at three days old, from fiery Trajections, as they are not to be neglected,
because of some accidental Connection; so they ought not to be trusted upon
their single report: yet some are more special, as fiery Trajections, when
frequent (...), shooting of the Stars, Ptol. II. 14. do usually speak some
Tempest at hand; or if not, excess of Heat.

7. The Comet also signifies infallibly some Excess, and that lasting; but
whether that prove as to Wind, or Drought, or Wet, they do not determine; that
Determination belongs to no one Appearance.

8. Nay Comets many times have nothing to do with Prognostics, being a sign of
Wet, or Drought, or Wind, and that a consequent sign, teaching us to look
backward only on the antecedent past Excess.

9. Vulgar Prognostics, and those Other of a genuine Astrology, i. e. Art, and
Experience, stand not on even Ground; for they reach only Constitutions
immediately subsequent, pronounce for to morrow, or next day: the Other
pronounces at distance, at a large prospect, and that, if need be, concerning a
whole Season. The most sagacious Birds can give no certain aim at a whole
Winters Constitution, come they, or go they sooner or later. They come upon a
natural Presumption of the Regularity of the Season, in which the Poor things
are sometimes deceived; as Pliny quotes the year, where an After-winter
destroyed many: but the Theory of Art foretells both the irregular
Interruptions of a Season, with the Restitutions, and that many Cycles of Years
before the Arrival.

10. Prognosis Astrological that is genuine, floteth not on uncertain
Principles, but knows whereupon it ought to fix.

11. Tempestatam, rerumque quasdam statas esse causas manifestum est. Plin. II.
39. This is the Principle on which it fixes: for certainly the Annual
Revolution, or recurrence of the same Constitution, or Inclination thereto,
does uncontrollably evince some Fixed Cause, which makes the same Revolution
to meet with the Effect.

12. Wherefore to all Noble Prognostic, Experience must be premised,
Observation being laid up in store for some years before hand, of the daily,
and sometimes hourly Alterations.

CHAP. IV.
Some Determinate Days, which have a peculiar Character and Disposition
produced from the Ancient Calendar. Some Critical Days. The Observation upon
S. S within no Superstition.
1. THE Ancient Diary of the Egyptians, Chaldees, yea the Ancient Philosophers
and Mathematicians of the Greeks and Latins, Democritus, Meton, Euctemon,
Eudoxus, Calippus, Conon, Hipparchus, Caesar, Columel, Pliny, and Ptolemy for
the Africanes, do encourage us in our Principle. For as we see some Months
Regularly, and therefore Naturally incline to Cold, Warm, Dry, Moist, in like
manner some Days of the Month, even of the same Month, have their proper
individual Inclination to Cold, Drought, Moisture, Heat; of which the Kalendars
inform us, not yet out of Date to our purpose.

2. We will consider the Excesses of Weather thoroughly noted therein: e. g.
Much Rain Dec. XVII. Much Wind Jan. XXII. Great Heat Aug. XV. Horrid Tempest
from the South Oct. ult. From the North Dec. XI, (...), etc. windy Weather,
stormy Constitution: (...), etc. None of which could pass into observation upon
a single Accident.

3. But least a single Accident should be pleaded, as unreasonable as it is,
the frequency of the Constitution, with its Contrary, is happily expressed: as
in Febr. X. (...), West-wind sometimes, but otherwise Jan. IX. for the most
part South-winds, and Dec. I. for the most part Turbulent. See Ptolem. opusc.
de stell. sign. In the Vranologion of Petavius, page 71. where you also meet
with Geminus his Diary for the whole year, according to the Degrees of the
Zodiac; That Geminus, we care not who knows it, who disputes against our
Pretensions, even in Him notwithstanding occur these Memorands. (...), ad 19,
fair for the most part. (...), Cold Winds, and ruffling for the most part, ad
4. So at 23, (...), Hail often; and 16 it uses to thunder, (...); as 4 also, it
uses to blow, (...). Agreeable to this is That in Columel, X Call. Sept.
Tempestas plerumque, oritur and pluvia; and all these Kalendar-men, whenever
they speak absolutely without terms of Diminution, there they are to be
understood as to the most part, otherwise the Observation were ridiculous.

4. Shall we take Observation nearer Home, and that from an Enemy, within less
than 200 years? Mirandula himself has given us some account of Days confessed
Hazardous at Sea, contr. Astrol. III. c. 13. p. 482. such as Feb. VI. XII. XV.
XVII. XIX. XX. Mart. I. VII. XV. XVII XIX. XXV. April II. (for so it should be
read) V. VI. XII. XX.

5. Yea not Italians, or Seamen only, but all Nations and Functions have so
much Interest in seasonable Weather, that they take the same notice of Days
extraordinary: Dies quidam apud Belgas (our Neighbors of Brabant) pluviarum
atri, and infames sunt, says Fromond. Meteor. lib. 5. and he names us one,
viz. IV or July, which he says they call St Martin the Dripper, quem S.
Martini bullientis, aut pluvii appellant: This Day I find not in every
Calendar, but in our English only, and not without the Inclination specified.
Fromond would have pleasured us therefore, if he had named the Rest.

6. But the old Verses help us, June VIII, S. Medard's day,
Humida Medardi pluvias, lux usque minatur;
And such days amongst us are St. John Baptist, June XXIV. St. Peter's Eve,
XXVIII. Mary Magdal. July XXII. who is therefore said, in the homely Country
Proverb, to wash S. James' s Shift, while dripping S. James himself (says the
same Dialect) Christens the Fruit. Add, such are St. Bartholmew, August XXIV.
St. Simon and Jude, Oct. XXVIII, with the day following, XXIX. the
Powder Treason, November. V. etc.

7. All which Days being Festival, or notable, for the Annex of some Mart,
Fair, or other Solemnity, could not choose but come under notice, with their
Character.

8. Nor have our Ancestors given us days obnoxious to Moisture only; we find
other Constitutions also noted, St. Mark's day, April XXV; with his Neighbor
St. Walburg's, April XXVII; and St. Philip, and James, are marked with an
Obelisk for dangerous times of nipping Winds, and Blasting, Nunc caret aura
fide, nunc est obnoxia ventis,
says one Verse: and again, Si friget, segetes subeunt plerumque periclum.
St. Margaret, July the XX, noted for Thunder, -- Reboat mugitibus Ether.
St. Matthias, for uncertain Air, in this remarkable Distich,
Matthiae, glaciem frangit, si invenerit illam,
Ni frangat glaciem, tum mihi creed facit.
As the Satyr thought it strange, that a man should with the same breath blow
hot, and cold; so the character of this Day seems as strange.

9. Yea the returns of Constitutions are not always confined to single days,
but to series of Days; whence it comes to pass, that some peculiar Days, in
this affair pass into Critical, enabling to pronounce somewhat concerning the
future Harvest, Vintage, or Winter: for what have we to do with the frivolous
Observation of the XII days in Christmas, as if they were a compendious
representation of the Months in the Year, or with the Prognostics on St.
Paul's day? sure no one Day can give crisis for a whole Year; but for a month,
or a week, a shorter term it may. Four days then there are, whose serenity
gives fair hopes of a Vintage: Vineent, Apr. V. Urban, May XXV. Assumption,
Aug. XV. and what Origanus interposes, St. Bartholmew Aug. XXIV. For Winter,
Purification, Feb. II. and Cathed. Petri, Feb XXII are also Critical. If it be
fair on the former of these, Major erit glacies post festum, -- is in every
bodies mouth: if in the latter it freezeth, the same constitution holds a
Fortnight. Again, Rain on Mid-summer day speaks fears of a wet Harvest; if on
July II. Visit. B. Virg. wet must be expected for a Month, says Origanus,
though the old Verse speaks more cautelous: Si pluit, haud poter is coelum
spectare serenum,
Transivere aliquot ni prius ante Dies.
If on St. Swithun's day, the cry of England is, it rains 40 days after; if on
St. Martin's day in November. XI, a wet winter is portended, says the Verse;
vid. Alsted. Vranom, p. 490. yea there is one critical Day recorded in Aetius
the Physician's time, and that must be many hundred years ago, concerning the
then first day of December. on which if it rained for the most part ((...),) it
held on for 37 days. Petav. Vranolog. p. 421.

10. Some that shoot without aim, may abandon these Observes for superstitious,
as that of St. Swithuns, in Mr. Parkinson's judgment is; but where there is
Experience, and innocent Reason, there is no ground for superstitious conceits.

11. For the Experience we have said, the most of these days were Festival and
so observable for the annex of some Solemnity, and thence came in the public
Experience, for the reason we shall give it in due place: in the mean while
asserting the truth of St. Swithun's crisis for some days after, more, or
less, (which the Vulgar made a shift to call forty) to hold good (...), as the
Greek Kalendars have it, and That Is enough.

CHAP. V.
The Sun, the great ^ight, justly admired, Notwithstanding alone He is not the
absolute cause of Heat, no not of the Seasons of the Year, or the Constitution
of the Day. Chance excluded. An Objection solved.
1. THis is enough for Demonstration of the Fixed Returns of the Weather, and
those Returns fathered on the Heavens, by reason and consent universal. Now in
the Heavens what but the SUN can produce these Effects in their respective
Periods? the Sun being so regular a Mover, that some have scrupled to call him
a Planet.

2. And who goes to debar the Sun of his due? let not us that contemplate the
Heavens be guilty of it. Let Theology it self teach us, that the Sun is a
great Minister, the Light and Life of the World; without it no difference of
Clime, or Season; no Spring, no Summer, no Autumn; All Time would be Winter,
Horrid Winter; the Sea a Mountain of Ice, the Land a Flint, and Darkness would
usurp his old Dominion over both. But sure God has, amongst thousand of other
Stars, made the Sun appear, and commanded him to run an eternal Race in his
great Olympiques. This Commission, as if conscious of the Infinite God, he
jollily executes, and Nothing in the Universe is hid from His Heat. At his Rise
the Morning-Cloud vanishes, the Fog dissolves, and the Dew gently exhales.
Toward Midday he bringhteth the Air into a cheerful Saphir, and guildeth the
Borders of the very Clouds with a costly limbus. All the Earth basketh in his
Light, while the Clay is calcined by his Heat. When he pleases, he imprinteth
his Face on the Roscid Cloud, and decircinates the Iris with his Pencil. He
draws the Waters as through an Alembick* and gageth the Depth with his Beam.
The Current of the Seas observe his Tekupha's, and flock All to the place of
his Residence. Where he keeps Court is the greatest conflux, the Stream makes
have to kiss his feet. He raises Thunders in his vertical strength, and gives
fire to the Priming of his Clouds. He raises a gentle Brise in the Aestival
Morn, and fanneth the Husbandman in the cool of the Evening. When he mounteth
he banisheth the Frost, and confineth it, as by the power of his Spell, to the
Ends of the Earth. The Flowers of the field open for his Entertainment, and the
Birds of the Air observe his Night-watches; they give a signal, as from their
Watch tower, and chaunt their Reveille to the Sons of the Night. All the
Clients of the Sky flock after him, and retreat dishonourably at his
retirement. The life of Animals subsists by his Energy, of our very Immortal
Spirits he is the Union.

3. Notwithstanding This, (and a less Hymn I could not make on Him, whose
Luster dazles us) I say, that the Sun alone, this Glorious Creature, cannot be
the Cause, the entire Cause of the Changes of the Air, and its Vicissitudes.

4. Because the Sun, considered alone, All things rightly weighed, requires
those of his Fellow-Celestials to constitute even the Seasons of the Year. The
Seasons differ one from the other in length of Day, or proportion of Light, and
the proportion of the Warmth; the Sun alone is the Author of the First, not of
the Latter. He is confessed a Light All-sufficient, but that it must therefore
be a Heat All-sufficient, is no warrant. A Taper lights the Room, which will
not warm it: for that the Sun carris the Name of Warmth, That argues that he is
indeed the Principal, most Eminent, not the sole Dispenser: So the General
carries the Glory of the Battle, who is far from being the Sole, though he be
the Principal Soldier. According to the tenor of which words must our piece of
a Hymn, on His, or rather his Creator's praise be expounded.

5. The truth of this will be clear, when we have considered that the Sun's
approach and Exaltation encourages the warmth of the Spring, and keeps up the
height of Heat in Summer, being the Eminent Cause of Both. But yet neither
Days nor Months do always increase in, or stand, or remit their warmth in
proportion to the Solar access or recess from the Solstice. This has been
urged by others, and may be instanced forty ways. It is notorious, that the
Aestival heat even increases as the Sun declines; for the Month of July, and
part of August are usually more soultry than the Solstitial month of June.

6. Here it is answered with one accord, that the Heats of July receives their
intenser degree from the measure of the prae-existent warmth; but this we have
precluded before, and add, that the Heats of July have been found as intense,
when the precedent June has been contrary affected; every man's memory being
able to prompt an Instance of an April, May, or June beyond expectation cold,
upon which the common comfort has been from hopes, that July and August would
make amends. Besides, that this holds not in July alone; the end of March may
have more warmth than April, and April than May; November warmer than October:
as again, January colder than December, March than February: we may here after
name some Times when it proves generally so, therefore the Sun is not the sole
Administrator of Celestial warmth.

7. It may be said again (as it is by some great men) in things of this Nature,
that they are Casual. But the word [ Chance] in Causes Natural, and
determinate, speaks our Ignorance. and it may be something of Injury to the
Creator. But 2. a hot July is never casual, being intended so by God's ordinary
Providence, for Harvest sake, That great Providence which works by the Great
Machine of Second Causes. 3. Nothing that is Prognosticable can be Casual.

8. Again, if the Sun alone were the cause, every fourth year would bring about
the same Revolution of Winds and Weather, the Sun being then exactly restored
to the same place by the Intercalary day interposed: but no such Revolution
appears. I find Eudoxus of old gave out indeed to this purpose, Plin. II. 47.
but no Experience confirmed it from his time to Pliny's age; he was only fond
of his own Surmise. If it had been so, we had been weather-wise by this time,
without out consulting Star, or Calendar.

9. Considering what is behind, it will not be very needful to say more here:
only to take away all Scruple, I would answer a possible Objection.

The Returns of the Weather being fixed, and determined, it is reasonable as you
say, that the Fixed cause be assigned the Author of That determination: but the
Sun, and nothing else, is the Determinate Cause, (for what else consines the
Return to the same Day?) therefore it must be the Entire and Adaequate Cause.

The Answer is ready: if all the Stars in the Firmament should conspire with
the Sun into one Tempest, they could choose no time, but what the Sun, the Lord
of Time, should determine. It follows not therefore, that if the Sun be the
Determinative Cause he is the Adaequate, the Sun bearing two places, Physical,
and Chronological; in the first he helps to produce, in the second he
circumstantiates the Production. But if the Identity of the Day's constitution
be pressed, we answer, that the Sun determines That, not absolutely, and
entirely, for then the Return would be infallible, but on supposition of the
other Causes meeting: these Concauses met do determine the Effect, as it were
Materially, the Sun closing with them specisies the time. Thus Disputers say
the last Unity is the form of Number, a principal Cause, but not an Adaequate.

CHAP. VI.
The Lunar Influence, and its History. Hippocrates doctrine of the Tides.
Dissent from the Learned Vossius. (...). Aristotle agrees with Hippocrates.
1. PRoceed we then, and let us say, that the Changes of the Air cannot be
referred to the Sun, taking in the Moon along with it, though (to give the Moon
her due also) she is of great Efficacy, as Ptolemy tells us in that excellent
IId Chapter of his first Book: All things, says he, animate, and inanimate,
receive her impression; the Rivers swell or abate according to Her light, the
Tides and Ebbes of the Ocean ((...)) swayed by his Rising and Setting; Plants
and Animals are in poor or better case as she waxes and wanes. Upon which words
I would we could comment; we endeavor thus. What the proper quality of the
Moon is, we find disputed: Ptolemy, and the Ancients define her to be Moist,
they mean (or ought to mean) that she is of a remiss warmth, to such a degree,
as is no Enemy, but rather friend to Moisture, by Resolving it, Calling it
forth, or otherwise Actuating it by her spirituous Ray, according as that
fluid, and withal salt Element is capable of impregnation.

2. And to this one principle of Warmth, will all the various Effects usually
ascribed to the Moon, be justly reducible. For on this account the Sea it self
ebbs and flows in all Rivers, Creeks, and Shores, making a Full Sea precisely
at what time the Moon comes to such a Point of the Compass, falling back every
day as many minutes (about 48) as the Moon comes later to the same Point;
luxuriating in her Spring-tides about the Full and Change, when she is direct
with the Sun, and flagging all the Quarters when she is at an oblique distance.
On this account it is that Flesh exposed to the Lunar Rays sooner putrifies;
those which walk along by Moonshine feel a Dose in their Heads, the Brains of
Animals moister at New and Full, Bloodless Creatures fuller of Spirit; that the
Shel-fish of the Sea, Crab according to its kind, Lobster, Oyster, at the same
time should be best and sweetest; (instances attested not by Heathen only, but
Christian Philosophers, S. Ambrose, but especially S. Basil, in their excellent
Discourses on the Hexaemeron:) that Decrepit men carry (as they say) a
Prognostic in their bones, by pains and aches, and shooting of the Humor in
several parts; that Epilepsies expect their dreadful Fits at the time of the
Moon, of which annon, yea and Convulsions too, if Aristotle mis-inform us not,
Hist. Animal. VII. cap. ult. That Crisis of Diseases, and Days Critical, which
Astrologers say they cannot be baffled out of, keep so true with the Moon; for
it is not the Waters only obey, and observe her, but All other called by the
name of Humors, even the Blood, the Spirits. What, that Salt Ammoniack
increases with the increase of the Moon; not so much as an Egg is set for
Propagation but at such time observed? All the Mysteries of Generation,
Conception, Formation, Birth, Purgation, Naturally depends (on the Sun it is
true) and also on the Moon. The Mystery of Septenary number, which the Great
Hippocrates stands so much upon, being the Hebdomadal number, must be referred,
not as Cardan suspects, to the Planetary, but to the Lunar Septenary. Thus
Births are vital at VII Months, at VIII seldom. Teeth are all put forth at VII
years, i e. (in Hippocrates Calculation) 350 weeks. Births facilitated at the
Full and Change, Conceptions at the Full, Purgations Menstrual, every Month (in
those which are in Health,) (...), the Month (says he) has such special power
over our Bodies, yea not only Conceptions, Abortions, Births, but Diseases,
Death or Recovery, have a kind of dependence on such Revolutions. Hipp. de
Carnibus, and alibi.

3. And this must not be looked upon as superstitious Doctrine by any body that
knows what belongs to a Nurse (attendant on the Sick,) or to a Midwife,
especially when our Age has been taught that our Blood circulates in our Body
every twenty four hours. Hence all Nurses of dying Bodies, with great
solicitude observe the Lunar Change, and those which die at Sea (in the great
and old Observation) commonly give up their last breath at the turning of the
Flood. Plin II. 41. Hence Purgations Medicinal, prescribed to be administered at
the Full. Eyes of some Cattle so affected, that the Darkness shall increase
proportionable to the Moon; yea some precious Stones are Natural Moon-Dials;
the Selenite, which Pope Clement the VIII. (if Cardan may be believed) had
among his Rarities. What shall I speak of those Animals, which are voic'd for
the like, or a greater Sympathy? The Luster of Cats Eyes observing those
proportions, ground enough for the blind Egyptians to worship the Beast; or if
any Creatures there be, whose Fibers or Legs increase according to the Age of
the Moon, it is reported of a certain Mouse, and Scarabee or Beetle.

4. Howbeit, to cease your smile, all the World knows that Husbandry cannot
spare her Lunar Observations, since the Moon governs the Moisture, and Spirit
of the Earth. Thence all the Rules for Cattle, their Admissures, their
Castration, etc. at several times of the Moon; for the Ground, enjoining to dig
their scrobes; for the Planting of Trees at the Full Moon; soiling their
Grounds at the Decreases, to avoid Worms, etc. making the beds, the Seed plats,
while the Moon is up; sowing Seed, and planting Trees, at the Increase;
covering Roots at the Full; gathering and Housing of Corn, etc. at the Wane:
Plin. XIX. 6. Garlic set for the abating of the Smell at the same time,
treading the Wine Press while she is under the Horizon. In felling of Trees for
Timber, when the Ancients have told us, that it must be a Winter-work* in
regard of the Sun. That Oaks cut down in Springtime will presently rot: they
teach withal, that it is of an infinite concern to add the Moons observation
as well as the Suns; Infinitum referi and Lunaris ratio, Plin. XVI. 39. The
Elm, the Pine, the Nut, and all other Timber Trees must follow the same Rule,
that if in the felling you join both Observations together, viz. the depth of
Winter, i. e. the Winter Solstice, and the last days of the Moon (
interlunium,) the stuff will last to perpetuity. And again, Brevissima
observatio est, quod vitiis carere velis, interlunio legere: and this upon a
point of good Husbandry, if we mean to sell, they must be gathered in the
Moon's increase, crescente enim Luna says the Politic Motive, Plin. XVIII.
30. frumenta grandescunt, they are best ^it seems, to fill the Bushel. Let all
this be mustred up into That comprehensive (...) in these words, Omnia quae
caeduntur, carpuntur, conduntur, innocentius, decrescente Luna, quam crescente
fieri. Plin. XVIII. 32.

5. In all which we favor not any uncertain stories, or overcurious, such as
are Those of the Lunariae, which Cardan (it seems) would have believed, but
more sober Herbalists question, if not reject them.

6. The old trick of riddance of Warts, by touching them at a New Moon, and
burying the Pease, Plin XXV. 28. though it seems to have something justifiable
in it, yet we are covetous of no such Instances, much less such as the Heathen
themselves censure for superstitious, and Magical, or with the milder sentence
of Observations subtle: Plin. XXVIII. 10. XXVIII. 32.

7. Verily much of Natural History (as it must needs depend on the Heavens)
relates to the Moon; much of Agriculture, Medicines, as it depends on the Sun,
so on the Moon. The increase of the Moon you see answers to the Springtime,
and the Interlunium to the depth of Winter, though of a nice Distinction the
Contemplation may be, yet there is a Lunar-Spring, Summer, Latter spring,
Winter, every Month, as the same are Solar in the Year: and so far must we
justify that Observation of Ptolemy in another Chapter, who teaches as much.

8. All the pity is, that the Great and Learned Author of the Tractate de motu
Marium, has small kindness for this Discourse, who has one Chapter entitled
Lunae multa perperam adscr^bi; his design is to deny the influence of the Moon
on the Seas motion, while he imputes it wholly to the Sun and the Nature, or
laws of Motion in the Sea it self; for the proof of which, he observes from
infinite Experience (for Authority is Experience testified) that the Ocean runs
from East to West, under the Torrid Zone, perfectly according to the Sun's
diurnal motion; and he adds, that while the Sun is in the Northern or Southern
Signs, this Motion inclines and glances accordingly. Verily the Work has
obliged not only all Navigators, and Merchants, but all Learned men whatsoever:
nevertheless I may have leave to imagine, that This demonstrates a de^endance
on the Sun, which homebred Definitions have excluded, and therefore are to be
corrected; but who understanding himself can exclude it? the Ancients did not.
Pliny, discoursing of the Tides, puts the Sun in the first place, and Ptolemy
acknowledges the Sun as more absolute in all the productions ascribed whether
to the Moon or any other. (...). I. 2.

9. For the very Nature of the Moon, which is a Reflection, supposes the same,
the Moon being but a Sun reflex'd (as they say of others also,) whose Full and
the Change being the observable Phases, are nothing else but eminent Relations
to the Sun: A Relation must include both its Terms, the Sun therefore cannot be
excluded: the Author demonstrates the Sea would have such motion, supposing
there were no Moon; but he may be pleased to enquire, and he may find that the
Moon cannot be spared, spared I say as to that warmth which the Sun it self
imparts; for by Her the Warmth is modified, tempered, increased, remitted
according to the variety of her Phases; by Her this warmth is made so kindly,
so suitable to the humid Element, that without it it cannot be governed. Warmth
will rarifie Water this Author has excellently taught us, and that the Moon
has a kind of warmth quatenus Lucid, he justly defines; so there is not much
betwixt us, every warmth Celestial we shall see has Influence on the Waters.

10. We have as good Demonstration that the Ebbs and Flows depend on the Moon,
as that she borrows her Light from the Sun; the diversity of the Phases
according to her access and recess show the one, the suitable Increase and
Decrease of the Tides according to those very Phases show the other.

11. At the Quarters the Tides are lowest ( Neap tides,) at the Change and Full
they are higher, (Spring-tides); in the one the Moon is conjoined with the Sun
in Diameter-line making no Angle, in the Other making a Quadrate, the utmost
distance from the Conjunction and Opposition.

12. The (...)or supposing, viz. that the Tides are lowest at the Quarters,
endeavors to show how they come to spring against the Change, and much truth
without question he delivers; but how comes it that Neap-tides happen just at
the Quarters? if the Moon have no Causality, they might happen at the Full as
well as at the Quarters; and if those Low-Tides might have run through all
phases of the Moon, and a Fortnight after had boiled into Spring-tides, then I
should have hearkened to the Demonstration, so far as to exclude the Planet; but
when the Low-tide is confined to the Quadrate, That creates Suspicion. We that
say the Moon communicates a greater (yet still kindly) warmth to the Air at the
Change, Full, and a less at the Quarters, may easily see why God at first
ordered the Abatement of the Waters to the One, and the Increase to the Other,
if it be true that the Sea works and purges every full Moon, as at other set
Times of the Year, which accrue to the Sun's account.

13. It Is an Illustrious Instance that is drawn from the Exuberance of the
Tides at or near the Aequinoctial Lunations, taken notice of even by the
Inhabitants on the Thames side, below the Bridge at least; yea of an elder
Observation* as to the Ocean in Strabo and Tacitus. It Is pretended that in our
River they are observed in February, and October, rather than on the precise
Months of March and September This Objection is not confident; the very
Neighborhood of the Months February to March and October to September, creates
a Suspicion of some Truth in the Instance: for That Difference is easily
accounted for, considering that Fall of Wet makes some addition, and that This
is notorious in February the Close of Winter, nor unusual in October the
Prologue thereto. Let March or September put on the wet Masque of either of
these Months, and the Effect will be the same. Secondly, who knows not that the
Tides swell, not on the precise day of the Lunation, but two or three days
also before and after? remembering then the motion of the Moon (supposing it
has no Latitude) it is odds but within two days after, after I say the
Lunation in February, the Moon will be found in the Equinoctial Sign; as in
October two days before, it is found in. But if Latitude, as reason is, may be
observed, the Moon may be found situate on the Equator in either Month, by a
Southern Latitude in the One, and a Northern in the other. For it is the whole
Circle Aequinoctial* not the Intersection only, that is considerable in this
Affair: adding withal that the Aequinox Physically considered has some
Latitude, as every Center has, within which bounds the Effect proves even the
same. As therefore the Spring-Tides in general, happening two days before and
after, are justly imputed to the Lunation in general, so the aforesaid
Equinoctial Exuberancies in February and October, are with the same justice
ascribed to the Equinox: for if we calculate rightly, the Interval between them
is not, as it seems, a whole Month, but only two days difference, in as much
as the Sun in a whole Months time gets no more ground than the Moon acquits in
Two days, where the Moon overtakes her Leader.

14. But the Retardation of the Tide, parallel to the Moon's coming to the
South about 48 minutes later, the only common motion as is acknowledged to the
Planet and the Element, is such an Argument. -- For that Two motions from the
Creation to This day should just jump together to so nice a Calculation of
time, and yet the Bodies moved have no dependence one on the other, is not
easily digested; especially when one of the Bodies is fluid, easily moved, and
as easily interrupted, disturbed by Inundations, fury of Winds, Droughts,
Frosts, Earthquakes: Natural Motion we know, once disordered, will run false,
like the Index of a Watch, 'till some good hand replace it. Sometimes the Tides
fail, sometimes they pay us with superfoetation: who restores Nature in this
case? the Sun keeps its course, differing little from it self and its own
Elevations a day or two after, and yet the Water returns to its wont, and
forgets its disorder, composing its self according to its measure warrantable
by the Age of the Moon. Here will it not suffice to say the Moon is an Index,
seeing it may be so, and yet a Cause too, as Excessive Heat of the Body is a
Token of a Fever, or a Southern Sun an Index of Noon. An Index of the Tides?
so may the Tides vice versa be Indices of the Lunar motion, and Both be equally
causes one of the other, if the Moon be a mere Index* i. e. not a Cause. But
the Moon is a warm Mover, and That Influence reaches yea penetrateth, the
Element: insomuch that if the Sun be constituted the Motor of the Seas, the
Moon, her History being attended, can scarce without violence be excluded.

15. There is a Notion of Lunacy abroad in the world, yea and extant in the
Gospel: (...), S. Matthew. IV. whether it signify Epileptick persons, as is
certain say Physicians, from the Symptoms, Matthew. XV. or the Raving Melancholy
distracted Persons, as the Syriac expounds it; see the Learned Martinius in
Lexic. such as we meet S. Matthew. VIII. and S. Marc. V. they are both sad
Instances of the Lunar Dominion on Humor in general, and the Humors of our
Temperature. Of the Epilepsie it is confessed, of the Other also it is as true by
the testimony of the Syriack And though some of the Ancients, S. Hier. and
Origin are jealous of this Notion, ascribing all to Diabolical Ferity and
Cunning, lest we should raise an Evil Report, and bring Infamy on God's good
Creature, if we should grant the Moon contributed any thing of disposition to
the Distemper: yet we answer, in a conciliatory way, with the Generality of the
Learned, avoiding Both Extremes thus: To refer all to the Natural Cause is one
Extreme, to impute All to the Infernal Fiend is the Other. There is more danger
of Injury done to Religion in the denial of these Natural Evidences, than of
Infamy to God's Creature in admitting them. It would be wrong to the Creature
to say the contrary, seeing This also Lunar Warmth is God's Creation. Therefore
the Arabic Translator owns the Philosophy, and construes (...) to be Those who
are tormented and vexed in principiis Pleniluniorum: whether he means Either or
Both of the Distempers abovesaid, is to be learned from the Arabian Physicians.
See Gul. Ader, the pious Critic, on the Diseases mentioned in the Gospels.

16. The Experience concerning the Shelfish, and their fatness at the
Interlunium, is evaded, by saying that the Tide recruits them, the Fresh water
that comes along with it. But does not the Moon conduce to the freshning i. e.
rarifying and quickening of that Stream? Does it not immit a new, or call up the
native spirit from its recesses to the very surface of the Element? The Lunar
warmth hat a double Office, not only quickening the Aliment, but, as the
Philosopher says, comforting the Cold bloodless Feeder: his words are these:
The Shel-fish thrive most at the Full Moon, not because they feed more (...),
(quite contrary to the Answer given) but because the Nights are warmer by
reason of the Moon. de part. Animal. IV. 5. For bloodless Creatures (says he)
are easily chilled, and rejoice therefore in warmth. Now warmth we know
nourishes as well as Victuals, as we see in Sleep, not excluding the Food, but
distributing it. Certainly the Lunar History gives Instances of its Power over
those Bodies whose Nutrition is not so facile, as Theirs seems to be, who have
a whole Sea to guzle in.

17. But at Cambaja it seems, at Bengala, Java Islands, and elsewhere, neither
do the Tides appear at the New or Full, but at the Quarters; when the Shelfish
also make their Markets. Answ. Some Difficulties there are (and who can expect
otherwise that studies the Universe?) raised against the Moon's Sovereignty,
which yet are found to vanish, the nature of the place, be it Sea or Shore,
once considered. For whatsoever difference here is found, no doubt is on the
part of the Recipient, according to that good Maxim, Quicquid recipitur etc.
and that solves all doubts in this case, even the various Fluxes of Euripus it
self. For let the Ocean flow in some places four hours, and ebb eight, as with
us; in others seven, and ebb five; as long as it flows once in 12 hours, and
twice a day, we are secure. Do these Spring-Tides observe the Quarters of the
Moon invariably? do they keep their times for the whole Periods twice a day
with other Ports? does the Succession keep to its Measure, I mean, happen 48
Minutes later every day? The Moon is the cause even of those Quarterly Floods;
yea the Change and Full may be the Cause with Us, while the Quadrate may be
assigned for the Cause there; the Quadrate being less powerful than the
Conjunction, but not utterly infirm, or of no force, as will be seen hereafter.
Who knows then but that the Quadrate, the less in an Intemperate Zone, may be
equivalent to the greater in a Temperate? we having defined, that it is not Heat
in every degree, but only a Kind and a Tempered Warmth that is effectual. The
Conjunction and Opposition may be excessive in the Torrid Zone, and so unfit to
raise the Humid Spirits; on which account we are taught, that the smallest
Tides are perceived under the Equator. Be the Mystery what it will, many
Definitions are absolutely True, confined to their Clime, which universally
cannot hold. The Sun rises and sets in 24 hours, in Greenland not so: the
South Wind blows from the Pole, not in these Countries: the Absence of the Sun
causes Winter with us, but Those under the Line have no Winter but when the
Sun is nearest them.

18. I must not conceal, that I have seen an Ingenious Manuscript concerning
this Subject, determined by the Hypothesis of a third motion of the Earth, with
great happiness solving many New Phenomenon; but yet I, who have not proceeded
so far in Mathematics, as to espouse Any Thing of that Principle, content my
self with these vulgar Presumptions, and think I have some reason so to do,
when I shall have asked these few Questions, not determinable I fear by such
Hypothesis. 1. Why even in calm and dry weather the Tides from the Change to
the Quartile, from the Quartile to the Full, yea the Two Tides of the same day
keep not their proportional Increase or Abatement? 2. Why the Springtide about
the Full of the Moon most commonly is less than That about the Change? 3. Why
the Moon's Perigee swells the Tide more than the Apogee, in as much as what Dr.
Childrey, my late worthy Friend has observed, All prodigious Floods have
happened remarkable at that time? 4. Why the Moon commonly loses nothing at her
appulse to the Equinox, at what time of the Month soever it happens. 5. Why it
gains in her Applications to either Tropic* if in her utmost Latitudes,
Northern or Southern. 6. Why the Moon, on the day of the Last Quadrate
decreasing makes as high a Water, sometimes higher than at the First in the
Increase. 7. Why the Lunar Aspects, even with the Rest of the Planets, do
advance the Tides, yea and her Applications also to some of the Notable Stars
amongst the Fixed.

19. It may not be amiss here to glance upon Sacred Authority, where there is
manifest Testimony of the Lunar Energy: Per Diem Sol non percutiet te, neque
Luna per Noctem Psalm. XXI. That Is the First. The other is in Deuteronomy. XXXIII.
where Joseph's Blessing is not complete, without the precious things of Heaven,
the Dew, etc. yea not without the precious Fruits brought forth by the Sun, and
the precious Things put forth by the Moon. Whatsoever Sense will be given to
the Testimonies, the Expression is bottomed on nothing but what we plead for,
the warmer Rays of the Moon For as to the First Testimony, Rheumes, and
Indispositions of the Head therefrom may be raised, it is confessed, by the
Power of the Moon; imputed to the Falling of the Dew, but as justly ascribed to
the Moisture of the Brain, and its Fermentation by the Nightly Beam. As to the
second, the Rare and Choice Fruits, once growing in the several Walks of
Paradise, and still according to the time of Year put forth in their Seasons,
is as beautiful a Contemplation as Spectacle, owing their Original to the Night
as well as Day, to the Sun, as also to the Moon, which even in Vegetation is
Solis vicaria. My Lord Bacon, I remember, assuring me so much that the Night
contributes as well as the Day; as in Artificial Preparations, sometimes a
quicker, sometimes a slacker Heat is requisite.

20. Gu^. de Val, Physician to the most Christian King, who gave us a fair
Edition of Aristotle, Ao 1654, tells the University of Paris News of Plants
Solar and Lunar; these latter he says are Brisker, Broader, Fairer, Sweeter,
and every way more pleasant by Night than by Day: such are the Convolvulus
caeruleus, a Bell-Flower, called by Artists Flos Noctis, with another or two of
the same kind, the Indian Mogli, tota nocte sub amica Luna flores expandit,
tantaque pulcritudine micantes, imo and tanta odorum suavitate fragrantes, ut
incolas omnes rapiat in sui admirationem, called Arbor Tristis, because it
hangs like dead and withered in the Daytime. Next, Geranium triste, ('it is pity
they are Indian Plants) which smells like Musk, says Mr. Parkinson, (for he
also bears witness to the Curiosity) at Night only, not at all in the Daytime,
as refusing the Sun's Influence, but delights in the.

21. As popular an Argument as This is, the Instances make out, that the Dew
gently falling upon the Flower, advances the Sent; that the Nights have their
Warmth; that the Moon when it shines (for it is not yet time to assert the
Influence of a Star at what time it is hidden) has a soft cherishing Beam; and
Reason tells us, that what is accomplished sensibly in a Few, may hold, though
less sensible, in All. For the aperture and explication of the willing Flower,
betrays a kindly Warmth breathing upon it from the Ambient, (as we see an
Anemone, which closes at Night, will open again as in the daytime, by the
immersion of the Stalk in warm liquor,) in which warmth the Moon, when it
shines especially, will be concerned. So that it is no Paradox for the Moon to
conduce to Vegetation, Maturation, etc. the Sun ripeneth, the Moon attempereth
and distributeth the proper Juice. The One baketh, the Other as it were soketh
(that I may use Pastery Terms) the Fruits of the Season. Antiquity therefore
has ascribed Fertility to the Moon, Canentes rite crescentem face Noctilucam
Prosperam frugum, says the Lyrick*
And another in his Hymn says well, Tu cursu Dea menstras
Metiens iter annuum,
Rustica Agricolae bonis
Tecta frugibus imples:
Which may serve for a Commentary on our Words of the Text. There is one
Testimony more behind, which may take place in the Lunar History, speaking out
the plain Philosophy of Hippocrates, or Nature rather, concerning the Acounts
of the Moon, as to Animals, and the set times of their Geniture. For as it is a
fine Contemplation to consider the Times of the Year, wherein they are excited
to Propagation, Spring, Autumn, or Winter (for some strangely choose That most
barren Season,) which Naturalists, justly enough, principally refer to the Sun,
Ptolem. I. 2. because it is a set time of the Year; so from this Season of
Propagation there is a Fixed term for their Birth, Yeaning, Calving, etc.
justly ascribed to the Moon, because it is a Term of Months, as before was
observed. Hear the Philosopher: Know thou the Time when the Wild-Goats, (the
Rupicaprae, Ibices) of the Rock bring forth? Can thou mark when the Hinds do
calve? Can thou number the Months they fulfill? Job. XXXIX. 1, 2. Months to
be fulfilled and numbered: now from Months you may as well exclude the Moon's
Course as Influence; the Heavens measure Motion, but the Sun and Moon are not
bare Measures, not in Motions which tend to Life and Vegetation; they are
Moderators as well as Measurers, seeing Life consists in Warmth and Moisture,
to which the Moon is no Enemy. Yea the Number of these Months are some of the
(...), H. Writ speaks of Genesis I, not only Politic or Ecclesiastical Festivals,
the Feasts of the New Moon, etc. but the word is applied also to Natural
Seasons, the set times when the Stork in the Prophet, and the Swallow, and the
Crane, recede and return again: the set times of the Summer-fruit, the Olive,
the Date, according to their Months, say the Jews; the Time of Life, in the
History of Abraham, Genesis XVIII. 10. and elsewhere. And All this is Reasonable
with Aristotle, in that great Chapter de Generat. Animal. lib. IV. 9. who was
shie in the admission of any thing which he could gainsay; his words are
Copious, (...) -- Reasonably therefore do Philosophers define the times of all
Procreation, Gravidation, and Life it self to be measured by Natural Periods.
By Periods, I mean, the Day, Night, Month, Year, and what Greater Times are
measured by them, as the Less; not forgetting the Revolutions of the Moon, the
Full Moon, the Interlunia, and the Quartiles. Now the Moon is as it were a Less
Sun, and therefore it conduces to all Generations, and their Perfections, and
after That, Corruptions: for the Motions of these Planets do comprehend the
Beginning and End of all Three. Thus, and more the Philosopher. For the
Evidence of these things being such as cannot be resisted, no marvel if he
applaudeth them, who elsewhere gives his Testimony to the seeming-mystical
Septenary Number, as Hippocrates before, who treating of Fishes, and the
History of their Procreation, he says, that the Female teem some of them not
above 30 days, some less; but none of them go any time, but what may be divided
into, and therefore measured by the Septenary Number. Hist. Animal. VI. 17.
Understand it with Allowance, and Exception sometimes, (...), and other
impediments. de Generat. IV. 9.

CHAP. VII.
Sun and Moon, nor singly nor jointly the sole Causes of the Constitution of
the Air.
1. SO have we seen the Vigor of the Sun, so of the Moon, in order to the
Changes of the Air. But the Changes of Air, however vigorous these Planets are,
for certain cannot be referred wholly to Either or Both: not to the Sun, as you
have heard, nor to the Moon herself; for allowing the Moon to have something of
the Solar nature, we do not find (what was said of the Sun) that the Days are
always, or most part, Charactered in their Constitution, according to her
accesses or recesses to the Sun or Tropicks. Secondly, the Mystery would have
been kenn'd through the Observation of 2000 years at least, seeing the Motions
of the Sun and Moon are conspicuous; but No body has pretended to find any
Specialties herein, excepting three or four days in the month, and those too of
very remote and uncertain signification: for the Moon is a Reflection, and
Reflections are tied to Laws: According to the Angle of Incidence, so is the
Reflection, and the strength thereof: but no Constitution of Air is tied and
bound to these several Reflections; the Weather returns in such a Month, when
there is neither the same phasis, nor an equivalent.

2. Nay, Sun and Moon jointly, are not the complete Causes of the Airs
Alteration, upon several grounds; for if so, every XIX years Revolution would
bring with it the same state of the Year, and we should be able to say what
would be the Face of Heaven to morrow, if we had observed 19 years ago, without
any great Conjuring.

3. Secondly, we argue from the Duration: the Same Constitution of Air
sometimes lasts a whole week, a month, yea predominates the best part of a
year, while the Moon (alas!) every 24 hours changes her phases; in two days
runs a twelfth part of the Heaven, in a Month shifteth all her Schemes and
Postures in relation to the Sun.

4. On the contrary we may consider the fickleness of the Weather. In two
hours, yea in half an hours time, the face of Heaven shall be Masked, clear,
calm, turbulent; but in half an hours time the Sun and Moon vary not any
considerable difference. Sometime it shall rain and shine by Fits with such
variety of surprise, that if the Moon and Sun had run the Zodiaque in that 12
hours, the variety could not have been greater.

5. Next may we take in the violence and extremity of Weather; for Heat,
soultry, melting, fainting Air; for Wind, the Fury of Tempestuous, blustering,
rocking the lofty Towers, and shaking the best and lowest Architecture. Of the
extremity of the Heat, the Moon, supposing the Sun never so much, cannot be the
Cause, the Moon being a Reflection, as was said, and a single Reflection: but the
Air is heated beyond the power of a single Reflection, as if there were some
Anthelii, one or two invisible Suns, as some have imagined Antiselenae. The
vulgar impute all to the Sun, and on a soultry day say, the Sun is very hot:
but sure the Sun has some Satellites, some invisible Company, or Guard, that
lie behind the Hyacinth-Hangings of the Heavens. In the fury of Tempest, the
vulgar speak more feelingly, when they say it Rains, as if Heaven and Earth
would meet, and blows as if it would rend up all before it: the Sun and Moon
alone give them little supicion of such prodigious strength, they rather
believe a Devil raging in a Storm, than impute such horrid Violences to so
sober and civil a Pair as the Sun and Moon are accounted.

6. Add the contrariety of the state of the Air: the Sun and Moon may be
assigned some Cause of Warmth, but who assigns a Cause of Cold? the Sun by his
oblique annual Accesses and Recesses in the Zodiac, dispenses Summer and
Winter; as by his Diurnal motion he distributes Day and Night. The Night and
the Winter are acknowledged Both cold, by reason of the Sun's Absence or
Distance, but whence comes the Day to be Cold? an Aestival day to be chill? Is
the Sun the Cause? the Cause of Contrarieties? and that, while Present? The Sun
cannot be the cause of Darkness when the Sun is present, neither can it be the
cause of Cold when it affords its presence. When therefore a chill Hail-storm
follows Lightning and Thunder, I ask which of these Two congeles the Hail?
which kindles the Flash? Does the Moon congele the Storm? It may be That Is a
tepid Planet: Is it the middle Region, and the Antiperistasis? then it would
always Hail, not Rain, when it Thunders, especially for the Hottest days, the
Fittest for the Antiperistasis: but when the lower Region we find is chilled
also, when it Thunders with Hail, and that at Mid-summer, who incourages this
Cold? what enlarges its Confines? it is too late to talk of Reliquiae Hremis at
Mid-summer or in July, nor to turn us off with the blind motion of the Matter.
For what is Uncertain and Confused, is Casual, and Casualty is inconsistent
with Science, so inconsistent that it is not to be pleaded by any Lovers of
Learning.

7. Lastly, the contrariety of the Accident to the Time: when e. g. after a Set
of close and muddy Days, the Air takes its qu: and clears up at Midnight; what
removes that Curtain? It Is scarce the nature of any Night to remove Clouds, her
chill Constitution does rather settle and fix, if not seem to gather them: the
Moon has not such power, for supposing she be up, the Sun sometime is hard put
to it to take a Mist from the Earth, much more the Moon. The like we say for
Winter, the Absence or Depression of the Sun makes cold Weather, but How come
Winters to be warm? warm ordinarily for a Month or more, when the Daisie,
Anemone, the Strawberry shall blow, and proclaim a favorable Season? The Moon
for half the time is in Winter-signs, as low and humble as the Sun. Add, when
it happens thus, that the Day and Night are ordinarily alike as to the
Constitution; yea the Winter-Nights have commonly most to do, being tempestuous
at least in the latter end of October and November, nay sometimes soultry
Nights are found in November, as sometimes Thunder and Lightning at Christmas.
Many a Summer passes, and it Thunders not; can a Winter-Night be warmer than
many a Summer? can the Sun in its lowest Degree and Absence withal, be more
Potent, than in Presence and Verticity? It Is more possible for the Sun to raise
Thunder in the Frozen Zones, if appearing above the Horizon, than to play such
Pranks in his Winter Nadir. As for the Moon, how can she by Night or Day
operate when she is under the Horizon? a Tempestuous Night continues and takes
no notice of her Setting and it may Thunder and Lighten in the Winter-night
before she rises: the Moon, as we said, does not so much as look as if she
liked such Roister-company.

CHAP. VIII.
The other five called into the Militia. Planets not made for Illumination
only. Light and Heat the same spirit. All the Planets have their Influence. Not
all of the same Nature or Operation.
1. THere are therefore some Satellites, which we spoke of, to be taken into
consideration; those five Lights, which have been called of old by those
Heathen Names of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, Mercury; notwithstanding which,
even by Scripture-precedent may be innocently used.

2. To our purpose, it is enough that they are Lights; for no Star, no Light in
the Heaven was made for Illumination only, few things in Nature are made for
one single end. For how many Ends was the Tongue given Us, or the Wing given to
the Fowl: without it the Fowl cannot fight, nor procreate, nor keep its Bill
warm, as well as not fly without it. For the Planets and other Lights are for
half their time invisible, they are with the Sun in the diurnal Hemisphere, as
well as in the necturnal, and therefore were not made, no not the Sun it self,
for a naked Illumination. If the Moon were made for Illumination only, she
would never appear by day, when there is no need of her Light; nor ever
disappear at night, when there is need. Sure Mercury, so seldom seen, unless in
Southern Climes, was not made for Illumination only on chiefly; to say nothing
of the Satellites, properly so called. If an Atheist should accuse the disorder
of Nature, and through that pretense deny the Wisdom of an Eternal Providence,
by urging the appearance of the Moon by day, or the hiding of Venus, Mercury,
Saturn, etc. and half the Numbers of the Fixed, which were made for Lights, I
would teach him this Truth; That no Star in Heaven was made for Illumination
only: they were made for Influences i. e (for we are not enamoured with any
occult Qualities) the Distributions, the (...) of Heat as well as Light. For

3. Since All Bodies Celestial are Lucid, either by an Innate or Reflex Light,
they must all of them have a Warmth more or less, at least some quality that is
homogeneous to it.

4. I said Hemogeneous, because though Light and Heat do differ incredibly in
their Expansions, the Spheres of their Activity being so incomprehensibly
disproportionable (as we see by the measures of the Warmth and the
Illumination, the Illumination reaching as far as the Pyramid of its Visiolity,
which may be for four or five Mile, while the Warmth extends not above so many
Yards) yet they are really and substantially the same spirit, though differing
formally, as they may relate to several faculties sensitive, the one to the
Eye, the other to the Touch.

5. The Sun is the Fountain of Light; the re^ of the Planets, it may be, are
but Reflections: notwithstanding, if they are no better, those Reflex Bodies, as
is apparent in the Moon, beside their Magnitude and Approximation to the Earth,
may have such Concavities and other Difformities of Solid Surface, that even
the Reflection may conceive Heat sufficient for what Operation they are destined.

6. The Sun, it is true, the Holy Scripture calls a Light, but not a naked
Light, for Experience it self tells us, that there is nothing hid from the Heat
thereof: the Peripatetick Fancy has no foundation nor in one, nor in the
other, nor Scripture, nor Experience.

7. Mark then, as the Sun has his Diurnal and Annual motion from Tropique to
Tropique, so the rest of the Planets have their Diurnal, Annual, or other
Periodical motion between the same terms. Therefore all the rest have their
Heat also. For no other reason has or can the World give, why the Sun should
move to and fro in the Obliquity of the Zodiac, but for the application and
substraction of his Heat, which I call Influence. It follows therefore that the
rest of the Planets which are appointed to the same oblique motion, must have
some such Influence to distribute: it is a Demonstration a Fine, and such we
take, supposing Providence, to be good.

8. We have not without cause therefore justified the Astrologer on the Moon's
part, when he makes us believe, that according to her motion there is a kind of
Lunar Spring, Summer, latter Spring, Winter, according to her Posse every
month. So though the Sun be the chief, as the Rose in the Posie; yet every
little Pink has his Sent, and a little Sagacity will distinguish them.

9. Those of the longer Period,, to those that are Masters of Observation,
shall be found to bear the same Proportion, making a Vernal Temper (for their
parts) on the Aequinox, an Aestival Temper in the Northern Signs, and the
contrary in the Southern. For and it is clear, that generally the later is the
Spring when they are behind the Sun, and the more early when they shoot before
it.

10. But the Heavenly Bodies must be found of different Natures so far forth,
as to favor Cold as well as Heat; and Dyrth as well as Moisture: or else no
Art can give a rational account of the Contrariety of the Constitutions
depending thereon. Thence all Astrology has been forced to find one chiller
and colder Planet than the rest. And sure it is, notwithstanding their Light
and Radiance, that they are not all of the same Energy or Operation.

CHAP. IX.
Natures of the Planets according to the Ancients, then according to Truth. Not
but the Coldest Planet. Cold no Privation. The Primum Frigidum. How a Lucid
Body can patronize Cold. Light is the Spirit of the Universe.
1. PTolemy has not adjusted the Definitions or Properties of the Planets
beyond Exception.

2. The greater misery is, that they do not agree, so much as I could wish,
with modern Experience; let the Curious Naturalist enquire, for the Planetary
Definitions are the Fundamentals of All Astrology, whether Legitimate, or
Suspicious.

3. Ptolemy, and All Astrologers after him, say thus. First, the Nature of the
Sun consists in a moderate Warmth, and Drought: (...), etc.

4. nature is Moistning, with some degree of Warmth: (...).

5. is the Cold Planet, Cold and Dry; the First in an intense, the Latter in a
more remiss degree: (...).

6. is (contrary) Hot, Dry, and Burning: (...).

7. of a temperate faculty, warm and moistning, but rather warming: (...).

8. temperate as, only with this difference; that whereas warms more, moistens
less, only contrary, contributes to Warmth less, and more to Moisture: (...)
etc.

9. is indifferent, as to Moisture or Drought, sometimes for the one, sometimes
for the other, (...). Elsewhere he says somewhat dry, (...), contrary in that
to.

10. Ptolemy his Evidences are from Sense, and Reason, the Difference of their
sensible Magnitude, the Difference of their Color, their Difference of
Situation in respect of the Earth, and Sun.

11. Now the Sun's Heat he argues (because All Disputation is plausible in its
first Theoremes) from the Administration of the IV. Seasons, the Approaches of
the Sun to the Zenith, witnessed (as he says) also by his singular Magnitude.

12. The Neerness of the to the Earth, being moderately warm, by the Sun's
irradiations, draws up Moisture. He does not say draws it up even to the Lunar
Sphere, as if the were affected by the Earth, or thereby formally moistened; but
more truly and innocently he speaks of an indefinite Attraction of the Sublunar
Moisture, defining no term or height of that Attraction, nor is there any
necessity of such Definition, no more than in the Sun, which notwithstanding is
attractive of the same.

13. The distance of, says he, from the Earth makes him Dry, and the distance
from the Sun makes him Cold.

14. While the Fiery Constitution of is as evident from his Color, so it is as
justly concluded from his vicinity to the Orb of the Sun, which lies next
under him.

15. The situation of between the extreme coldness of, and the burning of,
makes him temperate, yet not so but that the subject Spheres of and both
bequeath him a warming Influence.

16. The vicinity of to the Sun gives her Warmth, while she contributes also to
Moisture, as the does, and that by the greatness of her Discus,

17. is a Dryer, he says, because never far from the Sun in Longitude; and a
Moistner also, in that he bears upon the Moon's Orb, the greatest Contributer
to Moisture. Thus far Ptolemy, I. 22. Tetrabibl.

18. Now as to the Effects, they are put answerable to the premised
Definitions, as may be gathered from Ptol. lib. II. c. 9. in which Chapter he
treats of the Planets in their best advantage, their Lordship he calls it;
and there (says he) because of its Dryth, raises Winds, Lightnings, Thunders,
etc.

19. brings Hearts, and Droughts, and Thunders, and Stormy Winds.

20. healthful and temperate Air, yet with Wind, and competent Moisture.

21. also the same, temperate and serene Air, with Wind, and fruitful showers
intermixed, in the whole as, but with a greater suavity, (...), as Ptolemy
pleases himself in the Expression.

22. produces terrible Cold; and Frosts, and Snow, and Hail, and Mists, and
Clouds, and dark Air.

23. To the premises they reduce the determination of the Winds, when they make
cause the East, and West; South, North.

24. And what can Observation pretend to more? and how can. They be vain, which
are so specific and precise as These seem to be? And if so, how chance They
have not got footing in the World amongst other Liberal parts of Knowledge?
Surely, it is more easy to arrive to the knowledge of their Natures, than of
their Motions; yet the World has advanced to the Latter, and That with repute,
and starce as yet to the Former?

25. I say therefore, toward the Enucleation of the Question, First, that the
Planets, in Number VII, are more than numerically different; That very
Difference with a modest Disputer, is apt to persuade there is a Difference in
Nature.

26. Secondly, as to their distance from the Earth and the Sun, there is some
Secret lies in it: it is so considerable, so deliberate a work of the most High
Creator, that I think from hence alone a man may boldly pronounce, that it is
not indifferent to the Systeme of the World's Well-being; whereabout the VII
Planets are situate. This, as reasonable as it is, will be more strongly
enforced from the Doctrine of the Perigee, etc

27. Thirdly, since the Difference of their Color arises not from the Medium,
but from the difference of the Spirit, (as in Camphire and Brimstone inflamed,
the Flames wear several Colors.) This must argue some Difference of
Consistence: since in serenity of Air, in all Climes; the Moon has her
smooth-faced luster, his fiery beam, and his dimmer glare.

28. We do not desire to imagine, that the Planets are ought but Reflections,
yet we say withal that so Vast Bodies receiving the Ray which they Return, may
be of such several Consistences, and different Fabrics, that there may be
found as much variety in them as in other Reflexives, i. e. Plain, Unequal or
Concave Glasses, of which the one will generate Flame, and the other are too
weak for such Generation. Thus the Tiles and Lead on the Housetop, by reason
of their consistence, while they reflect the Sunbeams, conceive such Heat, as
is not to be endured by the Palm of the Hand.

29. Fourthly, we say that though there be two Contrarieties to be inquired
into, first of Hot and Cold, then of Moist and Dry, Ours will be but only after
the First Contrariety, in as much as the Second is an Affix, and an Appendage
to the First. Because it will be very easy to say, from what has been said
before, that every Planet as it partakes of Warmth, is thereby apt to produce
Moisture; whence the Sun it self being Hot, must also be defined to be moist:
for though the Sun dries up the Moisture fallen, yet the same Warmth first
attracted the Vapor, and the Vapor so attracted, with a little help from the
Contrary Quality, (of which we have said we cannot be always sensible chap. 2.
9.) condenseth it into a Drop: sothe and both are Moist but only by an
extrinsec Denomination, as much as they contribute to the attraction of it.

30. Dry, in respect to the Earth, the Sun may be called; but in respect of the
Air it is a Moistner. The Meteorologer respects not the Earth but the Air;
wherefore though Ptolemy has put only Dryth into the Sun's definition, he
cannot oppose this which is said of Moisture.

31. And thus the rest of the Planets also,, if they prove to be warm, by the
same reason must be admitted to be moist also, in our sense, though Ptolemy I
see scarce mentions Moisture for an Effect even of himself, in the Chapter
above quoted.

32. To proceed then, no Planet can be said to be Dry, i. e. a causer of Dryth,
but what is a Favourer of Cold; in as much as if Warmth be the producer of
Moisture, Cold must be the Resister, as the truth is it does resist,
dissipating or discontinuing the fatter vapor, by the immission of a cruder
Atome.

33. Thence it follows much to our purpose, that Cold must be the Parent of
Serenity, which is briefly proved by this; that the Cold Spirit is more
pellucid than the more opacous and unctuous vapor, which it dissipateth.

34. Since then we are bound to inquire into the first Contrariety of Heat and
Cold, that from thence we may find out their due Complications with Moisture
and Dryth, we say

First, that the Sun is a warm Body, and that of the same kind with what is
called Elementary Warmth.

35. Not that He is the primum Calidum, for That is Fire, or That Diffused
Spirit which is found indeed in the Sun, and other Celestials, but not confined
to them, rather distributed through the whole Universe to All its mixed or
compound Bodies, the Mines Subterranean especially comprehended.

36. The Moon has her remiss degree of Warmth, demonstrable as you have seen
by many a fair Experiment, making up Her History; to which I know the more
Curious can add more, that I may not say it is apparent, if watched at some
opportunity, even to sense. A Perspective of IV 1/2. Foot, taking the Rise of
the Moon after the Full in August, a warm day preceding, (that the Air may not
be Counter-disposed) shall sensibly present the Planet's warmth to the Eye. The
like have I found in a Summer-Even, sitting in a Southern Chamber, that the
Moon being eight or nine days old, when approaching the Meridian, has infused
a sensible warmth into the Chamber, though the Sun were set.

37. is found to be endued with a Heat, if the Effect may judge equal, nay to
all seeming, superior to the Sun; yet seeing he acts by dependence on Him, as
all the Rest do, we must compare None of them to their Maintainer.

38. has a warmth more remiss than or more intense than.

39. her Warmth is so remiss and slack, that she seems to befriend a Cold
Influence.

40. There is only left and, and it is very convenient that the cold Planet
assigned should be One of these Two. It may be somewhat for Ptolemies reason,
as also because None of the Planetary Bodies which pretend to Cold, except
these Two, can reign (I mean shine) all Night, the most fit opportunity for
Cold: shines but part of the Night, and the is too warm for the purpose.

41. This supposes I confess, that the Nocturnal Cold is ordered and managed
by the Celestial Bodies, which is most certain, and will be evidenced hereafter.

42. indeed (who can outface so Ancient and Loud Tradition?) goes for the
Coldest Planet. He is indeed of a Tepor so low and indiscernible, that he may
and must be reckoned as a Favourer of Cold, and so far Experience justifies the
Tradition.

42. But, ('it is well he has obtained the Character of Temperate, as well as)
is (oh let the Paradox be pardoned!) the Principal Cold and crude Planet: All
the Rest are warm and moist, though in different measure, only cold and dry, or
a Resister of Moisture. I know it is a great Paradox, and therefore to some will
be offensive: but it is such as wants neither Apology, nor Proof.

44. Not Apology: for what? must we in earnest submit to every Tradition in
Natural Science? There Is naught I hope in Philosophy, but what appeals to
Posterity, as to Sense and Reason, and will abide the Test of Natural Scrutiny.
Philosophy is too ingenuous to impose upon us, to offer to deceive us by
Authority. I grant the Authority of our Ancestors is Greater than is allowed by
the Junior Inceptors of these days: Many are despised by Us, whose Wisdom we
shall never attain to. But yet our Ancestors themselves have fixed Bounds to
their Authority: They swear us indeed not to corrupt their Books, they do not
swear us to believe. All they deliver. We must taste before we swallow;
especially in that part of Philosophy which lies beyond the Moon, abstruse
Theorems at a vast prospect and distance. In these I ought not to follow them
hood-winkt, to take All for granted as if They were First Principles, or from
Infallible Dictates; They teach us concerning Heaven, but they came not from
thence. I cannot give them their Due Praise, unless I examine their Theses; I
shall be a lazy unwise person, if I do not. I shall be loath to betray the
Generations of the World to Security, and Error. What Liberty the Ancients have
taken in a modest dissent from their Predecessors, is left to us for a Legacy.
Ptolemy himself differs from His Seniors the Egyptians.

45. Not Proof: no not from the Ancients themselves. For first, though They
declare him to be Moist, yet they teach us also that He is a Raiser of Winds, (
Ptol. I. 20.) which by nature are a Dry Exhalation, and Cold too. 2. is the
only Aeolus that blows up the North Wind, say both Ancients and Moderns, and
they say truly, a second Argument that is the Coldest. 3. With one mouth also
They truly and consequently affirm, that He is the Parent of Serenity; but if
the Cause of Clouds and Vapor be Heat, the Cause of Serenity is Cold, the
Cleansing Spirit of Cold. Add, that we shall see hereafter, how No Aspect
Planetary causes Dryth, but every one of them more or less incline to Moisture,
except be one; therefore if Cold be the Author of Dryth, (Dryth I mean in the
Constitution of the Air) is that Colder Planet. Yea so manifestly is He the
favorer of Dryth, that he shows this Influence not only in Serene and open Air,
but in Cloudy and dark Air, where many times he suspends the Moisture, and (as
the Vulgar speak, when in Cloudy Air a Dry Wind blows) It keeps up the Rain.
Nor is it to be concealed, that in All Fogs, and Mists has Influence, which
argues a dry fuliginous Exhalation mixed with Moisture, That Moisture which is
found and maintained at the Cost of the Rest of the Planets.

46. Colder and Dryer is than it self, as much as the North Wind is colder than
the East: for though the East be cold and dry compared to the West, it
obtains no such character compared with the North. But is confessed Parens
Aquilonis, Raiser of the North Wind, while contents himself with the East.

47. And for Dryth, Aspects of are not found to resist Moisture, to cause
Serenity, to raise dry Winds, to cast a Fog; a Cool Constitution it may
profess, but with inclination to Moisture: for admit it causes Snow; I desire
it be considered, that it is one thing to cause Snow, and another to cause it to
fall: and the Distinction will be admitted by them that consider, that how
bitter soever the Weather is when Snow hangs in the Air, as they call it, yet
the Weather relents in a sensible degree at the fall of Snow: then may concur
to the Solution of that Cold Mass, which or some other has created; but none
contests so much for Cold as, therefore is the Coldest. And let thus much at
present serve for the (...).

48. Toward the (...), how, or any other Celestial Body can be the Parent of
Cold, we are willing to declare. First, what is the Nature of Cold, whether
positive or meet Privation. 2. If Positive, what is the Primum Frigidum, Earth
or any other Body. 3. What relation a Body Celestial can have to Cold, if Cold
prove to be a terrestrial Emanation.

49. Though some Philosophers have said that Cold is a Privation, and it seems
to agree to what Ptolemy would say concerning the Quality attributed to, the
remotest of all from the Sun: yea though I think it manifest, that some things
called Positive Qualities, are no better than Privations, as Siccity,
Diaphaneity, Softness, etc. yet I take it, that Cold cannot be said to be such.

1. Because though it be necessary upon the removal of Moisture, I must
understand the Subject to be Dry; yet there is not the same necessity, that on
the Removal of Heat, I should apprehend the Subject to be Cold. Hence some
Philophers have (it may be not absurdly) defined, the Air to be Neither of its
own Nature, being the Subject and Receiver of Both.

2. Privation may be allowed a principle of Generation, but not of
Constitution; but Cold is a Constituent, as in Metals, Glass, etc. ingreditur
opera Naturae. Hence a sudden Heat violates the Consistence of the Glass,
whereas a Privation may be removed with Safety and Innocence.

3. Cold is Active, Penetrative, Expulsive of its Contrary, even as Heat,
Active and Biting, Penetrative through Glass it self, where neither Air, nor
Moisture can be transmitted: whose Action is so like that of Heat, that
sometimes we take it to be the very same. For a* Cold piece of Iron seems to
burn the Hand, if the Sense of the Touch (not the Eye) be witness; Expulsive of
the Heat, even Natural Heat: This is seen in Freezing of Beer or Wine, where
the Spirits driven out of their Cells, retire to their Center. In the freezing
of Fruits, which upon a milder Constitution suddenly putrify, the Spirit being
not able to recover its former Mansion, by reason of the disorder created. Add
the Gangrened parts of Man's Bodies in cold Countries, etc. the crumbling and
scaling of Brick and Stone in Frosts that are extreme, etc.

48. 4ly, a Spirit is no Privation, Cold is a Spirit, of such a Figure, says
Democritus, and not very absurdly, for the benumming operation of Cold,
curiously attended, betrays not the pungencies of the Pyramid, proper to Fire,
but the Contusion of a Cubical Figure, which is the figure assigned to the
Earth: but that Cold is a Spirit may be proved, because some Bodies enjoy a
cool Spirit, Vegetables, as the Rose; Minerals, as the Nitre; and all
Infrigidation is performed by transfusion of a Spirit, as Rooms are cool by
strewing of Herbs, Flags, and Aspersion of sweet Water, Vinegar, etc. Wines in
their Bottles are cooled by immersion into Water, the Water transmitting the
Spirit suddenly through the Vessel. This Spirit is evident and awakened by the
Motion: certainly if Heat be a Spirit, Cold is also a Spirit; and if the
South Wind warms by the introduction of the One, the North Wind chills by the
accession of the Other: and so much for the First, the Nature of Cold.

49. For the second, we deem that the Earth is rightly assigned for the primum
frigidum, and this may be gathered from the very situation it obtains in the
System of the World, viz. the very Distance from the Spheres of Heat, being as
good as in the Center of the Sphere of the Fixed, even in Copernicus his
Hypothesis. For though Cold be no Privation, yet it is not altogether becoming
the Order of Nature, that Opposites should have an opposite place, and be at
local as well as at formal Distance. God has not placed Heat at one of the
Poles, if he had, sure he had fixed the Cold at the Pole opposite. Giving him
therefore the liberty to place it in the midst of the Globe, the Frozen Zones
must quarter on each side, as far distant as they can, and that is tantamount
to Diametrical. For as to the Subterranean Fires, by Natures great End placed
in the Earth, they can put in no Caveat to our pretense, seeing they cannot
belong to the Nature of that Element, though therein contained, no more than
the Vegetable, or Animal Seeds that lie couched in the same. The same is to be
reckoned of Hot Earths, Lime, etc. They conclude not the Earth of its own
Nature, indifferent to Cold or Heat, no more than Hot-waters artificially
extracted, or Hot Baths for the Nature of the Water conclude any such
indifferency. But that Cold is an Earthy Spirit, whence shall we more evidently
conclude, but from the consistence of Ice? Ice has a terrene Consistence,
therefore it depends upon a terrene Spirit. For such cognation is there between
the Consistence, and the Spirit actuating, that a man may safely conclude the
one from the other. The Vegetable Spirit is of the same Nature with the Plant,
the Metallic Spirit with the Metal, the Fumid Spirit with the Odor, the
Earthy Spirit with the Earth. We confirm this by consideration, that all
Petrification is by intrusion of a Terrene Spirit, as in Wood, and other things
metamorphos'd by petrifying Streams, is confessed. And what is Ice, but Water
petrifyed? Add, that Ice becomes fixed by Incra^^ations so Cold fixes or
stanches Blood by incrassating of the parts. Hence the cold Spirit or Corpuscle
dilating the Body, as in liquor congeled in Earthen Vessels, bursts the Vessel,
and the Hand benumbed with Cold is more swollen and gowry than in open Weather.

50. Further, Metals, or Minerals, which are the coldest Bodies, are of a
Consistence Earthy, as Stone, Lead, Iron, yea Quicksilver, though a strange
Body, is the Colder, because it is so dense: for we may safely allow an Earthy
Spirit in it, notwithstanding its Fluor, as well as in other Metals, which at
least when melted are fluid. So much it seems to have of Earth, that though it
be fluid, we see it moistens not; the whitish Hue I hope is no hinderance,
since sundry Earths are of a Cretaceous color.

51. Again, every Stupefactive Spirit is Terrene, every Cold Spirit is
Stupefactive. For what I pray is Stupefying, but Congeling? the Cold Spirit
stanches Blood by Congelation. Thus Dioscorides, speaking of all Earths used in
Physic, says they are Cold and Stupifying: all Narcoticks, quatenus talia,
will be found invested with such a Spirit, Opium, etc. the History of the
Torpedo it self, I believe will prove it. Yea the Greatest Observers, that have
been curious in this point, declare, that as according to the common
Presumption, Heat tends upward, so the Cold has a tendency downward, a Heavy
Spirit; it seems then to be Earthy.

52. But whether this Spirit be Saline, or Nitrous, or of Quicksilver, is none
of our interest to define, it is somewhat too nice a discourse to be so
particular. Saline, or Nitrous, are All Earthy, and, it may be, not so much
different.

53. Here, I confess, our Discourse is strongly checked by some of the Noblest
Observers, who scruple to admit any prime Recipient of Cold, as not necessary
there should be a (...) of all Qualities; for there are None assignable, say
they, for Gravity, Figure, Motion, Color, Sound, etc.

To the Vindication therefore of such a Principle, let me crave leave to
distinguish, first of Qualities, then of the Prime Recipient; and say first,
that in all Qualities, whether Powers Natural, or their Sensible Objects, Heat,
Cold, Humor, Siccity, Light, Color, etc. as also Qualities more Material,
such as consist in the several Texture of Matter, Density, Rarity, etc. we must
carefully distinguish between Them and their Privations; the rather, because
the Philosopher says rightly, that the same Sense is Judge of both: for it is no
reason to look for a (...) of Privative Beings, but only of Positive. Thus it
will be vain to look for a Prime Recipient of Siccity; the Fire being dry, and
the Earth also, and neither owing that Quality one to the other, because being
a bare carentia and Absence of Humidity, all Bodies so deprived must aeque
primo rejoice in that Denomination. Thus I take it, is Rarity nothing but a
Privation of Density, Softness of Hardness, Smoothness of Asperity, Fluor of
Solidity, Friability of Viscosity, Leanness of Fatness, total or partial
Privations. For the Prime Recipient, though it be commonly a certain species,
yet it is not always so.

54. There are Properties which follow the Genus, as All men must confess, such
are the known Properties of Quantity, Figure, Place, Motion, Time, Gravity,
Color, Sound; Figure I say, for if Quantity be such a Property, then Figure
must also, however it be called Quality, or otherwise a Property of Corpus
solidum. Then Motion, for be the principle of Motion what it will, Matter or
Form, or Finiteness of Nature, it is plain it is a common Generical Attribute to
which it is annexed, we may call it corpus, or, if you will, substantia finita.
Then for Gravity, we have a General Recipient for That, whether in the new
Philosophy, which reckons All Elements to be Gravia, as tending to their
Center, Fire it self seeming to tend upward only on this account; or in the
more stale Philosopby, which makes Earth, Water, Air Gravia in comparison of
Fire; I say, according to the one, the Prime Recipient of Gravity is corpus
Homogeneum, supposing the Heavy substance out of its place, and corpus Opacum
according to the other, understanding it here as opposed to Lu^id; in which
sense Air, Water; Earth are opacons, and therefore Gravitating, as being
destitute of That Spirit which tends upward. We say the same of Color, that
corpus opacum, but as distinguished to pellucid or Diaphanous, is the Prime
Recipient of it; Color being nothing else but a nice mixture of Light and
Opacity. Yea for Sound it self we give a prime Subject, and That is corpus
Spirituosum; it being the Spirit that is the Subject and Vehicle of the Sound.

55. These things being premised, I say, that All Qualities, truly so called,
positive Beings, not privative, have necessarily their Prime Recipient in the
Species or the Genus at least: Heat, Cold, Humectation, Taste, Odor, All
Sensible Qualities, have their Prime Recipient; it being hard to find
Humectation where there is no Water, Cold where no Earth, Taste where no Salt,
Odor where no Oil, Light and Heat where no Fiery Spirit. And what do we say of
the Second Tactile Qualities, Crassitude, Solidity, Density, Hardness,
Roughness? The Earth no doubt is the Prime Receiver of them All, so that where
there is Solidity and Density, there is Earth, as Plato says, even in the
Stars themselves. For Viscosity, unless we say it is a Compound Complicate
Quality, ex pingui and arido, and so get off from the necessity of assigning a
Prime Recipient, as there is no Prime Recipient of Tepor, and mixed Colors; so
otherwise we may nominate a Gluten to supply That place, with the same liberty
as the Chemists name Sulfur, and Salt: for if it be said that there is no such
species, in which this quality inheres, no more is there any species of Salt
and Sulfur, the Prime Recipient of Savours and Odours; they are Generical
Natures, common to all Sapid and Odorate Bodies,

56. Surely, unless some Recipient be admitted, both in Active and Passive
Qualities, the Family of Nature will be at a loss. The several Tribes of Hot,
Cool, Sapid, Odorate, how manifold soever in their Natural Colonies, must needs
depend on some prime Propagator, as all Families do.

57. I will not say this is in imitation of God himself, and his
Communications, (Nature being nothing else but a Sciagraphy of Divinity) who
being a Creator has ordained a Generant, communicating Essence, and Gifts, and
Graces, Himself being of them All the (...).

58. And truly, when upon a just Induction made, we may find a prime Subject
for all the Active Qualities (truly stated,) as Light, Heat, Cold, Humidity,
etc. why we should not seek for prime Subjects for All the rest, which are
absolute perfections of the Subject in which they dwell, I see not, seeing the
Fabric of this Great Universe, though it be abstruse, yet it is such as does
encourage Enquiry (not discourage it) by the Mutual dependence of Causes, the
Second on the First, and the Third on Both: the Creator being admirable, not
only in the Number, but in the Order of his Creatures. To find Fire in
Fish-bones, Rotten wood, Tastes in Dews as well as Plants and Minerals, Stenches
in Mists as well as Puddles, and All through the communication of the same
prime Subject, incourages a Modest Enquirer, and brings him to the knowledge of
a (...), the prime Cause of All.

59. Neither is the prime Generical Recipient to be thought an Empty Notion, as
if Universal Natures subsisted only by the Operation of the Intellect, and did
not exist a part rei; for certainly They are guilty of the Empty Notion, that
make a Nature, not We that find it. Surely the Individual borrows all its
Reality from the Species, unless his Essence be a fiction, and the Species in
part from the Genus: the One is a Modification of his Universal, the Other a
Difference; and thus far for the second Enquiry.

60. Now thirdly, what Relation a Body Celestial may have to Cold, if Cold be a
Terrestrial Emanation, is the next Enquiry; seeing Reason, as Cardan confesses,
makes them All without difference warm, even it self if he be Luminous. Resp.
The Nature of the Planet is to be estimated, not from his Magnitude only, and
Distance, and Light, and Color; but much, if not chiefly, from its
Consistence, and Spirit, if any there be that inhabits it.

61. Their Bodies, of their own nature, are Opacous, but they are Pervious too.
This is known for certain as to the, it is full of Cells and Concavities, of a
vast Penetration; for otherwise, neither It, nor the Rest could so visibly, so
potently reflect the Solar Incidences. As to the Spirit, all that believe the
Sun to be of an Igneous Nature, as it is high time we should come so far, do
resolve that there are Mines of Sulfur in the Sun, which minister an Eternal
Pabulum to the Flame, as the Mines do to our Hot Baths. This is so certain,
that the Assertors of the Maculae Solares know not what else to define them,
but Sulphurous Fumid Exhalations issuing from it.

62. Again, all that are Curious Observers of the. do aver, not only Mountains,
but Waters also placed there, which cover all the darkish parts of the Lunar
Globe: and why may not God fill the Rest of the Celestial Bodies with a
suitable Spirit? The different Colors both of Planets, and Fixed Stars, do
more than probably argue a difference of Spirit lodged in them. It Is not
impossible but some of the Heavenly Bodies may partake of the Cold Spirit in
common with the Earth, as the Subterranean specus partakes of the Warm Spirit,
the Fires that rage there, in common with the Heavens.

63. What Mines of Sulphur may be lodged in, what Treasure of Nitre, or
Camphire, or Quicksilver may be in or? the Expiration of Camphire, even
flaming, cools a Room. Who can refell this with any better Argument than a
Smile? What know we their Internal Constitution, Where were we in the day of
their Creation, that we should pronounce of their Natures but by their Effects?
If thus it should be, how facile, how explicate is the Solution of this great
Question: Celestial Bodies, though Lucid, though Fiery, may have some of them a
cold Emanation, and at their opportunity they may cause a Winterly Weather, not
only by their chill Emanation from above, but by the consequent Attraction of
the Cold here below, as all Homogeneous Bodies naturally observe one another.

64. Verily we seem to flutter near some Truth, when the Scripture it self
seems to teach us so monstrous things as Waters above the Heavens, placed
there, wot you what but for the tempering of Celestial Heat? or some worse,
because unknown reason? Ger? Voss. de Idololatr. II. 39. and our own Learned
Gregory, beside the Jew and Ancient Christian: what may there not be contained
in the Celestial Bodies, (Seas or Mines) if there may be Elementary Bodies in
the utmost Circumference of the Heaven? Our narrow Imaginations cramp the
Planets, as far as the Distance diminishes them to sight, not daring to look
into the vast Continent of those unknown Orbs, which it may be are as little
Homogeneous as the Globe of the Earth, which seems a Globe of Dust, and similar
Mold, to those that have not descended into the heart of it, to those that have
not viewed the Fossiles, the Minerals, Metals, concrete Juices, Subterranean
Fires, etc. It Is clear that the Planets are not made only for Reflection, but
also for Modification of Light and Heat. And Light, if there be any Connate
Spirit in the Lucid Body, is apt to convey the Radiation, as the painted Glass
transmutes its Color along with the Beam, that shoots through it: the variety
of the Color, we must say again, does argue a difference of Spirit and
Confistence, as in the Yolk and White of an Egg is manifest.

65. But may be cold as the is moist (no Waters, no Lakes, no Seas supposed) by
extrinsecal Denomination. We say 2ly then, who knows but that Light and Cold
may have kindness one for the other? It Is a great Speculation that is before us.
When I was arrived in Philosophy so far, as to hearken to the discourse of the
Spirits of Natural Bodies, to which by Assent and Experience Universal all
Activity belongs, and finding that what they call Spirits, were for the most
nothing but igneous parts of the Compound, I justly cried up Avicen the
Physician, who owns the Elements Actual Existence in the Composition, as the
Existence of Fire among the rest: but when I was advertised from so great
Authority as my Ld Verulam, who somewhere tells us, that amongst Natural Bodies
there is found a Cold Spirit, I confess I was at some Loss, as to the stating
the Question Affirmative, every Spirit being the Actuous part of the Body.
Attending farther therefore to what was proposed, concerning Heterogeneous
Mixtures found in the same Body, by reason of which the same Vegetable or
Mineral may be qualified sundry ways, as in Salt, Pepper, Opium, etc.
consisting of a Hot and also Crude Spirit, subtilty weaved together, I began to
admit of a cold Spirit; or rather having admitted it, to guess the Reason or
its Activity, as borrowed from the vicinage of the warmer Corpuscles, as if a
Spirit were nothing else but the Igneous Particle incrusted in the Body; as if
the Spirit were Active upon one account, and seemed Cold upon the other For
Cold it self, at least in comparison of Heat, is but a dull and slow Quality;
that it may be a great question, whether setting aside its Figure and Gravity,
it has any pure Activity of Influx or Emanation, or no: for the Pressure it
makes by reason of its Gravity or Figure, is not Activity of Emanation, such as
is found in Fire; This it owes to Warmth perhaps. So that if God should
annihilate the Celestial Warmth, there would be no Elevation, or Emanation of a
Cold Spirit, all would sink and lie flat upon the Surface of its Cold Earth, as
in a most unlively Chaos. Hence it may be, before God was pleased to make the
Light or Heat Celestial, the Spirit of God is expressly said to move on the Face
of the Waters, to keep them in their serviceable (and therefore Natural)
Fluidity, which otherwise would be sullen, and put on their Icie, unpliant, and
unserviceable Rigor. For the Subterranean Fires, too much made of by some,
cannot so much as considerably supply the want of the Celestial; since it is
notorious, that on the top of Aetna itself, there lies all the year a continual
Snow.

66. The Heat then of Celestial Bodies may be such a friend to the Activity of
the Cold Spirit, as to raise it from its Center, and keep it up in suspense, as
under the Poles it does, toward the generation of Wind, Snow, Mists, Clouds,
etc. what the Northern Voyages sufficiently testify, testify I mean
concerning the Heat that is many times felt there, amidst the very Mountains of
Ice. In this case Cold first acts by Corporeal Contact and Gravitation of Those
Bodies that wade in the Atmosphere: That Is one way.

67. But again, the same Agent that raises that Exhalation, may, if it be
encouraged, hurry, and drive the Cold Atome, and impart a forced Activity to
it, as in the generation of Hail may be seen, and in all cold Winds, and
especially on those signal times, when Frost and Ice is found on the ground,
the Sky having been Cloudy, by the piercing of a sharp Wind, busling all the
Night before. That Is a second.

68, But sure Cold appears not always under a forced, sometimes with a proper
and Natural Activity, being quick, and agile, penetrative, and pungent, like
the Fiery Atome, entering the Body, and following the Leading Atome with a
vehement Nisus into the same; not by Gravitation only, because then there would
be but little Frost within doors, where there is little Gravitation, yea all
Congelation would begin at the top only, when as in Vessels of Wood and Metal,
the side and bottom of the Water is usually as soon congeled as the top it self.

69. Let us see whether Light have no Energie in this matter. Surely if any
thing may be entitled to what Philosophers call the Spirit of the World, This
is it, the smallest and most Active Body in the World; in Motion confessed to be
Instantaneous, in subtlety incredible, and absolutely incomprehensible. The
vast Activity of Flame is seen in the force and swiftness of a Ball discharged
from Cannon, etc. in the prodigious Eruptions of Earthquakes; but Flame it self
comes short of Light, as to Activity, as far as the Sphere of Calefaction, as
we have said, is narrower than that of Illumination. An Inch of Flame, if it
multiplies it self but in one straight line to the Eye, at three or four Miles
distance, of how rare, how subtle Particles must that one single Ray consist?
But when that Lucid Inch (as all Luminous Bodies spread themselves Spherically)
shall send its Beams through 10000 Lines so far protended, even as many as the
Eyes, which can be imagined to be placed in all differences of Position; I say
it argues the Light to be, for subtl^ty of Essence, and swiftness of Motion
(for the One follows the Other) incomprehensible. Hence I may argue thus: The
most actuous Substance in the world (I value not whether the Peripatetick
allows any such Notion, or no) is the Spirit of the World, But Light is such,
Ergo. Light, or Heat, One of them is; but the Premises rightly considered, it
will be found, that (since Both are Active) Light has not its Activity
quatenus of kin to Heat, but Heat rather, quatenus Luminous. From hence does
Heat learn to shed it self into a Sphere of Warmth round about, because it is
of the same Nature with Light: but Light is the (...) of that Quality, and
indeed of all Activity, at least as much as uses to be imputed to Heat, because
in the Competitorship for Sprightfulness, we find one so infinitely surpassed
by the other.

70. This Discourse supposes Light to be a Body, and may well do so, for very
many Arguments not to be produced here; seeing it is enough that the
Peripateticks I hope can produce no Accident whatsoever, separable from its
Primitive Subject, or any Migration of the one without the other: the Power of
Matter, and Eduction thencefrom, are mere Words, educed out of the power of a
Verbal Philosophy.

71. But then for its relation to Cold: before we speak of That, we must
consider, that though the Light and Heat be substantially the same Spirit, yet
for Doctrines sake, especially being different Objects of the Sense, they must
be said to differ specie, even as Air does from Water; though in the most
probable opinion it differ only from it by a vast rarefaction or Attenuation,
just as our Light from Heat; on which account it may be true to say, that Light
is the Author of some Action in Nature, which Heat is not: for the Heat and
Light differ only in tenuity, or rarity, and density, the Seat of Fire being
near the center of the Luminous Sphere, while purer Light is nearer the
circumference; the Sphere of Illumination being so Vast, the Circumferential
parts of the Spirit of so incredible Subtlety, must of necessity be denuded
from all manner of Heat real, and sensible, that whatsoever is ascribed to the
Spirit so attenuated, may in no wise be thought reasonable to be ascribed to
any thing else, such a vast difference interposing. So that it may not follow,
notwithstanding the Identity of the Spirit, that if Heat be contrary to Cold,
Light must also be deputed to the same Contrariety. Hence there is made way for
a reconcilement to amity with the Cold Spirit, the Contrariety being removed.

72. Now that Cold has such amity and acquaintance with the Luminous Spirit, I
prove, because Cold is an Active quality, Active by way of Emanation. Thus in
Stone-building, that Room is the cooler for the walls sake, the Emanation from
thence infrigidating the place: but if it be so active, whence has it this
Activity? we answer, from the universal Luminous Spirit implanted in it. This
is confirmed, because Cold is not only active in it self, according to its
measure, as Light is, but it resembles also the manner of the Activity. Does
Light cast it self into a Sphere, Cold also has its Sphere (its narrower
Sphere indeed) of her Activity. Place it in the Center, and all Parts shall
feel its Influence, so do all things imitate or rather express the motion of
the Universal Spirit.

73. Nor can it be otherwise imagined, since into the most deep recesses of the
Earth it is believed the Light of the Sun pierces through the Opacous Body,
giving Life and Spirit to every Mineral there in his kind. Then what Influence
the Heavenly Light has on the Animal and Natural Spirits all the World sees;
how cheerfully and briskly our Spirits behave themselves in a serene Season?
How dull and cloudy in close Air! what alteration our Bodies find at night! how
torpid our Limbs, and given to heaviness, composed for sleep and darkness! A
little Light we see raises us, wakes us, calls for the Spirit to the
Circumference, cheereth the sick, is welcome to those that are frighted with
Specter and Phantasms, the Day salutes us All, and bids us good Morn. The
Morning Cock chants not but upon warning given by the Light. The very Vegetable
Spirit in Darkness is a sleep, (Darkness I mean of the Time, not of the Place,
a great Argument for our Conjecture.) Hence the good Houswife gives no leave to
broach her Liquor in the Night-Season. Add that the subtle mixture of the Cold
Spirit delights in the white Color, Frost, Snow, Ice, Hail, Nitre,
Quicksilver: but Whiteness partakes of the Light, by which (I do not say it is
visible in dark, but) disposed to more visibility than other obscurer pieces.
Hence we answer an Objection, because in the dark recesses of the Earth no
Light is perceptible. Resp. The Spirit called Light or Heat, is Innominate of
it self, is only termed Light in relation to the Sense; so that we must not
conclude the Nonexistence of the Spirit from the Non-apparence, because more
is required to the one than to the other. We see not the dancing Motes in the
Air, but where the Sun discovers them, howsoever they frisk continually by us:
no man by Night sees the Lightsome Ray of the Luminous Body, if it run parallel
to the Eye. Nature has not given us Senses to perceive all possible, but all
convenient Objects; no Microscope reaches All things that are really existent.

74. As to Cold then, who knows not that the Brightest Night in Winter, and
most Starlight, are usually most Frosty? Dixeris Coelum esse frigidum, says
Kepler, who raises the Objection, to which he gives little Satisfaction: nay,
that the vehement Congelations are found about Daybreak.

75. All this concerns every Planet in the Heaven, not the Sun it self
excepted. I have wondered often at Wintertime to see Relenting Air in the
Sunshine, and freezing in the Shade; I concluded two things, both that Cold
had its Activity, and that the very Solar-light was no Enemy to it, not the
secundary Light, whatsoever it does if in its primary, or more perpendicular.

76. Here it will be argued, how comes Light to be the chief favourer of Cold,
since All Light at such a distance from the Center does the same? What shall we
say? If were the remotest from the Earth we had some pretense, but has that
plea for his Title. If we shall say from the difference of his Fabric and
Spirit therein lodged, and this argued from its whitish Light; then will put in
an equal claim. Resp. is most remote, but the Consistence and the Spirit is
different. is brisker to all appearance, glows darkly and sullenly; and are
bright, and flaming Comet-like, near to sparkling and Scintillation, this
argues a quick Spirit, while glows within the Profundity of his Globe. Unless
you will extort from us a confession, that we do believe that the Reason of the
crude Light that appears in to lie in the crude Spirit, placed there by Nature,
which we are not forced to avow; in the mean time sufficiently salving the
instance from, which we make not equally crude, by her vicinity to our Globe of
the Earth, as also to the Sun. The best of it is, that Both these ways of
Explication are hugely reconcilable, seeing a Spirit will secretly pass along
with a Beam, yea with a Flame too. So the Sublunar Cold shall be martial'd upon
a double account, the Agile nature of Light, and the Homogeneity of the Spirit
conveyed by it: as if it should be thus with the, she should be the Lady of
Moisture, upon the same twofold respect, viz. the Tepor of her Beam, and the
Sympathy of the Sublunar Moisture with the Lunar. Surely this does not
substitute violence instead of Nature, when we say that the Cold Spirit may be
acted ab extrinseco by the Celestial Light: because All Light (so for want of
words we call that Innominate Spirit) is of the same nature, the Light
Celestial with the Light or Spirit inbabiting the Sublunar Body; and by reason
of this Homogeneity One is naturally governable by the other, the Inferior by
the Superior; so is Iron naturally, not violently, though ab extrinseco
attracted by the Magnet.

CHAP. X.
The five Planets added to the Luminaries salve the Phenomenon. Winds blowing
where they list hinder not their Prognostic. Turbulency of Air from contrary
Causes. Jupiter (again) a resister of Moisture. The Planets not Signs only, but
Causes. Dominion ascribed to them in Scripture.
SO have we endeavored toward the settling of a Characteristic of All the
Planetary Bodies, constituting some of a hot Spirit, and They either in a more
Intense degree as, or Remiss as, all Procurers of Sublunar Moisture; one and
but one, how Lucid soever, yet either, endued with a Cold and Dry Spirit, or at
least befriending it, no Procurer but a Resister of Moisture.

1. And now All Variations of Air, reduced to the Laboratories of Cold and
Heat, may be safely imputed to the Bodies Celestial, since they appear of so
distinct, so contrary Energies; e. g. not only Rains and Thunders to Moist and
Warm, but the Frosts and Winds to Cold Productives: the Winds, I say, to Cold
Causes mixed with warmer; if with an equal Mixture, then the Winds are Dry, if
with an unequal portion of the warm Spirit, then Rain commonly is joined with
them.

2. And whereas our Principles profess to give Reason concerning the very
Determination of the Winds; what hinders? for when our Lord says, that the
Wind blows where it lists, He is far from making them Animate; He means that
the Winds were endued only with an Interpretative Freedom, thereby excellently
declaring the Freedom of Divine Grace, which often chooses its Province where
to blow. He does not deny its Emblem a Natural Cause either of Existence or
Determination, He only tells us the Origin of the Wind is Invisible, and the
Range of it uncertain, not fixed or bound to any one Point, from whence, or any
Coast on which it blows; we know not whence it comes, nor whither it goes, we
see not the first Head-Spring of the Invisible Cataract, nor how far it runs on
drift: He does not intend to deny, that the Heavens are the Cause of it, as in
the Trade-winds and Monsons are manifest, which God brings in their Seasons
out of his Treasures, as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. C V. nay he makes use of
the very Prognostic of foul Weather, (...) says the Greek, which in its
Definition includes Wind as well as Rain, from the Angry face of the Heavens,
S. Matthew. XVI.

3. These things thus established, former Arguments that lay against the
Assignment of the Sun and Moon alone, find their Solution: when we asked if the
Account of the Constitution lay only on them Two, whence came the Storm, the
Violence? it was scarce rationally imputable to two Stars only, but to Five
more, as Potent every whit as They, well it may.

4. We asked again, whence came the Duration of the Constitution, for the space
of a Week, Month, etc? not from the two Luminaries alone, but from the Other
Auxiliaries; seeing sometimes is found to keep his Posture for a week
unchanged, the like may and; a Week said I? yea a Month almost, as ordinarily
does; yea may hover about one and the same part of the Zodiac almost for the
space of 8 Months, in his Stations, Retrograde Courses, etc.

5. Next, as to the Vnsuitableness of the Constitution to the Season, or the
Time of the day. If nor Sun nor Moon alone can produce Warmth in the Night, the
Rest conspiring with Him or Them may easily. If the Sun cannot raise Thunder in
the Winter-Solstice, or at Christmas, may be so posited, as to play such
Gambols.

6. Lastly, whereas we justly demanded of Those that make the Luminaries the
sole Arbitrators of the Changes of the Air, Vnde frigus? (a Question that
exercises the Naturalist, as much as Vnde malum? did the Christians of old) we
have endeavored to find it a Terrestrial Spirit, call it what you please,
Nitrous, Salt, etc. Shis Terrestrial Spirit, regulated according to its
vicissitudes, from the Modification of the Light Celestial, chiefly (among the
Planets) by the Radiance of; by I say, who for the most part is found by
Experience to encourage Cold by his Presence, the others rather by their
Absence.

7. And this cold Cause I have confessed Astrology is bound to find, since
there are Constitutions of the Air existent, which manifestly argue Contrariant
causes even at the same time: for what else are Nocturnal Lightnings about
Autumn, often in Cold Air? What else are Lightning and Hail, Fire and Freezing?

8. Hitherto must we bring All Turbulency, since all Trouble in Nature proceeds
from Contraries, from Antipathies and Impatiencies mutual of Several Natures at
the same time engaged. Thus shall we see a vast Cloud, pregnant with Thunder,
bear up against the Wind, and a Superior Cloud ride contrary to the Inferior:
such do I undertake all Constitutions are, which are Droughty, Soultry, and yet
serene: the Serenity and the Drought being imputed to a cold Original, mixed
with the Contrary.

9. So that it is no miracle to observe white Frosty Mornings in May or July,
ushering in a soultry Day, yea it is a known Prognostic of such a day to find
a Fog (proceeding from a cold Cause.) blinding our early Prospect in the
Country: That and hazy Air, the first Lineaments of Mist or Fog, we impute to
the Influence of, blended or configur'd with his Fellows.

10. Certainly is he justly defined the Resister of Moisture, being the Parent
of Serenity; of such resistance, that when he cannot prevail so far as to
hinder a cloudy Sky, he will (and it is a fine Experiment) do his best then, to
make the Cloud Barren and Unfruitful; who if it happen that he is overpowred so
far, as to admit a moist Constitution obtruded upon him, yet he will maintain
his power so as to choke up the Moisture with a Mist, or niggardly crumble it
into a Drisle.

11. And whereas it may be observed by the studious Inquirer into these things,
that our Principle of Cold may sometimes be deeply engaged in Great and Violent
Rains or dangerous Flashing Lightnings, which are Moist and Warm Productions;
the Answer is legible in the Objection, for violence in Nature many times
presupposes some great Resistance, which for a while staves it off, 'till that
Resistance like a Dam in a Stream, being broken and overpowr'd, admits the
Danger to show it self. It Is not often that One Planet is deeply engaged, (
deeply I said, for there is a difference) at such times, but when such an Hour
comes, the Violence may be really ascribed to Causes contrariant, their
Action, Reaction, Resistance, and Counter-resistance one to the other. All
Lightnings are not alike Dangerous; some play more remote, out of harm's way;
some flash angrily and sudden, near the Earth; Experience of the Forge
teaches, that a cold Infusion adds violence to the Flame. This cold Activity
is discernible also by Hailstones at such times intermixed: howbeit suppose
there is none, because some Situations are no friends to that Meteor, the
Violence it self is no obscure token of contrary Action, as we see commonly in
Thunder-showers, with extraordinary Copiousness succeeding the Flash or Crack.
Tantae molis erat -- so many and so potent are the Celestial Instruments used
by Providence in the Alterations over head; the Sun, the Moon, and the Rest, as
it seems, of the Number.

12. When therefore God is pleased to call the Luminaries, and in Them the Rest
also, by the Name of Signs, he is far from denying his own Ordinance, whereby
he has made them not Signs and Siphres, but Authors and Causes of Inferior
Mutations, giving them Rule, Genesis I. a signal Dominion over the Earth: Dominion
seeming to be a very Egyptian word, from whom Moses in all probability
borrowed it; nay there are no less than three words signifying the same
literally and properly, (...) in Hebr. and Chaldee: so that there is no arguing
from the signs in Genesis I. unless we can find in our heart to aver, that the is
a Sign of the Month, and the Sun a Sign of Spring and Summer, etc. a bare Sign.

13. As weak is the Argument drawn by Learned men, Picus, Petavius, etc. the
word (...), used, as we have seen by the Ancient Astrologers, when they treat
nevertheless of the Effects: since every Cause not hidden, but incurring into
Sense, is apt to signify, as Rains signify Floods, and Turbulent Winds a
great Sea. Nor could the Ancient Observers be imagined to watch the Celestial
Motions with such care and diligence, but with hopes of obtaining the Cause, in
which they knew they had made no small progress, when after a little
Observation they concluded the Sign.

CHAP. XI.
Aspects, the Old justified; the New rejected. They depend not on Harmonical
Proportion. Their Revolution, Duration, and unquestionable Significancy. The
single Aspects no absolute Cause, but only Causa sine qua non. A large Soul
required to the due Contemplation of the Bodies Celestial. The Certainty of the
Moon's Natural Warmth. That being admitted, the Congresses with Her make way
for discovery of the Rest.
. 1. PLanetary Aspects are no vain Terms of a Bawbling Art, but are Mysterious
Schematisms of a secret Force and Power toward the Alteration of the Sublunar
World, especially the Air, and those Great Issues that depend thereon,
according to the Natures of the Influences, and the Influenced.

2. Planets therefore, without such Habitude, must of necessity have their
Energy; for on what shall the Efficacy of the Combination be founded, if the
Terms combined be utterly insignificant? Complication of Ciphres make no tale.

3. Besides it is unreasonable to deem, that Two in Configuration should be
Active, and twice two without such Combination be ineffective.

4. The new Aspects, though the Diligent Kepler after his Tutor Mich. Moestlin
ascribed much to them, are not much to be regarded, unless perhaps the
Quincunce and Semisextile.

5. The Quincunce Kepler reduces to the Opposition; by the same reason one
would think may the Semisextile to the Conjunction, both differing 30 degrees
from their Principals on each side, yet the Parity holds not.

6. Sometimes, the Quintile makes a show, and if That have ought in it, the
Biquintile will look for some Respect; and if so, then the Vigintile, and
Quindecile, and Decile, etc. will also look to be courted; while we hope we go
on such Principles, that we shall never be forced to own such Driblets of
Aspects.

7. These when they happen with notable Concurrence, it may seem that their
Testimony is not to be refused; but they very seldom so happen, and when they
do meet, there may be found a sufficient Activity without them. As Aug. XX. Ao
1621, in Kepler, there is a Record of a grand Effect, Dashing Rains, and Places
struck with Thunder, to which there are assigned, beside the Old Aspects Lunar
and other, two Quintiles and a Biquintile: here, say I, this Notable Effect may
be accounted for without these Quintiles, etc. The Concurrence of such New
Devises move not, because upon supposal of even feigned Causes, even those
pretended vain Causes may by Accident concur.

8. Yea Astrologers are sick of these New Aspects when referred to the, and
That not without Reason, since the Lunar Sextile, one of the Old Aspects, is
scarce of a discernible Efficacy; whatsoever is less, sure is Imperceptible.
The Semisextile, as we have hinted, being therefore to be discarded, yea the
Quincunce it may be has no Activity, but what is founded on a Fallacy of the
Cause.

9. Multiplying of Aspects is to be taken heed of, proceeding from a false
perswasin, viz that all Effects Sublunar are to be imputed to the mere
Planetary Habitudes; even Kepler himself was offended at some better
Principles, when he first brought in this Abortive, of which hereafter.

10. The Old Aspects, according to Ptolemy, are five: 1. Conjunction, whose
Character is. 2. Sextile, marked thus, Sextile. 3. Quadrate,. 4. Trine,. 5.
Opposition,.

11. Conjunction, when two Celestial Bodies are situate at or toward one end of
the same Line perpendicular, in the same Sign and degree, which Line being
protended reaches the Center of the Earth.

12. Opposition, when they are found at the Extremes of the same Diameter, viz.
at VI Signs distance.

13. It Is hard to say whether of These have the greatest Efficacy; for the
Conjunction may be more potent in one Respect, and the Opposition in another:
the is more for Warmth and Moisture, the for cool Air and Winds, seeing the
further the Ray is protended, the more it befriends the Cold Spirit. Note, this
must be understood per se, and of its own nature, howbeit by accident it may
prove otherwise.

14. Trine and Quadrate, where the Celestials are distant a 3d or 4th part of
the Sphere, i. e. four or three Signs of XII, have a notable proportion of
Activity; in the one the Rays make a right Angle, in the other an obtuse, not
much wide from a Right Angle at the Center of the Earth: yea a Trine makes just
a Right Angle sometimes, according to the difference of the Obliquity of the
Zodiac.

15. The Sexile, whereby the Celestials at two Signs distance, and no more,
make a very acute Angle on the Surface of the Earth, whose Lines being
protended cut one the other much on this side of the Center, the most imbecil
therefore of All the Aspects.

16. So the Aspects it may be have not their Foundation so much on Harmonical
Proportion, as on Physical and Optical Principles.

17. Aspects of Planets are in Number XCIII, being distributed among the
several Complications of the Planets.

18. Complications are XX, thus exhibited:







19. These Complications, let out by their several Aspects, etc. if every
Planet were alike free, would amount to CV: but when with and, and These among
themselves, admit no Aspect but, the Sum is abated to XCIII.

20. Unless the utmost Distances of and from the Sun may be reckoned in, being
tantamount to with him.

21. Some one or more of these Aspects are extant every Month, to qualify or
vary the Season according as the Decree Eternal has laid out their Motions.
For if there be no, there may be; if neither, a or etc.

22. Yet the Periods of Conjunctions are rarer, and meet but once in the
Twelvemonth, once in two years, about a Year and half only, in two Months, and
the runs through every Aspect with every Planet once in the Month; so that if
an Aspect be any thing, or Celestial Influence any thing, the Moon is a Great
Dispenser of it.

23. and meet in 8 or 9 Months. with about 2 years. with somewhat more. with
and according to their different meeting with. and in no less than 20 years,
called therefore the Great Conjunction.

24. The shifting of these Aspects every Revolution is observable, how they
fall in the subsequent year later than in the precedent: as later by a
Fort-night, about a Month, above a Month, about half a year;, though at 20
years distance, shoulders out half a year also.

25. Sometime and falling Retrograde are willing to salute and be saluted by
one another, and, as it happens, by the Superiors also; so that an Aspect may
be reiterated within less than its ordinary or direct Period And wherefore All
this? but for the various dispensation of Nature, and the most of it within the
memory of Man, though it be not necessary the Divine Providence should confine
its Transcendent Actions to the short Observation of the Small Epoche of one
Man's Life. Howbeit the Moon's Revolutions are of a short Term, whose constant
Visits, as we have heard, of every Planet, cannot be idle, unless we make All a
dumb Show, nay it were well we did, for then there would be oft-times Mystery
couched. Sure if there be so much of Art or Wisdom, there must be somewhat of
Natural concern in her various Phases.

26. One thing we have not considered yet, of no small concern in this Theory,
and That is their Duration: for though exact Calculation pretends to scruples,
First, Second, yet Natural Causes are not so straight-lac'd; a Convex-Glass
will burn at several distances.

27. Confining therefore the, and with That the rest of the Configurations to
the same Sign and Degree, and allowing the Acme of the Aspect to take place at
the precise Astronomical Time, with proportional allowance of Vigor or
Abatement, according to the Scruples of Access and Recess; yet true it is that
the Physical Influence of an Aspect, exerts it self before and after, i. e. as
long as the Heavenly Movables keep within the Terms of the Definition. Such
may be the Motion of the Planets, that they may keep even to the same Degree
(though not Minute) for a considerable Space. On this account we see an
Eclipse, Solar or Lunar, lasts several Hours, whose exact Central Calculation
is tied to a Minute.

28. Lo then another Suspicion, of no Idle Conceit, since Nature has made
nothing in vain, that should last about 4 or 5 hours;,, 3 days, 8 days, 9.
Again, lasts 9 days,, the like. But continues 24 days. These are the chief,
and for Brevities sake we content our selves with them.

29. Now as concerning their Influence, and the Specification thereof, be
pleased to take notice, that there is a Table goes about, pretending to
acquaint us with their significations, with some little Modifications indeed,
according to the four Seasons of Spring, Summer, etc. but as to the main
agreeing with it Self and Truth. Let the quainter Reader be pleased not to
nauseate it, lest the Knowledge of Celestials suffer thereby: I do not say it is
exact and beyond Amendment; I shall offer toward some Amends my Self, but for
the General I say, No man's Art or Experience, Syllogism or Induction has yet,
or ever shall, abolish it.

30. The Vulgar Table follows thus.
Pro natura aer temporis immutatur. Venti cum humid. Pluvia. Pluvia. Imber.
Ton. Pluvia. Frig. remiss. Venti. Tonitru. Venti sicci. Frigus rem. Pluv. frig.
Grand. Ton. Pluv. frig. Nix. Nebula. Venti. Tonitru. Venti. Frig. rem. Aeris
tempories. Venti. Temperat. Turbid. venti. Ton. Tempest. Turb. venti. Frigus
rem. Turb. vel Pluvia. Grando. Ton. Vent. vel pluv. Turbid. Vere. Aestat.
Autumn. Hvem. etc. Turb. Hum. Hum. calor remiss. Neb. Pruina. Nubes. Nix. Vent.
pluv. Vent. imbres. Vent. nubes. Vent. nives. Pluvia frigida. Pluvia. Pluvia
frig. Pluvia. Nix. Pluv. Tonitru. Tonitr. gradndo. Pluv. vel turb. Frig.
remiss. Frigus and humminuitur. Aestate tonat. Venti nubiferi. Pluvia. Imbres.
Pluvia. Frig. rem. Hum. vel nub. Calor remiss. Neb. turb. vel Nix. Venti
humidi, vel nubiferi. Venti interdum nubiferi.

31. Of which Table this is the Sentiment: the are warmly affected, and most
qualified for Cold, and that the Contrary Planets produce their Effects
according to their mixtures. warm, for you see they bring frigus remissum with
them; but the Aspects of bring no such News, except configur'd with: neither
brings any such remission, except configur'd with. cold is further discernible
in the production of Hail in the Summertime, it is but twice mentioned, viz. in
his Aspects of and; so it seems causes it. As for, it is true, it reaches that
he is not cold, but pretty warm, and makes temperate Air, remits Cold joined
with, and heightens it not, neither with nor, nor.

32. I would it were so, though I fear it will not prove so; for this very
Table, now I look hard upon it, proclaims with me that is a Resister of
Moisture, there being no mention of any Moisture, but only Winds and Temperate
Air, except in that rare Aspect of and, which comes it is known but once in 20
years.

33. For the rest the matter is even out of question: who knows not, said Mr.
Digges, as I remember long ago, that brings Winds and Rain, or other Aspect of
Winds, serene weather, Clouds or Rain, with and the like? There is as much
Evidence for them, and connection natural with the Effect given, as in any
Prognostic can usually obtain.

34. And Professors mean no more than a Prognostic, or a partial Cause. Wise
men stumble at and reject these Definitions, because they are not absolute and
infallible, in that the Event answered not one or two poor Observations; so
discarding good Knowledge, because it vouchsafes not to appear, and that in its
Meridian Evidence, to a hasty and impatient Censor. Rashly enough; for it is
true, that a Flint strikes fire, though the Spark does not always catch: there
may be Indispositions, yea contrary Indications in Nature. For what
Prognostic. I had almost said Definition of Nature is infallible, or
indefeisible? I mean what single Prognostic? for in the Concurrence, there is
a Certainty of the Answer. But for single Aspects we come not to contradict our
selves, who have avowed already, that the and (and the like must be said of the
other Pairs) however respecting one the other, are at no hand Causes Total, or
Adequate. All that we say is, they are not insignificant, but have their Share,
Causae sine quibus non.

35. The Lunar the meanest, the Middle somewhat a stronger Nisus, the three
Superiors the chiefest.

36. Even the meanest, the Lunar Aspects, do bode such and such Variations, and
that with Truth, for the major part, though a single Cause it be.

37. For we must enlarge our Thoughts, and not reckon (at this distance) by our
Eye; Planets are vast Bodies, whose Dimensions exceed the clasp of our narrow
Phantasms, of such, disproportion to our Ideas that we cannot reach them, Non
si te ruperis, inquit: to these then we must allow a proportionable Faculty,
commensurable to their Magnitude.

38. Let the be so many times less than the Earth, it is a vast Body still; for
he who takes not the Earth to be such, let him Sail round the Terraqueous
Globe, and then tell me his opinion: then we measure these Bodies right, when
we lose our selves in the Comprehension. If all have weak Brains with me, I
profess I cannot fancy the Magnitude of this Island, no not of a single County;
my best Prospect makes a Map of it; surveys it with contraction of Yards into
Inches, and Miles into Furlongs.

39. The Warmth of the is not so clear to the Sense as that of the, but to
Reason it is; so it is as evident that I have Pores in my Body, insensible
though they be, as that I have Nostrils.

40. Then for its Vicinity, the Eye it self judges by comparing the Heights of
the with the Absis of the, that it hangs a great way below the Expansum;
insomuch that she comes within the Earth's shadow, and is often totally muffled
in it, a sign that her distance is reasonable, and not improportioned to the
flux of her Influence toward the Earth.

41. As the Moon's Nature is attained by her Congress and Habitude to the Sun,
so the Nature of the rest may, by diligence, be discoverable by their congress
with the Moon. (1) Because the Lunar Configurations occur with every Planet,
and that through every species of Aspect. or of and there is none, nor of, but
both and own these Aspects to the * (2) The Planets observe their Aspect to
the, and with themselves, in longer Periods of Years, one or more, as you have
heard, but the observes her Approaches every Month; the odds is 13 to 1, for so
many Lunar Aspects are conspicuous, while but one Solar Configuration except
with appears. But in these there is nothing to be done, till we first see the
Great and Leading Syzygie, or Lunar Aspect with the; then, not before, it may
be time to discourse of the Rest.

CHAP. XII.
1. True, Science hates not the Light. 2, 3, 4. The Vulgar Table considered,
as to the. 5, 6. No need of Triplicities and Lordships in the Case. 7. The
brings Wind or Rain for the most part, or Warmth (the foundation of both.) 11.
The State of the Air without warmth must be serene. 13, Warmth conduces to
Snow, also to Wind. 14. Hence-Wind or Rain: have common Prognostics. Lord
Verulam's consent. Linschoten and Drake's testimony for foul Weather at a
small. 15. Evidence from Diaries for seven years. 16., worth observing. 17.
Astrological day from midnight to midnight. 18. Three days concerned in every
single Evidence. 21. Partile and Platick, a distinction of Aspects very
material. 22. The Orbs, so called, of the Planets. 23. Semisextile and
Quincunx. 24. Vicinity of helps to the credit of the New 's influence. 25. The
Diary. 27, and 64. Rains sometimes at the precise hour of the Aspect. 30. The
Gradual method of Nature, from the first privation to Constitutions
tempestuous. 31. Prospect of the variety of the Lunar Centributions for seven
years. 32. How we came to know the Nature of the Planets. 33. The not
indifferent to Heat or Cold, yet may be suspected for a Cold Planet. 34. Summer
days, not Hot on the account of the only. 35. Warmth in Winter days, and
Trajections in Frosty Nights. 37. Warmth at the Congress not always so
sensible. 39, and 44. Aspects do not so often miss as hit. 45. Constant
Observation defends our Theory, and answers Objections. 47. Aspects, Single
Causes though they be, bring their Effect above the proportion of the Moiety.
48. The inclination of the Aspects Mechanically illustrated. 51. The fatal
Stumble of the Adversary. 52. Change got its name from the Consequents of Wind
or Rain in the disjunctive. 54. This disjunctive may be determined. 55. The
Change rather inclines to West and Southernly Winds. 56. The Cause of the North
Wind is a secret. 57. The South East Wind is a rarity. 59. The Wind often
Changes on the day of the New. 60. Kepler made too little account of the,
revinced by his own Diaries. 62. The has manifest Influences on all Thunder
which happen at the Change. 63. Eichstad noted with Kepler. 66. Difficulty of
Prognostic arises in England, not because we are an Island, but because we are
a Northern Island. 69. Adversaries challenged to demonstrate the contrary to
our Pretensions. 70. Changes in certain Signs rarely or never fail of their
effect.
1. THough all Tradition, Ancient and Modern, tell us, that the change of the
has a signal Influence (beside what has been rehearsed in general) on the
Mutation of Air, so notorious, that scarce any the most refractary Skeptic
denies it, at least has not maintained the Paradox in Writing; yet for all our
vaporing, when we are urged to speak particulary, and distinctly to the Effect,
we hang off, and seem loath to come upon the Stage, as if Astrology were a close
and cunning Faculty, and afraid (as being founded upon uncertainties) to be
revinced by ordinary experience, and to expose it self, as it has done in some
other Points, for Ridiculous.

2. For what says our Table, p. 42. what Constitution does this Aspect bring?
Hot or Cold, moist or dry, calm or windy? All, the Oracle says here is, that
at, pro natura Temporis Aer immutatur. Say you, what is that Natura Temporis?
let no Deceit lurk in Generals. Is it according to the Season, i. e. the
Quarter of the Year? then the Change in Summer is hot and dry, in Winter cold
and moist, in Spring and Autumn temperate, dry or moist. But is it always so?
Not always, sure; it will appear otherwise, when we shall show, a cold Change
after Midsummer, and a soultry Air in March, and all within one Year of our
Lord An. 1671. Yet again, a cold Change in July, and hot in October, Anno 1672.
Nay, nor most part does it hold. The Aestival Lunation in May or June, a
considerable part of Summer, is rarely dry. Beside that, an Aspect professes to
bring some more special Constitution than what is forestalled in the General
Character of the whole Season: if the days that antecede and follow the Aspect
be, by virtue of the Season, hot and dry without the Aspect, what great Arcanum
is it to define the Day of the Change to be alike hot and dry by virtue of the
Aspect?

3. Is it according to the Month? so that the in March shall bring Wind, in
April Rain, in May fair weather, in June Heat and Dripping. Pretty well and
plausible. But what is the Nature of each Month? is it Fixed and unalterable?
or is there a second and superinduced Nature? if the nature of the Water is
fluid, is it not by nature a Fluid congelable? As Water respects the Services
of Men I grant it is fluid; and as the Year proves kindly; the Nature of the
Months are fixed. But are all Years kindly? are all Months seasonable? What if
the Month proves unseasonable, which Constitution shall this Aspect observe?
the Prime Constitution, or the Secondary, superinduced? if the later, there is
no light given us by the Celestial Phoenomenon, 'till we know how the Month
will prove; if the former, then all Constitutions at the Change prove
seasonable, and all unseasonable weather breaks at the Change, flat contrary to
Experience, though, I confess, not according to Expectation.

4. It will be said, it is enough if common Expectation looks for such a State,
seeing that Expectation it self is founded upon the frequency of the Accidents
corresponding. Be it so, -- Any thing that makes for our Interest, the Interest
of the Creation, and its Great Founder: but Astrological Prognosis pretends
further, even to discover when the Vulgar Expectation shall be frustrated;
pretends to admonish the World of unseasonable, as well as seasonable
Constitutions.

5. Little better are those two Salvo's that are brought by those, who are to
sensible of the failure of their Principle concerning the Triplicities, and the
Lordship of the Planet in chief.

6. But these Ancient Fancies have little, I fear, beside their Antiquities to
plead for them; That of the Trigon being a fine Knack in Ptolemy, but of no Use
we are sure in our Theory. For how shall we believe Fiery, Airrys, Watery,
Earthy Trigons, the one Hot and Dry, the other Hot and Moist, etc. according to
the Elements, who are not persuaded that the Elements themselves are so
qualified? For Example sake, not the Air in particular, and it is a most obvious
Objection; how, can I allow, is a Winter Sign? or one of the Earthy Triplicty,
when it is so near the Aestival Tropic? do (...) of and bring cold and dry
weather in, or hot and dry? Neither cold nor dry agrees to April, nor hot nor
dry to November.

7. As to that of the Lordship, the (...), and (...) as Ptolemy calls it; we
speak as to our Affair, besides the Confession of the Best Practitioners.
Eichstad, Ephem. part 1. page 32. that there is Nothing in it. 'Twere well
Natural Knowledge could find such a Compendium; yet if there were such, it
would hold only as to the General, as to the proper Day there would be a Non
liquet: but of this perhaps hereafter. We are sure we can do our business
without any such Notion, for our Method takes in sorry Considerations in lieu
of that one we omit.

8. Before we adventure to declare our Experience, let is be remembered thus
much is granted us, that at often times happens Winds or Rain, if not both, as
Mirandula's Sea men, you see, have witnessed. What do I speak of one Century
past? Even in S. Ambroses Age, much above a 1000 years ago, in time of Drought
it could be said, Ecce Neomenia pluviam dabit, Oh we shall have Rain at the
Change of the; the Father, it is true, gently reprehends it with Nollem dictum:
Not that he rejected the Philosophy, by which he greatly illustrates the
Creators Glory in that very Discourse, but abating rather the Confidence, which
we are too apt to place in second Causes, though imperfectly apprehended.

9. When it is remembered then that our Ambition reaches but to (...), speaking
of a single Aspect, as has been often said, (and said not out of a politic
Restriction, but with reason, from the nature of a single Cause, whose efficacy
many times reaches not, either for want of Coordinates; or is broken, by the
Counterpoise of contrary Agents) We avow that produces a warmer Air, attended
for the most part with Rain or Winds, but whether of these takes place,
exclusive to the other, must be determined by the whole conjuncture of the
seven, not by any one single Aspect.

10. So that Warmth is the Prime product the other are Consequents; that Cardan
may no longer say of this Aspect, Non unum significat, discouraging Inquirers
by so loose a Character, since it produces a Determinate effect as much as any
other Aspect, and as often.

11. It Is true, we who deal in prognostique, must treat of such warmth only, as
is sensible; but yet of a truth, there is very often warmth in Nature, which is
not directly distinguished by our Sensories; No man can say that he alone has
the Standard-sensory, to which all the Sensations of other must Conform.
Sometimes we infer, rather then discern the presence of Warmth, viz. from some
visible effect, to which the Sense would not otherwise assent, as by Snow
melting in a Cold Thaw, or an early Shrub (the Gooseberry suppose) sometimes
sprouting in January, whose Mornings may be Frosty: in this case, when Warmth
is so observed by Logical inference rather then Sensation, the Aspect thinks
she has right in the Effect.

12. They who are not studious of Nature, impatient to attend her leisurely
methods, will scarce be content with any thing less then the Effect in its
highest Complement. Unless we can warrant Wind or Rain at every Change, the Art
professes nothing; whereas if a Cloud or a Mist be produced, it may perhaps be
not unworthy the Observation of those who inquire into Causes, since the Air in
its pure Naturals, is serene, and supposing no Sun,, nor Star, must needs be
such: becase not any vapor can be raised or suspended by Heat, but, when that
Heat is extinct, must necessarily return by its innate gravity, or which is all
one, sympathy with its Original; to its First Bed. What harm is there in
exactness? if Account may be given of those places effects, at least, in the
more Acreamatic part of Philosophy, since these Effects make room for the
Greater, yea perhaps are distinguished only by a gradual distance. Some
portions of Clouds being observed to drops when the Zenith is absolutely dry,
and a Mist (in some (...)) shall we an English man to the Skin.

13. The Congress therefore of produces Warmth, and thereby Rain as its
Consequent; produces I say, or continues it already produced. Now what if I
go further, and say that it inclines at times also to Snow and Hail, for they
also have a certain dependence on Warmth, as a Comproductive at least, since
it is easy to distinguish between the Drop and its Congelation, ascribing those
distinct products, to the contrary generants; some pieces of Nature, like those
of Art, passing through many hands, before they are finished.

14. However to Rain it conduces, and to Wind also; since in all Wind the Warm
Atomic is found impelling the Cold, aut contra; whence warmth must be a
constitutive ingredient in the exhalati^^ driving, or driven.

15. Wind and Rain although they differ formally as can be, agree in their
Original as the great Veralam also observes, Resuscitatan Hist. vent. p. 42.
Hence as we have seen, they promise a common prognostique, as Harbinger before
them to prepare for their entertainment, the same Disturbances of Animal
Bodies, witnessed by the Notes and Postures of Animals, the Aches and Malodies
of Man and Beast, do fore-speak, yet disjunctively and undeterminately, Winds
or Rain. This argues say I, the Unity of the Origin, and on no other account,
even Windy Nights, as I am informed from the Kilne, make the boiling Liquor apt
to overflow: To say nothing of the Testimony of the Baroscope, where the
Mercury falls alike to windy Weather as it does to Rainy. Now for Wind and
Gusty Weather, and their Cognation to the new, we reduce further if need be,
the Testimony of Moderns, who in the Voyages to the East Indies, complained of
bad Rodes, by reason of a small, Linschoten lib. 3. cap. 2. Yea for the West
also our own Drake tells us again, that a small Moon makes foul Weather all the
main along. Last Voyage apud Purchase.

16. It might be time now to produce our evidence, that the Dubious may be
disposed to a further enquiry, if not assent; In our Diary you shall see we
have allowed no less than three Days to the Aspect, that we might more
securely hedge in Observation.

17. It Is a perpetual account of VII years; for if the kind Reader will admit
the like for the Opposition, Square, etc. to the Sun, we shall not burden our
paper with the same Aspects repeated between and the, although a private
Observer may perhaps find them not unworthy his consideration, they carrying
their price in their Foreheads; especially those from.

18. In the Tables observe that the Days are reckoned after the Civil account,
viz. from Midnight to Midnight, because Art must apply it self to the Public,
so that the Observer must not content himself with the Day Artificial only, but
look through the interval of the natural Day entire, since Nature, when we poor
Mortals are composed to Rest, like its Great Master, neither Slumbers nor
Sleeps: Since, if at any time soever, be it the Dead of the Night, a violent
Tempest hap to awaken the Neighborhood, unforeseen, the Science is sure to be
indicted of, I know not what, uncertainties; it behooves therefore that Art on
the other side should be relieved by all the true Affidavits of Shower or Wind,
etc. which may steal in at that Interval, wherein the Major part of the World,
buried in their Beds, will be concerned in censuring the Method when it fails,
though unconcerned in its Justification; when it hits.

19. Here it may be thought that three days are too many for the purpose of
pretended Art: I have answered, Nay, already, to secure, said I, the effect,
which must happen within such a Term, for if it falls beyond, the Effect may
not be reasonably owned, of which presently.

20. Those who consider but one Day only, must be asked, what if an Aspect by
its very chosen time, falls out in the very Confine and Juncture of several
Days, at, or about Midnight: Must not this Aspect and its pretended Influence
belong to more than one of those Days so united? A, put case, may last four or
five Hours, as by Ecliptical Conjunctions, is manifest; in such case the may
relate to those days, as a Tenement by its Situation may belong to two Counties
or Parishes.

21. Once for all we must speak out, and a proper Chapter it may make, that
Aspects Planetary challenge a greater duration, than four or five Hours space,
seeing the Bodies Planetary are capable of mutual affection at distance, not by
Corporal only, when Indistant, but by Virtual Contact. Influence, like Streams,
ofttimes mingling and blending together, when their Fountains are diversely
situated.

22. And if it be well remembered, this Postulate cannot be denied by those who
allow the Lunar Influence to be Moderatress of the Tides which swell and rise
one or two days before and after the Aspect, as Ptolomy from and with
Experience has taught. The same Experience has further taught us to observe
the like or greater Interval of two days before and after, in the Dissolution
of Frosts, as we shall see in the next Chapter.

23. Justly therefore Astrologers have taken up that famous Division, making
Aspects to be not Partil only, exact to a Degree and Minute, but Platic also,
with enlargement and latitude to more than one or two such Degrees.

24. All the Difficulty is concerning the precise Terms and width of this
enlargement: To which the Ancient Arabs have made shift to answer. For all
Astrology, we shall see, lies upon it, that the Terms of the Suns Orb, as they
call it; the Orb of its radiation be comprised in Fifteen Degrees, the Moons
Orb in Twelve, for Saturn about Nine, Jove about Nine or somewhat more, Mars,
Venus, Mercury, about Eight. Summa Anglican. distinct. 10. tract. 1. Cap. 5.
And such Answer upon my Word, proceeds from a great experience, not vain and
arbitrary, as in the mutual Aspects of the other Planets will be noted, where I
hope to clear up the matter. Twelve Degrees you see, are ascribed to the 's
radiation. Well was I, when I saw, (and it was long first) that the Ancients,
the Arabs of old, accorded to my Method observed in the Table: For if XII.
Degrees must be allowed to the 's Orb of Radiation, ante and retro, (for so
they express themselves distinctly) then a Triduum is necessarily engaged in
the Lunar Table, in behalf of the 's efficacy and its demonstration.

25. Verily some such Salvo, or more than this, must be had on the account of
the New Aspects, the Smisextile and Quincunx, two of which border on the, (like
as Sextiles, Quartiles and Trines, we know are double.) In behalf of which we
may say, that it is even pity these Aspects are not damtted as well as any;
(but no more) because, then their Definitions woul de in a natural Order, of
equal successive Distance; VII. Aspects defined by the distance of Signs, O 1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6. The Conjunction at Sign ^. (no distance at all) the Semisextile
at Sign 1, the Sextile at 2, the Square at 3 Signs distance, the Trine at 4,
the Quincunx at five Signs distance, the Opposition lastly at 6. I confess for
order and memory sake it is pity it is not so. But let me tell you unless the
Semisextile on each side ante and retro, be reduced to the, and the Quincunx
likewise to the Opposition, as their Matrices, their Forts and Principals; the
Conjunction as prescinded from this new Semisextile, forsooth, will be found
the most insignificant Aspect in the pack. I prove this from the IX. years of
Keplers Diary, where I took the pains to examine the Semisextile and Quincunx,
and the Issue was of as frequent effect, near the time when the is about a
whole Sign's distance, as when near the the Hour of her Conjunction. But no
reason in the Earth can be given why any Semisextile for Power or Dignity
should take place of his Mistress, nor Physical I wis, nor Harmonical. Nature
it self will appear against such bold Innovators, who go to depretiate her
great Instrument, the Aspect of the, which by crying up Semisextiles, will be
utterly evacuated as between two Interlopers, when as common Sense tells us,
that whatsoever little pittance may be afforded to such Pretenders, they must
at no hand be compared to their Chief, for as much as in all Union of Activity
the Force must naturally, unless by accident, be more strong and Effective
nearer the Perpendicular Line, then the Oblique. So that when the Activity of
the Lunar Congress is rampant, the Reason is plain, that Rampancy can by no
means be ascribed to the Vicinity of the Semisextile, but contrary the
effectuousness of the Semisextile, secluding accidental advantages, must be
referred rather to that efficacy, which, issuing most vigorously from the
Perpendicular, is not yet extinct in the Oblique Line. Surely the Observer
shall never find it worth while to observe Lunar Semisextiles or Quincunxes,
either prescinding from their Principals: No body as yet has found himself
obliged to do it. If we find any such thing in the other Planets, we shall not
stifle it, but as to the it is certainly a Frustra fit per phera.

24. I spoke of accidental advantages, I intended thereby some even Lunar
Conjunctions with other Planets,,, etc. Therefore let no Man wonder if I
introduce and here, who are always, at least, within two days march of the,
and consequently of the in her conjunctional Aspects, so the Lunar with being
so near at hand to the Sun, helps to credit the Solar Conjunction with a
heightened Influence, which belongs in part to himself, and it would be silly to
impute an effect to an Upstart Semisextile single Aspect, which is palpably
reducible to an old confessed, not single, but a double Conjunction, the one of
the with, the other of the with, and sometimes. Not but that the has her Orb
of radiation even here, for is not always contiguous to the Lunar Body, but
that, as in Morals so in Naturals also, a Friend may, though at some distance,
step in and help at a dead lift.

Hence I fairly desire it may be considered, whether this and, as the case
stands, may not be subservient to the Sun and in the swelling of the Tides,
sometimes before, sometimes after the Change, as their position happens. I am
sure I found it so, not only in the change of the in August 1676. when being a
little behind the Sun, the transiting that Night, raised the Tides above half a
yard, but at several other times. All objections to the contrary are of
feasible Solution, by what has bin hinted concerning the other Planets and
their equal Power, or at least some other causes assignable of the same Nature.

. A TABLE.
January.
1671. 21. (XXXI. Dec. Anni praeced. Hard Frost. Close. cold Winds. N. I. ho.
1. mat. H. Frost, some mist, yielding, ho. o. Misle 5 p. N. after W. S. W. II.
Wet most part. S. W. 20. Ejusd. Men's. Novil. alterum. XXIX. Fair, Windy, foggy
Air. Warm, high Wind, noct. seq. drying. S. W. XXX. ho. 2 p. Close Rain 3 p. H.
Wd. Cold vesp. N W. XXXI. H. Wind ante luc. Frost, Fair, then Close, Cold Wind.
N. 1672 9. XVIII. Mist, drisle m. and ante o. cooler, p. m Meteor great prope
10 p. W. XIX. 12 p. Close, damp Walls, Misle 6 p. etc. N W. XX. Some Rain m,
Cool, Wet vesp. etc. N. 73. 28. VII. Hard Frost, overcast, stiff Wind. S W.
VIII. 2 m. Fair ante m. Tempest of Wind, Hail-storm 4 p. and drisle. Cold
Night. W. IX. Rain much a 3 m. Dash. 7 m. H. Wind, Snow and Misle 1 p. N E. 74.
17. XXV. Misty m. Clearing, misty p. m. S E. S. XXVI. 9 p. misty and close m.
s. offer 10 m. E. XXVII. Rain 8 and 9 m. dropping m. p. E. 75 5. XIV. Cold,
close; misty. N. XV. Close a. m. Sun welcome 10 m. Temperate, Cloudy Night. N
W. XVI. Misty m. Cloudy cold day. N. 76. 25. IV. Very dark m. Fog, Cold. S W.
V. 5 m. Frost, misty m. Fair, cold d. overcast vesp. Terrae motus in agro
Wigorn. hoc ipso vel praeced. die. N E. VI. Frost, close, drisle 1 p. S E. 77.
14. XXII. Foggy, Frosty, overcast 1 p. N W. XXIII. 6 m. Fr. Cold and gloomy
Air. N. XXIV. Frosty, Cold Wd. Red clouds vesp. Nly.
February.
1671. Novi Lunio suo caret hocce q. anno Februarii mensis. 1672. 9. XVII.
Frosty, Fair. XVIII. 3 p. Frosty, bright, cold Wd. N. XIX. Frosty, bright,
misty p. m. and vesp. Wd. N E. 1673. 28. V. Fair and Frosty. N E. VI. 8 p.
Frosty, Foggy per diem tot. S E. VII. Frosty m. Foggy, dark, clear p. m. S E.
74. 17. XXIV. Wet max. part, and Snow. E. XXV. 4 p. Frosty, Snow 1 p. H. Wd 9
p. N. XXVI. Frosty, Lowering 11 m. and mist. S W. 75 6. XIII. Frosty, Snow and
Hail max part. N E. XIV. 6 p. Frost, Snow 11 m. wetting p. m. and 9 p. N. E.
XV. Snow 7 m. misle p. m. max. part. E. 76. 24 II. Close p. m. W. III. 7 p.
blustering ante Inc. wetting 4 m. and 9 m. Fair p. m. W. IV. Frosty, open, close
most part. SW. NW. 77. 13. XX. Rain 4 m. o. and p. m. much Rain a 5 p. ad mid.
noct. W. XXI. 13 m. much Wet 7 m. ad 9 m. R. 8 p. W. XXII. Rain noct. Wet p. m.
throughout warm. S E.
March.
1671. (XXVIII. Febr. close, misty. W. I. ho. 1. m. s. mist, clear p. m.
Coldish Wind, dry vesp. S. S E. II. Mist, bright above, Windy, Fair, mist vesp
S 19. Novi Lun. alterum. XXIX. Rain m. Soultry d. hot clear ni. S W. XXX. 10 m.
Soultry, Fair, Wy. Rain 3 p. S W XXXI. Warm, Lowering, Wdy Trajectiones. S W
1672. 9. XVIII. Mild, Rain 9 p. close m. p. E. XIX. 3 m. cool m. dry, flying
clouds, Cloudy in East, Heat p. m. and bright. E. XX. Bright, dry, some Mist.
S. 1673. 28. VII. Fr. close, cold, misty Air, dry. N E. VIII. 1 p. no Frost,
cloudy. S. IX. Fr. Fog m. close, cold vesp. S. 74. 17. XXVI. Rain m. close,
warm, s. mist. S W. XXVII. 8 m. Cloudy m. p. S W. hottish Nly. XXVIII. Hottish,
cloudy. E. 75. 6. XV. Rain m. Rainy ab. 11 m. ad 11 p. etc. E XVI. 10 m. Snow 1
m. Fair and Frosty 12 p. E XVII. Frost, Fair, mist, cold brisk Wind. N E 76.
24. III. R. a 6 ad 9 m. (...) 11 m. bright n. Meteor from Propus to Canis Min.
W. IV. 10 m. open, mist, clouds promise 1 p. Winds. S. V. Fair m. rain 6 p.
Windy, S. 77. 13. XXII. Cool R. Hail 3 p. Rainy, Windy m. p. Hail and Thunder 5
p. at Forest Hill W. vesp. E. XXIII. 6 m. Fair M. White Cl. Rain 2 p. and 8 p.
wet time complained of. S. XXIV. R. 8 m, etc. dry p. m. coldish vesp. N. W.
April.
1671. 18. XXVII. Sudden overcast m. offer. windy a. m. Rain 7 p. E. S. XXVIII.
6 p. Cloudy, Windy, Shower vesp. S W. XXIX. Shower m. winds, heat, shower 4 p. and
7 p. S W. 72. 7. XVI. Wind and wet 6 m. Chill wind, Cloudy as for Hail, Hail at
Stratford, cold n. N W. XVII. 11 m. Fr. bright, Nly cold, cloudy, some mist. N
W. XVIII. Cold, dry, misty beneath, especially ho. 4 p. N E. 73. 27. VI. Close,
windy, mist, drisle a 3 ad 9 p. E. VII. 1 m. warm, often overcast a. m. drisle,
Hail o. showring 1 p. wet a 3. ad 5 p. Rain 8 p. mist. N E. VIII. Fair m. close
and weltring a. m. N E. but vesp. S. 74. 15. XXIV. Offer a. m. Dry p. m. N W.
XXV. 2 m. high wind, cool, open. N W. XXVI. H. wind and showring p. m. and
vesp. and 9 p. wind laid. S W. 75. 5. XIV. Fair, temperate, very hard. E. XV. 2
m. close m. fair, warm, dry winds. E. XVI. Warm. brisk wind, close, mist p. m.
E. 76. 24. II. Very cold m. cloudy, windy. E. N E. III. 2 m. Fr. Ice, somet.
overc. so at n. E. S E. IV. Close m. showring 9 m. open, warm. W. m. N. o. Ely.
p. m. 77. 11. XX. Rain 9 m. close m. p. misty, very warm, Sun occid. Wind
various. E. XXI. 8 p. closing m. shower 1 p. Open. E. XXII. Cold m. troubled and
misty Air, s. wet 3 p. Cold complained of, and imputed to 27. W.
May.
1671. 16. XXVII. Cool, close m. p. W. XXVIII. 2 m. misty Air, shower in
prospect a. m. and p. m. shower 5 p. W. XXIX. Close m. warm, lowering. N. 72. 5.
XV. Dry, fair, warm, misty Air, Halo notable circ. Sun, observed by the People
ad merid. N E. XVI. 7 p. bright, warm, white cl. Centauri caput visum ad noct.
Med. N E. XVII. Bright, hot, dry clouds in Scenes wind E. mane, at Temp.
pomeran. S W. S E. clouds, ride contrary from the North. 73. 26. V. Close,
cool, drisle once or twice. N E. VI. Close m. p. drisle 6 p. cool winds stir.
N. N W. VII. Very cold m. often overcast, dry, N. at vesp. E 74. 13. XXIV. Drisle
7 m. H. wd, close, warm. S W. XXV. 9 m. very hot, foggy air, s. lowering. E.
XXVI. Warm, H. wd. showrs 2 p. 5 p. S W. 75. 3. XIII. Hot, fair, mist, N. mane
vesp. W. XIV. 4 p. hot, dry, s. lowering overcast. Wly. mane, vesp. E XV. Frost,
close m. open, cooler, brisk winds, s. drops 8 p. ab orient. shower 9, 10 p.
Ely. 76. 22. I. Shower 5 m. hot, s. white cl. W. II. 6. fair, meteors 11 p. W. N
W. III. Close m, cool, fair p. m. bright meteor from Crater through a whole
Sign Westward. W. 77. 10. XX. Foggy, lowering a. m. clouds long streaked Gusts
of wind 2 p. 5 p. cool day. E. XXI. 10 m. overcast, a. m. clear and dry, p. m.
wind various. E. vesp. N. XXII. Suspicious in s. parts of h. o. H. wd, a drop,
clear Horizon o. mist vesp. Ely. clouds S E. and ho. 8. p. N E.
June.
1671. 14. XXV. Fair, lowering o. windy p. m. S W. N. XXVI. 10 m. fair, dry,
wind, overcast 4 p. N E. XXVII. Close N. m. and lowering, open, windy p. m.
bright n. W. N W. 72. 4. XIV. Overc. wds. s. drisle 8 p. S W. XV. 2 m. close m.
p. wind, dropping 3 p. S W. XVI. Close m. wd. fair, wdy. p. m. S W. 73. 23.
III. Lowering Air Merid. hot p. m. Fair. IV. 8. Fair and hot, yet brisk cool
wind. E. V. Very hot, cloudy p. m. gentle rain 8 p. S E 74. 11. XXII. Bright,
hot, windy 11 p. and very lightsome then in North East. N. XXIII. 8. Overc. and
hopes of Rain. Lute-strings crack, Wly. vesp. Ely. XXIV. Bright m. Lowering 10
m. and alias, suspicious 11 p. N W. 75. 1. XII. Close, drops 3 p. Rainy 9 p.
etc. W mane, but p. m. Nly. XIII. 4 m. windy, close, cold, light in North ho.
11 p. N. XIV. Fair a. m. shower 5 p. and 8 p. wind. W. 76. 22. (XXXI May. Rain 8
m. often overc. brisk wind, Rain 6 p. red clouds vesp.) W. I. 11 m. cloudy m. p.
Sun eclips. warm. windy, showrs 1 p. burning brightness in the North. W. II.
Often overc. wd. suspicious, wds up vesp. S. 18. Novilun. alterum. XXIX. Windy a.
m. dropping 2 p. Rain 11 p. S W. XXX. 12 Rain 2 m. Rain little a. m. wd. and
lowering clouds. W. I. Jul. wind, drops o. warm, coasting showrs 7 p. W. 77. 8.
XIX. Fair, s. mist, lowering o. clouds upper, fly N. lower W. warm, dry wd. red
clouds. E. XX. 1 m. fair, misty cl. 11 m. ho. 7 p. clouds fly Easterly, wind
various, Meteor prope 12 p. swarm of Bees on a Sign in Cheapside. E. XXI. Mist
m. bright, heat. E.
July.
1671. 12. XXIV. Rainy, obscure d. brisk wd. XXV. 8 p. shower 11 m. and alias.
XXVI. Close, s. moisture ho. -- m. Muscis pluisse nuntiatum est. 72. 2. XIII.
Close m. p. cool wind. N. XIV. 9 m. H. wind ante luc. cold, gloomy. N W XV.
Open, clouds gather a. m. hail, close and lowering 9 p. N W. 73. 21. III. Offer
8 m. Delphin. occ. smart showrs 5 p. ad 11 p. Weather complained of. S. S W.
IV. 2 m. clouds in Scenes, 11 m. Storm, s. Rain Thunder 8 p. Rain 11 p. S W. V.
Cloudy, dark 9 m. Wly. open and warm. N E. 74. 10. XXII. Soultry, Fog a. m. R.
1 p. S E. 4 9 p N E. Thunder 1. p. N. mane. vesp. S. XXIII. 4 m. open, H. wd, S
E. Rain p. m. S W XXIV. Rain 2 m. 7 m. H. wd. Trajections occ. S. W. 75. 29.
XI. Hot, lowering, s. mist, windy vesp. E. XII. 1 p. cloudy, a. m. windy, warm,
cloudy at n. E. XIII. Windy o. fair, warm n. N. 76. 17. XXIX. Fair, white cl.
many Meteors ab Aquila ad in the South. E. XXX. 1 p. hot, fair, long cl. ab
Austro in Sept. 1 p. clouds like kembe Flax, Meteors, hot 11 p. N. XXXI. Fair,
overc. p. m. s. drops, W. vesp. N. 77. 16. XVIII. Close, foggy, lowry p. m.
scarce offer. Just drop 6 p. N. XIX. Dry, foggy, pale cl. m. heat, lowering,
dry. S W. XX. Hot night, bright, not a cloud in the Sky, s. mist, N. Hot, E. N
E.
August.
1671. 10. XXIII. Fog. clearing 9 m. very warm, s. shower Sun occ. gentle Rain
10 p. W XXIV. 8 m. foggy m. Soultry, clouds in scenes, calm. XXV. Fair m, foggy
a. m. warm, dropping 6 p. 72. 29. XI. Shower in prospect 1 p. 2 p. H. wd. 2 p R.
and many thunderclaps sub vesp. S W. XII. 6. Close m. p. and lowering, drisle 9
p. wdy 7 p. hot p. m. XIII. Wet night, close a. m. H. winds, R. 6 p. S W. 73.
19. I. Rain ad med. noct. praec. and wind, close m. open, wind, coasting
showrs, Sun occ. S W. II. m. white cl. aloft, overc. at n. S W. III. Rain or,
and antea, hard R. 10 m. and shower 5 p. S W. 8. Novilun. alterum. XXX. Shower 6
m. 6 p. o. 9 p. etc. wdy. S W. XXXI. 8. R. hard. 7 m. especially 3 p. 9 p. and
noct. tot. S W. Sept. I. Open, shower in prospect 3 p. 5 p S W. 74. 8. XX.
Closing, wet 1 p 6 p. N E. XXI. 10 m. closing, L. Rain 4 p. drops 8 p. N. XXII.
Close m. p. shower 10 p. S E. 75. 28. X. Soultry, cloudy, fair, W. N. N W. XI. 2
m. dark m. fair, soultry n. S W. XII. Dark m. Rain p. m. S W. 76. 15. XXVII.
Close m. open, cool, Meteors 111. 10 p. S W. XXVIII. 12. p. wetting 4 m. showrs
and wind a. m. o. 2 p. dark ante 4. p. R. 7. 9 p. high winds. S W. XXIX. Cold,
bright, pregnant cl. H. wd. N W 77. 5. XVII. Fog m. o. overcast orrient
floring. clouds shower 6 p. S W. XVIII 7 m. Offer m. wd and fair p. m. N W. XIX.
Fog m. cloudy m. p. and H. wd. s. drops 10 m. shower ante 4 p. W. N W.
September.
1671. 9. XXI. Wet 9 m. o close, wds, bright n. N W. XXII. 11 p. s. mist m.
shower 1 m. close m. p. clear night. N W. XXIII. Very cold, ice, misty air, dry
p. m. R. 10 p. and deinceps. N W. 72. 29. X. Frost, bright m. suspicious at n.
Red clouds and more winds. XI. 5 m. Dark and wet a. m. Rain 4 p. Meteor prope
Vrsam Maj. 8 p. S XII. Frost m. bright, cl. in scenes, wind. W. 73. 17. XXIX.
Close m. p. drisle; Sun occ. and 11 p. S W XXX. 4 m. h. Frost, bright a. m.
sho. often p. m. Oct. I. H. frost, fair 1. drops 11 m. Fair, Red clouds in the
East. N W. 74. 6. XVIII. Frost m. close m. p. N. XIX. 5 Fr. m. and bright. s.
rain a. m. and p. m. N E XX. Misty and cloudy, yet dry. N. 75. 26. VIII. Fair.
windy, floting cl. lightning in the East reported 11 p. N IX. 11 m. hot n. wet
and dark m. close and lowering, day soultry, Rain 6 p. E. X. Hot, close, hottish
d. s. wd. E. 76. 14. XXVI. Flying cl. temperate, fair, H. wd and bro^d clouds.
N E. XXVII. 11 p. mist m. Fair, windy, Meteor ab ore Ceti Rigel versus. Alterum
circiter ipsum Zenith 10 p. E. XXVIII. Fog, fair above. Fog again 9 m.
temperate, winds. E. 77. 3. XV. Fog, clouds pregnant, warm. Gossamere Meteor
prope Aquar. maum. and 8 p. Aliud in Collo Andromed. N. XVI. 10 p. Fog m. Fair,
great dash ab ho. 8 a. ad 10 p. in M. C. S. XVII. Warm n. s. drops 7 m. shower 7
p. cold wind p. m. W.
October.
1671. 9. XXI. Close, foggy, colder. N W. XXII. 4 m. some frost, fair. N W.
XXIII Close, drisle 10 m showring Sun occ. 8 p. wd very high before Sun set,
and per diem rot. S. 72. 27. IX. Fair m. p. heat p. m. heat drops, coasting 5
p. S W. X. 7 m. s. mist m. Fila, fair, hot a. m. more p. m. no Dew at n. Great
Tide observed. S E. XI. S. wet ante luc. and ante merid. S E. 73. 16. XXVIII.
Foggy a m. close, drisle 7 p. E. XXIX. 4 p. R. ante luc. H. wd. drisle 4 p N E.
XXX. Frost m. fair, close p m. N E. 74. 6. XVIII. Misty, warm, offer 1 p. 7 p.
S W. XIX. 3 m. Windy, offer o. shower Sun occ S W XX. Foggy and cloudy. threatn.
o. warm, Trajections, Two in the very place of being with the Pleiad. N W. 75.
25. VII. H. winds, close, missing 7 p. S W. VIII. 8 p. H. wind noct. tot.
showrs m. close winds W. IX. Frost, shower 2 p. misty air, W. mane, then N W.
76. 13. XXV. Drisle 5 m. close, misty brisk wds. N. XXVI. 9. Fair, s. clouds.
Meteor 12 p. N W XXVII. Fog. dark p. m. N. 77. 3. XV. Fog. h. frost, fair, W. S
W. cloudy, threatn. 1 p. and alias freezing 9 p. cloudy 11 p N W. XVI. 11 m.
Fair, fr, fog. brisk wd, very cold by all confession. N. XVII. Fog, fr. close,
S W. 8 m. ho. o. N. s. drisle 11 p. E.
November.
1671.. 9. XX. Close m. p. windy, Gusts Sun occ. W XXI. o warm, close winds. W.
XXII. warm, often misle, Gusts of wd 10 p. S W. 72. 27. VIII. Open a. m. close p.
m. Meteor 8 p. high wind 10 p. W. IX. H. wind noct. tot. Rain m. p. H. wind and
overcast d. S W. X. Misty a. m. closing p. m. s. Rain 8 p. S W. 73. 16. XXVII.
Rain m. warm, close m. p. drisle 1 p. S W. XXVIII. 8 m. Fog, warm, wetting m
and p. m. winds audible 10 p. S W. XXIX. Brisk wind, close m. p. S W. 74. 4.
XVI. Bright, overc. o. freez n. overcast 11 p. S W. XVII. Fr. fog, wetting 4 p.
Rain Northerly 11 p. S W. XVIII. Much R. noct. tot. and a. m. wind very high,
R. p. m. calm vesp. cold Planchers S W. 75. 25. VI. Severe, fr. wd. mist,
overc. vesp. N W VII 5 m. bitter fr. fog, fair. W. VIII. Frosty, fog, relent p.
m. N W. 76. 14 XXIV. Frosty, fair m. p. mist, Meteor on Orion. Hum. trajectu
servit 12 p. Ice on Thames. S W XXV. 8 m. Fog in East hindering the prospect of
the Eclipse, fair, frosty. S E. XXVI Fog, fair, frosty, much Ice on the Thames,
Meteor 9 p. a Mart, Vrsam versus. S. S E 77. 3. XIII. H. wd, s. drisle 3 p. 6
p. h. wd n. S. XIV. 12 p. Fog. dry night, open S W. fog o. and close S E. dark
and good shower 3 p. W. Meteors prope caput Dracon. XV. Rain 5 m. etc. drisle 1
p. very wet vesp ad 8 p. S W.
December.
1671. 9. XX. Close, cold, windy. E. XXI. 6 m. very cold, close m. p. dark p m.
N E XXII. Close, cold fog increase p. m. Freez 7 p. miss 11 p. S W. 72. 28.
VIII. Close offer a. m. snow 8 p. N E. IX. 5. Fog offer 9 m. close. N. X.
Misty, close. N E. N. 73. 17. XXVII. Much R. a med noct. ad Sun ort, etc. warm,
H. winds, cloudy. S E. XXVIII. 2 m. H. winds noct. praec. R. 6 m. Gusts and
Rain 3 p. hard R. 4. ad 10 p. S W. XXIX. Winds: and R. ante luc, fair, summers
d. Rain 8 and 10 p. S W. 74. 6. XVI. Close. Sly. XVII. 6 m wetting die tot. S.
E. XVIII. Brisk wind, open, tempest of wind, drisle 7 p. etc. S W. 75. 24. V.
Fog, dry, clear n. W. VI. 5. Fr. mist, close m. p. H. wds and s. R 7 p. W. VII.
Close, dark, warm, H. wind 10 p. W. 76. 13. XXIII. S. frost, close, misty, s.
drops. W. XXIV. 7. Dark. fog, close, Frost. E. XXV. Frosty, close. E. 77. 3.
XIII. Cool, clear m: p. windy 8 m. s. rain ante 7 m. drisle and H. wind o.
Flash of Lightning in S W. 8. p. s. rain 9 p. wet 11 p. S. XIV. 10 m.
Tempestuous wd noct. tot. s. rain 5 m. coldish, S W. Meteor 7 p. 9 p. W. XV.
Frost ante luc. Fog, wetting, dark day. E.
26. Thus the Table. Wherein you have an account of VII. years. Eighty Seven
Lunations, and two hundred and sixty one Days. Each day of the same Month
reduced under the common Head for perspicuity's sake.

27. In which Table we have not only the time of the Aspect set before us, but
very often the precise hour of the Effect also, that the Enquirer may set some
Value upon so punctual Account; the just hour of Rain, Wind, etc. as they take
place. For in very deed no Pretense of a Method is to be valued, but what aims
at the very Hour; that I may not say the beginning and the End, the whole and
half duration, as Astronomers do in the Eclipses. But we shall not vapor so
far, as yet; only if so be that any Principle shall pretend to such accuracy as
to mention the Time, that must be, say I, a Genuine, and a worthy Principle.

28. Yea sometimes we have noted the Rises and Obits of the Planets, and their
bearing toward the Fixed, when we have been curious to compare suspected Causes
with Effects, to teach the Enquirer that he is engaged in a World of
Observation: and that not the and the only, as the Vulgar deem, but the other
Celestial Bodies (none excepted) act their parts as certainly and as evidently
as the and does.

29. Before we give you a Synopsis or shorter view of this Table, it will not
be amiss to represent to you the Order of Nature, and the whole Course of her
Meteors from First to Last, by which the Reader may be somewhat edified, and
our future discourse appear the clearer.

30. Now Nature, as far as I conceive, seems to have begun at first with the
Privation, the Tohu of cold dark Air. The gradual Progressions seem to be
reduced to Warmth and its Degrees, as I may distinguish them into Positive but
Insensible, then Sensible and Vehement; these degrees, with the mixture of Cold
working on their subject matter, emit such variety as we see. First we have

1. Excessive, stubborn, unmixt. Frost and cold. Thence Dry Constitution.
Thence Serene. Calm.
2. Warmth insensible. Then Exhalation invisible. Thence Wind. (Mist. Halo.)
Wind from the North. From the North-East. Clouds. Hail. Snow.
3. Tepor, or Warmth sensible, Dew, Fog. Fila. Gossamere. Wind from the
North-West. Trajections. Pregnant Clouds. Rain moderate. Iris. Wind from the
West.
4. Heat Intense. Lightnings Nocturnal. Wind from the South-East. from the
South-West. from the South. Hot Days. Hot Nights. Winds Tempestuous. Rains
Violent. Lightning and Thunder.

31. Hereabouts, or pretty near is Natures Tract. Cast these Calculations into
Alphabetical Order for convenience sake, and we shall see into the very Anatomy
of the Novilunar Influence. For as for Objections which may be made against
this Scheme precedent; either they are not very material, or at least we cannot
stand upon their solution at present.

The Total of the days in the precedent Table.
Cold Frosty Days or Nights. -- 63. Clouds Pregnant -- 72. Close. Fog or
grosser Mist. -- 2. Fila. -- 2. Frosty Days. -- 34. Hail. -- 4. Halo. -- 0. Hot
Days. -- 28. Nights. -- 8. Lightnings Nocturnal. -- 2. Mist. -- 47. North-East.
-- 30. North-West. -- 31. Rain Moderate. -- 109. Violent. -- 28. Serene, Fair.
-- 31. Trajections. -- 19. Thunders. -- 3. Warm. -- 31. Wind. -- 101. Wind
Change. -- 29. Wind Tempestuous. -- 37. North Wind. -- 40. East. -- 45. West.
-- 44. South. -- 18. South-East. -- 16. South-West. -- 58. North-East. -- 36.
North-West. -- 12.
32. Our Learned Antagonists, as if our ^^etences were of Things impossible,
often ask us how we come distinctly to know the Natures of any Celestial Body,
the Sun excepted: We answer, the Method is here before them, let Industry and
Experience gather such Tables of the Planetary Congresses, (the larger, the
better) and they shall see, as in a Glass, the Effects of the Aspect, and from
thence define the Natures of the Celestial Bodies so configured, as much as
serves our turn, (and we know no more of the Sun it self) yea, the Nature and
Character of every Degree in the Zodiac, may be so determined, or if they will
take the pains to adapt a Table for VII. years (that's the least) to each degree
from the Appulse respectively.

33. Only our Evidence for Warmth by our own Table, seems not to be so full and
Cogent as our Interest requires; for under the Title Warm, we find but 31. Of
Hot Days but 28. in toto 59. What Is this to 261? especially when the cold days
are able to face them, whose sum is 63. I answer all the warm, Hot, and Soultry
days which occur in the larger Table, even in Summer time, must needs be
ascribed to the Influence of our Aspect. Nor will it prove in the end, that the
Cold Days are equal to the Warm, not in these VII. years, nay nor in any one of
them. But if it should happen in 15. or 30. years, as it cannot well, (I think)
that the cold days should have the greatest Poll, I would make the equal Reader
judge of this Problem, whether in this case the Nature of the stands
indifferent to Heat and Cold, whether the Lunar Light, I say, can be imagined
indifferent, as to those qualities; seeing Light and Heat are acknowledged the
same thing, so that the Sun it self would not be Hot, but on the account of the
Light.

2ly. Whether it may not probably be said that Heat therefore is an Effect
Proper, and per se, and that Cold is Alien; and per accidens; and if so, what
Violence would it do to any man's Intellect, who shall allow the Sun, yea the
Moon to be endued with warmth? If he should thereupon concede a new
superinduced warmth upon their Union and Congress; the Learned Gassendus does
the one, and not the other.

3ly. I should smilingly ask who knows but that this our Aspect may be taken
upon suspicion for the very Cause of Cold, happening so critically on the very
day, since many of those Days so noted, are found even in June, July, against
the very Nature of the Season, especially since some Philosophers I can tell
you, have heretofore ventured to say, that the was a Cold as well as a Moist
Luminary.

34. Let us consider again therefore as to the Warmth of the Summer Days here
concerned: That though the Word Summer smells of the Oven, and sounds hot and
parching, yet notwitstanding, he who shall recollect himself from his own
Experience, and descend into Particulars, shall find that every day in the
height of Summer it self, is not by any inviolable necessity Hot or Warm; whose
Days often prove cool to a great degree, for no small part of the time; so that
an usual complaint flies about of no Summer many times, when Summer is almost
expired. Therefore whenever any Day proves warmer than its Neighbors, it
must admit some Principle of such Heat, besides the general Cause, as they call
the Solar Heat. And therefore if a Man should enquire whence the Heat issues,
for example, March 29, 30. Anno 1671, and Sept. 9, 10. Anno 1677. and also the
intermediate Months between those two extremes of the Aestival half year, he
may see the Aspect stand Candidate to be admitted to answer: remembering before
we part, that if the aestival Day be termed only warm in the Diary, that
warmth, though it sounds temperately by a common, though not inelegant Meiosis,
may signify intense Heat in a tolerable degree, as Soultry in the less
tolerable. Howbeit, we have a share even of Soultry days to be found in the
Table.

25. Consequently to this let inquisition be made among the Novilunar Days in
the Hyemal moiety of the year, and we shall find warm days in every Winter
Month within the Verge of our Aspect. It Is our great Interest to secure this
prime influence of our Luminary; therefore we are willing to point at, first
October 9, 10. Anno 1672. noted for Heat, with a great Tide accompanying it.
October. 13. Anno 1674. Nov. 21. Anno. 1671. Nov. 27. Anno 1673. Warm. Nov. 15.
Anno 1677. a warm Night. In December. Anno 1673. Summer Weather. December. 7. Anno
1675. Warm day. January 29. Anno 1671. January 15. Anno 1675. Welcome and
Temperate, Weather. February 22. Anno 1677. the like. Add Lightning to help
out, December 13. Anno 1677. But what should I mention the rarer instance of
Lightning and Thunders; I might run to a greater Sum of Nightly Fiery Meteors;
for however I acknowledge they may shoot briskly in their own Region, seen in
hard Frosty Nights, as in November's New Anno 1676. Yet I hope those which
happen in a more open Season, may be Tokens of a warmth extending it self,
however elsewhere hindered, to our lower Mortal Region, Thus shall you find
Trajections noted, July 24. Anno 1674. with no more warmth noted on that day,
though but two days before there is noted Soultry Air and Thunder. And on the
29th. of the same Month many Meteors marked, Anno 1676. and Heat expressed not
till the Day after.

36. But the answer I take to, is as follows. We must distinguish of warm Days,
Days of Expressed Notation for Warmth or Heat, and so they are but a few,
scarce enough to baffle the Cold Chill Days. But I pray remember how many and
sundry times, may an Observer not find himself engaged to write Warm and
Temperate in Spring or Summer time, when it is a Natural Constitution; When it is
an Ordinary and Durable, though Preter-seasonable Constitution, Cold will be
sure to be remembered; even in Winter it pinches us to make us remember, and we
wish it over: But Warmth we observe not, unless it be News, and note some
alteration. The Taedium of Tautology is odious to every Pen and Ear. Once then
for all. Every Day where there is no mention of Cold is ascribed to the Warm
Side. Certainly, all Days of Rain, and some of Snow being often found with a
Tepor: And may I not say that Fog, Experience being Judge, does betray a Cause
remissive of Cold and the Extremity thereof? -- Nebulas neque in aestate, nec
in maximo frigore exitene, says the Naturalist. So that upon the upshot we
exclude not a Day, but those which are absolutely Cold and Freezing, without
the least Sign of Relent or Yielding (for why should we give away our Right?)
seeing That Relent or Yielding bespeaks a contrary Agent, prevailing in part,
at least, however sometimes not getting the Victory.

37. Because the Right of the Heavenly Bodies is not ours to give away, what
shall we say to those Novilunar Days, when no Remission of Frost seems to
appear, and yet sometimes a Southerly Wind is known to blow: Must not the new
answer for that Wind? Yea, and this use we make of this Secret in Nature, that,
as the South Wind is of a warm Character, though it may breath under a Frosty
Constitution, even so, though under such cool Circumstances, now and then, our
Aspect may challenge the same Character also.

38. And all this conduces toward the Prognostic part, unless you would have
the Pretender, like the Crow, always bespeak Rain, or think nothing is done,
with the Vulgar, unless they see a Shower: Alas! There is no place on the
Earth where it rains always. We, besure have our vicissitudes of Temperate and
quiet Air, a Fog, a Cloud, the more silent complications according to Natures
ambling pace; so that it behooves an Astrologer to trade in dry Weather
sometimes, and be content to foresee a gentle remission of a stubborn Frost,
and think he has done well, if it falls consonant to Nature, who must not
always be upon the Gallop.

39. Thus for the Prime Product. But now for the Rain and Wind. Hoc opus, hic
labor. How shall we justify that? We have more ways than one to this Wood.
What if we should acquaint the World, that seeing the Days in the Table
exhibited, are treble to the Aspects, that we are not bound it may be, to the
number of the Days; It is enough, if we have regard to the Aspect, and then our
advantage is this, that whatsoever shorter proportion the Effect bears to the
Days, we are safe enough, if that Aspect affords us its Influence in any one
Day of the Ternary, by that means giving Testimony sufficient to it self. Thus
the Seaman justly imputes the Flaw of Wind, and the Husbandman his expected.
Shower to the change of the. If it happen at all, he thanks I say the said
Configuration, hap it at what time it will within that Triduum.

40. This may surprise our Adversary so far, that he may censure us as no fair
Dealers. But there is no avoiding it, for the Aspect must be considered from
the beginning to the end, from the Minimum quod sic, to the Maximum quod non,
throughout the whole Territory and Dominion; and therefore we see the Shepherd
and the Mariner do not fix the day, but expect it once or twice, it may be,
within the Three, and prize their Experience, counting themselves no small Men,
for understanding more than some, who are greater Conjurers.

41. For Aspects then the Table witnesses thus, LXXXVII. Aspects are brought
on the Stage; no less then LXXI. bring Rain with them. No less then LXI. bring
Winds.

42. Concerning which by the way, we acknowledge that we have made use of every
Brise; for we, who do believe there is no Casualty in the least Puff, directly
issuing, could do no less. Every Gale at least, which may be Serviceable to the
Navigator, ought to be considered. But here we are conscious of some defect
unavoidable, seeing our Observations could not be made on the Top Sail at Sea;
a constant Watch kept above Deck Day and Night by Succession, must needs tell a
different Tale from him who has slept out a Watch or two, in the Hold, or
confined to his Sedentary Cabin. Not but the Seaman is sometimes becalmed at
the very new, as I have observed from Hackluit; nor can Linschoten, or Sir
Francis deny it, notwithstanding they would say that in such. Cases the
Causality of the Aspect must not be impaired, because of the rarity and
disproportion of the Instance. And who doubts it? Howbeit, as to our deficient
Observation of the Wind now acknowledged, we may be believed a little, and the
defect supplied from the observation of the Change of the Wind, and its quota,
which may fairly be reduced under the style of Winds; since there cannot be a
Change of Wind where there is no Wind stirring. That I say nothing of the
Specification of Winds, which could not be specifyed where there is a Dead Calm.

43. But to return to our Rain, I do acknowledge that Rainy Changes of are not
always of so high a Sum, they Rise or Flag according to the general
Temperature, to which a single Aspect must pay respect; yet still the Change
makes her part good at the long Run. So, though in Keplers Diary from the
beginning of 1621. to the end of 1629. CXI. Lunations bring but LXXXII. wet
ones; yet in the Diary of 24 years from Norimberg ab 1623. to 1646. Lunations
CCCXI. bring CCCVI. of Rainy or Snow; of Winds CLXXII. And of our own
Observation from 1652. inclusive to 1677. of CCXXIII. Changes, or (because two
are missing) CCCXXI. We have of Moisture CCLIV. and of Wind CCXXXIII.

44. Now, back Friends to Astrology have a long time exclaimed that there is no
certainty in Aspects; for, say they, they as often miss as hit, they reckon the
single day on which it happens by Calculation, and then they think they may
Triumph. But they are short in this, that they reckon no other Notion of a Day,
but the Feria, the day of the Week: For what if the Feria be dry when the Moon
changes? Sunday suppose, on June 15. 1675. hor. 4 Morn. If Saturday night
before, it Rains soundly, from hor. 9. Vesp. to, or toward Midnight, the Feria
(the Sunday) is dry, but the Change is not so. A day is 24 Hours; if it comes
therefore within 12 Hours before or after, it rains on the Day of the Change.
As there is a Lunar Month consisting of 28 or 29 Days, so there is a Lunar Day;
the World admits a triple Lunar Month, Periodical, Synodical, and of
Illumination. Ours is a day of the Synodical Month, only in this it is
singular, that it comprizes as many Hours after the Change as before; the Hour
of the Change being the common Term, half way of the whole, reckon the Day so,
and then let them tell me their Mind.

45. Always provided that we be not too hasty, or self-conceited, to conclude
against an Old Rule for one or two invidious Observations of such or such a
year, which, as it may happen, may be extraordinary, as in the year 1623. By
Keplers Diary we find no Rain neither in January, (a Winter Month) nor in
February, nor in April, the three moistest Months in the Year: No, not in the
Triduum. Well, we who look back many Years before we pronounce, do find that
there is great and admirable Variety in the Celestial Courses; and that a
General Temperature of the year swallows up the particular Inclinations: must
the Aspect therefore be indifferent to wet or dry, because it failed twice or
thrice? Can my crazy Body be said not to be inclined to an Ague, unless it be a
Quotidian? Suppose an Intermitting Tertian or Quartan hold me half a year, do
not I retain a Propension to the Malady, though it escape the first or second
Day? So is it here; the Aspect makes her part good at the Long Run. The
Neighbor years will make amends. In the year 1621. we have Moist Changes. 9.
Anno 1622. 9. Anno 24. 10. Anno 1625. 11. and Anno 1623. (the year objected) we
have 6, put them together, and the Sum will answer the Objection.

46. Let me not be reckoned tedious if I give a further Example of our Own; in
the year 1652. (when we first observed) the Change in January proved very Dry,
and Frosty; in February Cold and Windy; in March Foggy and Hot; (an
Intermission of 3 Courses) what then? The Inclination to Rain sleeps not, for
the Change in April, May, July, September, November, brings Rain and Winds. In
June and August Rain and Thunder. While October and December intermit again,
with Mists and Frosts, Cloudy Air, and Windy. Well then, the Change January the
next year, 1653. brings Rain; so April, (mark the intermission of February and
March) yea, the April Lunation brought but a drop or two, and July scarce
perceivable; May, and June, August, September, October, December, all, but
November showred down its Influence. And if Hevelius had observed but thus
much, he would have told us that the was placed so near us, rather for this
Influence, than for the advantage of those who observe her Motion to a Scruple,
and nothing of Influence.

47. But, suppose now that we forego this Device of the Aspect, and it be said
we are bound to give account still of so many Days concerned; Casting our
Counters right, we maintain that there is an Inclination Visible and Palpable,
to bear up toward the Number of the Days, though twice or thrice as many as the
Number of the Aspect. And for this we appeal to the Table, which was, let me
tell you, produced for this Reason, to make good this Notable Inclination, and
to show the Irrationality of those who will not allow it: The Objection
proceeding alike against this, as any other Configuration. The Question seems
then thus, Not how many times, but how many days do we find concerned in the
total of the Lunations? Answer, 261. See Now, how many of these by the Table
find for Rain, or Wind? For Rain, we find days 109. to which add what we noted
by themselves, the Violent Rains, whose Sum is 28. and the whole amounts to
137. beside a petty Sum to be added for Snow or Hail, which advances the Sum to
140. and upwards. How! Of 261 days are there found 140 Drippers by one single
Aspect? And is not the Inclination Palpable? For it is the proportion of Fifty
to an Hundred, not considering the Overplus: One Aspect, (and the like we shall
find true of any other Aspect) reaches to a Moiety.

48. For I hope we are not to learn what Mechanical Writers teach us to good
purpose, that Power and Inclination ( vis Motrix) may be proportioned out by
Numbers. As toward the Motion of a Bulk of 100 Weight, there may be applied
Movers of several rates; as of 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, etc. where the motive force
of 100. moves that Bulk infallibly, because thereby the Agent is equal to the
Patient; whether this equality be found in One only, or made up by several
rates of ten; (suppose) 20, 30, 40. or otherwise, which of themselves, it is
clear, are not each of them of infallible Effect, because inadaequate: Yet
notwithstanding, each of these have a real, unequal Share though it be, in that
Effect. That of Ten is a Tenth; that of 20. is a Fifth; that of 40. above a
Third part; that of Fifty is a half Sharer, since another of the same rate
performs the whole.

49. This presupposed, helps to clear our design of our Table, and the
Constitutions there, all which say we (except those which come in by accident)
the Aspect reaches, Consideratis Considerandis. For we do not, except it should
Snow, or Hail as often as it Rains, nor Lighten, or Thunder as often as it is
Warm; seeing the year is not wholly Winter, or Summer, but is divided into
Lesser Seasons, where those rarer Constitutions happen by Virtue of that
Inclination.

Lay them now in progressive Order, and see whether that will edify.

(...) Lightning or Thunder. -- 6. Trajections. -- 19. Mist. -- 80. Wind. --
103. Rain. -- 134.
And is this Influence of the Change indifferent, Now! Does it not most incline
to Rain? Next, under that, to Wind, Mist, Trajections, etc. Hence say I, one
inclines to Mist, Clouds, Winds, Rain, and to Trajections (at times) yea, to
Thunder it self: But to Rain and Wind most, else how come these instances to
exceed? For Rain and Wind, we have demonstrated come not from any unaccountable
Motion of Matter, but at set determinate Periods and Revolutions of Heavenly
Bodies. From this difference of the Account in such Revolutions, say I, as there
is greater disposition to Fog, or Cloudy, than to Frosty or Serene; hence in
there is some real Influence toward Mist and Fog, and close weather. And if
there be a greater aptitude for Wind and Rain, than for Dry and Calm Weather;
such as shall aspire almost to the Moiety of Days Comprehended; (reckoning 2 or
3 to every Lunation) then there is some known Force and Influence in the
Lunation, which being not content with such Imperfect Productions, as Fog or
Clouds, (though dispositions to Rain,) help to bring forth absolute and
complete Moisture.

50. To a Moiety therefore we are arrived in the days, and that is enough to
prove the Aspect not to be indifferent; They are as Powers of Fifty, to the
Motion of an 100. So it is an even Wager it Rains on One of the 3 days
concerned. And if any should be so toy some as to engage against such an Event,
in his Favor let me ask, Who shall decide the controversy, in case a Shower
in Prospect be discerned, when possibly it Rains not upon the Spot, nor (as the
Wind may sit) is like to do. Or suppose that the Air looks suspiciously, when
we have reason to believe it rains (or dews) within the Verge of our Horizon;
and in this case, in my Judgment the Wager is not absolutely and necessarily
lost; seeing no Astrologers, or Others, will profess always to engage that it
shall Rain upon his Rivals Head. No, he he takes his measures from the
public, the Country round about; if it reigns on the Neighborhood, the
Heavens have done their Do, and so has the Aspect.

51. Now, the Fatal Paralogism of the Adversary is this; He, when he sees not
such frequency of Activity as he requires, concludes that there is None. As if
because there is not the excessive proportions of 60, 70, 80. etc. toward the
Motion of a 100, Therefore there is no Activity or Force at all in the Agents.
Whereas a Motive Power even at 40, 30, 20. has a considerable Force or
Strength toward the Effect, although it be not commensurate to 50, 60, etc.
Aspects have no Force, because, they miss as, nay, more often than they hit.
Gassendus himself so reasons. But it is hard to conclude that an Aspect has
no Force, when the objection confesses that there is some; and that brings its
Effect almost, nay every whit as often, as the contrary. For what else, I pray,
should make the Success aequiponderate with the Failance? Is it not abominable
to conclude there is nothing of Weight in one filled Scale, where it
aequiponderates with the other? If an Aspect should contribute beyond the
Moiety to 70, or 80 times, and fail only 30, or 20 times, would not the
inclination be confessed? Well then, if it contributes but 50. is the
inclination abolished? Put case it contributes on this side the Moiety but 30
or 40 times, it is a great way distant from nothing. Five Pound is Weight,
though it be not Fifty; and Ten Pound is Weight, though it be not an 100. Five
Pound is not Weight of it self to crack a Nut; shall I therefore infer it has
no Pressure or Ponderosity toward such Effect? Common Experience refutes it.
Some outward Force or Impulse may be indeed necessary, but the less is
requisite, as the Weight is the greater. The Learned should have discerned the
Inclination, though but Partial, and not absolutely denied, but considered once
and again (since nothing is more reasonable in their own Opinions, than the
dependencies of the Inferiors on the Superiors) and never left searching of
these Truths, of which themselves upon Examination had found some Glimps.

52. More we could say, but it seems creeping to desire what is not down right,
Rain to be accepted. A close Day, suppose, or a Lowering Heaven; and yet the
jolly Wagerer, let me tell him, many times seeing the Air to Overcast and
Lowre, and put on her Mourning Vail; does not know well what to think of it,
and could Wish he might draw Stakes; so near does a Prognostic approach the
Truth, even when it comes many times short.

Only this I think may be proposed, that regard may be had not only to the Sums
of Rain, Wind, singly or jointly computed, (the commonly assigned Effect of
this Aspect) but also to the Disjunctive, whether Rain or Wind, seeing they often
times take their turns, and are not found always accompanying each other. So a
careful Observer may enhanse the Sum of the Influence by accession
considerable. No less XLI. Winds without Rain being noted in this our Table;
and so the Sum will lash beyond the Moiety to the undeniable rates and
proportions, the Adversary being Judge.

53. Now, as we are not fond of this Disjunctive neither, so have we no reason
to forego it, since I will tell you, Gassendus discoursing against our
Pretenses, degrades our Professors below the Beasts of the Herd; seeing the
Prognostic from the Notes of Birds and Beasts are more infallible, says he,
than that of our Pretenders. Now these Natural propensions so invidiously
commended, which are natural Complaints rather than Praedictions of a Symptom
present, not of an Effect Future, let the Reader mark, as infallible as they
are, hold only in this our Disjunctive. They do not determinately say Rain, but
indeterminately Rain or Winds, as we have from Captain Smith learned before.

54. However for the determination of this Disjunctive to Wind, or Rain, or
both, seeing it is justly expected we should speak Categorically in this
matter, we say that there may be found Rules in Art for that or for Nothing. In
the mean time we gain some little Credit to an Aspect, because it is confessed
that a single Aspect would then not be unworthy of regard.

55. Nor yet have we drained our Table. It bears as if it would give some Light
further, viz. to the determination of the Wind.

Let us see* the Sums being collated, we shall find that this Aspect, apt to
cause Winds, is apt also to determinate them to the West and to the South,
rather than to the North and East; which thus I make out; I take the Cardinal
Winds, and their Complications (making VIII. points of the Compass to serve our
turn) and adding the Sums, the account lies before you thus.

East. 38. N. E. 25. S. E. 12. West. 36. N. W. 27. S. W. 56. North. 46. N. E.
25. N. W. 27. South. 56. S. E. 12. S. W. 56 75. 119. 98. 124.
So that the inclination is least to the East, more to the North, more than
that to the West, and to the South most of all.

56. Here I lament I had not the accommodation of the Pyxis, or any Horizontal
Plate divided into more points of the Compass, though I see not that Natural
Knowledge requires so exact a Pyx as Navigation uses; because I boggle at
this, that I find the North Cardinal point gives more instances than the West.
To me it is a great Secret, the cause of the North Wind; how no Planetary
Aspect, except the Jovial was ever dreamt of for that Cause. But the North
appears when many times is engaged in no Aspect; therefore of that hereafter.

57. Let no observer ask me why, of all the Winds, the South-East least
frequents our Horison? Scaliger, I remember, tells us, for France that it is a
rare and nice Wind, so here with us in England. Hereafter, not here, we shall
tell whether we are able to answer this Nice Question.

58. But, why the Southerly and Westerly? If any ask, he may be answered from
the Premises, that the Lunation helps to warm the Air, and by Consequence to
the warmer Winds: The West and South, are such.

59. The indetermination or Change of the Wind in the same Day is notable, in
my Judgment, the Solution is easy; for the Change, I find, makes from the
cooler quarter to the warmer: It Is to be ascribed to the Approach of the toward
the Solar Body, which at distance suffers a North or East Wind to blow. But in
the nearer application befriends the Air with a Token of her Favor. The swift
in Motion, by reason of which she was thought to have no great Influence,
herein appears to be serviceable to the Change of the Wind, which often alters,
according to the 's application, or recess from the Sun, etc. So Fate will have
it, that what is objected to her prejudice, tends to her Luster in
Demonstration of her Influence.

60. Kepler therefore, and others, Eichstad, etc. make too little of this, not
vouchsafing to mention it, except when the is found engaged with others
pre^gaged among themselves, while they impute great Effects to some of his own
Pseudo-Aspects. As great an affront to the and as can be offered. Whether that
great Mathematician disdained to own any part of his Skill to the less
mysterious traditionary way, or rather whether he unhappily refused right
measures which offered themselves.

61. But could this great Man think, if but from his own Diarys, is
insignificant, when in the solitary Year 1617. it rained 7 times on the very
day of the Aspect, (not to meddle with Wind) as many times Anno 1621. and 1622.
VI. times Anno 1623. to press it no further.

62. Only upon the account of Thunder, to which Meteor, as rarely as it happens
with us, we say, that even with us this Aspect inclines, with a remote, yet
real Propension; and in Germany more. On which account we ask again, does
Thunder appear but a day before the change, May 4. Anno 1617. S. N. And shall
that Change have no influence thereon? At that time there was Thunder and
excess of Rain with a. But he acknowledges that alone could not answer to so
great a Product: No nor, which he is forced to produce, his Quincunx of and.
And yet Ne sic quidem Causarum satis apparet, as he honestly confesses. All
this while suffering the to stand by, blushing by it self, because unsaluted;
when as he might have observed, that not a year scapes him in his whole Decade,
which brings not that Constitution at the Change. Once perhaps, Anno 1626.
twice Anno 1621. 1628. thrice Anno 1622. 1627. four times Anno 1623. 1625. and
more then once Anno 1629. If Meteorum Diurnum may go for Lightning; what do I
speak of IX. or X. years, when in the Norimberg Diary, from 1623. to 1646. (a
notable Piece lent me by the Learned Dr. Bernard) there appears but two years
of Twenty Four, wherein there is no noise of Thunder herds at some aestival
New or other. In the rest it is ordinary to hear it thrice at one Aspect. Now
let any man tell me there is no inclination to Thunder in the New. And if it
must be granted for Germany, it must be granted, though but a Pin or two lower,
in England also. But, if to Thunder, what inclination has it to Rain, I pray?
Let the Adversary answer.

63. The Pretense of the 's swift Course and Transit is not so well, Eichstad
Ephem. For first, the Transit is not so sudden; it challenges 3 or 4 Hours in
spite of Fate. The Face of Heaven is alterable in less time; for though it is
true, many times Clouds, by the slow approach of Causes conspiring, do
leisurely gather into a density, while Rain, in the Country Phrase, is brewing,
yet I have seen Heaven often overcast of a sudden, and descend in a Shower, yea
Fair Weather, and anon Thunder Charged and Discharged, and all in a quarter of
an Hour.

64. What shall we say to those Conjunctions which bring their Effect within
the time of their Corporal Contact, within 3 or 4 Hours; such as January 19.
Anno 1671. Jan. 19. Anno 1672. Febr. 25. Anno. 1674. Febr. 21. Anno. 77. March.
30. Anno 1671. April 28. ejusdem Anni. April 7. Anno 1673. April 21. Anno 1677.
May 2. etc. All these with a little computation will be found to fall within
the terms of the said partil Aspect, as manifest as the great Dash on Sept. 10.
from hor 8. to 10. P. which proclaims the Change at the Hour 10. at Night. Or
the excess of Wet February 21. Anno. 1671. hor. 7. mane. proclaims the Change
at 10. Morning. To say nothing of the smart Showers, July 4. 11. hor. Vesp.
hint a Lunation following the next Feria at hor 2 Matutine. Yea, nor of these
Trajections which have been observed to shoot at this very time, of which we
have Examples in the Table, Sept. 27: Anno 1676. November 14. Anno 1677. so
that it is not the brief Transit (which indeed has a due Extent) makes the
ineffectual, but the flinching of the rest when they are ready for
Correspondence, the Sponge is full, and then a Light and transient pressure
expresses moisture; otherwise the Sponge is dry and stubborn, and will not
yield what is expected.

65. It Is confessed by the experience of Eichstad, that the Aspect happening in
the Angles (i. e.) the Oriental, Occidental, or Meridional, is wont to bring
Rain. But the Course of the is the same in those Angles as elsewhere; and
seeing Aspects Platique are also Operative, what Conjunction is there that does
not visit those Angles at distance more or less? The Fault therefore lies in
the Principles of those who discern not, or overlook, the other Causes, which
are of the secret Committee, as I may call it, where this Aspect seems to
preside.

66. Posterity will make up this Induction, if there be need, from all Europe,
if not from all parts of the World. And whereas many ingenious Men say, our
Island has no Correspondence with the Continent, which renders the attempts of
Prognostic Ridiculous, because impossible; It Is but an Excuse, the New has the
same Influence here and there, and all over the World, Observatis Observandis;
in the prime product, be sure; and in its Consequents, acording to the Capacity
of the Region, and the Time of the Year. Since Fog, Snow, Rain, Lightning, are
all united in one Original; and though they be opposite (do you mark me?) may
be predicted for the same day, in the several parts of the World, by them who
live upon the Spot, and know the disposition of several Places.

67. What difficulty appears in the Prognostic at home, arises not because we
are an Island, but because we are in a Northern Island: The Weather is more
Regular, and of far more easy Prediction, in the Torrid Zone, as all Mariners
will inform you, then in the Temperature, where the Anomaly is greatest,
according as the Elevation of the Pole is more or less. But this difficulty
Astrology mastereth.

68. These things rightly understood, our Natural definitions will prove to be
no longer of a precarious Credit, or denied their acceptance, because hitherto
laboring under the ill Aspect of a notion Astrological, while Prejudice for a
while, puts us out of conceit with Truth.

69. Let the Adversaries of this Principle in the mean while bespeak the next
25 or 30 years to bring in a contrary indication, as if the Heavens under this
Aspect or its Equivalent, (for we are sure of all, as of one) were indifferent
to Cold, or Tepid, Moist, or Dry. Alas! when they have carefully watched the
Heavenly Motions, they will be brought by their own experience to the Old Saw,
the Good Wives Tradition, unless they bespeak the and once again miraculously
to stand; Stand I say, for if they move either forward or backward, (though in
this latter, I confess, some confusion of Seasons will happen) yet as to this
Propension or Influence the case will be the same.

Let the Reader therefore raise his attentions toward Aspects in general
comprehending not the Lunar only but the rest, all of which stand indictable
for hundreds of grand commotions in the universe, recorded in Chronicles, or
History Marine, since even this our Novi-lunar Aspect affords us such excesses,
not Tempests only, but other more prodigious accidents, whether above, as
Comets, which we take to be of Kin to enflamed Meteors, or below, as
Earthquakes, and Inundations also, which follow either Tempests, or Earthquakes:
Let those Learned Men, who shall write of either Comet, or Earthquake, look
back into History, and he shall find Truth in the remark. And so, although more
may be said, we are willing to conclude the Chapter.

70. Only there is another way to work, to clear up the Reputation of the New
for a perpetual, and in some Station, an Infallible Influence; we tried once by
the vulgar Months, and they would not comply. It Is true in September, October
and December, you shall find it fails there but once of VII. times Revolution.
What then said we, if we should try in some certain Signs, which make up three
Months be sure as far as 30 and 31 days will go, though they enter not till 10
days after the appearance of the Kalender-Month: If we can bring certain days
in the year, thirty in number, where the never fails as to Rain; then the, as
inconstant as she appears in her Visor, is not always inconstant in her
Influence. Then the beloved Infallibility of the Conclusion is come up, or at
least is worth observing, when the Effect is not short, but exactly
commensurate to the number of her Revolutions. But so it is, as may appear by
the survey of this Table; some Lunations in such and such Signs are so saithful
to their pretenses.

Sign, Revolution, Event. VII. 4. VII. 6. VII. 7. VII. 6. VII. 6. VIII. 4.
VIII. 7. VII. 7. VII. 6. VII. 5. VII. 6. VIII. 7.

The Signs we point at are, ( i. e.) part of March and April, and part of July
and August, part of December and January, but above all commend me to most sure
and most abounding. A New between XII. of August and 12 of September brings
Showers 7 times in 7 Revolutions, Toties, quoties. Now this I hope does not
cassate what we have said, but corroborate.

CHAP. XIII.
1. Full Moon gave first hint to Astrology. 2. No naked appearance. 4. Her
Septennial Diary. 5. LXXV. in 87. Dripping Full Moons. 6. What, as to Winds.
10. Effect at the precise time. 11. Her warmth confessed by Aristotle. 13.
Sensible Warmth from the discernable in some cases with us. The Thermometer not
subtle enough to discern it, the Eye may 14. The New warmer then the Full by
day, and the Full warmer by Night. 16. Plenilunar nights warmer than Novilunar.
17. Illustrated. 19. Comparison of the Change and Full in their Diaries. 20.
Full brings more Rainy days than the New. 21. And more Storms. 22. The New
produces more Fog than the Full. 23. Nocturnal Gusts, and Rains more frequent
at the Full. She, or some other Planet must be up in the Night when there is
any Bustle. 24. Physical and Optical reason for the Full 's turbulency more
frequent than the New. 26 and 29. Some Full Moons, upon Courtesy, Infallible
as to Moisture. 28. Full Moon's Definition Astrological, inclines to W. and
Southern Winds, least of all to North.
1. THe next Aspect is the, a Configuration as notorious as the Conjunction,
God having pleased to bestow on it an Influence so manifest, that his power in
the rest of the Celestials might be the more early regarded; This Aspect facing
us with a Full and Serious look, that all who have Eyes and opportunity may
discern the effect of its presence. The New hides her self from us, Envies us
that Sight, and Calculation of her punctual Congress, but this offers her self
without a Veil, even to the Eyes of Wayfarers, Shepherds, Seamen, and so first
contributes to Astrology; For, since it is apparent that she has power over
our Bodies; We Mortals, without the benefit of this plain Aspect, should have
snored in darkness and ignorance, smarting, as the wild Beasts under the Pole
by Celestial Influence, yet not knowing who hurts us.

2. Let the Philosophers after Plutarch, discourse of the Face in the Lunar
Discus, whether they be Vales, or Waters, or whatsoever the Faith of the
Hevelian Telescope will persuade. Sure there is some final Cause of that (as to
the Vulgar it seems) Humane appearance, and That not any Intent to stumble the
poor Heathens into their pitiable Idolatry, but rather a Design of raising our
attention to that Luminary, which shining in its brightness, shows no naked
Form or Beauty, but such as is invested with Power, not Illuminative, I say,
but Irritative also; which we come now to evidence, if after the New 's
demonstration there be necessity of so doing.

3. We have assigned in our Table the space of 3 days for this as well as we
have already for, And more perhaps we might; for what should hinder? Unless we
have a kindness for the Quincunx, and if so; then we should have some regard
for the Semisextile also, bordering upon the Change, which can never be allowed
at least in the Lunar observation, as has been said.

The Diary.
January.
1671. 5. XIV. Frost, mist m. close p. m. Rain 4 p. 8 p. W XV. Ho. 1. m. close
mist m. R. 2 p. and Sun occ. S W. XVI Wd and thin overc. 10 p. high ante luc.
and R. so at n. S W. 72. 24. III. Close, cold, s. mist. N E. IV. o. Snow ante
L. Frosty a. m. cold, dark, drisling 3 p. N E V. No Fr, close, coldish. N W. s.
wd 73. 13. XXI. Close and very dark m. Candles used at the N. Exchange, noted
by many. W. XXII. 1 p. R. and Snow 1 m, close, drisle 7 p. W XXIII. H. Frost.
close, snow, m. and 2 p. Cold wind. N. 74. 4. XI. Foggy and wet m. N E. R. hard
1 p. S W. cloudy n. S E. XII. 6 m. Fair, dry, Moon Eclips. overc. p. m. offer 7
p. S W. XIII. R. 5 m. Foggy and misle p. m. max. part, Rain earnest 7 p. S W. N
E. at n. S. 75. 21. XXXI. Dec. S W. warm, open. At n. S. I. 8. Fr. fair, warm,
S E. Moon totally Eclipsed. S II. Fair, overc. and Gusts 2 p.
Lambs-wool-clouds. 10 p. S W. 76. 22. XXX. Wly. wet 9 m. open and stormy wind.
S W. XXXI. 8 m. H. cold, drying wd. Snow or hail 4 p. H. wd. noct. tot. and d.
Hail 2 p. Rain for 2 hours 3 p. S W. I. Febr. S W. but p. m. Nly, s. frost,
bright, mist s. thick cl. S W. 76. 10. XIX. Rainy 3 m. and a. m. H. wd.
variable, R. p. m. 8 p. 10 p. W. XX. 7 p. R. 1 m. and 8 m. Close m. p. S. XXI.
Temperate, open, close. S E. 77. 29. VII. Tempestuous noct. tot. H. wd. s.
rain. W. VIII. o. R. air 3 m. and ante. Fr. with Ice m. Frosty, cloudy at n.
and fog. W IX. Cloudy, wdy, drisle m. R. 1 p. ad 3 p. wd laid. drisle 6 p. Two
Meteors 1 po S. mor. Ely
February.
1671. 5. XII. Close m. high Gusts 3 p. and 1. Sirius or. cum, drisle 9 p. S.
XIII. 6. warm m. close and mist sub vesp. W. XIV. Cool, close m. p. S. 72. 24.
I. Bright, frosty, a List of clouds in the West, 4 p. relent, and wd turn S.
freez n. S E. fine halo 11 p. II. 12. misty m. frosty, snow pretty deep, Sun
occ. with Gusts. N E. III. Snowing noct. praeced. tot. and a. m. Deep above the
Leg calf, Relent, snowing vesp. N W. 73. 13. XX. Fair, warm, drisle 3 p. S.
XXI. Close m. R. and wd p. m. ad 11 p. etc. S. XXII. Wd and shower 1 or 2 p. m.
open m. p. S. 74. 2. IX. Frosty, bright, muddy ^, 3 p. and thin overc. 9 p.
wds. N E. X. 4. Frosty, fair m. S W. Snow o. and 10 p. less mist. XI. Frosty.
snow 8 m. bright a. m. some clouds p. m. N W. 75. Caret suo pleni lunio iste
Februarius. 76. 10 XVIII. s. rain 6 m. 8 m. and alias, misty vesp. E. XIX. 8 m.
cold, close misty m. E. open o. S. close p. m. S W. XX. Cold, dry, R. 11 m.
gently for an hour, wd S. 77. 29. VI. Frost m. open, H. wd and cloudy m. p.
some Rain 9 p. and H. wind. S. VII. 5 p. Rain midn. and 3 m. with hail. N W.
VIII. Frost, ice, cold brisk wd, snow n. W.
March.
1671. 4. XIV. Fog, fair and warm p. m. flying cl. at n. E XV. 11 m. no fog,
close, fair p. m. Hurricane at Cadiz, the like not known. E. XVI. R. m. Open,
Wly. but p. m. Ely. 72. 23. II. H. frost. misty m. p. Sun red, Moon red, and so
at n. as if Eclipsed. Narrow Halo. N W. III. 2 p. Frost, misty m. and die tot.
Sol rutilus, little wd. Nly. IV. Frost, s. mist, bright m. pleasant. N. 73. 12.
XXI. Misling 5 m. close cold vesp. N E. XXII. o. close, cold. N E. XXIII. Very
cold, close and misty, lowering 1 p: Hail ante 6 p. N E. 74. 2. XI. Open m. p.
fairer n. E. XII. 2 m. frosty, snow m. p. p. m. s. thaw. E. XIII. Frost a. 1.
Rain m. close and warm. W. 75. 21. XXVIII. Febr. R. 7 m. misle a. m. R. apace 1
p. S W. I. Mist 6. R. m. and a. m. Open p. m. wind turn Nly, then W. II. Fr.
fair m. Hail 3 p. 5 p. Hail and R. vesp. N W 10. XXX. R, carly, flying cl. R.
11 p. W. XXXI. 2 m. Rain a midn. ad mer. showers 7 p, Ely, m. but p. m. N. Apr.
I. Wly. Rain 6 m. Hail half an ho. after 10 m. shower 3 p. 76. 9. XVIII. R. 5
and 6 m. close m. p. dark 2 p. wetting 10 p. E XIX. 7 mist, wetting a. m. per
tot. and wind E. but at Noon S W. XX. Open m. close, wind, drisle 8 p. 11 p. E.
77. 29. VIII. R. 4 m. close, rain 9 p. S. IX. 7 m. R. mist, fair, s. wd 7 p. R.
10 p. E. X. Rain ante ort. and 8 m. H. wd Sly. N W.
April.
1671. 4. XIII. H. wd and wet, cold die tot. E. XIV. 4 m. cold, wdy, bright, H.
wd o. Gusty. E XV. H. wd, rain 1 m. cold. N E. 72. 23. I. Stormy wd and R. a.
m. s. scuds, clearing p. m. S W. II. 5 m. wdy, fr. clouds, H. wind, s. showrs N
W. but, p. m. W. III. Bright, wind high m. Hail 2 p. 3 p. 5 p. wd. various. S.
N. W. 73. II. XX. Windy, clear m. s. moisture 2 p. S. XXI. 1 m. close, H. wd m.
often Iowry, some shedding o. S W. XXII. Fine m. wdy, often lowering p. m.
dropping. S W. 74. O. IX. N E. close a. m. open p. m. misty 5 p. misling 10 p.
clouds ride N W. and Sly 8 p. cool. X. 10 m. S W. showers 11 m. etc. warmer,
mist S W. XI. Rain noct. R. 2 p. mist. E. 75. 18. XXVIII. Fair m. overc. s.
rain discovered 6 p. E. XXIX. 10 m. E. cloudy, wdy a. m. fair, wdy p. m. N E.
XXX. Ely. Clouds in scenes, mist, dry, fair p. m. clouds 11 p. N E. 76. 8.
XVII. E. offer 10 m. shower ante 1 p. cool n. E. N E. XVIII. 3 m. R. 11 m. 4 and
7 p. XIX. R. 4 and 5 m. 7 and 10 m. etc. open p. m. mist. N E. 77. 28. VI.
Open, fine shower 1 p. E. VII. 7 p Rain 7 m. close and cold. N E. VIII. Misty,
cold wind, close. N.
May.
1671. 2. XII. Very hot misty air, shower Sun or. and R. XIII. 7. Fair,
soultry, yet brisk cool wd. S W. XIV. H. wd, close m. shower 2 p. S W. 72. 21.
XXX. Apr. Cloudy and lowering much 1 p. vanishing. warm. Sly. I. 9. Dash of R. 8
m. M. C. close m. p. red cl. Sun occ. warm n. and cloudy. Ely. II. R. midn.
close, warm, shower 2 p. Sly. W. Pleni L. poster. 20. XXX. Wly, Fair, hot. N E.
XXXI. o. overc. open, overc. vesp. Gusts 10 p. N E. I. Jun. Cool m. sometimes
thin overc. threatening, clear sub vesp. N E. E. S. 73. 9. XIX. Open, temperate,
blew mist. N. XX. 1 p. wdy, close m. p. offering, blew mist taken up. S W. XXI.
Parelia at Womondham in Leichestershire, cool wd, s. shower 9 m. S W. 74. 28.
VIII. Sly. s. rain 4 m. fair, h. wd. S W. IX. 9 p. overc. p. m. misty, wdy,
Ely. offer once or twice o. and p. m. X. Sly. Fair, white cl. S W. brisk wd 1
p. 75. 16. XXVII. R. ante luc. 11 m. and p. m. E. XXVIII. 6 R. noct. tot. close
and showring. E. XXIX. Open. temperate, s. wet, lowering, E. 76. 6. XVI. Tempest
of wd till occ. circ. ho. 5 p. rain ante m. and alias. W. XVII. 10 m. shower by
coast o. and alias, so Sun occ. W. XVIII. shower 7 m. bright a. m. great rain
and hail 1 p. N. 77. 26. VI. Lowering m. p. Gossamere 1 p. s. wd, E. clouds
contrary 6 p. VII. 3 m. clouds hindering the Eclipse, misty, pregnant clouds,
suspicious by coast 1 p. brisk cool wds E. and sometimes various. Air not
wholesome. VIII. Early mist, fair, dry, s. lowering, brisk wd E. hazie prospect.
June.
1671. o. XI. Close m. p. or clouds in Scenes. N W. XII. 10 m. Close, Rain 3 p.
S W. XIII. Stormy winds, Rain 1 p. close, warm. S. 72. 18. XXIX. R. 8 m. 10 m.
3 p. S. XXX. 3 m. close, drisle m. etc. gentle rain 7 p. S W. I. Jul. Drisle 5
m. in M. C. and occ. and 10 m. wd, very misty air, N E. At n. N W. 73. 8.
XVIII. R. 5 m. and a. m. and 1 p. Nly, but p. m. S. shower 4 p. XIX. 4 m. R. 5
m. close, windy, s. wetting 1 p. N W XX. Bright m. cloudy o. open, cool,
lowering 4 p. N W. S W. 74. 27. VII. Bright m. clouding 9 m. cloudy p. m. wd N.
N W. warm night. VIII. 8 m. close m. p. wd, warm n. S W. IX. Wly, cloudy m. p.
s. drisle o. offer to shower 4 p. wd change p. m. warm n. N. 75. 15. XXVI. Wet 7
m. N. Thunder and a great dash, and s. hail, a 3 ad 4 p. occ. W. clouds go to
the East. Nly. XXVII. 4 m. cloudy, lowering. s. mist, drisle 1 p. in s. pl. S.
XXVIII. Wet a Sun or. ad o. and 4 p. ad 8 p. W vesp. E. 76. 4. XIV. Very hot,
s. wd, clouds, lowering p m. s. drops 9 p. complaint of Heat. W. XV. 6 p. Hot,
fair, s. cool gales, Ely. Meteor long in the East, seen notwithstanding the
Full Moon. XVI. Very hot, s. pretty brisk wd. S W. 77. 24. IV. Cold, fair,
closing m. p. o. clear East 6 p but thin overcast South and West. N. V. 2 m.
Fair, dry, long streaked clouds, clear horizon, no mist, cool m. N. E. VI.
Bright, dry, warmish. p. m. Ely. W. m.
July.
1671. 2. X. Fair, lowering, cooler wd. S W. XI. 10 p. Pouring R. 3 m. ad or.
showring 9 m. occ. open. S W. XII. Closing, wet p. m. per tot. dark 4 p. in M.
C. W. 72. 16. XXIII. Fair, bright cl. wd. S W. XXIX. 5 p. R. 8 m. gently so m.
p. d. Ely. drisle at n. misty day. or occ. 8 m. XXX. Rain ante l. so Sun or.
some store so 7 m. with wd. wet d. and stormy wd. specially at n. S W. 73. 5.
XVII. Close m. wetting 9 m. Nadir drisle a p. 5 p. occ. XVIII. 7. Fair, dry,
white cl. long stre^k'd cl. as a furlongs length 7 p. Hottish W. N W. XIX. Hot
a. m. lowering, very soultry p. m. s. drops 5 m. little shower. W. 74. 24. VI.
Shower 1 p. 3 p. and 5 p. S W. VII. 8. R. and hail 9 m. etc. showrs p. m. S W.
not discerned till half an ho. after rise, be. eclipsed. VIII. Showring 10 m.
1 p. dashing 5 p ad 8. fere Sly, but Ely p. m. then again S. 75. 12. XXV. Very
wdy. Rain o. 7 p. 9 p. W. XXVI. 2 p. Fair a. m. Rain, Hot, misling Night. W.
XXVII. R. m. and 9 m. wdy die tot N W. wd. S W. 76. 2. XIV. Fair, warm, hempen
cl. a. m. overcasting gradually p. m. H. winds. E. XV. 2 m. R. 4 m. very hot.
a. m. Rain 4 m. shower 1 p. ad 3 p. R. hard again, 5 p. Delph. occ. Thunder 6 p.
as Mr. Saunders. S. XVI. Cloudy, clouds in scenes a. m. dry p m. W. 77. 29.
III. Fair, dry m. cloudy. overc. sub occ. s. wd S W. N. at N. IV. 6 p. close m.
s. mist. N. lowry but with palish clouds p. m. bright n. scarce a cloud. N. V.
Cloudy m. Wd various E. N W. warm, Fair. E.
August.
1671. 27 IX. Fair a. m. coasting showrs n. and wd. thunder-showr 3 p. and 5 p
in Nadir 3 p. shower 7 p. X, 9 m. open, cooling shower 11 m. 3 p. S. W. XI. Fair,
overc. 8 m. Rain o. 5 p. 7 p. and gusts of wd, sad harvest. S W. 72. 15. XXVII.
N. wd, dashing o. and drisle m. p. S. W. XXVIII. 6 m. Higher wd. drisle 9 m.
dash 10 m. N W. XXIX. H. wd ante 1. and die tot. Rain 7 m. and 11 m. S W. 73.
4. XVI. some rain ante I. shower 2 p. S W. XVII. 11. m. close, lowering 2 p. s.
drops 5 p. S W. XVIII. Close, lowering, some rain 8 m. warm. W. N W. 74. 23. V.
Bright m. H. cool wd suspic. a p. N W. VI. o. N. W. High wd, open. R. 5 p. 7 p.
10 p. N W. VII. Much R. a. l. Fair, fog 8 p. N. 75. 11. XXIV. Cloudy m. rainy
p. m. S. XXV. 5 m. fair. S. XXVI. Cloudy m. open 8 m. wdy. W. 76. O. XII. s.
Rain 4 m. Fair, overcast a. m. wd. S. XIII. o. H. wd. flying cl. XIV. shower 6
m. 7 m. and before. wdy, cloudy. 77. 20. II. Close m. p. and misling, no mist,
windy. S W. III. 1 m. Foggy, rain 9 m. dash o. Hot then etc. dark 11 p. and
brisk wd. Rain noct. tot. fog. IV. Drowning m. Sun or. and R. contin. ad 6 p.
N. wind vear to the West. Stripped cl. at n.
September.
1671. 25. VII. Rain 'n. shower sudden 10 m. Storm of great Hail and Thunder 3
p. ending in Rain H. wd 9 p. N W. VIII. 6 p. Frost, fair cold and briskwd a. m.
Shower 1 p. 3 p. in M. C. 1 p. and ho 3. totally eclips. IX. Fog, rainy m. p.
close n. L. wd. S W. N. at N. 72. 14. XXV. Rain noct. t. s. wetting m. warm S
E. XXVI. 7 p. dark, wet a. m. p. tot. Shower 5 p. warm. S W. XXVII. Fog m.
close m. p. s. drisle 4 p. 9 p. S W. Ely at n. gusts of wd 10 p. 33. 3. XV.
Very cold n. praec. Frost, bright flying clouds, close n. S W. XVI. a m. R.
ante luc. and a. m. wetting 4 p. rain hard. H. wd 8 p. S W. XVII. Furious,
Tempest noct. tot. clear m. max. part. with low flying cl. H. wd d. tot, and
rain 1 p. S W. 74 22. IV. E. cloudy a. m. N W. not close p. m. N. cloudy n. V.
4 m. E. Fine day; close 5 p. coldish m. E. VI. N. Overc. 8 m. lowering. open, s.
wet 6 p. cloudy n. 10 p. E. 75: 10. XXII. Wind, open, temperate. S W. XXIII. 8.
Rain med. noct. Fair, Wly wd. Rain at n. XXIV. Rain 4 m. dark m. and o. warm p.
m. 38. H. wd 5 p. S W. 76. 28. X. Close m. p. open p. m. wind vesp. W. XI. 12.
frost m. s. rain circ. ort. and 4 p cold H. wd. N. XII. Fr. cool, close m. p.
brisk wd, no dew 11 p. N W. 77. 19. XXXI. Aug. H. winds noct. tot, etc. many
cl. and dark, lowering circ. o. calmer sub vesp. red even. Wly. Clouds N W. but
Wly 10 p. I. 11 m. Fog leaving a water in the basin, cloudy, windy. S W. II.
Close windy, warm, open a little, but cloudy 10 p. S W. 17. XXIX. Fog 4 m.
brisk wd. overc. 8 m. drisle 9 m. gusts of wd. a. m. more at n. rain 4 p. S. S
E. XXX. 8. showring 4 times a^ m. open p. m. drops vesp. clouds contrary to the
wd 10 p. wd various. N. S. E. I. Oct. Fog, some Frost, fair somt. overc. S W.
October.
1671. 25. VII. Gusts of wd ante 4 m. R. a. m. warm, close n. S E. E. at n.
VIII. 4 m. stormy wds 3 m. Rain noct. gust 10. wd, open, warm, s. fog at n.
Halo and calm beyond expectation. S W. IX. Fog m. warm, drops o. and p. m. m.
p. N. so Sun occ. and f. Fog, very warm 8 p. Halo with red limb. narrow. 72.
13. XXV. Fair, windy, cloudy in several pl. Ho. 9. Air disposed for hail. N E.
XXVI. 6 m. R. ante ort. ad 8 m. warm, overc. at n. S. S. E. XXVII. Misty and
rain ad ort. ad 10 m. showring 4 p. and 9 p. S E m. S W. p. m. 73. 2. XIV. Fr.
mist, rain 1. p. etc. so 5 p. 10 p. N E. m. S E. o. S W. XV. 5. Tempest of wd
noct. tot. open and wdy day. S W. XVI. Misly clouds N E. lowering p. m. and s.
wetting 8 p. and ante I. S W. 74. 21. III. Some wet ante l. and a. m. H. wd.
wet Sun occ. and 8 p. with wd. S. IV. 8. S E. hot n. H. wd. shower 10 m. great,
dark 4 p. S. in M. C. Rainbow above semicircular Sun occ. calm n. S W. V. S W.
Fair m. shower 10 m. R. 4 p. 6 p. H. wd. S. 75. 10. XXII. Rain at midn. and 8 m.
H. wds and stormy, warm, R. 4 p. W. XXIII. 2 mist. warm wetting 8 m. rainy 10
m. ad noon. close. W. XXIV. Stormy wds, dash of R. and Hail 1 p. Storm of R. 6
p. H. wds 9 p. in M. C. occ. S. S W. 76. 28. X. Wet ante l. and m. so 9 m. and
misty, open p. m. Freez n. Nly Meteors 11 p. by light, a Capellam Versus. XI. 3
Frost, misty, fair, somt. overc. misty at n. W. XII. s. rain m. and a m.
wetting 10 p. s. gusts, H. Frost at Okeham in Rutland. E. 77. 17. XXIX. s. rain
m. Fog Nly. s. rain 11 m. snow 8 p. Clouds 10 p. cold. XXX. 10 m. Fr. Fair
bordering thin Clouds 8 m. overc. and brisk wds 11 m. drisle p m. and vesp. N.
XXXI. Fog, hard Fr. dark m. E. open o. overc. 6 p. Frosty n. overc. 11 p. no
mist 11 p. S E.
November.
1671. 24. V. Close, cool, drisle 8 p. N E. VI. 2 p. Clear m. overcast o. Rain
4 p. N E. VII. Great Frost, Ice above the thickness of a crown piece. Frosty d.
clear. N W. 72. 13. XXIII. R. ante l. close wds, warm, drislle 11 p. W. XXIV. 5
p. close, drisle o. and 4 p. wdy at n. S W. XXV. Open, closing S W. at n. N E.
73. 2. XIII. Frosty d. Fair, Fog post Sun occ. N W. S W. XIV. 6 m. Frosty,
Fair. N E. XV. Frosty, Fair, overcast p. m. and yielding Freez at n. W. S W.
74. 21. II. H. wind ante l. some wet 9 m. o. 3 p. 7 p. much Rain. Sly. III. 1
p. Showry, somet. open. wd o. so post occ. IV. Fair m. p. once overcast, misty
at n. S W. 75. 10. XXI. Frosty, Fair, mist, wd. Ely p. m morn. Nly. XXII. 9 m.
Frost, but Rain 6 m. froze as it fell. Fair flying cl. H. wd. and black Fr. at
n. N E. XXIII. S W. then N W. H. Frost, close p. m. N W. 76. 28. IX. Frost m.
Foggy die tot: great fog m. missing and mis^ing 7 p. E. X. 9 m. Rain 9 m. and 6
m. mist, close, warm cold at n. E. XI. Frost m. Fog, fair wd. Ely Frost 12 p.
77. XXVIII. Frosty, foggy die tot. Thaw 7 p. with Rain. Gentle shower 12 p.
XXIX. 4 m. Fog, mild air; not open above. S. S E. Wd and drisse at n. S E. E.
XXX. H. wd and wet m. p. Rain 6 p. dark day. S W.
December.
1671. 24. IV. Rain m. coldish, open p. m. clear n. E. wd 11 p. Nly. V. 12.
Open m. Rain and Sun shine 11 m. showring by fits 1 p. N E. VI. Open and cold.
N E. 72. 17. XXIII. Rain a. m. cease 2 p. H. wd. cloudy at n. XXIV. 6 m.
various wd ante l. wd High, overc. p. m. for a while. wdy, droppy 11 p. S W.
XXV. Fair, H. wd ante l. flying cl. o. S W. 73. 2. XII. Clouds a. l. warm,
bright m. p. wd overc. Lambs wool cl. and a red circle circ.. S W. XIII. 7.
close m. p. warm, dry, more close at n. S W. XIV. Wet morn m. p. mist, S W. wd.
change and cooler. s. frost. N W. 74. 21. II. Close day. S W. III. 6 m. W.
close, dry, fair p. m. s. Frost at n. S. o. at n. S E. IV. Frosty, fair, mist.
S E. 75 11. XXI. Wd, cloudy a. m. Rain p. m. m. p. S W. Too warm. XXII. 9 m.
open wdy dry. S. XXIII. L. frost, fair, dry, wind. S W. Dieb. 23 and 24 Ships,
9 cast away at Mount Bay. 76. 29. IX. Frosty, Thames near frozen; snow ab ho.
1. ad noct. med. N. X. 4 m. snowing noct. tot. deep half a yard. wind, fair W.
XI. Frosty. Snow ante l. offer 10 m. dark and. close p. m. N. 77. 18 XXVII. Wd
and wetting a. m. H. wd vesp. S W. damp walls and pavements, wd and wetting,
tempestuous 11 p. S. XXVIII. 11. H. wd noct. tot. cloudy. H. wd and wetting 4
p. Higher at n. little rain S E. W. XXIX. Great fr. fog m. and die tot. circ.
horizour. Cold, bright, freezing and calm. Two Meteors though shine. W. S.
Plenilunia Eighty Seven.
Days 261. Moiety 130.
5. Number of the Aspects you see Eighty Seven. First, according to our Method
let us gather the Quota for that. Verily of 87 Full Moons there appear in this
Table Seventy Five Drippers. Now between 87. and 75. pray count the difference,
and the next thing you have to do is to deny the Inclination. Alas! Our very
days, even the Dripping Days reach to the Moiety, being in number 172. which is
40 days over and above.

6. We reckon but 64 Aspects for Wind, and 122 Days, which if it seems not so
round, for the Full Moon brings Wind as soon as any Aspect Lunar, at least
under public Notice, impute it to us who have fairly pleaded that we could
not always dwell on the Watchtower, or note the Gusts and Gales in the Night,
seeing whatever they make, like Rifts or Furrows on the Water, they leave no
durable Impression, but heal up without any breach. Only where Wind is not
expressed, it may sufficiently be understood either by the Change and Variety
of the Winds, which yet we have not considered in our Muster, or by the flying
of the Clouds, which we thought fit to admit. Add the moist Days, most of them
have their Gale, seeing every Shower says the Seaman, has its Winds, and Calm
Rains are seldom, though Mists and Fogs are often attended with such Still
Music.

7. Nor still are we to forget our Dis-junctive, either one or the other, Rain
or Winds: Consulting the Table I find about 28 Winds without Rain; add them to
172. the number of our Rain, the Sum is 200. which comes within prospect of
261. the Number of every Day in the Table.

8. And let no Man say, What day is there without Wind? For suppose there were
no Day without, neither is there any Day, almost, without some Aspect; there is
not a Whiff but has its Aeolus, some Aspect, or as good a thing, so has
Heaven provided for the Air, without which it would stagnate and be unwholsom,
yea, Pestilential, as the Air of close Prisons and Dungeons without
Perspiration. We may thank God therefore for every Flaver of Wind. But then
neither has every Day its Gale, that we may be engaged to enquire the cause of
the Difference, why some are brisk, and others dead Calms, though the Vulgar
cannot be concerned in such enquiry.

9. Not but that we have a Sense of High Lofty, more than Brisk Winds, in
number of days 86. in number of Aspects 55. The former Number exceeds the
latter, because many a time every Day of the Triduum proves windy. One thing I
cannot but observe, and it is the Concern of the Table to remember it, that in
the year of our Lord 1675. December 23. That very day was one of the two, when
from Mount-Bay we heard that no less than IX. Ships cast away, and yet the
Table notes only a Dry Wind without any Fury.

10. Here again I beg the Reader to observe the Vicinity of the Event to the
precise time of the Aspect, or the Complement rather of the Aspect, as January
XV. ho. 1. M. Anno 1671. Four Hours before One, you see it rains. June 11. 9.
M. Four Hours after. Both within Compass. August X. 8 m. Three Hours after.
September VIII. 6. P. Three Hours before. October VIII. 4. M. Stormy Wind and
Rain but an Hour before. November VI. 2 P. Rain, 1 Hour after. Try another
Year. Anno 1672. Janua^y IV. 11 m. Four Hours after drisly Rain. February XI.
12. P. Snow from set* all the Night. May I. ho. 9 M. Dash at 8 M. June XXX. 3
m. close and drisly, August XXVIII. 6 m. drisle 9 m. Sept. XXVIII. 7 P. Showers
5 P. October. XXVI. 6 m. Rain ante is ortum, ad 5 m. November. XXV. 5 p. Drisle 4
P. December. XXIV. 6 m. ante lucem. The Table is before the Reader* if he please
to go on, he will find the same effect.

11. Now for warmth, that the Full has a kindness for that, Aristotle has
long ago principled us, (...), the Plenilunar nights most warm. In Greece no
question more sensible than in our Northern Situation. But to run to
experience, I find in Hackluit in a discourse of the North-West passage. Edit.
1. page 601. The Flux of the Sea determined to the Rarefaction of the Water by
Lunar Heat. And elsewhere he tells us in a voyage to Guinea from Men of good
Credit, that they perceived issuing from the very beams of the a sensible Heat.
Garnishes Voyage, page 95. in the year 1584.

12. And without going to these hotter Climes, I my self have appealed to
experience, if any shall have patience to expect, near his Chamber Window, if
situate toward the South, while the makes her Transit, or if in an Aestival
Night, with the help of an ordinary Perspective; we nicely mark the affection
of our Eye, upon the Full 's first Emersion or Rise; the Eye, I say, that
living Thermometer, of more quick perception than the Inanimate, shall perceive
a fair gentle warm Impression from its Beams.

13. So little does that Objection move us, which pleads the contrary, because,
forsooth, this Warmth is not perceived by the Dead Thermometer. It will be
said, we know, that this seeming warmth is perceived by Fancy, and not by any
real sensation ab extra. To which I shall briefly say but this, that if our
Intention in that Experiment had been to explore the Lunar Warmth at such
times; Fancy, possible, might have imposed upon us, being corrupted by the Will
so far, as to say what she would have. But when our attempt was made only to
discern the quantity of the Discus or Figure of the in her Perigee, at the
instant of her Rise, and unawares beyond Expectation, a perception of Warmth
was found, the Impression was therefore not Imaginary.

14. Here if the Question be started, whether of the two is the warmer Aspect,
the Change or the full? That we do not perplex the State of the Question, it
only requires thus much, whether the Air be warmer at the Change, than at the
Full? And the answer is, that the New has the preheminency. For the Day
(speaking of the Artificial Day) is warmer at the Change than at the Full,
Generally: But the Night, again, is warmer at the Full, than at the Change.

15. Now let us see whether this agrees with our Tables? It does. For Lo we
find more warm days in the Day of the New, than at the Full: 38. in the First,
but 32. in the Later. Yet, least the small difference may not move us, let us
sum the days of excess, and then under the Full finding about 11. or 12. Under
the New we find 28. The Reason is not so much on the 's part be sure, as is
evident, because of the Aversion of its Beams from us, while the Full glares us
in the Face, but because the in her Change acts in consort with the Rest, which
are Day-Birds for the most part, and are found more frequent and numerous in
the Diurnal Horizon, than in the Nocturnal.

16. So for the Nights the Table accords, for surveying the Sum of Cold Nights
in the New, I find amounts to 55. but viewing the Nights at the Full, I find
but 48. which difference if it seem not wide enough, it may be made wider, by
considering that even the Frosts of the Full, are less absolute, than those of
the New, with abatement and limitation of some Frost, which occurs more
frequently in the Full. To say nothing of the Snow, which appearing also most
frequently at the Full, argues some Lenity in the Beams. Take one observation
more the Cold Nights at the Change run higher in the Year than the Cold Nights
at the Full. For Anno 1676. at the New in April I find a Frosty Night, crusting
the Water with Ice: But it will be hard I believe, to find Ice in an April
Night at a Full. The like I may say of Frosty Mornings in the Month of May, I
find One in the New, but None in the Full.

17. It Is strange you will say, that the Inter-Lunium should bring more Warm Days
than the Full, because every body sees that it is the Dark Side of the
Half-Luminary which is turned toward our Earth; all Shade is cool, now the by
her Shady-side Skreens the Light and Heat from us, and reverberates it upward.
To this we say, it is true, that the turns her Illustrious Side from us, and
therefore must be Cool. But how? Not absolute: There is a considerable Warmth
flies round on all sides, like Sparkles from an Anvil, and the repercussed Heat
is sufficient for all Operations Natural to quicken and encourage them, as in
the Lunar History appears: Yet we are not driven to say or believe that the is
pervious, especially as to sensible Heat; but we can solve all Operations of
Nature depending on her, even while under the Inter-Lunium, by this, that the
Ray, repercussed or reflected in the perpendiculum is redoubled, and so
requital is made for the aversion. Observe, 2ly. that the is much nearer to the
Sun in the, then at the Diametral Opposition; the Full is brighter than the
New, but she plays at a greater distance from the Sun. In the New she lies
between the Sun and the Earth: In the Full, she lies on the other side of the
Earth, twice as far from the Sun; so has the Wisdom of the Creator moderated
the Universe and the parts thereof, that what they want in Length, shall be
supplied in Breadth, as I may say. If the Luminous side of the had looked
toward us, as in the Full, the Heat would h^ve bin too near, Nature would have
bin scorched with too great Annoyances instead of Luminaries. Therefore in the
New, God has pleased to reverse the, making her as a Skreen or Fan to it self.
In the Night therefore when he has removed it at such distance, that it will
not burn, we can afford to see the Luminous side toward us, and partake of its
moderate Warmth and Influence. But we have answered fully to the quaere, why
Novilunar Days are more and more often Hot than Plenilunar, not only because in
the Day time, when the is at Full, she acts in her farthest possible distance
in the Hemisphere of the Antipodes; but because in the New she acts in consort
with the Rest: She is not only nearer to our Vertex, but she acts with and
among all the other Planets that are abroad in the Diurnal Hemisphere: The Full
being solitary for the most part without such Company, which company is not
bound to observe her Motion; the Sun is the Prince, whose Motions they mostly
attend.

18. What is sometime a Problem in natural Philosophy, How the Breath of our
Mouth seems warm to our Hand, when it lies near the Mouth, and cold when
removed at further distance? Is usually resolved thus: That the Hand lying near
the Mouth, receives the Breath warm from the Larynx and the Cavitys of the
Mouth, but at further distance the Breath in mixed with the cooler Ambient Air,
and so refrigerated therewith, which by Agitation seems the Cooler. The same
solution applied to our Lunar Aspects is not improper: The Full is at greater
dist^^ce from the Sun than the New, and therefore her Rays are more engaged in
the Cold Vapors of the Atmosphere, and upon that Account must give place to
the New as to the Day; But if we compare them in point of Warmth in the Night,
though she be at the same distance from the Sun, yet she is nearer us, and upon
that account the Plenilunar Nights may be warmer.

19. Shall we pursue this comparison in other Instances, and see whether it be
worth our while, if any observation can be raised, which brings Light or Use
with it. The two Tables lie thus

.. Cold Frosty Days or Nights. 56. 65. Cl^se or Lowering, 56. 67. Pregnant
Clouds. Fog. 23. 38. Mist or Hazie. 36. 48. Hot Days 11. 28. Hot Nights 5. 5.
Rain, Moisture. 103. 89. Lasting or Violent. 47. 35. Rain at N. 52. 30. Wind at
N. 13. 9. Snow. 14. 8. Trajections. 4. 20. Warm. 32. 38. Winds. 44. 56. Storms,
Gusts. 68. 43. Wind Change. 0 29. Thunder. 4. 4. Lightning. 0. 0. Hail. 9. 4.
Halo. 5. 0. Iris 1. 0. Fila or Gossamere. 1. 0 Cold Winds. 0 6. Dark, gloomy. 0
15. Stripped Clouds. 0 2.

20. Here pray view the difference between Wind, Rain, Fog: And if I mistake
not, we have laid the Foundation to clear up the difference. For Rain (Snow
excluded) the new brings 125. the Full brings you 150. Quere, here, how comes
it to pass, if the New, as we pretend, be warmer, (and Warmth is the cause of
Moisture,) that the Full shows fairest for Moisture. Shall we answer on the
grounds that we have laid, that Warmth is but One Parent of Moisture; there
must be another Parent for the Birth, viz. A competent measure of Cold, which
Competence being found in the Full, rather than in the New, the Full must
exceed in moisture. Quaere the 2d. time, how comes it to pass, if the New, as
we pretend be warmer, and Warmth is the Cause of Wind, that the Full blustereth
more than the New? Answer as above, The Wind has two Parents, Active and
Passive; A competent degree of Cold the passive Parent, the Full before its
warmth being furnished with that Compotency, is Cruder and Windyer then the New.

21. And this is confirmed stiffly from the excesses of Violent Rains, Storms,
Winds, which abound under the Full, rather than the New, because where the
Contraries choose to meet, there will appear the greater Hurry.

22. Once more then, how comes it to pass that the New produces Fog more
frequent than the Full? Say that the very Nature of a Fog proclaims the absence
of the contrary, I mean the Cold. There is both Warmth and Cold in the
Constitution, but they are in remiss degrees, they make a kind of Tepor, when
qualities, though contrary, live in quiet possession; upon this account Fogs
are seen for the most part of a warmish, sluggish, calm consistency. It Is easy
without Violence to speak to the several accounts of Snow and Hail, which
happen at the Full, twice as many times as at the New; there is a manifest
composition of two repugnant qualities in both these Meteors. As for the cold
part which is seen in both, the Full, which is the cooler Aspect, is proper for
them.

23. I have bin further curious to compare the Nocturnal Rains or Gusts which
have happened under the Change and the Full, respectively, not at the Rising
and Setting, (for that calls for a peculiar remark,) but either before Day, or
at Night, or Midnight, yea, or the whole Night, and on which side, do you
think, will lie the advantage? The Nocturnal Luminary is up to justify it, nor
will she deny her self, though behind the Curtain, to have bin then, and there,
at the time and place. We find it Rained or Raged in the Night 52 times, while
the New affords us but 30. which is some notable difference, though again for
Raining, blustering the whole Night, the New is not so for out of reach, but
she can bring up her Tale equal with the Full. It may be there is some
necessity that the Moon, or some other. Planet should be in the Nocturnal
Hemisphere, when it blows or Rains late at Night, or very early. If none of the
three Superiors be there, the alone will suffice, whereby you see the Nature
of the opposite Aspect in genere, for to tell you before hand, the Planets must
be strongly posited when ever it Rains by Day or Night, without an Opposition
at large, It Is extraordinary.

24. But we must by no means dissemble that there is another reason why the
Full is a more violent Aspect than the New, which may arise from hence, that
she comprehends by her radiation, ( reflex; though it be) a greater Arch of
the Sphere Celestial, than the New can; and so by consequence is apt to affect
more Celestial Bodies, being and Situate in that gr^^ter Portion. As the Eye
does not comprehensively Ken a Mountain (suppose) when it is near it, but must
remove it self to a distance, for the view of so great an Object: The Pyramid
of Illumination, whose basis lies upon the body that terminates the Ray,
enlarges her basis so much the more as the Illuminor is remote. Now, if the
influence be in some part, as most certain it is, commensurate to the
Illumination. This, we conceive, man be the reason of its Effect enquired into,
provided we at no hand exclude the other.

25. For when Astronomy tells us to excellent purpose, that the is in her
Apogee of the Eccentric or utmost distance from the Earth, both in and, it
sweetly closes with what we have hitherto pretended to help toward the Warmth
of the New, being so much nearer to the Sun, as she is more distant from the
Earth; as on the contrary for the cooler Beam of the Full, being so far the
more remote.

26. What we have said may be made somewhat clear by this Diagram

Let the point A. be the Globe of the Earth. B. the New in with the Sun. C. the
Full in to the Sun. D, E, F, G. an Arch of the Planetary Heaven, (as if the
Planets moved all in one Circle, for it is all a case.) It Is manifest that the
Triangle D, C, G. comprehends the greater Arch of Heaven, and E, B, F. the
Less. This is the New Pyramid; the other is the Full 's.

27. Have we never another Observation before we part? New and Full incline to
Rain. That will be confessed, now it is proved, yea, but What will you say if we
produce a Full that is a sure Card that always raineth, That is the Full in
April, when for 7 years together it fails not; so it may be called upon
Courtesy, infallible. Yea, the Full in August does the like. 7 times it rains
in 7 years, and more than 7. (or 14 either) if you reckon days as hitherto we
have done, and that no otherwise than we should. If the Reader will observe
more such Full s, he will lose nothing by it. Verily the New s also in the
Month of Aug. bear up equal with the Full s. But the cause of this difference,
Oh! When shall we come to that Text?

28. It remains now that we speak to the Winds, and then raise the definition
of the Aspect. In the Full we find from the East, 53 West, 44. North, 35.
South, 38. N. East, 29. N. West, 26. S. East, 15. S. West, 80. Reducing these
to their Cardinals, thus, --

East, 53. West, 44. North. 35. South, 38. N. E. 29. N. W. 26. N. E. 29. S. E.
15. S. E. 15. S. W. 80. N. W. 26. S. W. 80. 97. 150. 88. 133.

29. So that the inclination lies more to the South and West, as the New did,
with some Seeming Favor for the West. Hence we may raise our Character: viz.
The Full is apt to bring Wind and Rain, almost as often as the New. Yea, stormy
Winds and dashing Rain more often, pretty apt to favor Snow and Hail more than
the New; Fog, less; to Thunder less: though here it happens to bear no
inequality, To Westerly Winds first, or Southerly; to East many times; but
least of all to the North.

30. Now whereas we have hinted that the Full 's influence takes place oftener
than is there expressed, 'twill not be amiss to present the entire Table as was
done in the New where it shall without dissimulation, appear how often the Aspect
misses of making good her Character, how often she succeeds: In she misses not,
in she misseth not, in she misseth not, in and she misseth not as far as our
Table reaches. In and she brings eight Successes for eight Revolutions, call it
certain then or highly probable if you hate the Word Infallible. The Table
stands thus.

Sign Revol. Event. Sign Revol. Event. VIII. 8. VII. 7. VI. 4. VIII. 7. VIII.
8. VII. 7. VIII. 7. VII. 7. VII. 7. VII. 5. VII. 7. VI. 5.

So does the Full ((...)) give some Light to contemplations of Celestial
Influence.

CHAP. XIV.
The Lunar Warmth further deduced, as to the Change and Full, in the
Dissolutions of Frosts: A competent Catalogue of Frosts so dissolved; the
vulgar notion justified, yet it is not perpetual, sometimes other Causes step
in, specially. If the Full dissolves more Frosts than the New, it is agreeable
to our principles. Why the Frosts are not dissolved precisely on the day of the
Aspect, but 2 or 3 days before or after.
1. WE are indebted farther to show the Lunar warmth in these two Aspects of
Change and Full, by the periodical resolution of tedious Frosts, which
sometimes lock up the Elements, with our Blood and Spirits in Icy Chains, till
a comfortable Relent of milder air sends out a warrant for their release.

2. This gentler Spirit blows as at the, so at the Let the vulgar notion and
public monuments attest it; of this sort is, to run back no further, the Frost
VIIo Elizabethae An. 1564. It began, says Stow, Dec. 21. and lasted till our
City-River was frozen, so that New Years Festival was celebrated in warming
Sports and Exercises on the River, the new Thames Street: now as Stow tells us,
it thawed Jan. 3. An. 1564. the day after the Change.

3. The 2d. of that noted year 1572. famous for the Star in Cassiepeia, a
Tedious Frost from Alhallontide to Twelftide. This Frost is remembered for
congealing rains, as they fell till the arms of Trees overcharged with Ice,
brake from the Trunk; after Twelftide it took its leave, in good time, for
reckoning the hour of the being Ho. 10. noct. Jan. 3. the dissolution falls
within less than three days after the Change; A cold Spring followed it, but
that belongs to another consideration.

4. A 3d. An. 1579. short, but by the fall of Snow perilous to Wayfarers and
poor Cattle, still mentioned by some of our yearly remembrancers; it began Feb.
4 and held till Feb. 10. the day preceding the.

5. A 4th. An. 1598. from Jan. 1. to 10. the Thames almost frozen, the Frost
remitted Jan. XI. two days preceding the Change. Further in December. of the same
year the Thames almost froze again, which, the Week before Christmas was
dissolved. Now Seven days before Christmas happened the day of the Change.
Again, after that remission Dec. XXVII. it freezes a 3d. time, when lo! On New
years day it relented the very day of the Full.

6. Another An. 1615. Jacobi I. 13. held a months space from Jan. XVII. to Feb.
XIV. yea with little remission till March VII. That 7th of March is the day
following the Full.

7. An. 1621. a Frost from Nov. 24. ad Dec 7. when after a milder season it
returned again.

8. An. 1627. * Jan. XX. for three weeks, till Feb. XII. Diverse Booths, not for
sale of Drink only, but other Merchandise upon the place. But All remove on
Feb. 12. within three days of the Full.

In Germany in the beginning of the year we find Frigus intensissimum, Frigus
sonticum, immane, Danubius Concretus: but behold a gentle Aspect of a full
brings a Relent. Jan. 27. St. Vet.

* Note that in the Frost An. 1622. the Relent was in Germany not so long, for
with them the Danow was frozen by Jan. 8. 18. but the remission came at the
approach of the New Jan. 31. St. N. Febr. 10. Such difference there is in nice
cases between Regions. By Nicer cases I intend Frosts not universal.

9. An. 1623. The Danow frozen the 3d. time, the Frost began Dec. XIV. ceased
Jan 11. 1624. within three days before the Full.

10. An. 1626. Nov. XXI. Danow floted with Ice, it terminates Dec. 4. the day
next after the Full. Thus Keplers Diary affords us plenty of instances in a few
years; for more may be observed from those Diaries, who yet, good Man, in his
account of the natural cause, as is noted before, gives not half the due to the
Aspect.

11. An. 1635. A great and sore Frost within memory, the same which is
celebrated by Poets of the time, began as I remember, about the midst of Dec.
ceased as a Manu-script tells me Feb. 11. three days after the New.

12. An. 1645. Frost from Dec. 8. complained of by the Parliament-Forces, (so
called) as an impeder of their winter-marches, the perigee might help to hasten
it away, Jan. 17. for, die 18. as the Story says, the Frost was newly gone, and
that comes within compass of three days before the Full.

13. An. 1659 Decimo Caroli IIdi. at the end of the year, a Frost begun Dec.
XXIX. and although it remitted a little Jan. XI. in 60. and again on Jan. XIII.
yet it receeded not till day XVIII. the day after the Full.

14. An. 1662. Nov. XV. Frost brought Ice on the River day XXIX. but Dec. 1.
the day after the New it thawed; It returns again, and keeps its own, till day
XII. which preceeds the Full not above two days. And the third time December.
XXIV. in four Nights the Thames floated with Ice, it took its leave on
New-years-day, the day after the Change.

15. An. 1663. Jan. XXVIII. the day preceding the new, a Frost, began (we
confess, and could have owned the like before) but if it begins at the new, it
ends at the full, with some little warning, the day preceding.

16. The Winter of that fatal. year 1665. is not yet quite forgot, the Thames
was sick of dead palsy for three weeks, it seized her first Dec. XXVIII. An.
praeced. now, what the Comet of that year could not do, the Plenilunar
performed, for, III. days before, the Frost vanished. It froze again Jan. XXIX.
by the fourth of the next month Ice appeared on the Thames Feb. 7. All
dissolveth two days after the Change.

17. An. 1667. A strange Frost from Feb. XV. (at which time we comfort our
selves against the Menaces of Cold by the Topic of the Suns altitude, which
will not, say we, suffer such Hyemal Enchroachments at that time of year) when
mal-gre what the Sun could do, though in the Vernal Equinox, there was much Ice
in the River. Mart. IX I will not ask the Anti-Astrologer an account of this
accident, only acquaint the Reader, that March XIV. was new, and the XV. day
the bold Face of the Winter changed.

18. An. 1669. Dec. VII. A Frost of XX. days, the bitter Christmas day and the
Holy Day attending were universally noted, as intolerable as those two days
where, the 27 was sensibly milder, and three days after the wind turning to the
South, it wore away by Inches.

19. The same winter in the year following, viz. An. 1670. Jan. XXV. Frost
began with the Full, we see when it begun, note also when it dissolved Feb. XI.
the Second day after the Change.

20. An. 1674. Jan. XXIV. Frost began, the Full, on Feb. I. Had a good mind to
the dissolution, the wind turned, so the dissolution succeeded Feb. II.

21. An. 1672. Feb. XXIV. as late as it is in the Winter; This Frost, like that
in 67. held us uncivilly till March XII. on whose morn made its mittimus.

22. An. 1677. from Nov. 19. Frost of X. days brought Ice on the River, die 29.
It vanished, two days after, which fell within a day of the Full.

23. An. 1678. Dec. IX. ad 18. Nine days it held, and the last day was exactly
the day of the.

24. The last (and in the name of those that were come to man's estate I could
almost wish it were the last; I never met with any that could wish they might
endure the like again) is, That which began presently after the Solstice, Dec.
XIV. An. 1683. and lasted unmercifully all the Christmas twelve days with some
Semblance of relent (according as it was predicted, even the flattering
Semblance that I speak of) about Jan. XI. 4 days after the Change but returned
again, and claimed another Lunar Month, even till Feb. the 4th. in the Evening
of the day of the Change. A Frost so terrible all over Europe, that it was
matter of debate at home and abroad to find a parallel, the River being froze
even below the City-Bridge as well as above, (a circumstance I find not
mentioned in any of our precedent Congelations;) but we shall have occasion to
speak of this elsewhere; you see when it found its period, and the World was
glad of it.

25. Yea but who takes the pains to note the Failers? I answer it is our
Interest to note them, first That of An. 1600. from Jan. 2^. which in one se'
night had near froze the River. Stows Abridgement.

26. 2ly. That of the 5th. of King James I. An. 1607. destroying Herbage, Fish,
Waterfowl, of which, France, Ireland, yea and the new-planted- English,
complain in Capt. Smith's voyages, parallel in some Men's opinions to that of
1684. but at no hand to be yielded, because of its frequent interruptions, viz.
from Dec. 8. ad 15. then from 22. to 31. again; from Jan. 3. 1608. to 15. and
from 24. to 30.

27. 3ly. That of 1615. for though we have seen above, the 7th of March of that
year to agree to observation; yet we must give an account of that part which
began before Jan. 17. and held till Feb. 14. where no such observable is
pretended.

24. Like as An. 1621. from Nov. XXIV. ad Dec. VII. which bears the exception.

29. 4thly. That memorable Sore and tedious Frost An. 1676. from Nov. 16. to
Dec. 23. yea 10 days further; not inferior to many for duration and severity,
specially taking in the renewed Assault a Jan. 21. ad. d. 30 An. 1677.

30. Lastly that severe one for 2 Months space (with a few days interruption) a
Dec. 26. viz. An. 1678. ad Feb. 9. An. 1679.

31. It is our Interest, we say, to note these, not only because we gain a
little Catalogue of Frosts; but also a confirmation of the rule by a paucity of
exceptions; yet who knows not but the other Aspects of the either with, or with
others may deserve our glance on them, (though not considerable enough to found
an Axiom) as in our Aspect with for example; for whereas we find some of our
Frost not terminated at the or Lunar, but keep aloof at three days distance; if
that proportion seem too wide, we find the Mars with ready to patronize the
Birth: Verily there must be something in it, when An. 1653. above introduced,
we find the on the very day there noted for the departure of the Frosts. I do
not pretend that so it was An. 1623. 1669. but I say that An. 1607-15-20. three
of our excepted years we find a supply of the or with in the very day, or
within a day of the Frosts dissolution. So on Jan. XXXI. An. 1602. Feb. XI.
XIV. An. 1615. 1620. nay Once or twice, (as if this Planet were Rival to the)
the Frost begins with a, and ends with an, and contra, viz. a Jan. III. ad XV.
An. 1607. and a Nov. XXIV. ad Dec. VII. An. 1620. yey from a very piece and
quarter of a revolution also, as from a Square to a. So Jan. XXIV. usque ad
XXX. An. 1607. just as we observed some shorter Frosts, among the Soli-Lunar
Aspects; The like will hardly be shown with any other Planet, though it is true
again, that has no finger in the dissolution of the last: reckoning the
absolute dissolution on Jan. 3. An. 1677. for if we speak of ten days before,
when a kind offer was made, the new claims its right, within whose bounds the
drooping world has hopes of a release in such cases.

32. Now if any one finding upon the survey of this Table, that the Full Moon
dissolves a Frost more frequently than the New, should strive to make an
Inference contrary to the foregoing termination, I believe it will be hard to
accomplish, because it will be found, perhaps upon this or a longer survey,
that the Frosts which are dissolved at the Plenilunar Aspect, caeteris paribus,
were found of a brisker Solution in the night than in the day, and the
Novilunar Solutions, slower.

33. But if they persist to enquire, why sometimes, we meet not with the
dissolution precisely at the Aspect, but more commonly about it, at 2, nay 3
days distance; it is truly answered, that when such effects are not unjustly
ascribed to the Aspect, as the more worthy, there appear others under its wing,
to cooperate with the more noted configuration; as we have said before, that
or with the help to the Credit of the change or full: in the very Spring Tide,
for confirmation of which, be pleased to know for a certain, that that
prediction of flattering Semblance before spoken, in that wearisome Frost An.
1684. was determined not to the day of the Aspect only, but to the 3d. or 4th.
dayafter, the Artist observing the Rule now proposed.

CHAP. XIV.
1. Quadrate or Square proceeds on a right Angle. 2. Musica lillustration of
the Aspect is but a fancy. 3. equal to or 5. Influence of the or being granted,
puts in his claim. 6. The Triduum is convenient, though it seems to entrefair.
9. The Quadrat's right Angle admits some Latitude. 11. Diary. 12. The two
Quadrates compared. 14. They come near the full. 16. Of equal influence as to
the hour. 17. As to smart Rains. 18. In some Months or Signs of infallible
success. 20. and in Square make a fine Figure. 22. Second S quare considered.
23. Second Square more stormy than the first. 24. The Synoptical Table of the
influences of both. 25. How the second Square is warmer, and yet more stormy.
27. Why warmer. 28. Warmth perceptible in consort, though not by it self. 30.
Western Angle, warmer corner than the East. 31. More Rain in the Postnoon, than
in the Antenoon. 32. The Quadrates have influence before and after Sun. 35. Off
husius doubts of the influence, except in the Meridian and Horizon. 36. The
radiation is perpendicular though not vertical. 37. Influence perpetual. 38.
The Quadrate of the critical in corporal Distempers, noted from experience of
six or seven years. 41. The Seventh a critical day, and its foundation. 46. in
Square with the more powerful by its nearer distance to the Earth. 47. Prospect
of the Quadrates failing or infallible
1 IN the next place the Quadrate calls for our consideration, made much of by
the Astrologers, next to and. Conjunction, Opposition, and Quadrate go for
Tant-amount in the Meteorological part: We do not deny the Rule to have its
truth, and the virtue of the Aspect we have founded Architect-like, on a Right
Angle, formed by the Rays of the two Luminaries so related. 'Twas a pretry
Pythagoric fancy to compare the Aspects of the Celestial Bodies to the divisions
of the Musical Chord. So a Square to be a Diatessaron, as the is an Unison, and
the a Diapason. But this made way for such a crowd of incroching Aspects, (see
Kepler Sect. de novis Aspect. in Ephemerid. Anno 1617.) that every Pretender
would yearly strive to put in a new One; till Kepler ingeniously confessed,
that Tempestates observando vidi tandem deserendam esse Musicam: and we always
suspected it for a forced Hypothesis, which Mathematicians sometimes may be
guilty of.

2. This Quadrate or Quartile in its Dichotomy, as the Greeks call it, is
preceptible to sense as the Full is. That, by the Plenary, This by the
Half-Face illuminated, vulgarly the Half; and this Aspect returns twice in the
Month: First in the increase or tendency to the Plenilunium; the Second in the
decrease, tending to the Interlunium; as the half-way-House upon the Rode
Backward and Forward.

3. Now since the and and their Influence is undeniable, confessed and granted
us even by the Scruplers, who have no great kindness for the Ptolemaick
Astrology, it remains that the Quadrate also may produce its Credentials, Her
Letters Patentssigned by Experience, the Mistress of Faculties, whose Name and
Seal will not be questioned within the Territories of Sound Philosophy.

4. Therefore for a double Aspect we present more than a single Table, that we
might evince to the World, that we are of a guiltless profession, not afraid of
any Witnesses in Court against us, so that the Jury be honestly empanel'd. The
Diary is the verdict of the Country. For brevities sake I could have contented
my self with the account of One only, but that the Reader, I hope, may
hereafter find some reason to the contrary.

5. It may be said, that we have already produced our Tables for and in vain;
for what need we trouble our selves with the proof of any conclusion which is
granted? to which we answer, we fear they are granted us out of Charity, not as
of Debt; or for our importunity, as an Alms is thrown to a clamorous Beggar to
stop the Man's Mouth, who deserves not the pittance, although more he expects.
Not granted, I say, as our due by Virtue of our Evidence, because our Evidence
may be excepted against, as not Full and Home, by the Fastidious Dissenter; we
claim therefore, that the Reader Serenely and Calmly will be pleased upon due
consideration to accept, or favor our Evidence; without which, for all as we
know, (since there is no other imaginable Proof,) he may recall his grant, and
plead Non-Conviction, even about the Influence of the Change and Full. On the
contrary, if he allows our proceedings, and gives sentence for the and ^ upon
the strength of what has bin alleged, we hope the same Right will prevail for
this third Aspect. Since the evidence being produced to public view, if it be
alike for one as for the other, All, or None must be admitted.

6. To the ensuing Tables we have allowed the same Number of Days as in the
precedent Aspects, viz. three Days to each: It must be confessed in so doing we
may seem to interfere with the Neighbor Aspects on one hand, or the other,
which appears to be some inconvenience; to which we say, First, we found it
necessary for the comparing of the Aspects among themselves, which is intended
at the close of this Lunar Treatise, that they should be allowed all of them an
equal Number. I thought it fit once, I confess (to avoid this Coincidence) to
produce but one or two days at most, omitting sometimes the First, otherwhiles
the Third, according as those Days were found to be of a wider distance from
the Hour of the Aspect: Nay sometimes I omitted both the extreme Days, namely,
when the Aspect happened about Midday, reckoning 24 Hours to be a Competent
Measure of its duration or Influence. But I found at last one 24 Hours could
not possibly involve the total of the Influence, and another day being added,
obliged me to add the third also, upon the account that it is better to allow
with the most than with the least.

7. This I take to be certain, that the Influence of the Quartile lasts twice
24 Hours; And if so, that space of time, unless the Aspect happens precisely at
Midnight, is found to exist more or less, under the Denomination of 3 days. So
that (with the Readers patience) if the Aspect happen on Friday-Noon, we reckon
the complete boundary of that Aspect to begin on Monday Noon, and end at
Midday on Wednesday.

8. This being allowed, 'twas convenient to produce 3 almost entire days, in
regard that First, though the Day may, yet the Constitution, when Uniform,
cannot be divided: Next, that the different quality of the present Aspect may
be stated; notwithstanding sometimes we reckon one and the same Constitution to
the two Competitors, viz. the Sextile or the Trine; the Dignity of the Aspect,
I say, will be found, notwithstanding that common Accession, by its proper
Instances, their Number, and Moment So have I seen the same Weight successively
thrown into both Scales to evidence the difference of the Body which
preponderates. Howbeit, when an Instance falls out, let it be reckoned by all
means to that Aspect to which it is nearest situate.

9. But how a Right Angle should admit such a Latitude as we pretend, may be
another Scruple, but we know there may be some Latitude in a Natural Angle,
where there is none allowed in pure Mathematiques. A Right Angle made by
Luminous Bodies may have a virtual reach to half a Sign: Fifteen degrees breaks
no Squares, at least are not discerned to make such sensible variation in a
crowd of other Causes, which pretend to cooperate to the same Effect. Besides
there may be something considerable from the Vicinity of the Moon, for in other
Syzygies except the Lunar, I cannot say the Quadrate reaches so far. A Quadrate
of Saturn or Mars with Sol, loses it self in five Degrees perhaps.

10. Furthermore observe, that the two Columns of the approaching Table serve,
the first for the former Quadrate, the 2d. for the later, which differ a matter
of 14 or 15 days one from the other.

The Quartile Table.
January.
1671. 28. VI. Frost, ice, wet much p. m. S. VII. 11 p. rain ante luc. fair,
windy. NW. VIII. H. wd ante luc. and wet: windy and flying cloudyness. S W. 72.
17. XXVI. Fr. fair, cold, wdy; flying white cl. clear n. and audible wd. N E.
XXVII. 6 m. H. Frost, bright, overc. 4 p. N E. XXVIII. H. fr. bright, audible
wd. N E. Frosty. N E. 73. 6. XIV. Frost, white cl. as for snow o. close m. p. N
E. E. N. XV. 10 p. Frost, snow, hail o. m. and very dark, yield p. m. E. N E.
XVI. Close m. p. snow 5 p. E. 74. 25. IV. Fr. hoary; fair and cold, misty air.
S W. V. 7 m. frosty, fair. W. N. S. VI. E. great fr. and much hoar; mist, fair.
S. 75. 14. XXIII. Wly fair a. m. ^. 2 p. and apace M. C. 9 p. and 11 p. with
gusts occ. S W. XXIV. 2 m. S W. very warm, open, black clouding and wd. R. 11
p. S W. XXV. Wly. windy, wetting 8 m. clear S. R. 1 p. and 3 p. 76. 3. XI.
Frosty m. snow 4 m. frost 9. N W. XII. 9 p. Frost m. thaw apace v. N E. cold n.
frosty. S. XIII. Frost. Thaw m. cloudy ante l. close m. p. W. 77. ^1. XXIX.
Frosty, open. Ely. XXX. 2 p. misle a. m. rain p. m. max. pt. W. N E. XXXI.
Fair, frost. W. N E.
January.
1671. 13. XXII. Tempest of wd ante 1. close, gusts. H. wind at n. s. misle. S
W. XXIII. 3 m. H. wd ante 1. Fair summers d. N W. XXIV. Frost, open. S W. 72.
2. X. Frost, foggy die tot. taken up 8 p. S. XI. 10 p. Fair, s. mist, shower 7
m. pleasant d. Meteors 3. near Cassiop and Vrs. Min. E. XII. Fog, frost a. m.
S. thaw even. 73. 20. XXVIII. Fr. thaw and closing p. m. Bees work. Ely. XXIX.
4 p. close, coldish. N E. XXX. Drisle m. close, misty, s. wd. clear p. m. N E.
74. 9. XVII. Rain 2 m. snow die tot. Nly Thaw and R. toward n. S E. XVIII. 11
p. not cold 9 m. overc. 10 m. shower and H. wd 10 p. S W. a. m. S E. p. m. XIX.
Rainy 4 m. and day break with H. wd. cold, H* wd and storms of R. a. m. S. S E.
75. 28. VII. close, misty. N. VIII. 2. p. Close, misty, cold wd 4p. E. wind
make fingers ache. IX. E. Cold, Close, foggy wd. very cold at n, E 76. 17. XXVI.
Rain ante l. and 9 m. close wd. S. XXVII. 6 p. S W. fair, overc. and R. 5 p. S
W. XXVIII. Rain ante l. ad 8 m. open. W. S W. 77. 7. XV. Cloudy, Rain ante l.
close, s. rain vesp. and H. wd. S W. XVI. 1 p. mist, frost, fair, dry. W. XVII.
W. hard white Fr. and foggy. E. S. N. wd various.
February.
1671. 27 V. Frost, hoar ut diei praec. mist, fair, frosty, overc. 9 p. Halo 8
p. Wly. VI. 7 m. fr. snow found m. open Nly. fair p. m. Halo 9 p. W. VII. Fr.
snow 8 m. misting and misling die tot. raw. no wd. S W. 72 16. XXIV. s. mist,
fair, cooler p. m. bright n. Ely. Nly XXV. Ho. o. misty, dry. a. m. cool, close
p. m. Rain 9 p. N E. XXVI. close, damp windows; cool. N E. 73 6. XIII. H.
frost, cold, fair. XIV. 9 m. snow 9 m. much snow o. misle 6 p. fair 11 p. S E.
XV. Fine warm m. drisly toward o. and p. m. audible wds. S. 74. 25. II. Close
foggy S W. open 2 p. drisle 5 p. E. III. 10 p. Fr. close m. N E. cold misty
clouds 7 p. Wly, but wd from N E. IV. H. Frost and snow die tot, with wd. N E.
Freez, wd at n. 75. 14. XXI. Close, mist, snow 1 m. close m. p. E. XXII. 6.
Frosty, mist, fair; clouds in scenes. E. XXIII. Frost, hoar, overc. p. m. Fog,
fall 9 m. E. 76 3. X. Close, wdy p. m. rain 6 p. and H. wd. S W. XI. 6 p. Open
m. p. s. rain o. 7 p. S W. XII. Close, drisle 1 p. Wly Fog 6 p. N W. (...) In
Febr. nusquam reperitur prior.
February.
1671. 13. XX. Shower o. hail 3 p. wetting vesp. wds 11 p Nly a. m. vesp. Sly.
XXI. 13. p. Frost very cold, wd often, showrs o. and p. m. Light in the west,
clear n. Nly. XXII. Fr. close, rain 8 m. close m. p. Nly m. Sly. 72 2. IX.
Vehement Fr. cold wd. close, snowy vesp. ad 11 p. Nly. X. 7 p. Snowing and hard
Frost, close, frosty. N E. XI. Bright, frosty. N E. 73. 20. XXVII. Wet 9 m.
close, H. wd occ. XXVIII. 11 m. mist m. open, temperate. S W. close n. I. Mart.
H. wd. dashing wet. N W. Nly. 74. 8. XVI. Fog m. open m. p. N. W. bright n. N
W. XVII. o. open, windy, floting; cl. clear n. S W. XVIII. Close and cold. N.
75. 28. V. Fine a. m. over. 1 p. Meteor. 9 p. circa Cephea in N W. H. wd, rain
11 p. S W. VI. W. lowering 10 m. Nly. coldish at n. snow at mid. night. VII.
Nly. Open, shower of hail 11 m. o. 1 p. 3 p. 76. 17. XXV. Dry, mist, not clear
at n. S E. XXVI. 2 m. close m. p. lowering o. Meteor 11 p. from S. S E. XXVII.
W. misly, fair m. p. seen plain below and more Nly. Meteors 9 p. W. 77. 6.
XIII. Frost m. thaw p. m. rain noct seq. S W. W. XIV. 10 p. no fr. but Rain
ante l. starry n. W. XV. Warm night, open m. p.
March.
1671. 27. VI. Close, shower o. N E. VII. 5 p. Fr. wdy, close N E. snow offered
4 p. N E. VIII. Cold. s. mist, wd Ely, bright d. 72. 15. XXIV. Cloudy, mist m.
warm, little wd. close n. N W. XXV. 8 p. Cold, close, wdy. wdy and close 11 p.
E. Nly. XXVI. Close wd Sly. fine shower 4 p. great rain 8 p. Sly. 73. 5. XIV.
Warmish, bright m. white cl. S E. Sly. XV. 3 p. warm, fair, overc. 2 p. open,
close 10 p. S. S E. XVI. Windy, wetting, circ. 6 m. R. 11 m. Sly. 74. 25. IV
Frosty, close, very cold, L. wd. N E. offer snow 7 p. V. 10 m. Frosty, very
cold, open, snow 3 p. N E. VI. Frosty, cold, overc. rise and p. m. N E. 75. 13.
XXIII. N. Frost, ice, cold, open p. m. Halo 9 p. W. XXIV. 9 m. rainy m. and a.
m. close, soult. W. XXV. Wly. close m. p. Mist, warm m. cool o. 76. 3. XII. Fr.
bright d. gusts 2 p. E. XIII. 2 p. Frost, fair dry. E. XIV. Fog, rutilus a. m.
fair, dry. E. Nly. 77. 21. XXX. White fr m. open. N W. W. XXXI. 6 m. brisk wd.
fair, warm. fr. m. Sly. E. I. Apr. Misty air, yet the Horizon visible, close m.
p. s. wds. E. SE. coldish at n. S W. s. rain at Hackney. Forest met. fair, fr.
m. rain p. m. per tot. W.
March.
1671. 13. XXII. Frost, hail 11 m. and p. m. meteor circ. l. or much ice for
one night. N W. XXIII. 2 p. frosty, fair s. mist m. at vesp. N W. XXIV. Frosty,
great Ice, fair, s. mist m. vesp. N E. 72. 2. X. Snow in part lies; wdy, open,
H. wd. misty clouds, open n. N. XI. 3 p. White Frost, ice, fair, misty cl. wd.
S E. lowering m. p. W. XII. Snow on the ground. fog, thaw. 73 20. XXIX. Cold, H.
wd. Rain 1 p. 2 p. and hail then. so t. p. W. XXX. 5 m. wet m. p. s. snow m.
drisle shower 2 p. and p m. blustering. S XXXI. Rain a 7 m. ad 9 m. H. wd. s.
drisle. 1 p. 7 p. N W. 74. 8. XVIII. s. snow ante l. snowing a. m. very cold p.
m. s. misle. N E. XIX. 3 m. snow, tempestuous wd ante luc. and a. m. very old,
cloudy. N. XX. Snow ante l. snowy e. m. p. Nly. Foggy, H. wd ante luc. 75. 28.
VII. Misty, windy, dry. Ely H. wd ante luc. VIII. 10 m. E. Frost, ice, mist,
wd, dry. IX. Ely. Frost, often lowering, cold, dry. 76. 16. XXV. Misty, wet m. p.
and s. wd, brisk. N E. much rain 8 p. XXVI. 10 m. open, wdy. clear n. E. N E.
XXVII. E. fair, bright d. cold wd and rough. 77. 5. XV. Fr. ice, open, dry. S
W. misty XVI. 6 m. Frost, fair, white cl. W. XVII. Frost m, fair, frosty, white
cl. ante d. 15. between Cales and E Lucas. great storm and thunder with
Shipwreck. S.
April.
1671. 26. X. Cold, fair m. s. mist m. close m. p. N W. VI. 3 m. cold m. s.
mist. fair d. E. VII. Bright, E. wd audible 11 p. 72. 14. XXIII. Overc. a. m.
clearing, stiff wd. bright n. E. XXIV. 4 m. Bright, dry; not so clear p. m.
windy. Halo 1 p. N E. XXV. Dry, s. clouds Sly. fair m. less hazie then pale the
first day. 73. 3. XII. Open, windy, flying cl. S W. Cloudy showrs 7 p. occ.
XIII. 10 p. close s. mist. L. showrs p. 2 p. and m. p. p. m. S. XIV. Close m.
p. a. m. cold wd, open and warm p. m. N. 74 23. II. N E. Fine m. overc 7 m.
great cl. and threatening R. which vanish. S W. III. 7 p. Wly. Close, wetting 7
m. and black Heaven. S W. IV. Close, wetting 10 m. and 1 p. S W. 75. 13. XXI.
Fair, cold, flying cl. misty, s. lowering. E. XXII. 8 p. N. closing and hopes of
moisture; coldish m. offer wd and rain occ. S W. a. m. but vesp. N. XXIII. Nly.
Cold, cloudy, rain, hail ante 10 m. Nly after. E. 76. 2. X. Wetting 6 m.
hottish rain 3 p. etc. Wly. XI. 6 m. open, warm, s. lowering cl. overc. 10 p. W.
S. XII. Clouds m. hot n fair, brisk wd. Ely. hot wetting 5 p. S. 77. 19. XXVIII
Warm, many clouds, brisk wd. shower 3 p. E. S. XXIX. 10 p. Warm, H. wd. shower.
or rise. wd allayed vesp. W. S W. XXX. Open, rain 11 m. and constant ad med.
roct. wd Wly. various. S W.
April.
1671. 11. XXI. Bright m. s. mist, brisk wd, hot, clouding heb. vesp. N E.
XXII. 2 m. s. mist, fair, hot soultry. Meteors. XXIII. Mist, fair, hot. W. 72.
1. IX. Close, mist ante l. Clear 4 p. N. N W. X. 8 m. cold m. close, wetting a.
m. p. in. and serious Rain at n. N W. XI. Close, wetting 9 m. Nly. open ^.
black clouds, wetting 5 p. 73. 19. XXVIII. Close d. f. moisture 5 p. S W. XXIX.
1 m. close m. clear p. m. dry, no mist. N E. XXX, Fair, very hot. N E. 74. 7.
XVI. N E. s. rain 5 m. warm; often closing and lowering p. m. S W. XVII. 10 p.
close m. p. s. rain 7 p. S W. XVIII. Nly. Close. 75. 26. V. Rain 5 m. and
wetting 5 m. cloudy. E. VI. 11 p. E. clouding m. p. lowering 11 m. Fine d. cool
wd. N. VII. E. Fair a. m. close, Hail, high, cold and red wds. N E. 76. 14.
XXIII. Close m. p. lowering, coldish. N. N E. XXIV. 8 p. H. wd, cloud, s. drops
5 p. occ. M. C. XXV. N W. Close, lowering, bright n. N W. m. at n. E. S E.
hottish even. 77. 4. XIII. Close drops 9 p. S E. XIV. Rain 6 m. and o. and 1 p.
and by fits 3 p. shower coasting 7 p. H. wd 11 p. S. S W. XV. Open m. rain 11 m.
sweetly, with H wd. shower 6 p. S W.
May.
1671. 24. IV. Open, wds, warm, dark and lowry 4 p. S. V. 5 p. Windy, dash 9 m.
or fair, warm. S W. VI. Cold m. fair, hot. S W. 72. 12. XXII. Close wd. s.
showrs 7 p. S W. XXIII. Close. hottish, s. wd. S W. clds fly. N W. XXIV. Close
m. p. Nly vesp. E. 73. 2. XII. Very cold m. bright, overc. o. gentle rain 1 p.
5 and 7 p. very cold n. N E. XIII. 4 m. Close m. wet tempore pom. tot. S W. but
clds Northerly. S. XIV. Close, wetting m. cold offering p. m. 74. 22. I. Sly
Showrs. 5 m. 10 m. or. and 3 p. again occ. shower 5 p. more wet at n. cold, s.
hail p. m. II. 11 p. Nly. close wd, R. m. p. open p. m. R. 6 p. N W. III. Rain
m. H. wd. R. 5 p. S W. 75. 10. XXI. Cool m. warm, fair 9 p. E. XXII. a m. fair,
thick cl. gather 9 p. E. XXIII. Hot, cloudy 5 p. E. 76. 0. IX. Close wd. shower
8 m. 11 m. o. 3 p. 5 p. 7 p. W. X. 6 p. white pregnant cl. p. m. Nly p. m. W.
bright n. XI. Fair a. m. overc. o. s. rain 7 p. gusts of wd at n. W. 77. 18.
XXVIII. Close m. open, suspicious in the S. o. and troubled air; close vesp.
Rain 5 p. 10. p. midn. S E. S W. XXIX. 2 p. wet a. m. tot. ad 1 p. windy,
flying cl. S W. XXX. Fair a. m. many white cl. showry 5 p. in Nadir glancing
on. S W.
May.
1671. 9. XX. Cold m. coasting R. in the North 9 m. rainy m. p. and vesp. etc.
XXI. 11 m. Close m. rain 1 p. 3 p. Nly 7 p. 8 p. s. hail o. as Mr. Saunders
happily. XXII. Fair, floating cl. warmer vesp. s. rain 10 p. Nly at n. Wly. 72.
29. VIII. Cloudy m. bright, dry, coldish wd. N E. IX. 11 p. Close, warmish,
offering a drop, misty air, close n. N E. X. Close, misty air, bright dry,
warm. N E. 73. 17. XXVII. Rain 4 and 6 m. close, hottish; shower 1 and 3 p. dash
4 p. S W. XXVIII. 5 p. bright m. overc. s. rain 1 m. and a. m. and 1 p.
coasting temp. pom. tot. N W. XXIX. Close m. p. s. rain 10 m. S W. 74. 6. XVI.
Ely Bright, wet, hot S E. a. m. s. S W. no Meteors 10 p. XVII. 3 p. bright,
cloudy, shower occ. E. XVIII. s. shower ante 4 m. hot, windy. S. S W 75. 25. V.
Warm, misty wd turn S. o. close and lowering S W. VI. 15 p. N. lowering much, hot
d. W. VII. Lowering and mist N W. 76. 19. XXIII. warm, bright, dry Ely. bright
in N W. 11 p. XXIV. 6 m. warm, bright, more dry clouds then die praec. Meteor
11 p. a Lance Bor. ad Scorpii Front, lightning several times in S. S W. XXV.
Soulry day, lowry cl. 1 p. Stones sweat. Lightning much to the Northerly parts
11 p. E. 77. 2. XII. R. apace 4 m. wd, open, warm. Nly S W. W. XIII. 7 p. close
m. gusts, clody sprinkling 8 p. S W. XIV. Fine warm, floting bright cl.
sometimes lowry. W.
June.
1671. 23. III. Open, sometime threatn. Ely clds rise W. Halo cool n. IV. 6 m.
Close, s. mist m. offer p. m. W. V. Warmish o. floting cl. cool vesp. 72. 10.
XX. s. gentle drops a. m. shower 3 p. wdy d. XXI. Lowry m. wdy gusts, fair p m.
wd various N W. clouds ride Northward, wds 11 p. S W. XXII. Fl. clouds as for
r. N W. 5 m. shower 1 p. windy. N W. S W. 73. 0. X. Rain ante 5 m. etc. close m.
p. Cool. XI. 10 m. Cool m. close o. warm p. m. Wly. Ely at n. XII. Cool and
close m. wetting 10 m. and pm. S. 74. 20. XXXI. May Ely, open, overc. 11 m. I.
8 m. Fair a. m. warmer o. and dusty; cl. overc. 10 p. N E. N. II. Fair, bright,
dry, Nly, shower in 3. N E. Iterum. 18. XXIX. Close and lowering m. p. N W. XXX.
10 m. showrs m. droppy 4 p. 9 p. no mist. S W. I. Jul. bright m. close and
lowering o. H. wd 5 p. and dropping. (...) S W. 75. 8. XIX. Open, H. wd ante
luc. s. showrs. Nly. XX. 2 m. Open, thickish clouds, smart shower 4 p. N. XXI.
Fair 6 m. Wly. fl. cl. shower 4 p. 9 p. Ely. 76. 28. VIII. Close m. seeming
shower coasting 9 m. in the South; f. wetting at 9 p. W. N W. IX. 3 m. R. 3 m.
lowering m. p. S. X. R. 9 m. close Wly. Nly Meteors prope Pegas. 11 p. 77. 16.
XXVII. Close 5. m. heat, misty, floting cl. lightning in S E etc. thunder 9 p.
lightning in North 12 p. at Farnbrough Men slain by lightnings N W. XXVIII. 1
m. Cloudy ante 8 m. cloudy and cool. clears and warm p. m. N. XXIX. Sweet m. no
fog in prospect, brisk cool wd, cloudy m. S W.
June.
1671. 7. XVIII. Hot, dry, clear, s. mist, H. wd p. m. Ely but at n. N. XIX. 5
p. Fair, lowering, bright cl. wd. N E. XX. Fair, dry, fog ante or^. lowr and
shower discovred 3 p. shower of half an howr 4 p. that while the wind in the
West, then turn to N E. again. 72. 28 VII. Clody and great lowering, s. little
shower 2 p. hot. S. S E. VIII. 11 m. Heat, R. thunder 10 m. or. terrible thunder
and rain 2 p. S W. N. IX. s. drops 9 m. great mist a. m. troubled air 5 p.
shower. and 6 p. dash extraordinary, Ternados as a Merchant styled them. 73. 15.
XXVI. Close R. 6 m. wetting 8 p. R. 11 p. H. wd. and rain. m. p. of the night.
S W. XXVII. 7 m. R. 6 m. warm, fair, wdy. S W. XXVIII. Fl. cl. 8 m. H. wd,
clouds in scenes. S W. 74. 4. XV. Cloudy m. p. dry. N. XVI. 9 m. drisle 5 m. o.
close, warm. N. XVII. Nly. overcast o. close, a drop at n. Ely. 75. 24. IV.
Close, s. rain 11 m. 7 p. wd brisk. W. V. 6 m. Floting thin cl. o. warm till at
n. Nly. VI. Fair, warm a. m. coasting shower o. Nly. 76. 2. XXI. Fair m. cold
wd. Wly. overcast, shower 11 p. S W. XXII. 8 p. R. and thunder 5 m. 7 m. dark 8
m. Rain and thunder 5 p. and R. 8 p. N E. S E. S W. XXIII. R. 2 m. etc. 7 m.
Fair temperate wd, cool. S W. 77. 1. XI. Shower 1 m. 9 m. 11 m. N W. W. XII. 3
m. H. wd, noct. tot. floting clouds 9 m. s. drops, and offer 1 p. 4 p. shower 6
p. W. N W. XIII. N W. warm, open, overcasts 1 p. open Wly.
July.
1671. 21. II. Close m. clouds in scenes, misty R. 10 m. drowning Dash o. So.
shower 4 p. S W. III. Close o. rain 2 p. open S W. Smoke at n. waves toward N W.
IV. Fair, clouding p. clouds ride contrary. S W. S E. 72. 8. XX. Close m.
bright p. m. hot Meteors 11 p. S W. various. XXI. 2 p. Bright, Hazy m. hot. s.
gales N W. m. S E. S. p. m. not hazy even Meteors 3. 8 p. by light. XXII. Fair
m. warm, overcast p. m. and 10 p. shower 5 p. short Meteors 12 p. S W. 73. 28.
IX. Close, some wetting. S E. S W. X. 8 p. Fair m. s. showring a. m. p. m. open
S W. N W. XI. Overcast, wetting 11 m. 2 p. close S W. warm m. hot n. and close.
74. 16. XXVIII. Close a. m. and s. showrs, open. H. wd p. m. S. S W. clouds red
occ. after helping. XXIX. Clouding a. m. susp. in S E. H. wd. o. Meteors 11 p.
S. S W. Meteor near. XXX. H. wd, open a. m. Rain p. m. tot. H wd. S. S W. 75.
6. XVIII. Cloudy a. m. some drops, wd. S W. XIX. ho. o. Fair, windy, very cold,
misle vesp. rainy 9 p. W. XX. Rain usque ad 4 p. fair even. S W. 76. 27. VII.
Mist, close, offer 10 m. o. 2 p. shower 6 p. wd. Nly. VII. 9 m. great dash 6 m.
in Nadir. Rain a midn. by fits ad 6 p. rain 1 p. drisle 8 p Nly misty. IX. Dash
6 m. 11 m. mist, dash 5 p. Nly. 77. 14. XXVI. Fair, cool a. m. s. floting
clouds, supicious 7 p. in the W. wd S W. XXVII. 10 m. rain at midn. showring 3
m. 8 m. coasting shower S W. rain and thunder 11 p. and ante 6 rain. clouds ride
contrary. Meteor 11 p. ab Androm. ad 23 locum coolish. N. S W. XXVIII. Wet a.
m. per tot usque ad ho 1. vesp. floting cl. open p. m. coldish S. 2 Meteors
near Delph et Aquila oritur. S W.
July.
1671. 6. XVII. Moderate, some rain near night. XVIII. Bright day. XIX. Cloudy,
close a. m. pleasant p. m. 72. 25. VI. Wet a. m. tot. Dashes 2 p. p. m. fere
tot Circa 6 vesp. shower again occ. Cygni m. c. ceti ore etc. occ. 6 p. nadir
segr.. VII. Cloudy m. p. fine and dry. Wly. VIII. Bright m. close 11 p. and
threatening, open p. m. close vesp. and s. drops 8 p. S W. 73. 13. XXV. Close
shower 8 m. lowering, suspic. m. S W. hot. XXVI. 6 p. close. s. drisle a. m. warm
drisle 8 p. and wd. S W. XXVII. Close, H, wd, somet. lowering p m. S W. 74. 3.
XIV. Shower 9 m. shower and thunder 1 p. very H. wd circa o. S W. XV. 12. Fair,
dry, s. clouds in scenes. S W. warm Meteor below Lyra 11 p. Wly. XVI. warm,
dry, not clear Ely. close n. and hottish. 75. 22. III. Bright, dry, s. lowering
cl. p. m. Wly. IV. s. drops 2 p. 4 p. Wly hot day and night. V. Hot m. soultry
afflicting air, lowering. W. 76. 9. XXI. Hot n. cooler a. m. s. wd. brisk cly
circa vesp. clear meteor 10 p. Wly. XXII. o. Rain a 10 m. ad m. p. d. R. 9 p.
H. wd. Sly. XXIII. R. 8 m. floating heavy cl. shower o. and thunder thrice,
showrs 3 p. S W 77. 29. X. Clear, H. wd. 6 m. Wly. boisterous wd die tot. Rain
11 m. occ. Halo 11 p. Wly XI. 2 p. rain ab 8 m. ad 1 p. rain again a 5 ad 8 p.
R. 10 p. Wly with wd, warmer evening. S W. XII. shower 6 m. H. wd, great shower 9
m. open p. m. Wly. S W. red even.
August.
1671. 19. I. Cloudy, cool, gentle wds. II. Flying cl. yet fair. III. Hot and
cloudy. 72. 57. XIX. Cloudy a. l. R. m. ad 7 m. rain o. dash 4 p. s. rain 7 p.
Ely. S E. XX. 7 m. Hazy m. much lowering 5 p. cloudy a. l. N W. XXI. Frost, wd N
E. smoky air. 73. 26. VIII. Open. warm. N E. IX. 7 m. Close m. p. E. N E. close
n. open 11 p. N E. X. Close m. p. misty air E. N E brisk wd 2 p. hot n. and
rain 2 p. offering p. m. 74. 14. XXVII. Rain and misty ad 3 p. W. XXVIII. 4 m.
Rain 2 m. ad 8 m. shower circa o. loud thunders, showrs at Branford 4 p. N E.
XXIX. Fair, but cidy o. heavy clouds, dropping etc. Cobweb strings many, Fog
like water on the ground. N. Ely. 75. 4. XVI. Fair, bright all day. Wly. XVII.
Cloudy, bright at o. soultry even. Wly. XVIII. Fair, dry, hot n. Wly. 76. 24.
V. Overc. fog m. fair, warm, wd, white floting clds, overc. 3 p. wd Ely. N E.
Meteors, Two 11 p. One by. VI. 3 p. Misty air, fair, hot p. m. black, thick,
overcast as for thunder; showrs 5 p. wd. Ely. VII. Cloudy m. warm clouds p. m.
promise Red even. Nly. 77. 12. XXIV. Cool, open m. s overc. drops 9 m. cdly m.
p. Wly cloudy 11 p. W. XXV. Cool, dry, fair m. wd, cloudy in the W. m. and in
the S. p. m. warm, close m. p. Sly. W. XXVI. Warmer, drisle o. mist, open with
floting clds Wly p. m. N W.
August.
1671. 3. XVI. Fair, dry N E. 2 Meteors near p. m. XVII. 3 m. mist m. fair,
lowering as for thunder o. shower 4 p. Ely. m. XVIII. Dew on trees, (mist or
frost.) Nly overcast 8 m. clouds in scenes, bright n. South Horizon seen at
London. 2 Meteors by Ophiuchus. Nly. 72. 23. V. Fair, dry N E. hot, cldy at n.
Sly. VI. 1 m. showrs 3 m. drisling a. m, tot. hottish p. m. Sly. open, s.
clouds in scenes, clear n. Sly. VII. Fair a. m. hot p. m. but close; s. drops 4
p. S E. great dew on windows, as if frost. 73. 13. XXIV. Open, wdy, offering 11
p. calm. S W. XXV. Fair, clouds gather, shower 1 p. S W. XXVI. Stormy wds and s.
wetting 2 p. at Brainford. S W. 74. 1. XIII. Fog m. dry heat, s. clouds lowering
with misty air. N E. wd turned ab E. ad N. wd various. XIV. Misty, dry, heat
Wly p. m. S E. at n. XV. Hot and fair. S. S E. 75. 20. II. Fair, wdy, clear. S
W. III. Fair morn, overc. about o. flying clouds. W. S W. IV. Hot day Ely.
soultry night. Nly. 76. 8. XX. Clouds in scenes m. brisk wd. W. S W. XXI. 6 m.
clouding to m. fair, cool, Wly. cool n. XXII. Open, windy, shower o. s. rain 10
p.. N W. 77. 27. IX. Fog early, bright, Ely. wd, but clds Wly. s. floting
bright cl. warm, single cloud showring in the N W. 7 p. Sly. X. wetting 8 m. S.
hot a. praeced. hot day, yet close, wetting ante 7. S W. N E. XI. Fair m.
overc. 8 m. R. o. p. m. fere tot Rain pouring 11 p. S W.
September.
1671. 18. XXXI. August. Foggy, hottish, bright n. Meteor toward Pleiad. E. I.
Sept. 10 m. Fog, flying thin cl. S W. hottish bright night, Meteor bright near
S W. II. Hot n. misty air m. soultry as die praec. dry Wly. Meteor 10 p. prope.
72. 6. XVIII. N. Frost, cloudy, showring 3 p. Nly. winds East in time of the
shower. XIX. 2 m. Fog, frost m. floting cl. mist at n. N E. XX. Mist m. overcast
p. m. drisle 9 p. N E. 73. 24. VI. Close, wdy, rain 4 p. 10 p. and windy. S W.
VII. 11 p. Fog m. clear above, bright n. S. S W. VIII. Wd noct. tot. rain antq
l. showring ante merid. m. p. S W. 74. 13. XXV. N W. changeable, s. rain 10 m.
o. p. m. vesp. H. wd vesp. N W. Nly. XXVI. 4 p. cold, cloudy, windy. N W.
XXVII. Cold, close m. p. mistyish. N. W. 75. 2. XV. Rain 5 m. or about that h.
fair, warm. W. XVI. 2 m. fair a. m. cl. lowering, R. 5 p. W. XVII. Close,
somewhat foggy, warmish. S W. 76. 2 a. III. Fair m. mist, white cl. brisk wd,
no rain, though the Barometer stood at 48. when at 50. it most part raines. W.
S W. N E. IV. 9 p. Cloudy, hot n. s. wet 5 m. misty and rain o. p. m. and occ.
11 p. S W. V. Rain 1 m. apace, clouds in scenes. S W. 77. 11. XXIII. Warm Rain
2 m. somet. clouding so occ. very hot n. W. N W. XXIV. 1 m. clouds warm, somet.
lowering, dry. W. XXV. Brisk wd 9 m. open, warm.
September,
1671. 2. XIV. Close, offer 11 p. N W. XV. 10 m. Frost, mist, fair Meteor. N W.
XVI. Frost, floting cl. fine day, close vesp. and little wetting. N W. 72. 22.
III. Lowering, suspicious ante luc. and a. m. very cold Nly. S W. IV. 6 m. Cold
m. fair, overcast o. and shower 2 a 6 p. W. V. Cold m. flying cl. wetting o. 2
p. rough wd. S W. 73 10. XXII. Frost m. ice, cold a m. R. o. and p. n. per tot.
S E. XXIII. 9 m. showrs ort. ad 8 m. so 2 p. 2. 3. p. wd, high ante luc. S W.
XXIV. very warm m. and troubled air, west at p. m. m. p. short Meteor toward
Vrsa Majors head. N. N W. 74. 0. XII. W. open S W. warm, cloudy n. XIII. 2 m.
rain 4 m. etc. close shower 5 p. S W. N. XIV. Fr. cold dew, clear mist. Nly. H.
and cold wd, sometimes threatening. N W. H. wd 10 p. 75. 19. I. White frost,
fair, warm. N W. II. 8 m. Cold. foggy m. fair and cold. N W. III. Cloudy m. s.
hot. N W. 76. 7. XIX. Rain m. fair after. N W. XX. 1 m. wind open m. p. S W.
XXI. Mist, shower 11 m. fair p. m. mist. W. 77. 26. VII. Frost m. close midn. N.
fair, afterward a very cold n. E. N E. VIII. 9 p. Fog, frost early, great dew,
brisk wds, not a cloud in the sky. Meteors 7 p. N E. IX. Fog, fair, H. wd a.
m. lower p. m. Meteor near and Persues, Two near Engonas. Nly.
October.
1671. 17. XXX. Clouds, rain o. 2 p. 4 p. much post occ. S E. S. I. 4 m. stormy
wd. s. clds, stormy wind at n. S W. II. Wd laid pretty well, open dash o. H. wd
p. m. offer 9. R. 6 p. S W. Iterum, October. 17. XXIX. Close m. p. cooler,
bright n. N. XXX. 7 p. drisle m. close d. l. wd. S E. XXXI. Close m. open 9 m.
close and freez 9 at n. N E. 72. 6. XVII. Fair, but misty air; red cl. oc.
overcast night. W. XVIII. 9 p. Fog m. and a. m. coldish, lowering in South,
East, and S. W. clear in North, Meteors 7 p. XIX. Close m. p. and coldish;
clouds colored as for snow, drisle 9 p. N. N E. 73. 24. VI. Wind and rain ante
l. warm, close, dropping 2 p. S W. VII. 4 p. Frost, ice at Putney. Clowding,
shower 3 p. 9 p. S W. VIII. Fr. fair, mist, winterly air. N. 74. 13. XXV. Wind,
R. 7 m. misty, drisle 1 p. R. and wd 3 p. Lightning. South East 9 p. Meteor by
North Fish, from the North. S E. XXVI. 10 m. bright m. sudden overc. shower 10
m. so p. S W wind. XXVII. Rain a noct. med. m. p. so 7 m. 4 p. thence Furious,
tempestuous and driving cl. S W. Nly. 75. 2. XIV. s. wet m. 10 m. warm, close.
W. XV. 2 p. Close, warm, s. moisture 6 p. W. XVI. Fair, warm, close p. m. mist,
s. wet 5 p. N. 76. 21. III. S. Wd brisk, overc. 8 m. R. 3 p. drops 5 p. R. 6 ad
10 p. S. IV. 4 m. mist, wd, rainy p. m. m. p. ad 9 p. E. V. Rain m. 2 p. shower
3 p. and vesp. E. 77. 10. XXII. Fair, warm, pleasant Horizon, no mist, brisk
wd, R. p. m. W. N. XXIII. 6 m. Frost, mist, fair, wd Nly. Heaven stripped with
clouds. S. XXIV. H. frost, mist, winter day. N. S. S E. E.
October.
1671. 1. XIII. Open, mild. m. close offer 9 p. m. N W. XIV. 7 p. close m. p.
seems some frost, close p. m. N E. XV. N W. Close, brisk wd 11 m. close. N E.
72. 20. II. H. wd noct. tot. wet and dashing m. open p. m. S W. III. 1 p.
Frost, fair m. cloudy p. m. shower 5 p. N W. IV. Close, cool m. p. a. m. shower 4
p. S W. 73. 9. XXI. H. frost, misty and close m. p. N. m. after S W. XXII. 5 p.
close, misty. S W. N W. p. m. XXIII. Windy, wet p. m. tot. S W. 74. 29. XI.
Fog, open, burnished cl. Ropes. S W. XII. o. Rain ante luc. 3 or 4 m. in M. C.
in 28. and in dewing 8 m. open, warm even. N W. XIII. Ely. Mist, wetting a. m.
and p. m. 75. 19. XXX. Sept, cloudy m. clear d. S W. Oct. I. 12 p. N W. frost,
ice, fog. II. Sly. R. 6 m. fog, close, wd. E. Iterum. 18. XXX. Fog, frost. Nly.
XXXI. 2 p. fog, frost, s. misle 8 p. N E. Cloudy in the South vesp. I. Nov.
Mist, no frost, cold wd, bright 1 m. shower 3 p. wd 10 p. W. 76. 7. XVIII. Mist,
clouds, dewing 6 p. Nly. XIX. 8 p. Troubled air, mist, wd, drops 4 p. 5 p. N W.
XX. Misty m. if not rain early, close, cool wd. W. N W. 77. 25. VII. Fog,
drisle 9 m. wd Nly. N E. so 1 p. drisle. VIII. 5 p. Fog, wd and rain
considerable 5 m. etc. drisle m. p. d. Nly. IX. Fog. some wet 7 m close, s. wet
11 p. Nly.
November.
1671. 17. XXVIII. Fair, drisle, rain 4 p. W. XXIX. 8 m. R. considerable m.
close, warm wd. W. XXX. Close, fine, open o. close 3 p. E. 72. 6. XVI. Wd open
a. m. closing 3 p. R. 4 p. S W. XVII. 10 m. mist m. wetting 10 m. very wet 1 p.
s. wet 7 p. windy d. and n. S. XVIII. Close, fair m. p. close vesp. Wly 73. 24
V. close, wetting 8 p. Nly. VI. 2 p. Close, rain 1 p. W. N W. VII. Close,
misty, wd, R. snow 10 m. and post mer. m. p. Nly. Wly p. m. 74. 13. XXIV.
Frosty. s. snow ante l. bright, overc. p. m. s. snow, cold. W. XXV. 7 m.
Frosty, snow a. l. snow hard a. m fair p. m. overc. n. S W. XXVI. Snow a. l.
frosty, H. wd. fair. N W. 75. 2. XIII. Close, warm, mist, s. mist 10 p. N E. S
W. XIV. 5 m. Mist, frosty m. open, misle 7 p. N. XV. Misly, close, Ely. colder
p. m. W. 76. 20. I. Frost, H. wd, wetting 11 m. 1 p. drisle m. p. H. wd n. S W.
II. 2 p. Cloudy, windy, wetting. S W. III. H. wind noct. tot. clouds supicious
1 p. S W. 77. 20. XX. Frosty, fog, open. Ely. N. E. close at n. s. wd. N E.
Ely. XXI. 4. Fog, frost gone, open. Nly. rain and sleet 1 p. with Fog, R. 9 p.
W. XXII. Frost, snow found, cloudy Ely. snow o. and p. m. N E.
November.
1671. 1. XII. H. wd. noct. tot. frosty, H. and cold wd die tot. so at n. Two
ships perish at Yarmouth. N. XIII. 9 p. Fair, frosty, s wd. fog at n. N W. XIV.
Wd and snow 1 m. Thaw and warmer wd. S W. 72. 20. XXXI. October. Close, wetting
o. wd. N E. I. Nov. 10 p. Close m. very cold and H. wind. N E. open p. m. II.
Very cold, fair, H. wds, s. clouding 2 p. occ. Meteors 9 p. N E. 73. 9. XIX.
Frosty, foggy m. p. N E. XX. Rain a. m. m. p. droppy 4 p. S. XXI. Foggy, clear
above; frosty, great hoar. S E. S W. m. N E. n. 74. 28. IX. Rain 6 m. foggy,
clearing p. m. Wly. Mercury in the Tube, points at fair and clear, i. e. at the
height. Note. X. 10 p. Foggy, no frost, clearing, close. Nly. XI. N E. Fog, s.
rain m. close m. p. Ely. 75. 18. XXVIII. Mist, warm, fair. S W. XXIX. 12 p.
Frost m. Leads wet, yet no mist. W. XXX. Mist, Leads wet, fair, warm. N W. 76.
7. XVII. Fog frosty die tot. hoar remains d. t. N E. Sly. XVIII. 1 p. frosty,
hoary on the Houses as snow, winterly rain, snow-broth 2 p. cold, R. 5 p. Wly.
N W. at n. XIX. Foggy, frosty, wdy n. fair d. N W. 77. 20. VI. Fog, drisle 9 m.
open, shower 2 p. Meteor near, bright 6 p. s. near Cassiepeia. warm. S E. VII. 1
p. Fog, rain a 2 m. ad 4 m. s. rain 10 m and 2 p. S W. a. m. Ely p. m. VIII.
Shower m. warm rain 11 m. open p. m. Meteor near Capella. Two under Engonasin,
Westward.
December.
1671. 19. XXVII. Very hard frost, freezing at n. fair. N E. XXVIII. 7. snow m.
thaw p. m. N E. XXIX. Frosty a. m. thaw p. m. open, close, wds audible 10 p.
72. 6. XVI. Cold, close, dry. N W. XVII. 10 m. Rain 7 m. s. fog a. m. dark and
wetting p. m. R. 7 p. ad midn. N W. XVIII. Rain 7 m. and m. p. pouring 6 p. S
W. 73. 15. V. Fr. cold d. Nly. close m. p. Ely at n. VI. o. Frosty, sharp, cold
wd, open. Ely. wd very high at n. VII. Extreme frost, boys slide in a days,
mist, overc. 8 p. E. m. S. p. m. 74. 2. XXIV. Close, s. mist, warm walking. S
W. XXV. 4 m. Frost, fair, misty m. Fog fall 10 m. wetting 5 p. 9 p. l. wd. S W.
XXVI. Strange Christmas weather, warm, calm, fair. S W. 75. 2. XII. Cloudy p.
m. Halo, windy, wet night. W. XIII. 2 p. Much rain 5 m. dark, wdy, R. 2 p. H.
wd at n. very warm. S E. XIV. 5 m. R. med. noct. ad 2 m. so 7 m. close, H. wd,
very warm, tempestuous n. dash of R. 8 p. 76. 21. I. Clowdy mist, wd. S E. II.
2 m Frosty, mist, fair, wd. E. III. Frosty, fair, mist, wd. E. Iterum. 21. XXX.
E. Frosty, cloudy, misty. N E. N. some snow ante luc. milder 11 p. XXXI. 6. p.
Frosty, cloudy, foggy E. several pass over the Thames from St. Mary Dock to
Cold-harbor. I. Jan. Frosty, misty, cloudy, Ely wd. 77. 10. XX. Tearing frost,
fog, fair. Ely. N E. XXI. 2 m. Fog, frost, Thames froze at Putney. Fog gross
and stinking 4 p. S W. m. S E. vesp. XXII. Frosty, fog, close, much milder.
December.
1671. 1. XII. Close, wetting circ. o. close and cold p. m N. XIII. 2 m. Close
Ely. Frost. XIV. Frosty, black, cold. misty. Ely 72. 20. XXX. H. wd, R. 5 m. H.
wd and R. 8 p. S W. XXXI. 11 p. H. wd, drisle 8 m. per tot. cldy p. m. S W. I.
Jan. Warm, wdy, offering a. m. clear a. wdy p. m. S W. 73. 9. XIX. Close a. m.
R. 2 p. S. S. W. XX. 11 m. Windy, drisle a. m. stormy and R. 8 p. etc. S W.
XXI. Wind stint a. m. open, warm. close, and s. drops 5 p. S W. 74. 29. IX.
Close m. p. wd. S W. X. 5 m. Rainy n. and morn. R. 7 p. H. wds Ely. W. XI. N E.
s. l. frost, close m. p. offer 10. m. open brisk wd. N E. 75. 18. XXVIII. Open,
shower 10 m. 3 p. warm and fair S W s. fog even. R. hard 9 p. XXIX. 12. Rain
hard 4 m. somewhat open. S W. XXX. Frost m. cool, open, rain 4 p. fog m. R. 10
p. Wly. 76. 7. XVII. Snow m. fog, frosty. N W. XVIII. 2 m. Severe frost. N W.
XIX. Frosty, fair. N W. 77. 26. VI. Fog m. and a. m. s. wetting, unless the fog
only. E. N E. VII. 9 m. Rain ante 9 m. dark a. m. cloudy p. m. and cool N E. S
W, at n. Meteors III. two bright ones 10 p. windy, cloudy. S W. VIII. s. rain 5
m. 9 m H. wd and rain m. p. Sly.
11. It Is not my desire to be voluminous, while I introduce both the Quartiles,
but some probable suspicion of some difference of Effect under each prevailed.

12. For the comparison of the Quadrates among themselves, Reason would suggest
to us a perfect Parity of Power and Influence, seeing they are the very same
Phases, the same Luminous Section of the 's body at the same distance,
differing only in Dexter and Sinister Respects: unless the deformity of the 's
unequal Globe, perhaps, may occasion some difference in the reflection of the
Solar Light of one side, more than the other. Let that be inquired into by the
curious Selenographers.

13. Only in the 2d. Quartile the is too early for us, so that we have not
attended the Phoenomena, being gotten into the South by Five in the Morning,
and not rising before Midnight, when it is time for us to observe our Pillow. If
we had had some Argus Junior to have watched in the Interim, we believe we
should have found some more Specialities under One Quadrate, which may not
commonly be found under the Other.

14. We must begin with the former, of which we have a full sight about
Evening, being conspicuous in the midst of Heaven. Of these we know LXXXVI.
Aspects; and if we enquire into the Sum of those who are found with a
wet-footstep, who bring Moisture with them, we shall meet LXXI. so qualifyed.
LXXI. of LXXXVI! Does it not come near the Full in this Point? Here the
difference you see is fifteen, and there, the difference was but twelve. Cap.
praeced. 5.

15. Speak we now to the number of Day 258. the Moiety of those Days 129. for
this we produce you 143. moist Days, which will be accepted.

16. Go we to the Correspondence of the Hour, Anno 1671. Jan. VIII. we meet
with Weather ante lucem, the Aspect being near Midnight preceding Feb. VI. Snow
found in the Morning; the Hour of the Aspect fell upon hor. 7. Mat. March VII.
Snow offered, hor. 4. post merid. the Aspect hor. 5. October. I. morn. Stormy
Wind. So Nov. XXIX. Rain considerable at the Hour 8 morn. Then, Anno 1672. May
XXIII. Hottish Air, the being turned to Noon. June XXI. Winds at Midnight.
October. XIX. Meteors within two Hours of the Aspect. Nov. XVII. Aspect hor. 10.
morn. Rain hor. r. Post merid. So Dec. XVII. hor. 10. morn. It rains at 7 morn.
Anno 1673. Febr. XIV. Snow punctually at 9. morn. October. VII. hor. 4. P.
Showers, etc. We pursue it no further.

17. What store of smart Rains, or durable have we to plead for us weeping?
Verily Forty Seven. As many as at the Full. -- Go thy way for an Aspect
Astrological, Real, and worthy Observation. But seeing more goes to the
definition which we hunt after, we must enquire what single Heat the Aspect
brings, and there we find days so remarked but 13. which were very
inconsiderable, but that the brings no more; for it shows but 11. Hot Nights
8. and the Full but 5. -- And it is not likely that any Omission in these
instances (which being Excesses and Rarities, bring their Memorand with them,)
should step in.

18. Now, little did I think that our Quadrates would keep an infallible touch
with us: I dreamed or hoped for such Authority perhaps in the New, etc.
Methoughts I should find one Month of the XII. at least, bring a perpetual
dripping. But as you see the Full is Emulous of that Glory, so are our
Quadrates also, neither of them excepted: They both draw in the Lottery, and
both speed. The former scarce misses in February: In May and November it brings
not one dry Aspect. The Later Quadrate does the same in June and December; yea,
it adds a third Month, and that is October. Verily the October Aspect rains VIII.
times in VII. years; for the Aspects fall sometimes twice in a Solar Month. So
considerable an Aspect is the Quadrate.

19. Briefly then, if the Quadrate, as it does, brings its proportion of Warm
or Soultry Days, of Rains, etc. If sometimes perhaps short of the, sometimes
exceeding; always bordering on the respective Sums found on those confessed
Aspects; Nay let me add it as a Truth, Rain in some certain Months Infallibly;
then the Quadrate is a considerable Radiation.

20. And the Truth is, it is a brave Aspect, conspicuous in both its Terms;
Beautiful, as a graceful Figure in an Heroic Dance, and more significant. For
what observer is there, who having contemplated the Signal Distance of the
Luminous Bodies, thus Aspected, is not taken with the lovely Spectacle, wherein,
while one possesses the Height of the Mid-heaven, the other is either peeping
above the Brim of the Hemisphere, as it were in the Sportive pursuit of his
Colleague; or at the other end of the Hemispere diving out of his Sight? who? I
say, sitting upon some high prospect (the Summit suppose of a serene Hill)
observing a Shower, etc. in the remote Valley, upon one or two instances
repeated, will not be apt to suspect such habitude or Juncture of the Lucid
Bodies for such Effect happening at that critical time? As to the Spectacle, we
know that in the the Sun only shows himself, except, when sometimes eclipsed,
the is also thereby discovered. At the the Moon is only conspicuous: but at the
Quadrates both (as we have said) appear on the Stage.

21. Now, if any shall impeach this Fancy of some Vanity, upon the account that
the Trine and Sextile are equally conspicuous, upon the same Co-appearance of
the Terms: I answer, yea, but the distance is not so signal, so notable, so
Angular, Measuring out, like to two Landmarks, the Body of the Hemisphere; the
shining early in the Mid-heaven about rising in the last Quartile; as the in
the Mid-heaven when the rises in the first Quartile. For if the Full shows the
whole distance of the Hemisphere, the Half Moon measures out the Half, Midway,
the Semidiameter.

22. Let us see how near the 2d. Quadrate can come in these particulars, if it
does yield a little to its elder Brother, yet it may be a Brother still. But I
see no great precedence. The Reader may justify, or at least bear with me for
introducing the Later Quadrate Table, seeing contrary to Nature, it claims an
equality; yea, in some cases an upper Hand.

23. It comes short in Moisture moderate, it scarce comes short in violent
Rain; it seems to be equal in Windy; in Stormy, never trust me, it exceeds, as
43. does 34. and therein equals at least, the New, if not the Full. Does it not
exceed elsewhere? Verily it appears to be the warmer Aspect; it brings fewer
Frosty Days or Mornings; more Mists and Fog; for as for Halo's, we have desired
to be excused for observing them under the 2d. Quadrate, (which may be as
frequent here as any where else.) But Astronomers must Rest. Add more excesses
of Heat, more Trajections, and in fine more Thunders, wherefore the later is
the warmer Aspect.

24. But this is better seen in the following Synopsis of each Table.

Cold and Frosty, 68. 66. Frosty Days. 45. 31. Lowering or Close. 53. 36. Mist,
Hazy. 52. 71. Grosser Fog. 19. 29. Fila. 1. 0. Halo. 6. 0. Hot Days. 13. 24.
Hot Nights. 8. 3. Lightnings 4. 6. Rains. 143. 132. Violent or Durable. 47. 42.
Snow 17. 11. Hail. 2. 4. Trajections. 13. 11. Warm. 37. 18. Winds. 83. 33.
Winds change. 71. 77. Winds stormy. 34. 53. East. 56. 43. West. 56. 35. North.
36. 42. South. 29. 41. South-East. 19. 20. South-West. 73. 17. North-East. 42.
103. North-West. 24. 37. 40.

25. On the view of this Table the choicest difficulty is this, How the later
Quadrate can be appointed for the warmer Aspect, when as it gives Evidence for
stormy Winds more than the Former; since we have pretended in the precedent
Chapter that the Full is more stormy than the New, because it is somewhat the
cooler Aspect.

26. Resp. Besides, that, I no where say it is the only cause I reckon at
present that there are various degrees of cold in stormy weather, wherefore if
the blustering under the later be warmer, than either the blusteing under the
Full, or the First, the difficulty is solved: Stormy winds generally are warm,
even those, they which bring Hail excepted, which happen in the Night;
therefore I did not say cold must be Predominant wherever there is stormy
winds; or that it was Predominant in the Plenilunium; I do confess to remember
some ruffling blasts that have brought Frost with them, but even those rarer
Flaws were not stormy, because Chill in an Intense degree, but because as chill
as the exhalation was, it was Over-master'd by a warm one ( positively) or
warmer ( Comparatively) though to us perhaps not so sensible.

27. Now that the Later is warmer has been made out, concerning which we have
more to Add, to countervail some suspicions which may arise to the contrary
from the Styles of Warmth, Wind, West-Wind, etc. which found in the Column
belonging to the First, seem to surpass those of the 2d. as in warmth 37.
surpasses 33. and in Wind 83. outgoes 37. and lastly, 58. in the Western point
of the Winds outgoes 42. but the Excess is scarce valuable in the two first;
and the later will vanish, or at least be swallowed up, we may see, by the
South-west wind, which appearing but 73. in the first, shows 103. in the later
Quadrate. And to Confirm you that the later is more tepid then the former,
remember I pray, where the is in this later at Mid night, When the Natural day
begins, it rises: At Sun rise, when the Artificial day commences, it is aloft in
the South point. Now, it stands to reason that the Air should be warmer, when
there is a lower degree of Warmth premised to a greater which follows.

28. Now if this warmth is not perceptible to us, it may be sufficient it is
perceptible in consort, when the Sun and all the rest are risen. I cannot
perceive the strength of one Horse to the draught of ten thousand pound weight,
Bring the rest of the Team and I shall perceive it. That will be believe
rational, when you observe that warm is the day when the Sun, the chief rises
last, because in the Case we suppose, all the Rest have risen before, and
tempered and prepared the Air for that measure of warmth which succeeds.

29. Verily the is Viceroy to the Sun, and keeps her Court, and mounts her
Throne, and makes her way as well as the best, when she is Aspected, she is
commissioned to act such and such things in such a Post, and for her own part
seldom fails.

30. Again, is not the Western Angle, according to the Doctrine of the
Ancients, a warmer corner than the Eastern? Let the Favonii, the Tepid western
Winds witness that, with their warmer fruitful showers, while the ungentle
East Wind is accompanied with unkindly Drought, with unwelcom Appearances of
Fogs, and Frosts, and blastings. A little meditation will give us the reason a
priori, Whatsoever Efficacy lies in the Horizon, (which Efficacy must be
supposed without dispute) from the East the Stars every moment forsake that
advantage more and more, as it were in have toward another Post, while the same
Stars, be they more or less, having passed the Midheaven, every moment draw
nearer and nearer to the Horizon, and so proportionably, the contrary whereof
is found in the Eastern; the West, I say, fills, by what the East Emptyeth;
the West being the Receiver, while the East is but the Conveyance. Now the in
the last Quartile possesses. the West, while the is confined to his Eastern
Quarter: Both being present in their several Quarters, must needs show some
effect answerable to their Co-Existence, as we see in the Lunar Conjunction,
which being rightly compared with the Quadrate, will give some Light to the
heats of the Quadrate, which are found to be equal, nay surpassing those of the
Conjunction, as an Angle is more potent than a Line; the Lunar Light being
obverted toward us in the Quadrates, half part at least, which in the
Conjunction is reflected from us toward the Sun.

31. And this Doctrine is so true that if I mistake not, we shall by these
Tables observe more weather, winds and Rain in the Afternoon of the day, than
in the forepart, though both have their share too. For the further prosecution
of this Mystery, let me put this Question to my self, Whether the Quadrate
Aspect has any Influence, when either of the planets concerned, or both, are
under the Horizon? And though I was long e're I could be brought to it upon my
imperfect Theory, I find by the survey of our Instances that we must affirm the
Question to the no small Credit of the Aspect, which has a considerable
duration, and Influence suitable. For not only the Noontide, and the past Noon
Hours, and the hours of the Sun set, but even the Hours before Noon, yea, and
ante lucem, and also the Hours post occasum too, are at the Aspects disposal,
from Sunset to Midnight, as from the preceding Midnight to Sunrise, are
comprehended in the embraces of the Quadrate Aspect: as must be acknowledged by
them who well observe the Tables. Thus Jan. 8 1675. we find it rain apace, hor
9 p. and hor 11 p. die 23. 24. so Feb. 7. 1671. misling 8 p. Die 25. 1672.
Rain, Hor 9 p. Die 14. 1673. Misle 6 p. Die 11. 1676. Rain, hor 7 p. March 26.
1672. great rain, hor 9 p. Die 4. 1674. Snow, 7 p. so April 10. 1676. Rain 3 p.
etc. meaning beyond Bedtime. Die 30. 1677. Rain from before Noon to Midnight,
May 1. 1674. a wet day, and over-wet at night. Again, die 3. rain 5 p. and
Midnight. Die 28. 1677. Rain 5 p. 10 p. and Midnight. This repetition of
Midnight speaks what we would say: For at Midnight as the Sun must be in the
Nadir, so the, linked in radiation with him, must be about her setting. So if
we go on but two instances farther, we shall meet with Lightning and Thunder at
9 P. et 12. P. June 27. An. 1677, and elsewhere for the pursuit of this
observation is worth the while.

32. But stay, if the be setting at the Hour of Midnight, then one of the
Planets concerned are not as yet below the Horizon, -- I grant it is not, but I
must profess it is wonderful to me that should be so nearly clasped to the Sun,
by the Quadrate Aspect, that it should be effectual where the Solar Beam does
not meet it on the Surface of the Earth, as at Noon day, where there is
advantage of Reflection also. But the Sun being in the Nadir, uniteth it self,
with the Ray which passes cross from East, direct to the Opposite Arch. Such
is the Force of a Right Angle, or rather of the Rays so Coincident.

33. Well then, after the Hours of Midnight the Sun quitting the Nadir, and the
wading under the Horizon; Here is the Pinch, Has the Quadrate (we speak of the
First only for brevities sake) any blind un-dreamt of Influence, when neither
of the Laminaries Aspected are visible? Resp. It seems so; By all the weather
that I find ante lucem under the first Quadrate, and that will be sufficient to
establish our Opinion. Thus at the very entrance of our Table we find, (to let
alone Mists) Rain, and again high winds ante lucem. Jan 7. and 8. 1671. much
hoar frost, Jan. 6. 1674. an instance to be regarded as I find since, though I
fear I neglected it many times, as a slight Observation (but the true
Philosopher slights nothing) Feb. 6. An. 1671. Frost, Snow found in the
Morning, it fell then ante lucem. May 24. 1675. Rainy Morning, that is before
Sun rise. June 19. 1675. high wind ante lucem, and die 9. Rain 3 m. An. 1677.
July 27. Showers 3 morn. August 28. 1674. Rainy 2 in the morn. ad 8 m. Sept. 8.
1673. wind Nocte tota, Rain ante lucem. Sept. 15. 1675. die 5. 1676. die 22.
1677. October. 6. 1673. October 27, 1674. Rain and wet morn. most part. Nov. 24.
and 26. Snow, ante lucem. 22. An. 1677. Snow found again morn. Dec. 13. An.
1675. much rain 5 m. Dec. 20. An. 1676. Snow ante lucem.

34. It may be said these antelucana may be imputed to some other Stars which
emerge above the Horizon, and so are more present to their effects. Verily I
was aware of that, as or, of which one often rises before the Sun; but upon
search I do not find it is always so; no, not upon the 2 first Instances, where
rises not time enough to cause rain before day, seeing it rises but degrees. 5.
before the Sun: yea, in after Instances both she and rise after day. I grant
this happens not so frequent as at the Hour of Sunrise, which is more obvious
and more pleasant to consider, because more punctual and with greater variety,
the Sun altering his Hour according to its Month, but yet that it is so here in
as has been said, I have reason to suspect what the second does in this
nature, see 38.

35. Jofrancus Ofhusius an inquisitive person in his Book de Divina Astrorum
facultate, has taken upon him to some good purpose, to examine the Principles
of the Vulgar Astrology; where he foundeth with us the Basis of the Quadrate
Aspect on the Right Angle of the mutual radiations conspicuous in that Aspect:
but then withal he sees not how it can be efficacious, but at those precise
times, when one of the Luminaries is possessed of the Mid-heaven, at the moment
of the others Situation in the Horison. I am glad for true Astrologys-sake,
that so much is allowed for unquestionable: Our Tables being witness to that
nice Truth, as in part we have manifested in the Premises. But it appears also
from the same Evidence that the Aspect brings weather with it at other hours of
the Ante-Noon, and Post Noon more especially: yea, not seldom also for half the
day, if not the entire 12 Hours: which does proclaim a continued Influence
though not discovering it self so signally, but at some particular times.

36. Yea, but how can this be, for on the Meridian only the Ray seems
perpendicular, to which I Ken not what to say, unless this, that though on the
Meridian the Ray is to us Perpendicular, yet at other times it is also
Perpendicular, if not to our Meridian Terrestrial, yet to our Terrestrial
Hemisphere, as long as both of them are seen by us within our Horison, keeping
a right Angle. For the Lines of a right Angle protracted, pass the Center of
the Earth, which I remember to be the the definition of a Line Perpendicular.
Let us not mistake, the Rays of a Quadrate Aspect are not always vertical, but
yet they are always to the Earth Perpendicular.

37. Howsoever for the (...), that the Quadrate brings Rain at Noon, Afternoon,
and most part of that Afternoon, yea, the greatest part of the Day, let this
little Table be our Monitor.

. Noon. -- 18. Afternoon. -- 61. The whole Afternoon.10. Whole Day. -- 5..
Noon. -- 18. Afternoon. -- 47. Whole Afternoon. -- 8. Whole Day. -- 9. Ante
Lucem. -- 30.
38. Here we should have concluded, but what I have hitherto passed by in the
and. I am enforced not to dissemble in this Aspect, though it may seem not
directly to belong to Astrologers, to treat of Dolors Dolors and Diseases. But
seeing these Phenomenon of our little world do principally relate to the Stars
and their Aspects, whose Influence thereby is not only illustrated, but also
are renewed upon us by a daily remembrance, we present this following Account
for 2 or three years, consisting of indispositions; some more trivial indeed,
as the Aches of our Feet; some more grievous: Among which we could have
inserted the complaining noises of Birds, whch are confessed an Evidence of the
Mutation of the Air, (as we have said before) and indeed arising from some
disposition of their bodies in Sympathy with ours. But they being omitted, let
us at present observe our own Complaints rather at this time.

Anno 1671: Dec. 27. Hysterical fits. 1672. Jan. 28. Aches of Limbs and Feet.
1673. Several Childrem complain of Ailments. July 7. Aches in Limbs. Nov. 4. 5.
Hysterical fits. 6. Aches in Limbs. Anno 1674. Feb. 3. Distempers. March, 5.
Pains in the feet. April, 2. May 2. Children complain. Aches. 13. Aches again.
June 1. Children, Aches. 30. July 29. Aches. Aug. 28. Indispositions.
Hysterical. Sept. 25. Children sicken. Notob. 26. Nov. 25. Dec. 25. Aches. An.
1675. Feb. 22. Headache, Hysterical Fits. Aches in Feet. April, 21. Aches,
Children sicken. May, 21. Aches. Dec. 13. Children complain. An. 1676. March,
12. May, 10. Pains in the Feet. April 10. Headache. Sept. 3. Aches and
indispositions. Oct. 3. Nov. 2. Pains in the Feet. Dec. 2. Convulsions. An.
1677. Jan. 30. 31. Remembrances of the Gout. Feb. 22. March. 1. Aches in Limbs.
April. 29. Indispositions. May, 27. Gout. Aug. 24. Indispositions, Gout. Oct.
23. Sicking of Children. Sept. 23. Gripes. 24. Indispositions of aged Persons.
39. So have you a little Hospital-Bill of Dolors happening at, or within the
verge of the Square Aspect Soli-lunar, which justifies the old observation, and
those Good Men who in other places have born such witness to the Influence of
this Aspect. Honest Piso among the rest, whereby the skilful in Medicine may be
convinced of the Lunar Power over our frail Bodies, the more conspicuous indeed,
where the greater frailty, but as sure and certain even in the most sound and
healthful constitutions, the best of which have some Flaw or Breach in their
Texture.

40. And there is no avoiding this Evidence. I find indeed a remarque Jan.
XXXI. 1677. of a fit of the Gout, noted precisely at hor 9. vesp. at what time
as I suspected, I found that Mars over and above what the Aspect Lunar could
do, was posited in M. C. and Febr. 3. 1674. I made a greater Observable, of
Distempers happening hor 6 m. at what time were all together; and again, hor 10
p. the having got to the Pleiades, Distempers returning. All which I vow to be
no contemptible Observations, and say, that it is possible for a Physician by
these Methods, to be aware of his Patients Paroxysm. But this notice of other
testimonies, is not intended at any hand to exclude the Lunar Aspect, other
causes may help to irritate that Passion, which the in Square to the Sun
inclines to.

41. Seeing then this Quartile Aspect has power on Humane Bodies, and is
undeniably a VIIth. and that a critical day, it may be expected what I would
say to the Question, whether every VIIth. day, whether it fall in with the
Aspect or not, as the Physicians will have it, may be Critical, and if so,
whence comes so strange a faculty? Nay, if the Physicians ascribe it to the
Heavens, we are like to go along with them. The Cause is Celestial, says
Sennert, quoted by the Learned Dr. H. More; for at the First assault there is
a, as it were, of the with the Disease, when the Sick man's Month begins, where
on the VII. day, from the first complaint of the Patient, the comes to the
Square of that point of Heaven, where the Morbifick Conjunction began. And is
not this reasonable to believe, when even in Pestilential Diseases, where there
is least discretion of Critical days, the Influence of the confessedly appears;
not only on the Aspects of the in the Macrocosme,, but also whenever, as it
pleases God, any Person is taken sick, the whole Family is shut up for the
space of a Month. The Sick Month, the Patients month commencing at the first
Indisposition complained of. Consequent to which it is observed often times, that
the residue of an Infected Habitation, who perhaps have continued in Health, do
often drop down one after another within a Fortnight, or a Week, or sometimes a
second Month.

42. To refer this to the Periodical Course of the matter, as Cardan does, whom
of all Men in the World I thought would never have deserted his little
Demigods, the Planets, is not satisfactory to any, but those who are great
Haters of Superstition. For the Quere which asks how such a day is Critical,
enquires how the matter comes to such a Period? and the Answer is, because it
does. The very word Periodical shows that it depends on the Heavens: For though
I shall never go so far with Bodin, to admit a Period of States and Kingdoms
governed by the Heavens, yet, with honest Old Galen I aver, that these
determinate times are measured by the, yea, Life and Death it self, and all
Paroxisms of Fevers, and other indispositions, of which some are mentioned in
the Table, (suppose the Patient be under a due Regimen) are to be ascribed to.
I do not say the Moon always, but to some or other Aspects and appulses
Celestial.

43. It will be said again, that whatsoever may be found in the Soli-Lunar
Aspect, there is no such Right Angle to be found in this Imaginary of, related
to its position at the first seizure of the Malady: The cannot be in two places
at once, and the place where she first was in the sick account is now void of
any such Radiation. An Angle must consist of two Lines; Resp. It Is true, the
Moon has left her first place by her Profection to another; but the Objection
suppose the place to be a dead place, a dull unactive part of the Zodiac: but
the Moon, and the Patient felt it otherwise, when she came thither first, she
found Stars, or whatsoever else there may be, as it were in Watch and Garrison,
according as they are posted in that part of the Orb. And why may not the
Radiation of these Stars be in Square to the Radiation of the Moon? And this
may be fairly said, although I should freely confess that I never yet observed
the Fixed Stars in Aspect to the Sun, (except the Pleiades perhaps, or some
other such (...)) to have any such irritative faculty; though again that very
exception of the most notable Asterisms shows, that every Star has such
Power, though not so sensible.

44. But then, will not this let in all the Vanities of the Genethliaque
pretension? Their Directions, Receptions, etc. 2 Resp. This can only infer,
that upon a right process, some Conjecture may be given as to the constant
Health or Sickness of the Native, or, (which will content them) some
inclination thereto: more especially, if the Learned Physician (suppose) should
be acquainted with the Temper and Carriage of the Party; and that is the most
can be made from this Doctrine. Natura amat Septenarios, says the Physician (
Riverius in his. Praxis) and we must believe them in their Art: But there can
be no force in abstracted, Ideal Numbers; So I believe, yea, that neither
Philo-Iudaeus, nay, nor Plato ever intended it. I do not believe I say, the
Story of the Sabbatical River, or that the Sun shines in Rhodes, always on
Wednesday, because That was the day of his Creation; (as the Jew answered the
Philosopher, in Purchase) no more than the Violation of the X. Commandments is
to be shown in an ordinary Apple yet I must needs say I do not know but that
God has imprinted on the Universe, and the parts thereof, some Memorands or
Signatures of his Creation: There is no question, but that there are Umbrages
of his Glory in Light, his invisibility in the Air, his pure Act in uncessant
Motion, his Eternity in Circular Figure; why may not some obscure Impressions
and Memorands of his Oeconony in the Worlds Creation, be left to us to be
picked out of the Septenary, which seem to be observed by himself in the
Levitical Laws of the Leper, and the Menstruals, yea, and our present Septenary
of the place of the Moon, which, as we have heard, and daily see, runs from her
Month to her Month by Septenaries.

45. Septenarius est numerus perfectionis in Scripturis, upon the account that
the Heavens and the Earth were perfected by that Day, say Interpreters, who are
far enough from Superstition, whether the Pythagorick Cabalistical, or
Rosi-crucian, viz. Junius and Ainsworth. Now the first Seventh day of the
World, and the first Quadrate Lunar Phasis (it would have been well for
Chronology if it had been perpetually so) were coincident, being created, as
all agree, in the State of the fourth day.

46. After all, though it is said probably that the Critical Day acts as a
Quartile Aspect, yet we do not say that the Aspect operates as mysterious or
Critical, for setting aside all intrigues of Numbers, there is reason why the
Quadrate should operate upon Humane bodies: though we are beholden to the
Astronomer for his warning, viz. that the Lunar Globe according to Theory
Astronomicall, see Gassendus institut. is nearest the Earth when in a Square
Aspect to the Sun, than in any other Phasis.

47. To conclude with our one business, for confirmation of the Lunar Influence
on the Change of the Air, Observe that whereas, it is true, one Quadrate alters
the Air infallibly in such a particular Month: such estimation might be better
taken from the place, the Sign where the is rather than the time, the Month
Lunar, or Solar. And so it will appear that several of our Squares may be
effective 6 times in 7. of which senary number, Four only may be found in the
Solar Month, and the other two in the Month following. Such are in the first
Quartile, of Those in the Month of April, the first ten days of May, In May,
and the First 10 days of June, in July, August, October. But in the later
Quartile for April not so, but in May, July November it is so. It will be more
exposed to view in a Table. Thus then 1. 2. Locus.. Snow or Rain within the
Triduum more or less. Success. Return. Loc.. Snow or Rain, etc. Succ. Return.
Jan. 6. VII. Jan. 5. VII. Feb. 4. VI. Feb. 5. VII. Mar. 4. VIII. Mar. 4. VI.
Apr. 6. VII. Apr. 5. VIII. May. 6. VII. May. 5. VII. Jun. 7. VIII. Jun. 8.
VIII. Jul. 6. VII. Jul. 6. VII. Aug. 5. VII. Aug. 4. VII. Sept. 7. VII. Sept.
8. VIII. Oct. 6. VII. Oct. 7. VII. Nov. 5. VII. Nov. 6. VII. Dec. 6. VIII. Dec.
5. VI.

What remarques may be made on the signs and their mutual couplings, must be
discoursed of after: At present you see some Quadrates succesful in their
Influence for Rain or Snow 6 times in VII. Revolutions, yea 7 times in VII. and
8 times in VIII. and this is pretty fair.

CHAP. XVI.
1. 2. The Phasis seems gibbous and deformed. 3. A Triduum required to its
consideration. 4. Semisextiles and Quincunxes inconveniences. 6. The Trine
equal, yea, more potent than the Square. 9. Demonstrated from excesses of
Weather. 10. The compendions Summary of the Table. 11. The greatness of the
Aspect made out by Comparison with the Aspects precedent. 13. Tusses, or Colds
Epidemical not without Caelestial Influence. 14. Other Singularities in Tides
and Ebbs. 16. Winds shift round the Compass. 17. and 18. The first Trine of
September and December, and perhaps March never fails. The Second Trine in
February, March, September, October alike successful. 19. Trines apt for
Tempest. 20. 21. Their Energy founded on a right Angle. 22. A Trine more
tempestuous than a Square, the reason of that Paradox, the Ancients teach it
not.
1. This Aspect though it carries not such a Name among the vulgar, the Phasis
being not of so easy an Ocular designation as the Quadrate, may yet be brought
under a Familiar Cognizance by it is Gibbofity when the is not completely
Orbicular as at the Full, yet illuminate beyond the half Phase; By reason of
the dark different Section seems Broken in the back, representing a kind of
Tumor in the illuminate part.

2. A Phasis of some Deformity or irregularity which it may be, is easily
discerned in the later Trine, to my thinking; the reason may be because things
that are then past Prime, when compared with their lately enjoyed Perfection,
do abate of their Grace, or Lovelines, by discovery of some defect or ill
feature, which before was either not existent, or palliated. As deformed as it
is, it must not be disrespected, when we know the Quality and Worth of the
Family, which must be put into the balance with all other defects which may be
alleged.

3. This Quality of the Aspect should be derived from its proper Table, wherein
we had also produced Three days toward the Comprehension of the Influence. For
however some one off the Days may enterfere, (as we have said, Cap. praeced.)
with the Neighboring Aspect, yet at no hand do we run foul (as in the case of
two Women claiming Marriage to the same Husband) on uncertainties, but we give
each Aspect their Right, by dividing that term of time which seems to be common
to both. Thus, to give an example, April VII. and Novem. XXX. An. 1671. seem to
be claimed by both the Quartile and Trine; yet so, that the Afternoon only
shall belong to the Trine, and the Morning to the Quartile, One coming on,
while the other goes off. But neither are we driven to this, except only when
the is in the swiftest Course, when she runs grad. 15. in twenty four Hours, at
what time she must seem to huddle from one Aspect to another: but ordinarily it
is not so.

4. Some of the New Aspects, it is true, are for the most part suspected,
because they are stinted to so narrow a Confine, that if they do but in the
least move forward, they must necessarily trespass upon their Neighbors,
beyond all possible distinction. So I remember, Kepler being overborn with
Semisextiles, Quincunxes mixed with the Ancient Aspects, is forced to cry out,
In tanta turba, quis ovi cuique matri suum seliget agnum? ad Dec. 1627. But in
the Ancient Aspects we are never at such a loss, we can give account for each
day when it is required. Notwithstanding, as it is ridiculous to confine
Aspects to an indivisible point, for so they would never have bin discovered to
this Hour, seeing Calculation modestly confesses she has not bin able to
assign the Critical Moment, so it will be as nice and superstitious to
determine the measure of their Tenures to such an exactness; which if it could
be done, where of no use in Nature, I boldly say: whereupon this consideration
helps to acquit our Tables which assign three days to the Aspect, in case an
Aspect holds at some considerable, yet undeterminate time, above one day.

5. Not that we would make the continually engaged all the Month round, for so
no day on the 's part will have any thing to it self peculiar above another. We
have made distinction of the 's swifter and slower Motion; a continued
engagement may appear at sometime under the One, and scarce under the Other:
The swiftly mooving from a Square to a Trine, may, for all I know, be engaged
all that while, not confounding the Aspects, but continuing the Influence; as
the Celerity of a Boat is continued by a successive dip of the Oar, the Motion
received at the preceding Immersion being slackned indeed, but not utterly
extinct; However it be, it is all one to us, who will impute the Celerity to the
Impulse immediately preceding.

6. Verily these Trines, we will not say that they are, but we say that that
they seem to be equal to the Quadrates, and that is something of News, it may
be, since no less than the Norimberge Diary thinks it will nor quit cost, when
it notes the Quartiles constantly, to note the Trines once or twice in a year.

7. But what do we mince it with such moderation, like happy Gamesters talk
awhile of hopes and probabilities, when they are sure of the Game in their
Hand; we say, for all we know (the Quartiles name is up, it is true) That of the
Trine is the more potent Aspect. Let the Board Judge.

8. The Table here might come in, but since we present you with a compendium of
it, we may be dispensed with upon the account of brevity, We will only remark
some heights and excesses which call for attention here and there.

9. As, first, in the County of Sussex, An. 1671. Sept. III. we meet with
Thunder, Rain, and so much Wind as tore up Trees by the Root. Yea, again,
December. XXX. XXXI. Tempestuous Night and Day, when there was a general concern
for those at Sea.

Next year An. 1672. July XXIV and XXV. it blew so hard that the lowness of the
Ebb in the River Thames presented the Shelfe before St. Mary Church above 150
paces in length. December. XIX. and XX. News of Floods in the Country by reason
of Winds and rain.

Anno 1673. February XVI. and XVII. Turbulent and tempestuous Blasts, such as
shattered Windows and bent Iron: (an Effect of Tempest which I have not met
with more than once.) An. eod. Sept. X. Very high Wind. Sept. XI. Furious Wind
all the Night preceding, and day following three Houses blown down in
Covent Garden. Besides, October. XI. very high winds again.

An. 1674. April VII. windy, not expressed in our Table; but Storm at
L^yn-Regis, with much Shipwreck.

An. 1675. May XXIV. and XXV. Rain and Thunder.

An. 1676. August IX. High Wind, Tide as high, or higher than at the Change and
Full. Again, Sept. VII. and VIII. Gusts of Wind here. Very high Winds at Okeham
in Rutland, so general was the Constitution.

Ann. 1677. August XI. Turbulent and Windy. So day June I. great Dash of Rain
and Hail, with Lightning and Thunder. Again, July XXIX. High Winds, Showrs,
Thunder. August XXVII. High Winds and often darkish. What if I should go on,
and bring it home to our very doors, to the year 1681? Thus then it accords,
An. 1678. March 22. Winds very high. Jan. XIX. Thunder, Lightning. August
XVIII. Wind high.

An. 1679. Feb. X. High Wind. XI. High Wind with us, and on the same day, a
most violent Storm, as has bin known in Mediterranean (Gazet. Numb. 1388.)
July VIII. Gusts of Wind with Rain and Thunder at Stoken-Church. August VI.
Heat, Storms with Rain and Thunder.

An. 1680. Jan. XXX. and XXXI. very Tempestuous. Febr. XXVIII. very high wind
and cold whiles on the same day at Cologne, Lightning fell on the Church St.
Ursula, not without Damage. Merc. Angl. Numb. 33. June XXV. Soultry with us. At
Venice some Persons slain by Lightning, Gazet. -- And XXVII. Thunder and
Lightning. August XXIV. High winds, great Rain and Thunder. Sept. XXIII. Great
Rain, and at Dover, Thunder on the next day at Madrid, Rain and violent Thunder
and Wind (as says the Gazet) not expressible.

An. 1681. April XVIII. High wind. June XV. great Storm of Hail and Rain. July
XIV. and XV. Rain and High Wind. August XIV. Thunder and Rain. Sept. XIII. High
Wind by gusts. October. XII. High Wind at Night, at Yarmouth. December. X. Windy.
On the same day the Sea by a Strong S. W. broke up the Banks, etc. Tempest at
the Sea for several days: of which number be days X. and XI.

The other is so like this, that it is the worse, as we say; let us read
therefore with some attention.

An. 1671. Sept. XII. Terrible Tempests of wind and Rain, a 4 m ad 11 p. much
Shipwreck. XII. Ships broken in the River; Fourteen Sail cast away on the Coast
of France. Inundation at Lyn. The XIII. little better. November. IX. great
boisterous Winds worthy it seems of the Gazets Notice.

An. 1672. I. II. High Winds nocte tota. The same day, the East Indies were
tempestuous at Tywan; yea, the next Trine happened to be High Winds with us.
October. XXIX. Then December. XXVIII. High Tide on the Thames, ready to run into
Westminster Hall.

An. 1673. May XXV. at London Wind and Wet. At Warwick Storms, Rain, Thunder,
and Lightning. June XXIII. at Harwich, again, Rain, Thunder spout like a
Pyramid, which broke beyond Land-Guard-Fort. Sept. XXI. very wet nocte tota,
and High Wind; Whose Fellow Trine, you have seen has blown down Houses.

An. 1674. Jan. XVI. very high wind with us at London, on the same day a Ship
lost on the Goodwin. XXVII. day, vast Floods by Rain the days precedent. May
XV. Bright, hot, some Thunder, as the Watermen informed me.

An. 1675. Great Hailstones, high winds and Thunder near Windsor. Jan. I. In
the same year, the end of Dec. was stormy when it came to the Trine. What News,
day XXVI? Every day say they at Plymouth, brings an Account of great losses at
Sea; and all those Coasts are full of wrack. High Wind was noted with us, with
a great Storm of Rain. The XXVII. also was noted for breaking of Tiles and
Glass-Windows. And on this day also we have noted, Report of Vessels cast away.

An. 1676. Feb. XXIV. Tempest. June XIX. Lightning at 3 M. and 10 M. Harmful at
Putney. XX. Rain and Thunder at 3 M. July XX. Lightning and Thunderclaps, no
less than thirty three.

An. 1677. March 15. High wind. Ships cast away by Storms, and Thunder between
Cales and St. Lucas. July 8. High Wind and Thunder.

An. 1678. June XI. High Wind, beat the Tiles off again. May the I. High Winds,
nocte tota windy and Rainy, sad Maying. July XXVIII. Thunder, showers. Thundered
7 or 8 times. Aug. XXVI. very hot, Thunder heard ante horam 2 P. Sept. XXVI.
High winds and Rain, November XXIII. and XXIV. wet, but very Lofty Furious
winds etc. So I hope I lie under the Protection of, etc. and go no further.
These Instances show, though there be but One or Two in the year, that a Trine
is apt to admit such memorable violences, the Peer whereof is not easily found
in the Quadrate, etc.

10. But what of the other Instances, if we withold our Table, we cannot be
suffered to withold its Compendium. Then thus have you 1. 2. Cold, Frosty,
Entire. 26. 16. Frosty Mornings. 29. 47. Fog, Gross, and Thick. 17. 26. Misty
Air. 47. 34. Hail. 0. 3. Halo. 3. 6. Hot. Days. 25. 16. Hot. Nights. 5. 3.
Warm. 37. 31. Rain. 155. 162. Rain violent or Durable. 48. 52. Snow. 12. 13.
Tempestuous. 4. 6. Thunder. 5. 9. Winds. 102. 91. Winds various. 43. 43.
Tempestuous and Stormy. 44. 31. East. 42. 44. West. 31. 49. North. 28. 27.
South. 35. 21. North-East. 34. 34. North-West. 21. 27. South-East. 20. 26.
South-West. 90. 69.

11. So if I have adventured to call it a great Aspect, I have not done amiss,
for though I have said as much of All the rest hitherto, yet I may properly
enough term This so too. For the Other, I asserted against those who deny such
Realities; and now I assert this among those who confess the Rest, and take no
great notice of this. Why? What is the matter? Experiment of Nature is not at
my beck, nor is our Table, though it hides the Head, a Forgery. See here some
Strictures of comparison. Sum 109. sath the New under the Style of Rain; while
103. says the Full. Sum 143. and 132. say the Quadrates. Now our Trines, you
see, say 155. and 162. I should suspect this Surmount if I did not find a
Singularity of Influence in the Figure: It equals the Best of the Aspects as
for Hot Days, both in Number and Vigor: For the Vigor we remember with a Heat
complained of universally.

12. Another time I remember suffocating Gleans of the Sun, (...) the Ancients
call it, such as I never met with elsewhere but Once, and that was in the sad
Pestilent year, at the. Jan. 3. 1665. In another place I found the first hot
Day of the year shows it self on the same Aspect, June 22. An. 1675. On the
contrary, to point out the Singularity, I note, that the Frosty Days are not so
frequent as under the Quadrates, and yet they are as vehement notwithstanding,
as under any other Configuration, as if (which seems I know impossible) that
the same Spirit agitated Heat and Cold; For in Cold, sometimes there is a
smartness and keenness of Edge, which we call bitter Cold: such we found under
one of the First of these Aspects Jan. 29. 1672. So in Feb. yea March, 1674. in
October. as well as Nov, 1677. The like in April, beginning An. 1671. yea, and the
end, An. 1675. Give me leave to add, for it may be of some concern, the like
occurrents in the Later of these Trines, which though it seem the warmer of the
two, yet once I found it made me chill in my Bed, well fenced and guarded
against the injuries of the Air, though in the Month of March, An. 1671. ten
days after the Equinox, (...) March XX.) And the year following on the very day
of the Equinox, we had Ice even Bearing, brought to that consistence in 3 days,
which we say belong, or border on the Trine. Just as in October. Anno 1677. we
had Three Winter days, absolute Winter within the same confine.

13. Consonant to this, we may have occasion to speak of a notable
indisposition, of which in our seven years we met with Two Instances; we call
them Tusses Epidemicae, of which the first is noted in our Fugitive Table. Jan.
16. 1673. the other was noted all Europe over, October. 27. An. 1675. Concerning
which, being interrogated by a GREAT Person, what might be the Cause? I
answered Him with all Respect, but with all Assurance also, that it depended on
the Heavens, an Universal Cause in this sense; but little thought I then, I
confess, that this Lunar Radiation might have any Finger in it, which now
appears probable from a redoubled instance; yea, and from the Mysterious Change
of a Pungent Heat, to a Stupefactive Cold, observable here in this Radiation,
and others also, which our Bodies, or rather our Spirits may be sensible of,
when our unwary attendance on our selves can give no Minute Account of it. Some
Physicians did impute it, I remember to the Change of the Wind over night
toward the North, which was very true; but they will give me leave to advert
that there may be more in it so; several more hidden Celestial Causes (for
every Change of the Wind to a cold part brings not an Universal indisposition
over all Europe.) of which we can assign no more (as proper to this place) but
the Lunar Radiation among the Rest.

14. We have a double instance which may be glanced upon; we shall speak of the
store of Rain presently, but this is the Singularity, expressed by a Great Drop
more than ordinary, more than once, Great Hailstones, which in Tables of
observation of a wider Latitude do occur a 3d. a 4th. a 5th. time etc. arguing
in my judgment a different degree of Heat struck up at that time, as in the
generation of Hail commonly is seen, though encountered, it is true, with a
contrary Activity.

15. Of the same stamp is the next considerable in the Water-Floods of our
River the Thames, where a High Tide is noted, not only in the or, but sometimes
under our Trine also. August 1676. and December. 1672. That of the First, this of
the Later Trine. That of Dec. being as High a Tide as ever was known in the
Memory of Man, being ready to run into Westminster Hall, as I my self can
attest; It had bin a time of Frost and Snow, and therefore we shall allow the
consideration, but withal shall sue out our Title for the Aspect, seeing upon
review of Tide-Observations for some years I find, to my surprise, the Tides
start as frequently in each Trine, to a new degree of Height, sometime to equal
the Change and Full. But I will not press this too much, because it may
occasion a Brangle, upon consideration of the Tides great variety, upon
Droughts, Rains, sudden Thaws, and stiff Winds intervening; so that even the
Sextile and Quadrate, the Neaptide Aspect, is found at times to usher in
exuberant Floods: always provided that we may renew our Plea when time serves,
and, that I may not think it fortuitous, I found an extraordinary low Ebb with
us at London, noted on the same Aspect, where so great a shelf appeared at so
many places, that the River looked not like it self, when some curious Persons
were invited thereupon to waft thither, and to pace the Dimensions of the Terra
Firma, August 25. 1672. Now the use that I make of this, is this, the moderate
low Ebb in one part, does argue a proportionable height in another, Rye,
suppose, or Winchestea; It Is true the Ferrimen imputed this low Ebb to the
Western Wind, which I reckoned was a careless Answer, from such as are not
inquisitive Persons, because I could not observe any such briskness at that
time from the Western Quarter. Nor do many Winds from that Quarter leave the
River so naked.

16. Come we now to the Wind; the Singularity here in my Judgment is very
entertaining, the Wind not only changing (for so it may under all Aspects, and
less here, than elsewhere,) but want only playing; so that as I have often with
Pleasure observed, the Index has whiffed round all the points of the Compass,
from whence I observed by virtue of a Sic parvis -- the Tornados and Whirlwinds
may well depend on the Heavens, when an ordinary Linar Aspect shall show us
that variety. So May XXIV. and Oct. XXVIII. 1675. -- April VIII. 1672. Septem.
VII. October. VI. 1677. June XII. An. 1674. This take along with you, that when
the Wind so shifts and plays about, it is a sign of Weather approaching in the
Horizon, or actually existent at the same time, somewhere else.

17. Now, if the Reader please to like our former Representation of the
frequency of the Effect, Rain I mean in the Quartile Aspect, as it is plain and
not unprofitable, the like we are ready to present him here.

Revol. Success. Jan. VIII. 7. Feb. VII. 5. March. VII. 7. April. VIII. 4. May.
VII. 5. June. VIII. 6. July. VII. 5. Aug. VIII. 7. Sept. VII. 7. Oct. VII. 4.
November. VII. 6. December. VII. 7. Jan. VII. 6. Febr. VII. 7. March. VII. 7.
April. VII. 4. May. VIII. 8. June. VII. 4. July. VII. 5. Aug. VIII. 6. Sept.
VIII. 8. Oct. VII. 7. November. VII. 6. December. VI. 6.

18. Not unprofitable, whereas before, you see all Aspects are not alike
responsible in every Month, no, nor in the same Month. Some speed but 4 or 5
times, some 6. the Happyest complete their Number be it VII. or VIII. Hence it
follows that there are different properties of the Zodiacal Signs. A Lunar
Trine in and you see keeps touch, so far I can speak for the Fiery Triplicity,
and pray overlook not the other. A Trine in will deceive a blunt Astrologer,
which speeds but four Times in VII. so the rest, yet this is somewhat out of
place.

19. Yea, but the main Singularity to come to that at last, is concerning
Stress of Weather, hinted at already, if that be true which we have asserted,
or rather commended to observation, that the shifting of Winds argues
Commotions somewhere. We have said that the Phasis of the Trine looks with some
deformity, and the Character () seems to be Mysterious and Magical, if there be
such Power to raise Tempests. Without fooling, it has an unexpected, undreamt
of Influence toward Tempests, whether of Lightning in the capable Months, or
of Winds, Furious Ragings, Hurricanes, which sometimes are felt without the
Tropiques, even in our Septentrional parts: This being somewhat Novel, or near
Paradox, must, yea, has been demonstrated.

20. But then what should be the Latent Spring of this Energy, can any Man
tell? If the Musical Fancy does not please, we have assigned a Right Angle in
the Quadrate Aspect, for the Seat of its strength, if a Man may say it, before
ever we Read the more Learned Ofhusius. Verily, if we rightly consider it, the
same Angle may be found under the Trine, in as much as by reason of the
Obliquity of the Ecliptique, we see it fall out that one of the two Planets so
Aspected may lie just under the Meridian, when the other is on the Limb of the
Horizon.

21. Thus: Bring me and, Solstitial Signs to the Meridian, and there you shall
find but 3 Signs appearing, which make an absolute Quadrate: But reduce, either
of them to the Meridian, and in the Oriental part of Heaven you shall observe
IV. Signs a perfect Trine emers'd above the Horizon. The Equator is uniform,
shows it 90 grades constantly on the Eastern and Western side; the Ecliptique
is not tied to that constant Equality; it is unequally divided sometimes with 4
Signs of one side of the Meridian, and only 2 Signs on the other. And this is
not all. Let us consider the Occidental Mediety of Heaven, let us depress to
the Horizon, and we shall find near IV. Signs comprised in the Arch from the
Horizon to the Meridian, as before you found it from the Meridian to the
Horizon. So then, if in all these Cases a right Angle is discerned, the
Efficacy of the Aspect may be founded thereon.

22. Now, whether these Trines, as it seems according to this Doctrine, owe all
their Influence to these Critical Coincidences, with Meridian Circle or
Horizontal, may be referred to its proper Chapter, or may be solved by what
proposed in the. It remains only to enquire why a Trine is more Turbulent than
a Quadrate Aspect. And that will be assoiled by considering the measure of the
Angle, by the length of the Subtensa reaching 4 Signs, or 120 grades; for upon
this account is the Quadrate more strong than the Sextile, in the same manner
as the Trine is more Operative than the Quadrate, With a bar notwithstanding,
put in against the Quincunx, because of its vicinity to its principal, viz.
the, And perhaps because a Quincunx, as Semisextile also, are never found of so
large an Expansion as to possess the two Circles of Horizon and Meridian at the
same Moment, which yet we shall see a Sextile does. But first let us admit the
Trine Interest, and view its Books; the rather because I seem to advance a
Paradox. For though the Antiens hold the to be very perfect, above the Square
or Opposition, so that I had thought they had favored our Plea. Escuid. Tract.
2. did. 12. Cap. 1. Yet I dare not allege them, least they speak in relation
to Genitures, rather than the Change of the Air: So that we must wholly appeal
to the experience of our Table, though not extant here: But if the Ancient
Arabs mean the Change of the Air also, well and good; then I am free from the
guilt of a Paradox.

CHAP. XVII.
1. The the first Lunar Phasis of the Creation. 2. The secondary Light
discernible in the dark side of the Lunar Discus, whence? 3. The Aspect
operates. 5, 6. Keeps touch at the Hour. 7. The Moons part seems to lie in the
Complement of an Effect. 8. and 9. This Aspect need not be ashamed to appear
among her Kindred, it is as stormy as one of the Squares, and as dashing. 10. A
Table declarative of their Influence. 12. Second seems to outdo them all. 13.
In stormy Weather of more frequency, but less danger. 15. The Full brings less
moisture than any of its fellow Aspects. 17. Aspects compared as to dashing
Rains. 18. This Aspect takes place in fits of Rain, returning after frequent
intermission. 19, 20, 21. This demonstrated. 22. Of infallible success as to
Rain, how far the Table produced. 24. Inclination for Wind. 26. Search into the
reason of its Influence, whether there be any thing of a right Angle. Some
equality in all Aspects. The is critical with the Physicians not without
reason. 29. Gassendus his why-not's answered. 13. Suffrage of the Seaman from
our great Verulam.
1. THe Sextile, two Signs distant from the, though the last for Dignity, is
the first Aspect in order; and makes some show 3 or 4 days after the Prime,
enlightening about 3 digits of the 's disk, the rest being Opaque and dark: The
First Phasis of the, wherein she appeared to the World in the day of her
Creation; not in and, but about the Sextile Aspect. The First of being
imaginary, 2 days before (...) as the Jews most probably reckon. An Aspect
called by the Greeks (...), upon a vulgar account, unless they should have some
respect to the Tradition. The Latins call it, Cava Luna, because it tends to
Orbicular, the Inner Area being dark and shady, save that in the Craepusculum
we may discern a weaker diffusion of Light in the whole disk, not unpleasant to
behold.

2. Especially since we may wonder how it gets thither; The Copernicaus
persuade, that it owes the Original to her Sister Earth, whose illuminate part
makes it Reflection thither. Yea, Galileo most ingeniously solves the
Phoenomenon, why in the Mornings Later Sextile, this Luster appears somewhat
brighter than in the Evening: wherefore? but because supposing that the Earth
and Solid Bodies reflect stronger, than Water or Fluids: There is more Land
then Water (the vast compass of Asia,) Eastward of Europe, and more Sea than
Land, Westward. The truth is, if Wit will do it, the Copernican Hypothesis must
be accepted: but whether it comes from the Earths reflection, or from the Other
Celestial lucid Bodies, to which (whatsoever Galileo has observed to the
contrary, I should as readily incline) the Astrologer is not obliged to
determine.

3. Our engagement lies rather to assert, what Galileo doubts of, that the
Celestial Bodies operate upon the Inferior (if I have leave to call the Earth
inferior) by Light and Motion. At present, that the operates in her Sextile
Radiation.

4. Now whereas we have observed in the Trine Aspect, one day of the Triduum
often Lights in common with the Neighbor Quartile, and that toward the exit or
Introit, we confess so does the Sextile also. But in answer, as before, that
this is no visible prejudice to either Aspect; their Characters being raised
from their visible Efficacy, those common days, (if need be) not being
considered.

5. Add that the Sextile also, the poor Lagging Sextile, in imitation of the
great ones, gives warning at the Hour, and bears Testimony to its self within
its proper Duration.

6. Further we say, which we have not yet mentioned, these ^^urly Testimonies
are more to be remarked, because of the exactness of the Calculation presumed
in the, which in some other Planets will not be pretended. Greater is the
evidence created to our pretenses by correspondence between Cause and Effect,
so near, so punctual, so precise.

7. Hence, the Luminary is not only demonstrated to make One, but also to the
Curious, their very Place and Order is made known, while she appears to be
candidate for one, yea, for the Ultimate Cause, such as gives the final
Complement to the growing Effect: The last Stroke fells the Tree.

8. Verily this Aspect upon a Minute consideration has suffered by prejudice
and presumption. For the VI. part of a Circle sounding not so big, as the Trine
or Square, has beeen so scornfully looked upon, even by my self, as well as
others, but of a foolish presumption that so little an Arch of a Circle could
not lodge so remarkable an Efficacy; As if the Ancients bad brought it in only
for Complement sake, least they should have bin thought to have failed rather
in the accuracy of their Method, than in any Substantial.

9. Now whether our Table be produced or not, the Sextile is no Chip in Broth,
no empty Name of a Configuration, but a very considerable Engine, little though
it be, to produce Physical Effects. Now we do not, dare not say, it is equal to
the Trine; but this we say, it may keep company with the Best of the Aspects,
though it may be it has not half so fair an Estate. Therefore let us see, and
compare, First, if in the former you had 25 Soultry Days (the most probable
Method of proving an Aspect) even under our Sextile I find 20. As often Rain,
as often stormy Winds, as under the first Square. Strange! that two Signs
should be as potent as 3. nay 4. so rare a Contemplation is that of Nature,
that it will strike us with wonder, to set an edge upon our Enquiry. And well
may we muse and contemplate the for its fertility of Moisture: we find it a
little short indeed of the for the moderate Moisture, but for the immoderate
Effusions, or violent dashes our Sextile out-does; what not? When the First
brings but 48 dashes, etc. The first Sextile brings 60. For Snow in like
manner; For Hail more, so that it will be time to look to the Foundation of
this Aspect, and never leave till we have discovered it.

10. But we must premise the Compendium of our Table; that we may see further
what both Sextiles can do, as before we have exhibited the Trines.

10. I. II. Frosty Days. 28. 19. Warm Days. 46. 29. Hot and Soultry. 20. 36.
Hot Nights. 5. 5. Trajections. 7. 20. Lightnings. 8. 4. Thunder. 5. 7. Mist.
43. 43. Fog. 21. 38. Halo. 0. 0. Winds. 51. 59. Stormy and High. 35. 35. Change
of Winds. 33. 41. East. 50. 46. West. 31. 45. North. 41. 44. South. 21. 31.
North-East. 38. 42. North-West. 20. 18. South-East. 13. 14. South-West. 91. 51.
Rain. 149. 145. Violent, etc. 60. 27. Snow. 12. 11. Hail. 8. 5.

11. This is our Sextile, concerning whose power it is enough to say it equals,
or out-does the former Aspects hitherto treated of, in Heat, in Rain, in
Thunder, in Trajections, in Fog, Wind, Snow, Hail. Muster all the Aspects
together, that you may see them at Exercise; and by that you will easily
estimate their Significancy; where, if you be surprised with any appearance
contrary to expectation, you will not be the First that have bin amused. Ask
the New how many Hot days she brings? She underwrites 28. the Full. 11. the
first 13. the second 24. the former 25. the later 16. The Sextile, Former 20.
the Later Sextile 36. the Former Sextile out does the Full, the first, the
Later, the Second outdoes them all.

12. This makes toward the Character then, a Sextile, at least one inclined to
Warmth as much as the New. Why the New seems evident; but there is as certain
reason for this as that, if not so evident. Accordingly under this former
Sextile we meet with, if I remember, as Hot Weather for April as ever was
known, An. 71. die 23, 24, 25. which is not a pure Chance, even our Sextile
helps, as the Wren said when she pissed in the Ocean. For Thunder, or the Muter
Lightnings, it equals the New, I had almost said the Full Trajections, I know
not by what hap, are found to be equal to the New, or, 2d. Quadrate. These
yield 18 and 19. and our Aspect makes it 20. For High Winds, etc. no man thinks
that it is our turn now to cry up the Sextiles above the, which we have
adventured to say, is the most remarkable tempestuous. But that we may not be
mis-conceiv'd, we understand this not by the frequency of Tempests, for so the
Full is the most Tempestuous by far, before Quadrates or Trines either; but in
regard, of the Fury and Rage; A forer Tempest is often found under a Lunar,
than under any other Aspect Lunar: This is all we say, till the contrary is
proved. Now our Sextiles in this point for frequency seem to be equal to the
New, Quadrate, and Trine in either kind, and for Fury it brings one or two
Instances.

13. For better memory the Reader may please to view the matter again and see
what they underwrite for themselves.

.. I. II. I. II. I. II. 37. 68. 34. 43. 44. 31. 35. 35.

Where you see the Full, one Square, one Trine goes beyond us. All the rest,
even the New not much out-vying our Sextiles, which by some good hap are equal
one with the other to an unit.

14. For Moisture in general, more or less, our Sextiles exceed all but the Two
Trines, for 149. and 144. exceeds 109. and 193. the Sums of Moisture under the
New, and the Full: and the two Trines here are Paramount and one of the
Quadrates, as may be seen by this presentment.

.. I. II. I. II. I. II. 109. 103. 143. 132. 155. 162. 149. 144.

You see your Sextiles are inclined to moisture, yea, you see what surprises
me, that the full brings less moisture than any of his fellow Aspects:

15. Notwithstanding this, observe again that the Former Sextile, (however the
later comes to flag and lose its credit as to durable, or more violent Rains,
and it comes not off so disgracefully neither, when I see the New but a Piep
beyond it) the Former Sextile I say, Full, Quadrate, and Trine, for smart and
frequent dashing, cannot do better. Now if they be asked what they will
subcribe for Dashing Rains, they will answer in this order.

17... I. II. I. II. I. II. 28. 47. 47. 42. 48. 52. 60. 27.

Where 60. you see under the first Sextile, the Tale of her Dashes, outgoes the
Full and Quartiles, and is scarce approached unto, but by one of the Trines.

16. And here Let us a little view the Wonders of the Creator. Great and
various are the Shapes of the Changes of the Air. And be they never so many,
God has adapted Causes as numerous and various to answer those Effects. All
the strange and free postures of our Bodies, such as you see in Sprightly
Youth, whether at Sport or Exercise, we poor Ignaro's think they proceed from
the Pliantness of our Frames, it may be, or the freedom of our Will, but the
Learned Anatomist, who has dissected Nature, knows, that there is a proper
distinct Muscle fixed in our Fabric, to discharge every such Motion. So is it
in the Heavens. We meet with strange Weather sometimes, when the Heaven is, as
I may call it, fitted for Rain, when it shall clear up to a pure and bright
Sky, and of a sudden, showrs smartly and in earnest, and so continue showring
and clear interchangable for a considerable part of the day: Of which sort they
occur in our Table, not here produced, several Examples. The Celestial
Philosopher assigns this Aspect, That Is the Muscle, as it were, which the
Creator has made to exert this Motion: For it is a short Aspect; and if there
be in the Heavens any advantageous Post above another, it arrives sooner
thither. Now the smartness of the Shower shows an Aspect, and the suddenness
shows a Sextile.

17. Nay, if there be any thing in the Posts of the Horizon and the Meridian, a
Lunar Sextile by its applictions thereto can give account, without any other
assistants, of Rain VI. times a day; so with other help it may come to twenty
times in one day. And of this we had one most notable Instance.

18. The days when it thus rained by such intermitting Fits were these. Jan. X.
An. 1676. May I. An. 1674. April VIII. An. 1676. May VIII. and IX. An. 1676.
etc.

19. Now, if on any of these days the Fit came on Noon, or Sunrise, or Sun
set, or about two Hours distant, then it is a clear case we assign the Cause of
this admirable Product of Nature. But so it is. For on Jan. X. An. 1676. the
first day noted, we meet with wet Morning, which may comprehend either, or
rise, or the space between; and again, Rain 6 P. wherein the in of the is
exactly on the Meridian; this is to begin. The next is May I. An. 1674. which
being the last of the Triduum, is to be found under April. Here we find showers
10 m. and about the time when the in Sextile rises, as is expressly also noted.
The 3d. is April VIII. An. 1676. Rain 4 P. the then in. 2. was exactly South.
We will give you a 4th. May VIII. An. 1676. it rains hor 4. because the in
Sextile 4 m. O. exactly upon the Meridian at that Hour. Thus is God, Nature and
Art justified by these plain demonstrations, not to be avoided. And this I
proclaim holds, not only in the First but Second Sextile, though more rarely,
and that not according to the Southing of the Sun and Moon, but also to the
rise and setting; witness June 20. 77. where at the s sitting hor 3. exact, you
meet with a Thunderclap.

22. Nor must we say that a Quadrate and a Trine are apt, as often, to stir up
Nature, the Negative being plain from the very constitution of the Aspect,
which is founded upon the Distance of two Signs, and no more; the Influence
then of the Stars so Aspected, if they have any, must in a shorter space show
themselves, then those who have a larger Tedder. Sooner shall the Stars at the
distance of two Signs arrive to their Critical places, than those who are
distant 3 or 4.

23. Now, our Muster, according to the difference of Signs, as we did before in
the Quartiles, stand thus. -- I. Signs, Quotient, Success. VI. 4. VII. 5. VIII.
6. VII. 6. VIII. 8. VII. 7. VII. 7. VII. 5. VII. 6. VIII. 5. VII. 6. VII. 6.
II. Signs, Quotient, Success. VII. 5. VII. 7. VIII. 6. VII. 5. VII. 4. VIII. 8.
VIII. 6. VII. 6. VII. 5. VII. 7. VII. 5. VI. 5.

23. If the Quota's are not so full as in the Quadrates, etc. we may probably
infer that the Sextile is the weaker Aspect. Howbeit, there are here again some
near infallible Bespeakers of a shower. That in and brings 8. for 8, under
which I would Martial and in the First, and and with and under the Second: but
they seem not to fadge. Take then and which bring 8 for 8. and those which find
7 for 7. and let the Reader make his use of them., and, and, and are such.
Howbeit I must not enquire the reason or foundation of the difference which
appears, in this place.

24. Speak we to the inclination for Winds.

I. II. East. 50. 46. N. E. 38. 42. S. E. 13. 14. 101. 102. I. II. West. 31.
45. N. W. 20. 18. S. W. 91. 51. 142. 104. I. II. North. 41. 44. N. E. 38. 42.
N. W. 20. 18. 99. 134. I. II. South. 21. 31. S. W. 13. 14. S. W. 91. 51. 125.
106.
25. It Is pretty to observe, that the second brings 134 Northerly Winds, of due
West little. The First, 142. Westerly Winds, of North but a little; that the S.
W. Wind abates from the Quota's found under the or, and yet it is almost double
(91) to any other Quota assignable. In a word, I do not remember that the or
brought so much of Easterly Winds, though West, and North, and South, do
somewhat outbid the Eastern.

Thus is the Character of the Sextile.

26. Neither is there wanting foundation in Nature for so much Effect. Ofhusius
himself allowing it reasonable that Planets at any such distance, whether they
happen, One, on the Midheaven, while the other is on the Horizon, may alter the
Air, which happens under the Three Posterior Aspects,. Even in this Later, in
some parts of the Ecliptique, at or about Two Signs distant. The Sextile is
equal notwithstanding, or equivalent to a right Angle, viz. to the Equinoctial
Angle, which is always the same. And this, as I remember, is happily observed
by Ofhusius. But if this will not be admitted as sufficient and responsible for
some violent Effects showing themselves, what if I should observe, that in a
manner, all Aspects seem to be equal, whether Diametral or Angular: Wherefore
as in the there is an imaginary, or rather a Virtual Opposition, since the
Heaven is Circular, and shows an opposite point affected; so that you have no
single Aspect: then, contra, an is a virtual Conjunction. So is it in the Rest.
Bring in a Square of and, One of them to the Meridian, and the Square is
doubled: For there is a Quadrate Oriental and Occidental. posited on the
Meridian, makes a right Angle with the Sun in the Horizon, and another with the
point in oppositio Solis. Does not then our Sextile ( Oriental suppose) by the
same Reason, make a occidental? and back again, a in the East, constitute a
Sextile in the West.

27. For what pains and indispositions we had noted with their Obelisk here
also as in the Quadrate, how duly I had noted them I cannot speak, but how
truly they are noted, I can. So the Sextile is a Critical Aspect, I see, as
well, though not perhaps as much, as the Quartile. And what should hinder us to
assert an Ancient Truth, and so witnessed by the Learned Physicians, who tell
us, that in Critical Days, Quartus est Index Septimi. Now, as the Seventh day
is the One, so the Fourth Day is the other, even our very Sextile. I know there
are other Irritations of Aches and Pains in our querulous Bodies, besides these
Lunar Aspects, viz. the Rises and Obits, etc. of the Planets so posited,
co-incident with these Aspects, which I am not certain the Physician will
allow, though they exert their smart Influence at a minute; howbeit, if they
like not to admit of that, I am bound, nevertheless, to witness to the Truth
which they deliver.

28. We close up this Chapter with an Answer to Gassendus, who, though he dared
not deny an Efficacy to the Sun and Moon, considered as Luminaries, yea, though
he acknowledged it rational to believe that their Efficacy is advanced or
abated, according to the increase or decrease of their Light; yet he has no
kindness for these Luminaries so united and confederated by Aspect; for says
he, why should not the same be said of? who we know, now by the Telescope, runs
through the Series of the same Phasis as the does,? For answer, I could tell
him it is enough for a Mortal Astrologer, if he make use of all that is visible;
I say all that is presented by the Natural, though non-arm'd Eye. The
Spectators of the Heavens are rightly entertained by what appears on the
Theater, without prying into the attiring Room. No man speaks against a curious
inquisitor into Nature by Telescope or Microscope; I applaud the invention, but
there may be ill use made of it; when we search after hidden, in the neglect of
Obvious Truths. Secondly, though I could ask, whether Gassendus has calculated
these Aspects, and found them void or unactive; or deciphered them only for us,
that we might spend our Verdict. (Besides, that, the Quadrates of are
considered under another Name, viz. when she is enlongated from the Sun; by the
same token that she contributes to Warmth.) Yet where is the Angle we speak of?
Alas! Her furthest Elongation never sets her upon the Meridian, while the Sun
is on the Horizon. A Semisextile is her utmost Aspect as to us. When descends
as low as the in Orb as vast as the or Orb; then Gassendus shall see what we
will say: till then, the Influence of her Phasis is not so considerable, but
what a just Science may overlook, as Anatomy does a Capillary Vein or Glandule,
which is not necessary in the subsistence of the Body, and therefore may be
spared its consideration.

29. He tells us more, that if the has Influence upon the Earth, so may the
Earth on the. Will it not then be time to consider that, when we remove into
that Colony? No man pretends to prognosticate the State of the Air for the Man
in the; be the never so habitable, it is less than the Earth, and so it is
fitting the Earth should be considered before it. The plain enquiry with us,
is, whether the Fire warms the Hands? Now, to perplex this Question by a more
curious Problem, whether Fire works on Fire, is a new way of Philosophy. Nor
can I justly infer that Fire was not made for that use, because perhaps it was
made for some other Service in Nature. If the Earth has Influence on the, how
much more the on the Earth? If it has no Influence on the, it makes not
against us. For the Rain which makes the Meadows green, and the Cornfieldsd
fruitful, makes not the Wilderness fruitful, nor does it sweeten the Waters of
the Sea.

30. This rub being out of the way, it may not be amiss to remind us, that
great Enquirers bear Testimony, in other terms, to this Aspect. For where is it
that I read, that the Fifth Day of the, after long observation, is feared by
Mariners, for stormy. Verulam hist. of Wind, art. 32. par. 17. So says He. The
Fourth rising of the ibid. Now one, if not both these are the Sextile Aspect.
And if what I pretend of the Later Sextile, holds its own, then the Seamen may
observe together with the Fourth and the Fifth, the twenty fifth day of the 's
age, especially those who are resolved to learn no further. Better is it to
observe the alone, than to abandon all Astrology. Who knows, but the small,
touched at before by Linscoten and Drake, may belong to this Aspect more
properly rather than to the Change?

CHAP. XVIII. Comparison of Lunar Aspects.
1. The Synoptical Table of the Lunar Aspects compared. 3. The greater warmth
of the Later apparently infer a Lunar Warmth. 4. More Frosty days in the Former
than the Later. 5. So more morning Frosts on the same ground. 6. Astrology
demonstrates. 7, 8. New Moon brings more hot days than the Full. So the Second
Quadrate and Sextile; a probable reason why the Trine does not the like. The
Later Sextile brings more hot days than all. 9. Difficulty and Charge in
perpetual observation of Trajections. Second Sextile brisk as any. Aspects seem
not wholly divested of Influence, though under Hatches. 10. For Lightning, etc.
Second Trine is a busling Aspect. The Sextiles favor Corruscations. 11.
Lightning may sometimes flash in greater or lesser Arches of the Sky,
according to the different extent of the Lunar Aspect. 12. Aetna not unjustly
imagined in the Lunar Globe. 13. Full and most stormy. 14. and shifters of
Wind. 15. The Changes shift not Wind so often as the Full or First Quadrate. 16.
For Rains, and excesses of Rain The less Aspects exceed New and Full, the prior
Sextile almost doubles the number. 17. The Change brings the least Snow, the
Full most Hail. First Square and last Trine bring more Snow than the Change.
18. Rainbows made by the Sun not without Assistants. 19. Former Square and
Trine conduce to a limpid Horizon. 20. Fogs rarer at the Full than Change. The
Trines have the Fewest Instances. more inclining to Fog than the Sun. 21.
Gloomy days oftsn misty. 22. Fila, Gossamere defined. 23, 24. New favors
South-West Winds, the Full much more. 25. All the Aspects incline to the
Western or Southern Winds. 26. A Rule for a Mariner who expects an East Wind.
1. WE could not have been so diligent in declaring the Power of the Lunar
Aspects, but that we saw some necessity of a new closing Chapter, to discover
some other considerables belonging to the premises, which we presumed would
arise from the further comparison of the Aspects subjoyned in an Universal
Table, or where all the Aspects march in a Rank even and just with their
Influence, that they may mutually justify one the other.

2. Influxuum Lunarium quoad Aspectus singulos quotquot integro haud ita pridem
Septennio observati fuere Tabella Synoptica.

1. 2. 1. 2. 1. 2. Frosty D. 16 26 34 27 26 16 28 19 Frosty, M. Ev. 37 27 31 26
29 27 30 26 Hot D. 28 11 13 24 25 16 20 36 Hot N. 8 5 8 5 5 3 5 5 Trajections.
19 4 12 20 5 6 17 21 Lightnings. 0 0 1 2 1 0 5 5 Thunder and L. 2 4 4 4 5 7 3 6
Stormy Winds. 37 69 34 43 44 31 33 35 Winds varying 3 5 3 3 2 5 1 1 Winds
chang. 29 55 71 53 43 43 32 41 Rain. 109 103 143 132 111 162 149 144 Rain
violent. 28 47 47 42 48 52 60 27 Snow. 5 14 16 12 12 15 13 10 Hail. 5 14 16 12
12 15 13 10 Inis. 1 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 Halo. 0 3 4 0 5 6 3 6 Grosser Fog. 38 23 31
29 17 26 21 38 Winds East. 45 53 56 35 42 44 50 41 West. 44 44 56 42 31 49 31
45 North. 40 33 36 41 28 27 41 44 South. 18 38 22 20 35 21 21 31 N. E. 30 29 42
37 34 34 38 42 N. W. 31 26 24 40 21 27 20 18 S. E. 16 15 7 17 20 26 18 14 S. W.
58 80 73 103 90 69 91 51

3. To begin with Frosty days, a Title which we cannot well miscount. The New,
you see, gives 16 Votes, the Full 26. And there is an excess: The Full then, as
we have said, is colder than the New, (by Day, viz.) and we have ventured at
the Reason. But now, in the Later there is no such matter, no excess of Frosty
days, but the contrary, as the Tale shows. Then the Later, I say, are warmer
then their Mates. Wherefore? But because the rises before the Sun in the Later,
etc. Therefore there is apparent Warmth in the, which diminishes the Matutine
Frosts while it shines, and has not so much Power before it is risen. Which if
we have said it before in part, deserves now in full to be asserted again,
because it convinces those Learned, who pass for the more Learned by denying
such an evident Truth.

4 But why the Full is colder than the New, we have answered already; adding
withal, that the same Reason holds in part here for, the is late before she
rises; always remembering we speak of the day time only, when the more or less,
as at the Full absolutely, hides her Head.

5. Here, if it be objected, that the at Full shows her self by Night, though
not by day, the Objection is Seasonable; for it puts us in mind of what we have
determined in the case, viz. that she is warmer to us in Plenilunar Nights,
than Days. And this Decision of ours appears to be no quick or subtle Evasion
but a Lightsome manifest Truth. In witness hereof, the Frosty mornings appear
Fewer, even although the entire Frosty days have appeared more. Consequently,
on the same ground it holds here also in the other Aspects (though the Frosty
Mornings be not always of so certain a Cognizance, as the entire days) that the
Later bring not more, yea Fewer Mornings so qualified, than their Chiefs choose
to bring, I mean the First.

6. Thus we go on with the same certainty almost in Natural Demonstration, as
is found in Lines and Numbers, and therefore Astrology is Some Body, so far at
least, as she has acquaintance with the Sun and, and their Mutual Aspects.

7. Pass we now to consider the Hot Days, where, as we have said before, we are
less liable to falter in our Animadversions. View, I pray, the Number: The New
brings more such Days than the Plenilunium; the Reason is plain, the is up
(invisible, though she be) she is in consult with the Sun on the Day of her
Change, and makes a shift to own and maintain the Heat, notwithstanding her
dark side, as has bin shown before.

8. For the Rest then, the Second Square brings more hot days than the First;
the Second Sextile also, 36. to 20. We are ashamed so often to repeat the
Cause, viz. the preventing the Sun, and rising before, which in the former and
holds not, where the follows. But then, here we meet with an unlucky objection,
for that our Second brings Fewer hot Days than the First; we must look for some
R^bs in pursuit of Natural Knowledge, but by good hap this is none. For if we
recollect that the Denomination of many a hot day, arises chiefly from the time
about Noon to the Hour between 3 and 4 and withal consider that the in her
Later appears not, but is descended and gone in large speaking, almost two
Hours before Noon, we will easily grant that the Qualification of the day for
Heat must needs be at a loss, where the Cause of the Qualification has been so
long withdrawn. In the Square it is otherwise, the is but upon the Horizon, and
so she gradually sinks lower and lower, yet for a considerable space does she
maintain Warmth, in the same proportion as we see them maintain some Light
after their descent, while the Sun is posited about the Meridian, so the
Critical places agree punctually to that time; whence the Denomination begins.
But in the Later the Sun has lost his Mistress the even at 9 in the Morning;
so she is disappearing before he himself has mounted his Meridian: wherefore
this not obscurely make for us, who impute the difference of Heat in the Later
Aspects, to the difference of the Apparition of the, under one, more than the
other: wherein, that we feign nothing, let the Later Sextile bear us Witness,
who brings more hot days than all of them only on this account, that she keeps
near, as within call, to the Sun, and ^ets not till the Sun himself declines in
his strength, even in the cool of the day. This Sextile shows us 36 warm days
for her Brother Sextiles 20. I see other doubts perhaps desire admittance, as
why the First Sextile should not be parile to the Later, etc. But, besides that
this may be answered by what has bin formerly noted, concerning the East and
West Angles, I think it not prudence, having so far to go, to wait on every
puny Scruple.

9. The Hot Nights we meddle not with, they are but Rarities, and have their
dependances more material than on the Two Luminaries. The Trajections we speak
not to, because we cannot Imagine they should be duly and constantly observed;
No one man can do it; It requires the attendance of a Society, and an
Observatory maintained for that, and the like Notices. Only it is strange the
Second should be so brisk to equal the and the 's Trajections being 19. under
the. 20 under the Later. and 21 under the. This we gain by it; It proves the
Aspects are not wholly divested of Influence when under the Horizon, as the
second must needs be with both its terms, when nocturnal Trajections are
conspicuous. Only we may note that the Number 4. under the Full speaks but low,
because the Plenilunar. Luster envies us their more frequent notice. In the
mean time those few must be looked upon as Eruptions of Flame greater than
ordinary, who discover themselves even while the Air is possessed of so bright
a presence; and in the aestival season, besure, speak a glowing constitution.

20. Immediate to this we may view the Coruscations and Thunders under several
Titles, because many times they are found separate. These may be rather
considered, in that their Tale must be just and certain. And Lo! the New Moon
brings but two. The Full, Four. The Quadrates 4. with one or two Mute
Coruscations. The Later brings 7. The Later Sextile 6. So the Later is
considerable, and we have seen it is a busling Aspect, in Thunders as well as
Storms of Wind. Howbeit, the Sextiles have a great kindness for Flashing
without noise; so that it may be we did well to consider Lightnings or
Coruscations with Thunder, and without, apart by themselves. Verily the Later
Sextile which brought 6 Thunders (which Sum is as high as any bating one unite)
is observed to have brought over and above 5 Lightnings. And the first Sextile,
how Low soever in its Thunders; has brought notwitstanding 7 Instances of
Flashes. Shall we supersede the Enquiry into the Reasons for hasts sake: Only
take notice of a semblable Parallel between Lightnings here, and Trajections
before under the Sextile, the Later Sextile exceeding all the rest, here, as
there; if we can make out a probable reason of the One, it may hold in the
Other. And we would venture, but that the First Sextile comes in with VII.
Lightnings, and so makes a shift to equal the Later. Some inclination, no
question, it bears to it, and let the Curious mark, whether or no Lightning
has not its several Arks, and Segments of a Circle, according to the
Diversities of the Aspects? It Is more than probable a Sextile may flash through
two Signs; A to the Midheaven; a beyond it; an Opposition it may be but one
Sign, a Semisextile Aspect being reduced thereto. This is commended to future
Observation: remembering that I speak of the Signs as they run oblique in the
Zodiaque, not of the Equinoctial Dodecatemories. The Planets indeed, in the
Sextile Aspect lie so near one to the other, that if any cause shall set it
self upon making Celestial Fireworks, the Two Planets will be very apt to
catch, and to keep them alive throughout its allotted interval of spa^ or time.

11. Let it be noted also that this may agree to the Sextiles in Genere not
Lunar only, though we must assert the also to have an Aetna in her, according
to the New Selenography, or a force for Lightning; provided that no man
construes this to obscure the Powers of the greater Celestial Bodies.

12. Stormy Winds we have spoke to before, the Full here bears away the Bell:
When the other Hover about the Number of 40. the alarmes two Elements of the
Air and Sea about 60 times, and possibly more: Every gust we have not reckoned,
nor every brisk gale, nor every Windy Constitution, when as if we could have
hearkened out, many of those days in the Seamans Journal (I speak of our
British Seas only) might have bin noted for Rough and Rugged: the Cause is not
intricate, and has bin touched already, remembering that the Full bears
precedence as to frequency of Storms; For as to Fury, the Trine we have said,
seems to go beyond it.

13. Now for Winds variously Shifting and Frisking, we have cried up the Later.
But the Table tells us the Full holds its own there also; so be it then, if the
equal it, she is content.

14. To the more settled Change of the Wind, we have brought in our Quota under
every Aspect, the Wind may Change we know, every Hour, but with a Specialty
upon the Hour of the Suns leaving us. -- Ventus cum Sole reliquit, says the
Poet; and accordingly in our Diaries the Evening-Hour most usually presents you
with such an alteration. It Is to be imputed to the Aspect, according as it
appears in the Hemisphere, or Disappears; and that again as it is whole and
entire, or as intercepted by the Horizon about its Ascent or Descent. And this
is worthily remarkable therefore in the First Square, which changes the Wind
about 70 times, when the Rest show such Feats not much above 50, 40, or 30. For
that Winds come from the Stars, Oh it is a plain case in all their Periodical
Revolutions, as the Royal Philosopher tells us, Eccles. Cap. 1. Yea, and in all
its variations: It deserves the attention of the young Philosopher, how apt the
Wind is to change, Morning, Noon, Even, Midnight, under our Quadrate which
measures out the Heaven into those equal parts, whereby the One Planet follows
the Other with a punctual Uniformity, as to the Transits by the Horizontal Line
and the Meridian. And this rather in the First, than the Later Quadrate, for
some such like Reason, in proportion, as we have rendered before, of some
difference in the Later from the Former. To clear this, you shall find, as the
Table informs, that the admits the fewest Changes of the Winds, because there
is no difference of the Luminaries concerned, who rise together, set together,
culminate together; so that if she can hold her own after the Hour of their
joint descent or disappearing, she keeps the Wind at her point for that entire
Natural day; whereas in the Quadrate, and the rest of the Aspects
proportionately, if the One be up, the other is down, If one be in the South,
the other is in the West or East; which holds in the Opposition also, where
manifestly One of the Opposites are in the East, while his Opponent is in the
West; One is in the South, the other is in the North, which makes the Full
change her Winds as often as any, but our fore-noted Former Quartile.

15. It will be time now to speak of Rain and its excesses, which we have not
without Reason considered apart. The New and the Full, we have said carry the
Name; but here you see all the lesser noted Aspects exceed them Both; The two
Squares, both the Sextiles, and at last the Later. For those yield 130. and
140. the Later 160. speaking of round Numbers, when the and yield but 100. It Is
so in Excesses of Rain also, e(...)ll'd for the most part, if not outdone. The
New and one of the Sextiles bring the rarest Instances for violent Rain; the
Full and the other Aspects add twenty Instances, and the First Sextile is found
with double the number of the New, which is much, if duly considered. The
Consideration of Rain, Morning, Noon, and Even, etc. We reserve to the proper
Chapter of the Horizon and Meridian. Howbeit, we desire this may keep their
portion in the Table, while their turn comes. The like we say of other Hours,
with some curiosity observed by us in all the Tables, though all you see had
not leave to be produced.

16. For Snow, what the New brings above 5. you see is doubled, or trebled by
all the rest. Two Aspects there be, which are most frequent: of the Squares,
the First; Of the Trines, the Last. The New brings but 5. while they bring 15.
or 16. I believe we may find, nay we have hinted some Reason: Or, is it
nauseous to repeat? I am content to ease both my self and Reader. -- Hail
brings yet the smaller sum, of which the Highest is but VIII. and belongs to
the Full.

17. Rainbows complain of a defective Observation; I do acknowledge the
received Doctrine, which says they are the Sun's Embroidery on a Rorid Cloud;
but we shall find that there is some Collateral Assistance from the and others,
many times, to make them more Florid, and to draw them in a greater Arch; As we
met with one here, which appeared more than Semicircular.

18. For Halo's, it is pretty to observe that the 's have the greatest vogue;
That the Later Quadrate and Sextile accuse us for want of Zeal, or early
rising: But we have a good Excuse, why none are noted under the New, because,
Nemo tenetur ad impossible.

19. The Misty Sums we have not omitted, but yet we shall not reach to them
here; because the City where those observations grew, is seldom absolutely
free; what with vapid Exhalations from the River, and the Smother of the Fuel,
besides the general Constitution of our Northerly Island; so that in all this
time I have remarked not above 14 days, wherein the Horizon was clear and
Limpid, of which VIII. are found under the former and.

20. The grosser Fog, therefore, only considered, the New claims her
Birthright, she brings most, viz. 38. Only the Later brings as often. Now do I
fancy I could offer a Reason, why more Fog on the New, than at the Full, while
the Sun and are both at one Post, rather than when they are at two. For it is
with Mist as with Darkness, it is triumphant at Night, all the Hemisphere is
its own, and it Flows in from all parts of the Sphere, the East and North
especially; but the Full is as a Sentinel set in the other Hemisphere, by which
Aspect the Mist is curbed at Even, and by its Meridian height at Midnight, the
and in being remote Southerly, in Winter time, but in the in her Septentrional
approaches, visits the Northern Cardo, and lays an interdict upon Mists, (as
before in Frosts) that they presume not too much in her presence. This I take
to be a Rule, arising from the and compared, That a Planet by how much it is
remote from its Consort, the more is he adverse to Mist or Fog; whereas the
Sextile, which is not so remote, may be suspected a great Trader in Mist; for
we see One of them (the Later) brings as many Items as the. For who knows but
if the Hour were curiously observed when the Mists fell, the Mists under the
Quadrates and Trines might mostly happen within the Sextile Observation? the
Sextile Aspect bordering upon each. Surely the Trines, both First and Last,
bring the fewest Instances, because more remote, and more approaching to the
Opposition. And before we stir from hence, I flatter my self, that I can
demonstrate a likely Property of the, from the consideration of the Excess in
the Later, Later; and it may be not impossible, the Later Quartile also. For
who can warrant a Table of this Nature not guilty of the least Omission? Thus
then, if the Aspects Lunar where the Sun rises first, bring the fewer Fogs,
while Those where the gets up first, bring them more frequently; then the is
more inclinable to Fog than the Sun; and the Truth is, the Conclusion speaks
its own probability without any premises.

21. Mists ought the rather to be observed, because he who can give account
thereof, may give an account also of dark and gloomy days, which commonly are
Misty, unless when a full-swoln martial menacing Cloud makes the Heaven to
mourn: He may give an account also of a Red-angry Sun, Sol Rutilus, in Kepler,
which others call Sanguineous, unless they mean some more terrifying Spectacle.

22. Next the rarer Phoenomena of the Fila, the Thrids like Cobwebs found on
the Hedges and Herbs of the Ground, together with whiter Strings of seeming
Lawn, that fly so leisurely in the Autumnal Air; Gossamere, I remember they
call it; which is nothing else but the viscous misty vapor, furled up by the
warm alteration of the Air, while the mist is removing, or most part withdrawn.
I have a few remarks by me of a Fog appearing on the Ground like Water, of
which, if occasion shall be elsewhere.

23. There remains now little else to trouble the Reader with, except the
account of the Winds. Consult your Table, you will find that the Change of the
brings East, West, North Winds, almost indifferently, viz. as 45. 44. 40
Accordingly, N E. and N W. winds indifferently, as 30, 31. The South, and
South-East, according to the best of my observation, more rare, as 18. 16. but
most of all toward the South-West point, viz. 58. and let this be remembered as
a supply to the Character, that for the most part it favors the South-West.

24. The Full is not indifferent to East Wind, or North, or South, but finds
rather for East than West, much rather than for North, and because she brings
many more Southerly Winds then her, yet the South-West, I believe, is her
Favorite also, more South Winds under the Full, then at the Change.

25. Here we must not be infinite, nor must we repeat what I have said before,
only he who shall sum up the West, North-West, and South-West Winds, will find
that every Aspect bears toward the Westerly and South-west. What then? Do no
Aspects incline at all to the Eastern point? I have reason to believe the
affirmative, as has bin said before; as also for the Winds under the Right
Sphere, which are seldom not Easterly. And seeing now it is confessed by all our
Voyages, that the Sun on the North-side of the Equator modifies the cooler
gales into a North-East Wind, as on the contrary, on the South Side, to the
South-East; I have reason to believe that in our Northern Climes no Aspect,
Lunar, or other, inclines to Northerly Winds, because no Planet comes so high
as to get Northward of us, how great soever may be their Boreal Latitude,
saving to the Aspects of their privilege for a Northern gust; of which Mystery
in its place. Howbeit, that some of those Aspects before us incline to Eastern
Blasts, appears from the Table, where almost All the Aspects bring as much, or
more of the East point, than of the West, except perhaps the second and, yea,
and of the North-East point, in respect of the North-West, and that in notable
disparity, unless the Second, The difference but of three may not be
considerable.

26. Can I give no Rule for an East Wind to an Expectant Mariner? No other at
present but this upon the 's account; he must regard the First. the Last. and
the Second. If this will not do, the will not help him.

More I could say, and more may a Sagacious Reader fish out from the Table, or
the like of his own composing, which may be done from a more exact or more
extensive Diary. At present I bid all the Lunar Aspects Good Night.

LIB. II.
CHAP. I. Conjunction of Sol and Mercury..
1. The Aspects Direct and Retrograde. 2. Whether the Phoenomenon of
Retrocession be real. 3. The Earth in the Mosaic Systeme. 4. The Interest of
the Creation, a Planet Retrogade. The Copernican Solutions: the Fallacy of
Sense. 5. Pretense of the Paralax. No proportion between the Earths Orbit and
the Firmament. 6. Appeal to observation. 7, 8. Retrograde Course not absurd in
Nature. 9. May be performed by magnetisme. 10. Whether the Celestial Motions be
absolutely incredible? 11. The Earths Motion, as improbable. 12. The Sun must
move. 13. Light moves in a Physical Instant. 14. The Prognostic principle,
firm. 15. Mercuries motion settled by Kepler. 16. little, yet powerful. 17.
Powerful, though a Reflection. 18. Not a naked Reflection. 19. Not the less
powerful, though seldom visible. 20. The Aspects effects. Wind, Rain, Heat. The
Ancients introduced P^olemy 21. Virg. Seneca, etc. being Husbands and
Philosophers. 22. The Arabians. 23. The Moderns. 24. Assertion of 's influence
vindicates Astrology. 25. Even Mercurio-Lunar Aspects are of great Power. 26.
Influence on Lightning, etc. 27. not of an Amphibious Nature. 28. The Table.
29. Influence abridged in its proper Synopsis. 30, 31, 32. Demonstrated thence
through all Constitutions. 33. Our Astrology is noble Philosophy. 34. The
retrograde Aspect influential. 35. How and bring more Winds and Rain than the
and. 36. more windy than rainy with the Ancients. 37, 38. Nautical Observations
for the Influence of and on winds. 39, 40. Objection: answered. 41. All the
Chaldee Philosophy not superstition. 42. Proportion of the success of the
Aspect as to Weather. 43. The retrograde Aspect brisker than the rest, and
nearer to Infallible. 45. The Reason. 46. 's impression greater than the Lunar,
evinced from the Hail. 47, 48. From Thunders. 49. A Table of Thundering
Conjunctions from 52. to 83. 50. From Keplers Diary. 51. is influential at
several distances. 55, etc. has some influence on Earthquakes. 56. A List of
Mercurial Earthquakes. 57. Platic Conjunction of and. 58. The vulgar Objections
answered the first time. 61. It is not indifferent where is placed. 62. The
Aspects influence on Fiery Meteors. 65. Prodigious Hail, fiery Hailstones. 66.
Planetary Congresses conduce to Comets. 69, 70. Friendly collatian with the
Dissenter. 71. Gassendus treated at large. 76. The Power of Aspect from
subterranean evidence. 78. The same day Twelve month is not the same day
Astrologically. 79. Days may be produced which Rain 8 Days in 9. 81. Discourse
with those who object the contrary to the Prognostic to succeed as often as the
Prognostic its self. 82. Prediction falls under natural Knowledge, 83. Triumph
over vulgar Prognostics, not so generous.
1. SO, with much ado, we take our leave of the, the next that rises in our
Eye, is Mercury: It Is with the. An Aspect we meet with (the Lunar excepted)
most frequent; presenting it self afresh every two Months, or thereabouts. Now
this Planet, as all others, except the Luminaries, being found sometimes
Retrograde, as well as Direct, meets the, in either course alternately, though
with some difference; First, in Situation, being in his direct course found to
be higher than the Sun, and Lower in the Retrograde: Next, which is more
considerable with us, the difference of duration or space of time; for in the
Retrograde the Aspect holds not above 3 days, in the direct, sometimes five or
six Days (notwithstanding in the subsequent Diary I never recount above 4 days,
to the no small disadvantage of the Aspect) because in the Former, they journey
both like good Companions, the same way; in the Later they fly off of the
sudden, as they must needs, who go contrary ways.

2. Whether this Retrocession of and the rest, be Real, or Apparent only, we
know it is the great Question between the two Systems; and we are aware how
scandalous it is to leave the Darling Notion, and adhere to the Tychonick,
since all the great Neotericks have espoused the Copernican: In Policy also for
my Hypothesis sake, that it might find more easy admission in the World (for
no man will receive Truth it self, unless he be sweetly disposed thereto) I
might say, it is all a case whether the Phoenomenon be so or not.

3. Thus far I can go, I have reason to believe the Planetary Motions to be
Heliocentrical, Galileo has made it out: but I heartily beg Pardon, I have no
cogent reason to believe that the Earth is a Planet, moved in the Expansion of
Heaven, either with Diurnal or Annual Motion, to solve the Appearantes. But, (I
speak to those who have some kindness for it) I know not why the Mosaic Systeme
should be renounced. I agree, that Scripture may express it self according to
common apprehension: but in our case it is more than so, her Expressions seem
founded on a Primaeval Tradition; which from Adam to Noah, from Noah to the
Jewish Nation (as his VII. precepts also did) may resolve ultimately into
Divine Revelation, the voice of Him who best knows the Universe, because he
made it; Known was it of old, that the Globe of the Earth (a great Truth) is
Round, and that it hangs on nothing, fixed on its own Center. Nor does the
Scripture speak here, Secundum captum vulgi. And what says the Leading Book of
the World, (that is) the History? it says that at the beginning of Gods own
System, the Earth as the Waters hung in vacuo, for Darkness, Privation and
nothing else did encompass it, till He was pleased to say Light, which being
created for distinction of the Day and Night, made it move from the Opposite
Hemisphere (where it was first created) to the upper Hemisphere of the Eastern
Countries, so that Even and Morn made out the day; the Light was not first
created, and then the Earth to move toward it, but contrarily, He made the
Earth first, and the Light to wheel about, so the Earth was the Center of that
Orb of Light. If the Sun had bin made the first day, all things had went
Mathematically; the Gentre first, then the Gircumference. Or if this New Planet
the Earth had been made the fourth day, and bin placed in the Expansion with
its fellows, who would not have reckoned the Earth among the Planets? But the
Expansium, in whose utmost Lofts the Planets are placed, it is manifest, begins
at the Earth (the Terraquaeous Globe) thence dividing and parting those
inferior. Waters from the Superior, setting them at their due distance, the
Terms of which distance are of one side the Earth, and those Waters on the
other side the Firmament. Now, if this Expansion be uniform, and alike in all
Hemispheres, I see not but that the Earth must hand in the Middle of the
Firmament.

4. But whether this Explanation hold or no, I affirm it is the Interest of the
Creation, that the Planetary Motions should be as direct, so Retrograde,
Direct, for the ordinary Uniform dispensation of the year, and its Seasons,
equally distributing to all their due Signature and Temper: But Seasons we
know, do sometimes seem short, and at other times are prolonged. Winter holds
longer one Year than another, and Heat renews it self at the Latter end of
Summer, in August (suppose) or September. What is the matter? One Reason is,
Planets by Retrocessions, play their Lessons over again, they walk such an Arch
of Heaven, a second and a third time, which in a direct course they measure but
once. Then the Station of a Planet is a great occurrence, and causes Extremity
of Weather; you cannot dip into a Diary but so you will find it, the Effect is
apparent. The Cause must be real: Nay, says the Hypothesis, not real in its
self, but real to us it may be, as the Suns Eclipse: Or, to come nearer, his
rising or setting: For do we not see, say they, that when we part from shore,
the Bankside, and all the Buildings seem to recede from us: yea, when in a
clear Night we ferry over the River, do not the and Stars fly apace from us?
even so upon the Motion Annual of the Earth, the Planets seem to recede, when
as, indeed, they continue a regular undisturbed Course. But this does not yet
clear off the Objection; for the Shore and the Buildings, and the and the
Stars, though they seemingly fly amain, yet withal among themselves they are
found to keep their Station and due distance one from another: In the Planetary
retrocession it is otherwise, for they alter their Places in their Orbs, and
under the Constellations to which they are subject. When I put off from
Pauls-Wharfe, the Houses recede and fly from me, but at no hand change their
Station among themselves, their Ground or Distance: The Houses on the Wharfe
run not for have, behind Paul's Steeple, or come one Inch the nearer, then they
were: Nor do the and Stars, however hasting away, for any motion of mine alter
their respective distance, among themselves whatsoever they do in order to me.
So the Planet, when in his direct course he passed the Hyades, as in the Month
of October. An. 1677. By his Retrograde pace He got engaged in the midst of them
again, Jan. 1678. Yea, in August 1676. he was past the Pleiades also, in the
Month following: In September, October, November, he returned and passed them a
third time; and 'twas curious to observe how he inched along in the Retreat of
his, where his least motion, in other places not so sensible, was here more
distinct and conspicuous, being adjusted by such little Measures, viz. the
Petit distances of the Stellulae, of the Pleiades. This being a noble Instance,
may suffice.

5. To this it is answered, that the Parallax of the Planet, and the difference
of Prospect makes this seeming alteration, the Planets hanging much lower than
the Firmament, so that the Earth approaching toward the Planet, casts the
Sight of its Inhabitannt to one point forward, and when it has passed the
same, it casts to a contrary point. Yea but you see therefore I Instance in,
who, they say, has little or no Parallax, so exalted is he, and so near the
Firmament. Next, if there be any such Parallax in, then there would be found
such difference of Motion even among the Pixed, since They also be in different
Orbs, or Heights; on which account some shifting of place would, even there, be
discerned. They answer, that there may be made some such observation in time,
perhaps. Kepl. Epit. Astron: So a 1000 years hence we shall perhaps, see
somewhat or nothing; for a 1000 years backward there has been no such thing.
Others deny any proportion between the Earth, nay between the Orb of the Earth,
(a swinging Circle) and the Fixed; No proportion? How comes it to pass then in
measuring the Universe, Miles 60. or 70. answer to a degree? A degree, and that
in the Firmament, when the Stars hide themselves Northwards, or ward, if we
walk from either side. How comes it to pass that the Day increases, unless a
Degree in the Earth's Annual Motion answer to somewhat considerable in the
Firmament?

6. It is affirmed that the Planets, while seeming Retrograde, do keep on their
direct course: let experiment be made by some Observator (within the Tropicks
it must be) where the Planets to such and such portions of the Terraquaeous
Globe, do sometime become Vertical, at what time all Parallax ceases; whether
any of the Superiors rtreating to any notable Fixed Star, be not to be found
there where Tycho states him, rather than where the Hypothesis pretends;
whether it be not found near the Fixed Star, or Constellation, as really when
it receded thither, as when it first met it in its direct motion. This
Astrologers are sure of, that the same Effects of Heat and Rain, etc. are found
in the Retreat, as in the March.

7. And why should a Retrograde course be so absurd in Nature? To avoid which,
we must Fix the Sun, and Bowl the Earth about. Do we make the Planets thereby
Animate, or moved by Intelligences? Or is it indecorum, that such irregular
Motions should be found in Caelestial Orbs? Alas! The and, the Luminaries
themselves, though they retreat not, yet they have their Anomalys, their
Apogaee and Perigaee, Deviations, Latitude, far from being Homocentrical, as
possible the Infancy of the World, with Fracastorius since might Imagine. We
see afterward they found out Eccentriques, and when that would not do, added
Epycycles, and ventured the Decorum, which yet they were apt enough, as it
were, religiously to establish, for the Honor, as they thought, or the
Divinity of the Caelestial Bodies.

8. But 2 ly. What is the Return of the Luminaries from the Tropiques, but a
kind of Retrocession: From the Hyemal to the Aestival Tropic, they proceed
direct; from the Aestival to the Hyemal they retreat, and go back from whence
they came: All the difference is, they came up on One side, and go down on the
Other side of the Hedge (the Colure.) Nor must it be said, it is no
retrocession, but a progressive Motion from the North-West, to the South-East,
about its proper Center: The Answer will fit, if the Planetary Motion were
simple, measured by that oblique Circle only; but when it is a compound Motion,
not in a simple Circumference, but in a Spiral Line, fixed to no material Orb,
but performed in a free Ether; how comes it to pass that they know their
utmost Latitudes severally, the Sun not daring to venture so far as the does,
or sometimes. Galileo justly wonders at Motion Circular; what then is
Elliptical Motion? What is Motion with variety of Latitude? What is Retrograde?
It Is all but Wonder, and he who studies Nature, meets with nothing more
ordinary.

9. In my poor Judgment this Retrogradation gives its own account; for it
happens at such determinate times, viz. the Opposition of the Planet to the
Sun, which even in and is true; for the utmost distance is the quasi
Opposition, So that now it is manifest the is the Cause; no fear of making the
Planets Animate. For who, almost, grants not that there are Celestial
Magnetisms, as well as Terrestrial; that the Planets are Magnetical Bodies
touched by the Sun, (Sure it may be so explained) and thereupon move faster
when in with him, direct: So upon the they may, for all I know, be repelled for
a little space, seeing it is no News in a Magnet, though Wonderful it is, that
One Pole attracts, what the other repelleth.

10. But what shall we do, if the Motion we assign is incredible, the Sun must
move in our Opinion 300 Miles, in the time almost that our Pulse beats, and the
fixed Stars above so many thousand, which is abominable. R. For the fixed Stars,
I have reason to believe that they which bring them nearest to us, take the
rightest measures. And Cartesius was so wise as to suspect it; Howbeit, the
least distance assignable is stupendous, but who stands not amazed at the
Contemplation of the Universe? The Umbrage of the incomprehensible Deity! Where
shall we allow Wonders, if we shall not allow them in the Heavens above, nay
even at our Feet? Go we to the Microscope, the least Sand in the Hourglass
must consist of thousands of Corpuscles less than it self; which you may
believe, if you can fancy it resolved into a Fume. How much Fume will Nature
require to make up such a Solid, though little, Substance? But in the Heavens,
there it is broad day, where the Vulgar can discern Wonder; and if they object,
that their Motion is incredible, is not their Bulk incredible, the Distance
incredible, every thing suitable? The Distance of the Firmament in the
Hypothesis, is almost infinite, neque pudet says Copernicus, nor are we
ashamed to say it. But is their any Circumference so great, where Nature has
placed a free Body, but she can teach it to describe the same in any time
given? Cannot God make his Works even? If Nature can create motion, it can
accelerate it in infinitum, as number may be augmented; and if circular motion
it self is a Miracle, as Galileo says right, let him enhance his Wonder in the
Velocity Actual or possible. Our Understandings are narrow as our Expressions;
we must enlarge them. We stand amazed at the multitude of Siphres, and yet we
believe the number of Archimedes his Arenarius. There are some things
incredible in Nature, Even after Sight we cease not our Wonder, we desire to
see them again. I never used the Microscope, but I admired, I grant, our Motion
therefore incredible, that is to say, mavelous; none of the Copernicans have
dared to say, it is absolutely false or impossible. God who has made Light to
move for thousands of Miles in an instant, by a straight Line, may make it move
a semblable space through a Circle, if the use of the World requires it.

11. The Earth it self, according to the System, moves 900 Miles in an Hour,
Kepler. Epit. part. 5. page 107. upon which account it must move 15 Miles in a
Minute, and a quarter of a Mile in a Second, in the twinkling of an Eye. And is
not this incredible of the Earth, that her old Bones should move so fast,
considering the Heterogenereity of its Parts, and want of chohaesion. And this
is but the Diurnal Motion, for the Annual City goes a full Mile at that moment.

12. Add the very Idea of Moon, which, though never so natural, if swift,
consists in a hurry, a disquiet of all parts of the Body, tangible or
spirituous, from Center to Circumference. And therefore they tell us that our
Stars cannot move so fast, for fear of flying in pieces, but their Earth may
move in a trice, Diurnal and Annual, and not a Leaf tremble; though once or
twice a day it must give a shock too, say Some of them, a little stop to
reverberate the Sea, and salve the Tides of the Ocean. Well may they seign the
Earth is an Adamant or Magnet toward the Center, for its outward Gravelly
Crust was not made for Motion, with all its Coal ore and mineral, Lake and
River, and Spring in its Bowels; This we are all sure of, and as for those vast
Bodies above we are not sure, not in the it self, though we are willing to fancy
Water, yet sure no Gravel, etc. or the like, nay it is agreeable that they
should be more Simple Homogeneous, and of purer composure, according to their
Medium where they range, as the Ether is of purer, more refined Spirit than
the muddy Atmosphere. Imagine but the Plane of the Ecliptic, or Equinoctial
Real, and the Planet nearest the Center (be it what it will) to move but a
quarter of a Mile in a scrupleof time, and then there is necessity of Nature,
it must needs be that the Fixed and the Circumference must describe so
prodigious a Circle, and what hinders but that there may be as much consent
between the Fixed and the Planets, as if they were all engaged in a material
Circle? The Copernican Hypothesis is not unwilling to such a Fancy, as fa as
goes, and the Ptolemaic will not stand out.

13. As for the Suns particular, methinks it is made for Motion, it is
Sphaerical, it is Fire, it is Light, Fire and Light is Spirit, the Motion
inconceivable, witness Lightning so swift, as the Dr. says, that a man scarce
dare say he saw it. Nay, by their own confession, the Sun moves too, upon his
Axis- It Is impossible the Sun should rest. Pardon me if I say ordinary
illumination, and the incredible expansion of Light makes it out, rightly
considered, moving even in an Instant, not shaking the Air first, and so with
successive Undulation reaching the Organs, as in sound it is manifest, but
preventing all such slow paced Addresses, shoots its way through the Medium,
eluding, if not overcoming all the Resistances, Gartesius himself granting the
Light is seen in a Moment; which if it be done by impulse, as he would have it,
cannot be so sudden, as I think I could demonstrate; it must therefore be by
our monstrous, miraculous (for so it is) though Natural Emanation ( i. e.)
Local Motion.

14. All which notwithstanding, and what soever more may be said elsewhere, if
it proves to be Non-conclusive, we must need averr, that our principle of
Prognostic is unquestionable; howbeit, it maybe some will not reconcile it to
the New System, though other happyer Theorists can; and there may be several
unquestionable Truths, for which perhaps, we have not yet found their
Conciliator.

15. Other offenses cast in our way, are of less moment, seeming to make
against the Influence; as first, that he is one of the Least, and much cannot
be expected from a little. Neither is the motion of this Planet, as yet,
exactly determined: The motion it seems, being more intricate, and the
appearance of the Planet more seldom, at least in these more temperate Zones.
To this we may say, that among the many other things for which Astronomy is
indebted to the great Mathematician John Kepler, this is none of the least,
that he ventured to rectify the Motion of, setting it back two whole degrees;
the more to be prized, because the diligent Venetian Andrewos Argolus having
since undertaken also to correct the Prutenick account, though in a more
Southern Clime, wherein he had greater advantages, has not hit the Mark so
near as the happier German. For let me account this of some Weight, while
others use their Pleasure, that Keplers Calculation manifestly agrees with our
pretensions, as in some parts of Heaven is easily discerned; while that of
Argol's does not. In all my observation I do scarce remember that I could wish
our Planet a degree forwarder or more backward to answer for our Effects.
Kepler therefore when he fluctuates concerning his own Account, though not in
his Elongation from the; yet, as to the, not daring to affirm, but that he may
mistake 4 or 5 degrees in his Explicat. Fandament. p. 15. ante Ephem. 1617.
might have set his Heart at rest, in as much as I can assure him, that he was
never wide, a degree entire, but as happy as need to be; so that that
fluctuation of his, as it happened, proceeded not from his unaccurateness of
the Account, but from want of sight, sometimes, how to reconcile the State of
Heaven for that day; with that single Aspect; which, as we have pronounced all
the way, is vain and impossible: The contrary whereof, though he, (as we are
all found of our own Proposals) yet when he is put to it, that he might solve
the Correspondence of the Effect with the Planet, to alter the Calculation for
two days, he refused, with resolution. Nequit esse tantus Error calculi.

16. To the First then, that is but a little Planet, I answer; it may be so,
and yet be a great Body in it self. Compared with greater, the Earth is but a
small Body; and yet the Earth is a vast Body to all that Circumnavigate the
Globe, yea, or go to the Indies; yea, to all who travel but nearer home,
measuring step by step their Countries Length or Breadth, and so widen out our
thoughts to the Comprehension of the whole, by duly considering the
proportional part. 2. A little Body though it be, it may be a great Instrument;
if we go to the Dimension of the Planet, the 's influence is known to be great,
and yet the is certainly less than the Earth by much; the very shadow of the
Earth at a great distance from its first projection, bears a greater Diameter
than the Body of the, in all total Eclipses.

17. Yea, but is but a Reflection, only as the Telescope shows; it waxes and
wanes, is horned and gibbous as the it self: the like is said of, Venus! yea,
and some body else, we fear, unless they find Satellites to help him out.
However the will help us, and teach us that Reflections (for what is she else,
that has not one spill of Light of her own!) May be potent Influencers. Grant
the rest of the Planets to be as so many Moons, and we need not make Hue and
Cry for Foundation of Astrology.

18. But this will not content us; we challenge for a greater Influence than
that of. A will do more than a, and more evident. Lo ye now! We speak out;
because if we do not speakout, few will attend to what we say. Now, if so it
proves, what is wanting in Dimension, may be made up on other accounts; viz.
Vicinity to the, different Motion, the very Constitution and Fabric of the
Planet; for suppose by miracle, the Ocean should recede, like Jordan, and we
could walk in the depths of the vast Alveus dry-foot, should we not discover
more of the Make of the Earth, the Roots of the Mountains, and the strong
Barricado's of the Rocks, innumerous Cells for Minerals, and passage for
Communication of Waters? Ask but the Miners in Cornwall, or in the Dominion of
Germany; search with the Spaniard the Bowels of the Earth for Ore; go down so
low till you despair of returning, and tell us the News from the Center; must
we not in all reason think that a Planet is more than a Reflection from a Pewter
Dish? Of so vast a Circumference, and uniform, solid. No doubt in this sense
there is a World in the, and all the Caelestial Bodies, whose variety is hidden
by their distance, and concealed by their very Light.

19. These things, though as probabilities only, will help to solve another
Objection, and encourage me to say that the seldom appearance of, though a
Potent Planet, agrees very well with the Wisdom of the Creator, who thought it
not necessary that All his Instruments should be alike exposed to View: For
neither is the visible to the World; it is only ascertained to us by
Calculation; so the greater is the Admiration many times of the Effect, when
the Machine is in the dark. As to the Effects I even long to have produced them.

20. These Effects are, we say, Wind and Rain; or in case of a more calm and
dry Constitution, a notable and signal Warmth: By that very testimony showing
his Power and Promptitude toward the exciting of a turbulent State. And let no
wise man think the contrary, till he has observed one year round, and 6 or 7
at least of these Conjunctions; being aware of the disparagement, which
inevitably cleaves to all rash, though great Opinators, when their Sentiments
are dissonant to as great and obvious Truths. But stay, what are we? Seem we
not arrogant, and imply that none has said so before us? Let us sweeten our
way by premising something of Authority. Although Ptolemy and the Arabians are
not of so much repute, yet right may be done them. In the judgment of the
Weather, neither of them are so venturous as to pronounce for each particular
day; but enlarge their judgments to no less than a Lunar Hebdomade; the New,
the First Quarter, etc. At which critical times they raise a Scheme; and
pronounce from the Planetary Dominions therein curiously, observed, which
Curiosity; though we have had reason to discard, as being palpably made up of
Imaginary Requisites, or at least Alien to our purpose: Yet we have Reason to
lend some Ear to what is here and there confusedly delivered, as Effects of the
said Dominions; in as much as the Aspect is always an ingredient into that
Notion of Dominion. Ptolemy then is clear that in Dominion is apt to raise
winds, brisk and boisterous. (...). Lib. 2.

21. But those who were not such Artists, had got the Notion of the Planetary
Efficacy, as appears from Seneca, Virgil, both Philosophers, and I was going to
say Husbandmen, who had skill in the Weather, even without a Scheme; Virgil the
Senior instructs his Pupil to regard all the Planets, for so I gather, when he
mentions the two Extremes, Saturn and Mercury, that he comprehended all the
intermediate, and so Seneca understands him. Besure he did not exclude Mercury.

Quid tempestates Autumni and Sidera dicam,
Quae vigilanda Viris; vel cum ruit imbriferum ver.
Now what Aspects Planetary does he bid them watch and attend? Nothing but a
little Wind, or Rain, or Tempest, least the one prejudices his Corn, the other
his Herbage: Nothing but a little drowning of all his Hopes, and Tearing his
Corn up by the Roots: This the honest Virgil. Thus far got the Roman Astrology
then. Frigida quo sese Saturni Stella receptet, Aut ignis Coeli Cyllenius errat
in orbs. That Is our Mercury; whom the Poet calls elsewhere Swift; because
says Servius, (a man of Sense) it shows it self after eighteen days, when it
had disappeared before by its Vicinity to the Sun. The use that I make of it,
is this, That the Husbandman in Italy, especially in Spring and Autumn, which
were noted of old at Rome for more tempestuous than ordinary; having observed
the appearance of the Planet, might be aware of the Tempest under his
Occultation; or disappearing. Old Homer himself, Iliad 16. tells us, so much as
the Autumn is Stormy, but before Virgils time; you see, they had learned some
Reason.

22. Now, If I shall not fright my Reader, I shall mention Albumazar, 700 years
after, from his Treatise, de Magn. Conjunct. that he agrees fully with our
Character; which I gather not from express Words (for Astrology was not so
distinct in those days) as by consequence; the Doctrine which he delivers
supposes his Character. For, if brings Wind and Rain in 9. Signs of the
Zodaic, and Heat in 6. Then -- But so it is in E. -- Therefore -- And if 400
years after that, Haly goes further, and ascribes Wind or Rain to XI. of the
XII. Signs, as our Countryman Escuidus, famous in his time, ( i. e.) above 300
years since, delivers in his great sum Astrological, Did 4. Cap. 7. (Let the
Reader pardon my thin Astrologic Library.) Then, ut supra, our Character has
some Abettors. Now, though it be true that there is a great deal of Riff-Raff
in these Ancients, Albumazar, etc. such as would make a Christian sick to read
them, yet this must be owned in these and other Gentlemen, that whatsoever
sparkling Gems of Natural Truth lies rudely incorporate in these Arabian Rocks,
they ought to be severed, laid up and polished, till their price may be
discernible. Next, that though it is usual for Astrologers to take Aphorisms
upon trust from hand to hand, even as other Professors also do; yet it is very
improbable that these Notions should be continued from Ptolemy to Albumazar,
thence to Haly, from him and others to this Age, unless Experience has born
testimony to the Dictate Since Experience once asserting the contrary, these
Definitions would long e're this have vanished into Air; and what is more
empty, A Lie.

23. Enough then for the Ancients; come we home to our times more Na^ute and
searching: what do they say? We have heard already one good Man, that cried
Quis nescit, who knows not the Power of and in Conjunction; and again,
Conjunctio (...) ad, quorum in Meteoris magna vis est, (We read no further) are
the Words of that great Vranologer John Kepler, one who thought that the
motions of the Stars were dry Music, dumb Shows, unless they were endued with
Causality as well as Luster. And again, in commovendis tempestatibus multum
valet, de stella nova: page 40. and the same I believe he proposes 40 times;
so that he doubts sooner of the Calculation of the Aspect, than of the
Influence belonging thereto. Since him the diligent Inquisitor in Stetin, who
observed 20 years and upwards, bears witness to the Truth in Keplers own Words.
-- Mercurius in commovendis tempestatibus (says he) plurimum valet, Quod and
Kepler affirmat. Not thereby relying blindly on his Authority, but assuring his
own Experience in concord with it, as the Words carefully attended do import.
Nor must we make Orts of the Norimberg Diary for 30 Years by Kyriander, who
has annexed together every amongst the rest, from 1623. to 1647. even 150. and
upwards; Printed at Cassel in the German Language, An. 1651. from which just
experience he lays his Regula V. p. 103. on the Definition of this Aspect: Now
can any sober Man, without breach of Modesty, say, that after 23 years
observation, a Person of Quality, such as he is suspected to be, and a Scholar,
should expose himself so far to the World, as to publish such Flams to the
World, as his Rules must be presumed to be, if ill propounded, in such
instances whereof, all the Town, yea, most of the German Nation are judges.

24. All the Fate of our Astrology depends on this one Configuration, for if we
carry the Cause here, the Dam is broke, where all the Stream of the Heavenly
Bodies, Fixed as well as Erratique; gain their Current. If Mercury be granted
to signify to purpose, then not the Sun alone, nor the alone, are Influential.
There is one Mercury has a proper Influence as well as either. And if Mercury
then why not? Why not? etc. Names I wis of greater Account than ever was in
Heaven, Political or Astronomical. For you remember we are Challenged to prove
that any of the Caelestials, besides and can do any Feats. This Challenge we
come now to answer.

25. Besides the Sun and Moon we assert 's Influence, even as the Sun and as
the Moon. For let us aspect Mercury with the, in or, (for bears all Aspects to
her) we shall find them to turn to such an account, as that the Sun it self
aspected to the, cannot do more. For to say nothing of Wind and Rain, etc.
wherein the Mercurio Lunar Aspect equals the it self, you shall find in Keplers
Diary, Thunder and Lightning 6 times in 7 Years, yea, if we consider the
Mercurio Lunar also, we find the same Effect 3 times in 4 years, which is not
to be found in the Soli- Lunar Opposition.

26. Hear then what Ptolemy says, whose words are, speaking of 's dominion
(...), says he, (...), Lightning, Fiery Meteor, etc. adding what he never said
of the, that it makes (...), Hiatus Chasmes, and Trembling. (...), even
Earthquakes, the most horrible of Prodigies. Ha! say thou so old Boy? I fear
before we have done, we shall find some Truth in this thy Romantique Piece.

27. In the mean time we do not understand what the Ancients seem to pretend,
that he is of an Amphibious Nature, conform to all he shall meet with; be Moist
with the moist, and Dry with the Dry: For his Nature is mined to Warm,
inclining to Moisture, though sometimes Cold and Drowth appears when he is left
destitute of his Consorts; or as we may term it, afflicted by a contrary
Influence: So does the Flame give a clear Heat, and the Chime an acute Sound;
yet both, often times diverted by the whistling of the Winds, are less Heard or
Felt. They might in our Judgment have pronounced Saturn and to be of
Constitutions Indifferent; for even they are found sometimes accompanied with
Dry, sometime with Moist. But the returning more often than and, did more amuse
the Observer by its more frequent inconstancy, and that made them defend what
is scarce intelligible concerning 's Nature, though the same inconvenience of
Constitution is found in the rest; but this not so often falling under notice,
they thought themselves pretty secure. Proceed we therefore to Mercury's Table.

TABLE Direct.
28. January.
1670. 15. XXII. Violent gusts and R. 3 p. N. XXIII. Frost m. bright wds 9 m.
threatn as to a storm of Hail. N. XXIV. 5 Fr. H. wind 8 m. etc. Little storm of
hail or Snow occ. N. XXV. s. fr. R. p. m. Tempest of Wind 11 p. and Snow, W
after N. N. XXVI. Tempestuous wd most tot. violent toward M. s. Snow, frosty.
E. XXVII. Frost, snow 9 m. o. and p. m. off and on. N. 71. 25. III. Frosty,
bright m. p. N W. IV. Close, wet much a merid. ad vesp. S W. V. 5. Fr. m. fair.
VI. Fr. wet much p. m. S. VII. R. ante L. and wd. fair, windy. N W. 77. 7. XIV.
Fog m. misty, open. Aches. W. XV. R. a. L. Snow vesp. H. wd. Gout and Aches 6
p. S W. XVI. 8 m. mist, fr. fair. N. XVII. H. fr. foggy m. fog again o. and r.
to 9 p. Indisposition. N. XVIII. Cool, rain 1 p. dark 4 p. s. rain 6 m. Aches,
S.
February.
1668. 20. XXVII. Fog, wetting m. fair, warm, wind, Fog vesp. S W. XXVIII. H.
wind, storm, R. occ. fierce cold wd, drisle. N. XXIX. 5. Furious wds. wetting
a. m. and p. stormof. sleet occ. Wds audible. S. I. March. Fr. m. wet a m. and
hail 1 p. and occ. winds and cold. II. Brisk wd and wet a occ. ad 11 p. etc.
wds laid 5 p. S W. 69. 13. IX. Cldy, windy p. m, open, wdy vesp. S W. X. Cldy;
misty, wdy. S W. XI. 3. Cloudy, windy m. p. clear, cold, wdy. S W. XII. Cloudy,
wdy d. wet vesp. S W. XIII. H. wd. s. storms R. H. wind all n. W. 75. 13. XX.
Fr. close l. rain. Aches. E. XXI. Close mist, snow 9 m. Aches, Hysterical Fits,
Headaches. E. XXII. 6 m. Frosty, mist, fair, clouds in Scenes redoubled. E.
XXIII. Fr. overcast p. m. Fog, fair. 9 m. E. XXIV. Frost, Aches o. s. drops,
then wetting p. m. p. and 6. p. Aches 11 p. S E. 76 21. II. Close Aches 11 p.
close p. m. W. III. Blustering a l. some wet 4 m and 9 m. Aches 11 p. E. IV. 3
Fr. close m 1. Aches. W. V. R. m. H. wd, open. W. VI. High wd, R. a. l. cloudy.
Aches. S W. 82. 6 XII. 4. Frost, mist, fair rutilus. E. XIII. Thick Fog a. m.
coldish, red clouds vesp. great Fog at n. W. After. E. Two Lunatic in the
Bill. XIV. Frost, cold and Fog. occ. S. XV. Cold, cldy, foggy d. E. XVI. Mist
m. frost very cold; but vesp. milder. XVII. Mild, drisle a. m. and p. m. H.
winds a. m. and 10 p. S.
March.
1673. 17. XXV. Hail 11 m. R. 4. 2. p. S E. XXVI. Wind, shower 3 p. XXVII. 11
Close, wet 10 m. and p. m. m. p. S. XXVIII. Fair m. floting cl. great drops 1
p. mist very cold. N. XXIX. Cold, H. wd. R. 1, 2 p. and hail. so 4 p. N. 74. 1.
VIII. Frosty, close, dull, windy; snow a 4 ad 9 p. E. IX. Frosty, misty m.
clear o. etc. N. X. 7 Close m. offer 4 p. Snow hail occ. brisk wind and various
N E. but S W. a. m. XI. Open m. p. freez, Aches. E. XII. Frosty, snowing m. p.
s. relent; Aches, Histerical fits. 80. 10. XVII. Mist, close, cold wind, 8 m.
and 11 m. dash 4 p. R. XVIII. Fog, dewing 1 p. warmer than yesterday s. brisk
wd. XIX. Thick Fog, close, warm, E. o. gent. 5 p. S W. XX. 2 m. thick fog
below, clear above, fair warm p, m. IV. Meteors ante 9 p. S E. S. XXI. Fog, as
die preced. rutilus mane, warm p. m. s. wd. W. 81. 23. I. Close, cold wind. N
E. II. Open E. dark, s. rain 3 p. brisk Wind. W. III. 5. Very cold wd, R. and
Hail 10 m. Hail Cometa iterum Hagae conspectus eodem fere loco. IV. Snow 1 m.
and mane tot. mis^^ 9 m. N. V. Cold wind and snow, so o. Hail 6 or 7 times
after h. 1 p. N
April.
1671. 18. XXVII. clouded suddenly, offer m. wdy a. m. fair, rain 7 p. E.
XXVIII. Cldy. windy S E. shower vesp. S W. XXIX. Shower m. wd, heat; shower 4 p. 7
p. S W. XXX. Gallant R. m. shower 11 m. H. wd. open 4 p. Light n. 10 p. at Sea
going for Diep, fine shower with us 9 p. 72. 2. X. Cold m. wetting a. m. and p.
m. serious R. at n. N W. XI. 12. Close wetting 9 m. and 5 p. W. XII. Close,
misty. XIII. Coldish m. close, misty. N. N E. XIV. Close, clearing p. m. Aches.
N E. 78. 11. XX. Great R. ante L. wetting 7 m. dash 9 m. misty m. p. W. N E.
XXI. Foggy m. warm, close, much Lowr 2 p. wd various, but Nly m. p. XXII.
Pleasant, warm; wind. N W. XXIII. s. drops 7 m. Troubled air, R. 10 m. cool. N.
79. 25. IV. Fog, cloudy, s. wd, darkish p. m. N W V. 5 m. shower circ. 5 m. VI.
5 m. R. much nocte; cloudy, cold; At Dover R. m. p. ad 7 p. N. T. M. in
Piedmont. -- VII. Fog, fair, W. cold S E. vesp.
May.
1679. 18. XXVIII. Temperate shower, so 4 p. W. XXIX. 8. overc. m. Heat p. m.
bright n. E. XXX. Close, showring 6 p. Aches. S. XXXI. R. m. calm, heat. S. 70.
3. XII. Coasting shower 9 m. 11 m. 2 p. Hail, R. and Thunder 6 p. W. XIII. Open
m. threa^n; fair a. 10 m. etc. XIV. 8 m. close m. offer 3 p. hazie. W. XV.
Early mist, fair, warm, cool n. W. XVI. Hazy, close m. p. warm. N. 76. 12. XXI.
Cloudy, windy, mist m. offer 11 m. R. 1. p. wetting m. p. shower 6 p. occ. XXII.
Wetting m. shower 1 p. dashing N W. XXIII. 1 m. warm, bright day, bright in the
N West. XXIV. Warm, bright 11 p. dry. clouds, wds; Meteor 11 p. a Lance B. ad
M. Scorpium. Lightning several times. S W. 77. 28. VI. Report of Two s seen 9
p. long Clouds, lowering clouds m. p. Gossamere; Hazy 6 p. Apoplexy 7 m. E. VII.
3. misty, pregnant, cl. often; susp. cool wd and various. VIII. Early mist,
fair, some lowering cl. brisk wd. Hazy prospect. E IX. Warm, lowering, open,
windy. E. Shower at Hatfeild.
June.
1668. 2. XI. Dashing, lightn 11. p. hot, Clds. W. XII. Hot ante L. shower m.
and a. m. wd. Hot and Fog after the Rain Lightn. 9 p. W. XIII. 8 m. wdy. clds
fly low, showry m. p. dashing 4 p. drops occ. or. XIV. Wind, showers. W. XV.
Showry 10 m. and m. p. cool wd. XVI. Dashing and thunder, spoiling hay. W. 74.
12. XXII. Bright, hot S W. wd 11 p. very light some in the N. N E. Aches,
clouds. Estly at n. XXIII. Overc. and hopes of R. Lutestring crack, dark N. but
E. vesp. XXIV. 1 m. Lowr 10 m. susp, 11 p. S W. XXV. Close m. p. misty air,
lowering p. m. drop or two. E. N E. N W. 75. 27. VII R. o. etc. wind and close
vesp. Indisposition. N. N E. VIII. 1 p. close, open. IX. Close, windy night,
drops 5 p. Rain 8 p. N E. X. Close, mist, offer twice p. m. and 8 p. N. 81. 6.
XV. R. ante 7 m. open vesp. Nly XVI. Lowering wd N W. clouds ride from S W 9 p.
Dolphins sporting in the mouth of Severn. XVII. 4 m. lowering somet. open, mist
at N W. n. Hail T. M. thunder at Ferrara in Italy. XVIII. Fr. fair m. p. wd, s.
mist; cool n. N E. XIX. Lightning at n. troubled, clouding a. m. not much
moisture, drisle 7 p. and R. 9 p. Meteor. News of this shower with thunder
within 3 Leagues of Lime, by a Ship put in day 20. So also at York. 82. 20.
XXXI. May. mist m. H. wd. ante L. etc. heat, shower 5. occ. ad 10 p. Thunder
vesp. E. S E. S W. I. 4. H. wd. cldy p. m. a drop. II. R. a 4 m. ad 2 p. Wly.
Roan 2d. time fired with Lightning. At Zurick Lightn. and Thunder. III. Clouds
in Scenes, shower o. 2 p. 4 p. n. Thunder. Hail at Dunwich as big as Pigeons
Eggs.
July.
1672. 12. XXIV. Bright, dry m. H. wd. open. S W. XXV. o. close, H. wd, shower.
o. 1 p. 6 p. Low ebb. S W. XXVI. Close, dash 9 m. with H. wd then, bright p. m.
S W. XXVII. Close m. p. S W. 73. 27. VIII. Fair, dry, overc. vesp. and lowering
S W. IX. 2. Close, some misling. S E. X. Fair, L. shower a. m. and p. m. open.
S W. XI. Wetting 11 m. 2 p. warm m. hot n. S W. 79. 6. XVII. R. ort. white cl.
in Scenes, R. 2 p. Lightning 9 p. V. Meteors. d. 15. R. Th. 3 m. 7 m. XVIII.
Brisk wds 9 p. few cl. hot, some wet 6 p. W. XIX. 11 m. w. cloudy, Fog, gentle
Rain a ad 5 p. XX. Fair, cooler, few clouds at ^. E. 21. 28. I. E. Close, mist,
open dry, much offer. II. Close, brisk wind, shower m. 2 p. offer 3 p. S. III.
R. 6 m. showry a. m. dash 1 p. and thund. stormy and drisly vesp. which thunder
was prodigious at Hall in Swevia. S. IV. S W. Brisk wd, close m. p. dewing 10
p. R. 11 m. die sequ. at Basil, several Houses suffer by Lightning.
August.
1670. 14. XXVI. Hot n. fair, Meteor. N. XXVII. Fog, frosty p. m. Meteors,
Lightning twice from S W. Halo colored at St Albans. S E. XXVIII. 7 m. Foggy
m. soultry, bright, Meteors. Fax volans 11 p. S W. XXIX. Cooler dash of R. o.
H. wind. W. XXX. Coldish, windy, open, H. wd, close n W. 71. 26. IX. Coasting
showrs o. wd, thunder, sh. 3 p in Nadir 3 p. and. 5 p. sh. 7 p. S W X. Coasting
shower 11 m. 3 p. XI. 4. overcast 8 m. R. o. 5 p. 7 p. and gusts. XII. H. wd a.
L. and much R. Tempestuous wind circ. Merid. R. 5 p. great R. 9. p. XIII. Shower
1 p. fair the rest. XIV. Frost, fair, fog m. H. p. m. Cl. in scenes. W. 76. 24.
IIII. Fog thickish, barren cl. warm, Hysterical Fits. Meteors III. 9 p. one 11
p. one V. Fog m. fair, warm, wind, floating Clouds. E. N E VI. Fair, misty air,
hot p. m. Met. two 11 p brisk, overc. 7 p. VII. Warm, clouds p. m. and red
vesp. VIII. Warm, H. wd, very bright n. Meteors Wly. E. IX. Dry, fair, Tide 14
Stairs, Meteors. H. wds, cold n. Two passing bells. 77. 9. XIX. Fog m. cloudy
m. p. H. wd m. p. drops 10 m. shower 4 p. XX. 7 m. Fr. m. fair. s. lowering
clouds 11 p. W. N W. XXI. R. 4 m. wind and dropping 8 m. 8 m. R. 5 p. S W.
XXII. R. 11 n. m. p. much a. m. dash 6 p. wet, hail. 78. 21. II. Warm, overc.
p. m. fleec't clds 7 p. wd various, thunder 8 p. 10 p. III. Many fleec't clouds
8 m. cloudy in N W. m. c. S. S W IV. o. Mist, open, warm, close n. W. V. Early
mist, but Horiz. clear 7 m. Once overc. p. m. wind pretty brisk; warm p. m. and
night Meteors 11 p. W. VI. cldy, brisk wd, R. 7 m. 10 m. hot night, warm day;
Meteor circ. 9.
September.
1669. 3. XIII. Cool, open, great Meteor Eastward 8 p. wd overc. 10 p. E. XIX.
3 overcast m. bright. E. XV. Bright and cool. XVI. Fr. brisk wd. E. S E. 75.
12. XXIII. R. at midn. fair, somet. overc. W. wd, R. at n. XXIV. R. 4 m. dark 9
m. and o. warm p. m. H. wd 9 p. XXV. Stormy noct. tot. Dash 2 m. warm, wet a l.
ad 4 p. XXVI. Fair, windy, shower 2 p. S W. XXVII. Fog m. on the Thames, wdy,
pangs 7. W. 76. 24. IV. Hot m. Aches 8 m. s. wet 5 m. misty. S W and R. o. fine
r. p. m. and occ. Aches 6 p. and R. V. R. 1 m. apace, clouds in scenes, Aches 5
p. 7 p. VI. 5 Rainy 7 m. close, misty, wind, troubled air 10 p. Aches N. VII.
Close, very misty, wetting 3 p. etc. 82. 5. XV. s. fog, warm, clouds in scenes,
and lowering; very warm N. W. N E. XVI. Warm n. s. fog. close and warm 8 p. W,
XVII. 7 p. some drops 10 m. 4 p. R. gentle 6 p. etc. so ante 11 p. Rumor of an
Ignis Fatuus. XVIII. s. drops a. m. and o. lowering p. m. s. gusts, warm n. XIX.
Cloudy m. warm d. flying clouds, sometime promising. Ignes Fatui. W. XX. Fair,
but not over bright; Gusts 3 p. Meteors bright in Cygno Lyra, etc. vesp. ho. 10
p. S W.
October.
1668. 19. XXIX. Sept. Great Earthquake at St. Maloes. XXX. Sept. Winds,
coldish, wetting. R. 10 p. S. I. Warm beginning, wd R. a L 2 p. Lightning from
a single Cloud 8 p. S. II. Mist m. warm gusts p. m. shower o. ccc. 9 p. S. III.
Fair m. and mist, wetting 1 p. R. 4 p. and p. warm. S W. IV. Wind a l. H. wd o.
offer, drisle 3 p. W. 74. 1. XI. Fog, open, burnished cl. Fila. S W. XII. W. R.
ante L, dewing 8 m. warm n. N W. XIII. E. must, wetting a. M. and p. m. XIV. 1
m. R. 2 m. misty, dark. Gossamere. XV. 1 m. misty, dark, open 10 m. closing,
Gossamere. XVI. s. wd N W. Wly vesp XVII. Close, mist S W. winds, showrs 4 p.
warm. Indisposition. 80. 12. XXII R. m. and p. m. m. p. shower 7 p. E. XXIII.
Frost and very cold die tot. N E. XXIV. Fr. m. misty, cold, overc. 10 m. R.
ante 5 ad 8 p. S. XXV. 10 m. Clouds flying, s. R. 5 p. W. XXVI. Early fog. R.
ante o. Nadir, wind^ brisk, at Plymouth stormy. XXVII. R. ante 6 m. very dark,
showring 8 m. so ante 1 p. atque alias H. wind. N. XXVIII. Overc. ort. open
Wly; s. thin clouds at n. Ely. 81 22. III. Close, shower 4 p. wd audible. W. S
W. IV. Fr. m. bright ante n. temperate. overe. p. m. Hurricane, Antigoa. VII
Ships destroyed. Some say October 2. it is all of case. V. 9. mist m. very
suspic o.. open and cool p. m. W. VI. Fog, fr. m. overc. ante 1 p. Meteors 9 p.
Red cl. m. S. VII. Gr. fog, hempen cl. overc. vesp. E. VIII. s. R 5 m. open, R.
circ. 10 p. N E. at Falmouth stormy.
November.
1672. 14. XXII. Cold, fair, overc; fair and cold vesp. N W. XXIII. R. ante L.
close, wdy, warm, drisle 11 p. W. XXIV. 2. Close, drisle o. and 4 p. wdy n. S
W. XXV. Open, closing S W. N W: all n. XXVI. Open, wd, somer. overc. S W.
XXVII. s. R. a L. close, muddy d. W. 73. 20. I. Close, misty, misling o. N E.
close Hysterical Indisp. II. Mysty, cold. N E. III. Close m. p. misty. N E. IV.
Close, mist, Frost. Aches Hysterical Indisp. V. Close, wetting p. m. Hysterical
Indisp. VI. Close. R. 1 p. Aches 8 p. W. N W. 79. 4. XIV. Gr. fog and frost. s.
wd. W. XV. Extreme Frost, fog, open, wind, foggy n. W. XVI. 5 m. thick Fog,
frosty E. m. Sly. N. XVII. Thick fog, fr. thicker 9 m. A young Whale within 4
Miles of Deal. XVIII. Thick Fog, fr. thicker 9 m. frosty d. N. XIX. Extreme
fog, not see ten yards; fog moves from E.
December.
1677. 5. XIV. Frosty, close, misty. E. XV. Close, frost, snow, yield 9 m. Ely.
XVI. 2. s. snow found m. close. E. XVII. Wet found m. close, wetting 9 p. m.
XVIII. Close d. N E. 77. 16. XXIV. Wet a. L. close, foggy, drisle a. m. R. p.
m. and 10 p. coldish. W. then Nly. XXV. Cloudy, foggy, cool, freez at n. E.
XXVI. Fr. 3. m. fog, yield. drisle at Bromely. E. N E. XVII. 3. Wind and
wetting a. m. H. wind vesp. dark, damp walls, tempestuous 11 p. Sly. XXVIII. H.
wd, R. n. S E. Wly. Nly. XXIX. Fr. fog m. bright above, fog circa Horiz
freezing d. t. XXX. Very frosty and foggy, dark o. fog w. p. circ. Horiz. S. S
W. 78. 26. III. Frosty, foggy, cloudy, wd, s. snow. E. A Comet lately appeared
swift in Motion. IV. Great R. 2 m. s. fog, cldy, H. wd. R. 12 p. etc. S. V. R.
ante 1 m. cldy, brisk wd, warm. S. VI. Great fog rutilus a. m. fair p. m. W.
VII. 5. Cloudy, misty a. m. close p. m. E. VIII. s. fog, cloudy m. H. wd. E.
IX. H. frost, cloudy, s. fog very cold wd and clds. X. H. fr. and cldy, s. fog,
cold wd. Ely
Table Retrograde.
January.
1673. 7. XV. Snow, Hail a. m. very dark, yield. E. N E. XVI. o. close m. p.
show 5 p. E. XVII. Close, mist, wetting 5 p. coldish about o. N E. 79. (...)
17. XXV. Fr. vehement snow, sharp wd, N E. XXVI. o. Terrible fr. H. wd and
cutting by universal complaint, o^erc. p. m. N E. XXVII. Brisk and very sharp
wd, Thames almost freze. Cold these two days, as has been known. XXVIII. Fr.
vehement, L. Snow ante L. N E. 80. 0. IX. Mist, close, s. wd, Meteors 2
Eastward of the Pleiades 7 p. brisk wd. W. X. 9 m. mist, close, gentle wd. S W.
XI. Mist, close, open, s. wd. W.
February.
1671. 11. XVIII. Close, dewing o. and 10 p. N E. XIX. 8 m. s. wet m. drisle a.
m. coldish. N. XX. Shower o. Hail 3 p. wetting vesp, Sly, but a. m. Nly. 72. 24.
I. Frosty L. fringe of cl. Westward, relent, fine Halo 11 p. S W. S B, II. 12.
misty m. frosty, snow, ccc. etc. with gusts. N E. S E. III. Snow noct. tot. and
a. m. deep 1 foot, so vesp. relent. N W. 78. 4. XI. Mist m. Wly, summers days,
s. overc. n. XII. 2 m. Fog, clouds N E. Ely a. m. Wly. N W. occ. prope in hanc
speciem Mereors 6 p. juxta. 9 p. Aches 5 p. XIII. Fog, s. wetting 7 m. close,
temperate, Aches 11 p. N.
March.
1669. 16. XXV. Wind, snow 6 m. with hail 8 m. 9 m. cutting wd. N. XXVI. 6.
Freez and wind ante L. snow or. and offer p. m. so occ. N. XXVII. Frost, wind,
snow; winter weather; snow 8, 9 p. Wly. 70. 28. VII. Close m. open, temperate.
N E. VIII. 5. Close m. p. offer in prospect p. m. offer. S W. IX. Frost,
bright. N E. X. Fr. very cold, close, Lightning reported. 76. 8. XVI. Frosty 2
m. warm, wind, lowering. E XVIII. 2. s. R. 5, 6 m. close m. p. dark 2 p wetting
10 p. E. XIX. Mist, wetting a. m. per tot. and wind E. S W. o. Aches. 77. 21.
XXXVIII. Feb. Fr. fair, warm p. m. W. I. Mar. Frost, mist, Aches. E. II. Fog
and frost m. Cold, brisk wd.
April.
1668. 5. XIII. Warm, close m. p. wd, thin, overc. n N. XIV. 5. Close, wdy,
mist m, wetting n. N. XV. Fair m. lowering o. dry. W. 74. 16. XXV. H. wd, cool,
open. N W. XXVI. 1 p. H. wd, showring p. m. and 9 p. L. wd. S W. XXVII. R. a
Crepusc. ad 7 m. 75. 27. III. Hysterical passion. IV. Aches m. p. V. R. 5 m.
Wetting a. m. cool. E. VI. 12. Cloudy m. p. cool wd, fine d. Aches. E. N. VII.
Fair a. m. close and Hail o. H. cold wd, Indisposition. N E.
May.
1673. 5. XV. Pleasant a. m. shower 3 p. 5 p. N E. XVI. o. R. 7 m. brisk wd,
open p. m. N W. XVII. Close 6 m. fair, cool, dry; brisk wind. N E. 79. 17.
XXVII. Gr. Fog, close, R. 7 p. hot vesp. Lightning 8 p. XXVIII. Rain o. calm,
hot vesp. clds, E. wd; W. ante L. XXIX. R. store 5 m. 9 m. N E. 80. 27. VI.
Fog, close, dark p. m. shower and Thunderclaps III. 6 p. occ. dash 10 p. occ.
in Nadir. E. VII. o. fog, s. wd, drisle m. pouring o. dash 6 p. R. ante 11 ad
ho. 2 m. N E. VIII. Rain ante L. wd change S. close 4 p. bright Horiz. 7 p.
clouds in Scenes, Misle 3 p. N E.
June.
1671. 14. XXV. Fair, windy, lowr, clear n W. Vesp. S W. XXVI. Fair, wd, overc.
11 p. N E. XXVII. Close a. m. lowr, windy p. m. open N. N W. 72. 25. IV. Hops
blasted in the beg. of the Month. V. Close, s. rain 8 m. S E. VI. 1 m. shower m.
and 1 p. wd. S. VII. Great lowering L. shower 2 p. hot. VIII. Heat and Thunder.
S. S E. 78. 6. XVII. Misty cl. fair, warm. N E. XVIII. 3. Mist, heat E. s. wd.
Indispos. Thund. 8. 10 p. N E. XIX. Thunder, lightning 4 p. 5 p. 6 p. s. rain
Lightning 9 p. N.
July.
1670. 3. XIV. Often cloudy, puffs of wd. W. XV. 1 m. Hot, fair, wd H. Wetting,
p. m. shower 8 p. S W. XVI. Wet and windy ante L. a. m. 3 p. dash occ. S W.
XVII. Lofty wds, shower 2 p. or. W. 76. 13. XXV. S. misty m. smart shower 1 p.
wd S. Harmful lightning to a ship and men. XXVI. 11. Shower 6 m. warm, wdy,
Meteors Five 11 p. Two juxta Androm. and S W. XXVII. Hottish clds m. p.
lightning frequ' 10 p. cum Plei ad. Aches or. XXVIII. Rain and much Thunder.
77. 25. VI. Fog m. wd, bright, s. clds, Indisposition. Clouds coming against
the wd. VII. o. fog, fair E. a few clouds ride Nly, while the wd is Ely.
lightn. and thunder in prospect. VIII. Clouds rise 9 m. H. wd 2 p. troubled
Air, thunder 7 p. offer 8 p.
August.
1668. 7. XIX. Misle m. and 1 p. gentle shower 4 p. Iris. W. N. XX. 3. s. rain
ante L. Nisi aures fefellerint. fair, dry, s. wd. Wly. XXI. Mist m. bright; s.
mist vesp. wd a occ. W. 69. 20. II. Fair, heat. N. III. 5 m. open, shower p. m.
W. IV. Fair, heat, s rain reported ante L. W. 74. 17. XXIX. Indisposition
Hysterical. XXX. Fair, great shower. S W. XXXI. 12. Rain a 2 ad 5 m. misle a.
m. wetting 9 p. red Even. S W. I. Sept. H. wd noct. tot. offer 1 p. rain 3 p.
H. wd. Indispositions. 75. 0. XIII. Clear, wdy, great shower 3 p. and alias
boisterous rainy d. S W. XIV. 2 m. cloudy, great showrs o. XV. Wdy, rainy m.
gloomy d. offer. 81. 10. XXIX. Lately in Bononia T M. which happened about the
22d. or 23d. XXII. Fog, cool m. bright, hot, Met. ante 9. XXIII. Soultry,
threatening p. m. lightning very much ante 11 p. L. R. 11 p. W. XXIV. H. wd,
pregnant clouds, drop. Meteors fly apace in N W.
September.
1672. 23. V. Close, cool, flying cl. E. VI. Fog, fair, sometime dullish. VII.
N W. fog, close. 75. 3. XV. Very cold n. Frost, bright, flying clouds, close n.
S W. XVI. 9 R. a. L. and a. m. 4 p. rain hard and wd 8 p. S W. XVII. Furious
Tempest noct. tot. H. wd, R. 1 p. 79. 13. XXV. very H. wd, R. 10 m. damp walls,
rain an. 3. much rain and wd noct. sequ. XXVI. 11 R. noct. tot. and ort. H.
wind and warm n. scud o. 1 p. 3 p. XXVII. Wd, shower 9 m. 5 p. 6 p. rain hard
occ 7 p. and ante 9 p. E. 80. 27. VIII. Great fog, fair, warm p. m. List of cl.
in South W. N. E. IX. 8 m. great fog, fair, dry, hot 10 p. E. X. Great fog,
somewhat warm, Meteors 10 p. E.
October.
71. 6. XVIII. Frosty and bright. s. fog m. E. XIX. o. Fog m. Fog, cold; fog ^.
W. XX. Windy and very dark a. m. much rain 5 p. etc. S W. 72. 20. II. H. wd
noct tot. dashing m. open p. m. S W. III. 12. Fr. fair m. cldy p. m. shower 5
p. N W. IV. Cool, close m. p. shower 4 p. S W. 77. 16. XXVIII. Fog, cold, close,
convulsion; child sickning. N E. XXVIII. 12. Close, brisk wd, Fog R. 2. p. N E.
XXIX. s. rain m. and 11 m. snow 8 p. fog. N. 78. 29. XI. Cloudy, suspic. a. m.
open p. m. W XII. 1 m. R. fog, not a cl. in the sky. Freez Gossamere 5 p. f.
Met. prope E. XIII. Gr. fog, Gossamere, Halo 9 p. clear.
November.
1669. 8. XIX. Mist, frost, yield; close, mist taken up at n. S. XX. 6 m. Fr.
fog, thaw, close wd 7 p. smart but short shower 11 p. S. XXI. Fine R. welcome,
warm, misle, M. C. Wly. 70. 22. III. s. moisture m. cool, fair p. m. Fila. N W.
IV. Fr. snow 8 m. fair, cold prope caudam Freez n. W. V. Fr. overc. yielding;
wd p. m. Audible n. s. moisture Nly m. Wly p. m. 75. 18. XXIX. Clear, warm;
cloudy vesp. W. XXX. 1 m. Fog, fair, warm. N W. Newburg, Globe of Fire for 3
Hours. I. December. Fog, close m. p. cool. W. 82. II. XXII. Frosty, misty. overc.
o. yield vesp. N W. XXIII. 4 m. Gr. fog, fr. clumsie p. m. fog, freez at n.
Aches. E. XXIV. Great fog, cold, close, s. misle 8 p. Ely.
December.
1668. 24. IV. L. Frost m. cold, cloudy, wd, drisle 2. p. 10 p. E. V. 10. cold,
overc. a or. open, drop, red in N E. occ. VI. Close m. p. s. drizle, freez
vehement. N W. 73. 20. XXX. Cold, clear 5 m. R. 7 m. 4 p. wdy. S W. XXXI. 2. R.
die to harder 2 p. H. wd. S. I. Jan. Windy, open, overc, 1 p. H. wind and R. 6
p. S W. N E. vesp. 74. 4. XIV. Close p. m. warm, wd; Aches. W. XV. 11. s. ^. m.
close, warm. W. S E. XVI. Close. 76. 2. XII. H. fr. clear, Aches. E. XIII. 8 m.
dark and wet 8 m. E. XIV. Fog, cloudy, cold n. R. 6 p. E. Nly. 80. 14. XXIII.
Rainy and dash ante 6 m. and 2 p. R. vesp. H. wind at n. S. XXIV. 2. Wind Nly 1
m. great Halo (cujus intra aream) Tempestuous wd, R. 10 p. S. XXV. Open a. m.
H. wd, dark, dewing p. m. Tempestuous 8 p. Comet seen. 81. 27. VII. warm n. yet
s. little fr. 8 m. wd rise o. or. pleasant, coldish n. VIII. 8. H. Frost, fog
fall ante merid; not so cold occ. S E. IX. Dark a. m, misle 7 m. and a. m.
sweet shower ante 2 p. M. C. occ. very warm wd. W. Die sequente. Sea by a strong
West wd at Hague broke the Banks, and laid 2100 Acres under Water.
29. A Table of the Mercurio- Solar Conjunctions; as well of his direct Course,
first noted by themselves; and then of his Retrograde, where the Aspects you
see are XLVIII. Days 252. in the former; in the Later Aspects XLV, days but
143, Of which Later Table we hope it will not be amiss to give you, as hitherto
the Abridgement; that the Reader may Ken the Nature of: Not in a mist, or
thicker Cloud, but in a more expeditious and clear observation. Nor in the mean
while can the former be rightly censured supefluous, because the Faith of the
one depends on the Truth of the other; seeing the Later without the Former may
be pretended by those who are apt to Cavil, to be a forgery and feigned
Evidence.

Thus then lies the Abridgement.

Days 252. 143. Dir. Ret. Frosty Days. 18. 10. Frosty Nights. 30. 13. Cold. 10.
8. Warm. 37. 26. Hot and Soultry. 12. 9. Hot Nights. 7. 2. Trajections. 13. 5.
Lightnings. 8. 6. Thunder. 9. 6. Mist. 39. 17. Fog. 55. 20. Halo. 1. 0. Windy.
68. 36. Stor. my. 35. 18. East. 42. 28. West 46. 27. North. 27. 15. South. 20.
15. N. E. 15. 21. N. W. 13. 9. S. E. 9. 6. S. W. 40. 25. Rain. 78. 48. Rain
Durable. 36. 19. Snow. 13. 8. Hail. 7. 2. Gossamere. 4. 0. Wind Change. 18. 19.

30. It cannot be said now, but that at first sight it is probable has an
Influence; for here are the same Names and Instances of several States of the
Air, which have bin considered in the Lunar Tables: Here is Heat, Fog, Winds,
Rain, etc. as well as there, and in the same convenient proportions, the number
of the days concerned in the Lunar Tables being about 261. In this present the
days concerned, are somewhat short, viz. 252. Now if we begin with Heat Extreme
and Excessive, which we have said is most likely to fall under faithful
Observation, the Number here is XII. But XII. But then again there are but XI.
noted in the Pleni-Lunar Table: The one is confessed to have Influence, why not
the other? The next Instance is of Stormy Winds, wherein the Observation is
less liable to make default; (some it may, according as it may happen, that the
less curious Observator's Library may be situate;) of those you see 35. the New
it self being but 37. (To say nothing of a Sextile or a Quartile,) who
encourages, and bids him hold his own, he has passed the Pikes of the two
Scrutinyes, while he stands candidate to be reckoned an Officer in the
Caelestial Militia. He has sued for his right to heat, and has it adjudged to
him, he has recovered his right too, as a Friend to Aeolus, being always owned
for a Windy Planet, and it appears so.

31. It remains we make enquiry into Rain, Their's the Plunge; well offers for
Rain 78. That comes short of the Lunar Aspect, it is true, even when the
Disproportion is considered between the Sum of the days on either Aspect. But,
again view the Excessive, violent and lasting Showers, and our Mercurial
Conjunction exceeds the Energy of the Lunar, whose Dashing Number is but XXVII.
where our stirring exhibits XXXIII.

32. There rests, according to our constant Method to compare the Planetary
Moisture with the Sum total of the Days listed under its Aspect. If the Moiety
be obtained, the Influence is demonstrated. The days of our Mercurial Direct
Aspect, we have given in 252. the Moiety is plain to a Natural Arithmetique,
viz. 129. Toward this half Sum musters up his days of Moisture, of the less
rate, 48. of the greater Rate, if you please to inspect the Table 36. In toto
114. but 12. short of 126. Here I might cry out a Mercury, a Mercury, for such
a little difference, viz. 11 or 12. breaks no definitions. But then we have 20
days more to add, whereof 13 for Snow, and 7. for Hail; the total now is 134.
and the Moiety is exceeded as bravely as in the New or Full. For the New
gathering all her Instances of Moisture, makes 145. for 261. and makes 234 for
152. days.

33. In good time be it spoken, then Planets have Influence, and Astrology
rightly managed is a real noble Philosophy. Not only a is observable for Winds
and Rain, (which all Seamen know, as well as their Quadrant and Compass) but a
starts the like Effects, which the more Learned ought to know and deliver to
the Seaman: when they have got it once, then Astrology will lead the Van
Triumphant with Flying Colors: In the mean time be it writ in Capital Letters
upon a Pyramid.

34. Yea, but does this Method succeed in the Retrograde Aspect also? It does:
Sum up the Quota's for Rain, Snow, and Hail; and the Total amounts to the
Moicty of the Days, with Overplas: for the Sum being doubled makes 150. and the
Total of the Retrograde days, is 143.

35. Here may be asked the Question, How it com's to pass that the brings more
Instances of Winds and Rain, then especially, when it may be perceived that I
drive at the exalting of above. I answer, it strikes not at 's eminence; for
it is a ruled case, I hope, that Three are more Potent than Two. then is safe,
notwithstanding the Objection: For in a our is never far off, not a Signs
distance, if we stretch him on Tenterhooks; so is at hand to help on the Lunar
Effect. But at the Mercurial with the, the may be two, three, four Signs
distant.

36. It may be observed again that the Ancients make more a Windy than a Rainy
Planet, whereas we seem to make him for Rain, more then Winds contrary to the
mind of the Ancients. I answer, I have not traveled the world over neither
with Columbus, or Linschoten, our Drake, or Cavendish, and so cannot make an
universal Observation; It cannot be expected otherwise that, I speak for our
Climate only, being apt to believe that the Ancients spoke nothing but Truth,
relating also to their Climate. Mercury in the more Southern dryer parts, may
be more windy, and less for Moisture; but where moisture more abounds, the
contrary may obtain in our Septentrional Countries; yet what if I should grant
the Ancients their Plea, that He is moist with a touch of dryth. I am concerned
chiefly for his Influence in general.

37. I have not traveled, I say, but I have not so few Friends, but that I can
present them with some gleanings of Nautical Observation, which on the Seas
part will justify our Planets Character for Wind, and let it be a necity to
enquire to which of these our Planet chiefly inclines, and so that Scruple may
be baffled.

38. As I said, these are our Nautical Observations: -- First in a Voyage to
the East Indies.

April, Anno 1662. R. 24. 3. North, 2. Fresh gale S E. 4. Lat. 1. Fresh gale S
E. 5. 0. Fresh gale, good 6. South Lat. 1. Weather. 7. 1. 30. Fresh gale, good
Weather S E. E. Anno 1668. R.. 5. 13. North 13. Hard gales of Wind N E. in
Zenith 14. Latitude 12. Cloudy, hard gales N E. 15. 11. Fair, Hazy, fresh gales
N E. 16. 9. Fair, Fresh, gales Nly. August,. R.. 19. South 9. Fair, Fresh
gales, then moderate, S. S E. 20. Latitude. 8. Fine and moderate Gales. S. S E.
21. 7. Fair, moderate, pretty fresh P. M. S E. December,, 24 R. 4. South 34.
Fair, small gales, variable: S W. S. 5. Latitude 24. Small gales, Fair, then
fresh gales. N E. 6. 34. Morn: Excessive hard gales. N. N E. February. Anno
1669.. 3. direct. 8. 2. Rain, N. moderate gales. N E. 9. North 4. Cloudy,
pretty fresh gales. N E. 10. Latitude. 4. Cloudy, fresh gales. N E. 11. 5.
Thick weather, some rain, fresh gales. N. N E. 12. 6. Thick, some Rain, and
calm, pretty fresh gales most p. N E. 13. 7. Thick, small showers, pretty fresh
gales. N E. March, 25. North 45. Cloudy, moderate gales. E. N. 26. Latitude 45.
Variable, sometime fresh gales. 27. 46. Cloudy and moderate gales. N E. 28. 46.
Fair, moderate gales. N E. October. Anno 1671.. 7. R. 18. North 41. Very hard
gales of wind, close N E. with a great Sea. 19. Lat. 39. Cloudy, pretty fresh
gales. N. N W. 20. 37. Fair, moderate gales. Nly. December,. 4. Dir. 12. North
3. Moderate S E. 13. Latitude. 2. Cloudy, and moderate gales. S. S E. 14. 1.
Some Rain, fresh gales. S. S E. 15. Cloudy, fresh gales. 16. South 0. Cloudy,
fresh gales. S E. 17. Lat. 1. Cloudy and fresh gales. S E. 18. 2. Cloudy and
fresh gales. S E. 19. 3. Fair and fresh gales. On the 16th day were seen many
Fowls sitting on the water. February. Anno 1672.. 24. R. 1. South 35. Drisle,
hard gales. N E. N W. 2. Lat. 36. Drisle, fresh gales. S W. N W. 3. 36. S.
Rain, calmer, and small gales P. M. variable. W. N. SW. 4. 35. Fair, pretty
fresh gales. April,.. 2. Dir. 10. South 15. Cloudy, but fine fresh gales. E. S
E. 11. Lat. 13. Fair M. P. s. Rain, very fresh gales. S E. 12. 12. A little
gusty and small Rain. N. N E. 13. 11. Dark, abundance of Rain. E. much
Lightning at night, and moderate gales. N E. S E. 14. 10. Abundance of Rain
ante Luc. Wind variable, but moderate gales; but at 6 m. to 10 m. very fresh
gales. S E. Day 11. A strange Fish about 7 Foot long, with a long Snout like a
Garfish, and sharp Forehead, Scales. Day 13. Saw many Tropic Birds. July... 2.
Dir. 23. In the S. real of Tywan. N. Lat. 22. Fair N E. vesp. Sly a small gale.
24. Cloudy, small rain, moderate gales. 25. Much rain, and very unsettled
weather, the wind variable, 26. N. N E. S E. moderate gales most part, very
much rain at Midnight. Dark, much Rain, and moderate gales S E. One sudden Gust
Nly, in the nature of a Whirlwind. Thunder Night, and Rain extraordinary. E. S.
W. 27. Very miserable sad Weather, Thunder, Lightning, and Rains excessive, s.
fresh gales, and sometimes Gusts. November... 13. Dir. 21. North Latitude. 19.
Thick, Hazy, Tempestuous, s. Rain M. -- E. N E. 22. 18. Cloudy, fresh gusts,
showers, then fair, and fresh gales. E. N E. 23. 17. Fair, Hazy, some drops,
pretty fresh gales. E. N. E. 24. 16. Fair, fresh gales. 25. 13. Thick Hazy
Weather, gusts A. M. fresh gales. E. N E. 26. 10. Cloudy, thick, rainy, very
fresh gales. N. N E. 27. 9. Much rain, some gusts, and hard gales. N E.

39. Thus far for the East Indies in the good ships called the London, the
Experiment, Whose worthy Commander was my justly Dear Friend. I could add the
like for the West Indies Voyages; but these may suffice, the Observations lie
indeed with some interruption, some Conjunctions being not noted; but none on
our part having given a faithful Account wherever the journal related his Story.

40. Here I object to my self, that all this ramaging of Sea Instances does not
prove that our Dear is yet a Windy Planet, by the gales of Wind ascribed to
him; because these Gales, we know, last the Mariner from the Time he has first
set sail, to his very Port; but the does not last all that while, not for so
many Months as the East India Voyage requires.

41. Therefore I answer, the Objection seems reasonable, but it only seems so
for want of Experience, or the Knowledge of the true State of the Question. For
the Question is, not whether the is the only Aspect which raises Wind? But
whether be not rightly Charactered by the Ancient Astrologers for such a
Faculty? If so, then wherever he is configurate with or, or he may do the like:
He may, yea, and he does, as will be seen in its Place. Nor do we assert the
only Planet who is so qualifyed, the Aspects of the we have seen, have their
Winds along with them: So what with One Aspect, what with Others, as at a Game
at Football, the Ball comes to the Goal. Sometimes indeed there is a calm at
Sea, the Football lies still, but it is not long e're some Aspect or other
meets it, and accordingly as the Aspect is, the Gale is small and faint, or
fresh and brisk, or hard or extreme. The Mariner comes not to his Port by One
Aspect, but by All. Neither do the Natives use one Method, in the the River
Nile (suppose) the Boat sometimes sails, sometimes Rows, sometimes drives with
Stream, sometimes shoots the Cataract; shooting the Cataract speeds one on the
way, but it reaches not to the Port, the Sail, the Rope, the Pole at due times
must help to the Arrival.

42. Mercury then may enjoy his Character, and no man scruple it; for what
should hinder? Is all the Chaldee Philosophy Superstition? Even as much as all
Heathen Learning is abominable. We shall make some work if we throw away Euclid
and Archimedes, because Heathens, and Dioscorides, because an Egyptian; we
have observed before, that Moses himself threw not away all the Egyptian
Terms; and Nature it self may have in Chaldee Paraphrase.

43. Here, according to former precedent, we should range a Table for
Prognostic of the Rain according to the Signs: but here that Method takes not
place, because of the variety of the Days concerned, which in the Direct are
more or less, as the Motion of happens to be swifter or slower. In Aquary you
see the brings Rain, or Snow, or Wind, 5 days in 6. An. 1670. In An. 1668 it
brings Rain and Wind all its 5 days. In March 1673. the like. In March 1674
Snow thrice in 5 days, etc. But it haps not accordingly in the other years
under the same Signs; so that we cannot as yet pretend to any thing like
Infallible, implying in the mean while, what the Planet comes short at One
time, it makes amends at another: and communibus Annis, in the Direct, it
brings 11. of 16. in a certain Sign called Aquary; and 12. of 19. in. 14. of
21. in. 15. of 24. in after this Proportion.

In of XVI. Days, whereof wet. 11. XIX. -- 12. XXI. -- 14. XXIV. -- 15. XX. --
11. XVII. -- 10.

About 7. or 8. lies the difference. 43. Thus the Direct; the Retrocedent
Aspect is brisker according to his more fixed Stint of fewer ( i. e. but Three
Days) for the most part. For I promise you here Communibus Annis, the Aspect
brings Rain (and what more) I may say every day; in 9 or 10 days I find but two
excepted that are not Rainy; Once, indeed, I meet with Three.

44. Here Is Influence then, and something approaching Infallibility; if we were
as near the Lapis Philosophorum: as we are to some Infallibility, we should be
Rich.

45. The reason is given, because is found to be nearer the Earth on this side
the in his Retrocession, when direct he incedes above it. So the Inferior
Planets, what they loose in their Bulk, Nature makes up in their Vicinity to
the Earth.

46. Now, that makes a greater impression upon us than the, may by the
Attentive be observed, even from the Hail or Snow (as well as smart Rain) which
appears, though at most but seldom, yet more equally (when it appears) under
our Planet. For if I mistake not, the Snows under 's with are commonly more
hard and whistling, then at the New or Full, except upon a common Engagement
with some other Aspect, the more proper Origin of that Constitution. I reckon
in like manner, that the is not of her own Nature inclined at all to produce
Hail, I mean not a great drop, as Hail commonly is congealed in the Descent.
The is of a softer Light, apt to produce Dews and Mists, and the more
favorable Moisture. There is some Anger in Hail, and more Violence in the Heat
which fathers the Drop destined for it. And the same account for Hail compared
with the Lunar evinceth; for the New brings but 3 Instances, the brings 7. and
the and brings no more, which yet in days exceeds our Mercurial Conjunction.

47. Nevertheless, if that will not do, we may be pleased to compare the Loud
Evidence of Thunder on either side our shows IX. Thunders with VII. Lightnings
direct; Reflex it brings 17. for each. What Thunder does bring? Two. The Full,
Four. The Squares, Four. The Trines and Sextiles Lunar are Highest: The one of
the s bringing Seven; and a Sextile Six; but we then add the Account of
Lightnings and Thunder together, and our exceeds all.

48. But it may be I need not Labor to prove to be a more Potent Planet,
because, as I imagine, even the Adversary upon any Influence solidly proved on
our Planets part, not unwillingly allow the Preeminence to it, compared with
the. We remember here that Ptolemy told us of his (...), Thunder and Lightning,
and Fiery Meteors; we have met with a few of these later also, which may be
worth the mention. But what might Ptolemy first mean by his (...)? Do we think
that he meant that our Planet in Dominion was All Wildfire, and do nothing else
but Rumble in the Air in Summer time? By no means. He intended not that it
Thundered infallibly, Toties, Quoties; He knew it might and ought to frustrate a
Puisny's Observation of the Heavens, who has observed a Summer or Two, and
finding no such Meteor, has condemned Caelestial Philosophy, and Dethroned it.
But he speaking from long Observation of Himself, and the Reports of his
Speculative Ancestors, gives us to understand, that oft-times, not in every
Month, not in every year, perhaps not in every place, but only with them in
their Countries, in every, or at least most years this gave Fire. And so was an
Instrument of some Divine Power, whom all Nations believe creates that Meteor,
the Thunder. Well, you see this proved at large from Germany: Or, will you
please to accept an account from our own Land? I have by Gods Goodness lived to
make the Observation, and it is pity, it may be, it should perish, because the
Fate of a Liberal Science lies upon it. Then Lo! here it follows, even from
the beginning of my Observation; there is scarce a year missing, no, not with
us here in England, who yet are much cooler, I hope, than Egypt or Arabia.

49. A Table of such Conjunctions of the and, which have produced Thunder from
Anno 1652. to Anno 1683.

An. 1652. June 9, 10. Dir. 54. Jun. 28. Dir. 54. Sept. 5. Retr. 55. Jun. 12.
Dir. 56. Sept. 9. Dir. 58. Jun. 26. Retr. 58. Aug. 5. Dir. 60. July 12. Dir.
61. Mar. 11. Dir. 61. Apr. 20, 23. Retr. 62. Febr. 18. Dir. 62. April 5. Retr.
62. Aug. 8. Retr. 63. Mar. 15. Retr. 64. July, 3. Retr. 65. April, 21. Dir. 65.
May, 15. Retr. 66. July, 14,15,17. Dir. 68. June, 11. Dir. 16 October. 1. Retr.
1670. May 12. Dir. Aug. 27. Retr. 71. April, 30. Dir. Aug. 9. Dir. 72. July, 7.
Retr. 76. May, 24. Dir. July, 25. Retr. 27. Sept. 6. Dir. 77. July 7. Retr. 8.
78. May, 21. Retr. July 18. Retr. Aug. 3. Dir. 79. July, 17. Retr. 80. May, 6.
Retr. July, 3. Dir. 81. Aug. 13. Retr. 82. Aug. 6. Retr.

The Norimberg Diary makes braver sport, but we need it not.

50. Even Keplers Ephemerides brings us, An. 1622. April XXV. ventus, pluit,
Fulgura. An. 1623. Jan. V. Aestus, tonuit. VII. Calor, Fulgura, venti. Aug X.
Tonitrua, ventus magn. Pluv. XI. Tonitru, Grando multa. XII. Tonitrua continua.
An. 1625. Fulgura Matutina: Detonuit cum Imbre. July V. Nebula, Pluit, Fulgura.
Aug. XXI. Aestus tempestas. XXII. Tonuit Pluit. An. 1626. Jun. XV. Imber,
Tonuit, Pluit. XVI. Aestus procella, Pluvia Larg. XVII. Nebula, Tonitrua,
Pluvia. Aug. 11. Aestus, Procella, Tonitrua. An. 1627. Aug. XVIII. XIX. XX.
Imbres, Tonitrua. Aestus vapidus. Noctu Tonitrua. An. 1628. May, I. III. IV.
Aestuosum tonitrua. XXV. Iris. July IV. Nebula, Aestus, tonuit, pluviae
continuae. An. 1629. Jun. XV. Grando Tonitrua.

51. This may serve for a Taste, and when I was so far entered I remembered
withal the Limits of his distance from the Sun, and this use I made of it, that
whatsoever Effect the Sun is guilty of, our Planet must have a special hand in
it, for he is always found in the Sun's Company, and therefore must be
suspected, when any mischief is done; The Instrument that we most frequently
use is most Ministerial. Verily in 5. or 6 years Scrutiny I saw that of all the
28 gr. which meet out the distance of from, there is not one of them but is
found to raise this Tumult, though with some difference; and if there should be
any Secret in that, in time, I hope it will be made out. The difference then is
thus; After the exact Conjunction, the distance of gr. 2, 6, 8, 12, 14, 15, 17,
18, 20, 21, 23, 25, 26. And this whether be before or behind the Sun: of the
two, the rather before it.

52. The next Instance must be Earthquakes; for I shall never forget Ptolemy,
(...), says he; some instances we have met with, too many to be baffled in
perusal of Weekly Papers from the Empire, beside what in the late turbulent
Hurrys flew up and down our Metropolis. And we are in a fair way, having laid
this for a certain Rule, That whatever causes the Thunder, yea, or Storms, is
apt to cause an Earthquake, more or less; Not for that the noise of the Thunder
shakes the Earth, and makes the House to Tremble, as what every hurrying
Coach can do; but because the Subterranean Vulcans are imitated in their
supposed Shops, at the same time as the very Cyclops are, that while, in have
of their Work. Hence Kepler fancyed the Earth to be an Animal, sometimes
sweating, sometimes shaking, by the Impressions and Commotions of the Ambient
Ether, as may be seen in his accounts of May and August, 1621. and 1629.

53. But is it likely, any whit probable, such a squirting Planet as, a Lacquey
of the Sun; who seldom shows his Head in these parts, as if he was in Debt, not
responsible for any such great Production! We may cease to wonder, being to be
ordered by our Sense and Reason, rather than by our Conjectural Presumption.
Besides, let be a small Lucid Globe, his Conjunction with the Sun, I hope, is
not of small Consideration: Make up the defect of the one by the sufficiency of
the other.

54. Is it certain then that our Aspect is able to raise a storm, or Peal us
with a Shower? Then it is certain that he can blow up the Subterranean Fires. An
Aetna, Vesuvius, Hecla; in Sicily, Italy, Friezeland. It Is now above an 100
years that our Mariners had experience of this Truth, Hecla flaming was always
a Sign of foul Weather. Purch. p. 817. ad Annum 1610. Well then for
Earthquakes, do we not always, or for most part, find Foul Weather, Storms,
Lightning, either upon the Spot, the place which Heaves and Trembles, or in
remoter parts, we shall show some Instances; from whence we learn the Great
Power of the Heavens over the Earth confessed by the Soberest men, who do not
despise these Instances. Let what Thuanus has left upon record, be read in
Court, ad Annum, 1557, where after the mention of Tybers prodigious inundation
Sept. 14. another at Florence, another in France, he adds these Words.

Eadem rerum facies plerisque Nos per Europam eodem anno, and quasi occulta
quadam Caelestis ordinis confessione (lege consensione) etiam in remotissimis.
Orientis partibus fuit, nam apud Sinas in Sanuari a regione tanta diluvies ex
proximis montibus defluxat, ut Lacum ingentem effecerit quo VII. Urbes
absorptae sunt. Pecudum and Mortalium ingens numerus periit, puero unico tantum
in trunco arboris raro fortunae beneficio servato. Thuan. p. 278. 379.

55. Now, the most indubitable Original Fund, and cause of Earthquakes are
those vast Fires Subterranean, which work and wamble in the Bowels of the
Earth, and break out many times where there is no vent, always without fail,
where there is, or near the time of the Earth's Tremor. The want of this
consideration made the Worthy Kepler, and those which follow him, to run to an
Occult Cause Subterranean for his Meteors, when he was at a loss for his
Caelestial Causes, when as nothing is more plain, and less liable to exception,
then that the Subterranean causes, Fires, or other Evaporations are subject to,
and naturally do observe, and obey the Causes Caelestial.

56. Howbeit, let the Reader expect with all his prejudices, so he will be
pleased to examine what comes now to be proposed in that business of this
Mercurio-Solar Meeting. I don't know, but I find such an Accident as an
Earthquake in Basil, December Anno 1533. three times it was shook in that
Month. Once, if I may guess (and the reason of my guessing I will shortly tell
you) must be December 11. when there was a of and, and what if opposed, we are
not about the Denial of our Kindred. Other Aspects must be taken in too, but
that is one. Again, Anno 1538. Jan. 20. the same Swiss-Town shook with an
Earthquake. -- being (if I mistake not) scarce 9 degrees distant. In September
again, Anni ejusdem, a Famous Terrae-motus mentioned by Fromondus, die 27, 28,
29. the distance of our Planet is 7 degrees. Yea, since Italy shook, as
Fallopius notes, for 15 days together, a must happen amongst 4 or 5 of those
days. Come we to England in the year 1551. we find our Neighbors of Croyden,
Rygate, etc. so troubled May 25. Stows Annals, 605. in the very day on which
the is noted. Another famous one in September An. 1563. which shook Northampton
and Lincoln, noted by Thuanus also, who describes it in its frightful
Circumstances. There is a in Stadius's Ephemerides, noted at the end of the
Month So are we in England concerned in the pretense.

Anno ejusd. Nov. 29. great Terraemotus in Island, at what time Mount Hecla
Flamed. Purchase. tom. 3. 648. Stadius gives a the day before. An. 1601. Sept.
VIII. an Earthquake enters with the Century, and shook almost all Europe,
though Calvisius names only Switzerland, and the adjacent parts. It Is too much
for only to do so. But was not he one of them? Yes, he is one which can do what
Archimedes bragged of, Move the Earth: For if it be Old Style, it is ours; if
not, we have others will own it; and in the mean time in the following
Earthquake which was at London in Dec. of the same year; and in Christmas (
Stow, p. 797.) falls in the very Holydays.

In the year 1617. Kepler assists us with the Fame of an Earthquake, on Jan.
26. or Febr. 7. St. Novo. he acknowledges Thunder, and Lightning, and Meteors,
but alii (says he) Terraemotus: which Fame was very probable, you see by the
Circumstances; and who was in the wind but a.

An. 1618. Aug. XV. a sad Earthquake in the Evening among the Grisons in
Germany, where a vast Mountain buried its Neighbor Inhabitants, dicto citius,
1500 buried in a trice, says Calvis. makes one here also.

An. 1624. May VIII. at Ratisbon, where they were in some apprehensions of
Doomsday, says the same Calvisius, our is 6 degr. distant. Again July IX. or
XIX. is 9 degr. distant from the Sun. But before both these. March XXI.
Terraemotus ingens in Argenta, a Town in Italy 12 Miles from Ferraria, and the
Alps. Calvis. are 12 degr. distant.

An. 1625. Pestilential years (as 1625. was with us) are accompanied, abroad at
least, with Earthquakes, where at Norimberg the Diary observes One. Dec. XVIII.
when it Thundered the day before; the well answers both. There is one noted
before at the beginning of the year, Febr. XII. at Bamberg. There is a, and is
10 degr. distant.

An. 1626. Febr. 6. A Rock hanging over a certain Lake in Germany cleft in two
by an Earthquake, says Kepler, being then 10 gr. distance.

An. 1627. July XXX. St. N. Poor Apulia felt a most horrible Earthquake which
makes every Man that has Humanity tremble by consent, several Towns being
utterly destroyed, and a Bill of 17000. Persons that were lost. It seems to be
a Sin, to offer any thing like a natural Cause: But what is the Stone? Let us
look at the Hand which threw it. God is not to be excluded from his own work.
Enter, praesenter, Deus est and ubique potenter, is a good School-verse: I have
warrant beside Reason, to look on the Creation with some Fear, even the
Caelestials. And I cannot but observe that our Caelestial. though 12. degr.
distant, is nearest of all to the Sun, whether one way or the other. Nor can I
but observe that it Thundered in Germany (I know not what it did in Italy) three
continued days before, when was within 8 degrees. This may lead one to suspect
that the Vicinity of is the cause of both. Some may put in for the Eclipse
Lunar just before to be a Concause, which (if a free Astrology may be allowed)
formally considered, cannot stand; for how shall a Light obstructed, or
intercepted be advanced in Influence? Whether it be a Sign or no, we have
elsewhere considered for the Affirmative; for God did not time that Eclipse in
vain.

An. 1629. Another dire Terraemotus in the Alps mentioned by Kepler, and the
Norimberg Diary, when it thundered for a week together in most places in
Germany, as we see by the consent of the Diary the Day is near upon Aug. 6. or
16. where there are other Aspects ('it is true) and is 11. gr. from the Sun. But
before this we meet another, Jan. XXV. with Storms and thunder, while
Retrograde was conjoined with the 19. day.

An. 1632. Vesuvius breaks out with Earthquakes at Naples, on the day of the.

An. 1636. Sept. 16. Terraemotus, with Thunder, and a Meridian Iris at
Norimberg; an exact, and within 9 degr. of both and.

An. 1638. July 3. Betwixt Tercera Islands, Lat. N. E. came Fire out of the
sea, and an Earthquake before it 8 Days, Sandersons Hist. James I. was 2 degr.
distant, and in two days after followed the exact. Again, Anno eodem, December.
XIX. at Norimberg, Terraemotus, when lo! there is a the day before, with
shaking Fit, if it holds 3 or 4 days more, it may, for all that while is within
4 or 5 degrees.

An. 1640. Jan. 25. the German Diary informs us of another accompanied with
terrible Stormy winds, and much Rain; in other places Thunder, and he fixes it
right on among other configurations, the is noted Day 19. -- Again, March 21.
and 24. by the Rhine Terraemotus near Munster. is apparent die 20 Idem.

The next year An. 1641. October. 16. at Lintz, a great City near the Danow, an
Earthquake, with Stormy Winds. within a day of it, to whose Influence, with a
of the Diary imputes it.

An. 1646. In Apulia, May 29. a great concussion, an Iris, Rain, and at Prague,
Thunder, within a day or two at most.

An. 1649. Vesuvius is very hot in the Mouth, and afflicts Naples; an
Earthquake swallows up Ships at Messina. Calvis. Append. This I have reason to
believe was on Febr. 10. because of some reports of Prodigies happening at
Bristol, hereafter to be mentioned on that day.

An. 1657. July 8. Terraemotus at Bickley in Cheshire, a 8 degr. distant.

An. 1668. Sept. 29. A great Earthquake at Poictiers in France, Land. Gazet. N.
302. within 2 degrees.

An. 1669. The vast Eruptions of the Flaming Mountain Aetna, are scarce
forgotten. A vast Effect, but as great is the Cause, the Conspiracies of the
vast Caelestial Bodies. The Second Eruption was on March XXII. where was not
above 10 degr. distant. The remainder is already presented in a Table.

57. And what can be said more? Who can bring stronger Testimony then Aetna or
Vesuvius? Now I did reckon once to look back no further on this account, than
the year 1617. because the Calculations before Kepler from the Alphonsine or
Prutenick Tables are liable to Exception; Stofler, Stadius, Maginus, Leovitius,
etc. so that the Reader cannot see what he buys; but we find not that either
of these Computations are so wide, but that they will come under the Latitude
of 10. or 12. degrees, which is sufficient for our Expectation. Now if such an
an Interval be too large an Argument or the name of a. I take notice that both
Modern and Ancient Observers, though they abett most justly the Partil, yet
they could not tie themselves to it; being for the most part (except about the
Aequinox) for all as I see, ignorant of it. So the Platique bore away the
credit of the Partile in former Days.

But 2ly. We have said that there must be verily an Enlargement of two Planets
or more, to such a distance and Station, as is Mechanically requisite to
perform according to expectation: And no other do they mean, if I understand
them, by the Orb, but an Outlet, wherein the Planet being found, acts more
vigorously than if he were corporally conjoined with his Neighbor.

58. But this will not convince some Men. For how many s of which bring no
Earthquakes? If this were of any relation to Earthquakes we should hear of them
often, every two Months, etc. This objection we meet on every turn; it is a
Catholic Engine of Battery against Astrology, and its pretenses, even about
the State of the Air, and so has bin answered already: Yet because it will
recur even in this very Chapter, about the Generation of Comets, we will speak
to it here also. We have said, we make no one Aspect an adaequate cause of the
Effect; only Eminent and Considerable; which must be assisted with its
Neighbors: We have other Aspects which put in for their Share in the business;
we shall see them in the following Chapters, and surfeit on them. There is
scarce a or, yea, sometimes or, but steps in to help at a dead lift.

59. We do acknowledge that sometimes an Earthquake seazes both the Earth and
us without an Aspects Commission: But not One in Ten. As in Storms and
Tempests, so here.

60. But being always under the Sun, no wonder in the Terraemotus you will say,
seeing he cannot be far off at any time: I answer, it is true, and therefore I
have concluded he is a prime Requisite. Either the Sun himself can do nothing,
nor to Thunder or Earthquake, or if he does, will be hardby intermedling.

61. But it may be asked, may it not be indifferent where is posited R. I must
not allow that: for though I acknowledge the Effect may take place when he lies
at any, even his furthest distance; yet if any shall argue the Instance is
visible in all degrees alike; we defy his Irony; if he thereupon concludes
utterly against the Influence. First, because the Effect appears more often
nearer the Conjunction, than further off. 2. Because it happens more often in
the Retrograde Course than in the Direct; which he, who pleases to observe,
will take some pleasure in. 3ly. Because we shall find the like in the
Conjunctions of with other Planets; Conjunctions, I say, rather than
Oppositions. So are we beholden to Ptolemy, or whosoever it be, to transmit
this great Observation to Posterity.

62. But Ptolemy mentions also some notable incensed Meteors next to his (...),
as if they accompanied the Concussions of the Earth, which we find to be true:
(...), he calls them: some notable bulky Inflammations of Exhalation floating in
the Air, distinguished from the Ordinary (...), the Trajections and shooting of
the Stars, Balls of Fire, Dragons, Trabes, etc. which we meet with in History,
or their more proper Records, and of which Meteorologers write. Hither must we
refer the Phenomenon, strange with us, of Caelum ardens, where the Heavens
seemingly, nay, really burn; of which we meet one Example notable, An. 1574.
November. 14. where our plain diligent Annalist tells us were seen strange
impressions of Fire and Smoke proceeding forth of a Black Cloud at Midnight,
from the North, and so continued till day. Or the next Night following, Nov.
15. the Heavens from all parts seemed to burn Mavelous Ragingly, and the
Flames rising from the Horizon round about, did meet over our Heads, doubling
and rolling one in another, as in a clear Furnace. Stowad Annum 1574. Mr. How Is
Edit. page 679. Amasing Sights as we may see by the Annalist, which I note to
justify the German Writers, least they should be ridiculed for their
Memorands, who call them Chasmata, of which some are more terrible, others
less. In Germany they are frequent, says Kepler in his Comment. de Stel-Nov.
p. 54. and in the Southern parts of the World also, as I guess from the very
word; for in all Languages words which suffer contraction are known to be of
more frequent use, and according to the often occurrence of the thing
signified. (...) not contracted is (...). At Sea as far as I have observed,
they rarely are met with, unless perhaps near the Shore; the Reason may be,
because the Sea emits more Nitrous and less of the Unctuous or Sulphurous
Exhalation: So Lightning may be frequent at Sea, while those fiery Meteors may
be not so often produced.

63. But I am to give account of our Aspect; First we challenge that of our own
Climate, above related, we find there. I must confess there is another Planet
too, viz. Old Saturn, but that can breed no Scruple. And we run not so far
Southward, therefore let that be dissembled, we challenge then An. 1604. Sept.
16. Caelum arsit, says Kepler, and a not far off. Globus ignitus, says
Kepler, seen to fall. An. 1617. Febr. 7. Globus ater cum coma lucida. An. 1623.
May 31. July 19. 1626. Trabs Ignivoma, Kepler, An. 1629. October 2. Stella
magna. An. 1623. Nov. 20. Stellae grandes. What Is the beginning of these
Meteors? Aug. 4. An. 1625. Chasma. Again, October. 13. An. 1626. December. 10. An.
1640. May 14. An. 1642. Fiery Impressions. Aug. 11. 12. But the year 1630.
brought 3 Chasms. Jan. 21. Febr. 10. Aug. 30. Of which that in Jan. 21. is
noted for terrible Oder Brennendenhim mel Burning Heaven. An. 1641. while it
Thunders at Norimberg, elsewhere Fire is seen to fall from Heaven. Fewer von
himmel gefallen. An. 1644. Fiery Chasme noted at Egra in Bohemia. Aug. 22. and
they say with us also in that year, viz. Jan. 1. and July 11. the later of
which is attested by Merlin. Angl.

64. Hither also must we reduce Clarus Septentrio in Kepler; for what is a
Chasme at Noremberg, at Lintz was, only a Light in the North, one while, Dec.
10. An. 1626. and October. 6. An. 1629. Another while Caelum Sanguineum, which is
made a Prodigy by the same Kepler, who knows best, because he was an
Eyewitness.

65. All this Fire have I raked together from Kepler you see, and Kyriander,
who, I must tell you, cries up our Aspect for Thunder, and Fire falling from
Heaven before noted, Dec. 17. An. 1641. but elsewhere upon less occasion; for
on every one of those days shall you find what we call a, within 7, 6, 5
degrees, besure under 10. Blame not the Germans therefore if they fancy
Astrology; and let us hope that we shall have no such Cogent Fiery Evidences
for the Dint of the Heavenly Influences, to etch in the Belief of a
Scientifique Conclusion. A great Conclusion, and Cause Natural; for Nature is a
Prodigy, a Miracle; so that I do not wonder at the Instance, not yet mentioned,
in the Diary aforesaid, of what happened at Zicken in Brandenburg, Jan 7. An.
1640. under a, which bears a Contradiction in its mention Tearing Hail, Fiery
Hailstones; The Diary, it is true, comes in with his Exception, sed haec (says
he) sunt miraculosa. And far be it from me to Extenuate, any Stupendous Work
of the Creation, but I am apt to believe, that even this is such, I mean
Natural, and all Circumstances considered, has its Natural Cause, yet I grant
it heartily in some sense Miraculous. At Stetin the ingenious Eichstad tells us
of Sulphurous matter rained there. But I will not enquire now for fear I should
find some conjuring Aspect, and, that Sulphur containing Fire might be called
Hail. We that have ventured to ascribe to the a Power of blowing up, or shaking
the Earth, must not boggle at any thing less, or equal. Nor have we done yet,
scarce.

66. For Ptolemy, as far as I can see, made no mention of Comets; as if the of
Planets contributed not to the Opening of such Aetherial Monsters: although now
the Opinion begins to take, as we may see by Lubienec his Account, that the
Planetary Congresses do give them being. And surely, if they contribute to
Earthquakes, Lightnings, Fiery Meteors, etc. They may reasonably be thought not
to stand out for the Generation of Comets also, which are found always
hankering under Earthquakes, and other Commotions. For what reason can be given
why a Comet should bode an Inundation at one time, an Earthquake at another,
and a 3d. time a Plague, unless they are united in the same Cause, which in
common at his Seasons and Opportunities produces all Three. Beside the Comets
Aetherial and Sublunar are all of a Species, Mortal and Transitory, differing
in their Duration according to the difference of their own Dimension, as in
reason the Aetherial must needs surpass the Sublunar. Add that certain it is,
that the very Trajections, and other Fiery Meteors, Trabes and Dracones, are of
the same Species besure with Comets Sublunar, at least. Ergo.

67. Now that so it is, under Favor of those Great Men who deem otherwise,
will appear not improbable from some Instances ready to be produced.

The First is, An. 1577. a proper literal Comet, first observed by the Seamen,
says Tycho Nov. 10. where is according to Stadius but 10. gr. from the Sun
hasting to a nearer. This I say, helps to Midwife the Comet into the World. Its
appearance was breeding before.

An. 1582. The next Comet in the beginning of March. Ricciolus, Alm. Tom. 1. p.
13. at what time there is commencing toward the end of.

An. 1607. The Third Comet appeared on Sept. 16, Stylo veteri. On that day
there are visible Three Aspects, and one is, an accident so remarkable, that
Longomontanus treating of that Comet, as Riccilous informs, thinks it
reasonable to date that Comet from the Conjunction. So then.

The Fourth is that famous Comet of 1618. where we will stretch nothing,
because there is not that Consent about its first appearance: Besides that they
say there were three or four that year; two shining at the same time. All,
which I say is, if that be true which Lotichicus has declared, who wrote with
all Religious Diligence at that time that the Comet appeared first, about the
VII. Calends November, Stylo Vet. which is our October XXV. it lights
punctually upon a.

The Fifth, (and there is none intervenes) haps An. 1652. Dec. IX. seen near
Orion's Girdle: was in 3. So on the matter there was a on the very Solstice.

Again, An. 1661. a Comet seen at Amsterdam, Jan. 28. a makes one there.

An. 1664. Jan. 11. a Comet seen in Stiria, is but 8 degrees distant An. 1664.
Dec 17. There are Stories of Fires falling from above. Dec. XVIII. in Germany;
and I my self saw with Horror, an Angry blazing Meteor as big and round as the,
but with no such meek favorable Countenance. A within 3 degrees.

68. And what folly is in this Principle? When as it is certain that even the
aspected with the Sun, and the Rest, gives her Symbol toward the kindling of a
Comet; especially the Conjunction with the Sun: And Tycho I remember, thinks it
a reasonable Conjecture in that of 1603. To conclude this Chapter, it is good to
know what we hope to make as plain as Day; when some great Men there are beside
Fromond, who favor us, who refer the Original of a Comet to the Planets,
Postellus, Cabaeus, Telesius, Bullialdus, Kircher, Schuler, Heveltus and
Galileo, etc. And I doubt whatsoever Lubieniec is pleased to say, Ricciolus can
have no Demonstration to the contray; which may be seen in due place. Thus far
Ptolemy.

69. It Is time now, we advertise of Heat, whose account seems so Low, being but
12. because we reckon those days without Wind or Rain; otherwise the Sum gets
up to 56. with days more for Thunder and Lightning, And this may be no small
Medium for conviction of Dissenters; for if a Planet will not be allowed to
bring Rain, or Winds, it may be allowed to bring Heat at least, in Conjunction
with the Sun (for a very Mountain of Ice joined with the Sun, will reflect
Heat, till it is mastered.) Let the Industrious Calculator assure me that the
Luminous Planets do but meet, and he may assure himself without Violence to his
Intellect; or self-imposture, that the Warmth he finds at the Critical time
streams upon his Head from the Configuration. Does not our Verulam acknowledge
so much in his Inquisition into the Form of Heat? Henceforward let no man
therefore take up that vulgar, and scarce reasonable Expression, saying, On
such an Aestival day the Sun is very Hot, and ready to make one faint, etc.
when the difference lies, Elevation considered, very often in our Planets side,
who sculking under the wings of the Sun, betrays his undiscerned Presence by
his Natural glowing together with the greater Luminary.

Wherefore let me bespeak the Dissenter, Sir you are a Philosopher: Some of
these days, you may please to see, are more than ordinary Hot, as May the 13.
An. 1621. June 7. and 9. An. 1623. May the 24. An. 1624. or three days together
in August, An. 1625. or in June, An. 1626. I would know the Cause, as abroad,
so with us at home, An. 1672. July 15, 16, 17. (among others) 3 days hot
together. Whence comes the Heat? The answer is made, Oh it is usual for the
time of the year. But this answer is not Scientifical, it renders not the
Cause. If a Philosopher enquire after the Nature of Sleep, the cause is not
assigned by saying, It is usual, or, it is the time of Night; the gentle
Unctuous cooling vapors, to bemist and charm the Sensory, is the Cause:
Feverish and Famished Men sleep not for all the time of Night. So, be it never
so much the time of the year, place the Sun where you please, there is no
necessity this day must be hot with Express or Excessive Heat. Those 3 days of
July, though inclined to Heat as much almost as any. are not always found under
that Character. If the Enquiry were, whether a hot day in Summer were a
Prodigy? Such answer, indeed, were punctual: No, by no means; It Is usual, and
according to the time of the year: But when the Question proceeds of Cause
wherefore at that time of the year? Nay, wherefore on the very day, which might
have proved cold, notwithstanding the time of the year: We must look into a
more secret and abstruse cause: I must find a Reason from the very Constitution
of the Primrose or Violet, If I mean to answer the Question of its early
Blossom. The time of the year allows only an aptitude or Inclination. The
Argument does not follow from the Power or Inclination, to the Act; This day is
hot, because it was probable it would. What then (Sir) is the Cause? The
Astrologer reasonably urges, Chance can not be it, for what determines the
Effect? since all Events, though never so casual, are such, not because they
have no determinant, but because it is unknown.

71. Gassendus pressed with this Objection, denies Chance Ore tenus, while he
tells us, that the Sun, Moon, and Stars, are the general Causes of many
Phenomenon; but beside these, (for he knew generals were indetermined) He
mentions other Inferior Sublunar Causes, Causes per se (as he calls them)
Singular, Special, which determine them to Hic and nunc, Meteor. Epicur. p.
944. by which Cause if he means the nature of the place, situation, etc.
Subterraneous Fires, and Eruptions of vapors, we admit them heartily as well
as he. But certainly, Place and Situation are Circumstances, rather than
Causes, without which the Heavens can do nothing: That we confess, yet we deny
that they may be called therefore Efficients, Principal and Singular Causes.
The Fires Subterraneous seem to put on for Efficiency; but we profess to
believe that these Fires are not so Universal, as I see is imagined by himself
and others, Agricola, etc. who have not kindness enough for the Ethereal.

72. Neither, secondly, is this Cause but general still, and indeterminate, as
they say of our Heavens; the Determinate is yet to seek. For suppose the Fire
sends forth the Vapors, and the Vapors condense into Rain. Stay! May not the
Cloud be barren? The Vapor Dry, Foggy, yea, Pellucid? As in Serenity and
Drought is seen; seeing by the Testimony of the Baroscope, the Serene and
dryest Air makes the greatest pressure: What then makes it a Cloud, say I,
rather than Serenity? The Sun shines, and the Fires are at work, and yet
Serenity and Drought continues, many times, for the greater part of the year.
The answer is, the Vapor is condensed to Rain, it gathers into a Cloud. The^
for the (...)! For if Cold be mentioned to the generation of Clouds or Rain; we
ask further, What encourages the Cold at that time? Is it a Mid-Region? We
admit the Notion. But then, why does it not always Rain, or Cloud, according to
the Temper of the Region? As long as Vapors ascend continually, why don't they
as continually descend? (What we say in an Alembic.) The Subterranean Fires
work Day and Night, Winter and Summer, and the Mid-Region is never Free,
because the Superior (the more remote) Region is never Free also. Neither may
it be said, That there is variety in the Mid-Region, as not always of the same
Temper; sometimes extreme, sometimes more remiss. For so, it is true it may Rain
when it is remiss, and Snow or Hail when it is extreme. But in Frosty days, I
hope the Middle Region is extreme; Why don't it Snow then? How comes so many
Serene and pure Frosts, as all natural and wholesome Frosts are? Want of Supply
cannot be pretended; the Fires do their Duty, and at all times alike, for any
thing they know; whence is it that the Middle Region is Idle? For, that
sometimes this Region is guilty of no Cold? I suppose all that travel the Alps,
the Mountain Rhodope, Taurus, Libanus, or, our own Penmaur; All, who have heard
of a perpetual Snow lying thereon, will not consent. Surely then the difference
of the Temper of the Region, defined to be sometimes moderate, sometimese of an
extreme Cold, lies not in any confused disorder, or chance, but in Vicissitudes
Regular, with Anomaly, such as the Seasons themselves are capable of, and no
more; a sign that they are governed by Ordinances of Nature, excluding
Casualties. For if some Heat, beside Solar and Subterranean, governs the Tepor
of the year, as Cold is a privation, at least, it must be governed by the same
Caelestial Cause; nor can we rest till we have found that Cause in the Heavens.

73. To this the learned Man Objects thus, If it rains to day, it does not rain
again the same day 12 Month, but sooner or later, according as the matter is
prepared. To which I answer, If I should have said that it rains not at a New
or Full, but sooner or later, according as the matter is ripe, I should have
Fibb'd; seeing it is confessed that it usually raineth then, whosoever ripens
the matter. And so, I hope, I may retort in our Aspect of; that however, matter
is prepared at other times, it is usually disposed for Wind and Rain then. But
this objection concerns not Aspects, of which in general enough has bin said;
but is rather levelled at the Annual Revolutions of Stated days: No Question
but the matter is prepared for Rain, when it Rains, but who prepared it so
variously, so uncertainly, under such Difformity and Dissonance, (to comply
with the Objection) is the Question: The Sun and Moon alone, we have made good,
cannot be the Causes preparatory or determinant of a Shower, etc. nor can any
matter possibly prepare it self; as Ice cannot thaw it self, the very Notion of
matter being passive. He must have excluded Other Requisites, which he knew
Gelestial Philosophy pretends to, before he could justly infer so Universal a
Negative. It does not rain again the same day 12 Month, Ergo, the Sun is not
the Cause. I allow it, I will help the Argument, and say, it does not rain
again the same day 19 Year, when as the Golden Number tea cheth us, the Sun and
Moon are in the same place, Ergo, the Sun and Moon are not the Causes. But
still the Argument is Cripple, which says, Ergo, not the Heavens. A blind
Consequence that sees not more Lights than two in the Heavens. It will be said,
that by the same day 12 Month (or 19 Years rather) the Objection means the Sun,
Moon, and Fixed Stars: What then? Are not the Planets overlook't? Do they make
nothing of a World? The Planets are Worlds? They know the Sun is bigger than
the Earth, a World Celestial; is a World, as say Pretenders, less than the Sun,
etc. Now for the Fixed Stars, what has the same day 12 Months to do with any
of them? But those few only that relate to the Sun and Moon there posited? If
the Objector do believe, as he does not, that the Fixed are concerned with the
Sun, the Controversy would be soon dispatched; for the Fixed would also be
found to be concerned, which relates to 's or 's places, etc. And that which is
a high Truth, VII. Companies at least of the Fixed are concerned every day,
according to the number of the Erratiques, which transit by them: And if it
rains not the same day 12 Month, the failure proceeds from the different
marshalling of those Companies. But the VII. are always engaged to every day of
the Month or year. And hence comes the Halt, or delay of the Weather, which the
Objection takes notice of. Most times the beginning of March is Stormy,
sometimes the End, not according as the matter is prepared, as if the Womb of
the Air teemed so many Days, Weeks and Months before it brought forth, and then
by the same degrees returned to its Sterlity. This is the Grave Idea, which men
have of Natures Productions; attributing to One, what belongs to VII. For
Matter may be prepared and unprepared, and prepared again, as often as the Air
is overcast, and the Winds blow hollow, and drive away the Clouds. Matter may
be prepared in an Hours time, the Wind may turn in an Instant; verily as soon
as the Sun is set, it is ordinary for the Wind to vere about. It Is ordinary for
one Wind to blow by Night, and another by Day: The Barometer will show us the
Truth of this, which will change in an Hour or two from Fair to Rainy, and
never shows above a day before hand. The reason is, when there are more Workmen
about the Preparation then is imagined, the more sudden is the Effect: So that
hence also comes that Dissonancy of the Weather not complyant with the Season.
Cold at Midsummer, and warm at Christmas, because every Planet but the Sun,
Venus and Mercury, are at liberty. The Sun first makes the Season, Venus and
Mercury attend him; but the we know, and and may saunter, or make Excurons
where they please, to take up their Winter Quarters by themselves, while the
Sun and his Gang, are meteing out the Vernal or Summer Seasons.

74. According to the Nature of the Months, April we know, is inclined to Rain,
May to Warmth, June to Showers, July and August to Heat, January to Rain,
February to Snow, March to Hail and Turbulency. Suppose these Months be mingled
together, as they are mixed by Planetary Motion, the same Weather will the
Planets assuredly make, being found in the Signs answering thereto. So that if
it be warm at time of the year, because the Motion of the Sun chalks out the
Months of July and August, it may Rain at that time, because a Fourth Planet
may be in April's Quarters, and Hail, because a fifth may be in Marches Limits.
And do not the Vulgar confess that many times One Months Weather is found in
another? Yes verily! Place now Planets enough in Winter Signs, and it may
Freeze in March, and Snow in April; yea, as we have heard, not impossible in
June.

75. Oh! But the same Planets never meet again the second time in the same
Place and Posture. We answer: they may meet again in Equivalent places. For do
we think there are 365. kinds of Weather? Do not diverse Places in the Heavens
agree in the same inclination? Does it Rain only in April? Is not June
Dripping, and November, December, etc. So the seeming great Objection vanishes.
Either the same Planets may meet in Equivalent Places, or Equivalent Planets
may meet in the same Places. Verily, not Picus, nor Gassendus, with all their
Causes per se, or per what they please, can give account of One Frost dissolved
in Winter, No: Not after they have felt the Benefit of the milder Air; nor of
One Chill day in Summer, though they have smarted by it; much less of a
solitary Constitution, when one or two days shall strangely thrust themselves
into a Month of a Contrary temper. They admire and despair to find the Reason
why Winter dare not sometimes show his hoary Head (Bald at all times, but
sometimes not Hoary at all) and yet at other times march toward the torrid
Zone, pass the Line, and Face the Aestival Camp. No account, I say, can they
give of a White Easter, and a Soultry Christmas: Snow in May or April, and
Thunder in December. No reason for Long and Lasting Rains, seeing the Earths
Evaporation is not responsible; because the Earth, according as the Fires, are
continually at work, Evaporates in Drought as well as Moisture.

76. Gassendus observes indeed, p. 996. that the Workmen in the Mines presage
Rain upon the rising of the Fumes Subterranean. Let those Workmen, or some body
for them, be taught to consult an Ephemeris, and they may chance to find some
bonny Aspect at that time; as we may see in the Aspects of the Superiors,
which plainly agrees with our Hypothesis, and teaches that all nature is
troubled at their Presence, being irritated more at one time than another. Now
that all Nature is troubled, (to make a digression) and the Subterranean Fumes,
the Evidences of such Trouble, do rise at the Presence of Aspects, I have met
with a remarkable Instance or two, to lead in those who can make Additions. The
First above an hundred years ago, in the Month of July, An. 1547. which I shall
tell in a Famous Doctors own Words, in the Margin of his Ephemeris. viz. Primo
Julii apud Harreret Cati duo Longam postpugnam, in fontem morientes utrique
inciderunt, Pater familias, fontem in fici istis cadaveribus haud cupiens,
puerum demisit istos ut educeret, at puer ipse mortuus extractus est; descendit
homo alter, his mortuus; etiam tertius insania correptus, Patris Familias nomen
fuit Ryve duodecim mill. pass. a Fulburnia factum. The Later but lately indeed,
viz. Aug. IV. 1679. the day when most parts of England felt the Dire Lightning
and Thunder to their Cost. Those of our Neighbor Borough in Southwark,
remember it by a Woman slain with Lightning, dwelling in Kent Street; yea, and
by this Story, parallel to the former, when a young man, a servant upon
occasion went down into a Well belonging to the Family, stifled with a Damp,
groaned his last. And a second descending to the relief of the First, underwent
the same Fate; the Third not daring to be so charitable as to descend to
either. Now that the Heavens were set at both these times so to provoke Nature,
appears by this, that in both these we shall find Aspects of; yea, and at both
times posited in the Tropic: The First, in the Winter Tropic, and the Later in
the Summers: This is the second Story.

77. There is a Third Story of a Damp at the Fatal Sessions in the City of
Oxford, not arising so much from the Prisoners Frouzy Bodies, which might be
imagined, as from the Earth, at such a critical time. No less than 300. are
recorded in Stow to have perished, some on the Spot, others in a short time
after, An. 1557. who will reveal to us the cause of such a Fatal Damp, then,
and there arising! Let others search into the Nature of the Soil; As to the
Circumstance of time, why then, Oh! if could be found again, at or near the
Tropic, then we might draw some conclusion: Verily no otherwise. was then, then
also on the Winter Tropic, opposing, at, or near the other. See the
Ephemerides; so apparent is it, that an Aspect can trouble the Universe.
Pardon, good Reader, the Digression, it is only out of place a little, we should
have troubled you elsewhere with it.

78. Now after all, premising but one Postulate, I shall ask a Question; the
Postulate is, that the same day 12 Month, vulgarly so called, is not the same
day in Astrological Notion; which is defined by the same degree and its
Revolution. This degree answers not to that day next year. This Supernumerary
Bissextile Day introding, dispossesses the degree of its Room in the Bed, and
thrusts it so far, that it lies half out and half in, dividing it self between
two, that I may not say three days. Gassendus then should have obviated this,
and have said, I know that by reason of the Intercalary Day, while it is in
Fidai, the same vulgar day answers not adequately to the same degree; and
different Days may be concerned in considerable parts of the same degree, but
neither at One, or the Other does it rain again the next Twelvemonth; Ergo, the
Heavens are not the Cause. But he was not so provided; I confess it does not
always rain the same day 12 Month, if it had, Gassendus had bin an Astrologer,
and reconciled to good Learning. Now for my Question: What, If we produce some
days wherein it does often Rain next Revolution of Twelve Months, and by much
the most part, if we consider the Identity of the degree? So that I wonder what
day Gassendus does pitch upon? And whether he consulted his own observation, or
some other Diary? It may be he observed a year or two, and when it did not
prove the 2d. yea, and a 3d. time, he concluded. But how hard that is, has bin
shown already, especially when after a 2d. or 3d. failer, it holds, as in the
New has bin observed for 7 continued years after. Had he followed his blow,
and said, that All days are indifferent, and alike inclined, and for this
appealed to the Diaries, then he had routed us; But we Challenge all the World
to show that, or any thing near it. For beside the Ancient Diaries, which by
the equal Judicious are not to be questioned, Gassendus might have seen to the
contrary in Keplers: and every Modern Diary will confirm.

79. It must be time now to name some days if we can, for a Taste, thus I do it.
An. 1621. Ephemerid. Kepler. I find Wind and Rain. Jan. XII. An. 1622. die eod.
Wind and Snow. What would Gassendus have said if he had pitched upon this day?
The 3d. year, An. 1623. Snow. An. 24. High Winds on one of the Days (for here
are two concerned in the same degree) and Snow on the other. An. 1625. Much
Rain. Lo! For Five years together, Rain or Snow. An. 1626. I find neither, but
warm weather. But An. 1625. Some Snow. An. 1628. Stiff Winds for one of the
Days. And the Ninth year, An. 1629. It snow'd. -- Rain or Snow VII. years in
IX. So have we one Day. I have a second; Feb. 26. the degree is 18. where it
Rain or Snows (believe me) VIII. times in IX. years. It may be worth the
Describing in his own Words. February XXVI.

1621. Pluit Noctu. 1622. Pluvia Nix Frigus Nix. 1623. Neb. Nix. 1624. Gelu
venti Nimbi Niv. 1625. Obscur. Nix. 1626. Venti Ning. Pluviose 1627. Ningebat.
Continenter. 1628. Turbid, Vernat. 1629. Ning. Venti, Tonuit.
80. We need no more, when Thunder gives his voice for us; when the Heavens
themselves speak out for Astrology. And the Reader may think this pretty
feasible, if, what is true, every degree in it self as it speaks but it self,
its own 60 integral Minutes; so it respects two more, one on each side, as the
Liberties of the Mid-Degree, to which the Terms of the said Degree do not
reach, but the Influence does. So within Temple Bar I am within the City of
London (within the Jurisdiction of it) though without the Walls. Our Aspect we
grant, does not so much as we see, the Sun, and some of the Fixed can; the
reason is evident, viz. that Mercury is but one, and some Fixed may be many, a
notable part of an Asterism, but it is effectual enough to evince a strong
inclination, and thereby, by Gassendus's leave, declare the Nature of a Planet:
For excepting the Luminaries, says he, they cannot know the Nature of any
Planet, nor ascertain any Prediction thereby; for which he appeals to
experience which teaches us, that be the Prediction what it will, the Event
brings as many, yea more Experiments to the contrary, and therefore good Night
Astrology, Scientia Futilis, vana and nulla, There Is nothing in it.

81. This we know is the grand popular objection, which Cries, not reasons us
down. For those Gentlemen who please to make use of this Objection, I desire
them to consider again, for we are forced to repeat, that while they go to
overthrow a most useful Speculation, Will they, Nill they, They establish it.
For the Words of the Objection are these, The contrary to the Prediction
happens as often, or more often than the Prediction. If the contrary happens
but as often (and sometimes, though but rarely, more often.) Is not there a
great inclination of the Planet? And does not the prediction come near, and
hover about the Truth? Verily he has a great Aim that draws the Bow so
dexterously that it hits the White as often as he misses it. A Prediction of Art
is far from nothing, though it comes but to even terms: Probable it must be
when it succeeds as often as Fails, as it must do, if it fails but as often as
it succeeds.

82. We have proved, the, the event being observed at such continued times,
produces Rain, as to a Moiety of the Number, that Aspect being then a Natural
ingredient into a Natural Effect, the Total may be made up, sure, by the
Investigation of its Con-Causes; otherwise there would be a Scibile, a
Conclusion under natural Knowledge without any possible Natural Premises, which
is impossible; since the Principia essendi, as we have used to speak are the
same with Principia Cognoscendi: If it have the First, it must have the Second.
Nor must we object the squaring of a Circle, or the perpetual Motion not yet
found out, because, if we mark it, they are Conclusions in quest and pursuit,
not yet in being: But our conclusion is in actual Existence, whose Principle we
enquire after. But we see it Rain again, and again; wherefore if we object to
purpose, we must Assign the Longitude, the distance from the first Meridian,
etc. for we are all actually possessed of That, but for the Knowledge of that
Distance, I answer, it must be possible either from the variation of the
Compass, etc. as has bin of late professed, or the Hour of the Night being
given, and the verticity of the Moon, etc.

83. In vain then does the Learned Man Triumph, who after a whole Winter
observed, avows his Astrologers Predictions to hit but 6. or 7. in 130 times:
For this we are assured of, that all those days (130. of them) were not. or.
If he find but 6. or 7 days hit in so many Conjunctions with the or, then
Astrologers must not show their Heads again. If not, they are not quite
Bankrupt; they have some little Bank left. 2ly. He must not deny what he has
already granted; Astrologers, he confesses (or else we should have heard of
it) succeed near upon as often as they fail. 3ly. Nor must he be angry that we
have proved in part that he is not a Competent Judge; For if Three days must be
allowed to a Solar or with the, and Three, yea Four and Five sometimes, to
(beside what more might be said if I had his Diary in my Power) he might have
consulted better the Astrologers Credit and his own. I am sure our English
Writers pronounce cautiously with such Limitations, not always on a determinate
Day, but at or about the time; which on the Solar Aspects with hold at least a
Triduum, but with and much longer. Now, if in one or more of these days there
happen an Hiatus, the Aspect nevertheless is rightly stated, though the Effect
happens but once in the Triduum: For so we have seen the Countryman content
himself with his Maxim of the Lunar Influence, though several times his
expectation fails on the day of the Change, and on the other days also; That
which fails may be scarce considerable, if so be at other times he has amends
made him: for what fails in the smaller Observations, is made up in the larger;
Otherwise a Puny Philosopher will say the Suns faculty of Warmth is
extinguished, because it Snow'd at Midsummer; and April is not inclined to
Rain, because some years have not met with three drops in the whole Month.

84. To conclude therefore, there is nothing in Astrology, is very hard, when,
as I am persuaded (and no Friend to Vanity) that there may be something in
Cabala, Gematry; something in the mysterious Force of Numbers, in Critical
Days, Climacteric Years, the Doctrine of Magnetisms, Sympathies, and Natural
Magic, Transmutations of Metals, Doctrine of Moles in the Body, Doctrine of
Signatures of Plants, Dreams, Chiromancy, Genethliac Skill; (as to Health and
Sickness at least.) Let not the Reader think in the least we will add Geomancy,
Steganography, occult Philosophy, or any thing whose grounds hide from Mortal
search, or have a Sulphurous flavor of the unclean Spirit. But I have seen
from one of the Esprits of France, a Discourse of Chiromancy, (a Senseless
piece of Learning as ordinarily taught) yet made by him pretty and plausible.
We are Infidels too many, desirous of unseasonable and immense Convictions,
such as cannot be advanced. The Good God of Heaven has provided for us in a
temperate Zone, Places of Habitation and Rest: Such as are too good for us
because of its Calmnes. Will we not believe a Devil unless we see him? Nor
consent to an Influence unless we feel its Fury? Shall we conceit the Heaven
has no Power over the Earth unless it shakes us out of it? Destructive
Tempests, Hurricanes, vast Deluges, Lightnings, Rain, Comets, Earthquakes,
Dismal Darkness, Heat and Drought extreme and intolerable; the greatness of
these Effects, Foul and vast as they are, may excuse the Frequency, with our
Thanks to the Creator for Natures kindness to us, and yet must afford us also a
fair Item of such Inclinations, which at times brake in upon us. I confess it is
no matter for enquiring the Cause why I yawn sometimes, or why the Ear tingles?
I may be weary, or talking, or restless: But if, as God defend, I sink under a
dire Fit of an Apoplexy, or Epileptic Distemper, though but seldom it happens,
I shall be jealous I have an aptitude to it.

CHAP. II. Conjunction of Sol and Venus
1. and 2. A noble and permanent Aspect. 3. Aspects, their pretty Vicissitudes.
4. The Table of the Direct Aspect. 5. The Table of the Retrograde, 6. Somewhat
prolix, but necessary. 7. The contributes to Warmth. 8. And yet also to Cold;
how the Congress of Two Catorifick Bodies may increase, yea, and abate Heat. 9.
The Tradition of the Ancients. 10. Justified as to bright Air. 11. As to
Showers. 12. Contignations of Clouds, whence they proceed. 13. Justified as to
High Winds. 14. Though the prolixity of our Table be disadvantageous to our
Method, we find notwithstanding a Moiety for Moisture in the Direct. The
Retrograde Aspect brings moisture once within the Triduum. 15, 16. Presentment
of some days from the Table which brought store of Rain, and not a few, which
rained all the day long. Divine Providence proved thereby. How contributes to
such lasting Rains. Astrology demonstrates. 17, 18. Fleeced Clouds, stripped
Clouds have their determinate Cause. 19. Some account of Clouds riding
contrary. 20. Of the Morn, and Evening Tincture of the Clouds. 21. Difference
of Mist, inclines to Fog. 22. Platick Aspects explained, as powerful as the
Central, whereby we give an account of the Effects and its Duration. 23.
Recourse to Keplers Diary. 24. Due and proportionable distance is operative as
well as a Central Conjunction. 25. Some Light to distinguish the Effects even
when the Aspects are co-incident. 26. Our Aspect contributes to Waters. 27. in
elongation seems to contribute to the same. 28. Our Aspect attended with
Chasmes, and a parcel of fiery Meteors. 29. Yea some Comets and Earthquakes
occur. 30. Shortness of understanding it may be, to multiply Prodigies; to
acknowledge them is None. Nature not wholly excluded from Prodigy. 31.
Conjecture why Ptolemy ascribes no Fiery Meteors to, etc. 32. Tycho and Kepler
favor our Pretense, as to the Original of Comets. An attempt to give an
account of the Duration of a Comet. 33. Some instances in Floods. 34. And of
Monstrous Hail. 35. A Hurracane. 36. The Abstract drawn from the premises.
1. THe was a great, our present is a glorious Aspect; for is a fair Star by
all confession, White and pure, as the Flame of Virgin-Wax: Wherefore Nature
has given the more glorious Star a greater Orb in comparison of the other, ( I
mean) that her glories, might be often more observable. She therefore becomes
our Phosphorus at times of the year, and bids our Early Shepherd Good Morrow;
not only his Star, but his Valentine. At Even, like a kind Companion, she stays
by him all the Civil time of the Night, and then winks her adieu.

2. It may be judged also a Noble Aspect from the term of its duration, where
the Sun and She, within reach many times, go hand in hand a Fortnight together.
So that the experienced Astrologer has that one grand Influence to manage all
the while. I speak of the Partil Aspect, or what ought to be called so; since
the Platique Aspect reaches beyond, far beyond, as we shall see immediately.

3. The of and are Direct, or Retrograde: Hitherto we have spoken of the Direct
only. In the Retrograde (as in.) There are Four Days will limit his Influence.
In the Platique further. In this Diversity of Motion I cannot but take notice
of the pretty Vicissitudes of Direct and Retrograde every 10 Months; so that
every Second year there happens two s, the one in the Direct, the other in the
Retrograde; and every Fourth year so admirably contrived, that the same degree
of the Zodiac possessed in the First Revolution, you shall find it very near
inhabited again in the Second, the One Direct, the Other Retrograde, and vice
versa. And such pretty Methods I remember I might have observed in the
Conjunctions of and; yea, in the Quadrates of the and; but what have we to do
now but to open its Evidence.

Conjunction of Sol and Venus.
Direct.
3. January.
An. 1671. Jan. 29. 21. XXI. Close, warm season, H. wd 12 p. S W. XXII. Close,
H. wd noct. pressed. Tempestuous wd ante Luc. s. misle. S W. XXIII. H. wd ante L.
bright summer day; Athes. N W. XXIV. Frost, overcast n. S W. XXV. Rain ort.
Warm; rain 5 p. and gusts, Winds n. S. XXVI. Fr. m. warm: Snow and Rain 1 p.
Wetting 1 p. S W. XXVII. Some moisture 4 p. W. XXVIII. Fog, close, wetting day.
Sly. XXIX. Windy, s. fog, warm; H. wind n. Sly. XXX. Rain m. and 3 p. H. and
cold wd. N W. XXXI. Fair and Frost m. close, H. wd. a. L. Nly. Feb. 1. Frosty,
Nly 2. White Frost, High wind. E. III. Frosty, offer Snow. E. IV. Frosty, close
m. p. N E. V. White Frost, fair, Halo VI. s. Snow a. m. Halo 9 p. Nly. VII.
Misty, misling die tot. W. VIII. Wetting a. m. and post. mer. W. X. Wetting a.
m. and m. p. d. An. 1679. 25. 15. XIV. Frosty, snow noct. N W. XV. Ice on
Thames. Bridge stopped 9 m. Indisposit. XVI. Fr. s. snow, observed m. Snowing p.
m. per tot. ad 10 p. and fog, mild hor 9 p. N. XVII. Fr. s. relent, offering p.
m. N. XVIII. Fr. cloudy, not cold. N E. XIX. Fr. Gr. fog, takes up 10 m. N E.
XX. Fr. Cloudy, open, wd. N. XXI. Sharp wd, warmish, s. snow. has not offered.
N E. XXII. Red m. in S E. Fr. s. drissing p. m. XXIII. No frost, s. snow 8 m.
snow and thaw p. m. p. tot. ad 12 p. N E. XXIV. Sn. ante L. most part and 6 m.
thaw p. m. XXV. Fr. snow. very sharp wd. Freez, relent. N E. XXVI. Terrible fr.
H. wd and cutting by complaint of all. XXVII. Very sharp winds, Thames covered
fere. As cold as has been known. Misty. N E. XXVIII. Fr. vehement, L. snow
ante 1. milder, misty round about, though shine. N E. T. M. at Fort S. George
in E. Indies. N E. XXIX. Fr. fog, drisse 5 p. welcome thaw. N W. XXX. Gr. fog,
dry, thaw. S W. XXXI. s, fog, close p. m. N E. much Ice on the River. Feb. 1.
February.
An. 1655. Feb. 3. 24. XXVI Januar. Warm n. moisture a. L. R. all day wd. Ely.
XXVII. cold, dark, cold wd. Ely. XXVIII. Fair, frosty, s. gr. clouds. XXIX. Fr.
snow lies. XXX. Snow, scarce freez. XXXI. Frost, snow lies. I. Febr. Fr. soggy,
warm; R. n. S W. II. Windy. misty, misling by fits. S W. III. R. a ort. and m
p. wd, warm. IV. Wind gentle R. m. warm, more earnest Rain. V. Misling, warm.
VI. Fair, windy, dash of R. n. terrible blustering. N W. VII. H. wd, flying
clds, R. o. N W. VIII. Wet a. m. cldy, wdy. N E. IX. Cold wind, wet m. cl. cold
X. H. Wind. s. R. a. l. cold, misty, drisle m. dark. S W. XI. R. a. L. ground
mist n. s. drops 10 m. 1663. Die 1. 22 una cum and. XXIII. Jan. Fr. fog, clear,
a shower 10 p. XXIV. and XXV. Foggy, frost, foggy, clear. S W. XXVI. Fog, fr.
close, l. R. 10 m. 4 p. 7 p. XXVII. R. 6 m. close. XXVIII. Fr. snow a. m. hail
o. Nly. XXIX. Hard fr. with snow, drisling n. N E. XXX. Fr. extreme, s. snow m.
N E. XXXI. Fr, s. snow 6 p. N E. I Feb. Fr. extreme, cold wd, s. snow. II. Fr.
extreme white clouds. N. III. Snow a. L. fr. fog, close, yielding o. freez. IV.
Frosty, fair. V. and VI. Fr. fog, much Ice in Thames. VII. Fr. fog, white clds.
Wly. VIII. Frosty, fair, 9 Halo.
April.
1658. Apr. Die 8. IX. X. XI. ***. XII. Close m. warm; clouds Red, Wind and
gusts, clouds ride N E. XIII. Fr. m. close a. L. and misty ropes, bright warm.
N E. XIV. Fr. m. mist, ropes, warm, cool wd, blew mist occ: red at n. N E. XV.
Closing a. L. 10 m. deep blew mist, cold occ. it dropped. Weatherglass promised
R. N E. XVI. Fr. drisling p. m. showers occ. Hail at Land. 9 m. blew mist taken
up, dropping coasting showers. XVII. Close, warm, Rainy m. at Beconfield.
ropes. N W. XVIII. Fr. fair. R. great drops, coasting. So occ. N W. XIX. Fr.
rope, Meteors on side. S E. XX. Fr. cold or. offering to drop p. m. cold,
gusty. N E. XXI. Close, wdy, wetting a day break till night, very cold. N W.
XXII. Shower m. warm, close m p. clearing occ. N W. XXIII. Close m. s. wd, rainy
a o. ad n. welcome. N W. XXIV. Warm, dropping 1 p. gr. drops 9 p. Thund. 3 Claps
in the E. 9 p. much Rain and Thunder. d. 15. XXV. Close m. warm, open o.
flashes of Lightning, shedding 3 p. S E. S W. Clouds in Scenes. XXVI. Fair,
warm, s. lightning N E. and some Meteors. N E. 1666. 16. 6. gr. 5 did.. VII.
H. wind, fair m. overc. 8 m. mild and fine showers o. and 2 p. VIII. Sweet R.
a. m. tot. R. 2 p. 5 p. 9 p. W. S E. IX. s. moisture m. fair m. p. Hail,
coasting showers 11 m. hail 5 p. s. drops 6 p. X. Fog m. and a. m. Ely. Close
die tot. R. 7 p. 9 p. cold, rain. XI. Cold drops a. m. misling o. pouring R. 2
p. open 11 p. and freez Wly. XII. Fr. fog, close m. p. gentle rain 11 p. E.
XIII. Cold, mist m. open n. wetting 1 p. 4 p. etc. R. 8 p. W. p. m. so at even,
clouds in Scenes. XIV. Mist m. cold a. m. R. 6 p. ad 8 p. S W. XV. Mist,
hottish a. m. cool, brisk wind. W. XVI. Close, wetting m. p. H. wd and wetting
all n. Wly. Nly. XVII. Misty, wdy, stormy p. m. R. hard 8 p. XVIII. R. a. l.
wdy, rough weather, s. drisling R. p. m. hot. S W. W. S. XIX. Fair m. bright,
hot day; lightning, R. and Thunder 10 p. wd cool, mist, wind blow hottish. S W.
XX. Close m. s. dewing, open and hot; toward Even clear. S W. XXI. Close, misty
m. fair, hottish, bright n. S E. XXII. Mist, streaked clds, hot wind. XXIII. R.
or. fair, white clds. S.
April.
1674. Apr. 12. 2. V. S W. open, clouds in Scenes. VI. Nly. mist m. showers 11
m. wd change Sly p. m. then Ely. VII. N. E. Showers 9 m. warm, storm at the
Wells at Lyn, deep Shipwreck. XIII. Fair, but s. showers, and cold, clouds fly
Ely. Aches 10 m. IX. Close a. m. open p. m. misty, Aches, misling 10 p. X.
Showers 11 m. etc. warmer, Aches. S W XI. R. n. R. 2 p. Ely. Aches. XII. Wly
mist, open a. m. close p. m. brisk wind. S W. Aches. XIII. N E. suspicious a.
m. warm, open m. p. Aches. XIV. Hot and dry, misty air, castle clouds N E.
Aches. XV. N E. Fair, dry, hot. XVI. N E. s. R. 5 m. warm, lowering p. m. XVII.
S W. close m. p. s. R. 7 p. Aches. XVIII. Nly. close. XIX. Ely. Open, dry, s.
wet, warm S E. and N E. XX. Sly. H. wd 4 p and clds in Scenes. XXI. Close,
misty, shower 9 m. 10 m. at Islington wd, R. o. p. etc. tempestuous. S W. but
Ely n. XXII. Tempest a. l. and die tot. S W.
June.
1653. June 26. 15. XIX. L. R. m. cloudy, clear m. misty, R. N. XX. Cldy, some
drops at n. Rain Blood at Pool, Childrey. XXI. XXII. Cloudy, s. Sunshine. N.
XXIII. Cldy m. XXIV. Clear, cloudy, windy. N. XXV. Wdy, clds, s. R. n. N. XXVI.
Dropping A. L. clear m. p. misty. N. XXVII. Clear m. cldy, rainy. N W. XXVIII.
s. frost, clear, cloudy, windy. W. XXIX. Clouds, s. wd, Rainy at n. Sly. XXX.
Rainy, windy, misling, windy, at n. S W. I. July. Windy, wet, open at n. S W.
II. July. Wind, soaking Rain all day store. III. Clear, a shower espied N. Ely.
IV. Clear m. V. Fair. 1661. D. 25. 12. una cum and. XVIII. Cloudy, fog. XIX.
Cloudy 9 m. s. drops. heat. N E. S W. XX. Clear all day, even cloudy,
highbliting. Ely. XXI. Wind, cold, H. wd m. XXII. Cloudy, cool m. clear m p.
Ely. XXIII. Cloudy, cool, s. wd appears, Even cldy. XXIV. Cloudy, cold day,
windy gusts, Even cool, close, sometime, lowering warmer. N E. XXV. Cloudy, cold
day. N E. XXVI. Cloudy, cold m. and o. hot n. hot p. m. N. XXVII. Fog m. clear,
hot day. S W. N W. N E. XXVIII. s. R. m. cldy m p. Hot day and vesp. N W. XXIX.
Cloudy, wind cold, blew mist n. XXX. Cloudy m. p. cool o. N W. I. July. Cloudy,
appear. hot m. p. N. W. 1669. 22. 11. XV. Heat, s. clds, fog m. wd n. S W. XVI.
Heat, clds, overc. 10 p. and probably Lightning at n. Wly. XVII. Shower a. L. 3
m. warm, somewhat overc. cool wd n. Wly. XVIII. Warm, cool w. pale mist at n.
Wly. XIX. Mist, red w. fair, warm, cooler. N E. XX. Mist, pale mist at n. cool.
Nly. XXI. Mist, fair, warm, pale mist n. Nly. XXII. Fog m. fair, fog increased
8 m. hot and dry. XXIII. Mist m. fog 9 m. at rise, hot, dry, misty m. p. XXIV.
Warm, clds gather as o. close n. N E. XXV. close m. fair, cool. N E. XXVI. Fog
m. s. thin clds. N. XXVII. Fog m. pale, thick clds, dry season. Aches. Wly. XX.
Fog 4 m. a. m. hot drought, heat, drops 7 p. Ely m. Wly XXIX. Fog, hot, dry,
clouds n XXX. Close, Thunderclap 10 m. 1677. Die 19. 8. XIII. N W. warm, open,
overcasting 1 p. overc. 9 p. W. Indisposition. XIV. Fair m. cloudy 10 m.
pregnant clouds, warm N E. Fair a. m. much lowering 2 p. offering 4 p. XV. Heat,
drops 6 p. soultry even, and thick in the W. as if Thunder were near. S W. m.
p. E. at n. XVI. Floating white clds, warm 9 m. Ely but p. m. Wly. vesp. Sly.
White clds ride from the N. XVII. Shower 1 m. and a ort. close, mist, offer,
gentle R. 6 fere occ. at occ. R. 11 p. hot. XVIII. Wet 2 m. said the Watchman,
close R. 2 p. H. wd 3 p. hempen clds. Light. in N W. as if near day. XIX. Fair,
s. mist, lowering o. clds appear Nly. lower Wly. warm, dry, red clds occ. wd
bright vesp. m. p. Ely clds a N. ad S. 11 p. XX. Fair m. misty cl. 11 m.
floting, s. lowering clds 7 p. clds fly Ely. and wind various; little Meteor
over 12 p. XXI. Mist m. bright, s. mist, brisk wind, crave Meteors near Pegasus
wing 11 p. heat. XX. Mist, fair, shine; red 1 p. Heat border clds in W. occ.
hempen clouds; red clds occ. XXIII. Foggy m. and dry, bright d. wd Ely. occ.
hempen clds many occ. blond red s. upper steec'd clouds ride from the W. 8 p.
XXIV. Fog m. clear hempen clouds o. s. little thick clds in S. not discoverable
for the mist; hot wd Ely. occ. the Heavens round the Horizon listed with blew,
not cloud, but mist, soultry n. XX. V Mist, fair, soultry, much Lightning in E.
N. 10 p. Ely. XXVI. R. at n. Fair, bright, heat, cool, brisk wd, s. lowering,
thick clouds riding Nly. 6 p. XXVII Close 5 m. heat, misty, lightning in S E.
in N W. and thunder 9 p. Wly. thunder inter 4 and 5 p. Struck two men at
Farnborough. Indispos. XXVIII. Cloudy m. p. ante 8 m. cloudy and cool Nly;
clearing, warm p. m. Ely. Sly. Wly. Shower at Deptford o. 2 p. seems great in
the Perigee.
August.
1664. Aug. 31. 18. XXIII. Open, misty, cloudy, dry. N W. N E. XXIV. XXV. XXVI.
Frost, mist, bright, dry, S. S E. XXVII. Close m. p. S E. XXVIII. Wind, s. wet
m. mist, drisling. N. S E. XIX. Wet midn. and a. m. Lightn. 9 p. and R. mist at
n. S W. XXX. Mist, wet m. open m. p. Rain n. S W. XXXI. Wet m. p. R. hard 10 m.
showers p. m. and 10. p. hot. I. Sept. Very wet d. drenching drowning day. II.
R. ab n. cloudy, cold m. p. H. wd tot. n. S W. III. Sharp fr. m. bright a. m.
close m. p. IV. Misty m. close m. p. Nly. V. s. rain a. l. close m. fair and
cool n. VI. Foggy m. and offering 5 p. S. VII. R. 4 m. close m. p S. m. N W. p.
m.
August
1672. Aug. 28. 15. XVII. R. die tot. XVIII. Dashing. XIX. T. M. Thunder and
lightning Depford. R. 5 m. 7 m. XX. Hazy m. much lowering 5 p. Ely. XXI. s. wd,
frost, smoking Air. N E. N W. XXII. s. fr. overc, dry. N E. XXIII. Close,
dull, open p. m. N W. XXIV. Close, troubled Air o. and s. dewing, showers 1 p.
Wly. smoaky. XXV. Close m. s. lowering at n. N. Westerly warm. XXVI. Close and
troubled, warm. Wly. XXVII. H. wd, dashing and drisle m. p. S W. XXVIII. Higher
wds, drisle 9 m. dash 10 m. N W. XXIX. H. wd, a. l. and d. tot. R. 7 m. 11 m. S
W. XXX. H. wd. a. l. and d. tot. drisle 7 m. s. drops occ. XXXI. Wind and rain
a. l. wet p. m. Sly. I. Sept. Wind, s. rain 2 p. dash 6 p. Wly. II. H. wd; fair
m. p. coasting shower. S W. III. Aches a. l. and a. m. very cold, windy, IV.
Cold m. fair o. 2. p. shower 6 p. Wly. V. Cold m. flying Clouds, drisle and
wetting o. and 2 p. rough wd. S W.
August.
1680. Aug. 26. 13. XIX. Fog, open. Ely. XX. Close fog. hot, Ely, fair, bright
n. s. gusts of Wind and dry. Nly and Ely. S E. XXI. Gr. early Fog, thin, cloudy
Ely. s. wind, warm, bright, blew, mist Vesp. N E. XXII. Close m. fair 9 m. s.
thin clouds fair, dry, fresh winds, mist vesp. occ. Sly. XXIII. Close m. fair.
fritter-clds 10 m. H. wd 11 m. hot n. praec. hotter than any; stripped clouds
vesp. Aches. XXIV. Close m. very hot, windy, hot, streaked clds, clds coasting
S E. Heat, drops. Gr, rain and Thunder circ. midn. XXV. Open, hot m. Many
sleec't clds a sign of Wet; soultry, overcast and black. S. ward. s. R. 6 p. s.
showers 8 p. 10 p. XXVI. Soultry, hot, close m. p. a. m. s. drops open p. m.
and clouds vanish; lightning in N E. 9 p. much, though shine; Meteors 3. 9 p.
one cross the Heaven; misty air. XXVII. Fog m. not very clear, s. misty, hot,
thick, angry clouds; cloudy Eward; fair n. Wly. and Ely. XXVIII. Troubled air 9
m. and drops Ely. wet and Thunder and Lightning 5 m. ( in Nadir) ad ho. 12.
merid. very dark all that while; showers p. m. hot n. Ely Lightning in E. 11 p.
though shine. XXIX. Close m. s. R. 9 m. 11 m. ante 5 p. ab occ. and ante 9 p.
Sly. XXX. Fair, clds in Scenes, s. lowering, warm Lightn. n. from a cld or two
in the N. Cocks universally ante 5 p. XXXI. Clouds in Scenes m. warm, calm,
hempen clouds. H. Tides noted die 30. 31. clds fly low occ. I. Sept. Very cool
m. and fog thick: Cobwebs many in one Night; Halo; colored 3 m. II. Fog m.
overc. 11 m. s. drops, long Th. occ. in S W. shower after, clds ride S E. wd E.
Thund. ho. 2. clouds craggy occ. Lightn. 8 p. 9 p. III. Halo 2 m. close, cool,
open, warm p. m. Nly m. Sly p. m.
September.
1656. Sept. 2. 20. XXV. Aug. Wind till 3 m. cold, bright. XXVI. Overc. a. L.
mist, cloudy, fair. XXVII. H. wd, cloudy, H. wind n. XXVIII. windy, cloudy,
clear, warm, blew mist. XXX. Close m. clear m. p. I. Sept. Close s. wd, cool
showers; clear n. II. Close m. p. cool wd. III. Close, cold. IV. Overc. 8 m.
wind and lowering o. V. Thick mist, fleeting clouds, variable wds. VI. Wind
rise, overc. blew clds 9 m. VII. Close wd, s. feign blackish clds. VIII. Fair,
overc. wd s. shower o. R. IX. Close, fleeting clds; s. wet; flash of Lightn. 10.
close, red clds.
November.
1659. d. 5. 3. cum. V. Hard wd, sharp frost all n. and d. overc. 2 p. VI. Fr.
very cold. VII. H. fr. cold, overc. 1 p. h. wd p. m. dark, R. snow 8 p. VIII.
Wind all n. snow ante occ. bright, open wd, snow. IX. Wind 5 m. dark, drisling
10 m. wet 1 p. R. 6 p. X. s. wet p. m. R. n. Lightn. Flood. XI. Fair, warm,
cool at n. XII. Very cold fr. gentle R. a ad 2 p. XIII. Very hard fr. overc. 3
p. misty 9 p. XIV. Wd close, drisling 9 m. H. wd n. warm; s. wet. XV. Wind all
n. warm, fleeting clouds, red vesp. XVI. Fair still. XVII. Drisling, warm rain
all d. XVIII. Fair, fr. XIX. Fog, fr. XX. Fr. fog all day. XXI. Fr. fog all d.
very great fog. XXII. Fair d. fog n. fr. XXIII. Fr. and fog. XXIV. Muddy dark
m. fair p. m. XXV. Sun shine, fair, wd. 1667. d. 4. 1. IV. H. wind all n. and
d. cold, wetting. V. Wd a. L. s. wetting m. and o. wind at n. VI. Close m. p.
cold, open 9 p. and unusual clouds in furrows. VII. Mild, close, very misty
air. VIII. Warm, close, misling 9 p. IX. Mist, close, open p. m. X. Fr. fair d.
s. mist m. XI. H. fr. fog all d. XII. Fr. fog, thaw; wd and snow at n. XIII.
Fr. wd a. L. s. snow, close, cold wd. XIV. Dark wind m. s. mist, close. XV.
Mist, close, mild, cold wd n. VI. Dark m. and s. mist, cold wd. XVII. Mist,
cold wds, drisling at n. XVIII. Mist, wetting a. m. Snow p. m. m. p. wind and
great Snow. XIX. H. wd a. l. fr. snow lying; thaw p. m. wd close p. m. XX. R.
m. mist, warm, close, open p. m.
November.
1675. Nov. 10. 28 II. Fog, close m. p. s. mist 10 p. white frost m. Nly. III.
Fog. R. 6 m. 5 p. Nly. IV. H. winds 6 m. shower 6 m. V. Windy, very cold, sharp,
drying Nly white frost m. VI. Terrible frost, ice. VII. Fog, fr. fair. VIII.
Fog, fr. thaw p. m. IX. s. mist, R. 10 m. misle 3 p. X. Close, warm, h. wd,
rain 5 p. XI. Drisling m. p. very warm; s. wetting o. Wly. XII. Close. XIII.
Close, warm n. s. misle 10 p. XIV. Mist, fr. m. open, misle 7 p. Wly. XV. Mist,
close Ely. colder. XVI. N W. Fair m. p. cool mist, wdy. XVII. Cool, drying,
cloudy, shower 8. p. wind Nly. XVIII. W. Fog, cool, R. 9 p. XIX. S W. Fr. cloudy
m. p. cool Hals Tunbr. 83. D. 8. 26. XXX. October. 1. H. wd 1. I. fair. N W.
XXXI. Temperate, cloudy; H. wd 10 p. Sly. I. Nov. Wind, R. 5 m. flying clds; H.
wind in and. Wly. II. Fr. cold, suspic. 2 p. in N W. wd Nly. III. s. r. a. L.
cold and lowering clouds. N W. IV. Pouring R. 5 m. etc. H. wd, heavy (...) R. 4
p. H. wd 10 p. drisle. S W. V. H. wind and R. 5 m. Iris a. m. H. wind and cold
p. m. Wly some Swedish. ships cast away. Relat. extr. VI. Fair, cold, H. wd,
few flying clouds. N W. VII. Frosty d. fair, calm, Aches. Nly. VIII. Fr. Fog,
R. ante 9 m. drisling m. p. p. m. warm vesp. IX. s. rain circa midn. close p.
m. Wly X. Drisle, m. pleasant P. wind. w. XI. Fog m. s. fr. cloudy p. m. cold
wd Nly. and W. XII. Fair, overc. n. Sly. XIII. Close, cool, fog. Sly. XIV.
Cloudy, moist, wd. ^V. XV. Foggy d. wetting 8 m. 11 m. Wly. XVI. Gr. fog a. m.
fair p. m. cold vesp. Wly Ely. XVI. XVIII. XIX. Frosty, fog, close. Ely.
April.
1682. Apr. 10. o. I. Circa Apr. initium, diverse trees blasted. S W. some wd,
open p. m. temperate. Ely II. R. winds rise 10 m. or. cold wind; lo ring vesp.
E W. III. Cloudy, cold, some gusts. Nly. IV. s. rain ante L. and m. mist, cold.
Ely. N E. V. Close, misty, temperate N E. at n. Wly. VI. Warm, fair clouds,
contrary 9 m. Wly. at n. Ely. VII. Fog, cloudy, warm. Sly. Ely. and very foggy
vesp. gast of wd rise; Delphin occ. VIII. Very cold, fog m. overc. foggy m. p.
Wly. but at n. Ely. IX. Cloudy, misty; H. wd and gentle showring ante 4 p. Sly.
X. Windy, shower 10 m. Sly. XI. Windy, wetting 9 m. rain ad 9 p. Wly. XII. Shower
10 m. or. ante 3 p. and 4 p. occ. in M. C. XIII. Bright a. m. Clouds bordering
in the W. H. wd, cloudy p. m. with rain 10 p. fog occ. Sly. XIV. H. wind and
Rain m. and a. m. cldy p. m. S W. s. stripped clds. Wly. XV. Clouds in Scenes; a
shower a. m. and ante 2 p. Sly m. Wly p. m. XVI. Gross fog m. close and foggy a
occ. dash of R. usque ad 9 p. Ely m. Wly p. m. XVII. Clouds in Scenes, s. rain
ante o. right p. m. Wly. XVIII. R. 9 m. and alias. R. vesp. and 9. p. opposed
near Delphin. S W.
Table Retrograde. Per intervall. Grad. 3.
5. January.
1667. 30. 20. XXVIII. Fr. mild, close p. m. s. gentle wetting 9 p. S W. XXIX.
Fog falls 9 m. s. rain o. heavy clouds. Ely. XXX. H. wd b. d. and all day,
close, cold; so at n. N. Ely. XXXI. Cold, close, windy. 1675. Die 27. 18. XXVI.
Open, warm, fair. S W. Tonbridge. Halo. S W. XXVII. S E. Fr. mist m. windy,
fair. E. m. at n. Wly. XXVIII. S E. Misty, close, warm, lowering n. Tonbr. Halo
Aches. XXIX. S W. Very h. wind and rain a. L. stormy wd all d. 1683. 24. 15.
XXIII. Fog, cloudy m. p. H. and cold wind. N E. Aches. XXIV. Fog, frosty, fair,
sharp wd. Audible at n. Aches. N E. XXV. Fr. fog, thaw m. cold Aches. N E.
XXVI. Frosty, foggy, Fair wd. N E.
February.
1659. 1 23. XXXI. Jan. Fair, cold, s. Fr. R. n. I. Feb. Gentle warm R. II.
III. Very fair, Fr. n.
April.
1654. 16. 6. XIV. Misty and drisling m. warm wind. S W. XV. Fair and warm; s.
clds occ. S. XVI. Fair, dry, hot, cool wd. S. S W. XVII. Showrs often, R. warm
rain at Bedtime. S. XVIII. Warm n. s. showrs; R. some store. S.
April.
1662. 14. 4. XII. Close, warm. S. S W. Ely. XIII. White clds m. fair, warm, E.
S E. XIV. Fog 6 m. close m. p. hot, s. misling. E. XV. sh. Wetting 11 m. 2 p. 6
m. S W. 1678. 11. 1. IX. Warm, s. showers 1 p. Sly. fleec't clouds m. wet 11 m.
sub vesp. etc. X. Wetting 9 m. wetting m. p. wd audible at n. S. XI. Fair, wdy,
coldish, shower occ. and 10 p. S E. XII. Close, H. wd, clouds in Scenes, but
cold and dry; Centaur's head bright. XIII. Cold. XIV. Not a cloud in Sky. 1678.
Die 9. 29. VIII. R. a. L. showry 1 p. Hail 5 p. and rain. clouds contrary 7 p.
Wly. Sly, Nly. Frost m. IX. Mist m. seemed a frost; coasting showers and wind 1
p. so 3 p. various wd. Indispos. Wly. X. Mist, open, clds fly N. and S. wind
Ely. fine day, but lowering Westward; cool clds ride contrary. Nly. cold n. Wly
7 p. dewing 7. o. Ely. XI. R. 9 m. and m. p. m. p. a. m. fair p. m. misty. Nly.
June.
1657. 25. 13. XXIII. Mist m. bright, hot, mist at n. N W. Ground mist at n.
XXIV. Excessive hot, bright, blew, mist. S W. XXV. Hot, cooler wd, s. clds o.
s. overc. clear a bright Meteor. S W. XXVI. Cool, showring a. m. winds open. S
W. 1665. 22. 11. 28 XXI. Close, very hot. Ely. H. wd and cool. S W. at n. Ely.
XXII. Lowering m. a shower 8 m. open, hot m. and misty. S W. XXIII. Fair m.
coasting shower 1 p. cloudy, hot. S W. Clouds in Scenes, and ride contrary.
XXIV. Fair, cldy, coasting shower 3 p. and occ. S W.
August.
1668. 31. 91. XXX. White clouds, a shower. N W. Ely. XXXI. Frost, mist, white
clds, a Shower. Ely. I. Sept. s. mist and clds; bright m. frost, cold. N W. II.
Frost, cold, close, misty, cool wd. Wly.
June.
1673. 18. 9. XVIII. R. 5 m. and a. m. Nly. but p. m. Sly. shower 4 p. XIX. R. 5
m. windy, wetting 1 p. N W. XX. Bright, cloudy o. lowering 4 p. N W. S W. XXI.
Wetting 7 m. and 9 m. fair, overc. n. Sly. XXII. Windy, wetting Sly. Clouds in
Scenes. Sly. Indisposit. XXIII. Harwich R. Thunder etc. m. a. Spout. 1676. 29.
16. XXVIII. Shower 8 m. and s. shower o. 2 p. Dash, rain 7 p. R. and H. wd 9 p. S
W. Aches Epilepsie. XXIX. Cold. bright, pregn. clouds; H. wd, Aches extreme. N
W. XXX. Fair, cool, s. clouding 3 p. Wly. Aches, gr. shower at Bromly. Wly.
XXXI. Misty, lowering 11 m. Aches.
September.
1652. 5. 22. IV. s. wd, showrs; so at n. W. V. Cloudy, windy, so at n. N W.
VI. Fair, windy. VII. Fair, calm. N W. 1660. Die 3. 21. I. Fair, but rain at n.
II. III. Very fair, frost n. IV. Hot; drisling and soultry R. N. V. R.
drisling, hot, fair, p. m.
November.
1655. 19. 7. XVII. Close, warm, hot. S W. XVIII. Clouds, warm, opening vesp. S
W. XIX. Frost, warm, fair, wd, fair. N W. XX. H. wd a. l. and all day; driving
wet. N W. XXI. H. wd all n. calm ort. cldy, s. snow. N W. 1671. Die 14. 2.
XIII. Fair. N W. fog n. Aches die praec. H. wd. Two Ships lost at Yarmouth.
XIV. Wind and snow a m. thaw and warmer, wd, foggy air. S W. XV. Foggy air,
close drisle 10 p. wd. Wly. XVI. Wet a. l. and m. close, very warm. Wly. 1679.
15. 29. IX. R. a. l. after snow; cold, brisk wd. Nly. X. Very hard frost, snow
a. l. mist, s. rain a. 2 p. foggy vesp. Wly. XI. Very great fog, close, h.
frost, open, sharp wd. Nly. XII. Fog, very hard white frost; close m. p.
warmer. Wly. XIII. Nly. Open, fog, black frost; fair and frosty. Nly. sharp wd.
August.
1684. 27. 14. XXV. R. store m. and m. p. Nly. and Ely. XXVI. Angry clds p. m.
set to rain 10 p. etc. Wly. XXVII. R. a. L. cold, windy, very cold vesp. Wly.
XXVIII. Close, wetting, fine p. m. Wly. XXIX. Drisling showers p. m. S W.
June.
1681. Die 18. 6. XVI. Cloudy, sometime lowering wind. N W. Several Dolphins
sporting in the mouth of Severn. XVII. Lowering m. p. mist at n. per N W. At
Ferrara an Earthquake swallowed up Trees Five Mile. So at Lions in France.
XVIII. White frost, clear most part, wds. N E. XIX. Clouds in Scenes, some
drisle 7 p. Meteor with a train 9 p. A tempest of Lightning and R. 3 Leagues
from Lyme.
6. I acknowledge the Table has its Length, but if it be considered what the
experience of 30 years is for such an Aspect as, the Table should be looked on
as a Cimelium rather, than a surfeiting Superfluity. Alas! I wished it longer,
for he that shall survey the Table, will find that there are 4 or 5 Months
wanting, it requires almost another 30 years.

And let no man be grieved here that we have allowed too many days, 13. or 14.
toward the Verge of our Aspect; not so much for security sake, in case of a
defective Calculation, which in, it seems, is not controverted: But for the
more sure comprehension of those Effects, which by clear right belong to the
Aspect, though at the Distance of two degrees, since the Aspect challenges 7
days to it self, even while they are close among themselves in the same degree.

7. As to the Warmth of this Aspect, when we have met with days of Soultry
Heat, not seldom accompanied with Lightning and Thunder: They, who weigh those
Effects, and the determinate time of their appearance, will find (forgetting
all foolish conceits) our Feminine Planet to be Masculine so far, to be a
Virago, partaking of Pallas, the Flashing Fiery Goddess.

8. Thus is she a Friend to Warmth, but so, as sometimes you see, to Cold. Not
as the Toy takes her; how then should we comprehend her Fickleness? Or bring it
under Rule? But according as she is attended, or abandoned by the rest of the
Company. It Is no News that the same Planet, under various Circumstances, should
cause Heat, and admit, yea, and in some measure acuate Cold. The, the did so.
For we cannot dissemble that in the year 1663. we find Extreme Frost for 13
days together, even through the whole Period almost; but we may note, that it is
not there alone, but generally all Conjunctions as such, in some respect favor
Cold. Even the it self. How so? I answer, not as it is congress of Luminous and
Calorifique Bodies, since it is impossible but Heat should be intended and
increased by such Union; but because in all Conjunctions there is a
Co-arctation or Reduction of the Luminary to precise Points and Distances,
which it is certain may and do act more at a less confinement in the
Illumination of the Medium; no man to enlighten a fair Room will set the Tapers
contiguous, but will distribute them at a certain and proportionable Measure.
The Medium being more enlightened by such distribution, than when the Luminous
Bodies are contiguous. Well may some part of the Room have a Light more than
ordinary, but the whole Area shall be darkish. Just as two Seed-men in a Field,
that sow more ground at convenient distance, than if they walked together in
the same Furow. The Partile Congress of Two Calorifick Bodies does increase,
and also abate heat, under several considerations. It increases it as to the
point, it abates it as to the Circumference, it increases it as to the proper
place, it abates it as to the Common; for the Congress is Lineal, wherein the
Planets so meeting, are united, ('it is true) but they are constrained and
restrained to a precise point, a narrow appartment, whereby the remoter parts
being forsaken by that Influence; which erewhile spread it self there, is left
cold, naked and bare of that Influence which was more diffusive, when they were
at distance not unreasonable.

9. For the Sentiments of the Ancients, what do they declare when Venus is in
Dominion? Then says Ptolemy, she makes a fine temperate Air (...), Pure and
Fair. She brings also many and Fruitful Showers, (...), Raising, says he, the
Waters: Next, a windy Constitution with those showers, (...), he adds also
(...), the Star must be fruitful, if she be (...), she must be (...). The Arabs
agree for all I see; Albumazar and his Mamareth, (which I suspect to be the
Dominion) is much for Rain, and that in store, (...), as Ptolemy calls it, very
often. For next to the our Venus is reckoned moist, and therefore Benifique,
because moist. Tetrab. c. 5. and therefore again Feminine (he says) because
moist. Cap. 6. That Is their reason.

10. For the First of these, that makes a fine Air, I thought it had bin a
forced illusion to the Beauty of the Planet, wherein the Fiction of Venus
Aurea, and (...), must have bin glanced at: But when on a review I cast my Eye
on the Diary, I saw there was no Poetical Fiction in the case. Our oft-times
makes a bright Air, and clear, as her Hue pretends. Nor will we stand to
Imagine any probable reason therefore but this, that what causes the one, that
may be the Author of the Other: The Intrinsique brightness of the Planet may
perfuse the Air with a suitable Gleam. This may appear not only in the bright
days, or parts of days, which are found under her, whether Hot, or cold frosty
Constitutions, but even where some wet may happen. For how clear is the Air
many times (except perhaps in Winter) how Holiday-like I say, does it look,
when yet a shower may step in, and muffle the azure mirror? In like manner,
after a morning, Foggy though it be, may prove a clear and bright day, when the
sullen Fog may sculk here and there in its scattered Atoms, apaling the
brightness which at other times may be more vivid. I shall not stand much upon
this, only produce one notable Testimony mentioned in the Diary, where I was
never able to see in our City Horison, the Centaur's Head but once, and that
you see is on our of and.

11. For what follows in Ptolemy we are ready to prove as to Showers and
Dropping. She brought Rain in above 200 Instances, and that will do. And Rain
or Snow, all, or most part of the day, near 40 times. Once or Twice she
continues the Fog all day; even therein showing her Partnership with the Sun,
and how true she keeps to him; so that if under a of and, or you will plead,
you can find the like; I answer, Nay: For if I find our of and in any
reasonable Capacity acting at the same time, To our Beauteous Conjunction will
I ascribe the Continuance; as perhaps we may find the like in some after
Aspects, who are of as slow a Motion.

12. On this account it is that we often times see Clouds as in several
Stories, Lofts or Scenes, one over another. I do not fix them on this Aspect
only, but specially I do; such Contignations of the Clouds do show that store
of Rain is falling, or ready to fall. In all dire Tempests we may find such Bay
of Buildings in the Regions above, which when they fall on our Heads, make a
Ruina Caeli; the First Heaven does often tumble upon our Heads: And in Loud
Thunder these several Stories, no doubt, heighten the violence of the Eruption,
and helps to strike the Lightning downward, which otherwise would fly as
innocently as a soft silent Night-Flame, sudden or shooting in the Hush't Night.

13. For High Winds, whereof Ptolemy makes mention, we have a competent Number,
which occur both in the Direct Conjunction and Retrograde. I observe he does
not stick to attribute Winds to, though he has ascribed the same to before.
All that we shall say is, and no body will perhaps, gainsay us, that there is
reason why should be reputed of a more windy Influence than his Neighbor
Planet, because of his Vicinity, yea, and those more often Congresses with the
Sun: but notwithstanding this, we shall see to be Truth, that many times has
her Influence, and no small Influence on many Tempests, of which carries away
the Name.

14. What more remains will come under the more Platique Consideration of this
Aspect, whose Grandeur will not be conspicuous, except we enter into a larger
Field, being not unwilling herein to spare our pains. Here I find the Arabs,
Sum. Anglican. speak of 12. degrees, others of 15. which I must needs say is
founded on Experience, as has bin shown in part already in. Nay, some speak of
the same Sign, but of That we say little till we come to the Superiors. At
present we shall produce no Evidences but what comes within Compass of the
first Moiety of the Sign, the 15. degree, and all on this side of it.

15. But we have not done our best for our Moisture yet;

Thus then, notwithstanding we have said that 13. or 14 days produced for every
Aspect in the Direct Table is a Prejudice to our accounts, yet even so our
Moist Days in the Table outvie the Moiety of the Total. This in the Direct;
but in the Retrograde, which consists but of 3 days, what is the Issue? What?
But this, that there is scarce one Aspect under that Style, but what finds us
with Rain or Moisture; Once, if not Twice within the Triduum. And if so, pray
remember us to Gassendus; the reason we will tell you, that in this Case, i. e.
when Venus is Retrograde, Venus is nearer us than Mercury it self, So does
Astrology demonstrate.

16. Let the Reader favor me so, as to glance on these days following, and
then recur to the Table. First,

Direct. January.
1679. die 22.
February.
1655. die 5. 8.
April.
1658. die 17, 18, 24. 1666. die 9, 11, 13, 14, 17. 1682. die 16.
June.
1653. die 21, 26, 29, 30, 1677. die 17.
July.
1653. die
August.
1664. die 29. 1672. die 20, 28, 31. and Sept. 1. 16. 1656. die Septembr.
November 8.
1659. die 9, 10. 1683. die 1, 4, 8.
January.
1671. die 28. Feb. 17. ib. 1655. die 26. and Feb. 3. 1679. die 16. 23, 24.
February.
1655. die 2.
April.
1658. die 21. 23. 1666. die 8. 13. 16. 1674. die 15. 21, 22. 1682. die 14.
July.
1653. die 2.
August.
1664. die 31. Sept. 1, 2. 1672. die 17, 27, 29. 31.
November.
1650. die 16. 1667. die 4. 18. 1682. die 8.
17. I have read somewhat of the Treasures of Rain, Hail, Snow, and so have
you; Good Reader, if you please; I will show you one of them, the is one of
those Storehouses; for the First Column of the Table presents you with Store
of Rain, according as was noted by Ptolemy. The 2d. with Rain for a
considerable part of the day, yea, All the Day long, an Effect I wis, of some
Consequence to be regarded by all those who believe a Providence, and
Convincing all those who believe it not. For lo, on such an Aspect precisely
those Gluts of Rain do fall. See the same from Keplers Table also ready to be
produced, least any should say, it is merely Casual; no, it is not so, but it
would perhaps never have bin discovered, but by our Method of enlarging our
Aspect to a Fortnight, or thereabout. But how? That Is the Question, if it were
an Apple we spoke of, the Fairest yields most Moisture: But is it so amongst
the Stars? I thought once to dispatch it thus; that the Planets not Warmth
only, but its Motion also is to be considered. Upon the Account of Warmth she
is a Friend to Rain: Upon the account of her Motion, she keeps even pace with
her Sun, as it were, to justify and maintain the Constitution put up. For all
Constitutions are interrupted by the Separations of the Causes, which help to
produce them, unless when equivalent Causes succeed. These Causes are not
separated so soon, where the Motion is equal, as in our Aspect is found;
Continued Rains are not found therefore so frequent in, because by his swifter
Motion bids adieu to the, as also does, with a Motion much swifter. That this
is the Reason, appears, because these Rains, whose duration last an entire day,
are found mostly in the Direct motion of our Planet under this Aspect, where
this equality holds. In the Retrograde, where the Sun and She moving to
contrary Terms, are suddenly parted; we see no such Constitution happens. With
what justice now shall a genuine Astrology be counted a vain Pretense, when
it is even demonstrative, when it renders a reason of an Effect not
contemptible, a priori? Making as good Demonstrations, why Rains when they once
Catch, are apt to last by the equal motion of the Planets, as there is
Demonstration of a Lunar Eclipse by the Earths interposition.

18. There are some little Curiosities, that if they deserve not our regard,
yet perhaps, may be above our Contempt.

19. First, Concerning the Clouds, of which there appears these differences,
Flaxen Clouds, Fleeced Clouds, some which I call Fritter Clouds, all from their
likeness, other Striped or Streaked Clouds, lying in strange Furrows as it
were. I have reason to think these belong to the Aspect, because they are found
all of them within the interval of three degrees, and yet according to the
general Nature of Clouds, so diversified. Compare this with Clouds in their
Lofts or Contignations, These are abatements of that Fullness. Now all
abatements do spring from the substraction of the Cause, as in the Striped
Cloud, which is remarkable as sometime to reach from one end of the Heaven to
the other, somewhat difficult to explain as yet, having advanced not much in
our Theory, but feisible it is, being certain (to the Glory of Providence be it
spoken) that there is no appearance in Heaven without its Cause.

20. The next is, clouds riding contrary, contrary I say to the Wind, or
contrary to one another. Who sends them, trow you, of such different Errands?
It is not the same Wind drives the Clouds; howbeit, the Seaman has advanced so
far, to make his way to contrary points by the same gale. I used to compare it
to the turn of the Young Flood at the side of the River, when the main Stream
runs to Ebb. This contrariety happens in several Apartments of the Air,
Secundum sub and supra, and it is caused by a new Aspect superinduced to the
Prior, Senior, standing Aspect. Upon the same account, as it is usual for the
Wind to veer about against a Storm, and when the storm is done; to return to
its old Corner. And upon this account it may be what some say, that Clouds
coming against Wind are a sign of a Storm, or Thunder, and the like. The Cause
is different as in the Waters, it is Young Flood by the redundant Ocean. The
River ebbs by the Proneness of its Streams; this is more seen in our Aspect
perhaps than another, because of its duration; the longer the day Term is, the
more frequent are its Vicissitudes.

21. As to Blushing Clouds observable Even and Morn. All such Tinctare is known
to proceed from a of some fair Planet, etc. with the Sun. The Sun illustrates
the Vapor, the Reflex tinges it deeper; so in Sounds we may distinguish: a
Musket in the open Field makes but an half report, compared with that rousing
Bounce it gives in a Public Street, where every Wall reflects, and doubles the
noise. Say much the same of Icides, Halo's, etc.

22. But s inclination to Mist should not have been passed by. It seems to be
more than a Curiosity, when we shall number Fifty Fogs, and some Roping Fila,
besides thinner mistiness. Mist and Fogwe willingly refer to; Venus and are
somewhat alike in hue; if that will argue any thing; but if their properties be
different, as we shall see in, so there may be difference in the Fog for all as
I know. It Is a Curiosity for the Hygrometer to explore. A blew smoaky Mist is
clearly of a deeper Complexion than of a pale, whence those few that occur here
are imputable to some mixture, beside other contribute also, which when they
are peached, will answer. And so much for our Partile Aspect, but alas! We
have notdone.

23. We have said that the Latitude or Amplitude of the Aspects are not
commentitious, and nothing is more reasonable. For if two Agents united in a
Central Union can get a Name, why should they not be thought to be operative at
a convenient distance, whether anteceding that Union, or Consequent? Great is
the Sphere of the Planetary Activity downwards toward the Sublunary World.
Have they no Activity East, or Westward? They must have, for we speak of a
Sphere, not of a Line of Activity: Light and Heat throws it self round to all
parts of the Circumference, whereof the Luminous Body is the Center. The
greatest Patrons of a Partile Aspect will not make themselves so ridiculous as
to disown our Effect (if notable and awaking) though it happens 40. Hours
before and after. But this cannot be but by an antedated Union: Their Spheres
of Activity are co-incident before the perfect Union. Suppose then Sol and
Venus, for example, shed their Influence at gr. 12, 10, 8. distance: It Is but
making the Sphere of each to reach half way, to gr. 6, 5 or 4. Now I will
appeal to Experience, which every Man may try, who is Master of any Diary,
whether and do not operate at 6, 8, 10, 12 gr. distance, (I go not further) as
often; as Not? As often, I had almost said as at gr. 2. gr. 1. or the Central,
I am sure as Powerfully. For not all stupendous Effects hap at a Central.
There are distributions in Nature more remote, which will equal those nearer
Configurations. Wherefore to gr. 12. distance do we bring a Parcel of Keplers
Observation, and the distances noted, that the Reader may see what we offer.
It Is true, he will find there (perhaps) Three Months swallowed up in the width
of this overstretch't Observation. But why must Astrology be confined to a
Megre Aspect of One or Two, in lieu of Thirty Days? While all the rest of the
following Month lies Fallow. Is it worth the while? Who will study such
Astrology? It Is like searching in Tin-Mines for Silver; some may be found
there, but not so much as answers the Pains. No, No, the Vein of true Science
is richer, and can pronounce for most days as well, as for One or Two, when All
is rightly observed: I confess it is a great All; and part of that is
Observation of the Distances of and: The Benefit of this will be confessed,
when we shall offer from the Premises some Light toward, not only the
Production of an Effect, but also the Duration. As of a wet Time, a stormy
Season suppose, a Comet, or Earthquake, which sometimes last a Month, a
Fortnight, sometimes two; shall I give an example, Mr. Cavendish tells us that
there fell many furious Storms from March 6. to April 8. Now in the year 1591.
lasted the whole Month, and at April lay but at gr. 10. distance. Hackluit Vol.
3. what out-strips the said terms must be accounted for, otherwise: Let not
therefore in our following Table the degrees only, but the days also, be noted.
For what if some little Hyatus appears? In 1621, when the Numbers run on this
close Order, May 23, 24, 25, 27, 29. June 4, 8, 9, 80, 12, 13, 14, etc. Least
any should say we have mentioned only those days which serve our turn, when
those which are not mentioned are far inferior in Number: Well, what kind of
Weather have we in the Diary? Rain, Thunder, and that gr. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, etc.
as well us about the Central. Rain some store, gr. 12. An. 1617. R. Thunder and
Rain gr. 12. An. 1621. Dir. Chasmes, Lightning, gr. 12. An. 1623. Dec. 24. and
27. Thunder, Rain, R. An. 1622. Again gr. 12. April 2. Dir. An. 1633. Winds,
Rain, gr. 12. Nov. 21. An. 1622. Snow for 3 or 4 days, gr. 11, 12. Dec. 6. An.
1623. R. H. Winds, Rain, gr. 11, 12. An. 1634. Dir. Showers, June 16. An. 1625.
R. March 11. Rain, gr. 12. Thunder, Rain, Jun. 7. An. 1626. Dir:

25. The account from Kepler, under both Characters of the Retrograde and
Direct.

An. 1617. R.
June 28. Rain some store. gr. 12. 29. Thunder and R. at N. gr. 11. July 1.
Thunder and Storms. gr. 9. 4. Rain. gr. 4. 6. Heat and Chasme. gr. 1. 7. Heat,
Lightning. 8. Heat, Thunder. gr. 2. 9. Rain, Winds. 4. 10, 11. Rain abundance.
gr. 6. 12. Rain again. 9. 13. Wet. day. gr 10. 14. Showry. gr. 12.
Anno 1621. Dir.
May, 23, 24. Heat, Thund. Rain. gr. 12. 25. Squalor. gr. 11. 27. Showrs. gr.
11. 29. Hail. gr. 10. June, 4. Some Rain, Heat gr. 9. 8. Heat, Thunder. gr. 8.
9. Heat, much Rain. gr. 8. 10. Whirlwind. gr. 8. 12, 13, 14. Thunder. gr. 6.
13. Hail. gr. 15, 16, 17. Soultry. gr. 6. 18. Whirlwind. gr. 5. 19. Thunder,
Rain. gr. 4. 20. Rattling Tempest. gr. 4. 21. Heat, Rain. gr. 4. 24. Windy,
Cloudy. gr. 3. 25, 26. Heat, Notable Shower. gr.. 3. 29, 30. Store of Wet. gr..
2. July, 1. Rain. gr. 2. 5. Smart Showrs. gr.. 0. 6. Showrs, Winds. gr. 1.
July, 7. Winds. gr. 1. 9. Tempestuous with Thun, gr. 1. 13. Soultry, Iris. gr.
2. 14. Soultry, Rain. 16. Thunder. gr. 3. 17, 18. Showrs. gr. 3. 20. Thunder
ante 4 Merid. gr.. 6. 24. Rain. Winds. gr. 6. 29. Rain for 8 days. gr. 7. 30.
Thunder. gr. 7. August 3. Rain some store. gr. 8. 4. Showrs. 5. Winds. gr. 8.
8. Rain. gr. 9. 10, 11. Rain. gr. 10. 18. Fog, Lightning. gr. 11. 19. Much
Thund. Rain. gr. 12. 20. Rain. gr. 12.
Anno 1622. R.
April 18. Rain to purpose. gr. 11. 19. Rain. gr. 10. 21. Showers with Hail.
gr. 8. 22. Thunder, Showrs. gr. 6. 23, 24. Rain store at n. gr. 5. 25. Rain.
gr. 1. 29. Heat, Lightning. gr. 5. May 1. Nocte, Thunder, Rain. gr. 8. 2, 3.
Nocte, store of Wet. gr. 10. 12.
Dir.
Dec. 13, 14. Chasme and Lightning. gr. 12. Fog, Die tot. gr. 27. Chasmes,
warm. gr. 12. 31. Drisle. gr. 11.
Anno 1623.
Jan. 6. Snow. gr. 10. Jan. 7. Warm, Chasme. gr. 9. 9, 10. Windy, Snow. gr. 9.
11, 12, 13. Snowy. gr. 8. 16. Snow. gr. 7. 29, 30, 31. Winds, Snow. gr. 4. 3.
29. Caelum ardens. gr. 4. Feb. 1. Winds, some Snow. gr. 3. 2. Some Snow. gr. 3.
3, 4, 5, 6. Snow. gr. 2. 13. Snow. gr. 0. 14, 15. Boisterous winds. gr. 1. 17.
Snow, Rain. gr. 2. 20. Snow. gr. 2. 27. Snow. gr. 4. March 1. Rain, Snow. gr.
4. 2. Snow. gr. 4. 11. Winds and Snow. gr. 6. 12. Much Snow, Tepor. gr. 7. 13.
Strong West-Winds. gr. 7. 15. Snow. gr. 7. 24. Some Rain. gr. 10. 30. Wind,
Rain. gr. 11. April 1. Rain at night. gr. 12. 2. Thunder, Rain. gr. 12.
Ret.
Nov. 21. Winds, Rain. gr. 12. 23. Cold Winds, Snow. gr. 9. 25. Rain the whole
day. gr. 6. Dec. 1. Fog whole day. gr. 3. 2. Snow, Rain. gr. 5. 6. Snow for 4
days. gr. 11.
Anno 1624. Dir.
Aug. 2, 3. Some Rain. gr. 11. 5, 6. Thunder, Rain. gr. 10. 7, 8. Rain. gr. 9.
10. Smart Showrs, store. gr. 9. 12. Floods. 13. Tempests, stormy. gr. 8. 18.
Horrible Tempests. gr. 7. 19. Abundance of Rain. gr. 7. Sept. 1. Some Rain. gr.
2. 2. Smart Showers: gr. 2. 4. Wet. gr. 2. 5. Showrs. gr. 1. 6. Some Rain. gr.
1. 10, 11, 12. H. Winds. gr. 1. 13. Rain, store. gr. 14. Rain. gr. 1. Sept. 18.
Misty, Rainy. gr. 2. 20. Rainy. gr. 2. 21. Some Rain. gr. 2. 24. Furious
West-Winds. gr. 3. October. 2. High Winds. gr. 5. 3, 4. Rain. gr. 6. 5. High
Winds. gr. 6. 7. Rain. gr. 6. 10. High Winds, Rain. gr. 7. 11. Some Rain. gr.
8. 16, 17. Windy. gr. 9. 21. Windy, Rainy. gr. 10. 22. High Winds. gr. 10. 26,
27. High Winds. gr. 10. 11.
Anno 1625. R.
June 26. Showers. gr. 12. July 1. Great Rains. gr. 4. 6. Tempest. Hail. gr. 3.
10. Thunder. gr. 9. 11. Cruel Tempest. gr. 11.
Anno 1626. R.
March 11. Rain. gr. 12. 12. Moist. gr. 11. 20. Great Wind and Rain. gr. 10.
25, 26. Thunder and Rain. gr. 11. 27. Wind and Rain. gr. 8. 28. Thunder and
Showers. gr. 8. 29. Much Rain. gr. 7. 3. Rain. gr. 6. 4. Rain, Lightning. gr.
6. 5. Rain. gr. 6. 8. Some Wet. gr. 5. 12. Rain. gr. 4. 13. Nocte, Rain. gr. 4.
15. Some Wet. gr. 3. 18. Much Rain. gr. 3. 19. Rainy. gr. 2. 24. Angry Clouds.
gr. 0. 27. Ignes cadentes. gr. 0. 29. Rain. gr. 1. 30. Rain. gr. 1. May 4.
Wind, Rain. gr. 2. 8. Meteor Prodigios. gr. 4. 12, 13, 14. Thunders. gr. 4. 15.
Rain, windy. gr. 4. 16. Windy. gr. 5. 19. Snowy. gr. 6. 20. Winds. gr. 7. May
24. Great Shower. gr. 8. 3. Lightning, Winds. gr. 9. June 1. Rain, Lightning.
gr. 9. 3. Rain at night. gr. 10. 5. Shower of Rain. gr. 10. 6. Storms, much
Rain. gr. 10. 7. Thunder, Rain. gr. 12 9. Much Rain at night. gr. 12.
Anno 1627. R.
Febr. 3. Rain. gr. 12. 5. Stiff Wind and Snowy. gr 10. 6. Wind and Snow. gr.
8. 9. Night Windy and Snow. gr. 4. 11. 12. Rain. gr. 1. 13. High Winds and
Snowy. gr. 4. 16. Snowy. gr. 8.
Anno 1627. Dir.
October. 8. Dewing. gr. 12. 11. Much Rain. gr. 11. 12. Windy. gr. 11. 15. Rain,
Hail, Iris. gr. 10. 18. Halo. gr. 9. 19. Rain. gr. 9. 20. Moist, rainy. gr. 9.
26. Night store of Rain gr. 7. 27. Rain and windy. gr. 7. 28. Rivers high. gr.
7. 29. Snow, Rain, Wind. gr. 7. Nov. 2. Rain. gr. 5. 3. At Night Rain. gr. 5.
5. Fog continual. gr. 5. 6. Rain day and night. gr. 4. 9. At Night Snow. gr. 4.
12. Halo. gr. 3. 16, 17. Fog continual. gr. 2. 18, 19. Wind. gr. 2. 23, 24, 25.
Fog continual. gr. 1. 26. Rain. gr. 0. 27, 28, 29. High Winds, Rainy. gr. 0.
30. Snowy. gr. 1. December. 1. Rain. Snow, Wind. gr. 1. 5. Fog continual. gr. 2.
6. Rain, Wind. gr. 2. 7, 8, 9. Smart Showrs often. gr. 3. 13. Smart Showrs. gr.
4. 14, 15. Winds, Snow, Rain. gr. 5. 16. Rousing Winds. gr. 5. 17. Prodigious
Hurricane. gr. 5. December. 19. Parelia, Rain, Snow. gr. 6. 21. Shower. gr. 6. 23.
Snowy. gr. 7. 24. Rain. gr. 7. 27. Rain, Winds. gr. 8. 28. Windy, Rain. gr. 8.
30. Snow. gr. 9. 31. Snowy. gr. 9.
Anno 1626.
Jan. 1. Snow, Wind, Iris. gr. 9. 2. Winds, Iris. gr. 9. 3, 4. Winds. gr. 10.
5. Wind, Rain. gr. 10. 9, 10. Snowy P. M. gr. 10. 12. High Winds. gr. 11. 15.
Abundance of Snow. gr. 12. 17. Snow. gr. 12. Sept. 5. Rainy Night. gr. 12. 6.
It rained. gr. 11. 7. Storms of Hail. gr. 9. 11. Wet. gr. 3. 18. Thunder,
Shower. gr. 9.
Anno 1629.
May 25. Thunder, showers. gr. 10. 27. Black Clouds. gr. 9. 31. Lightning. gr.
9. June 1. Thunder, Rain. gr. 9. 5. Hail, Thunder. gr. 8. 6. Rain and Winds.
gr. 8. 7. Winds. gr. 7. 8. Little Rain gr. 7. 9. Windy. gr. 7. 10. Tempestuous
Winds. gr. 7. 11. Abundance of Rain. gr. 7. 14. A cruel Tempest. gr. 5. 15.
Great Showers. gr. 5. 19. Lightning, Threatening. gr. 4. 21. Thunder, Showers.
gr. 3. 22. Abundance of Rain. gr. 3. 23. Often Thunder. gr. 3. 24. A Rainy Air.
gr. 3. 25. Little Rain. gr. 2. 28. Thunder, Hail. gr. 2. 29. Rain. gr. 2. 30.
Iris, or Rainbow. gr. 1. July 1. Rain, Winds. gr. 1. 3. Storms, Winds. gr. 0.
4. Storms, often Winds. gr. 0. July 5. Winds and Rain. gr. 1. 8. Thunder, Rain.
gr. 2. 11. Showers. gr. 2. 12. Thunder, Showrs. gr. 2. 14. Lightning and Rain.
gr. 3. 15. Thunder at Noon. gr. 3 16. Thunder and Rain. gr. 3. 24. Men
Thunder-strook. gr. 5 25. Thunder. gr. 7. 26. Showrs. gr. 7. July 30. It
rained. gr. 8. 31. Thundered. gr. 8. August 1. Men Thunder-strook. gr. 1. 2, 3.
Thunder, Showrs. gr. 9. 4. Lightning. gr. 9. 5. Thunder, Shower. gr. 9. 6.
Shower, Thunder. gr. 9. 7. Thunder often, Lightning. gr. 10. 8. Thunder. gr. 10.
9. It Thundered. gr. 10.
24. Here I note well the Place of the Zodiac certainly contributes to the
Exhibition of the Effect; but withal, say I, the Due and Proportional Distance
helps as an accessory requisite, as has bin heretofore observed, as toward
the manifest Duration, or Exaltation of the same.

So in this Table, consonant to what has bin delivered, we meet Rain, and of
that Store. An. 1617. June 28. at gr. 12. July 10. and 11. at gr. 6. and July
13. gr. 10. So An. 1621. June 9. much Rain, gr. 8. July 20. Rattling Tempest,
gr. 4. July 29, 30. Store of Wet, gr. 2. but rainy 8 days together, Rain 7.
Three days after, Rain some store, gr. 8. and rainy gr. 10. Let the Reader be
pleased to go on, to Rain all day and abundance of Rain, and add to what has
been observed at home, from abroad in other parts of the World, the like in
other instances.

25. Here it will be seasonable I remove an Objection, which may lie thus: In
so great an Amplitude allowed to an Aspect, how shall we keep our selves
Honest, and not do wrong to all other Aspects of shorter duration, which may
fall within the Bounds of that under present Consideration? How shall we
ascribe the Effect to a Platick, which may with greater reason to a Partile
intervening, (as often it happens in a with this of.) To which I make answer,
that no great Aspect happening at the same time with another is confounded, or
swallowed up, but keeps some distinguishing Property, discernable at times even
under the Union. As suppose it Rains under a, if and be not far off, or nearer
than the Aspect of: it blows as well as Rains: Again, in a the Rain lasts
longer, the Thunder abides, Pertonuit, says Kepler, the Fog continues; by this
we ken her Influence in relation to the Sun is not expired, though in a Platick
distance, because the same measure of the Effect happens as is found in the
Partile. Not at all denying, but that a meeting of other Aspects may prolong a
Rain or Thunder where lies separate; only claiming this, that the Effect may be
ascribed as it ought, to, when others put not in.

26. But Ptolemy mentions, we hear, the Rising of Waters, following upon his
fruitful Showers premised, which must by natural consequence have its Truth,
relating to: And Kepler, not dreaming of Ptolemy; I persuade my self, with a
due diligence has noted down the Rise and Overflow of the River Danow, etc.
Fluvius crevit, aucti Amnos and there I find engaged, but not without, Aug.
1624. Nov. 1627.

27. Yea to deal truly I find also our Planet, rather at, or near her
Elongation as far as that Observation assists us, to have a hand in the Rain or
Snow which raised the Waters. It Is all but, and an Elongation of the Planets
are not without their Effect, being, as we have said, a kind of Opposition; or
unlessbecause there are other Aspects beside which help toward the increase.
Any lasting or in some parts of Heaven will raise them.

The Years in Kepler are these.
Anno 2622. Febr. 13. Inundatio Pons ruptus, elong. a. gr. 47. Anno 1622. March
17. Fluvius crevit. gr. 43. Anno 1623. June 11. Exundabat Danub. admodum. gr.
30. Dec. 26. Auctus Danub. gr. 30. Anno 1624. Feb. 18. Auctus Fluv. -- gr. 47.
Anno 1625. Jan. 15. Danub. crevit, gr. 30. May 3. Aucti amnes. gr. 38. May 5.
Auctus Danub. gr. 38. Aug. 20. Danub. crevit. gr. 43.
The First of these Instances shows no Rain preceding, wherefore it must be
caused by the resolution of the Snow which was dissolved the Week before, but
fell at the end of January, St. Nov. but even then our was above 40 degrees
distance, which is in Elongation.

28. Next Ptolemies silence in Fiery Meteors I wonder at, he reserves them all
for, there we shall hear of them. But snavity ((...)) as he calls it, is gulty
of such Terrors many times: Fiery Meteors, Chasmes, Comets, Spurious and Real,
and what else comes under the same generical Nature. Begin with Chasms,
Vibrations of Fire. -- We must run back to former Ages to prove this.

First, Anno 1556. Jan. XI. Flaming of the Heavens, frighting the Inhabitants
with Thoughts of the Period of the World at Auspurge: After which a Storm
elsewhere of Lightning, terrible: Lyc. 651. gr. 7.

Then Anno 1564. October 7. Land. North part of Heaven flaming toward the
Mid-heaven: Night being as bright as Day. Howes 658. On the same day at Lovain,
Chasmes described by Gemma. 11. 42. gr. 6. but withal a in 23::

Next, Anno 1568. Sept 25: Flaming Chasms at Lovain the whole night. Gemma 11.
63. gr.

Also Anno 1570. April 1. Chasmes again at Lovain: Gemma 11: 67. a gr. 11. a
gr. 5.

Add Anno 1617. July 17: Chasma, Kepler, somewhere in Austria 1623 Caelum
ardens at Lintz, Kepler, gr. 5. gr. 4. Jan. 29.

And Anno 1639. Jan. 30. Chasma at Noriberg. Kyr

And Anno 1648. May 25. Thunder, and Heaven flaming: and gr. o. and: This for
Chasmes.

Then for other Fiery Apparences.
Anno 1547: December XV. A Globe of Fire as big as the Sun, seen by the
Hamburgh: Mariners at Midnight: Dr. Dee. Annot. MS. Ephemerid: gr. 2. with 20
gr. distance.

Anno 1554: June 13. Globi ignes discurrentes, hor. 5: Merid. Lyc. 637: gr. 6.
with others.

Anno 1626. April 27. Globes of Fire falling by Night. Kepler, a and Partile.

Anno 1626. May 8. Meteoron prodigiosum: Item what Kepler calls Fulgur.
Aschavii tardum, Ib: and gr. 3:

29. Comets again not excepted, for we find --
Anno 1516. A Comet in the beginning of January, (for so it must be, if it
preceded Ferdinand's Death, who dyed Jan 23.) On the 7th of this January we
find a, but withal a:

Anno 1533. A Comet at the end of June, throughout July and August. a, so that
all July and August they were, in a manner, together.

Anno 1557. August 6. ad diem St. Barthol. A Comet obscure and pale.

Stadius, p. 66. Bunting. Chron. -- a gr. 2.

Anno 1578. May 16. Lyc. gr. 11. Lubienec.

Anno. 1582. May 15. Howes, 695. gr. 10.

Anno 1597. July. A Comet continuing from the 16th day, to the 9th of August.
Ricciol. in princip: a.

No, nor Earthquakes; for they also occur.
Anno 1552. Sept. 16. at Basil. Lyc. princ..

Anno 1554 April 30. at Lovain, Gemma, 11. 23. gr. 4.

Anno 1556. Jan XVIII. 19, 20. at Sanxi in China Purchase Vol. 3. 198.

Anno 1575. Febr. 26. York Worcester, Gloucester, Bristol, Hereford, etc.
Howes, p. 679. a.

Anno 1585. Aug. 4. An Earthquake, Howes, p. 709. gr. 4. with an.

Anno 1586. Perceived at Sea Hakl. p. 810. part 2. Vol. 2.

Anno 1613. Jan. 13. in Zant, Coryat apud Purchase.

Anno 1642. April 25. in Norico. Terrae fremitus; (a noise heard in some
Earthquake.) in 15. Kepler.

Anno 1626. April circ. 28. In Calabria: about what time (with Kepler) fell the
Ignes Caelitus cadentes. Partil.

Anno 1628. Jan. 9. a Fame of an Earthquake. Kepler. gr. 9.

Anno 2629. Princ. Augusti; In the Alps among the Grisons (Rhoetos) surpassing
that which happened Anno 1618. gr. 9. yea gr. 10. gr. 11. Kyriander. Now that
happened in August 15. on a.

Anno 1634. April 17. Kyr. in.

Anno 1637. July 1. at Tours Storms, and at Norimberg an Earthquake. Kyriander.

Anno 1642 Mart. 27. Turin in Piemont. p. 469. Kyr. gr. 7. gr. 12.

Anno 1643. Sept. 2. in Turin again, Kyr. gr. 7..

Anno 1668. Sept. 3. an Earthquake in the Canibes and Fear of Hurricane
following. gr. 4. Gazet, Numb. 304.

30. Now let no man Nauseate the Names of our Witnesses here in this knowing
Age, as petty Trades in Prodigies,, Objects of the Vulgar understanding,
because, though it may be shortness of Understanding to Multiply, it is scarce
so, to acknowledge such a thing. Our Speculation does sometimes border upon
such a thing as Prodigy: but it is clear our Primary intention comes to the
orderly Course of Nature; wherein if God please to show himself in a clearer
Glass of his Power, it will be not Piacular, we hope, to offer at the Cause,
deputed by the Creator for such Effect. For to remove the Nature of Prodigies
from every Natural Production (under correction) I fear is a mistake; since
though we must not with the Vulgar, reckon every Effect prodigious, wherein God
shows his Power, yet every such Exhibition of his Power and Fury joined, I
believe comes near. For it is hard to say that an Inundation which washes away
thousands, or an Earthquake which buries as many, signifies no harm. If it does
signify Harm, etc. I gather from thence a Deity displeased: So it is a
Prodigy, otherwise the Universal Flood had nothing Prodigious, no Lesson read
to us thereby: For Wise Men, I can tell you, give opinion, that even there,
some use was made of Natural Causes; as also in other Destruction of Cities by
Fire.

31. I say then, if we put the Chasms and Globi Ignei together, there may be
some cause of wonder why Ptolemy is silent, especially when there are a great
volly of Instances of Lightning and Thunder almost within hearing. In like
manner for his Silence in Earthquakes: But being more frequent in his
Congresses, fell more frequently under Observation, and so got the Name; and it
may be they were unwilling to believe that could Frown, since we have seen her
entitled to a soft, sweet Influence.

32. But the Table speaks impartially: And Comets themselves, it seems, are
beholden to: And who will dispute it, when the great Astronomers who undertake
to consider their Course, Tendency, Duration, after all, begin to suspect some
Relation they have to those Celestial Bodies: In one place Tycho suspects the
New Star 1572. had its Original with the New. Nov. 5: To what purpose, unless
the of help to light the Taper: When elsewhere, Anno 1577. he carefully
observes, that the Comet there spread out its Train not so much within the
Opposition of the Sun, as of our Planet. When was even in her Elongation, a
sign and a half distant. We do not exclude the Sun in our Celestial Production:
but Tycho observed right, and we thank him for it. The Comet here transmitted
the Rays of; Yea, but as he scruples it, has not such a Potent Ray. Resp.
exalted and assisted may own so much; for within a few degrees there lies
another Planet who is called. If Tycho had said, that and the Planet in had
transmitted their united Rays, he had hit it; for as sure as Truth, the Comet
owes its Original to and drawing on, from 12 gr. distance by Inches, to a
Partile Conjunction. The Comet began Novem. 10. the Partil of these two Planets
happens Dec. 2. so was the Comet all that while in good heart, and by
proportion must continue so till it come to 12 gr. distance on the Dexter side,
that is till Christmas. Thence I reckon it declines, and much more by what
time came to be a whole Sign distant, ( i. e.) out of the Bounds of
Conjunction, precisely the Comet vanished, Jan. 26. Which very point is
remarkable; though I wot well that such an appearance, which begins by one
Conjunction; or Opposition, may be fed by a succession agreeable to this. Mark
what Tycho has observed, and it is memorable even in Ricciolus his judgment,
who is no Friend to our Principle, that the Star in Cassiopeia, Anno 1572. was
saluted by All the Planets, before it was extinguished. Let any Man be Judge,
if this be unreasonable now, viz. if so be all the Planets in their Turns and
Positions have to do with the Generation of New Stars, Ricciol. p. 769. 7. And
I think I noted before that Tycho observed the same of a Comets Train, opposite
to (...) But of this more elsewhere. Howbeit Kepler calls to be heard, Lib. de
Stel. Nov. page 6. Et memorabile est eundem fuisse situm Solis ad Venerem anno
1572. sub exortum illius Sideris qui jam anno 1604. recurrit.

33. We cannot finish this discourse till we have pointed at the Waters that
have flowed in with, remembering always that our Aspect is responsible for the
days preceding the Date of the Flood, least any should think that Nature raised
them in an Instant from any Subterraneous Fountains.

An. 1501. where the Ebb overflowed, memorated by Lyc..

Anno 1573. the great Inundation in Holland, etc. cum inaudita Clade, Gemma 11.
167. and again Sept. 1. gr. 11.

Anno 1579. Feb. 10. Floods in the Thames, Howes 685. R.

Anno 1594. May 11. Great Water Floods in Surrey, etc. by Rain and Hail,
beating down Houses, etc. Idem p. 769.

Anno 1643. Dec. 2. at Thuringen Kyr..

Anno 1655. Jan. XX. H. Floods with us in England, gr. 3.

In our home Observation we meet with it once or twice at most.

34. One or Two Notes let me add concerning monstrous Hail, sometimes recorded
under this Aspect, specially when it speaks that cold Temper which is often
enhaunsed at the Partile Congress of the Planets, and according to what has
been noted; and because by reason of the Monstrous size of Hail it may speak
some Affinity to Floods.

An. 1531. Dec. 16. in Cardan de variet. c. 11.

1564. Jun 24. at Lovain of an Oval size, noted by Fromond from Gemma 11. 52.
10. The like with us at Chelmesford, July 17. Anni ejusdem.

1684. In England Hail 8 or 9 Inches Circumference, C. Smith. page 124, 125.

35. That the Hurricane mentioned in Keplers Diary goes not alone; It is a Twin
at least, witness Feb. 14. Anno 1627. where Galvisius tells us of 37 Ships, and
God knows how many Thousand men drowned, gr. 4. But we have not clogged the
Reader with such like Instances; from one, vehemence Another may be concluded:
What will procure an Earthquake, can make such a bustle in a Superior Element.

36. So have you seen in part what our Aspect does abroad or at home. That we
may sure to be brief, let us cast up all into the Short Sum thus. in a State of
Destitution, brings cool air at all times of the year, in Winter, Frosts, Sharp
and permanent. In like manner Mists and Foggs, But, with indifferent or more
considerable assistance, Warmth, cloudy and close Weather, Showers, Winds,
Rain, considerable part of the Day, if not all day long, sometimes Fiery
Meteors, Lightnings, Thunders. The fair Weather, though sometimes hot, we refer
to the State of destitution: The rarer accidents enter not into the Character.
So much for the, a beauteous Aspect to our understanding, for our Corporal Eyes
never see it.

CHAP. III. Conjunction of the Two Inferiors, Venus and Mercury.
1. An Aspect famed among the Ancients for much wet. 2. Venus, Mercury and the
Moon the moist triad. 3. The Influence palpable from their Vicinity to the
Earth, and something more. 4. Venus a bright Evening Star. 5. She contributes
to coruscations. 6. She and Mercury are sometimes mad Sparks. 7. Equal to any
Aspect precedent. 8. Evidence from Keplers Diary. 9. A prospect of excess of
Rain, of Lightning from thence. 12. The Home Diary. 13. Search into foreign
Diarys not unprofitable for Navigation. 14. Platick Aspect requisite to
understand the Nature of a Planet. 15. The Foreign Tempest-Diary of Sol and
Mercury hitherto reserved and produced. 16. The use to be made of it in caution
and self-preservation. 17. Some Hurricanes with us. 18. Foreign Tempest-Diary
of the Conjunction of Sol and Venus. 19. The Aspects of Sol and Venus with Sol
and Mercury compared, Mercury more turbulent than Venus. The Devil, whether he
may be in any Storm. 20. Foreign Tempest-Diary for Venus and Mercury. 21.
Venus and Mercury as stormy as Sol and Mercury, How that can be made out Stormy
especially when either of them is retrograde. 22. Account of a stormy
constitution sometimes for a whole Month. Magellan's pacifick Sea, The
interchanges of Sol, Venus and Mercury commended to the studious Mariner. 24.
Stadius in the Governor of Antwerps Hurrican over-looks our Aspect. 25, 26. A
Touch of Comets. 27. Co-incidence of the same day of the Comet Anno 1537. and
again, Anno 1578. very instructive of Gassendus and others. 28. Foreign Diary
of Fiery Meteors. 29. The Design of these Papers is universal. This Aspect must
be acknowledged as well as any other. 30. Some Earthquakes found under this
Aspect. 31. And inundations. 32. Truth not hearkened to. 33. Our home
Testimonies not inferion to the Foreign. 34. Keplers inserviceable Aspect. 25.
Something of the Motion considered. 37. The Aspect of Venus and Mercury never
return. 38. Motion and Influence both set forth the Glory of the Creator.
1. Conjunction of and what do they Effect? They pretend severally to do
something in with, but can they produce any thing in mutual one with the other?
Astrologers say they may, with help especially, Per aliquot dies excessum
humiditatis, ventorum nivium, etc. infere possunt, says Eichstad. But Eichstad
is but yesterday. What say our Arabian and Indian Astrologers, Albumazar, yea
Alchindus and Giaphar? They say the same (whether they speak Sense or no, we
shall see in what follows,) Quando erit and and in aliquo istarum mansionum
december humidarum, sign. pluviam multam, so Alchind over and over, Cap. 6.
Inspice, says he, in hora Conjunctionis, si Luna applicuerit cum and sign.
generationem pluviae in illa septimana. Again, si quando fuerit and in
Scorpione and Capricorno aut Aquario cum sign. pluviam. For, Planetae ferentes
pluviam sunt, Venus, Mercurius and Luna, in the beginning of the Chapter. When
the is in 20. That Is a critical time with the Indian: Then if the apply to and
sign. multas pluvias in eo anno. Yea for every New, or if they be found in any
of the 10 Mansions, the Effect follows, Thus the One; Now the Other; (remember
he speaks for his own Climate) or not above 10 gr. Latitude from the Equator.
If the Two inferiors, says he, apply to a Malevolent, or, submersio and
ruina, imbrium assiduitas timenda, Sect. 3. Our Moderns follow these Men,
Adrian, Vlacq in Ephemerid. Anno 1633. Quod si congressus acciderit hora
Conjunctionis, etc. Luminarium, pluviarum inundationem pariet. And they seem to
speak consequently, because we have met with some excess in conjoined with,
which it seems, they do not appropriate to that only, but plead for the like in
this, and if it should prove true, I can tell you enters us into a pretty
distinct Notion of the Planets, for is a second Sol, if he can bring forth the
same showers, etc. in amity with as has proved himself to have done, in
Conjunction with the same Venus:

2. We will not thus argue, though the Argument is Legitimate, that and met
together in, have undeniable Influence (as I see the Arabs or Indians also have
taught) ergo, the same and by themselves have their certain efficacy. This
belongs to the Chapter of Complicate Aspects, and our Method engages us yet to
show the Influence only of the Single and incomplicate.

3. They are both reflections confessed, they appear horned in their First and
Last Quadrate, as we call it, and though both of them are reckoned of less
Dimension than the Earth, yea and for part, less than the, yet it seems they
are so near, that they can give us a Sign of what they are, and who they be,
and thence we must fetch the reason, the Demonstration, as I love to call it,
because they are near. Because they are inferiors, therefore they are so
palpable in Effect, even when Direct; They are still the nearest of the Five.

5. They who look on only as a fair Morning or bright Evening Star, have other
Notions of her, as if she brought always Fine Weather with her very look, and
swept away the Angry Clouds with her Train; but it seems can scowl, and frown,
and storm, and mask her self in dirty Clouds, etc.

5. But this it not all, for consulting with the Ancients, that I might see the
Antiquity of Astrological Truths, though hitherto not much advanced, I learned
from the Famed Albumazar, that to their Rains and Showers added Coruscations
and Thunder for eight Signs in twelve. I for my part thought the Arab was mad,
but allowing for the difference of the Climate, He is not much out of the way,
for let even Albumazar have his due, All things considered, he is not to be
blamed.

6. But who would have thought and to be such Roysters? As soon would we have
believed that Two Diamonds could Fulgurate, or Two Knick-nacks of the fair
Forge thunder on their Wooden Anvil. Did the Fables dream of this, when they
tuaght the World, Venus and Vulcan were Familiars?

7. Whether they did or no, the Influence of for Winds, or Rain and Heat, and
Thunder, and abundance of all these is not fabulous. Whatsoever a or has done,
in that will a match them; for though be greater than the, yet surpasses the
and Earth also.

8. Now follows the Table, our Evidence drawn from Keplers Diary.

Direct.
High Winds. Turbo June 18. ventosum 24. Anno 1621. Feb. 14, 15. March 13. Anno
1623. Procella June 24. 1624. Feb. 15, 16. March 20. Aug. 31. Sept. 1. Ventus
Dec. 5, 8, 9, 1626. March 3, 4. October 13, 27. 1627. June 9. Ventosum,
Tempestuosum 10. 1629.

Retrograde.
Dec. 15, 19. Anno 1622. July 18. October. 22, 26, 27, 28. 1624. Feb. 10, 12, 13,
14, 15. 1626. Dec. 28. 628.

Direct.
Excess of Rain. June 20. Tempestas perstrepuit. 25, 26. Pluvia decumana. 29.
Largissime Pluviae. 30. July 1. Tempestuosum 9. 1621. July 4. cum inundat.
pluit largissime. 17, 18. 1622. Multa Nix March 12. Ninxit copiose December. 10,
12, 13. 1623. July 24. August 10, 11. cum Inundat. 13. Tempestus Hor. 18. Pluit
copiose 19. 1624. Temp. atrox July 11. 1625. March 29. April 13, 18, 19. Aug.
20, 23. 1626. Ningit continenter Feb. 27. Plu. Sept. 19, 20. October. 11. Pluit
copiose. 26. Aucti amnes. Nov. 6. Pl. die noctuque. 1627. April 21, 22, 23.
Plu. decumana May 1. Cataractae 3, 4, 5. Plu. multae 10, 11. 1629.

Retrograde.
Pluvia Dec. Aug. 31. 1621. May 24. 1626. Imbres Dec. Aug. 5. 1629.

Direct.
Thunder and Lightning May 21, 23, 24. June 8, 19. July 9. 1621. May 19, 20.
1622. Celum ardens Jan. 29. June 19, 30. 1623. Aug. 5, 6. 1624. July 10.
Fulminata. 14, 16, 17, 18, 21. 1625. March 25, 26, 28. Ap. 4. Chasmata Aug. 28.
1626. Apr. 21. Here Kepler confesses our Aspect, Horr. Fulmina. 25, 30. May 7,
25, 31. June 15. 1629.

Retrograde.
Fulminata aliquot loca Aug. 31. 1621. Chasmata Fulgetra December. 23. 1622.

July 19, 21, 23. 1624. May 31. June 1, 5. 1626. Sept. 18. 1628. Fulminati
homines. Aug. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Fulgetra Crebra 7. s Ton. 8, 9, 1629.

Direct.
Heat, May 8, 14, 15, 23, 24, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30, 31. 1621.

9. Where we have expunged the accounts of Simple Wind, and Rain, and Warmth,
and for brevities sake have mentioned only Excesses of Heat, Wind, Rain, and we
may add Thunder, to clear the Arabs from their madness which was suspected.
Their Experience, we must think, was grounded upon more than 8 or 9 years, and
a few Conjunctions therein contained. Let any one be pleased to view our
account, and note, as well as number the days, and he shall find Mad, or at
least Notable doings here and there. For Fulmina and Fulgetra Crebra, and Loca
Fulminata, and Homines Fulminati, appearing more than once or twice, does speak
for the Arab. Which seeing they happen under the Retrograde, as well as the
Direct Conjunction, pleads for the Aspect it self, whether the Arab is Fee'd or
not to speak for it. Nor can I help it, if the of to either of them be within a
few degrees or days, what time we meet with Excesses, for it is not always so.
Witness that on May 13. Anno 1622. where the of and is 17 days distant, and the
of and 30 days. And yet even there we meet with a Pluit Largissime, May 17. and
18. Heat and Thunder, May 19. and 20. to add no more, within 4 days of the
Aspect, and no other near of any note, the Lunar excepted. The Truth on it, it is
a sweet Eviction to see Rain and Storm, when the and are near together, as the
Arab said now of the with them, particularly, when in August 1629. it Thundered
above 7 days together. But reasonable Men have no cause to doubt, but that our
Aspect, by it self considered, when the as it were, stands and looks on, can
act its part in Winds and Rains, as you may see in the Abstract premised.

10. The reason must be, I have said, because of their Vicinity to the Earth,
as well as their moderate distance from the; Otherwise the could claim no
interest upon her Vicinity to us Sublunars, which we take to be confessed. And
is it not consonant and consequent that we should meet with Pluviae decumanae,
Largissimae, minxit multum and continenter? They say is thrice as big as, and
she yields accordingly. But is it not consonant I say to what we have observed
before in her with, when she watered the ground with her fruitful Dews the
whole, or a great part of the day? This seems not so ordinary in the of with,
except perhaps where moves very slow, which confirms the reason given from the
Slow and even Motion of that Planet with the, by which he helps to prolong a
Constitution, and keep it in Statu quo.

11. Must we give you a like taste from our own Country? We cannot say nay,
because it brings us the fullest and easiest Conviction, as far as I see yet,
of all the Aspects, I am sure that have been yet propounded.

ad gr. 10.
1671. Feb. 12. H. Gusts 3 p. etc. Sly. XX. Shower o. hail 3 p. wetting vesp.
Sly. a. m. Nly vesp. XXI. Often showring ante mer. and p. m. May 13. ad June 8.
Soultry. W. S W. XIV. H. wd, shower 2 p. XVI. Wind, shower South; fine shower 4 p.
XVIII. Some rain p. m. XX. Rain 9 m. Rainy m. p. XXI. R. 1 p. 7. p. 8 p hail o.
XXIII. Great dash o. (with Thunder) frequent p. m. XXIV. Coasting rain at o.
with thunderclap. S W. XXVIII. Showrs in prospect a. m. p. m. Wly. XXXI. H.
wd, very much rain 7 m. 10 m. o. 2 p. 4 p. 6 p. 10 p. June 1. Rainy and dashing
die tot. Thirty Showrs at least. Circa diem 4. A Church in Venice was fired by
Lightning.
November 17. ad 27.
XXII. Warm, often missing. S W. XXIV. H. wd. S W. XXVI. Rain ante lucem.
1672. June 13. ad July 26.
XIII. Thunderclap at Windsor. XVII. Soultry. XXVII. R. 6 m. ad 8 m. Sly 1 p. 6
p. 8 p. XXX. Drisle m. p. 3. July, drisle p. m. tot. A high wind, showers o. 1
p. p. m. tot. VI. Wet a. m. tot and fere tot p. XIX. Soultry. XXI. Hot season.
XXII. Three Meteors, by moonlight two. XXVI. Dash of rain m. H. wd.
September 24. ad October 3.
XXIV. Wet 5 p. ad 11 p. etc. with fog. XXV. Rain all n. s. wetting m. S E.
XXVI. Dark, wet a. m. tot. showers 5 p. warm. S W. XXVIII. Wet m. windy. S W.
XXX. Shower 9 p. and wdy. Sly. October. I. H. wind all n shower 1 p. 2 p. etc. II.
H. wd all n. wet and dashing m. S W.
1673. June 24. ad July.
XXV. Wetting little p. m. tot. S W. XXVI. Rain 6 m. 8 p. and 11 p. and n. m.
p. H. wd. S W. XXVII. Rain 6 m. windy. S W. XXIX. Smart shower 6 m. 9 m. 5 p. 8
p. 1 Thunderclap 3 p. July I. Rain 1 p. etc. S W. Floods at Oxford and Bristol,
and spout at Harwich. June 23.
1674. January 6. ad 13. March.
VII. H. wd o. and p. m. R. 9 p. Ely m. S. p. VIII. Wet die tot. a 5 m. ad 5 p.
R. p. midn. S E. X. R. ut supra. H. wd. XI. Wet m. rain hard 1 p. XIII. R. 5 m.
foggy and misle a m. m. p. Rearnest 7 p. XV. Wet a 1 p. ad 11 p. etc. S W. XVI.
Drisle 8 m. Rain 9 p. etc. Very High wd, Shipwreck at the Goodwin. XVII. R. a.
m. Snow die tot fere. Rain toward n. N E. XIX. Shower and high wind 10 p. S W. a
m. S E. p. m. XX. Snow and very High wind 1 p. N W. XXI. H. wind b. d. XXIV.
Much rain a 4 m. ad 7 m. warm. S W. XXVII. Rain 8 m. and 9 m. yea dropping m.
p. Ely. XXVIII. Rain 8 m. offer 6 p. Ely. XXIX. Wetting m. p. R. a 4 p. ad 11
p. XXXI. H. Wind 5 m. R. tot. Feb. VI. Excessive frosty. XIII. Much Snow 2 p.
ad 5 p. thaw. XIV. H. wind p. m. R. 5 p. S W. XV. R. fog a. m. 5 p. Sly and
Ely. XXI. Wet and dark a. m. XXII. Fog, sleet o. wetting 8 p. Ely. XXIII. R.
hard 2 m. 2 p. 9 p. S W. XXIV. Wet m. p. with snow. Ely. March II. H. wind n.
III. Snow all day, a great snow. N E. VIII. Windy, snow a 4 ad 5 p. Ely. X.
Snowing hard Sun occ. XII. Snowing m. p. p. m. XIII. R. m. and thaw apace,
warm.
Anno eod. April 18. ad 30.
XX. H. wind and dashing 4 p. etc. Sly. XXI. Shower 10 m. wd, rain 6 p. etc.
XXII. Tempest a. L. and die tot. with coasting showrs. XXIII. Showring a. m.
Hail at St. Albans. XXV. H. wd. XXVI. H. wind a. m. showring p. m. vesp. and 9
p. S W. XXVII. R. d. br. ad 7 m. XXIX. R. 5 m. and m. p. d. XXX. Rain 8 p.
Anno eod. July 5. ad 26. August.
V. Wind, shower 1 p. smart showring and thunder. VI. Shower 1 p. 3 p. 5 p. VII.
Showers of rain and hail 9 m. etc. Showrs p. m. VIII. Showring 10 m. 1 p. p. m.
dashing 5 p. ad 8 p. fere. Sly. IX. Shower 10 m. 1 p. X. Shower 7 p. S W. XIII.
H. wind, shower 1 p. and 8 p. XIV. Shower 9 m. shower and thunder 1 p. very H.
wind. XVII. R. 5 m. soultry, terrible Lightning 9 p. Meteor near Perseus.
XVIII. Much lightning, abate at midnight. 3 Meteors 11 p. XIX. Lightning and
thunder 2 m. R. coasting shower 1 p. H. wind. So at Strasburg, etc. XX. Pouring
rain a. and m. XXI. High wind. XXII. Soultry fog a. m. R. 1 thunderclap 1 p. R.
4 p. dash 9 p. Dire storm at Vtrecht, Antwerp, Ghent. XXIII. H. wind. XXIV.
Rain 2 m. 7 m. H. wiuds. S. S W. Meteor occ. XXVI. Soultry, yet windy,
Lightning much 8 p. etc. XXVII. H. wind, shower o. XXVIII. s. showers m. H. wind
p. m. XXIX. H. wind, Meteors 11 p. XXX. R. hard p. m. tot. H. wind. XXXI. R. 5
m. and 11 m. wdy. August I. Shower 5 p. high wind. II. Rain 7 p. R. a 9 m. ad 2
p. shower 3 p. and 10 p. III. s. fain m. shower 5 p. 7 p. Rainbow. S W. IV. R. 9
m. etc. and 1 p. V. H. cool wind. VI. H. wind, R. 5 p. 7 p. 10 p. N W. VII.
Much rain a. L.
1675. Jan. 31. ad 9 Feb.
XXXI. H. wind, s. snow or hail 4 p. II. Feb. Rain midn. S W. IV. R. m. p. by
fits, Dir. V. High wd and R. 11 p. S W. VII. Shower of hail 11 m. o. 1 p. 3 p.
Rain 8 p. IX. Wetting and hard snow 8 m. Anno eod. August 20. ad 23. Sept. XX.
s. rain n. windy. XXIV. Rainy m. p. m. XXVII. Windy, rain n. XXVIII. Wind, R.
at 12. S W. XXIX. R. at 3 p. m. 5. and 7. XXXI. Great Hurricane at Barbados as
ever was. Sept. V. Rain 5 p. drops 6 p. XI. Great rain 2 m. 3 m. XV. Rain 5 m.
XVI. Rain 5 p. XIX. Rain 2 m. s. R. 2 p. XXI. Windy, great rain 5 m. 1 p.
XXIII. R. at midn. Anno eod. Nov. 24. ad Dec. 5. XXIV. Windy, s. wetting o. R.
6 p. XXV. Rain a 3 p. ad 6 p. XXVII. Wetting 7 m. and 9 m. XXVIII. Warm.
1676. Feb. 21. ad March 6.
XXV. R. 11 p. Tempest, after occ. XXVII. Wind 6 p. Meteors 9 p. seen plain
below. XXIX. s. wetting, heat, drops toward occ. March III. Rain 6 m. ad 9 m.
fere, shower 11 m. bright Meteor. ^ 5. rain 6 p. etc. Anno eodem. August 28. ad
Sept. 5. XXVIII. Shower 8 m. and o. 2 p. dashing 4 fere R. 7 p. H. wind 9 p.
etc. XXIX. High wind. Wly. XXX. Rain at Bromley 1 p. great shower. IV. Sept. hot
n. f. wet. 5 m. R. o. fine rain p. m. and Sun occ. and 11 p. V. Rain apace 1 m.
1677. March 10. ad May 6.
X. Rain ante ort. and 8 m. H. wind. XI. Rain 2 m. 4 m. hail 1 p. Meteor, wdy,
wet 3 p. ad 6 p. XII. Rain ^. L. shower 1 p. XIII. Much snow 4 m. snow die tot.
XIV. R. m. o. and vesp. XV. Great storm between Cales and St. Lucas; which
broke the Mast of Captain Pile's Ship, and a Clap of Thunder broke the second
Mast, so that they were all cast away. XVIII. Rain a. L. s. wet 6 m. XIX. Rain
hard 1 m. 11 m. XX. R. a. L. H. wind. XXI. Very stormy all n. storm of rain and
hail 6 p. XXII. Rainy, windy m. p. rain and hail 3 p. Hail and Thunder 5 p. at
Forest hill. XXIII. Rain 2 p. R. ante 5 p, and 8 p. too much rain complained
of. Hail 4 p. XXIV. Rain 8 m. etc. XXV. H. wind all n. XXVII. Shower 6 p. 7 p.
XXIX. Rain a midn. and blow hard. April. Storm Wrackt the Loyal Merchant, Lat
49. III. April. Rain a. L. at Forest hill 4. Rain a. I. Nly. VI. Shower 1 p.
VII. Rain 5 m. XI. s. rain m. high wd, drisle, often R. XIV. Rain 6 m. and o. 1
p. 6 p. by fits 3 p. coasting shower 7. H. wind 11 p. XV. Rain 11 m. sweetly
with H. wds, showrs 6 p. XVI. Shower 8 m. hot n. R. and 4 or 5 Claps of thunder
in the S W. XVII. s. rain 9 m. wind, R. p. m. 4 p. by fits, a Comet. XVIII. s.
showring o. and 1 p. XIX. R. 3 p. and pretty store a 6. ad 8 p. XX. s. rain 9
m. XXII. s. wet 3 p. XXIII. Cold day, wdy. Percpisce at Greenwich, Whale at
Colchester. XXIV. R. m. 10 m. hard 11 m. 1 p. 6 p. wd. S W. XXVI. R. m. 10 m.
rain considerable 11 m. XXVII. Wet m. wet 6 m. here, and 36 Mile Northwards.
Rain 1 p. 5 p. 7 p. XXIX. H. wind, shower 9 m XXX. Rain 11 m. and constant till
midnight, ante midnight rain faster. The Vale of the white horse in danger of a
Flood. I. May. Wet m. rain 11 m. II. Rain 5 p. and 9 p. Flood at Tunbridge.
III. Wet a. m. tot. shower, rain and hail, an il lustrious Rainbow. Anno eodem.
June 30. ad 10 July. July VII. Lightning and Thunder 1 p. VIII. Troubled air,
Thunder 7 p. and Rain. IX. Shower 6 m. smart 10 m. High wind die tot. X.
Boisterous wind die tot. R. 11 occ.
1678. April 11 ad 18.
XI. R. 9 m. and m. p. m. D. XIII. Wetting o. 2 p. and 6 p. R. 8 p. XIV. R. 1
p. XV. Rain 1 and 2 m. XVI. Drisle m. 6 p. 11 p. XVII. Drisle 10 m. shower 2 p.
1679. Jan 22. ad 30.
XXII. Thawing, drisle, sleet p. m. XXIII. Snow 8 fere; some snow and thaw p.
m. per tot. XXIV. Snow m. p. n. XXVI. H. wind and cutting. Anno eod. November.
8. ad 18. VIII. s. rain p. 7 p. 11 p. IX. R. a. L. postea snow. X. s. rain ante
2 p.
1680. Sept. 3. ad 11.
III. Halo 2 m. V. s. raiu 10 m. and o. IX. Gr. Fog, hot 10 p. X. Gr. fog, wet
10 p. Meteor, 10 p.
1681. June 15. ad 22.
XV. s. rain, Sterlin great storm, hail. XVI. Dolphins in the Severn. XVII. T.
M. swallowing up Trees at Ferrara. XIX. s. drisle o. 7 p. Meteor with a Train 9
p. XX. Fine gentle rain a 2 p. ad midn. XXI. Brave wet day, curious dash ante 3
p. XXII. R. Sun or. winds. Anno eod. December. 18. ad 8 Feb. 1682. XVIII. Very
high wind a. L. and much Rain stormy day. XIX. R. 6 m. stormy ad Falmouth. XX.
R. 4 m. rain and wind ante 7 p. Porpisces 4 at Woolwich Reach. XXI. R. m. and
11 m. Flood at Copenhagen by Storm XXII. Rain a 7 p. ad 11 p. XXIII. Much Rain
noct. precedent. drisle p. m. m. p. snow at Okeham. XXIV. Plymouth very
tempestuous, much R. XXV. H. wind and much R. ab ante 4 m. ad merid. stormy day
and n. stormy Tarmouth 6 Vessels driven back by stress weather. XXVI. Very
stormy n. praeced. with R. storm of hai. Stormy by fits. XXVIII. Stormy p. m.
R. 12 p. XXIX. Wind and R. ante 2 p. and alias. XXX. H. wind p. m. R. and very
high wind, H. wind n, Jan. I. 1682. R. 2 p. ad 3 p. so 5 p. ad 8 p. H. wind o.
and p. m. III. Furrows, H. wind, blowing off Tiles, s. R. m. IV. Rain ante 1 m.
V. R. 6 p. VI. Inundation at Amsterdam. VIII. R. and H. wind a. L, and 10 m.
High wd 2 p. IX. Wind and wetting m. H. wind 10 p. X. s. R. m. H. wind n. XI.
Very high wd, s. snow and rain 2 p. XII. H. wind n. tot. rain 2 p. 3 p. vesp.
very high wind n. Shipwreck, a Dutch Vessel. XIV. Windy, higher vesp. s. rain 9
m. XV. Very H. wind m. R. 10 m. and p. m. smart showrs ante 5 p. XVI. Furious
Tempest m. tot. and die blowing of tops of Houses and Chimneys. XVII, R. ante 6
m. H. winds, s. rain 6 p. 9 p. and ante 12 p. XVIII. Stormy wind n. tot. circ.
d. h. the Seas near Holland rose 3 inches higher than in 1670. when there was
an Inundation. XIX. Showers ante 7 m. storm of rain and wd 4 p. H. wind at n.
Meteors 3 or 4 ante 9 p. XXI. Shower circ. 7 m. and ante 10 m. high wd ante 2 p.
R. serious 7 p. 10 p. much complaint of Shipwreck. XXII. R. ante 8 m. 10 m.
Meteor by 9 p. XXIV. Rain hard post midn. XXV. Rain sub vesp. Inundat. at Danow
higher by 2 foot than 'twas 35 years ago. XXVI. R. ante 3 p. II. Feb. H. wind,
driving snow ante 3 p. Jan. 16. Ex literis pene e tota Europa, constat omnes
undequaque fluvious exundasse. XXX. Stockholm, within 10 mises, T. M. very
terrible for half an hour. Comet at Leopold. Feb. VI. At Dover a Swedish Vessel
wrackt, Ships scarce safe in Falmouth Haven.
1682. 26. March ad 5 April.
XXVII. Rain ante 8 p. m. s. gusts, Rain ante 2 p. XXVIII. H. wd, scuds of rain
ante 5 p. 6 p. 7 p. 11 p. very tempestuous at Plymouth. XXIX. Windy, cold,
dark. XXX. Windy, s. hail ante 11 m. wind and showrs o. 3 p. 4 p. high wind.
II. Apr. High wind, rise 10 m. or. IV. S. rain ante 8 m. mist. Anno eod. June
5: ad July 25. V. s. wind, shower ante o. set to rain 7 p. ad 11 p. VI. Windy n.
s. drops 11 p. s. dewing o. VII. Gusty, drisle p. m. 2 p. 3 p. frequent
showring ante 7 p. so 8 p. 11 p. VIII. Boston-Seas outrageous for 2 days past,
say the Fisher-Boats. X. H. winds, showring m. 10 m. 11 m. S W. XI. H wd n.
tot. and die seq. showring 9 m. Pleiades med. C. 1 p. 3 p. Thunder said, vesp.
XII. Winds, coasting shower 4 p. 8 p. XIV. Shower and brisk wd. XV. Wind blowing
extreme, s. days past, several pieces of Wracks and drowned men; at Durham hail
and lightning, the like at Carlington in Ireland, destroying Corn many many
miles round. XVI. Shower o. rain at Putney for 3 hours; Dash of rain and Thunder
5 p. in Nadir. XVII. Dropping a. m. a 7 m. ad 1 p. m. p. winds. XXI. s. R. 6 m.
and high wind m. p. XXII. H. wd m. p. very often showring 8 m. and o. 5 p. 6 p.
9 p. XXIII. Coasting showers round, Thunder and great dash 5 p. XXIV. Maxfeid,
Hail and Lightning destroyed the Corn. XVI. Smart shower post 6 p. XXVII.
Bruxel, we have had very bad weather like to spoil our Harvest. XXVIII. Rain 10
m. 7 m. S E. Wly. XXIX. Very high wind, s. wetting ante 1 p. so 3 p. 7 p. 10 p.
XXX. H. and stormy wds 1 m. so m. p. R. circa 4 p. S W. I July. Stormy and wet
10 m. II. Shower ante 11 m. wetting o. 1 p. 2 p. H. wds a. m. III. R. early, die
tot. fere. IV. H. wind, s. rain, welcome Harvest day. VI. Lightning, with, harm
done at Sea at Brighthamsted. Lightn. tore one House all to pieces, and Fired
another. Lightning with us 10 p. terrible. VII. Lightning, thunders rain ante 3
m. shower circ. o. XII. At Anjou, Dreadful Tempest turned several Villages in
that Province topsi-turvi. XV. Thunder and some R. ante 3 m. XVI. Shower o. and
1 p. XVII. Wind, brisk shower 10 m. 2 p. 5 p. 6 p 11 p. XVIII. H. wind and
showring 7 m. N W. XX. Meteor 11 p. Wly. XXI. Wetting 9 and 10 m. R. 10 p. etc.
XXII. Showers coasting 1 p. brisk showrs post 3 p. XXIII. Shower 1 p. and p. m.
Phillipsburg, within a mile a Village mostly destroyed by Lightning.
13. Ha! How do thou like this Good Reader? Does it not found like Drums and
Trumpets? does it not alarm Thee? Alas! I have more of this Nature: For the
might of these configurations is not seen, unless we range yet further by Sea
and Land to tell more Heavy Tales of what has been done in old time on the
Solid and Watery Pavements of the World. A Philosophers mind is boundless,
sometimes his Pen. So the great Naturalist, Pliny, the First of that Name,
reads a Lecture upon the World, and all its Contents, whatsoever can show us
the stamp of Nature, the mark of a Divine Impress, while we content our selves
as hitherto with Storms, Floods, Fiery Meteors, and such Trade. For which,
because we have not done right as yet, to either of the Conjunctions of with,
or premised, which yet may be of profit to Navigation; and because our present
oft-times herds with a of, and vice versa, on this account we shall produce the
of and, and in their several Columns, which done, we shall subjoyn what remains
of.

14. And here is the benefit of our Amplitude, which we make in an Aspect, that
we shall not be defeated of our intent by the Calculations of the former
Century, how short soever they have been; but our design shall be built up,
stand sure and steadfast, because in our way we proceed as the good Architect
does, who knows that the longer is the Beam, the more hold it takes upon the
Wall, whereas if we should cut to an Inch, or half-Inch, what with shrinking of
the Timber, or the settling of the Building, All would come to Ruin.
Notwithstanding to confess ingenuously amongst this Triade of Aspects, the was
most welcome to us, be cause of a more certain, and a clearer Calculation.

The Foreign Diary of s Tempests, reserved to this place.
15. Anno Christi. 1500. April 23. The Portugal Admimiral Capralis his doom in
the reach of the East Indies. Purch. p. 1. page 30. 1517. June 26. Hurricane
blew down Houses, pulled up Trees at Nordling; Lychost, p. 133. 1535. May 20.
Storms and Tempests that Ships suffered; Hakl. 11 p. 212. 1539. August 23.
Extreme Tempests, and danger of perishing; Hakl. 3. p. 198. 1540. Feb. 11.
Tempest, a greater cannot be expressed; Hakl. 2. p. 421. From that day to the
20. Tempestuous Ib. cum. 1549. March 14. Wondrous Storms and Showrs praeter
modum; Dr. Dee, Annot. MS. ad annum cum in prim.. 1552. Aug. 21. Hurricane,
Lycosth 625. cum. 1553. August 3. Lat 70. Near Finmark Terrible Whirlwinds,
Hakl. p. 269. 1555. August 19. Storms so terrible we knew not the like, though
we had endured many since we came out of England, Hakl. 1. p. 318. 1557. June
2. Tempests and much Rain, Hakl. 1. p. 334. 1551. July 15. Hurricane, rifting
up Trees in many places, Gemma 2. p. 32. great storms at Sea, near Volga, Lat.
46. Hakl. 1. p. 350. cum. 1565. Dec. 24. Furious Winds, blowing open the Gates
of St. Paul's. 8th. Shipwracks on Sea, many perished in the Thames; Stow, p.
659. 1568. March 28. Tempests of wind, drowning the Tilt-Boats before
Graves-end. Stow, p. 662. 1569. August 18. Hurricane, Gemma 2. p. 65. gr. 12.
cum aliis. 1574. Nov. 18. Very tempestuous Winds all night, which Stow never
knew the like, p. 679. cum. 1576. March 5. Flaw of Wind from N W. Tilt-Boat of
21 Persons perished, Stow, p. 680. near the Equator. 1582. March 8. Outrageous
Storms on the Coast of Holland, Calvis. cum. 1585. Dec. 23. Earl of Leicesters
Tempest going for Roterdam, Stow, p. 713. 1586. June. 13. ad 16. Storm at
Virginia, c. Smith, 1. 9. 1587. May 27. Fair, but the Pinnace Foremast was
blown overboard, Davis's Voyage; Hakl. Vol 3. p. 3. 1589. October. 6, 7, 8. Very
rough weather, Hak. Vol. 2. p. 160. in fine. 1590. August 1. ad 9. Weather
exceeding Foul, much Wind and Thunder, Hakl. 290. 1591. Sept. 5. Storm, Hakl.
2. p. 175. in 21. 1592. Oct. 21. Wind blew extreme, Hakl. Vol. 3. p. 848. 1593.
April 18. ad May 10. Furious contrary winds, Cavendish Relat. Purch. 4. p.
1193. most part of that while. 1595. Oct. 26. Storm at Night, separated Sir
Francis Drake from the Fleet, Hakl. Vol. 3. p. 483. 1596. Feb. 14. Storm, Hakl.
Vol 2. p. 589. cum aliis. 1597. May 20. Extremity of fowl Weather, Hakl. p.
195. June 2. Extreme Storm near the Bay of Assumption, Ib. in fine. 1606. April
20. Pascha ventosum in. April 21. Vehement Tempests all Night, with Winds, Rain
and Thunder in a terrible manner. We were forced to lie at hull, Purch. 2. p.
686. cum. 1609. June 15. Great Storm, we spent Overboard our Fore Mast, Purch.
3. p. 583. in, prim. 1610. March 27. Terrible Storm. I was fain to spoon before
the Sea to save our Lives, Purch 1. p. 242. Sept. 21, 22, 23. At Lesbos, Lat.
40. Winds blew m. and Sea somewhat rough; Mr. Saundys, p. 114. cum. 1612. Dec.
22. to 28. Boisterous and stormy; Purch. 287. in. 1614. Nov. 9. Rainy and great
winds, at Lusham in Kent; Annot. M. S. in fine. 1618. Jan. 10. Foul Weather,
etc. 1619. July 26. Great Tempest at N E. Sail lost by stress of Wind small
rest all Night, Purch 1. p. 130 in. 1620. July 18. Foul Weather, etc. 2624.
Nov. 12. Still. Nov. Count Mansfelds Tempest, where his Ship was cast away;
Fromond 2. c. 3. art. 13. Calvis. in Pleicades. 1625. Jan. 5. Great Tempest,
some Boats drowned in our Thames, in, at the same time Storms of Wind in
Norimberg, and a Steeple in Eberspach struck with Lightning. 1626. Jun. 9.
Whirlwinds in Thames near Purfleet, tore up the ground. Howes, p. 1042. Dir.
12. Whirlwind on the Thames blew up much Water in the Air, the Boats were
turned round, Thunder and ha followed, Howes, Ib. cum il in fine. 1636. May 29.
Terrible Storm and Whirlwind in Smalcald, Norimberg, in. 1642. Feb. 16. Quen
Mary embarquing for England, forced back again by Weather; Sanders on cum.
1656. March 27. Rowsing Tempest at Oxford, cum. 1660. May 15. Hurricane. 1661.
July 20. Very wet and stormy, cum. 1666. Jan. 24. Hurricane. Sept. 20. High and
extraordinary Tempests of Winds and Rain ante merid. gr. 10. 1668. Febr. 16,
17, 18. Tempestuous Winds, gr. 5. Febr. 29. Furious Winds. Oct. 13. Stormy
Winds. 1670. Jan. 25. St. Paul's day, Tempestuous Winds. cum. Sept. 4. High
Winds, Rain all Night, cum.
16. I know not what will be the issue with my good Reader, since some may say
there is too much, and others, that here is not Instance enough. To the First,
I shall hope it is not unpardonable: To the Second, that it must not be supposed
that this can be a Tenth Part of the Evidence may be produced from the Annals
of Europeans, and that the Maritime Relations of several Countries, enough to
convince Tycho himself, and all his Academic Suspenders of Assent. I add
further, that if any Man will but consider what an Hurricane is, and the
Prodigious Violence wherewith it is described by the Attestator, parallel to
the Force of Lightning and Gunpowder, which makes the Seaman often complain of
some destructive Fiend engaged in the Star. If a man shall consider the Horror
of a Shipwreck, or which seems to be next, the perishing on our Rivers, where a
Shole of Passengers by hard Fate, are cooped up in a Tilt-Boat, which
miscarrying are arrested by the Dire Embraces of Death; He would not choose a
suspicious day to put to Sea in, nor consult an Astrologer for a day when there
haps a, that he might then to choose, pass down in the Boat.

117. This we may be sure of as to Hurricanes, that though we do not Feel such
Dire Commotions here, as within the Tropic, yet we have seen and Felt some not
blunt and bruit Violences of Winds, which have the Merchants mark of.

18. Now we may take a View of. As Furious, but not so frequent.

The Foreign Diary of, and the Tempest attending.
Anno Christi, 1521. October. 24. Magellans Tempest, Purch 11. p. 43. cum. 1539.
Nov. 26. Tempestuous winds, separating our Ships; Hakl. p. 407. cum. Dec. 11.
Cruel North winds broke the Ships, Cable, the Ship bulg'd. Hakl. p. 720. 1555.
Dec. 13. Water mounted so that we might see it 4 Leagues off, Hakl, p. 100.
1556. Jan. prim. Storms of N. winds from Terra Florida, and dispersed our Ships
in 2 ho. lasted 10 days cum. 1557. Nov. 10. Ambass, Tempest, Howes, 629. 1565.
June 17. Storm forced us to cut the Cable, and lose both Anchors and Cables to
save our selves, Hakl. Edit. 1. p. 536. 1568. Oct. 9. Extreme Storm, every hour
we feared Shipwreck. Hakl. p. 556. 1577. July 19. Diverse Storms and Flaws; una
cum. Hakl. Edit. 2. p. 65. 1580. Sept. 25, 26, 27. Great stormy Blasts, Hakl.
p. 842. cum. The whole Month was tempestuous Ib. p. 474. the lasted per totum
men's. cum aliis. October. 1. ad 7. The same weather for die 4. the Cables broke,
cum. 1583. Feb. 1. ad 5. Stout Gale, Hakl. Vol. 3. p. 767. cum. 1592. October. 2.
Stormy Winds at W. N W. near Lat. South 9. Hakl. p. 849. Die 4. Storm (as the
poor Seamen then phrased it) beyond all reason, Ib. Oct. 10. Dark Storm with
despair, Hakl. Vol. 3. p. 848. Oct. 21. Wind extreme, H. 2. p. 849. cum. 25.
Sudden Storms, our boat sunk at the Shore, Hakl. Edit. 2. page 329. 1596. Jan.
25. Wind so great that we could not lanch our Shallop. Sir W. Raleigh. Hakl. 3.
p. 629. 1597. July 9. Earl of Essex Fleet bound for the Azores, driven back 60
Leagues to Plymouth, Stow, p. 783. 1602. May 11. Stormy weather, C. Smith una
cum. 1608. Sept. 26. Mighty Storm on the Bay of Soldania, beyond the Southern
Tropic, split our Fore-Course, Purch. Vol. 1. p. 228. 1610. May 12. A hard
Storm, Purch. 1. p. 105. 1615. March 7. Cruel Storm continued diverse days.
Purch. Vol. 2. p. 1. p. 80. cum. 1619. Nov. 29. Hurricane at Burmudas, blew up
many great Trees, and cast away the Warwich, 17. 17. 14.. Not long after a
second, C. Smith p. 171. 1620. Sept. 13, 14. Storm at Bermudas with Snipwrack,
C. Smith, p. 190. 1627. Febr. 24. Naves 37. cum 4500 hominibus submersa, Calv.
(gr. 4) Dec. 17. Hurricane v. Kepler ad annum: and we have given it before, gr.
5. 1635. Feb. 6. Terrible blustering, cum.
19. So have you the of of a terrible unruly Influence, but by the comparing of
these two Tables, it is hard if we cannot make some estimate. It appears that
the of is more prone to lend us a Hurricane then that of. Hence (which I am
glad of) the old Character of is justified, even in Capital Letters; That it is
rather an exciter of Turbulency, than: For, I suppose blusters with some
quarter, sends a Boat on drift, but the Mercurial Hurricane has the dead-doing
Influence, Hurryeth a Vessel to the bottom, as if in reality the Fiend were
there, Abaddon or Apollyon; who has the Power of Death: who, though he have
not a hand in the raising of these violent Effects of Nature, as Bodin and
Helmont will have it, (for I cannot believe that there is a Fiend lodged in
every blast of Fired Gunpowder) yet nothing hinders but that the infernal
Spirit may make use of a Tempest which is raised to his hands, always willing
to be one at mischief. But this may be out of the way; only I thought good to
Start it, that Men may rightly value and measure the Heavenly Bodies and their
Influences, that we may look no longer upon them as Objects of a doting Theory;
as for the most part Astrology is censured.

20. Now let us see what an Hand a has in Storms, premising their Diary also.

The
Anno Christi. 1522. Febr. 11. A North W. wind in the Prow of the Ship would
not suffer us to pass the Cape of B. Speranza, Purch. Lib. 2. p. 452. per men's.
totum. 1539. Nov. 26, 27. Northwards tempestuous for two days; Cortez his Ships
lose their Company, Hakl. p. 407. cum. 1540. Jan. 9. etc. Tempest from the
North, driving back 20 Leagues, Hakl. 415. if we had been in Harbor we should
have been cast away, p. 416. 418. una cum. Febr. 1. Wind boistrous, the Seamen
glad in return, H. p. 420. Febr. 11. Ashwednesday, A greater Tempest says the
Seaman cannot be expressed. 1545. June 25. Hurricane in Devonshire, whereby
Trees were overturned, Churches, Chapels, Houses uncovered, Stow, 589. in.
Note that was then but 12. gr. distant from. 1547. Nov. 21. hor. 9. Ventus
Vehementissimus, una cum. 1504. June 6. Storm, Dr. Deo' s Annot. ad men's. 1553.
Aug. 1. Terrible Whirlwind, we were not able to bear any such, Sir H. Willougby
in Hakl. 1 p. 235. 1554. August 9: Antwerp, Tempestuous, N W. wind blew the
Governor and Family in their Coach off the Bridge into the Water, Stadius
himself rarely escaped from being crushed with the fall of a Tree, Tab. Berg.
203. in fine. 1558. May 12. Dangerous Tempests in Mare Caspium, for 44 ho.
Purch. Vol. 3. 198. cum. 1662. Jan 21, 22, 23. Horrida ventorum Tempestas Gemma
2. p. 40. 1573. August 2. Tempestates horrend. cum Ventis assiduis, Gemma 2.
169. in cum. 1576. August 24. ad 28. Very much wind like to lose our Bark,
Hakl. Edit 2. p. 72. cum una cum. 1577. July 4. Friezland, Boisterous Winds,
Hakl. 3. p. 33. cum. 1580. Sept. 5, 6, 7. Happy the Ship in Harbor, Hakl. 474.
cum aliis. Sept. 12. ad 17. Very tempestuous, per tot. men's. so die 25, 26, 27,
Ib. 1582. Dec. 27. Foul Gale of Wind, Hakl. 1. p. 613. 1586. Sept. 6, Mighty
Storm, very extreme, lasted ad diem 10. We intended to cut down our Masts,
Hakl. Vol. 1. p. 786. cum. 1587. October. 8. ad 14 Storm, in Six days drew us
further than we could recover in 13. Sir W. Raleigh. Hakl. Edit 1. 270. 1589.
Aug. 17. Wind blew hard at Virginia, C. Smith p. 15. Great Storm at night, die
19. Hakluit. 1592. October. 10. Dark, stormy, was furious with despair, Hack.
Vol. 3. p. 148. cum: 1594. March 21. Hurricanes, tearing diverse Trees, Barns,
monstrously and incredibly in several parts of Eegland, Stow, p. 766. circ.
prim. cum,. 1595. Dec. 19. The Foul Weather which Sir Francis Drake verifies to
his small, lies under this una cum, being scarce all three gr. 3 distant. 1696.
March 21. Stormy Gales of Wind, and much Rain, Hakl. Edit 2. 589. 1597. June
17. Stormy Weather, Hakl. 195. in fine una cum. 1605. Inter Sept. 26. and
October 5. Storms to our great Peril, looking always we should be wracked,
Purch. Vol. 4. p. 1257. cum 1606. April 21. Vehement Tempest all Night, with
Wind, Rain and Thunderterrible. Purch. Vol. 4. p. 1686. cum. 1086. Nov. 24.
Storm furious, that we drove before the Wind 3 leagues Purch. 4. 1282. 1609.
Dec. 22. ad 27. Boisterous and Storms. 1610. April 2. A Storm, we were forced
to bear up before the Sea, Purch 3. 231. July 15. Very stormy, Purch 4. 1759.
in cum. 1618. March 1. at Jucatra arose a Tempest, Purch Vol. 1. 677. gr. 8.
1620. Sept. 4. Great Tuffon overset Ships, and sunk them down suddenly, Purch.
Vol. 4. p. 641. gr. 9. 1637. October. 7. Great Tempest in the Frisian Sea,
Kyriander. 1640. Sept. 23. Stormy wind and great Flood in Dresden. Kyr. 1640.
Nov. 11. Dark, tempestuous when his Majesty King Charles the First escaped from
Hampton Court. H. I. gr. 9. cum aliis. 1651. Feb. 22. Tempestuous una cum, gr.
2. 1663. Nov. 7. Dreadful Storms at Tunbridge, both R. cum aliis gr. 5. cum.
1669. Oct. 31. Tempest Terrible cum gr. 11:
21. Lo! How our is stormy; it is against the Hair to say that that a is as
stormy as, for that were to equal with which the System of the World it self
will not endure, and Experience rejects, as by comparing the Mercurial Tables
will be seen. and conjure up some Hurricanes, but and do more. It will be
objected that if and be not so boisterous as and, then is brisker than himself.
And that being absurd, we must say, that and are like to the Eye and the
Spectacle; the Glass is not greater, i. e. Nobler than the Eye; and yet the Eye
armed with the Glass, sees clearer than when it is considered by it self: And
in our Simile, as there lies much in the Vicinity of the Unequal Glass to the
Eye of one side, and the Vicinity to the Object on the other: So there is much
in the Vicinity of these Planets, first to the Sun, and then to the Earth, the
objects as it were of their Influence. And we promised to evince this from
those rare Nicks of time, when and are both Retrograde; or one only, while the
other is in his Station: (I have but two Instances as yet) the Effects are
dreadful, witness that 1620. Sept: 4. and that 1663. Nov. 7. assigned the one
by Sea, the other by Land. The reason being no other then what we have, that
the Retrograde Course argues their Vicinity to the Earth, much more then the
Direct: The Astronomers will tell you how many Miles.

22. It Is obvious to note, that as in a, so in a; we sometimes give a fair
account of a whole Months Constitution, or more; as for February, Anno 1522.
Jan. 1540. the Month of September 1580. we have given a hint of other Planets
that have been guilty of the Riot, the and,, and sometimes and. To prepare the
Reader to expect Storms from all Quarters of Heaven; and that there is no such
thing as a Pacifick Sea under Heaven, as Magellan himself also found after 3
Months time in that very Sea which he so named.

23. Wherefore I reckon I have done not much amiss to introduce these 3 Tables
immediately foregoing, since the one gives Light to the other Rages, when it
may be is a Well-willer. A rages when is not far off; and a Rains and blusters,
when by his Vicinity shows his Interest in the Effect. So that I cannot but
commend to the Mariner, even after every Storm over-blown, and thanks to their
Preserver, to consider as a rudiment of Celestial Knowledge, how and and
interchangeably bear to one another. In VII. years time he will see he has
Reason to observe more then Lunar Aspects come to. For that is well, yet that
is as old as Noah's Ark; and what advance has the Navigator made I beseech him
for these 3000 years and upwards? It Is Pity.

24. Stadius, I confess, gives away his Hurricane (for it was no less) to the
rising of and with Arcturus supra Anno 1544. but he had done no wrong, if for
surity sake he had quoted other Witnesses, viz. this of our present Aspect.

25. Let us dispatch the remainder, for its Influence in Comets, which are but
Few, and Fiery Meteors which are more Plentiful, and then we come in sight of a
Conclusion.

Comets then have not many Instances.
First, Anno 1506. April 11. lasted 25 days, Ricciolus, gr. 10. cum. Anno 1530.
August 6. to Sept. 3. Ricciolus, cum aliis. Anno 1557. August 6. usque ad Fest.
Barthol. Stad. Bunting,. Anno 1578. May 16. Lubiniec, in cum. Anno 1582. May
15. Stow. p. 695. gr. 12. cum.
26. This last Comet, though I meet it not any where but in Stow, yet we know
no reason to question it, any more, then those of the same year which appeared
elsewhere in March, as may appear from our Celestial Evidence, both there and
here. For three of these Comets happened pat in the day of our Conjunction, or
very near; So that no question here is some Influence. See the Table of upon
this Head.

27. What if a Man should not let pass the Co-incidence of the same day in the
Month, Anno 1530. 1557. 1578. 1582. It may be a Meditation for Gassendus.

Some Fiery Meteors.
28. Anno Christi. 1521. October 24. Alvarez the Portugal Admiral for the
discovery of the East Indies, Tempest with 3 Lights, whereupon the Storm
ceased, Purch. Lib. 2. p. 43.. July 15. Lightning fell on the Town of Billay.
T. G. P. 1551. Jan. 13. Lightning in many Places of Germany, with apprehension
of Doomsday, Lycosth. 611. 1554. Febr. 19. Trabs ignea in Thuringen, cum variis
Circulis coclestib. 674. March 10. At Schalon in France, Ignes ardens, cum
fulgure, Lycost. 636. 1555. Dec. 29. At Voitland, ho. 11. nocte, Lightning
destroying Churches, so at Willenburg, Stanhurst, Lyc. 649. 1563. Dec. 1. ad
13. Winter Lightning unparalleld, cum aliis. 1569. July 13. Thunder, with Hail
as big as the Fist, Gemma 2. 64. 1582. Dec. 29. Lightning, Thunder, Hakl. V. p.
663. 1604. Sept. 16. Caelum arsit. Kepl.. 1607. April 16. Lightning at
Covenrry, with Rain, and unexpected Flood, How, 889. 1611. Jan. 1. In the midst
of Frost and Snow, Lightning and Thunder, Calvis. 1616. Nov. 8. Rain hard, with
Lightning and Thunder, Purch. 1. p. 105. gr. 7. 1618. March 7. Flame over the
Palace of Paris a Foot long, and a Cubit broad, fired the Palace Howes, 1029.
1622. May 21. Meteorum prodigiosum, as before in Kepler. Dec. 23. Chasms,
Lightnings, Ib. 1623. Jan. 29. Caelum ardens. Mar. 19. Lightning, Kyriander.
1624, Aug. 18. Lightning and Thunder, Wilsford. Nov. 2. Lightning and Thunder;
wondered at by Fromond, after cold Weather. p. 67. 1625. Mense Julii; At
Norimberg it Thundered Days in number 15. Kyriander, cum 8 or 9 days elsewhere,
at Ratisbon, Lintz. 1635. Aug. 31. Thunder and extreme Rain for an Hour, gr. 7.
Sept. 9. vesp. and noctu, much Lightning. 1637. Sept. 10. Terrible Thunder in
East Friezland, Kyriander. 1639. Jan. 30. Chasma. 1646. June 26. Thunder and
Rain, gr. 4. cum. 1642. Jan. 22. Thunder and Fiery Meteors, harmful, at Hanover
Kyriander, cum aliis. Jan. 27. Thunder, Wind, Earthquake. Id. Feb. 17. Thunder
and Storms, gr. 8.
29. I confess much of this Gear is fetched from Germany, which is a different
Country from ours; but what then? A Liberal Science is universal; I write for
the World, and Mankind, if I could do it Service, I should have my Guerdon. And
let no man say in this or any other Instance, because is always within call,
that it is the Aspect which is the Fac totum; For I shall desire that man only
to look on, and then on, and then let him say, whether looks not as Fair, or as
Foul, or what you will call it, as Potent as her Lower and less Copesmate.
Beside the consequence is good, if, or have Influence in Conjunction; then have
the like. For I hope we must not be put to win our Ground by Inches. If so, we
are ready to do it.

30. If and then are so boistrous, then we look for some Earthquakes here too;
Earthquakes and Floods.

Terra Motus.
Anno Christi. 1559. Sept. 14. Earthquake at Constantinople for 18 days,
Lycost, cum aliis. 1554. March 21. hor. 12. At Lovain an Earthquake with great
noise. 1571. Feb. 17. At Kinaston in Herefordshire a terrible noise, the Ground
opened, an Earthquake 4 days, Stow, p. 668. 1618. March 12. Terrible Earthquake
in the Indies, gr. 10. in, cum aliis. 1621. May 25. An Earthquake in Burgundy,
Kepler, gr. 9. 1626. Feb. 6. Una rupium Gamundiensi imminentium findi and in
contraria descedere visa est. Kepl. 1627. Nov. 14 Erdheven, Kyr. cum aliis.
1629. Aug. 1. Great Earthquakein Alpibus, Rheticis, Kyr, gr. 9. cum. 1636.
Sept. 16. Earthquake, Kyr. una cum. 1642. Jan. 27. Thunder and Earthquake, gr.
3. 1644. Feb. At Marseilles, Kyr. per mensem totum fere. 1645. Sept. 12.
Earthquake in Thuringia, Kyr. una cum.
31. But the Close of all is Inundations, to do the Arabs some credit.

1501. Aug. 14. The River Albis, Lycost. cum. 1549. June 23. Incepit imber
says Dr. Dee in his notes on that Month, the most violent since Adam, a
Condito Mundo, near the Tropic, cum. 1551, Jan 10. At Marpurg, great
Inundation, Lyc. 611. in Trop. cum aliis. 1552. Aug. 13. At Budissina near the
Sudetes (Mountains) Cataracts harmful, Lyc. 625. Peucer 240. in. 1579. May 27.
Whitsunday, great Rain and High Water, after a Cold and dry time, Stow, 788. in
princ. 1579. Febr. a Die 10. Continued Rain, caused high Floods in
Westminster Hall, Stow, 689. in. 1595. Febr, circ. 23. Inundation at Frankfort,
prodigious, above that of the year 1573. yea, Inundations throughout all
Germany.. 1598. Circ. Dec. princ. Prodigious Inundations at Rome, greater than
that of Ann. 1530. Thuanus, una cum in. 1607. April 16. Strange Floods at
Coventry, unexpected, Howes, p. 889. in 12.. 1611. Nov. and Dec. By continual
Rain, Waters higher than in memory of Man, much harm done. Purch. L. 3, 323.
una cum per men's. 1626. June 6. Pluvia Copiosissima, Kepler, gr. 12. gr. 10.
1640. Sept. 23. Grosser Wasser goust in Dresden, prope Equinoct. Kyr. 1643.
Febr. 6. The Maes overflows. Calv. Append. in 27. 1645. March 8. Rain, Thunder
Floods, variis in locis, gr. 3. Kyryander: Sept. 4. Weather extreme wet before
Spring, in princ.
And is not the Character made out now concerning Floods given by Alchindus,
and all the Tribe? We that are Well-wishers think it is.

32. And these inclinations are, and have been manifested to the World, though
Poor Astrologers talk to the Winds.

33. All this while I have dissembled the Force of our home Testimonies from
1676. downwards, for Constancy, yea and excess of Moisture; they speak as home
as Heart or Art could wish; For do you Find any year to come short? Does Anno
1672.? Let that be one, how many more ones will you find? Do you find any
Aspect to come short? two or three is the most, and whilst you look for them,
you will find so much moisture in the other parts, so encompassing, so
catching, that you will scarce have a dry thread about you. For you cannot but
mark the Frequencies of the Showers the same day twice, 3, 4, 5 times perhaps
in an afternoon, etc. I was willing to admit the Sextile of the to contribute
to such frequencies, and something they do, but, they are the Sprinklers, the
Water-Pots of Heaven, which teach the Art of Gardening so far, that in warm
Seasons we may often irrigate our Nurseries, Sepe parumque, as the Salern
School teaches us to moisten our Bodies.

Next mark the Store, like and, but far beyond it in liberality. Next the
Amplitude of the Aspect, for 10 degrees before and behind, justifying it self
by the Pertinacy of the Constitution throughout all the Term.

Then for the extremity or Violence, you shall find some years emulous of the
Foreign extremity oft-times, where is Retrograde, or Stationary, as we here
observed in the Foreign. Nay, I leave the searching Reader to find whether
some years among us make not as great a noise as those from Purchase or Hakluit,
or any other. To name that of the Close of Anno 1681. and the First Month of
1682. where we have some foreign Instances interspersed, and some of our own
as cruel as they.

34. Now this is the Aspect that never serves Keplers turn, he accepts not of
their Service when they bring Shower and Tempest at their Heels, as July 27.
Anno 1625. Parum tribuendum (says he) differentiae Latitud. ad 4. gradus, and
yet on the precedent day he tells us of Thunder, the next day Tonuit Longum;
and the precise 27. day pertonuit: So elsewhere harmful Lightning, Fulminata
loca. August 29. 1621. and then the again very laxe and Wide, and useless;
Discrepant Plagis Latitudinum, because was gr. 4. Southerly, and gr. 6. North.
But this is the Error of the necessity of a close Conjuction which many times
is enervated (say I) by its too near Cohesion. He reckons a Conjunction where
ever the desired effect appears not, to be loose, though but at 2 gr. distance,
as Anno 1621. May 14. Heat and a Rainbow, which imply Shower, did not answer
expectation. But gr. 2, 3, 4, 5. of Latitude, will not evacuate the force of a.
That of August 29. above quoted was gr. 3. distant. And in March 21. Anno 1623.
there was gr. 4. difference, and that in diversis Plagis Latitudinum: What?
Febr. 26. Anno 1627. he acknowledges an Apertio Portarum by a at degr. Lat. 9.
and that when one was on the North, and the other on the South. And yet I have
not urged from July 24. Anno 1624. where the Tempestas magna is raised, and
never another Aspect nearer, whereupon my Worthy Man is silent, and gives no
distinct account (except for two of the later days) the whole Month throughout.
And further I take notice where he rejects our Aspect one day, because of a
failure on the very day (forsooth) at the Months end. Yet now I pray see how
Tempestas and horrida Fulmina made him glad to embrace it at the beginning of
the Next. May 1. S. N. Anno 1629.

35. May I now consider the Astronomical motions of these Planets, then let me
for a close, take notice of their admirable turnings and windings, not to fill
up Paper, or increase the Bulk of a weak discourse, but by the way of Entry,
and disposition of the Reader, to clear his Eyesight, that he may behold those
Objects which Nature calls great. The Divine Being foresaw there would result
such a Variety from such an order, and thereupon enacted it should be. We may
remember that both these Celestial Bodies are capable of Retrogradation,
whereupon they meet together, sometimes in the Direct Course Both, and other
times in the Retrograde, and that for the most part Alternately. And all this
for the interest of the Change of the Air, and its Variety; in as much as the
Retrograde Place is nearer to the Earth (as before in) and therefore more
forcible. This you will believe when you shall find that when they are in
Conjunction, and both Retrograde (which had need come but seldom) they make a
Bustle. But of this else where. In the more frequent Congresses where there is
a single Retrogradation only; we meet with weather sometimes, I can tell you,
extreme also, and every Second year two or three of those Conjunctions, one on
the Neck of another. Whence let the Astrologer note, that when ever turning
short, happens to ingeminate his Conjunction in less than a Months time, as
oft-times he does; there he may find reason to reckon it a whole continued
Aspect in all the intermediate Space, the whole Month becoming his Quarter.

36. Who can choose but take notice also how these two Planets, when in do start
aside one from another 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. in Latitude, especially, even
sometimes to 7 degrees distance. And may not I observe, in favor of the
Tychonique Systeme now, that this extraordinary starting of does always
accompany her retrocession, thence conclude I that the one may be as real as
the other, but the latter is not pretended to be solved by the motion of the
Earth, and therefore, I fancy not the former.

37. But that which amazes me most is the enquiry after a Revolution when a
shall happen in the same Sign, on the same day of the year near the same
degree, so that and and shall all three lodge in a Bed; As Feb. 1. Anno 1663.
Grad. 22. of Aquary. When shall it be so again? Perchance hap it may, but with
no chain of Revolution. returns in 8 years, in 13. the in 19. because their
Dance is meted out to them; but and with the cannot easily meet again till they
have run out their first undertaking; wherefore Artists that tells us the one.
Kepl. Epit. Astr, VI. Cap. 5. are silent in the other.

38. At length we have done, and presented the Reader with what we have to say,
not any Dreams of fanciful Men, but honest Lectures of watchful Observers of
the great Folio of Heaven, to whose Creator from the considering part of the
World at least (for it is time to close) all Glory for ever, to which I hope
these Speculations do contribute.

CAAP. IV. Conjunction of Sol and Mars.
1. Transition. 2. of a sore Influence. 3. (...), a quick terrible Planet, of
old reputed. Plato explained. 5. Notwithstanding the Planet is no Bugbear. 6.
Droughts prodigious, not frequent. 7. Nor raging distempers. 8. Civility to
Truth, though a Stranger. 9. A Star Hot and dry with the Arabs. 10. But also
inclined to Wet in our opinion. 11. Dry, it may be, but not absolutely such.
12. Some cause assigned of droughty Seasons under this Configuration. 13.
Aptitude to Storm, 's prime Natural Influence. 14. His slow motion prevents the
frequency of his quarelling. 15. in vulgar speaking hotter than the Sun it
self, and more Turbulent. 16. Objection to that. 17. Answ. The Direct Ray with
the Reflex, is more than the Direct alone considered. 18, 19. Frosty Winters,
etc. under this Aspect. 20. Are no blot in the Martial Escocheon. 21. The
proclaims the Planetary Inclination in hard Winters, for the time more than a.
22. the Violence of the Aspect by the kindness of Providence is not so frequent
as those among the Inferiors. 23. Therefore in vain do we seek for Droughts,
to prove our Aspects Character. 24. The Martial Heat is visible in Droughts to
Sense, in Storms and Winds, visible to Reason. 25. A foggy Morn in Summer, or a
showry day infer Heat. acknowledged to conduce to Fog. 26. Evidence of Wet. 27.
Breviate of the Diary before hand conc. Wet. 28. Benefit of a Prolix
observation. 29. Superior Planet slow, but sure. 30. Argument to prove our
Aspect concerned in the Wet. 31. and in the Fog. 32. The modern Astrologers
avow Wet in aqueous Signs at least, our Opinion of their Method. 33. Remainder
of the Breviate. 34. Search into Natural Texture, intricate, Fog, etc.
imputable to our Aspect. 35. The nicety of Nature in snow, Generation of Hail
belongs to. 36. Prognostic not evacuated by the confessed intricacy of the
Contemplation. 37. The large Diary. 38. Mars is a malignant Planet. 39. A
Foreign miscellany Table of the Aspects effects. 41. The Violence of Mars more
clearly shows it self in the following Configuration. 42. Something of Comets.
43. Storms. 44. Blasts scorching and burning. 45. An essay to the cause of the
Currents in the Ocean.
1. SO have we done with the Inferiors and their matches amongst themselves;
Let us now see the issue of an inferior matched sometimes, with a Superior
House,, the First of which in order of nature and our method is Mars.

2. The Planet Mars through all Ages past has been reckoned one of the
Grandees in Aetherial Regions, of a sore Influence, and those ill consequences
that are wont to take place under Hot, Dry, fervid Constitutions.

3. The Truth is, if that helps, it looks Red and Fiery, whose Name of Old was
therefore (...), in Plato's Timaeus, and the Modern Hebrews addicted also to
Astrology; after the Heathens, have learned to call him (...) from the same
Red, Fiery hue.

4. But there is more in it than the Luster, there is the Operation and
Experience of That, the Fervors that issue from thence in Spring and Summer
Seasons: For so Cicero long ago in his excellent Book de Not. Deo^um, having
occasion to describe the Planets, says of our present Planet, Media Martis
[Stella] incendit, Igneae ardentisque naturae, says Pliny, the Mouth of all
his Ancient Predecessors. (...) says Porphyry, Martis Stella rapax, A Rampant
Star, says another. Propert the Astrologer in Lucan, Tuque o flagrante minaci
Scorpion incendis cauda, etc. because is reckoned our Planets House; whence
Virgil also makes the Sign or Asterism Scorpius to be Ardens, for Mars's sake.
But Tally in the forecited Book, says of Mars, that he is Terrible, Rutilus
horribilisque terris, and Macrobius from him; which is the Highest and fullest
Testimony, though all the precedent intend as much, wherein the Philosophers
(for such was Cicero) pronounced his own Sentiments and the Ages, without any
cautelous restriction of ut dicitur, ut ferunt, and yet not over Credulous to
believe every idle report; nor in matter of Philosophy would he have took
Plato's Testimony alone, (though that also is not without its Weight, as
founded on the experience of Ages precedent) had not the following Ages from
Plato downward to Cicero's time agreed in their Suffrage. But Plato talks
higher of (...), which gave occasion to Tully's expression. What Fears you will
say? I answer, agreeable to his Hot, rampant Character, long and contumacious
Droughts, and Wants of Rain, where all Verdure by the immoderacy of the Season,
is parched and burnt; Languors and Faintings, Fevers and Contagions; at
certain years depopulating Towns and Cities by Pestilence, which they attribute
to the Angry Heavens, among the Planets to Mars, and to Syrius among the Fixed
Stars. All which Ptolemy recounts on the Charactrr of, when in his Dominion.

5. But sure the noise could not have bin so loud, since no Planet can be
always extreme, but that overlooking the more temperate and remiss intervals,
they made sure to transmit the Fame of the more notable Excesses only. Hence,
we, poor Posterity! Believing and admiring those rare Events, are afraid of the
conceived Dominion of the Planet, because we think he is always such as he is
voic'd to be. But this Fear ought to be corrected; for it is easy to bring, in
less than an 100 years, above a hundred merciless Storms, which in their times
happen in several parts of the Ocean at New and Full, and yet, for all that,
Navigation, with Gods Blessing, goes prosperously on. Because those Phases of
the are not always out of Humor, but for the most part send merry Gales to the
Seamen; yea, and sometimes even a Calm. So that howsoever the Ancients have
represented the Planet for an ill conditioned Creature, it is not to be
understood, but that like our English Mastives, they may be seen to fawn
sometimes upon the Stranger, and have the name of a gentle Creature.

6. For as full as the Ancients are of the definition, the Meadows and Pastures
are not always parched into a Desert, nor the Grass Crumble under our Feet;
It Is not always the Men or Cattle languish and die for Thirst, whose Watring
places have forsaken their Valleys, whose Rivers are exalted into a Fuliginous
Atmosphere: There are but few Instances in any part of the World of Forests
Fired by heat Celestial; some there are, I grant, besides, the Story couched
under the Tale of Phaeton, as Eusebius records it.

7. Nor do the sad Revolutions of Pestilential years always perplex the
Inhabitants of the more intemperate Climes, the more indebted is the World to a
Gracious Deity, that Infinite Intelligence that moves the Spheres in such
Harmonions Measures, whose harsher notes are often interrupted by Pauses and
Respites; yea, and a more equal mean; not too High, nor too Low. Besides that,
we who live in more Temperate Climes, are often refreshed with Rain and
Moisture, and fanned with cooler Winds issuing from those privileged places,
the North parts, those Purlews of Heaven, where Planets in their greatest
Amplitude never yet dare show their Head; where Clouds obnubilating the Face of
Heaven, shall skreen the Sun from us, and cool Water shall be cast into our
Faces, least we faint.

8. But here is the inconvenience now, we are apt to question all Authority of
our Forefathers, because God has seated us better than those Nations, whose
great Observers have testified the Truths they have experienced. But can we
believe no Truth but what we smart under? Must we not be convinced of the
Pestilential Infection, till we are snatched away by the Contagious Converse? I
have known some so skeptical, but they got nothing by it. If Truth be a
Stranger to us, as sometimes it is, it is a part of Civility to own and entertain
a Stranger, as knowing not of what descent he may be. Must I be uncivil to a
Person because I am not known to him? Who is so happy as to be acquainted with
all Truths? He must be sure of all Perfections, and have lived in all places,
who can pretend to it. Say we, then what is to us? How Powerful is his Ray or
Aspect?

9. Truly the same, perhaps, as with the Ancients, a hot and dry Star, the
Ancient definitions run most upon Drought, and make no mention of Rain scarce,
(we had that it seems under and) and scare the Arabs Table speaks of Dryth
throughout every Sign, multus calor, Siccitas acris, only excepted, and there
he will allow us a little moisture, Album. apud Escuid.

10. Now though there be some necessity of asserting to be Friend to Moisture,
as before we have pronounced, Lib. 1. c. 9. 31. Seeing experience gives it (in
our Latitude at least) yea seeing the Elevation or Mamareth of above brings a
competent Moisture (though the Elevation of above they will have to be
droughty) in the Arabs Table; lastly, seeing Ptolemy himself excludes not all
Wet, but supposed Violence of Wind and Dashings ((...) is his Word) which must
imply some Violence (as in our Lords Parable of Rain, Flood) when joined with
(...) to say, nothing of Thunders, which draw in Wet also, yet this
notwithstanding I must not deny, that even in our Dropping Northerly Latitude,
appears still a drying kind of Planet (as the Course of Nature goes, and Art
requires no further) abounding, I mean, many times with more days of dry than
wet. For take our Martio-solar Table, and compare it with our Home-Evidence of
and, and the Observations shall seem as if they were taken in different Climes,
a Dry and a Moist, a Northern and Southern. It Is a piece of Entertainment to
observe the difference. For view our next large Table, too large, but that it
is in order to settle the Notion and Definition of this Signal Aspect, where
some difficulty meets us, and you shall find Dry, Close Weather, and Fog and
Heat prevail, only sometimes again it makes a start into a Storm or Dash with
High Winds, or Thunder, but scarce to equal the Moiety of the many days
comprised in the Table, or if so, far be sure from the Foecundity of and, who
have got the name for the moist Aspects, and if our Tables be not vain, deserve
it.

11. But I can never be brought to say, as dry as is, that He is absolutely
dry, that he resists Moisture, or contributes to Serenity; I find him so often
at a close Air, which dry, though it be, betokens his Months Mind to something
of Moisture, though he must not, as Providence will have it, always accomplished
it.

12. For verily when we meet with an express droughty time, as An. 1667. where
the Trees in the Gladsome Month of May, looked of a Fueille-de-Mort-Colour. So
An. 1669. when Rain was desired in June, yea the last year, Anno 1684. when all
the Leaves in Summer time hung shriveld on the Trees, when poor Cattle were at
their Christmas Fodder, the scorched Grass presenting all the bald places of
the Earth, I find no fault in our Aspect, but the same Remora, or Suspender of
Moisture, viz. and in the Sign immediately preceding, in both the Former years;
and the immediate Vicinity of, Anno 1684. as will be declared in due place; so
that we may solve it thus, Dryth and Serenity when the Aspect is not assisted,
Dryth with an aptitude to Storm when it is prohibited by some counterpoise.

13. For an aptitude to Storm must be allowed to, and for all as I know, its
prime natural Influence, seeing we are willing, and can easily solve the
contrary appearances, mostly taken notice of by the Ancients, because of their
Hot and Dry Clime, and the like.

14. For we must remember that is a slow-paced Planet, and goes along with the,
near upon, as does; so that within 5 degrees of each side of the (and I could
not allow less) he spends a Month at least before he is unconcerned with the.
Now and would be little Furies, if every time they met with the Sun, they
should nothing but drench the World with washing Rains, or hurry the Atmosphere
with Stormy Winds, or set the Air on Fire with Meteors for a Month together,
Providence has wisely ordered that in that Interval there shall happen variety
of the Constitution, and State of the Air, for Her great ends, unless perhaps a
Fixed Month we think of; but the Month which we consider is vagrant, and runs
through all the Seasons of the year, as in the Table will appear.

15. How Dry Bodies, as all Lucid Bodies are, should produce Drought, is no
hard Problem. But our Celestial Bodies must be considered not by themselves as
in the Aetherial Region, for there they produce nothing but dry Effects, Comets
suppose, etc. suitable to their Emanations: But they must be considered as
Instruments to move the Inferior Regions of the Air, filled with Vapor and
Exhalation; and so, dry though they be, they can produce moisture, somewhat
like a dry thaw after a hard Snowy Winter, produces a Flood,

16. Hence I surmise that himself under this Notion of an Instrument, is not
the occasion of Drought, but as destitute of Able Friends, or impeded by some
other Cause, which we shall evidence in, suppose, or by indisposition of the
Clime; Thus, All that Tract of Land or Sea under the Torrid Zone, where it is
known Rain comes but at one or two Months of the year, I reckon is generally
Indisposed, whose reasons are not here to be displayed. And thus comes to be so
famed abroad for Drought, etc. as Syrius of old, which in our remoter Clime is
not so terrible.

17. For his Heat in Summer Seasons, and elsewhere, we have, beside his Tokens
of blue Smoky Mist, Lightning, Trajections, etc. an express of above an 100
days, and what more might have bin justly noted. Yet I must not, nor does our
own Diary seem to give leave, that I should crow after the Ancients, and say
that is hotter than, least I should pull the World about my Ears; but I say
it is, (in vulgar way of speaking) a more violent Star than the Sun it it self.
This will be proved not only in this, but also in the ensuing Chapters.

18. This raises expectation, which we will endeavor to satisfy, when we have
answered one Objection, First, that it is absurd to make a Reflection, a Minor
Planet more Potent than the Major. 2ly. That it is uncertain whether our Planet
has any such heat or no; for if so, we should not (sure) find Hard, Sharp,
Frosty, Cold Seasons, whenever our violent Planet is conjoined to the Sun.

19. To the First; It Is absurd if we consider the Reflection by its self singly,
and disjunct from the Direct: But if we suppose the Direct Radiation, as in
Nature it does, then Two is more than one, the Direct and the Reflex is greater
than the Direct alone: So in vulgar speaking (as we say sometimes, the Son is
Finer than the Father, whereas all the Finery he wears comes out of the Fathers
Purse) is a more violent Star, because his Aspects with the are more violent
than those of the with the same. How comes that to pass, unless may be violent?
Thus a Conjunction of and latently includes. A does not include, wherefore if
Three be more than two, a is greater than a. This in strict Philosophy may not
be said, seeing the Minor has its Energy from the Major; but for Doctrines
sake we suppose to be as it were sui juris, independent of the Sun.

20. To the 2d. we say, Let Us see them, let us see the Frosts, they are not more
than what are found under, or, and yet they were Spit-Fires, Thunderers and
Flashers, had their Heats and Droughts, and Violences too.

21. We see One or Two in our own Diary, let us see the Rest; First, To run back
no further than King Henry the Eighths time, Anno 1536. We are told that Ice on
the Thames hindered the Kings passage at Greenwich, Dec. 24 while is within gr.
2. or 3. of his Syzygie.

Anno 1598. Dec. 1. ad diem 11. Thames nigh froze at London Bridge; the Frost
began, for all as I see, with a in Dec. 1.

Anno 1630. From Dec. 21. Three Weeks Frost, presently after the Partile of
and, Kyr.

Anno 1662. The Thames caked with Ice in 4 Nights, die 31. and was scarce
passable; and this within two days of the Partile, as is seen in the Tables.

Anno 1665. The end of February, and part of March, Frosty Weather,
commensurate to the in 24. This Frost is memorable from the Dire Pestilence
ensuing; so that we need not marvail at some stricture of Frost occurring in
our Sept. Anno 1658. In November. 1660. In May 1667. In Oct. 1675. in our Tables,
for the Case is plain, burns sometimes with a Cold Iron.

22. It Is so, but does this take from the Martial Influence any more, than you
see it does prejudice the Solar to admit Frosts, sharp and tedious? Astrologers
do usually speak of Debilities: All Planets in Winter Signs are but in a low
condition as to Northern site, so remote from the Winter Tropic: the Setting
Sun is weak and cool as a Glowworm, and Planets in the Winter Tropic are
setting even at Noon (as it were) by their near approach to the Horizon. Apply
this to and the rest; as in the Winter at Muscovy, Anno 1681, when the Polish
Soldiers suffered by the Cold, Calvis. All the Planets were in deep Winter
Quarters. Howbeit, even thus in his Weak Estate our Planet bears some Testimony
to himself by Snows amongst the Frost, or by Remission of the Cold, which may
be worth an Observers notice, when the Pladding Countryman overlooks such
Vicissitudes of Nature, if short and temporary; For so I hope none can object
to us the cruel Winter noted by Gemma, Anno 1568. Secuta est, (says he) Hyems
asperrima, but he speaks of no great Frost until the middle of March, which
concerns not a celebrated ten Weeks before. And what was the Asperity? Winds
and Rains. Churches struck with Lightning, and Floods, Jan. 3. before our was
expired. No, nor that of September, 1590. which was, says Stow, a very cold
Month with Snow and Sleet; but the same Month brought Wind, Rain, Lightning and
Thunder; to speak for the.

23. Add that these cold Examples are very rare, and that the commonly brings
milder Winter Air, so as whenever Frost appears, you may observe that is at a
distance from the Sun about a Sign, or two or three, etc. wherein if
Communication be interrupted; which keeps it out, the Cold breaks in; not but
that the distant Aspects have their Force, the Sextile, Quadrate, etc. but they
are not so Potent, nay, nor so durable as or.

24. In this case then the Opposition more than the Conjunction proclaims the
Planetary Heat, in as much as an opposal of and the very seldom fails of its
warm thawing Breath. Put the in the Winter Tropique, and let face him in the
Summer, though the Planet so posited shall be hid under the Earth, you shall
see what Fire he will save you on a Winters day; whereas if be about the
Quincunx of Sol, a Sign distant from the Oppositional Line, he is in a chill
posture, and so found in those Frosty days or Seasons, which happen at that
determinate time, some abatement being reckoned for the Northern side of our
Clime.

25. The Planet may be violent in his hour for all this, and is it not upon
that account that the Divine Goodness has retarded his Motion, that his
Configurations with the Sun, and other Planets, the excepted, being less
frequent, the World should be less distracted? Suppose therefore we should
allow (which indeed we cannot) that Great Britain, our dear Country, etc. felt
not the Smart of this Aspect, if other Countries do, the Divine Superintendency
has its end. For God is not a God of the North only; He takes care even for
those Lands which the Holy Phrase seems to say He takes no care of.

26. Hence if does not cause Drought in our Northern Climes, but when
obstructed by some dissenting Influence, etc. It Is not for us to muster up a
Barren Catalogue of Heats and Droughts (when Heat seems mostly to domineer) as
our Friend Eichstad has done in his hot July, Anno 1596. Hot August 1592. also
September 1594. and October 1596. a Remission of Cold noted in December: Then
skip to a hot June, Anno 1605. and July 1607. Not that we question the Truth of
the Testimony, but because he brought it no further, when he wrote about Anno
1636. for the demand will be, as he said in the like case, where are the Names
of the Shipwrackt Seamen, who are not hung up in the Tables of Neptunes Temple?
Why is not the year 1609. 1611. and so on, mentioned to make up his Triumph?

27. We therefore choose to consider his Heat, dry and Wet; if dry then it is
plain to Sense; if otherwise, to Reason. For who knows not, that after a Storm
of Rain in Summer, if the Sky clears up, we find a hot Day; the Traveller
confessing that it is Hot after the Rain; so far, that if through intense Heat
he finds the Ground to dry apace, He prognosticates more Rain to succeed; yea,
that this proves all the year long, except where Frost brings Serenity; if a
Wet day clears up, it is Fine and Warm, except, yea sometimes, al beita cool
Wind blows.

28. If we must allow Heat to a Summer Fog, we must allow it in proportion, to
Wet: A Foggy morning introduces Heat and Drought. A wet Morning clearing up
discovers Heat and Floating Clouds: That you shall not question his Warmth, you
shall find that he causes both (at times) Wet and Fog, according as I find it
makes up a piece of the Character in some Modern Astrologers, Argol. etc. which
I wonder at, because it savours of Novel Experience. But by their favor, I
must here say as before of Drought, that with us causes no Fog, but when
debilitated or resisted. is Generous, and Large, He is for pouring out his
Influence on such Showers or Storms, which by their Excess and Over-doing bear
his Signal.

27. Will the Reader therefore be pleased to ride Post with me through the Wet,
for that is the next enquiry from year to year Rain with store, and whatever
says the definition: Verily, Anno 1652. in May, you shall find Showry, V. days
together, just about the precise time of our Aspect. In July 1654. VI. days
together, to the Prejudice of Hay-Harvest. In August, An. 1656. die 17. Rain
pouring 7 mane, and die toto. Showers dashing 4 days together, die 10, 11, 12,
13. beside what more. In September, Anno 1658. Wet and Coasting Showers VI.
days together. Die 26. Rain for 3 hours, and the whole Night following to rise,
and so along.

30. Or had he rather see the Breviate of our ensuing Table, Thus I present it.

The Days are in Sum 584. of which we find,
Rain, Snow or Hail. 301. Whereof softer Rains, 38. Immoderate. 65. Showers
with some briskness. 143. Morning. 12. Evening. 12. Noontide. 13. Winds. 169.
Whereof with Storm and Fury. 97.
30. Here see the Benifit of a Prolix Observation. Others may repent it, I beg
their Pardon; I cannot. We must observe as much at home as the Ancients have
done abroad, if we mean to pronounce: Otherwise we make Science contemptible,
and reduce Books to Wast Paper, (for Lo you now!)

32. If our Argument from the Moiety be any thing, our Planet, to them who will
calculate his Influence with industry and Patience, will prove as we would have
it, a Friend to Wet; for 301. is a good Moiety of 600. of which Sum our Total
bears short. A Friend I can tell you, and a lusty Friend too, whose Vote passes
for more than a single one; the Modern Astrologers therefore have got it by the
end that he is a vehement Planet. For is he not a Superior? Remember we are
come among the Superiors, the Inferiors are quick and nimble. Where if one
position will not do, another will, the Superiors are not in such Have, they
are slow, but sure, So have I seen a Granado in the Air, fuming as it went
along in a sullen silence, and at last break and tear all in a Thousand Pieces.
And have we here no Violence? We have 61 immoderate Rains, and 97 violent
Winds. If my Friendly Reader pleases to contract the Table, by selecting their
Places, he will find the Violent Fits and Concussions of Nature, at home and
from abroad, some, as the Intelligencers came to our Hands.

33. He will find the Finger of our Aspect from the Critical hours, not only as
to the Luster of our Aspect, which paints the Clouds Red in the West, 5 or 6
times, yea to the Mid-heaven twice or thrice, to the East it self from the
Western setting, cross the whole Hemisphere Five or Six times. But further as
to its Rainy or Blustering Faculty, since you shall find Showers at Noon,
Showers in the Morn, but most of all Rain in the Evening or set, 20 times. Add
that the Continuance, the Duration speaks the Author, as we have observed
before in and, since, as we have said, as well as, moves along with the for
several days.

33. And this we reckon so undoubted, that we are not ashamed to say that this
is visible even in the Debility, when we see a Mist or Fog in the Morn, and the
like again at Even. The Noontide is not so capable of it, we mean after an
interruption, if the Winter Fog hold above half the day, It Is another case.
This we rather mention, because we contend not with the Ancients here, but we
with them avow he is Dry, even here in the Northern Latitude, in that he is so
affected, when in his Debility, when not assisted enough by, or the rest of his
Brethren.

34. Here let me shelter my self under the Modern Artists, that I may not seem
fond of Paradoxes in the Fundamentals of the Theory. They acknowledge the Dryth
of the Syzygie, and they acknowledge the Wet, only they come off more easily
than I can do, and according to the received difference of Watery Signs, and
Fiery, which distinction I wish could do, yea, or that, which with some seems
to carry more reason, that in Spring and Autumn it brings Winds, in Summer
Thunder and Hail, in Winter remission of Cold. I fear my Diary, as Prolix as it
is, will scarce justify it, no more then that it brings Darkness in Airy
Signs, or Signs Bicorporeal, where as it brings Darkness, well assisted, in
places near the Tropic or Equinox, be the Signs of what Divisions they may; But
I commend them when they tell us toward his Dryth, that being combust abateth
the Moisture. Oft-times it is so, and we have advanced some Reason why not he
alone, but others also may do the like in such a case, when not assisted,
because a, to which the Combust Planet hastens, pretends to Cold as well as
Heat sometimes, and by parity of Reason to Dryth, as well as Wet.

35. The Remainder of the Breviate runs thus.
Thunder. 16. Trajections. 12. Mist. 33. Blew smoke. 9. Fog gross. 78. Mist
Morn. 12. Fog Morn. 36. Fog. Even. 3. Ground Mist. 8. Fila. 6. Gossamere. 2
Cold. 18. Cold Wind. 14. Hail. 17. Frost. 44. Yea, with the days not specified,
perhaps. 60. Snow. 16. Close. 21.
36. All which premises we are to reckon for on the account of ^, and whether
they are imputable to the different approaches of the Planets before us, and to
the various and almost unsearchable intermixture of all the VII. which make a
several Texture, as it were, of the Heavenly Bodies. We are not ambitious to
define exactly, seeing all enquiry into Textures is intricate; But as far as we
may without ostentation, we say that Close Air shows an aptitude to Moisture,
Fog being a Participant of both Dryth and Moisture, may depend on our Aspect in
his different modification, according as it is grosser or Thinner, more pallid,
or more Smoky, Lower or higher; Ground-Mist I find under this Aspect, is a
nicety; Gross Mist speaks a Counterpoise, or Defect, or both; a Blew Smoky Mist
favors, from whence it may draw its Empyreum, In all the difference of the
Soil, which contributes much always to be regarded.

37. As to frost how it may happen even under this or any, we have cleared the
difficulty. The Snow which occurs under this Aspect in Winter Months, shows how
nice a thing Nature is, which can freez, and dissolve the frozen Vapors by
Inches, and Scruples, dissolve the Continuity, and yet keep up the Congelation,
whereas one would thin, what does the one, should do the other, the Vapor
being of so rare, almost a perspicuous Consistence. As to Hail let the
Observation excuse the Prolixity of the Table, without which we should have
believed only, and not seen the Truth of the Astrologers Dictate, that and
contribute, whether Por se or cum aliis, Let us no now enquire) to the Moulding
of that Pellet.

38. For though we said even now that the enquiry into the Texture, or Ni
cities of Causes, our part is intricate, we had regard only to the Full
Comprehensive Knowledge of the Object, not Evacuating, our design in the least,
which must content it self here with a proportional part of such absolute
Knowledge; I cannot comprehend which mixture will produce a Fog, or which is
much more difficult, create a Hailstone; but I observe that both Fog and Hail,
and Frost, etc. appear not ordinarily but when there is a discontinuation of
Signs possessed, or when only III. or IV. Signs are occupied, never when V. Now
for our

Large Diary of ad gr. 5. Intervall.
1672. 13. May 28.
A die 4. ad Jun. 14 VIII. Windy, misle, so at n. S W. X. Clear, windy. S.
XIII. Wind and R. at n. N. XIV. Windy, rainy, mist and wd at n. N. XV. Misty m.
H. wind p. m. N E. XVI. Windy, clear. N E. XVII. White Frost, clear, windy. N
E. XVIII. Fog at n. N E. XXII. Misty m. S E. XXV. Mist. m. windy, close, little
rain at n. S. N. XXVII. XXVIII. XXIX. XXX. Showry. (So at n. d. XXVI. XXVII.)
Jan. IV. Cloud, H. wind. N E. V. Clear, H. wd. Nly. VII. Windy. N. VIII. Rain,
windy. N. IX. X. Thunder, showrs N. d. 9. S W. d. 10.
1654. 27. July 10.
A Jun. 25. a Jul. 27. XXV. Wind and cl. Rain little. S W XXVI. Fine dewing
showrs; Heat. N W. XXVII. Hot, heavy air, s, Th. showrs. S E. N W. XXVIII.
Store of R. with some Thunder, XXIX. Hot. N E. XXX. H. wds, cold, s. drops. N.
Jul. I. Cold, R. wds. N E. II. Winds. III. Winds somewhat High, s. wet. N E.
IV. H. wd. N E. V. Misty, parching hot. VI. More temperate, blew mist. S VII.
Hot, black H. s. rain at n. S W. VIII. IX. X. Thunder showrs. S W. XI. Heat.
showrs. N W. XII. Wind and showrs. XIII. Inconstant sh. hinder hay harvest. N
W. XIV. Heat. XV. Scarce sensible drops. S W. XVI. R. Thunder very hot. XVII.
Wet and wd p. m. N W. XVIII. Blustering n. rain little. N W. XIX. S. rain ante
lucem, warm, 3 drops. N W. XX. Hot, high wind, some moisture. S W. XXI. Clouds
ride cross, hot, black at n. and some showrs. N W. XXII. Clouds, crossing,
dropping. XXIII. Hail, rain ante luc. wind very variable. XXIV. Very cold wd,
showring. XXV. Set to rain at n. N W. XXVI. Cold wd, inconstant showring. N W.
XXVII. R. Sun rise, and some wet m. X. R. at n.
1656. 3 Aug. 16.
Ab Aug. princ. ad finem. I. Wind rise 8 m. blew mist, red cl. occ. Meteors. N
W. II. Hot II. Hot, red wd, smoke flies. S W. wd N W. III. Foggy, very hot,
blue mist. S W. IV. White Fr. foggy extreme hot, blew mist, S W. V. Very Hot,
blew mist, wind S W. smokes waves. N E. VI. Very hot, wind high p. m. blew
mist. S W. VII. Wind noct. tot. s. drisle ante L. H. wds ort; wet day. VIII.
Misty m. s. rain. S W. IX. Stormy wind, but dry; mistyish Heaven. S W. X. H.
wds, dashing of rain 9 m. and 2 p. XI. H. wds, dashes, of rain 9 m. and o.
cloudy m. N W. XII. Misty m. R. hard elsewhere. XIII. Showring and store of
wet. XIV. Winds, s. misle; R. 10 p. S. W. XV. Rainy 1 m. winds S. sh. H. wd n.
S W XVI. H. winds, misty, red-clds at even. XVII. R. pouring R m. and die tot.
store of R. XVIII. Fair wind XIX. Mistlysh, Halo at n. XX. XXI. Fair, hot,
Hal^. XXII. Mist very hot, Gossamere. XXIII. Great fog, very hot. XXIV. Fog,
very hot storm of wind 11 p. XXVI. H. wds, misty air. XXVII. H. wds, offer to
drop. XXVIII. Windy, warm, blew mist. XXIX. Winds pretty high, blew mist. S E.
1658. 9. Sept. 22.
A Sept. 7. ad Oct. 7. VII. Showers 3 m. 5 m. dark, warmish. S E. VIII. Warm n.
showring 11 m. very warm Sly. red n. S E. IX. s. drops 8 m. very warm; dropping
5 p. and 9 p. S W. X. Very warm; Lightn. n. S W. XI. Hot, close; s. drops
Thunder 3 p. S W. XII. Fog m. gentle winds 10 m. sh. 1 p. S W. S E. XIII. R. 1
m. and a. m. ground mist. N E. XIV. Mist, close rain 10 m. and o, S. XV. R. a.
m. very dark, warm. XVI. Wind; some wet 1 p. drisle 5 p. S W. XVII. Windy,
stormy m. R. 2 p. 8 p. Ely. XVIII. H. wind, coasting showrs, wetting o. sh. 6
p. Nly. XIX. Fr. fair; showrs coast p. m. N W. XX. Fr. m. coasting showrs R.
and hot. E. N E. XXI. H. wd, drop or two; Halo at n. Wly. XXII. Coldish, Fila,
s. mist E. misle 9 m. wet till 2 p. XXIII. s. drops o. and n. gentle rain 8 p.
E. hideous tempest of wind 8 p. XXIV. Warm, close, misle n. W. XXVI. H. wd
noct. tot. red m. and even. warm R. 4. ad usque 7 p. XXVII. R 5 m. cly, red to
the East at n. XXVIII. Fog, clear above, wind, warm. S W. XXIX Halo, warm, clds
in Scenes; ground mist at n. XXX. Gr. H. wind and vehement blowing. Oct. I.
Warm; drops; Fila. II. Wind, Fila, blush East, ground mist. III. Thunder, mist,
Fila store. N E. V. R. 4 m. dark, misty; wetting m. p. S W. VI. Muddy air die
tot. R. 8 p. very wet night following. S W. VII. Store of wet, abundance p. m.
till 8 p. S E.
1660. 19. Nov. 1.
Ab October. 16. ad Nov. 17. XVI. Coasting showrs 5 p. W. XVII. R. ante L. Fila.
Nly. S W. XIX. Mist below. XX. Fr. fog N W. at o. E. XXIII. Cloudy, windy. Nly.
windy even; yet clear. XXIV. Fr. fair, windy. S W. Nly. XXVI. Cold, windy,
cldy; clear even, yet moist wind. XXVII. Dry, cold, windy; Hail and rain 1 p.
sh. 3 p. E. XXVIII. R. offer at R. cloudy. XXX. Fr. clear, seen plain half an
ho. XXXI. Fr. mist below about Horiz. s. rain, close and moist even. No. I.
Close, windy, threatn. W. II. seen 3d part of an-hour past or. III Morn
inclining to moisture. IV. Close. W. V. Fog below, close even. VI. Fair, wdy N
VII. Storm of Rain 11 m. S E. various W. IX. Thaw, some drops; stormy even. W.
X. Cold. H. wind, storm, Hail and R. 11 p. N W. XI. H. wind and rain; frost;
Hail and H. wd stormy rain vesp. N. XIII. Close mist, small rain 2 p. R, 5 p.
N. S. XIV. Snow ante L. 9 m. XV. Wetting mist 10 m. W. XVI. Windy, lowering. W.
1662. (...) 13. Dec. 24.
A Dec. 5. a Jan. 13. 1663. V. VI. Frosty, fog. S. VII, Frost, fog, snow m. p.
S W. IX. Fr. snow die tot. H. wd, drisle n. N E. X. Much snow ante L. hard
weather. XI. Frosty, fog. S W. XII. some rain p. m. XIII. Fog, rain 6 ad 8 p. S
W. XIV. Fog m. mild. S W. XV. Fog, rain 1 p. etc. E. XVI. Rain m. p. night.
Rain 1 p. and p. m. 5 p. E. XVII. Rainy. Ely. XVIII Rain ante L. N W. XIX. Cold
and cloudy. XX. Cold and wetting. S. XXI Close, misty; wetting 10 p. XXII. Rain
m. p. noct. praec moist m. shower 2 p. Rain 5 p. 9 p. S. XXIII. Fog, R. 1 p. and
cold N E. XXIV Frost vehement. Ice an inch thick; Fair; fog. XXV. Frosty; fog.
N E. XXVI. Windy. N E. XXVII. Snow ante L. Cakes of Ice in the River. N E.
XXVIII. XXIX. XXX. Frosty, close, misty. XXXI. s. misling n. Thames scarce
passable. S W. Jan. I. 1663. Mild, warm mist, misly and wd. II. Mild, drisle 4
p. R. 9 p. S W. III. Mild, some drops, Rain 7 p. 8 p. 9 p. S W. IV. R. a I.
Fair S W. V. Misty, wetting and windy 6. warm. S W. VII. R. a L. Fair not
without Fog. VIII. Fog at n. S W. IX. Thick Fog die tot. E. X. Thick fog die
tot. E. XI. Fog, frost, yielding. E. XII. XII. Foggy, frosty. E.
1665. 24. March. 4.
A Feb. 9 ad Mar. 28. IX. Fr. fair, wdy. W. X. Wind, wet a. m. 5 p. 6 p. stormy
at Chelsley reach. XI. Stormy wd, and wet 4 m. showrer 10 m. W. XIII. R. ante
L. showring a. m. cold, wetting and snowing Sly. XIV. Temperate, wetting p. m.
s. little snow, R. 6 p. 9 p. XV. Snow and rain a L. snow 5 p. W. XVI. Snow 1 p.
so vesp. N. XVII. Snow m. 5 p. N E. XVIII. Fog, snow and rain, fine thaw. Nly.
XX. * * XXI. Offering snow m. XXII. Offering snow 1 p. N E. mist at n. XXVIV.
XXV. XXVI. S E. XXVII. XXVIII. Very hard frost. W March I. Close, not drying
linen. II. Close, snowing 7 m. and offering d. tot. sometimes hail, snow 6 p.
Wly. III. Frost, snow lies, vanishes, cold wind. E. IV. Fr. cold wd, s. mist.
N. V. Snow 2 m. till. o. winter day. N. VI. Clouds in Scenes; not such frost
known in March. VII. s. offer, snow 3 p. W. VIII. Snow a. L. gr. Flaques o. H.
dangerous wd, cold snow at n. S W. IX. snow a. L. Hail 4 p. storm, snow 5 p. S
W. X. Storm, snow 4 p. S XI. Snow a. L. windy, wet 4 p. 9 p. E. XII. Warm and
welcome, wet a. m. S W. XIII. Warm, overc. and rain 4 p. S W. XIV. Drisling 7
p. s. rain 9 p. S E. XV. Warm rain 6 m. drisle 7 p. R. M C. S E. XVI. Warm. E.
XVII. H. wind, fair, warm. E. XVIII. Close, misty. E. XIX. Mist m. windy. N.
XX. Close. XXI. Close m. p. warm. XXII. Windy 10 p. N W. XXIII. Storms of hail
o. N W. XXIV. Wet m. o. some wetting vesp. S W. XXV. Warm, drisle. Nly. XVI. s.
fog, cold. W. XXVII. s. shower toward occ. Nly. XXVIII. Warmish, W. little
wetting vesp.
1667. 27. May 8. in.
Ab April 8. ad May 28. XVIII. Ground-Mist ante L. sad drought. S W. XX. Fog a.
L. occ. rain coasting 1 p. W. XXI. Very thick fog m. brisk wd, and S W. wetting
2 p. and welcome at n. and blustering. XXII. Showrs and blustering 2 m. and a. m
storm, hail 3 p. stormy occ. N W. N E. XXIII. Cold, windy XXIV. R. a. L.
showring m. N E. N W. XXV. Cold wind, s. drisle 2 p. 3 p. Nly. XXVI. Cold wd.
XXVII. Warm, dry. Wly. XXVIII. Mist m. dry mist 2 p. XIX. Cold wind p. m. L. R.
vesp. N W. XXX. Cold wds. N E. May I. Warm. Wly. II. Troubled air o. serene p.
m. W. III. Sound shower or. 2 m. E. III. R. and hail coasting, especially 1 p. 3
p. 5 p. a. m. m p. Sun occ. Trees looked yellow before for drought. N E. IV.
Misty, wetting, so o. V. Much ado to hold up. W. VI. Very bright, and cold
stormy wind n. E. VII. Windy, showring. Nly. IX. Warm, gentle wetting p. m. S
W. X. Cold m. Shower of hail at Kentish Town 7 m. stormy wind, s. rain 3 p. S E.
Shower a occ. XI. Cloudy, windy. XII. s little wetting or Wly. XIII. Close m. p.
L. wetting 7 m. gentle wetting, H. wd ort. XIV. s. shower a. m. stormy wd, shower
p. m. XV. Windy, showring a. m. Thunderclap. Wly. XVI. Fog m. and cold; hottish
day. S. XVII. Gentle wetting a. m. per tot. so p. m. XVIII. Wet. E. XIX. Cold
wind. Ely. XX. Close showring 10 m. so 2 p. 4 p. with Thunderclap. Ely. XXI.
Gusts of wd, showring 10 m. N E. XXII. Warm, s. shower 10 p. W. XXIII. Fog m.
dropping 9 m. and lowering p. m. XXIV. Hot. W. XXV. Mist m. hot. W. XXVI. Hot n.
W. XXVII. Fog m. hot. N. XXVIII. Hot. s. wet, high winds. N.
1669. Jun. 24. 12.
A die ^. ad July 9. Jun. VII. Windy, Rainy 9 m. N. IX. H. wd, close, warm,
some wetting 8 p. heavy air n. X. Sudden showrs o and p. m. XI. Winds, shower 11
m. Sly. XII. s. rain m. XIII. Hot and fair p. m. W. XII. Heat, bright Ground
Mist. Wly. XV. Fog m. heat o. S W. XVI. Heat, overc. 10 p. and, as I thought,
Lightning at midnight. XVII. Shower a. L. and 7 m. warm, some wet. Wly. XVIII.
Warm, pale mist at n. W. XIX. Mist, red wind, warm. N E. XXII. Fog m. increases
8 m. hot and dry; Rain desired. Sly. XXIII. Fog 9 m. Hot, dry mist. m. S. XXIV.
Warm. N E. XXVI. Fog m. N. XXVII. Fog m. dry season. Wly. XXVIII. Fog m. and
drought; heat drops 7 p. Wly. Ely. XXIX. Fog, hot, dry. Sly. XXX. Close,
Thunderclap 10 m. s. rain o. and vesp. Sly. July I. Close m. windy, wetting.
II. Wetting v 7 m. ad 10 m. with mists. Sly. III. Windy, dropping a. m. and
shower p. m. IV. Shedding m. S. V. Hot, dry. W. Die 3 At London great storms of
rain, Thunder 2 m. none at Kentish Town; News of great Rain in the North.
1671. Aug. 3. 20.
A July 13. ad Ag. 16. Jul. XIII. R. scrious 5 morning. R. hard 2 p. 4 p. M. C.
XIV. Rainy. XV. Stormy wd, some Rain. XVI. Rain sub vesp. XVI. Very warm and
close. XX. Close, windy. XXII. Misty rain m. high winds XXIII. High winds.
XXIV. Rainy, drrk, H. winds XXV. XXVI. rainy d. XXVII. R. p. m. many Flies and
Pismires. XXVIII. Hot rain usque ad 3 p. m. XXIX. Hot, r. vesp. XXX. Close,
hot, rainy night. XXXI. R. Sun or. a 3 m. ad 2 p. drowning afternoon as ever
was known. Aug. III. Hot, close air IV. Windy, rain p. m. V. Warm night, close
day, V. a Sun occ. ad 10 p. VI. Close, windy, warm. VII. Warm night. R. 10 m.
ad 6 p. VIII. Warm n. R. 10 m. and p. m. in earnest 9 p and 10 p. IX. Coasting
Showrs noon, and wind; thunder; shower 3 p. 5 p. 7 p. in Nadir. 3 p. X. Coasting
showrs 11 m. and 3 p. S W. XI. Rain o. 5 p. 7 p. sad harvest. S W. XII. H. wind
and much rain; tempestuous circa o. great rain 9 p. XIII. Shower 1 p. XIV.
Frost; fog m. hot p. m Wly. warm n. XV. Very thick fog. XVI. Two Meteors.
1673. Sept. 7. 24.
Ab Aug. 23. ad Sept. 24. Aug. XXIII. Drisling p. m. showring 6 p. S E. XXV.
Showring 1 p. S W. XXVI. Stormy winds, some wet 2 p. at Branford. XXVII. R. m.
ad 2 p. Lowering after, winds S W. shower 4 p. XXIX. Windy, shower 1 p. 2 p. and 4
p. S W. XXX. Windy, shower 6 m. 9 m. o. 6 p. 9 etc. S W. XXXI. R. hard 7 m. wet
m. p. especially 3 p. and 9. per noct. tot. Sept. I. R. noct. tot. shower in
prospect 3 p. and 5 p. II. Rain hard die tot. red in East. N W. III. R. 1 p.
dash 2 and 3 p. with hail; Meteor N W. IV. Fog 6 m. wetting 3 p. 4 p. frost m.
wdy S W. VI. Windy, R. 4 p. 10 p. S W. VII Fog, clear above. VIII. H. wd. noct.
tot. Rain ante luc. a m. m. p. S W. IX. Frost m. warm p. m. S W. X. Very high
wd. wetting 8 m. and 5 p. XII Furious wind, wet noct. tot. tempestuous day.
III. Houses blown down by Covent Garden: wetting m. and p. m. and misty occ.
XIII. Fog, some rain 10 p. XV. Very cold night; frost m. XVI. R ante luc. and
a. m. wetting 4 p. R. hard with wind 8 p. S W XVII. Furious tempest all night,
H. wind all day, R. 1 p. XVIII. Wd, hail, R. m. o. 5 p. S W. XIX. Gust of wind
and rain ante luc. dark 7 m. wdy. S W. XX. Rain 4 p. 8 p. 10 p. S W. XXI. Very
wet all night; high winds and R. a. m. per tot. fere: shower 4 p. 6 p. N W.
XXII. Frost m. R. noon and p. m. S E. XXIII. Showrs Sun or. ad 8 m. so 2 p. 3
p. H. wd ante luc. Armies in the Air seen by thousands of People at Posen in
Poland. XXIV. Very warm, wetting p. m. p. Meteor toward ursa Maj. head. N W.
1675. Oct. 16. 3.
A Sept. 30. ad Nov. 1. XXX. * *. Oct. I. Frost, ice m. II. R. 6 m. Fog, wd S.
then Ely. III. Close wd, Indisposit. IV. Aches. S E. V. Fog, rhyme, Cobwebs;
winds Indisposits 5 p. s. wet 11 p. V. S W. s. rain 7 m. warm, windy; Aches.
VII. H. wind, close, misle 7 p. Aches; Hysterical fits. VIII. H. wd die tot.
shower 6 m. W. IX. Fr. shower 2 p. misty air; Aches. N W. XII. Frosty, foggy,
fair; some relent; Aches. W. XIII. Close, warm, Indisposit. faintness; Headache.
W. XIV. Close m. and 10 m. warm. Wly. XV. Close, warm; some moisture 6 p. W.
XVI. s. wet 5 p. warm. XVII. Warm, close mistyish shower ho 2. fere ort. in M.
C. XV. III. Gr. frost; red even; wind various but little. XIX. Warm; Lambs-wool
clds. N E. S E. XXI. Mist, close, Wly. Dry weather complained of. Country men
cannot sow. XXI. Rainy m. showrs 4 p. 9 p. XXII. Rain at midn. and 8 m. H. wind
and stormy R. 4 p. warm. Wly. XXIII. Mist, warm; rainy 10 m. ad. o. Aches.
XXIV. Stormy wd; dash of hail and rain 1 p. storm of rain 6 p. H. wd 9 p. XXV.
Wind and rain 1 p. 4 p. 7 p. tempestuous and wetting 7 p. Lightning at Ghent
fired a Steeple at N. D. and slew them who went to quench it, Gotes 104. XXVI.
Windy a. L. Nly. Inundat. at Amsterdam, Hague. Harlem. XXVII. Blustering noct.
tot. s. rain 2 p. 4 p. N E. Aches, Universal cough throughout all Europe.
XXIVII. R. 11 m. 2 p. 6 p. Aches. Ely mist. XXIX. Gr. fr. misty; dry. E. XXX.
Fog, fr. Aches. Nly. XXXI. Fog, fr. s. misle 8 p. N E.
1677. Dec. 1. 20.
A Nov. 14. ad Dec. 20. XIV. Fog and close. S E. Dark and a good shower 2 p.
Meteor near Cap. Drat. in sickly Mouth, but no mortality. XV. Rain 5 m. etc.
very wet vesp. usque ad 8 p. warm. S W. at n. Nly. XVI. Shower in earnest 6 m.
so 9 m. XVII. Fog; R. Sun or. Nly. XVIII. Lightning ante 1 and 2 m. fog; s.
rain 10 m. Nly. XIX. Gr. fog; very cold. Ely. XXI. Fog, frost gone; r. and
sleet 1 p. etc. with fog; rain 9 p. W. Abortions. XXII. Snow found, so o. and
p. m. 8 p, Stomach aked at the Snow 8 p. brisk wd. N E. XXIII. Brisk and cold
wd, suowing often at o. and p. m. Nly. XXIV. Fr. wd, snow, fog 8 m. E. snow 1
p. and bitter cold; hail 1 p. blustering n. XXV. H. wd noct, tot. and cutting;
snow m. E. Snow driving small p. m. per tot. XXVI. Snowing ante L. rain 8 p.
Ely. Hysterical fits; Ice in the Thames. XXVII. Frosty, fog, indisposit.
XXVIII. Frosty, fog die tot. S W. Rain 7 p. Ely. gentle showers midnight. XXIX.
Fog, mild air, h. wd; rain at n. S S E. XXX. H. wd noct. tot. and wet: dry m.
p. each day; Rain 6 p. Aches. Dec. I. Fog, blustering vesp. and drisle; Rain 11
p. II. Warm rain circa 9 p. Sly. Glass rose 25. acc. to progn. III. Windy and
rainy die tot ab 8 m. warm. Ely. IV. Misty wd. drisle 8 m. Great Meteors in a
dispersed, cloudy sky. Aches. V. Dash, wind and wetting m. p. E. N. VI. Fog m.
and a. m. E. N E. VII. Rain ante 9 m. and dark. Meteors III. Two bright 10 p.
VIII. H. wd and rain most part. Sly. IX. Fog, bright above; rain since 1 m.
Meteors. Clouds contrary occ. R. a. m. and blow at midn. X. Ruffling wd and
drisle m. close, windy p. m. XI. Rain ante 2 m. windy, warm. Wly. Meteor 6 m.
was vertical where and lay. XII. S E. H. wind and suspic. ante 1 p. rain 2 p.
R. 6 p. Wly. Meteor near Cor. Lightn. 1 m. Melancholy. XIII. s. rain ante 7 m.
H. wd, Lightning 9 p. in the S W. s. rain 9 p. wet 11 p. XIV. Tempest of wind
noct. tot. rain 7 p. Met. 7 p. 9 p. XV. Fog and wetting, close and dark. E.
XVI. Fog, close m. p. wd. XVII. Fog die tot. E. Indisposit. XVIII. Fr. a fine
sight 5 p. XIX. Fog, clear above, Ice bears.
1680. 25. ad Feb. 28.
A Jan. 13. a Feb. 28. XIII. Fog, rain 6 m. wind high 9 p. Laville de
Muslipatan, summerge. XIV. H. wind noct. tot. offering at 8 m. m. p. warm. S W.
XV. Mist, close. S W. XVI. Mist, close, sprinkle 8 m. s. wet 9 m. warm. XVII.
Warm season. Nosegay offered, and white Cowslips; H. wind p. m. S W. XVIII.
Mist, s. rain ante ort. H. stormy wind. XIX. Mist, dark, small rain 9 p. and 10
p. XX. Mist. Audible Shower ante 7 p. very warm. XXI. Rain hard Wly. great fog
p. m. S. XXII. Fog, close, sharp wind: Red Wly: shower ante o. XXIII. Mist,
close, H. wind, warmer. Wly. XXIV. Fog, close, brisk wd, warm Wly. XXV. Close,
fog: fog at n. W. XXVI. XXVII. Fog very great, cold. W. XXVIII. Fog, frost m.
close m. p. XXIX. Fog, misling ante 8 m. milder. XXX. Fog, brisk wind die tot.
misle ante 5. W. XXXI. Fog, wind, H. at n. R. 8 m. 4 p. snow 3 p. Very
tempestuous wind m. p. Feb. I. Very high winds n. d. tot. frosty, rain 9 p. N
W. Three Tides in 5 hours attributed to the winds extraordinary. II. Very high
winds, blowing and rain. Great Wracks and losses at Sea, even at Deal. III. H.
wd, showry 2 p. Rain and great flaques of Snow. Nly. IV. H. fr. wd, s. drisle 3
p. and 2 a 5 p. sho. ante med. noct. V. Mist, brisk wind, rain ante 2 p. w.
Falmouth 4 or 5 days very stormy. VI. Mist, H. wd, specially circa o. and vesp.
etc. drisle 9 p. VII. Rain ante Sun or. and 9 m. close mist, brisk wind. VIII.
H. wd die tot. dropping 5 p. and ante 9 very stormy this week past in and out
of the Channel. IX. Rain circa or. shower 8 m. hail ante 11 m. 2 p. 5 p. a 6 p.
ad 8. X. Fog morn 8 m. N W. XI. Great fog below, frosty. Sly occ. and ante.
XIII. Frosty, foggy, die tot. XIV. Fog m. sharp air. Ely. XV. s. wet o. m. very
gr. fog. E. XVI. Close, cold, wd. E. XVII. Frosty, foggy air. E. XVIII. Fog,
frost, sharp air. XI. Warm, s. rain 4 p. ad 6 p. H. wd. XX. Much rain ante Luc.
Aches, fog n. XXI. Very great Fog; frost, wetting 4 p. shower apace 7 p. wind
high 9 p. S. S E. XXII. Fog, rain ante 2 p. occ. S XXIII. Fog, R. ante o and p.
m m. p. W. XXIV. H. wd, R. ante ort. and o. drisle 11 m. warm. XXV. Very high
wd, s. rain ante L. XXVI. Fog, R. circa 4 p. blustering p. m. per tot. XXVII.
Very sharp wind. Wly. H. wd. XXVII. Very H. wd, Wly. Cologne Th. Lightn. fell
on the Church S. Vrsula, Merc. Angl. n. 33. Die 7. Strange Epidemic sickness at
Castle Nuovo Intell. number. 30.
1682. 14. Apr. 14.
A March 25. ad May 5. March XXV. H. wind, cold, shower 10 m. N W. XXVI. Very
cold, some gusts. Ely p. m. Wly. XXVII. R. ante 8 m, some gusts, R. ante 2 p.
Wly. XXVIII. H. wd, scuds of R. ante 5 p. 6 p. 7 p. 11 p. N E. XXIX. Cold, dark
and windy. Nly. Ely. XXX. Windy, some hail circ. 11 m. wind and showrs o. 3 p.
4 p. XXXI Meteor 8 p. near Andromeda. Ely. XXVIII. Plymouth very tempestuous
for some time past. Ships in the road suffered much in rigging. Apr. I.
Temperate. II. H. winds 10 m. cold wind. Ely. IV. s. rain ante 8 m. and mist,
cold. Ely. V. Close, misty, temperate. N E. at n. Wly. VI. Warm, clouds
contrary 9 m. Wly at n. Ely. VII. Fog, warm Sly. at n. Ely. very Sly foggy
vesp. Lightning at Cologne overturned a house. Merc. Land. VIII. Very cold and
fog m. and 9 p. W. N E IX. Mist, High wind, gentle showring ante 4 p. S. X.
Shower 10 m. or. windy. Sly. XI. Windy, wetting 9 m. R. 3 p. Wly. XII. Shower 10
m. or. ante 3 p. 4 p. occ. M. C. XIII. H. wind, fog Sun occ. R. 10 p. Sly, XIV.
H. wind, rain m and a m. S W. XV. Clouds in Scenes, shower a. m. and ante 2 p.
Sly m. Wly p. m. XVI. Gross fog m. dash of rain a Sun occ. ad 9 p. E. m. W. p.
m. XVII. s. rain ante o. Wly. XVIII. R. 9 m. and alias. Rain vesp. 9 p. opposed
near Delphin. S W. XIX. s. rain 9 m. and alias a. m. dropping vesp. S W XX.
Windy some rain 10 m. or. Rainy o in M C. cum 10 quo tempore multae Stellae
fixae Persei, etc. M. C. occupa runt. XXI. Shower 11 m. 2 p. XXII. R. m. clds in
Scenes; rain 7 p. red clds ad M. C. and Or. XXIII. Shower 4 p. dropping. Ely.
XXIV. Fog, close; Rain apace ante 11 p. Ely. XXV R. a. L. wetting m. p. Gr.
Thund. 9 p. with sone R. till day break. Sly. Ely. XXVI. H. wind, showrs o. ad
p. m. Hot n. Sly, XXVII. s. rain 7 m. ante 2 p. red clds even. Wly. XXVIII.
Showring m. p. gr. Meteor in S. ante 9 p. W. XXIX. Hot rain 4 p. and 7 p. S W.
XXX. R. a 2 p. ad 11 p. etc. with high wd. VIII. Andalusia near Corduba s.
pestilence. Dutch Gazet. May I. R. ante 6 m. a m. m. p. H. wind. Wly II. R. a
occ. till fere 11. Indispos. Wly. III. Showring 2 p. Ely. IV. R. brisk 6 m. 2
p. 8 p. ad 11 p. Wly at n. Ely. V. R. 1 m. and post 5 m; foggy die tot. Ely.
VI. Circa hunc diem in Berkshire Oaks torn up by the roots: Corn sheard as if
it were mown. Harm at Stanford, Wadley, New berry. Curtis Intell. 153. 2 T. M.
at Orleance, Brovence, Rhimes, Soissons, shock Churches, and threw down several
Spires, ho. 2 m. and did at Paris, Deux ponts, Basil, so in Hungary, May 8.
destroying Houses, and burning the Inhabitants. gr. 5.
1684. June 7. 26.
A May 21. ad June 24. May XXI. Wind. XXII. H. wind. Ely XXIII. Brisk wind, red
clouds in M. C. at n Ely. XXIV. Cold wind. Ely. XXV. Fog, warm even. Ely. XXVI.
Close a. m. warm, wd. Ely. XXVII. Mist m. H. wd p. m. Ely. XXVIII. Clouds
gather suspiciously a. m. warm p. m. Ely. XXIX. Foggy m. stormy wd, gentle rain
vesp. welcome, hottish. Wly. XXX. some rain vesp. H. wind. Wly. XXXI. s. drisle
ante o. fine showring ante 12. p. S W. I June I. H. wd, threaten 11 m. Wly. II.
H. wd, warm, welcome, dropping d. m. m. l. III. Gentle wetting once or twice.
Wly. IV. Cloudy, warm. a. m. r. Sun occ. V. Hottish wd. Wly. VI. Close p. m.
Lightn. 10 p. VII. Ely cold wd vesp. wonderful. Fall of the Baro meter in the
m. VIII. Mist m. dark side very bright. little before it. IX. X. Warm. Ely.
Sly. XI. Mist m. Colds complained of. Ely XII. Warm, Ely mist. Ely. XIII. H.
wind Ely. All young Person labored with hoarsnes this Fortnight, and with
Eruptions like to the Itch. XIV. Misty morn, hot. Ely. XV. N. Hot, fair. So
XVII. Ely. XVIII. Hot, foggy vesp. Sun rutilus, Drought. Leaves fall off Trees.
Cattle fed Winter sodder. XIX. Mist m. hot. Ely o. Wly n. XX. Mist, drop a. m.
showry. W. XXI. Hot, fine gentle shower 5 p. 6 p. Wly. clds ride Ely. XXII.
Wind, wet 8 m. Clouds ride contrary. XXIII. Fog, suspicious for Thunder 8 m.
or, soultry. Ely. Jun. VII. St. N. Continua siccitat facit rusticos ingemiscere
and pene lacrymari, etc. XXVI. Hot, brisk wd. Ely. N V V.
39. What I had to say to this Diary, ushered it in: For as for Thunder, etc.
That is so obvious from a Martial Planet, that it will tire the patience of
any: only to Griefs I said nothing, of which sort of Instances I find but 24.
and some not of ordinary Note. Ptolemy and the Arabs do not stick to profess
such malignancy of, to which Heathenism, if we will call it so, I must
absolutely subscribe and averr a malignity in Planets, and their Mixtures one
to the other, as we shall see. It Is not to be disputed in the mixtures of the
Superiors with the inferior. And so I have done with our Home Testimony.

For our Foreign Evidence we will produce only this Miscellany Table.
40. Anno 1511. Comet terrible in Egypt, Arabia, etc. in signo a 30 Maii ad
July 3. Hevelius. circ. 7. June 20. Vesuvius burns, Ricciol. Anno 1515. A Comet
is mentioned like the, passing the whole Zodiac in a short space. Inundations
followed. Rochbach. Sir. W. Raleigh, Cap. 4 4. in a critical place this year,
17. Anno 1522. Feb. 11. Stormy near Cape B. sper. Purch., 21. Jan. 31. cum.
Anno 1530. A Comet in June, Chron. Sax., Aug. 19. 7. Sept. 1. T. M. at Cubaguae
with stench of Brimstone. Purch. Vol. 3. p. 868. and 952. Aug. 19. Anno 1532.
Comet began with in, a Sept. 23. lasted ad Nov. 10. yea, to Dec. 8. Appian.
Fracastor: apud Hevelium. Anno 1539. Comet a Maii 6. ad 17. Appian. apud
Hevelium. in gr. 12. did. and also gr. totidem. Anno 1541. April 4. On the
Abassine Shore great Storms from N. Thunder, great Hail, which run through all
points of the Compass. Purch. p. 1535. v. 2. gr. 10. cum. April 12. Whirlwinds
raising the Sands up into the Air. Scorching East winds, as much as Flames of
Fire. Ib. 1135. gr. 8. cum. Anno 1545. July 25. Hurricane over all Derbyshire,
with Hail as big as a Man's Fist. Howes, p. 109. gr. 12. cum gr. 4. Anno 1547.
Sept. 16. Fax ardens mirae Longit. ab. or. in occ. Lent volans. Dr. Dee's M.
S. in 26. Anno 1549. October. 2. Nocte venti rabidis. nec potuerunt esse
vehementiores. Anno 1557. Dec. 20. Parella, Lyc. 615. in 29. Anno 1552. Jan 12.
Winds, Snow, Hail, rain, Thunder, Lightning in several places in Germany, as if
Doomsday were come. Lyc. page 620. Inundations upon it incredible. Stadius.
Tabl. Gemma, With us at Sandwich, Jan. 13. drowned much Cattle. Childrey,
Trans. p. 2066.. Perig. gr. 7. cum aliis. Anno 1554. Cometa. Febr. 19. Trabs
Ingens ab utroque latere. Lyc. gr. 4.. Die 10. at Schalon in Fr. ignis ardens
cum fragore Lyc. 636. gr. 5. una cum aliis. Anno 1556. Comet a Mart. 5. ad
finem April, Lyc. Gemma 2. 27. Camerar. Hevelius gr. 12. 1. 11. Mart. 4.
Tornado. Hakl. p. 112 Vol. 1. Mart, 5. Continual Rain to the end of the Month.
Inde ad April 27. Serenity and Heat; more like June than April. Kyr. Howes 628.
gr. 11... April 10. T. M. at Constantinople, for 3 days; threw down the Church
at St. Sophia. Lyc. gr. 3. April 11. Lovanii vidimus ipsi ardentis lampadis
instar magnam in coelis facem. Gemma, Lib. 2. p. 30. April 23. Tempest of Hail
at Bruxels, extraordinary white: at Lavain fair Weather. Gemma Ib. o.. April
27. Halo super. Lyc. Anno 1558. July 11. At Nottingham, Whirlwind, Thunder,
beating down Churches, Heaving water into the Air; Hail, 15 Inches
circumference. Howes, 634. gr. 8. July 15. Hurricane in most parts of France,
at the Hour of the New, throwing down Trees, yea Turrets and Churches without
number. gr. 9. cum and. Anno 1564. Sept. month so hot, the River ready to boil;
The Fish Dyed; our Men fell sick. Hakl. p. 331. edit 2. in princ. October. Sept.
20. Floods from the Thames, drowning much Cattle, Howes, 657. gr. 5. Oct. 7.
Heavens burning (of which before) Howes. So in Flanders. Gemma, cum. Anno 1569.
Jan. 13. Inundation at Lovain, Gemma 2, 63. Lightning fired several Towers. Ib.
gr. o. Anno 1573. April 29. Lovanii, looked very pale, from Noon to hor 2. with
a colored Halo. Gemma 2. 163. gr. 7.. May 11. Halo with Parelia. Ib. Gem. 2.
165. June 7. Tocester in Northamptonshire, Tempest of Hail and Rain, with
Inundation, drowned much Cattle, carried away 6 Country Houses. Howes, 677...
Anno 1575. July 30. Harmful Lightning, hurting Men and Beasts Howes, 680.. Anno
1577. Inter Aug. 1. and 6 Storms. Hakl. p. 70. id. 2. gr. 3. gr. 8. Aug. 14.
Wind very great, Snow half a foot deep. p. 72, gr. o. From August 24. ad 28.
very much Wind, a fear of the loss of the Bark. p. 72. gr. 4. Aug. 30. Surge of
the Sea stroke in, and the Boat swam. Sept. 1. Great Winds N E. great Storm, we
lay at Hull, every Sea overlooking our Poop. p. 73. gr. 7. gr. 5. Anno 1579.
Sept. 9. North-East winds making us take in our Sails till the end of the
Month. Hakl. p. 744. Vol. 3. gr. 4. In September and October great winds and
Floods without rain, at Newport. Bedford, Chester etc. Howes, 686. Anno 1583.
Dec. 1. By contrary winds we were driven to Flimouth, Hakl. p. 134. Vol. 3. gr.
5.. and 9.. Dec. 18. By fair weather driven to Falmouth. Hakl. 16. Anno 1586.
Febr. 23: Bristol, very great Storm. Hakl. Vol. 2. p. 282. and 11. March 28.
Earthquakes mentioned at large in the East Indies. Anno 1518. May 1. Tempest of
Rain and Thunder with alteration of Tides and Currents. Purch. p. 1. V. 2.. May
10. Storm from the West, day and Night, Mr. Candish in Hakl. Ed. 2. 822. 6. May
16. Very stiff Gales, Id. as much wind as the Ship could bear. Ib.. May fine.
Tempest which scattered the Spanish Fleet Hows, p. 1.. Anno 1590. July ab 11.
ad 22. Calm and exceeding hot. near Cuba. Hakl. V. 2. p. 240. Nay, in Germany
and Netherland. Eichstad, Cat. Anno 1594. Month of August Hot and Fair, Howes,
Ingens Calor, Eichstad. Sept. Great Rains, which raised high Waters in Surrey
and Sussex, upon which the price of Corn rose, Howes,. Anno 1596. Eichstad
notes great heat. Oct. 15. Oct. 11. At Nova Zembla it snowed so hard that they
made a Maypole of Snow. Hakl. 3. p. 492. Anno 1598. Princ. Thames almost
froze.. Dec. 1. it thawed, Dec. 18. gr. 4. Anno 1603. March 12. Great Storm.
Purch. part 4 p. 166. gr. 4... April 28. Storm, no Ship able to live, Lib. 3.
192. May 3. Another sore Storm, the Seas shook all our Iron Work. Anno 1605.
Mar 29. Wind blew hard at Virginia. Cap. Smith. page 117. Partil. June 11.
Ingens aestas. Eichstad: Anno 1607. July 26. Ingens calor. Eichstad. Anno 1609.
July 24 Most terrible Tempests. Purch. p. 1. 1733. gr. 10.. August 7. So much
wind we were hardly able to keep the Shore, Purch. Lib. 3. p. 229. gr. 5.. Anno
1611. August 12. vd 27. Much Winds with Calms, and contrary winds with a great
Current. Purch. P. Lib. 3. p. 267. at Gardafeu. gr. 14, 13, 12 10. cum: Sept.
21. For 6 days the wind against us, which forced us to the Leeward. N. Lat. 10.
with Strong Current, Purch 3. 278. gr. 2. October. 2. Much rain Ib. gr. 1. Sept.
2. Lao. S. 24. gr. Between Cape Bon Sper and Madagascar we found no Westerly
Monsons, but contrary Ely Winds, with extreme Storms, Rain, Thunder and
Lightning. C. Saris. Purch. 334. gr. 9. 7. Sept. 10. Lat. So gr. 17. Strong
Current, Wind N E. 334. gr. 6. gr. 2. in princ. Sept. 11. Lat. So. gr. A Storm,
Ib. the Storm continued with more Wind in the Night than the Day. ut 5. Sept.
12. A Storm, Ib. complaint of the Current. See, if be not vertical. Purch.
Sept. 16. Strong Current, So 17. ut supr. Sept. 19. Extreme Current suffered
them not to stir, notwithstanding a fair and desirable stiff. Gale, Ib. Lat.
16. So. usque ad October. 3. gr. 3. 11. Anno 1613. Octobris mense, many Chasms
seen at Prague and Vienna. Calvis. December 7. Lat. N. gr. 33. Very much Wind
and Storms at N W. gr. 8. Lat. 38. there we left the great Current; Purchase.
Anno 1616. Jan 3. The Wind rising we put to Sea. Purch. 901. Jan. 10. 20. Lat.
gr. 53. Great Stream went South-West. gr. 2. Jan. 13. 23. It blew so hard we
were forced to take in our Topsails. Jan. 14. 24. About Evening it calmed, and
that Night we drove forward with a very hard Stream. Thousands of Whales. Jan.
15. 25. Latit. 55. Stiff Gale. Jan. 16. 26. Latit. 51. A flying Storm out of
the West. Jan. 17. 27. Very cold Hail and Rain. gr. 3. 8. Jan. 4. Frigus recte
predictum Herlino Anno 1618. Mart. 7. A Flame over the Palace in Paris. gr. 2.
supra. March 12. A terrible Earthquake in the Indies. April 15. At Mecha great
Heat, that men could not endure any Clothes, not so much as Linen; gr. 7.
April 21. Extreme Heat with a Storm of Wind off the Shore, Thunder and
Lightning vehement, but no rain; Purch. p. 624. gr. 7. gr. 7. Anno 1620. April
20. A Taste of the Tornados, North Lat. 8. Purch. 723. gr. 7.. 11. May 9. We
crossed the Equator; we would have crossed it more Easterly, but the Current
and wind would not permit. Purch. 1. 723. gr. 2. June 18. Pluit largissime
continues, Kepler, gr. 2. Anno 1622. June 18. Tempestuosum aestus. Kepler; gr.
4. Partil. July 1. Very dark day Showrs all night, die eodem, Fulgur and
Pluviae. July 15. Near the Ladrones the Tuffon from the South broke two Calbes.
cum. Purch 2. p. 1853. gr. 5. July 19. Great rain. July 20. Imbres crebri,
tonuit; Kepler. Anno 1524. August 18. In Norico ripensi Squalor; Thunder,
exceeding hot and dry. M. S. (supra). Anno 1626. Aug. 28. Chasmata, cum aliis;
gr. 5. Sept. 13. Ventus, serenum, mirante Keplero. Anno 1628. Nov. 6. Parelia;
gr. 4. Oct. English Fleet at the Isle of Re met with much Tempest. Howes, 1044.
die 15. gr. 10. 8. Anno 1633. Vesuvius burns several years after. Transact.
968. March 6. Cometa Lanceae Instar: Calvis. gr. 4. Anno 1635. April 6. Rain
and High Winds, gr. 4. gr. 11. April 17. Tempestuous Winds and Rain. April 19.
Very turbulent Winds M. S. May 18. Hot and dry; gr. 2. gr. 4. Anno 1637. June
15. Thunder, a Soldier slain by it at Cassels. Kyr. Partil. June 20. Halo
Solis; Kepler. June 1. Earthquake in Tours;. gr. 5. Anno 1639. July 24. Frost
and cool. Aug. 3. Iris Lunaris. Kyriander. Anno 1641. Aug. 25. and 26. Thunder;
Kyriander. gr. 3. Anno 1643. Oct. 3. Fiery Meteors in Breslaw; cum. Anno 1648.
Jan. 5. Chasms in the N. M. S. gr. 3. Anno 1650. Vesuvius Burns. Calvis. April
29. Formidable Thunders, Rain near Leicester especially, M. S. gr. 3.
41. The famed Violence of this Planet will be best apprehended when we have
seen his Configurations with the ensuing Planets; yet, even here it is
conspicuous in his share of Heat, Storms, Lightning, etc. and the Flames of
Vesuvius, Comets of extraordinary Shape, and if any other Novelty steps in.

42. Here we may be excusable if we bring one and the same Instance under
several Aspects; thereby admonishing, that the grand Productions of Nature are
owing, not to our single Cause, but to many, who are hired out, and employed
for the Service, as may be seen in all Works of Nature. So my very Pen moves
not now, but by the Assent and Consent of all those numerous Muscles, Veins,
Arteries, Nerves, which make up the Fingers. We have mentioned nothing in our
Table but what we would willingly speak to in its turn.

And First, Comets stare in our Faces, as Anno 1511. 39. 54. 50. But the Truth
is, they do not presevere, for we heard of no more, till Anno 1633. We shall
see what they will do in the next in the Two Superiors. For the reason I
persuade my self why a Comet shows it self, one year rather than another, and
why so thick and frequent in some years, as 1618. 1665. Why Hecla Mountain
flamed not from Anno 1558. to Anno 1593. Why Vesuvius sometimes two years
together: Why every Twelve years the Indians look for their Tuffon, their
All-destroying Whirlwinds? (Arduous Questions which the Worthy Democritus
Junior proposes to us.) The Reason in general can be no other but this, though
there be eminent Strokes in these Productions of some peculiar Caelestial; yet
there happens, or happens not a Concurrence of all Requisites in such and such
determinate postures, and Habitudes, and distance, Quibus positis, the Result
follows. For if one or other be wanting, the Effect gives no appearance. Where
a Comet begins with, whether alone, or in Company with. I take this to be an
eminent Stroke of our Planet or Aspect.

43. What should I reckon up the Lightnings, Storms, and Tempests, for they are
next, which occurr. Oh, Had our Intelligence been uninterrupted and uniform!
but the very Times did not bear that; it is not yet 200 years since the Indies
were known by European Navigators; nor did Navigation flourish with us till Q.
Elizabeth. Howbeit more might have been amassed together; but that we judged
some loss of time, as Hevelius also complains, when he sought out the History
of Comets. This let us observe, that as deficient as our Table may appear,
there is scarce a within these last 100 years, but contributes some remark
favoring our Fiery Meteor.

44. Among which there occur once or twice Burning and scorching Winds at the
Famous Port of Sues, at the hither end of the Red Sea; which put me strait in
mind of Ptolemy's (...), Hot and Melting Blasts, and shows to what Climes
Ptolemics Character may be properly reckoned; and withal that the Character
itself is no Figment, but grounded upon Experience and Observation, as all
good Learning is.

45. Halo's, Rainbows, and Parelia are noted; but they belong as has been
said, to a Conflux of Planets. For the Sun alone makes not any Rainbow that is
vivid or Illustrious; nor does the solitarily cause an Halo; but the and are
assisted sometimes by, as in less matters, when the Evening is red at set, and
then overspreads the Hemisphere; There is beside the, near the Horizon, or or
be either Eastor or West, or perhaps in Medio Coeli.

46. I may add further as to Comets, that although they appear not within the
Verge of what may be called a, yet they appear often when our Planet is
associated with the rest, I mean, in the same Hemisphere; for we are willing to
believe that more Comets are kindled in that space than when he wanders alone
in the other, the being more potent than the.

47. This though we have not mentioned, it is certain that the Aspects of and,
especially our are of Mal-Influence to Men's Bodies; and in token whereof we
shall find those years complain of Epidemic Distempers, etc. with their of.
Yea, even all the very time of the Conjunction: I could have inserted a large
Table to this purpose from all parts of Europe, and undeniable it is: Put these
Two Observations together, and the Corollary will be, that upon this account,
Comets may signify unhealthy times, New Diseases, Plagues, etc. even as they
do Earthquakes and Inundations, being the Com-Productions of those Superior
Causes which are the Authors of the aforesaid Evils. For if it be once granted,
that the Celestial Bodies are the Causes of the one with the other, the
Earthquake with the Comet, then the Comet may be a Sign of the Earthquake, and
whatsoever comes in Prospect with it. Hence upon this account many times, may
the Earthquake antecede the Comet (not always follow it) because it is not the
Comets, but it is a joint Effect of a Third Cause according to Natures Method,
Productive of both. Now Nature's Method is not always the same as in Smoke and
Fire The Smoke commonly precedes; true, in Green Combustibles, but not in dry
and unctuous; There the Flame precedes, and the Smoke follows. Now how comes
Smoke to be a Sign of Flame, but because one common Incentive produces both. A
Comet therefore following an Earthquake, though it loses the Praemonitory
part, yet it loses not the Nature of a Sign, because, though for the most
part it does by its precedence premonith: Yet it is subsequent too, and so a
Sign, not of what is future, but what is past: As the Footstep is a Sign of an
Inhabitant. So much for that.

44. But we have a greater Task in hand, and that is the Currents of the Ocean.
Now, a Current you must know, is such a Tide or Stream peculiar to a place that
it shall frustrate the Mariners reckoning, and set him back 20. or 30. Leagues,
when he, (the Wind being not able to Stem the Force of the Stream) shall think
he is so many Leagues advanced. The Philosophic Royal Society to excellent
purpose have desired, that all Navigators should take notice of the Current in
all parts of the Sea, for the improving Navigation: Which the Seafarers moved
by their own Judgment and Interest, do daily practice. It Is not many days
since that I strongly suspected any such Novelty (for they are not always
Constant and Unchanged) to relate to the Heavens. How many Noble Problems will
a good Astrology solve! May I without Envy endeavor the Invention? Perhaps it
is made out in our Table. What says Sir Henry Middleton, in his East India
Voyage, in Purch. Lib. 3. 5. From August 12. to 27. (this is time) A great
Current settling South-West 4 Miles an Hour, so that what we got by a favorable
Wind, we lost that, and more, when it fell Calm, being carried back by the
Current. Here Is a Fortnights experience at first Introduction. Their Latitude
above Gardefeu. Again, anonother Captain, Sept. 21. nearer the time of, which
happened Sept. 27. 13. For 6 days together the Wind against our will forced us
to the Leeward (toward Shore) with a Strong Current. Lib. 3. Cap. 12. 1. p.
278. After we had got clear of these dangers, we found the Current to carry us
to the Northwards Thirty Leagues, when we thought we had passed but Fifteen.
Ib. Oct. 10, 11, 12. we found our selves to lose more and more every day by the
Current. Ib. Latitude by Judgment 70 Leagues above the Mozambique. Third
Captain near Madagascar, or St. Laurence Isle; Sept. 10. Lat. South. gr. 17. A
strong Current setting South-West, having a stiff Gale we could not but have
run these 24 Hours, 24 Leagues, but in the Evening we made to the Island about
4 Leagues off. Sept. 11. We were carried by the force of a Current to the
Southward, almost a degree Southward. Sept. 13. The Current very strong against
us. Sept. 19. We steered North-East, but by the extremity of the Current we
were carried to the Southward; so that we were 10 days, and could not get to
the Northward, notwithstanding we had a reasonable stiff Gale. Lib. 4 p. 335.
Sept. 21. The Current did set exceeding strongly to the South-West, by West,
etc. Sept. 22, 23. We labored to get rid of the Current. October. 3. We came to
an Anchor after much Trouble by Currents. p. 336. That the Cause is from
over-head, the Seamen themselves suspect: some have said it is the Full. Purch.
p. 192. Others have said, (at times) it is the New. And they who expect to get
clear of them by Alteration of the Latitude, the depression of the Pole Star,
and the like: I can make it very probable that here at this year, in this
Latitude, considering in what Sign our is celebrated, in an Equinoctial Sign of
and this over an Equinoctial Latitude, that our of and does trouble the Waters:
Especially when the Tables furnish us with the like Evidence at the same and in
a different Month- and different Latitude, Anno 1612. Add a Third Testimony
from a in January, in another difference of Latitude, we felt a great Stream,
says the Seaman. And a 4th. Anno 1620. May 9. the being found May 16. It Is out
of road to pursue it further here: If it proves thus, it will become our Seamen
to be no Strangers to Conjunctions, to know a New as well as, and the of and
with them. Yet let no man think I appropriate it to a Martial Aspect, but I
look upon as one of the Celestials which moves the Sea. And if so, then by
Galilaeos his favor, there will be no need of moving the Earth for the Flux of
the Waters. To the and Stars it belongs, which seems to be proved from hence.
For if a part of the Heaven move a part of the Sea (a Current) then the Whole
moves the whole.

49. And let no man object his unreasonable distance in my first Instance, viz.
of gr. 14. for that Four Nights time terminates nearer to gr. 12. 10. which we
proclaim aloud to be a Legitimate distance, such as does strengthen, rather
than invalidate the Influence of the Application, as we have said before,
before ever we dreamed of such use to be made of it. But then secondly, we have
nearer applications of to in the other 3 years; yea in the very same. No, let
us rather see by this how the Celestial Bodies irritate the Waters,; (Beside
the additions of moisture which they lend the Waters) they put them into a Heat
and a Ferment, and make them run over, as I suppose. Both Tide and Current,
which are aloof from Shore, Ordinary and extraordinary, come to pass by a
Fermentation: see something of this, Feb. 11. 1680. III. Tides in 5 hours on
our Home River.

50. To conclude, as the Heavenly Bodies operate on the Elements, so do they
one upon another; to all seeming, I mean, as the Sun seems to be eclipsed:
Histories note, and Astronomers also take notice that the Sun it self suffers,
labors, and looks pale, Nec prosunt Domino, says the Heathen. Much ado has
been made from before in Heathen time, with the Maculae Solis; nay Spots are
observed now with a delicate curiosity in the other Planets. The Learned
Ricciolus bids us be gone with our Astrology; as if all the Changes of the Air
were to be imputed to the alone, with such Maculae or without, Injuriously and
Unhappily: The First, because it is plain, or may be plain, that the Sun alone,
or, cannot be the Causes of the Changes of the Air, or Seasons of the year. The
Second, because these Spots are the Products (I speak probably again) of those
very Conjunctions and other Aspects, which He with others, proscribes. This the
kind Reader will give me further time, if need be, to make out.

51. Take we with the Character of the Aspect. is apt to Heat, and sometimes
even in these Northern Climes, to Dryth; but more frequently to Lowr, Bluster,
Rain, (gentle or dashing) sometimes to Hail; which though it be rare, is more
frequent under the Martial Aspect than in other Aspects. In a weaker Condition
it admits, against its will, a Frosty Season. It Is apt to color the Clouds
rising or setting with the Sun. It is voic'd and truly for some malignity of
Influence upon our Bodies, whether (which is to be noted) it be Summer or
Winter, Hot or Cold; as to Frosty Seasons, with a little Help, it uses to cause
some Relent, or to bring Snow.

CHAP. V. Opposition of Mars and Sol.
1. The Opposition and its Diary. 2. The Breviate of the Diary. 3. more cold
than 4. Because in general is cooler. 5. Because the is shorter lived. 6. in
Perigee helps to smart Influence, yet he is but solitary, and therefore not so
brisk. 7. His Thunders in Summer do not hold in Winter. 8. Ninety one days of
118. either Rain, or Wind, or Heat. In frosty Seasons sits uneasy. 9. Fog and
hazy Air. 10. A Tempest given, a Philosopher may know the Hour of the day. 11.
Foreign Table. 12. and of a like Influence for the Main. 13. Maculae Solis.
14. Thames stows thrice in 9 Hours. 15. Sudden motion of the Mercury in the
Barometer. 16. The Dismal dark Sunday, 17. Frosts are not to be ensured. under.
18. Why in Perigee is sometimes seen.
1. Conjunctions we have considered, but this is the First Opposition which
comes in our way, the Lunar excepted. We will present its Table, because of its
use; yea, because it is short, and not clogging.

ad intervall. hinc inde, grad. 5.
1653. 8. 25. May 6.
III. Cloudy, windy. S W. IV. Showry, windy. S w. V. Very hot, ropes. S W. VI.
Hot. S W. VII. Hot and tainting rain and thunder at n. S W VIII. R. m. Windy.
W. IX. Cloudy, some wind. W. S. X. Some Thunder, wind pretty high. S W. S.
black frosty morning.
1655. July 11. 28.
VII. Offer at noon. N. VIII. Lowering m. hot 2 or 3 drops. N. IX. Hot, lowering.
N. X. Foggy m. coolish, high wind. S E. XI. Bright, cool wind. mist. N E. XII.
H. wd, bright. N E. XIII. Excessive hot, thunder. S. E. XIV. Red m. hot. S E.
XV. Very hot, clear. XVI. Thunder 4 in M. Showring and rumbling die tot.
1657. Sept. 28. 15.
XXVII Red clds Eastward. N W. XXVIII. Wind n. frost very cold. Nly. XXIX.
Stripped clds, cold p. m. s. moisture occ. misty. N E. Oct. I. Close, dark, cold
wd, wetting 2 p. 5 p. 6, 7. II. Warm air, ropes, ground mist, Meteor. N E
1659. Nov. 21. 9.
XVIII. Fair, frost. XIX. Frost, fog. XX. Frost, fog die tot, XXI. Extreme fog,
Watermen lost their way. XXII. Fair, fog at night, and fr. XXIII. Fr. fog.
XXIV. Dark morning, fair p. m. some rain at night. XXV. Fair, frost at n.
1661. Dec. 30. 19.
XXVII. Storms of great rain 1 p. showrs 6 p. 9 p. H. wind. XXVIII. H. wd noct.
tot. S W. XXIX. R. noct. tot. and so noon warmish. S E. XXX. Great rain 1 m. H.
wd S W. XXXI. Fr. close, clear, S E. I Jan. Wet N. warmish. S E. III. Drisling
a. m. warmish. W E. III. Fr. S W.
1664. Feb. 3. 24.
Jan. XXX. R. ante luc. cold shower 5 p. N. Jan. XXXI. Close m. p. cold, freez.
N E. I. Feb. Fr. very cold, mist, mild p. m. wetting 9 p. S W. II. Warm, close
most part, brisk wd. S W. III. H. wind, some wet at Sun set. S W. IV. Windy,
coasting hail 1 p. some drops 7 p V. Windy p. m. and some rain S W. VI. Wind
drisle 10 m. great rain 4 p. 8 p. etc. N W.
1666. March 8. 28.
V. Dry, hottish. Wly. VI. Hottish W, gentle showrs 3 p. W. VII. H. wd A. L.
fine showers o. 2 p. 5 p. Wly. VIII. Sweet rain a. m. per tot. R. 2 p. 5 p. 9
p. Wly. IX. s. moisture m. sh. a. m. hail 5 p. drop 6 p. W. X. Fog m. a. m.
Ely. Cold rain 7 p. 9 p. Wly. XI. Cold drops a. m. pouring rain a 2 p. ad usque
3 p. W. XII. Fr. fog, cl. in Scenes, cold gentle rain 11 p. Ely.
1668. April 17. 7.
XV. Lowering, scarce any moisture. E. XVI. s. heat-drops, thick. E. XVII. Gr.
dew, bright, hot. Wly. XVII. Windy, cool, bright. N E.
1670. Jun 22 0.
VIII. Warm, high and cold wind 11 p. Wly. IX. Warm mist on the hills at night.
Wly. Nly. X. Warm clds fly low. Nly. XI. Cobwebs, warm, Owl 9 p. 11 p. XII.
Bright, windy, especially at noon, Owl N E. XIII. Hot, bright, windy. Nly. XIV.
Windy, sh. 1 p. dashes 4 p. Wly. XV. XVI. Hot, fair. Nly.
1672. Aug. 30. 17.
XXV. Close most part, warm. Wly. XXVI. Close and troubled, warm. Wly. XXVII.
High wind, dashing o. drisle m. p. S W. XXVIII. Higher wind, dash 10 m. N W.
XXIX. High winds die tot. rain 7 m. ad 11 m. S W. XXX. Very high wind die tot.
drisle 7 m. s. drops Sun occ. XXX. Wind and rain ante L. wet p. m. Sly. Sept.
s. rain 3 p. dash 6 p. Wly. II. H. wind and coasting showrs at North-Cray. S W.
1674. Nov. 3. 21.
Oct. XXX. Wet die tot. wind, high wind at night. Wly. S E. Aches Index rose to
L. and and then returned to 35. XXXI. Fair, Wly. Aches. Nov. I. seen here
about; misty, dark wd, and offering 4 p. S. E. Barometer XIV. and while I
looked on it it struck to 20. circa 5 p. Aches. gout, Hernia. II. Wet 9 m. o. 2
p. 7 p. much rain, H. wind ante L. Sly. III. Showring, high wind o. S W. IV.
Misty at n. Aches. V. Fr. bright. N W. VI. Foggy, frosty, Ely. Aches.
1676. Dec. 16. 5.
XII. Fog, snow, vesp. Thames even quite frozen. XIII. Snow, frosty. XIV.
Bitter frost, fog. XV. Frosty, offer sn. N. XVI. Frost, close, dark. Wly. XVII.
Sn. m. Fog, indispositions, with Pleides. XVIII. Severe frost. N W. XIX. Fr.
fair. N W. Note that a days after, it rained.
1679. Jan. 21. 11.
XVII. Fr. s. little relent. Ely. XVIII. Fr. not very cold. N E XIX. Frost,
great fog taken up. 10 m. N E XX. Frosty, wind. Nly. XXI. Sharp wd, fr. not so
hard, s. snow, s. thaw. XXII. Red m. S E. Frost, thawing finely, drisle. XXIII.
No fr. some snow and thaw p. m. per tot. N E. XXIV. snow m. p. n. again 6 m.
1681. Feb. 22. 15.
XVIII. Fog, bright, rain a. m. per tot. Sly. XIX. Wet 9 m. ad Noon so p. m. m.
p. R. 8 p. 11 p. Wly. XX. Rain m. gusts 4 p. and some rain, warm. Wly. XXI. R.
1, 2. 5 m. fog, cold, high wind. Wly Nly. XXII. Fog, bright, wind, rain ante 9
m. and a. m. warm and some rain p. m. Ely. XXIII. Mist, cold and daying. Nly.
XXIV. Fr. m. misle m. 9 m. Sly. XXV. R. ante 8. suspicious p. m. XXVI. Foggy,
some rain ante 5 p. Ely.
1683. March 31. 20.
XXIX. Stormy wds blowing the dust on high XXX. Fog m. dry S W. wind. Wly.
XXXI. Little sh. Noon. wp. Aches. April I. H. winds, s. drops 11 m. wetting 3
p. cold, N. W. II. H. wind and storm noon M. C. with Sol and Mars. Storm and
drops ^^^ca 4 p. Cold by all men's confession P. M. N W III. Cold m. often
clouding. N W. IV. Fr. m. blostering m. cold, Small Pox, Meazels discoursed in
London and Windsor. V. Cloudy 4 p. and a shower. N W
2. The Breviate of this Table stands hereabouts.
Days 118.
Express Warmth. 18. Heat. 14. Rain. 35. Store or dashing. 16. Hail. 2. Snow.
8. Mist. 6. Fog. 17. Fila. 3. Ground-mist. 11. Thunder. 4. Wind. 20. Stormy
Wind. 21. Frost. 27. Cold. 10. Dark. 5.

3. Wherein you see that this Martio Solar is suitable to the, only as the
Nature of the requires: You see at the Foot of the Table it admits more
frequent Cold; the Nature, I say, of an in general, admits of Cold, rather
than, upon the same account as the Breath of my Mouth at a distance feels cold
and rough upon the Hand, which is warm and gentler when the hand is set nearer
to the Lips. In like manner as in an, colder and rougher Blasts are oftener
seen, than at the Change.

4. The reason is, because or, or any other Planet in with, acts chiefly,
Virtute reliquorum; for wherever the the Sun is conspicuous IV. or V. of the
VIII. Good Planets and True, are up at their Day-Labours; whereas in the one of
the Planets (besure) concerned, is absent, and so is in some incapacity of
conspiring as effectually with the rest, who then make their appearance.

5. Add, that the days concerned in the are fewer in Number than the days of
the, where the Planet Aspected with the Sun being Retrograde. as here, is
sooner disengaged from any respect to the Sun; the one falling back where the
other keeps his place.

6. A man would have thought that this would have outdone the, because of the
Perigee of the Planet in the, nearer considerably to the Earth, then in the.
Tycho making him lower than the Sun at such time, and showing a greater
Parallax. No doubt, this difference of Situation approaching to the Earth and
to the Sun whom it faceth, makes the attaque hotter, and the grapple of the
Beams more close and compact; but yet, as we observed in the 's Opposition, the
solitariness of the Planet helps to cool the Courage, in proportion to the
Fortitude it is endued with by the Approximation. And therefore our Sums of
Rain and Wind sink under the, though they did not flinch under the, that being
more able to be responsible for so many days, than for half so many.

7. This is clear and open; we confess what we find, we do not strive to wrack
up Testimonies to make good any anticipated Fancies as I thought my self, when
at the First observation in Anno 1652. I was greeted with Rain and Thunder; as
Anno 1655. I should find a bloody Aspect of. But proves not so Termagant, the
Vicissitudes of Nature, and the Northern Climes take off much from his edge.

8. To proceed then, the Sum of our days for Fourteen Oppositions, All which
are found in 30 years, amounts to 118. The Sum of our Rains, 51. What do we
stand Pedling? Rain, or Wind, or Heat, 91. As to the Cold and Frosts, we have
spoken enough already; For Thunders we have scarce 5 or 6. But bating the
Winter Months of 1661. 1664. 1674. 1676. 1679. 1681. Seven of the Fifteen, you
shall observe that those Months which Thunder not, were not asleep. You shall
find Rain and Winds, An. 1657. 1666. 1672. 1683. Heat and Soultry Air, Anno
1670. For, take him where you will, is a vehement Planet, to which if you will
confront us with a vehement Frost, Anno 1676, and smile at our Zeal, we have
prevented That Frump, by observing that sits uneasy in such Icy Chains, and
takes opportunity to strike Fire out of the Cold Steel, even in Winter it self;
and that in our Neighbor Countries (the like we presume in different parts of
Lapland, but that I cannot maintain so large an Intelligence) of which we have
given you, I am sure, one Instance from Gemma, and shall suddenly from
Calvisius, produce another. Howbeit, Less Symptoms will argue a Distemper of a
Planet, than such downright Fury.

9. And whereas I once thought it good to take notice of Fog among other
Concomitants of the Aspect, I believe now I had reason so to do, since I find
the Ancients to take notice of Humiditas Horizontis, among the Effects of the
Mamareth of and. This I interpret to be Hazy Air, as the Seamen call it, when
it is misty in the Horizon, and clear in the Zenith. See the Table in Escuid.
fol. mihi 33. in the Signs of. This has been observed under the, but here is
Authority to our Experience. Now if the Arabs allow a Fog on hazie Air in their
more Southern Hemispheres, how much more must it prevail with us in Northern
distance, where our case is sometimes that of Nov. 21. 1659. when such an
Egyptian darkness hovered over us both by Sea and Land, that our Day-Labourer
was benighted, and our Vagabond Waterman lost in his Boat.

10. Here we must not forget our punctual Evidence from the Critical times of
Noon, Sunrise, Sunset, as before in the precedent Lunar Aspects; by which a
Philosopher may know the Hour of the day, many times, by the Shower; for if it
rains about Noon, I hear strike as well as the Clock, unless with vulgar People
(in matter of Eclipses) you will believe no Phenomenon Celestial but what you
see; when as then at Even, or Sun rise, I find it rain, etc. A Philosopher does
as verily see glaring on the Sun, as he in the Story Saw, by force of
Refraction, the Eclipsed facing the Sun at the same Instant. Now, with recourse
to the Table, take notice to this purpose, of what happened vesperi, May 7.
Anno 1653. What at 4 m. July 16. Anno 1655. What at Noon, Sept. 24 Anno 1657.
and so please to go on:

So we pass to our vagrant Table.

of with a Little more Lattiude than the former Table.
1506. circiter Jan. 26.. 11. Jan. 15. ad 26. King Philip's Tempest sailing
from Flanders to Spain, driven on the English Shore, to which Stow adds, the
Eagle from the Spire of St. Paul's blown down, Lycost. antedates it. cum, etc.
April 8. m.
1510. T. M. in many parts in Italy, Lyc. 516. the Month not specified. 1531.
Cometa Fracastorii a Sept. 8. ad 18. Ricciolus, p. 9. vide. 1533. Nov. 25..
Eod. die, In the Province of Torgaw in Germany, the Sitter (a River) dammed up
by an Earthquake. Lyc: so Mezaldus, p. 245. cum. 1538. circa. Febr. 4.. Jan 20.
Basil shook with Earth quake. Lycosth. Jan 19. ad diem 22. Comet in following
the Sun. Mizaldus, Appian, Gemma. Lib. 1. p. 211. cum. circa gr. 10. Lychosth.
misplaces it. 1540. circa Mar. 9.. Mar. 2. and 3. Tempest dangerous. Hakl. Vol.
3. p. 422. March 8. Tempest dangerous still, Idem. 423. March 9. Great Wind and
Rain; every thing in the Ship wet. Id.. circa opp. Mar. 13. Great store of rain
(they say in Cassel.) Id. March 14, 15. Tempests brake two Cables. 1632. Circa
April 22.. Contrary Winds that we could not reach to New Foundland, till the
VII. of June. Hakl. Edit. 2. page 240.. 1644. Circa June 24.. June 16, 17, 18.
Tempest of Wind in Sundgoy, etc. destroying Cornfieldsd, Vineyards. Lyc. 1550.
Circa Dec. 18. init. On this very Dec. 18. The Thames flowed Trice in 9 Hours,
mentioned by Fromond. Meteor. Lib. V. Stow. page cum. 1553. Circa Jan. 21..
July 1. So much Wind that we spponed before the Sea, Frobisher in Halluit. 1678.
circa Sept. 26.. October. 8. A great Storm. Purch. part 1. p. 50. Cometa iterum
visus est in Front Pegasi. 1680. circa Nov. 18. princ. Lat. North 63. Contrary
Winds and Foul till day 18. Hakl. page 475. Comet ab. October. 2. to Jan. 24.
Hevel. 1582 circa Dec. 26.. Dec. 18. Fair Weather but stiff Gales. Hakl. Vol.
3. p. p. 183. 1517. circa March 4.. Febr. 23. Foul Weather, Hakl. Edit. 1. Very
great Storm, Hakl. p. 224. Edit. 1. Marca 1. Storm at N. continued 3 or 4 days.
Mr. Cavendish Voyage. 1593. circa Aug. 30.. Comet July 01. ad August 21. Hevel.
Quere, in. 1595. circa october. 31.. October. 26. Storm separated the Fleet, Sir
Francis Drake apud Hakl. 1600. Circa June 16.. Starr in Cygni pectore, in 18.
Lat. 55. N. Kepler de N. Stella. Jan. 20. The Thames almost froze in
Sevennights. Howes, Stormy, Purch 1. 75. Jan. 2. ad 8. continual Rains, Id.
page 73. 1602. Febr. 13, 14. St. Vet. Terrae Motus, W. High Winds, Transact.
2065. cum. 1604. circa March 27.. April 4. 1608. circa July 22.. July 26. Great
Thunder, Lightning, Rain; Calvis. cum. 1640. circa October 6.. Sept. 26. Winds
drive us to the shelter of a Rock; The Tramontana from the Black Sea brings
often with it such Storms. Sept. 10 ad Oct. 10. Current, Purch., which Aspects
being spent, the Currents were lost. 1612. circa Nov. 28.. Nov. men's. Terrae
motus in Westphalia, per. integr. men's. Calv. I. Nov. and Dec. Continual Floods
and Rains at Siam. Purch. 322. cum. 1615. circa Jan. 7. fine. Jan. 18. Lat. S.
8. degr. Violent Current set us an hundred Leagues back, Purch. p. 1. 525. Jan.
1. In Thuringia when other places were frozen, Storms, Lightning, Thunder;
Calvis. 1617. circa Febr. 7.. Febr. 6. much Foul Weather in the Downs. Purch.
631. Jan 29. Tonitu Fulgur, Terrae Motus, Kepl. A Steeple rent with Thunder at
Spelhurst, Strasburg Tower at the same time. Kepl. 6621. circa April 24.. April
22. Pluit, tonuit in Suevia, Kepl. where he commends some of his poor Aspects,
whereas our lies within 2 days of it. Febr. 7. and March. Very foul Weather,
Purch 1. 655. 1623. June 23. Formidable Tempest at Strasburg, Fired their
Magazin of Powder, Calvis. Kyrian.
June 24. 1625. circa Sept. 12. 1625. Chasma, Kyr. 1629. circa Nov.. Nov. 14.
Heimlichen Erdheben, Kyriander. 1629. circa Dec. 22.. Jan. 1. 1630. Here began
exceeding wet M. S. 1632. circa Jan. 26.. The American Fleet routed by
Tempests. 1636. circa April 7.. April 7. Heat, Rain, Thunder, Lightning, Kyr.
June 11. Thunder and Earthquake in Culabria. 1637. May 28. Much Thunder and
dashing. Kyr. 1640. Aug. 11.. Heat vesp. Thunder, Kyr. 1642. circa Jan 22..
October. 15. Iris Matutina. Kyriander. 1647. circa Jan. 13.. 7. St. Vet. Comme
toute la nuit it plu tonte la pour avec tourmente gresle and esclaiers. Moncon
Voyage d' Egypt, p: 151. so die 8, 9. 1649. circa Febr. 15.. Febr. 10. Ignes
Cadentes at Bristol. Hitherto do I conceive the Earthquake at Messina, the
Floods at Riga, and the Flames of Vesuvius, in Calvisias are to be reckoned.
May 10. Terrible Storm at N E. 1659. circ. Nov. 31.. Nov. 17. Sad, dark, rainy
day. 1674. circa Febr. 3. 24. Febr. 11. Lightning, Thunder. 1666. circa March
8.. March 3. Maculae in the Body of by Mr. Hook. Trans. p. 240. 1670. July 12.
Great Thunder and Rain, dashing 3 m. 1674. circa Nov. 3. 21. Mercury in the
Baroscope fell an inch me inspectante. circa hor. 5. 1679. Jan. 20. Terrae
Motus, according to prediction, which happenned in Guelderland throughout, cum
Fulmine, Tonitru. Land. Gazet. numb. 138. Jan. 12. A dismal dark Sunday
morning. Jan. 29. Terrae motus at Fort Saint-George, C. W. Limbry. 1681. circa
Febr. 22. 14. Febr. 25. Another Comet seen at London from South-East, ab 8. ad
p. broader than the last. Febr. 7. Terrae motus at Mentz, Francfort, according
to Prediction. Land. Gazet. March 3. Cometa iterum Hagae, eodem fere loco.
12. As the Full and New agree in Influence, so do our and of. Did the raise
Storms, separating Fleets? So does the. Does the contribute to a Fiery Meteor?
So does the. Is there a Comet hovering about the? So also an helps to such an
Impression. Inundations I do not find break in upon us so much; but Comets and
Earthquakes are frequent enough to gain the Readers Opinion. Bate now the New
Star in Cygni pectore; I am not yet ripe for that. One or Two exceptions will
not spoil a Rule. Yet, our Currents also at Sea do correspond in some measure,
it may be not so often as in the.

13. Our Maculae do begin to bring in their Witness: For, that Spot in the Body
of observed by Worthy Mr. Hook, falls in under the Verge of our.

14. As to our Currents, see them brought home to our Very Doors, when the
Thames flowed thrice in 9 Hours, Dec. 17. 1550. Will I say you then, offer to
ascribe that Prodigious appearance to our? I think I may safely, especially if
we met any such like accident under our before, as Feb. I. 1680. For what
though it be prodigious, as acknowledged by Fromond and others? Prodigious
Events have natural Causes, is as much confessed; And I am jealous there is
much in the Sign, which whether it prove or not, must be considered in due
place, seeing there are no instances abroad of thu same Nature.

15. To draw to a Conclusion, I have taken notice of a pretty accident Anno
1674. concerning the quick motion of the in the Barometer, which at such an
hour of the day fell while I looked on, hor 5. an Inch of the Sudden. Fell, I
say, in the Tube, but rose in the Curveture, the Air being of a sudden
levitated to such a measure. Let the Learned bear with me in my Folly, we have
adventured on the Currents Marine; I have found a Current in the Air
proportionable to that in the Water. For the Currents in the Sea, as all Tides,
are made by Levitation of the Humid Body, made by way of Tumor, which is
always Lighter; and more puffy, than when the Humor subsides unfermented. From
whence having received the Notion of the Air gravitating, I am by this petty
appearance confirmed in the opinion; Learning withal that it is the Celestial
Bodies, which (according to their various positions) do ferment or flatten the
Air; gaining also into the bargain, that the Air is of the same Lineage cognate
to Water, and though in the day of its Creation it was rarefied so far (as 1000
times they say) as that no natural cause shall reduce it again, yet still it
has a common Nature and Affection with it.

16. I would take notice of the Obscurity of the Heavens sometimes appearing
more than others, and that in Martial Aspects. It may be the dark and dismal
Sunday (in the Morning) is not yet forgotten: It happened not far from an,
whatsoever else frowned at that time upon us.

17. To speak of the Cold upon occasion of the years, -76. -13. is not
needdful, specially if we remember that as we have said, sits uneasy, so that
the state of the Air stands upon a ticklish point, when and are with one and
the other in a Frosty Season, and conclude to bring in a Thaw, as Dec. 21. in
the year 1676. as is noted in the Diary. For though an be chill of Nature as
touched before, and weaker Signs must be debilitudes; yet are very mutable from
one extreme to the other, when they are conscious they have a Friend at the
other Hemisphere in the opposite Sign. For this is mysterious, as in the
Chess-board. An Aspect bare and naked may do little, but alas! it may be
fortified by this or that appulse, then the removing of one man alters the Game.

18. I conclude with the apparition of by Daylight, I have observed
Astronomers mistaken in their conjectures in the point, we who enquire must be
suspicious; what if our Aspect should help to clear the Air, so as to make the
plains more conspicuous? and, as and have a brightness of air sometimes
attending the same Aspect, which at other times makes darkness, sometimes after
mist clarifies the Air. Our Table witnessing that the Aspect sometimes takes up
the Fog, Jan. 19. 1679. which at other times else, fell thick and threefold:
Nay under the as well as we meet with showing her self, Anno 1660. Oct. 30.

CHAP. VI. and.
1 The First Square, after the Lunar, deserves some consideration in the former
Square, rises before the contrary to what the did in the Lunar. 2. First
Squares home-Diary. 3. Nothing antimartial in the Diary. 4. In the first Square
the days are often all of a suit, viz. Wet. 5. Rain ante lucem, often in the
first Square. 6. is a blusterer. 7. A strange Phenomenon of Clouds, their
quick successive orderly generation. 8: Fog no stranger. 9. Evident Footsteps
of the configuration. 10. Prognostic not evacuated, though it be dry in one
place, while it rains in the other. 11. Lightning belongs to this Aspect. 12. So
does Hail, the Iris. 13. A note or Two concerning the Trine, the Second
out-does the First, 14. Inquiry into the reason.
1. WIth the of Sol and we have troubled the Reader, we must instance in one
more, for the Aspects sake, and what can be better than a Martio Solar Aspect
of that kind? We produce but one, and that is the First, viz. That which
follows the. We trouble you not with any of Keplers Diary, much less Foreign
Collections; Admit one of our own, and it may suffice. Now concerning this
Aspect I have nothing to note but only this, that our Planet, Aspected, seeing
it moves slower upon the Suns swift Departure from it, rises before the Sun in
the First Quadrate, etc. whereas the is found to rise after, which must be
taken notice of, because we shall make some use of the observation in the
timing of the Influence or effect.

2. Let the Table then enter, that we may see whether it gives the less
account, as the precedent has done, if yea, than we set mark upon it.

qui seqr.
2. An. 53. Jan. 21. 12.
XVIII. Rain, calm, wrack ride from South. Rain p. m. N W. XIX. Fair, warm, s.
rain at night. S W. XX. Misling, H. wind, warm. S W. XXI. High wd, showers,
mist vesp. warm morn. S W. XXII. H. wd, s. misling. S W. XXIII. Windy, s.
misle, wd and rain 9 d. S W. XXIV. Rain ante Iuc. s. showrs, freez night. S E.
An. 55. Mart. 8. 27.
V. Clds ride N E. winds, drisle 9 m. S W. VI. R. 4 m. calm, fits of showring.
N W. VII. Storms of hail and rain 2 m. cold; H. wd. Fits of rain at noon. N W.
VIII. Close m. some rain Sun. ort. sad rain. S W. IX. Overc. m. clouding
strangely, some rain. N W. X. Dewing ante ort. Hail 7 m. outrageous in s.
places; very cold. Nly. XI. Frost, close, misty m; clouds ride contrary;
storms, hail and rain. S W. S E. XII. Sad soking day; clear n.
An. 57. May 22. 9.
XVI. Dry, wd overc. 9 p. s. gusts. N E. XVII. Gentle shower m. misle 9 m.
windy, blew mist. N W. XVIII. Close, windy, open, blew mist. N E. XIX. Close m.
open, warm. N E. XX. Close m. open, cool wd, misle occ. wind at n. N W. XXI.
Fair, high wd, threatening o. cool wind at n. cold even. N W. XXII. Cloudy m. p.
cool, s. lowering. N W. XXIII. Close m. p. N W. XXIV. H. wind, coasting showers
5 p and occ. hot still post occ. N W.
An. 59. August 10. 27.
VII. Drisling o. and 5 p. wdy. S W. London fair and hot, cold n. VIII. Fair,
rain o. and 5 p. Hot; London ut supra. IX. Blew mist, wds, wetting 9 p. S W. X.
Much wet ante Iuc. and die tot. S W. XI. Heavy air ante luc. rainy 6 p. S W. S
E. XII. Wet p. m. Tempest of wind at n. showring. At London fair die tot. s.
rain at n S W. XIV. Flying cl. offering m. wetting occ. S W. XV. Land. Wet a.
m. fair, heavy air, hot, Lightn. at n. shower 10 p.
An. 61. Sept. 28. 15.
XXIV. Cloudy, cold wd, clear m. p. S W. XXV. Rain a med. noct. ad ort. etc.
Great Iris and smart showrs ante 8 m. H. wind, great storms of rain 7 p. S W.
XXVI. H. wd, smart showrs. S W. XXVII. Stormy wds, frequent showrs p. m. Cold
d. S W. XXVIII. H. wd, s. showrs m. cold and windy day. Wly. XXIX. Sad rain a 3
m. ad 9 m. bright, cold. N E. XXX. Frost, cold, shower 2 p. fog 9 p. S. 1.
October. Cloudy, shower 6 m. litttle shower n. S W.
An. 63. Nov. 3. 21.
XXXI. Oct. Cloudy a. m. open p. m. cold. Sly. I. Nov. Wind a. 1. Rain 4 p.
hottish. Sly. II. H. wind, offer 11 m. at n. hottish. Sly. III. H. wd, cldy,
hottish. Sly. IV. Wind, rain ort. close. hot. Sly. V. Rain 7 m. wd, rain 1 p. S
W. VI. Overc. warm, very high wd, rain 11 p. and noct. tot. S E.
An. 65. Dec. 5. 23.
II. Wind, s. rain ante Iuc. cloudy, warm S W. III. Close, warm, mist m. drisle
a. m. fog o. S W. IV. Frost, warm, clouded, suspic. 4 p. N W. V. Close, blew
mist, drisling, wetting 3 p. VI. clouded, drisle 9 m. wetting, rise circa 1 p.
drisle 9 p. S W. VII. Wind noct. tot. clouded rain 1 p. drisle sub orcas.
An. 68. Jan. 7. 27.
IV. Windy, drisly a. m. furious tempest of wind and rain rise; Lightning at
Salisbury 11 p. V. Tempestuous nocte dieque, shower. p. m. and vesp. W. N E. VI.
Rain m. wind and misle m. p. Nly. VII. Tempest of wind and rain a. m. Wly.
VIII. Mist, misling, Tempest driving, s. rain, misle and snow 2 p. 4 p. 6 p. S
W.
An: 70. Feb. 16. 8.
XII. Blustering noct. tot. R. p. m. snow 4 p much rain at n. S W. XIII. Rain
circa or. freez 4 p. S W. Ely. XIV. Frosty, fair s. gales. Ely. XV. Rain Sun
or. freez a. m. thaw m. thaw p. m. Ely. Land. ut supra. XVI. Frost, wet p. m,
Ely. Nly XVII. Wetting, foggy d. wet at n. Sly. XVIII. Fog m. moist, open p. m.
Estly at n. XIX. Fog m. some 1. frost, close m. p. and warm. Wly.
An. 72. April 16. 7.
XII. Close, misty. Nly. XIII. Close, misty, coldish m. Nly. XIV. Close. N E.
XV. Close, s. drisle 11 p. rain. S W. XVI. Wind and wet 6 m. Hail and snow in
the Country, and frosty morn this week. XVII. White fr. s. mist, bright, cold.
Wly. XVIII. Cold, dry, misty, misle 4 p. N E. XIX. Bright, dry. Nly. XX. Cold,
bright, dry. N E. XXI. Bright, dry, windy Sun occ. N W. XXII. Bright day, brisk
wind. Ely.
An. 74. July 14. 1.
X. Br. cl. warm p. m. shower 7 p. S W. XI. Bright, s. mist, cloud floating and
lowr. N W. XII. Fog. fair, float and lowr. S W. XIII. H wd, shower 1 p. 8 p. S
W. XIV. Shower 9 m. show and thunder 1 p. very h. wind circa o. S W. XVI. Warm,
dry Ely. close n. and hottish. XVII. Hot m. s. rain 5 m. N E. soultry, clds in
heaps, terrible Lightn. 9 p. Meteor near Perseus. XVIII. Soultry, dry. much
lightning about med. noct. 3. Meteors 11 p. XIX, Lightning and Thunder 2 m,
rain, coasting shower 1 p. H. wind and cooler.
An. 76. Sept. 11. 29.
VII. Close, very misty, wet 9 p. m. 3 p. etc. N E. VIII. s. rain m. wetting 3
p. 6 p. misty. N E. IX. Rain m. close, cool even, windy. N W. X. Close m. p.
open p. m. H. wind vesp. Wly. XI. Frost m. s. rain circa Sun or. and 4 p. cold
H. wd. Nly. XII. Fr. cool, close m. p. wind brisk 11 p. No dew 11 p. though the
Full show bright. XIII. Dew m. sad rain ab 8 m. ad 11 m. XIV. Rain noct. fere
tot. close m. p. misty. Nly.
An. 78. Oct. 20. 7.
XVII. Cold fog, rain 1 p. great shower, snow in very great flaques 3 p. XVIII.
Fog, cold, suspicicious p. m. Wly. XIX. Cloudy a. m. cold p. m. ecl. totally,
Halo 11 p. N W. XX. Very cold fog a. m. stripped clouds p. m. Ely. XXI. H. Fr.
ice, great fog, cold p. m. snow, wetting 11 p. Nly. Wly. XXII. Rain m. H. wind,
flying cl. Nly. XXIII. Fog, cloudy a. m. open, cool p. m. N E.
An. 80. Nov. 22. 12.
XIX. R. ante Sun occ. close, s. drisle 9 p. warm. Nly. XX. s. rain 7 m. Fog,
open m. p. suspicious 11 p. close wind. Ely. XXI. Cold wind, fog; brisk wind 2
p. cold vesp. Ely. N E. XXII. Frost, fair. N E. XXIII. Frost extreme, s. fog,
frosty. Nly. XXIV. Extreme frost, close, fog p. m. Nly. XXV. Fr. Comet at
Strasburg; frost, great fog, dark; warmer vesp. S W.
An. 84. Dec. 25. 14. a 22. ad 27.
XXII. Foggy, coldish, Aches 3 p. XXIII. Fog; wetting a. m. cold. W. XXIV. Rain
m. offer 11 m. close, cold, dark. XXV. Fog m. warm circa o. High and lofty
winds a o. ad merid. Sly. Tropic and Equin. XXVI. Fair, warm; H. wind toward
even. S W. Aches. XXVII. R. and wind m. and dropping, H. wind and showring p.
m. and 9 p. S W.
An. 85. Jan. 39. 21. a 27. ad Feb. 1.
XXVII. Open; warm. d. W. N. some frost n. XXVIII. Thick, fog a. m. tot. and p.
m. warm. E. XXIX. s. fog, close m. p. cold n. Nly. XXX. s. fog, wind o. clds
low. N. XXXI. Fog, rain 7 m. and 8 m. mist 10 m. Wly I. Feb. Frost, fog, close
a. m. Aches continual.
3. Here except a cold April, what anti-Martial face of Weather is there? Here
is heat in July 74. August 59. May 57. nay November 63. and January 53. and 85.
In these it is expressed, in the rest employed.

4. As to Rain, pray let it be adverted that the days comprised in the Aspect,
are more than once, all of a Suit, and that is a winning circumstance with fair
Gamesters, see Anno 53. 55. 58. 61. 63. 68. etc. So one would have thought we
had bespoke the two first years, wherein, in 15 days it rained, not 16. I
confess, but 15. it did: And though some other Months may prove dry, to
balance the contrary, yet with great inequality, it still holds. Hence in our
own Diary we find days 76. in 122. Nor can you find half 15. days dry together.
This Aspect, even in April, Anno 72. the Cold and Dry Month brought rain twice,
and that on the precise day.

5. But he who shall view the Table, the Winds, the furious Tempest, and the
sad soking Rains, and that before day, do plainly show the Power of in Square
with the Sun; for in this Aspect rises early, as we noted before, and is
sometimes got past the Meridian, before the Sun touches the Horizon. This makes
Rain ante lucem, Wind I say or Rain, not only at rise, but before, a great part
of the Night, Jan. 24, 53. March 6, 7, 8, 10. 55. Aug. 10. 59. Sept. 25, 27,
61. October. 1. Ib. Nov. 1, 4, 5. 63. Dec. 2. 65. Jan. 4, 5. 68. Feb. 12, 13, 15.
70. July 17, 19. 74. Sept. 11, 14. 76. October. 22. 78. November. 19, 20. 80. there
is scarce a year scapes: The Circumstance of the time first is notable, and
then the frequency of the result:

6. On such Consideration as this, we justly observed our Lunar Puissance,
treating of her Square with the Sun, and here with, the Evidence is more lusty
and busling, and calls us to take notice of the Edomite, who is known by
violence, furious, and sad Rains, which make a fair show in the Table, the
which we do find in the Second Square also. Rain there, Notable after the Sun
set, as here ante lucem.

7. Now follows one most notable Phenomenon, but our Table has not leave to
enter, Anno 55. March 9. the place was the good Town of Yarnton, where I first
professed to observe, Part of the Heaven toward the Southwas overcast, and
toward the North was clear, when Lo! In the Forenoon the Cloudy part seemed to
increase by a successive gradual condensation, as fast as a Seeds-man strews
his Seed, and in the same progressive Order, to my great admiration then, but
more since, because I never saw the like, nor any other that I know of, and
therefore it may be in vain to referr it to any probable or almost possible
cause, although the Square of and so near the Cardinal points, may be found to
act wonderfully.

8. In the Table we meet with some fog, we know it gets fotting many times in a
Martial Aspect.

9. In all the Sum of days 122, there is not above 30 days but are windy, and
rainy, or of express heat.

10. And whereas by this very Diary it appears that it may be a warm
Constitution in one place, as Kepler also has noted, when it is moist in
another, as in August 1654. it happened at Yarnton, when it was hot and Dry,
most part at London, it evidences that the Planets are warm in themselves, and
that Warmth produces Moisture, yet not at all times or places alike, saving,
notwithstanding the Credit of our Principle, which does not securely pronounce
always but upon Experience given, and knows to distinguish between Particular
and General Constitutions, the one confined to its Province, the other
obtaining all the Kingdom over, through which Cloud the Method is able to
pierce and pronounce with Limitation.

11. Lightning we meet with here about 5 times, but they only in 2 years, the
rest say little, howbeit it is not casual, for Lightning we meet with in Lepler,
Lightning in Kyriander.

12. If any Hail appears, we seize it. And the Great Iris, Anno 61. Sept. 25.
may be found to have somewhat of 's glare in union with the. We may hear more
of it.

13. All that we shall observe concerning our Trine, which has not been said
before, is, that the Second out-does the First without dispute; both for
Frequenee and Violence.

14. The Cause is not so obvious, for moves slow, even stationary almost in
both; If Artists will allow more slow in the Later than in the Former, that
will help: for upon that account the Later Square of the may pretend to its
Singular Effect. I will not venture, I may be thought to please my self in my
reaches at this and the other Problem, but I have no such satisfaction in so
doing: All I can do is to recommend them both to Observation, to see whether,
as in the Lunar Aspect it happened, the does not exceed the Square; For the
Comparison of one with the other, I shall not take occasion here to introduce
their Diaries, but even let them shift for themselves. If the Second Trine does
any whit out-go the First in Fiery Meteors, in Halo and Iris, let some
Celestial minded Man tell us the Reason: I hope it may be solved upon the
Premises, for I am in some have.

CHAP. VI. Of the Sextile of Sol and Mars.
1. Some notable Occurrences. 2. Sextile compared. 3. More Rains in the Former,
more excesses in the Later. 4. First Sextile rains often in the Even, the
Second not so often. Aspects therefore are effectual even under the Horizon. 5.
In both Sextiles the moisture happens post Merid. why: 7. The Second Sextile
Hails more than the First, the Reason. 7. A Note on. the Rainbow. 8. Clouds
furrowed. 9. Blite. 10. Honey Dews. 11. Some malignity even under the Sextile.
1. OUr Sextile of Sol and Mars cannot well be passed over, without wrong done
to Nature, and its Contemplation, (though the Diary we dare not show) such
notable Occurrences being found here also, as in the former Leading Aspects.
Did I say such occurrences? Or, are they some peculiar, and more rare Effects
that hang on this Combination.

2. I compared them both in the following Synopsis, and they yielded both of
them thus.

I. quo ante Solemn oritur.
Rain 75. Excesses 19. Winds 43. Of these, High Winds 24. Mists 23. Meteors 8.
Thunder 4. Hail 3. Icides 3. Dark Air 5 Summa diem 110.
II. in quo solemn. longinque sequitur.
Rain 51. Excesses 23. Winds 39. High Winds 23. Mist 14. Meteors 4. Hail 7.
Thunder, Lightn. 5. Icides 2. Dark Air 2. Sum. Dier. 105.
3. Where if the First out-goes the Second in the Prior Instance for Number,
yet in. Weight they seem to be equal; There are more Rains in the Former, more
Excesses in the Later. In Mists, in Meteors perhaps, in Dark Air the First
exceeds, in Winds, in Thunders, in Irides, the Second is equal.

4. But what shall we say to the disproportion of the Rains 75. to 51. It
cannot scarce be casual, and therefore the First will claim, especially if we
observe a Circumstance which stares in the Face of the Reader, where the Rains
in the First Sextile are observed to show themselves about Even or Sun set, or
after when our Planet aspected with the Sun, has taken leave of the
Hemisphere, yea when sometimes the Sun also has left it: In the Second Sextile
more seldom so, and yet there we find it 27. times: This be sure is gained from
it; that an Aspect has a due force or Influence even while one of the Bodies
concerned, (if not Both) are hidden under the Earth, which hitherto has been
with me a Question in the Square, and Trine, and Sextile, but now begins to be
held in the affirmative.

5. In both Sextiles seeing now the Moisture happens most part post meridiem,
the account seems to be easier. Sure the Western side of the Meridian, as we
have already said is most inclined to Rain, and that is the Scene of all
Sextiles, and of all other Aspects of Northern Declinationr except the and
Quincunx.

6. The Difference of Hail seems so considerable that I must hunt after some
reason: Is it not because that in the later the Planet rises after the Sun, and
in the very Hour of Hail happens to be in the rear alone, and Desolate. For
though the Planet be but 2 Signs distant, yet, if we observe it, Hail seldom
happens in the Evening, or near set, and therefore may be well upon, or on the
other side of the Meridian, which if it be, the Absence of the Sun makes it the
cooler Quarter.

7. Now what I find in common to these Sextiles are first the appearance of
Rainbows, and in the Second Sextile a Reflection of a Rainbow, an Iris reversed,
with the Purple-Facing outward, as by Laws of Reflection must appear, I am not
engaged to speak to the appearance, if it depends on this Aspect, I reckon it
rarity enough.

8. The Next is another passion of Clouds in Furrows unusual, to be noted the
rather, because of that strange observation of the appearance of Clouds
mentioned under the, whole new Creation seemed as sudden, as the Generation of
Smoke from the successive accension of matter combustible.

9. The next is a common Blite in the First Sextile, Jul. 7. Anno 1661 In the
Last, April 30. An. 60. there is one Effect hard to be discovered, unless by
very watchful Countrymen and Gardners, at what time we find in the following
Month many Caterpillars noted? Had we not some such instance before? And does
not all help? As the Wren said, --

10. Now let not our. Holy-drops sink, noted I remember May 4. An. 60. in the
Second Sextile, a casual Instance, I confess, but such as may be accounted for,
no doubt, where there is opportunity for a curious Observer. Stench of Mists
and Hony-drops we know belong to the same Cause.

11. Our last Instance is the worst, for it seems to be beyond question, it
brings oft-times a sick Interval, in March 74. June 76. August 78. for the
First: March, An. 73. April, Anno 75. May, Anno 77. for the Later. Six
continued years with one and the other Aspect, you see, are unlucky; I use the
Word, with an ut ita dicam, call it Offensive to Health, or, what you please.
Posterity will believe this, when they have confirmed it with their own
Observation. And so I make an end of the Martio Solar Aspect, the Habitude of
those two Great Planets.

CHAP. VII..
Conjunction of Mars and Venus.
1. This takes place here before. 2. It Is many times visible, and a fine sight
to see. 3. In Heathen Theology it is a lewd Fable. 4. It Is of uncertain return.
5. It brings an Apertio portarum. 6. It commonly brings its effect. 7. The
Aspects Character. 8. The Home Diary produced. 10, 11. Descant upon the
Evidence, i. e. as to Heat. 12. The Objection of frosts. 13. It brings
Testimony to Rain. Not to Floods in the Partile, they belong to the Platic. 14.
The Fog. 15. The Winds, the Observation concern. Wind changing. 16. Oft-times
prognosticable to an hour. 17. Halo Parelia. 18. Fiery Meteors. 19. Days 240.
of 280. bear the Character. 20. The Foreign Diary. 21. Who wishes well to the
Seaman, is a wellwisher to his Country. 22, Distance of 10 Degrees proper to
stormy Constitutions. 23. Account may be given of the Duration of a Tempest,
for a Week, Month, etc. 24. Stated or arbitrary. 25. Kepler forced to concur.
26. One Aspect extinguishes not another. 27. A Tuffon is a dire Meteor. 28.
This Aspect as proper for Hail as any. 29. Its Thunders. 30. Keplers
confession. 31. Blite. 32. Seven Degrees distance remarkable for Lightning. 33.
This Aspect either produces or prolongs Comets. 34. and 35. Proved. 36. New
Star in the breast of Cygnus, Dissent from Hevelius. 37. Earthquakes challenged
by this Aspect. 38. Platic Aspect must be admitted with Partile. 39. Currents
challenged. 40. Fournier's Opinion, the Moon not the only Cause. 41. Some
difference between Partile and Platic. 42. Floods. 43. Some Floods without Rain
speak fermentation. 44. They belong more to Mars and Venus than. 45. A List of
Mercurio Martial Floods. 46. A List of Venereo Martial Floods. 47. Our Planets
Aspected operate in sight one of another; proved. 48. Opposition of Mars and
Venus also a Flooding Aspect. 49. Strange Tides. 50. The Ancient Astrology in
this justified; Apertio Portarum. 51. Dissent from the Ancients, who make the
contrariety of the Houses to be the cause of Apertio. 52. and 53. Other causes
offered. 54. Apertio Portarum, a handsome term of Art. 55. The Milignity of
Martial Aspects. 56. Demonstrated by a large induction; the Origin of the
Pestilence is Celestial, against the diligent Dimmer-Brock. 57. It Is not eating
of Fruit makes the Autumn fickly.
1. THe Conjunction of Mars and Venus should in compliance with our former
Method, not precede, but follow that of; for so it was in the Solar
Conjunctions. But the consideration of the more confessed and exact Calculation
on side, moved me to present it before that with, whose account, till of late
days, has bin in the dark.

2. This happens some years to show it self to the public view in the
Nocturnal Hemisphere; God so ordering it for Astronomy's sake, that what could
not be possible in the Diurnal Solar Conjunctions, should be conspicuous to all
who were given to observation; and a fine Scene it makes in the Heavens;
Jucundum spectaculum, says Kepler, truly, as all must confess who regard the
Motion and Luster.

3. In the Harlot Theology of the Heathen, the Conjunction of with, makes a
lewd smutty Story; but in the Chaster Regions of thr Ether, It Is a Congress of
two Glorious Lights parlying one with the other such Language as we labor at
present to understand.

4. The Revolution of this Aspect is somewhat intricate, not visiting us once
in Two years, as the, but with more uncertainty and variety. Variety, because
it is found sometimes to repeat the same Radiation once or twice before its
departure, as Annis 1654. 1660. etc. Uncertainly, because we may meet with an,
and also our, within the space of one Twelve month, and again otherwise,
neither or in the same time.

5. Now, this is so far from an Every-day-Aspect, that it is by Astrologers
vouched to be free of the Society which bear an Apertio Portarum for their
Motto. A Port-opening opening of the Sluices of Heaven for Rain and Wind;
concerning which Notion, and the grounds of it, If I may speak freely, we will,
at the Close of this Chapter, declare our Sentiment.

6. The Aspect is violent, That Is plain, of a large effusion, exceeding many of
its fellow Martial Aspects; and so the Neoteric's tell us. For when they come
to declare its Influence, They lay Weight upon their Words, and say, Semper
fere fert malum statum aeris: and others willing to forget the Fere, (as if
there were some absurdity in Semper joined to Fere) pronounce roundly, Semper
malum, as if the Effect never failed. But who goes to persuade that? No, Solet
movere, says Eichstad, and goes no futher. The infallibility of the Effect
belongs to the perfection of Astrology. We are now treating but of the
Rudiments only, and first Principles considered by themselver.

7. Will you know the entire Character of this Aspect from Eichstad's
Experience? It uses to bring (says he) Warmth, Rains, Winds, and in
particular West-Winds, and at time of the year, Snows. Not forgetting Lusty
Coruscations. And He adds, That this Influence lasts for some continuance of
days, as before in, because the two Planets are of an Equal Gate. Ephem. part
1. ad Annum 1636.

8. We hear him, and therefore we produce our Table for the interval of two
degrees Distance, which relate to a Week, and somewhat more, at all times; yea,
as it may happen, may concern three Weeks, or a Months time within the confines
but of two degrees. That Is brave advantage for a Learner.

The Home-Diary of.
9. Intra Grad. 2. An. 1652. 11. February 26.
XXI. Clear, Rain, snow; wind changes. N. W S. XXII. Rain. XXIII. Rain, windy.
N W. XXIV. Wind various, dropping. S W. XXV. XXVI. Wind. S W. (Wrack rides N
W.) XXVII. XXVIII. XXIX. Cloudy, high wds. March I. Wind shift S W. N E. windy.
N E.
Anno 1654. 7. Jan. 29.
XXIV. Fair. S W. XXV. Misty, Halo. XXVI. XXVII. Fair, mist, rainy. S. XXVIII.
Misty, cloudy; so 29. S W XXX. Close m. open. S W. XXXI. Frost, close m. S W.
Feb. I. High winds, some wet, frost m. N W. II. High wind, some snow vesp.
frost m. III. H. winds, very cold, threatn snow. N W. IV. High winds, being
cold, threat. snow. N E. V. High wind, s. snow. VI. Frost, cloudy, suspicious.
VII. Clouds; showry; so at night.
Iterum, 15.. March 23. R.
XVIII. High winds, clearing. N E. XXI. Windy. N E. XXII. High wind, cold.
XXIII. High wind, snow, hail. N W. XXIV. Windy, some rain at night. N W. XXV.
XXVI. Windy, cloudy, m. p. N W.
Tertio, 23. October. 5.
II. Rain pouring noct. tot. violent wind, (...) pouring vesp. N W. III. H.
winds ante L. variable, wet m. stormy day. S W. IV. Cloudy, rain, wind,
Lightning N. N W. V. Dark and rainy a. m. showers N. S W. VI. Wet at evening. S
W.
Anno 1656. August 24. (...) 8.
XX. XXI. Fair, hot, Halo. N W. XXII. Very hot, Gossamere. S W. N W. XXIII.
Great fog; very hot. XXIV. Fog, hot; storm of wind 11 p. XXV. Wet till 3 m.
Bright, very cool. N E. XXVI. Fair N. W -- after N E. XXVII. High winds Ely.
offering. N E.
Anno 1658. 22. July 13.
IX. Windy, rain 9 m. S W. X. Soultry, wind. S W. XII. Melting day, Meteors. S
E. XIII. Windy, melting day, Meteors. S W. XIV. High winds, threatening, meteors
11 p. W. XV. VVindy, drisle m. XVI. Meteors. XVII. Showry. W.
Anno 1660. 18. June 14.
IX. Open and warm p. m. windy. W. X. Close, hot. W. XI. High winds, hot; H.
winds at night. N W. XII. Hot p. m. S W. W. XIII. Soultry, ground-mist at n. W.
XIV. Soultry. XV. Soultry, scalding air, W. XVI. Blew mist, drops 5 p. showrs,
lightn. 7 p. XVII. Showrs 2 m. S W. XVIII. H. showrs 4 m. Hot. S W.
Iterum August 17. 20. R.
XV. Very hot. S W. XVI. Fog. rain 10 m. very hot. S W. XVII. Soultry, hot.
XVIII. The same. XIX. Hot day, tot. Rain at midnight. XX. Drisle m.
Anno 1661. 16. Febr. 25. Tunbridge. in Kent.
XX. Rain. 9. m. and m. p. W XXI. Rain die toto; wet night, great Flood. XXII.
Rain 11 m. and n. rain 2 p. N E. XXIII. Cloudy, warm even. S W. XXIV. Stormy,
wet n. W. XXV. VVindy, rainy 9 m. S W. XXVI. Storms of Rain and hail. Halo 2. S
W. XXVII. Little frost, fair. V V. XXVIII. Frost, fog, misty. Halo. S. March I.
Sad rainy a. m. Rain p. and even. S. II. Very rainy, windy. S.
Anno 1663. 28. Jan. 12.
VIII. Little frost, fair, fog at n. S W. IX. Fog die tot. and night; frost. E.
X. Thick fog die tot. cold. E. XI. Foggy frost; chiefly p. m. E. XII. XIII.
Foggy, frosty. E. XIV. Foggy, sleet. E. XV. Foggy, some wet 4 p. and 10 p. S.
XVI. Fog, warm. S W. XVII. Fog, rain 8 p. etc. m. p.
Anno 1664. 8. November. 27.
XXIII. Hard frost, cold, fair. N. XXIV. Fog, frosty. N E. XXV. Hard frost,
rain 11 p. E. S E. XXVI. Drisling m. close rain. E. S E. XXVII. Misty; rain 11
m. and p. m. and 6. p. XXVIII. Wet ante Sun ort. so m. S W. XXIX. Wet ort.
some drops 8 p. N E. XXX. Close rain p. m. misty 6 p. ad 11 p. Dec. I. Some
drisle at n. N E.
An. 1665. 3. July 18. Stat. Waltham Cross.
XIV. Cloudy m. hot. N E. XV. Excessive hot, high winds p. m. lightn. and a
shower p. XVI. Much Lightning 2 m. Blew mist extended on the Hills. S E. XVII.
Blew mist over Sun vesp. cloudy in S. with two Terrible flashes, and a clap of
Thunder and Rain, from London to Edmonton. XVIII. Thunder and Lightning with
storms, 1 p. and coasting round the Horizon, P. M. N V V X XIX. Fog all m. Hot,
fine rain 10 p. W. XX. Refreshing rain at break of day, and at rise, cooling
Showrs. W. XXI. Dash 10 m. Thund. Land. 11. and Rain. S W. XXII. Cool, High
winds, coasting shower o. S W. XXIII. s. showrs 4 p. S W.
Iterum, o. Aug. 29.
XXII. Warm, cloudy, m. p. V V. XXII. Warm, drisle 6 and 7 p. S W. XXIV. Warm,
much Lightning and Thunder 10 p. a shower. S W. XXV. Misty m. misle, Rain 9 p. S
W. XXVI. Close m. p. warm, blew mist, Meteors, E. S E XXVII. Warm, showring 4
p. and 8 p. S W. S E XXIX. Suspicious morning, windy, fair. XXX. Windy tot.
noct. offering. S W. XXXI. Wind, close m. N W. Sept. I. Frost, very cold ante
wet 9 p. m. S W. II. Warm, close. S V V. III. Warm; misty m. N W.
Anno 1667. 28. Jan. 10. R.
VII. Windy, thaw, close, V V. VIII. Rain at day break. S E. IX. Cold m. p.
Rain, and snow. N. X Frost and snow; offers die tot. gusty. cold. N. XI. Frost;
Thaw noct. tot. S. XII. Dark day; Fog taken up. S.
Iterum, 28. Aug. 6.
II. Hot p. m. winds at night. N W. III. Hot. N E. IV. Fog m. hot. Lightning
according to prognostic. W. V. Fog m. hot, windy. S E. VI. Fog m. melting day;
yet brisk winds. S W. VII. Fog m. and falls a. m. hot; hail 2 p. Lightning. N
E. melting day, and fickly time. W. VIII. Hot n. fog a. m. melting day, dry,
Thunder toward London o. High winds vesp. Lightning at night in the N E. S W.
IX. Fine shower, stormy winds, Meteors (...) 6. p. X. Windy; showring 10 m. ad 1
p. S W
Anno 1669. 12. June 23.
XX. XXI. Warm, mist m. W. XXII. Fog 8 m. hot, rain desired. S W. XXIII. Mist
m. fog. 9 m. hot, mist m. p. Sly. XXIV. Warm, close. S W. N E. XXV. Close m.
cold n. N E. XXVI. Fog m. N. XXVII. Fog m. pale thick Clouds; a dry season. W.
Anno 1671. 27. May 12.
VIII. IX. Windy, hot. E. X. Much heat. N E. XI. Mist m. Ropes, soultry. W.
XII. Very hot, misty, shower at Moon rise. XIII. Soultry, yet brisk cool winds.
S W. XIV. H. wind; shower 2 p. Dewy n. S W. XV. Windy, offer a. m. shower at
Humsted. S W. XV. VVind, shower, so. and 4 p. showring. S V V.
Anno 1673. 28. April 23.
XVI. Misty air, heat. E. XVII. Hot day; mist, Field and City. XVIII. Close
morn. offering o. heat. N E. XIX. High wind and rain m. p. shower 4 p. XX. Windy
and rain. XXI. Close, high wind m. shedding Noon. XXII. Windy, some dropping p.
m. S W. XXIII. Lowering; High cool wind. Sly. XXIV. Windy. Sly. XXV. Drisle 10
m. and 3 p. S W. XXVI. Warm, some drisle 6 and 7 p. S W. XXVII. Shower o and 4
p. mist. S W. XXVIII. Close day, some moisture 5 p. S W. XXIX. Close m. no
mist. N E. XXX. Hot. N E. May I. Shower 6 m. soultry, Thunder 4 p storm of Hail
and Lightning 9 p. Ely m. Wly. p. m. II. Warm; wet 3 p. N E. III. Warm, close,
mist, Field and City. N E. IV. Close m. p. some wet 4 p. Nly.
Iterum, 15. May 21. R.
V. Drisle once or twice; cool. N E. VI. Drisle 6 p. cool day, some wind. N V
V. VII. Very cold m. Nly. VIII. Rain 10 m. brisk wd, N E. IX. Coasting shower 8
p. N E. X. Some wet, overcast. N. XI. Clouds, clearing, some Rain or Hail 2 p.
N. XII. Gentle rain 1 p. 5 p. 7 p. very cold night. XIII. Wet p. m. tot. S V V.
clouds ride. Nly. XIV. Wetting m. offer p. m. Nly. XV. Showry 3 p. 5 p. N E.
XVI. Rain m. brisk wind. XVII. Brisk wind. N E. XIX. Temperate, blew mist. N.
XX. Windy, offering; mist taken up. S W. Parelii at Womondham, in agro Leicest.
XXI. some showrs 9 m. S W. XXII. s. showrs at o. and vesp. Sly. XXIII. Showrs
coasting, and toward midnight. XXIV. Shower. ante 1 m. 4 m. smart at o. dash at
2 p. N W. XXV. Windy, wetting ante 9 m. Thunder at Warwick, Lightning. Rain in
the S W. at rise; showrs. South. S W. XXVI. Showring 10 m. offer p. m. windy S
W.
June 24. 1625. circa Sept. 12. 1625. Chasma, Kyr. 1629. circa Nov.. Nov. 14.
Heimlichen Erdheben, Kyriander. 1629. circa Dec. 22.. Jan. 1. 1630. Here began
exceeding wet M. S. 1632. circa Jan. 26.. The American Fleet routed by
Tempests. 1636. circa April 7.. April 7. Heat, Rain, Thunder, Lightning, Kyr.
June 11. Thunder and Earthquake in Culabria. 1637. May 28. Much Thunder and
dashing. Kyr. 1640. Aug. 11.. Heat vesp. Thunder, Kyr. 1642. circa Jan 22..
October. 15. Iris Matutina. Kyriander. 1647. circa Jan. 13.. 7. St. Vet. Comme
toute la nuit it plu tonte la pour avec tourmente gresle and esclaiers. Moncon
Voyage d' Egypt, p: 151. so die 8, 9. 1649. circa Febr. 15.. Febr. 10. Ignes
Cadentes at Bristol. Hitherto do I conceive the Earthquake at Messina, the
Floods at Riga, and the Flames of Vesuvius, in Calvisias are to be reckoned.
May 10. Terrible Storm at N E. 1659. circa. Nov. 31.. Nov. 17. Sad, dark, rainy
day. 1674. circa Febr. 3. 24. Febr. 11. Lightning, Thunder. 1666. circa March
8.. March 3. Maculae in the Body of by Mr. Hook. Trans. p. 240. 1670. July 12.
Great Thunder and Rain, dashing 3 m. 1674. circa Nov. 3. 21. Mercury in the
Baroscope fell an inch me inspectante. circa hor. 5. 1679. Jan. 20. Terrae
Motus, according to prediction, which happenned in Guelderland throughout, cum
Fulmine, Tonitru. Land. Gaze, numb. 138. Jan. 12. A dismal dark Sunday morning.
Jan. 29. Terrae motus at Fort Saint-George, C. W. Limbry. 1681. circa Febr. 22.
14. Febr. 25. Another Comet seen at London from South-East, ab 8. ad p. broader
than the last. Febr. 7. Terrae motus at Mentz, Francfort, according to
Prediction. Land. Gazet. March 3. Cometa iterum Hagae, eodem fere loco.
12. As the Full and New agree in Influence, so do our and of. Did the raise
Storms, separating Fleets? So does the. Does the contribute to a Fiery Meteor?
So does the. Is there a Comet hovering about the? So also an helps to such an
Impression. Inundations I do not find break in upon us so much; but Comets and
Earthquakes are frequent enough to gain the Readers Opinion. Bate now the New
Star in Cygni pectore; I am not yet ripe for that. One or Two exceptions will
not spoil a Rule. Yet, our Currents also at Sea do correspond in some measure,
it may be not so often as in the.

13. Our Maculae do begin to bring in their Witness: For, that Spot in the Body
of observed by Worthy Mr. Hook, falls in under the Verge of our.

14. As to our Currents, see them brought home to our Very Doors, when the
Thames flowed thrice in 9 Hours, Dec. 17. 1550. Will I say you then, offer to
ascribe that Prodigious appearance to our? I think I may safely, especially if
we met any such like accident under our before, as Feb. I. 1680. For what
though it be prodigious, as acknowledged by Fromond and others? Prodigious
Events have natural Causes, is as much confessed; And I am jealous there is
much in the Sign, which whether it prove or not, must be considered in due
place, seeing there are no instances abroad of thu same Nature.

15. To draw to a Conclusion, I have taken notice of a pretty accident Anno
1674. concerning the quick motion of the in the Barometer, which at such an
hour of the day fell while I looked on, hor 5. an Inch of the Sudden. Fell, I
say, in the Tube, but rose in the Curveture, the Air being of a sudden
levitated to such a measure. Let the Learned bear with me in my Folly, we have
adventured on the Currents Marine; I have found a Current in the Air
proportionable to that in the Water. For the Currents in the Sea, as all Tides,
are made by Levitation of the Humid Body, made by way of Tumor, which is
always Lighter, and more puffy, than when the Humor subsides unfermented. From
whence having received the Notion of the Air gravitating, I am by this petty
appearance confirmed in the opinion; Learning withal that it is the Celestial
Bodies, which (according to their various positions) do ferment or flatten the
Air; gaining also into the bargain, that the Air is of the same Lineage cognate
to Water, and though in the day of its Creation it was rarefied so far (as 1000
times they say) as that no natural cause shall reduce it again, yet still it
has a common Nature and Affection with it.

16. I would take notice of the Obscurity of the Heavens sometimes appearing
more than others, and that in Martial Aspects. It may be the dark and dismal
Sunday (in the Morning) is not yet forgotten: It happened not far from an,
whatsoever else frowned at that time upon us.

17. To speak of the Cold upon occasion of the years. 76. 13. is not needdful,
specially if we remember that as we have said, sits uneasy, so that the state
of the Air stands upon a ticklish point, when and are with one and the other in
a Frosty Season, and conclude to bring in a Thaw, as Dec. 21. in the year 1676.
as is noted in the Diary. For though an be chill of Nature as touched before,
and weaker Signs must be debilitudes yet are very mutable from one extreme to
the other, when they are conscious they have a Friend at the other Hemisphere
in the opposite Sign. For this is mysterious, as in the Chess-board. An Aspect
bare and naked may do little, but alas! it may be fortified by this or that
appulse, then the removing of one man alters the Game.

18. I conclude with the apparition of by Daylight, I have observed
Astronomers mistaken in their conjectures in the point, we who enquire must be
suspicious; what if our Aspect should help to clear the Air, so as to make the
plains more conspicuous? and, as and have a brightness of air sometimes
attending the same Aspect, which at other times makes darkness, sometimes after
mist clarifies the Air. Our Table witnessing that the Aspect sometimes takes up
the Fog. Jan. 19. 1679. which at other times else, fell thick and threefold:
Nay under the as well as we meet with showing her self, Anno 1660. Oct. 30.

CHAP. VI. and.
1 The First Square, after the Lunar, deserves some consideration in the former
Square, rises before the contrary to what the did in the Lunar. 2. First
Squares home-Diary. 3. Nothing antimartial in the Diary. 4. In the first Square
the days are often all of a suit, viz. Wet. 5. Rain ante lucem, often in the
first Square. 6. is a blusterer. 7. A strange Phenomenon of Clouds, their
quick successive orderly generation. 8. Fog no stranger. 9. Evident Footsteps
of the configuration. 10. Prognostic not evacuated, though it be dry in one
place, while it rains in the other. 11. Lightning belongs to this Aspect. 12. So
does Hail, the Iris. 13. A note or Two concerning the Trine, the Second
out-does the First. 14. Inquiry into the reason.
1. WIth the of Sol and we have troubled the Reader, we must instance in one
more, for the Aspects sake, and what can be better than a Martio Solar Aspect
of that kind? We produce but one, and that is the First, viz. That which
follows the. We trouble you not with any of Keplers Diary, much less Foreign
Collections; Admit one of our own, and it may suffice. Now concerning this
Aspect I have nothing to note but only this, that our Planet, Aspected, seeing
it moves slower upon the Suns swift Departure from it, rises before the Sun in
the First Quadrate, etc. whereas the is found to rise after, which must be
taken notice of, because we shall make some use of the observation in the
timing of the Influence or effect.

2. Let the Table then enter, that we may see whether it gives the less
account, as the precedent has done, if yea, than we set mark upon it.

qui seqr.
2. An. 53. Jan. 21. 12.
XVIII. Rain, calm, wrack ride from South. Rain p. m. N W. XIX. Fair, warm, s.
rain at night. S W. XX. Misling, H. wind, warm. S W. XXI. High wd, showers,
mist vesp. warm morn. S W. XXII. H. wd, s. misling. S W. XXIII. Windy, s.
misle, wd and rain 9 d. S W. XXIV. Rain ante luc. s. showrs, freez night. S E.
An. 55. Mart. 8. 27.
V. Clads ride N E winds, drisle 9 m. S W. VI. R. 4 m. calm, fits of showring.
N W. VII. Storms of hail and rain 2 m. cold; H. wd. Fits of rain at noon. N W.
VIII. Close m. some rain Sun. ort. sad rain. S W. IX. Overc. m. clouding
strangely, some rain. N W. X. Dewing ante ort. Hail 7 m. outrageous in s.
places; very cold. Nly. XI. Frost, close, misty m; clouds ride contrary;
storms, hail and rain. S W. S E. XII. Sad soking day; clear n.
An. 57. May 22. 9.
XVI. Dry, wd overc. 9 p. s. gusts. N E. XVII. Gentle shower m. misle 9 m.
windy, blew mist. N W. XVIII. Close, windy, open, blew mist. N E. XIX. Close m.
open, warm. N E. XX. Close m. open, cool wd, misle occ. wind at n. N W. XXI.
Fair, high wd, threatening o. cool wind at n. cold even. N W. XXII. Cloudy m. p.
cool, s. lowering. N W. XXIII. Close m. p. N W. XXIV. H. wind, coasting showers
5 p and occ. hot still post occ. N W.
An. 59. August 10. 27.
VII. Drisling o. and 5 p. wdy. S W. London fair and hot, cold n. VIII. Fair,
rain o. and 5 p. Hot; London ut supra. IX. Blew mist, wds, wetting 9 p. S W. X.
Much wet ante luc. and die tot. S W. XI. Heavy air ante luc. rainy 6 p. S W. S
E. XII. Wet p. m. Tempest of wind at n. showring. At London fair die tot. s.
rain at n. S W. XIV. Flying cl. offering m. wetting occ. S W. XV. Land. Wet a.
m. fair, heavy air, hot, Lightn, at n. shower 10 p.
An. 61. Sept. 28. 15.
XXIV. Cloudy, cold wd, clear m. p. S W. XXV. Rain a med. noct. ad ort. etc.
Great Iris and smart showrs ante 8 m. H. wind, great storms of rain 7 p. S W.
XXVI. H. wd. smart showrs. S W. XXVII. Stormy wds, frequent showrs p. m. Cold
d. S W. XXVIII. H. wd, s. showrs m. cold and windy day. Wly. XXIX. Sad rain a 3
m. ad 9 m. bright, cold. N E. XXX. Frost, cold, shower 2 p. fog 9 p. S. I.
October. Cloudy, shower 6 m. little shower n. S W.
An. 63. Nov. 3. 21.
XXXI. Oct. Cloudy a. m. open p. m. cold. Sly. I. Nov. Wind a. 1. Rain 4 p.
hottish. Sly. II. H. wind, offer 11 m. at n. hottish. Sly. III. H. wd, cldy,
hottish. Sly. IV. Wind, rain ort. close. hot. Sly. V. Rain 7 m. wd, rain 1 p. S
W. VI. Overc. warm, very high wd, rain 11 p. and noct. tot. S E.
An. 65. Dec. 5. 23.
II. Wind, s. rain ante luc. cloudy, warm S W. III. Close, warm, mist m. drisle
a. m. fog o S W. IV. Frost, warm, clouded, suspic. 4 p. N W. V. Close, blew
mist, drisling, wetting 3 p. VI. clouded, drisle 9 m. wetting, rise circa 1 p.
drisle 9 p. S W. VII. Wind noct. tot. clouded rain 1 p. drisle sub orcas.
An. 68. Jan. 7. 27.
IV. Windy, drisly a. m. furious tempest of wind and rain rise; Lightning at
Salisbury 11 p. V. Tempestuous nocte dieque, shower. p. m. and vesp. W. N E. VI.
Rain m. wind and misle m. p. Nly. VII. Tempest of wind and rain a. m. Wly.
VIII. Mist, misling, Tempest driving, s. rain, misle and snow 2 p. 6 p. S W.
An. 70. Feb. 16. 8.
XII. Blustering noct. tot. R. p. m. snow 4 p much rain at n. S W. XIII. Rain
circa or. freez 4 p. S W. Ely. XIV. Frosty, fair s, gales. Ely. XV. Rain Sun
or. freez a. m. thaw m. thaw p. m. Ely. Land. ut supra. XVI. Frost, wet p. m.
Ely. Nly XVII. Wetting, foggy d. wet at n. Sly. XVIII. Fog m. moist, open p. m.
Estly at n. XIX. Fog m. some l. frost, close m. p. and warm. Wly.
An. 72. April 16. 7.
XII. Close, misty. Nly. XIII. Close, misty, coldish m. Nly. XIV. Close. N E.
XV. Close, s. drisle 11 p. rain. S W. XVI. Wind and wet 6 m. Hail and snow in
the Country, and frosty morn this week. XVII. White fr. s. mist, bright, cold.
Wly. XVIII. Cold, dry, misty, misle 4 p. N E XIX. Bright, dry. Nly. XX. Cold,
bright, dry. N E. XXI. Bright, dry, windy Sun occ. N W. XXII. Bright day, brisk
wind. Ely.
An. 74. July 14. 1.
X. Br. cl. warm p. m. shower 7 p. S W. XI. Bright, s. mist, cloud floating and
lowr. N W. XII. Fog, fair, float and lowr. S W. XIII. H wd, shower 1 p. 8 p. S
W. XIV. Shower 9 m. show and thunder 1 p. very h. wind circa o. S W. XVI. Warm,
dry, Ely. close n. and hottish. XVII. Hot m. s. rain 5 m. N E. soultry, clds in
heaps, terrible Lightn. 9 p. Meteor near Perseus. XVIII. Soultry, dry, much
lightning about med. noct. 3 Meteors 11 p. XIX. Lightning and Thunder 2 m,
rain, coasting shower 1 p. H. wind and cooler.
An. 76. Sept. 11. 29.
VII. Close, very misty, wet 9 p. m. 3 p. etc. N E. VIII. s. rain m. wetting 3
p. 6 p. misty. N E. IX. Rain m. close, cool even, windy. N W. X. Close m. p.
open p. m. H. wind vesp. Wly. XI. Frost m. s. rain circa Sun or. and 4 p. cold
H. wd. Nly. XII. Fr. cool, close m. p. wind brisk 11 p. No dew 11 p. though the
Full show bright. XIII. Dew m. sad rain ab 8 m. ad 11 m. XIV. Rain noct. fere
tot. close m. p. misty. Nly.
An. 78. Oct. 20. 7.
XVII. Cold fog, rain 1 p. great shower, snow in very great flaques 3 p. XVIII.
Fog, cold, suspicicious p. m. Wly. XIX. Cloudy a. m. cold p. m. ecl. totally,
Halo 11 p. N W. XX. Very cold fog a. m. stripped clouds p. m. Ely. XXI. H. Fr.
ice, great fog, cold p. m. snow, wetting 11 p. Nly. Wly. XXII. Rain m. H. wind,
flying cl. Nly. XXIII. Fog, cloudy a. m. open, cool p. m. N E.
An. 80. Nov. 22. 12.
XIX. R. ante Sun occ. close, s. drisle 9 p. warm. Nly. XX. s. rain 7 m. Fog,
open m. p. suspicious 11 p. close wind. Ely. XXI. Cold wind, fog; brisk wind 2
p. cold vesp. Ely. N E. XXII. Frost, fair. N E. XXIII. Frost extreme, s. fog,
frosty. Nly. XXIV. Extreme frost, close, fog p. m. Nly. XXV. Fr. Comet at
Strasburg; frost, great fog, dark; warmer vesp. S W.
An. 84. Dec. 25. 14. a 22. ad 27.
XXII. Foggy, coldish, Aches 3 p. XXIII. Fog; wetting a. m. cold. W. XXIV. Rain
m. offer 11 m. close, cold, dark. XXV. Fog m. warm circa o. High and lofty
winds a o. ad merid. Sly. Tropic and Equin. XXVI. Fair, warm; H. wind toward
even. S W. Aches. XXVII. R. and wind m. and dropping, H. wind and showring p.
m. and 9 p. S W.
An. 85. Jan. 39. 21. a 27. ad Feb. 1.
XXVII. Open; warm. d. W. N. some frost n. XXVIII. Thick, fog a. m. tot. and p.
m. warm. E. XXIX. s. fog, close m. p. cold n. Nly. XXX. s. fog, wind o. clds
low. N. XXXI. Fog, rain 7 m. and 8 m. mist 10 m. Wly I. Feb. Frost, fog, close
a. m. Aches continual.
3. Here except a cold April, what anti-Martial face of Weather is there? Here
is heat in July 74. August 59. May 57. nay November 63. and January 53. and 85.
In these it is expressed, in the rest employed.

4. As to Rain, pray let it be adverted that the days comprised in the Aspect,
are more than once, all of a Suit, and that is a winning circumstance with fair
Gamesters, see Anno 53. 55. 58. 61. 63. 68. etc. So one would have thought we
had bespoke the two first years, wherein, in 15 days it rained, not 16. I
confess, but 15. it did: And though some other Months may prove dry, to
balance the contrary, yet with great inequality, it still holds. Hence in our
own Diary we find days 76. in 122. Nor can you find half 15. days dry together.
This Aspect, even in April, Anno 72. the Cold and Dry Month brought rain twice,
and that on the precise day.

5. But he who shall view the Table, the Winds, the furious Tempest, and the
sad soking Rains, and that before day, do plainly show the Power of in Square.
with the Sun; for in this Aspect rises early, as we noted before, and is
sometimes got past the Meridian, before the Sun touches the Horizon. This makes
Rain ante luccm, Wind I say or Rain, not only at rise, but before, a great part
of the Night, Jan. 24, 53. March 6, 7, 8, 10. 55. Aug. 10. 59. Sept. 25, 27,
61. October. 1. Ib. Nov. 1, 4, 5. 63. Dec. 2. 65. Jan. 4, 5. 68. Feb. 12, 13, 15.
70. July 17, 19. 74. Sept. 11, 14. 76. October. 22. 78. November. 19, 20. 80. there
is scarce a year scapes: The Circumstance of the time first is notable, and
then the frequency of the result:

6. On such Consideration as this, we justly observed our Lunar Puissance,
treating of her Square with the Sun, and here with, the Evidence is more lusty
and busling, and calls us to take notice of the Edomite, who is known by
violence, furious, and sad Rains, which make a fair show in the Table, the
which we do find in the Second Square also. Rain there, Notable after the Sun
set, as here ante lucem.

7. Now follows one most notable Phenomenon, but our Table has not leave to
enter, Anno 55. March 9. the place was the good Town of Yarnton, where I first
professed to observe, Part of the Heaven toward the Southwas overcast, and
toward the North was clear, when Lo! In the Forenoon the Cloudy part seemed to
increase by a successive gradual condensation, as fast as a Seeds-man strews
his Seed, and in the same progressive Order, to my great admiration then, but
more since, because I never saw the like, nor any other that I know of, and
therefore it may be in vain to referr it to any probable or almost possible
cause, although the Square of and so near the Cardinal points, may be found to
act wonderfully.

8. In the Table we meet with some fog, we know it gets fotting many times in a
Martial Aspect.

9. In all the Sum of days 122, there is not above 30 days but are windy, and
rainy, or of express heat.

10. And whereas by this very Diary it appears that it may be a warm
Constitution in one place, as Kepler also has noted, when it is moist in
another, as in August 1654. it happened at Yarnton, when it was hot and Dry,
most part at London, it evidences that the Planets are warm in themselves, and
that Warmth produces Moisture, yet not at all times or places alike, saving,
notwithstanding the Credit of our Principle, which does not securely pronounce
always but upon Experience given, and knows to distinguish between Particular
and General Constitutions, the one confined to its Province, the other
obtaining all the Kingdom over, through which Cloud the Method is able to
pierce and pronounce with Limitation.

11. Lightning we meet with here about 5 times, but they only in 2 years, the
rest say little, howbeit it is not casual, for Lightning we meet with in Lepler,
Lightning in Kyriander.

12. If any Hail appears, we seize it. And the Great Iris, Anno 61. Sept. 25.
may be found to have somewhat of 's glare in union with the. We may hear more
of it.

13. All that we shall observe concerning our Trine, which has not been said
before, is, that the Second out-does the First without dispute; both for
Frequenee and Violence.

14. The Cause is not so obvious, for moves slow, even stationary almost in
both; If Artists will allow more slow in the Later than in the Former, that
will help: for upon that account the Later Square of the may pretend to its
Singular Effect. I will not venture, I may be thought to please my self in my
reaches at this and the other Problem, but I have no such satisfaction in so
doing: All I can do is to recommend them both to Observation, to see whether,
as in the Lunar Aspect it happened, the does not exceed the Square; For the
Comparison of one with the other, I shall not take occasion here to introduce
their Diar^es, but even let them shift for themselves. If the Second Trine does
any whit out-go the First in Fiery Meteors, in Halo and Iris, let some
Celestial minded Man tell us the Reason: I hope it may be solved upon the
Premises, for I am in some have.

CHAP. VI. Of the Sextile of Sol and Mars.
1. Some notable Occurrences. 2. Sextile compared. 3. More Rains in the Former,
more excesses in the Later. 4. First Sextile rains often in the Even, the
Second not so often. Aspects therefore are effectual even under the Horizon. 5.
In both Sextiles the moisture happens post Merid. why: 7. The Second Sextile
Hails more than the First, the Reason. 7. A Note on the Rainbow. 8. Clouds
furrowed. 9. Blite. 10. Honey Dews. 11. Some malignity even under the Sextile.
1. OUr Sextile of Sol and Mars cannot well be passed over, without wrong done
to Nature, and its Contemplation, (though the Diary we dare not show) such
notable Occurrences being found here also, as in the former Leading Aspects.
Did I say such occurrences? Or, are they some peculiar, and more rare Effects
that hang on this Combination.

2. I compared them both in the following Synopsis, and they yielded both of
them thus.

I. quo ante Solemn oritur.
Rain 75. Excesses 19. Winds 43. Of these, High Winds 24. Mists 23. Meteors 8.
Thunder 4. Hail 3. Icides 3. Dark Air 5 Summa diem 110.
II. in quo solemn. longinque sequitur.
Rain 51. Excesses 23. Winds 39. High Winds 23. Mist 14. Meteors 4. Hail 7.
Thunder, Lightn. 5. Icides 2. Dark Air 2. Sum. Dier. 105.
3. Where if the First out-goes the Second in the Prior Instance for Number,
yet in. Weight they seem to be equal; There are more Rains in the Former, more
Excesses in the Later. In Mists, in Meteors perhaps, in Dark Air the First
exceeds, in Winds, in Thunders, in Irides, the Second is equal.

4. But what shall we say to the disproportion of the Rains 75. to 51. It
cannot scarce be casual, and therefore the First will claim, especially if we
observe a Circumstance which stares in the Face of the Reader, where the Rains
in the First Sextile are observed to show themselves about Even or Sun set, or
after when our Planet aspected with the Sun, has taken leave of the
Hemisphere, yea when sometimes the Sun also has left it: In the Second Sextile
more seldom so, and yet there we find it 27. times: This be sure is gained from
it; that an Aspect has a due force or Influence even while one of the Bodies
concerned, (if not Both) are hidden under the Earth, which hitherto has been
with me a Question in the Square, and Trine, and Sextile, but now begins to be
held in the affirmative.

5. In both Sextiles seeing now the Moisture happens most part post meridiem,
the account seems to be easier. Sure the Western side of the Meridian, as we
have already said is most inclined to Rain, and that is the Scene of all
Sextiles, and of all other Aspects of Northern Declinationr except the and
Quincunx.

6. The Difference of Hail seems so considerable that I must hunt after some
reason: Is it not because that in the later the Planet rises after the Sun, and
in the very Hour of Hail happens to be in the rear alone, and Desolate. For
though the Planet be but 2 Signs distant, yet, if we observe it, Hail seldom
happens in the Evening, or near set, and therefore may be well upon, or on the
other side of the Meridian, which if it be, the Absence of the Sun makes it the
cooler Quarter.

7. Now what I find in common to these Sextiles are first the appearance of
Rainbows, and in the Second Sextile a Reflection of a Rainbow, an Iris reversed,
with the Purple-Facing outward, as by Laws of Reflection must appear, I am not
engaged to speak to the appearance, if it depends on this Aspect, I reckon it
rarity enough.

8. The Next is another passion of Clouds in Furrows unusual, to be noted the
rather, because of that strange observation of the appearance of Clouds
mentioned under the, whole new Creation seemed as sudden, as the Generation of
Smoke from the successive accension of matter combustible.

9. The next is a common Blite in the First Sextile, Jul. 7. Anno 1661 In the
Last, April 30. An. 60. there is one Effect hard to be discovered, unless by
very watchful Countrymen and Gardners, at what time we find in the following
Month many Caterpillars noted? Had we not some such instance before? And does
not all help? As the Wren said, --

10. Now let not our. Holy-drops sink, noted I remember May 4. An. 60. in the
Second Sextile, a casual Instance, I confess, but such as may be accounted for,
no doubt, where there is opportunity for a curious Observer. Stench of Mists
and Hony-drops we know belong to the same Cause.

11. Our last Instance is the worst, for it seems to be beyond question, it
brings oft-times a sick Interval, in March 74. June 76. August 78. for the
First: March, An. 73. April, Anno 75. May, Anno 77. for the Later. Six
continued years with one and the other Aspect, you see, are unlucky; I use the
Word, with an ut ita dicam, call it Offensive to Health, or, what you please.
Posterity will believe this, when they have confirmed it with their own
Observation. And so I make an end of the Martio Solar Aspect, the Habitude of
those two Great Planets.

CHAP. VII..
Conjunction of Mars and Venus.
1. This takes place here before. 2. It Is many times visible, and a fine sight
to see. 3. In Heathen Theology it is a lewd Fable. 4. It Is of uncertain return.
5. It brings an Apertio portarum. 6. It commonly brings its effect. 7. The
Aspects Character. 8. The Home Diary produced. 10, 11. Descant upon the
Evidence, i. e. as to Heat. 12. The Objection of frosts. 13. It brings
Testimony to Rain. Not to Floods in the Partile, they belong to the Platic. 14.
The Fog. 15. The Winds, the Observation concern. Wind changing. 16. Oft-times
prognosticable to an hour. 17. Halo Parelia. 18. Fiery Meteors. 19. Days 240.
of 280. bear the Character. 20. The Foreign Diary. 21. Who wishes well to the
Seaman, is a wellwisher to his Country. 22, Distance of 10 Degrees proper to
stormy Constitutions. 23. Account may be given of the Duration of a Tempest,
for a Week, Month, etc. 24. Stated or arbitrary. 25. Kepler forced to concur.
26. One Aspect extinguishes not another. 27. A Tuffon is a dire Meteor. 28.
This Aspect as proper for Hail as any. 29. Its Thunders. 30. Keplers
confession. 31. Blite. 32. Seven Degrees distance remarkable for Lightning. 33.
This Aspect either produces or prolongs Comets. 34. and 35. Proved. 36. New
Star in the breast of Cygnus, Dissent from Hevelius. 37. Earthquakes challenged
by this Aspect. 38. Platic Aspect must be admitted with Partile. 39. Currents
challenged. 40. Fournier's Opinion, the Moon not the only Cause. 41. Some
difference between Partile and Platic. 42. Floods. 43. Some Floods without Rain
speak fermentation. 44. They belong more to Mars and Venus than. 45. A List of
Mercurio Martial Floods. 46. A List of Venereo Martial Floods. 47. Our Planets
Aspected operate in sight one of another; proved. 48. Opposition of Mars and
Venus also a Flooding Aspect. 49. Strange Tides. 50. The Ancient Astrology in
this justified; Apertio Portarum. 51. Dissent from the Ancients, who make the
contrariety of the Houses to be the cause of Apertio. 52. and 53. Other causes
offered. 54. Apertio Portarum, a handsome term of Art. 55. The Milignity of
Martial Aspects. 56. Demonstrated by a large induction; the Origin of the
Pestilence is Celestial, against the diligent Dimmer-Brock. 57. It Is not eating
of Fruit makes the Autumn fickly.
1. THe Conjunction of Mars and Venus should in compliance with our former
Method, not precede, but follow that of; for so it was in the Solar
Conjunctions. But the consideration of the more confessed and exact Calculation
on side, moved me to present it before that with, whose account, till of late
days, has bin in the dark.

2. This happens some years to show it self to the public view in the
Nocturnal Hemisphere; God so ordering it for Astronomy's sake, that what could
not be possible in the Diurnal Solar Conjunctions, should be conspicuous to all
who were given to observation; and a fine Scene it makes in the Heavens;
Jucundum spectaculum, says Kepler, truly, as all must confess who regard the
Motion and Luster.

3. In the Harlot Theology of the Heathen, the Conjunction of with, makes a
lewd smutty Story; but in the Chaster Regions of thr Ether, It Is a Congress of
two Glorious Lights parlying one with the other such Language as we labor at
present to understand.

4. The Revolution of this Aspect is somewhat intricate, not visiting us once
in Two years, as the, but with more uncertainty and variety. Variety, because
it is found sometimes to repeat the same Radiation once or twice before its
departure, as Annis 1654. 1660. etc. Uncertainly, because we may meet with an,
and also our, within the space of one Twelve month, and again otherwise,
neither or in the same time.

5. Now, this is so far from an Every-day-Aspect, that it is by Astrologers
vouched to be free of the Society which bear an Apertio Portarum for their
Motto. A Port-opening opening of the Sluices of Heaven for Rain and Wind;
concerning which Notion, and the grounds of it, If I may speak freely, we will,
at the Close of this Chapter, declare our Sentiment.

6. The Aspect is violent, That Is plain, of a large effusion, exceeding many of
its fellow Martial Aspects; and so the Neoteric's tell us. For when they come
to declare its Influence, They lay Weight upon their Words, and say, Semper
fere fert malum statum aeris: and others willing to forget the Fere, (as if
there were some absurdity in Semper joined to Fere) pronounce roundly, Semper
malum, as if the Effect never failed. But who goes to persuade that? No, Solet
movere, says Eichstad, and goes no futher. The infallibility of the Effect
belongs to the perfection of Astrology. We are now treating but of the
Rudiments only, and first Principles considered by themselver.

7. Will you know the entire Character of this Aspect from Eichstad's
Experience? It uses to bring (says he) Warmth, Rains, Winds, and in
particular West-Winds, and at time of the year, Snows. Not forgetting Lusty
Coruscations. And He adds, That this Influence lasts for some continuance of
days, as before in, because the two Planets are of an Equal Gate. Ephem. part
1. ad Annum 1636.

8. We hear him, and therefore we produce our Table for the interval of two
degrees Distance, which relate to a Week, and somewhat more, at all times; yea,
as it may happen, may concern three Weeks, or a Months time within the confines
but of two degrees. That Is brave advantage for a Learner.

The Home-Diary of.
9. Intra Grad. 2.
An. 1652. 11. February 26.
XXI. Clear, Rain, snow; wind changes. N. W S. XXII. Rain. XXIII. Rain, windy.
N W. XXIV. Wind various, dropping. S W. XXV. XXVI. Wind. S W. (Wrack rides N
W.) XXVII. XXVIII. XXIX. Cloudy, high wds. March I. Wind shift S W. N E. windy.
N E.
Anno 1654. 7. Jan. 29.
XXIV. Fair. S W. XXV. Misty, Halo. XXVI. XXVII. Fair, mist, rainy. S. XXVIII.
Misty, cloudy; so 29. S W XXX. Close m. open. S W. XXXI. Frost, close m. S W.
Feb. I. High winds, some wet, frost m. N W. II. High wind, some snow vesp.
frost m. III. H. winds, very cold, threatn snow. N W. IV. High winds, being
cold, threat. snow. N E. V. High wind, s. snow. VI. Frost, cloudy, suspicious.
VII. Clouds; showry; so at night.
Iterum, 15.. March 23. R.
XVIII. High winds, clearing. N E. XXI. Windy. N E. XXII. High wind, cold.
XXIII. High wind, snow, hail. N W. XXIV. Windy, some rain at night. N W. XXV.
XXVI. Windy, cloudy, m. p. N W.
Tertio, 23. October. 5.
II. Rain pouring noct. tot. violent wind, (...) pouring vesp. N W. III. H.
winds ante L. variable, wet m. stormy day. S W. IV. Cloudy, rain, wind,
Lightning N. N W. V. Dark and rainy a. m. showers N. S W. VI. Wet at evening. S
W.
Anno 1656. August 24. (...) 8.
XX. XXI. Fair, hot, Halo. N W. XXII. Very hot, Gossamere. S W. N W. XXIII.
Great fog; very hot. XXIV. Fog, hot; storm of wind 11 p. XXV. Wet till 3 m.
Bright, very cool. N E. XXVI. Fair N. W -- after N E. XXVII. High winds Ely.
offering. N E.
Anno 1658. 22. July 13.
IX. Windy, rain 9 m. S W. X. Soultry, wind. S W. XII. Melting day, Meteors. S
E. XIII. Windy, melting day, Meteors. S W. XIV. High winds, threatening, meteors
11 p. W. XV. VVindy, drisle m. XVI. Meteors. XVII. Showry. W.
Anno 1660. 18. June 14.
IX. Open and warm p. m. windy. W. X. Close, hot. W. XI. High winds, hot; H.
winds at night. N W. XII. Hot p. m. S W. W. XIII. Soultry, ground-mist at n. W.
XIV. Soultry. XV. Soultry, scalding air, W. XVI. Blew mist, drops 5 p. showrs,
lightn. 7 p. XVII. Showrs 2 m. S W. XVIII. H. showrs 4 m. Hot. S W.
Iterum August 17. 20. R.
XV. Very hot. S W. XVI. Fog. rain 10 m. very hot. S W. XVII. Soultry, hot.
XVIII. The same. XIX. Hot day, tot. Rain at midnight. XX. Drisle m.
Anno 1661. 16. Febr. 25. Tunbridge. in Kent.
XX. Rain. 9. m. and m. p. W XXI. Rain die toto; wet night, great Flood. XXII.
Rain 11 m. and n. rain 2 p. N E. XXIII. Cloudy, warm even. S W. XXIV. Stormy,
wet n. W. XXV. VVindy, rainy 9 m. S W. XXVI. Storms of Rain and hail. Halo 2. S
W. XXVII. Little frost, fair. V V. XXVIII. Frost, fog, misty. Halo. S. March I.
Sad rainy a. m. Rain p. and even. S. II. Very rainy, windy. S.
Anno 1663. 28. Jan. 12.
VIII. Little frost, fair, fog at n. S W. IX. Fog die tot. and night; frost. E.
X. Thick fog die tot. cold. E. XI. Foggy frost; chiefly p. m. E. XII. XIII.
Foggy, frosty. E. XIV. Foggy, sleet. E. XV. Foggy, some wet 4 p. and 10 p. S.
XVI. Fog, warm. S W. XVII. Fog, rain 8 p. etc. m. p.
Anno 1664. 8. November. 27.
XXIII. Hard frost, cold, fair. N. XXIV. Fog, frosty. N E. XXV. Hard frost,
rain 11 p. E. S E. XXVI. Drisling m. close rain. E. S E. XXVII. Misty; rain 11
m. and p. m. and 6. p. XXVIII. Wet ante Sun ort. so m. S W. XXIX. Wet ort.
some drops 8 p. N E. XXX. Close rain p. m. misty 6 p. ad 11 p. Dec. I. Some
drisle at n. N E.
An. 1665. 3. July 18. Stat. Waltham Cross.
XIV. Cloudy m. hot. N E. XV. Excessive hot, high winds p. m. lightn. and a
shower p. XVI. Much Lightning 2 m. Blew mist extended on the Hills. S E. XVII.
Blew mist over Sun vesp. cloudy in S. with two Terrible flashes, and a clap of
Thunder and Rain, from London to Edmonton. XVIII. Thunder and Lightning with
storms, 1 p. and coasting round the Horizon, P. M. N V V X XIX. Fog all m. Hot,
fine rain 10 p. W. XX. Refreshing rain at break of day, and at rise, cooling
Showrs. W. XXI. Dash 10 m. Thund. Land. 11. and Rain. S W. XXII. Cool, High
winds, coasting shower o. S W. XXIII. s. showrs 4 p. S W.
Iterum, o. Aug. 29.
XXII. Warm, cloudy, m. p. V V. XXII. Warm, drisle 6 and 7 p. S W. XXIV. Warm,
much Lightning and Thunder 10 p. a shower. S W. XXV. Misty m. misle, Rain 9 p. S
W. XXVI. Close m. p. warm, blew mist, Meteors, E. S E XXVII. Warm, showring 4
p. and 8 p. S W. S E XXIX. Suspicious morning, windy, fair. XXX. Windy tot.
noct. offering. S W. XXXI. Wind, close m. N W. Sept. I. Frost, very cold ante
wet 9 p. m. S W. II. Warm, close. S V V. III. Warm; misty m. N W.
Anno 1667. 28. Jan. 10. R.
VII. Windy, thaw, close, V V. VIII. Rain at day break. S E. IX. Cold m. p.
Rain, and snow. N. X Frost and snow; offers die tot. gusty. cold. N. XI. Frost;
Thaw noct. tot. S. XII. Dark day; Fog taken up. S.
Iterum, 28. Aug. 6.
II. Hot p. m. winds at night. N W. III. Hot. N E. IV. Fog m. hot. Lightning
according to prognostic. W. V. Fog m. hot, windy. S E. VI. Fog m. melting day;
yet brisk winds. S W. VII. Fog m. and falls a. m. hot; hail 2 p. Lightning. N
E. melting day, and fickly time. W. VIII. Hot n. fog a. m. melting day, dry,
Thunder toward London o. High winds vesp. Lightning at night in the N E. S W.
IX. Fine shower, stormy winds, Meteors (...) 6. p. X. Windy; showring 10 m. ad 1
p. S W
Anno 1669. 12. June 23.
XX. XXI. Warm, mist m. W. XXII. Fog 8 m. hot, rain desired. S W. XXIII. Mist
m. fog. 9 m. hot, mist m. p. Sly. XXIV. Warm, close. S W. N E. XXV. Close m.
cold n. N E. XXVI. Fog m. N. XXVII. Fog m. pale thick Clouds; a dry season. W.
Anno 1671. 27. May 12.
VIII. IX. Windy, hot. E. X. Much heat. N E. XI. Mist m. Ropes, soultry. W.
XII. Very hot, misty, shower at Moon rise. XIII. Soultry, yet brisk cool winds.
S W. XIV. H. wind; shower 2 p. Dewy n. S W. XV. Windy, offer a. m. shower at
Humsted. S W. XV. VVind, shower, so. and 4 p. showring. S V V.
Anno 1673. 28. April 23.
XVI. Misty air, heat. E. XVII. Hot day; mist, Field and City. XVIII. Close
morn. offering o. heat. N E. XIX. High wind and rain m. p. shower 4 p. XX. Windy
and rain. XXI. Close, high wind m. shedding Noon. XXII. Windy, some dropping p.
m. S W. XXIII. Lowering; High cool wind. Sly. XXIV. Windy. Sly. XXV. Drisle 10
m. and 3 p. S W. XXVI. Warm, some drisle 6 and 7 p. S W. XXVII. Shower o and 4
p. mist. S W. XXVIII. Close day, some moisture 5 p. S W. XXIX. Close m. no
mist. N E. XXX. Hot. N E. May I. Shower 6 m. soultry, Thunder 4 p storm of Hail
and Lightning 9 p. Ely m. Wly. p. m. II. Warm; wet 3 p. N E. III. Warm, close,
mist, Field and City. N E. IV. Close m. p. some wet 4 p. Nly.
Iterum, 15. May 21. R.
V. Drisle once or twice; cool. N E. VI. Drisle 6 p. cool day, some wind. N V
V. VII. Very cold m. Nly. VIII. Rain 10 m. brisk wd, N E. IX. Coasting shower 8
p. N E. X. Some wet, overcast. N. XI. Clouds, clearing, some Rain or Hail 2 p.
N. XII. Gentle rain 1 p. 5 p. 7 p. very cold night. XIII. Wet p. m. tot. S V V.
clouds ride. Nly. XIV. Wetting m. offer p. m. Nly. XV. Showry 3 p. 5 p. N E.
XVI. Rain m. brisk wind. XVII. Brisk wind. N E. XIX. Temperate, blew mist. N.
XX. Windy, offering; mist taken up. S W. Parelii at Womondham, in agro Leicest.
XXI. some showrs 9 m. S W. XXII. s. showrs at o. and vesp. Sly. XXIII. Showrs
coasting, and toward midnight. XXIV. Shower. ante 1 m. 4 m. smart at o. dash at
2 p. N W. XXV. Windy, wetting ante 9 m. Thunder at Warwick, Lightning. Rain in
the S W. at rise; showrs. South. S W. XXVI. Showring 10 m. offer p. m. windy S
W.
Iterum, 25. Dec. 7.
III. Wet a. l. shower 2 p. and p. m. S W. IV. Rain a. l. cold rain a. m. high
wind. N. V. Frost, cold Nly. but at night, E. VI. Frosty, cold sharp wd. E.
Very high wind a. l. VII. Extreme frost, mist, E. m. Sly p. m. VIII. Rain 7 m.
and 1. windy. S W. IX. Rain a. m. and at 9 p. S W. X. Wind, warm, close, S. V
V. XI. Drisle 1 p. 7 p. (...).
Anno 1675. 10. October. 27.
XXIII. VVarm rain 10 m. at o. wetting p. m. V V. XXIV. Stormy wind, dash of
Hail and rain 1 p. and storm, rain 6 p. high winds 9 p. XXV. Frost, yet warm m.
wind and rain 1 p. at 4 p. Tempestuous and wetting 8. p. W. XVI. VVindy a. l.
cold. Inundation in Holland, Amsterdam, Hague, etc. XXVII. Blustering noct.
tot. rain 2 p. 4 p. N E. Cough universal taken notice of. XXVIII. Rain 11 m. 2
p. 6 p. E. XXIX. Frosty, misty. E. XXX. Fog, frosty. N.
Anno 1677. 23. Sept. 13.
X. Fog, Meteors 10 p. W. Die praeced. Fire-Drake, as the people call it, seen
in Moorfields, as big as 20 Meteors. XI. Fog, warm, brisk wind. N E. XII. Fog,
brisk wind; Fila, warm Mete^^n East. XIII. Fog; wind turned from E. to S E. 9
m. a shower 11 m, drisle 4 p. S V V. XIV. Rain 2 m. misty, Meteors 2 or 3. One
near horn. E. XV. Thick so Nly. Gossamere. Meteors ab manu ad 9 p. XVI. Fog;
violent dash ab 8 ad 10 p. S. XVII. VVarm, drops 7 m. shower 7 p. cold wd p. m.
Wly
Anno 1678. 22. May 8. Stat.
IV. Brisk wind, rain 10 m. high wind, shower 2 p. 7 p. S W. V. Shower 10 m. wet
10 p. E. VI. Misty, rain ante C. Blast at Foresthill, and Ely there, VII. Brisk
winds, clouds in Scenes, warm. VIII. Very bright Meteors ab Ophiuch. IX. Misty,
hot S E. m. S W. hot 11. X. Hot by all confession; Mist, Meteors 2 near and
Aquila. XI. Mist, Ely hot rough wind ort. Red Meteors 9 p. Lightning hor. 11 p.
XII. Mist, rain m. rain 1 p. occ. storm of wind 11 p. XIII. High wind noct.
tot. Rain at 8 m. W. XIV. Misty, windy. W.
Iterum, 21. June 18.
XIII. Hot n. very hot a. m. Rainy a 3 p. ad 9 p. and 11 p. Nly. XIV. Misty,
drisle 1 m. misty d. (...) looks red; Heat 10 p. XV. Sun shine red, heat. Nly.
XVI. Misty, glowing. cl. heat. E. XVII. Misty, N E. warm. XVIIII. Misty m.
heat. E. XIX. Soultry, Thunder, lightning 4 p. 5 p. with rain; Lightning 9 p. ^
W. XX. Hot, Clouds in Scenes, Lightning 4 p. 9 p. S W. XXI. Hot, misty a. m.
Rain and thunder m. p. m. drowning Highways and Cellars. Wly. Ely. 11 a. at 10
p. Nly. XXII. Lightning ante 4 m. rain, heat. Wly a m. Ely p. m. XXIII. Heat,
coasting showrs 5 p. Iris, Thund. 7 p. Clouds rise 8 p. Lightning and Thunder
in the Night. XXIV. Brisk winds p. m. Lightning and Thunderclap, some rain, hor
8. p. Rainbow N E. with variable H. winds. XXV. Windy, shower m. N E. XXVI.
Warm. N E. XXVII. Warm, misty, heat. wind. N. Sly at Night. XXVIII. Heat. rain
circa 9 p. W. XXIX. Close and heavy air a. m. warm, Lightning, and dry Thunder.
Anno 1679. 17. Aug. 15.
XI. Gentle rain 7 p. Ely at night. XII. Ely misty day, red, warm, offer 3 p.
XIII. Ely. some fog, rain 5 p. -- Sly at n. XIV. Wly. Fiery Meteors 10 p. XV.
Wly. some wet in S. 7 p. rain 9 p. XVI. Wly Fog, some little rain presumed 1 p.
in the South, warm. XVII. s. rain at 9 m. and 10 m. Brisk wind, rain 2 p.
Lightning 9 p. Meteor 5. S. XVIII. Some rain 1 p. 3 p. cloudy 7 p. Wly. XIX.
Nly rain, a 6 p. ad 9 p. warm night, mist, troubled air a. m. Ely. XX. Fog,
rain ante 6 m. and 2 p. N.
7. October. 25. Stat.
XXIII. High wind, bl. frost. XXIV. Fog, cold Meteors 3. N W. XXV. Fog, frosty.
Nly. XXVI. Fog die tot. E. XXVII. Fog a. l. dark. E.
Anno. 1680. 21. May 27.
XXIII. Rain 8 m. very high wind, showrs 3 p. W. XXIV. Very high wind, rain 4
p. Wly. XXV. Very great fog, warm, rain 10 p. S E. XXVI. Rain 7 m. brisk wind;
troubled night. Ely. XXVII. Rain a 2 m. usque ad 3 m. and a 2 p. ad 4 p. hot
day, soultry night. XXVIII. Fog, soultry rain a 3 p. ad 8 p. XXIX. Brisk winds,
rain a 9 m. ad 2 p. shower 3 Claps of Thunder, rain apace ante 10 p. Ely. XXX.
Rain hard, fog, brisk wind, smart shower 8 p. Wly. XXXI. Brisk wind, warm. Wly.
Ann 1682. 4. April 13.
VIII. Cold fog. Foggy 9 p. wind. Ely. IX. H. wind, gentle showrs at 4 p. S. X.
Windy, shower 10 m. temperate. S. XI. Windy, wetting 9 m. cool p. m. Rain ad 9
p. Wly. XII. Shower 10 m. and ante 3 p. and 4 p. XIII. High winds, fog Sun occ.
high winds and Rain 10 p. Sly. XIV. H. winds and rain a. m. cold p. m. W. XV.
Clouds in Scenes; shower a. m. and at 2 p. Sly m. W. p. m. XVI Gross fog; close
and foggy p. occ. Dash of rain usque ad 9 p. wind E. m. and W. p. m. XVII.
Clouds in Scenes, some rain ante o. W
10. Perusing these Premises, though but of two degrees distance, which is
reckoned too little, by Artists, for an Aspect of with. I note these
particulars; some whereof are omitted in the common description; and what is
the First but Heat? and have a different Situation in the Heavens; and what
that difference may produce, I have no other way to acquaint my self but by
Observation. Verily and also are remarkable for this, which, we have hitherto
called the prime Product.

11. The Sum Total of our Bill is 280. from whence if we deduct the odd 80. or
90. rather (for so many days are exhibited from our Winter Months, viz. from
October to March, inclusive) We shall find but 200 days, or 190. The Moiety of
which is 100. and toward that we have 89. (say 90.) Express hot days. Be
pleased to look upon our account of August 1656. July 1658. June 1660. What
would men have more? They are the first Summer Months appear in the Table, and
they are immediately consequent one to the other; for of their kind none have
interposed in the intermediate years, none in 1657. or 1659. to contradict. Try
therefore again, not June only 1660. but August also corresponds. So does the
next Summer Months of 1665. 1667. 1669. 1671. Scarce a Month to be found in
discord amongst all the variety that Nature presents: Signally these. Let it be
remembered that we find melting Weather, Anno 1658. 1667. Scalding Air, Anno
1660. and excessive Heat, Anno 1656. 1665. 1671. 1678. and where not? Except
once or so, when the Wet has palliated the Heat, as 1679. or 1682.

12. The Objection of what Cold occurs, we have said, ought not to move a Wise
man; for where is variety, but in the Work of Nature? Study it in what Topique
you please, and you shall find it. This we say not, as if we were hindered by
the Objection; for the rarity of the contrary is Argument enough for us, as in
the has bin observed. March 1654 June 1663. October 1679. What is Three to
XXVIII.? Beside that, it is not for nothing that the Two last of those Months
have foggy Air, joined with Frosts; which shows an abatement of the Cold; and a
Similar Effect of a reserved Cause. For when we say Heat, we do not mean every
Day should melt or scald us; but some sensible degrees of the Quality, more or
less, and rather for the more. Therefore you hear that the Character of this
Aspect speaks of Snow and Hail at the Seasons as well as Rain or Coruscations,
hence Rain and Snow which is next, is not omitted by the Common Character.

13. This little Table, (I so term it because it stands upon a little Basis)
bears a competent Testimony to Rain. For even here, He, who shall hunt for a
dry Season, as March 1654. August 1656. etc. must wade through many a wet day
to get thither. As in our First and Second Instance of Feb. Anno 1652. and Jan.
Anno 1654. is visible. March it self subornes two days Witness for us, with
Snow and Hail in one day, and Rain in the other. To make short, we find 139.
wet days, Snow and Hail included, of our 280. which being an absolute Moiety,
speaks its mind. For the Floods or Inundations, the Effects of profuser Rains,
we shall speak in our Larger Account. For though we find even here an
Inundation, or Two, as that of Amsterdam, Hague, etc. Anno 1675. Yet, they are
found more commonly unconfined to such a Scantling of a degree or Two, (of
which alone this Home-Diary consists.) Hence that in Febr. 1661. about
Tonbridge, cannot be imputed to a Single day, but to sveral precedent Days at a
greater distance by two or three degrees more. Of Floods therefore in their
proper place; Eichstad (I say) refers Inundations to and, which we shall find
to be true: but so that and put in too; yea, many times at the very Nick, when
and may seem to be the only Sluce-Openers.

14. This brings us to the Third considerable, which I find is Fog, observable
for 18 days, which, though it come near a 20th part almost of the whole, yet
you know I reckon it not so much to the Influence of our Aspect; as to the
Half-Influence. A Fog being nothing but a wet or dropping Constitution, spoiled
in the making; The First Draught and Lineaments of a Shower drawn, as it were,
in Cole, not by a dropping, but a more dry Pencil. And hitherto do we reduce
the Fila, the Ropes on the Ground, and the Floting Gossamere; which I have
observed to be the Product of Fog or Mist, when that the moisture being
exhaled, the clammy part is left behind.

15. Winds, I would take to be accidental to our Partil Aspect at least, or not
so suitable to the Influence, as is found in others, (Though I acknowledge 90
Ins^^ces, of which 42 are heard as High and Lofty) In like manner as in
aspected with, we found not so much Wind as with. But the Winds changing, which
I find Twenty times, and upon a more attentive Watch believe it might have been
trebled: I am not going about to persuade, notwithstanding, that it belongs to
this Aspect alone, remembrieg what I have said already of the to some such
purpose; yet it may concern some certain Aspects more than others. For the
Solar Aspect with any Planet, the excepted, as we have said, I reckon here to
be excluded; since they help to Fix the Wind antecedently to the Change. For if
they do not, what else can be assigned? The Sun and those which conspire with
with him settle the Constitution; if any other adventitious cause can alter it,
it may: The Sun, I say, in Aspect, or out of Aspect, gives being to the
Constitution; the other which are concerned, not with him, but with one
another, exert their peculiar Strength in Weather and Winds; provided that the
Aspects of these different Planets lie at some distance from the; for otherwise
their Influence like Flames unite. But if it so happen that the Sun being up,
These Aspects are not in have to follow him, because of their distance; their
Influence may be separated so far as to suffer a cooler Wind to blow, which
upon their Rising shall vere to a warmer point. For observe it when you will,
if the Wind turns to a chiller part of the Compass, There is some retreat of
the Heavenly Bodies: They either part One from the Other, or leave the Horizon.
On the contrary, when the Winds turn from a cold Quarter to a Warmer, West or
South, etc, There is some new appearance above the Horizon, or new Application
of one to another. And this, it may be, made Eichstad observe to us, that the
Wind changed often to the West under this Aspect; which so far is true, that it
never changes from the Warm Quarter by virtue of this Aspect; toward the warm
Quarter it does (unless in State of Dereliction.)

16. Verily, it is a pleasant piece of Art to be able to say, as on some certain
days we may, while a Northerly Wind blows, to assign, I was going to say the
Minute, when the Wind shall turn. I remember One Instance of that Nature; I
cannot say 'twas this Aspect precisely; that once according to observation,
expecting the Wind to turn, I went up to the Battlements of the House, and Lo!
Within half a quarter of an Hour the Vane of a Neighbor Church at a very
little distance, turned to the Point which I was aware of. It Is well I was
alone, for if any less curious Person had been with me to have attested the
Event, which is sober Truth, I should have been suspected for a What do you call
him? -- This can the Observation of the Planets attain to, as may be seen in
the Chapter of the Rise and Setting of the Stars, a part of this Treatise.

17. There is another appearance for which this Aspect has a Fame, and that is
Iris, Halo, Parelia. Of the former we have one great Instance from
Leicestershire, of the Later I fear I have met with more than are noted down:
Something I am sure we shall find, though not proper to the Aspect perhaps, nor
again improper. Kepler has one remark under the name of Phasmata; by which he
means some such appearances, as may be seen by his note of Iris Inversa, circa
solemn ad Febr. 4. Anno 1662. Nay, by Halo; and Parelia expressly noted, April
25. Anno 1625. Remembering also that the inversed Iris is a praelude of the
Parelium; The Truth is, He mentions no other Sights but what we have pointed
at: I have reason to think that has a great stroke, and too, though not always
under this determinate Aspect, appealing to his Diary of 1623. Or, rather for
our Aspects sake, to that 1622. Where, besides what we have seen within two
Degrees, Phasmata, Parelia, Jan 25. Still. Vet. We meet with them a Second and
Third time at a further distance both before and after the Partile Aspect, at 7
gr. distance, and 11 degrees, Jan. 3, 4, 5. S. N. Now, least any should at a
venture tell us, that gr. 11. is too unreasonable a distance, he will be put to
the Blush, when he shall be told, that the next Parelii noted in Keplers Diary
are found once again when and are at the same Distance of gr. 11. Mart. XXII.
1622.

18. Of Meteors, Coruscations and Thunders we shall speak in our Larger Diary;
we will put some up here, and reckon them. Meteors 17. Lightning 12. Thunders
13. Genuine Offsprings of and. In Aestival Months understand; and I add, and
in Aestival Postures: In such a case is a Fire, is a Vulcan, an Ignivomous
Globe, scattering Flames through the Ether; a Fury, as well as a Beauty.

19. Suppose then we add no more, the Character of the Aspect will shine from
the surface of this little Diary: For if the Premises have any Force in them,
we shall find in about 280 days, near upon 240. that carry a manifest Signature
of in them. If Heat, if Wind, if Rain, Snow, Hail; and Lightning, and Meteors,
if thick Fog; (for Martial Fogs are more Gross and Dense than some others) if
Iris and Halo, be fruits of his configuration, Then here we see them. Rain with
Floods, and Lightning with Blite, Heat with a Sickly time; (now all is out, we
cannot eat our Words:) Then and in are not to be slighted. For Floods, Blite
and Sickness are hinted, even in this Table, more largely and more sensibly to
be seen in the Following Diary, which I have collected with some Diligence, and
presented to the Reader.

The Larger Foreign Table of of Stormy Winds and Rains in order to the
asserting of the Aspect, and the Platic Capacity.
Anno 1500. 23. May 29. Brasile 23. Storms sudden, sunk four of Admiral
Capralis Ship, Purch. 1. gr. 11. soon after another Tempest, Ib. gr. 3. Anno
1520. 22. May 13. Barua in Aethiopia. June, Great Rain and Tempest, being their
Winter; Purch. 1. 1047. 15. Great Rain and Thunder at Night; gr. 15. Anno 1524.
18. Febr. 15. Lovain. January, yea and Febr. Stormy. Gemma cosmocrit. 1, 192.
Anno 1626. 13. May 23. Ormuz. 11. and 12. Storm lasting several days. Purch 11.
1014. gr. 11. gr. 2. 6. Sept. 22. Afric. October. 15. Snow for 2 or 3 Days,
burying Men and Carriages. Leo Afric. apud Purch. gr. 10. Anno 1549. 9. Sept.
10. China. 15. Prodigious Tuffon. Purch. III. 197. Anno 1551. 27. Aug. 3. July
24. Barasque or Whirlwind. Purch 1. 876. gr. 4. Anno 1556. 25. Feb. 19. 17. and
18. Tornado. Foul W. day and night: Towerson's Voyage; Ha^l. gr. 1. 20. Fowl
Weather; great change of Winds gr. 1. 27. Great Tornado with much Rain, gr. 4
March 1. Tornado, Towerson, R. 11. gr. 8. S. Domingo. Hither add Jan 24. Storm
lasting 11 days with great Mist, dispersed 8 Ships. Tomson's Voyage. Hakl.
Edit. 1. 582. a gr: 13. ad gr. 8. Anno 1558. 13. Jan. 12. Dover. 9. Tempest.
Hollinshed. gr. 1. 21. Foul Weather. Hakl. Edit. 1. 12 gr. 9. Iterum, 7. May 8.
Caspian Sea. 13. Dangerous Tempest for 44 Hours. gr. 6. Tertio, 9. Sept. 29.
October. 5. Weather very foul. Towersons Voyage Third, Hakl. gr. 3. English
Coast. 16. Great Storms at Night (we lost Foresail) continued 3 days, gr. 9.
Anno 1562. 11. July 9. Caspian Sea. 22. Stiff Gale, forced us to Anchor;
Jenkinson's Voyage, Hakl. gr. 7.. Anno 1570. 11. October. 15. 5. Terrible Wind
and Rain, with great Shipwreck, etc. Stow, gr. 5. Anno 1573. 1. Jun. 20.
Tocester. 7. Tempests and Hailstones 6 Inches about, Rain, etc. Howes, gr. 7.
Anno 1577. 8. July 10. N. L. 61. Inter July 8. and 16. Cold Storms; Steerage
broke, Masts blown overboard. Frobishers 2 Voyage, v. Hakl. gr. 2. Friezland.
17. 18. Cruel Tempest at Night in the frozen Sea. Hakl. gr. 8. Anno 1579. 29.
October. 24. ( circ. 2. Die 29. West Indies. Nov. princip. Rough Weather; Acosta.
Lib. 3. gr. 5. Anno 1583. 1: Febr. 21. Rain and Thunder: Welshes Voyage. Hakl.
Anno 1590. 17. Jan. 14. A Jan. ad March 15. No fair Weather but Stormy. Purch
11. 1674. Febr. gr. 10. 12. Two great Storms in Jan. die 5. ibid. gr. 8.
Iterum, 14. October. princip. Oct. 1. Storms; Hakluit. gr. 10. In September
Month, says Stow, in his Summary, Thunder and Snows Anno 1592. o. Aug. 21:
London. Sept. 6. Boisterous Wind, driving out the Water of the Thames: Howes,
gr. 9. Anno 1594. 16. July 12. North Sea. 10. Storm out of the West. Purch.
III. 475. gr. o. London. Rain continually through June and July every Night.
Howes. July 26. 27. Rain extreme, Ibid. gr. 10. Anno 1596. 7. June 7. May 12.
Storm, in which was lost our Barks company, Sir W. Raleigh: Hakl. Edit. 2. gr.
12. S. Domingo. May 13. Unwholesome Rain; Purch. IV. 1167. gr. 11. Cadiz. June
20. Storm; Earl of Essex his Expedition: Hakl. Purch. gr. 8. Iterum, 12. Sept.
17. N. L. 32. North Sea. Sept. 8. Most terrible Storm at Even. Purch II. 1175.
Waves as high as the Topmast. gr, 8. Sept. 27. Blows hard, and freezes hard,
gr. 15. Anno 1599. 17. Jan. 8. Wind hindered, we could not double the Cape of
Bonsperanz. Purch I. 118. Anno 1602. 15. October. 17. Streights of Malaca. October.
17. S. N. Grand Spouts pouring out of the Heaven: Hakl. gr. 17. Cauchin South
Lat. Inter October. 3. and 31. Tempest, Purch. I. 913. Nov. 4. No end of Storms,
Rain, Hail, gr. 6. Anno 1605. 5. June 23. Die 19. Wind at Bedtide, force us a
shore. gr. 1. Jun. 11. Snow, Hail, Sea High; by reason of a mighty Current:
Purch. p. 816. gr. 6. Anno 1609. 2. June 26. N. Lat. 48. 8. Stormy, variable,
with Wind and Rain, gr. 11. 14. 15. Stormy, spent our Foremast overboard.
Hudsons Voyage. 3. gr. 8. Iterum, 15. Dec. 3. Nov. 29. Hard gale of Wind,
proved stormy, etc. Purch. I. 104. gr. 2. Dec. 3. In Bohemia, Pluit. In
Voitlandia, Ninxit. Die 4. Nix plurima ita ut viae passim inexplicabiles,
indefactae sint. Kepler, apud Eichstad. gr. 0. Die 11. Tempestuous; West wind
lasted certain days, with some Rain, Kepl. Ibid. gr. 5. Anno 1611. 3. October.
26. Mozamb. die 2. Much Rain, Purch. I. 278. gr. 14. 10, 11, 12. We found our
selves to loose much by a Current, Ib. gr. 6. 10. Much Rain and gusty time. gr.
6. 19, 21. Abundance of Rain. gr. 5. Anno 1613. 18. Sept. 13. Firando. Die 7.
Tuffon, overthrew 100 Houses, broke 40 or 50 Barks etc. Purch. I. 307. gr. 4. 4
Die 30. Extreme Winds, expected another Tuffon. Ib. gr. 10. Anno 1615. 7. Aug.
9. and 15. 22. Month of August stormy most part. 22. Winds Tempestuous, while
was under the Earth. Purch I. 538. gr. 6. Anno 1620. 5. Febr. 23. W. Indies. A
Febr. ad March 14. Many Tempests. Cap. Smith. p. 128. Anno 1622. 18. October. 4.
Lincii. Sept. 29, 30. Caliginos. ventos. gr. 2. October. 6. Zephyrus validus. gr.
1. Oct. 14. Nix pluvia. Kepl. gr. 6. Anno 1624. 9. Aug. 23. cum 4. Aug. 13.
Tempestas. gr. 6. 18. Tempest. Horrida. gr. 3. 19. Pluit Copiose. Kepler. Anno
1626. 2 July 12. Lyncii. July 6, 7, 8. Pluviae multae gr. 2. 10, 11. Nimbosum.
gr. 1. 12. Largae Pluviae. 13. Ventosum. 15. Imbres. Kepler gr. 2. Anno 1628.
5. Sept. 2. R. Aug. 31. Sept. 1, 2. Nimb. gr. 3. Sept 5. Nix, Pluvios. gr. 3.
Sagam. Sept. 7. Nimb. Grandinos. Kepl. gr. 6. Anno 1631. 22. Jan. 10. cum. Jan.
6. Norimberg. Dec. 30, 31. Jan. 1, 2. Snow. gr. 10. Jan 7. Wind and Snow. gr.
2. 11, 12, 14, 15. Snow. gr. 2. 25, 26, 27. Deeper Snow, gr. 7. Kyriand. Anno
1632. 3. Nov. 25. Nov. 21. Stormy Wind. gr. 2. 24. 25. Windy. 26. Rain. gr. o.
Kyr. Anno 1635. 24. Aug. 5. July 23. Smart rain at 11. gr. 7. 24. Rain and
Thunder. gr. 7. 27. Smart Rain. gr. 5. 31. Smart Rain. gr. 3. Au^^ust 3, 4.
Rainy, gr. o. 8. Smart Rain, gr. 2. 11. Rain and Thunder, gr. 3. 14: Thunder
and Rain, gr. 5. 18. Tempest, gr. 8. Kyr. Anno 1637. 9. June 23. June 7, 8.
Smart Rain, gr. 9. 15. and 18. Thunder, smart Rain, gr. 4. 21. Thunder, Rain,
gr. 10. 23. Storm. 24. Great Rain, gr. o. 25, 26, 27. Much Rain, gr. 2. July 2.
Much Rain, gr. 5. 4. Stormy, wet. gr. 6. 9. Much Rain, Kyr. gr. 10. Anno 1639.
22. May 11. cum. A May 1. ad 10. Great Rain, gr. 10. etc. 16. and 18. Snow and
Rain. Kyriand. gr. 3. May 12. Tempest, continues 5 days. Olearius, gr. 5. Anno
1641. 18. April 12. March 31. Much Rain, gr. 6. April 6. Wind, much Snow, gr.
4. April 10. Stormy. 12. Stormy. The young Prince of Orange in danger, gr. 1:
24. Rain and Thunder all Night, gr. 3. May 2. Snow, stormy Winds, gr. 5. 3.
Stormy, Kyr. Iterum, 25. June 10. May 27, 28. Rain, etc. gr. 6. 30, 31. Wind
and Rain, gr. 5. June 1. Rain. 4. Storm, gr. 5. 7. and 10. Smart Rain, gr. 2.
12. Wind, much Rain, gr. 1. 19. Great Rain gr. 8. Anno 1664. 6. October. 26. Oct.
17. Tempest, gr. 5. 22, 23. Much Rain, gr. 3. 27. Much Rain, gr. o. Nov. 8. and
9. Snow, Kyriander. gr. 7. Anno 1645. 12. Sept. 6. and 20. Sept. 12. Aug: 26.
Great Rain. gr. 10. 29. Great Thunder and Rain, gr. 8. Sept. 1. Rainy, gr. 6.
18. Much Rain, gr. 3. 19. Stormy Rain. 20. Much Snow, gr. 4. 22. Much Rain,
Storm, Winds, Kyriand. Anno 1647. Nov. 11. Die 11. Dark and Tempestuous Night,
when K. Charles I. escaped from Hampton Court, gr. 10. Anno 1650. April 11. Die
29. Formidable Thunder and Rain near Leicester, Wilsford. M. S. gr. 9. Anno
1652. 11. Febr. 26. intra gr. 10. did. Febr. 6. Very High Winds, some Rain at
Night. S W. gr. 9. 7. Much Wind and Rain. So at Night, gr. 9. 10. Rainy Night.
W. 11. Rainy gr. 8. 12. Abundance of Rain, High Wind, S E. gr. 6. 16. Rainy.
21. Rain and Snow S. gr. 4. March 10. Windy, Rainy, Rainbows, gr. 7. High
Winds, S W. 11. Rainy, wind: N W. gr. 7. 12. High wind, Storm of Hail at 11 of
the Clock. Anno 1654. 7. Jan 29. and March 3. 15. Jan. 21. Rainy, wind. N E.
gr. 4. Febr. 21. Rainy n. some Thunder, H. Wind. W. gr. 5. 24. Rainy toward
Night. N. gr. 5. Febr. 25. Very High Winds, Rain and Hail impetuous, gr. 5.
March 3. Showry Night. N E. gr. 6. 13. Rainy most part. S W. gr. 3. 23. High
Wind, Snow and Hail. N W. gr. 2. 27. High Wind, store of Rain, N. gr. 3. 28.
Very High Wind. N E. gr. 9. 29. Rainy Night. 30. High Winds. gr. 5. April 3.
Showrs of Rain and Hail, gr. 9. Iterum, 23. October. 5. Sept. 24. Some Fits of
Wet. S W. gr. 7. October. 11. Windy, wet. gr. 4. Anno 1656. 8. Aug. 24. Aug. 10.
Dashes of Rain 9 m. and 2 p. gr. 8. 12. Rain hard. 13. Store of Wet, gr. 7. 15.
Rainy 1 m. wind, S W. gr. 6. 17. Rain pouring a 3 m. die toto, gr. 4. Sept. 4.
Wind, showrs circa o. N E. gr. 7. 8. Store of Rain toward London, N E. gr. 9.
9. Flash of Lightning, gr. 10. Anno 1658. 24. July 18. July 1. High Winds die
toto, gr. 7. July 17. Winds and showry, gr. 2. Anno 1660. 18. June 14. May 30.
Wet; hard shower 4 m. gr. 7. 31. Coasting Showrs 11 m. Storms of Hail. gr. 7.
June 2. Stormy Wind and Wet m. p. gr: 5. 6. Storms, Hail, great Rain, windy,
gr. 3. 23. Wet 5 ad 10 p. Wly. gr. 4. 24. Storm of Rain a. m. N E. gr. 4. 25.
Wet o. and p. m. Nly. gr. 4. 26. Wind and wet m. p. Wly. gr. 5. July 3. Wetting
per diem tot. so at Night, N W. gr. 6. 6. High Wind; wet sub ort. S W. gr. 8.
Anno 1661. 15: Feb. 24. Febr. 13. Blustering Winds, gr. 5. 14. Storms of Hail
and Rain. gr. 5. March 3. Storms violent, gr. 3. 4. Frequent Storms. S W. 5.
Windy, Rainy, gr. 4. 6. Hard Rain, violent Storms of Hail at Noon, gr. 4. 8.
Rainy, Storm of Hail, W. gr. 5. 9. Violent storm of Hail, gr. 5. 13. Hard Rain
for 3 Hours, S E. gr. 7. 15. Rain hard, blustering Night, S W. gr. 8. 18. Rain
very much a 2 m. ad 5. S. gr. 9. Anno 1663. 28. Jan. 12. Jan 3. Rain 7. p. 8 p.
S W. Jan. 17. Rain 8 p. etc. most part of Night, S W. gr. 3. 28. Snow a. m. and
Hail, gr. 7. 29. and 30. Some Snow, gr, 8. Anno 1664. 8. Nov. 27. Nov. 9.
Winds, wet later half of day, gr. 9. S. 13. Terrible Tempest of Wind, Rain,
Hail 3 m. S W. gr. 7. 18. Gentle Rain 6 p. etc. gr. 5. S E. 21. Rain apace a 9
m. gr. 3. S. S E. Dec. 3. Flakes of Snow 1 p. Hail 3 p. gr. 2. 5. Gentle Rain 7
p. etc. gr. 4. 7 and 8. Much Wet, gr. 5. 9. Rains sadly 8 p. Much Rain as has
been known, gr. 6. 12. Rain sadly a 5 p. ad Midnight, etc. gr. 7. Lundy Island.
13. Lightning, harmful in a Ship thereby, gr. 8. Anno 1665. 26. July 17. Stat
and 29. Aug. 29. July 5. Showry at Southing, till Noon; High Winds, gr. 10. 6.
Coasting Shower 7 p. Storm 8 p. gr. 9. 8. Shower 3 p. hard 9 p. gr. 7. 9. High
Winds morning, gr. 6. 23. Showring 4 p. gr. 3. 24. Showring 9 m. coasting p. m.
High Wind, gr. 2. 25. Coasting Showrs, gr. 3. 26. Windy, Showrs occ. gr. 4. 29.
Rain before day, so 10 m. gr. 4. 31. High Wind, gr. 5. Aug. 1. High Wind, gr.
5. 3. Very high wind; gr. 5. 5. Wet afternoon, very wet midnight, gr. 4. 6. Wet
8 p. at midnight, gr. 5. 12. High Wind, coasting Showrs, gr. 4. 13. Furious
Tempests of Wind and Rain, gr. 4. 16. Shower 8 p. gr. 3. Sept. 5. Rain 1 p. 6.
p. 8 p. gr. 2. 6. Showring ab 11 m. by fits, ad 5 p. gr. 3. 9. Dashing 4 p. gr.
4. 10. High Winds. wet a. m. m. p. dash 4 p. gr. 4. 17. Stormy rain ante ort.
gr. 8. 18. High Winds gr. 8. Anno 1666. o. Oct. 27. Oct. 7. Showring 2 p. occ.
gr. 8. 10. Dash 11 m. S. 11. Rain most part of Night, gr. 6. 13. Showring occ.
stormy, gr. 5. 14. Rain a med. Noct. gr. 5. 15. Rain a med. noct. ad o. gr. 5.
16. Rain die toto, gr. 5. 17. Winds blow hard all Night, gr. 4. 19, 20. Rain
ante ort. gr. 3. 21. Rain m. p. ante merid. gr. 2. Nov. 3. High wind. 4 High
winds noct. tot. gr. 2. 5. Rain ante luc. gr. 3. 7. Dash 2 p. 7 p. S W. gr. 5.
8. Rain ante luc. gr. 4. 22. Very Tempestuous, gr. 7. 23. Tempest a ort. gr. 7.
24. Tempestuous winds, gr. 8. 25: Much rain ante luc. gr. 8. 29. Hurricane, gr.
9. 30. Storm of Rain, gr' 9. Dec. 5. Much wet, gr. 10. Anno 1667. 28. Jan. 10.
Dec. 8. anni praeccd. (1666.) High winds, gr. 10. P. M. Rain 1 p. 9. Rain ante
luc. High Winds, gr. 10. 12, 14. High Winds, gr' 10. 16. Snow m. and 1 p. gr.
10. 18. Rain and Snow, gr. 10. 20. Frost, Snow p. m. gr. 9. 24. Snow 4 p. 10 p.
gr. 9. 29. Rainy, gr. 7. 30. Snow and rain. Jan. 4. (1667.) High Winds, gr. 4.
5. Snow. A Dash, gr. 4. 6. Snow at rise, gr. 3. 18. Very windy, cold, gr. 8.
19. Rainy, a. m. gr. 9. Iterum, 28. Aug. 6. July 27. Welcome rain m. p. after a
great Drought, gr. 5. 21. Dropping m. p. gr. 5. 29. Rain before day, gr. 4.
Aug. 13. Storm of Wind and wet, gr. 4. 14. Very windy, wetting, gr. 4. 20.
Stormy wind, South 10 p. gr. 9. 21. Showring, stormy wind all nigt, gr. 9. Anno
1669. 12. June 23. June 7. Windy, rainy 9 m. gr. 10. 10. Sudden Showrs, gr. 7.
11. Wind, Shower 11 m. gr. 7. 17. Showrs ante luc. and p. m. gr. 4. July 2.
Wetting a 7 m. ad 10 m. gr. 5. 3. Great Storms of Rain gr. 4. 10. Great
Drought; so in France, gr. 10. Anno 1671. 27. May 12. April 30. Sad rainy m.
Hail, High Wind, gr. 7. May 1. Rain at midnight, gr. 6. 3. Dash, hor 10 p. gr.
5. 4. Dash and Shower 4 p. gr. 4. 5. Dash 9 m. gr. 4. 20, 21. Much rain 21.
Hail, gr. 4. 23. Great dash, gr. 6. 24. Rain coasting, gr. 7. 25. Rain at
night, gr. 7. 27. Shower a. m. and p. m. gr. 9. 30. Rain at o. and 1 p. gr. 10.
Anno 1673. 27. April 23. March 27. Rain 10 m. and p. m. gr. 9. 29. High Wind,
Rain, Hail, gr. 8. 30. Wet m. p. Snow m. blustering, gr. 8. 31. Rain and High
Wind, gr. 8. April 1. Showrs by fits; Hail, gr. 7. 3. High Wind, and Snow, die
tot. gr. 7. 4. Storm of Hail at o. gr. 6. 5. Snows hard m. and o. gr. 6. 8.
Hail at o. and shower 1 p. gr. 5. 14. Showring m. p. gr. 2 May 27. Rain 4 m. and
6 m. gr. o. 29. Coasting showrs p. m. gr. 4. Iterum, 25. Dec. 3. Nov. 19, 20.
Rain m. p. gr. 10. 22. High Winds and Wet, gr. 8. 24. The Tide, gr. 14. gr. 7.
25, 26. Wetting m. p. gr. 6. Dec. 3. Showrs, gr. 3. 14. Wet. m p. gr. 3. 16.
Tempest o. Wind with Rain 10 p. gr. 4. 19. Stormy Wind and Rain 8 p. gr. 6. 20.
Tempestuous Wind 1 m. gr. 3. Anno 1675. 10. October. 27. Oct. 21. Rain m. Shower 4
p. gr. 3. 22. Rain med. noct. and morning, gr. 3. Nov. 3. Rain 6 m. and 5 p.
gr. 4. 4. High Winds and Rain 6 m. gr. 4. 9. Rain 5 p. 8 p. gr. 8. Anno 1677.
23, Sept. 13. Aug. 27. High Winds, often dash, gr. 10. 30. Stormy day, Rain by
fits m. p. gr. 8. 31. High Winds noct. tot. gr. 8. Sept. 4. Soultry day, by all
confession, gr. 5. 9. High Winds a. m. gr. 3. 21. Showring, gr. 4. 23. Rain 3
m. 26. Rain 4 m. gr. 6. 28. Good Shower 5 m. gr. 8. 29. Gusty, some Rain, gr. 9.
30. Showring a. m. gr. 9. Anno 1678. 22. May 4. April 25. Showring ante luc. 5
m. 7 m. gr. 10. Winds rise. 27. Rain all the afternoon, gr. 8. 28. Stormy wind,
gr. 7. 29. Rain, Hail, high Winds, gr. 6. 30. Rain 6 p. wet night, gr. 5. May
1. Rainy and Winds m. p. sad maying, gr. 5. Rain hard ante 11 p. 2. Rain 9 m.
coasting, gr. 4. 16. Blite at Foresthill, gr. 3. 17. Meteors 10 p. gr. 2. 18.
Meteors, gr. 3. 22. Rain in the South 1 p. 3 p. gr. 3. 23. Rainy n. ad 8 m. 10
m. South, gr. 4. 24. Some Rain and Gusts 9 p. gr. 5. 25. Rain a. m. dash p. m.
gr. 3. 26. Rain hard a o. ad 3 p. gr. 4. 27. Blite, gr. 4. 29. Shower, hottish,
Thunder, gr. 3. June 1. Showry, gr. 4. 6. Rainy ab o. ad 6 p. gr. 3. 8. Rain.
9. Dash p. m. 11. Rain, gr. 3. 13. Rain a 3 p. ad 9 p. gr. 2. 28. At Bloise in
France a Church beat down with Lightning; Hail as big as the Fist. Gazet, 313.
Iterum, June 19. 22. June 30. Showrs ante 4 p. gr. 3. July 1. Dash 4 m. gr. 3.
5. Galaxie near the bow of showrs as if it were a palish Fire, gr. 4. 19. Rain
midnight, so 6 m. serious rain from 5 to 9. gr. 10. 20. Showrs; Dashes ante 3
p. Anno 1679. 17. Aug. 15. July 24. Rain ante luc. ad 5. gr. 10. 25. Rain 8 p.
gr. 10. 26. Rain ante ort. showring a. m. gr. 9. 27. Rain a. m. 30. Rain ante 2
p. gr. 9. August 2. High Winds, gr. 6. 3. Dashes of Rain with Thunder, gr. 5.
4. Great Dash, circa 3 p. gr. 5. 6. Rain, Storms of Rain, gr. (...) 27.
Showring, Storm of Rain gr. 5. 28. Rain ante luc. and m. p. High Wind a. m. gr.
5. 29. Rain die tot. Hurricane in several parts of the Empire, blowing down
Houses, and Men up into the Air, etc. vide Gazet, gr. 4. Sep. 2. Rain. 4. Rain.
5. Rain. gr. 7. 6. Rain hard, die toto, gr. 7. 9. Rain ante ort. gr. 7. 13.
High Wind, great Shower 3 p. gr. 8. 15. Rain morn 11 m. and ante 7 p. gr. 9.
Iterum, 7. October. 25 Stat. Oct. 3. Rain 6 p. gr. 10. 4. A dash 11 m. ort. p.
ort. Rain o. gr. 10. 5. Rain hard, gr. 10. 6. Rain ante luc. 8 m. 10 m. 3 p.
gr. 9. 8. Very High Wind, gr. 9. 10. Rainy n. a 2 m. ad 8 m. Tide, gr. 16.
Muslipatan in the East Indies plus part submergee. 1500 drowned. French Gazet,
July 30. 1680. 11. H: Winds, Rain, Great Floods, as within the memory of Man,
at Hockly by Clerkenwell, Lincolnshire, Hereford, Bridgewater, Welshpool,
Gazet, 1451. gr. 9. 12. Rain. 14. Rain. 15. Rain, gr. 8. 16. Rain hard a 5. ad
9. etc. gr. 6. 17. Rain, fere die tot. gr. 5. 18. Rain. 19. Rain 4 p. 21. Rain,
gr. 5. 22. Very High Winds; 3 Tides to day, gr. 3. 19. News of much harm by the
Floods; several-Houses, Coaches, Wagons, and Passengers lost. Domest. Intell.
Number. 31. gr' 5. 22. Tide Ran all one way, and yet the Water rose. 29. High
Winds. 31. Very High Wind, Rain morning, gr. 3. Nov. 2. Rain, gr. 8. 3. Coughs
complained of, gr. 9. Anno 1680. 21. May 27. 6. Shower, with Thunder at 3 m. gr'
o. 7. Dark at 6 p. gr. 10. 8. Rain ante lucem, gr. 9. 12. Rain ante m. and 10
p. 13. Cool Winds, Rain at 8 m. gr. 6. 16. Rain very hard die tot. gr' 8. 18.
Storm of Rain, Thunder and Hail, bigger than Pigeons Eggs, gr. 4. 19. Rain
circa 3 p ad 10. p. gr' 4. 20. Rain ante lucem; Iris. gr. 3.
June 1. High Winds, gr' 3. 4. Rain 4 m. ad 10 m. gr' 4. 7. Coasting showrs,
gr. 6. 10. Great Hail near Doway, gr' 7. 11. High Wind. 12. Dash 4 p. 13. Rain,
gr. 7. Anno 1682. 4. April 13. March 22. Stormy Winds, much Snow. gr. 10. Tides
at London Bridge twice in 12 Hours; flowed 7 hours a 2 p. 23. High Winds noct.
tot' at Harwich very tempestuous, gr' 10. 24. High Winds rise 9 p. gr. 10. 25.
High Winds, cold shower 10 m. gr. 10. 27. Rain ante 8 m. 2 p. gr' 8. 28. High
Winds, Scuds of Rain, gr. 8. 30. Hail 11 m. High Winds, Showrs, gr' 6. Die 28.
Very Tempestuous, at Plymouth Ships suffered greatly in the rigging. April 2.
High Winds, gr' 6. 4. Some Rain at 8 m. gr' 4.
20. Rainy. 21. Showrs, gr' 3. 22. Rain. 23. Showrs, gr' 5. 24. Rain hard, ante
11 p. gr' 5. 25. Wetting most part, grievous Rain 9 p. gr' 7. 26. High Winds
and Showrs, gr 7. 27. Some Rain. 28. Shower m. p. gr' 7. 29. Rain. 30. Rainy a 2
p. ad 11 p. gr' 8. May 1. Rain, High Winds, gr' 9. 2. Rain a occ' ad 11 p. gr'
9. 3. Showring at 2 p. gr' 10. 4. Rainy, gr. 9. About this day in Berkshire
Hurricane tore up Trees by their Roots, etc. Curt. Intelligence, 153.
21. No less Evidence than this will serve to establish our Principle; and I
wish it may. Those who have no need of it, I hope, will not count it a Burden:
Our Marine Evidence will be acceptable too, to our Studious Navigator; to whom,
while I wish well, I reckon I do right to my Country: It concerns him, at
least, to know there are Storms and Tempests, and Shipwreck appearing in all
its dismal Shapes and Denominations of Whirlwinds, Hurricanes, Borasques,
Tornado, Tuffon, whatsoever the Portuguez, or any other of our English have
smarted under. Effects of Nature so intolerable, (to speak with a
fellow-feeling of Humane misery) that a Man would be glad to know (though it
were but the pretended cause) of such Extremity. Remembering that while we speak
of Tuffons, Whirlwinds, we have to do with Miseries incredible, which weigh
more Grains Heavier, than some other, even intolerable accidents. And how
frequent these are at Sea, none knows so well as they that feel them; of which
the 1000 part appears not in public. And therefore what Hiatus soever is found
in our Table, must be imputed to the Rarity, yea, and imperfection of printed
Journals; whose Abstracts most commonly of the true Voyage, give not account of
one Tempest in Twenty; beside, that toward the beginning of the Later Age,
Navigation had not spawned into Sholes, as afterward; the Time allotted by
Divine Providence being not yet come.

22. Now, whereas we have owned beforehand that and perhaps are not so ready
to excite Winds and Storms, as the Mercurial Aspects are. I answer, There lies
a general Exception in case of the Platique Circumstance. Two Planets shall do
that at gr. 10, 12, 14, 16. distance, toward Stress and Violence of Weather,
which at gr. 1. or two, they shall not be able. And the Reason I have hinted
before, is Mechanical: To my surprise then I found, searching into Stormy
Weather, the Distance of several Planets, at, or near 10 degrees. The first
inspection I made was of Feb. 2. 1652. High Winds, says the Diary, lies
distant from the just gr. 10. from 11 Again, Feb. 6. Another such stormy Day,
is indeed gr. 16. distant from: but from, is distant 9. Again, March 2d and 3d
Stormy Days, is gr. 9. distant a Sole, and gr. 11. from. Now, that this should
happen to fall upon a, I confess is casual; The rest is not. For neither thus
do we make this distance an Efficient, properly so called; but a due
disposition of it only. And this justifies the Burden of our Larger Table; and,
as we have said, gives the Astrologer Room, enlarges His Prospect, and finds
him wherewithal to take the Altitudes of Influence at any distance. And this
holds in other excesses of Rain, Hail, Thunder, Heat in droughty times.

23. We have observed already that this consideration gives an account of the
Severity, together with the Duration of a Storm: in Planets of slow Recess or
Duration of a day or two indeed, this may be solved by a Partile Aspect; if a
Week, it may be solved by an allowance of 2 degrees: As we can have Instance
from the Lesser Table, so Anno 1661. there are but (...) quiet days found in
11. Anno 1680. 8 in 9. Rainy. But where 10 or more degrees take place, we can
give account of a Month, or six Weeks, according as an Aspect may happen; or,
as it may march its way by leisure. So Captain Smith tells us from Feb. to
March 18. the West Indies were stormy: Anno 1620. the Aspect happening Feb. 23.
So Stow tells us, Anno 1594. It rained continually June and July; the Aspect
following on July 12. And the same hand again tells us of the Month of
September, Anno 1590. out of order for two contrary qualifications, Thunder and
Snow, the Aspect not showing it self till the beginning of the next Month. Yea,
the same year Mr. Purchase tells us of no Fair VVeather till March; the Aspect
will answer for its share, for happening on Jan. 14. the midst of the Month it
may very well answer for all that Month; as many a year before, viz. 1524.
happening on Febr. 15. it may answer for that also.

24. But it is all one whether the Month be Stated, or Arbitrary; if it gives
an account for 30 Days immediately consequent, It Is the same thing.

25. Nay, it may so happen by accident at the Station or Reg ress of Planets,
the Aspect may be answerable for 60 or 70 Days; at what time we shall discern a
Partile Aspect repeated, like a Verse in Music, whereby the Song extends its
Entertainment to the Ear. So Anno 1654. the Aspect may be questioned as
accessory to all the Weather that appears on the Stage for all Feb. and March,
and An. 1665. from July 5. to Sept. 18. In which Instances, and in so many
more, they do not only stand answerable as I said, but also have wherewithal
to make good what they are charged with, out of their own proper Stock, and
help of Good Friends. This may be seen by our two Tables when united; if we
supply Asterisques of the Larger, with the Notes of the smaller Table. For we
were unwilling in different places to repeat the same Diary: And no wonder can
this be to those who shall observe that even in our Less Table, shall last a
Fortnight, and all that while be found within 2 degrees distance; Nay, in June
1678. almost 3 Weeks. Now, least any man should think two Degrees too much to
be allotted to this Aspect, as Kepler himself does in his Notes on March, An.
1629. Nam Conjunctio ipsa cum ultra gradum dissideant, says he, parum potest
-- nisi, etc. Yet within 7 days after, when he came to give account of Thunder,
day 9. which is Feb. 27. Old Style, he is forced to impute it to two Aspects,
whereof the one is expired, and the other not yet inchoate, Yea Mark, I pray,
to the Neighborhood ( Viciniae) of and, when by his own Calculation then
differs much about 2 Degrees.

26. Nor is there any inconvenience that a long-lived Aspect should prejudice
the many shorter which intervene; for we have everted that Objection, by
admitting what help and Assistance offers its self. Neither does one extinguish
the other, no more than the Sun extinguishes the Light of a Nocturnal Meteor.
It is so far from that, if we speak of Extinguishing, that it helps to kindle
it. One Aspect, like one Soldiers presence, animates the other.

27. Before we leave this, we must observe that although we have met with
Violences before, yet we have not so many Tuffons before; How terrible soever
they be, they are, and have been frequent abroad, Familiar even in the Holy
Story, and St. Paul's Voyage: Thrice we have the Word which the East Countries
have preserved to us, (...): surely (what the Mariner calls a Devil) there is a
Divinity in them. To hurry a great Ship downright in a Dismal Gyre, down into
the deep; a Ship perhaps, whose Neighbor not far off, is in a Calm? Who will
not see a Planet? Yea, more than a Planet; surely God speak not to Job, but he
speaks to us all, in a Whirlwind, and teaches us to admire him in his his
Armies Celestial, whilst we trembling adore the Maker, seeing Winds and Storms
fulfill but his Word.

28. As to our Glutts of Rain and their Consequences, the Floods, they speak
violence enough for a Martial Aspect, and so does Hail, as seldom as it
appears, it denotes an unquiet Constitution, a violence in its very make. Snow
is a pacifique Emblem, it makes no Noise; Hail Rattles and Destroys; Snow, can
but bury us, but Hail may kill. If a great Drop argues a violent Cause, Hail
does the same. This Cause Efficient is amongst the rest; and, if have any
reserve for Cold, rather than, and united are as proper as any other.

29. Let us now proceed then to our Lightning and Thunder, of which occur 21.

And for this part of our Larger Table, you see it Lighten in your Faces from
several Quarters.

Anno 1520. June 15. Great Rain and Thunder, Purch. 1027. gr. 15.

6. Sept. 23.

Basil, Thunder, etc. and so on as in the Table before.

30. Thunder-Months are commonly from April to October, and if you please to
see the Months have their Load; view once again and you shall see, November,
Dec. Febr. March, All but January discharging one piece for the Hour of and.
Nay, if it Thunder once in Febr. upon our pretended Aspect, you have heard
prejudice it self in the Learned Kepler confess the Presence of our Planets.
But it is not the only time, there has bin Thunder heard in February, Anno
1652. Febr. 21. I remember two Claps: at gr. 5. distance. That I may not go so
far as Cape Vincent, where Feb. 17. 1558. it Lightened and Thundered all Night,
and at gr. 14. Distance.

31. We have distinguished, in the Entrance of this Work, of Blite or Blasting,
One proceeding from Cold, the Other from Heat: Want of Rural Opportunities make
us not so ready for the difference. But the Later kind from Heat, may be
referred to Lightning; for the Word seems to come from the German Blits, which
signifies Lightning. And our Instance I find communicated from the Country. But
it is but once, and therefore may belong to some other Aspect.

32. One particular I must speak to observable in the Degrees of distance, and
that seems a strange one: that in this Head of Lightning the Number VII. seems
remarkable, when at such Distance it seems to Lighten more, than at others. (We
take notice of all things that may minister Wonder, or upbraid our Ignorance.)

33. For Comets the more I enquire, I find no Planets forge more than and,
therefore and must in proportion do the like; yet and stand not off, but
sometimes produce, otherwhile prolong the Productions of others. We will
present the Instances of both.

34. Anno 1511. Comet in Egypt and Arabia, voic'd for Terrible, in; from May
3. ad July 3. Hevelius, 6.

Anno 1590. Comet from Febr. 13. ad Mart. 6: Linschoten. Purch. 1675., 2. Jan.
17.

Anno 1664. Comet noted by Hevelius, Dec. 4. but seen in the East Indies 9 days
before, as a Worthy Sea-Captain, then at Sea, has noted in his Diary: gr. 1.
even upon the Partile.

34. As to which Comets I say, that they accord to our Doctrine premised, the
First, that of Anno 1511. preceding, by its Warmth hatched it in April, and it
was in good time disclosed by our Aspect of, about May 5. which also helped,
the Days before, to its Production.

For the 2d. of 1590. from Febr. 13. etc. I say here, that this Comet was
conceived by, preceding all the way, and brought to Light by, etc. Howbeit, our
Aspect stood longer by it than.

To the 3d. I say nothing can be plainer, for the Comet appeared in a Square
to, and in the same parallel, viz. upon the Tropique Circle, the one in 8, the
other in 8, on the Day of its Birth. At least let this be remembered.

35. This for the Production: Now for the Continuation of the Comet.

Anno 1532. a Sept. 23. ad Nov: 10. Comet., 24. October 14. so if began by, you
see it is maintained all October long, by.

Anno 1556. Comet a Nov. 12. ad Jan. 10. Gemma. Now happens o. Nov. 30. so it
is plain our reaches the very First day of the Comets appearing with, and as
plain it is, that it convoys it all along September to its Expiration.

Anno 1556. A Comet March 4. of which Hevelius at large, half as big as the,
in, gr. 8. preceded about Febr. 19. and this Comet is owned to lie in a direct
to, and if to, than to also; to whom in it own its Original. To us Well-Willers
nothing can be plainer, than that Comets are Flammeous, or Lucid Expirations,
which are produced by the Planets. Now, as to the continuation of this Comet to
April 23. where it expired in a Partile. We own, that disclosed it;, and
maintained it to the very last: but yet we cannot but observe, that on the very
day of its vanishing, and were severed a whole Signs distance, whereupon our
Meteor expired. I say, whereupon: though on that very day were all together, by
a second of. which confirms it is the Platique Aspect maintains the Celestial
Production: Such being the Relation of to throughout the Month of April, to the
day of Expiration. And Secondly it shows, that the Influence of often takes
place, if within the confines of 30 degrees, as will be found by Experience,
though hitherto I have been so timorous and modest, to point at but 15. or 16.
degrees at farthest. Furthermore, Anno 1661. Jan. 23. Still. Vet. we will not
pretend that and gave being to this Comet; Nay, we will allow it to, being then
within 10 degrees. But we examine what kept this Phenomenon alive throughout
the Month of February. Is not our Aspect here within 10 degrees at the beginning
of the Month. the Partile happening die 24?

36. But, now I speak of modesty, I fear I shall transgress, if I impudently
demand not the Tayled Comets only, but the New Stars also to be results of our
Conjunction. The New Star in the Breast of Cygnus, supposing that it, began in
November, yea, or December 1660. I do now with some security impute to the of,
which then happened about Nov. 23. This the World, perhaps, may be ready to
believe, when they shall consider with me, what amazing Effects are produced by
the Celestial Bodies in some peculiar parts of the Zodiac. Nor does its large
duration deterr me from that Fancy, supposing it lasted to Anno 1629. as Argol
will have it. For there is difference of Impression on the Agents part, and
difference of retentive disposition in the Starry Heaven, the Patient: Nor must
the Great Hevelius tell me, That the Light of the it self cannot reach to the
Fixed Stars, for the contrary is as certain a Truth, as that the reaches the
Stars of the Microcosme, the Eyes of our Mortal Bodies: Now let us speak to our
Earthquakes.

37. Our First Earthquake which may be pinned upon our Aspect, is that of An.
1538. where in September Month all Italy was troubled for 15. days. Fallopius
apud Fromond: about the midst of the Month begins to come into a Platique, at
12, 11, 10. gr. distance, acknowledging, etc.

Anno 1552. April 20. T. M. in Germany among the Mountains ( Sudetes) Lycosth.
about the 17. of May, 1. our Planet about 11 gr. distance; as and about the
same distance.

Anno 1554 at Lovain, April 20. Gemma Cosm. 2, 23. and about gr. 12. distant,
with. for she also we have heard Fromond confess is a Mover of the Earth,
having got advantage of Archimedes, that great Engineer, viz. a place where she
should stand. -- And before this (though Earthquakes are rare, and Thunders as
the Natives inform us) die Mart. 21. and 22. hor. 4. post mer. T. M. cum mugitu
and quasi clangore, Gemma, Ibid. where and were upon a Partile, and but gr. 5.
distant from, saving still whatsoever Causes Gemma has produced, which indeed
are so manifest, that he who looked into the Ephemerides about the middle of
March, may read it, and save the Labor of consulting the Author.

Anno 1570. at Ferrara, on St. Martins day, Nov. 11. Fromond. about gr. 10.
distance, and nearer.

Anno 1571. Febr. 17. at Kinaston in Hertfordshira, noted by Stow and Thuanus
too, as I remember are set at gr. 3. and at gr. 8.

Anno 1586. April 11. In Ireland Trees and Thickets moved by the River Bair,
Fromond from Ribera. He (who looks again) into the Ephemeris shall read the
reason; yea, though he does not understand the Character; what seems to our
purpose there appears amongst them.

Anno 1632. at Norimberg, Nov. 10. On a misty warm day, distant from gr. 7. the
entire Cause is assigned by Kyriander above dispute, where our Aspect is
allowed its share.

Anno 1637. July, die 1. at Tours in France stormy Weather, T. M. Kyriander
reckons it to the Station of. He might have vouchsafed, Nov. 23. happening on
the Day, and our but Seven days before; from which Term there is nothing noted
in the Diary but great smart Rain, Thunder and Storms of Wind, the Harbingers
of an Earthquake which take up its Quarters either there, or elsewhere, as the
Train fires.

38. So have you a parcel of Earth-movings imputable to our Aspect, nor can any
Scruple rise from hence, that our Planets Concern sometimes are at a Platique
distance, and thereupon seem to have less Interest, seeing we know not but, nay
it begins to appear now, I imagine that a 10, 12. gr. distance, or thereabouts
are requisite to a more potent Influence, than on the Partile. Howbeit, let it
be divided amongst them, and let the Platique be Equal in great Motions, at
least of Air and Earth. Here I should say something to the paleness of the
Solar Body, those Changes which are counted prodigious, and prove the Heavens
Subject to Generation and Corruption, but we are only upon a hot Sent of this
Arcanum; it may be we shall come to the (...). Have we not said something
before also?

39. A Word or two about Currents, as before in the preceding Aspects, some
Experience we have met with in this Quarter, and are willing to present the
Reader.

Anno 1605. June 1. Mighty Current violently brought us among the Mountains of
Ice. Hall's Voyage, Purch. p. 816. -- June 11. Fresh gale made the Seas high by
reason of a Mighty Current, which sets through the Straits. Ib. with, etc.

Anno 1609. June 3. Currents held us, strong out of S W. North Lat. 58. Hudsons
3d Voyage to Nova Zembla. Purch. 582. gr. 12. -- June 11: Current from the
Northward, deceived us 10 Leagues of our account. N. Lat. 51. gr. 10. cum.

Anno 1611. Oct. 10, 11, 12. a Current. Downton's Voyage near Zacotora; cum gr.
8. Purch. p. 278. -- Oct. 22. Current Westward, Ib. gr. 2. Nov. 1. Afternoon we
met with a Current, C. Guarda de Fuy, gr. 3. cum. 5. Current put us short 60
Leagues: Purch. 280. gr. 5. cum and.

An. 1662. Dec. 29. Great Current to the Southward. C. Limbery's Diary, N. Lat'
36. gr. 7. cum.

Anno 1663. Jan. 9. Hindrance by a Current, N. Lat' 28. gr' 1. cum. die 14.
Hindrance by a Current, N. Lat' 21. Id. being near the Zenith. 18. Hindrance by
a Current, gr. 3. cum.

Anno 1665. July 18, 19. Help of a Strong Current, Lat' S. 22. near the
Tropique, gr. 1. Stationary. -- Aug' 11. Great Current to the Southward. Lat'
37. Southward, 12. 13, 15 Currents. -- 17. A Current deceived us by 73 Miles,
Lat' 37. Southward. -- 23. A Current deceived us 109. Miles, since Aug. 18. gr.
2. -- 24. A Current. 25. Current of 18 Miles. -- 26. Current of 34 Miles. 27.
Current set West by North; South Lat' 34. -- Sept. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 Currents.
These are Currrents with a Witness.

40. Mr. Fournier in a particular Chapter concerning those Currents, enquiring
into the Cause, tells us, it is a very hard thing to assign it. And, as others
before him, refers it to the. This we get by discarding Astrolology, and the
Influence of the other V. and yet stand daily in need of them! I do not commend
these Disputants, who when they could not find out an Aetherial Cause for some
wondrous Effects in our visible Heaven, referred them to the Empyreum. But I
confess, I wonder that the Learned thought it bootless to overlook the Visible
part of Heaven, the Planets and their Configurations. Men shall never give an
account of these Great Questions if they deny our Influences, no more than they
can of the Magnet, denying it efflux, the Question is so gravelling. And I hope
Copernican's will not undertake it, suposing the Motion of the Earth could give
account of the Flux and Reflux: Which Mr. Fournier has shown, is not done yet
by Galileo. There is no meddling wtth the Solution of this Phenomenon by such a
Principle. The Currents are not Uniform, nor perpetual, as I am informed by my
knowing Friends; and I am glad on it: Glad of any occasion to make men enquire
into a True, though disgraced Principle; The Motion of a Trough cannot make the
Water boil and swell in the Free Ocean. The answers to all the variety of the
Tide, and the Planets to all the Variety of the Current. -- How comes there a
great Current, Dec. 21. 1662.? I will point you First to, but 7 gr. distance;
to and but 1 gr. distant. I will point to entering upon its Change, her meeting
with the Sun, yea and also. The will be allowed us; especially, if a New. But
why then a Strong Current, Aug. 23. 1665.? Will a Square of do it alone? No,
within 2 degrees. We have noted the Causes in the Diary all along,. -- in the
Zenith, Stationary.

41. And Let me note here some Diversity of the Platique and Partile Aspect,
here it may be the Later conduces most forcible to this Effect, when as the
former may contribute to the Change of the Air; I mean those which are
accompanied with Turbulency; because such State of Air is more universal and
unconfined, then a Current seems to be. -- The one is tied to a certain
Elevation, the other may reach from one Pole unto the other. But I define
nothing.

42. We are to treat next of Floods, whose Praediction, if it may be reached,
is a matter of moment to the Public: He that makes inquest into the Cause,
may consider, that they do not all arise on the same Spring; some are
Subitaneous, the Product of 24 Hours (or a less matter) others rise by degrees,
and Steal upon the Land they invade, by additional Portions: And some I may
call mixed, such, whose appearance is sudden, and yet were gradual in their
production: I mean those which upon a sudden Thaw of much Snow successively
fallen on the Days precedent, render a large quantity at once in Water. In this
case the Enquirer is not to consider the precise day of the Overflow, but to
look back some Weeks, more or less, that he may, if he can determine, or at
least take in the Time in which it fell. Beside that some Floods are caused
(they say) in maritime Countries by the Swelling of the Sea, and by tempestuous
Winds, driving the rarefied Brine over its Banks. -- Such were those of Oct.
14. 1579. etc.

-- Surely in that of 1608. there are no gluts of Rain mentioned by Cambden: --
And our Wonder may be confirmed when as we shall meet with Floods, which are
said to have happened without any apparent Cause; as if Overflows were to be
distinguished, some whereof had, some again had no Cause apparent. But the
distinction must on no hand pass; for having made some Diligent search into all
that I could raed of, 100. in number; I found that they all admirably agree
with the same Celestial Cause, with very little variety of the Species, from
whence I am ascertained there is seldom an apparent Flood without an apparent
Rain somewhere, though not a drop falls perhaps in our Division; for who knows
not there are Topical Rains as well as Winds, which will descend Secundo
Flumine, and betray the Injury which was first done in a distant place.

43. I have met with Floods accompanying Earthquakes, and subterraneous Streams
issuing from an Hiatus of a convulsive Mountain: But I am not obliged to speak
to those German or Indian Rarities. When Seas may be sucked up in a
Subterranean, as well as an Aerial Spout; or when a River may be expelled his
Channel by the Ruin of a Neighbor Mountain we will allow no Rain in the case;
For howbeit, that Cause which make an Earthquake, we have found is apt to make
a Storm, where the place and the Clime is capable, for the most part: Yet the
more ordinary Floods, whether of the Sea, or of the River, especially the
River, is never produced without its Proportion of Rain, though the Sea perhaps
may rise and even visit its interior Shore when no Land-flouds may increase
it: Mariners say (and truly) that it swells against every Storm, and therefore
all the Time throughout the Tempest: Yea, the Thames does not seldom (I
believe) show us such exuberant Tides, where the fall of Moisture has bin
sparing, or none at all; You will say at the New, or at the Full. Right, These
Aspects raise the Waters, by impregnation; but not only these, but other
Aspects also with them, or without them, (since Floods do not always happen at
those more frequent Lunar Revolutions) have a like Influence with the and (as
we have said already of) which does ferment, rarifie, and raise the Waters to
an Exundancy. Notwithstanding most commonly there is some fall of Rain, and
more perhaps than comes under notice at, or about this Ebullition of the Sea or
River; I mean those Rivers which by participation from the Ocean partake of
Flux and Reflux; One of these Causes is our present Aspect; for its quantity of
Rain you have heard; and for its tumefying Influence, you may think fit to
grant it, because tumefaction is inseparable from a troubled Sea, whether by
dry winds or Moist, it is all a case.

44. Now, whereas Eichstad has given away this Influence from our Present
Aspect to. I have made the more careful search, and the result is, according to
the Ancient Astrologers, that have the Preeminence; and well they may, in all
those Floods especially, which grow upon us by degrees, the Continuance of our
Planets Aspected, being of a greater date than the other, will be more
responsible to the Gradual Increase of the Waters.

45. That we may put our Hand toward the deciding of this little Controversy,
we will first produce our Testimony for, and we confess readily that are
Sea-swelling Aspects, so far, that Floods, as Eichstad has begun, ought to be
reckoned amongst their Influence. -- For, First we have the Memorable Flood --

1. Anno 1530. October. 8. At Holland, yea, and Rome also on the same day,
Mizaldus and others; gr. 9. gr. 7. distant.

2. Anno 1532. In November: In Holland again, Mizaldus, Die 15. gr. 1.

3. Anno 1547. August 12. Cataracts and Floods in Tustany; Thuanus, gr. 1:

4. Anno 1552. Jan. 12. In Holland Inundation incredible, Stadius, Tab. Gemma;
gr. 4. gr. 1.

5. Anno 1571. Feb. 5. Inundation at Lovain, Gemma; gr. o.

6. Anno 1594. Sept. Mense, at Cambridge, Ware, etc. High Waters, gr. 6. Stow.

7. Anno 1643. Decemb' 3. In Thuringia, gr' 4. Kyriander.

8. Anno 1658. August 22. At Feversham High Tides, Childres, gr' 2.

9. Anno 1660. Nov' 11. Thames overflows Westminster, Kingstreet; Transact' gr'
2.

46. Enough to denominate this Conjunction for a Watery Aspect; but not to award
it from. For here First we meet with --

1. Anno 1547. Wet and floating Months in Tuscany, obliging aversed Parties to
a Truce. Appetente Hyeme; Thuanus, is in being, per Octobr. tot. and max. part.
Novembr. not without some while mixed with it:

2. Anno 1565. Febr. 2. At Lovain, gr. 6. did. oppos.

3. Anno 1570. October. 5. England. Several Travelers lost by the Waters, etc.
Stow, gr. 5. dist'.

4. Anno eod' November. 1. In Holland, Calvis. A Foot higher than that of 1530.

5. Anno 1571. In Flanders, ab Aug' 15. ad 23. irreparabili Clade, Gemma; gr'
8. did. die 19.

6. Anno 1573. July princ. In Holland, etc. Gemma; gr' 4. gr' 11.

7. Anno 1579. Octob' 14. Memorable swelling of the Sea, vide Stow; gr' 7. gr'
1.

8. Anno 1594. June and July, Rain and Floods; Stow, gr' 2. July 15.

9. Anno 1596. The whole Summer Floods, Howes. In the midst of June (for its
part) gr' 3.

10. Anno 1602. Octob' 17. Streights of Malaca, great Spouts, etc. Hakl. gr' o.

11. Anno 1609. Dec' 4. In Germany, Nives plurimae viae, inexplicabiles, No
discerning of the Rodes, so real Floods, though not in its Formalities: Kepler
apud Eichstad; gr' o.

12. Anno 1623. Febr' 12. and 18. Danow overflows: Kepl. gr' 8. Again, Mart.
17. Danub' gr' o.

13. Anno 1661. Febr' 21. In Kent High Waters, gr' 2.

14. Anno 1666. Octobr' 14. and 16. Rain and Floods, gr' 5.

15. Anno 1678. June 21. Middlesex, sudden Cataracts turned Highways into
Seas, and Floated all Cellarage in the City; cum Pleiad. Lastly, Anno 1682.
Much Rain, Hail and Floods throughout England, April, and sequent.,.

47. We have not leave to say here All that is to be said in a Tractate of
Floods, a Worthy Topique: The Truth, I hope, may be picked out from the
scattered parts of this discourse. At present we are for our Clients the
Aspects of. And the First we see, that of, is the Greatest over Floods; though
oft-times they operate in sight one of another: as First, in that All-wasting
Deluge of Holland, Anno 1570. beside, Anno 1573. and elsewhere.

48. Howbeit, the precedence of our Aspect is confirmed from hence, that we
find not the only, but the of to call for a Flood, as on June 13. Anno 1529. A
Flood at Basil so memorable, that it was engraven on a Brass Monument, as
Lycostenes witnesses. Add that of March 29. 1606. where Shipwreck was
universal, and the Seas over-topp'd the Land, as Stow tells us. That at Prague
and Auspurg in July, mentioned in Norimberg Diary. A Third in Dresden, Anno
1642. Sept. 23. A Fourth in Oxfordshire, Anno 1649. Jan. 17. A Fifth, 1645.
whereas at an we more rarely meet with Flood, Not that they are of a dry
Influence, but because they are more Flitting and inconstant, while and abide
by their Proposition.

90. And, what shall I say? Must I pass the Tide observed in our Thames, Nov.
23. Anno 1673. and an Higher than that, October, Anno 1679. in our tedious
Observations? Nay, what indeed to that of Oct. 22. when the Tide ran all upon
the Ebb, and yet the Water rose? What there may be of Floods in the One, or of
Currents of the other, Let the Reader consider.

50. The Ancient Astrologers have talked to this purpose long before. Alkindus,
Alhamazar, etc. The First, if a Third Planet (says he) comes into. Fit quasi
diluviam apud Escuid. 2, 7. The other tells us, that in the Mamareth of above,
there happen Excessive Rains, be it in what sign soever: Which I look upon no
sham from the Arab, though I cannot sufficiently wonder why he acknowledges so
little Wet, except in One Sign, when vice versa, is elevated above; there is
some mystery in it that I reach not; for it is contrary to our Northern
Experience. But the Astrologer goes further, and demonstrates this Influence
from the Contrariety of their Domicils, according to the Doctrine of Ptolemy,
Tetrab. 1. 20. Hence, and with, and with, are peculiar Masters of Apertio
Portarum. Because possesses the Signs and, which are the Signs confronting the
Martial Houses of and. -- In like manner, in his Houses and oppose and, which
are 's Propriety. Lastly, in and oppose, whose House it is plain is or.

51. Not out of any Humor of contradicting Antiquity, whose defense I
endeavor where I may, I must needs own some dissatisfaction. For I ask any man
who is not passionate, (and why Truth shall not be the Interest of us all, I
know not.) Whether a of is not as Efficacious as a. I speak of Rain, especially
if the applys to them. Andwhether a is not as prone to Wind almost as a, for
they understand the Port-opening to Winds, as well as Rain; to say nothing of
Heat, yea, of Cold also, which last, though methinks it sounds not so well,
has obtained Yea, but I ask again, whether a, or shall be discarded from an
Apertio Portarum, to Rain or Hail, etc. or our Neighbor which we shall find to
be a Tearing Aspect; Nay we see always ready to open the Cataracts of Heaven,
and the Great Deep. Lastly, what we think of and, which is oft-time a
drenching, and helps to make Floods, if that be Opening, as old Japhar I see
has taught, quoted by our Countryman, Tract' 2. dist' 4. Cap. 4. to say no
more.

52. I may have leave therefore to offer to consideration whether or no this
Singular Promptness and Property of these Configurations to Rain and Wind, in
and, etc. The proclivity to Clouds and Moisture, in and. Winds and Storms in
the Aspects of may not be founded on other Bases in Nature, rather than the
Opposite distances of their Houses? Such are the differences of their Globe, or
their Ponderosity, as they call it, and the difference of their Qualities and
Motions, the Disparity of their Height, Elevation: Distances from the Earth,
with their several distances from the Sun, from the Fixed Stars; -- Whether
some or all of these do not contribute Naturally, and without subornation, to a
diverse Effect? Seeing it is certain that, First, the great disposal of these in
such diversity of Site and Order, was an Act of the Divine Wisdom, which it may
be is not yet di scovered thoroughly, and possibly never will be, except by such
kind of Contemplation. I remember the attentive Kepler observed, in May, An.
1622. That among the VII. in that Month, there was Ordo idem; sub Zodiaco qui
altitudinum in Sphaeris, and he adds, Nec sine auctario effectu; Ascribing the
notable Effects of a Thundering Month to that rare accident. And no question our
present Aspect of is more potent than, wherefore? But because of their
different Natures, yea, and Situations, is warmer, and also nearer than. Nearer
to us is, and nearer to one another. So in, the vicinity of conduces to Winds,
as the Vicinity of the to Warmth, Moisture, etc. and the Nature of contributeth
to the same Effect. Vicinity to us? Yea, and Vicinity to the Sun: On which
account the Lunar, or with is so considerable, as has bin noted before.

53. Yea, and -- -- the Superior Aspect, what Effects they have, may be from
the difference of their Globes and Fabrics, (for so our Tables make us
believe) the Vicinity to one another, and their Vicinity to the Fixed too, for
all I know, to speak doubtingly in a point of which I am sure. For what is it
else that the Ancients above quoted do sollicitously bid us mark the
Eccentricity of the Epicycle of, the being in Perigaeo, etc. Except Experience
taught them this Truth, which I now assert.

54. What then? Would I have Apertio Portarum to be routed? By no means. -- The
Terms are significant, and smell of Art worthy to be retained. They savor of
the Eastern Learning. Or, if you will, the Mosaic Astrology, But I desire
their Enlargement to other Configurations: I would not have the Word denied,
where the thing appears. It Is Special in. It holds in, and it shall not be
denied to, which being all of contrary Houses, I must needs say is a happy
congruity, or co-incidence but brings no Demonstration, no more than the
Congruities which the Copernican System boasts of, can unhinge the Earth, and
set it a running.

55. We close up all with the Contemplation of the Afflictive Influence of this
Aspect on the State of our Bodies. I am sorry for it, we find Feverish, and
other Distempers Epidemical heartned on by this Aspect, Anno 1667. Aug. 7. A
Sickly time noted. Anno 1679. August 2. Pestilent time abroad in Germany. Anno
1680. August 1679. August 27. Pestilential in Germany, as Prague, etc. And
though we acknowledge other more malefique Aspects, yet we cannot but observe
that even this has its malignanty. -- I cannot take delight to empale each
Page of this Discourse with a Black mourning Lig, (Mortal that I am) much less
delight I to seem to exclude a destroying Angel from the wasting Malady of
Pestilence: Only I think God has given us leave (saving to himself the Awe
that is due to a Revenging God) to consider what Second Causes he is pleased to
use in the pouring out of his Fury on us. And this I shall endeavor to do by
Linking the Year, yea the Month of the Year to the time of the Aspect
Influence, though in some more, in others less: acknowledging withal that in
some extreme Pestilences these Aspects are not found; as in those of 1593.
1625. but not those of 1603 and 1665. Note, Thirdly, that when a happens twice
or thrice in one year, the Greater is the Probability of some Mal-Influence;
though not always, (God be thanked) raging. Lastly, that whatsoever is by these
Presents imputed to, does at no hand acquit (if within Prospect).

56. Well then, Anno 1500. to begin so high, we meet with Pestilence abroad,
nay at home, in the beginning of the year: Though it concerns the Physician to
observe even Foreign Pestilences, because of the Consent of the parts of the
Universe, too apparent to be denied here; as well as in other Cases. May 29.
in, and this Pestilence of 30000 slaughtered, began before May, as may be
observed from our Chronicle; the King going then into Flanders to avoid it.

Anno 1506. Sweating Sickness 2d time, Stow, Oct 9. 29.

Anno 1511. Pestilence, Fracastor apud Dimerbr May 5. 6.

Anno 1513. March 26. 29. August 6. 20. (A double Aspect) The Pestilence at
London, Stow.

Anno 1515. In October 21. Morbus Epidemicus, Paradin upud Gam. 2, 32.

Anno 1517. Sept. 9. 5. Sweating Sickness from Lammas to Michaelmas, Stow.

Anno 1522. Pestilence at Rome, Kircher: A Plague Ubi Aves nidos reliquerunt;
Gemma 249. (which notes the Spring time, the time of the Aspect.

Anno 1528. Sweating Sickness, Aug. 24. 24. The Time appears by the adjournment
of Michaelmas Term.

Anno 1541. June 19. 27. Pestilence at Constantinople, Kircher.

Anno 1543. Pestilence at London, Stow, in May, in June. Hot in August, or
September it was. It began, probably, in May or June.

Anno 1549. Morbus in Pannonia, quo Serpents in H. corpore nascebantur Gemma
1, 100. Sept. 10. 9.

Anno 1551. Aug. 3. 27. Sweating Sickness at London, and 8 Dec. 23. The Aspect
repeated.

Anno 1558. May 8. 7. Later end of April, etc. Mortality among C. Towersons
Men, on the Coast of Guiny, Hakl. Yea at Astracan in Russia, a colder Climate,
Pestilence of 100000. Hakl. in Jenkins Voyage. Note, Aspect repeated in Sept.
9. And in City and Country here in England, Quartan Agues so rise that there
wanted Laborers for Harvest, Stow.

Anno 1564. Sept. 30. 13. Pestilence, Thuanus.

Anno 1577. July 8. 10. atque iterum Nov. 30. 10. Epidemical Distempers in
Spain. (Tavardilla) Italy, Germany, etc. Linschoten.

Anno 1581. Sept. 10. 12. Novus Morbus. Lanenburgensis, Dimerbrock 22.

Anno 1584. May 20. 7. Pestis furiosa, Quercetan, apud Dimerbr.

Anno 1586. April 7. 20. at St. Domingo in Febr. Calenture and Pestilential
Fever.

Anno 1588. Febr. 21. 1. at Java, on this very day Febr. 21. Complaint of
Sickness from the Heat of the place, Cavendish.

Anno 1592. Aug. 21. o. Pestilence at London, Michaelmass Term kept at
Hertford, Crast. Anim. Stow.

Anno 1594. July 12. 16. The Pestilence which Raged Anno praced rasted this
year also, Bell's Account of the Bills of Mortality.

Anno 1602. October. 17. 15. Pestilence in Holland and Zealand.

Anno 1603. Febr. 12. 16. and Aug. 4. 20. Pestilence about Land. Bp. Andrews
Sermon before the King, Aug. 20. the Aspect doubled.

Anno 1607. May 10. 18. In princip. Iunii, says the Journal, Gusts, Rain,
Calm, Sickness made us return Northward. Yea, London, April 30. had (though the
Total was under 50.) 14. Parishes infected. Bells account.

Anno 1609. June 26. 2. and again Dec. 3. 15. Parishes infected on June 25. Ten
and Twelve even on December 3. Bell's Account.

Anno 1613. Sept. 13. 18. Pestis Lausannae. Hildanus apud Dimerbr.

Anno 1622. Oct. 4. 19. Pestilence at Amsterdam. C. Grant.

Anno 1624. Aug. 23. 5. Sickly year, Grant.

Anno 1626. July 12. 20. at Amsterdam, Grant; Yea Kepler tells us of the
Plague at Lintz in the Siege time. Mense Augusts,.

Anno 1628. Sept. 2. 5: at Amsterdam, Grant.

Anno 1630. Flux, Summer Pestilence at London. This belongs to and, the time of
whose Aspect was the Greatest Total, Ball's Acc.

Anno 1632. Nov. 25. 3. Sickly, London; Grant.

Anno 1635. Aug. 5. 24. Pestis in Germ. and Belgio, Gravissima Dimerbr. 1, 3.

Anno 1637. 9. June 23. Though the Years precedent were very Pestilential, yet
this year was not free. Verily June 29. brought in the Highest Total, viz. 130.
Plague also at Constantinople and Prague.

Anno 1641. April 12. 18. and June 10. 25. and Dec. 6. 21. In April 12.
Parishes infected, 3. June 10. 13. and December 2. 17.

Anno 1643. Octob' 6. at London; at this time of October was the Bill highest,
viz. the First and Last Week which ended October. 26. Account.

Anno 1645. October. 12. 20. London. Where September 24. was the highest Total,
viz. 175. Parishes infected 43.

Anno 1647. Aug. 10. 11. and Nov. 10 15. at London, where August 12. brought
209. and Nov. 2. 120.

Anno 1648. May 25. 16. Plague in Africa, and Valentia in Spain. Kircher.

Anno 1652. Febr. 26. 11. Plague at Cracow; and sickly time in England, C.
Grant. To give some account of this, Note that in September this Year, was
Stationary; and in October but gr. 5 distant, in.

Anno 1654. Jan. 30. 7. March 23. 15. October 5. 23. at Copenhage and our
London Sickly, Grant The Aspect repeated.

Anno 1656. Aug. 24. 8. Great Pestilence at Naples, Kircher.

Anno 1658. July 13. 23. and October 28. 28. Sickly time Grant.

Anno 1665. Cannot be yet forgotten. Our Aspect was repeated. July 17. 2. and,
strait again Aug. 30. o. On July 17. the Bill brought 1000. and August 29. 6000.

All which, if I mistake not, helps to conclude the Great Question, de Origin
Pestis; and teaches us that it is from Heaven. The Diligent Physician at
Nimeguen scruples to allow an Aspect of and and; but we are so unreasonable as
to challenge more than that Aspect, though more Notorious than others. And we
desire this our Table may be examined as to those particulars: First, Do not
the Aspects agree with the year? (2.) Does it not keep touch too often with the
Revolutions immediately Succedent? As in 1543. 1549. 1551. 1584. 1586. 1588.
etc. (3.) Does it not agree to the Month? Nay (4.) sometimes to the Height of
the Pestilential Fury? See 1637. 1641. 1643. etc. (5.) Are not the Winter
Months infected also when the Aspect comes in December or January, etc.? Next,
are not those years molested where the Aspect returns? Again, is it not so all
the World over? No man can doubt that has seen 1665. go over his Head, but
that this Aspect, with all its Circumstances, was a sore Knot in that Celestial
Whip; which here we are not engaged to consider.

57. Yea, from hence we may discern, if any will please to use my Spectacles,
what makes the Autumn so Sickly: What blows up the Coal for New diseases to
sparkle among us. It has bin hitherto said, It Is eating too much Fruit: But
it is one thing to say, too much Fruit eaten may cause a Quartan Ague, etc. in
this or that Person; and another to say, when an Epidemic Distemper reigus, Too
much Fruit is the Cause! It Is the Season, not the Fruit of the Season is the
cause. For how much Fruit does the Ancient Person eat? Or the Labourer at
Harvest! I appeal to the very Practice of the Skilful Physician, whether he
find one in Ten of his Masculine aged Patients In a Sickly time, that can
ascribe his Malady to Fruit immoderately eaten? For how haps it that Men eat
more Fruit One year than another. The more Fruit there is, the more is eaten,
True, but are all Fruitful years Sickly? We do not find it so, nor yet all
Sickly Seasons Fruitful; Hippoirates teaches no such thing. He talks of the
Equinoxes, and the State of the Air. Learned Men are loath to impute: it to the
Season, because they Ken not the Mystery why the Season it self is Malignant?
When Hippocrates tells us, All unseasonable Weather is such. Our Table will
show in some part considerably what are all they which happen, August,
September and October? Do not three parts of them fall out in those Months? And
are not those Months themselves famous for Dangers upon a Celestial account?
The Physician is not to Learn what the Aequinoctial means; and do not every one
of these Harvest Aspects happen in Harvest Signs, or or beginning of? Consult
and consider, they do, and must do so. The same Causes make a Sickly Autumn,
which make a Sickly Spring also, as the very Table will inform. It Is not with
us as in Jamaica, and other places, where Fruit hangs on the Tree all the year
long; Fruit is a Rarity at sometimes of the Year, when a Quartan Ague, or the
Small Poches reigning or a Pestilent Fever is not.

CHAP. VIII..
Conjunction of Mars and Mercury.
1. Parity of Reason. 2. Different Aspects may partake of the same Character.
4. The Aspect cannot be considerd apart from,, which makes our Diary prolix,
but is hoped, not nauseous. 5. The Humor of the Aspect not found, but by an
enlarged Diary. 6. Astrologer without a laxe Contemplation of an Aspect will be
put to his shifts, as Kepler. No such thing as Anticipation; the Art betrayed
by it. 7. Natural Effects are not Orphans. 8. Further justification of our
prolix Diaries. 9, 10. Communication of Planets at gr. 10. distance, to say no
more. 11. Character. 12, 13. a sign of Dryth in the Ancients Opinion; some
tokens of that Dryth. Locusts a Sign of Dryth. 14, 15. The Aspect admits of
Cold and Frost also. 16. Which made the Ancients perhaps define to be of a
doubtful Tempur. 17, 18. In a state of Destitution. Light or Heat, which
conquers not Cold, actuates it. 19. So our North wind ^s actuated by the Rays
of our Northern Asterisms. 10. The Rains and fits of Rain. 21. The Winds 22.
Harmful and pernicious. 23. Thunders reckoned. 24. Not all Comets as Cardan
will have it, belong to. All the Planets contribute. Hevelius as shy as he is,
his consont thereto. 26, 27. Account of our Aspect's interest in some Comets.
28. Sorer Hail in Germany, then in England. 26, 29. Account of some Earthquakes
where our Aspect is concerned. 30. Great Fishes stranded note some disturbance
of Nature. 31. Sholes of Fish argue the like. 32. Duration of Earthquakes may
be accounted for. 33. Currents here also under this Aspect. 34. Some shifting
of Tides. 35. The late Dr. Childreys opinion curious. 36. Some Reasons for our
own and our Aspects concern. 37, 38. Conclusion with our Maculae and Malignancy
of our Aspect. 39. The Diary. 40. The reason of sudden and surprising Showrs by
fits. 41. The Gentle Dissenter posed.
1. WE have raised the Readers expectations of this Aspect; by showing
beforehand what it can do in no mean instance. The Truth is, the Power of this
Aspect follows the Premises. For if with have acted, and su^^ably have
imitated; them in case (...) have acted, and may imitate.

2. From different Aspects a different Character must not always be expeced.
Nature has several Causes which produced the same Effect: and Nature has
diverse Causes which produce the same Effects. The Fields were green, the
Flowers blow the Lark and the Trush sung their Voluntaries, says Keplers Ao
1621: When? even in January. So that as, Nature can make a Spring when the Sun
is an (...) make a Spring when the Sun is in, I mean Celestial Nature, not
Occur Causes, where our Mathematicician above thinks fit to shelters: (...) etc.

3. Now, though may have somewhat peculiar, as well as Common, yet it would be
improper for us to search that out, when as yet the Common Influence is not
granted us. We must show this first, and then if ought appears of Curiosity, it
will be perhaps welcome.

4. I had a devise once of considering our Aspect of, separate (forsooth!)
from,, but I was forced to abandon it, because they rarely happen so, as also
because a Potent Aspect's Influence may for certain be distinguished, even when
mixed with Aspects of no small Energy. Here the equal Reader will not be
offended, if he meet with the same Instance a new repeated, no more then where
a Miner shall take up a piece of the same Ore to search out several Veins of
Metal: So that if our Diaries be Prolix, upon a repeated Aspect, they may, I
hope, not easily be censured, where even upon a Second Scrutiny, which we
profess to have made, nothing can be spared. Add, that it is neither ignoble
nor unpleasant to be able to ascribe a durable Constitution, or State of Air,
to an Equi-durable mover.

5. Aspects of, as we have seen in the precedent of, are either Single or
redoubled. Single, may be in vogue, according as I am taught to reckon, about
14 days, or sometimes more, as they are loath to depart. But when by the
Retrograde Course of, it happens to be reinforced, it redoubles the Term of
Time, and reaches to a Month or more. So I find in Keplers Ephemeris, (...)
1624. where our Planets being met, June 2. separate to the distance of 10 gr.
and then meet a Second time, so the Sum comprised arise to days 39. Yea,
reckoning 10 degrees before and after, to 50 Days: A time wherein we may view
the complexion of the Planets. -- Whereas therefore I had once a Fancy for
brevities sake, (alas!) to enlarge our Observation but to gr. 5 distance,
supposing, to speak Truth, the Humor of the Aspect, I was taught to double my
Files, as I did in, that I might here also comprehend the entire Influence. So
for example in the following Table, the Aspect holds from October 15. ad Nov.
24. Ao 1658.

6. This ministers occasion of justifying our Table, and its Dimensions, beyond
the Partile micety; and I may instance from Kepler himself, and the hard shifts
he was reduced to, Ao 1628. where happening on his Aug. 10. Still N. He
acknowledges only, that the 8th and 9th days partain to it, which brought Rain
between them. Now, first take notice that this is the Month wherein he
acknowledges our Planets to be very near One the Other all the Month long (
Martem Mercurius per totum (...) antecedit) whereupon, say I, it Rained and
Hailed on the ^^ th Day; Lightened and Stormed, die 17, 18. -- Kepler imputing
the Lightning to Anticipation; and the Hail to no Cause at all. Die 17, 18.
Credidissem in Jovis qui sequitur, nisi Effectus subinde anticiparent. But, by
the leave of the Ancients, there is no such thing as ^^icipation in Nature, and
therefore not in the true Astrology: and Excessus sine causa Caelesti, gives
too great advantage to the Adversary, and betrays the Art by the Artists
confession.

7. But this is not all, since the good Man in the precedent Month under the
Wings of our present Aspect, is driven shamefully to acknowledge the State of
the Air for almost a Weeks time to be an Orphan Effect, without any Father
scarce to answer for it. The New Aspects he puts up, it is true, for the
Continual Rain, July 28. 29. his Semisextiles joined with apoor Sextile; But he
refers all at length to the Plethory of the Earths moving, and a Fancy of his
own, that his New Aspects wrought (forsooth) at distance; as the fight of a
Whip ('it is his own Simile) makes a pampered Jadero mend his pace: a Shadow of
Reason! When Nature is a Slugg, and does nothing at the sight of a Whip, she
will not stir, unless Auriga of some other bodies Lash make her smart.

8. Thus in our Home Diary, Ao 1669. we find in Congress, Aug. 20. I desire to
know whether were not in that Tumult, which happened 7. yea 9 days after, Aug.
27. and 29. the Diary calls it Terrible Lightning. Next, remove we backward to
day 7, 8, 9. where Lightning, as mentioned before; nay, on Day 12. Dreadful
Lightning. Two Dreadful Thunders in one Month, Now they are past, Fright us
not. But if we shall consult the Ephemeris, and find the same Aspects of the
same Planets repeated, One on the 14th as well as on the 20th, we may probably
own in the Riots. In the later was gr. 7. distant; and in the former, (least he
should be excluded) but gr. 2. Neither then, according to vulgar account was
any of those great Aspects, thereabouts. For was at nearest 5 degrees distant
in the later, in the former the distance was gr. 10.

9. At two degrees, some will say, it may be, but at 7 it cannot. I answer: Two
degrees distance is far from Partile. But, when this Month shall give us
Instance of Two degrees, and Four, and Five, and Six, and Seven; who can deny
but that our Aspect at these distances causes them? ( i. e.) Helps to make
them; For that is all we labor after. For an Aspect as vulgarly confined, is
Shackled, and excludes all consideration of sensible approach or Vicinity, so
as to make the distance of 2 or 3 degrees as much, as 2 or 300. Contrary, say
I, to all reason. For though the Gentral Conjunction be the Strongest; a
Corporeal Conjunction reaches, (says Cardan truly) as far as the aggregate of
their Semidiameters, at least, (in Ptol.) Yea, and separate also, say I, they
are not presently estranged; They have Rays and Proportions of Strength; They
are linked One to the Other, as we see in wrestling, when their Bodies keep off.

10. United Strength is more powerful, we have answered it already, Not every
kind of Union, for every design whatsoever. A File of Soldiers is stronger than
a Company of Straglers. But a Rank of Military men are stronger to attaque a
Fortress. Beside the Unity of the Line, there must be Unity of Proportion: Two
Planets in Lineal Conjunction hear no proportion to the Heavens, or to the
Atmosphere. Two Wings will not maintain a Bird in Flight, unless proportionate
to the Bulk. Harmony it self is nothing but Unity of Proportion; and that
reaches to Octave. Who knows then but 10 or 12. or 14. may be proportion for
Physical Effects; but we have spoke to this already.

11. Well, what can do more then as Regiomontanus has said cause Heat, Dryth,
or Winds and Rain, in their respective Signs? Cardan in the following Age has
little more to say; He adds, that it causes ventos, cum impetui, vehement
Winds; for, both the Planets, says he, are impetuous. In Ptol. 11. 62. Our
present Age has Furbush'd this, with an addiction of Rain, Snow, Hail, and
Thunder; Maginus and Eichstad. To whom Kyriander perfectly accords, for Rain,
Lightning, etc. And for Winds, he says, the Aspect is held the most turbulent
and unquietest of them all Vnruhigthen and Vngestumesten gehalten: (Rough
Words, and in their very pronunciation Tempestuous.)

12. All these Specialties, if they must be considered, our Tables will do them
right. The Ancients are willing to mention Dayth, which I remember is an
Ingredient into the very Definition of, and therefore must be Universal to
every Mercurial Aspect. Mars and is made a Moister; and I think it is vain to
contradict: They may differ as our Fruit does, our Apple or Grape, One Species
is more Liberal in her Juicy pressure, than the other. Verily there are many
Signs of Dryth; First, in the Winds, for which is famous. Next, in the very
moisture it self; which is not so profuse as in, but it many times brings Rains
by fits, more now, than at another time? Yea, by Stealth as I may say,
sprinkling only a little after set, or between that and Midnight. The Meteors
observed in the Night, and its share in Comets, whence Cardan, you heard, makes
Mars and Mercury, aspected or not, to be the Sire and For-runner of all Comets.
Fog seems to be a perpetual Effect, or attendent of, if not rather an attendant
in Ordinary to, with whomsoever configurate. To this we must add the East Wind,
which we know accompanies Fog; though this Wind also has its Fits, easily
shifting and changing to another point. Lastly, which must not be dissembled,
and left for the Adversary to make use of, Cold and Frost, intense and pungent;
for so we find it in a special manner in our Tables for sundry Weeks in several
Years, sometimes on the precise day of the Aspect; so that I am a little
reconciled to Cornelius-Gemma, who I thought once spoke what came next, when he
imputed a Hard Frost to an Aspect of.

13. But though the Diary put this cooling Card in my hand, since I scorn to
play foul, I am engaged to speak to it. First then, consulting my Eschild, I
find the Premises to be no great matter of News: For the Arab speaks not only
of Wet, but of Drought; Greater Drought than wet, pointed in certain Signs: by
the same token that they have a touch at Fog and more than a touch (which we
have seen in) of Infirmities and Sickness incident to Man. The same they repeat
in the Elevation of, above, Infirmities, and expressly not only Fevers, but
Coughs; A point to be regarded, as I have hinted before. By the same token
again that they forget not Dearth, which in their hotter Countries must proceed
from Drought, Nor the Aunoyance of devouring Locusts, which is an Effect of
Dryth also: A point far from fabulous, and that in Foreign, yea, in our own
Neighbor Countries; which I, for my part, cannot securely deny to depend on the
Heavens, since it must so depend, if it is imputable to the Season though the
Nimegeun Physician dares deny it. But this by the way.

14. As to Cold, now we meet with that also Once, in the Elevation of above
(...) to my wonder, I confess; but the Diary abundantly testifies. We have had
the like already in the Habitudes of,,; but as I rember in Thinner and Rarer.
Instances; Here more frequently; and in its greater pertinacy, not to mention
Jan. 28. 1661. and the days about it, and Jan. 19, 20, 21; 22. Jan. 1667. But
Ao 1663. you find cold wind, Ice and Snow, on the very day of the in the end of
March, and entrance of April The vehement Frost of Jan. 1665. for 10 days
together, and more. Frost, Ice, very cold wind, at the end of March. Ao 1667.
Frost and Ice again, Oct. 1. Ao 1675. which is very early; and upon the very
day. Winter Day October. 24, 25. Ao 1677.

15. Did Isay it is more frequent here, or with greater pertinacy it may, Not;
but these examples do show themselves upon the very day of the Conjunction
among others. Jan. 28. Ao 1661. and the days about it. Jan. 19, 20, 21, 22. Ao
1667, no news of any vehement Frost till December 19. Ao 1677. Frosts and Ice.
October. 1. Ao 1675. Winter days. Oct. 24, 25. Ao 1677. Vehement Frost, while the
Comet shone. Jan. 1665. for 10 days together. Cold, and Ice and Snow on the
beginning of April, and the end of March, 1663.

16. The Truth of it is, now I think of it, This gave occasion to the ancient
(...) of the Doubtful Nature of, as if he complied with his Neighbors, Warm
with hot, and Cool with Cold. But as from the beginning, I suspected it, so
neither do I find any Cogent Reason to gain the to that belief, since the same
may be said of the other Planets,,, etc.

17. My constant answer therefore is what I say for a Dry April, that our
Aspect was in a common State of ^ereliction, left to shift for its self, and by
it self can do but little; like a Sea Monster in a Shallow; Dry, or calm; or
Cold may take place where an Aspect is destitute. But further, I cannot prevail
with my self from the persuasion, that at times, being a positive Influence
where it cannot strike up a Heat, it will actuate the Sting of the contrary,
Cold. From the First time I considerd the oft-times commenced on Frosty days;
much more in, or, etc. I reckoned that the beams of the Planets conjoined could
do the less, if they could not perform the Greater. For I fancy that in a cold,
nipping, Frosty Air, the Atom, (could we see it) is in Motion, else say I, it
could not penetrate the Cutis: Heat it self could not affect us if it did not
penetrate. Now this Motion it may receive from the Celestial Beam.

18. I confirm this, because an Aspect of, and himself as we shall hear, has
got a Name for such Effects, which Eichstad himself has confessed. I add, that
and met together have a notable Influence for the same Cold, viz. Frost and
Hail, more (for otherwise I will say little, because you will say is a Cold
Star) than a, or: Wherefore? unless 's Heat (or Light) united indeed with, but
destitute of its other Companions, shows its Influence so?

19. I could ask, Whence comes the Activity of the North Wind, were it time to
ask the Question? In December suppose the Sun, etc. may raise the Exhalations,
but why does it not propell it from the South Point, where it is raised? I solve
it thus: The North Wind never blows but when the Planets are in some Destitute
Estate, and the Fixed Stars from 52 degrees distance on either side of the Pole
have time then to show themselves: They can breath, though they cannot heat us;
so it is Heat (insensible) actuates Cold. Thus may we have leave to discourse,
where it is not given to us to comprehend. And if the Fixed are concerned, It Is
their Light, or Heat, unless you will allow them another Influence, which I
think will be said only, never proved.

20. And now may we return with security to our Character, and bring in our
wonted List of Winds, Rains, etc. All that we produce in the preceding Aspect.

Ao 1652. Rain considerable, or violent, April 29. May 2. June 9, 10. July 5,
6, 7. 13. Rain all day, Jaly 18. and 22.

Ao 1654. June 28. July 1. 8. Sept. 9. (Fits of Wet 21.) 24, 25.

Ao 1656. June 9, 18, 24. (26. all day) July 19, 23, 26, 29, 30. Sept. 18

Ao 1658. Aug. 17. (22. all day) 28, 30. Oct. 15, 16, 17, 18. (whole night 27.)
November. 2, 5, 18.

Ao 1660. July 30. Sept. 5. Oct. 27. Nov. 7, 10. (Rain, Hail frequent 11.)

Ao 1661. Jan 15, 17, 18, 23. Febr. 13. Storms by Fits.

Ao 1662. Oct. 9, 23. Nov. 2, 3, 4, 6, 10, 11, 12. (m. p. 15.) 18. (by Fits
19.) die tot. 21.

Ao 1663. Jan. 26. (by Fits) 28. March 24. Apr. 5. (by Fits 6.) o, 21, 24.

Anno 1665. Jan. 18, 19, 25, 26. Febr. 10 Anno 1676. March 25. May 3. ( by
Fits) 7, 8, 10.

Anno 1669. May 30. June 7, 10, Aug. 9. ( by Fits 10.) 11, 12, 14, 30.

Anno 1671. May 16. 20. (by Fits 21.) 23, 26, 28. (by Fits 31.) June 1, 2, 7,
10, 14

Anno 1673. July 28, 26, 30, 31. Sept. 12, 16. (by fits 18.) 19. (by Fits 20.)
21, 22, 24, 26, 27. October 7, 11, 12, 13, 14, 17.

Anno 1675. July 17, 21, 23, 25, 26, 28, 31. Aug. 1. Sept. 23, 24, 25, 26 ( by
Fits 28.) Oct. 8. Dec. 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 18, 20, 21, 26, 27, 29 Ao
1676. Jan. 10. by fits.

Ao 1677. Sept. 13, 19, 17, 21, 23, 30. Oct. 3, 8, 9, 11, 13, 14, 18, 22. Dec
11, 12, 14, 25, 27.

Ao 1678. Feb. 21. (by Fits) 24. March 3, 4, 5, 6, 11, 15, 16, 17. (by fits
18.) 20, 21, 23, 29.

Ao 1679. Nov. 27. Dec. 1. 10, 11, 15, 20, 21, 25, 27, 28, 31.

Ao 1680. Jan. 3, 5, 7. (12. by fits) March 1, 3. April 5, 6, 8, 9. (by fits
13.) 15, 16, 17.

Ao 1682. Febr. 18, 20, 24, 25, 28. March 3, 7, 9, 12, 13, 20, 25, 27, 28, 30.
May 23, 24, 31. Of these we find some days wet throughout, July 16. 1652. June
26. 1656. Aug. 22. 1658. Nov. 21. 1662. July 21. 31. Aug. 1. 1675.

21. The Winds raise a greater Sum, among which (though more there were without
doubt) yet, these came to our Hands of Harmful and Pernicious Report.

Ao 1675. Dec. 14, 23, 27. Ao 1677. Oct. 14, 22. Ao 1678. March 18, 21.

Ao 1679. Dec. 20. Ao 1682. March 12, 22, 23. -- 19, 20. May 13.

The rest of these follow.
Ao 1652. April 18, 19, 20, 24, 27, 29. May 29. July 12, 4, 18.

Ao 1654. June 25. July 3, 4, 19, 24.

A 1956. June 7, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 25. July 17, 18, 19, 21, 28, 29, 30. Aug.
27, 29. Sept. 6.

Ao 1658. Aug. 16, 21, 25, 30. Oct. 18, 19, 25, 26, 29. Nov. 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8,
9, 12, 13, 15, 22.

Ao 1661. July 30, 31. Aug. 4. Nov. 10, 11, Ao 1661. Jan. 3, 12, 13, 15, 18,
21, 22. Febr. 6. 13.

Ao 1662. Nov. 10. 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 22. Ao 3663. April 17. May 1.

Ao 1665. Jan. 3, 18. Febr. 4, 5, 6. Ao 1667. March 21, 22, 25, 26, 27, 28.
April 30. May 6.

Ao 1669. June 9. Ao 1671. May 14, 31. June 8, 9, 13, 14.

Ao 1673. July 27. Aug. 3. Sept. 12, 16, 17, 19, 21, 23. October. 11, 12, 15, 18.

Ao 1675. July 24, 25, 27. Sept. 24, 25. Oct. 7, 8. Dec. 6, 8. 15, 17, 22, 26.

Ao 1677. Sept. 12, 13, 27, 29. Oct. 11, 14, 28. Dec. 8, 10, 12, 13, 14, 27, 28.

Ao 1678. Febr. 20, 21, 25. March 9, 15, 16, 18, 20, 21, 22. April 2.

Ao 1669. Dec. 8, 9, 18, 19, 20, 22, 25, 26. 27, 30.

Ao 1670. Jan. 2, 3, 4, 5, 7. March 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16.

Ao 1682. Febr. 18, 20. March 8, 9, 13, 14, 23, 24, 25, 28. April 2, May 31.

22. This Evidence is proper, when we shall glance on the History of the
Harmful Winds, which began not till the Year 1675. the First Year of various
Printed Intelligence of which we made this innocent use. In the First we note
Harm on Those days to our City Buildings. In the Second, IX. Ships cast away at
Mount Bay. In the 3d. A Hurricane, such are always terrible, being near
Earthquakes, as here. The Next, October 14. 1677. At Bridlington Bay,
Shipwreck, and die 22. at Swansey a Storm, wherein the Wonder no more harm was
done. And News of Wracks, October 18. with Dead Bodies cast upon Shore, 1678,
etc. which I desire might be considered; how frequent would their mention have
been, if the same Public Intelligence had been Stirring. For I will make the
Reader Judge, whether at least every Raging, Furious, Turbulent, Tempestuous
Gust, noted in the Diary, did not bring, for the most part, such a sad Story,
when I find more than once, such unwelcome Informations given us, ever where
Little or no Wind is noted by Observation; XII. Ships cast away is a dismal
Report (We speak of no Foreign Wreck) March 29. 1682. and yet no Wind noted in
the Diary. The like as in the Swanzey Storm, Oct. 22. 1679. For the other
greater Sum of Lofty Winds, it may not be amiss I should own that I have not
reckoned those Days which are termed Windy simply, which yet would have made
the Pomp the Greater, and it may be had right to be reckoned with their Glass.
The Winds before day, I thought it reasonable to account them Lofty; because
either they were violent, or might be presumed so, if but audible to those who
in their warm Beds, or drowsy Pillows, are disposed to hearken to a good quiet
Sleep, than an unquiet busling Blast. They who please may see more to their
satisfaction in Kepler, or Kyriander, and so much for the Unruhigten pair of
Planet, and in Aspect.

23. If you please to allow the Summer Months, the next is Thunders, etc. and
are pretty good Firemen. See them Exercise.

Ao 1652. June 9, 18, 19, 20, 21, 24, 25. July 7, 22. Ao 1654. June 25. July 8.
Sept. 23.

Ao 1656. June 10, 12. July 20, 25, 26. Sept. 9. Ao 1658. Aug. 14, 17.

Ao 1660. Aug. 4. Ao 1662. April, 6. Ao 1669. August 8, 9, 12, 27.

Ao 1671. Sept. 23, 24. Ao 1675. July 23. Ao 1677. Dec. 13. Ao 1682. May 22, 31.

Will you please to have more from elsewhere? Ao 1622. from abroad: June 19,
21. Aug. 27. Ao 1624, May 27. at Lintz. 28, at Norimberg. 29. at Linta. 31. at
Norimberg. June 1, 2, 7, 8. (9. at Norimberg.) 11. usque ad 15. at Lintz. (16,
18. at Norimberg.) Ao 1626. July 31. Aug. 16, 31. at Lintz. (4, 11, 12. at
Norimberg.) Sept. 30.

Ao 1628. Aug. 7. Lightning both at Lintz and Norimberg. December 22. Calum
Ardens in both places.

Ao 1630. Dec. 21. Lightning and Thunder at Midnight at Lintz.

Ao 1635. March 6. April 22. June 3, 14.

Ao 1637. May 15, 16, 17, 22, 23. July 25. Aug. 11, 20.

Ao 1641. April 23.

Ao 1648. April 29.

24. The next is Comets. Gardan, you have heard, pronounces that all Comets own
their production to this Aspect, seeing they are of a dry Influence. You see
what we have said of the Dryth of, but it is a fancy, of His reckoned only to
make an Aphorism. Some Comets are noted in his time, which should give him
occasion to say so; but I wonder why he should appropriate it to our Aspect,
since he made no Catalogues; for then he would have seen, not only, but,,,
though of moist Influence, as dry for this matter, as. Alas! All the Planets
we have said contribute to these Lucid Productions; And as Good Astrologers,
perhaps, as He, have adventured to sort out several kinds of Comets to each
Planet respectively: Some Saturnine, others Jovial, some Lunar: A Notion which
I thought had bin trifling, but that I see Hevelius also espouses it, who is
afraid to discourse any thing like an Astrologer, even where they ought not to
be disdained. He perceived the Truth concerning their Original. As for their
Natures, to me, they seem Entia per Accident, and so cannot brag of any Nature,
unless it be Relative, a Sign, or so, of what follows.

25. But I hope this great Truth may find reception one day; that every Aspect
happening within the Terms or Limits of a Comets duration, contributes to its
Existence. We will endeavor here in some part to persuade this. I remember
that December 12. 1680. the very Night that I wrote this, being summoned up to
view the Comet in the South-West, hor. 6. P. M. Consulting the Ephemeris, I
found there was in being, and that the New the day before ushered it in. But I
shall show Gardan a greater Comet Founder than, and that is, a, or. -- as dry a
Planet as though; are Comet-Founders many times. And what may do, will be seen
in due Season. Comets then, --

26. 1532. a September 23. ad Nov. 20. 12. Sup. in and.

1539. a May 6. ad diem 17: supra in and.

1558. Aug. 6. ad diem 24. princ. in ibid.

1596. July 9. a 13. ad Sept. 15. See it in and. Thuanus.

1647. Nov. 19. A Comet 2 days seen, and vanished.

1661. Jan. 28. St. Vet. Comet seen at Vienna, Hevelius.

1664. Nov. 24. So again supra in and.

1661. Feb. 25. Comet at London of and in med., cum.

Earthquakes love to follow oft-times, of which we have met with these. T. M.
In Lima fuit animadversus Kepl. in Jun. men's. Ao 1624. At Rome, says Kepler,
in July 9. 19. Ao 1624.

Ao 1643. Sept. 2. usque ad 6.

Ao 1645. Sept. 12. In Thuringia, Kyriander.

Ao 1667. April 1. At Rome.

Ao 1676. In Worcestershire, January 5.

Ao 1680. Vesuvius ejects Fire and Stones at Naples, Mense Martii.

Ao 1682. At Doncaster, May 16.

27. As to our Remarks which we promised: The First Comet of Sept. 1532. we
know, as before, appeared at. We envy not the Martio-Solar; but we with Reason
say, that preceding, helped to the Conclusion of this Comet; The greatest
Writers allowing them some time for their formation, before their presentment
to the World, Believe this when you have considered, that on the First day of
his appearance, which is more than I have said yet, a certain Planet faceth the
Pleiades: We break with Method a little, but I hope it will be pardoned.

The Next of 1539. we have ranked under, for near that it first appeared, May
6. We do not here go about to Anotomize the Comet, and show all its parts, but
we say and, I believe, will be found within less than Twelve degrees; Yea, and
as it happens, with, and not far from the Pleiades. Thus it haps, That
Constellation is not our Subject as yet? but it is a Celestial: And of
Celestial Aspects and Asterisms, Eadem est ratio.

The Third Comet of 1558. spoke its own Original so plain, that the World took
notice of it. Rochenbach, a Great Cometographer, quoted by Hevelius and others,
has these Words. -- It was in Form like a Spit, kindled in, ubi and in
oppositum cursum habuerent. There Is no disputing; look into the Ephemeris, and
you shall find those 3 Aspect at the very doors: Aug. 6. and though be
pretended to stand a little aloof, if measured by a Rule; yet they must all be
let in to speak with the Comet. has his share then; That Is all which I demand,
Note: that this is one of the Comets on which Cardan, even now, built his,
Axiom.

That of 1647. had a Week before, and Three days after the appearance: Their
Rays then were engaged when the Meteor appeared.

That of 1661. must be welcome, for it brings in its Mouth, in the very same
degrees of. There had been a preceding of our Planets about a Fortnight before,
according to our Doctrine, the repeated is the more Potent. Next we take notice
of the Phenomenon showing it self in Aquila, which is thereabouts Situate in
the Sign, notes a Conjunction of the Phenomenon, as it were, with the Aspect.
No more will we say at this present. Only, if the Reader consulting the
Ephemeris for that time, shall cast his Eye upon, and note his place, he may
chance to remember what we have said before of Facing the Pleiades.

The Comet 1664. Dec. 9. or as we said from Oxford, Nov. 24. does not owe its
Original to our, we may hear of it in, as already in. But what is to be noted,
is this; that according to our Principle it was nourished and cherished the
whole Month of January 1665. throughout, and the First part of February, since
our Diary reaches to the 10 day: Now if there were no other Evidence than our
Diary, might not a Man think there were somewhat, when but two Months after I
find another Comet show it self on the return of this very Conjunction
(together with I confess;) which Comet being said to begin March 31. falls so
patt for us on April's beginning, as if I had enlarged the Observation on
purpose to comprehend the Phenomenon. But seeing the contrary is not only
true, but also apparent, we have here our Conjunction, the Father of the
Appearance.

That at Moscow, Ao 1682. April 6. 5. 13. cum and in fine. as the Intelligence
of those days informed us; I have reason to look in the Report for certain, and
you see it falls within our Sphere. I know there are greater Configurations,
but I pray may have their Portion: For it is with Aspects Celestial, as with
Serpents: They get a Name of Fame by devouring the Less.

28. I should have spoke to the Hail that finds a place in our Character; some,
we have, we see under our Aspect; but England I reckon is not the Celebrated
place for Hail; I have met with Hail to my wonder in the Russia Voyages, but
Cold though we be, I find that some warmer Climes are most subject to it,
especially such as is Harmful to Harvest, or Vintage. In Rome, as Fromond
Notes, there were apponted Hail-Scouts, Watch and Ward to give notice of an
Approaching Storm: What and in state of destitution may contribute we have said
and which have brought Snow in May, at Norimberg, in Kyriand. There may be
somewhat in the Nature of that Soil: upon which account it is easy to observe,
that it Hails most in the Wine-Countries: Whether a Rhenish or a Claret Spirit
may not issue up to the Regions of Hail? We in England have but the Shadow of a
Vineyard. I speak of the Brisker Wines; for as for the Spanish Countries, whose
Wines are more soft and Unctuous, possibly the Injusies done by Hail are rarely
seen.

29. As to Earthquakes we have seen them before in, in, etc. the later of which
must carry the Name, because it is a busier Aspect; and comes upon the place
several times to once of the other Conjunction. It Is not to be denied, though
that are Shakers, as in that at Rome, Ao 1624. noted by Kepler, and are gr. 10
distant, while and are upon the very Spot of 6. -- Yea, before he tells us of
the like observed at Lima, he names not the day of the Month: But happen when
it will, it falls within the tedder of and, being stretched but 10 degrees.
Just now we remember a Second Comet happened at the return of and. Here we meet
with a Second Earthquake happened at the same time, and within a Months space
in both.

That of Ao 1643. lasting for 5 days, we were willing to make much of, though
and be 7 degrees distant; so from is but twice 7 degrees distant those 5 days,
in which he abates that Distance.

Thrt at Thuringen, Ao 1645. Sept. 12. has appeared under the, Yet and are but
4 degrees distant.

That of Ao 1667. shows and indeed at 7 degrees distance, and and at 6 gr.
distance.

Ao 1676. follows with that in Worcestershire, and are within 6 degrees, while
and, it is true, are nearer.

Next, Ao 1680. Vesuvius Flames, which are tokens, and Earnest of T. M.
thereabouts, is noted within the First 20 days of March that year; and within
the Midway, viz. die, 11 is noted.

Lastly, that at Doncaster, Ao 1682. adds to a gr. 7. gr. 11. distant.

30. I do not add the Legend of Two Grampisces stranded, or taken at Greenwich,
though I have owned that there is some reason to believe that such Novel
Appearances do give notice of some disturbance of the Earth and its Concomitant
Waters, which the Fish would avoid; but I impute it rather to the Dreadful
Thunders which are noted thereabouts, which is known to disturb all Brutes by
Sea or Land, into which piece of Philosophy the Psalmist has long ago entered
us. For who has excepted the Fishes of the Sea from Celestial Distempers?

31. This I observe, that Fishes do sometimes appear in Sholes when Celestial
Causes are visible moving thereto. So say the Journals for 10 days together, ab
October. 25. Nov. 5. 1662, returning from Java. Nov. 22. All under this Aspect.

32. Here again we see the convenience of enlarging the Sheets of our Aspect,
the Account may be given at least abroad; (for let it be thankfully
acknowledged Earthq. continue not long with us) They say, it is ordinary to
continue 40 days; yea, and Aristotle himself agrees to it, then the enlarging
of an Earth-shaking Aspect, as before, so here, to 30. or 40 Days; has its use
and ground in Nature, especially where Two Conjunctions meet: So that when One
ceases, the Second begins; thereby continuing, yea, and as it happens,
increasing the Puissance of the Aspect.

33. The Next trouble is with Currents; I have somewhat more perhaps, to
produce then they came to: Yet, because they are also of some Consequence, I
note, -- First, after a violent Storm of Wind in Lat. N. 42. March 31. April 1.
Ao 1665. A Current. April 2 or 3. in on the Equinox, with the on the Tropique.
But again, April 11. A Current, while the comes to the Equinox, and opposes in
on the other side. In like manner, April 4. 1665. the Ship London in her return
from Surat, Lat. N. 7. was found to be 22. miles more Northerly than by
account, and 22 more Westerly, Days 5 and 6. 17. and 18 miles more to the
Southward. Die 7. Eleven more, gr. 9. distant in, are united by the
intervening. Die 4. The same Planets with the applying to the Sun, are found in
the 3 days following. The next that comes homeward, Ao 1680. March 11. in the
Ship Sampson, Lat. N. 30. A Stream Southward of 10 Miles: Our Aspect is found
on the precise day: And another greater, Die 16. of 27 miles alteration. is as
far from, as is from the. -- Note that I find a like Current in the Golden
Fleece, at far different Latitude near the Line, about the time of the Aspect,
which I mention to persuade that this is no Error, or Fault, as may be
pretended. In the mean while we omitted Currents, and those extreme, Ao 1611.
Sept. 12. mentioned by Purchase, where the opposes, and also, as happened before.

34. Now, that which I have looked upon as a greater Arcanum, is the shifting
of the Tides: When the Thames, for example, shall Ebb and Flow twice or thrice
in the space of a few Hours; so we find it remarked to us by our Annals for
Prodigious: Such was that of Ao 1550. Dec. 18. Ao 1564. Jan. 26. 27, 28. Ao
1574. Nov. 6. Ao 1609. Febr. 19. Ao 1693. Jan. 3. Ao 1654. Febr. 2. Ao 1656.
Oct. 3. and Two or Three in our Diary since.

35. It Is no small enquiry since it is taken for a Prodigy; concerning which
point I am not engaged at present to say; the Ingenious Author of Britannia
Baconica, page 93. makes it nothing but the Tide at Ebb, Leisurely preceding
toward the Sea onward, and beaten back again by a North-west-wind. To this
purpose he observes, that these Tides most part happened when the waters were
at Lowest, about the Quarters of the; Yea, and when (so curious is he) she was
in Apogaeo; a Circumstance which he says, with Reason, helps to abate the
highest Water. And I would all hard Questions could be so easily solved: For
the Truth is, the Wind blew from the North-West, Ao 1654. Febr. 2. and Ao 1656.
say I, October. 3. (a North-East, at least) which shall break no squares; and the
Wind blew hard also. The like again, March 22. 1682. Add, May 31. News came
from Lime, the Seacoast; There it is said how a Storm of Wind, with Rain and
Thunder, caused several Ebbings and Flowings in the Water in half an Hours
time. So that it must be granted, that the Winds, and the Northerly Winds are
Instrumental in the case.

36. But to deal ingeniously, I believe there is somewhat more in it which this
Good Man would have hearkened to, viz. some less obvious Cause than a Stiff
North Wind falling in with those Circumstances. First, because neither is the
Neap-tide, nor the North Wind perpetual. That of Ao 1564. Jan. 26, 27, 28. was
within a day or two of the Full; and that is no single Instance; and besides
that, by his Confession the Apogaeum fails twice; I add, and a 3d. or 4th.
time, March 12. May 31. 1682. but chiefly because we are by this Hypothesis
engaged to find One every year, since there is scarce a year passes, but will
find us one North Wind brisk and blowing at Neap-tide. Next, that we seldom
find any such Tide, but a Notable Aspect of,,, is visible, and they in Partile
also. Again, we shall find some certain Month not so prompt to show us this
Fact; Not June, July, August, but chiefly the Winter Months; and especially
those which are capable of the Variation of the Equinoctial Tides, February,
March, October and November: and so we cannot speak fully to it, till we come
to treat of the Signs of the Zodiac. In the mean time the First suspicion we
had of this hidden Cause, arose from observing our Aspect caught twice or
thrice in the Company. are more than the occasion, they are the Authors; as
they are the Authors, not Solitary and Adaequate, but Partial, and at times of
Currents, Thunders, etc. This the Diary witnesses, that when in Sept. 1663.
there happened an Equinoctial Tide, March 31. It Is not the Sun, but Two Friends
of his be point blank upon the Equinox, our and.

37. And if the Maculae, which have bin so carefully observed those later
years, shall come to be imputable to our fantastic Causes, then the said
Causes may come in some repute, or that Effect to be vilified. But neither is
the Effect to be vilified, nor the Causes to be disputed. We have said before
for; we may venture in the same bottom for this Aspect also. It Is no small
matter to give an account of the paleness, yea, of the darkness, which is a
disposition of the Sun without an Eclipse. Such was that Famous Phenomenon in
Herodotus; when Xerxes and his Army marched from Sardis, as Calvisius will have
it, I began to question his Excellent Chronology on that account, for setting
Sacred Story aside, I could not imagine how Day should be turned into Night?
(Which Herodotus asserts) without some eclipse, or Lunar Interposition. But
Astronomers have collected some Instances which come home, or very near.
Pallidus is pretty frequent in Kepler's Diary, which denotes more than a mist,
since that is every where expressed by by its proper term. The labors, an dis
disturbed at such times, as the Learned Writers of the Macular Obscurations
conclude, Scheiner and Hevelius. All that I have to say is, this Inquietation
comes from the Heavens. In the Body of Celestial Sphere, one part affects
another. A, or an of and, nay with or will help to bring in a Macula into the
Body of the Luminary. Nay, the or of the Superiors aspected together will do
the like. And if the Sun be the Center of the Planetary Heaven, which I am
willing to believe from the Reasons of the Copernicans; there can be no scruple
how it shall come to pass, since every part of the Circumference glances upon
the Center. Thus in October 18, 28. Ao 1642. where Hevelius acknowledges a
Macula, and a Halo; there is an of at 7 degrees distance contributes, with an
of at gr. 5. distance. July 4. Stylo Veteri, at 6 degrees distance, July 16. at
7 degrees distance. Ao 1644. June 3. and 3 degrees distance. July 16. and 5
degrees distance. And any one may think it probable, when they shall find the
Phenomenon of Pallidus, May 1. 1627. and again 5, 12, 13, 15. and 28, 29. and
all within and opposition, at gr. 12, 8, 5, 3, 1, 0. distance. May 12. being a
Partile Opposition.

38. Here also comes at last, or a little Table of the Male-Influence noted as
it haps by its self: Which if I may serve the Student in Physique thereby; I
will present. I shall not need make a Cross upon the Door of this Aspect,
seeing what Pestilential Influence it has, for the most part, is not easily
distinguished from the precedent Aspect of. I shall only present a few Notes of
the Years, 1673. 1675. Some of more, some of less concern, of Aches,
Indispositions, etc. In 1671. there were noted but 3. June 18, 21, 22. In 1673.
July 22. what more ought here to be noted, I cannot say. But in September, I
read thus, 13. Aches 21. Spasmes 4 m. Aches 10 at Night. 25. Pains in the Feet.
26. in the Shoulder. 29. Scorbutical Sweats. Oct. 2. Podagra. 6, 15. Pains in
the Shoulder. 21, 22, 23. Aches. 24. Pains, Fits. -- Ao 1675. July 4.
Indispositions. 5. Soultry, afflicting Weather. 9. Sickness, Fevers. September
20, 22. Indispositions. 26, 27. Pangs. October 3, 4, 5. Indispositions. 6, 7.
Aches in the Shoulder, Hysterical Fits; Sickness, and within 7 days Death. 9.
Aches. So the 12 hor: 3 p. the 13. Indispositions. But the following one in
December is frightful, Dec. 2. Fits of Distraction. 4. Hysterical Fits,
terrible. 5, 6, 7, 8. Aches in both Shoulders. 9. Convulsion. 10. Child Sickned
2 m. -- 11. Podagra. 13. Children Sicken. 15, 16. Aches. 17. Hysterical Fits.
22. Indispositions ad 24. Aches 25. Indispositions, and 31. Aches. And so much
for.

Mars and Metcury; Home-Diary.
1652. Ab Apr. 16. ad May 2.
18. High wind, showrs. S. 19. Very H. wind, showring 20. High wind, showry. so
22. S E. 24. H. wind. 27. H. wind. 28. Showring m. ^^ 29. Showry, very Windy.
May 2. s. Storms at night. Iterum June 6. ad 29. 8. s. rain, windy. 9. Dash,
Thunder. 10. Thunder and Showrs. 14, 15, 16, 17, Red wind. 18, 19, 20, 21.
Thunders. 24, 25. Thund. 26. Windy. 27. R. wdy. 28. Some Rain, wdy. 29. Showry,
high Wind. Tertio, July 1. ad 23. 2. Some drops. 3. Dropping, windy, red wd. 4.
Dropping, high wind, red wind. 5. Rainy at night. 6. Showry, wdy. 7. Showry,
Thunder. 8. Showry, more wind. 9. Windy, some showts. 12. More Wind, rain at n.
13. Showry. 15. Windy. 16. Rain d. t. E. N. 17. Cloudy, dropping, wind W. than
S. 18. Dropping; more wind. 22. Thunder, showrs. 23. Cldy at n. and dropping.
1654. A June 24. a July 8.
25. Winds, and suspicious. 26. Winds, and fine Showrs; Heat. 27. Hot, S.
Showrs Night. S E. 28. Th. Store of rain. N E. 29. Hot, N. E. 30. H. wind, s.
drops. July 1. Cold Rain and Wind. N E. 3. Brisk Winds, s. Wet. 4. High Wind. N
E. 5. Misty, hot. 6. Hot; some rain at night. 8. Th. showrs. Iterum, Plat. a
Sep. 9. ad 27. 9. Wind showry. 10. Dark, suspicious n. 11. Misty m. hot. 12.
Suspicious, so me drops. 17. s. rain. 19. Winds a. l. dark. 21. Fits of wet.
Iris more than Semicircular. 22. Heat. 22. s. rain, Th. seeming at midnight.
24. Rain l. and p. m. wind. S. 25. s. store of rain 10 p. 26. Warm wind,
suspicion at night. 27. Misty m. warm.
1636. June 7. ad 27.
7. High wind, s. misle, hot. N E. 8. Hot, dry, Wind, s. misle. N E. 9. Wet 9
m. wind. hot p. m N E. 10. Thunder, dry. N E. 11. Hot and dry. ^ E. 12. Very
hot, thunder. 13. Red wind. 14. Dropping occ. 16. H. cool wind 3 p. 17. H.
wind, showrs 4 m. H. cool wind till occ. 18 Storms of R. and H. wd. 19. Wind,
dropping, coasting p. m. 20. Stormy wind, some wet. 21. H. wind, shower occ. N
E. 22. Heat. 23. Heat, dry meteor. 24. Very wet. 25. H. wind, s. dropping. 26.
Coasting showrs die tot. 27. Gentle rain a 4 p. ad 10 p. Iterum. a July 17. ad
Aug. 3. 17. H. wind, coasting showrs. 18. Stormy wind, reddish wd. 19. High
Wind, showring. 20. Heat. R. Thunder and L. 5 p. 21. H. wind, heat. 22. Wind,
gentle showrs. 23. Cain pouring hot. 24. Hot. 25. Hot Lightning, Thunder. 26.
Terrible L. violent showers, Hail, stormy Wind. 27. Dry wind. 28. H. wind and
drisle. 29. H. wind and showry. 30. H. wind, dashing. 31. Wind. Aug. 1.
Meteors, blew mist. 2. Hot, red wind (Clouds pontrary.) 3. Very hot, blew mist.
Tertio, ab Aug. 27. ad Sept. 12 27. Offering to drop, H. wd at n. 28. Windy,
warm, blew mist. N E. 29. Brisk wind. Ely. Sept. I. Showring. E. 4. Wind,
showry about noon. 6. H. wind, warm. 8. Store of rain toward London. 9.
Lightning a Flash. N E. 14 times N E. this bout.
1658. Ab Aug. 12. ad 30.
12. Fog m hot. 13. Thick Fog, hot, dry wd. S E. 14. Thunder 11 m. and p. m.
Ely. Foghotshowr 3 p. 11 15 and LatN E 86. Windy a. l. sprinkling 3 p Wly. 17.
Shower, Thunderclap 10 m. Lat. night. 19. Frost, windy, some wet 4. p. 20.
Misty, warm, shower 7 p. 21. Foggy m. H. wind, drisle 22. Serious wet die tot.
23. Warm shower occ. 24. Fog, warm wind, misling. 25. H. wind, s. wet. 26.
Cloudy, cold m. p. 27. Dropping 7 p. 28. Wind and showrs. 29. R. 4 m. windy at
night. 30, Stormy wind noct. tot. prae. Dry wind. N W. Iterum, ab Oct. 15. ad
Nov. 24.
Duplex.
15. Rainy, warm. 16. Rain a. l. dark, showring 5 p. 8 p. etc. 17. Violent R.
noct. med H. wd 8 p. 18. H. wind noc. praec. showring 7 p. etc. 19. Wind noct.
praec. shower noon. Gallant Meteor. 20. Cobwebs, 3 drops. 21. Gloomy. 23. Rain
Ely. 24. Rain 4 m. 25. H. wind, drisle. 26. Wind noct. prec. warm, rain 4 p.
and 7 p. 27. Rain nocte praeced. tota. 28. Cobwebs. 29. Wd blustering a. l.
Cobwebs. N E. 30. Frosty. N E. Nov. 2. Dark, wet, high wd 3. Stormy wind, Rain.
^. Wind noct. tot. with s. snow 10 p. ^ Rain 5 p. etc. 6. R. m. tempestuous and
wet. 7. Blustering a. l. wet 9 m. 8. H. wind; shower 4 p. 9. Wind a. l. wetting
p. m. 10 Windy p. m. Cobwebs. 11. Some wet. 12. Blustering a. l. 13. Blustering
a. l. Rain a. l. dark, windy, drisle, p m. m. p. 15. Turbulent a. l. 18. Wet a
4 m. ad 9 m. so noon ad 8 p. 22. Wind a. l. offer to snow H. wind. 24: Snow and
small rain.
1660. A July 28 ad Sept. 11. Duplex.
28. Hot Meteors at night. 29. Hot Sol rubens 30. E. wind brisk, showring. 31.
Stiff wind; ^ome Meteors. Aug 1, 2, 3. Drisle p. m. 4. Thunder, Lightning,
tempestuous. 5. Windy, drisle 7, 8, 9, 10. Hot and dry. 12. Misling 5 m. 13,
14, 15. Very hot. 16. Rain 10 m. dry, very hot 17, 18. Very hot. 19. Hot, dry,
rain midn. 20. Drisle m. 22. Rain at night. 23. Very hot. 24. s. rain m. 25.
Very hot, gentle rain at n. 16, 27. Very hot. 29, 30, 31. Frost m. Sept. I.
Rain at n. 4. Very hot; drisling. 5. Rain, hot. 10. Hot. showrs. 11. Hot,
drisling. Tertio ab Oct. 20. ad Nov. 13. 20. Fog. N E. 23. Windy. 24. Windy. N
E. 27. Dry, cold, windy, hail, rain. 29. Hot Sun rise. 31. Some rain. Nov. I.
Threatening. 3. Suspicious. 5. Fog below. 7. Storms of Rain n. and E. 9. Some
drops, stormy. 10. Stormy wind, hail and R. 10 p. 11. Stormy wind, storm of
Rain and Hail frequent.
1661. Jan. a d. 1. ad Feb. 13.
1. Frosty. 2. Frosty; close, windy, dry 3. Cold, dry, H. wind. 4. Close, dry,
windy. 5. Close, dry, Spring weather. 6. Close, dry, warm, windy. 7, 8, 9.
Close, dry, warm fog p. m. 9. 10. Fog, warm; dark; wet night. 11. Dry, windy.
12. Stormy wind, driving, small rain. 13. Windy night. 14. Windy, misty. 15.
Windy, close; stormy at night. 17. Windy, wet n. 18. A 4 m. etc. very wet,
windy. 19. Windy, cloudy. 20. Slabby, windy. 21. Windy, dry; H. wind n. 22. H.
wind, wet ight. 23. Wind, rainy ad 9 m. N E. 24. Frost m. 26. Some dew. 28.
Frost Ely. 25. 29, 30. Frost, bright Summers day. 31. Frosty, fog about
Horizon. Febr. 1. Windy, close mist. stormy. 2. Dry, windy, cold. 3. Windy,
mist. N W. 4. Windy, cloudy, dry. 5. Frost; close, cold p. m. H. wind. 6.
Close, high wind. Ely 7. Scotch mist; wet m. N E. 8. Idem. 9. Warm, close. 10.
Spring weather. s. rain a night. 11. Cold, sharp wnind p. m 12. Close,
threatening. Meteors frequent about Lyra and Cycnus. 13. Blustering wind. Storm
of rain Sun set. and 6 p. 8 8 p. Meteors near Pleiades. violent storm 10 p.
Jan. 28. Cometa, Hevelius.
1662. Ab. Oct. 10. ad Nov. 28. 9. Rain a. 1.
10. Fog, rain, walls sweat. Ely. 11. Warm rain 12 p. 12. Drisle 7 m. 5 p. 13.
Fog, warm. 14. Drisle m. warm. 15. Drisle o. and p. m. 16. Very warm. 17. Fog
m. warm. 18. Foggy. 19. Fog m. wind. 20. Fog, warm, high wind 9 p. 21. Rain a.
l. wd so vesp. 22. R. a. l. 4 p. and 8 p. 23. Much rain a. l. Meteors at n.
seem to lightn. 26. Windy. 27. Wet, fog, rain at n. 28. Shower 3 p. 29. Rain a.
l. 30. Drisle 7 m. 31. Fog, warm. Ely Nov. 1. Rain 7 p. 2. Rain 1 p. etc. 3.
Rain a 9 m. ad noon. 4. Rain hard a 5 m. ad 1 p. 5. Fog. 6. Drisle rain sub
vesp. etc. 8. Warm drops, Meteor. 9. Some Rain. 10. Iris 8 m. Storm of wd and
Rain 10 p. 11. Very dark with violent Storms. 12. Rainy m. H. wind. 13. R. a.
m. high wind. 14. H. cold wind. 15. Rain m. p. high wind. 16, 17. Fog, frosty.
Ely. 18. R. a 6. ad 9 p. fog. 19. Warm. drisle by fits. S E. 20. Fog. 21. Fog,
R. die tot. 22. Blustering noct. tot. 23. ad 22. Fog, frosty, die 27. Snow a.
l.
1663. Jan. 10. ad Febr. 2.
10. Thick fog die tot. misling o. Ely. 11, 12; 13. Foggy; frosty. Ely. 14.
Foggy, sleet noon. 15. Foggy, s. drops 4 p. 10 p. 16. Fog, warm. 17. Fog and
rain 8 p. etc. 18. Snow m. thaw p. m. 19, 20, 21, 22. Frost, foggy. 23. Shower 1
p. 25. Foggy. 26. Rain 10 m. 4 p. 7 p. 27. Rain 6 m. 28. Snow, hail. 29. Snow.
30. s. snow m. 31. Snow 6 p. Feb. 1. Offer to snow. Iterum, a March 22. ad May
3. Duplex. March 22, 23. Very cold wd 24. Storm of hail 6 p. ad 9 p. 26. Rain 1
m. and 7 m. 27. Cold wind, pinching. E. 28. Rain 9 p. 29. Rain and snow a. l.
30. Nipping; wet, ice. 31. Cold wind, Equinoctial Tides 28. Apr. 1. Ice, offer
6 p. 4. R. a. l. wet m. 5. Rain m. hard at noon. Ely. 6. Rain by fits, thunder.
8. Shower at noon, warm. 10. Dry. 16. Cold. 17. Brisk wind, rain 8 p. 19. Rain
m. and 9 p. 20. Showring 2 p. etc. 21. Rain p. m. tot. 15. 22. Rain p. m. 24.
Rain 9 p. etc. 25. Warm shower noon. 36. Dry air m. 27. Rain. 28. Windy. 29.
Drisle. May 1. High wind. Ely. 2. Hot. Ely. 3. Showrs. S E.
1664. Dec. 30. ad Feb. 16 An. 25. Aspectus duplex.
30. Offer to snow. 31. Windy offering. 1665. Jan. 1. Warm wind. Comet. 2.
Frost, windy. N E. 3. Wind noct. praeced. snowing Comet. 4. Snow a. l. 7 p. N
E. 5. Vehement frost. Comet seen. 6. Vehement frost. Comet seen. 7, 8, 9, 10,
11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Frosty. Ely. 16. Halo. 17. Offered Snow. 18. R. a. l. and 9
p. etc. high wind. 19. Dark and wet p. m. 22. s. rain o. 24. Snow a. l. 25.
Snow hard, and hail 7 p. Rain. 26. Rain all night; slabby. 27. Foggy, wet 3 m.
28. Drisle 5 p. 29. Offer Snow 10 m. and 6. p. N E. 30. Offer snow. Feb. 1.
Offering ecc. E. 3. Snow 10 p. 4. H. cutting wind. 5. Black Heaven, High wd. 3.
6. 7. Very high wind a midnight ad ort. Snow, wet 7 p. S E. 8. Windy m. p. 9.
Windy. 10. Wind, wet a. m. 5 p. and 6 p. Iterum, ab Apr. 2. ad 18. This is a
sad Month for Drought. 2. Suspicious. Ely. 3. Warm. Ely. 4. Warm m. Comet 4 m.
about Andromeda. 5. Warm. Ely. 6. Dry, hot. Ely. 7. Comet vanished; suspicious
9 m. 9. Mist, cry S E. and 10. 11. Warm. 12. Suspicious. 15. s. drops 11 m.
Brisk wd. 16. Suspicious. N E, 17. Frost, dry day. E. N E. Fog.
1667. A March 17. ad Apr. 6.
12. Fog, warm. 19. warm; offer o. 20. Halo n. E. 21. High wind, wetting. 22.
H. wind noct. tot. s. wet a. l. 23. Some rain m. wetting. 24. Dropping. 25.
Black and clouds; shower 10 p. and p. m. audible wind. 26. Hail; H. wind at n.
frost, Ice. 27. Very cold and high wind. Frost, ice. 28. Audible wind. 29.
Warm. 30. Mist, gentle drisle Sun occ. Apr. 1. Hot. dry, wind at n. 2. s. R.
warm. 5. Warm. 5. Some hopes of Rain. 7. Fog, dry. 240. Iterum ab Apr. 25. ad
May 12. 25. Some drisle. 26. Cold wind. 27. Warm, dry. E. 28. Mist m. dry, 29.
Some little rain even. 30. Wind, dry. May 1. Warm, dry. 2. Troubled air. 3.
Shower ort. Rain, hail 1 p. 3 p. 5 p. refreshing the Drought. 4. Wetting o. Ely.
5 Scarce hold up. 6. Stor my wind; drisle 8 m. 7. Windy and showring. 8. Warm,
some wetting Sun occ. etc. 10. Hail at Kentish Town. Stormy near London.
1669. A May 28. ad June 11.
28. Shower noon and 1 p. 29. Heat p. m. 30. Showring 6 p. 31. Heat. June 1.
Blew mist, heat. 2. s. moisture m. warm. 3. Foggy m. Ely. 4. Warm. 5. Windy. 6.
Suspicious. 7. Windy. Rain 6 m. 9. H. wind, warm. 10. Sudden Showrs circ. o. p.
m. 11. Wind, shower 11 m. Iterum ab. Aug. 4. ad Sept. 1. 4. s. rain a. l. 5.
Soultry. 6. Warm. Ely. 7. Hot. wetting p. m. L. at n. 8. Hot and Lightning. 9.
Rain and Lightning a. l. R. and Th. 3 p. etc. 10. Rain by fits. 1g. Hot m.
shower 2 p. etc. Meteor. 12, Close, some wetting. L. and Th. Dreadful rain 10 p.
etc. 13. Warm. 14. Da. h 2 m, o. coasting showrs. 15. Mist m. s. wet even. 16.
Shower before, and a. m. Hot night. 17. Some drops. Ely. 18. Fog a. l. warm S.
sprinkling. 19. Fog 9 m. coasting showrs, sickly time. 20. Some wet noon. 23.
Fog, warm. 24. Soultry. 25. Meteors, soultry. 26. Heat 2 drops. 27. Heat, mist.
Lightning and Thunder. 28. Mist, warm. 29. Terrible Th. Sun o^^. 30. Fair,
coasting showrs, wd. Th. clap. 2 Grampasses at Greenwich. Sept. 1. Warm, Lat n.
Bill of Mortality 665.
1671. A May 12. ad June 25.
12. Very hot, shower. 13. Soultry. 14. H. wind, shower 2 p. 15. Shower. 16. Shower
South, and 4 p. 18. s. rain p. m. 19. R. 8 m. coasting, drislep. m. 20. Rainy
m. p. and even. 21. Rain 1, 3, 7, 8 p. s. hail noon. 22. Rain 10 p. 23. R.
dash, thunderclap at o. frequent p. m. 24. R. coasting. Th. Clap at noon. 25.
Drisle m. rain sub vesp. 26. Wet a. m. 28. Shower prospect a. m. and p. m. 29.
Warm. 30. Rain o. and 1 p. warm. S E. 31. R. by fits, high wind a. m. June 1.
Rainy. 20. Showrs at least. 2. Warm and showring. 3. Threatening Ely. Halo. 5.
Morand Church fired by Lightning at Venice. 7. Rainy at n. 8. Rain 5 p. H.
winds midn. 9. Stormy winds, coasting showrs 1 p. 10. Dash 10 m. 12. Rain 3 p.
13. Stormy winds, R. 1 p. 14. Stormy wds, R. 10 m. dash 7 p. 15. Showrs 5 p.
17. Warm, dry. S E. 18. Hot. dry. Ely. 19. Dry. N E. 20. Shower in prospect wd
variable. 22. Hot, foggy m. 23. Soultry, dry mist m. 24. Soultry, dry,
1673. Jul. 15. ad Aug. 4.
16. Tuffon, Note marginal M S. 15. Hot floating Clouds. 16: Hot. 17. Wetting 9
m. drisle p. m. 2, 5 p. 18. Dry. 19. Hot a. m. very soultry. 2 drops. 20. Hot
shower in prospect. 21. Hot. 22. Hot. 23. Hot p. m. and n. 24. Soultry p. m. 25.
Shower 8 m. hot. 26. Drisle a. m. and p. m. warm. 27. H. wind. 28. Showring 10
m. 29. Showring. 30. Wetting 8 p. 31. Wetting m. p. Aug. 1. Rain midnight,
coasting shower. 3. Rain rise, high wind 10 m. 4. Warm. Iterum, Sept. 12. ad
Oct. 6. Aspectus duplex. 12. Wind and rain a. l. wet p. m. Fog m. Rain 10 p.
14. Drisle 9 m. and 4 p. 5. Very cold. 16. R. a. l. and a. m. hard, with wind 8
p. 17. Furious Tempest noct. tot. praeced. 18. Rain by fits. 19. Wind and rain
ante lucem. 20. Rain 4 p. 8 p. 10 p. 21. Very wet noct. praeced. H. wind. Rain
a. m. fere per tot. 22. Rain o. and p. m. tot. S E. 23. Snow Sun ort. ad 8 m.
H. wind a. m. 24. Very warm, troubled air. wetting m. p. short Meteor. 26.
Wetting a. m. and p. m. 27. Wet m. p. 28. Gossamere. Ely. 29. Drisle Sun occ.
and 11 p. Plague at Constantinople. Oct. 1. s. drops. 3. Windy, wetting 1 p. 4.
Cold and winterly T. M. at St. Domingo. 7. Shower 3 p. and 9 p. 9. Foggy a. m.
wetting 10 m. p. m. 10, Wetting noon. 11. Wetting, warm, Rain a. l. and a. m.
per tot. Very high wind. 12. Rainy a ort. ad o. R. p. m. Raging wind. E. morn.
S. noon. 13. Shower coasting. 14. R. m. p. N E. M. S E. noon. 15. Tempestuous
wind. 16. Wetting 8 p. 17. Showring 9 p. 18. Temepestuous wind die tot. R. 1 p.
19. Wind variable. 22. Misling. 23. Hot. 24. Wet. Aches and fits.
1675. A July 4. ad Aug. 6.
4. s. drops, hot day, Small Pox at Oxford. 5. Soultry afflicting weather. 6.
Soultry. 7. Hot. Ely. 8, 9. Hot, dry. Ely. 11. Hot, wind even. Ely. 12. Wind
Ely. warm. 13. Wind at noon, warm. 14. Offering 11 m. 16. Windy, R. threatn.
17. R. 9 m. and p. m. 18. Some drops. 19. Very cold, rainy 9 p. etc. 20. Rain 4
p. 21. Wet die tot. 22. Rain. 23. Wet 2 p. 3 p. Forest hill Rain, Thunder. 24.
R. 9 m. very windy, dark. 25. Very windy, rain. 26. Rain, dark hot. 27. Windy
die tot. 28, Rain noct. tot. 29. Hot. 31. Rain die tot. fere. Bad Weather. Aug
1. Rain die tot. 2. Windy. 4. Hot Ely. soultry night. Iterum a Sept. 22. Oct.
13. Sept. 23. R. at midnight. 24. R. 4 m. 9 m. H. wind, warm. 25. Stormy noct.
praeced. Dash 2 m. wet 2 p. 26. Shower 2 p. 4 p. 27. Fog m. 28. Dark m. Rain 3
m. 7 m. 9 m. 29. Windy. 30. Q. Oct. 1. Frost, ice. 2. Rain 6 m. Fog. Ely. 5.
Fog. 6. Rain 7 m. Warm. 7. H. wind, misling. 8. H. wind. noct. praeced. showrs
6 m. 10. Clouds contrary. 12. Frosty, foggy. 13. Warm. Indispositions. Dry
weather, the Country man could not sow. Iterum, a Dec 75. ad Jan. 10. 76. 2.
Fog, temperate. 4. Dark mist. 5. Fog, dry. 6. Some rain 7 p. H. wind. 7. Close,
dark, warm. 8. Stormy wind 4 m. R. 7 m. 9. Fog, offer 10 m. 9. Rain a. l. 2 p.
8 p. 10. Rain a. l. 3 d. warm, wdy. 12. Dash of rain, windy. 13. much Rain 5 m.
Dark, windy. 14. R. midnight 12 m. Chimneys blown down, dash 8 p. 15. High wind
at n. warm, wet p. m. 17. High wind at n. rain 11 p. 18. Much rain 4 m. wind.
19. Rain 10 p. 20, Rain 10 m. o. 7 p. etc. 21. Rain p. m. m p. 22. Windy day.
23. Dry, wind. 9 Ships cast away in Mounts bay. 24. Drisle 11 m. 25. Rain 6 p.
Loss at Sea. Gazet, 26. High wind, warm, storm of rain. 27. Rain 4 m. 6 m.
Hurricane. 29. Rain hard 4 m. 30. Rain 4 p fog m. Dec. 11. The Plague very
violent in the Turkish Territories.
1676. Jan. 1. Fo Ely.
3. Wetting p. m. Ely. 4. Fog, very dark. Ely. 5. T. M. in Worcestershire. 7.
Drisle 7 m. N E. 8. Misty. Ely. 9. Fog; some moisture 5 p. 10. Some wet m. 3 p.
6 p. Ely.
1677. A Sept. 8. ad Oct. 28. Duplex.
8. Fog Ely. Meteor ab ort. in occ. by Ophiuchus. 1. Fog; H. wind; Meteor near
and Ve^seus. Two more near Eng^nasin. Firedrake in Moorfields 7 n. 10. Some
Fog; Meteor 10 p. 11. Fog, warm; brisk wind. Ely. 12. Fog, fila, warm; brisk
wind. 13. Plague broke out again Grand Cairo. Fog, hottish, shower 11 m. high
wind 4 p. S E. 14. R. 2 m. Meteors near Horns. 15. Fog; warm Meteor ab Aqu^
man. sin. ad Jovem. 16. Fog, dash ah 8. ad 10 p. 17. Warm night, showring 7 p.
18. Fog m. 19. Fog, gross. Ely. 20. s. drisle 8 p. 21. Rain ante 3 m. 10 m.
Shower. 2 p. dark. Nadir 2 p. 22. Warm n. s. rain, wd m. 9 p. 23. Warm rain 2 p.
hot night. 24. Dry, warm. 25. Brisk wind, warm. 26. Rain circa 4 m. Plague at
Cracow. Gazet. 1242. 27. Warm, high wind. 28. Rain 5 m. 29. Fog m. brisk wd;
some Rain. 30. Showring 3 or 4 times; warm. Oct. 1. Fog, ropes. 2. Halo at
night. 3. Fog; smart shower 4 p. 4. Frost. Shower, Halo 10 p. 5. Some dew; rain 9
p. 6. Drisle; wind round the Horizon. 7. Drisle. N E. 8. Fog; wind and rain. 9.
Fog; some wet 7 m. and 11 p. 10. Fog: Meteors 11 p. about. 11. Dash and high
wind. 12. Foggy die tot. 13. Rain and hail 2 p. 14. High wind, dash 10 (...)
Meteors. Shipwreck at Bridlinton bay. 15. Fog; hard frost. 16. Fog, brisk cold;
wind very cold by all confession. 17. Frost, fog; drisle 11 p. Ely. 18. R. n.
t. and wet m. Horn fair spoiled. 19. Fog m. drisle 9 p. Ely. 22. Rain noon, and
p. m. dark. 24. Winter morn, and dry day. 25. Fog, winter day. Ely. 26. Fog,
winter day. Ely. 27. Fog. N E. 28. Brisk wind, fog 2 p. N E. Die 22. Storm at
Swansey: not the like, yet no great damage.
Iterum a Dec. 6. ad 31.
6. Fog. Ely. 7. Rain ante 9 m. 3 Meteors, 2 bright ones. 8. Some rain 5 m. and
9 m. H. wd m. p. 9. Fog, rain a 1 m. Meteors; rain and blow much. 10. H. winds
noct. tot. ruffling, drisle. 11. R. ante 2 m. Meteor 6 m. flaring. 12. Fog S E.
high wd, r. hard 3 p Meteor near cor. 13. s. rain ante 7 m. high wd, drisle o.
A flash of Lightning 8 p. 14. Tempestuous wind nocte tota. rain 5 m. Meteor 7
p. 9 p. 15. Fog, wetting; dark day. Ely. 16. Fog. N E. 17. Fog. Ely. 18. Frost
m. N E. 19. Ice; fog blow. 3. 20. Tearing Frost, fog. Ely. 21. Thames froze at
Putney; stinking gross fog. 22. Frosty, fog. 23. Wind p. m. Ely. some rain. 4.
Wet a. l. foggy, some rain p. m. 25. Foggy Ely. Rain at night. 26. Foggy. Ely.
27. Wind and wetting a. m. damp wall. Tempest 11 m. 28. High wind. 29. Frost,
fog m. and die tot. 2 Meteors; though shine. 30. Gross fog; frost and dark.
1678. a Feb 16. ad Apr. 3. Duplex.
16. Mist m. 17. Mist. Nly. 18. Frost, mist. Ely. Meteors 8 p. 19. Frost, mist;
s. dewing 11 p. rain. 20. H. wind p. m. and m. p. 21. Rain m. o. 7 p. 11 p.
high winds. 22. Wind. 23. Misty, wd. 24. Rain 4 m. 5 p. Ely. 25. High wind n.
t. Snow 6 m. 26. Sharp wind. Meteor 5 m. near. 27. Frosty, vast Halo 9 p. Ely.
28. Fog, dark. March I. Shower 10 m. dark p. m. 2. Some drops 8 m. and 8 p.
warmer. 3. Some rain, coasting shower, short Meteor. 4. s. rain 6 m. snow 10 m.
and 1 p. 5. Snow a. l. cutting wind, sn. Hail 1 p. 6. Wind and shower 4 p. 11 p.
Ely. 7. Mist, dry. Ely. Variable. 8. Brisk wind N R. drisle. 9. High wind,
wetting p. m. 10. Rain 4 p. S. scarce sensible drops. S E. 15. Rain 2 m. Meteor
near Corona. 12. Warmer mist m. Meteor. under praesepe. Bright Meteor ace. 13.
Misty. 14. Mist m. Ely. 15. Brisk wind, very high. R. 1 p. 2 p. 16. Rain a. l.
and 1 p. coasting p. m. m, p. H. wind. 17. R. a. l. 10 m. etc. wind p. m. 18.
H. wind. Shower 1 p. 2 p. 6 p. news of wracks cast up, with dead men a die 16.
March 19. Rain p. m. 9 p. Aches. 20. Rain 8 p. stormy wd and Rain. S E. 21.
Great rain ante 4 m. high wd. S W. Elizabeth of London cast away. 22. Gr. hail
1 m. Very h. wd. yet fair. S W 23. Great rain ante 4 m. warm coasting showrs 7
p. Ely. 24. Very warm a. m. Aches. Ely. 25. Very cold. Ely. 26. Cold wind. Ely.
27. Frost m. cold, Indispos. Ely. 28: Misty, fine rain 10 p. Ely. 29. Black
Heaven, some drops offer, snow 7 p. Ely. 30. Frost, ice, Sun rutilus. Ely.
Meteors ante nonam, one near Pleiades. 31. Cold, misty, coasting; moisture
discerned. Ely. Apr. 1. Wetting 5 p. N. and E. 2. Some moisture 3 m. and 6 m.
brisk wind, Hail; Meteor ante nonam. 3. Cold, high wd, little scuds 9 m. 3 p.
Ao 1679. Dec. 9. 11. a November. 27. ad Dec. 25.
27. Gr. fog, drisle ante 8 m. and Ely. o. and 7 p. misle 9 p. ad 11 p. 28.
Fog, close m. p. Sly. 29. Sharp wind, some drisle. Ely. 30. Close fog, cold
vesp. cold in bed, mane; drisle o. p. m. and m. p. Ely Sept. 1. Fog. wet m. p.
shower 2 p. N E. 2. Fog, frosty day. Sly. 3. Gross fog; Sun rutilus. frost m. 4.
Very great fog; Ice two inches thick. 5. Very great fog. Ely. 6. Very great
fog. Ely. 7. Very great fog; rain a. l. misle a. m. and ante 5 p. Nly. 8. Fog,
close m. p. H. wd 9 p. Wly. 9. Rain and wind 1 m. Wly. 10. Rain 1 m. and 9 m.
sharp wind. Wly. 11. Snow 2 p. and 2. Nly. Very high wind 9 p. Sly. 12. Frosty,
fog. Nly. 13. Frost. offer Snow 10 m. and o. misle p. m. Wly. 14. Very great
Fog, thaw. Wly. 15. Fog, wetting m. p. dark. Wly. 16. Very great fog, frost,
drisle o. 5 p. Ely. 17. Very great Fog, drisle ante 8 m. Wly. 18. Warm, high
wind, dewing 10 p. Wly. 19. Warm, brisk wd. Wly. 20. Fog, H. wind; rain 1 m.
snow 1 p. W. 21. Fog, frost; snow 10 m. m. c. 22. Frosty, high wd, snow 1 p.
Nly. 23. Frosty, sharp wind. Tower-ditch frozen; very gr. Fog. Wly. Extreme
frosty, hail circa 6 m. Dec. 10. Storm for three days and nights; several Ships
cast away, Holy head Gazet. 1468. 5. Bruzels very great fog. Gazet 1468.
Ao 1680. March 11. 24. a die 2. ad 20.
March. 2. Cloudy and cold ab 11 m. ad vesp. N E. 3. Frost m. snow, hail, rain
circa 1 p. N E. 4. Hard frost, streets froze. N E. 5. Frosty, bright. W. S W.
6. Frosty, some hail and R. o. again 2 p. Clouds in W. with Hillocks. 7. Snow
and hail ante 9 m. again 10 m. sharp wind. Wly. N E. 8. H. wind, snow at Sun
occ. cutting wd. Nly. 9. Fr. high wd, rain and sn. circa o. p. m. Wly. 10. Very
cold winds l. sn. occ. N W. 11. Hard frost, cold sharp wd, Aches. N W. 12. Rain
a 2 p. ad Sun occ. Aches. N W. 13. Rain 8 m. wet day, H. wd, some snow Sun occ.
N W. 14. High wind noct. tot. and h. frost, snow 7 m. and 10 m. very cold and
blustering. N W. 15. Fair, white Clouds, some mist p. Sun occ. 16. Misty,
cloudy, fair; very cold at n. E. 17. Fog, Clouds fly low 8 m. Ely. 18. Fog,
ropes on ground. E. 19. Fog. overc. 11 m. close p. m. H. 20. Rain a. l and Sun
ort. etc. Smart shower 4 p. In Yorkshire snow up to the knee in 24 hours. Iterum
Platick. Vide in and.
Ao 168^. Feb. 26. 29. A die 18. ad Apr. 2.
Feb. 18. High wind, some R 11 n. and 10 m. Sly. 19. Warm. Sly. 20. Warm, s.
wetting 4 p. 7 p. sat n. Ely. 21. s. rain 8 m. H. wd, Indispos. R. 8 p. Sly.
22. Fog, warm rain a 5 p. S W. 23. Fog, shower circa 2 p. W. 24. Great fog. rain
a 9 m. in Nadir) per diem tot. Aches Nly. 25. Rain n. and a. m. close p. m. and
Foggy, distempers; Small Pox in the Country. Ely. 26. Rain m. misty. 27.
Cloudy, some rain ante 4 m. Nly. 28. Dark o. rain 2 p. distemp. Wly. March 1.
Fog, closing p. m. Sly. 2. Scarce open m. cold vesp. N E. 3. Fr. m. rain. E. 4.
Great fr. 5. Frosty. S W 6. Some hail and rain o. an^ 2 p. 7. Snow, hail ante 9
m. so 10 m. p. m. Aches. 8. High wind and snow mod. noct. praec. some snow ante
occ. cutting wind. 9. H. wind, R. and snow o. and and p. m. Wly. 10. Very cold
wd, little snow p. Sun occ. N W. 11, Fr. sharp wd. Aches. N W. 12. R. gentle a
2 p. ad Sun occ. N W. 13. Very wet o. cold, H. wd, wet p. m. N W. 14. H. wind
noct. tot. snow 7 m. and 10 m. N W. 15. Boys sicken. N W. 16. Foggy. E. 17.
Fog, cold, Aches. Ely. 18. Fog, ropes, warmer, Aches. Ely. 19. Fog. 20. Rain a.
l. smart shower 4 p. Ely. 21. Some wetting 4 p. 6 p. 10 p. Wly. Faintness. 22.
Much snow, stormy wd, feels with a winter face. N E. 23. High wind noct. tot.
tempest at Harwich. 23. H. wind 9 p. etc. Wly. 25. H. wd, shower 10 m. cold. N
W. 26. Very cold day, Ely m. Wly p. m. 27. Rain ante 8 m. and ante 2 p. Wly.
28. H. wind, rain ante 5 p. 6 p. 7 p. N E. 29. Cold, dark, and windy. Nly. Ely.
30. Hail 11 m. wind and shower o. 3 p. 31. Cold wd flying clouds, Meteor 8 p.
near Andromeda. Ely. April I. Cloudy m. some wd, open p. m. Ely. 2. Cloudy m.
open, H. wind or. S E.
Iterum, May 24. 3. A May 17. ad 31.
17. Clouding, brisk winds, Iris. S E. 18. Warm, fair; brisk wind. Wly. 19. Fog
m. hot. E. 20. Clouds gather as for rain; some wind. Wly. 21. Hot mist m. mist
at n. Ely 22. Mist m. Thund. and Lightning on this side, in the Horizon. E. at
n. 23. Cloudy m. s. rain a. m. and ante Sun ort. 6 p. and 7 p. 24. Close m.
wetting ab 9 m. p. m. and cast such a luster on the clouds, as if the Moon were
up. 5. Open m. clouding. 26. Cloudy, open wind, and a little rain. W. 27. Cool
wind, some clouds. 28. Fair, dry, warm; s. rain p. m. W. and at n. S. 29. Dry,
fair, soultry p. m. S E. Ely. 30. Hot, misty air. S E. 31. Mist m. H. wind ante
o. etc. heat; Clouds gather in N W. shower at occ. till 10 p. with Thunder; wd
at n. and cloudy!
40. Have not we somewhat to do to bring in a Table of 853. days for so trivial
a thing as an Aspect? Truly upon that account I Clap't it into 3 Columns, that
it might not spread it self, though the Reader knows my mind, that I count not
any Aspect a trivial thing, the Treatise will be lame and mutilous after all;
yet I would not have it destitute of a Limme that was substantial, or one of
its vital Parts. Every jot of the Table will be in Season whenever our Two
Planets greet one another; especially to the careful Observer of Inferior
Nature and its subordination to the Superior, I was willing with the Ancients
to vote a Dryth in the Planet, but notwithstanding more or less, our Aspect
brings Moisture almost 500 days of the 850. in the Total.

41. I would venture to one Conjecture before we part, wherefore this Aspect
should produce fits of Wet, as is seen 20. and something must be imputed to,
either his Nature, or his motion Annual, or Diurnal, That, when he shifts into
another degree, This, while he takes his turn, saluting the Cardinal Points,
hand in hand with his Consort, or as in some Country-Dances an Handkerchief may
be between them. But by what has bin said in the Lunar Sextile, the Fits of
Rain, I believe, are justly imputable to the Nature and Motion of all: Annual
in the and; Diurnal in the rest; for the 's shifting for her part, is
undeniable, out of dry into a Wet Corner. In the mean time, let us have leave
to ask our Dissenter, what is the reason of those sudden Storms, which by fits
surprise us, when the former Shower being blown over, a Second appears oft-times
more violent than the First? What is the reason of this Diabetes Celestial,
when the Clouds are so often dropping, and cannot hold, he has heard how we CANT
of Motions and Aspects etc. I would be glad to hear him speak to it
intelligibly.

CHAP. IX. Conjunction of Sol and Saturn.
1. before, by Laws of Method, must be discoursed of, being the easier Planet.
2. Saturn of a dull Visage, and yet called (...); with the reason. 3. A vast
Planet, 4. The Aspect appears once in a Twelvemonth. 5. Our Ancestors have not
left us a Diary of 30 Years for Saturn. 6. The Aspects Character. 7. Virgil,
Seneca, Epigines, etc. Testimonies. 8. Character made out. An unquestionable
notion of Dominion. 9. and 10. In Winter Signs and, it causes Frost; nay Frost
grows upon us, as passes from downward. 11. Some Frosts in August. The Table.
12. How Saturn mingling with the Sun can cause Cold. 13, 14, 15, 16. Cold seems
to be a privation, is indeed a Spirit. Some offer of proof. 17. Saturn is not
so horribly cold with us, for he Rains more than Snows. 18. finds a time for
cold Days in Summer. 19. And yet he can Thunder and Lighten, and that with
Danger. 20. Prodigious Hail. The Aspect causes Snow at distance from the
Partile Aspect. 21. Red Clouds, Rainbows, Halo's. 22. Yea and Winds also, as
Epigenes has noted. 23. Foreign Evidence remitted to another place. 24. Some
Sober men are of our Principle, Vicount St. Albans, Sir Walter Raleigh, and
Gerard Vossius.
1. SAturn is the Highest Planet, of incredible distance; so high, that it
scarce admits any sensible Parallax, as Artists persuade; and yet we are
forced, though we strain our selves, to reach at him out of Course, by the due
Laws of Method, which prescribes us to premise, what is of more easy
Confideration, that way may be made for what is more difficile. Such, we reckon
is the Planet of Jupiter: for though Jove be the Inferior, and so seems to be
less remote from our preception, yet that is no necessary consequence in
Nature, as we may see in the motion of the Neighbor Planet, which though it be
less remote than or, is harder to be understood. Nature is fond of a Knot
semetimes, though she has made none in a Bulrush. But the Nobler Vegitables
are so full of them that without them there is no Fruitfulness; no not a Bud
shows its Head.

2. Saturn, if we spy him in his Orb has no promising Countenance, a dull,
heavy Aspect, of a Palish or Leaden Gleam; upon which account they ascribe that
Metal to this Planet: so that if an Astrologer should tell a Novice, pointing
to that Star, that it had a considerable Influence, he would tacitly pronounce
the Dictator more dim-sighted than his Star. So that I wondered why the Ancients
called him Phaenon ((...)) but that Achilles Tatius tells us, that he is called
by so bright a Names, though he be the dullest Star, ((...)) for good Omen
sake, ((...)) by the Greeks and Egyptians.

3. However, the Novice may be admonished, therewithal to beget an Opinion of,
that the Ancient Astronomers reckon him to be even as vast a Star as; and while
the Moderns say he is twice as big as, and ten times as big as the Earth; that
is, 5 times, (for it is Keplers opinion we point at) as big as, we see it may do
mighty Feats.

4. It Is about 30 years that this Planet runs his course in the Zodiac, and
therefore his Conjunction with the Sun throughout all the Twelve Signs cannot
be observed, but by a Long-lived Observation, for which we offer up our thanks
to Heaven. Howbeit, once in the year the and do salute us, and invite us to
note that Influence, which the well employed Ages of the World in old time have
so often experienced.

5. A Table of 30 years Revolution would have been a Rarity 30 years ago; For
our Ancestors have left us no such Legacy that I know, at least not to the
public; therefore however the Reader shall value it, I must offer again my
Solemn Thanks to the Great Author of Life, who has enabled his poor Homager to
perfect it.

6. The Character of our Aspect from Ptolemy and others lies thus; It produces
Cold, and Frost, and Misty Weather, Clouds and dark Air, with Snow, where he
mentions Rain, Hail, Inundations, etc. Diseases proceeding from Cold, Death of
Ancient Men, etc. that we mention no more. -- Albumazar admits all that of
Ptolemy, but he harps upon Dryth more, being reckoned a Dry, as well as a Cold
Planet.

7. Nor is it Ptolemy only, we have other Contemporaries or Seniors, which
speak on this fashion, as before we had Poets and Philosophers, Virgil, Horace,
Seneca, Epigenes, Figulus, in Lucan, etc. and the Greeks. As many as have
reckoned noxious, have reckoned him Cold, Sallust, Porphiry. Upon this account
Virgils interpreter to show his Learning, expounds Frigida Saturni Stella i. e.
Nocens, says he; so for the Colds Influence, No body doubts the Ancients
minds, no nor for the Rain, Hail, Inundations; for Figulus in the Poet tells
us, that in may cause Floods, Summo si frigida coelo Stella nocens nigros
Saturni accenderet ignes (a Verse where is painted in his colors)
Deucalionaeos fudisset Aquarius ignes. Lucan. Lib. 1. And whereas the Poet bids
his Rustic be so Weatherwise as to to observe and in some Verses before quoted
Servius, I profess gives Light to his Poet, by telling us under what Signs
brought Rain for Italy, viz. Capricorn illustrating Horace from thence.
Hesperiae Capricornus undae. Where he further tells us of a Sign for Hail, Hail
in Scorpio, Grandines, Epigenes, who learned what he had from the Chaldean,
enlarges our Character after he has told us that,,, are cold and windy, and
help to inspissate the Air, even to, according to his Principles, the Framing
of a Comet; he adds that the Opposition of and may Thunder. I Will promise you,
if stands by and consents, apud Senec. N. Quest. Lib. VII. in the same tone is
Servius also.

8. That which may be made out by our Table is the Cold, the Frost, the close
muddy dark Air, or Misty or Hazy, as Ptolemy and Albumazar agree. For that I
have said is the Humiditas Horizontis, found in the Mamareth of Sol over.
Eschuid. fol. mihi, 33.

This Character, I say, may be made out; for though the Definition, as worded
in the Ancients, makes a great Noise of Frigus Horrendum, and Sickness, and
Famine, and Murrains of Beasts, yet this is to be understood, not in our
Country, nor of every Conjunction at what time of the year soever, but of those
only where the Planet has Dominion (i. e.) some advantages by its Situation in
respect of the Earth, (a Dead-Winter Sign, suppose, or the like) under which
Notion no man of Sense can deny Dominion, but must admit it for Antiquities
sake, at least as a tolerable Experiment. And not without season; for if the
and the Stars govern the Night, and that be well said, because the Night is the
more illuminate by their presence, than the and, when in a Hyemal Conjunction,
govern the Winter, because Wintee is the Colder for that familiarity. So far am
I am Arab.

9. For how comes it that in December. Ao 1667. you meet with Horrid Frost; and
January 1667, which is the very next Syzygie, Bitter Frost: and Jan. 1669. and
Febr. 1670. if you please to consult the Table: and how comes it that the Frost
grows upon every, as it descends by gradually, toward the Winter Tropique,
where usually (not always, I confess for February and March perhaps, is capable
of a Saturnine Cold;) usually I say; you meet with long, fierce, tiring Winters.

10. That this should be most apparent to our good Readers, we have begun the
Table at the Close of September, that all the Winter Months might lie together,
and be first presented. Which Division reaches from Michaelmas to April 22.
(such a Portion of the year being capable of Snow, may be reckoned Winterly.)
Now, if it be observed, I say, How Frosty Mornings or Days grow upon our Clime
in those Months wherein accompanies the, so that when he comes to and, we may
look for hard Winters, whatsoever may hap at other times: He may acknowledge
that the Frost starts in the oftener upon such advantage.

11. What if in August Month we meet a Frost, and the First Frost of the Year?
I hope (though we stand not much upon that) under the. See the Table.

intra Grad 10. Hyemal part.
Ao 1657. Sept. 22. 9.
10. Very wet 2 and 4 m. very violent 8 p, N E. 11. Muddy, offering; flying cl.
N E. 12. Offering misle; fair sub occ. N E. 13. Wet m. muddy, misty. N E. 14.
Wet ante L. close, misty. N E. 15. Clouds fly low. Lowry o. N E 16. Windy,
overc. m. white cl. N E. 17. Cold, misling p. m. N E. 18. Wet circa Sun ort. N
W. 19. Frost very cold. Wd blew hard at the Downs. N W. 20. Mist, frost, cold.
white cl. thick o. Ely. S E. 21. Fr. bright. Very high wd sub occ. but calm. E.
S E. 22. Fr. mist, very cold and h. wind. cloudy m. p. specially at n. 23.
Scarce frost, temperate, Cloudy. S W. 24. Wind and coasting shower o. s. rain
and hail. N E. 25. Much rain ante L. wet and Bluster p. m. not so much at
Wickham. 26. H. wind noct. tot. Dark, offer a. m. red cl. at night. N E. 27.
Wind audible a. L. frost m. s. overc. red clouds; Eastward Sun occ. 28. Wind
noct. Fr. clear, very cold wd. N W. 29. Fair m. striped cl. cold, s. moisture
Sum occ. N E. 30. H. wind, driving showrs 2 p. cold. N E. 1 October. Dark, cold
wind. N E. 2. Close, milder. Fila, groundmist. Meteor, N E. 3. Mist, cobwebs,
s. drops 7 p. N E.
Ao School. Oct. 4. 21.
23. Sept. 23, Rain 4 m. H. wind and wetting 8 p. Nly. 24. Wind, wet m. and 5
p. m. 25. Drisling 4 p. 7 p. H. wind. N W. 26. Some rain 11 m. N W. 27.
Cobwebs, some rain 1 p. N W. 28. Winds and wet 3 m. N W. 29. Warm, some drisle
m. S W. 30. Warm, Cobwebs, overc. S W. Vehement wd blowing down Trees. Oct. I.
Warm, drops, Cobwebs. N W. 2. Wind, Cobwebs, overcast, Ground-mist. N W. 3.
Frost, mist, with ropes store, cold, overc. 4 p. N E. 4. Close m. cold, fair m.
p. N E. 5 Rain 4 m. dark, misty, wetting m. p. S W. N W. 6. Close, muddy air d.
t. rain 8 p. very wet, etc. S W. 7. Store of wet, abund. p. m. till 8 p. S E.
8. H. wd, overc. o. coasting. showrs Sun occ. N E. 9. Frost, bright, cold,
wind; Meteors fly. Wly. 10. Frost, ice, ropes, warm. N E. 11. Frost, mist, ice,
cobwebs, thick fog 9 p. Wly. 12. Fog m. moisture. Ely. 12. Dark and cool,
missing p. m. blew mist. Ely. 14. Some drisling, wet 2 m. so o. and p. m. Ely.
15. Rain die tot. warm, black, Thunder, clouds; overc. n. Sly.
Ao 1659. Oct. 17. 3. Ab Oct. 6. ad 28.
6. Fair, Rain and close. 7. A glorious day, rain n. 8. Very fair, Sun shine,
cold night. 9. Warm, thick Sky and rain. 10. Close warm weather 11. Cloudy,
warm rain at n. 12. Some rain. 13. Frost, and a glorious day 14. More warm, s.
rain. 15. Rain a. m. fair, shine p. m. 16. Fair, cool a. m. overc. p. m. High
wd at n. some drisling. Wly. 17 Rain 3 m. and a. m. clouds stored, dropping 1
p. shower 5 p. H. wind. W. 18. Cloudy m. p. some drops occ. Ely. 19. Fog m.
close p. m. wetting 4 p. 6 p. Wly. 20. Fog 3 m. fair, dry. N W. 21. Frost 10 m.
fair, temperate. N E. 22. Fog, close, opening 2 p. N E. 23. Close m. lowering p.
m. cold; dropping 5 p. and a Shower. E. S E. Ely. 24. Fair n. fr. cobwebs,
clouds low; overc. p. m. and 7 p. N W. 25. Wd noct. tot. wet a 2 m. close, some
rain 7 p. Ely. 26. Fair n. warm; gentle R. 3 p. red clouds at E. S W. 27. Fog
noct. tot. and o. gross Cobwebs; much Gossamere; fog 9 p. Strawberries rise on
sloping Banks. S W. 28. Fog, cloudy, open, warm, some wind: Meteors ursa. Sly.
Ao 1660. October. 28. 15. Ab Oct 16. ad Nov. 8.
16. Close m. p. coasting shower some places 5 p. S W. 17. Rain a. l. fair,
somet. overcast. Nly. 18. Fair, some clouds. N W. 19. Fair, fr. overc. 10 m.
Nly. Mist below. N W. 20. Fr. fog. N W. at o. E. clear p. m. N E. 21. Frost,
black thick clouds in S. occ. clear and fair. E. N. 22. Frost, clear, some
wind. N E. 23. Cloudy, windy. Nly. fair 9 m. N. 24. Fr. fair, windy. S W. 25.
Fr. cold, windy, cloudy; frequent clouds in S. S W. N E. 26. Fr. Clouds
curdled, close day. W. 27. Dry, cold, wdy, Hail and R. 1 p. a shower 3 p. 28.
Rain offer midn. cloudy. 29. Fr. curdled clouds. N. 30. Fr. fair; seen half an
an hour after Sun or. 31. Fr. mist below, about Horizon; some rain, close and
moist even. W. Nov. 1. Close, cloudy, windy; dry, yet threatening. W. 2. Fr.
seen half an hour after Sun rising. N W. 3. Mist, some clouds even inclining to
moisture. S W. 4. Close and cloudy. W. 5. Fog below, fleecy clouds. S W. 6.
Fair, windy. N. 7. Open; windy, storm of R. 11 m. S E. 8. Fr. and fair; freez
hard at n. W.
Ao 1661. Nov. 8, 26. Ab. Oct. 30. ad Nov. 19. Oct. 30. Some clouds Sun or.
31. Windy, rain 8 m. rainy ad 10 p. S W. as in mist, d. m. p. warm d. wind n.
S W. Nov. 1. Misty, slabby a. wdy. S E. 2. Rain 5 m. a shower 10 m. warm;
stinking fog 9 p. so 9 m. ad 11. usque ad occ. S W. 3. Rain 5 m. rain die tot.
cleat n. S W. 4. Very rainy m. ad 10. frequent showrs ad 2 p. S. 5. Very rainy
m. a 5 ad 8 m. windy, blustering. wet d. t. S. 6. Windy, close. S W. 7. Cloudy,
windy m. S W. 8. Cloudy, windy, misty day s. showrs. S W. 9. Cloudy, windy,
stormy; showrs 3 and 4 p. some drops 5 p. S W. 10. Cloudy, windy, cold; Rainy 4
p. etc. S W. 11. Blustering wind and cloudy; stormy 10 m. cold d. n. clear. W.
S W. 12. Fr. and cold m. W. S. 13. Fr. cold p. m. even bright W. S. 14. R. H.
wind midnight, smart shower p. m. Meteors, Lightnings 7 p. W. 15. Misty,
wetting, very cold. N E. 16. High wind, very cold s. Rain. N. 17. Fr. very
cold, some Rain. N. 18. Cloudy, cold, windy. Nly. 19. Cloudy, Holo. N.
Ao 1662. Nov. 20. 8. A Nov. 11. ad 28.
11. Rain 5 m. dark a. m wet. Very dark, with violent Storms of wind and rain
at n. 1 p. ad 3 p. snow in the Country. S W. 12. Rainy m. high wind, cold
freezing. S W. 13. Fr. fog, cold rain a. m. H. wind. S W. 14. Fr. H. cold wd
freezing. S W. 15. Rain m. p. H wind 1 m. S W. 16. Fog, fair, cold; frost m. S
W. 17. Fog, frosty. S E N E. 18. Cold, foggy, rain a 6 p. ad 9 p. Nly. 19.
Warm. close, drisling p. m. and 5 p. S E. 20. Fog, warm, some clouds. S W. 21.
Fog, rain 7 m. and aie tot. harder 5 p. S W. 22. Blow noct. tot. cold. H. wd.
open 3 p. W. 23. Cloudy, cold, rain 2 p. S W. 24. Rain hard 6 m. N E. 25. Fog,
frosty, clear n. N E. 26. Fog, frosty, clear n. N E. 27. Fog, fro; some snow a.
l. S W. 28. Fog, frosty, hard. S W.
Ao 1663. Dec. 1. 9. A Nov. 20. ad Dec. 10.
20. Close, cool wind. 21. Close and foggy. Wly. 22. Close and drisling. 23.
Rain toward or. Rain. Wly. 24. Fr. fair and mist. Nly. 25. Fr. fog; rain at o.
close. Nly. 26. Fr. fog, espec. toward o. W. 27. Close 9 p. N. 28. Open, not
over coldish. N. 29. Close. 30. Rain n. close day. E. Dec. 1. Mist m. W. 2.
Mist rain m. close p. m. m. p. ad 9 n. W. 3. Rain m. close day, high wd 9 n. S
E. 4. Rain m. open o. R. 9 n, 5 p: 5 Rain 5. Rain, wet a 2 p. high wd ad 7. N.
6. Fr. with snow, H. cold wd. N. 7. Snow n. freezing die tot. Snow 10 m. N. 8.
Frosty m. dropping 8 n. windy. Sly. 9. Fog, close, wind; some moisture a. m.
Sly. 10. Fog, close, moistning damp. Wly.
Ao 1664. Dec. 1. o. Nov. 30. Ad Dec. 22.
Nov. 30. Close, mild, rain p. m. wetting 6 p. ad 11 p. Dec 1. Close, mild,
some drisling at n. N E. 2. Some wet ante l. fog, coldish, close, mild. N W. 3.
Fog, cold, wetting, flaques, snow 1 p. hail 3 p. E. 4. Fog, h. fr. small snow
ante L. E. 5. Very h. black fr. R. gentle 7 p. etc. E. 6. Mist, close wetting 6
p. E. 7. Mist, R. ante L. and 4 m. wet a. m. and p. m. S. 8. Much wet 4 m. 7 m.
S W. 9. Close, wet m. R. rain sadly 8 p. etc. Sly. Much rain as has been
known. 10. Cold wind, close. N E. N. 11. Fr. some drops 4 p. walls sweat S. 12.
Wetting ante ort. and m. R. suddenly a 5 p. ad med. noct. etc. 13. Mist, close,
warm. S. 14. Close mist, cool, open day commended. S E. 15. Fr. close, mild. S
E. 16. Mist, cold, open. N. 17. H. fr. mist; rain 2 p. and p. m. S W. 18. Close
mist, warm. S. 19. Aches 6 m. Flaring Comet S E. in, above an hour high, warm,
wetting 1 p. S W. N W. 20. Comets 5 m. close m. p. warm. N W. 21. Cloudy,
close, mild. N W. 22. Close m. bright drisle 10 p. S W.
Ao 1665. Dec. 20. 11. Die 11. ad Jan. 2.
11. Fr. close d. cold wind N E. 12. Cold and drying p. m. N E. 13. High wind
noct. tot. close, cold N E. 14. Close, cold, brisk wd, little snow 9 p. circa
Moon or. Ely. 15. Roaring wind noct. tot. frosty, sharp, windy; fits of snow a.
m. 9 p. Moon or. Ely. 16. Frost and snowing die tot. Ely. 17. Hard frost, snow
sub noct. Ely. 18. Frosty and fair. Ely. 19. Frosty and fair. Ely. 20. Wind,
mist m. and vesp. o. Ely. 21. Hard fr. close p. m. N. 22. H. fr. mist ice on
Th. Wly. 23. H. fr. mist m. Wly. 24. Fr. snow, or. mist. N. 25. Excessive fr.
close m. p. p. m. Wly. 26. Close, mild, wind. Sly. 27. Mist m. warm. W. and S.
28. Fog, little fr. warm. Sly. 29. Fr. mist, close m. p. S E. 20. Close, mild,
wetting. S W. 31. Rain 6 m. and a. m. warm and mist. Sly Jan. 1. Rain a. l.
wind warm Store of wet 7 p. 2. Rain m. p. noct. warm, windy, dark. S W.
Ao 1667. Jan 2. 22. A Dec. 22. ad Jan. 14.
22. Snow a. l. frosty. 23. Frosty, high wd m. Nly. 24. Vehement fr. snow 4 p.
10 p. Nly 25. Severe fr. bright wd. Nly. 26. Frosty, rain 8 p. Nly. 27. Fr.
misty, misle 11 m. sn. 4, p. etc. 28. Mist, fr. mist 10 p. Nly. 29. Foggy,
cold; rainy. N W. 30. Snow m. then rain. N W. 31. Frosty. Nly. Jan. 1. Bitter
fr. snow. Nly 2. Bitter fr. ice on Th. Nly. 3. Bitter fr. Ice in bread, sn. sub
vesp. Sly. 4. Frosty, snow, h. wind and cold. Nly. 5. Fr. snow, dark wds. Nly.
6. Warmth, snow considerable Nly. 7. Wind, close, fine thaw. Wly. 8. Rain day
break S E. 9. Cold m. p. rain and snow, wind a. l. Wly. 10. Fr. and snow die
tot. Nly. 12. Mist m. fr. dark, fog taken up. Sly. 13. Mist, suspic. a. m. Ely.
14. Fr. misty die tot. h. wind. Sly.
Ao 1668. Jan. 14. 4. A Jan. 3. ad 24.
3. H. wind a. l. warm, misling m. and vesp. N W. 4. Windy, dropping; short,
but furious Tempest or. Wly. Lightning at Salisbury and Bagshot 11 p. Dr.
Childrey. 5. Tempestuous noct. and d. some showrs p. m. Wly. 6. Rain m. wind
and misling m. p. Nly. 7. Tempest of wind and rain a. m. Wly. 8. Tempestuous
driving rain and snow 2 p. 4 p. 6 p. S W. 9. Fr. windy a. l. N. 10. Stormy
cutting wind a. l. and die tot. snow a. L. 11. H. fr. closing. Wly. 12. H. fr.
mild. N W. 13. Wetting 1 p. warm. Wly. 14. Bright, warm, summers day. Talk of a
Comet, wind audible at n. 15. Fr. N E. 16. Mist, close, mild yet. N E. 17.
Close, mild, Birds sing, misle 5 p. N E. 18. Close, misling, mist. 19. Dark,
cold flavors N. E. but n. S W. 20. Fog m. and p. m. close. Sly. 21. Foggy m. p.
cold wind, fog n. Sly 22. Wetting a. L. and vesp. -- 22. Fog, warm, near
Aequinoct. S E. 24. H. cold audible wind, so mist. S W.
Ao 1669. Jan. 25. 16. A Jan. 13. ad Feb. 5.
13. Hard Fr. snow p. m. with Hail, snow n. 14. Fr. windy, more or less die
tot. 15. Cold, dark day, snow a little p. fr. continued. 16. Fr. obscure air,
little wd stirring. 17. Cloudy, cold, thaw p. s. Hail and R: 6 p. m. 18. Cold,
close, frosty; Starlight night. 19. Frosty m. drisling snow n. 20. Frosty m.
thaw p. frost at night. 21. H. fr. cutting air. 22. Fr. brake, misty cold
drisle. 23. Rainy, dark day. 24. Bright m. Rain and wind p. Storms of hail 3 p.
25. Winds and rain. 26. Frosty m. pleasant day. 27. Cold, windy, moist, drisle.
18. Pleasant day, Halo. 29. Moderately pleasant. 30. Small frost, wd N. Halo.
31. Frosty m. windy, cloudy p. at n. dropping. Feb. 1. Pleasant m. wdy, cloudy
p. Rain at night. 2. Cloudy, moist, hail p. wdy, cold n. 3. Terrible winds and
rain day and night. 4. Great winds continue, some rain day and night. 5.
Frosty, but variable.
1670. Feb. 6. 28. A Jan. 25. ad Feb. 17.
25. Rain p. m. Tempest 11 p. with Snow. Nly. 26. Tempestuous noct. tot. some
snow m. frosty. Ely. Blustering till Even. 27. Snow 9 m. o. and p. m. N. 28.
Snow m. p. N. 29. Snow 6 m. p. m. Lightn. 8 p. Ely. 30. Vehement frost, drisle
5 p. warmish at n. Ely. 31. Blustering, frosty. Thaw show ante 11 p. Feb. 1.
Blustering m. frosty. N E 2. Blustering noct. tot. Vr^e froze. Stormy wd. N E.
3. Vehement fr. snow 9 m. and 1 p. Bitter. N E. 4. Snow a. l. Taps froze. Nly.
5. Vehement Fr. snow p. m. N E. 6. Great snow a. l. m. Nly o. 7. Hard fr. N E.
8. Snow 8 m. and 11 p. N E. 9. Urine froze, snow m. and 11 m. p. 10. Snow a. m.
per tot. Nly. 11. Much snow p. m. H. wd, thaw. 12. Blustering noct. tot. wind
and rain p. m. Snow and Hail 4 p. Much rain 8. and 11 p. 13. R. circ. Sun ort.
freez 4 p. 14. Frosty, windy. Ely. 14. Rain Sun or. Freez upon it, and glaze
the ground; Thaw p. m. Ely. 16. Frost m. wet p. m. Ely. 17 Foggy day, wet at
night.
1671. Feb. 18. 10. a Feb. 9. ad March 1.
6. Snow a. l. Halo 9 m. 7. Snow 8 p. Misling die tot. 8. Wetting a. m. and p.
m. 9. Warm and cloudy, winds a. l. H. wind at night. 10. Wetting m. p. 11. Dew
on the Windows. 12. H. Gusts 3 p. etc. Drisle 9 p. 13. Warm m. close, misty
vesp. 14. Close m. p. cool. 15. Close m. p. wd, lower at Even. 16. Wetting 3 p.
17. Fog, very warm p. m. E. 18. Close, dewing o. N E. 19. s. wet m. drisle a.
m. cold. N. 20. Snow o. Halo 3 p. 21. Frost m. wind, often shower o. and p. m.
Nly. 22. Frost m. R. 8 m. 23. Fog, drisle even. 24. Some drops 4 p. 25. Wet sub
meridiem, cool p. m. shower from one cloud. 26. Frost, misle, drisle 5 p. N. 27.
s. drops. N W. 28. Close. Sickness at Barbado's. Gazet. March 1 Coldish noon. S
E.
1672. March 2. 22. A Feb. 20. ad March 13.
20. Fr. m. N E. 21. Mist m. drops toward Sun set. Comet at Dansk Transactions
4017. 22. Close, warm wind. 23. Misty air, warm. 24. Cooler p. m. Ely. 25 Dry
m. Rain 9 p. N E. 26. Close, damp windows; cool. N E. 27. Wetting a. m. close.
28. Indispositions. 29. H. wd a. l. cold, close, dry. March 1. Ice. N E. 2. Fr.
Sol rubens and Luna. N W. 3. Misty die tot. rubens, frost m. 4. Fr. Pleasant.
5. s. mist, offer p. m. and 7 p. and 10. p. 6. Shower 8 m. warm. 7. Snow o. and
1. p. cold wd. N W. 8. Snow hard p. m. tot. 9. Frost, ice. W. 10. H. wind. 11.
Ice, misty, lowering m. p. 12. Fog, thaw. 13. Gr. fr. misty, close m. p. wind.
1673. March 15. 5. A March 5. ad 26.
5. Snow, slabby 11 m. cold wd. N E. 6. Rain 1 p. 2 p. 5 p. N E. 7. Fr. close,
cold, misty, dry, N E. 8. No fr. cloudy. 9. Fr. fog m. close and cold. 10.
Warmish, wet p. m. Rain 11 p. N. 11. Close m. p. mist, dry. N E. 12. Snow and
rain vesp. ad midn. E. 13. Drop o. close, open even. S W. 14. Warmish S E. 3
Children complain. 15. Warm. S E. 16. Windy, wetting circ. 6 m. R. 11 m. 17.
Windy, Rain 7 m. 10 p. o. 5 p. 9 p. S E. 18. Thick noon, but no rain, windy p.
m. Great Halo 9. p. 19. Shower o. showring 7 p. 20. Fine. warm day. 21. Misting
5 m. close; cold wd. N E. 22. Hysterical fits 3 m. close, cold. N E. 23. Very
cold, close, misty. Hail ante 6 p. N E. 24. Wetting 3 p. Rain 10 p. S E. 25.
Hail 11 m. Rain 2 p. S E. 26. Wind, shower 3 p. N E.
1674. March 28. 18. A die 19. ad Apr. 1.
17. Rain 6 p. etc Ely. distempers. 18. Snow a. l. N E. so a. m; very cold p.
m. some misle N E. 19. Snow a. l. Tempestuous a. l. very sharp wind. Nly.
Aches. 20. Snow a. l. and m. p. foggy, High wind a. l. Aches. 21. Close, cold
and fog. N E. 22. Fog, offer snow, Aches. N E. 23. Fog, variable wind, A. 24.
Close fog, Aches. ches. 25. Very warm, s. mist. 26. Rain m. warm. 27. Warm,
hottish. 28, Hottish. Ely. 29. Fog; hot. Ely. 30. Brisk wind, fog. Ely. 31.
Fair. Ely. Apr. 1. Frost, wind Ely. Aches. 2. N E. Fr. threatening rain, vanish;
Aches. Variable wind. 3. Close, wetting 7 m. H. wd. 4. Cold, wetting 10 m. and
1 p. 5. * 6. Showrs 11 m. Ely. 7. Showrs 9 m. warm E. fits, Aches. 8. Fair,
Ely. Aches. 9. N E. Close, offer p. m. Aches. 7. Storm at Wells, Shipwreck at
Lyn.
1675. Apr. 11. 1. A March 31. ad Apr. 23.
31. Rain a midnight ad merid. Aches. Apr. 1. R. 6 m. Hail 10 m. 3 p. Aches,
cold. Nly. 2. Cold dash a. l. Aches. 3. Ely. Cold, Hysterical indispositions.
4. Cool wind, Aches m. p. 5. Ely. R. cool. 6 Ely. Mist, cool wd, Aches, N. 7.
E. Hail noon, cold winds, and red wds, Indispos. E. 8. E. Frosty, very cold red
wd. N E. 9. Ely. Frost n. 10. Warm, wetting a. m. brisk wind. 11. Warm, wind
coasting; shower, and 7 p. Aches. R. a. l. 12. s. drops 1 p. Aches. 13. Cold,
Aches. N E. 14. Windy, hazy. Ely. 15. Warm, dry winds; Aches. Ely. 16. Warm,
dry wind, Aches E. 17. warmwd, Aches, Sun occ. N E 18. E. Warm, dry. 19. Ely.
Close, misty. Ely. 20. E. Warm. Complaints. Aches. 21. E. Aches, sickness,
misty. 22. Cold, rain Sun occ. Aches. 23. N. R. Hail ante 10 m. o. Aches.
1676. Apr. 25. 15. Ab Apr. 13. ad May 7.
13. Some wet 5 m. 9 m. o. dark. Sly. 14. Rainy a 4 m. ad 1 p. Rainy again at 6
p. N E. N. Gout. 15. Open N W. mist Ely. p. m. fr. m. 16. Misty, close. E. 17.
Offer to rain 10 m. shower a 1 p. cool night, headaches. 18. Rain 11 m. 4 p. 7
p. 19. Rain 4 m. 5 m. 7 m. 10 m. etc. Open N E. mist, Aches. 20. Cloudy 3 p. s.
offering 4, 6 p. N. 21. Cool m. warm, misty, Meteors 9 p. Ely. Aches. 22. Dry
Nly. N E. colder at night. 23. Close m. p. coldish. N. N E. 24. H. wind, some
drops 5 p. Nly. 25. Close, Indispositions. 26. Hot night W. S W. Aches. Gout.
27. Hot, Meteors. ad caud.. 10 p. N Indispositions. 28. s. rain, hot night. Ely
Aches. 29. Showrs Wly. wind, hot, Aches. 30. A drop or two discerned. Ely at
night. N. shower 11 p. hot m. Aches. May 1. Shower 5 m. hot. Wly. 2. Fair,
Indispositions. Wly. Meteors. 3. Close, cool, fair and brisk wind. Meteor. N E.
Aches. 4. Cool a. m. wind p. m. E. Aches. 5. Fair, dry wind. Ely. Aches. 6.
Hot, wind, brisk noon, etc. Great drops 6 p. 7. High wind die tot. misty in
Morefields. W. S W.
1677. May 10. 29. Ab Apr. 28. ad May 22.
28. Warm, brisk wind, s. little shower 3 p. Sly. 29. Warm, high wind, shower 9
m. Indispositions. W. 30. Rain 11 m. and coasting till midn. wind. W. Vale of
White horse in danger of a Flood. May 1. Wet m. rain 11 m. Such a May Day not
known. S W m. N W. n. 2. Close, cooler, rain 5 p. 9 p. N W. Drisle 7 m. at
Forest Hill 3 p. at Vrbridge Flood at Tunbridge. 3. Wet a. m. tot. shower of
Hail and Rain with an illustrious Rainbow; drisle 9 p. Ely. m. Sly o. VVly p.
4. Shower 1 m. and 5 m. 5. Cool m. white frost. VVly. after Ely. various. 6.
Lowering m. p. some wind. Ely. Apoplexy 7 m. 7. Misty, brisk cool wind, Ely.
various. 8. Mist early. brisk wd. Ely. 9. Warm, windy. E. Shower at Hatfield.
10. Warm wind. Wly. 11. Warm; wind variously. Ely. Sly. 12. Rain apace 4 m.
wind and open. S. 13. Close m. gusty, sprinkle 8 p. 14. Fine warm day. Wly. 15.
s. little rain 7 m. warm wd. Wly. 16. Mist, very hot and brisk wind. Ely. 17.
s. wind, Meteors 10 p. soultry. Boys sicken. 18. Thunder, with dash of Rain 4
p. 19. Dropping 3 p. shower 4 p. and serious 6 p. clouds contrary. 20. Foggy,
gust of wind 2 p. 5 p. Ely. Various wd. cool. 21. Wind various, overcast a. m.
E. 22. High wind, a drop or a afar off, misty at night. Ely. 10. Rain 1 m.
Meteor 10 p. ab Oph. Cap. ad Lyram usque.
1678. May 25. 14. A May 13. ad June 6.
13. High wind noct. tot. wdy m. Wly. Rain ante 8 m. hot 10 p. Nly. 14. Mist,
wdy. N W. 15. Mist, brisk wd circa 7 m. cold m. confessed; close m. p. 16.
Mist, lowering. W 17. Mist m. Wly. p. m. Ely Indispositions. Hot wind, Meteor.
18. Misty, windy, open Ely. Red in the E. cold night, Meteors. 10 p. very
windy. 19. Misty m. cool E. great fr. m. hot, Aches. 20. Less fr. hotter,
little wd. Wly. 21. Warm, brisk wind. S W. 22. Rain, close, hottish; rain m. S.
1 p. rain 3 p. some rain 7 p. Ely. dark. 23. Rainy night ad 8 m. 10 m. close
Ely. warm. 24. Some rain and gusts 8 p. Nly. 25. Rain 2 m. and a. m. dash 3 p.
5 p. wd Southerly. 26. Close a. m. and mist, rain apace o. ad 3 p. at night
Wly. some drops 8 p. wd rise 9 p. 27. Windy, open; s. small rain; Blite at
Forest hill. 28. Ely. Rain 7 m. close, hottish. Nly. 29. Rain 5 m. and a. m.
close m. p. shower 4 p. and drisle Aches, morn Th. 30. Fair, warm, windy 4 p.
Wly. 31. Mist m. Wly, high wind, offer, clouding p. m. hot 9 p. shower 10 p. At
Blois in France, a Church beaten down with Thunder, much more harm in that
Neighborhood: Hail as big as man's Fist. Gazet 1310. June 1. High wind and
shower 4 p. 6 p. 7 p. drisle etc. Wly. 2. Misty, open, some wind, some drops 7
p. Wly. warm at night. 3. Some drisle 5 m: 7. m. close m. p. s. drisle 2 p. and
vesp. wd. Wly. 4. Open, misty, close m. p. soultry, wd. S. 5. Somewhat warm,
cloudy 11 p. Ely.
1679. June 9. 28. A May 28. ad June 21.
28. R. m. o. hot vesp. wind. Wly. 29. Rain store n. and 5 m. again 9 m. little
wind, open. N E. 30. Fog, wet m. p. p. m. Wly. Cobwebs. 31. s. wind Wly. 2
drops 8 m. June 1. Brisk wind S W. red Heaven. Wly. 4. Close, rain 5 m. drisle
7 m. brisk wds, rain vesp. and 10 p. 5. High, cold wd. Wly. 6. Stormy wind. S
W. 7. Windy. N W. Open 8. Fair, wdy. N W. 9. Wdy. Nly. 10. Cloudy, and
suspicious quarters. 12. Warm, brisk wd, offer vesp. s. distempers. 13. Some
wind, offer a. 8. hot S. warm n. 14. Open, drisle 10 m 1, 2 p. wind rise. S.
Warm although windy. 15. Warm wind Sly. clouds stripped. Gripes, headaches. 16.
Wd, warm, open, shower. S. close p. m. wetting 8 p. Nly. 17. H. wd, showrs S. S
W. wd laid Sun occ. 18. Shower a 8 m. 2. smart showrs 10 n. high wind. Sly. 19.
Rain a. m. and p. m. s. dash, rain Sun occ. ante Sun occ. Iris duplex. Sly. 20.
Rain little circa 10 m. warm a. m. Sly. 21. Wind brisk, clear m. cloudy
oftentimes lowering. Nly.
1680. June 23. 12. A June 11. ad July 5.
11. H. wind; misling 10 m. 4 p. 7 p. 12. High wind, rain, dash 10 m. 13. Rain
Nly. Fog, brisk wd. 14. Cool wind, rain 2 p. Ely. 15. E. Mist, wd. 16. Brisk
wind, hot night. 17. Drisling, hottish. 18. H. wd, drisle. 19. Clear. 20. Brisk
wd, dry; Hail as big as an Egg. Thunder in Hassia near Marpurg. 21. Brisk wd,
soultry. E. 22. Clear Ely. Southerly. 22: Great Fog, frost m. hot. Ely. 24.
Brisk wind, hot. Ely. 25. Harmful Thunder at Venice. 26. Ely. Clear, soultry.
27. Ely. Soultry, little shower Thunder 9 p. Clouds contrary. 28. Brisk wd,
soultry. 29. Clouds contrary. Lightn. 30. Ely. High wind, dew 7 m some mil-dew
observed, blasting. July 1. Ely. Dry, cooler. 2. Brisk wind, rain 2 p. 3. Rain
6 m. dash 1 p. Thunder, stormy wind; Plague at Andalusia. 4. Brisk wind, rain.
5. R. smart showrs.
1681. July 8. 26. A June 27. ad July 20.
27. Shower 11 m. hot and saint Lightning 9 p. 28. Hot n. fog. m. shower 11 m.
29. Rain o. ad 4 p, 30. Very wet ante Sun, ad o. Nly. Die 27. Darchester, about
Two miles from it, Globe of Fire burnt Trees to ashes. July 1. High wind, rain
8 m. and 11 m. Nly. 2. Cool fine day. Nly. 3. Troubled air 11 m. wd. 5. Fog m.
Harmful lightning in W. 10 p. 6. Th. R. W. circa 2 m. gentle shower 4 p. Nly. 7.
Hot n. some rain circa o. and 3 p. 1. Fog in Fields, soultry n. Nly. 9. Cooler.
N W. 10. H. wind m. N W. 11. Rain 2 m. 1 p. Temperate. 12. High wind, some rain
p. m. and 10 p. 13. High wind, calm at n. 14. R. High wind 6 m. Rain 6 p. 15.
High wind, some drops 9 p. 16. Some rain 9 m. and 4 p. windy vesp: 17. H. wind,
drisle 9 m. and 11 m. 18. Dry, some rain 1 p. Nly. 19. Dry clouds, warmer. N W.
16. Plague broke out at Magdeburg.
1652. July 15. 2. A July 3. ad 26.
3. Dropping, red wind. N E. 4. Dropping, H. red wind. N. 5. Red wind, rainy at
night. N. 6. Showry windy. N W. 7. Showry, Thunder at night N W. 8. Showry,
more wind, calm at night. 9. Windy, some shower at n. 11. Rain like, some wind.
S E. 12. More wind, rain at night. 13. Showry, misty at night. S E. 15. Windy.
S E. 16. Rainy die tot. 17. Dropping m. at n. wind change. 18. Dropping, more
wind; misty still at n. N. 19. Misty m. windy n. then E. 20. s. wind, misty n.
N E. 21. Misty m. close. 22. Thunder, showrs, sh. at n. N. 23. Dropping at n.
24. Showrs, clouds contrary. windy. 25. Windy, dropping. 26. Windy, dropping.
1682. July 23. 10. A July 11. ad Aug. 4.
11. Shower early; close, yet hot. Hurricane at Anjou. 12. Hot. 13. Hot n.
soultry p. m. 14. Fog, soultry, brisk wind. N E. 15. Hot n. Thunder, rain ante
3 m. 16. Shower o. and 1 p. some drop ante 5 p. 17. Wind brisk, fits of rain.
18. H. wind and shower 7 m. drop 1 p. very cool. 19. High wd, cool. 20. Cold n.
shower o. Meteor 11 p. 21. Wetting. Rain 10 p. etc. 22. Showrs coasting, cool,
windy. 23. Wind and drops 11 m. shower 1 p. and p. m. great Iris 7 p. N W.
Harmful Lightning at Philispburg. 24. Early wetting, dry; pains in the Head.
25. Fog m. hot. N W. 26. Fog m. hot, Meteors 2 by Aquila. T. M. at Friburg. 27.
Early wet, warm. 28. High wind, warm, some drisle. 29. High wind, suspicious
cold vesp. Meteors. 30. Warm, great Halo. 31. Warmer, gentle rain 2 p. ad 8 p.
Die 28. Hail at Bordeaux, harmful to the Vintage. Aug. 1. Windy, lowering p. m.
2. Windy. 3. Fr. cold m. 4. Cold, great dew, clouds contrary.
1653. July 30. 16. A July 19. ad Aug. 10.
19. Cold, red wind. N E. 20. Some rain. N E. 21. Windy, hot. N E. 22. Hot and
dry season. High wind n. N E. 23. High wind, cold, close. N E. 24. Hot, calm. N
E. 25. Misty m. hot, rain, Thunder. 26. Some rain, cold wind; blew mist. 27.
Rain a. l. blew mist. N E. 28. Coasting Showrs, hot. 29. Cold m. coasting
showrs. 30. A Shower. N W. 31. Gentle rain die tot. Aug. 1. Some rain, windy n.
2. Rainy, windy, thunder, shower. 4. High wd, H. wd, showry. Thunder. 5. Windy,
showry. 6. Idem, Flash of Lightning. 7. Windy, showry, rainy n. 9. Some wd. N
W. 10. Little wd. N W.
1683. Aug. 6. 23. A July 27. ad Aug. 17.
27. Foggy air; some gusts' warm. 28. Foggy, dark but no Rain. Ely, 29. Foggy,
hot, high wind. Ely. 30. Foggy, winds dry. Ely. 31. Foggy m. warm, winds. Ely.
Aug. 1. Misty, soultry rain 4. p. etc. 2. Foggy, showrs p. m. soultry. 3. Fog,
shower hot, brisk wd. 4. Brisk wind, cool shower. 5. Brisk wind, shower. 6. Some
rain, dark 4 p. 7. Brisk wind, cool m. Nly. 8. Rain m. p. by fits. high wd die
tot. 9. Some rain, coldish. Nly. 10. Hard frost, mist. gusts, no Rain. 11. Hot
n. wetting m. 12. Cold, high wd, shower. N W. Hamburgi glans ignea delabitur
fulguris instar. 13. s. drisle, cool even. 14. Rainy o. dark, hot, high wind.
15. Foggy, rainy m. p. 16. Frosty m. some drops, shower. 17. Misty m. coasting
rain. N W.
1654. Aug. 13. o. Ab Aug. 1. ad 25.
1. Red wind, high wind, cool mists. N W. 2. Dry, Sun eclipsed 7 of 12. N E. 3.
Wind and red wd, still n. N W. S W. 4. Fine showrs, mists. S W. 5. Hottish and
still. some wd p. m. N W. 6. Wind, some drops, misty at n. S W. 7. A shower
discovered. Some little wet at night. S W. 8. Wind, good store of wet. S W. 9.
Fair, bright air. S W. 10. Wind, frost, hot day. S W. 11. R. Th. b. d.
dropping, s. fits of Wet. 12. Thunder m. high wind; much wet, so at night. Th.
S W. 13. Most violent wind, with rain. s. say Thunder. S W. 14. Rain b. d. cool
wind, showring. S W. 15. Wind higher, stormy die tot. S W. 16. Cool,
unconstant, not so much rain. 17. Cool m. cold, showring. N W. 18. Cool; wet at
Sun set, wet to purpose. N W. 19. Very cold wind, mist at n. N E. 20. Hot,
muddy clouds, fair. N E. 21. Hot ground mist at n. N E. 22. Misty m. suspicion
of R. Sun occ. N E. 23. Blew mist, red clouds at n. N W. 24. Fair, white
clouds, suspicion, clear wd. N E. 25. Hot, fair; fewer white; some audible wd.
S E.
Ao 1655. Aug. 27. 13. Ab Aug. 16. ad Sept. 7.
16. Rain a. L. and Sun rise, wet die tot. S E S W. 17. Dark and showrs. S W.
18. Showring 3 p. hot. W. 19. Very wet, hot. S W. 20. Wet m. so at n. Thunder
s. places. N W. 21. Wind and wet, some clearing. N W. 22. Clearing, some storms
and clouds. N W. 23. Dropping, mist at midn. N W. 24. Mist m. Rain with us,
none elsewhere; Rain hard, a Flood feared. N W. 25. Mist, Sun shine. N E. and S
W. 26. Hot. W. 27. Fr. clear m. mist. lowering in some quarters. N W. 28. High
wd, flying, Clouds and darkish. S W. 29. Rain Sun or showring, clearing at n. S
W. 30. Fair, storms of rain, inconstant. S W. Stormy wind p. m. and driving
rain. H. wind at n. Sept. 1. Showrs, high wind at night. S W. 2. Tempestuous a.
l. Rain, misty H. Halo at n. S W. N W. 3. Fr. fine m. some gentle showrs. Ignis
faticus at n. S W. 4. Clouds fly low, rain, thunder. S W. N W. 5. Some coasting
showrs. N W. 6. Lowering, some showrs, thunder. S W. 7. Frost, bright, low mist.
s. showry. S W.
Ao 1656. Sept. 8. 96. Ab Aug. 25. ad Sept. 29.
25. Wind n. till 3 m. then calm, cold, wind rise. 26. Overc. a. l. N W.
mistyish Clouds, fair. N E. 27. H. winds, offering, high wind at n. N E. 28.
Windy, cloudy S E. N E. 29. Overc. blew mist. S E. N E. 30. Close m. 31.
Overcast m. N E. Sept. 1. Close. S W. cool, showring. Ely. 2. Close m. p. and
cold. Ely. 3. Close, cold. Ely. 4. Wind and showrs about o. blow away. N E. 5.
Thick mist m. Hempen clds little, yet variable. 6. Wind rise, blackish clouds,
S W. 7. Close, faint, blackish clouds. S E. 8. Some little showring o. store of
Rainbow Land. N E. 9. Close, flying clouds, lowering. A flash of Lightning. N E.
10. Close, red clouds Ely, at Sun acc. N E. 11. Close, lowering, some wd. N E.
12. Red m. fr. mist, flying clouds. N E. 13. Frost, mist falls 8 m. flying
clouds. 14. Fine rain a. l. so after Sun ar. rain 4 p. S W. 15. Rain a. l.
wind, cold, cloudy N W. 16. Some drisling Sun occ. N W. 17. Overc. m. clouds
fly low. N W. 18. White clouds, some little gathering at n. W. 19. Some
misling, open 10 m. reddish clouds. Ely. A wide Halo. 20. Fr. blew mist, Halo S
V V
12. Saturn had never been known for a Cold Influx, but by his Aspect, and
First with the Sun. Now, it is a pretty Problem, how mixing with the Sun, a
Glorious Fiery Furnace, should so easily Juggle as to practice Cold by such a
Congress? As Cardan faith, He can be only less warm than the Sun, and that a
less degree of Warmth compared with a greater, is absolute Cold: As in Water of
a low remiss, Warmth, says he, cast into a boiling Pot, it allayes the
wambling of the Liquor, in Ptol. Lib. XII.

13. No question but is higher than any of the Planets, because he i sooner
discovered upon the recess of the, than those which are near. I would it were
as wellagreed, how high he is, how many Semidiameters of the Earth he is remote
from us; It Is no question also but this height of helps, or contributes to get
him the Name of a Cool Planet; and seems to favor those no mean Philosophers,
who explicate Cold by the nature of Privation, or a less Agitation of the
Spirits in, or from that which is denominated a Cold Body, compared to the
agitation of the Spirits in the Warmer. But besides that this Notion seems not
to agree with Coldsharp Wind, where the chill Spirit is more agitated than the
Spirits of the Blood or Organ. It Is all one to us, whether it be Yea, or Nay;
yet since we have said the Cold is a Spirit, an Effluvium (as what Body has
not?) sudden, not always distinct and gradual in its Operation, but both sudden
and painful. Now Pain is Solutio continui, and therefore Cold must penetrate,
and separate, (even where no Wind is sensible) and Expel the Contrary Spirit,
which accordingly retreats, and is repelled thereby. The Touch of Brass,
Silver, in cold Weather, will force us to withdraw our Hand; and for the
Repulse of the Spirit, who has not seen a Cold Plate laid on the Neck, stanch
the bleeding at the Nose? For Cold is an Enemy to Heat, of which Enmity the
Spirit is sensible, and resists. For whereas it is said, that Cold constringes
the Pores: I rather think it is the Animal Spirit shrinks from the approach of
its Enemy first, and then Nature shuts up the Avenues to hinder entrance.

14. It Is to be considered also that Cold strikes up to the Head from the Sole
of the Foot, though well Shod and Armed against it, if we walk on a Marble
Pavement; which shows, one would think, some Activity upon the Organ of Sense
at some distance; as a Torpedo benumming the Fishers hand on Shore, when the
Fish is in the Stream; And for refrigeration sake to mix a cool Spirit with
Wine, we immerge it in Water, or lay it in Earth: There is a maniiest
Penetration of the Cool Spirit, where the case of Less Agitation will scarce
hold; for the Glass Bottle, it may be, is as cold as the Earth, or Water either.

15. Now therefore that it repells the Spirit, appears that after the handling
of Snow the Sensory is Warmer, because the Blood returns with advantage to
those Extreme parts from whence it was driven; there is a Perception in Nature,
and Contrary does smell its Contrary. To this purpose I remember long ago in a
hard Winter, where our College Ale, (for that was our Liquor) being
conglaciated into a Capacious Vessel, upon a Thaw never returned to its self,
but was found so much insipid Ice, with this difference only that in the Center
there was lodged about a Quart of much Stronger Liquor, than any was put into
the C^sk. A manifest Evidence that Spirits being besieged by the Ambient Frost,
retreated thither as to their Citadel. The like is to be observed in Fruits,
which upon the Solution of great Frosts are known to putrify, because the
proper Preservative, some would call it the Balsannick Spirit, of the Fruit is
dislodged by the Cold, so that the Warmth. returning finds nothing there but
the Carcass of the Apple. M. Rohault an ingenious Cartesian, meeting I see,
with this Objection, confesses there is a destruction of the Nexus, and Site of
the Parts: and what Parts can those be but the Spiricuous? Add likewise the
Instance of Mortification of the Members of our Body, so ordinary in Muscovy
and other Countries; which could not be if the vital Spirits did not retire
from the surface, and return again, not of a Sudden, but by degrees: Namely, if
upon their approach to Fire they lay Snow, as the Story goes, upon the part
affected, to prevent the famed Putrefaction.

16. I must not be long in this dispute, only this I say, we cannot show a
Corpuscle in the Privation, which darkens the Air, etc. But in a great Frost we
can show the Cold Atoms Fluttering about us: For in a Frosty morning the
pruinous Atoms lie floating in the Air, and the Traveller gathers them in his
Frosty Locks, oft-times hoary before his time; we can guess also of what size
the Atome is, and that it inclines to Gravity; we can tell to which of the
Poles it is fled when warm weather comes; I mean no more but this, Part is sent
up into the Air commonly called the Cool Region, and Part, sunk into the Earth;
that Earth which is as cool as Ice, and therefore helps to keep it all the year
long for the Palates of the Delicate. Cold is a Privation of Heat, as Sickness
is a Privation of Health when One comes, 'Tother goes, both are positive.

17. Now let us, if we dare enquire, How has acquitted himself for a Chill
Officer, whether he be such a Plumbeous Blew-nosed Planet as Antiquity marks
him. In our Winter Partition we must not expect that there falls under 's
Dominion more Snow than Rain; no not in Winter, I say, for Winters are most of
them Black, rather than White; and not one in twenty in the Course of Nature is
so rigid; and the like is to be said in Frosty Constitutions; Nature is kinder
than so to us in this Corner of the World, if it be but for the Travelers
sake, and the Beast under him. For hard would be their Condition, if a Horse
after 20 Miles rugged way hardly passed, might not have his usual Drench out of
the River: It is enough therefore that shows his sullen Influence more than or,
etc. The Number of the Days we are to account for, are 401. videlicet, from
September 27. to April 23. Now, because Snow is found sometimes so early, as
the end of September, and so late in the year, as April 23. we cannot look it
should Snow every intermediate day upon 's account, nor come up to a moiety, as
he does most fairly, if you put Snow and Rain together; for so you shall find
under the Style of Rain, and store of Rain, 149 days; add the 56 days for Snow
and Hail, and you have a liberal half of 401.

18. To Anotomize this cold Serpent a little further, I find the Summer thus,
Cold days 52. (without sensible Frosts) Frosty Mornings 80. Frosty
Constitutions of the Entire days 54. to which I may add Cold Wind 12. It is
true, we meet with a matter of 60. under the Style of Warmth, expressly such;
but then for excess of Heat, I take notice that we find but 3 hot days under
this Aspect, in 30 years under that Division, where October and March, and the
greatest part of April is concerned. In the Summer Partition from April 23. to
September 27. within which Interval, Snow seldom appears, in England at least,
we find hot days 46. and remiss warm, 24. which may administer a Quaere; as
also 10 hot nights, a piece of a Quaere, still; but even here we find cold 21.
Frosty Mornings about 16. Cool or Cold remitted, 18. yea, and 3. Frosty days,
extraordinary Frosts morn. and Hail 4. Frosty Mornings in the Month of May are
frequent, and sometimes they happen in the Month of August.

19. They that please to consult the Table, shall find what Influence he has on
Winds, Fiery Meteors, Lightning, Thunder; what upon Fogs, and Hazy and Dark
Air. In the Winter we hear of no Thunder, but of Lightning under both
Divisions, and in the Summer Partition about 80 times Thundering; we cannot say
that is too much for Saturn, if we could confront our Aspect with an Aspect of
and upon 60 years Evidence, (for so many years must be introduced to equal this
of and.) He shall find a wide difference; or if that will not Content, then we
must begin to learn, that notwithstanding the difference of the Planetary
Characters, in some Signs they may be all alike for Heat, Thunder, etc. only we
are bound to take Notice, that in the Summer time we meet with Harmful Thunder
under this Aspect; yea, and Harmful Lightnings as many times; when the Total
Sum of Lightning was but 6. or 7. Whether this mischief arises from some
peculiar Cause discoverable in the further Scrutiny of that Effect at such time
and place; or Whether it arises from the Exasperation of the Heat, according to
our ordinary Philosophy? Which may pass for a reason also till we can get a
better, perhaps, why and brought more days of excessive Heat, than of remissive
Warmth: But that our and can do brisk Feats, we have heard before from Epigenes.

20. Verily I do reckon it a reason, why we find thrice mention of Prodigious
Hail in the Summer Division, and yet ordinary Hail but twice. But we have
occasion for the like Observation, when we come to the Aspect of the and. In
the mean time let me observe, as to the appearance of Snow, that it may fall,
it is true, on the Day, or upon the Skirts of the Day, upon the precise Aspect.
But again to justify my enlargement of our Evidence, we shall find, that Snow
as naturally falls 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, yea 10 days from the Aspect: Saturn's remote
distance in the Perpendicular contributes to Cold, but it seems that an
Obliqu-Angular distance of the Planet does very well; but yet under a
reasonable confinement, within which may hear and comply. And this I make no
question holds in the of and, with some little difference, which here we are
not suffered to enquire: For if the be cool, the by our Principle, must be
cooler.

21. I have little else to trouble the Reader, only I cannot dissemble that I
have not thought that at such distance from could have contributed to red
Clouds, to Irides, or to Halo's; ^et some Instances of all three appear in the
Table.

22. Yea, or as Epigenes, whom I have a value for, to Wind, at such distance,
when as bears away the Bell, because of its Vicinity, and we think it is
reasonable: But if by his Bulk will make amends for that his distance; or if
his Ansulae, or Auriculae, that the Tube may see we heartily acknowledge our
Obligation to their Discoveries, we know not, here we find the Summer Division
above an 150 Instances of Wind, and 70 of them High Winds; and if cannot
challenge a share in them, who can? This must be unquestionable, the Greater
must the Influence be, the further the Influence is derived; wherefore if be
any thing at at All, he is a vast sublime Creature, placed aloft in a Sphere so
high, that we should not believe, but that we see Thousands of Creatures higher.

23. For our Aspects Foreign Evidence, perhaps we may see somewhat after the
Chapter of Saturn and Mars; or if we balk it, let it not be imputed to us, some
Foreign Instances we meet in the Diary already delivered, whereby we see can
Thunder, etc.

24. There is but one Objection lies in our Way, which upbraids us, that no
sober men are of our Opinion, I answer, the Objecter, if need be, will make one
sober Man, if our Evidence at least be sober; but 2ly. Have I not quoted my
Lord of S. Albans, and might I not have added to him Sir Walter Rawleigh, and
to him again Gerard Vossius, as Sober and Reverend Men as the World affords.
Sir Walter I remember bears Testimony to us about the Heats of and, and Vossius
in his Heathen Idolatry tells us, All our Aspects, particularly the Si aptis
caeli locis jungantur imbres generant, and quandoque etiam fulmina and era
reddit nubitum and turbidum, Cloudy, Close, dark Air, nay he ventures on the
Fixed too, and withal his Credit so far as to bid us look back on in principio,
Ann, M.D.LXIII. when a Cruel Pestilence raged in many parts of Europe. See the
place, Lib. 11. c. 47. to all which he puts to his Seal, Atque haec sunt ver 4
Cerlaque while some other parts of our Astrology perhaps he does not like; For
my part if I had not found that these Notions are certainly true, I would never
have set Pen to Paper.

CHAP. X. Conj. of Saturn and Venus.
1. An Aspect of uncertain revolution. 2. here always Direct 3. The Aspect
found thrice sometimes in the same Sign. 4. The Aspect's Character. 5.
Comparatively a calm Aspect. 6. What kindness it has for Cold. 7. Cold and its
Vicissitudes, even in Winter, are dealt out by the Planets. 8. How this Aspect
may be cold. Venus corniculated as the Moon. 9. Frest and Snow under at a
Platick Distance, under at a Partile. 10. Planets too near, I or too remote,
encourage cold. 11. This Aspect brings moisture within the Triduum; yea at 10
degrees distance is responsible. 12 No great kindness for aquatick Signs, etc.
A solid Astrology labored after. 13. The Symmetry and Co-incidence with the
Rest, (not the nature of any one Aspect) does all. 14. This demonstrated by a
Table of and, and its moisture throughout the Zodiac 15. Iris more than
Semicircular. Two Irides concentrical. Whether our Aspects do contribute? Why
fewer Irides in Winter than in Summer. 16. Our Aspect's Hail. 17, 18. Meteors
and Lightning. 19. Though Astrologers give us no such Item. 20. Several
Objections against the Division of Signs into Fiery, Aerie, Watery, etc. though
Leo may be termed a Fiery Sign. The true reason of Fiery, Watery, Windy
Influences. 21. Some Rules for Stormy Weather relating to this Aspect. 22, 23.
Some little Objections answered.
1. THe Conjunction of and has its certain Returns, the of has not so: For
though is found to serve, yet he does not find himself obliged to observe,
because she is a Stragler; She must be occidental, and She must be Oriental,
when She Lists; and whosoever will speak with her, must observe her Hours.
Hence it comes to pass, that sometimes we find a year void of this Aspect, as
Ao 1665. 1670. etc. But in lieu of that, sometimes we meet the Aspect twice in
a Twelvemonth, as in the year 1664. 1669. etc. In the year 1652. we find the
Aspect in May. In the year 1653. in July. In the year 1654. September. By this
account at Two Months Distance. In the year 1655. it should fall out in
November; but instead of that she makes such a Halt, that it is found in July,
Four Months before, and reaches not November till Two years after.

2. Here it is pretty to observe (and where is the Wisdom of God more seen, at
least as first Mover, than in the Celestial Motions?) That, though she Jerks
back the space of a Month or Two, from where she was before, yet she is always
found as to this Aspect with in progressive Motion. So that in July, Ao 1655.
she is found to have got Ground more, than she had got in September, though a
later Month of the year precedent.

3. I do not know whether I may further observe, that in this progressive
Course the Aspect will be found, sometimes but once in a Sign, sometimes more
than Once, viz. Thrice; or, if we may take in a Platique Aspect, four times, as
Ao 1662. 1663. 1664. or that the Distance of Two immediate Aspects shall
sometimes lie about 20 degrees, and sometimes not a Quarter of that Number.

4. Astrologers put up, you remember for 3 cool Planets. Accordingly they will
have us believe, that this Aspect is apt to produce in its Seasons, Cold and
Snows; sudden Showrs in Summer; Cold and Rain in Spring and Autumn; cold Rain
or Snow in Winter. Eichstad consents. But my German speaks plainest, Reg. 9.
that it commonly brings Cold, Moist, Unfriendly Weather with Snow or Rain.

5. Observe here, I pray, that they speak of no Wind; nor do they speak of any
violence. You see there is some difference between Planets Aspects. Verily
there is so: there is some Sluggishness in and, in comparison of ^ and, or,
what we hasten to, and.

6. And as to their Cold, in the year 1658, Aug. 26. you may find in the Diary,
uncomfortable Weather, which puts us in mind of the Unfriendly Weather in the
Character. There is mention of Cold on the 21. day. And on September 1, Cold
and Showrs 1 On Sept. 2. (if there be not an Error in the Diary) Frost and
Snow. Ao 1683. Sept. 2. again we find Frost morning. Ao 1656. Sept. 2, 3. Close
and Cold. Ao 1659. October. 22. Frost, 26 hard Frost. Ao 1661. So October 14, 16.
and 1563. in the Platique Aspect, die 26, 27, cold. 27, 29. Frost, 31. Cold. Ao
1664. Nov. 10, 11. Ice. 18. Frost, Ice. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. hard Frost and
Ice -- We go on, Ao 1657. Nov. 7, 8. Frost, 9. Hard Frost and Ice 10. Frost Ao
1660. Dec. 13, 14, 15. Frost, Fog. Ao 1662. Dec. 4, 5, Frosty, Fog on all parts
in the days preceding, and subsequent. Ao 1667. Dec. 24, 25, 29, 31. Frost
Mornings. Ao 1660. Dec. 20. Frosty days precedent and consequent, about 20 days
together. Ao 1664. Jan. 24. Frost for a Week together. Ao 1666. Jan. 10, 11.
Frost, Cold. 13. Cold, Freezing, and so four or five days after. Ao 1673. Jan.
24. Frosty ad 31. and as many days in February, Frosty. Ao 1669. Febr. 19. 20,
26. Ao 1671. Febr. 6, 7. Frost and Snow. 19, 20, 21. Hail, and very cold, Ao
1669. March 2, 4, 7. Frosty mornings. Ao 1676. March 12, 13, 16, 17, 27, 28. Ao
1672. April 3, 4, Cold. 10, 13, 16, 17, 18. Idem. Several Frosts in the
Country. Ao 1674. April 1. Frost. Ao 1652. May 17. Some Frost Ao 1679 May 10,
12, 13. Cold Wind. 14. Frost, Morning.

7. These are the Evidences as thin as they lie, and they lie not so thin
neither; On which Observers have found that this Aspect contributes to Frost,
every where, where it can show its self, and its Texture, not engaged in a
Cro^^ of other Configurations: In such case the Weather, the Constitution of
the Air, follows the Crowd; but withal bears Witness to all such Meetings of
the Planets, who make disorderly cold Weather, though allowed so long a term as
the milder Constitution. Darkness in deed challenges half the year, what it
loses in Summer, it gains in Winter but in Cold and Heat it is better ordered.
And let the Reader be assured, that even Cold is distributed and dealt out even
in Winter time by sundry D^les, according to the several Offices in the Great
Family of Nature.

8. He who denies the rest of the Celestial Aspects, because the is the
Fountain of Light and Heat, must deny that we can quench our Thirst at a Fresh
Spring or Rivulet, because the Ocean is the Fountain of Moisture. I will not
strive to make out the Cold of and, but by their Distance, and their
Disposition; of which later we are assured so far, that they are both rightly
termed Cold: as the is also, in comparison of the Sun; and that is enough. If
and the Rest be corniculate as the is, that also helps to a chill Influence.
We doubt not of that which every body, almost, in these days Knows: Only we
hint, that if Great Men would give their mind, or do so much Favor to Truth,
they might find ways to selve Objections, as well as make them.

9. This I have observed in and, that Frost and Snow came ordinarily at a
distance of grad. 5, 6, 7, etc. whereas what cold is observed here, for the
most part, in and, comes within less Compass and more near the day of the
Conjunction. The reason is at Hand. The Sun with, cannot so well contribute to
Cold, but by an Oblique gl^^ce, when may in a Direct incidence upon irritate
the Quality.

10. We have used the Reader to hear the Paradox, that is many times a Friend
to Cold, seeing we are never attaqued there with, but when the H. Bodies keep
aloof about 30 degrees more or less, or when they Creep too Close; suppose
within 10 degrees, or there abouts. For what does a (...) signify without the
consent of the rest? It Is like striking Fire with a Flint, it makes no report.
Let your Piece be in good order charged, etc. and then one Spark from one
Conjunction of the Flint and Steel may do execution.

11. But now as to Rain, or we may call it Moisture, this gentle Aspect
produces it, gently at least one of the 3 days, of which the day of the is the
midst. Not but that it finds its excesses some degrees distance Verily if we
set this Aspect even at 10 degrees distance, which yet perhaps should not be,
it turns to account, and Communibus Ann^^, comes near to be responsible for the
Moye^y of Days, These Papers may be loath to bear the unreasonable account of,
1500 Days, upon which I bottom my Experience: But so we shall find it.

12. Here, ^s every where else, we are troubled with (...) Signs, as if our
Aspect were most Foecund, in. The Ancients meant well, when they would have ^s
to understand, there is difference in the Dodeca^^mory or each XII. part of the
Zodiaque; but it was (...) of Experience merely, and Trifling Fa^'d DiFancy
which excogitated the (...) vision into Fiery, Aerie, etc. Not that I deny
possessed by this Aspect will yield Rain. But I must believe my Eyes, and say as
I find, that Aunt, 62, 63, 64. yielded more Rain than the three preceding years
of 59, 60, 6^. when the Aspect was conspic^ous in (...) I have not Spirit of
Contradiction, but if I may have leave to contribute to the Foundation of solid
Astrology after Kepler and Eichs^^d: All the Harm is, Art is advanced, Mankind
benefited, to say nothing of the Creators Glorys Ao 63. in ^ brought moisture
10 times in 18 days. In 64. ^^ times in 22 days, when as brought but 8 times
twice together.

13. Nor is it alone, but also, and and, which last though a Fiery Sign brought
moisture, Ao 53. 9 times. Ao 83. 15 times. Ao (...) 17 times. It Is the Symmetry
and Co-incidence of the rest with this Aspect in such a Sign, Fathers all the
Issue and Effect Therefore in ^^ for Example's sake it brings but 3 in one
year, and 7 in another. In but ^^ in the year, and 14 in another. In 9 in one
year, and but 6. in another Let the Reader be pleased to peruse the subsequent
Table, and he may consider, where if perhaps he meets with 29 days of Rain in
an Aspect of, He may withal begin to believe that there may be somewhat in
Platique Aspects, as that of Ao 63. not unworthy Notice, though I am willing to
agree it, that the Disparity between That Indirect and as it we^^ Casual Aspect
from the Direct, and of the more Primary Intention, may arise from a different
Pace or Motion found in, at that time of 40 days (For no less it compriseth)
more than in the Ordinary Combination (...) 24. But the Table may be produced.

A Table of the Aspects of and in every Sign of the Zodiaque for 30 Years ^ast
with the Quota of Moisture appearing at the times assigned.
in -- Si. Gr. Anni Moist. 0. 1673. 3. 18. 1674. 7. 7. 1675. 14. 11. 1676. 7.
1: 1677. 9. 20. 1678. 9. 24. 1679. 6. 26. 1652. 7. 14. 1680. 13. 15. 1653. 9.
3. 1681. 17. 6. 1682. 15. 26. 1683. 12. 4. 1654. 4. 8. 1655. 7. 26. 1656. 5.
14. 1657. 6. 16. 1658. 13. 4. 1659. 8. 20. 1660. 10. 23. 1661. 8. 9. 1662. 10.
27. 1664. 6. Plat. 1663. 20. 24. 1664. 14. 27. 1664. 6. 14. 1666. 11. 17. 1667.
17. 2. 1668. 12. 20. 1669. 12. 22. 1669. 7. 9. 1671. 10. 27. 1672. 10.

Let no than object the Number of 26. found in, for That Excess precedes from a
Tropical, not Aquatique Sign.

15. Some Specials may be further marked concerning Irides, Fiery Meteors, etc.

As to the First, I find long ago a Note of Rainbow Sept. 21. 1654. more than
Semicircular: I^ was some entertainment to us, and could not be omitted. In the
year 1678. July 22. I meet with a Note of two Rainbows, Concentrical I presume,
seeing Philosophy will not otherwise allow it: was on Foot at both times: if it
were but to help to gather the Moisture, as the helps to the Lunar Halo. But
there is somewhat more in it: Our helps to the Luster, and the Sign to the
enlargement, the South-East, or South-West Angle of the Horizon cannot admit so
large a Circumference, because it must needs be depressed according to the
Elevation of the Sun, who paints it in his North Declination. But in the midst
of the Horizon nearer the Cardinal Points, where the Sun runs in September,
there may be ample space for a Glorious Iris to embrace the Spectators, while,
all in, or concerned thereabout, stand and look on: nevertheless we are not
over-fond to impute our Concentrick Irides to this Aspect, for, and being in,
we do not see how they can overcast a Secondary Iris upon the First, formed by
the Sun, the Sun being in grad. 9.; but whether cannot, being within 14 degrees
of the Sun, That I question. Yea, it may be that and the Rest, may qualify the
Vapors (more than draw it up) make it Light and Tepid, more apt to take
Color, as I may say. For what is the reason that we have fewer Rainbows in the
Winter, than in Summer? is it not because the Winter Moisture is not of so rare
and pellucid consistence as the Summer Drop? The Drop is more Clumsie, Dense
and Icy, not so apt to imbibe or reflect the Light: whence there is no Iris
ever observed from a Snowy, yea or a Sleeting Cloud. Thus far therefore all
Aspects of Warmth contribute toward the Rainbow.

16. We remember heretofore helped to send us Hail, the same is He complicated
with Here, and There, in some certain Places; we hear of it under this Aspect,
more especially Mar. 16. 1672. June 1. Ao 1675. May 25. Ao 1677. but May 18.
Shattering Windows at Highgate, etc. July 23. At Epsom, such as has not been
within Memory. Ao 1678. and Ao 1682. destroying the Fruits of the Ground, June
24. and Day 29. terrible at Rochester, so August 18. a Rattling Storm.

17. So let us remember, who in certain Signs I find, viz. from to, kindles
Meteors, tayl'd and trayn'd Meteors, but more frequently breaks out into
Lightning and Thunder, as in all those Days where the Hail is mentioned; yea,
and many others not unfit to be noted, according to their Signs.

18. First, in the Sign, Thunder. May (1675.) 24, 25, 31. March 1677. 22. much
Lightning.

In, May 17. Much Lightning. 18, 25, 26. Rain and Thunder. Ao 1677. July 15,
16, 19, 22. Ao 1678. May 8, 1679.

In, July 3. at Home, and from abroad, News of Harmful Lightning from Basil,
etc. so again, day 14. at Leusden.

In, July 25. Ao 1653. Aug. 23. 30. besides Dec. 24. A Globe of Fire 3 hours at
Newburgh, and Sept. 6. a Meteor from the North to the Southwards, seen in our
Moorfields, hor. 10. P. M. with a Train of Six Inches Breadth. Ao 1681. Ao
1682. Jan. 24. at Maxfield, 29. at Rochester. Ao 1683. Sep. 5. and 6. So much
for.

In. Ao July 16. Showring and Thundering the whole day. 1656. Sept. 8.

In. Ao 1658. August 17.

In, Dec. 16. Ao 1660. much Lightning, so die 18. also. Ao 1661. Oct. 2.
Harmful Lightning.

19. These Instances ought not to be dissembled, because few give us any Item
of Thunder and Lightning from and, no, nor from Fiery Signs; whereas in these
Signs preceding, and can Work at the Forge, or some Hireling for them.

20. Further Disputing about the Signs, let it be referred to its place. In the
mean time no body is such a Brute as to deny to be a Fiery Sign, the Evidence
now brought will speak to it. But where is and? 2ly. What have we to do with
Earthly Signs? surely was never Dry, nor over Cold. 3ly. What if a Sign be Airy
and Watery too? for one. It Is impossible. Lastly, That any one Sign should
equally partake of any one Character; when as one and the same Sign; suppose,
by all Men's confession, shall be moist in some parts, rather than others.
Therefore it is the Multitude of the Fixed, and the Situation of the Arch of the
Zodiac and the various Relation to the VII. Planets. produce Fiery, Watery,
Windy Influences.

21. If and be in the same Sign, there may be Thunders; Nay, rather if and be
at a Sign or Two Distance, before or after, This Table shows a Storm is
impending. If and be in, when the is in, as above, Ao 1678. or be in, when the
is almost in, as Ao 1681. 1683. such a Conjunction, like a Knot in a piece of
Timber, makes the Piece the Stronger, which has its due Strength and Weight in
the other unknotty parts, precedent or subsequent.

22. If any shall say, that this agrees not with the Premises, where we termed
this Aspect one of the gentlest Configurations, we answer, we speak only
comparatively, in relation to those who are more brisk and active, and have
reason so to be.

23. But if again it be said, we had no such doings in, as if we made this the
more Masculine Aspect: we have said what we could to such Objection in the
precedent Chapters; so the Table follows.

Diary.
Ao 1652. May 24. 26. A die 16. ad June 3.
16. Windy. N E. 17. Little frosty, clear, wdy. N E. 18. Clear, some wind, fog
at n. N E: 19. Mist m. clear. N E. 20. Clear; calm. S E. 21. Clear, some wet,
misty at n. 22. Misty m. clear. S W. 23. Clear m. S W. 24. Mist at n. S E. 25.
Windy l. rain, some L. Wind. 26. Showrs; so at n. wind. S W. morn. W. 27.
Showrs. 28, 29. Showring. 30. Showring, windy. 31. Mistyish n. June 1. Cloudy
m. clear. 2. Wind turn at night. N E. 3. Cloudy m. clear.
Ao 1653. July 20. 15. a die 14. ad 29.
14. Sun clap in a mist, red wind. N E. 15. Insensible rain m. 16. Red wind. N
E. 17. Hot, some sprinkling at o. N W. 18. A shower. N R. 19. Cold red wind. N
E. 20. Some rain, too little. N E. 22. Windy, pretty open; Hot. N E. 22. Hot
and dry season. H. wd at n. 23. High wind, cold and close. N E. 24. Hot. N E.
25. R. Thunder-coasting. N E. 26. R. cold wd; blew color on the Hills. 27.
Rain a. l. some wet. 28. Cloudy and coasting sho. S W. 29. Cold m. coasting
showrs. S W.
Ao 1654. Sept. 20. 4. A die 11. ad 28.
11. Misty m. hot. N W. 12. Misty, cloudy; rainlike wds. 13. Wind before Sun
rise. 14. 15. Frost, fair. S W. 16. Frost, cold, bright night. S W. 17. Winds,
dark cld. S W. 18. Fair a. l. clear day. 19. Winds a. l. dark, cloudy Moon
appearing at night. S W. 20. Cloudy m. clearing. S W. 21. Some fits of wet,
Rainbow more than Semicircular. S W. 22. Flying clouds, heat. S W. 23. Winds
obscure, Thund. seem to be at midn. 24. s. rain a. l. wet p. m. 25. s. store of
rain 10 at n. S W. 26. Clear day, warm. S W. 27. Misty m. warm. 28. Wind at 5
m. fair, warm, S W.
Ao 1655. July 12. 8. a die 3. ad 22.
3. Fair, hot. S W. 4. High wind, troubled ^ky. S W. 5. Some moisture 8 m. etc.
S W. 6. Cool wind, some misling at n. N W. 7. Two or Three drops, offer of R.
o. W. 8. Hot, Two or Three drops. N. 9. Fair, hot. N. 10. Foggy m. high wind. S
E. 11. Some white clouds. N E. 12. H. wd and cool. N E. 13. Excessive hot. Th.
S E. 14. Red m. hot. S E. 25. Hot, clear, cloudy. 16. Thunder 4 m. showring and
rumbling all day. S W. 17. Wet m. clearing at night. S W. 18. Mist; some
coasting, fair. N E. 19. Windy, some showrs. N E. 20. Lost, but no notable
weather. 21. Mist, some lowering. N W. 22. Hot. W.
1656. Sept. 6. 26. A die 26. Aug. ad 19. Sept.
29. Clear a. l. blew mist. S E. N E. 30. Close m. clear p. m. N E. 31. Bright
day. Ely. Sept. 1. s. wind, cool, showring. Ely. 2. A little close m. p. and
cold. Ely. 3. Close, cold. Ely. 4. Winds and showrs about o. blows away; fair.
N E. 5. Thick, mist w. variable. 6. Warm, faint blackish ^ S W: 7. Close,
faint. S W. 8. Fair, store of rain toward London. N E. 9. Flash of Lightning. N
E. 10. Close, sometimes cloudy. N E. 11. Close, lowering; some wet. N E. 12. Red
m. frost, curious d. N. 13. Frost, mist, blackish cl. 14. Rain a. l. so after
Sun rise. 15. Rain a. l. dropping. N W. 16. Fair, blackish clouds. N W.
1657. Nov. 3. 14. a die 26. Oct. ad 13. Nov.
26. Cool, showring a. m. S W. 27. Overc. m. cool. S W. 28. Hot, dry, open. S
W. 29. Fair, hot, dry. N W. 30. Fair, hot, dry wind. N W. Nov. 1. Winds
threatn. m. fair p. m. 2. H. red wind, threatn. N E. 3. High wd, higher p. m. N
E. S E. 4. High wd, obscure and wd at n. N. 5. Close m. threatn; muddy cl. at
n. 6. Close, threatn. moist. 7. Frost, some wind, clear at p. 8. Fr. fair,
lowering. N E. 9. Hard fr. ice, threatening 4 p. N E. 10. Fr. fair, pretty hot.
11. Cloudy a. l. showring 10 m. 12. Close m. warm, offering to drop. 13. Wind
a. l. and all day. 14. Stormy and close rain. 15. Blustering wind, some
moisture. 16. Rain a. l.
1658. Aug. 26. 16. a die 17. Aug. ad Sept. 4.
17. Showring, Thunderclap 10 m. Light. at n. 18. Close m. p. clouds threatn.
19. Fr. windy, some wet 4 p. S W. 20. Misty 4 m: warm, showrs 7 p. 21. Foggy m.
cold: H. winds, wet 8 p. W. 22. Close, serious wet all day. S W. 23. Fair,
warm, a shower at Sun set. S W. 24. Fair m. fog 7 m. warm wind. 25. Misling m.
high wind. S W. 26. Cloudy, uncomfortable, cold. S W. 27. Cool, open m.
dropping 7 p. W. S W. 28. Rain, warm, rain 4 p. ad 6 p. 29. Rain 4 m. High wind
at might. W. 30. Blustering and stormy all n. dry. N W. 31. Fair m. wind rise.
Sept. 1. Open, cold, showrs. Ely. 2. Frost, snow, wet. Wly. 3. Cold, close m.
showring 10 p. 4. Fr. close m. ground mist 10 p. N E.
Ao 1659. Oct. 23. 4. a die 15. Oct. ad 1 Nov.
15. Rain, fair, open. 16. Fair, cool; High wind at night. 17. Rain 3 m. and a.
m. H. wd. W. 18. Cloudy m. p. some drops Sun set. E. 19. Close, windy. 20.
Close, windy a. l. shower 6 p. W. 21. Fair, cool. Wly. not clear. N. 22. Fr.
fair, shower 11 p. Wly. 23. Close, wet, windy, warm. Wly. 24. Wind high a. l.
fair a. m. windy. 25. s. rain 10 m. open. 26. Hard fr. foggish. 27. Fog m.
close. Nly. 28, 29. Foggy all day. 30. Close mist, warm. N. 31. Close rain.
Sly. Nov. 1. Bright, cold. N W.
1660. Dec. 16. 20. a die 6. ad 26.
6. Mist m. fair. 7. Thin mist m. S. 8. Close, but fair m. W. S. 9. Fair, H.
stormy winds. S W. 10. Fair, cold m. V V. 11. Rain a. l. stormy wind. V V. 12.
Fair, H. blustering wind. V V S. 13. Frost, fog between 10 and 11. S E. 14. Fr.
fog m. day freezing. W. by S. 15. Fr. fog, rain. S E. 16. Fair, high wind,
storms Rain and much Lightn. V V. 17. Rainy, windy day. S V V. 18. Clear till
7. then clouds; Lightn. 19. Rainy a. l. V V. 20. Cloudy about 9. rainy day. 21.
VVindy, fair m. S V V. 22. Fair m. rainy n. V V. 23. VVindy, threatening the
whole day. 24. Cloudy, close; rainy Even. S V V. 25. Wet, rainy m. clear 11 p.
p. m. 26. Fair; a shower. S V V.
1661. Oct. 8. 23. a die 29. ad 16. Oct.
29. Sad rain a 3 m. ad 9 m 30. Fr. shower 2 p. Oct. 1. Shower 6 m. cold. 2.
Threatening 8 m. dropping shower. Thunder, and a House burnt By Lightning. 3.
Fog. warm Even. 4. VVarm 8 m. mist. E. 5. VVarm, fog fall. 6. Cool m. dry,
warm. 7. fair warm. misty at n. 8. Cloudy Misty, warm. 9. Dry m. some wetting.
S V V. 10. Fog, warm; colder. 11. L. rain 2 m. cold, mist. Ely. 12. Sun app.
all m. cloudy p. m. N E. S. 13. l. fog m. some drops 9 m. mist falling. 14. l.
frost m. but a clear d. E. N E. 15. Fr. ground mist, shower p. m. N V V. 16.
Frost, mist, cold. N V V.
1662. Dec. 5: 9. a die 26. ad Dec. 13.
26. Fog, frost, clear n. 27. Fog, frost, some snow a. l. 28. Frost, fog,
hardy. 29. Fog. frosty. 30. Fog, frosty, some wet. N E. Dec. 1. Frost, fog,
some rain p. S V V. 2. Fog, cold, raw, rain 7 p 3. s. snow a. l. frosty. 4, 5.
Frosty, fog. 6. Frosty, fog, fair. S V V. 7. Frost, fog, snow m. p. 8. Frost,
fog, clear above. 9. Fr. snow all day, high wd. N E. 10. Snow a. l. hard
winter. 11. Frosty, fair, fog. 12. Thaw and slabby, some R. p. m. S V V. 13.
Thaw all n. fog; rain 6. ad 8 p.
1663. Plat. Oct. 27. 15. a die 3 Oct. ad 11. Nov.
3. Close, drisling 8 m. and o. and rain a Sun set ad 10. then open. S E. 4.
Fog and wet; some drops p. Sun set. S E. 5. Rain a Sun rise; rain 4 p. and 11
p. S E. 6. Rain a Sun rise and p. m. and Sun set. Sly. 7. Much rain a 2 m. Rain
2 p. Sly. 8. Rain a Sun rise ad 10 vesp. S V V. 9. Fair, cool. S V V. 10. s.
rain 2 m. fog. E. 11. Rain a. l. E. S E. 12. Rainy a. m. and p. m. 13. Cold m.
open, drisling 6 p. E S E. 14. Moist m. wet p. m. S V V. 15. Mist, some wet,
Meteors. S. S V V. 16. Fair a. l. much wet. 17. Frost, some wet. high wd. S V
V. 18. Fair, drisling 1 p. and 9 p. S V V. 19. VVind all n Rain 4 m. S V V. 20.
s. rain about Sun rise, and 2 p. S V V. 21. Close, but no rain or wd. S V V.
22. Close m. dash o. S. S W. 23. VVarm, open at n. S V V. 24. Close, opening,
dry. 25. Mist m. rain o. S E. 26. Storms all n. cold. S. S E. 27. Misty, some
lowering, cold, fair. N. 28. Close m. drisling; some Rain o. S W. 29. Mist,
frost, fair. S W. 30. Mist, frost, cold, fair. S W. 31. Cloudy, cold a. m. Sly.
Nov. 1. Wind a. l. rain 4 m. hottish. Sly. 2 High wind, offering 11 m. hottish.
Sly. 3. High wind, hottish. Sly. 4. Wind, rain, hot. Sly. 5. Rain 7 m. wind,
rain S W. 6. Warm, high wind, rain 11 p. S W. 7. Very H. wd, rain p. m. stormy.
S W. 8. H. wd vesp. blustering n. S W. 9. Stormy, rainy. S W. 10. Storm of rain
2 m. wind. S W. 11. Close m. p. shower 2 p. S W.
1664. Jan. 21. 24. a die 9. ad 31.
9. Frost, fog, dash. S. S E. 10. Wet m. wind, wetting o. S W. 11. s. drisling
m. and p. m. and 9 p. S W. 12. Cloudy; drisling Sun set. 13. Wind a. l. s.
rain, drisling Sun set. 14. H. wd all n. wet, storm 7 p. S W. 15. s. wet,
threatening. S. 16. Close m. wind warm. S. 17. Close, windy, flying cl. 18.
Drisling 1 p. and Sun set, Rain 10 p. S. 19. Close m. p. and moistm. Sly. 20.
Mist, close, moist. 21. Fog, fair. 22. Fog m. fog at n. 26. Foggish and
misling, s. wind. S. 24. Hard fr. fog. 25. Clear Fr. snow, thaw. Nly. 26. Sharp
flying cl. 27. Snow m. and a. m. Thaw and Rain. 28. Frosty, high wind. N. 29.
Hard fr. fair, wetting 3 p. 30. R. a. l. shower 4 p. N. 31. Close m. p fair at
n. freez. E. N E.
1664. Nov. 18. 27. a die 10. ad 28.
10. Frost, ice, mist, fair. S W. 11. Fr. ice, foggy, freez at n. 12. Rain m.
fair, cool rain 10 p. 13. Tempest of wind and R. Hail 3 m. high wds. 14. Open,
fair wind. 15. Overcast, close p. m. s. rain 4 p. and 7 p. S W. 17. Fair m. p.
wdy; freez at n. Rain 1 m. 18. Fr. cold mist, gentle R. 6 p. etc. 19. Fair,
bright n. 20. Fr. Ice, fair. S. S E. 21. Mist, frost, s. ice; R. a 9 m. ad 11.
W. 22. Hard white frost, ice, but fair. 23. Hard fr. fair. 24. Fog, frosty,
fair; freez at night. 25. Hard fr. thaw o. and rain 11 p S E. 26. Drisling m.
raw, mist at n 27. Mist, raw, rain 11 m. and p. m. and 6 p. 28. Wet a. l. so
all m. S W. 1665. Aspectu vacat.
1666. Jan. 16. 14. a die 7. ad 24.
Jan. 7. Warm, fog, wetting 10 m. E. 8. Misty, misting die tot. N E. 9. Mist,
rain Sun occ. and 9 p. Ely. 10. Mist, mild, freez at n. 11. Mist, coldish,
wetting 9 p. 12. Rain Sun ort. and 6 p. coldish. 13. Cold, freez 8 p. 14. Rain
Sun rise, and a. m. fog at n. 15. Misty, Sun had not shined many days. 16. Fr.
mist. 17. Fr. open m. snow 8 p. 12 p. 18. Frosty, snow, shower 11 p. 19. Frosty,
offering to snow. 20. Frost m. wet 2 p. 21. Fair, high winds. 22. s. rain a. l.
mild. 23. Fr. fair, wdy. 24. Tempestuous harmful wds, Rain, stormy dash.
Iterum Nov. 12. 17. a die 2. ad 23.
2. Warm, s. drop 1 p. Nly. 3. Close m. open and mild p. m. N N W. 4. Fair and
warm, some gusts. W. 5. Wind and rain n. fair. Wly. 6. Frost m. Meteors 7 p.
Wly. 7. Warm, shower 2 p. and Sun set, and 7 p. Wly. 8. Foggy m. and all day.
Sly. 9. Close and mistyish, Meteors 9 p. Sly. 10. Rain a. l. dash of rain 11 m.
at n. 11 p. 11. Rain m. p. hold up p. m. fog at n. Sly 12. Fog m. showrs a. m.
and o. Sly. 13. Wet m. showring toward Sun set. 14. Rain after midnight, and so
till o. S W. 15. Rain after midnight, and a. m. S W. 16. R. after midn and all
day; Floods. S W. 17. Wind blows all n. hard; R. a. m. W. 18. Fr. fair, curious
day. N W. 19. Wind and rain a Sun rise. Wly. 20. Rain a Sun rise, mistying 8 p.
21. Rain still a. l. and m. p. and a. m. Ely. 22. Moisture a. m. R. p. m. and 7
p. Wly. 23 Fair, calm m. wind rise o. shower 2 p.
1668. Jan. 1. 2. a die 23. Dec. 1667. ad 10 Jan. 1668.
23. Mist, close m. thicker o. Nly. 24. Fr. misling, fog 8 p. Sly. 25. Frost,
fine m. not clear at night. 26. Close, no wind, fog n. 27. Foggy, warm; misling
m. so at n. 28. Close m. wind rise p. m. drisling at n. 29. Fr. clear m. p.
stormy. Wly. 30. Fr. storm of hail. Ely. 31. Fr. fair m. p. Wly. Jan. 1.
Murrain of Horses about Kentish Town. Small Pox, distractions; Rain a. l.
wetting m. blustering n. Wly. 2. Fair a. m. some wetting. S W. 3. High wind a.
l. misling m. N W. 4. Windy, dropping, drisling a. m. 5. Tempestuous all n. and
die tot. toward even; s. showrs p. m. Wly at n. Nly. 6. Rain m. wind rise,
misling m. p. 7. Tempest of wind Rain a. m. 8. Wind audible, shower 2 p. 4 p. 6
p. S W. 9. Fr. calm, fair m. but windy o. Nly. 10. H. storm; wind a. l. N E.
1669. Feb. 27. 20. a die 18. ad 8 March.
18. Warm winds, shower 2 p. 11 p. Sly. 19. Offering at n. to snow. 20. Frost,
offer to snow. Nly. 21. Fog, open. N E. 22. Fog. may misle. Ely. 23. Fog, open.
24. Winds and clouds, offering. 25. Mist, open. 26. Cold wd Nly. l. or no
moisture. 27. Close, wet, wdy. 28. Warm wds, shower 2 p. 11 p Sly. March 1.
warm; shower and wind 2 p. and 11 p. S W. 2. Fr. mist m. warm at n. Sly. 3. s.
wet 6 m. warm. Wly 4. Fr. coldish wind, wet o. Nly. 5. Foggy a. m. and n. Nly
at night. Sly. 6. Thick fog; warm, fog at night. 7. Fr. warm, open. S W. 8.
Rainy, wdy, Thunder in in some places.
Iterum Dec. 20. 22. a die 8. ad 28.
8. Hard fr. winter; close m. p. 9. Close, mild p. m. wetting, high wind. 10.
Close brisk wd. Nly dash p. m. 11. Frost, mist m. 12. Frosty, fair, some mist
at night. 13. Water freez in a Basin. N E. fair, high wd. 14. Frosty, s. mist
m. close at night. 15. s. rain a. l. then freez, fog, thaw. 16. s. mist, misle
m. 17. Wd b. d. fr. freez. Nly. 18. Frosty, bright. Nly. 19. Frost; cloudy m.
clear p. m. Sun rise red, offer snow 6 m. H. cutting wd and cold. 21. High wind
and frost, so at n. Ely. 22. s snow m. 23. Frost. 24. Frost and snow all m. 25.
White fr. Thaw. N E. 26. Vehement frost, scarce tolerable. N E. 27. Equal frost
m. milder, no thaw. 28. Fr. but more close, high wind at n.
Ao 1671. Feb. 14. 9. A Feb. 6. ad 21.
6. Fr. some snow found m. open. Nly. Halo 9 p. Wly. 7. Fr. snowing m. misty
and misling die tot. wetting 8 p. S W. 8. Wetting a. m. and p. m. 9. Close,
windy at n. warm. Sly. 10. Close; wetting a. m. and m. p. so 9 p. 11 p. 11.
Fair wind, overcast p. m. Ely. 12. Close m. h. gusts 3 p. etc. drisle 9 p. Sly.
13. Warm m. close and mist toward even. 14. Cool, close m. p. Sly. 15. Close m.
p. mist even. Ely. 16. Close m. p. wetting 3 p. S E. 17. Fog open, very warm p.
m. S E. 18. Close; dewing o. and 10 p. N E. 19. s. wet m. drisle a. m. cold,
close. 20. Shower o. hail 3 p. wetting vesp. Sly. 21. Very cold; open wd, often
showring, Lightn in the West. Nly.
1672. Apr. 12. 27. Ab Apr. 3. ad 20. inclusive.
3. High wind p. m. Wly. Hail 2 p. 3 p. 5 p. 4. Cold m. offering o. h. wd;
close vesp. 5. Close dropping m. and a. m. windy. 6. Close, wetting a. m. shower
o. p. m. 11 p. 7. Dropping 9 m. o. shower 6 p. Nly. 8. Wetting 4. ad 8 m. close,
wetting 11 p. Nly. 9. Close mist m. Nly. 10. Cold m. close, wetting a. m. p. m.
rain n. N V V. 11. Close, wetting 9 m. Nly. 12. Close, misty. Nly. 13. Coldish
m. close, misty Nly. 14. Close. N E. 15. Close, s. drisle 11 p. S W. 16. Wind
and wet 6 m. cool wd; cold n. 17. White fr. cold, s. mist. 18. Cold, misty. N
E. 20. Windy, misty. N E. Apr. 16. Hail and snow in the Country. News of
several Frosts this week. 4 T. M felt in Venice, but much harm in Arimini in
Italy.
1673. Feb. 1. o. A Jan. 23. ad Feb. 10.
23. Open, cold, windy. Nly. 24. Snow a. m. and 1 p. h. fr. N E. High wd. a. m.
and n. cold, freezing at n. 25. Hard frost, sharp wind. overcast p. m. and n.
E. 26. Hard frost, cold wind. Ely. 27. Hoar fr. yet air is not cold, mist; ice
in Thames. 28. Hoar fr. thaw, closing p. m. Ely. 29. Close, coldish. N E. 30.
Drisle m. close, misty; s. wind. N E. 31. Fr. ice, wind close 11 p. N E. Feb.
1. Close m. open, misty. N E. 2. Fr. hoar, misty m. and even. N E. 3. Close m.
p. N E. frost m. s. ice. 4. Frost and cold, frosty n. 5. Frosty. N E. freez at
n. 6. Frosty. foggy all day. S E: 7. Frosty m. foggy, close p. m. N E. 8.
Drisle 6 m. 6 p. close, foggy; misling p. m. S W. 9. Open, overc. o. some wd. N
E. 10. Open a. m. close, dark p. m. S E. T. M. at Cologn and Bon 3 p. Gazet
759.
1674. Apr. 1. 18. A March 23. ad Apr. 10.
23. Fog, wind m. Nly. S W. Aches. 24. Close fog, some wind. Wly, N V V. Aches.
25. VVarm, open, s. mist. S V V. 26. Rain m. close, warm; s. mist. S V V. Nly.
27. Cloudy m. p. S W. warm, yea hottish. Nly. 28. Hottish N W. open. Wly. 29.
Fog, hot. Nly. 30. Open m. p. fog, cloudy; brisk wd. Ely. Apr. 1. Frost, bright
wd. Ely. Aches. 2. Red wind m. Aches. S W. 3. Close, wetting 7 m. High wd. S W.
4. Close, wetting 10 m. and 1 p. S W. 5. Open. S W. 6. Mist m. showrs 11 m.
Sly. 7. Showrs 7 m. warm, open, fits, Aches. 8. Some wind, Aches 10 p. Ely. 9.
Close a. m. offer p. m. misty; Aches 5 p. cool. 5ly. 10. Showry 11 m. warmer;
mist, Aches. S W. Storm at the Wells and Lyn, deep Shipwracks.
1675. May 29. 7. A May 18. ad June 1.
18. Close, fair. S W. 19. s. drops vesp. Nly. 21. Cool m. warm, lowering 9 p.
Ely. 22. Hot, cloudy 5 p. 24. Hot rain 7 p. Thunderclap 1 p. some wet 6, 8, 10
m. 25. Rain 10 m. wind, showring, Thunder, Rain 7 p. S W 26. s. moisture 7 m.
rain 5 p. 9 p. hard 11 p. 27. Rain a. l. 11 m. and p. m. mist. Ely. 28. Rain
die tot. close, shower. Indisposition. 29. Open, lowering. Ely. 30. Fair,
floating clouds, close vesp. s. drops. 31. Rain 7 m. 10 m. shower p. m. Sly.
Thunder. June 1. Rain 7 m. 10 m. with great Hailstones. Brisk wd, coasting
showrs 1 p. 7 p. 2. Some wetting o. 1 p. 3 p. 6 p. 9 p. Wly. 3. Little shower 3
p. Wly. Indispositions. 4. Close, s. rain 11 m. 7 p. wind brisk. Wly. 5. Dry,
warm at night. Nly. 6. Warm a. m. coasting shower o. 3 p. 8. fere. 7. Rain o.
etc. windy oven, and close. Indisposit. 8. Close, open. Nly. N E.
1676. March 20. 11. A March 12. ad 29.
12. Frost, gusts of wind 2 p. Ely. 13. Fr. Ely. Fits of Convulsion.
Indispositions, shower 11 p. 14. Fog. N E. Meazels break out. 15. Fog, warm.
Wly. Sly. 16. Fr. m. warm, s. wetting 3 p. S W. 17. Fr. 2 m. warm wind S E.
Indisposition. 18. Some rain 5, 6 m. close m. p. wetting 10 p. Ely. 19. Mist,
wetting 4 m. wd. Ely at o. S W. 20. Open m. close wd, drisle 11 p. S W. 21.
Open, warm. S E. 22. Some mist, warm; much Lightn. at Limehouse 10 p. 23.
Close, cool, brisk wind; shower 5 p. Ely. 24. Rain m. brisk wd vesp. Ely. 25.
Misty, wet m. p. and brisk wd. N E. Much rain 8 p. 26. Open, windy; Headaches.
N E. 27. Cold and rough wind; Indisposit. Ely. 28. Frost, w. not so rough.
Indisposition. 29. Fr. warm. Ely.
1677. May 20. 1. A May 10. ad 29.
10. Warm, windy, Wly. R. 1 m. 10 p. ab Oph. cap. ad Lyram. 11. Warm, overc. at
n. Ely. Gout. 12. Rain apace 4 m. wind open, warm. S W. 13. Close m. gusty,
sprinkle 8 p. S W. 14. Warm day. Wly. 15. Some little R. 7 m. warm wd. Wly.
Ely. 16. Mist, fair, very hot, brisk wd. Ely. 17. Some puffs of wd, soultry
hot. Boys sicken. Meteors 10 p. Ely. much Lightn. wet 2 m. 18. Soultry hot, Th.
with dash of Rain 4 p. 19. Dropping 3 p. shower 4 p. serious. 20. Foggy, gusts
of wd 2 p. 5 p. cold day. 21. Overcast a. m. wind various. 22. High wd. A drop
or 2 seen afar off. Indispositions; mist at n. Ely 23. Some wd. Ely. 24. Windy
a. m. hot day, cool, wd. 25. Hot, gr. Hail, R. Th. 3. p. Nly. 26. Some mist,
Meteor 11 p. Lightning. 27. Some drops 7 p. 8. p. wetting. 28. Close m. and
vesp. open, R. 10 p. midn. 29. Wet a. m. tot. ad 1 p. windy. Die 18. Great Hail
at London, and Highgate, broke Windows. 19. Short Meteor about Lyra.
1678. July 16. 20. A July 6. ad 26.
6. Brisk wind, hot p. m. red Heaven all over 8 p. Wly. N W. 7. Brisk wd, hot
p. m. and vesp. red Heaven. 8. Brisk wd, mist. W. 2. A sh. 1 m. cool brisk wd.
N W. 10. Brisk wd, mist, cold wind, warm p. m. 11. Brisk wind W. warm p. m.
shoulder 10 p. 12. Brisk wind. N. shoulder 11 p. 13. Mist, briskwind. W. warm.
14. Brisk wind W. warm. Sly. Lightn. 10 p. 15. Hot night, Lightning m. High wd
3 p. Meteors in. 16. Very hot n. warm day; Lightning 12 p. 17. Open, wet n. 18.
Some moisture o. H. wd 3 p. Wly. 19. Rain midn. 6 m. close, wetting, with Th.
serious rain a 5. ad 9. Sly. 20. Shower 10 m. ante 8. and 10 p. Dash ante 3 p.
with dash again. Sly. 21. Brisk wind, misty, warm. Cloudy 10 p. 22. Mist, shower
3 p. Thunder 5 or 6 times in S E. 2 Rainbows at the same time. S W. 23. Mist; 2
drops; brisk wd. Shower of hail at Epsam p. m. such as not within the Memory of
Man. 24. Mist, stiff wd, warm, some wet. Wly. 25. Mist. Rain 1 m. s. wetting 11
m. H. wds vesp. Sly. 26. Rain 3 m. brisk wind, coasting ante 3 p, R. 5 p. Wly.
1679. May 9. 24. Ab Apr. 29. ad May 18.
29. Fair Nly. red even. 30. Open, cloudy, s. wind, Wly. Meteors with a Train 9
p. May 1. Gentle wd, very warm. Sly. 2. Open, cloudy; some wd, Heat. Sly. 3.
Heat, some wd, overcast vesp. Sly. 4. Some fog, heat, brisk wd. Wly. 5. Warm n.
some rain m. S W. wetting a. m. 6. Rain m. drisle 7 m. wind. Sly. Rain apace o.
and 1 p. 7. Close, some wd. Sly. little shower. ante 9 m. offering 1 p. 8.
Close. Nly. Thunder 4 times 4 p. some rain, warm. Wly. at n. Ely. 9. Close rain
3 m. and 7. dri. p. m. Aches. N E. 10. Rain 6 m. great fog, close 8 m. Ely.
cold wind, close m. p. 11. Close, s. wd, s. mist, brisk wind. Ely. 12. Cold wd,
Colic, 12 p. 14. Open, some wd, Ely. cold m. 15. Open, gentle wind, frost m.
Sly. 16. s. wind Sly. close sometimes p. m. 17. Hot p. m. and overc. Wly. Nly.
18. Warm day S W. H. wd, lowering p. m.
1680. July 9. 14. A June 30. ad Jul. 18.
30. Mist, H. wind, dewing 7 m. shower 11 m. close wd. Nly. s. mildew observed
by the Country man, blasting where it lights. Jul. 1. Close mist, open m. much
cooler. 2. Close, brisk wd, shower m. warmer rain 2 p. and offering 8 p. 3.
Mist, cool wind, showring a. m. Dash 1 p. and Thund. Stormy wind and drisle,
vesp. S W. The Plague at Andalusia and at Prague, dye 7 or 800. in one Week. 4.
Brisk wind, close m. p. s. dewing 10 p. S W. 5. Rain 7 m. smart shower 5 p.
dewing ad 9 p. Wly. Roterdam Gazet. Basil several Houses endammaged, and Fields
by Thunder and Lightning. 6. Brisk wd, cloudy, open. Wly. 7. Gentle wind, open;
close 9 p. Rain 6 p. ad 10 p. S W. 8. Rain 5 m. Ely Fog. A Meteor 12 p. 9. Fog,
bright; hot n. S W 10. Fog; Meteor 10 p. Sly. 11. Brisk wd, warm. Ely. 12. Fog,
close, hot Meteors. Ely. 13. Brisk wd, close, R. ante 11 m. and 6 p. and 8 p.
hot though close. Wly. Plague at Dunkirk. Extraordinary Relations. N. 60. 14.
Cool, brisk wind, R. 11 m. shower 6 p. H. wd, Meteor 11 p. Leusden Lightning in
the Night piere'd the wall of the Tower, and fired Powder, Tower, Castle, and
great part of the Street blown up. Gaz. 1531. 15. Open, misle 10 m. shower 11 m.
Dash ante 4 p. offer 9 p. Sly, 16. Brisk wd, open, cooler Rain p. m. 1 p. s.
wet vesp. Wly. 17. Rain 3 m. and 6 m. H, wd, cool n. Rain 8 p. misty; s. rain
11 p. Nly. 18. Rain 1 m. dash 10 m. and 7 p. Rain die tot. N E.
1681. Sept. 2. 3. Ab Aug. 22. ad Sept. 12.
22. Cool. m. hot Meteor ante 9 p. 23. Soultry day; Very much Lightning ante 8
p. Thund. and l. rain ad 11 p. W S. 24. High wind die tot. S W. Meteors fly
apace in N. and E. Newburgh. A Body of Fire-Globe, burning in the Air for 3
hours. 25. Misle 7 m. Rain 8 m. hot n. H. wd; a shower 5 p. 26. H. wind a l. and
die tot. cloudy m. p. Wly. 27. Rain 8 m. close and darkish. 28. Open, close o.
a drop. Wly. warm. 29. Open a. m. warm, closing 5 p. drisle 7 p. 8 p. S. p. m.
30. Warm n. close, smart shower 10 m. s. wd, flash of Lightning ante 11 p. s.
drops. 31. Shower 7 m. showring hard 10 p. 27. Whale in Flushing taken.
Hurricane. Sept. 1. Shower coasting 5 p. and wd. S W. 2. Shower 11 m. and ante
vesp. ad 11 p. open. 3. Rain ante 3 m. ad 11 m. Meteor 9 p. Wly. 4. Rainy a. m.
brisk wd. Nly. 5. Cool, high wd, offer ante 6 p. Wly. rain p. m. close 6. Cool
m. overcast p. m. Wly. Meteor seen in Moorfields ho. 10 p. Ab Arcto in Merid.
with a Stream 6 inches broad, Gazet. A Comet for 3 days, ho 9. in S E. 7. Close
m. p. drop 6 p. wd. S W. 8. Close m. shower ante 8 m. H. wind. N W. 9. Meteor 1
p. between Cynosura and Draco. H. wd. 10. H. wind m. p. closing a. m. wetting
ante 11 m. so sub vesp. N W. 11. H. wd, fair. N W. 12. Cool m. wd, overcasting
p. m. close 11 p. N W.
1682. June 27. 6. A june 19. ad July 5. inclusive.
19. Warmer, s. wind. Wly. open 4. p. ad Sun occ. 20. Cool and brisk wind m.
close, drisle circa 3 p. and 9 p. 21. Some rain 6 m. H. wind m. p. pretty warm.
S W. 22. High wind m. p. very often showring 8 m. and o. and 5 p. 6 p. 9 p.
warmish. Strasburgh, Grass rots on the ground by the excessive R. that has
fallen here. Benskins. N. 117. 23. Warm m. s. wet 5 m. wd brisk m. shower 11 m.
Gr. dash of Rain and Thunder. N W. 24. Cooler, shower 10 m. and post 2 p.
Maxfield, Hail, Thunder and Lightning destroyed the Corn; hurt several Persons.
25. Shower 11 m. 1 p. 6 p. Sun occ. Gusts of winds rise 3 p. S W. 26. Cool,
gusts of wind 1 p. some gales 9 m. shower discovered 2 p. smart shower after 6 p.
red even, wd m. 27. Rain 4 m. and 5 m, open, s. wd. N W. Brussels, we have had
very bad weather here like to spoil our Harvest, Gazet. 28. Warm, close, some
drops post 8 m. Rain 10 m. some R. past 7 n. S E. Wly 29. Close, gusty; very
high wind 7 p. s. wetting ante 1 p. so ante 3, 7, 10 p. Indisposition at n. 30.
Close, H. and stormy wds 1 m. so m. p. especially p. m. Rain circ. 4 p s R. 7
p. S W. Before the 26th of June XI. Frosts at Chelsey Garden. About the 7. or
9. such as injured the Melons and Cucumbers. 29. Rochester. Terrible Hail,
Thunder and Lightning. Benskins 116. Jul. 1. Cooler, windy, drisle, stormy and
wet 10 m. Wly. 2. s. wetting at or. before Sun rise; showring 9 m. smart shower
ante 11 m. wetting o. 1 p. 2 p. High wd a. m. 9. Rain early, and die tot. fere,
shower 8 p. S E. m. S W. p. m. Gusts of wind 10 p. gentle Rain 11 p. 4. High
wind, some Rain 3 p. N W. 5. s. gusts, suspicious, open p. m. closing vesp.
open n. Wly.
1683. Aug. 28. 26. Ab Aug. 13. ad Sept. 6.
13. Close a. m. s. drisle, open p. 14. Rain m. Rainy o. close, hot, wetting,
H. wind. S W. 15. Foggy, rainy m. p. m. and a. m. High wind, cold. 16. Cool m.
s. drops a m. shower 5 p. Brisk rain 7 p. N W. 17. Misty m. some rain, coasting
o. and 1 p. 18. Open, cold wind m. sho. o. Th. 3 or 4 Claps. A Rattling Storm.
Some R. and Hail. N W. 19. Cloudy, wind audible, open. Wly. 20. Some mist,
often clouding and close. W. 21. Foggy m. close m. p. s. drops 3 p. Sly. 22.
Foggy, warm, l. wd. Wly. Sly. 23. s. mist, s. clouds m. s. wd, hot p m. 24.
Misty, lowering, very hot day, l. wind. Sly. 25. s. wetting 8 m. and p. m. warm,
s. wind. S W. 26. Misty m. H. wd, wetting 8 m. S W. 27. Mist m. high wind,
smart shower ante 4 p. s. drops 6 p. S W. 28. Cloudy, very high wind. N W. W.
29. Cloudy, very high wind. N W. S W. 30. Cloudy, windy, open at night. S W.
31. Mist m. close m. p. hottish. Sly. Sept. 1. Overcast, open, calm. Wly. 2.
Fr. m. Fog. Clouds Sly. Wind Ely. S E. 3. Cloudy a. m. with gusts; Rain in S E.
Foggy p. m. Wly. Sly. 4. Foggy m. and a. m. cloudy vesp. hottish then. Ely. wd,
Wly clouds. 5. Lightning, 3 Claps of Th. from the S. 10 p. R. S W. wind Ely die
tot. 6. Foggy m. soultry wd, cool, open p. m. closing vesp. with Lightning ante
7 p. One Thunderclap, dash of R. Sly.
Upon Second Thoughts and advice of Worthy Friends, who value Experience, upon
Consideration that it is long in gathering, and that 30 years gained are better
than 30 years refused, I have added this Table also, in which we have Iris,
Sept. 20. 1654. and 77. T. M. Apr. 4. 1672: Feb. 73. Shipwreck, Apr. 74 Great
Hail, 77, 78, 82: Hurricane. 81. Whale, Ib. Meteors with Trains, etc. July 29,
82. and so we proceed to the next Chapter.

CHAP. XI.. Conjunction of Saturn and Mercury.
1. a Planet of great Employment, and therefore is swifter. 2. Commonly Direct
in this Aspect. 3. Its Character for Wind and Rain. 4. And for Dark Air. 5. The
Influence proved for both Wet, and Dark Air. 6. And for Cold. Yet a Saturnine
cannot introduce a cold Season by its self. 7. may introduce Frost, but no such
as may spoil Vintage. Our monstrous Winters, not only upon 's account; Colds
being variously dispersed by the Celestials. 9, 10. Why October. 1572. was
tedious and Cold. 11. Notable difference between Frosts under. and. All Frost
comes not with a Wind, Mr. Hobbes there mistaken. 12. and distinctive Character
will be perceived by comparing their Tables. 13. Effects of Planets
distinguishable. Some Showrs Saturnine, some Martial, etc. 14. Contiguations of
Clouds whether ascribed to. Ground Mists. 15. Are not the issues of the Earth
without their cause from above. 16. Slender Moisture. 17. Variable Winds. 18.
Sometimes a Curious day. and no Prejudice to the Character. 19. Not given to
Floods, whatsoever it may do in Arabia. 20. The Table.
1. THe League between and, though allowing some Effect between such Alliances,
cannot be thought to be of any great Moment, because of their Immense Distance;
for What Influence can there be upon the Ocean, on a supposed League between
the Thames and the Straits of Magellan? Mercury is a little Planet, and a
Nimble One, thereby portending that he cannot be long of a mind, supposing he
does confer to some Amity. But we have labored before to possess the Enquirer,
that the very Swiftness and Agility of may not Lessen the Planet in account,
but rather aggrandise him, seeing the Swiftness of his Motion in its Orb is a
probable hint to us, that he had most business to do, which otherwise, without
such Agility, could not be dispatched. He must overtake the slower Planets, He
must return, and Re-salute them again; for for so it is ordered, that his
business goes on, even while he goes backward; Venus has done so before, with
and, and will not stand out.

2. Now, as we said, Venus not being bound to observe, also is at the same
Lock: He meets with sometimes before the, sometimes behind, and that at
farthest Distance; with the, his pace commonly is Direct; but now and then
slow, yea sometimes Retrograde; as Dec. Ao 1662. the being gr. 11. distant.

3. Yet all this signifies nothing, except we obtrude a Character upon the
World and fabber about an Influence of Wind and and Rain in Spring and
Summertime; Wind and Snow in Winter; Wind and Clouds in Autumn; It Is Maginus
his Description, which I see others willing to transcribe, Adrian Vlack. Ephem.
Ao 1663. and others. Nor is it amiss if we say Rain in the First place, and
then Wind, seeing and, yea, and the Rest for the most part, answer to Rain more
frequently, than to Wind.

4. Maginus added, wheresoever he had it, some mention of Tenebrosus Aer,
originally from the Arabs, no question; and truly the very view of the Diary
minded me of that, which made me Prize Maginus the rather, to whom Eichstad
accords, Turbulentum and sub frigidum aerem, says he; our Table oft-times
speaks of Close, sometimes Dark and Muddy Air: and true as Truth is it, that
some Planets do contribute more than others, to mask the Air, and darken it at
some special times; but and seem to be more frequent; so that I have reason to
think that if were posited in 's Orb, he would make more rainy Weather than,
because even at such distance he rouses up the Air, and Frowns upon us.

5. And what should we say more, when, who pleases to account the Wet days with
the Sum Total, whether we allow 2 or 3 days, or Twelve, and more, according to
our Enlargement of the Prospect, shall find that it will answer Expectation,
which must necessarily prove our Influence, whether on the nearer account
because of the Proxinity of the Effect to the Cause proposed, or in a more
enlarged account, because no reason can be assigned why Communibus Annis, in
500 days it shall rain every 2d Day, since that Effect is not observed upon
Equal Terms, every other day, secluding our Aspect. Verily in his Station at
least, is noted by Eichstad to be a Tenebrous Planet. Statio prima vel secunda
tenebras aeris affert.

6. But they join Cold with dark Air; and to that I say yea, at time of the
Year: and under limitations, some such as have bin mentioned. Here our
Predecessors give us a smart Note or two, for the use of the Planter or
Husbandman; they tell us, Ao 1572. at the end of October, there came a tedious
Cold season, as Appian has recorded in Tycho's Progymnasm. Yet what great harm
that could do, I do not so readily imagine. But in the year 1520. Werner
assures us, that there happened such a Frost in the Month of May, that spoiled
the Hopes of the Rhenish Vintage, the Buds were so sorely nip't, that they
never recovered for that Year, Eichstad, p. 37.

7. Whether Maginus had this or any more Instances to bottom upon I skill not,
but I see he has ventured to put it into its Character. Ut plurimum efficit
hujusmodi congressus frigiditatem non parum fructibus nocituram: Though others
since have advisedly left it out. I say First, that this ought not to be put in
to the Character. Astrologers at best are counted noisy Men, and I would not
have them make a noise where they betray themselves, and their Art. Neither do
I find any Aspect but a, a that are intended for that rare Effect; so was I
blank, well knowing that the alone cannot do such mischief. He knows little how
Cold is dispensed by the Superior Bodies, who thinks there is no Cold but what
proceeds from. Is there not? Not? Have we not seen himself mock us with a
Torrid Frost? Do not all Interruptions and Gaps make a Chill Air? Are not all
Conjunctions apt thereto? Especially and; yea, and also, with such limitations,
as here, viz. in a Crude Lonely Sign of, when there was never Planet to the
Right or Left.

8. The other Instance I admit, Ao 1572. for I find about the end of October,
not a, but a; for, Consonant to this I may observe, that and in Winter times,
put in for hard Frosts, without the Verge of the Conjunction. In Dec. Ao 1662.
for 16 days. In Jan. 1663. twice 7 Days, with an Hiatus of 4 days between. Ao
1667. Jan. XI. days. What do I speak of Winter? When we have a Midsummer Month,
Ao 1682. with Eleven Morning Frosts, noted from the Chelsey Garden. I say, is
not hear enough to warm us; which is said according to the Mind of Nature, and
no fancy, because it is well known, beside his distance, is in his remotest
Apogee in with, etc. when in the Opposition he is drawn nearer in his Perigee.

9. then is an Icy Cold Planet; I answer, no otherwise then as has been
declared, for these Cold Winters are but few, and where is found in a state of
Desertion, which may come to pass when some of his Fellow Celestials are too
far off, and others too near; and this is the very Case of October 1572. when,,
were crowded together, while others stood aloof off,,, in, in, no Planet in the
intermediate Sign to and. There Is the Hiatus, there is the State of Desertion.
And this Eichstad takes notice of expressly, imputing the Cold not to and, but
to united, which too strait Union is the Cause Effective, or Defective, (I say
both the one and the other) of Cold, and thus shall we see below.

10. Now, if we may be nice in distinction, we may perhaps observe, that though
and may cause Cold, as before it, yet there may be some difference in the
Energy, not seldom observed; for Frost and Cold are not all of a sort, there
are some calm Frosts, some accompanied with chilling Blasts; the Aspect with
the more Windy Planet, brings One, the Aspect with, etc. brings the Other. So
much mistaken was Mr. Hobbs when he imputed all Frost to a Wind; of which he is
excellently admonished by the Noble Mr. Boil. And thus may we Philosophize, if
we be put to it, concerning the Winters under this Aspect; for as for the
Frosty Winter Anno 1682. we may defer that till we come to and, that we may not
do wrong to the Aspect.

11. And this will better be done, if we should constitute a Comparison
between, and, as to these certain Heads of Heat, High Winds, and Smart Rains,
Snow, Hail, Frosty Weather, etc. we should confirm our Pretenses against the
ambiguous Nature, and settle so, that we may know his Character almost, before
we ken his Motion. But I must hasten.

12. Some pretty Fancies further present themselves upon a straiter perusal of
the Table. For why should I meet here also with Clouds flying Low, Clouds at a
great Distance, (in height Perpendicular, for that is meant) Clouds in Scenes,
Two or Three Stories high, and under this Aspect, so often, as to invite us to a
remark; and specially if we may suspect that sundry of the like Instances may
have escaped our Notice: May not this Distance of the Clouds Inferior and
Superior, favor of the Distance of their proper Causes? Yet I shall not say,
that, the Higher Planet, raised the Higher Story, and the Inferior, the Lower;
That would be too palpable. But what if on the other side, should attract the
Higher apartment, and raise the Lower? (For the Sun, we suppose, without which
neither is effectual) 's cooler Ray may let the Inferior (Cloudy) Pavement
descend: 's brisker Ray may elevate it nearer to its self. I assert nothing,
but if I may prompt the Curious to further Enquiry. -- This I can say, that
Experienced Observers may discern and distinguish the Dispositions of the
Planets by several Circumstances and Adjuncts proper and peculiar to each. A
man shall be able to say, This is 's Showrn, this is 's. This is from, this
From, or, with greater Evidence than we can say of Comets, which yet Hevelius,
you have heard, thinks is far from Ridiculous. A Shower with a Pale Fog may be,
with a deeper Blew may be, with Wind, without, sometimes or. And many other
appearances there are in the Air, Fleeced Clouds, Curdled Clouds, Clouds like
Hemp stripped, Fog, Hazy Air, Ground Mists, which are not to be found at all
times, nor under every Aspect, Ground Mists I say, which I find even here in
the years of my Rural Observation (and might perhaps have bin before heeded,
since I remember some objection I made to my self against their Observance.)
and in Morning and Evening, not being able to suspend them, but that they fall
upon the Land, Arable or Meadow: As in Winter time we may observe often a
deeper Fog with us below, yet upwards may see it clear, though otherwise it
appears cloudy upon the recess of a Mist; so different are the Effects and
Footsteps of the Celestial Causes. But of this before I remember, Lib. II. Cap.
2. 9.

13. The Objection that I made was, that Ground-Mists are the Issues of the
Earth only, and so could not claim any Ethereal Relation. But the Contrary is
apparent, for if Dews are, notwithstanding their Original, dispensed by the
Heavens, Mist also must be so dealt out; for to make up our Sorites, if no
Mist, no Dew, if no Dew; no Shower has an Ethereal Relation; and so we fall
back to Mechanisms, and the misty Speculations of the Cartesian, where we may
blunder all days of our Lives, and envy Owls and Moles, who can discern
something in the Dark.

14. Of this Nature it may be, is the slender Offer of Moisture here also
observable: Offer to misle says one day, July 18. 1655. Three drops. Another,
July 19. 1654. Rain scarce sensible says a Third, July 15. 1655. It agrees
with, and with what we have observed before, that he is a dry Officer, and
therefore not always fruitful in Wet, but inclined to Winds.

15. Winds variable, which are here remembered, may, next to the, be imputed to,
the next in swiftness of Motion: It Is true, if they vary when he is found
Stationary, then we lay no claim to that Effect; but we shall scarce find it
so, (I speak at adventure.)

16. Sometimes I have met with the Weather under this Aspect applauded. A
Curious day, a Day commended, etc. It Is no Fallacy in it its turn to impute it
to this Aspect, which is fair and seasonable (as others) when by its self, and
at time of the year, and under such Circumstances; and must needs be commended,
since Health it self is nothing but Temper, etc. This hinders not that
Character of his, which speaks Distemperature: For the difference of
Circumstance reconciles all: seeing they are apt enough to take occasion to
show themselves more Intemperate; which appears by this, If the present day
under and be commended, it argues the precedent were not so commendable, when
the precedent Distemperature was on the Cold Side. Then it is easy to say, the
approach of the did allay it, agreeable to that common Nature of, and the
proper Character of our Aspect under Consideration.

17. As to Albumazar, I find him talking of Floods, and Plenty of Rain in some
certain Signs, as,,, and, and sometimes as little Rain, yea, much Dryth, as in
and, Vicissitudes of Wet and Dry may agree well enough. Howbeit, but one Flood
appears in our Table, and that upon a Singular Concourse of Causes; not
imputable therefore to and, with any Eminence or special Note. and it is true,
may challenge that which is a more frequent, and therefore to all seeming a
more Potent Cause; more apt to fall in with stronger Congresses by its very
frequency: What the Arabs add of paucitas pluviarum, and yet Inundatio multa,
more than once, viz. in and, as I may hope it is no Contradiction real in diverse
Signs, as to their Clime; so such Exotic Consideration is not worth my while.

Diary.
Ao 1652. Jul. 23. 3. Ab Jul. 18. ad 28.
18. Cloudy, dropping, more wind, misty vesp. 19. Mist m. cloudy, wd variable,
mist vesp. 20. Close m. p. mist at n. 21. Mist m. close m. p. 22. Thunder,
showrs, showring at n. 23. Overcasting, dropping at n. wd variable. 24. Showrs,
clouds contrary, wds. 25. Windy m. s. clouds, dropping. 26. Windy, dropping,
some rain at n. 27. Some cl. 28. Thunder showrs, windy, showrs so at n. wd
variable
Ao 1653. July 21. 5. A Jul. 15. ad 26.
15. Rain insensible m. 16. Red wd, s. clouds. 17. Hot, s. sprinkle vesp. 18.
Cloudy, offer at misle, a shower. 19. Cold wd, cloudy m. red wd. 20. s. rain.
Too little. 21. Windy, hot. 22. Hot, dry season, winds high. 23. High winds at
night, cold and close. 24. Fair, hot. 25. Misty m. hot, rain and Thunder
coasting. 26. s. rain, shower at n. cold wd, muddy, blew mist.
Ao 1654. July 9. 27. A July 13. ad 26.
13. Cool wd, unconstant showrs spoiling Hay-making. 14. Heat. 15. Overcasting,
wd, s. insensible drops. 16. Wet, thunder very hot. 17. Wet and wind p. m. 18.
Blustering n. hot, somet. suspic. 19. Rain a. l. 3 drops, warm. 20. Hot, high
wds, s. moisture. 21. s. wd, clouds contrary, hot, some showrs at n. 22. Clouds
contrary, some drop. 23. Hail, rain a. l. cool wind, very variable, hail. 24.
Very cool wd, s. showring 25. Cls. gather, set to rain at n. 26. Misling noct.
tot cold wd, and inconstant showring.
Ao 1655. July 25. 9. Aug. 11. 10. A July 15. ad Aug. 21. Ret.
15. Very hot, cloudy Westward. 16. Thunder 4 m. showring and grumbling die
tot. 17. Wet morn. and m. p. 18. Mist, s. coasting moisture. 19. Mist, wdy, s.
showrs. 20. * * * 21. Mist, white cl: lowering clouds. 22. Winds, offer to
misle, hot. 23. H. winds, s. misle. 24. Misle, much rain p. m. 25. Fair m.
showring p. m. 26. Wind, much rain m. showring, cold. 27. H. wd, cool, white
cl. 28. Cloudy, windy. 29. Warm, moist p. m. and n. Ignis fatuus. 30. Misling,
storm o. wind. 31. Wind and misle o. Aug. ejusd. 1. s. lowering cl. Cobwebs;
overc. h. wd vesp. 2. Rain a. l. high wd, misle, m. p. 3. H. wd. thick whitish
cl. stormy, one Thunderclap. 4. High wd, cool; some drops. 5. Sometimes
lowering, wind drop at n. 6. Some wet m. clear, overc. night. 7. Close, darkish;
offer at R. 10 m. and ort. 8. Close m. wd. 9. Wind, clouds, drops vesp.
ground-Mist at n. 10. Hot, yellow m. offer at R, n. and o. 11. Hot, dark;
stormy o. and n. much Thunder. 12. H. blustering and sharp wd m. 13. Mist m.
lowering and misle m. coast. 14. Showrs inconstant, and by coasts. 15. Mist n.
inconstant fits of showring. 16. Rain a. l. and Sun occ. wet die tot. 17. Dark,
Thunder and some showrs. 18. Showring m. p. hot. 19. Very wet, s. wd, hot. 20.
Wet m. so at n. Th. in s. places. 21. Wd and wet, clearing.
Ao 1656. Sept. 10. 26. A Sept. 4. ad 16.
4 Wind, showrs circ. merid. 5. Thick mist m. hempen cl. little wd, yet
variable. 6. Wind rises, overcast, warm, blackish cl. 7. Close wd, faint,
blackish cl. 8. Some little showring o. store of rain toward London. 9. Close
m. flying clouds, lowr. flash of Lightning. 10. Close m. red clouds, Eastward
ad Sun occ. 11. Close, lowering, s. wind. 12. Red m. fr. mist, flying cl. 13.
Fr. mist falls 8 m. winds, sometimes high, blackish clouds. 14. Fine rain ante
l. and a Sun ort. high wind. Clouds at a great distance, Rain 4 p. 15. Rain
ante l. cold, cloudy, dropping. 16. Drisle Sun occ.
Ao 1657. Sept. 8. 7. A Sept. 2. ad 15.
2. Wet m. coasting showrs, warm, clouds. S W. s. misle drives. N E. 3. Rain
hard midnight, and ante l. warm; coasting showrs, clouds. S W. smoke N E. 4.
Overcast about Sun occ. wd and gentle rain. 5. Some moisture m. flying cl. wind
and wet 1 p. showrs coasting p. m. 6. Warm wd, fresh at Graves end. 7. Cold
wind, some drisle 9 p. 8. Shower 8 m. winds variable. 9. Wet ab 8 m. ad o. shower
4 p. misle 8 p. 10. Very wet 2 and 4 m. very violent Rain 8 p. N E. 11. Close,
muddy, offer, wd. 12. Close m. p. offering misle. 13. Wet m. close, muddy,
mist. 14. Wet a. l. close, misty. 15. Clouds fly low, lowering n.
Ao 1658. Sept. 9. 18. A Sept. 1. ad 16.
1. Cold, coasting showrs. 2. Fr. snow, wet. 3. Cold, showring, Ground-mist 10
p. 4. Frost, close m. Qu. Ground-mist. 5. Fr. coasting showrs 1 p. dropping 9
p. 6. Fr. Ground mist, Thunder. Southward a flash of Lightning at n. 7. Showrs
3 m. and 5 m. dark, warm. 8. Warm m. showring a. m. very warm, Red even. 9.
Some drops 8 m. very warm; winds 5 p. dropping 9 p. 10. Very warm, Lightning at
night. 11. Hot, close, some drops m. Thunder 3 p. 12. Fog m. gentle wet 10 m.
Shower. 13. Rain 1 m. mist and rain a. m. Ground-mist 11 p. 14. Mist, close,
rain 10 m. and o. 15. Rain 4 m. wet, dark, arm. 16. Overcast ort. s. wet 1 p.
drisle 5 p.
Iterum, Platic. Ab Oct. 17. ad Nov. 6.
17. Mist, Rain, violent wd 5 m. drisle p. m. high wind and rain 5 p. 18. Wind
noct. tot. warm, high wd. s. scuds p. m. showrg 7 p. 19. Wd noct. tot. clouds
low, shower o. Gallant Meteor. 20. Clouds in Scenes, cobwebs, 3 drops. 21.
Gloomy, windy. 22. Cold, ropes, mist. 23. Cold, close R. s. drops 3 p. gentle
rain 8 p. 24. R. 4 m. close. 25. Close wind 4 m. H. wind, s. drisling p. m. 26.
Wd all n. Sky red m. warm rain 4 p. ad 7 p. 27. Rain all night till Sun rise;
storms, cold wd. 28. Frost, ice, cobwebs, clds in Scenes p. m. 29. Some
blustering b. d. fr. ice, Cobwebs. 30. Hard frost all day, overc. 5 p. 31.
Overcast 9 p. thaw. 1. Ice, close m. not overcast, cold winds, variable. S. 2.
Dark, wet; cold a. m. H. wds. 3. Cold; stormy wind; rai^ 9 p. fr. roaring wd.
4. Wind muttering all night; cold; s. snow 10 p. 5. Fr. snow lies; Rain at 5 p.
so all night hard. 6. Rain m. wind and wet p. m. till night; Tempestuous wds at
n.
1659. Plat. gr. 3. did. a Sept. 4. ad 27.
4. Rain m. and wd. 5. Coasting shower p. m. storm with some wd 4 p. etc. 9.
Clouds in Stories, warm, coasting sh. 9 p. cobwebs. 7. Frosty, low mist,
cobwebs, cold, H. wd. 8. Rain a. l. sudden showring p. m. Rain and wd, spoiling
Harvest. 9. Very hard, terrifying weather a daybreak ad o. high wd and drisle
4 p. 10. H. wd, some wetting m. close. 11. Close, offering m. sad R. p. m. and
n. 12. Rain a. l. m. wd (a Flood) R. tot. n. 13. Rain a. l. close, some wd. 14.
Close m. p. driving wd. 15. Rain a. l. much R. a. m. tot. showrs 2 p. high wd,
(Flood rise) wds var. 16, Fair m. showry o. and p. m. store at London. 17. Fr.
high wd at Sun rise, and a. m. coasting showrs. 18. Cold and wind at n. 19. Fr.
showrs 2 p. and 4 p. dropping wds 9 p. and 10 p. 20. Winds 4 m. l. showring, so
1 p. wetting at night. 21. Bright m. H. winds 9 m. clds, wdy; Halo at n. 22.
Fr. wd misling 9 m. wet ad 2 p. 23. Gusts of wd; close, wdy, warm. 24.
Moistning o. and n. Tempest of winds blowing down Trees. 25. Rain m. cobwebs,
etc. wd, misling rain at night. 26. Wind tot. n. clouds blush at n. 27. Clouds
red to the East at night.
Iterum Partil October. 30. 5. Ab October. 24. Nov. 6.
24. Fr. cool wd, clouds rise 9 p. 25. Wind tot. n. and wet o. 2 m. store; s.
rain 7 p. wds variable. 26. Warm, gentle wet 3 p. red clouds at E. (along with
Fog 8 p.) 27. Fog tot n. and o. gross Cobwebs; much Gossamere, warm, fog. 28.
Fog, cloudy, warm, s. Meteors near Vrsa. 29. Dark, close; fog 8 p. near Vrsa.
30. Close, clouds, Meteors at n. 31. Cold n. s. fr. fog a. l. and 4 p. gross
Cobwebs, fog 6 p. 1. 5 m. dark, drisling 10 m. wd 1 p. rain 6 p. 2. Warm,
close, dark p. m. wd high, wind at n. offer drisle. 3. Warm, s. wind o. R. 7 p
etc. 4. W. s. wet m. cold s. sn. and blustering. 5. Storm, Hail; snow at London
m. Hard frost, sharp wd. 6. Frost, not so cold.
1660. 15. October. 28. ab Oct. 22. ad Nov. 5.
22. Frost, some wd. 23. Cloudy, wdy. 24. Frost, fair, wdy. 25. Fr. cold,
cloudy, wdy. 26. Fr. H. clouds curdled; close day. 27. Dry, cold, windy; Hail
and rain 1 p. a shower 3 p. 28. R. offer. midnight, cloudy. 29. Fr. s. h.
curdled clouds, freez n. 30. Fr. seen plain half an ho. after Sun rise. 31.
Frost, mist, curdled clds above, yielding 9 m. cold, s. rain. 1. Close, wdy,
dry, yet threatening. 2. Fr. three quarters of an ho. and above after rising,
Sun shine clear, some fleccy cl. 3. Mist even. inclining to moisture. 4. Close.
5. Fog below, s. h. fleecy clouds, close even.
Ao 1661. 25. October. 28. Ab October. ad Nov. 4.
21. Fog, cloudy d. wdy, but warm. 22. Cloudy, warm. 23. Cloudy, warm. 24.
Cloudy, cobwebs p. m. warm d. even. colder. fog in Meads; Halo. 24. Cloudy,
cobwebs, High mist; cold, some few clds, misty n. 26. A shower 7 m. misty for n.
wdy, driving sh. warm, p. m. freezing. 27. Fr. little fog; warm, cloudy. 28.
Warm day, cloudy. 29. A shower 9 p. misty, much R. ad 11 p. 30. Sun rising as in
mist, warm day. 31. Cloudy, windy, Rain 8. m. rainy ad 10 p. m. 1. Misty. 2.
Rain m. a shower 10 p. m. warm. 3. Warm, mist 9 m. and rainy most part ad Sun
set, fog. 4. Very rainy m. ad 10. frequent showrs ad 2 p. close.
1662. Iterum 9. Dec. 2. A Nov. 25. ad Dec. 23.
25. Fog, frosty, clear n. 26. Idem. 27. Fog, frosty, some snow a. l. 28. Fog,
frosty, hard. 29. Fog, frosty, hard ice upon Thames. 30. Fog, frosty, sonet. 1.
Fr. fog, some rain p. 2. Fog, cold rain 7 p. 3. Some snow a. l. frosty, fog. 4.
Frosty, fog. 5. Idem. 6. Frosty, fog. 7. Frosty, fog. sn. m. p. 8. Fr. fog,
clear above 10 m. 9. Frost, sn tot. d. H. wind with it. 10. As much snow a. l.
H Winter, s. little thaw. 11. Frosty, fog. 12. Thaw, s. rain p. m. 13. Thaw
tot. n. fog, rain 6. ad 8 p. 14. Fog n. Sun shine o. s. flying clds. 15. Rain,
fr. m. fog. 16. Rain m. p. 17. Rainy. 18. Rain a. l. fair m. p. cold. 19. Cold
and cloudy. 20. Cold and wetting. 21. Close, misty, wetting 10 p. 22. Rain m.
p. n. close, moist, shower. 23. Fog, rain 1 p. and cold.
1662. 5. Oct. 28. ab Oct. 20. ad Nov. 6.
20. Fog, flying cloud, warm H. wd. 21. Wind and rain a. l. rain even; H. wd.
22. Rain a. l. close rain 4 p. 8 p. 23. Much rain a. l. clds, wd, Meteors at n.
24. Fr. wind, cold at n. 25. Fr. threatening 1 p. 26. Fr. cloudy, wdy. 27. Fr.
wet fog o. Rain tot. n. 28. Fair m. shower 3 p. 29. Rain a. l. cloudy m. p. 30.
Drisle 7 m. 31. Fog, wd, warm.
1663. 21. Dec. 18. a Dec. 10. ad 25.
10. Fog, close, moistning, damp. 11. Fog, close, dampning, windy. 12. Fog,
close, moistning, wdy, cold. 13. Windy, rain hard ab 1 p. ad 9 p. 14. Much fr.
cold, rain 3 p. m. close. 15. Blow high tot n. with moisture; blustering day;
dash 3 p. 16. White fr. clear. 17. Frost, close even, s. dewing. 18. Rain a. l.
overcast o. then R. m. p. p. m. 19. Close day, s. moistning, fog. 20. Close
day, fog, frost m. 21. Close m. coldish, fr. m. 22. Close tot. d. muddy p. m.
cold. 23. Muddy, cold fr. m. 24. Great fog. stinking, clear above. 25. Very
cold, close tot die.
1664. P. Dec. 17. a Dec. 10. ad 22.
10. Cold, wdy, close. 11. Fr. close, some dropping, Walls swear. 12. Wetting
before Sun rise and a. m. Rain sadly a 5 p. ad midnight. 13. Mist, close, warm.
14. Close, mist, cool d. commended. 15. Fr. close, mild. 16. Mist, cold. 17.
Hard fr. mist. rain 2 p. and p. m. 18. Close, mist, warm. 19. A Flaring Comet
toward East in; warm, moist, wetting. 20. Comet seen 5 m. close m. p. warm. 21.
Cloudy n. Comet not seen. 22. Close m. overcast at n.
1665. 10. Dec. 15. a Dec. 9. ad 21.
9. L. frost, muddy, flying clds; overcast. 10. L. fr. close, cold, s. brisk
wd. 11. Little frost, close day, cold wd, s. l. clouds at n. 12. Close, (...)
clouds m. cold and dropping. 13. H. wd, cl. n. close, cold and drying. 14.
Close, cold, brisk wd, sn. at 9 p. 15. Roaring wd tot n. H. frost, sharp, wdy
d. 16. Very cold and frosty day Sun rising tot. d. 17. Hard fr. snow. 18. Fair,
blustering day, overcast. 19. Idem. 20. Hard fr. mist m. (so at n.) wds, fair.
21. Some thaw, mist; Hard fr. Sun shine a. m. overcast, close p. m.
1666. 20. Dec. 14. a Dec. 7. ad 23.
7. Fair m. cooler, fog at rising, overcast, drisling. 8. Close, wdy, high wd
p. m. Rain 10 p. cold a. l. 9. Rain a. l. clear n. 10. Fair n. hoar frost a. m.
clds flying. 11. Frost, fine m. suddenly a. l. offer Sun rise, closing m. p.
freez hard tot n. 12. Frosty m. freezing. 13. Frosty, sharp air, s. overcast 10
p. 14. m. frosty, yielding, drisling 7 p. etc. 15. Warm, yet cloudy, suspicious
p. m. drisle 4 p. wind audible. 16. Close, cold wd. 17. Close, cold, offering
to snow, wd a. l. 18. Some rain, freez. 19. Frost m. snow lies, thaw. some more
snow, wd 10 p. 20. Fr. snow 7 p. yielding a. m. yet snow a. m. freez. 21.
Frosty, fair, snow lies. 22. Snow a. l. frosty, thaw Sun, still. 23. Frosty,
snow lies.
1667. 23. Jan. 20. a Jan. 1. ad Feb. 10. 2. 26. Feb. 1. R.
1. Bitter frost, snow lies over the Thames, fog lies. 2. Bitter frost, ice
over the Thames. 3. Bitter frost, ice in Bread. 4. Frosty, snow, wd audible; H.
and cold wind, offering m. p. 5. Fr. snow, close, dark wds. 6. Thaw, warmth,
snow. 7. Wd. close, thaw. 8. Rain at day break, thaw, close. 9. Cold m. p. rain
and snow, wd tot. n. 10. Frost and snow m. offering tot. d. 11. Thaw tot. n.
frost. 12. Mist m. dark day, frost, fog. 13. Mist, suspicious a. m. cldy p. m.
14. Fro. misty die tot H. wind, close. 15. Fog, mist. 16. Fog, fog sub vespere:
17. Rain m. close, warm. 18. Very windy, cold. 19. Rainy, close a. m. 20. Fr.
fair, freez. 21. Vehement, frosty, wet, Rainy 10 p. 22. Very rainy, close. 23.
Windy, close, freez, and at n. 24. Fr. break day; H. wind, close n. wind at n.
25. Very high wd, tot n. more tempestuous day, shower n. 26. Close rain ab o. ad
3 p. m. H. wd. 27. Fr. fair and blustering. 28. Close, gentle rain p. m. and 7
p. and 9 p. 29. Fog a. m. some rain. 30. High wind a. l. and a. d. close, cold,
so to n. 31. Cold, dull, close m. high wd tot. d. 1. Cold, Scots mist, misling
m. wetting p. m. 2. Close m. 2 drops; milder. 3. Mild, fog m. close at n. 4.
Foggy tot. d. some misling 10 p. 5. Close, some rain m. 6. Blew fr. cold, close
and high wd 11 p. freez n. 7. Fr. snow a. l. Close, cold, wdy; close at n. 8.
Frosty, close m. p. 9. Frosty, close, mist; s. thaw p. m. snowing p. 10. Fog,
rain m. 1 p. and vesp.
1668. 7 Feb. 4. ad Jan. 28. a Feb. 10.
28, Wet m. p. Fr. and High wd. 29. Some fr. much wet and mist m. p. 30. Wet a.
m. 31. Misty, wet by fits tot d. and n. storm, high wind. 1. Frost, mist; close
m. close and wdy n. 2. Fair m. p. 2. close wds and wet m. by fits. 3. Rain,
storms, storm all p. Sun rise; stormy fits o. p. m. even. 4. Rain, wd p. m.
close, and wd audible. 5. Fair, warm a. m. Spring forward; mist, closing; wind
rise 10 p. wet 7 p. and 10 h. 6. Close wd. wet 4 p. and wd at night. 7. Fair,
but high wd, 8. Close m. p. and gusts; wds at night. 9. Close, offering a. m.
and misling 4 p. high wind tot n. 10. Winds, close, misling m. so at o. and 9
p. stormy wds p. m. and n.
1669. 17. Feb. 2d. a Jan. 27. ad Feb. 8. (...) 1670. 27. Jan 31. a Jan. 25. Ad
Feb. 5.
25. Some fr. close a. m. R. p. p. m. tempestuous wd. 26. Tempestuous wds tot
n. s. snow, frosty; close, blustering day. 27. Frosty; snow 9 m. o. and p. m.
28. Fr. close; snow m. p. thaw a. l. freezing a. m. at n. 29. Frosty and snow 6
m. sad Lightn. 30. Yellowish cl. winds at night. 31. Blustering tot. n. H. fr.
s. snow 11 p. 1. Blustering m. frosty, close, blustering tot. n. 2. Blustering,
frosty, bitter high wds. 3. Misling 10. calm Weather. 4. Vehement fr. cold;
snow a. l. 5. Vehement fr. yield, snow p. m. H. wds.
Ao 1671. Jan. 30. 7 iterum Feb. 19. 10. duplex. A Jan. 24. ad March 30.
24. Fr. open. S W. 25. Rain Sun ort. close, warm, gusts. Rain 5 p. wind. Nly.
26. Fr. warm, snow and R. 1 p. wetting 10 p. 27. Overc. p. m. some moisture 4
p. W. 28. Fog, wetting m. close and wetting d. some gusts 8 p. Sly. 39. Windy,
foggy, warm; H wd at n. W 30. Rain m. close rain 3 p. H. wind, and grows cold.
N W. 31. Fr. m. close, H. wd a. l. cold wd. Febr. 1. Frosty, open. Nly. 2.
Harder fr. fair. Ely. 3. Frost, close, offer snow. Ely. 3. Frosty, close m. p.
N E. 5. Fr. and ice, mist; Frosty, Halo 6 p. 6. Fr. some sn. found m. open.
Nly. Halo 9 p. Wly. 7. Frost, misting and misling die tot. R. mist. wetting 8
p. W. S W. 8. Wetting a. m. and p. m. 9. Close wd, wdy at n. warm. Sly. 10.
Wetting a. m. and m. p. d. so 9, 11 p. close. 11. Wd, overc. p. m. Ely. 12.
Close m. H. gusts 3 p. etc. drisle 9 p. Sly. 13. Fine warm m. close and mist
toward even. Wly. 14. Cool, close m. p. Sly. 15. Close m. p. mist even. Ely.
16. Close p. m. wetting p. m. S E. 16. Fog and very warm p. m. Ely. 18. Close.
dewing o. and 10 p. N E. 19. Some wet m. and drisle 9 m. coldish, close. N. 20.
Showrs o. cold hail 3 p. wds Sly. a. m. Nly. vesp. 21. Very cold, open, wind,
often showring o. and n. 22. Frost, close, rain 8 m. close m. p. Sly. 23. Fog,
close, some sensible drisle even. 24. Close, some drops 4 p. 25. Close, wetting
toward o. cool p. m. N. 26. White frost, mist; close p. m. drisle 5 p. Nly.
27. Close, some drops o. N W. 28. Close Wly. Sickness at Barbado's. Gazet.
March 1. Some mist, coldish wd, mist even. S E. 28. Mist, wdy, mist at even. S.
Ely. 3. Mist; wind open, showring 7 p. high wd. S E. 4. Some mist, close, wdy;
shower 3 p. S W. 5. Drisle 10 m. shower 1 p. Wly m. Nly 1 p. 6. Close, shower o. N
E. 7. Fr. wdy, close N E. snow offer 4 p. 8. Cold, s. mist, wind. Ely. 9. Some
mist, cold wd. Ely. Shoulder ache 10 p. 10. Fog, frost, cold; Rain 2 p. p. m.
tot. Sly. 11. Fog, closing; wind variable. 12. Much wet b. d. wet 11 m. and p.
m. tot. Sly. 13. Fl. cl. closing p. m. R. 6 p. etc. N E. 14. Fog, fair and p m.
warm. Ely. 15. Close, fair p. m. Ely. Hurracane at Cadiz, the like not known 3
m. 16. Rain m. open. Wly. close even, wd 11, p. wd var. 17. Close, cool wd. N
E. gr. dash of Rain and Hail 4 p. Rain 11 p. 18. Some mist. N E. windy at Sun
set; H. wind midnight. 19. H. wd, close, cold at o. wetting 1 p. Rain and sn.
even. H. wind. N E. wind variable. 20. H. wind, snow m. thaw p. m. freez at n.
Ely. cold in Bed. 21, Gr. fr. ice; close, snowing; freez n Nly. 22. Tearing
frost, hail 11 m. and p. m. freez, Meteor 11 p. much ice. 23. Gr. frost,
frosty, s. mist m. and vesp. N W. 24. Frosty, with great ice, s. mist m. and
vesp. N E. 25. Frosty; s. mist, cold wd, Ely. 29. Warm fog 11 m. heat; drops w.
S E 27. Wetting m. shower o. warm, close W. S W. 28. Warm, close, wetting m. p.
m. tot. and 6 p. 7 p. very varm wd, soultry n. 29. Soultry day, rain m. S W.
30. Soultry, windy, rain 7 p. S W.
1672. March. 23. 25. A March 17. ad 29.
17. Close, s. mist, windy 11 m. shower and Rainbow 6 p. Ely. 18. Open Ely. s.
rain 1 p. warm, closing m. p. 19. Cool m. dry. Ely. bright and heat p. m. 20.
Some mist. Sly. 21. Frost, close fog. mist. open 4 p. Wly. 22. Close n. misty
air, notable fog 3 p. close. Nly. 23. Mist, close, drisle o. notable fog 7 p.
Sly. 24. Mist m. warm; l, w. N W. close n. 25. Very cold, close, windy. Ely. N
E. 26. Close wd. Sly, fine dropping. shower 4 p. great R. 8 p. Sly. 27. Wind
warm, cloudy. Ely. Sly. 28. Close, some mist, rain 9 m. Dash 10 m. E. 29. Close
mist, warm. Sly S W.
1673. March 22. 6. A March 16. ad 26.
16. Windy, wetting circa 6 m. rain 11 m. open p. m. 17. Windy, some rain 7 m.
10 m. o. 5 p. 9 p. S E 18. Some mist, cloudy, fair p. m. wdy. S W. Great Hali 9
p. 19. Shower coasting o. slowring 3 p. S E. Sly. 20. Bright m. fine warm day. N
W. 21. Misling 5 m. close N E. cold even. 22. Close, cold. N E. great
Hysterical fit. 23. Very cold, close, misty; lowering 1 p. N E. Hail ante 6 p.
24. Close, wetting 3 p. and R. ad 10 p. S E. 25. Hail 11 m. Rain 2 p. 4 p. S E.
26. Wind, shower 3 p. N E.
1674. March 19. 17. A March 13. ad 24.
13. Fr. b. d. close, and warm W. 14. High wind and rain a. m. stormy wd p. m.
S W. Aches. 15. Misty, overc. some wind; Aches. 16, Rain circ. midnight,
showring 7 m. and a. m. and p. m. Ely. 17. Moisture b. d. and a. m. R.
considerable 6 p. etc. Ely. 18. s. snow b. d. snowing a. m. very cold p. m.
some misle N E. 19. s. Snow b. d. Tempestuous wd b. d. and very cold and sharp
wd. Nly. Aches, wd cont. 20. Snow b. d. snowing m. p. Nly. foggy, Aches at n.
H. wd b. d. 21. Close, cold and fog. 22. Fog, close, open a little p. m. N E.
Aches; s. offer to snow. 23. Fog, wind m. Nly. even. S W. Aches. 24. Close fog.
l. wd. Wly. N W. Aches.
1675. March 20. 29. and March 31. o. R. duplex. A March 12. ad Apr. 14.
12. Frosty, misty. N E. 13. Frost, cold, some mist. N E. 14. Close, s. hail 8
m. Rain apace 10 p. Thames low, the Laden Barges on ground. 15. Rain m. rainy
a 6. ad 11. m. ad 11 p. etc. Ely 16. Snow m. open. Ely. Aches Frost at 2 p. 17.
Frost, cold, mist N E. brisk wd. 18. Fr. fair, wetting; wind Ely. Aches and
Sickness. 19. Rain and snow m. close, celd. Ely. indispositions. 20. Close,
cold. Ely. aches. 21. Rain and snow 7 m. d lose, colp wd. Ely. 22. Cold, misty.
N E. open 10 p. Nly. 23. Fr. ice; cold, open; Halo 9 p. Wly. 24. Rainy m. and
a. m. close. Wly. 25. Close m. p. and mist; warm m. cool o. very warm 7 p. 26.
Very warm, clouding m. p. S. S W. 27. Misle 3 p. shower 4 p. dash 5 p. warm.
Ely. 28. Very warm, just offer; Halow. Wly. 29. Close m. p. wetting 6 p. etc.
Indispos. 30. Rain betimes m. rain 11 p. Wly. Aches. 31. R. a midn. ad o. shower
7 p. Ely. Aches. Apr. 1. Rain 6 m: hail half an hour after 10 m. shower 3 p.
cold, Aches. 2. Cold, offer 9 m. dash of R. past 2 p. Storm of Hail, cold. Wly.
3. Lowering m. p. cold. Ely. Indispos. 4. Open, cool. N. variable S W. Hysteric.
Aches. 5. Rain 5 m. and wetting a. m. cool. Ely. 6. Cloudy m. p. cool wd. Nly.
Aches. 7. Close, hail o. H. cold wd. and red wind. N E. Indispositions. 8.
Frosty n. and m. very cold, Red wd. N E. 9. Hard white frost, clouding p. m. S
W. 10. Close, warmish, some wetting a. m. and vesp. wind somet. high. 11. Warm,
fresh wd, coasting shower 6 p. shower 7 p. Wly. Aches, R. a. l. 12. Open, s.
drops 2 p. Nly. cold; Aches. H. wd. 13. Clouding a. m. fair p. m. N E. Aches.
14. Fair and temperate; wdy Hazy. Ely.
Iterum May 10. 4. Ab Apr. 28. ad May 18.
28. Fair m. rain a. l. and 6 p. Ely. Aches. 29. Cloudy, fair, windy p. m. N E.
Aches. Clouds in Scenes. 30. Mist, dry, Aches 11 p. and cloudy. New of T. M. at
Amboyno in the Gazet. May 1. Close m. and vesp. somet. open, Aches p. m. 2.
Rain midn. some drisling shower 7 m. and 11 m. rain 1 p. then 6 p. S E. 3. Rain
4 m. close m. p. N. Aches. 4. Cloudy m. p. at n. mist. N W. 5. Warm, misty. S
W. 6. Lowering, much air, wind variable. Aches. 7. Lowering and mist. N W 8.
Fair, dry, temperate, Nly. S W. 9. Windy a. m. somet. overc. cold vesp. N W.
10. Close m. p. mist, very cold m. drops 8 p. N W. 11. Warm, open; H. wind,
Indispos. 11 p. Wly. 12. s. drisle a. m. 10. m. 11 m. 4 p. and 6 p. Wly. warm,
foggy. Aches. 13. Hot, mist. Wly. 14. Hot, dry, s. lowering. Wly. vesp. Ely. 15.
Close m. open, cooler; brisk wd 8 p. 2 or 3 drops 8 p. from the E. shower 9 p.
10 p. Aches. 16. Wet m. p. d. Ely. Indispositions. 17. Close, cold, Aches. 18.
Close. fair. S W. lowering post merid.
1676. May. 11. 17. Ab Apr. 29. ad May 16.
29. Bright, hot. Wly. Aches. 30. Hot, a drop or two discerned Ely. shower 11 p.
wd variable. May 1. Shower 5 m. Hot. Wly. 2. Fair, Indispos. Meteor 11 p. Wly.
3. Close m. cool; brisk wd; bright Meteor N E. Aches. 4. Cool a. m. wd p. m.
Ely. 5. Fair, dry wd. Ely. Aches. wd variable. 6. Hot m. wind brisk o. etc. S
E. great drops 6 p. 7. H. wd die tot. lowering o. m. misty. Wly. 8. Shower 11 m.
4 p. 6 p. W. Aches. 9. Close wind, shower 8, 11 m o. 3, 5, 7 p. W. 10. Pregnant
clouds, Aches. 11. Some rain 7 p. gusts of wd. o. Wly. wd. 12. Open, dropping
m. shower 3 p. 4 p. shoulder 9 p. Wly. 13. Windy, close, offering 4 p. shower 7
p. dropping 11 p. Wly. 14. Close, shower 8, 10 m. hottish 4 p. Halo 11 p. Wly
15. Shower 6 m. 8 m. 10 m. and alias, shower o 3 p. h. wd, Indisp. cool n. Wly.
16. Tempest of wd till about set 5 p. s. rain 7 m. and alias. Wly.
1677. May 8. 2^ A Man 3. ad 13.
3. Wet a. m. tot. open p. m. shower of Hail and rain with an Illustrious
Rainbow; drisle 9 p. Ely m. Sly o. Wly p. 4. Shower 1 m. and 5 m. 5. Cool m.
white frost. Wly. R. 2 p. and 6 p. 6. Gossamere 1 p. s. wd. Ely. white fr.
Apoplexy 7 m. 7. Open, yet misty, brisk cool wd. Ely. 8. Mist, some lowering
clds; brisk wd. Ely. 9. Warm, open and windy. shower at Hatfield 5 p. 10. Fair,
warm. Wly. windy. 11. Warm, overcast at o. Ely. Sly Gout. 12. R. apace 4 m. wd,
open, warm S W. 13. Close m. gusty, sprinkle 8 p. S W. 6. Report of 3 Suns
seen. Long Cloud from Sommer-set-house to Si Mich. Cornhil at Sun occ. 10. R. 1
m. Meteor ab Oph. Cap. ad Lyram.
1678. May 6.. 11. Ab Apr. 30. ad May 12.
30. Brisk wind E. cloudy, warm p. m. Rain 6 p. May 1. H. wind noct. tot.
drisle 7 m. rainy and windy m. p. Rain hard ante 11 p. 2. Drisle circa 1 m W.
rain 9 m. coasting, dropping 1 p N W. brisk wd, misty ante 8. 3. Misty m. wet.
W. open; Red wd. 4. Brisk wind. S W. Rain 10 m. high wd, shower 2, 7. p. S W. 5.
Misty m. S E. wet ante 10 m. and 10 m. Open p. m. wet 10 p. 6. Misty, rain a.
l. Bliue at Forest hill, warm. Sly. brisk wind. 7. Misty, wet. brisk wind;
warm. m. 8. Misty, wet E. warm. Wly. Red wd. N E. Bright Meteor. 9. Misty, hot;
overcast o. S E. 10. Mist, wet; s. wind, hot. Indisposition; Meteor 11 p. 11.
Mist, hot; brisk wind, rough wd, Sun occ. Meteors 2 p. 9 p. Lightning in S W.
Red wd. 12. Mist, rain m. 1 p. stormy wd 11 p. Sly.
1679. May 16. 21. Platique. A May 2. ad 30.
2. Open, gentle wind. S W. 3. Fair Sly. heat, overcast vesp. s. wind. 4. s.
fog. Sly. heat, brisk wd. S W. 5. Warm n. some rain m. S W. fine wetting a. m.
to 8 shower 4 p. 6. Rain m. drisle 7 m. Sly. R. apace o. 1 p. and ad 3 p. 7.
Close, some wd. Sly. little shower ante 9 m. some offering 1 p. Thunder. 8.
Close. Nly. some rain; warm; Wly at n. Ely. 9. Rain 3 m. ad 7. Ely. close,
misty; drisle p. m. and Aches. N E. 10. Rain 6 m. great fog, close 8 m. Ely.
cold wd, close m. p. Ely. 11. Close, s. wd. Ely. mist; brisk wind. S W. 12.
Fair. Ely. cold wind. 13. Fair, white flying clouds, dr. Ely. 14. Open, some wd
Ely. cold m. 15. Open, gentle wd, frost m. Sly. 16. Fair Sly. close, lowering
vesp. 17. Hot p. m. and overcast Wly. Nly. 18. Warm d. S W. high wd; cloudy p.
m. 19. Open, misty, N W. fine brisk wd. Ely. 20. Open, gentle wind Sly. hot
Wly. 21. Hot, fair day. hot night. Sly. 23. Drops 5 m. brisk wd Sly. Hot shower
5 p. hot vesp. Rainbow. 23. Rain 5 m. and 6 m. foggy, close high wd. 24. s. wd
Wly. cold wind. s. Rain 8 vesp. 25. Close, high wind. Sly. R. 11 m. 26. Close,
brisk wd, r. a. m. fere tot. hot vesp. 27. Great fog, close rain 9 p. Ely.
hottish vesp. 28. Rain m. o. hot vesp. Wly. 29. Rain store n. and 5 m. rain
again 9 m. N E. 30. Fog, wet p m. and m. p. Wly dark p. m.
Iterum, July 1. o. A June 22. ad July 7.
22. Fair, dry. Nly. Indispositions. 23. Clear, dry, warm. Nly. Hot n. 24. Hot,
overcast. N E. Ely. 25. Fair, cloudy 8 p. wd rise 6 p. Ely. 26. Great mist and
dew 4 m. Ely. 27. Foggy, hot p. m. S E. 28. Windy, cold, but hot d. N E. 29.
VVindy, wind rise p. m. Lightning 10 p. and noct. tot. and some rain. 30. Rainy
m. Thunder ante 8 m. ad 10 m. Dash 3 p. and Lightning. Jul. 1. Overcast,
lowering wd vesp. wd. Sly. 2. Wind and wet 1 p. and 9 p. Sly. 3. H. wind 6 m.
and die tot. open. Sly. 4. Wind pretty high, cloudy m. p. S W. 5. Clear m.
fair, dry. Sly. 6. Open p. m. shower ante 5 p. Weathergall ante 8 p. 7. Foggy S
W. s. drops coasting 7 p.
1680. June 28. 13. A June 24. ad July 33.
24. Bright, hot, brisk wind. Ely. 25. Mist, gentle wd. soultry. S E. 26. Brisk
wd, very soultry. 27. Mist, very soultry, a little shower post Sun occ. Thunder
and Lightning 9 p. Ely 8 p. 28. Cloudy, brisk wd, soultry. S W. 29. Open, hot,
some wind; Flash of Lightning per 8 p. and ante 1 m. 30. Mist, high wd, dewing
7 m. Shower 11 m. close wd. Nly. Some Mildew observed by the Countryman,
blasting where it lights. July 1. Close mist, open, dry, some mildew again,
much cooler. Sly. 2. Close, brisk wd, shower m. warmer. Rain 2 p. and offering 8
p. Sly. 3. Mist, cool wind, showring a. m. Dash 1 p. Thund. stormy wd and
drisle vesp. Sly. The Plague at Andalusia and at Prague, there dyed 700. or
800. in one Week.
1681. June 26. 24. A June 20 ad July 1.
20. Close, gentle rain a 2 p. ad midnight. 21. Wet day, dash ante 3 p. Sly.
22. Rain Sun ort. wind, close wind 7 p. S E. 23. Shower Sun ort. 10 m. p. m. 6
p. Nly. 24. Rain Sun ort. so 7 m. Rain 3 p. 25. Warmer, fair; some lowering.
Sly. 26. Rain a. l. fog m. open, warm; shower 8 p. warm even. Lightning. 27.
Showring. hot n. Fog m. shower 11 m. hot, Lightn. 9 p. 28. Hot, fog m. shower 11
m. Wly. 29. Some mist m. rain a o ad 4 p. Wly. 3. s. R. very wet ante Sun or.
ad o. close, cool. Nly. Jun. 21. Hurracane at Lauburg, ho. 5 p. tore up Trees,
until'd Houses, took up men into the air. 27. Dorchester, Globe of Fire (above
2 miles from the place) which falling amongst Tuft of Trees, burn at Two or
Three to Ashes. Jun. 21. Monmouth, Lately Hail and rain lodges the Corn for
several Miles. D. 20. A Barn fired with Lightning. July 1. Some rain 4 p. H.
wd, R. 8 m. Nly.
1682. June 25. 6. A June 18. a July 3.
18. Some wind, mist m. misling 3 p. Wly. 19. Warmer, some wd. Wly. open 4 p.
ad Sun occ. 7. Frost observed this Month in the Apothecaries Physic Garden.
20. Cold and brisk wind m. close drisle circa 3 p. and 9 p. Wly. Gripes. 21.
Some rain 6 m. high wd m. p. pretty warm. S W. 22. H. wind m. p. often showring
8 m. o. 5 p. 6 p. 9 p. S W. warmish. Strasbourg. Grass rots on the Ground by
the excessive Rains that have fallen here. Benskins N. 117. 23. Warm m. wind
brisk m. shower 11 m. dash 2 p. coasting showrs, great dash and Thunder 5 p. N
W. 24. Cooler, shower 10 m. and post 2 p. Maxfield. Hail, Thunder and Lightning
destroyed the Corn; broke the Tiles, hurt several Persons. Brooks, N. 6. 25.
Shower 11 m. 1 p. 6 p. Sun occ. Gusts of wind rise 3 p. S W. 26. Cool, gusts of
wind 1 p. some Gales 9 m. shower discovered 2 p. smart shower post 6 p. Red even.
Before this 26. of Jun. 11 Frosts at Chelsey Garden. 27. Rain post 4. and 5 m.
open, some wind. N W. Brussels. We had very bad Weather here like to spoil our
Harvest. Gazet. 28. Warm, boy-sick, close, s. drops post 8 m. Rain 10 m. close
day, some rain post 7 at n. S E. Wly. 29. Close, gusty, very h. wind 7 p. some
wetting ante 1 p. so ante 3 p. 7 p. 10 p. S W. Indispositions at n. 30. Close,
high and stormy winds 1 m. so m. p. especially p. m. Rain circa 4 p. S W. some
rain 7 p. June 29. Rochester. Terrible Hail, Thunder and Lightning. Benskins
116. Jul. 1. Cooler, wdy, drisle stormy and wet 10 m. cold the Season
considered. Wly. 2. Some wetting at, or before Sun ort. shower 9 m. smart shower
ante 11 m. wetting o. 1 p. 2 p. H. wd a. m. especially. 3. Rain early and die
tot. fere, shower 8 p. S E. m. S W. p. m. gusts of wind 10 p. gentle rain 11 p.
1683. Aug. 20. 25. Ab Aug. 4. ad 24.
4. Brisk wind and cool, shower o. Wly. 5. Brisk wind, shower after 12 o. and
after 2 p. m. H. wd. Wly. 6. Some rain 10 m. o. 4 p. 9 p. Wly. 7. Wind brisk
and cool m. cloudy m. p. Nly. 8. Rain a 5. ad 8 m. and m. p. rain ante 8 p. and
seriously 11 p. hottish m. high wd. Sly. 9. Some rain m. and 11 m. coldish.
Nly. 10. H. fr. brisk gusts, closing. 11. Hot, some wetting m. close m. p. Wly.
12. Cold, high wd, shower circ. 1 p. wetting 10 p. N W. 13. Close a. m. some
drisle; open p. Wly. 14. Rain m. rainy o. close, hot; wetting; high wd. S W.
15. Foggy, rainy m. p. m. and a. m. high wd, cold. 16. Frosty m. some drops a.
m. shower ante 3 p. brisk rain 7 p. N W. 17. Misty m. s. rain coasting o. and 1
p. N W. 18. Open and cold wind m. shower o. Thunder 3 or 4 claps, and a rattling
Storm; s. hail and Rain. N W. 19. Cold, cloudy, wd audible open. Wly. 20. Some
mist, often cloudy, mist Sun occ. W. 21. Foggy m. close m. p. s. drops 3 p.
Sly. E. 22. Foggy, warm, l. wind. Wly. Sly. 23. Some mist and wd. hot p. m. and
fair. S W. Ely. 24. Misty, very hot d. l. w. Sly. Close and some wetting a. m.
and p. m. warm, s. wind, S W.
Foreign Diary of with the Inferiors, and Remarques thereupon.
Anno 1500. Comet in April for 18 days; the Ephemeris points out, but it also
puts down a: He who takes notice of the Asterisms where they meet, will be
think himself of the Pleiades. In one Word, are in, and if the 18 days were not
the very First of the Month, would be there with them. 1506. Comet again in
August, from several Authors, in Hevelius, where Micovius names the day, Aug.
8. Die Saturni, lasted till day 14. Thus he (though some speak of September.)
This short lived Star owes its Original to; so being within grad. 3. of, and
grad. 14. did. from. It Is true in, is a great Ingredient, but that had a hand
in it; believe when you look back on Apr. Anni ejusd. and find another Comet
had been there on the account of in. If we should prosecute this more minutely,
we would amongst the rest show in S. S. of, but no more of that. 1509. Sept.
14. Constantinople, Earthquake threw down Walls of the City, those next the
Sea: The Sea disturbed, so that it threatened the City; Lycosth. It held for 18
days. Here Is, all about the Equinoctial; I say, for may meet there 3 or 4
times, before once. Therefore our Superior has a main Influence: Lycost. Some
say 13000 Men slain. Fromond. 1510. Cardan tells us this year of Fiery Meteors,
and Stones fell from Heaven, some 60 Pound Weight, some 120. de Variet. Plyny
indeed we account a Liar, but not Cardan as yet. No Author questions it;
Keckerman, Lubienec, and others believe it. Oh that Cardan had mentioned the
Day or Month; I should have ventured at the Reason. But hap it when it will,
near the Equinox helps to make, or bake that Stone which weighed so many
Pounds. For that such things may be, see Calvisius his Testimony of his own
Age, upon the occasion of that which fell Ao 1492. 1520. Jan. 5. Vienna. Three
Suns, with an Iris at rise. die 6. hor. 3. Two Halo's about the Sun. This is no
great matter of Influence; only are together with. Five of in them, enough to
draw the Sun's Picture, because they are at it again Two days after. 1526.
Sept. Men's. Thunder at Basil fired their Magazin; Lycost, circa medium
Octobris, on Atlas Mount, Snow burying Men and Cattle. Leo Afer. apud Purch.
574. 1530. October. 8. Flood at Rome, Mizald. 244. opposed intra gr. 15. sed
vide. Intra Comitia Augustana mense Junii apparuit Cometa, Ecstorm. e Chron.
Sax. all in in men's. princ. at the end, all in; so the Heavens are ripe for 4.
But the Truth is, the Comet is only attested by one Saxon Record: It may be,
'twas a Sublunar Comet, not of General Appearance. This we see is the memorable
year for Wasting Floods, wherefore Aug. finds us another Comet for that matter.
If that in June be rightly set, then the Floods were pointed at by a double
Monitor: and what we have said is right, That Floods and Comets depend on a
Common Celestial Cause conceiving them, though not always bringing forth at the
same time. For behold the great Inundation in Noremberg, so dire, so lamentable
happened, when as and were in; so withal upon, being in, ( Saturn in, the other
Two in the Opposite.) 1538. Sept. 27, 28, 29. Puteoli in Campania; a place of
an ill Name from the beginning; miserably harassed with T. M. Fallopius in
Fromond, speaks of 15 days together; others for the greatest part of Two years.
For this of Sept. is not on the Equinox? and not far off? More minutely is not
in Cardinal Points; but this is out of its place? I was loath to lose the
Observation. And before we part with this year, what shook Basil, Jan. 20. in
Lycost. Is not there also? Yes: For as soon as the got of the one side of, and
stayed on the other, the City trembled. But come again to Sept. in the midst of
which happened Solyman's Tempest of Wind and Snow; and upon the very Equator.
Purchase. 1539. Inter Aug. 23: and Sept. 7. Francis Ulloa tossed with Tempest,
bound for California. de Laet. Cap. 6. in fine, but see also. 1540. Oct. die
29. New. Cruel Tempest, IV. Vessels broke; 686. Persons drowned at the Isle
Ladrones. Purch. 3. 256. Though a Capital Evidence. all in; but there is more
Evidence if the Ephemerides be consulted to prove these III. guilty. 1544.
Sept. 5. Guatimala in the West Indies. Vessels overthrown, and distroyed by
continual Storms and Rain. 120 Spaniards slain. Lanschoten, 229. Benzo. Hist.
No. Orbis Lib. 2. p. 67. near the Equator. all in. See 1509. of this Table, and
1538. 1551. Jan. 13. Germany, with sundry places, Tempest of Rain, Lightning,
Thunder, frightful; in: but see. Jan. 28. Lisbon, Fiery Meteors, an Earthquake
demolished 200 Houses; then accused, but all in. He is Potent you see in more
Signs than one. 1556. Aug. 2, Ill Weather; so die 7. Hakl. Ed. 1. 418. in. Die
9. Oldenburgh in Misnia, Tempest frighted all the Town. Lyc. our had a hand
there, appears from joining with to salute. Again, Die 19. A monstrous Storm,
never saw the like, us supra. So Sept. 2. apud Locarnenses, Hurricanes,
Thunder, Lightning, Inundation; of which the Inhabitants wrote a Narrative,
Cap. 8. It Is our, for is Stationary again at the time; and Sept. 5. in a little
Town of March, Chasms, or Many Fiery Meteors. Lyc. He mentions a voice from
Heaven, but that must be a Story when the Appearance was None. ut supra. October.
6. Acies Caelestes. Lyc. wonderfully opposes with an Opposition so rare, that
it confirms the report. Nov. 10. Storms extreme on the Sea Coast, Stow. in
still. 1557. October. 5. Lat. 41. Very foul, Hakl. in oppos.. 1558. June 2.
Tempest, Hakl. Ed. 1. in, and Stationary. October. 5. Very foul. Hakl. 129. in,
but in opposes. May 13. A dangerous Tempest for 44 hours at the Caspian Sea.
Purchase 198. supra in; but are within gr. 15. in fine. 1559. May 12. Caspian
Sea, a sore Storm. Hakl. 327. die 15. Another, we had much ado to live. 358.
cum, opposite. 1567. Febr. 16, 17, 18. Great Storm on the Coast of England,
Hakl. 130.. 27. at Flores Isle great Rain fell suddenly. Hakl. Fenner's Voyage.
July 14. Leuconotus vehemens Frumenta Sternens. Gemma 2. 357. in. in princ..
1568. March 28. Tempest of wind drowning Boats, Stow.,.. Sept. 23. Rocanat. A
Chasm flaming at night. Gem. 2. 63. all about the Equator. October 9. Storm,
Hakl. 556. in. 1569. March 12. Iris nocturn a, Gem. 2. 64. Gelu prodigiosum,
Ib. cum. 14. T. M. Lovain, circa hor. 12. Colores in Coelo valde terribiles.
Ib. Sept. 1. Coelum Sanguineum hor. 11. noct. but so bright as any thing, might
be read. Id. 2. 65. Stellae discurrentes, about the Equator, with in laxa
oppositione. November. 8. Horrible Comet, Gem.. 1570. October. 8. Wind, Rain, and
much Harm with Floods. Hollingsh. Stow. at the end of. 1571. Sept. 11. Chasma
flammeum, Gemma 2.. circa Equator. 1572. Nov. 18. Star in Cassiopeia: We shall
meet with opposed, but also we find in. Scorpio, say I, has great Influence on
such Phenomenon. 1574. Nov. 14, 15. London. Heavens burning. Stow. in. Even so
these 3 Planets in fired all on the one side, in over their Heads; and Jove
Fires all on the other side; an Ocular Demonstration! 1577. July 4, 5, 6. The
Fatal Damp at the Sessions at Oxford. You may remember, mentioned before in our
discourse of; there were other Aspects upon that place; but were great Movers,
who can deny it, when a Month after comes and destroys 20 Persons by Lightning,
Hows 682. I say, for is Stationary; No danger but when the Thief stands. 1578.
June 28. Freezland, is covered all over with Snow. Frobishera 3 d. Voyage. 630.
Hideous Fog, Ice infinite. 631.: 1581. Jan. 5. Tripoli. Ten Ships wracked by
Storm. Newberg. Purch 1. 411. Febr. 21. Aleppo. Comet ascending South-West in,
and descending North-East. Purch. I. 121. in. Note, this Comet appeared not in
Hevelius's Catalogue. Note also this Year there is News of a Vulcano Flaming at
the West Indies, Guatimala, Angoango, Iseland. From Acosta and others. But they
envy us the day of the Month. So or some other Good Planet loses by it. 1585. A
March 19. for so you must read it; ad April 14. Mr. Cavendish separated from
Sir Walter Raleigh, Hakl. 734. Wonderful that then began in 8. and about that
time in April, had got out of the Sign. 1587. April. 16. Easter Day, very Great
Storms for 3 days. Cables broke, Hakl. 759. oppos. in, in. and before that Apr.
12. Foul Weather, E. of Cumberland. Hakluit. 1596. Febr. 8. Great Tempest. We
lost the Foresight. Drakes Voyage, 3. in and. 1597. Aug. 24. Foul Storm, most
intensely violent 5 or 6 hours. Purch. 1943., but are in and Sept. 19. 20. all
in. 1599. Sept. 7. Streights of Magellan, Storms, forced Cpt. Wirtz to stay. In
2 Months not one fair day: our Principle refuses not to give an account if need
be of those Two Months, Suffice at present that it began at a New, near the
Equator of one side, with deep in on the other side. 1600. October. 17. Straight
of Mamilla, Storm had almost robbed us of our Masts and Sails. in, and within
call. 1606. June 10. Shoteland. All afternoon and Night following, thick and,
Rainy Weather. Purch 3. 823. Die 15. Lat. 56. deceived by an Orderly Current.
22. Storms. Purch. in Trop. July 6. 58. A Southerly Current Purch. 8. Die 9. A
violent Current, Lat. 60. Is not the added now to. Die 19. Mighty Current, Id.
1607. December. 8 Frosts till Jan. 15. thence to Febr. 15. It began in; Yea, and
the on the day it first appeared; to say nothing of, being come within the
term. 1608. June 18. C. de Agullias Tempestas and Frigus Maximum Arthus. in
trop. die 26. Tanta vis ventorum ut aliqui umbilico tenus aquis institerent.
Id.. 1609. July 2. New Foundland, At night much great Rain, Wind shifting.
Purch 3. 184. die 8. we caught 118 great Codd Fish, and saw great Sholes of
Herrings,. Die 10. Great Current, and yet no ground, at 170 Fathoms, Lat. 41..
1610. Circ. Jul. princip. we had a Storm, our Men fell sick ad fretum Davis.
Purch. Lat. 78. Aug. 2. A great and whirling Sea, whence I know not. Ib. 1615.
March 15. About C. Comorin we saw 3 Spouts of Water not far from us, one
whereof continuing about half an Hour. Purch. 1. 515,. in. Die 28. Magellan
Streights, Wind and Tide forced us out. Purch. 17. 1616. March 16. Terrible
Storm in the Bay of Portugal, 5 days and Nights. 1617. March 21. Ventus
Decumanus, Kepler; in, juxta Pleiad. May 1. Parelia, K. and. Die 1. Lightning.
K. in. Oct. 22. Sol Pallidus, K. whether do not contribute by way of Opposal of
the, and with the, by way of Opposal to, inquirendum est. 1618. April 21.
Thunder very vehement, but no Rain; Extreme hot at Night, in. Die 16. Hot. They
cannot endure to wear so much as Linen, ut supra. 1619. July 1. Pluviae
Continuae. Calv. in, opposed in. Dec. 10. A Current to the Northward, which
used to be South-East, Purch. 1. 1629. if that usual Current came not from the
Streights. It Is not impossible that former Current may, considering that are
all opposed in the Tropique. 1621. June 20. Tempestas perstrepuit. K. in. 29,
30. Largissimae Pluviae, Ib. in. Dec. 23. 24. Parelia, in. 1622. Circ. Anni
Princ. in Poland, Comet and Earthquake. Purchase, Vol. 5.,. Die 25. Phasmata, in
Norico, Arcus inversus in Franconia. K. in. in. 1626. Sept. 4. Iris, ante
ortum, Kepl. in. 1627. Jan. 18. Ventus decumanus, nix copiosa. in. Feb 9. Ad
Franciae oram ingens Tempestas., Stationary. March 1. Pallidus. in. A Feb. 22.
ad March 6. Maculae likewise in. April 2. Nix multas.. Aug. 13. Grampisce, at
Woolwich, is brisk, but and at the end of, do alone proclaim a Disturbance of
Nature. Febr. 14. Naves 37. submersae cum milibus Hominum. Calvis.; but opposed
by. 1628. October. 2. Westminster Hall Floated. in the last Decade of, the
Opposition of and helps to swell the Waters, but our other 3 Planets wring them
down. Not unlike was the Weather in Silesia, as appears from Keplers
Ephemerides, Imbres continui for Two days together at the end of September.
Sept. 7. Nimbi Grandinosi. October. 28. Parelia. in. there is and in too. Perhaps
that is the Principal Contributor. 1629. April 1. Continual Rain. Kepl. in the
last Decade of. Die 16. Wittemburg, Parelia. in fine. and. Die 21. Tempest and
Horrid Thunders. K. in fine. and. Sept. 17. Rain the whole day. in So die 19..
now it got in. Die 20. Sol Pallidus.. in to me nothing Plainer, the Sun's
Satellites, and Glow upon the Sun. 1630. May 7. Noxious Thunder, Kepler.,.
1636. Jan. 4. Rain and Storms, in. Die 6. Much Rain. Die 21. Viel. St. Rain
fast, Durchans. Kyr. helps to rain the whole day, we have heard. Here they are
found in, but and in contribute. May 14. Chasme. in. June 6. Heat, Thunder, in.
Die 15. Frightful Thunder and great Rain. in. July 1, 2. Rain and Thunder, in.
1639. Febr. 21. Travado's, Whirlwind, Mandelslo, Lat. 21.,; in. Aug. 9. Near
Madagascar, Grasshoppers deprived us of the Sight of, opposed by in. Die 22.
Monson, came unexpectedly. 1641. October. 16. At Danube Stream, Storm and T. M.
Kyr. 6. 28.. 1644. Nov. 17. Parelia, London. C. Wharton Die 18. Snow all day,
and also Thunder. Kyr. Die 25. Halo. 1645. April 16, 18. Sol sanguineous,
solves it pretty well; but withal opposes them near the Equator. 1646. Febr.
11. Thunder, Meteors, Kyriander. and we allow before; but also and and nearly
opposed. 1648. Nov. 13, 14, 15. Rainy and Windy. Die 19. Near the Isle Andro, a
Spout half a quarter of an Hour, Id. opposing in. Die 28. Very violent Storm.
Id. Dec. 2, 3. Fortune tres-violente all the Night. Id. Die 14, 15. Very
violent, Id. opposes in princ. Tropicks. Die 18. Currents, opposes ad fin.. Die
23. Strong Tempests of Winds and Rain, tot. die. in. Die 27. Hail and much
Lightning. Die 28. Rain a vesp. ad med. noct. Die 30. Sad shower, Hail and Storm
of Wind, most violent Lightning in the South-East. Many Ships lost in the
Mediterranean. Calvis. Append. To all this answers not so much and, as 's
opposing of near the Tropique. 1650. Warm Winter, many Plants Green. For
December and January the aforesaid Configurations may be noted. Vesuvius burns.
Transact. 68. on the Tropic point, or near it, the year throughout. Dec. 10. T.
M. in Northamptonshire, opposed All in Tropic, 1655. July. 29. Ignis fatuus.
Yarnton. in. Sept. 2. Tempestuous,. in. R. 1656. March 28. Much Thunder and
Rain, yet windy day. in, whereupon came Floods. April 3. Sed Rain mane toto.
in. Die 14. Floods at Yarnton, never so high. ut supra. 1657. Feb. 20. Very
Cold, bitter, blustering. opposing. April 14. Rain die tot. and near the
Equinox. 1568. March 29. Pouring Rain. opposed by in. 1660. May 28. Hot,
Thundering., in. R. 1665. Between April the 3. and May, 8. VII. or VIII.
Colliers stifled with the Damp. Transact. p. 44. Add this to our Relations of
this Nature at the end of Chap. 3. Lib. 2. which I brought in to evince the
Caelestial Powers of these great Movers in genere; but here I claim them for 's
proper Influence, which to me, they seem to demonstrate: and I was willing to
fancy here is a confirmation. For first, is not in the Tropic, the Critical,
Cardinal Position in all those 35 Days? Well! And 2ly. Were not some of these
Cole-Miners suffocated on the first and last days, between which the rest of
the Number caught their Death? Then say I, is concerned. I know there is and
in. But is not also Raiser of such Pestilent Damps at such times? Because if
there be no extant, there is 's, and that duple. Not alone, but with him in
princ., which is a perfect Square. But then for Opposition: Does not make all
the have she can to the Cardinal of? What think you of May 8. the last day of
the Fixed Term? Do we not find there a Partile Opposition between in, and and
in; the two extreme Days concur, a Quartile at the First, an Opposition at the
Later. I have more yet to say, when according to our Doctrine, enters just upon
a 30. gr. distance, which we may call a Quincunx or Opposition. It hits luckily
for our pretenses; and because I reckon it such, I will content my self, and
wade no further in the Complement of this Diary, undertaken only to manifest
the Power of, the least, to view, of all the Planets. Only this puts me in mind
to take into consideration whether with the Minors may have Influence on the
Body of the Earth, as well as the Spirit. To shake the massy tangible part as
well as to disturb the more Spirituous, Sulphurous, and Arsenical Exhalation.
And there is an Instance from Constantinople, Ao 1509. which brings too much
Evidence, Thirteen Thousand Men slain by the Ruin: Preparing the Grave first,
and then destroying the Person to stop its Mouth. There is no visible Cause so
conspicuous as near the Autumual Equinox. All that time no no and, etc. 1669.
Febr. 26. The late Famous Eruption at Aetna., 10. gr. Partile; again, March 1.
1680. Dec. 30. Naples, Terrae Motus, in, opposing Retr. Let this suffice. I
presupposed that and were Potent Stars; I was not so sure of. Wherefore having
some hints before from his with his Inferiors; I was engaged by my Love to the
search of Truth, to bestow some hours upon so warm a Sent; and behold to me, he
is as great as the Greatest Uranographer can make him; and so must we reckon
him. Let Calculators define his Place and Magnitude at their Peril. It
satisfies us that he is so big as to cause so great an Influence.
Cometae Saturnini et Pestes.
1505. Sept. 4. About Michaelmas, and the New, a great Meteor as big as the
Moon, hor. 4. Matutina. in, as well as and in. 1512. March and April, Comet,
Sanguinei coloris. in opposite. prope Equat. Add in the precedent Sign. It Is the
Signs conspire, and contribute their share. 1521. april 8. Spect. abilis Cometa
in fine. Dichotomae fimilis. Hevel. opposed in, opposed in. 1526. ab Aug. 23.
ad Sept. 23. were opposed about the Equinox long before its Expiration. Ergo it
was generated by the approach thereto. 1529. Four Comets this year, is in all
the year long, except the very beginning. 1530. In June, Comet, in, after, in.
1533. June princ. Comet in, prope Perseum, deinde Retrograde. in, not far off.
1556. March 15., all in. Sat est. And where did it begin? In sinistra ala
Hevelius. And how far is that from the precise Opposite Point of the Zodiac
to, or position? 1557. Mense Octobris, a Comet. Is it enough to say is in. No,
but there are 3 Planets in to in, viz., and this is enough. 1558. Comet in
August; I must not say was in; we shall find it under the Jovial Comets. But I
may say he was in, seeing he was Lodged with the Famed Pleiades. 1559. Comet at
the end of May, in, opposing in. 1560. Comet, December. 28. had a hand here,
posited in. 18. as sure as was in the same Sign with on the day of its first
appearance. 1569. Comet, about the beginning of November, there are other
considerables to be observed, but withal and were in: see in and, Ao 1577.
when a Comet showed it self in Peru, long before it visited Europe, viz.
November. 1. as Acosta Witnesses. Here, least I should forget it, let me note a
Grea Affinity between the Planetary Position here, and 1577. for here we shall
find two in, two in, and one in. There, two in three in, and one in. Nay, if we
find any other Mould for Comets but the Planetary dispositions in such Signs
and Degrees of the Zodiac, I am much abused. 1585. October. 18. A Misty Star
observed by Tycho; I see opposed in; but withal I desire it may be noted that
the Star appeared but 5 degrees distant (at first) from. It was therefore
created by opposing in that place. 1596. July 9. St. N. A Comet. and in
princip.. 1607. Sept. 15. St. N. A Comet, though is was 9 Months, belongs to
other Configurations; yet note, in, and withal where is strangely possessed, a
lucky Planet in will help to forge a Comet, but this by the way. See Ao 1560.
likewise Ao 1569. then that of Ao 1652. and Ao 1661. Feb. 3. St. N. 1625. A
Comet, Jan. 26. St. N. observed by Schickard, Kepler. in princip. and. Thus was
I willing to examine Epigenes his Doctrine, who ascribed the Genesis of Comets
to our Planet, and you see not without reason. Seneca therefore was too wife a
Man to attaque Epigenes hereabouts. Note always that this Draught is
concerning, only engaged with the Inferiors; with the Superiors and, he will
show yet further Power. -- And now let us consider his Malignancy, if any there
be; what hand he may have in irritating Epidemics Pestilences, etc. For I hope
he is more moderate as to that yet, while joined to the Inferiors, then
elsewhere. 1508. Pestilence. Dimerbr. 156. in. July. in. August. 1510. In
Gallia. Dimerbr. 159. in men's. Sept. ib. 1514. Pestis. Dim. 59. in men's.
August. 1517. Sweating Sickness from Lammas to Michaelmas. Hen. VIII. Stow. It
belongs to, yet were opposed in Tropical Signs, down to the midst of July.
1521. Great Death in England. Hen. VIII. Stow 514. opposed by in. July and
princ. of Aug. 1522. Pestis atrox Romae. As the year before in England, so now
at Rome. opposed by in, in the Month of July. Note a Pestilential face of
Heaven. 1525. Winter Mortality at London. Howes. It belongs to, for Oct. Nov.
etc. but the first Indisposition might well be in Sept. opposed by in. Are not
our assigned Caused consonant? for in 1521. are opposed by in, as here in. And
if 1526. were somewhat infected, as Fallopius witnesses, we have and at least
in September, opposed to in. 1568. Pestis crudelis, we shall find in. It Is
true, as to June and July Months. But in August are concerned; and for
September. 1540. Great Mortality, Ague, Flux, Pestilence. Stow in; for June and
July. for August. in for September. 1551. Sweating Sickness at London, July 12.
we shall find with, it is true; but in July he also opposes, then again and
again. And note in, for Dangerous it seems in those years, where the Estival
Planets in a knot, or immediate succession face him in. 1556. Fevers, whereof
dyed many Aldermen, Stow. The like is noted in an Old Ephemeris belonging to a
Prelate in those times. Episc. Orcadens. And is pointed out as the Cause; but
that enters not till November. Yet there is a begins in July, holds all August,
as Stationary in September and October: to say nothing of and in those Months.
1567. July. Pestilence, Lovain, Gemma: were opposed in men's. Julii. in August
and September. 1577. Bruno Callicus sive nova Moraviae Lues, Dimerbrock. in, in
Stationary; all July and August. 1578. Lisbone, Biennii spatio, 70000.
interiere. Untzer. We shall have have it under and, but 's place in fine ought
to be observed, since face him in June. and in July, which cooperate with the
beforesaid Congress of and. 1580. Novus Morbus Luneburgensis, is in again, and
opposed in June, in July. of 's being in, we have spoken before. 1609. S.
Pestilence in London. Other Aspects may give account of the preceding
Mortality. But for September S. N. we have in, opposing, and somewhat of. 1610.
Some Infection in London, Bristol. August. St. N. in opposed. and in. 1630.
Some Infection, London. circ. princip., and opposing in, holds all March,
April, May; Stationary. coming to the scrap in May and June; Then, or before
that, other Aspects take place. 1636. London. Pestilence began in May. in
Tropique Signs. In June and are opposed by Saturn.
CHAP. XII..
Conjunction of Sol and Jupiter.
1. The Planet unanimously defined by the Ancients to be temperate, 2, 3. And
yet a Thunderer as the Two other Superiors. Remphan The Character for the
Planet is not a Greek Z. 4. His Hue promises Lightning, (...). 5, 6, 7.
Defined to be Warm and Moist, yet sometimes he is busy with the Cold. 8. A
Favourer of Drought. 9. Content with a Misle or Drisle, or Shower only coasting
the Country. It Is wonderful when it rains in one place, and not in another, yet
that Objection does not rout Prognostique. 10. Philosophy gives account of as
wonderful things. 11. Moisture, and the Restricton of Moisture, must come from
several Principles. 12. Frosty Morn: under as under. 13. Eichstads Suffrage for
the Cold of. 14. The Satellites may have Influence with Jove, but not hinder
his Relation to Cold. A warm Gleam rebated may yet actuate a chill Exhalation,
proved by the Freezing Experiment with Salt, and the cracking of a Bottle
immerged in the Depth of the Sea. 15. Light the Spirit of the World; in no need
therefore of any Inherent Frigorific in the Planets. 16. The Ancients drew
their warm Character from the of Jove with Sol. Which 16, 17. is Warmer than
the Opposition. 18. Retraction of the Thesis which makes Jove the Cooler
Planet. 19. The Diary. 20. Jove of it self a Warm Star. 21. Ponderous and
Violent. 22. His Lightning scarce Innocent. 23. How is Cold; what Evidence for
it. It Is not any natural Emanation of the Planet, but wholly Accidental. 25.
Paralogism retracted. 26. is colder, but neither is he intrinsically such. It Is
Accident here also, and Restraint or Desertion, 27. Whether be Parent of the
North Winds, or Serenity. 28. Evidence of the Premises. 29. appears not Cold,
but in case of Desertion, notwithstanding his Distance. 30. Difference of
Frost. 31. Jove seems after all, to be a back Friend to Moisture. 31. Some
Solicitude in observing this Planet.
1. THe Aspect of Jove with and the rest has bin deferred to the last, because
we are the First that I know of, have ventured on the Paradox, to assert this
our Jove to be a Planet of some cool Influence, as well as the Famed. The
Sentiments of the Ancients is generally, that He is Temperate, Ptol. Lib. I.
Cap. 4. 20. Lib 2. Cap. 9. on which account, they reckon him with and, a
benefique Star, (...), because of their Temperateness, Ptol. I. 5. So he in
Lucan, A Jove temperies. Lib. X. 2. 207. Before him Cicero de Not. Deorum. Lib.
2. Stellatrum tantus est concentus ex dissimilibus motibus ut cum summum
Saturnus refrigeret, media Martis accendat, His interserta Jovis illustret and
temperet. The same Notion in Pliny, Ideoque hujus (Martis) ardore nimio and
rigore Saturni intensertum ambobus ex utroque temperari Jovem salutaremque
fieri, Lib. 2. Cap. 8. Where you have the Temper, and the supposed benefique
Influence founded thereon.

2. In such agreement all seems to be well, and so it may, if it can accord
with what is delivered elsewhere by Pliny, concerning the Three Superiors, that
They, of all the rest, are the most noted Forgers of Lightning, and amongst
them especially Jove, who is seated in the midst. Pliny, Lib. 2. Cap. 20.

3. That Jupiter, the Supreme God of the Heathens, should Thunder, is no great
Marvel, who in all Ages and Nations out of the Pale, has bin Worshipped for
such. But that the Planet should assume the same Thundering Title, deserves
consideration: It seems some such thing has been observed heretofore, coming
from him, as well as from and. Pliny, Lib. 2. Cap. and though we cannot say
that the Star of the Heathen God, Remphan in the Greek Translation of the
Prophet, does signify Jupiter, or the Thunderer, as Scaliger will have it,
since Remphan is the Coptique Name for Saturn, as Kircher and Bochart, from the
Coptique Lexicons do assure us; yet this we know, that the Character which it
has obtained among Astrologers, rightly drawn, resembles the Three-fork'd
Dart, which in Sculpture passes for Lightning, as Scaliger rightly; not the
First Letter of (...), the Greek name, as P. Naunius has conjectured, followed
by Salmosius in Solinum.

4. And truly there is Lightning in his Face, as also in Venus, (though the
Ancients take no notice of that) for is called of Old but (...), but somewhat
more, (...), in Hesychius, Bright and Illustrative, as Pliny said but now: Yet
is defined by no Fury or Excess of Warmth, but moderately and temperately Warm,
which may be some Argument to evince, that Astrology is for the sound part, not
founded on Fabulous Gentilism; but upon long and weary Experience.

5. Bright, Warm, and Temperate, must be consequently Moist, and so Ptolemy
gives it, not only in the place quoted before, but elsewhere, Tetrab. Cap. 5.
where for he expresses himself thus, (...): Moist then he is, but with
Moderation: In his Dominion he moistens the Fruits of the Ground; and Ptolemy
makes him increase the Rivers by his Moisture, (...) moderately, Tetrab. II.
Cap. 9. then is Moist and Warm, moderate and temperate in both. But we have
asserted also to be a Cool Planet; where are we now?

6. For, can Jove be like the Man in the Fable, who, to the Amazement of the
Poor Satyr, from the same Mouth breathed Hot and Cold? No, we intend not for
any Fancies sake of our own, to affront Sense, Reason and Experience: To deny a
Warmth to that Planet whose very Globe proclaims such a Celestial Glow; who is
found upon the Faith of our own Tables to maintain his Title of Thunderer in
some parts of Heaven, as also for Warmth and Moisture, to bring in a Quota,
such as may justify the Ancients Denomination.

7. Nay, but when Astrology discourses of a Cold Planet, she is far, it may be,
from believing any inherent Quality, such as shall challenge more property in
the Planet, then Light or Warmth: No, Lucid and Warm they are each of them, and
as such to be esteemed. Yet they may have withal a Faculty cohabiting with
Light and Warmth, which, when time serves, is a Friend to Cold; whether that
Faculty be distinguished wholly from Light, or is nothing else but the
remisser, weaker, or less assisted Beam, as we rather lay it.

8. We shall therefore prove that, unless heightened extremely, is Cold, like,
upon the account that he is a Favor of Dryth. Although our Experience is so
full, that we disdain Authority in the Case, yet it may not be amiss to
remember in the mean time what is granted by Cardan: Constant, says he, quod
and, imo and and exsiccant: and then it is a Question worth while, adds he, how
they can Exsiccate cum sint humidi. Cardan de VII. Stellis errat. Cap. 10. de
Saturn.

9. And when the very Ancients confess He is but moderately moist, as we have
heard, it seems there is some Obstruction in, that hinders the measure that
other Planets give. -- Secondly, another observable which I attend to, is some
abatement of Moisture, which attends it, and the Shower which the Countryman
calls a coasting Shower in our Aspect, running round the Heaven, and serving the
Neighbor Villages, in the mean time none of his bounteous Dole falls upon his
piece of Ground. Such a difference there is of Showrs, is manifest, whereof
some more liberally expand their Vail over all the Hemisphere; others, more
enviously confine themselves to such a Border, or Skirt of the Horizon. The
Observer shall find that this Shower, or the Confinement rather, I had almost
said is frequent under this, or some other Jovial Aspect; which if it be so, I
beseech the Reader, to observe, that it may not march for an Objection any
longer, how shrewd soever it has hitherto seemed, that all Predictions must
needs be vain, inasmuch as our Eyes themselves are Witnesses how it Rains
oftentimes in one place, while not a drop falls in another; and this within
Sight, within the very Ken of the Wizard, whereas the Wizard has got a
distinct Principle, which he advances, to give an account of that Excellent
Phenomenon, viz. when Rains shall fall General, and when Tropical.

10. It Is Excellent, we grant, and the Creator we heartily believe is to be
admired in it, according as Nature and Holy Writ teach us. But we ask what
absurdity is it in Philosophy to give some part of account of several things
justly wonderful. In Geometry, Optiques, Mechanics, Miracles are allowed. Are
they a Supernatural Philosophy? Verily, Astrology had been no Diversion or
Study of mine, but that it treated of Wondrous Causes, in order to Wonderful
Effects.

11. Now this I have called resisting, impairing, diminishing, and from which I
argue, that Moisture it self, and the Restriction thereof must come from
several Principles; it is not the same Principle that causes Rain in one part,
and at the same time Serenity round about the rest of the Hemisphere.

12. You have seen the Proof which we offered at before, Lib. 1. Cap. as that
he is the Fautor of Serenity, and so confessed by Astrologers, Cardan, Ptolemy,
Kepler, Eichstad: Men of Experience, and not of implicit Faith only. 2ly. From
the Strange Product of the Northerly Winds, which it seems also by the same
unanimous Voice to belong to this Body. Ptolemy makes it out by a fetch of his
own; but be that attempt of his passable or not, the (...) is true. 3ly. I have
been curious to observe the Aspects of and, each with, the; and I find Frosty
Morns and other Tokens of Cold, even as often under the Later, as under the
Former. I tried also in Keplers Nine Years Diary, and I found Nothing but
Agreement. It will be said, and so it will prove in the Aspects of with the. I
answer, Nay: Let any make Experience who has Observations by him, or, for Want
of them, in Keplers Diary.

13. We want some Authority to back us now, there being Few or none who tell us
that he has a Chill Influence: Yet we are not altogether Destitute of that
Experienced Eichstad's Suffrage, who, though he tell us, ( page 38.) and are
hot, yet he tells us ( page 40.) that some Transits of cause an East Wind, and
a Cold Air, at least by Night, and a bright Air by Day: But more home a little
before, that even the Aspect of and sometimes being Mediocre Gelu, because of
the North Wind that accompanies it. So much does Ptolemy's Fetch stand him in
stead.

14. What have we to say but this (leaving the Mystery of the Satellites, if
they have Influence considerable, as I believe they have none, no more than a
new single Star, in Cygnus suppose, has;) but that Jove singly considered,
with, or without those Attendants, though he be Warmer than, does not abandon
his Interests in frigid Impressions; since Warmth it self, when dulled and
rebated by the Affluence of the contrary, is not wholly bound up, but may and
does exert its Power according to its Stint; in exciting the chill Exhalation.
Thus in the Freezing Experiment, the mixture of Salt with the Cold Water helps
to Congelation, the Salt invigorating the Cold of the Water, and so
conglaciating the Snow. To which I refer the other Newer Experiment, wherein an
Empty Bottle stopped close, and sunk a while in the Depth of the Sea-Brine,
returns again either with a Crack or Flaw, or with the Cork forced into the
Neck of the Bottle. So great is the Condensation of the Air, as I reckon, from
the Coldness of the Water invigorated and actuated by the salt Ambient Spirit.

15. How to unriddle this better I know not, for I am not fond of a
Heterogeneous Principle lodged in the Planet, though it is suitable enough to
the Gopernican Subtilty, to make a Luminous Planet Fraught with store of
Heterogeneous Emanations, Cold and Moist, Nitrous, Sulphurous; yea, and these
reaching not 2 or 3 Miles, but 2. or 3000 Miles, if the proportions assigned to
the rarefaction of late, take place, which makes Air to exceed Water in rarity
1000 times; according to which a misle of Vapor or Fume, may be extenuated
into some hundreds at least. Yet least I should be forced to make use of the
same Hypothesis in the Fixed Stars, who emit all the way a Warm Emanation as
certain as they do Lucid One; For a Frigid Efflux I will not undertake, only
say, as you hear, that Light or Heat, from such a Body so distanced, so
circumstantiated, may have some Interest in the Cold Atome: Cold being not
caused, as Astrologers define, from the mere absence of Aspects, but often from
the presence of such determinate Aspects of and; or, as we may after learn from
the Planetary Bodies Position, in relation to the Fixed, whether they be
mutually among themselves Aspected or not. I said at the beginning, that Light
was the Spirit of the World; and the Learned Isaac Vossius I see since, is much
of that Mind.

16. The Truth is, the Ancients, as I have reason to believe, drew the
Character of Jupiter from their Observation of the Conjunction only, and
therein I confess most to an end he is found Warm and Moist, and the reason may
be, because in Conjunction with the Sun he becomes Diurnal, and so partakes of
the Additional Steams of those Celestials, which always attend the Sun. As a
Man is always warmer in a Crowd; Six, Five Planets may be, Four must be above
the Horizon at Noon, when Conjunction with Jove.

17. Nor is this all, for Joves Motion in Conjunction with the Sun, is more
deliberate and slow-paced, than in Opposition, etc. thereupon he may seem to
imbibe a greater share of the Solar Warmth, then by a further distance.

18. To this Effect some years ago I have disputed; but what say Second
Thoughts since? They say, that the First, besure, is the Certainty of
Prognosis, wavers not, for is cool, and many times in a Cold Fit, and the
return of that Fit comes under Cognizance. But then I find by what follows,
that I may be obliged to retract any Superiosity in this kind given to Jove, as
if he was cooler than, for albeit Jove does play his part as often for Frost,
even as perhaps; yet Jove is a much warmer Star, and Cold only by accident,
which is far a more facile and smooth way of Procedure. Here we will first
consider from the Experience of the Diary, the Warmth; and settle that; and
then for the Cold afterward. The Diary in this place seeing a Controversy is
to be decided thereby; hopes to be more welcome then ordinary.

Diary. The Hyemal Part.
Ao 1661. Oct. 7. 24.
Sept. 26. H. wd, mist m. sometimes showrs. S W. 27. Windy a. m. and clear;
stormy wd, and frequent showrs; cold d. 28. H. wd, s. showrs m. cold cold and
windy die tot. S W. 29. Sad rain a 3 m. ad 9 m. clear p. m. cold n. W. 30. Fr.
cold. s. drops, shower o. fog n. S. Oct. 1. Shower 6 m. cold, L. shower vesp. S.
W. 2. H. wind, cold shower 2 p. Lightning much, and Th. 8 p. ad 10 p. then
violent Hail, Harm done by Lightn. E. N. 3. Fog, warm, cloudy even. E. 4. Warm,
close mist m. ad 11 m. Ely. 5. Clear m. p. and warm, fog fall n. E. 6. Suspic.
some wd, cool m. warm. N E. 7. Clear m. p. fair, warm, misty vesp. N E. 8.
Misty a. m. warm, cloudy. E. 9. Cloudy m. p. dry, s. wetting 11 p. 10. Fog,
cloudy, warm, colder p. m. S W.
1673. Oct. 11. 28.
2. H. Frosty, lowering m. p. Aches. S W. 3. Fr. m. windy and wetting 1 p. S W.
Armies in the Air at Posen in Poland, seen by 1000 of Spectators. 4. Frost m.
lowering 4 p. cold and Winterly-misty. Great T. m. in S. Domingo. Gazet. 127. 5.
Frosty, ice m. Wly. frosty day. 6. Wind and rain a. l. warm, dropping 2 p. S W.
Aches. 7. Frost, ice at Putney, shower 3 p. 9 p. 8. s. frost, fair, mist,
winterly Air. N. 9. Frost, close, foggy a. m. wetting 10 m. and p. m. Sly. 10.
Wetting o. some Rain a. L. S. 11. Warm Rain ante l. and ante noon per tot. very
H. wds. S. S E. 12. Rainy a Sun ort. ad o. wd higher, raging with rain p. m. E.
m. S. o. W. vesp. 13. Bright a. m. coasting shower in the South and W. 2 p. S W.
14. Frost, mist, rain 1 p. 5 p. 10 p. Lightning and Thunder. Aches. N E. m. S
E. o. S W. ^n. 15. Open and windy day.
1662. Nov. 6. 24.
Oct. 28. Fair m. shower 3 p. S W. 29. Rain b. d. W. 30. Drisle 7 m. open. fair,
cloudy Sun set. S W. 31. Fog, bright day, warm wind. E. Nov. 1. Frost m. fair,
cloudy p. m. rain 7 p. Ely. 2. Rain 1 p. etc. S E. 3. Bl. clouds m. Rain a 9 m.
ad o. Sly. 4. R. hard a 5 m. ad 1 p. Sly. 5. Fog, cloudy. Nly. 6. Close m. p.
wind. S E 7. Close p. m. rain toward n. etc. S W. 8. Open, warm, clouds fly
low, R. S W. 9. Fair m. cloudy 1 p. and some rain, clear n. Sly. 10. Cloudy,
Iris 8 m. storms of wind and rain 8 p. Sly.
1674. Nov. 10. 28.
1. S. E Misty, dark chill wind and offer 4 p. wet ab 8 p. ad 10 p. Barometer,
sink fr. 14. ad 20. 2. Some wet 9 m. o. 3 p. 7 p. much R, high wind a. I. S. 3.
S W. Showring, h. wd o. so Sun occ. S W. S E. 4. Fair m. p. overc. misty n.
Aches 7 p. S W. These 4 days high wind on the Coast of England. 5. N. Frost,
bright, cold N W. 6. Foggy; frosty, clear above. Aches 11 p. E. 7. N E. Close
fog, rain 10 m. shower 1 p. 5 p. N. Indispos. 8. W. rain m. fog, warm, R. 3 p.
and wetting 9 p. 11 p. 9. W. Rain 6. m. foggy, clearing, p. m. Aches 11 p.
Indispos. 10. Foggy, no frost, clearing, close. Aches 11 p. Nly. 11. N E. E.
Fog, some rain m E. some wd. Aches vesp. and noct. 12. Dark fog, offer twice p.
m. wd p. m. N E. 13. N E. Some wet ante L. clouds flying, Aches 10 p. cold,
freez n. 14. N. Foggy die tot. wd p m. S W. cold frost, ice night.
1663. Dec. 9. 26.
Nov. 29. Close. 30. Rain n. close day. W. Dec. 1. Misty m. close. E. 2. Mist,
rain m. p. m. m p. ap 9 n. W. 3. Rain m. close d. high wind 9 n. S E. 4. Rain
m. rain 9 n. 5 p. S E. 5. Rain hard 3 m. close a. m. wet a 2 p. high wind ad 7.
N. 6. Fr. sleet a 6 m. 2 or 3 fleeces of sn. h. cool wd. N. 7. Sn. freezing die
tot. sn. 10 m. N. 8. Frosty m. dropping 8 n. windy. S 9. Fog, close wd, s.
moisture a. m. Sly. 10. Fog, cl ose, moistning damp. Wly, 11. Fog, close,
dampning. windy. Wly. 12. Fog, close, moistning, wdy, cold. S E.
1675. Dec. 12. o.
3. S W. Fog, fair, close m. p. S W. 4. Dark mist, close, wind. S. S W. 5. Fog,
dry, Hysterical fits, Aches. W. 6. Mist, frost, close m. p. wd, some rain 7 p.
H. wd, W. Aches 9 p. 7. Close, dark, warm. Wly vesp. Aches 9 p. High wind 10 p.
8. Stormy wds 4 m. rain 7 m. H. wd, open. S W. 9. Fog, cloudy m. p. offer 10 n.
wd. N. 10. Rain a. l. so 2 p. 8 p. H. wd n. Children complain. 11. Rain a. l.
windy, warm, R. 2 p. Lightning vesp. S W. 12. Dash of rain, fair, mist, windy.
W. 13. Much rain 5 m. dark, windy, rain 2 p. h. wind at n. Boys sicken. S E.
14. Rain midn. and 2 m. 7 m. high wd, very warm, tempestuous n. dash 8 p. 10 p.
S W. 15. Close, wet p. m. Aches 10 p. S W. high wind n. 16. Very warm, dark
winds m. Pouring rain 11 m. Aches. S W.
1653. Jan. 4.. 24.
26. Mystyish n. misle. N W. 27. Misle m. some frost at n. 28. Fair, s. wind. S
W. 29. Rain l. freez and mist at night. 30. Fr. mist, cloudy, windy at night.
31. Clouds, high wd. S W. Jan. 1. Mild, fair, windy. S W. 2. Rain-like, s. wds,
s. clearing. S W. 3. Wind and rain p. m. somet. freez. S W. 4. Fr. clear, s.
wind; windy; wet n. S W. 5. H. wind, cold rain, s. freez. 6. H. wind rain, so
Sun occ. S. 7. H. wind, s. snow. sleet. S W.
1665. Jan. 8.. 29.
Dec. 31. Frosty, windy, offering. Nly. 1. Freez m. open and warm, Comet seen.
W. N. 2. Frosty, windy, Comet seen clear. N E. Nly. 3. Frosty, windy noct. tot.
snowing a. m. N E. 4. Frosty, snow, cloudy, s. sn. 7 p. N E. 5. Vehement frost,
freez pot by the Fire. Comet seen, and ice upon the Thames. Nly. 6. Vehement
fr. Comet seen. Sly. 7. Vehement frost, Thames frozen, red clouds at n. 8.
Frost, mist Sun so warm as to melt snow, freez and fog at n. S. 9. Frost hard,
mist. N. Ely. 10. Hard fr. mist, open, s. bl. clouds 4 p. S E. 11. Vehement
frost. Thames even frozen. fair. S E. 12. Hard frost, giving p. m. freez at n.
but cloudy. N E.
1677. Jan. 13.. ^^.
4. H. wd, dash of rain 3 p. warm n. 5. W. Windy, somet, overc. warm. S W. 6.
W. Rain 10 m. and p. m. 8. vesp. N. mind 11 p. W. 7. Tempestuous noct. tot.
prac. H. wind, rain. W. Gout extreme. 8. W. Rain circ. 3 m. and ante, Frost
with ice, freez in shade, but cloudy, and fog at n. Gout extreme. 9. Cloudy,
windy, drisle m. wind and rain 1 p. drisle 6 p. Gout. Two Meteors 9 p. S. 10.
H. wind noct. praec. drisle drisle m. Tempestuous die tot. Meteors 3. near. 11.
W. Clear, cloudy, R. 11 m. 2 p. apace 8 p. Gout. 12. Harmful tempest noct. tot.
s. rain 3 p. 6 p. 8 p. W. 13. W. Fr. very high wind, storm, hail 2 p. 4 p. Rain
8 p. 14. H. wind, fog, open, Gout. W. 15. W. Cloudy. rain a. l. s. rain vesp.
and H. wind 7 p. Gout, Aches. S W. 16. W. noct. frost, fair, dry W. 17. W. Very
hard white fr. and fog m. so at o. with Rain, so 7 p. Nly. Indisp.
1654. Feb. 7.. 29.
Jan. 29. Fair, some wind. S W. 30. Clear, mistyish, sleet. S V V. 31. s.
clouds. Feb. 1. H. wind W. s. freez, windy n. s. l. wet. N. 2. Bl. frost, high
wind, very cold, some snow. 3. Black fr. snow-like, freez hard. 4. Fr. bustling
cold winds. N. 5. Fr. some snow ante l. N. 6. Fr. cloudy, rain-like, thaw. N.
7. Showrs, so at n. 8. Some rain, dropping at n. S. 9. Dropping at n. freez h.
N E. No wind. 10. Fair, cold, freez, h. at n. S.
1666. Feb. 13. 4.
Feb. 3. Fr. clear, bright Summers day o. snow m. p. p m. and n. W. 4. Hard fr.
ice, clear d. and open m. bl. Sky, very cold, freezing at n. Sly. 5. Cloudy m.
before Sun rise. 6. Very cold, Sun shine, open, fine Summers day, R. 6 m. 7.
Mist, cold, overcast, scarce any Sun shine, misting at p. m. and m. p. S W. 8.
Some moisture 5 m. S W. 9. Cold, cloudy, open 10 m. cloudy p. m. sharp wind,
clear n. Wly. 10. Overcast m. cloudy, open, N. p. s. clouding. 11. Thick fog
till 11 m. overcast at m. s. drisling by fits. S W. Sly. 12. Thick fog, misling
m. sharp wd, lowering die tot. 13. Thick fog, mist m. cloudy, overcast, coldish.
N E. 14. Fog, clear, Sun shine o. Summers day. The Sickness increased this
Week. S E. 15. Mist. m. cloudy, open at o. clear, fine and pleasant day. Nly.
16. Fair a. l. mist, frost, fair overcast n. Nly.
1678. Feb. 18 10.
8. Pleasant a. m. wdy o. cldy m. p. W. Rain 1 p. 11 p. 9. Rain 1 m. cloudy m.
p. drisle 8 p. W. 10. Cloudy, misty, drop or 2. W. Aches, indispos. 11. Mist m.
open, Summers day. W. 12. Fog, cloudy, N E. a. m. Wly p. m. then N W. ho.
Meteor 6 p. prope and cor. ho 9. prope and Sirium. Aches 5 p. 13. Fog, some
wetting 7 m. temperate, Aches 11 p. N. 14. Mist, cloudy, fr. m. coldish. 6 p.
a. fine sight. N W. Great Meteors circ. 8 p. 15. Mist, Aches, close, windy
even. W. 16. Mist m. cloudy, wind N. at n. W. 17. Mist Aches 8 m. Wly. close p.
m. mist 5 p. N. Aches. 18. Fr. mist, clear above, coldish, Aches. E. Two
Meteors ho. 8. one by the other juxta Sirium. 19. Some frost. mist, fair above,
overcast p. m. dewing 1 p. Sly. 20. H. wind, s. drops o. rain p. m. m. p. S.
21. Rain m. and o. high wd, R. 7 p. 11 p. S. 22. Wind, cloudy m. p. S W.
1655. March. 17. 6.
8. Sad soking rain. S W. 9. Strangely clouding, s. l. R. S W. Clouds as in
hail. 10. Dewing ante Sun ort. hail 7 m. very cold. N E. 11. Frost, close,
misty m. stormy R. Hail. S W. S E. 12. Sad soking day, clear n. 13. Frost m.
wind rise 10 m. clouds low. N E. 13. Rainy m. and p. m. by fits, clear n. S W.
15. Bright m. wind rise, cold, a drop. S W. 16. Fair m. clouds ride contrary,
dry, wholesome, cool. S W. 17. Close, warm, s. moisture at n. S W. 18. Close and
cold m. warm and close d. S W. 19. Close, wind, cloudy, dry. 20. Some wet 3 m.
close and dry, somet, open. 21. Fr. bright, cold wd. N E.
1667. March 22. 11.
13. Frosty, offering snow some what open, calm. E. 14. Fr. gusts of wind, mist
and Winterly Weather. freez n. S E. 15. Frosty and sn. a. l. thaw, misty thick
air. S S E. 16. Close, thaw, rain a. m. m. p. calm, Thames much ice. though Sun
in Equinox. 17. Fog, midn. close, misty, warmish. Sly. 18. Fr. ice, fair
welcome day. Ely. 19. s. frost, Sun clap in, close, offering at n. Wly. 20.
Grass fr. fair and welcome day, fine Gales, Halo at n. N W. 21. H. wd, wetting.
Wly. 22. H. wind noct. tot. s. the wet a. l. W. N W. 23. s. Rain, close mist,
wetting, calm. Nly. 24. Fair, mild, pleasant day, freez at n. N W. 25. Fr. fair
a. m. blew clouds and sh. p. m. 26. Fr. ice, very cold wind; Hail o. 7 p. H.
cold wind at n. Nly.
1679. March 27. 16.
17. Gr. fog, bright broad cl. o. cold n, and day. S E. 18. No fog, cold wind,
wetting m. p. S. 19. Great fog, rain 5 m. drisle S E. sharp wind and cold n.
rain 4 p. Nly. 20. s. rain ante 7 m. N. 21. s. fog, Rain ab ho. 5. med. vesp.
usque ad 7 med. fair (...) m. R. 6 p. Iris. 22. Clear Wly. Rain ab ho. 6. ad 8
p. S. 23. H. wind, no fog, R. circa ho. nocte. 24. R. ho. 3 m. clear, no fog. N
W. 25. No fog, cloudy, s. snow ante 5 m. cold, sharp, windy. N E. 26. s. fog,
frost, cold, sharp wind. E. 27. Fr. great fog, cloudy. Sly. warm day. 28. Some
fog, frost. S. 20. Gr. fog, freez, clear above, very cold. E. 30. Gr. fog,
clear above. S. 31. Rain ho. 3 m. cold, m. warm p. m. S.
Aestival Part. 1656. April 22. 12.
13. Rain 7 m. 2 p. Hail p. m. in some places. Rain Sun ort. S W. 14. Wind and
hard rain all n. s. coasting showrs. Flood never so high. 15. Overcast 9 m.
Halo Sun 9 m. cold. E. vesp. W. 16. Rain ante L. cloudy. Wly. 17. Close, foggy
ante Sun ort. warm, coasting showrs o. S W. E. 18. Red m. warm rain p. m.
gusts. W. 19. Cool and flying clouds, warm. W. 20. Red m. warm, gentle drops 2
p. S W. 21. Closing, very hot, blew mist, heat, drops Sun occ. S W. 22. Sun
morn. hot, wd, shower 5 m. 10 m. H. wind p. m. Red cl. fr. West to Mid-heaven.
23. Blew mist, high wind noct. N E. 24. Cool m. soultry. A cloud raised by the
very heat. 25. Bright m. soultry, Frogs croke. 26. Red m. lowering s. places,
misty clouds.
1668. April 28. 18.
25. Fair white cl. warm, s. gales. S W. 26. Mist in prospect, windy, l. shower
2 p. Wly. 27. VVindy m. s. showring a. m. s. dropping p. m. V V. 28. Cool,
drisle 8 m. etc. mist, a drop at n. N V V. 29. Wet m. s. wetting p. m. 30. Fr.
m. very cold a. m. N. Hail, clouds p. m. cold fair p. m. N E.
1680. May 3. 23.
April 24. E. Mist, clear, some overcast vesp. 25. Much dew, audible wd, warm.
E. 26. E. Very hot n. by all confession; warm day, cold wd, Aches 11 p. E. 27.
Clear above, fog below, very warm sickly. Passing Bells 5 p. E. 28. Clear
above, small wind, soultry. E. 29. E. Some thin cl. hot, brisk wind. S E. 30. S
E. Mist, very high wd, somewhat cooler. E. May 1. E. Close, cool wind, mist,
suspic. Sun ort. clds contrary Sun occ. 2. E. open, cool, brisk wind, Country
wish rain. Caterpillars begin to appear. 3. Hail, Thund. Ground-mist, not a
Cloud in the Sky, suspic. overc. Sun occ. 4. Rain a. l. etc. E. close, cool wd,
dewing 8 m. E. 5. E. Fog, clearing 7 m. warmer, close die tot. 6. E. Fog,
close, dark p. m. shower with Thunderclaps Three, 6 p. or. dash 10 p. etc. occ.
or. in Nadir. 7. N E. Fog, s. wind; drisle m. and o. dash 6 p. rain ante 11 p.
etc.
1657. May 13. 18.
20. Cool wind, misle Sun occ. wind at n. N W. 21. Fair, high wind, threatn. o.
cold even. N W. 22. Cloudy m. p. cool. N W. 23. Close m. p. N W. 24. H. wind,
coasting shower 5 p. Sun occ. hot, calm a Sun occ. 25. Cool wind, somet, overc.
Bees swarm, and return again. 26. Mist Sun or. dry, very hot S E. 27. Close m.
s. shower, hempen clouds Sun occ. S E. 28. Red m. hot, blew mist, N. 29. Red m.
wind. s. drops 3 p. 6 p. S W. 30. Lowering m. p. s. drops Sun occ. Showring
Oxford, and with us 10 p. colds. 31. Showring, fine rain 11 m. coasting shower
Sun occ. and 10 p. N W. June 1. Cool m. clear, white, overc. N W. 2. s. wd, s.
drops, (rain a n. N E.) S W. 3. Cool, s. gales, s. wet near London p. m. S E.
1669. June 4. 23.
May 25. Close, not cold, calm; fog at n. Wly a droper Two. 26. Fine rain Sun
or 3 p. Sun occ. VVly. 27. Often showring Moon or. etc. Sun occ. and after R.
bow. 28. Temperate, shower o. 4 p. bright. Nly. 29. Some overcast m. heat p. m.
bright n. Sly. 30. Close, showring 6 p. Aches. Sly. 31. Temp. calm. June 1.
Calm. open, blew mist. Heat 11 p. Sly. 3. Fog m. Ely. warm, fair. S W. 4. Fair,
warm, overcast at n. Wly. 5. Fair, windy. Nly. 6. Suspicious m. calm, cool in
shade. S W. 7. Windy, rainy 9 (...) p. m. and at n. chill. 8. Fair, flying
clouds, wd.
1681. June 8. 27.
28. Heat, clouds promise a. m. clear up p. m. W. 29. Heat, stripped cl. W. 30.
Heat, s. white cl. little Stars; H. cool wind. Small Pox rife. 31. Very high
wind, clear p. m. cold 10 p. W. June 1. Mist, fair, dry. E. but W. vesp. W. 2.
Fair a. m. stripped cl. s. gentle rain 8 p. W. 3. Heat, mist, fair E. white p.
W. pregnant clouds, wdy. W. 4. Fair, windy m. stripped cl. s. offer at n. W. 5.
Fair m. windy d. lowering and stormy wds 6 p. a. l. soud. W. S W. 6. Fair m.
hard fr. cloudy o. s. drisle. smart shower 6 p. 7. Bright m. clouding 8 m. cold
n. W. 8. Close, some offer 1 p. open p. m. N W. 9. Cloudy, windy. N W. 10. Cold
m. open p. m. some wd. 11. Cold m. fair. Nly. wind various. 12. Close, gusty.
1658. July 5. 22.
25. June. Clouds ride contrary, clear m. p. S W. 66. Fair, blew mist, Thund.
heard 6 p. N E. 27. Fair, blew mist, showring 7 p. S E. 28. Warm, drop a. m.
showrs o. 29. Bright m. threatn. o. heat, clear. N W. Sun occ. blush East. 30.
Mistying cl. hot, Thund. 10 m. dr, winds, blushing cl. Sun occ. S W. 1. Jul.
Cool and high wind die tot. little shower 9 m. shower 1 p. S W. 2. Shower o.
gentle gales, Ground-mist. S W. 3. Close m. cold day. S W. 4. Very hot, fair. S
W. 5. Fair, hot, shower 6 p. Heavens red. N. 6. Fog ante Sun ort. fair, H. wind.
W. 7. Open, dry, cool. W. 8. Misle 5 m. H. wind and cool, hempen cl. red cl.
Sun occ. 9. VVindy, rainy 9 m. open. S V V.
1670. July 9. 26.
June 29. Gusts of w. close m. p. s. drisle, Nly. close at n. 30. Open,
pregnant clouds. cloudy at n. Nly. July 1. Warm, open, close at n. Nly. 2.
Warm, close m. p. close at night. Nly. 3. Warmer, showring 10 m. and coasting 2
p. s. wind. Nly. 4. Fog m. fair, warm. N E. 5. Hot, fair, some mist at (...)
Ely. 6. Hot, s. lowering o. dry, audible gales 8 p. Meteors. N E. 7. Hot d.
windy, calm p. m. Nly. 1. Cool wind. Sly. mist at n. 9. Fog till 8 m. hot. Fog
at n. W. 10. Glass sinks, bright, hot, some Gales. Sly. 11. Hot n. open, fog 7
m. soultry air. Wly. red clouds in N E. and South. 12. Showring 3 p. and
misling before. W. 13. Wetting 5 m. showring p. m. Meteor at 3 in. puffs of wd.
1682. July 15. 2.
July 4. H. wd, some rain, welcome Harvest d. the rest. N W. 5. s. gusts, somet,
suspic. open p. m. hempen cl. at n. W. 6. Misty m. hempen cl curious harvest,
Lightning 10 p in the West, terrible in M. C. hot n. 7. L. Thunder and Rain
ante 3 m. s. gusts, shower circ. o drisle in S W. 8 p. W. 8. Angry clouds in m.
places but scarce any wet. W. E. 9. Great fog, early; clouds contrary 9 m. dry
p. m. W. 10. Great fog, some shower ante 4 p. hot even. W. S. 11. Misty, shower
early rise; close, yet hot. S. 12. Fair, hot, overc. vesp. S. 13. Fair, white
cl. soultry p. m. 14. Fog, fair, soultry, brisk wind. N E. 15. Hot n. Thunder
and some rain ante 3 m. circa occ. brisk cool wind. W. 16. Cloudy a. m. and
wind, shower o. and 1 p. winds brisker p. m. Heaven overcast at n. Except 4
yards space fr. W. to N E. 17. s. rain 9 m. 10 m. 2 p. 5 p. 6 p. 11 p. wind
brisk, S W. 18. H. wind and shower 7 m. drop 8 m. 1 p. very cool and temperate.
6. Harm done in Surrey. 11. Anjon. Dreadful Hurricane turned a Rock and several
Villages Topside turvy. Loyal Mercury, N. 16.
1659. Aug. 7. 23.
July 28. Coasting shower. XII. Meteors. N W. 29. Cool wind, shower 2 p. Meteors.
N W. 30. Warm, some rain 1 p. N W. 31. R. ante l. ad o. temp estuous vesp. S W.
S E. Aug. 1. Tempest of wind noct. tot. wetting a. m. N W. 2. Frost, windy,
fair. N W. 3. Frost m. set to R. 1 p. S W. 4. Frost. windy, warm, Meteors at n.
S V V. 5. H. wind, some rain 5 p. Tempestuous wd at night. S V V. 6. Blustering
and some rain a. l. clearing p. m. 7. Fair, drisling, showrs o. and 5 p. windy;
wetting ves. S V V. 8. Fr. R. o and in s. places 5 p. clear m. p. hot. 9. Fair,
blew mist, wetting 9 p. 10. Much wet a. l. S E.
1671. Aug. 11. 28.
2. Cloudy, cool, gentle wds 3. Flying clouds, yet fair. 4. cloudy, hot air. 5.
Very windy, rainy. 6. Cloudy, windy, threatn R. 7. Rainy, cloudy, windy 8.
VVarm, misty, floating cl. R. 10 m. and p. m. drops 6 p. R. seriously 9 p. 10
p. S W. 9. Coasting shower o. and wd. Thunder shower 3 p. shower 5 p. 7 p. 10.
Coasting sh. 11 m. 3 p. S V V. 11. 3 p. overcast 8 m. R. o. 5 p. 7 p. Gusts of
wind, said Harvest. S V V. 12. High wind a. l. and much R. Tempest circa merid.
with R. Dash 5 p. great rain 9 p. 13. Shower 1 p. fair the rest. 14. Fr. fair,
fog m. hot p. m. Clouds in Stories o. dry, warm n. Wly.
1660. Sept. 6. 24.
Aug. 27. Very hot and fair. 28. Dry, cooler. 29. Fr. m. fair. 30. Frost m.
fair. 31. Fr. m. fair. Sept. 1. Fair, R. at n. 2. Fair, fr. at n. 3. Fair, very
cold. 4. Soultry, drisle, rain. 5. Drisle, hot, fair p. m. 6. Frosty m. fine d.
7. Dry. 8, 9. Fair. 10. Hot, s. drisle, showrs.
1672. Sept. 10. 28.
1. H. wind, open, s. rain 2 p. dash 6 p. at London. VVly. 2. H. wind, fair m.
p. coasting sh. at North, lowering at London 3 p. S V V 3. Suspicious a. l. and
a. m. very cold. Aches. VVly. S V V. 4. Cold m. fair, overc. o. shower 2 p. 6 p.
Wly. 5. Cold m. flying clds. drisle and wetting o. 2 p. rough wind. S V V. 6.
Drisle, wetting 2 p. very warm n. S V V. 7. Close, very high wind o. R. 3 p. 6
p. S V V. 8. Sh. 2 p. wd and R. 4 p. S W. 9. Bright m. m. p. shower in prospect,
coasting 2 p. S W. 10. Fr. bright m. suspicious. 11. Dark and wet a. m. open
Rain 4 p. Sly. Sly. Meteor near ursa minor. 12. Frost m. bright, clouds in
stories. VVly. 13. Shower 2 p. 5 p. S V V. 14. Mist, cold m. bright fair d.
overc. m. p. p. m. s. coasting drops. S V V.
19. From this Diary it appears that Jove, notwithstanding some Cold here and
there peeping, is a downright warm Star in Summer, yea and in Winter, so far,
that according to his Description in Maginus, especially at Platic Distance; to
name no more, he rebates and remits the Cold of the Season, and that according
to his Nature. This you may discern by casting your Eye upon Dec. Ao 1663.
1675. with Jan, 1653. 1676. Feb. 1654. 1678. etc. comparing the Warm Air with
the Cold, the Wet with the Dry, etc. It Is true, Jan. 1665. is an exception, but
beside, the Evidence already offered, the Reader may discern in some of the
Months abovesaid, a just Summer Air express in Jan. and Febr.

20. Mars has the name for a violent Planet, but I do not find that is always
free from violence in any Month in the year, especially in the, as October. 7, 8.
Ao 1667. Nov. 5, 7. Ao 1656. Nov. 12. 13, 14, 15. 1668. Dec. 13. 1657. Jan. 21,
22. 1659. Jan. 16, 17. 22. 1671. Feb. 9, 21. 22. 23, 24. 1660. March 10, 13,
15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 24, 26. 1661. March 17, 22, 24, 25, 29, 30, 31. 1678.
Dec. 25. 1681. March 4. 1684. Not only for Wind and Wet, but as we said from
Pliny and the Ancients, Hail, Lightning, Thunder; Winter-Thunder in some
special Signs, which Signs by the Virtue of some judggling words, and the
Powder of an Opposition, make such Coruscations and Tempest in the Air, in Nov.
Dec. etc. A Diametral Ray metes the Circle of the Heavens, and unites Cardinal
Points, brings Midsummer at Christmas, and makes January taste of the Praesepe,
and February of the Lion. In our Diary for the you may see the like violence,
if not in Winter; See I say there, and believe me in the other.

21. And here I believe it will appear, that Jove's Lightning is also more
minacious, does more terrible Execution than usual, not out of the strange
Pyrotechny of the Planets Constitution, but, (as in case of and Stationary)
from the Excess or Disproportion of the Emanation, which makes the Scale fly up
beyond all comparison.

22. So much in the 1. place for the Warmth, now we have leave to speak to the
Frigid Planet. Yes surely, if he inclines to the North Wind if he inclines to
fair Weather, if he inclines to Fog, if to Dryth, and abating of Moisture, a
Misle, a coasting Shower, if he brings as many Frosts as, he must be allowed
amongst those who justly admit of more Frigid Stars than one. Now that he
furthers as many Frosts, must be evidenced by comparing him with, in hard
times, and Winter Seasons, which will be done in due place; and some of these
Products are apparent from the Table, viz. that of Fog and contracted Moisture,
yea some Frost too, and Cold Winds are found far and near. For the Sums lie
thus, Mist yields 55. Fog 49. in toto 114. Frost 86. Not to say that are all
consonant, true to these Styles notably and frequently.

23. But now -- after all Curiosity and minute Search possible, I find at last
that All this is, I may say, even Accidental to our Planet, i. e. falling out
in case of some Desertion, Hiatus, Co-arctation of Him, or the Rest, or Both to
a narrower limit. True it is, that it does Rain in one place and not in
another; that a Shower coasts the Country, and singles out, as we said, the
Ground in which it will shed its Influence, but then, for instance, a Star
Potent enough at Liberty, when restrained or forsaken, can do no more, than he
can do, can reach no further than a Topical Shower. The Planets bode a Shower
many times, when they give warning also, that it shall be Topical, confined to
a Parish, to an Hundred, to a Wapentale, yea to one side of an House, and not
another: On the same account we make the World believe we can tell when a
Meteor will Flare, and describe an Arch like a Flaming Arrow in the Air, and
when it will strike out of a sudden, as an Arrow, when near the Ground upon
Sight, fixes; the same is our reason for Hail, we see some Watery Meteors will
be produced, and yet we see not vigor enough to secure their freezing.

24. When I thus argued therefore, Jove produces Fog, but Fog is a Dew with
some degree of Congelation, to make it visible, ergo, Jove is Cold. I consider
the Dew and the Congelation are 2 things, the one may proceed from the Stars,
and the others from the Nitrous Atome, which is ready to break in, (being kept
out by main Force) on all occasions, where the Planetary Watch does not disturb
it, as in all Warm Weather it does; the Planets do not emit this Atome, but at
present they are not in the Capacity to Expatiate and hinder its Intrusion.

25. For, have we not made out how all s do tend to Cold? And does This not
hold in, which holds in others, it self? And is not there the same reason in
the as in, for when in they are confined to a Diameter Line, they may warm one
the other, but they cool the Air and us; then how much more may the rest of the
Aspects contribute to a Comparative Cold? Is there never a Lunar or will
contribute to Snow? Verily is commonly more Warmer, and Violent at distance,
than near the Partile; when, we observed, was cooler at distance, as you may
remember: A Sign that is more frigid than, by reason of his greater remove,
which cannot pretend to. But neither is it self cool upon any other
consideration, than his Remove, and want of Consent of the rest: nor does he
affect us with any sensible Frigidity; but in case of non-assistance of his
Fellows, as may easily be proved. So then is a Frigid Planet, much after the
same manner as is, which the Ancients, it may be, should have observed;
whencesoever it falls out, they did not give us such Aim: perhaps they
considered the Partile Aspect only, the Triduum, or thereabouts, and so defined
him a Temper suiting him to his Position between the two Planets, where the one
was most Remote, the other next to the Fountain of Heat. Here it may be
objected, that this is to make as cold as, and so put no difference in case of
Desertion or Destitution, and so All is lost. I answer, where is in Cold
Weather? Where are all the Planets in Frost and Icy Constitutions? Mars, Venus,
Mercury, are they a sleep? or a cold? as we say. Where is Sun it self, when the
Snow melts not under his Gleam. We know that the Planets simply considered may
come short of such an Effect in this and that Clime; but we speak of Aspects,
Synods, and Schematismes, for advantage of Influence Caelestial, and observe,
that even they want their Vigor when they want their Friends about them,
Martial Aspect not excepted. Yet still the difference is preserved of Planetary
Influence, as Astrology teaches, in that a Martial Configuration happens to be
more rarely so deserted, as to go away without Testimony: a manifest Argument
of the true settlement of the Planet's Natures, as every one who will take the
pains to confute Pretenders, shall find. One Difficulty I have not started, and
that is this, supposing the Truth of the Premises, how Jove, though more remote
than Mars, should not be as warm, or warmer than he, because of his Greater
apparent Diameter, and if he be either Equal or Superior in Warmth, how he can
represent more cold Weather than? The answer I confess I must ponder upon it,
for it is a new raised Quaere, and must be bid to come another time; in the
mean while it is apparent that I oblige my self to dissemble no difficulty.

26. Here I take notice of that of the Ancients, how our Planet is the Parent
of North-Winds, which in our Diary we find not: If I find Fog, I find the
East Wind, and if I find Wet, I find the West, or South Wind. The Diary, though
not exact, brings enough to show where the Presumption lies. In a Mist, it is I
confess, commonly East: in a Dry or fair Season, For the Quota for S. and S W.
is 112. the East gave 36. North 43. West 62. South 35. There the South carries
it. South 13. S W. 16 S E. 6. North 8. N W. 4. N E. 3. W. 11. East 8. We shall
see further, but I fear North Wind seldom appears but where there is an
Interruption of Vacant Sign in the order of the Planets. The like I say for
Serenity, and so in truth Serenity belongs not to any Aspect Primarily of a,
or, I mean, but to absence of some Party concerned in the contrary. This is a
Novel Assertion, and no small Paradox, to dare to question that Jove is a
Parent ( per se, I mean) of the North Wind, or fair Weather; though are better
disposed to Serenity than any other Pair, yet the Rule which I advance being so
general, will take place rather, when we shall find both Wind and Weather
abroad in the Air, where neither Jove nor his Aspects can put in.

27. It will be said, is it then only so, that is Cold upon the recess of
Planets from such and such a Station? I answer, no otherwise, let us prove it
by a little Induction from our own Tables precedent, on whose Evidence we
build, Sept. 29. Ao 1661. after a sad Rain and South-West Wind. We find a Cold
Night, a Northerly Wind, and next day, Sept. 30. a cold Morning with Frost; the
Sun has applied nearer to Jove grad. 1. but the Moon has made a wider Hyatus,
and approached the Opposition of Saturn, There Is our first Singular. The next
Instance is large, Ao 1673. where Five or Six days are concerned, Oct. 2. ad 5.
again, Oct. 7, 8, 9. This Frost we must know began on Sept. 30. and there the
Frost seems, to owe it self to the Application to Jupiter for that day, but the
grand Reason which holds for all those days concerned, is the crouding of 5 of
the Planets into one Sign, and the Dis-ingagement of the Moon from their
Company: the other consideration, I say, of approach to held but for its Day,
and no more. Take a Third Instance, Ao 1662. Nov. 1. There we meet with Frosty
Morning; the Cause is not only the contracted space between and, though That
helps, but the crouding of 3 together in so little a space. Take one more in
Dec. 6, 7, 8. Ao 1663. where we find Frost and Snow. We find also 4 Planets in
a Sign, crouding together within two degrees one of the other, and the Moon
Straggling on her way, not only parted from the Company, but forgotten them too,
only when it lights on the Common to all IV. it made the Snow also.

28. But does the case stand thus with Saturn also? Even the same, allowing for
his distance: Recur, if you please, to the Table of Sol and Saturn, and the
First frost there mentioned, Sept. 19. Ao 1657. holds 4 Mornings together. I
boldly say, it is not the Conjunction of Sol and Saturn alone produces that
Frost, but Primarily and Fundamentally the near approach of 4 Planets into one
Sign, as before. 2. The Propinquity of our Conjunction. 3. The Dis-ingagement
of Jove from the four, and the Lunar Application to Jove so dis-inagaged, and
with some other Considerables, etc. And though this may be only lucky, that the
First Instance should fall right, take a 2d October. 3. and 9, 10, 11. Ao 1658.
the Frost of the 3d. day happens not only from the Indistance of Sol and
Saturn, but also from the Dis-ingagement of the Moon from the 3 Planets in
Libra, and possessing less space than it did before. We could add the approches
of Mars to Sol and Saturn, which must be no wonder to any that believes what we
have endeavored to make out, and is consonant to this great Principle, that
all Conjunctions as Such, not nakedly considered, for their parts favor cool
Air. Yea, but an, says the Objection, creates a Frost, whatever the does; and
this is the difference between an Aspect of Sol and, Sol and, the former is
capable of a Frost, the other loves it, witness Nov. 1656. 1657. 1668. and Dec.
1669. more notably. Thus when time was, I argued with my self. I answer, the
Jovial Opposition is cooler than the Conjunction, and that according to
Premises, and the same Opposition again is a greater Cooler than that of Sol
and, from the different distance of their Orbs, and what more; but I fear we
shall find, that this kindness the Aspect may have for a Cold State of Air,
still supposes some Prior Fundamental Position of Heaven, which declares for
that cool State: but if the Planets run in a huddle into a narrow confine, it
is manifest there must be Conjunctions in Fieri. In like manner, as at such
time, if the other Hemisphere be occupied by any Planet, there must be in
either case; so it is not one single Aspect thereby creates a Frost, but the
Alteration of a Major Part, some whereof meet, others fly off, so, like unhappy
Commanders in an Army, they consent not with the whole, to keep out the Enemy,
by maintaining their Posts and Passes at such proportion of Distance, that they
communicate one with the other, the Cold Constitution, like the Enemy, will
come in at a Gap, unless there be some to dispute it with him. We shall not
trouble the Reader with a Diary for the, for I reckon that discourse is so
plain, it carries its Manifesto with it. All this while we make not Cold a
mere Privation, but Positive being, not as pure Darkness, but as a Mist, etc.
which will be sure to incroach where a sufficient Heat does not dispel it.

29. All this consists with my Fancy, that a Lucid Warm Body, which cannot
master a Cold Constitution, may add some adventitious Strength to it, as we
have often said, and attempted to illustrate by experiments; see 14. when a
Jove may be concerned, for though he carry Lightning in his Face, yet he is a
Tame, Cold Glowworm in his Retirements, as to our inferior Regions; neither
must we Imagine his Erradiation to be Idle. He may tickle the Cold Atome below,
and help to Inflame upwards. So have we seen Comets appear in Frosty Winters.

30. I wont stretch too far, and say that our Planet upon this account may
agitate the Cold Atome more than Saturn, because of its nearer Situation, and
as to sight, a greater Diameter: what difference then may be in Frosts, I smell
not; some are pure, and have a suitable Pertinacy; others may be extreme for
the while, and all of a sudden change the Scene into Storm and Tempest of
Lightning, etc. Where I reckon, beside others, the Planet which had a share in
the one, was concerned in the other, Strongly assisted at One time; a Natural
State of Destitution in the Other. There is a Natural, and there is a Mongrel
Frost. The like I may say of.

31. Whether Jove may have some Reluctance to Moisture, I must needs say, I
believe it, though I see for the most part this happens not but under a State
of Destitution too, so it may be Impotence, which we call Resistance: but when
I meet with sparing Moisture, with few Drops, a Misle, a Drisle, a Shower in
Prospect, when the rest of the Heaven is Serene, a striped Cloud, an overcast
Heaven that Frowns, but weeps not, a Mist, a Fog, and the like, a Drought as in
the Diary, attending the Aspect Jovial: I ken not what to say, but that he is a
Slug as to Moisture, and must be roused and wekened; I fancy many times. For
when he causes a Fog, or a lowering Heaven, if Mars, say I, were in is place,
he would produce a just Moisture, a Point elsewhere to be proved.

32. Thus have I observed and meditated: the Reader perceives some difficulty
depending, I cast about, what I could to discover the Temper of the Planet,
after all I was aware the best way was to draw up my Diary different from the
rest, comprising, viz. gr. 7. before the Partile Congress, and gr. 3. after;
reckoning that a Planet is of Warmer Effect after the Congress, than before,
because according to our Principle, the cold Constitutution observes the
Planets in their contradicted Order, which contraction increases upon the
gradual approach to the Colleague; but after the punctual Congress, the
enlargement increases by how much a greater Arch of Zodiac is entered upon. And
so much for.

CHAP. XIII..
Conjunction of Jupiter and Mercury.
1. The Aspect of and cried up for Winds, as if absolutely depending thereon,
Cardan, etc. 2. But Columbus, Eichstad, and Verulam; yea, and Old Giafar
himself are restrictive and wary. 3. Platick distance, Congress of many Planets
in one Sign, with some affecting that Congress, or some other Planet, etc. must
be considered as to Winds. 4, 5. The Square Aspect agrees, more Requisites are
produced. 6. New Method of Diary for this Aspect, if thereby we may discern its
Nature more conveniently. 7. The Aestival Part with this Aspect brings more Wet
than Hyemal. 8. The Diary. 9. Jup. procures Blite. A List of some Bliting Wind.
10. Some Bold intruding Fog after a Serene Morn. Text. 11. Observations about
the Square. in the Center of a Halo. Text. 12. Observe. about the Sextile. A
Green Halo.
1. PRoportionable to this Aspect of is the Configuration of, reckoning the
difference of Motion, in Direct Course moving faster than, cried up for Wind.
Hear Maginus, Magna ut dicant Astrologi Portarum Apertio, ad Ventos, and more
we could quote that are quick and confident in the Point; and What comes of it?
Every body sees the Fault to this day of Professors, when they judge a
Constitution by one Symptom.

2. So did Cardan long ago ascribe the Blustering Stormy Winds, when for their
violence they could not pass the Streets to our one Aspect, Ao 1552. In Ptol.
Lib. II. 52. but even Old Giafar was wiser, for when he had said that with and
were raisers of Wind, and that he who will prognosticate a Wind, must attend;
he adds, because the when after the Solar Congress; she applies to, and so
joins with him Sub eodem nexu and in contraria mansione, ventorum nunciat
discursus. He teaches not his Scholar to predict upon the bare Aspect, but so
and so. And again, Mercurius Jovi applicans aut Veneri in mansione ventos
figurante, ventos producit propitios. If there be more required to a
Prediction, then more is required to a Definition, the Ground of the
Prediction. Commend me to Columbus, whose Skill in Astrology looked after
Complicate Causes, as Purchase tells us, Lib. 1. Cap. 1. Text. 5. where being
arrived in America he would not put to Sea, because he found an Opposition of
and, and. 'Twas not a single Aspect neither of near, nor, but all together.
Eichstad is as cautelous, who mentions the New or Full, coincidence to make
things hold together, one way or other. The Great Verulam in his History of
Winds gave a hearing to this Aspect, though he was very wary and sparing of
making it an Aphorism; no question because he saw it uncertain, and not to be
trusted. The best Philosophers are most wary.

3. We'll allow the Ancient Astrologers that and, when Aspected, have natural
aptitude to Winds; but our Business is to speak to the Act, when they are in
Conjunction Platick, when there are two or three in the same Sign, with in
or,,,, for so I find the, Dec. 22. Ao 52. in, and the latter three degrees
distant from. Again, Febr. 25. Ao 54. in, three degrees distant on both days, a
Lunar Opposition of some distinct Planet. So, March 7. Ao 55., in, and May 12.
Ao 56. IV. in, grand. 2. distant from. June 15. IV. in July 23. in, in opposes
them all. As for Cardan's Storm, beside our Aspect, there are IV. in, and Jove
knows what more.

4. But it may be it holds in the Square Aspect; we must say it holds, but with
such limitations of a Platick Aspect, and opposite Sign or Aspect, or Signs
Cardinal, but above all the Position of Planets in a continued Order, in Four
or Five Sign. So Ao 1656. Aug. 27. and 29. it bluster'd, but when the
Intermediate day, the day of the Aspect was calm, tell me the reason, some
Astrologer, for no body else can do it.

5. Therefore to crack of Astrological Verity absolutely, is not so well,
without, or contrary, to Experience, Astrological Verity sometimes consists of,
as Matthiolus's great Antidote, a 100 Ingredlents. Ao 1662. Feb. 3. a Square of
and the Second day was windy; the first, a Stormy Wind doing much harm, besides
the distance Platick, there is a Square of and in Cardinal Signs. Ao 64. April
16. there haps the Aspect. Die 15. there was Wind, who was configur'd with, had
Two Planets joined with him in the same Sign. Likewise Nov. 10. High Wind
appeared die 9, 11. here the Astrologer will tell you the reason why on these
days, and not on the middle. Die 10. the affected Planet; had Companions with
him in the same Sign (or in the Opposition) all the three days, but an
Opposition (sometimes required) is more visible on the 9. and 11. than on the
10.

6. Now for the Winds cum Siccitate, which they speak of, I willingly hearken
to them, having always had that Notion of for Dry, before I met such favorable
expressions of the Artist to that Notion; but I fear, upon enquiry it will be
found that this haps mostly when there wants Assistance, Extensive or
Intensive, our Diary, you will see, favors it; but, as you may note, the
Diary's drawn contracted into a narrower Compass than usual, (partly to avoid
seeming Prolixity, but especially) to discover the Nature of the Aspect singly,
and by its self, referring Those Aspects which fall in with and, or with and to
their proper Heads.

7. But this seems to hold more in the Hyemal part than the Aestival; where not
many days about the Partile Aspect bring any moisture, yea and the whole Sum
shall frequently yield but a malignant Moisture; for where it proves otherwise,
to be sure, there is some juncture of Aspects more than requisite, as in the
year 74. (where to our Conjunction of and, there is a forked Opposition of,
with a Tooth for each, making III, Aspects in Astrologic account) is more than
evident; notwithstanding which I could not refer it elsewhere, as I do with our
Aspects at present, which were coincident with, for then I should refer away
all the Diary presently: So hard a thing is it to give an Aspect its true
Definition, because It is seldom or never found Distinct and Separate from
those that pretend to Influence, as much as they.

8. Yea, but why the Summer part moister than the Hyemal? To this I answer, the
Aestival Part may find some other Assistances, or Vigorous Positions, besides
Co-incidences of, which are on purpose excluded, or rather; because the
Aestival Part of Heaven does more invigorate those Planets which attend the,
not only by their higher Exaltation or Approches to Verticity, but also by the
greater Glories, and thicker Number of the Fixed that take up their Stations in
the Aestival Hemisphere, rather than in the Hyemal, which is in part confirmed
from hence, that the same Excess of Wet holds also in the Precedent Aspect of
and, (even though the proper Diary was not drawn up after this, but the usual
manner:) On the same account as July and August, you may know, are naturally
hot, and dry Months, by virtue of those Fixed that are found in and.
Notwithstanding these said Signs of or (as in case of our Aspect, which happens
every 12 years, or thereabouts) if they happened to be overcharged, by the
meeting of several, even Dry Planets, those Harvest Months yield Rain, and
Storms instead of a dry Pumice-Constitution.

. Diary. Hyemal Part.
Ao 1661. Oct. 9. 24. Ao 1662. October. 17. 20.
12. Close, drisling 5 p. some wetting 7 m. N E. 13. Fog, close, warm. S S W.
14. Close, drisling m. open p. m. warm. S W. 15. Close, s. drisle o. and p. m.
16. Open, very warm. 17. Bright day, fog m. warm, mist n. bright. 18. (Overcast
2 m. Belman) close, foggy die tot.
Ao 1663. Dec. 23. 29.
18. R. b. d. overc. o. R. m. p. p. m. 19, 20. Close days, s. moistning, fog. N
E. 21. Close m. a little open p. m. coldish. Ely. 22. Close die tot. muddy m.
cold. N E. 23. Close die tot. muddy, cold. Nly. 24. Some Sun m. clear; great
Fog as ever was known. Sly.
Ao 1652. Dec. 20. 21.
15. Clear, s. wd, star appears freez. S W. 16. Cloudy somet. some wet, Comet,
freez. N E. 17. Clear, s. w. cly at n. freez. s. w. N E. 18. s. clouds, wdy,
not so wdy at n. N E. 19. Cloudy, clearing, s. wd. N E. 20. Clear, s. w. cloudy
and misty at n. freezing a little. N E. 21. Misty, misling, clearing, thaw, s.
cl s. wind at n. S.
Ao 1665. Jan. 1. 27.
27. Dec. Mist, fog. s. wet 3 m. S. 28. Close m. cool, drisling, 5 p. Nly. 29.
Offering to snow 10 m. very cold p. m. snowing 6 p. N E. 30. Very hard frost,
offering to snow a. m. and 2 p. N W. 31. Very hard frost, s. clouds lowr o. s.
overc. 10 p. freez. S W. 1 Jan. Freez m. open and warm, wd up, Comet seen. N W.
2. Frosty, windy noct. tot. Comet seen clear. N E.
Ao 1666. March. 11. 11.
6. Mist, warm, white clouds, clear n. dry. W. 7. Mist m. coldish, s. clouds.
8. Rainy 7 m. Sun shine 9 m. 9. Fine clear m. brisk wind, clear o. hoar frost,
very cold. Wly. 10. Hard sr. clear m. and fair. Nly. 11. Mist, fair, clouds in
Stories, close m. p. Ely. 12. Frost, ice, mist, close m. p. E.
Ao 1654. Feb. 27. 4.
22. Windy, cloudy, s. Sun n. cldy m. p. freez. N W. 23. s, clds, s. rain some
places. N. 24. Cloudy, dropp. s. wind, Rainy, w. clear. N. 25. Very high wind,
rain and hail, stormy. N. 26. Fr. s. clouds, s. wind n. clear m. p. s. freez. N
E. 27. Cloudy still m. p. white frost. W. 28. ut 5.
Ao 1657. March. 8. 3. V. in. Ao 1657. March 19. 10. V. in. Ao 1674. Oct. 30.
26.
24. Rain 6 m. 2 m. m. p. and die tot. Aches, rain m. p. n. and blustering S W.
25. Rain 7 m. misty, drisle 1 p. Rain and winds 3 p. Lightning S E. 9 p.
Meteteors by North, frosty. N. 26. Bright m. sudden overc. and shower 10 m. so 1
p. S W. 27. Rain a midn. m. p. rain 7 m. wind and rain 4 p. furious tempest,
and flying clouds. Aches. S W. 28. Bright and windy. S W. 29. Frost, bright m.
windy; Aches. S W. 83. Wet die tot. and wind H. at n. Aches. S E. 31. Frost,
fair, Aches 8 p. Wly.
Ao 1675. Nov. 15. 24.
6. Terrible frost, ice in the Channels of the City. 7. Fog, frosty, fair, ice,
bitter frost. Wly. 8. Fog, thaw p. m. N W. 9. Some mist, rain at 10 m. and o.
Aches. S W. 10. Close, warm, high wind, R. 4 p. 5 p. 8 p. 11. Drisling m. p.
very warm, s. wetting o. Wly. 12. Close, warm. Wly. 13. Close, warm, mist, some
misle 10 p. 14. Frosty m. open. 15. Open, misle 7 p. Nly. 16. Fair m. p. cool,
mist. Wly. Ao 1676. vacat. Ao 1677. Jan. 14. vide in.
Ao 1678. Jan. 25. 4.
20. Great storm of wind and rain 3 m. stormy o. 2 p. great Halo noted 7 p. 21.
Open rain p. m. open vesp. and mist. Nly. 22. Fair m. cloudy m. p. mist m. so 6
p. N W. 23. Hoar frost, fair, foggy. N E. 24. Frost, rain o. snow offer p. m.
and vesp. N E. 25. Fog, snow gone Ely smart rain 7 m. 26. Fog, cold, misty.
Ely.
Ao 1679. April. 2. 18.
March 29. Great fog, clear above. Ely. 30. Great fog, clear above. Sly. 31. R.
ho. 3 m. cloudy, cold m. warm p. m. April 1. Rain considerable p. m. dark,
shower. rain 11 m. and 6 p. 2. Very clear m. shower o. S. 3. Rain 11 m. and 2 p.
m. S E.
Part Aestival. Ao 1656. May. 13. 17.
9. Fr. very cold, red wd. Ely. 10. Frost, fair, cool wd, Frogs croke. S E. 11.
White clouds flying low. 12. Some frost, fair m. red w. 2 or 3 drops. N E. 13.
Rain 100 miles N. ward, frosty, cold wind. N E. 14. Fr. clear white streaks,
Red bliting. N W. N E. Wind, blew mist.
Ao 1668. May 25. 24.
20. Close, coldish, offering m. Ely. Nly. 21. Coldish wd, open. S E. N E. 22.
Wet die tot, and n. threatn. Floods. N E. 23. Close, drisling m. p. wind at n.
near Aequinox. N E. 24. Winds, coldish, misling m. p. close n. Ely. 25. Warm,
open, some lowering. N. 26. Cool m. with clouds, warm. Wly.
Ao 1657. May. 18. 15.
15. Dry wd m. streaked cl. N E. 16. Dry wd, lights, cloudy winds, s. gusts. N
E. 17. Close m. a gentle shower, s. misling 9 m. blew mist. N N E. 18. Close,
windy, cloudy, blew mist. N E.
Ao 1669. May 31. 22.
28. Temperate, shower o. 4 p. bright n. Nly. 29. s. overcast m. heat p. m.
bright n. Sly. 30. Close, showring 6 p. Aches. Sly. 31. Temper. calm day.
Ao 1658. June 4. Stationary.
1. Windy, cool. S W. 2. Much rain. S W. 3. Rain, Lightning. S W. 4. Much rain.
S W. 5. Cloudy S W.
Ao 1670. Jun
2. Cool wind, open, offer o. s. wetting Sun occ. etc. Aches 11 p. 3. Open,
offering, warm. Wly. 4. Soultry a. m. wd brisk, much Rain and Thunder a 4 p. ad
Sun occ. then a gr. storm of Lightn. n. S W. 5. Fair, windy. Wly. 6. Close and
drisling. 7. Close m. p. and fair p. m. wdy 8. Close m. fair p. m. H. and cool
wind 11 p. Wly 9. Warm, open, s. bl. cl. s. mist, soultry at n.
Ao 1659. July 30. 22.
26. Fair m. drisling shower, hot, gusts of wind. W. 27. Wet 2 m. and a. m. Wly.
28. Cloudy, a coasting shower. 12 Meteors. N W. 29. Cool wind, a shower 2 p. some
Meteors. N W. 30. Clouds in stories, warm, s. rain 1 p. N W. 31. Rainy day
break, at o. tempest, wind at even. S W. S E.
Ao 1671. Aug. 11. 28. V. in. Ao 1660. Aug. 5. 17.
30. Showring a. m. close, lowering 1 p dropping vesp. N W. 31. Close m. stiff
wind, misty, open, Meteor n. N W. 1, 2, 3. Cloudy morning p. drisle. 4. Thunder
and Lightning, Tempest in Kent, much R. n. 5. Drisle m. fair p. after, and dry
Land. 6. Fair and cloudy Land.
Ao 1672. Aug. 16. 20.
11. Shower in prospect 1 p, and 2 p. 3 p. Rain and many Thunderclaps, H. wd 2
p S W. 12. Close m. p. and lowering, drisle 9 p. S W. 13. Wet n. close a. m. H.
wd, R. 6 p. S W. 14. Close, shower o. and wetting p. m. m. p. windy. S W. 15.
White lowering clouds, shower 4 p. N W. 16. Fog, frost, close m. p. white frost
m. Ely.
Ao 1673. Oct. 21. o.
16. Misty, cloudy. N E. Lowering p. m. and some wetting 8 p. s. wetting a. I. S
W. 17. Fair a. m. close p. m. showrs 9 p. S W. 18. Tempestuous die tot.
overcast noon, and rain 1 p. 19. Frost, fair, very misty. 20. Mist at n. 21.
Hard frost, misty and close m. p. Aches. 22. Misty, Aches, rain 8 m. S W. N W.
Ao 1680. April 8. 17.
3. Rain ante Sun ort. mist, cldy H. wind, wetting a. m. and ante 4 p. 4. Rain,
dark, H. wind m. little wetting circa 1. and 4. showring 7 p. N E. 5. Rain a 1.
ad 8 m. N E. fog brisk wind, red Heaven, misling 7 p. 10. p. Ignis Fatuus at
Waltham Abbey. S E. Ely. N E. 6. Some mist, gentle wind, rain a 3. ad 4 m. fog,
close. N W. 7. Dark fog, close, and seen hora 8. 8. Brisk wind, dewing circa 8
m. rain ante o. with Hail, Rain 1 p. 9. Open, brisk wind, dewing 7 p. Rain 10
p. S W.
Ao 1681. June 13. 28.
10. Cold m. cloudy, open p. m. dry, s. wind. 11. Cold m. fair, few white
clouds, wind variable. 12. Cloudy and suspicious, close, gusty. Sly. 13. Some
drisle 6 m. H. wind and close. 14. Very high wind, bright air, wd and wetting
10 p. welcome. N W. 1682. vide in.
Summa Dierum.
Part Hyemal.
Days 72. Wet 34. Wind 22. Frost and Cold 29.
Part Aestival.
Days 68. Wet 42. Wind 25. Frost and Cold 14.
As we were saying, there are more Wet days, and sorer in the Aestival Part. We
find 42. under 68. days here, and there, (in the Hyemal) we find but 34. under
72. we gave the reason as to, which holds in the also, as to smart Rains in
July and August; July and August abroad are the Hurricane Months.

9. Blite is a Country Observation, taught me at first by the Husbandmen,
oftentimes accompanied with a blew Tincture of the Air, or Red Wind, as they
call it, bringing not small Prejudice to Vegetables, especially in the first
blowing of Fruit, Corn, etc. It became my Diligence to mark it, for it concerns
the Public, which we all labor after; and I find it to belong especially to a
Configuration of Jove with Mercury, with Sol, with Mars. May 12, 13, 14. Ao
1658. under the Conjunction with Mercury. July 19. Ao 1653. under the, under
the, Jan. 16. Ao 61. But as proper as it does seem to a Dry Meteor, I found in
quest, that not so much as Venus is excepted; yea, Jove alone strongly posited
with some great Asterism Pleiades, Hyades, Caput caeti. It happens under a
North, or an East Wind, or a South-East for the most part; for the Inquirers
sake we'll give a List:

Ao 1652. June 5, 6, 7, 8. June 15, 16, 16, 18. July 3, 4. Ao 1653. July 19. Ao
1654. Aug. 1. Ao 1655. Apr. 23. Ao 1656. March 12, 18* April 24, 25, 26. May 7.
12, 13, 14. June 13. 30. July 1, 2. 5, 6, 7. 12. Aug 2. Ao 1657. March 10. 22,
23. May 14.
Some other Concurrents there are which concern the other Superiors who show
themselves at the same time. They who love a Garden, will attend them.

10. For Fog, October. 18. Ao 62. Sept. 24. Ao 63. we meet with such as were
unparalleled, nay we find a Mist hovering over the Medium, not left as a
Relic of Night, but rudely following after a clear Morn, making bold
Intrusion under the countenauce of this Aspect, Nov. 2. Ao 68. And This is the
Conjunction: the like I observed, Feb. 25. Ao 75. with a pretty attendance of
Roping thread Cobwebs, appropriate rather to the Months of Sept. and October.

11. We have learned before that the is a considerable Aspect, it appears to be
such in this Class, it brings Wind more than any of its fellow. Aspects, and
some stresses of Weather, as to Wind and Rain, and more particularly Hail, as
may be seen by its Inventory, not here produced. Only we must not let pass the
Green Halo noted in a Misty Frosty Night, ho. 9 p. Dec. 25. Ao 1655. It was
Novel to me, nor have I met or heard of a Parallel; on which I mused, the
rather, because considering that in the Natural Change of Colors, a Light Red
fades into a Dark, That into Blew, This into Greenish; I wondered that I never
observed the next immediate Precedent Color of a Nocturnal Vapor, viz. the
Blew; nor do I expect it should be observed, when as a Reddish Tincture in an
Halo is frequent: What the Propinquity of may do, or our concerned Planet in
the same Sign, I know not; I am glad I find some whom I may take upon suspicion
for the Cause; the Speculation is pleasant enough, and will deserve the
Divertisement of the Learned. This I learn, that although the Colors of the
Celestial Bow are reflected from a Rorid Cloud, yet we must not necessarily
infer, there is any R^rant Vapor descending, whenever these Colors are
presented; for in dry Seasons the Solar Halo's are sometime tincted with red,
and in the Parelia, by all Faith of Story, several Florid Arches or Bows
appear, which have not any Favor for the Instant Generation of Rain or Dew.
Now of the Sextiles, the First indeed has this peculiar Discrimination from
the II. that it is observed to cause Rain at Night, I mean about set, or after,
more often by half than the Latter.

12. In the year 1678. when the First haps to hold out about, or above a
Fortnight; in the Month of June we meet with* Lightning thrice in that very
term, viz. Jun. 22. 24, 29. and dry Thunder twice, viz. June 23, 29. and not
only there, but in Aug. 52. and Apr. 69. under Quadrate 2d. Trajections in Apr.
May, Sept. Blushing Tincture of the Heaven in the East, most part under 1. As
July 8. Ao 57. Sept. 27. Ao 58. May 17. Ao 78. yea July 20. Ao 68. a Purple
Border round the Horizon. Rainbows or Halo's one or two, though not found in
the former Aspects, we scarce mention, except one Halo may be serviceable to
us, viz. Oct. IV. Ao 77. under the II. Square, seen at that Hour, when not only
the was in the Center, but our Planet within the Circumference: Where, if the
decircinates the Circle, our Planet helps to supply the Vapid misty Consistence
wherein it is seated. Before we leave these Quadrates, this is palpably
evident, that the Second does less Feats, by far, than the First.

CHAP. IV.. Conjunction of Jove and Venus.
1. is voic'd to bring Fair Weather; Cardan's reason for it. 2. Serenity has
every man's good Word. 3. Fair Weather strictly, or at large. 4. A Serene
Aspect seems to be dry. 5. And Cool; but that is hardly granted, for 's sake.
6. Yet Astrology makes not as warm as. 7. The Diary must solve that. 8. A Diary
of more Aspects than one. 9. are slippery Aspects, profess a Calm, and meditate
a Storm. 10. Proved from Kepler's Diary. 11. Our own Home-Diary produced. 13.
The same issue in Aestival. 14. A Hyemal Part. 15. As much almost for Moisture
as Serenity. 16. How get the name for Serenity. 17. How, or in what case their
Serenity or Dryth is undoubted. 18. Ocular Demonstration from the Hyemal Part.
19. The same from the Aestival. 20. Rule to know Fair Weather under this
Aspect. 21. Rule for Frosty Morning in the Hyemal Part. 22. Those Rules hold in
also. 23. Resumption of the Violence of this Aspect, hitherto not taken notice
of. 24. The Character. 25. Sudden Alteration proper to Jovial Aspects.
1. THe Aspect of and, say Astrologers, smiles in our Face; prod^^ing Serene
Air; We shall not wanton it with Poetique lusions to those Feigned Deities,
giving countenance to Heathenish Institutions, or the Discredit of our
Principle: We will labor to avoid those Syrtes, Major and Minor. But we
hearken to the voice of Experience, which unanimously cries out, Serenitatem
affert, it clears up, and brings that Fair Constitution, which, it is pity,
(says the Proverb) should do any Harm. Cardan will give the Reason: Jupiter
non procedit nisi ad Serenitatem, says he, eo quod in calore vix excedit
temperamentum. De VII. Planet'. Lib. V. page 37^. But Intricacies of Nature are
not solved with every pretty Come-off; for then all Temperate Air should be
Serene, and all Serene, Temperate: No mild Weather close; no, not in April or
May; No fair Weather intemperately Cold, no, not in January and February.

2. Serenity carries the Name, because of its Bright and Lovely Sky-Colour'd
Coat, whence, though it is not so frequent as could be wished, yet it is more
observed, and mentioned with more regard.

3. But, what do they mean, Serenity mixed, or pure? Not the* Pure and Bright
Constitution, I fear, when a Man, even in the Northern Climates cannot discern
a Cloud, or so much as a Lock of a Vapor through the whole Canopy: Nor the
Glorious inviting Face of Heaven, where the Azure is inter-spread with Bright
Clouds, repressing the Light from their Airy Surface. But Fair Weather in a
large Sense as it is opposed to Dirty, when the Heaven may be, notwithstanding,
tinged with Fog* or overcast with a Cloud adequate to the whole, when the Air
may Lowr, and be Muddy at times, so it rain not; This, with Serenity strictly
called, may be the Fair Weather which and have a share in, and are voic'd for
such.

4. On this account I reasoned with my self, as I have declared already, which
here, upon this point started, may be remembered again, concerning the Planets
Influence. If it be so that cause Fair Weather, must not be of a Dry Complexion
rather than a Moist? Must not he be Dry, if he be Parent of Dry Weather? Dry,
as well as Temperate; and so Cool as well as* Dry.

5. Verily, I looked that the Astrologer should have professed that an Aspect
of with should have favored Cold also, and that, by Force of Evidence from his
Diary.

6. This I will say for them, that they do not pretend that and do remit or
abate the Cold of Winter, as with, and with does: And it is some wonder that
and, notwithstanding their allowed abatement of Cold in Wintertime, should by
confession (as we shall hear) bring Hail or Snow at peculiar times, and yet
tend nothing thereto.

7. This gives occasion to produce our Diary, to enquire there, and from thence
if it may be, deduce the Truth of our Pretenses to Cold, and to Serenity, or
the contrary.

8. For now, the Nature of our Enquiry being such, as in Reason abridgeth the
Diary to fewer Degrees far, than hitherto has been made use of; Greater Arches
in the Heaven being concerned in a Storm, than in a Calm; In Hot Weather, then
in Cold; We shall have the more Liberty to call in All, or most of the Aspects,
not for any other reason, but to settle and confirm the Character of the Aspect
either Pro or Con.

9. To tell you before hand, what I have found by Experience before the Tables
are introduced, when All comes to All, the Aspects of and, though they favor
Cold and Serenity in some measure, yet they are also Slippery Aspects, will
Fawn and Frown: I do not speak of bringing Cold in Winter, and Heat in
Summertime, but they will bring you Cold and Heat, Calm and Storm, (not at one
Instant, but) in the same Term, in one Senary of Days; and, as we have before
owned, in, is a violent Aspect, a kin to his Brethren.

10. What Paradox do I broach now? Must we not all believe Experience? For who
can dissemble Kepler's Noctu per pluit in 1622. Pluit large, 1623. with
Continua Pluviae to boot. Nix multa, 1625. Nix copiosae, 1629. Nix multa,
again, at the end of the same year, Dec. 8. This for Wet. For Wind the like
bustle, Ventus Impetuosus, Ao 1625. Ventosum and Austrozeph. Valid. Ao 1626.
Ventus Vehemens, 1629. All Three Summer Months, and two of them Thunder. The
agreeing with the. Snow 5 days together. Ao 1623. Rain 2 days, Ao 1634. Snow 2
days. Ao 1625. Hail 2 days together, Ao 1627. with Cataracts not long after.
Rain 2 days together, Ao 1628. The like, Ao 1629. Lightning once, and Thunder
twice, Ao 1629. Horrid Thunders, 1627. And what do we call this? Is not this
Violence? But this is not All. Lo! Somewhat more. Storms of Hail and Cold; and
yet on the same day Horrid Thunder. There Is our Paradox, our Jove and Venus.
It Is ordinary, I profess I find it so; and no where else, unless in a Jovial
Aspect: And even in and. All this may be seen in Keplers Diary under and,.

11. But let us see our own Diary. Home is best, and first of the Aestival Part.

Diary.
Aestival Part.
Ao 1656. May 28. 21.
27. Bright m. clouds lowering 8 m. wd, shower 9 p. some Lightning. N W. 28. Fair
m. wd, overc. 3 p. shower, rain hard. S W. 29. Cool, windy, a shower Sun occ.
black n.
Ao 1667. May 18. 24.
17. Close, gentle rain a. m. per tot. mist, some wet p. m. wd, rain 11 p. Ely.
18. Close m. p. cold wind, open n. rain 2 p. 4 p. Thunderclap. S E. Ely. 19.
Brisk cool wind, audible 11 p.
Ao 1658. June 13. 17.
12. Close m. wd, showrs, so p. m. W. N W. 13. H. wd, cool coasting showrs 7 p.
N W. 14. Cool, misling p. m. wetting 10 p. W. N W.
Ao 1669. June 9. 24.
8. Fair, flying clouds, wind. Sly. 9. H. wind, close, warm, some wetting 1 p.
heavy air n. 10. Sudden showrs p. m. warm.
Ao 1671. June 23. 17.
22. Fog m. fair, hot, dry, soultry p. m. Nly. 23. Mist m. fair, dry. 24. Dry,
opening, mist, clds, wd. Wly. 25. Fair, windy p. m. clear n. S W. n. Wly.
Ao 1682. June 19. 26.
18. Much lowering, s. wind. mist m. temperate. 12. Warmer, s. wd. Wly. 20. Cool
and brisk wind m. drisle circa 3 p. and 9 p.
Ao 1660. July 9. 12.
7. Wind a little, shower 8 m. clear m. p. S W. 8. Fair, windy, warm, overc. 3
p. S W. 9. Fog ante Sun or. dry, troubled air 3 p. W. 10. Fair, cold, clouds
ride contrary. N W. S E.
Ao 1659. August 31. 29.
30. Drisling, Rain, dark; s. said Th. S W. 31. Wind, storms of rain. 1 Sept.
Rain, cool wind, coasting showrs, Meteors 2. flashes, dry. N W. 2. Rain 3 m.
dashes of wet p. m. and 9.
Ao 1660. Iterum, Aug. 31. 22.
30. Fair, a hoar frost m. 31. Fair, a hoar frost m. 1 Sept. Fair, but rain n.
Ao 1670. Aug. 27. 7.
25. Close m. p. fac voluns 9 p. a Meteor. 26. Thick fog, hot n. fair p. m. a
Meteor. W. 27. Fog p. m. dry, bright n. Meteors, Lightning, some rain, colored
Halo. 28. Foggy m. soultry, br. d. Meteors at n. S W.
Ao 1661. Sept. 10. 18.
8. Mist m. cloudy, suspic. d. rain awhile 8 p. N E. 9. Cloudy, clear m. p.
some clouds, hot day, a flash of Lightning. W. 10. Smart shower, cloudy n. hot,
rain 8. S W. Ely. S W. E. N E. 11. Cloudy m. p. Sun shine hot vesp. cloudy,
close Ely n
Ao 1672. Sept. 7. 27.
6. Drisle, wetting 2 p. very warm n. S W. 7. Close m. H. wind o. rain 3 p.
very warm wind. S W. 8. Close m. open 9 m. coasting showrs, wind, rain, clouds.
S E. 9. Bright m. shower in prospect; coasting 2 p. susp. S W.
Ao 1674. Sept. 20. 17.
19. Br. m. s. rain a. m, and p. m. fr. m. 20. Misty, cloudy, yet dry. 21.
Pleasant a. m. clon^^g m. p. 22. Some drisle 10 m. Rain 5 p.
Part Hyemal. Ao 1662. Nov. 26. 29.
24. Rain hard 6 m. N E. 25. Fog, frosty, clear n. N E. 26. Fog, frosty, clear
n. 27. Fog, frosty, some snow a. l. S W.
Ao 1673. Nov. 22. 7.
21. Foggy, clear above, fr. S W. m. N W. p. m. 22. Wd, rain 6 m. wet p. m. and
8 p. Sly. Ely. 23. Mist, fair above. S. S E.
Ao 1653. December. 17. 17.
15. Foggy, moist and warm. N E. 16. Wds a. l. clear, s. wd. R. at n. S. 17.
Rain a. l. Sun shine, fr. n. great Halo circa Sun. S. 18. Fair, fr. some gusts,
clear. N E.
Ao 1664. Dec. 8. 22.
7. Mist, rain a. l. and 4 m. wet a. m. and p. m. Sly. 8. Much wet 4 m. Dog
(...) 8 p. rise. S W. 9. Close wet m. rain hard 8 p. and store, as has not
been known.
Ao 1675. Dec. 4. 28.
3. Fog, fair, wet, close m. p. S W. 4. Dark, mist, close, wind. S. S W. 5.
Fog, dry, clear n. fr. Wly.
Ao 1677. Dec. 23. 27.
22. Fr. fog, cloudy, yielding p. m. mild. S E. 23. Cloudy, wind p. m. some
rain. S E. Ely. 24. Wet a. l. close, foggy, drisle, s. rain p. m. Wly. 25.
Cloudy, fog a. l. cool, dry, fr. h. n. Ely. January vacat.
Ao 1653. Feb. 15. 4.
14. Cloudy, some wind, warm and dry. E. 15. Cloudy, some wind, Summer weather.
W. 16. Clouds, s. wd, Sun app. fair and warm. N W. 17. A blast of wind Sun occ.
N.
Ao 1664. Feb. 3. 8.
2. Brisk wind, close m. p. warm. 3. Close m. p. h. wind, some wetting, Sun
shine. S W. 4. Fair, windy, cloudy o. coasting hail 2 p. s. drops 7 p. S W. 5.
Cloudy, windy p. m. and s. Rain. S W.
Ao 1666. Feb. 28. 8.
27. Close mist, offer a. m. storm of hail 4 p. N E. 28. Bitter frost m. snow
lies, some offer m. clds, at. for Hail, offering m. N E. 1 March. Mist m. close
wind, clear n. no frost.
Ao 1677. Feb. 12. 13.
20. Rain 4 m. rain hard 5 p. Wly. 21. Much wet 7 m. ad 9. rain 8 p. Wly. 22.
Rain p. m. tot. warm. Wly. S E.
Ao 1655. March 6. 3.
5. Clouds ride N E. wind. s. drisling 9 m. S W. 6. Rain 4 m. very still,
showrs unconstant. 7. Showrs of hail, rain 2 m. cold fr. H. wind, some fits of
rain m. S W. 8. s. rain Sun or. a sad soking R. S W.
Ao 1657. March 30. 5.
29. Winds, cold and cloudy, s. moist m. N E. 30. Close, some wind a. l. cold,
lowering, clear n. H. wind. S E. 31. Wind a. l. close, very cold, mistyish m.
white flying clouds from W.
Ao 1668. March 20. 9.
17. Close, cold, windy, fair p. m. make a fine show. 18. Br. cool wd, rise 10
p. not so brisk. S E. 19. Brisk wind, audible n. Ely. Nly. 20. Fr. for the last
fortnight in London. Fair, dry, under Lanx B.
Ao 1679. March 12. 13.
11. Fine springing shower ante 1 p. 12. Some fog, rain. ad 7. noct. S E. 13.
Some rain m. some fog, cold frost. Ely.
Ao 1681. Apr. 6. 13.
4. Cloudy, misling 1 p. made a fine show. Ely. 5. Bright, fair, brisk wind,
Ely. 6. Fair, some wind, warm. Ely. 7. Misty air, clear above, and calm. W. 8.
Fair, hot, high wind. S W. 9. Fair m. mist, windy, clouding a. m. gentle rain 3
p.
13: This you see is our English Diary, and do we not meet with Lightning one
day, Rain hard the next. Ao 1656. Rain all the Forenoon May 17. and Thunder 18.
1667. Aug. 30. 1659. and the next day Wind and Storms of Rain. Aug. 31. Flashes
of Lightning, Sept. 1. Dashes of Wet, Sept. 2. Fax Volans, Aug. 25. Lightning.
Aug. 27. 1670. Lightning, Sept. 9. Smart Shower, Sept. 10. -- High Wind June 13.
1658. June 9. 1669. Sept. 7. 1672.

Soultry Air, June 22. 1671. Aug. 28. 1670: To say nothing of troubled Air,
which argues a Ponderous Influence. It Is a great Stone which upon injection
mudds the Water; I need not pray you to observe the Lightning, and, we have
said, carry it in their Faces.

14. The Hyemal rains hard, Nov. 24. 62. and Nov. 22. Ao 1673. Rainy at Night,
and Wet Morn. Dec. 16, 17, Ao 1653. Then Dec. 7, 8, 9. Rain in such store as
has not been known, Ao 1664. Wet anto luc. Dec. 24. Ao 1677. Summer Weather in
the midst of Febr. Ao 1653. Warm in the beginning of Febr. 1664. with High Wind
for Two days after. Hail, Febr. 4. 1664. and Febr. 27, 28. Ao 1666. which Hail
in 's Theory we produce as a Mark of Violence, etc. Rain hard, much wet, Rain
the whole Afternoon, Febr. 20, 21, 22, Ao 1677. At the same tone in March, Ao
1655. Rain, Hail, unquiet Weather, a sad soking Shower. 6, 7, 8. Fine Shower,
March 11. Ao 1679. High Wind and Heat, Apr. 8. 1681.

Days in the Hyemal Part 54.
Rain -- 26. Brisk Influence, or Violence. -- 15. Frost -- 11.
In the Aestival Part, Days 46.
Rain -- 27. Violence -- 15. Frost -- 4.
15. The Account you have received, the Aspects are but short, howbeit they run
the Zodiaque once round, and That brevity will be pardoned in me, who conceal
nothing for fear of being discovered. You may see by the Sum, 13. that
according to our Method, the Aspect conduces, I had almost said; as much to
Moisture as Serenity.

16. How comes it to pass then that have been voic'd for Fair Weather? Is it
because of the difference of the Climate? Is it because Serenity, as I said, is
more taken notice of? (One Fair Day making amends for Two Foul Days) or is it
because at the close of the Fair Day, appear in the Western Angle, and make a
fine Spectacle? so ampliating the Serene Day preceding by an Illustrious Close.
( and making the most notable Congress in the Heavens, the Fair Couple of the
Celestial Court) or, Is it because in the Hour of Serenity These Two Stars add
to the Glory of the Serene Day, beside what the Usurping Sun challenges to
himself, though, the Truth is, It Is we ascribe All to the Sun, which the Sun
challenges not.

17. For shame will some say, Does not make Fair Weather? I have answered, and
I cannot recall it. In such Circumstances of Nonassistance, Vacancy of a
mediate Sign, or co-arctation of Place. So are white Boys, and bring you such
Lovely Weather, as makes Life it self the sweeter.

18. Now try the Truth of what is now observed, August the 30. and 31. Ao 1660.
the first pleasant days in the Aestival Table; See before your Eyes no Hiatus,
but straitness of place.

17.. 22.. 23.. 6.. 9.. 8.. 11..
Not only together, but is crouding with them in, nor only that, but and
nusling together in. Again, shall May 19. 1667. go for a Fair day? Then you
have not alone in, but and in in. I say nothing of a Gap:

1.. 22.. 24.. 25.. 20.. 5.. 7..
3ly. Ao 1669. June 8. Here is together again in, and not far off; yea Five of
the VII. within 15. degrees, which is far from that distribution which is
required to Moist Weather, for thus they list.

25.. 27.. 23.: 24.. 27.. 2.. 8..
19. So in the Hyemal, Dec. 18. 1653. Here, not only are in Congress, but also
Faces them in the other Hemisphere within the confine of poor 3 Degrees.

20. But is it thus in the, and, and? Thus and no otherwise; he that will not
be ashamed of his Prognostic of Fair Weather, must not pronounce absolutely on
Jove and Venus's Square, but with the limitation prescribed; I would rather
urge this, because when the Artist promises Fair Weather, and Rain takes place,
the Mistake is fouler, and more pitiable, than when declaring for Rain it
succeeds not: Because there may be a Fog, yet an overcast, a pregnant Cloud,
or a lowering Sky for a while, that may make some weak Apology for the mistake.
But when Rain appears, after a man of Skill has promised fair Weather,
Expectation is frustrate, the Journey or Visit is defeated, so All who meant to
enjoy the privilege of the smiling day, turn their Anger they conceived
against the spiteful Heavens upon the Sciolist. Therefore let them attend the
Aspect, if they please, whosoever are curious this way, but withal carefully
inspect if they please, whosoever are curious this way, but withal carefully
inspect how the Planets concerned are accompanied, how the rest are posited;
If, with the nearest, there is one Requisite good, which we call co-arctation of
place; if, with the farthest, above 30 degrees distance suppose, then there is a
2d. Requisite, which we call an Hyatus, or Vacant Sign. Some other Punctillio's
there are (but these are the main) where we may pronounce Dry or Fair Weather,
and so please himself, and his Client.

21. We need not multiply Examples, the Rule is most part perpetual; I add that
the same Method is to be observed for the Prediction of Frost, whether for the
Day, or for the Morn at least; the Reason is, because few Fair or Dry Days are
found in the Hyemal part of the Year, which are not accompanied with Morning
Frosts. Such were the days whose Dryth was now considered. Ao 1653. Dec. 18.
for the Hyemal Table. -- And Ao 1660. Aug. 30, 31. for the Aestival.

22. Note withal this same Doctrine would have been good in the Aspect of, but
it is more singularly good with this Aspect, having greater kindness for fair
Weather, for some such reason as we have ventured at, or for some Better.

23. To draw to the Character then, They, who follow Maginus, Argol, Adrian
Vlacq, tell you nothing of Violence. They talk of gentle Rains, and tell you of
abundance (forsooth) of Fertility, as if were always a good Girl. But we have
seen her Spirit in the preceding Aspects, with or at least; and oft-times she
is the same when she reflects on, so that not only Gentle Winds or Rains, but
High and smart also she procures: Yea, and I should add, you see Thunders and
Lightnings, had no body said so as yet. But well fare Eichstad, who has said
it before me.

24. What then is the Character of our Congress? I answer with the. Road,
Serene, and Fair, and gentle breathing Wind, but apt to worse, to Frown and
Muffle her self, to put on her Masque in a Fog or a Muddy Air. She Favors also
Cold and Frost, but so, as she is easily alterable to sign the contrary. Now
since from Heat comes all Violence, she raises the Wind sometimes, and sparkles
in Lightning. Difference you must think there is in the Posts, Degrees, and
difference of Assistance, and so it comes about.

25. Now, if it be said that a sudden Alteration is observable in other
Aspects, and therefore not proper to the Jovial. I answer, neither so sudden,
nor so constant. An in Winter Months shall not bring Frosts so often as and
opposed. Surely not a or a it may be, so much as ours. Our Eyes teach us some
difference of and from others; the Fairest Planets in the Heavens, of the
greatest visible Diameter; so that if they have any kindness for Cold, which
Experience teaches, they may be allowed, as strange as it is, to be easily
reconciled to Warmth.

Foreign Miscellany Diary for the Aspects Jovial last past, and Remarques
thereon.
1500. Pestilence at the beginning of the year, Hows. We will refer it to and,
though in Feb. are all in, which also found matter for the Flood in Lovain,
Feb. 11.

1501. Prasil, Lat. 32. April Cold and Tempestuous, in. in princ. men's.

1502. April 4. ad 9. Dangerous Tempest. South Lat. 52. It made Americus
Vesputius return. de Bry Relat. Navig. Yea Lopez's Tempest is not much out of
the way..

1506. Comet appeared in the Month of August die octavo, running through the
Signs and near Ursa Major. Michovius apud Hevel. in, preceding in.

1508. April Mense, T. M. inundat. ex statione, says Eichstad. I know not, I
see in.

1510. Aestus maxim. in opp. and inter eos stat.

1512. Comet, Coloris Sanguinei in March and April, Ricciol. in.

1516. Julio men's. Calor and Siccitas, Eichstad.. imo in fine and princ..

Cometa in Jan. 'Twas bgot under, but accompanies it.

1518. Sweating Sickness in Brabant, and Germany. in Aug. Lyc. Stow, in.

1521. Comet at the end of April, Lunae Dichotomae similis. Ricciol is on the
place, but in and stands by; let that be remembered when you come to Bead-roll.

June 28. Thunder fired the Magazin at Milain, Lie. in,. Pestis Romae atrox,
Kircher, Gem. with for May, for June, July in. When 's Aspects enter, and
accompanies them. Then beware of -- See another Instance in the next year,
1522. For to the Pestilence and Famine noted by Mizaldus in his Cometograph. we
find that Aspects were followed by Saturnine in June, July. See in also.

1525. Dec. princ. Rain with N. Wind, Purch. IV. 1554. 7.. 26..

1526. July 20. At Zay (apud Tugios) among the Switzers, Pulvis Pyrius fulmine
tactus. Lyc. 14. 22..

Nov. Dec. and Jan. (following) Floods, Howes. The Rule holds here also, For
the and the rest, go hand in hand with in Nov. and Dec., etc. in.

1527. Pestis Romae, Untzer. 1169. Junio mense, in.

July 1. Great Storm, near Mountains of Ice ( New Foundland) in. in princ.
opp. in 24.

Dec. 11. Comet, Gem. 2, 10. in. in. Noted for the Testimony of that frightful
Age, speaks tragically of it, which our more confident times would answer with
a Smile or a Tush. But the Sponsors we have produced are great,, etc. if that
in the beginning of the year following be another, the same Godfathers stand.

1528. Alius Cometa visus est in Piscibus in opp. Saturni.

2. Great Drought July and August, in. Lyc.

June 17. ad 21. At Apalaken in the West Indies, Thunder store, threw down
Trees for several Miles, the Trees being most part cleft from one end to the
other, Purch. 3. 1502. on the Trop. point of. See the Ephemerides. Gaffarel
makes believe the Volume of the Heavens is Legible, it is a fancy, if not worse;
but here, you may read the Storm in Character plain: The Alphabet that is
pretended, I skill not.

July 19. Great Hailstones at Auspurg. are in still.

1529. Comet, a Chasme Jan. 9. Pontanus.. add in.

Feb. 24. Tempest of Wind at Uratislaw, Lyc..

1530. T. M. Sept. 1. on the Coast of Camana, near the Isle of Cubagua in the
Indies. Purch. III. 868. in.

1532. April 11. Parelia. Venetiis. Lyc. Fromond. 406..

Die 25. in Helvetia, Halo circa..

Sept. 25. ad Nov. 20. Comet, Mizald. Appian. in, in. mense sequ. Note also the
III. in, conspiring. Rockenback therefore says it was kindled by.

1533. Comet in July 17. non procula Perseo in. Leovit. The place, non Procul a
Perseo points out the Author. 17. in. 's Opposition kindles it in the Asterism
Extrazodiacal, backed by the III. following in the next Asterism.

1535. July 25. Terrible Thunder about Zurich, fired Houses, Lyc. in and. in.

1537. Dec. 12. Lightning fires the Castle at Rome, near Pont Aelius. Lyc. it
comes under, but add also.

1539. May 11. Comet, Mizald. 233. At what time Basil was troubled with a
great, yet harmless Earthquake. are in. but let the good Reader add the Two
Superiors Square in Cardinal Signs, which shook Italy in the year before in
Sept. (Fallop. apud Fromond.) And shakes Misina again this year, June 13. not
without help of in, etc.

July 27. By the Isles of Xalisco, on the backside of America, extreme
Tempest, we thought we should have perished, Hakl. 398. in. You may find it
under, but you see there is IV. have Title to it, and not Two only.

Dec. 17. For Two or Three days, great store of Rain, Hakl. 414. in opp..

1540. July, Aestas sicca, Lyc. in.

Great Mortality, London, Ague, Flux, Pestilence; Stow in; in.

1541. Feb. 19. Rain hard near Massua in the Abexin Country, Purch. 11. 1129.

Feb. 20. Wind fair at E. at the beginning of the 2d. Watch, we fell on a
sudden on very Whitish Spots, which did cast from themselves certain Flames
like Lightnings; this Novelty made no impression on the Pilots of the Country.
22. opp. Stationary.

1544. Aug. 21. Comet sub forma Draconis, Rockenb. in.

1546. Aug. On St. Laurence Eve at Mechlin, so many Barels of Powder fired with
Lightning, 500 men slain, Lyc. Gem. 2. 102. Fromond; at the end of with the, in.

1547. Sept. 20. A Star which directed us to Mount Sinai, say the Travelers in
Purch. 1380. which Mr. Purchase has pleased to deride with his Qui amant, ipsi
sibi somnia fingunt, with what Charity, let the meek Reader judge. To say
nothing how his Volumes would dwindle away, if all such stories must be marked
with an Obelisk. I had no reason to let it pass, because the disposition of the
Heavens lie fair for such appearances. III Planets in, of in Cardinal Signs,
and which is to our purpose, an in; Add that we hear of a Comet within a Month
after, nay we hear of a Meteor nearer, but 4 days before, for so says my
Manuscript. Sept. 16. hora 9. noct. Fax ardens mirae Longitudinis ab or. in
occ. lent volans ejusdem cum altitudinis, Dr. Dee. There Is no man dreams of a
Parallel to the Star of the Eastern Sages, in Sacred Writ; Neither must we deny
God's Signal Providence may be interpreted in private and inferior Convoys,
many things as God would have it, oft-times falling out according to our wish.

Acies Coelestes, October. 1. Lyc. Stationary in, opposing first on this side the
Autumnal Equinox, backed with and; and within a few days we hear of a Comet,
which gives some hint, that both Comets and Phasmes Celestial, have some
dependence on our Theory, whatsoever more the Later may challenge. A Star seen
by Dr. Dee, as he testifies in his Manuscript.

1548. Aug. 4. Pluv. imber vehemens, cum ingenti Tonitru, Lovain. Dr. Dee. 8..
20..

Sept. 5. Auster Vehemens nocte circa horam 7. cum Tonitru magna. Dr. Dee. 27..
18.. etiam in.

1549. March 13. Pluit toto die. Die 14. Wondrous Storms and Showry.

Die 16. Vehementis. vent. imber. in.

April 5, Nocte, Magnus vent. and Pluvia contin. in.

May 24. Vent. Vehementis. in, and opp.

1559. Oct. 21. Foul Weather, and change of Winds, Hakl. 98.:

Die 25. Much Rain and foul Weather. 27. Very high Winds ib. 98..

Nov. 7. The Wind continuing S E. which has not been often seen (on the Coast
of Ferro) Hakl. 99. in.

1566. April 10. T. M. in Constantinople, Lyc. 4. in fine.. etiam in. die 8.
Lampas. Gem. 2. 30.

Die 23. Dirae Tempestates Bruxellis, cum alibi aura serena foret ib.

Nov. 10. Storms extreme on the Scotch Coast, Stow. in.

Die 20. Tempest for 12 days and more Lerius Navig. Brasil. in, add opp.

Dec. 6. Parelia; Lyc. in; in opp.

Die 26. Tonitrua, Lyc. Stationary in, in opp.

1558. Jan. 9. Tempest continued 4 or 5 days, in.

June 9. Tempest after Calais was delivered, excessive for 4 or 5 days, which
was called, the Wind that blew away Calais, Hollinsh. die 25. Extreme Current
Eastward toward the Line, Hakl. 128. in and.

1560. Mense April, Comet in Galliis, Eckstorm. in, add and.

Sept. 25. Parelia, cum arcu inverso, Gem. 2. 28. in,. in.

1567. Terrible Tempest toward Paris, rooting up Trees, and drowning Beasts, T.
P. 31. 7. 8..

1568. June 6. Ipso Pentecostes die, sanguine pluit per multa Brabantiae Loca,
Gem. in; add in.

The Co-incidence of with the Aspects of are here, and elsewhere to be noted
for great Products of all kind soever. See Ao 1521. 1522.

1569. Jan. 13. at Lovain, Inundations High and swelling, Gem. 2. 63. in Trop.
Stationary.

May 14. T. M. Bruxels, Gem. 2. 64. in Trop. and are scarce quit of Opposition.

1570. Aug. 4. Chasma, Gem. 2. 67., cum in.

1571. Sept. 11, Chasma flammeum, Gem. 2. 69. in and.

1572. Nov. 1. Sharp Frost from the First to Twelftide,, add.

Princip. Nov. Stella nova in Asterism. Cassiopeiae quam descripsit, Gem. 113.
21. 12.. Quinetiam ad oppos. una referenda est.

1576. July 14. Lat. 61. The Vehemence of the Wind broke our Fore Yard, Hakl.
617. in, cum.

Aug. 18. In two Hours it froze round about the Ship, Hakl. very near to one
another in.

Die 21. Snow nocte, 1 Foot thick on our Hatches, ib. 621..

Sept. c. Lat. 63. A very terrible Storm, one of our Men blown overboard, but
that he caught hold, Hakl. 1. 621. in opp. by in. I hope I need not bid the
Reader mark it.

1578. Apr. 7. Brasil. Storms, Thunder and Lightnings, Hakl..

1579. April 24. Snow a Foot deep, Stow. in opp..

Sept. and Oct. Great Winds and Floods, (not any Rain) drowning Men and Cattle,
bearing down Houses at Newport, Bedford. Stow. in ad in. to particularise no
more.

1580. Apr. 6. Great T. M. Stow, 687. Thuan. in, in fine ad in.

May 1. T. M. in Kent, Stow. Summary, in, and in. Hence we see our Aspect had a
hand in the Earthq. 3 Weeks ago.

Die 24. Hills covered with Snow, Buroughs Voyage, Lat. N. 41. in in opp. in.
Sure they are not always covered with Snow in Latitude 41.

June 6. Lat. N. 58. Very cruel Storm, Hakl. opp. in ad opp. in and.

Jul. Mense, Novus morbus Lunabergensis, Dimerbr. opp. in Trop. yea on the
other side claim a share. Add, at their Heels opp. in. the Rule we have given
before, Ao 1521.

1585. Dec. 23. Earl of Leicesters Tempest going for Rotterdam, Hows. 8. 1..
add in.

1586. Jan. 2. Parelia. From. 1.. 20..

July 7. A Flaw of Wind took me, I saw a Whirlwind take up much Water for 2 or
3 hours together, Hakl. 1. 781. in princ. in non procul a princ.

Nov. 17. Disease in the Belly extreme, but short. Earl of Cumberlands Voyage,
795. in and.

Dec. 23. T. M. in Guatimala, Purch. 3. 939. opp. in Trop. Signs An Opposition
of is entering also.

A die 25. ad Jan. 12. 87. Though the was near, yet was it Cold, and wind
variable as in England, Lat, S. 32. Hakl. in Trop. Signs, ad.

1587. June 24. 27. ad 30. Lat. N. 67. Extreme hot. Lat. 70. above the Horiz.
about 5 degrees. Hakl. 117. and 1^1. and in, add in.

July 12. Lat. N. 72. Mighty bank of Ice, the Wind would not suffer us to
double, ib. in fin..

Die 13. hot, shining on the Ice, yet melted it not, ib. 791. ut sup. in.

Die 25. Mavelous hot, Lat. 61. ib. 79. in.

A Drought, that Corn began to wither in Virginia, Ib. in and.

1518. Aug. 4. Arrived at Harwich, having been 2 or 3 days tossed with a mighty
Tempest, Hakl. 2. 603. in, in Antiscio.

Sept. 2. Tempest cast the Spaniards on Ireland, Hakl. 607. in, and Retrograde.

1589. Feb. 15. A Rio Benin. Current Westward, Hakl. 163. in and.

Die 18. Close, drousie, Thunder, Lightning and Rain, ib. 2. 127. in and.

Die 24. St. Vet. Great Storm, excessive Rain, 3 Corpo Santos, Linschot. 167.
opp. partile, in, add.

Aug. 1. London. Greatest Thunder and Lightning as had been known, yet
harmless, Stow. in, and, with a piece of.

Die 17, 18. Wind hard N E. in Virginia* gr. Storm die 18. Capt. Smith. in in.
See the same Scheme of Heaven before, Ao 1576. Sept. 7. (let me entreat you.)

Sept. 25. Great Tempest rose suddenly in the Night, Hakl. 2. 159. in princ.,
in fine; add in.

Oct. 2. At Tercera, Two men slain by Lightning, Linschot. in. add.

Die 6, 7, 8. Near Tercera, very rough Weather, Hakl. 2. 160. in princ. in fine.

1590. Sept. 15. Wind so exceeding high, that we were forced to lie a tr^ Hakl.
294. in princ., in fine.

Sept. Mense. Thunder and Snow, Stows Summary, ut supra.

1596. Dec. 5. Thunderball at the Cathedral of Wells, whilst the Doctor was
discoursing of Spirits, as Stow thinks fit to observe, page 782. 1. 6., Add in.

Die 7. Great Storm of Snow, our Sack froze, Purch. 3. 495.,. in.

Die 18. At Westram in Kent, T. M. Hows, 783. in, in. a sign that and had a
hand in the former Thunderball, seeing the Approach of the to in that degree of
the Zodiac moves the Earth it self.

Die 20. Great Storm, and Snow. Our House covered with Snow, Purch. 3. 495. in,
in.

1597. March, Extreme Cold, circa fin., circa 10.

April cold and showry, in, cum in and.

May cold and dry, in, cum ut supra.

June 5, 15. Great store of Hail, Snow. Purch. 4. 506. in.

1598. April 10. Much Wind at the Straits of Magellan, Purch. 2. 130. All April
wonderful much Snow and Ice, in Retrograde.

Aug. 7. Tempestas turbulentissima, disjecta Naves inter Cabo and Madagascar.
in, in.

1599. Aug. 10. Great Storm, in.

1601. Feb. 1. Sunday morn, Tempest of Wind beyond St. Gile's in the Fields, a
Windmill broke. Stow. in and.

Aug. 14, 24. Impetuous Winds, Whirlwind sink ships, Purch. 1604. in Equator,
in, and in.

Aug. 29. Sept. 8. T. M. Celeberrimus. From prope Aequatorem.

1606. Jan. 11. Hot Weather, 19 Whales and Porpoises, in. opp. in Trop.

Aug. 4. Wind, Rain; very high Seas, opp. in. opp. in Trop.

1607. Aug. 12, 13, 14, Rain without Intermission, Purch. 1. 796. in.:

1608. March 15. Current, in, add in.

June 2, 3, 4. Thunders and Rain felt by the Discoverers of Virginia, so that
they called the Isles, Limbo, Capt. Smith, page 56. in, add in.

1609. May 3. St. No. At Nera, very great T. M: not unusual there, (but yet
never comes without its Commission) Purch. 717. in, add in.

Die 13. Very much Ice, stiff Gale, ib. in princ..

Die 26. A Great Storm, we were not able to maintain a Sail, ib. 3. 581. in,
add in.

June 12. T. M. in Nera insula iterum Arthusius,.

Nov. 29. Hard Gale all day, it proved a Storm at Night; Purch. 1. 204: in opp.
in.

Dec. 3. St. N. Glacies ubi nullus aspectus, says Kepler, apud Eichstad, in
opp. in, there is Aspect enough.

1616. Jan 16, 26. Flying Storm out of the West, Wind high, and blew Water,
Lat. N. 55. Purch. 1. 91. in fine.

1617. Hyems tepida, Kepler. in. VI. of the Planets lie in this order, in
Capricorn Three, in Aquary One, Pisces one, and this Last in a growing
Opposition of in Stationary. So little need is there of Keplers occult Causes,
if he had marked the Tepor die 19. where he would have seen the in covering the
Three in.

Jan. St. Vet. 6, 7, 8. Neb. continua. in.

May 26. St. V. Tonitru Imber, K. in princ. opp. in fine.

June 5. 15. Tempestas Horrida, Fulgura, Tonitrua continua. Let any one note
it, Friend or Foe, Both Stationary, in Opposition, in princ. More of the like
nature, die 12, 13, etc. in opp.

June 23. July 3. Pertonuit, imbres,.

June 29. July 9. Tonuit, imbres,.

July 1. 11. Tonuit, Tempestuosum, Id.

Die 16. Squalor and Chasma, Id.

Die 7, 8. 17, 18. Tonitru imbres..

Die 10, 20. Pluvia Copiosiss..

Aug. 19. Iris, opp. in princ..

Aug. 25. The Water of the Sea seemed almost as white as Milk, and so continued
till day 30. (Note, No Ground could be found in that Water) C. Pring, Purch 1.
631. 22.. 27. in princ. Add with the Pleiades 24. princ..

1618. March 7. Meteor near the Palace at Paris, Howes 24, 9, stat. 13.. 28..

July 14. 24. Two days after we were horribly tossed, Trigaut. 1619. 6. opp. 21.

Aug. 15. ad Sept. 15. Famous Comet, while is near as is far, opp. in princ. in
fine.

Die 16. Comet, Hevel. in opp..

1620. November. intra dies 14. Diluviuum in monte Ferratensi, quo pagi integri
hominesque non pauci aqua submersi Calvis. in. opp. in princ..

Die 26. At New England, Rain 6 or 7 hours nocte, Capt. Smith 27. 12.; Add in,
in.

Die 27, 28, 29. Comet in New England, with Frosts; Thames was froze with us,
intra gr. 14.

1621. May 21. In Burgundia, T. M. which Kepler says was the Product of, but
we also find 5. 27.. but 8 gr. distance.

1626. March 29. Pluvia Aestus fulgura, opp..

April 25, 26. 28, 29. Tonitru venti Fulgur. Imbres, opp. in.

Circa diem 28. T. M. in Calabria, you heard of it before in, but you may give
leave to oppose them, from 23. they lying in 16.

Sept. 4. Iris ante Sun ort. Kepl. a gr. 5. did. Add in.

Sept. 5. Ventus Decumanus, Kepl. intra gr. 4. gr. 12.

1627. June 27. Iris Kyr. 23. 2. o. Stationary.

Dec. 17. Ventus Horribilis Strages dedit Sylvarum, and Aedificiorum per
Bohemiam, Kepl. gr. 18. gr. 23. distant from.

1628. June 8. Tempestuos. Tonitrua, Kepl. opp. in.

June 16. T. M. at St. Michaels, and a New Island, Olear. in fine opp. in. This
is the Month wherein Kepler confesses the Influence of Tempestuous Fixed Stars,
with an occult Subterranean Cause beside. For it seems there was so much wet
throughout the Month, that it hindered the Harvest in Bohemia. These occult
Causes is a skulking Principle.

Dec. 13. A^ra Pluvia. in.

1629. June 14. Saeva Tempestas, 5.: 11.. cum opp. in.

June 23. July 3. Tonitrua Crebra,, add, etc.

Die 28. July. 8. Tonitrua, Grando, opp..

Die 30. July 10. Iris;.

July 12, 14, 15. Tonitru imbres,.

Die 24. Aug. 3. Fulminati Homines, opp. in.

Aug. Perscribitur ex Alpibus Rhetiis montem Shua, terrae motu utique fissum
agros late ruinis texisse, 29.. 18.. 26.. The very day on which Kepler notes,
Men were slain with Thunder. As in the former Earthquake I spoke of, the same
Hand notes, Globes of Fire; Such are the Created Powers above!

1630. Jan. 25. St. Vet. Chasma terribile seu ardens Coelum, in.

1636. Jan. 27. Much Rain and Flood Norimberg. Kyr. princ.. opp. prine..

Die 30. Rain, Snow, Thunder, and T. M. Kyr. opp., etc.

Feb. Mense. Baetis inundans cum magna strage, Fromond. opp., imo and and.

May 30. Heat, black Rain, Thunder, Lightning, in. Add in

June 8, 9, 10. Heat, Thunder, Lightning, Rain, in.

Die 15. Night Thunder and great Rain. So die 25. intra gr. 12.

July 1, 2. Rain and Thunder, in princ..

Die 5, 7, 8, 10. Much Rain, and Storms of Wind, ut supra.

Die 20. Much Rain and great..

Die 30. Tempest, at Petsora, Olear, in.

Aug. 7. Tempest forced us to cast Anchor. in fin.. princ..

Die 11. Current forced the Ship to the Shore, Olear; 11.. 4. stat

Die 27. Much Rain, circa med..

Sept. 7. ad 9. Tempest and a Violent Current, 17. 29..

Sept. 14. Tempest forced us to cast Anchor, in fine.

Die 16. Iris, Storm and Lightning, with gr. Rain and T. M. Kyr. in fine prope
Aequatorem.

October. 22. Tempest lasted 5 days, Olear. in fine.

1637. Sept. 1. Terrible Floods in East Friesland, Kyr. in princ.. in.

1638. March 7. Very great Tempest nocte, Olear. in. stat.

Die 17. ad 24. T. M. in Calubria, Kyr. in Station.

Note it lasted a Week, in which time the affects all the Planets concerned,
excepted; for it opposes die 17, 18. it opp. die 19, 20. it joins with the next
3 days, and opp., and the last day it joins with, the is on the same place
here, as it was at the last Earthquake in the year 1636. on Sept. 16.

May 3. Ascension Day, Wallingford Church fired by Lightning; Wilsford. intra
gr. 9.

June 11. T. M. in Calab^it again, with Thunder, in opp. in Tropic. yea opp. at
20 gr. distance.

1639. May 13. Ole^^. At Night the Wind so violent, as if the Elements were
near the Resolution into their first Chaos..

Sept. 23. T. M. in Italy, Kyr. circa princ.. Here note the Fixed that are
concerned, opp. the Pleiades and the Hyades. So did opp. the Pleiades in an
Earthquake, Dec. 19. in the year before which we willingly omitted, because
there was no other notable Circumstances concerning.

October. 15, 16, 17. Very great Heats, Lat. S. ^6. in. in Olear.

Oct. 21. Great Fiery Chasme, Kyr. S, 16., add in.

Die 24. Chasma, Kyr. 8. 18..

Octobris mense, Inundation, Kyr. in. in.

Dec. 6. A Storm, Olear. in.

Die 24. A dreadful Tempest, insomuch that 24. Ships cut off their Masts' being
in the Downs, Olear. in. in. Stat.

Die 27. Lambeth. A Violent Tempest, that many of the Boats which were drawn up
to Land at Lambeth were dashed in pieces; the Shafts of Two Chimnies were blown
down upon the Roof of the Archbishop's Chamber; one of the Pinacles of Croydon
Church was blown down; and another at Canterbury. Dr. Heylin's Hist. Presbyt.
and R. B. S. page 64. and 65. circa Trop. in.

1640. June 12. Iris. ex una part, ex altera.

Die 26. Thund. Wolkenbruck, Gusts and Cataracts, in Trop. Add. This Rule holds
for Floods, for the like comes again in a Fort-night:

1641. Jan. 25. Thunder. 25, 21,.

Feb. 7. Auster Validus and Frigidus, 29.. 6..

Aug. 24. ad 31. Much Rain, with Thunder and Lightning.

Die 29. Iris. Sept. 18. vesp. Lightning and Rain.

in princ and

1644. October. 1. Flood in Spain, 12.. o..

Nov. 17. Parelia tria Londini.

Die 18. Snow and Storm.

15.. 25..

1645. July 3. Thunder, Hail and much Rain, 21. in princ..

Nov. 15. Disease in the Parliament Army near Exeter, died 7, 8, 9 on a day,
Sprig. 4.. 8..

1646. May 4. Harmful Thunder, 15.. 5.. Add in.

Die 20. Iris, T. M. in Apulia and Calabria. 20. 12..

1646. June 23. Terrible Thunder, 20. 16.. add III in.

July 24. Great Current, gr. Meteors ab occ. in or. in fine.

Die 11, 12. Thunder, 17.. 20. 28..

Aug. 10. High Wind and a very great Sea, in.

Die 17. Marseilles, Lightning killed 3 Men in the Port, 27. 24..

1647. Sept. 29. Marenburg in Persia, Comet, Hevel. o. 28..

1649. Feb. Fire reported seen at Bristol, and it rained Blood at Gloucester,
near the Aequinox; add.

I shall make no Affidavit to the Truth of the Report, I well remember I
thought it not impossible in such prodigious Regicide times to put us in mind a
little of what we are guilty. The Aspect, I Will tell ye, favors the
Affirmative: For the like Instance we have met before, Ao 1568. But we shall
see of this Nature hereafter.

1650. Apr. 29. Formidable Thunder and Rain near Leicester especially,
Wilsford. 29.. 2.. add in.

Dec. 10. Northampton, T. M. Calvis. Appendix. in 28. 11. etc.

1652. Comet about Orion's Buckler and Shoulders, in and. add. 12. years hence
you will have the like, Ao 1664. a Sign that is one that belongs to the Mint.
See in. Some there are that have thought it is the same with that in 1665.
Transact. p. 18. That is tosay, as the Thames is the same River which it was
twelve year ago, no otherwise. They may as well say Earthquakes too, at such a
distance are the same.

1655. May 1, 2, 3. Excessive Hot, in, etc.

1656. May 20. Rained Wheat at Eardington near Oxford, of a Blew Varnish, and a
Sulphurious taste.; add. This I saw, and the like we meet with elsewhere.

October. 17. Tempest of Wind,.

1657. July 18. South Ley in Oxfordshire, a Man slain with Lightning, in Trop..

1658. June 4. Violent Showrs,, etc.

July 19. Frequent Meteors,, add.

1660. October. 3. At Hull 2 m. A great Sheet of Fire S E. it grew Light, that
they could read a small Print half an hour, Annus mirab. in. This (I suppose)
is what the Germans call a Chasme.

Die 30. In Hertfordshire Caelum Ardens, Annus Mirab., add.

Nov. 11. Rain, High Wind and Hail frequent,, add.

1661. April 11. Frequent Lightnings and Meteors,.

Sept. 29. Sad Rain and Inundations in Severn, in, ad fin.. Transact. 2067.

October. 11. House burnt by Lightning,.

1664. June 7. Harm done by Lightning near Charing Cross,..

Die 19. Great Thunder and Hail 2 p..

1666. July 31. Clouds riding against the Wind, proved a Storm of Rain and
Thunder, in Aequatore.

1668. Dec. 17. Hail, Rain, Thunder, Lightning,.

Die 18. Rain all Night, Floods in the Morn..

1669. July 10. Drought, so in France. in, in.

Dec. 24. A most noted intolerable Frost this, and the day before,.

1670. Jan. 7. Harmful Tempest about day break, S W. 8.. 10. 23.

July 7. Heat, Sickly Time, Fevers, Sly. 26.. 24.. and in princ.. Retr.

8. Dash of Rain and Thunder 2 p.

11. Iris. gr. Shower 6 p.

15. Cold, dashing 5 p. S W. 28. princ..

18. Lightning nocte. 29. in princ..

1671. Jan. 17. Very Tempestuous night and day, opp..

22. Tempest of Wind ante lucem, idem Aspect.

1675. June 1. Thunder near Windsor, 13. 11. 20..

12. Much Rain a 9 p. ad 12. intra gr. 20.

1677. Jan. 1. Frosty, Hundreds pass over the Thames, in princ. gr. 9. did. a.
gr. 19.

1678. Jan. 18. Tempest of Lightning, Thunder, and Hailstones very large.
Narrative. So at the Downs. 2. intra gr. 10. in fine.

Die eodem. 17 Men struck with Lightning a Shipboard at Cowes by the Isle of
Wight.

Die 31. Falmouth, very tempestuous, princ. Retr.

1678. Septembris fine, Inundation, Transact. p. 9..

1679. April 6, 16. News of an Earthquake in Piedmont, a Town called Rosia sunk
into the Earth, about a Hill. Two Persons of 200 escaped, Gazet. 1401. in fin..

April 15. Comet. 21. 5. 16. etc.

1680. March 23. Vesuvius throws out Fire and Stones. 13. 26. 27. 13.. Both and
within the Bounds that I assign for Influence on these great Products.

April 9. News from Smyrna of a T. M. which overturned a Hill, and overwhelmed
a Village, in fin.. in princ. Here say I, our Planets had a hand in both
Earthquakes, or neither.

1680. Nov. 21. Comet, in opp. in.

1681. March 27. High Wind, Cold, Snow 7 and 8 m. Winter Weather, 2. 11. 26..

Apr. 1. Romae Septentrion. versus Cometa major lucidiorque nupero. 8. 12.

April 16. Halo circa Solemn, cum aliquibus minoribus Iridum instar. Extraora.
Relat. Numb 35. 15. 22..

Die 22. Ex inferiore tractu Albis Ruricolae queruntur ex anni siccitate,
grandem Scarabeorum invalescere numerum, qui delicatum Arborum florem abradit.
Diocesis Bremensiis tristius conqueritur, de inusitato murium Numero, qui
segetem radicitus abradunt. Relat. Extraord. Number. 32. 16. 29.. in is apt to
bring a Drought.

May 1. One slain with Lightning at Stepney. 18.. 6..

Die 3. Lately T. M. in Zealand, and Star extraordinary for 3 Nights, 19.. 7..

Die 5. This Night following a general Blite which blited all the Walnut Trees.

Die 22. At St. John's Town in Scotland, unusual Hail, Rain with Thunder, T. M.
for a quarter of an Hour. Benskin's Intelligence. 23. 11.. opp. by in. Yea, add.

Some few Additionals.
1527. May 27. Heidelberg, the Old Castles Magazin fired with Lightning, Lyc.
28. 13.. and in princ..

1542. Aug. 5. Lat. 41. West Indies, a Tufon from the South, the Winds, Rains
seeming more than Natural, we threw all into the Sea, cut both our Masts
overboard. Our Bark next day split on a Rock. Purch. III. 263. 29. 16.. not
without and in.

1655. May 17. In Thuringia and elsewhere, a Flood so Famous, that the Writer
Lyc. in his declining Age reckons it thrice, deceived, I suppose, by the
Variety of the Places from whence the News come. in princ.. in fine, in princ..

1557. June 2. Yarmouth, Tempest and much Rain, Jenkinson in Hakl: 334. 4. 6.
20. 23..

1589. October 9. Tercera, 11 Ships sunk by foul Weather, the rest scattered by
a Storm. Purch. IV. 1673. 4. 25. 28..

1591. Apr. 17. I saw four great Spouts in the Afternoon, but thanks be to God
they came not near us, Hakl. 132. in opp. in. not without and in a Tropical opp.

1596. May. Foul Weather, Drake in Hakl. 3. 589. 25. in princ..

1597. June 5. St. N. Foul Weather, with great store of Hail and Snow, near
Nova Zembla, Purch. III. 536, 28.. 2, 12, 14,. Add in fine.

1599. May 27. Whit S. Great Rain and high Winds. Stow. 9. 20..

1601. Sept. 10, 20. Encountered with a Terrible Tempest, Purch. III. 712. 2..
7.. 24..

1627. April 18. Thunder, Rain, Kyr. opp.

May 5. Rain and Thunder, Kyr. opp.

7, 8. Thunder, Rain, prope Pleiad.

21. Thunder, Rain, Wolkenbruck,.

30. Thunder and Rain, Kepl. 23,. 5..

June 5. Thunder and great Rain,.

13, 14. Thunder, and Gross Wasser Schlag,.

1628. June 20. Storm, Wind,.

22. Rain nocte tot..

24. Thunder and much Rain,.

Nov. 30. Much Snow,.

Dec. 7. Much Rain,.

1629. June 21. Thunder and Lightning..

1630. Aug. 21, 22. Thunder and much Rain,.

1634. July 13, 14. Rainy,.

1635. June 24. and 29. Stark Rain and Thunder,.

1637. October. 6. Stark Rain and Thunder nocte..

1638. Sept. 20. Stormy and Rain,.

26. Much Rain Through and Through, says the Dutchman, Kyr..

30. Much Snow,.

Oct. 6, 18, 20, 21. Stormy..

1. So have ye our Foreign Diary, with some glances by the By of several
Instances, perhaps not unworthy Consideration; now that the Reader may see we
are in earnest; let him be pleased to trace this Diary by these Steps; the
leading Aspect is and; here you find Storms, Aug. 4. 1588.

2. The next Step is, here we find Storms, Ao 1548. 1549. April 10. 1610. Feb.
1. 1616. Jan. 16, 1618. July 14. 1626. Sept. 15. 1636. July 5, 7, 8, 10. 1638.
March 7. 1639. Dec. 27. 1646. Aug. 10. 1660. Nov. 11. In Number 15.

3. The 3d. step is; here we find Storms, 1655. Nov. 7. 1636. Oct. 22. 1639.
May 13.

4. Next comes, and he makes some bussle too. First, with alone, as may be
seen, Ao 1525. 1529. Feb. 4. 1558. June 9. 1601. Aug. 14. 1641, Feb. 7. 1638.
Sept. 20.

5. And yet more bussling with and. Ao 1501. 1527. July 1. Once or twice, 1549.
Ao 1555, and twice in November. 1556. Once in Jan. 1558. then in 1576. 1580. June
6. Ao 1587. July 12. 1588. Sept. 2. 1589. Feb. 24. 1590. Sept. 15. 1606. Aug.
4. 1609. May 26. and Nov. 19. Ao 1626. Dec. 17. 1636. Aug. 7. 1630. Jan. 7.

6.. Now this is according to our Doctrine premised, Congress of many Planets
in one Sign, Chap. 13. ^3. And who knows but the Planet may be termed, (...)
upon an audible account from his raising of Winds (in these Circumstances) as
Iris is a messenger upon a more Visible account. Some good Learning may be
produced to back this Fancy, but we pass it, and take notice, that if and raise
Storms, wet or dry, besure and will raise their Tumult. Ao 1539. Dec. 17. 1541.
Feb. 19. Ao 1555. 163. Dec. 6. and bis in Jan. 17. 1671. and 5. out-does the
rest you see, and the next is in 2.

7. Further, and, Five of the Planetary Consort, cannot be wanting to disturb
the Air, as Ao 1502. 1576. Sept. 7. 1589. Aug. 17. 1639. Dec. 24. Nay they
would do more than any Congress yet mentioned, but that Reason tells us, that
Four or Five cannot agree to meet, so easily as Two or Three can.

8. Other Mixtures there are, which must not be thrown away: as, 1629. June
14., 1596, and, 1636. July 30. Sept. 7. bis. 1656. Oct. 16.. 1599. Aug. 10.,
1549. 1567. Sept. 7.

9. Now seeing we have allotted the Preeminence, where it is due, we may
consider the Aspects promiscuously, since they all agree in Turbulency and
Storm. Here, blowing Men overbord, breaking their Fore-yards, Main yards, and
in dispersing Fleets, which too often never meet. Storms that throw down Spires
of lofty Towers, Ao 1529. Tempest that Roots up Trees. Sept. 7. 1567. and
demolishes Houses a Kingdom throughout, 1627. That makes poor Mariners yield
themselves to Mercy, when they ly a Try, as they call it, a drift, I think they
mean, not able to maintain a Sail, 1609. Tempests threatening a Resolution of
the Universe into the Old Chaos, 1639. such things will be, notwithstanding 's
dwarf Stature, and the others Smooth face, sometimes take place.

10. There is a Hurricane or two would not be passed over; One French, Three
English, Ao 1567. Sept. 7. 1576. 1601. and the Lambeth Hurricane. For the
First, we have heard of it before in; now, in, not without. For the 2d. we
shall find it in, which then it seems could do nothing without. March 7. 1576.
The Poor Miller, which in the 3d. Hurricane had, with and to Divorce his
Millstones. Febr. 1601. Add that dreadful one in Bohemia, Ao 1627. Dec 27.

11. But the Ominous Tempest at Lambeth Ao 1639. was the first that convinced
me, that there may be Hurracanes even in England. I have trepass'd against some
learned Men, who will admit of no such Heathen Trumpery, as an Omen. But I
speak the Sense of the Learned Reporter who was an excellent Historian, and may
be, made as much use of it as another. Yet our business is to assign the Cause,
which we say, (as far as it is to be discoursed of here) was and, super-added
to and. No other Conjunctions are near. A great Instance of the Imperfection of
that Astrology, which reduces all to Partile Aspects; when, the Lunar
excepted, there is not a Partile Conjunction or Opposition within 3 Weeks on
either side. But, according to our Hypothesis, if there can be no Storm of the
most inferior rate, without a meeting, (besides and, for they are ready at all
times) I was going to say of the Superiors, one or more, either with
themselves, or with the Inferiors, within Thirty degrees. You may guess that
an Astrologer has enough to do in a Large and Noble Field, such as (to
Prophecy for once) joined with good Literature in after Ages may be valued. If
this be an excursion, let it be pardoned, Proviso, that we remember that our
Planets have the great hand in this remarkable Tempest, as will infallibly
appear by the Moons place, where? But in Opposition to them Both. In what
Signs? In and. And have I not desired our Gentle Objectors but lately, to study
the Sign? Does not the more gentle Reader remember those Arch Birds have been
often brought before him for Riot and Tumult?

12. As to the Rains and Floods, which appear, we impute them as we do the
Winds, to our Aspects, not simply, but under such Circumstances met. 1. Such as
Ao 1551. May 17. before Whitsunday at Kitting, Chesenfort, Rottolsee, etc. Lyc.
613. 23,. 3,. Jan. 13. 1569. at Lovain, Tropic.

2. Ao 1599. May 27. Whitsunday Great Rain and High Winds, Hows. 9. 20..

3. Ao 1636. Jan. fine, the Dutch have it Gross Wasser Fluch, Kyr. Fromond
speaks of one in Spain, in Febr. 1,. 1.. So Sept. 1. 1577. in East Frisland,
etc.

13. But Oh the Spouts, the Cataracts, 1591, April 17. 1627. May 21. and Aug.
14. the Dutch call them Wolkenbrucks. What grovelling Philosophy can give an
account of them? Who dares venture on them? It Is enough to make a Peripatetick
confess the shortness of his Notions, enough to break a Novelist; especially in
those at Sea, where the Water is seen to run up in a Body through an Airy
Cylinder, as if it were one of Archimedes's Engines. Who says it is done With a
Whirlwind, may speak Truth, but does not cease to wonder, I hope. For if a
profound Vortex of Air by its Force, though not by its Density, can prop up a
Lake of Waters in the Atmosphere, how can it insinuate it self into the
Profundity of the Sea, to bear up such a quantity into its unnatural place? But
I answer, it is an Immane Force, for so we read at home, as well as in France,
that Whirlwinds have torn up Trees; nay, and removed them; twisted the Trunks
so torn, and folded up the Leaden Coverings of Churchos. Is all this Natural?
Who knows but it may, if it be Celestial? Now, Ao 1591. April 17. our Planets
are opposed: so are-hey again, June 26. 1640. not without and, as the Table
Confesses.

14. This puts in mind to run over our Thunders, and here we find and to bring
us about IX. years, viz. 1586. 1627. 1629. 1641. 1645. 1646. 1660. 1964. 1678.
Then and do exceed a little, and bring us XI. 1528. 1519. bis. 1590. 1627.
1628. 1630, 1646. 1664. 1670. 1675.

While (odds though it be, Two to Three) bring XXII. wiz. 1521. 1526. 1535.
1537. 1548. 1596. 1617. bis. 1618. 1636. turbulent years, and so on in the
Table. But the reason of this Excess we have given, because and meet oftener
than and can; please you to see the other mixtures of, that brings us some
murmurs, Ao 1627. 1681. bring us III. ( is always so near at hand, when meet.)
bring us XI. as many, IV. We Will tell you but one Story from Hakluit, (of which
our Diary is silent, Sept. 18. 1591). of a Clap of Thunder at Sea, that slew
Four Men outright, their Necks being wrung aside; and of 92 Persons not one
untoucht, Lancasters Voyage, Part 2. page 104. This is what I called Immane
Force, and I ascribe it to the Immane illustrious Bodies over our Heads. Here
is not only of and. which may be, has got some repute now, but also an of and;
of which Complicate Congress you have had some late great Examples. This we do
not to forestall that Aspect when it comes, but to prepare us for it, and to do
some kind of Right to and. I tell you the other Story, from Lyc. Feb. 10. 1548.
In Saxonia Ignis Caelestis visus in aliquot Urbes incidere. Here is the same
accident, a of and again, seconded by an Aspect of and; the last was on, and
this a Firing of Magazines is ordinary; we have 4 or 5 Instances.

14. Our Eyes opened by such Instances, made me affirm that and carried
Lightning in their Faces. They have a Nitrous Aspect, which helps to the
quickness of the Flame, especially; for seems to have a more unctuous Creamy
Flame; as I fancy in the Brighter Trajections, while the Smaller Meteors look
red and coalish, but no Trajection methinks resembles.

15. I am not engaged to discourse the Thunderball which entered the Church, nor
of the remarkable Chance, that at the Very time, the Discourse of the Doctor
was concerning Spirits. The Vulgar are apt to make wrong Consequences from such
Premises. Divine Wisdom had reason so to do, it may be, to convince some
Skeptical Auditors from such coincident Circumstances.

16. More is it to my purpose, to desire you to observe what Dr. Dee's
Ephemeris tells us, That the Fax ardens was seen under, of the same Altitude
(in respect of the Horizon) and Longitude. It Is a great Note, and I have often
observed the like to my great satisfaction and conviction, without any Item
given from the Annotation. Where note that the distance of and at that Meteor,
Mirae Longitudinis, as he calls it, was Cometical; the same I mean, as is found
oft-times, when Comets are produced; because we are next to speak of Them.

17. Now least any should think the Distance of our Planets, here observed, is
unreasonable wide, I shall offer an Instance in Feb. 7. St. No. 1617. where and
are 28 degrees distant on the day when it Lightened, and a great Fireball is
noted by Kepler: and answer, I should have thought so too, but that I find
again in Feb. 12. 1641. a Thunder, noted when was in 29. and in 15. I
acknowledge This is not so wide a distance. But do not the Winters Thunder in
the same February, near the same day in the same Signs, though not quite the
same distance, argue somewhat for us? It must needs do so. For and are found in
these Signs but once in Twelve year, and twice in 24 year; we find such
Positions to Thunder in February. Is there no Contribution then toward such an
unseasonable Tumult? Never let us distance it; no, not at the Distance of 28
degrees, since it is the same distance as is noted for Turbulent, under the
Notion of One Planet at the entrance of a Sign, and another at the Close: Yea,
note again a good time that and in February, as and in August, are Positions
disposing to Thunder, Witness one Evidence more from Ao 1649. in the Thunder at
Mechlin; that Mechlin which is noted twice for the same Meteor in our Table.

18. But what shall we do for the III. Corpo Santo's? for I shall with the
Vulgar Mariner abroad, take them to be Saints too, but for the Dimness of their
Light, and perhaps their Superfluous Number, if there be no Natural cause for
them, more than the working of the Ship, and the Pitchy Effluvia of the Board
and Tackle; for then in all mighty Storms they would be conspicuous, and so
disabuse the distressed Seaman from his Superstition, but seeing it is not so,
there is some more secret disposition of the Air toward the Generation of such
Lights. I am willing perhaps to reduce it to other Aspects; but when I observe
the Situation of our in and, I cannot exclude our Configuration. Some
Observers, nicer than I, would take some notice of an Instance of Harmless
Thunder, Great yet Harmless, Ao 1589. And again, Harmless Earthquake. Well fare
the Principle, say I, that will give Light to Mortal Eyes in this Affair!
Observe it is a first, which is less Violent than an. Secondly, it is in Solitary
Aspects, for when others are in place where, Thunder is Harmless, as in May 4.
1646. But what it may be more, I promise nothing, for Tercera's, and other
places sakes. See Oct. 2. 1589.

Now for Comets. 19. How? Stella Nova, Ao 1572. among them? Do we make no more
of it then than so? As before p. 313. that is a new Device, and a bold one.
Ricciolus is more wary, who treats of them apart with greater Caution; I
answer, He does well, and so do others it may be. But who can help it, if a new
Star degrades it self so far as to appear in the company of a Meteor: He must
stand to all hazards, and come by some disgrace thereby, unless he has
somewhat to show of a higher Original: Even the case almost of the Goose and
the Swan, if the Swan can show no more than a longer Neck, He may be taken for
the same Species. Thereabouts lies the Decision.

20. But before we come to this, let me separate the Meteors, the Comets, I
should say, of this Table, into two sorts, e'rewhile upon a, otherwhile upon an
of our Planets; perhaps the new Star in Cassiopeia will make some amends for
the Readers Patience. Go to then: The First Conjunctional Comet noted, happens
to show it self in, and tend to. Ao 1506. Comets with us, and with every man
else, are nothing but the Effluvia of the Planetary Bodies, at such times, and
at such Positions, as are apt to make such Impressions. And say from our Table;
Is not our in in the Sign, Grad. 13. Grad. 20.. Shall we before the due time
give you the whole of this Comet where the Star first appeared; We shall but
betray his Original, for and are in, and in, in, an intermediate Sign. Are we
not taught that the Comets passed from III. Planets to II. then as the Train
lay, from to. And did it not first show it self Aug. 8. when the came to
fortify by Opposition? You will say I ascribe it to All; very good: and
therefore I prove it of each. At present of, and that in. Now this Comet
appeared upon Conjunctions mostly, but one Opposition, and that Lunar. It comes
into my head, that these Conjunctional Comets, generated by mere Conjunctions,
I say, for the most part are but short lived. This lasted but its Week.

Now, if any, not exercised in the Doctrine of the Sphere, should ask me how
this Meteor should be seen, being in the same Sign with, the Globe will inform
him, that though the parts of the Sign near the Ecliptic, or the s place, set
with the, yet in the Horizon of Europe, the more Northern parts nearer the
Ecliptical Pole, never descend under the Horizon. A great Notandum for those
who take Pleasure, to observe the Dependants of these Meteors upon their
Sources, the Planets, which very often are found to appear in the same Sign, as
they do often in the Opposite.

21. The next, Ao 1512. of which we have no distinct account, only that it
appeared in March and April; mark, if a does not happen, and that in the Sign
yea, was not the last in? Which every body knows is opposite to; and therefore
is in part the same (the two extremes being united in the Radiation.) Now if it
lasted longer, my observation takes place here also, viz. that it is not a
merely Conjunctional Comet, since we find an Opposition of and, as by the way,
you may note, there was before of the same, but s do not give so long date we
have said.

22. That of 1516. brings not any particular account with it, and therefore
cannot expect any from us. The general Truth is most plain, for it is not only a
Single of; but a Triple to, and in and. And so let our Table be corrected.

23. That of 1521. in the Month of April, has an Opposition of and in and, and
so it got into our Table. But the Place of the Comet considered, is said to be
the end of. And is not the Planet at the entrance of the Month, at the end of,
and the beginning of opposed by? By the greater right therefore it seems to
belong to that.

24. For that of 1527. Dec. 11. noted by Creusser in Gemma. The Reader may
guess what Faith we give to the report, when he shall find with us, that the
same Celestial Causes are on Foot, as were found busy 11 years ago, viz. in
and. But the Truth is, upon better Inspection, they allow this Meteor to be but
of short continuance. And that Terrible Appearance to date it self in Aug. as
perhaps we may see in and.

25. For that which the Table takes notice of, Jan. 18. 1528. we have assigned
it the same Original with that in the close of the last year, and truly the
Illustrious and, stat. does highly persuade. But the Comet appeared in, Well
and good; for on the 18th day is an near the Fishes in, as he was near the
other Comet in, Ao 1521. Beside, Comets, as I take it, use to lodge between
their Planetary Sires, as here between and.

26. The next is that of 1532. Sept. 23. which lasted to Nov. 20. That Is well
and particular; yea, to Dec. 8. says Fracastorius; which according to Appian,
who has described part of it, it began in, and by Oct. 14. got into, by the
beginning of Nov. into, a Star thrice as big as. How many Proofs have we here
of its Original, common to other Fiery Meteors? Which ought to be argued;
First, from the Concomitants of such Appearances, as Inundations, etc. if we
may believe the report of Rochenback. Next, from the in, at that time observed,
not by us, but by the Age then in being, happening on the very Birthday of the
Meteor; and the Observation proves to be good, only (to accomplish it;) they
should have said a of and (Partile) and (Platique though he be) for Three
Planets in, as well as other Signs, always conduce: Then comes our Planets, in
the beginning of Stationary, and toward the end, viz. 24. Who has so good a
Memory to remember that part of the Eclyptique which it respects, and what it is
joined with? And does not Appian's Observation tell us, that beginning in, it
passed through, and as far as the 3. of. This was Nov. 8. within gr. 8. Longit.
of. Where would you have Comets to be? In the Mouths of the Planets? Is there
not sufficient Neighborhood betwixt the Generant, and Generatum! Trust me, our
Planet runs back to a with in, and holds there till the 25 of Nov. the same are
the Causes of Existence, and Conservation. But why should it begin in? I
answer, it is well if I can guess why it should make have into, then, to. I
don't pretend to be a Revealer of all Mysteries. I have said that Comets used
to be generated in the mid place, between the Planets. I considered, that Two
hours before the rise, the was the same Sign with, as well as in the same Sign
with. The beginning of, where the Comet first started, is aequidistant from 21.
(the place of the at that time in the morn) and with on the other hand. For the
expiration of the Comet, Dec. 8. consider that in the end of Nov. and were
scarce past that degree of, where kindled it; but about Dec. 8. when and were
past the Opposal of the Hyades, and knocking off, there the Fuel failed. Yea,
but this seems a Conjunctional Comet, and so by our Principle it should not
last; I answer, I am not over-fond of that Notion of mine, and then I say it
may be reckoned Oppositional, in respect of the Fixed Stars, Pleiades and
Hyades, which carry a great stroke in the Nativity and Life of this Meteor, as
any man who observes the Erratick Motions, may confess.

27. The Comets of 1533. and 1539. we pass by, because they may challenge some
other place; the first, an of and, the latter a. For Appian puts this last
Comet Five days sooner, viz. May 6. If it be the latter, There are III. in.

28. Then, Ao 1541. Aug. 21. A Comet tayled like a Dragon, as our Author
Phrases it; It seems to be of short continuance, we'll be as short with it, in,
a Conjunctional Comet; the more Conspicuous is it, because the III.
Conjunctions are all noted in the same Month.

29. The Comet 1560. happening in Dec. not in April, points out a different
cause from what is assigned in the Table, viz. and in Trop. Signs; but the more
material I reckon to be the Interposition between in on one side, and in on the
other. This, I say, I take to be the most material, although the Comet which
lasted but 28. days may seem to expire at the Expiration of and, which
according to our Principle, lasted to the end of the Month.

30. Now for the year of Grace, 1572. and that great Star in Cassiopeia's
Chair, the Wonder of the World then, while the Poets of the Age, Beza and
others noted it for a Second to that Sacred Star which shone out to the Eastern
Magi; and it still shines in Records, illustrated by the Noble Tycho, and
discoursed of by all the Learned since, who love the Beauteous Theory of the
Heaven over us. It Is this Star claims to know his Kindred, Family and Original;
for we are far from believing it a Star of the first Creation, but of the same
Descent and Lineage, as other new Lights, whether it have a Train or no; Though
who knows, as some ingenious Men have quaeried, whether it may not have some
Train upward into the Ether, opposite to the right Line which passes its
Center? We know other Learned Cometographers do not reckon them amongst Comets;
Ricciolus, Hevelius, because they wander not, but keep their Station like one
of the Eternal Fixed. But if the Comets and New Stars have the same spreading
Train, the difference of Fixat on, will be but accidental; Now That it was of
the same Production, I shall not infer from those Attendants that usually
accompany Comets, whether they be Droughts, etc. or distempered Airs, from
Gemma's Cosmocriticks, and others, referring that to another place, but from
the consent of the Learned, followed and confirmed by Hevelius, and from the
Particular Evidence which I now introduce, while I advance and, their noted
about the 14. of Nov. in the Ephemeris; but it began, Enquirers say, at the
entrance of Nov. or the end of October. So have we a Platique Aspect of 10 degr.
distance, which is no small advantage, and withal Stationary: For so I call it
when it is Three or Four days in One degree; whether it be upon the Reflex or
Direct Course; And was not in the same Circumstance (as also when time serves)
in other Comets under this Aspect?

31. The second Instrance shall be concerning the conservation of Comets by
this, and other Aspects hinted already; as in that we read of Ao 1511. It began
in the end of May; there is and, III. in, to kindle it; after the middle of
June, peeps in the of, being in, and after July's beginning, (consonant to what
we have already delivered) and draw near to a Partile, and so the Comet expires.

32. Let the next come for confirmation, Ao 1527. seeing it lasted but an Hour
and a quarter, it will not be much Trouble. Yea, but it was of no duration; the
answer is, the Opposition was Partile; Partile or alone will not do, they have
no Life in them.

33. And what need we say after Ao 1572. but that a few being behind, we must
speak to them All. Truly 1618. is as Famous almost as 1572. Here in Aug. 15. ad
Sept. 15. we find a Comet, which lasted about a Month. It began upon a near
meeting of, while exactly, I may say, opposed both; but Exact and Partile
Aspects will not do, say we, without more Lax and Winder-spread Radiations to
supply the Light or Flame of the Meteor; and These, Lo! agreeable to the
Observations just now made, for is opposed by ad grad. 28. Distance, which is
the measure of a Sign, the Distance of a Providore; who looks abroad into the
Country for the supply of his Charge, seeing the Country forage near home, will
not maintain a Comet.

34. The Sum for our Earthquakes we have in the precedent Table in these years,
viz. 1508. 1539. at Basil, 1556. Constantinople which held Three days, and
threw down the Church of Sancta Sophia. Ao 1569. at Bruxel, with hoarse noise,
strange Colors in the Air, some said, Specter. 1580. in London, where it
continued but one Minute. On the Sea Coasts in Kent extreme, felt 3 times, hora
6, 8, 9. Ao 1586. West Indies again, 1596. Westram in Kent. 1601. 1609. at Nera
once, and again, Ao 1621. Burgundy. 1626. in Calabria. 1629. Among the Alps.
1636. at Norimberg. 1638. in Calabria once or twice. 1639. in some other part
of Italy. 1646. in Apulia. 1650. Northampton. 1679. at Piedmont. 1680. Vesuvius
Flames. 1681. in Zealand, about XXI. in the Total. And is not That a great
Total?

35. Hence am I as sure as I write, that this Phenomenon, as great and
Stupendous as it is, depends upon this Celestial appearance, or with. Those
who believe that Comets have Influence upon Earthquakes, which is an opinion
hovering about, and bordering upon Truth, may think I believe no
Improbabilities, since our Bright Planets and do not much ablude from some kind
of Comets. Yet why should I trifle?

Is it not plain, that for severalyears our Planets are both in the same Sign,
what have we but a of and, Ao 1609. 1679. 1645. 1680.

In like manner a of and, Ao 1530. 1639. 1681. within the same Sign, I say, or
within so many degrees, which is all one; and this with great Variety, some at
a distance of 28. suppose some 24. some 16. some at 8. some at 2. and I hope
that will please our Partile Customer.

36. But the out-goes the, and there is reason for it; witness Ao 1569. 1580.
1636. 1638. which is also visible in the Complications, for whereas there are
but Three on the Conjunctional side, viz. Ao 1539. 1621. 1650. the Oppositions
are more, Ao 1508. 1556. 1580. 6591. 1626. 1628. 1629.

For if and, or have their Effect, it stands to reason as we have said, that
and have something more. So these Earthquakes may be reduced to their Classis,
as well as the Storms and the Lightnings.

37. Here I must note again, pursuant to what has been said already in the
like Notion, that in the, the wider is the distance, (so it be within compass)
the greater is the Disposition of Firing the Subterranean Train in the
Earthquake, as before the Aetherial Train of the Comet. Therefore as it may be
confessed, an Earthquake should be produced at 5 degrees or 8 distance; so it is
more than possible it should be produced at 14. gr. distance, as in the second
Instance of Ao 1580. or at 20 gr. did. as in the Kentish Earthquake, Ao 1596.
And somewhat yet further, as the Enquirer into particulars will observe.

38. We cannot define for certain which Sign of Heaven, or Months in the year
are most apt to produce Earthquakes; Our Information from our Forefathers
being defective, even as Ricciolus justly complains, about Comets, part. 2.
page 23, 24. but this we say, that and are sometimes remarkable; as may be seen
in the Carabrian Earthquakes, Ao 1626. and 1638. July XI. in both which years
and were so near the same Position, that a Candid Reader will startle at the
Observation. For how? says he, a 2d Earthquake at the end of 12 years, which
is known to be 's Period? Then it is likely that is one of the Instruments of
that Motion. And withal does it happen, says he, to be in the same place in
both years? Then it is probable again that in such a degree of the Zodiac,
conspiring with certain others, is endued with the same motive faculty.

39. To see how Truth will justify it self, not only as to the General, that
these Tremors of the Earth are imputable to the Heavens, but that these Aspects
wherein we are at present engaged, are their Causes Efficient, for the News
from Naples in the Gazet. October. 1685. the Instant on which I write, tells us,
that Sept. 23. Oct. 3. their Mountain Vesuvius within these few days began to
burn again, casting out Flames and Ashes with a Terrible noise, and the last
moiety of the Month; What are the Aspects but a of and? Shall I gratify our
Friends Les Scavans in Paris, and so close this tedious discourse. It Is not
much out of the way, they tell us that the City of Paris owns but two
Earthquakes; the First, April 6. 1580. and the other May 12. St. N. 1682. In
the first Earthquake, and are at the end of, and is upon the Pleiades. In the
Second, is at the end of, and and very near the Pleiades. I could make an
absolute Rule of it, but this place don't allow me to run upon the rest of the
Parallel: In 102 years somewhat of the same Revolution may come about.

40. Concerning the Parelia, though we shall see them happen under other
Aspects, yet the Revolution of this Aspect, co-incident with the Variety of the
Appearance, does bespeak the curious to make further enquiry; we cannot here
digress about the matter which reflects the Light, whether the Vapor be Dry, or
Icy, as Descartes justly imagines; only we say, the Luster reflected is not
merely Solar, but borrow from some other Astral Radiations; for though the
Secondary Suns must by course of Nature be less brave and bright than the chief
Luminary, yet it does not always prove so, they say; Upon no other account
sure, but upon that of other Luminous Bodies, which help to advance the weaker
Reflection.

41. And such was that at Venice, of which Cardan gives an account, Ao 1532.
And who knows but Mathematicians may find, considering the Situation of the
Suns in the Vertical Circle, that the brighter of the Parelia belongs to, the
other to? Certainly and were much about the same distance from the Sun, One to
the West, the Other to the East.

42. That of Jan. 2. 1586. I have no reason to believe but that our Opposition
was Influential. He who shall read Rothman's Description in Fromundus, how
close the Parelia lay on each side of the Sun, may probably suspect the near
Conjunction also of and to help to such Impressions.

43. That of 1550. seen in the Duchy of Brunswick, finds and within 6 degrees
one of the other; and if there be any thing in that, in the same place now,
where we found, Ao 1532. and vice versa, and in the same place now, where we
found, 1586. interchangeably. Something there must be; for consulting my Notes,
I found Clouds strangely colored with Rainbow Tincture, May 15. in Gem. Ao
1556. where is in the very same degree, etc. but that belongs to the succeeding
Aspect, it is true; yet we see how the Heavens will answer if they be spoke to.

44. I confess I seem to talk at random, as Men are wont to do, that are armed
with a strange Fancy, and lull themselves in a Security, that one will
undertake the trouble of their Confutation. Yet I must needs own the further I
go, I like my self the better. For the Instance of Sep. 25. Ao 1560. where you
meet with a Parelium, and a reverst Iris; what can I say different from what is
said, when we shall contemplate with, or without Gemma's Figure, and newly
risen together; to say nothing of 's readiness to peep, and setting in the
West? Can this Arcus and Parelium arise from any other Concourse of Causes, It
arises from the alone the Ante-blanetary will say; but will he, nil he, is
within 2 degrees of this all-doing. Science must not speak vulgarly; the Shadow
that my Body casts under a of and, vulgarly would be called the 's Shadow only,
but exactly to speak it is not so; for it is known can cast a Shadow by her
self; But then why an inverst Shadow? I could speak to that, but I wonnt grasp
too much. For the Irides our Foreign Diary speaks sufficient.

45. I shall not please my self in speaking to the Currents under this Aspect,
but shall refer it to a Further place. Only my Idle Head asks the question
about the White Milky-Waters, what may be the Reason; and because, I confess, I
have a Months mind to impute its appearance to the Heavens. For First, it is
but an appearance, though lasting for a Night or so; at Day Light it vanishes.
If it were any mixture of any Whitish Ferment, it would be senseless to think of
an Aetherial Procurement. But the Field is too large for any such Mixture, the
Ship being under Sail all the time of its Observation: hence there is no
thinking of any such Salvo. We shall therefore consider next, whether this
appearance is observed at any times more remarkable than others, as to the
Heavenly Positions; and if that proves, we may next consider, whether it be
Nonsense to say, That the Heaven may own such Effects on the Water, as it has
in the Air? The Sun can Guild the Clouds, and the can paint them with a Pale
hue: The others, we see, can make their Irides and Halo's; yea, help to the
Coloring of a Solar and Lunar One. Why may not this Wheyish hue of the Water
be an Impression from and, and others, analogically to the appearance of the
Halo? As for the Position, and are extraordinarily circumstantiated, by
relation one to the other, and by the Station of Venus each of the 3 days
specified, Ao 1617. Yea, Ao 1616. I have met with the same appearance before,
and not in ('it is true) but in a Aspect, which is a chance that calls for our
Attention. and have Brightness enough to make a Nectiluca of the Sea, and all
agreeable to those Principles, which the Notable Author of that Discourse
advances. We shall see further, it may be, and if I speed here, I shall begin
to suspect that our Aspect might be the Cause of the Whitness, the
extraordinary Whiteness (for ordinary is not to our purpose, it may be) as some
have observed long ago in Hail whiter than ordinary, which proves to fall under
our. Aspect. Howbeit to the Whiteness of the Sea, pray look back to what is
noted in the Diary, Ao 1541.

46. What we have to say of Phasmes and Apparitions in the Air, which we do
meet with in unquestionable Records (whatsoever may be expected) we shall say
but little. Descartes, we see, ascibes all such Stories to the Fancies of
Superstitious People, and so some other Learned of our Men who have followed
him. But we, who heartily believe Spiritual Substances Good and Bad; believe,
said I? Nay, we say in the Name of Mankind, we account the Evidence such, that
whosoever resists it, while he denies Truth, confirms it; Why so? Will you say,
Even because Humane Nature cannot, I think, acquire such a proud Antipathy to a
confessed beside Divine, Truth, without some black Veil cast over their Eyes.
We I say, who admit these Substances, considering the report of Heathen,
Jewish, and Christian History, can easily admit such appearances, as Armies,
Camps, Ships, Noses, Trumpets, so far forth that the Truth is, They come not
under our Cognizance, no more than other Pranks of Demons do, unless, as is
confessed in Lunacies, the Spirits of the Air, who, (no disgrace to natural
Science) are better Philosophers than our selves; know the times and Seasons
fitted to their use by the admirable variety of the Course of Nature. And this
I avow to be highly probable, as shall be made good in the Close of this
Discourse. Here under and we meet with that of July 19. 1550. seen at Trebinium
in Saxony, not far from Wittemberg, Armies and Noises heard, with Blood spilt,
Lycosth. Fincelius. Our Aspect, beside that of and, is paramount here, Partile
about 20. or 21. Another such Spectacle in Saxony again, (I would He had named
the proper place) he gives us of a Hearfe seen, and Mourners, and Trumpets
heard, Oct. 1. 1541. here, to say nothing of III. in, before as observable in
rare Effects; our Planet from 3. oppose in 27. There Is a Third, 1554. Aug. 5.
9. P. M. near Stolpen; Armies with shooting, and Lightning between whiles;
which though I put no stress upon, because the Adversary may be apt to say, the
Military Noise was nothing but disguised Thunder; I answer, if History spoke
only of Noise, etc. They said something. But when they add Instances of
Fighting, Blood, Shouting, Trumpets, which are not so easily represented by
Thunder: When they add Horses, Naval Forces, etc. as in that before the Spanish
Invasion, mentioned by Fromond, seen by thousands; we must not allow that Truth
in part, shall pass for the whole Truth. The whole Truth implys both Physical
and Hyphysical Agents in the Affair. But of this hitherto; -- only for the
Truth of the Phenomenon, if you desire the Jewish History, you have the
Maccabees Story; If the Heathen, you have, besides the Poets, Pliny, Appian,
Valerius Maximus, and others. And for Christian, you have among the Ancients S.
Gregory; if the Moderns, Melanchtan, Fincelius, and Snellius. Where we don't
introduce Hyperphysical Causes to defeat Natural, but only unite them, and make
them agree; thereby confirming us in the Rational belief of that good Record,
which tells Stories of Spirits, making use of Nature for natural Eftects, such
as Whirlwinds, etc. What Angel was that, what Visible Angel, which Jerusalem's
King saw slaying his Subjects? And what Motto was that which Constantine saw
written in, or near the Solar Body? Are they not hitherto to be reduced? A
Supenatural Power clothed in Nature, may be Legible, as Visible.

47. Let us shut up this Aspect with Frost; it is not enough, it may be, to say,
that an Aspect of and is found in all obstinate Frosts; as in that severe
Winter, which, they say, killed up the Birds and Beasts, Ao 1502. though and
were in Play before; yet in February came in and. So, Ao 1581. a Winter, which
in Poland Gangreen'd the Bodies of Military Men, Calvis.,.

Ao 1520. in the Month of May, which was so cold, that all the hopes of Vintage
was nipt in the Bud notoriously, upon the account not of and and conjoined, but
of being opposed to both.

Ao 1572. in October. early, long and untimely Frost, Eichstad, p. 39. upon long
Conjunction for a Month together, with and in and opposed. Which Frost, by the
way, introducing the new Star in Cassiopeia, Evidences, that It also was of the
Nature of Comets, which not seldom are produced in Frosty Seasons.

Ao 1587. So in the Months, out of Winter quarter do we meet with a Hyemal
Constitution, June 19. Ao 1557. and opp.. Sept. 4. 1587. When it Freez'd,
Bluster'd, Hailed, Snow'd, says our English Annals; upon the account, chiefly,
I confess, of and in and, but also on the account of our even in.

Ao 1597. May again, Cold and Dry, Stow and Hakl. Part. 3. p. 195. tells us of
extreme Cold Weather, manifest on in with. Yet, for all this on the other side,
the same Planets strongly assisted may contribute to Heat. So the Seamen
complain, they were half roasted the 10th of June, Ao 1660. Lat. North 65. while
and were in. And June is not July also, Ao 1645. on near the same accident is
recorded for a Hot Season. The First being in, the Second in, but within
Bounds. The Reason of Frost and Cold we have declared to be either the
Restraint of the Planets to few Signs, 3 or 4. Or, 2ly. an Hiatus in their
order, or which is equivalent, a width or distance above the Signal Term, viz.
grad. 30. Note, that the opposite Sign coming in place instead of the
co-opposite is next door to an Hiatus. One or more of these Conditions are
found in every one of these Chill Years; unless there be some Mystery in the
Positure of and to be mentioned in due place.

48. are not so notable, because of shorter Comprehension, Yet they also
minister some occasion to speak a Word of this Constitution. We have both kinds
here, Cold and Hot. For he is no Astrologer, who cannot swallow such seeming
Contradiction, that establishes both upon the same Cause in several
Circumstances, viz. When Solitary, and When in Consort. If Snow and Storms,
Nov. 18. 1644. If Snow for 4 days in March be any Argument; If Snow a. Foot
deep found at London at the end of April can move us; If extreme Snow at Chery
Isle on May 16. Ao 1607. Purch. 5. 526. or if Snow with Internal Cold, as the
Mariner calls it, Purch. 3. 504. if, an extreme Cold, March and April, and May
to boot, will bespeak us; the Table will furnish you with the years, 79. 97.
1644. for 's Influence in his Solitary Capacity.

49. Hitherto may I add the Ice of the Northern Seas in Aestival Months, from
the years 1527. 87. and the like. And let no man wonder that I sail to the
Frozen Zone, upon the account that these (I have almost said) Eternal Ice-Banks
take place, only from the absence of the warm Sun, there being no room there
for the small Game of This or that Planet; though I Worship the Sun as well as
another man, yet after careful Observation, I, for certain found the contrary
to this most certain Principle: For it is known that the Northern Seas are not
always of a Temper: Some Winters the Ice makes inrodes upon the more Southern
Climes; sometimes again it retreats, till it is Cooped up almost to the Polar
Circle; Concerning which, see the Islanders Latin discourse in Hakl. Edit.
2ly. That Author makes us believe sometimes that there is a quite clear Sea;
when sometimes again we shall find Ice 100 Fathom deep, as Purch. 3. p. 38. and
that in Lat. 60. which difference of years cannot proceed merely from the Suns
absence, which in all Winters is one and the same; but from these petty
Skip-Jack Aspects which have to do (and have Patent to show for it) where ever
the Sun has to do. I have made it my business to observe it scrupulously, the
rather because in times of Yore, as of late the English, with other Nations,
have had an ardent desire (if that would carry them through) to find a
North-West Passage to the East Indies; wherein our Frobishers, Hudsons,
Davises, have taken immortal Pains; but as (unless encouraged by an Aspect)
Columbus had never found the West Indies, neither shall the North-West passage
succeed without the same Clew, Martin Frobisher by good hap, through its
Influence, as then assisted, Ao 1587. found it Hot, Extreme Hot, in Lat. 61.
our being the same at both times. What do we in his First Voyage, Ao 1676. when
he met with Ice at a nearer distance, Lat. 61. our being the same at both
times. What do we speak of 61? When under the same Aspect we find Mountains of
Ice in our own Latitude (in New Foundland, I mean) where it appears, Ao 1527.
We cannot encourage the ordinary Undertaker to any of these Voyages; no, not in
those years where and meet in Summer Signs; because we find the Assistance so
rare, that our Aspect seems to favor Ice, in two years of three: and the third
only to give the Mariner some flushing hopes of the dissolution of the ice,
which was yet, notwithstanding the warm Reflections, in vain expected. However
the difference of the Extent of the Frozen Sea, does depend on the Heavens; I
appeal to any one who shall please to compare the well-set Full-bodyed Ray of
Heaven in the Warmer year, from the Shattered Order and Positions of the
Planets in the Colder Years. Small hopes therefore of a N W. passage; and yet
there is Difference of years, some less desperate than others, of which later
kind, if my Augury fail not, the present year 1686. will be remarkable. But
this will occur again, it may be.

LIB. III.
CHAP. I.
Of the Three Superiors mutual Configurations. And first, of SATURN and MARS.
1. The Three Superiors call for Wonder. 2. Whether and have any Tragical
Conse quences. 3. 30 or 40 days by right are to be allowed for the view of this
Aspect. 4. and 7. Eichstad, etc. to secure the Art, are cautelous in rendering
the Character of the Aspect. 5. Maginus also puts in his Limitations. 6. All
Concurrents allowed, the Influence of the Configuration is plainly discernible.
8. The Vehemence of the Aspect seen in Tempests, Lightning, Hail. 9. Not so
many Inundations here, as elsewhere, to repress those who say, We know nothing
of the Stars. 10. Astrologers therefore do not put up this Aspect for a
constant Rainer. 11. Oft-times dry, and sometimes Frosty. 12. As in Southern
Signs. 13. Yet its inclination to Rain reaches near the Moiety of 30 days. 14.
Yea they have their excessive harmful Fits; a Wonder in, so remote a Planet.
The Sun's Exaltation alone, produces not Lightning. 15. Fiery Meteors brief
under this Aspect. 16. How, for Snow. 17. Other effects of this Aspect, Irides,
Halo's, interchangeable clearing and clouding. 18. Mists of a deep blew. 19.
Mists progressive creeping in the Valleys. 20. Blushing Tincture of the Clouds
even from this Aspect. 21. Dark Air. 22. The Diary. 23. Some Additionals to the
Diary. 24. The Character of the Aspect. 25. Diary Foreign of Storms, Hurricanes,
Rains, Thunders, Floods. 26. Necessary to the greatness of the Argument. 27.
Its Theory Irresistible. 28. The utmost Platick distance with the Quincunx and
Semisextile have their Effect. 29. and are engaged in all violent Effects, if
posited within 30 degrees. 30. Evidence from the Table, the Famous Stormy year
of 88. considered. 31. Further Evidence. 32. A discovery of the Causes unknown
to the Learned Kepler. 33. Our Aspect engaged in the account of 40 days
Turbulency. 34. and has no Name for Inundations. 35. A List of Comets proper to
and. 36. Their Planetary Original proved from the Comets, Ao 1528. 1538. 1558.
etc. 39. Not and only, but with, etc. 40. Yea and but rarely. 41. More frequent
in and. 42. Keckerman's Observation; Comets appear near their Autumnal
Aequinox, the Reason. 43. Comets used to appear also about. Why they so often
show themselves near the Feet of Ursa Major. 44. and carry the greatest sway.
45. Comets of 1528. and 38. though at the same time of the year, and the same
place of the Zodiac, are not the same. Most Comets appear about January. 46.
Comets which were said to oppose, did oppose too. 47. Astrolegers often predict
Comets. 48. T. M. and Comets under and, of equal Number. 49. A List of
Earthquakes proper to this Aspect. 50. Some Affinity between Comets and
Earthquakes. 51. Why Comets universally appearing, are sometimes visible to
Asia sooner than to Europe. 52. Sickness and Pestilence feared to have relation
to this Aspect. 53. No danger to Religion. 54. There are some Aspects
Malignant, the Vulgar confessing the thing, though not in Terms. 55. A List, of
Sickness Epidemical, and Remarks thereon. 56. Some Ghostly Counsel. Whether all
years are Sickly. 57. Sickly years are too frequent. 58. Physicians accord with
us. 59. Eclipses no natural Signs of Pestilences. 60. Why Sickness in one place
more than another? A noble Enquiry. 61 Some emollient Observations to lay our
Fears. Tropical and Equinoctial Signs most Critical. Scorbute Epidemical, not
indifferent at Sea every year. 62. Pestilence arises not from merely
supernatural Causes. Dimerbrock answered. 63. New Diseases, therefore
preter-natural, is no Consequence. Yet God sometimes punishes Miraculously. 64.
Observations of Currents Marine. They are produced by all the Planets. 65.
Evidence for our assertion. 66. The Learned Author, de Motu Marium, etc.
extolled and considered. 67. It Is not the Sun alone that moves the Sea and
Winds. 68. The Stars come in. 69. Distinction of Currents. 70. Heats and
Frosts. 71. Fiery Meteors. 72. etc. Irides, Halo's, and Parelia notable under
this Aspect. 75. An Objection about the unreasonable distance of the Cause
assigned, answered. 76. Sol Pallidus. 77. His rarer and greater Obscuration.
78. Maculae Solis. 79. and 80. Stranding of Monstrous Fishes. The Mermaid may
be a Spectre.
1. WHat Preparation shall I make for the Aspect of Saturn and Mars? Names of
great Moment in the Book of Nature, where many a Paper is filled with their
Story, their equal Effects and Influences. The Three Superior Planets make
Three Congresses, etc. SATURN and MARS; SATURN and JUPITER; JUPITER and MARS,
described justly in Capital Letters, to call the Eye of the Reader to attend
their Greatness. I leave Astronomers to tell you their Magnitude, their
Distance, their Proportion to one another, and to the Earth, etc. And when you
have read them with me, before we have done, we may wonder as much at their
Influence, as their Dimension, etc.

2. Astrologers call them the Two Infortunes, and to prove That true, They
Alarm us with Wars, and the Death of Princes (among other sad Events) which no
man of Honest Morals or Politics, delights to hear of. Now, though I verily
presume that this is no Oracle, at least not of God's or Nature's: For let the
Arabs, or somebody for them, produce their Schedules, whereby a Freeborn
Natural Intellect may be convinced of such pretenses, before they exact our
belief; yet I must needs own that All things considered, no Bribery can make me
absolutely acquit them from the Imputation of some unfortunate, or unavoidable
Influence to the Generality in some kind or other. Howbeit, it is not
seasonable to trea^ of any Malefic Force in the beginning of a Chapter: What
Tragical Consequences it is guilty of, we will not entreat of till the last
Act, not till the close, as hitherto has bin observed in the foregoing
Aspects; where if we chance to hear of Earthquakes, Sicknesses, and
Mortalities, we will not impose upon the World, or Frown them into our belief;
but we will humbly and honestly produce our Schedule, show our Testimony under
Hand and Seal, and make Mankind the Judge; who, if they throw the Bill out of
the House, we shall be contented, in case that they will do themselves the
Right, to show the Forgery of our Evidence.

3. The Aspect reverts ordinarily but once in two years, the taking place every
second Year, and according to the Laxity of gr. 10. distance, which the
Ancients allow in Eschuid. so challenges about 30 or 40 days, which is no
unreasonable Width. For who is there initiated in Astrological observation,
that will grudge to allow a notable Effect to a, if it fall within the Month.
We will give you leave to wonder at us, if we should talk of the Operation of
an Aspect; yea, or a Comet, at the 2, 3 nay 20 year distance; but 30 or 40 days
is but a moment passed, and may, yea must be granted us: for at gr. 10 distance
we often find such Efforts of Weather even here, as has been remembered in ^^,
etc. For the State of the Air we must speak to first, before we harass our
Reader with louder Peals of Mortality.

4. Now, because this Aspect being so Ponderous, raises a great expectation,
as to the very State of the Air, I find the Modern Writers somewhat timorous in
rendering the Character, being aware of the Scoffers Bolt, (soon shot at those
who are so assured of their old fashioned Thesis) yet perchance cannot so well
make out the Truth against the Captious. Nay, says he, if your, your grand
Superiors, the Famed Enemies to Mankind, and to one another, many times fails
of its Feats; what Trust is there to be given to such Old Doting Principles?
Eichstad therefore, unreasonably mixes the Aspect of with it. Unreasonably I
say, for how long must a Proselyte stay till the Aspect of is co-incident. And
will he warrant that it shall bring then Wind or Rain? Frost or Snow, or
Nubilum Coelum? He will not. Maginus more warily says, that they operate
according to the Quality of the Signs; yea, and what is more, in my Judgment,
the Fixed Stars, who are found with them; Not a Word of which has bin
mentioned hitherto in the Conjunctions of an Inferior. But beginning with the
Signs he labors to secure his Art, at least, in the momentous conjunctions by
such Limitations and conditions; the Reason I suppose, I have offered, with the
Tenderness he had for his Art, and his Endeavor to stand by it, as to these
main Foundations or Pillars on which it rests.

5. Far am I, you may believe, from quarrelling at the Fixed Stars; but I
contend that the same Limitations ought to be put to all the Foregoing Aspects,
on the same Exigence and necessity, as to the Superiors. To one, as much as to
the other. Otherwise the most frequent Aspect, will not convince fastidious
self-conceited Persons; nay verily, nor the Lunar neither, as we have shown
before, but that we have the Tradition and Experience of the Husbandman, and
the Seaman on our side, who are the Strength of the Kingdom. What says Maginus
on this very Aspect concerning Hail, Si caetera concurrant; Yea, that is Right,
That Is like a Philosopher; What are those Concurrences, and where; for if a
single Aspect be All; every man laying the Planetary Table before him, may
profess (a ridiculous sort of Prognostique, which is not to be endured for the
Learned fake.

6. And if it be asked How we shall know the Character, blended amongst the
Concurrents; I answer, not every Property perhaps, is so easily discernible in
such different Mixture, but the most Signal are discerned by the Violences
which often are produced, either upon, or near the precise Aspect; Or, at
least, before its Expiration: Which Violences notably, and frequently iterated
upon the return of the Aspect, have constituted the Character delivered down to
us from our Ancestors.

7. As wary was Cardan of old, who tells us, That It inclines to Hail and Rain,
Si caetera juvent. What they would all say, is this, That the Aspect Lashes out
into some Excess of this Nature before it takes its leave. And this as to the
First, viz. Rain is for certain, whether within 6 days, as they say, or within
my more unreasonable Width of a Months space, which may be confessed, perhaps:
And then the Vehemence of that Effect shall, I avow, be distinguishable from
any Shower, etc. that falls afar off without the Verge; except upon another
equivalent Influence.

8. Here I do not intend to tie my self to any one Individual Aspect, but of
the whole Sylloge. Let some Number of our Aspect be considered, and upon
comparison so it shall be found. Say the same of Tempests, Harmful Winds,
Destructive Lightnings, etc. which our Table affords. Nor must it be argued
that we have said as much before of others, and possibly may again: For what
hinders that at several times of the year, according as they take place in
their admirable Succession, they may all show their Vehemencies, and yet be
distinguished by him who lists to observe and compare. Besure Tempests, with
and without Lightnings, must be added as well as Hail, which though it comes
not half so frequently, must not be left out of the Character.

9. In the mean while it may be true, That as the Quantity or duration of the
Effect, and may not be so copious as some others; for I find not so many
Inundations, indeed but few in comparison with the Aspect of and. Mark that.
Who then shall say hereafter that we understand nothing of the Stars? We
forgive those Learned Men who have adventured to wrong us heretofore; but
hereafter let them avoid such Obloquies; Let them show as many Floods under
and, and we will be confuted.

10. This makes me take notice of those Words in Maginus, which are seasonable
here, Martis cum applicatio Nubes and Ventos multiplicat, Imbribus detrahit,
acra corr-etc. Our Honest Countryman, Escuid. Did. 4. tract. 1. Cap. 4. tells
us from Dorotheus the same Words: Whoever was the Author, the Words are Sense,
and agree with the History of the Aspect exhibited in our Diary, where I find
many Dry Days and Fair, with a Brightness of Air, Curious Weather, Amaeni
Soles, as Kepler has it, yet oft-times overcasting, and lowering, and looking
suspitiously, as sometimes again, opening after a close Air. This you may
please to observe when the rest of the Concurrents are not met, and the Aspect
is Solitary; Then the Weather will savor of the Contemperation of the
contrary, and be Placid and Temperate.

11. And this at times of the year will lead in Frost, for that Cause which
tempers the Aestival Air, will freez us up in Winter; and for this you must
look the Old Arabs will bear witness for 's sake, which they make to be as cold
as Friendship it self. Wherefore if it happen in Signo Terreo, says Messahala.
sign. Neves and gelu, et fortitudinem frigoris apud Escuid, did. 2. tract. 1.
Cap. 11.

12. For the Proof of the Premises, to begin with the last Instance, our Frosty
Days, not of Mornings only: we hear of them in the years 56, 60, 64, 66, 68,
70. Frosty mornings every Revolution, from 54. to 70. Yea, and after in Ao 74.
But the Diary will not consent to Messahala, as to his Earthly Sign, only and,
since, for Airy, Watery, and Fiery Signs, make up the account, as well as the
Earthly. How much easier is it to say in the Southern Signs, it makes Frost
many times, etc.

13. Now the Inclination to Rain holds about the Moiety of the 30. and odd
days, but with some difference of Signs. For Hail, we hear of it but 11 times.
in, Five Signs; and when I have reason to believe the like of the Opposite, we
cannot positively exclude any.

14. Now for excess of Rain, more or less, we have not One Aspect escaped. And
now smart many of them were, the Diary will not conceal. The high Winds we must
proclaim, because by their Harmful Impulses They will be remembered; they will
not sleep till they have mischief wrought on the place. That and should be sore
upon us, may be attributed to their Vicinity; but that so remote should be
Harmful, there I profess to wonder at the Venerable Footsteps of a Deity, in
the Worlds great System, and the parts thereof: for we found harmful with, and
therefore no wonder with, as we have before observed. Do Astrology Justice, is
a Superior, and perhaps there is no violent stroke from Heaven without the
Edge and Dint of one of the Superiors. -- Wherefore now let us view the
Tempest, 1658. Sept. 30. And those Gusts on the Thames, Oct. 20, 21. which were
reported harmful. Let us view those of Nov. 11. 1662. October. 29, 30. Ao 1664.
Nov. 28, 29. Ao 1666. and Nov. 12. 1668. And what need more ado? Here are Three
Blasts of this small number, which blew down Trees in the Country, and the
Chimnies in London. Sept. 30. Ao 1658. Nov. 11. Ao 1662. Nov. 28. and 29. Ao
1666. The Aspect succeeds but 10 times in 20 years, and therein, 10 times it is
ready to knock us on the Head. Such Accidents come not often, they had not
need. I remember, noted in the Diary, that after sore Rains, and have been seen
together within a Span, etc. as on Nov. 24. Ao 1670. Nature I say, and say it
again, is loath we should be ignorant of her admirable Occonomy, and therefore
it shows it us: and when it does not, we shall not be credulous accounted, if
we believe that Lightning according to our Method, and the nature of the thing
also, is allied to Furious Tempests; for so at Lundy Island we meet with
Lightning, and harm done to a Ship there, when with us there was Terrible
Tempest only of Wind, Rain and Hail, without any Fiery Meteor, Nov. 13. 1664.
Now of Harmful Lightning we meet further in the years, 1674. 1676. 1680. in the
Signs,; or if it will Edify more, in the Months of June and August; Those are
the Paramount Months besure, the Aestival Months; but that the Sun alone
produces them because of, his Exaltation; is a Prodigy of a Paradox, and will
never be believed till All the rest of the Lights be extinguished. Astrology
wants Records to search; If she had them from the Conquest, it were well. But
the 13th of Nov. 1664. just now mentioned, shows that it is not the Sun's
exaltation produces Flashing by its self; for in November he is not Exalted;
unless the Presence of and (which is true enough) do help to exalt him.

15. Upon this account the Fiery Meteors of the Night are pretty rife under
this Aspect. For in the year 1672. I observed them 4 or 5 times. In 1674.
Three. In 1676. 5 times. In 1678. 8 times. In 1680. and 1682. four times each.
They have been more rare in 1654. 1656. 1662. 1670. The Time of the year where
no observation was made, were Winter Months; and I could not be at the Charge
of the Watch. An Ingenious Sea Captain, who kens the Constellations, may
contribute much to our Theory, by engaging his Night Watch to look upward, not
neglecting neither the Course of the Ship.

16. As to Snow, we find it as rare or more then Hail, but 9 times in All. In
the year 1668 1670. 1672. In the Signs and. They were the Signs of the Aspect.
But the Solar Sign was only, the Snow falling in November.

17. There are many other pretty things occur in the History of and, some
whereof are common to other Configurations, others may seem to be more proper.
Clouds, and Passions of Clouds, blushing toward the East, Irides, Halo's,
Lowering, Suspicious and Threatening, with a suspended Effect. While no Rain
falls, Mists, Fog, Low Ground Mists, etc. -- Concerning which I must needs say,
I have observed the Air under this Aspect to clear and cloud interchangeably
for several Days. Ye will say, so it does it other times: It does so, and not
without Cause; which Cause, if a Man can render then or Now, what Harm is it?
Saturn and Mars is a great and permanent Aspect, whereby the Air is for a long
while more easily alterable (as when a Disease hangs about us, our Bodies are
more incident to a Fit) when there happens a more full and smart Concurrence,
as we see it not seldom meets with.

18. Note that the sudden Mists under this Aspect put on an extra ordinary Hue,
noted for their deep Blew, as well under the Opposition, as under the
Conjunction.

19. We have spoke of the Ground Mists before, and some Instances we have here
so frequent, as if they seemed to belong to, even as I ventured to conjecture.
Of these we meet, One in the year 1652. 3 in 1658. 4 in 1660. and 2 in 1666.
and amongst these, one most notable, Ao 1666. Nov, 21. where I observed it
making a creeping Progression in the Valleys, hor. 9. manc. I remember
elsewhere, where a Low Mist, by a leisurely Progress, has shifted its ground,
stole from a Meadow into a Close, and with a silent Inundation overflowed the
Neighbor Pastures. Tell me, some good Philosopher, the Cause! I meditated, and
thought the Water might attract, but the Motion was from the side of the River;
and that of Nov. 1666. was distant 2 or 3 Miles from the River Thames. I
consulted, and found it was a Sign of a Tempest; for the Wind rose to an
audible Height the Night and day following, and so continued 3 or 4 days very
Tempestuous, and (yea and rather than fail) were all together; now the Cause of
the Tempest must be the Cause of that Sign: and that these Planets were the
Cause of the Tempest, may appear by the Premises, and the further Criterium
(were it time to show it) at the time of the Planets setting, hor. 8. vesp. of
the next day, at which time the Air, according to the Diary, was very
Tempestuous, and as it had been before at set.

20. As for Irides and Halo's, we light upon them sometimes, and they are not
altogether accidental to an Aspect either of and, as we have seen before. Nor
to This, because they are Notable here for Number or Circumference: Add that
they contribute to a like Passion of the Clouds, viz. that blushing Tincture in
the East, and that not only when the Aspect is Situate about the West, but also
when nearer the Zenith. Quaere, Whether not so when in the Nadir? Or the other
Hemisphere. Yea, lastly, what if we shall find that Notable Passion of Parelium
found under this Aspect.

21. For a Dark Ether I though I might impute it to, and sometimes to upon
different accounts, but when I consulted the Diary, I found the Effect confined
to certain Signs, Aries, Cancer; and once, Pisces, Virgo, Leo. So this note
must be reserved for the Tropic and Equinox, or they seem to be the Critical
Places.

The Home Diary of.
22. Ao 1658. Oct. 12. 1.. 22.
6. Close, muddy air die tot. very wet 8 p. etc. 7. Store of Wet, abund. p. m.
till 8 p. S E. 8. Overc. o. coasting shower in prospect, shower Sun occ. N E. 9.
Frost, bright, cold wds, Meteors. W. 10. Fr. ice, ropes, warm. N E. 11. Fr.
mist, ice, cobwebs, thick fog 9 p. W. 12. Fog m. overc. moist air n. E. 13.
Dark and cool, misle p. m. blew mist. E. 14. Drisle, wet 2 m. o. and p. m. E.
15. Rain circ. dilucul. warm; black Summer. Clouds and open, overc. n. S. 16.
Wind all n. rain a. l. ad usque 8 m. dark and wet p. m. 5 p. 8 p. S. 17. Mist,
violent rain at midnight, at 5 m. drisle p. m. H. wd, rain 8 p. S W.
Ao 1660. Oct. 25. 14.
20. Fr. N W. fog, clear, mist below. N E. 21. Fog m. cloudy, windy, warm. E.
22. Fr. fair, s. wet. N E. 23. Cloudy windy, fair 9 m. windy, clear vesp. N.
24. Frost, fair, s. wet, wdy. N. 25. Cold, cloudy, windy, clds. frequent in S.
and S W. clear even, yet wd, moist. N E. 26. Fr. fair, high clouds, curdled,
close day. W. 27. Cold, windy, hail, r. 1 p. shower 3 p. N E. 28. Rain a med.
noct. cloudy E. N E. 29. N E. Fr. clear. 30. Fr. W. curdled clouds, hot.
Ao 1662. Nov. 5. 6.
31. Oct. Fog, bright day, warm, wd. E. 1 Nov. Fr. m. fair, clouding p. m. rain
7 p. E. 2. Overc. rain 1 p. etc. S E. 3. Blew clouds m. Rain a 9 m. ad o. S. 4.
Rain hard a 5 m. ad 1 p. S. 5. Fog, cloudy, somet. open. N. 6. Close m p. wd. S
E. 7. Close p. m. drisle, rain overcast vesp etc. S W. 8. Open, warm, clouds
low, s. coasting drops, wind, Meteor a Pleiad. ad Capell. 9. Fair m. clouds 1
p. s. rain. S. 10. Iris 8 m. storm of wind and R. 8 p. Sly.
Ao 1664. Nov. 12. 27.
8. Fr. cool, fair wind. S W. 9. Fr. overcast, wd and wet per tot. S. 10. Fr
ice, mist, fair. S W. 11. Fr. ice, very foggy, Sol rutilus, freez n. S W. 12.
Rain m. fair, cool, R. 10 p. S W. 13. Dreadful Tempest, wind Rain and hail 2 m.
windy, open. S W. but after the storm N W Harmful Lightning in a Ship at Lundy.
14. Open, fair, wind. S W. 15. Overc. close p. m. s. rain 4 and 7 p. S W. 16.
Fair m. rain o. open p. m. R. 10 p. S W. 17. Rain a. l. 2 m. fair, windy, freez
nocte S W.
Ao 1666. Nov. 19 18.
15. Frosty, fair. 16. Frosty, sharp day. E. 17. Frosty, fair, fog. rise,
yield. wind 11 p. and overc. S W. 18. Close, some mist die tot. S W. 19. Warm,
open, somet lowering, H. wind a. l. Sly. 20. Drisle a. l. misty, wetting, so 1
p. warm, open, wds. S W. 21. Mist creeps in the Valleys 9 m. close m. p. wd,
close n. S W. 22. Wind at n. close, misty, wetting, high wind; very tempestuous
Sun occ. and 8 p. III Plan occid. clear. 23. Close m. p. Tempestuous Sun occ.
etc. s. drops. S W.
Ao 1668. Nov. 23. 9.
19. Windy and wet 6 m. etc. some rain 10 p. seen together. 20. Hard frost a.
m. freez n. W. 21. H. frost, closing, misty, wet store, p. m. and n. W. 22.
Cold wind a. l. close, open a. m. E. 23. Fr. fair, cold. N E. 24. H. fr. open
m. close p. m. rain 4 p. close and cold wind. N E. 25. Thick fog m. p. Sol
rutilus. close 11 p. E. 26. Foggy, drisle or snow at n. 27. Foggy, close, cold,
drisle n. Nly. Cocks crow 9 p. 28. Fog. rain m. much rain n. blustering. Wly. N
W.
Ao 1670. Nov. 26. 1.
22. Winds all n. drisle 9 m. very stiff gusts, and s. rain Sun occ. seen
together N W. 23. Coldish a. m. rainy 4 p. etc. wind audible. Wly. 24. s. rain
9 m. Tempest 1 p. etc. s. rain p. m. Meteor 9 p. Wly. 25. Rain ante Sun ort.
clouding often, close n, N W. 26. Fr. ice, mist m. overc. n. wd audible Nly.
27. H. fr. s. overc. fair and bitter freezing n. Wly. 28. Frosty, snow 6 m.
close. N W. 29. Frosty, close, winds audible n. N E. 30. Frosty, open wds.
audible n. N E
Ao 1672. Nov. 18. 25.
12. Frost, fog a. m. open. Ely. 13. Fr. close p. m. and dark rain 5 p. 8 p. 9.
p. H. wind. S W. 14. R. a. l. wetting a. m. and p. m. Much wet a 5 p. ad 10 p.
H. wind day and night. Sly. 15. Fair a. m. H. wd, shower 2 p. and p. Sly. 16.
VVind, open a. m. closing 3 p. rain 4 p. S W. 17. Mist m. close, wetting 10. m.
very wet 1 p. windy d. and n. 18. Fair m. p. close vesp. and n. W. 19. Much
rain a. l. and a. m. close. W. 20. Close m. p. drisle 9 p. W. 21. Much rain 5
m. and high wind, close. S W. 22. Cold, fair, overc. coldish at n. N W. 22. R.
a. l, close, windy, warm, drisle 11 p. W. 24. Close, drisle o. and 4. p. wd at
n. S W. 25. open, closing. S W. At n. N W. Dec. 26, 27, 28. Lightning much at
Gravesend. 29. Tenterden Church and 8 Houses fired with Lightning.
Pars Aestiva. Ao 1674. July. 8. 28.
4. 7 m. Mercury (...) offering, shower 7 times 4 p. Pleiad. occ. S W. 5. Wind,
shower 1 p. smart showring, Hail and Thund. slaying Men and Cattle at Newington,
Bleehingly, Narrative. 6. Shower 1 p. 3. 5 p. S W. 7. Rain and hail 9 m. etc.
shower p. m. Aches. 8. Showring 10 m. 1 p. and p. m. dashing 5 p. ad 8. fere
Sly. Aches. 9 shower 10 m. 1 p. S W. 10. Warm p. m. shower 7 p. S W. News of a
Plague at Smirna. 11. Bright, s. mist, floating cl. and lowering. S W. 12. Nly,
fair, warm a. m. floting cl. and lowering. 13. H. wind, shower 1 p. Rest of H.
clear.
Ao 1676. July 15. 24.
10. Close m. p. misty, Sol rutilus, wd vesp. N. N E. 11. Bright day, wind
brisk, s. few cl. Nly. 12. Cloudy, bright m. p. sometime lowering. E. 13. Bright
N E. Warm. wd. N E. 14. Fair, warm, hempen cl. overcast, by degrees p. m. H.
wind, Aches. E. 15. Very hot a. m. rain 4 m. (Aches) 11 m. 1 p. 3 p. Hard 5 p.
Dephin or. Aches. S. 16. Cloudy Sly. clouds in Scenes a. m. dry p. m. Aches W.
17. Hot a. m. open wind, Aches. close m. p. W. 18. Hot, bright, scarce a cl.
Aches. N. 19. Hot n. early fog, hora 7 m. soultry day, hot n. Wly m. Ely n. 20.
Soultry, bright, clouding 7 p. Lightning twice, Rain and Thunder 33 Claps, much
Lightning nocte.
Ao 1678. July 31. 21.
26. Rain 3 m. brisk wind, casting ante 3 p. Rain 5 p. Aches. Wly. 27. Rain,
brisk wd, high wd, sh. 3 p. Wly. 28. Gr. clouds, floating, sh. 10 m. Thunder 2
p. in N E. Th. ante 6. rain, hail, coasting shower ante Sun occ. Weathergall in
S E. Wly. Sly. 29. R. brisk wind, coasting 2 p. R. and Thunder ante 4 p. Wly.
30. R. m. clouds gather, rain, Lightning 3 p. sh vesp. Wly. 31. R. gr. dash 1
p. Th. R. 8 p. Meteors behind 2. Stars in cauda, and below Arcturus. Ely m.
with a mist. 1 Aug. Rain 1 m. misty air, warm, cl. in Scenes, Meteor by,
Lightn. 10 p. Ely. at n. Wly before. 2. Warm, fleeced clouds 7 p. Cocks 10 p.
wd various, Sly. Th. 8 p. and 10 p. Wly. 3. Ely, fleeced cl. 8 m. overc. 4 p. S
W. 4. Mist, open, warm, close n. Wly. 5. Early mist, clear Horiz. 7 m. brisk
wind, warm. Wly. 6. Hot n. R. 10 m. warm d. Meteor ante 9 p. Wly.
Ao 1680. Aug. 20. 19.
14. Rain 3 m. stormy wind. R. 8 m. storm circ. merid. Sly. 15. R. m. 9. 11 m.
o. 1 p. dark shower post 2 p. occ. (so 5 p.) windy n. N W. 16, Plague at Dresden
increases, 263 dye in a week; windy, Rain 7 m. fair, dry, W. N W. 17. Mist,
early, striped cls, Meteor bright a 9 p. 18. Close, brisk wd, Meteor near M. p.
a 9 p. Ely. 50 Villages in Saxony infected, Gazet. Number. 1543. 19. Fog, open.
Ely. 20. Fog, hot, s. gusts, Nly. Ely. N E. 21, Great, early fog, warm, blew
mist vesp. N E. 22. Fair, fresh wind, mist vesp. Sly. 23. Fair, fritter-clouds,
high winds, hot n. tot. Cocks ^ p. 24. Very hot, windy, stripped clouds,
coasting, heat, drops, gr. R. and thuad. circ. merid. 25. Hot m. fleeced
clouds, shower 6 p. 8 p. Wly. 26. Soultry, some drops, Lightning in N E. 9 p.
Meteors 3 p. 1 cross the Heavens. 27. Fog m. hot, s, angry clds. Wly. at n.
Ely. 29. Th. and Lightn. harmful.
Ao 1652. Aug. 10. 5.
5. Clear, cloudy, little wind. N W. 6. Rainy m. clear, cloudy, windy at n. N
W. 7. Clear, cloudy, same at n. windy. S W. 8. Clear, cloudy, windy, still at
n. S W. 9. Cloudy, windy, rainy at n. W. 10. Showry, s. Sun, high wd, N W. 11.
Clear, cloudy, l. wind, clear n. misty still. W. 12. Clear, cloudy still. N.
13. Clear, cloudy, s. wd. N. 14, 15. Clear, cloudy. N E. 16. Clear, cloudy.
Ao 1682. Sept. 12. 16.
7. Fog, close m. p. lowering, calm. N W. 8. s. clouds, lowering, s. gust, cold
10 p. N E. 9. Cold m. high wind, Ely. long cloud 8 m. from S W. to N W. Wly.
10. Fog m. close, brisk wind, shower ante 5 p. Ely. 11. Wet 11 m. and Moon occ.
Ely. 12. Clouds rise 8 m. of Urine color; close and lowering 10 m. N E. 13.
Fog, misty, not drying, warm 9 p. Aches and sickness. N E. 14. Fog n. taken up,
close, warm n. Wly. 15. Warm, cl. in Scenes, lowering, very warm n. Nly. 16.
Warm n. s. fog, close and warm 8 p. Wly 17. Gentle R. 6 p. etc. brisker ante 11
p. A talk of Ignis Fatuus near Albemarl House. 18. s. drops a. m. and o. s.
gusts, warm night. Wly. (...) Sandwich. Tempest driving back the Ships that
failed out of the Downs. Monstrous Fish 7 foot long taken on the Coast, etc.
Loyal Mercury from Boyton. Number. 27.
Ao 1654. Sept. 3. 2.
Aug. 28. Overc. clear, overc. clouds, storm. S. 29. Bright, very cold m.
bright d. N E. 30. White fr. bright d. some wet, rare harvest. N W. 31.
Overcast, s. wet, clearing N W. Sept. 1. Misty m. 1 or 2 drops at n. S W. 2, H.
wind b. d. wet d. cool Stars shoot n. S W. 3. Unconstant coasting, wet, winds.
4. Hail, wind b. d. cool, showrs of hail and R. Stars shoot. 5. Stormy, some
said Thunder m. S W. 6. s. wet m. Lightning at n. Stars misty. 7. Gentle rain
from break of d. till o. cloudy, Lightning, frequent at n. S W. 8. Cloudy m.
clouds pleasant, with 2 or 3 drops discovered. S W.
Ao 1584. October. 3. 12.
Sept. 27. Close, warm, wet m. p. Wly. 28. Mist m. warm, close, Ely m. p. 29.
Much rain a 3 m. ad 9 m. Wly 30. Cloudy and black, lowering N W. October. 1. Close
and wet m. a. m. p. hottish at n. N W. 2. Close, sometime lowering, warm. N W.
2. Fleeced clouds 8 m. s. drops a 5 p. and misty, shower Sun occ. Wly. 3. Frost,
clouding and offering several times p. m. showring ante 11 p. 4. Very great
dash circa 2 m. dash 11 m. showring p. m. and ante Sun occ. 5. Rain a. l.
cloudy m. s. wd. Wly. N W. 6. Cloudy, close m. p. 7. H. wind, R. mist a 4 m.
fair a. m. close and wet 4 p. ad 11 p. Sly. 8. Rainy, dark from last n. ho. 6
p. without stint till 9 m. lowering clouds. Wly. 9. s. frost, clouding and
lowering, cold n. Fleeced clds Sun occ. Nly.
Ao 1656. Sept. 24. 28.
18. Fair, br. wh. cl. s. L. gathering at n. W. 19. Close, s. misling, opening
10 m. threatening black mist, reddish cl. Eastwards, a wide Halo. 20. Frost, w.
v. gathering, blew mist, Halo. S W. 21. Misty m. fair, s. wind, notable warm
wd, overc. 22. Misty, very blew mist, fair, s. cl. growing a Semicircle with
Rainbow Colors 9 m. alm vertical. 23. Thick fog, with gross Cobwebs all in a
n. 24. Sun shine, h. wd, wh. cl. s. mist, w. p. m. cl. and fi^^ showrs Sun occ.
warm. S W. 26. Rain 1 m. frost, fair, Halo great nocte. 27. Dark, windy,
showring. S W. 28. s. wet midnight, wd noct. tot. dark, misling by Coast. S W.
29. Wind a. l. dark, dropping o. 5 p. etc. S W. 23. Ao 1658. Sept. 23. Hideous
tempest of wd S W 8 p. 25. R. 4 m. misling R. n. S W. 16. Wind nost. tot. 29.
Halo, ground mist. 30. Harmful wind blowing down Trees. October. 2. Blush E.
ground mist. 3. Ropes store. 5. Rain 4 m. dark, misty, wetting m. p. 18. H. w.
showring 7 p. etc. 19. Wind noct. tot. shower o. gallant Meteor. Sly. 26. Wind
noct. tot. very red m. R. 4 p. ad 7 p. 27. R. noct. tot. ad Sun ort. 29. s.
blustering ante luc.
Additional to the Hyemal Part, the fair Days omitted.
Ao 1660. 7. s. little coasting shower p. m. 13. Cobwebs and Gossamere. 14. Rain
3 p. 6 p. and 8 p. 15. Wetting m. p. sad rain a 5 p. ad 9 p. 18. R. ante lucem.
Nov. 7. Windy, storm of R. 11 m. S E. 9. Stormy vesp. 10. H. wind, stormy Hail
and R. 11 p. 11. H. wd and R. frequent hail, storms of rain, H. wd vesp. Ao
1662. Oct. 20. Warm, H. wind 9 p. 21. Wind and rain a. l. H. wd and rain vesp.
H. wind did harm upon the Thames. S W. 22. R. a. l. 4 p. 8 p. S W. 23. Much a.
l. Meteors n. S W. 27. Wet, R. noct. tot, 29. Rain a. l. Nly. Nov, 11. R. 5. m.
very dark, with violent storms of R. Chimnies blown down. 12. Rainy m. H. wind.
S W. 13. Cold rain a. m. H. wd. S W. 14. II. cold wd. S W. 15. Rain m. p. H. w.
d 11 m. S W. 18. R. a 6. p. ad 9 p. 19. Close, drisling p. m. 5 p. 21. Rain 7
m. and die tot. harder 5 p.
24. This Table viewed will yield some such Character of the Aspect: and are of
a long continuance, and help to qualify the Air for a Month at least; the
distance of 10 degrees, before and behind, through which space it produces not
always furious Effects, but is moderate many times, and temperate; yea, and at
many times of the year inclining to Frost and Fog. It is apt to Storm and Rain
with Vehemence, and violence Notable, upon advantage taken, to Thunder,
Lightning. It Is inclined to Hail, though somewhat rarely, yet more notably than
other Aspects. It shows its Luster many times in a Rainbow, etc. Some
excessive Rain falls either near it, or within the terms described. More of its
Violence in the Foreign Table, which follows.

Foreign Diary.,.
25. Anno Christi. 1500. Storms and Huracanes, Rains, Floods, Thunders, Chasms.
Feb. 11. Flood at Lovain, Gem. Cosm. Lib. 2. Cap. 4. in Marging.,. Dec. 20.
Great Flood again, Gem. ib in princip.. 1511. A 3d time, Flood at Lovain. If he
means February, or threabout, we find then in. England. 1526. November,
December, January, February, Great Rain and Floods, destroying Cornfieldsd,
Pasture, Beasts, etc. Stow, in. 1528. Febr. Nunnez Admiral's Tempest; Ramus,
Vol. 3. p. 310. the fine. 1529. January 29. Chasme, Fristsch. 1534. May 27. Ill
Weather, Cartier's Voyage, Hakl. V. 3. p. 202. gr. 11. see it in. Near Carata.
1536. May 16. Tempest, Hakl. V. 2. p. 230. gr. 4. distant. Rome. 1537. Dec. 2.
Harmful Thunder, Lyc. gr. 20. distant. Back side of America. 1539. Nov. 9. ad
15. Storms and great Franc. de Ulloa, apud Hakl. 406. seu VC.. 26, 27.
Blustering Winds separating us, etc. Cortez, gr. 20. did. Hakl. 407. Dec. 1.
Cruel North Wind; Cables broke the Trinket, and Misen rent asunder, Hakl. gr.
19. distant. 17. Two or Three days great store of Rain, Hakl. 414. gr. 17.
did. in 14. 1540. Jan. 10, 11, 12. Furious North: Winds, Hakl. 416. gr. 1.
distance. 16. Fierce Winds drove us back, Hakl. 41. Dec. 24. Tempestuous Winds
drove us 20 Leagues back, Hakl. 302. The 3d Storm again drove us back the 3d
time, Ib. in. gr. 15. Febr. 1. ad 8. Ill Weather, Hakl. 420. 10. Vesp. Tempest
dangerous beyond Expression, p. 421. Die 23. Northern Winds wonderful, p. 422.
Die 25. Terrible Sea; the farther we went, the more the Winds increased. The
Winds could not be worse. 23, 24. The Devil, they said, in the Winds, gr. 10.
did. March 2, 3. Tempest dangerous. 9. Bad weather, p. 493. 19. Store of Rain,
like the Rain in Castile. 14. North-West Winds broke Cables, gr. 13. aist. Near
Red Sea. 1541. March 11. Storm raised Sand toward Heaven. Purch. 1302. in and,
did. gr. 19. Die 20. North Wind troubled the Sea. April 4. Great Storms at
North-West, ante merid. after Thunder and Hail, Purch. 1135. gr. 10. did. in.
Die 12. Whirlwinds raising up the Sands, Storms and Calm within a Stones cast,
p. 1138. gr. 17. 1542. Aug. 5. Tempests with Shipwreck, Purch. gr. 22. distant.
12. Tuffon, with Wind and Rain; seeming more than Natural, Purch. gr. 25. did.
in. March. 23. Snow for 4 days, in gr. 10 distant. June 14. At Buda, Tempest,
and the top of St. Stevens Church suffered by it, Lyc. in. gr. 2. distant.
Jerusalem. 1546. Jan. 14. Huracano's, Thunder, great Rain, T. G. P. e Surio. in
gr. 13. distant Add 20. 18. Minia. Febr. 10. Chasme, Lycosth. gr. 5. distant.
1547. June 5. Crebrae Procellae, etc. Dr. Dee, Annot. ad Annum, gr. 21.
distant. April 28. At Misena Cathedral struck with Thunder, hor. 5. P. Lycost.
in Tropic. gr. 5. did. 1548. Jan. 27. Pluviosa tota. in princip Idem, in gr.
15. Febr. 21. Rains. May 9. Venti Pluvii, Grandiris is Impetus, Id. in gr. 8.
did. Mart. 8. Pluviosum valide, Id. die 19. Pluvios. valde, Ib. in gr. 25.
distant. 1549. April 5. Rain continual, in, gr. 27. did. June 6. Stormy Rain.
12. Imbres. 21. Tempestuous. in, 20, gr. did. 18. Boistrous Winds. 26. Imbres
vehementes, cum continua Pluvia, gr. 26. did. 28. Venti Vehementes ante merid.
22. Pluvia per tot. diem, cum Tonitr. gr. 17. distant. From June 1. ad 21.
Unnatural (as they called it in those days) untidy Weather. June 6. Mighty
Storms of Wind, and Rain, Vide diligenter causam, says the Doctor. Die 12.
(...) Vehementissimi. 20. Maximi and Vehementiss. Imbres cum Grandine, hor. 5.
did. ad gr. 10. in. 27. June 21. The deepest Winter; could be no fowler day.
Die 23. Imber a Candito Mundo Vehementiss. duravit per ortum Sagitarii, cum
ton. in sine, Dr. Dee. in gr. 21. distant. May 3. Imbres Vehementes. 24. Venti
Vehementiss. p. Sol ort. 1550. Jan. 19. ab hora 10. Noct. statim ventus mire
crescebat. 23. Ho. 1. Grando, Pluvia, gr. 18. Febr. 14. a meridie mirum
crescebat Ventus, nocte cessavit, in princ. Febr. 7. hor. 4. min. 30. Tonitrua,
Pluvius Dies. 1551. Circ. Mail 15. Ante festum Pentecostes, Great Inundation in
Germany, ( in gr. 15. distant) and the Neighbor parts of France, described by
Lyc. July 24. Borasque or Whirlwinds, danger of drowning, Purch. 1576. sive S.
S. July 21. River overflows, when it had not rained in a Month before, gr. 28.
did. 1556. Febr. 17. Wind North-West; Tornado, Thunder, Wind and Lightning, in
gr. 10. did. 20. Much Change of Winds. Foul Weather. 27. Ternado's, with much
Rain, in gr. 11. did. March 1. Tornado, Towrson in Hakl. 112. in gr. 10. did.
Dec. 26. Thunder, Harmful in Swevia and Bohemia, Lyc. in, gr. 6. did. 1157.
Jan. 13. Sea went so high on the Shore, that we could not Land. Hakl. Edit. 1.
p. 114. Die 31. Foul Weather, Hakl. 121. Febr. 7. Wind, great Gusts of Rain,
Lightning and Thunder; but the Gust down, Wind came to N E. Hakl. Edit. 1. p.
122. grad. 11. June 2. Tempest and Rain. 11. Stiff Gale, Took in the Shrowds.
Storm lasting till the 16th day, Boroughs Voyage. Hakl. Edit. 1. gr. 16. 22.
Wind N W. fain to seek Harbor. 24. Great Mist and Darkness. in Aequinoct.
1558. March 26. Whirlwind. in princip. gr. 3. did. April 1. A Flaw all day at
E. where ordinarily it is S W. Towrson's Voyage, Hakl. in 22. gr. did. 1559.
Hyems, Jan. and Febr. Ventosa ac humida. London. Sept. 1. Thunder Terrible,
Stow. 1013. gr. 19. 1562. June 5. Tempestuous, Hail and Thunder, Gem. in, gr.
14. distant. Lovain. 1565. Jan. 6. Inundation, Gemm. 2. intra gr. 30. Feb. 11.
Inundation Gemm. 23., 12.. 1566. July 18. Winds, Lightning, Gemm. in gr. 11.
did. 1569. March 10. Horrible Chasm, in gr. 20. did. Holland. 1570. August,
Dire Inundation; 40000. perished, Grimstone, in fere. Partil. London. 1574.
Sept. 4. Storms of Rain 4. P. M. Stow, in. Gravesend. 1576. March 5. Flaw in
the Night, drowned a Tilt-Boat, with 31. Persons, Stow, in gr. 13. did. L. N.
63. August 21. Snow a Foot Thick, Frobisher. in gr. 7. Lat. 61. 1577. a June 8.
ad July 4. No Night but some Storm. June and July Boisterous, with Wind and
Snow, and Hail, Frobishers 2d Voyage. 1581. July 21. Great Blasts and Storms,
ad Diem 28. usque in gr. 12. distant. 1582.. 1583. Aug. 16. Foul Weather, in
gr. 17. did. 21. Stormy. Hakl. 102. 1585. July 7. Whirlwind taking up Water
into the Air for 3 Hours, Hakl. 783. a June 15. ad 29. Many Tempests; vel VC..
July 8. Cold Showers 10 at Night, much Lightning, gr. 20. distant. July 2. 12.
The Night before much Lightning round about. 16, 17, 18. Great store of Whales,
Hakl. 783. Tuffon, the Waves seemed to touch the Clouds, Linschot. in princ.
gr. 15. distant. 26. Strong Winds, Sea high; in gr. 10. Aug. 18. Foul Weather.
Aug. 19. Snow at Night, with much Wind and Foul Weather. Aug. 28. ad Sept. 12.
Very great Storms, gr. 7. in. Circ. Lat. 60. Aug. 23. Very Stormy day, Hakl.
780. gr. did. 9. Davis. Sept. 10. At Night very great Storms, separated our
Ships, Davis's Voyage for the North, Hakl. Edit. 1. p. 786. gr. 20. did. 1586.
April 2. Winds to sing and bellow. May 21. Hard Gale, and Rain. 1587. Jan. 3,
4, 5. Dangerous Storms, Purch. 1. page 58, 59. gr. 28. distant. 10. Three
Anchors broke. 20. to Febr. 23. Many Flaws. Febr. 15, 16. Much Rain, Wind,
Cold, Hakl. gr. 24. did. N. L. 52. Aug. 14. Stormy, many Whales stopped our
Fleet in a Storm, Davis. in gr. 10. distant. 21. Tempest, Admiral forced to cut
his Cable, gr. 5. 1588. May 10. Vehement Storms for a Day and Night, in fine,
gr. 7. 16. Much Wind as the Ship could bear, 21. gr. did. 24. Tempest which
shattered the Armada. July 6. Tempest, gr. 22. did. 1589. Febr. 18. Thunder,
Rain, Lightning, in gr. 14. Die 24. Great Storm, III Corpo Santo's, Linschot.
March 5. Great Storms, broke the Rudder, Corpo Santo, in 8. gr. 13. 18. Storms,
broke our Main-Yard. 31. Storms for Two Days and Three Nights. 21. Great Storm
continued till April 9. 8, gr. 20. did. April 9. ad. 14. Storm forced us back
again. 18. As great a Storm as ever. August 4. A very dangerous Storm, gr. 22.
Virginia. 17, 18. Blew hard, gr. 16. 1589. Sept. 16. Store of Rain noct preced.
E. of Cumberland; much Lightning nocte. 17. Great Fish Ibid. Die 25. Great
Tempest, Hakl. 2. 159. Oct. 2. Two Men slain with Lightning, 1. 1591. April 7:
Rainy. Three Spouts,. May 3. Terrible Gust with Lightning, tore our Fore-Sail,
in Tropic. gr. 6. 23. Cruel Gust of Rain. 8. Fog and Tempest, 10th. Great
Storms dispersing our Ships, Hakl. From April 18. to May 10. Furious Winds,
Purch 3. 1139. in Tropic. gr. 8. distant. May 13. ad June 10. Nothing but
Tornado's; we could not keep our selves dry Three Hours, Hakl. 103. in Tropic.
Sept. 30. Cruel Storms, as if the Sea would have swallowed the Isle Tercera,
Linschot. gr. 5. distant. Corvo. Sept. 11. ad 14. Storms Unparalleled, Purch.
3. p. 1629. in Tropic. gr. 8. distant. Near Silly. October. 6. Winds and Rain,
gr. 11.. Circ. October. 11. Extreme Storms, gr. 14.. 1595. April 13. Thunder,
Lightning, ( Die Paschatis) stored with Rain, yet very Cold, gr. 7. distant.
1596. Aug. 23. Store of Lightning and Rain. 24. Blows hard, 14. gr.. 30.
Boistrous South Wind, and great Snow. Sept. 4. Blows hard. 7. Wind high, Purch.
1175. 8. Very Dangerous Storm, Waves as high as the Topmast, gr. 20. 1597.
April men's. Cold Showrs. 6. day, Foul Weather, stiff Winds, 16. Foul Weather,
gr. 8. did. May 2. Storm, foul Weather, and great Winds. 7. Foul, and Snows
hard, gr. 15. did. May 24. Great store of Snow, gr. 15. did. 1598. Aug. 7.
Disjectae Naves Tempestate in, vide and. London. Sept. 5. Harmful Thunder, gr.
11. Did. Circ. fin. Sept. Many high Winds and Rain. October. 8. Admiral lost a
Boat and a Man, vel VC. 1599. April and May, Cold and Dry, in and. May 2.
Sudden Gusts of Wind about this time of the year, are very Fruitful, with
Storms of Thunder and Lightning, terrible and dangerous, Purch. I. p. 148. Our
Misen was broke and split in the middle, Pyrard's Voyage, Purch. 114. To II..
1602. Sept. 20. Tempest terrible, in fine, gr. 7. did. Inter Oct. 3. and 31.
Tempest and Current to the South, gr. 16. 1605. May 27. Blew hard, C. Smith. p.
19. gr. 6. distant. Virginia. June 11. Cold, Snow and Hail, in fine gr. 6.
did. 1606. April 1. Much Rain. 7. Great Storm. 26. Much Stormy about a
Fortnight, gr. 28. Distant. May 4. ad 14. A Storm, gr. 26. did. sive SS. July
24. Rain and Fog. 25. Blows very hard all Night, gr. 26. August 4. Wind, Rain,
very high Sea. 10. Mavelous high. 30. Blows very much, gr. 8. did. in
Tropic. 1607. Jun. princip. Gusts of Rain 11. 6 or 7 Whales, gr. 6. did. 14.
Snow, much Wind. 15. We lay at Drift, gr. 4. did. 99. Rain and Fog. 23. Hard
Gale, great Rain, as in England. 25. About Noon, Three Grampoises, in Tropic.
gr. 4. did. 28. Hard Gale 29. The hardest Storm in the Voyage, gr. 11. 15. A
Mermaid. Die eod. VII Whales and Propisces, gr. 17. did. 10. Procella, Imbres.
13. Still Gale, gr. 6. July 12. More Porpisces than before. 14. Very much Rain
and East Wind. 16. Rain and Storm, gr. 10. G. de Aguilla. 18. Tempest and great
Cold. Arthus. 20. Grando mixta Ton. and Fulgur. Arth. gr. 18. gr. 22. 26. Tanta
vis ventorum ut aliqui Umbilico tenus Aquis institerint. Arthus. gr. 26. 14.
Frost and Snow, gr. 27. April 2. Mighty Storm for 6 hours, in. Ab April 4. We
lay driving to and fro in the Sea, growing all the while. May 2. Hard Storm at
South, gr. 7. did. 1608. June 2. Thunder and Lightning Vide supra in and. 5.
Great Shower of Hail. Kent. July 26. Thunder, Lightning, Rain. 1609. July 24.
Storm unparalleled. 27. Corpo Santo's. 1612. April 12. Wind blew hard, N W. gr.
9. 1615. Aug. 11. We labored to get to Land. 14. Much Rain, Thunder,
Lightning. Indian Mosque split with a Thunder bolt gr. 19. 20. Wind blew the
white salt from off the Sea. gr. 12. August mense, etc. Boisterous Winds.
M^^son not steady, in. 22. Winds Impetuous while the was under the Earth, gr.
11. 23. St. No. At Rio de Tumba in the West Indies, Storms, Rains, Thunders
haunted them till Sept. 13. that they could not find the Isle Coquez in 5
degrees. Spilbergen in Purch. 1. page 84. 27.. 9.. Ab. Aug. 19. ad 24. Blew
very hard, Storms and Thunder, gr. 13. Sept. 3. A great Sea, but little Wind,
E. gr. 4. 10. Much Rain and a Corpo Santo. Foul Weather followed, the Sea
racked our Ships. Sept. Water as white as Milk, gr. 1. did. 23. Thunder,
Lightning, gr. 12. distant. 1616. April 6. Rainy and Smooth Water, gr. 24. 10.
Blew hard, a great Shower. 16. Tornodo's from all parts of the Compass: Stinking
Rain, gr. 15. May 3. Many Tornado's, gr. 6. distant. 1617. Aug. 25. Water
white, gr. 22. 1618. April 21. Storm, Wind, Thunder, gr. 23. May 1. Storm for 3
Nights. June 10. Foul Weather, gr. 7. in princip. 1619. Sept. 27. All Night
Tempestuous, terrible. Thunder and abundance of Rain, East Indies. Purch. 1.
660. 10, 22., opp. gr. 10. gr. 5. October. 1. A Night of Wind, Rain, Thunder and
Lightning, as either before or since, I never saw, 13., 22.. 1602. April 20.
Tornado's, gr. 17. July 9. Storm, great Extremity, gr. 17. in princip. 26.
Tempest terrible, abundance of Rain. 27. Stormy and dangerous, gr. 22. 28. Ad
Aug. 1. Wind increased still. Streights. Nov. 19. Great Tempests, gr. 18. 1621.
October. 22. Venti furentes, Kepl. gr. 18. Streights. Nov. 19. Great Tempests,
gr. 18. 1625. March a 22. ad 24. Pluit die nocteque; sive VC. Kepler. April 27.
Fulgur Matutinum, Kepl. gr. 7. May 8. Chasma, Kyr. Partile in. 18. Hail, Snow,
lb. July Mense; I observed it Thundered no less than 15 days apud Kyr. gr. 26.
June 11. Terrible Thunder, Kyr. gr. 13. 1626. July 3. Pluit noct. tot. gr. 27.
did. 7. Frigidae Pluviae multae. 23. Procaellae, Tonit. Aestus, cujus causam
ignorare sa fatetur Keplerus, gr. 18. 31. Tonit. largi imbres, gr. 12. 1627.
May 21. Ton. Cataractae, in gr. 7. distant. 1628. Sept. 7. Nimbi Grandinosi. in
gr. 3. distant. 1629. May 3. and 4. Cataractae and illuvies prodigiosa
demoutib. Sudeticis Kepl. gr. 13. distant. June 14. Saeva Tempestas, gr. 19.
19. Fulgura minacia, gr. 29. 23. July 3. Tonitrua Crebra. p. 348. 16, 11.
Norwich. 1630. October. Great Shipwracks by Storms, in princ.. 1631. May 18, 19.
Thunder, Plashing Rain, Kyr. gr. 12. June 14. Thunder and Plashing Rain, Kyr.
gr. 11. Hamburgh. 1632. Oct. 11. Inundation, Norimberg, Ephem. 1634. October. 11.
Inundation, Kyr. gr. 10. where 6133 men were lost, Calv. Append. Oct. 11, 12,
13, 14. were nothing but rainy, Kyr. 1635. May 19. Plashing Rain and Thunder,
gr. 5. did. June 27. Great Tempest of Hail, etc. Kyr. July 26. Thunder,
Lightning, Rain. August 10 m. Lightning ab Orient, sive QV. 1636. October. 22.
Tempest lasted 5 days at Astrachan, Olear. in 9. and in 26. Kov. 11. Tempest,
Olear. 188. 13. Tempest continues. 14. Tempest abated a little, it grew again,
we lost our Anchor, Rudder and Mast, Ib. 1637. June 15. Thunder, then a Shower.
Kyr. 1638. October. 21. Dry, Tempest of Thunder and Lightning. 1639. Aug. 29. We
had those Storms (called Travado's) which are quickly over, Olear. Mandeslo's)
Voyage, in and. 1640. May 17. Harmful Thunder and Lightning. Sept. 23. Storm of
Wind, and great Water-Gust,. October. 18. Chasmata. 1641. Aug. 25. Audib.
Thunder, gr. 5. 1643. Sept. 2. ad 6. Much Rain, Kyr. gr. 5. 1644. April 23. and
24. ad 30. Frost and Snow, gr. 25. in. May 3. Chasma, Kyr. 16, 17, 18. Thunder
Harmful, in gr. 10. 23. Men slain with Thunder, in gr. 6. 1645. Sept. 4.
Extreme Wet. Fairfax's Soldiers and Horses dyed, Sprig. 9, gr. 19. in and. Oct.
Extreme Wet, the Ways unpassable for Military Carriages, Sprigg. 8. gr. 18.
1646. May 4. Thunder Harmful Kyr. 26. Thunder and Hail, Kyr. June 23. Terrible
Thunder. July 11, 19. Thunders. 1647. Nov. 11. Dark and Tempestuous Night, when
his Majesty Charles the I. escaped from Hampton Court, in gr. 18. 1648. Nov. 9,
19. Near Andros Isle, a Spout near a quarter of an hour,: 1660. Oct. 30. In
Hertfordshire, Caelum ardens,, supra in. 1668. Dec. 17. R. Hail Th. Lightn.
11., 27. vide sapra in.
26. Great is our Subject, and great must be the Care and Pains to Master it:
We traversed the World, the Reader sees, to display our Aspects Greatness. We
could wish we had Circumnavigated the Globe, and taken Observation all the way.
Great use, in the mean while, may be made of the Mariners Journal, to teach us
to look up to the Stars and Bright Asterisms, to learn, not so much their
Number, as their Power. Note in the mean time the Table presents the Opposition
mostly, for Brevities sake.

27. We have already labored to preclude all Objections that we suspect may be
brought against these Tables, their Imperfection, or their Prolixity. It Is in
vain to struggle with the Libyan Hercules, we lift our Adversary up into the
Air, and he must expire.

28. As to our large extent of the, even to a Semisextile, Let it take its
Fate; let the Censurer of these Papers, as in some Tradesmen's Bills, abate
what seems unreasonable, so he allows us something for our Pains. It Is not
the first time we have done so; yea, we are required to allow so much in some
grand Effects. Eichstad, upon his own Observation, I see, has abetted the
Quincunx, whose Influence, when he found, he was in have to attest it; and
thereupon inserted (though out of place) a Notandum at the end of his
Calculation, Ao 1644. We have not given you our Word here, but some Evidence
also, though not so often as we might, both for the one and the other. We might
do as much for the Semisextiles.

29. And now, what shall I say? What New Thing comes under Observance! Storms
are no News, nor Thunders, nor Rains: The Effects are common, spread over the
Face of the Earth; But the Man of Experience, with the Man of Science; the
Mariner and the Student knows not that and are many times the Signal Causes of
such Effects; yea, and have some Causality more or less, according to their
Stage; so that wheresoever they be, in Aspect, or out of Aspect within 30
degrees, or without, they know they are engaged, as sure as the Sun knows his
going down.

30. And this is visible in our Table, to those who will please to ponder the
frequency of the Fits of the Weather that return within a Months time. As in
1540. 1550. etc. in Febr. 1556. In Jan. and June, 1557: or shall weigh the
Obstinate Constancy of a Churlish; yea, sometimes of a Savage Constitution, as
in June 1549. In June and July, 1557. Add 1585. where July; August, and
September are troubled with Cold; or May and June 1588. which year the English
and the Spaniard will never forget: where in we would not be thought to
derogate from the First Cause, but only as we are now engaged, do assert his
Wisdom by not abrogating the Second, created and assumed by himself.

31. Nor do we stay here: For March and April, 1589. April and May, 1591.
August and September, 1596. April and May again, 1597. Sept. and October. 1598.
May and August, 1606. June 1607. are extant in the Table. And what need I wade
further?

32. It Is Want of this, made Kepler at a stand, when he professes he understood
not the Cause of Wind, Rain, Storm and Thunder in the beginning of Aug. 1626.
Initium (says he) cui ascribam non habeo. When as there are sundry Causes,
some nearer, some remote. Amongst the remote, the distance of and, 18 degrees
at furthest; and is it not reasonable to think so? When he finds near upon as
distant from on one side, as is on the other. Such Curiosity there is in the
Planetary distances, as we have before admonished. The like loss he is at for
his Pluit tota nocte, July 3. Anni ejusdem. For though and be 27. degrees
distant, they are not excluded from their Share in the Effect; for they find
several ways of Union, as in our Natural Body it happens, not so obvious to be
remarked. Little thought he of the of and, but at 6 degrees distance; Little
thought he of the Moon's application to the Opposite of, in process of the
whole Night. In fine, Little thought he of the numerous Fixed, then and there
posited, which connects and between 14. and 11.

33. Shall I give you one Instance more in Ao 1627. We find Lightning, and
Rain, and Cataracts for 40 days in the Months of May and June, in which while
Thunder and Lightning 14 times. Amongst other Aspects we find our of and.
Kepler, whom I never mention without an Interior Honor, flies to the Nature
of the Soil, to the exudations of Oily Plants, and Minerals, and Fossiles,
which he says are full of Vitriol, etc. Whereupon he produces a like place of
Medicinal Waters and Quarries of Slat, which more frequently suffer by
Lightning, allowing himself only one Thundering day to our Aspect. Now in all
this 40 days there is not an Aspect likely, but an of and, and, and a of and,
to which he makes his recourse, conjecturing, that 3 or 4 Aspects could not
show themselves so illustriously, but that this opened the Earth, to emit its
Exhalations for half a year together. But omitting that manifest subter-fuge of
an half-year-Aspect, for the account of 40 days; an Aspect that is not so
moist, or so impregnative with Moisture, nor so Potent, seeing it is but a. He
must have an hard Forehead that will deny an of and to have an Hand in these
Excesses, when he shall see Tonitrua horrenda, upon the very Day, and Cataracts
the day after. Then he must be very Resty that will not allow it for probable
at least, that the meeting of our of and, with this of and, did not contribute
to all those numerous Thunders within those Limits. Does not Nature it self
teach us to enlarge these Aspects, and make them comprehensive of these
Celestial Tumults, that they may be laid at their Door? Single, neither one nor
the other can do it, but mixed, they may; for at the end of 40 days and are but
23 degrees distant. Whosoever therefore shall say, and did none of this,
neither by themselves, nor by the help of others, had as good tell us there are
no such things in Nature, that they are upstart new invented Terms, that there
is no such thing as Arab, that there is no such Man as Kepler, that He; and all
that look upwards, are, and have been Fops and Simpletons; or if this last be
no great absurdity, then let them but confess what they see with their Eyes,
that opposed the Pleiades, and not far off from them, Stationary all the Month;
and if he knows not what this signifies, 'twill become a man to learn.

34. There remains a doubt about Inundations, which I have ventured to assert,
do not break in so often under this Aspect, as under some others. Yet, so it
haps that the Three First Instances of this Table are solely concerning Floods.
The Aspect with must carry away the name for Floods; sometimes with; sometimes
with but most with. That and may sometimes wet their Feet, or wade deep into
the same, must not be denied. But we must enquire whether it be so frequent,
and shall cause an Excess of Wet in more parts of the Zodiac then and; their
Situation here shows the reason. and, and are the Signs, for the most part,
where a Flood appears under, being the Equinoctial Signs.

Next, it may not be amiss to see whether, when a Flood happens under our
Aspect, an Aspect of or with be not as Paramount there as can be? If so, the
Effect must rather be imputed to that Cause which oftener obtains; though he who
has the fewer Votes must not be excluded. But and does not come near the
wringing-wet Influence (as Houswives call it) of and, Ergo. -- Take therefore
the first Instance of Febr. 11. Ao 1500. There Is in. There is so. Now stretch
it as far as you are able; when all is done, there will be found (remember, an
Aspect which is next to for Excess of Wet) which sticks closer, and reaches
further: That Aspect then must be reckoned the main procurer of the Effect. The
Rain and Snow which contributed to the Flood, fell in November, December, or
January, or in the first week of February, or in all together; I find in
November distant but gr. 15. In Dec. Die 10. but gr. 8. distant; In January but
one degree; In February when the Flood came, but 7 gr. distant; while and come
not in Play till the midst of December; from which time They are allowed to
contribute, but not to evacuate the Right of the other Aspect. The same Answer
must serve to the 2d or 3d on S. Thomas Eve, Gem. Lib. 2. For and were opposed,
it is true, and in a Critical place, in princ.. But who but and (I say nothing
of her being Retrograde the while) were conjoined all the preceding Month; and
on the very day of the was within less than 15 degrees did. so that the of in
Platique of, which Nexus our Planets one with another in a Triple Cord, let me
tell you, brings Excesses of all kinds. The 3d of Ao 1511. if it were in the
Month February, as the word Rursus in Gemma's Margin may import, Lib. II. p.
151. That falls under the Signs and. So, Ao 1629. May 3. and 4. Otherwhile in,
as Ao 1570. Aug. 1. but Ao 1627. concerning which we have spoken already as to
its Cataracts, (which are Floods in another term) the Signs were and.

It Is true, Ao 1551. in, but and were within less than half a Sign, in April,
which must contribute to a Summer Flood. Thus with such Remarks as these, we
assoil the Difficulty.

35. The Comets we shall represent as they succeed orderly with the Places of
our Planets in the Dexter Margin, whether or presuming it observable, if they
be at that time within the Compass of a Sign ( i. e.) 30 degrees, though the
Terms of that distance lie under several Denominations, as, yet they are as in
the same Sign.

Ao 1500. Comet in April for 18 days (Others, four Months) in Sept. one sub
Signo, said to be Horrendae Magnitudinis, attested by several, Lycosthenes,
Funccius, etc. our Planets lie at 28 gr. distance, viz. 23., 21..

Ao 1505. Circ. Fest. Michaelis and Novilun. Novembris. A Comet like the but
not so bright. It lasted till Shrovetide the following year. Linturius apud
Lubienec. Now in Sept. 27. our Planet lay thus at gr. 16. distance, 29. 15.

Ao 1506. April 12. Cometa per 5 Dies ( others 25.) visus est, Calvis. our
Planets gr. 2. did. 10.. 12..

Ao 1513. A Dec. fine ad Febr. 19. Anni sequent. our Planets are set at gr. 2.
distant, 23., 21..

Ao 1516. Comet said to shine a little before the Death of Ferdinand King of
Spain: which must be about January, 13.. 9..

Ao 1521. Mense Aprilis, Cometa in fine Ricciolus, 15. 5..

A 1528. Jan. 18. Cometa in, in the Opposition of, says Ricciolus Hevel. in o.
in 27.

Ao 1538. a Jan. 27, ad 21. Comet observed to appear in gr. 5. Lat. Bor. gr.
17. in ipso Pegasi Collo, also in oppositione Saturni, says P. Surdus, apud
Ricciol. 27., 20..

Ao 1556. Sub initio Martii Cometa equalis fere Lunae Dimidio. Cardan de
Variet. It was seen Die 50. supra Spicam juxta alan Virginis sinistram. Die 9.
Juxta arcturum, Ricciol. Ducavit ad finem Aprilis, 11. 4..

Ao 1557. ab. Aug. 6. ad 24. Comet in, Stadius, p. 66. Bunting 8., and 16..

Ao 1559. Sub finem Maii, usque ad Diem 22. Junii, Ricciol. 28.. in 12.. Die
antem Junii, 10. Retrograde,. 8..

Ao 1560. April Diebus 28. in Galliis visus est Cometa, Roch. 5.. 7.

Ao 1586. Comet in Virgin. They name no Month if the First half year it
happened, our s at hand, in March, April, May.

Ao 1596. In Germany, July 9. Inter Stellas ursa Majoris, Rochenback,
Rothmannus, apud Hevel. 26. 7.

Ao 1604. October. 3. in gr. 17. Eck storm apud Lubien. 11. 24.

Ao 1647. Nov. 19. Arcturo paulo minor in gr., cum Lat. bor, 26. seen for 2
days only, Hevel. 27. 22..

Ao 1664. Dec. 4. in, and Lat. Austr. 22. ad Rostrum Corvi, Hevel. 29., 13..

Ao 1682. Aug. 16. Comet near the Feet of Ursa Major, then in 2. in 29.

36. Concerning which Comets, if it be not Yet, it Will be a Plain Case, that
they depend on the Stars: the former Age perceived it: For from thence
Ricciolus had his Observation that the Comet 1528. lay in Opposition to. And
again, that of Ao 1538. from P. Surdus, it was opposite to. In like manner
another Historian of the Genuese Affairs, teaches us, that the Famed Comet,
1558. was sited in to, Bizar. apud Hevel. Now, whether Opposition be taken in
an exact Mathematical Sense, or in a Vulgar, for any Distance of Two Bodies in
a right Line: as I see these Authors take the Word at large, for the one and
for the other; I say either of them proves the Dependence of the Phenomenon
from the Planet. Thus, That in the Constellation of (the Southern of the Two)
was Opposite Diametrically, as Surdus says, to then posited in 20. See! to the
Sun it is not Opposite, no, not by accident; to he is. It owes its being then,
( i. e.) its Luster, for a great part to, as the Full owes its Luster to the
Opposition of the Sun. In like manner does the Famed Comet 1556. owe its
Existence to the Opposition of, Mars being then in the beginning of, the Comet
showing it self in the Opposite. Yea, grant that the Sun was not far off about
20. Yet who will not say, but that the Sun it self is, in some sort, accidental
to the generation of the Comet, seeing These Comets are generated in the
Opposite Point. To end Disputes, let us attend to the Sun, if you please, on
the One side of this Comet, and in 11. on the other side, and between them the
Three,. It Is as clear as Light, that the Comet draws his Original.

37. That for further Proof, if need require, let the Reader cast his Eye on
the Comet, 1516. there he shall find and within gr. 4. Anni 1512. 1560. within
gr. 2 one of the other. And how could the Former Century choose but observe, at
least, leave it as remarkable to Posterity, if they perhaps may make some
Conclusion from thence. Now, whereas in other Comets recited, our Planets lie
at remoter distance; I desire it may be observed, that Those who lie within gr.
8, 13, 16. etc. the most remote are found within the Compass of 30 degrees, the
Confine of a Sign; which are not therefore to be, by a Careless Presumption,
reckoned for naught, but to be studiously remarked; in as much as we ought not
to confine Nature to our Shallow Pedantique Dictates, but to follow and trace
her in all her Liberties she takes, which will be found to have their terms of
Confinement, as the Hunted Hare, which, notwithstanding all its Breathing, is
known to keep within such a Compass. So that the First Comet of 1500. where was
in 29. and in 21. is owing to the Neighborhood of three Planets, as sure as
those which are found when and shake hands within a degree or Two.

38. Say we the same of Those 2 or 3 Comets which fall under the Opposition of
and, Anni 1521. 1529. 1647. On which we enlarge not, because we hope there is
no need.

39. Especially when lends her helping hand, with and so we find it about 4 or
5 times in our Beadrol immediately preceding in the Leading Comet, Ao 1500. In
the following one of 1505. In the Third of 1556. In the Fourth of 1596. In
which let me tell you and are found most part of nearer Conjunction, then and,
viz. within 2 or 3 degrees. As Ao 1500. when and are almost within a Sign
Distant. So Ao 1656. when and were 7 degrees asunder. Ao 1596. and within 8
degrees, and distant twice Five. I leave it to your Choice, whether you will
please to say, that and assisted and? Or Vice versa; though without
Controversy the Less is Accessory, and the Greater is Principal. The Truth is,
and that 'twill come to, Comets, and all other Productions Celestial, depend
upon the Conflux of the Heavenly Bodies, and certain Positions: though we have
been forced in a more Prolix Method to Drill the Reader on, as we have often
said, if he would grant us some parts of Truth, before we could expect him so
liberal as to grant the whole. An seems to occur more rarely in this Affair:
the of with Platique, does often occur. Platique I say, for as for the Partile,
it is in vain to pronounce, till the Age shall think it worth its while to give
us the Motion of for some Centuries past.

40. Our hand is in, and we intend no repetition of the same. What say we then
to and? They put in at and also, and therein they seem to surpass the Aspect
of. But yet, I know not what an exacter Search may find, and appears but thrice
in the Cometical Scene, and by but twice. The First, Ao 1500. May 20. 10 gr.
did. 28. 8.. (See before in and) The next, Ao 1506. in Aug. and in. The 3d Ao
1633. June 19. and in. The on April 1. 1512. toward the end of and, and again
in That still Famous 1618. Nov, 14. in the beginning of and.

41. An Observer would make more use of this Table. For First, our Planets are
near enough, I tro. Ao 1506. 1513. 1516. 1556. 1560. Why, in all these, and are
within gr. 8. at farthest; yea, but 4. yea, but 2 distance conjoined. But Ao
1557. and 1559. they lie at distance but gr. 8. opposed. And here by the way,
observe more frequent Effects at than.

42. Observe, 2ly. that you find and both in twice, Ao 1528. 1556. and learn
what Keckerman has observed, That Comets love to appear near the Equinox: and
that near the Autumnal Equinox, rather than the Vernal. The reason we have
blurted out often enough: The time is yet to come that and have appeared in, to
cast a Comet in: What was done in former Countries troubles me not: 1000 years
ago is another Case.

43. 3ly. That you find in, and in but not both in. 4ly. that and are found in
together, Ao 1506. and in with his Neighbor Equinoctial Sign. Ao 1538. The
Equinoctial Sign puts us in mind of Keckerman again; but puts us in mind of an
Answer to a serious exception; viz. Why do so many Comets show themselves near
the Feet of the Great Bear? Have recourse to Hevelius's Table, and you shall
see this verified in that of August, 1506. What is that of 1521. in fine? But
letting that pass, come to 1531. 1539. 1558. 1582. 1596. 1607. that Famous one
of 1618. and the last that showed it self to us, Aug. 16. 1682. It Is odds but
you will find some Celestial Wayfarer housed in, or Affecting it with it may
be, before, or after. Surely where the Comet appears in the Months, June, July
or August, it is a plain case some Planet must be near in those Months. Believe
me, in Three or Four of the other Months we find a Planet in, which is the
facing Sign of; even that great Planet.

44. Observe, 4ly. that and its opposite carry the greatest Sway in this
Affair, concerning which we cannot opportunely here enlarge.

45. Observe, 5ly that the Comets of 1528. and 1538. showing themselves at the
same time of the year, and in the same place of the Zodiac, with the same note
of an to, would give occasion to think it were one and the same Comet, whose
Chronology was multiplied Two for One: But the contrary is true; Two they were,
like one another, but like Brothers born at 10 years distance. This ministers
another occasion to tell, that there are more Comets appear in January than in
any other Month: And for the Summer Months, the greatest Total appears in Aug.
So that our Notion of and is confirmed: And that of the Equinoctial Sign. See
Ricciolus's Table, Almagest, 1. Part. page 23.

46. In the next place, Those Comets who are reported to have opposed, might as
well have bin said to oppose. Certainly if it appear in, as 1528. it comes as
near to the beginning of, as to the end. So in the other of 1538. 27, which is
's place, comes nearer, 5. then 20. does, which is the place of. It Is true, in
that of 1556. They were so near together, One can make no Comparison. Only this
I would be at, if may not be excluded, I hope shall be taken notice of.

47. No more of this Gear will I trouble the Reader with in this place, only
let us keep in remembrance, That Three of these belong, indeed, to no one
Aspect of the Superiors, but to all Three. On which account, Astrologers have
the Heart to predict them sometimes, and with Thanks to the Arabians they hit
for the most part.

48. As to Earthquakes, I observe that their Number seems to be equal with that
of the Comets, which shows that and deal in such Trade, and are apt to give
Fire to one as well as the other. I do not find that This always is joined with
That, or that with This. Some years bring one without the other, some contrary.
But withal some years usher in Both; such were the years 1500. 1506. Cometical
years in the First, of which Vesuvius is noted to have Falm'd by Ricciolus, and
Constantinople to have Trembled, Rochenback. The like they testify, Ao 1516.
and Ao 1595. which two last I have specified in the Table; because they seem
more determinate then the other, falling nearer to the Epochae of the Comet,
for so I reckon that which followed the Comet in July, 1595. to have shown it
self in Sicily, about September: much concerned the mean while that the precise
Days are not specified by the less Curious Historian.

Of Earthquakes.
49. Ao 1506. Pestis and max. T. M. Constantinopoli, Rockenbach. 1508. Mense
Aprilis, T. M. Eichstad, ( 7., 10.,) page 42. 1516. T. M. near Norimberg,
Rockenbach. 1531. Jan. 36. Lisbon: 1500 Houses overturned, Mizaldus, 244.
lasted 8 days, Lycost. 8., 22.. 1536. April 1. Aetna Flames, Lycost. Vesuvius
burns all the year, 22., 17.. 1538. Vesuvius flamed thrice this year,
Rockenbach. 1540. January 25. At Chemnitz in Misnia, Lycost. 572. 8,, 9.. 1542.
At Constantinople, Eichstad. 1548. Febr. 9. At Basil, 12., 14.. 1551. May 25.
In Surrey, Stow, 22., 13.. 1554. March 21, 22. At Lovain, Gem. 21., 1.. 1556.
April 10. T. M. 18., 3.. 1580. April 6. 11. May 1. Great Earthquake throughout
England, Stow, taken notice of by Foreiners, Thuanus, etc. 16., 27.. 1585. Aug.
4. Notingham, Kent, 19.. 15. 1586. Dec. 23. T. M. Destroyed most part of the
City of Guatimala, Purch. and a Vulcan had 6 Months vomited Flame, 18.. 29.
1591. From July 6. to Aug. 12. In the Isle of St. Michael, Purch. p. 1677. 24.,
10.. 1595. T. M. in Asia, following the Comet seen in July, Hist. Sicul, apud
Ricciolus. 1596. In Mexico, July 22. Aug. 30. September 4. 14. 4. 1606. Oct.
13. Not long, but terrible, 2. 22. 1632. At Naples, October. 8. 27. 27.. 1636.
Sept. 16. Kyr. 14., 7.. 1637. July 1. Tours. 14. 22.. 1638. September 7. 2.,
8.. 1643. Sept. 6. 5., 3.. 1646. April 11. May 29. 3., 12.. 1648. Gr.
Tremblement, De Terre. 1667. July 18. Bickley, in Oxfordshire, 19. 2.. 1677.
Nov. 13. In the Isle of Palma. Mr. Hooks Lectures, 7.. 7.. 1680. Hevelius,
July 24. Aug. 6. Milain. 60. Persons lost, 1., 15.. March 13. Vesuvius throws
out Fire, in Trop.
50. He who shall please but to Canvass this Table after the Method pointed at
in the Precedent, shall see all things Consonant and Consequent. He shall see
the History of Comets and Earthquakes. They both lie in a Belly: He shall see
that the same Signs, for the most part, Fashion One, and produce the Other.
They must necessarily do so, where they come upon the Stage at the same time (
i. e.) within a Month or Two, more or less, as the Parturient Pangs are more or
less tedious. He shall see that the s and s Platique are to be regarded; though
in some determinate Places, even the Partile gives a great Lift. He shall see
this, that (if I mistake not) Nature is at more cost to make a Comet, than to
move the Earth: Seeing the Earth is moved but in part, an Island, or a
Province; but your Stupendous Comets are universally visible all the Earth
over.

51. Scarce any difficulty remains about them (at least which I can hope to
master) but this: Why Comets universally appearing, should be visible to Asia,
before they are observed in Europe: Why, in some parts of Europe before others.
So I find it happens; and Hevelius (I remember) takes notice of it. If all
Comets were sublunar, as Ricciolus thinks it possible, then something might be
hammered out for a kind of Answer. But seeing that great Artists will not have
it so, let me propose that Doubt which I cannot solve. The Reader, I hope, does
see some reason why we admire, though in Prospect, the approaching Superior
Planets; I looked on them with Veneration, as I do a Mountain, seeing plainly a
Footstep of That Immensity whose Consideration swallows up the Considerer.

52. In regard of which I come the more unwilling to the Introduction of
Pestilences, least I should be thought such a Patron for 2d Causes, as in the
least to presume upon the prime Being. As he who acknowledges a Creation,
confesses the prime Cause; so he who acknowledges Providence, must confess a
Second. And what are the the Planets? They are no Idols, nor the Work of any
Strange God to us. Jannes and Jambres did not make them. No Miraculous Magique
placed the least of them in the Firmament; nor can any Charm (whatever the
befooled Heathen Imagine) pull them down. They are the Creatures of the pure
Virgin Creation, before ever it was besmeared with the unwholsom Mists of
Heathen Idolatry. But what then? May not God use his good Creatures sometimes
to scourge us? We cannot say but we have deserved; and that the Divine Wisdom
has good ends in it, most Commonly to the Sufferer, always to the Surviver,
that the Generality may see the Fairness of God's Creation, leave him no Arms
Defensive or Offensive, against a Daring Presumptuous Rebel.

53. If God has ordained Sideration of Plants, or blasting of Fruits, must we
accuse the Creation? For if God please, upon just Provocation to strike a
Sinner dead with Lightning; or Petrifie him as a Monument of a Salt Stone,
(...), Who shall charge Him, or the Work of his Hands, Foolishly. It Is the same
Case of an Aspect. They are Malignant: What hinders more, then that a Viper or
a Scorpion should be Malefique? Yea, but a Malignant Aspect comes of necessity;
and so seems to evacuate Religion, and the Great Duty of Prayer, since come
it must, and will stay its time, whether we regard Religion or no. -- Come it
must: grant it: And it is Fatal. It may in a Sense be so. But here is Room for
Religion: For God can Deliver, even in Fatal Dangers. A Danger that is
unavoidable, Quoad adventum; Quoad Eventum, aut exitum, may be safely passed. A
Storm is Fatal, and the Mariners know that such a time of year in such a Reach,
it must be Tempestuous. But then by grace done to Religion, God may carry them
through. If I go to Sea, let me live Religiously, not in hopes, it may be, that
God will never send a Storm; but that in case of such danger, I may Weather it.
There Is Fruit enough of Religion; yea, in case of Shipwreck, If I come safe to
Land; the saving of my self Demonstrates, that I do not serve God for Naught.

54. If this Rubb be cleared; for I dare not be so much an Astrologer, as to be
an Enemy to Religion; then I say we pretend to nothing but what is clear and
confessed; even by the Vulgar themselves, but that they are not used to
spinning of new Conclusions from a Plain Thread, viz. that the times of the
year unseasonable, are unhealthy. That an excess of Heat, even in Season, much
more out of Season, is dangerous to all Bodies. This Distemper proceeding from
the Planet, which the Vulgar themselves, that can spell the Word, will not
deny. Nothing hinders but that an Aspect of the Superior Planets may be
reckoned more or less dangerous at certain times. Foggy Air is unwholsom;
Harvest time is obnoxious to Fevers; and a Hot May makes a fat Churchyard.
Put this into terms of Philosophy, and it signifies an Aspect of and are
somewhat Equivalent to Malignant about and, brings Fevers, and an Aspect of
and in in May time, kills us up. brings foggy, choking Weather.

Morborum Epidem. Catalogus a Centuriae Proxime Elapsae principio usque ad
Annum 1683. quotquot ad Asp. reduci posse videantur.
1500. Great Pestilence, Stow. The King ( Henry VII.) went for France. May 8.
The Sickness then threatening. Note, that the increase occasioned the Kings
departure, May 8. while and were at that present with in gr. 30. the happening
Febr. 10. 17. 1506. Sudor Anglicus, noted secunda vice, Stow. Febr. V. 27. The
as in the Margin, but from that Febr. to July, whereabouts the Sickness likely
was rife, continued within gr, 30. did. as before. 1510. In France,
Dimerbrock. p. 159. Dec. 7. 8. The Aspect fell in the Close of the year
preceding, but by Retrograde Course returned into the same Sign with, or at
least within gr. 20. and there held till August, which is remarkable. 1518. and
1519. Winter Sickness throughout the Land, Stow. Nov. 8.. Nothing more
manifest, in Tropical Signs, all Nov. Dec. and January, etc. following. Let any
man consult the Ephemerides, and mark the Motion of, the Saturnine Motion of. A
Cause that comes as rare in such a critical place, as a Winter-Pestilence.
1521. Great Death in England, Howes. Jan. 10.. The Opposition falls in January,
but, as is usually by Retrograde course, recovers the Aspect in Spring time,
and has scarce foregot it in July; but before that time plays the part of in
the; look upon her motion, and speak. 1522. At Rome and Genoa, Pestis atrox,
Gem. 2. 249. begins in July, In; comes not in till Sep.. 1525. Was Pestilential
by Fallopius's reckoning, who has noted the Duration of a Pestilence for Six
years together, viz. from 1524. to 1530. apud Dimerbr. p. 136. The scarce
expired in June, when lo! long before the was on Foot, which holds all July; at
what time to lack no help was also in being. Here Is the Nexus before spoken of.
1527. At Rome, amongst the Soldiers, in 3 Months space Thousands dyed, Untz.
1169. From June and July, in. 1534. In Gallia Narbonensi Valeriola apud
Dimerbr. p. 56. The happens in May, and that in too, which introduces a sickly
Summer; but there are more Irons in the Fire. 1538. Pestis crudelis, ab
excrementis Stellarum, notante Paracelso, apud Dimerbr. p. 13. June 13. 12. The
falls in high Summer, and that in the Equinoctial Sign. Note the Sign, it bodes
no good you know. 1540. Pestilent Flux, Ague, sub Henry VIII. Stow. June 23.
in. No good expected from an Aspect in. It Is an Equinoctial Sign with. It Is
hard to show a year free at such a critical accident; when I see I shall say
(as at all times) (...), Blessed is he who sits in the Circle of the
Heavens. 1549. Morbus quo viperae and lacertae in hum. corporib. gignerentur
Gemm. 159. in. Nor expired till July, which may comprehend the time. 1551. At
Shrewsbury, Sweating Sickness, April 15. and at London, July 12. Sub Edward VI.
How. June 9.. The falls in Midsummer, and before it expires, viz. at the end of
July; it is renewed by fresh Comers from the same Signs till September. 1557.
Catarrhus Pestil. per totam Europam Valles. in Hippocr. progn. p. 99. Thuanus,
p. 346. At Delf Thousands dyed before Month of May, Forster. Jan. 12. 21. The
holds strongly from January to March, April, May. This single Instance is
demonstrative: for before May had bin slow motioned; yea the returns again, in
July. Mark! and forget not Totam Europam. 1562. Lues pecoris infanda, Gem. May
7. 2. The falls in May, in the Tropic of but expect. 1566. Morbus Ungaricus
hoc anno mundum intract. Dimerbr. p. 22. June 23. 27. The precisely at
Midsummer. 1568. In Gallia, Mense Julio, Plater: apud Dimerbr. p. 80. and 102.
Lovanii etiam Gem. (62.) ad magis in proximos pagos. July 12. 23. The Plague
happens in the very Month where the Aspect is partil; besides the Infamy that
lies upon the Signs, and. See Ao 38. 49. 1570. Pestis truculenta totam Italiam
invasit, Tridentum, deinde Veronam, hinc Venetias ubi centum M. homines
interrempti: tandem Mediolanum accessit, Kirch. July 12. 13. The is in the
Margin. It Is true, with a Vengeance, what was said of and. Kyr. 1874. Lovain,
Gem. II. p. 48. Aug. 5. 1. The as in the Margin. It haps at the worst time of
the year, August and September are the Months when Heaven reckons with us, sed
vide. 1577. Bruno Gallicus (iste nova. Moraviae Lues) quem sive Annus peperit,
Dimerbr. p. 22. May 28.. The in the end of May, in the Tropical Sign,. 1589.
March 15. 25. Scorbute in the Ship. March. The in and, the very Month. 1590. In
Mauritania, Purch. in. I would know the Month. If it were in April, May, June,
or July, we have the in a Tropical Sign. 1591. At Rome, Pestis and Fames,
Kirch. March 27. 23. The as in the Margin, and September 17. again, it is found
still on the Tropical Signs [ Still] is to be noted. 1598. Great Plague at
Morocco. Aug. 16. in The in, and happens in August. Quid Plura? 1599. April 16.
26. Scorbute on Shipboard, 4 dyed per diem. April.. This in and this Month.
1606. At London, Bell's account. So at Frankenstal in Silesia. Dimerbr. p. 94.
Sept. The at the Height in September, in a Tropical Sign. 1607. Some Sickness
in London. So in Purch. it is noted at Sea, that Sickness made them return,
Junii princip. June 20.. The at high Summer. The Margin shows the Signs, and
the very Month of June. 1608. Some Pestilence still at London. The in April, in
which Month Multi Aegrotantes, says Arthusius. But the Heights of this
Sickness were observed in Sept. and Oct. when and were within gr. 10. 1609.
Some Pestil. still. Bell ut supra. The haps in July, scarce a Month before the
height. 1610. Very moderate Pestilence, for there dyed under 1000. in the whole
year. May,. It will suffice to note, that there was in May, in the Sign. 1618.
At NorWay, Grant. p. 78. Sickly in England, Id. June, in. The in June, and in a
Tropical Sign. 1619. At Grand Cairo, Gr. p: 164. October. 13.. The in Tropic
Signs, October. 13. sed vide exam. 1620. Sickly Season, Grant. 27. The in June
again, in a Tropical Sign. 1621. Octobris princip. Pestilence: Purch. III.
1658. October. 26. 20. The in Tropic Signs. 1622. At Amsterdam, Grant. July 11.
25. The happens in July, and still in a Tropic Sign. July is known to be as
catching as August. 1624. At Amsterdam; London sickly at the same time, Grant.
Aug.. This is plain by the Aspect on Aug. 3. 22. Yet take in the great. 1625.
At London. May,. This Dire year of 1625. was not found without our Aspect in
and; but, oh! Remember the other Superior Aspects Concomitant, succedent. See
in. 1626. At Amsterdam, Grant. At Lintz. in Germany, Kepl. Aug. 25. 17. Not
without a in, pray, remember once more. 1627. At Amsterdam, Grant.. The in May
and June, not expired. After which an of another Superior with. 1628. At
Amsterdam, Grant. Our strengthens it self in August and September, and that
about or, which of them you like best. 1636. A Plague of 10000. and odd; Land.
The Highest Week, and were in and gr. 13. did. Pray note it. 1629. At London
dyed 1317. Bell's account. Our was in. 1637. At Constantinople, Plague, while
London was Sickly, Grant. July 11. Our, as in the Margin, in July, and Tropic
Signs, which held part of June, all July, and part of August, in Signs
belonging to the Tropique. 1640. At London, the Highest Week Sept. 10. Total
331. Plague 105. and were in, within 4 degrees; the Truth of it is, who cannot
see it? moves no slower than the Months preceding. 1641. A Pestilence of 30000.
are in in August. 1646. At London. June 14.. The and goes as far as July, where
it is met by another Superior Aspect. 1645. The Total is under 2000. the
Aspect in at the end of Sept. the highest Week Aug. 28. Let any Man consult the
Ephemeris. 1648. Valencia in Spain, at Constantinople, in July. In Africa also.
Kirch. Sect. 1. Cap. 9. June 28. 11. The is timed for a Summer Month, and in a
Tropical Sign. It lasts all July, and not quite ceased in Aug. 1652. At Cracow,
Grant. Sickly in England. Id. The in August, in principio. Yea, other Aspects
have their shares opposed in Tropical Signs. See Table. Aug. in. 1654. At
Copenhagen, Grant. Sickly in London, Id. Sept. 3. 2. draw toward in July,
celebrated in the Sign; in Sept. princip. vide, as above. 1656. At Naples, a
great Plague at at Rome, at Genoa, Kyrcher. Sickin England, Grant. Sept. 24.
28. appear, where? but in Sept. The precise within 2 degrees of the Equator.
1657. At Genoua; the Height at August in principio, Grant. June 22. o. precise
in the Equinoctial Point, ad Jun. fin. calls for our remembrance. 1661. Sickly,
London, Id. June 26.. Our Planets are opposed about Midsummer, which we see by
sundry Examples premised, bodes ill. Yea, the very Aspect held till. August the
midst. 1665. That, I hope, never to be paralleled Pestilence, of 100000
Funerals. in Tropical Signs in July; there is one String of the Scourge. But
our killing of holds on.
56. Have I not said too much? is it not too plain? It Is not too much for a
sober Melancholy Consideration. It were Wisdom in us, if we could secure our
selves against those Fears which Annually fall upon us, almost every Summer or
Harvest, by seeking a more healthful Air, and a better Country above this
Elementary World. I did not know but some may make this use of it, and then I
have not said too much. The new Atlantis no question, as some have happily
mistaken concerning the Situation of Paradise, is above the Moon, be above and,
and all malefique Influences, real, or seeming: But this by the way. -- I am
aware of a just exception against such Discourses as these, which seem to make
every year, almost, Pestilential; for so the curious Reader will quickly find,
that what with one Aspect, and what with another, we make very few years to
pass free; since not a year goes over our Heads, but we shall meet with a, or
at least an: and if so by chance it haps that these Aspects prove inoffensive,
their Malignity being quenched by the the Season of the time, or by their State
of Desertion, then another Malignant Combination of with suppose, exercises the
same Malignity as before. To this, the Physicians will answer for us, that
there is difference between Pestilences, as in Motions of Water, all are not
raging or furious; wherefore, although at the inauspicious found of the Word we
fear, yet, God be thanked, we do not often feel its Fury. There is a difference
I say, when the yearly Bill shall scarce arise to 10000. from that higher year
which raises it to 5 times, yea, ten times as much: When a year brings 5000. or
6000. in the whole, and the other brings as many in the Week. And the
Physicians tell us again, that there is difference between absolute Pests, and
Diseases that may have some Spice of Malignity, and therefore called
Pestilential, because of their Cognation, and too near Vicinity. Nay, further,
we take it in a more large Signification; where, if you please, Forgo the
Name, and consider the years that are Sickly, and found to be such, when as yet
the Citizen, notwithstanding, finds it not his Interest to remove from his
employ whereby he subsists; Here I say, Not only the Croking Astrologer, but
the Phystian, and the Eminent Virtuoso himself takes notice frequently of the
year, and arrests them upon suspicion of Malignity.

57. Now, if every sickly year (which yet I do not believe) had some manifest
Criterium of Malignity in it; you need not be afraid to look into a List even
of such years, at least, if they were only of Foreign concern: We can easily
believe that Coonstantinople, or Grand Cairo is never free, yet we are not
troubled at the report. But if we are concerned, as I think we ought, for those
that are abroad also; and if we keep Correspondence in most parts of the World,
whether we like it, or no, we shall find, that somewhere or other, some
Sickness, not unworthy the Note of the Curious, is brisk upon our Mortal
Bodies. That these Configurations are disposing, or if you will, indisposing
Causes of our Humors and Spirits, will be plain, if it is not already; and the
very frequency of their return either by or, does confirm the Thesis, which
imputes those Maladies to those Configurations. For what can we say, when we
find those Configurations in being, when the Distemper reigns? What will you
say when you find the Distemper to start out within a Fortnight, or Week of the
precise Aspect? What will you say, if when the Aspect seems to expire, it shall
not absolutely cease? Supposing the Sickness to continue, till it has
introduced another in its Room to maintain the Indisposition begun by the
First. What will you say when the Malady shall hold (though with some
abatement, the Season considered) in the Winter Months, in October, November,
December. This not always, as Dying Relics of the Summer distemper, but as
continued Impressions of a durable Cause, which may be, will not expire, no,
not in the year following, and so unite two Pestilential Summers together by a
never dying, because always cherished, Relic; So that Jan. and Febr. of the
succeding year shall write as Pestilential, as the closing Months of the
former. They were but moderate years, it is true; but yet within this Century,
from Ao 1606. to 1610. 5 continued years are reckoned Pestilential. And in the
Former Century, Fallopius you find has noted as much. So that I quote, no
Astrologer, and yet you see what I offer is too true. It is not Vanity nor
Noise, but the weighty Truth, that Pestilential or Unhealthy years, are as
frequent as the Superstitious Planetary Contendeth. For that they are the
Causes, is as certain in Nature, as that they alter the Air in in those very
times: Nay the former is demonstratively proved by the later. Since
Pestilential Disposition of Air depends upon unkind Excesses and Exorbitances
of Weather, to Heat and Drought, sometimes to Cold, and Wet, which can be
ascribed to nothing but the Heavens over us.

58. What therefore should I quote Authors of our side, when the Physicians
themselves appear for it? Who yet are not commonly Well-willers to the
Mathematiques, Erroniously thinking that there is no other Science conducing to
their Practice, but what they are Masters of. Time may come, if God shall give
leave, that we shall point out, not only Aspects, but Asterisms, Constellations
in the Firmament that are Malefique; as Ptolemy has most truly delivered down
to us.

59. As for Eclipses, if they happen near a Pestilential Season before, or
after, I think some use may be made of that Concurrence; but for any
determinate Cause, or so much as Sign of Pestilence, with Cardan's leave, I
understand not. But Aspects, Aspects of Superior Planets, they are our
Scourges. Have we not said there is some Sickness or Mortality, yea, and that
for the most part within Europe, somewhere or other, almost every year?

60. How it comes to pass in one place, rather then another? Were we able to
answer, it is not here to be treated. Why the Sweating Sickness here in England
should begin, Ao 1551. at Shrewsbury April the 15. and not seize the City of
London till July 12. is a Question seems to be above a Mortal Resolution. In
like manner, that Notable Catarrh Epidemical in the year 1580. noted in no
worse an Author than Calvisius, which in June invaded Sicily, In July, Rome; In
August, Constantinople, and Venice; In September, Germany and Hungary; in
October. Pomerania; In November and December, Denmark and Swedeland; and is a
Noble Enquiry, fit for a Council of Philosophers; and what if I should say,
with the safety, nay with the advantage of Religion, and the awe of a great
Creator, may be adventured upon in our Theory.

61. But let us observe what is more obvious: First; that no Sign Celestial is
free, not nor. All the rest come under the Notion of Tropical and Equinoctial
Signs, which, we cannot help it, (no more then we can help our Mortality) have
their Danger. But let not the Womanish Spirit of any be cheated by an
Equivocation: For a Sickly year does not signify the XII Months trouble;
there is respite most commonly IX. Months in the XII. nor does it signify an
Universal Distemper. Nor 3ly. do we pretend to wasting Plagues every year, God
be praised; for Italy it self is free from such Plagues, many times, 20 years
together. Nor 4ly. are these Signs or Aspects dangerous, but at times: If they
fall about Aestival or Autumnal Months: Nor then neither, ( 5ly.) Except
assisted by the Addition of Powers equally Noxious. A Tropical Sign has its
Virtues and Abilities, as well as its Inconvenience; They are warm and
Comfortable; They guild the Air, and ripen the Fruits of the Earth; and the
Equinoctial Signs of themselves are temperate and wholesome: The Air is never so
fine, as when the for Instance, passes or. And much more may be said to get a
good Opinion of these Discourses. But again, lest we may be too secure, Let the
World know, that no Sign is Free: Yet of All, the Tropique and Equinoctial
Signs are most notable, Here in Sickness, as before in Tempests, Comets,
Earthquakes. Next, pray note how sure we pretend to be; yea, how manifest is
our Pretense from certain years; see I pray, among many others, that of 1540.
with all its Brethren. That of the Catarrh, Ao 1577. And before, That of the
Winter Plague, Ao 1518. 3ly. That those Observations must go to Sea, as well as
serve us on the Shore. For the Scorbute, or whatsoever Malady reigned on
Shipboard, is comprehended under these Rules. Even the Line it self is not
unwholesome, unless there be some Distemperature above it; I speak of a Sickly
time; The Line may dispose to a Scorbute in this or that Individual; but the
Line may be passed safely, and Free from a Scorbute, Epidemical, as I may call
it, except, as before excepted. So we may term it a Healthy Spring, although
here one, and there another be seized with an Ague. 4ly. Observe how Universal
is the Celestial Influence, when by Capt. Grants Observation, our own dear
Country shall many times have grudgings of a Distemper, at what time other more
remote Cities shall suffer under Pestilence: Visited, I might have said, for
God's hand it is; but yet this very Observation also shows, that God does not
scourge by New, preter, or supernatural means, whatsoever my well meaning
Physician imagines, Dimerbrock de Peste, Prob. 1. whom I leave to be confuted
by the Learned of his own Faculty, from his Medical Principles and Experience,
which are, in my short Sight, plainly against Him.

62. For if the same good Man had seen our Evidence, he would not have
condemned those Learned Christians, Mercurialis, Sennertus, and others, for
subscribing to such Pagan Principles, as are here advanced; assuring our selves
that there is nothing hereby taught contrary to Law or Gospel, rightly and
soundly understood: though perhaps the Solution of these Knots, and the
Explication of those Authorities are not so proper for an ordinary
Understanding. In the mean while, That we may answer his Astrological Argument
about the Nimeguen Plague, 1635. and 1636; We say, that he confesses there was
a in Sept. and that in. Pray revise our Table, and see whether it sounds well,
that in, which (if it be any thing) is a Natural Cause, can be the proper
Harbinger to a Preter-Natural Poison, for so he calls the Pestilential Poison.
Next we say, That he confesses there was a in, Oct. 20. 1636. Do you hear?,
and in an Autumnal Month, October? Yea, but then it began to decline: I answer,
if it had not been for that, it would (by Gods Grace, which must always come
in, Causes, or no Causes) have declined sooner. It began to decline then, a
Fortnight ago, I warrant, it was at the Height: Then was in the Very Tropique
of, within 8 degrees of, in the same Tropical Sign.

63. And whereas with some Plausibility he presses us with new Diseases
unknown to our Ancestors, which have broke out de novo into this Plaguey Age, [
Hoc nostrum ulcerosum seculum] whose Causes were not created at the beginning.
Such the Sweating Sickness. Ao 1436. the Venerial Pest. Ao 1556. the Hungary
Distemper. Ao 1566. the New Plague at Moravia, Ao 1577. New Diseases at
Lunenburg, 1581. etc. -- So presumptuous do we seem, that we profess to lay out
the Causes of these from God and the Stars; the Celestial Scourges. Witness our
precedent Table, where we mention one or two of these Plagues. But how easy is
it to deny this Inference, they are new, therefore Preternatural? For certainly
if Curable by Natural Succors, they are Natural. If the Remedy happily found
out for these Distempers were not preter-natural, neither were the Diseases so
to be accounted. I shall not stick to allow that the Divine Power may, and does
sometimes Punish miraculously, as in some Judgments, as Story says of
Perjured Men, such as have expressly challenged the Divine Power to do its
worst, if they attest a Falsehood. And I shall acknowledge that Gods Hand is
more visible in a Disease incurable, or a sudden Death, then otherwise; yet, I
cannot allow them to be All preternatural. I acknowledge Gods Arm more Terrible
in a sweeping Pestilence, when thousands weekly are numbered to Confusion: But
who can stint God's Power so far, as to tell us what he can do by Natural
Means? and what He cannot: Who is so comprehensive a Philosopher to Define? --
Astronomers are fain to divide the Diameter of the World into 100000 parts.
Alas! We scarce know the 100000th part of the Creation. He knows little of
Nature, who knows not its Effects may be prodigious. A Disease may be new and
strange for Its Signs, Symptoms, and other Attendants, but yet it may come
within the Compass of Nature, an Arrow from her Magazin; and as such may be
reducible to a certain Head or Tropic. Every year almost shows us a different
Distemper, and the reports of that difference are Nice; some from within, and
some, take my Word, from without; Between One and the other, there is no new
Creation, for God has made the States of his Creatures as well as their
Beings: and the Results and Consequences of these in their Several States are
part of his Creation-Decree; that Things corruptible at such times, or in such
Cases shall corrupt and putrify. For, the consequence, say I, and result of
these Corruptions, are part of the Creation, the Horrid Taste and Stench, and
other Noisomness, as well as the Substance before Corruption. Now, how many
Spices of Distempers, Dissonances, Contrarieties, Poisonous Qualities, may
arise from several Corruptions of the Blood, God only knows. It never appeared
before, therefore it is a New Creation. By that reason Gunpowder and the
Loadstone would be newly created: New Diseases are like new Phenomenon, New
Stars, suppose, never appear before, and yet all Natural; New Diseases, like
the Extracts of Chemists, are prae-existent in their Causes.

64. Now though and can produce Instances of Currents, (which is the next
particular) from some certain Diarys, as we shall see presently; yet I think I
may safely now affirm, Once for all, every Planet has its share by their
Course; the Inferiors,, the Superiors,. Yet here it is to be noted, that there
seems, at least, some difference in the meeting of the Planets in order to that
Effect; that the Combinations of the Superiors among themselves, whether
because their meeting is more seldom, or for any other Reason, are not so
briskly busy in the said Effect, as the Inferiors, whether combined among
themselves, or the Superiors. and are oftener seen in a Current, then and, or
and. The reason is rendered from the rarer return of the Aspect; which reason
holds in meeting with or, for though they meet but every second year, no more
than and, or and do: yet being met, they are ordinarily known to pass and
repass one by the other, 2 or 3 times, and so heighten the Frequency of their
Meeting above that of,, who seldom make such interchanges. Justly therefore we
have, or ought to have laid these Effects at the Doors of the precedent Aspect,
not one excepted,,,,,,,, etc. Yea, the must be owned as has bin said, and
suspected above this 100 years for the Cause. A Cause if they will; and that at
New and Full, as has bin truly imagined. But the Scanty Philosophy of this Age
spoils All. For it is not the of with, or Opposition to him alone, But, also
(let me have the Readers Assent and Faith till I am disproved) say I, the and
with the rest; with Produce a Journal Marine, and explore the Truth of my
Assertion. -- That the Aspects of the Superiors with Inferiors,, trouble the
Waters, and make accidental Drifts, Currents, Overfals; we speak not of the
Natural constant Tides or Currents, but the new-raised Streams, which are
produced, so called. Add the or of them all with the, and it may be only Those,
not Quadrates or Trines, etc. and when thou have explored This, commend it to
the Mariner; (the Man who ventures his Life for a little Philosophy, and less
Wages.) And yet I have not done: What more can I say? You remember, I trow,
what a pother we have kept of the Tropic and Equinoctial Points, or Portions:
There, There, keep you to that, and thou have the Mystery of Currents. Suffer
us to repeat these Words, Tropic, etc. if their nicety be such as cannot be
expressed at one discourse: Take in the Equivalents too, and if I were to make
a Treatise of the Sea-Currents, I could not say much more. The Equivalents to
the Tropical Position are, gr. 24. ad finem, and principio. Next the end of,
and the beginning of, the end of. I should have said first, a gr. 26. ad finem,
while the Equivalents of the Equinoctial Position, are the entrances of and,
with their Opposites. When we have proved this, we'll trouble the Reader no
more with the Subject, as new and difficult as it has bin conceived. For the
proof then let us examine the subsequent Instances, two or three for an Hundred.

65. The First I meet with is in Guiney Voyage in Hakluit, at the end of the
year 1554. where in Febr. in the next year, 1555, day 15. we hear of Currents
from Castle del Mina, to Cape de los Palmas: So also between Cape de Monte, and
Cape de Verd, great Currents which deceive many. And it seems to be an account
of two Months Sailing, viz. part of Febr. all March, and part of April, not
above 4, 5, 6. degrees Northward from the Line. Now the Heavens lie thus. --
Febr. 15. 12., 9., 28., 24., 3., 5., 16.. Where an you see is just upon the
Aequinox in and, again within 3 degrees. Yea, and by our Paper, lie in the
Equivalents, the entrance of and, to note no more. But the whole Month of
March, you will say it is an Equinoctial Month, the is there, is there, is
there, Slow and sure, is there, as before, and opposing thereabouts. We must
only make a scruple how far the Aequinoctial advantages reach. -- And what
improbable Groundless Fancies shall we promote, if we desire it may be
observed, that these Gold-Coast Voyages, while they give us such Caveats for
the slippery Currents near the Line, had all the Planets, at least 5 of the 7.
Perpendicular, or Vertical over them, and that for all the Month.

Ao 1566. Dec. 19. Capt. Towerson's 2d Voyage. In height of Sierra Leona, we
ran thwart certain Currents, which set to the Westward, as if it had been the
over-fall of a Land, making a great Noise, like to a Stream, when the Water is
Shole; but we had no ground at a 150 Fathom. The Heavens thus, 12., 18., 21.,
20., 21., 7., 17..

December is a Tropical Month, as March is an Equinoctial, accordingly we have
Tropical, in the Equivalent, about 21. If 3 s of of the conduce any thing, let
others Enquire. Howbeit are but 6 degrees distant from an Opposition.

66. But has not the Learned Author of the Treatise de motu Mar. and Ventorum;
opened our Eyes in the Doctrine of Currents, and solved them all, without
recourse had to Aspects or Influences, the Sun excepted. Resp. To do that
Author right, I must acknowledge it is a Great Piece, showing the Diligence,
the Sagacity, the Judgment of an excellent Pen. A Work that will make him
great to all Posterity, who shall have any thing to do with Philosophy or
Commerce. He, who shall find the so much desired Longitude, shall not oblige
the World more than he has done. And what Returns his Countrymen have made
him, I know not: I do envy them the use that They make of his Work; the
manifold Advantages in Navigation that thereby accrue to those who will learn
what he has pleased to Dictate, not only to them, but to the World. Though I
do believe therefore that the Ocean under the Torrid Zone, in its Diurnal
Motion, moves from East to West round the World, with some Inclination
Northward; or Southward, according to the Suns Declination; Though I do believe
a 3d. Motion contrary to those, viz. from North to East, to make restitution at
the same time for the Stream which has forsaken his Shore by his Western
Progress, and thank Him for it: I do believe further, that this Back sliding
Motion is that which gives Life and Being to (though he scorn to take notice of
it) what is vulgarly called the Current. But I cannot hear him, when he
excludes the, or, (as in his Epistle) the Starry Influences. The Motion of the
Sea would be such as it is (Situation of Land considered) whether there were,
Starry Influences, or no; says he. For how rash is that Hypothesis to make the
Sun alone sufficient, without the Starry Assistance. When the Sun in incircled
with so many Stars; when the Stars are so many Suns more, or at least
Reflections of that Solitary Agent. If Reflections from below the Earth it self,
contribute to Tempests, etc. Why not Reflections from above? The Sun may carry
the Credit of it, as we have said in a Conquest, the General is cried up, but
if you enquire more minutely into the Affair, Many a Brave Officer does his
part. And this has in part appeared, not only in Tempests, and somewhat else,
but also in the Motions of Tides. Some what has bin spoken of a Moon, of a
Mercury, etc.

67. It Is the Sun assisted with the Stars which makes the Sea to move. It Is by
their Influence that he spreads the most of its Motive Power on the Equinox,
and 40 degrees on either side of it. And if we speak of Vegetation and Animal
Life, 40 degrees yet further, even to the Frozen Zone. What Is a little
Glimmering? To save Nature's Credit there must be some more abstruse Virtue,
then what is obvious to the First Sensation: more abstruse, and of more Moment.
Shall I say that Nature has made Wine only to warm the Tongue; yea, it is made
to little purpose unless it chears the Heart also. The very Piss-bed. a Star
though it be, in its kind, is made to little Purpose, if it only resembles our
Heavenly Body. Beside This therefore, it is known to have a greater Virtue, as
the Endive and Succory, to be refrigerant. But the Number, the Vastness, the
Mystical Order of the Stars I am amazed at, a World of Wonder arising thence.
Why on the Equinoctial? Why on each side of it? Why on the Tropic? Why on the
Arctick and Arctarctique Circles? Why near the Poles? It Is acknowledged that
the Sun can do much posited on the Equinox, Cap. 28. Does the Sun arrive
thither alone? The Author knows that and cannot be far from him. Besides that,
are there no Stars there? He acknowledges it to hold rather in the Autumnal
Equinox; He may please to observe that there are more of the Fixed in the
Autumnal Equinox, then in the Vernal. There is the Asterism in of one side, and
on the other: When in the other Hemisphere and are more naked Signs: The Motion
of the Winds, and Motion of the Sea are Consequent one to the other. Let it be
so; so the Motion of the Heavens be antecedent in Nature, and Co-incident in
time. Which on the Sea's part he seems to grant, Cap. 21. Notwithstanding
elsewhere He ascribes the Turbulencies of the Air to the turning of the Ocean,
which Nature then labors with. In like manner the Navigators Ascribe those
Turbulencies to the shifting of the Monsoons, those Winds, which, with the
Waters turn an oblique Course toward the Sun: neither of which do I understand.
Collision of Seas or Winds instigated by different or Contrary Causes, I grant
may make some Bustle; as in the Tornado is evident, where the Winds blow from
all parts of the Compass. But here is no Collision, here no contrariety; the
Sun is not contrary to its self. A Conversion there is, and a Change of the
Stream. But a Gradual Change may be performed in Tranquillity for all that I
know, i. e. if the Sun in the Tropic Cause the greatest Inclination of the
Stream, the nearer he comes to the Equinox, the more should he incline to an
Indifferency, to be determined to one part according to the Solar recess from
it.

68. To the Stars therefore in the Plural, Those Motions of Seas and Winds will
be imputed; which he will find himself obliged to believe, if we shall produce
Reasons from the Asterism of Heaven, and show the very Causes, the true primary
Causes of all those brave Enquiries; which he by his Principle resolves. Why
Hurricanes are perceived, yearly almost, near the Coasts of America? Why again
in that Sea which flows between the Northern part of China and Japan, etc. I
could add why the time of the year is Stormy in any part of the Ocean? Why it
rains so constantly and excessively, as to find the great Nilus and its
overflowing. Why Magellanus was becalmed 70 days together? The Reasons and
Causes of which being seen, will be the very Light; speak the Truth of our
Assertion, and the Ineffable Glory of the Creator.

69. Currents then may be distinguished into Substance and Circumstance, as
they are Streams distinct and severed from the General Waters, or as they run
with such a degree of Swiftness as is more than Ordinary; with Noise, or
without Noise, deceiving the Mariner sometimes 20 Leagues in 24 Hours, or
keeping him back with a Stream insuperable, when if they cannot stem the Tide,
though under a stiff Gale, the former is to be imputed to the Heavens in its
ordinary Constitution; or, to speak with the Learned Vossius, to the Sun: The
later must be ascribed to the Aspects, some not ordinary Constitution
Celestial. For if the Heavens are the Cause of the Original Motion of the Sea,
and its acceleration, which at several times is acknowledged to differ, Then it
must be the Cause also of that Motion which results from the Original; the Sire
or Mother of the Currents. The like in the Winds: For though I see some
difficulty there, and though I acknowledge the Air to be of an easier Agitation
then is imagined, yet I cannot think that the Monsoon (though in part it is) is
nothing in the World but a Consent of Motion with the Stream, excluding the
Heavens. So am I sure the Stormy Winds proceed from a new Coition of the
Celestial Bodies, and thereupon constantly upon its Approach the Monsoon for
the while changes.

70. The rest of the Instances abroad let us dispatch, and we have done. The
year 1520. tells a Tale of a Frost which hurt the Vineyards even in September;
Eichstad imputes it to an in and, Platique; and the rest of the Aspects
mingling with, which we will not dispute.

Ao 1599. Cold and Dry April and May, in and April 25. impute it to and so
opposed, and withal deserted.

Ao 1607. June 12. A Midsummer Frost on the precise day of the Summer Solstice.
Fromond reckons it rare, and the Truth is, and are all three in the towering
height of. Yea, from the Opposite Sign, irradiates between and so posited. It Is
the more observable not for any Miracle, but to show 's chilness, viz. his
distance. If the, which is nearer, had been in 's place, it would scarce have
been.

For Heat, and are noted to cause a great Heat at Lisbon, even in Dec. Ao 1528.
Purch.

Ao 1540. Hot Summer, upon the account of our Planets in, when as were
possessed, which Peucer weakly refers to an Eclipse, April 5. which in Truth is
neither Cause or Sign.

Ao 1558. Great Heat, vertical, May 11. -- was Vertical, but was strengthened in
his Verticity by the Neighbourhoods of other Planets, among the rest,
platiquely opposing, who also is strengthened by a Friend in the same Sign.

Ao 1589. a Febr. 3. ad March 6. Extreme hot. -- Our Aspect helps, an Platique
in and, but there is, besides, other Aspects in extraordinary Circumstance of
slowest Motion.

Ao 1585. August very hot, in. It Is plain to Sense; for all the Signs that
should be taken up for hot Weather, are sped.

Ao 1607. Great Heat, in Trop. -- I was honest, when startled even now at the
surprising Difficulty of a Frosty Morning on the Solstice: the Planets, said I,
being so posited. You see my scruple had some ground, for this following Month
had Warmth enough.

Ao 1608. Aestas Calidissima noted even when our is in a Winter Sign, viz..
Well, that comes accidentally, if the Summer Sign, and its Neighbors will show
all the Cards in their Hands, and outface or oppose the Winter-Gentlemen, Rare
though it be, it is no Miracle.

Ao 1615. Aug. 2. ad 27. Warmer than at any time of the year. Impute it to the
Approach of the of to in, then and there considered with, etc.

71. We have some few Fireworks belongs to us, some only Show others
mischievous.

Ao 1520. Fax ardens, Sept. 4. Lyc. in and, Platic.

Ao 1546. Chasme, Febr. 10. Lyc. in fine.

Ao 1548. Febr. 10. again Fiery Meteors, in 13.

Ao 1559. Sept. 1. London, Terrible Thunders, in gr. 19. did. There are milder
Aspects to be observed, but even ours also shoots from far, and Frights us.

Ao 1595. Pasch. April 20 Thunder, Lightning; yet very cold, and so continued
to the Months end, in and; the Cold may be reduced to its place.

Ao 1598. Sept. 5. Harmful Thunder at London, flew some Men, Stow, in.

Of Halo's, Irides, Parelii, etc.
72. Halo's are sometimes colored like Iris, and the Parelia are always
striped with Irides; which that they depend on our Principle appears, as
elsewhere we have contended in the like case, from the Multiplicity, the busy
time in Heaven, from the frequency of Aspects, not of ordinary Concourse. I
shall instance in one, not mentioned in the following, of strange Parelia, seen
at Norimberg, March 22. on a Good Friday (I mention that to secure the true day
and year) where no less than 8 s or s are found in a Fortnights time. Ao 1554.

First, 1514. Jan. 12. in Ducatum Witebeiengensi, hor. 3. P. M.

1520. Viennae, Jan. 5. 14. 24..

1523. May 2. Parelia, at Zurich; within gr. 6. of Opposition,; is in with,
only gr. 9. between them. It Is strange, if accidental to the Effect, that these
should be counter-link't within 9 degrees; but the like occurs, May 18. 1627.
Kepl. and Iris, die 29. Yea, Paraselenae, April 9. 1554.

1532. At Venice, April 11. Parelia, Fromond. Lyc. in 26. It Is as strange
again, that our Planets should meet in Partile Conjunctions, and know nothing
of the Spectacle.

1554. March 6. Ingolstad't, circ. 8. and 9. morn. Lyc. in 20.

1550. March 30. Palmarum in 9.. 7..

1554. April 9. Paraselenae at Sumerfield, 24., 17..

1555 Febr. 10. Parelia at Vinaria, Lyc., and in fine.

Nay, now it is probable that our Aspect can make such Counterfeits, Heavenly
Counterfeits, Hypocritical Suns; here are three Witnesses.

1556. Dec. 6. Parelia, and in and, gr. 11. did. either the Platique Aspect
has Influence, or else neither Partile, nor Platique: and if neither, then we
poor Men spend our time finely. In the mean while it is a pleasant Cheat, and we
are loath to be disabused.

Ao 1569. Die May 21. Paraselenae, Bunting, 4. 29..

Ao 1573. Parelia cum Iridib. May 11. Gem. 23. 3.

Ao 1557. July 28. in Suntgoy, 8. 8.. So before, die 21. ejusd. men's

Ao 1585. July 19. Rainbows, in and gr. 14. did.

Ao 1552. Febr. 19. with Halo and Iris, Lyc. we mean a dry Iris, such as are
seen with Parelia. in gr. 3. did.

Ao 1551. May 21. Paraselenae, counterfeit Moons and Irides, and in and gr. 11.
did.

Ao 1569. March 12. hor. 12. Iris Nocturna, Gem. and are plainly eugaged in the
Beginning of and, yea, and our Platic, though here at a mannerly distance, for
all its modesty, is guilty of the appearance, the hour 12. at Night shows the
has to do, though from the Opposite Hemisphere; and has to do with the
Picture, for that the in is not yet ascended.

73. Add to these a few from our own Observation.

Ao 1656. Sept. 22. Yarnton near Oxford: Semicircle with Rainbow Colors 9 m.
in fine, as before, Ao 1555. So near was I to have seen a Parelium, but it was
not my Lot.

Ao 1662. Nov. 10. Land. Iris, in print..

Ao 1678. July 22. Two Rainbows, in gr. 5. distant, besides Halo's Lunar, Sept.
20. 25. Ao 1556. Sept. 29. 1658. and Nov. 2. 1656.

74. Admit also these from Kepler.

Ao 1621. Aug. 16. Halo, 17. 1..

Ao 1623. May 14. Parelia cum Halone Solis die 15.

Irides.
Ao 1621. Jan. 7.. 1., 25.. --. May 15. 5., 26.. July 13. 13., o..

Ao 1623. May 30. 16., 2.,.

Ao 1625. Sept. 20. 27., 9.,.

Ao 1626. July 8. 17., 12. Sept. 4. Iris ante ortum Solis; 19., 24.,.

Ao 1627. June 16. 22., 17.,.

Ao 1628. Aug. 14. 23., 9.,.

Ao 1629. Aug. 26. 1., 10.,.

Parelia; May 14. 1623. cum halone Solis, die prox. 9., 25..

75. It will be said, these distances are too unreasonable, we may comprehend,
what not? at so great a Liberty. The answer may be, that it is not perpetual:
There are some Neighbourly distances. 2. For all as I see the greatness of the
Distance conduces to the Effect, provided 30 degrees be not exceeded. For to
paint a Sun, or a Lucid Globe in the Water, as the Parelium may seem to be,
requires many a Ray issuing from Arches of a Circumference, some less, some
greater, which Suspicion of mine will be found true, if we go no further then
attending to, and comparing those very Instances, Jan. 17. and May 15. 1621.
Sept. 20. 1625. But we have. This is not a place for it. Only this by the way,
if we were to treat of the Parelia purposely, we see we should here also find
the Tropiques and Equinoxes.

76. Sol Pallidus noted in Kepler's Diary, whatsoever it signifies, is not much
different from the Halo, etc. the Causes and Distances of those Operants are
near alike.

First, Nov. 20. Ao 1621. 20., 8.. April. 1. Ao 1629. 3., 28.. May 15. Ao 1627.
21., 24.. June 11. Ao 1627. 23., 13.. April 29. Ao 1625. 19., 25..
and in some Signs I find conduce to a Mystiness, as may be observed by our
Domestique Diary, if Pallidus be no more, nor the Coelum Sanguineum, twice met
under Territories of and; the matter is not much, though not unworthy of a
Remark, October. 13. 1625. Caelum Sanguin. and before that Sol Sanguin. April 24.
1623. 4., 28..

77. This it may be runs higher than we imagine; for of Old in the former
Century, we meet with in April 1547. Universal News of Sol darkened for 3 or 4
Days, die 22. etc. That it was a prodigious Spectacle throughout all France and
Germany, some say Britain, (though our Chronicles are silent) noted by
Calvisius and Fromond from Lycost. and Fritschius, when Writers do believe that
the was close Mourner for the Prince Elector Fredrick being taken: Whatsoever
the matter was, that which we regard at present is, the place of 5.
contributing to the Phenomenon, and in fine, not much above 5. grad. did.
from a complete Opposition. I say, near, and the also opposing in the beginning
of. I thought it once had been a Flaw in Calvisius's Chronology, that he could
not give an account of a Vernal Eclipse of the Sun in the 7th year of Xerxes,
Anno Christi Not. 478. for I reckoned there could be no Solar Obscuration
otherwise, except miraculous; but I see there may be some rarer Phenomenon of
this kind from Natural Causes, besides a proper Eclipse; such are produced by
Kepler, Epit. Astron.

78. For the Maculae Solis, whether they be distinguished from the former
Obscurations, or not, I have a few straggling Instances.

I don't mention that of March. 25. April 5. because the distance is of gr. 20.

Nor that of May 19. 29. because the distance is of gr. 17.

Yet a fond Man would mark the Identity of those distances, especially when
there haps a third, and who knows how many more.

79. But I produce May 1. 1625. and June 8. a noted space for the Month,
wherein our Aspects sweetly reign in and.

I produce 2dly. the Month of June, 1642. where some Learned Men have ventured
to teach that the Months was Cold, because of the multitude of the Maculae
which rebated the Solar Heat. Then which there cannot be a greater
Demonstration of our Principle; for we have here under the Equinox, which will
give a shrewd Essay to tinge the Sun with their Impressions; but there is a
Triple Conjunction, Flush of Three in. They, the Three Superiors, which say
we, can aid the Multitudinem Macularum; yea, and the Cold too. For what
Communication of direct Rays is there between the place of the 3 Superiors,
and the Place of the, or? That is the True Cause of the Cold; and He may set
his Heart at rest, who thinks to find any new Principle from the aculae, or any
thing that concerns the Sun in its solitary Capacity. (These Instances from
Ricciolus I produce.) 3dly. Sept. 1643. S. N. the most of that. Month is taken
up by alike tripled; though as before in the Conjunction, I shall only point at
a Spot which came into Play, die 14. S. N. the place of in 1, of in 5. you see,
how near the Opposition. This Macula afterward, says Hevelius, was divided
into many, and on day 19. they met again in ours only; in Unam iterum co
aluere; and whether this day appears not to be the day of the precise Aspect.
-- The 4th of June, Ao 1614. a New Macula appeared, and held out 6 or 7 days
within 3 days of the precise in 18. when the soul Weather screen'd it from the
diligent Observator; when that 3 days after the Weather was fair; the same
Macula was seen again, and not without a Partner. Hevelius, Appendix to his
Selenography.

80. For a Farewell to and, It would not be convenient we should take leave of
our Foreign Diary till we have noted the extremity of some Constitutions, and
the singular accidents therein mentioned. To find Hurricanes, yea Tuffons,
Storms which are termed unparalled, incredible, beyond the reach of Nature.
The Truth is, Hurricanes and Tuffons especially, come with such Violence, that
ordinary Nature stands amazed at them. Then the great execution of Lightnings
too often, which proceeds from no mild Causes, but great and angry Instruments
of a Divine Power. The Singularities which I mean, are, beside the Parelia and
Irides, (the last thing we treated of) The White Waters and shining Sea, which
I would fain attain to the Cause of, if it can appear to be Celestial. The
Disturbance of the Creatures Marine, Whales, and other Monsters, I do impute,
(I do not say it is perpetual) to our Aspect; the Reader must be Judge of all
that is offered. Thus then.

Ao 1574. July 9. A Monstrous Fish I hear of at the Isle of Thanet, shot
himself ashore, Stow, 18., 2..

Ao 1607. June 11. VII Whales, 16., 10..

Ao 1608. April 20. 25.. o..

May 15. 7 Whales and a Mermaid, o., 7..

Ao 1615. Sept. 25. Great Fish struck his Horn into the Ship, etc. 24., 8..

Ao 1626. Aug. 13. Grampass at Woolwich, 10., 16..

Ao 1639. April 2 Whales, 1., 25..

81. I reckon that Fish are disturbed when they swim visibly above the Water,
they find themselves ill at ease in the Element, and seek ease elsewhere. All
Animals labor under the secret Influence of a not secret Cause.

82. The Mermaid, I take it as I find it, I will not dispute, whether it were a
Reality or a Spectre; I can prove Specter are seen at Sea sometimes; and I can
believe also that there are such Mockages of Humane Nature by Sea, as an Ape is
on the Mountain. There were Whales seen with it, and that is sufficient. And
Thus much for the great Superiors, Saturn and Mars.

CHAP. II.
Aspect of JOVE and MARS.
1. An Aspect to be heeded with a sober Observation as the Precedent. 2. Great,
on diverse accounts. 3. and 4. What Influence it has on Cold. 5. The Hyemal
part of its Diary. 6. It has a great Hand in Monstrous Frosts, particularly in
that, never to be outdone, of 1684. The Arabs consent in the Case. 7. Some
Frost even in Aestival Mornings. 8. Cold Weather not always Wholesome. 9. The
oftimes Turbulent even in the Winter. 10. Whether so in Summer? 11. What
Influence upon Dryth. 12. Maginus's Note, concerning Heat, if our Aspect haps
in eadem Quarta with, justified. 13. Maginus's difference of the Aspect, when
prevails, and when prevails, not so clear. 14. Whether this Aspect conduces to
Fires, and Configurations? 15. To Sickly Seasons it does conduce. 16. God
having made all things Good, hinders not the Malevolency of the Creature
against Sinners. 17. Sicknesses of the Season, depend upon the Season it self.
18. Instance in Catarrhs. Note on the Universal Tussis in October. 1675. 19. A
determinate prognosis of a Distemper aimed at. 20. The Aestival part of the
Diary. 21. Fog belongs to this Aspect, Not always proceeding from a declining
Sun; some Curiosities about Fog. 22. Monstrous Hail. 23. This Aspect is a
Cooler. 24. Some Instance from abroad. 25. More abundant Instances from
Kepler's and Kyriander's Diary, to which the Reader is referred. 26. This
Aspect brings Cold in March, April, and sometimes, May. 27. Yet our Aspect as
to Cold is a false and uncertain Configuration. 28. and no welcome Aspects. How
we are to be afraid of the Signs of Heaven. 29. The Character of the Aspect.
30. Zeal for a well-founded Astrology. 31. Ancient Times must be reviewed 32.
Forien Table of Tempest, etc. 33. Aspects of the Superiors more Signal than the
pure Inferiors. 34. No amazing Extremity without the Superiors. 35. Two or
Three days Weather is nothing under a Superior Aspect. 36. They often bring
Two, Three Months disturbance. 37. Some Dire Inundations may happen under this
Aspects. 28. An honest Monitum for the Low Countries, about Inundations. 39.
Another for Rome. 40. A List of Floods found under this Aspect. 41. and 42.
Dire Inundations admonish (those who may be concerned) to consult Astrology.
That Consultation will not be fruitless. 43. In Inundations, Waters are
rarefied, as well as augmented. 44. No clashing with the Premises. and in their
private Capacities are one thing, in their public another. 45. Catalogue of 's
Lightning. 46. The Aspect in a Rampant Estate knows no moderation. 47. Some
monstrous Instances of Lightning. 48. Thunder all Summer long. No Thunder
without an Aspect. 49. Comets Planetary Original proved. 50. Three of the four
Comets in 1618. belong to our Aspect. 51. and 52. The Comet, Anni 1531. 53.
etc. An Account of the following Comets. 62. New Star in Serpentarius. Thuanus
and That Age make it of Planetary Original. 63. Summary of the Comets under
and. 64, 65. Earthquakes and Vulcans under; their Table with Remarks. Van
Helmont's arguments against the Earthq. Planetary Original answered. 66. The
baleful Circumstances of Earthquakes not mentioned. 67. Firing of Cole-Mines,
Analogous to Vulcan's Earthquakes lie deep. 68. Diseases under and, with
Remarks. 60. Something of Currents. 70. Parelia, Halo's, Irides, enumerated.
71. And spoken to. 72. Claritas Septentrionalis. 73. Sol Pallidus. 74. Maculae
Solis from Sheiner, Hevelius, accounted for. 75. Prodigious Rains, Sanguinis
Frumenti. 76. Droughts, Plagues of Locusts and Mice, etc.
1. AS the Aspect of to were to be regarded, because they are Leagues and
Alliances of Superior Planets; upon the same account are these Habitudes of
and to be heeded with a sober and composed Observation. For Astrologers justly
crack of great things proceeding from their Supeoiours, though not every moment
falling out, yet recorded abroad, and some of them comprehended within the
Memory of Man, yea, it may be, happening every 7 years, as in and has bin
observed.

2. The Aspect of and we suspected to be Great, even before the knowledge of
any Influence, only because it visits us but seldom, once in two years. A or
will make us wait so long; till they return in specie again: For such is the
Interim of 2 Conjunctions or Oppositions. In this later there is some Variety
or Design rather in Nature; for if haps to be Retrogade, these Two Superiors
will face one another twice or thrice before they come off; so a great part of
the year will be sometimes engaged according to Us in one considerable Aspect.
There Is a certain Law in the Heavens, we have said, which none but Astronomers
contemplate; none but Astrologers make use of. The First, look on it as a
perplexed business: The other, a Wise and Powerful Economy. But, why, of all
Mathemetical Diagrams should the Celestial Scheme be least useful? He, who
looks upon Architecture and Fortification to be only Trangunims, is a Wise Man,
of great Experience and He who thinks the Distance and the Motions of the
Planets with all their Variety, either as to themselves, or to the rest, is
only Siphre, and dumb Show, shall sit next to him. At present, that we may not
undertake too much in our discovery, we will content our selves with the
distance of about gr. 3. before and after, reserving what falls beyond to our
more grand View of Foreign Accidents, as we have done before, we hope, with some
Satisfaction.

3. But letting alone that Dead-doing Influence of and, which will show its
self in the Close, to the amazement of all pretended Reformers of Science; let
us consider first, its least offensive Influence toward Cold; and for this
purpose present the Diary Bipartite. Hyemal by its self, and the Aestival.

4. The Reader may make one glance, and see what those two Planets can do; the
First whereof has Flushing in his Face; the Other a Flame glowing in the
Center.

Hyemal Part.
Ao 1656. Dec. 21..
17. Fr. cold, snow p. wds p. 18. Fr. wd, snow 8 m. cold, wd st. snow. 19. H.
fr. bitter cold, h. wds. 20. H. wd. dark, offer, snow thin all n. rain 11 p.
21. Thaw and wd, Moon Halo, thin Vapors. 22. Fr. and foggy die tot. 23. Fr.
foggy a. l. thick o. drisly, wd a 10 p. sn. 8 p. 24. Wind a. l. and fr. snow m.
H. wd o. sleet. 25. H. wind a. l. dark, cold clearing, clouds low.
Ao 1659. March 2. 3.
Febr. 26, 27. Frost, cloudy, 28. Very fair and frosty. March 1. Drisle, cold,
wind, fair p. m. frost. 2. Cold fr. yet rough wd. 3. Frost, cold, cloudy, wdy,
E. 4. Close, cold. E. 5. Sharp fr. wind change 4 p. s. rain.
Ao 1668. Jan. 5. 26.
Dec. 29. s. fr. stormy, close p. m. stormy, fair m. 30. Fr. offer m. storms,
hail before Sun rise. 31. Fr. audible wd, fair m. p. s. wd. Jun. 1. Rain a. l.
close, misty m. open. 2. Fair a. m. clouds, s. wetting. 3. H. windr a. l.
disle, warm. 4. Windy, drop or drisle a. m. short, but furions rempest of wind
and r. lightn. 11 p. 5. Tempestuous noct. tot. wdy day, vesp. showers, 6. Rain
m. wind rises, mild, 7. Tempest of wind and rain a. m. 8. Tempest, drive rain
and Snow 2 p. 4 p. 9. Windy n. frost and fair. 10. Stormy, cutting winds a. l.
and frosty day, snow lies, ^inely together. 11. Frosty, closing, yielding 10 p.
12. Hard frost, yielding; flying clouds. 13. Close m. p. wetting 1 p. warm 9.
14. Frost, close m. bright summers day.
Ao 1670. Nov. 5. 17.
October. 30. Close, s. mist, warm. 31. Close, warm, wd, rain at night. Nov. 1.
Frost, cold, bright, Meteors at night. 2. Ice, bright, cold, overc. night. 3.
s. moisture m. close, cold, fair. 4. Ice, s. snow 8 m. fair, cold. 5. Ice, wd
p. m. s. moisture. 6. H. wd a. l. and die tot. misty m. dark at Sun set very
warm. 7. Open, h. wind a. m. and o. frost (...) n. 8. Ice, bright, frosty. 9.
Frosty a. m. some r. 9 p. 10. Close, some mist, warm 6 m.
Ao 1672. Dec. 28. 17.
22. Close, windy 2 p. rain 4 p. very high wind 10 p. 23. Rain a. m. hold up 2
p. high wd, cloudy night. 24. Tempestuous r. l. fair, H. wd, overcast p. m.
harmful on the Thames, offering. 25. Fair, H. wd a. l. flying clouds. 26. Rain
2 m. ad 8 p. Sun set; windy, rain o, and p. m. high Tide as ever was known. 27.
Rain o. close, high wind, 11 p. 28. Winds, rain 1 p. ^ p. H. wd 11 p. 29. H. wd
die tot. shower 3 p. Lightning destroys the Church at Beningden. 30. H. wd, rain
5 m. H. wind, R. 8. p. 31. H. wd, drisly a. l. tot. H. wds, cloudy p. m.
Ao 1675. March 3. 17.
7. Frost, overc. stiff winds. 8. Fair a. m. storm of hail 4 p. and drisle,
cold night. 9. Rain much at 2 m. dark 7 m. storm of snow and misle 1 p. H.
winds 11 p. 10. H. wd, fair a. m. cold, warmer at n. 11. Frost, mist, fair a.
m. of fer p. m. 12. Frost, ice, fair, mist, windy. 13. Fr ice, yielding p. m.
close, winds. 14. Frost, ice, white clouds, as for snow, o. 15. Fr. ice, snow,
hail a. m. dark, close. 16. Offer, close m. p. and sn. 5 p. 17. Close, mist,
wetting 5 p. coldest about Sol occ. 18. Some drisle 7 m. fog m. p. mist. N. 19.
Close, misling 3 p. and ^ p. 20. Close m. p. misty, drisling 6 p.
Ao 1681. Nov. 29. 19.
Nov. 25. Coldish, dark, s. R. 4. p. wetting 11 p. 26. Cloudy, cold, brisk
wind, s. moisture m. p. 27, H. wind a. l. with moisture 2 p. 4 p. R. 10 p.
Meteor 7 p. cold and sharp. 28. H. wind, fair, cold a. m cold night. 29. Fr.
some wetting o. freezing 11 p. Sickness lately broke fort ^ in Barbary. Nov.
20. Breaking out of the Evil. Dec. 8. News of a Comet in Lituania. 10.
Earthquake in the Country of Cleve. 30. H. frost. fair, scarce a cl. 10 m. wet
ante Sun set, and the night. Dec. 1. Windy, cloudy, scarce hold up, rain Sun
set, warm 2. White clouds flying unde. a black Heaven; warm p. m. Boys Sicken.
Ao 1684. Jan. 26. 21
22. Extr. frost. fiercer at n. sn. (...) p. open m p. brisk wds. 23. Fr.
unparalleled, snow, winds vesp. intolerable. 24. Fr. unsufferable; snow a. m.
1 p. p. Sun set, wd. E. 25. Some snow a. m. p. m. not so vehement. 26. Frosty,
and snow often, snow at n. sharp wd. E. 27. Frosty, sharp wd. 28. Frosty, sharp
wd, strange News of ice at the lands-end. Thames passable below Bridge. 29.
Frost, but yields a. m. freez at n. sharp wd.
6. I can scarce cast my Eye on this Table, but I meet with Frost, or Ice,
Frost and bitter cold wd, Dec, 1656. Frost, Snow, and cutting Wind, Dec, 1667.
and Jan. 1668. Frost, sharp Frost in Febr, and March, 1659. Ice in the entrance
of Nov. 1670, which is not very usual. Frost at the end of Nov. 1681. Only Dec.
in the year 1672. is free. But the year 1684. will be remembered for
Temple-Street sake, the unparalled, unsufferable Frost! the History of which
Frost throughout the World, had not been an unworthy undertaking; so much did I
hear of it. Here you may see the terms of unsufferable and unparalled, fall
in the Sphere of our Aspect: so our Aspect helps to the Obstinacy; That Is all
we observe. And it is not the first time that and are found opposed in Monstrous
Frosts, even in our Age: For on this our Aspect I meet with Danubius concretus
and frigus immane; but this, in Kepl. Ao 1621. and again as we shall see in due
place, Dec. 1634. Finding some little Glimpse of this strange Truth, I have
magnified honest Eichstad, but he is forced to put it off from the Nature of
the Planet, and expose it to the Northern Wind then blowing. In the mean while
I am not little pleased, that the Ancient Arabs should vouchsafe this Truth,
which none of our Moderns, for want of Experience, have dared to accept. I was
not little pleased, I say, to observe that those Pagan Friends of ours, who
speak of the Inundations of Tigris and Euphrates from this Aspect found in one
certain Sign (in which I know they speak true, by the way) should tell us that
in other Signs and make great Colds in, Snow in, great Cold in, Astrol. Anglic.
did. IV. Lib. 1.

7. Surely the Summer Months then are not quite free, for in May, 1661. we find
Frost. Morn; yet hot day noted, Ao 1663. Mense Junii, Hail 3 or 4 times. In
Sept. 1665. Notable Frosty Cold Weather. In March 1675, Icy Frosts, Hail. Hail
die 8. Snow die 9. yea, Frost, Ice, Snow and Hail, all on Die 15. But Sept. 20.
Shows black Frost in 1679. And this moves us easy People to believe Old
Traditions.

8. I said we would begin with the least offensive Influence, and that was
Cold; I hinted thereby (contrary to the vulgar Presumption) that Cold is not
always a wholesome, innocent Constitution; no, not in Winter: In Summer perhaps
it will be said, that it is unseasonable, and therefore may not be agreeable.
For I fancy I may distinguish (to speak rudely) two Spirits of Cold, the one
proceeds by Nature, the other by the Chemistry of the Heavens, i. e. by mixing
Two Hot Ingredients to produce Gold; as our Noble Pyrophilus offers. The Cold
proclaimed under our Aspect, or its Equivalent, answers to this later
Production, Two Luminous Planets conspiring to effect it. I remember in the
year 1665. a year which we ought all to remember, who were concerned; when in
the Month September there came Notable Frost, Cold and Winterly Weather: All
men gladded themselves with this Conclusion, That the Plague would cease: I
doubted it then, having found by Observation, that and had a Hand in Both; and
the event was too true, the Sickness abated not upon it, but rather rose to its
Fatal Height. When the Cold came by the ordinary way of Nature, i. e.
Separation of Calorific Bodies; then, God be thanked, we thought of returning
to our dear Native City, but before that the Observer durst not venture. Now
for the Winter even there we find Frost, and a Cold Dec. and yet great
Suspicions of Hurtful Influence, our Aspect being confessed, as may appear by the
Murrainer of Cattle in that time; and the Eruption of Evil in Youth, which
accompanied it.

9. Now though our (to speak of that alone) may ordinarily produce a Frost, and
help to continue the same, put up by other Causes, yet the Hyemal part shows
the Turbulent Nature of our Planets in Winds, not only cold and cutting, but
High and Disorderly: Twice or Thrice do we meet with Fury and Damage: often
with Lofty and Hurrying Gusts, The beginning of January 1668. and the Close of
Dec. tells us of Lightning in the Holy Days, Destroying Towers of Churches. As
for the great Tide noted about that time, it seems but a single Instance; but
we may reckon for it, or the like in our Doctrine of Inundations.

10. How turbulent are we in the Summer then? Winter, I hope, is the more
Turbulent Season: November, December, January and February, and March also: For
all Observation gives in November and December to be notable for Turbulency,
witness our Hyemal Breviat, so of the rest: yet in the Summertime, as short as
our Notice is (for the Longer will tell you another Tale) and bring then, I
say, High Winds and Rain; June 1652. and Store of Thunder at the same time.
Store of Rain in Sept. 1654. and Thunder on the 23d. day. Sad Rainy Day, April
26. 1661. with Heat after. Ao 1663. Thunder and Hail, violent Storms in June.
Stormy in Sept. 1665. Heat and Meteors all June, 1677. Rain and Lightning. Hard
Rain and Flashes of Lightning, Sept. 1679.

11. We must not forget the Dryth; for what conduces to Frost, conduces to a
dry State of Air, in Summer especially. The Figure of Leo and Aquarius happily
show (I do not say prove) the One should be Dryer than the Other: July, Fairer
than Jan. This we note to stop the Mouths of those, who dipping upon this
place, perhaps, may be apt to condemn us for the Rain which falls under this
Aspect, which we think observable, though the greater number of the Days be
free from it.

12. Maginus tells us if the Aspect hap in the same Quarter with the Sun, it
produces Soultry Heat, in eadem Quarta, as I remember in the Ancients,
signifies the same Quarter of the year, and That is reason, and confirmed by
our Aestival Breviat, Proviso, that you understand the Effects of Heat too,
Storms, Rains, Thunders, as the Fit takes them: In the same Sign with the Sun,
it must needs do the like.

13. He tells us further that in this Aspect we must regard which Planet has
most Prevalency, and why? because if Jove prevails, happy go lucky: but if
prevail, then come Droughts and Sickness, and Alia Mala suboriuntur. To which I
say, I heartily acknowledge and to be a Weighty and Dire Aspect, I may say, and
I fear others will be of my Mind before we have done. But I understand not the
Mamareth, or Elevation of the Arabs; or if I do, I see not the suitable
difference of the Effect: Fortitudes and Dignities of Planets, are Terms not to
be wholly exibilated; for a Planet above the Horizon is more strong than below;
Of Northern Latitude they say more strong, than the Southern, concerning which
in another place. But yet, as they are vulgarly taught (I speak as to our
Affair) They are to me Quicksands, I find no Footing. This I was willing to
do; what Ptolemy and Others speak of Dominion of a Planet to apply it to a, or
some great Aspect, or, and I found it to accord. For a Planet encouraged or
irritated, if it have any Influence, must show its Strength by that Irritation:
Now such Irritation is found in the greater Aspects.

14. The like I say of Fires and Conflagrations, which are imputed to this
Aspect, especially; I know not but Ptolemy may mean, only the accident of
Firing of Trees and Woods by excessive Heat in his more Southern Countries, as
has bin touched before; or Firing of Buildings by Lightning; and this may be
too true then, and since in those places. And if true, it helps to abett the
Immortal Influence of Planets, which are the Divine Instruments of Vengeance:
but if otherwise he means, though I shall not go about to deny some seeming
Evidence which may be brought, therefore, I say, I am not engaged to meddle in
it; nor do I believe it can, or will be ever made out: The Effects which we
teach have a natural dependence on their Causes; as Rain depends on Heat, as
the Color of the Rainbow depends on Light.

15. But to make amends, for Sickly Seasons, Accute Diseases, etc. which
Maginus adds, Let the Learned World pardon me, if I do again averr it, and
strike the Nail homer yet, than I have done already, with all safety to our
most Holy Religion, and the blessed Author of it.

16. For is it not a Childish Argument to say, God made all things Good (i. e.)
conformed to his own Idea; therefore, there is no Malefique Creature? Not to
enquire curiously, what should have been the natural Course in the Innocent
State, we suppose our Apostasy and Rebellion toward God, and so we believe
with Siracides, that Fire and Teeth of Wild Beasts, and Stings of Serpents were
made for Vengeance; that the Sun may now burn us by Day, and the annoy us by
Night; that the Stars of Heaven may be Wormwood, and have a bitter and unkind
Influence. The conduces to Fevers, and the to Frenzies and Epilepsies.

17. And verily, This Observation found me when I thought it not, came dressed
to me in its own Light, while I was attending to the various Shapes and Changes
of the Air; no suggestion to my remembrance of any Astrologers, Ancient or
Modern, taught me to suspect what I afterward found, that the Distempers of
the Season depend upon what the Season it self depends, the Aspects and
Positions of the Celestials. Galen also so long ago saying the same, Fevers,
Catarrhs, Small Pox, Fluxes, Pestilence, etc. according to the difference of
the Clime, and the Patient, do annoy us, when the Heavenly Bodies Transit, or
take up Station in such Parts of the Zodiac. There is no denial of it.

18. Kepler in his Diary has observed, it seems, amongst his Germans, Catarrhs
and Coughs At Lintz. Ao 1621. April 20. Coughs at Saganum in Silesia, Febr. V.
Ao 1629. Catarrhs. Who would suspect such a Malady had any relation to the
Planets above? Cold Air, and a Moist Brain, etc. These are Physical Causes
internal of Catarrhs. But of late, strange Experience taught us in London, yea,
all Europe, that, saving all such internal and proximate Efficiency, some
strange Aspect, Single, or Complicate, disturbs the Humor. For the Case was of
one Night, even of One, wherein a manifest barking Cough had seized the
generality of Young and Old, October. 26. 1675. Verily, there was an Aspect of
and, with an of, which occurring as rarely as its pretended Effect, may be
suspected for some Cause of it: However, this was then, but the Catarrhs of
Germany (no body is so fit to acquaint us herein as Kepler) belong to our
Jove-Martial-Aspect. In both these several years and Months we shall find a;
the First, Jan. 22. the Second, Febr. 10th. and that you may suspect here also
they were a Cause, you shall find no other Coughs or Catarrhs elsewhere
specified.

19. To proceed, these Catarrhs are noted to have happened within a day or Two,
if not the very day of the Configuration; where I desire the good Readers
favor while He observes that we labor after a Determinate Punctual
Prognosis, even of Maladies, as well as Constitutions of the Air, we do not
pronounce indeterminately, and leave the Determination of the Event to its
proper unknown Cause, and Father it, when it happens upon its pretended
Assignation: That is the Vulgar imperfect way; but we match the Effect to the
Cause, acknowledging no Postu^^ous Brood in our Midwifry: Then, and there,
appeared the Effect, not sooner, nor later.

Aestival Part.
Ao 1652. June 37. 6. A June 23. ad July 2.
23. Cloudy, clear, s. wd. 24. Cloudy, store of Thund. showrs at n. 25. Cloudy,
rain, s. Thund. 26. Windy and cloudy at n. 27. Clouds, s, rain, wdy. 28. s.
rain, wdy, cloudy at n. 29. Showrs, high wds. 30. Showrs and wdy. July 1.
Clear, wdy,
Ao 1654. Sept. 19. ad 28. 16.
19. Winds b. d. dark, cloudy. 20. Cloudy m. clouds overc. 21. Cloudy, s. fits
of wet weather. 22, Flying clouds, heat, wind at n. 23. Winds, dark, cloudy,
Th. at midn. 24. Rain. 25. Rain m. s. store of R. 26. Cloudy m. clear d.
audible wds, r. suspicious. 27. Misty m. warm.
Ao 1661. April 28. 5.
24. Cloudy, sometimes showry, clear even. 25. Cloudy, wdy 9 m. showry, wet
day, even. cloudy. 26. Cloudy, wdy, a sad rainy day. 37. Cloudy, misty m. p.
even. cloudy, s. rain. 28. Cloudy, a shower at night; bright m. p. even. cloudy,
s. rain m. n. 29. Cloudy, rain, threatening o. s. drops. 30. Cloudy, somewhat
misty p. m. s. Sun. A Starry even. May 1. Cloudy, dry p. m. somewhat clear, and
Sunshine. 2. Frost, l. fog, clear m. Hot May weather.
Ao 1663. June 29. 5.
26. Close, wet m. coasting showrs 3 p. 6 p. Hail. 27. Rain 7 m. storm,
thunder, hail p. m. rain at 7 p. m. 28. Fog m. clear up, cloudy p. m. clear
might. 29. Bright m. cloudy toward o. violent storms of Hail, dropping 6 p. 30.
Fair, dry, some flashing clouds, overc. 10 p. July 1. Rain Sun rise, s. dashing
o. fair and heat p. m. 2. Dry, warm, blushing quarters H. p. m. 3. Close m. p.
Ao 1663. Sept. 18. 12.
13. Frost, fair, cool wd, warm, Sun shine, overcast n. 14. Frost, close m. p.
dry 4 p. gentle rain m. p. 15. 16. Notable frost, fair, cool, cloudy. 17.
Storms of Rain and wd. 18. Very cool, h. wd, suspicious about Noon; coasting
showrs vesp and Sun set. 19. Hail, frost m. doubtful, cloudy, close, winterly,
s. rain 2, 3, 4 p. 20. Calm, close, s. showrs at Sun rise, weeting mist all
day. 21. Close m. p. s. dropping, rain 5 n. 22. Some dewing morn. hottish,
close. 23. Moon shine b. d. overcast. rain.
Ao 1675. March 13. 19.
7. Frost, overcast, stiff wds. 8. Fair a. m. storm of hail 4 p. and drisling,
cold n. 9. Rain much a 2 m. dark 7 m. a storm of snow, misle 1 p. h. wd 10. H.
wind, fair a. m. and cold, warm n. 11. Frost, mist, fair a. m. offer p. m. 12.
Frost, ice, fair, mist, windy. 13. Frost, ice, yielding p. m. and close wds.
14. Frost, ice, white clouds as for snow. o. close at Sun rise. 15. Frost, ice,
snow, hail a. m. cloudy, dark, close, yielding p. m. 16. Offer, close m. p. s.
snow 8 p. 17. Close, mist. wetting 5 p. coldest about o. 18. s. drisle 7 m. fog
m. p. misling at n. 19. Close, misling 2 p. 9 p. 20. Close m. p. misty, drisle
6 p.
Ao 1677. June 15. 27.
10. Close, fog m. ad o. open and no mist. Meteor 10 p. in the earth and Air.
11. Showrs a. m. 9 m. n. m. 12. Windy n. floating clds 9 m. s. dropping and
offering 1 p. 4 p. shower 6 p. 13. Warm, open, overcast 1 p. open, overcast 9 p.
14. Fair m. cloudy 10 m. pregnant clouds, warm. 15. Fair a. m. much lowering 2
p. offering 4 p. drops 6 p. soultry even, thick, etc. 16. Floating white clouds
9 m. and 8 p. overc. 17. Shower 1 m. and Sun rise, close, mist, hot, offer. ^ 11
p. 18. Wet 2 m. said the Watchman, close, rain 2 p. high wind 3 p. 19. Fair,
some mist, lowering o. clears up Nly. lowr. Wly. 20. Fair m. misty, close 11 m.
floating, lowering clouds 7 p. wind various. 21. Mist m. bright, s. misty: brisk
wd. Meteors near Pegasus.
Ao 1679. Sept. 16. 9.
12. Close mist, close most part, cloudy, warm, brisk wds, great drops 2 p.
cloudy 1. 13. High winds; great showrs 3 p. rain 8 p. overcast, close, great
fog. 14. Cool m. open, cloudy; brisk, suspicious 11. 15 Close, fog, rain a. m.
11 m. hard ante o. 16. Clear, colder, rain 7 m. 11 m. o. 3 p. high wind;
flashes of Lightning ante 10. 17. Clear, cloudy, high wd, cool rain. 3 ante 5.
shower ante 6. Large Iris. 18. White clouds, mist, brisk. wd, suspicious, cloudy
1 p. cool. 19. Close, cloudy great fog, cool wd, open. 20. Black frost, cool,
clouding p. m. rain ad 12. (...) 7. 2 very high wd.
^ 21. As for Fog, though it is regardable at Sea or on Land, yet we have balked
it, because it is no Rarity, out of ease to our selves; yet an Instance or two
found us in the Summer especially. That of July 5. 1578. termed, Hideous Fog
and Mist in the Journal, and so continued for a Fortnight, Hakl. p. 41. 5., 7..
we may read the Cause in these Characters; the cause of the Darkness and
Continuance. That of Aug. Ao 1580. in the Night (in North. Lat. 69. though it
be) we see is not procured but by consent of Aspect, 19., 4.. But you will say,
one Instance proves nothing. True, if I pronounced any pretended Truth from a
Naked Instance. Alas! I superseded to produce more for Brevity sake. Let us
take two or three therefore (since they are called for) from Keplers Diary;
Sept. 2. 1625. there is noted, Nebula faetida; in another place, Nebula Pernox.
Nov. 15. 1627. Yea, Nebulae continuae for 5 or 6 days; from Nov. the 25. 1627.
Dec. 1. Anni ejusdem. All which Kepler refers to the Nature of the Month,
secluding the Aspect: When as we find in every one of these, without exception,
either Opposition or Conjunction, Platique or Partile. We don't go to deny that
Sept. Nov. Dec. are Misty Months, and that upon Keplers Account of Sol Cadens,
or declining, or distance of the Sun: Therefore Scotland is more Obnoxious to
Fog than England; and England more than France or Spain; The Occasion of
Gondomar, famed Reproach, when he left us in Winter time, who bid us remember
his Service to the Sun, the next time we see him, for he had not seen the
Gentleman a long time. But though Fogs are more frequent and permanent in
Winter, than Summer, yet the Declination of the Sun is not the Plenary perfect
Cause; for how then come Mists in April, May, June, July, if a declining Sun be
the absolute Cause? How come Mists in Winter to fall on the Less, and Vanish in
the Greater Declination? How come they to fall sometimes, not in the Night, nor
toward Morning, but toward Noon, at hor. 9. or 10. in the Morning? How come
Mists to clear up at Midnight? If a Mist falls in Sept. yea in Aug. upon a
Declining Sun, it must last till the end of March at least; for March is a
Misty Month. No, no: the Peregrinations of the and, which I think constitute
the Nature of the Month, abstracted from the Other Planets (unless we shall
reckon and to the Sun) dispense nor Cold, nor Heat, Mist nor Clarity, without
the Consent of the Rest. It Is they help to continue, and continuing to
incrassate the Fumid Vapor, according as Summer Misty Aspects take place. For
it is not always a like Misty; no, not near the Pole, as the North-West Voyages
inform us. And it is clear from this, that it is not perpetual Fog with us in
Winter. Yet the Sun is farther from the Zenith than the Pole Artique is from
the Tropic. Nay, I fancy it is not a perpetual Fog there (though 160 degrees be
a great Reach) no, not in Winter. For as God has made the to give Light to
Greenland, etc. and the other most Northern Parts for half the Month, as the
for half the year; it is likely then, that it is not always a Hideous Fog, such
as can wholly intercept the Light. God has a care even for the Wild Beasts. It
concerns then our Mariners to acquaint with these Principles. A of with any
Planet will ordinarily make a Mist any where, except under the Line: There, I
have not met with any. But within a few degrees Latitude 7 or 8. I find Hazy
Air, Ao 1662. in C. John Limbereys Journal; and withal an of and. It Is so of
the rest, as certain as any thing in Nature. But we are concerned with our
Aspect in hand. Of which I shall desire at this time that we observe only this,
How the Hideous Fog, specified from Hakluit in Frobishers 3d Voyage, falls
under the same Aspect, and the same degrees in both Places: Sept. 2. in Kepl.
Ao 1623. being 4. 4. and This in Hakl. 5. 7. Where is the Difference?

22. The next shall be the monstrous Hail, noted first at Auspurge, July 19.
1528. Lycosth. 3., 5.

Ao 1521. Sept. 4. at Basil, such Hail as destroyed the Vintage, Lycosth. 26.,
1..

Ao 1557. Languedoc, Tempest cum Ton. and Grandines, such as was not in the
Memory of Man, Gem. 2. 131. 12.. 28..

Ao 1589. July 13. near Lovain, Winds, Hail, Thunder, Gem. 2. 65. 12., 4..

Ao 1600. June 18. at Riff in Norfolk, Hailstones as big as Walnuts, threw down
the Wheat, Stow, 20., 10..

For the Hail. What shall I say? That helps to the drop, the great drop, and to
the Cold. This has bin said before. This I will say, that though I was no
Eyewitness of these Hail-Storms so many years ago, yet I am sure their
Memorand is True; and so far the Witness of Lycosthenes, that others may
witness for themselves. It destroyed the Vintage in one place; the Corn in
another (these are no small Admonitions to Mortal Observers). I consult not the
Author to embellish the Story with Frightful Circumstances, being already
persuaded, that great are these Superior Aspects, and as answerable are their
Effects.

23. There remains nothing, as I take it, but that we conclude with a cooler.
and have been found of late in such a Position to favor, yea, to provoke
Winter; No wonder that it produces Hail in a Summer Storm; is remote, but That
will not serve to explicate his chill Influence; and, they say, is Moist, but
He may be as dry in some Circumstances; and if attempers him, is but one, He
cannot alone repress the Crudity of that Positure Celestial, but either consent
to it, or is conquered by it. I shall produce some evidence to this Truth
before I have done; nor do I reckon it superfluous, which lets us into the
knowledge of the abstruse Nature of; or if you will, the Hidden Operation that
Light or Warmth has in the Dispensation of Cold; which to me is a Positive
Quality, though I strive as much as I can to Captivate my Judgment to my
Betters, who teach the contrary.

Frigus,
24. 1540. Dec. 17. Snow hard, much Cold at Chiacca, Purch. p. 3. p. 1544. 2,
18.. 1568. Dec. 2. Hyems asperrima usque ad medium Martii, Gem. 2. p. 63. Hows,
p. 662. 20. 2. 1573. Late Spring, Wind N E. with Frost from the beginning of
the year till Ascension. On March 1. 11., o.. and April. 1. 4., 7. 1578. Jan.
28. Port St. Julian Latit. South 49. We entered into the Port, two Months
following colder than in England in the Depth of Winter, Hakl. Vol. 3. p. 752.
3., 29.. July 2. Storm that Night separated the Ships in the midst of the Icy
Mountains, Hakl. p. 40, 41. 8., 6.. 1579. Febr. 4 ad 10. Frost and Snow,
wherein many Cattle perished, and Travelers lost, Stow, 625. 15., 13.. Nov.
19. High Winds Northerly, there was a great Frost, with much Ice in the River
Astracan, Purch. Vol. 2. p. 442. 26. 17.. 1587. Late Spring, and cold Summer;
no Cherries until St. Jamestide. Stow's Summary. in the matter all the first
half of the year. It Is but a; but so notable, deserves a mention. So I find it
again, Cold March and April, Ao 1599. on the same accident. 1595. From
Easter Day, on which it Thundered, Cold Wind April 20. and May following, o.,
23.; and May 11. 15., 27.. 1598. Jan. 1. ad 10. The River Thames near frozen
over, Stow. 138. 6., 22. Dec. 1. ad 18. Thames almost frozen, Stow, p. 788.
19., 17.. pinching nearer and nearer. 1600. Jan. 20. Frost over the Thames
almost in one Seven-night, began here. Hows, p. 135. 4., 10.. March 23. Snow on
Easter Day, and so continued extreme Cold: Snow'd again die 30. 1.. 10.. April
4. Snow, Month Cold and Dry every Morning, Hows. p. 790. 3., 10. May 1. Cold
and Dry in April and May, but two days Rainy, 8., 11. 1609. Jan. 12. Virginia
River frozen near half a Mile, C. Smith, 13., 6.. 1620. Nov. 27, 28, 29.
Extreme Cold in New England, C. Smith, opposed, but also entering on Opposition,
whence several Days in Dec. were noted. 1622. Jan. 24. St. N. Frigus
intensissimum laesit vitium ipsas radices 3., 11. 1625. Dec. 17. Frigus
horridum. Dec. 19. Glacies in Danubio. 10., 26.. 1626. Nov. 24. ad 29. Frigidum
Crustae in Danubio. 11., 15.. Dec. 26. Frigus acre, 22., 24.. 1634. Dec. 6.
Frost continued all Winter Solstice, which with Drought before, so sunk the
Thames, that Barges could not come to Land. the like not known in 100 year;
yea, People went over the Thames, says Perkins, 29., 2.. 1645. Dec. 15. Frost,
bitter Cold, Sprig. So Jan. 6, 9, 12. id.
25. This may seem enough to Well-Willers: Yet because it is a piece of a
Paradox, that two Warm Stars (forsooth) should produce Frost; we shall bring in
a heap of Snow-balls, and sturdy Ice, to persuade some kind of Assent to This
strange Thesis; and when we have done, shall put in our Caveat. Our further
Evidence may be drawn out of a continued Diary, from 1621. to 1646. without
Interruption; unless when and interdict, as belonging to their Royalty, or when
the present Aspect happens in the Summer half year.

1621. Jan. 14. S. V. Frigus intensissimum. 15, 16. Ningidum. 18, 19. Ninxit.
22. ad 26. Frigus immane. Febr. 14, 15. Ningidum. 25. Gelavit. March 16, 17.
Venti frig. gelavit. 19. Ninxit. 20. Frigus. 21. Nix pluvia. 22. Gelavit. 25.
Golida, pluvia. 29. Nimbi Grandinosi. 30. Ningidum. 31. and April 1. Nivosa,
Grando, Tonuit. And so on as it occurs in the Book to which we refer.
All This will not satisfy a near Inquisitor, who will observe to me the
greatness of the Stride and Distance between the Former and the Later Chill, or
Frosty day. For example, Ao 1621. Jan. 26. Frigus immane, but no news again of
any thing like it, till Ningidum, Febr. 14. or Gelavit appears Febr. 25. a
month after; and that a poor bare Instance till the midst of the Month
following. I question Such Observers. Thus, -- Will not you allow some
extraordinary accident which makes an entire Month warm in Winter? When That,
whatever it retires, the Aspect returns to its Old Wont, (not on Febr. 25. for
that is but one Lonely Day, but) on March 16. where you see we have Cold and
Frost for 5, or 6 days, being the end of March; yea, and 6 or 7 days not far
off in April. For what should I mention Winter Months? Well, though we stand in
it, that Winter brings no Frost without a Winter-Position and Aspect; yet we
will put others in Nomination.

26. March, Ao 1628. for our Aspect's sake, brings Frigus Hyemale, die 5. and
6. the very Term Hyemale shows the Cold unusual: Yet die 9. and 10. appears
Frigus intensum, and Nix copiosa, the very day of the Equinoctial Sun. Nay, in
April's first Week, Flaques of Snow twice or thrice.

March again, Ao 1629. Snow the day preceding the Equinoctial, and Frost 3 or 4
days after. Nor is it News, for Ao 1631. we find March his Nose drop with Frost
and Snow, Die 13: and 16. Yea, a Month after, April 10. Rain, Snow, and Sleet.
April the 10th did we say? We have in another year, April 12. and 16. Rain and
Snow. Nay, if you love me, or my Aspect, look upon March and April 1640.

Yea, May Cold, Ao 1639. at Norimberg. Schlossen, much Snow, and Regen Sleet;
Snow and Rain for 3 days together. Here, I hope, it is not time of the year for
Snow. No Aquarius in May. If the Night be Chill, and the Morning make the Cow
quake, as the Country Saw has it, the Days methinks should not Frown. But the
Old excuse may serve for March, when Cold appears, What? but Hyemis Reliquiae;
and so perhaps they will pretend for April too, but with an inward Blush, at
least, discovering the unreasonableness of such pretense, at such distance. But
for the end of May, when the Sun is thinking to mount his Tropic Circle; if
the Sun alone orders all, there can be no Relics of Winter preserved so long
in the Air. There is no Subterranean Repository there to keep ice; There is a
Workhouse to make Snow and Hail in Summer Months, but no Repository to keep
it. Jove therefore must be a Gooler sometimes, and and must contribute as much
as and to Winter Weather; and that in Platique Aspect as well as Partile; whose
Chill Influence is sometimes discernible in July and August: Of which see, if
it be worth the while, July and August, 1627. 1630. 1644. Yea, June and July,
1641. Compare, I pray, the Memoirs of the late Springs and Cold Summers, 1573.
1587. 1595. 1660.

27. My Caveat therefore now is to my Faculty, that they heedfully look about
them, when they undertake the Prognosis of the Constitution of the Air under
this Aspect. For it is a very false Configuration, not sure to a side, as we
have admonished before, but many times leaves his Expectant in the Lurch: but
you must observe his Comes and Goes, and so you will find him out. For
according to those Vicissitudes, He will pretend to Winter, deep Winter, Snow
and Hail, and Cold 3 days together, and on the 4th Thunder. I have given one
example of many, viz. April 1. 1621. where Kepler records on the same day,
Nivosa, Grando, and Tonuit. And this agreeable to what has been observed in
etc. before.

28. Here then take the Character of the Aspect. The of and in ordinary
Circumstances, produces as ye have heard, Cold frosty Mornings in Winter; yea,
and not seldom in Spring time. With a little more encouragement, produces
Snow, Cold Rain, Sharp cutting Winds. In Summer time all manner of Weather,
Dry, Mist, Clouds, Winds, Heat, Rain, Hail, Thunder oft-times with Violence, a
Taste of their Superiority. Apt to Turbulency and Tempest also in Winter, not
Lightning excepted. The is much of the same Strain, only perhaps for Cold, has
a less kindness.

29. But enter Jove and Mars, the second time, the 2d. of Superiors. They make
a fine Sight when they come within a Span Breadth in the Firmament; but like
the Canon in the Camp, they are beautiful, but terrible. They bode mischief
more frequently than a Comet; yea, and Cause it too. We consider it prescinded
from no Syzygie, but that of the Two Highest, and. It swallows up, we have
said, the Aspects of Less Duration, as a Serpent does Worms and Toads, and is
nourished by them; though those Minor Configurations are not destroyed, but
live and move in the Belly. We are not glad, nor do we boast in telling the
World strange News to aggrandize the Art, or the Professors. All that we wish
is, That the World may know the import of what it sees, and when they believe,
or smart under the Effects, may Learn to Fear, to come to some, at least,
Natural Theology; since he said not amiss, who has taught us, that Fear and
Terror first created (or Refreshed) the Idea of a Deity. Nor has God in his
Oracles, forbid us to be afraid of the Signs of Heaven, if the Prophet means
the Natural Congresses of the Heavenly Bodies. He forbids us not, I say, to be
afraid absolutely, though to Vulgar Interpretation it may seem so, but only
(...), such a Consternation and Emotion of Mind that is found in Heathens, who
ordinarily look no higher than the 2d Cause. As in sundry places he bids us not
to care and Cark for the things of the World, nor fear the Persecutor, who
kills the Body.

30. To those who are not convinced from the Faith of our Testimony, nor from
our Weak Reflections thereon, we draw in this further Evidence, being Zealously
affected toward the advance of a Natural Astrology; believing, or else I should
be heartily sorry, that it conduces to the advance of Religion, and the Glory
of the Creator, whose Worms we are, whatsoever Philosophy takes up our Brains,
Old or New.

31. Our former Tables of this Aspect was but the Soft Stop of the Organ; This
is the Loud one which makes the Lofty Curvature of the Celestial Arch to ring,
and shout out the Praises of him, in whose Temple all these great Things are
Transacted. He who will know Truth, must look back into past time: If the World
were but of yesterday, and made by the Concourse of Atoms, it were but Venial
to be an Infidel: but when so many years are passed over our Ancestors Heads,
and the same Nature holds now as before, I say, nothing but this, that He who
minds Truth, must not despise the Light which the past Ages have left us. The
Scrowle of past Times, which remindeth us of Tempests as far as 180 years, runs
backward, part of which we have already presented, the Residue now succeding
is, as follows.

32. A Table of Tempests, Rain, Hail, Snow, Winds.
Anno 1517. June 26. Tempest, Hail, with T. M. at Nordlingen, Lyc. 17., 21..
1520. July 11. K. Henry's Temporary Banqueting House, built for the Emperors
entertainment, with all its Pomp, blown down, Stow. 11, 6.. 1521. October. 24.
Magellane Tempest, and 3 Lights on the Shrouds, Purch. 5., 23.. 1526. Circ. May
10, 11, 12. near Otmar, extreme Darkness, and rage of Weather, lasted till May
20. Purch. 1. p. 1114. 29. 26.. 1527. Ab April 12. ad June 3: Rain Day and
Night, so that Corn failed, Hows, p. 527. and 530. in; some transpose this to
1528. Lyc. 1528. July 19. Auspurge, Great Hailstones, Lyc. 535. and in princ.
1538. Hyeme imminente, says Calvis. Barbarosa's Shipwreck near the
Acroceraunii, 2000 Men lost. Surius, p. 671. In Nov. and opposed in Tropical
Signs, as and also. 1539. Circ. Aug. 23. Extreme Tempest near the Isles of
Xulisco, on the backside of America, with danger of perishing, Frobisher,
Hakl. 398. 8., 15.. 1541. Sub Hyemem Caesar faedae Tempestate ad Argieram
Africae jactatus in Magno Discrimine versatus est. Hell. prefat. and Calvis. ad
Nov. init. and in fine. June 30. Wind blew hard at E.S.E. Red Sea Mouth, 25.,
17., in and. 1547. July 20. Libo Notus vehementiss. Dr. Dec. Annot. ad Mensem,
22., 12.. Aug. 1. Africus Vehementiss. and Pluvia continua a 4 hor. ad 10. P.
M. Init., 10.. Aug. 14. Procella cum Africo Vehementiss. ut Caelum delapsurum
Crederii, o.. 10., cum and. Sept. 11. Sand in the Air like Smoke carried with
the Wind. 1548. May 1, 2, 3. Exceeding Boisterous. Dec. 14.. 9.. Die 8, 9, 10.
Stormy, Cold, Rain, 19.. 10.. Die 11. Grando cum magna pluvia June 13. Pluviosa
tota. Die 14. Rain from Midnight to 10. m. Id. 16. July 6, 7. Mist, Rainy
Lovain. Dec. 19., o.. 1549. October. 15. and 25. Ventus. 3., 23., id. Nov. 10.
Ventus Vehementiss. id. in and 20. Die 13. Boistrous as might be, and Rain, id.
Die 16. Ventus long Vehementiss. 1550. Aug. 5. Tuffon near Laubin. Fritsch.
9., 24. Add 6.. June 11, 12, 13. Stormy, that those which were on shore durst
not return, Lat. 65. Hakl. 314. 27., 18.. Die 18. Wind Northerly constrained us
to go back, Ib. October. 5. Lat. N. 41. Very foul Weather, with Winds, Rain,
Towerson, Hakl. 129. 26., 2.. Die 16, 17. Near the Isle of Wight, Great Storm,
Towerson, Hakl. p. 130. in 4. Nov. 10. Russian Ambassadors Vessel cast away on
the Scottish Coasts the Ambassador scarce escaping, Stow, in, and 25.. 8..
1558. July 15. Hurricane through a great part of France, quo tempore exact
Novilunium fuit, Gem. Hakl. 23. 2.. Die 15. Near Volga, great Storm at S E.
Jenkins, Hakl. p. 350.. Aug. 13. Caspian Sea, Storm from the East for 3 days,
we thought we should have perished, Hakl p. 351. 1562. Jan. 21, 22, 23. Horrida
ventosa, Tempestas, Gem. 24., 22. Again, March 11. in 26. Totius anni status
Tempestatib. ventorum and procellis infestus, Gem. 2. 37. with in Signo eodem
ad Maii finem usque cum and usque ad June. 1668. October 9. Extreme Storm, for
every Hour we feared Shipwreck, Hawkins in Hakl. p. 556. 21., 9.. 1576. July 1.
Much Wind, we spoon'd before the Sea. So die 8. again, Hakl. 618. 23., 15..
1577. Nov. 30. Two Barks Company lost by Tempest and Fog, Hakl. 3. p. 39. 12.,
22.. Die 30. A Surge of the Sea took the Master of the Gabriel overboard, Hakl.
3. p. 72. Sept. 1. Storm very great, every Sea over-raking the Poop. Hakl. 3.
p. 72. Frobisher, 12., 22.. Die 23. Coasts of Cornwall, very foul Weather,
Frobisher, 22. 26. October. 16. Great Storm, W. S W. within a days Sail of the
Isle of Wight, Towerson, Hakl. 2. p. 51. 2.. 11. Nov. 13. Sir Francis Drake
departed from Plymouth, and next day was in great danger, his Mast broke.
Arthus. p. 8. 7., 29.. 1578. Jan. 20. Friesland covered with Snow, Frobisher,
Hakl. 3. p. 752. 25., 5.. July 2. Storm carried the Ship in the midst of the
Icy Mountains, Hakl. p. 40, 41. 1., 6.. Julii Mense, Snow and Hail, Frobisher,
p. 48. and opposed, and not wholly the Distemper of the Country, as Frob.
imagines. July 26. Terrible Tempests, with Snow, we could not open our Eyes,
nor hand the Ropes, Hakl. 1. 42. 9.. 17.. Aug. 31. Outrageous Tempest,
separated M. Frobishes Fleet, continued a long time; the Fleet met not till
Sept. 20. The whole Month stormy, Hakl. 3. 44. and 92. 13., 16.. Sept. 1. Lost
Anchor and Cable. Hakl. Nov. 1. Terrible Tempest, Purch. I. p. 42. 13., 2, and
in. 1579. Febr. 4. ad 8. day, Snow, two Foot in the shallow, Stow, in 13.
October. 1. Sea swelled;, Merchants lost their Goods on Shore, many drowned,
Stow, 686. 22.. 19.. 1580. July 2. Wind blew very much, great Fog, Hakl. 1.
469. Die 23. Very much Wind, Rain, and Fog, Ib. Die 27. Snow all Night, and
much Wind. Aug. 2. Very much foul Weather, P. M. and nocte tot. Die 5. Rain and
very much Wind, etc. Die 13. Blew very hard, great store of Snow. We lay Hakl.
171. Die 15. and 16. Windy and Rainy. Sept. 2. Winds variable at all points of
the Compass; so much Wind in this Night we lay at Hull, near Foulness. Sept. 5,
6, 7. Very foul Weather, Hakl. 1. p. 474. Happy the Ship in Harbor, princ. Die
23. 27. Norway, very much Wind with Rain and Fog, Hakl. Ib. ut supra. October. 1.
ad 7. Very much Wind, and Vehement Blasts; Foul Weather, especially the 4th.
when our Cable broke. Nor is it possible more Wind should blow, Hakl. 1. 475..
October. 17. ad 22. Mediterranean Sea, Horrid Tempest. Prosper Alpin, Africi
Venti eo tempore flare sole^t procellosi, lb. October. 8. ad 24. Floods,
Catarrhs, Fog, Rain 18. Dec. 3. So much Wind, that we could bear but our
Fore-Course, Hakl. 16., 24.. Die 27. Snow all Night, with much Wind. 1551.
March 7, 8. Procellosa Navigatio Alpin, Purch. 22., 4.. April 5. ad 11. Very
great Winds and Storms, Purch. 1. p. 1411. and in and. 1586. June 12. Great
Tempests severed Fleets, Arthus. Occid. ind. p. 8. 6., 24.. June 13. Virginia,
an unusual Storm for 4 days; Hakl. p. 746. 8., 25.. Great Billows and Showrs
Liusoh. p. 373. A 16. ad 29. Many Tempestuous Storms, Hakl Ib. o., 25.. July 7.
Whirlwind, takes up the Water, Hakl. Ab Aug. 28. ad Sept. 1. Lat. 50. Two very
great Storms, Hakl. p. 785. 10, 26.. Sept. 6. ad 10. Mighty Storm, which
unrigg'd our Ship; Cable broke, so that we expected to be driven on Shore,
Hakl. 786. 22., 8.. Sept. 3. Long Voyage, unhappy, Cavendish apud Hakl. Very
great Storm, lost the Sight of the Pinnace, which Pinnace never returned, Hakl.
Ib. 11.. 2.. July 8. Tempest, Winds, Seas bellowing. 24, o. Die. 9. A Corpo
Santo, Ib. 1588. Sept. 2. Tempest cast part of the Armado on the Irish Coast,
where many Ships perished, Purch. 109. 14., 2.. Sept. 8. Plymouth, Terrible
Storms, tearing Sails, Oars. Hows 813. 18., 4.. 1598. Jan. 1. ad March 14.
Stormy Weather, cum in Sept. 14, 15. Storm, Hakl. 294. in una cum. 1595. June
20. Foul Weather, Stow, 21., 14.. April 18. Furious Tempest, broke Cables, and
lost Anchors, Hakl. p. 582. 1.. 6. 1590. October. 5 and 8. Blew hard, Purch. 24.,
8.. Die 18. Great Storm and Cold, 3. 0.. Die 31. Great Snow; 12., 4.. Nov. 13.
Foul Weather, great Snow, Purch. 21., 8.. 1597. June 21. Isle of Blank, much
Wind at E. Hakl. 3. p. 195. 5., 4.. Die 24, 25. Plymouth, extreme foul Weather,
Purch. Die 26. Blew hard from South. July 19. Earl of Essex Fleet from the
Azores, 60 Leagues from Plymouth, driven back by a Storm of 4 days. Howes, p.
783. 26., 10.. Aug. 1. Wind hard, Waves hollow. Die 1^. Storm, Purch. 1. p.
709. Die 17. English Fleet dispersed, with many Storms and foul Weather. 14..
Sept. 5. met at the Azores, Hows, 783. Die 28. Wind blew hard. October. 14. great
Storm, danger of drowning, Purch. 3. 1212. 15., 8.. Oct. fin. on the Coast of
Sussex, great Storm, Purch. 1945. 1598. Jan. 8. They Landed, having endured
many Storms, which endangered them on the Rocks of M. Bay, Purch. 1. p. 77. in.
Die 11. Continual Rain, and diverse Storms, ad 17. in Maurice Bay. Purch. 1. 74.
8., 19.. Febr. 22. St. N. Fearful Storm. 26., 12.. 1599. In fine Aug. A great
Storm, Lat. 54. it continuing usque ad October 5. 8., 10.. 1600. June 18. At
Rysse in Norfolk, Hailstones like Walnuts, broke down the Wheat, Howes, 790.
19., 10.. Sept. 9. Storms in two Months not one fair day, Purch. 1. 79. 15.,
12.. October. 4. Storm lost our Anchor, 28., 16.. October. 18. Much Wind, our
Foresail blew away. Die 27, 29. Storms, 7., 19.. Nov. 1. Much Wind, Purch. 9.,
20.. Die 4. Storms, Purch. 1072: Die 27. Very much Wind, Purch: 3. p. 130. 15.,
21.. Dec. 23. Boistrous Winds, overbearing Tides, blown Leads of Churches,
Stow. 789. 14., 24.. Dec. fine. Storms finished the Month and year, 18., 21..
1601. Frost a Febr. 13. to April 12. ( Easter Day) Wind neither West, nor
North. We impute it to the Aspect, which then, secundum nos, expired, 12., 16..
1602. May 30: Fog and Snow, great Whirlwind, Current, 17.. 11:. June 6. Much
Rain. Die 15. Much Rain, Wind and Fog. Nov. 12. Pleasant Gale, and very much
Rain, Purch. 225. 1608. Dec. 24. Creat Shower, high Wind, S E. Capt. Smith; at
Virginia, 6., 5.. Die 30. Vehement Wind, much Rain 6 or 7 days together, Ib.
1609. Dec. 21. Sub noctem Tempestas, Kepl. 27., 12.. 1610. Jan. 10. All the
time before the Wind having bin W. S. W. blew Storms Easterly. 1615. October. 1.
After much Sea trouble, they had Sight of Land, but the Sea wrought so they
could not Land, Purch. 1. p. 81. S. N. Ventus decumanus. April 6. Venti Validi,
S. N. 7. Nimbi. 13: Pluit tot. die. 22. Nix. 24, 25. Pluit Copiose. 27, 28, 29.
Nimbi crebri. Dec. 13, 14. Pluit Largiter, 15., 2. 18. Pluit toto die. 20.
Pluit tota Nocte. 28. Pluit Copiose. 1618. Dec. 14. Beaten back, cross Winds
blowed us back. 1619. May 26. Astracan. A great Tempest, Purch. 1. p. 130. 29.,
9.: 1620. A Febr. ad March 14. Many Tempests, and foul Weather, Capt. Smith,
in. March 20. Great Storm, many Corpo Santo's in the Indies, Purch. I. p. 620.
Dec. 28. Rainy, Rain p. m. freez and Snow all Night, Capt. Smith, 238. 25.,
11.. 1621. E. Diario Kepleriano, St. N. Jan. 2. Much Rain, and dirty. 14. Nox
Pluvia. 25, 26. Ningidum. Febr. 10. 14. Ventus Validus, 13. 20, 21. Ventus
decumanus. 22, 23. Ningidum. 24. Prodigiosus ventus, Viennae, and Pluvia. 27,
28. Pluit largiter. March 3, 4. Nimbi quos imputat Viciniae magni Fluvii, cum
and grad. tanto duob. distent ab Oppositione. 21, 22. Pluit Largiter. 23, 24,
25. Noctes pluviae. April 2. Ningidum larga pluvia, 23., 22.. Die 8. Nimbi
Grandinosi, 21.. 21.. May 14. Tempestas, Grando, 11., 1.. 1625. October. 23.
Ventus Tepidus and impetuosus. October. 25. Ventus magnus. Nov. 16. Ningidum. Die
17. Pluvia continua. Dec. 6. Nimbi Grandinosi. Die 18. Ruinae Nivium. 1626.
Jan. 5, 6. Venti Calidi and Nives. Die 10. Ventus decumanus. Die 13, 14. Ventus
Calidus continuus nives agitans. Die 18. 19. Euri Nives aggerantes. Febr. 6.
Pluviae Multae. Die 20. Ventus Calidus. Die 22. Ningidum. Die 24. Ventus
Validus. March 2. Ninxit multum. Die 5, 6. Nix alta. October. 1. ad 4. Euri
Validi. Die 9. Ventus Validus. Die 13. Eurus Validus. Die 14. Ventorum impetus,
Nimbi nivium. Die 24. Ventus eeris ningidus. Nov. 27, 28, 29. Venti Validi. 30.
Ningidum. Dec. 7, 8, 9. Nimbi crebri. 1628. Jan. 2. S. N. Ningidum. 24, 25. Nix
Copiosissima. March 1, 2, 3. Venti Validissimi. Die 19, 20. Nix Copiosa. Die
29. Nix Ventus impetuosa. April 7. Ventus Validus. Die 9. Foeda Pluvia. Die 14.
Nivosae Grandines. Die 17, 18. Grando nives. Die 19. Foeda Pluvia. Ab April 27.
ad May 3. St. Vet. Pluvia, and dum and per: Fixas Tempestuosas meant, Kepl. May
11. 12. Pluit Copiose. Die 13. Tempestas. Die 23. Grando. Dec. 17. Pluit
largiter. Die 18. Ventus Validus. 23. Dies atra Pluvia. 1648. Dec. 30. Sad
Shower, Wind and Hail most violent, Lightning vesp. 1651. Sept. 4. Very Wet,
while K. Charles the II. sat in the Royal Oak.
33. To raise our Thoughts up to the Bulk of our Ponderour Planets, it is best
first to make use of Kepler's punctual Diary, where you shall meet with, not
only Nimbi, Crebri, Pluit Copiose, largiter, tota die, Nix Pluvia, Ventus
magnus, Impetuosus, Decumanus, Tempestas, Atrox, Horrida, etc. Now though the
same has been pretended in the Inferior Aspects; yet this I say, that Those
Aspects so powerful then, though we considered them Solitary, for Methods sake,
in Nature were not so; when they mounted so high as to produce Extremities,
they were united and backed with Equal; yea, with greater Aspects than
themselves. It being an undoubted Truth that the Aspects of the Superiors, the
Pure Superior Aspects, are of more signal, more Majestic Influence, then the
Pure Inferiors; or when a Superior is mingled with one below him. For, as,
beside the Vote of Holy-Writ, it is apparent that in an Elephant or Whale, the
Power of God is more stupendiously seen in the very Bulk and Dimensions of the
Animal, and the Proportionable Strength; so is it among the Celestial Bodies,
the Congresses and Oppositions, etc. of the Superiors; the Behemoths and
Leviathans of the Ether, being of greater Bulk, of Heavier and Graver pace,
carry more of the Celestial Creator's Character and Impression, than the
Meaner; so far, that as the Strength of the one, the Monstrous Animal, etc. so
the Strength of the Other, the Planet is incredible.

34. And therefore be sure to reckon always, when you see any amazing Extremity
of Weather, that the Superior Planets have the greatest Stroke, either by
their mixed, or by their pure Concatenations.

35. Observe secondly, the repeated frequency of the Extremity, Two days,
Three, Four, Five, Ten, etc. which according to the Narrow Inferiors
Principle, will not hold so long in any Aspect of, (except perhaps, once in 10
or 20 years upon a Station) and therefore must be imputed to a more lasting
Radiation. Thus, Ao 1621. in March we find Three Nights together, Rain (we make
nothing of 2 days) Ao 1627. Jan. 14, 15, 16, Nix continua. Ao 1628. March 1, 2,
3. Ao 1629. Jan. 16, 17, 18. Blustering. Dec. 24, 25, 26, 27. Snowing. As
before, Ao 1625. Dec. 14, 15, 16, 17. the same. Now for Five, Febr. 23, 24, 25,
26, 27. Stormy, Rainy and Sleet.

36. It Is easy to parallel this out of the Table of the Storms recorded, long
before last Century: For even Ao 1526. we meet with extreme Darkness for 10
days, Ao 1597. Aug. 17. Our English Fleet were dispersed, so that they met not
till September 5. -- Ao 1598. Jan. 8. lands the Seamen, having endured many
Storms. Ao 1615. October. the 1. after much Sea Troubles had Sight of Land. Nay
on Sept. 9. 1598. the Weather was sad and Stormy, that in Two Months they had
not one Fair day. Time was when we thought 50 days too much (when it rained so
that Corn failed with us in England, 1526.) and yet our Aspect or Table is yet
more unmerciful; for in some years, with some interruption more or less, we
often meet with 3 Months Disturbance. July, August, September 1547. and Ao
1548. May, June, July. -- Add Sept. November. Dec. 1557. and 1577. June, July,
Aug Sept. (4 Months) Ao 1578. So when Gemma tells us, that Totius Anni status,
Ao 1562. was infested with Tempests and Storms; our Aspect of and shall answer
for the first 5 Months, found twice in the same Sign in that while. But may I
not mistake non Causa, pro Causa? I answer, not well amids such Testimony. I Will
reach you but one Instance; The 50 days Rain when Corn failed, we scruple not
to assign to our, as a Cause. Nor will any man else, when he sees the Bodies
concerned, lodged in and, not excluding the of and; but we assert our Aspect to
make one, and a great One, and that so confidently, that by this we dare
convince Lycosthenes of a slip, who post-pones that wet Spring to 1528. because
there is no such drenching Aspects appear in that after year; of which Slips
there are too many, saving the great usefulness of the Design. But I do not
pretend to convince all by Astrology. Concluding there are more obvious means
by comparing other Records, etc. However this slip I evince by this Method.

37. The Length and the violent Starts of this Aspect being considered, we need
not wonder, if we find prodigious Inundations too often under it, where among
others, that at Home, and in Holland, Ao eod. though not the same Month, and
our Home Inundation in Somersetshire, at the beginning of this Century, will
never be forgotten by the places concerned.

38. Now, shall not we who pretend to great things say somewhat to That, in our
following Table, First, and miserable deluge in Holland, where so many Towns
were swallowed up, tops of whose Turrets to this Day peep out of the Water, I
know not on what account omitted by some Annalists, where 100000. People were
Drowned. I am not such an Atheist as to magnify second Causes to the prejudice
of the First; In my Philosophy They illustrate his Glories, not Eclipse them. I
would advise therefore, some of our beloved Neighbors of the Low Countries, to
watch the Caelestial Positions of that time; in particular there is a concourse
of our two Superiors in; Especially if about the beginning of Nov. which they
may know, is apt to Floods. For in this year 1521. and are found in the one in
the beginning of the Sign, the other at the End. And is not that, First,
according to our Principle? And again, is there any other Aspect near, that is
Considerable? And yet again, This being not our Only Instance in and. as we
shall see, Who knows but a little insight in Astrology may save 100000. Lives?

39. The Next dire Inundation at Rome, where the waters were Raised the depth
of the Longest Spear; They may please to take heed of a Congress of the Planets
in, if two of the Superiors be amongst them; for so we find a in the beginning
of, not without assistance, when their Inundation happened; and Lo! about a
Month after, what with Winds and Rain, Nov. 6. such another Flood, Ut Telluris
obratae Clades, and pecorum and homines interit us, non satis describi possit,
says Gemma.

Floods by.
40. Anno 1521. Nov. 1. Dire Inundation in Holland, 72 Villages drowned,
Fromond. Met. Lib. 5. Stow, 11., 24.. 1529. June 14 Basil in Switzerland, Rains
continual, and Floods; remembered by a Monument, Lyc. 22., 16.. 1530. October. 8.
Inundation of Tiber at Rome, Mizald, hor. noct. 11. Nov. 1. Deluge in Holland
and Flanders, Gem. 1. 183. Grimston, 9., 7.. supra in p. 249. 1532. Nov. men's.
Inundation in Zealand, Mizald. Surius, 16., 4., 23.. p. 249. supra. 1551.
Marpurg, Jan. 10. Great Inundation, breaking down the Stone Bridge of the
Country, Lyc. 22., 29.. Add and in. Febr. 20. Inundation after the recovered
from the Eclipse, lasted almost two Months, Peucer, 385. 21., 1.. 1556. April
23. Bruxels: Tempest of Hail, harmful, and Flouding at Lovain, in the mean time
fair Weather, Gemma 2, 30. 12., 2.; add 12.: 1557. Sept. 10. In Languedoc,
Thunder Lightning, Hail, and Flood upon it, which was not in Memory of Man,
Gem. 2, 31. and in, E Paradino. Sept. 14. at Rome, and Recorded, Thuanus. And
so at the East Indies. 1571. Lovain, Febr. 5. Great Indations, Gem. 2, 68. 28..
6.. 1579. Febr. 10. After a deep Snow; continual Rain a long time, so that
Westminster Hall was Floated, Stow, 12. R. 18.. 1607. Jan. 10. Vast Inundation
in Somersetshire, after a great Rain and Springtide; in some places 20 Miles
in Length, Hows, Calvis. 7., 2.. 1627. Sept. 10. Danubius ripas egressus Kepl.
26., 4.. Die 18. Rock Wasser, Kyr. 1629. October. 2. Westminster Hall floated
27., 11., Flood in Holsatia. (High Spring Tide, Chilorey, Transact. 2063.) Yea,
and Mexico. 1168. Jan. 23, 24, 25. Norimberg, Much Rain and Wasser Fluth, Kyr.
4., 19.: 1649. June 17. Rain all Night, High Floods, 16., 9.. 1627. Sept. 9. In
Franconia nube rupta tanta aquarum vis decidit ut in aliquot pagis domus
eversae, homines cum armentis submersi, etc. Calvis.
To these we add, which have escaped Collection.
Ao 1528. June 14. Flood at Basil in Switzerland, Lyc. 538. 22., 16.. Ao 1547.
Aug. 12. Cataracts and Floods, 9., 1. and. 1555. Sept. 21. Westminster Hall
floated, Stow, and 22, 23. Childrey, 27., 29.. 1670. March 10. Inundation,
Childrey, Transact. 9., 23.. 1571. Dec. 17. Inundation at the Rhine in
Nemetibus; at the Rhine in France. 16., 26.. Thuanus. 1579. October. 14. Sea
swelled, Hows, 22., 19.. supra p. 250. 1599. Nov. 4. and 14. No end of stormy
Rain, Hail and Snow, Hakl. 11., 20. 1619. Julii mense, Pheviae fere continuae
cum Inund. in Thuringia, Calv. 14., 26.. 1649. Sept. fine and October. Gross
Water-Flouds, 0., 0.. 1652. Jun. 20 Great Floods at Dodmonton in
Glocestershire, 7.. 2.. 1668. March 4. Stormy Wind, overflowing Kings-Lynn, 5.,
15.. 1670. October 9. At Bridgewater, at Welchpool, 6., 20.. 1680. At Oxford,
Inundation, and elsewhere, in June, in princ.
41. Now here to continue where we were intercepted Ao 1530. we find the same
Congress in holds on still, and III. of the VII. in. Whatsoever other
Assistants fall in, which we may know by their Livery: for we find a Superior
in, and two, I may say, in; That Is the Badge of a Drowning Planet, opposing to
its Correlate,.

42. And to wade no further, suppose an experienced Observer should have said,
and, especially in, are dangerous; may not he have reason to think he has
obliged the Persons concerned, when within 40 years after, he hears that in
Languedoc, there happened such Floods from Excessive Storms of Hail and Rain,
as merited a place in the French Chronicler; Paradin; such Floods as were not
within the memory of Man: While the Cause, and were found again in the same
Sign. They may say, What are they concerned with the French Chronicle? I
answer, I was willing to make an Observation for their use. Concerning the
Interest that the Sign has in Inundations, which they may the more easily
believe, if it be but for this, that their Floods often happen about Oct. and
Nov. where it is odds but some Planet or other is lodged in. Nay, I can produce
them three noted Inundations more, First, Ao 1565. Jan. 6. where and are in. Ao
1570. Nov. 1. and in. And before that Ao 1552. Nov. 19. beside the of and, two
Planets were in, the making the Third, two or 3 days before the Flood. What
more we have to say, we may expect it in our next and last Aspect. In the mean
while if they like to observe the Positions of this Aspect, as they are
presented in his Table; happening in other Signs beside, it may not be
fruitless. Better be False alarmed twice or thrice then be Surprised once.

43. We note the Difference between Land-Flouds and Inundations Marine; the
First are caused by excessive Effusion of Rain, Hail, Snow, resolved on a
sudden. The other is caused by the same hasty Augmentations of the Sea, at what
time the Body of the Sea is swelled and ratified, as well as disturbed. Swelled
I say, by the Warmth, as well as tossed with the Winds, where it is more apt to
forget it self by overtopping its Bounds to a more furious Eruption. Somewhat
to this purpose I have said before, discoursing of the Tides, and their
increase. I gather my proof at present from the Hour of the Invasion, which
was, says Grin-stone, in that of 1530 at Noon, at which time, not the alone,
but and with him, were on the Meridian: this raised and disturbed the Waves to
that unpreventible Height, as they overflowed All, though the Springtide
wanted two Hours of its Height. And thus much for a Touch at Floods and Deluges.

44. Now, remembering that I make, in some Cases, a Resister of Moisture I may
be asked how he comes to be a Flouding Planet? As by our Table it appears; I
answer, The Character of the Planet is not to be drawn from the extraordinary
Position. There are some Monstrous Positions in Heaven, where you may not know
what to make of the Celestial Body, unless you define it by Fury: There happens
a certain irritation sometimes amongst these Celestials, wherein they seem to
differ from their ordinary Temper: may assist or abate the Moist Influence of
this or that Planet, but you must not imagine He can give Check to them All; He
may deal with one, be it it self; He cannot oppose an Army: When they are
indifferently inclined, he grudgeth the Moist effect. He can crumble a Shower
into a Drisle, or Dust it into a Fog, etc. But when they are in a heightened
elevated Estate, He is so far from Moderating, that he Aggrivates the Effect;
so a Good Horseman, by a seasonable Check, preserves his Beast from stumbling;
and in a greater Hazard, where he cannot recover that Stumble, his own Weight
adds to his Fall. We met with some few Floods under and, and some under and,
and more, now, under with. All we can conclude hence, is, that this later
Aspect is more apt to excess of Rain, than the two former, which must be
granted, as by his Prerogative above and. But a truly Moist-Influence conduces
to a kindly, as well as a Violent Moisture; as in and, and, and, etc. is
manifest. The Objection I Will assure you, is no surprise; for I always observed
it, that is the only Planet of a Singular Speculation; where he cannot prevail,
he does as the rest; and being a Superior, adds no small Weight to the
Production. I call a Monstrous Position, such as First, is not Transitory, but
lasting, and that, of tedious, extraordinary, unmeasurable Length. Secondly, I
call that Monstrous, which within the term of its duration, mixes and
incorporates it self with Aspects of the same Excess and Fury. On the First
account all the Superior Aspects are concerned, because of their long
duration, from whence it comes to pass, that whenever the Inferiors,
suppose, are set for extraordinary Rain, They being not expired, fall in with
the rest, and where they light, they fall heavily. On the second account, which
is the next notion (for Monstrosity oft-times is founded in Mixture) we find
our present Aspect, of it self not so furious, for excess of Wet, but where he
is mixed with Configurations of, of as great Inclination. So in those
Monumental Floods at Basil, viz. 1529. an of and, not Solitary, but mixed;
opposing, as well as, conjoined with as well as opposing: In that of Zeland,
Nov. 1532. there is concerned with, and again with. See p. 250. Add a 3d. at
Marpurg, Jan. 10. 1551. There Is and, the Flouding Aspect, as well as the
Provoking. Again, 1566. April 23. at Brissels, ye shall find a mixture of and,
on 's part; and and, on 's part. To add no more that at Languedoct, Sept. 10.
1557. Ye shall find a Commixture of and with our Aspect. And what if they be
not mingled? If they be contemporary, it is the same Case. This I call the
public Capacity of an Aspect. The Power reaches further when he is joined, as
it were, in Commission with another, Grandee (for of them we only treat now,
then when they act by themselves.

Lightning, Thunder,, Ignita Met.
45. Anno 1526. April 20. Lightning fired Magazin in Helvetia, Lyc. 21., 24..
1528. Jan. 17. ad 21. At Apalaechen in the West Indies, Tempest of Thunder,
threw down Trees, Purch. 3. p. 1502. 13., 28.. 1531. Dec. 16. Frightful Tempest
of Lightning and Thunder, Carew de Variol. 271, 25., 17.. Add Stat.. 1537. May
26. Heydelberg Magazin fired with Lightning, Lyc. 9., 13.. 1547. Sept. 8. In
the Province of Guatinala, a Town of that Name wholly overthrown by Lightning,
Linschot. Here Is a Mixture, opposing in, and joined with Partile in 24. 1548.
June 4. Tonitru cum vehemente Imbre. Dee, 9., 15.. Mixture here also. July 7.
Lovain, Ho. 4. Ton. Ingens, Id. 19., 1.. Add oppos. in. 1551. Jan. 13. In many
places of Germany, such Rain, Thunder and Lightning, as if Doomsday, in the
Peoples fears, were approaching, Lyc. 21., 28.. etc. 1558. Sept. 1. Tempest of
Thunder, Gem. 1. p. 31. 23,. 2. Yea, Partile, with other Mixture. 1569. July
15. Fulmen, grando pugno Equalis, Gem. 2, 84. 19., 5.,. 1575. July 30.
Lightning Harmful, Hailstones 7 Inches, Hows, 608. 27., 9.. Add 15.. 1577. Aug.
4. Sunday 9 m. at Bliborow in Suffolk, Lightning rent the Church Wall,
scorching several, slaying 20 Persons, so at Bungey, from Norwich 9 Miles, Hows
612. 24., 16.. 1580. July 17. Shower and Thunder, Pet's Voyage, Hakl. 5., 10..
1598. March. 26. Great Lightning, Thunder, Hail, still Cold, Hakl. Coals. How,
1302. 12., 10.. 1602. June 30. Sandwich in Kent, Lightning and Hailstones, 7
Inches about, lay a Foot deep on the Ground, Hows, 812. 2., 12.. 1609. March
13. Venti Pluvia Tonitrua per, biduum Arthus. 13., 18.. 1610. Shifting of
Tides, Thunder with Rain, Childrey, p. 99. 10., 0.. 1616. July 6. St. N. Rain,
Lightning, Thunder, Schouten, Purch. I. 103. 21., 42., with a Mixture of 20..
21. Vesp. much Rain, Thunder and Lightning, 19., 16.. in. Lat. 1. degrees. 13. 30.
Thunder, Lightning, so that the Ship shook, and seemed to be on Fire, with a
Shower of Rain, never the like, id. 19., 22.. Aug. 8. N. L. 4. Rain hard with
Thunder and Lightning, 18., 28.. 1617. April 24. Aestus, Ton. Pluit, Kepl. 1.,
26., Stat. in. 30. Tonuit, Kepl. 1., 27. Stat. Dec. 15. Ventus valid. Tonuit,
25., 5.. 1619. July 21. A Person struck dumb and Lame, with a Flash of
Lightning, Purch. p. 659. 12.. 10., in Trop. Stat.
Part 2.
1621. March. 31. and die seq. Nivosa grando and tonuit, Kepl. 23., 21.. April
14. Tonitru Pluvia, 26., 18., with a Mixture of with the Pleiades. 20. Large
pluit, Tonuit, Kepl. opp. and with a Mixture of. 22. Gelidum pluit, Tonuit. ut
sup. July 22. Frigus pertonuit tot. die. 21., 10.. 29. Tempest, grand. fulmen.
21., 14. 1627. July 1, 8, 9, 10, 12, 16, 17, 18, 19, 21. 22. Lightning,
Thunder, 21., 7.. Aug. 3. Tonitru. 10. Tempestas horrida, 22., 21.. Sept. 9.
Nissae in Silesia, Turris fulminae Tacta and Calvis. 26., 3.. Dec. 18. Pragae,
Fulmina, 21., 17.. 1628. April 13. Stellae magnae, Kepl. 3., 8.. April 23, 24.
Tonitrua, so at Norimberg, 2., 14.. 9. Hatford in Berkshire, Great Th. and
Noises, sometimes a retreat. Hows, 1043. 3., 6.. 28. Fulgura, so at Norimberg,
2., 17.. 30. Thunder at Norimberg, idem. May 16. Venti, Frigus, fulgura, 6.,
27., with a nearer mixture of 15. Dec. 22. Caelum ardens, so at Norimberg, 23.,
14.. 1629: Febr: 27. Tonuit, so at Norimberg, 28., 14., with 16. Sept. 12.
Virgae Caelum ardens, so at Norimberg, 27., 2.. October. 1. Stellae magnae, Kepl.
27., 11.. June 5. Thunder and Storms, Kyr. 22., 12.. 17, 19. Lightning and
Thunder, 12., 4.. 5. Rain and Thunder, 12., 4.. July 3, 8, 10, 14, 16, 18, 24.
usque 30. cum Aug. 1. Thunder. in and. 1631. May 14, 18, 19, 25. Thunder. June
1. Thunder, with a Mixture of and. July 24, 31. Thunder, with a mixture of and.
Aug. 11, 17, 19. N. Thund. October. 6. Lightning, 28.. 2.. 1637. Jan. 25. Storm,
Wind, Snow, Rainy, Thunder. 1639. April 6. Thunder. May 9. Blite, 21. Blite.
1640. Jan. 24. Terrible Storm of Lightning. April 2, 4. Meteor, Thunder. 16.
Schlossen Donnier. 25. Thunder, Rain, Kyr. Jan. 8. Basil, Lightning. Febr. 6.
Lightning, Basil. Febr. 23, 25. Thunder. March 15, 16, 31. April 1. May 4.
Thunder. 1641. June 10, 19. Lyc. Donner. 20. Rain throughout, with Thunder.
July 2, 3, 21. Thunder. 25, 28, 30. Lightning. Aug. 6. Thunder. 1644. Jan. 16.
Schlossen. 27. Thunder and Schlossen. 28, 29, 30. Thunder. July 1, 2, 3, 5, 17,
18, 19. Thunder. 20. Lightning at n. 22, 30. Thunder. Aug. 1, 7. Thunder. 16.
Thunder. 29. Thunder. 30. Lightning, Thunder. 31. Great Thunder and Rain. Sept.
3, 4. Thunder. 20. Lightning. 21. Lightning at Night: 22, 23, 24, 25. Thunder.
1646. Aug. 8. Thunder. 16, 17. Stark Thunder. 1648. Dec. 25. Much Lightning,
Hail. 1650. April 29. Formidable Thunder near Leicester. 1651. Aug. 22.
Memorable Thunder and Lightn. at Worcester, yea most part of England, 20., 2..
46. What if I should let this Table take its Fate, and shift for it self,
presuming that no man can be so fast asleep, who will not awake at such a Peal
of Thunder, so thick, so continued. For when Ao 1621. our second Part, or
Diary, takes place, unless in the years reserved for and, there is scarce a
year wanting, which answers not and, both which we have termed Violent. All the
Superiors may be well met for Moderation; They know not what it is, when
Rampant; Enpassant, They are quiet enough. Tonitru Ingens, July 7. 1548. Great
Lightning, May 26. 1537. Tonitrua multa, June 1. etc. 16, 17. 1627. and All day
long, July 22. 1621. and Ao 1644. -- Not with Flash only, or Noise, but with
harm at Prague, for that Kepler means by Fulmina, Dec. 18. 1627. for it is not
Tonuit, nor Fulgura, nor Tonitru; that Learned Man is Distinct. If the Reader
shall consult the place, he will see more by the Neighbor Ventus horribilis,
throughout Bohemia, which roots up Trees, and tears down Houses, which is
nothing but a Dark Lightning, the Violence of Fire wrapped up in Winds, which
Notion, time was, I admired in Fromond; but since I see Aristotle himself owns
the Cognation, He may be applauded for it. You have the like Instance here,
June 17. 1528. and more you shall meet, April 20. 1526. May 26. 1547. Sept. 9.
1627.

47. We read of Lightning ran upon the Ground in the Mosaic Records. It may
glister afar off, and, it may be too near us, to embrace us, to lick us into
our Dissolution; such Lightning, where the Ship shakes, and seems to be on
Fire, July 30. 1616. And such Lightning that strikes a Mortal Man dumb, and
Lame, July 21. 1619. which is a Mercy, compared to those who are Slain
Outright. Aug. 4. 1577. Lightning accompanied with Hail, here 7 Inches about.
July 30. 1575. Hailstones 7 Inches about. June 30. 1602. Lightning as if
Doomsday were coming. June 13. 1551. Nay, where it is come, I should think, at
Guatimala (as of old at Sodom) where the whole Town was destroyed, and 120 even
Christian Inhabitants, Ao 1547. These are the Angels of God; the Dead-doing
Aspects of Heaven, the Watchword and Sign given when Vengeance takes place;
the Armies Celestial of which Dominus Zeba^th is Lord, who terrifies us, not
with Noise only, of Canon or Drum, April 9. 1628. but with Fire and Sword, and
Arrows from the Celestial Artillery.

48. All the harm it is like is not remembered, see the boldness, the frequency
and familiarity of the Visit, view 1627, 1628. 1629. It Is Germany indeed, but
by Keplers leave, we have said, Germany never heard Thunder but from the Canon
of an Aspect; See then again, 1640. 1641. see and admire, 1644. All Summer long
it Thundered, sometimes 3. sometimes 4 days together; and where was our Aspect
all these 4 Months, even at the breech of the Canon. No man shall deny it, but
he who scorns to be convinced. So we proceed to Comets

49. That Comets have Planetary Original, we have said, appears from hence,
that they are found commonly under a Conflux of Planets in the same Sign, III.
or more. Secondly, That they are found at the time when the Planets Halt, that
is to say, when they are Retrograde or Stationary; in particular, who is the
greatest Criple. 3ly. Under Aspects of Planets, especially Superior, we are
engaged only to the Later; but for the Readers more abundant Confirmation, we
may have leave to note the rest as they concur.

50. The year 1618. says Ricciolus, beside several Flaming Appearances,
presents the World with 3 or 4 Comets. Now I take it, we need go no further for
Evidence, because no less than 3 of the 4 fall under the Aspect of and. The
First, we confess, does not belong to us; for we are not so injurious as to
grasp all. The Second, whatever it was, Comet or Meteor, seen by Shickard in
Wittemberg, October. 10, 20. or at Colen, by Ursin, October. 20, 30. or by others;
It Is certain we find an and Partile in and, and therefore not far removed on
the days following, from Nov. 12, 22. ad Dec. 3, 13. 28., 9., 11 degr. distant.
The Third, which is called THE Comet, known by our Forefathers in England by
the Death of Queen Ann, that followed, began when was in 21. and entering into.
This lasting to Jan. 10, 20. And does not our of and then expire? Comets that
usually begin at a Quincunx, may expire at a Quincunx. Will you know further? I
say that this Comet depended upon and, you may see by its Retrograde motion;
for beginning with, it never rested till it came to, which was about the 10,
20. of Dec. by Ricciolus his Table: To and it is true, in Jan. but that is upon
new supplies. Or, if you will say, that is a Pretense; then, I pray, mark this;
that on the very last day, viz. Jan. 1, 11. 1619. of its apparition, our Aspect
of and is expired. Now for that of 1664. see and. Let us view them further from
the following Table.

51. For the First, Ao 1531. from the beginning of, directing his Course to,
his Northern Latitude decreasing leads us to assign the time of their
Conception and Expiration, it began Aug. 6. But is not the immediate Sign
before possessed the Comet-Founder? and Are not and alike prepared; are all
together there. But mark the Aspect to which the Comet hastens, our Congress
with in, which about the time of Extinction were in a Partile; and Does not
this agree to what we have plainly said?

52. I have nothing to say to the shape of this, or 'tother Comet, which is
pretended to be That of a Dragon. We leave that to the excellent Hevelius's
Industry; it is plain 'twas of no long continuance. There Is little else said of
it. A small Comet, and help to blow it up; but nothing could have been done,
had not been a Signs distance before them.

53. That of Ao 1557. in the Month of October, while was in the first 11 days,
began in the nick of our Partile, and appeared in the very Sign, where, I
fancy, when one Sign is possessed with Planets on one side in, and our supposed
Planets on the Tropic of on the other side, there is room for a Comet to appear
in the middle, and dance, as it were, in a Ring, whilst his Progenitors stand
and look on.

54. The next of 1621. is rightly referred by Observers of those times to a of
and; nor could they avoid it, seeing those Aspects ply at the very day for the
Next Fare. Nature writes plain, sometimes, to encourage us to study her
Fast-hand. It continued 18 days, even to Bartholomew-tide, and appeared in,
(for when others say, I fear a mistake of the Character) and there is reason for
it; but because we have not any certainty of the Measure, the duration
prolonged by some beyond Aug. 24. I will not shoot one uncertain Arrow to find
another. Now, this Comet is a Planetary Original, i. e. with the Fixed, because
it appeared under Coma Berenices, which is a due distance from its Progenitors,
and in, and opposing.

55. The Famous Comet of 1577. Nov. 2. lasted 3 Months, it begins with a
Partile Aspect of and, but and are within Terms of the first Month, and
therefore according to our Method claims Title to the Comet. If had not been
in, with the other two; the Ternary had failed, and the same Sign had not bin
possessed. We have said that a Conjunctional Comet lasts not long; That Rule
has its Limitation, unless the Planets concerned be Superiors, and unless,
2ly. there be equivalent Supplys; among which I reckon Stationary for two
Months, etc. for I wont reckon a of and, least then it may be found to belong
to the next. All that I shall ramblingly note here, that this is the Comet
which Tycho observed cast its Train on the averse side, directly from rather
than the; but Tycho durst not believe his own Eyes, for the Length of the
Cometical Train, could not (says he) proceed from, and without question he was
there in the right; but How came to be overlooked, and, Does not he grow toward
a with, does not that alter the Case? When the Comet was a Month Old, and were
in. Comets are most diligently decypher'd by this Learned Age in the
Geometrical way (where again I applaud Hevelius) Yet, may be there would be as
much Fruit, if the Astrological way were not wholly neglected. Again, if it
appeared at the beginning of; was it not of Planetary Descent, when was there
at that Instant? Did it not expire just where and came to a Partile Aspect?

56. For that of 1578. They give this account of it, that it was seen at ho. 9.
of the Night, with a long Train toward the North, and the two lesser Comets
followed it, with some other Meteors, but quickly vanishing. They give us no
account of the Sign, much less the degree where this Comet appeared, or how
long it lasted; If our Ancestor had been so kind, -- it had been no harm. I
spoke lately of Astrological Confidence, this Comet appeared, it seems, to the
South-East at 9 at Night; then let any man see whether it was not lodged in,
and if so, first our Planetary Original is evident, for the with his and newly
entered, do beget their Like in the Opposite Sign, but they could not be so
fruitful, till our Aspect entered, and being Stationary near the Equinox, I must
not say with our Author, that was in with at that hour; but I avow the
Influence, yet omit it; for if I should consider even the Lunar Influence, I
should never have done.

57. Here before we stir, we have another Aspect of ready for our Purpose, in
the Month of October this very year; we are obliged with the day of its rise;
where we find Stationary in the beginning of, opposing (to say no more) at the
end of. This Comet is omitted by Hevelius, but the diligent Lubiniec from
Fabricius and Echstorm presents it. This Comet lasts to the years end; Nay, we
hear of it in Jan. 1579. Now, by my reckoning, our Aspect of lasts all that
while; and for all as I see, expired at the end of the Month, when it came to a
Partile; such as these I call Oppositional Comets. Fabricius tells us it
appeared in the place where the Former vanished.

58. The great Comet of 1580. has (if you be pleased to remember what I have
said) as great and Illustrious Original, the with his and in (you see there is
no denial of our Principle) with our great Aspect of and are great Signs, and
last to the 14. January, Stilo Veteri, where some say; it ended. The
Continuation is not obscure; especially, when and are scarce dis-ingaged: or if
they be, the Comet thereabout expired.

59. The next of 1585. begins with an of, the Comet appearing opposed to,
consequently near to, which is Natures Text hand, so plainly Legible; it lasted
about a Month from October. 8. because of the Aspect in and, etc. but no longer
than a Month, because I find not, or any III. in one and the same Sign.

60. Ao 1590. The Comet holds a matter of 12. days. No Planet Retrograde, no
concourse of III. in the same Sign; only Two in, and One in, which it seems is
not sufficient, except and be amongst them.

61. Ao 1595. Three Planets are getting into, and that is pretty well, with our
Aspect of and, the Comet ending by that time they came together to the Partile.

61. Ao 1607. A Comet of about 50 days duration, an opposal, began it, but
enheartned by our Opposition of and; nor does a Partile fail a Comet, if on the
Equinoctial Point, as Potent as a Platique.

62. We have a New Star also to be ascribed to this Radiation, that it may not
be outdone by the precedent Aspect of, viz. That of October. 1604. in
Serpentarius; of which Kepler, among others, wrote a Discourse. Nor do I so
much as doubt in the least the Truth of this Assignation. For have we not seen
a great one, That of 1572. relating to a Planetary Congress? But that which
makes me the bolder is, that I have Friends to back me, so that if we run the
Risque of a Censure, we shall not suffer alone; for Thuanus delivers, that it
was the general persuasion of all who looked upward, Quod in Conjunctione Jovis
and Martis, II. Kalend. October. contingit hoc Phenomenon accensum, etc. and
Thuanus had more Wit than to gain say it. Only to avoid repetition, we must not
discourse of it here, but desire it may be demur'rd to the greatest and last
Aspect of and.

A Summary of the Comets of and.
63. 1531. Aug. 6. ad Sept. 3. 27., 20.. Ricciolus Milichius, described by
Appian. 1541. Aug. 21: 8., 9., 14.. Cometa in forma Draconis, Cauda longa
ignea, Ecstorm, Lubien. 1557. Mense. October in Sign, circa in fine, aut princ.
si conjecturae deturlocus. 1558. Aug. 6. ad 24. in accensus, 8., 6.. 1577. Nov.
9. Europae. Nov. 1. Peruviae, Still. Vet. 4., 24.. 1578. May 16. 7., 2.. hor. 9.
post occasum Solis. October. mense, in front Pegasi iterum visus est Cometa
obscurus atque pallidus, 2., 22.. 1580. October. 2. ad Jan. 14. 11., 15.. 1585.
October. 18 ad Nov. 5. 8., 10.. 1590. A Febr. 23. Still. Vet. ad March 6.
Hevelius; 14., 18.. 1597. Ante Jul. 16. ad Aug. 9. 24, 9.. 1607. Sept. 15. St.
Vet. ad Nov. 5.. 4., 12.. 1609. May 19. 10., 11.. 1618. Cometa primus, Aug. 25.
ad Sept. 5. Cometa altera, October. 10. ad 20. 28., 8., Kepler, Ricciolus. Draco
volans, per caput Andromeda, Schickard apud Ricciolum. Cometa tertius, Nov. 12,
22. ad Dec. 3, 13. 28., 9.. Nov. 1. Igneum Meteor incurvatum, die 7, 17.
Spirae, Cometa visus Walbank. Cometa quartus, a Nov. 14, 24. ad Jan. 14, 24.
29., 10. 1664. Dec. 4. per 3. menses, Hevelius, vide sub and. Dec. 9. Comet 6
m. S E, almost as big as big as the; angry and terrible. Nor could all my
Epicurean Principles applied to my fancy persuade me to the contrary,, vide
sub. 1681. News of a Comet in Lithuania, Dei. 8.. Vide etiam sub.
64. Now it will be time to turn the Scenes from Admiration to Fear; or admire
still, if our Aspect be of an Earth-Shaking Spirit, and it seems so, for we
have at hand a Table of Earth-movings as Copious as need to be; I have not
bespoke the Aspect at the time of the Concussion; nor have I by an Engine, or
Helmont's Spirit Infernal moved the Earth at the time of the Configuration: I
have only studied part of Natures Alphabet, and made a shift to put the Letters
together, and interpret by History.

65. We begin with the last Century. A^ 1500. Vesuvius Flagrat ardente Cometa,
Ricciolus; are found in July; and in Aug and Sept. 1577. June 26. Nordling in
Germany Saw the Ruin of 2000 Houses by T. M. and Hurricane, Lyc. in joined with
as great Movents viz. opp. in Trop. 1530. At Cubagua, Sept. 1. The Sea rose 4
Fathoms from its ordinary Course. The Earth did open in many places, whereout
sprung much Salt Water as black as Ink, etc. Many Houses fell, Purch. III. 868.
in. Yea, and on each side the Equator. 1531. Lisbon in the Month of Febr. You
heard of before in, but in July 13. came again, Mizald. Lyc. There (I promise
you) an in and. 1538. Italy shook for 15 days, and were entered already in
March, and at a competent distance, such as makes Work in the Earth, besides
other Aspects. 1537. Mount Aetna flamed, said Fritschius, who heard the news.
Lycosthenes puts it the year before, April 1. and tells us that all the Country
near the Puteoli, were so harassed, that there was scarce a House standing.
Agricola is certain for March 23. Lib. de Fossil IV. 20. We have no Aspect for
his year of 1536. but for 37. when Aetna burnt still, we have in Power April,
May, and June throughout. But stay, No Aspect for March. 23. 1536. Yet; I was
going to say a Cardinal; pardon the absurdity, It Is better than nothing. 1540.
T. M. in Germania, Dec. 14. Lyc. Many Houses shaken. It haps at the Winter
Tropic, and therefore and in oppos. in must be allowed; and then the next is
our Asp. in ad gr. 20. did. 1551. Jan. 28. Lisbon. A fatal day, for beside
terrible Meteors and Rain of Blood, says Frytschius, an Earthquake beat down
200 Houses, and killed 1000 persons; returns Retrograde to join with at the end
of. Other places suffer this Month by Tempests and Inundations. Violences
seldom come alone. Add the Hill Pocatepec, whose Mouth or Crater was half a
League over; this Hill had not emitted any thing for 10 years before, Purch.
III. 1124. Also at Guixos, 70 houses were sunk, Purch. II. 1695. See the
consent of the parts of the World! Some years more discernible than others.
Wisely noted by Thuanus before. 1556. April 10. Constantinople, T. M. threw
down many Towers, and the Church of Sancta Sophia; of a Truth are just entered
on their Aspect, 3., 3.. 1570. They say Ferraria in Italy had fits of shaking
for two years together, From. In the former of these years, viz. the present, I
have an of from the end of Febr. to the midst of June, going Retrograde on
purpose to oppose, and when that expires, a of and begins; These two Aspects we
have told you are unquiet when they meet. 1571. The second of these unquiet
years we meet with an Earthquake of our own, at Kinaston in Herefordshire, Feb.
17. Stow, 668. 1. 17. the midst of also in the beginning of the Sign, and at
the end. Our Aspect alone does not effect it, nor is it done without it. 1571.
Nov. 1. At Venice, thence to Florence, thence to Cortray in Gallia Togata,
destroying that City, once the finest in Italy, Thuanus; and in and, in the
middle. See elsewhere for this year in the Isle of S. Michael, ( Ao 1591.)
Purch. 1581. Angoango a Village of Peru, was ruined thus, a great part thereof
was raised up, and carried away, many of the Indians smothered, and that which
seems incredible, the Earth that was ruined did run and slide upon the Land, as
if it had been Water or melted Wax, which I, by the way, note for St. Peter's
sake, who mention the melting of the Elements? But the Month is not specified;
all we can say is this, if this direful Calamity was inflicted on these
Sorcerers and Idolaters (for such they are noted.) In the first half year we
show God's Celestial Scourge in our Aspect, the saddest criticalplace of
Heaven, viz. its Tropical Purliews. 1586. July 9. June 29. T. M. in the Cividad
Real the Royal City in the West Indies, which run 170 Leagues along the Coast,
and overthwart in the Sierrae, 50 Leagues, it ruined a great part of the City,
the Sea ran two Leagues into the Land, rising above 14 Fathom. Acosta, Fromond.
and Purch. III. 941. Let the Reader be judge of our Superstition, our Aspect
now is in of the Tropical Heights, as before it was in. Believe this when you
see that the same and at the same year, caused an Earthquake, and a dire one
too; for all the City fell, and some People slain at Guatimala, Purch. III.
929. even on Dec. 23. 1586. At the chief Town in Java Major, fituate near a
burning hill, says Dr. Heylin. This year the Hill brake forth exceedingly,
oppressed infinite numbers of men, and cast great Stones into the City for 3
days together. But now is got in a Cardinal to. Are Squares also (by the way)
of such Power? Ask our Famous Cavendish whether within three Months after he
felt not another Earthquake; (how did the Shore tremble when he felt the
concussion at Sea?) Lat. 33. on March 22, Hakl. p. 810. at what time were not
far from the, a Cardinal. But we must not meddle with Quadrates, much less with
Trines, (as but now.) Only let the Reader see how vast are the Inlets of a Due
Astrology. 1591. In the Isle of St. Michael, Purchase p. 1677. we meet with an
Earthquake which lasted a Fortnight, from July 26. ad Aug. 12. It belongs to
and, as plain as Nature can write, being opposed in Tropical Aspect; but
information sends us back to such another Earthquake falling 20 years agone;
which if it happened in the last Quarter of the year, we will find sureties to
make it good for Planets opposing and, see Ao 1571. before. But if it happened
about July and Aug. we have a Cardinal between and, which helps us beyond
expectation. 1606. At Bantam, October. 13. About Midnight an Earthquake very
terrible for the time, Purch. I. 385. in, entering on. I must not say Well met.
1606. Dec. 13. At Bantam, about Midnight, T. M. Purch. 1. 385. in fin.. 1609.
April 2. St. N. Near Teraltas in the East Indies, a Rock burning in the Sea,
always smoking, Verhuef. apud Purch. I. 717. 17., 1.. May 3. St. N. Great T.
M. at Nera, not unusual (in those parts) the day before the Dutch built their
Castle there, Purch. I. 717. 24., 21.. 1610. June 1, 11. Hecla casting out
Fire, Purch. 817. All the Planets engaged; and not in or, but in Cardinal.
1616. July 29. St. N. Under the Line we had an Earthquake which made our men
run out of their Cabins, our Ship seeming as to strike against the ground,
when, casting out our Lead, we found none, Schouten's Voyage about the World,
Purch 1, 105. the is almost Partile in the Tropical Height. Die 7. St. N. A
high hill casting Fire and Flame from the top thereof, not far from Guinea,
Purch. 1. 103. 21., 6., which Aspect is complicated with also. Mark whether
this is the third or fourth time of this Aspect in its Rampant Height. 1618.
March 12. If it be St. N. and are engaged. 1619. January 29. Near Franckford ad
Moenum. It belongs to and, their Congress in; but and are engaged to charge one
the other in the Entry of their Opposal. Again, at Ratisbone, T. M. sub obscure
animadversus, 6., 12.. May 13, 21. In the upper Burgundia and Alsatia. Kepler
agrees with us here, imputing it to a repeated of and Annot. ad Mensem. He is
in the right, although his Printer mistakes for. In the right, I say, for if I
find one Aspect lasting a Twelve month upon the Matter, as this does, I will
find it with monstrous Effects. For behold a Third T. M. Aug. 20, 30. near the
Mein and the Rhine, but the next Aspect enters a Caveat. 1625. Dec. the 18. at
Norimberg, 10., 25,. 1626. At Worms, (Kyr.) Feb. 1. see here the same Aspect
produces two Earthquakes; in Dec. at one place, in Jan. at another. Febr. 6,
16. Una Rupium lacui Gamundiensi iminentium findi and in contraria discedere
visa est, Kepler. It was believed, he says, to portend the Seditions of the
Boors which followed that Omen: we speak not to that now, but we hope that the
Reader will suspect with us, that the of and portended the Earthquake. 1627.
July 20, 30. After Thunder and Lightning in Germany at least for 8 days, after
an Eclipse of the, to make them remember, An horrible Earthquake, destroyed
several Towns in poor Apulia, where Kepler discovers no Celelestial Cause, and
I fancy no Causes but Celestial, for the Subterranean Fires are but the matter
on which our Causes operate. Let any one that cares for an Ephemeris, mark
whether is not posited at the end of. I hope that Celestial cause may be proved
from the foregoing Chapter of the Saturnine Earthquakes. Mark, secondly,
whether the don't oppose him at the entrance of, that little Cause is not
ridiculous: but to say no more, let him mark whether be not Stationary in 21.
and opposed in 9. Now 21. is not far from 24. Say no more. Nov. 14. St. Vet.
Norimberg, T. M. Kyr. 28., 9.: The truth is, opp.; he penetrates not into the
Aspect, that thinks it only brought a little fair Weather at the beginning of
the Month. Here is a double Earthquake again this year, before this Aspect has
taken its leave. 1628. A Fame of an Earthquake, Jan. 9. Kepl. and lie at this
distance, 24., 22.. I can scarce forbear giving my Judgment, why I think the
report was true, there need no great studying the point for 22. and 24. it is
but looking wishly on their Faces, and when you meet them, you will know them
again. 1632. October 8. at Naples, 24. 27. quere in and: 1640. April 14.
Mechlin, Terrae motus, Helmont. 1645. Jan. 19. Norimberg, T. M. with Thunder,
Snow, Kyr. 21., 17.; so at Poictiers, in France, T. M. with a horrid Tempest
Memoires Ludovici XII. 1650. Vesuv. burns, Transact. 968. if happens in March,
April or May, our Aspect will answer it. 1665. Near Oxford, Jan. 19. Transact.
p. 166. in, see. 1668. Sept. 3. Garibee Isles 29. in France. 8 1669. May 12.
Vesuvius cast out Smoke, Saunderson, in. 1676. Febr. 3. Colepit Fires, Transact
and in. 1670. At Kenebunch in the Province of Main, a piece of Clay Ground
thrown up by a mineral Vapor over the Tops of high Oaks into the River,
stopping its passage, the hole 40 yards Square, wherein were thousands of Clay
Bullets as big as Musket Ball, and pieces of Clay like Musket Barrel. So at
Gosco one and twenty miles off; and Fish in some ponds thrown up dead upon the
banks. A wonderful number of Herrings cast up at high Water on black point
harbor for a mile together. Josselin. in Tropical signs. retrograde till
Autumn, then comes an of besides a of in.
66. We have not been all the way Sollicitous of the Circumstances of T. M. we
cannot brook a Frightful Story that is over long; Our Spirits droop, and our
Blood runs into Serum with no vivid Color in it. Frights we know, dispossess
some, of their Wits; They disturb the most obdurate Heart; Who can hearken with
Pleasure to the Doleful Note of the Screech Owl? Yet I could not pass over some
dire Circumstances, which usually appear upon the Stage when the Gacodemon
enters. It Is enough we have noted it before, to show their conjunct dependence
on the Heavens.

67. The Cognation also between the Subterran^^n Fires breaking forth from
Hecla, or Vesuvius being confessed, we see no reason but the Colepit which the
Transactions tells us fired on such a day, should be reduced under this Head,
and that with probability, not only from the likeness of the Phenomenon, but
the likeness or Identity of the Aspect. Even the Back-Friends to Astrology, we
have seen, confess the Heavens have Power on the Mines of Germany, etc. I would
fain know where they have not. I will not stretch a Text to the Center, which
only meant perhaps the Surface. There Is nothing hid from the Solar Heat: but
when Earthquakes at the Indies, run so many leagues, yea, and at home; as the
last in Oxfordshire; shall run in a Chanel as it were, as far as Barbary; the
Convulsion must lie deep, and contracted into a less circumference, that it may
diffuse it self to the greater.

68. Here we must take notice of one instance supplied from Van Helmont.
That Helmont, who, under the name of the Schools, makes nothing to run down
all Philosophers before him, for that, says he, no Exhalations, nor Vapor, nor
Sulphurous Spirit has any thing to do in the Earthquake; but only some Fiend
or Cacodemon is employed by Commission from Heaven. Now the Vesuvii and the
Aetnae, the several Vulcans flaming round about the World, and the indisputable
affinity between the Earthquake and the monstrous Eruption, which the Schools
teach, might have kept Him to rights. For it is not any Levity, or a Wind
enclosed, but a vast Nitro-Sulphureous Spirit, of incomprehensible Force, that
striving within her womb discomposes the Earth. To this he presently comes upon
us and asks us, First, Is there a vein of Sulfur, etc. throughout the whole Low
Countries; for all Holland Trembled, and Flanders to boot. I answer, there may
be, for all that he knows. Agricola persuades that the Subterranean Fires are
as copious, especially in Maritime places, where Earthquakes mostly appear; and
this is witnessed by Sulfureous Stench, which has been observed, wherever the
Vapor gets vent. Yea, as some have delivered, a dis-colouring of the Air, as
it were, by sulfureous Fumes. Nay, it is beyond, [ as it were] for wherefore do
the poor Birds fall to the Earth? But that being taken giddy by such
suffocating Steams. 2dly. He cannot intend sulfur refined, and depurate; then
by his own Principles he must allow Sulfur to be every where, in every compound
Body, or in their Matrices, the places where they take their being. Every Peble
is constituted of so many Grains of Sulfur, and our Castle-Goal, we see,
betrays its constitution by perfect yellow sum; mixed with the darker Soot.
Every thing then will melt, has Sulfur in it, and what will not melt in those
all-dissolving Heats of the Sub^^ranean Furnace? The Earth will melt like Wax,
and run many 2 Mile in a fusile constitution, and yet we speak at large, for if
it be a Bitumen of any kind or color, if it be Pitch, if it be Naptha, if it be
Coal, it is Sulfur to us, wherever there is Mineral, or hot Baths, or Medicinal
Waters, or Metals, or Quarries of Stone, there is Sulfur and Salt, etc. So that
it is in vain to anatamize the Regions of the Earth to the Center, and assure us
there is no room in the Globe of the Earth, for He has offered nothing that I
can see why the seat of the Tremor may not be, where he acknowledges the
Mineral; for there, besure are, Oils, Sulfurs, Salts, Mercury and Earths, and
Juices, and whatsoever wants a name, and one of those impatiently contrary to
the other; nor is He ignorant of it, but confesses that if the least drop of
Water falls upon Metal or Marchesites melted, they fly about like mad with
incredible Antipathy. Consonantly some Stories say, that in one of our
Hiatus's, there was observed Water in the depth of the Cavity, in Stow. He
asks, 2dly. why the Concussion is so transient, quickly past, though it returns
by fits. Oh, to that I say, that the Planetary Positures, as they require
Critical places, so they watch their Critical Hours: Did not this T. M. happen
at Midnight? He asks, thirdly, why the Earthquake in 1640. and that of
threescore years before happened both, in April. I could ask him why his Angel
or Devil chooses to scare us That Month, Yet we say that the Spring is the time
of the year; and seeing it happened that there were but 12 days difference
between that of 1580. April the 6th. (the time that I believe Mechlin trembled,
as all England did) and 1640; It manifestly shows that these Earthquakes come
under the Philosophical Rules. He asks 4ly. what extraordinary heat was found
there, to shake the Earth at those precise times, which was not found in the
Intermediate years, adding, that, that night was a very cold night, with a
Chill North Wind, and much Snow the day before. How? say I, does a Chemist call
for a sensible Heat to all wondrous Operations? Nothing more against his own
Experience, who tells us in one place of his fellow-Travellers Shoulder burnt
by the Suns imperceptible Heat as he passed over the Alps, as plainly as if he
had been stung by Gantharides, and teaches us in another, 1 ounce of Salamniac
mingled with 4 ounces of Aqua Fortis shall break the glass presently; and how?
but by an invisible E^halation. And what great heat there is in the Ingredients
separate, He knows best. An Exhalation, you see, by his own Confession, can
make a strong glass fly in pieces. But I answer, the Schools call it Heat, they
should say Influence, or his own Gas, which takes place in cold Weather as well
as Hot. As we see and feel oft-times the Influence of the Heavens opeperate
upon our Bodies, while that Heat is not discerned by our Sensories. There may
be Communication between Homogeneals, Fire and Fire, Aetherial and
Subterranean, when there may be no Communications between Fire and Earth; I
mean our Corporeal Organs. Yea, I come closer to the matter, and say that
Planetary Warmth in a remiss degree, as in Weak and Calmer Earthquakes, may
actuate Cold, as well as encourage the Grosser Warmth, may stir the Nitrous
Spirit, as well as inflame the Sulfury Particle; for it is necessary (that is
more than probable) that all such immane Violence must be founded upon those
Hostilities of Nature, which we call Antipathy. When we are agreed about this,
then I Will point at the Influence with my Finger, and show him our Ethereal
Heat in of and at the first Earthquake, and a of and at the Second. And these
Aspects in Critical places, which do not occur every year. It Is well if they
meet in 12, in 30, and even then, if they want any one requisite, the Effect is
blank. We grant him, that the final Cause of the T. M. is the awe of the Divine
Menace. And upon this account whatever others think, I value our Theory, being
engaged in matters of so ponderous concern. But we do no think that the Divine
Power acts immeditely in those Effects which are Periodical, and have their
Revolutions, though they be strange. We dare not grant the Creation so
imperfect, that the Divine Power which made the Universe, acts as much without
a created instrument, as with it. But this it is, for Wise Men to lay aside the
consideration of the Noblest Parts of the Universe, so overlooking and setting
at naught those Wonders of the Ether, the Fixed Stars and Planets, to run
higher into Heaven, or lower into Hell, to borrow Angelical Spirits from
thence, to make up the Planetary account; thereby creating to themselves,
fantastic Articles of Religion or Philosophy, to avoid Superstition falsely so
called. 1668. Sept. 3. T. M. in the Caribee Islands, in and. Die 29. T. M. in
France; a single Earthquake will not serve our turn, Aspects 28., 11:. 1676. Febr.
3. News of a Cole-Pit taking Fire, Transact. What will my curious Reader say,
if he finds a of and here? We have no Vesuvius, Heaven be thanked; yet Causes
hit strangely to their pretended effects. 1681. T. M. in the County of Gleav^^
with a Comet in Latuania two days before. And now we come unwillingly to
Diseases under and.
Anno 1500. In the Saturnine Table, the Century begins with the Pestilence in
H. VII. time; and the Aspect of and is truly noted, but not perfectly. For
September, thereabouts the Pestilence rages most, that brings an with other
help, even in the Extremity of and. Polydor, Virg. sets this Pest at 1499. Nor
does the contrary appear from Stow. Our account is however that it fell in
1500. and without all question, whatever the precedent year might be, 1500 was
Pestilential. See the Table of.

1506. Sweating Sickness in London the Second time. Not so violent, as Ao 1485.
the I. of K. Henry VI. For you have heard: Add in, no better Sign.

1508. Pestilence, Dimerbr. p. 156. and in July. lie in wait August and
September.

1511. Pestil. ex Fracastorio, Dimerbr. 89. nothing of, but and in and, July,
Aug. Sept.

1517. Sweating Sickness from Aug. 1. to Michaelmas, IV. in, of which and are
two of them. The Winter Plague that followed, see in.

1522. Cruel Pestilence in Rome, Germany, begins in July in and.

1527. At Rome. For Aspect, etc. in Tropical Signs.

1528. Sweating Sickness reigning; the Term was adjourned Jan. 17. to Mich.
Many dyed at Court, Stow. and on each side of the Summer Tropic, in the Month
of July, In, etc. Nothing plainer; hardly find an innocent year. If the
Superiors are found in in July, they are after found in.

1529. This English Plague was found in Germany also, this following year; the
Whip is much the same twist. opposed in Aug. etc.

1538. The Cruel Pestilence mentioned by Paracelsus; brought with it, but I
fear it made not have away in the Declension of the year, because of Tropical
opposed in Sept. October. at least.

1544. Pestilence at Constantinople, Kirch. and in, entered in, in Aug. though I
refer it to the next of the Superiors.

1548. The Mortality in London, sub Edw. VI. Stow, in, not separated 30 gr.
till Aug. med.

1551. Whatsoever we have said of, certain it is, it began at Shrewsbury, April
15. that are on either side of the Summer Tropic, and within Terms. Now it
began at London, as says Stow, July 12. etc. there is a of our and, a
Secondary, when in slow motion entering, as we shall note elsewhere. Yea,
there is a salute of, All naught.

1558. Negay in Russia. Never the like Plague there, Hakl. 348. in. July, Aug.
Sept. London, Quartan Ague, Stow. All to the same Aspect, with Assistance.

1566. A Turbulent Plague in Italy, said Kircher, where we consider that the
was scarce expired in Junii principio, and a of a Secondary in July and Aug.
This is not the first time, and therefore we sing our Miserere again.

1567. A Dry and Pestilential time at Lovain, to the midst of July, from May;
even to the midst of July.

1569. Pestilence in London; adjourned Michaelmas term to Nov. 3. and thence to
Hilary next year, Stow. Not and only, but were entered in Tropical in July.
Digitus Dei is plain with another Finger,, July.

1571. Febres, Funestissimae, Dysenteria, and end of Aug. opposes in; but
besides, they would not be so rampant, had not entered before the last act, even
in September.

1576. Dire Pest at Venice, Padua, from May to Jan. of 60000. Untzar e Foresto
within Terms of one the other in. Where, I beg, that 's Motion may be traced,
it is slower than, as we have elsewhere noted; but it lasted till the beginning
of the Subsequent year. Does not and come in at October. to back and on the Stage.

1578. At Lisbon, within the space of 2 years, 7000 dyed. Untzer, e Linschot.
We need not conjure for, and that in Signs Equinoctial, for they are up above
ground, Partile, July; in.

1580. Epidemic Distemper, by a Catarrh with Cough all Europe over, Galvis. By
a particular account know it came into Italy in June; to Rome in July; to
Venice, Constantinople in August, to Germany, Hungary in September, to
Pomerania in October, to Denmark and Sweden in November. Here our Principle
desires it may be considered, whether, first, had not a hand in All this; for
as for Sicily, we find, which, when is slowmotion'd, we may call it, and that
in Tropic Signs; As to Rome's part, we find opposed to;; according to our
reckoning; then entering on an. As to Venice and Constantinople, we find our
rampant, and in and. In September, right rampant the same Aspect; nay, the same
Company holds. Pray consult the Ephemeris, even for October, November,
December. Oh, that Evidence so clear, so wonderful, has not been discovered
heretofore; in, through the faltring Motion of, all those Months, October. Nov.
Dec. besides some Months preceding. That we may learn to look up, and laying
aside our Coy Prejudices, may confess Nature to be stupendous, and this being
acknowledged, to make a right use of it.

1581. Novus Morb. Lunaebergensis, Dimerbrock, Tropical in April and May which
disposed, at least, the Body to admit the Influence.

1586. S. Domingo, Calenture, 700 dyed, Drakes last Voyage, Purch. Vol. 4. p.
1182. in, June, July, August.

1593. Belongs to, but --

1594. When the Plague was not ceased quite, the Total though being under a
Thousand, to the, comes in at June, an in the same Signs.

1597. June, Sickness on the English Fly-Boats, in the Voyage to the Azores,
Purch. in R.

1599. Beside the, we have an unlucky Concourse of in Card. Signs.

1604. London, Total 896. Parishes infected, 96., cum in mense Septembris.

1606. In we cannot deny but they are joined in, and October. the Highest week of
that year: but withal, as to our Principle, enters into the same Sign; I mean
into the distance of gr. 33. but a Fortnight after; on which account this very
later end of October. shows 100 of the Plague, though in Nov. it slept, because
are even unhinged.

1607. We have said before of this year, and the Month of June, how were
domineering there, but note, that June this year was not to be compared to
September and October, where are opposed in Equinoctial Signs, and the Totals,
though the Plague be moderate, is three to one. Now what Live Coal is it which
continues the Pestilence, from Nov. 1. the preceding year, where fell off, to
the Spring of this Instant year? What but our Aspect of, which held 4 Months,
to bring that along thither through the Winter Months, of November. Dec. Jan.
Febr. when Serpents themselves can scarce sting. Any further we do not enlarge.

1609. grasp all; but has nothing in this year? Yes, as much as the 4 first
Months come to: They are but Winter Months but we speak of a glowing Coal in
Winter, an in Febr. 18. on which every Week by some means or other, secondary
Agents, the Total appears 40. in the Plague, Mr. Bell's Account.

1610. Now if the Pestilence continues as to our forecited Account, till this
year be expired, all of a piece with the former; our Aspect takes place in Dec.
past, and Jan. and Febr. of this instant; and that in Tropical Signs. We find,
it is true, no Master-Pestilence, but the Total is higher in that very January
under, than in April under and.

1617. At Rome and Naples a Murrain of Cattle, Kirch. 1. Cap. 9. all along, and
in March, April, May. In June, July, August, September, I confess, it is and,
which by their Pace seem to be 's Substitutes, according as we have hinted
before, though in Sept. October. inches in, and they will challenge those
Seasons. It Is between them, and Writ as I say in Capital Letters, to those who
read the Alphabet of Nature; and is to much purpose taken into our
consideration, because there is some Affinity between the make of the Bodies of
Brutes, and us: wherefore there must be some Affinity in our Maladies. Sure I
am, that Kircher notes a death of Infants at the same time.

1618. Plague at Norway, says C. Grant, and sickly year in England. For the
Spring and Summer, May, June, July, we have owned, before. For August, we have
opposing, which will do no good when lies perdieu, for an opposal in and in the
following Months.

1619. At Grand Cairo 72500 swept away in X Weeks, C. Grant.

A Dismal Effect of a dire Cause; for I have learned to tremble at the Aspects
of the Superiors, as they may be set high or low: Now suppose as Story says,
that the Plague with them in Egypt ceases when the Sun enters into. It Is a
Secret, but I observe our was, dire and high-set above 10 Weeks before the 's
entrance into. Dire, I say, and high set, in slow, but sure Motions, and
Equinoctial Signs.

1620. Sickly England, C. Grant. The Astrologer Answers, if the Spring were
Sickly, you have and in Equinoctial; if the Summer, we have noted before.

1622. Another, Grant, in New England, Capt: Smith,.

1625. For this 1625. we must consult, yet we can scarce honestly refer you
thither, without wrong to; the Weekly Bill will inform us; Buried (says the
Bill) of all Diseases, 5205. the Highest Week, ending Aug. 18. and where are
our Planets? Read and Judge. On Aug. 18. One of our destroyers is in 3. and the
other in 1. They differ 2 degrees from Diametrical Opposition; and that in the
commanding part of Heaven, the Circulus Maxemius, which we have often called
the Equator or Equinoctial Circle, and is famous with us Superstitious People
for Remarks of Nature. Here I note, and forget not that this was the 2d
Instance which convinced me.

1627. At Amsterdam, Grant; the is acknowledged in its proper Table; which
tells us of another Superior joined with this year, and that is, in August we
know its in and. -- It Is easy by the way, to note Amsterdam to be none of the
best Air in the World, because of its frequent Infections: The Truth is, no
Town or City seated near the Brackish Waters of the Sea, can be pure, and
agreeable. For the Air must have its ill disposition from the Waters, as the
one not Potable, so the other not Potable also, for the Lungs and Spirits do
draw as well as the Stomach; I would it were as easy for Them to observe the
Aspect of the Superior Planets, that they may be cautious under them, and
learn to fear, not the Planets, but the Divine Rod, which, will we, nil we,
hangs over Populous Cities.

1630. Some Pestilence at London and at Cambridge, above 1000. dyed that year;
if the Saturnine Aspect with in the former Table comes to close in the year,
viz. in Sept. 27. as it does not, then see how you will like our in July and
August, in. This is clear, that the Highest Week in July 29. was nearer our
Jovial, than the Saturnine Aspect.

1636. We find it in our other Table, but withal we find in the highest, which
is within 3 gr. of. But what is that to? Yes, Stationary is Tantamount: a new
lesson at first, but now an old one.

1637. Some little Pestiferous year; 3000 in all; the highest Week was June 29.
near the Aspect of, we would deal impartially; yet nothing hinders, but we may
note withal in Cardinal Signs.

1641. Is found in before; but as the year exhibits an Aspect of in August, it
premises an Aspect of with in July's beginning; and what time it increased 5 in
the Total, and 50 Parishes more infected. It Is true, the height appeared not,
[703] till Sept. 2. at what time we find at large; or, which is as Potent, and,
when is Retrograde. Yea, exact in the beginning of and, whose Influence we
cannot as yet discourse of.

1644. A little Visitation, not much above a 1000 Total, the highest Week ended
October. 3. ^^receded in, and was not expired at the Height of the Distemper.

1646. We noted ^he of to have endured till the end of July, or the first Week
in August; and then we pretended another Aspect of the Superiors entered;
That Is our present Aspect, where I flatter my self that it is not unworthy
consideration, that whereas the one Aspect, according to us, seems expired,
Aug. 4. the other, this of and enters about Aug. 13. so careful are the
Heavenly Host in their Watches, to relieve one another when in a State of
Hostility toward us. In the highest week, Sept. 2. then, besure, are within
Terms; also note his with would be scarce Innocent. But this is not all; To see
that our Aspect will be owned, as we have more then once observed: the Aspect
which entered about the middle of Aug. runs through, and falls not till almost
August enters again, conecting the Pestilences of those years, and twisting
them into one Third, (though the Winter perhaps, be a little more Slender, and
the Aestival more Cable-like) in my mind, who Plead for co-existence of Causes
with Effects; This is considerable, others may enjoy their Principles; where I,
poor Grosse-Test, can find no Footing. Alas! Who can walk upon the Water?

1649. Sickly London, Grant, in July, etc. That is too pat. I list not to
speak of the Pest at Amsterdam, and Harlem, because they fall not under any
Aspect of the Superiors. For, as considerable as they are, they do not exhaust
all the Doctrine of the Causes of Pestilence over-head; They are to be produced
in a Planetary Tract rather. Only this agrees and suits with what is before
delivered, that on September the 27th. which proved the Highest Week, we can
point out one that is guilty, and scarce flies for the same. A, though not.

1658. Sickly City in London, Grant. I want the Weekly account here, and
perhaps there is no need of it, together in at the beginning of Summer, which
least they should cool, in June and July are renewed by a deputy Congress of
instead of. Stationary or Retr. we have said, is as Malefique as any of them
all.

1661. In 's Table it may be objected that the Bill did not start up in to 500.
etc. till and were expired: be it so. But have we not said even now, that
Stationary is equivalent to, and that is entered upon a. with before the Start,
and lasts till comes in at October, who are met in. But that is innocent in
comparison of what we advance, Stationary in, the highest Week, whose Total was
600. Aug. 27. under the said Stationary.

1665. There remains Ao 1665. A 100000. Persons: more it may be than are born
in a years time throughout England. (I am not pleased with Aug. 1690. nor
perhaps July 91. nor May, etc. 92. but I hope London will never taste the like.)
There were Councils of War, and Parties, and Ambushes, and Retreats; it is a
wonder to see the Military Discipline. There were in Tropic, in May. There was
and in the same. There we had opposing both Stationary in June. Do you hear, or
understand our Terms? There was opposing still Stationary in July, where got
into Opposition with, and now the Thousands are blown up into a Swelling Total;
inflames the Mortality Bill to 7000. when mingles, which begins, according to
us, in the midst of Aug. In September with holds up the Malignity. And Oh
unhappy, but too true observation, at the time of the think you, the Bill was
at highest, after it pleased God it decreased. And

How many think you? Even 1800. in the next Week, because the Aspect after the
Congress is Weaker in the Recess than in the Access, as in other cases has bin
said, but the succeding Week proved not so; the measure of abatement was not
half the former Sum, to show, it is not the Declension of the Sun only, or the
Time of the year in general, for then it would have abated in Proportion; but
it is some other more particular disposition of that Woeful year 1665. Howbeit in
the midst of October, it remitted by 1800 again, in though still; yet upon
leaving the Aestival Sign, (which Signs Aestival are the Life of the Death, the
Vigor and Sting, next to Sin,) is the cause of all: Here I observed, that if
it had abated a 1000, per week by Novembers midst, there should have been but
two hundred, or say 3. or 460. Funerals; but in the midst of Nov. we find 1300.
and the following 900. because, in my opinion, the Aspect was not disengaged
till that time; Then it was, and lo! the Week was content with a pretty
reasonable and ordinary Sum of 500 and odd. To them be it, who make ill use of
these Discourses, who can believe a Prime Cause, and yet admit no second, or
will not Worship him, unless he acts by Miracle. No man seems to magnify the
Deity, more than an Enthusiast; but the Sober Principle resisting no Light,
Loves and fears God as He is, and as he shows himself, not ridiculous either to
Christians, or Heathens.

Thus does the Pestilence walk in Darkness, the Sickness destroys at the noon
day, (...), Not two Evil Angels, as the Talmudists, yea the Chaldee Paraphrase,
Septuagint consenting, but the Striking Influence, Diurnal, Nocturnal. Those
Arrows from Heaven that fly by Day, and Those Mortal surprises that ensnare us
by Night; whence the Psalm is called a Song of Evil Occurrents; for as the
Prime Cause makes his Sun to Shine on the Just and the Unjust; so he makes his
Planets and Fixed Stars to burn us where he pleases. For no body tells us that
in Contagious Diseases, Nights are more easily passed than the days; the
Celestial Influence, being equal, as in the Chasme, Motion of the Seas,
Tempests and Earthquakes is apparent. Where upon I was apt to think that Those
Hebrew Doctors, for their imperfect Notices of things, increased by a glimpse
perhaps of the Wasting Spirit in the Word there used, might construe it of
Spirits which was to be interpreted of Influences. So I say that whatsoever
Truth there may be in the Jewish Glosses of That and other Places in Holy Writ,
seeing it owns a Destroying Angel, and Evil Angels are more busy, not only in
Temptations, but also Ministerial Executions of Wrath, I must, whatsoever
becomes of Tempests, not be engaged to discharge our Influences. The year 1665.
was generally noted for a Dry, Misty year; if the Influences caused that
Constitution, they had a hand in the Malady.

Currents under and.
69. For Currents, etc. I am aware that I may seem like a Horse used to the
Road, and cannot get out; but when I consider that I do hereby advance a Stock
toward the Discovery of the Cause, whether Celestial, or no; I shall find some
Mitigation of Censure. Here we have but a few to trouble the Reader, as --

1609. Febr. 19. High Water at London Bridge, when it should have been Dead
Low. Childrey, p. 95. 10., 11..

1616. Aug. 7. Calm, and strong Current, 18., 4...

1618. Dec. 19. Great Current fell, the Admiral in danger of Shipwreck, 4.,
2....

1620. March 5. A Current, 13., 19..

May the 8. A Current. 4., 19.. --.

1635. October. the 8th. a Current, 28., 4.. III. in.

October. 27. A Current, 1., 15..

1648. Dec. 18. Currents. Monconys. 14., 8..

And I do not insist much upon these, as if the Aspect had any eminent Power in
the Streams, because I see other Causes nearer the, and nearer home, to the
Earth I mean, that challenge this Province; and whether They, or These do exert
remarkable Influences, unless in some places of Heaven posited, is to be
enquired: as also, whether among the Superiors, may not have more Power,
though remoter, than in the Motion of Waters? The Seamen use to adjust their
reckonings, by allowing for Impediments, wherein, besure, Currents are
comprehended; Notwithstanding, I have noted none but where the Current made
them speak out; and have none of the Moderation above premised; in the mean
time I desire comparison may be made between the two Superiors in the case.

Parelia.
70. Something is contributed, but other Aspects may be more proper; and
perhaps, may multiply the Images of the before our present Aspect, because
Pranks it more than seems to do; howbeit take our few Instances of Parelia with
Halo's.

1528. May 16. Halo circa Solemn, Lyc. 22., 22..

1550. Aug. 11. Norimberg, and alibi, in a fair day, Irides, and other
Phoenomena, Lycosth. 607. 13., 26..

1551. Magdeburg, Paraselenae seen, with VII. Irides, Lyc. 612. at Wittemberg
also, described by Lycosth. p. 613. 615. Gem. 1. p. 194. 5., 11..

1559. Febr. 28. Antwerpiae, Tres Soles cum variis atque diversis circulis
Visisunt, Lycosth. 614. 22., 3..

1607. Dec. 13. Iris tot. die, 22., 4..

1617. May 1. Parelia. 1., 27..

1619. Mense Maii, Tres Soles,.

Dec. 13. Iris tot die, Kepl. 22., 4..

1621. Aug. 18. Halo, o., 22..

1623. Lincii Parelia; Kepl. May. 18. 16., 26..

May 30. Iris, K. 16., 28..

Nov. 24. Halo, Kyr. o., 3..

1625. July 6. Iris, 25., 27..

Sept. 20. Iris, et clarus Sept. 27., 10..

October. 14. Gaelum Sanguineum, Kepl.

Dec. 8. Oldenburgi, Parelia, in Coron. Regis Ferdin. 3. die, Kepl 25; 10..

1627. October. 18. Halo Solis, Kyr. and Kepl. 4, 6., 15. Iris, Kepl.

Nov. 12. Halo, Kyr. and Kepler, 29., 9..

Dec. 14. Parelia, Kyr. in Bavaria, 21., 21..

1628. Jan. 2. Iris, Kepl. Kyr. 27.. 20..

March. 18. Iris, Kyr. 3., 11..

April 13. Iris, Kyr. 3., 9., 25. Iris; Kepl. and Kyr. 2., 15..

May 14. Iris, Kepl. and Kyr. 1., 26. 23. Iris, Kyr.

1629. March 24. Halo. K. and Kyr. 1., 3..

1631. March 4. Iris, Kyr. 9., 21..

1635. Jan. 14. Halo, 29. Partil..

1637. Febr. 9. Halo, Kyr. 26., 4., 10. Tres Soles cum Iride. Kyr.

March 2. Paraselenae. 1., 19..

April 19. Tres Soles cum Iridd. Kyr..

Nov. 13. Halo and Columnae, Kyr. 17., partile.

Dec. 10. Halo, 25., 29..

Dec. 20. Halo, Kyr. 2.. 6.. 23. Iris, Kyr.

Febr. 2. Iris, Kyr. 4., 15..

March 18. Halo. 23., 15..

1640. April 27. Iris Matut. Kyr. 7., 5..

1644. Aug. 17. Parelia, Kyr. 29., 9..

1646. Aug. 25. Iris, Parelia, 3., 28.. Aug. 29. Iris.

1672. May 15. Halo, 10 mane, lasted near an hour 9., 25..

71. Concerning the Halo, the Iris, we must not repeat what has been said; we
are in the mind still that there is more Pencils go to the draught of such
Images; as we shall see in the Cognate Phenomenon of the Claritas
Septentrionalis, which happening in the Night time, cannot then arise from the
alone. As to the greater appearance of the Parelia, and Paraselenae, we have
here a considerable number, a Dodecade of such Rarities: and such a Number, in
spite of fate, proves they have some dependence on the Aspect in hand, however
we cast about to make it out. The great Joseph Scaliger on Eusebius, was
engaged by his Argument to give us some Chronological Notes of these Phenomena;
but he scarce tells us the Month, much less the Day: A Fault that more are
guilty of, besides him, having no Opinion of Celestial Philosophy. We do not
trouble our selves here about their signification. Fromond modestly takes off
Gemma for his Vanity in that respect; He proposes perhaps, his own Fancies for
standing Rules. They cannot well reconcile Aristotle, and others, who make the
Parelia to be the Forerunners of Tempests and Showry Weather, with Descartes
his opinion before commended of a Solar Reflection from some Icy Particles,
which at that time may hang in the Air. For nothing hinders but that such
Particles may hang in a cold clumsie Air, as well as a Sheet of Snow, it is
certain, floats before it is portion'd into Flakes. Secondly; because I well
remember that upon the report of three Suns seen at Oxford on a certain day
before noon, which I neither had hap to see, nor yet to record; I took notice
that the morning was cold: Nor does any of these appearances show themselves at
Sea, but under a chill Latitude. So by a good token Scaliger tells us that his
Hollanders saw it in the Latitude of 71. All which sweetly agrees with our
Aspect of and, which we have owned, and shall farther prove, of a Dry and Cold
Energy.

Claritas Septentrionalis.
72. The Nocturnal Brightness, whether in the North or in the East, may deserve
to be considered; which we have said cannot come from the alone, but from some
new accessions of Light from those Bodies which are as moveable as Torch-Light,
sometimes together, sometimes asunder: which though I am assured it springs
from a Conflux of Celestials so posited; yet I protest it is hard to find such
an appearance without our Aspect of and. -- Days noted in Keplers Diary, are --

1625. August 28. September, 20 5., 3..

1626. June 16. Claritas nocturna. o., 1..

1628. Dec. 10. 11., 14..

Dec. 16. 18., 12..

1629. Sept. 11. 27., 2.. St.

October. 6. 28., 12.. St.

October. 19. 28., 14..

In most of these days we find a Congress of three Planets or more. Kepler has
observed that the Clarity used to happen at a, and though observing two, he was
in a fair way for three, yet he did not deliver it to posterity. are 3. Aug.
28. S. V. 1625. Sept. 20. and are 3. 1626. Jan. 16. and are 3. and 's Latitude
being considered, not far from one another, 1628. Dec. 10. are 3 too, never to
be questioned; and one the 16th. the makes 4. 1629. October. 6. and are owned to
be in. Nor is the too far distant on the 10th. day. Sometimes we meet 4.
engaged in two, but more commonly 3. engaged in one Triple. In all these and
are concerned. We meet with one exception, and that is Febr. 25. S. V. 1645. if
2 gr. width can put them out of case. It Is not 's Brightness only, no question,
but the proportion also that he bears to the rest that are upon the Scene. This
will be granted, I hope, that Planets in can easily dart up their Light above
the Horizon on certain days and hours; and you shall find that this Clarity
never comes to pass, but when 2 or 3. if not more, are posited in these Signs,
or their Opposites: Yea, and the Months that are above specified do accord.
Verily, as to I must own that Kepler has noted a Splendent Air in the daytime;
a Spurious Serenity, as in the Notes of -- September 8. 1624. January 9. 1626.
Jan. 18. 1626.
A Brightness of such consistency as bodeth Wet; this is certain, that the
Nocturnal Clarity; among the Country People, is a sign of Rain; and he that
pleases to look over the places quoted in Kepler, will find it so.

Pallidus.
73. When we meet with Pallidus here 9. or 10 times, we may think it is caused
by that Influence which has upon Mist, which according to the difference of
its Density, does represent the (and the) now red, now pale, as a more Watrish
Cloud makes him shine Watery; but They who look nearer into the Diary, and
observe how Judicious a Person Kepler was, may be apt to think there is
something more in it, than a Mist or Fog, when he shall find that Mist is a
Style by it self; and Pallidus, for the most part, by its self: It Is true, if
this diversity should arise only from the Medium, it were scarce worth the
mention; but if there should be at the time a perfect Serenity, it would imply
some other Passion of, co-existent perhaps, with that Crassitude of Air,
expressed only Ao 1617. not elsewhere. Now if it were through a Mist, I say,
it is a wonder to me that Kepler should observe so many Mists in 3 years, Ao
1622. 1623. 1624. and never a Pallidus all the time. It Is not improbable
therefore, but it may be some grudgings of the Maculae near the Disk of the,
together with some disturbance of the Medium, if any such were, nearer to us:
Sure I am, that these Maculae Solares are recorded at, or near the very times
where most of these Solar Palenesses are mentioned; and sure I am that and in
or, are of strong and stubborn Influence. The of and will make a Mist; a or,
not excluding the Minor Aspects of with etc. can do more. The days above
specified, are these.

1617. March 3, 4, 5. Pallidius, 25., 21..

1626. Sept. 18. 20., 3., 4., 7., 28..

October. 13. 25., 2., 12., 4, 17..

1627. July 18. 21., 8..

October. 28. 6., 4..

1628. April 6. 3., 5..

May 1, 2. 22. 19..

May 18. 4., 1., 29., 7., 17..

Dec. 8. 21., 10., 13., 27., 10.; 10:

Dec. 18. 13., 20..

1629. September 20. 27., 6..

I do not go about to deny, I say, there may be Mists and Fog in the case, but
I surmise also another more intimate Sullage to contribute, though perhaps by it
Self, except by the curious, less observable, By it self, I say, less
observable, yet in Conjunction with another may increase the sickly appearance;
So use we to see in a Damp Air and a moistened Eye, a bright Nocturnal Iris
about Light in our Chamber. Neither can we let pass the Bloody Hue wherein the
appeared, Sept. 29. 1571. throughout a great part of Germany, though worth the
notice of Thuanus, an of fell near the day, Sept. 20. but, besides a in a
critical place; we have our Aspect of has taken fast hold, 22. 24. and we are
sure that these Causes assigned have their realty, because other Prodigies also
happen about the same time, rationally concluding, that where Nature breaks out
into rare Symptoms, there she is diseased.

74: For the Maculae, we need not be so punctual to let out their Line, or to
take them short, as in Comets; otherwise I would say, that beside distance
between and; we find and opposed at the end of and for those Spots which
appeared from Sept. 26. S. N. ad October. 6. in the Rosa Ursina; and those that
succeeded from October. 5. to the 15. The reason seems to be, because we meet
with the Macula, when our two Planets were in the critical place of 25. 22. and
we hear nothing of all the year before, from Jan. to Sept. whilst yet the was
in being most of the time. Another reason may be, because while receded from
the; he applied to, the reason why we have another appearance, ab October. 25. S.
N. ad 31. Ao 2. a May 15. ad 21. Sheiner. and again, a 20. ad 26. I have reason
to think, that beside the appearance of Three Planets by the ingress of, in;
the Vicinity of did contribute, because on the 20. day there is a new
appearance, upon the account (now) of 3 in, our two Planets, and the. Another
appearance from June 10. ad 14. We do not without reason impute to and joined,
amongst the rest, when the Aspect salutes us, Jun. 2. S. N.

Ao 1624. a 13. Sept. ad 26. We have a within the term, and they contribute,
joined one with the other, as well as joined with, of which, I wonder, if
Sheiner have taken notice; I fear he has not: but as has bin suspected to
have been a Macula, so may be suspected to cause one; to me it is obvious;
Certainly on the 17. day, and are as near as can be, and what Influence may
they have in the next appearance from day 22. ad October. 6. at what time our
Planets are but at 8 degrees distance? Verily, They both hold to the next
appearance of Sept. 28. ad October. 14.

The next, Ao 1625. From Jan. 8. ad 24. S. N. where it is reason to believe upon
the former Principles, that and Stationary both, do help to besmut the, while
and are within 10 degrees of; surely when they come within 3 degrees, June 29.
we hear of other Maculae, Scheiner, 149. What, that the next Month July speaks
as plain as Nature can speak to the point. So that now I arrive to some
certainty, all in one Sign; and being Stationary for their parts, Circumstances
of Nature which the Curiosi are to attend, unless they mean to cut out Work for
Philosophy only, and not help to dispatch it; and then our Planet's in a
Partile critical. See Scheiner, Rosae Ursinae, 241. 245. 253. and alibi. Nay,
if yet a following Month of August does not consent, let Scheiner on one hand
be consulted, p. 247. 249. 351. with the Ephemeris on the other hand: I might
say, I am haunted with the Phenomena, and they will never be laid: no, not in
Sept. Scheiner, 255. 281. 283. as long as the Charm of the of are within the
Equinoctial Circle.

Nay, if they come again, Ao 1626. for a whole Month of January, S. N. and a
piece of Febr. I shall think there is some virtue in Characters, even a not
being without their Fruit. Scheiner, according to report of the curious
observer, 341. 345. to quote no more.

So far for Him: if Hevelius be as lucky. The first in October. 9, 19. 1643. we
meet with a Macula; Hevelius his Additament to his Cometography, when was in,
and opposing both. Is not this hand plain to read? Surely, Ao 1644. July 16,
26. we meet with a Macula when is Stationary, and and are conjoined in, within
5 degrees, the being got into. For She also, she would have you to know, is
called to the Birth sometimes of these Phenomena. One or two Instances more
would have done us no harm; but Hevelius is weary; and I am not sorry for my
Vacation. Howbeit, for a Farewell, if I yet can take my leave, For more I
enquire, the more we are encouraged; as particularly by what he says, that
bating the Foul days, he observed the without any Maculae or Faculae, for three
Weeks together, which according to us, may well be, for and are not always
Retrograde; nor do they always throng into a Sign; nor do Aspects of the
Superiors always happen; Nor are all Aspects of the like force to this Effect;
and whereas he would gladly know when there is any Maculae appear in Wet and
Close Weather; let me also propose it to the Curious, to snatch an Observation
now and then, when the perchance shows it self at times, in a Season otherwise
Rainy. For, in my Opinion, though every course of the Solar Maculae does not
mudd the Air yet, when ever the Air is so muddy, the Solar Discus will have a
touch, as it were, of the same.

Prodigious Rain, Sanguinis, Frumenti, etc.
75. This Head provokes the Smile of the conceited Reader, but a rash Smile
shows nothing but Indiscretion. I know not why the Affirmative may not be as
confident as the Negative: As far as I see into Nature, it is oftener so, than
otherwise. The confidence of the Asserter, if it be well grounded, has this
proper in it, that it puts the Sceptique into his second thoughts, which the
Proverb says, is the way to Wisdom. But if any man denies it, He may please to
know he has some Company. There have been other Infidels in the former Age as
well as He: Vulgar People (for so it haps that a Reforming Sciolist sides with
the Ignorant) were afterward convinced by their Eye, the only Certificate of
the Infidel, and unlearned. If no one shall believe Mont-gibel Flames; but they
that go to see it, how would the Turkey Merchants laugh at them? These Portents
are as unquestionable, though not so fixed. Hear what Gemma says of the Rain,
October. 1572. five Miles from Embden in East-Friesland; Multi in rei memoriam
plenos Cyathos asseruarunt, Gem. 2. p. 105. So again, May 15. 1556. where he
notes some that said there was no such matter, but upon enquiry it was found to
be true, Lib. 2. p. 30. In the former of these it rained Blood for five miles
together: besides other Examples we had before under another Configuration. To
these, and the like, we may say that there is in the Air, (...), a mixture of
Heterogeneous Seeds or Mites, though in some places more, and some less,
according to their different Tinctures; Now the Resolution of these Mites in
some may be more easy, in others more difficult; as a Bloody Shower suppose, is
more easy, than that of Milk; in that the Red Earth may be more resolvable
into Minims, than a White Chalk, or Marble. That which is more easily
dissolvable, as in Chemists Operations, is content with a gentle Heat; that
which is more difficult, requires a keener Flame. Now the Aspects differ like
the Chemists Fire: wherefore these rare appearances belong to the Stronger
Fires, the glowing of the Superior Heats. For raining of Ashes we own them,
perhaps, to be nothing else but the descent, in a calmer Air, of what was
before taken up by a Turbulent: as in the Arenade, if we remember; but these
appearances found only under the Superior Aspects, do commonly argue a more
intimate Influence into the Effect, not only by raising the Atome more copious,
and to a greater Height, but also tempering the Color by helping it, as it
were, to incorporate into the Moisture percolated through the Inferior
Atmosphere; though it seems too, by the rarity of the Red Snow, communicated to
the ever Noble Mr. Boil, that the tinged Atmosphere reaches beyond some part
of that Region, where those Watery Meteors are found.

The single Instance of that Hony-Dew which fell May 12. 1550. at Basil and
Bern, mentioned by their Countryman, which he says, was followed as usually by
a Murrain of Cattle; I shall not exercise my poor Philosophy upon it; only
observe, that the Superior Planets do exert their Influence in several parts,
which Singly, or Conjunctly argue their Influence.

We have one rarity more, and that is raining of Wheat; yea, and Poulse with
it, if we may believe Lycosthenes, and that in a time of Dearth: Must we not
have recourse here to our Panspermia, and a Vegetable Spirit as well as a
Mineral? For a great Shower I cannot speak: but for some Sprinklings, I remember
there was a report at Oxford, May, 19. 1656. at what time I gathered some my
self upon the Church-Leads at Eardington near Oxford, where I believe they are
preserved as Rarities by the Noble Lady to whom I presented them. Some Airy
Fancies would say, that they are generated by the Influence of the Virgins
Spike. If so, They were the more proper Present to a fair Lady. But I think
that our Aspect of Jupiter and Mars may rather challenge it, and some Impress
it might have of Planetary Heat; although it was just Grain, with a perfect
white Flower within, yet one end thereof was more Gay than the the other,
burnished with the Light shining Red, mixed with a Changeable Blew. Add, that a
Flower tasted odly, with a Smatch of Sulphur, so that for my part I imagined it
never came out of any Ear.

The places of and, March 15. 1551. for the Wheat Shower, was 23., 8.. The
places for the Honey-Dew, was 25., 1.. The places for the Bloody Shower, May 15.
1556. was (would you think it?) 27., o... Who would not be inquisitive, when we
see the same year, within 8 days show it self in such strange appearances? The
place for the Bloody Shower in 1571. is 11., 13., unless two degrees difference
will rob us of this Instance.

Droughts, Plagues of Locusts, Mice, etc.
76. Such as Ao 1527. a Jan. 27. ad April 12. Stow, 527. 11., 15..

Ao 1528. Magna Siccitas in aestate ut videtur, Lyc. 535.

Ao 1547. In July. Aestus toridus, Dr. Dec.

More we may hear of upon 's account in the next Aspect: to make up this Head
therefore, the Plague of Locusts is bred by Drought; of which we meet several
Instances, which Chronicles tell us swarm in Droughty years, which we may not
consider in this place, though under our Aspect, seeing the greater Aspect of
and forbids. -- There we shall meet with this Pest in the year 1504. and 1542.
the one for Drought, the other for the Insect, that infected Italy, Germany,
etc. in Sept. October. Nov. etc. witnessed by Lycosthenes, Surius and Gemma, etc.

Calvisius tells us from the Turkish Annals that Ao 1586. in June, Locustis
Pluit, It rained Locusts. I shall be willing to allow from Profane, yea Sacred
Story, that they were brought thither by a Wind; as in Podolia it happened, Ao
1576. so it rained Locusts, as it rained Quails. But again they must first be
mustered, before they can be conveyed to their Quarters. There was some
Constitution whereby they were generated, some Siccity, or Uredo, etc. of which
in was a case Co-existent with the Month of June, when this Rain fell.

Our English Annals tell us of the like Pest of Mice, which did much harm about
Nov. 3. 1580. the standing durable Aspect is plainly Legible, for the precedent
Month, or Months if need be; an in being Stationary, as we say, for such a
purpose.

CHAP. III.
Of the Aspect Tres-Grand between SATURN and JOVE.
1. The Highest Superiors; Enquiry into the Council of God, why meet but once
in 20 years; many a prank do they play in the mean while. The Lifeless
Hypothesis of the pressure of the touched at. 2. This Congress is dangerous. 3.
Yet the Congress does by no means portend all That shall happen in the next 20
years extent; yet the comprehensively stands for all the rest of the Aspects.
4: Not All Extremities from the Minor Planets. 5. Aspects whatsoever fall
within the Terms of this our Supreme, are reckoned as co-incident, to avoid
Prolixity. 6. The Aspect, as usually, first considered in Little. 7. Where it
shows its Teeth sometimes. 8. The Character accord. to Astrologers, speaks
mainly of Drought. 9. Drought, and oft-times Mist and great Dews. 10. Kepler's
consent. 11. The Constitution of, be it Dry, or otherwise, is of notable
duration. 11. Evidence of Cold and Dry Influence from Ao 1622. and seqq. the
Aspect repeats it self, because it desires to be taken notice of. 12. Platic
Width must be allowed in, since Astronomy it self owns it cannot calculate it
to a day. One degrees distance holds a Fortnight, and so proportinably. 13, 14.
Kepler no Friend to Platic Influence, forced here to confess it. 15. Diary
[Keplers] of 1622, 23. for Winter Cold, and Aestival Drought. 16. Evidence from
Germany, from the English Collonies of Droughty Year: the very Thunders
Aestival being Dry and Barren: Winds and no Rain, not of an exhausted Earth, as
Kepler fansied. 17. The Year 1643. though not for our turn here, yet our Aspect
gives us many a notable table Cold touch. 18. The Years 1662. much, and 1682.
too much for our turn. 19. The last intolerable Frost beginning at November's
Close, 1583. and lasted till Candlemas, 1684. touched, not described. This
Frost predicted upon the account of this Aspect: Kepler at a loss: Crude Air
may, but Cold Winds, Frost and Snow are not caused by the melting of the Snow
on the Alps. 20. A Frost parallel to our Last great Frost, 120 years ago, upon
the same account. 21. And 's trade in Lightnings and Thunder at other times at
large, fairly demonstrated from Keplers Diaries; Lightning not always attended
with Thunders; They make Stridorem, but not Boaturni. 30, 31. Hence the
Influence of the Pair demonstrated toward the generation of Comets. 32. The
Arabians far from ridiculous in the point. 33. more than half the Fathers of
their proper Comets. 34. Further proof from the Comets about 1503. where we
note that our Planets were in the same Sign as in 1682. and the Comet in the
same place i. e. near Ursa Major. 35. Proof Continued from, 40, 15, 24. 36.
From the year 1544. 38. From Ao 1564. 39. From 1583. 40. From the Star in
Serpentarius. 1604. 41. The memorable Transit of that Comet by all the Planets.
42. ad 47. Ricciolus's Argument against the Arabian Doctrine answered 43, 44,
45. A Table of Comets which have happened within the Verge of the and since the
Incarnation. 45, Comets may be predicted. 46. Whether an Aspect is less
operative, because it is not absolute, but wholly comparative, its Essence
consisting merely in Relation to us; no fondness sometimes for a Copernican
Subtilty. 47. Whether and can produce any Stars as big as themselves. 48.
Conjunctions maxim in the Fiery and Watery. Trigons, with the great Mutations
of the World introduced thereby, are above our reach. 49. etc. and as they
cause Drought, so engaged in some Company they cause Floods. 50. Peucer refers
the Influence of our Aspect to a Solar Eclipse. Conspiracies Planetary. 51.
Some account of Stanhursts lamentable Flood. 52. The Cataract at Budissina. 53.
Water in Floods raised also by Rarefaction. 55. Gemma's Lamentable Floods, and
his opinion of Fermentation of Waters by melting of Snow, kindly received. 56.
An unparalled Flood in Holland, etc. An. 1572. Evidenced from thence, that
the new Star in Cassiopeia is homogeneal to the Bearded Comet. 57. Some Home
Floods. It Is the Spirit makes the Waters proud. 58. A just admiration of the
greatness of the Aspect; the Principle is far from Superstition. 62. The Author
delights not in baleful Relations. 63. Kepler's Subterranean Cause pitied, but
the Man admired. 64. Kepler unhappy, when he teaches there is nothing in the
Sign. 65. The Flood of 1642. in Holland, justly referred to our Aspect by
Kyriander, but no Anticipation will pass. 67. Floods at Northampton. 69. The
late Floods of Holland described from the French. 69. The late news of 20000
Carcases floating, makes the Author affectionately wish, that those who are in
Power in the Low Countries would find a Professor of Astronomy, obliged to
Study our Theory. 70. of and brings as many Comets as a. 71. Earthquakes heard
of once in 10 years. 72. The stupendous Aspect once more admired. however
fancied Old and Decrepit, is a high and mighty Planet. 73. An. 1554. Three
Earthquakes. An. 1563. It Thunders at London, and the Earth quakes at Island.
An. 1612. T. M. upon the Land, while a Stormy Christmas wracks 60 Vessels in
one Spanish Port. An. 1632. Kyriander ascribes Vesuvius's Flames to our Aspect.
An. 1638. No greater evidence for any Conclusion in Nature. An. 1642.
Anticipation once more rejected. An. 1643. of and must not exclude the Aspect
of and. 74. etc. That the Superior Planets cause Earthquakes, is no news;
Pliny teaches it from the Babylonians. Notes upon the Chapter in Pliny. 75.
Pliny's Testimony for the Cardinal Signs, a great Truth; with other notable
Notes concerning Earthquakes. 76. Continuation of the like Notes. 77. An
Earthquake may last 40 days; nay, a year or more by fits, with the reason. 79.
Inundations and Earthquakes oft-times go together by the Antient's confession.
80. Inundations, Earthquakes, Comets, Pestilences hang all on one Thread.
Objection answered. 81. Our Aspect malignant as to Health. 82. The best
Physicians consent, and are more to be suspected than any other, which makes
some Astrologers venture to predict a Pestilence; the reason why our Aspect
seems to be most suspicious. 83. Some notion of Dominion in the case. Cardan
bids us enquire into Eclipses, to little purpose. 84. etc. Evidence of Aspects
Malignity. The Sweating Sickness, An. 1563 Vicinity strongly suspected, even
beyond the Tedder of 30 degrees, An. 1623. 1643. Two or Three Pestilential
years together united under our Aspect. 85. Whether and are malignant without
the Aspect of and. 86. Aspects of the same malignancy in less Diseases, Agues,
Variolae, Scorbutes. 87. etc. Distempers more or less correspond to the
revolution of our and every twentieth or tenth year. 89. Comets etc. attended
with s. Distempers. 90. The Kings of Englands entrance upon their Reign, does
not usually, much less always introduce a Pestilence, as Phanatiques chatter.
92. Some good News to lay the Objection, which says, I make every Xth. year
Dangerous. 93. Pestilences may hanker about a City 3 or 4 years.
1. WE are arrived at last through many a weary four Step by Sea and Land (not
without the Divine Assistance) to the Plus grand Aspect of the Two immediate
Superiors, and. They are Planets of Stately, Slow, and Majestique Motion: they
caress not one another every day; the Globe of the Universe knows They meet but
once in 20 years. If there be no Mystery in that (beside the Majesty of it, for
Princes meet but seldom) I am fowly lost: For, can a small Revolution of Nine
or Ten Moons of matter produce a Man; and does the God of Nature, in a Sydereal
Revolution of Twenty Years produce nothing? What? neither off nor on? Well is
it, if it does not produce a Monster, both in the Macro and the Microcosme. For
tell me, you that believe (I speak not to others) that all things were made for
the Interest of Humane Nature, what can be the end of the Divine Counsel,
suitable to so great a Risk, of such extent? I cannot find any thing in any
moveable whatsoever, where Motion is made for Motion's sake. The Sun and the
Sea, the Wind, the Blood, Ebb, Flow, Breath, Circulate, Decline, Advance for
the execution of some Ministeries which they perform by the way. There is work
for them to do besides Dancing; Their Motions are to be weighed and felt, as
well as measured. It grieveth me to see Learned Men talk of Pressures of Air,
and thereby solve Problems concerning the Ocean's Ebb and Flow. There is little
hope that and shall be allowed any Influence (for Pressure is not Influence)
when it is denied to the Moon, the Image and Reflex of the Sun: They seem to me
to deny the Action of Light and Heat. And I would fain know what else is
Active? whether or no the Motion of the Waters cannot be apparently accounted
for without those Lifeless Hypotheses of Bulk and Weight. I speak only of
things which are Lucid. Alas! Alas! there is many a sad Transaction to be
performed by these our two Instruments of the first Mover (ever to be adored)
before the return to a second Conjunction. Many a Terrible Token seen and felt
in the World, before they can get off; many a Prodigious Frost, Drought,
Dearth, Pestilence, etc. which have seized the World, and lasted also, while
senseless Men have been swept away amidst all their dangerous self-indulgency,
and the Security under an unhappy Principle.

2. This Aspect I must repeat again, is a Tres-grand Congress of Mighty Bodies,
spreading its Wings from East to West, and hovering over us for a year or two,
3 or 4 nay, almost 5 sometimes, before they get clear of one another. So Two
great Ships on the Main, on a foul meeting, endanger all the Passengers.

3. I am not of their Mind, I must own, who persuade, this grand Conjunction
portends all the Changes Political or Natural, that happen in the World within
its Revolution; for that Evacuates the intermediate Configurations, divesting
them of their Influence, the of these very Planets, all which have their
several Stations; yea, and differences of Influence; Some more forcible, others
less. Nay rather, Of those great Events natural which are proper to the Aspect,
and considered by themselves, the Greatest which probably can happen within the
space of XX. Years, falls within the time or term of a Signal Aspect, i. e.
about two years or somewhat more, before and after what we call the precise
Conjunction, Or, which is next the in all its Virtue and Efficacy: though the
Square we have seen, is a Dame too, except an Artist say that by, He means the
whole Risque, excluding no Aspect, and then I am content.

4. This we shall prove from our History: for though we have dinn'd the Readers
Ears with nothing but Comets, Earthquakes, Pestilence, etc. as proceeding from
the Minor Aspects, we must know that and have their Hours, a Jurisdiction I
mean, and Territories which belong to them, where we shall meet with as much
Mischief as in any other parts; So there is most harm done in the greatest
Parishes.

5. Here We have ordered it so, that what belongs to our Aspect, comes to be
presented by it self, having, to avoid Repetition, omitted those Aspects Jovial
that are co-incident, whether with or, etc. which must be allowed their Weight
and Strength, according to their Fortitude; yet so, as not to exclude the
Influence of our Termagant, which is as the Basis to every I fusion that is
mixed therewith; or like the Keel, the first Poundation-Piece of a Ship,
whereunto all the Minor Aspects for the time being, are Riveted and Mortaised
like the Ribbs of the Vessel.

6. But what has been hitherto our Method, which, I hope upon due
consideration will be taken in good part; we must consider this our supreme
Configuration at the wrong end of the perspective, viz. with its abbreviature
first, and after survey it in its farther extent.

7. The abbreviature will show us the Nature in Little, and notwithstanding
afford us some Extravagances sometimes, whereby a suspicion will be raised of
some Stranger, and stronger Power that lies Couchant between the configur'd
Pair.

8. My Reader would, I fear, be at a loss, if I should transcribe the Character
of this Aspect from our Elders, as from Cardan, the Congress of and, says he,
as to the qualities of the Fixed, and the Signs, where it happens, does affect
the Air for many days with fair Weather, or Rain or Winds, Comment. in Ptol. if
the Luminaries at least be Aspected. Is he not almost ridiculous? But that he
has a Salvo from the Sign and the Fixed Stars which determine the
Dis-junctive. Regiomantanus says, For many days before and after, it brings
great Drought in the Fiery Signs; and in Watery Signs,, it brings Rains, Floods,
Inundations, and Particularia Diluvia. This is very well, But then in Aerial
Signs, I hope, it brings Winds, in. In Earthy Signs, Frost and Snow,.
Regiomont. dare not say so of this, whatsoever he has said of an Aspect in
General. Maginus is as cautelous, consenting as to the Drought and Floods: but
passing by the other Moiety of the Denomination of the Signs, He comes to the
Quarters of the year; and tells us that, In Spring it brings turbid Clouds, and
moist Air; In Summer, Hail and Thunder. In Autumn, Winds and Rain; In Winter,
Turbid Air again. Tagliacozzo accords, only he restrains the Turbid
Constitution to the Spring, the Hail to the Summer, the Rains and Floods to
Autumn, and the Turbid Air in Winter, to the Humid Signs only, in which the
other seems to be indifferent, regarding only the Diversity of the Seasons.
Eichstad, after all, (He went by his own experience) ventures not on the
premises or their variety, but asserts, though not from his own experience
(what I do now from mine) that and first, has an Influence for Drought, while
he brings Instances from 1516. and 1614 of which in due place, and expressing
himself further in Keplers way, who fancies that the great of the Superiors
hinders the Concoction of the Earth, so that it cannot attract the Waters of
the Ocean, whereupon must issue Drought.

9. We, I hope, more intelligibly say, that and produce a Dry Constitution,
because it produces a Cold one, being the two most remote Planets (if there
were no more but That) Cold being the Parent of (at least) some Species of
Drought. 2ly. We say it produces a Cold Air more often, and more Naturally,
than Heat. This, few agree to, though they admit Hail in Summer, which is some
Token, but it appears Consequent, from their very distance, beside what else
has bin said before of the Planet 's Influence. 3dly. It produces often with
the Cold and the Drought a misty Air, Fog and Foeculent, confessed at least, in
Winter. But Argol, who has added somewhat of use to what he found in Maginus,
and consequent to that which I would not forget, put in great Dews, more often
observed in, or after foggy Mornings.

10. And this I take to be meant by Kepler, when he says, cum Jove vapidum ex
Calentibus terrae latebris edu cit acrem, qui in producendis meteoris, ingentes
habet vires, in Optic. Paralip. p. 274. quoted also by Eichstad, where I do not
pretend to understand his Philosophy; either the Misty Reek out of the Earth or
Waters, visible, as the Fume from a Stable, much less that Mists have such
tendency to Meteors, more than other Clouds; but I do assert the Truth of the
Aphorism, that and is an obscure, Foggy Congress very frequent.

11. In the mean while we are told our Aspect brings a Settlement as to what
happens, Rain, or Shine, for many days; but they leave the poor Disciple to
determine the Number himself. Alas! how many 20. years must a Student pass to
determine That? Notwithstanding, they are not to be reproved: for the variety
of Motions and Habitudes of the Planets are so admirable, that no determinate
number will fit. The year 1682. with 1683. saw 3 's meet in one, and so it
continued 9 Months in the year; and the like we shall show presently in 1622.
etc.

12. Now, to make out our Cold and Dry Character, what with Intelligence from
Germany, and my own Experience, I could produce four of these Grand
Conjunctions with their respective Diaries, Entire; the first whereof and 2d we
shall present; the first Conjunction, though it be Celebrated in the Month of
July, and in the Sign, a Sign, besides other disadvantages, which has no great
favor for Cold; for Heat rather, Thunder and Lightning; yet we can be content
to make no exception against it, but all things considered, to admit it. The
Conjunction lies at the Door of July 7, 17. but how many degrees we shall
expatiate before or after the day of the Conjunction in this our Minor Table,
which we make praevious to the following larger Diary, That is a Question; for
sundry reasons I have pitched upon 8 degrees of Platique Distance, not more;
because I would not overcharge the Reader: nor Less, least I should wrong the
Aspect, especially when the Aspect for fear it should be wronged, seems to me
to repeat its Motion, not being content, as we may see, to pass part of
September, October, November, December entire, Ao 1622. but Commences again, at
April 1. 1623. and so holds on to October 4. Yea, a third time, from about the
end of March, 1624. to the beginning of May, the same year. So falls it out
that we have some taste of this Aspect, not only the Summer Months of June and
July (where we find little of his cooling Influence) but of the early Spring
Months, yea, of the later Autumn and Winter.

12. For, what are Aspects tied, do we think, to precise Minutes and Moments?
the Vanity of that appears from this Grand Conjunction. An Astrologer must be
lost in a Mist there, not knowing whether he goes, when Astronomy it self
confesses She is uncertain, and does but conjecture at the Moment. Hear
Kepler's honest confession: Planetae validi and tardi non contrabunt suos
effectus ad momenta minuta conjunctionis Plenariae (speaking of this very
Conjunction) ut de quibus adhuc ipsa Astronomia incerta est, propter
subtilitatem. Calculators will differ above a Week in the Point. What say you,
if VII. days shall not make above one degree distance. If VII. days before
differ but one degree from the precise Conjunction, then VII. days after differ
no more from the Conjunction: So there is a fortnight comprehended within a
degree's space; and a Month within two degree's space, reckoning on each side
to, and from the Conjunction. How far this ought to be extended even in meaner
Aspects, we have before spoke our Mind; we make nothing even of ten degrees
Distance; we have seen and Rain excessively, even to Floods at Five, yea VII.
or VIII. degrees distance. Nay, if we have proceeded further, which must not be
denied, it is certain, if we enlarge upon any Configuration, we may safely, upon
and.

13. This we shall prove even from Kepler himself (though he be no Friend to
Platick Efficacies) while he allows an Influence of and at such Distance; He,
where he reckons they have took leave one of another, yet upon the intervening
of a Third Planet, finds no such matter. For Lo! in his account of May, 1623.
having told us Faithfully, that for the space of 12. Days the Weather was in
Norico uniform, i. e. Cold and Rainy all the while. He tells us withal that
the Intervention of with and (a Sextile he means) was the Cause: which is the
rather to be marked, because the Instance is at the Cold Influence, Frigus and
Pluviosum there, yea and at Lintz too; for there we find Venti frigidi, Gelu,
Pluviosum. Yea, Nives, on May. 11, 21. which is somewhat of the Premises. And
where is and then? About 5 or 6 degrees distant.

14. In another place being over-loaded with Evidence from the Exalted
Influence of the Aspect on October. 7, 8, 9. He cries out, till I hear him, Non
sufficient Aspectus in hunc diem, What shall we do then? Will not a mighty
Sextile of,,, falling thereabouts on several Days, do the Feat? No: Non
sufficient. But we must even send for a to make these Sextiles so Potent. Now
and on these days are grad. 7. distant, at least. It Is true, This belongs not
to the Cold Influence: It Is all one for that, and 's Aspect is fetched from the
Dead to answer for Pranks committed, as if they were Living.

15. It will be time now to produce some of our Tables. The First then may be
as follows.

A Table of intra Grad. 8. 23., 1..
Ao 1622. Intra grad. 8. Sept. Still. Nov. 14. Nebulae. 17, 18. Neb. Aestus. 20,
21, 22, 23. seren. 24. Nebula. 28, 29, 30. Nebulae. October. Still. N. 2. Pruina.
5, 6. Frigus. 7. Nebulae. 8, 9, 10. Caliginosum. 11, 12. Frigidum. 17, 18, 19.
Nebulae, Frigidum. 20, 21, 22. Frigid. Nix in Collibus. 26, 27, 28. Frigidum.
30. Frigus. Nov. 2. Still. N. Frigus. 3, 4. Pruina. 5, 6, 7. Caliginosum. 9.
Foetida aura. 10, 11. Nebulae. 13, 14. Frigidum. 15. Neb. Nix. 19, 20. Nivos.
21, 22. Frigidum. 28. Nebulae. 29, 30. Frigidum. Dec. 2. Pl. N. 2. Gelavit,
Nix. 4. Frigus. 5. Nebulae, Nix. 7. Nebulae Densissimae. 8. Nebulae, Nix. 11.
Nix. 12. Ninxit. 13. Ninxit per tot. diem. 14. Gelu. 15, 16, 19. Frigus. 19.
Gelu duravit. 21. Frigus. 22, 24, 25. Nix. 27. Ninxit. 28. Nives. 29. Frigus.
26., 3.. 1623. Jan. 1, 2. Still. Nov. Frigus. 3. Neb. densissima, tot. die. 6.
Frigus intensum, Nebulae. 8, 9. Frigus mediocre. 14, 15. Frigus Restauratum.
1624. ab April 7. St. N. ad October. 4. 10. Ventus Frigidus. 11. Gelu, Sol
Pallidus. 12. Gelu, Tonitru. 14. Sol Sanguineus. 16. 17. Gelidum. 20. Sol
Pallidus. May St. N. 1623. 3. Nebulae. 14. Nebulae. 17, 19. Venti frigidi. 19.
Gelidum. 21. Pluvios. Nives. 22, 23. Frigidi, and Udi dies. 26. Grandinos. N.
B. ab 11. ad 21. totum tempus in Norico pluvios. and Frigid. Nebulae in Oceano
Brittannico, Kepler, ad May 1623. Note, that in Summer the Scene changes not
for Drought, though for Heat it may. June 14. S. N. Nebulae. 15, 16, 17.
Squalores: 25, 26. Frigida Aura. July 4. St. N. Equalor. 5, 6, 7, 8. Calores.
9. Squalor. 11, 12, 13. Calores. 14. Squalor. 17. Grando. 19. Squalor. 26, 30.
Squalor. 31. Siccitus. Aug. 1, 2. Aestus magni. 2, 3, 4. Siccitas. 5. Squalor.
11. Grando. 18, 19. Squalores intol: erandi usque ad 26. October. 3, 4, 5.
Frigid. Ningid. 3, 4. Ningidum, 6. Gelu. 7. Pruina, Nivis instar. 1624. March
30. Here now, the Spring is cool. 31. Nix. April 1. St. N. Ningidum. 2. Frigus.
3, 4. Gelu, Ninxit. 5. Ninxit. 7. Ningidum. 8. Ventus Frigidus. 10. Frigidum.
11. Pruina. 13. Frigus. 14, 15, 16, 17. Euri Frigidi. 18, 19. Aura Frigida. 30.
Sol in occasum rubens. May 1, 2, 3. St. N. Squalores.
16. From which Diary take Notice how every Month which is more capable, has a
cold mark; and those which are scarce capable, feel the impress of the Aspect
by Drought: (for the overflowings of the Danow in June, Ao 1623. toward
Midsummer, I hope, is a Rarity;) and in July we scarce find a Drop of Rain;
whence Kepler with Reason concludes the Diary of the Month with Siccitas; which
is no ordinary Style in that Book. Surely in New England we find a Drought
noted from June's beginning to the end of July, Purch 4. p. 1866. Yea, in
Germany all July long. Even the very Thunders brought no Rain with them,
according to what is before noted, Dry Thunders are an effect of Joves
Dominion; and yet according to the Diary, it Thundered five or six times. To
proceed, Winds instead of Rain, says Kepler, not upon the account of an
Exhausted Earth as he imagines, but on the account of those Planets, that being
met, resist Moisture, and separate it. There are a matter of 330 days that we
are concerned in for the investigation of this Aspect, the Fair Days and the
Dry being reckoned, which are omitted in the Table; 74. in the first Division,
121. in the 2d. and 20. in the 3d. make even up 200. of that Total (330.) And
75. for so many Cold Days occur expressly in the Table, then the Influence is
manifest 275. of 330. bear Witness to a Dry, Cold, Aspect.

17. Our next Conjunction falls by Course in the year 1643. on Febr. 16. here
we shall seem to be at a loss, not where the Aspect falls in a Winter Month;
for there we are not to seek for Cold, Mist, Frost, Snow, etc. each Month
having its proportion. Dec. Ao 1642. gives 26. and Ao 1643. Jan. gives 21.
Febr. 22. March 15. April 17. but before that, from May 22. to Aug. 2. when
They come within 8 degrees in Summer Months, where the Aspect does not seem so
much for our turn, the Critical Position, as it uses, altering the Case. Well,
it will yield us the more Instances under the Style of Heat, Moisture, Storms,
etc. Yet, even here, we meet with the German Diary, Frost at the end of May, [
Heart Reif] Cool Weather; yea, Cold on June, 21, 25, 27. with Snow, or Clouds
ready for Snow, if I read the Dutch right, Kait Wind Schnee Wolken, so hard is
it an for Aspect in the Various Changes of the Celestial Motions, not to show
its Teeth. See Kyrianders Diary.

18. But the next of 1662. is quite for our turn, and the next 20 years after
too much for our turn; when first that of 1662. brought Cakes of Ice in the
Thames at the end of November, December's beginning, about a Fortnights time;
and Renewed then a 2d time at December's end, at what time the River was scarce
passable. At it again, Ao 1663. where extreme Frost, and hard Winterly Weather
in the Close of January, brought much Ice a third time upon the River; when,
besides Frosts in the mean space, appeared Cold and Chill Winds, pinching the
Spring at the end of March, April too was much upon an Easterly Wind; by the
same token that my Memorial tells me, on May 2. I saw and within two degrees: I
suspected something even then that they were some Cause of that Constitution
following, whatsoever I thought of the Cold preceding. The Truth is, the Aspect
lasts all the year within 8 degrees Compass, and Tokens thereof may be
discerned in its Cold Influence: I mean in the Frost of Aug. die 11, 13, 20,
21, 22, 28, 29, 30. in September, October, December.

19. But That of 1682. according to my terms of grad. 8. begins about July 10.
and ends not till a year after, Aug. 24. 1683. By my Notes I find a Cold Night
in the midst of July, 1682. yea, and Frosty Cold Pinching Mornings, besides the
Day time, August 3. and 4. and so Signal was it two Months before Christmas,
that I remember according to my Notes, Gentlemen got on their Upper Coats and
Cloaks, in spite of the Cuerpo mode, to defend their Shoulders from the Cold.
But in November of the year 1683. There, There began the Winter which told us a
heavy tale, and lasted, with a small Interruption of 4 or 5 days, till the New
after Candlemass, 1684. That is the Winter under which we groaned a Twelvemonth
after; whose farewell had a Sting; for bringing a dry Summer after it (a Badge
of and when they are not mastered) the Markets forgot their Plenty of Flesh and
Fish, the later being killed by the Frost, and the former by the Drought,
Cattle being pinched in their Pasture, the poor Vegetable perished, scarce a
Sallard to be seen, the Grape intercepted, and the Artichoke destroyed;
Rosemary and Bays became new Exolick Plants; This was the Winter that closed up
the Thames, and made it Terra Firma, when his Majesty of Happy Memory being
Sollicitous for Ice at the end of November before, was told, His Swans would
have Ice enough before that Winter was over; the Wizard intimating That Frost,
which upon the Position of and, he saw, would be so severe. The Truth of it is,
the Planets are not within the compass of 8 degrees. Alas! we stated that
number for Rudiment and Introduction sake, we confined our selves to it at
first, only to introduce, not to exclude the greater Distance. Know therefore
that at this They were both in, above twice 8 degrees distance, and the better
Artist must consider them both nearer and further, the one sometimes, at other
times the other taking place. And it is no News, for thus we find in Keplers
Diary Forty years ago, when the two Planets met in. Honest Kepler is at a loss
for the reason of a Cold Winter; especially of the Hyemal Cold in March. 1621.
Alas! Good Man, how does he turn every Stone? How does he conjure for it out
of the Earth, but it answers not? The Superior Aspects have been in Play for
two year before, as we could prove from his own Annotations: the short is,
March proved so Cold, that it minded the Goodman of his Country Proverb; which
counsels the Old Men to put on their Swords to defend them from the sharp
Assaults of the Air. and are but 10 degrees distant: but he not dreaming of
such Martialists, has recourse to the Nature of the Month. But what is the
Nature of the Month? It Is he himself who asks the Question; and it is a worthy
Question, Quae potest esse natura partis anni, aut quae est substantia
temporis, what Body has time which is endued with such Working Faculties? It Is
the Sun Characters a Month in specie, and the rest with the characters it in
individuo; He imputes it to the melting of the Snow on the Alps, which causes,
he says, those Cold Winds which bring the Winter Frost. But why is it
constantly so every March? There Is Snow on the Alps every Winter. We find not (
Ao 1621. Ao 1622. 1623. 1624. we find and) Ao 1626. we find no such thing
again. As for the rest we must remember there are other Cool Aspects of,
besides and. Nay, 2ly. I could never digest the pretense of Cold Winds from
melting of Snow; Floods and Waters I understand, and a Crude Air: but that
melting of Snow on the Mountains should cause Frost and Snow in the Valleys, I
pretend not to understand, For Wind formally considered, rises not from the
moistened Earth, nor falls by its own Weight, the Cold is its own Property,
which it lends, and borrows not. Again in Snow its self, Air relents, how
much less does it Freez when the Snow Thaws? Motion is the Formality of Wind,
but Motion requires an Application of a new Cause. There is Master, I grant in
the Atmosphere, Plenty; when Snow melts, as there is in the Bellows deducted;
but there wants an impulse, an Aspect, a Constellation, as we have defined it
at the beginning, to make a Wind.

20. Now why may not I look back into the former Century, I do amiss in sparing
the Labor; in the year 1563. 1564. you shall find a Frost parallel to that of
ours, 120 years after; about Christmas (as with us) it was unsupportable, the
Ears of the Poor, their Hands, and other parts gangreen'd; the Nut, the Pear,
the Peach, the Rose-Tree, the Vines, all but Root utterly extinguished. Death
of Man and Beast, Dearth of all things folfowed, Gemma Cosmoc. 2, 44. And would
you know now where our Planets were? You will find them upon the matter in the
same places, One in, the other in then, and Both in now, being but newly entered.

21. Pass we now from Frost to Flame, to show that and in, viz. from the exact
Aspect so called, to the Quincunx, has an Influence sometimes more, sometimes
less, on all Lightnings, Thunders that have been heard in Summer or Winter, and
bordering on the for the space of Vyears together. How, say you? Even so: I
know it is no small enterprise: it is such as will amuse Astrologers themselves,
till they please to calmly consider what has, or shall be said. Yea, but this
needs a Proof. Keplers Diary is extant for some years when this happened. He is
a man of Authority, who making inquisition into Astrology, as many ingenious
Persons at this day do, has left us his Notes. From them we Demonstrate our
Thefis, we demonstrate that this, haps in 1622. in 6. July 7, 17. Now, we are
not going to say that the Heat, and Thunder a Twelvemonth before, June 2, 3.
St. N. depend on the Superior Configuration, as posited in that very Sign or
degree, 6. (though that Congress were then, and not before, in its perfect
Complement) but we say that when and in prospect of such Conjunction, entered
within such Barriers, as shall render them within 30 degrees distance, there
can nothing happen all that livelong-while, but must be imputed, more or less,
to those Planets so approximate. For Example, take me the Tonuit of Jun. 2, 3.
aforesaid, 5, 51. and place in 6, 43. and are on the Quincunx; are They not? If
I prove then is concerned in that Thunder; then and both being so Aspected, are
not quit. Now that is concerned, any man that is but so moderate as to grant
us, that a Concourse of Planets in the same Sign is apt to beget something,
shall find that and are but gr. 6. distant; then and are but gr. 4. distant; so
there are 3 Planets in, and the in, which is Anti-Gemini, and opposing both,
being strengthened by the Vicinity of and and somewhat by its Vicinity to. Let
not the Reader think we have said all, shown all the Causes: Nay, we see but a
part in which and have a share. To make this more probable, know that the same
Method gives account for the next Tonitru, Jun. 8, 18. and therefore we escape
that. We meet with next ferventissimum tonuit, pluit. Moist, soultry Air and
Thunder, day 19, 29. see, if are not posited all between and, so that and are
the Bounds and Shedds, as it were, to coerce them; but if any of the Planets so
coerc'd are Operative, the extremes Coerced cannot be Idle. To say none are
Operative, is against our Supposition; for no moderate man but will, in this
case, grant that and, all Three in their Tropical Heights can raise Fervours in
the Air: This is so easy, so evident, that I would begin my Pains here to
teach That Man Astrology, i. e. to look upward.

22. The next is a Tempestuous Day with Thunder, Jun. 9, 19. as yet we do not
say that our Planets Influence is so legible, as others of the Minor Rank; for
are all within 10. grad. one of another; II. in the end of, the other II. in
princ.. Now (note that it is the New, the day of the Change) I argue thus; if
any of these IV. had Influence as the New Moon, at least is granted, toward the
raising of Tempest then all these IV. had the like. Well, still the and have
operation in the end of, and shall not in the middle of the same Sign? And if
have, shall not also, being near the same Tropique height on the Left side, as
on the Right? Besides, that he is now got three degrees nearer, then at the
last time. There comes two more Tonuits before this Month is done; for they are
like to be thick on the account of the Tropical Height of our Planets, which
are the first in the Pass, and therefore strike up the first Heats. -- Lets
balk a Thunder or two, and come to Much Thunder. Aug. 19, 29. Aestus Pertonuit
pluit; so the Diary; Here, to make short work, is concerned, if it be Thunder,
the while is in, is in Anti-Gemini: shall 's wide to be efficacious; and shall
's to be ineffectual? and now approach 5 degrees, more the One where is at
Junes beginning, than the other, where is station'd at the end of June.

23. Well, the Sun begins to decline, as Kepler uses to say, and therefore
Thunders begin to sleep in there Embers: Howbeit, there is a parting blow, Sept.
9. St. N. 1621. some places Fired, or struck with Lightning: We see, and cannot
choose but see where and are posited; but that is so near, appears by his
Height, 23. by this strong opposal from, as was said before; and by the 's
with, partaking with those Heights, and receiving that fierce from the Martial
Star; I say, who is approached to, now six degrees of the Thirty. Thus much for
the First year.

24. No news of any Thunder now, till April of the year following, 1622. Then
comes a Clap 2 days together, die 7, 8. where is trow we? In his Tropique
Height still, 22. Where is? Fallen back a little to 15. nearer the Altitude
Tropic. and are come nearer now by a degree; and if that will not unite them,
the will, Die 7. the wades between and for that day, and the day after forsakes
him not; This is so plain, as if we read with a Fescue.

25. and now are almost within 20 degrees; a great approximation for the
Superior Planets, as has appeared before, even in the Minors: See by the way,
whether the Stars be not Thunderers? For, which but now raised Thunder by of,
is at the same Sport in the with the same; the One at the Entrance, the other
at the Exit of.

26. So certain, I say, that the cannot come to but in Thunders again, Ao 1622.
May 1, 11. the, Three Comrades in, and within 20 degrees of the nearest of the
Three.

27. All this may go for Gratis dictum: But will any Man's Obstinacy say, that
the Aestus, Tonitrua, May 19, 20. were not caused by and as to a share, when
has got into; a Sign of the same Denomination with, and but 18. degrees
distant? Then let them say that or makes no heat on those Aestuant days, and
let them prove it, because the Sun makes none when it comes into the same Sign.
Here the Planets in strike up the first Heat, and continues them; and in the
highest Absis Finish.

28. So will I leave and in at their Rains and Thunders, all June and July, St.
N. August, and seem alone, but within ten degrees now, where must pass, if and
lie in her way; Three Planets in, we have heard have Thundered already in June
and July,, and the like can do in Aug.

29. There Is one Tonuit in September, die 15, 25. tonuit largiter pluit, and
are but 7 degrees distance, and though the year is declined, yet the keeps up
the Summer inclination on that day, while she rides in, in, in and also, in,
etc. Yet further, October. 9. St. N. Tonuit, Pluviae, Grandines: see whether the
be not in Antigemini,, etc. as before.

30. I should weary my self, and my Reader (which is worse) if I should follow
this trade in June, July and August; 1623. when and the Rest crowd into the
same Signs, what with Aestus, Squalor, Tonitru, that they come to Tonitrua
continua before they have done, three days together, and Fulgura continua a
Week after; and Squalores intolerandi, for about a Week together; and so we
have done: Now what is the matter with Chasmes and the Lightnings in Winter,
Jan. 2. and 7, 17. 1623. (we are indebted to speak to Winter) first there is two
Planets in Anti-Gemini, and two in Anti-Cancer, which bolt upon, lying quiet
till they come in grad. 27. of, where he being prim'd by those 4 in the other
Hemisphere, Fires his Superior, who lies but at 8 degrees distance. Therefore
in the Night this happens, while and are up, and ascending the Meridian. Judge
this to be true, when you see three Planets in Anti-Cancer firing 's Beacon,
Jan. 7, 17. while he transmits that Flame to and the, which by this time is got
to, and beyond them; but so as to play his Game still with them.

31. Here I must take notice that in the Premises there appears Lightnings, I
mean dry Lightnings, pretty frequent; Lightnings without Rain, in a serene Air;
and Lightnings without Noise, although by Congress of Planets and their
Mixtures, Lightning most commonly is accompanied with Thunder; yet there are
some Positions of Heaven that produce a quiet Lightning, present themselves
only to the Eye. I think I have met with some who assert that all Lightning
carries a Thunder with it, though by reason of Distance, sometimes not so
audible. But the contrary is evident both by Day and Night, even in Cloudy,
much more a Serene Air. I will grant the sudden Eruption of the Flame does
create some noise, but all noise is not Thunder. Every Flash may make Stridorem
at non beatum, there must be resistance, a Cold, Dense Exhalation, which must
keep the Flame in, like the sides of a Canon, till it breaks out at some
Orifice, as we may call it; it must be some reluctance in the composition of
the matter, as in the Materials of Gunpowder, some Moisture as well as
Drought, which Moisture is supplied by the other Planets,, notwithstanding
where and are in Mutual Regard, it happens that the Dry Lightnings take place
oftener than otherwise; which is no contemptible Argument of the Drought of at
least, in favor of our Principle. Such Instances we have in the few Days
underwritten. June 8. July 16. Aug. 18. 30. Ao 1621. Then April 15, 29. May 19,
20, 22, 23, 24, 25. June 1. Aug. 8. Dec. 23. 1622. Then April 3, 4, May 21.
July 8, 10, 11, 12, 16. in the Month of the Partile Aspect; Aug. 8, 9. 1623.
April 23, 24, 28. May 7, 27. June 1. July 23. 1624. Lasty, in the Chasms, Dec.
23. 27. 1622. Jan. 7, 29. 1633. those Lightnings mores especially, which are
noted to be continual, Aug. 8. 1623. Chiefly that in the beginning of January,
when the Heavens Lightened and Burned all Night without a Drop of Rain or Hail,
Jan. 2. 1623. St. N. Caelum ardens, within the Month.

32. This being so according to the Philosophy of the Ancient Astrologers and
may have Influence in the Generation of Comets, because they have a dry
Emanation. The Arabs are known to predict Comets from the of and, and they are
laughed at for their Pains: We would laugh too for company, but that in our
little Dealing we have observed that the Old Pagan Gentlemen did speak some
Truth, if the Court would be pleased to hear them. It may be they are not exact
always, because they tie themselves to the Partile Conjunction, and then look
upon it as a Consequent of that Conjunction; whereas if we enlarge the Congress
of and to a Quincunx, or somewhat better, and instead of a Consequent say a
Concomitant, we should find that the Arabians did leave some Footsteps of
Truth, which carefully followed and improved, may reduce to the Determinate
Prediction of those Meteors, as many as shall probably happen every Twenty
years Revolution; for which It is not good manners in me at least to make a
Faction in Philosophy; and so deny what I saw with my Eyes. I do not speak of
the Comet at Mosco you will believe, March 6. Ao 1682. nor that at Vienna, July
the 18. St. N. in; but That noted one in Aug. of the same year, seen from Ten
at Night, till Four the next Morning, posited between Charles's Wain, and Cor
Leonis; This Comet, which was Famous for its universal View, and for its
Critical Place, since) Comets have used heretofore to take up their Station
thereabout, as we have noted before now.) This Comet, I say, happened when and
were in, within less then X. degrees one from another; So I meddle only with
Notorious Phenomena, which have the public Stamp upon them, and have their
Diaries recorded. As those that were seen after the Conjunction in, 1664. about
Christmas, at what time and were both in. Three Comets then seen by my self,
and all the World beside, (we know this may be mentioned before, under the, yet
that must not hinder the greater Conjunction.) We have befores, you see,
already favoring the Arabian fabulous surmise, who did not mean so, as if a of
and were a private Aspect; They knew it was Impartial, of a large extent and
Dominion, Martialling Minor Aspects under it; and upon that account ought not
we Christians to deny that these Configurations often bring Comets with them.
Ye see here are two together; First, that in 1664. then that in 1682. What
should we cavil? I acknowledge it is not XX. years punctually, but they both
roame within the Verge of the. The same comes but once in XX. years may be, but
it stretches its Wings forward and backward, so that the Effect may come
sooner or later, either about the 22. or 18. years Distance.

33. Well, but it is a Chance, it is such such a Chance as has chanced before my
scantling time: For how came the Arabians to dream of it? But enough of that.
Go we backward; have we known any Comet about 1644. Verily none appears, we
must be content then. Let us retreat to the year 1625. where and are but a Sign
distant, which to me is as good as if they were about half a Sign, or XII.
degrees distant, seeing there is difference of Communication of one Planet to
another, according to the difference of their Station in the Firmament. We have
ventured to say the Influence runs beyond 30 degrees sometimes; of which we may
perhaps in due place give some account. It Is a Wonder, and no Wonder; None,
because a Comet is not accomplished without the concurrence of the Inferiors;
and yet a Wonder, because and carry such a stroke with them, that they seldom
are without such Issue; being more, as we say, than half the Fathers of it.

34. What a Drudgery it is to convince an Adversary! Come, for his sake let us
begin at the first Stage of the last Century; At the end of Ao 1503. there was
a notable of the Three Superiors; In June 1504. it came to the turn of and to
meet alone about the end of. I am not so zealous for my Crony Aspects, as to
put up 3 Comets, or 4 in the year 1504. 1505. 1506. That of 1504. though extant
in Hevelius and Lubieniec, to the best of my discretion, must be discarded,
proceeding from the Misunderstanding of Niphus his Words, quoted by Cardan,
who tells us not of any Comet appearing, Ao 1504. the very year of that Triple,
but only refers a Comet of 1506. to that mavelous precedent, though 2
years after. For Mizaldus says not, with Hevelius his leave, that Heller
observed any such Comet in that year. For if that very Authors Preface be
consulted, found in the same Volume with Mizald. his Cometography, he
manifestly distinguishes the 3 years, as I have said, and only tells us that
the Comet in August, 1506. was that Cujus Halitum prioris Anni Eclipsis (1505)
and magna Conjunctio contraxisse putantur The confessed Comet we dispatch
first, and say with those Old Good-fellows, who made up the [ Putantur] that it
is a Product of the Congress of and: Not of the Partile Conjunction working at
two years distance, but of the self-same and at the distance wherein they are
found at the time of the appearance, which the Ephemeris gives us at scarce 30
degrees, at which Distance we have seen they operate, as well as at nearer
approach. Now let me ask, this Comet of Aug. where did it appear? In the Signs;
here, above Ursa Major; After, under it, as Hevelius gives us satisfactory
Testimonies. Let me see, where was the Planets and in the year 1682. when the
Comet appeared about the same Constellation? Were they not in the same Signs?
This Comet was called Cauda Pavonis. We are not arrived as yet to so much
exactness, as to expect the same Figure at several times; the same Celestial
Station is pretty well proportioned to our Pretenses. But there was another in
April for 5 days at least, which was drawn out by Werner of Norimberg. If there
were, which I do not much question; beside and do countenance it with a Partile
Aspect; and are nearer than they were in Aug. But was there no Comet in 1505.
then? There was; and that in Sept. about New at Michaelmas: Note the Planets,
One in, two in, two in, two in. Oh! that they had been so good as to have
communicated the place to Posterity. I have said enough for the production of
it; as was within 30. grad. of, so was within 20. grad. of. So much for our
first entrance of and, in defense of the Truth of our Arabian Brethren; only
note that the first of these Comets was looked upon to be attended with Siccity.

35. Now taking a XX. years Leap to the next, which happened about the 10.
degree of, and near the beginning of Febr. Is It us see whether our Arabs are
always Liars? Nay, we have Rockenbach to assure us, yea, and Mizaldus too,
brought in by the diligence of Hevelius, who testifies that there was such a
Saturnine Comet, as he calls it; and that Famine and Pestilence did for two
years space afflict his Countrymen. But it is left at large, they do not tell
us Day nor Month. I do not know, and were in due Distance, April 1522. And if
that but answer, it is enough. But Ao 1523. we have more satisfaction, for
there, about the end of October, or Novembers Entrance, a Comet was justified
by a great Inundation, says Lycosthenes, and Praetorius. Great Inundation?
That is but a little Word: a Dire Inundation of 32. Miles, Men and Cattle
innumerable swept away, in the Kingdom of Naples, Quarto, Kal. Nov. and 10.
grad. distance; a Dire Congress, and a Dire Effect. The Partile of this
happened about 11. Febr. 1524. I would this were the only Dire Effect that
belongs to our Aspect; my Fears have not been ^ain, we shall not find it so.

36. The next Partil falls in Sept. 1544. about the end of. Now, whether 1543.
show us a Comet, or anything like it (for by our Principles we are indifferent)
will be seen from Lycosthenes, followed by Sennert and Fromond, who tell us
that IV. Nonas Maii in the Marquisate of Baden was seen, bor. 4. P. M. A Fiery
business as big as a Millstone; the Tail of which, (or some other Meteor so
called) descended, and swoop'd up a River; the likelihood of which descent,
Scnliger is called in to attest, Exerc. 79. the Reader sees we acquiesce with
Lubieniec, and while we stand not for the strict acceptance of the Word, but a
remarkable effect we think must be owned by some Cause or other, the Distance
within bounds of and, are 20. 16. And by the way, Comets and Fiery Meteors are
cognate.

37. For Ao 1535. if there were any Comet, as from Rockenbach they take it up,
and Hevelius brings somewhat of confirmation from Camerarius, I shall not stand
upon it, seeing it seems to be like the precedent with the Story of Ignis
Cadens, and no time is specified; but if there were, we have and in will stand
for Witness.

38. So move we on to 1564. and its of and in April, 28. and here we meet a
Comet on the Feast of St. James, July 25. no more is said of it.

39. Another Step brings us to, Ao 1583. in 22. the year 83. has no Comet, but
82. fails us not. They give it out to be of immense Magnitude (they mean the
Train) May 14. between North and South after set; noted by Tycho, Kepler, etc.
Its Train streamed before Auriga's Right and Left Shoulder, lasted from May 14.
to 28. This Light being given us, we see its Original by its place in, where is
with and both Retrograde near him, which we grieve not to acknowledge, have the
most visible concern in that appearance; but yet, that and have also their
share, appears; For it began precisely when the was first conjoined to, and
lasted 15 days, say some, until the came in to. Note we from Mr. Cambden's
Eliz. that this Comet was attended with a Desperate Tempest, not only of
Thunders and Stroms, but of Hail 3 Inches about, some Stones being formed Star
fashion, or like the Rowls of Spurs, a rarity from and 's Anvil.

40. So, at last we are entered into our Century, now current, in good time, for
now we are come into and, and a Comet, October. 1. Ao 1604. Yea, and that Comet
predicted by some Arab, upon the account of the Conjunction; and of this Kepler
in his Discourse of the New Star; is a competent Witness, who tells that many
Astrologers with Herlicius foretold this Phenomenon. And have they not Reason?
Has any great as yet missed for the space of a 100 years? This is the 6th., of
which not above one that has flinched, but brought forth according to
expectation. For we have precluded the Objection from a new Star before, which
if it be, the Argument is the Stronger, and the Theory more ennobled, if even
this Novelty depend on a Planetary Aspect. A New Star is more than a Comet; for
a New Star besure is Aetherial, and so the Comets are Sublunar. We know right
well, that this New Star has bin produced already under the Configuration of,
and we might vapor of such a Phenomenon, which began on a of, Sept. 2. By a
good token that a Gentleman given to Metoroscopy, looking on the two Stars in,
saw three; so near was the Effect to the Cause; but at no hand must a great
exclude a greater; and are in Partile, and were within X. degrees: so were all
three in the same Sign to evidence the Astrological Conclusion: The Triple is a
Triple Chord; it is three Witnesses. Have we not met the like before, a Comet
imputed to the Three Superiors in? How Potent is the Heavenly Militia! This
Comet was among the Fixed, as appears from the immobility, seeing it budges
not, at least from its first Distance, in respect of the Stars in Opiuchus's
Leg and Foot; from whence it appears, that if the Planets can reach to the Seat
of the Fixed upward, then they may reach to our Sublunar World; There, lying in
the Midway, may receive the Influence, as in a Racket, and send it down to the
Subter-Aetherial Globe; but This by the way. Let us enquire how long this New
Star lasted? At what time it was extinguished? A year, besure, That is agreed
on; and October. day 8. Ao 1605. saw it. The Truth is, we would have it so, yet
after that; there is little News of it: It decreased too fast; Three Planets
produce it; but Two, and help to continue it, possibly to the end of the year;
but its Quincunx is not yet spun out till then. In March after, for certain,
there was no such appearance.

41. How Signal is our Conjunction! How much concerned! At whose expiring, a
Comet expired. Hence comes that memorable Note of Kepler, as Ricciolus justly
call's it, that Every Planet in the Heavens made their Transit by this Comet
before it was extinguished; and dwelt with it in its Cradle, and for two Months
together: All help, but we see who are the Principal.

42. Yea, but do you hear, says Ricciolus, Lib. 8. 2. c. 18. how many
Objections lie against the Opinions of the Arabs? Not one, I hope, as we have
stated it. Yes, First, says he, How many Conjunctions have passed us without
any New Stars? 'Twas but one, says he, viz. that in the year 1604 answered the
Prediction, but one event fortunate, cannot make a Fixed Rule. Right, but what
means One only event? Did the Arabian Sages Found their Rule upon that of 1604.
who lived some of them above a thousand years before? No question they observed
themselves, or had observed to their hand, many such an Attendant on the of
and. Mollerus and Crabb, were not such Ofes to predict a New Star 1604. unless
backed by some Tradition or precedent Experiment. 2ly. Osiander has seen
plentifully that there is scarce a and since 150. but has brought its Meteor;
to say nothing of and, or and before produced: And therefore we give the Poet
leave, cried up by Kepler, Ricciolus and others, to call us Astrologasters; but
by his leave, we do not in this case tell a 1000 Lies to one Truth, we appeal
to Consideration.

43. Here my Zeal forced me to look back on the former Centuries, by the
excellent Table of the Great Conjunctions from the beginning in Ricciolus, Lib.
7. And there I find Ao 1464. in 11. attended with a Comet; A Comet, Ao 1463.
Another on the very year 1444. the in, the Comet in, and when? at the day of
the Solstice; so, etc. were in the Scrape; The Ao 1405. in 2. was beset with
Comets 1403. and 1407. That of 1365. in, was squired in by a Comet on March the
11. lasted above 5 Weeks. That in 1345. in, attended by a Comet in Aug. and
lasted two Months. That of 1306. may bring three for all as I know. One Ao
1304. 1305. which was Horrendae magnitudinis, says Hevelius; And another,
1307. and 1286. brought one about 1284. -- The 1266. was squired in by one of
1264. and 1246. with one 1245. And let this be enough, unless the Reader has a
Thirst to look to our Saviors time; and Lo! we were of the same mind,
comprizing all the Conjunctional and Cometical years as they are recorded.

A Table of Comets which have happened On, or within the Verge of since the
Incarnation.
Anni Christ. Anni Comet. 15 14 55 54. 75 76 214 218 333 335. 373 370. 393 392.
396 412 409 sive. 413 532 531. 571 570. 611 613.. 684 683. 730 729. 750 749
fin. 829 830. 869 868. 908 Eod. anno. 928 930 fin. 948 945. 1008 1005 Sive
1009. 1028 1027 1031 1107 1106. 1147 1145. 1146. 1167 1165. fin. C. 1168. 1226
1223. 1246 1245 fin. 1266 1264 pr. 1267. 1268 1286 1284 pr. 1304 pr. 1306 1305.
1307. 1345 1347. 1365 1362 pr. 1385 1382. 1405 1403. 1407. 1425 1426. 1444 Eod.
anno. 1464 1463. 1504 1505 1506. 1524 1521 1522 1523. 1526 1544 1541 1542. 1543
Eod. Anno. 1564 1568 1583 1582. 1585 1603 1600 Eod. anno. 1623 1625 fin. 1643
1647 1661 1663 1664. 1665 1680 1683 1682.

Which Table proves more fortunately favoring our Principles, then could be
expected: for seldom do we find the Comet or New Star appear on the precise
year, as it happened Ao 1603. but a year or two before or after; where and are
half a Sign distant; yea, and sometimes more, as we have said, and could prove
even from the Table; but even Good way is tedious, if the Miles be long. And
note, I pray, how justly we stated the Question with the dis-junctive,
Consequent or Concomitant. For the years Precedent are too often found
furnished with a Blaze of a Meteor, as well as the Consequent, that we may
safely aver there is foundation in Nature for such appearance so
circumstantiated. And don't let pass those years which repeat their Effects in
the same kind, teeming as it were, 3 years together sometimes, and lying Fallow
at other times. The Ao 1306. is owned by the years 1304. 1305. 1307. The 1524.
is alike owned by the bright Issues of 1522. 1523. 1526. Just as in our own
time, the 1663. is owned by 1661. 1664. 1665. Hence we see what the Arabians
must mean: They could not intend their prediction from the precise year, since
we find no such Instance from the time that they flourished. For after
Ptolemies Quadripartite was by the command of the Saracen King turned into
Arabic, then we hear of Messahala and Albategnius, Ao 889. and Alfraganus, Ao
950. Haly, Ao 956. Alphard, 980. Haly Aben Rodoan, 1024. Alkindus, 1100.
Alpetrag. 1149. Albumazar, 1166. whose years I have set down, that we may see
what were those very Comets observed by the Arabians, every man in his day,
upon which they founded their (I think I may call it) Excellent Rule, so that I
wondered that the Learned Ricciolus should tell us but of one Instance; who
gives us a Catalogue of all Comets, and a Chronological Table of Astrologers;
by comparison of which his own Works, he might have informed himself better.
But great Men who sail with the Stream, have no appetite to any thing that is
hight Astrology, though in it self never so Noble; though it give account of
such Arcana they confess they despair to find out.

45. His next Argument proceeds not so much against the Thesis, that the Great
Conjunctions are productive of New Stars, as against the pretended method of
Predictions, the time or place of the appearance, by the Observation of the
degree of the Zodiac and the precise Day; But the precise day is not yet agreed
on, some approaching sooner, some later, as in 1603. there was observed among
the Mathematicians near a fortnights difference. All this we know to be true,
and the vanity of the Arabs was to talk of Degrees and Minutes, forsooth, in
cases where there is no necessity, as we see it usual with them in Prognostics
of Rain, when they would be thought not to say nothing; They propose Methods
Nice and Scrupulous, which it may be they scarce believe themselves; I am sure
can never be made out. But what is this to the Thesis? The Conjunction may be a
Cause of an effect, though we know not when that Cause will be produced to act.
Not that I deny that Comets may be predicted to a Month, yea a Day; why not as
well as an Earthquake? But then it is by Christian, not Arabic Method; by
considering the Rest how they fall in with the Grandees Aspected, contributing
each One their share to the common Product.

56. The third thing. An Aspect of and cannot produce a New Star, because the
Aspect is only comparative, and in relation to us upon Earth; It is not
absolute in its self, nor in Relation to the Fixed Stars; for in such relation
and are always in, seeming in a right Line drawn through their Centres,
wheresoever they are, will terminate on some part of the Firmament; and so
there must be Comets everlasting. Answer, this Argument proves that no Aspect
in the Heavens can produce either Wind, or Clouds, or Showrs of Rain; no, nor
the very New; for the Conjunction of of and is an Aspect only in reference to
us, not in its self, nor in respect of the Fixed. Why is it not in its self? Is
there no Specialty upon a perpendicular Ray terminated on the Earth, and
thereby redoubled? Is there no difference of the Angle of Incidence, though it
make Summer and Winter? A Line drawn through two Planets, place them where you
will, terminates on the Firmament for one extreme; but shall it terminate on
the Earth for the other? But the Argument strikes at the Doctrine of Aspects in
general, which stand as sure as Philosophy and Geometry can make them. An
Aspect is somewhat in comparison to us, It Is nothing in its self says he: A
mere Fallacy. For though for Examples sake, a Solar Eclipse be nothing in its
self, since all its deficiency is quoad nos; and so the distinction may be
allowed; Yet the membra dividentia may sometimes tumble in One Belly. Some
things there are that challenge both; the New is dark quoad nos, the Full is
Lucid in se, and quoad nos also. For what does This make of Us, or the Earthly
Globe? (I speak not to the Learned Opponent, but to the Argument, which is a
Copernican Subtilty, to say the best.) Was not the Universe Celestial made for
Us? I know how indifferent the Coprnicans are; but I ask my self, was not
Heaven, and All that is therein, made for Man's benefit? The Zodiac, I hope,
was; I speak according to their own Sentiments; How came the Lumpish Earth to
describe it so exactly? Was it not for the benefit of its Inhabitants? Planets
placed where you will, have Influence, but not Influence of Aspects. The One is
General, the Other Special; by the General they illustrate and Cherish; by the
Special they moderate the Seasons of the year, and qualify the Days,
presenting Ordinary and Extraordinary Meteors according to the Law of the first
Mover.

47. The last and best Argument speaks thus, and cannot be the Progenitors of
that Star which is bigger then themselves: but the New Star 1603. was bigger
than by much; the Minor is confirmed from the great distance of the place from
whence it shone, even the Firmament far above and. But the apparent Magnitude
seeming to equal, it is known it must be in it self much bigger. I answer, the
Argument smells well of Learning and Reason, and deserves a fair assent, or a
fair Solution: and this we take to be such, while we give two Reasons: First,
that and are intended not for the sole Progenitors of the Star, but only the
more notable, or Eminent Contributors toward the same: for who can exclude the
Sun? Who or it self? In Branching Comets it is clear the Sun has to do; by the
Projection of the Tail therefrom. We have heard something of the Rest also,
having seen Comets appear at the Triple of in that great year 1524. when the in
30 hours space made her Transit through them all, the like whereof, says
Kepler, perhaps was never known; and we presume the Arabians did not deny such
explication of their mind. But 2ly. we have a greater Reserve; To the Erratick,
we add All the Fixed that are affected by such Erraticks; and how many These
are within the Zodiac, our former Discourses adventure to show; the Fixed are
quite other things, plainly Immense Globes of Light, shining with their own
Native Flame, and big enough, upon irritation of the Planets, which is always
necessary, to make Stars as great as themselves; Thousands can make a product
equal to any Singular; more must not be said in this place, but the very Roving
of the Comets show the one, and the Fixedness also infers the same. The
New-Star does not Budge from the Stars in Ophiuchus, It argues their intimate
connection. Show me a New Fixed Star in a bare place, and we shall demurr: but
that in 1572. was not; nor that in 1603.

48. There remains no more to be said on this head I take it; for to meddle
with the, which are called Maximae, and the Distinctions of the Fiery, Watery,
etc. Trigons, performed in 794 years space, with the Great Mutations of the
World, pretended to be introduced thereby. The Foil of our great Sire; The
Days of Enoch; The Flood; The Law of Moses; The Foundation of Rome; our Blessed
Savior; Charlemaign, etc. as they seem to be fine Speculations exhibited after
the Arabians had mustered some such observables in Kepler and Ricciolus; I do
with all deliberation leave them as I found them, in as much as my ambition is
rather to contribute a Mite toward the advancement of the Celestial Philosophy,
and the Student whatsoever, who shall think fit to take so useful a Theory into
his Encyclopaedy: On which account I list not to enter a dispute, or to pass my
Judgment of the Star at the Epiphany of our Lord, though Kepler fixed it upon
a of. de Nova Stella. My Employ is about matter great enough for my
undertaking, without Soaring so high as Alliaco and other Professors.

49. With what face can an Astrologer, who lately contended for Drought, now
talk of Floods, but we have said it is no contradiction, for the rule is Idem,
qud idem. -- But now the case is altered; and you will please to remember the
Oracles which spoke of Droughts, mentions Floods also. We have been dipped in
Floods before, but there is no avoiding them: They return upon us again in the
name of.

The First Flood we find is in the Kingdom of Naples, ushered in, as Junctine
will have it, by a Comet, V. Kal. Nov. 1523. the Flud it seems following the
Summer after, 1524. in which time the Summer being full of Cataracts, as Alsted
has it, a dire Inundation reached and made Havoc of Houses, Villages, Men,
Cattle, as far as the reach of 32. Italian Miles. Lycosth. and others. The
Constitution of the Summer so Violent and so portracted, shows a Commensurate
Cause, which can be no other but the Long-Spun Aspect of and, with the Hits of
the Rest. For in August they lie within 20 degrees one of the other. In June
but 15. in both distances apt enough; though a good Diary of that Drowning
Summer would be worth Money.

50. Ao 1534. Lyc. notes Floods in Poland (he notes the same thing twice, I
suppose, p. 553. 555.) In the later page he takes notice that All Europe beside
labored under Drought. Inund. Max. fuere Caeteris terris per Europam
arescentibus. Not unlikely this, for is opposed to in in such a qu, that it may
bring forth a Drought, that is out of question with us) that this Drought may
not in some places obtain, is as unquestionable with Observers: Now the others
may believe what the Learned say in this Matter, that a Drought in some places
is a Sign of a Tempest in another; more especially a rapid, not a temperate
Drought: So much may places differ. Now this, you must know is an.

But the same Author reports before, Dire Inundations, as he calls them, in
Flanders, about Antwerp, etc. Ao 1533. in fine, in princip. he is not distinct
for the time, but difference of Position changes the Influence. And the Truth
is, Drought is the natural product of this Aspect for many days. Floods from
Rain excessive, or Hail, are but the Exacerbations, as we have said, of Nature,
caused not from our Planets, but by the mixture of such Potent Influences with
others set and prepared for such Effect; whereupon give me leave to note the
One as well as the Other, as well as, as they take place; or behold the next
Opposition of our Planets newly entered. Peucer tells us that there was such a
Drought after the end of Aug. that very Ponds were dried up, and the Fruits of
the Earth mourned, p. 382. He imputes it (Good Man) to the Solar Eclipse, Aug.
31. Ao 1551. But it were worth knowledge whether the Drought was not extra suas
causas, before the Eclipse; if but a day or two before, it is enough; for
whatsoever Cardan somewhere fancies, that such Effects may anticipate their
Causes, Credulity it self cannot believe it; Though it be then the ingress of
of our Aspect this year, yet it is January following 1552. we hear of many
Floods, Lycosth. and it was day Jan. 12. says Gemma. Floods in January may
come by a Wet Weather, or by Snows dissolved. True, but excess of Wet and
Floods come not, no not in Winter without some Exterior Cause, or Conspiracy
of Causes: Conspiracies said I? I looked upon the Ephemeris, and I found the
Luck of my Expression; for here, if ever, there was a Conspiracy of All in, and
in. All the Inferiors engaged against, whose Moisture, while he resists, he
enforces or increases. Now, if these be allowed of one hand opposing, then
must be allowed on the other hand, lying at the same Posture and Distance on
his side, as do on theirs. Nay, if you here confess five of the Planets, you
must confess the Rest. For is, it is true, Superior, but is Higher. See the
Truth of our Pretensions, of themselves cause Drought, mixed and engaged over
Head and Ears, cause Floods.

51. I cannot in conscience call for those manifest Overflows which happened at
Whitsontide the precedent year, which Stanhurst says, Non sine lacrymis
vidimus, though I do believe and in immediate Signs, even beyond a Quincunx,
profess their inclinations: but the distance is too wide, nor is it our
interest to prove our Planets to have a Natural tendency to such Excesses: yet
because the Reports are so large, p. 613, 614. we refer them to the in and, and
to the Planets in, in I say, of which is the chief.

52. I need not force in any Instances, the Rhine will bear Witness, Ao 1553,
June 19. to such Excesses, endamaging all the Cities, I think, (for they say,
They were infinite) that are situate near its noble Stream. Take Notice if you
please of and 's Congress, but withal note that and are in Oppositional
Quincunx, 4. 4. Lycosth. 616. Yea, in Aug. Ao 1552. Die 13. Budissina, Peucer's
Native Country felt the smart of a Cataract; they call it a piece of a Cloud, a
Spout they would say, that drowned all for the space of 2 miles, with 30 men
lost, Peucer, p. 340. A strong of and with other Planets to back him; or,
(seeing we have heard of the Phrase before now) to make a Conspiracy. Sooner or
later does not vary the Species; a Spout there, is a Flood, which the Seamen
describe to be a Cloud with a Tail like a Serpent, drawing the Waters in a
Smoke or Mist; and wherever it falls, Woe to the Sea-farer, Hakl. Vol. 2. p.
106. One of these in Aug. XXVII. Another, October. XX. p. 110. In the First a
Partil of and; in the second; X. degrees distance.

53. Ao 1564. Sept. 20. Our Thames overflowed, and drowned much Cattle. Let any
man look into the Ephemeris, and take notice how many of the VII. are in, IV.
of VII. yea, or the 20. day, V. reckoning to its opposite Sign. A notable
Instance of what we have asserted about Equinoctial Tides, and the Raising of
Water by Rarefaction, which our late ingenuous Theorist of the Earth considered
not, when concerning the Flood he affirmed there was no Water in Nature
sufficient for it.

54. Ao 1565. in January and February, at Lovain, the River Dilia overflowed in
that Prodigious Winter which scarce ended before April. The later of these,
Febr. 11. did much harm, Gem. 2. 42, 43. and are in we have said before; but so
is and, which has Influence not only on that overlong Winter, but also in the
excess of Snow or Rain, according as they were provoked.

55. The next lands us on 1573. in and, upon which account the years concerned
are famous upon Record. Comets, Floods, Pests. Why, I tell you, the New Star in
Cassiopeia as sure as you are there, is the Offspring of and. Let me dispatch
the Floods, and I will prove it. But Oh the Floods! If it be but that at
Lovain, Jan. 8. 1573. where the Waters rose upon the Thaw above 17. Cubits
high; so described by Gemma, by ruining of Houses, Trees, Bridges, Mills,
Pillars, Floating of Beds, Trunks, and all manner of Household Goods;
Consternation and Shrieking of all Sorts and Sexes, that it brings a cold Steam
upon the Heart of the Reader, so prodigious, that an Astrologer though he be,
allowing the Snows and the Thaw, and all that, still wonders at the Cause, and
offers at some Fermentation which he imagines to arise from the mixture of
Snow-Water, etc. A Point which ought to be considered; but neither so was he
yet satisfied; He might have been satisfied had he considered the pure
fermenting Power of our Aspect, opened by the Appulse of and (for there was
neither Change nor Quarter in respect of the Sun) if he had considered the
Reach of our Aspect, which is confessed in in its Partile Estate to cause
Floods and Inundations; which it concerns us to know, for the Relator himself
was almost drowned, in common danger, though the Flood coming by day, God be
thanked, not above 8 or 9 were lost.

56. But there is more Woe yet. In the same year, and in Summer time, in the
beginning of July it self, a Deluge happened not in one City or so, but the
Country it self, Holland with Frieseland were plagued, Inaudita Clade, Gem. 2.
167. where the Learned Man tells us that the New Star in Cassiopeia was at that
time abated of its Greatness and Splendor, yea but and were under no
abatement. They were in a Partile not above a Month before: we must not dare to
mention the Pleiades engaged between them. But so it was, whether our Planets
signify any thing or no, that we in England heard of a harmful Flood at
Tocester by a Storm of Hail and Rain, June 7. which gives us a little taste what
was the Constitution of the most part of June, which raised such Floods there,
and elsewhere. Let the Reader be pleased to consider, and he will allow
something to our Alms-Basket, especially when there comes a 3d. or 4th.
Inundation in West-Frieseland as rueful and as masterless. In the mean time let
me tell him my Opinion, that these and other such like Attentendants of the New
Star are manifest Indications of its Nature Homogeneal to that of the Bearded
Comet, which will we, nil we, are too often attended only with such Retinue.

57. We hear of no Floods till about the next, which makes me remember that the
is better at such Tragical Sport, than the, and first with our selves, Ao 1594.
we meet with Rain very sore for 14 hours, April 11. which is an unlucky
Prologue to what we hear of May 2. great Water-Flouds in Sussex and Surrey;
June also being as much a Trespasser as May: Nor does it cease in July, though
it please God to send a fine August. Both one and the other were the effect of
our Aspect, even the Rain from and, as well as the fine Weather; (to see what
Providence can do) though it return to its wet again the Month following, where
we reckon a double Influx of and, yea, and of the rest too in their proportion,
a generative Faculty of Wet, when all Requisites are supposed, and a Spirit
communicated to that Wet, whereby the Moisture is Proud and Swelling, apt to
clime and outrun its bounds; As the Bubble in a smart, and warm Shower, is a
Sign of a Spirit which starts up, and carries with it a Film of Water Fatter
than ordinary; Least any should say, that seeing we like Gemma's Philosophy of
some Ferment in the Waters, we should therefore deny that our Planets were not
contributers to the Moisture as well as the Tumor, which we must assert they
do. But our Tres-Grand-Aspects are not so easily got off; for Ao 1595: the
Scene lies in Germany, the Rhine, the Maes, the Maene, the Neccar, the Danow,
all with one consent obey their Superiors, and make such Work about Colen,
Mentz, Francfort, worse than they did Ao 1573. of which before at Lovain, etc.
Many Carcases here Floating, which we heard not in the former, the Maes in one
Night swelling thirty Foot, and the Rhine thirty nine.

58. And did I not say deservedly that these are GREAT Aspects? For I hope the
Reader is almost convinced by this time. Are they not GREAT Bodies, and as
Great CAUSES that move over our Heads? The effects of them are such that we
should not believe them, though we saw them: as the Poet said of Troy,
Victamque quamvis videat haud credit sibi potuisse vinci: So Dire, so Amazing,
that our Infidel-Will begins to question the Maker of All, as if he could not
find in his Heart to be so extremely severe with his Sinful Creatures. It
preaches to me a Religious sense of him that makes the Seven Stars, and Orion;
yea, and also, and calls for the Waters of the Sea, and pours them out upon
the Face of the Earth, as the Prophet seasonably preaches, if Floods be meant.
I am concerned for my Neighbors of the Low Countries: I have offered some
Items before to take heed to the Heavens over their Head. For it is Childish to
call a Noble Science Superstition, if it leads you to the Knowledge of the
Creator; The Saints and Prophets of Old were not so peevish. We may safely go
as far as they. Suppose they knew not the Niceties of the Microscope, and
therein come short of us; They knew the Glories of the Fixed, and the
Erratique, and therein they went beyond us.

59. The next we meet in princ., Ao 1603. Here we gladly see that we find some
respite. Except we shall go far toward East Indies, as the Bay of Antongil,
where Sir J. Laurence and his Fleet Wintering, found Ao 1601. etc. much Rain,
and great Floods overflowing the Country. Purch. Tom. 1. p. 101. To the
drinking of which Waters, he imputes the Flux that troubled his men, being not
wholesome, as in most places, says he, in those hot Countries: and are entered
for Jan. and Febr. 1602. though falls back afterward. It makes no noise to meet
a high Tide, one or two, about this Winter with us. But will not a Spout be
considerable? Aug. 17. a Whirlwind taking up the Sea, Purch. 2. p. 813. A Great
Spout pouring out of the Heavens in the Island of Malaca. Or a Tide higher than
in 40 years before, Childrey in the Transactions, page 2065. These are some
Symptoms of our Dead-doing Influence, and we are glad we have no more to
produce. This was the Conjunction.

60. But the in and, Ao 1613. cannot wipe her Mouth, she is guilty on Record of
what she cannot wash away, since in Thuringia chiefly; yea, and Bohemia,
Saxony, Austria and France, the Corn was lost by Hail and Lightning, and many
Inhabitants together with their Houses were lost, Calvis. This happened on May
29. while and were 15. grad. distant.

61. This is for Europe, and Ao 1613. But the East Indies, Ao 1614. in the
Month of Aug. a greater Flood than has been seen in 29 years, which drove away
Salt Hills and Towns, says Purchase, and many 1000 of men and Cattle. The place
is called Narsa par Peta, while a Neighboring Town had about 4000 Houses
washed away, the Stone-Bridges, as finely built as Rochester-Bridge, which were
three Fathom high above Water, proved three Foot under, Tom. 1. p. 326. Has
and nothing to do in Floods, when 29 years ago, which must be 1585. there was a
Flood, and a Congress of our great Celestials: and this years August, she lay
but at XII. grad. distance.

62. I have not been so punctual in describing Earthquakes, because I love not
(whatsoever the Reader may miscollect) I delight not in the Raven-Notes that do
befall Recitements at large of those Subjects which I am engaged to treat of;
for Who desires to be reckoned a oaleful inauspicious Bird? Only here in Floods
I am the more particular, if by any means can I procure an awful Esteem, and
not a slight contempt of the Divine Hand; yea, and if I might consult the
Interest of Mankind, so far as these Papers will reach, to give them some
little Glimpse or Insight into eminent Dangers; for though every Patient cannot
be his own Physician, yet nothing hinders but that a Nurse by some Notes
attentively hearkened to, may get some Skill in Medicine.

63. I am weary of multiplying of Instances, and yet my Journeys end being in
prospect, I cannot sit down. We have not heard much of the Diaries of our
Century; Let us bring the Flood home to our Doors; Threescore years ago then,
Kepler tells us of two Inundations of Danow within one Week of 1622. with the
Bridge broke, and the same force (...) in June anni ejusd. where Kepler recurs
to his Subterranean Cause, thereby forsaking his better Principle. In June he
refers it mostly (...) the Appultes of the, Five Lunar Oppositions happening
within 24 hours. How manifestly does he own the Planets Situate in a Posture
easy to be irritated! Five of them within 20 degrees, All in, amongst them as
Supreme, and gr. 15. Lo! what a shift the poor man is put into by his
dis-favour to our Solid Principle. He found the whole year violent, and for the
Solution of that Grand Problem, he is forced to bespeak his Subterranean Cause;
without which (and that must last as long as he has need of it, viz. the whole
year) point blank he tells us the Constellations of Heaven could not effect so
much. What a great Man had he bin, too great, if he had not stumbled at this in
his way? Oh! that I understood the Constellations as well as he did, the
Motions, etc. But he proceeds, Nihil hinc situm in Natura Signi: There Is
nothing in the Sign; no, not in the Sign. Let any man Judge, who has attended
to the mention of the Sign: If it comes in our way, we will again remember the
Reader. In the mean time will not our Cause assigned which persevereth the
whole year throughout in the Sight of all Men, an swer better than a Cause in
Hugger-Mugger, of which no man shall ever hope to give an account? I hope it
will. But I must not dwell here, for --

64. The, Ao 1633. in and, scapes not. Kyriander helps us here, April 24. 1633.
Gross Gewasser, says the Dutch. But higher than that in the beginning of
October, Gewaltige Spring-fluten and Ergiessungen, in Holland and Zealand. In
the former year is grad. 6. distant. In the next grad. 24. distant, and withal
in. There we have met with Kepler already, who made us believe there was
nothing in the Sign toward a Found; when the the very next Instance tells us
that there is Gevaltige Spring fluten. We have but 3. or 4 more, and we have
done.

65. What does 1642. the in. A man would wish and far enough (and they are of
the farthest remote of all the Planets) if it be true what the Diary says, that
on November 14. ( November is a Flouding Month) Umb diese zeit in Hispanien am
Fluss Ebro ein grosser regen und ergiessung einkommen daruber an die 4000.
Soldaten elendiglich ersoffen; And about the end of November from the River
Poo, a terrible Inundation of Waters, wherein many Thousands of Men were
drowned, in Italy, Kyr. This Kyriander acknowledges to be from in, so far he is
an Astrologer. But what shall he do? The Partile comes not till February next
year, Oh! but it is an Anticipation of and, which Philosophy I have pityed
already, not derided: for he who reads these Stories can be in no laughing
Vein. My Heart aked for fear I should meet more of these uneasy Narratives,
and I Divine, I think, I should find the like in the Netherlands. Jan. 4 1642.
where the Diary tells us that such a Flouding time has not been observed, as
men judge for many 100 years before. whereby I believe they note the
monstrousness of the Phenomenon? shall I call it, rather than consult the
Universal History of the World; I have reason to believe our Reports to be as
true, and may be as great, some of them; and how great in the mean while is the
Cause, the Cause from whence they Spring? So that now our Heart is hardened, and
we can take notice of a Gross Wasser, yet again in December, 1643.

66. That in the next decade, 1653. brings no Floods with it, unless you will
reckon that in Glocestershire at Dodminton, June 20. mentioned by Dr. Childrey,
p. 66. for the Truth is, Those were dry Years; in which nothing hinders but
there may be an Anomalous Flood, or Glut of Wet in some places, and I am glad
of it.

67. For all as I see, the of 1663. is the like. I meet with Violences of Fiery
Meteors, etc. but no Floods can I set Eyes on; if there be any, it is our Gain.
If not, Admire with me the all wise disposition of the Heavenly Motions, which
are made not only to Punish at the time appointed, but sometimes to give us
respite. It Is the Divine goodness to send no Floods, where he pleases to order
a Pestilence. In wrath he remembers Mercy. Howbeit, my Diary, upon perusal,
informs me that even there, Ao 1663. May 5. There arose Floods at Northampton:
A place it seems more apt for such Waters, then others. And see Febr. 28. 1673.
we had News of great Floods at Thoren, (Thuringia) in Germany on the breaking
up the Ice. But not only so. But in Summer, beside a Spout seen to break at
Harwich, near Land-guard-Fort, Jan. 24. 1673. Floods for certain in
Oxfordshire, and Bristol, not the like for many years, with great Loss, say my
Observations. There remains but of That 1682. for whose sake we waded so far,
or else we had let down our Sluices.

68. The of 1682. The First is from Iceland, Great Floods in most parts. This
is Sept. 29. and. grad. 7. distant. in 17. to meet again with good Kepler, who
was wiser. From Waymouth such a Flood that the Waves were scarce possable, Nov.
2. is where he was. Dec. 18. at Dinnot in France. Before that, from the Hag^e,
(...) by a strong Wind broke the Banks, and laid 2400 Acres of Land under
Water, Dec. 10. and from Copenhagen, the Sea by reason of a Storm, rose so
high, that it is the Wonder of the Age, says my Intelligence, and has done
great Harm. But this year being expired, I would the Aspect would be satisfied
with this. Hearken to the French Account. From Bruxels, This is but the other
day, Jan. 27. St. Vet. Vingt cinq des principaux Villages de Flandre, aut este
sumbergez. From Amsterdam, Des dommages extraordinaires que les vents and les
de hordemen des eaux ont causez en Flandre, dans le Brabant, en Hollande and
Zealand Quelques Uns asseurent que ces dommages a nostre egard, montent a plus
de cinquante Millions. We can see only the Steeple ( le Clocher) de la Ville de
Tolen, de la ville de Bommene, etc. and c'est le plus triste spectacie qui se
soit vu de puis plusieurs siecles. Where is, but in higher than he was before,
nearer the Tropical Height, in 11. before he was in 17. In May our Domestique
Intelligence tells us the Country is so floated there is no Traveling, no
access to London; Traveling Coaches perished. At Deal the Sea overwhelmed the
Banks, Drowned much Cattle, May 16. 1682. News also from Scicily of Torrents
breaking down Trees, Villages destroyed by the Floods, May 28. Gazet, 1742.
July 7. with us at Shropshire, much Damage at a Village 7 Mile from Boudley,
the Flood run in from Jan. 30. to July 4. the like not within Memory. Flood
also 6 Mile from Coventry. In Aug. 18. there was a Water-Spout near Harwich in
the Shape of the Monument at London Bridge, mounting up in the Air, then fell
down with a most incredible force, made the Sea smoke, Thompson's Intelligence.
Yea, all the time of the Dreadful Adamant Frost, Remember, and Jan. 1683. and
84. It Is for certain by Merchants Letters, that there were great Rains and
Floods in the Guadalquivir, the River in Andalusia.

69. We shall now have done; for Ao 1684 Sept. 10. we hear of Floods in Leopol,
Russia. In Nov. 9. St. N. A Flood near the Isles of Oberon, Rhee, Broage,
beyond Memory of Man, as we have it in the extraordinary Relation from Germany.

I acknowledge that there were strong Aspects heretofore noted, mixed with our
great in some parts of this Drowning Season; but the Astrological Reader must
do right, and with me acknowledge the Line of the stretched over these 3 or 4
years. Those Countries therefore which shall think it worth the while, must
watch these great s, and their Mixtures. Nor would it be an unwise part, if
amongst other Learned Professors at the University of Leyden, or elsewhere,
there were a meet maintenance ordered for a Professor of Astronomy, mixed with
Astrology, if any should fancy such an Union of Science, to give some, it may
be, more than probable warning of such Infandous Cataclysmes, Pictures, and
Assurances of Noah's Flood, that at least the life of Thousands may be saved.
For as I remember we had an account of twenty thousand Carcases, Wreck's of
Mortality, Floating on the Remorsless Deep. Upon which account if it be
Feasible, it is worth the while; but I must leave it to discretion. These Papers
show, I hope, that our Speculation is not a Vanity, since the Floods hold on,
and keep pace from Month to Month, and from year to year, with our violent
Conjunctions. Mark that. They hold and keep pace, starting out at their
Opportunities in the Winters, yea in the Summers. I do acknowledge there may be
Floods when our Aspect is dissolved, as we have admonished sufficiently before.
But I deny that there can be shown any such Infamous Years together for
Frequency of Floods, as this and some others precedent, unless under our
prodigious Configuration.

70. Now whereas my kind Reader may, I confess, with blushing, justly censure
me tedious, I must not make an Apology, because it incresses the Tedium, I tell
them one only, I was shorter in the Comets, for if the same right had been done
to this Aspect there, we should have found as many blazing under the as we have
done under the. Comets under this, if the be consulted, will double the Number.

Terrae Motus, and Vulcano's, or Fiery Meteors.
71. We join them together because of their known Affinity, as has been said,
whether they belong to or. And let no man think we have Earthquakes to present
every New-Year, as every New year, almost, has its Distemper. Nay, God be
thanked, Earthquakes grow not so common; neither can they be expected here
under this Aspect (which returns between and in their Partile Acme) but every
10 year. They which will hear more of these Dire Agitations of the Earth, must
return to and -- and, -- which have their special Table of such great
Accidents, where and stand unconcerned oft-times, as to their or.

72. They, who will create to themselves an Awful Idea of this matter, which we
labor to beget in our Celestial Theorist, may be pleased to mind these great
Effects, and show them to the next concourse of People, like Monsters fetched
from the further parts of the Earth for our Admiration. Nothing so dire is
there, which does not by frequency become Familiar, and carelessly regarded, by
a Reader especially. Though we therefore present but one Species here, yet, if
the Grand Effects be but mixed I say, and considered together, an Earthquake
here, an Inundation there, a Pestilence yonder, a Hurricane elsewhere, and some
more frightful Appearances; all taking their Essence and Existence from the
Celestial Influence, especially our Superiors, and -- and -- and, whose very
Names we repeat with some Awe, as they bear Relation to the Glorious God, we
may possibly think with the Christian Astrologer, that they are indeed, great
Names, answerable to their Stupendous Bulk and Influence. I have heretofore
hinted thus much, and I love it: is agreed to be the high Planet of the VII.
Consider him not, I beseech you, according to his simple Character of a Sicle
[] for what is he then but a Fiction? which according to the dead Description
of an Old decrepit Greybeard, is innocent, because of his Weakness and
Distance. For I do not find but his Distance argues his Greatness, his
Exaltation rather than Remove, as Potent as if he were nearer the Heavens, the
further he lies from us. And of great Influence upon Earthquakes, even without
Aspected. -- and I cannot but observe do show How weak the Globe of the Earth
is in their Hands, at least, as to its parts, whether One or both can turn the
Earth round by its Beams, as the Copernican teacher, I cannot say, but the
parts of the Earth are in the Power of the Sun, etc. and too, to move and
shake, and shog them at their Pleasure.

73. Begin we then with a Vulcana, Ternate Island is such, Ao 1511. It Flames
often, Purch. p. 168. 182. We find, but This is but a Trine. 1516. Earthquake
is noted with a Comet, Rockenbach. Now if it happened in the first IV. Months
of the year, we have and (the excess allowed) to answer it. 1523. Earthquake in
Autumn, after a Comet again, and a washing Summer. Lycosth, in fine, princ.
1533. Nov. 26. The River Sitter damm'd up by the Fall of a Mountain into the
Stream, in Tropic Signs. 1536. Aetna flamed a whole year. Chronol. Account in
the Transactions, Vol. 4. 968. in for January and February, continued by and,
Lyc. notes it on April 1. 1538. Sept. 27, 28, 29. Terrible Tumors of the
Earth, Fires break forth near Averno in Italy. But this is a in Cardinal Signs.
1542. After, says Eichstad, T. M. at Constantinople. The was double; the First
at Februaary's beginning, the Last at the end of May. Both in. If the T. M.
happened in September; yea, if after June, as it seems not much sooner by
Eichstad's Words, Post Conjunctionem. We can produce with, or without
Allowance. 1552. Sept. 16. Basil shook a little, hora 6. P. M. Lycost. in and.
Eodem Anno, In Misnia, and other places in Germany, Idem. Before this, April
20. The Tract of German Hills called the Sudetes, Lycost. With allowance it
holds. 1553. Aug. 17. Along the River Elbe, a great T. M. falls in the Mouth of
a Partile in. 1554. March 21. Midnight, cum tremore mugitus ingens, ac velut
aheneus clangor multorum Curruum, qui concitato agmine preterirent, Gemma,
2723. Another, March 22. hor. 4. P. M. Bic valide subsiliente Solo. A Third,
stronger yet, April 30. hor. 5. P. M. At Lovain All three. All the Planets (as
Gemma observes) and I could not but observe, were in the end of, near the
Equinox, and in the. That we regard at present, is only our. -- And those who
have a kindness for the Partile rather than the Platique, will think it
credible, when they shall see the third Earthquake on April 30. to happen on
that nice Point about the end of and. 1563. Jannary 17. At Lovain, an
Earthquake, which Gemma says, he foretold, by a long streak under the on
Christmas day, and such like fancies. But I rather should fancy, besides an of.
and in Tropical Signs, a of our Superiors in and, even the same, which about a
week before, caused the Hurricane and Lightning in Leicester, as Stow and
Hollinshead tell us, overthrew Houses, etc, Nov. 29, Midnight, a Light from
Hecla; an hour after the whole Island trembled as if it should have been moved
out of its place. A horrible noise of Ordinance, incredible, etc. we thought
the whole Frame of the World would fall. The Sea went back two Leagues, and
remained Dry, Purch. III. 648. and (Hear me) are close together, in the
beginning of. We have noted elsewhere the Thunders at London of a Fortnights
continuance, before the Winter Tropic. It may well Thunder in England, if the
Earth quake in Island, as we elsewhere note. We may see how far Northward the
Planets can reach. Eodem Anno; The Vulcano in Terra Del Fuego, had like to have
burnt all the Island Land, Hakl. 448. Edit. 2. 1564. Aug. 20. About Evening in
Sophora, Aliquot oppida cum Pagis vicinis absorpta sunt, adeo ut multa vestigia
domorum extent. It lasted from Aug. 20. ad 6. Sept. Garcaeus. In the same year
in Sclavonia under the Dominion of the Venetians, the City Cataro, June 6. was
harrassed Idem. In the former, and in, did. grad. 12. In the Later, in princ.,
did. grad. 6. 1569. May 14. Midnight, Lovanii, cum rauco murmr, who adds,
that there are Specter seen wandering in the Air. This is but a in and: 1575.
Febr. 26. Earthquake at York, Bristol, and Gloucester. Books fell down in Men's
Studies; Bells tolled, and Chimneys fell, Stow. 10. 0. 1581. April 21. at
Angoango. See it before in and. Yet the two Superiors came under
consideration, if our allowance be granted. 1582. February 5. T. M. in Persia,
5., 0.. Eodem Anno, An Earthquake, overthrew the whole City of Arequipa,
Acosta, apud Purch. III. 941. See before in. 1583. July 30. At Blackmore in
Dorsetshire, 3 Acres removed, Stow. 27., 8.. 1601. Aug. 29. St. V. In Germany,
Italy, France, Asia, South and North, almost throughout the World. in, but and
are not above 8 gr. in excess, Keckerm. apud Fromond. 1612. Nov. per mensem
integrum, T. M. in Westphalia, in and, gr. 12. did. Calvisius tells us of such
a Stormy Christmas at Sea, that 60 Vessels perished in one Spanish Port, and
above a 1000 Dead Carcases found on Shore. They, who have not the Heart to ask
what is the matter: If they will believe in our Aspect, may see God is visible
in the Character of Nature. 1613. Zant, January 13. an Earthquake continued for
5 or 6 days together, Coriat apud Purch. II. page 1811. in and, gr. 11. did.
See, I pray, the Celestial Powers, there is but 8 grad. did. between the last
in November, and this in January. 1622. April 25. May 5. Terrae fremitus in
Narico, when two days before Pluit in Misnia scrupos Characteribus Plumatis,
Kepl. ad Annum 1622. 25., 16.. 1624. March 8. Lincii, Fama fuit de Terrae Motu,
in gr. 8. did. Ao Eodem, July 19. S. N. Romae, grad. 12. did. 1615. February
12. St. V. Im Stifft Bamberg ein gross erd-heben, Kyr. Imputed by Kyriander to,
etc. All helps. But the two Superiors far within 30 grad. A Comet preceded in
January, as Kepler notes, ad finem Anni. 1632. October. 7. Vesuvius near Naples
flaming, Kyr. October. 18, 19, 20. Earthquake, with glowing Winds, most part of
the Month, and Rain, and Partile, with the Pleiades. Kyriander has got it by
the end, to please himself and Us in declaring the Case; and a man may swear it
was the Cause, without danger of Perjury. It is a Noverint universi per
presents, as I use to call it, and a Flourish of an Astrological Character.
The Transactions taking notice, that Vesuvius burned for several years in
January 1633. where our expires not: see Vol. 4. 968. 1634. April 17. St. V.
There seems to be an Earthquake ( Erdboden) and the of our Superiors in Tropic
Signs, is much concerned. 1638. March 17. ad 24. Earthquake in Calabria, and
Tempest of Thunder all the while. The Like Storms in Nether Saxony, day 5. and
elsewhere, day 12. I thought fit to mark it upon the account also of the
Partile of. Again, Sept. 3. Kyr. Upon the account of the same Platick, June 2.
terrible T. M. throughout New England, Joselin. It Is a bold word to say, I
would be glad to see, Put all together, a greater Evidence for any Conclusion
in Nature. 1641. October. 16. Stormy Winds and Earthquake, Kyr. refers it to a of
with and conjoined, but our Superiors challenge their. having but 3 gr.
excess. 1642. Jan. 27. Tempestuous, and a Specimen of an Earthquake, says Kyr.
Our Superiors are got nearer, 23., 12.. Again, March 31. Earthquake in Turino,
by the Station of, says Kyr. and an Aspect of and, but he takes no notice of
and, nor dreams he of our, 7., 19.. Again, November 18. Earthquake at Francfort
on the Maene, with other mischiefs done by Floods in the same Month. It Is an
Anticipation, says Kyr. of and; yea, but he may know, they are but 9 grad.
did. 1643. January 20. ad 24. More Earthquake, and Earth-break, with mischief
up and down, in Kyr. Our Superiors are but 3 gr. did. but remember it is at
the end of. Anno Eodem. Sept. 2. ad 8. Earthquake again, Kyr. refers it to an
of -- -- --. So do we heartily; but we also point to our two Superiors, found
both planted in. 1644. In March, at Nissa de Provenca, Ein Erd-heben, Kyr., but
withal, 10., 0. within 20 degrees. 1658. Great Earthquake in New England. Note,
that if it happened in the last 6 Months, it found a of and in and. 1662. Jan.
26. and 28. T. M. in New-Enggland, 6 or 7 times in the space of 3 days, 13.,
4.. 1663. Several Earthquakes this year in New England, in. 1665. January 19.
T. M. near Oxford. Transactions, p. 166. 4., 2.. 1668. April 3. T. M.
New England, an exact Quartile of and. 1680. Aug. 3. St. N. T. M. not far from
Basil, Gazet of Rotterdam, 10., 17.. Aug. 16. Milain, T. M. with Thunder and
Lightning, wounded Six Persons, and killed an hundred. It Is and with excess of
2 degrees. 1681. Jan. 3. T. M. at Wells and other parts, with Stationary, which
is a, or what you please. Die 27. T. M. at Basil, the same with February the 8.
February 3. and 7. T. M. according to expectation. I must not say prediction.
May 22. T. M. St. Johnstons. Again. June 17. Ferraria, T. M. which swallowed up
Trees, 29., 23.. But note, that and in and posited, stands not upon Niceties,;
they can speak to one another, as if within Terms. Note again, that
notwithstanding this and more Evidence that may be brought from the former
Centuries, yet the Earthquake which was predicted, and happened according to
expectation, was not produced on the account of the Two Superiors, but upon
the Order and Position of the whole Septenary, which belongs to
after-Speculation.
74. Now let not the World admire and say, that I tell them a great deal of
News; I arrogate it not to my self; for so old is this Doctrine, that the Books
are not extant which first taught it the World, as I after espied. And yet All
this close observation of Earthquakes in the Tables precedent, especially this
Later, may pass with favor, for a piece of a Commentary on that great
Naturalist, whose Enquiry into Earthquakes cost him his Life. The Tenants of
the Babylonians, says he, do hold that Earthquakes are caused by the Influence
of the Planets, sed illorum Trium, but especially of those Three who are the
Procurers of Thunder. Lo you, they are our Three Superiors, Saturn, Jove, and
Mars, Lib. 2. cap. 79. What News is it then to tell of Saturn and Jove, -- Jove
and Mars, -- Saturn and Mars? The Planets which the old Babylonians did mean,
or they meant nothing. For let any be pleased to survey our Tables of
Earthquakes under Saturn and Mars, -- Jove and Mars, laying Pliny before him,
he shall forthwith be convinced; and how would he be overwhelmed with Evidence,
if we were Masters of so much Chronology and Calculation Astronomical, as to
name the first Earthquake from the Flood, and assign the Aspect; a Task which I
have rendered the more easy, if it were to be expected, by enlarging, or rather
vindicating the Dominion of the Aspect, of its own Nature so enlarged.

75. These Earthquakes, says the Naturalist, are made by the presence of the
Planets aforesaid with the Sun, or their Conjunction, or if you will,
Congruency, because I suppose the Old Babylonians included the Opposition, to
which our Tables bear plentiful Testimony. Now This chiefly, says he, happens
Circa quadrata Mundi. A great Note, and means nothing else but the Cardinal
Signs near the Tropic and the Equinox. Who would not be proud to redeem such a
glorious Truth from the Rubbish under which it has bin buried so many thousand
years in the neglected Fields of Antiquity? Hippocrates has long ago given us
the same Note about Sickness and Maladies, which the happy Roman Pen has
preserved to us about Earthquakes, and yet We love to be in the dark. Gemma
says the same of some Comets circa Tropos and Equinoctia I. 112. and yet
Astrologers forsooth speak not a Word of Sense. But to proceed, what he tells
us from Aristotle, Earthquakes appear only in Calms, we don't find to be true
in our Northern Regions, Germany, and the like. Nearer the Mediterranean, it
may be true, with Regard to the Wind, though not with Regard to Lightning; it
being agreed on as Pliny states the Question, neque aliud in terreno Tremor
quam in Nube Tonitruum. Earthquakes and Thunders are near a Kin. For whereas
they take it for certain, that Winds are the Cause of Earthquakes, they must
mean Spirits; there is no other way to reconcile the Ancients to Truth. But
Pliny tells us further, that Earthquakes may be predicted. So they were, by
Anaximander and Pherecydes. He means Predictions Philosophical, Conjectures
taken from some certain Signs, and that, it may be, is easy in places that are
Obnoxious thereto. But I don't hear any of his early Chaldeans have foretold it
by Astrological Predictions, by Arguments taken from the Cause, though upon the
Truth of their Principle, they might. He tells us in the next Chapter 80. of
the Dire Effects, Throwing down, Swallowing up, Raising Hills, Letting out
Streams, Springing of Hot Baths, Retreats of the Ocean; Of which our Tables are
not silent, and might have made more Noise; but Then to let pass the admirable
account he gives of the several Noises that are heard, according to the variety
of the Event, he tells us that they are felt oftener in the Night time, then in
the Day; yet sometimes at Noon. He mentions also Morning and Evenings for
Critical Hours, all which strongly declare a Celestial cause. The Sun I mean,
and He, you must know, is never without his Retinue. Consequently, he tells us
that Earthquakes happen many times at Eclipses. And have not we proved that the
Moon, New and Full, has Influence on Thunders Ethereal, Subterranean, etc. at
which Congress, if Eclipses and Earthquakes be more noted, by so notable
consent of Heaven and Earth, whence the Creator is more Illustrated, I reckon
that That Providence has its End.

76. In the next Chapter 81, he tells us, that at Sea also they are sensible of
Earthquakes, that they feel the Stroke. And where is it, that in the Collection
of this Table, I meet with a Passage where a Ship in an Earthquake felt such an
impulse, that they thought she had struck on ground; but when they heaved the
Lead to explore the truth of their Suspicion, the Author says, they found no
Bottom, Purch. p. I. p. 105. -- How wide, yea, how deep is the Train laid in
recesses of the Earth, which shall move a heavy dense Abyss, so quick, that it
shall aemulate the hardness of a Rock? What an Eruption would there have been,
if it had been in Sicco, on a dry Surface? How strange, yea, how
incomprehensible are the penetrations of the Celestial Influences! He tells us
further of a certain Sign in the Air, when a thin Cloud in a Serene Sky shall
be stretched to a vast space, the very Token by which Gemma predicted an
Earthquake, as Fromondus also notes; Where, though Fromond, perhaps justly,
makes slight of this Token, yet, this I can say upon Recollection of my self,
that I, who perhaps have observed that Token as often as Fromond, do remember
that there was more than ordinary to do among the Planets at such appearances,
and so they may be reckoned Signs remote and in-adaequate, as the Eclipses are
confessed to be.

77. In the 82. Chapter, letting pass several Considerations, for we write not
a Treatise of this Subject; He tells us an Earthquake may last Forty days, nay
some a year, yea two year throughout. The three Planets that the Chaldeans
spoke of, may be twined together so long, and may, appears by their slow
dis-ingagements, and many times by their fresh returns before they are
absolutely Dis-engaged.

78. In the 83. Chapter, He tells us of Smoke and Fire starting out between two
Mountains in Mutina, when Martius and Julius were Consuls; manifesting the
Kindred between the Flaming, and the Quaking Mountain. See Cap. 88.

79. To proceed, in the next Chapter 84. He informs us of Inundations and
Earthquakes that they go together, even as it may be noted in Aristotle
himself, which is no untruth, and may be proved from the Premises, whether the
Inundation be as I may term it, wet or dry, caused by Rain and Wind, or by
Spirit and Inflation only, As we have considered before, when we treated of the
Rarefaction of the Watery Element, which in Floods joined with Earthquakes is
most certain: and in Floods in distant Countries must be presumed in some
Proportion, if not from the Heat below, at least by the Heats from above,
whence the Sea is allowed to tumefie against every Storm, by the Influence of
the, or other Planet.

80. Now, if we may observe here, what also we have before asserted, that
Comets go along with those Earthquakes and Inundations, as being united in a
common Efficient, where matter is disposed, though Pliny has no such Hint, we
shall conclude: Only I am sensible that here it will be said, That this is old
Stuff; Earthquakes, Inundations, Comets, and Pestilences, I warrant, to make
them All hang on a Thread, agrees not with the New Philosophy. I may answer, if
it agrees with Proof and Reason, we are well enough. I think I can prove that
they hang all in one Thread, Three of them; and for Earthquakes connection with
Pestilences, Fromond himself admits it beyond all doubt or Suspicion. Not that
I believe you know that Earthquakes are the Causes of Pests, but that the Three
Superiors, as the Chaldeans have said of Earthquakes, are the Causes, under
God, of Epidemical Distempers, Agues, Fevers. Nor will it conclude against
this Doctrine, that sometimes our Earthquakes appear without an Inundation; a
Comet, without an Earthquake; or Plague, without a Comet, therefore their
meeting is Casual; For many things in Nature are not reciprocal, which yet have
Connection one with the other, though the Connection always appears not. To
Instance in nothing but what belongs to our present Discourse, Flaming
Eruptions are of kin to Earthquakes, yet not always does an Earthquake follow.
Why not? Why, it is obvious to say, and the Answer is good here, All things are
not ready, the matter is not prepared, etc. much less Vice versa, does it
always Flame when the Earth Trembles; The Reason is, because it cannot break
forth, according as before we have Instanced in Lightning, and its Consequent,
Thunder; Thunder, and its Consequent, Rain. Lightning and Thunders and Rain
hang all on a Third, yet it does not always Rain when it Thunders, nor, I am
sure, always Thunder when it Rains.

81. Now as we have attempted before to show or affected with to have no benign
Influence, upon Health now it may be expected, we should say the same of and;
and verily we must speak as we find, nor is it dissonant from reason, for the
Superiors Influence met together, is too unkind and disagreeable, too much
disproportioned to our Nature, our Bodies being nothing in their Hands, like a
Venice Glass by a rude touch quickly complains. As the Man, so is his Strength;
and the Deduction is Strong. For if or united with, the less erratic, can
disturb our Frame and Temper; how much more can and, unquestionably the two
vaster Bodies, put us out of order? All Disease is nothing but Disturbance and
Distemperature of our Tenor of Life, our Blood, Spirit and Humor; and I hope
we need not beg any Man's Belief of the less Conclusion, when we have
demonstrated the greater. Those Planets which we have demonstrated to be
Inceendiaries, Perturbers of Heaven and Earth, may, for that while at least, be
suspected and presented, for the disturbance of Man an infirm part of the
Universe.

82. The best Physicians consent, even those who otherwise are not so
Astrologically given, which is a probable Argument of the Truth, whenever a
Professor is fain to run abroad out of his own Jurisdiction, to give account of
what is done at home: Their Eye chiefly, I confess, is upon and, with reason
enough, if the Premises be true: But they do not mean that Configuration in any
exclusive Sense. Hippocrates meant All by his (...), All that concur to the
Character of the Season. Now our Two Superiors are more to be suspected in
impoisoning the Fountains, and corrupting our Mass of Blood, because of their
Pertinacy and Perseverance, as he that on the Stage has the longest part', is
most concerned in the Plot; the Terms of Duration in and are more protracted
than any other. and, by the Repetition of the Aspect, may sometimes disturb the
Ambient above a year: and by playing fast and loose, seldom disturbs us less
than Four or Five; in which space of time, they create such immethodical
variety, and inequality in the Air, so alien from the kindly natural State and
Season, that our Bodies yield like Flesh fresh and sweet, in a hot Air, and are
sensibly exposed to Putrefaction, and That which follows Stench, which is a
Token of the Dissolution, and as it were the Deordination of the Compound: And
to make some improvement of This, I reckon that even the Malignity of a
Distemper is nothing but the Enmity that takes place in the Compound, when the
curious parts component are at discord, the Mal-Effects of Discord being
Infinite. I confirm my self by this Conjecture, that there is such a Proportion
between the Live-Flesh, and the Carcass, that as the Faetor or Stench of the
one is infectious, and thereupon abominable: Even so is the Effluvium or odor
of the Infected Person as malignant and pernicious, though not so obvious to
Sense, because the Spirit of Life-Bloud is more Subtle and Minute, than the
crasser Spirit of Carcase-Gore. Be it how it will, Astrologers venture
sometimes to predict Epidemical Distempers; they venture their Credit too, when
they hazen a Good City every foot with some such Nuisance; but when they
pronounce on the accont of our Aspect, they have sometimes come off with
Credit. Comets have been several times predicted, and it is owned, by Herlicius
Appian, and others. In like manner I remember the Pestilence of 1665. was given
notice of by Mr. Edlin in his Astrological. Treatise of our preceding. It may
be disputed, I confess, whether we had not better be ignorant of such a future
Evil Day among other Reasons, for that, he that proclaims such unwelcom News,
will thereby make himself hateful to his Country, as hard-hearted, pityless, if
not dealing with Evil Angels, seeing in the Jews Theology They are concerned
here, unless perhaps he heartily loves the Public, and is so obliging, that he
counterpoises that Suspicion by his known Innocence and Merit. Alas! Is not
the Misery, I fear, not so much the Astrologers Skill, as an unwillingness to
prepare against an Evil Day, which the best of us, it is true, desire to put
off. I fear it, I was going to say I know it; for it is a clear case, if upon a
surprise, we may sometimes, though too late, wish we had foreknown the event:
it is Consequent then, that it is a desirable Science, that inables us to
foreknow. For, put case the Prediction fails, instead of ridiculing the
Observation, it might be much better to thank God for his long-sufferance,
since what usually has been, might have been once more, nor was it improbable,
howsoever.

83. Here the Astrologers put in their note of Attention to observe which of
the Two Planets have Dominion or Elevation one above another; for if have
Dominion, say they, then Nothing but Mischief, if, the contrary, or something
better. And when Haly, or who is it? defines one way of Dominion over the other
to be, when a Planet shall be on this side the Medium Caeli, or nearer to the
West, (and so Cardan in Ptol. Lab. III. Cap. 14.) while the other is under the
Earth. I must own thus far, that there is some difference between a Planets
Application to, or the Separation from another, as to the State of the Air;
Every Agent being more fortified in the Augmentation of its Force then in its
Diminution, though alike gradual. But for Sickly Times I don't find, that as
many Distempers, or to speak plain, Pestilences, succeed the Aspect as go
before it. How it is in the Arabian, or other Climes, I know not; but
consulting Escuids Table, which is the Compend of Albumazar, I find Erit Mors
inter homines, when our Aspect haps in under 's Dominion; and the same Mors
multorum Hominum with greater Men, when has the Dominion. Cardan bids us
enquire into Eclipses, two years before, or a little more. Nay he will give us
an Example of a great Pestilence at Milain, Ao 1524. which followed the Eclipse
in Aug. Ao 1523. I turn to the year 1524. and there I find another cruel Cause
of a terrible Pestilence, what do you think? Our very of and. He tells us of
with, unfortunate in the of the, etc. and respecting and from. I tell him
Frustra fit per plura, even if what be said were all unquestionable.

84. For our Evidence we will not vapor and run back to the Incarnation, as we
seemed to do in the Comet, which method indeed was only a Mercurial Finger, if
any shall delight to Travel on the like Design. We will come nearer Home, and
content our selves with the beginning of the former Century, where the first
which appears complete, is found in 20. June, Ao 1504. what Sickness does
attend, Gemma answers, for Brussels, Pestis Virulenta, Ao 1502. Again, Ao 1505.
in Flanders, Gem. 2. 249. and our Sweating Sickness the second time in London,
Ao 1506. says Stow. Note that in June 1502. and are both in, in 1505. both in,
in 1506. within Terms. This for the first.

1. The Second Congress of our Superiors after 20 years past in the year 1524.
10. for the year 1524. we may remember, Honest Cardan has furnished us with one
example from Milain; and before that, Ao 1522. Kircher informs us of a cruel
Pestilence at Rome, our Planets being within Terms in April at least, and
October, which instance being far from Solitary, gives us just Cause to suspect
that the Vicinity of and, even beyond the Tedder of 30 gr. is of dangerous
signification, which is confirmed presently from the Winter Mortality noted in
London, Ao 1525. where our Planets are 10 degrees distance, but secretly linked
together by their mutual Approaches to the Equinox, even on 's part, not here
to be treated of.

2. The third meeting of and in September, Ao 1544. about 27. Here is
Pestilence at London again in the Month of July, as Stow informs, our Planets
within 20. degr. distance.

3. The next meeting is found in the end of, Aug. 1563. In the year 1562. a
Strange Murrain of Cattle, says Gemma; This was in the beginning of the year,
and our Planets were out of Bounds; only in Oct. I find a note of Variolae and
Morbilli, Smallpox, etc. with another Murrain, it should seem. But in Ao 1563.
a great Plague in Germany, says Untzer, our City of London not escaping that
time. Add Ao 1564. Pestilence at Brussels, says Gemma, at the end of the year,
Yea, Ao 1566. the Strange Plague in Hungary within the Terms of our Planets, or
not above 4 degrees excess.

4. The Fifth happens about 20. April, 1583. and we meet with a new Disease at
Lunenburg (July 1581.) as Dimerbrock informs us. Now though the time of the
year does but border upon our Aspect, and and answer for the Distemper, yet we
have said that even bordering years are dangerous upon the account, that though
our Planets be without their Bounds or Limits, yet they may be fetched to life
again (as it were) by a Third Planet stepping in between the Extremes, and a
good shift too, as we see practiced before, 14. of this Chapter; for verily
both and from the opposite Quarters do so face and, that they unite them for
the present, and force their Contribution to the mischief. This I do not
mention for lack of Instances for we find a furious Pestilence in 1584. but
because I see it is of great concern in my Judgment to solve the appearances
often occurring.

5. The 6th. happens about Christmas, Ao 1603. in 10. And here we meet with a
Pestilence in London, as it pleased God so to order it in the first year of K.
James, the first of that Name; any one may see it was our two Planets and, in
the hand of the great God (unless all we have said hitherto is Vanity) by the
New Star, and the Frost that followed the year ensuing, proper Attendants on
our Aspect, which, I hope, we have made out; and can further evince it by
running back into past Centuries; yea, or Chiliads of time. Note here again, Ao
1604. while London was clear, (says Stow) other Cities, Villages and Towns
Corporate were extremely visited.

6. Go we now to the year 1623. and observe the Congress in the beginning of,
in the Month of July. Threescore years ago is within Memory, when our City
smarted under the farewell of our Planets in. We know to what great purpose we
have before observed, the Equinoctial of and in the hottest time of this
Visitation; but we are not bound therefore to put out our Eyes, or say we do
not see, that this grand Fatal, or Positure of the two Supreams by commission
from Heaven, does conspire with the like fatal Positure of the Third Superior.
We will not anotomize the year, but we may discover the Footsteps of our Aspect
by the Droughty Summer noted in New England, Ao 1623. Purch. IV. 1866. by the
Fire-ball that was seen all Germany over. By other Meteors, mentioned also by
Kepler, Ao 1624. not to forget the Maculae Solares which Hevelius has left upon
Record were more frequent in that year, than ever any he met with.

7. All this while we forget the of and, at Midsummer, 1513. in the beginning
of and, at what time England labored with its Metropolis, says Mr. Stow. We
take no notice of those Distempers mentioned by Fracastorius, Ao 1511. or that
strange Murrain mentioned by Fernelius, Quae Solas Feles corripuit.

8. In the next, we find Pestilence in France, Ao 1534. mentioned by Valeriola
apud Dimerbrock.

9. The next we hear not of. But that of 1573. before Midsummer, in and; Gemma
will tell us, for his Country, lasted two year, Ao 73. and 74. the cure of
which he discourses. And may we not say the New Star in Cassiopeia is a
Concomitant of this? Yes, even as the New one in Serpentarius was of the.

10. We shall name but one more in the 36th. year of Q. Elizabeth, Ao 1593.
which is acknowledged for a Pestilential year in this City.

85. Well, it seems our Aspect may be Pestiferous with the help of his
Neighbors; It may be enquired whether without his Fellow-Martial-Aspects, I
fear we shall find it absolutely so; Let the Reader Judge. Some Pestilential or
Sickly Years seem for a while to appear when is conjoined with neither. As
perhaps, Ao 1502. when a Pestilence raged at Bruxels, and 500 perished in a
Day: the of and fell off betimes, viz. in the Month of May, before probably the
Pestilence began: But behold we see a of and then enters; so there is a and
preceding, and following, Ao 1505. and preceding; and come not in till the end
of August. Ao 1543. an prevails, and falls off in May, but and hold their own.
To speak therefore as I find, seeing it is rare to find a or of, without such an
Aspect of and, We may not possibly pronounce upon the whole year, without
reckoning in the Martial Aspects, which if they precede, may dispose or
cooperate to the common Nuisance; The of and in a Spring, yea, or Winter Month
( February suppose) may alter the matter, and corrupt it, followed by an Aspect
of and. How much more when they are Plaited and Breaded together in the same
Twine, and at the same Hour, as it oft-times happens.

86. It Is easy to note, that we may proceed in the same Method in the; it is
enough we have pointed at it; but for Brevities sake we abstain, as we do much
against our Will; Concerning Agues, Fluxes, Smallpox, Scurveys, which are
taken at Home and Abroad, by Sea or by Land, when the greater Plagnes don't
appear. It Is long ago, I remember it still, when in a Droughty January and
February, the Small Pox was rife in the County of Oxford; it came into my
fancy the and complete in February, might be the under-Cause, reasonably
imputing the unseasonablenss of the Weather to have Influence upon the Malady,
and casting about me, I suspected the Planetary to be the Cause of the Dry
Constitution; then which nothing is more certain, whether we repect Drought, or
Malady.

87. If then, what between the and, we should find every XXth. Year more or
less, should prove with us in England, (if not Pestilential) yet a Sickly Year,
and vice versa: Then I say, we should believe in Astrology. Nay, God forbid we
should have such Cogent Commanding Evidence: for then it were as certain as a
Mathematical Principle. But what if our Evidence Flutter near such a place,
shall we not think it has a Nest thereabout? Try we our Homespun Annals from
the beginning of the Last Century, and let us visit the and, that we may see
how they stand affected to us English. They are unkind at the best, but let us
believe in our Principle no further then we find.

The
88. First then, Ao 1504. 20. in June, our Planets meet in 2. the year 1503.
was a Dry Summer, says Stow. No Rain notable from Whitsontide to our Lady Day
in September. And Ao 1506. before Planets are gotten clear off, the Sweating
Sickness assaulted us a second time. 1523. Next, Ao 1524. in 10. in February.
Now Ao 1521. was a great Mortality in London, and other places of the Realm,
beside a Dearth. This is on one side of the, and again on the other side, Ao
1525. Those two Years were very Sickly, so that Michaelmas Term was adjourned,
and the Christmas kept in the Country. 1544. Third, Ao 1544. in Sept. 28. A
great Pestilence at London, whereby Michaelmas Term was adjourned to St. Albans
this very year. 1563. Fourth, Ao 1563. in 28. Plague and Pestilence, first at
New Haven, and then after in London, of which Dyed 23372. whereof of the Plague
17404. this very year, Stow. 1583. Fifth, Ao 1583. April, in 21. The year 1582.
brought forth a Comet, May 15. The Year 1583. Earthquake in Dorsetshire; and if
none with us, it brought a Plague elsewhere, and that a furious one.
The.
1513. So Ao 1513. the in June, in and 7. A Great Mortality of Pestilence is
noted in England, and about London especially, the very same year wherein the
happened. It may be to some purpose to note the Drought.
in Febr. 21.
Ao 1534. No News with us of Sickness; howbeit, for the Aspects sake, we must
note that other places saw Comets, and Earthquake. Ao 1554. in July, 29. Now Ao
1551. (a matter of a year before, as we observed the same distance in the
Conjunction, Ao 1523.) Sweating Sickness in the North parts of England, and
London. On the 12th. of July it was vehement, it killed in 24 Hours, or less.
Note, that the Comet in 1556. appeared within the Verge of this. Ao 1573. in
June, 22. Earthquakes. Ao 1571. and 1575. a New Star. Ao 1572. with a Great
Winter, and Dearth, Heavens burning twice. As it brought forth all these, so no
Plague did we hear of. Ao 1593. in May, 22. Plague in London, of which several
Aldermen are noted to have dyed. Of all Diseases, 17193. of the Plague, 10695.
1603. Sixth, Ao 1603. December. in 9. Another New Star; Pestilence in London,
whereof in One Week, in July, Dyed 857. of all Diseases, 1103. This was but one
Week. Nor was 1604. quite free; for in that year Dyed of the Plague 896. Plague
also noted in Ostend, etc. 1603. 1623. Seventh, in 6. Ao 1623. The great
Plague Year within remembrance, whereof Dyed about 3000 in one Week in August,
viz. from the 11th. to the 18th. Preceded, Ao 1621. and 1622. with a great
Frost. 1643. Eight, Ao 1643. February, 25. Now in 1642. Dyed of the Plague
1824. And in 1643. 996. 1663. Ninth, Ao 1663. October, in 13. This Year, and
the following were, as to London Healthy; but abroad not. Several Comets
appeared in, and before 1665. at the mention of which we tremble. And though it
may be pleaded our Aspect was dissolved, yet it was no wide Dissolution, at the
Height not above 9 degrees expired: so true is my suspicion of an Enlargement
of their Boundary. Note, Small Pox, Jan. 1664. and Meazles. rife in March
following. 1682. Tenth, Ao 1682. in October, in 19.. The year 1681. was none of
the Healthfullest. I will not dispute, there was some Pestilence; but without
dispute the Sums of 400. 500. yea, 600. per Week, are not desirable Sums.
Surely from May to September there past not a Week under 400. Ao 1613. 12.
Sept. and Ao 1612. 28. August; the years were clear of the Plague, as by Bell's
Account appears. Inundations we meet with 1612. in the Later Part of the
Year, but the Summer Dry, and little Hay. Inundations again, 1613. 1633. The in
and 7. Ao 1633. Maio mense, all clear till 1636. and that comes not within our
Verge. It belongs (to admiration) to; their Motion, and height of the Sickness
considered. 1653. July, 14. Droughty Febr. I remember, and a Sickly Season in
the Country, as is elsewhere noted. The year was introduced by a Comet at the
end of 1652. Ao 1673. in and 15. Aug. This year goes for a Healthy year, but in
all its Parts I find it otherwise, for the Spring complained; Jan. 27. 354.
Febr. 3. 418. 10. 430. 17. 537. 24. 510. March 10. 688. 17. 695. 24. 568. Mar.
3. 547. The Sums are high in February and March; our Two Planets were opposed
near the Equator. So those Months were sickly, though the year was well, God be
thanked.
This for us. But in America, the French Gazet tells us the Small Pox raged
among the Indians, as the Plague does among the Europeans. In Spain also a
Plague, which ceased the year following.

Ao 1682. In June, we hear of great Mortality of Cattle in the North parts of
Scotland.

In Aug. Plague in Algiers Rages, says the News from Paris.

In October. Flux rages in the Garrison of Oran for some time past. At Bermudas a
Destructive Fever, mortal to many in two or three days.

Ao 1683. January, Plague broke out Jan. 3. St. N. in Caschaw in Upper Hungary,
so that Teckley was forced to remove in March. From Vienna we hear of a
Contagion among the Turks, Thousands being found dead betweed Belgrade and
Buda. In May 13. From the French Kings Army, a Cough and Gravedo Pectoris,
which, in a few days marched off 4000 of the Army. Relat. extraord.

From Lintz, in July, a Dissentery was so rife, that the Emperors Army was
forced to move to Vienna, Relat. Extraord.

In September, the same in Holsatia, Lunenberg, etc. Fever in Spain, scarce a
House free.

But one fails, and not many Oppositions.

89. Thus it is, and the more we enquire, the worse we shall find it: for where
ever any fails, it is to be feared that other places have not bin so happy, at
what time the City has been so secure: whether we take the Word in a good or
bad Sense, I mean them no harm. If I have mentioned sometimes, Comets,
Droughts, Floods, we intimate thereby that such are the Attendants; of
Distempered years, and therefore imports so much: Comets, I say, among the
rest, imply an unhealthy Constitution, of Distempers extant, and co-existent
with it. I could confirm the Premises by a further review of Chronicle, even
from the Conqueror; yea, from the Incarnation; if the Table of the mean
Conjunctions will be serviceable to us, as they must be, because the Equation
of and at most is not above gr. 10. if I remember right.

90. It may be asked me what I will say to those who give out that Pestilences
come in with our Kings Reigns: A New King brings a Pestilence. I answer;
suppose it were so, what Inference will they make? What absurd intolerable
Inference will a Phanatique (for it is their Observation, they say) draw from
thence? What Black Mouth can say, that K. James the Peaceful; or, K. Charles
the Martyr were Plagues, (for that is the English of it) to the Nation? The
Martyr shows that the Nation, the Predominant part, were rather a Plague to
him: The Guilt of which is not yet expiated; and God knows when it will. But
that grand delusive Principle whereby they persuade themselves (God help them)
to be the only peculiar of God, makes them bespatter any one who is not of
their Lay-Communion, though Better and Superior. An Unchristian Division; yet
they call themselves the Church, the Salt of the Nation, and yet infatuate. If
a Monarch perhaps through his more generous Education, sees himself Bound not
to Truckle under them, or connive at their Self undoing, They are what not? But
they see no Sin in themselves. If they did, with how much greater Probability
might they say, that God sends a Visitation at the entrance of a New Prince, to
reckon with us for our Misdemeanors under the Old! He seems to choose us that
Critical Time to show we have been in arrear. But so they fill up the measure
of their Fathers, with their Proverbs, like them; That Princes eat sour Grapes,
and the Peoples Teeth are set an Edge. It Is a Fallacy of that Accident which
Providence suffers many times, to prove us, whether we will make rash, heady,
unworthy, self-Justifying Conclusions, so proclaim our selves to the World for
a perverse Generation. Because God said once, I gave a King in my Wrath,
therefore says the Dissenter, All Kings are from the Wrath of God. That Is an
Inference from the same delusive Spirit, which wheedles many a Poor Soul to
their Ruin. But let them look back and compare, the First Eleven Kings came in
with Health, even William the Conqueror, and King John brought no such
Memorandum; No, nor King Richard the 3d. nor King Henry the VIII. nor his
Daughters, Queen Mary, no more then Queen Elizabeth. But VI. of XXVI. Kings can
be thus slandred. Now we under God, in Philosophical Speculation impute it to
such and such Aspects; We have seen That of 1603. of King James; and 1623.
under King Charles I. his entrance, hung upon the Revolution of our Aspect: So
did that at the entrance of K. H. VII. 1485. It falls manifestly within the
Verge of and. I grant that God's Wisdom and Power is seen in Circumstances and
Coincidences of Events; but we must take heed of Fallacious Arguing, least by
the Rule we say the same of the Plagues coming in at the First Parliament,
seeing the Monarch usually calls one at his Entrance.

91. But the Truth I have told them already, Heaven ows us a Payment for all
the Week, and then as some Parents do, they chastise their Children at the
beginning of a Kings Reign. It Is we are set down in the Black-Book,
incorrigible I fear, and therefore we smart.

92. But another sore Objection assaults us, as if We made Pestilences too
frequent, every X. or XX. Year. I answer, Mercy steps in, and denies the
Consequence. Truth says there is Danger, and Conscience says We deserve it; but
we see, with thanks to Heaven, it is not always so. Sometimes it is not once in
XX Years, though it cannot be denied but that about once in that Term there is
some reason to fear: for so the Table begins in the Column, Ao 1504. 1524.
1544. We do not love to hear of Death: that is true. Yet no man will give above
VII. years for a Life; that is less than X. nor can you make a Deed to any
purpose, without mention of Mortality. So let the Objection cease, and instead
of reviling with sad Truths, let us remember our Enemy, and prepare to meet
him. Memento homo quod pulvis es, must not be abolished.

93. The Truth of this Hypothesis appears from the continuance of 112.
Pestilences, and from their Prodromi, Fevers, Fluxes, etc. It Is a ruled case
amongst us, That the Small Pox growing more Rife than ordinary, bodes some
worse Distempers ensuing. If in the Spring, then the Summer is feared; If in
the Summer, then the following year is suspected. And this is fairly accounted
for with us, who put up the Aspect for two year, nay for more; A Pestilence may
last, I do not say, Rage, Four Years, on the Account of and. It did so. The
City of London was not absolutely free for 8 years together. There Dyed above a
1000 per Annum each of those 8 years. In 1643. indeed it reaches but 996. IV.
of them, viz. 1641. 1642. 1643. 1644. are imputable to our Aspect; Only the
later part of 1644 takes in the next Malignant Congress of and.

CHAP. IV.
Of Saturn and Jove, Appendix to the Precedent Chapter.
1. We must do right to our Aspect before we part; the want of Princed Diaries
amongst us for 40. or 50 Years at least, is a great Desideratum. 2. A Summary
of all the Years of this, and the last Century, that are concerned either in
whole or in part, in the two Chief Aspects of and. 3. The Difference of the
troubled State of the Air, found in any of the Years aforesaid (whatsoever
Minor Aspect shows it self) must be ascribed to this Transcendent Aspect. 4.
Manuduction to the use of all our Diaries premised, to illustrate the Influence
of our so great Aspect. 5. Our Planets Calm and Silent when they lie in close
Quarters. Hence Stoeflers ignorant and unhappy Essay at the Prediction of a
Deluge, when all the Planets met in the Watery Sign, An. 1524. whereas Planets
[distributed to their several Posts] can Drown, or Burn the Inhabitants of the
Earth. A Notable Story from Purchase of Fire and Deluge in the Years 1542. and
82. Good meaning Men may be fully mistaken in the censure of Superstition. and
the Longest, and Lustiest Fingers in Nature. 6. Presentment of our Aspects most
notable Influences in a continued Series, (of some time at least) judged
convenient for the comparing of Later and Former Aspects, as they may concern
us in England. 7. Produced therefore from our plain Annalist, for the Years
1562. etc. and the there found. 8. From the Year 1570. etc. and the there
found. 9. From the Year 1582. and the there found. 10. The Influences of the of
our Age, An. 1682. not sparingly related from our own Collections. 11. The
Years introduced are found strangely to agree in Comets, Floods, Lightnings,
Pestilences, though our Years relating to the last, as to Pestilences, have
been to us in England happily exempted. Consent of the Habitable part of the
World as to Inundations, notorious about the entrnace of 1682. as Thuanus
heretofore had noted in his time. 12. Mr. Stow's Notes of what happened in the
Years 1591, 92, 93, etc. may be probably a kind of Speculum, to let us see in
some measure, what may happen to us seven Years hence in 1992, 93, 94, 95. 13.
Warning given for a touch at Monstrous Births. 14. A View of Frosts and
Droughts relating to our Aspect. 15. Some Years infested with Vermin. Whether
it ever rained Locusts at Constantinople? 16. A Conclusive discourse about
Parelia, their relation to this Aspect, saving the Cartesian Supposition. 17.
Monstrous Hail. 18. Farewell to Comets, etc. He that can tell Twenty, must be
convinced. 19. Exact Enquiry establishes knowledge. 20. many times mischievous
and unsupportable; a Consideration of Damps, resumed upon Cardan's Story. 21.
Our Aspect has a hand sometimes in Armies Ethereal, as in monstrous Rains. 22.
As Superstitious as we are, we don't undertake to reduce all Prodigies to the
Visible Heavens. Not the Phoenomenon of Crosses falling upon Garments, nor
every Incredible Monstrous Birth. 23. Monstrous Births that are more usual, are
justly ascribed to the Heavens, particularly to the Aspects of the Superiors.
24. Not only Corporal Disturbances but Distractions and Disturbances of mind
are found not created, but heightened under this Aspect. This is seen in
Distracted People, Turbulent Spirits, yea, and False-Prophets; Proof by Appeal
to History. 25. Conclusion, with a Fore-tast of the second part, and a Rule or
two to judge of the Weather, to stay the Readers Stomach.
1. SOmething more is to be said of this Aspect, but what is fit to be said, is
no small Quaere with me; for shall and 's Aspect be my Great, yea, Tres-Grand
Argument, and shall I speak least to it? I should have afforded it a just
Diary, what I found meet to do for some of the Rest, and not put off our Aspect
with a Fragment or two, which it cannot take kindly at my hands. But what could
I do, if the Tedder of the Configuration reaches us, as in our Theory it seems
to do, to 4 or 5 year, and that with a just Claim? Could my too free and
profuse way of Transcription copy out so many Years, and insert it here? Alas!
that would yield a Specimen but of one Aspect; He must observe a second
Revolution at least, who means to draw either new Conclusions, or establish the
Old. Some such thing is wanting to the Celestial Philosophy, some such Volume I
mean, that should give us 4 or 5 Revolutions from Kepler, Kyriander, and what
British Observations could be collected toward half a hundred years, or more,
if our Age were yet so happy. I please my self much with the Fancy, how
suddenly the Celestial Knowledge would be advanced, if our Ancestors defect
herein could be made up by some private Re-search, or Voluntary Contribution;
for, for a right use made of it I question not, as long as the Theory is
innocent, though novel, and so many Learned Men amongst us, that believe a God
in Heaven, and his Glorious Providence. The Truth is, I once thought upon just
Motives, omitting the Fair and Calm Constitution, to exhibit a Compendious View
of the Aspect in all its Shapes; and being aware of the Prolixity, I thought to
correct that Fault by the mixture of some not unprofitable Observations as I
went; but being not so far enamoured with my Attempt, it dyed in the Birth.
Must I leave then this Momentous Aspect uncultivated, unregarded? Nay I shall
give the Reader at present, some Directions how to make use of the Former
Observations, for the Benefit of this present Aspect. Let him be pleased to
View what follows: See, it is no less then a Summary of all the years concerned
from the Fountainhead of our Collections, and when he has viewed them, let him
mark what I say.

2. A Summary of all those Years from the beginning of the last Century, where
and, or, according to our Sentiment, has to do.
Ao 1502. ab initio Maii ad anni fine. 1503. 1504. 1505. 1506. ad finem
Augusti. 1522. a Feb. med. ad Maii fin. a Princ. October. ad Anni fin. 1523.
1524. 1525. ad Junii medium. 1542. a med Aug. ad fin. anni. 1543. 1544. 1545.
1546. ad fin Februarii. 1562. a princ. Martii ad fin. anni. 1563. 1564. 1565.
ad med. Nov. 1566. a med. Maii ad Julii med. 1581. a princ. Dec. 1582. 1583.
1584. 1585. ad med Maii. 1601. ab October. med. 1602. ad Martii finem. a med.
Junii ad fin. anni. 1603. 1604. 1605. 1621. a med. Apr. ad fin. anni. 1622.
1623. 1624. 1625. ad med. October. 1641. a med. Febr. ad med. Julii. ab October.
med. ad fin. anni. 1642. 1643. 1644. ad med. Julii. 1661. a med. Augusti ad
fin. anni. 1662. 1663. 1664. 1665. ad med Martii. 1680. a med. Julii ad med.
Sept. 1681. a princ. April ad fin. anni. 1682. 1683. 1684. 1685. a princ. Maii
ad med. Aug.
1512. a princ. Maii, ad fin. September. 1513. a princ Martii ad fin. anni 1514.
1515. ad Junii finem. 1516. a princ. Jan. ad Maii med. 1532. a princ. December.
ad finem. 1533. ad finem Julii. Ab October. med. ad anni fin. 1534. 1535. 1536.
ad finem Feb. a med. October. ad anni fin. 1537. ad med. Januarii. 1551. a princ.
Aug. ad fin. anni. 1552. ad fin. Februarii: a princ. Junii ad fin. anni. 1553.
1554. ad med. November: 1555. a med. martii ad Oct. med. 1571. a Junii med. ad
Julii med. 1572. a med April ad fin anni. 1573. 1574. 1575. ad fin. Junii.
1576. a Feb. princ. ad fin. Apr. 1591. a med. December. 1592. ad fin. Junii. a
med. November. ad fin. anni. 1593. 1594. 1595. a med Aprilis. a med. Aug. ad fin.
anni. 1596. ad Fin. Febr. 1610, a princ. Aug. ad fin. anni. 1611. a princ. July
ad fin. anni. 1612. 1613. 1614. ad med. November. 1615. a med April ad fin. Sept.
1631. a princ. Maii ad med. October. 1632. a Martii princ. ad fin. anni 1633.
1634. ad fin. Julii. 1635, a princ. Jan. ad med. Junii. 1651. a med. Jan, ad
med Maii. 1652. a princ. Jan. ad fin. Aug. a med October. ad sin. anni. 1653.
1654. 1655. ad fin. Martii: a med October. ad fin. anni. 1656. ad med. Febr,
1670. a July fin. ad fin. anni. 1671. ad med. martii. a princ. Junii ad fin.
anni. 1672. 1673. 1674. ad med November. 1675. a princ. Junii ad fin. Sept.
3. Whatsoever Heights or Excesses are found in the state of the Air, Natural,
as I may term them, or Prodigious, in High Winds, Hurricanes, Dark Air, more
gentle lasting Rain, or Violent dashing Showrs, deep Snow, Showers of Hail of
usual or pernicious Size, whatsoever Floods or Inundations, the Attendants of
the Premises; Whatsoever Tempests of Lightning, Thunder, Chasmes, Fiery
Meteors, Comets, Earthquakes, Pestilences, Parelia, Phasmes of the Air,
Prodigious Rains of Blood (so called) etc.

On the contrary, whatsoever Cold, Frosty, or Hot Droughty Air; whatsoever
Mist, or Fog, or Smoaky Air, Bliting or Blasting, Mildew, Threads or Cobwebs,
Gossamere, Caterpillar, Locusts, etc. mentioned in any of our Notes Domestic
or Foreign, to happen in any of these years, within the terms specified in the
Table; (What narrower Aspect, or Aspects soever may bear the Name) they belong
to the or of and, assisted or deserted, as well as to the Minor Aspect; they
must all, I say, be laid before the Door of this Configuration, that we may see
how Rich it is.

4. Let me wait upon the Reader back through all the Tables, till we come to
the first, that which is appropriate to and, page 131. that we may in some
measure be, not acquitted only, but, justified, for our profuser Transcripts of
our Diaries.

What do we find in March, Ao 1673? Wet and High Winds: It belongs in all
reason, as to the Congress of and, so also to our. The same we say for the Snow
and Hail, Ao 1674. Add if you will, the Aches, Hysterical Fits, Even They are
to be ascribed, says the Astrologer, to and, co-incident to the of the
Supremes. And let no man question it that will search out those limitations,
which are easy to be found by observing Months and Signs, or such like
Circumstauces, which as yet were not proper for me to search after. Do the like
with the following Years comprised in the Table. Go we then to February, Ao
1655. in and Diary, page 159. The Warm Weather we find there, die 3, 4. the
measures of Rain on the same days, the Dash of Rain and Terrible Blustering,
belong to and, and our of the Superiors also not yet expired; while on the
contrary, the Frost extreme on the 1. of Feb. Ao 1663. belongs to and (and)
co-incident with a of the Two Superiors. We will give but an example or two
out of the Foreign Diary, the first of which belongs to and, p. 184: We read
there from Hackluit, May 20. Ao 1535. Ships suffered by Storms and Tempest, of
and, of and. A 2d time, Ao 1552. a Hurricane, Aug, 21. Platic, of and amongst
the rest. A 3d. Ao 1574. Nov. 18. Tempestuous Winds all night at London, and
with our (for these years are specified in the Summary.) Add March 8. 1682.
outrageous Storms on the Coast of Holland, such as deserved a mention by
Calvisius, of, and withal of.

Thus may any one, if he please, make use of our Notes which we have presented
to the World, not to increase the Bulk of the Volume, but to save the Pains of
the Diligent Observer in a point of Knowledge now so much desired.

5. We have made you believe that the Character of this Aspect holds forth Cold
and Frosty Seasons, (Winter at least) and Droughty Seasons with Cold or Heat,
as they happen. And it is admirable to see, that not only before, but, after we
know the reason, how Cool, Calm and Civil the Aspect is at times, at other
times as huffing and boistrous; yea, wild and prodigious, and insupportable.
For what noise, I pray, does the make E. gr. joined with the of and, for 18
days together in May 1652. page 292. How loud is he in July 1653. while opposed
in and. What in Sept. 1654. or 56. a Misty Morning, and a Shower or two in the
first, Red Wind, some Rain, (too little, says the Note) in the Second.
Rain-like, Dark Air, some Fits of Rain in the Third. What does December. 1662.
bring, but Frosts ( p. 293.) Alas! Frost is no Influence, 'twill be said, but
a suspension of Influence, a long Vacation, (Frost or Fog) as in January and
November 1664. But see! these Planets are not distributed, they are too near
one another, whether Three or more, to show any remarkable Influence, as we
have said. 'Twas a great mistake therefore of Poor Stoefler, to alarm all the
Country with fears of a Deluge, when time was, to make the Country build, or
procure boats for their safeguard, or fly to the remote and higher places, in
Febr. 1524. because all the Planets, forsooth, met in the Watery Sign, (as they
are apt enough to do, if the Superiors wait for them there) for what was the
Issue, to the Infamy of Astrology, through ignorance and ill management, the
whole Month proved Fair and Screne, as in such case, according to our
Principles, it is very apt to do; On the other side, when Distributed, what do
they not? Shake the Earth, Burn it, Drown it, raise Mountains out of the Sea
(for new Islands must be such) bring Lakes out of Mountains, abolish Cities,
exterminate Inhabitants, burying them alive in Earthquakes, and washing them
away in Floods. Concerning which take one Paragraph in Purchase, when he comes
to speak of Guatimala, a fertile Province and City of the same Name in the
West- Indies. He tells us that the City was once Situate at the Foot of a
Vulcan, but was removed Two Miles thence, because in the Year 1542. (one of our
years) on December 26. A Lake hidden in the Bowels of that Hill, forth in many
places with such Violence, that it ruined most part of the City. But (mark ye)
All is well for a matter of 40 years, so one is harmless, yet in the year 1581.
(which is a Borderer, as we call it) there issued from another Vulcan two miles
off, such an Eruption of Fire, as threatened to consume all before it; and such
a Shower of Ashes as both filled the Valleys, and almost buried the City. Now
the next year 1582. (a year claimed by our Aspect) there issued for 24 hours
such a Stream of Fire that burned the Stones and Rocks, drank up 5 Streams of
Water. He adds this remarkable Note, that before that first Eruption of Waters,
some Indians came and told the Bishop, that they had heard an incredible Noise
at the Foot of the Hill; The Christian Bishop reproved them, that they should
not trouble themselves with vain, yea, Superstitious Fears. But about the Hour
Two in the Morning, that Deluge appeared, which carried away many Houses, and
whatever stood in the way, wherein 520 Spaniards perished, Purch. Vol. V. Cap.
14. 2. So that sometimes we see good meaning may censure us unjustly of
Superstition; but the design of these Papers is to give more light to us that
have seen 1682. then those Good Men who lived in 1582. Now at none of these
Terrors, I wis, whenever our Superiors then were, can we find the rest to be
placed in the same Sign, neither Watery nor Fieri, but distributed at their
several Posts, as if they were sent out upon duty to execute their orders; for
in all such great Products, Nature uses her Mechanics, her Distances, her
Lines, her Angles, of unequal Measures and Proportions. All the Planets lie not
in one Concentrick Orb, as neither do the Fixed. Wherefore by the Rule of the
Vectis, the higher Planet Caeteris Paribus must have the greater Force. I see
some Emblem of this in my hand, the strength of that Organ lies in the unequal
measure of the Fingers, of which the Little Finger is the weakest, and the
Longest is the lustiest.

6. After all this, the Prowess of our Two Superiors, I fear, wont be
discerned so convincingly, by distracted Instances hitherto presented in their
respective Tables, as by one continued Prospect in their more united order and
succession, whereby we may see how they exert their heavy Influences according
to the Series of time: Wherefore we may further think fit to present you an
example of Two or Three, for the Most part from our own English Annals, wherein
we are more nearly concerned: that by comparing our last in, with that of 1582.
where the said Planets are in opposite Signs to the former, or else with that
of 1563. where they are about the same Signs, which we tell you is, we may see
them coguation.

. 7. Ao 1562. Pestilence at Newhaven, when an English Garrison, where they were
scarce able to bury their Dead.

Ao 1563. Pestilence in London, of which dyed 23600. Jul. 8. Lightning
destroyed one Woman, (here I am punctual, because we are at Home, and it
concerns us to understand where we live) while in Essex a man, Stow says, was
torn in pieces, Stones and Trees rent in many places.

Earthquake in diverse places, Lincoln, Nottingham, etc.

Dec. 1. ad 12. Continual Lightning and Thunder, specially day 12. at n.

This Month at Grimesby in Lincolnshire was driven ashore a Fish, in Length 19
yards, his Tail 15 Foot broad, 6 yards between his Eyes, etc.

Ao 1564. Great Flood from the River Thames, many Cattle perished. October. 7.
The North parts of the H. seemed to be covered with Flames proceeding toward
the middle of the Firmament, and after an hour it descended West, and All the
Night, being the next after the Change, seemed as Light as if it had been day.

Dec. 21. Frost, Thames passable from the Bridge to Westminster, heretofore
remembered in our Kalendars, till That of 1683. drowned it and its mention.

Ao 1565. Jan. 3. It thawed, and on the fifth day no Ice to be seen, which
caused great Floods, many Travelers drowned.

July 16. Thunder, Lightning and Hail from ho. 9. p. ad ho. 3. mat. which
destroyed the Corn, until'd Houses; beat down Church Battlements at
Chelmesford, Leeds, Cranbrock, Dover, etc.

Dec. 24. Tempest of Wind so raging, that the Seas, yea the Thames overwhelmed
many Persons, and blew open the Gates of the West end of St. Paul's Cathedral.

The Terms of our Aspect if they be out, it is no prejudice to omit it, it is a
Borderer at least. This for the. Let us approach now to the years which are
adjacent to the.

8. Ao 1570. is but a bordering year. Nor does Stow mention any thing but
(which is too much, if it had so pleased God) a General Pestilence there was
throughout Europe, at Venice above 60000 deceased.

Oct. 5. Terrible Tempest of Wind and Rain, much Shipwreck, many Houses and
Villages overflowed many Women and Children lost.

Ao 1571. Feb. 7. Earthquake at Kinaston in Herefordshire for 4 days, certain
Rocks, with a piece of Ground removed, carrying great Trees and Sheep-cotes. It
overthrew Kingstone Chapel, the Ground in all was 26 Acres. At first it made a
Terrible Noise. A new Hill of 20 Fathom high. Which Circumstances I relate the
rather, that we may see how our Country is obnoxious as well as others.

Ao 1572. Nov. 18. Star in Cassiopeia, for the space almost of 16 Months:
Great. Frost and sharp Winter from before the Feast of All Saints till after
Twelftide, with great and deep Snows, and sometimes Rains; a Late Spring, the
Wind continuing N. and E. till after the Ascension, with sharp Frost and Snows.

June 7. Hail and Rain at Tocester in Northamptonshire, whence Floods, whereby
6 Houses were born down, etc. many Sheep drowned, lying in the High Hedges,
where the Water-Flouds left them, the Hail square and six Inches about.

About Lammas Dearth at London.

Ao 1574. July 9. At the Isle of Thanet, A Whale shot himself on Shore, ho. 6
p. Length 22 yards. Any Man might have crept into his Mouth.

Sept. 4. Storm of Rain, etc.

Nov. 6. Two great Tides in the Thames, the First by Course, the other
overflowed the Marshes.

Nov. 14. About midnight following, strange Impressions of Fire and Smoke out
of a black Cloud in the North, noct. seq. that in all parts it seemed to burn
with marvelous rage, the Flames did double and roll one on another, as in a
Furnace, the Flames rose from the Horizon round about, and met over head.

Nov. 18. Stormy and Tempestuous out of the South, specially after midnight
till next morning. I have not known the like from any Quarter, says our
Annalist.

Ao 1575. Feb. 14. Cold and Hard Frost; after a Flood, which was not great.
Great numbers of Flies and Beetles came down the River of Avon; at Tewksbury a
Foot thick above the Water.

Feb. 26. Between ho. 4. and 6 p. m. Great Earthquake in York, Worster,
Gloucester, Bristol, Hereford.

July 30. Great Tempest of Lightning and Thunder, wherewith in diverse places
Men and Beasts were stricken Dead. Great Hail also 6 or 7 Inches about.

Sept. 26. In the City of London, A Woman delivered of four Female Children,
who followed all in Health and good liking their Deceased Mother, who died a
Month after; which whether I had reason to transcribe will be seen toward the
Close of our Papers. I must observe that they were conceived, (if not born)
under the Aspect.

Ao 1576. March. 5. In the Night a great Flaw of Wind from the N. W. ruined a
Tilt-Boat with 31 Persons, one Boy excepted.

July 4, 5, 6. The Fatal Sessions at Oxford, where so many Men were destroyed
by a Damp. We have referred it to, and we abide by it as a parcel-Cause, but we
are willing to reduce it also among other notable Causes, to our; for it is
certain it is a Borderer: are within Bounds; and opposing, delivers up also,
linked with it. It Is no little matter that kills 500 Persons by a Breath.

Ao 1582. May 13. Comet, hora 10 p. descending in the N W. the Beard streaming
S W.

Aug. 12. Lightning, Thunder, Whirlwind, with hail fashioned like Spur rowls,
two or three Inches about in Norfolk, beat the Corn flat to the Ground, rent up
many Trees, and shivered them into pieces, or writhed them like Withs; the Top
of Henden Church was lifted up, 5 Webs of Lead ruffled up together like so much
Linen Cloth.

1583. Jan. 13. Blackmore in Dorsetshire, a piece of Ground of 3 Acres, removed
from its place 600 Foot.

October. 10. Caster in Norfolk, a Fish by Force of the Easterly Wind driven
ashore, whose Tail was 14 Foot in Breadth.

Summary of the Occurrents happened at, or about the last, 1682. and seqq. from
our own Collections.
10. 1611. April 1. Romae Septentrionem versus Cometa major Lucidiorque nupero
qui Neapoli visus est.

Die 22. Ex inferiore tractu Albis Ruricolae queruntur ex anni siccitate,
grandem scarabeorum invalescere numerum qui delicatum arborum florem abradit.
Dioecesis Bremensis tristius conqueritur, de inusitato Murium numero qui
segetem radicitus abradunt, Rela^ Colon. Number. 37.

May 3. 13. Lately an Earthquake in Zealand, and Meteor of an extraordinary
bigness, for 3 Nights in Amsterdam Horizon.

Die 5. This Night following, a great and general Bliting Wind, the
Walnut-Trees felt it, Middlesex.

Die 20. Hurricane lately at Barbado's.

Die 22. St. Johnston's, Hail, Rain, Thunder and Lightning, unusual circa 5 p.
T. M. for a quarter of an Hour. Benskins Intelligence.

Die 27. Drought, not within memory, Engl.

Die 30. Near Lancaster, Lightning and Hail as big as Walnuts for two Hours,
damaging the Corn.

June 18. About a week ago, Rained Wheat in Dean Forest.

Die 13. Oxford, lately happened Lightning, etc. which fired a House:

Die 16. Dolphins sporting in the Mouth of Severn.

17. Ferrara, Thunder, Hail, Earthquake.

20. Lime, A Vessel put in, which felt a Tempest of Thunder, Rain, and
Lightning, never the like.

20. Lately at Lions in France, terrible Earthquake.

29. Dorchester, within two Miles, a Globe of Fire falling among a Tuft of
Trees, burnt two or three to Ashes.

July 3. Sheerness, Whale lately seen in the Mouth of the Thames.

5. West-Chester, a Man stroke Dead with Lightning.

6. Chichester, about 3 m. Trumpets sounding a Charge, etc. Thunder, etc.

16. Hamburg, Plague broke out at Magdeburg.

23. Friburg, Thunders, Armies, Squadrons, Battalions, etc.

25. Thunder bolt clove a Woman in 4 parts, a Man had no hurt.

26. Portugal Row, near Hide Park, Thunder 8 m. shook the House, so till 11 m.

T. M. in Lorrain, 6 Stately Houses destroyed.

St. Colombs Church suffered by Lightn.

Aug. 9. Francofurti ad Viadrum Locustarum pestis.

11. Lues epidemica Dresdae, and in reliqua Misnia.

16. Jersey, Comet SW. ante 5 m. with a Train of 3 yards.

27. Whale in Flushing taken, 30 Foot long.

Nevis in India occid. Hurricane. Two Bristol Ships lost; 4 or 5 at Antigoa.

Sept. 6. Meteors seen in Moor Fields, with a Stream 6 Inches broad.

13. Vesuvius burns for four days, T. M. in Naples, two Shocks, Gazet. Numb. 96.

14. Lues Epidemica in Calabria.

16. Pestilence continues at Hamburg.

20. Great Storms of Hail., then Swarms of Flies for 3 Hours, passed Eastward
with the Wind.

October. 2. Hurricane at Jamaica.

6. Comet lately appeared in 13. swift in motion.

10. At Falmouth for some Days, Very Stormy Weather, so at Harwich.

16. Plague in many parts of Spain, seems not yet to be decreased.

23. Star last n. with a large Train, but the Clouds hindered.

29. Dreadful Storm at Dover Rode.

30. Portland, Dismal accounts from several places of this Stormy Weather.

Nov. 2. Weymouth, such a Flood from the continued Rains, that the Ways are
hardly passable.

4. Near Lincoln, Lucid Circle in the Air like a Rainbow, reversed.

6. Deal, a Zeland Vessel cast away in Tempest.

10. Westchester, Monstrous Fish lately taken like a Crocodile, Domest.
Intellig.

13. Plague not quite ceased at Magdeburg.

29. Sickness lately broke out in Barbary.

30. Violent Storms since day 26. at Hague, ruined part of the Fortification at
Narden.

Dec. 10. Hague, Strong S W. Wind, broke up the Banks, and laid 2100 Acres
under Water.

8. Falmouth, many Shipwracks.

December. 15. Summer Weather, and much Thunder p. m.

21. Gopenhagen, Waters so high, that it is the Wonder of the Age.

30. Great Floods in the Country.

1682. Jan. 13. Turin. Comet appeared like that last year, yet more dreadful.

16. Furious Tempest noct. tot. and die, blowing down Tops of Houses and
Chimneys, without Rain.

Amsterdam, Inundation there, tres difficile reporter, says the French.

17. Very high Tide in the Thames, over all the Bushes.

18. Inundation near Holland, 3 Inches higher than Ao 1670. at Brill,
Rotterdam, etc. many People and Cattle drowned.

21. Inundations in Ireland, Connaught, etc.

25. Inundation of Danow, higher by two Foot then it was 35 years ago.

31. Stockholm, yesterday within 10 Miles, T. M. very Terrible for half an Hour.

Feb. 6. Winter Weather, blowing, Raining and Snowing near Salisbury, but near
Andover no sign of it.

12. West Riding in Yorkshire Snow Knee-deep in 24 Hours time; at Worthington,
Tides have altered to the amazement of the Seamen.

March 6. Comet at Mosco.

19. Plymouth, small Vessel cast away, 7 Passengers drowned; and at Dunkirk
Storms destroyed their Sea-Work, blowing down several Houses in the Town, and
part of the Steeple, killing 6 Men.

22. Tides at London Bridge thrice in 12 Hours, flowing 7 Hours from 2 p.

April 1. Trees blasted.

29. T. M. in Hungary, destroying Houses, and burying the Inhabitants. May 1.
T. M. at Paris in the Night.

2. At Deux Ponts, Basil, etc.

4. Hereabouts in Berkshire, Trees torn up by the Roots, others torn in pieces,
Corn shared as if 'twere mown, Standford, Wadely, Newbery, Wantage.

13. Brussels, Storm of Thunder and Lightning, demolished many Stately
Buildings.

16. Doncaster T. M. inter horam 2 and 3. mat. and 12. minutes.

29. Hague, weather so dry, that all the Ground lost by the Inundation is
recovered.

31. Lime, Great Storm with Rain and Thunder, caused several Ebbings and
Flowings in half an hours time.

At Evensham in Oxfordshire, Hailstones and terrible Lightning tore up Trees,
etc.

June 3. Dunwich, Hail, such as has not bin known for several years past.

14. Mortality of Cattle continues in the North parts of Scotland.

15. Durham, Hail, Thunder and Lightning, destroying Corn. July 11. Anjou,
Dreadful Tempest, turned several Villages of that Province Topside-turvy.

Aug. 6. Not far from Hereford, two Houses consumed by Lightn.

11. Plague rages much at Algiers.

15. Plague rages at Halle, 300 dying each day, Loyal Mercury 319.

16. Vessel riding at Anchor in Dartmouth Port, the Main Post Fired by
Lightning.

19. Comet in N W. 8 p. a Tail of 3 Yards fere. This Comet seen at Tunbridge,
day 16.

Sept. 23. Gravesend Tilt-Boat cast awaytand several drowned, so other Boats on
Thames.

27. Fevers up and down the Country about Northampton.

October. 5. Exceter, a Child born with two Heads. Relation Printed by Will.
Davis.

October. 7. Destructive Fever, Mortal to many in 3 days, specially in
intemperate Bodies.

12. So far our various Intelligence ceases, various indeed, if I had reported
all; If Half this were true, it is enough to show the just notion I have of the
Superiors. What then if there be scarce three mis-reports in the whole? I was
going to say, I know the main to be Truth; may we not then usefully compare our
Years of the Later Century, viz. 1562. with this 1682. upon the Evidence they
give? Is there no similitude of Influence discernable of 1582. with our 1682?
Our Collections are more exuberant than Stow's, and good reason, for he wrote a
kind of Annals, and We Diaries, which are destined for the Record of
Influences. This Consideration being allowed, compare Those Years together, as
to Comets, Floods, Lightnings, Earthquakes; the Comfort is, we cannot match
them as to Pestilences, the more are we indebted to the Great Moderator; though
some parts of the World, we see, were visited with Epidemick Distempers. We
have hitherto escaped. When we have made our Comparison, then we may please to
note the Close of the Year, 1681. and Entrance of 82. do put us in mind of That
Consent of the Parts of the Universe, so long ago, as we have said, observed by
Thuanus in his time, when Holland, Germany, Ireland, yea all Europe, as is
elsewhere noted, complained of Inundations; Some Conspiracies Planetary are
confined to a Province only, while others again extend themselves through the
whole Empire.

12. Now though I would give occasion to none to act Stoefler, and make himself
ridiculous by vain Predictions; Yet it must not be denied, that if a Year past
and gone, be found upon such reasons to represent and repeat a preceding year
in a Flood, in a Hurricane, Rural Earthquake, Monstrous Birth, or some such
rarer Event; Why may not the next Aspect of our Supremes be interpreted for the
Future, where we can find a Precedent to compare it by? I confess the demand is
Reason, and to show I like it, though Divinatory Philosphy, unless grounded on
a manifest experience, is rarely precarious nor can I say I pronounce upon a
laborious Examen of particulars, yet in general, and by a confuse Light, I may
say that the years of Q. Elizabeth, 39. etc. i. e. the year of our Lord, 1592,
93, 94 and part of 95. are a kind of Speculum, whereby we may read something
which may succeed 6 or 7 years hence, Ao 1692. 93, 94, 95. and being near the
same Signs, as in those years of the Queen. Not that I would have any make
false Apprehensions, and by the Multiplying Glass of his Fancy, think the
years will be nothing but Tempestuous etc. But that there may some of the same
Events revolve again in those Years, be it Comet Huracane, or some Distemper as
has been already hinted.

13. But what have we to do with the mid-Officers of a monstrous Birth. If that
be not a Freak, a midwifery I much marvel: I confess, it is usual with those who
advance a Principle to draw it, and stretch it with some violence, to make it
speak to every Case; and it is a Fault, E. gr. to introduce a Magnetism or a
Vortex with our Learned Countryman Gilbert, or Descartes, when there is no
need. We will see whether we are guilty very suddenly, but we have something to
dispatch first by way of perusal of our former Chapter concerning some
Instances found there.

14. As to the Frost, we have said a little, circ. page 447. etc. But by way of
Appendix we may know the other Frosts are in these Papers produced to whose
Extremity did conduce.

15. The Pareliu we have met with before in the Aspect of, page 394. in a
competent Catalogue, which no doubt, in some certain Situation at least, cast
their Luminous Influence upon the Celestial Imagery; we find it so in the Iris,
and we must admit it here. For as we have given a hint in those of May 3. at
Zurich, Ao 1523. that are concerned; so we wonder, if be not alike concerned,
when of 15 Instances, 9 shall be found in Amity with our Aspect (not
considering the Paraselenae) to which we add 1614. May 13. at Prague, from
Calvisius, Ao 1622. Jan. 22. and Feb. 8. St. Nov. at Lintz again, Feb. 19, 20.
(from Kepler.) At Rome, March 11. from Argol, Pandos-sphaer. At Lintz again,
March 25. from Kepler; then April 14. Ao 1625. and Sept. 20. anno eod. lastly,
1684. March 18. from Trig's Calender for the following year. When 9 I say
appear, Any man may suspect, though the Art will be to make it out, that our
Planets are not idle at that time. For if,,, in the foregoing Papers do present
us with these appearances, what can be said, but that All have their own, and
the Superiors, a superior share. Who can deny first, that have a share in the
appearance on May 11. 1573. and May 20. 1673. though at a hundred years
distance, where are near in the first, and in the second. Or, at a less
distance of 9 years May 13. 1614. and May 18. 1623. when shall be near in the
one, and in the other. Who can deny it, when he finds those Famous Parelia, Ao
1502. to commence under. as page 344. yea too being not far from a Partile. Who
cannot presume, when he sees a Crowd of these Mock-Suns, no less then Six, in 2
Months time, Ao 1622. where we find two, Ao 1625. the Year wherein the King of
Poland saw Six at a time, as Descartes was informed. I will give but one Proof
more, viz. when he sees Phasmata, the being in, facing Feb. 4. 1622. and
Parelia, Feb. 8. when she faces. Phasmata and Parelia are akin. Well, when He
comes to join with in, as but now she opposed him in, then we find these
appearances passim, in several Places, must needs be concerned here, for
Phasmata is more then Parelia; must needs be concerned, I say, when he shows
the Appearances two days together.

And what can be learned by Moonlight; let no Man think we exclude the Sun,
projecting the Parelium, though we talk of Collateral Assistants. The Analogy
of the Paraselenae will evince that, if it needed any such Argument to
corroborate. But neither does the exclude her Adjutants, for in that of Ao
1554. Apr. 9. mentioned before is in with, not far off, near one another in the
same Sign. And the Paraselenae in Calv. Ao 1622. Feb. 8. seen at Heidelberg,
had in with,,, all above board, which strengthen the by their several
Impressions, whereby she may be able to make her Reflection discernible. This I
presume holds in those also that are Alien to our Aspect, as that of 1551. May
21, which belongs not to, but, where the Phenomenon must happen, while the is
in Tropical with, which if it does not strengthen the in her Projection, I
never saw the like. I don't go about to give account of the Crux Atra, taken
notice of in the midst of the, unless I lived in Germany, where there is
frequent talk of them, because it is easily evaded by those who will admit no
Portents; I regard the simple plain resemblance of the or, and I accuse those
Philosophers that impute all to the Luminaries non-assisted, while they may,
with as good reason condemn me for being too minute. Alas! I do but hint,
there are more Causes than one, I cannot, nor shall I be allowed, to say all,
only here is one pretty Problem: how comes it to pass, that on Feb. 4. 1622. of
Keplers Diary, I find first, in Quincunx with, and with, and a Fortnight after
in Quincunx with, and with, in this later there is Parelia, in the former there
is Phasmata. Now Phasmata, we have said, is Parelia, and somewhat more.

17. Harmful and Prodigious Hail lies scattered up and down in the foregoing
Pages under, April 4. 1541. July 25. 1545. Under, Ao 1565. July 24. Under, Ao
1573. June 20. 1661. March 9. Under, Ao 1680. June 20. 1682. July 28. Under, Ao
1672. March 16. 1682. June 24. a 9. and Aug. 18. Ao 1675. June 1. Under 1682.
June 15, 24. Lastly, under, Ao 1575. July 30. and 1602. June 30. See what can
do when in Signs immediate one to the other, and any two of them in a state of
Co-arctation; they cast you Hail in a Mold of 7, yea 9 Inches about, and the
Scene lies in England too, that we may see it is possible that Heaven should
stone us to Death.

18. For Comets, Earthquakes, Pestilences, we have troubled the Reader too
much, especially if not yet convinced; but let me tell him once for all, if he
please to count a Score, yea, a half score of years, he will find the Tallies
agree. For if you view the two last Columns of our Cometical Table, page 457.
you shall find that to every twenty years therein contained, there answers two
or three Cometical Years, and we have discoursed of them in the Pages before.
Add the Oppositions, and then 'twill be every tenth year, and let any Man try
whether the years 1512, 1532, 52. 72. 92, 1612, 32, 52. 72. don't bring the
Comets in the Neighborhood.

Ao 1512. brought one in March and April. 1513. brought another in Dec.

1532. brought one in Sept. 1533. another in June, p. 174. and 208. not to omit
that of 1531. in Aug.

1562. found you one in 1554. p. 208.

Ao 1572. brought, and brought again a New Star, which is as good as a Comet
every inch of it.

1529. Lighted up that in July 10th. 1593.

1612. * * *

1632. brought one like a Lance hanging over Barcelona.

1652. brought you a Comet in Dec. p. 149.

1672. brought one in Febr. at Dantzick.

Here is but one year Failer, and will not that be allowed to be possible, when
as much as our Planets appear, They will do little without the Rest, which in
the variety of the Heavenly Motion, may, I hope, furnish you with one exception
in above a hundred years, and who knows whether it were an exception? For
Hevelius and the Polish Gentlemen forsook me in the years 1632. and 1672. till
the Continuator of Calvisius furnished me with One from Barcelona; and the
worthy Oldenburg, with that at Dantzick in the Transact. mentioned above page
279.

19. Thus, will an exact enquiry make our Aspects to keep a true time to the
harsh Music of Earthquakes and Pestilences, which I leave to the pursuit of
the Diligent Physician, or other Naturalist.

20. The like I say, of all the mischief that we meet with (we have given you a
little Specimen, compact together in this Chapter) that will come to your hand
scattered up and down in these Papers or elsewhere. I cannot acquit the rest,
less durable Configurations; but under These I have met with too much; let me
name them and take my leave; Pernicious Lightning that dallies not with us, but
strikes dead, or petrifies us, or fires our House about our Ears. In
Whirlwinds, Tuffons, that turn up the Roots of Trees, Foundations of Houses,
that take up Water into the Air, and hurry down Men into the Waters depth, that
set the Heaven burning over our Heads, and teach us the Faith of a Doomes-day;
nay more, These Planets sometimes suffocate us in a Moment with a Damp, and
strike us in common with a dire Apoplexy (of which by the way there is extant
one Story in Lycosthenes, Ao 1554. which, because the Instances are rare, I
would not lose) yea otherwise that hare us, and distract us with Horror; so
that we suspect and fancy, nay sometimes see Specter or Spirits in the Air,
whose Portion is Tempest and Brimstone; so that sober Persons, when yet nothing
can be seen, believe it is their Hour, Gemma, etc. If I find and engaged, I
content my self, that I know the under-Cause, by which the mischief is done,
which is not done without some Instrument elevated to such purpose. To instance
in the Damp only, It Is Lycosthenes tells us, that at Milain, July 23. Ao 1554.
a Vault having been made for a Drain, 20 days after, viz. Aug. 12. they went
down to take up the Centres, as they call them, that sustained the Arch, the
First Man, when he was half way on the Ladder, fell down Dead; the Second
ventured, and at the same place fell down dead also; a Third, when he came so
far, encouraged the Standers by, and promised that he would fetch up his
Fore-Men, but instantly when he put his Head under the Brick-work, down he
fell; so did a Fourth Man, when a Fifth Lusty Fellow went, and drew up one of
the Dead, so being emboldned, he descended a second time, and when he put his
Head under the Arch, down fell he also, who being pulled up presently (as they
had provided for fear of the worst) and with much ado they brought to life. At
this Feat Cardan was present, and it must be added to the like relations above,
page 153. and 154. where the Doctor's Damp, and the Sessions at Oxford, July 4.
Ao 1577. as they are to be attributed to or; so is this of Milain to be
ascribed to on one side,, on the other. I need not revive my old Notions, to
tell you one was in Tropic the other in the Equinox. Finally, to complete this
head, Will it be worth the while that in those two Damps of Aug, 4. 1679. page
153. and another, Ao 1665. in April, page 215. that our Supreme was posited in
the beginning of in the former, and in the later, I leave it to fair opinion.

21. What hand our Planets have in the Armies Ethereal, the Spirits that
muster them, know right well; be they Good, be they Bad Spirits, Astrology is
never the worse, though the Devil understands it, no more than my Holy Faith is
depreciated, because the Fiends believe. But be they Evil, or Good Spirits, as
the Learned think, this I can say, that the relation of Lions and Horsemen,
and Towns besieged, July 3. Ao 1534. from Peucer, if it be no Fancy, has our
of the Superiors to favor it; and it is the first that is mentioned by
Lycosthenes in the last Century. Again, May 17. Ao 1535. formed Armies in a
Serene Air were seen, and Martial Noises heard, it is our still.

The Third Relation, October. 1. 1547. belongs not to us, that is not to this
Aspect, but whether it belongs not to our Planets, when is in the Tropic, and
in the Equinox, beside other Observables, we cannot here dispute. Ao 1553. June
5. at Coburg,, and, Ao 1554 June 11. five Miles from Norimberg, a noted
Skirmish of Horsemen for two Hours, put Men into a Doomsday Consternation. And
the Aspect of so Partile, so Critical, will confirm any Inquirer in the belief
of the Story, beside the fair play they give us for two Hours together; and,
(which I think I have reason to take notice of) in these two last Instances,
there is mention of Showers of Blood, at, or near the time of these
appearances. (Prodigies oft-times draw in a Chain, and make a Train.) These
appearances come again, Aug. 5. page 358, for I will not take notice of what is
reported, at 10 at Night, July 24. how Armies met and shouted once, twice and
thrice; neither must I pass them by, because of the Identity of the Celestial
Positions, which create the same Faith to each one as to any. Now, Is it not a
pretty chance that Three of these Scenes should be exhibited in one year; If
the Relations be true, as the Contents are rare, the in the Aequinox comes as
rare.

22. It appears by the Premises, that we are willing with other Philosophers to
give some account of Rains of Blood. We observed but now, that they happen
sometimetimes with other Prodigious Appearances, as of Three Suns, and the
like. But, as Superstitious as we are, we labor not to give account of every
strange Circumstance; Nay, we rather think with good meaning People, that such
Phoenomena may portend somewhat, though reducible to a Natural Cause, by reason
of those Amazing Circumstances which attend. I Instance in Bloody Crosses, Ao
1501. which have fallen upon Men's Garments, and marked them in several places
with Red; there is no denying of the Fact, since Cardan strives to fetch the
reason from the very Texture of the Garment, the Woof lying across to the warp.
But as Fromond notes, if we sprinkle Blood upon a Garment, the experiment will
not prove; wherefore he justly refers it to what must be owned, the Divine
Finger pointing at something that is shortly to succeed. For the Story speaks
not of a bloody Shower, nor of any Rain properly so called; Nay, they speak of
such Figures found in Veils of Churches, and Garments under Lock and Key, nor
of Crosses always of one Color. What is the Issue? There followed a Plague,
says Fromond, after those ominous Tokens, in the year 1503. The like is
reported for the year 746. And Famine, after those of Ao 969. Here I may say, I
remember St. Chrysostom himself takes notice of such a Prodigy in his time,
upon which he Triumphed, as a Sign from Heaven of the Exaltation of the
Crucified Jesus. With him shall my Astrology Philosophize, even though it should
prove that Ao 1501. 1534. were years that belonged to our beloved Aspect. The
like I may say in some measure of the Fiery Hail we have met with in the Papers
before, though comprehended within the Clutches of our Planets. What follows is
of lesser concern, but strange still; Hail which was fashioned like Spur-rowls,
etc. I commend Cartesius's Diligence, but I applaud not his Design. Assuredly
not all Phoenomena in Nature can be solved excluding Miracle; or not, if you
will bear it, without Planets and Angelical Substances. And yet I heartily
allow that our Philosophy, whatever it aims at, shoots short. Ponds or
Fountains turned into the appearance of Blood, may be accounted for, by the
Theory of Damps; (when the Earth being disturbed from the Heavens, is apt to
fall into a quaking Fit) a disposition to, or a Consequent of the Earthquake;
This perhaps may tinge the Water. It Is poorly done of Scepticks to deny
whatsoever they cannot give account of; yea, or of others who set themselves
against received Truths, and are forced to refuse Authentic Authority. He is
hard beset, who, because he does not believe any Portent in Comets, or other
Ethereal Phasmes, will question Josephus's History of the taking of Jerusalem.
Where He Instanceth in Monstrous Births also, seen before the War, and
therefore in all probability portended it; the Heifer which brought forth the
Lamb before the Altar, might signify that God was bringing some strange thing
upon the Nation; I own I cannot give any account of Such. In These Births there
is more than a Planet.

23. More than a Planet, that is, a Signal Exertion of God's absolute Power,
contrary to the very Grain of Nature, or, which is all one to me, his own
Decree, by which Nature is established. More of which kind occur in Writings,
if Men have need of Arguments to believe a Deity; But we descend to a Lower
Sphere, Births that are beside, not against the course of Nature, where the
Species is safe: yet remarked with some exorbitancy or Defect, either to the
pity or the affrightment of the Beholder. The Causes of these are assigned to
be the Plastic Virtue (be sure) the Imagination of the Mother, to which he
should add Terrors, Affrightments, the Constitution of the Country, the
difference of Diet, and, which I did not suspect would be confessed, the
Sidereal Influences, Schottus, Lib. 5. Cap. 28. We cannot accuse Schottus of
unkindness to the rest of the Stars, though he proves it only from the Moon.
Some good men may think I have grasped too much already, and that I need not
wade into this deep, I can say for this particular, I was not fond of it, nor
was I invited thereto by any Astrologer, not by Ptolemies Chapter de Monstris,
I Will assure you, for in this place the Conception is to be regarded, and not
the Nativity, or its proper Scheme, as Cardan also notes. But, like the
Merchant that trades abroad, I was offered a Penny worth, the years presented
themselves to me, and bid me take them upon Suspicion; what Suspicion I had
will appear presently. I am not going to say that every strange Birth, none
excepted, was conceived under; but I say the Contingency is so frequent, that,
it may be, it deserves to be noted by those who understand better. Take notice
that we refer to the Conception, and then we begin with a young man in Arles,
with six Fingers on each Hand; 15 years old was he when Valericola saw him, in
the year 1561. whence he must be Born Ao 1546. and conceived in Ao 1545. one of
the years specified above, page 492. I will not run back as far as the year
1446. much less to the year 1274. where we meet with Births of deformed Hands
and Feet, but keep my self in my Bounds; so then, Ao 1537. not far from Wurts,
by the River Molda, Natus est Infans sine Pedibus, Lyc. The like again at
Widensbach a Mile off Schleusing, ending in a Pyramidal Figure, Ao 1552. ib.
Again, Ao 1556. a Birth of same Figure, Aldro^and. Ao 1556. at Basil a
Man-Child born without Ears, Lyc. Ao 1593. at Konningsberg with a Hare's Ear,
Schenckius. Ao 1503. An Infant without Nostrils, Eyes or Ears, Lyc. Ao 1554. at
Stetin, with an Arm coming out of his Ear, Lyc. Ao 1514. May 10. A Child born
without a Nose or Nostrils, Gem. The same year at Bononia, a Girl with four
Eyes baptized, and lived four Days, Amatus Lusitanus. Ao 1554. A Headless
Infant, with Eyes in the Breast, Finkel. apud Lyc. Ao 1615. Puellus Satis
grandis fine Capite, only a Mouth and Teeth in the place of the Neck. Another,
Ao 1624 in Italy, whose Eyes, and Nose, and Mouth were in the before said place,
Aldrovand. Ao 1544. at Milain, Nata est Puella Biceps. Cardan, Lib. XIV. de
Var. Ao 1514. In March, the like, Rhodigix.

Ao 1536 at Zurich, an Infant born with two Heads, Three Arms, and as many
Feer, Lyc. Ao 1553. in Misnia the like. Lyc. Ao 1515. in Bavaria, she begged up
and down 26 years after, Pareus. Ao 1552. in (...) Ao 1536. a double Birth
joined together, though but one Heart between them, Gem. The like Ao 1555.
Al^^^. Ao 1593. Another at (...) And have we not an Instance in this very
Chapter of the like Miscarriage, for so I may call a Monstrous Birth? Verily,
if I had, not met with such a Spectacle among the Prints at the very Threshold
of our Inquiry in the year 1503. that year being charged with a second
unfortunate Birth; If I had not met with two other sad Prints at the year of
the, 1514. as at the If I find something of this Nature in Man or Beast the
next, Ao 1523. and a strange one beside Ao 1525. In cujus corpusculo aliud
preterea Corpus praependebat ad Genuasque, who lived, and was showed up and
down in Fairs 30 years after. If the next, Ao 1533. shows you a Monstrous
Animal at least, Lepusculum cum octo pedibus, quorum quatuor in dorso
eminebant. Beside that, Ao 1534. I meet at the same Birth, two short-lived
Twins joined together in the same fleshly Co-alition as I met with 30 years
before in the; if yet again I find another kind of Birth, Ao, 1537. if between
the year 1543. and 1544 we meet with 3 or 4 such monstrous Productions, (to
proceed no further) Is it not enough to make my poor Head teem with monstrous
Thoughts that these Events belong to Especially where Imagination comes in;
then you see I am haunted with these Apparitions, and invited to follow them.

Now my Suspicions were these, since in the hour of their Engagement (a long
hour) produces such wondrous and monstrous things in the Universe; why may not
their disturbance be universal, and reach our Humane Bodies, put them into
Disorder, by God's Permission or Commission, or both? Whether, we leave to
Divines to determine. Consent between the Heavenly and Humane Bodies is
manifest; Consent between Ethereal and Animal Spirits is manifest; such a Wind
blows, the Body is affected, as Tradition and Experience has taught even the
Vulgar, the Ancient Physicians every where proclaiming it, then there must be
something in it, because it is observed some years more than others. They (...),
Rabbi Moses, noting the Sicilian Women, Quodam annosaetus deformes and (...)
^^cipites peperisse, Schottus, Lib. V. Cap. 2. Such a kind of year was the
third of Queen Elizabeth, as Sir Richard Baker has noted, and the year 1615.
in Germany, as Calvisius has noted. And do not we perceive some years to be
more Fruitful, of these Anomalies, than others; we have as, good as named them
twice, rather than fail, Ao 1503. 1514, 1536, 1537, 52, 54, 56, 93. But
further, the probability of this may appear, (...) these years, the same
Deordination is found in Animai^ (...), Hares, Calves, whose Examples I forbear
to multiply. I might add some Monstrosity in Vegetables, of which here and
there Examples will occur.

But now to come a little nearer, that I may explicate my self; I consider the
Fornaces of Egypt, and the known manner of hatching of Chickens, not by
incubation of any Female, but by hiding them in Dung, whose Warmth is supplied
by the Fornaces; and which is much to our purpose, seeing Warmth applied by
Art, can hardly observe the even Hand, and the gradual Methods of Nature, many
of these Chickens proved Monstrous, redundant or defective in Leg or Bill, etc.
Now the Heats or Influences of these Years where our Planets are concerned, may
be, nay it is plain, are unkind, unsuitable, if not intemperate; the only second
Cause (as far as I understand that matter) of Pestilent Contagion: Where I can
Imagine no reason, there my Astrologers lead me not; as in the case of Fires,
notwithstanding some unlucky co-incidences of the pretended Effect of the
Martial Aspect. But where we have some Semblance of Reason, we propose our
Thoughts, and submit them to the Learned.

24. It Is no question but over the Body it has Power, yea over Inanimals;
Metals will not run sometimes so freely, and Quicksilver will not work. Those
who are concerned, wondering at the Reason. We besure, tell them it is an Aspect,
to get Credit to our Principle. As for the Animal, Let any observe our Diary of
and. As many as fall into this our Aspect, they present us with Aches,
Distempers, Hysterical Fits, in some special Signs at least. But we have
further to go: The Mind, and its Faculties are liable to be disturbed by a
Celestial Meeting. All grant it possible I remember, by the Intimacy of the
Faculty with the Spirit, and the Propinquity of that to the Body: Now if I
mistake not, I have observed various Alterations and Emotions of Spirit under,
Visible in Melancholy, Griefs, Distractions, Phrensies, Lunacies, etc. Not
that the Stars cause Frenzy or Distraction, Heaven forbid; but because our
Minds, Sickly, and Crazy, and Distempered by our natural Weakness, or willful
self-Corruption, Antecedent to the Celestial Energy, the secret judgment of
God, not interposing are not able to stand under the harsher temptations of the
Planets. This being the true solution of crazed Intellects, as the Midsummer
Moon, as they call it, our Heart, like a sore part, cannot endure to find it
self touched, or treated so rudely by Natural Agents, who have no power to
check themselves, but act according to the utmost of their Strength. I have no
other proof but what is drawn from Observation of the Weekly Bills, which
though I know, looks as Baleful as the sight of a Spectre in a dark Night
walking over the Graves of the Dead; yet even the Melancholy Secrets of Nature
may be pryed into, if perhaps we can reach them. Those unhappy Felo's de se,
that make away themselves by what kind soever; I do suspect are the worse in
the Sense now explained, through the Potency of the configuration; as the
Physician knows the Delirium of his Feavourish Patient is heightened by the
Intemperance of the Weather. And this is a Demonstration to them who easily
Infer, that if the Celestial Bodies are the Causes of the one Intemperance,
They have some unhappy share in the other, the Intemperance of the Planets. But
what can be observed from the Bills of Mortality, where the Periods of Men are
only mentioned? You do well not to ask. You grant it seems, that there are some
Fatal Diseases of the Mind there recorded. Then, say I, the Periods of those
Persons betoken the height of their Passion under which they labor and
struggle, and are thrown at last; I observe then that many times Distractions
and Lunacies from several Quarters meet at the Grave; the same Week which
mentions a poor Melancholic that has laid violent hands on himself, shall
mention the Disease of a Lunatic, and another who dyed with Grief; and let no
man call me cruel, I pity them as much as any. But I must confess I reckon
Immoderate Grief, under which Head too many are found in the Bill, to be a kind
of Distraction; That Grief, Lunacy, and the Melancholy Desperado are carried
forth in the same Weekly Sheet to be buried. And what if we shall meet
sometimes, not only more than a single Instance in one Week, but a sad pompous
Succession of such fatal Exits, for a Month or more together. Thus in the year
1680. in the last Week of March we find one self-murtherer with the Knife; the
first Week of April by Poison; the second, by the Noose, the week which is
dated from the 20th. day, the Noose, or Fatal Knot; from day 27. the like, with
a Lunatic beside. From May 4. Grief, and the Halter; from 11. the same, with a
Lunatic, yea from the 18th. the same again. The Succession holds entire for
one Month together, and if it had not been dis-continued by a single
Intermission, it had held out Two. I cannot deny, but that other Aspects may
sometimes be unhappy, but I chance to observe it first in; the Potency, the
Name of that great Congress called me to look toward some materiate Cause, if
Religion and Philosophy will bear the Speculation: I took notice of two
Lunacies in the Diary of in the Month of Febr. 1682. two together struck me, I
referred them with a reserve notwithstanding, for a more strict enquiry to the
Co-incidence of that Solar Aspect to. I am sorry I am at a loss for the
Mortality-Bills even of that Year; but in the year 1681. I have Instances from
May 17. of killing Grief; from May 24. of self-murder; from May 31. of Grief
and self-murder; from June 21. Lunacy, and self-murder. Afterward, these
black Exits came not so thick, till October 18. there we meet with all these,
self-murder, Grief, and Lunacy; in the next week, October 25. a Lunatic
again, the first of Nov. self-murder. What Rule can we give, when we may fear,
and prevent (I speak to those who have Catholic or Universal Charity) such
fatal Events? Consider, to keep to our Aspect, when are in, when a third Planet
joins with either, or approaches the Equinox, or is strongly posited (Suppose
the Pleiades) especially if, one or more be Retrograde: These, or most of these
are found in the Instances premised. The last Fortnight of May, and the first
Week of June, were newly entered; a third Planet, forsooth applies to, another
Planet, applies to, is strongly posited in the mid-Week at least, are together,
which is not usual, Retrograde. I should have mentioned the Tropic as well as
the Equinox, and then I have given the Rudiments of a Rule at least, which I
could confirm, but 'twill be more satisfaction to an Inquirer to believe his
own Eyes.

And what should I meddle with Discords, Tumults, Seditions, Wars, Rebellions,
Treasons, Impostors, Sectaries, False-Prophets. It Is confessed in Thesi, that
all these proceed from a Diseased Mind and ungoverned Passion; a Zeal that
cannot be justified, Pride, Envy, Wrath, Heady, Hair-brained Temper, which the
Spirit expressly tells us, help to make Dangerous times; we mention none,
because our design is to Edify not to provoke; to possess the more Learned,
who have great advantages over others to be Sober, Virtuous, and Sons of Peace,
upon the account that the contrary Party, Enemies of Peace, have Whimsies in
their Heads, (...), as Theodoret confidently expresses himself concerning no
less a Man than Arius, (to this day admired by some Anti-Ecclesiastiques,) they
are betwatled in their Understandings, tainted with a Spirit of Madness, and
Dictates of a private Spirit, unhappy here, whatever they shall be hereafter.
Now it is pretty to see if we take a Chronology ( Calvisius suppose) and observe
the Occurrents of this kind for the most part of the Years before specified,
and he shall find some entertainment as to what is mentioned, as if the Planets
were make-bates, whereas the Fault is in us, who will not suffer our
Inclinations, Prejudices, Possessions, how unhappily soever bent, to be cured
by God's Grace, through sound moral principles, and a Holy Religion, being
Proud and self-conceited; condemning others, but sillily never so much as
suspecting our selves, or Parts, though perhaps ignorant, or ill-natured, than
which nothing can be more pitiable. It will be said that Troubles are seen in
most Countries every year. Yea, but they do not break out afresh every year;
Seeds of Disturbance are sown by the Enemy, and they live in our Hearts, a rank
Soil; but as we see that Grass grows all the Spring, yet a warm day or two
makes it grow an end; so is it here: A Configuration may indispose an infirm
mind, and cause it, if not checked to run zealously to its Ruin. To conclude
therefore, I am aware that such is the Variety which may be found by our
curious Enquirer, that the Person who puts himself to the trouble, may resolve,
that This is but a Fancy, (like that of the Year Climacterical, which has
much to be said Pro and Con, So many dying on that year, so many dying without
its reach.) Now, though under Correction I think there may be more in it than
so, because the Doctrine is consequent to the Premises, and because we have
other Tantamount Configurations accusable on the same Score, to render an
account of other Years, which are Foreign to the present, (and This the Opinion
for the Climaterick cannot pretend to) yet I will not stickle. In the mean
time, it will be good Counsel if we can take it, that we descend into our
selves, discern our own Spirits, and so cautelously, with such Circumspection,
that nothing from within, or without may irrevocably precipitate us; as a
prudent temperate Man so orders his Body, that the most Critical times of the
Year, Spring nor Autumn may call his Life in question: This should be preached
to the Mobile in a Loyal-Field Conventicle, and Prayer before the Sermon that
they may have Ears to hear: then will it be true, That a wise Man will have
Dominion over the Stars.

25. And thus far for the Energy of the Aspects Planetary, Simple and
Complicate, which last Member required a distinct Chapter by it self, but the
Intricacy of the Speculation is such, that it will not come to its turn, as
yet, to be the Subject of our Discourse. The Zodiac and its Signs and their
Degrees perhaps with the Equinoctial, the Two Tropicks, the Horizon, the
Meridian, etc. are to be premised, with all those Glorious Lights hanging in
the Blew Veil of the Heavenly Tabernacle, though we have not left our good
Reader to seek, but have shown him that there is, and must be complication of
the Aspect even there, where we seek for the Nature of the Single and
Incomplicate Aspect. But is all this Paper spent, says my Friend, and am I
never the near? So sometimes Ignorance is dis-appointed. The Man thought that
so many Load of Bricks would Build his House, and they were all spent in laying
the Foundation; here is some Foundation laid, I hope; so much we are the nearer.
Well, hut we have ventured in our Discourse to give you some Rule from the
Lunar Aspects, which we call Infallible, as far as a Set of Years could vouch
for Infallibility. But if you will be impatient, and have me fore-stall the
Second Part, because there is no such Book yet in being, and Age begins to
faint, be pleased to take notice; what we have said before, that the Planets
lying in immediate order, well distributed through 4 or 5 Signs, are apt to
bring Warmer and Moister Weather, then when they are discontinued, or lie in a
lesser Arch. Secondly, though Planets lie in continued order, and well
distributed, they shall seldom bring any Moisture, without of, see page 75. l.
10. or rather, one of the Superiors, together with some Lunar Aspect. Thirdly,
when the Planets are discontinued, that is to say, above 30 degrees distance,
the Weather is the Cooler, the Dryer, the Wholsomer, a Northerly Wind is apt to
blow in the Summer, and Frost in Winter. When the Planets lie continued,
without any from a Superior Planet, if the Sun rises first, the Morning is the
Colder, if it rises last, the Warmer. For Summer, the nigher comes to the
Planets well distributed, in the Northern Hemisphere, the Warmer is the Day;
the further it receeds from them in the Southern Hemisphere, the cooler is the
day.

The Planets must lie in Six Signs, or 5, or 4, or 3, or 2, or 1.

When the Seven Planets lie in Six Signs, for you must know they cannot lie in
Seven, (the Seventh being opposite to one of the Six, must therefore be reduced
to it.) It cannot well be cold, but it will be Cloudy, suspicious. If they are
comprised in 5 Signs, which way soever, they have their Weight, to Warm, Cloudy
and commonly Wet Weather.

If in Four Sings, IV Sign. 3 1 1 2. 2 1 1 3.
observe these Numbers in the Margin, it is no Steganography, it comes not from
Trithemius, it denotes only the number and the order of the Signs possessed.
Example, in 1. 1. in 1. in 2. or in 1. 1. 2, 3.

If in Three Signs, III Sign 3 2 2. 2 2 3.
mark the numbers in the Margin.

If in Two Signs, mark the numbers assigned. If I say you attend to the Planets
Position under the Conditions before expressed, of Distance and Distribution,
it will not repent you. You will see that you are in a Prognostic way, and
that there wants nothing but a little Observation, to bring it to perfection,
II Sign. 2 5. 4 3.
all the Exceptions or Failers will lie, upon the account of, and the Planet
engaged to him, or immediate to him, for and immediate, or, if they lie first
or last in order especially, they defeat us of our Moisture. Neither must we be
too severe with these Rules, but reckon it sufficient if we see the Effect one
of the Days, though the Rule holds for two, the Rule being nakedly proposed,
without any Ties or Restrictions, which are necessary sometime, seeing the
Quarters of Heaven are not alike disposed, witness the Month of March, which is
commonly dry footed.

There remains now nothing but the Readers Favor to glance upon the Errata,
which will drop in a Work of this Length, and uncouth Argument. Yea, before he
casts his Eye thither, let him pardon the grand Erratum, the Bulk of the Book.

Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus, Dominus, Deus Sabbath, Pleni sunt Coeli and Terra
Gloria tua; Hosanna in Excelsis.
RECOGNITION.
THe Author willing to rid himself of his Cumbersome Papers, committed some
part of them to the Press above ten years since, and it will be allowed by all
fair-spoken Persons, that we may rectify an opinion, under a longer
experience. What hinders, but that he may take notice of an Instance or two,
which are to be read cum grano Salis, or to save that Charge, to be retracted.
The first of these, concerns prodigious Showrs of Dust and Ashes, which I see
since, are not generated in the Air, as page 2. is reported, but elevated
thither. Neither do I know, whether it be the more probable Opinion that the
Frog is generated in the Airy Region. The Thunderbolt also, mentioned 2. Cap.
2. I have been taught, is not any body aggregate of Earthly Particles, but only
the dint of Harmful Lightning, called by that Name by the Vulgar,
notwithstanding sometimes, it must be granted that Stones have fallen from the
Clouds. But the chiefest Contradiction that requires a Conciliator, is, that we
make Jove colder than Saturn, page 29. and yet after make him a Warm Star, page
327. it is the hardest Word in all the Scroul of Heaven, and yet if we look on
it, it is writ in Capital Letters. It Is hard to say, I confess, that is the
Coldest, when he is nearer than, and to sight, greater. So there we eat our
Words, and let be the Coldest, for his remote distance, and his less Diameter.
All this while we speak of Cold in a Comparative Sense, not denying, but what
is comparatively Cold, may be absolutely Warm. So himself is Warm too: and the
Cold we impute to a state of Desertion, for reckon 's distance as high as you
please, in to the in Summer Signs, unless in state of Desertion, he is a warm
Planet. It Is but a folly to dissemble, in all Cold Winters acts his part as
well as, and the most Prodigious Winters succeed under their mutual Aspects. So
let be the next Cold to. Nay, I must speak all; whosoever deals in Prognostic,
shall find to be a Resister of Moisture, more than any; and how should be dryer
than, and notwithstanding have no Title to be esteemed Colder, let greater Men
determine: Sure all distinct minute Prognostic supposes to be dry and cool, and
the Planetary Influence acknowledges it, as is remarked in the foregoing
Treatise.

Addend. Page 377. lin. 33.
Of this we have had too late a Proof in the sad Flood at Hamburgh, Dec. 7.
1685. where there is a notable Co-incidence of, so posited with in the other
most critical place, the close of, which we have wished those Countries to
observe, if they please.

An Advertisement.
THe Truest and Best approved Weather-Glasses, both Baroscopes and Thermometers
are accurately made by John Warner, a Maker of Mathematical Instruments at the
East end of Portugal Row, near adjoining to Lincolns-Inn-Fields, London.

ERRATA.
Page 42.. read... 45. l. 34. Fiery, being. 59. l. 20. expect. 60. l. o. Fatal
Paral. id. l. 46. no less than XLI. 64. l. 23. and part. id. l. 24. part of 74.
l. 32. Competence. 80. l. 24. Musical ill -- l. 20. Chap XV. 81. l. 10. per --
82. l. 8. Tuesday. 92. l. 25. its. 101. l. 27. were 105. l. 19. Winchelsey.
107. l. 28. Mnvoidrs. 111. l. 43. in 2. l. 44., etc. 112. l. 29. and. l. 30. l.
32. oppositio. 113. l. 20. or. 121. l. 38. Collation. 122. l. ult. of the
Planets orb, 124. l. 21. possible. 125. l. 35. Cohaesion. l. 36. Velocity. l.
37. of motion. 141. 42. its. 144. l. 16. irritated. 145. l. 10. Damp July 4. l.
14. 1577. l. 19. etc. at 161. -- Aug. 19. Bedford. 163. -- Apr. 9. 16^0. 165.
l. 32. actuate. 174. l. 6, Suavity. 175. l. 12. 1622. 30. Traders. 176. l. 36.
Elbe. l. ult, 1618. ib. N. England. 178. l. o. Bode Wet. 201. l. 40. Empyreuma.
211. l. 15. Cables. 219. l. 10. 1532. l. 15. 1544. l. 36. 1580. 219. l. 44.
1571. 252. l. 26. List. 283. l. 30. produce. 286. l. 27. certa Romans 312. col.
2. l. 15. may. 317. l. 13. Drought. 319. l. 36. Sentiment. 320. l. 26. wary.
321. l. 23. Topical. l. 31. dele, and. 322. l. 45. in Conj -- l. 51. dele the.
328. l. 39. Wapentake. 331. l. 44. contracted. 332. l. 1. dicunt. 343. 1525.
7., 26.. 1527. in princ. 1528. Jan. 18. alius C -- 344. 1532. Sept. 25. lege
23. 1533. July, lege June. 1540. Lyc. add Stow. 1544. lege 1541. 1546. opp. in.
345. 1559. lege 1555. 1566. lege 1556. Nov. 10. in. Nov. 20.. 1567. Add Sept.
7. 346. 1586. in fin.. 347. l. 14., add in. 378. l. 13. dele Dext. Marg. lege
adjoin'd. 384. l. 34. intravit. l. 39. ad lege at. 394. l. 36. one, lege some.
l. 37. dele of. 395. l. 53. 1625. add, where the Iris is decircinated with more
than one Aspect assistant. 393. l. 34. Trangums. 405. l. 21. Gondomar's. 407.
l. 48. it is. 417. l. 27. aggravates. 428. l. 19. then that. l. 39. ammoniac.
429. l. 37. immediately. 442. l. 11. Boatum. 443. l. 37. Sore. 449. l. 40. why
is it not. l. 44. digest. l. 52. Master, lege after. 452. l. 30, 31. boatum,
add, as has been said. 453. l. 36. Verilly if. 454. l. 16 were. 455. l. 41. so
the, lege some 458. l. 28. thing, lege thus. 460. l. 9. protracted. 404. l. 31.
issued forth. 500. l. 19. Midnight Officers. l. 20. Midwifry, lege Caprice.
501. l. ult. 1562, lege 52. 502. l. 3. 1529. lege 92. 504. Valeriola. 505. l.
o. dele Birth. Genua usque. 506. l. 35. at the Midsummer Moon. 507. l. 34. with
the Pleiades. 508. l. 3. Specified, yea, from our Bl Saviors time, that is more.
Books Printed for Obadiah Blagrave at the Black Bear in St. Paul's Churchyard.
DOctor Gell's Remains; being sundry pious and learned Notes and Observations
on the whole new Testament, opening and explaining all the difficulties
therein; wherein our Savior Jesus Christ is yesterday, to day, and the same
for ever. Illustrated by that Learned and Judicious Man, Dr. Robert Gell,
Rector of Mary Aldermary, London, in Folio.

Christian Religions Appeal from the groundless prejudice of the Scepticks to
the Bar of common Reason; wherein is proved that the Apostles did not delude
the World. 2. Nor were themselves deluded. 3. Scripture matters of Faith have
the best Evidence. 4. The Divinity of Scripture is as demonstrable as the being
of a Deity. By John Smith, Rector of St. Mary in Colchester, in Folio.

The Case of Ministering at the Communion Table when there is no Eucharist,
stated and discussed; upon occasion of a Treatise entitled, Parish Churches
turned into Conventicles, etc. together with some preliminary Reflections made
upon two Papers in answer to that Treatise; in 4o.

Weighty Reasons for tender and conscientious Protestants to be in Union and
Communion with the Church of England, and not to forsake the public
Assemblies, as the only means to prevent the growth of Popery; on several
Sermons on 1 Cor 1. 10. That ye all speak the same things, and that there be no
divisions among you, but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same Mind,
and in the same Judgment, on Heb. 10. 25. not forsaking the assembling our
selves together, as the manner of some is; in 8o large.

The Psalms of King David paraphrased, and turned into English Verse, according
to the common Meter, as they are usually sung in Parish Churches, by Miles
Smith; in 8o large.

The Evangelical Communicant in the Eucharistical Sacrament, or a Treatise
declaring who is fit to receive the Supper of our Lord, by Philip Goodwin; in
8o.

A Fountain of Tears, emptying it self into three Rivulets, viz. Of
Compunction, Compassion, Devotion; or Sobs of Nature sanctified by Grace,
Languaged in several Soliloquies and Prayers upon various Subjects, for the
benefit of all that are in Affliction, and particularly for these present
times, by John Featly, Chaplain to his late Majesty.

A Course of Catechizing, or the marrow of all Authors as have Writ or
Commenced on the Church Catechism; in 8o,

A more shorter Explanation of the Church Catechism, fitted for the meanest
capacity; in 8o. price 2 d. by Dr. Combar.

The true bounds of Christian Freedom, or a Treatise, wherein the Rights of the
Law are vindicated, the Liberties of Grace maintained; by Sam. Bolton, D. D.

Fons Lacrymarum, or a Fountain of Tears; from whence does flow England's
complaint, Jeremiah's Lamentation, paraphrased with Divine Meditations, by John
Quarles, in 8o.

Gregory Father Greybeard with his Vizard pulled off, or News from the Cabal,
in some Reflections upon a late Book, entitled, The Rehearsal Transprosed
after the fashion it now obtains; in a Letter to Sir Roger L'Estrange; in 8o.

A Reproof to the Rehearsal transprosed in a discourse to its Author, by Dr.
Parker; in 8o

A Good Companion, or a Meditation upon Death, by William Winstandly; in 12o.

Select Thoughts, or choice Helps for a Pious Spirit, a Century of Divine
Breathings for a Ravished Soul, beholding the excellency of her Lord Jesus: To
which is added the Breathings of the devout Soul, by Jos. Hall, Bishop of
Norwich; in 12o.

The Remedies of Discontent, or a Treatise of Contentation; very fit for these
present times; by Jos. Hall, Bishop of Norwich, in 12o.

The Curtezan unmasked, or the Whoredoms of Jezebel painted to the Life, with
an Antidote against them, or Heavenly Julips to cool Men in the Fever of Lust;
in 8o.

The admired piece of Physiognomy and Chyromancy, Mataposcopacy, the
Symmetrical proportions, and Signal Moles of the Body fully and accurately
explained, with their natural and predictive significations both to Men and
Women, being delightful and profitable; with the Subject of Dreams made plain:
whereunto is added the Art of Memory; by Richard Saunders; in Folio:
Illustrated with Cuts and Figures.

Observations upon Military and Political Affairs; Written by the most
Honorable George Duke of Albermarle; in Folio: Published by Authority.

Modern Fortification, or the Elements of Military Architecture, practiced and
designed by the latest and most experienced Ingeniers of this last Age,
Italian, French, Dutch and English; and the manner of Defending and Besieging
Forts and places: with the use of a Joint Ruler or Sector, for the speedy
description of any Fortification; by Sir Jonas Moore Knight. Master Surveyor.

A General Treatise of Artillery of Great Ordinance: Writ in Italian by Tomaso
Morety of Brescia, Ingenier; first to the Emperor, and now to the most serene
Republic of Venice, translated into English, with Notes thereupon; and some
addition out of French for Sea-Gunners. By Sir Jonas Moore Knight: With an
Appendix of Artificial Fireworks of War and Delight; by Sir Abraham Dager
Knight, Ingenier: Illustrated with diverse Cuts.

The Art of War, and the way that it is at present practiced in France, both
for Horse and Foot; in Three parts; in 8o large.

A Mathematical Compendium, or useful Practices in Arithmetic, Geometry and
Astronomy, Geography and Navigation, Embatteling and Quartering of Armies,
Fortifications and Gunnery, Gauging and Dialling; explaining the Loyerthius
with new Judices, Napers, Rhodes or Bones, making of Movements, and the
Application of Pendulums: With the projection of the Sphere for an Universal
Dial. By Sir Jonas Moore Knight.

The Works of that most excellent Philosopher and Astronomer Sir George Wharton
Baronet: giving an account of all Fasts and Festivals, observations in keeping
Easter; Apotelefma, or the Nativity of the World of the Epochae and Erae used
by Chronologers: A Discourse of Years, Months, and days of Years; of Eclipses
and Effects of the Crises in Diseases: With an excellent discourse of the names
Genius and Species, efficient and final causes of all Comets; how Astrology may
be restored from Morinus; in 8o large, cum multis aliis.

The practical Gauger, being a plain and easy method of Gauging all sorts of
Brewing Vessels; whereunto is added a short Synopsis of the Laws of Excise: The
third Edition with Additions: By John Main.

A Table for Purchasers of Estates, either Land or Houses; by William Leybourne.

Leyborn's Platform for Purchasers and Builders; in 8o large.

Sir Jonas Moore's Arithmetic, with new Mathematical Tracts, in 8o large.

Blagrave's Introduction to Astrology, in three parts; containing the use of an
Ephemerides, and how to erect a Figure of Heaven to any time proposed; also the
signification of the Houses, Planets, Signs and Aspects; the explanation of all
useful terms of Art: With plain and familiar Instructions for the Resolution of
all manner of Questions, and exemplified in every particular thereof by Figures
set and judged. The second treats of Elections, showing their Use and
Application, as they are constituted on the Twelve Celestial Houses, whereby
you are enabled to choose such times as are proper and conducible to the
perfection of any matter of business whatsoever. The Third comprehends an
absolute remedy for rectifying and judging Nativities; the signification and
portance of Directions; with new and experienced Rules touching Revolutions and
Transits, by Jo. Blagrave of Reading Gent. Student in Astrology and Physic; in
8o large.

Blagrave's Astrological Practice of Physic; discovering the true way to cure
all kinds of Diseases and Infirmities which are naturally incident to the Body
of Man, in 8o large.

Gadbury's Ephemerides for thirty years, 20 whereof is yet to come, and
unexpired, in 4o.

Philosophy delineated, consisting of diverse Answers upon several Heads in
Philosophy, first drawn up for the satisfaction of some Friends, now exposed to
public View and Examination; by William Marshal, Merch. London; in 8o large.

The Natural History of Nitre, or a Philosophical Discourse of the Nature,
Generation, place and artificial Extraction of Nitre, with its Virtues and
Uses, by William Clark, M. Doctorum Londinensis.

The Sea-mans Tutor, explaining Geometry, Cosmography and Trigonometry, with
requisite Tables of Longitude and Latitude of Seaports, Travers Tables, Tables
of Easting and Westing, Meridian miles, Declinations, Amplitudes, Refractions,
use of the Compass, Calendar, measure of the Earth Globe, use of Instruments,
Charts, differences of sailing estimation of, a Ship-way by the Log, and
Log-Line Currents. Composed for the use of the Mathematical School in Christ's
Hospital, London; his Majesty's Charles II. his Royal Foundation. By Peter
Perkins Master of that School.

Mr. Nich. Culpeppers last Legacy, left and bequeathed to his dearest Wife for
the public good, being the choicest and most profitable of those secrets,
which, while he lived, were locked up in his Breast, and resolved never to
publish them till after his Death, containing sundry admirable experiments in
Physic and Chyrurgery. The fifth Edition, with the Addition of a new Tract of
the Anatomy of the Reins and Bladder, in 8o large.

Mr. Nich. Culpeppers Judgment of Diseases, called Symoteca Vranica; also a
Treatise of Urine. A Work useful for all that study Physic, in 8o large.

Mr. Nich Culpeppers School of Physic, or the experimental practice of the
whole Art, wherein are contained all inward Diseases from the Head to the Foot,
with their proper and effectual Cures: such Diet set down as ought to be
observed in sickness and in health, in 8o large.

The complete Midwifes practice enlarged, in the most weighty and high
concernment of the Birth of Man, containing a perfect Directory or Rules for
Midwifes and Nurses; as also, a Guide for Women in their Conception, Bearing
and Nursing of Children, from the experience of our English, viz. Sir Theodoret
Mayrn, Dr. Chamberlain, Mr. Nich. Culpepper, with the Instructions of the Queen
of France's Midwife to her Daughter, in 8o large. Illustrated with several Cuts
of Brass.

Blagraves suppliment or enlargement to Mr. Nich. Culpeppers English Physician,
containing a description of the form, place and time, Celestial Government, of
all such Plants as grow in England, and are omitted in his Book called the
English Physician, printed, in the same Volume, so as it may be bound with the
English Physician, in 8o Large.

De Succo pancreatico, or a Physical and Anatomical Treatise of the nature and
office of the Panecratick Joyce of Sweetbread in Men, showing its generation
in the Body, what Diseases arise by its Visitation; together with the Causes
and Cures of Agues and intermitting Fevers, hitherto so difficult and
uncertain, with several other things worthy of Note. Written by that famous
Physician D. Reg. de Graff. Illustrated with diverse Cuts in Brass; in 8o large.

Great Venus unmaskt, being a full discovery of the French Pox or Venereal
Evil. By Gideon Harvey, M. D. in 8o large.

The Anatomy of Consumptions, the Nature and Causes Subject, Progress, Change;
Signs, Prognostications, Preservations, and several Methods in curing
Consumptions, Coughs, and spitting of Blood; together with a discourse of the
Plague. By Gidion Harvey, in 8o large.

Eleuchus of opinions concerning the Small Pox; by Tobias Whitaker, Physician
to his Majesty; together with problemical questions concerning the cure of the
French Pox; in 12o.

The Accomplished Cook, or the Art and Mystery of Cookery, wherein the whole Art
is revealed in a more easy and perfect method than has bin published in any
Language; expert and ready ways for the dressing of all sorts of Flesh, Foul
and Fish, with variety of Sauces proper for each of them; and how to raise all
manner of Past, the best directions for all sorts of Kickshaws; also the terms
of Carving and Sewing. An exact account of all Dishes for all seasons in the
year, with other admirable Curiosities, approved by the five and fifty years
experience of Robert May in his attendance on several persons of great Honor;
in 8o large.

The Queens Closet opened, incomparable secrets in Physic and Surgery,
Preserving, Conserving, and Canding; which was presented unto the Queen by the
most experienced persons of their times; in 12o large.

The Gentleman's Jockie and approved Farrier; instructing in the nature, causes
and cures of all Diseases incident to Horses, with an exact method of Breeding,
Buying, Dieting, and other ways of ordering all sorts of Horses; in 8o large.

The Countrymans Treasure, showing the nature, cause and cure of ail Diseases
iucident to Cattle, viz. Oxen, Cows and Calves, Sheep Hogs and Dogs, with
proper means to prevent their common Diseases and Distempers, being very useful
receipts, as they have been practiced by the long experience of forty years; by
James Lambert, in 8o large.

St. Foyne improved, a Discourse showing the utility and benefit which England
has, and may receive by the Grass called St. Foyne, and answering all
objections urged against it; in 4o.

Pharomand, that famed Romance, being the History of France, in twelve parts;
by the Author of Cleopatra and Cassandra; in Folio.

Parthanessa, that famed Romance.

A short History of the late English Rebellion; by M. Needham, in 4o.

The ingenious Satyr against Hypocrites; in 4o.

Wits Interpreter, the English Parnassiu, or a sure guide to those admirable
accomplishments that complete the English Gentyr, in the most acceptable
qualifications of Discourse or Writing; in which briefly the whole mystery of
those pleasing Witchcrafts of Eloquence and Love are made easy, in diverse
Tracts; in 8o large.

Mysteries of Love and Eloquence, or the Art of Wooing and Complementing, as
they are managed in the Spring Garden, Hide Park, and other places; in 8o large.

The Maidenhead lost by Moonlight, or the adventure of the Meadow; by Joseph
Kepple, in Quarto.

Vercingerixa, a new Droll; composed on occasion of the pretended German
Princess. in 4o.

Meronides, or Virgil Traversly, being a new Paraphrase upon the fifth and
sixth Book of Virgil's Aeneas in Burlesque Verse; by the Author of the Satyr
against Hypocrites.

Gerania, a new Discovery of a little sort of People called Pigmies, with a
lively description of their stature, habit, manners, building, knowledge and
Government; by Joshua Barns of Emmanuel College in Cambridge, in 8o.

The Woman is as good as the Man, or the equality of both Sexes: Written
originally in French, and translated into English.

Cleaveland's Genuine Poems, Orations, Epistles, purged from many false and
spurious ones which had usurped his name. To which is added many never before
printed or published, according to the Authors own Copies; with a narrative of
his Life; in 8o large.

Newly reprinted the exquisite Letters of Mr. Robert Loveday, the late admired
Translator of the three first Volumes of Clepatra, published by his Brother Mr.
Anthony Loveday, in 8o large.

Troades, a Translation out of Seneca; in 8o.

Wallographea, or the Britan described, being a Relation of a pleasant Journey
into Wales; wherein are set down several remarkable passages that occurred in
the way thither, and also many choice observables and notable commemorations
concerning the state and condition, the nature and humor, actions, manners,
and customs of that Country and People, in 8o.

Troja Rediviva, or the Glories of London surveyed, in an Heroic Poem, in 4o.

Wit and Drollery, Jovial Poems, corrected and amended with new Additions; in
8o large Adaga Scholica, or a Collection of Scotch Proverbs and Proverbial
Phrases, in 12o. very useful and delightful.

The Batchelors Banquet, or fifteen degrees of Marriage, in 4o.

The Institutions, Laws and Ceremonies of the most Noble Order of the Garter;
adorned with many Sculptures in Copper; by that Noble and ingenious Gentleman
Elias Ashmole, Esque in Folio.

The perfect Statesman, or Minister of State; wherein are briefly set forth the
true Nature of the Subject, the endowment inherent to the person, the method of
his Election, Institution and Reception; the object of his Office distinguished
under such principles as are immediately requisite to the Establishment of a
Commonweal, by Leonard Willin Esquire; in Folio.

A Treatise of Taxes and Contributions, showing the Nature and Measures of
Crown Lands, Assessments, Customs, Poll-monies, Lotteries, Benevolence,
Penalty, Monopolies, Offices, Tyths, Raising of Coins, Hearth-money, Excise;
and with several intersperst Discourses and Digressions concerning Wars, the
Church, Universities, Rents and Purchases, Usury and Exchange, Banks and
Lumbards, Registers for Conveyances, Buyers, Insurances, Exportation of Money
and Wool, Free Ports, Coyns, Housing, Liberty of Conscience: by Sir William
Pette Knight; in 4o.

England described through the several Counties and Shires thereof, briefly
handled; some things also premised to set forth the Glory of this Nation, by
Edward Leigh Esquire;

England's Worthies, Select Lives of the most eminent persons from Constantine
down to this present year 1684. by William Winstandly Gent. in 8o large.

The Glories and Triumphs of his Majesty King Charles the II. being a Collectin
of all Letters, Speeches, and all other choice passages of State since his
Majesty's return from Breda, till after his Coronation, in 8o large.

The Portugal History, describing the said Country, with the Customs and Uses
among them, in 8o large.

A new Survey of the Turkish Government completed, with diverse Curs, being an
exact and absolute discovery of what is worthy of knowledge, or any way
satisfactory to curiosity in that mighty Nation, in 8o large.

The Antiquity of China, or an Historical Essay, endeavoring a probability,
that the Language of the Empire of China, is the primitive Language spoken
through the whole World before the confusion of Babel; wherein the Customs and
Manners of the Chineans are presented, and Ancient and Modern Authors consulted
with. Illustrated with a large Map of the Country, in 8o large.

An Impartial Description of Surynham upon the continent of Guiana in America;
with a History of several strange Beasts, Birds, Fishes, Serpents, Insects and
Customs of that Colony, in 4o.

Ethecae Christianae, or the School of Wisdom. It was dedicated to the Duke of
Monmouth in his younger years, in 12o.

The Life and Actions of the late renowned Prelate and Soldier Christopher
Bernard Van Gale Bishop of Monster, in 8o.

The Politician discovered, or considerations on the late pretensions that
France claims to England and Ireland, and her designs and plots in order
thereunto; in two serious Discourses in 4o.

The Conveyancers Light, or the Complete Clerk and Scriveners Guide, being an
exact draught of all Precedents and Assurances now in use, likewise the Forms
of all Bills, Answers and Pleadings in Chancery, as they were penned by diverse
learned Judges, Eminent Lawyers, and great Conveyancers, both Ancient and
Modern, in 40 large.

The Privileges and Practices of Parliaments in England, collected out of the
Common Law of this Land, in 4o.

A Letter from Oxford concerning the approaching Parliament then called 1681.
in vindication of the King, the Church, and Universities, in 4o.

The Antiquity, Legality, Right, Use, and ancient usage of Fines paid in
Chancery, upon the suing out or obtaining some sorts of Original Writs
retornable into the Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, in 4o.

Brevia Parliamentaria Rediviva, in 13 Sections, containing several Catalogues
of the numbers and dates of all Bundles of Original Writs of Summons and
Elections that are now in the Tower of London, in 4o.

The new World of Words, or a general English Dictionary, cotaining the proper
signification and Etymologies of Words, derived from other Languages, viz.
Hebrew, Arabic, Syriack, Greek, Latin, Italian, French, Spanish, British,
Dutch, Saxon, useful for the advancement of our English Tongue; together with
the definition of all those terms that conduce to the understanding of the Arts
and Sciences, viz. Theology, Philosophy, Logic, Rhetoric, Grammar, Ethic,
Law, Magic, Chyrurgery, Anatomy, Chemistry, Botanicks, Arithmetic, Geometry,
Astronomy, Astrology, Physiognomy, Chyromancy, Navigation, Fortification,
Dyaling, cum multis aliis, in fol.

Cocker's new Coppy-Book, or England's Penman, being all the curious Hands
engraved in 28 Brass Plates; in folio.

Sir Robert Stapleton's Translation of Juvenals Satyr, with Annotations
thereon; in folio.

The Rudiments of the Latin Tongue, by a method of Vocabulary and Grammar; the
former comprizing the Primitives, whether Noun or Verb, ranked in their several
Cases; the latter teaching the forms of Declension and Conjugation, with all
possible plainness: To which is added the Hermonicon, viz. a Table of those
Latin Words, which their sound and signification being merely resembled by, the
English are the sooner learned thereby, for the use of Merchant Tailors School,
in 8o large.

Indiculis Vniversalis, or the whole Universe in Epitomie, wherein the names of
almost all the Works of Nature, of all Arts and Sciences, and their most
necessary Terms are in English, Latin and French, methodically digested, in 8o
large.

Farnaby's Notes on Juvenal and Persius, in 12o.

Clavis Grammatica, or the ready way to the Latin Tongue, containing most plain
Demonstrations for the regular Translating of English into Latin, with
instructions how to construe and parse Authors, fitted for such as would attain
to the Latin Tongue, by T. B. Schoolmaster.

The English Orator, or Rhetorical Descents by way of declamation upon some
notable Themes, both Historical and Philosophical, in 8o large.

M. Tulli Ciceronis Epistolarum Selectarum Libri tres, in 8o.

Fax Nova Lingua Latiua, in 8o large.

Mapps.
A New and exact Mapp of the whole World, with the late newest Discoveries of
all the parts of Persia, with a Description thereof in French and English.

A New Mapp of Oxford.

A New Mapp of the Royal Exchange.

A large Mapp of the City of London, and its Ruins, faithfully surveyed,
wherein is declared its Original, Antiquities, Monuments, Customs, Knights,
according to the Ancient Charter, granted to the said City by former Kings of
England.

An Advertisement of an Excellent Water for the Preservation of the Eyes.
THere is sold by the said Obadiah Blagrave, a Water of such an excellent
Nature and Operation for preservation of the Eyes, that the Eye being but
washed therewith once or twice a day, it not only takes away all hot Rheumes
and Inflammations, but also preserves the Eye after a most wonderful manner; a
Secret which was used by a most Learned Bishop: By the help of which Water he
could read without the use of Spectacles at 90 Years of Age. A Bottle of which
will cost but 1 s.

FINIS.

