A SERMON OF ST. PETER, Preached before HER MAJESTY THE Queen-Dowager, In Her
Chapel at Somerset House, on the Twenty ninth of June, 1686. BEING St. PETER
and St. PAVL's Day.

By THOMAS GODDEN D. D. Preacher in Ordinary to Her Majesty.

Published by Her Majesty's Command.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
for His Household and Chapel. 1686.

A SERMON OF ST. PETER, Preached before Her Majesty the Queen Dowager, On St.
Peter and St. Paul's Day, 1686.
Et Ego dico tibi, quia Tu es Petrus, and super hanc Petram aedificabo
Ecclesiam meam. Matthew. 16. 18. And I say unto thee, that Thou art Peter, and
upon this Rock I will build my Church.
TWO Years were now elapsed from the time of their first Vocation, that Peter
and the rest of the Disciples had been constant Auditors in the School of the
Word made Flesh, conversing daily with him, hearing the Sacred Oracles, which
distilled from his Gracious Lips, and beholding the great Miracles he wrought
for the Benefit of Mankind. And now it was high time they should give some
Account of what they had learned under so Divine a Master. In order to this,
our Lord designs a solemn Examination; and having led them into the Coasts of
Caesarea Philippi, proposes two Questions to them. The First, Preliminary only,
to open the way, and lead them (as it were by the Hand) into the Knowledge and
Confession of the Truth, Quem dicunt homines esse Filium hominis? Whom do Men
say, that the Son of Man is? The Second, the Substantial Point, and which was
to be the Test of their Proficiency, Vos autem quem me esse dicitis? But you,
Whom do you say that I am?

To the First of these Questions the Answer was easy, because the Judgments of
the World are every where to be met with; and so, without any demurring upon
the matter, they readily answered, Some said, that He was John the Baptist;
some, that He was Elias; others, Jeremias, or some one of the Prophets. These
were the Judgments the World made of him: But why not one Word of the Messiah
among the rest, since they knew the term of Years was now expired, and his
Coming daily expected? No sooner did the Baptist appear Jo. 1. 19.
out of his Solitude, but presently a solemn Embassy of Priests and Levites was
sent from Jerusalem, to ask him if he were not the Christ who was to come. But
when the Messiah himself appears, the best Title they can afford him, is of a
John the Baptist, or an Elias, or a Jeremias, or some one of the Prophets; but
no mention at all of the Messiah. O false and deceitful World, how Erroneous
art thou in thy Weights, and Unequal in thy Measures, giving to one what is due
to another, and always deviating from Truth, either by Excess or Defect!

That these Judgments the World made of his Person, were such, that is,
Erroneous, our Lord sufficiently intimated by leaving them, and addressing
himself to his Disciples with the Second Question; Vos autem quem me esse
dicitis? But you, My Disciples, who now for two Years together have been daily
Witnesses of my Life and Conversation, and seen the great Works I have done,
Whom do you say that I am? Here the rest of the Apostles, not knowing what to
answer, (for this Doctrine, as St. Cyril says, was above their reach) remained
S. Cyril. Catech. II.
silent: Only Peter (whom the same Holy Father calls there the Prince of the
Apostles, and Sovereign Herald of the Church) not of his own Invention, or
induced by Humane Reason, but illuminated in his Soul by God the Father,
answered and said, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the Living God: that is, not
by Adoption, as others, but by Nature, of one and the same Substance with thy
Eternal Father.

And now what was the Reward (as St. Hilary calls it) of this so Noble and S.
Hilar. in Matthew. c. 16.
Generous a Confession? First, He declared him Blessed, in having been so
highly favored by God: And then, as it follows in the Words of my Text, and
the Sequel of the Gospel, He said unto him, Et ego dico tibi, quia Tu es
Petrus: And I say also to thee, that Thou art Peter, (which is by
Interpretation a Rock) and upon this Rock I will build my Church, and the Gates
of Hell shall not prevail against it. And I will give to thee the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven; And whatsoever thou shall bind upon Earth, shall be bound in
Heaven; and whatsoever thou shall loose upon Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven

Had these been the Words of a Chrysostom, or some other famed Orator, in a
Panegyric of St. Peter, they might have been looked upon as Hyperboles, or
Exaggerations of Rhetoric. For if they be understood to mean as they sound,
never was such Honor and Dignity as this, conferred upon any of the Sons of
Adam, from the Creation of the World. But now that the Eternal Word, who is
Truth it self, has been pleased to be the Encomiast of our Saint, and to
pronounce them with His own Blessed Mouth in so solemn a Manner, our Faith is
exempt from all suspicion of Hyperboles, and the Honors given to St. Peter
must be his very True and Proper Elogium.

And because this is what (God willing) I shall endeavor to make out in my
following Discourse, I shall divide my Text and it into Two Parts. In the
First, I shall let you see the great Honor conferred upon our glorious Saint,
by our Lord's confirming to him, on this occasion, the Name of Peter, that is,
of a Rock; Et ego dico tibi, quia Tu es Petrus; And I say to thee, that Thou
art Peter: In the Second, That this Name was not only a Title of Honor, but
supposed or carried with it a real Communication of the Dignity and Authority
imported by it; which was to be the Rock or Foundation-stone, upon which the
Church should be built, and super hanc Petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam; And
upon this Rock I will build my Church. That I may treat worthily of them, Let
us implore the Assistance of the Divine Spirit, by the Intercession of that
Sacred Virgin, who was chosen before all to be the Mother of him, whom St.
Peter confessed to be the Son of the Living God.

Ave Maria.

The First Part.
Et ego dico tibi: And I say unto thee, that Thou art Peter. IN the First Book
of Kings, (or, as some 1 Reg. 2. 30.
call it, of Samuel) chap. 2. verse. 30. God was pleased to make a gracious
Declaration in favor of his Servants, or rather, to enter into a Solemn League
or Covenant with them, That if they should Honor him, he would Honor them.
Quicunque glorificaverit me, glorificabo eum. Whosoever shall Honor me, I will
Honor him. Now among all the Honors, with which he has been pleased to Honor
them, who Honor him, that of foretelling the Name, by which they should be
called, or changing the Name given by others into another more noble, is set
forth to us in the Holy Scripture, as a Particular mark of his Favor to his
greatest Servants. In the first of these ways he Honored the Son of Abraham
with the Genesis 17. 19, and 21. 6.
Name of Isaac, which is by Interpretation Laughter, to signify, that he
should be the Joy of his Parents; The Son of Amon King 3 Reg. 13. 2.
of Juda, with the Name of Josias, that is, The Fire of the Lord, to fignifie
the Zeal with which he should take away the High Places, and burn Men's Bones
upon the Altars; as also, the Son of Zachary, with Luke 1. 13. 15.
the Name of John, that is, Gracious, to signify, that he should be filled
with the Holy Ghost, even from his Mother's Womb. In the Second way, he
Honored the Father of the Faithful, by changing his Name from that of Abram
into Abraham, which signifies, A Father of many Genesis 17. 5.
Nations: In like manner, his Wife, by Genesis 17. 15.
changing her Name from that of Sarai into Sara, which signifies as much as
Absolute Lady; and lastly, his younger Grandson, by changing his Name of Jacob
into Genesis 32. 28.
that of Israel, which signifies A Prevailer with God: But in both these ways
he was pleased to Honor the Great and Illustrious Subject of my Text, Simon
the Son of Jonas; first by foretelling when he first beheld Jo. 1. 42. Marc. 3.
14, 16.
him, that he should be called Cephas, or Peter, which is by Interpretation a
Rock: then by giving him that Name, when he chose his Twelve Apostles; and
lastly, by confirming it to him anew, (after the Confession he had made of his
being the true and natural Son of the living God) with the solemn Asseveration
of my Text, Et ego dico tibi, quia tu es Petrus. And I say unto thee, that thou
art Peter.

And may we not then here make use of those words, (and with far greater
advantage to our Saint) with which Haman was commanded to Proclaim the Honor
done to Mardochaeus by King Assuerus, Sic honorabitur, quemcunque voluerit Rex
honorare, Esther 6. 9.
Thus shall the Man be honored whom the King delights to honor: For if it
were a particular Mark of Honor to the most Elect Servants and Favorites of
the King of Glory, that himself was pleased either to design or foretell the
Name, by which their Memory should be had in Benediction through all
Generations; or change that which had been given them, into another more Noble
and Excellent, with how much more advantage does this Honor shine glorious
upon the Memory of our Saint, on whom the Son of God was pleased to confer both
these Signs of his Favor. First, Tu vocaberis Cephas; Thou shall be called
Cephas or Peter. And then again, Et ego dico tibi, quia tu es Petrus, I say
unto thee, that thou art Peter. Such Honor as this have not all the Saints.
This (as St. Ambrose says, speaking of St. Lib. 2. in Luc. c. 1.
John) is a Privilege proper to the Merits of the most Eminent among them, Vt
a Deo nomen accipiant, to receive their Name from God, and in a more especial
manner of the great St. Peter. And why? but because he complied with the
condition of the Covenant, in the Honor he gave to Christ, in a more eminent
manner than the rest.

Two things there were, at which the World was scandalized in our Savior above
all others. The first, that he had told them, That to obtain Eternal Life, they
must eat his Flesh and drink his Blood, which they could not hear without
Horror. The Second, That he made himself the Son of God, which they looked
upon as the greatest of Blasphemies. And by whom was his Honor vindicated in
both these Points, but by St. Peter, in the two most Illustrious Confessions he
made of these two great Mysteries of our Faith: The First, of the necessity of
the true and real eating his Flesh, and drinking his Blood, for the obtaining
of Everlasting Life. The Second, Of his being the True and Natural Son of the
Living God.

That the Confession he made of the Real Manducation of the Body of our Lord,
was first in time, is manifestly evinced from the series of the Acts of our
Savior's Life, Recorded by the Evangelists. For before his coming into the
Coasts of Caesarea Philippi, where he proposed the Question to his Disciples,
Whom do you say that I am? he had fed five thousand Men, besides Women and
Children, with sive Loaves and two Fishes, which Miracle St. Chrysostom says,
Hom. 45. in Jo.
he purposely wrought before hand, by it, to prepare them to believe what he
should afterward teach, concerning the giving them his own Body and Blood at
his last Supper; Propterea id prius fecit miraculum etc. and accordingly,
seeing the Multitudes Jo. 6. 26.
follow him from place to place, because they had eaten of the Loaves, and were
filled, that is, with expectation of being still so fed and entertained by him;
he took occasion from thence to exhort them to labor for a much better Bread,
which camedown from Heaven, and which he would give them, viz. His own Flesh,
which he would give for the Life of the World. At this, you know, how not only
the Jews strove among themselves, saying, How can this Man give us his Flesh to
eat? but many of his own Disciples also, were so scandalized, that they
withdrew themselves from his Company, and would have no more to do with a
Teacher of so absurd a Doctrine, and Commander of so horrible a Practice. And
this too, after they had heard him say, The Flesh profits nothing; The words
that I speak unto you, are Spirit and Life. Rather it was upon hearing these
very words, and understanding them to be a confirmation of what he had said
before, that they went back, and walked no more with him. And is not all this
an evident Sign, that they understood him to speak of giving them his very true
Flesh to eat? Otherwise, certainly they would not have quitted him, nor called
it a hard Saying, that he should say his Flesh was Bread, any more than they
did, when they heard him say, He was a Vine or a Door. Nor was it a less
evident Sign, that our Lord himself also meant, as he said, that is, to give
them his Flesh to eat in very deed; how easy had it been for him, and how
would his Goodness, (that Goodness which brought him down from Heaven to save
Sinners) have moved him in this, as in other Occasions it had done, to have bid
them not to be scandalized at what he had said of giving them his Flesh to eat,
for that it was spoken only in a Parable, and that he intended no more by it,
than to give them Bread and Wine as a Figure of his Body and Blood in
remembrance of him? This, I say, had been very easy for him to do, and surely
well becoming him, who came down from Heaven to seek what was lost, and not to
drive away what was found: And his not doing it, but reprehending them for not
believing, and permitting them to depart in their unbelief, John 6. 64
is a convincing Argument, that both he spoke, and they understood him to speak
of the giving his true Flesh to be eaten by them. This being so, our dearest
Lord solicitous now for the Twelve, whom he had chosen Marc. 3. 14.
to be constantly with him, and to send them forth as occasion served, to
Preach to others, Addresses himself to them with those words full of Tenderness
and Love, Numquid and vos vultis abire? And will you also, you not only my
Disciples, but my Apostles and Domestics, will you also go and leave me upon
the same Accounts as these others have done? When Peter stepping forth with his
wonted fervor, cries out, Domine ad quem ibimus. Lord, to whom shall we go?
Thou have the words of Eternal Life: As if he should have said, Thou have
promised Everlasting Life to those who believe in thee, and if that be not to
be obtained but by eating thy Flesh, and drinking thy Blood, though we understand
not how, or in what manner it can be done, since thou have said it, be it to us
according to thy word. For we have believed and are sure, that thou art the
Christ, the Son of the Living God, and therefore can make good whatever thou
have said, as well in this, as in all other things, how hard and absurd soever
they may appear to Sense and Reason.

Thus did St. Peter give Honor and Glory to Christ, by his steadfast belief and
Confession of the Truth of what he had said, of the necessity of eating his
Flesh and drinking his Blood in very deed, for the obtaining of Everlasting
Life: In like manner, as Martha afterward did, when being asked by our
Savior, if she believed him to be the Resurrection and the Life, she answered
with the words of St. Peter, Vtique Domine. Yea Lord, I believe that thou art
the Christ Jo. 11. 27.
the Son of the Living God, and consequently, as being true God, can by thy
Power raise Lazarus again to Life. But why was not St. Peter then presently
Honored by our Savior with a Beatus es Simon Barjona, Blessed art thou Simon
the Son of Jonas? To this Theophylact answers, That our Lord suspended praising
him then (though he deserved it) least being at a time when others deserted him,
it might seem done out of design, and a piece of Artifice to retain him with
him; but Euthymius more probably thinks it was, because he answered not for
himself only, but in the name of all, among whom there was one so far from
being worthy of praise, that our Savior presently after (Emendans Petrum, says
a learned Expositor) to rectify Peter's mistake, told them, He was a Devil.

The Second Confession he made, was that of my Text, when our Savior demanding
of the Twelve, Whom they said that he was? He alone answered, not in the name
of the rest, or as delivering the Faith of them all, (as he had done before,
and found he had been mistaken:) but as delivering his own proper Sentiment, (a
Sentiment Inspired by a particular Revelation from God the Father to him alone,
but to serve as a Formulary of Confession to the rest,) Tu es Filius Dei vivi;
Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God: Begotten from all Eternity by the
Father, coequal, coeternal, and consubstantial with him.

And This is that full and generous Confession which justifies the Wicked,
Confirms the Just, triumphs over the World, confounds the Devil, rejoices the
Angels, and opens the Kingdom of Heaven to all Believers. This is that
Confession, which encouraged the Martyrs to undergo their Torments; the
Confessors, to have their Conversation in Heaven, even whilst they lived upon
Earth; And the Virgins to run after the Odours of the Perfumes of all sorts of
Virtues, which this Divine Bridegroom of Souls left behind him in this World,
whilst he Conversed in it. In a word, This Faith and Confession of S. Peter,
that Christ was the Son of God, begotten of his Father from all Eternity, and
born in time of his Virgin Mother, is, in the Language of S. Ambrose, S. Ambr.
lib. de Incarnat. cap. 5.
no less than a General Definition, or Prae-condemnation of all the Heresies
that should ever arise in the Church; Adversus omnes Haereses Generalis est
ista Fides.

Thus it was that St. Peter vindicated the Honor of his Master, by confessing
him to be the very true and Natural Son of God. And what did our Lord do, or
rather, what did he not do, to recompense him for it, and to comply with the
Condition of the Covenant on his Part, that is, of Honoring those who honor
him? First, He proclaimed him Blessed whilst yet upon Earth, Beatus es Simon
Barjona, Blessed art thou Simon the Son of Jonas. Then confirmed to him the
Name of Peter, which is as much as to say, a Rock or solid Foundation-Stone,
such an one, as on it he would not doubt to build his Church, and that so firm,
that the Gates of Hell should not prevail against it. Lastly, He promised to
deliver the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven into his hands, with so full and
ample a Commission, that Whatsoever he should bind upon Earth, should be bound
in Heaven, and whatsoever he should loose upon Earth, should be loosed in
Heaven. And had not St. Hilary then great reason to exclaim upon this Passage,
as he does with these words? O in nuncupatione novi Nominis, S. Hilar. in Matt.
c. 16.
felix Ecclesiae Fundamentum! O happy Foundation of the Church, in having this
new Name of PETER imposed on thee; and worthy Rock for Christ to build his
Church upon, which should destroy the Laws of Hell, and break in sunder the
Gates of the Abyss, and the Prisons of Death! O BEATVS COELI JANITOR! O Blessed
Doorkeeper of Heaven, into whose hands the Keys of the Entrance into Eternity
are committed, and whose Judgment upon Earth shall have the Authority of a
Rule, or prejudging Sentence in the Court of Heaven!

Thus St. Hilary, with whom the rest of the Fathers, both Greek and Latin
agree, as to the substance of the thing. For though some of them, (especially
after the Council of Nice) chose rather to affirm the Church to be built upon
St. Peter's Faith or Confession, than upon his Person; yet their meaning was to
assign the Reason, why our Savior made choice of him above the rest, to build
his Church upon; and not to exclude him from being the Rock on which the Church
is built; any more than it was the meaning of St. Peter himself, to deny that
God had made him the Instrument of curing the lame Man at the Gate of the
Temple, when he said, that not he and John Acts 3. 12, 16.
by their own Power or Holiness had made him to walk, but the Faith which is by
Jesus Christ: Or than it was the meaning of St. Jerome, to deny that the same
St. Peter Ep. 61. ad Pammach.
really walked upon the Sea, when he said, Super aquas non corpus ambulasse,
sed Fidem; that his Body walked not upon the Waters, but his Faith.

And thus much I hope may suffice to have spoken of the First Part of my Text,
the great Honor conferred upon our Saint, by our Lord's confirming to him the
Name of Peter. Et ego dico tibi, quia Tues Petrus: And I say also to thee, that
Thou art Peter. I shall now proceed to the Second, and let you see, that this
Name was not only a Title of Honor, but carried with it a real Communication
of the Dignity and Authority imported by it, which was, that of being a Rock or
Foundationstone, upon which the Church should be built. Et super hanc Petram
aedificabo Ecclesiam meam.

The Second Part.
Et super hanc Petram, etc. And upon this Rock I will build my Church. It Is no
very unusual thing among Men, to meet with Titles of Honor without any thing
correspondent in the Subject to support them: And the Reason is, Because it is
in the Power of Princes to give Titles, but not to give fit qualifications for
them; nor yet always to discern, whether the Person be really endowed with them
or no. But when God (who is Truth it self) gives a Title, or imposes a Name, it
must be the height of Extravagance to call in question the real existence of
the Dignity and Authority imported by it, in the Person to whom it is given. We
read in the second Chapter of Genesis, that after that Genesis 2. 14.
God had formed every Beast of the Field, and every Fowl of the Air, he brought
them to Adam, to see what he would call them. And the Scripture says, that what
Adam called every living Creature, that was its Name, that is, its true and
proper Name, as expressing the Nature and Properties of that Creature, as
distinct from all others. And if Adam, by the Wisdom infused in him by God at
his Creation, was so exact, that he gave no Name to any thing, which was not
its proper name, shall we think, that He who is the Wisdom of the Father, by
whom all things were made, and who gives them their very Natures, would give
the Name of Peter, and that in so solemn a manner, as Ego dico tibi, quia Tu es
Petrus, I say unto thee, that Thou art Peter, that is, a Rock, and upon this
Rock I will build my Church, to one only of his Apostles, but that he intended
by it to signify some singular Privilege communicated to him, by which he
should be distinguished and exalted above the rest?

Hear, I beseech you, the Paraphrase St. Hierom makes upon the Words of my S.
Hierom. in Mat. 16.
Text. Peter answering, said to Christ, Thou art the Son of the Living God.
Christ answering, said to Peter, And I say also to thee, That thou art Peter.
And what was this, says St. Hierom, but as if he should have said, Quia Tu
dixisti, Because thou have said to me, That I am the Christ, the Son of the
Living God, Et ego dico tibi, I say also to thee, That thou art Peter, non
sermon casso, and nullum habente opus, not with an empty Word, which has no
force or efficacy in it; sed dico tibi, But this I say to thee, quia meum
dixisse fecisse est, because my saying is doing, or, for me to say a thing is
the same as to do it? From whence it follows, That at the same time that our
Savior said to him, Thou art Peter, that is, a Rock, he made him to be so, by
communicating to him those correspondent spiritual Qualities for the support of
his Church, which are found in a material Rock, to sustain the Building which
is laid upon it. And this St. Hierom shows to have been our Savior's meaning,
by the Example he immediately subjoyns, That as our Lord communicated Light to
his Apostles, that they might be called the Light of the World, and the like,
in other Names or Titles they received from him, as of the Salt of the Earth,
etc. In like manner also to Simon, who believed in Christ the Rock, he gave the
Name of Peter. And then concludes, that according to the Metaphor of a Rock --
Recte dicitur ei; It is rightly and properly said to him, that is, to Peter,
Aedificabo Ecclesiam meam super Te; I will build my Church upon thee.

This is the Discourse of that great and famous Doctor St. Hierom, by which it
appears, that our Savior, when he gave to Simon the Name of Peter, that is, a
Rock made him the Rock on which he would build his Church, and that in a more
Eminent manner than any other of the Apostles, as is every where affirmed by
the same holy Doctor, giving him the Titles of Prince, Chief, Head, and
Greatest of the Apostles: And this very agreeably to the Reasoning of S. Paul
in a Point of much higher Concern, in his first Chapter to the Hebrews. There
this great Apostle being to prove, that Christ our Lord transcended all the
Quires of Angels in the Excellency of his Nature, thought it a convincing
Argument to allege, that he had obtained a more Excellent name than they,
forasmuch Heb. 1. 4.
as our Lord had said to him, and to none of them, in the second Psalm, Thou
art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. And those must think this Argument
of St. Paul to be of no force, who when they hear our Savior say to Simon the
Son of Jonas, and to none other of his Apostles, Thou art Peter, and upon this
Rock I will build my Church, can think that some singular Prerogative was not
meant by it, to be communicated to him, in which he should Excel the rest of
his Brethren.

That the Apostles themselves understood it to be so, at least after the coming
of the Holy Ghost, the Four Registers left us of their Names are so many
Authentic Testimonies to inform us. The First by St. Matthew, c. 10. v. 2. The
Second by St. Mark, c. 3. v. 16. The Third by St. Luke, c. 6. v. 14. And the
Fourth by the same St. Luke, in the 1. c. of the Acts of the Apostles, v. 13.
For although St. Andrew were before St. Peter in diverse respects, as in Age,
being (according to St. Epiphanius) his Elder Brother; and also in following
Haer. 51.
of Christ, (for St. John says of him, that Jo. 1. 41.
he went and found out Peter and brought him to Christ) yet Peter by all the
aforesaid Evangelists is evermore set before Andrew, and all the rest of the
Apostles. And St. Matthew (himself one of the Twelve) not only puts him in the
first Place, but expressly gives him the Title of Primus. The Names of the
twelve Apostles, says he, are Matt. 10. 2.
these; Primus, The First, Simon, who is called Peter. And why was this? to
observe only the order of numbering? No: For then after he had said, Primus, The
First, Simon, who is called Peter, he would have gone forward with, The Second,
Andrew; the Third, James; the Fourth, John; and so of the rest to the end. But
whereas he does not do this, but sets down their Names, as it were in a List
one after another, without any Particle to signify Precedence in one before
another, and only adds the Title of Primus to Peter, it is a manifest
Indication, that the Word was used by him to signify Peter to be not only the
First in Order, nor yet in Place, but the Chief also in Dignity and Authority
among them; as when we say of a Foundation, (which S. Peter was) that it is the
First thing in a Building, the meaning is not, that it is so only in Precedence
of Time or Place, but in regard of the Preeminence it has of Firmness and
Solidity in order to the rest of the Building, which is to be sustained by it.

And this is yet farther confirmed from another remarkable Circumstance in the
aforesaid Catalogues, which is, that whereas the other Apostles are never named
in order, but differently, not only by different Evangelists, but by one and
the same. For Example, Andrew next after Peter by S. Matthew, Matt. 10. 2.
James by S. Mark, and both James and John Mark 3. 17.
by S. Luke, Acts 1. 13. before Andrew, whom Acts 1. 13.
he had placed before them in his Gospel: Luke 6. 14.
And so in like manner Thomas and Bartholomew before Matthew, Acts 1. whereas in
his Gospel Bartholomew and Matthew are Luke 6. 14, 15.
named before Thomas; yet Peter is every where set in the Head of the
Catalogue, and preferred before them all; which certainly cannot be imputed to
Chance, or the Will of the Writer, (for then his Name might have been put
sometimes in one place, and sometimes in another, as well as those of the other
Apostles) but to the particular Direction of the Holy Ghost, and the
Appointment of Christ himself, which no Evangelist could change or alter. Hence
it is, that when S. Paul says of himself, Gal. 1. 18. that he went to Jerusalem
on purpose to see Peter, S. Ambrose, (or the Author In Ep. ad Gal. c. 1. v. 18.
of the Commentaries upon the Epistles of S. Paul, commonly ascribed to S.
Ambrose, and as ancient, if not ancienter than He, and of whose Authority S.
Austin makes use upon occasion) gives this Reason for it; Because he was Primus
inter Apostolos, cui delegaverat, Salvator curam Ecclesiarum; The First among
the Apostles, to whom our Savior had committed the care of the Churches. The
same Reason also is given by S. Chrysostom and others; Because he Hom. 86. in
Jo.
was the Mouth and Prince of the Apostles. And S. Austin says of him, That he
represented Tract. 124. in Jo.
the whole Church, Propter primatum Apostolatus, by reason of the Primacy or
Preeminence of the Apostleship, which was conferred on him. So that if the
Judgment of these Fathers, who speak the Sense of the Church in those Primitive
Times, (S. Austin being the youngest of them) be to be taken, when S. Matthew
in reciting the Names of the Apostles, says, Primus Simon, The First, Simon,
who is called Peter, his meaning was not, that He was so in Order only or
Place, but that He was Princeps, or Chief; or as S. Hierom calls him, Maximus,
the Greatest of the Apostles in Dignity and Authority; in like manner as S.
Paul says of himself, that he was Peccatorum Primus, the First of Sinners, 1 Timothy 1. 15. In Ps. 70.
non tempore, (as S. Austin expounds it) sed malignitate; not in order of Time,
but in the Greatness and Enormity of his Offense.

But that which must needs weigh down the Scale in this matter, with all
impartially-considering Men, is the solemn Promise Mat. 16. 19.
(and no less solemn Performance) which our Savior made to St. Peter, and to
him alone, that he would give to him the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven: Tibi
dabo Claves Regni Coelorum; To thee will I give the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven. And what was this, but the Supreme Power and Authority of Governing his
Church? For the word Keys being a metaphorical Expression, is frequently used
in the Holy Scripture to signify that Superiority or Supreme Power with which
a Person is invested to Govern a Family, a City, or a Kingdom; and therefore
when a City is surrendered, it is the usual Custom to deliver up the Keys to the
Prince, or Principal Person, in acknowledgment of his Power, and as a sign of
Subjection to it. Our Savior then, when he promised to give to Peter the Keys
of the Kingdom of Heaven, that is, of his Church upon Earth, at the same time
designed him to be that Faithful and Prudent Servant or Steward, whom he would
set over his Household, to feed and govern it. And however we read that the
Power of binding and Matt. 18. 18.
loosing, which is an Effect of the Keys, was promised to all the Apostles in
common, Matthew. 18. 18. yet it was not till after the Keys had been promised to
Peter, Matthew. Matt. 16. 19.
16. 19. Nor is it any where read in Scripture, that the Keys themselves, the
proper Token and Badge of the Supreme Stewardship over the Church, were
promised to the rest, but to Peter alone.

And when did our Lord perform this Promise, but when, a little before his
Ascension into Heaven, being now to withdraw his own Visible Presence from his
Church, after a second Examination, or, as Origin calls it, Confession how much
he loved him, and this in the presence of the rest of the Disciples, he
delivered to him, as the same Origin expresses it, (in his Fifth Book upon In
Ep. ad Romans c. 6. l. 5.
the Sixth Chapter to the Romans, which St. Hierom thought worthy his
translating) Summam rerum de pascendis ovibus, the Supreme Charge or
Superintendency of things, in order to the feeding of his Flock; not only of
his Lambs, but of his Sheep; in which Expressions all the Faithful, of what
Degree or Preeminence soever, are included? And to take away all suspicion as
if he meant not to give him an Authority above that of the rest of his
Brethren, he asked him not only if he loved him, but if he did not love him
more than They; manifestly declaring, by the Excess of Love he required from
him, a proportionable Excess or Superiority in the Power he committed to him.

Nor was this any way inconsistent with their being All Equal, as they were
Apostles, (in which regard it is, that S. Cyprian, S. Hierom, and others,
affirm them to have been so.) But on the contrary it was necessary, that one
should be endowed with a Preeminence of Authority above the rest, for the
preservation of Unity, and consequently of the Church, its Safety consisting in
Unity, its Ruin in Division, according to the known Saying of our Savior,
Every Kingdom divided against it self, shall be brought to destruction; Matt.
12. 25.
and every City or House divided against it self, shall not stand. And this is
the Reason which S. Hierom gives, (with whom Lib. 1. adv. Jovinian.
the rest of the Fathers agree) why One (meaning Peter) was chosen among the
Twelve, Vt capite constituto Schismatis tollatur Occasio; viz. That a Head
being constituted, the Occasion of Schism might be taken away.

And now to advance one step farther, and so draw to a Conclusion: If it be
true, as most certainly it is, what our Savior said, that Every Kingdom
divided against it self, shall be brought to ruin; and on the other side, that
The Gates of Hell shall never prevail against his Church, which is his Kingdom,
it manifestly follows, That as the Church is to continue for ever, so also the
Authority given to Peter was not to die with him, but to descend to his
Successors, and to remain for ever in the Chair of Peter. Of which Chair St.
Austin speaking, says, In Psalm. cont. part. Donati.
Ipsa est Petra, quam superbae non vincunt Inferorum Portae; This is the Rock,
which the Proud Gates of Hell do not overcome. And therefore S. Hierom, when
three unhappy Ep. 56. ad Damas.
Factions brake out at the same time, and each endeavored to gain him to their
Party, cries out to them, Si quis Cathedrae Petri jungitur, meus est; Let me
know which of you holds Communion with the Chair of Peter, and him I shall
acknowledge for mine: Super illam Petram aedificatam Ecclesiam scio; Id. Ep. 58.
I know the Church to be built upon that Rock. I know, that whosoever eats
the Lamb out of that House is Profane, and whosoever shall not be in the Ark
of Noe, when the Deluge comes, peribit regnante diluvio, shall perish in the
Waters.

Some perhaps may think this to be a dreadful Saying, and so indeed it is: for
as St. Austin says, Nihil sic debet formidare Christianus, quam Tract. 27. in
Jo.
separari a corpore Christi; A Christian ought to dread nothing so much, as to
be separated from the Body of Christ, which is his Church: For if he be
separated from the Body of Christ, he is no Member of Christ; And if he be no
Member of Christ, he is not quickened by the Spirit of Christ. The Spirit
quickens only the Members which are united to the Body.

How much then are They bound to give thanks to Almighty God, whose good Lot it
has been, either to have been brought up from their Infancy in the Communion of
this Chair, upon which the Church is built, or after having been bred
otherwise, to have been powerfully, and yet sweetly drawn and incorporated into
it! Who can recount all the Graces and Blessings which those enjoy, who are in
this happy Communion, and of which those remain destitute and deprived who are
out of it! I shall give a brief Account of some of them in the words of the
Great S. Austin, and so conclude.

First then, by being Members of this Holy Communion, it is, as the same Father
In Ps. 42.
says, that we are Inhabitants in that Holy Mountain, of which David foretells
in his 42. Psalm, that when God has brought us into it by his Light and Truth,
he graciously hears the Prayers and Supplications we offer up to him, in order
to our own Eternal Salvation. Mons Sanctus ejus, Ecclesia ejus est; This Holy
Mountain is his Church. There it is that, as himself has promised, Every one
Matt. 7. 8.
that asks, shall receive; Every one that seeks, shall find; and that knocks at
the Gate of Heaven, shall have it opened to him. Happy Condition, to be thus
assured of being heard, when we pray for our selves!

And then again, of being Partakers also of the Prayers and good Works of
others. For the Soul of all true Believers, as the same S. Austin says, being
One Soul, per unam In Ps. 103.
Fidem, by the Unity of the same Faith; and all the Faithful One Man, by reason
of the unity of the Body of Christ; As the Functions of the several Parts in
the Natural Body, so also the Prayers and good Works of each Member of this
Mystical Body, redound to the benefit 1 Cor. 12.
of the Whole. Every one has a share in the Prayers and good Works of all, and
may say with holy David, Particeps ego sum omnium Ps. 118.
timentium te; I am a partaker of all those that fear thee, and keep thy
Commandments.

And this not only whilst they were laboring in this Life to gain Heaven for
themselves, but after that they are reigning in it with Christ. Their Charity
by change of State, is not diminished but increased. Securi, (says St. Cyprian)
de sua salute, de nostra sunt soliciti; Being now secure of their own
Salvation, they are solicitous for ours; And the Prayers they offer up for us,
are so much more efficacious and available, by how much the Saints in Glory are
in greater union and favor with God.

Nor do we reap this benefit of partaking the Prayers and good Works of others
only whilst we are in this Life, but also after we are departed out of it: for
as the same St. Austin In Enchirid. c. 109.
(speaking of the Custom of the Catholic Church in his Time, (as in ours) of
Praying for those who were departed in the Communion of it) says, Neque
negandum est; It is not to be denied, but that the Souls of the Faithful
deceased, are relieved by the Piety of their living Friends, when the Sacrifice
of the Mediator (that is, of the Body and Blood of Christ) is offered, or Alms
given for them in the Church.

These, dear Catholic Brethren, with many others, too long to be insisted on at
present, are great Advantages, which those only can be partakers of, whom the
Grace and Goodness of God has placed in this Holy Mountain, his Church.
Quisquis praeter hunc montem erat, non credat, se exaudiri ad salutem aeternam;
Whoever Prays out of this Mountain, says St. Austin, let him not flatter
himself with a vain belief, that he In Ps. 42.
shall be heard to Eternal Salvation. Many who Pray out of the Church, have
their Petitions granted in many things, as for Health, Wealth, Children, and
the like; But he that will obtain Eternal Salvation for himself, must Pray in
this Holy Mountain, if he will be heard. There, says he, let him Worship, In
Ps. 44.
who will be accepted; there let him Pray, who will be heard; and there let him
Confess, who will obtain remission of his Sins.

And as those only Prayers which are offered in the Communion of the Church,
are by virtue of this Communion efficacious to Eternal Life; so also those good
Works only which are done in it, and those Sacraments which are received in it.
Multi, says S. Aug. in Ps. 36.
he, quasi exercent bona Opera; Many exercise themselves in Works seemingly
good, but they belong not to that Husbandman whom our Lord calls Father,
because they dwell not in the Land, which he Cultivates and Waters. Ipsam
formam habet Sarmentum, etc. In Ps. contr. part. Donat. Ipsam formam habet
Sarmentum, quod praecisum est de vite, Sed quid illi prodest forma, si non
vivit de radice?
A Branch cut off from the Vine, has the same Form it had whilst it was in it;
But what will it avail it to have the same Form (of Godliness) if it live not
from the Root? What more glorious State of Life than that of perpetual
Continency! a State so high and sublime, that our Savior does not enjoin it to
any, but only exhorts to it with a Qui potest capere, capiat; Let him that can
take it, take it. And yet the same holy Father speaking of some Religious Women
in his Time, In Ps. 44.
who had obliged themselves to that holy State, but out of the Church, says,
they are Virgins indeed, Sed quid proderit eis, nisi adducantur in Templum
Regis; But what will it avail them to be so, unless they be brought into the
Temple of the King? that is, into the Communion of the Catholic Church.

And then again, for the Sacraments, (those Conduits or Channels, which our
Lord has instituted, as the ordinary means to derive his Grace into our Souls)
though they may be administered and received out of the Church, yet the Virtue and
Benefit of them cannot be had but in the Church. As the Water (says he) which
took its rise Ecclesia Paradiso comparata. S. Aug. l. 4. de Bapt. contr. Donat*
c. 1.
in Paradise, staid not there, but went forth from thence into the adjoining
Countries; so also Baptism (and it is the same of other Sacraments) may be
administered not only in the Church, but out of it. But, as the Happiness of
Paradise went not forth with the Water, but could be enjoyed only by those who
remained in it; so also the Virtue of the Sacraments, which is the Gift of
Eternal Life, is not found but within the Church. In a word, the same Holy
Father tells us, Extra Ecclesiam Catholicam totum habere potest praeter
salutem: A Man may have all Ser. super Gesta cum Emerito. Lib. 1. de Baptis. c.
49. Ep. 48. ad Vincentium, and alibi passim.
things out of the Catholic Church, besides Salvation. He may have Faith,
Baptism, and the rest of the Sacraments; He may have the Word of God; He may
believe and preach in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; He may
distribute his Substance to the Poor, and give his Life for the Name of Christ:
But when all is done, Nusquam nisi in Ecclesia Catholica salutem poterit
invenire; He can find Salvation no where, but in the Catholic Church; no
other, in his Judgment, than that in Communion with the Chair of Peter, of
which you heard him before affirm, Ipsa est Petra, This is the Rock, which the
proud Gates of Hell do not overcome.

Had I advanced these things of my self, I might perhaps have been condemned of
Incharitableness by some: But the Respect and Veneration which All have for the
Great Saint whose Words they are, will, I hope, protect both him and me from
undergoing, and also prevent them from pronouncing so uncharitable a Censure.
But if any will be yet so severe, I only desire them to consider, whether it be
want of Charity, when we see a Person sailing securely (as he thinks) in a
new-trimm'd Vessel, but leaky at the bottom, to warn him of the danger he is in
of never coming to his Port. This was the Case of St. Austin with those who
were out of the Church. He saw the danger they were in (though they saw it not
themselves) in venturing to Sea in any other Vessel than that of St. Peter; and
his Charity moved him to warn them of it. He saw the certain Ruin they were
exposed to, for want of true Charity, which if they had had, they would neither
have rent the Unity of the Church themselves, nor been Followers or Adherents
of those that did.

And now, dear Catholic Brethren, what remains for us, but that giving Thanks
to Almighty God, for having brought us by his Light and Truth into his Holy
Mountain, and humbly begging for the like Grace and Mercy upon those who are
yet out of it, we Contend earnestly for the Faith which was once delivered to
the Saints, laboring S. Jude Cath Ep. v. 3.
diligently (as the Chief and Head of the Apostles, St. Peter himself, exhorts)
to make our Vocation and Election sure by good Works. 2 Pet. 1. 10.
For as none can be saved out of the Church; so such only shall be saved in it,
who show their Faith by their Works. As it was not enough for the Jews to vaunt
that they Jo. 8. 39.
had Abraham for their Father, when they did not the Works of Abraham; So
neither will it avail us to glory, that we have St. Peter for our Father,
unless we do the Works of St. Peter. Our Faith must be accompanied with our
Works. Both together in the Communion of the Church, (that Church which our
Savior promised to build upon Peter) will give us an assured Title to that
Everlasting Glory in the Kingdom of Heaven. Which I beseech him graciously to
bestow upon your Sacred Majesty, and all here present, etc.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 12. line 21. for how easy, read Otherwise how easy. p. 13. l. 24. for
Accounts, r. Account.


