A GLORIOUS VICTORY Obtained by the SCOTS against the Rebels in IRELAND.

Showing in a very true, and warrantable Relation how the Scots to the number
of two thousand five hundred and fifty went Voluntarily into Jreland under the
Command of Colonel Hayse to relieve the poor distressed Protestants there.
the last day of December. 1641.

With the number of those Rebels that they slew, and the names of some Towns
where they pillaged the sam^, wherein the Rebels inhabited, and had first taken
from the Protestants.

With many credible, Memorable, and Remarkable passages herein.

London, Printed for John Thoma^, 1641.

THE SCOTTISH Battle with the Rebels in IRELAND.
THe Papists, and that Rebellious nest of Vipers in Ireland, (whose bloody
designs are not limited with humane terminations, but so laxe, that they are
altogether irregular) have plotted and daily studied to supplant the very
root, and glorious foundation of the Protestant Religion to the utter
demolition of Christianity. And being impartial in their viperous Tyranny,
they have not spared any Six, or degree whatsoever, but as if they meant to
make the Protestants fit sheaths for their Swords, even so they have bloodily
pierced them with the same. Thus they have continued a long time in their
Rebellious proceenings, and have brou^ht hereupon the manifold distress, and
condoleable calamity of the poor Jnhabitants in the City of Dublin, and
elsewhere to such miserable calamity, that it makes even my pen to tremble in
expressing it, and J am sure it would pierce an heart of Adamant to hear the
Relation thereof.

But I will not digress too far from my intent, and Subject in a preliminary
deviation, for it is not unknown to the world, what inhumanity, and
tyrannical cruelty they have showed to the Protestants there, who do groan
under their nefarious oppressions, and divelish machinaeions. What shall I need
to describe tho murders, cruelties, and incestuous rapes, that they daily
commit. What shall I need to relate the Tyrants names, who are the Actors in
this io ernall, and stupendous Tragedy? These things the world are troubled
with enough daily, and I would to God they were not too much (I suppose)
troubled with many things in this regard, especially those whom we may lawfully
denominate to be Poetarum figmenta, the appellation J am sure is correspandent
enough to their delitions, J had almost said Fictious Fancies. For my part it
is not my intent to delude the world with a fabulous error: for that, which
here after I am to relate, is not only real, and credible, but also
warrantable, and Privilegious, as appear by many Letters sent unto Merchants,
and other sufficient Citizens in this Honorable City of London, who are ready
to testify the srm^.

The Scots having taken into their Christian Commisseration the extreme
misery, and calamity that the Protestants in Jreland are daily involved in, and
the danger that the City of Dublin is in, did of toeir own, free, and
spontaneous will collect a number of themselves to go Voluntarily in Ireland
to help and relieve the said poor Protestants. They gathered together the
number two thousand 500 and 50 or thereabouts, and went under the command of
Colonel Hayse, thus they marched with great alacrity into Ireland, and as they
went, they still met with many Rebels wandering about the Territories of
Scotland, and after some private inquisition, they hearing that they had stolen
both Cattle and other things from them, and pillaged many places thereabouts,
did slay whomsoever they did meet, and supposed to be Rebels. Thus they marched
on, and did kill many by the way, proceeding with great Magnanimity.

At length they came unto a Town named Puragh, where they found very nigh a
thousand Rebels residing thereabouts, which Town they had takeu before from
the Protestants, and inhabited there, but the Scots entered violently upon them,
and slew all that they could find, and withal they pillaged the same, some
part thereof they burnt, when as they could not have free entrance into it, and
the rest they all pillaged. Here they stayed that night, and a great watch was
set round about the same, and espyes in most places thereabouts, for fear the
Rebels should at any time of the night assault them unawares.

Jn the morning every man courageously prepared himself for B^tt^ll, the
colors were displayed, Trumpets sounded and Drums beaten, and so they marched
out of the said Town, of P^ragh onwards unro Dublia. the number of the Scots
that were slain at that time were not above thirty at the most, or
thereabouts, but there were at the least 2000. slain in all of the Rebels
with those that they killed by the ways that they came from Scotland. and
those in the Town of Puragh. thus they still went on Magnanimously, and with
great puissance, whenas after they were 2 Mills and 3 half of the Town they
met with a Troop to the number of 200. or rhereabouts who had a drove of
Cattle with them, these the Scotts immediately besett round about, some they
killed, and others they took, so that not one man escaped from their hands,
but those that they took they enquired of them whither they went, and they did
tell ehem to the Town of Puragh. they asked then from whence that drove of
Cattle came or by whom they were sent, but one man amongst the rest, related
unto them every particular thing concerning the same, that they had taken the
said herd from some Protestant Shepherds, and the like, whereupon without any
longer inquisition, or delay they slew those that remained of the Rebels, and
did drive the Cattle before them, when they had traveled a little farther they
met with many more, some with 40 in a Company some with more, and others with
less, all which they slew incontinently, and so continued in their
proceedings toward the City of Dublin, to the relief of the Protestants
there, whose courageous proceedings I beseech God to bless, and favor, to the
great honor of his name, the propagation of his Gospel, and the flourishing
prosperity of Protestant Religion, that the firm root and radicate foundation
there be not extirpated by such wicked, cruel, impious, Savage, inhumane,
irreligious, and Tyrannical Rebels. Wherefore J beseech the divine providence
to be propitious unto them, that their number may be encreatsed, and some
greater aid be sent suddenly unto them in an auxiliary opitulat on That, being
conjoined in an vnnanimos^ cournge, and concatenation of minds they may utterly
expel, and exenterate those refarious Wolvns from Gods little flock.

FINIS.

