A POEM, Occasioned by the Magnificent Proceeding To the FUNERAL Of Her late
MAJESTY Queen MARY II. Of Blessed Memory.

From the Royal Palace of White Hall, to the Collegiate Church at Westminster,
the 5th of March 1694-95.

Ecce mihi lacciae dictant scribenda Camaenae,
Et veris Elegi, flatibus ora Rigant.
Boet. decons. Phil. lib. 1. met. By P. G. Gent. Late of the University of
CAMBRIDGE.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Chapman, at the Angel in Paul-maul; and John Graves
over against Wills Coffee-House, in Covent Garden: And are to be Sold by John
Whitlock, near Stationers' Hall. 1695.

To His GRACE, HENRY, DUKE of Norfolk, EARL-MARSHAL of England, EARL of
Arundel, Surry, Norfolk and Norwich; BARON of Mowbray, Howard, Segrave, Bruise,
(de Gower) Fitz-Alan, Warren, Clun, Oswaldestre, Maltravers, Greystock,
Furnival, Verdon, Lovetot, Strange de Blackmere, and Howard of Castle-Rysing;
First DUKE, First EARL, and First BARON of England, AND CHIEF of the House of
Howard; CONSTABLE and GOVERNOR of the Castle and Honor, AND GUARDIAN of the
Forest of Windsor; LORD LIEUTENANT of the Counties of Norfolk, Surry and Berks,
and City and County of Norwich, AND KNIGHT of the most Noble Order of the
Garter.
SIR,
IT has been an Inveterate Objection against the Society of Poets, that their
most Natural and Regular Performances have been at best but the forced and
spurious Offsprings of Bribery or Ambition; The Falsity of which will be very
obvious from the Characters of the Objectors, who have been ever looked upon by
the more impartial Critics, as a Pack of envious Pedants; as much beneath a
Capacity of Conceiving, as a Power, or Desire of Emulating their most Excellent
Patterns; whereas the true and genuine Springs that actuate a Poet's Invention,
are the Actions, and Passions of Hero's; The mighty Purposes, and Designs of
Worthies; And, in short, all the Eminent Productions of Great Souls: And the
very Original Title of his Profession will allow him only to Copy out and
Imitate the more remarkable strokes of the Great Ones: In which Province he is
so much unworthy of Censure, that he seems to serve an apparent Turn of
Providence, by supplying the defects of Age, and Memory, with Immortal Tables
and Monuments, which Rescue the History of Honorable Acts from the devouring
Efforts of Fate and Oblivion.

But I do not offer this to Reconcile Your Grace to a favorable Opinion of
that Order, as hoping my self to be included in the Gracious Indemnity, (For I
have no Pretensions to the Adoption of Phoebus, though have always admired that
noble Economy,) But because I know how much the Favor and Patronage of so
great a Mecoenas would acuate and encourage the Ingenuity and Industry of the
more refined, Wits vigorously to pursue the Roman Paiterns, and recover the
clapsed Majesty of that Incomparable Style.

But when I saw that Matchless Scene, which, by this time, All Europe knows the
late Funeral was: When I considered the singular Occasion, the Death of that
Illustrious Princess, of whose Worth the most speculative Head can scarce form
an adaequate Idea; The Order and Harmony of the whole Proceeding, And have
since observed the great Omission of those Encomiums that were due, even from
those that have boasted of a Talent, I could not but presume to offer this
little Specimen of my private Sense; And have at last ventured to Entitle it to
Your Grace, as the Great Master of the Public Solemnities; Being till now
deterred from the Attempt, by the sense of those many Imperfections which are
chargeable upon it. When I remembered the Maxim, viz. Of two Evils, choose the
least, I thought it more eligible to be too obsequious, than neglectful.

Therefore I humbly desire to shelter these Lines under Your Grace's
Protection, hoping the Defects and Irregularities that their Author has
Intruded on You, will be Remitted upon his Promise; that when Maturity and
Experience shall have pruned the lavish Crescences of his Pen, and regulated
both his Thoughts and Words by the best Models, something shall then be
offered more worthy of their Patron by,

May it please Your GRACE, Your Grace's most Devoted humble Servant, P. G.

A POEM, etc.
SOON as the sad Procession did appear,
The black solemnity drew near,
Thus spoke my Ecstasy, 'twixt Doubt and Fear.
What! Is some an Angel fallen? some God Dethorn'd,
Or is there Rage in Heaven that is unatton'd?
Has some Dear Minion of the Stars of late,
Felt the bold touches of aspiring Fate?
Has some degraded Seraphim been thrown
From his desired Etherial Mansion down.
(If in those smooth Pacifick Tracts there be)
That Rough-hewn word endured Catastrophe.
Is Albions Genius in a Lethargy?
Or Nature dead? and all mankind agree,
To meet, and weep their Mothers Obsequy;
Or if Perfection, Sufferings would allow,
I Would think the God of Nature suffered too:
For such a General sorrow cannot be,
The common Tribute to Mortality.
Such are the strokes of Ecstasy, and Flame,
Such the Idaeas, such the Thoughts that came,
From one, whose Judgment up to Madness flew,
Mistaking what he saw for what he knew.
But as a Voice or Sound sets men at Right,
Oppressed with the feigned Incubus by Night;
A Lady that fat by, and heard the whole,
And saw the sad Confusion of my Soul,
Conscious both of my Zeal, and my mistake,
Softn'd, and could not choose but Pity take,
And soon as Breath, and Words could distence Tears,
She thus began to solve my anxious Cares.
Know (Sir, said she) the Causes which you guess,
Would be Hyperboles, swol'n to excess,
But that the real Cause is little less;
For Albion's better part, her Soul is Dead;
Her Genius languish'd, and her Beauty fled,
The Queen, and Empress, of her Soil is gone,
Which all its fertile Juices out will mourn,
In Tears, and Fallow grow, when left alone.
A Queen, in whose blessed nature was combined,
A Beauteous Body, and a Virtuous Mind;
A Queen whose outside Luster nere has been,
Out-shin'd by any thing but that within;
Whose sweetness tempered Majesty so well,
That none could Judge in which she did excel,
A Queen in whom all Virtues centered even,
Those Choicest ones, that send mankind to heaven,
Her Soul thus freighted more securely Rode,
Than did Europa mounted on her God;
Thus balanced fearless, she advanced on high
And stem'd the aqueous Torents of the Sky;
Like Marine, Thetis, through the waves she drove,
To make the next approaches unto Jove.
That Part of her, which here she left behind,
The only proof, she was not all Divine,
Which could the best, and truest Caution be,
To keep her Subjects from Idolatry;
Tho 'twas the worser part of her by far,
Yet better much than other Mortals are;
This Piece of Heavenly work, which not long since
Served many turns of Divine Providence,
And startl*d Atheists into Faith and Sense,
Has touched its fatal Period, and now must
Be laid, Promiscuously with common Dust;
Releast from all the Toils of Fate, must have
The still Recesses of a silent Grave;
Whilst Time through various Scenes of Rapine pass,
Rending to Atoms that admired Mass
Now all this Pomp, this August Cavalcade,
Is but an humble offering to her Manes paid,
Costly enough indeed, yet highly due,
Both to her Honor, and our safety too,
For had her Manes no fresh Honors seen,
They Would never thought of Albion again,
But left the unhappy Isle in Anger and Disdain;
Had not the Body which the Gods preferred,
With best, and Choicest Honors been Interred,
That Body which could frozen Hermits thaw,
And into Continence mad Lust could awe.
Those very powers, which have the Good in store,
Would n'ere have blessed ungrateful Albion more;
But now they are pleased with this lamenting Train,
Pleased with the Tears of every Street and Plain,
Pleased with the Ecchos which the Rocks return,
From Mountains, Woods, and doleful Vales that mourn;
For which the tender Guardian Genius waits,
Still hovering over our Heads, protects the State,
From all the By-Blows of sinister Fate.
Observe (continued she) this aged Tribe,
How well the day of Mourning they Describe,
How well this melancholy Train of Years,
Open the melancholy Scene of Tears;
How doleful, how surprising they appear!
Like wandering Ghosts wrapped in benighted Air,
Or half-liv'd Hermitesses tired of Breath,
Clothed in the Palid Livery of Death;
Think that you hear them speak their inward Grief,
Blaming the long Delays of useless Life;
Living so many Years, and she so few,
To whose Improvements many more were due;
With such complaints, exhausting all their Tears.
Would fain expire, but cannot for the Fears,
Of more Fatigueing with Revolving Years.
Thus venerable Age, makes its Defense,
And out-pleads Poverty, for Reverence.
Nor does such Grief appear in those alone
From whom the Heat and Strength of Life is gone,
For see the Sons of Ma^s, Youth's full of Blood,
Of British Blood, and obstinately Good,
Who thought it once Divertisement to see,
The Common Throws of Vulgar Destiny;
Now Droop, and Languish, at the awful Fate,
Which can alone attack the Good and Great.
Now fearful Paleness stands for Martial Red,
And Sorrow circles every Warlike Head;
A Passion never known in Soldiers Breast,
But for the Sense of Private Honor lost;
The British Banner's, which have Conquered too,
As far as e're the Roman Eagles flew,
Now Furled with Sadness, Dull, and Ponderous are,
And yield no longer to the Pliant Air.
Observe the Inanimate Machines of War,
How dull their Sounds, how flat their Eccho's are;
The Drum's, and shriller Trumpets, Voices break,
Without their sprightly Emphasis they speak;
They Have mourned to Hoarseness, and have spent their Breath,
And Sound no longer Victory, but Death.
Take next the humble Offerings of the Quire,
Who though their Notes are low, their Key no higher,
Yet with a mournful Symphony, take pains,
To imitate at least Seraphick Strains:
Those Strains that welcomed blessed Maria's Ears,
And sang her Entry to the Heavenly Spheres;
But as the Swan sings her own Elegy,
They Are better set for Death, than Harmony:
See too the dismal Face of all the Court,
Where all the lively, gay, and young Resort;
How languid Grief, the sanguine Smile destroys,
Grief bred by this Reverse of Humane Joys;
Such as their Grandeur, and their Pleasure cost,
In which the Easiness of Life is lost;
And what is yet more Irrep'rable, I mean,
The blessed Example of their Pious Queen.
Nor does this vast Metropolis Retain,
Its solemn Tribute, but has sent a Train,
Of Gowned Magistrates, Experienced Years,
To show the Emporium lying all in Tears:
Tears; which from that Society were due,
For Public Cares, and Private Favors too;
Nay Prudent Interest, forced them to atone,
The Watchful Manes of Maria gone;
Which when appeased, might to the Trade be kind,
And save their Ships from raging Seas and Wind;
Which hovering Paramount, by Sea, and Land,
Might all the Marine Gods, and Nymphs command,
To clear their Way from Pirates, Rocks, and Sand,
To land their Cargo, and enrich the while,
Her once so loving, and beloved Isle.
Here next the Nation's Council does appear,
Called by the Fate, and Exigence of the Year,
Who from the Toil of Business, and the Care
At home of keeping Peace, abroad of War;
Are come to make their sad Procession too,
And it is but what their Country bids them do,
It Is what they would themselves, could they appear,
At once, and bring their mighty Numbers here;
But Heaven forbid, such Dangers e're should be;
Lest a returning Deluge we should see;
And Tears should swell the Thames next flux so high,
To make the Established Iris falsify.
Here (Sir) as in a Landscape you may stand,
And take a Prospect of the mourning Land;
Here Is Grief in various Phases, diverse Strains,
The Grief of Cities, Burrows, Rural Plains,
Of Counties, Provinces, and Marine Ports,
Each simply striving for the best Efforts;
How their Resentments they may best Reveal,
And best express their Loyalty and Zeal;
The Glorious Footsteps of her Reign Express,
Those Halcion Days of Ease and Happiness;
And thereby most their Countries Honors raise,
For Love and Gratitude's the worthiest praise:
Nor here the Passion stops, but does you see,
Farther Ingross the whole Community;
The second State is like the Third oppressed,
And sure the First is more than both the Rest;
Though Generous Passion, Princely State, and Care,
Will not permit the Royal Person here:
The Aulic Peers, and Prelates who best knew,
Her way of Thinking, and of Living too,
Can make the best, and justest Estimate,
Of all we lost in her precocious Fate;
Can juster Zeal, and Greater Passion be
Hemmed, in the Verge of strait Mortality?
No! For a larger you must upwards go,
This strides the highest Badges here below,
The Noble Coronet, and Mitre too,
The Lawn, and Ermin both are sulled now,
For they no more must her Decorum see,
No more their Precepts, and Advice must be,
Strengthn'd with all that Force, and Energy,
Which sprang from those Bright Paths in which she went,
Whose pattern Clench'd the Christian Argument,
This! This, is the truly Lamentable! since
The World Persues the' example of their Prince.
See next the Royal Open Chariot drove,
Not much Inferior to the Wain above,
For That, and Ours, may the same Office have,
To draw Eclipsed Planets to their Grave,
For such Maria was, such as never Star
Made nobler Figure in our Hemisphere,
But since her Ether sallied out with Breath,
And she bright Orb, was crusted over by Death;
That Part which could no Influence Emit,
Her Royal Sun, Her Phoebus has thought fit;
Should with a solemn Pomp by all be seen,
And drawn to Darkness, in this brave Machine;
Her Orb, her Scepter, and her Richer Crown,
Glad once she took them up, now sad she laid them down,
See, how they follow, and their parting Mourn,
They Tempt, they Sigh, and wish her to return,
But! O! it is Vain! For 'twas not out of Love
Of them she staid, but for the Work of Jove,
Which e're she touched her Zenith, and 'twas Noon;
She had accomplished, and returned too soon;
Too soon to go, soon as she did appear;
But Angels seldom long continue here.
See next Britannia's Mourning Genius go,
Veiled, like the Empress of the Shades below;
Those Shades where baffled Lovers Lives are spent,
For such the Grief is she does Represent,
Britannia, and her Mistress loved so well,
To those extremes that neither could excel:
And though she has her dearest Queen survived,
Yet not her Love, for that is as when she lived;
Only improved more capable to see,
And work the solid'st joys for her Posterity.
Yet Pensive Isle, she must the loss deplore,
Maugre the Embryo Blessings laid in Store;
She has Indulged a Passion till it is grown,
Too big for any Nature but her own;
Which should it pass the Extreme, yet in no wise,
Could it commence a Monster, or a Vice;
For as her loss no Bounds of Merit knew;
So her Resentments shall be boundless too;
Thus just Britannia, mourns her Princess gone,
And shows her Generous sense of Favors done.
Observe the Royal Funeral Pile, erect,
The Glory of the Isle, and Architect;
A Pile for her Repository made,
Wherein her stately Relics must be laid,
Until her Minion Prelate speaks her Praise,
And tells the grateful Story of her Days:
Tell how that Body, which is here Reposed,
How pliant 'twas to the Soul, it once enclosed,
How free her Temp'rament from evil Blood,
TO adulterate the Genuine streams of Good;
How Loyal all her Natural Passions were,
And to her Reason did Allegiance bear,
And though the Mischiefs of a fallen State,
With various second causes did create,
Humors, and Pains, the Artillery Fate;
Which unto all that humane Nature bear.
As necessary as their Beings are,
Though these in unrelenting Numbers came,
And quite demolished this Harmonious Frame;
Yet here their Efforts fell, and flag'd behind,
And could not Raise a Tempest in her Mind;
Nor must (Continued she) this Pile detain,
Her for whose stay Britannia prayed in vain:
There Is one stage more remains, for her to go
Down to the dark unwholesome Grave below;
(But here the watery symptoms Deluged over,
And her she sighed a thousand Passions more.)
But e're (said she) this last Remove from hence,
Be made unto her final Residence;
Ages to come shall say, 'twas I that gave,
This early Caution to the unthinking Grave;
Be sure unhospitable Grott! be sure
This once to keep a Royal Corpse secure,
Condense your Pores ye Marbles, let not pass
Through them the subt'lests Attome of her Mass;
To be exposed to common winds, and hurled,
Like vulgar dust, about the open World;
For know that Fate has nothing here to do,
Whilst our Palladium is secured by you,
For Dead, she saves, and nothing can destroy,
A liveless Image, once preserved Troy.
From Her these Isles expect more safety far
Then Scottish Kings, from their Prophetic Chair,
Then let Her Rest, nor let her Influence cease
But Ages, Chained to Ages, flow in Peace;
Whilst late Posterity shall wonder more,
At her Posthumous Blessings, than her Reign before.
Here ceased my Sapho! and discharged her Muse,
Which I Retained as fitted to my use.
No Mercenary Hired to Echo forth,
The purchased Tale of any Mortals worth;
Fitter for Mourning, than for sprightly Lays,
For Yew, and Cypress, than the springing Bays;
Thus set, she Sang. --
It Is I (said she) that Sing the Fate of Kings,
And tell of mighty Actions, mighty Things;
It Is I that Garnished every Worthy's Hearse,
With lasting Numbers, never dying Verse;
'Twas I kept time with Fate in all its Turns,
And sprinkled Verses on the Roman Urnes;
The Great ones Statues I contrived at Rome,
And drew the Scheme of Mausolus's Tomb;
Of Ptolomy's Pyramides, which now desie,
Tempests, and all the Artillery of the Sky;
Great Otto's Propht was Entombed by me,
At Mecca; 'twas for mighty Policy.
Nor left I out of my Display's of Fame,
The Roman, Scythian, Amazonian Dame;
I made Lucretia's wounded Image stand,
Grasping the bloody Dagger in her Hand.
At Tomyri's Foot, I vanished Cyrus laid,
Devised her trampling on his bleeding Head.
And brave Semiramis with the noble Scar,
Which Robbed an Infant to maintain a War.
Nor did I pay valor alone its Due,
But Goodness, Piety, and Learning too;
At Mother Athens how did I set forth,
With Motto'd Piles her Virtuoso's Worth;
How did I mourn the Fate of all her Sages,
And kept their names Entire in future Ages;
Nor was I unprepair'd their worth to tell,
Who at Pharsalia, or at Cannae fell;
Oblivion never yet could wrest from me,
An Action worthy of Eternity.
But to these Isles I followed Caesar over;
When Dead at Rome I Sang him Conqueror.
'Twas I inspired the Soldiery to Raise,
Prodigious Stone-hinge, to Aurelius Praise.
Kept for the wonder of the last of Days.
And all the Monarch's since of Norman Line,
I had Entombed with Honor in one Shrine,
But that for Fate, yet here at last I Am come,
To score the noblest Honors on the noblest Tomb;
Honors yet unperform'd by me,
Honors which lapsed Age never did see,
Honors which have forestalled Posterity.
'Twas I the Mistress of the works that drew,
The model of this Pile which does outdo,
The Architecture that Vetruvius knew;
And other Masters of those Orders, All,
Which took their Names since Mighty Babels fall.
In short! there is nothing wanting in this Frame,
This Mausolaeum but a greater name:
One Stroke remains to make this awefull Scene,
Matchless as our Maria's Life has been;
When Heaven shall see its workmanship to stand,
So nicely Mimick'd by a mortal Hand,
That wondering Strangers at the Frame shall start,
And Doubt and Hope, it is Nature and not Art;
Whilst every Air, and every Grace, shall fall,
In due proportion with the Original;
I need no other Character to give,
No Motto to support, and make it live,
No Rich Device to set the Statue forth,
And make it Immortal as the Copy's worth;
No Panegyricks such as load the Dead,
And make the Hero's Manes blush to red.
But bravely add, this modest Stroke of Fame,
Since all Men knew that Comprehensive Name.
FUI MARIA.

