Master Glyns REPLY TO THE EARL OF STRAFFORDS DEFENSE OF The several Articles
objected against him by the House of COMMONS.

Published by special direction, out of an authentic Copy.

LONDON, Printed for Lawrence Chapman, Anno 1641.

Master GLYNS Reply to the Earl of STRAFFORDS Defense.
My Lord of Strafford having concluded the recapitulation of his evidence, Mr.
Glyn applied himself to their Lordships in manner following.
MAy it please your Lordships, my Lord of Strafford (as your Lordships have
observed,) has spent a great deal of time in his evidence, and in his course
of answering has inverted the order of the Articles; He has spent some time,
likewise, in defending the Articles not objected against him, wherein he has
made a good answer, if in any: we shall presume to withdraw a while, and rest
upon your Lordships patience; and I doubt not but to represent my Lord of
Strafford as cunning in his answer, as he is subtle in his practice.

The Committee withdrawing for about the space of half an hour, and then
returning to the Bar, Mr. Glyn proceeded as follows.

My Lords, your Lordships have observed how the Earl of Strafford has been
accused by the Commons of England of high Treason, for a purpose and design to
subvert the fundamental Laws of both the kingdoms, of England and Ireland,
and to introduce an Arbitrary, and Tyrannical government: The Commons have
exhibited Articles in maintenance of that charge: My Lord of Strafford has
thereunto answered in writing. The Commons have proceeded to make good their
charge by proof, and thereunto my Lord of Strafford has made his defense; and
this day my Lord of Strafford has taken upon him to recollect his evidence,
and make his observation upon it, the most he could to his advantage.

My Lords, we that are entrusted for the house of Commons, stand here to
recollect the evidence on our part, and to apply it to the general charge, and
how far it conduces thereunto.

My Lord of Strafford in recollecting the evidence of his defense, as I did
mention before, has (under favor) expressed very much subtilty, and that in
diverse particulars, which I shall represent to your Lordships.

My Lords, before I enter upon the recollection of the proofs produced on the
behalf of the Commons, I shall make some observations, and give some answer to
that recollection of his; though very disorderly to the method I propounded to
my self.

And first, in general, it will appear to your Lordships, (looking upon your
notes, and observing his recollection) that he has used the repetition of
evidence on both sides, in such manner as you know who uses Scripture; that
is, to cite as much as makes for his purpose, and leave out the rest. And
likewise, that in repetition of the evidence, he hat^ mis-recited, plainly,
very much of the proofs on both sides, and likewise has pretended some proofs
to be for his defense, which indeed were not: and he has taken this farther
advantage; when it makes for his defense, he has disjoynted the proofs, and
testimonies, and severed them asunder, that it might appear to your Lordships,
like rain falling in drops, which considered in distinct drops bring no
horror, or seeming inconvenience with them; but when they are gathered
together into an entire body, they make an Inundation, and cover the face of
the earth. He would not have your Lordships look on those Testimonies together,
but distinctly, and asunder, which being put together look horrid, as will
appear to your Lo. when you duly consider of them.

These be the general observations, which in my Answer I doubt not but to
make good: But before I shall enter into observations of what he has spoken,
I shall answer in general to some things which he has in general alleged.

In the first place, he has made a flourish this day, and several other
days in the way of his defense, That if he could have had longer time, he
could have made things appear clearer, and have produced more proofs. Give
me leave to inform your Lordships that he is no way straightned of time, for
he has bin charged above three months since* he knew what was laid to his
charge, and therefore his pretense of want of time, and of his disabilities to
make better proofs, are but flourishes. And it appears plainly, whatsoever he
has had occasion to make use of, even the least paper, though he fetched it
from Ireland, there is not one wanting; he has copies of papers from the
Council Table, from the Parliament of Ireland, and all that may any way tend
to his justification, and yet he stands upon that flourish, that if he had had
time he could have made it more clear.

My Lords, he has mentioned often this day, and oftener the days before, that
many of the Articles laid to his charge are proved but by one witness; and
thereupon he takes the advantage of the Statute of E. 6. that says, A man
ought not to be condemned for high Treason without two witnesses. My Lords,
this is a fallacy known to his own breast, I doubt not, and not taught him by
any of his Council, or others learned.

The Treason laid to his charge, is, the subverting of the Laws; the evidence
is, the Articles proved: and though some one Article appears to be proved but
by one, yet put the evidence together, you shall never find it to be within
the words or meaning of the Statute; for the charge is proved by a hundred
witnesses: and because one part of the evidence is proved only by one
witness, since, when you put them together, you will find a hundred witnesses,
it is not within the words nor meaning of the Statute, neither will his
Council direct him to say so, I am confident.

My Lords, another observation I shall be bold to make, is, that he was
pleased to cast an aspersion (as we must apprehend) upon them that be trusted
by the house of Commons this day, That we that stand here, alleged and
affirmed things to be proved, that are not proved: He might have pleased to
have spared that language; we stand here to justify our selves, that we do
not use to express any language, but what our hearts and consciences tells us
is true; and howsoever he is pleased to cast it upon us, I am confident I shall
invert it upon himself, and make it appear, that he has bin this day
guilty, in the highest degree, of what he most unjustly lays to our charge.

And now my Lords to enter upon the particulars, he has been pleased to make
it his general Theme to day (though he has not spoke much to day but what
he has spoken formerly) that these particulars considered by themselves make
not a Treason, and therefore put together he wonders how they should make a
Treason: Several misdemeanors can never make a murder, and several murders
can never make a Treason; and he wonders it should be otherwise in this case.
My Lords he did instance it (if my memory fails me not) in a case of Felony;
That if a bloody knife should be produced in the hand of the party suspected
to have slain the man, if the party had bin there seen before the death, it
were a strong evidence; but there must be death in the case, the fact must be
committed, else there can be no murder: but he himself might answer himself,
for there is a great difference: There cannot be murder but there must be
death, but he knows very well there may be Treason and yet no death; it is
too late to forbear questioning Treason for killing the King, till the King be
killed: God forbid we should stay in that case, for the very intention is the
Treason, and it is the intention of the death of the Law that is in question,
and it had been too late to call him to question to answer with his life for
the death of the Law, if the Law had been killed, for there had been no Law
then; and how should the Law then have adjudged it Treason, when the same were
subverted and destroyed? and therefore he is much mistaken.

The greatest Traitor, in the memory of any that sits here to hear me this
day, had a better, a fairer excuse in this particular then my Lord of
Strafford, and that is Guido Faux; for he might have objected, that the taking
of the Cellar, the laying of the Powder under the Parliament House, the
kindling of the match, and putting it near, are not so much as a misdemeanor,
if you look no further; for it was no offense in him to lay Barrels under the
Parliament House, and to kindle the match, and to lay it near; but collect all
together, that it was ea intention to blow up the King and the State, there is
the Treason: but God be blessed it was not effected; So that the rule is the
same. Nay, my Lord of Strafford has not so much to say, when he is charged
with a purpose and intention to subvert the Law; for to that purpose gave he
traiterous counsels, and executed actions, thereby discovering his intentions
to destroy the Kingdom, and to destroy the Kings claim by Law, and descent.
It is true, they were not put in execution, but they declared his intentions;
therefore this gives an answer to his first flourish, which is not so great an
Argument as the greatest Traitor might use for himself, and yet it proved
Treason in him.

My Lords, he has been pleased to divide his Treasons into two parts, and his
division I allow of; that is, Treason by Statute Law, as he terms it, though
it be Treason by the Common Law; and constructive Treason: And upon that method
he has recited the evidence produced on either part; Give me leave to follow
and trace him a little, and afterward to discharge my duty in taking my own
course, and representing the evidence as it appears, truly; and I will avoid
(as much as I can) to fall into my Lord of Straffords error, in mis-reciting a
Particle; if I do, it shall be against my will.

He begins with the fifteenth Article, and pretends that that is not proved;
the ground and foundation of that Article was a warrant issued out by himself
to a Sergeant at Arms, one Savill, which gave directions and power to that
Sergeant to lay soldiers on any person that should contemn the Process of
the Council* board in Ireland; that was the effect: Now (says he) this
warrant is not produced, and adds, that the Judges will tell your Lordships,
that if a man be charged with any thing under hand and seal, the deed must be
produced and proved, or else no credit is to be given to it. Truly, my Lords,
it is true, if it had been a Bond, or a Deed, where those that seal it use to
call their neighbors to testify, and be witnesses to it, perhaps it might be
a colorable answer, that because we do not produce the Deed, and prove it by
witnesses, you can therefore give no credit to it: But, my Lords, in case of
authority to commit high treason, I suppose my Lord of Strafford, nor any other
did call witnesses to prove the signing, sealing and delivering of the warrant
for execution of high treason; and therefore it is a new way and invention
found out by his Lordship, for ought I see, to commit high treason, and to give
authority for it; and it is but taking away the original warrant, and he
shall never be touched for any treason. But I beseech your Lordships patience,
till I come to open that Article, and your Lordships will find the warrant,
(though it be not produced,) proved by three or four witnesses, and his hand
and seal proved too. And whereas he pretends the Sergeant at Arms is no
competent witness, because he excuses himself; my Lord mistakes himself, for
I take it to be no excuse to prove a warrant from any person whatsoever, if it
be to commit high treason: and therefore Savills testimony is the more strong,
being so far from excusing, that he does accuse himself: And though he is
charged with laying of soldiers upon the Kings people, contrary to an
express* Act of Parliament made in 18. H. 6. yet my Lord is pleased (I know
not how to term it, whether it be merrily, or otherwise) to use his Rhetoric,
Here is a great levying of war, when there is not above four Musketeers, or
six at most, laid upon any one man.

My Lords, it is a plain levying of war, and without all question, and in all
sense, it is as much mischievous to me to be surprised by four or six
Musketeers, to enforce me to any thing they would have, as if there were an
Army of forty thousand brought upon me; for if that strength will but over
master me, it is all one to me whether I be mastered by four, or by four
thousand. And therefore let not this be a rule, that to send four, or six, or
ten Musketeers up and down is not considerable, because of the smalnesse of
the number (the danger is the same;) yet this is no levying of war, because
they go not in troops of greater number, as it pleases my Lord of Strafford to
affirm.

My Lords, your Lordships remember what the effect of the Warrant is sworn to
be, that howsoever the Sergeant at Arms, and his Ministers that executed it,
brought but four, or six, or ten, yet the Sergeant might have brought all the
Army of Ireland, for there was authority so to do.

And admitting the matter of fact proved, he mentions an Act of Parliament made
11. Eliz. whereby a penalty is laid upon men that shall lay soldiers on the
Kings subjects, and yet (as my Lord observes) it must now be Treason in the
Deputy.

My Lords, the very casting of an eye upon that Act, shows it to be as vainly
objected, as if he had said nothing; for in truth it is no other than as if he
should say, The King has given me the command of an Army in Ireland, and
therefore I may turn them upon the bowels of the Kings subjects: It is no more
in effect.

Your Lordships have heard him the other day mentioning two Acts of Repeal,
and I expected he would have insisted upon them; but it seems he has been
better advised, and thinks them not worthy repetition, nor indeed are they. And
if the matter of fact be proved upon the fifteenth Article, I am confident he
will find the Statute of 18. H. 6. to be of full force.

My Lords, I am very sorry to hear, that when levying of war upon the Kings
subjects is in agitation, and he charged with high Treason, he should make
mention of the Yorkshire men, and the army now on foot, whereby he would
insinuate, that if he be charged with high Treason, then they must be likewise,
though they lie quartered, and have meat and drink with the assent of the
people; which may breed ill blood for ought I know.

From the fifteenth Article he descends to the three and twentieth, and that is
the Article whereby he stands charged with speaking of words, and giving of
council to his Majesty to incense him against his Parliament, pretending a
necessity, and telling him he is loose and absolved from all rules of
government; that he had an Army in Ireland which he might make use of to reduce
this kingdom. In this he is pleased to begin with the testimony of my Lord
Ranelagh, conceiving an apprehension and fear in him, that the Army should go
over to England, which my Lord says, is no more but his saying, and master
Treasurer Vane' s.

I pray God my Lord Ranelagh had not much cause to fear; but by the same rule
he may lay a charge of unwarrantable fear upon all the Commons; for sure the
Commons of England did fear it, else they would not make an Article of it: But
my Lord Ranelagh's fear did not arise from a slight cause, and he showed
himself a good Commonwealths man in expressing it, and he is to be commended
for it, howsoever it be apprehended by my Lord of Strafford.

For his observation of the single testimony of Mr. Treasurer Vane, give me
leave to take the same latitude as his Lordship did; for he shows to three or
four Articles what he could have proved; as to the Article concerning the
Army, he could have proved the design of it by Sir John Burlacy, and some
others, if they had been here. But by this rule and liberty he has taken to
allege what he could have shown, give me leave to tell you what we might have
shown, and are ready to show: We could have made it express, and proved it by
notes taken by Secretary Vane the fifth of May, when the words were spoken,
which notes should have been proved, if we had proceeded on the three and
twentieth Article, to corroborate the testimony of Mr. Secretary Vane, and that
by two witnesses. We could likewise have shown how we came to the knowledge
of it, it being by means unknown to master Secretary Vane, and have made him
an upright Counselor and witness: but we shall prove his intentions to bring
in the Irish Army another way, when I come to open my own course and method.

My Lords, he pretends these words were spoken the fifth of May, but when they
were testified by master Treasurer, he did not speak of the fifth of May, and
yet now my Lord remembers the day; and I wonder how he came to the knowledge
of the day, unless he likewise remembered the words.

But that my Lord observes, is, That being spoken then, how should he persuade
the King, that he had an Army in Ireland, when in truth he had none there? for
the Army was not on foot till a month after. This, my Lords, is plainly
answered; and if he had thought of his own answer, he had answered himself:
for he tells you, that in April before, he had taken a course for the levying of
the Army, he had nominated the officers, giving direction for raising it: And,
the day of the Rendezvous of the Army was appointed the 18. of May. And so in
his own answer he makes an answer to the objection, and the objection is taken
away out of his own confession.

From that Article he falls to the seven and twentieth Article, whereby he
stands charged with levying money by force upon the Kings people in Yorkshire:
he is pleased to observe, that all the proofs for the maintenance of that
Article, is only the levying of money with four soldiers by Sergeant Major
Yaworth. Where he is pleased to disdain the war, because it was so weak, yet
it was too strong for them (God help them) that were forced upon pain of life
to pay it. And whereas he pretends the warrrant was not from him, I shall
reserve that till I come to the Article, and when I come to the proofs, I
believe it will remain fixed upon him.

And there he left his Statute Treason, and now he falls to the second kind of
Treason, and that was the introductive or constructive Treason: He begins with
the third Article, that is, concerning some words that he should be charged to
have spoken in Ireland; and I shall desire that your Lordships would be pleased
to look upon your notes, how he answers that Article; My Lords, says he, I am
charged to say that Ireland was a conquered Nation, and that their Charters
were nothing worth, and bind the King no further then he pleases; therefore I
am a Traitor because I speak the truth. There was his answer in his collection.
And for their Charters he says, he might might very well say so, for he
intended it no otherwise, but according to the validity of them, for they were
several ways questionable, and ought not to bind, unless they were good in
law. But if you look upon his Arguments, he has, like a cunning Orator,
omitted the principal part of the Article; and that is, that Ireland is a
conquered Nation, and they were to be governed as the King pleases, the King
might do with them what he lists; this he omits: although they be proved by
three witnesses, and are appliable to his intentions fully; yet he could make
use of so much as makes for him, and leaves out the rest, like your Lordships
know whom.

Then he descends to the fourth Article, and this concerns some words he should
speak upon an occasion betwixt him and my Lord of Cork, that he should tell my
Lord of Cork, he would have neither Law nor Lawyers dispute or question his
orders. And upon another occasion, that he would make my Lord of Cork and all
Ireland know, that all Acts of State (which are Acts of Council) there made, or
to be made, should be as binding as any Act of Parliament: This he said was
proved but by one witness: and I extremely marvel to hear him say so; for
the latter words we proved by four, or five, or six witnesses, that is, that
he would have Acts of State as binding as Acts of Parliament. Whereas he says
these are all the words produced against him in the time of seven years
government there, your Lordships have heard of many words, and if we would
trouble your Lordships further in this kind, we could prove such words spoken,
as often almost as he remained days in Ireland, that is, for the mis-recitall.
The other part two witnesses proved; but the residue, That they must expect law
from the King as a Conqueror, That Acts of State should be equal to Acts of
Parliament, And when an Act of Parliament would not pass, he would make it
good by an Act of State, these speeches at other times were proved by five
witnesses.

Then he falls back to the second Article, touching the words, That the Kings
little finger should be heavier then the loins of the Law.

My Lords, these words were proved expressly by five witnesses, to be by him
spoken; and if he had produced five hundred that had said he did not speak
them, they had not been equivalent to disprove five; but he produces none. Sir
William Penniman repeats other words, and inverts them, and none but he.
Another party, a Minister, reports a report that he heard concerning these
words, but, my Lord, says he, the occasion of the speaking of them was not
mentioned. Truly perhaps it might be the forgetfulness of my Lords memory,
but let me put him in mind. And your Lordships remember that the occasion was
expressed by one, and that is Sir David Fowls, that he laying a command upon Sir
David to repair a bridge, and calling him to account why it was not repaired,
Sir David Fowls told him, he could not do it by law. And therefore omitting
it, my Lord said to him, Sir, some are all for Law and Lawyers, but you shall
know that the Kings little finger will be heavier then the loins of the Law.
Here is the occasion, though he would have another business, the knighting
money to be the occasion.

From the second he falls to the three and twentieth Article, that is,
concerning words, That he should counsel his Majesty, that he might use his
Prerogative as he pleased; but in saying there was no proof offered, he here
begins to fall upon the other fallacy, that is, to pull things asunder (whereas
we produce them together) and would make that that is a faggot, to be but a
single stick; but, under favor, when I come, with your Lordships patience, to
open the force of the proofs, and put them together, he shall find (contrary
to his expectation) that they are fully proved by the testimony of many
witnesses, upon consideration of the precedent, concurrent, and subsequent acts
and intentions of my Lord of Strafford.

I shall not now run over my Lord Primates testimony, or my Lord Conwayes, or
master Treasurers, or my Lord of Bristols, but make use of them in their proper
places, when I shall put all together, to show his design, and to prove his
speaking of the words.

Then he comes to the five and twentieth Article, which I shall not insist on,
though he pretends it not proved; I shall refer that to my recollection, that
I may not answer to his pieces, but bring all together, and then the horror of
his fact shall more speciously appear. Only this (under favor) I cannot
pass over, when he comes to justify an advice and counsel of the Kings being
loose and absolved from all rules of government, and that he might use his
Prerogative as he pleases, he is pleased to mention the argument of the Judges
in the ship money, and what they should deliver, he makes the warrant of his
counsel. Now your Lordships may observe, he would justify his actions by law,
in some cases, where it is to his advantages, but in other cases he must be
ignorant of the Law.

But, my Lords, for him to mention any thing in the Argument of the Judges,
concerning the ship money, which is now condemned, and to make that a ground of
his counsel and advice to the King, and not the judgment in truth, but the
argument of the Council at Bar, that therefore he is loose, and absolved from
all rule of government; for him to make the Parliaments deferring to give
supply, to be that necessity which was insisted upon in the Counsels argument,
and to be such an unavoidable necessity, as to beget an Invasion upon propriety
and liberty, it rests in your judgments, and the judgments of all that hear
me, what argument this is, and what he declares his opinion to be this day.

In the latter part, let me close hands, and agree with him; he says, Proofs
must be taken by themselves, they must not be judged by pieces, but together;
and now in good time I shall join with him, and shall desire the same
judgment, That things may not be taken asunder, but judged together, according
to his own words.

For the twentieth Article, he is thereby charged with being an Incendiary
between both Nations, and an occasion of drawing two Armies into this kingdom,
and to incense the war.

My Lords, I remember (if I did not mis-conceive, and my memory misprompt me)
my Lord said, he could have no occasion to incense a war, being a man of
estate, and should have no benefit by it, having sufficient to live without it:
but in due time I shall make it appear, to my apprehension, and I believe to
your Lordships, when you have heard it, that the incensing of this war, and
provoking of it, was the principal instrument of bringing to pass his design
of subverting the Laws, through the whole work of it.

My Lords, in the passage of this, he takes occasion to speak of the testimony
of master Secretary Vane, who testifies, that my Lord was for an offensive, and
himself for a defensive war: whence my Lord argues, here is no great
difference, for both were for a war: but, my Lords, is there no difference
between an offensive and defensive war, in case of subjects that live under
one King? is there no difference to bring an Army to offend them, and for the
King to raise a force to defend himself? truly I think there is a great
difference, and a very material one too: but your Lordships see he makes no
difference between them.

My Lords, in the four and twentieth Article he mentions, that he is charged
with being an occasion to break the Parliament, and lays hold of that, as in
the other Articles, that it was not proved, but declined. My Lords, when he
shall hear the repetition of the evidence, though part of the Article was not
particularly insisted upon, yet I believe it will appear to your Lordships,
and the world, that he was the occasion of breaking the last Parliament, and it
is expressly proved by witnesses enough; and though he says, how should any body
think him an occasion of it; that did so often advise Parliaments? yet I shall
show anon, that when he did advise them, it was to compass his own design
and plot, without which his ends could not be brought to pass.

He came from the four and twentieth Article to the seven and twentieth, and
he answers against that Article, that when Armies are in the field, men cannot
walk so peaceably, as an Attorney with his box and papers in Westminster hall.
I know not what he means; but when two Armies are in the field, they may raise
war against the Kings people, as well as the King for his just defense; it is
the way to make his people terrified with armies, and to avoid them as a
serpent, and therefore it is a dangerous aspersion, as I conceive.

With these he concluded, except some things that he took, by way of
artificial insinuation, to persuade your Lordships, that it was dangerous to
raise a Treason that had lain asleep I know not how many hundred years, and
create a Treason. A strange thing indeed it is, that a man should be charged
with a Treason for subverting the Law! A strange thing that one should be
charged with Treason for killing a Justice sitting in the seat of justice, and
yet it should be no Treason to destroy King, and kingdom, and people, and
all; all which are destroyed, if the Law be subverted.

And now having touched upon what he has spoken, with your Lordships good
favor, I shall crave leave to run the course I have propounded with my self,
and that very briefly, that is, upon the whole matter to show how far the
evidence, produced on the Commons part, does prove the charge.

My Lords, That laid to his charge is a design and purpose to subvert the
fundamental laws of two kingdoms, and to introduce an Arbitrary and
Tyrannical government; not that he did effect it, but that he did intend it:
for if he had done it, it had been t^^ late to question it, he had left no rule
whereby to cal^ him to trial; but his intention and his endeavor are his
charge.

My Lords, how far this is proved; if your Lordships be pleased to call to
mind, the Articles, and the evidence produced on the Commons part, your
Lordships will find, I believe, that his words, his counsels, and his actions,
do sufficiently prove his endeavoring to destroy.

In the first Article, where my Lord of Strafford has the first opportunity
offered him to put this endeavor in execution (that is the first place of
eminency amongst his other places and commands, which, I take it, was his being
made President of the North) he is no sooner there, but there be Instructions
procured to enable him to proceed in that Court, almost in all causes; for a
man can scarce think of a cause which is not comprehended within the
Instructions obtained after his coming thither: but I shall put your Lordships
in mind of two clauses of the Instructions procured in the eighth year of this
King, and after he was President; that is, the clause of habeas Corpus, and
Prohibitions; that no man should obtain a Prohibition, to stay any suit that
should be commenced before him, in the Council of York; that if any man should
be imprisoned by any process out of that Court, he must have no Habeas corpus.
A Prohibition is the only means to vindicate the estate of the subject, if it
be questioned without authority. A Habeas corpus is the only means to
vindicate his liberty, if it be detained without law: but these doors must be
shut against the Kings subjects, that if either they be questioned* or
restrained before him, there must be no relief. How far he could go further I
am to seek, there being no means for the subject to ^^lieve himself, if he be
questioned for his estate with^^ authority; no means to redeem himself, if
his person be imprisoned without law. And he had so incircled himself about,
that if the Judges should fine the party that returns not the Habeas corpus,
according to law, there was a power, and a warrant, by the Instructions, to the
Barons, to discharge the Officers of that fine. And now I refer it to your
Lordships judgments, whether this be not to draw an arbitrary power to
himself.

For the execution of this power, it is true, it is proved to be before the
instructions in the eighth year of the King; but then it rises the more in
judgment against him; for your Lordships have heard how he went into a grave
Judges chamber, blaming him for giving way to a Prohibition, granting
Attachments against one that moved for a Prohibition; and though this was done
before the Instructions were granted, yet the Instructions coming at the
heels of it, shows his disposition and resolution more clearly, for he acts
it first, and then procures this color to protect it: and though he pretends
there was no proof, yet I must put your Lordships in mind, that when these
things were in question, concerning the apprehension of a Knight, by a Sergeant
at Arms, he kneeles to his Majesty, that this defect might be supplied, and
this jurisdiction maintained, else he might go to his own Cottage.

And here being the just commencement of his greatness, if you look to the
second, it follows, that at the public Assizes he declared, that some were
all for law, but they should find the Kings little finger heavier then the
loins of the law. He did not say it was so, but he infused it as much as he
could into the hearts of the Kings people that they should find it so; and so
he reflects upon the King, and upon his people: The words are proved: And to
speak them in such a presence, and at such a time, before the Judges and
Country assembled, they were so dangerous, and so high expressions, of an
intention to counsel the King, or act it himself, to exercise an arbitrary
government, above the weight of the law, as possibly could be expressed by words.
And this is proved by five witnesses, and not disproved, nor is any color of
disproof offered, but only by Sir William Penniman, who says, he heard other
words, but not that he heard not these words: If he does, he must give me
leave not to believe him; for five affirmations will weigh down the proof of
a thousand negatives.

He stays not long in England with this power (though while he stays you
hear how he vexes the subject) but then he goes into Ireland; and as his
authority increases, so he ampliates his design; and no sooner is he there,
but the third Article is laid to his charge, That when the City and Recorder of
Dublin, the principal City of Ireland, presented the Mayor, upon a solemn
speech and discourse concerning the laws and liberties (as your Lordships know
that is the subject matter of a speech at such presentiments, as when the Lord
Mayor of London is presented to the King) I beseech your Lordships observe the
words he then used, they were a conquered Nation, and that we lay not to his
charge, but they were to be governed as the King pleases, their Charters were
nothing worth, and bind but during the Kings pleasure.

I am to seek, if I were to express an arbitrary power, and tyrannical
government, how to express it in fitter words, and more significant terms than
these, that the people shall be governed at the Kings will, that their
Charters, the finewes and ligatures of their liberties, lands, and estates,
should be nothing worth, and bind no longer then the Kings pleasure, specially
being spoken upon such an occasion, and the words proved by two or three
witnesses of credit and quality.

From thence we descend to Articles, that show the execution of his purpose.
There be three things a man enjoyes by the protection of the law; that is, his
life, his liberty, and his estate. And now, my Lords, observe how he invades,
and exercises a tyrannical jurisdiction, and arbitrary government over them
all three. I shall begin with the fifth Article, that is concerning my Lord
Mountnorris and Denwit. My Lord Mountnorris, a Peer of that Realm, was
sentenced to death by procurement of my Lord of Strafford; who, howsoever he
pretends himself not to be a Judge in the cause, yet how far he was an
Abettor, and Procurer, and Countenancer, and drawer on of that sentence, your
Lordships very well remember; he was sentenced to death, without law, for
speaking words at a private Table, God knows, of no manner of consequence in
the world, concerning the treading upon my Lord of Straffords toe; the sentence
procured seven months after the words spoken, and contrary to law, and
himself being put in mind of it, my Lord Mountnorris desiring to have the
benefit of the law, and yet he refusing it.

And then it was in time of peace, when all the Courts of justice were open,
and to sentence a man to death of that quality, my Lord of Strafford himself
being present, an author, a drawer on of it, makes it very heinous. Your
Lordships remember this Article was fully proved, and though he pretends his
authority by a letter from his Majesty, I shall in due time give a full answer
to that, so that it shall rise up in judgment against him, to aggravate his
offense, and that in a great measure.

Here he exercises a power over life, his excuse was, that he procured a pardon
for my Lord Mountnorris; but the power was exercised, and the tyranny appeared
to be the more; he would first sentence him to death, and then rejoice in his
power, that he might say, There remains no more but my command to the Provost
Marshall to do execution. To exercise a power over his life, and to abuse him
afterward, is very high; but no thanks to him that the sentence of death was
not executed, it was the grace and goodness of his Majesty that would not
suffer my Lord Mountnorris, a person of that eminence, to be put to death
against law.

But the other was hanged, and, as appears, against law; and though my Lord
pretends the party was burnt in the hand, yet that was not proved, nor
material: and for him to do this in time of peace, when the Courts of justice
were open, it argues a desire in his breast to arrogate a power above law.

And in truth I may not omit some observations that my Lord made this day; he
hopes his Majesty would be pleased to grant him a Pardon. I perceive he
harbored in his thoughts, that he might hang the Kings subjects when he
would, and then get a Pardon of course for it. The Lord bless me from his
jurisdiction.

My Lords, give me leave to go back again, here is power over the lives and
liberties of the subject; but he exercised likewise a Tyrannical power over
his estate. Your Lordships may be pleased to remember the fourth Article, where
he judges my Lord of Corks estate, in neither Church land, nor plantation land,
and therefore had no pretense of a jurisdiction; for it is a lay fee divolved
by Act of Parliament to the Crown; yet he deprives him of his possession which
he had continued for twenty nine years, upon a paper petition, without rules
of law. And whereas my Lord of Cork went about to redeem himself (the law
being every man's inheritance, and that which he ought to enjoy) he tells him,
he will lay him by the heels* if he withdraw not his process: and so when he
has judged him against an express Act of Parliament, and Instructions, and
bound up a great Peer of the Realm, he will not suffer him to redeem that
wrong, without a threat of laying him by the heels, and he will not have Law
nor Lawyers question his Orders, and would have them all know, an Act of State
should be equal to an Act of Parliament: Which are words of that nature, that
higher cannot be spoken, to declare an intention to proceed in an arbitrary way.

The next was in my Lord Mountnorris his case, and Rolstone. And here I must
touch my Lord with misrepetition. Rolstone preferred a petition to my Lord
Deputy, my Lord Deputy himself judges his estate, and deprived him of his
possession, though he cannot produce so much as one example, or precedent
(though if he had, it would not have warranted an illegal action) but he
cannot produce a precedent, that ever any Deputy did determine concerning a
man's private estate; and if he has affirmed it, he proved it not: some
petitions have been preferred to him, but what they be non constat. But, though
never any knew the Deputy alone to determine matters of land, yet he did it.

To the seventh Article we produce no evidence; but my Lord of Strafford cannot
be content with that, but he must take upon him to make defense for that which
is not insisted upon as a charge; but since he will do so, I refer it to the
book in print, where he determines the inheritance of a Nobleman in that
Kingdom, that is, my Lord Dillon, by a case falsely drawn, and contrary to his
consent; and though he deprives him not of his possession, yet he causes the
Land to be measured out, and it is a danger that hangs over his head to this
day. And had we not known that we had matter enough against my Lord of
Strafford, this should have risen in judgment against him; but I had not
mentioned it now, if he had not mentioned it himself.

The eighth Article contains several charges, as that of my Lord Chancellor,
how he imprisoned him upon a judgment before himself and the Council, how he
enforced the Seal from him when he had no authority, nay, though it were
excepted by his Patent that he should no way dispose of it; but he looked not
to Authority, further then might make way to his will.

Another concerns the prime Earl of that Kingdom, my Lord of Kildare, whom he
imprisoned, and kept close prisoner, contrary to the Kings express command for
his deliverance; and in his answer my Lord acknowledges it, but says, that
that command was obtained from the King upon a misinformation.

These things I would not have mentioned, if he had passed them over; but since
he gives them in, give me leave to mention, and say, we had a ground to put
them into charge, and could have proved them, if there had been need,
punctually and expressly, and I believe little to my Lords advantage.

But Your Lordships I think do remember my Lady Hibbots case, where the Lady
Hibbots contracts with Thomas Hibbots for his inheritance for 2500. l. executes
the contract by a Deed, and Fine levied, deposits part of the money, and when a
Petition was exhibited to the L. Deputy and Council for the very estate, your
Lordships remember how this came in judgment before my Lord Deputy; there was
but a petition delivered, there was an answer made* and all the suggestions of
the petition denied; yet my Lord spoke to Hibbots himself, that was willing to
accept the money, not to decline the way that he was in by petition; five
hundred pound more will do him no hurt to carry into England with him: and
yet, without examination of a witness, a Decree was made to deprive this Lady
of her estate: And the purchasing of this land by my Lord of Strafford was
proved by two witnesses, though not absolutely, yet by confession of Sir Robert
Meredith, and others, whose names were used in trust for my Lord of Strafford,
and that it proved according to my Lord of Straffords prophecy; for the man
had five hundred pounds gain above the Contract with my Lady Hibbots:

But after, the lands were sold for seven thousand pound; so that the Lady
Hibbots offense was her making of a bargain whereby to gain five hundred
pounds; But there was no offense in my Lord, to make a bargain for three
thousand pounds, and to gain four thousand pound presently: this you see
proved by Hibbots the party, and by master Hoy the son of the Lady Hibbots.

So that here is a determination of a cause before the Council Table touching
land, which was neither plantation, nor Church-land, without color of the
instructions, contrary to law, to statute, to practice; and if this be not an
exercising of an unlawful jurisdiction over the Land and Estates of the
subject, I know not what is.

In his answer to this case he did open it (yet whether he mistook or no I
know not) that he had a letter from the King, but he produces none in
evidence; and that is another mis-recitall. I am sorry he should misrecite, and
fix it upon the person of his Sovereign in a case of this nature.

Now he falls more immediately upon the liberty of the subject, and that is by
the Warrant mentioned in the ninth Article, to be issued to the Bishop of Down
and Conner, whereby he gives power to him and his Officers to apprehend any of
the Kings subjects that appeared not upon Process out of his Ecclesiastical
Courts, expressly contrary to law; and your Lordships have heard how miserably
the Kings subjects were used by this warrant, as has been proved by a
Gentleman of quality, Sir James Mountgomery: And howsoever he pretends it was
called in, it was three whole years in execution, before it was called in; and
though he pretends his Predecessors did ordinarily grant Warrants of that
nature, yet he proves no such thing.

My Lord Primate was examined, and he says, that Bishop Mountgomery did tell
him there was such a Warrant, and one witness more speaks of one Warrant, and
that is all the witnesses produced, and that but to be a copy too. Your
Lordships have heard how he exercises his jurisdiction and power over
particulars, and that in a numerous manner; now your Lordships shall find it
universal, and spread over the face of that Kingdom that was under his
jurisdiction, and that is in the tenth Article, which concerns the Customs:
where he does impose upon the Kings subjects a rate and tax against law, and
enforces them to pay it, or else punishes them for it; which is expressly an
arrogating to himself of a jurisdiction above the law.

My Lords, in his answer he pretends that this is rather a matter of fraud than
otherwise: in truth and so it is, and that a great one too. But as it is a
fraud, a dis-service, and deceit to his Majesty, so it is likewise an exercise
of a tyrannical jurisdiction over his subjects: That it is a fraud to his
Majesty it plainly appears, for the King lost exceedingly by it; whereas
before the rent affoorded the King was 11050. l. there was improved by the new
lease, that my Lord of Strafford took but 1350. l. and I beseech your Lordships
observe how much the King lost by it; for my Lord had comprehended in his new
lease the impost of wine, for which the King before that time received 1400. l.
a year; and likewise the Custom of London Durry, Colerane, and Knockfergus,
for which the King had reserved 1700. l. a year, besides the moity of the
seisures: so here is 5000. l. that the King lost of the old rent expressly: and,
if your Lordships please, observe the gain and benefit my Lord of Strafford
made by it; in one year he and his sharers received 39000. l. and in the last
year 51000. l. and that expressly proved upon two accounts: and if this be his
dealing, where is his service to the King in his pretense to advance the
Customs?

It is true, he says, the King has five eighth parts, but it was but within
these two years, the King had it not before. And I would very gladly have
heard whether the King received his part of an account of 55000. l. if he had
received it, I believe we should have heard of it.

My Lords, there is something more; here is a new imposition on the Kings
people without law, and yet I will do my Lord of Strafford no injury: but I
tell you how the proof stands; It was a book of rates framed before he came to
the form, for the book of rates was in March, and the date of his assignment
is in April following; and therefore my Lord says, it could not be for his
benefit. But, my Lords, all this while my Lord of Strafford was in England, and
in agitation for the procuring of it, and they come one upon the heels of
another, and I beseech you observe cui bono; the book of rates was procured
within a month of the Patent, but God knows whether it were not within the
compass of his intentions to take the Patent; and therefore whether he were
not the Instrument of raising rates, it rests in your Lordships judgment, and
all that hear me; I am sure the benefit redounded to himself: and so here is
an arbitrary government in imposing and forcing to pay, for that I desire your
Lordships to take with you; and he might as well have raised nineteen
shillings on a pound, as nine pence, or three pence, by the same rule of Law.

The next Article in number was the eleventh, and I would be glad my Lord had
not mentioned it; it concerns the Pipe-staves, wherein he pretends he did the
King great service, and that, he says, was the reason of our passing over it:
but that was not the reason; it had been a foul business if we had opened
it; but having enough besides, we made not use of it: for the substance of the
proofs by multiplicity of witnesses had been, That the parties themselves
that bought the Pipe-staves for four pound odd money, were feign to sell them
to his Instruments for six pounds, and after to buy them again for ten pounds,
else there must be no license to export them: But that I would not have
mentioned if he had let it slip over.

I come to the twelfth Article, and that is concerning the Tobacco, wherein he
pretends the Kings service, and, if my memory fail me not, the desire of the
Parliament, that he should take this into his hands for the King.

My Lords, therein, under his favor, he has misrecited the evidence, and
spoken that he cannot justify; for he can show no such desire of the
Parliament. It is true, there was a desire of the Parliament, that the King
would be pleased to take his Customs into his hands for the advancement of his
revenew, that it might go to maintain himself, and he might not be abused,
and others live by it; but to take the Tobacco into his hands, he never did,
nor can produce a witness to prove such their desire; and therefore, under
favor, he fixes a wrong upon the Parliament, and injures your Lordships by his
reciting that he neither did nor can make good; for there was no such thing.

But if you observe the course he takes, he makes Proclamation to hinder the
importing of Tobacco into Ireland; that if it be imported, it must be sold to
him at his own rate; and by this means he first hinders the liberty of the
subject from doing what the law allows him, and so takes on him an arbitrary
power; and secondly, he ingrosses this commodity to himself, deceiving his
Majesty, to whom he professes so much fidelity; for whereas there is 5000. l.
rent to the King, he, by the computation of Merchants, receives near 140000*
l. a year: And because their computations are not always true, I do not care
if I allow him 40000. l. mistaken, and then he will gain near 100000. l. so
that if he intends the Kings benefit, it is wonder he told not his Majesty of
the great profit that might thereby have risen, and let him partake of it, as
in justice he should have done, according to the trust reposed in him: but you
have heard of no such matter. And surely my Lord of Strafford would not have
omitted it, if it had been for his advantage, especially in this presence,
where he omits nothing to clear himself, or to insinuate with his Majesty.

Now I come to the thirteenth Article, the Article concerning Flax, which I
know is fresh in your Lordships memories, and I believe will be so in the
memories of the subjects of Ireland for many years, how he engrossed it into
his hands, and interrupted the trade of the poor people, whereby such miseries
and calamities befell many of that Nation, that, as you have heard it proved,
thousands dye in ditches for want of bread to put in their mouths. And whereas
he pretends that this was proved but by one witness, and that man to be
imprisoned, and of no credit, though he was his own instrument; your Lordships
remember Sir John Clatworthy his testimony, and another, and his own Warrant
produced, and acknowledged here to justify the execution of it, and such a
thing was thereby taken into his own hands, that I profess I never heard the
like, that the poor people should be constrained to use their own as he
pleased, and that pleasing of himself laid an impossibility on the people to
execute his pleasure, which was a bondage exceeding that of the Israelites
under the Egyptians; for there was not laid so much upon the Children of
Israel, but there was a possibility to perform; they might with much labor
perchance get stubble to burn their brick, but the natives here must have a
charge laid upon them without possibility to perform, and the disobedience
must cost them no less then the loss of their goods, which drew with it even
the loss of their lives for want of bread. This was not proved by only one
witness, but by many. And your Lordships remember the remonstrance of that
Parliament of Ireland, which declares it to a greater height than I have opened
it.

The fifteenth Article is that of levying war upon the Kings subjects,
expressly within the Statute of 25. E. 3. and 18. H. 6. Your Lordships have
heard the Warrant proved by the party himself, to whom it was directed;
whereby power was given to lay soldiers upon any party, that did not obey my
Lord of Straffords orders at the Council Table, but not to circumscribe him to
a certain number; but the Seargeant at Arms, and his ministers, might lay as
many as they would. It is true, this warrant was not it self produced, but a
copy was offered, which was not read; and therefore I will not offer it to be
proved, but the party that executed the Warrant it self, proves it to be under
the hand and seal of my Lord of Strafford, he proves the express authority of
it, which was to the effect I opened; three or four more, who saw and read it,
proved the same: and that it was under the hand and seal of my Lord of
Strafford, that accordingly it was executed upon diverse of the Kings subjects;
it was proved by three witnesses expressly in the point, how by color of this
Warrant the Sergeant at Arms, and his Officers, sent soldiers to lie in the
houses and lands of the Kings subjects; how the owners were thereby forced out
from their own habitation; how their goods were wasted and devoured, their corn
and victuals eaten up, and the soldiers never left them, as long as any part
of their estates remained to maintain them.

My Lord of Straffords defense is, that it has been used before his time in
Ireland; wherein he has again mis-recited; for he did not offer a proof,
nor a particle of a proof, that ever any man did know soldiers laid upon any
party for refusing to appear to a Warrant, or for other contempt at Council
Table, before himself did it; but he offered to prove, that formerly
soldiers were sent against Rebels, and that after they were declared to be
Rebels, and justly too; and he proved an use and custom to force men to pay
the contribution money due to the King, but that was by consent of the people,
who granted a contribution of 20000. l. a year, for increase of the Kings
revennue; and that it might not be upon record in the Exchequer, and so claimed
as due in time to come, they consented that soldiers should be laid upon them
that refused it; and the word ( consent) is within the Statute of 18. H. 6.
Again, did he prove all manner of rents were levied by soldiers? no such
thing; but such rents as were designed for payment of the Army: he proved by
Sir Arthur Terringham the laying of soldiers once for the payment of a sum
of money; but sir Arthur being demanded whether it were the Kings rents, or
comprehended within the same general rule, he could make no answer thereunto.

Your Lordships remember, he says he did not know it, and therefore probably
it was the Kings rents; and doubtless it was so.

But if he had produced presidents, it could not be an authority for Treason,
that if people did not appear to his orders, he must levy war against the
Kings subjects; and for his extenuation of the war, that the same was of no
great danger, there being not above five or six soldiers laid at a time. I
would to God the people oppressed by it, had cause to undervalue it: I am sure
four or six Musketeers are as strong to oppress a man as four thousand; so
the matter of fact is strongly and expressly proved. Besides, though there came
not above four or five to a house, yet the authority given to the Sergeant was
general; he might have brought more if he had listed: and in truth he
brought as many as the estate of the party would maintain.

And as to the not producing of the Warrant, I have already answered it. If it
were in the case of a Deed wherein men call for witnesses, it were something;
but God forbid that the Treason should be gone, and the Traitor not
questionable, if his warrant can be once put out of the way.

The next Article which is laid to his charge is, for issuing out a
Proclamation, and Warrant of restraint, to inhibit the Kings subjects to come
to the Fountain, their Sovereign, to deliver their complaints of their wrongs
and oppressions. Your Lordships have heard how he has exercised his
jurisdiction, and now he raises a battery to secure and make it safe. If he do
wrong, perhaps the complaint may come to the gracious ears of a King, who is
ready to give relief, and therefore he must stop these cries, and prevent
these means, that he may go on without interruption. And to that end he
makes propositions here, that the Kings subjects in Ireland should not come
over to make complaint against Ministers of State, before an address first
made to himself. It is true, he makes a fair pretense and show for it, and
had just cause of approbation, if he had intended what he pretended; But as
soon as he came into Ireland, what use made he of it? he ingrosses the
proceedings of almost all the Courts of Justice into his own hands, and so
pre-possesses the King by a colorable proposition, and prevents their coming
over before they had made their address to himself, and then he becomes the
wrong doer, and issues Proclamations for the hindering of the Kings subjects to
seek redress without his leave; which is as great a proof of his design,
and as great an injury to the people, governed under a gracious Prince, as a
heart can conceive. And what his intention was in exhibiting this proposition,
it will appear in the sentence of a poor man, one David, who was censured, and
most heavily fined for coming over into England to prosecute complaint against
my Lord of Strafford. It is true, that this was not the cause expressed, but
this was the truth of the matter. Your Lordships remember a clause in the order
at Council Board, whereby is set forth the cause wherefore the party is not
sentenced, which I never saw in an order before, nor should now, but that my
Lord foresaw there was danger in it, that he might be charged in this place for
the fact; and therefore puts in negatively why the party was not censured.
Clausula inconsulta inducit suspitionem. And how defends he this Article? he
says, his Predecessors issued Proclamations to hinder the Kings subjects from
going over, lest they should join with O Neale and Tirconnell beyond sea, and
so it might be dangerous to the State; but because they may join with
Forreiners, shall they therefore not come to the King to make just complaint?
what this argument is, I refer to your Lordships judgments.

Then he pretends a former president, affirming that the like Instructions were
given to my Lord of Faulkland; but was there any, that none should come to
their Sovereign to make their just appeal if injured? Surely there was never
any such Instruction before, and I hope never will be again.

The next Article is the nineteenth: And now when he had so plentifully
exercised his tyranny over the lives, the liberty, and the estates of the Kings
subjects. A man would think he could go no further; but see a Tyranny
exercised beyond that, and that is over the Consciences of men: hitherto he
dealt with the outward man, and now he offers violence to the inward man, and
imposes an Oath upon the Kings subjects, and so exercises a tyranny over the
Consciences of men.

And setting aside the matter of the Oath, if he has authority and power to
impose such an Oath as he shall frame, he may by the same power impose any Oath
to compel Consciences.

He pretends a Warrant from his Majesty to do it, but the Kings Ministers are
to serve the King according to law; and I dare be bold to say (and we have good
reason to thank God for it) if any of the Kings Ministers tell him that any
Command he gives is against law, there is no doubt but in his goodness and
piety he will withdraw his Command, and not enforce execution; and therefore
if there were an error, the King is free, and the Ministers to be justly
charged with it.

But there was no Command from the King to compel and enforce them to take the
Oath by the power of the Star Chamber, to commit them to prison, to impose
heavy fines, and tyrannize over them; all which he did in the case of Steward.

And now one would have thought he had acted his part, when he had acted as
much as lay in his own power; and yet he goes beyond this, he was not content
to corrupt all the streams (which was not a diverting of the course, as he
spoke in his answer; for he not only turned the course of the water, but
changed the nature of it, converted it into poison, a legal and just
proceeding into a Tyrannical and Arbitrary government, which is not turning,
but corrupting of the clear and crystal streams to bitterness and death.)
But yet the Fountain remains clear, and perhaps when his hand is taken off,
you shall have the streams run as pure and incorrupt as ever they did. This is
it troubles him, remove but this obstacle, and the work is perfect; and
therefore now he will go about to corrupt the streams: if he can but infuse
his poison into the Kings heart, which is the Fountain, then all is done; and
now he attempts that, and approaches the Throne, endeavors to corrupt the
Kings goodness with wicked counsels; but God be thanked he finds too much
piety there to prevail.

And therefore the next Article is that, that charges him to be an Incendiary
to the war betwixt the two Kingdoms: and now I shall be bold to unfold the
mystery, and answer his objection: To what purpose should he be an Incendiary?
were it not better to enjoy his estate in peace and quietness, then have it
under danger of a war? Now your Lordships shall have the Riddle discovered.

The first thing he does after his coming into England is, to incense the
King to a war, to involve two Nations, of one faith, and under one
Sovereign, to imbrue their hands in each others blood, and to draw Armies into
the field.

That he was this Incendiary, give me leave to revive your Lordships memories
with the proofs which will make it plain; and first give me leave to note
unto your Lordships, that his Majesty, with much wisdom, did in July 1639.
make a pacification with his subjects, and even at the very heels of this
pacification, when all things were at peace, upon the tenth of September, which
was the next month but one, your Lordships remember the sentence of Steward in
the Star Chamber of Ireland, for not taking the oath; your Lordships may call
to mind the language my L. of Strafford was pleased to use of the Scots: when
all was in quietness, he then calls them no better then Traitors and Rebels,
if you will believe what the witness testifies, whom my Lord is pleased to
call a Schoolmaster: And truly admit he were so, because he is a
Schoolmaster, therefore not to be believed, is a non sequitur. And another
witness, one Loftus, speaks to the words, though not in the same manner; but,
I say, the tenth of September, when things were at peace and rest, when the
King was pleased to be reconciled to them by that pacification, what boiled in
his breast then to the breaking forth of such expressions, I know not, unless
it were an intention to be an Incendiary.

My Lords, I must say and affirm, and he has not proved it to the contrary,
that all this while (I am confident) there was not any breach of the
pacification on either side, and it lies on his part to prove there was: But
the Parliament of Scotland then sitting, and making preparation for their
demands in pursuance of the Articles of pacification, he, coming over into
England in September, immediately upon the pacification, answers, That he found
things so distracted here* that it was fit the Scots should be reduced by
force, if they could not be otherwise: yet no breach appears, no war was
denounced, there was no intention of a war: But see what harbored in his
breast all the while?

The fourth of December following, my Lord Traquaire made his relation to the
Council of the Scots proceedings: and all this while there was no Demands
brought by the Scots themselves, nor reason of their Demands brought by others,
though they were prepared; yet you have heard his advice was for an offensive
war, and that the Demands were a just cause of the war. And though he
pretends he said no more then what the rest of the Lords of the Council
concurred with him in, I will join in issue with him in that, and if some of
your Lordships be not satisfied, you have many noble Lords among you, from whom
you may be satisfied that it is not so; I am sure he proves it not. It is true,
in the proposition of the Demands some of the Lords of the Council did say,
that these Demands hypothetically, if the Scots did not give satisfaction by
their reasons, were a just cause of war; but not any Lord of the Council was
of opinion, that the very Demands, positively, without hearing of the reasons,
were a just cause of war, but himself; and I believe the noble Lords of the
Council their Consciences can tell them, and I believe will deliver it to the
rest of the Peers, that I speak truth.

For the offensive war he pretends a concurrence of the rest, but it was
disproved; many were for it upon these terms, if they did not give reasons,
and show just cause for their Demands; and many were against an offensive war
upon any terms, and therefore herein he fixes that upon the Lords of the
Council, that he cannot make good.

All this while his intentions are discovered by a matter precedent, but after
the breach he discovers his anger further toward the Scottish Nation, and
makes it his design to incense the King to this war.

My Lords, he is not at an end yet, for he confesses himself that he advised
the King to call a Parliament; and now I come to his work of merit, but it was
to his destruction, and serves to prove this Article directly; for to what
purpose was this Parliament called? Exitus acta probat; it was no sooner set,
but within three weeks a proposition is made for supply toward a war
against the Scots: who was the cause of calling the Parliament? himself; and
therefore who was the cause of this proposition but himself? and so the
calling of the Parliament is a concurring evidence of his being an Incendiary
to put on the war; and it shall appear anon absolutely, that he was the
occasion of it, though he thinks there be no proof of it.

Did not he go over into Ireland, and by his solicitation there, Subsidies
were granted by the Parliament, only to maintain this war, and to show
their engagement in it? and who was the occasion of drawing them on, I refer
to your Lordships judgments, by the circumstances precedent.

Your Lordships heard his good opinion of the Scots, when he began to discourse
with the Citizens touching money, and their affording of the King supply, and
seizing the mint, by giving them no better expressions than Rebels; for, says
he, you are more forward to help the Rebels, than to pay the King his own: I
know not who he meant, but certainly the Scots were in his thoughts; so that
from the beginning he incensed the war against them: first, he exclaimed
against them during time of peace. He alleges in his answer, that things were
found in such distraction, that it was fit the Scots should be reduced by
force* he gave advice precipitately without hearing the reasons, and not
concurrent to the Council, for an offensive war; and putting all together, I
refer it to your Lordships judgment who is the Incendiary; for how can it be
proved more clearly, unless it should appear under his hand and seal,
proved by two or three witnesses?

Now, my Lords, how comes this to be his design? here the mystery comes to be
unfolded. Having thus incensed to the war, and engaged the King to the
uttermost, and having a Parliament now dissolved without supply, he sets up an
Idol of his own creation, as a means to draw on his design, and that was
necessity; necessity is it that must enforce the King: what to do? to levy
money, to use his Prerogative, to raise supplies upon his subjects without
their consent, against their will, necessity must be his argument, and this
war must be the^ occasion of that necessity, and without that he cannot
suggest to the Kings ear, or advise this necessity, till this be brought to
pass.

And now he has brought it to pass, he began in the one and twentieth, two
and twentieth, and three and twentieth Article, to persuade the King* that
necessity has surprised him, by the Parliaments deserting of him; that the
Parliament had for saken the King, in denying supply, and having tried the
affections of his people, he was loose, and absolved from all rules of
government, and had an Army in Ireland which he might employ, to reduce this
Kingdom.

That he spoke these words to the King, part is proved by two concurrent
witnesses, that is, that having tried the affections of his people, he was now
loose, and absolved from all rules of government; which words are proved by two
witnesses of eminent quality, that is, my Lord of Northumberland, and Sir Henry
Vane: and truly, howsoever my Lord in his speech pretends, that the most
material words are proved but by one witness (it seeming that he held it not
a material charge, that he counseled the King that he was absolved from all
rules of government) for my part, if your Lordships be satisfied those words
were proved, I could willingly satisfy my own Conscience in it, and make no
great matter to quit the rest; for I know not how he could express it in
higher terms, then that the King was absolved from rules of government, for
then he might do what he would.

It is true, the latter words, touching the Irish Army, are expressly proved but
by one witness, master Secretary Vane; but are fortified again with such
circumstances as make up more then one, yea, more than two other witnesses, if
your Lordships will have the patience to have it represented, as it is proved.

For howsoever it be slighted by him, if your Lordships will call to mind the
words of Sir George Radcliffe, his bosom friend (to whom he had contributed
without question his advice in all causes) the said Sir George Radcliffe
expressed it before, and told some of his friends (supposing that he never
should be called in question, and that the power of my Lord of Strafford had
been enough to protect any thing he had done, and out of the abundance of the
heart his mouth spoke) the King must now want no money; if he did, no body
would pity him, now he had his sword in his hand.

Sir Robert King proves it so. My Lord Renula discovered the smoke of the fire
that he had just cause to suspect, and on good grounds, I am sure; and if the
Commons of England had not just cause to suspect him (as I believe he is
convinced they had good cause) what is the reason this suspicion should be
entertained at that time, my Lord of Strafford being not then questioned for
it? and yet my Lord Renula should say, Shall we turn our swords upon our own
bowels? shall we bring this Army to turn the points of our blades upon that
Nation from whence we were all derived? and that was before any conference with
master Secretary Vane.

Sir William Penniman himself, his own witness and friend, says, at York,
before my Lord of Strafford was questioned, that there was a common fame of
bringing the Army into England, and there is something in that surely; and
after all this, to produce one witness that expressly proves the very words
spoken in terminis, as they be charged, if your Lordships put the whole
together, see whether there be not more then one witness.

And, under favor, my Lord Cottington, if you call to mind his testimony, I
must justify, he did declare, that he heard my Lord of Strafford tell the
King, that some reparation was to be made to the subjects property; which must
infer, he had advised an invasion upon the property; else by no good
coherence should a reparation be made. And that he testifies this, I must
affirm, and most here will affirm it; and I think your Lordships well
remember it: and that is an addition to it; for if your Lordships cast your eye
upon the interrogatory administered to my Lord Admiral, and my Lord Cottington,
that very question is asked; so that his own Conscience told him, he had
advised something to invade upon the people, when he advised to a restitution
after things should be settled: and so I refer it to your Lordships
consideration, whether here be not more then one witness by far.

It is true, he makes objections to lessen this testimony; first, that this
Army was to be landed at Air in Scotland, and not here; and this was declared
to Sir Thomas Lucas, master Slings by, Sir William Penniman, and others.
Secondly, that others that were present, when the words are supposed to be
spoken, did not hear any such words.

For the first: perhaps the Army might be originally intended for Scotland, and
yet this is no contradiction but he might intend it afterward for England;
surely this is no Logic, that because it was intended for one place, it could
never be intended for another place; so his allegarion may be true, and the
charge stand true likewise.

Beside that it was intended orriginally for Scotland, what proof makes he?
He told several persons of the design, but I will be tried by himself, he
told some, it was for Scotland, he told others it was for England; and why you
should believe his telling on one side, more then on the other side I know not;
though he pretends a reason of his several allegations that the world should
not know his design, but if you will not believe him one way, why should he be
believed the other way? and if not the other way, why the first way?

For the second, several persons were present when the words were spoken
touching the Irish Army, and they were examined, and remember not the words;
but one man may hear, though twenty do not hear; and this is no
contradiction at all: For those persons whom he examined, the Lord Treasurer,
Marquess Hambleton, my Lord Cottington, did not hear the words that are
proved by two witnesses, concerning the Kings being loose, and absolved from
rules of government: and if they did not hear those words, no marvel they
did not hear the other: and therefore that which he himself pretends to be a
convincing testimony, is nothing at all; so that his objections are clearly
taken away, and the single testimony fortified with testimonies that make
above one witness, and so the words are fully proved.

But to fortify the whole, I shall handle all these Articles together, This
design to subvert the Law, and to exercise an arbitrary power above the Law in
this kingdom, will (upon the proofs putting them altogether, and not taking
them in pieces as my Lord of Strafford has done) appear to have been
harbored in his thoughts, and settled in his heart long before it was executed.

You see what his Counsels were, That the King having tried the affections of
his people, was loose and absolved from all rules of government, and might do
every thing that power would admit, and his Majesty's had tried all ways, and
was refused, and should be acquitted of God and man, and had an army in
Ireland, wherewith if he pleased he might reduce this kingdom: so there must
be a trial of his people, for supply that is denied, which must be
interpreted, a defection by refusal, and this refusal must give advantage of
necessity, and this necessity must be an advantage to use his Prerogative
against the rule of the Law, and consent of the People; this is his advice.
which shows that this very thing that happened did harbor in his thoughts long
before the breach of the Parliament, and the occasion of the Army.

Your Lordships have heard it confessed by himself, That before this last
advice, he had advised the calling of a Parliament: to the Parliament a
proposition of twelve Subsidies was made for supply, and (which may be spoken
with great assurance) before they had consulted, or given any resolution to
that proposition, the Parliament was dissolved, upon a supposal that the supply
was denied. Now that this was predesigned by my L. of Strafford himself, I
beseech you observe these things following, that is, the words in the two and
twentieth Article, That his Majesty was first to try the Parliament, and if
that did not supply him, then he would serve the King any other way.

His words are proved by Mr. Treasurer, That if the Parliament supplied him
not, he would serve him any other way; and this is before the Parliament set:
now if your Lordships hear the proofs of my Lord Primate (which my Lord of
Strafford slights taking it singly) My Lord Primate before the Parliament was
called, when my Lord of Strafford was in Ireland, and not yet come into this
kingdom, testifies, my Lords, saying, That if the Parliament will not supply
his Majesty, the King was acquitted before God and Man, if he took some
other course to supply himself, though against the will of the Subjects. I
beseech your Lordships observe how he prophecies these things must come to
pass, and advised them accordingly.

My Lord Conway testifies, that before the Parliament sat, my Lord of
Strafford said, that if the Parliament would not supply his Majesty, the King
was acquitted before God and Man, if he took another course to supply
himself, though it were against the will of the subject, and he doubts not but
the Parliament would give, what? twelve Subsidies: and your Lordships very well
remember, twelve were propounded; but I beseech you observe the coherence of
all: the Parliament must be called, they must be tried, if they deny there is
necessity, and this necessity is a warrant for the King to proceed; so that my
Lord of Strafford must be judged to be either a Prophet, or to have this
design before hand in his thoughts.

Now the Parliament being broken before answer to the demand given, he vents
his counsel in the three and twentieth Article, and how far it is proved your
Lordships have heard. Now comes the Bullion to be seized, the Copper money to
be advised, and now comes he to tell the King that the Aldermen of London must
be put to fine, and ransom, and laid by the heels, and no good would be done
till some of them be hanged, so you hear his advice; I beseech your Lordships
observe what success this advice took; four Aldermen were instantly
committed, and then the Council of the three and twentieth Article is fomented.

First, he foments the war, then there is a necessity, the defection of the
Parliament must set the King loose from rules of government, and now see
whether the occasion of the war, the calling of the Parliament, the
dissolving of it, be not adequate to what he propounded to himself, namely, to
set up an arbitrary government.

Your Lordships remember how fresh my Lord of Bristowes memory is, touching my
Lord of Straffords opinion upon the dissolution of the Parliament, how he
declared unto my Lord of Bristow instantly within three or four days after,
That the King was not to be mastered by the frowardness of his people, or
rather of some particular persons; and your Lordships remember Sir George
Wentworths words spoken the very day of dissolving the Parliament: which may be
very well applied as a concurrent proof to his intentions of bringing the Army
into England. He was my Lords own brother, that knew much of his Council, and
his words are, That the English Nation would never be well, till they were
conquered over again. So my Lords put all together, if he declared his own
intentions, if actions, in executing of this tyrannical, and arbitrary power,
if Counsels of as dangerous consequence, in as high a strain as can be, be not
a sufficient evidence to prove an intention, and desire, to subvert the Law, I
know not what can prove such an Interpretation: and now I refer it to your
Lordships judgments, whether here be not a good proof of the Article laid to
his charge.

My Lord in the seven and twentieth Article he is charged with levying of
war upon the Kings people, by forcing them in Yorkshire to pay money: to
prove they were so forced, you have heard by two witnesses, that Sergeant Major
Yaworth, by Musketeers, four together in the town, and one by one out of the
town, did compel them to pay the fortnights contribution, else they were to
serve in person: That he did this by warrant is likewise confessed by Sir
William Penyman; and whether this were an authority derived from, or commanded
by my Lord of Strafford, that is the question; and, my Lords, it is plainly
proved, that it was commanded by my Lord of Strafford, for Sr. William Penyman
himself being examined, alleged that the warrant was made in pursuance of the
relation, and direction made by my Lord of Strafford.

Your Lordships heard what my Lord of Strafford did say before hand, as is
proved by two witnesses, (Sir William Ingram and Mr. Cholmeley) that this money
should be paid, or levied on the subjects goods; Then his declaration to Sir
William Penyman, (in pursuance of which he made his warrant) That it was the
assent of the Lords of the great Council, that this money should be levied;
and taking all together, whether it fixes it not upon him to be the author and
instrument, it rests in your judgments in point of fact: and so I suppose the
seven and twentieth Article rests on him, and so I shall conclude the evidence
produced on the behalf of the Commons.

And now give me leave to put your Lordships in mind of some evidences offered
by my Lord of Strafford himself in his answer, and in the passages of his
defense, for his clearing and justification, but tending directly to his
condemnation.

I will enter upon some passages he mentioned to day, and often before* When he
is charged with invading the estates of the Peers of the kingdom of Ireland,
and determining them, upon paper petitions in an arbitrary way* your Lordships
have heard him speak it before, and repeat it this day, that he did it out of
compassion for the more expeditious proceeding on behalf of the poor, against
these mighty* But then, my Lords, I beseech you compare some other part of his
proceedings. Your Lordships remember the business of the Flax, which concerns
the poor wholly and universally; and if compassion had been the rule and
direction of his actions toward the poor* surely this would have been a just
cause to have commiserated them in this case; but he exercised his power over
them, and over them wholly, and over them universally: and therefore it shows,
it is not his compassion to the poor, nor respect to the rich, or mighty, that
will any way restrain or obstruct his ways, to his own will. And therefore
you may see what truth there is in his answer, by comparing one part of the
charge with another, when the business of the Flax brought that calamity upon
the Kings Subjects, that thousands of them perished for lack of bread, and
dyed in ditches.

Secondly, your Lordships have often heard him use a Rhetorical insinuation,
wondering that he should be charged with words, and they strained so high as to
be made treason, to question his life, and posterity, though the words might be
spoken unadvisedly, or in discourse, or by chance: your Lordships remember the
fifth Article touching his proceedings against my Lord Mount-Norris where words
were spoken in an ordinary discourse at dinner, and slight ones, God knows, of
no consequence at all, such as another man would scarce have harkened after,
and yet my Lord extends them to the taking away of my Lord Mount-Norris his
life; gets a sentence of death against him, and that against Law, with a high
hand, in such a manner, as I think your Lordships have not heard the like; and
therefore, I beseech you, compare one part of his answer with another, and see
how ready he is to make use of any thing that may excuse himself; and yet when
he comes to act his power, you see his exercise of it.

You have heard how he magnifies his zeal for advancing the Kings benefit,
and revennue, and his care of his service, and would shelter and protect
himself under it, to justify an exorbitant action* but if your Lordships call
to mind the business of Customs for Tobacco, (which in truth were the Kings
right and due, and a great profit was thereby advanced; and he trusted to
advance it.) The King must loose of his former rents in the case of Custom,
and received a small rent in the case of Tobacco, my Lord himself in the mean
time imbursing such vast sums of money: where is then the discharge of his
trust? where is his care to advance the Kings rents* to increase his revennue?
Compare that part of his answer with this, and see what credit is to be given
to his affirmation.

My Lords, throughout the passages of his discourse he insinuates, (and never
more then this day) with the Peers of the Realm, magnifying them almost to
Idolatry; and yet my Lords, when he was in his kingdom, in Ireland, and had
power over them, what respect showed he then to the Peers of the kingdom,
when he judged some to death, trampled upon others in misery, committed them to
prison and seized on their estates; where then was the Peerage he now magnifies?

And to show it was an insinuation for his own advantage, you may remember,
when there was an unlawful Act to be committed, that is, the levying of money
in the North, what regard had he then to the Peers of the kingdom, when he
comes to justify and boulster up high treason it self, under the name and
authority of the great Council, where most of the Peers of the Realm then
were? and so by this time I know what credit your Lordships give to his words
spoken, when he lies under your mercy, and power: But what do I speak of the
Peers of the kingdom, and his using of them? My Lords, he spared not his
Sovereign, his Majesty in his whole defense; for being charged with offenses
of a high nature, he justifies those offenses under the pretense, and under
the authority of his Majesty, our gracious King and Sovereign, even murder
it self, in the case of Denwit, and my Lord Mountnorris. Treason it self, in
the fifteenth Article by a command in Ireland, and in the seven and twentieth,
by a pretended authority from his Majesty in the face of his people; he
justifies my Lord Mountnorrice his sentence by a letter from his Majesty,
Denwits sentence by a Commission from his Majesty, and he read three or four
clauses to that purpose.

My Lords, my Lord of Strafford does very well know (and if he does not know
it, I have a witness to produce against him, which I will not examine, but
refer it to his own Conscience, that is, the petition of right;) that the
Kings servants are to serve him according to law, and no otherwise: he very
well knew if an unlawful act be committed, specially to a degree of Treason
and Murder, the Kings authority and warrant produced, is no justification at
all. So then, my Lords, to mention the Kings name, to justify an unlawful act
in that way, can do him no good; and his own understanding knows, it may do
the King harm, if we had not so gracious a King, that no such thing can do
harm unto.

But, my Lords, to produce the Kings warrant to justify his actions under his
Patent and Command, what is it else, but so far as in him lies, in the face
of his people, to raise a cloud, and exhale a vapor? to interpose betwixt the
King and his subjects? whereby the splendor of his glory and justice cannot
be discovered to his people.

My Lords, what is it else, when the people make complaint against the
Ministers (that should execute justice) of their oppression, and slavery, and
bondage? For the Minister, when he is questioned, to justify this under the
Kings authority, what is it, I say, but, as much as in that Minister lies, to
fix this offense, to fasten this oppression upon the King himself, to make it
to be believed, that the occasion of these their groans proceeded from his
sacred Majesty? yet God be thanked the strength of that Sun is powerful
enough to dispell these vapors, and to disperse the cloud that he would have
raised; but in the mean time my Lord is nothing to be excused.

My Lords, he may pretend zeal to the Kings service, and affection to his
honor, but give me leave not to believe it, since, when he is questioned by
all the Kings people, and in the face of his people, and offenses laid to his
charge, which himself now confesses to be against law; he should justify it
under the Kings authority; that savours not of a good servant: I will say no
more.

My Lords, he is charged with exercising of a tyrannical power over the Kings
people, and in his defense your Lordsh^ps have often heard (and I may not omit
it) that he shelters himself under the protection of the Kings Prerogative,
though he be charged with tyranny of the highest nature that may be: see then
how foul and malignant an aspect this has. My Lords, what is it else, but to
endeavor, as much as in him lies, to infuse into the Kings heart an
apprehension, that his Prerogative is so bottomless a gulf, so unlimited a
power, as is not to be comprehended within the rules of law, or within the
bounds of government? for else why should he mention the Prerogative, when he
is charged to exceed the law? What is it else, but, as far as in him lies, to
make the people believe (for I may not forget the words he has used) by his
magnifying of the Prerogative, that it has a special stamp of Divinity on it,
and that the other part of the government that God pleases to put into the
Kings hands, had not that stamp upon it? as if anything done by one, was to be
justified by authority derived from heaven, but the other not.

These expressions your Lordships remember; and I may not omit to put your
Lordships in mind of them; and I can expound them no otherwise, then, as much
as in him lies, to make the subject believe and apprehend that which is the
buckler and defense of his protection, to be the two edged sword of his
destruction, according to the doctrine he preached; and that that which is the
Sanctuary of their liberty, is the snare and engine of their slavery. And thus
he has cast a bone of contention, as much as in him lay, betwixt King and
people, to make the subjects loath that glorious flower of his Crown, by
fixing a jealousy in them, that it may be a means of their bondage and
slavery.

But there is so much piety and goodness in the Kings heart, that I hope, upon
fair understanding, there will be no such occasion; but no thanks to the
party, that so much adva^^ed the prerogative in the case and condition he
stands in, to justify that which is laid to his charge of high treason.

My Lords, I beseech you give me leave; there is no greater safety to Kings and
people, then to have the throne incircled with good Counselors; and no greater
danger to both, then to have it encompassed with wicked and dangerous ones; and
yet I beseech you call to mind how he has attempted to deprive the subject of
all means to discover this danger, by insinuating to your Lordships, what a
dangerous thing it were, if Counselors should be called in question for giving
of counsel; for who then (says he) would be a Counselor? where is your
safeguard? where is the Kings service? Is not this, as much as in him lies, to
deprive the people of the means whereby they must make themselves happy, and
whereby the King must be happy, that is, by his having good Councillors about
him? and yet he infuses that venom, that the questioning of Counselors is
dangerous both to King and Peers, if it should be brought into example. My
Lords, for many years by past, your Lordships know an evil spirit has moved
amongst us, which in truth has been made the author and ground of all our
distractions, and that is necessity and danger: this was the bulwark, and the
battery that serves to defend all exorbitant actions: the ground and foundation
of that great invasion of our liberties and estates, the judgment in the ship
money, and the ground of the counsel given of late to do any thing, and to
persuade the King that he was absolved from all rules of government; and yet
your Lordships have observed in the course of his defense, how often he has
raised this spirit, that God be thanked has been laid, to the great comfort
of King and Kingdom, by your Lordships, and all the Commons in Parliament. And
when he stands under this question, and goes about to justify his exorbitant
actions, how often has he created this Idol again? and therefore I am afraid
he discovers too much his own heart in it.

My Lor: I may not omit some other passages in his defense, how he has cast
scandalls upon three Nations in this place; that is, in his first day of
defense, when the Irish Remonstrance, made by all the Commons of Ireland, was
produced by the Commons of England; he expressed in a passion, that things were
carried against him by faction and correspondence, and (if he had time he
would make it appear) with a strong conspiracy. Here is a scandal cast upon
the Parliament of Ireland with a reflection on the Commons of England;
howsoever, it is true your Lordships may remember the recantation he made that
day, which I will not omit, desiring not to lay any thing to his charge but
what is true; but it is the reflection of a scandal that I cannot omit to put
your Lordships in mind of; and the rather, because this Remonstrance, presented
from the Parliament of Ireland, did bear date before my Lord of Strafford was
charged here, which is very remarkable, viz. the seventh of November; and
therefore, though he pretends a correspondence, certainly there could be none
then, for he is not charged here til the tenth.

And the same day, justifying a sentence in the Castle Chamber, your Lordships
remember he affirmed, that unless a strict hand were kept upon the Nation
there, they would find it hard to prevent perjury, one of the most crying
sins in Ireland. Now to lay an aspersion upon the subjects of Ireland, being
under the government of the same King with us, how fit this is to be done by a
man in that condition that my Lord of Strafford is, I refer to your
consideration.

Another passage I remember, whereby in his defense he fell upon that Nation;
in answer of which I may not omit to do the service I owe to the Commons for
whom I am trusted, and that is, that talking of an arbitrary and tyrannical
government, in reference to some Orders of the Commons House in Ireland, he
used words to this purpose: You talk of an Arbitrary government, look upon
these Orders, here is an Arbitrary government: and yet when he produced the
Orders, they appeared to have so much justice and discretion in them, that he
can lay nothing to the charge of them, though in a passion he is not backward
to asperse them.

My Lords, if this Lion (to use his own language) now that he is chained and
muzzled under the restraint and question of high Treason, will here take the
boldness to vent this language, and express this malignity, how would he do
if he were unchained? how would he devour? how would he destroy? etc.

My Lords, something concerns your Lordships; your Lordships remember that he
was not backward in his own answer, to fix a charge of high Treason upon the
Lords of the great Council; and howsoever, he has affirmed this day, I must
open it again, that the charge of the seven and twentieth Article he fixes in
his answer to be by consent of the Lords of the great Council, though he has
since recanted it; and yet you have heard him allege, that he will stand and
fall by the truth of his answer.

My Lords, I am now at an end. You have my Lord of Strafford here questioned
for high Treason, for going about to subvert the fundamental laws of both
Kingdoms, in defense whereof your noble Ancestors spent their lives and
bloods. My Lords, you are the sons of those fathers, and the same blood runs
in your veins, that did in theirs; and I am confident you will not think him
fit to live, that goes about to destroy that which protects your lives, and
preserves your estates and liberties.

My Lords you have the complaints of three kingdoms presented before you
against this great person; whereby you Lordships perceive that a great storm
of distemper and distraction has been raised, that threatens the ruin and
distraction of them all.

The Commons, with much pains and diligence, and to their great expense, have
discoved the Jonas, that is, the occasion of this tempest.

They have still and will discharge their Consciences, (as much as in them
lies) to cast him out of the Ship, and allay this Tempest.

They expect and are confident your Lordships will perfect the work, and that
with expedition, lest with the continuance of the storm, both Ship, and
Tackling, and Mariners, both Church and Commonwealth be ruined and destroyed:
The danger and horror of this storm, your Lordships shall hear by the
Gentleman that is next to speak.

FINIS.

