White Hall. A Poem. Written 1642. WITH ELEGIES ON The Right Honorable
FRANCIS Earl of BEDFORD. And HENRY Earl of Manchester, Lord Privy Seal: both
deceased during this present Session of Parliament. WITH An Anniversarie on the
timelesse death of Mrs. Anne Kirk, wife to the truly Noble Geo. Kirk, Gentleman
of the Robes and of his Majesty's Bed Chamber, drowned unfortunately passing
London Bridge, July 6. 1641.

The Author Hen. Glapthorne.

London, printed for Francis Constable, 1643.

To my noble Friend and Gossip, Captain Richard Lovelace.
Sir,
I Have so long been in your debt, that I was almost desperate in my self of
making you payment, till this fancy by ravishing from you a new Courtesy in its
patrondge, promisedme it would satisfy part of my former engagements to you.
Wonder not to see it invade you thus on the sudden: Gratitude is aeriall, and
like that Element* nimble in its motion and performance; though I would not
have this of mine of a French disposition, to charge hotly and retreat
unfortunately: there may appear something in this, that may maintain the
field courageously against Envy, nay come off with honor; if you, Sir, please
to rest satisfied, that it marches under your Ensigns, which are the desires of

Your true honourer Hen. Glapthorne.

White Hall.
WHat Earthquake's this? that with such fury shakes
My lofty Turrets from their Base? and makes
My marble pillars totter, as they meant
To sink into the Center? the event
Of these strange terrors certainly must be
Sad prefaces to the book of misery,
Which now is opend in me; every page
Of which is able to affright the age
To hear it read, make Nature mourn and keep
My Obit, nay the worlds great Genius weep.
How vain are humane glories? why, should men
Repine to meet a dissolution, when*
Even in an instant, such vast frames as I,
Castles, and stateliest marble fabrics die?
Nay Monarchies, such as have seen (the light
Of the whole world) the Sun rise fair and bright,
And set within their limits, quickly, have
Had all their reatnesse shrouded in the grave
Of that stern tyrant Destiny, who flings
His various storms on Kingdoms, nay on Kings,
Who though they heavens immediate figures be,
Cannot evade this sad fatality:
When like loud thunder violent, or the North,
Its sudden tempest hideously breaks forth,
As't has on me, who have for many years
Out-shin'd the state and luster of my Peers.
Great Hampton Court, fair Greenwich, Richmond, and
The pleasant Nonesuch; that I seemed to stand
Equal with Lo'uure, or that work of all
So much admired, Spaines costly Scuriall;
Who since that prince of Prelates, Woolsey, laid
My firm foundations, have as Empress swaid
Over all the Birtish palaces, and been
The constant Residence o'th'King and Queen,
That with their presence royal, did adorn
My well built Fabric: As continued Morn
Had dwelt about my cheeks, whose every ray
Appeard sufficient to creat new day
Forth of the Chaos; As if t'had begun
Here to do Homage to the Eastern Sun,
Which never more shall red with blushes rise,
To see himself out-shin'd by th'orient Eyes,
Of those pure Constellations: that still went
About me, made me seem a firmament
Of moving stars: and unexampled I
Was held the seat where Earths best Diety
Joyed to reside. As I had been the sum
Of pleasure, the worlds sole Elisium.
Then were the times, when in my infant pride,
Great Henry (who my buildings dignified
First with that supreme honor) did resort
Hither, entituling me his Sovereign Court.
When he his conquering Ensigns did advance,
Over the bowels of insulting France:
When Turwis trembled at his fierce Alarmes,
Where Maximilian his Imperial Arms,
The Roman Eagles bravely did display
Without dishonor, taking Englands pay.
When conquered Tournay sent his spoils to adorn
My walls for such Illustrious trophies borne.
Then who like me was happy when that King
To me did all his mighty triumphs bring.
That Honors own brow could not beast more Bays,
More wreathes of Palm, then in those happy days
Grew to my temples: And when silken peace
Had tied wars surly rage up; what increase
Of blessings flowed about me then? as Thames
In its curled waves, had swallowed the four names
Of those sweet Rivers that did once surround
Eden, and I had been that happy ground
Pregnant with Aromatic Balm and spice,
The first created, long lost Paradise.
Then did the worthies of that famous Age,
Make me the constant, the continued stage
Where they did act their Revels, Mirth, and Sport,
Being the harmless Genii of the Court:
When tilts and tournaments did to the life
Imitate without bloodshed, wars, hot strife.
Then gentle Love did all his Cupids arm,
To wound the Ladies (such wounds cause no harm)
And struck the stubborn and more marble hearts
Oth'gallant Heroes with his flaming Darts.
And when that King had ran his mortal race,
The thronging stars striving to make him place
Among their weaker fires: his hopesull son
Edward (whose virtues all affections won)
That little Eye of Nature, the Delight
Oth'Kingdome, by his bloods undoubred right,
Weilding this Scepter, did confirm to me
The former Charter of my Sovereignty.
So did his Sister Mary, though her reign,
(Cause fraught with trouble) scarcely did maintain
Me in my wonted ornaments, when she,
Who was the very soul of Majesty,
That virgin Queen, whose unexampled glory,
Gives truth to same, and miracle to story;
In whose pure frame, as in their spears were set
The stars of Tudor and P^^ntaginet.
Eliza. ruled, then I began to wear
A dress of Excellence, more rich, more clear,
And full of wonder, then Fames bounty coud
Ere clothe her brazen pillars in. I stood
The envy of all Nations; then in me
All blessings strived to make an unity.
Then from the whole world, I did tribute take
Brought into me by that great Neptune, Drake,
Who furrowed up the threatening Oceans face,
(And swift as billows do each other chase)
Pursued the steps of honors through the maine,
Rifling the treasures of scarce known New Spain:
Whose Mines and Towns he ransackt, and ran on
(Big with a noble brave Ambition)
Through all opposing dangers, till he ^^rl'd,
As twere a girdle 'bout the spacious world.
Then did I groan under the unvalued weight
Of spoils cast on me in that Eighty Eight;
When that same huge Armado did invade
The British Seas with terror, and displayed
(In form of a vast Crescent on the flood)
Itself as if t'had been a tall grown wood:
Till our small Navy did it self advance,
(Resolved to stand the utmost storm of chance)
Against that monstrous Fleet, that even defide
Heaven in its infinite ambitious pride,
And boldly led on by that son of ^ame,
Our valiant Admiral, noble Nottingham,
Gave them fierce battle; then in fire did fly
Like thunderbolts in lightning from the sky
The deathfull bullets, splitting with their stroke,
The knotty ribs of their tough Biscaine Oak:
Cracking their Masts, and with their sulphurous breath
Giving their Ships fresh wounds to let in death:
Which as they sunk cast forth a purple flood,
And drowned in water, drowned the waves with blood.
The waves that by th'forc'd motion wrought so high,
As they had meant to hang tears in the Suns hot Eye,
Who in a maze obscured his golden light,
While clouds of smoke transformd the day to night.
The affrighted Mirmaids flockt in sholes to see
That dissolution of Mortality.
And as it were in pity did instead
Of their false Charms, chant requiems to the dead.
The seas blew Sexton, Triton, making graves,
Did work so hard he sweat amidst the waves:
And Proteus now a constant visage wears
Of sorrow, shedding pearls in stead of tears.
Then what was rich and precious in that Fleet,
With it the joyful Conquerours did greet
Me at their home return from these brave broils,
As I had been the temple where the spoils
Of that renouned sea fight ought to be
Hung up as Trophies to white victory:
Nor were all these all triumphs that did fall,
During this reign, on me (then blessed White Hall)
A thousand ornaments my rooms did gain,
Fetched from the richest Cities of proud Spain.
When that same joy of manhood whom his fare
Did afterward render unfortunate,
Illustrious Essex with auspicious sails,
Set forth to th'conquest of Hereculean Cales.
Where great Alcides fixed his pillars, and
Writ Non plus ultra to the then known Land:
That City glorying in the Indian ore
As low as earth humbled her head before
That conquering Earl, while her tall towers and spires
Burnt (as 'twere Martyrs) in those hideous fires
Themselves made for themselves, till their huge frames
Consumed to ashes in their own bright flames.
Then did I flourish, then my spacious rooms
Were hung with Arras, nay with Persian looms.
Then did my walls dressed in rich colors vie*
With Roman Palaces for Imag'ry:
Mosaic paintings (though I Am now forlorn)
Did then my costly gilded roofs adorn.
Statues of Parian Marble such as might
The amorous Pigmalion invite
To laugh at his dull workmanship, did grace
My walks and gardens: then in every place
The wheat crowned Ceres (with her head unshorne)
Freely advanced her plenty bearing horn:
The most delicious viands in full state
Served to my tables in huge antic Plate:
While plumpe Lyaens with green lvie crowned,
Danced up to the eyes in precious wine, a round
Through my large Lobbies: then those sons of chine
And pith, the Guard carowsd black Iacks of wine
In stead of single bear; then did they eat
Without control that emperor of meat,
The lusty chine of Beef; while I did seem
With magazines of plenty still to teeme
Without least fear of barrannesse: the spring
To me her beauties did as offerings bring,
The glorious summer and rich Autumn paid,
Their blessings as my tribute: while this maid
Was my imperial mistrisse winter's breath,
Had not the force to freeze my youth to death:
Which then like the Arabian year was seen,
With gorgeous face still flourishing and green.
No civil broile or foreign fear did fright
Me from my daily practice of delight;
Justice was then returned again to earth,
Those blissful times gave no sinister birth
To foul oppressions; then within my frame
Nere had been heard that so detested name
Of a Monopoly; nor by Patent made
Lawful, were injuries to every trade;
But each one then did under his own vine,
Eat his bread freely and carouse his wine;
Which knew no Medium, then 'twixt those extremes
Of white and claret; then the common theams,
Of the glad people were full of joy and praise,
Of those superlatively happy days.
There were no clamors heard within my gates,
Of men iniustly robbed of there estates.
By powerful Favorites: no faction then
Reignd, less an emulation amongst men
Who should do worthiest things. As in a hive
The Bees small palace, where each one does strive
Which shall most honey to the storehouse bring,
Defllouring those chaste virgins of the spring
The azure violets, that hang down their heads,
While they suck all their sweetness from their beds:
With which their thighs fulfilled, they nimbly fly
(Carrying that victim of their industry)
Into the common dwelling, where they sing
Triumphant peans to their ayrey King:
So'twas in me, each strived who should excel
Others in acting the States business well,
Who could most frequent by th'worlds eye be seen
Ready in service to that virgin Queen.
No tumults then, attempted were by th'rude
And many-headed beast, the Multitude:
(To whom the present times seem ever worst,
Praising the past they never knew) they durst
Not then in mutinous troops have past by me,
As if they meant to fright bright Majesty
Out of my bosom; then there was no strife
In The Common wealth about religion rife.
But all was peace and justice, which then grew
Together like the Gemini. I knew
No gaudy fashions then from giddy France
Brought hither since to be the Courts mischance,
Sick of that sorraigne pride, whose various dress
Has ushered in effeminate wantonness.
The Lords then in their native habit went,
Which was as comely as magnificent.
The Ladies then their genuine beauties ware,
Ignorant of the imposture of false hair:
Nor did they their own red and white attaint
With that foul treason against Nature, paint:
But each one strived with cunning art to find
New ways of virtue to adorn their mind.
Such was my fate, so temperate and just,
It never knew riot, nor conversed with lust.
Nor did my glories, when that virgins breath
Expiring seemd to bring the Island death,
End or diminish. A new star brake forth,
As bright and quickening from the boisterous North,
Darting its cheerful influence through my rooms,
Which did from mournful solitary tombs
Resume their pirstine luster: when great James
Had past the Twede to view imperial Thames,
Whose swans, in stead of their own dirgies sing
Triumphant welcomes to the long wishd King;
Whose each look was a star, and every smile
The Sun that quickened, with new life, this Isle.
This James who the two Kindomes did unite,
As happy Henry the red rose and white:
This James the darling and delight of fate,
Borne for the Solomon oth'British State.
This King of more then Kingdoms, all men's hearts;
Monarch of letters, Emperor of arts:
When he his happy peaceful reign begun,
What plenteous streams of joy and bliss did run
Through all my veins! what a full throngd resort
Did beautify each corner of my Court!
When arms, as useless, were hung up, no jarre
Was heard, no noise of home or foreign war.
The Muses then did flourish, and upon
My pleasant mounts planted their Helicon.
Then that great wonder of the knowing age,
Whose very name merits the amplest page
In Fames fair book, admired Johnson stood
Up to the chin in the Pierian flood,
Quaffing crowned bowls of Nectar, with his bays
Growing about his temples; chanting lays,
Such as were fit for such a sacred Ear
As his majest^ck Misters was; to hear,
Whom he so often pleased with (those mighty tasks
Of wit and judgment) his well labored Masks.
Then those two thunderbolts of lively wit,
Beamont and Fletcher gloriously did sit
Ruling the Theater, and with their clean
Conceptions beautifying the Comic Scene.
And noble Done (borne to more sacred use)
Expressed his heavenly raptures; As the juice
Of the Hyblean roses did distill
Through the Alembeck of his nectard quill.
Chapman-like Homer in me often reads
His Odisses, and lofty Iliads.
That I did rather then appear to be
The worlds best furnishd learned Academy,
Then the Kings palace: who when fatal fire
In its malicious fury did conspire
To ruin part of my fair buildings; He
Great James renewd with State and Majesty,
Like to himself, that goodly Fabric, which
Is for materials, as invention rich;
On polishd marble pillars, which shall stand
To speak his fame, white this renowned Land,
Free from the invasion of all foreign harms,
Is walld about with Oceans watery arms.
For which fair ornament I must bestow
My graitude on worthy Inigo,
Whose skill in Fabric did direct each part
Of that excelling srame with powerful art.
Yet should I silent be, the very stones,
So quaintly laid, will speak the praise of Jones.
But now the sands of his full glass being run,
In the Imperial chair his royal Son
(Whom heaven protect, and with a prosperous reign
Grant to rule this fair Island, and maintain
It in tranquillity and happy peace,
To Justice and Religions full increase)
Brave Charles succeeded. Then my joys renewd,
As Eagles their old feathers being mewd.
I with his vigorous presence warmd, grew young,
My witherd frame appearing far more strong
Then at its first foundations; mirth and sports
Like fayries trippidg through my happy Courts.
When Englands Charles the great in me was seen,
To give a gracious welcome to his Queen,
That flower of France, her sexes fairest pride,
Maria Henrietta his dear Bride,
Who with a numerous progeny has blessed
The british Kingdom; which in peace and rest
Was pregnant with felicity, until
Like torrents falling from some lofty hill,
Or like some sudden strome out of a cloud,
Mischief came thundering from the North so loud,
As'twould have wakend death; thence thence did rise
Those tears which dwell in seas about mine eyes.
Then 'gan my stately world admired head
To shrink, when Charles a puisant Army led
Into the field, with resolution hot,
To tame the daring valor of the Scot:
Who urgd (it seemd) by some Imagind wrong,
Their confidence being as their force was strong,
Came marching hitherwards: but yet white peace
By its all powerful goodness causd to cease,
Those so lamented discords; and did bring
In safety to me, home my much loved King:
And as a Taper which ere it expires,
Collects together, its concluding fires;
As 'twere to light it self to death, displayes
Ere it extinguishes a sudden blase;
More flaming glorious then it is perfect shine
Could ere expand; so did those beams of mine
Break forth, exteading a gay sickly light,
And now is obvolv'd in an ere-lasting night:
Since Charles his absence; as you have seen the air,
Which yesterday was so serene and fair:
Heavens forehead wore no wrinkles; curle its brow
Into a thousand duskie furrows now:
So it is with me, who am enforced to shroud
My face, which yesterday contemnd the cloud:
That now obscures it; timorous to see
That which increases still my misery.
Where are those beauties now from whose each eye,
Flew winged flames of love and majesty,
That trope of Ladies, who so often did gild
My starely rooms with their own looks, which filled
All my Dimensions with rays pure and bright
As was in Paradise, the worlds first light?
Vanished like shadows, they no more appear,
The Sun being set; death now inhabits here,
And a continued dullness, now instead
Of those soft measures which so often were led
Over my spacious floores there does intrude,
Its meager self, that nothing solitude:
In stead of Music, such as by the Spheres,
And tunefull Orbs is breathd to inchant all Ears:
Upon my Turrets nightly there does howl,
The most prodigious and portentous Owl:
Nothing but fear and terror in me dwells,
Such as is resident in those dark cells,
Where naught but death raigns; what contagious sin
Of mine committed, against Great Charles has bin
The cause of his long absence, I am sure
I Am in my innocence as clear and pure,
As in my infancy: why then should he
Inflict upon me, this sad destiny?
Why should I languish like a fair young bride,
Thus desolate, being causelessly denied
The comfort of my spouse, who now in arms,
Exposd is to the dangerous alarms
Of a rude civill-warre, which if a prayer
Has power to qualify; I Will fill the air
With Orisons, as zealous as my faith,
Wit, or religion; nay invention has
Forced to produce: may these Domestic broils,
Like morning dew dry up, without those spoils,
Of Kingdoms fire, and bloodshed: May there be
'twixt King and Subject such a Sympathy,
As'twixt the soul and body, as each part
By strickt relation bears to the head and heart.
May the King love his Subjects, they obey
His just behests, till his great Empires sway,
Be fixed and lasting in his name and blood,
While this fair Island over looks the flood.
Showers of continued blessings softly fall
Upon him, that the wishes of White Hall
May prove true and prophetic: who must mourn
In widdow'd sadness, till best Charles return.
On the Death of the Right Honorable Francis Earl of Bedford.
ELIGIE.
WHat apparition's this? who is it that wears
About him wrapped a Crystal shroud of tears:
Who is it that in deaths mansion breathless lies
In stead of tapers, having grief swollen eyes,
Stuck round about his Hearse, what an amase
Begot by grief and wonder, here displayes
Sorrow in's blackest Ensigns; as if all
Mankind entombed were in this sunerall:
My admiration leaves me now each breath,
Sighs in sad accents, glorious Bedfords death.
The Iron Soldier that 'ith rage of war
Nere wept, when all his body was one scarre:
Nor sighed at groans of Infants, now does keep
His Obit, and, like a soft Virgin, weep:
The Courtier whom religion scarce would win,
Ere to diffuse a drop for his loose sin:
Now unconstrained part in this sorrow bears,
And wears no other Jewels, but his tears,
Wrapped in sad Cyprisse, misseltoe, and yewe:
Their Daphne laid aside the noble crew
Of Phoebus Priests lament him; till their cries
Turn all to Epicedes and Elegies:
Nay in this sad distemper of the State,
When most men's sostnesse varies into hate,
All now contend in mourning to be chief,
And know no other passion but their grief:
He whose Illustrious virtues with his blood
Joined, did entitle him both great and good:
Who with a modest sweetness strived to win
All men's affections, as if there had bin
In his pure essence multiplied, every part
Of true nobility fixing in his heart;
Which seemed the sphere where honor did reside
Without the least formality or pride.
Not like those curious great ones, who create
Factions and strange distractions in the state,
Who by malignant Councels strive to bring,
Distempers on the Kingdom and the King:
Who though their violent Councels overwelm
The vessel strive to be advanced to th'helme.
Like the Suns daring offspring, nere content
Till they have atchivd the Chariots government;
Which when their feeble sorces cannot guide
Like him they boast in great attempts to have di'de:
No he was wise, and from ambition clean,
Esteemd the truest safety in the mean:
His actions being temperate and free
From crime, except too much humanity.
Who shall like Bedford now, instruct the age
Both by example, and the patronage
Of true religious piety, how to be
Fruitful in works of public charity:
Who with a noble and ambitious zeal,
To increase the glory of the Commonweal;
Did those two works of wonder (which shall stand
To speak his fame in after times to the land;)
Built Covent Garden and (that spacions plain.)
The Fens his cost and industry did gain,
From the surrounding waters, where to show
What a devotion his Intents did owe
To heaven, (lest men its worship should neglect*)
In each a Church his bounty did erect:
Such was his life, In Covent Garden, at Thorny Abbey in the Isle of Ely.
it never did enforce
The great man's envy, or the meaners curse.
And now his essence by that mortal war,
against nature deaths translated to a star:
His Name shall live, while never dying verse
Has power to hang fresh glories ore his hearse
Which shall ex^oll and dignifie his Name
Among the Nobles Hero'es, which old Fame,
Has in its lasting Chronicles inrold,
In characters of rust contemning gold:
Till to perpetuat Bedfords merited glory,
He be his houses, nay this Nations story.
On the right Honorable Henry Earl of Manchester, Lord-Privie-Seale.
ELIGIE.
What reverend ghost is this which to my view,
presents the shape of noble Montague:
As if 'twould beckon me to's hearse, to come
And sing his honored Epicedium:
I do obey thy summons, nay and boast
The glory cast on me by thee fair ghost.
Which I perceive now, to be truly he
Who living bore the style and dignity
Of Earl of Manchester, and for the weal,
Oth' Kingdom sat long time Lord-Privie-Seale.
He who when living truths example stood,
To teach great men how to be great and good:
Nay to be wise and learnd to act each part,
Of their lives scene with virtue and with art,
Which he made virtues handmaid, and with skill
Managed his greatness without greatness ill:
Who is it that has not in the fair pursuit,
Of honor read the name of Montacute,
That boasts it self derivitive to be,
From those great ancient Earls of Salisbury,
That did our English glories so advance,
In all our Conquests over vanquishd France:
From whence this Earls descended, who did draw
Conscience with silken chains to kiss the Law:
All whose great Offices to his lasting grace,
He passd exalted from Recorders place,
To be the Kings Sergeant, who did then prefer
Him first chief Justice, then Lord Treasurer;
And after by his gracious free consent,
Confirmd him of his Council president.
Hence knowing his integrity and zeal
To Justice, made him last Lord Privie-Seale.
Can he then fall unpitied, and not have
A thousand fluent eyes to wash his grave:
Those men must mourn him surely who did by
His Judgments gain long banishd equity;
As if divine Astrea at his birth,
Had flown on Turtles wings back to the earth;
Her own just precepts freely to impart
To him, and multiply them in his heart.
And now he is immortal; lo from far,
Me thinks I see the aged Manchester,
Shine a new star in heaven, and with his bright
And gilt refl^ction, beautify the light;
Where he shall live for ever, and be read
Here is in his works of piety, though dead
His mortal frame be, yet his noble name
Shall live eternizd, by the tongue of fame,
And while the world lasts, his Al-Mondo shall
Stand canditate for honor, even with all
The works of learned Writers, and his prays
Be by time's hand adornd with wreaths of bays.
Thus virtue can secure men dead, and give
Life to their memories which shall ever live.
On the Noble, and much to be lamented, Mrs Anne Kirk, wife to Mr Geo. Kirk,
Gent, of the Robes and of his Majesty's Bedchamber, who was unfortunately
drowned passing London Bridge, July 6. 1641. an Anniversary.
ELEGY I.
What tumor's this, that on the tongue of same
Flies like a prodigy? as if it came
To fright the Genius of the world with fears,
Nay change its moving effence into tears:
Now, now irrivocably flees the sound
Her sexes pride; illustrions Kirk is drowned.
See how bright troops of virgins, who from far
Appear, resembling every one a star
Drowned in a sea of pearl, do sadly rise
From her loved urne, each one without their eyes,
Wept out, or there left burning as they would lent
Those lights for tepers to her monument.
See how the Matrons lay their tires aside,
And only in their sorrow take a pride,
Their sorrow which now beautifully wears,
In stead of diamonds, carcanets of tears.
Where shall we find a frame so fully graced
With virtues in so rich a body placed?
That it was truly held the unmatchd shrine
Of humane beautie^ mingled with divine:
As if the heavens and nature did agree,
In her to fix the greatest sympathy
Could be between them; what was fair and good,
Inclusive possibly in flesh and blood.
Who with her gentle 'haviour and deport,
Did gain the love, not envy, of the Court.
And yet she fell untimely; like a rose,
Which in the morning sweetly does disclose
Its purple beauties, till the winds in love
Do with their frequent boisterous kisses move
Its fragrant leaves so rudely, that ere night
They witherd fall; so she did, the delight
Of womanhood and virtue; in whose grave
Lie more then ere mortality shall have.
Again to boast, whose glories shall (when all
Her sexes Legends unapochryphall
For truth and beauty) in fames book be writ,
As a large preface fix in the front of it.
That when posterity reads the rape has bin
Acted by death on this bright Cherubin;
The virgins may her annual Obit keep,
And big with noble emulation, weep
To understand their fexes richest store
Consumed on her; Nature's become too poor
To frame her equal beauty, or display
Such art and wonder in succeeding clay.
And though this Lady fell, the spoil of fate,
Who with too rigorous haste did antidate
Her day of destiny, nothing could be found
Cruel enough to give that desperate wound,
But the false waves, who as they meant to inshrine
Her (whom they took for sea borne Ericine)
In watery arms, officiously did skip
With fluent motion from each lip to lip,
Till being enamourd on her balmy breath,
(Cruel in love) they kissed her even to death:
And viewing then no more life to remain,
Like Crocodiles they wept ore her they would slain.
ELIGY II.
THe year's revolved, and now once more is come
The day in which she suffered martyrdom,
And against the usual custom did expire
In water, holily as those the fire
Did sanctify for heaven, who usd to take
Delight to run to the flame-bearing stake.
Had she like them been to have receivd her death,
Ere the weak fire by the winds pregnant breath
Could have been blown into a flame, our eyes
Should have prevented tyrant deaths surprise,
And let fall such a huge contracted tear,
Able to quench fires element in its sphere
This was the day, when that same subtle thief
Fate stole earths comfort hence, and cast a grief
Perpetual as her virtues, ore the face
Oath mourn^ull world, which can afford no place
For mirth or sport, till celebrated be
The annual requiems to Kirks memory:
Which grows more precious, like rich mighty wine
By being long kept; or relics in a shrine
Preservd as sacred, which inviolate hold
The Charter of their fame though nere so old.
Wi^h what a serious grief do men relate
Losses in their particular Estate;
The toyling husbandman will many years
After rehearse unto his rustic Peers
His past misfortue, when the Summers heat
Did blast his fruit, or mildews hoped for wheat.
The greedy Merchant, if he do sustain
A loss by shipwreck in the ^lattering maine,
Sighs at its memory; which does still renew
His wealth then drowned to his vexed fancies view.
And must we not lament, are we not bound
Upon the day when glorious Kirk was drowned*
When natures sweetest fruit did blasted fall,
To solemnize with tears her funeral:
Yes to diffuse a deluge, that as she
By water met her pitied destiny,
That element to expiate its black crime
May spend its moisture on her dust, till time
Dissolve; and we translated to the skies,
(Where tears are wiped away from all men's eyes,)
Exalted to her fellowship may be
Her blessed companions in the felicity
She with the Saints possesses; but till then
Her loss must be the grief of all good men.
FINIS.

