Mary's Choice, OR, The CHOICE of the truly Godly Person Opened, and Justified,
IN A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL OF Mrs. ANNE PETTER, Late Wife of the
Reverend Mr. JOHN PETTER, Pastor of the Church at Hever in Kent. April 26. 1658.

By JOHN GLASCOCK, Late Fellow of Magdalen College in Cambridge, and now
Pastor of the Church at Little Canfield in Essex.

Psalm. 114. 30. I have chosen the way of Truth.

Prove. 12. 26. The right^ous is more excellent then his Neighbor.

Prove. 31. 30. A woman that fears the Lord she shall be praiscd.

Psalm. 112. 6. The righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance.

Christianus est Filius Dei, Haeres Regni, Frater Christi, Socius Angelorum,
Dominus Mundi, particeps Divinae Naturae.

Luther. Utere Caducis Fruere Aeternis.

LONDON, Printed by J. H. f^ Samuel Gellibrand, at the Golden Ball in Paul's
Churchyard. 1659.

Mary's Choice.
LUKE Chap. 10. Verse. 42. But one thing is needful and Mary has chosen that
good part which shall not be taken away from her.
THese words deservedly challenge our best attention, not only because of the
most excellent matter contained in them, but also in referrence to the most
incomparable Author, our dear Lord Jesus Christ, by whom they were spoken.

They may be considered two ways.

1. Relatively:

2. Absolutely.

1. Their Relative capacity is that whereby they hold forth upon what terms
they stand with the Context; as the discretive particle [But] which stands in
the front of the Text, intimates.

2. According to their Absolute capacity, they are considered as they lie
entirely of themselves; For brevity sake I shall handle them under this last
Consideration.

The sum of the words is, Christ's weighty commendation of a worthy Woman:
Their principal parts are three.

1. A remarkable Affirmation. 2. A seasonable Commendation. 3. An irrefragable
Confirmation.
1. A remarkable Affirmation. One thing is needful. Christ does not speak here
of an ordinary, arbitrary business; but of that which is necessary.

2. The seasonable Commendation is expressed in the next words, And Mary has
chosen that good part. We read in Verse. 40. of Martha's complaint of her sister
Mary, for leaving her to serve alone; In Verse. 41. Christ seemingly, at least,
checks Martha, for being over solicitous about that service of preparing for
his bodily repast; Which although a very good, and necessary work in its kind
and order, yet not altogether faultlesse, when by reason of it better service
was neglected. And then in the words of the Text, Christ in stead of checking
Mary, as her sister Martha by her complaint seemed to expect, bestows a
singular Commendation on her. Where two things are observable.

1. A description of the person commended, by her Name, Mary. 2. The matter of
her Commendation, viz. Her good choice: Mary has chosen that good part.
3. The irrefragable Confirmation follows in the last words. Christ does not
barely assert, but also strongly prove the goodness of her choice by an
Argument taken from the duration of the good she chose; It was most durable.
Which shall never be taken from her.

I shall not abuse your patience by insisting upon what Stella and other Popish
Writers, largely comment upon the Text, concerning the two kinds of lives,
Contemplative and Active, which they gather from the different behavior of
these two sisters, Mary and Martha; but shall premise a brief, and general
received Interpretation of the Words, among learned and judicious Divines, and
then propound out of them the Doctrinall Conclusion, which shall set bounds to
my present Discourse, and your Christian attention.

1. One thing is needful.] That is, one kind of Provision, say some, as if
Christ had said in other words; O Martha, thou needst not be at such cost, and
pains to prepare many, and rare provisions to entertain me with; One dish of
ordinary fare will be more easily procured by thee, and better accepted by me.
Damnat Christus, nimias occupationes quibus distringebatur Martha in sese
excipiendo: Christus enim non est delicatus hospes, non affectat exquisitas
mensas, non epulas lautas requirit, tenui victu est contentus; magis quaerit
nitorem animi exquisitam fidem, compositos mores, and similia, Aretius in locum.

2. One thing is needful.] That is, Christ is necessary; So others. Ille solus
est nobis necessarius, caetera quae multa sunt non sunt necessaria. Augustine
Sermon. de Verbis Domini, Secundum Lucam.

3. One thing is needful.] That is, to hear the Word of God, and to labor
after eternal Salvation: So a third sort. Elegit Maria Verbum Dei audire, and
saluti operam dare. Hunc verum esse arbitror sensum. Opponit enim Christus
studium Mariae studio Marthae. Maria hoc unum curabat ut Christum audiret, and
ab eo salutem quaereret; Martha ut Christo in omnibus quibus poterat,
ministraret illud unum esse necessarium dicit, haec multa non sunt necessaria,
etc. Mald. in locum.

2. Mary has chosen that good part.] (...), bonam partem elegit, so Beza,
Suitable to our English Translation. And Ambrose who translateth as we do, yet
interprets the words comparatively. Verbum agnoscere majus opus esse, quam
ministrare divina sententiae authoritate definitur, nec tamen Martha in bono
ministerio reprehenditur, sed Maria, quod meliorem partem elegerit, antefertur.
Ambros. Sermon. 11. in Psalm. 118.

Cassianus and Maldonat, with some others, read the words in the Superlative
form. Optimam partem elegit. Has chosen the best part; for which they render
this reason (viz.) that the comparison is not to be understood, as if made
only between what Martha and Mary did choose; but between what Mary chose, and
what Martha, or any other person in the world could make choice of, and
therefore the Comparison lying between many, it ought to be expressed by the
Superlative degree. Mihi quidem non videtur noster interpres melius
compationem, etc. Mald. in locum.

These things premised, I might draw up a short Paraphrase of the words, and
out of it raise many useful and doctrinall Conclusions; But I purpose to take
notice of, and to propound only one which engrosseth much of the marrow, and
substance of the Text.

From the remarkable Commendation of Christ (who was best able to judge)
concerning godly Mary her choice, as being fixed upon the most durable, and
consequently upon the best good: the words without violence will afford us this
most excellent and useful Observation.

Observe. The choice which the truly godly person makes, is unquestionably and
incomparably the best choice which can be made.

For the more orderly and profitable prosecution of this Observation, four
things are to be endeavored; something is to be spoken by way of

1. Explication. 2. Confirmation. 3. Vindication. 4. Application.
For the explication, and confirmation of this Doctrine, two things are to be
showed:

1. What the true Christians choice is?

2. That the true Christians choice is unquestionably, and incomparably the
best choice which can be made.

Touching the first of these, before I propound the description of a Christians
choice, it will not be amiss to premise, that the word [Election or Choice]
may be taken two ways,

1. Largely. 2. Strictly.
1. Largely, for that it comprehends both the acts of the understanding and the
will. Electio est 1. in ratione secundum quam intellectus habet judicare quod
alteri est proponendum.

2. In voluntate, secundum quam voluntas habet movere, aut impellere, sive
imperare de prosecutione ejus quod judicatum est. Ca.

2. Strictly, For the Wills act only about the means leading to some desired
end: when many means occurring, some one of them is preferred before the rest,
this act of the Will, by the Philosopher, is called Election or Choice. The
word is here to be taken in the largest sense, as relating to the end, as well
as the means, and may be thus described.

The choice of a true Christian is that, whereby his soul, assisted by special
grace, prefers before all other things whatsoever, Christ, with all his
spiritual blessings, which he by his blood has purchased, and God of his
grace in his holy Ordinances dispenses to his people.

For the help of the understanding, and memory of the weakest capacity, I shall
analetically resolve and explain the several branches of this description.

In the description these parts are principally observable.

1. The principle of this choice. 2. The Object of this choice. 3. The formal
act of this choice. 4. The fountain of all that good which is chosen. 5. The
meritorious cause of it. 6. The outward and ordinary means of its conveyance.
1 The Principle by which any person is enabled to make this choice. The choice
which the Text, and Doctrine speaks of is such, as only a true Christian can
make. It Is as possible for a beast to desire to be a man, or a toad to be an
Angel, as for any of the Posterity of Adam, since the Fall, without
supernatural, and Iter ad gratia^ est per gratia^, Prosper.
special Grace, rightly to choose God, and the things of God. And the true and
irrefragable reason of it is, because, as the Philosopher rightly determines,
nothing does or can act beyond the sphere of its own activity. Wicked ones
choose their own ways not Gods. Esa. 66. 3. Yea, They have chosen their own
ways, and their soul delights in their abominations.

2. The Object of this choice is expressed in these words, Christ with all his
spiritual blessings.] A whorish heart can be content with a divided Christ,
nothing less then an whole Christ can satisfy a sincere Christian. Here two
things are distinctly to be considered.

1. The Primary Object of this choice. Christ's person.

2. The secondary Object. All his Spiritual blessings.

1. Christ's person; Who can by words fully express what glorious, and
soul-ravishing beauty the truly godly person does discern in the lovely person
of Jesus Christ. It Is admirable to consider thoroughly the large and patheticall
description the Church makes of Jesus Christ, by way of answer to a question
propounded to her by the daughters of Jerusalem, Cant. 5. 9. What is thy
Beloved more then another Beloved, O thou fairest among women! What is thy
Beloved more then another, that thou do so charge us? Verse. 10. My Beloved is
white and ruddy, These two being duly mixed do make the most beautiful and
orient look, or color, that any person is capable of, and then it follows
[the chiefest among ten thousand,] and because so, he deserves to have as much
love as ten thousand hearts put into one could hold; and this lively and lofty
description of Christ is continued to the end of the Chapter. Verse. 16. His
mouth is most sweet, i. e. His word, and promises which are as it were the
breath of Christ's mouth. We had rather be without fire, water, bread, sun, air,
said a Dutch Divine, then want that one sweet sentence of our blessed Savior
Mat. 11. 28. Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden and I will
give you rest. Yea, He is altogether lovely, totus, totus desiderabilis, wholly
amiable, every whit of him to be desited. But as for wicked persons their
judgment of Christ is far otherwise; like whores, they prefer the gifts
before the giver; and yet not all but some only of Christ's gifts are
acceptable to wicked ones. Christ's pardon will do well to deliver them from
danger, but Christ's sinne-subduing grace is as unacceptable to them as Christ's
person; But of this more in the next branch of the description. A short
discourse of this high, and spiritual subject, viz. The lovelynesse of Christ's
person amongst many is a dark and tiring business. Esa. 53. 2. When we shall
see him, that is, Christ, there is no beauty that we should desire him. This
was spoken in the person of the carnal Jew, who judged of Christ according to
his outward appearance. 1 Cor. 2. 14. The natural man receives not the things
of the spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can be know
them, because they are spiritually discerned. And who wonders that a blind man
is not affected with the most beautiful object which is before him when he is
not capable of discerning it. Deformity, and beauty are both alike to such a
person; it is so proportionably in Spiritual Objects.

2. The Secondary Object of the Christians choice is thus expressed, viz. [All
Christ's spiritual Blessings] A truly godly person does as truly desire
sanctifying grace, to make him serviceable to Christ here, as pardoning grace
to render his condition happy hereafter, as the Apostle speaks: He has his
fruit unto holiness in this Romans 6. 22.
life, as well as the end everlasting life. It were an inexcusable wast of time
to be large in the further proof of this; I shall therefore only name one Text
for its full confirmation, Ephesians. 1. 3. Blessed be the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly
places in Christ. Out of these words (to omit many things contained in them)
for my present purpose I shall observe three things.

1. Godly Paul speaks these words, not in his own name only but in the name of
all the godly Ephesians, because it is not said, who has blessed me, but who
has blessed us.

2. He gives thanks, not for some only, but for all spiritual blessings that
were procured for them by Christ, for so are the words, who has blessed us
with all spiritual blessings. Now if Paul in his own name, and in the name of
all the godly Ephesians bless God for all spiritual blessings, by Christ; It
follows by undeniable consequence, that he and they did unfainedly desire them
all, otherwise their thankfulness for them had been hypocritical and
abominable.

3. His thankfulness for them was equal, therefore such was his and their
desires for them. But is it so with the wicked! Who dare affirm it? while they
are wicked, they do not, cannot desire to partake of all spiritual blessings.
A cursed Balaam Number. 23. 10.
may desire to die the death of the righteous; but no wicked man alive, while
such, can desire to live the life of the righteous.

1. They do not desire it. Hear their own words, Luke 19. 14. We will not have
this man rule over us. This was a very plain but yet a very rude and rebellious
message, and yet such dust-heaps are found in every corner, such masterlesse
monsters rise every where; So that by their own confession, they may be judged
and condemned, for being unwilling to live as the holy subjects of the King of
Saints in this life.

2. They cannot desire it. Romans 8. 7. The carnal mind is enmity against God,
for it is not subject to the law of God, neither-indeed can be. By these words
we see plainly, the best of an unregenerate person is not only averse, but
utterly adverse to the rule of holiness, and the Will being guided by the
Understanding; If the carnal mind (as the Apostle here plainly asserteth) be
enmity against the law of God, the rule of holiness, the carnal will cannot
possibly be for conformity to it.

3. The Meritorious cause of all the good which the truly godly person chooses,
is the precious blood of the Son of God, Spiritual Causa procalactica.
graces, and comforts here, and the eternal glory of the other world, are no
cheap things, but most costly, and accordingly ought to be valued, and improved
by us, Ephesians. 1. 7. In whom we have redemption through his blood, the
forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace. Redemption is a
very comprehensive word, and many times is put for all the benefits of the
Covenant of Grace. So that every godly person may write this superscription
upon his pardon, assurance, perseverance, and all the other benefits he
partakes of by Christ in this life. These are the price of blood, and that the
best blood, called precious, 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. and that worthily, because the
blood of God, Act. 20. 28. And so being the blood of an infinite person, and
consequently the price an infinite price. This will much more hold true
concerning the glory of the other world. Heb. 10. 19. Having therefore brethren
boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus. No getting to the
shore of glory, but by a sinners swimming upon the most precious stream of a
Saviors blood. These things ought to be frequently the meditations of
Christians to inflame their loves to a most lovely and loving Savior, and to
quicken them to endeavor suitable praises for all their costly privileges in
both worlds.

(...).
4. The Formal Act of this Choice, is that, whereby they prefer Christ, and
all his spiritual blessings, before all worldly things whatever. This is the
inseparable property of all, and only truly godly persons. That they esteem
God and the things of God above all other things, is evident in the example of
godly David, as appears by those remarkable words recorded in the 119. Psalm.
30. I have chosen the way of truth, and Verse. 173. I have chosen thy precepts,
compared with Verse. 167. My soul has kept thy testimonies, and I love them
exceedingly, far more then any thing in the whole world. Psalm. 119. 103. How
sweet are thy words unto my taste! yea, sweeter then honey to my mouth. And
Verse. 72. The law of thy mouth is better to me, then thousands of gold and
silver. Those words of the 4. Psalm. v. 6, 7. Many there be that say, who will
show us any good? The (many) in the Text are all the ungodly* The good was
temporal, as is clear from the seventh Verse. But now godly David prays for
the light of Gods countenance, i. e. the manifestation of his favor to his
soul, and professes that such a precious mercy being obtained, would make him
more glad then any worldling could possibly be, when his corn and wine
increased. Yea, Psalm. 63. 3. He preferres Gods loving kindness before life it
self; And that (as Satan truly) is to be preferred before all other worldly
things whatsoever. Job. 2. 4. Skin for skin and all that a man has will he
give for his life: But no wicked person living does set such an high value upon
God, and the things of God: But if God be twelve with him, some worldly Object,
to which he is inordinately affected is always thirteen; as appears by those
words, Luke 14. 14. when Christ was speaking of the privilege of the righteous
at the resurrection, one that hears him, cries out, Blessed is he that shall
eat bread in the kingdom of God, as if he had said in other words, that is a
glorious and happy estate, I choose that for my portion. Christ presently, to
discover his hypocrisy, propounds the parable of the guests, who were invited
to partake of that privilege he seemed so much to admire, verse. 16, 17. and
then we read verse. 18. they all with one consent made excuses: They seemed much
to esteem the privilege of Christians at the resurrection, but their Oxen,
Farms, Wives, lay much nearer to their hears, for which we read verse. 21.
That the Master of the house was very angry, as he had great cause, as shall be
hereafter proved.

Causa pro^gumena.
5. The Fountain of all the good the godly person chooses is the Free Grace
and favor of God toward his precious people; which they all do deservedly
admire in this life, and will upon further grounds more perfectly admire to all
eternity in the life to come. The shoutings of all the godly in both worlds
are, and ought to be Grace, Grace. It Is not considerable what carnal Sophisters
may object against this truth, because it was asserted in the third branch of
the description, That all the godly persons privileges in both worlds, were
dearly purchased for them by the most precious blood of Christ, the Son of God,
and thereupon as they conceive Gods conferring those privileges upon the
Elect, seems rather, if not only, an Act of Justice and not at all of Grace.
In this have, I shall say no more (and I think more need not be said) then to
name that pregnant Text of the Apostle for the confounding of that carnal
cavil, Ephesians. 1. 7. In whom we have redemption through his blood, the
forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace. According to
blessed Paul's divinity, Christ's blood as the meritorious cause of Redemption
and Remission, is very well consistent with the grace, yea, the riches of the
grace of God the Father. It Is very true, they were exceedingly costly to Christ,
we are the greater debtours to his love for being willing by so great a price
to purchase our peace, it is as true, they are not costly to us, we have them
without money and without price, Esa. 55. verse. 1, 2.

6. The outward and ordinary means of conveying of all Christ's spiritual
blessings into the hearts of Gods people is, the right use of his holy
Ordinances. The Ordinances of God are canales gratiae, the golden pipes by
which the golden oil of grace empties it self into the hearts of Gods people.
It Is true, but very sad to consider that many slight the Ordinances of Grace,
and not only so, but discourage others from waiting upon them by speaking
according to the language of proud Pharaoh, Exodus 5. 17. Ye are idle, ye are
idle, therefore ye say, let us go, let us go, and do sacrifice to the Lord; So
they say, because the people of God are idle and unwilling to take pains in
their callings, they spend so much time more then others in gadding to hear
sermons: But alas, though it be easy to hear sermons, as they use to do, yet
as God requires, and his people endeavor to do, with prepared and fixed
hearts, is much harder to do, then any exercise they were ever acquainted with.
But Wisdom is justified of her Children, Mat. 11. 19. Holy David had better
thoughts of Gods Ordinances, Psalm. 84. 1. How amiable are thy tabernacles O
Lord of hosts! my soul longs, yed even faints for the Courts of the Lord.
And Verse. 3. He seems to envy the Sparrowes that had liberty to build their
nests near Gods Altars. Verse. 10. he adds, One day in thy Courts is better
then a thousand else where. If any demand why David is such an admirer and
extoller of Gods Ordinances, he gives a satisfying account Verse. 11. The Lord
will give grace and glory. Grace, and the first fruits of glory, are wrought,
preserved, and increased in the hearts of Gods holy ones, in the right use of
Gods Ordinances. Thus much shall serve for the first.

I come now to the second thing, That the truly godly persons choice is
unquestionably, and incomparably the best choice which can be made!

I shall endeavor to make good this conclusion. One would think that amongst a
people professing Religion, and so well instructed as we in England have been
for above fourscore years, a short proof might seem sufficient for this
purpose; For my part if there were not a line in the Bible to prove it besides
the 1 Timothy 4. 8. I could not but judge that abundantly convincing. Godliness
(says the Apostle there) is profitable for all things, having the promise of
the life that now is, and of that which is to come. This is truly asserted of
that which the godly man chooses, but cannot be truly said of any thing in the
whole world besides. But because the practice of most does plainly declare,
that they are not of a right belief in this weighty point, I shall further
confirm the goodness of the godly persons choice above all other choices that
are or can be made by any ungodly person in the world, by one unanswerable
Demonstration, which is as follows.

Demonstration.
That good which the godly person chooses is the best, in order to all the
Concernments af this life, and that which is to come. When this is made good,
more need not be spoken for the proof of the godly persons choice, as the best
choice which can possibly be made. For all the concernments of all persons in
the world are reducible to these two heads, and therefore that choice which is
the best in Order to both these, is unquestionably and incomparably without all
dispute, the best choice that can be made.

I shall now address my self to hold forth the several branches of this
Demonstration, in that order in which I have propounded them, with their
several proofs.

The Concernments of this Life are,

1. Temporal. 2. Spiritual.
1 The godly persons Choice is the best choice which can be made, upon a
Temporal account, in reference to the outward good things of this Life.

Here two things are distinctly to be considered.

First, The godly man's Personal,

Secondly, His Relative Capacity.

First* As to the godly man, considered in respect of his Person, his choice
appears to be better in reference to temporal good things, then the choice of
any ungodly person in the world. The wicked chooses creature comforts only,
and looks no further, whether Gods blessing, or curse, go along with them:
but the truly godly person cannot be content with creature comforts, in the
greatest abundance, if he cannot enjoy God with them. The wicked cares not
what course he takes to get them, right, or wrong, much at one to him, but the
godly person seeks them only in a way of righteousness.

There are these remarkable differences between the condition of godly and
ungodly persons, in reference to temporal good things.

1. In point of security, for the enjoyment of such a measure of worldly estate
as shall be necessary for them. The wicked person has no sufficient security
in this case. It Is possible he may vainly boast of his Michaelmas hundreds or
thousands; But alas, who knows not but that through his own prodigality, the
violence and injustice of others, and many other ways, God by his Providence,
may order things so, that he and his may be reduced to extreme wants before his
death. What age of the world abounds not with sad instances in this kind!
Bellesarius, that sometimes was very rich, before his death begged for an half
penny. The Apostle calls 1. Tim. 6. 17.
them uncertain riches, and well he may, for we can have no more hold of them,
then of a flock of birds that sit in a man's yard, which are presently upon the
wing, and are gone. Prove. 23. 5. Riches certainly make themselves wings, they
fly away as an eagle toward heaven. Oh that the greedy Mammonists would
seriously and frequently consider this heart-weaning consideration. But all the
precious people of God who have made the choice the Text speaks of, have Gods
infallible promise, which is the best security that can be desired, that they
shall never want any thing that is good for them (the God of heaven, their most
wise, and merciful Father being Judge) while they continue in this world. This
comfortable truth may be proved by many Scripture Arguments; but those words of
the Psalmist, Psalm. 34. 10. seem sufficient, They that seek the Lord, as all do
that rightly choose him, shall not want any good thing. Upon such a ground as
this word of Promise David did, and every true Christian may, confidently
expect at Gods hands, what they shall need at any time. Psalm. 23. 1. The Lord
is my shepherd, I shall not want: The true Christian who is in a poor and mean
condition in the world, if he be assured that he has made this choice I am now
speaking of, may possibly live to see his purse often empty, and his cupboard
too, but being under a full promise, Psalm. 34. 10. he may answer his own soul,
when tempted by Satan to distrust Gods seasonable provision, as Abraham did his
Son in another case, O my son God will provide, Cen. 22. 8.

2. The godly man has the best Right to his temporal estate. The wicked have
only a providentiall right as creatures, as hypocritical Jus soli, non jus
coeli.
Ananias had to his estate before the sale of it, Acts 5. 4. But the godly
person has a spiritual right to his estate as a new Creature, by virtue of
his Covenant interest in Jesus Christ, the undoubted heir of all things,
Hebrews 1. 2. This great comfort the Apostle minds the godly Corinthians of,
and under their name all the godly persons in the world, 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22, 23.
All things are yours, whether Paul or Apollo, etc. all are yours, and ye are
Christ's, and Christ is Gods. q. d. Ye hold all in Capite tenui, which is the
Best.

3. He shall have more comfort in his temporal estate, be it never so small,
then the richest reprobate in the world can have in his greatest abundance.
Amongst many other arguments that might be used to prove this assertion which
is so great a Paradoxe to the whole company of unregenerate persons, this is
sufficient* That God so fashioneth the hearts of all his precious people* that
he makes them in some measure to be really contented with that proportion of
temporal estate which his wise and fatherly Providence carves out unto them;
but no such comfortable thing is to be found in the heart of the richest
Christlesse person in the world, notwithstanding his great earthly treasures.
The strength of this reason depends upon making good two Conclusions, which I
shall distinctly propound and prove in their order.

Conclusion 1. God makes his people contented with that measure of outward
estate which he thinks fit to bestow upon them, be it never so little. This
appears by those excellent words of the Apostle, Phil. 4. 11. I have learned in
whatever state I am therewith to be content; I know how to be abased, and how
to abound, etc.

Object. If any should carnally cavil, and say, it is true, it was so with Paul,
who was a None*such for eminence of Grace, but it does not follow, it is so with
every ordinary godly person. One swallow makes not a summer.

Solution, I answer, That although in this state of imperfection, neither
knowledge, faith, contentment, nor any other sanctifying grace is perfect in
degrees, while we are in this world, but there 1 Cor. 13. 9.
are and will be some pangs of unbelief, and discontent in the most precious
Christians; Yet where true godliness has once taken the Throne, All, even the
weakest of Gods people are really contented with their worldly condition, and
with the whole contexture of Gods Providence toward them. 1. Tim. 6. 6.
Godliness with contentment is great gain, that is, with a mind that has
Dutch Annot.
enough, and is content with that which the Lord affords him; which contentment
it self also springs out of godliness; For he that has Christ has all things
with him: So that where true godliness enters the soul, contentment is always
one part of the train, which cannot be separated from it.

Conclusion 2. No wicked rich man in the world is, or can be contented with his
worldly condition, Psalm. 73. The Psalmist speaking of the wicked, says, their
eyes stand out with fatness, they have more then heart could wish. The learned
Diodate expresses his thoughts thus upon these words; Every thing went on
prosperously with them, even beyond their own hope, conceit, or desire: Now,
one would think, if ever, they will be content with their worldly estate; But
alas, no such sweet flower of true contentment ever grew in the barren
wilderness of corrupt nature: This is to be found only in the garden of
grace, or paradise of glory. For if you look into the next words, you shall see
a true Character of their base, cursed, and most unworthy disposition, Verse. 8.
They are corrupt, and speak wickedly concerning oppression, although supposed
to possess more then heart could wish, yet still greedy of the gain of
oppression, their language is like the Horseleaches Prove. 30. 15.
daughters, Give, give. It Is possible some of them observing how many of the
Lords dear people live cheerfully, and contentedly with much less then the
twentieth part of that they possess, may endeavor to avoid shame and censure
amongst men, to hide their discontent, and make a lying profession of being
very well satisfied with their worldly lot, but (without the least breach Genesis
33. 9.
of charity) I may, and must take leave not to believe them, notwithstanding
their frequent, and confident professions, because it is written Eccles. 5. 10.
He that loves silver shall not be satisfied with silver, nor he that loves
abundance, with increase; this also is vanity: If God says, as it is here
expressed, that he that loves silver, to wit, inordinately (as all wicked
lovers of it do) shall not be satisfied with silver, and increase, I may then
say to such pretenders to contentment with their worldly estates, in point of
our faith, as Peter and the other Apostles to the Council, as to their
obedience; We ought to believe God rather then men. It Is as Act. 5. 19.
possible for a wicked man to fill his body with Air, and his chest with grace,
as his mind with wealth. It Is with them as with a ship, It may be overladen
with silver, and gold, even unto sinking, and yet have compass and sides to
hold ten times more. So here, a covetous wretch, though he have enough to sink
him, yet he shall never have enough to satisfy him. So that the Conclusion
which the Psalmist delivers, is most worthy to be observed, Psalm. 37. 16. A
little that the righteous has is better then the riches of many wicked: He
does not say of how many, because let us think of never so many, yea of all of
them, the righteous man's little is better in very many remarkable respects then
all their greatest treasures heaped together: The King of Spain, although the
greatest Prince in Christendom by far, having his Empire so far extended
that he may truly say, that the sun ever shines upon his Dominions, yet gives
this for his Motto, Totus non sufficit Orbis, The whole world is not
sufficient. God by Solomon tells us, that in the house of the righteous is much
treasure, Prove. 15. 6. although many times there is scarce a good bed to lie,
or a seat to sit on. The time will certainly come, when the richest wicked men
that ever lived will see clearly that their account would have been much
narrower, and consequently their condition to all eternity less miserable, if
they had been so poor as to have begged their bread from door to door all their
lives long. It Is with the blessings of this life, as it is with perfumed gloves,
when they are richly perfumed, their perfume is much more valuable then the
leather, whereof they are made; So not so much earthly blessings considered in
themselves, as their being perfumed with the sweet love of God in Christ, is
that which makes them blessings indeed, truly deserving the name they bear.
Now all the blessings of those who have made the choice in the Text, are all
thus perfumed; All the barley bread they eat, beit never so course, all the
clothes they wear, be they never so mean, with all their other temporal
blessings, they proceed from the same sweet love of God, wherewith he was moved
to bestow Jesus Christ upon them for salvation, Romans 8. 32. He that spared not
his own son, but has delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him
freely give us all things! Nothing is more ordinary then for wicked rich men to
judge themselves the only happy persons in the world, Prove. 10. 15. The rich
man's wealth is his strong city; There he is very safe, and happy in his own
conceit: But as for the poor, in his wicked rich neighbors eye he is despised,
Prove. 14. 20. The poor is hated even of his own neighbor: but the rich has
many friends. But did they consider that which the Scripture speaks of their
condition, they would discern no such cause to boast of it, Mal. 2. 2. God
threatens to curse their blessings, (and who is able to conceive how bitter
Gods curse is) and not some of them only, but all of them, Deuteronomy. 28. from 15,
to 22. Consider O wicked man and tremble to think, the curse of God fills all
thy sweet cups, and dishes with wormwood and gall. Gods curse (as a fury)
haunts thee in all thy ways. In the City it attends thee, in the Country it
hovers over thee, coming in it accompanies thee, going forth it follows thee,
and in travel is thy companion: So that upon the matter, so many blessings so
many curses, the more blessings the more curses. Me thinks I hear all the Lords
people blessing God for denying them such a miserable portion. It Is not the
great Cage that makes the Bird sing sweetly: So it is not the great estate that
brings with it cordial contentment. Experience tells us in the small thatch't
cottages, where the people of God dwell, are found more cheerful persons, then
in all the stately Palaces of the world, that are possessed by graceless ones.

Secondly, Let us a little consider the godly man's Relative Capacity, and there
it will be as true, that his Godliness is more for the advantage of his
posterity, then all the gold, and silver that are horded up by Christlesse
persons can be for the benefit of their posterity, except God incline them to
choose his ways, and then the property of their estates is altered, but this is
no thank to their Parents.

Here two things are to be distinctly propounded and confirmed.

1. Personal goodness is very profitable for posterity, Exodus 20. 6. God
promises to show mercy to thousands of them that love Ps. 112. 1, 2.
him and keep his commandments, Psalm. 37. 22. God promises that the seed of
his people shall inherit the earth. The child of such a Tenant as paid his Rent
well shall not be put out of his Farm.

2. The greatest treasures that are heaped up by wicked parents for wicked
Children are very unprofitable for them. Many a time they are not a quarter so
long in spending, as they were in Eccl. 5. 14.
getting. De male quaesitis vix gaudet tertius haeres. The third heir seldom
rejoices in ill gotten goods; And this is enough to confute the common
proverb, Happy is that son whose father goes to the Devil. But suppose the best
that can be supposed in this case, that they continue with him; Consider
Solomon's words, Eccles. 5. 13. There is a sore evil which I have seen under the
sun, namely riches kept for the owners thereof to their hurt. Worldlings sit
and brood upon their wealth, and hatch to their hurt; as the silly bird does on
the eggs of the Cockatrice. A wicked rich Son is but like a fatted Ox, fitted
for the slaughter. The sunshine of prosperity ripens his sin apace. Bernard
calls such a condition, Misericordiam omni indignatione crudeliorem, A most
cruel mercy. What good is there in having a rich suit with the plague in it,
and so proportionably, a great estate with the curse of God cleaving to every
penny of it. These things premised, I appeal to all sober minded persons to
make judgment, whose condition is most comfortable of two persons; the one of
them who can only say, I had a Father, Grandfather, or great Grandfather
(judged by the world for wise) M^c. 7. 3.
who to leave me rich and honorable, did rise early, go to bed late, and all
his life long did wickedly with both hands, and when he had climbed as high as
he could, and scraped as much wealth, as he was in a capacity to get, I not
being religiously instructed, but suffered to be as vile as I would be, longed
for his death, that I might enjoy the honor and estate, for which he exposed
his soul to the devil by wicked getting, and I am like to drive the same course
by wicked using them. Who trembles not to think what a sad meeting Prove. 1. 32.
such a parent and child will have at the day of judgment, how dreadfully to
all eternity they will curse each other. The other Esa. 8. 21.
has this to say; It Is true my Parents were of low birth, and mean estate in the
world, but they were such as loved the Lord Jesus, and his dear people
unfaignedly, brought me up in the nurture 2 Pet. 1. 4^. Exodus 20. 6.
and admonition of the Lord, and so left me, although mean in the world; yet
under very many and exceeding precious promises, more worth then the whole
world, or ten thousand worlds, Ps. 37. 22.
if there were so many: Who can conceive and express how joyfully such a Parent
and Child will meet together at the last day, and bless God, with and for each
other, to all eternity.

We have dispatched the first branch of the Demonstration, which although it be
least considerable, yet it was requisite to be the more largely proved, because
most doubted of; For Balaam, Number. 23. 20.
and so other wicked men, that like not the condition of Gods people in this
world, yet seem at least to desire the death of the righteous, and consequently
their everlasting safety in the other world: We promise (and shall perform)
greater brevity as to the other two branches.

2. The truly godly persons Choice is unquestionably best, upon a Spiritual
account. I might easily be large, but must be short in the confirmation of this
Conclusion, and that under these two heads.

Their condition spiritually considered is First, Most honorable. Secondly,
Most comfortable.


First, the Honor of a godly persons condition may be evidenced (to omit other
ways) by the light of these three Considerations.

They are most honorable in 1. Their Relations. 2. Their Service. 3. Their
Guard.


As to the honorable Relations of godly persons, I shall only name two.

They are I. Sons of him who is the God of Glory. II. Spouses of Christ, who
is the King of Glory.


I. All godly persons are the Children of God, Gal. 3. 26. For ye are all the
children of God by faith in Jesus Christ. What greater honor can be desired
then for God to say to poor dust as it is written, 2 Cor. 6. 18. I will be a
Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters. Jacob was at great
pains and patience to Genesis 29. 18, 25, 27, 28.
become son in Law to churlish Laban: and David held it a great honor to be son
in law to King Saul, 1 Samuel 18. 23. and v. 27. we see with what difficulties he
encountered to climb to that height of honor; But alas, that was nothing to
this,, the Honor of this is not to be spoken, or thought of, without the
highest admiration, 1 John 3. 1. Behold what manner of love the father has
bestowed on us, that we should be called the sons of God. That note of
admiration Behold, could never be more fitly used, then in a discourse upon
such an honorable privilege as this of Adoption. A true believer may
confidently call him Father, who is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; Christ
bids Mary tell his Brethren (and what better John 20. 17.
news could be told) that when he ascended, it was to their Father, as well as
his Father, their God as well as his God; And it is considerable, that this
honorable privilege of Adoption is equally conferred on all true believers,
how weak soever they are Credo fide languida sed tamen fide, Dr. Cruciger.
in the Faith of Christ. The least bud draws sap from the root as well as the
greatest branch; The weakest hand may as truly receive a ring of gold, and be
enriched by it, as the strongest hand that is; A weak faith is a joint
possessour, although no faith can be a joint purchaser of this glorious
privilege. The infant new born is as truly and as much a Child as the eldest
child in the family. Now although many that never made this Choice I am now
speaking of, will frequently with abhorred impudency call God Father, yet all
their Rhetoric will not prevail with God to speak to them according to that
language he uses to his own, 2 Cor. 6. 18. I will be your Father, and you
shall be my sons and daughters. Certainly this impudency of theirs in calling
God father, is greater then they are aware of; If a person of quality, and
approved piety, should pass through a town, and some ragged beggar, the known
child of some notorious strumpet should run after him, and presume to call him
Father, what an high disgrace and hateful affront would this be judged to be
by all sober persons! It Is far worse when a wicked man presumes to own God under
this title. We may in part perceive with what indignation such wicked ones will
be rejected by God, by those words of our Savior, John 8. 44. in verse. 41. of
that Chapter the wicked Jews laid claim to God as their Father: We have one
father, even God. But Christ could not brook that Satan's brats should disgrace
his Father by using such language, and therefore in verse. 44. he tells them
plainly, they were of their Father the devil, his holy Father scorned such
unholy Sons, and he an holy Son was ashamed to be a brother to Heb. 2. 1^.
such unsanctified persons; Such honor have only the saints. Psalm. 148.

II. All true believers who have made the holy Choice I am speaking of, are the
honorable Spouses of Jesus Christ, the King of Glory. So the Apostle speaks
of the believing Corinthians, 2 Cor. 11. 2. I have espoused you to one husband,
that I may present you a chaste virgin to Christ: Now this being so, Christ
being most glorious and honorable, his people must needs be so; For as the
Lawyers speak, Uxor fulget radiis mariti, The wife always shares in, and
shines with the rays of her husbands honor. In Psalm. 45. 16. We see that
Christ's spiritual seed, such are all true believers, are Princes in all lands.

(...) Plut.
2. Their service is most honorable because Gods service. Among men to perform
the meanest office about the person of a Prince, is rightly judged honorable;
The title of a servant of God is an higher title, then that of Monarch of the
World, as Numa King of Rome once said. The highest style that King David could
devise to give himself, not in the phrase of a frivolous French complement, but
in the plain speech of a true Israelite, was Psalm. 116. 16. Oh Lord truly I am
thy servant, I am thy servant; He doubles it, because he knew not possibly how
to add an higher and better title.

3. Their Guard is most honorable. Heb. 1. 14. Are they not all ministering
spirits, sent forth to minister to them that shall be heirs of salvation! The
interrogation is to be resolved into this Affirmation; Are they not all (viz.)
the Angels ministering Spirits, etc. that is, they are certainly. The God of
glory himself has not more noble creatures to wait on his own glorious
Majesty. Amongst men it is counted an high piece of respect, when some person
highly respected by the Prince takes leave of him, to send some of his
principal Courtiers to accompany him the length of a room, or Psalm. 34. 7.
Psalm. 94. 11.
Courtyard; but all the precious people of God stir not one step, without
this glorious, although invisible guard of an Angel, or Angels, (I speak
nothing of the safety of this guard, which is unquestionably stronger, then a
guard of many armed men, although never so well armed and ordered) Graceless
nobles have oftentimes a company of vile men like themselves waiting on them,
as if their own personal sins were not sufficiently provoking, but they must
have their idle, drunken, and swearing servants by their sins also, as with
cartropes, to draw down speedy and fearful vengeance upon them. One of the
Saints guard is able to prevail against many thousands of ungodly ones, Isa.
37. 36. Then the angel of the Lord went forth, and smote in the camp of the
Assyrians one hundred fourscore and five thousand, and when they arose early in
the morning behold they were all dead corpses. But all the holy ones of God Ps.
103. 20.
are attended by holy and mighty Angels who excel in strength, and never want
will to be serviceable to the people of God to their best advantage according
to divine appointment.

Secondly, The condition of those that make the godly man's Choice is
unquestionably the most comfortable condition. I the rather touch upon this,
because it has been, is, and will be a slander used by wicked men to
discourage others from the good Spiritus Calvinisticus est spiritus
melancholicus.
ways of God, to assert the inconsistency of strictness in an holy profession
with a cheerful, and comfortable conversation: As if as soon as a Christians
name and heart is really given up to God, he must everlastingly bid adue to all
true joy and delight: The falsenesse of that imputation brought against the
precious ways of God, I shall endeavor to discover and confute by making good
these two Conclusions.

1. That true and great joy is found in Gods ways.

2. Such joy can no where else be obtained.

1. The joy of Christians in the ways of God, is a true and a great joy. Prove.
3. 17. Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace; They
are strewed with roses, and paved with peace. Some degree of comfort follows
every good action, as heat accompanies fire, as beams and influences issue
from the sun; Which is so true, that very heathens upon the discharge of a good
conscience have found comfort, and peace answerable, which if it had been the
comfort of a conscience purified by the blood of Christ, it had been praemium
ante praemium, a forereward of well-doing, in doing whereof (not only for doing
thereof) there is great reward, Psalm. 19. 11. It Is impossible that those ways
should be uncomfortable where the work of walking in them is wages to it self.
We see here that God by the mouth of Solomon tells us, that the ways of
wisdom, that is, of Christ the wisdom of the father, are ways of
pleasantness, and all her paths, not only some of them, are peace. This being
so, it matters not although the wicked men in the world should say, and swear
that they are uncomfortable ways: The Apostle declares what our duty is in such
a case, namely to believe God, and not men, Romans ^. 4, Let God be true, and
every man a liar; And if we consult the Apostle, 1 Pet 1. 8. we shall find the
greatness of the godly man's joy asserted. Whom having not seen, ye love, in
whom, though now ye see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable
and full of glory. Mr. Leighs souls solace against sorrow.
Oh the joys! the joys! the joys! that I feel in my soul! they be wonderful,
they be wonderful, they be wonderful; were the words of Mistress Katherine
Brettergh. And another, Oh the joy! the joy! the unexpressible joy that I find
in my soul! The truth is, these joys are best known by experience; The best
discourse that can be used, is not sufficient for the full expression of Psalm.
34. 8.
them: And therefore holy David wisely provokes others to get a taste of Gods
goodness themselves, for that would more prevail with them to admire, and
prefer Gods comforts before all other comforts whatsoever, then never so many
high expressions uttered by those who have the feeling of them, for it is in
this case, as it is with one, who tastes honey he is more satisfied by the
taste of its sweetness, then if he should hear the learned discourses of an
hundred Philosophers concerning it. We have now briefly proved that the joy and
comfort to be found in Gods ways, is true, glorious, and great, we proceed to
the second Conclusion.

2. The joy of Christlesse persons is not such true, great, and glorious joy; I
do not say, they have no joy, and comfort, I only assert, that their joy is not
of that kind and excellent quality, with the joy of the Lords dear ones; Which
for brevity's sake I shall discover by comparing the comforts of those who are
interested in it, with those that are strangers to it, in four particulars.

First, The joy of true Christians, as Christians, is a true, real, and
substantial joy; Esa. 9. 3. the joy of Gods people is compared to the joy of
harvest, and the joy of those that divide the spoil. Now what joys are more
real and enlarged that can be found amongst the children of men! The husband
man after all his great cost, pains, and patience, when he lives to see a
plentiful harvest does not only seem, but does really, and exceedingly
rejoice. The Soldier that a little while since was horribly affrighted, with
the roaring of Cannons, and the fatal falls of many on his right and left hand,
after the battle is over, himself in safety, and dividing the rich spoils of
his enemy: Who is so senseless as to doubt of the reality of his joy! or so
eloquent as to express the greatness of it: So real and great, yea much
more, is the joy of the precious people of God. But on the other side, the joy
of the wicked is mostly in appearance, not in reality, 2 Cor. 5. 12. The
Apostle speaking of the false hearted Corinthians, gives this remarkable
Character of them, That they glory in appearance, and not in heart. Their
services are hypocritical, and so are their joys. And it is most just with God
to suffer it to be so. For shame therefore O ye sons of vanity, boast not of
that joy, which is but skin deep, which is but the hypocrisy of mirth, your
laughter is but grinning, your hearts often times ache terribly when your
impudent faces counterfeit a smile. Learn, learn before it be too late, holily
to abhor that mirth which is so frothy, and flashy, which only smoothes the
brow, but fills not the breast, which only wets the mouth, but cannot warm and
cheer the heart.

Secondly, The joy of Gods holy ones is high and noble.

1. It is an heaven-born birth, and consequently proceeds from the highest and
most noble efficient. Gal. 5. 22. The fruit of the Spirit is joy. God the holy
Ghost is the worker, and preserver of a Christians joy.

2. When Christians rejoice their highest faculties are exercised upon the
highest objects possible, not sensual objects, such as beasts can rejoice in,
nor merely rational, such as well-bred Heathens can excel in, but spiritual,
and supernatural objects, then which none can be found more noble, or so noble.
This is evident by those words of the Church, Esa. 61. 10. I will greatly
rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall be joyful in my God, for he has clothed me
with the garments of salvation, he has covered me with the robe of
righteousness, as a bridegroom decketh himself with ornaments, and as a bride
adorneth her self with jewels; So that it is evident, that not riches, but
righteousness, not the vanities of this world, but the concernments of the
other world, are the noble objects, of Christians joys. Let us now glance upon
the low, sordid, and brutish objects of worldlings joys, Luke 12. 16. And he
spoke a parable unto them, saying, the ground of a certain rich man brought
forth plentifully, verse. 17. And he thought within himself, saying, what shall
I do, because I have no room where to bestow my fruits. And he said, verse. 18.
This will I do, I will pull down my barns, and build greater, and there will I
bestow all my fruits, and my goods, verse. 19. And I will say to my soul, soul,
thou have much goods laid up for many years, take thine ease, eat, drink, and
be merry, verse. 20. But God said to him, Thou fool, etc. In these words we see
the low objects of the worldlings joy, the Creatures, not the Creator, their
goods on earth, not the God of heaven, food and drink are for the body, which
is the brutish part; In the 20. verse. we see the right censure of God upon
this person, he calls him Fool, and so he was, because he only minded such low
and perishing objects, his barns being a fitter object for his hoggs then for
himself to delight in.

Thirdly, The joy of Christians is a strong joy. Heb. 6. 18. It Neh. 8. 10.
is called strong consolation, and it makes the people of God strong, even to
admiration of all observers. It is reported of one Adrianus, that seeing the
Martyrs very comfortable when suffering very grievous torments, he asked one of
them the cause, and the answer was, Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither
have entered into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them
that live him, 1 Cor. 2. 9. The naming of which Text so wrought upon him, that
afterward he became a Martyr. In 2 Cor. 7. 4. Afflicted Paul expresses
himself thus; I am filled with comfort, I am exceeding joyful in all our
tribulation. Verse. 5. For when we were come into Macedonia, our flesh had no
rest, but we were troubled on every side, without were ^ightings, within were
fears. Verse. 6. Nevertheless God that comfort those that are cast down,
comforted us by the coming of Titus. The joy of Christians like oil gets above
all the deep waters of adversity. It Is to admiration, how even weak women and
children in time of persecution, having their hearts strengthened with Gods joy,
have endured such grievous torments with such triumphant gallantnesse of
spirit, that their enemies were more weary of infflicting, then they of
enduring those grievous things wherewith they were tried. And it is well known,
that some of the great ones of the world, in discontent have laid down their
Empire, because they could not conquer Christians by torments. But as for the
joy of the wicked, it is very weak: Many birds can sing a scurvey note in
summer time, but in winter they are gone; such is the joy of the wicked in
prosperity, then they speak high, and look merrily, but the least cross almost
marrs their mirth, and puts them into their dumps. There is more whining, and
crying with some Christlesse person for the loss of a Cow, Horse, nay
sometimes for a small Pig, then of thirty or forty years rebellion against
God. Alas, their weak comforts are easily overtopt, they lie at the mercy
almost of every thing, the frown of a rich neighbor, the plague at the next
family, the fall of a market make many of them sigh, and groan like dying men;
and if they at any time hear a terrible clap of thunder, like Caligula, they
are ready to crawl under their beds, as frighted worms wriggle into their dark
holes. I might easily give many remarkable instances of the different behavior
of the godly and ungodly under the same kind of affliction. I shall name but
one in this have, and that is the affliction of scarcity, Hab. 3. 17, 18.
Although the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vines,
the labor of the olives shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat, the
flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls,
Verse. 18. Yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my
salvation. Here we have a blessed pattern for our imitation, when under
afflictions, The Prophet Habbakuk prayed, believed, rejoiced; But in a like
case wicked men carry themselves not like godly persons, but like bruit
creatures, Hos. 7. 14. And they have not cried unto me with their hearts, when
they howled upon their beds: They assemble themselves for corn and wine, and
they rebel against me: Under their scarcity no right praying, believing,
rejoicing, but rebelling against God, and howling like a company of starved
dogs. O the glorious and invincible strength of true Christian joy! O the weak
and vanishing joy of all Christlesse persons in the day of trouble.

Fourthly, If we consider the difference between the joy of the wicked, and
godly in point of duration, it will be very remarkable. If you come and ask a
Saint, possessed of that noble heaven-born joy before mentioned, saying;
Friend, how long will this joy of yours last! He may answer, and make good his
answer after this manner, My glorious joy which is unspeakable, shall last as
long as I would have it to last, It shall endure as long as any thing on earth,
or in heaven endures, It shall run parrallel with the longest line of Gods
eternity: This is fully proved from those words, 2 These. 2. 16. Now our Lord
Jesus Christ himself, and God even our Father, which has loved us, and given
us everlasting consolation. God is an everlasting God, and his peoples
consolation is everlasting. It Is true the sun of a Christians joy in this life
may be clouded with temptations, and desertions; but yet it is most certain
that sooner or later all these clouds shall be scattered, and their joy appear
as glorious, yea more glorious then ever before. The dark clouds may for a
while keep in the bright beams of the sun, that it shines not out so
comfortably as at other times: but still it is not, cannot by this means be
pulled out of its Orb. It Is so with a Christians joy, Psalm. 30. 5. Weeping may
endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning. Esa. 54. 7. For a small
moment have I forsaken thee, but with great mercies will I gather thee. Verse.
8. In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment, but with everlasting
kindness will I have mercy on thee, says the Lord thy redeemer. But come and
propound the like question to a Christlesse person, although in the most
prosperous condition in respect of fulness of riches, height of honor,
variety of all the choicest delights of the children of men; that ever any such
person has enjoyed, or can enjoy in that state; and you shall see what a
woeful, if true answer must be returned, when you ask, how long his joy shall
last! It may be some wicked man may dream, and confidently utter those golden
dreams, that his condition shall be comfortable in both worlds: There are very
many, too many such dreamers in all corners of the world; But you must
remember, I told you that, although many wicked men say, yet no wicked man
living can prove any such thing as this, that his joy shall continue with him
in both worlds, or that it shall abide with him so long as he lives in this
world. When the wicked depart out of this life, they must everlastingly bid
adieu to all true joy and comfort, Rev. 14. 11. The smoke of their torments
ascends for ever, and they have no rest night nor day. But many of them begin
their hell here, long before their translation hence, as the godly their
heaven. A wicked man though in never so flourishing, and prosperous condition
in the eye of sense, or reason, cannot upon good ground be confident that his
peace, and comfort shall continue one week, or day or hour longer, Eccles. 7.
6. For as the crackling of thorns under a pot, which make a short blaze, and is
suddenly extinct, so is the laughter of a fool; Such God accounts, and calls
all wicicked men. Amos. 8. 9.
The Prophet Amos tells the wicked, that their sun shall go down at noon day. All
the wicked man's considerable joy may be over, before half his days be passed;
God delights to mar the mirth of Christless ones in the midst of their
jollity; Dan. 5. In the beginning of the Chapter, we read that King Belshazzar
made a great feast for a thousand of his Lords; and himself, his Princes, wives
and concubines were upon their merry pinnes, quaffing, and carowsing in golden
and silver vessels, taken out of the Temple: But we read in v. 5. that all this
joy was turned suddenly into extreme sadness. In the same hour came forth
fingers of a man's hand, and wrote over against the Candlestick upon the
plaster of the wall of the Kings Palace, and the King saw the part of the
hand that wrote. v. 6. Then the Kings countenance was changed, and his thoughts
troubled him, so that the joints of his loins were loosed, and his knees smote
one against another. v. 7. Then the King cried aloud, etc. Oh the
inconsiderablenesse of that short lived joy which a wicked man cannot be
rightly confident to enjoy for the small space of one poor hour. Job. 20. 5.
These things premised, if any person wish well to his own joy, no choice, but
the Christians choice is the right way to obtain, and retain it in both worlds.

3. The Christians choice is as unquestionably the best, in reference to the
concernments of the other world. It cannot be reasonably expected, that in a
piece of an hour I should go over in my discourse the state of the Saints
blessedness in Heaven, and the sinners misery in Hell, that by comparing them
together, it may be discovered which choice is best, that which leads to
Heaven's happiness, or Hell's misery. This may abundantly suffice for my
present purpose, to mention four remarkable Particulars, which hold forth light
enough convincingly to prove the conclusion I have delivered about this weighty
point.

1. The Godly man's choice will infallibly bring him to so happy a condition in
the other world, that he shall not desire, or have cause to desire any other
good, then that he shall then be possessed of, Psalm. 73. 25. The Psalmist
expresses himself thus, Whom have I in heaven but thee! and there is none upon
earth that I desire besides thee! If this be the language of the Saints in this
world, surely there will be much more cause why it should be their In beatudine
complebitur omne desiderium beatorum, Aquinas.
constant language in the other world. God is the universal good, and they will
then be in the fullest enjoyment of it, that their natures are capable of; and
so there will be no need of the least contribution of any other good below God
to perfect their substantial happiness. That sea of goodness will surely fill
brim-ful all their largest vessels. Psalm. 16. last verse. Thou will show me the
path of life, in thy presence is fulness of joy, and so no room for any other
objects: But as for all the wicked their woeful case will be far otherwise, then
their most afflicted estate ever was in this life. In this world such is the
admirable kindness of the glorious God to his cursed, adversaries that he
seems to deal with them more like children, then like enemies. The Psalmist
tells us, that in this life, Psalm. 73. 7.
they have more good things then heart could wish. Here, when they are in pain,
or any other affliction, many of them can say to their servants; Call my dear
husband, or wife, to refresh me with their company: Bid my beloved Child, or
faithful Friend, come and be helpful to me: Go fetch me such a costly
Cordial, to keep up my fainting spirits: But in the other world, God affords
them no such comforts. Their cup of gall and wormwood have not the least drop
of any comfortable ingredient to qualify the bitterness thereof, Luke 16. 25.
But Abraham said, Son, remember, that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good
things, and likewise Lazarus evil things, but now he is comforted, and thou art
tormented. Wicked men have all the comfortable portion that they are like to
receive from God, in Psalm 17. 14.
this life; no wonder therefore when death comes, they are soloth to depart
hence. The request made was but for a very small courtesy, verse. 24. a finger
dipped in water would have been but a poor means to abate the pains of his
tongue tormented with hellish flames; yet as small as it was, it was denied, to
let all Christlesse persons know, what they must trust to in the other world.
They must only drink of the wine of the wrath of God without mixture, not the
least drop of mercy shall be mingled with it. Rev. 14. 10.

2. The condition of all godly persons in the other world, shall be much more
comfortable, then they can possibly conceive while they are in this life. Oh
how happy would many judge their condition to be, if all that they could
possibly conceive to be delightful to them, might be enjoyed by them! But the
case of all glorified persons shall be far more comfortable then this comes to,
1 Cor. 2. 9. Eye has not seen, ear has not heard, nor has it entered into
the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that 1 John 3. 2.
love him. It never entered into the hearts of God; best people here to conceive
fully, how happy their glorified condition shall be: Their happiness shall be
made up of such ingredients, which the infinitely wise God, who prepared it
shall judge to be most comfortable; and sure infinite wisdom can best choose
the most comfortable ingredients, and his infinite love to his people, will not
suffer him to leave out any of them. But now on the other side, the ways that
wicked ones choose, will bring them to greater woe and misery in the other
world, then they can for the present fully conceive, Psalm. 90. 11. Who knows
the power of thy wrath? The interrogation is to be resolved into this negation;
None can fully conceive the greatness of it. We may conceive that it will be
very dreadful, and although we know not to the utmost how dreadful it will be,
'twill certainly be intolerable, Rev. 6. 15, 16, 17. And the Kings of the
earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief Captains, and the
mighty men, and every bondman, and every freeman hid themselves in the Dens,
and in the rocks of the mountains, and said to the mountains and rocks, fall
on us, and hide us from the face of him that sits on the Throne, and from
the wrath of the Lamb. This was a poor shelter, for the mountains melt, and the
rocks rend at his angry presence, for the great day of his wrath is come, and
who shall be able to stand! Oh woeful, and miserable miscreants, who can neither
abide, nor avoid the fearful wrath of God! It would be very sad news to a
wicked man, if one should come and tell him, that that person who hates him
most of all others in the world, has power over him, and is devising all the
horrid torments that the wit of man can imagine, which shall shortly be
inflicted upon him; But alas all this is but a very small thing (I had almost
said a very nothing in point of terror) If it be compared with what terrible
and true tidings I am now from God to acquaint all Christlesse persons with.
Although you who are wicked do often pretend (as those liars the Prophet
Ezekiel speaks of) much love to your God, with your lips, yet I am sure, he
does not believe you; But he who knows your hearts better then your selves
says, Zech. 11. 8. that his soul loathes you, and your souls abhor him; And
if you die in this condition, the misery which you shall endure in the other
world shall be, not what the finite understanding of one no nor ten thousand
angry malicious men, laying their heads together can devise to execute upon
you; but what the infinite understanding of that God who loathes you, has
prepared to render your condition most exquisitely, unspeakably, and
unconceivably miserable. Mat. 25. 41. Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting
fire, prepared for the devil and his angels. There is the doleful emphasis of
the misery of damned persons in the other world; Their misery was prepared by
the infinite wisdom of God, who best knows what ingredients are most
torturing, and his infinite hatred of their sinful persons will not suffer him
to leave out the least of them. They have vexed, Isa. 63. 10. Ezekiel. 16. 43. and
32. 9.
and fretted Gods soul by their sins here, and God will vex every vein of their
hearts, and be revenged on them to the utmost hereafter. Histories mention many
ways of torment which the heathenish and antichristian factions have invented,
to discover their cursed rage against the precious people of God; As plates of
iron burning hot, which they have laid upon their naked flesh, pincers red hot
with which they have pulled off the flesh from the bones, bodkins with which
they have pricked their bodies all over casting them into Lime-kilns, and into
Caldrons of scalding lead, their skins were flead off alive, and their raw
flesh rubbed with salt and vinegar, they were laid upon Gridirons, roasted and
basted with salt and vinegar, their bodies were rent asunder by fastening them
to boughs of trees, they were tossed upon the horns of Bulls with their bowels
hanging out, they were tortured on the rack, on the wheel, and on the gibbet
with flaming fire under them. These were very grievous ways of torment; But
alas, these and many more such devises, were no more then the inventions and
executions of finite men, which God permitted to be used upon the bodies of the
people who were dearly beloved of his soul, and therefore are but as bug-bears
to scare children, if they be compared with that most fearful vengeance which
an infinite God has decreed to execute upon all Christlesse persons in the
other world; Because of the infinite hatred that is in his soul against them.
In short, The happiness of heaven will be much more sweet, then the people of
God can conceive, while they are here, and the misery of hell will be much more
dreadful then the wicked, in this life, either did or could possibly imagine.

3. The Godly in the life to come shall have only such company as they would
have. Man is a sociable creature, therefore suitable society is a delight, etc.
This will be a very considerable ingredient in that happiness. Here they cry
out, or have cause continually to cry out in the words of the Psalmist, Psalm.
120. 5. Woe is me that I sojourn in Meshech, that I dwell in the tents of Kedar
Little does the wicked ones of the world know and consider, what an
heart-breake they are to their godly neighbors, and nearest relations, because
of the wicked courses which they take. It is with them as it was with Lot, 2
Pet. 2. 7, 8. Their righteous souls are vexed from day to day with seeing and
hearing of their unlawful deeds. But hereafter they shall be in that place
where no such persons shall have leave to appear, Revel. 21. 27. There shall in
no wise enter into it, any thing that defiles, neither that works
abomination, or makes a lie. No dirty Dog shall set footing on that pavement
of Glory. In heaven thou shall enjoy highest communion with God the Father, who
elected thee, God the Son who redeemed thee, and God the holy Ghost, who
sanctified and comforted thee: Then shall thou be in the company of innumerable
Angels, who have done thee more good offices then ever thou tookest notice of,
and the spirits of just men made perfect; Here it is sweet, yea very sweet to
enjoy the company of one or two godly persons, what will it be then, to be in
the company of all the righteous that ever were, are, or shall be? Here the
best of Christians are imperfect in their knowledge, love, and all other
graces; and yet wise, and holy Moses chose rather to suffer affliction with
them, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, esteeming the reproach
of Christ greater riches, then the treasures of Egypt, for he had respect to
the recompense of reward, Heb. 11. 25, 26. But sure the company of Gods people,
when there is no ignorance, envy, frowardness, or any other corruption, will
be much more desirable. But on the other side the company of those that make
not this choice will be a very great part of their torment; they must depart
into the place where the devil and his angels are, Mat. 25. 41. Here if men do
but fancy the apparition of one devil to them, they look pale, their hair
stands up, they shriek terribly, and are ready to drop down dead: What will
their woeful case be in the midst of the devils really abiding with them? Here
wicked ones have many persons, as husbands, wives, children, friends, that are
the delight of their eyes, and the joy of their hearts; But in the other world
it would be a very great abatement of their misery, if they might never see any
of them that remain Christlesse as themselves do. A great many think they have
done all that belongs to them, if they provide estates for their relations,
wives and children to live gallantly in the world, but never take the least
care about their souls, more precious then the world: But when they meet
together before Christ's Tribunal, may not many women with better warrant say to
their husbands then Moses wife did to him, Thou have been a bloody husband to
me; And many children, Oh thou cruel Father, if you had (according to your
duty) instructed, corrected, and given me an holy example, I had never been so
sinful and so miserable as now I am: And so servants cry out bitterly, Oh that
I had never entered within the door of that family of such a graceless Master,
who in stead of helping me to heaven, haled me with violence to the pit of
destruction. On earth it is a common speech amongst the wicked, The more the
merrier, not so in hell, Luke 16. 21. Then he said, I pray therefore, father,
that thou would send him to my fathers house, for I have five brethren, that
he may testify unto them, least they also come into this place of torment. I
cannot be so charitable, as to think, so good a thing as Charity dwells among
the damned crew: But he knew that if they came to hell, his torments would be
the greater, and therefore desired never to see them more. Mat. 8. 12. They
that miscarry in the other world, they weep and gnash their teeth: The more
therefore who are damned, the louder and more hideous roaring, and the greater
number of ghastly, and frightful persons, Mat. 13. 41.
who gnash their teeth. The saints in the life to come shall never be afflicted
with any unacceptable company for a day hour or moment, and the wicked shall
never be refreshed with a pleasing companion, although it be but for the least
space of time which is imaginable.

4. All the godly persons shall enjoy the comfortable condition before
mentioned to all eternity; and all the wicked shall endure that woeful misery
for ever. This great big-bellied Epithet, Eternal; is that which heightens
happiness, or misery to the utmost. I begin with the first branch. The Saints
happiness will be, and they shall know that it will be everlasting. Psalm. 16.
11. In thy presence is fullness of joy, and at thy right hand are pleasures for
evermore. This proves the joy of glorified ones shall be everlasting. And if we
look into 1 These. 4. 17. we may observe Paul speaking in the name of believers,
We which are alive and remain, shall be caught up together with them in the
clouds, to meet the Lord in the air, and so we shall be ever with the Lord. And
if the Saints in this life know, that their happiness shall be everlasting, in
the life to come, surely the knowledge of the saints Triumphant is not less,
then the knowledge of the saints Militant: this being so, that their happiness
shall be everlasting, and they know it shall be so. The Apostle might well
add, verse. 18. Wherefore comfort one another with these words. It is not
possible, or needful that more comfortable words should be spoken to any of the
Children of men. Ubi est summum bonum, ibi summa faelicitas, summa jucunditas,
vera libertas, perfecta charitas, aeterna securitas, and secura aeternitas.
Bernard, Medit. cap. 4.

Now as for the wicked, Eternity is that which renders their condition
amazingly, unspeakably, and unconceivably woeful, Esa. 33. 14. The sinners in
Sion are afraid, fearfulness has surprised the hypocrites. What is the
matter! There follow two hard Questions, Who shall dwell with devouring fire,
although for a short space of time! But the hardest Question of all is, Who
shall endure everlasting burnings! If the damned in hell could in truth say
(which they cannot) I have been roaring, and yelling many years in this burning
lake, but after so many hundred, or thousand years I shall certainly be
delivered out of this place of Torment; The thoughts of being delivered,
although after a long time would wonderfully abate their misery: But when they
speak that which is the truth in this case. Here I have been a great while,
weeping, and gnashing my teeth, and so must be for ever. This Eternity is (as I
may so speak) The very hell of hell. What more confounding words ever did or
can God speak, or wicked ones hear, then those words which God will ere long
pronounce in their hearing, Mat. 25. 41. Depart ye our sed into everlasting
fire. When the wicked have been in hell as many years as there are hairs on
their heads, stars in the firmament, or sands upon the Seashore, they are as
far from the end of their torments, as they were the first moment they dropped
into the burning lake.

I have now dispatched the Demonstration of the Doctrine, by which it clearly
appears, that in reference to all the concernments of both worlds, The godly
man's choice is unquestionably and incomparably the best choice that can be made.

The third thing that I promised, was to vindicate this glorious Doctrine from
the Objections, and Cavils that are brought against it; to name them all, were
a very long, if possible task. I shall take notice of two principal ones, which
being clearly propounded, and fully answered, I shall hasten to the Application.

Object. The Scripture declares, That the Choice you speak of will infallibly
expose us to many Afflictions, Acts 14. 22. We must through much tribulation
enter into the kingdom of God. Let the people of God walk never so wisely and
holily, there is no avoiding of the Cross: If any think to go to Heaven
without tribulation, he must (as the Emperor Constantine told the Heretic
Acesias.) erect a ladder, and go up alone. Now the Apostle tells us, Heb. 12.
11. No chastning for the present seems to be joyous* but grievous: How then can
that choice be so much approved, that renders our condition so grievous in this
world!

Sol. Before I Answer this Objection, I must premise, That although this and a
thousand such Objections framed by Satan, or his instruments, cannot
prevailingly alter the choice of any, that have in truth given up their names
and hearts to God, and his precious ways, yet needless discouragements may be
upon their spirits by means thereof. Again, This consideration of afflictions
that they who walk in Gods ways meet with, may dishearten others from making
this choice, when invited and provoked to enter into the way of life. I shall
therefore give in something by way of answer, for the satisfaction of both
these sort of persons, who are herein concerned.

Sol. 1. To take off the discouragements of those who have made this holy and
happy choice the Text speaks of. I can in this haste name but a few things (but
I hope enough for their relief) to be considered by them. I do not, dare not
deny, That the way to heaven is through much tribulation, because the Scripture
in the aforementioned place elsewhere does so fully assert it. But withal I
may add that this very doctrine has been judged by Christians to be no such
uncomfortable doctrine, as the Objection before mentioned seems to hold forth;
yea we may gather from the expressions of some eminent ones, that they would
rather have accounted the contrary an uncomfortable doctrine: as holy Bradford,
Act. and Mon.
who said, that if there were any way to heaven on horseback, it was by
affliction. And another we read of in the Book of Martyrs, who professed, that
if any thing was abated of his affliction, it was to his loss: and sincere
Saunders could say, I am in prison, till I am in prison: and a fourth, The more
pain, the more gain.

2. Let me entreat you to consider, what may be observed out of Heb. 12. 11.
this very Text (to omit others) to answer the Objection: It is not said,
Chastisements are grievous, but seem grievous. Afflictions are indeed grievous
to outward sense, and in that respect it is here said, that chastisements seem
grievous. But when sense feels grief, faith may, and often does conceive
abundance of comfort, James 1. 2. Believing James could say, that we must count
it all joy when we fall into diverse temptations. The world wondreth, says Mr.
Philpot the Martyr, how we can be merry in such extreme misery; But our God is
omnipotent, who turns misery Act. and Mon.
into felicity. Believe me there is no such joy in the world, as the people of
God have under the Cross; I speak it by experience: And for those who are so
tender and delicate professors of Religion, that their senses must by no means
be offended, I might send them to school to abundance of Heathens, who would
make them blush to speak of such womanish and childish tenderness. Anaxarchus,
when he was commanded by a Tyrant to be put into a mortar, cries out to his
persecutors, Ye do but beat the vessel of Anaxarchus, he accounted the
affliction of his body no such great matter: and our Lord speaks fully to this
point, Mat. 10. 28. Fear not them which can kill the body, but are not able to
kill the soul. The worst that the worst of incarnate devils can do to the
people of God, is but to put the body to pain, and not always that neither,
without Gods permission: For holy Bainham at the stake, and in the midst of the
flame (which had half consumed his arms Acts and Monu.
and legs) spoke these words, O ye Papists, ye look for miracles, here you may
see a miracle, for in this fire I feel no more pain, then if I were in a bed of
Down; but it is to me as a bed of Roses.

2. The grievous afflictions of the people of God are mitigated by the
limitation of time; they are but for the present time of this life; so that,
the shortness may exceedingly comfort against the sharpness of them. 1 Pet. 1.
6. Now for a season (if need be) ye are in heaviness through manifold
temptations. We read in the 3d of Lamentations, that the Church was so deeply
afflicted, that she was filled with bitterness, v. 15. and made drunk with
wormwood, v. 31. We see what was her great and sufficient cordial to keep her
from fainting: The Lord will not cast off for ever, as if she had said, This
bitterness is not everlasting bitterness, and therefore not so overwhelming.

3. The many excellent fruits of sanctified afflictions of Gods people, may
sufficiently comfort against the grievousnesse of them. Heb. 12. 11.
Nevertheless afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto
them which are exercised thereby. Here Interpreters conceive, that by
righteousness we are to understand the same thing that is called holiness in
v. 10. there is one glorious effect of sanctified afflictions; and then this
affliction is amplified by a special Epithete, Peaceable, that is, Chastisement
when sanctified works peace in Christians, and that is double, Internal in
this world, and Eternal in the world to come. A word of each of these.

1. Sanctified afflictions are made use of by God for the increasing of the
grace; of his people, this is Gods end. Heb. 12. 10. He chasteneth us for our
profit, that we may be partakers of his holiness; and he never falls short of
his ends. The Rose is sweeter in the Still, then on the stalk; the like
difference is to be found amongst Christians, when under, and out of
affliction. John 15. 2. Every branch in me my Father purges, that it may bring
forth more fruit: As Vines are made fruitful by pruning, so are Gods people by
his pruning knife of afflictions. Methinks this should be enough to quiet and
cheer up Gods people under the sorest afflictions. We are not barely contented,
but very thankful, and willingly part with our money to Physicians that give
us bitter purges, and Chyrurgians, that put us to great pain by launcing our
flesh, that so the diseases and wounds of our bodies may be cured, and sweet
bodily health restored: We ought much more upon the account of our spiritual
welfare, be not only contented under, but very thankful for all Gods most
smarting dispensations, that tend to the restoring and preserving our spiritual
health.

2. Sanctified afflictions are very useful for the procuring and preserving of
inward peace, this follows strongly upon the former; for that which advances
holiness, must needs procure peace. Isa. 32. 17. And the work of
righteousness shall be peace, that is, the peace of conscience which passes
all understanding, and is full of glory, Phil. 4. 7. This peace of God, like
David's Harp, drives away the evil spirit of cares and fears, and soon husheth
all. Besides, such is the wisdom and indulgence of God to his afflicted
children, that he deals with them, as we with ours. We are not prodigal of our
Cordials, but give them only to our sick, not healthful children: so the Lord
sees that in time of great affliction his people most need, and will most
prize his cordials, and then he pours them out freely. Many of the people of
God know this by personal experiences; and if they had not drunk deeply of the
cup of affliction, they had been strangers to the sense of those strong
consolations of the Gospel. Heb. 6. 18. Hos. 2. 14. I will bring her into the
wilderness, and speak comfortably to her. When Christians are in a wilderness
condition in respect of such afflictions, that they know not what way to turn,
then God uses (...)
to speak kindly to them, yea to their very hearts, as the Original does import.

3. The sanctified afflictions of Gods people tend to their eternal peace. Isa.
32. 17. they serve to sweeten and greaten their glory in the other world. 1. To
sweeten it. Eccl. 5. 12. The sleep of a laboring man is sweet: Sleep is the
nurse of nature, the wages she paies the poor man for his uncessant pains;
these laboring men are no sooner in bed, but the next thing is, they are fast
asleep; their rest is more uninterrupted than the rest of others: So it is with
the precious people of God, that all their lives long have been laboring hard
in Gods furnace of affliction. It cannot be here fully conceived how sweet the
glorious rest will be to them: Amaritudo praeeuntis doloris commendat amplius
gaudia sequutura. Hier. ad virginem in exilium missam.

Majora certamiaa majora sequuntur praemia. Tert. ad Scap.
2 To greaten their glory. The greater the combats, the greater are the
following rewards of grace. Bernard calls the persecutors, but his Fathers
Goldsmiths, that are working to add Pearls to the glorious Crowns of Saints, 2
Cor. 4. 18. For our light afflictions which is but for a moment, works for us
a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory. Here is an elegant
Antithesis, and a double Hyperbole beyond englishing. For affliction, here is
glory; for light affliction, a weight of glory; for momentany affliction,
eternal glory. But then those words added, (...) are very remarkable, An
exceeding, excessive, or a far more excellent, will make the eternal weight of
glory a just object of our largest admirations to all eternity.

2. As for those who are afraid to choose the precious ways of God, because of
the grievous afflictions which have been mentioned, and choose the ways of sin
to prevent troubles, they do as foolishly as they, who run into the fire
thinking to prevent burning, which is impossible. To undeceive them, I shall at
this time propound only these few Considerations.

First, Choose what way thou will, and take what course thou can, thou shall
certainly meet with afflictions, Eccles. 9. 2. All things come alike to all.
There is one event to the righteous and to the wicked, to the good, and to the
clean, and to the unclean, to him that sacrifices and to him that sacrifices
not. As is the good, so is the sinner, and he that swears, as he that fears
an Oath. Look abroad in the world: What afflictions can be named, that are not
found in the Tabernacles of the wicked, as well as in the habitations of the
righteous? Are there not poor sinners, as well as poor Saints, sick
unbelievers, as well as sick believers? Are not the children of reprobates as
perverse, prodigal, and heartbreaking, as the children of Gods elect? Job 5.
7. Man is born to trouble as the sparks fly upward. As it is natural for the
sparks to fly upward, so it is natural for every sinful man to come forth in
this world to misery.

Secondly, Before afflictions come, the ungodly have more cause to fear they
will come upon them, than the godly, because God in his Word has made promises
to deliver his people from all sorts of afflicting evils, and has threatened to
bring all those evils upon the wicked, as we may read at large, Deuteronomy. 28. 4.
God promises to bless the fruit of the bodies of his servants. v. 18. He
threatens to curse the fruit of the bodies of the wicked. v. 5. To bless the
basket and store of his people. v. 17. To curse the basket and store of his
adversaries. v. 7. He promises to deliver his obedient children from their
enemies. v. 25. He threatens the contrary evil to those that are disobedient.
And the like may be said in many other instances in this Chapter, and
elsewhere. All that can lightly be objected is, That the promises we are now
speaking of, are conditional; and that notwithstanding these comfortable
declarations of Gods favor to his dear ones, we see by experience that they
are sorely afflicted in their estates, posterity, and by cruel adversaries. To
this I briefly answer; These temporal promises are conditional, but withal I
must further add, The people of God do, and have cause cordially to approve
those Conditions.

The only Conditions are these two,

1. God will vouchsafe all sorts of temporal blessings privative, and positive
to his people, unless it be more for his own Glory to deny them any of them.
Now the Lords Grace which should teach his servants to prefer his Glory above
their spiritual and eternal good, does teach them much more to prefer Gods
Glory above their temporal good: Which they signify, when according to
Christ's prescription, Mat. 6. 9. they understandingly pray, Hallowed be thy
Name. There that petition which teaches to pray that God would order all things
concerning themselves, and all the rest of the world, as may make most for his
own Glory, is set before all other petitions that concern either their
temporal, spiritual or eternal good. And therefore in such a case as holy Job,
they can as cordially bless God for taking away children, and estate, as for
giving them, Job 1. 21. God has given, and God has taken away, blessed be the
Name of the Lord.

2. The other condition is, God will give such or such temporal blessings to
his dear people, unless himself, who is best able to judge, see it most for
their real advantage to want them. So the promise runs, Psalm. 34. 10. They that
seek the Lord shall not want any good thing. They may be without many things,
which, in strictness of speech they do not want: Now this being so, the people
of God may charitably be supposed in cool blood to be very contented under,
nay, thankful for such afflicting providence, whereby good things in
themselves, although not fit for them; are withheld or removed from them, Heb.
12. 10. One of the great Arguments he uses to comfort the godly Hebrews under
afflicting providence, was that I am now speaking of, because God afflicted
them for their profit, that they might be partakers of his holiness. Whatsoever
is for our good, be it never so bitter, ought to be entertained with
thankfulness, not sullenness. But now it may be pleaded also in reference to
the wicked, that notwithstanding all the threatenings in the Bible, abundance of
wicked persons are free from many of those evils before-named all their days.

To this I answer two things.

1. They are deeply indebted to God for his rich long suffering toward them,
Romans 9. 22. God endures with much long suffering the vessels of wrath fitted to
destruction.

2. They have no cause when all their accounts are rightly cast up, to boast of
their exemption. The less they have suffered hitherto, the more is behind;
their preservation from lesser present, are reservations to greater future
vengeance, 2 Pet. 2. 9. The Lord knows how to deliver the righteous, and to
reserve the wicked to the day of judgment to be punished. Origin in 8 hom. in
Exodus 20. quoting Hos. 4. 14. I will not punish their daughters when they
commit whoredam, expresses himself thus, Vis indignantis Dei terribilem vocem
audire, etc. Will thou here the terrible voice of a provoked God! You shall be
without chastisement for a testimony that you Heb. 12. 8.
are bastards, not sons. When was Jerusalems condition so desperate, as when God
said, My fury shall depart from thee, I will be quiet, Hie ure; hic seca modo
in aeternum Parcas. August.
and no more angry, Ezekiel. 16. 42. Fieri Domine, fieri, cried Luther, strike
Lord, strike and spare not; far minora volo, ne graviora feram, I am willing
to bear lesser, that I may not bear greater evils. Bernard calls it
misericordiam omni indignatione crudeliorem, a most cruel and killing courtesy.
Job accounted it a great favor to sorry man, that God accounts him worth
melting, although it be every morning, and trying, though it be every moment,
Job 7. 17. 18.

Thirdly, When the same kind and measure of outward evils do befall both the
godly and ungodly, the condition of the Lords people is abundantly more
comfortable as in many other respects, so more eminently in these three, if we
consider,

1. The motive, of their troubles. 2. The measure, 3. The issue,

1. What moves God to afflict his people?

I answer, the same precious love, which moved him to bestow Jesus Christ upon
them to save them from wrath to come, Heb. Rev. 3. 19.
12. 6. For whom the Lord loves, he chastises, and scourges every son whom he
receives. v. 7. If you endure chastning, God deals with you as with sons. So
that it is not common, but Fatherly love which moves God to afflict his
children. But if the Question be, Why does God afflict wicked ones? another
answer must be given, to wit, because he bears ill will to them, Zech. 11. 8.
My soul loathed them, and their soul abhorred me. Mark what follows
immediately upon Gods abhorring them, v. 11. Then said I, I will not feed you,
that that dies, let it die; and that that is to be cut off, let it be cut off;
and let the rest eat every one the flesh of another. What moves God to bring
poverty upon wicked men, because God hates them, and cares not although they
starve. Why does God send abundance of vexations into their Families? because
God abhors them, and grudges them Family-comforts! Wherefore does he smite them
with sickness, because he loathes them, and so values nor their lives! They may
die, and drop into hell as suddenly as may be, it shall be no trouble unto his
heart: Here we see a most remarkable difference between those who choose the
ways of God, and those who choose the ways of sin, John 18. 11. The cup that
my Father gives me shall I not drink it? This cup was the most bitter cup that
ever was, or shall be mingled; yet the love of a Father did sufficiently
sweeten it: But the hatred of God does much more imbitter the afflictions of
the wicked, which are of themselves very bitter.

2. As to the measure of the afflictions of the godly and ungodly, there is
likewise a very wide difference, Jer. 30. 10. God bids Jacob not fear, or be
dismayed. v. 11. The reason that is rendered, is this, I will correct thee in
measure. Es. 27. 8. In the day of his east wind, he will stay his rough wind.
Although God for his own Glory, and his peoples great good in both worlds,
often tries his people to the top of their strength, yet he never did, or will
try any of them above their strength. 1 Cor. 10. 13. God will not suffer you to
be tempted above that you are able, but will with the temptation also make a
way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it. This is wonderfully comfortable
to the people of God, but as for the wicked, God takes no such care about them.
If God at any time suffer them as it were to scramble from under the weight of
some heavy affliction; before they have well breathed themselves, Gods angry
hand lays a heavier burden on them, that they cannot stand under it, but must
utterly sink. God deals with wicked men in this case, as enemies in war do;
when one enemy has stricken another down to the ground, for the present he
lies like a dead man, and stirs neither hand nor foot, and so he leaves him,
but if afterward he pass by, and observe the least stirring, he lifts*up his
arm presently, and fetches an harder blow, and tells him, he will make him that
he shall never stir more: So when God has made a great breach upon the estate,
health, or any other comforts of the wicked, for the present they are cast
down, but after a while God observes they can make a sorry shift to live under
those strokes, then God lifts up his angry arm higher the next time, and sinks
them that they never joy more in any worldly comfort. This is notably
illustrated by a similitude the Prophet Amos uses, Amos 5. speaking of the
wicked in time of afflictions, v. 18. he says, The day of the Lord to them is
darkness, and not light, not the least mixture of mercy, verse. 19. It Is as if
one flee from a Lion, and a Bear did meet him, or went into the house to lean
on the wall, and a serpent bit him: Here we see the last affliction the worst,
Deuteronomy. 28. 20. The Lord shall send upon thee cursing, vexation, and rebuke in
all that thou set thy hand for to do, until thou be destroyed and till
thou perish quickly, because of the wickedness of thy doings whereby thou have
forsaken me.

3. The difference between the afflictions of the godly and ungodly in the
issue is as remarkable as any of the former differences. The issue of the
Saints affliction (as we have already showed is exceeding comfortable in
respect of the improvement of their graces, and enlargement of their spiritual
comforts here, and the richer crown of Glory prepared for them in the other
world. But as for the wicked man's Afflictions, his corruptions are not purged
away, but enraged by them, as the wicked Jews Esa. 8. 21. In the time of their
extremity they cursed their King, and God; but could such wickedness help
them! alas, no, they must pay dear for it, v. 22. They shall look unto the
earth and behold trouble, darkness and dimnesse of anguish, and they shall be
driven to darkness: Still worse and worse. A great many wicked persons that
never rightly studied or understood either the great evil of sin, or severity
of divine justice, where satisfaction cannot be made when they feel painful
extremities, use to say, they hope they have all their hell here; but Christ's
words, Mat. 24. 8. may in this case fitly be used; Their torments here are but
the beginnings of sorrows; The wicked in this life do but sip as it were of the
top of the cup of Gods wrath; the bottom, which is the most bitter, they must
be drinking off throughout the eternity of the other world. By this which has
been spoken it appears clearly, that the best, nay only way, either to prevent
afflictions, or else to procure comfort under them, benefit by them, and
infallible deliverance from them, is to choose what holy Mary in the Text
choose (viz. the precious ways of Christ.

Object. 2. It Is true much has been spoken of the pleasantness of Gods ways
above all other ways what ever; But many a wicked person will still object
against them that surely they are not so comfortable as has been asserted;
because they see many who are reputed the holy ones of God, walk (as far as
they can discern) very sadly and uncomfortably, from one years end to another;
And many that walk in other ways, seem as pleasant and merry at all times as
any on earth. Now because one Argument from the Topic of sense, prevails with
sensual unbelievers, more then ten arguments from the Topic of Faith; It will
be necessary to speak something for the Answer of this Objection.

Solut. There are two branches of the Objection which must be distinctly
answered.

The First is this; Many Godly ones seem very sad, therefore sure the ways of
God they walk in are not pleasant. To which I Answer,

I. It must not be denied (oh that it could with truth) but that some, yea too
many precious People of God wrong themselves very much, and greatly disgrace
the excellent ways of God by their uncomfortable walking in them: some of them
deserve Horribilia de Deo, terribilia de side.
much tender pity, because of the sad desertions they are under, and the many
fearful temptations they are haunted with from time to time; but as for others
of them (were I now at leisure) it would be a very necessary office of love to
reprove them sharply for taking the devils part against themselves, and so
often rallying together their routed uncomfortable objections against their own
interest in the sure mercies of David: But sure they must take another, and
better course, before their bosoms be filled with the unspeakable, and glorious
joy of the Gospel. But this being granted, this argues not at all the
unpleasantnesse of Gods ways, but only the failings of some that walk in
them: And it is the perfection of baseness for any from hence to take occasion
to reproach the good ways of God, the Doctrine that is according to Godliness,
strictly requires all Gods people (and that upon very sufficient grounds, as
you have heard, when I proved they are all the honorable spouses of the King
of Glory, and undoubted heirs of the Kingdom of Glory, and so have causes
enough, when they discern them immediately; and everlastingly to triumph with
ravishing joy) to rejoice constantly and abundantly. Phil. 4. 4. Rejoice in the
Lord always, and I say, again rejoice, The ingemination here used to press the
duty notes the difficulty of the duty of spiritual rejoicing, and so our
backwardness to perform it, and yet further intimates the exceeding
gratefulness of it to God when performed. For it is in this case expressed by
God according to the manner of men, when we send a child or servant to any
place for the dispatch of many businesses; we tell them this, and the other
business must be done, but then some one principal thing, on which our heart
is set, we single out, and tell them, they must be sure, what ever is
neglected, to be mindful of that; So here, God would have Christians pray,
mourn, and do other holy duties, but he uses no such expressions about them,
pray, yea I say, again pray; mourn, yea I say, again mourn; But, Rejoice, I
say, again rejoice: Because the right performance of this duty is very much
according to the heart of God. I Will name but one place more which requires this
joy to be enlarged as well as constant. Psalm. 32. 11. Be glad in the Lord and
rejoice ye righteous, and shout for joy all ye that are upright in heart. From
these words we may clearly, and strongly infer three things, pertinent to our
present subject.

1. God is vehemently urgent with his people, spiritually to rejoice, In the
former Text the duty was twice mentioned here it is thrice expressed. Be glad,
rejoice, shout for joy. A beautiful person when gracefully smiling, appears
most beautiful; So of all the Christians in the world, none is so amiable in
the eyes of God as the cheerful Christian, especially when under afflictions.

2. God would have all his people, even the weakest of them to rejoice, for so
it is expressed, be glad, and rejoice all ye that are upright in heart; He does
not say all ye that are perfect in holiness, but all ye that are upright in
heart, although laboring under many spiritual infirmities.

3. God would have this joy to be enlarged; For so much is implied in those
words here used, Shout for joy. Shouting is an outward sign of inward and
excessive joy, such as is the joy of harvest, and of those who divide the
spoil, which are the greatest earthly joys, and to them spiritual joys are
compared, Isa. 9. What malicious, and profane villains are they, who dare call
Gods ways uncomfortable, as many do, when they see any of Gods people dejected;
Oh say they, such a precise Minister has made such a man or woman mad, he has
undone my wife, or child, it is pity he should be suffered to live; Now if these
rash censurers would but ask these dejected souls, why they are thus troubled,
they would tell them, It is not the fault of any of those holy Doctrines which
Gods faithful Ministers deliver, but because they fear they are not at all
holy, or at least not so holy as they would be, and Gods holy doctrine requires
they should be; and sometimes it is, because they hear of g orious and ravishing
privileges, which are the portion of Gods people, and they see so much
sinfulness, and unworthiness in themselves, that they dare not lay claim to
them, and so are tormented upon that account; so that things being rightly
considered, not the holy doctrine delivered by Gods faithful Ministers, but the
unholinesse of men's hearts, and lives is the true cause of their
uncomfortablenesse. And so only the ways of sin, and not the ways of Christ
deserve to be branded for unpleasant. But I earnestly exhort all wicked ones
that hear me, to take heed of such gross mistakes, and being so greedy to take
up and utter such reproaches against Gods glorious ways. God will certainly
reckon with wicked ones for all their hard speeches against Jude 15.
him, and then these most vile, and abhorred words cannot be forgotten.

II. Many of the people of God are thought very sad, when they are very full of
inward comfort. The joy of Christians is not a light, frothy, flashy, gigling,
face mirth, as the joy of the wicked is. Seneca tells us, that true joy (even
such as he was capable of) is a very severe thing: How much more may this be
asserted of the joy of Christians! Because wicked men see the people of God
grave and mortified in their countenance, as they ought to be, and not gurning
and gigling as themselves are, they presently cry out without cause; Oh sad
Christians! Oh unpleasant ways of God! But Solomon tells us, that these
strangers to Gods ways are not fit judges of them, as to the point of joy,
Prove. 14. 10. The heart knows its own bitterness, and a stranger does not
intermeddle with his joy. The wicked know not in what bitterness the people of
God are sometimes, so as to pity them, nor yet how exceedingly joyful they are
at other times, so as thereby to be provoked to get into that comfortable
estate wherein they live so pleasantly. Further, suppose thou see them often
weeping sometimes they may weep for joy, not for sorrow, and bitterness of
heart; and at other times the cause may be not the unpleasantness of the ways
of God in which themselves walk; but the wicked 2 Pet. 2. 7, 8.
and woeful ways in which thou, and such as thou art walk, may make them to
abound with tears, as holy David did, Psalm. 119. 136. Rivers of tears run down
mine eyes, because they keep not thy Law.

III. Because wicked men are carried so much by sense (blessed be God for it)
we have enough to stop their mouths from what they may see and hear, if they
will but observe, and remember what they may in this kind; But here their
baseness is frequently and notoriously discovered; For they will either not
observe when they may, or else carelessly forget such useful observations, and
insist upon contrary examples. I cannot more fitly compare them for their
wickedness to any, then to such (as all the world cries out of) who are idle
persons, who when they come into Tradesmens shops, they desire to see some of
their wares, some is accordingly showed to them, They find fault presently,
offer is made to show them better wares, but they fling away and will not see
them, which discovers plainly their ill minds, who came only to trouble others
by caviling, not to buy any thing for their own use; It Is proportionably so in
this business, wicked men pretend a desire of entering into Gods ways, but that
they dislike the uncomfortable behavior of some who walk in them. Hereupon we
offer to show them more comfortable Christians; but all this will not prevail
to win them to the ways of God; which is an apparent sign, that not the
pretended uncomfortablenesse of some Christians, but their own habitual enmity
against God, and his ways is the true cause of their not embracing them, Romans
8. 7. Because the carnal mind is enmity against God; for it is not subject to
the Law of God, neither indeed can be. Now for the proof of what is here
asserted, That there are many (the Lord increase their number daily.) who walk
in Gods ways with much more comfort under all occurrences, then any other
persons whatever: if wicked ones will but diligently observe their own
families, and the families of others, they would see clearly; That many small
losses, and crosses which put them into their dumps, their godly relations and
neighbors, do bear with much evennesse of spirit, and real contentation under
the righteous hand of God; and do live much more cheerfully in an afflicted
estate, then they do in a flourishing and outwardly prosperous estate. They are
like Paul, 2 Cor. 7. 4. not only joyful, but exceeding joyful in all their
tribulations, which many times wicked men are not, in the greatest prosperity
that they are capable of. So that I may say to wicked men, by way of allusion
to Paul's words to King Agrippa, Act. 26. 27. Do you believe these things! I
know you do, or at least have cause enough to believe them.

The Second branch of the Objection was, the observation of many who walk not
in Gods holy and strict ways, to be always very pleasant and merry, and
therefore their ways are rather to be chosen then Gods ways.

Besides what has been already delivered (which some would think abundantly
sufficient to confound this cavil) I shall add Four Considerations more,
endeavoring (if God be pleased to bless them) to make wicked ones ashamed and
afraid of using this plea any more.

1. They are most groundless joys. Eccl. 2. 2. I said of laughter, it is mad,
and of mirth what does it! It may be truly affirmed of all the joy of the
wicked, it is no better then madness. You shall come into some places, where
you meet with those they call naturals, and if you never saw, or heard of them
before, their excessive laughter will presently discover them; every word that
is spoken, and almost every straw that is stirred puts them into a fit of
laughter, as if they were the merryest persons in the whole country; but their
friends who sit and hear it, hang down their pale faces, and shed many a bitter
tear, under this sad providence, and would much rather have been childlesse (if
God had so pleased) then call such a person son or daughter; They know there is
no cause for such excessive joy, it proceeds wholly from their natural
distemper; So a great many wicked men, like a company of mad men, laugh, shout
and revel, as if none in the world so merry as they, in the mean time their
godly Relations, who know their joys to be wholly groundless, and proceeding
from a spiritual frenzy, weep abundantly in secret to see them leaping and
dancing as it were upon the very borders of the burning lake. God who
understands their condition better then themselves, tells them (if they dare
believe him, and woe to them if they do not) that they have more cause to weep:
James 5. 1. Go to, now, ye rich men, weep and howl for the miseries that shall
come upon you, (and who besides God knows how soon) wicked ones live every
moment under all the heavy, and dreadful curses that are written in Gods
blessed Book. So that for my part, I should judge the condition of many more
hopeful, if their laughter were turned into roaring, and out of a deep sense of
their present sinful and dangerous estate, they cried out in all companies
under the impressions of Gods terrors upon them, as the jailer, Sirs Act. 16.
30.
what must I do to be saved! A through sense of a present bad condition, is one
of the first necessary steps to a better future condition.

2. They are grudged comforts. Godly Solomon wisely advises, Prove. 23. 6. Eat
not the bread of him that has an evil eye, neither desire thou his daintiest
meats. If it be uncomfortable to partake of the delicates of a Muck-worm's
feast, who grudgeth what is eaten by his guests, how much more may wicked men
be unwilling to set their hearts upon these choicest worldly comforts, which
not a churlish gripple clown, but a gracious, and a bountiful God would not
have them to be so much delighted with. God seems to grudge every wicked man
every comfortable smile he has while he remains Christlesse. Hos. 9. 1.
Rejoice not as other people, was Gods language by the Prophet, to the
unconverted ones to whom he wrote, and sure he meant as he spoke. O ye ignorant
sots, that under gray hairs understand not so much of the principles of
Religion as a well catechized child of seven or eight years old. O ye
blasphemous swearers, swinish drunkards, devil-like liars, impudent whores,
proud Jezabels, greedy Mammonists, hypocritical Judases, and all unregenerate
ones of what rank soever, in the ruff of your carnal jollities, remember and
seriously consider these words of the Prophet, and proceed in those abhorred
jollities if you dare.

3. All the joys of the wicked are but stolen waters; It Is sad, yea very sad
living, when a child, or servant dwelling in some untoward family cannot get a
good piece of bread to eat, or any other food, but by stealth, when the parents
or master is in bed and fast asleep; It Is so with all wicked men, as merry and
jovial as they are, were their Consciences not asleep for the present, we might
almost as well seek, and find joy in hell, as in their bosoms. You that read
the story of Francis Spira, that will tell you enough to convince you of the
utter inconsistency of carnal jollity with an awakned and roaring Conscience:
Some of his words were these; Verily Desparation is hell it self: I account my
present estate worse, then if my soul, separated from my body, were with Judas,
and therefore I rather desire to be there, then thus to live in my body. And no
wicked man in the world can be certain that his Conscience which has slept
thirty or forty years, will sleep one hour, or moment longer; and if it awake,
Rejoice if thou can; thy tune and tone then will be nothing but hellish
weeping, and yelling; let thy companions which formerly were most pleasing to
thee, come in presence, then in stead of delighting in them, thou will be ready
to fly in their faces, and to tear out their throats for drawing thee into
those sins, which have brought such an hell into thy woeful Conscience, Genesis 4.
7. We have the Lords words to Cain, If thou do not well, sin lies at the
door, there sin in respect of the clamor of guilt in a sinners conscience, is
compared to a fierce mastisfe, or ban-dog, which lies at some door, which while
it is asleep, any stranger man or child may quietly go in and out the doors;
but when the dog awakes, let the stoutest man come near at his utmost peril, he
barks loudly, and flies greedily at his very throat, and pulls him down, in
spite of the stoutest resistance he can possibly make. Facti sunt a cord suo
fugitivi, Tertul.
Now this, and worse is the case of every christlesse creature, his Conscience
will certainly erelong awake, that is intimated, because you know the noise of
passengers in and out, will not suffer a dog to sleep long at a door, then if
it were possible every wicked man would run from himself, although it were into
the midst of roaring Lions, greedy Bears, when robbed of their whelps, or ugly
and frightfull devils. God then terrifies them with dreams, throws handfuls of
hell fire in their faces. An awakned conscience, as Ambrose speaks,
interpellat cogitantem excitat, dormientem, interrupts the sinner while he is
thinking of other things, and awakens him out of his sleep by ringing that
doleful peal in his ears, that makes him start and stare, Veni miser in
judicium, Come thou wretch and receive thy judgment for all these base and
God-provoking abominations.

4. To name no more at this time. All the joys of the wicked are very costly,
yea over costly joys. We say of the best gold, it may be bought to dear; it is
certainly so in referrence to all the comforts of the wicked in sinful ways:
let them be fancied to be never so sweet, I am sure their price is too great.
The loss of heavens unconceivable joys, and the sense of hels unimaginable
miseries to all eternity, is the price of the sorry, sensual, brutish
delights in this world: between the price and purchased joys of worldlings,
because the price is infinite, and the joy purchased is finite, There can be no
proportion: There is no question, but many wicked men dream golden dreams, as
if they might merrily dance all their days after the Devils pipe, and sup with
Christ in glory. But the conceit is so gross, that the very naming of it seems
a sufficient confutation: I must now in Gods name earnestly beseech wicked ones
well to weigh the words of his dear Son, recorded Luke 6. 25. Woe be to you that
now laugh, for ye shall mourn and weep. One would think, that if Christ had
only said mourn, or weep, it had been sufficient, but he says, mourn and
weep, that is abundantly mourn, and mourn, and do nothing else but mourn. A
wicked man's joy is like a book fairly bound, which when it is opened is full of
nothing but mournful Tragedies: But this is not all; because the Scripture is
its own best interpreter, I must by warrant of another Scripture tell wicked
men, that at the time of execution of Gods fearful vengeance upon them, he
will proportion the measure of his flaming wrath then, to the measure of their
sinful jollities, in the days of their provocation, Rev. 18. 7. God tells us
how he will deal with wicked Babylon, and consequently with all other
Christlesse sinners in the day of his wrath; how much she has glorified her
self, and lived deliciously, so much torment, and sorrow give her; For she
says in her heart, I sit as a Queen and shall see no sorrow; When God shall
reckon with men in the other world, how unconceivably fearful above others
will their condition be, who while they lived here, being as the Apostle 2 Timothy
3: 4.
speaks, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God, spent all that time (which
should have been employed in serving and glorifying God, in examining their
deceitful hearts, weeping over their rebellions against God, praying fervently
for the pardon of them, and power against them) in bowling, and hunting,
hawking, or which is worse, unlawfully gaming, immoderately drinking, whoring,
and the like prodigious practices, and the more sinful mirth any day, the
better they judged that time to be spent; But when God shall say to them in the
day of his wrath according to his own words above mentioned, so much as these
wicked persons have lived deliciously, so much sorrow and torment shall be
given to them; Oh then when it is too late wicked ones may wish, Oh that I had
never been in any such merry company all my days. If I had been less joyful,
then should I have been less miserable to all eternity; the pleasures of sin
were but for a short season, thy vengeance will be eternal. Oh most woeful
purchase made by a wilful self-conceited, and self-deluded sinner, that would
take no warnings, either from the Preachers in their Pulpits, or Conscience the
Preacher in their bosoms. The good Lord grant that these and the like
Considerations may take off some poor souls from their greediness after the
Devils cup of sweet poison.

This for the explication, confirmation, and vindication of the Doctrine.

The fourth and last thing promised is the Application of it.

Use 1. Of Information.

This being so, as we have heard, That the Choice of the truly godly person is
unquestionably, and incomparably the best choice which can be made: Many things
might be collected by way of Information. I shall note only one.

Hereby we are informed that the truly godly persons are unquestionably the
wisest persons in the world, because their choice is the best choice: For in
nothing more clearly does the wisdom or folly of men, and women appear, then in
the choices which are made by them. A good Choice argues wisdom, and a bad one
folly. And therefore God when as he does usually brand wicked ones, (who are
fondly conceited of themselves, as if they were the only wise persons in the
world) with the mark of folly, uses such an Argument as is taken from their
bad choice to prove it, Prove. 1. 22. How long ye simple ones will ye love
simplicity, and ye scorners delight in scorning, and fools hate knowledge.
Amongst other Arguments, God uses to prove these wicked ones to be fools, and
simple ones, this is one, Verse. 29. They did not choose the fear of the Lord.
To prefer counters above gold, pebbles above pearls, can proceed from nothing
but childish ignorance, and notorious simplicity: And yet so bad, or rather
much worse is their choice, who prefer carnal comforts before spiritual, and
temporal before eternal blessings, as all the wicked ones in the world do.
Wicked ones think the Lords people a company of silly persons, because they run
not with them to the same excess of riot: but 1 Pet. 1. 4.
the Lords people know that they are guilty of the greatest folly imaginable, as
God (who is best able to judge) has often proclaimed in his Word. On the o her
hand, the only wise God calls all godly ones the children of wisdom, Matthew,
11. 19. And seeing the wisdom of Heaven pronounces them wise, they need not
regard the contrary judgment of the worlds profane and proud sots, who are as
blind as beetles in Gods matters, although eagle-ey'd in worldly affairs.

Of Examination.
If the Godly persons choice be the best; Let the consideration of this
Doctrine prevail with us to make diligent enquiry, whether we have made this
choice as yet, or not? This trial might be managed by propounding to our selves
such Questions as are suitable to the several branches of the description of
the Godly man's choice, mentioned in the explication of the Doctrine; as namely,

1. Whether God has wrought a great change in us by the infusion of
supernatural and special Grace.

2. What respect our souls bear to the Ordinances of Grace, and in several
other particulars: But to pass by them, I will briefly touch upon this one
other general Note.

If we have chosen God, and the ways of God, it will infallibly appear by the
delight which we take both in himself and them; for whatsoever is chosen by us
is ever delightful to us. Psalm. 119. 30. compared with v. 35. Now this delight
manifests it self after this manner:

1. By our engaging in the precious ways of God without delay; So it was with
holy David, Psalm. 119. 30. I have chosen the way of truth; how did that appear?
V. 60. I made haste, and delayed not to keep thy Commandments. By this note of
trial, it appears those that put off God and his work (as most do) from one
week, month, nay, year unto another, have no delight in the ways of God, and
consequently have not made the choice of the Text.

We do not hear men say, and tell God, that they will not at all believe in
Christ, repent of their sins, and yield obedience to his holy Commandments; but
they have no mind to set upon these and other spiritual duties presently. Some
thing or other still comes in the way to cause procrastination: Some worldly
bargain must be carried through, some recreation must be followed, some
graceless company attended, some lust satisfied, before they can find leisure
to work the work of God. Such a deluded sinner is spoken of, Matthew. 21. 28, 30.
Son, Go work to day in my Vineyard. This is Gods voice to all that choose him,
and his ways, without delay to engage in them. Not so much as one day more is
allowed by God for sinful practices. V. 30. The graceless sinner answers, as
if he intended to comply with the voice of God; But the time was not yet come;
he said, I go, Sir, but went not. It was a wise Observation of Seneca; Stultus
semper incipit vivere; and elsewhere speaking of such, says, Semper victuri,
they are always about to live better, but never begin. So Augustine in his
time made a like Observation, Modo, and modo, non habent modum: the heartlesse
essays and hypocritical purposes of such sinners come to nothing. How many when
they are sick, and fear death, and so can enjoy the riches of the world,
delights of the flesh, and pleasures of sin no longer, complement with God, and
as if they were ravished with the beauty of his ways, make liberal promises,
as if for time to come, they would never walk in any other paths but Gods; but,
alas, common experience makes it evident (if God spare them) that they were no
true-hearted Christians, but as the Apostle speaks, 2 Pet. 2. 22. Dogs
returning to their vomit. A dog that loves stinking carrion above other things,
yet when the cudgel is over his head, forbeareth: So when the King of terrors
stands over these persons, they keep outwardly at a distance from sin; but
afterward they are so much the more greedy of wicked company, and ways,
because of their former restraint.

Trial 2. Genesis 25. 29.
We are not so apt to be weary of those things wherein we delight as in other
things. Take a carnal man that is addicted to Hunting, he will run many miles
in a day, that a stranger, who observes it, wonders, he is able after so much
travel to stand upon his legs, that he does not presently drop down upon the
ground like a fainting man: Let the same man be required to go one quarter of
the way to the place of Gods worship, he will tell you it is impossible for him
to walk half so far, his strength will not bear it, and God will have mercy,
and not sacrifice. Now the reason of this difference is clearly this, his
delight in Hunting prevents his weariness in that exercise, but his want of
delight in Gods worship, causes his weariness in a far lesser walk. I might
easily multiply pregnant instances of the unwearied diligence of those who have
chosen the ways of God. David's example is very considerable to this purpose,
Psalm. 119. 147. I prevented the dawning of the morning, and cried, Psalm. 55.
17. Evening, and morning and at noon will I pray, and cry aloud, and he shall
hear my voice. Psalm 119. 62. At midnight will I arise, and give thanks. This
good man, who had chosen and delighted in Gods ways, is at Gods work early and
late, and the day will not serve his turn, but at midnight he awakes for the
worship of God; but now on the other side, many who are angry, if you do not
admire them for rare Christians, yet it may be said of them as the Prophet Esaias
expresses in another case, Es. 3. 9. The show of their countenance does
witness against them. Their faces are so different in different places, as if
they were not the same men: in their own houses, and in their Marketplaces,
and Fairs, they look as cheerfully, and as contentedly, as any in the world:
but in Gods house where his holy Ordinances are attended, they look so
drowzily, and so discontentedly, and sadly, as if they were a company of sick
or dying men. This was the temper of those sinners mentioned, Mal. 1. 13. who
cried out against the worship of God: Behold, what a weariness it is, and they
snuffed at it: No day with them so long as the Sabbath, no hours so long as
those that are spent in the service of God. This accursed spirit was in those
we read of, Amos 8. 5. When will the Sabbath be over, that we may set forth
wheat, etc.

Trial 3.
What is done with delight, is done very frequently. The Swinish Drunkard does
not satisfy himself once or twice in a year to go to the Alehouse, but
because he delights in drunken company, he goes often to such places. The
unclean person does not content Prove. 7. 8.
himself to walk once or twice in a year to a Whore-house; but his Monday,
Tuesday, I had almost said, his every days walk is toward the Whores corner.
It Is proportionably so in spiritual matters. Mal. 3. 16. They that feared the
Lord spoke often one to another. The Saints delight in mutual Conferences, and
manifest their delight by being frequent in their communion one with another.
The devotion of one, who has chosen the ways of God, is not like the
condition of one that has an Ague, sometimes sick, and sometimes well; one day
for God, and another for the world, and the Devil. David who delighted in the
ways of God, could say with confidence before the Searcher of hearts, Psalm.
119. 20. My soul breaks for the longing it has to thy judgments at all
times. And indeed the ways of God being always the same, that which draws forth
your delight at one time, may be found to engage your hearts to them at all
times; they are always beautiful, and equally beautiful; they are always
pleasing to God, and means of precious communion with God. And therefore
whoever seem religious only by fits and in certain good moods, as they call
them, cannot give good proof, that they delight in the ways of God: nor can
the soul of God delight in such hypocrites. Hos. 6. 4. We may observe Gods
dislike of such inconstancy. Oh Ephraim, What shall I do unto thee! Oh Judah,
What shall I do unto thee, for your goodness is as a morning cloud, and as the
early dew it passes away: as if God had said, Oh Ephraim, Oh Judah, I know not
what to do with you. Thy doing good only by fits, and good moods is justly
abhorring to men, but much more abominable in the sight of God. What Father, or
Master can brook that son or servant, that will happily do something that is
required of them, but not constantly. Certainly such as are not constant in the
ways of God, delight not in them, and he cannot with honor accept of such
unconstant services, wherein his Authority is so palpably neglected and
contemned.

Trial 4.
What is undertaken with delight, is carried on with resolution, and impatiency
of opposition: Many a man froward enough in his spirit, will suffer himself in
many smaller things to be crossed; but if he be opposed in his darling design,
you may almost as safely encounter a Bear robbed of her whelps. This is evident
in the example of holy David. We read in Psalm. 119. 30. He had chosen the way
of truth, which was the way of God. V. 106. His resolution to carry on that
work of God is eminently expressed; I have sworn, and will perform it, that I
will keep thy righteous judgments. One that has chosen the way of God, may by
the violence of some strong temptation, be justled out of the holy path for a
short space of time; but when he can recover himself from that violence, he
returns with as great, yea greater zeal then formerly into Wisdoms pleasant
ways: The sweetest bait, nay, all the pleasant baits, that Satan can use at
one time are not bribe big enough to make the true Christian to forsake the
ways of God, which he has once chosen. Heb. 11. 24. By faith Moses, when he
was come to years refused to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter; choosing
rather to suffer afflictions with the people of God, than to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season. Pleasure, riches, and honor are the Summer of
the worlds alluring benefits; yet holy Moses gallantly turns his back upon them
all, and saw more amiablenesse in Gods ways, although under the most
discouraging appearance, in a time of greatest affliction; then in the ways of
sin, when in the most tempting garb of prosperity in Pharaoh's Court. The
speech of Galeacius Caracciola, the Noble Marquess of Vico, was very
remarkable to this purpose, when he was tempted with a very great sum of
money to forsake his Religion, he manifested his holy indignation against such
a base proffer, in these words: Let your money perish with you, who esteem all
the gold in the world worth one days communion with Jesus Christ: and as they
cannot be bribed out of the ways of God; so neither can the worlds greatest
affrightments scare them from Christ's service. Dan. 3. We read of
Nebuchadnezzar dedicating a Golden Image in Dura, and v. 14. tells Shadrach,
Meshach and Abednego, that if they would not worship it, they should be cast
into the midst of a burning fiery Furnace. V. 16, 17, 18. you may read their
stout and gallant answer. We are not careful to answer thee in this matter: as
if they had said, Go, Scare children with thy great words; our God can deliver
us, if he please, but if not, suppose the worst, we are at a point, we are
resolved not to fall off from Gods service to such abhorred worship. A great
many seem to have chosen the ways of God, and follow the chase hard, till they
meet with honey, (as it is in the Story, 1 Samuel 14.) but then Demas-like they
forsake their duty, embracing the present world, 2 Timothy 4. 10. And others, who
do not thus miscarry, are through inordinate fear of worldly troubles, and
disadvantages, hindered from an holy course; like those unsound Professors of
Religion, represented by the stony ground, who when trouble and persecution for
the Gospels sake did arise, were immediately offended, Mark 4. 17. In short, by
what has been said, the palpable difference between those who have, and those
who have not chosen the ways of God, is evident; Neither worldly favor, nor
fear can take off Gods people from his ways which they have chosen: but as for
others, if the honey of worldly pleasures, profits, or preferment does not
corrupt them, and stop them from embracing, and proceeding in an holy course*
the frown of a rich Kinsman, or Landlord, the scoffs of profane neighbors, or
the sight of a stake of Martyrdom, will certainly keep them to their dying day
in the Tabernacles and courses of the ungodly. I have now dispatched some brief
Notes of Trial, by which they who are not willing to put a cheat upon their
souls, may by the blessing of God make a true discovery of their choice,
whether it be good, or bad, safe, or damnable.

Prove. 3. 17.
wilderness more delight might justly be expected, then in the true Paradise of
Christianity; as if Aegypts Onions and Garlic were more refreshing, then
Canaans Grapes. And the great aggravation of this folly appears when we
consider, what sorry and pitiful things they are which hinder this incomparable
choice: all which may be fitly reduced to these 3 heads: 1. The brutish
pleasures. 2. The deceitful riches. 3. The empty honors of this vain world.
Well, I dare not enter into this large Field, but shut up this discourse with
those words of the Prophet, Ezekiel. 19. 14. This is a Lamentation, and shall be
for a Lamentation.

The last Use which I shall a little insist upon is by way of Exhortation, in
two branches.

1. Is the Godly persons choice unquestionably, and incomparably the best
choice which can be made. Then me thinks, without prejudice, I may address an
Exhortation to all of you, that hear me this day, who have not yet made this
choice, 1. To alter your choice, and be satisfied with no choice, but the most
excellent one, which this Doctrine holds forth.

2. If this choice be the best, it cannot be made too soon; Delay not to follow
the counsel of this Exhortation, the sooner it is made the better.

I begin with the first branch of the Exhortation, for the pressing whereof
almost innumerable Arguments offer themselves for its enforcement. For what is
the scope of the whole Bible, but to take off men from that base choice, which
all naturally make, and to engage them to make such a choice, as Godly Mary in
the Text made. I have leisure only to hint a very few Arguments to this
purpose. And many of the most excellent Arguments I must for their largeness
omit, as namely, the admirable pleasantness of the ways of God, Prove. 3. 17.
Her ways are ways of pleasantness, etc. 2. The easiness of the ways of God
if compared with the worlds drudgery, and Satan's slavery in the ways of sin,
Matthew. 11. 29, 30. But the explication, confirmation, and vindication of these,
and such like Arguments from the cavils of graceless persons, to whom they are
the greatest Paradoxes in the world, would require rather a large Volumn then a
small part of a single Sermon.

I shall therefore take up some few other Arguments of quicker dispatch: And
one would think much might be said in a few words, that may be very persuasive
for this choice I have been speaking of. But I remember the story of one, who
after his Conversion seemed to think that the evidence of Gods Arguments to
bring off from sin to Christ, was such, that scarce any that considered them
could withstand the strength of them; but by much sad experience he afterward
found, that old Adam was too hard for young Melancthon. However the great God,
who can persuade, deals with men as reasonable creatures, and offers Hos. 11. 4.
Arguments to move them to a compliance with himself. I shall therefore produce
some few of his Arguments, praying, and hoping for his good blessing to make
them effectual.

2 Per. 1. 12.
that great mystery, which the Angels willingly pry into, as if Heaven it self
could not furnish them with an object more worthy of admiration; And yet
notwithstanding this most wonderful (...) prono capite and propenso collo
accurate introspicire.
willingness of God to bestow himself upon the children of men for their
happiness (for he himself has no need of them) yet the Scripture gives us
clear assurance, that none shall enjoy him who are finally so graceless as not
to choose him. This was well observed by holy and learned Austin long since,
Qui fecit te sine te non servabit te sine te, He that made thee without thee,
will not save thee without thee; that is, he will not force himself and
salvation upon any in a strange prodigality against their wills. This account
we have given from God himself by the hand of Solomon, Prove. 1. 26, 27, 28. God
speaking of the certain and fearful desolation of the wicked, notwithstanding
their supposed earnest suit for salvation, alleges this reason for it, v. 29.
they did not choose the fear of the Lord; and therefore (as they well deserved)
God was resolved to withhold salvation from them.

If we take up with any thing on this side God, and the things of God in our
choice, we are not sure, if we were the greatest Oracles of worldly wisdom
that can be found on earth, to obtain what we make choice of. Art thou a fond
admirer of a great estate, and thereupon do bend all thy wits to compass it,
sparing no pains in the seeking riches; when thou have used thy utmost skill
and diligence to get a great estate, in spite of thy heart thou may dye
under Beggars bush. This Solomon observed in his time (and any wise man may
make the like observation in our time) Eccl. 9. 11. Riches are not always to
men of understanding. Deuteronomy. 8. 18. It is God that gives power to whom he
please to get wealth. And it might be added by the warrant of other Scriptures,
to keep it, when they have got it. Again, does thy soul thirst after the favor
of great ones! without the help of God this can never be compassed by the
greatest wisdom and diligence that any ambitious person can possibly use.
Eccl. 9. 11. Solomon tells us, That favor is not to men of skill. They who are
most skilful to discover the temper, and accordingly to humor those whose
favor they are greedy of, are most probable to obtain their favor, but be
they never so skilful, they often miss their mark. Psalm. 75. Promotion comes
neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from the South; but God is the
Judge, he puts down one, and sets up another. The hearts of all are in
Gods hands, and it is he alone that can incline them toward us, or turn them
from us. Now what has been said concerning man's inability to obtain worldly
wealth, or favor, may as truly be asserted concerning al other temporal good
things whatsoever. Now this being so, let us learn wisdom from the sad
experience of others disappointments, who misplace their choice, to choose that
which is most worthy our choice, and most certain to be enjoyed if chosen,
(viz.) an interest in Gods favor with all the glorious benefits of both worlds
that flow from it; whereas if we choose other things of less worth, it will be
our sad lot to fare as those who affect marriages with those above their rank,
or unwilling otherwise to comply with them, they fret and grieve themselves
into deadly consumptions, and leave their names behind them under the severe
censures of observes, for their notorious weakness and proud folly.

Eccl. 3. 12. I know that there is no good in them, that is, the things of this
world, but for a man to rejoice, and to do good in his life; and also that
every man should eat and drink, and enjoy the good of all his labor, it is the
gift of God; and if so, then not in the power of any one in the world without
the help and blessing of God. What is a rich man's condition better then a poor
man's, if he do not use it, do good with it, and take comfort in it? But this is
manifest by common experience, that many such persons have as little or less
comfort of their estates then those who have not the hundredth part of such an
estate: and the like may be said of all worldly blessings. One cannot choose
but stand and wonder, what some persons ail to look so sadly, and live so
discontentedly as they do from one years end to another; when if we observe
their worldly portion, one can scarce find any pleasant thing that God
withholds from them; many times it is only the want of some small matter, that
their extravagant fancies fix upon, which is so inconsiderable in it self, that
they are ashamed to own it as the ground of their dissatifaction with their
condition. 1 King. 21. 4, 6. Ahab seems as if he would make a dye of it, surely
some great matter is the cause of it; but the story tells us, it was only
because Naboth denied him his little Vineyard, when himself (as is probable)
had more and far better of his own. Peter Martyr upon this place cites an
Epistle of Ambrose to a friend of his, in which he makes a comparison between
Naboth and Ahab, and pronounces poor Naboth in a better condition then rich
Ahab, because he was comfortable in the enjoyment of his little, and Ahab
sinfully and sottishly discontented notwithstanding his great abundance. A
great many strangely fancy, that if they could but scrue up their estates to
such an height as they propound to themselves, or get into the favor of some
that are great in the world, none in the world should live more comfortably
then themselves: but alas, many times they wear out their bodies, stretch and
torment their consciences, and cannot be masters of their designs; and if at
any time they obtain what they eagerly seek, they never meet with one half or
hundred part of comfort in such a condition as they promised to themselves. And
therefore I seriously offer to their consideration that Scripture, Eccl. 5. 10.
He that loves silver shall not be satisfied with silver, and he that loves
abundance, with increase; this also is vanity. The like is true of all worldly
enjoyments: And therefore if God tells worldly men, that they shall never obtain
comfortable satisfaction in their greatest abundance, it is the vainest thing
in the world for them to think to prove God a Liar, which is black blasphemy in
the least to imagine.

Luke 14. 14. Christ speaking of the recompense of the righteous at the
Resurrection, one who sits by cries out by way of admiration. v. 15. Blessed
are they who shall eat bread in the Kingdom of God: As if he had said in other
words, I choose the happy condition of Christ's people above all things in the
world besides. But Christ presently for the discovering of his unsoundnesse
propounds the Parable of the Guests, who were invited to partake of those
things he seemed to admire and choose, and then we read, v. 18, 19, 20. that
all made their excuses, (as if they would not go to Hell without some seeming
good reasons) One had a great Farm to look after, another a new bargain, a
third a wife; all which they preferred before the things of Christ's Kingdom.
Well, how did Christ take this at their hands? I answer, His indignation flamed
out against them. V. 21. We read he was angry, and if you desire to know how
great his anger was, v. 24. it is said, The persons who preferred the things of
this world before the things of his Kingdom, should not taste of his Supper,
that is, should not partake of the least degree of his comfortable favor,
which was the spiritual delicacy of that great Supper. As if Christ had said in
the height of his indignation, I will never vouchsafe such a wretch so much as
one loving look in this, or the other world. And here by the way, let
worldlings take notice, that the persons mentioned in the Parable preferred
lawful worldly comforts before the comforts of Christ, viz. their Farms,
bargains, and wives. A great many think if the things they set their hearts
upon be lawful, there is no danger of inordinacy; but we see this Scripture
speaks the contrary. With what face can any stand before Christ at the last
great and terrible day, and say, Lord, I preferred the sensual pleasures of
Hunting, Hawking, Bowling, and other worldly pleasures, which are but for a
season, before Psalm. 116. ult.
the pleasures of thy Kingdom, and right hand, which are for evermore. According
to the judgment of right reason, spiritual pleasures are much better then
sensual, which gratify our brutish part; and there is no comparison between
comforts that are only for a season, (as all the comforts of this world are)
and the comforts of the other world which are eternal. In short, by preferring
any worldly comfort before Christ, and the things of Christ, thou do as it
were say, My money is better then Christ, the favor of a rich Feprobate is
better then the favor of the eternal God, and the alone All-sufficient Savior
Jesus Christ. Now this great disgrace and reproach, Jesus Christ, as you have
heard, will never bear at the hands of sottish sinners. But then where shall
these Monsters appear with comfort? who say the pleasures of sin are better
then the pleasures of godliness, that prefer the smiles and favor of a filthy
Whore, before the favor of Jesus Christ; that say, the wine on earth is better
then the new wine prepared in the Kingdom of God. If Christ be justly enraged
against those who prefer Earth before Heaven, he cannot but be much more
incensed against those who prefer Hell before Heaven.

Genesis 2. 17. certain death if they did eat of the forbidden fruit, Genesis 3. 4.
Satan suggests the contrary. Thou shall not surely die. We know by sad
experience the truth of Gods commination, and the falsehood of Satan's
insinuation; learn therefore, O ye sons, and daughters of men to believe God,
and not Satan, God tells us plainly that if we choose the ways of sin, we
cannot avoid the punishment of sin. What Solomon says concerning one way of
sin is true of every way of sin, Prove. 5. 5. Her feet go down to death her
steps take hold of hell. Amongst other pregnant Scriptures to prove the certain
issue of a bad choice, those remarkable words of the Psalmist are considerable,
Psalm. 11. 6. Upon the wicked he will rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an
horrible tempest, this shall be the portion of their cup. No man living is able
fully to conceive, and express how much woeful misery is implied in these
expressions. Nah. 1. 6. Rev. 21. 8.
With men the torments caused by fire are judged rightly amongst the greatest of
torments; and therefore God uses often this Metaphor, to set out the miserable
condition that shall befall the wicked in both worlds: But that is not all, fire
alone causes exquisite torments, but fire and brimstone together, cause a much
fiercer flame. And this fire is not said to be dropped, which notes, a small
quantity, but to be poured down, which intimates a great measure of his wrath,
that shall fall upon the wicked: And yet further it is observable, that this
great measure of wrath shall not come down upon the wicked leisurely, and
calmely, but like rain in a mighty tempest, one drop hastily after the other
with abundance of terrible violence. It is said here, that it shall be an
horrible tempest of fire, that shall descend upon the wicked. God will not come
to the dying beds of Christlesse sinners, and say, tell me ye abhorred
drunkards, swearers, liars, cheaters, and all ye unregenenerate persons of what
name soever, are ye willing to be damned! you have chosen and walked in the
ways of sin which lead to hell, and all the threatenings and promises of my
blessed book, could not stop you in your sinful course! Are you willing to
enter into the gates of darkness, and to be prisoners in hell for ever! But I
presume of your Answer if such Questions were propounded; Oh no, dear God of
mercy, we cannot bear the thoughts of such a condition. The wicked will be
ready then to use those words of the Prophet, before cited, Isa. 33. 14. Who
among us shall dwell with devouring fire! Who shall endure everlasting
burnings! A great many simple persons, think, that when people being horribly
afraid of everlasting burnings, cry earnestly to God to be delivered from that
fearful misery, they are certainly penitent, and that God cannot find in his
heart to damn them: But alas, the devil in the possessed person had as much
grace as this comes to, Mark. 5. 6. It is said, he worshipped, and verse. 7. the
words which he used, are recorded: I adjure thee by God, that thou torment me
not: But no such language will prevail with Christ to release Devils from
everlasting torments, nor will like words be effectual for the keeping any
finally unregenerate from the damnation of hell. Wicked men here by their
sins cross Gods revealed will, and God is resolved in the other world to
cross their wills, by inflicting intolerable punishments upon them for those
sins. And therefore Gods language in Psalm. 11. 6. is peremptory without any
peradventure, This shall be their portion, will they, nill they, and so Mat.
25. 46. These shall go into everlasting punishment. Wicked sinners now grieve
Gods spirit bear by their rebellions, and God is fully resolved to make all the
veins of their heart to ache to all eternity.

God for keeping them (as prone as others) from falling into such reproachful,
and dangerous miscarriages; But if it be so bitter, when under misery, to want
the compassion of foolish and hardhearted men, it is abundantly more miserable,
under far greater misery to be reproached, but not pittyed by him who is a God
of infinite wisdom, and most tender compassion. That this fearful and sad
condition will befall the wicked, is evident from those words of God by Solomon,
Prove. 1. 22. How long ye simple ones will ye love simplicity, and ye scorners
delight in scorning, and fools hate knowledge? Because I have called and ye
have refused, I have stretched out my hands and none regarded; but ye have set
at naught all my counsel, and would none of my reproof: I also will laugh at
your calamity, and mock when your fear comes. When your fear comes as
desolation, and your destruction comes as a whirlwind, when distress and
anguish comes upon you. Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer,
they shall seek me early but shall not find me; for that they hated knowledge,
and did not choose the fear of the Lord.

When sinners are weeping, yelling, and gnashing their teeth under Gods fearful
vengeance, and they calling aloud for favor, and God regards their cry no
more, then men regard the howling of beasts and barking of dogs; but laughs in
their faces, as it were and mocks them, telling them, they were simple ones,
and stark fools, who for the pleasures of sin, which last, and they knew
would last but for a season, they wilfully exposed themselves to that fearful
indignation of God; which they were often assured would be intolerable and
everlasting. One would wonder with what face any such sinner can look upon God
and beg his mercy, when God may suddenly put them to silence by telling them,
he damnes none but those, who choose damnation, and how can they reasonably
except against their own choice. I easily imagine what will be pleaded by
sinners in this case; They never did, nor can any choose such misery for their
portion, nothing is more abhorring to their thoughts. That which is the Object
of the Wills choice, must be presented under the form and notion of good to the
creature: But this appears to them in that form which is most contrary to the
creatures good and welfare. Well, Let sinners please themselves never so much
with such seemingly learned Objections; God will quickly out-argue them, Deuteronomy.
30. God by Moses calls upon the people to walk in the way of holy obedience to
all his commandments, and not to dare to disobey any of them, and backs his
exhortation to obedience with promises of blessing, and his dehortation from
disobedience with terrible threatenings, then verse. 14. shuts up that discourse
after this manner, I call heaven and earth to record this day against you, that
I have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing; therefore choose
life, that both thou and thy seed may live. In which remarkable words,
according to Gods interpretation of them, which is always according to truth,
it is manifestly apparent, that they who choose the way of obedience, choose
life; and so by the Law of Contraries, they who choose the way of Disobedience
choose death, which is a comprehensive word, including the fearful misery of
both worlds. It may 2 These. 1. 8. 1 Cor. 6. 9. 10. Ephesians. 5. 7. 1 John 3. 5.
be truly said to all ignorant persons, covetous muckworm's disobedient sinners,
and every other person abiding in their unregenerate estate; You are in love
with everlasting burnings: you long to be in the lake which burns with fire and
brimstone, which shall never be quenched, because they walk in those ways and
continue in that estate, which infallibly brings to that misery. As we say to
persons that feed on such meats as are unwholesome, and dangerous, you long to
be sick, and be in your grave: because they will not forbear what will make
them sick, and bring them to the house of rotteness: And God himself, whose
language will not be reformed by any deluded sinners vain philosophy, speaks
after the same rate, Pro. 8. 36. He that sins against me, wrongeth his own
soul, all they that hate me, as all do, who do not make the choice I have been
speaking of, love Death; And if so, how can it be with reason expected, that
God, Angels, or men should pity them under it! I remember what God by Solomon
says, Pro. 3. 5. Lean not to thine own understanding, and Prove. 26. 12. See
thou a man wise in his own conceit! there is more hope of a fool then of him.
Certainly, if wicked ones would cease to be both Judges and parties in their
own case (which is the most foolish, and unreasonable thing in the world to
contend for) they must be forced to acknowledge the choice I am pleading for,
to be the best choice. Let this be put to the votes of Heaven, and earth, I had
almost said, and of hell also, to consider what choice is best, and it will be
clearly carried for the godli's, against the wicked's choice. To begin with the
votes of heaven; God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost (as you have heard) do
command all men to make, and commend, and reward them most highly for making
the holy choice. The innumerable company of holy angels manifest their
approbation of it by rejoicing when any person Luke 15. 7.
truly repents, and thereby declaredly forsakes his former choice, and ownes no
choice, but that which Mary in the Text made. Hence it is usually said, the
tears of the penitent are the wine of Angels, that is, they are much refreshed
to observe them. And for all the glorified Spirits, which are before Gods holy
throne Ephesians. 2. 10. Heb. 12. 14. Rev. 21. 27.
in heaven, they had never been admitted into that blisful place, if they had
not chosen the holy path which leads to it. Let us now come down to gather the
Votes of the earth; Let holy David (as such) speak for himself, and
consequently the sense of all holy ones, Psalm* 119. 30 I have chosen the way of
truth, and verse. 173. I have chosen thy precepts; But then let us consider
whether any thing of this nature may be expected from the wicked. Certainly at
some times when under great outward afflictions, inward awaknings of
Conscience, and under the sentence of death in their own apprehensions, some of
them will speak more holy truths in an hour* then they have done in seven years
before, they abound with good discourses, as if they had newly dropped down from
heaven; They speak truly and eloquently of the vanity of the creatures, of the
woeful effects of sin; the unvaluable comfort of a pardon in the blood of
Christ, call upon all that are about them, not to follow their former wicked
examples, but to be sure to choose the ways of God, and the company of his
people, which, if God spare them, and dare believe them, they will not stick to
make him large promises before many witnesses of better behavior toward him
all the remaining part of their days. So that in this case we may appeal not
only from the wicked to the Godly, but from the wicked to themselves, from
them, when their Consciences are asleep, to the same persons, when their
Consciences are awakned.

But it may be some will say, what charity is it, to account those wicked,
whose expressions are so pious? I Answer,

1. God forbid that I, who need so much charity my self, should be uncharitable
to others.

2. Some, yea many that have spoken so (as common experience proves) have
afterward, being reprieved from death, for a while returned to such manifest
wickedness, as is inconsistent with the power of godliness. Unless, (which
the Scripture will not 1 Cor. 6. 10, 11.
bear, although this hypocritical age will) men should say, O ye h^ly
drunkards, religious fornicators, godly swearers, pious cheater, the Kingdom of
heaven stands open to receive you. All of the better sort on earth always vote
for the choice of the Text; and some of the worst of men and women at some
times: But sure no good Votes can be found in so bad a place as hell. I shall
only suggest at present the speech of the rich man the parable speaks of, Luke
16. 28. who when in hell, desired that his five brethren might be warned not to
come to that place of torment which they could not avoid, unless they made a
better choice then himself had done, and no choice could be effectual to that
end, but the choice in the Text. I enquire not into the motive of that warning,
I am sure the matter was unquestionably right. Oh that these considerations may
be duly weighed by the children of men, before it be too late. I dare add no
more to press the first branch of the Exhortation, and am much troubled, that
I can now speak so little to the second branch, which also deserves a most
vigorous enforcement.

Branch 2. To press you who hear me this day, to make the choice in the Text
early; Give me leave to offer some few quickening Considerations, which I must
do little more then name.

Cons. 1. We are by the indispensible command of God to make this choice early
Eccl. 12. 1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth. Now says the
Text, it is not left as a matter indifferent, and at our own liberty, when we
will begin to make this choice, Mat. 6. 33. Christ calls upon the children of
men to seek first the kingdom of heaven and the righteousness thereof, which
is as much in effect, as if he had said; If you dare follow the advice of me,
who am a wonderful Counselor, let the first, and unalterable choice be fixed
upon God and the things of God.

Cons. 2. It Is the most reasonable thing in the world that it should be so.

1. Because (as we have showed largely) God, and the things of his Kingdom do
best, and indeed only deserve our early choice, and nothing is more reasonable
then to be guided in our choice, by the different worth of Objects that are
before us, Prove. 4. 7. Wisdom is the principal thing, therefore get wisdom, and
with all thy gettings get understanding. That which is principal, must be first
and most regarded, what ever be neglected.

2. The earlier this choice is made, the easier will our work be to get and
keep out of forbidden paths.

Assuredly let men begin never so soon to leave the ways of sin, and to walk in
the ways of God they will find it sufficiently difficult to turn their back
upon wicked company, and to give a bill of divorce to their most beloved sins:
But the longer they have been in league with sinners, and the longer they have
been wedded to any sinful course, the difficulty will certainly increase by
those means. The Prophet speaks fully to this point, Jer. 13. 23. Can the
Ethiopian change his skin? or the Leopard his spots? then may ye also do good
who are accustomed to do evil. The Ethiopian cannot change his skin, nor the
Leopard his spots; So that the Prophet hints it as impossible: And therefore I
may well assert it as very difficult for an accustomed sinner to return to God;
and without more then ordinary grace, it would remain everlastingly impossible
for such an one to be brought over to the obedience of Christ.

Cons. 3. A late choice will certainly be very prejudicial to us in this, if
not also in the other world. The broken bones that many get in their younger
days, before they be sober and wise in the government of themselves, although
they may be set again, yet they have many painful remembrances of them
afterward. It Is so proportionably in spiritual matters. Men's dodging with God,
and delaying to work his work may cost them much dearer then they are aware.
God made his beloved Job in bitterness to possess the sins of his youth, Job
13. 26. Although they who make this right choice late, shall not wholly loose
the happiness of the other world, yet they, who early choose the ways of God,
are ordinarily soonner under the light of Gods reconciled countenance, which
is, as it were, an Heaven upon earth: And if that be supposed as true (which
goes current with many learned and sober Divines, which I cannot now discuss)
that there are degrees of glory in heaven, they who engage late in Gods
vineyard, will throughout eternity possess Heavens glory in a less degree,
then otherwise they might have been capable of; So that on such a supposition
late comers unto God, seem in some respects, by their delays to suffer
eternal prejudice.

Cons. 4. Gods eminent acceptance of early comers into his ways, ought to be
of special force to engage us to follow the counsel of this Exhortation. It Is
our duty to study how we may do that which is acceptable in the sight of God;
and not only so, but likewise to labor with all our might after that which is
most acceptable to God. Now Gods remarkable acceptance of those Colos 3. 20.
who early choose him, and his precious ways, is restified by the high
commendations he in his Word bestows upon them. This stands on Record for the
praise of young Timothy as long as the blessed Book of God shall be found in
the hands of any person, 2 Timothy 3. 16.
That from a child he had known the Scriptures, which were able to make him
wise unto salvation. It Is greater honor, and so accounted by Gods holy ones,
to be a servant of Christ, then Emperor of the world. But to be as Mnason was,
an old disciple, one Acts 21. 15.
who chose Christ's service early, and so for a long time had been in Christ's
Family; does unquestionably bring a further degree of honor, and upon that
account he is recorded in sacred Story. Romans 16. 5. Salute my well-beloved
Epenetus, who is the firstfruits of Achaia unto Christ. Gods soul has desired
such first ripe fruits. Mich. 7. 1. And therefore this is spoken of as a
singular commendation. Such Primroses are a delightful sight in Gods Garden.
Romans 16. 7. Salute Andronicus, and Junia, my Kinsmen, and my fellow prisoners,
who are of note among the Apostles, who also were in Christ before me. These
last words are very observable. This glorious Apostle seems to prefer those
private Christians above himself, because of their early choice. True
Christianity makes any man noble, early Christianity more noble.

Cons. 5. It Is a most base and disingenuous thing to make this choice late. In
the time of the Law, the first and the choicest of persons and things, were set
apart for God, and the best and worst were worthily rejected by him. With what
face almost can any sinner come before God, to offer his late service to him!
How easily may God make him like the man without the wedding garment
speechless before him! God may say to such an one, Satan, the world, and the
flesh, have had the service of your first and best days, let them for me take
the worst also. Must your God have the worlds and the devils leavings, or
nothing! I abhor the motion. God needs not our best services, and deserves much
better service then we are able with our best abilities of soul and body to
afford him; And therefore to offer him the last and worst of our services, must
needs be highly provoking. This is clear from those words of the Prophet, Mal.
1. 8. If ye offer the blood for Sacrifice, is it not evil? Offer it now unto
thy Governor, will he be pleased with thee, or accept thy person, says the
Lord of Hosts? The Interrogation is to be resolved into this Negation, (i. e.)
He will not accept thy person, when thou bring a blind or lame sacrifice:
and can it be reasonably imagined, that the great and glorious God should
accept of such sorry things, as a silly mortal man would justly scorn; Oh
friends, this base disingenuity has cost many of Gods people very dear.
Although all that rightly choose God, and his ways, at what time soever, are
accepted with him, and beloved by him; yet it is well enough consistent with
his love, guided by an infinite Wisdom, not to manifest the same to such
provokers of a long time. How many have we known (some of whichwere undoubtedly
Gods dear ones) who have gone many years together roaring to the very borders
of the Grave, and no comfort could be fastened upon them by the most skilful
Barnabasses; and this the great Spring of their tormenting fear, they strongly
apprehend, it is too late, it is too late: If they had come in sooner, they
might have found acceptance, but they think that God will disdain to accept of
the devils orts; and therefore the door of hope seems to be shut against them.
And certainly Satan, who needs no help of any to make Arguments for him to
dispute against the trembling Christians hope in God, when he finds so many
terrible things delivered in the Scripture against this common sin of delaying
to turn to God, he will be ready to improve them to the utmost. For the
awakening of the secure, I will mention a place or two to this purpose. Mal. 1.
14. We have these words of God, that roar like thunder in the ears of
Procrastinators. Cursed be the deceiver, who has in his flock a male, and
voweth, and sacrifices to the Lord a corrupt thing; for I am a great King,
says the Lord of Hosts, and my Name is dreadful among the Heathen. The male of
the flock is judged the best of the flock; and therefore God pronounces his
curse upon those, who put him off with worse: No hope then appears of Gods
acceptance of our worst, of our late, lame, and blind sacrifices. The other
place is that of the Psalmist, Ps. 95. 7. God calls upon men presently without
so much as one day's delay to turn to him; and that Exhortation is pressed in
the following Verses, by an Argument taken from the woeful misery of those that
delayed, and put off God from year to year, till he would no longer bear it, v.
10. for in v. 11. God tells him his mind in such terrible language, that their
ears might well tingle, and their hearts tremble at the receiving of it: Unto
whom I swear in my wrath, that they should not enter into my rest. I do not
remember any such terrible Text in all the Bible against Murderers,
Blasphemers, who are incarnate devils, or any sort of sinners that can be
named. God threatens to damn all sorts of Christlesse sinners; but he does not
manifest so much fury, as to swear, they shall not partake of his mercy: So
that Satan has this dreadful advantage against those, who have unworthily
delayed to turn to God, if they afterward begin to lament after God: Satan
will be ready to entertain them with such suggestions as these, as good
nothing, as nothing to the purpose; there is no hope for them, they should have
come sooner, and if they will not believe him, he bids them take their Bible,
and read in the 95. Psalm. 11. v. where against those that have provoked God by
delays, he swears, they should never enter into his rest. Thus I have
dispatched five Considerations to provoke you to a speedy choice of the good
part which shall never be taken from you.

I dare add no more, because I must needs spend the remaining part of the time
in speaking concerning the sad Providence which has brought us together at
this time. And because it is not usual with me upon such occasions to make any
large discourse concerning the dead, (the main scope of Funeral Sermons being
the instruction of the living, and not the commendation of the deceased) I
shall in my following work confine my meditations to these two general heads.

First, I shall give an account briefly, why I now vary from my ordinary course.

Secondly, I shall deliver what I judge meet for your edification, so far as
the straits of time will permit me.

1. If any demand, why I now undertake to speak of the dead (being besides my
ordinary practice,) My Answer is ready; Because I do not remember that ever I
could with so much confidence, and to so good purpose, speak of any person, as
I can concerning this excellent Gentlewoman, the solemnization of whose Funeral
has occasioned this great Assembly: Particularly there are three reasons,
which satisfy my self, and I doubt not but they will likewise satisfy any
other person, who are worthy of, and willing to receive satisfaction concerning
this matter: As,

1. Lest by my silence, I should deprive very many of a more then ordinary
pattern for their holy imitation. Her conversation which lay open to public
view was very considerable: but there were many remarkable things in the more
retired part of her life which were not commonly known; and yet the knowledge
of them might be of singular use to direct and quicken many to like profitable
exercises of piety: This copy of her life was freer from blots then the lives
of many other worthy women.

2. A discourse of this nature may be of use for the comfort of her near
Relations; although the more evidences of her remarkable piety are brought to
their remembrances, the greatness of their own loss is thereby the more
clearly discovered. Yet such self-love as makes them confine their thoughts
wholly to their own loss, neglecting the needful meditation of her
incomparable gain, is certainly liable to reproof. Many that follow their
graceless Relations to the Grave (which did greatly love them, and were dearly
beloved by them) are greatly dejected, chiefly upon this ground, because of
their great fears touching their everlasting state. But I can with confidence
bespeak the friends of this deceased Gentlewoman in like words to those of our
dear Savior, to the daughters of Jerusalem; Weep not for her, from Luke 23. 28.
whose eyes all tears are wiped, but weep for your selves; weep for your
surviving Christlesse Relations, and over the afflicted daughter of Sion, and
the more of these tears the better.

3. If I should forbear to speak concerning the holy life of this our deceased
Christian friend, how is it possible that the great duty of duly laying to
heart this sad visitation we are now under, should be performed by many of you!
Who can be sadly affected proportionably to a great loss, when for want of
information, the loss is only apprehended as ordinary! Now God takes it very
ill at their hands, who live carelessly under such sad Providence. Es. 57. 11.
The righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart, and merciful men are
taken away, none considering that the righteous are taken away from the evil to
come. A great many think their whole duty is performed, if for two or three
days after the hearing of such news, their table talk be to this purpose; Such
a good Gentlewoman is dead, she did much good in her place, I am sorry for it:
When it may be in a fortnight, or month after, it is almost utterly forgotten,
that there was any such person. The Scripture last mentioned tells you, That God
many times snatcheth away his people by death, when some great evils are
approaching to the places where they lived. I love not to conceive, or utter
doleful prophecies, but my earnest prayer to God is, that we may all walk
penitently under this stroke, that greater displeasure then we are at present
aware of do not flow in upon us through this very great breach.

I now address my self to the last general head, I propounded to speak to,
viz. A brief account of some things, and but some things (for haste) which were
remarkable in the holy life of Mrs Anne Petter. And here I might speak of her
in a threefold capacity. 1. Natural. 2. Civil. 3. Spiritual. But I call to mind
the rule observed by Basil the Great, in the praise of Gordius the Martyr: It
is (said he, or to this purpose) the vainglorious fashion of the world, when
they would praise any person, to speak of his Family, to derive his pedigree
through many discents, to enlarge upon his natural disposition, parts,
education, learning, and such other accomplishments. Sed Ecclesia haec tanquam
supervacua dimittit. The Church looks only at those things which may glorify
Christ in his Saints, and thereby do good to them that remain alive. According
to this rule, I shall forbear to speak of her very loving, humble, and
ingenuous temper. 2. Of the Family whereof she was a Branch, although in it
self very considerable according to the worlds account. These were not the
things she did, or had cause overmuch to value. My Discourse therefore
concerning her, will be wholly confined to her spiritual endowments, and
operations; for in reckoning up the estate of rich persons, small matters are
not mentioned, their estates are not reckoned by pence, or shillings, but by
pounds, by hundreds and thousands: we shall do proportionably in this
undertaking. And here also, she might be considered personally, and relatively:
but I shall not stand upon any curiosity of this nature. What I shall mention
as observable in her, and very worthy of imitation, falls under these two
general heads:

1. Her disposition, and behavior toward those on Earth.

2. Her affection, and carriage more immediately relating to the God of Heaven,
and the things of Heaven.

For the first, her disposition, and behavior toward them on Earth.

1. She was one of a public, and consequently of a very excellent spirit. This
she manifested many ways, by her being constant, and fervent in her prayers
for the public welfare, by her sadness, when at any time it fared ill with any
part of the Church of Christ, although in Forain parts, where no present danger
of any of her personal worldly concernments did biass her, by her great joy,
when she heard of its flourishing estate; And whereas a great many at their
meeting with others enquire after news, that it may only furnish them with
matter for tablediscourse, and present them with variety of objects for their
proud censures; her questions tending that way were usually, if not constantly,
expressed in this short pious form, How does it go abroad with the Church, and
Cause of Jesus Christ? That was all in all to her, as to matter of news. It
would be over-tedious to go through all the instances, which might be mentioned
on this account. I shall only touch upon one or two more; she evidenced her
public spirit by the great and cordial respects, which upon all occasions she
expressed toward those that appeared gallantly, and courageously in the Cause
of Christ. She would name them with honor, while living, and bitterly bewail
their deaths, when taken hence by Gods angry hand. She could say with Deborah,
Judge. 5. 9. My heart is toward the Governors of Israel, that offered
themselves willingly among the people. Bless ye the Lord; And yet further, she
did not satisfy her self by serving God with that which cost her naught, she
never repined at any expense of money in the Cause of Christ. And which was
much more considerable, having an only son left her, who was most dearly
beloved by her, she willingly parted with him for the service of the public
interest.

2. She was very bountiful to those that were in need, as many of you here
present can testify, from large and long experience: her charity was not
hypocritical, like theirs spoken of, James 2. 15, 16. If a brother, or sister
be naked, and destitute of daily food, and one of you say to them, Depart in
peace, be you warmed and silled; notwithstanding you give them not those things
which are needful to the body, what does it profit! One little handful were
much better, then many such mouth-fuls. Her charity was constant; she did not
content her self once in a year to drop a small alms, and then all the year
after live like an hard-hearted, and closefisted Mammonist. She was daily
begging, and receiving spiritual alms from Heaven, and expressed her
thankfulness to God for it, by giving out freely and frequently, for the supply
of those who were in want. Very many here, and elsewhere, might have deservedly
prayed for her, when living, using such words as Paul for Onesiphorus. 2 Timothy
1. 16. The Lord give mercy to the house of Mistress Petter, for she often
refreshed me and mine.

3. Her unfeigned and fervent love to those of the household of Faith, Gal. 6.
10.
was very manifest; partly, 1. By her bountiful gifts bestowed on the^; she was
not (as many are) afraid to see, or hear of such objects, but as the Prophet
speaks, Es. 32. 8. The liberal person devises liberal things, and so did
she; if at any time she by information offered by others, or enquiry made by
her self, came to the notice of any godly person in distress, she opened her
purse, without any motives, besides what her own inflamed heart furnished her
with, and sent liberal tokens to those whose faces she never did, or shall see,
till she behold them in the Kingdom of Glory. 2. And by admitting them before
others into familiar society with her self, although never so mean in the
world; herein very like the man after Gods own heart, Psalm 16. 2. O my soul,
thou have said unto the Lord, Thou art my Lord, my goodness extends not to
thee, but to the Saints that are in the Earth, and to the excellent, in whom is
all my delight. She would be almost frighted, when she saw any come within her
doors, that she knew could not speak, and were unwilling to hear of the things
of God, but a poor Christian was a very acceptable guest to her at any time.

4. She was one of a vey peaceable temper, and upon that account Mat. 5. 9.
Romans 12. 19.
worthy to be called a Child of God. If money would purchase it, she was
content, nay, very glad to buy it with the loss of right; she was in this
respect eminently God-like, that when others have been manifestly guilty of the
breach of peace, and had not humility enough to offer reconciliation, she was
willing to be the first in seeking reconciliation. And when arguments with men
prevailed not, she wept in secret, and poured forth prayers before God to
obtain it, and rejoiced wonderfully Romans 12. 18, 19
in the good success of any means that could be used to procure and preserve it.

5. She was one of a healing spirit, which appears by her discourses, wherein
she was very careful to avoid names of division, and declared the great grief
of her soul for the unhappy differences among Gods precious people: and if any
spoke to her of any that differed from her in judgment, as if they wondered,
how she could be familiar with them, she would ordinarily make this Answer, I
am verily persuaded they truly fear God, and so long I can heartily close with
them, and (over-looking what I conceive to be their infirmities) honor them
for the image of Jesus Christ that shines in them. Poor divided England has
great cause bitterly to lament the loss of such a Christian, who excelled in
this kind: Also like Christ, she was much in prayer for this needful union,
John 17. 11.

6. She was exceeding careful of the souls of those that were under her charge;
which was evidenced by the great pains she took to instruct them: besides her
holy example before them* and daily prayers for them, she was wont to hear her
servants repeat over their Catechismes once a week, especially before their
receiving the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; Oh that her example herein might
provoke others to greater care, as to the souls of their servants. They might
consider, that God might have made them servants: but seeing God has been so
indulgent toward them, and has provided for their ease, by giving them
estates, so that they can keep servants; it would be but an equal and ingenuous
discovery of their thankfulness to God for that mercy, by taking care that
their servants might find some time to do Gods work, as well as their work. And
indeed who ever came near her to receive corporal alms, she could not send them
away empty, if fit objects of charity; and her alms was usually double for the
soul as well as the body. She would call upon elder persons to attend upon the
public Ordinances, and to bring up their children to read; and the children
she would exhort to dutifulness to their parents, diligence in their work, and
care to learn their Catechismes.

Secondly, As to her affection, and carriage toward God, etc.

1. She was one that evidenced abundance of love to Jesus Christ. She was not
like those mentioned, Ezekiel. 33. 31. who profess much love with their lips, but
little or no evidence of it in their lives, whereby their hearts are
discovered. John 14. 21. He that has his Commandments, and keeps them, he it
is that loves him: Now as to the Evangelical keeping of Gods Commandments,
it is very rare to meet with any that was so willingly, and cheerfully
industrious at all times to comply with them in a holy conformity, as she was.
She was so far from scanting God in point of manifest duty, that sometimes she
was ready in some cases not so manifest, to over-do; and out of the abundance
of her heart, would her mouth speak often, and much of the precious love of
Jesus Christ. She was wont to say, that no divine argument did more deeply
affect her, then that of the love of Christ. Before the manifestation of
Christ's love to her soul, she was to admiration importunate for the obtaining
of it, and afterward as careful to preserve it, as the Church in Cant. 3. 5.
She held him, and was not willing for so much as one day or hour to let him go.

2. She was very zealous in the worship of God in private, as well as in
public: She was daily exercised (if health permitted) in the reading of the
holy Scriptures; and for many years together read over the whole Bible once in
each year. Besides also she read much in the approved Treatises of our most
eminent practical Divines; by which means she attained to a very great measure
of knowledge, and was very sound in the faith. I could not observe in more then
twelve years acquaintance with her, that she was in the least infected with any
one of the errors of the times. Oh that in these exercises which are so
profitable, many, especially of her rank, would follow her, as their pattern.
It would make any holy soul to mourn bitterly in secret, to consider how many
Gentlewomen can talk even to admiration, of all ordinary worldly subjects; but
if any discourse of the points of Religion be begun in their hearing, they are
put quite out of their element, and cannot hold pace in such discourses one
half quarter of an hour, then many of them can say no more, but yea, or nay,
because they understand not perfectly what is said, and are ashamed to discover
their ignorance by a total silence, or by contradiction, when they want
arguments to maintain their dissent: If they would wisely redeem some time from
their sleep, and many hours from that time that is usually bestowed in an
abhorred prodigality, in the overcurious decking, and trimming their vile
bodies, and if further they would beware of trifling away so many after-noons
in dangerous visits of all sorts of persons, of their rank, although apparent
enemies of Jesus Christ, they might gain much time for these and all other holy
exercises. I am sure Christ is little beholding to them, who are so tender of
their own reputation, that to avoid that which the foolish world calls
incivility, they will make bold to rob him of abundance of precious hours,
which his service calls for, and deserves at their hands; and sure none are in
this true friends to their souls interest; but if any godly persons shall
offend by their over-familiar converse with Christ's enemies, it may, and does
justly provoke him to turn former familiarity with them into long and very sad
estrangements, for which they may thank their own unwarrantable civilities as
they style them; Some there are, who content themselves in reading some part of
the Scripture, when they have nothing else to do; but although this be a chief
part, yet certainly not the whole of their duty; for it is not the bare reading
of the Scriptures that will make them Christians, but the understanding of
them; and for this end, what means more proper, and probable, then the perusal
of the Treatises of the godly Learned, who excel in the gift of sound
interpretation of the Scriptures. I have many times thought that the devil is
willing, and it is for his interest, that some should read the Scriptures, if
they be not forward to use other helps for the understanding of them: Because
the Scriptures being barely read, and not understood, does quiet some of their
working Consciences, and yet by this means alone many of them are not at all
directed, and quickened in those exercises, wherein the main power of Godliness
does consist. Surely it will be very confounding in the great day of Accounts
to those rich persons, who have neglected these duties, when it shall appear
that many a poor Christian that was forced to rise early, and go to bed late,
to get barley bread to keep themselves, and children from starving, have yet
spent more hours in reading the Scriptures, hearing weekly Lectures, perusing
the Treatises of godly Divines in one year, then they have done in seven,
happily in twenty years, or all the time of their life. But I see my deep sense
of the woeful neglect of these necessary duties has transported me strangely,
and made me much larger upon this Head then I intended. I will recompense this
prolixity with all convenient brevity upon the next Head, which yet deserves as
large a Discourse; and that is

3. Her most remarkable constancy in the duty of private prayer, in the seasons
of it. When she was at home, and her family-occasions extraordinary by reason
of guests, it would not cause her to omit, or shorten that necessary service;
when abroad, and tired with travel, (which many would take for a complete
excuse) she would not betake her self to her bed, till this duty was duly
dispatched. It Is a very sad thing to consider, that many who call themselves
Christians, and are angry if others do not subscribe to their judgment of
themselves, without giving the least hint of backwardness, who yet seldom, if
at any time pour out their requests before God in secret. Alas such persons
consider not that a wretch newly crept out of one Gaol, and groaned for by
another, may yet in a crowd go along with a Petition to a great Prince, when it
is presented in the name of many; but for any Subject to have leave, and heart
to go privately upon all occasions into the Prince his presence, with
Petitions, argues an high degree of familiarity. And as she was much in begging
mercy, so likewise in thankfulness for mercies vouchsafed to her self, or any
of hers; she used to speak much of them, and once in every year to set a day
apart for the exercise of thanksgiving to God for them, by which she evidenced
her self to be a most wise, and ingenuous Christian. You have now heard
something of her zeal in the private worship of God, and it cannot be
reasonably conceived, that she was less careful of Gods public service. Many
that seem forward for that, are wholly negligent of private worship, but it
would be very strange to observe the contrary. Hypocrisy (the Epidemical
disease) will leave no stage-work undone.

Now here I might insist largly on her diligence in attending upon the
preaching of the Word, when she had strength of body, and was conveniently
seated. She used (to prevent drowsiness and distraction) to stand, fixing her
eye upon the Preacher; Luke 4. 28.
which she was wont to say, she learned of (the Elect Lady) her Religious
mother. And when she was to receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, her care
to come a prepared guest to that blessed feast, was more then ordinary: Much
time was spent in the hard, but gainful duty, of self-examination, and
importunate prayer, that Christ would prepare her for, and bid her welcome to
that holy Banquet. And indeed her great zeal to the worship of Esa. 58. 13.
God appeared clearly in her singular delight in that time, which by Gods
appointment is set apart for special attendance upon it, I mean the holy
Sabbath of God: Many (Oh that I were not forced to say, most) keep only such a
Sabbath, as Divines use fitly to call, the Sabbath of asses; when they have
tired themselves in the week day, in the worlds drugery, when the Lords day
comes, they rise later in the morning of that day, and go to bed more early in
the evening of it, then at other times; By which means their own (as the
bodies of their beasts) have much ease and refreshment, but as for spending the
whole time of it (the most equal thing in the world upon many unanswerable
grounds) in the public, and private exercises of Gods worship, this they can
by no means brook: But as for this excellent Gentlewoman, as she had a better
heart toward God, so was her behavior outwardly answerable. She used to rise
more early upon the Lords Amos 8. 5.
day, then upon any other day, no weather hindered her from the public Assembly,
and what time was not spent in public, was exactly employed in private duties
of Gods appointment.

3. She was one of a very Humble Spirit, which appeared in her affability, and
courtesy to the meanest persons who had occasion to make use of her; And when
she spoke (as she did often) of the merciful Providence of God toward her, in
providing comfortably for her all her days, as to the concernments of both
worlds, she would ever express her admiration of Gods great goodness toward
her, by acknowledging that what God had done graciously Luke 1. 48. Jud. 6. 15.
1 Pet. 5. 5.
for her, was for one, who (in her own thoughts) was the meanest of her fathers
family. I scarce have known any more adorned with the glorious robe of humility
then she was.

4. She was a cheerful not a sullen Christian; by her cheerfulness in Gods
precious ways, she did more credit the Gospel of Christ, in one year, then many
other drooping and lowering Christians in a long time. She was none of Gods
whinnels, that upon every petty outward affliction, or because inward comforts
were not dispensed at that time, and in that measure they expected, like
froward children, are ready to throw away what is in their hands already; her
great care was to get a clean and quiet conscience; and when the Bird in the
bosom did sing sweetly, she could well enough digest many other disappointments.

5. She was very patient under affliction and living to so great an age as she
did, it cannot be imagined but that she shared in the Act. 14. 22.
common lot of Christians. She had much of that ingenuity which was in holy Job,
which she discovered by those words, Shall we Job 2. 10.
receive good at the hands of God, and not evil? When her pains increased in
the time of her sickness, toward her end, she would say, I love God still, I
will trust him still; And in the greatest afflictions that she was at any time
under, she was so far from fainting, and discontent, that she would say, We
must not be overmuch troubled for worldly losses, or crosses, these are but
chips of the cross, we deserve that God should make our burden more heavy to
all eternity.

6. She was a most heavenly minded Christian, She abounded Col. 3. 1. 2.
always in discourses tending that way (not only in her sickness) but all the
time of her health; and could scarce be patient to hear any long discourses of
other subjects, when in the company of Gods people, who could speak to better
purpose. And when any of her Relations came to visit her, before their parting,
she would usually say; Nothing troubled her more, then to think, that while
they had been together, they had done one another so little good, and been so
little helpful to each other in the way to heaven.

Ephesians. 6. 16. Romans 4. 20. 1 Timothy 4. 8.
7. To name no more, She was eminent in the eminent Grace of Faith. She gave
the Lord much glory by believing. Her Faith appeared to be of the right stamp,
because it closed with, and made improvement of all promises for this life, and
for that which is to come. When any worldly difficulties we objected in
referrence to her self or near Relations, she would say, God had never failed
her 1 Samuel 17. 37.
yet, and he was all-sufficient, and therefore she would trust God for all. Now
that Faith which uses to feed upon former experiences is ordinarily strong.
And when any dangers were before her, she was very courageous and undaunted;
Which was the issue of her well grounded Faith. When the troubles were in Kent,
and a great many men and women, were at their wits end, and being wholly
destitute of Faith, were ready to cry, and run from place to place, one being
solicitous, where to dispose of his money, another to hide his person in
safety, she was quiet; She said, it was not bolts and bars, that kept her in
safety in quiet times, but Gods almighty Providence, and that was as able to
secure her now, and therefore she could then sleep in peace, as David, Psalm. 3.
8. Nor was her faith less observable in reference to its actings about the
concernments of the other world. And here her faith of Adherence and Evidence
(as it is usually expressed) were both very strong. It Is true, Satan was very
busy with her, to get her from the Castle of the Promises, where her strength
lay; but God had made her so wise a Christian, as to have the Gospel considered
1 John 3. 23.
as the Law of Faith always in her thoughts, and by that means she was made
afraid at any time of neglecting to cast her self wholly upon the free grace of
God in Christ for salvation, according to the Covenant. The Commands of God
made her fearful of omitting the duty of Prayer, of mispending her precious
time, and other prescribed duties; So likewise the clear commandment above
mentioned, for believing, made her as much afraid to neglect Ephesians. 6. 16.
that duty, which is the most eminent of all Christian duties, and the most
helpful to all the rest.

As to the faith of evidence, she attained to such a degree of it, that by it
(which was a most incomparable privilege) she was lifted up ry much above the
fear of death. Her language in the time of her sickness was, Come Lord Jesus,
come quickly, and for my part, it was to my great admiration to hear of what
she spoke frequently, and cheerfully concerning many particulars relating to
her funeral, not needful to be imparted. Now I have finished what I intended
upon the Providence which brought us together at this time. And me thinks, I
hear some of you to speak after this manner; Why no more? To which I answer,
All the flowers of a garden so well stored, as the garden of her long, and
Christian life was, with a grateful variety of sweet and beautiful Graces,
cannot in a short time be gathered, and presented in one handful. But a far
greater number are more apt to say, Why so much of her virtues, and nothing of
her infirmities? Was she while living in this world, perfect, of the Church
Triumphant and not Militant? To which I answer, least I should seem to flatter,
which none that know my temper will readily charge me with, it must be
confessed, that she had her infirmity; (as all others, of the best of Saints
have in this life) yet because they are unquestionably covered, forgiven, and
forgotten by Christ, it will argue us the more Christlike to forget them, as he
has given us an example. Besides I observe in Heb. 11. where the holy Ghost is
enlarged in the praises of the holy Patriarchs, and other Worthies, who had (at
least some of them) greater miscarriages then I ever observed in her, that none
of their praises are stained with any blots, or buts of their sinful
infirmities.

To sum up all, this excellent Gentlewoman Mrs. A. Petter, so manifested her
Graces in all Relations and Conditions, that it may be truly said of her: She
was a most loving, respectful, and obedient Wife, a very tender and careful
Mother, a conscionable and bountiful Mistress, a peaceable and helpful
Neighbor: In Prosperity she was very cheerful, thankful, and fruitful; In
Adversity very submissive, self-searching, and penitent. Well, what now
remains, but that I bespeak you all in the words of Christ, Luke 10. 37. Go ye
and do likewise: And then (craving pardon for my very unusual prolixity) I shut
up all with like words to those of the blessed Apostle. 2 Timothy 2. 7. Consider
what has been spoken, and the Lord give you understanding in all things.

FINIS.

