The VANITY of Dogmatizing: OR Confidence in Opinions. Manifested in a
DISCOURSE OF THE Shortness and Uncertainty OF OUR KNOWLEDGE, And its CAUSES;
With some Reflections on Peripateticism; AND An Apology for PHILOSOPHY. By IOS.
GLANVILL, M. A.

London, Printed by E. C. for Henry Eversden at the Greyhound in St.
Pauls-Church-Yard. 1661.

TO THE Reverend my ever honored FRIEND, Mr. JOSEPH MYNARD, B. D.
SIR,
I Dare not approach so much knowledge, as you are owner of, but in the dress
of an humble ignorance. The lesser Sporades must vail their light in the
presence of the Monarch Luminary; and to appear before you, with any confidence
of Science, were an unpardonable piece of Dogmatizing. Therefore whatever be
thought of the Discourse it self, it cannot be censured in this application;
And though the Pedant may be angry with me, for shaking his indear'd Opinions;
yet he cannot but approve of this appeal to one, whose very name would reduce a
Sceptick. If you give your vote against Dogmatizing: it is time for the
opinionative world, to lay down their proud pretensions: and if such known
accomplishments acknowledge ignorance; confidence will be out of countenance;
and the Sciolist will write on his most presumed certainty; This is also
vanity. Whatever in this Discourse is less consonant to your severer
apprehensions, I beg it may be the object of your charity, and candor. I
betake my self to the protection of your ingenuity, from the pursuits of your
judicious censure. And were there not a benign warmth, as well as light
attended you, 'twere a bold venture to come within your Beams. Could I divine
wherein you differ from me; I should be strongly induced to note that with a
Deleatur; and revenge the presumption, by differing from my present self. If
any thing seem to you to savor too much of the Pyrrhonian: I hope you will
consider, that Skepticism is less reprehensible in enquiring years, and no
crime in a Juvenile exercitation. But I have no design against Science: my
endeavor is to promote it. Confidence in uncertainties, is the greatest enemy
to what is certain; and were I a Sceptick, I Would plead for Dogmatizing: For the
way to bring men to stick to nothing, is confidently to persuade them to
swallow all things.

The Treatise in your hands is a fortuitous, undesigned abortive; and an
aequivocal effect of a very diverse intention: For having writ a Discourse,
which formerly I let you know of, of the Soul's Immortality: I designed a
preface to it, as a Corrective of Enthusiasm, in a Vindication of the use of
Reason in matters of Religion: and my considerations on that Subject, which I
thought a sheet would have comprised, grew so voluminous, as to fill fourteen:
which, being too much for a Preface; I was advised to print apart. And
therefore reassuming my Pen, to annex some Additional Inlargements to the
beginning; where I had been most curt and sparing: my thoughts ran out into
this Discourse, which now beggs your Patronage: while the two former were
remanded into the obscurity of my private Papers: The latter being rendered less
necessary by his Majesty's much desired, and seasonable arrival; and the former
by the maturer undertakings of the accomplished Dr. H. More.

I have no Apology to make for my lapses, but what would need a new one. To
say they are the Errata's of one that has not by some years reached his
fourth, Climacterical, would excuse indeed the poverty of my judgment, but
criminate the boldness of this Address. Nor can I avoid this latter imputation,
but by being more criminal: and to shun this respectful presumption, I must do
violence to my gratitude. Since therefore your Obligations have made my fault,
my duty; I hope the same goodness, that gave birth to my crime, will remit it.
Hereby you will further indear your other favors: and make me as much an admirer
of your virtues, as I am a debtor to your civilities: which since I cannot do
them right in an acknowledgement; I Will acknowledge, by signifying that the
greatness of them has disabled me from doing so: an impotence, which a little
charity will render venial; since it speaks your self its Author. These your
indearments will necessitate me to a self-contradiction; and I must profess my
self Dogmatical in this, that I am,

SIR, Your most obliged And affectionate Servant JOS. GLANVILL.
Cecill house in the Strand, March 1. 1660.
The Preface.
Reader,
TO complain in print of the multitude of Books, seems to me a self-accusing
vanity, whilst the querulous Reprehenders add to the cause of complaint, and
transgress themselves in that, which they seem to wish amended. It Is true, the
births of the Press are numerous, nor is there less variety in the humors, and
phancies of perusers, and while the number of the one, exceeds not the
diversity of the other, some will not think that too much, which others judge
superfluous. The genius of one approves, what another disregardeth. And were
nothing to pass the Press, but what were suited to the universal gusto; farewell
Typography Were I to be Judge, and no other to be gratified, I think I should
silence whole Libraries of Authors and reduce the world of Books into a fardle:
whereas were another to sit Censor, it may be all those I had spared, would be
condemned to darkness, and obtain no exemption from those ruins, and were all
to be suppressed, which some think unworthy light; no more would be left, then
were before Moses, and Trismegistus. Therefore, I seek no applause from the
disgrace of others, nor will I Huckster-like discredit any man's ware, to
recommend mine own. I am not angry that there are so many Books already,
(bating only the Anomalies of impiety and irreligion) nor will I plead the
necessity of publishing mine from feigned importunities. Those that are taken
up with others, are at their liberty to avoid the divertisement of its perusal:
and those, to whom it is not importunate will not expect an apology for its
publication. What quarter the world will give it, is above my conjecture. If it
be but indifferently dealt with, I am not disappointed. To print, is to run the
gantlet, and to expose ones self to the tongue- strapado. If the more generous
spirits favor me, let pedants do their worst: there is no smart in their
censure, yea, their very approbation is a scandal.

For the design of this Discourse, the Title speaks it. It is levied against
Dogmatizing, and attempts upon a daring Enemy, Confidence in Opinions. The
knowledge I teach, is ignorance: and methinks the Theory of our own natures,
should be enough to learn it us. We came into the world, and we know not how;
we live in it in a self-nescience, and go hence again and are as ignorant of our
recess. We grow, we live, we move at first in a Microcosm, and can give no more
Scientifical account, of the state of our three quarters confinement, then if
we had never been extant in the greater world, but had expired in an abortion;
we are enlarged from the prison of the womb, we live, we grow, and give being
to our like: we see, we hear, and outward objects affect our other senses: we
understand, we will, we imagine, and remember: and yet know no more of the
immediate reasons of most of these common functions, then those little Embryo
Anchorites: We breath, we talk, we move, while we are ignorant of the manner of
these vital performances. The Dogmatist knows not how he moves his finger; nor
by what art or method he turns his tongue in his vocal expressions. New parts
are added to our substance, to supply our continual decayings, and as we dye we
are born daily; nor can we give a certain account, how the aliment is so
prepared for nutrition, or by what mechanism it is so regularly distributed;
the turning of it into chyle, by the stomachs heat, is a general, and
unsatisfying solution. We love, we hate, we joy, we grieve: passions annoy us,
and our minds are disturbed by those corporal aestuations. Nor yet can we tell
how these should reach our unbodyed selves, or how the Soul should be affected
by these heterogeneous agitations. We lay us down, to sleep away our diurnal
cares; night shuts up the Senses windows, the mind contracts into the Brains
center. We live in death, and lie as in the grave. Now we know nothing, nor can
our waking thoughts inform us, who is Morpheus, and what that leaden Key, that
locks us up within our senseless Cells: There Is a difficulty that pincheth, nor
will it easily be resolved. The Soul is awake, and solicited by external
motions, for some of them reach the perceptive region in the most silent
repose, and obscurity of night. What is it then that prevents our Sensations; or
if we do perceive, how is it, that we know it not? But we Dream, see Visions,
converse with Chimaera's, the one half of our lives is a Romance, a fiction. We
retain a catch of those pretty stories, and our awakened imagination smiles in
the recollection. Nor yet can our most severe inquiries find what did so abuse
us, or show the nature, and manner of these nocturnal illusions: When we puzzle
our selves in the disquisition, we do but dream, and every Hypothesis is a
fancy. Our most industrious conceits are but like their object, and as
uncertain as those of midnight. Thus when some days, and nights have gone over
us, the stroke of Fate concludes the number of our pulses; we take our leave of
the Sun and Moon, and bid mortality adieu. The vital flame is extinct, the Soul
retires into another world, and the body to dwell with dust. Nor does the last
Scene yield us any more satisfaction in our autography; for we are as ignorant
how the soul leaves the light, as how it first came into it; we know as little
how the union is dissolved, that is, the chain of the so differing
subsistencies, that compound us, as how it first commenced. This then is the
creature that so pretends to knowledge, and that makes such a noise, and bustle
for Opinions. The instruction of Delphos may shame such confidents into
modesty; and till we have learned that honest adviso, though from hell, GNOTHI
SEAYTON Confidence is arrogance, and Dogmatizing unreasonable presuming. I
doubt not but the opinionative resolver, thinks all these easy Knowables, and
the Theories here accounted Mysteries, are to him Revelations. But let him
suspend that conclusion till he has weighed the considerations hereof, which
the Discourse it self will present him with; and if he can untie those knots,
he is able to teach all humanity, and will do well to oblige mankind by his
informations.

I had thought here to have shut up my Preface, being sensible of the taedium
of long praeliminaries. But lest the Ingenious stumble at my threshold, and
take offense at the seemingly disproportionate excess, which I ascribe to
Adam's senses: I Will subjoyn a word to prevent the scruple. First then, for
those that go the way of the Allegory, and assert pre-existence; I Am secure
enough from their dissatisfaction. For, that the aetherial Adam could easily
sense the most tender touches upon his passive vehicle, and so had a clear and
full perception of objects, which we since plunged into the grosser Hyle are
not at all, or but a little aware of; can be no doubt in their Hypothesis. Nor
can there as great a difference be supposed between the senses of eighty, and
those of twenty, between the Optics of the blind Bat and perspicacious Eagle,
as there was between those pure un-eclipsed Sensations, and these of our
now-embodyed, muddied Sensitive. Now that the prae-existent Adam could so
advantageously form his vehicle, as to receive better information from the most
distant objects, than we by the most helpful Telescopes; will be no difficult
admission to the friends of the Allegory. So that what may seem a mere
hyperbolical, and fanciful display to the Sons of the letter; to the
Allegorists will be but a defective representation of literal realities. And I
cannot be obnoxious to their censure, but for my coming short in the
description.

But I am like more dangerously to be beset by them that go the way of the
plain: and 'twill be thought somewhat hard, to verify my Hypothesis of the
literal Adam. Indeed, there is difficulty in the Mechanical Defense; and
Dioptrical impugnations are somewhat formidable. For unless the constitution of
Adam's Organs was diverse from ours, and from those of his fallen self; it will
to some seem impossible, that he should command distant objects by natural, as
we do by artificial advantages. Since those removed bodies of Sun and Stars (in
which I instance) could form but minute angles in Adam's Retina, and such as
were vastly different from those they form in ours assisted by a Telescope. So
that granting Adam's eye had no greater Diametrical wideness of the pupil, no
greater distance from the Cornea to the Retiformis, and no more filaments of
the Optic nerves of which the tunica Retina is woven, than we: the
unmeasurable odds of Sensitive perfections which I assign him; will be
conceived mechanically impossible. These difficulties may seem irresistibly
pressing, and incapable of a satisfactory solution.

But I propound it to the consideration of the Ingenious Objectors, whether
these supposed Organical defects might not have been supplied in our unfallen
Protoplast by the vast perfections of his Animadversive, and some other
advantageous circumstances: So that though it be granted, that an object at the
distance of the Stars could not form in the eye of Adam any angles, as wide as
those it forms by the help of a Tube; yet I think my Hypothesis may stand
unshaken. For suppose two Eyes of an equal and like figure, in the same
distance from an object; so that it forms equal angles in both: It may come to
pass by other reasons, that one of these Eyes shall see this object bigger then
the other: yea, if the difference of the reasons on both sides be so much
greater, one Eye shall see it clearly, and the other not at all: For let one of
these eyes be placed in an old body, or in a body deprived quite, or in a great
measure of those spirits which are allowed the Instruments of sight, or of the
due egress and regress of them, in their natural courses and channels; and let
the other have a body of a clean contrary quality; or let the soul that
actuates one of the said eyes, be endued with an higher faculty of
Animadversion (I mean with a greater degree of the Animadversive ability) than
the soul has, that actuates the other. In either of these cases, the
forementioned difformity of vision, will fall out in the same uniform case of
Dioptrical advantages. For a little angle made in the Eye, will make as
discernible an impression to a Soul of a greater Animadversive power, and
assisted by more and meeter instruments of sight; as a greater angle can make
to a soul of a less power, and destitute of those other Instruments, which are
as necessary to sight as those Dioptrical conveniences. So that grant that the
object set at the same distance made angles in the eye of Adam, no wider than
those it forms in ours; yet that which we discern not, might have been seen by
him, having more and better spirits, and being endued with a stronger
Animadversive, according to mine Hypothesis. For there is the same proportion
between a great power, and a little help, or a little Angle; which is between a
small power, and a great help, or a great Angle.

If all this satisfy not, I beg from the ingenious the favor of this
consideration: That some grains must be allowed to a rhetorical display, which
will not bear the rigor of a critical severity. But whether this mine
Hypothesis stand or fall, my Discourse is not at all concerned. And I am not so
fond of my conjectures, but that I can lay them down at the feet of a
convictive opposition.

To the Learned Author, of the Eloquent and Ingenious Vanity of DOGMATIZING.
POets are but Libe'lers, I implore no Muse;
Parnassian praise is an abuse.
Call up the Spirit of Philosophy:
Your worth's disgraced by Poetry.
Summon Descartes, Plato, Socrates:
Let this great Triad speak your praise.
Other Encomiasts that attempt, set-forth
Their own defects, and not your worth.
As if a Chamber-light should dare essay,
To gloss the beauty of the day.
He that thinks fully to describe it, dreams:
You're only seen by your own beams*
And only Eagle-eyes can bear that light;
Your strength and luster blindes weak sight.
Let pedants quarrel with the light that detects
Their beloved vanities and defects.
And let the Bat, as soon as day's begun,
Commence a suit against the Sun.
Let reprehended Dogmatizers stamp;
And the scorch't Moore curse Heavens lamp:
While nobler souls, that understand what is writ,
Are debtors to your strength and wit.
You have removed the old Antipathy
'Tween Rhetoric, and Philosophy:
And in your Book have clothed Socratick sense,
In Demosthenian Eloquence.
Yo've smoothed the Satyr, and the wanton have
Reformed and made Rhetoric grave.
And since your Pen has thus obliged them both,
It Is fit they club t'express your worth.
H. Darsy, Esquire

To his Worthy Friend Mr. JOSEPH GLANVILL; Upon the Vanity of DOGMATIZING in
Philosophy, displayed in his Ingenious Book.
NO controversies do me please,
Unless they do contend for Peace:
Nor scarce a demonstration,
But such as yours; which proves, there is none.
Doubful I lived, and doubtful die:
Thus AYTOS gave E'PH the lie;
And with his own more aged Critics,
Expunged his Youthful Analyticks.
To make my Shrift, that certain I
Am only of Uncertainty;
Is no less glorious, then due,
After the Stagirite and You:
I am absolved, if the Hand
Of great Apollo's Priest may stand.
You have made Ignorance a Boast:
Pride has its ancient channel lost;
Like Arethusa, only found
By those, that follow't under ground*
Title your Book, The Works of MAN;
The Index of the Vatican:
Call it Arts Encyclopaedy;
The Universal Pansophy;
The State of all the Questions,
Since Peter Lumbard, solved at once;
Ignorance in a learned dress,
Which Volumes teach, but not profess;
The Learning which all Ages knew,
Being Epitomized by you.
You teach us doubting; and no more
Do Libraries turned over and over:
Take up the Folio, that comes next,
'Twill prove a Comment on your Text;
And the Quotation would be good,
If BODLEY in your Margin stood.
A. Borfet, M. A.

TO HIS Ingenious Friend the Author, on his Vanity of DOGMATIZING.
LEt vaunting Knowledge now strike sail,
And unto modest Ignorance vail.
Our firmest Science (when all is done)
Is naught but bold Opinion.
He that has conquered every Art
The Encyclopaedy all by heart;
Is but some few conjectures better
Than he that cannot read a letter.
If any certainty there be,
It Is this, that there is no certainty.
Reason's a draught that does display,
And cast its aspects every way.
It does acknowledge no back parts,
It Is faced like Ianus: and regard's
Opposite sides; what one frowns on,
The Other face sweetly smiles upon.
Then may the Sciolist hereby
Correct his Metoposcopy.
Let him, e're censure reason, found
And view her lineaments all round.
And since that Science he has none,
Let him with you his nescience own.
Weakness acknowledged is best:
And imperfection when confessed.
Meek and unboasting Ignorance,
Is but a single impotence:
But when it is clad in high profession,
It Is then a double imperfection.
A silly Ape struttingly dressed,
Would but appear the greater jest.
But your example teaches us
To become less ridiculous.
He that would learn, but what you show,
The narrow bounds of what men know:
And would but take a serious view,
Of the foundations with you:
He Would scarce his confidence adventure,
On bottomes which are so unsure.
In disquisitions first gust
It would be Shipwrackt, sunk, and lost.
P. H.

READER,
That the Author may not be accountable for more faults, then his own; he
desires thee to correct, or at least to take notice of these Typographical
mistakes: some of which are less considerable, but others, if unobserved, may
disturb the sense, and render the meaning less obvious: thou art therefore
requested to exercise thine ingenuity, in pardoning the Printer; and thy
justice, in doing right to the Author.

ERRATA.
Page. line. read. 20. 5. unite. 22. 2. apprehenders. 24. 9. spirits. 25. 7.
spontaneous. 27. 7. principles and. 28. 27. motions. 29. 21. conceive it. 41.
10. considerations. 42. 11. composition. 60. 6. makes. 67. 16. and our. 70. 12.
of reason. 99. 25. mad, that. 102. 5. be what. 103. 26. of. 113. 9. cousenage.
129. 20. the world. 140. 1. the best.

Books newly published.
A perfect History of The Civil Wars of Great Britain and Ireland, by an
Impartial pen, in folio.

Britannia Baconica, or the Natural Rarities of England, Scotland and Wales, as
they are to be found in every Shire, in octavo.

The Vanity of DOGMATIZING; OR, Confidence in Opinions.
CHAP. I.
A display of the Perfections of Innocence, with a conjecture at the manner of
Adams knowledge, viz. that it was by the large extent of his Senses; founded
upon the supposition of the perfection of his Faculties, and induced from two
Philosophic principles.

OUr misery is not of yesterday, but as ancient as the first Criminal, and the
ignorance we are involved in, almost coaeval with the humane nature; not that
we were made so by our God, but our selves; we were his creatures, sin and
misery were ours. To make way for what follows, we will go to the root of our
ancient happiness, and now ruins, that we may discover both what the Man was,
and what the Sinner is.

The Eternal Wisdom having made that Creature whose crown it was to be like
his Maker, enrich't him with those ennoblements which were worthy him that gave
them, and made no less for the benefit of their receiver, then the glory of
their Author. And as the Primogenial light, which at first was difused over the
face of the unfashion'd Chaos, was afterward by Divine appointment gathered
into the Sun and Stars, and other lucid bodies, which shine with an underived
luster: so those scattered perfections which are divided among the several
cantons of created beings, were as it were constellated and summed up in this
Epitome of the greater World, MAN. His then blisful enjoyments anticipated the
aspires to be like GODS; being in a condition not to be added to, as much as in
desire; and the unlikeness of it to our now miserable, because Apostate, state,
makes it almost as impossible to be conceived, as to be regained. A condition
which was envied by creatures that nature had placed a sphaere above us, and
such as differed not much from glory, and blessed immortality, but in
perpetuity and duration. For since the most despicable and disregarded pieces
of decayed nature, are so curiously wrought, and adorned with such eminent
signatures of Divine wisdom, as speak it their Author, and that after a curse
brought upon a disordered Universe; what think we was done unto him whom the
King delighted to honor? and what was the portion of He^^ens Favorite, when
Omniscience it self sat in Council to furnish him with all those
accomplishments which his specific capacity could contain? which questionless
were as much above the Hyperbolies that fond Poetry bestows upon its admired
objects, as their flattered beauties are really below them. The most refined
glories of subcoelestial excellencies are but more faint resemblances of these.
For all the powers and faculties of this copy of the Divinity, this meddal of
God, were as perfect as beauty and harmony in Idea. The soul was not clogged by
the inactivity of its mass, as ours; nor hindered in its actings, by the
distemperature of indisposed organs. Passions kept their place, as servants of
the higher powers, and durst not arrogate the Throne, as now: no countermands
came hence, to repeal the decretals of the Regal faculties; that
Batrachomyomachia of one passion against an other, and both against reason, was
yet unborn. Man was never at odds with himself, till he was at odds with the
commands of his Maker. There was no jarring or disharmony in the faculties,
till sin untuned them. He could no sooner say to one power go, but it went, nor
to another do this, but it did it. Even the senses, the Souls windows, were
without any spot or opacity; to liken them to the purest Crystal, were to
debase them by the comparison; for their acumen and strength depending on the
delicacy and apt disposure of the organs and spirits, by which outward motions
are conveyed to the judgment seat of the Soul: those of Innocence must needs
infinitely more transcend ours, then the senses of sprightful youth does them
of frozen decrepit age. Adam needed no Spectacles. The acuteness of his natural
Optics (if conjecture may have credit) showed him much of the Celestial
magnificence and bravery without a Galilaeo's tube: And it is most probable that
his naked eyes could reach near as much of the upper World, as we with all the
advantages of art. It may be 'twas as absurd even in the judgment of his
senses, that the Sun and Stars should be so very much, less then this Globe, as
the contrary seems in ours; and it is not unlikely that he had as clear a
perception of the earths motion, as we think we have of its quiescence.

Thus the accuracy of his knowledge of natural effects, might probably arise
from his sensible perception of their causes. What the experiences of many ages
will scarce afford us at this distance from perfection, his quicker senses
could teach in a moment. And whereas we patch up a piece of Philosophy from a
few industriously gathered, and yet scarce well observed or digested
experiments, his knowledge was completely built, upon the certain, extemporary
notice of his comprehensive, unerring faculties. His sight could inform him
whether the Loadstone does attract by Atomical Effluviums; which may gain the
more credit by the consideration of what some affirm; that by the help of
Microscopes they have beheld the subtle streams issuing from the beloved
Mineral. It may be he saw the motion of the blood and spirits through the
transparent skin, as we do the workings of those little industrious Animals
through a hive of glass. The Mysterious influence of the Moon, and its
causality on the seas motion, was no question in his Philosophy, no more then a
Clocks motion is in ours, where our senses may inform us of its cause.
Sympathies and Antipathies were to him no occult qualities. Causes are hid in
night and obscurity from us, which were all Sun to him.

Now to show the reasonableness of this Hypothesis, I Will suppose what I think
few will deny; That God adorned that creature which was a transcript of
himself, with all the perfections its capacity could bear. And that this great
extent of the senses Horizon was a perfection easily competible to sinless
humanity, will appear by the improvement of the two following principles.

First, as far as the operation of nature reaches, it works by corporeal
instruments. If the Celestial lights influence our Earth, and advance the
Production of Minerals in their hidden beds, it is done by material
communications. And if there be any virtue proceeding from the Pole, to direct
the motion of the enamored steel (however unobserved those secret influences
may be) they work not but by corporal Application.

Secondly, Sense is made by motion, caused by bodily impression on the organ,
and continued to the brain, and center of perception. Hence it is manifest that
all bodies are in themselves sensible, in as much as they can impress this
motion, which is the immediate cause of sensation: And therefore, as in the
former Principle, the most distant efficients working by a corporeal causality,
if it be not perceived, the non-perception must arise from the dullness and
imperfection of the faculty, and not any defect in the object. So then, is it
probable that the tenuous matter the instrument of remoter agents, should be
able to move, and change the particles of the indisposed clay or steel, and yet
not move the ductile easy senses of perfected man? Indeed we perceive not such
subtle insinuations, because their action is overcome by the strokes of
stronger impressors, and we are so limited in our perceptions, that we can only
attend to the more vigorous impulse: but this is an imperfection incident to
our degraded natures, which infinite wisdom easily prevented in his innocent
Masterpiece: Upon such considerations, to me it appears to be most reasonable,
that the circumference of our Protoplast's senses, should be the same with that
of natures activity: unless we will derogate from his perfections, and so
reflect a disparagement on him that made us. And I am the more persuaded of the
concinnity of this notion, when I consider the uncouth harshness either of the
way of actual concreated knowledge, or of infant growing faculties; neither of
which methinks seem to be much favored by our severer reasons.

Thus I have given a brief account of what might have been spun into Volumes; a
full description of such perfections cannot be given but by him that has them;
an attainment which we shall never reach, till mortality be swallowed up of
life.

CHAP. II.
Our Decay and Ruins by the fall, descanted on. Of the now Scantness of our
Knowledge: with a censure of the Schoolmen, and Peripatetick Dogmatists.

BUt it is a miserable thing to have been happy: and a self-contracted
wretchedness, is a double one. Had felicity always been a stranger to
humanity, our now misery had been none; and had not our selves been the Authors
of our ruins, less. We might have been made unhappy, but since we are
miserable, we chose it. He that gave them, might have taken from us our extern
enjoyments, but none could have robbed us of innocence but our selves. That we
are below the Angels of God, is no misery, it is the lot of our natures; but
that we have made our selves like the beasts that perish, is so with a witness,
because the fruit of our sin. While man knew no sin, he was ignorant of nothing
else, that it imported humanity to know: but when he had sinned, the same
trangression that opened his eyes to see his own shame, shut them against most
things else, but it, and his newly purchased misery. With the nakedness of his
body, he saw that of his soul; and the blindness, and disaray of his faculties,
which his former innocence was a stranger to: and that that showed them him,
made them. Whether our purer intellectuals, or only our impetuous affections,
were the prime authors of the anomie, I dispute not: sin is as latent in its
first cause, as visible in its effects; and it is the mercy of heaven that has
made it easier to know the cure, then the rise of our distempers. This is
certain, that our masculine powers are deeply sharers of the consequential
mischiefs, and though Eve were the first in the disobedience, yet was Adam a
joint partaker of the curse. We are not now like the creatures we were made,
and have not only lost our Makers image, but our own: And do not much more
transcend the creatures, which God and nature have placed at our feet, then we
come short of our ancient selves; a proud affecting to be like Gods, has made
us unlike Men.

For whereas our ennobled understandings could once take the wings of the
morning, to visit the world above us, and had a glorious display of the highest
form of created excellencies, it now lies grovelling in this lower region,
muffled up in mists, and darkness: the curse of the Serpent is fallen upon
degenerated humanity, that it should go on its belly, and lick the dust. And as
in the Cartesian hypothesis, the Planets sometimes lose their light, by the
fixing of the impurer scum; so our impaired intellectuals, which were once as
pure light and flame in regard of their vigor and activity, are now darkened by
those grosser spots, which our disobedience has contracted. And our now
overshadow'd souls (to whose beauties stars were foils) may be exactly
emblem'd, by those crusted globes, whose influential emissions are intercepted,
by the interposal of the benighting element, while the purer essence is
imprisoned within the narrow compass of a center. For these once glorious
lights, which did freely shed abroad their harmeless beams, and wantoned in a
larger circumference, are now pent up in a few first principles (the naked
essentials of our faculties) within the straight confines of a Prison. And
whereas knowledge dwelt in our undepraved natures, as light in the Sun, in as
great plenty, as purity; it is now hidden in us like sparks in a flint, both in
scarcity, and obscurity.

For considering the shortness of our intellectual sight, the deceptibility and
impositions of our senses, the tumultuary disorders of our passions, the
prejudices of our infant educations, and infinite such like (of which an after
oecasion will befriend us, with a more full and particular recital) I say, by
reason of these, we may conclude of the science of the most of men, truly so
called, that it may be trussed up in the same room with the Iliads, yea it may
be all the certainty of those high pretenders to it, the voluminous Schoolmen,
and Peripatetical Dictators, (bating what they have of first Principles and the
Word of God) may be circumscribed by as small a circle, as the Creed, when
Brachygraphy had confined it within the compass of a penny. And methinks the
disputes of those assuming confidents, are like the controversy of those in
Plato's den, who having never seen but the shadow of an horse trajected against
a wall, eagerly contended, whether its neighing proceeded from the appearing
Mane, or Tail, which they saw moving through the agitation of the substance,
playing in the wind: so these in the darker cells of their imagined principles,
violently differ about the shadows and exuviae of beings, words, and notions,
while for the most part they ignore the substantial realities; and like
children make babies, for their phancies to play with, while their useless
subtilties afford but little intertain to the nobler faculties.

But many of the most accomplished wits of all ages, whose modesty would not
allow them to boast of more then they were owners of, have resolved their
knowledge into Socrates his sum total, and after all their pains in quest of
Science, have sat down in a professed nescience. It is the shallow unimprov'd
intellects that are the confident pretenders to certainty; as if contrary to
the Adage, Science had no friend but Ignorance. And though when they speak in
the general of the weakness of our understandings, and the scantness of our
knowledge, their discourse may even justify Skepticism it self; yet in their
particular opinions are as assertive and dogmatical, as if they were
omniscient. To such, as a curb to confidence, and an evidence of humane
infirmities even in the noblest parts of Man, I shall give the following
instances of our intellectual blindness: not that I intend to poze them with
those common Aenigma's of Magnetism, Fluxes, Refluxes and the like, these are
resolved into a confessed ignorance, and I shall not pursue them to their old
Asylum: and yet it may be there is more knowable in these, then in less
acknowledged mysteries: But I Will not move beyond our selves, and the most
ordinary and trivial Phenomenon in nature, in which we shall find enough to
shame confidence, and unplume Dogmatizing.

CHAP. III.
Instances of our Ignorance propounded, (1) of things within our selves. The
nature of the Soul, and its origin, glanced at and past by; (1) It Is union
with the body is unconceivable: So (2) is its moving the body, considered
either in the way of Sir K. Digby, Descartes, or Dr. H. More, and the
Platonists. (3) The manner of direction of the Spirits, as unexplicable.

IN the prosecution of our intendment we will first instance in some things in
the general, which concern the soul in this state of terrestrial union; and
then speak more particularly to some faculties within us, a scientificall
account of which mortality is unacquainted with. Secondly we intend to note
some mysteries, which relate to matter and Body. And Thirdly to show the
unintelligible intricacy of some ordinary appearances.

1. It Is a great question with some what the soul is. And unless their
phancies may have a sight and sensible palpation of that more clarified
subsistence, they will prefer infidelity, it self to an unimaginable Idea. I Will
only mind such, that the soul is seen, as other things, in the Mirror of its
effects, and attributes: But, if like children they will run behind the glass to
see its naked face, their expectation will meet with nothing but vacuity and
emptiness. And though a pure Intellectual eye may have a sight of it in reflex
discoveries; yet, if we affect a grosser touch, like Ixio^ we shall embrace a
cloud.

2. And it has been no less a trouble to the world to determine whence it
came, then what it is. Whether it were made by an immediate creation, or
seminall traduction, has been a Ball of contention to the most learned ages:
And yet after all the bandying attempts of resolution it is as much a question
as ever, and it may be will be so till it be concluded by immortality. Some
ingenious ones think the difficulties, which are urged by each side against the
other, to be pregnant proofs of the falsehood of both; and substitute an
hypothesis, which for probability is supposed to have the advantage of either.
But I shall not stir in the waters, which have been already mudded by so many
contentious enquiries. The great St. Austin, and others of the gray heads of
reverend Antiquity have been content to sit down here in a professed neutrality:
And I Will not industiously endeavor to urge men to a confession of what they
freely acknowledge; but shall note difficulties which are not so usually
observed, but as insoluble as these.

3. It is the saying of divine Plato, that Man is natures Horizon; dividing
betwixt the upper Hemisphere of immateriall intellects, and this lower of
Corporeity: And that we are a Compound of beings distant in extremes, is as
clear as Noon. But how the purer Spirit is united to this clod, is a knot too
hard for fallen Humanity to unty. What cement should unite heaven and earth,
light and darkness, natures of so diverse a make, of such disagreeing
attributes, which have almost nothing, but Being, in common; This is a riddle,
which must be left to the coming of Elias. How should a thought be united to a
marble-statue, or a sunbeam to a lump of clay! The freezing of the words in
the air in the northern climes, is as conceivable, as this strange union. That
this active spark, this (...) [as the Stoics call it] should be confined to a
Prison it can so easily pervade, is of less facill apprehension, then that the
light should be pent up in a box of Crystal, and kept from accompanying its
source to the lower world: And to hang weights on the wings of the wind seems
far more intelligible.

In the unions, which we understand, the extremes are reconciled by interceding
participations of natures, which have somewhat of either. But Body and Spirit
stand at such a distance in their essential compositions, that to suppose an
uniter of a middle constitution, that should partake of some of the qualities
of both, is unwarranted by any of our faculties, yea most absonous to our
reasons; since there is not any the least affinity betwixt length, breadth and
thickness, and apprehension, judgment and discourse: The former of which are
the most immediate results [if not essentials] of Matter, the latter of Spirit.

4. Secondly, We can as little give an account, how the Soul moves the Body.
That, that should give motion to an unwieldy bulk, which it self has neither
bulk nor motion; is of as difficil an apprehension, as any mystery in nature.
For though conceiving it under some phancied appearance, and pinning on it
material affections, the doubt does not so sensibly touch us; since under such
conceptions we have the advantage of our senses to befriend us with parallels,
and gross appre^henders may not think it any more strange, then that a Bullet
should be moved by the rarefied fire, or the clouds carried before the
invisible winds: yet if we defaecate the notion from materiality, and abstract
quantity, locality and all kind of corporeity from it, and represent it to our
thoughts either under the notion of the ingenious Sir K. Digby as a pure Mind
and Knowledge, or as the admired Descartes expresses it, une chose qui pense,
as a thinking substance; it will be as hard to apprehend, as that an empty wish
should remove Mountains: a supposition which if realized, would relieve
Sisyphus. Nor yet does the ingenious hypothesis of the most excellent
Cantabrigian Philosopher, of the souls being an extended penetrable substance,
relieve us; since, how that which penetrates all bodies without the least jog
or obstruction, should impress a motion on any, is by his own confession alike
inconceivable. Neither will its moving the Body by a vehicle of Spirits, avail
us; since they are Bodies too, though of a purer mould. And to credit the
unintelligibility both of this union and motion, we need no more then to
consider, that when we would conceive any thing which is not obvious to our
senses, we have recourse to our memories the storehouse of past observations:
and turning over the treasure that is there, seek for something of like kind,
which has formerly come within the notice of our outward or inward senses. So
that we cannot conceive any thing, which comes not within the verge of our
senses; but either by like experiments which we have made, or at least by some
remoter hints which we receive from them. And where such are wanting, I cannot
apprehend how the thing can be conceived. If any think otherwise, let them
carefully examine their thoughts: and, if they find a determinate intellection
of any Modes of Being, which were never in the least hinted to them by their
external or internal senses; I Will believe that such can realize Chimaera's.
But now in the cases before us there are not the least footsteps, either of
such an Union, or Motion, in the whole circumference of sensible nature: And we
cannot apprehend any thing beyond the evidence of our faculties.

5. Thirdly, How the soul directs the Spirits for the motion of the Body
according to the several animal exigents; is as perplex in the theory, as
either of the former. For the meatus, or passages, through which those subtle
emissaries are conveyed to the respective members, being so almost infinite,
and each of them drawn through so many meanders, cross turnings, and diverse
roades, wherein other spirits are continually a journeying; it is wonderful,
that they should exactly perform their regular destinations without losing
their way in such a wilderness: neither can the wit of man tell how they are
directed. For that they are carried by the manuduction of a Rule, is evident
from the constant steddyness and regularity of their motion into the parts,
where their supplies are expected: But, what that regulating efficiency should
be, and how managed; is not easily determined. That it is performed by mere
Mechanisme, constant experience confutes; which assures us, that our
sponta^^eous motions are under the Imperium of our will. At least the first
determination of the Spirits into such or such passages, is from the soul, what
ever we hold of the after conveyances; of which likewise I think, that all the
philosophy in the world cannot make it out to be purely Mechanical. But yet
though we gain this, that the soul is the principle of direction, the
difficulty is as formidable as ever. For unless we allow it a kind of inward
sight of the Anatomicall frame of its own body of every vein, muscle, and
artery; of the exact site, and position of them, with their several windings,
and secret channels: it is as unconceivable how it should be the Directrix of
such intricate motions, as that a blind man should manage a game at Chess. But
this is a kind of knowledge, that we are not in the least aware of: yea many
times we are so far from an attention to the inward direction of the spirits,
that our employed minds observe not any method in the outward performance;
even when it is managed by variety of interchangeable motions, in which a steady
direction is difficult, and a miscariage easy. Thus an Artist will play a
Lesson on an instrument without minding a stroke; and our tongues will run
divisions in a tune not missing a note, even when our thoughts are totally
engaged elsewhere: which effects are to be attributed to some secret Art of the
Soul, which to us is utterly occult, and without the ken of our Intellects.

CHAP. IV.
(4) We can give no account of the manner of Sensation: nor (5) of the nature
of the Memory. It is considered according to the philosophy of Descartes, Sir
K. Digby, Aristotle and Mr. Hobbs, and all ineffectuall. Some other
unexplicables mentioned.

6. BUt besides those abstrusities, that lie more deep, and are of a more
mysterious alloy; we are at a loss for a scientificall account even of our
Senses, the most knowable of our facultyes. Our eyes, that see other things,
see not themselves: And those princip^^^^ foundations of knowledge are
themselves unknown. That the soul is the sole Percipient, which alone has
animadversion and sense properly so called, and that the Body is only the
receiver and conveyer of corporeal impressions, is as certain, as Philosophy
can make it. Aristotle himself teaches so much in that Maxim of his (...).
And Plato credits this position with his suffrage; affirming, that it is the
soul that has life and sense, but the body neither. But this is so largly
prosecuted by that wonder of men, the Great Descartes, and is a Truth that
shines so clear in the Eyes of all considering men; that to go about
industriously to prove it, were to light a candle to seek the Sun: we'll
therefore suppose it, as that which needs not amuse us; but yet, what are the
instruments of sensible perceptions and particular conveyers of outward motions
to the seat of sense, is difficult: and how the pure mind can receive
information from that, which is not in the least like it self, and but little
resembling what it represents; I think inexplicable. Whether Sensation be made
by corporal emissions and material (...), or by motions impressed on the
Aethereall matter, and carried by the continuity thereof to the Common sense;
I Will not revive into a Dispute: The ingenuity of the latter has already given
it almost an absolute victory over its Rival. But suppose which we will, there
are doubts not to be solved by either. For how the soul by mutation made in
matter a substance of another kind, should be excited to action; and how bodily
alterations and motions should concern it, which is subject to neither; is a
difficulty which confidence may triumph over sooner, then conquer. For body
connot act on any thing but by motion; motion cannot be received but by
quantative dimension; the soul is astranger to such gross substantiality, and
has nothing of quantity, but what it is clothed with by our deceived
phancies; and therefore how can we conceive under a passsive subjection to
material impressions? and yet the importunity of pain, and unavoydableness of
sensations strongly persuade, that we are so. Some say, that the soul indeed is
not passive under the material phantasms; but does only intuitively view them
by the necessity of her Nature, and so observes other things in these there
representatives. But how is it, and by what Art does the soul read that such an
image or stroke in matter [whether that of her vehicle, or of the Brain, the
case is the same] signifies such an object? Did we learn such an Alphabet in
our Embryo-state? And how comes it to pass, that we are not aware of any such
congenite apprehensions? We know what we know; but do we know any more? That by
diversity of motions we should spell out figures, distances, magnitudes,
colors, things not resembled by them; we must attribute to some secret
deduction. But what this deduction should be, or by what mediums this Knowledge
is advanced; is as dark, as Ignorance it self. One, that has not the knowledge
of Letters, may see the Figures; but comprehends not the meaning included in
them: An infant may hear the sounds, and see the motion of the lips; but has
no conception conveyed by them, not knowing what they are intended to signify.
So our souls, though they might have perceived the motions and images
themselves by simple sense; yet without some implicit inference it seems
inconceivable, how by that means they should apprehend their Archetypes.
Moreover images and motions are in the Brain in a very inconsiderable latitude
of space; and yet they represent the greatest magnitudes. The image of an
Hemisphere of the upper Globe cannot be of a wider circumference, then a
Wall-nut: And how can such petty impressions notify such vastly expanded
objects, but through some kind of Scientifical method, and Geometry in the
Principle? without this it is not conceivable how distances should be
perceived, but all objects would appear in a cluster, and lie in as narrow a
room as their images take up in our scanter Craniums. Nor will the Philosophy
of the most ingenious Descartes help us out: For that striking upon diverse
filaments of the brain cannot well be supposed to represent their respective
distances, except some such kind of Inference be allotted us in our faculties;
the concession of which will only steed us as a Refuge for Ignorance, where we
shall meet, what we would seem to shun.

. 7. The Memory is a faculty whose nature is as obscure, and has as much of
Riddle in it as any of the former; It seems to be an Organical Power, because
bodily distempers often mar its Idea's, and cause a total oblivion: But what
instruments the Soul uses in her review of past impressions, is a question
which may drive Enquiry to despair. There are four principal Hypotheses by
which a Resolution has been attempted. The first that I Will mention, is that of
the incomparable Descartes, who gives this account: The Glandula pinealis, by
him made the seat of Common Sense, does by its motion impel the Spirits into
diverse parts of the Brain; till it find those wherein are some tracks of the
object we would remember; which consists in this, viz. That the Pores of the
Brain, through the which the Spirits before took their course, are more easily
opened to the Spirits which demand re-entrance; so that finding those pores,
they make their way through them sooner then through others: whence there
arises a special motion in the Glandula, which signifies this to be the object
we would remember. A second is, that of the ingenious Sir K. Digby, a summary
of which is, That things are reserved in the memory by some corporeal exuviae
and material Images; which having impinged on the Common sense, rebound thence
into some vacant cells of the Brain, where they keep their ranks and postures
in the same order that they entered, till they are again stirred up; and then
they slide through the Fancy, as when they were first presented. These are the
endeavors of those two Grand Sages, then whom it may be the Sun never saw a
more learned pair. And yet as a sad evidence of the infirmities of lapsed
humanity: these great Sophi fail here of their wonted success in unridling
Nature. And I think Favor it self can say no more of either Hypothesis, then
that they are ingenious attempts. Nor do I speak this to derogate from the
Grandeur of their Wits used to Victory: I should rather confer what I could to
the erecting of such Trophies to them, as might eternize their Memories. And
their coming short here, I think not to be from defect of their personal
abilities, but specific constitution; and the doubt they leave us in, proceeds
from hence, that they were no more then men. I shall consider what is mentioned
from them apart, before I come to the other two: And what I am here about to
produce, is not to argue either of these Positions of Falseness; but of
Unconceiveableness. In the general, what has been urged under the former head,
stands in full force against both these, and them that follow. But to the
first; If Memory be made by the easy motion of the Spirits through the opened
passages, according to what has been noted from Descartes; whence have we a
distinct Remembrance of such diversity of Objects, whose Images without doubt
pass through the same apertures? And how should we recall the distances of
Bodies which lie in a line? Or, is it not likely, that the impelled Spirits
might light upon other Pores accommodated to their purpose through the Motion
of other Bodies through them? Yea, in such a pervious substance as the Brain,
they might find an easy either entrance, or exit, almost every where; and
therefore to shake every grain of corn through the same holes of a Sieve in
repeated winnowings, is as easy to be performed as this to be conckived.
Besides, it is difficult to apprehend, but that these avennues should in a very
short time be stopped up by the pressure of other parts of the matter, through
its natural gravity, or other alterations made in the Brain: And the opening of
other vicine passages might quickly obliterate any tracks of these: as the
making of one hole in the yielding mud, defaces the print of another near it;
at least the accession of enlargement, which was derived from such transitions,
would be as soon lost, as made. But for the second, How is it imaginable, that
those active particles, which have no cement to unite them, nothing to keep
them in the order they were set, yea, which are ever and anon justled by the
occursion of other bodies, whereof there is an infinite store in this
Repository, should so orderly keep their Cells without any alteration of their
site or posture, which at first was allotted them? And how is it conceivable,
but that carelessly turning over the Idea's of our mind to recover something we
would remember, we should put all the other Images into a disorderly floating,
and so raise a little Chaos of confusion, where Nature requires the exactest
order. According to this account, I cannot see, but that our Memories would be
more confused then our Midnight compositions: For is it likely, that the
divided Atoms which presented themselves together, should keep the same ranks
in such a variety of tumultuary agitations, as happen in that liquid Medium? An
heap of Ants on an Hillock will more easily be kept to an uniformity in motion;
and the little bodies which are incessantly playing up and down the Air in
their careless postures, are as capable of Regularity as these. Much more might
be added, but I intend only a touch.

But a Third way, that has been attempted, is that of Aristotle, which says,
that Objects are conserved in the Memory by certain intentional Species,
Beings, which have nothing of Matter in their Essential Constitution, but yet
have a necessary subjective dependence on it, whence they are called Material.
To this briefly.

Besides that these Species are made a Medium between Body and Spirit, and
therefore partake of no more of Being, then what the charity of our
Imaginations affords them; and that the supposition infers a creative energie
in the object their producent, which Philosophy allows not to
Creature-Efficients: I say, beside these, it is quite against their nature to
subsist, but in the presence and under the actual influence of their cause; as
being produced by an Emanative Causality, the Effects whereof dye in the
removal of their Origin. But this superannuated conceit deserves no more of
our remembrance, then it contributes to the apprehension of it. And therefore I
pass on to the last.

Which is that of Mr. Hobbs, that Memory is nothing else but the knowledge of
decaying Sense, which is made by the reaction of one body against another; or,
as he expresses it in his Humane Nature, a Missing of Parts in an Object. The
foundation of this Principle [as of many of its fellows] is totally evers't by
the most ingenious Commentator upon Immaterial Beings, Dr. H. More in his book
Of Immortality. I shall therefore leave that cause in the hands of that most
learned undertaker, and only observe two things to my present purpose. (1).
Neither the Brain, nor Spirits, nor any other material substance within the
Head can for any considerable space of time conserve motion. The former is of
such a clammy consistence, that it can no more retain it then a Quagmire: And
the spirits for their liquidity are more incapable then the fluid Medium, which
is the conveyer of Sounds, to persevere in the continued repetition of vocal
Airs. And if there were any other substance within us, as fitly tempered to
preserve motion, as the Author of the opinion could desire: Yet (2.) which will
equally press against either of the former, this motion would be quickly
deadned even to an utter cessation, by counter-motions; and we should not
remember any thing, but till the next impression. Much less can this Principle
give an account, how such an abundance of motions should orderly succeed one
another, as things do in our memories: And to remember a soug or tune, it will
be required, that our Souls be an Harmony more then in a Metaphor^ continually
running over in a silent whisper those Musical accents which our retentive
faculty is preserver of. Which could we suppose in a single Instance; yet a
multitude of Musical Consonancies would be as impossible, as to play a thousand
tunes on a Lute at once. One motion would cross and destroy another; all would
be clashing and discord: And the Musicians Soul would be the most
disharmonious: For according to the tenor of this opinion, our memories will
be stored with infinite variety of diverse, yea contrary motions, which must
needs interfere, thwart, and obstruct on another: and there would be nothing
within us, but Ataxy and disorder.

. 8. Much more might be added of the difficulties, which occurr touching the
Understanding, Fancy, Will, and Affections. But the Controversies hereabout,
are so hotly managed by the divided Schools, and so voluminously every where
handled; that it will be thought better to say nothing of them, then a little.
The sole difficulties about the Will, its nature, and sequency to the
Understanding, etc. have almost quite baffled inquiry, and shown us little
else, but that our Understandings are as blind as it is. And the grand question
depending hereon, (...); I think will not be ended, but by the final abolition
of its object. They, that would lose their Knowledge here, let them diligently
inquire after it. Search will discover that Ignorance, which is as invincible,
as its Cause. These Controversies, like some Rivers, the further they run, the
more they are hid. And I think a less account is given of them now, then some
Centuries past; when they were a subject of debate to the pious Fathers.

CHAP. V.
How our Bodies are formed unexplicable. The Plastic signifies nothing; the
Formation of Plants, and Animals unknown, in their Principle. Mechanisme solves
it not. A new way propounded, which also fails of satisfaction. (2.) No account
is yet given how the parts of Matter are united. Some Considerations on
Descartes his Hypothesis, it fails of Solution. (3.) The Question is
unanswerable, whether Matter be compounded of Divisibles, or Indivisibles.

THerefore we will pass on to the next, the consideration of our Bodies, which
though we see, and feel, and continually converse with; yet its constitution,
and inward frame is an America, a yet undiscovered Region. The saying of the
Kingly Prophet, I am wonderfully made, may well be understood of that
admiration, which is the Daughter of Ignorance. And with reverence it may be
applied, that in seeing we see, and understand not. Three things I Will subjoyn
concerning this Sensible matter, the other part of our compositoin.

. 1. That our bodies are made according to the most curious Artifice, and
orderly contrivance, cannot be denied even by them, who are least beholden to
Nature. The elegance of this composure, saved the great Aesculapius, Galen,
from a professed Atheism. And I cannot think that the branded Epicurus,
Lucretius, and their fellows were in earnest, when they resolved this
composition into a fortuitous range of Atoms. To suppose a Watch, or any other
the most curious Automaton by the blind hits of Chance, to perform diversity of
orderly motions, to indicate the hour, day of the Month, Tides, age of the
Moon, and the like, with an unparalled exactness, and all without the
regulation of Art, this were the more pardonable absurdity. And that this
admirable Engine of our Bodies, whose functions are carried on by such a
multitude of parts, and motions, which neither interfere, nor impede one
another in their operations; but by an harmonious Sympathy promote the
perfection and good of the whole: That this should be an undesign'd effect, is
an assertion, that is more then Melancholies Hyperbole. I say therefore, that
if we do but consider this Fabric with minds unpossest of an affected madness;
we will easily grant, that it was some skilful Archeus who delineated those
comely proportions, and has expressed such exactly Geometrical elegancies in its
compositions. But what this hidden Architect should be, and by what instruments
and art this frame is erected; is as unknown to us, as our Embryo-thoughts. The
Plastic faculty is a fine word: But what it is, how it works, and whose it is,
we cannot learn; no, not by a return into the Womb; neither will the Platonic
Principles unriddle the doubt: For though the Soul be supposed to be the Bodies
Maker, and the builder of its own house; yet by what kind of Knowledge, Method,
or Means, is as unknown: and that we should have a knowledge which we know not
of, is an assertion, which some say, has no commission from our Faculties. The
Great Descartes will allow it to be no better, then a downright absurdity. But
yet should we suppose it, it would be evidence enough of what we aim at.

Nor is the composition of our Bodies the only wonder: we are as much non-plust
by the most contemptible Worm, and Plant, we tread on. How is a drop of Dew
organized into an Insect, or a lump of Clay into animal Perfections? How are
the Glories of the Field spun, and by what Pencil are they limn'd in their
unaffected bravery? By whose direction is the nutriment so regularly
distributed unto the respective parts, and how are they kept to their specific
uniformities? If we attempt Mechanical solutions, we shall never give an
account, why the Wood-cock does not sometimes borrow colors of the Mag-pye,
why the Lilly does not exchange with the Daysie, or why it is not sometime
painted with a blush of the Rose? Can unguided matter keep it self to such
exact conformities, as not in the least spot to vary from the species? That
diverse Limners at a distance without either copy, or design, should draw the
same Picture to an undistinguishable exactness, both in form, color, and
features; this is more conceivable, then that matter, which is so diversified
both in quantity, quality, motion, site, and infinite other circumstances,
should frame it self so absolutely according to the Idea of its kind. And
though the fury of that Apelles, who threw his Pencil in a desperate rage upon
the Picture he had essayed to draw, once casually effected those lively
representations, which his Art could not describe; yet it is not likely, that
one of a thousand such praecipitancies should be crowned with so an unexpected
an issue. For though blind matter might reach some elegancies in individual
effects; yet specific conformities can be no unadvised productions, but in
greatest likelihood, are regulated by the immediate efficiency of some knowing
agent: which whether it be seminal Forms, according to the Platonical
Principles, or what ever else we please to suppose; the manner of its working
is to us unknown* or if these effects are merely Mechanical; yet to learn the
method of such operations may be, and has indeed been ingeniously attempted;
but I think cannot be performed to the satisfaction of severer examination.

That all bodies both Animal, Vegetable, and Inanimate, are formed out of such
particles of matter, which by reason of their figures, will not cohaere or lie
together, but in such an order as is necessary to such a specifical formation,
and that therein they naturally of themselves concur, and reside, is a pretty
conceit, and there are experiments that credit it. If after a decoction of
herbs in a Winter-night, we expose the liquor to the frigid air; we may
observe in the morning under a crust of Ice, the perfect appearance both in
figure, and color, of the Plants that were taken from it. But if we break the
aqueous Crystal, those pretty images dis-appear and are presently dissolved.

Now these airy Vegetables are presumed to have been made, by the relics of
these plantal emissions whose avolation was prevented by the condensed
enclosure. And therefore playing up and down for a while within their liquid
prison, they at last settle together in their natural order, and the Atoms of
each part finding out their proper place, at length rest in their methodical
Situation, till by breaking the Ice they are disturbed, and those counterfeit
compositions are scattered into their first Indivisibles. This Hypothesis may
yet seem to receive further confirmation, from the artificial resurrection of
Plants from their ashes, which Chemists are so well acquainted with: And
besides, that Salt dissolved upon fixation returns to its affected cubes, the
regular figures of Minerals, as the Hexagonal of Crystal, the Hemi-sphaerical
of the Fairy-stone, the stellar figure of the stone Asteria, and such like,
seem to look with probability upon this way of formation. And I must needs say
it is handsomely conjectured. But yet what those figures are, that should be thus
mechanically adapted, to fall so unerringly into regular compositions, is
beyond our faculties to conceive, or determine. And how those heterogeneous
atoms (for such their figures are supposed) should by themselves hit so
exactly into their proper residence in the midst of such tumultuary motions,
cross thwartings, and arietations of other particles, especially when for one
way of hitting right, there are thousands of missing; there is no Hypothesis yet
extant can resolve us. And yet had heaven afforded that miracle of men, the
Illustrious Descartes a longer day on earth, we might have expected the utmost
of what ingenuity could perform herein: but his immature Fate has unhappily
disappointed us; and prevented the most desirable Complement of his not to be
equaled Philosophy.

. 2. (2.) It Is no less difficult to give an account, how the Parts of the
Matter of our Bodies are united: For though superficial Enquirers may easily
satisfy themselves by answering, that it is done by muscles, nerves, and other
like strings and ligaments, which Nature has destined to that office; yet, if
we seek for an account how the parts of these do cohere, we shall find the
cause to be as latent, as the effect of easy discovery. Nothing with any show
of success has yet appeared on the Philosophic Stage, but the opinion of
Descartes; that the Parts of Matter are united by Rest. Neither can I
conceive, how any thing can be substituted in its room, more congruous to
reason; since Rest is most opposite to Motion, the immediate cause of disunion.
But yet I cannot see, how this can satisfy, touching the almost indissolvible
coherence of some bodies, and the fragility and solubility of others: For if
the Union of the Parts consist only in Rest; it would seem that a bagg of dust
would be of as firm a consistence as that of Marble or Adamant: a Bar of Iron
will be as easily broken as a Tobacco-pipe; and Bajazets Cage had been but a
sorry Prison. The Egyptian Pyramids would have been sooner lost, then the
Names of them that built them; and as easily blown away, as those inverst ones
of smoke. If it be pretended for a difference, that the parts of solid bodies
are held together by hooks, and angulous involutions; I say, this comes not
home: For the coherence of the parts of these hooks [as has been noted] will
be of as difficult a conception, as the former: And we must either suppose an
infinite of them holding together on one another; or at last come to parts,
that are united by a mere juxta-position: Yea, could we suppose the former, yet
the coherence of these, would be like the hanging together of an infinite such
of Dust: which Hypothesis would spoil the Proverb, and a rope of sand, should
be no more a phrase for Labor in vain: For unless there be something, upon
which all the rest may depend for their cohesion; the hanging of one by
another, will signify no more then the mutual dependence of causes and effects
in an infinite Series, without a First: the admission of which, Atheism would
applaud. But yet to do the Master of Mechanics right; somewhat of more
validity in the behalf of this Hypothesis may be assigned: Which is, that the
closeness and compactness of the Parts resting together, does much confer to
the strength of the union: For every thing continues in the condition, wherein
it is, except something more powerful alter it: And therefore the parts, that
rest close together, must continue in the same relation to each other, till
some other body by motion disjoyn them. Now then, the more parts there are
pen't together, the more able they will be for resistance; and what has less
compactness, and by consequence fewer parts, according to the laws of motion
will not be able to effect any alteration in it. According to what is here
presented, what is most dense, and least porous, will be most coherent, and
least discerpible. And if this help not, I cannot apprehend what can give an
account of the former instances. And yet even this is confuted by experience;
since the most porous, spongy bodies are oft-times the most tough in
consistence. It Is easier to break a tube of Glass or Crystal, then of Elm or
Ash: And yet as the parts of the former are more, so they are more at rest;
since the liquid juice, which is diffused through the parts of the Wood, is in
a continual agitation, which in Descartes his Philosophy is the cause of
fluidity; and a proportioned humidity conferr's much to union [Sir K. Digby
makes it the Cement it self]; a dry stick will be easily broken, when a green
one will maintain a strong resistance: and yet in the moist substance there is
less rest, then in what is, dryer and more fragill. Much more might be added:
But I Will content my self with what is mentioned; and, notwithstanding what has
been said, I judge this account of that most miraculous wit to be the most
ingenuous and rational, that has or [it may be] can be given. I shall not
therefore conclude it false; though I think the emergent difficulties, which
are its attendants, unanswerable: which is proof enough of the weakness of our
now Reasons, which are driven to such straights and puzzles even in things
which are most obvious, and have so much the advantage of our faculties.

. 3. The composition of bodies, whether it be of Divisibles or Indivisibles, is
a question which must be ranked with the Indissolvibles: For though it has
been attempted by the most illustrious Wits of all Philosophic Ages; yet they
have done little else, but shown their own divisions to be almost as infinite,
as some suppose those of their Subject. And notwithstanding all their shifts,
subtilties, newly invented Words and Modes, sly subterfuges, and studied
evasions; yet the product of all their endeavors, is but as the Birth of the
laboring Mountains, Wind and Emptiness. Do what they can; Actual Infinite
extension every where, Equality of all bodies, Impossibility of Motion, and a
world more of the most palpable absurdities will press the assertors of
infinite divisibility. Neither can it be avoided, but that all motions would be
equal in velocity, the lines drawn from side to side in a Pyramid, may have
more parts then the Basis, all bodies would be swallowed up in a point, and
endless more inconsistences, will be as necessarily consequential to the
opinion of Indivisibles. But intending only to instance in difficulties, which
are not so much taken notice of; I shall refer the Reader, that would see more
of this, to Oviedo, Pontius, Ariaga, Carelton, and other Jesuits: whose
management of this subject with equal force on either side, is a strong
presumption of what we drive at.

CHAP. VI.
Difficulties about the Motion of a Wheel, which admit of no Solution.

BEsides the already mentioned difficulties, even the most ordinary trivial
occurrents, if we contemplate them in the Theory, will as much puzzle us, as
any of the former. Under this head I Will add three rhings touching the Motion of
a wheel, and conclude this.

. 1. And first, if we abstractly consider it, it seems impossible that a wheel
should move: I mean not the progressive, but that Motion which is merely on its
own Center. And were it not for the information of Experience, it is most likely
that Philosophy had long ago concluded it impossible: For let us suppose the
wheel to be divided according to the Alphabet. Now in motion there is a change
of place, and in the motion of a wheel there is a succession of one part to
another in the same place; so that it seems unconceivable that A. should move
until B. has left its place: For A. cannot move, but it must acquire some
place or other. It can acquire none but what was B's, which we suppose to be
most immediate to it. The same space cannot contain them both. And therefore B.
must leave its place, before A. can have it; Yea, and the nature of succession
requires it. But now B. cannot move, but into the place of C; and C. must be
out, before B. can come in: so that the motion of C. will be pre-required
likewise to the motion of A; and so onward till it comes to Z. Upon the same
accounts Z. will not be able to move, till A. moves, being the part next to it:
neither will A. be able to move [as has been shown] till Z. has. And so the
motion of every part will be pre-requir'd to it self. Neither can one evade, by
saying, that all the parts move at once. For (1.) we cannot conceive in a
succession but that something should be first, and that motion should begin
somewhere. (2.) If the parts may all change places with one another at the same
time without any respect of priority, and posteriority to each others motion:
why then may not a company of Bullets closely crowded together in a Box, as
well move together by a like mutual and simultaneous exchange? Doubtless the
reason of this ineptitude to motion in this position is, that they cannot give
way one to another, and motion can no where begin because of the plenitude. The
case is just the same in the instance before us; and therefore we need go no
further for an evidence of its inconceivableness. But yet to give it one touch
more according to the Peripatetick niceness, which says, that one part enters
in the same instant that the other goes out: I Will add this in brief: In the
instant that B. leaves its place, it is in it, or not: If so; then A. cannot be
in it in the same instant without quantative penetration. If not; then it
cannot be said to leave it in that instant, but to have left it before. These
difficulties, which pinch so in this obvious experiment, stand in their full
force against all Motion on the Hypothesis of absolute plenitude. Nor yet have
the Defenders hereof need to take notice of them, because they equally press a
most sensible Truth. Neither is it fair, that the opposite opinion of
interspersed vacuities should be rejected as absurd upon the account of some
inextricable perplexities which attend it. Therefore let them both have fair
play; and which soever does with most ease and congruity solve the Phenomenon,
that shall have my vote for the most Philosophic Hypothesis.

. 2. It Is a difficulty no less desperate then the former, that the parts vicine
to the center, which it may be pass not over the hundredth part of space which
those do of the extreme circumference, should describe their narrower circle
but in equal time with those other, that trace so great a round. If they move
but in the same degree of Velocity; here is then an equality in time and
motion, and yet a vast inequality in the acquired space. A thing which seems
flatly impossible: For is it conceivable, that of two bodies setting forth
together, and continuing their motion in the same swiftness, the one should so
far out-go its fellow, as to move ten mile an hour, while the other moves but a
furlong? If so, 'twill be no wonder, that the race is not to the swift, and the
furthest way about may well be the nearest way home. There is but one way that
can be attempted to untie this knot; which is, by saying, that the remoter and
more outside parts move more swiftly then the central ones. But this likewise
is as unconceivable as what it would avoid: For suppose a right line drawn from
the center to the circumference, and it cannot be apprehended, but that the
line should be inflected, if some parts of it move faster then others. I say if
we do abstractedly from experience contemplate it in the theory, it is hard to
conceive, but that one part moving, while the other rests, or at least moves
slower (which is as rest to a swifter motion) should change its distance from
it, and the respect, which it had to it; which one would think should cause an
incurvation in the line.

. 3. I Will add only this one, which is an experiment that may for ever silence
the most daring confidence. Let there be two wheels fixed on the same Axel in
Diameter ten inches a piece. Between them let there be a little wheel, of two
inches Diameter, fixed on the same Axel. Let them be moved together on a plane,
the great ones on the ground suppose, and the little one on a Table [for
because of its parvitude it cannot reach to the same floor with them] And you will
find that the little wheel will move over the same space in equal time with
equal circulations, with the great ones, and describe as long a line. Now this
seems bigg of repugnancies, though Sense it self suffragate to its truth: For
since every part of the greater wheels makes a proportionable part of the line,
as do the parts of the little one, and the parts of those so much exceeding in
multitude the parts of this: It will seem necessary that the line made by the
greater wheels should have as many parts more then the line made by the less,
as the wheels themselves have in circumference, and so the line would be as
much longer as the wheels are bigger: so that one of these absurdities is
unavoidable, either that more parts of the greater wheels go to the making one
part of their lines, which will infer a quantitative penetration; or that the
little wheel has as many parts as the great ones, though five times in
Diameter exceeded by them, since the lines they describe are of equal length;
or the less wheel's line will have fewer parts then the others, though of equal
extent with them, since it can have no more parts then the less circle, nor
they fewer then the greater. But these are all such repugnancies, as that
Melancholy it self would scarce own them. And therefore we may well enter this
among the unconceivables. Should I have enlarged on this Subject to the taking
in of all things that claim a share in it, it may be few things would have been
left unspoken to, but the Creed. Philosophy would not have engrossed our Pen,
but we must have been forced to anger the Intelligences of higher Orbs. But
intending only a glance at this rugged Theme, I shall forbear to insist more on
it, though the consideration of the Mysteries of Motion, Gravity, Light,
Colors, Vision, Sound, and infinite such like [things obvious, yet unknown]
might have been plentiful subject. I come now to trace some of the causes of
our Ignorance and Intellectual weakness: and among so many it is almost as great
a wonder as any of the former; that we can say, we know.

CHAP. VII.
Men's backwardness to acknowledge their own Ignorance and Error, though ready
to find them in others. The ( i) cause of the Shortness of our Knowledge, viz.
the depth of Verity discours't of, as of its admixtion in men's Opinions with
falsehood, and the connection of truths, and their mutual dependence: A second
Reason of the shortness of our Knowledge, viz. because we can perceive nothing
but by proportion to our Senses.

THe Disease of our Intellectuals is too great, not to be its own Diagnostick:
And they that feel it not, are not less sick, but stupidly so. The weakness of
humane understanding, all will confess: yet the confidence of most in their own
reasonings, practically disowns it: And it is easier to persuade them it from
others lapses then their own; so that while all complain of our Ignorance and
Error, every one exempts himself. It is acknowledged by all, while every one
denies it. If the foregoing part of this Discourse, have not universally
concluded our weakness: I have one Item more of my own. If Knowledge can be
found in the Particulars mentioned; I must lose that, which I thought I had,
That there is none. But however, though some should pick a quarrel with the
instances I alleged; yet the conclusion must be owned in others. And
therefore beside the general reason I gave of our intellectual disabilities,
The Fall; it will be worth our labor to descend to a more particular account:
since it is a good degree of Knowledge to be acquainted with the causes of our
Ignorance. And what we have to say under this head, will be comprehensive both
of the causes of that, and (which are the effects thereof) of our
misapprehensions and Errors.

. 1. And first, one cause of the little we know may be, that Knowledge lies
deep, and is therefore difficult; and so not the acquist of every careless
Inquirer. Democritus his Well has a (...), and Truth floats not. The useless
froth swims on the surface; but the Pearl lies covered with a mass of Waters.
Verisimilitude and Opinion are an easy purchase; and these counterfeits are
all the Vulgars treasure: But true Knowledge is as dear in acquisition, as rare
in possession. Truth, like a point or line, requires an acuteness and intention
to its discovery; while verisimility, like the expanded superficies, is an
obvious sensible on either hand, and affords a large and easy field for loose
enquiry. And it is the more difficult to find out Verity, because it is in such
inconsiderable proportions scattered in a mass of opinionative uncertainty;
like the Silver in Hiero's Crown of Gold: And it is no easy piece of Chemistry
to reduce them to their unmixed selves. The Elements are no where pure in these
lower Regions; and if there is any free from the admixtion of another, sure
it is above the concave of the Moon: Neither can any boast of a knowledge, which
is depurate from the defilement of a contrary, within this Atmosphear of flesh;
it dwells no where in unblended proportions, on this side the Empyreum. All
Opinions have their Truth, and all have what is not so; and to say all are true
and none, is no absurdity. So that to crown our selfs with sparks, which are
almost lost in such a world of heterogeneous natures, is as difficult as
desirable. Besides, Truth is never alone; to know one will require the
knowledge of many. They hang together in a chain of mutual dependence; you
cannot draw one link without many others. Such an Harmony cannot commence from
a single string; diversity of strokes makes it. The beauty of a Face is not
known by the Eye, or Nose; it consists in a symmetry, and it is the comparative
faculty which votes it: Thus is Truth relative, and little considerable can be
attained by catches. The Painter cannot transcribe a face upon a Transient
view; it requires the information of a fixed and observant Eye: And before we
can reach an exact sight of Truth's uniform perfections, this fleeting
Transitory our Life, is gone. Thus we see the face of Truth, but as we do one
another, when we walk the streets, in a careless Pass-by: And the most
diligent observers, view but the backside of the Hangings; the right one is
of the other side the Grave: so that our Knowledge is but like those broken
ends, at best a most confused adumbration. Nature, that was veiled to
Aristotle, has not yet uncovered, in almost two thousand years. What he sought
on the other side of Euripus, we must not look for on this side Immortality. In
easy disquisitions we are often left to the uncertainty of a guess: yea after
we have triumphed in a supposed (...); a new-sprung difficulty marrs our
Ovations, and exposes us to the Torment of a disappointment: so that even the
great Master of Dogmatists himself concludes the Scene with an Anxius vixi,
Dubious morior.

. 2. Another reason of our ignorance and the narrowness of our apprehensions
may arise hence; That we cannot perceive the manner of any of Natures
operations, but by proportion to our senses, and a return to material
phantasms. A blind man cannot conceive colors, but either as some audible,
gustable, odoriferous, or tactile qualities; and when he would imagine them, he
has questionless recourse to some of these, in an account of which his other
senses befriend him. Thus more perfect apprehenders misconceive Immaterials:
Our imaginations paint Souls and Angels in as dissimilar a resemblance. Thus
had there not been any night, shadow, or opacity; we should never have had any
determinate conceit of Darkness; That would have been as inconceiveable to us,
as its contrary is to him that never saw it. But now our senses being scant and
limited, and Natures operations subtle and various; they must needs transcend,
and outrun our faculties. They are only Natures grosser ways of working,
which are sensible; Her finer threads are out of the reach of our feeble
Percipient, yea questionless she has many hidden Energies, no ways imitated
in her obvious pieces: and therefore it is no wonder that we are so often at a
loss; an infirmity beyond prevention, except we could step by step follow the
tracks and methods of Infinite Wisdom, which cannot be done but by him that
owns it.

CHAP. VIII.
A third reason of our Ignorance and Error, viz. the impostures and deceits of
our Senses. The way to rectify these mis-informations propounded. Descartes
his method the only way to Science. The difficulty of exact performance.

. 3. ANother reason is the Imposture and fallacy of our Senses, which impose
not only on common Heads, who scarce at all live to the higher Principle; But
even more refined Mercuries, who have the advantages of an improved reason to
disabuse them, are yet frequently captivated to these deceiving Prepossessions:
appealing to a Judicature both uncommissioned and unjust; and when the clearest
Truth is to be tried by such Judges, its innocence will not secure it from the
condemning award of that unintelligent Tribunal: For since we live the life of
Brutes, before we grow into Man; and our Understandings in this their Nonage,
being almost merely Passive to sensible Impressions, receiving all things in an
uncontroverted and promiscuous admission: It cannot be, that our Knowledge
should be other, then an heap of Mis-conception and Error, and conceits as
impertinent as the toys we delight in. All this while, we have no more ^o
reason, then the (...) [as Plotinus calls it] amounts to. And besides this our
easy submission to the sophistications of sense, and inability to prevent the
miscarriages of our Junior Reasons; that which strikes the great stroke toward
our after-deceptions, is the pertinacious adherence of many of these first
Impressions to our Graduate Understandings. That which is early received, if in
any considerable strength of Impress, as it were grows into our tender natures,
and is therefore of difficult remove. Thus a fright in Minority, or an
Antipathy then contracted, is not worn out but with its subject. And it may be
more then a Story, that Nero derived much of his cruelty from the Nurse that
suckled him. Now though our coming Judgments do in part undeceive us, and
rectify the grosser Errors which our unwary Sensitive has engaged us in; yet
others are so flesht in us, that they maintain their interest upon the
deceptibility of our decayed Natures, and are cherish't there, as the
legitimate issues of our reasonable faculties.

Indeed Sense it self detects its more palpable deceits, by a counter-evidence;
and the more ordinary Impostures seldom outlive the first Experiments. If our
sight represent a Staff as crooked in the water; the same faculty rectifies
both it, and us, in the thinner Element. And if a square Tower seem round at a
distance; the eye, which mistook in the circumstance of its figure, at that
remove, corrects the mistake in a due approach: Yea, and befriends those who
have learned to make the advantage of its informations, in more remote and
difficil discoveries. And though his Sense occasion the careless Rustic to
judge the Sun no bigger then a Cheese-fat; yet sense too by a frugal
improvement of its evidence, grounds the Astronomers knowledge, that it is
bigger then this Globe of Earth and Water. Which it does not only by the
advantageous assistance of a Tube, but by less industrious experiments, showing
in what degrees Distance minorates the Object. But yet in inifinite other
cases, wherein sense can afford none, or but very little help to dis-intangle
us; our first deceptions lose no ground, but rather improve in our riper years:
so that we are not weaned from our childhood, till we return to our second
Infancy; and even our Gray heads out-grow not those Errors, which we have
learned before the Alphabet.

Thus our Reasons being inoculated on Sense, will retain a relish of the stock
they grow upon: And if we would endeavor after an unmixed Knowledge; we must
unlive our former lives, and (inverting the practice of Penelope) undo in the
day of our more advanced understandings, what we had spun in the night of our
Infant-ignorance. He that would rebuild a decayed structure, must first pluck
down the former ruins. A fabric, though high and beautiful, if founded on
rubbish, is easily made the triumph of the winds: And the most pompous seeming
Knowledge, that is built on the unexamin'd prejudices of Sense, stands not, but
till the storm arise; the next strong encounter discovers its weakness, in a
shameful overthrow. And now since a great part of our scientifical Treasure is
most likely to be adulterate, though all bears the image and superscription of
Verity; the only way to know what is sophisticate, and what is not so, is to
bring all to the Examen of the Touchstone: For the prepossessions of sense
having (as is shown) so mingled themselves with our Genuine Truths, and being
as plausible to appearance as they; we cannot gain a true assurance of any, but
by suspending our assent from all, till the deserts of each, discovered by a
strict enquiry, claim it. Upon this account I think the method of the most
excellent Descartes not unworthy its Author; and (since Dogmatical Ignorance
will call it so) a Skepticism, that is the only way to Science. But yet this is
so difficult in the impartial and exact performance, that it may be well
reckoned among the bare Possibilities, which never commence into a Futurity: It
requiring such a free, sedate, and intent mind, as it may be is no where found
but among the Platonical Idea's. Do what we can, Prejudices will creep in, and
hinder our Intellectual Perfection: And though by this means we may get some
comfortable allay to our distempers; yet can it not perfectly cure us of a
disease, that sticks as close to us as our natures.

CHAP. IX.
Two Instances of Sensitive deception. (1) Of the Quiescence of the Earth.
Sense is the great inducement to its belief; its testimony deserves no credit
in this case, though it do move, Sense would present it as immovable. The Sun
to Sense is as much devoid of motion as the Earth. Four Cases in which motion
is insensible, viz. (1) If it be very swift. (2) If it be steady and regular.
(3) If very slow. (4) If the Sentient partake of it. Applied to the Earths
motion. The unweildiness of its bulk is no argument of its immobility.

NOw before I leave this, I shall take the opportunity, which this head offers,
to endeavor the detection of some grand prejudices of sense, in two instances;
the free debate of which I conceive to be of great importance, though hitherto
for the most part obstructed, by the peremptory conclusion of sense, which yet
I shall declare to have no suffrage in the case of either: And the pleasantness
and concernment of the Theories, if it be one, I hope will atone the
Digression.

. 2. First, it is generally opinion'd, that the Earth rests as the Worlds
center, while the Heavens are the subject of the Universal Motions; And, as
immovable as the Earth, is grown into the credit of being Proverbial. So that
for a man to go about to counter-argue this common belief, is as fruitless as
to whistle against the winds. I shall not undertake to maintain the Paradox,
that stands diameter to this almost Catholic Opinion. Its assertion would be
entertained with the hoot of the Rabble: the very mention of it as possible, is
among the most ridiculous; and they are likely most severely to judge it, who
least understand the Cause. But yet the Patronage of as great Wits, as it may
be e're saw the Sun, such as Pythagoras, Descartes, Copernicus, Galilaeo,
More, Kepler, etc. has gained it a more favorable censure with the learned
World; and advanced it far above either vain, or contemptible. And if it be a
mistake, it is only so: There Is no Heresy in such an harmless aberration; at
the worst, with the ingenuous; the probability of it will render it a lapse of
easy Pardon. Now whether the Earth move or rest, I undertake not to determine.
My work is to prove, that the common inducement to the belief of its
quiescence, the testimony of sense, is weak and frivolous: to the end, that if
upon an unprejudiced trial, it be found more consonant to the Astronomical
Phenomenon; its Motion may be admitted, notwithstanding the seeming contrary
evidence of unconcerned Senses. And I think what follows will evince, that this
is no so absurd an Hypothesis, as Vulgar Philosophers account it; but that,
though it move, its motion must needs be as insensible, as if it were
quiescent: and the assertion of it would then be as uncouth and harsh to the
sons of Sense, that is, to the generality of Mankind, as now it is.

That there is a motion, which makes the vicissitudes of day and night, and
constitutes the successive Seasons of the Annual Circle; Sense may assure us,
or at least the comparative Judgment of an higher faculty, made upon its
immediate evidence: But whether the Sun, or Earth, be the common Movent, cannot
be determined but by a farther appeal. If we will take the literal evidence of
our Eyes; the Ethereal Coal moves no more then this Inferior clod does: For
where ever in the Firmament we see it, it is represented to us, as fixed in that
part of the enlightened Hemisphear. And though an after-account discover, that
it has changed its Site and respect to this our Globe; yet whether that were
caused by its translation from us, or ours from it, Sense leaves us in an
Ignoramus: So that if we are resolved to stand to its Verdict, it must be by as
great a Miracle if the Sun ever move, as it was that it once rested, or what
ever else was the subject of that supernal change. And if upon a mere sensible
account we will deny Motion to the Earth; upon the same inducement we must deny
it the Sun; and the Heavens will lose their First Moveable. But to draw up
closer to our main design, We may the better conceive that, though the Earth
move, yet its Motion must needs be insensible; if we consider that in four
cases Motion strikes not the Sense.

1. The Velocity of Motion prevents the sense often. Thus a Bullet passes by
us, and out-runs the nimblest Optics; and the Fly of a Jack in its swiftest
rounds, gives the Eye no notice of its circulations. The reason is, for that
there is no sense without some stay of the Object on the faculty: For in Sense
there are two considerables: The Motion made on the Brain; and the Souls act
consequent thereupon, which we call Animadversion: and in this latter consists
the formality of Sensitive Perception. Now though possibly the Ethereal Matter
might convey the stroke and motion made on it quite to the Brain, before the
pass of the Object; yet the soul being taken up with other attendances,
perceives not, till engaged to it by iterated impressions, except the first
impulse be very strong and violent. Thus in the clearest night we cannot see
some of the smaller Stars, upon the first cast of the Eye to their Celestial
Residence: yet a more intent view discovers them; though very likely their
Motion reached the Brain, as soon as the more noted impress of their Fellows.
Thus upon a slight turn of our sight, we omit many particularities in nearer
objects, which a more fixed look presents us with. And thus the swiftest
motions, though they knock at the door; yet they are gone before the soul can
come, to take an account of their Errand. 2. If Regularity and steddiness
accompany Velocity; the motion then leaves not the least track in the
sensitive. Thus a French Top, the common recreation of Schoolboys, thrown from
a cord which was wound about it, will stand as it were fixed on the floor it
lighted; and yet continue in its repeated Gyrations, while the sense discovers
not the least footsteps of that praecipitate Rotation. The reason is much what
the same with the former: For that meeting no joggs, or counter-motions to
interrupt it, the return of the parts is so quick, that the mind cannot take
notice of their succession to each other: For before it can fix to the
observation of any one, its object is gone: whereas, were there any
considerable thwart in the Motion; it would be a kind of stop or arrest, by the
benefit of which the Soul might have a glance of the fugitive Transient. But I
pass these; they concern not our present enquiry. 3. If the Motion be very
slow, we perceive it not. Thus Vegetables spring up from their Mother Earth;
and we can no more discern their accretive Motion, then we can their most
hidden cause. Thus the sly shadow steals away on Times Account-Book the Dyal;
and the quickest Eye can tell no more, but that it is gone. If a reason of this
be demanded; I conceive it may be to some satisfaction returned, That it is
because Motion cannot be perceived without the perception of its Terms, viz.
The parts of space which it immediately left, and those which it next acquires.
Now the space left and acquired in every sensible moment in such slow
progressions, is so inconsiderable, that it cannot possibly move the sense;
(which by reason either of its constitutional dullness, or the importunity of
stronger impressions, cannot take notice of such parvitudes) and therefore
neither can the Motion depending thereon, be a^y more observable, then it is.
4. If the sentient be carried passibus aequis with the body, whose motion it
would observe; [supposing the former condition, that it be regular and steddy]
In this case especially the remove is insensible, at least in its proper
subject. Thus, while in a Ship, we perceive it not to move: but our sense
transfers its motion to the neighboring shores, as the Poet, Littus campique
recedunt. And I question not, but if any were born and bred under Deck, and had
no other information but what his sense affords; he would without the least
doubt or scruple, opinion, that the house he dwelt in, was as stable and fixed
as ours. To express the reason according to the Philosophy of Descartes, I
suppose it thus: Motion is not perceived, but by the successive strikings of
the object upon diverse filaments of the Brain; which diversifie the
representation of its site and distance. But now when the motion of the object
is common with it, to our selves; it retains the same relation to our sense, as
if we both rested: For striking still on the same strings of the Brain, it
varies not its site or distance from us; and therefore we cannot possibly sense
its motion: nor yet upon the same account our own; least of all, when we are
carried without any conamen and endeavor of ours, which in our particular
progressions betrays them to our notice.
Now then the Earths motion (if we suppose it to have any) having the joint
concurrence of the two last, to render it insensible; I think we shall need no
more proof to conclude the necessity of its being so.

For though the Third seems not to belong to the present case, since the
supposed motion will be near a thousand miles an hour under the Equinoctial
line; yet it will seem to have no Velocity to the sense any more then the
received motion of the Sun, and for the same reason. Because the distant points
in the Celestial expanse [from a various and successive respect to which the
length, and consequently the swiftness of this motion must be calculated]
appear to the Eye in so small a degree of elongation from one another, as bears
no proportion to what is real. For since the Margin of the Visible Horizon in
the Heavenly Globe is Parallel with that in the Earthly, accounted but 120
miles diameter; Sense must needs measure the Azimuths, or Vertical Circles, by
triplication of the same diameter of 120. So that there will be no more
proportion betwixt the sensible and real celerity of the Terrestrial Motion,
then there is between the visible and rational dimension of the celestial
Hemisphear; which is none at all.

But if sensitive prejudice will yet confidently maintain the Impossibility of
the Hypothesis, from the supposed unwieldiness of its massy bulk, grounded on
our experience of the ineptitude of great and heavy bodies to Motion: I say
this is a mere Imposture of our Senses, the fallacy of which we may avoid, by
considering; that the Earth may as easily move, notwithstanding this pretended
indisposition of its magnitude, as those much vaster Orbs of Sun and Stars. He
that made it, could as well give motion to the whole, as to the parts; the
constant agitation of which is discovered in natural productions: and to both
as well as Rest to either: Neither will it need the assistance of an
Intelligence to perpetuate the begun Rotation: Since according to the
Indispensable Law of Nature [ That every thing should continue in the state
wherein it is, except something more powerful hinder it] it must persevere in
Motion, unless obstructed by a Miracle. Neither can Gravity, which makes great
bodies hard of Remove, be any hinderance to the Earths motion: since even the
Peripatetick Maxim, Nihil gravitat in suo loco, will exempt it from this
indisposing quality; which is nothing but the tendency of its parts, which are
ravished from it, to their desired Center. And the French Philosophy will
inform us, that the Earth as well as other bodies is indifferent in it self to
Rest, or its contrary. I have done with this instance, and my Brevity in the
following shall make some amends for my prolixity in this. He that would be
informed in this subject of the Earths Mobility, may find it largely and
ingeniously discussed, in Galilaeo's systema Cosmicum.

CHAP. X.
Another instance of the deceptions of our Senses: which is of translating the
Idea of our Passions to things without us. Properly and formally heat is not in
the fire, but is an expression of our sentiment. Yet in propriety of speech the
Senses themselves are never deceived, but only administer an occasion of deceit
to the understanding: proved by reason, and the Authority of St. Austin.

SEcondly the best Philosophy [the deserved Title of the Cartesian] derives all
sensitive perception from Motion, and corporal impress; some account of which
we have above given. Not that the Formality of it consists in material
Reaction, as Master Hobbs affirms, totally excluding any immaterial
concurrence: But that the representations of Objects to the Soul, the only
animadversive principle, are conveyed by motions made upon the immediate
Instruments of Sense. So that the diversity of our Sensations arises from the
diversity of the motion or figure of the object; which in a different manner
affect the Brain, whence the Soul has its immediate intelligence of the
quality of what is presented. Thus the different effects, which fire and water
have on us, which we call heat and cold, result from the so differing
configuration and agitation of their Particles: and not from, I know not what
Chimerical beings, supposed to inhere in the objects, their cause, and thence
to be propagated by many petty imaginary productions to the seat of Sense. So
that what we term heat and cold, and other qualities, are not properly
according to Philosophical rigor in the Bodies, their Efficients: but are
rather Names expressing our passions; and therefore not strictly attributable
to any thing without us, but by extrinsick denomination, as Vision to the Wall.
This I conceive to be an Hypothesis, well worthy a rational belief: and yet is
it so abhorrent from the Vulgar, that they would as soon believe Anaxagoras,
that snow is black, as him that should affirm, it is not white; and if any
should in earnest assert, that the fire is not formally hot, it would be
thought that the heat of his brain had fitted him for Anticyra, and that his
head were so to madness: For it is conceived to be as certain, as our faculties
can make it, that the same qualities, which we resent within us, are in the
object, their Source. And yet this confidence is grounded on no better
foundation, then a delusory prejudice, and the vote of misapplyed sensations,
which have no warrant to determine either one or other. I may indeed conclude,
that I am formally hot or cold; I feel it. But whether these qualities are
formally, or only eminently in their producent; is beyond the knowledge of the
sensitive. Even the Peripatetick Philosophy will teach us, that heat is not in
the Body of the Sun, but only vertually, and as in its cause; though it be the
Fountain and great Distributour of warmth to the nether Creation: and yet none
urge the evidence of sense to disprove it: Neither can it with any more Justice
be alleged against this Hypothesis. For if it be so as Descartes would have
it; yet sense would constantly present it to us, as Now. We should find heat
as infallible an attendant upon fire, and the increase thereof by the same
degrees in our approach to the Fountain calefacient, and the same excess within
the Visible substance, as Now; which yet I think to be the chief inducements to
the adverse belief: For Fire (I retain the instance, which yet may be applied
to other cases) being constant in its specifical motions in those smaller
derivations of it, which are its instruments of action, and therefore in the
same manner striking the sentient, though gradually varying according to the
proportions of more or less quantity or agitation, etc. will not fail to
produce the same effect in us, which we call heat, when ever we are within the
Orb of its activity. And the heat must needs be augmented by proximity, and
most of all within the Flame, because of the more violent motion of the
particles there, which therefore begets in us a stronger sense. Now if this
motive Energie, the Instrument of this active Element, must be called Heat; let
it be so, I contend not. I know not how otherwise to call it: To impose names
is part of the Peoples Charter, and I fight not with Words. Only I would not
that the Idea of our Passions should be applied to any thing without us, when
it has its subject no where but in our selves. This is the grand deceit, which
my design is to detect, and if possible, to rectify. Thus we have seen two
notorious instances of sensitive deception, which justify the charge of
Petron. Arbiter. Fallunt nos oculi, vagique sensus
Oppressa ratione mentiuntur.
And yet to speak properly, and to do our senses right, simply they are not
deceived, but only administer an occasion to our forward understandings to
deceive themselves: and so though they are some way accessory to our delusion;
yet the more principal faculties are the Capital offenders. Thus if the Senses
represent the Earth as fixed and immovable; they give us the truth of their
Sentiments: To sense it is so, and it would be deceit to present it otherwise.
For [as we have shewn] though it do move in it self; it rests to us, who are
carried with it. And it must needs be to sense unalterably quiescent, in that
our Rotation with it, prevents the variety of successive Impress; which only
renders motion sensible. And so if we erroneously attribute our particular
incommunicable sensations to things, which do no more resemble them then the
effect does its aequivocal cause; our senses are not in fault, but our
precipitate judgments. We feel such, or such a sentiment within us, and herein
is no cheat or misprison: it is truly so, and our sense concludes nothing of its
Rise or Origin. But if hence our Understandings falsely deduct, that there is
the same quality in the external Impressor; it is, it is criminal, our sense is
innocent. When the Ear tingles, we really hear a sound: If we judge it without
us, it is the fallacy of our Judgments. The apparitions of our frighted Phancies
are real sensibles: But if we translate them without the compass of our Brains,
and apprehend them as external objects; it is the unwary rashness of our
Understanding deludes us. And if our disaffected Palates resent naught but
bitterness from our choicest viands, we truly taste the unpleasing quality,
though falsely conceive it in that, which is no more then the occasion of its
production. If any find fault with the novelty of the notion; the learned St.
Austin stands ready to confute the charge: and they, who revere Antiquity, will
derive satisfaction from so venerable a suffrage. He tells us, Si quis remum
frangi in aqua opinatur, and, cum aufertur, integrari; non malum habet
internuncium, sed malus est Iudex. And onward to this purpose, The sense could
not otherwise perceive it in the water, neither ought it: For since the Water
is one thing, and the Air another; it is requisite and necessary, that the sense
should be as different as the medium: Wherefore the Eye sees aright; if there
be a mistake, it is the Judgement's the Deceiver. Elsewhere he says, that our
Eyes mis-inform us not, but faithfully transmit their resentment to the mind.
And against the Scepticks, That it is a piece of injustice to complain of our
senses, and to exact from them an account, which is beyond the sphere of their
notice: and resolutely determines, Quicquid possuut videre oculi, verum vident.
So that what we have said of the senses deceptions, is rigidly to be charged
only on our careless Understandings, misleading us through the ill management
of sensible informations. But because such are commonly known by the name of
the Senses deceipts (somewhat the more justifiably in that they administer the
occasion) I have thought good to retain the usual way of speaking, though
somewhat varying from the manner of apprehending.

CHAP. XI.
A fourth reason of our Ignorance and Error, viz. the fallacy of our
Imaginations; an account of the nature of that faculty; Instances of its
deceptions; Spirits are not in a place; Intellection, Volition, Decrees, etc.
cannot properly be ascribed to God. It is not Reason that opposes Faith, but
Fancy: the interest which Imagination has in many of our Opinions, in that it
impresses a persuasion wiihout evidence.

FOurthly, we err and come short of Science, because we are so frequently
mislead by the evil conduct of our Imaginations; whose irregular strength and
importunity does almost perpetually abuse us. Now to make a full and clear
discovery of our Phancies deceptions; 'twill be requisite to look into the
nature of that mysterious faculty. In which survey we must trace the Soul in
the ways of her intellectual actions; whereby we may come to the distinct
knowledge of what is meant by Imagination, in contradistinction to some other
Powers. But first premising, that the Souls nature (at least as far as concerns
our inquiry) consists in intelligibility: And secondly, that when we speak of
Powers and Faculties of the Soul, we intend not to assert with the Schools,
their real distinction from it, or each other, but only a modal diversity.
Therefore I shall distribute Intellectual operations according to the known
triple division, though with some difference of representation. The first is
simple apprehension, which denotes no more, then the souls naked Intellection
of an object, without either composition or deduction. The foundation of this
act, as to materials, is sensitive perception. Now our simple apprehension of
corporal objects, if present, we call Sense; if absent, we properly name it
Imagination. Thus when we would conceive a Triangle, Man, Horse, or any other
sensible; we figure it in our Phancies, and stir up there its sensible Idea.
But in our notion of spirituals, we, as much as we can, denudate them of all
material Phantasmes; and thus they become the object of our Intellects,
properly so called. Now all this while the soul is, as it were, silent; and in
a more passive way of reception. But the second act advances propositions from
simple intellections: and hereby we have the knowledge of the distinctions or
identities of objective representations. Now here, as in the former, where the
objects are purely material; the Judgment is made by the Imagination: if
otherwise, we refer it to the Understanding. There is yet a third Act, which is
a connecting of Propositions and deducing of Conclusions from them: and this
the Schools call Discourse; and we shall not miscall it, if we name it, Reason.
Now this, as it supposes the two former, so is it grounded on certain
congenite propositions; which I conceive to be the very Essentials of
Rationality. Such are, Quodlibet est, vel non est; Impossible est idem esse,
and non esse; Non entis nulla sunt praedicata, and c. Not that every one has
naturally a formal and explicit notion of these Principles: For the Vulgar use
them, without knowledge of them, under any such express consideration; But yet
there was never any born to Reason without them. If any ask, how the Soul came
by those foundation- Propositions: I return, as Quantity did by longum, latum,
and profundum; they being the Essential annexes, or rather constitutives of it,
as Reasonable. Now then, when the conclusion is deduced from the unerring
dictates of our faculties; we say the Inference is Rational: But when from
mis-apprehended, or ill-compounded phantasmes; we ascribe it to the
Imagination. So we see, there is a triple operation of the Fancy as well as
Intellect; and these powers are only circumstantially different. In this method
we intend a distinct, though short account, how the Imagination deceives us.
First then, the Imagination, which is of simple perception, does never of it
self and directly mislead us; as is at large declared in our former discourse
of Sense. Yet is it the almost fatal means of our deception, through the
unwarrantable compositions, divisions, and applications, which it occasions the
second Act to make of the simple Images. Hence we may derive the Visions,
Voices, Revelations of the Enthusiast: the strong Idea's of which, being
conjured up into the Imagination by the heat of the melancholized brain, are
judged exterior Realties; when as they are but motions within the Cranium.
Hence Story is full of the wonders, it works upon Hypochondriacal Imaginants;
to whom the grossest absurdities are infallible certainties, and free reason an
Impostour. That Groom, that conceited himself an Emperor, thought all as
irrational as disloyal, that did not acknowledge him: And he, that supposed
himself made of Glass; thought them all mad, that dis-believed him. But we
pity, or laugh at those fatuous extravagants; while yet our selves have a
considerable dose of what makes them so: and more sober heads have a set of
misconceits, which are as absurd to an unpassionated reason, as those to our
unabused senses. And, as the greatest counter-evidence to those distempered
phancies is none: so in the more ordinary deceits, in which our Imaginations
insensibly engage us, we give but little credit to the uncorrupted suggestions
of the faculty, that should disabuse us. That the Soul and Angels are devoid of
quantitative dimensions, has the suffrage of the most; and that they have
nothing to do with grosser locality, is as generally opinion'd: But who is it,
that retains not a great part of the imposture, by allowing them a definitive
Ubi, which is still but Imagination? He that said, a thousand might dance on
the point of a Needle, spoke but grossly; and we may as well suppose them to
have wings, as a proper Ubi. We say, Spirits are where they operate: But
strictly to be in a place, or ubi, is a material Attribute, and incompatible
with so depurate a Nature. We ask not, in what place a thought is, nor are we
solicitous for the Ubi of Virtue, or any other Immaterial accident. Relations,
Ubications, Duration, the vulgar Philosophy admits into the list of something;
and yet to enquire in what place they are, were a soloecism. So that, if to be
and to be in a place be not reciprocal; I know not why spirits may not be
exempted, having as much to plead from the purity of their nature, as any thing
but one, within the circle of being. And yet Imagination stands so strongly
against the notion, that it cannot look for the favor of a very diffusive
entertainment. But we are more dangerously deceived, when judging the Infinite
Essence by our narrow selves; we ascribe Intellections, Volitions, Decrees,
Purposes, and such like Immanent actions to that nature, which has nothing in
common with us, as being infinitely above us. Now to use these as Hypotheseis,
as himself in his Word, is pleased to low himself to our capacities, is
allowable: But a strict and rigorous imputation is derogatory to him, and
arrogant in us. To say, that God does eminently contain all those effects in
his glorious simple Essence, that the creature can produce or act by such a
faculty, power, or affection; is to affirm him to be ^ what he is, Infinite.
Thus, to conceive that he can do all those things in the most perfect manner,
which we do upon understanding, willing, and decreeing; is an apprehension
suitable to his Idea: But to fix on him the formality of faculties, or
affections; is the Imposture of our Phancies, and contradictory to his
Divinity. It Is this deception misleads the contending world; and is the Author
of most of that darkness and confusion, that is upon the face of the
Quinquarticular debates. Now then, we being thus obnoxious to fallacy in our
apprehensions and judgments, and so often imposed upon by these deceptions;
our Inferences and Deductions must needs be as unwarrantable, as our simple and
compound thoughts are deceitful. Thus the reason of the far greatest part of
mankind, is but an aggregate of mistaken phantasms; and in things not sensible
a constant delusion. Yea the highest and most improved parts of Rationality,
are frequently caught in the entanglements of a tenacious Imagination; and
submit to its obstinate, but delusory Dictamens. Thus we are involved in
inextricable perplexities about the Divine Nature, and Attributes; and in our
reasonings about those sublimities are puzzled with contradictions, which are
but the toyings of our Phancies, no absurdities to our more defaecate
faculties. What work do our Imaginations make with Eternity and Immensity? and
how are we gravelled by their cutting Dilemma's? I Am confident many have thus
imagined themselves out of their Religion; and run a ground on that more
desperate absurdity, Atheism. To say, Reason opposes Faith, is to scandalize
both: It Is Imagination is the Rebel; Reason contradicts its impious
suggestions. Nor is our Reason any more accountable for the Errors of our
Opinions; then our holiness for the vitiosity of our Lives: And we may as well
say, that the Sun is the cause of the shadow, which is the effect of the
intercepting opacity, as either. Reason and Faith are at perfect Unisons: The
disharmony is in the Fancy. (...), is a saying of Plato's; and well worthy a
Christian subscription, Reason being the Image of the Creators Wisdom copyed
out in the Creature. Though indeed, as it is now in the subject, it is but an
amassment of imaginary conceptions, praejudices, ungrounded opinions, and
infinite Impostures; and it is no wonder, if these are at odds with the
Principles of our belief: But all this is but apish Sophistry; and to give it a
Name so Divine and excellent, is abusive and unjust.

There is yet another as deplorable a deceit of our Imaginations, as any: which
is, its impressing a strong persuasion of the Truth of an Opinion, where there
is no evidence to support it. And if it be such, as we never heard questioned
or contradicted; it is then held as indubitate, as first principles. Thus the
most of mankind is led by opinionative impulse; and Imagination is
praedominant. Hence we have an ungrounded credulity cried up for faith; and the
more vigorous impressions of Fancy, for the Spirits motions. These are the
grand delusions of our Age, and the highest evidence of the Imaginations
deceptions. This is the spirit, that works in the children of Fancy; and we
need not seek to remoter resolutions. But the excellent Dr. H. More has
followed Enthusiastic effects to their proper Origin, and prevented our
endeavors of attempting it. His Discourse of Enthusiasm completely makes good
the Title; and it is as well a Victory, as a Triumph.

CHAP. XII.
A fifth Reason, the praecipitancy of our Understandings; the reason of it. The
most close engagement of our minds requisite to the finding of truth; the
difficulties of the performance of it. Two instances of our praecipitating; as
the concluding thing impossible, which to Nature are not so; and the joining
Causes with irrelative Effects.

. 5. AGain another account of the shortness of our Reasons and easiness of
deception, is, the forwardness of our Understandings assent, to slightly
examined conclusions, contracting many times a firm and obstinate belief from
weak inducements; and that not only in such things, as immediately concern the
sense, but in almost every thing that falls within the scope of our enquiry.
For the declarement of this, we are to observe, That every being uncessantly
aspires to its own perfection, and is restless till it obtain it; as is the
trembling Needle, till it find its beloved North. Now the perfection of a
Faculty is Union with its Object, to which its respective actions are directed,
as the scope and term of its endeavors. Thus our Understanding being perfected
by Truth, with all the impatience, which accompanies strong desire, breaths
after its enjoyment. But now the good and perfection of being, which every
thing reaches at, must be known, and that in the particular instances thereof;
or else it is not attained: and if it be mistaken, that being courts deceit and
its own delusion. Now this Knowledge of their Good, was at first as natural to
all things, as the desire on it: otherwise this innate propension would have
been as much a torment and misery to those things that are capable of it, as a
needless impertinency to all others. But Nature shoots not at Rovers. Even
inanimates, though they know not their perfection themselves, yet are they not
carried on by a blind unguided impetus: But that which directs them, knows it.
The next orders of being have some sight of it themselves: And man most
perfectly had it, before the touch of the Apple. So then beside this general
propensity to Truth, the Understanding must know what is so, before it can
entertain it with assent. The former we possess (it may be) as entirely as when
Nature gave it us: but of the latter little, but the capacity: And herein have
we made our selves of all creatures the most miserable. And now such a
multitude, such an Infinite of uncertain opinions, bare probabilities, specious
falsehoods, spreading themselves before us, and soliciting our belief; and we
being thus greedy of Truth, and yet so unable to discern it: It cannot be, that
we should reach it any otherwise, then by the most close meditation and
engagement of our minds; by which we must endeavor to estrange our assent from
every thing, which is not clearly, and distinctly evidenc't to our faculties.
But now, this is so difficult; and as has been intimated, so almost
infeasable; that it may well drive modesty to despair of Science. For though
possibly Assiduity in the most fixed cogitation be no trouble or pain to
immaterializ'd spirits; yet is it more, then our embodyed souls can bear
without lassitude or distemper. For in this terrestrial state there are few
things transacted, even in our Intellectual part, but through the help and
furtherance of corporal Instruments; which by more then ordinary usage lose
their edge and fitness for action, and so grow inept for their respective
destinations. Upon this account our senses are dulled and spent by any
extraordinary intention; and our very Eyes will ache, if long fixed upon any
difficultly discerned object. Now though Meditation be to be reckoned among the
most abstracted operations of our minds; yet can it not be performed without a
considerable proportion of Spirits to assist in the Action, though indeed such
as are furnished out of the bodies purer store. This I think to be hence
evidenc't; in that fixed seriousness herein, heats the brain in some to
distraction, causes an aching and diziness in founder heads, hinders the works
of Nature in its lower and animal functions, takes away or lessens pain in
distempered parts, and seldom leaves any but under a weary some dullness, and
inactivity; which I think to be arguments of sufficient validity to justify
our assent to this, that the spirits are employed in our most intense
cogitations, yea in such, whose objects are most elevated above material. Now
the managing and carrying on of this work by the Spirits instrumental
co-efficiency requires, that they be kept together without distraction or
dissipation; that so they may be ready to receive and execute the orders and
commissions of the commanding faculty. If either of these happen, all
miscarries: as do the works of Nature, when they want that heat, which is
requisite for their intended perfection. And therefore, for the prevention of
such inconveniences in meditation, we choose recess and solitude. But now if we
consider the volatile nature of those officious Assistants, and the several
causes which occur continually, even from the mere Mechanism of our Bodies to
scatter and disorder them, besides the excursions of our roving phancies (which
cannot be kept to a close attendance); it will be found very hard to retain
them in any long service, but do what we can, they will get loose from the Minds
Regimen. So that it is no easy matter to bring the body to be what it was
intended for, the Souls servant; and to confine the imagination, of as facil a
performance, as the Goteham's design of hedging in the Cuckoo. And though some
constitutions are genially disposited to this mental seriousness; yet they can
scarce say, Nos numeri sumus: yea in the most advantaged tempers, this
disposition is but comparative; when as the most of men labor under
disadvantages, which nothing can rid them of, but that which loosens them from
this mass of flesh. Thus the boiling blood of youth, fiercely agitating the
fluid Air, hinders that serenity and fixed stayedness, which is necessary to so
severe an intentness: And the frigidity of decrepite age is as much its enemy,
not only through penury of spirits, but by reason of its clogging them with its
dulling moisture. And even in the temperate zone of our life, there are few
bodies at such an aequipoiz of humors; but that the prevalency of some one
indisposeth the spirits for a work so difficult and serious: For temperamentum
ad pondus, may well be reckoned among the three Philosophical unattainables.
Besides, the bustle of business, the avocations of our senses, and external
pleasures, and the noise and din of a clamorous world are impediments not to be
mastered by feeble endeavors. And to speak the full of my Sentiments, I think
never Man could boast it, without the Precincts of Paradise; but He, that came
to gain us a better Eden then we lost. So then, to direct all this to our end,
the mind of man being thus naturally amorous of, and impatient for Truth, and
yet averse to, and almost incapacitated for, that diligent and painful search,
which is necessary to its discovery; it must needs take up short, of what is
really so, and please it self in the possession of imaginary appearances, which
offering themselves to its embraces in the borrowed attire of that, which the
enamored Intellect is in pursuit of, our impatient minds entertain these
counterfeits, without the least suspicion of their cousenage. For as the Will,
having lost its true and substantial Good, now courts the shadow, and greedily
catches at the vain shows of superficial bliss: so our no less degenerate
understandings having suffered as sad a divorce from their dearest object, are
as forward to defile themselves with every meretricious semblance, that the
variety of opinion presents them with. Thus we see the inconsiderate vulgar,
prostrating their assent to every shallow appearance: and those, who are
beholden to Prometheus for a finer mould, are not furnished with so much truth
as otherwise they might be owners of, did not this precipitancy of concluding
prevent them: As it is said of the industrious Chemist, that by catching at it
too soon, he lost the long expected treasure of the Philosophical Elixir. I Will
illustrate this Head by a double instance, and close it.

1. Hence it is, that we conclude many things within the list of
Impossibilities, which yet are easy Feasables. For by an unadvised
transiliency leaping from the effect to its remotest cause, we observe not the
connection through the interposal of more immediate causalities; which yet at
last bring the extremes together without a Miracle. And hereupon we hastily
conclude that impossible, which we see not in the proximate capacity of its
Efficient. Hence, that a single Hair should root up an Oak (which the
Mathematics teach us to be possible) will be thought fit to be numbered with
the story of the Brazen-head, or that other of the wishing Hat. The relation of
Archimedes's lifting up the ships of Marcellus, among many finds but little
more credit, then that of the Giants shouldering Mountains: And his other
exploits sound no better to common Ears, then those of Amadis de Gaul, and the
Knight of the Sun. And yet Mathematicians know, that by multiplying of
Mechanical advantages, any power may conquer any resistance, and the great
Syracusian wit wanted but Tools, and a place to stand on, to remove the Earth.
So the brag of the Ottoman, that he would throw Malta into the Sea, might be
performed at an easier rate, then by the shovels of his Ianizaries. And from
this last noted head, arises that other of joining causes with irrelative
effects, which either refer not at all unto them, or in a remoter capacity.
Hence the Indian conceived so grossly of the Letter, that discovered his Theft;
and that other, who thought the Watch an Animal. From hence grew the impostures
of charms, and amulets, and other insignificant ceremonies; which to this day
impose upon common belief, as they did of old upon the Barbarism of the
incultivate Heathen. Thus effects unusual, whose causes run under ground, and
are more remote from ordinary discernment, are noted in the Book of Vulgar
Opinion, with Digitus Dei, or Daemonis; though they owe no other dependence to
the first, then what is common to the whole Syntax of beings, nor yet any more
to the second, then what is given it by the imagination of those unqualifi'd
Judges. Thus every unwonted Meteor is portentous; and the appearance of any
unobserved Star, some divine Prognostic. Antiquity thought Thunder the
immediate voice of Jupiter, and impleaded them of impiety, that referred it to
natural causalities. Neither can there happen a storm, at this remove from
Antique ignorance, but the multitude will have the Devil in it.

CHAP. XIII.
The sixth Reason discours't of, viz. the interest which our Affections have in
our Dijudications. The cause why our Affections mislead us; several branches of
this mentioned; and the first, viz Constitutional Inclination largely insisted
on.

AGain we owe much of our Error and Intellectual scarcity to the Interest in,
and power which our affections have over, our so easily seducible
Understandings. And it is a truth well worthy the Pen, from which it dropped;
Periit Iudicium, ubi res transiit in Affectum. That Jove himself cannot be wise
and in Love; may be understood in a larger sense, then Antiquity meant it.
Affection bribes the Judgment to the most notorious inequality; and we cannot
expect an equitable award, where the Judge is made a Party: So that, that
Understanding only is capable of giving a just decision, which is, as Aristotle
says of the Law, (...): But where the Will, or Passion has the casting voice,
the case of Truth is desperate. And yet this is the miserable disorder, into
which we are lapsed: The lower Powers are gotten uppermost; and we see like men
on our heads, as Plato observed of old, that on the right hand, which indeed is
on the left. The Woman in us, still prosecutes a deceit, like that begun in the
Garden: and our Understandings are wedded to an Eve, as fatal as the Mother of
our miseries. And while all things are judged according to their suitableness,
or disagreement to the Gusto of the fond Feminine; we shall be as far from the
Tree of Knowledge, as from that, which is guarded by the Cherubin. The deceiver
soon found this soft place of Adam's; and Innocence it self did not secure him
from this way of seduction. The first deception entered in at this Postern, and
has ever since kept it open for the entry of Legion: so that we scarce see any
thing now but through our Passions, the most blind, and sophisticate things
about us. Thus the Monsters which story relates to have their Eyes in their
breasts, are pictures of us in our invisible selves. Our Love of one Opinion
induces us to embrace it; and our Hate of another, does more then fit us, for
its rejection: And, that Love is blind, is extensible beyond the object of
Poetry. When once the affections are engaged, there is but a short step to the
Understanding: and, Facile credimus quod volumus, is a truth, that needs not
plead Authority to credit it.

The reason, I conceive, is this: Love as it were uniting the Object to the
Soul, gives it a kind of Identity with us; so that the beloved Idea is but our
selves in another Name: and when self is at the bar, the sentence is not like
to be impartial: For every man is naturally a Narcissus, and each passion in
us, no other but self-love sweetened by milder Epithets. We can love nothing,
but what is agreeable to us; and our desire of what is so, has its first
inducement from within us: Yea, we love nothing but what has some resemblance
within our selves; and whatever we applaud as good or excellent, is but self in
a transcript, and e contra. Thus, to reach the highest of our Amors, and to
speak all at once: We love our friends, because they are our Image; and we love
our God, because we are his. So then, the beloved Opinion being thus wedded to
the Intellect; the case of our espoused self becomes our own: And when we weigh
our selves, Justice does not use to hold the balance. Besides, all things
being double-handed, and having the appearances both of Truth, and Falsehood;
where our affections have engaged us, we attend only to the former, which we
see through a magnifying Medium: while looking on the latter, through the wrong
end of the Perspective, which scants their dimensions, we neglect and contemn
them. Yea, and as in corrupt judicial proceedings, the fore-stalled
Understanding passes a peremptory sentence upon the single hearing of one
Party; and so comes under the Poets censure of him, Qui statuit aliquid part
inaudita altera.

But to give a more particular account of this Gullery; Our affections engage
us as by our Love to our selves, so by our Love to others. Of the former we
have the observable instances of natural disposition, Custom and Education,
Interest, and our proper Invention: Of the latter in that Homage, which is paid
to Antiquity, and Authority. I take them up in order.

1. Congruity of Opinions, whether true or false, to our natural constitution,
is one great incentive to their belief, and reception: and in a sense too the
complexion of the mind, as well as manners, follows the Temperament of the
Body. Thus some men are genially disposited to some Opinions, and naturally as
averse to others. Some things we are inclined to love, and we know not why:
Others we disesteem, and upon no better account then the Poet did Sabidius, Hoc
tantum possum dicere, Non amo te. Some faces at first sight we admire and dote
on: others, in our impartial apprehensions no less deserving our esteem, we can
behold without resentment; and it may be with an invincible disregard. I
question not, but intellectual representations are received by us, with as an
unequal a Fate upon a bare Temperamental Relish or Disgust: And I believe the
Understanding has its Idiosyncrasies, as well as other faculties. Some men are
made to superstition, others to frantic Enthusiasm; the former by the cold of
a timorous heart, the latter by the heat of a temerarious brain: And there are
natures, as fatally averse to either. And the opinions, which are suited to
their respective tempers, will be sure to find their welcome, and to grow
without manure. Your dull phlegmatic Souls are taken with the dullness of
sensible doctrines: and the more Mercurial Geniuses calculated to what is more
refined, and Intellectual. Thus opinions have their Climes and National
diversities: And as some Regions have their proper Vices, not so generally
found in others; so have they their mental depravities, which are drawn in with
the common air of the Country. And I take this for one of the most
considerable causes of the diversity of Laws, Customs, Religions, natural and
moral doctrines, which is to be found in the divided Regions of the inhabited
Earth. And therefore I wonder not at the Idolatry of the Jews of old, or of the
several parts of the world to this day, nor at the sensual expectations of the
Mussel-men, nor at the fopperies of the superstitious Romanists, nor the
ridiculous devotions of the deluded Indians: since that the most senseless
conceits and fooleries cannot miss of Harbor, where affection, grown upon the
stock of a depraved constitution, has endeared them. And if we do but more
nearly look into our faculties, beginning our survey from the lowest dregs of
sense, even those which have a nearer commerce with matter, and so by steps
ascend to our more spiritualized selves: we shall throughout discover how
constitutional partiality sways us. Thus to one Palate that is sweet,
desirable, and delicious, which to another is odious and distastful; or more
compendiously in the Proverb, One man's meat is another poison. Thus what to
one is a most grateful odor, to another is noxious and displeasant; 'twere a
misery to some to lie stretched on a bed of Roses: And in the sense of life;
that is a welcome touch to one, which is disagreeing to another. And yet to rise
a little higher to the nobler pair; the musical Airs, which one entertains with
most delightful transports, to another are importune: and the objects, which
one cannot see without an Ecstasy, another is no more moved at, than a Statue.
If we pass further, the phancies of men are so immediately diversified by the
individual Crasis, that every man is in this a Phoenix; and owns something,
wherein none are like him: and these are as many, as humane nature has
singulars. Now the phancies of the most, like the Index of a Clock, are moved
but by the inward Springs and wheels of the corporal Machine; which even on the
most sublimate Intellectuals is dangerously influential. And yet this sits at
the Helm of the Worlds belief; and Vulgar Reason is no better then a more
refined Imagination. So then the Senses, Fancy, and what we call Reason it
self, being thus influenced by the Bodies temperament, and little better then
indications of it; it cannot be otherwise, but that this love of our selves
should strongly incline us in our most abstracted dijudications.

CHAP. XIV.
A second thing whereby our Affections engage us in Error, is the prejudice of
Custom and Education. A third, Interest. The fourth, Love to our own
Productions.

2. ANother genuine derivation of this selfish fondness, by reason of which we
miscarry of Science, is the almost insuperable prejudice of Custom, and
Education: by which our minds are encumbered, and the most are held in a Fatal
Ignorance. Now could a man be composed to such an advantage of constitution,
that it should not at all adulterate the images of his mind; yet this second
nature would alter the crasis of the Uuderstanding, and render it as obnoxious
to aberrances, as now. And though in the former regard, the Soul were a pure
(...); yet custom and education will so blot and scrible on it, as almost to
incapacitate it for after-impressions. Thus we judge all things by our
anticipations; and condemn or applaud them, as they agree or differ from our
education-prepossessions. One Country laughs at the Laws, Customs, and
Opinions of another, as absurd and ridiculous; and the other is as charitable
to them, in its conceit of theirs. This confirms the most sottish Idolaters in
their accustomed adorations, beyond the conviction of any thing, but Doomsday.
The impressions of a barbarous education are stronger in them, then nature;
when in their cruel worships they lance themselves with knifes, and expose
their harmless Infants to the flames as a Sacrifice to their Idols. And it is on
this account, that there is no Religion so irrational, but can boast its
Martyrs. This is it, which befriends the Talmud and Alcoran; and did they not
owe their credit more to it, then to any rational inducement, we might expect
their ashes: whereas Education has so rooted these mis-believers in their
ungrounded faith, that they may as soon be plucked from themselves, as from
their obstinate adherencies; and to convert a Turk, or Jew, may be well a
phrase for an attempt impossible. We look for it only from him, to whom our
Impossibles are none. And it is to be feared, that Christianity it self by most,
that have espoused it, is not held by any better tenure. The best account that
many can give of their belief, is, that they were bred in it; which indeed is
no better, then that which we call, the Woman's Reason. And thousands of them,
whom their profession, and our charity styles Christians, are driven to their
Religion by custom and education, as the Indians are to Baptism; that is, like
a drove of Cattle to the water. And had our Stars determined our nativities
among the Enemies of the Cross, and theirs under a Christian horoscope; in all
likelihood Antichristianism had not been the object of our aversion, nor
Christianity of theirs: But we should have exchanged the Scene of our belief
with that of our abode and breeding. There is nothing so monstrous, to which
education cannot form our ductile minority; it can lick us into shapes beyond
the monstrosities of those of Africa. And as King James would say of
Parliaments; it can do any thing, but make a man a woman. For our initial age
is like the melted wax to the prepared Seal, capable of any impression from the
documents of our Teachers. The half moon or Cross, are indifferent to its
reception; and we may with equal facility write on this rasa Tabula, Turk, or
Christian. We came into the world like the unformed Cub; it is education is our
Plastic: we are baptized into our opinions by our Juvenile nurture, and our
growing years confirm those unexamined Principles. For our first task is to
learn the Creed of our Country; and our next to maintain it. We seldom examine
our Receptions, more then children their Catechisms; For Implicit faith is a
virtue, where Orthodoxie is the object. Some will not be at the trouble of a
Trial: others are scared from attempting it. If we do, it is not by a Sunbeam
or ray of universal light; but by a flame that is kindled by our affections, and
fed by the fuel of our anticipations. And thus like the Hermit, we think the
Sun shines no where, but in our Cell; and all the world to be in darkness but
our selves. We judge truth to be circumscribed by the confines of our belief,
and the doctrines we were brought up in: and with as ill manners, as those of
China, repute all the rest of world, Monoculous. So that what some Astrologers
say of our Fortunes and the passages of our lives; may by the allowance of a
Metaphor be said of our Opinions: That they are written in our stars, being to
the most as fatal as those involuntary occurrences, and as little in their
Power as the placits of destiny. We are bound to our Countries opinions, as to
its laws: and an accustomed assent is tantamount to an infallible conclusion.
He that offers to dissent, shall be out-lawed in his reputation: and the fear
of guilty Cain, shall be fulfilled on him, who ever meets him shall slay him.
Thus Custom and Education has sealed the Canon; and he that adds or takes away
from the Book of Orthodox belief, shall be more then in danger of an Anathema:
And the Inquisition is not confined to the jurisdiction of the Triple-Crown. So
we preposterously invert the Precept; holding fast what has the Vote of our
antedating apprehensions, we try all things by these our partial Prolepses. He
that dares do otherwise, is a Rebel to Orthodoxy; and exposes his credit to
Sequestration. Thus Custom conciliates our esteem to things, no otherwise
deserving it: what is in fashion, is handsome and pleasant; though never so
uncouth to an unconcerned beholder. Their antic deckings with feathers is as
comely in the account of those barbarous Nations, which use them; as the
Ornaments of Lace, and Ribband, are in ours. And the plucking off the shoe is
to the Iapanners as decent a salutation; as the uncovering of the head is to
us, and their abhorred neighbors. On the other hand we start and boggle at
what is unusual: and like the Fox in the fable at his first view of the Lion,
we cannot endure the sight of the Bugbear, Novelty. Hence some innocent truths
have been affixed with the reproach of Heresy: into which, because contrary to
the inured belief, the violent rejecters would not endure a patient inspection:
But as children frighted in the dark, who run away with an outcry from the
Monsters of their own imaginations framing; and will not stay for the
information of a better discovery: so they looking on them through their
unadvised fears, and uncharitable suspicions; command their Understandings to a
praecipitate flight, figuring their phancies to shapes monstrous and horrible,
through which they make them the objects of their aversion. Hence there is no
truth, but its adversaries have made it an ugly Vizard; by which it is exposed
to the hate and disesteem of superficial examiners: And an opprobrious title
with vulgar believers is as good as an Argument. It Is but writing the name,
that customary receptions have discredited, under the opinions we dislike; and
all other refutation is superfluous. Thus shallow apprehenders are frighted
from many sober Verities; like the King of Arabs, who ran away from the
smoking Mince-Py, apprehending some dangerous plot in the harmless steam. So
then, while we thus mistake the infusions of education, for the principles of
universal nature; we must needs fail of a scientifical Theory. And therefore
the two Nations differing about the antiquity of their Language, made appeal to
an undecisive experiment; when they agreed upon the trial of a child brought up
among the wild Inhabitants of the Desert. The Language it spoke, had no reason
to be accounted the most ancient and natural: And the lucky determination for
the Phrygians by its pronouncing the word Beck, which signified bread in the
dialect of that Country, they owed not to Nature, but the Goat-herd; from
which the exposed Infant, by accompanying that sort of animals, had learnt it.

3. Again, Interest, is another thing, by the magnetisme of which our
affections are almost irresistibly attracted. It is the Pole, to which we turn,
and our sympathizing Judgments seldom decline from the direction of this
Impregnant. Where Interest has engaged us; like Hannibal, we will find a way to
verity, or make it. Any thing is a Truth, to one whose Interest it is, to have
it so. And therefore Self-designers are seldom disappointed, for want of the
speciousness of a cause to warrrant them; in the belief of which, they do often
as really impose upon themselves, as industriously endeavor it upon others.
With what an infinite of Lawsuits, controversies, and litigious cases does the
world abound? and yet every man is confident of the truth and goodness of his
own. And as Mr. Hobbs observes, the reason that Mathematical demonstrations are
uncontroverted, is; because Interest has no place in those unquestionable
verities: when as, did the advantage, of any stand against them, Euclids
Elements would not pass with a Nemine contradicente. Sir H. Blunt tells us,
that temporal expectations bring in droves to the Mahumetan Faith; and we know
the same holds thousands in the Romish. The Eagles will be, where the carcass
is; and that shall have the faith of most, which is best able to pay them
for it. An advantageous cause never wanted Proselytes. I confess, I cannot
believe that all the learned Romanists profess against their conscience; but
rather, that their Interest brings their consciences to their Profession: and
self-advantage can as easily incline some, to believe a falsehood, as profess
it. A good will, helped by a good wit can find truth any where: and, what the
Chemists brag of their Elixir, it can transmute any metal into gold; In the
hand of a skilful Artificer, in spite of the Adage, Ex quolibet ligno
Mercurius. Though yet I think, that every Religion has its bare Nominals: and
that Pope was one with a witness, whose saying it was, Quantum nobis lucri
peperit illa fabula de Christo!

4. Besides, fourthly, Self-love engages us for any thing, that is a Minerva
of our own. We love the issues of our Brains, no less then those of our bodies:
and fondness of our own begotten notions, though illegitimate, obliges us to
maintain them. We hug intellectual deformities, if they bear our Names; and
will hardly by persuaded they are so, when our selves are their Authors. If
their Dam may be judge, the young Apes are the most beautiful things in Nature;
and if we might determine it, our proper conceptions would be all voted Axioms.
Thus then the Affections wear the breeches: and the Female rules, while our
Understanding governs us, as the story says Themistocles did Athens. So that
to give the sum of all, most of the contests of the litigious world pretending
for Truth, are but the bandyings of one man's affections against another: in
which, though their reasons may be foiled, yet their Passions lose no ground,
but rather improve by the Antiperistasis of an opposition.

CHAP. XV.
5. Our Affections are engaged by our Reverence to Antiquity and Authority.
This has been a great hinderer of Theorical improvements; and it has been an
advantage to the Mathematics, and Mechanics Arts, that it has no place in
them. Our mistake of Antiquity. The unreasonableness of that kind of Pedantick
Adoration. Hence the vanity of affecting impertinent quotations. The Pedantry
on it is derided; the little improvement of Science through its successive
derivations, and whence that has happened.

ANother thing, that engages our affections to unwarrantable conclusions, and
is therefore fatal to Science; is our doting on Antiquity, and the opinions of
our Fathers. We look with a superstitious reverence upon the accounts of
praeterlapsed ages: and with a supercilious severity, on the more deserving
products of our own. A vanity, which has possessed all times as well as ours;
and the Golden Age was never present. For as in Statick experiment, an
inconsiderable weight by virtue of its distance from the Center of the
Balance, will preponderate much greater magnitudes; so the most slight and
chaffy opinion, if at a great remove from the present age, contracts such an
esteem and veneration, that it out-weighs what is infinitely more ponderous and
rational, of a modern date. And thus, in another sense, we realize what
Archimedes had only in Hypothesis; weighing a single grain against the Globe of
Earth. We reverence gray headed Doctrines; though feeble, decrepit, and within
a step of dust: and on this account maintain opinions, which have nothing but
our charity to uphold them. While the beauty of a Truth, as of a picture, is
not acknowledged but at a distance; and that wisdom is nothing worth, which is
not fetched from afar: wherein yet we often deceive our selves, as did that
Mariner, who mistaking them for precious stones, brought home his ship fraught
with common Pebbles from the remotest Indies. Thus our Eyes, like the
preposterous Animal's, are behind us; and our Intellectual motions retrograde.
We adhere to the determinations of our fathers, as if their opinions were
entailed on us as their lands; or (as some conceive) part of the Parents soul
were portion'd out to his offspring, and the conceptions of our minds were ex
traduce. The Sages of old live again in us; and in opinions there is a
Metempsychosis. We are our re-animated Ancestors, and antedate their
Resurrection. And thus, while every age is but another show of the former; it is
no wonder, that Science has not out-grown the dwarfishness of its pristine
stature, and that the Intellectual world is such a Microcosm. For while we
account of some admired Authors, as the Seths Pillars, on which all knowledge
is engraven; and spend that time and study in defense of their Placits, which
with more advantage to Science might have been employed upon the Books of the
more ancient, and universal Author: It Is not to be admired, that Knowledge has
received so little improvement from the endeavors of many pretending
promoters, through the continued series of so many successive ages. For while
we are slaves to the Dictates of our Progenitors; our discoveries, like water,
will not run higher then the Fountains, from which they own their derivation.
And while we think it so piaculous, to go beyond the Ancients; we must
necessarily come short of genuine Antiquity, Truth; unless we suppose them to
have reached perfection of Knowledge in spite of their aknowledgements of
ignorance.

Now if we enquire the reason, why the Mathematics, and Mechanic Arts, have
so much got the start in growth of other Sciences: We shall find it probably
resolved into this, as one considerable cause: that their progress has not
been retarded by that reverential aw of former discoveries, which has been so
great an hinderance to Theorical improvements. 'Twas never an heresy to
out-limn Apelles; nor criminal to out-work the Obelisks. Galilaeus without a
crime out-saw all Antiquity; and was not afraid to believe his eyes, in spite
of the Optics of Ptolomy and Aristotle. It Is no discredit to that ingenious
Perspicill, that Antiquity never saw in it: Nor are we shy of assent to those
celestial informations, because they were hid from ages. We believe the
verticity of the Needle, without a Certificate from the days of old: And
confine not our selves to the sole conduct of the Stars, for fear of being
wiser then our Fathers. Had Authority prevailed here, the Earths fourth part
had to us been none, and Hercules his Pillars had still been the worlds Non
ultra: Seneca's Prophecy had yet been an unfulfill'd Prediction, and one
moiety of our Globes, an empty Hemisphear.

In a sense, (...), is wholesome instruction; and becoming the Vote of a Synod:
But yet, in common acceptance, it is an Enemy to Verity, which can plead the
antiquity of above six thousand; and bears date from before the Chaos. For, as
the Noble Lord Verulam has noted, we have a mistaken apprehension of
Antiquity; calling that so, which in truth is the worlds Nonage. Antiquitas
seculi est juventus Mundi. So that in such appeals, we fetch our knowledge from
the Cradle; which though it be nearest to Innocence, it is so too to the fatal
ruins which followed it. Upon a true account, the present age is the worlds
Grandaevity; and if we must to Antiquity, let multitude of days speak. Now for
us to supersede further disquisition, upon the infant acquirements of those
Juvenile endeavors, is foolishly to neglect the nobler advantages we are
owners of, and in a sense to disappoint the expectations of him that gave them.
Yet thus we prevent our selves of Science; and our knowledge, though its Age
write thousands, is still in its swadlings. For like Schoolboys, we give over
as soon as we have learned as far as our Masters can teach us: And had not the
undertakings of some glorious Heroes prevented; Plato's year might have found
us, where the days of Aristotle left us. For my part, I think it no such
arrogance, as our Pedants account it; that almost two thousand years elapsed
since, should weigh with the sixty three of the Stagirite. If we owe it to him,
that we know so much; it is long of his Pedantick adorers that we know so little
more. I can see no ground, why his Reason should be textuary to ours; or that
God, or Nature, ever intended him an Universal Headship. It was another, in
whom were hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge: His reason only is the
Yea and Amen; who is the Alpha and Omega, the Christian (...). 'Twas this vain
Idolizing of Authors, which gave birth to that silly vanity of impertinent
citations; and inducing Authority in things neither requiring, nor deserving
it. That saying was much more observable, That men have beards, and women none;
because quoted from Beza: and that other, Pax res bona est; because brought in
with a, said St. Austin. But these ridiculous fooleries, to your more generous
discerners, signify nothing but the Pedantry of the affected Sciolist. It Is an
inglorious acquist to have our heads or Volumes laden, as were Cardinal
Campeius his Mules, with old and useless luggage: And yet the magnificence of
many high pretenders to Science, if laid open by a true discovery, would amount
to no more then the old Boots and Shoes, of that proud, and exposed
Ambassador. Methinks it is a pitiful piece of Knowledge, that can be learnt
from an Index; and a poor Ambition to be rich in the Inventory of another
Treasure. To boast a memory (the most that these Pedants can aim at) is but an
humble ostentation. And of all the faculties, in which some Brutes outvie us,
I least envy them an excellence in that; desiring rather to be a Fountain, then
a Hogs-head. It Is better to own a Judgment, though but with a Curta supellex of
coherent notions; then a memory, like a Sepulcher, furnished with a load of
broken and discarnate bones. Authorities alone with me make no number, unless
Evidence of Reason stand before them: For all the Ciphers of Arithmetic, are
no better then a single nothing. And yet this rank folly of affecting such
impertinencies, has overgrown our Times; and those that are Candidates for the
repute of Scholars, take this way to compass it. When as multiplicity of
reading, the best it can signify, does but speak them to have taken pains for
it: And this alone is but the dry, and barren part of learning, and has little
reason to denominate. A number of Receipts at the best can but make an Emperick.

But again, to what is more perpendicular to our discourse, if we impartially
look into the remains of Antique Ages; we shall find but little to justify so
groundless a Tyranny, as Antiquity has imposed on the enslaved world. For if
we drive the Current of Science as high, as History can lead us; we shall
find, that through its several successive derivations it has still lain under
such disadvantages, as have rendered any considerable accession unfeasable. And
though it has often changed its Channel, by its remove from one Nation to
another; yet has it been little more altered, then a River in its passage
through differing Regions, viz. in Name and Method. For the succeeding times
still subscribing to, and copying out those, who went before them, with little
more then verbal diversity; Science has still been the same pityful thing,
though in a various Livery. Now if we look upon it, either in the hand of the
superstitious Egyptian, fabulous and disputing Grecian, or as garrulous Roman:
what has it been, but only a pretty toy in an Hieroglyphick; a very slender
something in a Fable; or an old nothing in a disputation? And though those
former days have not wanted brave Wits, that have gallantly attempted, and made
Essays worthy Immortality; yet by reason either of the unqualified capacities
of the multitude, (who dote on things slight and trivial, neglecting what is
more rare and excellent) or the clamorous assaults of envious and more popular
opposers, they have submitted to Fate, and are almost lost in Oblivion. And
therefore, as that great man, the Lord Bacon has observed, Time as a River,
has brought down to us what is more light and superficial; while things more
solid and substantial have been immersed. Thus the Aristotelian Philosophy has
prevailed; while the more excellent Hypotheses of Democritus and Epicurus have
long lain buried under neglect and obloquy: and for ought I know might have
slept for ever, had not the ingenuity of this age recalled them from their
Urne. But it is somewhat collateral to my scope, as well as disproportioned to
my abilities, to fall upon particular Instances of the defects and Errors of
the Philosophy of the Ancients. The forementioned noble Advancer of Learning,
whose name and parts might give credit to any undertaking; has handsomely
performed it, in his ingenious Novum Organum. And yet, because it may conferr
toward the discovery of how little our adherence to Antiquity befriends Truth,
and the increase of Knowledge; as also how groundless are the Dogmatists high
pretensions to Science: I shall adventure some considerations on the
Peripatetick Philosophy; which has had the luck to survive all others, and to
build a fame on their Ruins.

CHAP. XVI.
Reflections on the Peripatetick Philosophy. The Generality of its Reception, no
Argument of its deserts; the first charge against that Philosophy; that it is
merely verbal. A Censure of the Peripatetick Jesuits. Materia prima in that
Philosophy signifies nothing. A Parallel drawn between it and Imaginary Space:
this latter pleads more for its reality. Their Form also is a mere word, and
potentia Materia insignificant. An essay to detect Peripatetick Verbosity, by
translating some definitions.

THat Aristotle's Philosophy has been entertained by the most; has deceived
the credulous into a conceit, that it is best: And its intrinsic worth has
been concluded from the Grandeur of its Retinue. But Seneca's determination,
Argumentum pessimi Turba est, is more deserving our credit: and the fewest,
that is the wisest, have always stood contradictory to that ground of belief;
Vulgar applause by severer Wisdom being held a scandal. If the numerousness of
a Train must carry it; Virtue may go follow Astraea, and Vice only will be
worth the courting. The Philosopher deservedly suspected himself of vanity,
when cried up by the multitude: And discreet apprehenders will not think the
better of that Philosophy, which has the common cry to vouch it. He that writ
counter to the Astrologer in his Almanac, did with more truth foretell the
weather: and he that shall write, Foul, in the place of the Vulgars, Fair;
passes the juster censure. Those in the Fable, who were wet with the shower of
folly, hooted at the wise men that escaped it, and pointed at their actions as
ridiculous; because unlike their own, that were truly so. If the major Vote may
cast it, Wisdom and Folly must exchange names; and the way to the one will be
by the other. Nor is it the Rabble only, which are such perverse discerners; we
are now a sphere above them: I mean the (...) of pretended Philosophers, who
judge as odly in their way, as the Rascality in theirs: and many a professed
Retainer to Philosophy, is but an Ignoramus a in suit of second Notions. It Is
such, that most revere the Relics of the Adored Sophy; and, as Artemesia did
those of Mausolus, passionately drink his ashes. Whether the Remains of the
Stagirite deserve such Veneration, we'll make a brief enquiry.

1. That the Aristotelian Philosophy is an huddle of words and terms
insignificant, has been the censure of the wisest: And that both its Basis and
Superstructure are Chimaerical; cannot be unobserved by them, that know it, and
are free to judge it. It Is a Philosophy, that makes most accurate Inspections
into the Creatures of the Brain; and gives the exactest Topography of the
Extramundane spaces. Like our late Politicians, it makes discoveries, and their
objects too; and deals in beings, that are nothing beholden to the Primitive
Fiat. Thus the same undivided Essence, from the several circumstances of its
being and operations, is here multiplied into Legion, and improved to a number
of smaller Entities; and these again into as many Modes and insignificant
formalities. What a number of words here have nothing answering them? and as
many are imposed at random. To wrest names from their known meaning to Senses
most alien, and to darken speech by words without knowledge; are none of the
most inconsiderable faults of this Philosophy: To reckon them in their
particular instances, would puzzle Archimedes. Now hence the genuine Idea's of
the Mind are adulterate; and the Things themselves lost in a crowd of Names,
and Intentional nothings. Thus these Verbosities do emasculate the
Understanding; and render it slight and frivolous, as its objects. Me thinks,
the late Voluminous Jesuits, those Laplanders of Peripateticism, do but
subtly trifle: and their Philosophic undertakings are much like his, who
spent his time in darting Cumming-seeds through the Eye of a Needle. One would
think they were impregnated, as are the Mares in Cappadocia; they are big of
words: their tedious Volumes have the Tympany, and bring forth the wind. To me,
a cursus Philosophicus, is but an Impertinency in Folio; and the studying of
them a laborious idleness. It Is here, that things are crumbled into notional
Atoms; and the substance evaporated into an imaginary Ether. The Intellect,
that can feed on this air, is a Chamaelion; and a mere inflated skin. From this
stock grew School Divinity, which is but Peripateticism in a Theological
Livery. A School-man is the Ghost of the Stagirite, in a Body of condensed Air:
and Thomas but Aristotle sainted. But to make good our charge against the
Philosophy of the Schools, by a more close surveying it. That its Principles
are steril, unsatisfying Verbosities; cannot escape the notice of the most
shallow Inquirer. To begin at the bottom; their Materia prima is a mere
chimaera. If we can fix a determinate conceit of nothing; that is the Idea on it:
And, Nec quid, nec quale, nec quantum, is as as apposite a definition of
nothing, as can be. If we would conceive this Imaginary Matter: we must deny
all things of it, that we can conceive, and what remains is the thing we look
for. And should we allow it all, which its Assertors assign it, viz. Quantity
interminate; it is still but an empty extended capacity, and therefore at the
best, but like that Space, which we imagine was before the beginning of Time,
and will be after the Universal Flames. It Is easy to draw a Parallelism
between that Ancient, and this more Modern Nothing; and in all things to make
good its resemblance to that Commentitious Inanity. The Peripatetick matter is
a pure unactuated Power: and this conceited Vacuum a mere Receptibility. Matter
is supposed indeterminate: and Space is so. The pretended first matter is
capable of all forms: And the imaginary space is receptive of any body. The
matter can be actuated at once but by a single Informant: and Space is
replenisht by one Corporal Inexistence. Matter cannot naturally subsist
uninform'd: And Nature avoids vacuity in space. The matter is ingenerate, and
beyond corruption: And the space was before, and will be after either. The
matter in all things is but one: and the space most uniform. Thus the
Foundation-Principle of Peripateticism runs but parallel to an acknowledged
nothing: and their agreement in essential characters makes rather an Identity,
then a Parity; but that Imaginary space has more to plead for its reality,
then the matter has, and herein only are they dissimilar. For that has no
dependence on the bodies which possess it; but was before them, and will
survive them: whereas this essentially relies on the form, and cannot subsist
without it. Which yet, me thinks, is little better then an absurdity: that the
cause should be an Eleemosynary for its subsistence to its effect, and a nature
posterior to, and dependent on it self. This dependentia a posteriori, though
in a diverse way of causality, my reason could never away with: Yea, one of
their own, Oviedo a Spanish Jesuit, has effectually impugn'd it. So then
there is nothing real, answering this Imaginary Proteus; and Materia prima has
as much of being, as Mons aureus. But to take a step further, their Form is as
obnoxious; and as dry a word, as the formention'd Nominal. I Will not spend time
in an industrious confutation: The subject is dry, and I long to be out on it;
with a note on its imaginary Origin, I Will leave it. It Is source is as obscure,
as Nile's; and Potentia materiae is a pitiful figment. Did it suppose any thing
of the form to preexist in the matter, as the seminal of its being; 'twere
tolerable sense to say it were educed from it. But by educing the affirmers
only mean a producing in it, with a subjective dependence on its Recipient: a
very fine signification of Eduction; which answers not the question whence it is
derived, but into what it is received. The question is of the terminus a quo,
and the answer of the subject. So that all that can be made of this power of
the matter, is merely a receptive capacity: and we may as well affirm, that the
world was educ'd out of the power of the imaginary space; and give that as a
sufficient account of its Original. And in this language, to grow rich were to
educe money out of the power of the Pocket. To make a full discovery of the
jejune emptiness of these Philosophic Principles, were a task as easy for an
ordinary undertaker; as it would be tedious to an Ingenious Reader. Gassendus
has excellently performed it, and, I am confident, to the conviction of those,
whom nobler Principles have not yet emancipated from that degenerous slavery. I
shall not attempt a work that has been finished by such an Apelles. Only to
give an hint more of this verbal emptiness; a short view of a definition or two
will be current evidence: which, though in Greek or Latin they amuse us, yet a
vernacular translation unmasks them; and if we make them speak English, the
cheat is transparent. Light is (...) says that Philosophy: In English, the Act
of a perspicuous body. Sure Aristotle here transgrest his Topics: and if this
definition be clearer, and more known then the thing defined; midnight may vye
for conspicuity with noon. Is not light more known then this insignificant
Energie? And what is a diaphanous body, but the Lights medium, the Air? so that
light is the act of the Air: which definition spoils the Riddle; and makes it
no wonder, a man should see by night as well as by day. Thus is light darkened
by an illustration; and the Sun it self is wrapped up in obscuring clouds: As if
light were best seen by darkness, as light inaccessible is known by Ignorance.
If Lux be Umbra Dei; this definition is Umbra lucis. The Infant, that was last
enlarged from its maternal cells; knows more what light is, then this definition
teaches. Again, that motion is (...), etc. is as insignificant as the former.
By the most favorable interpretation of that unintelligible Entelechy; It is
but an act of a being in power, as it is in power: The construing of which to
any real meaning, is beyond the criticisms of a Mother Tongue; except it
describes our modern Acts of Parliaments. Sure that definition is not very
conspicuous, whose Genus posed the Devil. The Philosopher, that proved motion
by walking, did in that action better define it: And that puzzled Candidate, who
being asked what a circle was, decrib'd it by the rotation of his hand; gave an
account more satisfying. In some things we must indeed give an allowance for
words of Art: But in defining obvious appearances, we are to use what is most
plain and easy; that the mind be not misled by Amphibologies, or ill conceived
notions, into fallacious deductions. To give an account of all the
insignificancies of this Philosophy, would be almost to transcribe it; a task
that I should never engage in, though I owed no account for my idle hours.
'Twill need a pardon from the Ingenious for the minutes already spent, though
in a confutation.

CHAP. XVII.
2. Peripatetick Philosophy is litigious; it has no settled constant
signification of words; the inconveniences hereof. Aristotle intended the
cherishing Controversies: proved by his own double testimony. Some of his
impertinent arguings derided. Disputes retard, and are injurious to knowledge.
Peripateticks are most exercised in the Controversal parts of Philosophy, and
know little of the practical and experimental. A touch at School Divinity.

THat this Philosophy is litigious, the very spawn of disputations and
controversies as undecisive as needless; is the natural result of the former:
Storms are the products of vapors. For where words are imposed arbitrariously,
having no stated real meaning; or else distorted from their common use, and
known significations: the mind must needs be led into confusion and misprision;
and so things plain and easy in their naked natures, made full of intricacy
and disputable uncertainty. For we cannot conclude with assurance, but from
clearly apprehended premises; and these cannot be so conceived, but by a
distinct comprehension of the words out of which they are elemented. So that,
where they are unfixt or ambiguous; our propositions must be so, and our
deductions can be no better. One reason therefore of the uncontroverted
certainty of Mathematical Science is; because it is built upon clear and settled
significations of names, which admit of no ambiguity or insignificant
obscurity. But in the Aristotelian Philosophy it is quite otherwise: Words being
here carelessly and abusively admitted, and as inconstantly retained; it must
needs come to pass, that they will be diversely apprehended by contenders, and
so made the subject of controversies, there are endless both for use and
number. And thus being at their first step out of the way to Science, by
mistaking in simple terms; in the progress of their enquiries they must needs
lose both themselves, and the Truth, in a Verbal Labyrinth. And now the
entangled disputants, as Master Hobs ingeniously observes, like Birds that
came down the Chimney; betake them to the false light, seldom suspecting the
way they entered: But attempting by vain, impertinent, and coincident
distinctions, to escape the absurdity that pursues them: do but weary
themselves with as little success, as the silly Bird attempts the window. The
mis-stated words are the original mistake; and every other essay is a new one.
Now these canting contests, the usual entertainment of the Peripatum, are not
only the accidental vitiosities of the Philosophers; but the genuine issues of
the Philosophy it self. And Aristotle seems purposely to intend the cherishing
of controversal digladiations, by his own affectation of an intricate
obscurity. Himself acknowledged it, when he said; his Physics were published,
and not so: And by that double advice in his Topics it is as clear as light. In
one place, he advises his Sectatours in disputations to be ambiguous: and in
another, to bring forth any thing that occurs, rather then give way to their
Adversary; Counsel very well becoming an Enquirer after Verity! Nor did he here
advise them to any thing, but what he follows himself, and exactly copies out
in his practice. The multitudes of his lame, abrupt, equivocal,
self-conttadicting expressions, will evidence it as to the first part: which
who considers, may be satisfied in this; that if Aristotle found Nature's face
under covert of a veil, he has not removed the old, but made her a new one.
And for the latter, his frequent slightness in arguing does abundantly make it
good. To instance, he proves the world to be perfect, because it consists of
bodies; and that bodies are so, because they consist of a triple dimension; and
that a triple dimension is perfect, because three are all; and that three are
all, because when it is but one or two, we cannot say all, but when it is three,
we may: Is not this an absolute demonstration? We can say All at the number
three: Therefore the world is perfect. Tobit went forth and his Dog followed
him; therefore there is a world in the Moon, were an argument as Apodictical. In
another place he proves the world to be but one: For were there another, our
Earth would fall unto it. This is a pitiful deduction, from the mere prejudice
of Sense; and not unlike theirs, who thought, if there were Antipodes, they
must needs [as it is said of Erasmus] in Coelum descendere. As if, were there
more worlds, each of them would not have its proper Center. Elsewhere showing,
why the Heavens move this way rather then another, he gives this for a reason:
because they move to the more honorable; and before is more honorable then
after. This is like the Gallant, who sent his man to buy an Hat, that would
turn up behind. As if, had the Heavens moved the other way; that term had not
been then before, which is now the contrary. This Inference is founded upon a
very weak supposition, viz. That those alterable respects are realities in
Nature; which will never be admitted by a considerate discerner. Thus Aristotle
acted his own instructions; and his obsequious Sectators have super-erogated in
observance. They have so disguised his Philosophy by obscuring Comments, that
his revived self would not own it: And were he to act another part with
mortals; he would be but pitiful Peripatetick, every Sophister would out-talk him.

Now this disputing way of Enquiry is so far from advancing Science; that it is
no inconsiderable retarder: For in Scientifical discoveries many things must be
considered, which the hurrey of a dispute indisposeth for; and there is no way
to truth, but by the most clear comprehension of simple notions, and as wary an
accuracy in deductions. If the Fountain be disturbed, there is no seeing to the
bottom; and here is an exception to the Proverb, It Is no good fishing for Verity
in troubled waters. One mistake of either simple apprehension, or connection,
makes an erroneous conclusion. So that the precipitancy of disputation, and the
stir and noise of Passions, that usually attend it; must needs be prejudicial
to Verity: its calm insinuations can no more be heard in such a bustle, then a
whisper among a crowd of Saylors in a storm. Nor do the eager clamors of
contending Disputants, yield any more relief to eclipsed Truth; then did the
sounding Brass of old to the laboring Moon. When it is under question, 'twere
as good flip cross and pile, as to dispute for it: and to play a game at Chess
for an opinion in Philosophy [as my self and an ingenious Friend have sometime
sported] is as likely a way to determine. Thus the Peripatetick procedure is
inept for Philosophical solutions: The Lot were as equitable a decision, as
their empty Loquacities. It Is these nugacious Disputations, that have been the
great hinderance to the more improveable parts of Learning: and the modern
Retainers to the Stagirite have spent their sweat and pains upon the most
litigious parts of his Philosophy; while those, that find less play for the
contending Genius, are incultivate. Thus Logic, Physics, Metaphysics, are
the burden of Volumes, and the daily entertainment of the Disputing Schools:
while the more profitable doctrines of the Heavens, Meteors, Minerals, Animals;
as also the more practical ones of Politics, and Oeconomicks, are scarce so
much as glanced at. And the indisputable Mathematics, the only Science Heaven
has yet vouchsaf't Humanity; have but few Votaries among the slaves of the
Stagirite. What, the late promoters of the Aristotelian Philosophy, have writ
on all these so fertile subjects; can scarce compare with the single disputes
about Materia prima.

Nor has Humane Science monopoliz'd the damage, that has sprung from this
Root of Evils: Theology has been as deep a sharer. The Volumes of the
Schoolmen, are deplorable evidence of Peripatetick depravations: And Luther's
censure of that Divinity, Quam primum apparuit Theologia Scholastica, evanuit
Theologia Crucis, is neither uncharitable, nor unjust. This has mudded the
Fountain of Certainty with notional and Ethnic admixtions; and platted the
head of Evangelical truth, as the Jews did its Author's, with a Crown of
thorns: Here, the most obvious Verity is subtiliz'd into niceties, and spun
into a thread indiscernible by common Optics, but through the spectacles of
the adored Heathen. This has robbed the Christian world of its unity and
peace; and made the Church, the Stage of everlasting contentions: And while
Aristotle is made the Center of Truth, and Unity, what hope of reconciling? And
yet most of these Scholastic controversies are ultimately resolved into the
subtilties of his Philosophy: And me thinks an Athenian should not be the best
guide to the (...); Nor an Idolater to that God he neither knew nor owned. When
I read the eager contests of these Notional Theologues, about things that are
not; I cannot but think of the pair of wise ones, that fought for the middle:
And me thinks many of their Controversies are such, as if we and our Antipodes,
should strive who were uppermost; their title to Truth is equal. He that
divided his Text into one part; did but imitate the Schoolmen in their
coincident distinctions: And the best of their curiosities are but like paint
on Glass, which intercepts and dies the light the more desirable splendour. I
cannot look upon their elaborate trifles, but with a sad reflection on the
degenerate state of our lapsed Intellects; and as deep a resentment, of the
mischiefs of this School-Philosophy.

CHAP. XVIII.
3. It gives no account of the Phenomenon; those that are remoter, it attempts
not. It speaks nothing pertinent in the most ordinary: Its circular, and
general way of Solution. It resolves all things into occult qualities. The
absurdity of the Aristotelian Hypothesis of the Heavens. The Gallaxy is no
meteor: the Heavens are corruptible. Comets are above the Moon. The Sphere of
fire derided. Aristotle convicted of several other false assertions.

3. THe Aristotelian Hypotheses give a very dry and jejune account of Nature's
Phenomenon. For as to its more mysterious reserves, Peripatetick enquiry has
left them unattempted; and the most forward notional Dictators sit down here in
a contented ignorance: and as if nothing more were knowable then is already
discovered, they put stop to all endeavors of their Solution. Qualities, that
were Occult to Aristotle, must be so to us; and we must not Philosophize beyond
Sympathy and Antipathy: whereas indeed the Rarities of Nature are in these
Recesses, and its most excellent operations Cryptick to common discernment.
Modern Ingenuity expects Wonders from Magnetic discoveries: And while we know
but its more sensible ways of working; we are but vulgar Philosophers, and not
likely to help the World to any considerable Theories. Till the Fountains of
the great deeps are broken up; Knowledge is not likely to cover the Earth as
the waters the Sea. Nor is the Aristotelian Philosophy guilty of this sloth and
Philosophic penury, only in remoter abstrusities: but in solving the most
ordinary causalities, it is as defective and unsatisfying. Even the most common
productions are here resolved into Celestial influences, Elemental
combinations, active and passive principles, and such generalities; while the
particular manner of them is as hidden as sympathies. And if we follow manifest
qualities beyond the empty signification of their Names; we shall find them as
occult, as those which are professedly so. That heavy Bodies descend by
gravity, is no better an account then we might expect from a Rustic: and
again, that Gravity is a quality whereby an heavy body descends, is an
impertinent Circle, and teaches nothing. The feigned Central alliciency is but
a word, and the manner of it still occult. That the fire burns by a quality
called heat; is an empty dry return to the Question, and leaves us still
ignorant of the immediate way of igneous solutions. The accounts that this
Philosophy gives by other Qualities, are of the same Gender with these: So that
to say the Loadstone draws Iron by magnetic attraction, and that the Sea moves
by flux and reflux; were as satisfying as these Hypotheses, and the solution
were as pertinent. In the Qualities, this Philosophy calls manifest, nothing is
so but the effects. For the heat, we feel, is but the effect of the fire; and
the pressure, we are sensible of, but the effect of the descending body. And
effects, whose causes are confessedly occult, are as much within the sphere of
our Senses; and our Eyes will inform us of the motion of the Steel to its
attrahent. Thus Peripatetick Philosophy resolves all things into Occult
qualities; and the Dogmatists are the only Scepticks. Even to them, that
pretend so much to Science, the world is circumscribed with a Gyges his Ring;
and is intellectually invisible: And, (...), will best become the mouth of a
Peripatetick. For by their way of disquisition there can no more be truly
comprehended, then what is known by every common Ignorant: But ingenious inquiry
will not be contented with such vulgar frigidities.

But further, if we look into the Aristotelian Comments on the largest Volumes
of the Universe: The works of the fourth day are there as confused and
disorderly, as the Chaos of the first: and more like that, which was before the
light, then the completely finished, and gloriously disposed frame. What a
Romance is the story of those impossible concamerations, Intersections,
Involutions, and feigned Rotations of solid Orbs? All substituted to salve the
credit of a broken ill-contrived Systeme. The belief of such disorders above,
were an advantage to the oblique Atheism of Epicurus: And such Irregularities
in the Celestial motions, would lend an Argument to the Apotheiosis of Fortune.
Had the world been coagmented from that supposed fortuitous Jumble; this
Hypothesis had been tolerable. But could the doctrine of solid Orbs, be
accommodated to Astronomical Phenomenon; yet to ascribe each Sphere an
Intelligence to circumvolve it, were an unphilosophical desperate refuge: And
to confine the blessed Genii to a Province, which was the Hell of Ixion, were
to rob them of their Felicities. That the Galaxy is a Meteor, was the account
of Aristotle: But the Telescope has autoptically confuted it: And he, who is
not Pyrrhonian to the disbelief of his Senses, may see; that it is no exhalation
from the Earth, but an heap of smaller Luminaries. That the Heavens are void of
corruption, is Aristotle's supposal: But the Tube has betrayed their impurity;
and Neoterick Astronomy has found spots in the Sun. The discoveries made in
Venus, and the Moon, disprove the Antique Quintessence; and evidence them of as
course materials, as the Globe we belong to. The Perspicil, as well as the
Needle, has enlarged the habitable World; and that the Moon is an Earth, is no
improbable conjecture. The inequality of its surface, Mountanous protuberance,
the nature of its Maculae, and infinite other circumstances [for which the
world's beholding to Galilaeo] are Items not contemptible: Hevelius has
graphically described it: That Comets are of nature Terrestrial, is allowable:
But that they are materiall'd of vapors, and never flamed beyond the Moon;
were a concession unpardonable. That in Cassiopaea was in the Firmament, and
another in our age above the Sun. Nor was there ever any as low as the highest
point of the circumference, the Stagyrite allows them. So that we need not be
appal'd at Blazing Stars, and a Comet is no more ground for Astrological
presages then a flaming Chimney. The unparalled Descartes has unridled
their dark Physiology, and to wonder solved their Motions. His Philosophy gives
them transcursions beyond the Vortex we breath in; and leads them through
others, which are only known in an Hypothesis. Aristotle would have fainted
before he had flown half so far, as that Eagle-wit; and have lighted on a hard
name, or occult quality, to rest him. That there is a sphere of fire under the
concave of the Moon, is a dream: And this, may be, was the reason some imagined
Hell there, thinking those flames the Ignis Rotae. According to this
Hypothesis, the whole Lunar world is a Torrid Zone; and on a better account,
then Aristotle thought ours was, may be supposed inhabitable, except they are
Salamanders which dwell in those fiery Regions. That the Reflection of the Solar
Rays, is terminated in the Clouds; was the opinion of the Grecian Sage: But
Lunar observations have convicted it of falsehood; and that planet receives the
dusky light, we discern in its Sextile Aspect, from the Earth's benignity. That
the Rainbow never describes more then a semicircle, is no creditable assertion;
since experimental observations have confuted it. Gassendus saw one at
Sunsetting, whose Supreme Arch almost reached our Zenith; while the Horns
stood in the Oriental Tropicks. And that Noble wit reprehends the School-Idol,
for assigning fifty years at least between every Lunar Iris. That Caucasus
enjoys the Sunbeams three parts of the Nights Vigils; that Danubius arises
from the Pyrenaean Hills: That the Earth is higher toward the North: are
opinions truly charged on Aristotle by the Restorer of Epicurus; and all easily
confutable falsities. To reckon all the Aristotelian aberrances, and to give a
full account of the lameness of his Hypotheses, would swell this digression
into a Volume. The mentioned shall suffice us.

CHAP. XIX.
4. Aristotle's Philosophy inept for new discoveries; it has been the Author
of no one invention: It Is founded on vulgarities, and therefore makes nothing
known beyond them. The knowledge of Natures outside confers not to practical
improvements. Better hopes from the New Philosophy. A fifth charge against
Aristotle's Philosophy, it is in many things impious, and self-contradicting:
Instances of both propounded. The directing all this to the design of the
discourse. A Caution, viz. that nothing is here intended in favor of novelty
in Divinity; the reason why we may embrace what is new in Philosophy, while we
reject them in Theology.

4. THe Aristotelian Philosophy is inept for New discoveries; and therefore of
no accommodation to the use of life. That all Arts, and Professions are capable
of maturer improvements; cannot be doubted by those, who know the least of any.
And that there is an America of secrets, and unknown Peru of Nature, whose
discovery would richly advance them, is more then conjecture. Now while we
either sail by the Land of gross and vulgar Doctrines, or direct our Enquiries,
by the Cynosure of mere abstract notions; we are not likely to reach the
Treasures on the other side the Atlantic: The directing of the World the way
to which, is the noble end of true Philosohpy. That the Aristotelian Physiology
cannot boast it self the proper Author of any one Invention; is praegnant
evidence of its infecundous deficiency: And 'twould puzzle the Schools to point
at any considerable discovery, made by the direct, sole manuduction of
Peripatetick Principles. Most of our Rarities have been found out by casual
emergency; and have been the works of Time, and Chance, rather then of
Philosophy. What Aristotle has of Experimental Knowledge in his Books of
Animals, or elsewhere; is not much transcending vulgar observation: And yet
what he has of this, was never learnt from his Hypotheses; but forcibly
fetched in to suffrage to them. And it is the observation of the Noble St.
Alban; that that Philosophy is built on a few Vulgar Experiments: and if upon
further enquiry, any were found to refragate, they were to be discharged by a
distinction. Now what is founded on, and made up but of Vulgarities, cannot
make known any thing beyond them. For Nature is is set a going by the most
subtle and hidden Instruments; which it may be have nothing obvious which
resembles them. Hence judging by visible appearances, we are discouraged by
supposed Impossibilities which to Nature are none, but within her Sphere of
Action. And therefore what shows only the outside, and sensible structure of
Nature; is not likely to help us in finding out the Magnalia. 'Twere next to
impossible for one, who never saw the inward wheels and motions, to make a
watch upon the bare view of the Circle of hours, and Index: And it is as
difficult to trace natural operations to any practical advantage, by the sight
of the Cortex of sensible Appearances. He were a poor Physician, that had no
more Anatomy, then were to be gathered from the Physnomy. Yea, the most common
Phenomenon can be neither known, nor improved, without insight into the more
hidden frame. For Nature works by an Invisible Hand in all things: And till
Peripateticism can show us further, then those gross solutions of Qualities and
Elements; 'twill never make us Benefactors to the World, nor considerable
Discoverers. But its experienced sterility through so many hundred years,
drives Hope to desperation. We expect greater things from Neoterick endeavors.
The Cartesian Philosophy in this regard has shown the World the way to be
happy. Me thinks this Age seems resolved to bequeath posterity somewhat to
remember it: And the glorious Undertakers, wherewith Heaven has blessed our
Days, will leave the world better provided then they found it. And whereas in
former times such generous free-spirited Worthies were, as the Rare newly
observed Stars, a single one the wonder of an Age: In ours they are like the
lights of the greater size that twinkle in the Starry Firmament: And this last
Century can glory in numerous constellations. Should those Heroes go on, as
they have happily begun; they will fill the world with wonders. And I doubt not
but posterity will find many things, that are now but Rumors, verified into
practical Realities. It may be some Ages hence, a voyage to the Southern
unknown Tracts, yea possibly the Moon, will not be more strange then one to
America. To them, that come after us, it may be as ordinary to buy a pair of
wings to fly into remotest Regions; as now a pair of Boots to ride a Journey.
And to conferr at the distance of the Indies by Sympathetick conveyances, may
be as usual to future times, as to us in a litterary correspondence. The
restoration of gray hairs to Iuvenility, and renewing the exhausted marrow,
may at length be effected without a miracle: And the turning of the now
comparatively desert world into a Paradise, may not improbably be expected from
late Agriculture. Now those, that judge by the narrowness of former Principles,
will smile at these Paradoxical expectations: But questionless those great
Inventions, that have in these later Ages altered the face of all things; in
their naked proposals, and mere suppositions, were to former times as
ridiculous. To have talked of a new Earth to have been discovered, had been a
Romance to Antiquity: And to sail without sight of Stars or shoars by the
guidance of a Mineral, a story more absurd, then the flight of Daedalus. That
men should speak after their tongues were ashes, or communicate with each other
in differing Hemisphears, before the Invention of Letters; could not but have
been thought a fiction. Antiquity would not have believed the almost incredible
force of our Canons; and would as coldly have entertained the wonders of the
Telescope. In these we all condemn antique incredulity; and it is likely
Posterity will have as much cause to pity ours. But yet notwithstanding this
straightness of shallow observers, there are a set of enlarged souls that are
more judiciously credulous: and those, who are acquainted with the fecundity of
Cartesian Principles, and the diligent and ingenuous endeavors of so many true
Philosophers; will despair of nothing.

5. But again, the Aristotelian Philosophy is in some things impious, and
inconsistent with Divinity; and in many more inconsistent with it self. That
the Resurrection is impossible; That God understands not all things; That the
world was from Eternity; That there is no substantial form, but moves some Orb;
That the first Mover moves by an Eternal, Immutable Necessity; That, if the
world and motion were not from Eternity, then God was Idle; were all the
Assertions of Aristotle, which Theology pronounces impieties. Which yet we
need not strange at from one, of whom a Father says, Nec Deum coluit nec
curavit: Especially, if it be as Philoponus affirms, that he philosophiz'd by
command from the Oracle. Of the Aristotelian contradictions, Gassendus has
presented us with a Catalogue: We'll instance in a few of them. In one place he
says, The Planets scintillation is not seen, because of their propinquity; but
that of the rising and setting Sun is, because of its distance: and yet in
another place he makes the Sun nearer us, then they are. He says, that the
Elements are not Eternal, and seeks to prove it; and yet he makes the world so,
and the Elements its parts. In his Meteors he says, no Dew is produced in the
Wind; and yet afterward admits it under the South, and none under the North.
In one place he defines a vapor humid and cold; and in another humid and hot.
He says, the faculty of speaking is a sense; and yet before he allowed but
five. In one place, that Nature does all things best; and in another, that it
makes more evil then good. And somewhere he contradicts himself within a line;
saying, that an Immovable Mover has no principle of Motion. 'Twould be
tedious to mention more; and the qualiiy of a digression will not allow it.

Thus we have, as briefly as the subject would bear, animadverted on the so
much admired Philosophy of Aristotle. The nobler Spirits of the Age, are
disengaged from those detected vanities: And the now Adorers of that Philosophy
are few, but such narrow souls, that know no other; Or if any of them look
beyond the leaves of their Master, yet they try other Principles by a Jury of
his, and scan Carts with Genus and Species. From the former sort I may hope,
they will pardon this attempt; and for the latter, I value not their censure.

Thus then we may conclude upon the whole, that the stamp of Authority can make
Leather as current as Gold; and that there is nothing so contemptible, but
Antiquity can render it august, and excellent. But, because the Fooleries of
some affected Novelists have discredited new discoveries, and rendered the very
mention suspected of Vanity at least; and in points Divine, of Heresy: It will
be necessary to add, that I intend not the former discourse, in favor of any
new-broach'd conceit in Divinity; For I own no Opinion there, which cannot
plead the prescription of above sixteen hundred. There Is nothing I have more
sadly resented, then the phrenetick whimsies with which our Age abounds, and
therefore am not likely to Patron them. In Theology, I put as great a
difference between our New Lights, and Ancient Truths; as between the Sun, and
an unconcocted evanid Meteor. Though I confess, that in Philosophy I Am a
Seeker; yet cannot believe, that a Sceptick in Philosophy must be one in
Divinity. Gospel Light began in it Zenith; and, as some say the Sun, was
created in its Meridian strength and luster. But the beginnings of Philosophy
were in a Crepusculous obscurity; and it is yet scarce past the Dawn. Divine
Truths were most pure in their source; and Time could not perfect what Eternity
began: our Divinity, like the Grandfather of Humanity, was born in the fullness
of time, and in the strength of its manly vigor: But Philosophy and Arts
commenced Embryo's, and are completed by Times gradual accomplishments. And
therefore, what I cannot find in the leaves of former Inquisitours: I seek in
the Modern attempts of nearer Authors. I cannot receive Aristotle's (...), in
so extensive an interpretation, as some would enlarge it to: And that
discouraging Maxim, Nil dictum quod non dictum prius, has little room in my
estimation. Nor can I tie up my belief to the Letter of Solomon: Except
Copernicus be in the right, there has been something New under the Sun; I Am
sure, later times have seen Novelties in the Heavens above it. I do not think,
that all Science is Tautology: The last Ages have shown us, what Antiquity
never saw; no, not in a Dream.

CHAP. XX.
It Is queried whether there be any Science in the sense of the Dogmatists: (1)
We cannot know any thing to be the cause of another, but from its attending it;
and this way is not infallible; declared by instances, especially from the
Philosophy of Descartes. All things are mixed, and it is difficult to assign
each Cause its distinct Effect. (2) There Is no demonstration but where the
contrary is impossible. We can scarce conclude so of any thing: Instances of
supposed impossibles which are none. A story of a Scholar that turned Gipsy;
and of the power of Imagination. Of one man's binding another thoughts; and a
conjecture at the manner of its performance.

COnfidence of Science is one great reason, we miss it: whereby presuming we
have it every where, we seek it not where it is; and therefore fall short of
the object of our Enquiry. Now to give further check to Dogmatical pretensions,
and to discover the vanity of assuming Ignorance; we'll make a short enquiry,
whether there be any such thing as Science in the sense of its Assertours. In
their notion then, it is the knowledge of things in their true, immediate,
necessary causes: Upon which I Will advance the following Observations.

1. All Knowledge of Causes is deductive: for we know none by simple intuition;
but through the mediation of its effects. Now we cannot conclude, any thing to
be the cause of another; but from its continual accompanying it: for the
causality it self is insensible. Thus we gather fire to be the cause of heat,
and the Sun of daylight: because where ever fire is, we find there is heat; and
where ever the Sun is, Light attends it, and e contra. But now to argue from a
concomitancy to a causality, is not infallibly conclusive: Yea in this way lies
notorious delusion. Is It not possible, and how know we the contrary, but, that
something, which always attends the grosser flame, may be the cause of heat? and
may not it, and its supposed cause, be only parallel effects? Suppose the fire
had never appeared, but had been still hid in smoke; and that heat did always
proportionably increase and diminish, with the greater or less quantity of that
fuliginous exhalation: should we ever have doubted, that smoke was the cause
on it? Suppose we had never seen more Sun, then in a cloudy day, and that the
lesser lights had never shown us their lucid substance; Let us suppose the day
had always broke with a wind, and had proportionably varyed, as that did: Had
not he been a notorious Sceptick, that should question the causality? But we
need not be beholding to such remote suppositions: The French Philosophy
furnishes us with a better instance. For, according to the Principles of the
illustrious Descartes, there would be light, though the Sun and Stars gave
none; and a great part of what we now enjoy, is independent on their beams. Now
if this seemingly prodigious Paradox, can be reconciled to the least
probability of conjecture, or may it be made but a tolerable supposal; I
presume, it may then win those that are of most difficil belief, readily to
yield; that causes in our account the most palpable, may possibly be but
uninfluential attendants; since that there is not an instance can be given,
wherein we opinion a more certain efficiency. So then, according to the tenor
of that concinnous Hypothesis, light being caused by the Conamen of the Matter
of the Vortex, to recede from the Center of its Motion: it is easily deducible,
that were there none of that fluid Ether, which makes the body of the Sun in
the Center of our world, or should it cease from action; yet the conatus of the
circling matter would not be considerably less, but according to the
indispensable Laws of Motion, must press the Organs of Sense as now, though it
may be not with so smart an impulse. Thus we see, how there might be Light
before the Luminaries; and Evening and Morning before there was a Sun. So then
we cannot infallibly assure our selves of the truth of the causes, that most
obviously occur; and therefore the foundation of scientifical procedure, is too
weak for so magnificent a superstructure. Besides, That the World's a mass of
heterogeneous subsistencies, and every part thereof a coalition of
distinguishable varieties; we need not go far for evidence: And that all things
are mixed, and Causes blended by mutual involutions; I presume, to the
Intelligent will be no difficult concession. Now to profound to the bottom of
these diversities, to assign each cause its distinct effects, and to limit them
by their just and true proportions; are necessary requisites of Science: and he
that has compast them, may boast he has outdone humanity. But for us to talk
of Knowledge, from those few indistinct representations, which are made to our
grosser faculties, is a flatulent vanity.

2. We hold no demonstration in the notion of the Dogmatist, but where the
contrary is impossible: For necessary is that, which cannot be otherwise. Now,
whether the acquisitions of any on this side perfection, can make good the
pretensions to so high strained an infallibility, will be worth a reflection.
And, me thinks, did we but compare the miserable scantness of our capacities,
with the vast profundity of things; both truth and modesty would teach us a
dialect, more becoming short-sighted mortality. Can nothing be otherwise, which
we conceive impossible, to be so? Is our knowledge, and things, so adequately
commensurate, as to justify the affirming, that that cannot be, which we
comprehend not? Our demonstrations are levied upon Principles of our own, not
universal Nature: And, as my Lord Bacon notes, we judge from the Analogy of our
selves, not the Universe. Now are not many things certain by the Principles of
one, which are impossible to the apprehensions of another? Thus some things our
Juvenile reasons tenaciously adhere to; which yet our maturer Judgments
disallow of: many things to mere sensible discerners are impossible, which to
the enlarged principles of more advanced Intellects are easy verities: Yea,
that is absurd in one Philosophy, which is a worthy Truth in another; and that is
a demonstration to Aristotle, which is none to Descartes. That every fixed star
is a Sun; and that they are as distant from each other, as we from some of
them; That the Sun, which lights us, is in the Center of our World, and our
Earth a Planet that wheels about it; That this Globe is a Star, only crusted
over with the grosser Element, and that its Center is of the same nature with
the Sun; That it may recover its light again, and shine amids the other
Luminaries; That our Sun may be swallowed up of another, and become a Planet:
All these, if we judge by common Principles or the Rules of Vulgar Philosophy,
are prodigious Impossibilities, and their contradictories, as good as
demonstrable: But yet to a reason informed by Cartesianism; these have their
probability. Thus, it may be, the grossest absurdities to the Philosophies of
Europe, may be justifiable assertions to that of China: And it is not unlikely,
but what is impossible to all Humanity, may be possible in the Metaphysics, and
Physiologie of Angels. Now the best Principles, excepting Divine, and
Mathematical, are but Hypotheses; within the Circle of which we may indeed
conclude many things, with security from Error: But yet the greatest certainty,
advanced from supposal, is still but Hypothetical. So that we may affirm,
things are thus and thus, according to the Principles we have espoused: But we
strangely forget our selves, when we plead a necessity of their being so in
Nature, and an Impossibility of their being otherwise.

That one man should be able to bind the thoughts of another, and determine
them to their particular objects; will be reckoned in the first rank of
Impossibles: Yet by the power of advanced Imagination it may very probably be
effected; and story abounds with Instances. I Will trouble the Reader but with
one; and the hands from which I had it, make me secure of the truth on it. There
was very lately a Lad in the University of Oxford, who being of very pregnant
and ready parts, and yet wanting the encouragement of preferment; was by his
poverty forced to leave his studies there, and to cast himself upon the wide
world for a livelihood. Now, his necessities growing daily on him, and wanting
the help of friends to relieve him; he was at last forced to join himself to a
company of Vagabond Gypsies, whom occasionly he met with, and to follow their
Trade for a maintenance. Among these extravagant people, by the insinuating
subtilty of his carriage, he quickly got so much of their love, and esteem; as
that they discovered to him their Mystery: in the practice of which, by the
pregnancy of his wit and parts he soon grew so good a proficient, as to be able
to outdo his Instructours. After he had been a pretty while well exercised in
the Trade; there chanced to ride by a couple of Scholars who had formerly bin
of his acquaintance. The Scholars had quickly spyed out their old friend, among
the Gypsies; and their amazement to see him among such society, had well-nigh
discovered him: but by a sign he prevented their owning him before that Crew:
and taking one of them aside privately, desired him with his friend to go to an
Inn, not far distant thence, promising there to come to them. They accordingly
went thither, and he follows: after their first salutations, his friends
enquire how he came to lead so odd a life as that was, and to join himself with
such a cheating beggarly company. The Scholar-Gypsy having given them an
account of the necessity, which drove him to that kind of life; told them, that
the people he went with were not such Impostours as they were taken for, but
that they had a traditional kind of learning among them, and could do wonders
by the power of Imagination, and that himself had learnt much of their Art, and
improved it further then themselves could. And to evince the truth of what he
told them, he said, he would remove into another room, leaving them to discourse
together; and upon his return tell them the sum of what they had talked of:
which accordingly he performed, giving them a full account of what had passed
between them in his absence. The Scholars being amazed at so unexpected a
discovery, earnestly desired him to unriddle the mystery. In which he gave them
satisfaction, by telling them, that what he did was by the power of
Imagination, his Fancy binding theirs; and that himself had dictated to them
the discourse, they held together, while he was from them: That there were
warrantable ways of heightening the Imagination to that pitch, as to bind
another; and that when he had compassed the whole secret, some parts of which
he said he was yet ignorant of, he intended to leave their company, and give
the world an account of what he had learned.

Now that this strange power of the Imagination is no Impossibility; the
wonderful signatures in the Foetus caused by the Imagination of the Mother, is
no contemptible Item. The sympathies of laughing and gaping together, are
resolved into this Principle: and I see not why the fancy of one man may not
determine the cogitation of another rightly qualified, as easily as his bodily
motion. This influence seems to be no more unreasonable, then that of one
string of a Lute upon another; when a stroke on it causes a proportionable
motion in the sympathizing consort, which is distant from it and not sensibly
touched. Now if this notion be strictly verifiable; 'twill yield us a good
account how Angels inject thoughts into our minds, and know our cogitations:
and here we may see the source of some kinds of fascination. If we are
prejudiced against the speculation, because we cannot conceive the manner of so
strange an operation; we shall indeed receive no help from the common
Philosophy: But yet the Hypothesis of a Mundane soul, lately revived by that
incomparable Platonist and Cartesian, Dr. H. More, will handsomely relieve us.
Or if any would rather have a Mechanical account; I think it may probably be
made out some such way as follows. Imagination is inward Sense. To Sense is
required a motion of certain Filaments of the Brain; and consequently in
Imagination there is the like: they only differing in this, that the motion of
the one proceeds immediately from external objects; but that of the other has
its immediate rise within us. Now then, when any part of the Brain is strongly
agitated; that, which is next and most capable to receive the motive Impress,
must in like manner be moved. Now we cannot conceive any thing more capable of
motion, then the fluid matter, that is interspersed among all bodies, and
contiguous to them. So then, the agitated parts of the Brain begetting a motion
in the proxime Ether; it is propagated through the liquid medium, as we see
the motion is which is caused by a stone thrown into the water. Now, when the
thus moved matter meets with any thing like that, from which it received its
primary impress; it will proportionably move it, as it is in Musical strings
tuned Unisons. And thus the motion being conveyed, from the Brain of one man to
the Fancy of another; it is there received from the instrument of conveyance,
the subtle matter; and the same kind of strings being moved, and much what
after the same manner as in the first Imaginant; the Soul is awakened to the
same apprehensions, as were they that caused them. I pretend not to any
exactness or infallibility in this account, foreseeing many scruples that must
be removed to make it perfect: It Is only an hint of the possibility of
mechanically solving the Phenomenon; though very likely it may require many
other circumstances completely to make it out. But it is not my business here to
follow it: I leave it therefore to receive accomplishment from maturer
Inventions.

CHAP. XXI.
Another instance of a supposed Impossibility which may not be so. Of
conference at distance by impregnated Needles. A way of secret conveyance by
sympathized hands; a relation to this purpose. Of the magnetic cure of wounds.
This discourse weakens not the certainty of truths Mathematical or Divine.
Mathematical Science need not elate us, since by it we know but our own
creatures, and are still ignorant of our Makers. (3) We cannot know any thing
in Nature, without the knowledge of the first springs of natural motions, and
these we are ignorant of. Descartes his Philosophy commended.

BUt yet to advance another instance. That men should confer at very distant
removes by an extemporary intercourse is a reputed impossibility, but yet there
are some hints in natural operations that give us probability that it is
feasible, and may be compast without unwarrantable assistance from Daemoniack
correspondence. That a couple of Needles equally touched by the same magnet,
being set in two Dyals exactly proportioned to each other, and circumscribed by
the Letters of the Alphabet, may effect this magnale, has considerable
authorities to avouch it. The manner of it is thus represented. Let the friends
that would communicate take each a Dyal: and having appointed a time for their
Sympathetick conference; let one move his impregnate Needle to any letter in
the Alphabet, and its affected fellow will precisely respect the same. So that
would I know what my friend would acquaint me with; it is but observing the
letters that are pointed at by my Needle, and in their order transcribing them
from their sympathized Index, as its motion direct's: and I maybe assured that
my friend described the same with his: and that the words on my paper, are of
his inditing. Now though there will be some ill contrivance in a circumstance
of this invention, in that the thus impregnate Needles will not move to, but
avert from each other (as ingenious Dr. Brown in his Pseudodoxia Epidemica
has observed:) yet this cannot prejudice the main design of this way of secret
conveyance: Since it is but reading counter to the magnetic informer; and
noting the letter which is most distant in the Abecedarian circle from that
which the needle turns to, and the case is not altered. Now though this
desirable effect possibly may not yet answer the expectation of inquisitive
experiment; yet it is no despicable item, that by some other such way of
magnetic efficiency, it may hereafter with success be attempted, when Magical
History shall be enlarged by riper inspections: and it is not unlikely, but that
present discoveries might be improved to the performance.

There is besides this another way, which is said to have advanced the secret
beyond speculation, and completed it in practice. That some have conferred at
distance by sympathized hands, and in a moment have thus transmitted their
thoughts to each other, there are late specious relations do attest it: which
say, that the hands of two friends being sympathized by a transferring of flesh
from one into the other, and the place of the letters mutually agreed on; the
least prick in the hand of one, the other will be sensible of, and that in the
same part of his own. And thus the distant friend by a new kind of Chiromancy
may read in his own hand what his correspondent had set down in his. For
instance, would I in London acquaint my intimate in Paris, that I am well: I
would then prick that part where I had appointed the letter [ I:] and doing so
in another place to signify that word was done, proceed to [ A,] thence to [
M] and so on, till I had finished what I intended to make known. Now that there
have been some such practices, I have had a considerable relation, which I hold
not impertinent to insert. A Gentleman comes to a Surgeon to have his arm
cut off: The Surgeon perceiving nothing that it ailed, was much startled at the
motion; thinking him either in jest, or besides himself. But by a more
deliberate recollection, perceiving that he was both sober, and in earnest;
entreats him to know the reason of so strange a desire, since his arm to him
seemed perfectly sound: to which the Gentleman replies, that his hand was
sympathiz'd, and his friend was dead, so that if not prevented by amputation,
he said, it would rot away, as did that of his deceased Correspondent. Nor was
this an unreasonable surmise; but, if there be any such way of manual
Sympathizing, a very probable conjecture. For, that which was so sensibly
affected with so inconsiderable a touch, in all likelihood would be more
immuted, by those greater alterations which are in Cadaverous Solutions. And no
doubt, but that by the same reason it would have been corrupted, as some times
Warts are by the decay of buried lard that was rubbed upon them. Now if these
ways of secret conveyance may be made out to be really practicable; yea, if it
be evincible, that they are as much as possibly so, it will be a warrantable
presumption of the verity of the former instance: since it is as easily
conceivable, that there should be communications between the phancies of men,
as either the impregnate needles, or sympathized hands. And there is an
instance yet behind, which is more creditable than either, and gives
probability to them all.

That there is a Magnetic way of curing wounds by anointing the weapon, and
that the wound is affected in like manner as is the extravenate blood by the
Sympathetick medicine, is for matter of fact put out of doubt by the Noble Sir
K. Digby, and the proof he gives in his ingenious discourse on the subject, is
unexceptionable. For the reason of this wonder, he attempts it by Mechanism,
and endeavors to make it out by atomical aporrheas, which passing from the
cruentate cloth or weapon to the wound, and being incorporated with the
particles of the salve carry them in their embraces to the affected part: where
the medicinal atoms entering together with the effluviums of the blood, do by
their subtle insinuation better effect the cure, then can be done by any
grosser Application. The particular way of their conveyance, and their regular
direction is handsomely explicated by that learned Knight, and recommended to
the Ingenious by most witty and becoming illustrations. It is out of my way
here to enquire whether the Anima Mundi be not a better account, then any
Mechanical Solutions. The former is more desperate, the later has more of
ingenuity, then solid satisfaction. It is enough for me that de facto there is
such an intercourse between the Magnetic unguent and the vulnerated body, and
I need not be solicitous of the Cause. These theories I presume will not be
importunate to the ingenious: and therefore I have taken the liberty (which the
quality of an Essay will well enough allow of) to touch upon them, though
seemingly collateral to my scope. And yet I think, they are but seemingly so,
since they do pertinently illustrate my design, viz. That what seems impossible
to us, may not be so in Nature; and therefore the Dogmatist wants this to
complete his demonstration, that it is impossible to be otherwise.

Now I intend not by any thing here to invalidate the certainty of truths
either Mathematical or Divine. These are superstructed on principles that
cannot fail us, except our faculties do constantly abuse us. Our religious
foundations are fastened at the pillars of the intellectual world, and the grand
Articles of our Belief as demonstrable as Geometry. Nor will ever either the
subtle attempts of the resolved Atheist; or the passionate Hurricanoes of the
phrentick Enthusiast, any more be able to prevail against the reason our Faith
is built on, than the blustering winds to blow out the Sun. And for
Mathematical Sciences, he that doubts their certainty, has need of a dose of
Hellebore. Nor yet can the Dogmatist make much of these concessions in favor
of his pretended Science; for our discourse comes not within the circle of the
former: and for the later, the knowledge we have of the Mathematics, has no
reason to elate us; since by them we know but numbers, and figures, creatures
of our own, and are yet ignorant of our Maker's.

(3.) We cannot know any thing of Nature but by an Analysis of it to its true
initial causes: and till we know the first springs of natural motions, we are
still but ignorants. These are the Alphabet of Science, and Nature cannot be
read without them. Now who dares pretend to have seen the prime motive causes,
or to have had a view of Nature, while she lay in her simple Originals? we know
nothing but effects, and those but by our Senses. Nor can we judge of their
Causes, but by proportion to palpable causalities conceiving them like those
within the sensible Horizon. Now it is no doubt with the considerate, but that
the rudiments of Nature are very unlike the grosser appearances. Thus in things
obvious, there is but little resemblance between the Mucous sperm, and the
completed Animal. The Egg is not like the oviparous production: nor the
corrupted muck like the creature that creeps from it. There Is but little
similitude betwixt a terreous humidity, and plantal germinations; nor do
vegetable derivations ordinarily resemble their simple scminalities. So then,
since there is so much dissimilitude between Cause and Effect in the more
palpable Phenomenon, we can expect no less between them, and their invisible
efficients. Now had our Senses never presented us with those obvious seminal
principles of apparent generations, we should never have suspected that a plant
or animal could have proceeded from such unlikely materials: much less, can we
conceive or determine the uncompounded initials of natural productions, in the
total silence of our Senses. And though the Grand Secretary of Nature, the
miraculous Descartes have here infinitely outdone all the Philosophers went
before him, in giving a particular and Analytical account of the Universal
Fabric: yet he intends his Principles but for Hypotheses, and never pretends
that things are really or necessarily, as he has supposed them: but that they
may be admitted pertinently to solve the Phenomenon, and are convenient
supposals for the use of life. Nor can any further account be expected from
humanity, but how things possibly may have been made consonantly to sensible
nature: but infallibly to determine, how they truly were effected, is proper to
him only that saw them in the Chaos, and fashioned them out of that confused
mass. For to say, the principles of Nature must needs be such as our Philosophy
makes them, is to set bounds to Omnipotence, and to confine infinite power and
wisdom to our shallow models.

CHAP. XXII.
(4) Because of the mutual dependence and concatenation of Causes, we cannot
know any one without knowing all. Particularly declared by instances. (5) All
our Science comes in at our Senses; their infallibility inquired into. The
Authors design in this last particular.

(4). ACcording to the notion of the Dogmatist, we know nothing, except we knew
all things, and he that pretends to Science affects an Omniscience. For all
things being linkt together by an uninterrupted chain of Causes; and every
single motion owning a dependence on such a Syndrome of prae-required motors:
we can have no true knowledge of any, except we comprehended all, and could
distinctly pry into the whole method of Causal Concatenations. Thus we cannot
know the cause of any one motion in a watch, unless we were acquainted with all
its motive dependences, and had a distinctive comprehension of the whole
Mechanical frame. And would we know but the most contemptible plant that grows,
almost all things that have a being must contribute to our knowledge: for, that
to the perfect Science of any thing it is necessary to know all its causes; is
both reasonable in its self, and the sense of the Dogmatist. So that, to the
knowledge of the poorest simple, we must first know its efficient, the manner,
and method of its efformation, and the nature of the Plastic. To the
comprehending of which, we must have a full prospect into the whole Archidoxis
of Nature's secrets, and the immense profundities of occult Philosophy: in
which we know nothing till we completely ken all Magnetic, and Sympathetick
energies, and their most hidden causes. And (2) if we contemplate a vegetable
in its material principle, and look on it as made of earth; we must have the
true Theory of the nature of that Element, or we miserably fail of our
Scientifical aspirings, and while we can only say, it is cold and dry, we are
pitiful knowers.

But now, to profound into the Physics of this heterogeneous mass, to discern
the principles of its constitution, and to discover the reason of its
diversities, are absolute requisites of the Science we aim at. Nor can we
tolerably pretend to have those without the knowledge of Minerals, the causes
and manner of their Concretions, and among the rest, the Magnet, with its
amazing properties. This directs us to the pole, and thence our disquisition is
led to the whole systeme of the Heavens: to the knowledge of which, we must
know their motions, and the causes, and manner of their rotations, as also the
reasons of all the Planetary Phenomenon, and of the Comets, their nature, and
the causes of all their irregular appearings. To these, the knowledge of the
intricate doctrine of motion, the powers, proportions, and laws thereof, is
requisite. And thus we are engaged in the objects of Geometry and Arithmetic,
yea the whole Mathematics, must be contributary, and to them all Nature pays
a subsidy. Besides, plants are partly material'd of water, with which they are
furnished either from subterranean Fountains, or the Clouds. Now to have the
true Theory of the former, we must trace the nature of the Sea, its origin; and
hereto its remarkable motions of flux and reflux. This again directs us to the
Moon, and the rest of the Celestial faces. The moisture that comes from the
Clouds is drawn up in vapors: To the Scientifical discernment of which, we
must know the nature and manner of that action, their suspense in the middle
region, the qualities of that place, and the causes and manner of their
precipitating thence again: and so the reason of the Sphaerical figure of the
drops; the causes of Winds, Hail, Snow, Thunder, Lightning, with all other
igneous appearances, with the whole Physiology of Meteors must be enquired
into. And again (3) in our disquisition into the formal Causes, the knowledge
of the nature of colors, is necessary to complete the Science. To be informed
of this, we must know what light is; and light being effected by a motion on
the Organs of sense, 'twill be a necessary requisite, to understand the nature
of our sensitive faculties, and to them the essence of the soul, and other
spiritual subsistences. The manner how it is materially united, and how it is
aware of corporeal motion. The seat of sense, and the place where it is
principally affected: which cannot be known but by the Anatomy of our parts,
and the knowledge of their Mechanical structure. And if further (4) we
contemplate the end of this minute effect, its principal final Cause, being the
glory of its Maker, leads us into Divinity; and for its subordinate, as it is
designed for alimental sustenance to living creatures, and medicinal uses to
man, we are conducted into Zoography, and the whole body of Physic. Thus then,
to the knowledge of the most contemptible effect in nature, it is necessary to
know the whole Syntax of Causes, and their particular circumstances, and modes
of action. Nay, we know nothing, till we know our selves, which are the summary
of all the world without us, and the Index of the Creation. Nor can we know our
selves without the Physiology of corporeal Nature, and the Metaphysics of
Souls and Angels. So then, every Science borrows from all the rest; and we
cannot attain any single one, without the Encyclopaedy.

(5) The knowledge we have comes from our Senses, and the Dogmatist can go no
higher for the original of his certainty. Now let the Sciolist tell me, why
things must needs be so, as his individual senses represent them? Is he sure,
that objects are not otherwise sensed by others, then they are by him? and why
must his sense be the infallible Criterion? It may be, what is white to us, is
black to Negroes, and our Angels to them are Fiends. Diversity of constitution,
or other circumstances varies the sensation, and to them of Iava Pepper is
cold. And though we agree in a common name, yet it may be, I have the same
representation from yellow, that another has from green. Thus two look upon an
Alabaster Statue; he call's it white, and I assent to the appellation: but how
can I discover, that his inward sense on it is the same that mine is? It may be,
Alabaster is represented to him, as jet is to me, and yet it is white to us
both. We accord in the name: but it is beyond our knowledge, whether we do so in
the conception answering it. Yea, the contrary is not without its probability.
For though the Images, Motions, or whatever else is the cause of sense, may be
alike as from the object; yet may the representations be varyed according to
the nature and quality of the Recipient. That Is one thing to us looking through
a tube, which is another to our naked eyes. The same things seem otherwise
through a green glass, then they do through a red. Thus objects have a
different appearance, when the eye is violently any way distorted, from that
they have, when our Organs are in their proper site and figure, and some
extraordinary alterations in the Brain duplicate that which is but a single
object to our undistemper'd Sentient. Thus, that is of one color to us standing
in one place, which has a contrary aspect in another: as in those versatile
representations in the neck of a Dove, and folds of Scarlet. And as great
diversity might have been exemplified in the other senses, but for brevity I
omit them. Now then, since so many various circumstances concur to every
individual constitution, and every man's senses, differing as much from others
in its figure, color, site, and infinite other particularities in the
Organization, as any one man's can from it self, through diverse accidental
variations: it cannot well be supposed otherwise, but that the conceptions
conveyed by them must be as diverse. Thus, one man's eyes are more protuberant,
and swelling out; another more sunk and depressed. One man's bright, and
sparkling, and as it were swimming in a subtle, lucid moisture; another more
dull and heavy, and destitute of that spirituous humidity. The color of men's
eyes is various, nor is there less diversity in their quantitative proportions.
And if we look further into the more inward constitution, there is more variety
in the internal configurations, than in the visible outside. For let us
consider the different qualities of the Optic nerves, humors, tunicles, and
spirits; the diverse figurings of the brain; the strings, or filaments thereof;
their difference in tenuity and aptness for motion: and as many other
circumstances, as there are individuals in humane nature; all these are
diversified according to the difference of each Crasis, and are as unlike, as
our faces. From these diversities in all likelihood will arise as much
difference in the manner of the reception of the Images, and consequently as
various sensations. So then, how objects are represented to my self; I cannot
be ignorant, being conscious to mine own cogitations; but in what manner they
are received, and what impresses they make upon the so differing organs of
another, he only knows, that feels them. There is an obvious an easy
objection, which I have sufficiently caveated against; and with the considerate
it will signify no more then the inadvertency of the Objectors. 'Twill be
thought by slight discerners a ridiculous Paradox, that all men should not
conceive of the objects of sense alike; since their agreement in the
appellation seems so strong an argument of the identity of the sentiment. All,
for instance, say, that Snow is white, and that Jet is black, is doubted by
none. But yet it is more then any man can determine, whether his conceit of what
he calls white, be the same with another; or whether, the notion he has of one
color be not the same another has of a very diverse one. So then, to direct
all against the knowing Ignorant, what he has of sensible evidence, the very
groundwork of his demonstration, is but the knowledge of his own resentment:
but how the same things appear to others, they only know, that are conscious to
them; and how they are in themselves, only he that made them.

Thus have I in this last particular played with the Dogmatist in a personated
Skepticism: and would not have the design of the whole discourse measured by
the seeming tendency of this part on it. The Sciolist may here see, that what he
counts of all things most absurd and irrational, has yet considerable show of
probability to plead its cause, and it may be more then some of his presumed
demonstrations. It Is irreprehensible in Physicians to cure their Patient of one
disease, by casting him into another, less desperate. And I hope, I shall not
deserve the frown of the Ingenuous for my innocent intentions; having in this
only imitated the practice of bending a crooked stick as much the other way, to
straighten it. And if by this verge to the other extreme, I can bring the
opinionative Confident but half the way, viz. that discreet modest aequipoize
of Judgment, that becomes the sons of Adam; I have compast what I aim at.

CHAP. XXIII.
Considerations against Dogmatizing. (1) It Is the effect of Ignorance. (2) It
inhabits with untamed passions, and an ungoverned Spirit. (3) It is the great
Disturber of the world. (4) It is ill manners, and immodesty. (5) It holds men
captive in Error. (6) It betrays a narrowness of spirit.

I Expect but little success of all this upon the Dogmatist, his opinion'd
assurance is paramont to Argument, and it is almost as easy to reason him out
of a Fever, as out of this disease of the mind, I hope for better fruit from
the more generous vertuoso's, to such I appeal against Dogmatizing, in the
following considerations; that is well spent upon impartial ingenuity, which is
lost upon resolved prejudice.

1. Opinionative confidence is the effect of Ignorance, and were the Sciolist
persuaded so, I might spare my further reasons against it: it is affectation of
knowledge, that makes him confident he has it, and his confidence is counter
evidence to his pretensions to knowledge. He is the greatest ignorant, that
knows not that he is so: for it is a good degree of Science, to be sensible that
we want it. He that knows most of himself, knows least of his knowledge, and
the exercised understanding is conscious of its disability. Now he that is so,
will not lean too assuredly on that, which has so frequently deceived him, nor
build the Castle of his intellectual security, in the Air of Opinions. But for
the shallow passive intellects, that were never engaged in a through search of
verity, it is such are the confidents that engage their irrepealable assents to
every slight appearance. Thus mere sensible conceivers, make every thing they
hold a Sacrament, and the silly vulgar are sure of all things. There was no
Theoreme in the Mathematics more certain to Archimedes, then the Earth's
immovable quiescence seems to the multitude: nor then did the impossibility of
Antipodes, to antique ages. And if great Philosophers doubt of many things,
which popular dijudicants hold as certain as their Creeds, I suppose Ignorance
it self will not say, it is because they are more ignorant. Superficial pedants
will swear their controversal uncertainties, while wiser heads stand in bivio.
Opinions are the Rattles of immature intellects, but the advanced Reasons have
out-grown them. True knowledge is modest and wary, it is ignorance that is so
bold, and presuming. Thus those that never travailed without the Horizon, that
first terminated their Infant aspects, will not be persuaded that the world
has any Country better then their own: while they that have had a view of
other Regions, are not so confidently persuaded of the precedence of that, they
were bred in, but speak more indifferently of the laws, manners, commodities,
and customs of their native soil: So they that never peep't beyond the common
belief in which their easy understandings were at first indoctrinated, are
indubitately assured of the Truth, and comparative excellency of their
receptions, while the larger Souls, that have travailed the diverse Climates of
Opinions, are more cautious in their resolves, and more sparing to determine.
And let the most confirmed Dogmatist profound far into his indeared opinions,
and I Will warrant him 'twill be an effectual cure of confidence. (2) Confidence
in Opinions evermore dwells with untamed passions, and is maintained upon the
depraved obstinacy of an ungoverned spirit. He Is but a novice in the Art of
Autocrasy, that cannot castigate his passions in reference to those
presumptions, and will come as far short of wisdom as science: for the
Judgment being the Hegemonical power, and director of action, if it be led by
the over-bearings of passion, and stored with lubricous opinions in stead of
clearly conceived truths, and be peremptorily resolved in them, the practice
will be as irregular, as the conceptions erroneous. Opinions hold the stirrup,
while vice mounts into the saddle. (3) Dogmatizing is the great disturber both
of our selves and the world without us: for while we wed an opinion, we
resolvedly engage against every one, that opposes it. Thus every man, being in
some of his opinionative apprehensions singular, must be at variance with all
men. Now every opposition of our espoused opinions furrows the sea within us,
and discomposeth the minds serenity. And what happiness is there in a storm of
passions? On this account the Scepticks affected an indifferent aequipondious
neutrality as the only means to their Ataraxia, and freedom from passionate
disturbances. Nor were they altogether mistaken in the way, to their designed
felicity, but came short on it, by going beyond it: for if there be a repose
naturally attainable this side the Stars, there is no way we can more hopefully
seek it in. We can never be at rest, while our quiet can be taken from us by
every thwarting our opinions: nor is that content an happiness, which every one
can rob us of. There is no felicity, but in a fixed stability. Nor can genuine
constancy be built upon rolling foundations. It Is true staidness of mind, to
look with an equal regard on all things, and this unmoved apathy in
opinionative uncertainties, is a warrantable piece of Stoicism. Besides, this
immodest obstinacy in opinions, has made the world a Babel; and given birth to
disorders, like those of the Chaos. The primitive fight of Elements does fitly
emblem that of Opinions, and those proverbial contrarieties may be reconciled,
as soon as peremptory contenders. That hence grow Schisms, Heresies, and
anomalies beyond Arithmetic, I could wish were of more difficult probation.
'Twere happy for a distempered Church, if evidence were not so near us. It Is
zeal for opinions that has filled our Hemisphear with smoke and darkness, and
by a dear experience we know the fury of those flames it has kindled. Had not
Heaven prevented, they had turned our Paradise into a Desert, and made us the
habitation of Iim, and Ohim. It Is lamentable that Homo homini Demon, should be
a Proverb among the Professors of the Cross, and yet I fear it is as verifiable
among them, as of those without the pale of visible Christianity. I doubt we
have lost S. John's sign of regeneration. By this we know that we are past from
death, to life, that we love one another, is I fear, to few a sign of their
spiritual resurrection. If our Returning Lord, shall scarce find faith on
earth, where will he look for charity? It is a stranger this side the Region of
love, and blessedness; bitter zeal for opinions has consumed it. Mutual
agreement and indearments was the badge of Primitive Believers, but we may be
known by the contrary criterion. The union of a Sect within it self, is a
pitiful charity: it is no concord of Christians, but a conspiracy against
Christ; and they that love one another, for their opinionative concurrences,
love for their own sakes, not their Lords: not because they have his image, but
because they bear one another. What a stir is there for Mint, Anise, and
Cummin controversies, while the great practical fundamentals are unstudyed,
unobserved? What eagerness in the prosecution of disciplinarian uncertainties,
when the love of God and our neighbor, those Evangelical unquestionables, want
that fervent ardor? It Is this has consumed the nutriment of the great and more
necessary Verities, and bred differences that are past any accommodation, but
that of the last days decisions. The sight of that day will resolve us, and
make us ashamed of our pety quarrels. Thus Opinions have rent the world
asunder, and divided it almost into indivisibles. Had Heraclitus lived now, he
had wept himself into marble, and Democritus would have broke his spleen. Who
can speak of such fooleries without a Satyr, to see aged Infants so quarrel at
put-pin, and the doting world grown child again? How fond are men of a bundle
of opinions, which are no better then a bag of Cherry-stones? How do they
scramble for their Nuts, and Apples, and how zealous for their pety Victories?
Methinks those grave contenders about opinionative trifles, look like aged
Socrates upon his boys Hobbyhorse, or like something more ludricous: since
they make things their feria, which are scarce tolerable in their sportful
intervals. (4) To be confident in Opinions is ill manners, and immodesty; and
while we are peremptory in our persuasions, we accuse them all of ignorance and
Error that subscribe not our assertions. The Dogmatist gives the lie to all
dissenting apprehenders, and proclaims his judgment fittest, to be the
Intellectual Standard. This is that spirit of immorality, that says unto
dissenters, Stand off, I am more Orthodox then thou art: a vanity more capital
then Error. He that affirms that things must needs be as he apprehends them,
implies that none can be right till they submit to his opinions, and take him
for their director. This is to invert the Rule, and to account a man's self
better then all men. (5) Obstinacy in Opinions holds the Dogmatist in the
chains of Error, without hope of emancipation. While we are confident of all
things, we are fatally deceived in most. He that assures himself he never
erres, will always err; and his presumptions will render all attempts to
inform him, ineffectual. We use not to seek further for what we think we are
possessed of; and when falsehood is without suspicion embraced in the stead of
truth, and with confidence retained: Verity will be rejected as a supposed
Error, and irreconcileably be hated, because it opposes what is indeed so. (6)
It betrays a poverty and narrowness of spirit, in the Dogmatical assertors.
There are a set of Pedants that are born to slavery. But the generous soul
preserves the liberty of his judgment, and will not pen it up in an
Opinionative Dungeon; with an equal respect he examins all things, and judges
as impartially as Rhadamanth: When as the Pedant can hear nothing but in favor
of the conceits he is amorous of; and cannot see, but out of the grates of his
prison. The determinations of the nobler spirit, are but temporary, and he
holds them, but till better evidence repeal his former apprehensions. He will not
defile his assent by prostituting it to every conjecture, or stuff his belief,
with the luggage of uncertainties. The modesty of his expression renders him
infallible; and while he only says he Thinks so, he cannot be deceived, or
ever assert a falsehood. But the wise Monseur Charron has fully discourst of
this Universal liberty, and saved me the labor of enlarging. Upon the Review
of my former considerations, I cannot quarrel with his Motto: in a sense Ie ne
scay, is a justifiable Skepticism, and not mis-becoming a Candidate of wisdom.
Socrates in the judgment of the Oracle knew more then All men, who in his own
knew the least of any.
CHAP. XXIV. AN APOLOGY FOR PHILOSOPHY.
IT is the glory of Philosophy, that Ignorance and Frenzy are her Enemies.
Now to vindicate this abused excellence from the mis-reports of stupid and
Enthusiastic Ignorants, I Will subjoyn this brief Apology: Lest those
unintelligent maligners take an advantage from our discourse, to depretiate and
detract from what has been always the object of their hate, because never of
their knowledge, and capacities; Or, which is the greater mischief, lest this
should discourage those enlarged souls, who aspire to the knowledge of God, and
Nature, which is the most venial ambition. If Philosophy be uncertain, the
former will confidently conclude it vain; and the later may be in danger of
pronouncing the same on their pains, who seek it; if after all their labor
they must reap the wind, mere opinion and conjecture.

But there is a part of Philosophy, that owes no answer to the charge. The
Scepticks, (...), must have the qualification of an exception; and at least the
Mathematics must be priviledg'd from the endictment. Neither yet are we at so
deplorable a loss, in the other parts of what we call Science; but that we may
meet with what will content ingenuity, at this distance from perfection, though
all things will not completely satisfy strict and rigid enquiry. Philosophy
indeed cannot immortalize us, or free us from the inseparable attendants on
this state, Ignorance, and Error. But shall we malign it, because it entitles
us not to an Omniscience? Is it just to condemn the Physician, because
Hephestion dyed? Complete knowledge is reserved to gratify our glorified
faculties. We are ignorant of some things from our specifical incapacity, as
men; of more from our contracted, as sinners: and it is no fault in the
spectacles, that the blind man sees not. Shall we, like sullen children,
because we have not what we would; contemn what the benignity of Heaven offers
us? Do what we can, we shall be imperfect in all our seize; and shall we
scornfully neglect what we may reach, because some things to mortality are
denied? It Is madness to refuse the Largesses of divine bounty on Earth, because
there is not an Heaven in them. Shall we not rejoice at the gladsome approach
of day, because it is over-cast with a cloud, and followed by the obscurity of
night? All sublunary vouchsafements have their allay of a contrary; and
uncertainty, in another kind, is the annex of all things this side the Sun.
Even Crowns and Diadems, the most splendid parts of terrene attains; are akin
to that, which to day is in the field, and to morrow is cut down, and withered:
He that enjoyed them, and knew their worth, excepted them not out of the charge
of Universal Vanity. And yet the Politician thinks they deserve his pains; and
is not discouraged at the inconstancy of humane affairs, and the lubricity of
his subject.

He that looks perfection, must seek it above the Empyreum; it is reserved for
Glory. It Is that alone, which needs not the advantage of a foyl: Defects seem
as necessary to our now-happiness, as their Opposites. The most refulgent
colors are the result of light and shadows. Venus was never the less beautiful
for her Mole. And it is for the Majesty of Nature, like the Persian Kings,
sometimes to cover, and not always to prostrate her beauties to the naked view:
yea, they contract a kind of splendor from the seemingly obscuring veil; which
adds to the enravishments of her transported admirers. He alone sees all things
with an unshadowed comprehensive Vision, who eminently is All: Only the God of
Nature perfectly knows her; and light without darkness is the incommunicable
claim of him, that dwells in Light inaccessible. It Is no disparagement to
Philosophy, that it cannot Deifie us, or make good the impossible promise of
the Primitive Deceiver. It is that, which she owns above her, that must
perfectly remake us after the Image of our Maker.

And yet those raised contemplations of God and Nature, wherewith Philosophy
does acquaint us; enlarge and ennoble the spirit, and infinitely advance it
above an ordinary level. The soul is always like the objects of its delight and
converse. A Prince is as much above a Peasant in spirit, as condition: And man
as far transcends the Beasts in largeness of desire, as dignity of Nature and
employment. While we only converse with Earth, we are like it; that is, unlike
our selves: But when engaged in more refined and intellectual entertainments;
we are somewhat more, then this narrow circumference of flesh speaks us. And,
me thinks, those generous Vertuoso's, who dwell in an higher Region then other
Mortals; should make a middle species between the Platonical (...), and common
Humanity. Even our Age in variety of glorious examples, can confute the
conceit, that souls are equal: And the sole Instances of those illustrious
Heroes, Carts, Gassendus, Galilaeo, Tycho, Harvey, More, Digby; will strike
dead the opinion of the worlds decay, and conclude it, in its Prime. And upon
the review of these great Sages, methinks, I could easily opinion; that men
may differ from men, as much as Angels from unbodyed Souls: And, it may be,
more can be pleaded for such a Metaphysical innovation, then can for a
specifical diversity among our Predicamental Opposites. Such as these, being in
a great part freed from the entanglements of a drossie Vehicle, are employed
like the Spirits above; in taking a survey of Natures Riches, and beginning
those Anthems to their Maker, which Eternity must consummate. This is one part
of the life of Souls.

While we indulge to the Sensitive or Plantal Life, our delights are common to
us with the creatures below us: and it is likely, they exceed us as much as in
them, as in the senses their subjects; and that is a poor happiness for man to
aim at, in which Beasts are his Superiors. But those Mercurial souls, which
were only lent the Earth to show the world their folly in admiring it; possess
delights, which as it were antedate Immortality, and [though at an humble
distance] resemble the joys above. The Sun and Stars, are not the worlds Eyes,
but these: The Celestial Argus cannot glory in such an universal view. These
out-travel theirs, and their Monarchs beams: skipping into Vortexes beyond
their Light and Influence; and with an easy twinkle of an Intellectual Eye
look into the Center, which is obscured from the upper Luminaries. This is
somewhat like the Image of Omnipresence: And what the Hermetical Philosophy
says of God, is in a sense verifiable of the thus ennobled soul, That its
Center is every where, but it is circumference no where. This is the (...); and
what Plotinus calls so, the divine life, is somewhat more. Those that live but
to the lower concupiscible, and relish no delights but sensual; it is by the
favor of a Metaphor, that we call them Men. As Aristotle says of Brutes, they
have but the (...), only some shows and Apish imitations of Humane; and have
little more to justify their Title to Rationality, then those Mimick Animals,
the supposed Posterity of Cham: who, had they retained the privilege of
Speech, which some of the Fathers say they they owned before the Fall; it may
be they would plead their cause with them, and have laid strong claim to a
Parity. Such, as these, are Philosophies Maligners, who computing the
usefulness of all things, by what they bring to their Barns, and Treasures;
stick not to pronounce the most generous contemplations, needless unprofitable
subtilties: and they might with as good reason say, that the light of their
Eyes was a superfluous provision of Nature, because it fills not their Bellies.

Thus the greatest part of miserable Humanity is lost in Earth: and, if Man be
an inversed Plant; these are inversed Men, who forgetting that Sursum, which
Nature writ in their Foreheads, take their Roots in this sordid Element. But
the Philosophical soul is an inverted Pyramid; Earth has but a point of this
Ethereal Cone. Aquila non captat muscas, The Royal Eagle flies not but at
noble Game; and a young Alexander will not play but with Monarchs. He that has
been cradled in Majesty, and used to Crowns and Scepters; will not leave the
Throne to play with Beggars at Put-pin, or be fond of Tops and Cherry-stones:
neither will a Soul, that dwells with Stars, dabble in this impurer Mud; or
stoop to be a Play-fellow and Copartner in delights with the Creatures, that
have naught but Animal. And though it be necessitated by its relation to flesh
to a Terrestrial converse; yet it is, like the Sun, without contaminating its
Beams. For, though the body by a kind of Magnetism be drawn down to this
sediment of universal dreggs; yet the thus impregnate spirit contracts a
Verticity to objects above the Pole: And, like as in a falling Torch, though
the grosser Materials hasten to their Element; yet the flame aspires, and,
could it master the dullness of its load would carry it beyond the central
activity of the Terraqueous Magnet. Such souls justify Aristotle's, (...); and
in allayed sense that title, which the Stoics give it, of (...). If we say,
they are not in their bodies, but their bodies in them; we have the Authority
of the divine Plato to vouch us: And by the favor of an easy simile we may
affirm them to be to the body, as the light of a Candle to the gross, and
faeculent snuff; which, as it is not pent up in it, so neither does it partake
of its stench and and impurity. Thus, as the Roman Orator elegantly descants,
Erigimur, and latiores fieri videmur; humana despicimus, contemplantesque
supera and coelestia, haec nostra, ut exigua and minima, contemnimus.

And yet there is an higher degree, to which Philosophy sublimes us. For, as it
teaches a generous contempt of what the grovelling desires of creeping Mortals
Idolize and dote on; so it raises us to love and admire an Object, that is as
much above terrestrial, as Infinity can make it. If Plutarch may have credit,
the observation of Natures Harmony in the celestial motions was one of the
first inducements to the belief of a God: And a greater then he affirms, that
the visible things of the Creation declare him, that made them. What knowledge
we have of them, we have in a sense of their Author. His face cannot be beheld
by Creature-Opticks, without the allay of a reflection; and Nature is one of
those mirrours, that represents him to us. And now the more we know of him, the
more we love him, the more we are like him, the more we admire him. It Is here,
that knowledge wonders; and there is an Admiration, that is not the Daughter of
Ignorance. This indeed stupidly gazeth at the unwonted effect: But the
Philosophic passion truly admires and adores the supreme Efficient. The
wonders of the Almighty are not seen, but by those that go down into the deep.
The Heavens declare their Makers Glory; and Philosophy theirs, which by a
grateful rebound returns to its Original source. The twinkling spangles, the
Ornaments of the upper world; lose their beauty and magnificence; while they
are but the objects of our narrow'd senses: By them the half is not told us;
and Vulgar spectators see them, but as a confused huddle of pety Illuminants.
But Philosophy does right to those immense spears; and advantagiously
represents their Glories, both in the vastness of their proportions, and
regularity of their motions. If we would see the wonders of the Globe we dwell
in; Philosophy must rear us above it. The works of God speak forth his mighty
praise: A speech not understood, but by those that know them. The most Artful
melody receives but little tribute of Honor from the gazing beasts; it
requires skill to relish it. The most delicate musical accents of the Indians,
to us are but inarticulate hummings; as questionless are ours to their
otherwise tuned Organs. Ignorance of the Notes and Proportions, renders all
Harmony unaffecting. A gay Puppet pleases children more, then the exactest
piece of unaffected Art: it requires some degrees of Perfection, to admire what
is truly perfect; as it is said to be an advance in Oratory to relish Cicero.
Indeed the unobservant Multitude, may have some general confused apprehensions
of a kind of beauty, that guilds the outside frame of the Universe: But they
are Natures courser wares, that lie on the stall, exposed to the transient view
of every common Eye; her choicer Riches are locked up only for the sight of
them, that will buy at the expense of sweat and Oil. Yea, and the visible
Creation is far otherwise apprehended by the Philosophical Inquirer, then the
unintelligent Vulgar. Thus the Physician looks with another Eye on the
Medicinal herb, then the grazing Ox, which swoops it in with the common
grass: and the Swine may see the Pearl, which yet he values but with the
ordinary muck; it is otherwise pris'd by the skilful Ieweller.

And from this last Article, I think, I may conclude the charge, which
hot-brained folly lays in against Philosophy; that it leads to Irreligion,
frivolous and vain. I dare say, next after the divine Word, it is one of the
best friends to Piety. Neither is it any more justly accountable for the
impious irregularities of some, that have paid an homage to its shrine; then
Religion it self for the sinful extravagances both opinionative and practical
of high pretenders to it. It is a vulgar conceit, that Philosophy holds a
confederacy with Atheism it self; but most injurious: for nothing can better
antidote us against it; and they may as well say, that Physicians are the only
murderers. A Philosophic Atheist, is as good sense as a Divine one: and I
dare say the Proverb, Ubi tres Medici, duo Athei, is a scandal. I think the
Original of this conceit might be; That the Students of Nature, conscious to
her more cryptick ways of working, resolve many strange effects into the nearer
efficiency of second causes; which common Ignorance and Superstition attribute
to the Immediate causality of the first: thinking it to derogate from the
Divine Power, that any thing which is above their apprehensions, should not be
reckoned above Natures activity; though it be but his Instrument, and works
nothing but as empowered from him. Hence they violently declaim against all,
that will not acknowledge a Miracle in every extraordinary effect, as setting
Nature in the Throne of God; and so it is an easy step to say, they deny him.
When as indeed, Nature is but the chain of second causes; and to suppose second
causes without a first, is beneath the Logic of Gotham. Neither can they [who,
to make their reproach of Philosophy more authentic, allege the Authority of
an Apostle to conclude it vain] upon any whit more reasonable terms make good
their charge; since this allegation stands in force but against its abuse,
corrupt sophistry, or traditionary impositions, which lurked under the mask of
so serious a name: At the worst, the Text will never warrant an universal
conclusion any more; then that other, where the Apostle speaks of silly women,
(who yet are the most rigid urgers of this) can justly blot the sex with an
unexceptionable note of infamy.

Now, what I have said here in this short Apology for Philosophy, is not so
strictly verifiable of any that I know, as the Cartesian. The entertainment of
which among truly ingenuous unpossest Spirits, renders an after-commendation
superfluous and impertinent. It would require a wit like its Authors, to do it
right in an Encomium. The strict Rationality of the Hypothesis in the main, and
the critical coherence of its parts, I doubt not but will bear it down to
Posterity with a Glory, that shall know no term, but the Universal ruins.
Neither can the Pedantry, or prejudice of the present Age, any more obstruct
its motion in that supreme sphere, wherein its desert has placed it; then can
the howling Wolves pluck Cynthia from her Orb; who regardless of their noise,
securely glides through the undisturbed Ether. Censure here will disparage it
self, not it. He that accuses the Sun of darkness, shames his own blind eyes;
not its light. The barking of Cynicks at that Hero's Chariot-wheels, will not
sully the glory of his Triumphs. But I shall supersede this endless attempt:
Sunbeams best commend themselves.

FINIS.
The Contents.
CHAP. I. A Display of the Perfections of Innocence; with a conjecture at the
manner of Adams Knowledge. page 1. CHAP. II. Our decay, and ruins by the fall,
descanted on: of the now scantness of our knowledge. 10. CHAP. III. Instances
of our Ignorance (1) of things within our selves. The nature of the Soul, and
its origin glanc't at, and past by. (1) It Is union with the body is
unconceiveable: So (2) is its moving the body considered either in the way of
Sir K. Digby, Descartes, or Dr. H. More, and the Platonists. (3) The manner of
direction of the Spirits as unexplicable. 17. CHAP. IV. (4) We can give no
account of the manner of Sensation: Nor (5) of the Nature of the Memory. It is
considered according to the Philosophy of Descartes, Sir K. Digby, Aristotle,
and Mr. Hobbs, and all in-effectual. Some other unexplicables mentioned. 27.
CHAP. V. (6) How our bodies are formed, unexplicable. The plastic signifies
nothing. The formation of Plants, and Animals unknown, in their principle.
Mechanism solves it not. A new way propounded, which also fails of
satisfaction. (2) No account is yet given how the parts of matter are united.
Some considerations on Descartes his Hypothesis; it fails of solution. (3) The
question is unanswerable, whether matter be compounded of divisibles, or
indivisibles. 41. CHAP. VI. Difficulties about the motion of a wheel, which
admit of no Solution. 54. CHAP. VII. Men's backwardness to acknowledge their own
Ignorance and Error, though ready to find them in others. The first cause of
the shortness of our knowledge, viz. the depth of Verity discourst of: as of
its admixtion in men's opinions with falsehood; the connection of truths. And
their mutual dependence. A second reason of the shortness of our knowledge,
viz. because we can perceive nothing but by proportion to our senses. 62. CHAP.
VIII. A third reason of our Ignorance and Error, viz. the impostures and
deceits of our Senses. The way to rectify these mis-informations propounded.
Descartes his method the only way to Science. The difficulty of the exact
performance. 69. CHAP. IX. Two Instances of Sensitive deception. (1) Of the
Quiescence of the Earth. Four cases in which motion is insensible, applied to
the Earth's motion. 75. CHAP. X. Another instance of the deceptions of our
Senses: which is of translating the Idea of our passions to things without us.
In propriety of speech our Senses themselves are never deceived; proved by
reason, and the authority of St. Austin. 87. CHAP. XI. A fourth reason of our
Ignorance and Error, viz. the fallacy of our Imaginations. An account of the
nature of that faculty; instances of its deceptions. Spirits are not in a
place. Intellection, Volition, Decrees, etc. cannot properly be ascribed to
God. It is not Reason that opposes Faith, but Fancy. The Interest which
Imagination has in many of our Opinions, in that it impresses a persuasion
without Evidence. 95. CHAP. XII. A fifth reason, the precipitancy of our
understandings, the reason of it. The most close engagements of our minds
requisite to the finding of truth; the difficulties of the performance of it.
Two instances of our precipitating. 106. CHAP. XIII. The sixth reason discourst
of, viz. the interest which our affections have in our Dijudications. The cause
why our affections mislead us. Several branches of this mentioned; and the
first, viz. constitutional Inclination, largely insisted on. 113. CHAP. XIV. A
second thing whereby our affections engage us in Error, is the prejudice of
Custom and Education. A third interest. (4) Love to our own productions. 125.
CHAP. XV. 5. Our affections are engaged by our reverence to Antiquity and
Authority; our mistake of Antiquity; the unreasonableness of that kind of
Pedantick Adoration. Hence the vanity of affecting impertinent quotations: the
Pedantry on it is derided. The little improvement of Science through its
successive derivations, and whence it has happened. 136. CHAP. XVI. Reflections
on the Peripatetick Philosophy. The Generality of its reception, no argument of
its deserts; the first charge against that Philosophy. 148. CHAP. XVII. 2.
Peripatetick Philosophy is litigious, it has no settled constant signification
of words; the inconveniences hereof. Aristotle intended the cherishing
controversies, proved by his own double testimony. Some of his impertinent
arguings derided. Disputes retard, and are injurious to knowledge.
Peripateticks are most exercised in the controversal parts of Philosophy, and
know little of the practical and experimental. A touch at School Divinity. 159.
CHAP. XVIII. 3. It gives no account of the Phenomenon. Those that are remoter
it attempts not; it speaks nothing pertinent in the most ordinary; its
circular, and general way of solution; it resolves all things into occult
qualities. The absurdity of Aristotelian Hypothesis of the Heavens. The Galaxy
is no meteor. The Heavens are corruptible. Comets are above the Moon. The
sphere of fire derided. Aristotle convicted of several other false assertions.
169. CHAP. XIX. (4.) Aristotle's Philosophy inept for new discoveries. It has
been the Author of no one invention: It Is founded on vulgarities, and therefore
makes nothing known beyond them. The knowledge of Natures outside, conferrs
not to practical improvements: better hopes from the New Philosophy. A fifth
charge against Aristotle's Philosophy, it is in many things impious, and
self-contradicting; instances of both propounded. The directing all this to the
design of the discourse. A caution, viz. that nothing is here intended in
favor of novelty in Divinity. The reason why we may embrace what is new in
Philosophy, while we reject Novelties in Theology. 177, 178. CHAP. XX. It Is
quaeried whether there be any Science in the sense of the Dogmatist: (1) We
cannot know any thing to be the cause of another, but from its attending it;
and this way is not infallible, declared by instances, especially from the
Philosophy of Descartes. (2) There Is no demonstration but where the contrary
is impossible. We can scarce conclude so of any thing. Instances of supposed
impossibles, which are none. A story of a Scholar that turned Gipsy; and of the
power of Imagination: Of one man's binding another thought, and a conjecture at
the manner of its performance. 188, 189. CHAP. XXI. Another instance of a
supposed impossibility which may not be so. Of conference at distance by
impregnated Needles. Away of secret conveyance by sympathized hands; a relation
to this purpose. Of the magnetic cure of wounds. (3) We cannot know any thing
in Nature, without the knowledge of the first springs of natural motion, and
these we are ignorant of. Descartes his Philosophy commend^d. 202 CHAP. XXII.
(4) Because of the mutual dependence and concatenation of Causes, we cannot
know any one without knowing all. Particularly declared by instances. (5) All
our Science c^mes in at our senses, their infallibility inquired into. 213
CHAP. XXIII. Considerations against Dogmatizing, (1) It Is the effect of
Ignorance. (2). It argues untamed passions. (3) It disturbs the world. (4) It
is ill manners, and immodesty. (5) It holds men captive in Error. (6) It
betrays a narrowness of Spirit. 224. CHAP. XXIV. An Apology for Philosophy.
235.
FINIS.

