THE SPEECH OF SERGEANT GLANVILL, IN THE UPPER HOUSE OF PARLIAMENT FOR Peace
and Unity. Also showing that the way to preserve peace, is to be well
provided for War.

LONDON, Printed in the year 1641.

THE SPEECH OF SERGEANT GLANVILL in the upper House of Parliament, for the
Redress of the present Greevances.
His Majesty being seated on his Throne, Sergeant Glanvill was called to the
Bar, being represented by the House of Commons for their Speaker; who spoke
as follows.

May it please your Majesty,

THe Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of your Commons House of Parliament in
conformity to ancient and most constant usage (the best guide in great
solemnities) according to their well known privileges (a sure warrant for their
proceedings, and in obedience to your Majesty's most gracious commands (a duty
well becoming Loyal Subjects have met together, and chosen a Speaker, one to
be the mouth, indeed the servant of all the rest to steare watchfulie and
prudently in all their weighty consultations and debates, to collect faithfully
and readily the uotes and genuine sense of that numerous assembly, to propound
the same seasonablie and in apt questions for their final resolution, and to
present them and their conclusions, their declarations with truth and light,
with life and luster, and with full advantage to your most Excellent Majesty.
With what Judgment, with what temper, spirit, and elocution he ought to be
endued, your Majesty in your great wisdom is best able to discern, both as
it may relate to your own peculiar and important affairs of State to the
proper work and business of this House of Commons, which was never small or
mean, and now like to be exceeding weighty.

It is a learned age wherein we live under your Majesty's most peaceful
government and your House of Commons is not only the representative body, but
the abstracted quintessence of the whole Communalty of this your noble Realm.

I most humbly therefore beseech your Majesty as the father of the
Commonwealth, and hope of the whole nation, to whom the care of all our
welfares appertains, to have respect to your own interest, have regard to
your House of Commons, have compassion upon me the unworthiest member of that
body, ready to faint with fear, before the burden lights on me, I have only a
hearty affection to serve you and your people, little abilities for
performance; In the fullness therefore of your Royal power, your piety,
goodness, be graciously pleased to command the House of Commons to deliberate,
upon a better choice who may be worthy of their choosing, and your Majesty's
acceptations.

My Lord Keeper having by his Majesty's direction confirmed him as Speaker, he
adrest himself to his Majesty as follows.

Most gracious Sovereign:

My profession has taught me, that from the highest Judge there lies no writ
of Error, no appeal; what then? remains, but that I first beseech Almighty
God the Author and finisher of all good works, to enable me to discharge
honestly and effectually so great a task, so great a trust; and in the next
place humbly to acknowledge your Majesty's favor. Some enemies I might fear,
the common enemy of such services, expectation and jealously; I am unworthy
the former, and I contemn the latter. Time the touchstone of truth shall teach
the babbling world, I am and will be found an equal freeman, zealous to serve
my Sovereign, zealous to serve my dearest Country.

Monarchy Royal of all governments the most illuustrious and excellent,
whether we regard the glory, wealth, or safety of the governors or people; I
hope none of this Nation are of Antimonarchicall spirits, nor friends to such,
if there be, I wish no greater honor to this Parliament, then to discover
them and to assist your Majesty to suppress and confound them.

To behold your Majesty in peace and safety afoards complete joy to all Loyal
Subjects, who cannot but conclude with me in this desire.

Serus in Caelum redeas diuque,
Laetus in terris Populo Britanno
England is your seat of residency, Scotland is your native place, and herein
has the advantage Ireland imitates England by a great and quick progression
in civility and conversation, in improovement of the soil and plantation.

France is still attendant on your Royal style; A Kings Prerogative is as
needful as great, without which he should want that Majesty which ought to be
inseparable from his Crown, nor can any danger result thereby to subjects
liberties, so long as both admit the temperament of law and Justice, specially
under such a Prince, who to your immortal Honor has published this to the
whole world for your maxim, that the peoples liberties strengthens the Kings
Prerogative, and the Kings Prerogative is to defend the peoples liberties;
Apples of gold in pictures of silver.

Kings as Kings are never said to err, only the best may be abused by
misinformation; this the highest point of Prerogative that the King can do no
wrong; if then by the subtilty of misinformers* by the specious false pretenses
of public good, by a running and close contrivance of their ways to seduce
the Sacred Royal Person, it be surprised and over wrought to command contrary
to law, and be executed accordingly; this commands will be void and these King
innocent even in his very person, and the authors of such misinformations, the
actors of such abuses stand exposed to just sensure, having nothing to defend
themselves but the color of a void command, made void by just prerogative, and
the fundamental reasons of state.

Touching justice, there is not a more certain sign of an upright Judge, then
by his patience to be well informed before sentence given, and I may boldly
say, all the Judges in your Kingdom may take example by your Majesty, and
learn their duties by your practice, my self have often been a witness
thereof to my no little admiration.

From your patience, please you give me leave to press to your righteous
judgment, and exemplify it but in one instance. When your Lords and people in
your last Parliament presented your Majesty a Petition concerning their rights
and liberties, the Petition being of no small weight, your Majesty after
mature deliberation, in few but most effectual words; ( soit droict faict come
est desire) made such an answer, as shall renown you for just Judgment to all
posterity.

Let us heartily pray that this Parliament may be famous for the advancement of
Sacred Religion, and to that end that the most Reverend Prelates, sitting on
the right hand of your Kingly side, be most forward therein, to whom it is
most proper.

That the Nobles girt with their swords in their creation, and most especially
rewarded and honored for Actions military: call to mind the most renowned Acts
of their Ancestors, whose lands and honors they inherit, and how renowned
this Land has been through the whole World for Art and Arms, and labor to
restore it to its ancient splendour: The best way to preserve peace, is to be
well fitted for War.

But were this Nation never so valiant or wealthy, if unity be not among us
what good will riches do us, or your Majesty but enrich the conqueror, he
that commands all hearts by love, he only commands assuredly; greatness
without goodness can at best but commmand bodies.

It shall therefore be my hearty prayer, That such a knot of love may be knit
betwixt the Head and members that like Gordius knot it never be loosed: That
all Jesuited foreign states who look a squint upon our Jerusalem may see
themselves defeated of all there subtle plots and combinations of all their
wicked hopes and expectations to render us, if their mischief might take
effect, a people in considerable at home, and contemptible abroad.

Religion has taught us ( Si Deus nobiscum quis contranos,) and experience I
trust will teach us ( Si sumus inseperabiles sumus insuperabiles.) It was found
and I hope it still shall and will be the Tenet of the House of Commons; That
the King and peoples good cannot be severed: And cursed be every one that goes
about to divide them.

FINIS.

