PHILASTROGUS KNAVERY EPITOMIZED, WITH A VINDICATION OF Mr. Culpeper, Mr.
Lilly, and the rest of the Students in that noble Art, from all the false
aspersions (of the malicious Antagonists) cast upon them, about the great
Eclipse of the SUN.

Whereunto is annexed an Epistle to all moderate spirited men, showing the
peoples great mistakes, and misunderstanding of the honest and ingenious
Artists, who spoke truly, as is averred by this ensuing Tractate.

Written by J. G. a lover of all irgenious Arts and Artists -- April the 5.
1652.

London, Printed in the year, 1652.

Courteous Reader.
I Present thee here with a strange Tractate, yet it flows with truth, Artists
being condemned undeservedly; as I am a lover of Artists for Arts sake, so (to
my poor power) have I endeavored a vindication of them, but I could have
wished one more abler would have taken it in hand.

Now if thou be a lover of Art, look in here if thou have a mind, and if any
thing in it be worthy of honor, give honor to whom honor is due.

Farewell.
A WHIP FOR PHILASTROGUS, OR His Ignorance EPITOMIZED.
HAving perused many scurrilous Pamphlets full of opprobrious language, filling
the itching ears of the vulgar with strange words, and not only hurtful to the
ears, but destructive to the sense of seeing likewise: Most people being
purblinde by looking into such a foolish speculum; these two senses, being but
the forerunner of the evil that is behind, and that takes hold of the
Intellectuals, of all sorts (the wise excepted) even to the involving them,
into the epidemicall diseases of the times, making them seem to the wise,
obvious to sense, and reason, -- The foolishness of this age (said one of
Wisdoms children) exceeds all the preceding follies:

But to return, had he who styled himself Philastrogus been wise, he would have
scorned to have absconded his name from the world, but he knowing he has done
evil, lets his bastard-brat fly about for a father and, and dares not own it
himself;

But by (or without) your leave sirs, I will run over your malicious Pamphlet
(but shall not use prolixity) counting my time more precious then to expend it,
to the answering of such a piece of folly, but shall take notice of what you
prove your self to be:

1. No Christian, and that by several arguments, of which more anon. 2. You
prove your self to be a singular knave. 3. You prove your self to be a fool and
a dunce. 4. A madman. 5. A cheater of the Commonwealth.
Of these in their order, and so to my Journeys end.

First, That you are no Christian, I prove thus.
ALL envous and malicious men (be they Priests or Physicians) deviate from
Christianity, and by the rule of Christ are no Christians -- ( Mat. 5.)

But you are, (and have proved your self) both envious and malicious, therefore
you are no Christian --

The first Pamphlet you sent abroad (entitled Lillies Ape whipped) by your own
confessions was scurrilous, and in my judgment, was simple enough in all
reason --

The second as an extract of your former vented conjury, has proved you, to be
more simple, and inhumane then your former, you thinking, that your base
calumniating terms (would not prove you fool sufficient) against Mr. Culpeper
--, but like a foolish Fiddler that plays your old lessons over again (when you
play your most) and so your unchristian-like spirit comes forth in the same
foolish dialect, to speak against Mr. Lilly too (though your ground you speak
on be ten thousand times more non-sensicall then any Almanacks you accept
against --

But why talk I thus to one of such excelling parts? what did I say excelling
parts! excel do you indeed in one sense; but it is in the most beggarly things
you do excel, dirt being too good an element for you to wallow in -- Toreturn
--

The humble spirit of a Christian (for that is the work I have to do) envies no
man nor thing: but you envy the men you know not (if you know their persons,
their Intelects you are ignorant of) and carp at the things that are too high
for you, like the Fox in the Fable.

The Fox comes to the vine when the grapes were ripe, and looks upward and sees
them too high, quite out of his reach, he presently slights the grapes, going
his way fains they are sour, the reason is because he could not come at them,
otherwise they had been sweet enough for him --

So you carp against the knowledge of these men and envy them, and the reason
is, because their Knowledge, their Art, is too high for you, it is out of your
reach.

If you had any knowledge in what you envy you would not be to seek of the
difference between Astrologers and Astronomers, the one being to calculate, the
other to predict from their calculations.

But I shall leave you to that prediction, in the Revelations, which implies
Ignorance, to the ignorant --.

And now I think you see in what you excel others ( i. e.) in ignorance, for
all men in one sense or other may be said to excel, but your retentive faculty
is a receptacle for nothing but ignorance, therefore you can be said to excel
in nothing properly but ignorance --.

Secondly, That you are no Christian, I prove thus.
A Man that puts forth himself in the nature of a Crokodile or Serpent, venting
his venom against men that are lovers of God, and good-men, cannot be said to
be a Christian. But you have put forth your self in the nature of a Crokodile
or Serpent, venting your venom, against the servants of Christ, viz. Mr.
Lilly, Mr. Culpeper, and the rest of that noble and Christian-like Art --

Therefore you are no Christian --.

When these Honest men by their painful undertakings, and their daily study
(as they have waited upon God, and served the world in) have imparted to the
world the sweetness of that talent God has given them: in their Annual
Judgments and Revolutions, and many other ways as they had occasion, as the
learned writings of many of them testify, viz.

Mr. Lillyes Introduction, his Chaos of the world, his Starry Messenger, and
many more, which if considered with reason, would stop the mouth of the envious
Antagonist. Mr. Culpeper his learned Translation of the London Dispensatory,
his Semeiotica Vranica, his Directory for Midwives, and his English Physician,
and last of all, and not least to be considered his Magnatum Catastrophe: or a
Treatise of the Eclipse of the Sun: I had forgot (almost) Mr, Lillyes Annus
Tenebrosus. To sum up Mr. Ramseys works, and Sir Christopher Heydons, and many
other excellent Artists, the time would fail me who have imparted their
knowledge to the world, as men and Christians, willing to do good, each to
other; I wish our lazy Presbyterian priests would thus labor to edify their
flocks, and not trouble their simple brains to petition against Astrologers,
who observe the stars and planets in the courses, lest God who binds up the
influences of the heavens, let them loose to the utter destruction of such
lazy shepherds --.

I wish likewise, our College of Physicians, would thus labor to find out
cures, suitable to the cause of their patients disease, (But why speak I thus?
if Diana falls, Demetrius is undone) and mind their patients good more then
their own interest.

Now it most evidently appears, that these men have endeavored to take away the
blankets of Ignorance from poor people, and are willing that they should come
to true knowledge, ( viz.) 1. To know God. 2. To knowthemselves, their
freedoms and privileges, and would not monopolize what is their right. But you
like unchristian-like Priests and Physicians have a long time absconded the
truth from the vulgar, covering it with a black gown, and like so many great
owls have frighted away the vulgar, as so many little birds, not suffering
them to partake of what was their right, and if any honest hearted man discover
your knavery to the vulgar, to show them how they are cheated, Then your master
the Devil sets you on work (and will one day truly pay you your wages) to vent
your malice and bitterness against them; and if this be Christianity -- the
Lord bless me from it.

Thirdly, That you are no Christion, I prove thus.
A Liar (says the Scripture) is an abomination of the Lord; whatsoever is
abominable to the Lord, falls short of Christianity

But you are an abomination to the Lord, in your lying, therefore no Christian
-- but one that falls short of Christianity.

1. The groundwork of your lying, is at the beginning in calling their
Almanacks non-sensicall, knew you sense from nonsense you would not have so
egregiously mistook; I was about to say, I Would satisfy you in that, but
remembering the Wise-mans words, I shall forbear, viz. Bray a fool (says he) in
a mortar, and his folly will not depart: I shall give the world notice, that
his works have been praised by learned men, (besides Priests and Physicians)
and they will not call them non-senficall, because they have knowledge in the
things he writes --

2. Your next of consequence is your gross mistake of him in his discerning
faculty, for matter of Astrology: Durst you show your face, to him, or any
other Artist, I suppose you would quickly prove your self, as blind as a mole; for
in such things, I see by your writing you have but little sight; therefore if
you intend to vindicate your lies you must either fly to Westmisterian
Schoole-boyes or send to some of your brethren in envy, in Oxford or Cambridge
for help: and yet it may be, not serve your turn neither.

3. Your lies now begin to multiply, I am come to a a third, and there you say
(Jupiter) is in his detriment, but as false as theformer (and that is false
enough) for Jupiter is in his fall in: and that makes you fall from wisdom,
into the gulf of folly.

Now I perceive of a truth, you are no Artist at all though you style your self
Philostragus, for you have lied with out measure, or wit either --

And this fully evidences, that you are troubled with the vertigo in your
brain, or rather your brains cracked, which makes you write in such a vain of
madness, and not of reason.

4. A fourth lie is like unto it (it makes me smile to see how like the father,
the children look) a liar brings forth nothing but lies, as appears by your
unlimited way of lying, you say, he wears a periwig, and that is as base a lie,
as ever you writ, or spoke in your life; I was about to say, I wondered that you
could frame your self so orderly to the way of lying, but that I need not, if I
consider that Mercury is ill dignified in you, which will if you have not a
special care, make you a reproach to the world; I need not I think give the
world satisfaction in this so well a known lie -- for I think, it is not
unknown, to more men of quality, in London, that he has as firm a head of hair
as any man in England: and this will be proved true (as it is true) when you
like a Baals priest shall have no covering on your head for your knavery.

Say I am honest in dealing so heartily with you, I really believe I do not
wrong you; well, as I have discovered your unchristian-like malice, so I come
next to your knavery.

But I leave the courteous Reader, to make the Moral or application himself,
because I have somewhat else to do, then to dilate or open every piece of
knavery you have vented --

First, That you are a Knave I prove thus.
1. HE is a Knave that exclaims on men for good. But you have exclaimed upon
Mr. Lilly, Mr. Culpeper, and the rest of that noble Art, for good --

Therefore you are a Knave --

2. He is a Knave in grain (and fool too) that speaks a thing and cannot prove
it --

But you have spoken many things against Mr. Culpeper, Mr. Lilly, and the rest
of that noble Art, Ergo --

He is a fool and a dunce that speaks or writes merely upon imagination, and
fancy, and not on sure ground: but you have both writ and spoke merely upon
imagination and fancy, and not on sure ground, Ergo --

He is a madman (and besides himself) that speaks dividually by the fancy of a
foolish hearsay, and not by a grounded knowledge or real sight: But you like
a madman, or a man besides your self, have spoken dividually by the fancy of a
foolish hearsay, and not by a grounded knowledge or real sight, Ergo --

He is a perfect cheater that publishes a mess of lies twice -- But you have
published a mess of lies twice, and upon too several men chiefly, for want of
wit; to take a joint view of the Calculation of your lies, (your malice and
madness being not sufficiently vented) Mr. Lilly whom you praise in one of
your pamphlets, you dispraise in your other, therefore you appear to be a
cheater and a madman, again -- to conclude, (for it is high time to leave off
talking to a fool) your significator being in a house where he does not
delight, viz. Aries, and ill dignified in you, as appears by your wit and
manners, for they are both alike;

And now let me tell you it is most easy (for you) and most requisite, that you
should be acquainted with that horn-book, and this I really believe, you are as
likely to be acquainted with it, as any I know, if you are not already, I think
(nay I am sure) the rules of Art will not lie.

And now I would give you a little insight in the business, to do you good,
though you your self delight in envy, and to do evil to others -- and that I
may acquaint you with something to purpose, take notice that the sun is very
near unto Mercury, and Mercury is your significator, and they make more
conjunctions in tracing the Zodiac, then any the other planets do, the moon
excepted -- and when they make their conjunctions, beware your forehead --

One word more to you, and I have done; and that shall be a caution,

Take heed how you asperse any of the servants of God; but you according to
your apprehension, may judge them, to be none of that number, but that they are
so I shall prove thus, All those that in the spirit of love, are willing to
communicate to the world, of what God has made them to partake, are real
servants of God --

But Mr. Culpeper, and Mr. Lilly (and many before inserted) in the spirit of
love, have communicated to the world of what God has made them to partake.

Therefore the Astrologers are really the servants of God, take heed therefore
(I say) that you do not abuse the servants of God, lest the judgments of God
take hold on them, as on the mock-priests of old, causing you to be your own
executioner and there be none to deliver you.

To all those that are moderate.
DEar hearts, the cloud of ignorance that lies upon you, begins to be drawn
aside, by the power of a divine presence speaking in honest minded men, that so
you may have a purer sight manifested to you, to see clearly that truth that
belongs to your peace, which hitherto has been absconded and hidden from you,
it is the will of God that you should be as Mary, always choosing that good
part, there is a time I confess when God does hide himself, under the most
oblique and Aenigmaticall clouds, and so he has now from the generality of the
world, which makes the truth so evilly spoken of: Behold my friends, I show you
a mystery --

The Lord hides himself certain times from his people, and yet all things, at
all times, both above us and below us, speaks him forth to us, in a most sweet
and harmonious manner.

The Lord sometimes shakes the truth by changes here below, (and a reverend
Divine once said, that worldly changes was one of the clouds in which Christ
came) as he has done of late years, with a witness.

He sometimes speaks from heaven, as he did by that most direful Eclipse of
the Sun on the 29. of March, admonishing us to beware of high aspirings, lest
our glory be eclipsed: Many malicious Antagonists, have thrown dirt in the face
of all those to whom God revealed that wonderful sign of heaven, and not for
want of ignorance have vented many base aspersions to the throwing down of Art,
and the dishonor of God that gives the Art.

But to you that are rational and moderate I shall aver that there has not
been one so great this two hundred years, I mean not so much of the body of the
Sun obscured, yet I confess it has been much darker, but then it has been a
more cloudier day, and a day of gloominesse, and the reason why it was no
darker with us, was by reason of the moons distance from the Dragons head,
otherwise we might have been forced to have made use of candles as well as
those in the North, and Northwest parts of this land.

The envious Antagonists cry out against the Astrologers for not declaring what
weather would be, but if you please to peruse but Mr. Bookers Ephemeris, you
will quickly find them out of their text: for Mr. Booker speaks plainly and
tells them about the 18. day of March, it breaks and clears up, and is very fair
for many days together, with fresh temperate and wholesome winds, not
mentioning any bad weather to intervene at all.

And yet says the malicious Antagonist, they know not where it should be fair
or foul, if this was not vented by a spirit of malice judge you --

Others are so ignorant, that they will not stick to say, that had not this day
been written of, it would not have been taken notice of, but had they had the
perfect sight of their eyes and but looked toward the north and northwest part
of the heavens they might have seen it no lighter then in a moonshiney-night --

There are some others (and they none of the smallest fools neither) who
expected the earth to be covered with an Egyptian darkness at nine a clock,
when none of our English Astrologers writ any such thing at all, but this they
writ, that the Sun should begin to loose his light some min. before nine: which
accordingly he did, if I do not wonder never trust me, how men could frame such
an irrational opinion as this, as sure as the Suns in the firmament their
Senses suffered as great an eclipse as the Sun, when they vented it, certainly
they never read Scripture nor heard reason, for if they had they must have
received the Sun, to be the greatest Luminary, and that full body of light,
that gives life to all creatures by its sweet arraies, and comfortable beams;
and how in reason then could any expect it to be dark quite when the
Astrologers writ that it should begin but then to be dark.

On this account do all ignorant people asperse the Astrologers, and say, that
they predicted this Egyptian darkness: but my dear friends take notice the
Astrologers writ no such thing, for they knew to the contrary.

True it is indeed, Mr. Booker speaking of the black Saturday about 54. years
agone) says that this may be called black Monday, this being a more direful
Eclipse then that, and that by reason of the Suns being Eclipsed in the very
degree of his exaltation, and from Mr. Bookers words Black-munday had its rise:

But would you know the truth of the aspersion, if you would, then thus,

A company of knavish Italian Mountebanks, spreads their bills abroad, telling
poor people what might preserve them from the terrible Eclipse of the Sun, when
as they begin not to operate or show themselves till Michaelmas next, and yet
poor people (not for want of Ignorance) thought they should have been stricken
dead in the streets. Being affrighted with those knavish Mountebanks, who told
them of (and scared them with) an Egyptian darkness, when the English
Astrologers never writ any such thing.

Therefore you now knowing the original of this business if your moderation
be not eclipsed, you may moderate the passion of the ignorant, who have been
set at work by these self-seeking fellows, viz. the Mountebanks, to rail and
speak evil of the things they know not.

I could wish that our governors would a little take notice of these flying
and false aspersions, that are about this Eclipse, for let them assure
themselves, the prodigious effects of it, does relate to them more then to the
commonalty, they being in superior places, the Sun being a superior planet, and
signifies men of power, and therefore it most concerns them to take notice of
it, and cause these aspersions to cease, or give some trusty men power to
prohibit them, lest the vengeance of God take hold of this nation. It Is
impartial justice in this and all other things we ought to have from men in
power, it is our due, men in power ought to have submissive obedience, and
reverence from us it is their due, that this alone may be perfected, and our
Governors of this nation may sing a quietus est, with their governed to the
stopping of all malicious mouths shall be my earnest prayer and desire, and I
think this is no bad prayer nor desire neither.

Farewell.
FINIS.
Postscript to the Reader.
Reader,
THere are many other Pamphlets extant that are bespattered with lies and
forgeries, that had the Pamphleter been known, his folly would have been
laughed at, or he laughed at for his folly, Mercurius Phreneticus with his
Gallimofry of nonsense, is one of the chiefest, I had thought to have made
some animadversions upon him and the rest, but upon perusal I have found them
so full of simplicity, that I will not trouble thee with it at all,
apprehending thou may hear enough of such kind of stuff, and it may be more
then thou art willing.

Farewell.
J. C.


