This Book Entitled, The Orphans Legacy, written by John Godolphin LL. Dr. I
do LICENSE to be Printed,

Exeter house 26. April. 1673. Shaftesbury C.

THE Orphans Legacy: OR, A Testamentary Abridgement. In Three PARTS. I. Of Last
Wills and Testaments. II. Of Executors and Administrators. III. Of Legacies and
Devises.
WHEREIN The most Material Points of Law, relating to that Subject, are
succinctly Treated, as well according to the Common and Temporal, as
Ecclesiastical and Civil Laws of this Realm. ILLUSTRATED With great variety of
select Cases in the Law of both Professions, as well delightful in the Theorie,
as useful for the Practice of all such as study the one, or are either Active
or Passive in the other.

By John Godolphin LL. Dr.

Hebr. Chap. 9. V. 16, and 17.Where a Testament is, there must also of
necessity be the death of the Testator. For a Testament is of force after men
are dead: otherwise it is of no strength at all whilst the Testatour lives.
LONDON, Printed by E. T. and R. H. and are to be sold by Joseph Nevill at the
sign of the Greyhound in St. Paul's Churchyard; And Christopher Wilkinson at
the Black Boy, over against St. Dunstans Church in Fleet Street, 1674.



To the Right Honorable, ANTHONY Earl of SHAFTESBURY, Baron ASHLEY of WINBURN
St Gyles, and Baron COOPER of PAWLET, Lord Lieutenant of DORSET-SHIRE, Lord
High CHANCELLOR of ENGLAND, and one of His MAJESTY'S most Honorable PRIVY
COUNCIL, etc.
My Lord,
BEfore this Treatise Presumes to hazard it self in the Readers hands, its
highest. Ambition is to lie at Your Honors Feet. What in the like Case was
once said to a Person of Grandeur, Qui apud te audent dicere, Magnitudinem tuam
ignorant; qui non audent, Humanitatem, is my Apology for this Loyal Confidence.
Were not the Scales of Justice in Your hands; or were the Tribunal, which You
Illustrate, under a Cloud for want of a Luminary to enlighten the Law; yet such
is the Conquest Your Victorious Condescensions have made on all
not-disingenuous hearts; Such Your exact Inspection into Men and Manners; Such
Your depth of Just and Successful Counsels; Such Your serious Recreation in
the more Noble Arts and Sciences; Such Your Dexterity in Reconciling Law to
Equity, by Your Great Prudence in the Conduct of Juridical Contestations; and
All under the immediate Vmbrage of Majesty; That the Insignificant Author,
doubting the Euroclydons of a Censorious Age, and Ambitious of his Obligations
to Your Lordship, humbly Craves Your Pardon for presuming to take Sanctuary
under Your Protection of Equity, in case this ORPHANS LEGACY proves not so Good
in Law, as in the most Critical Construction may Indemnifie,

MY LORD, Your most Obsequious Servant, Devoted to your Honors Commands, usque
ad Aras, JOHN GODOLPHIN.

To the Reader.
NOt in the least to Anticipate any Just Exceptions, but (if possible) to
prevent all prejudice, let me premise, That the Industrious Mr Swinburn, (
Second to none that ever Writ of this Subject in our Native Dialect) having
been pleased to confine himself to the incomparable Laws of his own
Profession, has left the fairer Latitude for Variation, admitting him to have
transcended all possibilities of Imitation. And if this Treatise speak not in
its proper Idiom, it is because Reports could not so aptly as Decisions be
taught the Justinian Language. Nor let it appear Presumptive, That a submiss
Votary of his, seems to Invade the Territories of an Alien Profession, having
so many Presidents for his Warrant therein, as (expunging but a very few
Quotations of one or two Apocryphal Authors) may well amount to something like
a Justification by virtue of the Lex Talionis; That with all submission to the
Judicious, as with smiles to the Captious, the subscription at a venture may be

Thy Friend J. G.

Of Testaments and Last Wills.
The Chapters of the First Part.
I. What a Testament, a Last Will, and Codicil is, and how they differ. II. Of
the several distinctions or kinds of Testaments. III. Of Testaments solemn and
unsolemn. IV. Of Testaments Written and Nuncupative. V. Of Testaments
privileged and unpriviledged. VI. Of Codicils. VII. What persons are incapable
of making Testaments or Last Wills. VIII. Of persons Intestable by reason of
the want of discretion. IX. Of persons Intestable for want of Freedom or
Liberty. X. Of Women Covert. XI. Of persons Intestable for want of their
principal senses. XII. Of persons Intestable by reason of some Criminal
Convictions. XIII. Of Conditional Testaments. XIV. Of the several kinds of
Conditions incident to Testaments. XV. Of Testamentary Conditions in reference
to Marriage. XVI. Of the manner of proceeding during the suspense of the
Condition. XVII. Of Testaments void. XVIII. Of Testamentary Revocations. XIX.
Of a Reviver of a Will revoked. XX. Of the Probate of Testaments. XXI. Of Proof
requisite to a Will. XXII. Bona Notabilia.
THE ORPHANS LEGACY. The FIRST PART. OF Testaments and Last Wills.
CHAP. I. What a Testament, a last Will, and Codicil is: And how they differ.
A Testament is a Just Sentence of our Will, touching what we would have done
after our death, with the appointment of an Executor. L. 1. ff. de testa.
Exchange the words [Just Sentence] into the words [Lawful Disposing] and then
it defines a Last Will. Mant. de con. ult. vol. lib. 1. tit. 4. n. 10.
And if instead of [with etc.] you say without the appointment of an Executor,
you give the definition of a Codicil. Ibid. tit. 8.
But an Executor and a Last Will or Testament are such Relatives as the one
cannot be without the other. l. 10. ff. de jur. Cod. Plow. Com. 185. in
Woodward and Darcyes Case.
Insomuch, that although much be written in the name of a Will, many Legacies
bequeathed, and many things appointed to be done; yet if no Executor be named,
expressed or employed, it is no Last Will or Testament. Inst. de haered. l. 1.
l. 2. ff. de Vulg. Substit. l. haered. palam. ff. de Testam. and Broo. tit.
Execut. 20.
Thus a Testament is a Just Sentence of our Will touching what we would have
done after our death. A Last Will is a Lawful Disposing touching what we would
have done after our death. And a Codicil is a Just Sentence of our Will
touching what we would have done after our death, without the appointing of an
Executor.

From the said Definition of a Testament, the Legal Inferences are six, viz. 1.
That a Testator in his Will may not command Six Inferences from the definition
of a Testament.
or order any thing against Justice, Piety, Equity or Honesty. 2. That it be
full and perfect without defect or imperfections, either in respect of
Solemnity, or in respect of Will and meaning. 3. That it ought to be advisedly
and deliberately made, and not absque animo Testandi. 4. That the Testator
ought to be sui juris, in respect of what he disposes in his Will. 5. That his
Will be independent, not suffering the least coaction or dependence on the will
or pleasure of any other. 6. That the Testament receives life by the Testators
death, and is of no force till his decease.

A Testament is frequently called a Will or Last Will; for these Such a
Testament as whereto the appointment of an Executor is essential, does properly
refer to Goods and Chattels; for Lands by virtue of the Statute may be devised
by a Will in writing where no Executor is named.
words are commonly Synonymous and promiscuously used: yet some are of Opinion,
that they understand it most properly, who limit a Will only to Land, and a
Testament only to Chattels requiring Executors, which a Will only for Land does
not require: For it seems that by the Common Law where Lands or Tenements are
only devised by writing, albeit there be no Executor named, yet that is
properly called a Last Will; and where it concerns only Chattels, a Testament.
Sheph. Epit. cap. 155.
The truth is, a Testament taken strictly according to the said definition
differs from a Last Will, D. D. post glos. in dict. l. 1. ff. de testa.
yet not as opposite thereto, but only as the Special differs from the
General; for every Testament is a Last Will, but every Last Will is not a
Testament. In a word, a Last Will is a general word, and agrees with each
several kind of Last Wills or Testaments. Mantic. ubi sup. tit. 5.
But a Testament properly so called, is only that kind of Last Will wherein an
Executor is named or appointed.

Plowden in his Commentaries does define a Testament to be the Witness of the
mind, and to be compounded of these two words, viz. Testatio and Mentis: But
this is no adequate definition of a Testament; neither is it a compound word,
Aul. Gel. lib. 6, c. ^2. to Serve. Sulp.
but a single word, such as is Calceamentum, Paludamentum, and the like. And if
it be demanded whether a Testament may be good in Law without a Seal, it is
Answered in the Affirmative; for a Seal is Sealing not absolutely necessary to
a Will.
not absolutely necessary to a Testament, though it may be fit and expedient.
Offic. ex cap. 2.
For a Will not being properly and legally a Deed, may be good enough without a
Seal, which is one essential part of a Deed; yet has a Will the force and
effect of a Deed. Ibid.


CHAP. II. Of the several Distinctions or kinds of Testaments.
A Testament is either Solemn L. hac consult. C. de Testa.
or Vnsolemn. l. 1. ff. de iniust. rupt. and irrit. testa.
This though the first and greatest distinction of Testaments, yet of least
force or use with us now in England. 2. Testaments are either written or
Nuncupative. Myns. Inst. de testa. ordin.. fin.
3. They are either privileged or unpriviledged. Mant. ubi sup. l. 1. tit. 57.
Of Privileged Testaments there are three sorts, whereof some are called
Military Testaments; others are called Testaments only among the Testators own
Children; and others are Testaments to Charitable and Pious uses. But if no
Executor be named or appointed, then it has not the name of a Testament, yet
it shall retain the name of a Last Will, and comprehends one of these three,
viz. either a Codicil, or a Legacy and Devise, or a Gift in regard or by reason
of death.

CHAP. III. Of Testaments Solemn and Vnsolemn.
IN Solemn Testaments are comprehended the Solemnities of the Civil Law; as the
presence of seven Witnesses, their subscription or subsignation; the making or
expediting the act of the Will it self at one and the same time; with diverse
other Solemnities necessarily required by the Civil Law as Essential to a
Testament, whereof we have no use here in England, being not obliged to such
Ceremonies. Tract. de Rep. Angl. lib. 3. cap. 7. and Lynw. Constable. in cap. Stat.
verb. probatis, tit. de testa. lib. 3. and Bract. de Leg. and Consuet. Angl. l.
2. c. 25.


In Vnsolemn Testaments the said Ceremonies are omitted; and such are our
Testaments here in England, wherein we are no further obliged than to the
observation of such Requisites as are necessary Jure Gentium, which requires
but two Witnesses: Mant. ubi sup. lib. 6. tit. 3. nu. 9. in fine.
And saving in a Devise of Land, wherein Writing is also necessary, and that it
be made in the Testators life time. St. H. 8. an. 32. cap. 1.
The Testator (if he please) may make use of more than two witnesses, and
procure their subscription, yea for prevention of Forgery to every page of the
Testament, but no obligation hereto.

CHAP. IV. Of Testaments Written and Nuncupative.
1. Testament Written, what? 2. Difference between Devise of Lands and Bequest
of Goods. 3. Lands of Burgage tenure and by Custom deviseable, may pass
Nuncupatively. 4. Naming Executor not necessary in a Will, only for devise of
Lands. 5. Notes taken in writing-sufficient for devise of Lands. 6. Testament
Nuncupative, what? 7. The Will whether Nuncupative or Written, in case the
Executors Name be omitted out of the writing? 8. Law Cases relating to this
subject.
. 1. A Written Testament is such as at the time of making thereof is committed
to writing. Myns. Inst. de testa. ord.. Sed cum paulat.
By which words are excluded such Testaments as are afterward put into
writing. For being first made by word of mouth they still remain Nuncupative,
notwithstanding the reducing thereof into writing after the Testators death.
Myns. ibid.. fin.
Among other advantages that a Testator has by a written Will this is one;
that he may conceal the Contents thereof from the Witnesses, L. hac consult.
Cod. de Testa. and glos. ibid.
which in a Nuncupative Will he cannot do. And it is sufficient, if taking his
Will in his hand he say unto the Witnesses, This is my Last Will and Testament,
or herein is contained my Last Will; or other words to the like effect. Auth.
and non observato. Cod. de Testa. and DD. ibid.


2. As touching the disposition of Land of Inheritance by Will, if it be not
fully written before the Testators death, so far at least as concerns the
disposition of the said Land, it may not be for that part made good by reducing
it to writing after the Testators death; but as touching Goods and Chattels it
may. Offic. Exec. cap. 2.
Nevertheless if it be written before the Testators death, though it be never
brought nor read to him after the writing thereof, yet is it good enough, and
that not only for Land, but also for Goods and Chattels, provided that there be
an Executor named. 6 H. 6. Dyer. 32.
And this shall be a Will in writing and not verbal only, yea though it want
the subscription of the Testators Name. Offic. Exec. ubi supra.
For many cannot write at all, and some want hands: Nor is the subscribing the
name of the Maker any essential part of a Deed, much less of a Will, which
needs not sealing as a Deed does.

3. Lands and Tenements deviseable by Custom may pass by a Nuncupative Will
for any time whatsoever; for in a Devise of Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments
held in Burgage-tenure, it is not necessary that the same should be written,
because such may pass sufficiently by Will Nuncupative, Swinb. part. 1.. 11. n.
5.
because such Lands were deviseable before the making of the Statute of H. 8.
enabling to devise Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments by Will in writing in the
Testators lifetime, which cannot pass by a Nuncupative Testament or Will
without writing: Stat. H. 8. an. 32. c. 1.
So that Lands of Burgage-tenure, and by Custom deviseable may pass
Nuncupatively, though Lands of other tenures are not deviseable but by Will in
writing.

4. Though the naming or appointing of an Executor be essential to constitute a
Testament or Last Will, yet this properly refers only as to Goods and Chattels;
for a man may by his Last Will in writing devise his Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, though he make no Executors, because an Executor has nothing to
do with the freehold of Land.

5. If the Writer does only take Notes from the mouth of the Testator of his
Last Will, for the devise of Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and afterward
write the same, but the Testator dies before it be showed unto him; yet this is
sufficient for a Will in writing for the coveying of Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments. Dyer i^ Ca(...) inter Sack vile and Brown.
Likewise it is sufficient if Notes or Articles be made and read to the
Testator; though the same be not engrossed at large or in form of Law until
after the Testators death. Ibid. sup. ult vol. cujusdam Hanton.


6. Testaments are called Nuncupative, when the Testator without any writing
does declare his Will before a sufficient number of Witnesses; Inst. de test.
ordinan.. fin. and l. heredes. ff. de testa.
and such Nuncupative Will is of as great force and efficacy (except for Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments) as any written Testament. l. hac Consultat.. per
nuncupat. C. de testa.
Yea this verbal, oral, or Nuncupative Will, being after the Testators death
reduced to writing, and having the Court Seal affixed thereunto, is of as good
validity touching the disposal of Goods and Chattels, as if it had been written
in the Testators lifetime. Stat. 14 H. 6. 5. and 5 H. 5. and (...) M. 15. and
^6 Eliz.


7. Although many Legacies be made and written in a Will, and many things
expressed to be done, yet if no Executor be named in the writing, only A. and
B. by word of mouth appointed to be Executors; this shall not amount to a Will
in writing, but to a Nuncupative will only; Offic. Exec, ubi sup.
because one essential part of the Will, (viz. the appointing of an Executor)
is omitted out of the writing. Nay, the appointing of him Executor, who is
named in such a Note left with C. D. is no sufficient making of an Executor at
all. Sum. Silv. tit. de testa. fol. 443. 6.
Nor is the appointing of any one by a doubtful and uncertain Name a
sufficient making either of an Executor or Legatary, Inst. de Legatis..
incertis.
unless some other sufficient circumstance does make it plainly appear whom the
Testator meant; so tender and cautious is the Law of fixing the interest of any
upon mere doubts and uncertainties.

8. A man took Notes of a Will of one who lay sick, and afterward he drew up
the Will in writing, but the sick person dyed before it was showed to him. Yet
it was the opinion of the whole Court, that the same was a good Will within the
Statute of 32 H. 8. to convey Socage Land. Trin. 6 E. 6. Dyer, 72. So was it
adjudged in 4 and 5 Eliz. in Hinton's Case, where Articles were read to the
Devisor concerning the disposition of his Lands, and the Articles were written
and engrossed after his death; and yet it Hugh. Abridg. verb. Wills and
Testaments.
was a good Will within the said Statute of 32 H. 8.

A man intended Land to J. S. for life, the remainder to J. D. and before the
remainder was written the Devisor dyed. It was the opinion of the Court, that
the same was a void Devise for the whole Lands within the Statute of 32 H. 8.
because that the one did depend upon the other: But in that case it was holden,
that if a man seized of two Acres, intends one of them to J. S. and the other
to J. D. and the Devise to one is written, but the Devisor Trin. 11 Jac. in C.
B. Caesar and Lakes Case. Adjudged acc. Hugh. Abridg. Ibid.
dies before the Devise of the other Acre to the other is written; It is a
good Devise for the Acre which is written, but not for the other Acre.

B. Brought Writ of Entry in nature of an Assize against his Fathers Wife. The
Case upon Evidence was this, viz. H. B. the Brown and Browns Case. Mich. 4 and
5 P. and M. Anders. Rep. Cas. 85.
Plaintiffs Father, and Husband of the said Wife, being sick at London sends
for A. desiring him to write the Last Will and Testament of his Lands. A.
desires B. to declare what he would have his Last Will and Testament to be, and
who to be his Executors, whereupon A. wrote short Notes of his Last Will, and
every Legacy, and who should be his Executors, then returned to his own House,
there wrote the said Will in Order and Form, and therewith returning to the
House of H. B. within half an hour after 12, intending to have read the same
unto him, was then told that the said H. B. dyed at twelve of the clock just
before. Whereupon A. delivered the same to the Executors that were therein
named. The Wife enters on the Testators Tenements, and what was Devised to her,
the Son enters upon her, the Wife reenters, whereupon the Plaintiff brought
his Writ. The Opinion of all the Justices was, That it was a good Will in
writing, according to the Stat. of 32 H. 8. and declared their Opinion on the
Evidence given; whereupon it passed for the Wife, and she enjoyed the Land.

CHAP. V. Of Testaments Privileged and Unpriviledged.
1. Testaments Privileged what, and how many kinds thereof. 2. Military
Testaments, their privileges. 3. Testaments made in favor of the Testators
Children, their privileges. 4. Testaments made for good and pious uses, their
privileges. 5. Testaments Vnpriviledged, what?
. 1. TEstaments Privileged are such as are qualified by some special freedom
or benefit contrary to the common course of Law, Mant. ubi sup. lib. 1. tit.
57. in sin.
or by some special freedom are discharged from the usual Requisites and
Observations of Common and General Law; whereof there are (as in the second
Chapter) chiefly these three kinds, viz. 1. Military Testaments. 2. Testaments
made in favor of the Testators Children. 3. Testaments for good and pious uses.

2. The privileges of Military Testaments, or of a Testament made by a
Soldier are many, but chiefly these Four; viz. 1. A Soldier is not disabled
from making his Testament by any of those impediments which disable others,
unless for want of Reason, or other like grand causes whereby he is disabled
Jure Gentium. Myns. de Milit Test. in pr.
2. Whereas diverse persons are prohibited from being Executors or Legataries to
other persons, yet the Law does not so prohibit them from being Executors or
Legataries to a Soldier, save in some very few Cases specially limited in the
Law. Bart. in dict. tit.
3. Soldiers are clearly acquitted from the observation of the Solemnities of
the Civil Law in making of Testaments. l. Divus. ff. de mil test.. plane. Inst.
eod.
4. Whereas no other person can dye with two valid Testaments, yet a Soldier
may, and both Testaments shall stand good according to the intent or meaning of
the Testator. l. querebatur. ff. eod.
Other privileges there are peculiar to Soldiers in making their Testaments,
but they being many, Vasq. de succes. resol. lib 2.. 20. ubi enumerat 70
Privilegia militibus indulta.
it would not answer the design of a Compendium to make a specification
thereof. Only let it not here escape our Observation, that these Privileges
belong only to such Soldiers as are in expedition or actual Service of war, l.
pen. C. de test. mil. and Mant. ubi sup. l. 6. tit. 1. nu. 32.. sed hactenus.
Inst. de mil. test. and Gail. Obs. 118.
and not to such as lie safely and securely in some Castle, Garrison, or other
like place of defense. Myns.. illis autem. Inst. de mil. test. and Jul. clar..
testam. q. 15. in fin.


3. The privileges of Testaments made in favor of the Testators Children, are
chiefly these three, viz. 1. If two Testaments be found after the Testators
death of diverse tenures, and it appear not which of them is the latter
Testament; In this Case that shall be presumed the latter, and so prevail,
which is made in favor of the Testators Children. Bart. in l. 1.. 1. de bon.
poss. secund. Tab. ff. Clar.. testa. q. 100.
2. The Testament made in favor of the Testators Children, is not so easily
revoked as possibly other Testaments may be. Auth. hoc int. Liberos, eod. de
Testa. and Glos. ibid.
3. A Fathers Testament among his Children shall take effect, though there be
no Witnesses to prove the same, being written or subscribed by the Testators
hand, or by him procured to be written by some other. Bald. Paul. de Castro.
and Jas. in Auth. Quod sine C. de Testa.
Howbeit these two last Privileges by the Custom of England, the latter of
them especially, are common to all English men's Testaments; so also are all
other privileges which the Law does indulge to such Testaments inter Liberos.

4. The Privileges of Testaments made for good and pious uses (being such as
are made to Orphans, Widows, Strangers, Prisoners, Lame and Diseased persons
being poor and indigent, to Hospitals, Schools, Colleges, also for the
redemption of Captives, repairing of City-Walls, Bridges, and such like) are
chiefly these four; viz. 1. This kind of Testaments may be written with strange
and unaccustomed Characters, yet shall be good and effectual. Mant. ubi sup. l.
6. tit. 3. n. 3. and Tyraq. de Privil. piae Cause. c. 12.
2. If the Testament ad pios usus be found Cancelled, and it be not known
whether the Testator did willingly cancel the same, the Law presumes it to be
unadvisedly cancelled, whereas in other Testaments the contrary is presumed;
but in this kind of Testaments ad pios usus, if it be not certainly known that
the Testator did wittingly cancel the same, it shall be in effect as if it had
not been cancelled at all. Co^ar. in Rub. de test. part. 3. nu. 19. and Mant.
ubi sup. l. 12. tit. 2. n. 32.
3. In this kind of Testaments it is sufficient that the condition (if any be)
be observed and accomplished by other means than according to the precise form
of the condition. Tyraq. ubi sup.
Whereas in other Testaments or Legacies, it is not sufficient unless the
condition be precisely observed. l. Maevius. and l. qui haered. ff. de Cond.
and them.
4. The Testament ad pios usus is not void in respect of uncertainty, as other
Testaments are. Bart. and Jason. in l. 1. C. de Sacros. Eccl. and Gras. These.
Com. Opin. Instit. q. 12.
And generally most Privileges that do belong to other privileged Testaments,
do belong also unto this Testament ad pios usus.

5. Testaments Vnpriviledged are such as have not any benefit or freedom above,
or contrary to the common course of ordinary Law, but are generally obliged to
the observation of such Requisites as the Law regularly appoints for all
Testaments.

CHAP. VI. Of Codicils.
1. The etymon, and original of the word. 2. The definiti^^ of a Codicil. 3.
Codicil may be made with or without writing, before or after the Testament. 4.
Who may make a Codicil; and whether more Codicils than one may consist
together?
1. A Codicil in the Etymology thereof, does signify a little Book,
Codicillus being but the diminitive of Codex: you may if you please call a
Testament a great Book, and a Codicil a little Book or writing. The Original of
these Codicils was merely occasional; for when by reason of the multiplicity of
legal Solemnities requisite to a Testament, which are not so to a Codicil, the
Testator failing of sufficient opportunity to make a Testament Solemn, was
enforced to fly to the refuge of a Codicil for declaration of his Will to be
performed post mortem: Or otherwise as additional to the Testament, touching
something therein omitted; or explanatory to it, touching something therein
ambiguous; or derogatory to it, touching something therefrom to be detracted.

2. Every man that writes of this Subject abounds in his own sense touching the
definition of a Codicil; but he will be found least in error who defines a
Codicil to be the just Sentence of our Will, touching that which we would have
done after our death, without the appointing of an Executor. Mantic. l. 1. tit.
8.
Yet here observe, that the word [Just] is not so comprehensive in this case as
in the definition of a Testament; for here it does not signify those
Solemnities and ritual Formalities which are Testamentary, but only an
exclusion of illegalities, and inclusion of such perfections as are consistent
with the nature of a Codicil; so that we may not improperly infer, That a
Codicil is a kind of an unsolemn Last Will. Gras. These. Com. Op.. Codicil. in
prin.


3. A Codicil may in effect be made either in writing or without it, Gloss. in
Rub. c. de Codicil. and Minsing. in dict. Rub. Instit. and Wesemb. in ff. de
jure Codicill.
provided you do not call it a Nuncupative Codicil, that being an abuse of
words; for if a Codicil may, as aforesaid, be called a Little Book or Writing,
it is improper to call it Nuncupative; therefore although all the power and
force of a Codicil may be made without writing, yet being so made it may not
otherwise than improperly and abusive be termed a Codicil, but rather something
Loco Codicilli, and which has the full force and effect of a Codicil. Also a
Codicil may be made as well by him who dies Intestate as by him who dies
Testate. l. conficiuntur in prin. ff. de jure Cod. and. non aute n. Inst. de
Codicil.
Neither is it material whether it be made before or after the Testament; l.
confic. ibid.
for in both cases it shall be reputed as part and parcel of the Testament,
Vigel. meth. jur. Civil. part. 4. l. 9. c. 23.
and to have equal force with it; unless being made before the Testament it be
revoked in the Testament, or be contrary to what is contained therein. Mynsing.
post gloss. in. non tantum. Inst. de Codicil.


4. Persons capable or incapable of making Testaments are even such also as to
Codicils Bart. and alii in l. 2. de Legib. 1. and Gras. These. Com. Op.. Cod.
nu. 2.
Yet a man may die with diverse Codicils, and the latter shall not (as in diverse
Testaments) null the former, so as the one be not contrary to the other. l. cum
proponat. Cod. de Codicil.
And if in such Codicils (it not appearing which was first or last) one and the
same thing be given to one person in the one, and to another person in the
other, the Codicils are not void, but the persons therein named ought to divide
the thing equally betwixt them. Glos. and DD. in dict. l. cum proponat. and
Gras. These. Com. Op.. Codic.


CHAP. VII. What Persons are incapable of making Testaments or Last Wills.
REgularly every person has full Power and Liberty to make a Testament or Last
Will, Instit. quib. non est perm. fac. test. in prin. and gloss. ibid.
and therein may dispose of his Goods and Chattels, Roland. de Codic. n. 6.
except such persons as are prohibited by Law or Custom, Glos. Inst. ubi sup..
1. and Gras. These. Com. Op. q. 26. nu. 1.
whereof some are prohibited because they want Discretion; such are Children,
Mad Folks, Idiots, Old Persons grown Childish, and such as are drunk: Others,
because they want Freedom and Liberty; such are Villains, Captives, and Women
Covert: Others, because they want some of their principal Senses; such are the
Deaf, and Dumb, and Blind: Others, because they are Criminous; such are
Traitors, Felons, wilful Self-murtherers, and the like. Others, because of
certain Legal impediments; such are Outlawed Persons, men at the point of
Death, Alien Enemies, and such others. But here Note that all the said persons
are not in all cases absolutely and utterly intestable; for that some of them
are intestable, but in some Cases only, as will more distinctly appear
hereafter. Note also, that the King, his Heirs and Successors may lawfully make
their Testaments, and that Execution shall be done of the same. Cook. Inst.
part. 4. cap. 74. Cur. Prerog. ubi Citat. Rot. Par. 16. R. 2. nu. 10. and Rot.
Par. 1 H. 5. n. 13.
The Lord Cook makes mention of the Testament of King H. 4. and his Executors
refusing, the Archbishop of Canterbury was to grant Administration with the
Testament annexed. Cook. ibid. See 1 H. 6. n. 18.


CHAP. VIII. Of persons Intestable by reason of the want of Discretion.
1. Of Children in Minority. 2. Of Mad Persons; and proof of Insanity. 3. Of
Idiots or Natural Fools. 4. Of Persons grown Childish by reason of Old Age. 5.
Of such as are Drunk. 6. Law-Cases relating to the third Paragraph of this
Chapter.
1. AN Infant-Male at the Age of fourteen years, and Female at the Age of
twelve years, may make a Testament touching Goods and Chattels; l. qua aetate.
ff. qui Testa. fac. possint. and. preteria. and Inst. quib. non est permiss.
and l. si frater. C. qui testa fac. poss. and Cowel. Inst. lib. 2. tit. 12.
although both Sexes in construction of Law are Minors or Infants until the
Age of twenty one years, Dr. and Stud. l. 1. c. 21. and lib. 12. c. 28.
till which Age neither of them can make any Conveyance of Land good in Law.
Stat. 34 H. 8. c. 5.
And before the said respective Ages of twelve and fourteen years neither of
them can make any Testament at all, no, though it be ad pios usus: Jas. in
dict. l. si frater.
But at the accomplishment of the said respective Ages each of them may, even
without the consent of his or her Guardian Jas. ibid.
or Parent, if they have any Goods in their own right, make a Testament
thereof, Perk. tit. devise. fol. 97.
though not of Lands of Inheritance, Stat. 34 H. 8. c. 5.
unless the Custom of the place does enable them for it. Perk. ib. fol. 504.
But before the said respective Ages neither of their Testaments is good,
though made by the approbation and with the consent of their Guardians; Jas.
ubi supra.
yea, though they afterward attain to the said Ages, and then neglect to
ratify them: l. preteria. Inst. quib. non est permis. fa. test.
But if he or she has attained to the last day of the said Ages of twelve or
fourteen years, the Testament so made by him in the very last day of the Age of
fourteen years, or by her in the very last day of the Age of twelve years is as
good and lawful, as if the said day were then already expired; dict. l. qua
aetate. and ibi Bart.
or if after the accomplishment of the said Ages respectively, he or she does
expressly approve and ratify the Testament made during their minority, then is
the same made good and effectual by this new declaration thereof. Paul. de
Cast. and alii in l. si frater. C. qui testa. fac. poss.


2. Such as are Mad persons can make no Testament during the time of their
insanity of mind, l. furiosum. C. qui testa. fac. poss.
no, not so much as ad pios usus. Bart. in l. 1. C. de Sacros. Eccl. n. 16.
Nay, the Testament made at such a time shall not be good, though afterward the
party recover his former understanding; dict. l. furiosum.
howbeit if such Lunatic persons have any Lucida intervalla, or intermissions,
then during the time of such freedom from the Lunacy they may make their
Testaments betwixt the fits. Ibid. and dict.. preteria. and DD. ibid.
And here Note, that every person is presumed to be of perfect mind and memory
until the contrary be proved. Bart. in l. nec Codicillos Cod. de Codicillis.
So that he that objecteth Insanity of mind must prove the same; Bart. ibid.
for which it is sufficient if he prove, that the Testator was beside himself,
or had lost his Reason but just before he made his Testament, though he prove
not the Testators madness at the very time of making the same, Glos. in c. fin.
de Succes. ab Intestat.
unless the contrary be proved, or circumstances to induce a contrary
presumption. Mantic. ubi supra. lib. 2. tit. 5.
For it is a very tender and difficult point to prove a man not to have the use
of his Reason and Understanding; therefore it is not sufficient for the
Witnesses to depose that the person was mad, unless withal they render upon
knowledge a sufficient reason thereof. Bald. in dict. l. furiosum. and
Maschard. de probat. ver. furiosus.
Neither is one Witness sufficient to prove a man mad, Masch. ibid. and Cons.
127. n. 9.
nor two, in case the one depose of the Testators madness at one time, and the
other of his madness at another time; Ibid.
but both agreeing in time, if then the one Witness deposes of one mad act,
the other of another mad act at one and the same time, these sufficiently prove
that the Testator was then mad, though they do not both depose of one and the
same mad act. Masch. post Ruin. ubi supra.
But in contrary depositions these Witnesses are to be preferred, which depose
that the Testator was sound of memory. Gabriel. l. 1. Com. Constable. tit. de Test.
Con. 4. nu. 19.
And if he used to have some intervals of Reason, and it be not certainly known
whether the Testament were made in or out of his fits of Lunacy; in this case,
if no argument of frenzy or folly can be collected by the Testament, it shall
be presumed to be made during the intermissions of the Lunacy, and so adjudged
to be good; Gras. These. Com. Opin. verb. Testa. q. 21. and Vasq. de Success. l.
1.. 2. nu. 20.
yea, though it cannot be proved that the Testator used to have any clear and
calm intermissions at all, provided the same Testament be wisely and orderly
made, Gras. 25. n. 4. and Boer. q. 23. n. 88. and Ludo. Decis. 1. nu. 13.
otherwise not. Bald. and. Angel. in dict. L. furiosum.
For in this case, the least word sounding to folly is sufficient to induce a
presumption that the Lunatic person had no intermission of perfect Reason and
sound Memory at the making of such Testament; for one foolish word in that case
may frustrate the validity of the whole. Angel. ibid.
But if a man who is of good and perfect Memory, makes his Will, and
afterward by the visitation of God, he becomes of unsound Memory (as every man
for the most part before his death is) this Act of God shall not be a
Revocation of his Will, which he made when he was of good and perfect memory.
Cook. 4. part 124. Beverlyes Case.

3. Idiots are likewise excluded from making Testaments, nor may they dispose
either of their Lands, St. H. 8. an. 34. c. 5.
or of their Goods; Si hard. in Rub. C. qui test. sac. pos. nu. 16.
But he that only is of a mean capacity or understanding, or one who is as it
were betwixt a man of ordinary capacity and a fool, such an one is not
prohibited from making a Testament, Sino. de Pret. de interp. ^lt. vol. l. 2.
dub. (...)o. 4
provided that he has understanding enough to conceive what is the nature of a
Testament or Last Will, being well informed thereof; otherwise he being
destitute of such understanding is not fit to make a Will. Cook lib. 6. in Casu
Paulet. le Marq. de Winchest.
Here Note, that by the Laws of this Land, he that can measure a yard of cloth,
or rightly name the days of the week, or beget a Child, shall not be accounted
an Idiot or a Natural Fool; Term of Law verb. Idiot. and Stamford. de Prerogat.
Regis.
yet it will not be indisputably granted, that an Act so Natural as the
begetting of a Child can so qualify a Natural Fool as to render him in the
charitablest construction of Law Testable. For if he be such a Natural Fool, as
that though of Lawful Age, yet cannot declare of about what Age he is, nor
number twenty, nor knows his Natural Parents by their several names and
Relations, or the like easy questions, such an Idiot is undoubtedly
intestable. 3 Eliz. Die. 203, 204.
Notwithstanding all which, if it may appear by sufficient circumstances and
conjectures, that such Idiots had the use of Reason and Understanding at such
time as they did make their Testaments, then are such Testaments, good in Law.
Franc. in dict. L. Furiosum. and Mant. lib. 2. cap. 15.


4. Persons grown Childish by reason of old Age can no more make their
Testaments then Children; Simo. de Praetis. de interpretat. ult. vol. lib. 2.
Dub. 1. Sol. 4. nu. 22.
yet old Age alone does never deprive a man of the power of making his
Testament: l. Senium. C. qui testa. fac. poss.
But when a man, by reason of extreme old Age, is become even a Child again in
his Understanding, or rather in the want thereof, or by reason of extreme old
Age, or other infirmity is become so forgetful, that he now knows not his own
Name, he is then no more fit to make a Testament then is a Natural Fool, or
Child, or Lunatic person. l. sin. C. de h^red. instit.


5. Such as are Drunk, during the time of their being Drunk can make no
Testament that shall be good in Law: Vasq. de Succes. crea. l. 2.. 13. Requis
7. nu. 8. and S^mo. de Praetis. ubi supra. l. 2. Dub. 1. Sol. 4. nu. 22.
yet understand this, as only when he is so excessively drunk, that he is
altogether deprived for the time of the use of Reason and Understanding, being,
according to the Flaggon-phrase, as it were dead-drunk; for if he be but so
drunk, that his Understanding is but somewhat clouded and obscured, and his
Memory but troubled, he may in that case make his Testament, and it may be good
in Law. Idem Vasq. and Simo. de Praet ubi supra.


6. A. Executor of J. S. brought an Account against B. as Receiver of the
moneys of the said J. S. upon Ne unque Receiver pleaded: It was found for the
Plaintiff, and Judgment given, that he should Account; and being in Custody
upon a Capias ad Computandum; he was found in Arrearages, and his body taken in
Execution. Afterward the Will was made void in the Ecclesiastical Court, for
that the said J. S. was an Idiot from his birth; which being certified by Writ
into the Chancery, and thence by Mittimus into B. R. an Audita Querela was
brought by B. setting forth all the said matter, whereupon the Court demurred.
3 Eliz. Dyer. 203. vid. Cook. 8. part. 147. in Dr. Drurie's Case. in H(...)
Abridgment, verb. Wills and Testaments.
It was said by Cook, That in 35 H. 8. It had been Adjudged, That in that Case
the Audita Querela did well Lie.

The Marquess of Winchester, by his Will in writing (as supposed) Devised
diverse Manors to his Reputed Sons, Devising further, that they should sell
diverse Manors, and also bequeathed Plate, and other Legacies to them. This
Will was assayed to be Proved in the Prerogative Court; but it appearing by
circumstances, the said Marquess to be Non compos mentis at the time when the
supposed Will was made, it was moved for a Prohibition in B. R. because a Will
touching Lands, and a Will concerning Goods were both mixed together; and that
in Case they should there proceed as to the Goods, the same would prevent the
Trial in the Kings Bench, where a Will for Land shall be Tried; for which
Reason a Prohibition in that Case was generally (21) Trin. 31. Eliz. in B. R.
Cook. 6. part. 23. The Marquess of Winchesters Case in Hughs Abridgment. ibid.
awarded. 2. In that Case it was resolved, That a Testator at the making of his
Will ought to be of a memory, not only to answer to ordinary and familiar
questions, but also to have a disposing memory, so as to be able to make a
disposition of his Lands with Reason and Understanding; and that That is such a
memory, which the Law calls Sanae Memoriae.

CHAP. IX. Of Persons Intestable for want of Freedom or Liberty.
1. Of Villains. 2. Of Captives. 3. Of Prisoners.
1. Villains are Intestable, if their Lord by Entry and Seizing take and enjoy
all their Lands and Goods, Broo. Abridg. tit. Villen. and Perk. tit. Grants.
fol. 6.
otherwise their Wills are not void, but by such Entry and Seizing before
Probate they become voidable; Dr. and Stu. l. 2. c. 42.
Except of such Goods, whereof such Villains were Executors to others; for of
such Goods they may not only make their Wills, Broo. ibid. nu. 73.
but also maintain actions even against their Lords, in case they should take
from them such goods as they have by Executorship. Ibid. nu. 68.
But of this there is little or no use with us now here in England, as in
former times.

2. A Captive, during the time of his Captivity, cannot make a Testament, l.
ejus qui ff. de Testa. and Brac. lib. 2.. 16. n. 5.
yea, though he afterward make an escape, yet the Testament made during the
Captivity is void; Dict. L. eius qui.
but if it were made before his Captivity, then after his escape or enlargement
it shall be as good in Law as if he had not been Captive at all. l. ratio. ff.
de Capti^. and Gras^. These. Com Opin.. testa. q. 25.
Likewise he that is alive and in Captivity (for the upholding of his Will
which he made in his Liberty) is feigned by a Legal fiction to be dead the hour
before he became Captive; so that if he dye in Captivity, yet is his Testament
so made before his Captivity allowed, and his Executor shall have all his Goods
as if he had died the day before his Captivity. l. lege Cornel. ff. de Testa.
Likewise if any person be taken by a Pirate, Turk, Infidel, or Christian, with
whom open War is not proclaimed, he so taken remains a Freeman in
construction of Law as to Testability notwithstanding such Capture, and
therefore his Testament made during such restraint shall be good. l. qui a
Latronib. ff. de Testa.


3. Persons condemned to perpetual Imprisonment cannot make a Testament; Panor.
in Rub. (...)tra. de Testa. and Gras. These. Com. Opin.. Testa. q. 28.
But a person imprisoned only for debt, or the like, is not thereby disabled to
make his Testament, Bald. in l. 1. Cod. Si quis aliq. test. prohib. nu. 5.
or is his Testament void, except it be made in the favor of him at whose Suit
the Testator is imprisoned, on purpose to extort the same from him. l. qui
carcerem. ff. quod metus causa. and Mant. sup. l. 1. tit. 7. n. 2.


CHAP. X. Of Women Covert.
1. Women Covert Intestable as to Lands. 2. They are Intestable as to Goods
without the Husbands License. 3. They are Testable as to Chattels by
Executrixship. 4. They are Testable as to things merely in action, whereof they
were not possessed during Coverture. 5. Whether they may accept Executrixship
without their Husbands consent, or the Husband Administer in case of their
refusal thereof. 6. Cases in the Law concerning this Subject.
1. THat Women Covert are Intestable for want of Freedom is not such a general
Rule in Law as to exclude all exceptions. It is true, a married woman cannot
make her Testament of any Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, Stat. 34 H. 8. c.
5.
specially she cannot devise the same to her Husband, (...)ook. Abridg. tit.
Devise. nu. 32, 34.
though she were not thereto constrained by him, but would do it of her own
accord freely and voluntarily, and though such Testament were made before her
Marriage with such Legatary-husband. Arg.. alio* Inst. quib. mod. testa. infir.
And albeit the Wife survive the Husband, yet the Testament made during
Coverture is not good. c. non firmatur. de (...). jer. 6. l. 1.. 1. de Legate. 3.
But yet if after her Husbands death she approve and confirm such Testament,
made under Coverture, then this new Consent or new Declaration of her Will
makes the Devise good. l. 1.. 1. ff. de Legib.
Also, if the Testament were made before Marriage, and she outlive her
Husband, it shall be good. Plowd. in Cas. inter Brett and Rigden. f. 343.
Also, where power of selling the Testators Land is given to a Wife-Executrix,
there she may sell even to her own Husband, Stat. 10. H. 7. c. 20.
or to whom she please.

2. Of Goods and Chattels the Wife cannot make her Testament without her
Husbands License; Bract. de leg. and Cons. Angl. l. 1. c. 20. and Broo. tit.
Devise nu. 34.
for all the Goods and Chattels which the Wife had at the time of marriage,
Tract. de Rep. Angl. l. 3. c. 6. and Dr. and Stud. l. 1. c. 7.
and all the Chattels real (if he survive the Wife) belong unto the Husband by
virtue of the said marriage. Dr. and Stud. ibid.
Yet by the Husbands License she may make her Testament even of his Goods,
Lynwood. c. Statutum. verb. de Testa. l. 3. and Bract. l. 2. c. 26. and Broo.
tit. Devise. nu. 34.
yea, though the Husband understand not of his Wifes Will, yet if after Probate
thereof made by the Executors he deliver them the Goods therein Devised, he
thereby ratifies the Testament, though he were not privy to the making thereof;
Perk. tit. Devise. cap. 8. fol. 97.
for the Goods being once delivered by him according to the tenor of the Will,
it is then too late for him to revoke the same; Ibid.
Otherwise notwithstanding his License given her to make a Will of his Goods,
he may revoke the same at any time before the Probate thereof. Brook. ubi supra.
Or otherwise having made her Will by her Husbands License, he may choose
whether he will suffer it to be Proved; for his Consent is necessary as well to
the Approbation as to the first making thereof. And this extends also to the
Goods which she had in her own right before marriage, for thereby immediately
all Chattels personal, and Goods moveable are so divested out of her into her
Husband, that although she survive him, yet they return not to her again, but
go to her Husbands Executor or Administrator.

3. Touching Goods which she has as Executrix to another the Case is
otherwise, for such do (whether she or her Husband live or die) still remain in
and to her only, whereof she may make her Will without her Husbands consent,
Fitzh. Abridg. tit. Exec. nu. 20. and Brook eod. tit. nu. 11. and Perkins. tit.
Devise. c. 8. fo 97. and Stat. 12. H. 7. cap. 24.
and him (if she please) Executor, for otherwise he may not have them after his
Wifes decease, Offle. of Exec. cap. 7. and. Cos. Apol. par. 1. c. 3.
because of such goods (the Wife dying without will) the next of Kin to the
Wifes Testator may take the Administration, as de bonis non Administratis.
Offi. Exec. ubi supra.
And here Note, that though the Wife being Executrix to another, may without
her Husbands License make her Testament of such Testators Goods, yet she may
not bequeath them by Legacy without making an Executor. Plowd. int. Grimsby and
Grantham. fo. 525.
But if the Wife be made as well Legatary as Executrix, and she accept of the
Testators Goods, not as Executrix but as Legatary, in this case she cannot
dispose of the said Goods by Will or otherwise without the Husbands consent;
for by accepting them as Legatary she makes them her own, and consequently her
Husbands. Tract. de Rep. Angl. l. 3. c. 6.
And Note further, that although the Wife being Executrix, may without her
Husbands License make her Testament of such Goods whereof she is possessed as
Executrix, yet the fruit and profit arising (during the Marriage) out of such
Goods shall accrue to her Husband, and not unto her self as Executrix; so that
without her Husbands approbation she can make no Testament of such fruits and
profits so arising. Swinb. part. 2.. 9. nu. 21. and part. 3.. 6. n. 17.
And if it does not appear whether the Wife accepted the same as Executrix or
as Legatary, she shall by the Laws of this Land, (herein not agreeable to the
Civil Law) be deemed and presumed to have accepted the same as Executrix.
Plowd. in Cas. inter Paramor and Yardly and Dyer, fol. 277. An. Eliz. 10.
Q. The ground or reason of such presumption.

4. A Wife without her Husbands License or Consent may make her Testament of
such Goods and Chattels whereof she was not possessed during marriage, and as
to such things she may make her Husband Executor if she please. Broo. Abr. tit.
Test. n. 11. and Fitzh. Abr. tit. Execut. n. 109.
And the Husband cannot by Will bequeath or make an Executor of an Obligation
which he has in right of his Wife, nor of any other thing merely in Action. Le
Abr. dez Cases. edit. 1599. incerto Authore. q. 1. and 7 H. 6. fol. 2.
For debts or things in Action are not divested out of the Woman into the
Husband by marriage, yet she cannot make an Executor thereof without her
Husbands assent; Offic. Execut. cap. 17. Sect. 1.
for during her life he may receive them or release them, though after her
death he shall not be entitled to them, unless his Wife make him Executor
thereof, or after her death he take the Administration of her Goods, whereby he
then becomes liable for her debts out of the same when he shall have received
them. Ibid. and 12 H. 7. fol. 22.
And thus also Chattels real are not so divested out of the Woman into the
Husband by marriage, but that she surviving him, and no alteration made of the
property in her lifetime by her Husband (who had then power to dispose thereof
though not by Will) they continue to her and remain in her as before marriage;
Ibid. Offic. Exec.
yet such a Woman in her Husbands lifetime could not without his consent make
her Will touching such Real Chattels, but he surviving her they would by the
operation of Law accrue unto him. Ibid.


5. As without the Husbands consent the Wife may not make her Will, so likewise
without his consent she may not take upon her the Office of an Executrix: Ibid.
cap. 16. Sect. 1.
But if once the Will be proved, and the Execution thereof committed to the
Wife, though against the Husbands mind and consent, probably it may stand good.
Also the Wives Administering without the Husbands privity, though no Will be
proved, will probably bar the Husband as well as her self from pleading in any
Suit commenced against them, That she neither was Executrix, nor ever
Administered as Executrix. On the other side, if a married Woman named Executrix
refuse the Execution of the Will against her Husbands mind and desire, it is
supposed the Law will not fix the Executrixship upon her against her Will; yet
the Husband may Administer and Prove the Will for his Wife. 33 H. 6. c. 31.
Also if the Husband (no Will being Proved) does Administer in his Wifes right
but against her Will, This notwithstanding her dissent will so bind her, that
during her Husbands life she can hardly decline the Executrixship, for that by
the Law of the Land she cannot be sued alone as Executrix, and being sued with
her Husband she must join in Plea with him, whereby the Administration by her
Husband will conclude her also, 3 H. Rot. 112.
but not so after his death, for then she may refuse. 1 Eliz. Dyer. 166.


6. If a Feme Sole make a Will, and after take a Husband, the same is a
Revocation thereof: For the making of a Will is but the inchoation or inception
thereof, which has no effect till the Testators death, Because, Omne
Testamentum morte consummatum est, and voluntas est ambulatoria usque ad
extremum vitae exitum: And Cook. 4. Part. 61. in Forse and Hemblings Case.
Hughs Abridg. Verb. Wills and Testaments.
therefore it being no perfect Will when she takes a Husband; and after
marriage, her Will being her Husbands, and subject to it by her taking a
Husband, she has wholly revoked the Will formerly made by her.

Debt upon an Obligation, the Condition was, Whereas the Defendant had taken A.
S. to Wife, who was a Widow, being possessed of diverse Goods; if he would
permit his said Wife to make a Will, and to dispose in Legacies so much as she
would, not exceeding fifty pound, and perform what she appointed, That then,
etc. The Defendant pleaded, that she did not make a Will; whereupon Issue was
joined; it was found, that she made a Will, and thereby disposed of diverse
Legacies, not exceeding fifty pound, but that she was a Feme Covert at the time
of the making of the Will: In this Case it was adjudged for the Plaintiff. For,
although she being a Feme Covert, could not in Law be permitted to make a Will
to dispose of any Goods without the Husbands assent; yet it is a Will within
the intent of the Condition; for it Mich. 5 Car. in B. R. Mariot and Kingman's
Case. Croo. 1. Part. 159. and Hughs Abridg. Verb. W(...)s and Testaments.
was in the intent of the Condition, That she should make a Will to that
purpose, notwithstanding the Coverture; and it is but her appointment, which
the Husband by his Obligation is bound to perform; and the finding that she was
a Feme Covert, was not in this Case material.

If a Feme Covert make a Testament, and Devise Goods to another, 26 Ed. 3. 71.
Rolls Abridg. tit. Devise G.
and the Husband after her death deliver the Goods to the Devisee accordingly,
it will bind him.

A Defendant Covenanted by Indenture with the Plaintiff, That Pasch. 26 Eliz.
C. B. Eston verse. Wood. Cro. par. 3. (...) 9.
whereas he intended to marry E. S. a Widow, That he would pay all the Legacies
which she by her Last Will in writing, bearing date 1 May 20 Eliz. did give and
bequeath, and was bound by Obligation to perform the Covenants in the
Indenture. In Debt upon the Obligation the Defendant pleaded, that after the
making of the Will and the Obligation, he intermarried with the said E. S.
which marriage continued till her death; so the Will and Devise of E. S. was
void, and demanded Judgment, etc. And it was adjudged that the Plaintiff shall
recover. For notwithstanding it was not a Will to all intents and purposes, yet
the Indenture refers to that which did bear the name of a Will; And although
it was not a Will indeed, it was not material.

A Feme Covert Executrix may without her Husbands consent Mich. 8 Jac. B.
Graunt's Case, per Curiam. Roll. Abridg. tit Devise.
make an Executor of those Goods she has as Executrix. Likewise she may make
an Executor of the Things in Action due to her.

A Woman Covert may make a Testament if her Husband agree Ibid. Roll. Abr. tit.
Devise.
to it after her death. And such, albeit she be an Executrix, cannot Devise any
of the Goods she has as Executrix, without her Husbands consent or his
agreement to it afterward; yet she may make an Executor thereof without his
consent. Likewise a Feme Covert cannot Devise things in Action which she has,
without the consent and agreement of her said Husband.

If a Woman Covert die Intestate, Administration may be committed Roll. Abridg.
tit. Executor. E.
of her Goods, for possibly she had things in Action, which are not given by
the Law to her Husband. D. 8 Eliz. 251. 90. Admit.

CHAP. XI. Of Persons Intestable by reason or for want of their Principal
Senses.
HE that is both Deaf and Dumb by Nature can make no Testament or Last Will, L.
discretis. C. qui testa. fac. poss. and. item Surdus. Inst. quib. non est
permis. fac. test.
except it may appear upon good and sufficient ground that he does understand
what a Testament means, and also that he has Animum Testandi; for if so, then
he may by plain significative tokens and signs declare his Testament. Decius in
dict. l. discretis. and Tyraq. de Privil. piae Cause. c. 9.
But in case he be Deaf and Dumb only by accident, he may (if he be able) write
his Testament with his own hands; Dict.. item Surdus. Inst. quib. non est
permiss. fac. testa.
or otherwise, not being able to write, yet having understanding, he may, as
the other, make his Will by signs, else not at all. Dec. and Tyr. ubi supra.
Such as are only Deaf and not Dumb may make their Testaments. Mynsing. in
dict.. item Sordus.
Also such as are Dumb and not Deaf may write their own Testaments if they can,
otherwise they may make them by good and sufficient signs well known to the
Witnesses then present. DD. in dict. l. discretis.
Also a Blind man may make a Nuncupative Testament before a sufficient number
of Witnesses, but not a Written Testament, unless the same being read to him
before Witnesses he in their presence acknowledge the same for his Last Will
and Testament; So that the bare acknowledging thereof to be his Last Will,
without hearing the same read unto him, is not sufficient. DD. in l.
consultissi na Cod. qui testa. fac. poss.


CHAP. XII. Of Persons Intestable by reason of some Criminal Convictions.
1. Traitors Intestable from the time of the Crime committed. Before the world
was gone too far from its Primitive State of prudent frugality, and when
debauehery was no virtue, nor prodigals, nor infamous libellers were Testable,
as to the making or proving of a Will. l. is cui. and Gloss. ibid. ff. qui
test. fac. poss. If a man criminally indicted, die before he be condemned, his
Testament is good. Pendente processu capitali, non impeditur quis facere
Testamentum. -- Rub. in l. si quis. ff. qui test. fac. poss. Where no property
in goods or lands, there no ability to Devise.
2. Felons not Intestable before Conviction. 3. Heretics Intestable till they
reclaim their Heresy. 4. Apostates Intestable. 5. Incestuous Intestable,
saving to their Parents and Children. 6. Sodomites are Intestable. 7.
Self-murderers Intestable under Limitations. 8. Outlaws and Excommunicates not
absolutely Intestable. 9. Outlawry in an Intestate no good Plea in Bar to a
Creditors Action against his Administrator.
1. Traitors are Intestable, for they lose both their Lives, Lands and Goods,
whereof they were possessed at the time of the Treason committed, or at any
time after. Stat. 5 Ed. 6. cap. 11.
Insomuch that Traitors are Intestable, not only from the time of their
Conviction, but also from the time of the Crime committed; So that the
Testament before made does by reason of the conviction become void both in
respect of Goods, and also of Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments. Stat. ibid.
and DD. in l. nemo. de legib. and l. quisquis l. 1. c. ad leg. Jul. Majest. and
l. si quis de injust. Test. and Stat. 1 R. 3. cap. 3.
Howbeit a Traitor that is pardoned and restored may make his Testament. L. si
quis. quatenus ff. de injust. rupt. and irrit. testamentis.
Neither shall such Goods as the Traitor has as Executor to another be
forfeited; whence it follows, that of such Goods he may make his Testament;
which also extends to persons Out-lawed for Debt, also to persons attainted or
convicted of Felony. Stat. 32 H. 6. cap. 34.


2. Felons are likewise intestable being lawfully convicted, for the Law has
otherwise disposed of their Lands and Goods: Eliz. An. 5. cap. 14. and terms of
Law. verb. robbery.
But if a man be only Indicted of Felony, and die before his Conviction or
Attainder, he may make his Testament both of Goods and Lands: Stat. 1 Rich. 3.
c. 3.
Or being Indicted, and thereon Arraigned stands Mute and Dumb, and will not
Answer, in this Case he forfeits only his Goods, Dr. and Stud. lib. 2. (a). 41.
and therefore may make a Testament of his Lands. Quia non prohibetur quod non
condemnatur.
And here Note, that in respect of a Felons Lands the time of the Fact
committed is to be respected, but in respect of his goods the time of his
Judgment: Perk. tit. Grants. fol. 6.
So that he loses his Lands from the time of committing the Fact, but his
Goods only from the time of Conviction; insomuch, that at any time before his
Conviction he may bequeath, sell, or otherwise alienate his Goods and Chattels.
Brook, Forfeitures 5. 28. 65. 89. 103, 113, 117. and Cowels Instit. jur. Ang.
lib. 2. tit. 12.. 3.
Howbeit if he make his Testament before his Condemnation, it will be
frustrated and prevented by his Judgment. Panorm. in Rub. de Test. Extr. and
Jul. cla.. testa.
So that the Testament of a Felon convicted is void, though he be never
Executed; void even by force of the Condemnation, Ib. and Gras.. testa. q. 26.
and Vasq. de Success. lib. 1.. 6. n. 18.
unless he afterward does obtain his pardon. dict. l. si quis.. quantus.


3. Heretics, if they be Convicted, or publicly Excommunicated, cannot make a
Testament of their Goods and Chattels: Auth. Credentes C. de Haeret. and
Lynwood. c. 1. de Haeret. and Vasq. Bart. and alii. in dict. Auth. Credentes.
But if they reclaim their Heresy, they are not Intestable.

4. Apostates, or they who do wholly renounce the Christian Faith which once
they did profess, and do become Jews, Turks, or Infidels, are worthily excluded
by the Law from being capable of making a Last Will or Testament. l. 1, 2, 3.
C. de Apost and Sum. Host. tit. de Apost.. qualiter.


5. Incestuous persons are prohibited to dispose of any Goods or Chattels by
Will, saving to their Children begotten in marriage, that is, in lawful
marriage; or to their Parents, Brothers, Sisters, Unkles or Aunts. l. si quis
C. de incest. nuptiis.
Where by Parents understand all of each Sex in the right Line ascending, and
by Children all of each Sex in the same Line descending. Accurs. Bald. and alii
in dict. L. si quis.


6. Sodomites, or such as are guilty of that wicked and abominable sin against
Nature, mentioned in the Holy Scripture, Genesis cap. 19.
are intestable, and prohibited to bequeath their Goods or Chattels. Spec. de
Inst. edit.. Compendioso. nu. 5.


7. Self-murderers, or such as wilfully destroy themselves are intestable; l.
si quis filio.. ejus. ff. de test. and L. 2. C. qui test. fac. poss.
nor can they make any bequest of their Goods, for they are all Confiscate.
Vasq. de Succes. Resol. l. 1.. 3. nu. 31. and Bract. L. 3. tract. 1. c. 31.
Yet there are Those who distinguish between the kinds, or rather the occasions
of Self-murder; viz. 1. That which is occasioned through the fear of Execution
of a Judgment of Condemnation. 2. That which is occasioned through a tired
sense of a long, tedious and irksome life. 3. That which is occasioned through
the pain and violence of some Disease. In the first case it is said they lose
like other Felons both Lands and Chattels; in the second, Chattels only; in the
third, neither Lands nor Chattels. Fleta. c. 36. in princip.


8. Outlawed persons, though outlawed but in an Action personal, forfeit all
their Goods and Chattels, Dr. and Stud. l. 2. c. 3. and terms of Law. verb.
utlegare.
and therefore cannot make any Testament thereof. Jul. Clar.. testa. q 19. Dr.
and Stu. l. 1. c. 16.
But the Outlawed for Felony, forfeiting their Lands as well as their Goods
and Chattels, cannot make any Testament of either. Terms of law, verb.
utlegat(...)
Though the Outlawed only in an Action personal may make his Testament of his
Lands; yet not so of his Goods and Chattels. And as for Excommunicate persons,
if they be excommunicated for Heresy, or other cause which renders them in it
self legally intestable, in such cause they cannot make a Testament, otherwise
it is for the most part held they may. Swinb. part. 2.. 22.


9. An Action of Debt was brought against J. S. as Administrator of J. D. The
Defendant pleaded that the Intestate was Outlawed at the Suit of J. N. after
judgment; and so being Outlawed died Intestate. It was resolved, That the
Plea was not good; for it is but a Plea by Implication, that he has not any
Goods; and so but Argumentative. Vid. 37 H. 6. 27. by Prisoit. acc.
And Trin. 37 Eliz. in C. B. Rott. 2954. Wolley and Bradwells Case was vouched
to be adjudged accordingly; and therefore the Court upon the view of the Record
in Wolleys Case gave judgment, that in the Principal Case it was no Plea.
Mich. 20 Jac. in C. B. Bullen and Gervis Case. Hutton. 53.


If Debt be brought against an Executor, and he pleads, that his Testator was
and died Outlawed; it was holden in that case, that this does not prove a
Nullity of the Will, for then he might have pleaded, that he was never
Executor; but it tends only to this, that no Goods did come to his hands for
satisfaction of the Testators Debt, by reason of the Out-lawry. Vid. 49 E. 3.
5. 29. Ass. 63. 33 H. 6. 27. acc. In Hughs Abridg. Verb. Wills and Testaments.
Mich. 43, 44. Eliz. B. R. inter Shaw and Cutteresse per curiam. Roll. Abridg.
tit. Execut. N. Co. 5. Marshes Case 111. Roll. ib.


A man Outlawed to a personal Action may make Executors; for he may have Debts
upon Contract, which are not forfeited to the King. Consequently for the same
reason Administration of such a man's Goods may be granted.

If an Exigent for Felony be awarded against a man, whereby he loses all his
Goods, yet he may make Executors to reverse it, for there he is not attainted:
So Administration of such a man's Goods may be also granted.

CHAP. XIII. Of Conditional Testaments.
1. When a Testament may be said to be Conditional. 2. What words sufficient to
express or imply a Conditon. 3. The difference between Conditio and Modus.
1. THe Testament may then be said to be Conditional, when the Executor is
therein Conditionally assigned and appointed, for the assignation of the
Executor is the Life and Soul of the Testament. Now the assignation of the
Executor is conditional, when such a suspensive quality is added thereto, as
thereby the effect of the disposition is for the time impeded, and depends on
some future event. Sichard. in Rub. de Inst. and Subst. C. nu. 1. and Grass.
These. Com. Op.. Legatum. q. 46.


2. Many and diverse are the words which do express or imply a condition in a
Last Will or Testament, whereby the Testament it self, or the disposition of
the Testator therein becomes conditional. Such are the words following; viz.
[if, when, whiles, which, what person, who, whosoever, and sometimes the
Ablative case absolute.] Also these words following, viz. [except, unless,
otherwise, until, whenever, as much as, in as much as, for as much as, seeing
that, to which end, to the end that, for this purpose, so far as, so long as;]
also prepositions, when they serve to, or govern the Accusative Case, as [By
and To] yea and when they govern the Ablative Case, as [With] if it so appears
to be the Testators meaning. And in a word, every part of Speech whatsoever it
be, that suspendeth the disposition of the Testator in expectation of some
future event, does either express or imply a Condition. Bart. in L. 1. ff. de
condition ib. and Demonstrat. and Mant. de Conject. ult. vol. lib. 10. tit. 5.
and Sichard. ubi supra. C. nu. 4. and Vasq. de Success. progress. lib. 3.. 29.
nu. 3. in fine. and Bart. in L. si Titio. ff. quando dies Legate. cedit. and L.
si ita Scriptum ff. de legate. 20 and Ripa in l. Centurio. ff. de vulg. and
pupil. Subst. nu. 160, 161. and Dyer fol. 74. nu. 16. and Alex. Consil. 185.
lib. 2.


3. Conditio is an annexed Quality, which so long as it depends unperformed,
hinders the effect of the disposition. Bald. and Sichard in Rub. C. de
Instit. and Subst.
And Modus is a moderation whereby a charge or burden is imposed by the
Testator in respect of some commodity, which hinders not the effect of the
disposition in so strict and exact a manner as Conditio does. And as Conditio
is commonly known by the word [if] so Modus for the most part is known by the
word [that] Bart. in l. quib. dieb.. Termilius ff. de Cond. and Demon.


CHAP. XIV. Of the several kinds of Conditions incident to Testaments.
1. The distinction of Conditions. 2. The Law of Possible Conditions. 3. The
Law of Arbitrary, Casual, and mixed Conditions. 4. The Law of Affirmative and
Negative Conditions. 5. Conditions Impossible, Unlawful and Captious, are
ineffectual. 6. Necessary Conditions, of no force in Law.
1. AS many and various are the words and expressions which are as the signs
and landmarks of a condition: so no less manifold are the divisions and
subdivisions in the Law of Conditions themselves; but as to our purpose we
shall content our selves with a few, and reduce them all to these following;
viz. Conditions are either, 1. Possible, and they are either Casual, Arbitrary,
or mixed; which consist either in Chancing, Giving, or Doing, and are either
Affirmative or Negative. Or 2dly Impossible either in respect of Nature, of
Law, of Persons, or of Contrariety. Or 3dly Necessary, and that in respect
either of Fact or of Law. And thus all Conditions relating to this subject may
be reduced to one of these Three Heads, viz. either Possible, Impossible, or
Necessary. Sichard. in dict. Rub.
As for Captious and Unlawful Conditions, they fall in construction of Law
under the second head of this distinction.

2. Possible Conditions must first be accomplished before the effect can take
place, l. qui heredes. ff. de Condit. and demonst.
unless it sticks not with, nor may be imputed to the party on whom the
Condition lies, wherefore such Condition is not performed; for in such Case the
Condition will be accounted as accomplished, specially if the Condition be
Arbitrary, and the party not in Mora nor Culpa why the same is not indeed
accomplished. And here Note, that every Possible Condition ought to be
precisely observed or performed; neither is it sufficient, save in some cases,
to accomplish the same by any other means, or in any other manner than is
prescribed; Gloss. and DD. in l. si quis haered. C. de Inst. and Subs.
unless it may appear that the Testator did more respect the end than the
means; Mantic. de conject. ult. vol. lib. 10. tit. 16. n 3.
or unless the party in whose favor such Condition was made does consent unto
other means; Simo. de Praetis. de interpret. ult. vol. l. 1. sol. ult. nu. 34.
or unless the Condition be when something is disposed in pios usus, or unless
the Law allows other means than the precise form which is prescribed. And
whereas it is true in Law what has been said, That when it does not stand by
him to whom the Condition appertains, wherefore the Condition is not
performed, it ought to be for the most part accounted as accomplished, l. cum
non Stat. etc. imputari. de Reg. jur.
though indeed and in truth it remains unaccomplished; and whereas this is
generally true when the Condition is merely Arbitrary, l. que sub Condit.. 1.
ff. de Condit. Instit.
and the party to whom the Condition was enjoined not in fault, wherefore the
Condition is not accomplished; so as that an impediment shall be said to excuse
a man from delay in the matter of performance of Conditions; DD. in l. quod te
ff. si cert. pet.
yet notwithstanding all this, when the impediment may be foreseen and
prevented, such impediment shall not excuse him who does not avoid the same.
Gloss. and DD. ibid. and Zas. in l. continuus.. illud. ff. de verb. Obligat.
But when the impediment of performing a Condition does proceed from the
Testator himself, then the Condition is reputed for complete though not
accomplished; and in that case it shall prejudice neither the Executor nor the
Legatary. DD. in l. milites.. ult. ad ^eg Jul. de ^dal.
In like manner when the impediment does proceed from a third person, the
Condition is to be accounted in Law for accomplished, Bart. in l. in test. ff.
de Cond. and De ^on.
unless such third person were ignorant of the Testators Will. Maatic. l. 11.
tit. 16. nu. 22.
But when the performance of a Condition is hindered by the Will and Providence
of God, there the Law does not allow any feigned performance, Ibid. nu. 23.
except it be in favor of Liberty from Bondage l. libertatem. ff. de Manum.
or Alimentation, or ad pias causas, Tyraq. de Privil. piae Cae. c. 57.
or except the Qualification be not Conditional but only Modal. Grass. These.
Com. Op.. Legate. q. 58.


3. Arbitrary Conditions, that is, such as consist in his Power on whom they
are imposed, ought not to be performed till after the Testators death, l. 2.
ff. de Cond. and demon. and l. si quis heredem. C. de Instit. and Substit.
unless the Condition be such as cannot be iterated, for in that case it is
sufficient that the same was performed in the Testators lifetime, even before
the making of the Testament; l. si jam facta. and l. haec conditio. ff. ibid.
or unless the Condition be referred to the time past. l. talis. ff. ibid.
Also an Arbitrary Condition imposed upon an Executor may be performed at any
time during the Executors life, and he meanwhiles enjoy the Executorship. l. si
quis instituatur.. 1. ff. de haered. instit.
This holds true, unless the Judge assign a certain competent time for the
performance thereof; upon default whereof Administration may be committed as of
one dying Intestate, till the Condition be performed: Bart. Bald. and Paul. de
Castro. in dict. l. si quis. and dict.. 1.
But if such Condition does appertain to a Legatary, then it must be performed
so soon as conveniently he may, or else the Legacy is lost, l. haec conditio.
ff. de Cond. and demon.
unless the Legatary were ignorant of such Condition or Legacy; for in that
case no prejudice shall accrue to him by reason of such ignorance. Bald. in l.
1. C. de Inst. and Subst. nu. 20.
And it is sufficient for the obtaining the effect of a Condition, that the
said Condition was once accomplished, though it does not continue so. Bart. in
l. Substit. ff. de vulg. Substit.
And although Arbitrary Conditions (as aforesaid) are not regularly performable
till after the Testators death, yet Conditions not Arbitrary but Casual or Mixed
are accounted as accomplished, though performed before the making of the
Testament, Provided the Testator were ignorant thereof: l. si jam facta. ff. de
Condit. and l. si quis haered. C. de Instit. and Substit.
But if the Testator were not ignorant thereof at the making of the Testament,
then it is otherwise, and the Condition remains to be performed. l. si ita
Scriptum ff. de Legib.
For when the Condition is merely Casual, the same is neither accounted for
accomplished nor extant in presumption or fiction of Law, neither for
unaccomplished or deficient, until the actual event of the same Condition does
first come to pass. l. unica.. sin autem. C. de Cad. tol.
Indeed an Arbitrary Condition is diverse times accounted for accomplished in
Law though not in Fact: but a Casual Condition is not accounted for
accomplished or extant in Law, unless the same be accomplished in fact also.
Ibidem.
And such must be accomplished before a Legacy can be due: And in case the
Legatary happen to die before the accomplishment of such Casual Conditions, the
Legacy is quite lost and cannot be transmitted to the Executors or
Administrators of such Legatary. l. liber.. si ita. ff. de haered. instituend.
And in Mixed Conditions it is in this case as in Conditions that are merely
Casual. Dict. l. si quis haeredem. C. de Instit. and Substit.


4. Again, of the Possible Conditions some be Affirmative, some Negative; when
the Condition is Affirmative, the Executor or Legatary cannot obtain the
Executorship or Legacy so long as Affirmative Condition depends unfulfilled,
though they should put in sufficient bond to make restitution in case the
Condition should be deficient, l. Mutian. ff. de Cond. and them.
unless such Affirmative Condition does secretly imply or contain a Negative,
l. pater.. Socrus. ff. ibid.
which consists in Doing or Giving; or when the Disposition is not made sub
Condition but sub Modo only: l. r. c. de his quae sub modo etc.
But when the Condition is Negative, the Party on whom the Condition lies may
be admitted to the effect of the Condition in the mean time, or during the
dependence of such Negative Condition, he first entering into Bond or Caution to
make restitution in case the Condition be not performed. l. Mutian. ff. de
Condit. and demon.
For if the Condition be Negative, consisting in not Doing of some thing, and
cannot be performed so long as the person lives, on whom it was imposed, then
may he obtain the Legacy by giving in caution to accomplish the Condition, or
not to do that which by the Condition was prohibited; otherwise in default
thereof to make full restitution. Ibidem.
But if the Negative Condition be such as may be performed during his life on
whom it is imposed, then is not such caution to be given. l. cum tali.. 1. ff.
ibid. and l. pater.. Socrus. ff. ibid.
And if ever a Negative Condition be reduced to an impossibility, it is then
accounted as accomplished, Gloss. and DD. in dict. l. Mutianae.
because it is then brought into such a state as that it is not capable of
being infringed. Also if the Negative Condition consist in not Chancing, then
likewise is the foresaid caution not to be admitted. Ibidem.
Lastly, when the Condition is Affirmative, then it is to be understood of the
first Act of performance only; but when the Condition is Negative, then not
only the First Act, but also Second, Third, and every other Act is perpetually
forbidden. l. hoc genus. ff. de Cond. and Demon.


5. Impossible Conditions, be it in either of the four former respects, viz.
either in respect of Nature, of Law, of Persons, or of Contrariety or
Repugnancy, are in themselves void, and work nothing as to any hinderance
either of Executorship or of Legacy; But the Condition which was not impossible
at first, yet becoming impossible afterward, is not void in it self, yet
makes void the disposition whereto it is annexed. Mantic. de Conject. ult.
vol. lib. 11. tit. 16. n. 23.
Also under this head fall all unlawful Conditions, and such as are contrary to
good manners; for what is unlawful to be done, the Law will have us to
understand as impossible to be done; and not only Conditions simply unlawful,
but also all Captious Conditions; for when the Condition is repugnant to the
nature of the disposition it self, it is then a Captious Condition, and is of
no force; for all Captious Conditions are void; so are all Captious Wills and
Testaments; as when the Testators will depends on the Will of another, it is
a Captious Will, and of no validity, l. illa. ff. de haered. instit.
unless it be in favor of Liberty, or ad pios usus. l. fidei commiss. ff. de
fidei commiss.


6. Necessary Conditions are all of no force, whether they be necessary in
respect of fact, or such as cannot but come to pass, or whether they be
necessary in respect of Law; for in vain does the Testator annex that as a
Condition to the disposition, which the Law requires without: for as in
construction of Law, that is deemed as impossible which the Law prohibits; so
likewise is that deemed as necessary which the Law absolutely requires;
therefore when the Condition is in either extreme, that is, either necessary or
impossible, such hinders not as to any suspension of the effect, but it is as
if any such Condition had not been at all expressed. l. si pupillus.. qui sub
Condition. De Novat.


CHAP. XV. Of Testamentary Conditions in reference to Marriage.
1. Conditions against the Liberty of Marriage, Unlawful. 2. Condition of
Marrying with the Consent of another how far Lawful, or not.
1. ALl Conditions against the Liberty of Marriage are unlawful; Vigel.
Method. jur. Civil. part. 4. l. 14. c. 3.
but if the Conditions are only such, as whereby Marriage is not absolutely
prohibited, but only in part restrained, as in respect of time, place or
person, then such Conditions are not utterly to be rejected. l. cum ita. and l.
hoc modo. and l. sed si.. cum vit. ff. de Cond. and demon.
Thus an Executor or a Legatary made on some Condition against the Liberty of
Marriage, may notwithstanding the nonperformance of such Condition obtain the
Executorship or Legacy: l. quoties. ff. ibid. and l. 2. C. de Indict. vid.
Yea if the Testator make one his Executor, or give him a Legacy upon condition
that he marry with the consent, and according to the good liking or appointment
of some other person, this condition is unlawful. l. cum tale.. si arbitratu.
ff. ib. and Gravet. Consil. 1. n. 3. and Mant. l. 11. tit. 18. nu. 8.
Insomuch, that if such Executor or Legatary marry contrary to such restraint
or condition, he shall notwithstanding be admitted to the Executorship, and
receive the Legacy, as if no such Condition had been expressed. Gravet. and
Mant. ibid. and Perkins de Test. Conjug. l. 1. c. 24. n. 6.


2. Notwithstanding what has been said, the Condition holds good, if the
Testator make one his Executor, or give him a Legacy if he marry not without
the Counsel or Advice of another person; so that the Testator giving him a
Legacy if he marry with the Counsel or Advice of another person, he is excluded
from the Legacy, if he marry without such Counsel or Advice; Mantic. ubi supra.
yet in this case he is not bound to follow such counsel or advice, but only to
request the same. Paul. de Cast Cons. 300. vol. 1. and Felin. in c. 10. part.
de Constit. Ext. Col. 2.
Again, although the condition of marrying with the consent of another is void,
so as the party on whom such condition is imposed, may obtain the Legacy
without such consent, yet marry he must, or he cannot obtain the Legacy; for
although the condition of such Consent be unlawful, yet must he marry before he
can pretend to the Legacy, because that part of the Condition is not unlawful.
Mant. de Conject. ult. vol. l. ^1. tit. 18. nu. 8.


CHAP. XVI. Of the manner of Proceeding during the suspense of the Conditions.
1. The Condition depending, Administration may be committed to the Conditional
Executor. 2. The Law what, in case the Condition be not performable by the
Executor, on whom it is imposed.
1. THat Creditors and Legataries may have Remedy during the suspense of the
Condition of the Executorship or Legacy, it is lawful for the Judge to commit
Administration to him that is conditionally assigned Executor, yet only for so
long time as the Condition depends and is not extant or else deficient; l. si
quis instituatur.. 1, 2. ff. de haered. instituend.
and when the Condition is extant, he may Prove the Will and detain the Goods
of the deceased, as Executor to the Will; but if the Condition be infringed or
utterly deficient, then ought he to make restitution to the next of Kin to the
deceased, or to those to whom belong the Administration of his Goods; l. 2.. si
sub Condition. ff. de bonor. possess.
for by breach or defect of the Condition the deceased is reputed to have died
intestate, or as if he had never made an Executor; l. haeres. ff. de acquir.
haeredit.
And the former Administration being forfeited, a new may be committed: l. si
quis instituatur. ff. de haered. instituen.
But if the Conditional Executor will not meddle with the Administration of the
deceased's Goods when the Condition is performable, then may the Judge assign
the Conditional Executor a competent time for the accomplishment of the
Condition, within which time if it be not performed by him, and if it be within
his power, it may be imputed for infringed or deficient, Provided that other
time for the performance of the Condition be not assigned in the Condition it
self. Bart. Bald. and Paul de Castr. in ff. de haered. insti^uend.
And in case of such infringement or deficiency Administration may be committed
according to the Statute as of one dying intestate. Stat. 21 H. 8. c. 5.
But if the Judge knowing of this Will does commit Administration to some other
without the Executors knowledge, or without appointing him some competent time
for the accomplishment of the Condition, then is the Administrator in hazard
of being sued by the Executor in an Action of Trespass, unless the Executor did
formerly refuse. Abridg. dez Cas. Edit. Anno 1599. tit. Administ, fol. 183. n.
1.


2. If the Condition be such as that it does not lie in the power of the
Executor to perform the same, then may the Judge at the Petition of the
Creditors assign a time to such conditional Executor to undertake the
Administration of the Goods, which if he neglect or refuse, then may the Judge
after such time elapsed commit the Administration to such as have Interest,
until such time as the Condition be either extant or deficient; or else (as
some think) the Judge may grant a Letter ad Colligendum to some other person
than the conditional Executor. But then Note, that such person as has such
Letter ad Colligendum, not being Administrator, the Actions which otherwise
might be brought against the Administrator, may now lie against the Judge.
Terms of Law. verb. Administ. and Broo. Abridg. tit. Ordinarii. nu. 13. and
Abridg. dez Cases, fol. 176. nu. 12.
And though the Judge may grant his Letter ad Colligendum, yet he has not
power to give Authority to sell any of the said Goods though perishable. Dyer.
fo. 256. and Abridg. ibid.
And if such person to whom such Letter ad Colligendum is granted, should by
virtue of such Power sell any of such the said Goods, he is suable as Executor
to his own wrong. Dyer. ubi supra.


CHAP. XVII. Of Testaments void.
1. By what means Testaments are void Originally. 2. By what means they become
void afterward. 3. Law-Cases pertinent to this matter.
1. A Testament may be Originally void or voidable wholly or in part through
some original defect: as thus; First, because the Testator is such a person as
cannot make a Testament. Supra, cap. 7.
Secondly, because the things bequeathed are not deviseable by Will. St. 27 H.
8. c. 20. and Dr. and Stu. l. 1. c. 8. and Perk. tit. devise 102.
Thirdly, because the manner of the disposition is unlawful. Supra, cap. 14..
5, 6.
Fourthly, because the person made Executor is incapable thereof. Infra, lib.
22. cap. 6.
Fifthly, because the Testator was compelled by fear, Bart. in l. fin. ff. si
quis aliq. testari prohibetur.
or circumvented by fraud, or overcome by immoderate flattery, Oldend. de
Actionib. clas. 5. fol. 518.
or induced by some other unlawful means to make his Will. Sixthly, because of
error, uncertainty or imperfection. Seventhly, because the Testator had not
Animum Testandi. l. Lucius. and l. Divus. ff. de Milit. Testa.


2. A Testament, though free from all Original fault, may yet afterward become
void. As first, by making of a later Testament.. posteriori. Inst. quib. mod.
testa. infirm.
Secondly, by cancelling or revoking that which is made. l. 1. ff. de his qui
test. del.
Thirdly, by some alteration of the state of the Testator.. alio. Inst. quib.
mod. testa. infirm.
Fourthly, by forbidding or hindering the Testator from making another
Testament, or from correcting the former. l. 1. and 2. ff. si quis aliq.
testari prohibetur.
Fifthly, by unwillingness or inability of him that is appointed Executor, when
he will not or cannot officiate as Executor. Sixthly, when the Executor cannot
be certainly known, there being diverse men of that name and no distinction
made; this A man makes a Testament without naming any Executor. This is good
for Land, but not for goods. Dyers Read. in Stat. of Wills. Sect. 2.. 3.
uncertainty of the Executor makes void the Will. Seventhly, when the Testator
does err in the person of the Executor; but in an error of the Name only, and
not of the Person it is otherwise, save in certain Cases hereafter limited.
Thus a Testament, though free from all Original fault, may yet afterward
become void; but a Testament originally void, can never afterward be made
good. Trin. 36. and Mich. 36, and 37 Eliz. Downhall verse. Catesby. Moo. Rep.
nu. 483.


3. Error upon a Judgment given against the Plaintiff in C. B. on a Formedon
in Remainder, upon special Verdict, and found that D. gave instructions for the
writing of his Will, to give his Lands to one of his Sons for life, and the
Scrivener by mistake wrote an Estate in Fee; and the Court agreed that the Will
was utterly void, because it was not the Will of the Testator. Yet it seemed to
Fenner Justice, that for so much as it may be, it should be; that is, for an
Estate for life, which was his Will: but all the other Justices were against
him.

In the Court of Wards between the Coheirs of Sir William Rider, The Case of
the Coheirs of Sir William Rider, in the Court of Wards. Moo. Rep. nu. 1222.
it was declared by Coke Chief Justice of the C. B. and Tanfield Chief Baron,
That if one make his Will in writing, and then says, I will alter it, or add
to it; that is not his Will, because it is not complete, or finished, nor
published for his Will, but is deferred or delayed till the Alteration or
Addition be made to it. And if the party die before such Alteration or
Addition, and without publishing it to be his Will, that Will is not his Will.
But if he make his Will, and publish it, and after it come to his mind to alter
or add to it, and he say that he will alter it, or add to it, but dies before
he make any Alteration or Addition, then the former shall be his Will.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Testamentary Revocations.
1. The several kinds of Revocations. 2. Revocations by Marriage. 3. Where two
Wills are found, and it be not known which was made First or Last, which shall
be presumed the Latter Will. 4. In what cases the former Will stands unrevoked,
notwithstanding the making of a Latter Will. 5. Cases in Law touching
Revocations.
1. REvocations may be either of Executorship or of Legacies, and that either
in whole or in part; and this may be either by Word or by Deed, or by Act and
Operation of Law, or by Marriage. The Testator at any time before his death
has power to revoke or alter his Will at his pleasure. Bald. in l. Sancimus.
C. de Testa. and Mant. de Conject. ult. vol. l. 2. t. 15.
And as a Will may be made by word only, so even a written Will may by word
alone be revoked and annulled. Offic. Exec.. de Revocat.
For by making a Nuncupative or Verbal Will one may revoke a written Will; yea
one may by word only express the alteration of his mind thus far, That the Will
by him formerly made, shall not stand but be revoked and annulled; and this
shall stand and be effectual; Ibid.
So that if he then die without making a new Will or new publication or
re-affirmance of the former, he dies intestate. But a Will advisedly made
shall not be nullified by doubtful speeches of the Testator without clear and
perspicuous Revocation, or words which tant amount. Crok. Rep. Cas. Eyres ers.
Eyres in C. B.
Nor can there be a Revocation of Legacies among Children without precise
mentioning the first Will, and the Legacies thereby given to the Children. The
Law is the same, when the Testator having no Children devises Legacies to his
Brothers. Ibid.
And as a Will may be wholly revoked, so also in part only. Also the
Executorship of one or more of the Executors may wholly or in part be revoked,
and yet the Will may stand good in all the other parts, so as there be any one
or more Executors left unrevoked; but if all the Executors be revoked, then the
whole Will is revoked. And this revocation (as aforesaid) may be by word only
without being expressed in the Will, or any other writing. Bald. Paul. de
Castr. Mantic. Alex. Jason. Din. cum multis aliis.
Likewise Revocations may be by Act and operation of Law as well as by Fact or
by any direct and express terms; as thus, when the Testator makes a Feoffment
to one man of the same Land by Deed, which he had formerly devised or
bequeathed to another by Will. 6. Ed. 6. Dyer. and Goldsb. Rep. in Cas. Gibson
verse. Platloss. and Crok. Rep. in cas. Hodghinson verse. Whood. in C. B.
Also if one bequeath his black horse by Will, yet afterward sells or gives
him away, and buyeth another black one; this latter black horse shall not pass
by the Will, because the Testator had him not at the time of making the Will,
as also because such his sale or gift of the former black horse was an actual
revocation of his Bequest or Legacy thereof. Offic. Exec. ubi supra.
The like of Corn in the Barn, or other thing whereof the Testator makes any
Act of Alienation contrary to the disposition thereof in his Will. Lastly,
although a Testator may by word revoke a Will made in writing that is good, yet
he cannot by word affirm a Will made in writing that in it self is void.

2. There are likewise Revocations by Marriage; as thus, If a Woman Sole make a
Will, and afterward take a Husband; this without any more shall work a
Revocation or Annullation. Ibid.
But in case the Husband be Bound or Covenanted to make good or perform the
Woman's Will, which if he afterward refuse to do, his Bond or Covenant stands
good against him, and is also Suable. M. 25, 26 Eliz.
Yet a married Woman cannot by word countermand and revoke her Will formerly
made when she was Sole and unmarried, by reason of the Coverture taking away
the freedom of her Will. And if the Husband does give his Wife License to make
a Will of his Goods, yet he may revoke the same, not only at the making of the
Will, but also after her decease, at least before the Will be Proved. Supra,
cap. 10.. 2.


3. No man can properly be said to die with two Testaments, except a
Field-Souldier in actual Service: l. quaerelatur. ff. de militari Testa.
yet a man may make two Testaments, and both stand good, and both be proved,
provided they be of and as touching distinct and several things, and the
Executors thereof limited accordingly, and the one no way derogatory to the
other; Offic. Exec.
But of the same things there can be but one Will, for the Last rescinds all
former Wills. l. posteriore. Inst. quib. mod. Testa. infir.
Yet a man may die with diverse Codicils, and the latter does not infringe the
former, so long as they be not contrary the one to the other. l. cum proponat.
C. de Codicil.
But if two Testaments be found, and it appear not which was the latter, both
are Null and Void: l. ult. and ibi DD. C. de Edict. Divi Adrian.
yet if one of them be made inter Liberos, or ad Pios Vsus, that shall be
presumed to be the latter, and so take place; yea, or if one of them be made in
favor of such as ought to have had the Administration in case of intestation.
Sichard. in dict. l. ult. and Mant. l. 2. t. 15. n. 17.
But if one of them be in favor of the Testators Children, or of them that
ought to have had the Administration, and the other be ad pios usus, In this
case if they that should have had the Administration be the Testators Children,
then that shall take place; Mant. lib. 6. tit. 3. nu. 48.
yet that ad pios usus shall have priority of a Testament of the same date made
in favor only of collateral Kindred. Idem per l. Sancimus. c. de Sacrosanct.
Eccl.
But if two Codicils be found, not appearing which was made First or Last, and
one and the same thing be given to one person in one Codicil, and to another
person in the other Codicil, in this Case the Codicils are not void; but the
persons therein made Legataries ought to divide the bequest equally betwixt
them. Gloss. and DD. in l. cum propenat. C. de Codicil. and Grass. These. Com.
Op.. Codicillus.


4. The former Will shall stand good and unrevoked notwithstanding a later
Will, in case the later Will be voidable by any ways or means whereby Wills
become void, and the former be without any such just exception;. ex eo. Inst.
quib. mod. Test. infirm. and l. Sancimus. C. de Test.
or in case it be justly suspected that the Testator was circumvented by fraud,
or compelled by violence to make that later Testament: Simo de Praetis. de
interpretat. ult. vol. lib. 4. fol. 226. nu. 46.
Or in case in the former Will there be inserted a clause derogatory of not
making any other Testament, and sufficient mention, or express revocation
thereof be omitted in the later; Gloss. in l. si mihi and tibi. ff. de Legibus.
For if in the former Testament there be a clause derogatory of Wills and
Testaments afterward to be made; as if the Testator says, Whatsoever
Testament I shall hereafter make, I will the same to be void and of no force:
In this case it is not infringed by a later Testament, unless in that later
there be mention thereof sufficiently made to amount unto a legal revocation of
that former Testament or clause derogatory. Ibid. and Jason in l. Horatius. ff.
de Liber. and posthum. Mich. 38, 39 Eliz. B. R. per Popham. Roll. Abridg. tit.
Devise. P.


5. If a man says, that he will revoke his Will hereafter which he has made,
that is not any revocation, without the doing of some other Act. Likewise, if
one says that he will make a Feoffment thereof to another, that is no
revocation before it be done: But if a man Devise Land to another by his Will
in writing, and after Devise it unto another per paroll, albeit that is void as
a Will, yet it is a revocation of the former Will.

If a Devisor alien the Land Devised, and afterward repurchase Roll. ibid. R.
the same Land, yet the Will is revoked as to that Land. 44 Ed. 3. 33. 44. Ass.
D. 3, 4 P. M. 143. 55. Contra. 2 R. 3. 3. b.

Trespass upon evidence, where one has made his Will in writing, Pasch. 4 Jac.
B. R. Sympson verse. Kirton. Cro. Rep. par. 2. Pl. 2.
and devised his Land to A. and her heirs; and afterward being sick and lying
upon his deathbed (because A. did not come to visit him) affirmed that A.
should not have any part of his Lands or Goods. It was held by all the Court,
that it was not any revocation of his Will, being but by way of discourse, and
not mentioning his Will. But the revocation ought to be by express words, that
he did revoke his Will, and that she should not have his Lands given unto her
by his Will, or such like words which might show his intent to make an express
revocation thereof.

Ejectione Firmae. Upon evidence to a Jury it was resolved by Mich. 16 Jac. B.
R. Fitzhugh Cranuel verse. Saunders. Cro. Rep. par. 2. Pl. 3.
the Court, and so delivered to the Jury, that if one makes his Will in
writing, of Land, and afterward upon Communication says, That he has made
his Will but it shall not stand; or, I will alter my Will, etc. These words are
not any revocation of the Will, for they are words but in futuro, and a
declaration what he intends to do; but if he says, I do revoke it, and bear
witness thereof; he does hereby absolutely declare his purpose to revoke it in
praesenti, and it is then a revocation: Also Mountague said to the Jury, and it
was not denied by any other of the Justices, That as one ought to be of a good
and sane memory at the disposing, so ought he to be of as good and sane memory
when he revokes it; And as he ought to make a Will by his own Directions, and
not by Questions; so ought he to revoke it of himself, and not by Questions.

CHAP. XIX. Of a Reviver of a Will Revoked.
1. How a Will Revoked may be Revived. 2. How an Executor Revoked may be
Revived. 3. How one may dye both Testate and Intestate.
1. OF a Will Revoked there may be a Reviver by a new publication of that
revoked Will; also a Will revoked may without making a New Will be revived and
set on foot again by annexing a Codicil thereunto, Tract. de Offic. Exec.. de
^o^ Publicat.
or by adding any thing to the Will; or by making a new Executor; or by express
speech and word, that it shall stand good and be his Will, yea, and sometimes
without either of these; as thus, A man makes his Will, many years after he
makes another, then in his sickness both these Wills are put into his hands,
and being demanded which of these Two he will have to stand for his Last Will
and Testament, and being required to deliver back that which he will have to
stand, and to detain the other in his hands, he delivers back the Will he first
made possibly many years before the later; In this case the former Will, though
once made void by the later, is now revived again, and shall stand as the
parties Last Will and Testament. Ibid. and 44 Ed. 3. sol. 33.


2. If one of the Executors Names be stricken out of the Will, and afterward a
[stet] be written over it by the Testator, or by his appointment, he is then a
revived Executor; but then Note, that if the [stet] shall stand good, the
Executors Name over which it is written, ought not to be so blotted out but
that it may be read and discerned, otherwise the [stet] is over nothing at all.
Or if the Testator express by word in the presence of witnesses, that the party
put out shall yet be Executor, he is then also a revived Executor. Lastly, if
the verbal re-affirmance renew the Executorship, then is the Will partly in
Writing partly Nuncupative, his Name not being to be found in the written Will;
for the appointing of the Executor does create the Will, though it has not
life till the Testators death; which is Divinity as well as Law. Heb. 9. 16, 17.


3. If a man seized of Lands in Fee-simple, dispose of the same, or part
thereof by his Will in writing, it shall stand good for the whole or part
according to the difference of Tenure, though no Executor be named or
appointed; Ratio est Stat. 32 H. 8. c. 1.
so that the party shall die Intestate as touching his Goods, whereof
Administration is to be committed, St. 31 Ed. 3. c. 11.
yet shall have a Will as touching his Lands, because Land is not properly
Testamentary. Offic. Exec. c. 1.. 1.
And so a Will may be good in part only. Goldsb. Rep. in Cas. Gibson verse.
Platloss.
But where the strictness of the Civil Law is observed, there a man cannot die
partly Testate and partly Intestate; Dec. Cognol. and Hier. Fran. in l. jus
nostrum. ff. de Reg. jur.
though here in England where that Ceremonial strictness is not observed, but
all immunities enjoyed, being not obliged to any other observance in making of
Testaments than what is Juris Gentium; Tract. de Rep. Angl. lib. 3. c. 7.
a man may thus and several other ways die partly Testate and partly
Intestate. Broo. Abrid. tit. Exec. and Plow. in casu inter Greisb. and Fox. and
Socin. Reg. and Fallen. Reg. 495. ubi 22 Casus in quib. pot. quis decedere pro
part Test. and pro part Intestatus.


CHAP. XX. Of the Probate of Testaments.
1. Where, and before whom the Will is to be proved. 2. By whom, and at whose
instance the Will is to be proved. 3. When is the Will to be proved. 4. How and
in what manner is a Will to be proved. 5. What are the Fees upon Probate of a
Testament. 6. Touching refusal to prove the Will.
1. EVery Last Will and Testament after the Testators death ought to be duly
Proved before a Competent Judge in the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. A Testament
or Last Will is to be Proved before the Bishop of that Diocese within which the
Testator had his Domicil or Habitation, or before his Official; unless by
Custom or Prescription within certain Lordships or Manors it appertains to
the Chief Lord; Fitzh. tit. Testam. nu. 2. and Dr. and Stu. l. 2. c. 28.
or unless the Testator died within some peculiar Jurisdiction, in which case
the Probation of the Testament may be Prescription or Composition belong to the
Judge of the peculiar; Jo. de Atho. in Legatin. Libertat. de Execut. Testa.
verb. Ordinario.
or unless the Testament be such as wherein only Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments and no Goods be devised; or unless the Testator had Bona
Notabilia at his death in diverse Diocesses; in which Case the Probation of the
Testament appertains to that Archbishop within whose Province such Bona
Notabilia are; Linw. in c. Statut. verb. ad quos pertinet. and Perk. tit.
Testam. fol. 94. and Fitzh. Abridg. tit. Adm. n. 7. and Brook. cod. tit. tit.
48.
Or unless by Custom it appertains to the Major of some Borough; for
ordinarily and regularly though Wills and Testaments are to be Proved before
the Judge of that Jurisdiction within which the Testator died, or rather within
which he had his usual habitation and made his last abode, Dr. and Stu. ubi
supra. and Perkins ubi supra. and Tract. de Rep. Anglicana. l. 3. c. 7. and 21
H. 8. c. 5.
yet some Testaments may be Proved in some Boroughs before the Major thereof by
Custom; where it shall be understood to be only in respect of the Burgages
within such places deviseable, but in respect of their Goods they shall be
Proved according to the Law Communi Forma^; Offic. Exec. c. 4.. 1.
and there only where the Lands are bequeathed; which is nothing strange, when
as aforesaid in some Manors by Prescription Testaments may be Proved before
the Stewards thereof, yea though no Lands be bequeathed therein. 2 R. 3. Fitz.
4. Coke lib. 9. fol. 43.


The Probate of Testaments did belong to Ordinaries but of later Times, de
Consuetudine Angliae and non de Communi Jure: and the power to grant
Administration was granted to the Ordinary, by the Stat. of 31 Ed. 3. cap. 11.
And before that time, the King was accustomed to seize the Goods of the
Intestate, to the intent they might be bestowed for the burial of the dead, and
the payment of the Intestates Debts, and the advancement of his Wife and
Children; and the Ordinary himself has not power to sell the Goods of the
Intestate, though they be in danger of perishing, nor release a Debt due to the
Intestate; by the Stat. of 31 Ed. Co. 9. part, Hens(...) Case.
3. The Commissary of the Bishop of the Diocese granted Letters ad colligendum
and ad vendendum ea quae peritura essent, and inde computum reddere; the
Grantee sold Goods which would not keep, but perished; and an action of Debt
was brought against him as Executor in his own wrong, and it was adjudged
maintainable, because the Ordinary himself had not such power; and therefore he
could not give it to another, 7 Eliz. Dyer, 256. Again, the practice has been
when Testaments have been Proved before other than such as are mentioned in the
Premises, as appears by this Case. A Testament is disproved in the
Ecclesiastical Court, and the party appeals to the Metropolitan, and it is
there disproved, and afterward there is an Appeal to the Court of Delegates,
and it is there disproved also; and at last the party appealed to the Queen in
Chancery, by the Stat. 25 H. 8. and there also it was disproved before the
Commissioners: And if the Queen ex Authoritate sua Regali might grant Letters
of Administration, was the Question. The Opinion of the Justices of the Common
Pleas, was, That she might, because the said Court of Chancery is the Highest
Court; and the matter being once there it cannot be determined in any Inferior
Court: and then the party may show in his Declaration generally the matter, and
that Administration was granted to him by the Queen Ex sua Regali Authoritate,
under the Seal of the Court of Delegates. Mich. 24 Eliz. in C. B. See Godbolt.
after, 10 Jae. in B. R. Stephenson's Contrary, That the Court of Delegates
cannot grant Letters of Administration.

A Lessee for years of Lands, by his Last Will Devised his Term to one whom he
made his Executor and died; the Devisee entered before any Probate of the Will,
and held the Land for a year and more without any Probate, and then died. The
Question was; Mich. 22 Eliz. Dyer 367. Hughs Abridgm. verb. Wills and
Testaments.
whether his Executor or Administrator should have the Term, or that the
Ordinary should commit Administration of the Goods of the first Testator? It
was the Opinion of the Court, That the property of the Term was lawfully in the
Executor by his Entry, and the Devise well executed without any Probate.

In Debt against Executors, it was Resolved, That if any of the Exccutors
refuse before the Ordinary, yet he that refused may Administer the Testators
Goods at his pleasure, and Prove the Will; but if all the Exccutors do refuse
before the Ordinary, there Administration shall be granted, and they cannot
after Administer. 2. That in Debt brought against an Executor, it is a good
Plea, That the Testator made him and another Executor, who is alive not named,
without saying that the Testament is Proved. 3. Resolved, That the Lords of
Manors in former times had the Probate of Wills in their Courts; and in
ancient time when a man died Intestate, and had made no disposition of his
Goods, the trust of them was committed to the King, who was and is Parens
Patriae. And the Ordinary was Constituted by the King in loco Parentis, and his
Power was given to him by the Stat. of 31 E. 3. Vid. Cook. 9. Part. 37, 38. in
Hensloes Case. vid. Hugh's Abridgment. verb. Probate of etc.
cap. 11. 4. Resolved, that although the Ordinary had the Power given to him as
before, yet no Power thereby is given to the Ordinary to sell or dispose of the
Goods either to his own use, or to the use of any other; and that he has not
any absolute property in the Goods, but a property only secundum quid.

2. The Testament is to be Proved by the Executor Perk. tit. Test. fol. 93.
whom the competent Judge either ex Officio, or at the instance of the
interessed may call before him to Prove the same, and to declare his acceptance
or refusal of the Execution thereof; 21. H. 8. c. 5. and l. 1. ff. quemadmodum
testa. approba. and ibi Bart. Bald. and Ang. in dict. l. (...).
yea some think it may be done at the instance of such as have no interest, to
the intent that thereby they may be certified whether the Testator left them a
Legacy. Glos. and Bald. in l. 2. ff. ibid. in princip.
And because it often happens that a Last Will or Testament is left in the
Custody of some other Friend than the Executor, the Law has provided, that in
whose hands soever it remains, he is compellable to produce the same, and to
exhibit such Testament. l. (...). in prin. and. hoc interd. ff. de Tab. ex^il.
And if he once had it, the Law presumes him to have it still, until he prove
the contrary by good evidence, or by his own oath at least. Alex. in l. 2. C.
de Test. nu. 3. verb. Tamen.
Also an Executor dying before he has Proved his Testators Will, his Executor
(that is) the Executors Executor may not Prove both the Wills, and so become
Executor to both the Testators; but in case the Goods of the first Testator
were after Debts paid bequeathed to the first Executor, then may his Executor
take Administration of the first Testators Goods with the Will annexed.

3. The time when the Will is to be Proved is somewhat uncertain, and left to
the discretion of the Judge, according to the distance of the place, the weight
of the Will, the quality of the Executors, the absence of the Witnesses, the
importunity of Creditors and Legataries, and other circumstances incident
hereunto. l. 2.. utrum. ff. quemadmod. Testam. approb.
Yet regularly Testaments ought to be insinuated to the Official or Commissary
of the Bishop of the Diocese within four months next after the Testators death.
Fulb. Par. par. 3. Diolog. 3. fol. 32.
And the Ordinary may sequester the Goods of the deceased until the Executors
have Proved the Testament; so may the Metropolitan if the Goods be in diverse
Diocesses. 9 Ed. 4. 33.
Also the Ordinary may compel the Executor to Prove the Will, and to accept or
refuse the Administration: if the Executor refuse, or if there be a Will made
and no Executor appointed, the Ordinary must commit Administration cum
Testamento annexo to whom he shall think fit, and take Bond of the
Administrator to perform the Will. If no Will be made, he must grant
Administration to the next of Kin; if they refuse it, then to whom shall desire
it; and if no body take the Administration the Ordinary may grant Letters ad
colligendum bona Defuncti, and thereby take the deceased's Goods into his own
hands, wherewith he is to pay the Debts and Legacies so far as the Goods will
reach; 31 Ed. 3. c. 11. and 13 Ed. 1. c. 19. and 21 H. 8. cap. 5.
for which himself becomes liable in Law like other Executors or Administrators.

4. A Testament after the Testators death and not before may be Proved either
in Common Form; as when the Executor presenting the Testament before the Judge,
without citing the interessed, does depose the same to be the true, whole, and
Last Will and Testament of the deceased, and whereupon the Judge does annex his
Probate and Seal thereunto: Or in form of Law, as when the Widow or next of Kin
to the deceased are cited to be present, in whose presence the Will is
exhibited before the Judge, whereupon Witnesses being produced, received,
sworn, examined, and their depositions published, the Judge in case of
sufficient proof does pronounce for the validity of the Testament. Bal. in l.
2. c. de Testa. nu. 2. and Sichard. ibid. and Alex. and Paul. de Cast. and alii
in eand. leg.
Now he that Proves but in Common Form, may be compelled to Prove the same
again in form of Law; but being once so Proved the Executor is not compellable
to Prove it any more; Paul. de Cast. Consil. 96. vol. 1. and Simo de Praetis de
Interp. ult. vol. l. 2. dub. 2. Sol. 3.
but being Proved only in Common Form, it may be questioned at any time within
thirty years next after, Cowell. Interpret. verb. Probat.
by common Opinion before it work prescription, which is otherwise in case it
be Proved in Form of Law, or per Testes. There is another kind or Form of
Proving Testaments, which in the Civil Law is called Apertura Testamenti, but
this savours too much of Ceremony to be of any use with us. Let it therefore
suffice to be farther Noted, that be the Testament Proved in what manner
soever, yet the Executor before the Office-Seal be affixed thereto, is to be
obliged by his Oath, yea and by Bond if need so require, to render a just
account of the Execution of the Testament when be shall be thereunto lawfully
called. Stat.. and postquam. de Test. l. 3. Provin. Constable. Cant.
Lastly, the Probate of every Bishops Testament, or the granting Administration
of his Goods, although he had not Goods but within his own Jurisdiction, does
belong to the Archbishop of the same Province. Coke Inst. Part. 4. verb.
Praerog. Court. cap. 74.


5. Touching the Fees for Probate of Testaments, for Registring, Sealing,
Writing, Preising, making of Inventories, giving Acquittances, Fines, and all
other things concerning the same; as also for granting Administrations, the
Reader is here referred to the Statute of 21 H. 8. cap. 5. Enacted in that
behalf, where the penalty Stat. 21 H. 8. c. 5.
is Ten Pounds for taking more than is there appointed. If the Executor request
any to engross the Testament, he must agree with him that he does so request,
Coke Ibid.
or bring one ready engrossed with him, which for prevention of paying more
Fees than is due by the Statute, is advised as a safe and ready way. Note, that
by the said Statute, neither the money raised of Lands appointed by Will to be
sold, nor the profits thereof, are to be accounted as any of the Testators
Goods or Chattels. The Will is to be brought with Wax thereunto ready to be
Sealed, and proof to be made thereof. And the Executor at the making of the
Inventory is to call or take to him two of the Testators Creditors or Legatees,
or in their absence or refusal two honest persons of the Testators next of Kin,
or for default of them two other indifferent persons; which Inventory being
indented is to be attested for the truth thereof by the Executors Oath, and one
part thereof to be left with the Ordinary, the other part thereof to remain
with the Executor.

6. If on Process or Summons from the Judge the Executors appear not to Prove
the Will, they are punishable for contempt; if they appear, but refuse to Prove
the Will, the Judge may grant Administration to the Widow or next of Kin. Dict.
Stat. 21 H. 8. c. 5. and 9 Ed. 4. c. 33. and Plowd. 184. (...).
Now Refusal cannot be by word only, but it must be Entered and Recorded in
Court, and therefore it must be done before a Competent Judge, and not before
Neighbors in the Country. But where an Executor has once Administered, there
he cannot afterward refuse to Prove the Will and take on him the Executorship,
because by once Administering he has accepted the Executorship by
interpretation of Law, and so determined his Election; and in that Case the
Ordinary ought not to accept of such refusal, but to compel him to Prove the
Will, and take upon him the Executorship. 9 Ed. 4. 47. Dyer in Cas. Greisbrook
and Fox. Plow. Com. 280. b. Pasch. 7 Eliz.
Yet in case the Judge does admit one to refuse notwithstanding his former
having Administered, it shall stand good. 26 H. 6. fol. 78.
But after refusal and Administration committed to another the Executor may not
recede from it, and go back to Prove the Will, and to assume the Executorship;
indeed if only upon the Executors making default of appearance upon Process or
Summons to Prove the Will, Administration be instanter committed to another, in
this case the Executor may yet at any time after come in and Prove the Will,
and so undo the Administration. Mich. 27, 28 Eliz.
But if after refusal it appear to the Judge that the Executor had Administered
before such refusal, he may revoke the Administration, and enforce the Executor
to proceed to the Proving of the Will: As if A. being Executor shall
Administer, and yet refuse to Prove the Will, so that Administration is
committed to B; if B. being afterward sued for Debt shall plead the matter
supra, it shall be found a good Plea. Offic. Exec. cap. 3.. 2. An Executor
before Probate of the Will may release, but not bring an Action. Harrisons
Case. Cook. 5. part. 28. vid. Hugh's Abridg. verb. Probate of Wills and
Testaments.
Also an Executor may be sued for the Debts of the Testator in some Cases even
before the Will is Proved, for he may not by his own act of delaying to accept
or refuse the Probate of the Will keep off Suits, except he will refuse in due
manner, that so Administration being granted there may be some one suable by
the Testators Creditors for the Debts owing by him. Ibid. vide lib. 2. c.


CHAP. XXI. Of Proof requisite to a Will.
1. What Testimony sufficient to Prove a Will. 2. Proof requisite to a Will
written by the Testators own hand. 3. What Witnesses are incompetent to Prove a
Will. 4. Legataries how far they may be competent Witnesses. 5. Animus
Testandi, how it may be proved.
1. WHere there is no controversy or dispute touching the Will, there the
single Oath of the Executor alone is sufficient for the Probate thereof in
Common Form; and where other proof is requisite, there it lies much in the
breast of the Judge duly regulated by Law what proof to admit for the number of
Witnesses, for the quality of them, and for the nature of the Proof according
to the circumstances and strength of opposition made against the Will. But
regularly by the Laws and Customs of England, Two Witnesses without exception
are requisite for the due Proof of a Testament, and Two such are sufficient;
Jus Civil exigit septem.. sed cum. and. fin. Inst. de Testam. Ordin.
So that it is not necessary to have any more than Two, In c. Statut. verb.
probatis. l. 3. Provin. Constable.
and it may be in vain to have no more but One; Jas. in l. Cunctos. C. de Summa
Trinit.
for a Nuncupative Testament must be proved by at least Two Witnesses without
exception. But

2. A Testament written by the Testators own hand Proves it self without the
help of such Witnesses; yea, though it has not his Name subscribed to it, nor
his Seal affixed to it, nor witnesses present to it; Provided it be undoubtedly
known to be his writing, or can be sufficiently proved so to be; yet shall it
have the more Authority if so be it be subscribed by himself and Witnesses, and
Sealed. Nor is it necessary to the Proof of a written Will that the Witnesses
hear it read or subscribe it, so as they can depose that the Testator declared
before them, that the self-same writing now produced, is, was, or should be his
Last Will and Testament. For in a written Will or Testament it is not necessary
that there be any Testimony of Witnesses where it is certain and undoubted that
the Testament is written or subscribed with the Testators own hand; Auth. quod
sine. C. de Test.
or that the Testator caused the same to be written by another; but if these be
doubtful, then the testimony of Witnesses is necessary. Bart. in l. si ita
Script. ff. de Cond. and Demon.
Also the Witnesses ought to prove the very identity of the writing, that is,
that the writing now showed is the very same writing which the Testator in his
lifetime affirmed before them to be his Last Will, or to contain his Will, or
other words full to this purpose; DD. in l. hac Consultiss. and in Auth. in non
observato. C. de Testam.
so that it is not sufficient for the Witnesses to say, this is the Testators
own hand, for or because we know his hand; Bart. and alii in l. (...)ita
scripsero. ff. de Cond. and demon.
neither is it sufficient by comparing other writings of the Testators own hand
with the Testament, Sichard. in ff. Auth. Quod. sine.
for hands may be counterfeited, therefore proof by similitude of hands is not
full proof, Bart. and alii in l. Admonendi. ff. de jurejurand.
except where the style and practice of the Court runs otherwise. Vestr. Prac.
lib. 6. c. 1.
Nevertheless if the Witnesses depose that they saw the Testator write or
subscribe the Testament, and know the same to be his Testament and Hand;
Sichard. ubi supra.
or that they had heard the Testator to confess that he had made his Testament,
and that the same was in such a man's Custody; Bart. and alii l. siita
scripsero. ff. de Cond. and Demon.
or if the Testament were found in the Testators Chest among other his
writings, in these Cases the proof made by comparing of hands is a full and
sufficient proof; Gras. These. Com. Op.. Test. q. 16.
yea, though there appear not any of those helps by probable circumstances, yet
if there be no suspicion of fraud, nor fear of subornation, proof made by
comparing of hands may be allowed for full and sufficient proof. Likewise if it
be proved that the Testator in his lifetime did acknowledge that his Testament
was contained in a writing left in such a man's hands or custody, and that man
produce a writing, deposing it to be the same which the Testator left in his
custody; such proof is sufficient without any further comparing of hands. Alex.
Cons. 167. vol. 5. nu. 1.
But if the Testator did also acknowledge that his Testament contained in such
a writing left in the custody of such a person, was written with his own hand,
then such proof is not sufficient without comparing of hands, whereby it may
appear to have been written by the Testator himself. Astr^us in l. heredes
palam. ff. de Testa. nu. 2.


3. Regularly all persons are held competent Witnesses to prove a Controverted
Will, save such as the Law holds incompetent; such are such as are parties
interessed, or presumed in Law to be biased in affection, or the like; also
infamous persons, as perjured, or the like; also such as for want of judgment
and understanding the Law rejects. And if it cannot be proved whether it be a
Testament or a Codicil, the circumstances being so indifferent to either, then
is it most safe in regard of the Statute to commit the Administration to the
Widow or next of Kin demanding the fame, to avoid the forfeiture of Ten pounds,
Stat. 28 H. 8. c. 5.
in case the Judge before whom such penalty is demandable should adjudge the
party to have died Intestate or without a Will.

4. A Legatary may be a competent witness for the proof of a Will in all parts
thereof, saving for what concerns the Legacy therein bequeathed to himself..
Legatariis. Inst. de Testa. Ordin. and Portius ibidem.
So that suppose never so many Witnesses to a Will, wherein each of them has a
Legacy, they cannot sufficiently prove the Will as to their own Legacies, Bart.
in l. omnibus. C. de Testib.
but for the rest of the Will they may. Albert. de Testib. c. 4. nu. 57.


5. It is very observable, that the most considerable Requisite the Law aims
at to the constituting of an Executor and making of a Testament, is to be
proved more by Circumstances than by Witnesses; and that is Animus Testandi, or
the intent or purpose of the Testator to make his Will. Gloss. in l. plane.
Inst. de Testa. Milit.
For it is the mind, purpose and intent of the Testator more than his words
that gives life and being to the Testament. Mant. de Conject. ult. vol. lib.
2. tit. 15. and l. ex feod. ff. de haered. instit.
The circumstances, that prove the intent or purpose, must also themselves be
proved by Witnesses. These Circumstances proving such a purpose in the Testator
are many; as when the Testator is in any more than ordinary danger of death;
Gloss. in l. Divus. ff. de Milit. Testam.
or that he orderly composeth himself for such a work; Gloss. in dict. l. plane.
or that he required the Witnesses to bear witness thereof; Gloss. in dict. l.
Divus.
with many other the like circumstances, as to the person, time, place,
occasion, manner of speech, deportment, and in whose presence. All which the
circumspect Judge is to take into consideration; for since the mind and
intention of the Testator is the essential qualification of every Testament,
and not capable of a Being otherwise than by such intention, and the mind and
intention of man not so much as conjecturable otherwise than by outward
circumstances, it is most necessary that they fall under a due proof by
sufficient Witnesses.

CHAP. XXII. Bona Notabilia.
1. What shall be accounted as Bona Notabilia. 2. Where the Will is to be
Proved in case there be Bona Notabilia. 3. How or when Debts and Bonds may make
Bona Notabilia. 4. Law-Cases touching this Subject.
1. IT is agreed by all, that Five Pounds is the sum or value of Bona
Notabilia; provided that where by composition or custom in any County Bona
Notabilia are rated at a greater sum, the same is to continue unaltered; as in
the Diocese of London it is Ten Pounds by composition; Coke part. 4. Instit.
cap. 74. verb. Prerogat. Court.
Provided also that if any man die in itinere or in a journey, the Goods that
he has then about him or with him shall not be as Bona Notabilia to cause
Administration to be committed, or the Will to be Proved in the Prerogative.
Offic. Exec. c. 4.. 2.
Nor is it necessary that the party must have five pounds in each and every of
the several Counties where his Goods are dispersed, but it is sufficient if the
party deceased were possessed of Goods and Chattels in some other County than
that wherein he lived and died to the full value of five pounds besides those
Goods extant in the County where he died. So that although the deceased's Goods
and Chattels do amount to Ten Pounds or more, yet if the Goods and Chattels
extant in some other County do not extend to Five Pounds at the least, the
deceased is not to be accounted to have Bona Notabilia.

2. Regularly the Will is, as has been said, to be Proved in the
Ecclesiastical Court of the same County where the Testator is an Inhabitant, or
wherein he made his most usual residence and abode for the latter years before
his death, and not in the Ecclesiastical Court of that County wherein he made
his Will, or wherein he died, but where his last place of habitation was; but
if the Testator died possessed of Goods to the value of Five Pounds, called
Bona Notabilia, in diverse Counties, then the Will is to be Proved in the
Prerogative Court, to which also Appeals from any other inferior Jurisdiction:
So that the Prerogative Court of the Archbishop of Canterbury is the Court
wherein all Testaments are to be Proved, and all Administrations to be granted,
where the party dying within his Province has Bona Notabilia in some other
Diocese than that wherein he died, which regularly is to be to the value of
Five Pounds, save where by custom or composition it is at any greater sum, as
aforesaid. Also if any Testator die not possessed as aforesaid, and the
Executor notwithstanding Prove the Will in the Prerogative, such Probate shall
stand good: But it is otherwise if the Will be Proved in the Inferior
Jurisdiction when the Testator dies possessed, as aforesaid, of Bona Notabilia;
for in such case it is again to be Proved in the Prerogative. And if a man has
Goods in diverse Diocesses or Provinces, and make his Executor of his Goods in
one of the Provinces, and die Intestate as to his other Goods: And if the
Ordinary do commit Administration of the Goods which are in the other Province
unto the said Executor, then is he both Executor and Administrator, and the
party died both Testate and Intestate. 35 H. 6. 36.
And if a man died Intestate having Bona Notabilia in diverse Diocesses, the
Judge used to Assess a convenient sum to be employed in pios usus, but with
and under certain limitations, Coke ubi supra.
or legal restrictions.

3. Debts owing to the Testator are held Bona Notabilia as well as Goods in
possession, their value being answerable; yet if the penal sum of a Bond be
but Five Pounds for the payment of a less sum, although the Bond be forfeited,
yet that is not understood as Bona Notabilia, although in Law the whole penal
sum be a Duty. Offic. Exec. ubi supra.
And those Debts are said to be Bona Notabilia, where the Bonds or other
Specialties are, and not where the Debtors inhabit; so that if the Bonds be in
the County where the Testator died, and the Debtors in another County, in this
case the Will is not to be Proved in the Prerogative Court; but in case the
Debts are only by Contract without Specialty, they are then to be esteemed Bona
Notabilia there and in that place where the Debtor is. But in case Lands be by
Will given to be Sold for payment of Debts and Legacies, this is not to be
accounted as Bona Notabilia, though it be Assets; Ibid.
for where Land is bequeathed to be sold for such uses, there neither the money
raised thereby, nor the profits thereof shall be accounted as any of the
Testators Goods or Chattels.

4. One had Goods solely in an Inferior Diocese; and the Metropolitan of the
Province pretending that he had Bona Notabilia in diverse Diocesses, committed
the Administration of the Goods. It was resolved, that such Administration
granted by the Metropolitan, was not void, but voidable by Sentence, because
the Metropolitan has Jurisdiction of all places within his Province. But if
the Ordinary of one Diocese commits Administration of Goods when the party
has Bona Notabilia in diverse Diocesses, the Administration is void as well for
his Goods within the Diocese, as without. 22 Eliz. in C. B. Vere and Jefferys
Case. Co. 5. part. 29.


In an Action of Debt brought by an Administratrix upon an Administration
brought by the Bishop of R. the Defendant pleaded an Administration committed
to him by the Dean and Chapter of Canterbury sede vacant, because the
Intestate had Bona Notabilia. The Plaintiff Replied, that the said
Administration was Repealed; and it was adjudged for the Plaintiff: 1. Because
the Defendant did not show what Bona Notabilia the Intestate had in certain;
and it shall be intended he had not Bona Notabilia, and such Administration is
but voidable. 2. Because before the Repeal of the Administration committed by
the Metropolitan, the Inferior Ordinary may commit Administration; and when
the Defendants Administration is Repealed, it is void ab initio; and in the
Principal Case, it was also resolved, that whereas the Administration was
committed to the Obligor, that the Debt was not extinct, because it is in
another right: otherwise it is, if the Obligee himself made the Obligor his
Executor. 8 Jac. Coo. 8. part. Sir John Needhams Case, fol. 135.


In Debt brought upon an Obligation, the Case was, the Intestate died in
Lancashire: The Obligation upon which the Action was brought was in London at
the time of his death. The Bishop of Chester in whose Diocese the Intestate
died, grants Administration to J. S. who released to the Defendant: The
Archbishop of Canterbury granted Letters of Administration to the Plaintiff,
and in Debt brought by him the Release was pleaded in Bar. In this Case, it was
holden by the Justices, where one dies who has Goods in diverse Diocesses,
Canterbury shall have the Prerogative; and it was holden, that if Canterbury
has not any Prerogative in York, yet that this Bond ought to be Sued in and
committed Administration of, within the Court of Canterbury, and committed by
the Bishop of that Diocese. Hill. 38 Eliz. C. B. Byron and Byrons Case. Cro. 3
part. 472. and Hugh's Abridgm. vol. 3. tit. Administrator.


If a man dies Intestate, having Goods in diverse Counties, the Metropolitan
shall grant the Administration; 14 H. 6. 21. 10 H. 7. 18. 35 H. 6. 43. If he
has Bona Notabilia to the value of one hundred shillings in diverse Diocesses,
the Metropolitan shall grant the Administration; 10 H. 7. 16. b. Or if a man
dies beyond the Rolls Abridgm. tit. Execut. lit. F.
Seas Intestate, the Archbishop shall grant the Administration; P. 11 Jac. B.
per Co. to be adjudged in 42 Eliz.

If a man dies Intestate having Bona Notabilia in England and Dyer. 14 Eliz.
305. Roll. ibid. (...).
Ireland several Administrations shall be granted, viz. by the Archbishop of
Canterbury for the Goods in his Province, and by the Archbishop of Dublin for
the Goods in his.

It is Ordained by a Canon, 1 Jac. cap. 92. That if a man dies in a Journey,
the Goods which he had at that time with him, shall not cause his Testament or
Administration to be liable to the Prerogative Court.

If a man has Goods to the value of Five Pound in one Diocese, Rolls Abridg.
tit. Execut. lit. H.
and a Lease for years of the same value in another Diocese, they are Bona
Notabilia, whereby the Archbishop shall grant the Administration, although the
Lease for years be not a thing moveable, nor properly Bonum, but it is a
Chattel according to Pleadings.

If a man becomes bound in an Obligation at London, and dies Intestate in
Devon, and there has the Obligation at the time Trin. 14 Car. inter Lunn and
Dodson, per Curiam. Roll. ibid. lit. G.
of his death with him, Administration ought to be granted by the Bishop of
Exon, where the Obligation was at the time of his death, and not by the Bishop
of London where the Obligation was made; for the Debt shall be accounted Goods,
as to the granting of Letters of Administration, where the Bond was at his
death, and not where it was made.

To make Bona Notabilia, a Debt without specialty shall be accounted Hill. 37
Eliz. B. and Trin. 17 Jac. inter Trowbridge and Tailor, per Cur. Roll. ibid.
Goods where the Debtor lives, and not where the Testator lived. Likewise if a
man dies Intestate, having diverse Debts or Obligations in several Diocesses,
the Debts are said to be Bona Notabilia where the Bonds or Obligations are, and
not where the Debtors or Debtees are.

If a man has Goods to the value of Five Pound in one Diocese, and a Bond or
Obligation to a greater value in another Diocese, Dyer. 14 Eliz. 305. 58.
the Obligation being there also made, they are Bona Notabilia, for which
reason the Archbishop shall grant Administration.

Anciently if a man died Intestate, having Goods to the value of Forty
Shillings in two Diocesses, it should make the Goods to be Bona Notabilia,
whereby Administration should be granted by the Perkins.. 489. Roll. ibid. lit.
1.
Archbishop. But by a Canon 1 Jac. cap. 93. It is Ordained, that Bona
Notabilia shall be accounted to be Five Pound at least, and that none shall be
said to have Bona Notabilia unless he has Goods in diverse Diocesses to the
value of Five Pound, and so that Canon has changed the Law, if it were
otherwise before. Likewise in the said Canon there is an Exception of such
Diocesses where by Custom or Composition Bona Notabilia are rated at a greater
sum than Five Pound.

The Chapters of the Second PART.
I. Of the Appointing or Constituting Executors. II. Of Conditional Executors.
III. Of appointing Co-executors. IV. Of substitutions and appointing Executors
by degrees. V. Of the several ways of Constituting Executors. VI. Of persons
incapable of being Executors or Administrators. VII. Of an Executors Executor.
VIII. Of an Executor in his own wrong. IX. Of a Child in the Womb made
Executor, and of an Infant Executor; as also of Executors and Administrators
durante Minoritate. X. Of a woman under Coverture made Executrix, or making
Executors. XI. Of Debtors and Creditors made Executors. XII. Of the general
difference between an Executor and an Administrator; and wherein they generally
agree. XIII. Of the Executors Rights exclusively to the Heirs. XIV. Of the
Heirs Rights exclusively to the Executors. XV. What goes neither to the Heir
nor Executor, and in what Cases. XVI. Of the Indivisibility of the right and
interest of Co-Executors. XVII. Of the Executors Interest and Possession; and
how it differs from that which he has in his own proper Goods. XVIII. Of the
Executors Right in opposition to the Heirs in reference to Mortgages. XIX.
Touching the Executors Election to accept or refuse the Executorship. XX.
Touching what Acts may or may not be done by an Executor before Probate of the
Will. XXI. Of Inventories. XXII. Of Actions mantainable by Executors or
Administrators. XXIII. Of Actions maintainable against Executors or
Administrators. XXIV. Of Assets charging Executors, or not. XXV. Additionals to
the three last Chapters, touching how far and wherein Executors may be charged.
XXVI. Of a Devastavit or Wast in an Executor or Administrator. XXVII. Of the
Executors power in Sale of Lands devised to be sold. XXVIII. Of Debts,
Legacies, and Mortuaries, and the Executors method in payment thereof. XXIX. Of
Executors Accounts. XXX. Of Administrators in a notion distinct from Executors.
XXXI. Of Administrations fraudulent and revocable. XXXII. Of Filial Portions.
XXXIII. Of Right to Administration. XXXIV. Of Succession in the Right Line
Descendent. XXXV. Of Succession in the Right Line Ascendent. XXXVI. Of
Succession in the Line Transversal or Collateral.
THE SECOND PART. OF Executors and Administrators.
CHAP. I. Of the Appointing or Constituting Executors.
1. The Testators freedom or Liberty in making Executors. 2. How the Office of
Executorship may be performed or discharged, when a King is made Executor.
1. THe word Executor taken in the largest sense falls under a threefold
acceptance, for so there is Executor a Lege constitutus, and that is the
ordinary of the Diocese; and there is Executor a Testatore constitutus, and
that is the Executor Testamentarius; and there is Executor ab Episcopo
constitutus, and that is the Executor Dativus, who is called an Administrator
to an Intestate: By the Civil Law this Executor Testamentarius, or Haeres in
the Dialect of that Law, does succeed in Vniversum jus defuncti. L. 1. Cod. de
Heredib.
Now the Law holds forth that Liberty to Testators that they may if they please
exclude their own Wives and Children, and appoint strangers in their Testaments
to be their Executors; Bract. de Consuetud. and Leg. Angl. lib. 2. cap. 26. and
Tract. de Reb. Angl. lib. 3. cap. 7.
for the validity of the Testators Will chiefly consists (in) the freedom and
liberty of the Will of the Testator. Therefore the Testator may if he please
appoint even Bondmen, Villains, or Prisoners as his Executors, Inst. de Haered.
inst.
or Infants, Brock. Abrid. tit. Execut. nu. 115.
yea whether born or not born at the time of the Testators death; Jo. de Can.
Tract. de Exec. ult. vol. partic. r. nu. 44.
or Women, whether under Covert and Married, or Sole. Fitzh. and Broo. tit.
Exec.
Also Testators may if they please make such persons their Executors as are
either their Debtors or their Creditors, l. Simus.. in computatione. C. de jure
delib.
or one single person, or many jointly as Co-Executors in several persons,.
unum. Inst. de haer.
or many jointly representing one Body, as a College, City, or other
Corporation. l. haered. C. de haered. Inst. and Minsing. in dict.. unum. and
Gras. These. Com. Op.. Inst. q. 40.
So likewise they may make their Executors simply and absolutely, or
conditionally; also from a certain time, or to a certain time; also either
universally, or specially and particularly; likewise in the first, second,
third, etc. degree by the substitution of one Executor in the place of another.
And here note, that after how many ways an Executor may be appointed, after so
many and the same ways may a Legacy be given; and whosoever is capable of an
Executorship, is also capable of a Legacy. Gloss. in l. is cui. ff. de Test.
Et e Contra.

2. When the King is made Executor, he does appoint certain persons to
Officiate the Execution of the Will; against whom such as have cause of Action
may bring their Suits; and appoints others to take the account. Rot. Par. 15
H. 6. n. 32.
So Katherine Queen Dowager of England Mother of Henry the sixth, who died 2
June, 1436. made her Will, and thereof Henry the sixth her sole Executor;
whereupon the King appointed Robert Rolleston, Keeper of the Wardrobe and
others to Execute the said Will, by the oversight of the Cardinal, the Duke of
Gloucester, and the Bishop of Lincoln or any Two of them, unto whom they were to
account. Coke Inst. part. 4. verb. Praerogat.


CHAP. II. Of Conditional Executors.
1. Executors may be appointed simply or conditionally. 2. Executors may be
limited in point of time. 3. A threefold qualification of an Executors Power.
1. TEstaments wherein the Executor is pure and simply made, are such as
wherein the Testator makes his Executor without any condition at all; but when
the assignation or nomination of the Executor has some such quality added to
it or joined with it, as whereby the effect of the disposition is suspended and
depends upon some future event, then is such assignation said to be
Conditional. Sichard. in Rub. de Inst. and Subst. C. nu. 1. and Grass. These.
Com. Op.. legatum. (...). 46.
Also the condition in creating or appointing an Executor may be either
precedent or subsequent; H. 6. fol. 6.
yea and sometimes it may be conditionally that he give security to pay the
Legacies, and, in general, to perform the Will before he Act as Executor. The
conditions incident to the appointing of Executors are very numerous and
uncertain according to the pleasure of the Testator, so as they be neither
necessary, nor impossible, nor unlawful, nor captious Conditions.

2. The time may be limited when the Executorship shall begin, and that either
certainly or with reference to Contingency; Plowd. in Cas. inter Greith. and
Fex. and 32 H. (...). and Brook. nu. 155. tit. Execut. and tit. Administ. nu.
45.
for by the Laws of the Land it is lawful for a Testator to appoint his
Executor either from a certain time, or until a certain time; and in the mean
time Administration may be committed to the next of Kin, or to the Widow; and
the Acts then done by such Administrator cannot be voided by the Executor
afterward; Plowd. in dict. Cas.
and in this sense the same person may be said to die partly Testate and partly
Intestate, which by the strictness of the Civil Law is not allowable. Dec.
Cagnol. and Hier. Franc. in l. jus nostrum. ff. de Reg. Jur.


3. As the Conditions incident to the making of Executors and giving of
Legacies, are (as aforesaid) very many and full of variety; so also the power
it self of Executors may be limited, qualified, and divided, specially these
Three ways, viz. First, Really: as thus; he may make A. his Executor for his
Plate and Householdstuff; B. his Executor for his Sheep and Cattle; C. his
Executor for his Leases and States by extent; and D. his Executor for the Debts
due to him. Secondly, Locally: as thus, viz. he may make E. his Executor for
his Goods in Cornwall; F. his Executor for his Goods in Devon; and G. his
Executor for his Goods in Somerset. Thirdly, Temporally: as thus; he may make
his Wife his Executrix during her Widow-hood, or during his Sons minority. 19
H. 8. 3. and 16 H. 8. Dyer. 4. Hill. 33 Eliz. in Com. B. and 32 H. 8. Bro^. 115.


CHAP. III. Of appointing Co-Executors.
1. How one alone or many jointly may be made Executors. 2. How Executors may
be made universally or particularly.
1. ONe person alone, or diverse together, so the number be not too numerous,
may be appointed Executors.. Et unum. Instit. de haered. instit.
And where diverse persons be made Executors, all are to be admitted, and not
one without the rest, l. religiosa.. Sanct. de Test. lib. 6.
unless they cannot or will not undertake the Executorship. Supra. Par. 1. c.
20.. 6.
Which conclusion holds true, though he be a stranger who is joined in the
Executorship with the Testators own Son; it is true also whether the
Executorship be appointed alternatively or disjunctively; in which case if the
Testator say, I make A. B. or C. D. my Executors, both persons are Admissable;
l. quidam. C. de verb. sign. and Mant. de Con. ult. vol. l. 4. t. 3. n. 19.
For this word [or] in favor of Testaments is taken for [and] dict. l. quid.
C. ibid.
unless it be most evident that the Testator did bear much more affection to
the one than to the other, Ripa. in C. inter caeteros. De Res^ript. Extr. nu.
54.
or unless the Authority of Election of the person be by the Testator granted
unto another, l. Si Titio aut Seio. ff. de Leg.
or unless one of the persons be incapable of the Executorship. Jas. in l. cum
quid. C. de ver. ^ig. limit. 5. and Broo. Ab(...)idgm. tit. Execut. n. 117.
And here note, that where there be diverse Executors, the Action commenced by
them or against them, ought to be commenced in all their names, and not in the
name of some of them only without the rest.

2. Likewise an Executor may be appointed either universally or particularly.
Universally, when he is made Executor of the whole Will, or of all the
Testators Goods, or indefinitely; l. 3. C. de mil. testa.
and such Executor may enter into all the Testators Goods; l. haered. ff. de
Reg. jur. and ibi Cogn. and Plowd. in Cas. inter Creisb. and Fox.
in which respect he is universally chargeable with the payment of all his
Debts and Legacies, so far as the same Goods extend. Te(...)ms of law. verb.
Exec.
Also an Executor may be appointed Particularly, that is, of some part of the
Will, or only of some part of the Testators Goods; Fitzh. Abr. tit. Exec. n.
26. Broo. eod. tit. a. (...). and 155.
in which respect such Executor may meddle with no more than is allotted to
him, and so not chargeable but according to his portion. Fitzh. and Br. ubi
supra. and l. si haered. de Eleg. 1.
And if there be no other Executor appointed, such particular Executor cannot
meddle with the residue of the Goods; for of them the Testator by the Laws of
this Land is said to die Intestate. Fitzh. and Br. Ibid.
And thus in this case also may the same person die both Testate and Intestate,
not only in respect of time, as aforesaid, but also in respect of place and
Goods, contrary (as was before declared) to the strictness of the Civil Law. In
the same sense also one may be made universal or particular Legatary. And where
the Testator leaves all his Goods or the residue of them to some person, none
else being appointed Executor, that person in Law seems to be appointed
Executor thereof, at least admissable to the Administration.

CHAP. IV. Of Substitutions and appointing Executors by degrees.
THe Testator is then said to make degrees of Executors when he does substitute
one in place of another; l. potest quis. ff. de vulg. Subst. and Inst. de vulg.
Subst. in prin. and Franc. post Glos. in cap. ult. de Testa. 6. and Broo. tit.
Exec. nu. 9.
For an Executor may be made either in the first, second, third, fourth or
fifth degree, etc. Ibid.
And he that is made Executor in the first degree is said to be instituted, the
rest are said to be substituted: Zas. in Tract. de subst. in prin.
As thus; The Testator makes A. his Executor, but if he will not or cannot be
his Executor, then he makes B. his Executor, and if B. cannot or will not be
his Executor, then he makes C. his Executor; and so on. In which example there
be Three degrees of Executors; A. is said to be instituted Executor in the
first degree; B. is said to be substituted Executor in the second degree; and
C. is said to be substituted in the third degree. And so it is lawful for a
Testator to make as many degrees of Executors as he pleases; dict. l. potest
quis. ff. de Vulg. Subst. and Inst. eod. tit. in prin.
and in the place of one only Executor he may if he please substitute more than
one.. plures. Inst. ibid.
Also it is lawful for the Testator to institute an Executor simply, and to
substitute another in his place conditionally; l. qui Liberis. ff. de Vulg.
Substit.
or to institute one conditionally, and to substitute another simply. l. sub
Condition. ff. de haered. instit.
And so long as he that is appointed Executor in the first degree may be
Executor, he in the second degree may not be admitted. l. quamdiu. ff. de Acq.
haered. and l. cum in testa. ff. de haered. instit. and l. post ad C. de Impub.
Likewise by the second degree the third is repelled, and by the third the
fourth, etc. Also if but any one of the Executors in the first degree may be
admitted, the Substitute is excluded, unless the Testator does appoint to every
Executor first instituted his several Substitute respectively. l. quidam. C. de
Impub.
Also the Substitute ought to succeed in that part or quantity of the Testators
Goods which was assigned to the former Executor. l. 1. C. eod.


CHAP. V. Of the several ways of Constituting Executors.
1. The bare nomination of an Executor is the Creation of a Will. 2. Words
implying an Executor equivalent to the word Executor. 3. Instances of an
Executorship without naming the word [Executor.] 4. Small Errors in a Will no
prejudice to the Will.
1. THe bare naming of an Executor, in the name of a Will, without giving any
Legacy, or appointing any thing to be done by an Executor, is sufficient to
make it a Will, and as a Will it is to be Proved: Offic. Exec. c. 1.. 1.
for the naming of Executors is by Implication a gift or Donation to them of
all the Goods, Chattels, Credits, and personal estate of the Testator, and the
laying upon them an obligation of satisfying the Testators debts to the just
value of the said Goods and Chattels.

2. Although no Executor by the word [Executor] be expressly in the Will
nominated or appointed, yet if any other words or circumlocutions equivalent to
the Function of an Executor, or to the charge and office which in any part
pertains to an Executor, be recommended or committed to any one or more, it
shall amount to as much as the Ordaining or Constituting of him or them
Executors by the very word Executor. Cum tibi. de Testa. Extr. sum. Rosell.
verb. testa.. 1. verse. quibus verbis.
For the Law in the interpretation of Wills and Testaments regards not so
much the words as the meaning of the Testator. l. quoniam. Mant. de Conject.
ult. vol. l. 4. (...). t. 3.
Besides, it is not always necessary to express the word [Executor] in the
making of an Executor; Broo. tit. Execut. nu. 98.
nor indeed has every Testator skill enough so to do, or to think it
necessary. Panor. in C. Ranusius. nu. 3
Wherefore it is sufficient if the Testators meaning does appear by other words
of the like sense. in dict. l.* quoniam. C. de Testa. and Mant. supra.
Hence then it is evident that such words as do imply the office of an Executor
are as valid as the word [Executor] it self; so that if the Testator declare by
his Will that A. B. shall have his Goods after his death, to pay his debts, or
otherwise to dispose thereof at his pleasure, or to that effect, he shall be
his Executor. 39 H. 6. Dyer. 290.
Insomuch that he that does commit all his Goods to the disposition of another,
does not die Intestate; yea, if only Administration be (by that word) in a Will
granted to one, Executorship does thereby pass. M. 15, and 16 Eliz. 21 H 6. 6,
7. and 39 H. 6. Dyer. 290.
And unto whom the Testator does leave the residue of his Goods (none else as
aforesaid being appointed Executor) to him the whole Executorship does pass by
that general Legacy, at least the Administration as aforesaid is to be granted
to such a general Legatary; the reason being, because the ignorant and vulgar
sort know not for the most part how better to express their meaning of an
Executor, or the function thereof.

3. If the Testator says, I commit all my Goods to the Administration, or to
the disposition of A. B. in this case he is made Executor, it being in effect
as if he had said, I make him my Executor: dict. cum tibi. De Testa. extra. and
Sum. Rosell. ubi supra.
Or if he says, I will that A. B. shall dispose of my Goods which be in his
custody, he is thereby made Executor of those parcells of Goods; Abridg. dez
Cases. fol. 175. nu. 1.
or if the Testator says, I commit all my Goods to the hands and disposition
of A. B. In this Case also he is made Executor of all his Goods. Broo. Abridg.
tit. Exec. nu. 98.
So also if he says I make A. B. Lord of all my Goods: l. his ver. ff. de
haer. inst.
or, I leave all my Goods to A. B. Glos. Bart. and Bald. in dict. l. his verbis.
or thus, I make A. B. Legatary of all my Goods: Mant. ubi supra. nu. 8.
or I leave the residue of all my Goods to A. B. Panor. in dict. c. Ranu. de
Test. extra. nu. 3.
or if the Testator says, I will that A. B. be my Executor, if C. D. will not;
in this Case C. D. is appointed to be Executor, and may if he please be
admitted to the Executorship, and exclude A. B. Jul. Cla.. test. l. 35. nu. 2.
Or if the Testator supposing his Child, his Brother, or his Kinsman to be
dead, does say in his Will, viz. Forasmuch as my Child, my Brother, etc. is
dead, I make A. B. my Executor: In this Case, if the person whom the Testator
thought dead be alive, he shall be Executor. Sichard. in Rub. de haer. inst. C.
nu. 3.
Or if the Testator being demanded by another whether he does make A. B. his
Executor, does answer, Yea, I do, or, What else, or, Why not, or, Whom else
should I make Executor, or, I cannot deny it, or other words to that purpose
cum animo Testandi; this shall be a pure and simple assignation of A. B. to be
Executor. Ripa. Alceat. Zasius. and alii DD. in l. (...).. si quis ita. ff. de
verbor. Oblig. and Jul. Clar.. Test. q. 37.
Also if the Testator does make A. B. or C. D. his Executors; in this Case both
of them shall be his Executors; because (as aforesaid) or] is here taken for
[and] Provided always in all the Cases aforesaid, and in every other the like
Case, that the Testator have a firm and constant purpose and meaning to make
his Will whenever he utters any such words. Mantic. de Conject. ult. vol.
lib. 4. tit. 4. in prin.
And as it matters not by what significant words the Executor is appointed: So
it is not material in what part of the Will or Testament he is appointed, as
whether in the beginning, or in the midst, or in the end thereof:. ante.
inst. de Legate. and Gras. These. Com. Op. Inst. q. 1.
So as that he be therein expressed or sufficiently employed as aforesaid.

4. False English, or words mis-spelt in a Will, or other common mistakes shall
not prejudice the Will or disposition or Executorship, if it may evidently
appear what or whom the Testator meant, and that at the same time he was not
non sanae memoriae; yea, though the Will want the words of conclusion, viz. In
witness whereof, etc. It is good in case it may otherwise appear to be the
Testators Last Will and Testament.

CHAP. VI. Of persons incapable of being Executors or Administrators.
A Postates, l. hi qui. C. de Apost.
Traitors, Felons, l. qui ultimo. ff. de Poenis.
persons Outlawed, Fitz. Abridg. tit. Adm. n. 3.
Incestuous Bastards, C. de Incest. Nupt.
Famous Libellers, l. is cui.. ult. ff. de Testa.
manifest Usurers, Gloss. ibid.
Sodomites, Ibidem.
uncertain persons,. incertis. Inst. de Legib.
and Recusants Convict, 3 Jac. cap. 5.
are all excluded from being Executors; yet each of these has his respective
qualifications. Sap. lib. 1. cap. 7, 8, 9.
And all these are incapable both of Executorship and Legacies, if they be such
either at the time of making the Testament, or at the time of the Testators
death, or when they assume the Executorship. l. si alienum.. 1. ff. de haered.
instit.
Yet Incestuous and Adulterous Bastards are incapable of being Executors only
to, or receiving Legacies only from their own Natural Parents, necessary means
of sustentation only excepted. Gloss. in Auth. quib. mod. Na. effic. sui.. fin.
and Jul. Cla.. Test. q. 31. nu. 4.
But as to other Legataries it is sufficient if they are capable only at the
time of the Testators death. l. non potest. ff. de leg.
And the foresaid Rule relating to Incestuous Illegitimates is attended with
more ampliations and restrictions in the Law than to insert here is adequate to
the design of this summary Collection. Add to these persons Excommunicated, who
so long as they lie under the sentence of Excommunication are not to be
admitted either to Executorship or to Legacy; cap. intelleximus. de Judic. and
C. post cessionem. de Probat. Extr.
nor during such time can such commence any suit for Legacies; they cannot sue,
that is, proceed in suit as Executors till they be absolved; for this works not
a nullity of the Executorship, nor overthrows the suit, but stays it only from
proceeding until absolution be had and obtained: Offic. Exec. cap. 1.. 4.
Yet a person Outlawed (as is reported) also a person attainted may be an
Executor: Croke Rep. in Sir Vpwells Caroons Case.
where it is also said, that an Alien may be Administrator, and have
Administration of Leases as well as of personal things, because he has them as
an Executor in another right, and not to his own use. Crok. Rep. ib.
Yea, it is also said, that a Bastard, an Excommunicate, or an Outlawed person
may be as able and as absolute an Executor as any other. Fitzh. tit. Execut.
nu. 11. 88. Non-ability. 18 Broo. Non-ability. nu. 38.
Also Infants may be made Executors; but the performance of that Office shall
not be committed to them until they have attained unto the Age of seventeen
years. Offic. Exec. c. 18. and alii.
To the first forementioned may be added Corporations, which, although lawful
ones, yet may not stand Executors, unless they can duly Prove the Will, and
take an Executors Oath. Finally note, that what has been here formerly said of
Executors, may be also applied to, and understood of Administrators.

CHAP. VII. Of an Executors Executor.
1. That the Executor of a sole Executor is Executor to the first Testator. 2.
That an Executors Executor cannot perform a Trust committed by the first
Testator. 3. An Executors Executor has nothing to do with the first Testators
Goods, where there is a surviving joynt-Executor. 4. In what Case an Executors
Executor shall have to do with the first Testators Goods, when the surviving
joynt-Executor shall not meddle therewith.
1. AN Executors Executor, where there is no joynt-Executor, is Executor to the
first Testator as he is to the second, and consequently has a right to all the
profit, and is liable to all the charge that the first Executor had or was
subject unto; yet with this caution and difference, that the one Testators
Goods shall not stand charged for the other Testators debts, but each for his
own respectively. Stat. 25 E. 3. cap. 4. and Coke 5. 9 and Plow. 86. and 84 H.
6. 14.
And if in such case the Executors Executor assume the Administration of the
first Testators Goods, he cannot afterward refuse the Administration of the
Goods of the later Testator; but he may accept the later, yet refuse the
former; but not e contra. Trin. 17 Jac. Com. B. Wolf and Heydens Case.
Also an Executors Executor shall not be admitted to Administer the Goods of
the first Testator where the first Executor (who was his Testator) refused to
Administer, or died before Probate, Dyer 372.
unless all the residue of the first Testators Goods, after the debts paid, be
given in the Will to the first Executor. Adjudged in Hill. 9. Char. in Dens
Case and Brownl. 1. par. 9^.


2. Where a special trust is by Will recommended to an Executor, as to sell
Lands, etc. This being not performed in his lifetime, shall not be performable
by his Executor after his death. Offic. Exec. cap. 20.
Contrariwise it is of an interest, as to take the profits of Lands for certain
years toward payment of Debts and Legacies, or for recovery of Rents of
Inheritance left unpaid in the Testators lifetime.

3. If Two Executors be appointed, whereof one makes his Testament, wherein he
names his Executor and dies, his joynt-Executor surviving; in this Case the
Executor of the Executor is not to be joined with the said joynt-Executor
surviving, neither in the Execution of the Will, nor in Suits or Actions.
Brook. Abrid. tit. Execut. nu. 92. 160.
And if such Executor of the Executor have any Goods which did belong to the
first Testator, the surviving Executor of the same first Testator may have an
Action against such Executors Executor for the same. Ibid. nu. 9^.
Insomuch, that if the surviving Executor does afterward die intestate, yet may
not the Executors Executor meddle with the Goods of the former Testator: for
the power of the Executor who died first was determined by his death, the other
then surviving; Ibid. nu. 149.
And the Judge in this Case may commit the Administration both of the surviving
Executor who died afterward intestate, and of the Goods of the former Testator
not before Administered. And if the Executor of the Executor who died first,
meddle with the Goods of the first Testator, he may be sued by the Creditors of
the first Testator, as Executor in his own wrong: Ibid. nu. 2^, and 99.
But where there is no joynt-Executor, there most things which concern
immediate Executors, extend also to the mediate or more remote Executors; that
the mediate Executor in the fourth, fifth, or further degree stands in like
manner Executor to the first Testator, as the first and immediate Executor, and
may sue or be sued as the former. Offic. Exec. cap. 20.


4. Suppose Two Executors, whereof One refuses to Prove the Will and
Administer; the other Proves it, Administers and dies Testate; In this Case the
Executor of that joynt-Executor that so Proved the Will, shall be the first
Testators Executor, and the surviving Executor so formerly refusing shall not
now be admitted to intermeddle therewith, because his Election determined at
his Co-Executors death. Dyer 160.
But it is otherwise where the surviving Executor has accepted the
Executorship, for in that Case he shall have the sole disposing of the Estate,
and the Co-Executors Executor is not to intermeddle therewith, but to surrender
to the other what Goods belonging to the first Testator happen to be in his
Custody.

Error, the Error assigned was, That W. E. had brought debt upon an
Obligation by the name of W. E. Administr. Bonorum and Hill. 33 Eliz. B. R.
Limnex, verse. Every. Cro. par. 3.
Catallorum A. E. durante minori aetate of J. E. Executor of the said A. E.
Executor of R. E. and demands a Debt upon an Obligation of Twenty nine pound
made to the said R. E. the first Testator, whereas he could not bring an Action
by this Name, but as Administrator of R. E. But it was said, that
Administration of the Goods of R. E. being committed to him by this name,
omnium Bonorum, etc. A. E. it may well be committed to him by this Name;
especially when A. E. did not die Intestate, but made an Executor; 10 Ed. 4. 1.
That by the grant of the Administration of the Goods of the Executor,
Administration is by it granted of all the Goods of the first Testator; 27 H.
8. 7. Curia, Contra clearly. For by this Administration committed, he has no
Authority to meddle with the Goods of the first Testator; and for this cause
the Judgment was reversed.

Debt against the Executor of an Executor. The Defendant pleaded, that the
Executors Testator had fully Administered, and Pasch. 3 Eliz. Moo. Rep. nu. 8.
that he had nothing in his hands at the time of his death; and it was found
that he had Assets. Whereupon a Fieri facias issued to the Sheriff, and he
returned, that the Defendant had nothing. And it was held, that the Sheriff
should be amerced, for he should have stopped making such Return: And that it
should be no prejudice to the Plaintiff, for that the Debt shall be charged so
long as the Record remains in force not Reversed by Error nor Attaint. And if
he has no Goods of the Testators, he shall be charged of his own proper Goods,
For that when he pleaded that the first Testator had fully Administered, he did
not say that Assets did not come to his hands after his Testators death.

CHAP. VIII. Of an Executor in his own wrong.
1. Who is an Executor in his own wrong; and what Acts make him such. 2. How
far an Executor in his own wrong is chargeable; and how impleadable. 3. What
Acts shall not make a man Executor in his own wrong. 4. A caution to avoid
wrongful Executorship, as also for Creditors in their Suj^s against wrongful
Executors. 5. Law-Cases to this Subject Relating.
1. AN Executor in his own wrong, is he that takes upon him What an Executor in
his own wrong is; see Terms of Law, Kelway 59. 93. Dyer 105, 157, 255. Coke 5.
32. Brook. tit. Exec. 162.
the Office of an Executor by intrusion, not being so Constituted by the
deceased, nor for want of such Constitution Substituted by the Court to
Administer. Yet this extends not to Overseers, who seeking only to preserve and
keep in safety the deceased's Goods from damage, without any dispending or
disposing the same, are excused from being Executors in their own wrong: 8, and
9 Eliz. Dyer. 255, 256.
But if one who neither is Executor nor Administrator shall use the deceased's
Goods, or possess himself thereof, this is a sufficient Administration to
charge him as Executor in his own wrong, whereby the deceased's Creditors may
recover their Debt against him, if there be no other Executor or Administrator
lawfully Constituted, who has Proved the Will or Administered. Coke, lib. 5.
Relat. fo. 33.
Yea, though there be a lawful Executor, yet if any other take these Goods,
claiming them as Executor, does pay or receive Debts, or pay Legacies, and
intermeddle as an Executor; In this Case, because of such express claiming to
be Executor, he may be charged as Executor in his own wrong, although there be
another Executor of right. l. in cause. ff. de Minor.
Also, he that takes the deceased's Goods to satisfy his own Debts or Legacy,
shall be charged as Executor in his own wrong. Coke ubi supra. fol. 30. in
Coults Case.
Also, if one do either pay Debts of the Testators, or receive Debts, or make
Acquittances for them, or demand the Testators Debts as Executor, or give away
Goods which were the Testators, or deliver money of the Testators for Fees
about Proving the Will; or being Sued as Executor do take it upon him, and
plead in Bar as an Executor; all these are an Administration and will make him
Executor in his own wrong, although there be an Executor or Administrator of
right: Offic. Exec. c. 14.
But if he pays Fees or Debts only with his own moneys, then it is otherwise.
Likewise, if he that is named Executor in the Will, take Goods of the Testators
and convert them to his own use; yea, if he do but take them into his hands
without converting them; yea, if the Wife named Executrix or not named, take
more Apparel of her own than is necessary, this is an Administration: but if by
the assent or delivery of the Executor, it is not. Ibid. c. 3. and Dyer. 105.
and 166. and 33 H. 6. 31.
And if he that from the Judge has Letters ad Colligendum, do sell or dispose
of any Goods, though otherwise subject to perishing, it makes him an Executor
in his own wrong; yea, though by the said Letters ad Colligendum warranted so
to do, for the Judge himself may not so do. Ibid. cap. 14.
So that if the Ordinary without formal Letters of Administration Granted, do
give one License and Authority to sell the Goods of the Intestate quae peritura
essent, and he does it accordingly, he which does so Administer, shall be as an
Executor of his own wrong. 9 Eliz. 256. Dye^.
Also if another man does take the deceased's Goods and sell or give them to
me, this shall charge him as Executor of his own wrong, but not me. Also, if a
man make a Deed of Gift of all his Goods and Chattels to another and dies
Intestate, and this Deed be but fraudulent, and in trust, and the Donee after
the death of the Donor does dispose of these Goods and Chattels; in this Case,
and by these means he shall be Executor in his own wrong: Sheph. Epit. verb.
Testam. ubi citat Goldsb. 116. pl. 12. Brownl. 1. part. 384, 385.
But if the Deed of Gift be bona fide in satisfaction of a just Debt, and the
Goods be no more than the Debt, it may be otherwise: But if the Goods be much
more than the Debt, there it seems he shall be charged so for the Overplus, and
that whether he have them in possession or not. And so was the Opinion of
Justice Jones at Gloucester Assize, 9 Char.
So that it is evident that a man may make himself Executor in his own wrong,
either by Proving the Will with the deceased's money, or by converting his
Goods to his own use, or by delivering his Money or Goods to his Creditors in
satisfaction of their Debts, or by receiving Debts due to the deceased, or by
releasing them, or by delivering any Legacies in kind given by the deceased, or
by taking a man's own Legacy before the Executor has accepted of the
Executorship, or assented to the delivery thereof, or by suing as Executor for
any debt due to the deceased, or by answering as Executor to any Plea commenced
against him as such, or by selling any part of the deceased's Goods as his
Executor, or by discharging the Mortgages of the deceased with his money; by
these and many other ways a man may become Executor in his own wrong.

2. The Executor in his own wrong thereby renders himself not only obnoxious to
the Action of the Right Executor, but also to the Suits of the Testators
Creditors, yet but only so far as the Goods which he so wrongfully Administered
do amount unto. Cop. lib. Inst. (...) 5.
And this usurping Executor, or Executor in his own wrong, is not in Suit to be
distinguished from the Lawful Executor by Name or Title, but to be Sued
generally by the Name or Title of the Executor of the Last Will and Testament
of the Defunct; which if he deny, he must plead that he neither is Executor nor
Administered as Executor; yet where there is a Lawful Executor and another does
Administer in his own wrong, it is at the Election of the Creditors either to
Sue them jointly together, or one or both of them severally and by himself. But
Note, that there cannot be an Administrator by wrong, or in his own wrong, for
the Law knows no such Appellation. Also, if the next of Kin to the deceased
procure some Insolvant person or stranger not only to take out the Letters of
Administration, but also to make himself a Deed of Gift of all the Goods for an
invaluable consideration, he may be thus charged for the Overplus of the worth
of the Goods more than he gave, if not for the whole. And if a Debt or procure
such an Administration to be taken out, and then get a Release of his Debt from
such Administrator, this may make him chargeable as Executor in his own wrong
for so much as his Debt does amount unto. Stat. 43 Eliz. cap. 8. and Plich. 7,
Jac. C. B. per Chief Justice.
So that all wrongful Executors of what kind soever, do, for so much as they
have disposed, and no more, make themselves chargeable to any Creditor or
Legatee of the deceased as far forth as any Lawful Executor is chargeable. Dyer
255, 166. Coke 5. 34. 9. 39. and 5. 33. and Plowd. 148. 145. and 33 H. 6. 31.
8. Dyer 210. and Plowd. 184.
And if Administration be granted to any one after he has intermedled
wrongfully with the deceased's Goods, this will not purge his wrong done
before; and therefore in this Case a Creditor may charge him as Executor in his
own wrong, or as a Lawful Administrator at his Election. Coke 5. 33. Kelw. 59.
Pasch. 39 Eliz. and Brownl. 1. part. 103. and 2. part* 184, 185.


3. When the Will is Proved, or Administration granted, and others then
intermeddle with the Goods, this shall not make those others Executors in their
own wrong by construction of Law, because there is then another Executor of
right against whom the Creditors may bring their Action; L. in Cause. ff. de
Minor.
and such wrongful intermedlers with the Goods when there is another Executor
of right, are liable to be Sued by him as Trespassers. Also, if a man perform
only acts of Charity or of Humanity, as feeding the Testators Cattle, Fitzh.
tit. Execut. nu. 45.
or preserve them by taking them into his custody, or dispose of them only
about the Funerals, Brook tit. Admin. nu. 6. 28.
or make an Inventory thereof, Mantic. de Conject. ult. vol. lib. 12. tit. 9.
n. 159.
or deliver the Widow only her convenient Apparel, or as a mere Trespasser
enters to his Goods whether quick or dead, converting the same to his own not
to the Testators use, he does not hereby become Executor in his own wrong when
there is an Executor or Administrator of right. Broo. tit. Execut. nu. 16. and
tit. Admin. n. 42.
But if one deliver to the Widow more of her Apparel than is convenient to her
degree, or if she take, or another deliver to her more than such, he or she
thereby becomes Executor in their own wrong. 11 H. 6. 28. and 33 H. 6. 31. and
(...) 1 Eliz. Dyer 166.
But if a man lodge in my house and die there, leaving Goods therein behind
him, I may keep them until I can be lawfully discharged of them, without making
my self chargeable as Executor in my own wrong. Trin. 17 Jac. per Chief Just.
Or if I take the deceased's Goods by a mistake, supposing them to be my own,
or under color of a Title, this will not make me Executor in my own wrong: Or
if one do but take a Horse of the deceased's and tie him in his own Stable,
this makes him not Executor in his own wrong: Or if I do only lay up the Goods
of the deceased to preserve them in safety for him that shall have right to
them. This will make me no more chargeable than if I took an Inventory of all
the deceased's Goods. Coke 5. 34. and Kelw. 63.
Nor is an Executor in his own wrong chargeable as such where an Executor of
right, or Administrator has fully Administered the deceased's Goods. Crooks
Rep. in Cas. Whitmere verse. Porter. Mich. 3 Char.
Nor shall any light acts or intermedlings make one an Executor in his own
wrong where there is a rightful Executor, and a Will by him Proved, or
Administration committed, or where there is another of right to be sued; for
whosoever wrongfully takes the deceased's Goods from the rightful Executor or
Administrator, makes himself not an Executor but a Trespasser to them; though
it would have made him an Executor in his own wrong, had there not been an
Executor by right, Coke, lib. 5. 33, and 34.
who (notwithstanding the other) stands charged with, and is liable for the
debts of the Testator.

4. Whosoever fears to be adjudged Executor in his own wrong, his safest
course is not to meddle at all, but utterly to abstain from all manner of use
of the deceased's Goods; and especially let him take heed that he do not sell
any of the deceased's Goods, nor receive any of his debts, nor kill any of his
Cattle. Brook. tit. Administ. nu. 26.
And if one after wrongful Administration of some of the deceased's Goods take
Administration, and after such Administration taken be sued by a Creditor for a
Debt as Administrator, and after such wrongful Administration there remain not
Goods sufficient to pay that debt, the Creditor can recover no more than
remained after such rightful Administration taken, because he sued him as
Administrator; therefore he should in such case have sued him as Executor,
because he was Executor in his own wrong before he took Letters of
Administration; and so then the Goods which were Administered before the taking
such Letters of Administration must thereby be included to be liable for the
debt due to the Creditor, otherwise not. 21 II. 6. 8.
Therefore Creditors must look before they sue, for else they know not whether
he so intermedling be Executor or Administrator, nor consequently how to found
their Action aright, and safely for good success; since a suit against an
Executor as Administrator, or against an Administrator as Executor will prove
frivolous; one Error in a Foundation may be the Foundation of many in the
Superstructure.

5. A. brought debt upon an Obligation of forty pound against L. as Executor of
P. The Defendant pleaded, That P. in his life time was indebted to him in forty
pound, and that there came to Mich. 6 Jac. B. R. Alexander and Lanes Case, with
Weast and Lanes Case. Yelv. Rep.
his the Defendants hands Goods to the value but of ten pound, which he
retained toward satisfaction of his own debt, and averred, that no other goods
beyond that value of ten pound came to his hands to be Administered, etc. The
Plaintiff replied, and showed, That the Defendant is Executor in his own wrong
to P. and that he has much other goods belonging to P. to be Administered at S.
in the County of N. and conclude, and hoc paratus est verificare, etc. The
Defendant rejoined and demanded Judgment, whether the Plaintiff shall be
admitted to Plead, That the Defendant is Executor in his own wrong, inasmuch as
himself has by his Declaration affirmed him to be Executor Testamenti; upon
which the Plaintiff demurred in Law: To which point in Law the whole Court
would hear the Plaintiff, for he could well Reply, That the Defendant
(notwithstanding the Declaration) is Executor in his own wrong, for there is no
other Form de Court, Ireland. 5. Rep. fol. 30.
as was adjudged in Coulters Case: But per tot. curiam the whole Plea is
discontinued; for the Defendant having Pleaded, that as to the goods to the
value of ten pound, he had retained them for debt to himself, and that he had
no more goods to be Administered, it was an Offer of a good issue; and then when
the Plaintiff replied, that he had other goods, etc. and conclude, and hoc
paratus est verificare, it is not good, for he ought to have said, and hoc
petit quod inquiratur per patriam, for that there was any surplusage of goods
when denied by the Defendant, and urged by the Plaintiff, he ought to have come
to an issue, but could not by reason of the ill conclusion. And in the same
Term between Weast Plaintiff and Lane the same Defendant; where Weast demanded
four pound debt against Lane as Executor, ut supra, and all the rest of the
Plea was ut supra, Judgment was given for the Plaintiff, because the Defendant
had confessed goods to the value of ten pound in his hands, which is more than
the debt in demand; and therefore it being in the judgment of the Law, That an
Executor in his own wrong cannot retain to pay himself, Judgment shall be
given only upon the Defendants own confession; and so it was: Quod nota. Yelv.
a Counsel pro Quaerent.

Debt against the Defendant as Executor of J. S. he pleads that he had taken
Letters of Administration, Judgment of the Writ, etc. The Plaintiff replied,
that the Defendant Administered de son tort, and after took Letters of
Administration, Judgment, etc. Trin. 28 Eliz: B. R. Stubs verse. Rightwise.
Cro. Rep. par. 3.
And upon this it was demurred, Godfrey for the Defendant argued, That now the
name of Executor is lawfully changed before the Action brought, and therefore
is to be sued by his new name as Administrator; 9 Ed. 4. 33. 21 H. 6. 5. 18 H.
6. 29. 13 H. 4. Executors 118. Coke contra; for when by his tortious
Administration he has given advantage to be sued as Executor, he cannot by his
own act purge this tort, and cause the Plaintiff to sue him by another name,
but the Plaintiff has election to sue him one way or other, for he shall take
no advantage by his own Tort; as if one in Execution escapes, and is taken away
by the Jailer, he shall not have an Audita Quaerela; and it will be a mischief
if the Plaintiff shall be compelled to sue him as Administrator, for it may be
that whilst he Administered of his own wrong he wasted the goods; and if he be
only sued as Administrator, he shall only be charged of the goods which came to
his hands since Administration; 12 R. 2. Administrators 21. And it was
afterward adjudged, that the Writ was good, and that the Defendant respondra
ouster. Nota, if Judgment be given against an Executor upon Demurrer, and
Execution be awarded, the Sheriff cannot return, nulla habet bona Testatoris,
but is to return a Devastavit, as if it had been found against the Executor by
Verdict, for per Curiam he has charged himself by his own Plea.

Debt per etc. verse etc. as Executor, he pleaded Nunques Executor etc. and on
special verdict found, that Administration of the Anonymus. Hill. 38 Eliz. C.
B. Cro. Rep. par. 3.
goods of the Testator was committed to the Wife of the Defendant, who is dead,
and that he kept bonam partem bonorum in his hands, and sold them. Williams
moved, this Verdict was void for the uncertainty, for bonam partem is
altogether uncertain; but it was held to be well enough, for if he detain any
part, it makes him Executor de son tort, and wherefore it was adjudged for the
Plaintiff.

Debt against R. as Executor of T. the Defendant pleads that T. Pasch. 39 Eliz.
C. B. Bradbury verse. Reynell. Cro. Rep. par. 3. Pl. 27.
died Intestate, and that certain of his goods came to the Defendants hands,
and afterward Administration was committed to J. S. to whom he had delivered
the said goods. Et per Curiam, it is not any Plea, for if Administration had
been committed to himself, it would not have purged the first tort: So here,
although Administration is committed to a stranger, in regard that he has once
made himself chargeable to the Plaintiffs Action as being Executor de son tort
etc. he shall never after discharge himself by matter ex post facto. Wherefore
etc. Adjournatur. and vid. 21 H. 6. 8. 9 Ed. 4. 47. 2 R. 3. 20.

The Executor of A. brought Action of Debt against B. as Executor of D. upon a
Bond, the Defendant pleaded, that D. died Intestate, Trin. 12 Jac. C. B. Keble
and Osbasten's Case. Hob. ^9.
and that before the Writ brought, Administration of his goods was committed to
N. who Administered and yet does; the Plaintiff replied, That D. died Intestate,
and before the Administration granted diverse goods of his came to the
Defendants hands, which the Defendant as Executor of the said D. Administered,
seu aliter ad suum proprium usum disposuit: whereupon Issue being joined, it
was found for the Plaintiff; for since there was an Executor before the
Administration afterward granted, the Plaintiff had cause of Action vested in
him, which shall not be taken away by such Administration afterward granted,
though it be before the Action brought; and so much the rather, because the
goods taken by wrong before the Administration, shall not be Assets in the
hands of the Administrator, till they be recovered, or damages for them.

A Woman Executrix takes a Husband; afterward they are Divorced upon a
Pre-contract; the Wife Appeals to the Delegates; and pendant the Appeal the
Husband Administreth the goods, and then dies. It was a Question, whether the
Husband should be said to be an Executor in his own wrong? vid. 2 Jac. Co. 5.
par. 2 Mar. Dyer, 105, 106.
Reads Case 33. That when a man dies Intestate, and a stranger takes his
goods, and uses them, or sells them, he is an Executor Dyer ibid. and Co. 5.
par. 33. vid. Porter's Case. 1 Eliz. Die. 166. acc.
of his own wrong; for they to whom the deceased was Indebted have not any
other against whom they can bring their Actions for recovery of their Debts:
And so note, that the very seizure of goods will make one an Administrator of
his own wrong.

Debt against G. as Executor to H. the Defendant pleads, that H. the Testator
was bound in a Stat. of One Hundred Pound, and besides that he had not Assets;
and hereupon they were at Issue, Pasch. 40 Eliz. B. R. Ireland verse. Coulter.
Cro. Rep. par. 3. vid. Rep. at large.
and a special Verdict found, That the Defendant was Executor de son tort
demesne, and that the Testator was indebted unto him, and that he retained
diverse goods to satisfy that debt due unto himself, and over and above then to
satisfy the Recognizance he had not in his hands, etc. and si, etc. It was
argued by Tanfield and Goldsmith for the Plaintiff, and by Coke for the
Defendant. The sole point was, whether an Executor de son tort may retain goods
to satisfy himself? And Coke moved that he well might; and the Plaintiff by
this Action against him has allowed him to be rightful Executor; wherefore the
finding that he was Executor per tort is not material; and he being allowed to
be Executor, may do all things as an Executor, viz. pay Debts, or any other
Lawful Acts; and as he may do it to a stranger, so he may pay himself. Gaudy
and Fenner were of his Opinion. For as he shall be charged by reason of his
possession: Like reason it is, he should be allowed all Lawful Acts; and this
is here a Lawful Act: as where etc. Popham and Clinch e contra: For an Executor
de son tort shall never have any benefit by his Malefesance; and etc. A
Precedent was cited, Pasch. 32. Eliz. in C. B. That an Executor de son tort
might not retain to satisfy himself; wherefore etc. Afterward upon another
day it was moved again, and the Court said, They were resolved, That an
Executor de son tort de mesme cannot retain goods to satisfy himself his own
debt. And Popham said, That diverse of the Justices in Sergeants Inn (to whom he
had propounded the Case) were of that Opinion, and that they were resolved to
enter Judgment for the Plaintiff: But it was then surmised to the Court, that
the Defendant was dead, and thereupon a stay of Judgment was prayed; but the
Court would not stay it upon such surmise: but upon the Plaintiffs prayer
Judgment was entered, 5. Co. 20.

Ejectione firmae, for Whites Closes, upon Not Guilty it appeared upon the
Evidence, That a Lease for years was granted to one Okeham, who died Intestate,
and Anne his Wife assigned it per paroll Pasch. 25 Eliz. B. R. inter Kenri^k
and Burgess. Moo. Rep. n. 273.
to one Burgess, and after she got Letters of Administration, and made an
Assignment thereof to one Kenrick. And the Court directed the Jury for Kenrick
the last Vendee; yet they agreed, That if one Enter as Executor of his own
wrong, and sell Goods, and after obtain Letters of Administration, the Sale is
good; but in this Case there is a Term in Reversion, whereof no Entry can be
made, nor can any man therein be Executor of his own wrong; and therefore the
first Sale to Burgess, before Administration, is utterly void.

At the Kings Bench in Debt, all the Justices of England being Hill. 40 Eliz.
B. R. Colter verse. Ireland. Moo. Rep. nu. 696.
Assembled at Sergeants Inn, it was Adjudged, That an Executor of his own wrong
cannot pay himself either Debt or Legacy.

Debt against one as Executor; the Defendant pleaded, that the Pasc. 34 Eliz.
C. B. Bradbury and Reynells Case. Cro. 3. Part. 565. Hughe's Abridg. Vol. 3.
tit. Execut.
deceased died Intestate, and that certain of his Goods came to the Defendants
hands, and that Administration was committed to J. S. to whom he delivered the
Goods. It was adjudged no Plea, in regard he had once made himself chargeable
to the Plaintiffs Action as Executor of his own wrong, he shall never discharge
himself by matter ex post facto.

Note, in an Action of Debt brought against A. as Executor in his own wrong, he
pleaded ne unque Executor, and it was found against him, and Execution was
awarded against him for the whole Vid. Noy. 69. Hughe's Abridg. ibid. tit.
Execut.
debt, viz. Sixty pound for his false Plea, although in truth he had not
intermedled, but with one Bedstead of small value; and so it was said it was
adjudged, 40 Eliz. in C. B. in Kitchen and Dixons Case.

CHAP. IX. Of a Child in the Womb made Executor, and of an Infant-Executor; as
also of an Executor and Administrator durante Minoritate.
1. Whether the Child in the Womb may be made Executor. Vid. Dyer, fol. 303,
304. Coke, 6. 67.
2. At what age an Infant-Executor may Administer. 3. What Acts may or may not
be done by an Infant-Executor. 4. To whom the Right of Administration does
belong durante Minoritate. 5. Diverse Cases Reported in the Law, pertinent to
this Subject.
1. THe Child in the Womb may be made Executor; insomuch that when such is so
appointed, if the Mother bring forth Two or Three Children at that one Burden,
they are all to be admitted Executors. Jas. in l. placet. ff. de Liber. and
Posthum. and Mantic. de Conject. ult. vol. lib. 4. tit. 8. nu. 4.
The Law is also the same as to a Legacy given in like manner, which is to be
equally divided amongst them. Paul. de Cast. in L. qui filiabus.. 1. ff. de
Legib.


2. Though an Infant how young soever he be, may be Executor, Brook. Abrid.
tit. Exec. nu. 115. and tit. Coverture nu. 56.
or unborn as aforesaid; yet the Execution of the Will shall not be committed
to him until he attain the Age of Seventeen years; for Administration granted
durante Minoritate ceases when the Infant-Executor attains to that Age of
Seventeen years. Coke Rep. lib. 5. in Princes Case.
And if it be a Female-Infant, and married to a man of Seventeen years of Age
or more, it is then as if her self were of that Age, and her Husband shall have
the Execution of the Will, and Administration thereof. Offic. of Exe. cap. 18.
This limitation of Seventeen years comes in by the Canon, not by the Common
Law.

3. Although an Administration granted durante Minoritate does as aforesaid
cease when the Infant-Executor does attain to the Age of Seventeen years, yet
betwixt that Age and the Age of Twenty one years, such Executor cannot Assent
to Legacies; Coke ubi sup.
howbeit upon satisfaction really made he may release a debt due to the
Testator; Brook ubi supra. and Coke Rep. lib. 5. in Russels Case.
for although his Actings unconformable to the duty and office of an Executor
bind him not, yet such acts as are conformable to such an office done by him
during his Minority (that is, till he be of the Age of Twenty one years, for
till then the Common Law holds him a Minor) are binding and good in Law. Coke
ibid. Russels Case.


4. Until the said Age of Seventen years the Administration is to be committed
to some other, as to the Father, or to the Guardian or Tutor of the Child;
Offic. Exec. ubi supra.
who during such Minority cannot sell or alienate, save in cases of necessity,
nor Set a Lease for a longer term than the Executors Minority. Coke ubi supra.
in Princes Case.


5. E. R. Executor of W. R. brought his Action on the Case against T. P.
supposing that diverse of the Testators Goods came to the Defendants hands, etc.
In which Action the Defendant pleaded Hill. 21 Eliz. B. R. Russel and Frat's
Case. Anders. Rep. Case 212.
a Release from the Plaintiff: Whereunto was replied, That the Plaintiff was
within Age at the time when he gave such Release, and whether such Release was
a bar upon a demur in B. R. was the question? where it was adjudged that it was
a void Release. The matter was after removed and brought before the Justices in
the Exchequer Chamber by a Writ of Error, where all the Justices of the Common
Pleas and the Barons of the Exchequer held, That the Judgment in that point
was good, and that it was no Error; for they said that an Infant-Executor
cannot Acquit, Release, or Discharge a Bond without receiving the money due
thereupon; otherwise he might through his own folly or ignorance charge himself
of his own proper Goods, which is not allowable in an Infant to do by a Release
or Acquittance without some other Act; but if upon a single Bond or Obligation
he receive the money, and make an Acquittance or Release, they held that was
good, and the Infant should be bound thereby; but by other means the Obligation
could not be discharged; and they all held, That when a single Obligation is
made to an Infant, and he during his Infancy receive the money, and make an
Acquittance, he shall be bound thereby.

Action is brought against the Defendant as Administrator of J. S. during the
Minority of D. Issue joined, and found for the Plaintiff. It was alleged in
Arrest of Judgment, That the Declaration Trin. 6. Jac. B. R. Croft and Walbanks
Case. in Yelv. Rep.
was not good, because non constat whether D. were Seventeen years of Age at
the time of the Action commenced, at which time the Defendant-Administrators
Authority is determined; but it was adjudged, That the Plaintiff is not to show
or set forth that matter, (1.) Because the Plaintiff is a stranger to the
Defendants power; (2.) Because the Defendant by joining issue has admitted
that his power continues.

Biss makes Katherine his Wife, and John his Son (aged one year) his Executors.
K. Proves the Will alone, and marries the Trin. 6 Jac. B. R. Smi^h and Smiths
Case. Yelv. Rep.
Plaintiff, and they (without the Son) bring Action of Debt as Executors
against the Defendant, who pleaded in abatement of the Writ, that John was made
Executor with Katherine, and that he was yet alive, not named, etc. The
Plaintiff replied, That John was not above one year of Age, that Katherine had
Proved the Will, and had Administration committed to her during his minority,
etc. Whereupon Yelv. demurred, and adjudg'd for the Defendant, quod Billa
cassetur, for that in truth they are both Executors, and ought to be named in
the Action; and albeit that Katherine by the Administration committed to her
durante Minori aetate has the full power, yet the Infant ought to be named,
for that she has affirmed him to be an Executor.

Debt as Administrator to A. L. durante minori aetate W. L. the Hill. 40 Eliz.
(...) (...) verse. Gase^yne. Cro. Rep. par. 3.
Executor upon an Obligation, and averrs, that W. L. was within the Age of
Twenty one years. The Defendant pleaded an ill Bar, and it was thereupon
demurred; but because the Court was resolved (upon Conference with diverse
Civilians openly in Court) That the power of an Administrator durante minori
aetate, does cease at the Executors Age of Seventeen years, and that
Administration committed after that Age of the Executor is merely void, and
notwithstanding this averment here, the Executor might be above the age of
Seventeen years, and within the age of Twenty one years: It was therefore
adjudged, Quod Quaerens nihil caperet, etc. 5. Co. 29.

Trespass upon a special Verdict; the Case was, Jackson Lessee for years by
several Leases of diverse Lands, some of them in the Hill. 41 Eliz. Price verse.
Simpson. Cro. Rep. par. 3.
Diocese of York, some in another Peculiar in the same Diocese, devised all
these Leases to his Son, and made his Daughter within Age his Executrix: the
Mother takes Administration durante minori aetate of the Executrix, in F. the
Peculiar where the Testator died, ad Commodum and proficuum Executricis; the
Administratrix granted this Term, durante minori aetate of the Executrix, to
the Plaintiff: Whether the Grant were good or not, was the principal Question.
The Court resolved, that it was not good; For such an Administrator has but a
special property ad proficuum Executoris, but not a general property as another
Executor or Administrator has; and therefore his sale of Goods, unless they be
Bona peritura, or it be for necessity for the payment of debts, which he is
chargeable to pay, it shall not bind: But he may sue and be sued, and yet his
Authority is but a limited Authority; and therefore like as if Letters ad
Colligendum bona Defuncti were granted to one, there he may sell bona peritura,
as Fruit, or the like. (2.) It was moved, whether the Assent of an
Administrator, Whether Administratriae durante minoritate, may Assent to a
Devise of a Term^?
durante minori aetate, to the devise of a Term, or the Assent of the Executor
himself (during his minority) to such a Devise be good? Anderson said, That an
Executor at the Age of Eighteen years may Assent; but whether the Assent by
such an Administrator be good or not, they doubted. (3.) It was moved, whether
Administration should in this case be granted at Two places, viz. the one
within the Peculiar, the other by the Archbishop of York, Ordinary of the
Diocese; or whether he should have the Prerogative in both, as he had where
Bona Notabilia were in diverse Diocesses. And it was resolved, That there should
be two Letters of Administration granted; for the Archbishop shall not have
any Prerogative here, because this Peculiar was first derived out of his
Jurisdiction; wherefore etc. 5. Co. 29.

Error of a Judgment in Debt in C. B. The Error assigned was, because the
Plaintiff sues by an Attorney, where he was an Trin. 38 Eliz. C. B. Bade verse.
Starkes. Cro. Rep. par. 3. pl. 7.
Infant, and ought to sue by Guardian: But because the Action was brought by
him as Administrator, so that he sued in auter droit, Infancy is no impediment
unto him, no more than Out-lawrie, and therefore he might well sue by Attorney;
and it was thereupon adjudged for the Defendant, that the first Judgment
should be affirmed. Note, that if an Infant sue, and not as Executor, he must
then sue by his Guardian; vid. Case Bartholomew verse. Dighton, Hill. 37 Eliz.
B. R. in Cro. Rep. part. 1. Pl. 22.

Debt upon an Obligation made to the Testator. The Defendant Pasch. 40 Eliz.
Knot and Knot Executors of Knot verse. Barlow. Cro. Rep. par. 3. Pl. 27.
Pleaded a Release made by one of the Plaintiffs. The Plaintiff replies, That
this Release was made without any consideration, and he who Released was within
Age at the time of the Release made; and it was thereupon demurred, and
adjudged for the Plaintiff, that it was a void Release, being by an Infant
without consideration.

In the Case between A. and M. as Administratrix of J. during Mich. 17 Jac. B.
R. Walthall verse. Aldrich. Cro. Rep. par. 2. Pl. 12. vid. Rep. at large.
the minority of L. It was among other things Objected, That the Plaintiffs
Declaration was not good, because it is brought against her as Administratrix
durante minori aetate of L. And it is not averred, that the said L. was yet
within the age of Seventeen years, sed non allocatur; for true it is, that if
one brings an Action, and entitles himself as Administrator durante minori
aetate of one such, he ought to show that he is yet within the Age of Seventeen
years, as Co. 5. fol. 59. Pigots Case. For that he is to take Conuzance how
long his Authority shall continue, and he ought to show it to enable himself to
the Action: But when he brings the Action against one as Administrator durante
minori aetate, there such Plea need not be shown; for so long as the other
continues his meddling, he shall be sued; and the Plaintiffs need not take
Conuzance of the age of the other; as etc. And here if her Authority were
determined, it should be shown on the Defendants part; therefore the Judgment
was affirmed.

Note, it was resolved by all the Justices of England, That the Hill. 26 Eliz.
B. R. Russels Case. Co. 5. part. Case 27. vid. ibid. 28.
Release of a Debt or a Duty by an Infant Executor, after Probate made of the
Will, is not good; because it should be a Devastavit, and charge the Infant of
his own Goods; and also it should be a wrong which an Infant by his Release
cannot do; and also because it is not pursuant to the Office of an Executor.

Infant Executor; Administration was committed durante minori Hill. 39 Eliz.
Ford verse. Glanvile. Moo. Rep. nu. 648.
aetate, debt was brought against the Administrator, and then the Infant came
of full age; and the Justices very much doubted whether the Action did abate.

A Guardian Recovered a debt on an Obligation made to an Infant, Trin. 14 Jac.
B. R. White verse. Hall. Moo. Rep. nu. 1163.
the Defendant paid the Principal and Costs, and prayed that the Guardian might
be ordered to acknowledge satisfaction. The Court said, That a Guardian, or an
Infant, or Executor, may not acknowledge satisfaction for more than they
receive; and for so much they ordered the Guardian to acknowledge satisfaction:
And made an Order that no Execution should issue for the residue.

If an Administration be repealed from one and granted to another, Mi^h. 10
Jac. B. per Curiam. Roll. Abridg. tit. Executor. lit. M.
which was only durante minori aetate, and that other bring the first
Administrator to account, and after give him a Release, yet the Infant at his
full age may compel the first Administrator to account to him again, and the
former account to such second Administrator shall not Bar him, for such
Administrators Release is not good, unless for some such cause as for which it
ought to be made.

It was by the Chief Justice of the Queens Bench demanded of the other Justices
there Assembled upon hearing of Causes, If one Hill. 26 Eliz. Anders. Rep. Cas.
164. vid. 16. H. 7. fol. 5, 6.
make an Infant his Executor, that Releases a Debt due to him as Executor
without receiving the sum due (which receipt, if it be good, will be a
Devastavit by the Infant of the Goods in his hands) whether such Release shall
bind the Infant or not? It was agreed One makes an Infant his Executor, and
dies; the Ordinary grants Administration to a stranger during the Infants
minority; after when the Infant came of full age, he Proved the Will. Now the
Quest. was, what remedy the Infant should have against the Administrator for
the goods, viz. Whether an Action of account, or a Writ of Detinue, or to take
his Action against the Ordinary himself to deliver him the goods? The Opinion
of the Justices of the Bench was, That he could not have an Action of Account,
but a Detinue, or might sue in the Ecclesiastical Court for the goods. -- 36*
H. and. C. B. Anderson Rep. Cas. 86.
by them all, That such Release is void; for an Infant by his own Laches and
Folly shall not prejudice himself. Yet a Feme Covert Executrix may receive
money (without her Husband) which was due to her Testator, and give an
Acquittance for the same; and if she gives an Acquittance for debt which causes
a Devastavit, the Release shall be good, and the Wife and Husband bound
thereby; the reason is, for that the Wifes Administering without her Husbands
Consent, is and shall be accounted the Husbands Folly; but an Infants Folly
shall not be reckoned to his prejudice: But if one be in debt to the Testator
upon a simple Bond or Obligation, and the Infant Executor receive the money and
give Acquittance; in that Case the Acquittance is good, because there is a
necessity for it, for otherwise the Obliger is not bound to pay the same; and
in that Case there is no folly in him.

CHAP. X. Of a Woman under Coverture made Executrix, or making Executors.
1. Whether the Husband may fix an Executrixship on his Wife without or against
her consent? 2. Whether she may assume or accept the Executrixship without or
against his consent? 3. The difference between the Common and the Canon, or
Spiritual Law in this point. 4. How the Wife may be said to be an Executrix
without her Husbands consent. 5. In what case a Wife may make an Executor
without her Husbands consent. 6. In what cases she may make her own Husband, or
any other her Executor.
1. IF the Husband of a Woman appointed Executrix in a Will, would have his
Wife to take upon her the Execution of the Will, to which she will not assent,
but refuse the Executrixship when her Husband would have her to take the
Execution thereof: In this Case the Executrixship is not to be fastened on her
against her will; Panor. in c. Jo. de Test. extr. nu. 3. and Olden. de Execut.
ult. vol. tit. 7. in fine. and alii.
but Administration is to be granted to the next of Kin, as in case of
Intestation. But if the Husband, though the Will be not Proved, does Administer
as in the Wifes Right, though against her mind and will, she will hereby be so
bound and concluded, as that during his life she may not decline or avoid the
Executrixship: Offic. Exec. c. 17.
But not so after his death, for then she may in this case refuse. 1 Eliz.
Dyer, 166. B. where is cited 3 H. Rot. 112.


2. As a Wife named or appointed Executrix in a Will may not be compelled unto
the Execution thereof, without her own and her Husbands consent: so neither
shall she assume or accept such Executrixship without her Husbands consent and
approbation, because it is in his power to oppose and hinder it. Offic. Exec.
ubi supra.


3. That the Wife appointed Executrix in a Will, may neither assume nor be
compelled to the Executrixship without her Husbands consent, is true Doctrine
only at the Common Law; Bryan Chief Just. 2 H. 7. 15.
for by the Canon or Spiritual Law, which does not, like our Common Law,
distinguish between Women married and unmarried in such matters, it is
otherwise. 2 H. 7. 15. b.
For there the Wife may sue or be sued apart and alone without her Husband; and
therefore in that Court the Husbands disassent, denial, or refusal would be of
small force to hinder the committing of the Executrixship to the Wife, she not
refusing. But by the Law of England the Wife is so under the Husbands power, 33
H. 6. 31. 43. 39 Ed. 3. 1.
that she is not capable of contradicting in pleading or doing other Acts;
insomuch that she could not take Lands nor Goods by Gift or Conveyance without
her Husbands Assent. 27 H. 8. 24.
And therefore the Husband may express his disassent as to his Wifes Proving
the Will wherein she is made Executrix.

4. If a Woman Sole be made an Executrix, and she marry before she intermeddle
with the Estate, and then her Husband does Administer; this is such an
acceptance as will bind her, and she can never afterward refuse it. Brook.
tit. Execut. 147.
Likewise, if once the Wife Administer, though without the Husbands privity and
assent, and though no Will Proved; This will go far to conclude them both for
ever after from pleading, That she neither was Executrix, nor Administered as
Executrix. The Law is the same, if once the Will be Proved, and the Execution
thereof committed to the Wife, though against her Husbands mind and consent.

5. A Wife or a Woman Covert, being Executrix to another, and in that Right
having Goods moveable, may thereof make her Testament, and without her Husbands
consent; Fitzh. Abrid. tit. Execut. nu. 20. and Brook. eod. tit. nu. 11. and
Perk. tit. Devise, cap. 8. fol. 97.
because she has not such Goods merely to her own use, but as representing the
person of another; and therefore such Goods as she so has as Executrix, are
not her Husbands, but are to be disposed of for the use of the Testator. And
not only so, but of these Goods she may make her Husband her Executor, Brook.
ibid. and Apolog. for proceed. in Courts Ecclesiastical, part. 1. c. 3. page
22. in fin.
or any other person without his License; unless instead of making an Executor
thereof, she bequeath the Goods whereof she is Executrix, by Devise or Legacy;
Plowd. in cas. inter Bransby and Grantham. fol. 525.
for even with her Husbands consent she cannot bequeath such Goods; or unless
she is not only Executrix but Legatary also, and has accepted of the Things
bequeathed not as Executrix but as Legatary, for thereby they are invested in
her Husband, Tract. de Rep. Angl. lib. 3. cap. 6.
for which reason they cannot be given from him without his License and
Consent. l. id quod nostrum. ff. de Reg. jur.
Thus also for the continuation of this Executorship, the Wife may make her
Executors and her Will as touching such Goods, Debts, or Credits, without her
Husbands Consent, to whom no benefit could redound by the Administration of
these Goods which his Wife has in right of another; for those Goods would go
and be to the next of Kin to A woman Covert Executrix may consent to a Legacy.
If there be two Executors, whereof one a Legatee, he may consent to his own
Legacy, and take it without the others assent. 11 H. 4. 8^. Roll. Abr. tit.
Devise.
the Testator, taking Administration de bonis non Administratis, in case the
Wife should die intestate. Plowd. in Cas. inter Greisbrook and Fox.
And therefore her Husband not being capable of advantage by such Goods, cannot
be thereby prejudiced. And so it is but Reason that the Wife should appoint her
Executors of such Goods, and continue the Executorship thereof according to the
mind of the first Testator, without the License or necessary consent of her
Husband; which Consent indeed as touching all Goods and Chattels which the Wife
had before Marriage, or since in her own Right, must be first had and obtained;
otherwise her appointing of Executors as to them will be invalid and of no
force.

6. A Woman (by the Common Law) may make her Husband Executor of such things
whereof she was Executrix to another before, or of a duty due unto her before
Coverture, or of a Rent being behind upon a Lease made unto her for term of
life, or of other Lease, or of any thing whereof the possession must be
obtained by Action: but she cannot make him Executor of that which she has in
her possession as in her own Right. T. 12 H. 7. fol. 22. Apol. of proceed. in
Courts Ecclesiastical, cap. 3. par. 1. page 22.


CHAP. XI. Of Debtors and Creditors made Executors, or Administrators.
1. How the making a Debtor Executor becomes a Release of the Debt in Law. 2.
In what Cases this holds true where there are joynt-Executors appointed. 3.
Under what limitations a Creditor-Executor has precedence of other Creditors
in paying himself first. 4. Law-Cases relating to this Subject.
1. IF an Executor Prove the Will, and be indebted to the Testator, the Debt is
extinct in Law; 2. Ed. 4. 3. 61. Plowd. Com. 36.
yea, though the Executor died before he did ever Administer or Prove the Will;
Plowd. Com. 185.
for the Debt is released in Law by making the Debtor Executor, though he never
Administer. 21 E. 4. 3. and 11 H. 6. 38.
There is the like extinguishment of the debt, if the Creditor marry with one
of the Executors of the Debtor: (...) H. 4. f. 83, 84.
But if the Debtor take Administration of the Goods of the Creditor, this ought
not to discharge him of his debt, but it ought to be as Assets in his own
hands, for that the Intestate did no Act to discharge him from the debt. Also
if the Obligee make the Obligor his Executor, this is a Release in Law of the
Action, but the Duty remains, for the which they retain so much Goods of the
Testator. 8 E. 4. 3. and 21 E. 4. 2. Coke Con. on Littl. Instit. part. 1. lib.
3. c. 8. Sect. 445. in med.
Likewise, if an Infant of the age of Seventeen years release a Debt, this is
void: But if the Infant make the Debtor his Executor, this is a good Release in
Law of the Action. Coke ibid.
But if a Feme-Executrix take the Debtor to Husband, this is no Release in Law;
for that is injurious to the deceased, and in Law works a Devastavit. Ibid and
Mich. 30, and 31 Eliz.
But if the Testator make the Wife of one indebted to him his Executrix, it is
a Release in Law, as if she her self were the debtor; but if after the
Testators death she do marry with such a debtor, then it is a devastation.
Offic. Exec. cap. 17. Sec. 1.
Also if A. and B. be made Executors; the Testator being indebted to A. Ten
pound, and B. being indebted to the Testator Ten pound, in this Case the debt
of B. to the Testator stands in Law extinct. Ibid. cap. 2. and 21 H. 7. 31.
Plowd. Com. 185. contra Danby and Choke. 8 E. 4. 3.
And as it is thus at the Common Law; so also by the Civil Law, when the
Creditor makes the Debtor his Executor, by such Executorship the debt is
confounded, and that because of impossibility in Law, forasmuch as the Executor
cannot bring an Action of debt against himself, being one and the same person;
the Obligation therefore is by secret Act of Law disannulled. Phil. Dec. ad
Reg. jur.


2. So also it is if any one of joynt-Debtors be made Executor, or any one of
the joynt-Executors be a debtor to the Testator, for that they cannot Sue
without making him who is a Debtor also a Plaintiff, which he is not capable of
against himself. Plowd. ubi supra. and 2 R. 3. 20. per Starkey. and 22. per
Vavasor.
The Law is also the same for Actions either of Trespass or Account. Ibid. 9 H.
5. 13.
So that if Two persons be jointly bound to the Testator in One hundred pound,
and he make one of them his Executor, this is held for a Release in Law of the
Bond or debt to them both. Fulbec. Parallels. lib. 1. Diolog. 7. fo. 44. and 11
H. 4. pl. 31. and 21 E. 4. 81.
So if one make his Debtor and another his Executors and die, in this Case if
that Executor who was not indebted to the Testator survive the indebted
Executor, he shall not have an Action of debt against the Executor of his
Co-Executor although the indebted Executor did not Administer in his lifetime:
for the Action was once extinguished and determined, and no Action can be
brought but in the Name of them both. 20 E. 4. 17. and 21 F. 4. 3. and 21 H. 7.
31. per Fineux.
But if one that is indebted make his Creditor and another his Executors, the
Creditor may have an Action if he do not Administer; 8 E. 4. 3. per Brian.
But when the Testator is indebted to me and makes me his Executor, I may
detain the Goods for my debt: So that it seems, that though the Action be
extinct in regard of the Testator, yet the debt is still in esse in respect of
strangers or other Creditors. 7 H. 18. 27 H. 6. in Scir. fac. 7 El. Com.
Greisbrocks Case. 275. and Labridg. dez Cases, Edit. A. D. 1599. tit. Execut.
nu. 3. and Fulb. ubi supra. f. 44. and l. Scimus.. in Computatione. Cod. de
jure Deliberandi.


3. When a Creditor to the Testator is made his Executor, he may detain so much
of the Testators Goods, as whereby to satisfy himself in the first place
before other Creditors. But withal, although the Testators Creditor, being
made his Executor, be in as good case or better than other Creditors of the
Testator, Dict. l. Scimus.. in Comput. and cap. Stat.. Statuimus. l. 3. prin.
Constable. Cant.
and may allow his own debt before other like Creditors, Plowd. in Cas. inter
Woodward and Parry. and Labridg. dez Cases. fol. 174. nu. 3.
and may detain so much of the Goods of the deceased in his own hands as his
debt does amount to; Fulb. ubi sup. fol. 44.
yet this is to be understood only when he has duly made an Inventory of the
Deceaseds Goods according to Law; dict. L. Scimus.. in Com.
Nor has he such a clear power to pay himself before any other, unless his
debt be by Specialty or upon Record. Plowd. Com. 185.
And as an Executor has his Election to pay which Creditor he will first, that
is of equal degree for quality of debt; so has he election to pay and satisfy
himself of what part of the Testators Goods he will, yea, though the Testators
Goods amount in all to no more than his own debt. Offic. Exec. c. 2. nu. 4.
And if there come not to the hands of such Executor Goods sufficient to pay
himself, he may (as some conceive) have an Action of debt against the other
Executor where there are more than one. Plowd. Com. 185. and 13 H. 8. 15. and
11 H. 4. 83. and 12 H. 4. 21. and 20 Ed. 4. 17. and 21 H. 4. 3.
Sed Quaere, Whether after he has once Administered, specially if he pay
himself any part of the debt, he have not thereby barred or disabled his Suit
for the residue: Otherwise he may sue the Heir for his debt, if he has not
Administered as Executor; provided that the Bond extend to the Heir, which
without express words it does not, though for the Executor it be otherwise; and
so may sue the Heir, if the Heir be bound and he have not sufficient Goods as
Executor. 12 H. 4. 21. and Offic. Exec. ubi supra.
Always observing, that although it be commonly spoken in the general, That an
Executor may first pay himself, yet it is to be understood with this caution or
condition, That the debt to him be of equal weight and dignity with the debts
to others; for if his Testator were indebted to other men by any Statute,
Judgment or Recognizance, and to him, whom he makes Executor, only by Bond or
other Specialty, then may he not first pay himself, that is, by paying of
himself leave them unpaid whose debts are of a higher nature; but if there be
sufficient for satisfaction both to them and himself, then is it not material
which of them is first paid.

4. If an Obligee Release to the Executor of the Obligor before Pasch. 1 Jac.
B. per Curiam, Roll. Abridg. tit. Execut. A.
Probate of the Will, it is a good Release if he Prove the Will afterward.

If a Debtee die Intestate, and the Ordinary commit Administration to the
Debtor, whereby the debt is extinct, [Q.] yet it shall Trin. 7 Jac. B. Roll.
ibid. lit. G.
be Assets in his hands as to debts, because the Ordinary has no power to
discharge the debt. It was agreed per Curiam.

If Administration be committed to the Obligor, the same does not extinguish
the debt; but if the Obligee does make the Obligor Co. par. 8. 135. Sir John
Needham's Case.
his Executor, the same is a Release in Law of the debt, because it is the act
of the Obligee himself: But if a Woman, who is an Executrix takes the Debtor to
Husband, and the Husband dies, the same is no Release of the debt, because it
was only so suspended during the Coverture.

The Father and Son were jointly and severally obliged to A. Trin. 12 Jac. C.
B. Friar verse. Gildring. Moo. Rep. nu. 1174.
who made the Sons Wife his Executrix, and devised to her all his Goods after
his debts and legacies paid, and dies; the Wife Administers; the Son makes his
Wife also Executrix and dies; the Wife dies Intestate, Administration of the
Goods not Administered of the Obligee was committed to F. who sues G. the
Father, who was the surviving joynt-Obligor. And the Court was of Opinion, That
the making of the Wife of one of the Obligors Executrix was a suspension of the
Action during such time as the Executrixship continued, as 8 El. 4. 3. And
Nichols Justice said, That a Personal Action once suspended by the act of the
party; as here by the act of the Obligee, in making the Wife of one of the
Obligors his Executrix, shall be Extinct for ever; otherwise, if by the act of
Law. And it seemed to the Court, That by the last clause of the Devise of all
his Goods to the Wife after his Debts and Legacies paid, the Obligation passed
to the Wife. And inasmuch as that the duty and debt thereof is a thing in
action, which by our Law cannot be transferred by a Devise, yet it shall enure
as a Declaration of the intent of the Obligor, that the debt is extinct; and
the Civil Law allows a Devise of debts due to the Testator to be good. And it
is averred in the Principal Case, That the Debts and Legacies are all paid:
whereupon Judgment was given, Quod quaerens nihil capiat, etc.

The suggestion was, That whereas one was in debt to J. S. in Mich. 7 Jac. B.
R. Flud and Rumsey's Case. Yelv. Rep.
Thirty pound, who after by deed of Gift in his lifetime conveyed all his
Goods and Chattels to A. and after made the Plaintiff and B. his Executors, and
devised that the Plaintiff should pay out of the Thirty pound which he owed him
Ten pound to the Defendant for a Legacy; who brought the Plaintiff into the
Ecclesiastical Court for the same, where by the Law the Thirty pound debt is
extinct by making the Plaintiff Executor; and showed that he had Proved the
Will, etc. And per Curiam, the Defendant shall have a Consultation, forasmuch
as the joynt-Executor has no remedy to recover the Thirty pound against the
Plaintiff his Co-Executor; nor can have any Action for the same during the
Plaintiffs life, yet the debt not extinct, but remains as Assets to any other
Creditor, as is 8 E. 4. And by the same reason that one Debtor fait Executor,
uncore il paiera Legacies,
debt shall satisfy another debt, it shall satisfy a Legacy also; and much
the rather, in regard the express intent of the Testator was to that purpose,
having precisely limited the Legacy to be paid out of the debt. Quod not a per
totam Curiam. And Consultation was granted accordingly. Yelv. Council for the
Plaintiff.

CHAP. XII. The general difference between an Executor and an Administrator;
and wherein they generally agree.
THey differ thus, viz. An Executor is made either by the Testator, or by his
own Acts; but an Administrator is appointed only by the Judge. An Executor may
appoint an Executor to the first Testator, so cannot an Administrator; yet a
bare and mere Executor, or a naked Executor to whom nothing is bequeathed in
the Will, made choice of merely for his care, and not at all for his profit,
cannot bequeath the Testators Goods in his Will by Legacies, no more than an
Administrator; for these Goods are to be employed only for the behoof of the
Testator, in which respect such Executor is accountable as well as an
Administrator: But of the Profits and Fruits which happen and arise of those
Goods which belong to any as Executor he may make his Testament, though not of
the Goods themselves; and so also in some cases may an Administrator. They
agree thus, viz. An Administrator is entitled to all the Goods and Chattels of
the Intestate, as well as an Executor to all the Goods and Chattels that
belonged to the Testator; they are both alike liable to the payment of Debts
and Legacies, and they are both accountable. These are the most general things
wherein they differ and agree. Their more particular agreements and
disagreements are very many according to their distinct Beings, Interests, and
Offices: For which reason the Reader for his fuller satisfaction in this point
is referred to his own Observations from the Contents of the several Chapters
of this Testamentary Treatise.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Executors Rights exclusively to the Heirs.
1. The several divisions and distinctions of such things as come to the
Executor; and what Chattels are. 2. Of such Chattels real, living and moveable,
as accrue to the Executor. 3. Of such Chattels real, without life and
immovable, as go to the Executor. 4. Of Chattels personal, living and
moveable, belonging to the Executor. 5. Of Chattels personal, without life and
moveable, pertaining to the Executor. 6. Several Laws in reference to this
subject.
1. ALL things that come unto an Executor may be divided into things possessory
and actually in the Testator, or into things only in action and not actually in
him; and the things possessory may be divided into Chattels real and
immovable, or into Chattels personal and moveable. Again, the possessory
Chattels real may be divided into things living, or into things without life.
Also the personal Chattels or Goods moveable may be divided into things living,
or things inanimate and without life. There are also comprehensive of some of
these, Chattels principal, and Chattels accessory that follow the principal. So
that Chattels are all possessions of Goods moveable and unmovable, except such
as are in the nature of a Freehold or parcel of it. And they are called real
or immovable, either because they are such in their own nature; or because
they appertain to something real by way of dependence, as a Box with writings
of Land, the body of a Ward, the fruit of a Tree, or the Tree it self upon the
Land; or because they issue out of things immovable and of a more real nature,
as Leases for years, at Will, Wardships, Tenants Estates by Statute Merchant,
Staple, or Elegit, and Grants of the next Advowson.

2. The Chattels Real, Living and Moveable, which did accrue to the Executor,
were such as these, viz. Wardship, being a real Chattel in respect of a Tenure
of Land, whereby was intended such Wardship as was by Knights Service, and not
such as is by Socage Tenure; also a Villain for years, as by Grant for a Term
from him that had the Inheritance.

3. The Chattels Real without Life and Immovable, that go to the Executors,
are generally and for the most part in Houses or Lands, by Lease, or extent
upon Judgments, Statutes, or Recognizances; or in things issuing out of Houses
or Lands, as Rents, Commons, and the like; as arrerages of Rent behind at the
Testators death; also Advowsons, Tithes, Fairs, Markets, Profits of Leets, and
the like which the Testator had only for years. Also, the Title accrewed to the
Crown upon Attainder of Felony, where the party held not of the King, viz. the
Annum, Diem and Vastum, that is, power not only to take the Profits for a year,
but also to wast and demolish, etc. is but a Chattel; And therefore though
granted to one and his Heirs by the King, yet shall go to the Executor not to
the Heir. No. Na. Bre. 88. Reg. Orig. fol. 102.
Also, a Lease for years determinable upon lives, which is a Chattel, and shall
go to the Executor; 37. Ass. p. 11. An Executor of a Lord shall have Fines
Assessed upon the Tenants at their admittances in the Lords time.
As also does an Extent upon a Statute. Likewise, if a Termer for years grant
his Term by Bequest or otherwise to A. and his Heirs; if A. dies, his
Executors, not his Heirs shall have it, for it is no Inheritance. Or if such a
Termer grant a Rent out of the Land to A. and his Heirs, or the Heirs Male of
his body, yet shall it go to the Executor not to the Heir, for it being derived
out of a Chattel, it self remains a mere Chattel, and becomes not any
Inheritance. Rent.
Offic. Exec. cap. 5.
Also, if a Rent be granted out of Land to one in Fee-Simple, Fee-Taile, for
Life or Years, and it be not paid to him in his lifetime, the Arrerages shall
go to his Executor not to his Heir. Or if a man seized of Land and possessed of
a stock of Cattle, Let it for Years and Covenant with the Lessee that he pay to
Him and his Wife, their Heirs and Assigns, one hundred pound per annum during
the Term; in this Case after the death of the Lessor, his Wife surviving him,
her Executor and not his Heir shall receive this payment. Dye^. 275.
Again, if A. grant the next Presentation of the Church of B. unto D. In this
Case if D. dies, his Executor shall have it as a Chattel. Dyer. 283. 34 H. 6.
27. Presentation.
Not the Heir. Or if A. grant a Lease for years of Land to D. and his Heirs,
and dies; his Executor and not his Heir shall have this Term. Coke 10. 87.
Littl. Sect. 740. Fitzh. Account. 56. F. N. B. 120. and Brownl. 1 part. 77.
106. Terms of years.
And if A. possessed of a Term of years of Land, grant it by Deed, or give it
by Will to D. and his Heirs, or to D. and his Heirs Males, or devise it by Will
to B. for life, the remainder to D. and his Heirs; in these Cases D. shall have
these Terms of years as Chattels, and after his death his Executor shall have
them. Coke 8. 95. 10. 87. Plowd. 524. Lease for years.
Also, if a Lessee for life make a Lease for years absolutely; This in Law is a
Lease for so many years, if the life live so long, and shall go to the Executor
after his death. Brownl. 19. 30. 1. part. Coke 7. 12.
And if one makes a Feoffment in Fee of Land, the Feoffee covenanting to do
diverse things to the Feoffor, and to forfeit five pound to him and his Heirs as
often as he shall fail performance, Forseitures on breach of Covenants.
and the Feoffee does fail and break his Covenant diverse ways, and the Feoffor
dies; in this case his Executor, not his Heir, shall have and recover all the
Forfeitures that are past and unpaid. Also if any Goods or Chattels be granted
to any Heads of Bodies Politic and their Successors, their Executors and not
their Successors shall have them. Sheph. Epit. chap. 155. fo. 983.
In like manner, if a Lease for years be made to a Bishop and his Successors
and he die, his Executor, not his Successor, is to have it. New Terms of Law.
Tit. Assigns. and Coke sup. Littlet. 46.


4. Among the living Chattels Personal that go to the Executor, may be
comprehended an Apprentice for years, the interest of a Debtor in Execution for
debt, and in a Prisoner taken Jure belli. No. Na. Br. 88. Reg. Orig. fol. 102.
Also Cattle of all kind; yea, and Fishes in a Pond, Conies in a Warren, Deer
in a Park, Pigeons in a Dove-house, where the Testator was but a Termer or
Lessee thereof, for then they are to go to his Executor as Accessory Chattel
following the State of their Principal, viz. the Pond, Warren, Park, and
Dove-house: Offic. Exec. c. 5.. 1.
Or if the Conies, Pigeons, or Deer were all tame, they are then likewise to go
to the Executor, and not to the Heir; so likewise are Hawks reclaimed; yea, it
is felony to steal Hawks young in the Nest; which implies that they are Goods
and belong to the Executor. Ibid. cap. 5.


5. Chattels Personal, without life and moveable, as all Householdstuff,
Implements and Utensils, Money, Plate, Jewels, Corn, Pulse, Hay, Wood felled,
Wares, Merchandise, Ships, Carts, Plows, Coaches, etc. are evident to belong to
the Executor, not to the Heir. And generally all things sowed and not arising
from the Earth without manuring, go to the Executors^; and such things as grow
of themselves to the Heir; therefore Corn in the Corn standing.
field growing or standing shall go to the Executor. Perk. tit. Devise, fol. 99.
Also Hops, though not sown if planted; likewise Hemp and Saffron do like Hops.
Corn growing pertain to the Executor. Also after Corn reaped, and before the
Tithes set out, the Inheritor of the Tithes dying, his Executor and not his
Heir seems to have the best right to the Tithe set out.
Tithe after set out. Offic. Ex. ubi supra.
Also things above ground in Gardens, as Mellons of all kind, and the like, go
to the Executor, not to the Heir; as also all other things as have such a
yearly setting or manurance, Garden Fruits.
as severs them in interest from the soil. Ibid.
Also the Writings and Evidences that concern not the inheritance, but only
Writings and Evidences touching Chattels.
Leases, Terms, Goods, Chattels, or Debts, pertain to the Executor. If one that
holds Land for the Life of A. B. sow the Land, and A. B. happen to die ere it
be ripe and cut, and he that so Corn standing.
holds the Land happen to die also before it be ripe, the Executor of the
Tenant shall have the Corn. And if the Tenant in Tail sow the Land he does so
hold, and die ere it be cut; the Executor, not he in Reversion, nor the Heir,
nor the Issue in Tail shall have it. Also, if A. make a Feoffment of Land to B.
excepting Trees.
the Trees thereon, which he afterward grants to B. for years; in this Case
the Trees are in the nature of a Chattel, and if B. dies his Executor shall
enjoy them. Coke 4. 63.
Or if A. seized in Fee of Lands whereon Trees grow, sell these Trees to B. who
then dies before they be felled; in this Case the Executor or Administrator of
B. shall have them, and may sell or cut them down. Coke 11. 50. and Perk. Sect.
58.
Lastly, The Executor without contradiction of the Heir may in any convenient
time after the Testators death, enter into the house descended to the Heir for
the removing and taking away of the Goods, so as the door be open, or at least
the key be in the door; 21 H. 6. 30. If other Goods chance to be taken among
them, he is excused. 21 H. 7. 25. Vid. Lib. Intr. 640.
but he cannot justify the breaking open of the door of any Chamber to take
Goods thence: But if the Goods be not removed in convenient time, the Heir may
distrain them as Damage Fesante.

6. If a Lease for years be made to a Bishop and his Successors, and he die,
his Executor, not his Successor is to have it. New Terms of Law. Tit. Assigns.
and Coke sup. Littl. 46.
If a Presentment to a Church happen to a Tenant in Tail, and he die before he
Presents; his Executor, not his Issue in Tail shall Present, because the
Chattel is not divested; Likewise if a Termer have Presentation to a Church.
a Presentment which does happen during the Term, though he do not Present, yet
he shall have it. F. N. B. 34. a. B. Perk. Sect. 97. Bodies Politic.
If a Parson, Vicar, Master of a Hospital, or any Body Politic be possessed of
any Goods or Chattels in their own Right, and die, they shall go to their
Executors or Administrators, not to their Successors. Coo. 4. 65. Perk. Sect.
58. Advowson.
If a Lease be made for years, or the next Advowson of a Church, or Covenant
for payment of money or the like be granted, or an Obligation made to one and
to his Heirs; In all these Cases he has this as a Chattel, and it shall go to
his Executor, and not to his Heir: So if any such thing be granted to one and
his Successors, his Executors shall have it: And if the Heir or Successor get
the Deed, the Executor may Recover it from them. Littl. Sect. 740. 14 H. 4. 24.
34 H. 6. 27. (...). N. B. 120. Broo. Oblig. 18. 68. Fitz. Account 56. Chest of
Writings.
If one has a Box, or Chest, or Trunk full of Writings at his death, and the
same is open, not sealed or locked; this shall go as Goods to his Executor: but
if it were sealed or locked, as incident to the writings, it would be the Heirs
whose the Writings be. 22 Ed. 4. 7. and 3 H. 7. 15.
If a man has a Term, and Devises the same to one, and the Heirs of his body;
his Heir shall not have it, but it shall go to his Executors, because a Term
which is but a Chattel, cannot be Entayled. vid. 28 Eliz. Peacocks Case, and 21
Eliz. Higgins and Mills Case, Adjudged acc. In like manner, if a Devise be made
of Land to one, and the Heirs of his body for Five hundred years, it is a
Release for years, and his Executors Co. 10. Loves 87.
shall have it; For an Executor shall have all Leases for years; and although
the Heir, and not the Executor, shall have the writings which concern the
Inheritance, yet the Executor and not the Heir, shall have the Chest wherein
such writings are, if the Chest were 18 F. d. 4. 3. 41 Ed. 3. 2. 14 H. 4. 6.
Roll. Abr. tit. Execut. lit. v.
not locked; but if locked, then the Heir shall also have the Chest, as
aforesaid.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Heirs Rights exclusively to the Executors.
1. Of things Personal, that go to the Heir, not to the Executor. 2. Of things
Real, that belong to the Heir, not to the Executor. 3. A Law Case touching the
same.
1. TO the Heir, not to the Executor, do belong Fishes in a Pond, Conies in a
Warren, Deer in a Park, and Pigeons in a Dove-house, where the Testator had
the Inheritance in the Pond, Warren, Park, or Dove-house; for such are not
Chattels at all in that case, nor to go to the Executor, but to the Heir
together with the inheritance. Kelways Rep. fol. 118.
Also Grass growing for Hay, and Trees growing or standing (except as in the
last precedent Chapter) and the Fruit thereon, go to the Heir not the Executor.
Perk. tit. Devise, fol. 99.
Also, Glass, whether by nails or otherwise affixed to the windows, either by
the Lord or the Lessee, descends not to the Executor but to the Heir, as being
made parcel of the Freehold or Inheritance of the house. Coke Rep. lib. 4. in
Herlakendens Case. in fin. fol. 63, 64.
But if there be Glass from the windows, or Wainscot loose, or doors more than
are used, that are not hanging, they shall then go to the Executor. Coke 4. 63.
21 H. 7. 26.
As to the Heirs Rights the Law is the same as to Wainscot if affixed or
fastened to the house; Coke ubi sup. in Herlakenden's Case.
yet by the Civil Law such things as are in the house more for Ornament than
Structure, pertain not to the house. Rebuff. and D. D. in L. pen. ff. de Verb.
Sign.
Nor is it material whether the Wainscot be fastened by great or little nails,
by skrews or irons thrust through, or by other ways or means; for it suffices
to make it parcel of the Freehold, and consequently to go to the Heir not to
the Executor, if it be any way affixed or In the latter end of H. seventh's
time, an Executor taking a Furnace, which was set in the middle of a Room, and
not fixed to any wall, was adjudged as a Trespasser to the Heir.
fastened to any part of the house. The Law is also the same concerning all
things fastened to the Freehold or to the ground by mortar or stone, as Tables,
Dormant, Leads, Mangers, Milstones, Anvils, Doors, Keys, Glass-windows and the
like; for none of these be Chattels, but parcels of the Freehold, and therefore
belong to the Heir, not to the Executor. Kelways Rep. fol. 88. nu. 2. and
Labridg. dez Cases tit. Execut. fol. 181. nu. 4. and Offic. Ex. ubi supra.
Also Writings and Evidences that concern the Inheritance do pertain to the
Heir; also the Boxes and Chests wherein the Writings and Evidences of
Inheritance are kept, and usually have ever been employed only for that
Service, shall go to the Heir not to the Executor, whether sealed or not
sealed, locked or not locked. Offic. Ex. cap. 5. and 41 E. 3. 2. and 36. H. 6.
26. and 18 E. 3. 4. and 3 H. 7. 15.
Also in some Cases Corn in the ground shall go to the Heir not to the
Executor; for if a Lessee for years Certain sow the Land a little before the
end of his Term, and the Term end before it be cut; in this Case he that is to
have the Land, not the Executor of the Lessee for years shall have the Corn.
Dyer 316. and D. and Stud. 35. and Perk. Sect. 59.
And if one be seized of Land in Fee, and thereof make a Lease for years,
paying Rent at Michaelmas, or within ten days next after, and the Lessor
happen to die within the term after Michaelmas, and before the ten days
expired; in this Case the Heir of the Lessor and not his Executor, shall have
the last half years Rent due at Michaelmas. Hill. 7 Jac. B. R. per curiam.
Lastly, Things under ground, whether in Gardens or elsewhere, as Carrets,
Parships, Turnips, Skerrets, and other such like things under ground, shall go
to the Heir, not to the Executor. Offic. Ex. cap 5.


2. Where a Rent is reserved upon a Lease for years, there it shall not go to
the Executor, but to the Heir with the Reversion, other than the Arrerages of
such Rent as were behind at the time of the Testators death, for such belong to
the Executor not to the Heir. St. 32 H. 8. cap. 37. and Coke 4. 48.
If A. mortgage the Inheritance of Land to B. upon Condition of Redemption by
payment of one hundred pound to B. his Heir or Executor, and B. dies, the Deeds
being delivered into his hands: In this Case the Heir not the Executor shall
have the Deeds; for though the money may be paid to the Executor, yet in the
mean time the Land descends to the Heir; nor is there any debt to the Executor,
because it is in the Election of A. whether he will pay or not. But if on the
other side the Land had been sold for one hundred pound not paid to A. but a
Condition, that if not paid to him, his Heir or Executor by such a day, then to
Re-enter, and A. dies: In this Case there is a debt to his Executor, and no
Land descended to the Heir of A. yet shall the Heir have the Deeds, because
there is a Condition descended to him. Offic. Ex. ubi supra.
But if a Feoffee in Mortgage, before the day of payment which should be made
to him, make his Executors and die, and his Heir enters into the Land as he
ought; In this Case the Feoffor ought to pay the money at the day appointed to
the Executors and not to the Heir of the Feoffee: Littl. Inst. lib. 3. cap. 5.
Sect. 339.
Unless the Condition were, that the Feoffor pay to the Feoffee or to his Heirs
such a sum of money at such a day, then it ought to be paid to the Heir. Ibid.
Also where the Testator recovereth Land and Damages, or a Deed and Damages,
and dies before Execution, the Heir shall have Execution for the Land or Deed,
and the Executor for the Damages; but until the Heir sue a Scire Facias, the
Executor cannot 43 E. 3. 2. 10 E. 4. 5, 6.
sue Execution for the Damages; for Execution must be first of the Deed, then
of the Damages. Also, if Executors keep in their own hands for the space of
one, two or three years Lands devised by Will to be sold for any purpose,
converting in the mean time the profits thereof to their own proper use, the
Heir of the Testator may enter to the Lands, and put out the Executor, Perk.
tit. Devise, fol. 104, 105. and Brook. Abridg. tit. Devise, nu. 19.
unless the money for the Land to be sold be to be distributed in pios usus;
Ibid.
because in this Case the Frank-tenement after the Testators death is in the
Executors, not in the Heir: Kelways Rep. fol. 107, 108. nu. 25.
for which reason the Heir cannot enter in this Case as he might in the former.

3. In an Action of Debt brought against Executors; They were at Issue if
Assets were in their hands or not; and the Jury found by a Special Verdict,
That the Testator was seized of a House in Fee, and made a Lease thereof, and
of certain Implements of household in it for years, rendering Rent to Him, his
Heirs, and Assigns; and found that the Executors after the death of the
Testator, continually received the Rent, and prayed Advice of the Court, if the
same were Assets in the Executors hands? And the Opinion of the Court was, That
it was not Assets; for that the whole Rent was to go with the Land in
Reversion, as magis digne; and so did belong to the Heir, not the Executors.
Hill. 20 Eliz. Dyer 361. vid. Plo. Com. 114. and 259. acc.


A man Wills, that after twenty years after the death of the Devisor, J. S.
shall have the Land in Fee; the Heir of the Devisor shall have the Land during
the Term, and not the Executor. Dyer' s Read. in St. of Wills. Sect. 3.. 4.


CHAP. XV. What goes neither to the Heir nor Executor, and in what Cases.
1. Bona By the Civil Law, Bona Parapherna sunt quae Mulier ultra dotem adfert
(it is a word borrowed from the Greek) and de his bonis Maritus
Administrationem habet, ita ut sine speciali uxoris mandato, and agere and
convenire possit. Myns. Inst. 97. Mention is made. thereof at the Common Law,
where it is called Bona Paraphonalia. 12 H. 7. 23. 18 Ed. 4. 11. b. And the
Wive's Apparel is called Bona Paraphonalia. 18 E. 4. 11. B, per Vavasor. The
Wife after her Husbands death shall have the apparel necessary for her, and not
her Husbands Executor. 37 H. 6. 28. and 33 H. 6. 31. Bro. Execut. 19.
Paraphernalia go neither to the Heir nor to the Exeeutor. 2. Things in
joynt-Tenancy go neither to the Heir nor to the Executor. 3. Things willed by
the Testator to be sold for certain uses, go to neither of them. 4. A Lease
simply for Three Lives goes neither to the Heir nor Executor.
1. BY the Civil Law those Goods belonging to the Wife, called Bona
Paraphernalia l. hac lege. and leg. fin. Cod. de Pact. Covent. sup. door.
descend neither to the Heir nor to the Executor, neither are they by that Law
subject unto the payment of the Husbands debts: l. ob maritorum. Cod. Ne Uxor
pro Marito.
But now under that notion of Bona Paraphernalia we are not to understand the
Wifes Apparel, with her Bed, Jewels and Ornaments for her person, to be
comprehended, but her convenient Apparel, and only such as is agreeable to her
degree; Dyer fol. 166.
and such shall go to the Wife only, the rest unto the Executor. And thus much
the very word being Etymologized does imply. What Paraphernalia are, see Alex.
lib. 1. Consil. 42. Col. 6. verse. nec Obstat. and Lib. 2. Consil. 63. Col. ult.


2. The Goods and Chattels which one has in Joynt-Tenancy with another, shall
not on his death go to his Executor nor to his Heir, but to the other surviving
Joynt-Tenant, and that by right of survivorship. Otherwise it is with Tenants
in common; for if A. and B. have Goods or Chattels in Joynt-Tenancy, and if
either of them grant what belongs to him, unto a Third person; in this Case,
that Third person, and he which kept his part unsold are Tenants in Common; and
therefore if either of them Two die, the deceaseds part of such Goods and
Chattels shall go to his Executor, and not to the surviving Tenant in Common.
Littl. Sect. 281. 320, 321. and Perk. Sect. 525, 526.
Also if Husband and Wife be Joynt-Tenants of Land, and the Husband die, the
very Corn growing thereon shall survive to her, together with the Land; and
though the Husband sowed it, yet shall it not go to his Executor. Eliz. Dyer.


3. The Moneys or Profits arising out of Lands Willed by the Testator to be
sold, are not accounted as any of the Goods or Chattels of the person deceased;
21 H. 8. 5.
and consequently do go neither to the Heir nor to the Executor, but to the
uses for which it was willed to be sold.

4. If one have a Lease simply for Three Lives to him and his Assigns; this is
no Chattel, therefore shall not go to the Executor; and it is no Land,
therefore it shall not go to the Heir; but in this Case it shall go to him who
first after the Testators death Enters and Claims it as an Occupant, if no
assignment thereof be made in the lifetime of the L^ssee. Offic. Ex. cap. 5.
But a Lease for years determinable upon Lives is a Chattel, and shall go to
the Executor. 37 Ass. p. 11.
So also does an Extent upon a Statute.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Indivisibility of the right and interest of Co-Executors.
Their Indivisibility 1. In point of Power and Authority. 2. In point of
Interest and Possession. 3. In Case of Plaintiffs and Defendants.

1. WHere there are more Executors than One, or Joynt-Executors to the same
Testator, One of them cannot give nor release his Interest to the other; or if
he does, it is void; and he who so releaseth, shall still have as much Interest
as he to whom he released, because each had the whole before. 9 E. 4. 12. 14.
21 E. 2. 13. (...) H. 8. 21, 22.
Therefore if one Executor release but his part of a debt, it has been held
that the whole is discharged. But if one Executor alone sell Goods of the
Testator, he alone may maintain an Action of debt for the money. 38 E. 3. f. 9.
So if Goods be taken out of the possession of one Executor, he alone may
maintain an Action for the same, and that without naming himself Executor.
Offic. Ex. c. 9.
Also, one Executor not joining in suit with another, may any time before
judgment release, but after Judgment he cannot, because then it is altered in
nature, and turned into Rem Judicatam. And though many Executors to one and the
same Testator make but one Executor, yet the devastation, wast, or misdoing of
one shall not charge the rest, nor make their Goods liable for recompense; Book
of Entries, and so held in An. 12 H. 7. Lib. Entr. f. 327. and Kelw. Rep. fo.
23. and 11 H. 6. 38. and a. 4 Eliz. Dyer 210. and P. 4 H. 8. Rot. 303. Tr. 34*
El. Pas. 36 Eliz.
but himself shall answer for it with his own Goods, yet no further than the
value of the Testators Goods so wasted or misadministred.

2. If one of the Executors where there be Two or more, grant his part of the
Testators Goods, all passes, and nothing is left to the other; for that each
has the whole, and there be no Parts or Two have a Lease for years as
joynt-Executors, if one of them alien the whole, it shall bind the other; for
each has an entire power to dispose the whole, both being possessed in right
of the Testator. 37 Eliz. B. R. inter Panel and Fen. Agreed and Adjudg'd.
Roll. Abr. tit. Execut. lit. O.
Moities between Executors; Thus, if an Horse come to four Executors, each has
a Horse, and yet all four have but one. Also, though a Lease for One thousand
Years of One thousand Acres of Land come to Two Executors or more, no partition
or division can be made between them, because it is not between them as between
joynt-Lessees of Land, where each has but a Moitie in Interest, though
possession of and through the whole; but among Executors each has the whole;
and therefore if he grants his part, he grants the whole; yet one Executor may
demise or grant the Moitie of the Land for the whole term, and so may the
other: and this way they may settle a Moitie for each in some Third person
entrusted for them; but one Executor cannot make a Lease to the other of any
part, because he had the whole before; nor can one of them Sue the other as
Executor, unless the Testator devise to one of his Executors all his Goods,
after such Debts and Legacies paid and satisfied; for in such Case after
satisfaction thereof that Executor may take the remainder of the Goods, and
maintain an Action of Trespass against the other if he take them from him, and
consequently an Action of Detinue if he keep or detain them; but this he may do
not as Executor, but as Legatee.

3. Where there are diverse Executors, they are all but as one person, and
therefore cannot plead several pleas being sued; 37. H. 6. 17. 9 H. 6. fol 44.
38 E. 3. 9 Brook. Exec. 13. 20, 21.
all of them represent the Testators person, and they must all join in Suits as
Plaintiffs, and be joined as Defendants, or at least so many of them as have
Administered; therefore one Executor sued, if he plead that there is another
Executor not sued, must also plead that that other has Administered. 9 H. 6.
44. Bro. 13. 33 H. 6. 38. Bro. 20,
Thus Executors, though never so many represent the person of the Testator, as
one person. 9 Ed. 3. cap. 3.
Therefore all of them shall have but one Essoyn, neither before appearance nor
after, because their Testator himself, whose person they represent, could have
no more. And therefore where Executors as Defendants have appeared, if any one
of them will confess the Action, this binds and concludes the rest; but if one
will plead one Plea and the other another, some are of Opinion, that that shall
be received which is best for the Testators Estate. So where they Sue, such as
will not prosecute shall be severed, and the rest without them may proceed.
Offic. Ex. c. 9.
It is evident by what has been said, That Two Joynt-Executors being Sued
cannot plead two distinct Pleas, because they both represent but one person,
viz. the Testator, who could have but one only Plea. 37 H. 6. 30. and 7 H. 4.
13.
Yet others say, they shall have several pleas, and the most peremptory shall
be tried. 8 Ed. 4. 24. Execut. 31.
And if any one of Joynt-Executors Plaintiffs dies, the Writ abates, though he
so dying was for nonappearance on summons before severed; and so it is, if one
of the Co-Executors Defendants dies. Yea, if a Creditor Sue A. B. C. as
Executors, where only A. and B. are Executors, even there by the death of C.
the Writ abates. Also if a man make Three Executors whereof Two refuse the
Administration, yet they shall be Executors by the Will, and may Administer
when they please, and an Action ought to be in all their Names, otherwise the
Writ shall abate. Fulb. Paral. part. 2. Diolog. 3. fol. 33.


CHAP. XVII. Of the Executors Interest and Possession; and how it differs from
that which he has in his own proper Goods.
1. What may be said to be in the Executors Actual Possession, or not. 2. How
the Executors Interest in the Testators Goods differs from that which he has
in his own. 3. Whether an Executor may by Will bequeath the Goods he has as
Executor. 4. Whether the Administrator of an Intestate Executor may intermeddle
with the Goods of the first Testator. 5. How Testators and Executors are
Correlatives as to Chattels.
1. IN Chattels Personal the Executor has such an Actual Possession presently
upon the Testators death, though never so far distant from him, and without any
laying his hands actually on them, as that he may maintain an Action of
Trespass against any taking them away or spoiling them, though he or any for
him never came near them; Offic. Ex. cap. 10. in pri^.
but Chattels Real, as Leases for years, are not in his possession, till
himself or some for him actually enter thereupon. Perk. 6. 1.
But a Lease for years of Tithes, be the Executor never so far distant from
them at the time of the Testators death, shall be in his actual possession
instantly upon the setting out thereof, so as he may maintain an Action of
Trespass against any that shall take the same so set out, though he, nor any
for him did never actually lay their hands thereon. A. 5 E. 3. 17. and 21 H. 6.
43.
But in Glebe Lands into which Entry may be made, the Case may be otherwise.
Nor are Debts accounted to be in the Executors hands till recovered: So
likewise Arrears of Rents, yea, of Inheritance behind in the Testators
lifetime; for Executors are qualified to receive them also.

2. An Executors Interest, as Executor, is only in his Testators Right; Coke
lib. 9. 83. b. in Pinchons Case.
his Interest in his own Goods is absolute and proper; therefore, though the
Lord of a Villain might take all the Villains own Goods, yet he might not take
the Goods he had as Executor. Littl. tit. Villenage, 41, 42.
And from hence some have been of Opinion, that an Executor granting all his
Goods, these are excepted which he has as Executor, except the Executor
(according to the Lord Dyer) who is the Grantor, be named Executor in the
Grant. Offic. Ex. cap. 7.


3. Nor can the Executor by Will bequeath the Goods he has as Executor,
without a precedent alteration of the property thereof, and with a Reconveyance
thereof back to himself again.

4. An Executor dying Intestate, his Administrator cannot meddle with those
Goods the Intestate Executor had as Executor, but thereof Administration must
be granted. As De Bonis non Administratis to the next of Kin of the Intestate
Executors Testator. For the reason aforesaid, the Goods which a man has as
Executor, are not liable for the Executors debts, and therefore cannot be taken
in Execution for his own proper debts. Plowd. Com. 52. 5. inter Brans by and
Grantham, p. 20 Eliz.
For the same reason also the Goods which a Woman has as Executrix, are not
divested out of her into her Husband by marriage, nor can he have them after
her death without being his Wifes Executor. Upon the same ground it is (as was
but now hinted) that the Goods and Chattels of the first Testator in the hands
of his Executors Executor (no alteration of the property thereof being made by
his Executor) shall not be liable for satisfaction of the debts of his said
Executor: As thus, suppose A. makes B. his Executor and dies; B. makes C. his
Executor and dies; Now if B. made no alteration of the property of the Goods of
A. but merely left them to C. In this Case the Goods which so came to B. as
Executor to A. and so from B. to C. shall not be liable in Law to pay the debts
of B. the immediate Executor of A.

5. There is a further discovery of an Executors Interest as to Chattels Real,
wherein Testators and Executors are as Correlatives; for if a man make a Lease
for life to one, the remainder to his Executors for twenty one years, the term
of years shall immediately vest in the Lessee; for even as Ancestors and Heirs
are Correlatives as to Inheritance; so are Testators and Executors Correlatives
as to Chattels: And therefore if a Lease for life be made to the Testator, the
Remainder to his Executors for years, the Chattel shall vest in the Lessee
himself, as well as if it had been limited to him and his Executors. And thus a
Remainder of years limited to the Executors of a Lessee, shall presently vest
in the person of the Lessee himself, because Testators and Executors are
Correlatives as to Chattels.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Executors Right in opposition to the Heirs in reference to
Mortgages.
1. How the Executor does more represent the person of the Testator, than the
Heir does the person of his Ancestor. 2. The difference in point of payment,
whether to the Heir or to the Executor in Case of Mortgages.
1. IF the Feoffee in Mortgage before the day of payment which should be made
to him make his Executors and die, and his Heir enters into the Land as he
ought; in this Case the Feoffor ought to pay the money at the day appointed to
the Executors, and not to the Heir of the Feoffee; unless the condition were,
that the Feoffor pay to the Feoffee or to his Heirs such a sum of money at
such a day. Littl. Inst. lib. 3. cap. 5. Sect. 339.
Here note, That the Executors do more represent the person of the Testator
than the Heir does the person of the Ancestor; for though the Executor be not
named, yet the Law appoints him to receive the money, but not so the Heir,
unless he be named. Coke, ibid.
Here also note, That if the Condition upon the Mortgage be to pay the
Mortgagee or his Heirs the money, and before the day of payment the Mortgagee
dies, the Feoffor cannot in this Case pay the money to the Executors of the
Mortgagee. Ibid.
But if the Condition be to pay the money to the Feoffee, his Heirs or
Executors, then the Feoffor has election to pay it either to the Heir or
Executors. Ibid.


2. If a man make a Feoffment in Fee, upon Condition, that the Feoffee shall
pay to the Feoffor, his Heirs or Assigns, Twenty pound at such a day, and
before the day the Feoffor makes his Executors and dies, the Feoffee may as
aforesaid pay the same either to the Heir or to the Executors, for they are the
Feoffors Assigns to this intent: But if a man make a Feoffment in Fee, upon
Condition, that if the Feoffor pay to the Feoffee, his Heirs or Assigns, Twenty
pounds before such a Feast, and before the Feast the Feoffee makes his
Executors and dies, the Feoffor ought to pay the money to the Heir, and not to
the Executors, for the Executors in this Case are no Assigns in Law. And the
reason of this difference is, for that in the first Case the Law must of
necessity find out Assigns, because there cannot be any Assigns in Deed, for
the Feoffor has but a bare Condition, and no Estate in the Land which he can
assign over; but in the other Case the Feoffee has an Estate in the Land,
which he may Assign over: And where there may be Assigns in Deed, the Law
shall never seek out or appoint Assigns in Law. Coke, ibid.


CHAP. XIX. Touching the Executors Election to accept or refuse the
Executorship.
1. Of the Judges Power to affix the time for that Election; or in Case of the
Executors refusal what his Power is. If all the Executors write a Letter to the
Ordinary, desiring him to commit Administration, for that they cannot attend
the Execution of the Executorship or the Will, it is such a refusal as that
they cannot afterward Administer. Hill. 31 Eliz. B^wacorn verse. Cartor. Moo.
Rep. nu. 426.
2. In what Case a person may be compelled to accept the Executorship,
notwithstanding his Judicial refusal. 3. How one appointed Executor by the Will
may Administer, notwithstanding his refusal to Prove the same.
1. HE that is appointed Executor in a Will, may be summoned to appear before
the Judge of the Jurisdiction, to accept or refuse the Executorship. Boic.
Panor. and Bar. in C. Tua nos. de Testa. and Plowd. in Cas. int. Greisbr. and
Fox.
The time wherein he that is named Executor in the Testament, is to deliberate
and determine Legate in Libertatem. de Execut. Testa. and ibi. Jo. de Athon.
verb. approb. Consu.
whether he will accept or refuse the Executorship, is uncertain, and left to
the discretion of the Judge, who has used at his pleasure, and when he will,
not only within the year, but within a month or two to Cite him that is named
Executor to accept or refuse the Executorship; and upon the nonappearance or
refusal of such Executor to Prove the Will, the Judge may commit Administration
as of an Intestate. Brook Abr. tit. Admin. nu. 32. and tit. Execut. nu. 49.
102. and 31 H. 8. cap. 5.
And such Administrators Power is effectual in Law, until the Executor
undertake the Executorship. Bald. in L. deberi. C. de Fidei Commiss. and Plowd.
in Cas. int. Greisbr. and Fox.
For then the Judge may revoke such Administration. Broo. Abrid. tit. Admin. n.
33.
But if the Judge knowing that there is a Will, grant Administration, not
having first called the Executor to accept or refuse the Executorship; the
Executor when he shall have Proved the Will, may Sue such Administrator in an
Action of Thespass; Abridg. dez Cas. tit. Administ. nu. 2. fo. 183.
Because the Judge has no power to grant Administration but in Case of
Intestation, or that the persons named Executors either will not or cannot be
Executors. 21. H. 8. c. 5.


2. No man can be compelled to accept the Executorship, Panor. in C. Jo. de
Test. Ext. nu. 3. and Oldend. de Execut. ult. vol. tit. 7. in fin.
unless he has already intermedled with the Testators Goods as Executor;
Plowd. in Cas. inter Greisb. and Fox.
for then it is too late for him to refuse. Fitzh. Abrid. tit. Execut. n. 35.
Yet if any Legacy be given him in the Will, wherein he is named Executor, he
may then be compelled to accept the Executorship, or he shall lose his Legacy.
Gribal. These. Com. Opin. verb. Tutor. and Romans Consil. 235.
Yea, though he were of Kin or Allied to the Testator. Ibidem.
Yet the Wife shall not lose her Thirds, nor the Children their Filial Portions
by refusing the Executorship. Auth. hoc amplius. C. de Fidei. Com. Novel. de
haered. and Falcid.. si quis autem. Cok. 9. 37. Fitzh. tit. Admin. 6. 11. Bro.
tit. Adm. 32. Perk. Sect. 485. Dyer, 160. 21 Ed. 23.


3. Although where an Executor has Administered, he cannot afterward refuse,
because he has thereby determined his Election; and although where there is an
Executor and he refuse, or many and all refuse, the party is dead as Intestate,
and Administration is to be committed with the Will annexed; yet in case there
be diverse Executors, viz. A. B. C. and A. only refuse, and the Will be Proved
by the other Two, there A. continues an Executor, notwithstanding his refusal;
Coo. lib. 5. fol. 28.
so as he may still release debts of the Testator, and debts owing by the
Testator may be released to him. 22 Ed. 3. 19. and 15 Ed. 3. 8.
Yea, if Suit be to be had by or against the Executors, it shall not be in the
Names of B. and C. only, but A. also must be Named as a Plaintiff or Defendant,
or else the Action may be overthrown. 41 Ed. 3. fol. 22. and 21 Ed. 4. fol. 24.
Yea, this Executor which refused may afterward Administer at his pleasure,
and intermeddle with the Goods as well as the others; but after their death he
cannot so do; 42 El. Coke 9. fol. 36, 37.
for then the Executor of him that Proved the Will is only to Administer; and
the others refusal continuing to the death of his Co-Executor, his Power then
died also with him; but so long as the one Co-Executor lives that Proved the
Will, the other, though he refused the Executorship before the Judge, may yet
afterward, so long as the other lives, Administer the Goods, or Remit the
Debts due to the Testator; Bro. tit. Ex. (...). 38. Dyer fol. 160.
And that Co-Executor that so Proved the Will, cannot hinder him, nor can he
Recover against the persons by him so released. Bro. eod. tit. (...). 37. and
nu. 117. Vid. Part. 1. cap. 20.. 6.


Trespass. It was found by Verdict, That Sir Ralph Rowlet being possessed of a
Term, made his Last Will, and thereof made the Lord Keeper Bacon, Catlin Chief
Justice, and others his Executors, Mich. 29, and 30 Eliz. C. B. Broker verse.
Charter. (...). Rep. par. 3.
and Devised the Term to the Lord Catlin, and died. All the Executors wrote a
Letter to Dr. Dale, Judge of the Prerogative Court, That they could not intend
the Execution of the Will, and desired him to commit the Administration to
Henry Goodyer, the next Kin of the Testator; The Administration was accordingly
granted, but the Register Entered the Cause, viz. For that the Executors did
defer suscipere onus Testamenti. After this, Catlin Entered upon the Land
Devised to him, and granted it over; the doubt was whether this Grant were
good: 1. Whether the Letter were a sufficient Renunciation? 2. Whether (if they
once refuse) they may, after Administration granted, Administer at their
pleasure? Dr. Ford declared to the Justices, That by the Civil Law a Renouncing
may be as well by matter in Fact, as by a Judicial Act, and they may refuse per
parol, and Cited a Rule in the Civil Law, Non vult esse haeres, qui ad alium
vult transfer haereditatem; and Haereditas est totum jus quod defunctus
habuit. And to the second matter he said, Qui semel repudiaverit haereditatem,
amplius haereditatem petere non potest; and Qui semel repudiaverit, shall not
after be Executor, quia transit in contractum. And that Executors cannot refuse
for one time, but for ever; but they may pray time to Advise or Consider of
taking upon them the Executorship, and it ought to be granted; and in that Case
the Ordinary is to grant in the mean time Letters ad Colligendum, etc. but is
not to grant Administration. And for these Reasons there being a refusal, the
Grant made after Administration committed, was void; and so was the Opinion of
the Court.

CHAP. XX. Touching what Acts may or may not be done by an Executor, as well
before as after Probate of the Will.
1. An Executor may before Probate of the Will enter into the house of the Heir
to seize on the Testators Goods. 2. A limitation or qualification of that
Power. 3. In what Case payment must be made by or to an Executor, though no
Will yet Proved by him. 4. What Actions an Executor before Probate of the Will
may or may not maintain. 5. An Executor may before Probate of the Will make an
Inventory of the Testators Goods and Chattels. 6. Several other things which an
Executor may do before he has Proved the Will. 7. An Executor may retain the
Testators Goods to satisfy his own Debt.
1. THe Power of an Executor depends wholly upon the Will and designment of
the Testator. Now an Executor may before his Proving of the Will, seize and
take into his hands any of the Testators Goods; yea, enter into the house of
the Heir, if not locked, so to do, and to take the Specialties of debts; and
generally, he may do all things which to the Office of an Executor pertains,
except only bringing of Actions and prosecution of Suits; Offic. Ex. c. 3.. 1.
and 9 Ed. 3. fol. 33. 47. and 7 H. 4. 18.
for they cannot Sue till they have the Will under the Seal of the
Probat-Office.

2. Although an Executor may after the Testators death enter into the house
where he lived and died, and where his Goods are; and thence take them away
even before Probate of the Testament, yet understand it with this caution, That
he must do this within convenient and reasonable time, as within or about
thirty days next after the Testators death; and that also in a due and
peaceable manner when the doors are open. Littl. Sect. 69. Plowd. 281. Bro.
tit. Execut. 129.


3. An Executor may also before Probat of the Will pay debts and receive debts,
and make acquittances of debts owing to the Testator: Yea, if before such
Proving of the Will the day be come for payment upon Bond made by or to the
Testator, payment must be made by or to this Executor, though the Will be not
yet Proved, and that upon like pain of forfeiture, as if the Will were Proved.
Offic. Ex. ubi sup. Coke 6. 18. 9. 38. 5. 27. Plowd. 280. 9 Ed. 4. 47. 36 H. 6.
7. Fitzh. tit. Admin. 2. 6. and Brow. 1. part. 76, 77. 73. 53.
Also an Executor may before Probate give or sell any of the Goods and Chattels
of the Testator not otherwise bequeathed in the Wiil, and for the same may
maintain his Action.

4. For an Executor for Goods of the Testator taken from him, or for a Trespass
done upon the Lease Lands, or for a distraining or impownding of the Goods or
Cattle, may maintain Actions of Trespass or Replevin or Detinue even before the
Will be Proved, because these Actions arise out of the Executors own
possession. Dyer in Plo. Com. 281. Case of Greisbr. and Fox.
But an Action of Debt or the like contracted by the Testator he cannot
maintain before the Will be Proved, for therein he must show forth the Will
Proved under the Court-Seal. And as at the Common Law, If a man be bound to
another in a certain sum of money to pay at a certain day, and the Obligee
before the said day Release unto the Obligor all Actions, he is barred of the
duty for ever, though he could not have an Action at the time of the Release
made; even so may an Executor before Probate of the Testament Release an
Action. Trin. 2 Jac. in Com. Ban. inter Middleton and Rinnot. 18 H. 6. 23. b.
Pl. Com. 277, 278. in Greisbrooks Case. per Weston. vid. Coke, lib. 3. cap. 8.
Sect. 512.
And the Reason of both is, because the right of Action is in them, for that
the Debt is a thing consisting merely in Action; and therefore though no Action
as yet then lies for the Debt, yet because the Right of Action is in them, the
Release of all Actions is a discharge of the Debt it self.

5. Another thing that an Executor may do before the Proving of the Will, and
which is expedient for him, though as yet not so necessary, is the making of an
Inventory; for the Executor had need be cautious that he do not intermeddle
with, or Administer the Testators Goods until he has made an Inventory; for
although the Act of an Executor is said to hold in Law before the Proving of
the Will, Plowd. in Cas. inter Greisbrook and Fox.
and the making of an Inventory; Lynwood in C. Statut.. inventarium. tit. de
Testa. lib. 3. Constable. Prove. Cant. verb. prius.
yet for intermeddling with the Testators goods as Executor before he has made
an Inventory, or caused the same to be made, though not exhibited, he was
according to Law punishable; Legate in Libertatem de Execut. Testam.
unless it were for doing such things as could not conveniently be deferred
till the Inventory were made, as concerning things relating to the Funerals, or
disposing such things as Servando servari non possint, and such like. Jo. de
Atho. in dict. Legate in Libertatem. verb. inventarium. dict. C. Statut..
inhibemus. in Text. and in Gloss,
Besides, if he make not an Inventory and yet Administer, he may be compelled
to discharge out of his own purse more Debts and Legacies than happily the
Testators Goods and Chattels did amount to.

6. There are several other things which an Executor may do before he has
Proved the Will; and he may also keep any of the Goods of the Testator, so as
he pay out of his own money the value thereof in Administration of the
Testators Estate; Dyer 2.
he may also if he want money to pay Funerals, or discharge Debts, sell any of
the Chattels Real or Personal, whereof the Testator died possessed, yea, though
that thing were particularly bequeathed. As if a man be possessed of a Term of
years, and bequeath the same to A. B. the Executor may notwithstanding the
bequest at any time before his Assent given to the Legacy, if he have* not
Assets sufficient to pay the Debts, sell this Term of years, and the Legatee is
remediless. So also he may do, although there be Assets enough besides to pay
the Debts; but in such Case the Legatee may not be without all relief in a
Court of Equity against the Executor as to Damages; but the Sale is
unavoidable. Plowd. 543, 544.


Lessee for years Devised his Term to one whom he made his Executor, and died:
The Devisee entered before any Probate of the Will, and held and enjoyed the
Land for a year and more, without Proving of the Will, and then died; it was a
Question, whether his Executor, or in Case he died Intestate, his Administrator
should have the Term? It was the Opinion of the Court, That the Term was
lawfully settled in the Executor by his Entry; and it was a good Execution of
the Devise, without any Probate made of the Will. Mich. 22 Eliz. Dyer, 367.

Letters of Administration do relate to the time of the death of the Intestate,
and not to the time of the granting of them; and Mich. 1652. B. R. Long and
Hobbs Case. Styles 341.
therefore an Administrator may have an Action of Trespass, or a Trover and
Conversion for Goods, taken by one before the Letters granted to him; otherwise
there would be no Remedy of the wrong done.

Executors took the Testators Goods before they had Proved the Will; another
took Letters of Administration, and takes the Goods out of the Executors hands
before the Will was Proved: Pasch. 42 Eliz. Anders. Rep. par. 2. Case. 83.
The Executors bring their Action of Trespass against him who took the Goods;
the Court held that it did well lie; for after the Testators death the Goods
belong to the Executors, and to none other; and an Administration to
intermeddle with these Goods is utterly void; for that they have nothing to do
with those Goods as Administrator when there is an Executor.

7. An Executor may retain Goods in satisfaction of a Debt due to him from the
Testator, and the Retainer shall be held good. Plow. Com. 184.
Action of Debt was brought against the Executors of A. B. who pleaded that
they had fully Administered; the Plaintiff gave Evidence that they had Goods in
their hands; the Defendant showed, that the Goods were pledged by their
Testator, and that they had Redeemed them with their own money to the full
value; and that for the rest of the Goods, that they had paid to the Testator
as much for them as they were worth: It was holden, That the same did well
maintain their Issue of Fully Administered; for that an Executor shall by way of
Retainer be recompensed that which he has paid. 6 H. 8. Dyer 2. 20 H. 7.
Kellway 58.
But an Executor of his own wrong cannot retain Goods, but they shall be Assets
in his hands. Coo. 5. part 30. Coulters Case.
The like we have in another Case. Two men were possessed of Goods as
Executors; the one of them took the goods into his hands, and disposed of
diverse sums of money in pios usus, and pro anima Testatoris, which sums did
amount to more than the Goods of the Testator were worth; and he did retain the
Testators Goods as his own proper goods, converting the same to his own use,
whereof he died possessed, after he had made his Will, and therein Executors.
The surviving Executor brought Detinue of the said Goods against the Executor
to the value of One hundred pound, upon which the Defendant pleaded the matter
Supra. It was adjudged, That the Retainer was Lawful; and that those Goods now
in the hands of the Executors, were not Assets or Goods of the first Testator
in the Executors hands. Mich. 2 Eliz. Dyer, 187.
Or suppose a Testator be indebted to a man by Bond in Twenty pound, if his
Executors make a sufficient Obligation to the Testators Creditor, and
sufficiently discharge the Testator, without fraud or covin, they may retain
the Goods for so much, and the Goods retained shall not be Assets in their
hands, yea, though they have appointed ulteriorem diem for the payment of the
money. Pasch. 30 El. in C. B. Stamp and Hutchins Case. Leon. 111, 112.


S. Brought Debt against S. as Executor to B. who pleaded fully Administered,
etc. to which the Plaintiff replied, That he had Goods of the Testators to the
value of Two hundred Marks, Shelley verse. Sackvile. Anders. Rep. par. 1. Case
50. vid. 20 H. 7. fol. 2. 4, 5. M. 6 E. 6.
which the other confessed and gave in Evidence, that he had paid as much of
his own proper money for the Testators Debts, and showed how; the Judges
doubted whether he could give the matter in Evidence, and desired the Opinion
of the Justices of B. R. thereon, who held, That he might give it in Evidence;
whereupon the Justices proceeded accordingly: For it was agreed, Hill. 10 H. 8.
That the property of the deceaseds Goods by payment of the Testators Debts to
the value of the said Goods, retained to the amount in value, was altered, and
the property being altered to the use of the deceased, is a just Administration.

CHAP. XXI. Of Inventories.
1. Within what time an Inventory is to be made and exhibited. 2. The manner
how, and reason why an Inventory is to be made. 3. What ought to be inserted
into the Inventory, and what not.
1. THe time appointed for the making of an Inventory, and for exhibiting the
same, is left to the discretion of the Judge, Text. in C. Statut.. Inventarium,
tit. de Testa. lib. 3. Prove. Constable.
which he is to regulate according to the circumstances of Place, Person,
Goods, etc. Lynw. in C. Statut. verb. Arbitrio.
yet Regularly the Inventory ought to be begun by the Executor within Thirty
days next after the Testators death, or his notice of being made Executor, and
to be finished within Thirty days more after that, or within a year, if the
Goods be remote, else he may be charged for the whole debt. Gazal. verb.
Inventarium.


2. The Executor in making of an Inventory ought to call Two at least of the
Testators Creditors or Legataries, or upon their refusal or absence Two other
honest persons, and in their presence shall make a true and perfect Inventory
of all the Testators Goods, Chattels and Credits; and the same shall be
indented, whereof one part shall be by the said Executor upon his Oath for the
Truth thereof left in the Registry of the Court, the other part to remain with
himself. In which Inventory the Testators Goods and Chattels are particularly
to be valued and apprayzed at their true and just value. And all such Goods and
Chattels as are contained in the Inventory are presumed to have belonged to the
Testator, and now to the Executor, and no more. Therefore if a Creditor or
Legatary affirm, that the Testator had at his death more Goods than are
comprised in the Inventory, he must prove the same; for such an Inventory by
the Civil Law cannot be disproved, unless the number of the Witnesses be twice
as many in number as they which do Prove it; Fulb. Paral. 2. part. 3. Diol.
fol. 32.
And if the Executors or Administrators do make a True Inventory, they shall
not be charged further with any Debts than the Goods of the Testator or
Intestate will extend. But if the Executor Enter upon the Testators Goods
without making an Inventory, then the Presumption of Law will be against the
Executor, that he had Goods sufficient, not only to pay the Debts, but all the
Legacies also: So that the Reason is evident wherefore an Inventory is to be
made, viz. lest the Executor if otherwise than honestly disposed, should
defraud the Creditors or Legataries by concealing the Testators Goods. Fran.
Porcel. in Tract. de Inventorio. q. 2.. Sancimus. De Haered. and Fall. in Auth.


3. Generally all the Goods and Chattels whereof the Testator died rightly
possessed (some certain things for special Reasons and Legal reservations only
excepted) ought to be put into the Inventory; 21 H. 8. cap. 5.
And therefore Leases are not exempted: Terms of Law, verb. Chattels. quae sunt
Cat. Re.
Also Corn growing on the ground is to be put into the Inventory, because it
belongs to the Executor: Perk. tit. Devise, fol. 99.
But not Grass or Trees so growing, which belongs to the Heir; Perk. ibid.
Nor Glass-windows, nor Wainscot; Coke Rep. lib. 4. in Herlakendens Case in
fin. fol. 63, 64.
Nor Tables Dormant, nor Mangers, nor any thing affixed any way to the
Freehold; Kelw. Rep. fol. 88. nu. 2. Labridg. dez Cas. zit. Exec. fol. 181. ^u.
4.
Nor the Box or Chest containing the Evidences of the Land; nor Doors, Locks or
Keys, nor Fishes in the Pond; nor Doves in Dove-houses situate in Lands
belonging to the Heir; Ibidem.
Nor Bona Paraphernalia, that is, the Wives convenient Apparel suitable to her
Degree; l. hac lege, and l. fin. C. de Pact. conven. sup. Dot.
For as they are not to be put into the Inventory of her Husbands Goods, so
neither are they liable to the payment of his Debts; l. ob maritorum. Cod. Ne
uxor pro marito.
But the Wives Jewels, Chains, and Borders, and other Rich Ornaments of her
Person are to be put into the Inventory of her deceased Husbands Goods. dict.
Stat. 21 H. 8. c. 5.
Also Debts due to the Testator are to be put into the Inventory: Glos. in l.
Chirographus. ff. de Adm. Tuto.
But Moneys raised upon Lands given by the Testator for the payment of Debts or
Legacies are not to be inserted into the Inventory. St. H. 8. ubi supra.
Likewise all House-holdstuff is to be put into the Inventory: under which word
are comprised Tables, Stools, Forms, Chairs, Carpets, Hangings, Beds, Bedding,
Linen, Basin with Ewers, Candlesticks, with all sorts of Domestic Vessels,
whether of Earth, Wood, Glass, Brass or Pewter; yea, Apparel, Books, Weapons,
Tools, Cattle of all kind, Victuals, Corn, and Grain of all Sorts, Waynes,
Carts, Plowgeare, Coaches; (though no House-hold-stuff) also Plate and Jewels;
and generally all things not affixed to the Freehold, but coming to the
Executor and not descending to the Heir, are to be Inventaried; but such things
as are affixed to, and so become part and parcel of the Freehold, and all
things that descend to the Heir, and come not to the Executor, are to be
exempted out of the Inventory.

The Lady C. was possessed of diverse Leases, and conveyed them in Trust, and
afterward married with A. B. the Lady received the money upon the Leases, and
with part of the money she bought Jewels, and other part of the money she left,
and died; A. B. took Letters of Administration of the Goods of his Wife, and in
a Suit in the Ecclesiastical Court, the Court would have compelled him to have
given an account of the Jewels, and for the Money, to have put them into the
Inventory; but the Opinion of the whole Court of B. R. was, That he should not
put them into the Inventory; because the property of the Jewels was absolutely
in him as Husband, and he had them not as Administrator; but of such things as
be in Action, as he shall have as Administrator, he shall be accountable for,
and they shall be put into the Inventory: And for the Moneys received upon
Trust, it was resolved, that the same was the Moneys of the Trustees, and the
Wife had no remedy for it, but in Equity, and therefore the Husband should have
it as Administrator: And in that Case it was Resolved, That if a Woman do
convey a Lease in Trust for her use, and afterward marries, That in such Case
it lies not in the power of the Husband to dispose of it: And if the Wife die,
the Husband shall not have it, but the Executor of the Wife. Trin. 15 Char. in
B. R. Sir John St. John's Case.


CHAP. XXII. Of Actions mantainable by Executors or Administrators.
1. The several kinds of Actions maintainable by Executors. 2. An Action
Personal in the Testator is none in the Executor. 3. An Executor may sue for
Rents and the Arrerages thereof; yea, in some Case where the Testator himself
could not. 4. An Executor Outlawed or Attainted may yet have Action. 5. In
what Case one Co-Executor may Sue another. 6. In what Court Executors ought to
Sue. 7. Cases in Law touching this Subject.
1. REgularly Executors may Charge all others for any Debt or Duty due to the
Testator, as the Testator himself might have done; and the same Actions that
the Testator himself might have had, the same for the most part may Executors
have also: Sheph. Epit. cap. 115.
And therefore Executors may have Actions of Account, Actions of Trespass de
bonis asportatis in vita Testatoris, Actions of Debt against Goalers upon
escape of Prisoners, Writs of Error upon the Statute of 27 Eliz. Attaints upon
the Stat. of 23 H. 8. Writs of Restitution upon the Stat. of 21 H. 8. An
Indemnitate Nominis when the Testators Goods are taken upon an Out-Lawry
against another man of his Name; Actions of Covenant, for breach of a Covenant
made to the Testator; Action upon the Case upon the Trover and Conversion of
the Testators Goods; an Ejectione firmae for an Ejectment of the Testator out
of a Term; an Action of Debt for Rent behind in the Testators lifetime; also
an Action of Debt for the Arrerages of an Annuity due to the Testator in his
life. March. 329. 13. Pl. 13. Plowd. 181. Coke 11. 90. Weast. 2. cap. 22. F. N.
B. 117. Dyer 322. Cok. 11. 41. and 6. 80. and 9. 86. St. 9 H. 6. cap. 4. Broo.
tit. Exec. 161. Cok. 5. 27. St. 7 H. 4. c. 6. Cok. 4. 50. Broo. tit. Exec. 169.
and 122. Coke 9. 85. Action. Dyer 144. 322. 69. St. 12 H. 8. cap. 10. and
Brownl. 1. par. 101.
Likewise an Executor for Goods taken from him that belonged to the Testator,
or for a Treaspass done upon the Lease-Lands, or a distraining or an impownding
of Goods or Cattle, may maintain Actions of Trespass, or Replevin, or Detinue,
even before the Will be Proved. Dyer, in Pl. Com. 201. Case of Greisbrook and
Fox.
Likewise, etc.

2. But an Executor shall not have an Action for a Personal wrong done to the
Testator, when the wrong done to his Person, or that which is his, is of that
nature as for which Damages only are to be Recovered; and therefore an
Executor can bring no Action for the beating or wounding the Testator, or for a
Trespass done to him in his Cattle, Grass, or Corn, or for a Wast by his Tenant
done in his Lands; for all these are but Personal Actions, and die with the
Testators person. Sheph. E^. ubi sup.


3. If one grant a Rent out of his Land for life, Provided that it shall not
charge his Person, and the Rent be behind, and the Grantee dies; in this Case
the Grantees Executor may have an Action of Debt for those Arrerages. Cok. sup.
Littl. 146.
Likewise if any Rent or Arrerages of Rent be due to one upon a Grant of Rent
out of any Land to him, or reservation of Rent upon any Estate made by him of
Land; in these Cases his Executor may have an Action of Debt for this Rent, or
he may distrain for it so long as the Land chargeable with the Rent, and out of
which it does issue, is in his possession that ought to pay it, or any claiming
by or under him. Cok. 4. 50. and 32 H. 8. c. 37. Note, that in all Cases and
Actions brought by Executors as Executors, the Writ shall be in the Detinet
tantum, although the duty does accrue in his own time; because the thing
recovered shall be Assets. And so it was adjudged Pasch. 7 Jac. in B. R. in the
Lord Rich and Franks Case. and 43 Eliz. in B. R. in Sparks Case.
Yea, an Executor in some Cases may have his remedy by Action for the Arrerages
of Rent which the Testator himself in his lifetime could not; for if a man
grant a Rentcharge out of certain Lands to another for life with a Proviso in
the Deed, that the Grantee shall not in any sort charge the Person of the
Grantor generally, and the Rent be behind, the Grantee dies, the Executors of
the Grantee shall have an Action of Debt against the Grantor, and charge his
person for the Arrerages in the life of the Grantee, notwithstanding that
Proviso; because the Executors have no other remedy against the Grantor for the
Arrerages; for Distrain they cannot, because the Estate in the Rent is
determined; and the Proviso cannot leave the Executors without remedy; 6 Eliz.
Dyer, 227. and Cok. sup. Littl. l. 2. c. 12. Sect. 220.
so that the word [Proviso] in this Case does work only a qualification or
limitation, not a Condition or a Covenant.

4. One that is Outlawed or Attainted in his own person, may yet Sue as
Executor, because his Suit is in another right, viz. the Testators. 21 H. 6.
30. and 21 H. 4. 49. 69. and 42 Ed. 3. 13. 14 H. 6. 14, 15.
But he that is Excommunicate cannot proceed in Suit as Executor; yet this
Excommunication pleaded does not abate or overthrow the Suit, but makes that
the Defendant may stay from answering his Suit, until the Plaintiff be absolved
and discharged from his Excommunication. 3* H. 6. 40. Littl. 44. Cok. 81* 69.
11 R. 2. Excom. 25.


5. Although one Co-Executor cannot Sue another for possession of the Testators
Goods; for that many Executors to the same Testator are but as one man, and no
man can Sue himself; Broo. tit. Exec. n. 98. and argum. c. debitum de Baptis.
Extr. and l. preter. ff. de Tut. and Cur. dat. and Fitzh. tit. Exe. nu. 32.
So that when the Testator does make diverse Executors, if any one of them does
get the Goods, or the possession of the Goods of the Testator, the other
Executor has no Action for recovery of the same Goods, or any part thereof;
for the said Reason that one Co-Executor cannot Sue another; nevertheless, if
the Testator make diverse Executors, and do bequeath to the one of them the
residue of his Goods, it is not only lawful for him to whom they are so
bequeathed to retain the same, but also if the other Executor enter thereunto,
he is subject to an Action of Trespass. Broo. eod. tit. n. 104.
Also if the Executor of a Co-Executor have any Goods belonging to the first
Testator, the other surviving Co-Executor of the first Testator may have an
Action against the Executor of that deceased Co-Executor for the same. Broo.
tit. Exec. nu. 99.
Also if there be Two Administrations granted together, he that is the rightful
Executor or Administrator may Sue the wrongful Administrator for the Goods in
his custody. 36 H. 6. cap. 7. Cok. 8. 135.


6. Executors may not Sue for the Goods of their Testators in the Court
Ecclesiastical, but at the Common Law. St. 2 R. 3. c. 17.
Yet in some Cases an Executor may Sue in the Ecclesiastical Court, as touching
his Testators Goods; as when a man bequeathes Corn growing, or Goods unto one,
and a stranger will not suffer the Executor to perform the Testament; for this
Legacy he may Sue the Stranger in the Ecclesiastical Court. T. 4 H. 3.
referente Fitzh. tit. Prohibit.
But if a man take from an Executor Goods bequeathed, for this the Executor
must Sue his Action of Trespass, and not Sue in the Ecclesiastical Court. 32 H.
8. c. 37.
Also Tenants may be Sued but at the Common Law by Executors or Administrators
for Rents behind, and due to the Testator in his lifetime, or at the time of
his death, and may for the same distrain the Land charged with the Rent.

7. A Woman and another person were made Executors, the Woman took Husband, who
did not alter the property of the Pasch. 1 Eliz. B. R. Benl. Rep. Hugh. Abr.
tit. Execut. acc. 2.
Goods of the Testator, and then the Wife died, it was adjudged, That the other
Executor might have an Action of Detinue against the Husband for the same Goods.

Debt brought by an Executor as due to his Testator, and Judgment given for
him, but before Execution the Plaintiff died Intestate, Anders. Rep. par. 1.
Case 49. C. B. vid. 2 R. 3. fol. 8. 10 E. 3. fol. 26. H. 8. fol. 7. H. 28 H. 8.
inter Levet and Lewknor.
and the Ordinary committed Administration of the Goods of the first Testator
to another, who Sued out a Scire Facias on the Judgment. All the Justices
agreed, That the Scire Facias did not lie, For that when the Executor died
Intestate, the Testator was dead Intestate also, whereby the Judgment and
Recovery was void.

Detinue brought by an Executrix against her own Husbands Executor; the Case
was this, One Falconer, who was the Plaintiffs Mich. 15, 16 El. C. B. Hunks and
Alberoughs Case. Anders. Rep. Cas. 45.
first Husband, made his Will, gave diverse Legacies, and toward the end of his
said Will, said, [The Residue of all my Goods I Give and Bequeath to Frances my
Wife, whom I make my full and whole Executrix of this my Last Will and
Testament, to dispose for the wealth of my Soul, and to pay my Debts] and died
indebted to diverse persons, to whom the said Frances paid the said Debts, and
all the Legacies, having then Goods in her hand, for which this Action was now
brought, she having after married one John Hunks who made the Defendant his
Executor, to whose hands the said Goods came: Whereupon the Court demurred, and
Judgment was, that the Plaintiff should recover; for notwithstanding the
Devise, viz. of the Residue (as aforesaid) she has them not as a Devisee but
as Executrix, because the words of the Devise can have no other intendment than
that she should enjoy them as Executrix.

Debt brought by the Executrix of J. T. against W. B. The Case was this; The
said W. B. caused a Writing to be made and sealed; Anders. Rep. par. 1. Case 8.
inter Taw and Bury, vid. Die. (...) Eliz. and Whelpdales Case. 5. Rep. fol. 119.
E cont. H. 1 Eliz. Rot. 442.
which he delivered to V. C. to deliver to J. T. as his Act and Deed:
Accordingly the said V. C. offered the same to the said J. T. as the Act and
Deed of the said W. B. But he utterly refused to receive the same as such;
notwithstanding which, the said V. C. there left the said writing; which matter
the Defendant pleaded, and said it was none of his Act; whereupon was a demur,
and Judgment given for the Plaintiff.

Debt upon an Obligation Conditioned, That if the Defendant in Michael. Term
then next ensuing, in the Prerogative Court of Trin. 41 Eliz. Lamb Executor of
Drables verse. Brownwent.
the Archbishop of Canterbury at London, should give to D. his Executors or
Administrators such a Release and Discharge from and against him and his
Children for the receipt of One Hundred Marks, as by the Judge of the Court
should be thought meet, That then etc. The Defendant pleaded, that the same
Term one S. was Judge there, and that the said Judge did not Devise or Appoint
any Release or Discharge, etc. And it was thereupon demurred, and adjudged to
be no Plea: For that it is not alleged that he caused a Release to be drawn
and tendered to the Judge to be allowed: for it is on his part in discharge of
his Obligation, to draw such a Release as the Judge should allow: Wherefore it
was adjudged for the Plaintiff. 5. Co. 23. b. Mich. 43, 44. C. B. Pl. 42.

Debt as Administrator to B. upon an Obligation: The Defendant pleaded, That
the Plaintiff was an Alien, under the Obedience Pasch. 41. Eliz. Brocks verse.
(...)illips. Cro. Rep. par. 3.
of Philip King of Spain, Enemies to our Sovereign the Queen, and demands
Judgment, whether he should be Answered; and it was demurred thereupon, and
adjudged that he should Answer.

Assumpsit: By an Executor of a Promise made to his Testator: The Defendant
pleads non Assumpsit, and found for the Mi^h. 38, and ^9 Eliz. B. R. Edwards
verse. Stapleton. Cro. Rep. par. 3. Pl. 1.
Plaintiff, and Judgment for him. And Error was thereof brought, and
Assigned, because he did not show in Court the Testament in the Declaration
mentioned: Whereunto it was said, That it was but default of Form, which is
aided after Verdict; but all the Court held it to be matter of substance; for
otherwise he does not entitle himself to the Action, without showing the
Testament. For which cause it was Reversed.

Debt upon a Special Verdict; the Case was: A Parson made a Lease for years,
rendering Rent at Michaelmas, or within a month Trin. 39 Eliz. C. B. Case
Pilkin(...) verse. Dal on. Cro. Rep. par, 3. Pl. 1(...)
next after; The Lessee Enters; the Lessor dies within ten days after
Michaelmas: Whether his Executor has any remedy for this Rent, was the
Question, and Ruled that he had not; for the Rent was not due in the Testators
time, nor until the end of the month. And in such Case it has been adjudged,
that such Rent belongs to the Heir, where it is reserved by a Lay-person, and
he dies after Michaelmas, and before the month ended. Wherefore it was
adjudged accordingly. vid. 10. Co. 129.

Action brought by an Administrator for Rent reserved upon a Lease for years by
the Intestate; and for Rent arrear in his time the Action was brought; and he
shows how Administration was committed by the Archbishop; but does not say,
Quod profert hic in curia Literas Administrationis; The Defendant pleaded, and
found for the Plaintiff. And it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, Mich. 14 Jac.
B. R. Sir John Cutts verse. Bennet. Cro. Rep. 2. par. Pl. 9.
That the not showing the Letters of Administration was matter of Substance,
which made the Declaration vicious, and not aided by the Statute of 18 Eliz. or
32 H. 8. by the Verdicts; for that enables the Plaintiff to his Action, and the
omission thereof takes from the Defendant the advantage which he might have by
demanding Oyer thereof; and etc. The Court resolved, That it was a matter of
Substance, which ought to be shown by the Plaintiff to enable him to his
Action: And the Defendant shall have advantage thereof at any time; wherefore
it was adjudged for the Defendant. Vid. 28 H. 6. 31. 16 Ed. 4. 8. 21 H. 6. 23.
Plowd. 52.

Error in a Judgment in C. B. The Error Assigned; for that in Assumpsit
brought as Executor, although he shows himself to Pasch. 10 Jac. B. R. Browning
verse. Fuller. Cro. Rep. par. 2. Pl. 1.
be Executor to him to whom the Promise was made, yet he says not, Testamentum
hic in Curia prolatum. The Defendant pleaded non Assumpsit, and found against
him, and Judgment accordingly: And this being assigned for Error, was held to
be matter of Substance, and not of form only; and was therefore Reversed.

An Executor brings Debt upon an Obligation: The Defendant pleads, non est
Factum, and found for him. And now the Mich. 7 Jac. B. R. Haywarth verse. David.
Cro. par. 2. Pl. 6.
Question was, whether the Plaintiff should pay Costs upon the New Statute of 4
Jac. which exacts, That in every Action where the Verdict passes for the
Defendant the Plaintiff should pay Costs: but it was resolved, That this Case
is not within the intent of the Statute, he being in another right, and of
matter which lay not in his cognizance; therefore the Law never intended to
give Costs against him. And so it is upon the Statute of 8 Eliz. where Costs be
given in case the Plaintiff is Non-suted: As it was ruled in one Fords Case,
and so it was Ruled here. And although Manne said, Costs had been allowed in
the like Cases, they appointed, that henceforth it should no more be so.

It was held, That an Administrator shall have Trespass de bonis Pasch. 37
Eliz. i^t. H^r^is and Van^^ge. Moo. Rep. nu. 526.
asportatis in vita Intestati by the equity of the Statute of 4 Ed. 3. And an
Executors Executor by the Stat. of 25 E. 3.

On a Scire Facias the Case was this, Goth was in debt to one Couper Mich. 44,
and 45 Eliz. B. R. Yate verse. Goth. Moo. Rep. nu. 931.
who died Intestate; his Wife took Administration, and brought Debt, and had
Judgment to recover, and died Intestate; Yate the Plaintiff took
Administration of the Goods of Couper non Administrat. and brought Scire Facias
to have Execution on the Judgment: But it was adjudged, that it does not lie
for want of Privity; but it is clear, that he may have a new Action of Debt.
And by Popham and Yelverton, if an Administrator recover Damages on Trespass
de bonis asportatis in vita Testatoris, and then dye Intestate, his
Administrator shall have Execution thereon; otherwise of a Debt recovered which
was due to the Intestate.

Tenant in Dower makes a Lease for years reserving Rent, and Mich. 3 Ed. 6.
Moo. Rep. nu. 25.
takes a Husband; the Rent is in arrear, the Husband dies; and it was agreed by
the whole Court, That his Executors shall have the Rent.

If A. make a Promise to B. and after B. die Intestate, and Administration
Mich. 15 Char. B. R. int. Goslyn and Osburn per Curiam. Rolls Abr. tit. Execut.
lit. c.
of his Goods be committed to C. who after dies also Intestate, and after
Administration is committed to D. of the Goods of C. In this Case D. cannot
have an Action on the Promise made to B. as Administrator to G. For he is not
Administrator to B. in that Administration was not granted to him of the Goods
of B. unadministred by C.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Actions maintainable against Executors or Administrators.
1. Executors liable to be sued by Creditors, though their Testators Goods not
actually possessed by them, or imbeziled from them. 2. What kind of Servants
wages Executors are liable to pay and discharge. 3. How Executors are liable in
Case of breach of Covenant by their Testator in his lifetime. 4. In what Case
an Executor may be liable to pay his Testators Debt out of his, the Executors
own proper money. 5. Several other Cases wherein Executors are liable to be
sued. 6. Certain Cases wherein Executors are not liable. 7. Several Law-Cases
touching Actions against Executors and Administrators.
1. ALthough the Executor has not actually and particularly laid his hands
upon any of the Testators Goods, yet shall he be said to be in possession of
them, so as to stand liable to the Creditors, so far as they extend in value,
though afterward others do purloyne or imbezil them. Offic. Exec. cap. 10.


2. Executors are liable for the payment of the wages of the Testators Servants
retained in Husbandry and the like, but not for the wages of Waiters or
Serving-men; the reason of the difference is because of the Statute compelling
the one, not the other to serve. 4 H. 6, 16.
Yet for them also an Action did lie against the Testator himself because of
his Covenant.

3. Where a breach of Covenant happens in the Testators lifetime the Executor
stands chargeable; Therefore if one make a Lease of Land by Deed, wherein he
has nothing, and die before an Action of Covenant be brought against him, it
will be maintainable against his Executor, though no express Covenant. Noke and
Anders Case.
Also if a Lessee for years Covenants to repair the Buildings, or to pay the
Quit-Rents issuing out of the Lands Let, the Executor to whom the Term comes
must as well as his Testator perform that Covenant, although he did not
Covenant for him and his Executors. Offic. Exec. cap. 11.
Likewise if one be Lessee for years, or for life, without any Indenture or
Deed, as he may be, 21 H. 6. 1. 44 Ed. 3. 42.
and his Rent being behind dies; In this Case his Executor shall be liable to
the payment of this Rent, though without any specialty: But if the Lessee for
years sell or grant away his Term or Lease and die, his Executor shall not be
charged for any Rent due after the death of his Testator, though himself in his
lifetime was still liable for the Rent to grow due after, until the Lessor
accept the Assignee for his Tenant: 44 Ed. 3. 5. 7 Ed. 3. 11. 14 H. 7. 4. Dyer
247.
So that if a Lease for years be made rendering Rent, and the Rent be behind and
the Lessee die, his Executor shall be charged for this Rent; or if the Lessee
for years Assign over his Interest and die, his Executor shall be charged with
the Arrerages before the Assignment, but not with any of the Arrerages due
after the Assignment. Bro^. Exec. 127. and Cok. 3. 21. 22.
Also an Executor is chargeable for Tithes due from the deceased. Trin. 7 Jac.
E. (...). F. N. B. 5^.


4. If an Executor Sued, do plead that he never was Executor, nor Administered
as Executor (for that must be added) then if Issue be taken upon this Plea, and
it be found against him, the Plaintiff shall have Judgment to Recover not
Damages only, but the Debt it self out of the proper Goods of the Executor, if
none of the Testators can be found. Likewise, as it is frequent in use for
Executors to pay the Testators Debt with their own moneys, and to make
themselves satisfaction out of the Testators Goods: So it is most equal, that
Executors should with their own money discharge the Arrerages of Rent of those
Leases, the Profits whereof themselves enjoy by virtue of the Testators Will:
Therefore where an Executor is sued for Rent behind, after the Testators death,
upon a Lease for years made to the Testator, and by him left to the Executor,
here it shall be adjudged and levied upon the Executors own Goods; for that so
much of the profits as the Rent amounted unto, shall be accounted as his own
Goods, and not his Testators. Again, if Executors plead Plene Administra. and
it be found for them, and after that certain Goods of the Testator come to
their hands; in this Case, if he which brought the first Action of Debt, bring
the same against them again, the Action is well maintainable. 7 Ed. 4. 8. per
Littl.
It is also to be remembered, That the value upon an Appreyzment in an Inventory
is not binding, nor much to be regarded at the Common Law either for or against
Executors, for if it be too high it shall not prejudice the Executor, if it be
too low it shall not advantage him; but the very true value as shall be found
by the Jury when it comes in question, whether the Executor has fully
Administered, or has Assets in his hands, or not, is that which is binding in
the Law.

5. Executors are liable to satisfy the Obligations made by their Testators,
though they be not therein bound by Name. Also an Action of the Case lies
against an Executor upon an Assumpsit, or the simple contract of the Testator,
especially where the ground of the Assumpsit is a true and real debt. Also the
Rationabilis pars bonorum by Custom in some places is maintainable for the
Widow and Children against the Executors. Cok. lib. Intr. 564. Such an Action
in Yorkshire.
Also a Detinue lies against him for the Goods delivered to the deceased, if
the Executor does still continue the possession of them. Likewise an Action
lies against the Executor for arrerages of account found upon the deceased
before Auditors. Brownl. Rep. 18, 19, 22. 53. 2. part. ^9. 81. 139. Coke 9. 86.
and Plow. 182. F. N. B. 121. 3 H. 6. 35. 11 H. 4. 45.
Also the Executor of a man that recovereth a Debt upon a Judgment had by the
deceased, shall be chargeable with restitution, if the Judgment be reversed
for Error. Curia B. R. 21.
Also where a Prisoner dies in debt to a Jailer for his diet during the time
of his imprisonment, his Executor is liable. 27 H. 6. 4. b. 1 H. 7. 17. 2 H. 7.
8, 9.
Likewise where one has a Tally of the Exchequer, to receive money of some
Customer, Receiver, or other Officer of the Kings, and delivers it to him, he
then having money of the Kings in his hands; if he dye without paying the same,
his Executor shall stand chargeable with the payment thereof. 27 H. 6. 4. 15 E.
4. 16. Coke lib. 9. fol. 87. b.
Also the Executors of an Administrator are chargeable, where he did neither
pay the Debts, nor leave the Goods of the Intestate to the next Administrator,
but otherwise disposed of them: Yet an Executor is not chargeable in an Action
of Detinue, nor of Account (except to the King) for the Testators detaining,
and not paying, or answering things received, or under his charge. 2 H. 4. 13.
Coke lib. 11. fol. 88. 5 H. 6. 35. 11 H. 4. 64. 91, 92. 9 H. 6. 12. Vid. cap.
22. (...).


6. But an Executor, as has been formerly employed, is not chargeable for any
personal wrong done by the deceased, for it dies with his person; neither will
an Action of Debt lie against him upon the simple Contract of the deceased, but
an Action of the Case only. Neither will an Action lie against an Executor upon
an Arbitrament made in the lifetime of the deceased, albeit it be made in
writing: Neither will an Action lie against an Executor for Costs given in
Chancery against the deceased in a Suit there, for it is lost when the party
dies. And where there be many Executors and all have accepted, they must all be
joined in the Suit; but if some of them have refused, possibly the Suit may be
good enough against the rest. Ad^udged, H^ll. 40 Eliz. B. R. Bowyers Case,
Hill. 7 sac. B. R. per 3. Justices. Coke 9. 39, 40. Broo. tit. Execut. 78. 136.
Fitzh. Brief. 341.
Otherwise, one Executor cannot be charged without his Co-Executors, except it
be in the Case of Severance, and in some special Case where one alone does the
wrong; as where one Executor does detain the Deeds from the Heir. Brownl. 1.
part. 18, 19, 22. 53. 2. part. 39. 81. 139.


7. Debt brought against the Executor of H. W. The Defendant pleaded, That he
never was Executor, nor Administered as Executor. The Jury found, That the said
H. W. died possessed of Mich. 5, 6 P. M. C. B. Stokes verse. Porter. Anders.
Rep. par. 1. Cas. 23.
diverse Goods, and that one W. A. was indebted Seven Pound to him, which the^
Defendant had received, and for which he had given his Acquittance, and that
immediately after the death of the said H. W. the Defendant took into his
possession all his Goods, converted them to his own use, enjoyed them, and
disposed of them to his own profit at his own will and pleasure. And whether
upon this matter of Fact, the Defendant were Executor or not, was submitted to
the Court, who were of Opinion, That this matter of Fact was the Administration
as of an Executor, and that the Defendant should be charged accordingly.

Scire Facias, upon a Judgment against a Testator in Debt brought against his
Executors, who pleaded, That before they had knowledge of this Judgment, they
had fully Administered all the Mich. 43 Eliz. C. B. Littleton and Hibbins Case,
Cro. 3. pa^. 793.
Testators Goods in payment of Debts upon Obligations. It was adjudged no Plea,
for at their peril they ought to take knowledge of Debts upon Record, and ought
first of all (unless Debts due to the Queen) to have satisfied them. It was
adjudged accordingly.

Debt was brought by S. B. against D. B. and others Defendants Executors, etc.
The Defendants pleaded Recovery against Hill. 29. Eliz. C. B. Brasebridge verse.
Baskevi^e, Anders. Rep. Cas. 197.
them by another in an Action of Debt, and showed the Contents of the Record;
to which it was Replied, That the Recovery was by Covin, to defraud the
Plaintiff of his Debt, and hereupon Issue was joined; it was found by Verdict
for the Plaintiff, and agreed by all the Justices, That the Judgment should be
against the Executor as against the Testators Goods, and not as against his own
proper Goods; being hereunto upon good Advice inclined for several Reasons.
(1.) For that the Plea was a void Plea; for the Record which the Defendant
pleaded, was such as the Plaintiff does confess and avoid, and not like that
which is every way false; as when one pleads that he never was Executor, nor
Administered as Executor, etc. which Plea being every way false, and so within
his own knowledge also, does for that Reason cause that Judgment in that Case
shall be of his own proper Goods. (2.) Another Reason is, That because such
Judgment is most agreeable to Reason, viz. To give the Plaintiff Recovery of
his Debt out of the Testators and not the Executors Goods, which is conceived a
more reasonable way than to charge the Executors; for that they bear the
burden of the Administration of the deceaseds Will, they deserve to have as
much favor as Reason will admit, and not be charged of their own proper Goods.
It was further said, That if an Executor should be liable to such Judgment of
his own Goods, it would be a cause of often refusing the Administration of
Testaments, for it is a thing of ill consequence to bind Executors in their own
proper Goods in any other Cases than have been in fore-time adjudged; which
Cases were cited out of diverse Books, but here omitted for brevities sake; none
of which Cases have any resemblance with this in question.

Debt was brought against an Executor; the Plaintiff Declared Mich. 30, 31
Fliz. C. B. Anders. Rep. Cas. 218.
upon a simple Contract, To which the Defendant pleaded Fully Administered; It
was found against him; and moved in Arrest of Judgment; for that the Action
was against an Executor who is not chargeable in that manner; and it was said,
That when it does appear to the Court, that the Executor is not chargeable, the
Court ought not then to Judge for the Plaintiff, and to this purpose some Books
were cited, and it was said, That the Reason why an Executor shall not be
charged upon a simple Contract, is, for that he is a Stranger, and cannot have
notice of the Contract; and therefore the Law will not have him to be charged
for that alone without somewhat else: But in this Case it appears that he had
notice of the Contract, inasmuch as thereupon he pleaded fully Administered, and
that Plea being admitted, it implies as if he had known of the Contract; and
therefore when he pleaded that he had fully Administered, which was found
against him, Judgment ought to have been given for the Plaintiff; for proof
whereof a Judgment was cited, which appears to have been given, An. 10 H. 6.
fol. 15. and 13 H. 6. As the Book says in the like Case against an Executor
upon a simple Contract. All which notwithstanding, it was resolved by the
Court, That the Plaintiff should take nothing by his Writ, giving their Reasons
for such their Judgment, which for brevities sake are also here omitted.

Debt against an Administrator upon an Arbitrament made Mi^^. 39, 40 Eliz. B.
R. Bowyer verse. Garland. Cro. Rep. par. 3.
betwixt the Plaintiff and the Intestate in Writing; and the Defendant demurred
thereupon; and without argument it was adjudged for the Defendant, because the
Intestate might have waged his Law. But otherwise it were, if it had been in
debt upon Arrerages of Accounts before Auditors.

Assumpsit against an Executor upon the Promise of the Testator; and in the
Declaration it was not averred, That he had Pasch. 29, 30 El. B. R. Cottington
verse. Hulet. Cro. Rep. par. 3.
Assets to pay debts, etc. But Mich. 29, 30 Eliz. It was adjudged, that the
Declaration was good; and the Plaintiff recovered.

Debt against an Executor upon an Obligation made by his Testator; the
Plaintiff was Nonsuited, the Defendant had Costs by Trin. 38 Eliz. Fetherstone
verse. Allybon. Cro. Rep. par. 3.
order of the Court. Otherwise it is where an Executor is Plaintiff, and is
Nonsuited. For it cannot be intended, that it was conceived upon malice by
him. Vid. Stat. 23 H. 8. cap. 15.

Debt against an Executor upon an Arbitrament, made in the time of the
Testator. It was demurred in Law, whether it lay Pasch. 39 Eliz. Hampton verse.
Boyer. Cro. Rep. par. 3.
or not? Because the Testator might have waged his Law. And adjudged without
Argument that it lay not.

Debt against P. as Executor. The Plaintiff had Judgment to recover de Bonis
Testatoris. And thereupon a Scire Facias was awarded, Pasc. 38 Eliz. Aldworth
verse. Peel. Cro. par. 3.
and the Sheriff returned Quod nulla habuit bona Testatoris. And the Plaintiff
surmiseth, that he had wasted the Testators Goods; whereupon he prays a Scire
Facias why he should not have Execution de bonis propriis: And ruled by the
Court, That this Writ shall not be awarded, upon the surmise of the party, upon
a devastation; nor in any Case where the Judgment is de bonis propriis, unless
it be upon return of the Sheriff, where he returns a Devastavit. Vid. 9 H. 6.
9. and 57. Fitzh. Execution 9.

Scire Facias against an Administratrix to have Execution of a Judgment
against the Intestate; the Defendant pleaded, Quod Pasch. 39 Eliz. C. B. Ordwey
verse. Godfrey. Cro. Rep. par. 3. Pl. 20.
nulla habet bona, quae fuerunt Intestati, tempore mortis suae, in manibus suis
Administranda, nec habuit die impetrationis brevis, nec unquam postea. And it
was thereupon demurred, and held by all the Court, that it was not any Plea;
for a Judgment cannot be answered without another Judgment; and it may be,
she had Administered all the Goods in paying debts upon Specialties, which is
not any Administration to bar the Plaintiff. Or (as some said) it may be she
had paid Debts upon a Statute or Recognizance, which is not allowable against a
Judgment. But Anderson denied it; for there is not any Priority of Debts upon
Record, unless in Case of the Queens Debt, which is first to be paid. And here
the Defendant ought to have pleaded specially, how she had Administered.
Wherefore it was adjudged for the Plaintiff.

The Defendant pleaded Out-lawry in the Testator, 29 Eliz. not reversed, and it
was thereupon demurred. Herne for the Plaintiff Trim. 39 Eliz. C. B. inter
Wolley and Bradwel, and his Wife Executrix of Sir Tho. Manners. Cro. Rep. par.
3. Pl. 21.
moved, That it was not any Plea, because (admitting it to be a Plea) it should
be, in regard of the Testators being Outlawed, he could not have any Goods but
what appertained to the Queen, and then the Executors might not have any Goods
to satisfy: But that is not so; for the Testator might have a debt due to him
upon a Contract, which is not forfeited; or, it might be, the Testator Devised
Lands to be sold, and which are sold, the money is Assets in their hands; and
in 3 H. 6. 17, and 32. it was holden to be no Plea. And of that Opinion were
Walmesley and Owen. For a person Outlawed may well make a Will, and have
Executors, over and besides the Goods forfeited to the Queen, as in the Cases
before put, and others of the same nature: But Beamond e contra, for the Bar is
good to a common intent; and these kind of Assets shall not be intended, unless
they be shown. Wherefore prima facie the Plea is good. Anderson absente
Adjournatur. Afterward for defect of pleading, without regard to the matter in
Law, it was adjudged for the Plaintiff. 8 Ed. 4. 6. 21 Ed. 4. 5. 39 H. 6. 27.

Error of a Judgment in C. B. against Three Executors: The Error Assigned
was, That one of them died pending the Writ 41 Eliz. C. B. Anonymus. Cro. Rep.
par. 3. Pl. 10.
before Judgment. And Warberton moved, that this was Error; but when one of
the Executors Plaintiffs die, this is no Error, for they might be served: But
the Court held it no Error. 3 H. 7. 1, 3. 8 Ed. 3. 11.

Scire Facias against Executors, upon a Judgment against their Testator in
debt: They pleaded, that before they had any knowledge Mich. 42 and 43 Eliz. C.
B. Littleton verse. Hibbins. Cro. Rep. par. 3. Pl. 37.
of this Judgment they had fully Administered all the Testators Goods in paying
of debts upon Obligations; and it was thereupon demurred, and after Argument at
the Bar, adjudged for the Plaintiff, that it was not any Plea. For they at
their peril ought to take cognizance of debts upon Record, and ought first of
all (unless for debts due to the Queen, wherein she has a Prerogative) to
satisfy them; and although the Recovery was in another County than where the
Testator and the Executors inhabited, it is not material: But if an Action be
brought against them in another County than where they inhabit, and before
their knowing thereof they pay debts upon Specialties, that is allowable:
wherefore it was adjudged accordingly. Vid. 4 H. 6. 8. 21 Ed. 4. 21.

Debt against an Executor, who pleaded he had reins in ses Mich. 25 Eliz. C.
B. Anonymus. Cro. Rep. par. 3. Pl. 8.
mains, but certain Goods distrained and impownded, it was adjudged to be no
Assets to charge him.

The Case was, A. Covenanteth with B. to put his Son an Apprentice to C. or
otherwise that his Executors shall pay B. Twenty Pasch. 33 Eliz. C. B. Parrot
verse. Austin. Cro. Rep. par. 3. Pl. 2.
pound. A. does not put his Son an Apprentice to C. and dies; B. brings debt
against the Executors of A. and it was Resolved by the Court, That it lies not
for Two Reasons: (1.) It cannot be a debt in the Executor where it was no debt
in the Testator: And if one Covenants to pay Ten pound, debt lies against him
or his Executors, as 40 Ed. 3. and 28 H. 8. Dyer are; but if he does Covenant
that his Executors shall pay Ten pound, an Action lies not against them. (2.)
The first part of the Deed sounds in Covenant, and the second part shall be of
the same nature and condition. Q. of this Reason.

Note, Assumpsit by the Testator lies against his Executor, in Vid. Cas. Legate
verse. Pincheon. Mich. 9 Jac. B. R. and Cas. Clark verse. Thompson. Hill. 17 Jac.
B. R. and Cas. Fawcet verse. Charter. Hill. 20 Jac. B. R. Qui omnes Casus in
Cro. Rep. par. 2.
Case the Debt rises upon a Loan and Promise of the Testator to pay, and the
Promise be for the payment of a mere debt, and not to do any collateral Act,
and where the Testator himself, by reason of such Promise, could not have waged
his Law; in such Case his Executor is chargeable; but upon a mere collateral
Promise of the Testator, an Assumpsit lies not against his Executor. Such was
the Opinion in Q. Eliz. time: but now in Reg. Jac. the Opinion of both Courts
was, and resolved, That the Action against the Executor lies as well in the one
Case as in the other.

Scire Facias Sued by H. against W. Executor to his Father for Execution of a
Judgment obtained against the Testator. The Defendant Hill. 11 Jac. C. B.
Harecourt verse. Wrenham. Moo. Rep. nu. 1178.
pleaded Plene Administravit at the time of bringing the Action; and thereupon
they were at Issue, and the Jury found, That the Testator conveyed a Lease in
trust to one Fisher, against whom the Executor had recovered One Thousand pound
in Chancery, which was come to the Executors hands, Et si super tota materia,
etc. Two Points in this Case were argued at the Bar and Bench: (1.) Whether the
Plea of Plene Administravit at the time of bringing the Writ were good, in that
Judgment was given against the Testator in his lifetime; and it was Ruled,
that it was not good, but that in such Case the Executor should have pleaded,
There was nothing in his hands at the time of the Testators death, because the
Judgment bound him to satisfy that debt before others: but by the joining of
Issue the advantage of that exception to the Plea was waved. (2.) Whether the
Sum Decreed in Equity in the Chancery shall be Assets; and they all agreed it
should be Assets, because the Jury found, that by virtue of the Executorship it
was come to the Executors hands. 9 Eliz. Dyer 264. And money arising of the
sale of Lands by Executors shall be accounted Assets. Chapman and Daltons Case.
Plowd. Also Damages recovered by Executors pro bonis asportatis in vita
Testatoris shall be Assets. Vid. Pasch. 39 Ed. 3. and C. B. Ordinary and
Godfreys Case.

W. And others brought D. against the Defendant as Executor, he pleaded Plene
Administravit: And it was found by Verdict, Hill. 37 Eliz. Watsons Case. Moo.
Rep. nu. 518.
That the Defendants Wife was made Executrix, who to defraud the Creditors, had
made a Deed of Gift of the Goods before her marriage with the Defendant, and
yet retained them in her possession, and took the Defendant to Husband, and
died; and the Defendant had now as much goods in his hands as would suffice to
pay the Creditors their debts. And the Court adjudged for the Plaintiff, for
that the Defendant confessed himself Executor by pleading Fully Administered,
and therefore is chargeable, because the property of the Goods passed not out
of the Wife by that Grant, being fraudulently made as aforesaid, by the Stat.
13 Regin.

One sued an Executor in the Ecclesiastical Court for a Legacy, Pasch. 14 Jac.
Lloid verse. Maddox. Moo. Rep. nu. 1307.
who pleaded Recovery in debt against him at Common Law, and beyond that he had
not Assets wherewith to satisfy. To which the Plaintiff in the Ecclesiastical
Court Replied, That the Recovery was by Covin, and that the Plaintiff in the
Recovery offered to discharge the Judgment, and the Defendant would not. And
hereupon the Question was, whether a Prohibition should be awarded or not. And
it was Resolved, That it should not be awarded, for that the Covin or Fraud is
properly examinable in the Ecclesiastical Court, because the Legatee cannot sue
for his Legacy at the Common Law.

Action upon the Case of Trover of Goods; The Case was this, Hill. 31 Eliz.
Moss verse. Pack. Moo. Rep. n. 473.
a Recovery in the Exchequer was had against the Executor of P. of Debt and
Damages, and Fieri Facias issued de bonis Testatoris, si etc. And if none,
then Damna de propriis: the Executor dies, the Sheriff levies Execution of the
Testators Goods before the Return of the Writ, and adjudged good
notwithstanding his death after the Test of the Writ.

B. brings Debt against H. on a Demise for years to one unto Case Boddy verse.
Hargrave. Moo. Rep. nu. 771.
whom H. was Administrator: And the Writ was in the Debet and Detinet.
Whereupon in Arrest of Judgment it was showed in B. R. That it ought to have
been in the Detinet only, because against an Administrator: But it was
adjudged, That it was good in the Debet and Detinet, because the Rent due
incurred in the Administrators time, and the Land is not Assets, but only so
much of the Profits as the Land is worth above the Rents; and the Administrator
shall not answer for more than the Land is worth, deducting the Rent: But in
all Cases where an Executor or Administrator brings an Action for a Duty
Testamentary, there it ought to be in the Detinet only, because the Duty being
demanded, ought to be Assets.

An Executor is not chargeable for a Debt due by the Testator 10 H. 6. 25. Co.
9. Pinchon 88. Roll. Abridg. Adjudged inter German and Rowles.
upon a simple Contract. Regularly an Executor shall not be charged without
Specialty in any Action wherein the Testator might wage his Law, for that an
Executor cannot wage his Law of other men's Contracts. 46 Ed. 3. 10. b. 11 H. 6.
b.

Information in the Exchequer in nature of an Account was Hill. 39 Eliz. B. R.
Dodington's Case. Cro. Rep. par. 3.
brought against D. Executor of W. M. supposing that W. M. had received money
of the Queens amounting to One thousand five hundred pound, upon a special
Verdict; the Case was, That W. M. had received annually out of the Exchequer
Fifty pound as a Fee for his Diet for Thirty years together, which was paid him
by the Command of the Lord Treasurer; who had Authority by Privy Seal to make
allowance and payment of all Fees due, but in truth, these were not any due
Fees: And whether his Executor shall be charged with these Sums so received,
was the Question. And after Argument it was adjudged, that he should be
charged; for it was held, That this payment of the money by the appointment of
the Lord Treasurer, was not allowable; for the Privy Seal is not sufficient
Authority to dispose of the Queens Treasure, unless where it is due; and he
disposing of it otherwise, it is out of his Authority. (2.) It was held, That
this money delivered by Authority of the Lord Treasurer, who is quasi a
Judicial Officer, and it was quasi a Judicial Act by him; yet it shall not bind
the Queen; for it was without his Authority, and without warrant, to make
allowance thereof, not being due; and it is at his peril who receives it, or
demands allowance thereof. For these and other Reasons (mentioned in the
Report) it was adjudged for the Queen against the Defendant, and although he
were Executor, he should answer for it as a debt from the Testator. 11 Co. 90.
b.

Error upon a Judgment given in an Assumpsit against an Executor upon a
Promise of the Testators, where the Plaintiff declared, Mich. 37, and 38 Eliz.
in Came. Scac. Stubbins verse. Rotheram. Cro. Rep. par. 3.
That the Testator in consideration of Marriage promised to pay the Plaintiff
One hundred pound, and for nonperformance of this promise brought the Action,
and Judgment there given for the Plaintiff: and this matter was assigned for
Error, that the Action lay not against an Executor; and all the Justices and
Barons (besides Clark Baron) held it to be Erroneous for this cause: For
Anderson said, The Reason why Debt lies not against an Executor upon a Contract
of the Testators, is, because the Law does not intend that he is privy thereto,
or can have notice thereof, and he cannot gage his Law for such a debt as the
Testator might; and when debt will not lie, it is not fit that this Action upon
a bare Promise should bind him; for it stands upon one Reason; And if these
Actions should be allowable, it would be very mischievous, wherefore the
Judgment was reversed. Q. Whether a Recovery in this Action against an
Executor, is allowable against a debt upon an Obligation, if it should be an
Administration; for then it would be mischievous to Creditors; and if it should
not be an Administration, it would then be mischievous to Executors, that they
should be charged therein, and not have allowance thereof against other
Creditors; for it may be, that at the time of the Recovery they did not know of
other debts. Note, that this Term was given the like Judgment betwixt Griggs
and Helhouse in an Action brought against an Administrator upon a Promise of
the Intestates to pay money, etc.

Debt against the Defendant as Administratrix of J. S. upon plene Administravit
pleaded, it was found by Verdict, That the Testator Mich. 30, and 31 Eliz. B.
R. Martyn verse. Alice Whipper. Cro. Rep. par. 3.
at the time of his death had Goods to the value of One hundred pound, and was
bound to another by Obligation in One hundred pound, and that the Defendant had
taken in this Obligation, and made another in her own Name with Sureties to the
Obligor. And upon the motion of Heal, the Court held, That this was an
Administration, and it is in the nature of a payment, and so much of the
Testators debt is thereby discharged; and so it was said to be adjudged in
Woods Case. Nota, fuit Ruled accordingly. Pasch. 30. in C. B. which was
entered, Mich. 28, 29 Eliz. inter Stamp and Hutchins.

Action upon the Case on Indebitatus Assumpsit does well lie, for every debt
implies a Promise; and it is one good consideration Mich. (...), 45 E^. B. R.
Slad. and Merleys Case. Yelv. Rep.
in Facto whereon to found an Action: But for a debt by simple Contract due by
the Testator no Assumpsit lies against Executors, and it was openly delivered
by Popham Chief Justice, No. 44 Eliz. to be the Resolution of all the Judges,
and to be a President in all Cases, that might after happen.

It was agreed by Yelverton, Williams and Crook, Justices, That if a man by
Indenture lease Land to J. D. for years rendering Mich. 5 Jae. B. R. House and
Websters Case. Yelv. Rep.
Rent, and J. D. dye making A. his Executor, the Lessor may have Action of Debt
against the Executor for the Rent reserved, and the Arrears thereof after the
death of the Lessee, albeit the Executor never enter nor agree to the Lease;
for the Executor represents the Testators person, and the Testator by the
Indenture was stopped, and concluded to pay the Rent during the Term upon his
own Contract; and albeit the Rent exceeded the value of the profit of the Land,
yet the Executor cannot waive the Land, but notwithstanding that shall be
charged with the Rent. Vid. Opin. Ascue, 21 H. 6. 24. and 11 H. 4 Contr.

Action Sur Trover and Conversion of Goods, upon demurrer the Case was; The
Ordinary committed Administration of the Goods of an Intestate to the
Defendant; afterward the next of Kin sues out a Citation in the Ecclesiastical
Court against the Defendant Hill. 37 Eliz. B. R. Wilson verse. Packman, Gro.
par. 3.
to Repeal that Administration, and he (pendente Lite) sells those Goods, and
afterward his Administration is Repealed, and Administration committed to the
Plaintiff, who for this Conversion (pendente Lite) brings this Action; and it
was moved for the Defendant, that this Action lies not, for the Administration
at the Common Law is well committed, and the Statute does not alter the Law in
this point, but gives a penalty against the Ordinary, if he commits them not to
the next of Kin, and the Administrator till Administration Repealed has an
absolute Authority to dispose of the Goods as he pleases. Tanfield, e contra,
The Conversion pendente Lite in the Ecclesiastical Court is not lawful, but is
a Tort to the Plaintiff, and that the Sentence there proves, which is, that all
things attempted or done pendente Lite shall be void, and the Justices ought to
have regard to the Civil Law in this point, as in 27 H. 6. Guard, 118. 2 R. 2.
Quare impedit, 143. and 4 H. 7. 13. And by the Sentence it appears, that the
Administration is revoked as if it never had been; and upon this reason it is
in Dyer 339. where an Administrator recovered a debt, and afterward another
procured himself to be joined in the Administration, and released the debt, and
afterward it being revoked, this release was not any bar to the execution. And
Mich. 25, 26 Eliz. in the Common Bench between White and Carry this very point
was in question, and adjudged, that the Action lay. Gaudy, The Action well
lies, for the Sentence does not repeal mean Acts done by an Administrator which
are for the Intestates benefit; but forasmuch as these Goods were not converted
or employed for the Intestates use, it is reasonable that he should be charged
for them. Popham and Fenner e contra. For the Administrator has an absolute
interest and power to dispose of the Goods, until the Repeal be made; and it
is not like unto an Appeal upon a Sentence, for that makes it as no Sentence;
but the Repeal of the Letters of Administration does not void it ab initio, and
make a lawful Act Tortious, but rather in this Case the new Administrator shall
have an account for the money received; and the words in the Sentence are not
to be regarded, for they are common and ordinary in all Sentences. So he having
the Goods lawfully, and converting them lawfully, shall not answer for them as
for a Tort done. And Popham here said, If Administration being committed, the
Ordinary commit new Administration, it is a Repeal of the former without any
Sentence of Appeal; and if the first Administrator wast the Goods, the Debtee
shall have the Action against him; and if he pleads that Administration is
committed over, he may well by this Replication maintain it, because he wasted
the Goods when he was Administrator, wherefore etc. Et Adjournatur; but
afterward the Action was discontinued by the Plaintiff.

Debt against one as Administrator to N. upon an Obligation; T^in. ^7 Eliz. C.
B. Snelling verse. Norton. Cro. par. 3.
the Defendant shows the Custom of London to be, That if a Contract be made by
a Citizen, to pay money to another Citizen, and he who made the Contract dies,
that his Executors or Administrators shall be chargeable therewith, as if it
were upon an Obligation; and shows further how the Intestate was indebted upon
a Contract to A. who had Recovered against him, and that he had Riens ouster en
ses maines, etc. And it was thereupon demurred. Glanvile moved that this
Custom was not good; For (1.) it is against Law, That an Executor or
Administrator should be charged upon a simple Contract, wherefore etc. Daniel e
contra, The Custom was always to bind the Executors or Administrators to pay
Debts upon Contracts, and Customs in London are confirmed by Parliament, and
are now as strong as a Statute; and therefore in London they prescribe to give
Land in Mortmaine, which is against Statute Law; and there is not any Custom,
but that it deprives, and is against the Common Law in some point. And this
Custom is reasonable, for a Debt upon a Contract is as well due as a debt upon
an Obligation, and therefore there is as great reason for the payment of the
one, as of the other; although the Law has given a greater Prerogative, viz. a
Priority of paying the one, rather than to the other, etc. Owen Justice, The
Custom is reasonable; for the Executor in Conscience is bound to pay Debt upon
a Contract as well as upon a Specialty; and such a matter was about four years
since in this Court, but not adjudged. And of that Opinion were the other
Justices, especially as this Case is, being executed against him who is liable
and chargeable by the Customs of London.

Adjudged per totam Curiam, That where an Executor is Plaintiff Mich. 7 Jac. B.
R. Telv. Rep. Executor ne paiera Costs sur le Stat. 4 Jac.
for any thing touching the Testament, and is Non-suite, or Verdict pass
against him, he shall not pay Costs, by the Statute of 4 Jac. For the Statute
ought to have a reasonable intendment, and no default can be presumed in the
Executor who complains, because it concerns other men's Fact, whereof he can
have no perfect knowledge; and so it was resolved and adjudged by all the
Justices of the Common Pleas. Quod Nota. A Judgment established by both
Courts, contrary to some few Presidents, which were in B. R. to the contrary.
Quod Nota.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Assets charging Executors, or not.
1. What Assets are, and the several qualifications thereof. 2. Whether
Damages recovered by an Executor be Assets. 3. Mortgages redeemed by the
Executor, and Chattels reverting to him upon failure of some Condition by the
Legatary to be performed, are Assets in his hands. 4. Increase gotten to
Executors by Merchandising with the Testators Goods, and other things never in
the Testators possession, are Assets in the Executors. 5. Debts due to the
Testator are no Assets in the Executor, till recovered or released by him. 6.
Whether Land devised to be sold for payment of Debts and Legacies be Assets. 7.
An Executor dying indebted, and leaving to his Executor such Goods as he had as
Executor, These are not Assets in such Executors Executor liable to the last
Testators Debts. 8. Whether an Advowson be Assets. 9. How real Chattels may
turn into Personal Assets. 10. In what Case a Debtee-Executor may retain Money
or Goods of the Testators, which shall not be held Assets as to other
Creditors. 11. Other men's Goods in the Testators possession at his death, shall
not be Assets in the Executors hands. 12. Executors discharged of Assets as to
so much as they pay of the Testators Debts with their own Money or Goods. 13.
Certain Law-Cases touching Assets.
1. ASsets are where one indebted dies Testate or Intestate, and his Executor
or Administrator has sufficient in Goods or Chattels, or other Profits to pay
the deceaseds debts, or part thereof, and for so much he shall be charged:
Terms of law. and Coke sup. Littl. 374.
So that all such Goods, Chattels, and Actions which did belong to the deceased
in right of Action or Possession as his own, and so continued to the time of
his decease, and which after his death the Executor or Administrator does get
into his hands, as of right of his Executorship or Administration, and all such
things as accrue to the Executor or Administrator by reason thereof, and
nothing else, shall be Assets in their hands to oblige them in Law as
chargeable to the deceaseds Creditors or Legataries. So that all things
valuable may be Assets, but such things as are not valuable are not Assets.
Coke sup. Littl. 388.
Note that Assets in the hand of any one of the Co-Executors shall be
understood as Assets in the hands of all the Executors, Kelw. 51.
be it in any County or place whatsoever. Coke 6. 47.
All the Testators Goods and Chattels in Action or in possibility at his death,
and afterward recovered by his Executors, are Assets in their hands, but not
till recovered and come into their possession; therefore Debts of any kind
whatsoever due to the deceased, are not Assets in his Executors or
Administrators hands to charge them until they be Recovered: Cok. sup. Litt.
124. 5. 31. Broo. Assets 24. Dyer 264. 121. 2 H. 4. 21. Cok. 6. 58. Kelw. 63.
Dyer 362.
But whatever an Executor or Administrator must Sue for, by or under that Name
or Appellation, is (being Recovered) Assets in his hands. Curia. Mich. 13. B.
R. Coke 1. 98. Plowd. 84. 292. Coke 5. 34.
Yea, notwithstanding an Executor or Administrator does purchase the Fee-Simple
of that Land, whereof he had a Lease for years in right of the deceased
(whereby the Lease is drowned) yet the said Lease shall still continue to be
Assets in his hands. Coke* 87. Brook. Leases. 63.
Or if Executors do sell the Goods of Testators and buy them again, they remain
as Assets in their hands, because they are the same Goods which were the
Testators. 18 H. 6. 4.
If a man has a Lease for years, worth Fifty pound per annum or more, out of
which he pays Ten pound yearly Rent, and dies; in this Case not the full value
of the Land yearly, but only so much as is above the said Rent shall be deemed
Assets in the hands of the Executor or Administrator. Brown^. Rep. 1 part. 33.
76. and 2 part. 47.
Or suppose the deceased dies possessed of Goods and Chattels to the value of
Two hundred pound, and in debt to M. Two hundred pound, and to N. One hundred
pound, and to O. Fifty pound, and to P. Twenty pound, and Composition is made
with M. for Sixty pound, or other Sum more or less under Two hundred pound; In
this Case the Executor is deemed to have Assets chargeable to the other
Creditors for so much as is above the Sum so compounded unto Two hundred
pound. 27 H. 8. 6.
Or where a man is indebted Forty pound to one, and Thirty pound to another,
and dies, leaving but Forty pound in all, and his Executors agree with the
Creditor of Forty pound for Ten pound, and have his Acquittance for the Forty
pound, yet the Thirty pound remaining in their hands shall be Assets. Fitzh. 27
H. 8. 6.


2. If Executors do Recover any Damages for Trespass, or other wrong done to
the Testator, the money recovered will be Assets in their hands, as well as
Debts recovered upon Bonds, or Bills, or Lands by them taken in extent upon
Statutes, Recognizances, or Judgments. So held in Sales Case of Damm^g^s in
Qua. Imp. Recovered conte. of the presentment.
Yea, without ever having these moneys, Executors may make them Assets in their
hands, viz. by making Releases, or Acquittances, or Acknowledgement of
Satisfaction; for this amounts to a Receipt, and charge the Executors
toward the Creditors with the whole penal Sum, though possibly they receive
but part, as the Principal, or some such proportion: But Debts or Damages
recovered by a Judgment had by the deceased in his lifetime, whereof no
Execution was, are not Assets in his Executors or Administrators hands, until
Execution be made; yea, though Execution be made, and the Damages so recovered
that they be gotten into the Executors hands or possession, yet if the
Judgment be Erroneous, and the Execution avoidable, it shall not be deemed
Assets in his hands; for which Cause a Debt Sued and Recovered by one as
Administrator to A. B. and afterward a Testament made by A. B. produced and
proved, is not Assets in the Administrators hands, because the Executor in the
said Testament may recover it from him.

3. A Mortgage Redeemed is Assets, unless the Executors redeemed it with their
own money. Frewick 20 H. 7. 2.
Likewise Goods of the Testators redeemed by the Executor with the Testators
money, are Assets in the Executor; it is otherwise if the Executor having no
moneys of the Testators does redeem them with his own money. 21 H. 7.
If the Testator grant a Lease for years, or Horses, Sheep, Plate, or other
Cattle unto A. upon some Condition that A. did not perform after the Testators
death; in this Case the Chattel reverts and comes back to the Testators
Executors, and is Assets in their hands. Also if A. Covenant with B. to make
him a Lease of such or such Land by such a day, and B. dies before the day,
and before any Lease made; now must A. make the Lease to the Executor of B. and
the Lease so made to him shall be Assets in his hands, Case int. Chapman and
Dalton. Eliz. Reg. Plowd. Com.
because the Executor shall have the Term only as Executor: So if A. undertake
to deliver in to B. Twenty loads of Coals, Wood, or other Merchandise
whatsoever, and this is not performed in the life of B. but afterward to his
Executor; this shall be Assets in his hands as well as the money recovered in
Damages for non-performing should have been. Likewise any Goods or Chattels
whatsoever given or bequeathed to any person by the Testator upon a Condition
certain, and the Condition not afterward performed by such Conditional
Legatary, the said Goods and Chattels conditionally bequeathed do revert to the
Executor, and become Assets in his hands.

4. Increase gotten to the Executors by Merchandising with the Testators Goods,
shall be Assets in their hands, and shall charge them. 11 H. 6. 35. per
Babington.
Likewise Damages recovered by an Executor in an Action of Trespass, shall (as
aforesaid) be Assets, and yet they were never in the Testator. 21 E. 4. 4. b.
11 H. 6. 35. b. 3 H. 6. 2. and 2 H. 4. 21. and 1 H. 4. 6. and Co. in Littl. l.
2. cap. 11. Sect. 192.
Also if a Lease be made to one for life, the Remainder to his Executors for
years, and he dies, this will be Assets in the hands of his Executors, though
it never were in the Testator. Offic. Exec. c. 6. Resolved by three Judges,
temp. Eliz.
So where a Lease for years is bequeathed to A. for life, and after to B. who
dies before A. although B. never had this Term in him, so as that he could
grant or dispose it, yet shall it rest in his Executor as his Goods, and be
Assets in his Executors hands. Ibid.
Likewise a Remainder for years, so in the Testator, that he might grant or
dispose it at his pleasure, though the same fell not in possession to the
Testator in his lifetime, yet this is Assets to the Executor, even whilst it
continues a Remainder, and before it falls into possession, because it is
presently valuable and vendible. In like manner Gain gotten by Trading (as
aforesaid) with the Testators money, Wool growing upon Sheep after the
Testators death, also the increase of Sheep or other Cattle after the Testators
death, though never in the Testators actual possession, shall yet be Assets in
the Executor. Likewise a Feoffment made to the Feoffors use for life, and after
him to the use of his Executors or Assigns for a certain number of years, that
number of years shall be Assets in the hands of the Feoffors Executor. Also
Goods hypothecated or pledged to the deceased in his lifetime and not
redeemed, or the money thereof when redeemed, is Assets in the Executors or
Administrators hands. Likewise the money raised by the Sale of the deceaseds
Lands, sold by his appointment by the Executors for the payment of his debts
(as when the deceased did in his lifetime appoint that his Executors shall
sell his Lands to pay his debts) shall as aforesaid be Assets in the Executors
hands. Co. sup. Litt. 388. 5. 34. Dyer 362. Kelw. 63. Co. sup. Littl. 54. 20 H.
74. Brook. Assets 12.
Also if Executors had a Villein for years, and the Villein purchased Lands in
Fee, and the Executors entered, they had a Fee-Simple, but it was Assets. Co.
sup. Litt. lib. 2. cap. 11. Sect. 172. and 192. Dr. and Stud. and Broo. tit.
Villenage. 70.
The reason was, because they had the Villein in auter droit, viz. as Executors
to the use of the dead. And if Executors having Assets, do wast it, or pay
Debts or Legacies in any other order or method than the Law has prescribed,
they must answer it out of their own Estates. Terms of Law. and Coke 6. 46.
Dyer 271.


5. Debts due to the Testator be not Assets in the Testators hands so as to
charge him for the payment of Debts and Legacies, until Judgment and Execution
had, or they be otherwise recovered, received, or released by him. And an
Executor paying the just value of the Testators Goods to the Creditors, may
retain the same Goods in his hands, which nevertheless shall not afterward
charge the Executor as Assets. But if question be concerning the value, it is
received by all, that the value upon the appreyzment is not binding, nor much
to be respected in a contest at Law, for if it be too high it shall not
prejudice the Executor, if too low, it shall not advantage him; but the very
true value as it shall be found by Jury when it comes in question, Whether the
Executor has fully Administered, or has Assets or not, is that which is
binding in Law.

6. If a man give Lands by his Will in Fee to his Executors to be sold for
performance of his Will, these even before the money be raised are Assets both
for payment of Debts and Legacies. 3 H. 6. 3. and 2 H. 4. 2. and 9 Eliz. Dyer
264. and 14 Eliz. Dyer 31.
But if the Land be given only for payment of debts, they shall then only be
sold for that purpose, and not for payment of Legacies: But the profits of the
Land before it be sold are not in that case Assets; but let the Executor see to
the sale thereof in due time limited and prescribed by Law, lest the Heir
Enter; for Regularly the mean profits of Lands, devised to be sold, shall not
till the sale be Assets in the Executors hands, unless it be otherwise devised
by the Testator. Co. sup. Littl. lib. 2. c. 3. Sect. 169. and lib. 3. c. 5.
Sect. 383.
And although Lands devised to Executors for years, are Assets in their hands;
yet if the Testator Devise, that his Executors shall sell his Lands; this is
not Assets until the Land be sold, and the money received for the same shall be
Assets. Brownl. 2. part. 47.
Notwithstanding what has been here said in this point, and although Lands
given for the payment of Debts and Legacies were Assets before the Statute of
21 H. 8. cap. 5. which says indeed, that if one Will by his Testament any
Lands, etc. to be sold, neither the money thereof coming, nor the profits
taken, shall be accounted as any of the Goods or Chattels of the Testator; yet
since that Statute, viz. in the late Queens time, the Law was twice admitted
still to be according to the third of H. 6. viz. That Land given to Executors
for the payment of Debts and Legacies is Assets, and so the money thereof
coming. 9 Eliz. Dyer 264. and 14 Eliz. Dyer* 31.
Likewise, if a man make a Feoffment upon Condition, that the Feoffee shall
sell the Land and distribute the money to the Testators use; whereupon he
sells the Land, and the Feoffor makes him his Executor, the money received
for the Land sold shall be Assets in his hands. Brook. Exec. 51. 2 H. 4. 21.
and 3 H. 6. 3.


7. As the Goods which a man has as Executor to another, are not liable to be
taken in Execution for his own debts, either upon Recognizance, Statute or
Judgment had against him: So if such a one die indebted, leaving to his
Executor such Goods as he had as Executor, these shall not be Assets in the
hands of such Executors Executor, as subject to the payment of the Last
Testators debts, but liable only to the payment of the Debts and Legacies of
the first Testator. Plowd. Com. 525. int. Bransby and Grantham. P. 20 Eliz.


8. If the Grantee of the next Avoidance of a Church, dies after the Church
becomes void, and before he presents; In this Case the Grantees Executor by
presenting whom he please, shall not thence be understood to have Assets for
the payment of the debts of such Grantee or Testator, for that legally no
profit could be made of such presentment; yet if in that Case a Stranger should
happen to present, and thereupon such Executor of the said Grantee in a Quare
Imped. recover Damages, the money of such Damages so recovered shall be
Assets. Sales Case, in Com. Ban. Mich. 32, and 33 Eliz.
Yet it is by good Authority said, That an Advowson is Assets; Co. sup. Littl.
l. 3. c. 13. in fin. Sect. 712.
but a Seigniory of Homage or Fealty, or in free Almoigne is no Assets, because
not valuable. Ibid.


9. As the Testators Debtors Land after Execution taken by the Executor in
Extent, turns a Personal Duty into a Real Chattel, and into Real Assets: So
money paid to the Executor by such a Debtor for such an Extent, or by a
Mortgage for a Mortgage of a Lease for years, turns these Real Chattels into
Personal Assets charging the Executor. Note, that Assets must be in State or
Interest, and not in use or right of Actions or Rights of Entry, for they be no
Assets until they be brought into Possession. Coke sup. Littl. lib. 3. cap. 13.
Sect. 712.


10. A Debtee making the Debtor his Executor, or dying Intestate,
Administration be committed to the Debtor; this Debt as for so much shall still
continue as Assets in his hands as to other Creditors; yet a Debtor making the
Debtee his Executor, he may retain so much as to satisfy his own debt, and it
shall not be deemed as Assets to any other Creditor. As suppose A. B. having
Goods to the value of One hundred pound dies Intestate, and obliged to C. and
D. in One hundred pound a piece, the Administration of whose Goods is committed
to E. F. and then afterward C. dying makes the same E. F. his Executor; In
this case the said E. F. may retain the One hundred pound for satisfaction of
his own Debt, and it shall not be deemed as Assets in his hands, as to satisfy
D. or any other Creditor. Barnets Case, Hill. 8 Jac. Plow. 184.
But an Executor of his own wrong, to whom the deceased was indebted in a
certain sum of money, entering upon so much of the deceaseds Goods to the value
of his debt, thereby intending to pay and satisfy himself, shall be held
chargeable with so much as Assets in his hands, for the satisfaction of any of
the deceaseds Creditors or Legatees. Coke 5. 30. Dyer 2.
Likewise the Executors of an Administrator are chargeable, where he did
neither pay the debts, nor leave the Goods to the Administrator, but otherwise
disposed of them. Offic. Ex. fol. 199.


11. Other men's Goods and Chattels in the Executor or Administrators hands that
were in the deceaseds possession, whether he had or had not right to them, so
as they belong not to the Executors, make not the Executor or Administrator
chargeable, they being not Assets in his hands. For this reason, if another
man's Goods happen to be among the deceaseds goods, and they all without
distinction come to the Executors or Administrators hands, this other men's
Goods shall not be Assets in their hands. Nor are Rents belonging to the Heir,
though received by the Executor, any Assets in his hands; neither are the Goods
and Chattels of a person Deceased and Outlawed at the time of his death any
Assets in his Executors hands, because he was disinteressed thereof by the
Out-Lawry. Kelway 63. Coke 6. 58. Dyer 362. Dr. and S(...). lib. 2. cap. 3.


12. An Executor having Goods of the deceased to the value of One hundred
pound, taking up an Obligation of the Testators of the same sum, and really
paying the money, is discharged from having Assets as to this to any other, for
that the property thereof is now solely in himself. The Case is the same, if he
surrender his own body, or give the body of another for him to the Testators
Creditor for the debt; but a bare Promise made by the Executor, or another for
him, to pay the Testators said debt, will not discharge him of Assets. Goldsb.
79. Pl. 15.
But if Executors do really pay the Testators Debts of their own Goods, they
may retain the Testators Goods to the same value to their own use. 6 H. 8. 2.
Dyer fol. 2. and fol. 187.
So that the Executor paying the just value of the Testators Goods to his
Creditors, may retain the same Goods in his hands, which shall not charge the
Executor as Assets. Finally, this is a sure Rule, That where no fault is in the
Executor, there he shall not be bound to pay more for his Testator than the
Testators Goods do amount unto.

13. Action of Debt was brought against Executors; the issue was, whether there
were Assets in the hands of the Executors the day of the Writ brought; it was
given in Evidence for the Plaintiff in the Action, That the same day the sum
of One hundred pound was paid to the Executors in the Prerogative Court, and
presently by the Order of the said Court, the Executors paid the said One
hundred pound to another Creditor of the Testator; but the Opinion of the Court
was, in regard the money was once in the Executors hands, that payment of it
over, by the Order of the Court of Prerogative, was not to the purpose; and
therefore the same was adjudged to be Assets in their hands: But yet it was
holden, That upon special pleading of such matter, peradventure it might not be
Assets in their hands, to pay another debt. 4, and 5 Ma. Dyer* 208.


When an Administrator compounds with one who has a Judgment of One hundred
pound for Sixty pound, who offers to acknowledge satisfaction upon Record,
and the other defers it to the intent to suffer it to stand in force to deceive
a Creditor; this shall not hurt the Creditor, but he shall recover; and the
money remaining in the Administrators hands-shall be Assets, notwithstanding
such Composition. Pasch. 8 Jac. in C. B. Turners Case. Co. 8. part. 132.


If I devise Lands to my Executors for Three years for the payment of my Debts,
and I make Executors, and dye; this is Assets in my Executors hands. But if I
Devise my Land to be sold for the payment of my Debts, and I make Executors,
and dye; this is no Assets before the Lands be sold. Pasch. 9. Jac. in C. B.
Brownl. 1 part. 34. vid. Hill. 10 Jac. in C. B* Brownl. 2. part. 47. acc.
Also if an Executor does make gain of the Testators money, the same shall be
Assets in his hands. Hill. 12. Jac. C. B* Rott. 1963. Harcock and (...)renhams
Case. Brownl. 1 part. 76, 77^.
.

It is not requisite, that every Assets be a thing in possession; or once in
the hands of the Testator; for a thing may be Assets which was never in the
Testators hands, if those things come in lieu of the things which were in the
Testators hands, as money for Land or other Goods sold. Also things in Action
or Possession, certain or uncertain, if they be released, are Assets; the
reason is, because by such release is given away that which might have been
Assets: And therefore if Trespass be done to the Testator in his lifetime, for
taking his Goods, and he dies, and his Executors release all Actions, the same
is Assets, because it might be proved to the Jury, That had the Executors not
released, but had brought their Action of Trespass de bonis asportatis in vita
Testatoris, that they might have recovered Damages, which would have satisfied
Debts or Legacies; and therefore the release of Executors in such Case shall be
Assets. Mich. 27 Eliz. in C. B. Ritleys Case. Godbolt 29, 30. vid. Trin. 13
Jac. in C. B. Foster and Jacksons Case. Hob. 59, and 60. a(...) vid. Mich. 15
El. Owen 36. adjudged acc.


An Administrator may take the Goods which are given by the Intestate to
defraud Creditors, for that the gift is void, and therefore they shall be
accounted Assets. Also, if a man does Administer as Executor, and then takes
Letters of Administration; it is at the Election of the party to Sue him as
Executor or Administrator. Mic(...) in C. B. (...) and S(...) S(...) O(...)


If a Testator Mortgages a Lease for years, and dies, his Executors may redeem
it with their own money; and the Lease shall be Assets in their hands, for so
much as the Lease is worth above the sum which they paid for the redemption of
it. ^ in C* (...) and (...) Leon. 155.


If a Debtee dye Intestate, and the Ordinary commit Administration to the
Debtor, whereby the debt is extinct, yet it shall be Assets in his hands as to
debts, because the Ordinary had no power Trin. 7 Jac. B. Roll. Abridg. tit.
Execut. lit. G.
to discharge the debt, as was agreed per Curiam.

If a Feme Executrix to her former Husband, take another to Hill. 29 Eliz.
Crosman verse. Read Moo. Rep. nu. 363. Pasch. 5 Eliz. Moo. Rep. nu. 157.
Husband, to whom her former Husband was indebted, the debt is extinct, and
shall not be Assets.

It was held by all the Justices, That if a Feme Executrix has a Term, and she
take a Husband, who purchased the Reversion, the Term is extinct as to the Feme
if she survive, yet in respect of all Strangers she shall account as Assets in
her hands.

Debt against D. as Executor, the Defendant pleads Plene Administravit, Hill. 1
Jac. C. B. Richardson verse. Dowell. Cro. Rep. par. 2. Pl. 28.
and issue upon Assets; the Jury found, that he Administered, and had Assets in
Ireland: And whether that were Assets here, they prayed the discretion of the
Court; and all the Justices (besides Walmesley) held that it was well found;
for they may find a thing in Ireland; and when they find that he has Assets,
that is sufficient; and when they further say, in Ireland, it is idle and vain.
It was therefore adjudged for the Plaintiff.

Debt against the Defendant as Executor of J. S. he pleaded Mich. 27; and 28.
Eliz. C. B. Brightman verse. Reighley. Cro. Rep. par. 3.
Fully Administered, etc. and upon a special Verdict it was found, that J. S.
made the Defendant his Executor, being then within Age, and thereupon the
Ordinary committed Administration to A. and B. who Administered, and they had in
their hands when the Defendant came to his full Age, of the Goods of the
Testators Six hundred pound, and the Defendant at his Age Proved the Will, and
then released to A. and B. all Actions. And it was adjudged, that it was
Assets. Anderson said, The doubt was, because it was uncertain what he
released, and for that only an account lies; but here the certainty appears
by the Verdict. And Piriam said, If an Executor does release an account, and it
is not certain what he shall recover, it is not Assets; but if it can appear or
be Proved, that so much was due, it is Assets. For the Law presumes he has
received so much as he does release; and the Plaintiff had Judgment. Nota,
Rhodes said, That in 17 Eliz. it was Ruled, that where one made his Last Will,
and thereby willed, That none should have any dealing with his Goods until his
Son came to the Age of Eighteen years, except J. S. that by this J. S. was
Executor during the minority of the Son; and that it has been adjudged, that
when as one upon his deathbed said to his Wife, That she shall pay all and
take all; by this she was Executrix.

Debt upon an Obligation against one as Executor of A. the Defendant pleads
plenement Administravit, and issue thereupon; the Jury find a special Verdict,
That A. made E. his Executrix, and Hill. 37 Eliz. Wilcocks verse. Watson. Cro.
Rep. par. 3.
died possessed of diverse Goods, which E. made a fraudulent gift of all her
Goods to J. S. etc. and continued in the possession of them, and took the
Defendant to Husband and died; That the Defendant is possessed of part of these
Goods to the value of etc. and paid Legacies; and if those Goods should be
found to be Assets in his hands, they found for the Plaintiff; and if etc. then
for the Defendant. Fenner held that they should not be Assets, for although
being but fraudulent, it shall be said to be a void Gift against the Donor and
Creditor, and so liable to his debt; yet it is good betwixt the Donor and
Donee, and shall not be Assets in the hands of any but the Donor or Donee; but
here the Husband is a mere Stranger thereto, wherefore etc. But all the other
Justices e contra; for that by the Common Law (the Gift being fraudulent) they
are liable to the Plaintiffs Execution: And Popham said, If the Gift were good
against all but Creditors (as it is) then they belong to the Donee, and in his
hands are liable to this debt; and if the Gift be void, they remain to the
Executors of the Feme, and then the Baron having taken them and paid Legacies,
is chargeable by reason thereof as Executor de son tort demesne; and so those
Goods quacunque via data are liable to this debt in whosesoever hands they
come, unless by Title Paramount, or by Sale bona fide; wherefore it was
adjudged for the Plaintiff.

Scire facias against S. as Executor of F. V. upon a Judgment given against
the Testator of Two hundred pound, he pleaded payment Hill. 41 Eliz. Bethel
verse. Stanhope, Cro. Rep. par. 3.
of Forty pound debt due to the Queen, and besides that he had riens in ses
mains. And thereupon they were at Issue, whether he had Assets? And it was
found by special Verdict, That the Testator was possessed of diverse Goods, to
the value of Two hundred and fifty pound, and by covin to defraud his
Creditors, made a Gift of his Goods to his Daughter, with a condition of
payment of twenty shillings, that it should be void, and died. The Defendant
intermedled with the Goods, and afterward the Daughter by this Gift took the
Goods; and after that Administration of the Goods of F. V. was committed to the
Defendant; and whether upon this matter he shall be charged as Executor, and
that those Goods should be Assets in his hands, was the question. And after
Argument it was adjudged for the Plaintiff. For first, when he meddled with the
Intestates Goods, although he were neither Executor nor Administrator, and
afterward Administration was committed unto him, a Creditor has election to
charge him as Executor or Administrator; especially here when he pleads as
Executor, the finding by the Jury, that he is Administrator, is not to purpose,
9 Ed. 4. 53. 2 R. 3. 20. 21 H. 6. 8. Secondly, all the Court held, That this
Gift of the Goods is in it self fraudulent, as appears by the Condition; and
the Covin is expressly found by the Jury, and then it is utterly void against
the Creditors, by the Stat. of 13 Eliz. and the Intestate died possessed of
them; and when afterward the Donee took them, it was a Trespass against the
Administrator, for which he has his remedy, and they are always Assets in his
hands. But if a Trespasser takes Goods from a Testator in his lifetime, so as
they never were but a chose in Action to the Executor or Administrator, they be
not Assets until they be recovered: Wherefore notwithstanding the taking of
them by the Donee, yet they always remained as Assets in the hands of the
Administrator, and therefore he is chargeable for them as Executor de son tort,
by his intermedling with them before Administration committed, and the Goods by
Law remained always in his possession. Wherefore it was adjudged for the
Plaintiff.

CHAP. XXV. Additionals to the three last precedent Chapters, touching how far
and wherein Executors may be charged.
1. Executors not chargeable upon a simple Contract of the Testators. 2.
Actions of Account lie not against the Executors of the Accountant. 3. Personal
Actions lie not against Executors as Executors. 4. Executors liable for no more
than comes to their hands. 5. The Husband not liable for his Wifes debts after
her decease. 6. In what Case the Ordinary may be sued for the deceaseds debts.
7. How an Executor may make himself chargeable de bonis propriis. 8. The method
of proceedings where Execution is de bonis propriis. 9. Executors obliged,
though not mentioned in the Obligations. 10. Contracts dissolved by Obligations
after made.
1. VVHerever the Testator might wage his Law, there the Action lies not
against the Executor; 41 E. 3. 15. and 15 E. 4. 25. Except for the Kings Debtor
by a Quo minus in the Exchequer. Co. lib. 9. fol. 98. So of Accounts except for
the King.
therefore he is not chargeable upon an Action of Debt upon a simple Contract;
yea, though such a debt grew for the most necessary things, as Meat and Drink,
which binds even an Infant to payment, yet will it not charge the Executor of
a man of full Age; so that though a common Host or Victualler trust his Guest,
he loses his debt by his death. Coke 9. fo. 87. 22 H. 4. 23. But if the sum
be written on it, they are bound as by a Deed. 28 H. 8. Dyer 23. a.
Understand these things of Contracts only by word; for where the Testator in
his lifetime did put his Seal to any Deed or Writing made upon any such thing,
this being then more than a simple Contract, takes from the Vendee his wager
of Law, and thereby charge his Executor: But if the Testator Seal only unto a
Tally or the like, with Scotches, expressing a debt, this is no such specialty
as shall charge his Executors. Offic. Exec. Of Contra^s personal.
And although no Action of debt lies against the Executor, as aforesaid, upon
a simple Contract, yet may the Creditor in that Case maintain an Action upon
the Case grounded upon the Assumption employed, though not expressed. S(...)des
Case. (...)ke lib. 4 and lib 9. 87. Pincho^^ case.
And thus indeed the Executor is charged in substance or matter for a simple
Contract, though not in manner for a debt, but as for breach of promise, making
recompense in damages instead of the debt.

2. No Action of Account lies against Executors, (except for the King) that
is, against the Executors of the Accountant; Co. sup. Littl. lib. 2. c. (...).
Sect. 125.
Nor indeed at the Common Law for the Executors of him to whom the Account is
to be made; but that is helped by Statute. Rot. Parl. 50 E. 3. nu. 123. Coo.
ibid.
For Executors could not have an Action of Account at the Common Law in respect
of the privity of the Account; but the Stat. W. 2. cap. 23. has given an
Action of Account to Executors; the Stat. of 25 Ed. 3. cap. 5. to Executors of
Executors; and the Stat. of 31 Ed. 3. cap. 11. to Administrators. Coo. sup.
Littl. lib. 2. cap. 5. Sect. 123.
And as an Executor is not chargeable in an Action of Account as aforesaid; so
neither is he chargeable in an Action of Detinue nor of Account (except to the
King) for the Testators detaining and not paying or answering things received,
or under his charge or custody.

3. Although Executors are in Law understood as the Representees of their
Testators persons, yet if the Testator in his lifetime commit any Trespass
either upon the Person, Lands or Goods of another, no Action lies against his
Executor for the same; the reason is, Actio personalis moritur cum persona, as
has been formerly declared: Hence it is, that there is no remedy in Law to
compel Executors, though they have Assets, to make satisfaction of a Trespass
done by the Testator in his lifetime; for every Trespass dies with the
person. Dr. and Stu. lib. 2. cap. 10.
And therefore also it is that no Action lies against the Executor of him who
in his lifetime carried away his Corn, Hay, etc. without setting forth the
Tenth, and died before recovery had against him for the same, although during
his life the treble value were recoverable against him in an Action of debt;
and this holds true, though the Testator were a Lessee for years, so as his
State came to his Executors. The Law is the same, and upon the foresaid Reason
and Rule in Law, if a Lessee for years commit wast and die, no Action lies
against his Executor for this wast. Yet the Law is otherwise against Executors
of Ecclesiastical persons in case of Dilapidations; for if a Parson or Vicar do
suffer the buildings of his Benefice to go to decay, and dies; his Executors
are liable by the Spiritual Law to the Successors Suit.

4. An Executor shall not be charged with, nor in respect of any other Goods
than those which came to his hands after his taking upon him the charge of the
Executorship, or by virtue thereof. And although the Executor of an Executor
shall answer others to whom the first Testator was indebted, as much as he
shall recover of the Goods of the first Testator; yet if that Executor did
Alienate and Convert to his own use all the Goods which did belong to the
former Testator; in this Case no Action does lie against the Executor of the
Executor for Recovery of any debts due by the first Testator. Likewise where A.
makes B. Executor; and B. makes C. Executor, there the Goods which came from,
or were left by A. be not in the hands of C. liable unto the Judgments had
against B. Nor on the other side, are the Goods of B. in the hands of C.
subject to the Judgments had against A. And the like is to be understood of
Statutes, Recognizances, and Bonds. Also by the Laws of this Land an Executor
shall not be charged by any bequest made by his Testator of the Goods that did
belong to another man. Indeed by the Civil Law it is otherwise, for there it is
lawful for the Testator to bequeath another man's Goods, which the Heir at the
Civil Law must buy, or pay the value thereof, if the Owner will not sell them.

5. If a Woman in debt marry, and dye before the debt be recovered against her,
though leaving to her Husband much more than the value of the debt, yet is he
not liable in Law to pay one penny of her debts after her decease, because he
neither is her Executor nor Administrator, nor came to her Goods by wrong.
Ridl. View of the Civil Law. part. 2. cap. 2. Sect. 4.
Insomuch that a Woman indebted One thousand pound, and having Leases and other
immovable Goods to the value of Three or Four thousand pound marrying with A.
B. and then dye before the debt be recovered against her; In this Case the
Husband shall have all the value of his Wifes Estate, and yet in Law not be
liable for her debts; during her life he is liable but not afterward. Offic.
Exec. c. 17. Sect. 1.
This seems a defect in the Law, whereby Creditors are at a loss without
remedy; therefore let them sue in her lifetime, for Lex fit vigilantibus non
dormientibus.

6. If a man be indebted and dye Intestate, or if the Executors of one who has
made a Will refuse to be Executors, whereby the Goods do come to the hands of
the Ordinary, the Creditors may have a Writ of Debt against the Ordinary by the
Stat. of West. 2. cap. 19. Fitzh. N. B. 120. D.
and in this case he must be sued by the name of Ordinary. 9 E. 4. 34.
But after Administration committed the Ordinary shall not be sued. 8 Eliz.
Dyer 247.


7. An Executor may make himself chargeable of his own proper Goods, either by
Omission or by Commission; By Omission, as when he being sued upon an
Obligation or the like, there being at the same time a Judgment in force
against him or the deceased, and has but just enough in his hands to satisfy
that Judgment, yet does not plead this in Bar of the present Action, but
suffers the Plaintiff to recover against him; in this Case he must satisfy the
second debt out of his own Estate: Or by Commission, as when he does something
that is a Wast in him, and thereupon a Devastavit is returned against him, in
which case he must answer as much as he wasted out of his own Estate; or when a
suit being against him, he pleads such a false Plea therein as tends to the
perpetual Bar of the Plaintiffs Action, and yet being of a thing within his
certain knowledge, as when he pleads he is not Executor, nor ever Administered
as Executor, and upon trial of this issue it be found against him, that he is a
lawful Executor, or Executor in his own wrong; in this Case he must satisfy
the debt out of his own Estate, whether he has Assets or not, and the
Execution had upon the Judgment shall be levied upon his own proper Goods. 2
H. 6. 12. Dyer 185. 80. Coke 9. 90. 94. 9 H. 6. 57. 34 H. 6. 45. Broo. Exec.
141. 105. Littl. Broo. Sect. 29. Kelw. 61. Broo. Exec. 164.
Likewise, if an Executor or Administrator sued does plead to the Action Plene
Administravit, and upon Trial it be found against him; in this Case if he have
any of the deceaseds Goods left in his hands, the Execution shall be of them;
but if he have none such, then the Execution shall be, and he shall be charged
for so much as is found to the value thereof to be in his hands, of his own
proper Goods: But where one is sued upon a Promise made by the Testator, and he
plead Non Assumpsit to it; or where he is sued upon a Deed made by the
Testator, and he plead Non est factum to it, or the like; and these issues upon
Trial are found against him; or when he shall confess the Action, or suffer a
Judgment to pass by default against him, or plead any vain Plea; In all these
Cases he shall not be chargeable of his own Estate, neither shall the Judgment
and Execution in these Cases be de bonis Propriis, but de bonis Testatoris only
for the Debt, and de bonis Propriis for the Costs. And yet if an Executor or
Administrator shall entreat a Creditor to forbear his debt, until a day, and
then promise to pay him; by this promise he has made himself chargeable as for
his own debt, howbeit it shall be allowed him upon his account. And if a debt
be recovered against one who dies before Execution sued, leaving Goods
sufficient to satisfy; then shall not the Land descended to the Heir be
charged therewith, nor by like reason any Land conveyed after Judgment. Or if
a Creditor be made Executor by his Debtor, and pay himself part out of the
Goods, he cannot sue the Heir for the rest, because the debt cannot be
apportioned, but otherwise he may. Offic. Exec. page 142.


8. In all Cases where a man is charged of his own Estate, and the Execution be
de bonis Propriis, the Judgment is ever de bonis Testatoris. And the method or
form of proceedings in such cases, is this, viz. The first Execution is against
the Executor de bonis Testatoris, and not de bonis Propriis: And after a
Devastavit returned by the Sheriff, and not before, against the Executor or
Administrator, a new Execution is directed to the Sheriff to levy the debt de
bonis Testatoris; and if there be none of them to be found in his hands, then
to levy them de bonis Propriis Executoris vel Administratoris: Therefore if an
Executor or Administrator be sued by a Creditor, and the Executor or
Administrator plead a Plene Administravit generally, or plead specially that he
has no more but to satisfy a Judgment or the like; and upon trial this issue
be found against him, and that he has in all, or in part, enough to satisfy
the debt; In these Cases the Judgment is de bonis Testatoris, and thereupon an
Execution is as in other cases to levy the debt de bonis Testatoris in the
hands of the Executor or Administrator, and the Costs de bonis Propriis. And
upon the Return of the Sheriff a special Execution does issue forth to levy the
money de bonis Testatoris: And if it appear that he has wasted the Goods, then
that he shall satisfy the Execution de bonis Propriis. And hereupon also the
Plaintiff may, if he please, have a Capias against the Body, or an Elegit
against the Lands of the Executor or Administrator; and other course of
Proceedings cannot, nor may be had in this Case against the Executor or
Administrator. Atworths Case. Mich. 38, 39 Eliz. 34 H. 6. 45. 46 Ed. 3. 9.
Fitzh. Executor. 9. Coke 5. 32. 8. 134. Dyer 185. 32.
But a Suit Commenced against an Executor as Administrator, or against an
Administrator as Executor will prove invalid; for neither the one nor the other
is chargeable with the payment of Debts or Legacies in such an Erroneous Suit.
But where an Action of Debt was brought against Two Executors, whereof the one
appeared and confessed the Action, the other making default; thereupon
Judgment was given to Recover against them both de bonis Testatoris in their
hands, and Execution accordingly: And upon this Execution the Sheriff returned
a Devastavit against that Executor only that made default, and hereupon a Scire
Facias went out against him alone, and afterward an Execution against him
alone de bonis Propriis. Brownl. Rep. 2. part. 24. 33. 50. 76. 78. 116. 2.
part. 187. and Dyer 210.
And in a Fieri Facias upon a Recovery against Executors the Sheriff Returning
a Devastaverunt, a Writ of Execution issues against the deceaseds Goods, and if
there were none such, then against the Executors Goods. 11 H. 4. 70.


9. If one by Bond or Covenant oblige himself to pay such a sum of money at
such a day, not mentioning his Executors at all, yet is the Executor also bound
as included in the Name or Person of the Testator. For if a man binds
himself, his Executors are also bound, though they be not named in the Bond;
but so it is not of the Heir. Co. sup. Littl. lib. 3. c. 5. Sect. 8^7. in fin.
And in this respect the Executor does more actually represent the person of
the Testator, than the Heir does the person of the Ancestor. So that every Bond
or Covenant by the Testator made for payment of money or the like, though he
does not Covenant for, nor bind Himself and his Executors by express words,
reaches unto his Executor also, although he be not named. And yet the Heir is
not bound if he be not expressly named by the word Heir, though there be never
so great Assets or Land descended to him. And although Executors do so
represent their Testators persons that they stand liable for their ^8 H. 8.
Dyer 14. and 22.
Debts though not mentioned in the Bonds; yet where a man is bound that he will
not sue upon such a Bond, and dies, if his Executors afterward sue, this is
held to be no forfeiture of the Bond. Offic. Exec. p. 156. 27 H. 8. 26.
So where one is bound to pay Ten pounds within a month after Request made to
him, and he dies before Request made, it suffices not to make it to the
Executor. Ibid. and Manwood. 15, and 26 Eliz.
And although in a Judgment had against a Testator in his lifetime, no mention
be made of his Executors, yet are they liable in that case; for to debts upon
Record, and to debts and damages already recovered against the Testator, and
to debts by recognizance, the Executor is liable though he be not named. So
likewise do Executors stand charged with other inferior debts upon Record, as
Issues forfeited, Fines imposed by Justices at Westminster, or at Assizes,
Quarter Sessions, Commissioners of Sewers, and the like.

10. An Obligation made after a Contract dissolveth the Contract. So that if a
man do make a Contract to pay certain money for a thing bought by him, if he
make an Obligation for the money, the Contract is discharged, and he shall not
have an Action of Debt upon the Contract. 9 E. 4. 25. 28 H. 6. 4. 21 H. 7. 5. 1
H. 6. 8. per Bab. 20 H. 6, 23.
And therefore if A. and B. do bargain with C. to pay him One hundred pound for
Corn or other things, and afterward C. takes some Writing Obligatory of A.
only, and then B. dies; in this Case the Executors of B. are discharged,
because they stood charged only by the Contract, which is extinguished by the
said specialty; for such writing Obligatory does determine or drown any duty by
a mere Contract, because Specialty is of a higher nature. And although an
Executor not named in the Obligation be notwithstanding bound, as aforesaid,
supposing also that he that is named in the Testament, has in due form Proved
the same, yet is he not thereby liable or obliged to satisfy the Creditors of
the deceased, as one that has Administered, unless also he has paid the Fees
due for the same out of the Goods of the deceased.

It was Adjuged, that if an Executor pay a debt of his Testators with his own
proper Goods, he may retain as much in value of Hill. 10 H. 8. Cleydon verse.
Spencer. Moo. Rep. nu. 3.
the Testators Goods. And 6 Ed. 6. in debt by Shelley verse. Sackvile Executor
of H. Brown, he pleaded Plene Administravit, and upon Evidence the Plaintiff
showed, That the Defendant had a Farm belonging to the Testator in his hands to
the value of Two hundred Marks; the Defendant showed how he had expended Two
hundred Marks in payment of the Testators debts: And the Question upon the
Evidence was, whether the Defendants Plea was receivable? And upon Consultation
with the Justices of B. R. it shall be received to maintain the Issue of Fully
Administered for so much as it amounted unto, because to make such a Retainer
and Deduction, as to alter the property, is one and the same.

F. H. Executrix of F. brought Detinue of Goods against A. Mich. 15, and 16
Eliz. Hunks verse. Alborough. Moo. Rep. nu. 242.
The Case was, F. had made a will in writing, and thereby given many Legacies,
and at the end of his Will gave the Residue of his Goods to F. his Wife, whom
he made his sole Executrix, for the payment of his debts, and to dispose
thereof for the wealth of his Soul. F. the Wife after takes H. to Husband, who
made A. the Defendant his Executor, and died; and against A. does F. H. bring
Detinue for the Goods of F. And it was adjudged for the Plaintiff, because F.
H. does not here take the Residue of the Goods as a Devisee or Legatee, but as
Executrix, by reason of these words, viz. [for the payment of his debts, and
for the wealth of his Soul.] And the Justices held, That all works of Charity
were within the Intent.

CHAP. XXVI. Of a Devastavit or Wast in an Executor or Administrator.
1. What a Devastavit or Wast is; and in what Case the Writ of Devastaverunt
does lie. 2. How many ways a Devastavit or Wast may be committed. 3. An
Executor or Administrator in a Devastavit or Wast is chargeable de bonis
Propriis. 4. What Acts do not amount to a Wast; also a Wast committed by one
Co-Executor shall not charge another. 5. The manner of Proceedings against
Executors or Administrators in case of a Devastavit.
1. A Devastavit or Wast in the Executor or Administrator is when he does
mis-administer the Goods and Chattels of the deceased, or mis-manage that Trust
which is reposed in him, either by the Testator as to the Executor, or by the
Law as to the Administrator; and therefore the Writ of Devastaverunt bona
Testatoris lies against Executors for paying Legacies or Debts without
Specialties, to the prejudice of Creditors that have Specialties, before the
debts upon the said Specialties be due. For in this Case the Executors are as
liable to an Action as if they had wasted the Goods of the Testator riotously
or without cause. Coxels Interpreter. verb. Devastaverunt.
Likewise, the said Writ lies against Executors or Administrators, when they
deliver the Legacies given by the Testator, or make Restitution for wrongs done
by him, or pay his debts due upon Contracts, or other debts upon Specialties,
whose days of payment are not yet come, etc. and keep not sufficient in their
hands to discharge those Debts upon Record or Specialties, which they are
compellable formerly by Law to satisfy; or do deviate from that method or
order enjoined Executors by the Law in the payment of Debts and Legacies; In
such Cases they shall be constrained to pay of their own Goods those Duties,
which at the first by the Law they were compellable to pay, according to the
value of that which they delivered, or paid by compulsion; for such payment of
Debts or delivery of Legacies as is aforesaid, before Debts upon Record, or
Specialties, whose days of payment are already come, are accounted in the Law
a wasting of the Goods of the deceased, as much as if they had given them away
without cause, or sold them, and converted them to their own use. Terms of Law,
verb. Devastaverunt.


2. From the Premises it is evident, that a Devastavit or Wast may be committed
several ways; more particularly thus, viz. When more is expended about the
Funerals of the deceased, with respect had to his Estate and degree, than is
meet and fit; when Executors pay Legacies in money, or assent to Legacies given
in other things, before the Debts are paid, not reserving sufficient to pay the
Debts also; when the Debts are not paid in that order and manner as the Law
requires, but payment is made of that first which should be paid last, when
there is not sufficient to pay all; when the Executor gives a Release of a Debt
or Duty due to the deceased before his Receipt thereof; when he Releases an
Action, whereby he might recover the deceaseds Goods, or the value thereof;
when he sells the deceaseds Goods much under value, specially if in a
fraudulent way, as to his near friends, to his own use, or to have money under
hand, or the like. Plowd. 543. Coke 5. 32. Dr. and Stu. 75. Perk. Sect. 488.
570. Kelway 59.
But be the appreyzment what it will, and let the Testator sell for what he
will, he shall stand chargeable to the best and utmost value toward the
Creditors; but a Sheriffs sale of the Testators Goods upon an Execution at an
under-value is no wast in the Executor. Offic. Exec. p. 246.
If an Executor upon a Bond of Two hundred pound forfeited for non-payment of
One hundred pound, accept the Principal, or Cost, or Damage, and give a
Release or Acquittance of the whole forfeited Bond, or of all Actions, or upon
Record acknowledge satisfaction upon Judgment had; this shall be a Devastavit
or Wasting of so much as the penal sum is more than is received by him, and so
far his own Goods stand liable to Creditors not satisfied. 13 Ed. 2. Fitzh. 91.
Whether the Executors or Administrators of the wasting Executor dying before he
has answered for the W^st shall be charged. Q. Offi. Exec. p. 253.
And so doubtless is it, if he do but give up the Bond, having no Judgment
upon it, though he neither make a Release, nor acknowledge satisfaction. The
Law is the same in Case of releasing of Trespasses, or other causes of Action;
As if one take away Goods from the Testator or his Executor, and he give a
Release; this is a Wast and makes his own Goods liable: Yet on the other side,
if an Executor by payment of Two hundred and forty pound or thereabouts, get in
a forfeited Bond of Five hundred pound, it shall be an Administration but of
Two hundred and forty pound, or of no more than he really paid. 27 H. 8. 6. p.
Fitzh.
Also the Executors verbal agreement to require or sue for no more, or his
giving It is a Devastavit in Executors to pay an Vsuricus Bond; in Winchcomb
and the Bishop of Winchester's Case. Hob. 167.
a Receipt for so much as he has received, or delivering of the Bond into a
Friends hands, or into a Court of Equity by way of Security to the Debtor that
he shall not be sued for more, is no Devastation or Wast, since that the rest
in Law still remains as due and suable. Offic. Exec. p. 248.
And upon the Issue of Plene Administravit the Jury is to find whether the
Executor has Assets or not, and not whether a Devastation, for that must come
in by the Sheriffs Return upon the Fieri Facias. Temp. Eliz. in Cas. int.
Hankford and Metford.
Again, the Executors submitting to Arbitrament matters of Debt or Duty due to
the Testator, or touching his Goods taken away, is another way of discharging
dangerous to Executors; for if it happen that by the Arbitrators Award the
Trespassers or Debtors be discharged without full Recompense made, the rest of
the value will subject the Executors to the Creditors, because it was their own
voluntary act to submit to Arbitrators. Offic. Exec. ubi supra.
Or if an Executor allow a Writ to suffer Judgment to be had against him, upon
a Writ which is abatable, he shall not have allowance of that, but this shall
be Returned as a Devastavit. Brownl. Rep. part. 2. in Cas. Lawry against Aldred
and Edmonds; and as in 10 Ed. 3. 503. a.
Yea, if money be paid by an Executor upon an usurious Contract, it is a
Devastavit. And it was held by the Lord Hobard, That if an Executor pay a Bond
made upon an usurious Contract, it shall be a Devastavit or Wast in the
Executor. Brownl. part. 1. Cases in Law.


3. These and the like Acts are said to be a Devastavit or Wast in the Executor
or Administrator; which being discovered against him by the Sheriffs Return
will charge him de bonis Propriis for so much as he has so mis-administred;
insomuch that any Creditor may charge him for the Debt due to him from the
Testator, as for his own proper Debt, and for so much Execution shall be made
against him upon his own Body, Lands and Goods. Yea, the Husband shall be
charged in a Devastavit for the Wast of himself or his Wife, where she is an
Executrix, whilst they both live; but after her death it may be otherwise: yea,
and if a void Administration happen to be committed, and the Administrator wast
the Goods, and then Administration be committed to another; in this case the
former Administrator may be charged by the Creditors for the wast done in his
time.

4. But for an Executor or Administrator without fraud to sell the Goods of the
deceased under value, especially where more cannot conveniently be made of
them, is no wast. Nor shall one Executor or Administrator be charged for the
wast done by another; for where there are many joynt-Executors, if only one of
them does commit the wast, he alone shall suffer for it. Dyer 185. Co. 5. 32.
Old (...). of Entries 11. and Dyer 210. Dr. and St^. 78. and so held in 12 H.
7. and in Cas. inter Walter and Sutton. in Com. Pl. Temp. El. and in Cas. int.
Hankford and Metford. Tem. El. and lib. Ent(...)ies, fol. 227. Kelw. Rep. fol.
23. and 11 H. 6. 38. a. 4 El. Die. 210. a. The Writ so Issued against the Waster
only. P. 4 H. 8. Rot. 303. Tr. 34 El. and Pasch. 36 Eliz. Offic. Ex. p. 252.
So the Executor or Administrator committing Wast in the Gift or Sale of any of
the Goods of the Defunct, shall answer it alone, and not he to whom the Goods
are so given or sold; yet the Executor or Administrator of such an Executor or
Administrator shall not be questioned for it after his death. Also an Executor
or Administrator may lawfully sell or convert the deceaseds Goods to his own
use, so as he convert the money thereof to the deceaseds use in payment of
Debts or the like, and pay so much of his own money as the Goods so converted
to his use are worth; and this shall not be imputed to him as a Wast. Yea, he
may sell any special Legacy that is bequeathed, and even this shall be no Wast
in him, though it be a wrong to the Legatee, in case there be Assets to pay
Debts besides: But when he has enough to pay all the Debts and Legacies, then
he may dispose of the whole Estate how he please without any prejudice to
himself or others. Browl. Rep. 1. part. 24. 33. 116. 2. part. 81.
And note, That the wasting Executor does not incurr damage, or make his own
Goods liable for satisfaction for the Wast, further than the value of the
Testators Goods so wasted or mis-administred does amount unto. An Action of
Debt was brought against Two Executors; one appeared and confessed the Action,
the other made default; and Judgment was given to recover de bonis Testatoris
in both their hands; whereupon a Scire Facias issued. The Sheriff returned
Nihil; but he who made default had wasted the Goods, upon which a Scire Feci
issued against him who had wasted the Goods, and upon Return of the Scire Feci,
Execution Vid. 4 Eliz. Dyer 210.
was awarded, of his own proper Goods only, without his Co-Executor.

5. If the Executor confess he has Assets, supposing the Executor to be
Defendant, then may the Sheriff Return a Devastavit. Browl. Rep. part. 2. in
Cos. Morgan verse. Sock. Pasch. 10 Jac.
If the cause of Action be against Executors or Administrators, the Judgment
is to recover the Debt and Damages of the Testators Goods, if the Executor
has so much in his hands; and if he has not, then the Damages (as was
formerly shown) of the Executors or Administrators own Goods. And if the
Sheriff upon a Scire Facias Return a Devastavit, then a Fieri Facias or Elegit
may be sued out to levy the Debt and Damages of the Executors or
Administrators proper Goods. And if the Executor plead, That he never was
Executor nor Administered as Executor, and it be found against him that he had
Administered but one penny, the Judgment shall be to recover the Debt and
Damages of the Executors own Goods. And in a Case of Debt brought upon a
Record, the Execution shall be brought where the Record remains. Brownl. Rep.
in Cas. Green verse. Wilcox. Trin. 44 Eliz.


Judgment was given against B. in a debt of One hundred pound in C. B. After
the said Judgment he entered into a Statute to J. S. and died Intestate; his
Wife takes Letters of Administration, 45 Eliz. B. R. Read and Bearlocks Case.
Yelv.
and removes the Record of the said Debt recovered against her Husband into B.
R. by Error; depending the Suit she pays the Debt due upon the Statute to J.
S. Afterward the former Judgment is affirmed. On a Scire Facias against the
Administratrix to have Execution, she pleaded payment of the said Statute,
beyond which she had not Assets. Upon this the Justices of the Kings Bench were
divided, viz. Popham and Gaudy against Fenner and Yelverton. It was referred to
the Opinion of the other Justices; they joined in Opinion with Fenner and
Yelverton, and judged it a good Plea, and that the paying of the Statute was no
Devastavit; for at the time of the Execution of the Statute she could not plead
the Judgment of C. B. it being then doubtful whether it would be affirmed or
not; therefore no default in the Wife-Administratrix in paying and discharging
the Statute; for she could not have an Audita Querela, nor any other Remedy to
be freed from payment of the Statute, at the time of the Execution thereof.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Executors power in Sale of Lands devised to be sold.
1. The difference between a Devise, that the Executors shall sell the Land;
and a Devise of the Land to the Executors to be sold. 2. The profits of Land
Devised to be sold are not Assets in the Executors hands for a time before such
Sale. 3. In what Case the Heir may or may not enter upon unsold Lands devised
to be sold. 4. Executors accepting may without others Refusing, make a good
Sale of Lands devised to be sold. 5. In what Case surviving Executors cannot
sell Lands devised to be sold.
1. WHere Land is by Will appointed to be sold, neither the money raised, nor
the profits shall be accounted as any of the Testators Goods or Chattels. Stat.
21 H. 8. cap. 5.
And when a man devises, that his Executors shall sell the Land, there the
Land in the mean time descends to the Heir; Perk. tit. Devises, fol. 104, 105.
and until the Sale be made the Heir may enter and take the Profits. Ibid. and
Broo. Abridg. tit. Devise, nu. 19.
But when the Land is Devised to his Executors to be sold, there the Devise
takes away the Descent, and vesteth the State of the Land in the Executors,
and they may Enter and take the profits, and make sale according to the Devise.
Kelw. Rep. fol. 107, 108. (...). 25*
Also when a man devises his Land to be sold by his Executors, it is all one
as if he had devised his Land to his Executors to be sold, because he then
likewise devises the Land whereby he breaks the Descent.

2. If a Testator does appoint by his Will his Executors to make sale of
certain Lands for the use and behoof of the said Testator, and the Lands after
the Testators decease happen to remain some time unsold, the Profits thereof in
the said time before such sale made shall not be Assets in the Executors hands,
unless the Testator did devise, That the mean Profits till the Sale should be
Assets in their hands; for otherwise they shall not be so, though the Executors
in this Case have no Estate or Interest in the Land, but only a bare and naked
Power and Authority. Cok. Inst. lib. 2. cap. 10. Sect. 169. and lib. 3. cap. 5.
Sect. 383.


3. But if the Executors having power to sell the Land of the Testator, defer
the Sale thereof after the offer of a reasonable price, converting the Profits
thereof to their own use, the Heir may lawfully Enter to the Land, and put out
the Executors Dyer fol. 371. nu. 3. Fulbeck Paral. lib. 1. fo. 41.
if they have no further Authority or Interest than only to sell the Land and
distribute the money, for then the Frank-Tenement does descend to the Heir,
Kelw. ubi supra.
and the Executors are bound to perform the Devise in convenient time: But if
the money for the same be to be distributed in pios usus, then the
Frank-Tenement is in the Executors after the death of the Testator, and not in
the Heir. Ibid. Kelw.
So that in such Case he may not Enter as in the former. Yea, if Lands Devised
to be sold be not accordingly so done by the Executors, the Law will then
enforce them to sell the Lands so soon as they can, because the mean Profits in
that Case taken before Sale are not Assets to charge the Executors as
compellable to pay debts of the same: But if a man Devise, that his Executors
shall sell his Land, there they may sell it at any time, for that they have but
a bare and naked Power and no Profit.

4. If many Executors be named in a Will, wherein Power is given to them to
sell Land for any purpose; and some of these Executors refuse the Executorship:
In this Case the other Executors who stand to the Will, may dispose and sell
the Land without the consent of the other who so refused the Executorship. St.
H. 8. and Swinb. part 6.. 3. nu. 7.
But Note, That an Executors Executor cannot sell the Land of the first
Testator (who by his Will gave Power to his Executor to sell the same) unless
there be a Co-Executor surviving.

5. Although the surviving Executor may sell the Land which a Testator does
bequeath to his Executors to be Sold, because as the State so the Trust shall
survive; yet in case the Executors in that part of the Will impowering them to
Sell be particularly Named, each by his particular Name, and one of them refuse
and dye before Sale made, then the Survivors cannot sell the same, Coke Inst.
lib. 2. c. 10. Sect. 169.
because the words of the Testator (one of the Executors refusing or being
dead) cannot be satisfied, unless the Testator express in his Will a Power to
the Survivors or Survivor of them, or to such or so many of them as take upon
them the Probate of the Will; without which words (the Executors being
particularly Named) it is otherwise: But if the Land to be Sold be left to his
Executors generally, not particularizing their Names, then Sale made by some of
them only, in this Case is good; for that now by the Statute of 21 H. 8. cap.
4. it is Provided, That where Lands be Willed to be sold by Executors, though
part of them refuse, yet the residue may sell. But here Note, That they may not
sell to him that so refused, because he is yet a party, and privy to the Last
Will, and remains an Executor still so long as any Co-Executor lives. For it
was the Opinion of the etc.

Note, that by the Opinion of the Justices, if a man makes his Last Will, and
Wills that his Executors shall sell his Land, and Tr. 27 H. 8. Anders. Rep. Cas
52.
Devises his Land to his Executors to be sold, and one of the Executors refuse
the Administration of the Testators Goods before the Ordinary, the other
Executors cannot sell the said Land to the Executor so refusing the
Administration, by the Statute 21 H. 8. cap. 4. For that Executor
notwithstanding such his refusal is still a party, and privy to the said
Testament, and is one of the Executors at his pleasure.

It was adjudged in B. R. between Vincent and Lee, where a man devised, That
his Sons in Law should sell the Reversion of his Hill. 25 Eliz. Vincent verse.
Lee. Moo. Rep. n. 291.
Land, without mentioning their particular Names; if some of them dye, that the
others may sell.

Upon a special Verdict, the Case was; A man seized of Lands in Possession, and
of other Lands in Reversion, upon an Estate Tr. or Hill. 35 Eliz. Mich. 38, and
29 Eliz. C. B. Townsend verse. Wale. Cro. Rep. par. 3. Pl. 54.
for life, Devises by his Will in writing, That his Executors should have all
his Lands Free and Customary in D. for Ten Years to perform his Will, and the
Will of his Father, with the Profits thereof; and that after the Ten Years, his
Executors or any of them should sell it for the payment of his Debts. He makes
Three Executors and dies: The one dies, the Ten Years expire, Tenant for Life
dies; the Two surviving Executors sell the Land, etc. Spurling. This Sale is
not good: (1.) The Reversion of the Estate for Life passed not, because he had
other Lands there to satisfy the words, and it was not his intent to pass it,
because there were not any Profits to be taken thereby. (2.) The Sale by the
Two surviving Executors is not good, for it ought to have been by all, or by
one of them only. But the Court resolved to the contrary in both; wherefore it
was adjudged accordingly.

The same Case is Reported by Anderson, thus; viz. J. T. Hill. 35* Eliz.
Townsend and Wale's Case. Anders. Rep. par. 2. Cas* 44.
brought Ejectione Firmae against J. W. and others. The Defendants pleaded Non
Culp. whereupon Special Verdict was given, the which in effect was, That one
Smith being seized of Twenty Acres of Land, made a Lease thereof to one for
Life; and being also seized of Sixty other Acres, made his Will in manner
following, viz. I Will and Charge my Executors, and every of them, to fulfill
my Fathers Will, and this my Last Will; (in which were diverse Legacies) In
Consideration whereof I give all my Lands and Tenements to my Executors, and
they to take the Profits thereof by the space of Ten Years; and those Ten Years
ended, I will the same to be sold by my said Executors, or by one of them. And
made Three Executors, and died; after the Tenant for life died; one of the
Executors died also. The Two Executors Enter on the Sixty Acres, and receive
the Profits thereof for Ten Years, but Entered not on the Twenty Acres; but
after the Ten Years ended the surviving Executors sold the Twenty Acres to J.
H. who Entered and Leased the same, whereon the Action is brought. It was said,
That the Executors did not Sell; but it was adjudged, that the surviving
Executors might Sell; For it appeared that the Intention of the Testator was,
That the Land should be sold for the performance of his Will, which the
surviving Executors might Execute, and consequently do what the Testator
appointed in order thereunto.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Debts, Legacies, and Mortuaries, and the Executors method in
the payment thereof.
1. Debts to be paid before Legacies. 2. The Executor may pay himself first. 3.
What Debts to the Crown shall have priority of payment before Debts to the
Subject. 4. Judgments upon Record to be satisfied next after the Debts due to
the Crown. 5. Next after Judgments upon Record, Debts by Statutes, or
Recognizances, are payable before mere Personal Debts. 6. After Statutes and
Recognizances, Debts due by Obligations or penal or single Bills are to have
the next precedence in payment. 7. Debts upon Specialties, Bonds and Bills are
to be satisfied before Debts upon a simple Contract. 8. After Obligations Debts
due upon simple Bills, Merchants Books, and other Specialties are to be paid.
9. Touching Debts due for Rent upon Leases, what the Law in that Case is. 10.
Debts for Servants wages payable before Legacies. 11. Covin in an Executors
payments shall not prejudice a Creditor. 12. Mortuary, what it is; when, where,
how much, and in what Cases payable. 13. Law-Cases relating to this Subject.
1. ALl the Debts must be paid before any Legacies be paid or delivered, and if
there be not enough (over and above the Legacies) to pay all the debts, then
and in that Case any thing given by way of Legacy may be sold for payment of
the Debts; and in such Case the Legataries must be content to lose their
Legacies.

2. In the first place the Executor or the Administrator, if he be a Creditor
to the deceased, shall be preferred before others; so that he may deduct to
satisfy himself first, although other Creditors lose their whole debt thereby,
specially if his debt be in equal degree with the other debts; so that an
Executor may allow his own debt in prejudice of other like Creditors, Plowd. in
Cas. inter (...) (...) and Darey.
if he has made an Inventory, and in case he be not Executor of his own wrong.
Co. Rep. lib. 15. sol. 30.
Understand this especially when the debts are of equal degree, for if the
Testator be indebted to other men by Statute, Judgment, or Recognizance, and
to the Executor only by Bond or Specialty, then may he not first pay himself,
unless there be Goods sufficient to pay both him and them. But by the Civil and
Ecclesiastical Laws the Executor is in the same case with other like Creditors.
(...). Scimus.. in computatione. Cod. de jure Deliber. and C. Stat.. Statuimus
de Test. lib. 3. Prove. Constable. Cant.


3. If there be any debt due to the Crown, and the King Commence his Suit for
it before any other man can get a Judgment for his debt, he shall be satisfied
before any others; neither is it in the Election of the Executor to prefer any
other debt due to any Subject. Magn. Chart. c. 18.
So that if the Executor be Sued by any Subject for any such debt, he may plead
in Bar of the Suit, That his Testator died thus much in debt to the King,
showing how, etc. and that he has not Goods surmounting the value of that
debt. M. 33, and 34 Eliz. The Lady Walsinghams Case. in Com. B. and Trin. 39
Eliz.
And if the Suit be not so by way of Action, as that the Executor has a day in
Court to plead, but be by way of suing Execution, as upon Stat. Merchant or
Staple, then is the Executor put to his Audita Querela, wherein he must set
forth this matter: But this priority of payment of the Kings debt before any
other, is to be understood of such of the Kings debts only as are of Record,
and not of sums of money due to the King upon Wood-sales, or Sales of his
Minerals, for which no Specialty is given, or of Amercements in his Courts
Baron, or Courts of his Honors, which be not Courts of Record, or of Fines for
Copyhold Estates there, or of money upon the Sale of Strayes within the Kings
Manors or Liberties, or of forfeitures to the Crown of debts by Contract, due
to any Subject, by Out-lawry or Attainder, until Office thereupon found. Offic.
Exec. cap. 12. p. 206, etc.
But of Fines and Amercements in the Kings Courts of Record, there is no
question but they are debts of Record.

4. When the King is satisfied, then must the debts of the Subject be paid, Co.
9. 88. Plow. 184. 545. Dyer 80. Dr. and Stu. 75, to 79. 138. 33 H. 8. 39. Co.
5. 28. 4. 54, 59, 60. 8. 132. Dyer 232. 32. 21 E. 4. 21. and Broo. Exec, 88.
172. Co. 8, 132. Die. 32. Plow. 279, 280. Broo. Exec. 103. Kelw. 74. Brow. Rep.
part. 1. 73* 53. 76, 77* 80. 104. 103. 2 part. 51. 82. 37.
if there be Goods of the deceased sufficient remaining, and that in this order
or method. First, before other personal debts, whether they be due by
Obligation, Bill, or otherwise, Judgments and Condemnations are to be
discharged; that is, the debts due by Record, by any Judgment had against the
deceased in any Judicial proceeding in any Court of Record. Broo. Exec, nu.
172. Dr. and Stu. lib. 2. cap. 10. D. Coke. lib. 4. fol. 60.
Nor is it any Plea for a Creditor by Statute to say that his Statute was
acknowledged before the Judgment, and so is more ancient; for a Judgment
though latter, yet being more puisne, is to be preferred before a Statute in
time precedent: But if this Judgment be satisfied, and is only kept on foot to
wrong other Creditors, or if there be any Defeazance of the Judgment yet in
force, then the Judgment will not avail to keep off other Creditors from their
debts. Co. l. 5. fol. 28, and l. 8. f. 132. 2.
And here Note, that between one Judgment and another had against the
Testator, precedence or priority of time is not material, but he that first
sueth Execution shall be preferred, and before any Execution sued it is at the
Election of the Executor to satisfy which Judgment he will first. 15, and 16
El.
And here observe farther, that this is to be understood of Judgments only
against the Testator, and not of any against the Executor himself; also, that
what is said of a Testator in Case of an Executor immediate, is to be
understood likewise of the Testators Testator in Case of the Executor of an
Executor. Again, the foresaid respect to debt by Judgment is not to be
restrained or limited, only to the Four Courts at Westminster, but extends it
self to Judgment in all other Courts of Record, as in Cities and Towns
Corporate, having Power by Charter or Prescription to hold Plea of Debt above
Forty shillings; for though Execution cannot be there had of any other Goods
than such as are within the Jurisdiction of that Court, yet if the Record be
removed into Chancery by a Certiorari, and thence by Mittimus into one of the
Benches, then Execution may be had upon any Goods in any County of England.

Again, Debts upon Specialties must be paid before debts upon Contract, 29 H.
8. Dyer 32.
and debts upon Record must be paid before debts upon Specialties; also a
Judgment in a Court of Record shall be paid before Statutes, which are but
private Records, as also before Recognizances acknowledged by Assent of the
parties. Likewise a debt upon or after a Recovery, though it be a latter debt,
shall be paid before a precedent debt due by Recognizance or Statute, because
although they are both Records, yet the Judgment in the Kings Court, upon
Judicial proceeding, is the most notorious and more eminent in degree than a
Statute or Recognizance taken in private by consent of the parties, and
therefore shall be preferred before it. Mich. 32 El. in C. B. Pemberton and
Barhams Case, and Co. 4 part. The Case of the Warden and Commonalty of Sadlers.


5. In the next place, Debts due by Statutes or Recognizances entered into by
the deceased are to be satisfied; for the debt due upon Statute Merchant and
Recognizance is to be discharged, (if there be Assets) before any Personal
Debt; Coke 5. 91. Seamans Case; Execution against an Executor upon a Statute;
and l. eos Cod. Qui potiores in pignore.
For that by virtue of the Recognizance, not only the person of the Debtor is
obliged, but also after the expiration of the day of payment, the moveable
Goods of the Debtor may be apprehended, and sold for satisfaction of the debt.
An. 13 Ed. 1.
Here Note, that a Statute and Recognizance standing in equal degree, it is at
the Executors Election to give precedence to which he will; neither is it
material which of them was first or last; nor between one Statute and another
does the time or antiquity give any advantage as touching the Goods, though
touching the Lands of the Conusor it does; but as for his Goods in the hands of
the Executor, who first seizes them by his Execution, shall have the
preferment; and before suing of Execution the Executor may give precedence to
whom he will, and may if he please satisfy the Recognizance before the
Statute, at least if he do it before Execution sued thereupon: But Executors
(under pretense or color of Recognizances for the peace or good behavior, or
the like, or under pretense of Statutes for performing Covenants touching the
enjoying of Lands, not forfeited, nor any sums of money possibly ever thereupon
becoming payable) are not to withold payment of debts by Specialty, and
thereby defraud the Creditors; so that if the Statute or Recognizance be only
for performance of Covenants, and no Covenant be broken, an Obligation for the
payment of present money shall be discharged before it: Also, no Judgment or
Statute that is discharged, or is left and suffered to lie by agreement to bar
others of their debts, shall bar debts upon Obligations. And here Note, That a
Statute is a more expedite remedy than a Recognizance; for upon a Statute
Execution may be taken out without any Scire Facias, or other Suit, which
cannot be in the Case of a Recognizance, for there if a year be passed after
the acknowledgement, no Execution can be sued out against the party, himself
acknowledging it, without a Scire Facias first sued out against him; and if he
be dead, then though the year be not passed, yet must a Scire Facias be sued.

6. After Statutes and Recognizances debts due by Obligations and penal and
single Bills are to be paid if there be yet Assets. Broo. Abrid. tit. Exec. n.
172. 28 H. 8. Dyer 32. Dr. and Stud. cap. 10.
And if there be diverse Obligations, then it seems to be in the power of the
Executor to discharge which he will first, Broo. ibid. and Dr. and Stud. lib.
2. cap. 10. p. 78.
unless the day of payment in the one Obligation be expired, and in the other
not yet come, in which Case the Obligation whereof the day of payment is
expired is to be first satisfied; Broo. ibid. Labridg. dez Cases. Edit. An.
1599. fol. 174. p. 2. nu. 4.
or unless a suit be Commenced for one of the Obligations, for then it is not
in the Executors power in prejudice of that suit to discharge an Obligation,
for which no Action is brought. Broo. ibid. 172.
But if Two several Creditors bring several Actions against the Executor upon
Two Obligations, he that first gets Judgment must first be satisfied.
Labridg. dez Cases, fol. 174. p. 2. nu. 6.
Yet a debt due upon Record may be paid depending the Action; Broo. ibid. nu.
172.
and although in case of several Obligations, when the time of payment upon the
one was come at the time of the Testators death, not so upon the other, and he
to whom the Obligation is, whose time of payment was expired at the Testators
death, forbear to demand or sue for his debt, until the other Obligation
become also payable; In this Case it is then in the Executors power to pay
which he please, if the Goods extend not to pay both; for it is the
Commencement of the Suit only which intitles to priority of payment, or at
least restrains the Executors election; therefore an Executor may not pay a
debt of equal degree to a Creditor that brings no Action for the same after
another Creditor has brought his Action. Dr. and Stud. lib. 2. cap. 10.
But whether a bare verbal demand without a suit be sufficient to hinder the
Executors payment to the other, is a question, but resolved in the negative.
Offic. Exec. p. 222, 223. and Dr. and Stud. p. 78.
Yet an Executor may make payment of any debt due by Record, as by Judgment,
Statute, etc. after suit begun by another for some other debt. And
notwithstanding what has been said, an Executor cannot in all Cases pay him
first who first commenced suit, but he who first has Judgment must first be
satisfied; as when one Creditor does first begin suit, and others suing after
him get Judgment before him. 41 E. 3. Fitz. Exec. 68. 6, and 7 El. Dyer 232.
vid. 21 H. 7. Kelw. 74.
And in such Cases the Executor may expedite the suit of the one by a quick
confession of his Action, and retard the suit of the other by Essoignes,
Emplances, or dilatory pleas. 5 H. 7. 27. So Walmsley Just. P. 39 Eliz. Co.
lib. Intr. 269. Such a Recovery by confession is pleaded against another, and
held good; Dr. and Stud. p. 78. b.
Nay, after suit commenced, yet until the Executor has notice thereof, he may
pay any other Creditor, and then plead that he has fully administered before
notice of the others suit.

7. For it is a good Plea for the Executor to say, That he had fully
Administered before he had notice of the Plaintiffs Writ; 7 H. 4. 10. Plow. Com.
277.
for though he do pay debts upon Contracts, the Writ depending against him upon
a Bond, whereas he had no notice of the suit, he shall not be in such case
charged. 2 H. 4. 21.
Yet regularly in this case of an Action brought upon a simple Contract, the
Executor is to plead and to set forth those debts upon Specialties, yet debts
upon a simple Contract are to be paid before debts of Charity. Dr. and Stud.
lib. 2. c. 10.
Likewise debts upon a simple Contract are to be paid before amends for a
Tespass done by the Testator. Dr. and Stud. ibid.
And here Note, that between a debt by Obligation, and a debt for Damages upon
a Covenant broken, there is not any priority or precedence, but the Executor
may pay which he please first. But if one has a debt due to him from the
deceased upon a simple Contract, or the like, and he sue the Executor for it,
when there be debts due to others upon Bonds and Bills unsatisfied; in this
Case the Executor may not pay this debt, nor may he suffer the Plaintiff to
Recover in his Action, unless he has Assets sufficient to satisfy the Bonds
and Bills over and above that of the simple Contract.

8. After Obligations, Debts due upon simple Bills, or Merchants Books, or
other Specialties are to be satisfied and discharged, Dr. and St. ibid.
though indeed Bills are of the nature of an Obligation, and charge the
Executor as well as an Obligation; for whatever words prove a man to be a
debtor, or to have another man's money in his hands, or wherein the Testator, if
he were alive, could not wage his Law, shall charge the Executor. Fulb. Paral.
l^b. 2. fol. 30.
And under this Head may be placed debts due upon Shop-Books, and some verbal
Contracts and Covenants Parol.

9. Now debts due for Rent upon Leases of Land or Grants of Rent will come into
Consideration; though some are of Opinion that debts due for Rent in the
Testators lifetime (be the Rent reserved upon Leases made by or without Deed,
for years, or at Will) are in equality of degree with debts due upon
Specialties; if the Rent grew due since the Testators death, then it is not in
Law accounted the Testators debt, for only so much is in Law accounted Assets
to the Executor as the Profits of the Lease amounted to over and above the
Rent; so as for that Rent so behind the Executor himself stands debtor, and
therefore is sueable in the Debet and Detinet, whereas for the Rent behind in
the Testators lifetime, and all other the debts of his Testator, he must be
sued in the Detinet only. For this reason it is, that an Executor sued for debt
upon Bond or Bill, cannot (except in some special cases) plead a payment or
recovery of Rent grown due since the Testators death, though of Rent behind at
the time of his death it be otherwise.

10. If the Creditor has no Specialty or Writing, the Executor is not bound
precisely to pay the pretended debt, saving for the Servants wages; Broo. Exec.
nu. 87. and nu. 163.
for wherever the Testator might wage his Law, no Action lies against his
Executor. Terms of Law, verb. Exec.
But debts due for Servants wages, and Workmen also must be paid. For
Assumptions or Promises made by the Testator upon good consideration will
oblige his Executors to a performance, or recompense in case of
nonperformance; but these are post-posited and give place to all the former;
and an Action of the Case may be brought against the Executor upon the Promise
or Assumption made by the Testator in his lifetime by word only, without
writing, if there be Assets. Broo. Exec. nu. 172.
And these Debts by Contract or Assumption express are to be satisfied before
Legacies; Co. lib. 9. fol. 88. and Dr. and Stud. lib 2. cap. 10, 11.
and also before the Reasonable Part to the Wife and Children, to which by
custom in some Counties they are entitled. 21 Ed. 4. 21. and 2 E. 4. 13. and 2
H. 6. 16.


11. If there be Two Creditors in equal degree, and both sue, if the Executor
does by Covin or agreement help that Creditor that began his Suit last, to his
Judgment or Execution first, and there be not Assets then left to pay the
other Creditor, he must be satisfied out of the Executors own Estate, if this
Covin be proved against him; for an Executor ought not to help one Creditor to
a Judgment sooner than the other Covenously. But the confession of an Action
so done on purpose by an Executor, is no Covin in the Law; for Covin is where
the Action is untrue, and not where the Executors bear a lawful favor. Dr. and
Stud. ibid.
But where there is really Covin in an Executor, there it shall be no prejudice
to a Creditor; and for this reason it is also, that an Acquittance given to an
Executor for more than he paid, shall not prejudice a Creditor for more than
the Executor did really pay.

12. A Mortuary or Corse-present is a Gift left by a man at his death to his
Parish Church, for the recompense of his personal Tithes and Offerings, not
duly paid in his lifetime; and this by the Executor was used to be paid, next
to the Heriot, and before the Debts. Flet. lib. 2. cap. 50. Bract. l. 2. fo.
60. Britton. fol. 178. Co. sup. Littl. l. 3. cap. 3. Sect. 287.
And if a man be sued in the Spiritual Court for a Mortuary, a Prohibition will
lie. Dr. and Stud. lib. 2. c. 55.
Though it appears by the Stat. of 13 Ed. 1. commonly called Circumspecte
agatis, That Mortuaries are sueable in the Court Christian; and in the Stat. of
21 H. 8. cap. 6. an Order and Rate in money is prescribed for Mortuaries. And
in Ancient Times if a man died possessed of Three or more Cattle of any kind,
the best being kept for the Lord of the Fee, as a Heriot; the second was wont
to be given to the Parson in right of the Church. Cap. Statutum. De Consuetud*
in Provinc.
But more particularly touching Mortuaries, these Five things are more
especially observable from the said Statute: (1.) That no Mortuary shall be
taken or demanded of any for any person dying within this Realm, whose moveable
Goods at the time of his death extend not to the value of Ten Marks. (2.) That
no Mortuary shall be given or demanded but only in such places where by Custom
they have been used to be paid. (3.) That no person shall pay Mortuaries in
more places than one, viz. in the place of his most usual Dwelling or
Habitation, and there but one only Mortuary. (4.) That for a person deceased,
having at the time of his death in moveable Goods to the value of Ten Marks or
more, (clearly above his debts paid) and under the value of Thirty pounds,
there shall not be taken above Three shillings and four pence for a Mortuary;
and under the value of Forty pounds, not above Six shillings and eight pence
for a Mortuary; and of the value of Forty pounds or upward to any sum whatever
(clearly above his debts paid) not above Ten shillings for a Mortuary. (5.)
That for a Woman under Covert Baron, or Child, or any person deceased, that at
the time of his death was not a Housekeeper, nothing at all shall be paid by
way of Mortuary. Stat. 21 H. 8. cap. 6.
And here Note, That Mortuaries ought to be satisfied out of the deads part
only, that is, after and not before the Goods be divided among the Wife and
Children, where by the custom of the Country she can challenge her Widows
part, and they their filial portions; yet they are to be paid before any
Legacies whatever; for that a Mortuary is of the nature of a Legacy, yea it is
in the Law termed the Principal Legacy. Concerning other persons exempted from
Mortuaries, and of the extensions and limitations, and other interpretations
thereof, see the said Statute of 21 H. 8. at large.

13. If an Administrator compound for Forty pound with one who has a Judgment
of One hundred pound; this underhand composition shall not prejudice any other
Creditor who is a stranger to it: For every Administrator ought to execute his
Office lawfully, in paying Debts, Duties, and Legacies in such precedence as
the Law requires; and an agreement made between them and others shall not be to
the prejudice of a third person. 8 Jac. Coo. 8. part 132. Turner's Case.


In Action of Debt brought against an Administrator, it was the Opinion of the
Court, That he might retain moneys in his own hands of the Intestates, to
satisfy a debt due to himself; But an Executor of his own wrong should not
retain to satisfy his own debt. Mich. 11 Jac. in C. B. Bond and Greens Case.
Godb. 216. vid. Coo. 5. part. Coulters Case.


An Administratrix durante minori aetate of an Executrix made diverse
Obligations unto the Creditors of the Testator, and afterward took Husband:
The Opinion of the Court in this Case was, That so much of the Goods of the
Testators as amounted unto the value of the debts paid, and undertaken for,
the. Husband might retain as his own. Mich. 15 Jac. in C. B. Briers and
Goddard's Case. Hob. 250.


Debt against an Executor by an Original, who pleaded a Recovery against him in
the Court of Ipswich, and that he had not any more Goods than what would
satisfy the said Recovery, and the Recovery was after the Test of the Original
Writ; but he averred, That before the Recovery he had not any notice of the
Suit by the Original; and the Plaintiff demurred; and it was adjudged for the
Defendant, be it whether he had any notice or not; for if one sue him, and give
notice, yet he may confess the Action of another who commenced his suit after
the former, and therein may pleasure his Friend, so as it be without fraud. But
if he be sued by one upon an Obligation, and will pay another debt by
Obligation without suit, there and in that case if he has notice of the suit,
it is a Devastavit; otherwise if he has no notice thereof; and so in such case
the notice is material.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Executors Accounts.
1. Executors obliged to Account. The Ordinaries power therein. 2. Within what
time an Executor ought to Account. 3. An Account judicially made shall not
prejudice absent Creditors or Legataries not duly summoned.
1. TO render an Account is not the least part of an Executors or
Administrators duty, thereto obliged as well by his own Oath as by the Law;
insomuch that should the Testator himself discharge his Executor from making an
Account, yet may the Ordinary at his discretion in case of Fraud exact an
Account from him. Lynwood in c. Religiosa. verb. rationem de test. lib. 3.
Provinc. Constable. Cant. and Jo. de Athon. in mag. Glos. in Legatin. Libert. de
Exec. Testa. and Jo. de Canib. and Olden. Locis Citatis.
Therefore the Ordinary may if he please call him to Account either Generally
or Particularly, as the Case shall require; and that either at or without the
motion or instance of the Creditors or Legataries, within a year, or what time
he please; at which Account he may call all the Creditors and Legataries; and
therein he must set forth what he has received, what expended, and Prove it
too if need so require: And upon a just Account so made, the Ordinary may
acquit him, whereby he is discharged of all Suits in the Spiritual Court. But
as to that, the style of each Court is to be observed. Swinb. part. 6.. 20. nu.
4.
And in the Proof of such Accounts the lesser sums, as under Forty shillings
may be Proved by the Executors own Oath, the greater must be by due proofs.

2. The Executor ought to have a competent time for the performance of the Will
before he be called to an Account, which time ought to be a Twelvemoneth: l.
nulli C. de Episc. and Cleric. and Boic. in c. tua nobis; de Testa. Extra.
Covar. in c. 3. eod. tit.
Yet he may sooner be called to it by the Ordinary in case of
Maladministration, or if the Ordinary see cause for it; Lynw. ubi supr. verb.
Congr. and verb. rationem reddere.
at least to a particular Account; but herein also the several styles of
several Courts are to be observed. And in this Account the Funerals, Debts,
Legacies, and moderate Expenses ought to be allowed to the Executor so far as
he has really paid, or is obliged to. And the Executor having made a full and
just Account, ought to be acquitted and discharged of all further suit, if it
be such an Account of his whole Office; Menach. de Cas. 209. in fin. Broo.
Abridg. tit. Admin. n. 14.
neither is he to be called by the Ordinary to any further Account. l. semel C.
de Apoch. and Olden. de Exec. ult. vol. tit. 8. nu. 17.


3. No Executor is obliged to make any Account to the Creditors or Legataries
extrajudicially; Jo a Canib. de Exec. ult. vol. 2. part. noviss^mum.
but at their instance to the Ordinary he is compellable to it judicially: and
at the making of such Account they and all others having or pretending to have
interest are to be summoned Legally to be present; Spec. de Inst. edit.. nunc
vero nu. 45. and Lynw. in c. Statutum.. and postquam verb. Ordinatios.
Otherwise the Account made in their absence, and they not summoned, will not
prejudice them. l. de unoquoque ff. de re jud.
And yet extrajudicially an Executor may exact an Account of his Co-Executor,
but not in Judgment or judicially; Lynw. ibid. verb. rationem in fin. Glos.
ibid,
but the Ordinary as aforesaid, may call them both or either of them to a
Judicial Account. L. 2. C. de Adm. tut.


CHAP. XXX. Of Administrators in a notion distinct from Executors.
1. Administrator, what he is in the Law. 2. The Origination of an
Administrator by and to whom Letters of Administration are to be granted. 3.
What provision of Law in Case of an Administrator after an Executors death. 4.
What the Law is, in case a Stranger does Administer, or the Ordinary grant his
Letters ad Colligendum. 5. In what manner Administration is to be granted. 6.
Of Administration durante minoritate. 7. In what Cases Letters of
Administration may be granted. 8. Law-Cases touching this Subject.
1. AN Administrator is in the Law called Executor Dativus, because as such he
is constituted or appointed by the Ordinary. As by the Statutes, so by the
Common Law of this Realm an Administrator is properly taken for him that
Legally has, or in his own wrong illegally, the Goods and Chattels of a person
dying Intestate, or has Administered to the same; but more properly, that has
them committed to his trust and charge by the Ordinary, and is accountable for
the same whenever it shall please the Ordinary to call him thereunto; and
this is done for default of an Executor.

2. By the Constitution of Leo the Emperor it was Enacted, That if a man
dying, bequeath any thing for the Redemption of Captives, etc. and appoint one
to execute the Will in that point, the party so appointed should see it
performed; but if he appointed none to do it, then was the Bishop of the City
Authorized to demand the Legacy, and therewith to perform the Will of the
deceased without delay. l. nulli Licere. 28. Cod. Episc. and Cleric.
From whence it is probably conjectured that the Administration of the Goods of
persons dying intestate, by Bishops and others of Ecclesiastical Authority and
Jurisdiction under them, was Originally derived. For it was Anciently Ordained,
Westminster. 2. an. 13 Ed. 1. c. 19.
That the Goods of those dying Intestate should be committed to the disposition
of the Ordinary, who should be obliged to answer the deceaseds debts, so far
forth as his Goods would extend unto, even as Executors themselves in the like
case. And after this by another Statute, 13 Ed. 3. c. 11.
power was given to the Ordinary to appoint Administrators, and to Authorize
them as fully as Executors, to gather up and dispose the Goods of the
Intestate: Always provided, that they should be accountable for the same as
Executors; by which Statute it is ordained, That the Ordinaries shall depute
the next and most lawful Friends of the Intestate to be his Administrators; who
then in Law have nigh in all things equivalent power with Executors. 38 Ed. 3.
fol. 26. and 41 E. 3. fol. 2. and 37 H. 6. f. 15. Dyer f. 236. Co. lib. 5. f.
9. and lib. 6. f. 18. and lib. 9. f. 38. and Co. Inst. lib. 2. cap. 11. Sect.
200. f. 133. b. and Regist. f. 141. V. N. B. f. 61. Fitz. N. B. f. 120. D. and
Rast. pla. f. 320.
Insomuch that whatever has been or may be spoken of the one, may nigh in all
points be properly applied and aptly accommodated to the other. And lastly, in
confirmation of the Premises it is enacted by a latter Statute, 21 H. 8. 5.
That in case any person die Intestate, or having made a Will, the Executor
therein named refuse to Prove the same, the Ordinary, or others Authorized for
the Probate of Testaments may grant Administration to the deceaseds Widow, or
to the next of his Kin, or to both at the Ordinaries discretion, taking Surety
for them for the due Administration. Broo. Administ. 47. and Co. lib. 3. fol.
40. and lib. 9. fol. 39. It was resolved by all the Justices, against the
Statute of 5 E. 6. That the Father and the Mother are the next to whom
Administration shall be granted, of the goods of the Son or Daughter, who dye
Intestate -- 34 El. Co. 3. part. in Ratcliffs Case.
And by the same Statute it is further Enacted, That if diverse persons claim
the Administration as next of Kin, which be in equal degree of kindred to the
deceased, and where any one person only desires the Administration as next of
Kin, where indeed diverse persons be in equality of kindred, then in every such
case the Ordinary is at his Election and Liberty, to accept any one or more
making request, where diverse do require the Administration.

3. An Executor after Probate made dying Intestate, the Administration of the
first Testators Goods not Administered may be granted to whom the Ordinary shall
see cause in Law; and he may grant the Administration of the Goods both of the
first and second deceased de bonis non Administratis to one and the same
person; in which case the Administrator ought to see, that his Administration
have special words for granting the Administration of the first Testators Goods
not Administered. Broo. Exec. 117. 26 H. 8. 7. Coke 1. 69. Dyer 372. Terms of
Law. tit. Admin.
For though some are of Opinion, that by the general Administration the
Administrator shall have not only the Executors but the Testators Goods also,
yet this is otherwise held for Law at this day. Fitz. Administ. 9.
And an Action shall lie for or against such an Administrator as for or against
an Executor, and he shall be charged to the value of the Goods of the deceased,
and no further, if it happen not otherwise by his own false Plea, or for that
he has wasted the deceaseds Goods: But if the Administrator die, his Executors
do not succeed him in that Administration, but the Ordinary is to commit a new
Administration. The Law is the same when an Executor dies before he has
Proved the Will, or Administered any of the Goods; in which Case a new
Administration is to be granted to the Widow or next of Kin of the first
Testator with the Will annexed, unless he had also bequeathed the residue of
his Goods unto the said Executor; for in that case the Administration of his
Goods belongs unto the Widow or next of Kin of the Executor, and not of the
Testator. Or if an Executor be made Universal Legatary, and die before he has
Proved the Will of the Testator, in this case likewise the Administration of
the Testators Goods does belong to the next of Kin of such universal Legatary,
and not of the Testator. Dyer 371.


4. If a Stranger that is neither Administrator nor Executor, take to himself
the deceaseds Goods, and Administer of his own wrong, he shall be charged and
sued as an Executor and not as an Administrator in any Action that is brought
against him by any Creditor: But if the Ordinary make a Letter Ad Colligendum
bona Defuncti, he that has such a Letter is no Administrator, but the Action
lies against the Ordinary himself as well as if he took the Goods into his own
hands, or by the hands of any of his Servants by any other Command or Order.
Terms of Law, verb. Administrator.
And Note, that if an Administrator does alienate or convert to his own use all
the Goods which did belong to the Intestate, in this case an Action does lie
against the Executor of that Administrator, and is liable to be charged for the
debts due by the Intestate, which is otherwise of an Executors Executor.

5. An Administration must pass under Seal in Writing, not by word of mouth;
for the Ordinary cannot commit Administration by word of mouth; otherwise it is
if it be entered into his Registry, though Letters of Administration be not
formerly drawn. 21 H. 6. 23.
Yet it may be granted as well upon condition as absolutely, and as well for
part as for the whole Estate; so that a man dying possessed of Goods in Two
Provinces, making his Will of the Goods only in one of them, and dying
Intestate as to the Goods in the other Province, Administration may be granted
as to the Goods of that Province whereof he died Intestate; likewise
Administration may be granted only for or during some certain limited time.
Dyer 294. Fitzh. Administ. 5. 34 H. 6. 14. and Plowd. 279.
Also an Executorship limited to a certain time, the Ordinary ought to grant
Administration after the expiration thereof; or if a man appoint an
Executorship not to begin till some certain time after the Testators death,
Administration is to be granted till that time does Commence. Brownl. Rep. 1
part. 5. 2 part. 119.
In like manner where an Executor is made conditionally, and the condition yet
depending, it is for prevention of prejudice to Creditors and Legataries,
Provided, that the Ordinary may commit Administration to the said conditional
Executor only during the dependency of the condition; l. si quis instituat.. 1
and 2. ff. de haer. instit.
but upon infringement or defect of the condition Administration is to be
granted to the next of Kin. l. 2.. si sub Condit. de bon. poss.


6. There is also an Administrator durante minori aetate, which is a special
kind of Administration, and is only in case where an Infant under the Age of
Seventeen years is made Executor; in which case the Administration is committed
to one or more of the next of Kin of the Infant during his Minority, that is,
till he be capable of the Executorship, which is at the Age of Seventeen years;
the power of such an Administrator is equivalent to the power of other
Administrators; Coke 5. 29. 6. 27. 9. 27.
and therefore if it be granted during the Minority of several joynt-Executors,
all under the Age of Seventeen years, and one of them dye, or attain to the Age
of Seventeen years, then is the Administration determined; so also is it if a
Feme-Minor Executrix take a Husband of that Age. Brownl. Rep. part 1. 31. 46,
47. 80. 101. and part 2. 83. 148.
And if such an Administrator durante minori aetate get a Judgment, and before
Execution the Infant-Executor does come of Age, the Executor himself may have
Execution of this Judgment.

7. To the several reasons and causes for granting of Letters of Administration
mentioned in the Premises may be added, That if a Testament be not made with
all Freedom, as it ought to be, viz. without fear of Loss or hope of Gain,
without Threats, Flattery, Fraud, or Collusion; without Error, Uncertainty,
Fallacy, Imperfection, Cancelling, or Revocation; or if the Testator be a
person incapable of making a Testament; or if his Will, contrary to the nature
of Wills, depend upon another man's Will; or otherwise the party dying
Intestate, as aforesaid, or Testate and the Executor refuse to Prove the Will;
In all these cases the Administration is to be committed to the Widow or next
of Kin to the Intestate, 21 H. 8. 5. 31* Ed. 3. cap. 11.
sometimes with the Will annexed if there be any, and in some cases not: But
the Administration is not to be committed according to the Statutes to the
Widow or next of Kin, in case of suspending the Probate by reason of the yet
dependency of some unaccomplished condition in the Will, but to him that is
made Executor, and that only for and during so long time as the condition
depends; for in this case the party is not Intestate so long as the condition
is accomplishable or performable. Again, if the Mind, Will, and Intention of an
intestate touching the disposition of his Goods and Chattels be declared,
though for want of making an Executor he dye Intestate, Jul. Cla.. Testa. 9. 5.
nu. 2.
so as Administration is to be committed; yet for that here is not only an
inchoation but in part a progression of a Will, it is to be annexed to the
Letters of Administration, and to be observed and performed by the
Administrator.

In Detinue brought by an Administrator of a Chain, of which the Intestate died
possessed, and which after came to the Defendants hands; the case was upon a
special Verdict, That the Administration was committed to the Defendant in
London by the Bishop of Cork being in London; but they did not find that the
Defendant was possessed of the Chain in London; and in this Case these Points
were resolved: 1. That a Bishop of Ireland being in England might commit
Administration of things in Ireland, because it is but a Power and Authority
which follows his person, wheresoever it is. 2. That an Administrator made by a
Bishop of Ireland, could not bring an Action here as Administrator, because of
the Letters of Administration granted in Ireland there could be no Trial here.
3. That an Administrator might declare of his own possession, although he was
never possessed, if the Intestate at the time of his death was possessed, for
that the Law casts a possession upon him. 4. That upon a general Issue pleaded,
the Jury might find a foreign matter, as a thing done out of England. 5. It
was resolved, That in the Principal Case, the substance of it was the
Possession, and not the Administration. It was adjudged for the Plaintiff.
Pasch. 27 Eliz. in C. B. Carter and Crofts case. Godbolt 33. Vid. Dyer 304.

An Administrator brought an Action of Debt for Rent, which was found for the
Plaintiff, and Judgment given. Exception was taken that the Plaintiff had not
showed by whom the Letters of Administration were granted to him: But the
Opinion of the Court was, That it was too late to show that after Verdict; for
that the Jury have found, that the Administration was duly granted. And it was
said in the Court, That in a Declaration it is not necessary to show by whom
the Letters of Administration are granted; or to say that they were granted by
him cui pertinuit, or per loci illius Ordinarium. Trin. 1651. in B. R. Marshal
and Ledshams Case. Styles 282. vid. 1 Jac. in Excheq. Chamb. Wade and Atkinsons
Case adjudged contrary. Cro. 2 part. 10. Hugh. Abridg. tit. Administ.
Yet Note, that it was said in another case, That if an Administrator bring an
Action against an Administrator, it is not necessary for the Plaintiff to show
by whom the Letters were granted to the Defendant, but he must show by whom the
Letters of Administration were granted to himself to entitle him to the Action;
for if it appear not to the Court, that he is Administrator, he cannot Sue.
Mich. 1655. in B. R. Ingram and Fawsets case. Styles 463.


If an Infant be made Executor, Administration, during the Minority of the
Infant, may be committed to the Mother; and the same shall cease and be void,
when the Infant is of the Age of Fourteen years: But such Administrator cannot
sell the Goods of the Testator, unless it be for necessity of payment of debts,
because he has the Office of Administrator, only pro bono and commodo of the
Infant, and not to its prejudice. Coo. 5. part. Princes Case, 59.


Note, it was resolved per Curiam, That an Administration durante minori aetate
of an Executrix, was not within the Statute of 21 H. 8. of necessity to be
granted to the Widow of the Testator, because there is an Executor all the
while; otherwise, if the Executor were made from a time to come. Mich. 15 Ja.
C. B. Briers and Goddards Case. Hob. 250.


An Infant was made Executor, and Administration was granted to another durante
minori aetate of the Infant, who brought Action of Debt for money due to the
deceased, and had the Defendant in Execution, and then the Executor came of
full Age. It was moved that the Defendant might be discharged out of Execution,
because the Authority of the Administrator was determined, and he cannot
acknowledge satisfaction: And it was said; That he was rather a Bailiff to the
Infant, than an Administrator: But the Judgment of the Court was, That though
the Authority of the Administrator was determined, yet the Recovery and
Judgment did remain. Mich. 29 El. in C. B. Gol^b. 104.


In an Account brought by an Administrator durante minori aetate against the
Defendant as Bailiff of such a Manor; it was found for the Plaintiff: It was
moved in stay of Judgment, That Mich. 7 Car. B. R. Wells and Somes Case. Cro.
1 part. 174.
it is not showed, that the Executor the Infant was within the Age of Seventeen
years, and it might be he was above the Age of Seventeen years, and yet under
Age: But the Opinion of the Court Vid. Mich. 9 Car. Dorchester and Wells Case.
Cro. Rep. par. 1.
was, That it shall not be so intended unless it be showed, that he was above
Seventeen years; and especially when the Defendant had admitted him to bring
the Action, and had pleaded to Issue.

Between P. and S. the Case was; An Infant was made Executor, to whom certain
Leases among other things were devised, and Mich. 41, 42 Eliz. Prince and
Simpsons Case. Anders. Rep. Cas. 58.
Administration during his Minority committed to one, who sold and alienated
the Leases. It was agreed by the Justices, That the Administrator could not
sell the Leases, unless there were good and reasonable cause moving thereunto;
as in case there were no other Goods save the Leases wherewith to pay the
Testators debts, which ought of necessity to be paid; the Leases may to that
end and purpose be sold, otherwise not; but Beasts and other things which
cannot long be kept or preserved, especially fat Beasts, Corn, or the like may
be sold. And of this Opinion was the Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, and the
Chief Baron.

Debt as Administrator of B. upon an Obligation, the Case was, That the
Intestate died in Lancashire, but the Obligation was at Hill. 38. Eliz. C. B.
B^ron verse. Byron. Cro. Rep. par. 3.
London at the time of his death; and the Bishop of Chester, in whose Diocese
he died, committed Administration to J. S. who released to the Defendant; and
the Archbishop of Canterbury committed the Administration to the Plaintiff;
and this Release was pleaded in Bar, and it was thereupon demurred. Warberton,
Every. Debt follows the person of the Debtee, and Chester is within the
Province of York, where the Archbishop of Canterbury has nothing to do.
Anderson, Where one dies who has Goods in diverse Diocesses in both Provinces,
there Canterbury shall have the Prerogative; otherwise there would be Two
Administrations committed, which is Res inaudita. The Debt is where the Bond
is, being upon a Specialty; but debt upon a Contract follows the person of the
debtor; and this difference has been oftentimes agreed, vid. Dyer 305. And if
the Archbishop of Canterbury has not any Prerogative in York, but that
several Administrations ought to be committed, yet at leastwise Administration
for this Bond ought to be committed to the Archbishop of Canterbury; wherefore
the Release is not any Bar.

Debt against the Defendant, as Administrator of F. he pleads a Hill. 40 Eliz.
C. B. Smalpeace verse. Smalpeace. Cro. Rep. par. 3.
Recovery against him as Executor, and besides to satisfy that he has not any
Assets. And it was thereupon demurred and adjudged to be a good Plea, and he
shall not be twice charged: wherefore it was adjudged for the Defendant.

Debt against the Defendant as Administratrix of T. H. her Husband, upon a
Lease to the said T. by Indenture for years, and Pasch. 41* Eliz. B. R. Body
verse. Hargrave. Cro. Rep. par. 3.
how the Defendant is Administratrix to him: And for Rent arrear after his
death the Action was brought in the Debet and Detinet; upon Not Guilty pleaded
it was found for the Plaintiff: and now moved in Arrest of Judgment, That the
Declaration was not good; for that etc. And at another day it was moved, That
this Declaration ought to have been in the Detinet, and not in the Debet and
Detinet, because she has the Term as Administratrix, and is not charged by her
own Contract, but by an Act of the Testator, and to that purpose was cited 19
H. 8. 8. 10 H. 5. 7. And a President was shown in C. B. between Barker and
Kelsay, where the Action was brought in the Detinet only. And Godfrey affirmed,
that in Fenns Case in this Court it was Ruled, That the Action ought to be
brought in the Detinet. Gaudy, The Action is well brought in the Debet: For
this Rent, though Arrear after the death of the Intestate, begun first in the
Administratrix, and therefore the Action well lies against her in the Debet:
For the reason why the Action against an Executor shall be in the Detinet, is
for that the debt grew due by the Testator; and therefore it cannot be said
that Executor Debet. But in an Action against the Heir it shall be in the Debet
and Detinet, because he is bound by special words in the Obligation; and here
the debt which in the time of the Administratrix occurred, is her debt; and in
Dyer 6 Ed. 6. 81. the Action is brought in the Debet and Detinet for Rent
Arrear in the time of the Executor, and admitted to be good. Popham accord. For
the being charged with the Rent in her time, it accrews by reason of the
Profits of the Land, which she her self received, and therefore she is charged,
having quid pro quo. For if an Executor has a Lease for years of Land of the
value of Twenty pound per Ann. rendering Ten pound per Ann. Rent, it is Assets
in his hands only for Ten pound over and above the Rent. Fenner agreed to this
Opinion, and to that purpose cited 10 H. 6. 11. That the Husband shall be
charged after the death of the Feme for Rent Arrear in his own time, because he
received the Profits of the Land: So as the Rent grew due in respect of the
occupation and taking of the Profits. And therefore she is chargeable, and not
merely as Executrix. Clinch agreed with them; wherefore it was then adjudged
for the Plaintiff. Note, That afterward this Judgment was reversed in the
Exchequer Chamber for the point in Law: For all the Judges of the Common Bench,
and Barons of the Exchequer held, That she ought to be charged in the Detinet,
because she is charged only by the Contract of the Intestate. 5 Co. 31.

The Case was; One died Intestate in the County of York, and a Stranger prayed
Letters of Administration to be granted to him, Mich. 10 Jac. B. R. Stephenson
verse. Wood. Bolst. par. 2. 3, and 4.
which was Repealed by the Delegates at York; there was an Appeal to the Court
of Delegates in the Chancery, who did Repeal the former Sentence at York; and
adjudged, that the Party made no Will, and granted Letters of Administration to
him who Appealed to them: The Archbishop of Canterbury granted Administration
to a second person; and the Archbishop of York to a Third person, who made a
Release unto the Debtor of the Intestate; upon which Release, debt was brought
by the first Administrator against the Defendant, who pleaded the Release made
to him: And whether this grant of Letters of Administration by the Judges
Delegates were good, or not, was the Question. But the better Opinion of the
Court was, That the Letters of Administration, which were granted by the Judges
Delegates, was not good; but there being Bona Notabilia, the Administration was
to be granted by the Archbishop: And it was said, That if the Party who died
Intestate, had Goods in several Provinces, both the Archbishops there having a
Peculiar, might grant Letters of Administration; and although the King be
Supreme Ordinary, and by Delegates may do many Acts; yet the Court of Delegates
cannot do this, nor have they power to Prove any Wills; for the power of the
Judges Delegates, is, Potestas Delegata corrigere non exequi: And the Court
said, That it was adjudged in one Brakenburies Case, That the Judges Delegates
had not power to grant any Letters of Administration.

An Exception was taken to a Declaration, because the Plaintiff conveyed his
Interest to an Administrator, to whom the Archbishop Trin. 24 Eliz. B. R.
Dorrel against Collins. Cro. Rep. par. 3.
of Canterbury did grant the Administration of all the Goods of the Lessee, and
did not show how the Archbishop granted it, either as Ordinary, or by his
Prerogative: And this was held by all the Court a material Exception: But it
was afterward alleged, That all the Presidents in this Court (viz. B. R.) and
in C. B. were so in general, without special showing how; and for that they
would not change the Presidents, they disallowed the Exception. And in this
Case it was held, That if an Administrator does grant Omnia bona and catalla
sua, a Term which he has as Administrator does not pass, for it is not suum,
but he has it in right of the Intestate: But if one has a Lease as Executor
or Administrator of the Manor of D. and he grants all his right and interest
in the Manor, the Term which he has as Executor etc. does pass; for he had no
other Right in it, and his intent is to pass it, but by general words it shall
not pass.

Debt against the Defendant as Administratrix, she pleaded Plene Mich. 28, 29
Eliz. Stamp verse. Hutchins. Cropar. 3.
Administravit; the Jury found, That the Intestate was indebted to diverse by
Obligations, and that after his death the Defendant had taken in the
Obligations, and had obliged her self to pay the greater part of the sums
contained in the Obligations, at certain days to come, and for the residue had
promised to the parties, That in consideration of delivery in of the said
Obligations, that she would pay etc. And by the Opinion of Anderson, Windham,
and Periam, it was held clearly a good Administration, so that the property of
the Goods of the Intestate to that value were altered and changed in the
Defendant.

Action Sur Trover: And Declares as Administrator of J. S. Mich. 29, 30 Eliz.
La^y verse. Smith. Cro. par. 3.
and that Administration was committed to him by A. B. Official to the Bishop
of Peterborrough, and shows not that he was Ordinary of the Place, or that
the granting of Administration did belong to him; and this matter after Verdict
was alleged in Arrest of Judgment; but because diverse Presidents had been so,
and that such Declarations had been allowed, the Court did give Judgment for
the Plaintiff.

Debt as Administrator to one Philips, and Declares, That Administration of the
Goods of Philips was committed to him per Mich. 36, 37 Eliz. Morgan verse.
Williams. Cro. par. 3.
Adrian Vane Sacrae Theologiae Doctorem, such a day apud Monmouth, and the
Plaintiff recovered in the Common Bench by default; and Writ of Error was
thereon brought, and the Error Assigned, because it is not shown that Vane was
Ordinary of Monmouth, nor that the committing of Administration appertained to
him; and in regard it was in a Declaration which ought to be certain, and he is
not a Bishop, nor any person who may be intended to be the Ordinary, the
Judgment was therefore reversed.

It was moved by Coke the Queens Attorney, That the committing Hill. 37 Eliz.
Came. Scac. Bingham verse. Smeathwick. Cro. par. 3.
of Administration being by the Archbishop, although he had not Goods in
diverse Diocesses, because it is in his Province wherein he has Jurisdiction,
it is not void, but only voidable by Sentence; and it is not like to an
Administration committed by another Bishop of the Goods of a man who died in
another Diocese, or who had Goods in diverse Diocesses; and this difference has
been taken and agreed in the Queens Bench, etc. But the Justices said, it was
all one, and the Administration is void in both cases, and not voidable only.

Debt upon an Obligation of One hundred pound, one of the Defendants was
Outlawed, the other pleaded, that he who was Mich. 43 Eliz. C. B. Godfrey
verse. Woodward. Cro. Rep. par. 3.
Outlawed, was made Executor, and solely Proved the Will, and Administered, and
that the Defendant as Servant unto him took diverse of the Testators Goods by
his Delivery, and by his appointment had sold them, Absque hoc that he
Administered as Executor, or in any other manner, and it was thereupon demurred,
and adjudged to be an ill Plea, because he does not say that he refused before
the Ordinary, nor confesses any Administration; for that which he confesses
is not any Administration, and so no answer to the Plaintiff: Wherefore it was
adjudged for the Plaintiff.

Debt; The Plaintiff as Administrator of J. S. sued upon an Obligation made by
the Defendant, and had Judgment, afterward Hill. 3 Jac. B. R. Barnehurst and
Sir Charles Yel. vertons Case. Yelv. Rep.
the Administration is revoked; but notwithstanding that, the Plaintiff
proceeded, and got the Defendant in Execution. And upon a motion to the Court,
it was agreed by the whole Court, That the Execution was void, and that the
Defendant ought to be discharged, Quia Erronice emanavit; for that the Letters
of Administration being revoked, the Plaintiffs power is determined; therefore
the ground of his suit being overthrown, viz. his Commission, he has no
Authority to proceed further, and the Execution issued without Warrant. The
same Law (per Curiam) on a Judgment for an Administrator, the second
Administrator shall not have Execution thereon, for he is not privy to the
Record. Quod nota.

Debt; The Case was: Rent was granted to Baron and Feme for their lives, the
Rent was Arrear, the Baron dies, another Rent is Mich. 42, 43 Eliz. C. B.
Temple verse. Temple. Cro. Rep. par. 3.
Arrear, the Feme dies Intestate, and her Administrator brings debt for the
Arrerages due in the Life of the Baron, and after. All the Court resolved that
it well lay, because the Arrerages survived to the Feme, as well as the Rent it
self. But an Exception was taken to the Declaration; for that it is alleged,
that Administration was committed by the Dean of Lichfield, and it shows not by
what Authority he committed it, nor that he was Loci illius Ordinarius; and for
this cause the Court held the Declaration to be ill, for the Court intends not
his Authority, being special, without showing it. But the pleading of
Administration committed by a Bishop is good enough, without saying that he was
Loci ilius Ordinarius, for so it shall be intended, and so the Presidents
warrant it; but in a Bar of Replication it is vicious. vid. 35 H. 6. 46.

Debt brought against C. as Administrator, and Judgment thereupon; Mich. 17
Jac. B. R. Chiverton verse. Trudgeon. Cro. Rep. par. 2. Pl. 20.
and now moved in Arrest thereof, That this Action was brought by an
Administrator, who shows, That Administration was committed to him by the
Archdeacon, but shows not what Authority the Archdeacon had to commit
Administration; and in proof thereof 21 H. 6. 23. and 35 H. 6. 46. were cited.
And the difference is where Administration is committed by the Bishop or
Metropolitan, and where by one who has a peculiar Jurisdiction; for in the
last case he ought to show how he has his power, Plowd. 297. And although it
be after Verdict, yet it is not helped by the Statute of 18 Eliz. cap. 14.
being matter of substance and not of form, as it was adjudged in Cutts and
Bennetts Case; but the Court held, that it was well enough; and they said, That
the Books are of Peculiars, for it cannot be intended, that they have any
Authority unless it be shown: But the Archdeacon is Oculus Episcopi: And de
Jure Ordinario he is to commit Administration: And it was adjudged for the
Plaintiff.

An Executor recovers Debt, and dies Intestate; the Ordinary Hill. 28 H. 8.
Levet verse. Lewknor. Moo. Rep. nu. 13.
committs Administration de bonis non etc. The Administrator shall not have a
Scire Facias on the Judgment, but a new Action of Debt as Administrator to the
first Testator, who is now dead Intestate.

A man sets a Lease for years, the Lessee Covenants for him and his Assigns,
that he will not Lop nor Top the Trees during the Mich. 5 Eliz. Moo. Rep. n.
136.
Term: And after the Lessee dies Intestate, and the Ordinary committed
Administration to J. B. who lopped the Trees; whereupon the Opinion of the
Court was, That it was a breach of the Covenant, for that an Administrator is
an Assign as well as an Executor.

Administrator brought Debt, and declared that Administration Mich. 36 and 37
Eliz. Morgan verse. Williams. Moo. Rep. n. 504.
was committed to him by A. B. Sacrae Theologiae Professorem, and says not
Loci ilius Ordinarium; for which cause upon Error the Judgment was reversed.

In this Case the Question was, whether the Ordinary had power Hill. 13 Jac.
Slawny verse. Elbridge. Moo. Rep. nu. 1191.
to take a Bond or Obligation of the Administrator to distribute, according to
the Ordinaries discretion, the Goods that should remain after Debts and
Legacies paid. And it seemed to the Court, That such Obligation is not good:
But in regard the Case was of great consequence, Adjournatur.

Debt brought by J. S. against A. P. Executor of H. W. upon Mich. 5, 6 Ph. and
Ma. Stokes verse. Porter. Moo. Rep. nu. 53.
a Bond or Obligation of One hundred Marks; the Defendant pleaded, he was never
Executor, nor Administered as Executor; whereupon they were at Issue, and at a
Nisi Prius it was found by a special Verdict, That he had received Seven pound
Debt due to the Testator, and made an Acquittance for the same, and took into
his possession several particular parcels of Goods of the Testators, and
converted them to his own use: whereupon all the Justices resolved, That it was
an Administration; but at the Request of Sir Anthony Brown they respited the
Judgment; after the Defendant died, and it repented the Justices that they had
not given Judgment.

The Ordinary may grant several Administrations of several parts 34. H. 6. 14.
Roll. Abridg. tit. Executor. lit. D.
of the Intestates Goods, 10 Ed. 4. 1. b. 18 H. 6. 22. b. 38 Ed. 3. 21. Also he
may grant the Administration conditionally, as whereas it was before granted to
J. S. who is now Outlawed, or a Prisoner, or beyond Sea, etc. he may grant it
to another with an Ita tamen, That if the said J. S. return into England, he
shall Administer when he returns.

If an Executor takes only the Goods which the Testator in his 20 Ed. 4. 17.
Roll. Abridg. tit. eod. lit. B. Roll. ibid. 11 H. 4. 84.
lifetime took from him per tort, it is not an Administration.

If certain Goods be devised to a Co-Executor, and he take them without the
Assent of the other Co-Executor, it is an Administration, because a Devisee
cannot take the Goods devised without the Executors Assent.

Administration may be committed of the Goods of a Woman Roll. ibid. tit.
Execut. lit. E.
Covert who dies Intestate, for possibly she might have things in Action, which
by the Law are not given to her Husband, nor after her decease are at all
invested in him. D. 8 Eliz. 25. 90. Admit.

A man possessed of Goods, made an Infant his Executor, and Hill. 36 H. 8.
Bendlowes 25. and Hugh's Abridgm. vol. 3. tit. Administ.
died; the Ordinary committed Administration durante minoriaetate of the
Infant, to a Stranger: The Question was, when the Infant came of full Age, what
Remedy he should have against the Administrator for the Goods? It was the
Opinion of the Justices, That he should not have an Account against him, but he
might have Detinue against him for the Goods, or otherwise Sue him in the
Ecclesiastical Court for them.

Debt against an Executor: The Defendant pleaded, That he Trin. 30 Eliz. B. R.
Stubbs and Rightwise Case. Cro. 3. par. 92. and Hugh's ibid.
had taken Letters of Administration: The Plaintiff replied, That he
Administered of his own wrong, and after took Letters of Administration. It was
the Opinion of the Justices, That by his own Act he cannot purge himself of the
first wrong; and therefore this Action by the name of Executor, good. Pasch. 30
Eliz. B. R. Henson and Webbs Case. Cro. 3. part. 121. Mich 43, 44 Eliz(...)
(...) R. Scidmore verse. Winstone. Cro. Rep. par. 3.


Note, it was resolved per Curiam, That Debt upon a Contract of the Intestate
does not lie against an Administrator.

Debt by an Administrator. After Verdict it was moved in Arrest of Judgment,
That the Declaration was not good, because he Counts, that Administration was
committed to him by the Bishop of St. David's, and he says not Loci illius
ordinarius, nor cui Administratio pertinuit; sed non allocatur. For it is
intended that he is the Ordinary, and so is the common course of Declarations,
unless the Administration is alleged to be committed by one who has a
peculiar Jurisdiction.

The Commissary of the Bishop of London committed the Administration of Goods
by word, and gave an Oath to the Administrator, which was Entered in the Acts
of the Commissary; but there were no Letters of Administration, either in the
name of the Commissary or Ordinary; and whether this was a good Administration
granted by word, was the Question? It was not resolved, but the better Opinion
seemed to be, that it was not. Vid. 21 H. 6. 29. 21 Ed. 4. 50. Vid. Co. 8 part.
31. Acc.
It cannot be without deed.

If diverse persons be made Executors, and some of them refuse at one time, and
some of them at another, before the Ordinary, they may afterward Administer
the Goods of the Testator, but if they all refuse before the Ordinary, and the
Ordinary commits the Administration of the Goods to another: Afterward Cook 9
part. (...). Henslo^s Case.
they cannot Prove the Will.

A Merchant of Ireland by an Obligation made in Ireland, became bound to A. B.
of London; which Bond was in London, and there remained. A. B. died Intestate
in Com. B. in England. The Bishop of Ireland committed Administration to the
Son of A. B. who released the debt. The Archbishop of Canterbury committed the
Administration to the Wife of A. B. and she brought an Action of Debt against
the Obligor; and adjudged the Action was maintainable; for that the
Administration shall be committed by the Ordinary of the place where the
Obligation is, and not where the Debt first did arise; because it is not 1^
Eliz. Dyer* 303. Lukars Case.
Local.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Administrations fraudulent and revocable.
1. The Statute of 34 Eliz. cap. 8. Touching fraudulent Administrations. 2. In
what Case an Executor ought to Prove the Will notwithstanding Letters of
Administration granted to another. 3. Letters of Administration once granted,
are not revocable at the Ordinaries mere will and pleasure. 4. In what Case
Acts done by a former Administrator are good in Law, notwithstanding second
Letters of Administration afterward granted. 5. Cases in Law touching this
Subject.
"1. FOrasmuch as it is often put in ure to the defrauding of Stat. 43 Eliz.
cap. 8.
Creditors, that such persons as are to have the Administration of the Goods of
others dying Intestate committed to them if they require it, will not accept
the same, but suffer or procure the Administration to be granted to some
Stranger of mean Estate, and not of Kin to the Intestate, from whom themselves
or others by their means do take Deeds of Gifts, and Authorities by Letters of
Attorney, whereby they obtain the Estate of the Intestate into their hands, and
yet stand not subject to pay the Debts owing by the said Intestate; and so the
Creditors for lack of knowledge of the place of habitation of the
Administrator, cannot Arrest him or Sue him: And if they fortune to find him
out, yet for lack of ability in him to satisfy of his own Goods, the value of
that he has conveyed away of the Intestates Goods, or released of his Debts by
way of Wasting, the Creditors cannot have or recover their just and due debts.
Be it Enacted, That every person and persons that shall hereafter obtain,
receive, and have any Goods or Debts of any person Intestate, or a Release, or
other discharge of any Debt or Duty that belonged to the Intestate upon any
fraud as aforesaid, or without such valuable consideration as shall amount to
the value of the same Goods, or Debts, or near thereabouts (except it be in or
toward satisfaction of some just and principal Debt of the value of the same
Goods or Debts to him owing by the Intestate at the time of his decease) shall
be charged and chargeable as Executor of his own wrong, and so far only as all
such Goods and Debts coming to his hands, or whereof he is released or
discharged by such Administrator, will satisfy, deducting nevertheless to and
for himself allowance of all just, due, and principal Debts upon good
consideration without fraud, owing to him by the Intestate at the time of his
decease, and all other payments made by him, which Lawful Executors or
Administrators may and ought to have and pay by the Laws and Statutes of this
Realm."

2. Although upon an Executors refusal to Prove the Will and take on him the
Office of Executorship, and thereupon Administration be committed, the Executor
cannot (as some hold, sed Quaere) go back again to Prove the Will, and assume
the Executorship; Offic. Exec. page 60.
yet if only upon the Executors making default to come in upon Process to Prove
the Will, the Administration be committed; in that Case the Executor may yet at
any time after Appear and Prove the Will, and so cause the Administration to be
revoked. Mich. 27, 28. Eliz. inter Bale and Baxter.
Also, if after an Executors refusal it shall appear to the Ordinary that he
had Administered before such his refusal, then may the Ordinary revoke such
Administration granted to another upon such refusal, and compel the refusing
Executor to Prove the Will; for that by so Administering precedent to his
refusal he has accepted and determined his Election, and therefore cannot be
admitted to accept and refuse also; so that in this Case also the
Administration may be revoked.

3. Some have been of Opinion, That the Ordinary after he has granted Letters
of Administration, may yet afterward even without cause showed, and at his
mere pleasure revoke the same, and grant it to another; yea, that if the
Ordinary grant Letters of Administration to one, and then again afterward
grant Administration of the same Goods to another, that hereby the first
Letters of Administration be vacated and revoked, albeit there be no express
words of revocation contained in the latter. 4 H. 7. (...). Littl. Broo. Sect.
330. 34 H. 6. 14. Dyer 339. Broo. Administ. 7.
But indeed the Law seems far otherwise, and that the Ordinary, after he has
granted, according to the Statutes in that behalf provided, the said
Administration, cannot afterward at his pleasure revoke it, and grant the same
to another without cause, that is, unless the It has been adjudged per Curiam,
that where the Ordinary has granted Letters of Administration to one who ought
to have them, that in such Case they ought not to be revoked by the Ordinary.
Pasch. 23 Char. in B. R. Beteswor. (...) Case. Styles 10.
first Administration were illegally granted, or where the first Administrator
either cannot or will not Administer, or the like.

4. Where there is a former Administration regularly granted, all Acts Lawfully
Executed by the first Administrator as Administrator, are good in Law, and
shall bind the next and succeeding Administrators. For this reason it is, that
if Administration be granted to a Stranger, and the next of Kin sue to have it
revoked, and the first Administrator (pendente lite) during the suit sell the
Goods on purpose to defeat the second Administrator, and then the first
Administration happens to be revoked, and the Administration to be committed to
another; In this Case the second Administrator cannot recover these Goods, or
have any remedy, unless the first Suit for granting the Administration were by
Appeal annulled; in which case all that the first Administrator did was void,
and the second Administrator in such Case may recover all the Goods the first
Administrator sold. Again, if the first Administration be conditionally
granted, all the Acts which the Administrator does before the breach of the
Condition, are good; so that the subsequent Administrator cannot avoid any
gifts or sales before such breach made by the said former conditional
Administrator. 21 H. 8. 5. Coke 6. 18. New B. of Entries. 38. Plowd. 281. Cok.
6. 19. Dyer 339.
But suppose the Bishop of a Diocese does, as he ought, grant Letters of
Administration of the Goods of an Intestate, not having Bona Notabilia, to one:
And the Archbishop grant Letters of Administration of the same goods to
another; In this Case the effect of the first Administration is suspended until
the other be repealed by Sentence. And if there be a Will concealed, and
thereupon Administration is granted, after which it happens that the Will is
produced and Proved; In this Case the Administration is determined, and all
Acts vacated which had been formerly done by such a surreptitious
Administrator. Brownl. Rep. 2 part. 83. Coke 8. 135. Plowd. 281. 9 H. 5. 5.


5. In Trover and Conversion, the Case was; A man died intestate, and the
Ordinary committed Administration to a Stranger; and afterward the next of Kin
of the Intestate Sued a Citation in the Ecclesiastical Court to have it
repealed; and pendente Lite the Administrator sold the Goods of the deceased to
defeat the Plaintiff; and afterward the Letters of Administration were revoked
by Sentence, and the first Sentence annulled and made void, and new
Administration granted to the Plaintiff. In this Case it was resolved, that the
Action did not lie; and here the difference was holden between a Suit by
Citation, for to countermand or revoke the former Administration, and an
Appeal, which is always reserving of a former Sentence; for an Appeal does
suspend the former Sentence, otherwise of a Citation: And in this Case, because
the first Administrator had the absolute property of the Goods in him, he might
sell them to whom he would; and although the Administration be afterward
revoked, the same shall not make void the Sale. 37 Eliz. in B. R. Coo. 6 part.
28. Tackman's Case.


Letters of Administration were granted to J. S. and he released all Actions;
and afterward the Administration was revoked, and declared to be null and void
by Sentence. It was adjudged, that in that Case the release was void. Mich. 9
Jac. Rot. 2304. in C. B. Throgmorton and Hebby's Case. Brown. 1 part. 51.


An Administration may be granted upon Condition; and such an Administration,
if the Condition be not performed, may be revoked; But if such an
Administrator, before the Condition be broken, gives away the Goods; yet such
a Gift is good. Coo. 6 part. 19. in Packman's Case. Mich. 35, 36 Eliz. Anders.
Rep. 313. Case.


It was agreed by the Court in Carew's Case, That if the Bishop commit
Administration, he may revoke the same without any Sentence of Revocation to be
given in any Ecclesiastical Court, or elsewhere.

It was adjudged, That if a Metropolitan grant Administration Hill. 22 Eliz. B.
R. inter Veere and Jefferyes. Moo. Rep. nu. 288.
where the Intestate has not Bona Notabilia in diverse Diocesses, it is
voidable, not void. But 19 Eliz. it was clearly held, That if a Bishop of a
Diocese grant Administration which appertains to the Metropolitan, it is void.

Two Executors were in Suit which of them was the True Executor, Trin. 43 Eliz.
C. B. Robyns Case. Moo. 874.
the Ordinary (depending the Suit) granted Administration, it seemed to the
Court that he could not so do.

CHAP. XXXII. Of Filial Portions.
1. The Pretorian Law in point of Succession. 2. Whether the Ordinary may
compel the Administrator to give Filial Portions. 3. What provision of Law now
in force as to distributions of Intestates Estates.
1. AN Administration of a deceaseds Goods and Chattels does not proceed by or
out of the Civil Law properly so called, which only makes Heirs, and gives
right of Succession, but out of the Pretorian Law, or Law of Conscience; which
in Equity calls sundry to the Succession of other men's Goods by
Administration where there is no Will, and in some Cases where there is a Will,
as where the Will is concealed, or the Executor renounceth the Will; but if the
Will once appear, then the Administration cease. In Cases where
Administrations are to be granted, the Children of the deceased had liberty by
this Law to take it within a year after the death of the deceased; and if they
were further off of Kin, then they had only a hundred days to take it in,
unless those who were to take it were Infants, Mad, Deaf, Dumb, or Blind; in
which Cases there was a longer time assigned. By this Law the Praetor granted
Administration, not only according to the Tables of the Testament, but many
times even against the Tables of the Testament: As where a Child was not
dis-inherited in his Fathers Will, by and in plain and express terms, but
passed over with silence only; or that the Child was not born at the time of
his death, and so not certainly known whether any such Child were living or
not, or whether to be hoped for: In which case if it did after appear, then was
the Mother by that Law to be put into possession of that which was the Child's
part. If there appear no Will, then was the Administration by this Law
committed in this order or method. First, the Children of the deceased were
admitted; Secondly, those that were next of Kin by the Male Line; Thirdly,
those that were next of Kin in the Female Line; which difference
notwithstanding between Male and Female at this day is taken away, and they
that are next of Kin, are equally admitted of either Sex. Lastly, came those
which had right thereto, in that they were Man or Wife. Ridleys view of the
Civil and Ecclesiastical Laws. Sext. 8. cap. 1. par. 1.


2. It has been and still is much controverted, whether the Ordinary has
power to compel the Administrator to give Portions to Children, or to allot and
distribute Filial Portions to the deceaseds Children out of his Estate; If the
Ordinary attempt this, either before or after the granting of Letters of
Administration, it is held by some, that the Administrator may have a
Prohibition against the Ordinary, Coke 8. 135. 9. 39. Dyer 255. Westminster. 2. cap.
20. and 31 Ed. 3. cap. 11.
and diverse have been granted accordingly; yet notwithstanding this, it is
usual for the Ordinary to order and allot distributions of Filial Portions, and
therein Prohibitions not often granted at this day. Hill. 13 Jac. Coke B.
Henslowes Case. and Trin. 3 Jac. Coke B. in Davies case. and Hill. 2 Char. 1.
Coke 9. in Fotherly's Case.


3. But now this Question is fully Resolved, and the Controversy at an end; for
by a late Statute, 22, 23 Char. 2.
it is Enacted, "That the Ordinaries shall call Administrators to Account, for
and touching the Goods of any person dying Intestate, and order and make just
and equal distribution of what remains clear (after all Debts, Funerals, and
just Expenses first allowed and deducted) amongst the Wife and Children, or
Childrens Children, if any such be, or otherwise to the next of Kindred to the
dead person in equal degree, or legally representing their Stocks pro suo
cuique jure, according to the Laws in such Cases, and in manner and form
following: That is to say, one third part of the said Surplusage to the Wife of
the Intestate, and all the residue by equal Portions to and amongst the
Children of such persons dying Intestate, and such persons as legally represent
such Children, in case any of the said Children be then dead, other than such
Child or Children (not being Heir at Law) who shall have any Estate by the
settlement of the Intestate, or shall be advanced by the Intestate in his
lifetime, by Portion or Portions equal to the share which shall by such
distribution be allotted to the other Children to whom such distribution is to
be See the said Stat. at large.
made, etc. And the Heir at Law, notwithstanding any Land that he shall have by
descent or otherwise from the Intestate, is to have an equal part in the
distribution with the rest of the Children, etc. And in case there be no
Children, nor any Legal Representatives of them, then one Moity of the said
Estate to be allotted to the Wife of the Intestate, the residue of the said
Estate to be distributed equally to every of the next of Kindred of the
Intestate who are in equal degree, and those who legally represent them.
Provided, that there be no Representations admitted among Collaterals after
Brothers and Sisters Children: And in case there be no Wife, then all the said
Estate to be distributed equally to and amongst the Children, etc." And no such
distribution to be made till after one year after the Intestates death; nor
without sufficient security to be given by those to whom such distribution
shall be made, for refunding back to the Administrator (according to each ones
ratable proportion) in case of the Intestates Debts afterward sued for and
recovered, or otherwise duly made to appear: For other Provisoes, Rules and
Limitations in the said late Act of Parliament, the Reader is referred to the
Statute it self, there more at large.

Note: An Administration cannot be revoked for the not bringing in of the
Inventory, and the Account of the Administrator: And the Ordinary upon an
Administration granted, had not [before the said Statute] power to make any
distribution of the Surplusage, nor to take any Bond for to Answer the
Surplusage, by the true meaning of the Statute of 21 H. 8. which intends a
benefit to the Administrator, and not an unprofitable burden. Mich. 15 Jac. in
C. B. Tooker and Loanes Case. Hob. 190. Vid. Styles Pasch. 24. B. R. Hill. and
Birds Case. acc. Vid. Hill. 16 Car. in C. B. Mersh. 93. Hugh. Abridg. verb.
Adm. p. 117.
The Ordinary has not power to make distribution of the Goods, because there
may be a Debt which was unknown; and if he might distribute, then the
Administrator should be charged with the debt of his own Goods. Vid.
Briersley's Case, Brown 1 Part. 31. acc. Whether this were Law then, is a
needless question, it being otherwise now by the Statute aforesaid.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of Right to Administration.
1. What the Method of Succession is by the Laws of this Realm. 2. How the
Civil Law understands it. 3. The difference between the words [Kindred and
Consanguinity:] between [Cognatos and Agnatos.] 4. Whether an Alien no Denizon
may be an Administrator. 5. Administration granted a Caveat depending, is void
in Law.
1. BY the Law, both by the Statute Laws, the Common Law, and by the Civil
Law, the nearest of Kin to the deceased Intestate is to succeed in the
Administration of his Goods. 31 Ed. 3. c. 11. and 21 H. 8. c. 5. Littl. Broo.
Sect. 233. 415. Fitzh. Excom. 13. Coke 9. 39, 40. and 3. 40. Dyer 339. and 4 H.
7. 14.
As first to the Husband or Wife; but if they fail, then secondly, to the
Children whether Male or Female; but if they fail, then thirdly, to the
Parents, whether Father or Mother; but if they fail, then fourthly, to the
Brothers or Sisters of the whole blood; but if they fail, then fifthly, to the
Brothers or Sisters of the half blood; but if they fail, then sixthly, to the
next of Kin, as Uncles, Aunts, etc. From these the Ordinary cannot grant the
Administration to a Stranger, if they seasonably require it, and are not
otherwise affected by some legal impediment; but he may grant it to which of
these he please, if diverse of them in equal degree do desire it; yea, to a
Stranger if they neglect it.

2. The Civil Law as to the Intestates Estate, whether Real or Personal,
considers it all under the same Notion; yea, in this case it makes no
distinction either of Ages or Sexes; but all that are concerned may challenge
an equal proportion, provided they be of equal degree, and of identity in
blood, whether of the whole or of the half blood. But the Wife was otherwise
provided for by the Civil Law, l. 4. Sol. Mat^.
Therefore exempted from a Succession to the Goods of her Intestate Husband.
There are but Three Orders or Degrees chiefly of Kindred which the Civil Law
does specially take notice of: The first is in the Right Line Descendent, as
Children, Grandchildren, and so downwards. The Second is in the Right Line
Ascendent, as Parents, Grand-Parents, and so upwards. The Third is in the Line
Transversal or Collateral, as Uncles, Aunts, Great-Uncles, and so side-wards;
always remembering that the whole blood is more worthy than the half blood; and
the nigher Degree more worthy than that which is more remote.

3. Consanguineus or Consanguinity, and Agnatus properly so called, and
strictly so taken, does comprehend only them that be of Kin by the Fathers
Side. Franc. in c. Sciant. de Elect. 6. 2. Alex. Cons. 229. n^. 10. vol. 6.
Therefore the word Kin or Kindred is of a greater Latitude than Consanguinity,
because it comprizeth Cognatos as well as Agnatos, and so comprehends all the
Relations of both Lines, both Male and Female; for Cognati properly understood,
signify only such as are the Mother-Side, and of the Female Line. And here
Note, that the most remote Agnati or Kindred of the Line Male in a Right Line
Descendent are preferred before the nighest Kindred of the Female Line; but it
is otherwise in a Transversal or Collateral Line. Cowell Inst. jur. Angl. lib.
3. tit. 5.
But as to Land in Fee or of Inheritance the Right thereof quasi ponderosum
ever descends Downwards in a Right or Transversal Line, and never does
Re-ascend the same way that it Descended by the Ancestors death; yet it may
Ascend a Latere or Sideward for want of Right Heirs in the Descendent Line,
Glanvile lib. 7. cap. 1. and Co(...)ell ubi sup. lib. 3. cap. 1.. (...).
which often happens.

4. Suppose an Alien born and not made Denizon happen to dye Intestate within
this Realm, having Kindred born beyond Sea, and others though more Remote born
in this Realm; In this Case an Alien may be Administrator, and have
Administration of Leases, as well as of Personal Things, because he has them
as an Executor in another Right, and not to his own Use: And he may be an
Administrator as well as a person Outlawed or Attainted may be an Executor;
and no Prohibition will lie in this Case. Croo. Rep. Pasch. 1 Char. 1. in Sir
Vpwel Car^on^ Case.


5. An Administratrix Sued the Defendant in the Court of Chancery; the
Defendant showed, That before Administration was committed to the Plaintiff he
had put in a Caveat in the Ecclesiastical Court, hanging which Caveat, the
Plaintiff obtained Letters of Administration, of which he demanded Judgment
pendant the Appeal. It is a good Cause to stay the Suit until the Appeal shall
be determined. In this Case it was also said, That the same was not like unto a
Writ of Error; for by the purchasing of a Writ of Error, the Judgment is not
impeached until the Record be Reversed: But the very bringing of an Appeal is a
suspension of the first Judgment for the principal matter. Mich. 42 El.
Willoughby and Willoughby's Cas. Goldesb. 119.


If an Executor dye Intestate, Administration ought to be granted of the first
Testator, for now he is dead Intestate: 21 Ed. 4. 24. 26 H. 8. 7. But if an
Executor after Administration dye Intestate, Roll. Abridgm. tit. Executor.
and the Ordinary grant Administration of all the Goods of the Executor, he may
Administer the Goods of the first Testator, 10 Ed. 4. 1. Quaere, if an
Administrator does make an Executor, and dies, his Executor shall not have the
Administration of these Goods, but a new Administration ought to be granted of
them. 34 H. 6. 14. D. 32 H. 8. 47. 11. Co. 5. Brud. 9. b. Adjudged. And if an
Executor before Probate of his Testators Will does make his Executor, and dye,
the Executors Executor cannot take upon him the Execution of the first
Testament; but Administration of the first Testators Goods is to be granted cum
Testamento annexo, D. 22, 23 Eliz. 372. 8.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of Succession in the Right Line Descendent.
1. What the Jus Repraesentationis is; or that several Children by one Father
deceased do Conjunctim represent the Person of that Father. 2. That Succession
(when the Case so requires) is to be computed in Stirpes not in Capita. 3. That
the Grandchild (living the Father) succeeds not to the Grandfather; nor (by
the Civil Law) if conceived after his Grandfathers death. 4. How the
Succession (according to the Civil Law) is, in Case of Children not all of them
by the self-same Parents; and how at Common Law.
1. NExt to the Widow, this Right of Succession in the Right Line descendent is
the first degree of Right to the Administration of an Intestates Goods; for
they are in the first place admissable to such Administration, who are of the
Right Line descendent from the deceased: So that if a man dye Intestate,
leaving behind him Children, Parents, and Collateral Kindred, the Children do
in the first place Succeed as to the Goods whereof he died Intestate,
exclusively to the Grandchildren whose Parents are living. It is otherwise if
their Parents be dead; for if a man dye, leaving one Son, and one or more
Grandchildren by another Son deceased, these Grandchildren are Admissable,
together with that living Son, their Uncle. And this is Jure Repraesentationis,
whereby several Children of one Father do Conjunctim represent the Person of
that Father: But yet this must be understood according to the Law-Terms, not in
Capita but in Stirpes only, that is, not according to the several Branches, or
by Poll as we use to say, but according to the one Common Root of those several
Branches; and therefore put all the Grandchildren together, they can have no
greater proportion among them all than singly belonged to their Father, were he
then alive. So that in the foresaid case the Estate is to be divided into Two
equal parts, whereof one Moity is due to the Son, the other Moity to the
Grandchildren to be equally divided amongst them.. Cum filius. Inst. de
haered. quae ab intest. and Gras.. Successio ab Intest. q. 2. nu. 6. and
Capriol. de Succes. ab Intest. lib. 1. nu. 602.
And this Right or Law of Representation holds in infinitum in the Right Line
descendent; Capr. ibid. and Grass. ibid. q. 2. nu. 13. Covar. Pract. quaest.
cap. 38. nu. 5. and Gomez. Resol. Tom. (...) cap. 1. nu. 15.
contrary to the Opinion of the Famous Bartol, who held, that it reached not
beyond the Great Grandchildren.

2. In like manner, if there be diverse Grandchildren by diverse Sons deceased,
and no Son living, they succeed to their Grandfather in Stirpes not in Capita,
that is as aforesaid, not according to the distinct number of the several
Grandchildren, but according to the number of their Fathers or Sons to the
Intestate; so that the Grandchildren by each deceased Son to the Intestate
shall Conjunctim, and amongst them all respectively have just that proportion,
which their respective Fathers, or Sons to the Intestate could challenge if
they had been alive at the time of the Intestates decease; so that Two
Grandchildren by one Son have no more than one Grandchild by another Son,
because the Son by whom are the Two Grandchildren to the Intestate could have
no more than the Son by whom there is but one Grandchild, in case both the
Sons had been living when the Intestate died. Indeed, if there be no
Grandchildren, save only by one Son, then they succeed equally according to
their number, unless they be in unequal degree, as Grandchildren and Great
Grandchildren. And the reason why Succession goes in Stirpes not in Capita, is
because they succeed not in their own right, but in the right of their Ancestor.

3. A Grandchild whilst his Father is alive, has not the precedent right to
the Administration of the Goods of his Grandfather dying Intestate; nor does a
Grandchild succeed to his Grandfather unless he be born, at least conceived,
at the time of his Grandfathers death. Barry de Success. Intest. nu. 5.
So that a Grandchild conceived after his Grandfathers death is not in his
own person by right of Representation (according to the Civil Law) Admissable
to succeed his Grandfather. Gras. ubi sup. q. 2. nu. 16. Guide. Pap. q. 612.
Capriol. ubi sup. lib. 1. nu. 619. and licet. Inst. de haered. quae ab Intest.
And that which hitherto has been said of Sons and Grand-Sons holds true in
Law as to Daughters and Grand-daughters, who are equally with the other
Admissable to a succession of their Intestate Parents Goods without any
distinction of Sex. Gras. ibid. q. 2. nu. 2.


4. Whereas the Law is, That Children shall succeed equally to the
Administration of their Intestate Parents Goods, this must be understood only
of such Children as are begotten of the self-same Parents; for if there be
Children by diverse Parents, as if a Woman has had Two Husbands, and one Child
by the First, Two by the Second; In this case each of them respectively
succeeds (according to the Civil Law) only to the Goods of his own Father, but
all of them equally to their Mothers. Grass. ibid. q. 17.
And this also by the same Law holds true as to the Grandchildren by such
Children of each marriage respectively. Otherwise it is, if a man has had two
Wives, with Goods and Children by each of them, and dye Intestate, leaving no
Relict or Widow; for in this case all the Children by both Wives shall equally
succeed to the Goods and Chattels of their Father dying Intestate.

In the case of a Prohibition granted to the Ecclesiastical Court, for granting
Letters of Administration to a Sister of the half blood, when there was a
Brother of the whole blood, who sued for them. It was agreed by the Court, That
it is in the power of the Ordinary to grant Administration either to the
Brother of the whole blood, or to the Sister of the half blood, at his
Election, because they are in equal degree of Kindred to the Intestate. But if
Administration be granted to the Husband and Wife where the Husband is not of
Kin to the Intestate, but a Stranger; in such case if he survive his Wife, he
should have all the Goods, and the Kindred be defrauded, which is not
reasonable; and therefore such Administration shall be void. Mich. 23 Car. in
B. R. Styles 74, 75. Vid. Pasch. 24 Car. in B. R. Hill and Birds Case. Styles
102. acc.


CHAP. XXXV. Of Succession in the Right Line Ascendent.
1. Whether Parents, specially the Mother, be next of Kin to her Child. 2. The
method of Succession (by the Civil Law) in the Right Line Ascendent. 3. How the
Succession goes by the Civil Law, when some of the Collaterals concur with
those of the Ascendent Line. 4. Whether by the same Law, the deceaseds Brothers
and Brothers Children may concur with their Parents to the Succession.
1. NOtwithstanding that Maxim at the Common Law, That Inheritance cannot
Lineally Ascend, yet is the Parent more nigh of blood to the Child even by that
Law, than is the Uncle. Littl. Tenures, fol. 1.
And by the Civil Law, as the Son and Daughter be in the first degree of
Kindred in the Line Descendent: So the Father and Mother are in the first
degree of Kindred in the Line Ascendent.. 1. Instit. de Grad. Cognat.
To constitute a Kindred it is sufficient that the Relations do center and
agree in aliquo Tertio, or flow from one common Head or Fountain, or spring
from the same Stock or Root; Thus the Father and the Daughter, the Mother and
the Son, the Mother and the Daughter, the Father and the Son, they flow from
one and the same Fountain, they spring from the same Root, viz. the
Grandfather; and therefore are of Kin each to other. And by the Laws of this
Realm Parents are reputed to be of Kin to their Children, and the Mother to be
of Kin to her Child; and therefore by the Statute Law if a man seized of Lands
in Socage, his Heir being within the Age of Fourteen years; In this case the
Mother shall have the Wardship of her Son, as being next of Kin to whom the
Lands cannot descend. Stat. de Marlebridge, an. 52 H. 3. and Brook Abridg. tit.
Administ. 47. Coke lib. 3. Ratcliff's Case.
Indeed, by the Law of the twelfth Table, the Mother could not Succeed to her
Children, nor they to her. Inst. de S. C. Tertil. in Prin.
But this is now altered, the Law now being otherwise. Auth. Novel. de haered.
ab Intestat.
It cannot be denied but that this Question, viz. Whether the Mother be of Kin
to her Child? has been much controverted amongst the ablest Lawyers, and in
the close of all, after much dispute it has been adjudged in the Negative,
viz. That the Mother is not of Kin to her Child. Brook. Abr. tit. Administ. nu.
47. and Coke lib. 3. in Rot. lisss Case. cum similib.
As in that remarkable of the D. of Suffolk in Ed. the sixth's time, wherein an
Administration was granted away from the Mother to a Sister of the half blood.
According This remarkable Case of the D. of Suff. wherein the point was,
whether the Mother or the half Sister ought to have the Administration, is at
large in Swinb. part 7.. 8. nu. 10. with the reasons of Judgment exactly
weighed and considered.
to which Judgment diverse other Administrations for several years after were
granted away from the Mothers, to the Brethren and Sisters as next of Kin.
Notwithstanding all which, the Law indeed being all that while quite otherwise
than was practiced, at last the Truth prevailed, and the practice now frequent,
and Judgment every where given for the Mother, that she is of Kin to her
Child, 21 H. 8. cap. 5.
who dying Issueless and Intestate, the Administration of his Goods may be
committed to her as next of Kin, according to the Statute. Or if he be
Issueless but not Intestate, and makes his Kin his Executor, or bequeath the
residue of his Goods to his Kin, the Mother in this case is Admissable to the
Executrixship as next of Kin to her Child, or on the same account to enjoy the
Legacy during her life, and after her death then the other next of Kin.. Si
igitur. Novel. ibid. ubi sup. and D. D. in (...). cum ita.. fin. ff. de Legate.
2. Grass. These. Com. Opin.. Fidei Commiss. q. 16.


2. If the deceased leave no Children, they in the Right Line Ascendent do by
the Civil Law succeed him, but in this Order. First, the Father and Mother
succeed equally, and exclusively to all others that are of a more remote
degree; or the Mother only, if the Father be not alive; or the Father only, if
the Mother be dead. Grass.. Success. ab Intest. q. 22.
And if there be several Parents of a distinct Line, who are equal in degree
but unequal in number, they succeed according to their Stock or Root, not
according to their number; thus the Grandfather by the Fathers side shall have
as much as both Grandfather and Grandmother by the Mothers side. Grass. ibid.
and Pet. Greg. lib. 45. cap. 9. nu. 10. and Cuiac. ad Novel. 118.
But if the Parents be in an unequal or different degree, then the right of
Representation does cease, and the nigher shall ever exclude the more remote.
Thus the Father excludes both the Grandfathers by the Fathers and Mothers
side, and the Mother both the Grand-Mothers. Grass. ibid. Greg. cap. 9. nu. 11.
Covar. de Success. ab Intest. and Cuiac. ubi supra.


3. There are also some of the Collateral Line, who by the Civil Law do concur
with those of the Ascendent Line; for the Brothers and Sisters of the deceased
do succeed him, together with the Father and Mother. Grass. ibid. Greg. cap. 9.
nu. 12. Capriol. lib. 2. nu. 76. de Succes. ab Intest. and Auth. Novel. de
haered. ab Intest.
And the Succession when the Brothers concur, is proportioned according to
their number. Novel. 118. Cu^ac. ib. Covar. de Succes. ab Intest. Vasque de
Succes. progra. lib. 3.. 25. nu. 38. Pet. Greg. lib. 45. c. 9. nu. 13. and
Mynsing. Observe. Cent. 6. n. 41.
But if there be diverse Kindred of the same degree to the Intestate, whose
Father is dead, whereof some are by the Fathers side, others by the Mothers
side; as if the deceased leave a Grandfather by his Fathers side, and a
Grandfather and Grandmother by the Mothers; In this Case the Succession is
not proportioned according to their number, but it is to be divided into two
equal parts, and the Grandfather by the Fathers side draws the one Moity, the
Rest the other Moity. And if it happens that together with those of the Line
Ascendent, and with Brothers of the whole blood to the deceased, there be the
Sons of other Brothers of the whole blood deceased; In this Case the Sons of
such Brothers deceased shall Succeed together with the others, but not
according to their Number, but according to their Stock or Root; that is, those
Sons of such deceased Brothers shall among them all have only that proportion
which would have come to their Fathers if they had been alive. Grass. q. 23.
Greg. 29. Cuiac. in Novel. 118.
Here Note, that this is meant only of the Children of such Brothers deceased;
therefore the Grandchildren, and others more remote are not admitted together
with the Parents, and Brothers, and Sisters of the deceased. Grass. and Covar.
ubi supra.


4. Brothers and Sisters only of the half blood to the deceased do not concur
with the Parents in the Succession. Grass. q. 24. and Fach. lib. 6. c. 8.
Thus the Grandfather in Succession to his Grandchild does exclude the
Brothers of half blood to such Grandchild, unless the Brothers be of the same
blood, and of the same side with such Grandfather. Pap. lib. 21. tit. 1. art.
8. Guide. Pap. Consil. 176.
And if a man dye Intestate, leaving a Mother and the Children of his Brothers
deceased behind him, the Mother alone shall Succeed to the Intestate, Meynard,
lib. 7. cap. 21.
unless there be other Brothers of the deceased then living; for then the said
Children of the said Brothers deceased shall concur with the Mother. Meynard
ib. ita Judicat. in Arresto Tholos.
Thus Brothers and Brothers Children may concur with their Parents to the
Succession of the deceased, but all other Collaterals are excluded by the
Parents; insomuch that the Uncles both by the Fathers and the Mothers side are
excluded by the Grandfather and Grandmother of the deceased. Decii Consil.
^23.


CHAP. XXXVI. Of Succession in the Line Transversal or Collateral.
1. The Line Collateral is Twofold: In which Line the Jus Repraesentationis
holds only in Brothers Children, not in their Grandchildren. 2. Regularly the
whole blood is ever first Admissable to Succession in the Line Transversal or
Collateral. 3. Yet in that Line the nigher Degree, though but of the
half-blood, is preferrable before a remoter Degree of the whole blood. 4. How
far, and to what Degree Collateral Kindred may Succeed each other. 5. How the
Succession goes, in case the deceased leaves no Children, but Kindred only by
the Ascendent and Collateral Line.
1. THe Transversal or Collateral Line is Twofold; the one Descendent by the
Brother and his Children downwards; the other Ascendent by the Uncle, and so on
upwards; and none of the Ascendent do ever Succeed, unless they of the
Descendent Line do fail. Bract. l. 2. (...). 30. nu. 1. Britt. c. 119.
And the nighest degree to the deceased in the Descendent Line do Succeed
first; but that failing, then the nighest of Kin in the Line Ascendent. And
although Brothers Children of the whole blood do ever exclude Brothers Children
of the half-blood, yet this Jus Repraesentationis in the Collateral or
Transversal Line holds only in Brothers Children, not in their Grandchildren.
Cuiac. ad Novel. 18. Capriol. lib. 3. nu. 125. Grass. q. 31. Pet. Greg. lib.
45. cap. 11. nu. 8. and Covar. de Succes. ab I^t. Peregrin. art. 21. nu. 7, 8.
de Fidei Commiss.
So that if A. dye, leaving behind him Children by one Brother deceased, and
Grandchildren by another Brother also deceased, these Grandchildren of the
one are excluded by the Children of the other. Alex. lib. 3. Cons. 5.
For in a Transversal or Collateral Succession the Son alone does represent the
Father, and then only when the controversy is touching the Succession of his
Uncle, Ibid. in fin. Consil.
not of his Great Uncle or others of any degree higher or farther off. Menoch.
lib. 4. Praes. 95. nu. 8.
But when the Children of Brothers deceased do concur with other Brothers of
the deceased, then they all succeed according to the Stock or Root, and they
draw no more than their Father should have done if he had been then alive.
Grass. q. 30.
And by the said Law of Representation it comes to pass, That Brothers Children
who are in the third Degree, are by way of Fiction supposed to be in the second
Degree, and so are preferred before the Uncles of the deceased, who are in the
same third degree. Novel. 218. cap. (...). and Cuiac. ibid. and Pet. Greg. cap.
11. nu. 7.


2. In the Transversal or Collateral Line this is a perpetual Rule, That they
are first to be admitted who are of the whole blood of the deceased. As thus;
A. having B. a Son, and C. a Daughter by one Wife, and D. a Son by another
Wife, dies, B. Succeeds him and dies Issueless; In this Case C. the Daughter to
A. and Sister to B. by the whole Blood succeeds him, and not D. the Brother by
the half Blood. Littl. l. 1. c. 1. and Britt. c. 119. nu. 7. Fleta lib. 6. c.
1.. omnes autem. and. jus etiam. and. quandoque.
In like manner E. having F. a Brother, and two Sons, viz. G. by one Wife, and
H. by another Wife, dies; G. succeeds him and dies Issueless; In this Case F.
Uncle to G. (who is of the whole Blood) succeeds him, and not H. Brother to G.
by the half Blood. Littl. ibid. Coke l. 3. in Ratcliffs Case, fol. 40. b. and
41. a. b. and 42. a.
But if F. also dye Issueless, then H. succeeds him, because he is Allied to
him both ways, as well by the Grandfather as by the Grandmother. Littl. ibid.
paulo post.
And therefore, unless F. be Brother to E. as well on the Mothers side as on
the Fathers side, the succession will be otherwise.

3. Suppose a man dies, leaving behind him neither Children, Parents, Brothers,
nor Sisters, nor their Children, but only Brothers Grandchildren, Uncles, and
other Collateral Kindred; In this Case we must follow the Rule of Law, the
nigher in degree shall have the precedence in right; and if there be diverse in
the same degree, they are all equally Admissable according to number, not Root
or Stock, and that without distinction of Sex, consideration being had only of
the Kindred it self. Grass.. Successio ab intestat. q. 33.
Again, suppose there were Three Brothers, whereof two of the whole Blood, and
one of the half Blood: If these two of the whole Blood dye, each of them
leaving a Child behind him, whereof one afterward dies also, and issueless: In
this Case the surviving Uncle is preferred before the other Son by the Brother,
albeit that Brother was of the whole Blood to the Father of the deceased.
Ranchin. Decis. par. 4. Consil. 45. and Alex. lib. 5. Consil. 166.
So also the Uncle of a deceased is preferrable before his Brothers
Grandchildren, albeit the said Grandchildren proceeded of a Father who was of
the whole Blood to the deceased, and the surviving Uncle but of the half Blood.
Boerii Decis. 302.
For in the Collateral Line the being of the whole or half Blood is not
considerable beyond Brothers Children; for then the nearness of degree, not
whether whole or half Blood is considerable: So that although a Brothers Son of
the whole Blood shall exclude a Brother of the half Blood, yet even the
Children of Brothers and Sisters of the half Blood shall exclude remoter
Kindred of the whole Blood in the Collateral Line. Authen. post fratres, de
Legit. haered.
The Reason in Law is, because (as aforesaid) in a Transversal or Collateral
Line the nigher degree, though but of the half Blood, shall be preferred before
a more remote degree of the whole Blood; which yet does not hold in a Right
Line, whether Descendent or Ascendent. And if a man dye leaving neither
Children, Parents, Brothers, Sisters, nor their Children behind him; in this
case the Uncles and Aunts concur in the Succession, and exclude all other
collateral Kindred, because there are none others in the third degree as they.
After these, then do succeed the Great Uncle and the Brothers Grandchildren,
to whom the deceased was a Great Uncle, all in a parity, because they are in
the fourth degree. And here Note, that Nephews and Nieces succeed together with
their Uncles and Aunts in the Goods of their Grandfather and Grandmother, yet
only for such a proportion and for so much as should have come to their Parent
if he or she had been alive; for it is in a conjoined not in a distinct sense
that the Jus Repraesentationis is here in force.

4. It is a Question how far and to what degree collateral Kindred may succeed
each other. The Civil Law puts a difference in this case between collateral
Kindred by the Male Line, and collateral Kindred by the Female. It is said,
that Kindred by the Fathers side may even in collaterals succeed even to the
tenth degree inclusive, and by the Mothers side to the sixth degree.. ult.
Inst. de Success. Cognat.
For the Kindred by the Mothers side is not extended so far as that of the
Fathers side, because, that by the Mothers side is only beholden to, and helped
by the Praetor or the Praetorian Law, but that of the Fathers side has also
the Civil Law to confirm it. But this difference or distinction being of no use
or practice with us, let us not mistake upon this ground, and thereby without
cause occasion our Theory to beget an Error in Practice. For in very deed this
difference or distinction is now removed by the Civil Law it self; for whereas
the Old Law of the Digests and Codes did distinguish between Kindred by the
Father, and Kindred by the Mother, now by a latter Law of the Novels this
difference or distinction is abolished.

5. Lastly, if the deceased left no Children, but Kindred by the Ascendent and
collateral Line; then for a yet clearer discovery of the Right of Succession
distinguish thus; viz. Either he has only Brothers of the whole Blood, or only
such Brothers Children; or he has Brothers by the half Blood, or such Brothers
Children: In the first case the Brothers only succeed; in the second case only
the Brothers Children; in the third case the half Brothers, and such Brothers
Children succeed equally according to their Stock or Root, not according to the
number of their persons. l. Praetor. ff. de Coll. 60.
Likewise if one dye, leaving one Brother and three Children of another Brother
deceased of the whole Blood, the Brother alone shall have (as formerly
declared) as much as the said three Children; and these do succeed exclusively
to all other collateral Kindred. Also Brothers of the half Blood do exclude
other collaterals Ascendent, as Uncles, Aunts, whether by the Father or the
Mothers side, and that without distinction of Sex. Auth. de haered. ab intest..
reliquum. and. seq. C. de haered. Auth. cessante. and Auth. Tres fratres.
But put case a man dies without Children or Parents, leaving one Brother by
the Fathers side only, another Brother by the Mothers side only: for instance;
A man having had two Wives, and a Son by each, dies; and the second Wife takes
another Husband, having a Son by him; then if the Son by the second Wife of the
first Husband dies, he leaves a Brother of the half Blood by the Father, and a
Brother of the half Blood by the Mother; In this case the Civil Law says, that
the Brother by the Fathers side shall succeed in the Goods that came by the
Father, and he by the Mothers side in the Goods which came by the Mother, Cod.
de Leg. haer. de Emanci^at. in fin.
and both of them equally as to all Goods otherwise acquired; but our Law knows
no such distinction, for they shall succeed equally, being equal in degree and
equal in Blood; because by Marriage all was invested in the Father.

THE Orphans Legacy The Third Part.

OF Legacies and Devises.

THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS of the Third Part.
Chap. OF Legacies and Devises in General. 1. Of Devisors, and Devises, or
Legataries. 2. Of Words and Expressions sufficient for Legacies. 3. Of
Conditions and their Resemblances incident unto Legacies. 4. Of the several
Marks and Kinds of Conditions and Questions in Law touching the same. 5. What
things are Devisables by Will; and whether a Testator may Bequeath what is not
his own. 6. Of Lands Devisable by Will. 7. Certain cases touching Devises of
Lands, void or not void 8. Certain Cases touching Devises of Land in
Fee-simple. 9. Certain Cases touching Devises of Land by way of Entail. 10.
Certain Cases in Law touching Devises of Land for Life only. 11. Certain Cases
in the Law touching Devises of Leases, or for a Term of Years. 12. Law Cases
touching Devises of Reversions or Remainders. 13. Touching Devises of Lands
with Limitations and upon Conditions. 14. Touching Devises of Rents. 15. Of
Devises touching the Sale of Lands by Executors or others. 16. Of Legacies and
Devises in respect of Marriages, as also between Husband and Wife. 17. Of
Legacies and Devises to a Child in the Womb. 18. Certain Cases of Devises
touching Lands and Real Chattels. 19. Cases in the Law touching Legacies of
Chattels Personal. 20. Of Legacies touching Goods in General; also what is to
be understood under that Notion of Goods; and what by Movables and
Immoveables. 21. Law Cases touching Money Bequeathed by the Testator. 22. Of
Legacies relating to Debts, with certain cases in the Law touching the same.
23. Touching Election in point of Legacies; to whom The Election of a Legacy
expressed with too much Generality or Dubiety, belongs; whether to the Executor
or to the Legatary, with certain cases in the Law touching the same. 24. When
and how Legacies are null, or become void or voidable; with certain cases in
the Law touching the same. 25. Certain Positions or Assertions of Law for the
better understanding of this Subject of Legacies and Devises, with certain mixed
cases touching the same. 26.

THE ORPHANS LEGACY. The THIRD PART. OF Legacies and Devises.
CHAP. I. Of Legacies and Devises in General.
1. What a Legacy or Devise is. 2. What are the Requisites to the making of a
good Devise. 3. Whether is more Considerable as to Legacies, the Time of making
the Testament, or of the Testators death. 4. In what Court Legacies and Devises
are properly Recoverable.
1. A Legacy called a Devise at the Common Law, Terms of Law. Ver. Devise.
is some particular thing or things given or left either by a Testator in his
Testament (wherein an Executor is appointed) to be paid or performed by his
Executor,. 1. Inst. de Legate.
or by an Intestate in a Codicil or Last Will (wherein no Executor is
appointed) to be paid or performed by an Administrator.. non autem. Inst de
Codicil. Et L. ab Intest. ff. de jure Codicil.
The Word Devise is specially appropriated to a Gift of Lands: The Word Legacy
to a Gift of Chattels; though both are used promiscuously; For a Devise is said
to be where a Man in his Testament gives or bequeatheth his Goods or his Lands
to another after his decease. Terms of Law, ubi supra
Observe, it is formerly said, That a Legacy is a particular thing given by
last Will and Testament; For if a man dispose or transfer his whole Right or
Estate upon another, That according to the Civil Law is called Haereditas, and
he to whom it is so transferred is termed Haeres; but at Common Law he is the
Heir to whom all a man's Lands and Herediditaments do descend by right of Blood:
And by the same Law the Word [Devise] from the French Deviser, is properly
attributed to him that bequeaths his Goods by his last Will or Testament in
writing; the Reason being, for that those Goods that now appertain only to the
Devisour, are by this act distributed and divided into many parts. Cowell
Interp. verb. Devise.


2. To the giving of Legacies, or to the making of a good and sufficient Devise
there are several things Required. The Person of the Devisor must be Legally
qualified to Devise; the thing Devised must be such as is Legally Devisable;
The Devisor at the time of making the Devise must have Animum Testandi; That
the Devisee or Legatary be in his Person such as is capable of taking by way of
Devise; That there be no Co-action on the Testator, but that his Will be free
and independent, without fear, force, or flattery, or other Sinister
Contrivances; That the Devise be made in that due manner and form as it ought
to be; That the thing Devised be Devised upon none other then (if any) Lawful
Terms and Conditions; That the words of the Devise be such as do clearly
declare the Mind and Intention of the Devisor; That Probate be made of the
Testament, after the Devisors death; Perk. Sect. 406.
And in case it be of Land, then that the Devisor be solely seized thereof in a
Fee-simple Estate, and not jointly with another, and that the Testament,
wherein such Devise of Land is, be made in writing.

3. To find out the Testators mind and meaning, which is the very Index of the
Testament, the time of making thereof is regularly more considerable in point
of Legacies, then the Time of the Testators death, because the presumption of
Law is, That his mind is not altered, L. tertia and l. eum qui ff. de Probat.
unless it may otherwise appear by sufficient Evidence. Therefore the Testators
words are specially to be referred to the Time when the Testament was made, L.
si ita legatnm. de aut. and arg.
and most especially if the Testators words be general words. Bart. in l.
ult.. 1. de Leg. 2.
So that if a Father bequeath to his Son, who is a Student, all his Books, and
after buy other Books, those other pass not by that Legacy. Bald. Cons. 284.
nu. 1. vol 2
Or if he bequeath 10 l. to his Parish Church, and after remove his Habitation
into another Parish where he dies, the 10 l. is due to the Parish wherein he
lived at the time of making his Testament, and not to the Parish wherein he
dyed. Romans in Auth Similit. E. nu. 93. andC. ad Leg. Falcis l. Si cognatis.
Yet if the Testator bequeath any thing to his Kindred (in such general words)
the Kindred which were at the time when the Testament was made, are not so
included as to exclude such as were his Kindred at the time of his death. Dict.
l. si cognatis.
Also if a Testator bequeath his Movables, such only are understood to be
bequeathed as were the Testators when he made his Testament. Dict. l. si ita.
De aur. and arg. and Raph. Fulg. Cons. 99. nu. (...)
Likewise if the Testator Bequeath Releases to all his Debtors, there are no
more comprehended in that Legacy then were his Debtors when he made his
Testament, Aurel. 1. de Liber. Leg and Fulg. in Cons. 37.
Or if he give to a certain Hospital all his Moneys in the Bank, or in Bankers
hands after his Debts paid, and there be at that time a 1000 l. in their hands
over and above his Debts, and he lives so long that at his death there is 3000
l. in their hands above his Debts: In this case there is only one 1000 l. due
by that Legacy to the Hospital, because the Legacy is to be computed according
to what he had in their hands at the time of making his Will, and not according
to what he had at the time of his decease. Paul. Castr. in l. cum stipulamur.
nu. 3. de verb. obl. and Jas. in l. si quis illud nu 10. quoth. quisque jur.
Also if he Bequeath all his Movables, having at that time Fruits of the Earth
not separated from the Soil, which yet afterward and before his death are
separated: In such case such Movables pass not by that Bequest; because they
were not Movables at the time of making the Testament: Alciat. Cons 182. lib.
9.
But this is not uncontrovertable; for in this point there are some of the
Learned of another Opinion. Paul. Castr. Cons. 132. lib. 1 and Dec. Cons. 472.
nu. 5.
Or if a Man Bequeath so many pieces of such a certain Coin, which afterward
does rise or fall in its value; The Legacy in that case shall be estimated as
the said Coin was in value at the time when the Testament was made, not at more
nor less. Oldr. Cons. 31. l. uxorem. testam. and Bald. de Leg. 3. and l. medico
in prin. de aur. and arg.
Also if a House with all things therein be Bequeathed, such things as the
Testator afterward brings into that House are not within that Legacy. Bened.
Cap. Cons. 45. nu. 5. and Cor. Cons. 14. nu. 14. and. Paris. Cons. 80. nu. 41.
Vol. 2.
And here observe, That what has been said as to the Time of making the
Testament, holds True likewise, and so is to be understood, as to the time of
making a Codicil; the words whereof are chiefly to be referred to the time of
the making thereof: Insomuch that in case by way of Codicil a man Bequeath all
his wearing Apparel to his Wife, and after some Tract of Time makes a Will and
dies, no more Apparel does pass by that Codicil (supposing it not contradicted
by the Will) then the Testator had when he made that Codicil. L. quae dam ff.
de. ju Codicil.
And yet notwithstanding all this which has been said, that the Time of the
making of the Testament is chiefly and specially to be referred to in the due
Construction of Legacies, yet this is to be understood only when the words of
the Testator speak of the time Past or Present; Bart. in l. his verb. in prin.
de Leg. 5.
Not when he speaks of the time to come by words of the Future Tense; L. filiam
de aur. and arg.
Nor when he speaks by such words of the Present Tense as cannot take effect
but for the future. Dict. l. filiam and Roll. Val. Cons. 39. nu. 12. Vol. 4.
Also when the Legacy is Universal under some Name Appellative, and in its
Nature Collective, as Herd, Flock, and the like; such a Legacy admitting of
Increase and Decrease, the Time (in that case) of the Testators death is more
to be inspected and considered then the Time when he made the Testament. L
peculium in prin. de. leg. 2. and l. grege. de leg. 1.
So likewise, if the Testator wills that such a one shall dispose of the
Profits of his Estate, it shall be understood of such Profits thereof as were
at the Time of his death; because the word [Profits] is universal, and
therefore not to be restrained only to the time of the making of the Testament.
Alciat. Cons. 173, nu. 4. lib. 9.
Or if he Bequeath his Money in the Bank, the Profits thereof at the time of
his death shall pass by this Legacy, Jas. in. l. cum stipulamur. nu. 3. ad fin.
de verb. oblig.
which (if you observe it) differs from that Case of money in the Bank
abovesaid; also if the thing Bequeathed be such as is in ordinary use, and by
using is consumed, and another of like kind had instead thereof, That other
shall pass by this Legacy, for in such case not the Time of making the
Testament, but the Time of the Testators death shall be considered. Bart. in l.
si ita. nu. 8. de aur. and arg. in l. quid haeredem nu. 2. de. Trit. Legate.
Nor is the Time of the Testaments making so considerable when the Legacy is
Conditional, for then the performance of the Condition will fall under chiefest
Consideration. L* mea res and l. eum qui. Glos. de cond. and demon.
Also the Time of the Testators death, when it most tends to the upholding of
the Testament, is more considerable then the Time of the making thereof. Bart.
in l, placet. nu. 2 de Lib. and posth.
And therefore, though the words in the Testament be of the Time Past or
Present, yet in that the Will of the Testator holds free and good even to his
last-Breath: They shall also Refer to the Future in those things that depend on
the mere Will of the Testator, L. 3. in fin. de Adim.
And if he Bequeath indefinitely his Corn, it shall be understood all such as
he has at the time of his death. Bald in Rub. C. de Verb. sign. nu. 4.
Observe finally, That if the Testators words in a Bequest be doubtful whether
they Refer to the Time Past, or to the Time to Come, they shall be h] B(...).
in l. si ita legatum. de Cond. and them.
understood to relate unto the time that is to come.

4. Where a Devise is made of Goods, if the Executor will not Deliver the same
to the Devisee, he has no Remedy by the Common Law; Terms of Law. verb.
Devise. and Off. Exec. cap. 19. in prin.
but must have recourse against him by way of Citation out of the
Ecclesiastical Court to appear before the Ordinary, to show cause why he
performs not the Testators Will; for the Devisee may not take the Legacy and
serve himself, but it must be Delivered to him by the Executor. Ibid.
So that the Legatary has no Remedy by the Common Law for any Legacy of Goods
to him bequeathed, except (as that Law says) in case where some particular
thing (as the Testators Horse, Signet, or the like) is bequeathed: Broo. tit.
Devise. nu. 3. 6. 14. 27. 30.
Or if the Testator wills that his Executors shall sell his Land, and pay
such and such Legacies out of the Proceed of the Sale thereof, in such case the
Legatories may Sue at the Common Law for the same. But if the Mich. 5. P. and
M. Dyer. so 151, 152. and Mich. 29. and 30. Eliz. Co. B. Germyes case. and Hob.
Rep. so. 265.
Legacies be Bequeathed to be paid out of Leases, and not out of Fee-simple
Lands. then the Legatary may likewise Sue in the Ecclesiastical Court for the
same; Brown Rep. 1. part so. 34.
For though Legacies are to be sued for in that Court only, yet the Ordinary
cannot take Cognizance of Freehold devised, Perk. Sect. 576. 579. and Dr. and
Stu. lib. 2. cap. 55. and Cowells Inst. p. 146
And whereas it is said, That the Devisee may not take the Legacy and serve
himself; but that it must be Delivered to him by the Executor, yet the Law is
otherwise in Case Lands, or any Rents, or other Profit to be taken out of
Lands, be Devised to a Man in Fee-simple, Fee-tayle, for Life, or Years; for in
these Cases the Devisee may enter into, and take the thing Devised without the
Executors leave for so doing. Perk. Sect. 576, 577, etc. Coke sup. Lit. III.


CHAP. II. Of Devisors and Devisees or Legataries.
1. Who may be a Devisor or Devisee or Legatary. 2. What persons are incapable
of being Legataries. 3. Whether an Infant in the Womb may be a Legatary; or a
Feme Covert to her own Husband. 4. Whether Bastards may be Legataries.
1. REgularly, every one that is qualified to make a Testament may make a
Devise of the same thing, whereof he may make such Testament; and whosoever is
disabled to the one, is disabled to the other also. And therefore Infants under
the age of 21. years may not be Devisors of Land; nor of Goods under the age of
14. as to the Male, or under the age of 12. Years as to the Female. L. qua
aetate ff. de Test. praeteria. Inst. quibus non est permiss. fac. Testa. l. si
frat. C. qui testa. fac. poss and l. ult. C. de Testa. Mil. and Perk. tit.
Devise fo. 97.
Nor may a Woman under Covert Baron Devise her Lands to her own Husband, or to
others with or without his Consent. Coke sup. Lit. 112. 4. 61. Broo. Devise 32.
Nor may any Ecclesiastical person or Member of a Body Corporate Devise the
Lands or Goods which they have in right of the Church or Corporation. Perk.
Sect. 496.
So that every Devisor ought to be a person qualified to devise, and that both
in respect of his Person and the thing Devised; he must also have at the same
time Animum Testandi, and the thing Devised must be such as is Devisable. And
as to the Devisee or Legatary, all such by the Civil Law as are incapable of
Inheritances and Goods are excluded from being Legataries or Devisees, and
indeed from being Executors. But every one by that Law that may be made an Heir
or Executor, may also be a Legatary or Devisee; and as to any others no Devise
may be made: Cod. de Haered. instit. l. 1.
Yet with this Difference, that the Executor must be a Person capable both when
the Testament is made, and when the Testator dies: ff. de Haered. inst. l^si
alien.. de Extraneis and Inst. de haer. qual. and did
But it is sufficient for the Legatary that he be capable at the Testators
death. ff. de donat. cause. mort. l. in mortis and de Cond. Et demon. l. eum qui
and ff. de jur. Fisci. l. non intelligitur. quando.
Indeed at the Common Law it is otherwise; for there a Devise or Legacy may be
given to all persons to whom a Grant may be made, save in some few Cases; And
the Devise ought to be good and sufficient in Law at the time of the Testators
death; Therefore if a Man Devise Lands to an Hospital, or the like, when there
is none such at the Testators death, though afterward made or erected, such
Devise is Null and Void: The Reason is, Because Devises at Common Law are
Purchases, and he that takes Lands by Purchase, must be capable to take the
same when it falls to him by the Purchase. Perk. 97. Sect. 505. and 9. H. 6.
23. and 2. El. 119. Pl. 18. Dyer 13. Eliz. 303. Pl. 46. Die. and 300. Pl. 39.
and 5. f. 4. 6. per Bil.
Thus by the Common Law the Devisee ought to be capable at the time of the
death of the Devisor; which holds also True by the Civil Law: Hence it is, that
though a Man may not grant nor give Lands to his Wife during the Coverture
because they both are but one Person in Law, yet by Custom heretofore he might,
and by Statute now he may Devise his Lands to his Wife to have in Fee-simple,
or otherwise; because such Devise takes not effect till the death of the
Devisor, and then they are not one person. Lit. lib. 2. c. 10. Sect. 8. 27.
Assis. Pl. 60. 24. H. 8. Broo. Devise 34.
So then, Regularly whosoever may be a Grantee, may also be a Devisee or
Legatee.) Perk. Sect. 505, 510.


2. For which Reason a Cominalty not Incorporate by the Kings Charter to
Purchase Lands is Incapable; therefore if a Man Devise Lands Devisable in Fee
to A. for Life upon a certain Condition, the Remainder to certain Men of a
Fraternity, upon the same Condition, not Incorporate by the Kings Charter, and
enabled to Purchase, this Remainder is void. Perk. 98. Sect. 510. 49. E. 3. 3.
Therefore a Legacy given to an unlawful College, is void; for by that is
meant all Companies, Societies, Fraternities and other Assemblies not so
Constituted by the Prince, and therefore incapable of being Legataries. But
generally a Devise may be good to any Person or Persons not specially rendered
incapable by Law; for by the Civil and Ecclesiastical Law, the Legacy is void
if it be given to an Heretic, Apostate, Traitor, Felon, Persons Excommunicate,
outlawed Persons, Bastard, unlawful College, as aforesaid, Libeller ler,
Sodomite, Manifest and Notorious Usurer, except in some special Cases. And yet
it seems that a Devise of Lands to any such Persons is good within the Statute
of Wills. Dyer. 303, 304. B. R. curia. Mich. 3. Jac.
Likewise an uncertain Person can be no Competent Legatary, no more then he is
of being an Executor; insomuch that if a Man Bequeath any thing to a person by
a certain Name, without other description of his person, and there be more then
one of the same Name known To the Testator, in this Case neither of them shall
be Legatary by Reason of the uncertainty.. incertis. inst. de Legate. Jo. An.
Gem. and Franc. in c^si pater. de Test. 6.
Hence it is that Devises made in these words, viz. To his best Friend, or to
his best Friends; are void Devises. Cook 6. 68.
Or to his Son A. B, when he has two Sons of the same Name, unless you can
help it by an Averment, which Son the Testator meant. but persons named
Alternatively or Disjunctively are not so uncertain, but may be admitted as
Legataries; And therefore if the Testator Bequeath 10 l. to A. or B. or to such
or such a person, both of them shall have the Legacy equally betwixt them. L.
cum quidam C. de Ver. sign. and DD. ibid
Because this word [Or] is in favor of Testaments taken for [and] L. cum quid.
ibid.
when it is so placed between two persons, either as to the appointing of
Executors, or to the making of Legataries; unless it can be well proved, That
the Testator did bear more affection to the one then to the other; Rip. in c.
inter caeteros de Rescrip. Extr. nu. 54, Paris Cons. 21, Vol. 3. Jul. clar..
Test. q. 80, nu. 5
Or that he gave Authority to some other person of making the Election which of
the two should be the Legatary, L. si Titio aur Seio. de Leg 2, and l. u^r..
cum quidam. ff. de Reb. dub..
Or when one of the persons is Incapable of being a Legatary for any of the
Reasons aforesaid. And if the Devisor does Bequeath to his Brother or his
Children such a thing, saying, [I give to my Brother or his Children] in this
Case upon the presumption of Affection, the Brother shall enjoy the Legacy
during his life, and after him the Children shall be the Legataries: l. cum
pater.. ^te. ff. de Leg. 2. Bald in c 1, de eo qui sibi and haered. suis lib.
feud. Jul. clar. q. 80. nu. 5.
But if it be Devised to him and his Children, then are both the Parent and his
Children equal and Joynt-Legataries. Plowd. 345, Co. 1. 105, 155, Perk.. 508.
And whereas it is formerly hinted, That an Heretic may not be a Legatary or
Devisee, understand it of an Heretic that is such at the time of the Devisors
death; for it does not prejudice the Legatary that fie was an Heretic at the
time of the making of the Testament, so as he be not one at the Testators
death. L. non oportet. ff. de Leg 2. Peck. de Test. coning. l. 4, c. 31, Grass.
These com. Op. Institut. q. 28.
Add nnto this Anabaptists; for the Law Civil and Canon excludes them also as
Incapable of being Legataries. L. ult. de Sacr. Baptis. reit. c. Minsing in
tit. de haer. inst. in prin.
But a person outlawed, though depending the Outlawry against him, he cannot
Sue for his Legacy; Fitzh. A. bridge tit. Administ. nu. 3.
Yet he is not so properly said to be altogether Incapable of being a Legatary,
as of being Incapable of Suing for his Legacy; unless the Outlawry be Reversed
by some Error or discontinuance in the Suit, or unless the party Outlawed were
beyond the Seas at the time of the Outlawry being pronounced; Terms of Law.
Verb. ut legate.
Or unless there were some defect on omission of the Three Proclamations in
such Cases by the Stat. required; 31. Eliz. cap 3.
Or unless his pardon be obtained, wherein the words of the Pardon ought
diligently to be considered; Co. Rep. lib, 5. fo. 49. in Wirralls Case.
For by force of the Outlawry the Legacy is forfeited and confiscate. Likewise
a person Excommunitate is not so Incapable of being a Legatary, as unadmissable
by the Ordinary to Commence any Suit for his Legacy during his persistency
under such Sentence of Excommunication. Phil. Franc. in Rub. de Testa. lib. 6.
nu. 32, and Grass. These. Com. Opt.. Institutio. q. 4, and Bald. in l. id quod
pauperib. c. de Episc. and Clerc. nu. 6.


3. If one Devise to an Infant in his Mothers Womb, it is a good Devise;
otherwise it is by Feofment, Grant, or Gift; For in those Cases there ought to
be one of ability to take presently, or otherwise it is void. Terms of Law.
Verb. Devise.
And if one Devise his Land to his Daughter and Heir Apparent in Fee-simple,
and the Wife of the Devisor be privily with child of a Son which is born after
his death, Then is the Devise become good, for that now she is not Heir to her
Father. Fitzh. tit. Assize. 27.
Also a Feme Covert may be a Competent Devisee or Legatary to her own Husband.
as to such Lands, Goods or Chattels which he shall devise to her. M. 19. Ja.
cur. B. R. Crump. verse. Body.


4. Whereas Bastards, whether Bastards in simple Fornication, in Adultery, or
in Incest, are without distinction incapable by the Civil Law of being
Legataries, Covar. de spons part. 2. c. 8,. 5, n. 15, 16, 17. and Jul. clar. l.
5,. fornicat. and. Incest. and Auth. ex complex. c. de Inces. nupt. and DD.
ibid.
yet understand this only where they are made Executors or Legataries, to their
own natural Parents, for to any othets they may be Executors or Legataries.
Glos. in Auth. quib. mod. na. effic. sui.. fin. Clar.. Test. q. 31. n. 4.
Also by the Ecclesiastical Laws they are capable of being Legataries even to
their Adulterous or Incestuous Parents so far as is needful or necessary for
their convenient sustentation, or for their competent alimentation and relief.
C. cum haberet de co. qui dux. in ux. q. pol. per. Adult. and l. legatis ff. de
aliment. and Decio. Neap. 164, n. 2.
Therefore have the Laws and Statutes of this Realm provided for the same
purpose; 18, Eliz. cap. 3
which do also permit every Man as well by Deed executed in his life time,
Perk. tit. Grant. f. 11 and Bract. l. 2. c. 7.
as by his last Will and Testament to be executed after his death Perk. tit.
Devise. f. 94.
to give or devise to any of their Bastards without distinction, all their
Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments without restraint. And by the civil Law the
lawful Children of Bastards may be Legataries to the Adulterous Grandfather,
Jas. in. l. haereditas c. his quib. ut indgn. n. 7, 8.
but not to the Incestuous Grandfather. Bal. in l. si quis incestus c. de
incest. nup.


Mich. 4. Ed. 6. Ander. Rep. Case. 82.
If a man possessed of Goods devises the same to his Son when he shall attain
to the Age of 21. Years, and in case the Son dye before that Age, then one of
his Daughters to have the said Goods, and the Son die before the said Age. The
Question is, Whether the Daughter shall have the Goods immediately upon and
after the Sons death, or whether she shall stay till the time that the Son
should have been of that Age in case he had so long lived. The opinion of all
the Justices was, That she shall have the goods immediately upon the Sons death.

Hill. 4, Ed. 6, Moo. Rep. nu. 39.
A Man had Issue a Bastard, and after Intermarries with the same Woman by whom
he had that Bastard, and has Issue Two Sons by her, and then Devised all his
Goods to his Children. It is by every one supposed, That the Bastard shall have
nothing, for that he is Nullius Filius. In that case it is clear that a Bastard
shall not take by a Grant. But Q. as to a Devise. And if the Mother of the
Bastard make such a Devise: It is clear, That the Bastard shall take thereby,
because he is certainly known to be the Child of his Mother.

CHAP. III. Of Words and Expressions sufficient for Legacies.
1. Any Words, whereby the Testators mind or meaning is expressed or employed,
are sufficient for Legacies. 2. Legacies are not destroyed by Words
impertinently used by the Testator in the Bequest. 3. That words carrying a
false demonstration, shall not vitiate and null the Legacy; Also how this is to
be understood. 4. Whether a Legacy may be Bequeathed only by the Testators
Signs, Becks, or Nodds, when he can speak articulately. 5. Whether a Legacy
shall pass by Words only Implicatory of a contrary Condition: 6. In point of
Legacies the Testators meaning expressed by Words, is more to be heeded, then
when employed by Deeds. 7. The Testators Words by Implication may be such, as
may make the Legacy greater Casually, then he plainly expressed Originally.
1. IF a Man in his last Will and Testament says, I do give, bequeath, devise,
order, or appoint to be paid, given or delivered; or my will, pleasure, or
desire is, That he shall have or receive, or keep, or retain; or I Dispose, or
Assign, or Leave such a thing to such a one; or let such a person have such a
thing; or any other Words whereby the Testators Mind or Meaning of Bequeathing
is expressed or sufficiently employed, shall be significant enough whereby the
Legacy shall pass, provided no other Legal Obstacle stand in the way; because
it is not in last Wills and Testaments as in Deeds; for in Deeds the Words do
fall under a stricter examinination then the intention, or the mind; but in
Wills and Testaments the Testators Mind and Meaning is more valuable and of
more efficacy in Construction then his Words, so long as the Interpretation of
his Mind and Meaning hold a Conformity with his words, nor is oppugned by any
other part of his last Will and Testament.

2. A Testator in making a Bequest may possibly speak such words as may be very
impertinent, yea and in themselves altogether untrue, and yet the Legacy not
destroyed: As thus; viz. If I give and Bequeath my Field Long-acre to A. B.
beyond, above, besides, more then, or over and above the Black Horse, which I
had of him in Consideration of the Ten pounds which he owed me: This Long-acre
is a good Devise or Legacy to A. B. albeit the Testator never had any such
Black Horse of him, and althongh he never owed him any such Ten pounds; The
Reason is, because the said words, [above, beyond, etc.] in this sense, and in
this case are Inclusive, and are so to be understood and interpreted. Surd.
Decis. 285, and Are^in. in l. qui ita ff. deDot. praeleg. and Bart. ibid.
Mantic. l. 9, tit. 3, nu. 32, and Menoch de Praesump. lib. 4. praes. 145, and
Perigrin. de Fidei Comiss. art. 16, nu. 18.
So that,

3. A false Demonstration shall not vitiate a Legacy; Insomuch that if the
Testator, who has Bequeathed nothing to A. B. do say, That out of the Hundred
pounds which I have Bequeathed to A. B. I de give Fifty to C. D. If in this
case it be questioned whether any thing be due to A. B. And what is due to C.
D. The Answer is, That Fifty Pounds are due to G. D. although nothing be here
Beqeathed to A. B. because a Legacy shall not be vitiated or nulled merely by a
false Demonstration; But to A. B. nothing is due; because it was not the
Testators mind to Bequeath any thing to him, but rather to lessen or diminish
it, if any thing had been given him; For a Deminution, Ademption, or taking
from in such case has its operation to evince by how much the less, not by how
much the more the Legacy is due. L. 14, de admi. leg.
But if the Testator say, I Bequeath 100 l. to A. B. beside my Field Long-acre:
In this case Long-acre is presumed to be Bequeathed as well as the Hundred
Pounds. And whereas it is heresaid, That a false Demonstration does not vitiate
or make void the Legacy: Understand it thus, That is, if the Demonstration be
altogether and totally False: But if it be False only in part, Then the Legacy
is void only for that part, and it may hold for another part. Rebuff. ad l.
Appellatione verse. Tertio. de verb. Sign.
To this may be added Case, If the Testator say, I Bequeath to A. B. the
Hundred pounds which I have in my Chest; there is nothing due to A. B. and the
Legacy is void, if it be not in his Chest; L. fi Servus. qui quinque ff. de
Leg. 1.
because he that so says, does not Bequeath a Hundred pounds simply; but the
Hundred pounds in his Chest: And these words [which are in his Chest] does
demonstrate, That the Testators meaning was to Bequeath rather by way of
certainty, as to the Species or Corpus, then as to the quantity.

4. If the Testator say, I Depute such a thing to A. B. Or I Assign such a
thing to C. D. This is a good Bequest or Legacy; Menoch. de Praesump. lib. 4,
praesumpt. 105, nu. 2.
Yet withal here observe, That a Legacy may be Given or Bequeathed only by
Signs, or Becks, or Nodds, by the Head, Hands, or Eyes. Mantic. lib. 6, tit. 4,
n. 1.
But this is more clear and less Dubitable, when a Legacy in such manner is
left by a Testator, who by Reason of the violence and surprise of some Disease
is deprived of his Speech; Covar. cap. cum tibi. lib. 2, var. Resolut.
at least of speaking articulately, though not deprived of his Speech totally.
Math. ad Guide. Pap. quaest. 459.
The greatest doubt is concerning him, who though he can speak articulately,
yet does Bequeath by Signs or Nodds; for some are of Opinion, That such cannot
dispose of a Legacy in that manner: Additionator. ad Gomez. var. Reso. tom. 1,
c. 12, n. 2.
But this is commonly rejected as the more unsound Opinion. Math. ad dict.
quaest. 459, and Gomez. dict. c. 12, n. 2.
Now a Legacy is then understood to be left in this case, when the Testator
being asked by some one whether he will leave a Hundred pounds or such a thing
to himself or some other, does not Answer to the Question, but by Signs or by
Nodding his Head, showing a pleased or displeased Countenance, or by other
motion of the Body does plainly discover his Will and Pleasure therein.

5. Suppose the Testator speak only after this manner, viz. If my Son A. B.
Marry with C. D. let not my Executor give him a Hundred Pounds; whether from
these words by the contrary sense is the Legacy of a Hundred Pounds understood
to be left to his Son A. B. under the contrary Condition, viz. If he do not
Marry with C. D. This is held in the Affirmitive. Mantic. lib. 3, tit. 17.
Yet this would not hold if he should appoint an Executor after this manner,
and say, If my Son A. B. Marry with C. D. let him not be my Executor, or one of
my Executors: The Reason is, because an Executor may not be Instituted, nor the
Office of an Executor inferred only by Conjecturals. Mant. dict. tit. 17, nu. 2.
Again, a Legacy taken away under a Condition, is not only from thence
understood to be given under the contrary Condition; because a Legacy due only
under a Condition, may not be argued or inferred from a contrary sense by force
of a bare ademption, but by force of a Legacy formerly so Bequeathed as may not
be understood to be taken away though the Condition fails, but only when the
Condition takes place or effect. Mantic. ibid


6. In Cases doubtful touching Legacies, and the Testators Mind or Meaning as
to the same, Recourse must be had rather to what he does Express by Words, then
what he does imply by any Acts or Deeds, when there appears any discrepancy
between them. Hence suppose a Parent having diverse Sons and Daughters, does
appoint them all his Executors, and to his eldest Daughter does deliver all his
Keys and his Signet Ring which he commonly used; And having delivered these to
her to keep, does withal Order and Assign, That his said Daughters, Son, or
Servant, (be it expressly either) shall have such Apparel, Moneys, or other
things as he has in his Care, and under his Custody: Whether in this case does
the Parent seem to Bequeath to that eldest Daughter whatsoever is under Lock,
shut up, or Sealed. The Answer is in the Negative. L. cum pater. pater pluribus
ff. de legate. 2.


7. Lastly, The Testators words may possibly be such, and carry in them such a
sense by direct implication, as whereby the Legacy may casually become greater
then at first was apprehensively expressed by him. For Explanation whereof add
to the former this one Memorable Case more. Suppose a Legacy be given by a
Testator to the Son of him who is indebted to the Testator; adding withal
these Words, viz. I should or I would leave him more, if his Father had paid me
what he owes me. In this case it is held, That if afterward that Son happen to
be his Fathers Executor, he is by these Words freed from that Debt which his
Father owed to the Testator. L. ult.. 1. de Dol. Excep. and Roman. Singu. 535.


Hill. 14, Jac. B. R. per Cur. Roll. Abridgm. tit. Execut. Litt. X.
If there be a Devise of a Legacy to one and his Assigns, though the Devisee
die before Payment, yet his Administrator shall have it as his Assign.

Mich. 24, Eliz. Weasts Case. Moo. Rep. nu. 314, Stat. 34, H. 8, 32, of Wills
Amersam said to Moore, That Popham, now Chief Justice of England held in his
Readings, That if one by a Letter express his Will for the Disposal of his
Lands, it is sufficient: For it was the Case of one Weast, who went beyond Sea,
and wrote such a Letter, wherein he willed, That his Lands should go in such
manner. And it was held a good Devise.

CHAP IV. Of Conditions and their Resemblancies Incident unto Legacies.
1 A False Necessary Demonstration does vitiate a Legacy, but not a False
Snperfluous Demonstration. 2. The Parity of Operation between a False Cause and
a False Demonstration; and whether a False Cause does vitiate a Legacy? 3.
Whether a False Condition does vitiate a Legacy. 4. The Difference between
Modus and Conditio. 5. In what Cases the Word [if] does not amount to a
Condition.
1. WHat Conditio is, or by what Words it is expressed or employed, with the
several Kinds thereof incident to Testaments, has been formerly hinted at.
Supra part. 1, cap. 13, 14.
And as a Condition relates to Legacies: It is such a Quality added or annexed
to the Devise or Legacy, as whereby the effect thereof is suspended, till some
future Event, whereon it depends, does come to pass. For in the Bequeathing of
Legacies, as well as in the Appointing of Executors, there is for the most part
either That which the Law calls Conditio or Modus, or Causa, or Demonstratio;
The two former whereof refer to the Time to Come; The two Latter to the Time
Present or the Time Past. And a Demonstration is instead of the Name of Persons
or Things, and is nothing else but a Note and Designation, whereby either the
Person of the Legatary, or the Legacy it self is Demonstrated: For which Reason
a Legacy is not rendered Void or Null merely by Bequeathing it by a False Name,
or through a mere Erroneous Appellation only Demonstrative, so as the thing
Bequeathed be certain, and Person of the Legatary not uncertain.. Siquidem.
Inst. de Legatis.
So likewise is it in case of a false Demonstration, which does no more vitiate
the Legacy, then if it were given by a wrong Name.. Falsa. Inst. Ibid.
As if the Testator say, I Bequeath Bucephalus my Black Horse of my own breed,
or which was a Fool of my White Mare; This Legacy is good, though he were not
of his own breed, or a Colt or Fool of his White Mare. But understand this only
when the Demonstration is too full or superfluous, and not of a Demonstration
which is no more then Necessary, and which respects the very Substance of the
thing Bequeathed. Now a Demonstration is said to be too full and superfluous,
when it is added to a thing certain and sufficiently Demonstrated before, and
which would plainly enough appear without any such Addition of that
Demonstration; and of such Demonstrations only it must be understood what is
here said, viz, That a false Demonstration does not vitiate the Legacy. And as
a superfluous Demonstration that is in it self False does not vitiate the
Legacy, when it is such a false Demonstration of the thing Bequeathed, so
neither when it is added to the Person of the Legatary. L. Demonstratio? de
Condit. and Demon.
And herenote, That a Demonstration has more Energy, Force and Operation in it
then a mere Name: And therefore if the Testator has Two Daughters, the one
Married at London, viz. A. B. and the other Married at York, viz. C. D. does
say, That I Bequeath 100 l. to C. D. my Daughter, which is Married at London;
in this case the Legacy of the 100 l. is due to A. B. Pap. Not. 1, tit. de
Legate. verse. dePareil. etc.
In like manner a Demonstration by the Quality is of more Force then that which
is by the Confines, Bounds, or Limits of Place; Therefore if a Testator does
Bequeath his Cherry-Garden, being in such a Place, nigh such Neighbors, it is
a good Legacy, and due, albeit it be not in that Place, but in another. Rebuff.
de dilat. at. 2, gl. 2, nu. 18.
So that it is not a False Superfluous, but a false Necessary Demonstration
that does vitiate the Legacy, and that which respects the very Substance of the
Thing it self Bequeathed: For from thence it is, That (as in the last precedent
Chapt.) if the Testator say, I Bequeath Ten Pounds which I have in my Chest
unto A. B. Nothing is due to him if it be not in his Chest; because in this
case the Demonstration is inherent to the very Body or Substance of the Thing
it self Bequeathed.

2. What has hitherto been said of a False Demonstration, the same in Law may
be Applied to a False Cause, or a False Ground or Reason; for as a Legacy is
not vitiated by a Superfluous False Demonstration, so neither is it by the
Addition of a False Cause or Reason.. long. Inst. de Legate.
And as by a Demonstration it is signified to whom and what is Bequeathed: So
by the Cause or Reason it is showed why or wherefore it is Bequeathed. Hence it
follows, That if the Testator say, I Bequeath 100 l. to A. B. for that the
Structure or Building of his House was prosecuted and went forward, or the
like: In this case the Legacy is due, though that Cause were not True; Rebuff.
ad l. 27, verse. ideo. De Verb. Sign.
Yea whether the Testator did or did not know the Cause to be False; Gomez.
Var. Resol. in Tom. 1, cap. 12, nu. 76.
Unless the Cause be such as is Inherent with, and taken for the very Substance
of the Legacy it self; in which Case a Bequest or Legacy is void by a False
Cause; or unless the Testator declares the Cause Conditionally, that is, in the
same manner as a Condition uses to be declared, as by the word [if.] As when
the Testator says, I Bequcath a Hundred Pounds to A. B. if he has taken care
of my Business in London: For every Cause though it be Conditionally spoken or
after the manner of a Condition, yet it refers to the Time Past; whereas a
Condition refers to the Time to Come. Therefore it is very material to consider
whether the Testator does express himself Causatively, as by the Word [Because]
or Conditionally, as by the Word [if:] For if Conditionally, and the Condition
be under a Falsity, then the Legacy is not due; but it may be otherwise though
the Cause be False; unless it can be proved that the intention of the Testator
was otherwise; Now the mind or the intention of the Testator may be proved
either Truly or Presumptively; Truly, if the Testator fully so express nimself;
presumptively, when the Cause does respect or refer to Consanguinity or
Affinity: As when the Testator says, I Bequeath a Hundred Pounds to A. B.
beeause he is my Brother or Kinsman. Gomez. Var. Resol. Tom. 1, cap. 12. nu. 76.
Others in this point of a False Cause do distinguish between an Impulsive
Cause and the Final Cause, and conclude thus, viz. That the Impulsive Cause
does not vitiate the Legacy, but that a Final Cause does. Menoch. de Praesump.
l, 4, praes. 14. and Galgan. de Cond. part. 2, c. 4, q. 1, 2.
In all which variations and doubts the Testators Mind and Meaning so far as is
Rationally Colligible, must turn the Scale. To conclude therefore this Point:
If the Testator says, I do Bequeath a Hundred Pounds, because he lent me a
Hundred Pounds, This Legacy holds not if the Cause be False: Yet if he says; I
do Bequeath the Hundred Pounds to A. B. which he lent me; this Legacy is good,
though nothing were lent him. Ibid. Menoch. praesum. 24.


3. Again, it may be a Question, whether a False Condition does vitiate a
Legacy? Some are of Opinion; That it does vitiate a Legacy: Leon. Galgan, de
Cond. part. 1, cap. 5, nu, 26.
As if the Testator say, I Bequeath a Hundred Pounds to A. B. if he pay to C.
D. what I owe him; when the Testator ows nothing at all to C. D. which some
will understand only when the Condition is Originally False and ab initio; for
if it be False only Ex post facto; as if the Testator did owe him indeed; or
was indebted to him a Sum of Money, but paid it to him after he had made his
Testament, the Legacy is notwithstanding due say some, but contrary to Truth
and Law. L. cum tale.. p^n. de. Cond. and Demon.
So that the Condition which is False ab initio is held as an Impossible
Condition, and therefore voids not the Legacy: And on the other side, That
Condition which is False ex post facto, is held as Defective, and for that
Reason does not Void or Null the Legacy. Cuja. indict.. pen.


4. Modus and Conditio are distinguished from each other by certain Notes,
Signs or Forms of Words or Speech: as thus, The common Note or Word by which a
Condition is usually known, is by the Word [if:] And that whereby Modus is
commonly conceived and known is by the Words [That, or So as.] Therefore if the
Testator says, I Bequeath Ten Pounds to A. B. so as he give Five Pounds to G.
D. This is only Modus. L. utilitas.. 1, de manum. test.
But if he had said, I Bequeath Ten Pounds to A. B. if he give Five Pounds to
C. D. Then it had been a Condition. L. si. ita. ibid. and dict. l. utilit. ibid.
Yea though the Testator add a Condition to the Modus, yet the Word, [That]
implies a Modus not a Condition: As thus, I Bequeath Ten Pounds to A. B. on
Condition that he give Five Pounds to C. D. Gomez. Var. Resol. To. 1, cap. 12,
nu. 70, and Grassus.. legatum. q. 49, 58, and vasque de success. progr. lib.
3,. 27, nu. 15, and Mantic. lib. 10, tit. 5, nu. 15, 16.
Yet in some cases the Word [That] may rather imply a Condition then a Modus,
especially if it can be Proved, That the Testators meaning was, That the
Legatary should fulfill what is enjoined him before he should enjoy the Legacy.
Hence it is, That it may be judged from the Method and Order of the writing of
the Words themselves, whether it be a Modus or a Condition: For if the Testator
does first enjoin a charge or a burden before he does make the Disposition or
give the Legacy, then it is to be understood as a Condition: As thus, If the
Testator say, That let A. B. give my Son C. D. Five Hundred Pounds, and take
all my Goods; or let him give him Five Hundred Pounds and be my Executor. It is
otherwise when a Charge is joined with a Grant or Disposition that in it self
is already perfect and complete: As thus, If the Testator say, I make or
appoint A. B. my Executor under this Condition, that he Succeed not in, or
Possess himself of my Estate till my Legacies be paid. Menoch. Cons. 131. lib. 1
And this is a current Rule, That whenever it may clearly appear that it was
the Testators Intent and Meaning to make a Condition, it shall be understood as
a Condition though he used words that are properly Modal; and whenever it can
likewise be proved that his Meaning was to make a Modus, it shall be understood
only as Modal, though he used words that are properly Conditional. L. in
condiionib.. 1, de Cond. and Demon. and l. 2. (...). de his quae ^oen. nom.


5. There are certain Cases wherein the Word [If] does not amount to a
Condition; one is, when the Condition does refer to the Time Present or Past,
L. mutuo. (...). If. de Tutel.
As if I say, If A. B. has made me his Executor, let C. D. be my Executor; or
if A. B. has given me a Hundred Pound, let C. D. have a Hundred Pound; For
this kind or manner of Speech being then presently ab initio, either True or
False, does not suspend the Executorship or Legacy, but has its operation ad
statim, either to their Confirmation or Annullation.. Conditiones. Inst. de
^erb. Oblig.
Another Case is when the Executors or Legataries are made in this manner, viz.
Let A. B. and C. D. be my Executors as to the parts which I shall Appoint or
Assign them; or let them be my Executors if I Assign them any parts; or let
them be my Legataries as to the parts which I shall Appoint, or if I Assign
them any parts; In this case it is held that they are not Appointed Executors
or Legataries under a Condition, but that such making Executors or Legataries
is vallid and good, albeit the Testator should afterward Assign them no parts:
The Reason is; because such a kind of Speech does admit a double Sense or
Interpretation, and is as if the Testator had added; And if I Assign no parts,
let them be my Executors or Legataries in equal parts. L. 2, de (...) Inst.
Several other Instances might be given to show wherein the Word [if] does not
make a Condition; but these may suffice, our purpose on this Abridgement being
not to insist longer in Instances then what are sufficient for illustration.

CHAP. V. Of the several Marks and Kinds of Conditions, and Questions in Law
touching the same.
1. This Subject of Conditions very Voluminous in the Law. 2. The several Words
and Phrases of Speech denoting Conditions. 3. The Diverse kinds of Conditions.
4. Several Questions in Law touching Conditions, Resolved by Mr. Swinborne, and
others learned in the Law.
1. THis Subject of Conditions, with their several Marks, Notes Signs,
Differences and Variations, with their Ampliations and Restrictions or
Limitations, both as to the appointing of Executors, and Bequeathing of
Legacies, is a Field so large in the Law, as indeed would of it self require a
very large Volume to reduce them all though but to a Compendium, indeed too
vast a Body to be Comprised in such an Abridgment as this is; you may well
guess that this is a Provident Truth to obviate overcurious Expectations,
rather then any lazy Excuse to save Labor, if you seriously consider by what
variety of Words and Phrases; by what multiplicity of Senses, Constructions and
Interpretations; and in what innumerable Cases Conditions are made.

2. As When and in what Case a Condition may be made by these words following,
viz. [If. So as. Provided. To the intent. On Condition. To the purpose. That.
When. Whereas. In case. So that. To. After. Afterward. After that. So long as.
Until. Who. Which. Whenever. Whosoever. What person. Which person. Except.
Otherwise. Where.] With many others. As also if you consider in what cases a
Condition referring to the Time Present or Past may improperly be a Condition;
Also when an Argument is drawn from the contrary sense, may have place in
Conditions; Also what the Difference is between [If] and [when;] and in what
Cases the Disjunctive word [Or] placed between two Phrases of Time to Come,
shall disjunctively infer^a Condition; also when such a Conjuction Copulative
(as Noting one thing necessarily to precede, another shall follow) does make a
Condition; Also, whether Adverbs of Negation make a Condition or only a Modus;
And whether every Adverb that suspends the Disposition till some future Event,
does make a Condition; Also in what Cases and when Prepositions do make a
Condition; And in what Cases Pronouns do the same; Likewise when Relatives as
to Substance, Quantity, Quality or Number do make Conditions; Also by what
words, and when are Tacit Conditions, and how many ways such may be made; And
whether a Condition by Relatives be not a Tacit Condition; Also whether a
Condition may not be made by Participles spoken Absolutely; And although
Participles of the Time Present or the Time Past, do not make a Condition, yet
whether Participles of the Future Tense may not make a Condition; Also when and
in what Cases Gerunds may make a Condition; As also in what Cases the bare
mention of a Condition does not always make the Disposition Conditional. Cum
multis aliis.

3. Of Conditions there are many kinds, whereof some be Necessary, some
Impossible; some Indifferent or Possible. The Two former are void ab initio. Of
necessary Conditions some are Termed so in respect of Fact, some in respect of
Law. Impossible Conditions are such either in respect of Nature, or of Law, or
of the Person enjoined, or in respect: of Contrariety, Repugnancy, Perplexity,
or Incompatability. And of Possible Conditions some are Arbitrary, some Casual,
and some Mixed. Of which Possible Conditions some consist in Chancing, some in
Giving, some in Doing, some Certain, some Uncertain; Respecting either Time, or
Place, or Persons, or things; whereof also some are Affirmitive, some Negative.

4. There are also in the Law almost innumerable Questions relating to this
Subject of Conditions; To Enumerate some of them, as whether Impossible or
Dishonest Conditions do make the Disposition Conditional? whether Necessary
Conditions make the Disposition Conditional? What are the various effects of
Conditions, whether Necessary, Impossible, or unlawful Conditions do suspend
the effect of the Disposition? Whether Conditions partly certain, partly
uncertain, do suspend the effect of the Disposition? Whether Impossible
Conditions which the Testator supposed to be Possible do suspend the effect of
the Disposition? Whether Conditions that are very hard and almost Impossible do
suspend the effect of the Disposition? Whether it be not sufficient for an
Executor or Legatary to accomplish the Condition by some Equivalent means,
though not in the punctual and precise manner prescribed by the Testator?
Whether Conditions at first Possible but afterward becoming impossible do
hinder the effect of the Disposition? Whether Conditions Impossible by reason
of Repugnancy, Contrariety, Perplexity, or Incompatability do not make void the
Disposition? Whether the Condition be not in Law held as accomplished, when it
is not the Executors or the Legataries fault wherefore it is not performed?
Whether when the Condition is Negative, the Legatary may not have his Legacy,
entering first into Caution for Restitution thereof in case such Condition be
not kept and performed? Whether every Possible Condition ought to be observed
precisely? Whether and in what cases the Legatary may obtain his Legacy before
the accomplishment of the Condition? Whether it be sufficient that the
Condition was once performed, though it does not continue so? Within what time
the Condition may or ought to be performed when no certain Time is limited by
the Testator? In what sense that common Condition [if he dye without Issue] is
to be understood, and when it may be said to be accomplished? Whether the
Natural as well as the Lawful Issue be to be understood by them words? Whether
that Condition be accomplished if he die leaving his Wife with Child which is
afterward born? Or whether in case he has a Child, but dies before his
Father? Whether there be any Difference, and what that Difference is, betwixt
this Condition [If he dye without Issue,] and This [If he have no Issue?] What
the Law is in case the Issue be born dead? Or dies as it is born? What course
to be observed in Legacies, where more then one are born at the same birth?
Whether the Condition of payment to be made to an Infant be performed by
Payment made to his Guardian? Whether he in whose favor a Condition is made
may not consent to other means of performing the Condition then was prescribed
by the Testator? Whether a precise performance of a Condition be not understood
only of Voluntary Conditions, and not of Necessary Conditions? Whether such
precise performance of a Condition be Requisite when the Legacy is in favor of
the Testators Children, or ad pios usus? Whether the Condition may be performed
by another person then him that is Nominated in the Condition? Whether casual
Conditions may in any case be reputed as accomplished before the Event? In what
cases casual Conditions be reputed as accomplished, albeit the same be not so
indeed? Whether a Condition does prejudice the Executor or Legatary when the
Testator himself does hinder the performance thereof? Whether a Condition does
prejudice a Legatary when the performance thereof is obstructed by a Third
Person? Whether the accomplishment of a Condition hindered by casual means shall
prejudice the Legatary? In what cases an Affirmitive Condition does imply a
Negative? What the Law requires of the Legatary, as to Bond or the like, when
the Condition is not performable during Life? Whether a Negative Condition is
said to be accomplished when it cannot be infringed? What if the Party be
already Married, to whom any thing is Bequeathed Conditionally, [if he shall
Marry?] Whether the Condition shall be reputed as accomplished, if the Legatary
were once willing, and afterward becomes unwilling? What are captious
Conditions, and how they shall not prejudice the Legatary? Whether a Legacy
given with a Condition dependent on the will of another then the Testator
himself, be not a void Bequest? What the difference in Law is between the
Testators referring his will to the Absolute, and to the Limited will of
another? Whether he to whom the Testator commits the Disposition of all his
Goods be not Executor or Universal Legatary? How far the Conditions of Legacies
or Executorship against the Liberty of Marriage be Lawful? How far as to
Legacies or Executorships the Condition of Marrying with the Arbitrament, Will,
or Consent of another is Lawful? Whether the Condition of forbidding the
Alienation of the Legacy is Lawful? In what cases the Legatary may Alienate the
Legacy, notwithstanding such prohibitory Condition of Alienation? Within what
Time the Condition may and ought to be performed by the Legatary when no
certain Time is set or Limited by the Testator? Whether the Condition may be
performed during the Time betwixt the making of the Testament and the death of
the Testator? Whether a Legatary must not perform an Arbitrary Condition as
soon as he can? Whether any Time does prejudice a Legatary whilst he is
ignorant of the Condition? Whether a casual Condition may not be accomplished
at any time? With innumerable other varieties of Conditions well known to such
as are acquainted with the Law; whereby you may now by this time readily
perceive it was a Truth which was formerly hinted. That to Treat of this
Subject of Conditions as to Executorship and Legacies, and to do it distinctly,
though not in the Amplitude of their due Dimensions, but by way only of a
compendious Contraction, would of it self require a very Voluminous Tract;
Being therefore bound up to the Laws of an Abridgment, we may not Sail into the
Vast Ocean of the Laws to fetch you home any Transmarine Resolutions to the
said Questions, but shall only refer you to our own Countreyman, in this
Profession the Learned Mr. Swinborne, and others who of this Subject have
written very Copiously, yet Succinctly.

CHAP. VI. What things are Deviseable by Will; And whether a Testator may
Bequeath what is not his own.
1. What things in particular may be Devised or Bequeathed. 2. In what Case a
Legacy given by a Testator, of a thing that is not his own, may be good or not.
3. How a Testator may Bequeath what is his Executors. 4. A Bequest to one of
what was his own before, is void. 5. The Difference between the Common and
Civil Law, in this Point of Devising what is another Man's, and not the
Testators. 6. Goods in Joynt-tenancy not Deviseable.
1. REgularly and Infallibly all things that come to Executors, or that at the
Testators death, can be Assets in the Executors hands, were Deviseable by him
in his Life. More particularly, All the Testators Goods and Chattels, whether
Real and Immovable, or Personal and Moveable, whereof he dyed actually
Possessed or Interessed in Expectancy, in his own and not in another Right,
nor in Joynt-Tenancy with another (saving in some certain Cases in the Law
specially excepted) are Deviseable; As now also are Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments, whereof some are Deviseable by Custom, as Gavelkind, and Burgage
Tenure; others by virtue of certain Statutes. But more specifically; first, as
to Chattels Real, all Leases in Lands or Houses, either for Years, or Years
Determinable upon Life or Lives, or by Extents, Statutes, or Recognizances, or
Rents (not Rents reserved by the Inheritor, yet the Arraerages of them also.)
Likewise Commons, Advowsons, Tithes, Faires, Markets, Profits of Leet, and the
like in the Testator for Years, and all such Creatures as a Termer has in a
Warren, Park, Pond, Dove-house, or the like in the Testator for Years.
Secondly, as to Chattels Personal, all Debtors taken in Execution, Captives,
Apprentices, all Cattle, of all kinds, Creatures naturally Tame, or being
otherwise, are by Act reduced thereto, as Hawks reclaimed or the like, also
Hounds, Greyhounds, Spannels, Mastiffs, Ferrits, and the like; also all
Merchandable Goods and Commodities whatever; Likewise Ships and other Vessels
Naval with their Guns, Rigging, Tackle, Apparel, Furniture and Provisions;
Likewise Weapons for War, Books, Musical Instruments, and the like; Also Corn,
whether in the Ground, Field, or Barn; And Trees Felled, or not Felled, being
Sold from the Inheritance of the Ground, or excepted by the Seller of the
Inheritance of the Land; Also all other Grain, as Corn; Also Hops, Saffron,
Hemp, and the like, whether on the Ground or in the House; Likewise Hay, and
all Fruits gathered, (but not Grass ready to be cut for Hay, nor Fruits on the
Trees; but such as are separate from the Inheritance; therefore not
Garden-Fruits in the Ground, or not separate from it; Also Bills, Bonds,
Mortgages, Statutes, and the like; Also Money, Plate, and Jewels; Likewise all
Householdstuff, Implements, and Utinsils, not fixed to the Freehold; All
Coaches, Carts, Wagons, Plows, and the like, with their Appurtenances;
Likewise Desks, Cabinets, Trunks, Chests and Boxes, Excepting such as contain
only the Evidences of the Inheritance, and have used so to do; Also all Linen,
Bedding, Pewter, Brass, and Iron, that is Moveable, and not fastened to the
Freehold as aforesaid: Therefore not such Coppers, Cesterns, or Furnices, nor
Locks and Keys, Waynscot, or Window-glass. Finally, here Note, That Things in
Action, as Debts or the like are Deviseable: so are Obligations, and
Counterparts of Leases; Likewise Uses not Executed by the Statute of Uses, but
remaining at the Common Law. Perk. Sect. 500, Dyer.
And though Actions altogether uncertain, are not Deviseable; yet possibilities
and uncertainties in diverse cases are Deviseable. Perk. Sect. 527, Lit. Broo.
Sect. 437, Dyer, 272. Plow. 520.


2. In and by the Question, [Whether a Testator may Bequeath any thing which is
another, and not his own] is meant and intended any thing wherein neither the
Testator, nor the Executor, nor the Legatary has any just Propriety, or which
does not of Right belong to either of them. Now in order to the Resolution of
this Question according to the Civil Law, (discrepant from the Common Law in
this point) the known Distinction is, That if the Testator did certainly know
the thing Devised to belong unto another, and not unto himself, at the Time
when he Devised the same? Then such Devise is good, and the Executor (if there
be Assets sufficient) is to purchase the same, and Deliver it to the Devisee.
Otherwise it is, in case the Testator were Ignorant thereof, and supposed it to
be his own; unless the True Owner consent to the Legacy, or that it was
Bequeathed to Pious used. L. cum alienam. C. de Legate. and Grass.. legatum. q.
14, nu. 2, and Cui ac. ad Leg. virum ex familia.. si rem tuam. De Legate.
And in case the Owner thereof will not Sell the same, at least not at any
reasonable Rate, the Executor is to pay the Legatary the just value thereof. L.
non dubium.. ult. De Legate. 3.


3. Suppose a, Testator does Bequeath something that is his Executors. In this
case the Legatary shall have it, whether the Testator did or did not know it to
be his. L. unum ex familia.. Si rem tuam. de Legate. 2, and Grass.. legatum. q.
14, nu. 7.
The Law is the same, though there be Co-Executors, and the thing so Bequeathed
belong only to one of them. Gomez. var. Resol. tom. 1, cap. 12, nu. 14.
But in that case they shall all bear a proportion, to be allowed them in
Assets; but if Assets fail, the Legacy fails also.

4. If a Testator Bequeath to A. B. the same thing which did appertain to A. B.
in his own proper Right at the Time when the Testament was made, it is a void
Devise; yea, though A. B. should afterward alienate the Thing, so as that the
property thereof were out of him at the Time of the Testators death.. Sed si
rem. Inst. de Legate.


5. Notwithstanding what has hitherto been said according to the Civil Law,
yet by the Common Law the Goods and Chattels that are another Man's are not
Deviseable; and therefore if one Man gives or devises another Man's House, it is
a void Devise. So also, if one Devise the Things that by special Custom of some
Places, (as the Heir-looms do belong to the Heir) this Devise is void, for it
is not Devisable from him. Plow. Grantham's Case. Coo. sup. Lit. 185, and 308.


6. The Law with us is so far from countenancing a Devise of what is another
Man's, that it does not allow the Goods and Chattels which the Testator himself
has jointly with another to be Devisable; and therefore if there be Two
Joynt-Tenants of Goods and Chattels, (as when such Things are given to Two, or
Two do Buy such Things together) and one of them Devise his part of the Things
to a Stranger, This Devise is void, Insomuch that if in this case the Testator
make the other Joynt-Tenant his Executor, the Will as to this is void, and he
shall not be charged as Executor for these Goods, but he shall have them
altogether by Survivorship. Perk. Sect. 526, Littl. 287, Dr. and Stu. 167.
Nay, the Goods and Chattels which the Testator has, but not in his own Right,
but in Right of another, are not Devisable: And therefore an Administrator
cannot Devise the Goods and Chattels he has as Administrator, for such Devise
is void. Plow. 525. Broo. Adm. 7, Fitz. Adm. 3.
Howbeit; an Executor may appoint an Executor of the Goods of the first
Testator, which an Administrator cannot do.

CHAP. VII. Of Lands Deviseable by Will.
1. Whether Lands are Deviseable, what Lands, and how much thereof. 2. What
things may be Bequeathed under a Devise of Lands, and what not. 3. What Persons
incapable of Devising Lands. 4. Who may be Devisees, or what Persons may take
by a Devise of Lands, and what not. 5. What kind of Testament sufficient for a
Devise of Land, and what not.
1, LAnds, Tenements, and Hereditaments held in Gavelkind are Customarily
Devisable by Will. Terms of Law. Verb. Gavelkind. and Dyer. fo. 153. verb.
Devise.
So likewise are Lands held in Burgage-tenure, Fitz. N. B. ex gravi querela.
and Dr. and Stud. l. 1, cap. 7, and 10.
whereof the Will may be only Nuncupative and without Writing; and into which
the Devisee after the Testators death may enter without any Livery of Seysin
thereof made unto him: Little. tit. Burgage.
yet this shall not prevent Survivorship in case of Joynt-Tenancy in such
Tenure Princip. Grounds. fo. 20.
And though by the Common Law of this Realm, Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments are not Devisable, yet now by Statute they are (if held in
Socage) all Devisable, and Two parts of Three though held in Knight Service.
27, H. 8, cap. 10. It is not Necessary that the Will wherein Burgage Land is
Devised should be in Writing. But the Custom of the Place as to the Probat and
Enrollment of such Wills ought to be observed. F. N. B. Ex gravi querela. and
Broo. tit. Devise 22, 43, 51.
But then the Will must be in Scriptis, not Nuncupative. Now though Land be
thus Deviseable partly by Custom, partly by Statute, yet there are certain
persons incapable of Devising Lands, and there are certain Lands incapable of
being Devised, as appears by what follows in this Chapter.

2. As Lands are now Devisable, so there are certain Things in some certain
cases that pass by way of Bequest by and under a Devise of Lands: As thus; A
Man Seized of Land Devisable Builds a House thereupon, the House is
Devisable; the Law is the same as to a Rentcharge de novo created. Dyer in
Stat. of Wills, 32, and 34, H. 8. An Estate for years might be Devised at the
Common Law by him who was Possessed thereof; but an Estate in Fee might not.
Also a Guardian in Knight Service might Devise the Wardship both of Body and
Land. 50; Ass 1, Admit. Roll. Abridg. tit. Devise. lit. B.
Also a Man Disseisee of Land Deviseable, Devises to the Disseisor in Fee, in
Recompense of a Release which the Disseisor made unto him, This is a good
Devise. Also where a Man has Land in Right of his Wife, and he grants parcel
of it to another, and after Devises the Residue to another, This also is good.
Likewise where a Man has a Seigniory to him descended of the part of his
Mother, and after the Tenancy descends unto him of the part of his Father,
both being Devisable, and he not having any Issue: In this case he may make
Devises to several persons, that is, the Seigniory to one, and the Tenancy to
another. Dyer. ibid. cap. 4.
The Lord Dyer also says, That a Termor of Land which is not Deviseable,
erecting a Furnace, and fixing it in the midst of a House in the said Land, may
Devise this Furnace. Also that where a Man is Seized of Land Deviseable, and
Devises totum statum suum to one and his Heirs, This shall be a good Devise
for the Land. Likewise where a Man devises primam vesturam seu tonsuram prati,
which is Deviseable, it is good, and the Law is the same as to Trees growing,
and to grow for ever. Also Tenant in Fee-simple or in Fee-taile may Devise the
Corn, though the Land be not Deviseable, but as to Trees in that case the Law
is otherwise. Also a Man Seized of a Mill, may Devise the Runner Stone, but not
the under Stone, unless the Mill it self be Devised. Likewise a Man Seized of a
Common, grants a Rent out of the Land, although that the Land be Deviseable,
yet that Grant is void, and by consequence a Devise thereof. Nor is an Advowson
in gross Deviseable, nor any other Thing which lies not in Tenure; but a
Mesnalty or Seigniory is Deviseable, because they lie in Tenure. And if the
Husband Devise the Corn upon his Wives Land, and dies, This is good, whether
the Corn were Sown before the Marriage or after. Ibid.


3. The persons not qualified to Devise Lands by Will are such as These, viz. A
Bishop may not Devise the Land of his Bishopric; but of the Arrearages of the
Rent of the Bishopric he may make a Devise by Testament. The Law is the same
as to a Deane, or Parson of a Church. Also the Master of an Hospital cannot
Devise the Lands of the Hospital, nor the Arrearages of Rent issuing out of the
same. In a word, Spiritual Persons, Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes,
Archdeacons, Prebends, Parsons, Vicars, or any Member of a Corporation, may
not Devise the Land or Goods which they have in right of their Churches or
Corporations. Perk. Sect. 496.
For the Head or any of the Members of a Corporation cannot make a Testament or
a Devise of such Lands or goods they have in Common, because they are to go in
Succession. Also an Infant of the Age of 16. Years Seized of Lands Deviseable,
who may Alien it by the Custom, yet he cannot make a Testament or a Devise
thereof; or if an Infant makes a Will of his Land within Age, and dies after
that he comes to full Age, making no Revocation, This is not a good Will.
Dyer. ubi supra. cap. 1.. 7.
And yet although an Infant until he be of the Age of 21. Years can make no
Devise of his Lands; St. 32. and 34. H. 8.
Yet it is held that by special Custom in some places where Land is Deviseable
by Custom they may Devise it sooner. Also a Woman under Covert cannot make a
Devise of her Land with or without her Husbands consent, neither to her Husband
nor to any other. Stat. ibid. and Co. 4. 51. and Broo. tit. Test. 13. and. Co.
sup. Lit. 112. 4. 61. and Broo. Devise 32.
Yet of the Goods she has as Executrix to another she may make an Executor
without his consent; but of them she can make no Devise either with or without
his consent, because they are not Deviseable; and if she do Devise them the
Devise is void. Sk. Epit. verb. Testam. fo. 933.
Touching such as are Born both Deaf and Dumb: The Lord Dyer says; They may
make a Will of their Land by Signs. Dyer. in Stat. 32. and 34. H. 8.
Though others Affirm, That a Man that is both Deaf and Dumb, and that is so by
Nature, cannot make a Testament; but that a Man that is so only by Accident,
may by Writing or Signs; so also may a Man that is only Deaf or Dumb, whether
by Nature or Accident. Also an Alien Born and not Denizon'd cannot make a
Testament of his Lands; yet if an Alien Purchases Land in Fee, and makes a
Will, and after the King makes him a Denizon, after he dies, his Will is then
good as to his Lands or Goods. Dyer. ibid.
Also a Traitor Attainted, from the Time of the Treason committed can make no
Devise either of his his Land or Goods; for they are all forfeited to the King;
yet a Pardon from the King restores him to a capacity of dying Testate as to
both. Likewise a Man Attainted or Convicted of Felony cannot by Testament
Devise either Lands or Goods, for they are also forfeited, but if he be only
Indicted and die before Attainder, he is then Testable as to both; or being
Indicted will not Answer upon his Arraignment, his standing Mute may possibly
preserve him a power of Devising his Lands. And although the Testament of a
Felo de se be void as to his Goods and Chattels, yet as to his Lands it is
good. 5 and 6. Ed. 6. c. 11, prerog. Reg. Plowd. 258, 259, and 261.
So likewise although a Person Outlawed in a Personal Action cannot, so long as
the Outlawry does continue in force, make a Testament of his Goods and
Chattels, yet of his Lands he may; not so of Persons Outlawed for Felony; the
Law is the same as to a Man Attainted of a Praemunire; It is otherwise if a Man
be only Excommunicated. Dyer. in St. of Wills.


4. Regularly all Persons who may be Grantees may be also Devisees. Perk. 505.
510.
Insomuch that a Devise of Lands is good within the Statute of Wills, Dyer.
303, 304. B. R Cur. Mich. 3. Jac.
even to such persons as to whom a Legacy by the Civil Law is void, except in
certain cases; such as Heretics, Apostates, Traitors, Felons, Excommunicates,
Outlaws, Bastards, unlawful Colleges, Libellers, Sodomites, manifect Usurers,
and Recusants Convict. It is a Rule, That the Devisee must be capable of the
thing Devised at the Time of the Devisors death if it be then to take effect in
Possession; or if it be a Remainder, he must be capable of it at the Time when
the Remainder shall happen, otherwise the Devise is void; F. 9. Jac. B. R
If so, then a Devise to an Infant in the Womb at the Testators death seems to
be void, New Terms of Law. tit. Devise. But by the Civil Law it is otherwise.
Paul. de Castr. in l. qui filiabus.. 1. ff. de Legibus.
Yet if a Man Devise to such an Infant, and he happen to be Born before the
Testators death, it seems that in this case the Devise is good. Again, A Devise
made to a person altogether uncertain, and not certainly Named or Described, is
altogether void; yet a plain Description of a Person (without naming him) is
sufficient, so that a Devise made to the Dean of Paul's (without naming him) is
good. A Man Devises his Land to Elianor the Daughter of I. S. who has diverse
Daughters, whereof one is named Hellen, and none Eleanor; This is a good Devise
to Hellen. Dyer. in. St. 32. H. 8.
Likewise if a Man has Two Wives, and he Devises his Land to his latter Wife
in Fee, the first Wife shall have it; or if he has Two Sons called John, and
one of them is a Bastard born before Marriage, and he makes a Devise to his Son
John, the Legitimate John shall have it and not the Bastard. Dyer. ibid.
The Husband can be no Devisee as to a Devise of Lands from his Wife. There are
Three Brothers by the same Father and Mother, and the middle Brother Seized of
Land Deviseable, gives it by his Testament Propinquiori fratri suo, it seems
that neither of them shall have it. Ibid.
Suppose a Man who has a Term, Devises the Land to one and his Heirs the
Devisee dies leaving Executors; his Heirs shall have the Land, and not his
Executors; the Law is otherwise in case the Entire Term were so Devised. Ibid.
A Devise of Land made to the Canons of a certain Cathedral for ever, or
Canonicis Ecclesiae D. Pauli Land. in perpetuum, is a good Devise to all the
Canons jointly in Fee, and the Survivor shall have the Entierty. If a Man
wills that his Executors shall Sell his Land for the Payment of his Debts,
and they all die save one, who makes the Sale; in this case the Vendee shall
not have the Land; the Law were otherwise if the Land had been Devised to the
Executors to be Sold. If a Man has Issue a Son, and Land is Devised to the
Father Habend. sibi and Hered. de Corpore suo Legitime procreand. and after the
Devisee has Issue another Son, the second shall have the Land. Ibid.
If a Man Devises by the Will, That after the death of his Wife the Land
Devisable shall go to I. S. his Wife shall have it for her Life by this Devise.
Or if a Man wills that after 20. Years after the death of the Devisor I. S,
shall have the Land in Fee, the Heir of the Devisor shall have the Land during
the Term, and not the Executor. Ibid on the St. of Wills. c. 4.. 1.


5, A Testament Nuncupative is not good for a Devise of Land, nor a Testament
made in Print, if it were never written; yet a Testament written, though no
Executor be named therein, is good for Lands, but not for Goods. Likewise a
Testament without Sealing or Subscribing is good enough for a Devise of Land;
Perk. 476, 477. March. Rep. f. 206: pl, 245.
so as it be put into Writing in the Testators Life Time, although it be never
proved before the Ordinary. Dyer. ubi, supra.
But if in a Testament there are these words, viz. Haec est voluntas and
intentio mea A. B. etc. This is not good for the disposition or devise of Land
without saying ultima voluntas, Ibid.
according to the Lord Dyers Opinion, who in his Learned Readings on the Stat.
of Wills, 32. and 38. H. 8. if he were indeed the Author of that Impression,
1648. does further Affirm, That if a Man makes a Testament of his Land in one
County, and long after makes a Testament of his Land in another County, These
are good. Also that if Two Men severally Seized of Lands make a Joynt-Testament
of their Land, This shall be good, and several Testaments. Also that where a
man is in making his Testament, and having Devised a parcel of his Land, dies
before the perfection and finishing thereof, This shall be good for so much as
is Devised. That a Man willing by his Testament, that his Lands shall be Sold
to pay his Debts, not declaring by whom; This is a good Will, and shall be
performed by his Executors or Administrators. That a Man making a Will of Land,
in which he has nothing, and after Purchases the same Land, and dies, This
is not good. That a Woman Covert making a Will of her Land, and after taking a
Husband, who has Issue, the Husband dies, the Wife dies, this is not a good
Will. That if a Man make a Will of his Land, and after alien this Land in Fee,
and after repurchaseth the same Land, This is not a good Will. That a Man
making a Will, and after making a new Will, and after on his Deathbed says,
That the first Will shall be his last Will, This is good. Also that where a Man
gives Land by his Will in Fee, and after by another Will gives the same Land
to another but for Term of Life; This is a Revocation of the Entire first Will.
Dyer. on the Stat. of Wills. cap. 2.
Also if a Man Devise another Man's Land, This Devise is void; but if he after
the Devise made, Purchase this Land, then the Devise is good. Plow. 144. Fitz.
Devise. 7.


CHAP VIII. Certain Cases touching Devises of Land, Void or not.
1. Lands What, and how Devisable. 2. Certain void Devises of Land. 3. To what
Persons and in what Cases Devises of Land may be good or not. 4. The same Lands
twice Devised to several Persons in the same Will, how both Devises may stand
good. 5. The Profits of Land Devised do pass the Land it self; in which Case
Testaments more favorably construed then Deeds. 6. How Lands Purchased after a
Devise of Lands made, may pass by that Devise or not. 7. Several Cases in Law
referring to this Subject.
1. ALthough Lands made Devisable by Statute cannot be Devised otherwise then
by Will in Writing, yet Lands and Tenements Devisable by Custom may be Devised
by a Nuncupative Will without any Writing. But Copyhold Land is not Devisable;
nor can Tenants in Tail or pur auter vie, or Joynt-Tenants Devise their Eestate
in the Land they so hold, no more then they could before the making of the said
Statute, which does not empower them thereunto. But such as are Seized of Land
in Common or Coparcenary, may devise the same. St. 32. H. 8. c. 1. and St. 34.
H. 8. c. 5* and Coke sup. Lic. III. Perk. Sect. 544. Lit. Sect. 287. Dyer. 210.
Old N. B. 89 Perk. Sect: 500. 539, 540. 446. 497, 498. A man seized of Land
Deviseable, Devises totum sta^um suum to one and his Heirs; This is good for
the Land. Dyers Read. on Stat. of Wills. Sect. 4.. 6.
And if there be Two Joynt-Tenants for Life, and the Fee-simple to one of them,
he that has the Fee-simple may Devise his Fee-simple after the death of the
other Joynt-Tenant for Life. And in such places where Lands were Devisable by
Custom before the making of the Stat. of 32. H. 8. a Devise of Lands may be
good against the Heir for the whole, but by the Stat. impowering to dispose of
Lands by Will, a Devise of Land is not good against the Heir save only for Two
parts in Three.

2. He that Devises Land ought to have a Right to, and possession of the Land
he Devises, otherwise the Devise is not good; and therefore if a Disseisor
Devise the Land he has gotten by Disseizin, this Devise as to the Disseizee is
void. Plow. 485.
Likewise if a Man be Disseized of his Land, so that he has nothing but a
Right thereof left, and then he Devise this Right or the Land, this Devise is
also void. So if one Contract for Land, and pay his Money for the same, but
has no Assurance made him of the Land, and he Devise the same to another, such
Devise cannot be good; yet possibly he that received the Money may be
compellable in a Court of Equity to Assure and Settle the Land according to the
Devise. NevillsCase.
Likewise if one Devise another Man's Land, such Devise is void; but if after
such Devise made he Purchase this Land, and die without Revocation, now is that
Devise good. Plow. 144. and Fitz. Devise. 7.
Also if A. Bargain and Sell Land to B. on Condition of Re-entry if he pay to
B. Twenty Pounds; and B. Covenants that he will not take the Profits until
default of Payment; and A. make a Lease of Seven Years thereof to another, and
after break the Condition; in this case B. may Devise the Land, and the Devise
will be good. Adjudged. Powscley and Blakemans Case, A man Devises his Land to
Elianor, the Daughter of I. S. and he has diverse Daughters, whereof one is
named Hellen, and none Elianor, This is a good Devise to Hellen. Vid. Dyer's
Read. Stat. on Wills. Sect. 3.. 15.


3. If one Devise his Land to the Children of A. B. by this Devise the Children
that A. B. has at the Time of the Devise made, or at most at the Time of the
Testators death, and not such as shall be Born after his death, shall take by
that Devise and have the Land. Also, if a Devise of Lands or Goods be made to
the Heirs of A. B. (he then, and at the Time of the Testators death being
alive) this Devise is void; because the person to whom a Devise is made must be
capable of the Devise by that Name by which the Devise is made to him, when
there is no other description whereby to infer the Testators meaning; yet if
Lands or Goods be Devised to the Executors of A. B. and he die before the
Testator, and make Executors, This is a good Devise to such Executors; or if a
Man make a Feofment of his Land to the use of his last Will, and then Devise
that his Feoffees shall be Seized to the use of B. C. This is a good Devise of
the Land per intentionem. Pasch. 9. Jac. New man's Case.
Also a Devise of Land to one, paying so much a Year to another, with a Clause
of Distress upon failure of Payment, is a good Devise; but a Warranty cannot be
made by a a Will. Co. sup. Lit. 386.
Yet if Land be Devised for Life, or in Tail, Reserving a Rent, in this case
the Devisors Heirs shall be bound to the Warranty in Law, and the Devisee shall
take advantage thereof. Also a Devise of Land may be made to one, and a Devise
of a Rent out of the same Land to another in the same Will, and both stand
good. Likewise Land may be Devised to one in Fee, and after the same Land in
the same Will may be Devised to another for Life or for Years, and both these
Devises may be good. and may well consist together. Plow. 523. 540. and Dyer
357. and Co. 8. 24. 83.


4. In like manner if a Man in the former part of his Will Devise all his Lands
by general words to one in Fee, and in the latter part of his Will Devise some
special part thereof unto another in Fee; Both these Devises are good, and may
stand together; that is, The former Devise is good for as much as is not
afterward more specially Devised, notwithstanding the Subsequent
Specification; and the latter is good for so much as is so specially Devised,
notwithstanding the precedent general Disposition. It is otherwise when the
general Clause comes last, for then the first Devise is void. 38. Eliz. Co.
Banc.
So also it is supposed to be where both the Devises are particular, that then
the first Devise is void: As suppose a Man does first in his Will Devise
Long-acre to A. and his Heirs, afterward in the same Will he does Devise the
same Land to B. and his Heirs, in this case some have held the first Devise to
A. is void, which others have denied, holding that both the Devises are good,
and that A. and B. in this case shall be Joynt-Tenants. Quaere. Dyer in his
Lect. 1. and per Inst. Dodr.


5. If a Man Devise the Use, Profits, or Occupation of his Land, by this Devise
the Land it self is Devised. Co. 8. 94. Plow. 525.
Or if a Man Devise only the Profits of his Land, this is a Devise of the Land
it self. Brownl. 80. 1. Part.
For Lands will pass by words in a Will, which will not pass by the same words
in a Deed; but whatsoever will pass by any Words in a Deed, will pass by the
same Words in a Will; The Reason is, because Wills are always more favorably
interpreted than Deeds; and there is good Reason for that also. If a Man says
in his Will, I give all my Land or all my Tenements to A. B. he shall have not
only all the Lands; whereof the Devisor is Sole Seized, but also all the Lands
whereof he is Seized in Common, or Co-parcenary with another, and not only all
the Lands he has in possession, but also the Lands he has in Reversion of any
Estate he has in Fee-simple. But if he say, I give all my Lands in Possession
only, then the Lands he has in Reversion are excluded out of that Devise.
Plowd. 66.


6. If a Man Seized of Land of Fee-simple in the Parish of Grade, says in his
Will, I give all my Lands in the said Parish to A. B. and after the Will made
and published he does Purchase other Lands in the said Parish and dies; in
this case, and by this Devise A. B. shall not have the new Purchased Lands.
Plow. 343, 344. Old N. B. 89. Fitz. Devise 17.
Yet by a new Publication of the Will after the Purchasing of such Lands they
will pass to A. B. the Devisee. Trin. 37. Eliz. B. R. Breckford. verse. Parincote
Yea though he has no Land in the said Parish at the Time of making the said
Devise, yet if afterward he does Purchase Lands in that Parish, in this case
such ne(...) Purchased Lands will pass by the said Devise; because it shall in
that case be intended that he meant to Purchase them. Also if a Man has some
Lands in Fee-simple, and other Lands only for Years in Dale, and he Devise all
all his Lands and Tenements in Dale; by this Devise the Lands and Tenements he
has for Years does not pass; but if he has no other Lands in Dale but those
for Years, in this case probably they will pass. Hill. 20. Jac B. R. Loftis
verse. Baker.


7. A. Devises his Lands to M. his Wife, until. E his Daughter shall
accomplish the Age of 21. Years, the Reversion to the said E. and the Heirs of
her Body, upon Condition that she shall pay unto his said Wife during her Life,
in Recompense of her Dower of all his Lands 20 l. and upon default of Payment
he wills his Wife shall enter, and enjoy all the Lands during her life; the
Remainder ut supra, the Remainder to I. S. in Tail, and dies. M. the Wife
enters, E. the Daughter being within the Age of 14. Years. M. takes to Husband
I. D. The Husband and Wife came and demanded the 20 l. and none ready to pay
it. Whereupon the Husband and Wife brought a Writ of Devise and Recovered. In
this Case it was Resolved, were the 20 l. Rent or a Sum in gross, That by the
bringing of the Writ of Dower. the Wife of the Devisor had lost all the benefit
which was to come to her by the Devise; because the said Rent was Devised to
her in Recompense of her Dower; so that it was not the meaning of the Devisor
that the Wife should have both. Mich. 30. El. in C. B. Geslin and Werburrons
Case Leon. Rep. p. 137, 138.


5. P. and M. vid. Owen 30. and Hugh. Abridg.
In the Time of Queen Mary, Benloes Sergeant moved this Case: A Man Seized of
Lands and Tenements in London devised them by these Words, viz. [I Will and
bequeath unto my Wife A. my livelihood in London for Term of her Life] and that
by this Will the Lands in London pass to the Wife by this Word [Livelihood]
Note, for Brook Justice said, That it was in ancient Time used so in diverse
places of this Realm, and had been taken for an Inheritance. Unto which Dyer
also agreed.

A. having Two Sons by Two Wives, devised his Land to I. his Eldest Son, and
his Heirs, after the death of his Wife, to whom he devised them for her Life.
The Question was, Whether the Son should take them by Devise as a Purchasor, or
as Heir at Common Law by descent. The Court held, that the Devise was void, and
that it was not in the power of the Son to make Election to take by descent, or
by Purchase; but he must of necessity take the Land as the Law directs, which
is by descent; And it is against a Maxim of Law to give a Thing to such a
person to whom the Law gives it, if it had not been given. Mich. 24. Car. in B.
R. rot 2052. Preston and Holmes's Case. Styles 148, 149.


A Man made his Will in these Words, viz. I give and Bequeath one half of my
Lands to my Wife, and after her death I give all my Lands to the Heirs Males of
any of my Sons, or next of Kin. In this Case it was held, That the Devise was
void, because of uncertainty, and the words being in the disjunctive; and we
ought not to frame a Sense upon the Words of a Will, where we cannot find out
the Testators meaning. Trin. 1649. rot. 849. in B. R. Beal and Wyman's Case.
Styles 240.
Likewise it has been adjudged, That Lands devised to a Man's Issue was
uncertain, and therefore such Devise void. 42. Eliz. in C. B. Tailor and
Sawyers Case.


If a Man has in his Occupation several Farms together, and then does Devise
one of the Farms called D. and all the Lands to the same belonging, the other
Farms shall not pass with it, although they be occupied altogether. Trin. 20.
Jac. in B. R. rot. 811. Knights Case. Godbolt. 358.


If a Man does Will and Devise, That A. and B. his Feoffees shall stand Seized,
and be Seized to the use of I. S. for his Life, the Remainder over, etc. when
in Truth he has no Feoffees. It is a good Devise to I. S. by reason of the
Intention. Or if a Man make a Feofment to his own use, and afterward Devise,
That his Feoffees shall be Seized to the use of his Daughter A. who in Truth is
a Bastard, it is a good Devise of the Lands by Intention. Mich. 2. Car. in B.
R. Baffield and Byboro's Case. Popham 188.


Three Brothers are of one Father and Mother the middle Brother Seized of Land
Devisable, gives this by his Testament Propinquiori fratrisuo. It seems that
none of them shall have it. Dyer's Read. on the Stat. of Wills. Sect. 3.; 5.


Note, it was held by the Justices, That if a Man Seized in Fee of a Manor and
Lands, Devises the same by his Will to his Son, and afterward in another part
of the same Will devises a Third part of the same Lands to another of his
Sons, That they are Joynt-Tenants of the Lands: And so if a Man in one part of
his Will devises his Lands to A. in Fee, and afterward by another Clause in
the same Will he devises the same Lands to another in Fee, they are
Joynt-Tenants. Mich 8. Eli. in C. B. Leon. 3. Part. 11. and Hughe's Abr. 3.
Vol. in Appen. tit. Wills, Testaments and Devises.


Trin. 36. Eliz. Brown and Pease Case. Anders. Rep. Case 315.
Between B. and P. the Case was this. I. W. being Seized of the Manors of W.
and C. in Socage, made his Testament, devised the Two Manors in Form
following, viz. The Manor of W. to the Eldest Son of R. F. his Cousin, and his
Heirs; and further he devised the other Manor to M. W. during her life, and if
she dies, and then any of my Cousin F's Sons Living, then I will my said Manor
of C. to him that shall have my Manner of W. -- R. F. had Two Sons G. and I. --
G. enters on the Manor of W. and the said M. enters on the other Manor. After
G. dies without Issue. I. enters on the Manor of W. and alienates the Fee
thereof Afterward M. dies. I living. The Question was, Whether I. ought to
have the M. of C. or not. The Court agreed, That he could not have it, for that
he was not such Person as was named or limited to take by the Will, for that he
had not the Manor of W. at the Time of the decease of M. and therefore not the
Person intended by the Will.

Trin. 37. El. Beckford verse. Parnecott. Cro. par. 3.
The Case was, That R. P. Seized of diverse Lands in A. and having Issue Four
Daughters, B. I. F. M. made his Will 27. Eliz. in Writing, and thereby all his
Land in A. he devised to B. and I. his Daughters, and made them his
Executrices, and after in 33. Eliz. Purchased other Lands in A. (which are the
Lands in Question) and after one I. S. came to the Devisor, and desired that he
would Sell unto him those Lands which he lately Purchased. And he said; No,
they shall go with my other Lands in A. to my Executrices. Afterward in 34.
Eliz. he fell Sick, the Will was read unto him, and he said nothing thereto;
but then gave diverse Legacies of Goods to others, and caused them to be written
and annexed in a Codicil thereto, and dyed, Whether these Lands newly Purchased
shall pass to the Executrices by that Will, was the Question? viz. Whether by
those words used to a Stranger, or the annexing of a Codicil to the Will, being
only concerning Goods, be as a new Publication of his Will, to make these Lands
to pass, etc. First, It was agreed by the Council on both sides, and by the
Justices, That if the Devisor after the Purchase of that Land had made new
Publication of his Will, and showed his Intent, that those Lands should pass,
it had been a good Devise of them: For the Words in the Will are [all his Lands
in A.] which are apt enough and sufficient to carry them, and he could not have
added more apt words thereto. But afterward all the Justices (Gaudy absente)
held that it is a new Publication of his Will, and sufficient by the words to
I. S. For that shows his intent sufficiently, and the Will writ has words
sufficient. And Fenner held, That the annexing of the Codicil thereto, is a new
Publication as to it: For therein he Affirmed, That it should be his Will at
that Time. But the other Justices doubted thereof, because he does not show
thereby any intent, That this Will should be for his Purchased Lands, nor that
he then remembered them. But for the foresaid Reasons it was adjudged for the
Plaintiff, That those Lands well passed by the Will.

Mich, 34. El. In the Court of Wards. The Lord Cheneys Case. Co. 5. part 67.
Suppose a Man has Two Sons, both named John, and conceiving his Eldest Son to
be dead, he Devises his Land by his Will to his Son John generally, when in
Truth the Eldest Son is living. In this Case the Younger Son may allege and
give in Evidence the Devise to him, and may produce Witnesses to prove the
Intent of his Father; And if no Proof can be made, the Devise shall be void for
the uncertainty of it.

Glanvile Sergeant prayed the Opinion of the Court in this Case. Mich. 48, and
39. Eliz. C. B. Bon. verse. Smith. Cro. par, 3. pl. 64.
A Man had Issue a Son and a Daughter, and Devised his Lands to his Son in
Tail, and if he dyed without Issue, That it should remain to the next of his
Name, and dyed. The Son dyed without Issue, the Daughter being then Married,
whether she should have the Land was the Question? And held per Curiam, That
she should not: For she had lost her Name by her Marriage; but it should go to
the next Heir-male of the Name. But if she had not been Married at the Time of
her Brothers death, the Daughter should have had it, for she was the next of
the Name.

Trin. 39. Eliz. C. B. Jobsons Case. Cro. par. 3.
One Devised certain Lands in N. in Tail, the Remainder to the next of the Kin
of his Name, and at the Time of the Devise, the next of his Kin was his
Brothers Daughter, who was then Married to I. S. the Devisor dyed. The Tenant
in Tail dyed afterward without Issue. Whether the Daughter should have the
Land was the Question upon a special Verdict, and adjudged without Argument
that she should not: For she is not now of the Name of the Devisor; but of her
Husbands Name. But if she had been unmarried at the Time of the Devise and
death of the Donor, although she had been Married at the Time of the death of
the Tenant in Tail without Issue, yet she should have had the Land. Wherefore
it was adjudged accordingly.

Mich. 41. Eliz. B. R. Yates verse. Clinkard Cro. par. 3.
Ejectione Firmae; For certain Lands in A. upon Evidence to a Jury, a Devise
was shown of an House with the Appurtenances, and thereby Land in the Field was
claimed. And Popham doubted whether it should pass. But Fenner said, That it
well might pass. And that upon Demurrer in 28. Eliz. it was adjudged
accordingly. The Defendant then to make it clear showed, That the House was
Copyhold, and the Land Freehold: And the whole Court thereupon conceived, That
it could not be said Appurtenant, although it had been used with it. Wherefore
the Plaintiff was Nonsuited.

Trin. 2. Jac. Horton verse. Horton. B. R. Cro. par. 2. pl. 4
In the Case between H. and H. all agreed the Case of 13. H. 7. That a
Testators Devise to his Heir of his Land after the death of his Feme, is a good
Devise (by Implication to the Feme) of that Land during her life; for it
appears he intended his Heir should not have it until the death of his Feme:
And none other can have it besides the Feme. And therefore it is a good Devise
to the Feme by Implication. But if such a Devise had been to a Stranger, after
the death of his Feme; it might peradventure have been otherwise; for the Heir
in the Interim might have had it.

Mich. 37. H. 8. Anders. Case. 83.
Note, That the Opinion of all the Justices was, That if one make his
Testament, wherein are these words, viz. [I Release all my Lands, etc. to A.
and to his Heirs.] It is a good Devise of the said Lands to A. and his Heirs.

Mich. 30, 31, C. B. Ander. Case. 117. vid. dict. Case.
Upon a special Verdict the Case was this. A Woman Seized of Lands made her
Will, and devised the same to one and his Heirs; after they Intermarry. After
Marriage the Woman intending to revoke her Will, does revoke it by words after
Marriage, and says, That her Husband shall not have the Land by her Will, and
after dies. Whether the Husband by that Will, or the next Heir to his Wife,
shall have the Land, was the Question? The Case was Argued Pro and Con, several
Arguments on both sides. In fine it was Adjudged, That the Will was void, and
that the Husband could take nothing thereby.

Pasc. 5. El. Moo. Rep. nu. 143.
A Man Devised his Lands to his Wife from Year to Year until his Son I. come to
the Age of 20. Years, and dies; the Wife enters. I. dies before he attain the
Age of 20. Years. And it was moved by Harper, whether her Interest were thereby
determined. And it was held by all the Justices, That by the death of the Son
the Estate of the Wife was determined, and that she had no longer any Estate
therein. For it is to be intended that the Will of the Devisor was, That his
Wife should have the Land during the Minority of his Son, for that he himself
could not Legally dispose of the Land, being within Age. And Dyer said, That by
these words de anno in annum. It is intended, that the Will of the Devisor was,
That the Interest of the Wife should determine by the death of his Son. But if
the Words had been [until his Son should Come, or might Come to that Age of 20.
Years] then notwithstanding his death, the Estate of the Wife had continued.

Mich. 30. El. in c. B. Sir Ant. Denny's Case. Leon. 2, Part. 190. and Hugh's
Abridg. Appen. tit. Devis.
A. Seized of the Manor of Chessam, extending into Chessam, and the Town of
Hertford, and also of Lands in Hertford, Devised by Will the Manor of Chessam
to B. his Eldest Son in Tail, and the Lands in Hertford to C. his Younger Son.
It was held by all the Justices, That the Younger Son should have all that part
of the Manor of Chessam, which lay in the Town of Hertford.

Pasc 16. El. in B. R. Leon. 2. Part. 221. and Hughs Abridg. ibid.
A. Devised that his Lands should descend to his Son, but Willed, That his Wife
should take the Profits thereof, until the full Age of the Son, for his
Education and bringing up, and dyed; The Wife Married another Husband, and dyed
before the full Age of the Son. It was the Opinion of the Justices, in this
Case, That the second Husband should not have the Profits of those Lands till
the full Age of the Son; For nothing is Devised to the Wife but a Confidence,
and she is a Guardian or Bailiff for to help the Infant, which by her death is
determined, and the same Confidence cannot be transferred to the Husband.

A Man Seized of a Message to which a Garden and a Curtilage did belong,
Enclosed with a Wall, and there was no way to the Garden but through the
Message: He Devised the Message to his second Son in Fee, not mentioning the
Garden nor Curtelage, nor says cum pertinentijs: Hill. 30. Eli. B. R. Carden
and Tucks Case, Cro. 3. Part. 89. and Hughe's ibid,
It was Adjudged in this Case, That the Garden and Curtelage did pass by this
Devise; They said a Curtelage is parcel of the House, as a Stable and a
Dovehouse; and the Garden shall pass, because it is as well for Necessity to it
as for Pleasure.

A. Seized of Lands had Two Daughters, and Devised the Lands to the Eldest and
her Heirs, that she pay to her Younger Sister yearly 30 l. It was the Opinion
of all the Justices, That this was a Condition, for so was the Intent of the
Devisor; For otherwise the Younger Sister had no Remedy for the Rent. Trin. 30.
El. B. R. Crickmere and Patersons Case. Cro. 3. Part. 146. and Hughe's ibid.
And in this Case it was Adjudged, That the Younger Sister might enter upon a
Moity of the Land, for breach of the Condition in Non-payment of the Rent, for
which the Action was brought.

Mich. 30. El. B. R. Bon and Smith's Case. Cro. 3 Part.. 532. vid. Trin. 39.
Eliz. c. B. Johsons Case. Cro. 3 Part. 576. Adjudged acc.
A Man had Issue a Son and a Daughter, and he Devised his Lands to his Son in
Tail; and if he dyed without Issue, it should remain to the next of his Name.
(r) The Son dyed without Issue, the Daughter being then Married. The Question
was, whether she should have the Lands? It was Resolved by the whole Court,
That she should not, for that she had lost her Name by her Marriage: But if she
had not been Married at the Time of her Brothers death, she should have had it,
for she was the next of Name.

A. B. Seized of Lands in Socage, Devised the same by Words to his Three
Sisters; a Stranger present Recited the Testators words to him; whereat he
Affirmed the same. Afterward the Stranger for his own Remembrance puts the
words into Writing, but read them not to the Devisor before his death. This
Devise so Reduced into Writing mode and form is void, because it was written
without the order or direction of the Devisor, and consequently not within the
Statute. But if after the writing thereof he had read the same to the Devisor,
and thereupon the Devisor had Affirmed the same, it had then been a good
Devise. Pasc. 30. El. B. R. Nash and Edwards Case. Leon. 113. It was the
Opinion of the whole Court that the Devise was vaid, and Wray Chief Justice
said, That if he Appoint A. to write his Will, and it is Written by B. the
Devise is void. But if after he ha Written the Will, he had Read it to the
Devisor, and he confirmed it, it had been a good Will. It was the Opinion of
the Court, That the Plaintiff being Heir at Law, should have Judgment to
Recover the Lands against the Three Sisters.
It was the Opinion of, etc.

A. devises his Lands to W. after the decease of his Wife, and if he fail,
then he wills all his part to the discretion of his Father, and dyed. W.
Survived, the Father being dead before, without any disposition of the Land. In
this Case the Father has a Fee-simple, there being no difference where the
Devise is, That I. S. shall do with the Land at his Pleasure, and the Devise
thereof to I. S. to do with it at his discretion. Trin. 30. El. Rot. 1160.
Whisker and Cleytons Case. Leon. Rep. p. 156.


A Man Seized of Lands in A. has Issue four Daughters, A. B. C. D. and devised
all his Lands in A. to A. and B. Two of his Daughters, and made them his
Executrices: Afterward he Purchased other Lands in A. A Stranger being
desirous to Buy this Land of him newly Purchased, he refused, saying, That this
Land should go with the Residue of his Land to his Executors, as his other
Lands should go. Afterward the Testator made a Codicil, and caused it to be
annexed to his Will; but in the Codicil no mention was made of this new
Purchased Land. In this Case this new Purchased Land shall not pass: For
Notwithstanding that the Reading of the Will, and the making of a Codicil, may
amount to a new Publication; yet it does not manifest the Intent of the Devisor
to be, that more shall pass by that, then he intended at the first; Also the
new Reading of the Will, and the annexing of a Codicil, may not properly be
termed a new Publication; And without an express Publication for this Land
newly Purchased, this Land shall not pass. Hill. 43. Eli. B. R. Beckford and
Parnecoles Case. Goldesb. 150. vid. Bret. and Rigdens Case. Plow. Com. 340


A Man Let several Houses and Lands by several Leases for Years, rendering
several Rents, amounting to 10 l. per annum, and made his Will in this manner;
viz. I Bequeath the Rents of D. to my Wife for Life; the Remainder over in
Tail. By this Devise the Land it self shall pass; for it appears, his Intent
was to make a Devise of all his Lands and Tenements, and that he intended to
pass such an Estate, as should have continuance for a longer time then the
Leases should endure; and the words are apt enough to convey the Lands, it
being an usual manner of speaking of some Men, who name their Lands by their
Rents. Mich. 45. Eliz. in c. B. Rot. 125. Kerry and Dirricks Case. Cro. 2.
Part. 104. Hughs Abridg. tit. Devise.


A Man Devised Lands to another Man and his Heirs: The Devisee dyed in the Life
of the Devisor, and then the Devisor dyed. In this Case the Heirs shall not
take by the Devise, for that the Heirs are not named as words of Purchase, but
only to express and limit the Estate which the Devisee should have; for without
these words (Heirs) the Devisee could not have the Fee-simple: and the Heirs
are named only to Convey the Lands in Fee-simple, and not to make any other to
be Purchaser but the Devisee. Vid. Plow d Com. 342. in a Bret and Rigdens Case.


CHAP. IX. Certain Cases touching Devises of Land in Fee-simple.
1. A Fee-simple may pass by several Words and Expressions in a Will, which
will not pass it by Deed. 2. A Power to Sell Land Devised, passes the
Fee-simple; so does the Devise of the Land (without other words) on the least
Consideration of a Payment to be made by the Devisee. 3. A Fee-simple will pass
in a Will as well by the Implication as Expression of the Word [Heirs.] 4. A
nice Distinction between Joynt-Tenancy, and Tenancy in Common. 5. A Devise of
Lands to a Corporation for Life is a Fee-simple; and whether it may pass by the
Word [Assigns] without the Word [Heirs] or the Words [For ever.] 6. A
Fee-simple passes in a Will by Implication of a power to Sell the Lands, as
well as by Payment of Money, enjoined the Devisee. 7. In what Sense the
Habendum shall be Construed, where the Devise of Lands seems somewhat doubtful.
8. In what Case a Fee-simple, and all the Testators Inheritances may pass by
General Words to the Devisee. 9. A Devise in Fee made to one, cannot in the
same Will be made to another. 10. How the Word [Paying] does Create a Fee in a
Devise, and bow by a Devise of Rents the Land it self does pass. 11. A Devise
shall be for the Dvisees Benefit, not Prejudice; also in what other Case a Fee
shall pass by Implication. 12. In what Case, and by what Words the Fee, and not
Leases, or the Leases and not Fee, do pass by a Devise. 13. Other Cases in Law
touching this Subject.
1. THere are many Words and Expressions whereby Lands will pass in Fee-simple
by a Will, which by a Deed will not so Convey the same. As suppose a Man devise
his Land in this manner, viz. I give my Land in Dale to A. B. and his Heirs, or
to A. B. in Fee, or to A. B. for ever, or to A. B. Habendum sibi and suis, or
to A. B. and his Assigns forever, or to A. B. to give away, or Sell, or do
therewith at his Pleasure; All these and such like in a Will Create a
Fee-simple Estate, and A. B. shall have the Land to him and his Heirs for ever;
Lit. Broo. Sect. 133. Perk. Sect. 1. 6. Lit. Sect. 586. Kelway 43. Co. sup.
Lit. 19, 20. H. 6. 35. Lit. B^. Sect. 432. 19. H. 8. 10.
yet by such words in a Deed no more will pass then an Estate for Life, save
only in the first Case. Also if any now since the making of the Statute of
Uses, Devise that the Feoffees of his Land shall be Seized of the Land to the
Use of B. C. and his Heirs, or to the Use of B. C, and the Heirs of his Body;
or that his Feoffees shall make an Estate of the Land to B. C. and his Heirs,
or to him and the Heirs of his Body; This is a good Devise of the Land in
Fee-simple or Fee-tail. There are also several other ways of Fee-simple by
Will. For suppose Land be given to a Man Habend. sibi and Haeredi suo: This
indeed is not Fee-simple; otherwise it is, if it be given sibi and duobus
Haeredibus suis tantum. Dyer. Lect. in Stat. Wills. cap. 5.. 1.
So if Land be given to a Man Habend. sibi and Haered. with warranty of the
Land sibi and Haeredibus suis, This is a good Fee-simple. Ibid.
Or if a Man Devise Land to A. B. for his Life, and after to the Heirs, or to
the right Heirs of A. B. By these Devises A. B. has a Fee-simple in the Land,
Dyer. ubi supra cap. 3.. 3.
Also if one Devise his Land to his Wife to dispose thereof at her will and
pleasure, and to give it to one of her Sons; by this Devise she has a
Fee-simple; but it is qualified, for she must Convey it to one of her Children,
and cannot Convey it to another. Co. 6. 16. and Dyer. 126.


2. When in a Will power is given to a Devisee of Land by the Testator to Sell
that Land, such Devisee has a Fee-simple in that Land; for power to Sell
gives by Implication an Estate in Fee-simple, 18. Jac. B. R. Green verse. Dewel.
Also, if one Devise his Land to A. B. paying 10 l. (without other words.) By
this the Devisee has the Fee-simple of the Land, albeit the 10 l. be not the
Dundredth partvalue of the Land? In like manner, If one Devise Land (whereof he
is Seized in Fee) to A. B. paying 10 l. to G. D. By this Devise, albeit there
be no Estate expressed, yet A. B. has the Fee-simple of the Land in respect of
the Payment of the Money. Mic. 13. Jac. B. R. Dyer. Sect 307.
This holds True only in case the Intent of the Testator does not appear to be
otherwise.

3. If one in his will devise his Land to his Wife in the first place, and then
says my Will is, That my Son A. shall have it after my Wives death, and if my
Wife dye before my Son B. that then my Son A. shall pay to B. 10 l. by the Year
during the Life of B. and also 100 l. to I. S. In this Case A. shall have the
Fee-simple of the Land. Hill. 17. Jac. B. R. Adjudge ed. Spicers Case
Also, if one Devise his Land in this manner, viz. Trin. 30. El. If I Devise
Lands to two equally divided between them, they are Tenants in Common. But if I
Devise Lands to Two, equally to be divided between them by I. S. Till such
Division be made they are Joynt-Tenants. Mich. 31. Eliz. in B. R. Dickons and
Marshes Case Goldesbr. 182, 183.
I give White-acre to my Eldest Son and his Heirs for his part; Item,
Black-acre to my youngest Son for his part; by this Devise the the Youngest Son
shall have the Fee-simple of Black-acre. Or thus; I give White-acre to A. B.
Item, Black-acre to A. B. and his Heirs; by this Devise A. B. shall have the
Fee-simple as well of White-acre as of Black-acre.

4. If a Man Devise his Land in this manner; Item, I give to A. B. and C. D.
and their Hoirs my Land in Kent equally, or my Land in Kent equally to be
divided; by these words A. B. and C. D. shall have and hold the Land not as
Joynt-Tenants, but as Tenants in Common, so that the Heir and not the Survivor
shall have his part that first dies: And yet in case of such a Limitation by
Deed it is otherwise. But if one Devise his Land to A. B. and C. D. and their
Heirs (without more words) it seems that by this Devise they shall take and
hold as Joynt-Tenants; Adjudged Lowen verse. Cox. Mich. 37, 38. El. Com. B.
Dyer. 25. Lit. Broo. Sect. 133. Lit. 283. Perk. Sect. 170. Dyer. 350.
Yet if one Devise Land to A. B. and C. D. and the Heirs of either of their
Bodies lawfully begotten; it seems that by this Devise A. B. and C. D. shall
take and hold as Tenants in Common, and not as Joynt-Tenants. Dyer. 326.
Likewise the Case is the same, if one Devise his Land to A. B. and C. D. in
this manner, viz. I Will that A. B. and C. D. shall have my Lands in Kent, and
occupy them indifferently to them and their Heirs. Pasch. 9. Jac Newmans Cafe.
Brown. Rep. 1. part. 131. 169.
But if one, who has Two Daughters only, give or Devise his Land to them in
Fee; by this Devise they shall take as Joynt-Tenants, and not be in by Descent
as Partners; Goldsb. 141. Plow. 53.
for the Testators Will shall take place.

5. If Land be given to the Mayor and Commonalty of London, or any other
Corporation to have and to hold for Term of their Lives, it is a Fee-simple.
Dyer. Lecture in Stat. of Wills. Sect. 5.. 13.
Or if a Man say, I give to A. B. my House with all the Lands for 21. Years;
and that A. B. shall have all my Inheritance, provided it be not contrary to
Law; In this Case A. B. shall have the Fee. Hob. Rep. 7.
Or if he give it to his right Heirs Males, and Issue of his Issue of his Name,
this also is a Fee-simple. Brown. 129. 147. 149. 1. part. and part. 2. 272. 177.
And although it be affirmed by some, That if the Testator Devise his Land to
A. B. and his Assigns, without saying [For ever,] A. B. shall have an Estate
only for Life; Co. sup. Lit. 9. Perk. Sect. 57 239, New Terms of Law. tit.
Devise.
Yet the contrary is Asserted by others, and that it is a Fee-simple. Trin. 2.
Car. in B. R.


6. If a Testator says, I will my Land to my Son A. during his Life, and after
his decease to my Son B. And in case my Son A. shall hereafter Purchase Lands
of as good Value as that Land for my Son B. that then my Son A. shall Sell the
Land Devised to my Son B. as his own, and shall pay 20 l. to C. D. In this Case
A. has a Fee-simple, employed by the Power which A. has to Sell, beside the
Payment of Money. Mich. 18. Jac. B. R. Green verse. Dewel.
Also, if one Devise Land to me and my Heirs, and in Case the Heir at Law put
me out, that then I shall have other Land instead thereof; in this Case, and by
this Devise I have the Fee-simple of the first Land, notwithstanding the latter
words. Pasch. 14. Jac. in B. R.
Likewise, if a Testator Devise Land to me for my life, the Remainder to his
own Son, and the Heirs Males of his Body, and in default of such Issue, the
Remainder to the next Heir-male of the Testator, and the Heirs-males of his
Body; In this Case the next Heir-male of the Son has an Estate in Fee-simple.
Perk. Sect. 567.


7. Suppose a Man Seized of Lands, make his Will in this manner, viz. Imp. I
Devise to my Wife Black-acre for her life, the Remainder to my Son T. in Tail.
Item, I Will to my Son T. all my Lands in D. also all my Lands in S. also my
Lands in V. Also I give to the said T. my Son all my Island or Land enclosed
with Water which I Purchased of I. S. To have and to hold all the said last
before Devised Premises to the said T. my Son, and the Heir of his Body. In
this Case the Habendum shall extend to all the Lands in D. S. and V. and shall
not limit the Devise only to the Island; because the thing last Devised by the
Will was an Island in the Singular Number, which cannot Answer to the Habendum
in the Plural, which if extensive to the Island only, T. then should have but
for Life in the Lands of D. S. and V. But it was otherwise Resolved, viz. That
the Habendum should extend to all the Lands in D. S. and V. Trin. 28. El. in C.
B. rot. 1458. Wiseman and Wisemans Case. Leon. Rep. 57. 58.


8. A Man Seized of a Message holden in Socage in Fee, Devised the same by
these words: I Devise my Message where I dwell to A. B. and her Assigns for
10. Years; and A. B. shall have all my Inheritances if the Law will. In this
Case the Devise in Fee of the Message is good; and by the general words of the
Will, all his Inheritances do also pass. Mich, 11. Jac. in C. B. Wedlock and
Hardings Case. Godbolt. 208.


9. If a Man Devise Lands to one for ever, there he has a Fee; for such an
Estate might be conveyed by Act Executed. But if he further Devise, That if the
Devisee do such an Act, that then another shall have the Land to him and his
Heirs, the same is void; for when as he has disposed of the Estate in Fee to
one, he has not power after in the same Will to dispose the same to another;
it being a Rule in Law, That such an Estate which cannot by the Rules of the
Common Law be conveyed by Grant Executed in his life time by Advice of Council
learned in the Law, such an Estate cannot be Devised by the Will of a Man, who
is presumed to be void of Council. Co. 1. part. 85. in Corbets Case.


10. A Man having Lands in Fee-simple, and goods to the Value of 5 l. only,
Devised to his Wife all his Estate, paying his Debts and Legacies; his Debts
and Legacies amounting to 40 l. It was Adjuged in this Case, That all his Lands
did pass by the Devise, and that the Devisee had a Fee-simple in the Lands, the
word [Paying] enforcing it; for they are to be paid presently, which cannot be,
if the Lands pass not in Fee. Trin. 1651. in B. R. Kirman and Johnsons case.
Styles 293 Mich. 45. Eliz. in C. B. Riches case.
And if a Man Devises all his Rents: It was held, That all his Lands do pass.
Ibid.


11. Note, That by intendment of Law, a Devise shall be for the benefit of the
Devisee, and not to his prejudice: As if Land to the Value of 3 l. per annum be
Devised to A. and that A. shall pay out of it 50 s. per annum. In this Case A.
has but an Estate for life, for he may pay it out of the Profits of the Lands,
and is sure to be at no loss. But if it be Devised to B. for life, the
Remainder to A. paying 50 s. per annum out of it: In this Case A. has a
Fee-simple by Implication; because after the Payment thereof A. may dye, before
he can receive satisfaction for the same out of the Profits of the Land; and
therefore such Devise shall be a Fee-simple, because the Law intends that the
Devise was for the benefit of the Devisee. Coo. 6. part. 16. Colliers case


12. Note also, That if a Man has Lands in Fee, and Lands for Years, and he
Devises all his Lands and Tenements; the Fee-simple Lands pass only, and not
the Lease for Years. (2) If a Man has a Lease for Years, and no Freehold, and
Devises all his Lands and Tenements, the Lease for Years passes. (3) That if
one Devises his Lands which he has by Lease, to his Executor for life, the
Remainder over, that there ought to be a special Assent thereunto by the
Executors as to a Legacy; otherwise it is not Executed. Trin. 7. Car. in B. R.
Rose and Bartlets case. Cro. 1. part. 213. Trin. 14. Jac. B. R. Moo. Rep. Gu.
1164.


13. A. Devised his Lands in London to his Son and his Heirs, after the decease
of his Wife; and in Case his Daughter should Survive his Wife, and his Son, and
his Heirs, that then the Daughters should have it for Life, and after their
death I. and R. should have the same, and that they should pay 6 l. 16 s.
yearly to the Company of Merchant-Taylors to be disposed of to Charitable Uses.
In this Case three Points were Argued: (1) Whether the Wife had an Estate for
life by Implication of the Will? And it was Resolved, That she had. (2) Whether
the Son had a Fee-simple, or Fee-tail? And it was Resolved, That he had a
Fee-tail by Implication of these words, viz. [if his Daughters, Survive his
Wife, and his Son and his Heirs] whereby it is plainly employed, That the Heirs
there intended are the Heirs of his Body, and not his Heirs in Fee; for so long
as the Daughters live, the Son could not dye without a Collateral Heir. (3)
What Estate I. and R. have after the death of the Daughters? And as to, That it
was Resolved, That they have a Fee-simple by Reason of the Annual Payment of
Money; and it is not to be regarded what Annual Value the Land is of over and
above the Sums they pay; for every Sum of Money paid or payable does cause the
Devisee to have a Fee-simple. And Coke Chief Justice said, That a Devise to A.
and his Successors is a Devise of a Fee-simple, without the word [Heirs,]
because it implies a Fee-simple, although it wants the express words.

Between L. Plaintiff, and B. Defendant. L. Seized of Land Lowen and Bedds
case. Anders. par. 2. case. 10.
in Fee Devised it unto Two Persons Equaliter, and to their Heirs. Whether this
made them Joynt-Tenants or Tenants in Common, was the Question? It was holden
by the whole Court, That they were Joynt-Tenants and not Tenants in Common.

A Man Seized of Lands Devised them by his Testament to his Wife to dispose and
employ them for her and his Sons at her own Will and Pleasure. And it was held
by Dyer, Weston, and Welsh, That she had a Fee by such words, as if he had
Devised Pasch. 6. El. Moo. Rep, nu. 162.
the Lands for ever: For the Construction of Law supplies the defect in these
words of the Devisor, according to his meaning. And it was held by Dyer and
Welsh, That the Estate in her is Conditional; because these words ea intention
make a Condition in every Devise, but not in a Feofment, Gift or Grant, unless
it be in Case of the King: And these words do amount as much as to say, she
should not convey it away to a Stranger, but keep it and give it to his Sons.

S. Seized of Land in Fee, holden in Socage, and Devisable Pasc. 17. Jac. B. R.
Spicer verse. Spicer Coke the Queens Attorney demanded of the Court. A Man has
Two Daughters, being his Heirs, Devises his Land to them and their Heirs, and
dies. Whether shall they take as Joynt-Tenants by Devise, or as Coparceners by
Descent? And all the Justices held clearly, That they shall have it as
Joynt-Tenants; for the Devise gives it them in another Degree then the Common
Law would have given it them, and after the benefit of Survivorship between
them. Anonimus Cro. par. 3. B. R.
in Gavelkind. Devised it to his Feme for her life, paying 3 l. per annum to T.
his Son during his life; and that he should take but Two Load of Wood for
Fire-boot: And if she dyed before the said T. then he Devised all his Lands to
R. his Son, paying to the said T. 3 l. per annum, and paying to such one of his
Sisters 20 s. and to another Sister 20 s. The Feme dies. R. enters. The
Question was, what Estate R. had by this Devise. And it was Adjudged, he had a
Fee; For when he Devised it to his Feme for life expressly, etc. and to R.
generally without limiting the Estate, and apppointed him to pay to T. 3 l. per
annum during his life, That carries in it an Intendment that he should have
Fee, especially when his Father therein further willed, That his Son R. should
pay two other Sums in Gross, and none of them to be out of the Profits, it is
by Intendment and by Implication a Fee; wherefore upon the first Argument it
was Adjudged for the Defendant; for they said, That these Things which have
been so often Adjudged ought to rest in Peace. Vide 4. Ed. 6. tit. Estates 78.
29. H. 8. Br. Testam. 18. Dyer. 371. Wellock and Hamonds Case. 32. and 33.
Eliz. Cited in Borastons Case. Co. 3. 20, 21. And Colliers Case. Co. 6. 16.

A Man by the Premises of his Will Devises his Land to I. S. in Fee, and by
the Sequel he Devises the same Land to I. N. in Fee; they both shall take by
this Testament, and shall be Joynt-Tenants. Dyer's Read. on Stat. of Wills.
Sect. 3.. 3.


A Devise made Canonicis Ecclesiae Catholicae Pauli Land. in perpetuum, is a
good Devise to all the Canons jointly in Fee, and the Survivor shall have the
Entierty; the Law is otherwise in Case of a Devise made Civitati Land. in
perpetuum; the Corporation of the Mayor and Commonalty shall take by this
Devise. Ibid.. 8.


A Man has Two Wives, and he Devises his Land to his latter Wife in Fee; the
first Wife shall have it. Ibid.. 16.
Likewise if one has Two Sons called I. and one of them is a Bastard, and Born
before Marriage, and he makes a Devise to his Son I. the Legitimate I. shall
have it, and not the Bastard. Ibid.. 17.


A Man has Issue a Son, and Land is Devised to the Father Habend. sibi and
Haered. de corpore suo Legitime procreand. and after the Devisee has Issue
another Son, the second shall have the Land. Ibid.. 18.


A Man Seized of Three Messuages, Devised by his Testament to his Son A. one of
them, Naming it, and A. to enter after his Wives death; and Devised another of
the Messuages to his second Son, paying 10 l. to his Sister, and he to enter at
his Age of 21. Years, and Devised the Third Message to his Third Son in like
manner as to his Second Son. And after in his Testament willed, That if either
of his Sons dyed before 21. Years of Age, that Mich. 15, 16. Eliz. Anders.
case. 100.
then his part should be divided among the Survivors, and each of them to be
the others Heir; they all attain to the full Age, and the Two Younger Sons paid
their Sister the several Sums as was appointed in the Will. The Question being
what Estate the Two Younger Sons had in those Messuages Devised them by the
Will? it was held a Fee-simple.

CHAP. X. Certain Cases touching Devises of Land by way of Entail.
1. How Lands Devised by way of Entail, may happen to be divested out of one,
and be vested in another, upon the birth of an Issue in Tail. 2. Tenant in Tail
may not by any Devise, Condition, or Limitation be Barred from Alienating by
suffering a Common Recocovery. 3. A Difference in Point of Entail between
Devises by Will, and Grants by Deed. 4. The several ways of Entails by Devise;
with the difference between Devising Semini suo, and Sanguini suo. 5. The
Question whether Issue born or not at the time of making the Devise, may put a
difference between an Estate-Tail and Joynt-Tenancy. 6. What shall be a
Fee-simple by Deed, which is but an Estate-Tail by Devise. 7. In what Case the
Younger Son may have Fee-simple, and the Elder but an Estate-Tail. 8. Otherways
how an Estate-Tail may be Created by Devise. 9. Instances of Law for further
illustration of Entails by way of Devise. 10. In what case the Word [Or] shall
be taken for [And] to Create an Estate-Tail by Devise. 11. Other Cases of
Estates-Tail by Devise with Cross-Remainders. 12. An Estate-Tail by Devise,
with employed Remainder. 13. How there may be a Devise of an Estate-Tail of Rent
as well as of Land; and how a Tail limited to some Lands, shall not extend to
others therewith Devised.
1. A Man Seized of Lands in Fee, Devised them to his Wife for life, and after
to his Two Sons (if they had not Issue Males) for their lives; and if they had
Issue Males, then to their Issue Males; and if they had not Issue Males, then
if any of them had Issue Male, to the said Issue Male: The Wife dyed; the Sons
entered into the Lands; and then the Eldest Son had Issue Male, who afterward
entered; the Younger Son put out the Issue. In this Case the Lands by the birth
of the Issue Males are divested out of the Two Sons, and vested in the Issue
Male of the Eldest, and he has an Estate-Tail therein. Hill. 13. Jac. in B. R.
Blanfords Case. Godbold. 266.


2. A Man Seized of Lands in Capite, Devised them to his Wife for life, and
after her decease his Son John to have it; and if his Son John marry, and have
by his Wife any Issue Male of his Body Lawfully begotten, then his Son to have
it; if no Issue Male, then his Son Thomas to have the House; and if Thomas
marry having Issue Males of his Body, his Son to have the House after his
decease. And if any of his Sons or Issue Males go about to Alien or Mortgage
the House, then the next Heir to enter, etc. In this Case it was (1) Resolved,
That the Sons had an Estate-Tail in them severally, and to the Heirs Males of
their Bodies; for that these words [if he have no Issue Male his Son Thomas to
have it, are sufficient to create Tail to John, and so of the rest. (2)
Resolved, That no Condition or Limitation, be it by Act Executed, or by
Limitation of Use, or by Devise by last Will, can Bar Tenant in Tail to Alien
by suffering a Common Recovery. Hill. 8. Jac. in the Court of Wards. Sandays
Case. Co. 9. part. 128.


3. If a Devise be made of Land to A. B. and the Heirs Males of his Body, and
he has Issue only a Daughter, who has Issue a Son, the Son shall not take by
this Devise: Or if such Devise be made to him and the Heirs Females of his
Body, and he has Issue only a Son, who has Issue a Daughter; she shall not
take by this Devise. Terms of Law. tit. Devise. Co. sup. Lit. 25. Plow. 414.
And here Note, That in point of Entails there is a Difference between Devises
by Will and Grants by Deed; for if a Devise of Land be made to A. B. and to his
Heirs Males; by this Devise A. B. has an Estate-Tail: Otherwise it is if such
a Limitation be made by Deed; for if one by Deed give Land to another and his
Heirs Males, by this the Donee has a Fee-simple, and his Heirs General shall
have it. 27. H. 8. c. 17
But if a Devise of Land be to A. B. and to the Eldest Heirs Females of his
Body, by this Devise all his Daughters, and not one of them only shall have it.
Coo. sup. Lit. 27.
And if a Man Devise his Land to his Wife for life, and after to his own right
Heirs Males, and he has Issue Three Daughters, whereof one after his death
has a Son: In this Case, and by this Devise the next Collateral Heir Male of
the Devisor, and not the Son of the Daughter shall have the Land. Trin. 9. Jac.
Adjudged Gurteis Case.


If a Man Devise his Land to A. B. and to his, or to the Heirs Males, or Heirs
Females of his Body, or of his Body begotten; or to him and his Issues Male, or
his Issues Female; or to him and the Heirs Male of his Body begotten on M. or
to him and E. his Wife, and the Heirs Male, or the Heirs Female of their Two
Bodies begotten; or to him and his Heirs, if he shall have any Heirs of his
Body, else that the Land shall revert; or to him and his Heirs if he shall have
any Issue of his Body; or to him and the right Heirs Male of his Body; or to
him and his Heirs; provided that if he die without Heirs of his Body, that then
the Land shall revert; by all these and such like Devises an Estate Tail may be
Created of the Land so Devised. Brown. Rep. 1. part. 5. and. 2. part. 75.
Likewise if one Devise his Land in Dale to A. B. and semini suo; by these
Words A. B. has an Estate Tail; But if he say, I give my Land in Dale to A. B.
and sanguini suo; it is said, That by this Devise A. B. has the Fee-simple of
the Land.

5. Suppose a Devise be made thus, viz. I give my Land in Dale to A. B. for
life, the Remainder to C. D. and E. his Wife, and their Children; or to them
and their Men-children; or to them and their Issues; by these Devises (if C. D.
and E. his Wife have no Children at the Time of the Devise) an Estate Tail is
Created; but if they have any Children at the time of the Devise, then hereby
is Created an Estate for all their lives only in Joynt-tenancy. Sheaph. Epit.
c. 155. ver. Testa. p. 960.


6. If one Devise his Land to his Wife for life, the Remainder to his Son; and
if his Son die without Issue, not having a Son, that then it shall remain over;
this is a good Estate Tail. Brownl. 2. part. 270.
Likewise if Lands be Devised to A. B. and his Heirs Males, or his Heirs
Females, without saying [of his Body] by this Devise A. B. has an Estate Tail:
But if such a Limitation be by Deed, it is said to be a Fee-simple. Lit. Sect.
31. H. 6. 25. 27. 9. H. 8. 27.


7. If one having Two Sons Devise part of his Land to his Eldest Son and his
Heirs, another part of his Land to his Youngest Son and his Heirs; and if
either of them dye without Issue, that then the other shall be his Heir; by
this Devise either of them has an Estate Tail, and no Fee-simple. Hill. 22.
Jae. B. R. Danyels Case.
But if one Devise his Land to his Eldest Son and his Heirs, and if he dye
without Heirs of his Body. that it shall remain to his Youngest Son and his
Heirs; by this Devise the Eldest Son has an Estate Tail, and the Youngest Son
the Fee-simple. Adjudged Mich. 9. Jac. Wallops Case.


8. If one Devise his Land to his Son W. S. and if he marry, and have an Issue
Male begotten of the Body of his Wife, then that Issue to have it; and if he
have no Issue Male, then to others in Remainder; by this Devise it seems W. S.
has an Estate Tail to him and the Issues Male begotten of the Body of his
Wife. Coo. 9. 127.
Also if one Devise Long-acre to A. and then say, Item Broad-acre to A. and the
Heirs of his Body; by this Devise he has an Estate Tail in both Acres. Trin.
30. Eli.


9. If one Devise his Land to his Wife for years, the Remainder to his Younger
Son and his Heirs, and if either of his Two Sons die without Issue, etc. that
it shall remain to his Daughter and her Heirs; and the Younger Son die in the
life Time of the Father, and after the Father dies: it seems by this Devise
the Elder Son shall have the Land in Tail. Dyer. 122.
Or if one Devise his Land to his Wife for life, and after to his Son, and if
his Son die without Issue, having no Son, (or having no Male) that then it
shall go to another; by this Devise the Son has an Estate Tail to him and the
Heirs Males of his Body. Adjudged Trin. 7. Jac. C. B. Robinsons case.
Or if Lands be Devised to Man and Woman unmarried, and the Heirs of their Two
Bodies; or to the Husband of A. and Wife of B. and the Heirs of their Two
Bodies; by these Devises are made Estates in Tail. Co. sup. Lit. 20. 26. Plow.
35.


10. If Land be Devised to A. B. and the Heirs of his Body, and that if he die
it shall reman to C. D. by this Devise A. B. has an Estate Tail, and the
latter words do not qualify the former; but C. D. must attend the death of A.
B. without Heirs of his Body, before he shall have the Land. Adjudged 14 Eliz.
Trin. 9. Jac. in B. R.
Also if Lands be Devised to A. B. and the Heirs he shall have by C. his Wife;
by this Devise A. B. has a Fee-Tail, and not a Fee-simple. Coo. sup. Lit. 26.
Likewise if one Devise Land to his Son and his Heirs, and that if his Son die
within the Age of 21. Years, or without Issue, that the Land shall remain over:
and the Son dies within Age having Issue; in this case, and by this Devise the
Son has an Estate Tail; and [Or] in this place shall be taken for [And]
Adjudged Mich. 37, 38. Eliz. Sale verse. Gerard.


11. If a Man Devise his Land in this manner, viz. I give White-acre to my Son
A. and his Heirs; Black-acre to my Son B. and his Heirs; and Green-acre to my
Son C. and his Heirs; provided that if all my said Sons die without Issue of
their Bodies, that then all my said Lands shall go to M. my Wife, and her
Heirs; by this Devise they have all of them Estates in Tail of their Land, and
as it seems Cross-Remainders to either of them of the Land of each other. Mich:
18. Jac. B. R. Gilberts case.
Also if one Devise his Land to A. B. and if he die without Issue Male of his
Body, then that it shall remain over to C. D. by this Devise A. B. has an
Estate Tail. Coo. 9. 128.


12. If a Man having Issue Three Sons Devise his Lands in this manner, viz. One
part to Two of his Sons in Tail, and another part to his Third Son in Tail; and
that neither of them shall Sell his part, but that either of them shall be Heir
to other; by this Devise either of them has an Estate-Tail; and if one of them
die without Issue, his part shall not revert to the Eldest, but shall remain to
the other Son, for it is an employed Remainder. Lit. Broo. Sect. 1. 431. Br.
Devise. 38. Done. 44.


13. If one Devise to A. B. that if he and the Heirs of his Body be not paid 20
l. Rent yearly, he and they shall distrain; by this Devise A. B. has an
Estate-Tail of this Rent. Also if a Man Devise his Manor of D. to his Eldest
Son, and also all his Lands in S. in Tail; in that case the Entail is limited
for the Land in S. and shall not extend to the Manor of D. But if the words
had been [I Devise my Manor of D. and all my Lands in S. to my Son in Tail,]
the Son had had an Estate Tail in both. Adjudged 4. Eliz. Hugh. Abrid. Devise.
But suppose a Man Devises his Lands to his Wife for Life, the Remainder to
his Son in Tail; and if he die without Issue the Land to remain to A. B. and
his Wife for their lives, and after their deceases to their Children. In this
Case the Court was divided, whether the Children of A. B. had an Estate in
Tail, or only an Estate for life. Mich. 40. Eliz. in B. R. Goldesb. 138.

One Devised all his Lands to another, and the Heirs of his Body Hill. 14. Eli.
Anders. case 84. vid. cas. 88. Ibid.
begotten, and after in the same Will Devised, That if the Devisee die, the
said Lands should remain to another in Fee. The Court held, That the Devisee
has notwithstanding an Estate Tail by the first words, and no Estate passed by
the last words. Hill. 6. Eliz. C. B. Anders. case 110.


One Devised his Land to W. his Son for Term of his Life, and after his decease
to the Men-children of his Body; and in case the said W. dyed without any
Man-child of his Body, that then the Land should remain to another, etc. The
Testator dies; W. dies without Issue Male of his Body, etc. and the Question
was, What Estate he had; the Justices of the Bench held, that he had an Estate
to him and the Heirs Males of his Body.

F. Seized of Land in Gavelkind had Three Sons, and Devised Mich. 13. Jac.
Spark verse. Purnell. Moo. Rep. nu. 1190.
part to one, part to another, the other part to the Third, and if either of
them dyed without Issue, the other should be his Heir. It was Adjudged an
Entail in each; and a Fee-simple by the words [Heir to other.] And so it was
Adjudged Hill. 32. Eliz. in Carters Case C. B. 11. H. 6. 13. b. Roll. Abrid.
tit. Devise. Lit. K.


If a Devise be made to one and his Heirs, and in Case that he has Issue a
Daughter, that she shall have the Lands. If the Devisee has Issue a Son and a
Daughter, and die, the Son shall have the Land; and although the Daughter
afterward take a Husband, and has Issue a Son, he shall not eject the other.

CHAP. XI. Certain Cases in Law touching Devises of Land for Life only.
1. A Devise of Land to one (not saying, How long) is an Estate only for life.
2. Power of Distraining Devised to one (without other words) on Non-payment of
a certain Annual Sum, is only an Estate for Life. 3. A Devise of Land to one
and his Heir, (in the Singular Number) or to one and his Children is but an
Estate for life. 4. Several Instances of Law touching Estates only for Life by
way of Devise. 5. Several Instances of Estates for Life by Implication,
Devised. 6. A Devise of Land to one thereby obliged to a present Payment
Creates a Fee-simple; But if Payment be to Issue out of the Profits of the Land
Devised, it makes only an Estate Tail. 7. A Devise of an Estate for Life in
Reversion. 8. A Devise of Two Estates for Lives; the one to some in Being, the
other to others in Reversion. 9. A. Devise of Lands in Esse or Posse,
Conditioned upon an Annual Payment to be made by the Devisee, during his or her
life, which Devise is made by one in the Remainder in Fee, and not in
Possession, does pass an Estate only for life. 10. A Devise (by general words)
of all a Man's Estate, Mortgages, etc. may pass (as to the Real) no more than an
Estate for Life, and not a Fee by Implication, 11. The Law ever accommodates
the Testators words, whatever they be, (as nigh as possible) to his intent and
meaning.
1. IF a Man Devises his Land to A. B. and say not how long, nor for what
Time, by this Devise A. B. has an Estate only for Life in the Land. Fitz.
Devise III. Goldesb. 183.
But if a Man Devise his Land to A. B. and his Assigns, without saying [For
ever;] it has been a Question whether he has only an Estate for Life, as was
held by some; Co. sup. Lit. 9. Perk. Sect. 57. 239. New Terms of Law. tit.
Devise.
or a Fee-simple, as has been Affirmed by others. Trin. 2. Car. B. R, Daniels
case.


2. In the latter part of the last Chapt. it was said, That it was an Estate
Tail of the Rent, if one Devised to A. B. that if he and the Heirs of his Body
be not paid 20 l. Rent yearly, he and they shall distrain. But now if the
Devise only be, That if A. B. be not paid 20. l. yearly, he shall distrain,
etc. by this Devise A. B. has only an Estate for Life. Likewise if one devise
a Rent of 10 l. out of his Land to be paid quarterly, and say not how long the
Rent shall continue; this is but an Estate in the Rent only for Life Co. sup.
Lit. 147. 8. 85. Brownl. 2. part. 74, 75.


3. If one Devise his Land to A. B. for his Life, or to him (without any more
words) or to him and his Heir (in the Singular Number,) or to him and his
Children, (he then having Children.) By all these and such like Devises A. B.
has only an Estate for life in the thing Devised. Fitzh. Devise. 16. Co. 6.
16. Perk. Sect. 577.
And if one Devise, That A. B. shall have and occupy his Land in D. (and say
not how long) by this Devise A. B. shall have the Land (as aforesaid) only for
life. Pasch. 9. Jac. Newmans case.
But If I Devise that A. B. shall enter into my Land, (and say no more) by this
Devise A. B. has no Estate at all, but power to enter into the Land only.
Dyer. 342.


4. A Man having a Son and a Daughter dies; Lands are Devised to the Daughter,
and the Heirs Females of the Body of the Father; by this Devise the Daughter
has only an Estate for her life; for there is no such person, for she is not
Heir. Coo. sup. Lit. 24.
Likewise if one Devise his Land in D. unto A. B. for life, and after to the
next right Heir, (in the Singular Number) and to his right Heirs for ever; by
this Devise A. B. has only an Estate for life. Co. 1. 66.
Or if one Devise Land to A. B. for life, and after to the next Heir Male of A.
B. and to the Heirs Males of the Body of such next Heir Male; by this Devise
also A. B. has but an Estate only for life. But if he Devise his Land to A. B.
for his life, and after to the Heirs or to the right Heirs of A. B. by these
Devises A. B. has the Fee-simple of the Land. And if it be to him for life,
and after to his Heirs Males, then he has an Estate Tail. But if one Devise
Land to F. G. and M. his Wife, and after their decease (or the Remainder) to
their Children, by this Devise, whether they have or have not Children at the
time, F. G. and M. his Wife have Estates only for their lives Co. 6. 16.
Goldsb. 138. Plow. 47. 134. Plow. 33.


5. If one Devise his Land to A. B. in Fee after the death of C. D. (being his
Son and Heir apparent) by this Devise C. D. has an Estate for life by
Implication; and till the Devise take effect, the Law gives it to him by
descent. The Law is the same where one does devise his Land to A. B. after the
death of his Wife; by this Devise the Wife has an Estate for life by
Implication. Likewise if a Man Devise in this manner; I give my Goods to my
Wife, and that after her decease my Son and Heir shall have the House where the
goods are; it is held, That by this Devise the Wife has an Estate for life in
the House by Implication. But if a Man Devise his Land to A. B. after the death
of I. G. (a Stranger to the Devisor) it seems that by this Devise I. G. has no
Estate at all by Implication, and that this does but set forth the Time when
the Estate of A. B. shall begin, and that the Intent of the Testator is, That
his Heir shall have it until that Time. Broo Devise 48. 52 Lit Br. 107. 15. H
7. 13. New Terms of Law. tit. Devise. Plow. 158. 414. 521.
The Reason of the difference is, because a Man is bound to provide for his
own, not so for a Stranger; and so the Law presumes what Nature does teach.

6. If one Devise his Land in this manner, viz. I give my Land in D. to A. B.
to the intent that with the Profits thereof he shall bring up my Child or my
Children; or to the intent that with the Profits thereof he shall pay to I. M.
10 l. or to the intent that out of the Profits thereof he shall pay yearly 10
l. By these Devises A. B. has only an Estate for life, albeit the Payments to
be made be greater than the Rents of the Land. Otherwise it is in case the Sum
of Money is to be paid presently, and not appointed to be paid out of the
Profits of the Land; in which case A. B. should have a Fee-simple in the Land.
Coo. 6. 16. 3. 20. Broo. Estates. 38.


7. If the Father of A. be Tenant for life of Land, the Remainder to A. in Fee.
And A. devise the Land to his Wife, Rendering for her natural life 5 l. to the
right Heir of the Father of A. by this Devise the Wife of A. has an Estate for
life after the death of his Father. Dyer. 371.


8. Land was Devised to Husband and Wife, and after their decease to their
Children, they then having Issue a Son and a Daughter. In this case the Husband
and Wife have but an Estate for Term of their lives, the Remainder to their
Children for life, and no Estate Tail; for the intent of the Testator here
shall be construed according to the Rules of the Common Law; and by the Common
Law the Husband and Wife have but an Estate for their lives, with a Remainder
to their Children for their lives. Hill. 42. Eli. in B. R. Co. 6. part. 16, 17.
Wilds case.


9. The Son Seized of a Remainder in Fee, after the death of his Father who was
Tenant for life, devised the same by these Words, viz. I Devise to D. my Wife
the Lands which I have, or may have in Reversion, after the death of my Father,
paying therefore yearly during her life, to the right Heirs of my Father 40 s.
and dyed, his Father living: It was the Opinion of the Court, That no Estate
passed by this Devise, but for Term of the life of the Wife, and that she
should not pay the 40 s. until the Reversion did fall after the death of the
Father. Mic. 23. Eli. Dyer. 371.


10. A. Seized of diverse Lands in A. B. and C. the Lands in C. being in him by
Mortgage forfeited; Devised the Lands in A. and B. to several Persons, and then
adds this Clause in his Will: All the rest of the Goods, Chattels, Leases,
Estates, Mortgages, whereof he was possessed he devised to his Wife, after his
Debts and Legacies paid; made his Wife his Executrix and dyed. The Wife entered
into the Mortgaged Lands, and devised it to the Defendant and his Heirs, and
dyed. The Question was whether the Fee passed to the Wife by this Devise, by
the Name of all his Estate, Mortgages, etc. It was the Opinion of the whole
Court; That an Estate for life only passed unto her; and not a Fee by
Implication of the general words in the Will. Trin. 10. Car. in B. R.
Wilkinsons and Merrylands case. Cro. 1. 323.


11. Note, That there is a difference, when one Devises his Term for life, the
Remainder over, and when a Man Devises the Land, or his Lease or Farm, or the
Occupation, or Use, or Profits of his Land: For in a Will the intent and
meaning of the Devisor is to be observed; and the Law makes construction of the
Words to answer and satisfy his intent, and puts them into such order that his
Will shall take effect. And when a Man devises his Lease to one for life, it
is as much as to say, He shall have so many Years in it as he shall live; and
that if he dies within the Term, that another shall have it for the Residue of
the Years: And although at the beginning it is uncertain how may Years he shall
live; yet when he dies, it is certain how many Years he has lived, and how
many Years the other shall have; and so by a subsequent Act all is made
certain. Co. 8. part. 65. in Mannings case. Pasch. 5. Eliz. Moo. Rep. nu. 153.


A Man made his Will in this manner. [Item, I give my Manor of Dale to my
second Son. Item, I give my Manor of Sale to my said Son and his Heirs] what
Estate he had in the Manor of Dale was the Question. It was held by Dyer,
Weston and Welsh, That in the first he had but an Estate for life; for that it
is as much as to say; as if he would give his Manor of Dale to him for his
life; for that as much is included therein without saying [His Heirs.] And that
[Item] seems a new Gift to a greater degree in the second place to make amends
for the other. Brown, e Contra, and that the [Item] is a Conjuntion Copulative,
and that the word [Heirs] expressed in the latter Clause extends to both the
Manors. But if the Word [Heirs] were put in the Gift of the former Lands, it
would be otherwise. Dyer; if in the first place or Clause there were not any
person named, but that the words were [Item, I give the Manor of D. Item, I
give the Manor of S. to I. K. and his Heirs,] there and in that Case it would
refer to both the Manors. Pasch. 17. Eli. Baker and Raymonds case. Anders.
case. 251.


W. C. by his Will Devised a Message in these words, viz. I give to A. L. my
Cousin the Fee-simple of my House; and after her decease to W. her Son. The
Judges held, That A. L. had an Estate for life, and her Son a Fee-simple in
Remainder. And so it was adjudged.

R. D. Seized in Fee of a House, and Possessed of Goods, made his Trin. 39.
Eliz. Deacon verse. Marsh. Moo. Rep. nu. 804.
Will in these words, viz. The rest of my Goods, Lands, and Movables
whatsoever, after my Debts, Legacies, and Funerals paid, to my Three Children,
I. T. and M. equally to be divided amongst them. And it was Adjudged, That they
have an Estate only for life in the House, and are Tenants in Common, not
Joynt-tenants.

CHAP. XII. Certain Cases in the Law touching Devises of Leases, or for a Term
of Years.
1. In what Case the Word [Shall] is taken for [Should] in Devise of a Term. 2.
A Devise of Lands for 99. Years, may be only for no more of that Term, then the
Issue Male of the Devisee shall continue. 3. The Devise of a Term to one and
his Heirs, shall go to the Devisees Executors or Administrators, and not to his
Heirs. 4. Chattel-Leases and Leases for Years pass not by a Devise of all his
Lands and Tenements. 5. By a Lease for Years Devised for Life, does pass the
whole Term; yet is it not an Estate for Life. 6. The whole Interest of a Lessee
in his Lease-Lands, does pass by a Devise of his Lease, Term, Farm, Profits,
Tenure, or Occupation thereof, as well as by any other words. 7. The Residue of
a Term, is as the Term it self. 8. A Man may Devise such an Estate by Will,
which he cannot make by Act Executed: Or he may Create an Interest by his Will,
which by Grant or Conveyance in his life time he could not do. 9. That may be
the Devise of a Lease for Years in Law, which does not seem to appear such in
Fact. 10. The whole Term, though not named, shall pass by a Devise, where no
other can pass by Implication.
1. IF one Devise his Land unto his Executors until his Son shall come unto the
Age of 21. Years, the Profits to be employed toward the performance of his
Will; and when he shall come to that Age, that then his Son and his Heirs shall
have it. By this Devise the Executors shall have it until he be of 21. years of
Age; and if he die before that time the Executors shall also have it until the
time he should have been 21. Years of Age, if he had lived so long; and the
word [Shall] in this case is taken for [Should.] Co. 3. 20.
Likewise if one Devise his Land to his Executors for the payment of his Debts,
and until his Debts be paid; by this Devise the Executors have but a Chattel,
and an uncertain Interest, and they and their Executors shall hold it until the
Debts be paid and no longer. Co. sup. Lit. 42.


2. If one Devise his Land to A. B. and the Heirs males of his Body for the
Term of 99. Years; it seems that by this Devise A. B. has but a Lease for so
many Years, if the Heirs Males of his Body shall so long continue, and that for
want of Issue Male the Term of Years shall expire. And in this case the
Executor or Administrator, not the Heirs Males of A. B. shall have it after his
death. Co. 10. in Leonard Lovets case. 87. 46.


3. If one possessed of a Term of Years, Devise the same to another and his
Heirs, or his Heirs Male; by this Devise the Executors or Administrators, not
the Heirs of the Legatee shall have it. Co. 10. 46. Lampets case. Perk. 558.
556.
So that if a Lessee for Years of Land Devise all his Interest therein to his
Wife, if she live so long, and after her death if any part of the Term be to
come, Devise the same to A. B. his Son, and to the Heirs of his Body; in this
Case, and by this Devise the Executors or Administrators of A. B. and not his
Heirs shall have it.

4. If a Man Devise all his Lands and Tenements in D. yet Leases for Years do
not pass by these words; for by Lands and Tenements is intended Frank-tenements
or Freehold, and not Chattels. Broo. Abr. tit. Done. nu. 41.


5. If one has a Lease for Years of Land, and Devise it to A. B. for life; by
this Devise the whole Term is Devised, and A. B. shall have the whole Term if
he live so long, and yet A. B. shall not have an Estate for life by this
Devise. So likewise the Law seems to be the same upon a Grant by Deed made in
that manner. Co. 4. 66. and 7. 23. Plow. 420.
And if a Man possessed of a Term of Years of Land Devise his Term or his
Lease, or the Land it self by a Devise, in either of these words the whole Term
does pass. Brownl. Rep. 1. part 41. 45 and 2. part. 308, 309.
A Term of Years is Devised to the Churchwardens of the Church of D. and to
their Successors: This is not good; but for Goods so Devised the Law is
otherwise. Dyer's Readings on Stat. of Will. Sect. 3. 6.
A Man who has a Term, Devises the Land to one and his Heirs; the Devisee
dies, and has Executors; his Heirs shall have the Land, and not his
Executors: The Law is otherwise, if the entire Term were so Devised. Dyer. ib..
7.


6. If a Lessee Devise his Lease, or his Term, or his Farm, or his Profits,
Tenure or Occupation thereof; by either of these Devises, his whole Lease and
all his Interest in the Land is bequeathed as well as by any other form of
words. Dyer 122. 33. 128. Co. 1. 83. 6. 42. and Dyer. 4. 33.
But if a Man Devise his Land only for so many Years as his Executor shall
name, it seems this Devise is not good; Plow. 524.
Yet if it be for so many Years as A. B. shall name, and he name a certain
Number of Years in the Testators Life Time, this is a good Devise.

7, A Man possessed of a Term of Years, may Devise all the Residue of that Term
of Years that shall be to come at the Time of his death. And if a Testator
having only a Term of Years in certain Lands, does Devise the said Land to A.
B. and does not say for what Time; it seems that by this Devise the whole Term
is devised, unless the Testators Intent does appear to be otherwise.

8. A Man possessed of a Term for 40. Years, by his Will Devises the same to
I. S. after the death of his Wife; and that the Wife should enjoy it during her
life; and that I. S. should neither Devise it nor Sell it, but leave it to
descend to his Son; and in the mean Time my Will is, That my Wife shall have
the use thereof during her life, yielding 10 l. Yearly to I. S. during her life
at Two Feasts, and made his Wife Executrix and dyed. The Wife entered, and paid
the 10 l. Yearly according to the Will. In this Case Three Points are Resolved.
(1) That I. S. does not take by way of Remainder, but by way of Executory
Devise: And a Man may Devise such an Estate by his Will, which he cannot make
by Act executed. And that the Case is no more but this, That after the death of
I. S. the Wife should have the Residue of the Term. (2) The Devise is good,
being but a Chattel, which may vest and divest at the pleasure of the Devisor.
(3) That there is no difference when one Devises his Term, the Remainder over;
and when a Man Devises his Land, or his Lease, or the Use, or Occupation, or
the Profits of his Land; That a Man by his Will may Create an Interest, which
by Grant or Conveyance he cannot Create in his life Time. Co. 8. part 96. Math.
Mannigs case.


9. A. Devised his Lands to his Daughter and her Heirs, when she came to the
Age of 18. Years, and that the Wife should take the Profits of the Land to her
Use, without any account to be made, until the Daughter come to 18. Years, and
made his Wife his Executrix, and dyed; provided the Wife should pay the old
Rents, and find the Daughter at School; the Wife enters, proves the Will, takes
Husband, and dies: It was found that all the Conditions were performed, and
that the Daughter was within the Age of 18. Years. It was Resolved in this
Case, That it was a Term for Years in the Wife, and a good Lease, Trin. 17. Jac
C. B. Blackburns case Hutton. 36.


10. A Man was Lessee for 40. Years of a House, and by his Will gave the House
to I. S. without limiting any Estate, That he should have in it. It was the
Opinion of the Court, That he should have the whole; for no other Estate in the
House either for Life, or at Will, shall pass by Implication, or for one Year
or Years; and therefore the whole shall pass to the Devisee. Mich. 14. El.
Dyer. 307. Anders. Rep. case. 105.


A Man possessed of a Term of Years, Devised the same in these words, viz. [The
residue of my Goods, Moveable and Immovable I give to my Son John, whom I make
my Executor, and to him I give my whole Years that I have in my Farm of M. and
if he die, I give it to my Daughters.] John the Executor and Devisee proves
the Will, claiming the Lease according to the Will, and dies Intestate: His
Administrator for good Consideration Sells the Lease that remains. Whence the
doubt or Question was, whether the Daughters or the Assignee should have the
Lease? The Case was referred to the Two Chief Justices, and Justice Walmesley,
who all agreed, That the Assignee should enjoy the Lease, and not the
Daughters. Q. Whether a Devise to them in such manner be void?

One made a Lease for life, after Leased the same to A. for 99. Mich. 44, and
45. Eliz. B. R. Spark and Sparks case. Yelv. Rep.
Years if he so long lived, to Commence after the decease of the Lessee for
life. And if A. dyed during the said Term of 99. Years, or the Lease otherwise
determined, and after the death of the Lessee for life, then the Lessor granted
for him and his Heirs, that the Land should remain to the Executors of A. for
20. Years. Lessee for life dies. A. Leased for 20. Years Rendering Rent, and
dies Intestate. B. takes his Administration, and brings Action of Debt for the
Rent. It was Adjudged, That it does not lie. for it seemed to Gaudy and
Yelverton, That the Contingent of 20. Years was never Vested in A. But if A.
had made Executors, he might take by way of Purchase, (Executors being in name
of Purchase: As in Cranmers Case. 14. Eliz. Dyer.) But if it had been limited
to the Executors for Payment of the Debts of A. or the like, then by the intent
apparent there would be an Interest in A. and in the Executor for the use of A.
as Popham and Fenner agreed in point of Law as to an Action of Debt.

A Man made his Will in this manner, viz. [I have made a Lease Trin. 3. Eliz.
Moo. Rep. nu. 101.
for 21. Years to I. S. paying but 20 s. Rent.] And it was held, That it was a
good Lease by the Will. For that Word [I have] shall be taken in the Present
Tense, as is the word [Dedi] in a Deed of Feofment.

A Man Seized of a Manor, part in Demesnes, and part in Lease Trin. 3. Ed. 6.
Moo. Rep. nu. 24.
upon Rent Suit and Service. Devised by his Testament to his Wife during her
life all his Lands in Demesnes, and also by the same Testament did Devise to
her all his Services and high Rents for 15. Years; and further by the same
Testament did Devise all his Manor to another after the death of his Wife. And
it was Agreed by all the Justices, That the last Devise took not effect for any
part of the Manor till after the death of the Wife; and that the Heir after
the Expiration of the 15. Years, and during the Wives life shall have the
Services and Chief Rents.

If a Man possessed of a Lease for Years of Land, Devise the Mich. 5. Jac. B.
inter Mallet and Sir H. Sackford. Roll. Abr. tit. Devise.
same to one for Life, the Remainder to another; although the first Devisee
has the whole Estate or Term in him, and no Remainder can depend thereon at
Common Law, yet it is a good Devise to the second Devisee by way of an
Executory Devise.

If certain Lands be Devised to one, he cannot take them without 11. H. 4. 84.
Tr. 39. El. in Came. Scac. inter Edmonds and Buskin lit. Trin. 39. Eliz. B. R.
Roll. ibid. lit. A.
the delivery of the Executor. Or if a Man be possessed of a Lease for Years of
Land, and Devise the same to another, the Devisee cannot have it, or enter upon
it without the Executors or Administrators Consent.

CHAP XIII. Law-Cases touching Devises of Reversions or Remainders.
1. What Devise of a Reversion is good, and what Remainder may be Devised. 2.
As the Limitation, so the Devise of a Remainder after a Fee; is void. 3. In
what Case the Devise of a Remainder of a Chattel-real, may be void. 4. The
Devise of a void Limitation, is a void Devise. 5. A Devise in Remainder of
Goods, is void. 6. In what Case the Devise of a Remainder over in Fee, after
Lease for Life made by Executors, is void. 7. The Difference between a
Remainder Entailed by Devise, and Entailed by Deed. 8. A Remainder Devised to a
Church, accrews to the Parson of that Church. 9. A Refusal in one to take by a
Devise, shall not prejudice another in Reversion or Remainder. 10. How the
Devisors Daughters Issue (without naming her) shall have the Devised Remainder
before the Issue of his Sons. 11. A Termer of a 100. Years to come, Devises it
to one for Life, the Remainder over, it is a void Remainder. 12. A Devise of a
Remainder in Fee after a Lease, which Devise is made by him in Remainder, is a
void Devise, if the Lessor Re-enter. 13. Several Cases, wherein he in Remainder
may Devise his Remainder. 14. Fee-simple Devised to one, the Remainder cannot
be Devised to another, albeit the first Devise were but Conditional. 15. A Term
of Years by way of Remainder is Devisable; but a Devise by way of Entail with
Remainder over, is void. 16. Lessor may Devise the Reversion of Land for Life,
notwithstanding a Feofment in Fee. 17. Remainder of a Rentcharge in Fee, may
be Devised to one, where the Land, out of which the Rent does arise, is Devised
to another. 18. A Devise may be good for the Reversion of a Term, where not for
the Rent. 19. The Devise of a Remainder may be good, where yet an Estate Tail
shall precede. 20. He in Remainder shall take presently, where the Devisee for
Life is incapable of taking by Devise. 21. Though a Man cannot Devise to
himself, yet he may Devise a Remainder to his own right Heirs. 22. A Man may
Devise a Reversion by the Name of all his Inheritance or Hereditaments. 23.
Devises of Remainders to the next of Blood. 24. Where the Devise of a Remainder
after the Remainder, makes the former Remainder but an Estate for Life.
1. IF a Man Devise his Land to B. C. for life, the Remainder to the next of
Kin, or next of Blood of B. C. this is a good Devise of a Remainder. Fitzh.
Devise. 27. Plow. 523. Perk. Sect. 509 510. Broo. Corporat. 55.
Or if a Lessor Disseiseth his Lessee for life, and makes a Lease for life to
another for Term of life of the first Lessee, the Remainder over in Fee; though
the first Lessee enters, yet he in the Remainder may Devise his Remainder.
Dyer. in St. of Wills. 32. and 34. H 8. Sect. 8.. 1.


2. If one Devise his Lands to A. so as he render 20 s. per annum to B. and if
he fail thereof, then his Estate to cease, and to remain to B. this Devise is
good, but the Limitation of the Remainder is void, because a Remainder cannot
be limited after a Fee. Pasch. 29. H. 8. Dyer. 33.
Therefore if a Man makes a Lease for Years upon Condition, that if the Lessor
disturb the Lessee within the Term, that the Lessee shall have the Fee, and
makes Livery accordingly, and after the Lessor does disturb the Lessee for
Rent, where none is in arrear and after Devises his Reversion, this Devise is
not good. Dyer. Readings in Stat. of Wills. Sect. 8.. 4.


3. A Man possessed of a Term for 40. Years, Devised that his Eldest Daughter
should have the same to her, and the Heirs of her Body, the Remainder, if she
dyed without Issue Within the Term, to C. his second Daughter in Tail. The
Eldest Daughter took Husband, and dyed within the Term without Issue: Her
Husband Sold the Term. It was the Opinion of the Court, That his Sale thereof
was good, and that the younger Daughter had no Remedy for it, because it was a
void Remainder, being of a Term, which was a Chattel-real, and so is to go to
the Husband. Trin. 28. H. 8. Dyer. 7.


4. A Lease was made to A. for 41. Years if he should so long live, and if he
dyed within the said Term, that then his Wife should have it for the Residue of
the said Years. It was held, That the limitation to the Wife in Remainder was
void; for that the Term ended by the death of A. and then there was no Residue
to remain to his Wife. 9. Eliz. Dyer 254. Plow. Com. 190.


5. A Man possessed of certain Goods, Devised them by his Will to his Wife for
life, and after her decease to I. S. and dyed: I. S. in the life time of the
Wife, did Commence Suit in a Court of Equity, there to secure his Interest in
Remainder. A Prohibition was granted in this Case; and the Reason was, because
a Devise in Remainder of Goods was void, and therefore no Remedy in Equity, for
Equitas sequitur Legem. It was agreed, That a Devise of the Use and Occupation
of Lands, is a Devise of the Land it self, but not so of Goods; for one may
have the Occupation of them, and another the Interest in them. Trin. 17. Car.
in C. B. Marsh. 106.


6. Suppose a Man Devises a Reversion, depending upon an Estate for life, to
the Parson of D. and to his Successors; if the Parson die, and after a new
Parson be made, and the particular Tenant die also, the new Parson shall have
it. Also if a Man Devise Land to one for Term of life, the Remainder over in
Fee, and the Devisee for life refuse, yet he in the Remainder may enter; but if
the Will were, That the Executors shall make a Lease for life, the Remainder
over in Fee, and they offer to make a Lease accordingly, and the Lessee
refuses, he in the Remainder shall not have the Remainder. Dyers Read. ubi
sup. Sect. 3.. 2. and 9.


7. I. S. has issue Two Sons, and dies; the Elder has Issue a Daughter who
has Issue a Son, and dies. Land is given by Testament to one for life, the
Remainder to the next Male of the Body of I. S. begotten; the second Son of I.
S. shall have the Land, and not the Son of the Daughter; It would be otherwise
if the Remainder were so Entailed by Deed. Dyer. Ibid. Sect 3.. 12.


8. If Land be Devised to one for life, the Remainder to the Church of D. the
Parson of the said Church shall have it. Ibid.. 19. and 21. R. 2. Plowd. Com.
523.
And if a Man wills that after 20. years after the death of the Devisor I. S.
shall have the Land in Fee; the Heir of the Devisor shall have the Land during
the Term, and not the Executor. Dyer. Ibid.. 24.


9. A Man Devises his Land to his Daughter and Heir, being a Feme Covert, and
to the Heirs of the Woman, the Reversion over in Fee, and dies; the Husband
refuses to take by the Devise, he in the Remainder enters; he shall retain
the Land during the lives of the Husband and Wife; but after their decease he
Issue of the Wife may enter upon him. ibid.. 22.


10. A Man Seized of Land in Fee, has Issue Two Sons and a Daughter; the
Father Devises the Land to his Wife for Term of life, the Remainder
propinquioribus de sanguine puerorum of the Devisor; the Daughter has Issue
and dies; the Issue of the Daughter shall have this Remainder; and although
that the Sons have Issue after, yet their Issue shall not have it. Ibid,. 23.


11. A Man has a Term of a Hundred Years to come, and he Devises this to one
for Term of life, the Remainder over to I. S. this is a void Remainder; it were
otherwise if the Devise were, that the Devisee shall have the Occupation of the
Land during his life, the Remainder over. Ibid. Sect. 4.. 10.


12. A Lease is made for life, the Remainder over in Fee, reserving Rent by
Indenture, and for default of Payment, that it shall be Lawful for the Lessor
to enter and detain during the life of the Lessee; he Reenters for the Rent
Arrear; he in the Remainder Devises the Remainder; such Devise of the
Remainder is void Ibid. Sect. 8.. 6.


13. If Land be given to Two Persons, Habendum to the one for life, and after
his decease to the other in Fee; he that has the Fee may Devise his Reversion
thereof. Ibid.. 10.
Likewise if Land be given to one for life, and that after his death it shall
descend to I. S. in Fee, he may Devise this Remainder. Ibid.. 12.
Or if a Lease be made dummodo solverit 10 l. to the Lessor for his life, he
may Devise the Reversion, with the Rent. Or if a Lease be made to an Infant or
Feme-sole for life, the Remainder in Fee, and the Infant at his full Age, or
the Feme after Coverture disagree; he in Remainder may Devise his Remainder.
Ibid.. 16. 18.


14. If the Fee-simple of Land be Devised to one, the Remainder cannot be
Devised to another, albeit the first Devise be but Conditional. And therefore
if a Man Devise his Land to A. B. in Fee, so that he pay 100 l. to C. D. And if
he fail, that then it shall remain to G. D. and his Heirs; this Remainder to C.
D. is void; for upon the Failure of Payment by A. B. the said C. D. may not
enter, and have the Land, but the Devisors next Heir. Likewise if Land be
Devised to F. G. and his Heirs, and if he die without Heirs, that then it shall
remain to I. M. and his Heirs, this is a void remainder.

15. A Man may Devise a Term of Years by way of Remainder, and the first
Devisee cannot hinder the second of the Remnant of the Term. Co. 8. 9. 5. Plo.
519. 546. 516. 539. and Dyer. 277.
But yet a Man possessed of a Term of Years cannot Entail it by his Will: And
therefore if a Man Devise his Term to A. B. and his Heirs, or to him and the
Heirs of his Body, or to him and his Issue, the Remainder to B. C. this
Remainder is void, and the Devise is good for the whole Term of Years to A. B.
and his Executors. Co. 10. 87. 47. Pasch. 17. Jac. B. R. Child verse. Baily.


16. A Man Seized of Two Acres in several Towns in one County (that is) of the
one for life, and of the other in Fee; and makes a Feofment by Deed of all his
Lands in the same County, and makes Livery in the Acre in Fee in the name of
both; the Lessor (notwithstanding this) may Devise the Reversion of the Acre
for life. Dyer. Read. in Stat. Wills. Sect. 8.. 19.


17. If a Man grants a Rentcharge out of Lands devisable to one for life, the
Remainder over to the Grantor and his right Heirs, and after the Grantor Devise
the Land to a Stranger in Fee and die, the Heir of the Devisor may Devise the
Remainder of the Rent in Fee. Ibid.. 21.


18. A Lease for Term of 100. Years is made to a Bishop and his Successors; he
makes a Lease for life, Rendering Rent to him and his Successors, and after he
Devises the Reversion with the Rent in Fee; this is a good Devise for the
Reversion, but not for the Rent. Ibid.. 26.


19. If a Man having Two Sons and a Daughter Devise his Land to his Wife for
Seven Years, the Remainder to his Younger Son and his Heirs, and if either of
the said Two Sons die without Issue of their Bodies, the Remainder to the
Daughter and her Heirs, and the Younger Son die in the life Time of the Father,
and after the Father die; in this case and by this Devise the Daughter has a
good Remainder; but it seems the Elder Son has first an Estate Tail by the
Intent of the Devisor. Dyer. 122.


20. If Land be Devised to A. for life, the Remainder to B. for life, the
Remainder to I. S. in Fee, in this Case (if B. be a Person incapable of a
Devise) then he in the Remainder in Fee shall take presently after the first
Estate for life ended. And if the Devise be to a Person incapable for life, the
Remainder to I. S. in Fee, then shall I. S. take presently. Perk. Sect. 576.
567.


21. If a Man Devise his Land to two persons by name, and the Heirs of either
of their Two Bodies, and for default of such Issue the Remainder to the right
Heirs of the Devisor; after the Devisors death one of the said Devisees dies
without Issue, the other Devisee has Issue and dies. In this Case and by this
Devise the issue of such surviving Devisee shall have a Moity and no more of
the Land. Dyer. 326.


22. A Lease is made to I. S. for the Term of the life of I. N. the Remainder
to the same I. N. for Term of life of the said I. S. -- I. N. in Remainder
releaseth all his right to the said I. S. and dies. In this Case the Lessor
may Devise the Reversion. And if a Man who has a Reversion Devises this
Reversion by the name of all his Inheritance or Hereditaments in D. it is a
good Devise. Dyer. in St. Wills. Sect. 8. 35. 36.


23. If a Man having Issue Three Sons, A. B. and C. does Devise his Land to C.
the Remainder to the next of Blood to the Testator: In this Case and by this
Devise A. shall have the Land after the death of C. as the next of Blood.
Likewise if a Man having Four Daughters, Devise his Land to the Youngest in
Tail, the Remainder to the next of Blood; by this Devise the Eldest Daughter,
and not all the rest shall have the Land after the Estate Tail. Also if a Man
has Two Sons and a Daughter, who has Two Daughters, Devise his Land to a
Stranger for life, the Remainder to his second Son for life, the Remainder in
Fee to the next of Blood to his Son; in this Case if the Eldest Son die without
Issue, the Daughter and her Daughters shall have the Land. Fitzh. Devise 9.
Perk. Sect. 508.


24. If Land be Devised to A. for life, the Remainder to B. and the Heirs of
his Body, the Remainder to C. D. and his Wife, and after to their Children; by
this Devise C. D. and his Wife have Estates for their Lives only, and their
Children after them Estates for their Lives Jointly. And albeit they have no
Children at the Time, yet every Child they shall have after may take by way of
Remainder. Co. sup. Lit. 9. Broo. tit. Tail. 21. and Co. sup. Lit. 20. 6. 16.


If one Devise his Land in this manner, viz. I give my Land to A. in
Fee-simple, after his decease to B. his Son, who is his Heir apparent. By this
Devise A. has an Estate for life first, the Remainder to his Son for his life,
the Remainder to the Heir of A. in Fee-simple. Dyer. 357. Pasch. 44. Eliz. B.
R. Pays case. Cro. par. 3.


One Devised his Land to I. S. from Michaelmas following for five Years,
Remainder after the Plaintiff and his Heirs: He dyed before Michaelmas. The
Question was, Whether this were a good Remainder? Because it could not enure
instantly by his death; for it may not begin until the particular Estate, which
was not to begin till after Michaelmas, and a Freehold cannot be in Expectancy.
But all the Court held, That it very well might Expect; For in Case of a
Devise, the Freehold in the mean Time shall descend to the Heir, and vest in
him. Wherefore without Argument it was Adjudged accordingly, and that the
Remainder was good.

If one Devise a Personal Chattel to one for life, the Remainder Mich. 5. Jac.
B. per. Cur. Roll. Abr. tit. Dev. Co. 10. Lampet 47. b. Mich. 13. Jac. B. R.
per Dodridge Roll. ibid.
over to another, it is a void Remainder.

If a Man Devise a Term to one for life, the Remainder to another for life,
with diverse Remainders over: The Executors Consent to the first Devisee, will
be a Consent as to all the other Remainders. Or in Case a Man Devise a Term to
one, and a Rent thence issuing to another, and dies, the Executors Consent to
the Devise of the Term, is an Assent also as to the Rent.

If an Estate be given to the Husband and Wife, and the Heirs of their Two
Bodies, the Remainder to the right Heirs of the 27. Ass. 50. Curia. Roll. Abr.
tit. Devise. lit. F.
Husband, he may Devise that Remainder to his Wife.

CHAP. XIV. Touching Devises of Lands with Limitations, and upon Condition.
1. The Condition of a Devise of Land not written in the Testators Life Time,
makes the whole Devise as void, as if the Devise it self had not been written.
2. A Fee-simple of Remainder upon Condition by way of Devise. 3. In what Case
the Executors of a substituted Devisee cannot claim the Lands Devised under
Limitations. 4. A Condition or Limitation may not continue a Devised Estate for
part, and defeat it for the residue. 5. In what Case the word [Paying] shall be
construed only as a Limitation, and not as a Condition. 6. Not he in Remainder,
but the Heir, shall take the advantage of a Condition broken, annexed to a
Devise of Lands. 7. A Condition or Proviso contrary to Law is a void Condition.
8. The Heir may enter upon a breach of Condition, notwithstanding a failure of
somewhat that ought to have been done by a Third Person. 9. The Heir may not
enter, where it is but a Limitation and not a Condition. 10. If the Condition
be, That a Lessee shall not Demise the Premises for above one Year, and he
Devise the Premises, it is a breach of the Condition. 11. Lands Devised upon
Condition of superstitious Uses, are vested in the Crown.
1. IF a Man give order for the writing a Devise of his Land to A. B. upon
Condition; and the Devise to him be accordingly written, but the Testator dies
before the writing of the Condition; in this Case the whole Devise to A. B. is
void. Brownl. Rep. 1. part 44.
And as in the case of Goods and Chattels conditionally bequeathed, the
Executor shall keep the Thing until the Condition be performed, and after the
Condition broken shall take advantage thereof: So in Case of Lands
Conditionally devised to one and his Heirs for ever, or for life, the Heir of
the Devisor shall keep the Land till the contingent Condition happen to take
effect.

2. If one Devise Land of the value of 100 l. per annum to A. for life, the
Remainder to B. paying 50 l. to C. by this Devise B. shall have the Fee-simple
of the Remainder upon Condition.

3. If one Devise his Land to his Wife for her life, and if she live till his
Son come to the Age of 25. Years, that then he shall have the Land, and if she
die before he comes to that Age, that then A. B. shall have it till his Son
come to that Age. A. B. dies before the Wife, and after she dies before the Son
comes to the Age of 25. Years. In this Case the Executors of A. B. shall not
have the Land till the Son comes to the Age of 25. Years. Goldsb. 64. Plow. 2.


4. A. Seized of Lands in Fee, had Issue Six Sons and one Daughter, and Devised
the said Lands to I. S. for 90. Years, if the said I. S. and G. his Wife, or
any of them should so long live, the Remainder to P. his Eldest Son, and the
Heirs Male of his Body, the Remainder to these other Sons, the Remainder to his
Daughter. Provided that if the said P. his Son, or any of the Sons of the said
Devisor, or any of the Heirs Males of their Body, should endeavor by any Act
to Alien, Bargain, or Discontinue, then after such Attempt or Endeavor, and
before any such Bargain, Sale, etc. were Executed, that the Estate of such
person attempting, etc. should cease, as if he were naturally dead; and that
then the Premises should descend, remain, and come to such person to whom the
same ought to come, remain, and be, by the intent and meaning of his Will, and
dyed. P. Levied a Fine of the Lands, he in the next Remainder entered, and
claimed the Reversion by force of the Devise. It was Adjudged in this Case,
That the Conuzee had the Reversion in him, and might maintain an Action of
wast, because the Proviso of Restraint in the Will of A. was void and repugnant
to Law; and a Proviso, Condition or Limitation ought to defeat the whole
Estate; and it cannot continue it for part, and defeat it for the Residue.
Hill. 37. Eli. in C. B. Rot. 1758. Jermyn and Arscots case.


5. A Copyholder of Lands in Borough-English having Three Sons and one
Daughter, Devises his Lands to his Eldest Son, paying to his Daughter and
every one of his other Sons Five Pounds within Two Years, and surrendered to the
use of his Will. The Eldest Son was admitted, and did not pay the Five Pounds
within Two Years. In this Case it was Resolved, (1) That although the yearly
Profits of the Lands for Two Year did exceed the Money to be paid, yet the
Eldest Son had a Fee-simple. (2) Although this word [Paying] in the Case of a
Will makes a Condition; yet in this Case the Law shall Construe this unapt word
[Paying] a Limitation. For if it should be a Condition, the same should descend
to the Eldest Son, and then it should be at his pleasure, whether the Daughter
or Brothers should be paid or not; and therefore in this Case the Law should
judge the same a Limitation, of which the youngest Son should take advantage.
33. Eliz. in B. R. Wollock and Hammonds case. vid. Co. 6. part. Collyers case.
acc.


6. A Man Devised Lands to his Wife, upon Condition that she should bring up
his Son at School, etc. and that after the death of his Wife, the Land should
remain to his second Son in Fee, and dyed. The Wife entered, the Condition was
broken; the Eldest Son after his full Age entered for the Condition broken; in
this Case it was held, (1) That a Condition might be annexed to a will by the
Stat. of 32. H. 8. of Wills, which gives liberty to a Man to Devise for the
advancement of his Wife, etc. Hill. 3. Mar. Dyer. 127. Warrens case.
That a particular Estate may be upon Condition, though the Remainder be
without Condition. (3) That he in the Remainder should not take advantage of
the Condition, but the Heir, because he is prejudiced in the Inheritance by the
Devise.

7. If a Man make Two Men his Executors, Proviso, that one of them shall not
Administer his Goods; the Proviso is void, because it restrains the Authority
which was given by the first part of the will, and agrees not with the Law; for
by Law every Executor may Administer the Goods: And such was the Opinion of
Baldwin and Egglesfield. Trin. 19. H. 4. Dyer. 4.
But Fitzh. conceived the Proviso to be good, for that he might bring an
Action, although he did not Administer.

8. A Man Seized of Tenements in London, Devised the same to Two Persons, upon
Condition that they should pay to his Wife 10 l. per annum issuing out of the
said Tenements, at Two Feasts; and if the Rent be behind by the space of Six
Weeks being demanded, that it should be lawful for the Wife to distrain. It was
held a good Condition; and that if the Rent be behind, yet the Wife cannot
distrain before a demand of the Rent; but the Heir of the Husband might enter
for the condition broken, though the Wife did not demand the Rent. Hill. 18.
El. Dyer. 348.


A Man Devised his Land to his Younger Son, when he should accomplish the Age
of 24. Years; upon Condition that he should pay 20 l. to the Daughter of the
Devisor, and if he shall die before the Age of 24. Years, then his Eldest Son
shall have the Land upon Condition that he pay the said 20 l. and if both his
Sons failed, that the Land should remain to his Daughter, and dyed. The Younger
Son entered after 24. Years of Age, and did not pay the 20 l. to the Daughter;
the Eldest Brother entered upon him. It was Resolved by the Court in this Case,
That the same was a Limitation and not a Condition, and therefore the entry of
the Elder Brother was not lawful. Hill. 43. Eli. in B. R. Wiseman and Baldwins
case. Goldesb. 152, 153.


10. A Man made a Lease for Years, upon Condition, That if the Lessee shall
Demise the Premises, or any part of it, other than for one Year, to any person
or persons, then the Lessor and his Heirs to re-enter; the Lessee afterward
Devised it by his Will to his Son. It was held by the Court, That it was a
breach of the Condition. 31. H. 8. Dyer. 45. Hill. 36. Eliz. in B. R. Cole and
Tauntons case. Goldesb. 184.


11. If Lands be Devised upon Condition of superstitious Uses, as to find a
Chaplain to say Mass, or the like superstitious Uses mentioned in the Will, the
Remainder over for the like Uses, and if they in Remainder perform not the
Condition, then to forfeit their Estate, and the Lands to remain to the right
Heirs of the Devisor. In this Case it was held, That although the Land was
Devised but Conditionally to find a Priest to say Mass, yet that it was within
the Stat. of 1. Ed. 6. Cap. 13. whereby the Lands were vested in the Crown,
because the said Uses were superstitious Uses, to which the Condition of the
Devised Lands did refer. Hill. 45. Eli. in C. B. Co. 1. part. Adams and
Lamberts case. Pasch. 17. Eliz. Hubbard and Spencers case. C. B. Anders. case
126.


F. C. Seized of the Manor of S. made his Testament in writing, and Devised
the Manor to his Wife for the Term of 30. Years in these words, viz. For and
to these Intents and Purposes following, viz. I will, and my mind and intent
is, That B. my Wife shall yearly Content and Pay out of the Issues and Profits
of the said Manor to Sir A. I. and others 30 l. And further Wills, That the
other Legacies given in his Will should be paid by her, and therein Devised
diverse Legacies. And further Willed, That his Wife should be bound to Sir A.
and others for the performance of his Will. F. C. the Devisor dies, the Wife
enters on the Land, etc. takes the Profits, and thereof pays the Legacies, but
not to Sir A. and others, etc. Whereupon the Heir Enters as for breach of
Condition. It was held by the Justices, that it was no Condition, but a
Declaration of the Testators intention; for to what end or purpose should the
Wife be bound, if it were a Condition. But Judgment was not given in the Case,
for the Parties agreed.

CHAP. XV. Touching Devises of Rents.
1. Rents Issuing out of Lands, are as Devisable as the Land it self, so as it
be the Testators own Land. 2. A Grantee may not Devise the Rent, which he has
only for another Man's Life. 3. Rent to be Issuing out of a Common, is not
Devisable. 4. Several ways how Rents may be Devised. 5. The Devise of the
Reversion of a Rent upon a false suggestion, is a void Devise.
1. A Seigniory, Rent, or the like, is Devisable as Land is, and will pass
without the Atturnment of the Tenant. Perk. Sect. 538. Lit. Sect. 585, 586.
Dyer 253. 140. Fitz. N. B. 121. Go. sup. Lit. III. 8. 83. 3. 33. Brow. 1. part.
75, 76.
So that a Man may Devise a Rent de novo issuing out of Land, or a Rent issuing
out of Land that is in esse before. And therefore if one make a Lease for Life
or Years, Rendering Rent, the Lessor may Devise this Rent. Likewise if a Rent be
granted to one and his Heirs, the Grantee may Devise this Rent. Also a Man that
is Seized of Land in Fee, may Devise any Rent out of it at his pleasure. But a
Man cannot Devise a Rent out of another Man's Land that is none of his own, nor
out of that which he has not; and therefore if one Devise Twenty Pounds to be
issuing out of his Manor of Dale, when in Truth he has no such Manor; that
Devise is void.

2. If Rent be granted to one Man for the life of another, it seems the Grantee
may not Devise this Rent, but that on failure of other disposal thereof in the
Grantees life Time the Terre-tenant shall hold it as an Occupant. Dyer. 253.
And if one Devise a Rent of any certain Sum out of his Land to be paid
quarterly, and say not how long the Rent shall continue; this is but an Fstate
for life of that Rent. Co. sup. Lit. 147. 8. 85. Bro. 2. part. 74, 75.


3. If a Man Seized of a Common, grants a Rent out of the Land, although that
the Land be Devisable, yet the Grant is void, and by Consequence the Devise.
Dyer in St. Wills. Sect. 4.. 15.


4. If a Tenant for life make a Lease for Years, Rendering Rent, and after the
Tenant for life Surrender to the Lessor all his Right, and then the Lessor
Devise this Rent, this is a good Devise during the life of the Lessee for life.
Or if a Man make a Lease for life, Reserving Rent to him and his Heirs, and the
Lessor Devise this Rent; this also is a good Devise of the Rent; otherwise it
is, if he Reserve the Rent to him and his Assigns. Or if a Lessee for Term of
Ten Years, make a Lease over for Term of 40. Years, and the Lessor confirm the
Estate, Reserving a Rent to him and his Heirs, and after by his Will Devise the
Rent in Fee; this also is a good Devise of the Rent after the Ten Years, but
not before. Dyer. ibid. Sect. 8.. 29. 34. 37.


5. A Man Seized of a Rent, makes a Deed reciting that whereas I. S. holds
the said Rent of his Grant for Term of life, he grants the Reversion of the
said Rent after the decease of I. S. to the Grantee and his Heirs in Fee; and
in Truth I. S. had nothing in the Rent; the Grantee Devises this Rent; this is
no good Devise of the Rent. Ibid.. 8.
If the Husband make a Leaf for life to the Daughter and Heir apparent of his
Wife being Covert, Rendering Rent; and the Wife-Mother die, and the Husband
Devise the Rent; this is a void Devise of that Rent. Ibid.. 32. Mich. 44, and
45. Eliz. B. R. Salters case. Yelv. Rep.


In an Action of the Case upon Trover, the Defendant justified and pleaded Rent
granted to A. his Executors and Assigns for the life of B. out of Black-acre,
and showed that A. was dead, and that he as Administrator to A. distrayned for
the Rent on Black-acre in Arrears after the death of A. and that he is to have
it during the life of B. It was Adjudged, That the justification was not good
either for matter or manner; for that after the death of A. the Rent
determined, and cannot come to his Executors or Administrators; for it was not
a Thing Testamentary, but a Frank-tenement, and nothing in the Grant to A. and
his Heirs for the others life.

If Rent be granted out of Land Devisable by Custom, the 22. Ass. 78. Adjudg'd.
Perk. 8. 135. Roll. Abr. tit. Devise, E.
Rent may be Devised within the Custom, for it is of the same nature with the
Land.

CHAP. XVI. Of Devises touching the Sale of Land by Executors or others.
1. The mean Profits of Lands Devised to be sold, are not Assets in the
Executors hands, unless the Testator shall specially so Appoint it. 2. The
Heir, and not a stranger though appointed in the Devise, shall take the
advantage of a Breach of Condition annexed to a Devise touching sale of Lands.
3. Where the Executors have only an Authority, and not an Interest in the Lands
Devised to be sold, the Heir of the Devisor shall have the mean Profits thereof
till it be sold. 4. Otherwise, where the Executors have an Interest; in which
case the Money or Proceed upon the sale, but not the mean Profits, shall be
Assets in their hands. 5. Several Devises touching sales of Land, with or
without the Assent of another. 6. By the word [Appurtenances] shall pass in a
Devise Lands commonly used with a Message. 7. A Copyholders Case of Devise of
Land to his Wife. 8. Where one, who has but an Estate for life, and no
Interest to sell, may yet have an Authority to Appoint who shall sell the Lands
Devised. 9. In what Case relating to this matter a Prohibition may Lie, or not.
10. A Case of Law, wherein one Executor alone (where there are two) can not
sell the Land Devised. 11. How a sale of Lands Devised to be sold, may be void
for want of sufficient Authority. 12. In what case a Sale of Lands Devised to
be sold, may be made by one Executor, where there are two Appointed by Name.
13. Where there is an Interest as well as an Authority and Trust, the Executor
of the surviving Executor may sell the Lands of the first Testator Devised to
be sold. 14. Executors, who Refuse to Administer the Goods, may yet sell the
Testators Lands, Devised to be sold. 15. Lands Devised to be sold by Executors,
the one Refusing, the other may sell, but not to the Refuser. 16. A Sale by
some only of the Executors is void, where there is a special and Joynt-Trust.
17. The Difference between an Authority, and an Interest in Executors in point
of Sale.
1. IN all Cases of Devises of Land to Executors to sell the same, it is most
Prudential to make it as clear and certain as may be (that is) That the
Executors or the Survivor of them, or such or so many of them as take upon them
the Probat of the Will (if his intent be so) shall sell it. Co. sup. Lit. 112.
113.
And it is safer to give only an Authority than an Estate: unless his meaning
be that they shall take the Profits of the Land until the sale; And if he do
so, then it is Requisite that he Appoint that the mean Profits until the Sale
shall be Assets in their hands; for otherwise it shall not be so. Brown 1.
part. 34. 2. pt. 47. 100.


2. If one Devise Land to others to the intent that with the Profits thereof
they shall Educate Children, or pay such Sums of Money or the like. In this
case the Devisees must do accordingly, or they may be compelled thereunto. Co.
6. 16.
And Regularly the Heir, and not a Stranger, shall take the Advantage of a
Breach of a Condition annexed to Devises touching sale of Lands. And therefore
if one Devise Land to another and his Heirs, Provided that he pay 100 l. to A.
B. Otherwise that the Land shall remain to C. D. and his Heirs; in this case,
if the Devisee do not pay the Money, C. D. shall not take Advantage of it, nor
have the Land according to the Devise, but the Heir of the Devisor shall enter,
and have it, and Eject the Devisee. Dyer. 33. 348. 126. 128.


3. If the Testator intending to have his Land or part thereof sold, for the
payment of Debts or Legacies, does Devise the same in this manner, viz. I will
that my Executors, or that A. B. and C. my Executors shall sell my Land. Co.
sup. Lit. 236. 112, 113. 15. H. 7. 12. Dyer. 177. 219. Kelw. 40. 45. and 107,
108. Perk.. 542, 543. Lit. Broo.. 371. Vid. sup. in pt. 2. cap. 27.
In this case the Executors have only an Authority and no Interest, For which
reason the Land in the mean time Descends to the. Heir of the Devisor, who
shall enjoy the Profits thereof until it be sold; In which case also the
Executors may sell it when they please, unless they be hastened thereto by order
of Court; And are all to join in the Sale; Insomuch that if one or more of them
dye before the Sale, the surviving Executors, or the Executors of the deceased
Executors may not sell it by this Authority. The Case is the same if any of the
Executors Refuse the charge of the Will; in which Case the rest of the
Executors which accept the said charge, may not alone sell the Land, unless the
words in the Will be, That his Executors or some of them shall sell it: But now
by the Stat. of 21. H. 8. cap. 4. Some of them may sell it without the rest, in
case any of the Executors dye before the Sale.

4. But if the Testator Devise the Land in this manner, viz. I give my Land to
my Executors to be sold, etc. In this case the Exeeutors have as well an
Interest in the Land, as an Authority to sell it; And therefore it does not
here descend unto the Heir as in the former case, but the Executors shall keep
it till the Sale, and may sell it when they will; so as it be within any
competent or convenient time; for otherwise the Heir may Enter and Eject them,
by a Condition in Law annexed to the Interest. And in this case the mean
Profits until the Sale is no Assets; but the Money or Proceed upon the Sale
shall be Assets in their hands. And in this case, if before the Sale one or
more of the Executors dye or refuse, the rest may sell it, for the Estate
surviveth; But it is supposed they may not sell to him that does refuse the
charge of the Will; Neither may they in either of these Cases transfer their
power of selling to any other, nor keep the Land themselves, though they pay
the value thereof with their own Money.

5. If the Devise be, that the Executors shall sell with the Assent of A. B. in
this case if A. B. dye before he Assent, the Executors can not sell; and in his
lifetime they can not sell, without his Assent. Brownl. 2. Rep. 100.
And if one Devises that his Lands shall be sold to pay his Debts, and say not
by whom, in this case it shall be sold by his Executors; Or if one Devise all
his Land except Ten Acres, which he does appoint to pay his Debts; by this
Devise his Executors or the survivor of them, may sell the said Ten Acres. But
if one say by his Will that A. B. shall have as well the Guardianship and
Education of his Children, as the disposing, letting, and setting of his Lands;
in this case A. B. has not power to sell the Land. Perk. 547. Dyer. 371. 26.
Or if one Devise that his Land shall be sold after his Wife's death by his
Executors with the Assent of A. B. And make his Wife and another his Executors,
and dye, and after A. B. dye; In this case the Land can not be sold, for the
Authority is determined. Dyer. 219.


6. Suppose a man seized in Fee of a Message, with which certain Lands have
been occupied time out of mind, give his Instructions for the making of his
Will; and inter alia declares, That his meaning is, that his said Message and
all his Lands in W. shall be sold by his Executors; And the party that writes
his Will, Pens it in this manner, viz. I will that my house with all the
Appurtenances shall be sold by my Executors; the Devisor dies, The Executors
sell part of the Lands: By this Devise such Sale is good, and the Lands do
pass; for the words [with all the Appurtenances] are effectual to enforce the
Devise, and extend to all the Lands; specially because the Devisor gave
Instructions accordingly. Hill. 28. Eliz. B. R. Higham and Harewoods case.
Leon. Rep. 34. vid. 3. Eliz. Plow. Com. 210. Sanders and Freemans case.


7. A Copyholder, Devises his Land to his Wife for her life, and that after
his death, the Wife or her Executors should sell the Land, and Surrendered to
the use of his Will, which was Entered thus, viz. To the use of his Wife for
life, Secundum formam ultimae voluntatis. In this Case she has an Estate in
the Land to her own use for her life, and also an Estate in Fee to sell it;
otherwise the clause (secundum formam ultimae voluntatis) should be void. Mich.
29. Eliz. B. R. Godbolt. 46.


8. A man Devises by his Will his Lands to his Wife, and if she have Issue by
the Devisor, that his Issue shall have it at his age of 21 years, and if the
Issue dye before that age, or before his Wife, or if she have no Issue, that
then she shall choose two Atturneys, and she to make a Bill of Sale of any
Lands to her best Advantage. In this case she has those Lands for life, and
she having no Issue, has not any Interest to dispose, but has an Authority to
nominate two who shall dispose of the Lands, and they may make Sale thereof.
Mich. 5. Jac. B. R. Beale and Shepherds case. Cro. 2. part. 199.


9. A man did Devise his Lands which were held in Socage to be sold by his
Executors, and that the Money thereof coming should be disposed of in payment
of special Legacies which he Appointed by his said Will; the Executors sold the
Lands. One of the Legatees (after the Will was Proved) sued the Executors in
the Ecclesiastical Court for his Legacy; whereupon, a Prohibition was prayed:
It was resolved in that Case. (1) That the Money was Assets in the Executors
hands. (2) That there was no Remedy for it but by Suit in the Ecclesiastical
Court, and therefore a Prohibition did not lie in the Case. Trin. 9. Eliz.
Dyer. 264
But Querie of the second payment; for it was held by all the Justices of both
Benches Mich. 4. and 5 Mary. Dyer. 152.
Where a man Devises that his Executors shall sell Lands, and of the Money
coming shall give such a Portion to his Daughter, That this was not a Legacy
because going out of Lands, and that Suit did not lie for it in the
Ecclesiastical Court; But an Account lies at Law for the Money; And therefore
in that case a Prohibition was granted to stay the Suit in the Ecclesiastical
Court. Dyer. 151; 152.


10. A Devise was made to A. B. for life, the Remainder to C. D. in tail, and
if C. D. dye without Issue of his body, that then the Land shall be sold by his
Executors; he makes two Executors and dies; A. B. dies; C. D. dies without
Issue of his body; In this case it seems that one of these Executors alone
can not sell the Lands. Goldesb. 2. pl. 4.


11. A man Devised his Lands to his Wife for term of her life, the Remainder to
D. his Daughter in tail, and if she dyed without Issue, that then after the
death of his Wife, the Lands should be sold for the best value by his Executors
with the Assent of A. and B. And made his Wife and a Stranger his Executors,
and dyed; the Wife Entered and dyed; A. and B. dyed; and the Executor who
survived sold the Land alone: The Opinion of the Court was, That the Sale was
not good, because he wanted sufficient Authority. Michal. 5. Eliz. Dyer. 219.


12. A man seized of diverse Manors and Lands, Devised all the said Manors and
Lands to his Sister and her Heirs for ever, Except out of this General Grant my
Manor of R. which I do Appoint to pay my Debts; and made two Executors by Name
and dyed. One of the Executors dyed; the other took upon him the charge and
Execution of the Will, and afterward sold the Manor of R. for 300 l. for the
purpose aforesaid, in Fee. It was the Opinion of the Court, that he might well
sell it; for by the Circumstances it appears, That such was the Testators
intent; and not to leave the Reversion to Descend to his Heir, but to trust his
Executors with the Sale of it, for the payment of his Debts. Mich. 23. Eliz.
Dyer. 371.


13. A. made B. and C. his Executors, and by his Will appointed, that they
should have and hold the Issues and Profits of his Lands, until his Heir should
come to the age of 21 years, to the intent that the Executors with the Profits
thereof, should pay his Debts and Legacies, and bring up his Children. One of
the Executors dyed, the surviving Executor made his Executor, and dyed also the
Heir being within age. It was the Opinion of the Court in this case, that the
Executor of the survivor might receive the profits of the Lands, and dispose of
them during the Nonage of the Heir, because it was an Interest in the
Executors, and not an Authority or a Trust only. Hill. 2* Eliz. Dyer. 210.


14. If a man has Feoffees, and makes his Will That his Executors shall alien
his Land; if the Executors Refuse the Administration of his Goods, yet they may
sell the Lands, because the Will is not of a thing Testamentary; But the
Executors have not a power to meddle with the Land, unless such a special power
be given to them. If a man makes his Will of his Lands, and that his Executors
(without naming them by their proper Names) shall sell them, if they refuse to
be Executors, yet they may sell the Land: But if a man makes his Will, that his
Lands which his Feoffees have, shall be sold, and does not say, by whom; the
Executors shall sell the same, and not his Feoffees; because the Moneys which
come by the Sale, shall be Assets in the hands of the Executors; which is a
proof that they may sell them: And if his Will be, That the Executors shall
sell the Lands, before the Alienation the Heir may take and Receive the profits
thereof; and if no Sale be made, the Heir shall hold the Land for ever. Mich.
15. H. 7. 12.


15. A man Devises, That his Executors shall sell his Lands: Now by the Stat.
of 21. H. 8. cap. 4. If the one refuses, the other may sell the Lands; but the
Sale can not be made to him who refuses. 27. Eliz. in Benloes case Adjudged.
vid. Co. 1. part. Instit. 113.


16. A man made his Will, and made A. B. C. D. his Executors, and Devised his
Lands to the said A. B. C. D. by their special Names, and to their Heirs; And
further Devised, that the Devisees should sell the Lands to F. G. if he would
give for it before such a day 100 l. and if he would not, that then they should
sell it to any other, to the performance of his Will, viz. the payment of his
Debts. F. G. would not give the 100 l. one of the Executors refused to
intermeddle, the other three sold the Land; It was the Opinion of the Court,
that the same being a special and a Joynt-Trust, that it could not survive, and
that the Sale by the Three was void. Mich. 29. Eliz. B. R. Bonifant and Sir
Richard Greenfields case. Godbolt. 77. vid. 26. Eliz. B. R. Vincent and Lees
case. in Co. 1. part. Instit. 113. acc. These and other Cases relating to this
Subject, are Reported in Hughs Abridgment. Tit. Devise.


17. By the Premises it is Evident, That if a man Wills that his Executors
shall sell his Lands for the payment of his Debts, and they all dye but one,
and the survivor make the Sale, the Vendee shall not have the Land, and that
the Law is otherwise, if the Lands were Devised to the Executors to be sold;
The Reason is as aforesaid, because in the former case the Executors have only
an Authority, in the other case they have an Interest. But if a man makes two
Executors, and wills that they shall sell the Lands for the payment of his
Debts; And they sell it only for term of life, the Remainder to one of
themselves, and the Vendee dies; he in the Remainder may Enter. Dyer. in Stat.
Wills. Sect. 3.. 10, 11
Sed Q.

CHAP. XVII. Of Legacies and Devises in respect of Marriage. As also Between
Husband and Wife.
1. A Condition of Marriage may be annexed to a Legacy; but an unlawful
Condition thereof is void, and does not prejudice the same. 2. A Condition of
Marriage with the Consent of a Third person, does oblige the Legatary to Marry,
if he will have the Legacy; but does not oblige him to have such Consent. 3. A
Condition of Marriage with the Advice of another, obliges the Legatary to ask
such Advice, if he will have the Legacy, but does not oblige him to follow it.
4. If a Legatary be Married when a Legacy is given him on Condition of
Marriage, it is Material to see whether the Testator knew so much, or not. 5. A
Condition against Marriage is void, and the Legacy will be good
notwithstanding. 6. If there be given to one, if he shall not Marry, a Legacy
when he dies; he shall have it presently and not wait for it till his death. 7.
If 200 l. be given to one if she do not Marry, and 100 l. if she does, and she
after Marryeth; What shall the Legatary have. 8. What the Wife shall have (as
to her Legacy) if she Marry after her election to the Contrary. 9. The
Distinction which the Canon Law makes, in case of Conditions directly contrary
to Marriage. 10. If the Husband does Devise his House to his Wife quamdiu she
shall continue a Widow, and she live and dye such, it shall accrue by the
Civil Law to her and her Heirs for ever. 11. A Legacy on a Marriage Condition,
or made payable at a time to come, and the Legatary dye before the time come,
whether and when due. 12. Difference between bequeathing a Legacy to one when
he shall be of full age, and bequeathing it to him to be paid when he is of
full age. 13. A Devise made by a Feme sole to him with whom she after Marries,
is void. 14. A Devise of Lands generally made by the Husband to the Wife for
life, is no Bar to her Jointure, otherwise if Devised for her Jointure. 15. A
Moiety of Goods Devised by the Husband to the Wife, is the Moiety of them as
they were at his Death, if there be Assets enough for his Debts.
1. IF a man bequeath 100 l. to A. B. Provided that he Marry with C. D. the
Marriage must take effect with C. D. before the Legacy is due to A. B. unless
there be an Illegallity or too much Indignity in such Marriage; in which case
the Condition is void in Law, and it shall not prejudice the Legatary. Mantic.
de Conject. ult. vol. lib. 11. tit. 18. and l. Titio centum.. 1. De Demonst.
and Condit. and l. haec Conditio. De Demon. and Condit.


2. If I Bequeath 20 l. to E. F. so as she Marry with the good liking and
Consent of A. B. she must Marry, otherwise she has no right to the 20 l.
Mantic. ibid.
But she is not obliged to have the Consent of A. B. therein. l. 72.. Si
arbitratu. ff. De Demon. and Cond.
Yea, she shall have the Legacy though she Marry not only without his Consent,
but also although A. B. be altogether unacquainted therewith, or knowing
thereof should contradict it, Vasq. Controvers. l. 3. cap. 94. nu. 14.
unless it be Appointed in the Will expressly, That in case she Marry without
such Consent, the said Legacy of 20 l. shall be and enure to such or such pious
uses specially mentioned in the said Will. Mant. ubi Supra.


3. If I Bequeath 100 l. to A. B. so as she Marry with the Advice of C. D. In
this Case A. B. shall not have the said Legacy unless she require or desire the
Advice of C. D. Albeit, she be not obliged to follow his Advice therein, yet
she is obliged to ask his Advice, or she can not have the said Legacy. The
reason of the Difference in this case from the former is, That in the former
there may be a total impediment to Marriage it self, in This it is otherwise.
Mant. ibid. nu. 10. and Grassus.. Legatum. q. 50. nu. 11.
But if C. D. be Dead, whereby the Condition is rendered impossible; In such
case it is as if it were performed, provided that C. D. were Dead before his
Advice could well be asked or required.

4. If a man Bequeath 100 l. to C. D. in this manner, viz. I give and Bequeath
100 l. to C. D. if he shall Marry. And C. D. was a Married man at that time
when the Testament was made. In this case it is Resolved, That if A. B. the
Testator were at the time of making the Testament Ignorant of C. D's being then
Married, the Legacy is instantly due to him upon the Testators death, because
the Condition in a Legal Construction is actually performed; But if the
Testator at the time of his making the Testament did infallibly know that C. D.
was then Married, the said Legacy is not due to him until he be Married a
second time. l. Si jam facta. ff. De Cond. and Demon. and Papo. Notar. 1. lib.
9. tit. de Fidei comiss.
which Distinction ought to fall under Consideration with those who hold, That
if a Testator Bequeath 100 l. to C. D. toward her Marriage, the Legacy may be
due to her, albeit she were Married at that time when the Testament was made.
Bald. ad L. ult. C. De Sentent. quae, etc.


5. If I bequeath 10 l. to one, provided she do not Marry, it is a void Proviso
in Law, and she shall have the 10 l. although she do Marry. Mant lib. 11. tit.
19. and in l. hoc modo. de cond. and Them.
Otherwise it is, if the words be, Provided she do not Marry at such a time, or
in such a Place, or with such a Person. Peregr. de Fidei comiss. art. 11. nu.
118.


6. If a man Devise to A. B. in this manner, viz. I give unto A. B. if she
shall not Marry, my Manor of D. when she dies. In this case A. B. although she
Marry, shall have the Manor presently, and not expect or wait for it until her
death. The Reason is, because that Time of her death is not joined with the
Legacy, but with the Condition; as if the Testator had said, viz. If A. B.
shall remain unmarried to her death. Cuiac. in l. intestato.. Sed si. De suis
and Legit.


7. Suppose a man does bequeath 200 l. to A. B. if she do not Marry, and 100 if
she do Marry; and after she Marryeth. Some are of Opinion that in this case A.
B. shall have 300 l. viz. 100 l. because she is Married, and 200 l. because the
Condition of non-marriage or against Marriage is void. Others are of opinion,
that she can recover but one of the said Legacies, and that is the 200 l. l.
Titia. ff. De Cond. and Demonst.


8. Suppose a man bequeath to his Wife the use and occupation of all his Goods,
if after his decease she shall abide in her Widdowhood; But in case she Marry
again, that then she shall have only 100 l. In this case, if at first the
Wife's Election be to continue in her Widdowhood, she shall accordingly enjoy
and have the use and occupation of the said goods; But if after that she Marry,
she shall not have the said 100 l. Surdus. de Alimentis. tit. 9. quaest. 16.
verse. Addo.
And some are of Opinion, That by such second Marriage, she forfeits both the
said Legacies, because thereby she nulls her precedent Election whereby she was
concluded, and therefore shall also restore or refund the value of the Interest
of such Goods as she used and enjoyed during her Widdowhood; and so it has
been Adjudg'd. In Rot. Romans dicit Matheac. de Legate. in lib. 1. cap. 4. nu. 17.


9. Although a Condition directly contrary to Marriage, annexed to a Legacy in
a Will, is a void Condition for that very reason; yet the Civil or rather the
Canon Law does distinguish in this point between a Virgin and a Widow, and
says that such Conditions against Marriage (as to a Virgin) are void; but
allows them as to Widows. Mant. lib. 21. tit. 19. and Ranch. Decis. part. 1.
Conel. 298. cum multis aliis.
. Specially if the Legacy be given by a Husband to his own Wife, or by a Son to
his Mother.

10. A man bequeaths the House wherein he lives to A. B. his Wife, quamdiu she
shall continue a Widow, and dies; A. B. does not Re-marry, but lives and dies
a Widow. In this case the said House by the Civil Law comes to A. B. and his
Heirs for ever. De Praetis. lib. 4. int. 1. dub. 10. nu. 93.
Note, that what in the premises has been said touching the invallidity of
Conditions against Marriage, annexed to Legacies in relation to Females, holds
the same in Law touching the like illegal Conditions in reference to Males or
Masculines.

11. A man Devised to his Daughter 500 l. toward her Marriage. In this Case it
was the Opinion of the Court, That if she die before Marriage, her Executors
shall have it, But if the words were [To be paid at the day of her Marriage, or
at the age of 21 years.] and she dies before both, it is otherwise. Pasch. 37.
H. 8. Dyer. 55. in the Lord Latimers case. As in Hughs Abridg. tit. Devise.
Sect. 6.. 9.
The latter part of which Judgment seems not to agree with the Civil Law in
that point, which says, the time of the age of a Legatary may be joined either
to the substance of the Legacy, or to the execution and performance of the
same; if the time of the age of the Legatary be joined to the substance of the
Legacy, as when the Testator does give thee 100 l. when thou shall be of the
age of 21 years; In this case if thou dyest before that time, thy Executors
cannot recover the 100 l. But if the time of the age of the Legatary be joined
only to the execution or performance of the Legacy, as when the Testator does
give thee 100 l. which he wills shall be paid when thou accomplish the age of
21 years; In this case, although thou dye before thou accomplish the age of 21
years, yet thy Executors or Administrators shall recover the same, when the
time is accomplished, wherein thy self (if thou had been then living) might
have recovered the same.

12. Consonant whereunto is that which we find Reported, viz. That it was
agreed by the Court, That if a man Devises to his Daughter 100 l. when she
shall be Married, or to his Son when he shall be of full age, and they dye
before the time appointed, and make Executors, their Executors shall not have
it. But it is otherwise, if the Devise were to them, to be paid at their full
ages, and they dye before that time, and make Executors, there the Executors
shall have it. Mich. 9. Jac. in C. B. adjudged acc.
Which difference was since likewise so Agreed and Adjudged. Trin. 1653. in B.
R. in Doomlow and Shawes case. Vid. 15. Car. in R. R. and Hugh. Abridg. tit.
Devise Sect. 7.. 14.


13. A Feme Sole Devises Lands to A. B. in Fee, to whom afterward she was
Married; and during the Coverture Countermands her Will, saying, her Husband
should not have the Land, nor any other benefit by her Will, and dies. In this
case the Husband shall not have the Land, not only because of her Countermand,
but because of the disability of a Feme Covert to make a Will, which takes no
effect till the parties death. Mich. 31. Eliz. in C. B. Goldsb. 107.
And therefore if a Feme sole Devises Lands to a man, and then takes him to
Husband, and dies: This Inter-marriage is a reversion of the Devise, and the
Heir of the Woman shall have the Lands, and not the Husband, because after
Marriage the Will of the Wife, in Judgment of Law, is subject to the Will of
her Husband, and a Feme Covert has not any Will; for the making of the Will is
but the Inception thereof, and takes no effect till the death of the Devisor.
Co. 4. part. 61. Forse and Hemblings case, and Hugh. Abr. tit. Devise. Sect.
1.. 52.


14. If a man Devises Lands generally to his Wife for the Term of her life; It
cannot be averred to be for the Jointure of the Wife, and in satisfaction of
her Dower; But if a man Devises Lands to his Wife for life, or in tail, for
her Jointure, and in satisfaction of her Dower, the same is a good Jointure
within the Stat. of 27 H. 8. Co. 4. part. 4. in Vernons case.


15. A man Devised the Moiety of his Goods to his Wife, and dyed. It was the
opinion of the Court, That she should have the Moiety of them as they were at
the time of his death, if his Executors had Assets sufficient to pay his Debts.
5. Mar. Dyer. 164. Vid. 38. H. 8. Dyer. 59. Lord Latimers case. adjudg.


If a Legacy be given to a Woman Covert, and her Husband give a Release, and
afterward he and his Wife sue in the Ecclesiastical Court for the Legacy, the
party sued shall not have a Prohibition upon the Husbands Release, because the
Temporal Judges cannot meddle with a Legacy, nor consequently determine whether
the Release will extinguish the same. As Hill. 7. Jac. B. R. in Starkey against
Barton and Gores case. ^elv. Brook. tit. Devise. 18.
the Case 29 Eliz. Adjudged.

The Husband may Devise to his Wife although they are but one person in Law,
for it takes no effect till after his Death.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Legacies and Devices to a Child in the Womb.
1. A Devise to an Infant in the Womb is good. 2. It may be good, though the
Infant be ripped alive out of the Womb. 3. It is good, though it be a Devise in
Remainder, or in Tail. 4. How the Divident of a Devise shall be in case of
Twins, unexpected, or an Hermophrodite. 5. How the Legacy shall be apportioned,
when bequeathed to any Child in the Womb, and more then One or Two happen to be
Born. 6. Where a Devise void or voidable in his Inception, may become good by
matter ex post facto.
1. THat a Child in the Womb, to whom a Legacy is bequeathed or Lands Divised,
is after his or her Birth, though subsequent to the Testators death capable of
taking by such Devise, is a Truth now not to be controverted though it has
been Contradicted and otherwise Resolved; for we find it Reported in a Case
thus stated, viz. A Man had Issue Five Sons, his Wife being with Child with the
Sixth at the time of his death; and by his last Will declared, That the Third
Part of his Land should descend and come to his Son and Heir, the other Two
Parts he bequeathed to his Four Younger Sons by Name, and to the Heirs Males of
their Bodies; and if the Infant in the Mothers Womb be a Son, then he to have a
Fifth Part, as Coheir with his Four Elder Brothers. The Sixth Son was Born
after the death of his Father; in this Case it was Resolved, That the Son Born
after the death of the Father, should not have any thing, because he was
incapable as a Purchasor, when the Devise was first to take effect, because he
was not then in esse or rerum natura. Mich. 14. El. Dyer. 303. and in Hugh.
Abr. tit. De. Sect. 8.. 1.
Notwithstanding which, it was not long after in another Case otherwise
understood, in which Case it was Admitted, That a Devise to an Infant in his
Mothers Belly was good. Trin. 17. El. Dyer. 342. and Hugh. ibid.. 2.
It is presumed, the intendment is of such an Infant as was born after the
Testators death. In other Cases also it has been held, That Devise to an
Infant in his Mothers Belly, is good. Farringdons case. vid. Coke: 7. part. 9.
in the Earl of Bedfords case. and Hughs ibid.. 3.


2. A Man Devises his Land to his Wife being with Child, the Remainder to the
Issue en ventre safeme. his Wife in Travail dies, and the Son is ripped from
his Mother alive; he shall have the said Remainder. Dyer. in St. Wills. Sect.
3.. 3.


3. If one be possessed of a Term of Years of Land, and Devise the same to his
Wife during all the Term, and if she die within the Years of the Term, then to
A. and B. his Two Sons, if they have no Issue Male; but if they or either of
them have Issue Male, then that it shall go the use of those Issues Male; the
Wife dies, and the Two Sons dye without Issue Born, one of their Wives being
privily with Child of a Son, who after his Fathers death is Born; In this Case
and by this Devise the Issue Male shall have it as soon as he is Born. Hill.
13. Jac. in B. R. Adjud. Blandfords case.


4. Suppose a Man possessed of an Estate to the value of 721 l. hi; Wife being
with Child, did Devise in this manner, viz. Whereas my Wife is with Child, I
Will that if she be delivered of a Son, that then that Son shall have 480 l. 13
s. 4 d. And my Wife shall have 240 l. 6 s. 8 d. But in Case she be delivered of
a Daughter, then my Will is, That that Daughter shall have the 240 l. 6 s. 8 d.
and my Wife shall have the 480 l. 13 s. 4 d. and dies. It happens, That the
Wife is after delivered both of a Son and a Daughter. The Question is, How each
Legatary shall be satisfied his and her Legacy according to the Intention of
the Testator; for by the Will a Legacy is given to each of them: It is
Resolved, That according to the Testators Intention, which is the Index of the
Testament, the Son shall have double to the Wife, and the Wife double to the
Daughter; and consequently the Son shall have 412 l. the Wife 206 l. and the
Daughter 103 l. Which in all amounts to 721 l. the full value of the Testators
said Estate. So that each person is to have a Portion answerable to the Rate of
Proportion mentioned in the Will l. Instit. ff. de liberis and Posthum. and
Mant. de Conject. ul.. Vol. lib. 4. tit. 9. nu. 12.
But if the Child which the Mother brings forth be an Hermophrodite, then it
shall have the Portion due to that Sex whereof the Hermophrodite does most
participate. l. quaeritur. ff. de St. hom.
But if that also be doubtful, it is to be presumed according to the more
worthy Sex, viz. the Masculine. Addit. ad Bart. in dict. l. quaetitur.


5. In Case a Testator says, If my Wife bring forth any Child, I give to the
same 100 l. and she bring forth Two or Three Children. In this Case every Child
may obtain a Hundred Pounds, if there be Assets sufficient, and the Testators
Goods will suffice to satisfy the same, otherwise there must be a
proportionable deduction. l. qui filia^us.. 1. ff. de Legib. and DD. ibid.
Others say, the Legacy must be divided among them. Mantic. Conject. ult. Vol.
l. 4. tit. 8. n. 4. If he had said, I give to the Child in the Womb 100 l.


6. There is a Case wherein by the Birth of a Child after his Father, the
Testators death, a Devise becomes good to another, which otherwise would be
void, when none is given to himself: As thus. If one Devise his Land to his
Daughter and Heir apparent in Fee-simple, this Devise is void; yet if in this
Case the Wife of the Devisor be privily with Child of a Son which is born after
his death, now is the Devise become good, for now she is not Heir to her
Father. Fitz. tit. Assize. 27. vid. Shep. Epit. verb. Testam. cap. 155. d. 968.
Mic. 24. El. Mo. Rep. nu. 412.
Q.

Mead and Pyriam Justices in the C. B. Affirmed, That it had been there
Adjudged in the Lord Dyers Time, That if Lands are Devised to Two Men, and the
Child where with the Devisors Wife then goes, that such Devise is good, and
the Child shall take by such Devise: But whether they shall take in Common or
Joynt-tenancy the Lord Dyer doubted.

A. possessed of a Lease for Years Devised the same to his Eldest Mic. 27 and
28. Eli. B. R. Stanley ver. Baker. Mo. Rep. nu. 358.
Son, and the Heirs of his Body; and if he dyed without Issue, then to P. his
Younger Son, and the Heirs of his Body; and for default of such Issue, that the
Term should remain to his Daughters. The Testator dies leaving Two Daughters,
and afterward another Daughter is Born. The Eldest Son Sells the Term, and
dies without Issue; the Younger Son dies also without Issue; the Three
Daughters enter, and the Term was Adjudged to them Three, although the Youngest
Daughter was not Born at the Time of the death of the Devisor; otherwise if he
had named the Two Daughters in the said Devise by their proper Names.

CHAP. XIX: Certain Cases of Devises touching Lands and Chattels-real.
1. The difference in Power of Devising between him in Fee, and Tenant in Tail
for Life. 2. What Uses are Devisable. 3. Money payable on a Mortgage is
Devisable, though Devised before the day of Payment. 4. Obligations or
Chattels-real in right of a Wife, as Executrix or not, are not Devisable by the
Husband. 5. A void Presentation is not Devisable, in what kind an Advowson in
Fee may be. 6. Whether Leases and Rents may pass under the Notion of
Immoveables, as also Bonds and Specialties under the Notion of Movables. 7.
What shall pass by a Devise of all Goods, Chattels, Movables or Immoveables.
8. The difference between an universal Successor, and a naked Executor or
particular Legatary. 9. Devise made under Coverture may be good by new
Publication of the Husbands death, otherwise not. 10. The same Law as to a
Devise made by an Infant during Minority disqualified. 11. Not full Payment
Equivalent to no Payment. 12. A Personal Charge incumbent on a Legacy, is to be
defrayed by the Executor, not the Legatary. 13. Equity in Election to be
Regulated by the Testators Intention. 14. Circumstances of a Devise not
Restrictive, nor joined to the Devise it self, ought not to minorate the same.
15. A Devise shall be interpreted to the utmost Consistency with the Devisors
words to the best advantage of the Devisee. 16. Comprehensive words ought not
to be extended beyond what is Rational in Construction of Law. 17. The
Advantage of a Residuary-Legatary when others refuse. 18. Discrepancy among the
DD. touching a Legacy to the Poor. 19. Accessory Advantages to a Legatary
between the making the Testament and the Testators death. 20. The Devise of a
Thing not in rerum natura at the Testators death, is void. 21. The Testators
Estimation of a Legacy does not alter the Condition thereof. 22. The Executor
may not exceed his Testators Estimate to a Legataries prejudice. 23. The Devise
of a part, not expressing what part, implies a Moity. 24. Constructions of Law
to avoid uncertainty; and the Law touching Elections. 25. Where a Legacy is
given Nomine poenae, and failure in the Executor, the Legatary may take either,
but not both Legacy and Penalty. 26. Where there happen Two Elections in one
Devise, the Legatary shall have the first, the Executor the second. 27. The Law
touching a Devise of a House, where the Testator had none, or many, or burnt,
or ruined, or pulled down, or demolished, or re-edified. 28. In what Case a
Mill joining to a House, shall pass by a Devise of the House, or not. 29. One
Thing ought not to be Comprised under the Appellation of another, beside the
Testators Intention. 30. One Stable or one Kitchen to Two Houses, shall pass
with that Devised House, whereto they are most nigh, or most Contiguous. 31.
The Law touching the Devise of a House with all things therein. 32. The
Difference between a Devise of a Chamber, and the Devise of a Shop. 33. The
Devise of a Field carries also the Edifice erected thereon. 34. The Civil Law
where the Fee of Land is Devised to one, and the Rents of the same Land to
another. 35. in what Case an error or mistake in the Testator may be a
prejudice to the Legatee. 36. A Legacy or Devise may be inferred as well from
the Testators Intention as Expression. 37. A Devise by Reason of an Omission of
that whereof the Testator said he would make a description, is not void. 38. A
Legacy to Two, whereof one is not, accrews in the whole to the other that is.
39. Further Exemplifications of Law touching Devise of Houses, altered, burnt,
and re-edified. 40. An Exception of a Thing which is not, is no prejudice to
the Devisee. 41. The same thing Conditionally twice Devised by two Testators to
several Persons, how or in what Case good to either or not. 42. By a Devise of
ground does pass the Edifice thereon, albeit it were erected after the Devise
made. 43. How a Devise is to be apportioned, where the Devisees are joined in
the thing Devised, but disjoined in the manner of Devising. 44. A Devise of
Lands by a certain Name carries all of that Name, though otherwise distinct,
unless the Testator intended otherwise. 45. Any words that do but plainly
declare the Testators meaning, may serve for a Devise. 46. The Executor shall
pay the Landlords Rent for Ground in Lease, the Fruit or Proceed whereof is
Devised to another for the Term. 47. A mistake in the Testator only of the
Situation of the Lands Devised, shall not prejudice the Devise. 48. The
difference between necessary and voluntary Alienations, prohibited to Devisees
by a Testator. 49, A Tripartite Case in point of Alienation prohibited by a
Testator. 50. How the disjunctive [Or] in Legacies and Devises, is frequently
understood for the conjunctive [And.]
WHere a Man is Seized of a House in Fee, or of Land in Fee, and may devise
such House or Land, in such case may Devise the Doors, Windows, Wainscot, or
the like Incidents of the House, also the Trees and Grass growing upon such
Land. Otherwise it is with a Tenant in Tail for Life or Years in Houses or
Land. Coo. 4. 63. Perk. Sect. 512 518. Coo. 11. Rich. Lifords case. Kelway 88.
vid. l. caetera. l. si quis inquilinus. in prin. de Leg. 1. and Pereg. de fidei
Commiss. art. u. nu. 105.


2 If a man has an Use that is not Executed by the Stat. of Uses, but remains
at the Common Law, he may make a good Devise thereof. Perk. Sect. 500.
And therefore if one possessed of a Term of years, grant it over to another to
the use of the Grantor, he may Dispose this use by his Will, for it is in the
Nature of a Chattel.

3. One that has Money to be paid him on a Mortgage, may Devise this Money
when it comes. If A. Enfeoffe B. of Land, upon Condition that if B. do not pay
A. 100 l. such a day, that then A. may Re-enter. In this case A. may Devise
this 100 l. if it be paid; and the Legacy is good, albeit it be made before the
day of Payment come.

4. A Man cannot Devisc by his Will any Real Chattels that he has only in
right of his Wife; nor the Obligations that are made to her alone before or
during the Coverture, nor the Chattels Real or Personal which she has in right
only of another as Executrix. But all her own proper Goods and Chattels
Personal, and all Obligations made to them both during Coverture he may Devise
by Testament. Perk. Sect. 560. and Dr. and Stud. cap. 7.


5. A Bishop cannot by his Testament Devise the Presentation of a Church that
became void in his time, yet if he or the Parson of a Church have the Advowson
thereof in Fee, and Devise that Two or Three of his Executors shall present at
the next Avoidance, this is a good Devise. Trin. 13. Jac. in B. R.


6. By a Devise of Immoveables (which are Chattels real) do pass Leases, Rents
and the like; and by a Bequest of Movables (which are Chattels Personal) will
pass Bonds, and Specialties; but Debts pass not by either of these Devises.
Agreed. Hill. 9. Car. in C. B.
By Immoveables are understood not only the foresaid Chattels-real, but also in
some sense Trees growing on the Ground, Fruit on the Trees, Terms of Years and
the like; and by Movables are Regularly understood all Goods both Actually
Moving, and Passively Moveable.

7. If a Man Bequeath to A. B. all his Goods, he shall thereby have the
Testators whole Estate (his Lands, Tenements) and Freehold excepted) and
thereby the Debts and Money. Gloss. in l. his verb. ff. de haered. inst. Bart.
and Bald. ibid. and Stanf. Prerog. c. 16. and Tyraq. de retr. art. Lign.. 1.
glos. 7. nu. 18. and old. Cons. 209.
If he Bequeath to him all his Chattels, he shall have thereby all as in the
former Case. If he Bequeath to him all his Movables, he shall have all his
Personal Goods, both quick and dead, and if he Beqneath to him all his
Immoveables, he shall have all the Testators Leases, and all the Natural Fruits
thereof, as Grass on the Ground, Fruit on the Trees, and the like; consequently
Fishes in a Pond, Pigeons in the Dovehouse, etc. as Appurtenances to the
Ground Devised, as well as the Natural Fruits, or Grass growing on the same
Kelway. Rep. so. 118.


8. If a Man Devise all his Goods and Chattels to A. B. and die, and A. B. die
also before he has proved the Testators Will; in this Case the Administration
of the Goods and Chattels of the said Testator shall be committed to the next
of Kin of the said A. B. and not to the next of Kin of the said Testator,
because in this Case A. B. was the universal Successor. Dyer. 371. nu. 8.


9. If a Woman under Coverture Devise her Land, then publish and approve it
after her her Husbands death, when she is sole; by this means that Devise which
was Originally void, is now become good: But if she make and publish it during
the Coverture, albeit her Husband does afterward die, and she become sole; yet
this accident alone, without a new publication after her Husbands death, will
not make that Devise good. The Law is the same as to Goods and Chattels. Plow.
344.


10. In like Manner if an Infant within Age as to Lands, or within Age as to
Goods, Devise the one or Bequeath the other, and publish the Will; and after he
come to full and competent Age publish and Approve it again: By this means the
Devise or Legacy becomes good; otherwise it is, in Case he do not Publish and
Approve it when he attains to Full and Competent Age. Plow. ibid.


11. Suppose the Testator does Devise in this manner, viz. I Will that my
Executor shall pay 100 l. to A. B. by the Tenth day of March next after my
decease; and if otherwise, then my Will is, That my Executor shall Surrender to
him all the Right I have in a Lease of my Ground called Black-acre; and dies.
The Executor does not pay to A. B. above 90 l. by the day Appointed. In this
Case A. B. restoring the said 90 l. to the Executor shall have the said Ground;
and he may detain the Money till he recover the Land. Galgan and de. Condit. in
pt. 2. cap. 5. q. 15.


12. Suppose the Testator does Devise the Fruits of an Orchard or other Lands,
which at a Rent certain he has taken to Farm for Seven Years; who shall pay
the said Rent, the Executor or the Legatary? It is Answered, That the Executor
shall pay it, because it is a Personal Charge. l. qui concubinam. qui hortos.
de Legate. 3. and Pinell. ad leg. 1. De. Bon. mat, par. 2. nu. 72 and de
Praetis. lib. 4. int. 1. dub. 3. nu. 14.
Or if he Devise certain Lands which he had lately bought, but the whole
purchase-money not paid at the Testators death; the Executor, and not the
Devisee is liable for the same: Charond. Resp. lib. 4. cap. 50.
But the Devise shall not take effect till the same be paid, if there be no
other Assets wherewith to pay it.

13. A Man possessed of Three Fields, whereof Two called Rushcrofts, the one
being of much better value then the other, the third called Longlands, does
Devise one of his Rushcrofts or Longlands, which he will, to A. B. and dies. In
this case A. B. has his Election, whether he will have one of the Rushcrofts
or Longlands; but if he chooses one of the Rushcrofts, it shall be that which is
nearest in value to Longlands. l. 1. de. Reb. Dub. and l. ult. De tritico,
vino, and oleo leg.


14. A Man made his Will, and therein Devised to A. B. all the Lands which he
had in the Tenure or Occupation of his Tenant C. D. Consisting of Meadow,
Pasture, and Arrable Grounds, Situate about the Farm-house of the said C. D.
and dies. The Question was, Whether other Pasture and Arable Grounds belonging
to the Testator, in the Tenure or Occupation of the said C. D. and by him
Rented of the said A. B. (but not Situate as aforesaid) were to be Comprised
within this Devise. In this Case it was Resolved in the Affirmitive, The Reason
is, because the quality or Circumstance of the Place or Situation is not here
joined with the Devise for any Restrictions sake, but only by way of
Demonstration. Surdi. Decis. 241.


15. A Man bought certain Lands of A. B. with a Clause or Covenant of
Redemption within a certain Time, in the Nature of a Mortgage. The Time of
Redemption being Elapsed, the Purchaser made his Will, and therein ordered,
That his Executor should Restore the said Lands to A. B. paying what Costs and
Charges the Testator had been at, and Expended about the said Lands. The
Question was, Whether the Mortgagor or Vendor, now the Legatary or Devisee were
in this Case obliged to pay the Redemption-money over and above the said Costs
and Charges which the Testator had Expended about the Lands as aforesaid. In
this Case it is Resolved in the Negative, viz. That the Devisee shall have the
Land paying only the said Charges, and without paying the Redemption-money. l.
quibus. 1. de Cond. and Them. and Pap. Notar. 1. tit. de legate. verse. est
pertinente.


16. A. B. by his last Will and Testament makes his Two Sons C, D. and D. B.
the Joynt-Executors of all his Estate, and dies. C. B. for a certain Sum of
Money Sells his Part or Interest in the said Estate unto D. B. his Brother.
After D. B. makes his will, and therein Devises to the said C. B. all his
Interest in the said Estate by his Father, and dies. The Queston was, Whether
C. B. by that Devise should have all the said Estate whereof the Two Brothers
were made Joynt-Executors by their Father, or only so much thereof as accrewed
to D. B. by virtue of his Co-executorship. In this Case the D. D. are somewhat
divided, but the prevailing Opinion is, That C. B. by this Devise shall have no
more then accrewed to D. B. by virtue of his Co-executorship; because the other
part of the Estate was his by Purchase, and not by being Executor to his
Father; and the Property being altered by the Sale, it ceased to be the Fathers
Estate, or any Estate to D. B. by the Father, and became his own proper Estate
by Purchase. Decij Consil. 69. and Molin. ibid.
But the Question is put a little further, as whether the said Devise shall be
made good as the said part was when the Father dyed, or as it was at the time
of D. B. the Testators death. In this it is Agreed, That the said Devise shall
be considered only as the Estate was at the Time of the death of the Devisor D.
B. and not as it was at the Time of the death of his Father. Molin. add.
Cousil. 69.


17. A. B. being possessed of several Houses by Lease does Devise Two of them
in his last will and Testament unto C. D. such as he shall choose; or Two of
them to C. D. which he will, the rest to I. G. In this Case if C. D. refuse to
take by this Devise, and will choose neither of the said Houses, I. G. shall
have them all. l. cum. optio. de option. Leg.


18. A. B. makes his Will, and thereof C. D. his Son the sole Executor; in
which Will he appoints, that a Fourth part of his Estate shall be given to the
Poor in Case C. B. die without Issue. C. B. Survives the Testator, has a Son,
makes his Will, and therein Ordains, That if his Son should happen to die
Intestate and without Issue, that then the Contents of A. B. his Fathers Will
should be performed, and dies, leaving Issue a Son: After the said Son of C. B.
dies Intestate and without Issue. In this Case. In this Case some are of
Opinion, That the said Fourth part of A. B. the first Testators Estate is not
due to the Poor, because that general disposal which C. B. made in his Will,
ought to be understood only of such Things as might be claimed by the first
Will, and which could be due only by the same. Alex. Cons. lib. 6. Cons. 81.
and ibid. Molin.


Others conceive, That it is due to them, in Case there were no other Legacies
contained in the Will of A. B. which his Son C. B. was to see performed and
discharged.

19. If a Man does Devise Land whereon is no House at the Time when the
Testament was made, but One is built thereon before the Testator dies; in this
Case the House as well as the Land shall pass by this Devise. l. si ex toto..
si ariae. De Legate. 1. and l. si ariae. De Leg. 2. and Gomez. Resol. Tom. 1.
cap. 12. nu. 16.
Likewise if a Testator Devise a Bond or Debt, owving to him by some Goldsmith
or Banker, the principal whereof has produced an increase by the Interest
thereof since the time of making the Devise. In this Case by the Civil Law the
Legatary shall have such Interest in the Bankers Hands, as well as the
Principal, which accrewed by virtue of the Principal during the Testators life,
after the making of the Testament; l. ult.. Cai. De Liberat. l. nom. de Leg 3.
De Praetis. lib. 4. int. 1. dub. 4. nu. 12 and. dub. 7. nu. 65. and Alex. lib.
7. cons. 25. cum multis alijs.
which by that Law holds true in all Credits producing an Interest or Accessory
profit; yet it is otherwise even by that Law as to annual Rents payable out of
Land, for therein the Civil does agree with the Common Law, That the Arrears of
such Rents behind at the Testators shall go to the Executor, and not to the
Legatary, to whom the Land is Devised. l. quaesitum.. si mihi. De legate. 1. and
Pere. art. 48. nu. 10.


20. If the Legacy be not in being, in rerum natura, at the Time of the
Testators death, then neither the Thing bequeathed, nor the value thereof, is
due to the Legatary; but if the Thing Devised is only by any Impediment
obstructed from being delivered in kind, then the Devisee shall recover the
true value thereof. Angel. Mat. lib. 1. cap. 19. de Legate.


21. If a Testator Devise in these words, viz. I give unto A. B. my Land called
Blackdown, which I value at 100 l. this estimation thereof by the Testator
shall not alter the Condition of the Legacy, as if thereby the Executor paying
100 l. to A. B. he shall be barred from having the Land in Case it be more
worth. Mantic. lib. 9. tit. 8. number. 2.
On the other side, if the Land be less worth then 100 l. the Executor is not
obliged to supply that undervalue; nor if it be more worth, may he retain the
overplus. Ranch. Decis. pt. 1. Concl. 335 and mantic. lib, 9. tit. 1. nu. 25.
Or if the Testator say, I give to A. B. my said Land, and my Will is, That if
it be worth less than 200 l. that then my Executor shall make it up so much
worth to him. In this Case if happily the said Land be found to be more worth,
the Devisee is not obliged to restore the overplus-value. Ranch. pt. 1. Concl.
314. and de Praelis. lib. 4. int. 1. Dub. 5. nu. 17.


22. If a Testator does appoint, that his Executor shall Sell such Lands to A.
B. at a Price certain, limited by the Testator; the Executor must abide by that
Price which is so limited by the Testator, though the Land be much more worth.
Ranchin. d. concl. 335.
Likewise if a Testator does by way of Condition to a Legacy enjoin the
Legatary to do some special Thing; as the Repairing of a Church, or the like;
which being finished, the Reparations exceed the value of the Legacy; In this
Case none but the Legatary shall bear that overplus of Expense in the said
Reparations. De Praetis. li. 4. int. 3. dub. 3. nu. 29.
And if an Executor be Appointed to give me such Lands or 100 l. In this Case
if he does not deliver me the Land, I must have the 100 l. be the Land more or
less worth. Mant. d. tit. 8. nu. 2.


23. If a Testator Devise part of his Lands called Watermead to A. B. not
expressing what part, the Devise shall not be void by reason of uncertainty,
but A. B. shall have the one Moiety thereof; And if the Testator himself had
but a Moiety therein, or other lesser part, the Devisee shall have the one half
of what the Testator had therein. Rebuff. ad l. nomen.. Portionis. de verb. Sig.
But if the Testator says, I give to A. B. that part of the House which I
inhabited, or was wont to make use of for my habitation; if it be uncertain and
cannot well appear which part of the House that was, A. B. shall have the whole
house, so as no other than the Testator did inhabit or used to dwell therein.
Rebuff. ibid.


24. A man having several Houses in the City where he lives, and others in
other places, says in his Will, I give one of my Houses to A. B. In this case
A. B. shall not be excluded his Legacy by reason of uncertainty, but shall have
one of the Houses situate where the Testator lived, Grass. legatum. q. 62.
or if he says, I will that A. B. shall have one of my Houses, he shall choose
which he will have: But if the Testator say, I will that my Executor give one
of my Houses to A. B. In that case the Executor has the election to give him
which he please. l. plane.. pen. de Legate. 1. and l. 19. 23. l. si ita.. ult.
de Legate. 2.
And in case the Legatary having the election, makes more than necessary delays
in determining his election, the Ordinary at the instance of the Executor, may
fix him a time within which he shall finish the same, in default whereof he may
Decree the election to the Executor. Fran. Grimander. lib. 1. cap. 16. De usus
l. mancipiorum. l. si Optio. de Option. Legate.
But if by the Testators Will the election be neither in the Executor, nor in
the Legatary, but in a third person, In such case that third person is to make
the choice within one year next after he shall be thereunto required, otherwise
the election devolves to the Legatary, whose choice in such case is not to
exceed the Rule of Mediocrity. l. ult. C. Commun. de Legate. and De Praetis.
int. 1. dub. 3. sol. 4. infin.
And if the Legatary happen to dye before such election made by him, his
Executor shall have it. Ranch. Decis. par. 1. concl. 387. and Guide. Pap. q.
214. charond. Resp. l. 7. c. 95.


25. If a Testator does by his Will appoint, That his Executor shall within a
certain time deliver into the right and possession of A. B. such or such Lands
by name, under the penalty of 100 l. In this case, if A. B. (the time being
elapsed, and the Land not delivered) shall accept the penalty, he may recover
the 100 l. but not the Land; But if he accept not the penalty, he may recover
the Land, not the 100 l. Galgan. part. 2. cap. 5. q (...). De Conditionis.


26. If a Testator in his last Will and Testament does Devise in this manner;
viz. I give unto A. B. one of my Meadows; or one of my Houses. In this case the
first choice is in the Legatary, whether he will have one of the Houses, or one
of the Meadows; But then the second election is in the Executor; that if the
Legatary choose a House, the Executor shall appoint him which he shall have.
Papon. Notar. 1. lib. 10. tit. de Leg. verse. cela. page 710.


27. If the Testator Devise a House; not expressing what House; it is a uoid
Devise, if he had no House; but if he had several Houses, it shall be presumed
to be that House wherein he usually dwelt, if his intention appears not to the
contrary. Menoch. de Presum. lib. 4. Praes. 129.
And if the House Devised, afterward happen to be burned, the ground whereon
it stood is due and belongs to the Devisee. Mantic. li. 9. tit. 2. nu. 35.
But if it were pulled down by the Testator himself, and not re-edified, it is
otherwise; l. si ita legatum.. ult. de Leg. 1.
for that implies a revocation of his mind and will. But if a House Devised
happen to fall in the lifetime of the Testator, the Legatary shall have the
ground whereon it stood. l. qui ususf. De ususfr.


28. Suppose there be a Mill joining to the House which is Devised, or it be
erected at the end of the Wall of the House, or Situate at the end of the
Orchard belonging to the House; the Question is, whether it shall pass to the
Legatary with the Devise of the said House? In this case if the Mill was built
by reason of the House, and to Grind for the use of the Family thereof, it
shall then pass with the House in the Devise thereof; Otherwise, if it were
built to produce an Annual Rent, or to Grind for any Strangers whatever, unless
it stand upon part of the ground of the very principal Mansion house, and
within the Precincts of the same. Molinae. glos. 5. nu. 5.


29. Suppose a man does purchase certain Tenements of A. B. and other certain
Tenements of C. D. with one and the same price, and with the same Sum of Money,
and after does Devise A. B's Tenements in these words, viz. I do give and
Devise A. B's Tenements as I bought them, unto J. G. The Question is, whether
C. D's Tenements do also pass by that Devise? It is Resolved in the Negative,
unless it does appear by sufficient proofs that the Testators intention was to
comprise the one under the Appellation of the other, or unless the Testator
used promiscuously to receive and place to Account the Rents of both in the
name only of A. B's Tenements. l. Praediis. De Legate. 3. in. Titio.


30. If a man having two Dwelling-houses joining together, which have but one
Kitchen, or but one Stable in common to them both, Devise one of these Houses;
the Kitchen and the Stable shall pass with that House they join nighest unto,
and through which the passage commonly is unto them, or which if demolished the
Kitchen or the Stable could not remain useful. Alex. lib. 3. Consil. 54.


31. If a House Devised with all the things in it, It is to be understood only
of those things that werein it when the Testament was made, and not of those
things which the Testator brought into it afterward; likewise if a House be
Devised with all the things which shall be found in it when the Testator dies,
it is not to be understood of such things as were brought into the House
without the privity or knowledge of the Testator, or which were casually and by
chance brought into it; Contrariwise, such things as were casually carried out
of the House, shall not be excluded out of the said Legacy or Devise; l. si ita
legagatum. De Legate. 3 and Mant. lib. 12. tit. 2. nu. 46.
nor any moveable Goods in the House which are not momentaneous, but ever
remaining there as of Domestic use; For which reason Debts upon Bills or
Bonds, Money, and Wares designed for Merchandise, and the like, are not within
the said Devise of a House with all things in it. l. quaesitum.. Papinianus. de
instrum. Leg. and l. de Leg. 3. and mantic. ubi supra. Ranchin. Decis. part. 3.
Concl. 280. Ang. Mathaeac. lib. 2. c. 17. nu. 24. de Leg.


32. If a man Devise his Chamber, he is to be understood rather to have Devised
the things belonging to the Chamber, than the Place. Mantic. li. 9. tit. 2. nu.
49. and De Praetis. lib. 4. int. 1. dub. 7. nu. 19. page 301.
But if a man Devise his Drapers-Shop, he is to be understood to have Devised
rather the Place than the Wares therein, For that the word [Drapers] serves
only by way of Demonstration to to show what shop he meant; Otherwise, if he
say, I Devise, my Shop and Cloth; in that case it shall be understood the Cloth
in the Shop. Mant. d. tit. 2. nu. 52.


33. If a man Devise a certain Field wherein any Edifice or Building does
stand, that Building does pass by such Devise of the Field, if not expressly
excepted in the Devise; l. Si ita. infin. De fundo instruct. Leg. chopinus lib.
2. cap. 3. de Privil. Rust.
yea, albeit the Edifice were Erected after the Testament was made; but if the
Field be Devised (excepting the Edifice thereon) the ground, in case the
Building should be demolished, is likewise excepted out of such Devise. Mantic.
d. tit. 2. nu. 23.


34. If a man should Devise the Fee of certain Lands to one, and the Rents,
Profits, and Issuers of the same Land to another, and both in the same Will; In
this case by the Civil Law the Rents thereof are equally to be divided between
the two Legataries.. 1. Inst. de ususr. and l. si proprietas. De ususr.
adcrescend.


35. Suppose a man in his last Will and Testament says, I give unto my Wife
the Tenement and 700 l. which I had with her in Marriage, when as in truth he
had but 600 l. with her beside the Tenement; In this case she shall have 700 l.
with the Tenement, Menoch. de Praes. lib. 4. Praesump. 145.
unless it can be sufficiently proved that the Testator did think or conceive
that he had had 700 l. with her; in which case there is only 600 l. and the
Tenement due to her by the said Legacy or Devise. Surd. Decis, 142.


36. A Legacy or Devise may be inferred from the mind and intention as well as
from the Express words of the Testator. As thus, A. B. constitutes his two Sons
his Executors, and in his Will says, That they shall not in any case Alien the
Leases and Rents, which out of his Estate are about to come to them, but shall
preserve them for Succession, viz. of their Children, and ordered it so, that
he made his two Sons enter into Recognizance to observe his said Injunction
accordingly, and dies. The Successors of the said Sons claim and demand the
said Rents and Leases by virtue of the said Devise. They cannot De jure, but
after the decease of both the said Sons, it shall come to their said
Successors, not before. gloss. in. pater filios. l. pater filium. De Legate. 3.


37. The omission of the quality or description of a Devise in a Will, albeit
the Testator therein said he would insert the same, does not viciate or null
the Devise. Therefore if a man Devise certain Lands and Tenements with their
Appurtenancee, situate nigh a Town, to the Corporation thereof; and in his
Will says [Which Lands and Tenements with their Appurtenances, I shall after
in this my Will describe, and set forth the just bounds and Limits thereof; as
also what I would have the said Corporation Annually to do in remembrance of
me, for and in consideration of this my Devise] But being by death prevented,
does neither of these; the said Devise is notwithstanding good. l. cum pater..
vicos. in gloss. ibid. De Legate. 2.


38. If Land be Devised to A. B. and C. D. when A. B. is not in rerum natura,
C. D. shall have the whole. gloss. in l. Si quis legaverit de Legate. 1.


39. A Testor does Devise certain Houses to A. B. after the death of his
Executor, and dies; the Houses happen to be burnt, living the Executor, and by
him Re-edifyed, the Executor dies. In this Case the Executors Executor is
obliged to surrender the Houses to A. B. but he may deduct the charges of
Rebuilding them, if they were not burnt by any default of the first Executor;
otherwise not. gloss. in l. Domus. de Legate. 1.
But if they were burnt in the Testators life time, and by him Rebuilt, or
others erected in the same place; In this case the Devise is void, unless it
appears that the Testators mind was otherwise. l. si ita Legatum.. si Domus. de
Leg. 1.
But if they were only mended, altered, and repaired so often that there
remains now nothing of them at the Testators death as when the Testament was
made, In such case the Devise is good. Ibid. and Bart. in d. Leg.
The Law is the same in case of a Ship or other Vessel so often Repaired, that
little or nothing thereof now remains at the Testators death, which was at the
time of making the Testament.

40. A. B. Possessed of certain Lands called the Millfields, in one corner
whereof stood a Little Vineyard, made his Will, and therein Devised in this
manner, viz. I give unto I. G. my Lands called the Millfields, excepting the
Vines which shall be therein at the time of my Decease. A. B. after the making
of the said Testament, and before his death did cut down the Vines which were
in the corner of the said ground, and dies. The Question is, whether the corner
of the said ground where the Vineyard stood shall pass by this Devise? It is
held in the Affirmative, l. si quis legaverit. de Leg. 1. and gloss. ibid.
grounded upon that Rule in Law, Exceptio rei quae non reperitur, nihil
importat. Bar. indict. l.


41. A. B. By his last Will and Testament does Devise a certain House to C. D.
in case his Ship returns within a year safe home from the Straights, makes his
Executor, and dies. The Executor does Devise the same House to J. G. under
another Condition. Depending that other Condition the said year expires, and
the Ship not returned from the Straights; whereby the first Condition of the
Devise to C. D. fails, In this case the Devise made by the Executor under that
other Condition, if performed, is good; otherwise it would be, in case the
former Condition had been accomplished; in which case the Devise made by the
Executor would have been void. gloss. in l. si sundam.. cum statu lib. De
Legate. 1.


42. If a man Devise a certain parcel of ground, and after Erect an Edifice
thereon, the Building or Superstructure as well as the ground does pass by that
Devise, and the Devisee shall have them both; l. si areae. de Legate. 2. and
Bart. in dict. L. superficies sequitur solum. gloss. min. lit. a. in l. si tibi
homo. de Legate. 1.
because the Rule in Law is, Quod aedificatur in area Legata, cedit Legato. As
we use to say, Cujus est solum ejus est usque ad coelum.

43. Suppose the Testator does Devise one half of his Lands in Dale to A. B.
and does Devise the same half part of the same Lands to C. D. and does Devise
all his Lands in Dale to J. G. and so joins them all in the thing, and disjoyns
them in and by the words. In this case J. G. ought to have one Moiety of the
Lands; A. B. and C. D, the other Moiety. After C. D. dies before the day of
performance of the Devise, by which means his part accrews to his Collegataries
by way of Accression, (or as we say by way of Survivorship) and not to his Heir
nor Executor: Therefore as J. G. had more in the Devise than A. B. so now he
has more than A. B. in that part of C. D. gloss. in l. Maevio. de Legate. 2.


44. A. B. Possessed of diverse Lands and Tenements, among which were certain
Lands called Lillystones, and so called time out of mind; but in regard of its
great Extent, he did for the better and more Commodious Letting it to Farm,
divide it into two parts, and called the one the Upper Lillystones, the other
the Lower Lillystones. A. B. makes his Will, and therein gives diverse Lands and
Tenements to his Niece, among which he gives Lillystones, not saying whether
the Upper or the Lower Lillystones. The Question is, whether his Niece shall
have all the said Lillystones, or only one of the said divided parts thereof?
It is Resolved, she shall have the whole, unless the Executor of A. B. can
prove the Testator intended her only one part thereof. l. Gaius Sejus. and
gloss. ibid. de Leg. 2.


45. A Testator makes his Son Executor, and in his Will says, Let my Hop-yard
at the lower end of my Orchard, and my Ground in the Parish of D. suffice my
Cousin A. B. It is a good Devise of the Ground and Hop-yard, to A. B. So
likewise, if he had only said, let my Cousin A. B. be contented with the said
Ground and Hop-yard, or with my House situate in, etc. gloss. in l. fidei
commissa. de Legate. 3.
Note that in this case the person of the Devisee must not only (as in all
other Legacies) be certain, but also the Land Devised must by the Description
of its situation be reduced to an infallible certainty; otherwise the Devise
will be void. gloss. min. ibid. lit. t. verb. fundus.


46. A. B. Rents certain Orchards at 20 l. per ann. for the term of Seven
years, makes his Will, therein gives the Fruit thereof for the residue of the
term yet to come and unexpired unto C. D. and orders his Executor to deliver
him the Lease, and to suffer him to enjoy the Fruits of the said Orchards for
and during the term aforesaid. In this case the Testators Executor shall pay
the said Rent, and suffer C. D. to enjoy the Fruits thereof; otherwise the
Legacy might be nothing worth; or if Fruit fail worse than nothing. l. qui
quatuor. and gloss. ibid. de Leggat. 3.


47. An Erroneous demonstration by a Testator of the situation of Lands
Devised by him, shall not prejudice the Devise. As thus, The Testator in his
Will says, I Devise my Lands of Cammerweli which are in Ireland unto my two
Nephews A. B. and C. D. Also my Lands of Kirkaven which are in Scotland, and
dies. After the Testators death there are found certain Lands which belonged to
him called Kirkaven, but they are not in Scotland; The Question is, whether
those Lands in the description of whose situation the Testator was mistaken,
do belong to the Devisees? It is answered in the Affirmative, if it appear the
Testator had any thoughts of Devising them at all. l. patronus.. libertis. and
gloss. ibid. de Legate. 3.


48. A Testator makes his Son Executor, and in his Will Prohibits him from
alienating or Mortgaging the Estate or any part thereof, whereto he is entitled
by such Executorship, commanding him to preserve the same for his Children
lawfully begotten, and dies. The Son for 100 l. does Mortgage or sell outright
to A. B. such certain Tentments of the said Estate as his Father the Testator
left at his death in Mortgage to C. D. for 100 l. and with the Proceed thereof
pays off the said 100 l. to C. D. to whom his Father in his life time had
Mortgaged the same. The Question is, whether the Sons Obligation or Alienation
thereof to A. B. contrary to the Testators express command, be good in Law? It
seems not, because of the Testators Prohibition fortified with a Reason, That
he would have it left to his Children lawfully begotten; but the Law is
otherwise, and ratifies the Sons Obligation or Alienation thereof to A. B.
Because it was a necessary expedient, and not of his voluntary choice; the Law
touching such Prohibitions extending only to voluntary, not to necessary
Alienations. l. Pater filium. and gloss. ibid. de Leg. 3.


49. A. B. makes his Will, and therein Devises certain Lands and Tenements to
his five Sons by Name, under this Proviso or Condition, That if either of them
Alienated his part thereof to a Stranger, that then that part so Alienated
contrary to his Will, should be and enure to the Crown for ever, and dies.
After Two of the Sons sell their parts to One of the other Three their
Collegatories and dye. He after makes A. B. a stranger his Executor, gives him
the said Two purchased parts, and dies. The Question is, whether the said Two
parts belong to A. B. or to the surviving Collegataries that did not Alienate,
or to the Crown? It is Resolved, that they belong to A. B. and not to the
Collegataries, nor to the Crown; Not to the Collegataries, because the person
of A. B. the stranger is not here to be considered, but the person of the
Purchaser who Devised it to him, who according to the Testators mind was one of
those to whom the Testator permitted or tacitly employed a Sale might be made;
And it is only they, not others, that are prohibited to sell their own parts;
and therefore the parts which they purchase, are not, as those which they hold
immediately from the Testator, prohibited by the express command or tacit
intent of the Deceased, to be alienated to strangers. Nor to the Crown, because
the Condition of the Devise, viz. Alienation contrary to the Testators meaning
(without which the Crown is not entitled thereto) is not existent? for that the
parts meant by the Testator, were sold to their Collegatary, and not to a
Stranger, to whom indeed they were afterward Devised, but not in derogation to
the Testators sense and meaning, because not the person of the Stranger,
Executor to the Purchaser, (as aforesaid) but the person of the Purchaser
himself is chiefly to be considered. Dict. L.. quindecem. and gloss. ibid. de
Legate. 3.


50. Note, That in a Bequest of Legacies, the word [or] is not much a Note of
Disjunction, as of Augmentation (comprehending both;) because in Disposition of
Legacies, the Law expatiates the Interpretation as far as it may have any
consistency with the Testators mind and meaning, and will take its measures
from the utmost Latitude of his intentions. For which reason if the Testator
says, I give my City-house or my Country Farm to my Daughter Anne, she shall
have both. Grass.. legatum. quaest. 66. and Alex. lib. 2. Consil. 163. nu. 4.
And this is the Common opinion, from which notwithstanding there are not
wanting, and they not of the minor DD. who recede in their Judgments, and held
That a Disjunctive in a Legacy ought to retain its force, so as the Executor
may be least burdened. Molinae. and Covarr Resol. lib. 2. cap. 5. nu. 10.
which seems nothing inferior to Reason in an impartial balance; yet this may
be relied on as indubitable, that where the Disjunctive is placed between two
such things as are commonly conceived under the notions of Genus and Species,
or between the whole and his part, then and in such case it shall be taken for
a Conjunctive; as if the Testator should say, I bequeath to my Wife my Plate,
Jewels, or such things as I provided for her; the latter words whereof are
Generical, the former Specifical, she shall have both. Or if he says, I
bequeath to my Wife my Wine which is in the City or in the Port; the Port is
held as part of the City, and she shall have the Wine in both. Likewise if any
thing be bequeathed to D. E. or F. G. here in this case also the word [or]
shall be taken for the Copulative [and] so that both of them shall equally take
by this Devise, unless the one be of nearer kin to the Testator than the other;
in which case the nearest of kin shall have it for his life, the other
afterward; l. cum pater.. a te. de Legate. 2.
or unless it can be proved that the Testator did bear more affection to the
one than to the other; in which case he to whom the Testator did bear most
affection, shall be preferred; Ripa. in c. inter caeteras. de Rescript. Extra.
nu. 14.
or unless the one of them is not legally capable of the Legacy; in which case
the word [or] shall stand, as properly it is, for a Disjunctive.

One Devised his Lands to his three Daughters, and said further in these words,
viz. I will that every of them be others Heir by Mich. 31. Eliz. Fowler and
Owgley's Case. Anders. Case. 129.
equal portions. Whereupon it was doubted, when one of them dyed, whether the
others should hold by survivorship as Joynt-Tenants, Or in this case as Tenants
in Common. The whole Court was of opinion for the latter, and not as
Joynt-Tenants, for that it appeared, the intention of the Donor, was such in
saying That each should be others Heir by equal portions, which could not be if
there were a survivor, for thereby it is not possible the words of the Will can
be of any force.

Although properly Houses pass not by the name of the Lands Trin. 38. Eliz. B.
R. and Pasch. 41. Eliz. Ewer verse. Hayden. Cro. par. 3. Pl. 3. Pl. 4. Vid. Rep.
at Large. in Cro. ubi supra.
yet in a Devise they shall pass by the Name of all the Lands, if the
intendment be not otherwise by some Expressions of the Devisor; for though in a
Writ nothing shall be demanded or recovered but according to its proper
signification; yet in Wills Expressions shall be taken according to the Common
intendment. Wherefore in a Will, by the Devise of his Land all his Houses may
pass, or not, according as it is phrased by the Devisor; For if a man Devise
all his Lands, his Houses shall pass; but if he restrain the word [Land]
according to its genuine propriety, as Arable Land, or does couple it with
Meadow and Pasture, in such case the exposition of the word shall be taken
according to the common intendment of the Devisor; or having both Houses and
Lands in A. and B. does say, I bequeath to C. all my Houses and Lands in A. And
to D. all my Lands in B. In such case and by such expression the Devisor seems
to exclude the Houses in B. out of the Devise to D. which expressly he includes
in the Devise to C.

Moore succinctly Reports the case thus, viz. Debt for Rent, the Trin. 36.
Eliz. Ewer verse. Haydon. Moo. Rep. nu. 491.
Defendant pleaded nihil debet. Whereupon it was found, That J. S. being seized
of three Houses, and other Lands, Pastures, and Meadows in Watford in the
County of Hertford; as also of a House and Land in the County of Oxford,
Devised the same in this manner, viz, I give all my Capital Message in the
County of Oxon, and all other my Lands, and Meadows, and Pasture in the Parish
of Watford. The Devisee brought Debt against the Lessee for years of the Houses
in Watford: And it was adjudged Maintainable, because the word [Land]
comprehends Houses, and the Houses shall pass by the Devise.

CHAP. XX. Cases in the Law touching Legacies of Chattels Personal.
1. CHattels Personal may be bequeathed to one for life, and afterward to
another; in which case the first has only the use or occupation, the other
has only the Propriety thereof. So that if one Will that A. B. shall enjoy the
use of his Housholdstuff during his life, and after that it shall remain to J.
M. This is a good Devise thereof to J. M. 37. H. 6. 30. Littl. Broo. Sect. 388.
314. 209.
But if the thing it self be bequeathed to the first of them, then it is
otherwise; for the gift of a Chattel Personal though but for one hour, is the
gift thereof for ever; Hill. 9. Car. B. R. the Lady Davyes Case.
Provided, the Testator make it Absolute, not Conditional.

2. Chattels Personal do pass under the legal Notion of Movables, as Chattels
Real do under that of Immoveables; of both which the Law makes a Distinction
into Creatures Living, and Things inanimate; albeit of the living Chattels Real
there can but very few instances be given; Such was Wardship in respect of the
Tenure of Land; As also Villenage for years; or that right which the Lord had
in the Villain only for a Term; who resembled him whom the Civil Law terms
Ascriptitius Glebae, or one in perpetual Obligation to the Plow on some certain
Lands. The Real Chattels Inanimate chiefly consist in Houses, or Lands, or the
issues thereof, as by Lease for years, or by Extent upon Judgments, Statutes,
or Recognizances; Or if the Testator had a Term of years in certain Advowsons,
Tithes, Profits of Fairs, Markets, or Court Leets, the Interest is a Real
Chattel among the things inanimate; likewise a Presentation to a Church, upon
the next avoidance, and before it come to be void, is a Real Chattel. Off.
Exec. cap. 5.
But of this, and Chattels Personal, with their respective Individuals, the
Reader may have a more exact Description, if he has a retrospect to Cap. 6.
Par. 3. whereunto he is referred for clearer satisfaction.

3. A. B. having two Brothers and one Son, makes his Son his Executor, and in
his Will says, That he would have his Son let the said two Brothers, (who are
the Sons Uncles) have all the goods he has in D. and M. or elsewhere, saying
withal, That all these things he does leave them for this Reason, because he
would not that his Son should have any Difference or Controversy with them. In
this case and by this Devise A. B. seems to leave his two Brothers only what
was in common between him and them, and no more; This interpretation being
grounded on the Reason annexed at the close of the Testators words, where he
says [Because his Son should have no difference or Controversy with them] by
which Reason he seems to have a prospect of Differences like to arise between
him and them by occasion of some goods in common between them (as is usual in
cases of such Community) And thence seems by such words added to the Bequest to
prevent such probable Differences, not intending to include within that Legacy
such Goods as were not like to cause any Difference between them. l. cum
pater.. Dulcissimis. and glos. ibid. de Leg. 2.


4. The first Declaration of the Testators mind Derogatory to the second,
prevails against that second, unless thereby the first be specially revoked;
And therefore if a Testator in the beginning of his Testament, says, That to
whom I shall bequeath twice, I would have it due but once; and then gives a
Horse to A. B. After in another part of his Testament gives his Books to A. B.
And after that toward the end of his Testament says, it repents me that I
declared my self in that manner in the former part of my Testament, for I
incline that A. B. should have my said Books and the Horse; In this case the
Legatary shall have them both, notwithstanding what the Testator said in the
former part of his Testament; for a Testator cannot in his Will impose such a
Law on himself, as from which by his Will he cannot recede; because only that
which is indeed his Will, is his Law, and a Law unto it self, and that alone
shall stand. l. Si quis in principio. and gloss. ibid. de Legate. 3.


5. If a man does Devise to A. B. all that he does possess in London; by such
general words shall pass all that he has in the Suburbs, as well as in the
City; But his Books of Account or Cash in his Chests, which he has either in
the City or Suburbs, do not pass by such general words in a Will. l. uxorem..
legaverat. and gloss. ibid. de Legate. 3.


6. If I bequeath 100 Books, the Legatary shall have 100 Volumes of Books, not
computing the several Books that may be in one Volume, as so many of the 100.
And if I bequeath him my Study or Library, she shall have only the Books, not
the place where they are, nor other things that may be there. l. librorum. and
glos. ibid. de Legate. 3.


7. If a man Devise his House to A. B. with all the things therein when he
shall dye; such things as are there only by chance, and did not use or were
wont to be there, do not pass by that Devise; yet such things shall pass as
only by some accident were not found there, but used to be there; But Money
found there, which not long before was received from Debtors, and intended to
be again Lent out, does not pass by such Devise. l. si ita Legatum. and gloss.
ib. de Leg. 3. Yet if a Bequeathed Ship be after so often Repaired, that there
remains nothing of the same Ship but the Keel, the Legacy is good. l. quod in
rer. not.. ult. ff. de Leg. 1.


8. If I bequeath Materials fit to make a Ship, and after do build a Ship
therewith; the Ship does not pass by that Devise. Or if I bequeath a Ship, and
after do rip abroad that Ship, the Legatary shall not have the Materials
thereof; yea though another Ship be afterward built of the same Materials, he
shall not have it. Yet if I bequeath a Wedge of Silver, wherewith any Vessel is
after made, the Legatary shall have it, so as the form or fashioning thereof be
not of more value or cost more, than the Silver it self is worth. l. lana. and
gloss. ibid. de Legate. 3.


9. A Testator had six Marble Statues, and a great quantity of other Marble; he
Devises two of his Marble Statues, and all his other Marble to A. B. whether
by this Devise may the Legatary claim the Six Marble Statues? It is answered
Negatively, he can have but two Marble Statues; because when the Testator gave
him the Statues so specially and Numerically both, he seemed not to intend the
Legatary should have the other four by that Devise; If so, he would not have
specified in two, had he intended six, l. 1. de aur. and argent. legate. and l
legata. de Supellect. legate. and l. haeres meus.. duae. and glos. ib. de Legate.
3.
but, rather in all probability would have mentioned six in stead of two; but
if the number, or the Names of the Statues bequeathed be not specified in the
Legacy, they will all seem to pass under the Genus of Marble ex abundanti.
dict. l. legata and Cuiac. in dict. l. in toto.


10. A man having two Horses, does in his Will say, I give to A. B. the two
Horses which I shall have when I dye; after the Testator sells his two Horses,
and at his death is found to have only two Mares. In this case the Legatary
shall have the two Mares; because in construction of Law the Feminine in such
cases is comprised in the Masculine. l qui duos. and gloss. ibid. de Legate. 3.


11. If a man indebted 20 l. has Goods worth 100 l. and gives to his Wife the
one half of all his Goods to be equally divided between her and his Executors;
In this case the Wife shall have the one half of all the Estate personal, and
that without any defalcation. Goldsb. 149. pl. 74.


12. Under the notion of Housholdstuff, is not to be understood in any Will or
Bequest, any Apparel, Books, Weapons, Tools, for Artificers, Cattle, Victuals,
Corn in the Barn or Granary, Waynes, Carts, Plowgear, or Vessels fixed to the
Freehold. Vid Swinb. par. 7. 10. verse. sin..
As for Plate, it is the common and fairest Exposition to understand only so
much thereof within the Notion of Housholdstuff, as the Testator himself in his
life time did so understand, and as much thereof as himself did esteem rather
as Utensils than Ornaments, and accordingly made use thereof rather for the
daily and ordinary service of his House, then for Ornament, Pomp or delicacy.
And as touching Coaches, whether they are within the Notion of Housholdstuff or
not, I suppose the Reader will not easily be persuaded to join with those in
their opinion, who hold it in the Affirmitive; Swinb. ubi supra.
unless he will also allow the Plow and the Cart (which are of more Domestic
use and service than Coaches) to have the same Privilege with the other.

13. A Testator may Bequeath the Corn growing on his ground at the Time of his
death; yet if he be a Lessee for Years, and sow the Land so short a Time
before the Expiration of his Lease, that the Corn cannot possibly be ripe when
the Term Expires, and he die before such Expiration of his Term; In this Case
his Bequest of such Corn is void, because himself if he had lived, could not
have Reaped it after his Term Expires.

14. If a Man Bequeath all his Sheep, neither the Rams nor the Lambs are
comprised therein; but if he Bequeath his Flock of Sheep, they are both therein
comprised. l. Servis leg. de leg. 3.
Or if he Bequeath 20. Sheep which he has in his Flock, and which indeed is
all his Flock, the Legatary shall have them all; because by this he Bequeatheth
his Flock of Sheep. l. grege. de de Legate. 1. and gloss. ibid.
Likewise if one Bequeath his Flock or his Heard to me, and the Testator
living, some of the Flock or Heard die, and others put into their stead. In
this Case the Legatary shall have them, because it is the same Flock or Heard
as formerly: But what if one of them die; in that Case and notwithstanding such
diminution the Legatary shall have the 19. though it be not the Flock which the
Testator Bequeathed. Likewise if 19. die, so that but one only remains, the
Legatary shall have that one. Also if a House be Devised, which is after burnt,
the Legatary shall have the Ground whereon the House stood. l. si grege. de
Legate. 1. and gloss. ibid.


15. A. B. Devises his Horse to me and thee, willing that each of us should
have a Horse entirely; in this Case one of us shall have the Horse, the other
of us the value or Price of that Horse. l. si mihi de Legate. 1.
and in Case (the Testator being dead.) thou after make me thy Executor, who
was before thy Collegatary, I shall have the whole Legacy, that is, mine if I
will, or thine if I will, but if I take by the one, I cannot claim the other
also. gloss. in dict. l.


16. A Testator Sick in London, there makes his Will, wherein he appoints his
Executor to deliver the Horses he had at Edenborough in Scotland to A. B. (then
also at London with the Testator) the Third day next after his decease, and
dies. The Question is, whether this Legacy be good or not? It seems not,
because of the distance of Place rendering the Performance of the Legacy
impossible at the Time limited by the Testator. But the Answer is, the Legacy
is good and possible, nor ought the distance of Place to prejudice the same, in
regard the Testator might after the making of the Testament possibly live long
enough to have the Horses brought from Edenborough to London timely enough to
have the Legacy performed by the Time limited by the Testator, dict. L. si mihi.
if there were nothing else to be said in the Case, as indeed there is.

17. If the Testator says, I give A. B. my Diamond-Ring which I believe is in
my Cabinet; but in Truth is at that Time in the bottom of the Sea; his Executor
is not obliged to pay the value thereof to the Legatary, nor to deliver it till
it can be got out of the Sea, and then he shall be no less legally then
miraculously obliged. l. haeres. and gloss. ibid. de Legate. 3.
or if a Testator Bequeath 20. Gallons of Canary out of such a Hogshead, and
there be found but Ten Gallons in it, the Legacy is not invalid; for the
Legatary shall have the Ten Gallons, but no more. l. si quis servum.. 2. de
Legate. 2.


18. A Testator Gives and Bequeaths an Ox to one, the Ox dies before the day
comes for the delivery of him to the Legatary; he shall have neither his Flesh
nor his Hide; otherwise if he had dyed after the day for the delivery thereof
was come. l. mortuo Bove. and gloss. ibid. de Legate. 2.


19. A Testator in his last Will and Testament says: I Will that after my
decease my Executor hereafter named shall pay 50 l. per annum to my Wife,
whilst she shall be with my Son in London. The Son went from his Mother, yet
staid in London, but not with his Mother. The Question is, whether the 50 l.
per annum be due to the Mother? It is Resolved Affirmatively: But if the Son
had gone out of London, and the Mother might have followed him, but did not,
but continued still in London; the Legacy would not be due to her, save only
for that Year wherein the Testator died; which shall be due, albeit in that
Year she continued not with the Son above one day: But if the Mother could not
follow the Son when he went out of London, nor can otherwise be duly
charged-with any neglect, wherefore she continued not with her Son, the Legacy
of 50 l. per annum shall be due to her. The Reason of the Premises is, because
the said words [Whilst she shall he with my Son in London] has the force of a
Condition. l. qui quatuor.. uxori. and gloss. ibid. de Legate. 3.
In like manner if a Testator Bequeath any thing to A. B. if he shall dwell in
the City with his Son, it is not required that the Legatary shall dwell in the
same House with his Son; but if there be no mention made of any Place, as if
the Testator should say [if he dwell with my Son] the Condition is not
fulfilled by the Legatary, unless he dwell in the same House with the Testators
Son. gloss. min. ibid.


20. If a Testator enjoin his Executors to pay unto A. B. the Sum of Ten Pounds
per annum, and he live Six Years and Four Months, the Executors of A. B. shall
receive Ten Pounds for the whole Seventh Year; because such an Annuity is due
in the very beginning of every Year, where no certain Time of Payment is set by
the Testator.

Not whether Jewels be Chattels, but what shall pass under the Notion of Jewels
is the Question. For the Case was, the Earl of Northumberland Devised by his
Will his Jewels to his Wife, and dyed possessed of a Collar of S's, and of a
Garter of Gold, and of a Button annexed to his Bonnet, and also of many other
Buttons of Gold and Precious Stones annexed to his Robes, and of many other
Chains, Bracelets, and Rings of Gold and Precious Stones. The Question was,
whether all these would 26. Eliz. E. of Northumb. Case. Referred to Wray and
Anderson. vid. Hughs Abr. verb. probat. of Wills and Testaments.
pass by the Devise under the Name of Jewels. It was Resolved by the Justices,
That the Garter and Collar of S's did not pass, because they were not properly
Jewels, but Ensigns of Honor and State; and that the Buckle of his Bonnet, and
the Button did not pass, because they are annexed to his Robes, and were no
Jewels. But for the other Chains, Bracelets, and Jewels, they passed by virtue
of the said Will.

CHAP XXI. Of Legacies touching Goods in general, and what is to be understood
under that Notion of Goods, and what by Movables and Immoveables.
1. THat movables fall under the general notion of Goods is out of question,
but whether Actions, and Rights of Action, and suits at Law depending fall
under that notion, is a question. The Affirmative is not only the most
Received, but (as Orthodox) the best approved Opinion, l. bonorum. de verb.
sign. and Grass.. Legate. q. 19. and mant. lib. 9. tit. 4. nu. 13. cum multis
alijs.
though much opposed by some of the Learned who will not admit such Actions to
pass by way of Legacy under the Notion of Goods, save when the Bequeathing
words are universal; as when the Testator says, I Bequeath all my Goods, or I
Bequeath a fourth part of all my Goods. Matheac. li. 17. cap. 17. nu, 18. de
Legate.
Alleging, that if the words be only general words, as when the Testator
says, [I Bequeath my Goods] In such Case Actions and Titles to Actions are not
comprehended therein, because of the Pronoun [my] And that by the general word
[Goods] is comprised no more than the Testator has in his actual Propriety
jure Dominii. It is certain that if the Legacy of Goods in general be limited
to any certain place, as when the Testator says, [I bequeath the Goods which I
have in my House] In such case Actions, because they are not Circumscriptible
properly by this or that place, do not fall under that general notion of Goods.
Dict. c. 17. v. 17. and Gras. dict. q. 19. nu. 3.
Or if a man bequeath his Dutch Goods, the Bonds or Debts owing to the Testator
in Holland pass not by a Legacy under that notion, albeit the Universal word
[all] were added to it, Pinell. ad Rub. C. de bon. matter. part. 1. nu. 10.
unless it were a Legacy given by a Merchant, who may rationally be presumed to
have in Holland Debts only owing to him. Pinell. ibid. nu. 12.


2. Such as assert Actions and Rights of Action to fall under the general
notion of Goods, do yet deny them to fall under the notion of Movables or
Immoveables; for with much confidence it is affirmed, That by the Jus Commune
Actions and Right of Actions are not Comprised in a Legacy of Movables or
Immoveables; No, though the universal word [all] be added thereto; No, though
the Note of universality should be geminated in the words of the Legacy, as
when the Testator says, [I bequeath to A. B. all my Goods Moveable and
Immovable wheresoever they shall be found] And this is held even by those who
yet allow them to fall under the general notion of Goods. Grass.. Legatum. ubi
supra. and Pinel. ubi. part. 1. nu. 31.
But this is contradicted by other of the Learned, who hold, That where the
words of the Legacy are universal, in that case Actions and Rights of Action
are comprised within a Legacy of Movables and Immoveables. Molinae. ad Alex.
lib. 6. Consil. 68. and Dec. Cons. 237. and 639. and Jo. Philippi. Resp. 64.
Now then, to reconcile the difference between the Dissenting DD. in this
point, the fairest opinion is, that they are comprised therein when the
Testator geminates the words of universality, and abounds or superabounds in
his sense that way, as when he says, [I give to A. B. all my Goods Moveable and
Immovable, and of what kind soever, or wheresoever they shall be found; or
other words to such most universal import. Ang. Matheac. lib. 17. cap. 17. nu.
16. de Legate.


3. All Corporeal Movables inanimate which are only passive in their motion,
as Books, Armor, Plate, Housholdstuff, and the like; and all Animals moving or
active in their motion, as Horses, Sheep, etc. fall under this general notion
of Goods. Peregr. art. 5 nu. 43. de sidei commiss. and Dec. Cons. 653. and l.
moventium. de verb. sign. and Al^i.
But what if the Testator in his Will says [I give unto my Wife all my
Moveable Goods and Housholdstuff of my House] whether shall the Wife have any
of the Movables other than such as are of or belonging to his House? Some are
of opinion, that these words [of his House] keep this general Legacy under a
Restraint, and confine it to the Moveable Goods only which are in or of his
House; others (and they the most approved) hold the quite contrary, and say,
that these words are set to enlarge the Legacy, and give the Legatary the
greater latitude of right even to other of his Goods which are not in his
House. Mant. 9. tit. 3. nu. 17. and Mathaeus de Afflict. Decis. 106.
And whereas some raise a double objection against it, 1. That where the Genus
(as in this case) does precede and the species follow, (the Moveable Goods
being the Genus, the Housholdstuff the Species) there and in such case the
former islimited and restrained by the latter.

2. That the Copulative [and] is here to be understood for [that is] Both which
Objections are fairly answered thus; viz. The first Objection holds only where
the Genus and Species are not diversifyed in quality, but quite otherwise where
they are or may be (as in this Case) of a distinct nature and quality; for in
such case both shall pass by the Devise; as when a man bequeaths Nourishment
and Physic to his Son. And the other Objection is as weak as the former,
because the Copulative [and] when it comes between two such things as whereof
the one may be included in the other (as it may in this case) is not to be
understood for [that is] as in the Objection. Mathae. ibid.
Indeed where a Testator does add to a Devise of several things specifically
named something in General, but limited to some certain Place; in such case
that local limitation will work a restriction upon all, though otherwise never
so generally or universally bequeathed; As when he says, I give unto my Wife
all the Houshold-Furniture both Woollen and Linen, and other Utensils of my
House; In this case he shall be presumed to intend her nothing of all this out
of or not belonging to the House. Mantie. ubi supra.


4. Whereas it is much controverted among the DD. (as appears by what was
formerly said) whether Actions and Right of Actions may be comprised within the
Notion of Movables and Immoveables, albeit the Note of universality be added
to the Legacy, yet it is here to be observed, that it is agreed on all hands,
that in cases of necessity they are comprisable within a Legacy of Movables
and Immoveables; As when the Testator makes A. B. the universal Legatary of all
his Movables, and C. D. the like of all his Immoveables; and these two
accordingly and to the effects aforesaid his Executors, and dies. In such case
for the prevention of the Testators otherwise dying partly Testate and partly
Intestate, they are admitted to be comprised as aforesaid. Rebuff. ad l.
moventium. de verb. Sign. and Ranchin. par. 4. Concl. 23. and 24. and Grass..
legatum. quaest. 19. nu. 5.


5. By what was formerly said it is apparent, That when a Testator does
bequeath his Movables Indefinitely, all his Movables are therein
comprehended, albeit at the end of the Request he should thereunto add some
particular thing specifically, as when the Testator says, I bequeath all my
Moveable goods whatever and Housholdstuff of my House to A. B. Tepat. tit. de
Legate. in genere. cap. 4.


6. Among the Movables are computed all such things as may easily and without
prejudice be removed from place to place; l. Titius. de Acq. rer. dom.
otherwise they fall under the notion of Immoveables, l. 1.. Si jusserim. de
acquirend. possess.
as all other things affixed to the House, or (as we say) fixed to the
Freehold, or cannot well be removed without being damnified. Rebuff, ad dict.
l. moventium. verse. moventia. de verb. Sign.


7. An office, which a man has for term of years, and may make Sale thereof,
is computed among the Immoveables; Charond. Resp. lib. 5. cap. 40. aut. 41.
yet it has been adjudged, That a Registers-Office is comprised within the
Movables. Peleus. in Act. Forens. lib. 8. cap. 66.


8. Doves belonging to a Dove-house, as voluble as they are Naturally, yet are
computed among the Immoveables legally, by reason of their Relation to the said
Place, until they are taken and kept under Confinement; And therefore till such
Capture they go to the Haeres Immobilium, as the Civil Law styles the Heir, and
not to the Executor. Molin. ad Cons. Paris. par. 1.. 1. glos. 8. nu. 33.
The like may be said of Fish in the Pond, which are there for multiplication,
breed, and increase, and not for present use only. Molin. ibid. nu. 18 and
Grass.. legatum. q. 19. in fin.
The Materials also of a House pulled down only with a design and intent
therewith to rebuild the same, are computed among the Immoveables. Papon. l.
17. tit. 4. arrest. 6.
yea a Ship though she be never so swift a sailer, yet for all her have is
computed among the Immoveables. Boerius. q. 177. and Strac. Tract. de Na. vib.
part. 2. nu. 30. Whereas Money in a Devise is comprised under the Notion of
Movables; understand it only when Movables are generally bequeathed; not
limiting them to any place. Sed si Mobilia alicujus loci, veluti Domus, vel in
Domo, Relicta sunt, non legatur pecunia quae Negotiationi ibi paratur. Mant. de
Conject. ult. vol. lib. 9. tit. 3. nu. 3.


9. It is a Question much controverted, whether Money be it never so Current,
be comprehended within a Legacy of Movables; As if the Testator should say, [I
give thee all the Moveable Goods in my House,] and there be found at his death
1000 l. in his chest; [If this were the Readers Case, no doubt but he would
soon resolve it in the Affirmative, and rather than fail, prove it
syllogistically; whatever is Current is Moveable, but Money is Current, Ergo,
etc.] But to be serious, for the better resolution of that doubt, distinction
must be had between Money hoarded up in a strong Chest, for the safe keeping
and preservation thereof that it may not be thence soon removed; and Money
found in a Chest, there put not for that end, but for common use and Service,
and for daily and ordinary expenses. In the former case it passes not by a
Devise of Movables; in the latter it does. Menech. lib. 4. Pres. 138. and Dec.
Cons, 381. nu. 4. and ibid. Molinae.
And if it be doubtful for which of these ends it was there reposited, the
presumption shall be for the Latter. Menoch. ibid.
Which holds true, albeit the Testator should Devise the. Immoveables only
Indefinitely, or design this Money only to be Let out at Interest. There is a
great quarrel among the DD. (for this Engine of all mischief is of a very
Metalsome quality) whether Money actually out at Interest be within the notion
of Movables; some affirm it, Pinel. ad l. 1. de bon. matter. par. 2. nu. 44.
and 45.
others deny it, Gail. Obs. li. 2. c. 11. nu. 7.
comprising it under the notion of Debts, which seems most rational; But Money
in Cash has gained the more received opinion of its being comprehended within
a Legacy of Movables, albeit it happen to be much in quantity, These. Decis.
160. Mobilibus Legatis, Legata Pecunia. l. Si chorus.. 1. and l. si fundus. ff.
de Legate. 3. Dec. Cons. 381. nu. 4. Etiam Cambiis tradita. Pinel. l. 1. in 2.
part. nu. 44. de bon. Matter.
or designed for a Purchase, so, as it be not for that end of a great quantity.
But in such Places where by common usage of Speech Houshold-goods are mainly
and frequently meant or intended by the word Movables, or if it be such Money
as was only designed by way of Trade for Merchandise, the Testator being also a
Merchant, and the quantity be great; or if the Testator bequeath all his
Movables in such a House, excepting none at all; In all such cases Money, how
acceptable soever it otherwise be, yet is not admissable to any comprehension
within a Legacy of Movables; These. ibid. and Mant. lib. 9. tit. 3. and Menoch.
de Arbitr. l. 2. c. 489.
Nor when any certain place is added to the Legacy, as if the Testator should
say, I give my House to A. B. with all the things therein, none excepted.
Menoc. dict. Praes. 138. and Mant. l. 9. nu. 3, and Rench. Decis. par. 3.
Concl. 280.
No, Money found hid in the Wall of a House, albeit the Testator should say,
[be the Movables of what kind or Condition soever.] ibid.


10. And as for Debts, Bonds, and Obligations for Money owing, they are not
within a Legacy of Movables, be the place where they are added or not added to
the Legacy, but make of themselves, a third kind of Goods distinct, from the
former; Peregr. art. 5. nu. 43. and Alex. lib. 6. Consil. 68. and Mantic. ubi
Supra. cum Mult. aliis.
unless in such places where Custom prevails, That Obligations touching things
Moveable shall be computed among the Movables, and touching things Immovable
bequeathed among the Immoveables. Jo Bacquet. du Dro^ct de Justice. cap. 21.
nu. 84.


11. If the Testator says, I give part of my Goods to A. B. he shall have the
Moiety thereof; for by saying a Part, and not what Part, the one half is
regularly to be understood; Gloss. in l. si Titius. de Legate. 3. Pars pro toto
by Figurative Law. Pars pro Medi^tate by Law indeed.
yea, though the Testator himself had but the one half of the thing bequeathed,
yet the Legatary shall have a Moiety of that half, and albeit the Testator
should say a certain part. ibidem.
But if he says [any part, or what part soever] then be it never so little,
the Legatary must therewith be content, and the Executor is discharged.

12. Lastly, whatever was formerly said touching that Litigious subject of
Money, though by some formerly held as none of the Testators Goods or Chattels
Kitchen. verb. catalla. fo. 32.
either Moveable or Immovable, yet now the Law understands Money better than
to exclude it out of that notion, and the opinion is now as Current as Money it
self, That it is part of the Moveable Goods of the Deceased;. and quia parum.
Auth. de Nuptiis. and Rebuff. ubi supra. in L. Moventium. de verb. Sign. and
Mantic. de Conject. ult. vol. lib. 9. tit. 3. nu. 2. Decii Cons. 381. and 472.
unless it be Money arising of the Sale of Lands, Tenements, Or Hereditaments
appointed by the Testator in his last Will and Testament to be sold, or Money
coming of the Profits of the said Land for any time to be taken; This Money is
indeed by the Statutes of this Realm excluded from being reputed as any of the
Goods or Chattels of the person so Deceased. St. an. 21. H. 8. cap. 5.


13. Also by a Bequest of Movables will pass the Industrial Fruits of the
ground, or such as are there sown by the Industry of Man in expectation of a
speedy removal thence with increase; Decis. Aven. 16. nu. 4. post, Paul. Castr.
Cons. 132. quem Decius and alii sequuntur.
But not the Natural Fruits, or such as grow of their own accord without any
great labor or cost; for these are not reputed Movables, unless they were
separated at the time of the Testators death. Decii Cons. 472.
Thus Trees and Grass together with the Land whereon they grow, descend to the
Heir as parcel of the Freehold: But the Corn growing thereon belong to the
Executor as part of the Testators Goods and Chattels. Perh. tit. Devises. and
Fulbeck. eod. tit. fo. 37, 38.


14. Where one bequeaths all his Goods and Chattels, or all his Corn, or all of
any other thing; by such bequest does pass not only All the Testator has of
that thing at the time of making his Testament, but also All he has thereof at
the time of his death; And not only the All thereof which he has in
Possession, but also what thereof he has not in Possession but Expectation.
But if he limit this All to a certain place, or as to or in the occupation of
some certain person, then no more will pass: by such Bequest than what he has
in such Place, or in the occupation of such a person at the time of making the
Testament. Plow. 343.


15. And therefore a man may bequeath by Will not only those things which he
has at the time of making thereof, but also such things as he is to have, or
may have afterward; Thence he may bequeath the Corn that shall grow in such
Ground the next year after his death, or the Wool or Lambs his Flook of Sheep
shall yield the next year after his death; But in case there shall be no such
Corn, Wool, or Lambs the next year, then the Legacy proves fruitless. Yet if
the Testator bequeaths 20 Quarters of Corn, or 20 Lambs, and does Will that the
same shall be paid out of the Corn that shall grow, or out of his Flock the
next year, and there be no such Corn, or not so many Lambs the next year, yet
the Devise is good, and must be paid. The Reason of the difference is, because
in the former Case there is such a Restriction and Limitation set to the Legacy
as renders it questionable whether it might ever become due or payable; In the
latter there is only Demonstration how it shall be paid, and nothing of any
such Restriction as calls the Legacy it self into question. In the former there
is a tacit Condition, in the latter the Legacy is Absolute.

CHAP. XXII. Law-Cases touching Money Bequeathed by the Testator.
1. IN the last precedent Chapter, it has been Examined how far Money may be
comprised under the notion of Goods Moveable or Immovable bequeathed; It
follows now, that for the clearer illustration of this Desirable subject, we
insert certain Cases in the Law touching the same; And because when Money is
bequeathed, it often happens that a more than ordinary power is given to, or
Latitude left in the Executor by the Testator, It is requisite in the first
place to see how far a Legacy of Money left to the will of an Executor is good
or not; which cannot well be Resolved without considering the several ways of
disposal thereof; as thus, viz.

2. The Testator says [I would have 10 l. given to A. B. if my Executors mind
were not against it] In this case A. B. cannot have the 10 l. unless he can
first obtain the Executors consent for it; because a Legacy in that manner
given is tacitly Conditional, and first requires the Executors Approbation
even by the Testators mind and intention for the performance thereof; But if
once the Executor gives his consent, he must then pay the 10 l. and cannot
after recede from it to the prejudice of the Legatary. gloss. in. sic fidei
commissum. l. Fidei commissa. de Legate. 3.
Likewise, if the Testator says, [I give 10 l. to A. B. when my Executor will,
or when my Executor please.] In this case as in the former, the Legacy is not
due till the Executor thinks fit, but must wait his pleasure, and be in a
dilatory Expectancy as long as he lives, or so long as he does not say he will
pay it; But if once he declare that he will pay it, and after dies before he
does pay it, his Executor is obliged to make it good; Contrariwise if the
Legatary dye before the Testators Executor declares his consent to the payment
thereof, for then it does not accrue to the Legataries Executor, because it is
Conditional till the Executor declares his consent to pay it, and such a
Condition to be performed at the pleasure of another, as that the Legacy cannot
come to the Legataries Executor before the Accomplishment thereof. Gloss. ibid.


3. If the Testator says, [I give A. B. 10 l. if my Executor will] In that
case the Legacy is void, because there the Testator subordinates his Will to
the Executors, makes his Executors Will Absolute, and his own Insignificant.
But in case he says after this manner, viz. [If my Executor think fit, I give
A. B. 10 l. Or if my Executor conceive it expedient, let A. B. have 10 l.] In
these cases the Legacy is good, because here the Testator seems not to leave it
wholly to the mere will and pleasure of his Executor, but as it were to the
judgment of any honest or indifferent person, or (as the Law phrases it)
arbitrio boni viri. The Law is the same, in case the Testator says, [if my
Executor see cause for it, or it seem reasonable to him. Let A. B. have 10 l.
or I would have A. B. to be 10 l. the better for me.] For although a Legacy
cannot be left to the mere will and pleasure of the Executor, yet to his just
and reasonable will it may; for so it is left more to Reason than to his Will.

4. But what if the Testator says [I give 10 l. to A. B. if he shall deserve
it of my Executor] In that case the Legacy is due in case the Legatary shall
carry it no otherwise toward the Executor than as any honest man would or
might do in the like case; or no otherwise, than as any honest and indifferent
person might or would be well satisfied therewith. Likewise if the Testator
says, [I give A. B. 10 l. if he has not offended my Executor] the Legacy is
due, if it appears that A. B. has behaved himself toward the Executor no
otherwise than what would satisfy any reasonable and impartial man. In a word,
when it is left wholly to the mere free and arbitrary will and pleasure of the
Executor, the Legacy is void; but when it is left to his will, only as it shall
seem meet, just, and equal to him, it is good; for if in it self it be just and
equal, the Executor may not interpret it otherwise. Gloss. ibid. lit. o. verb.
arbitrium.


5. If a man Devise all his La(...) to A. B. and his Heirs, excepting Twenty
pounds for Ten years, which he wills shall be employed for his Children; This
is a good Devise of the Sum of Twenty pounds a year for Ten years. Trin. 9 Jac.
in B. R.
Or if one bequeath 20 l. to the Children of A. B. who then has three Children
more or less at the time of making such Bequest; and after, but before the
Testators death, he happen to have other Children; In this case those other
Children he has afterward, shall have no part of the said Legacy, but the
Children born at the time of making the Testament shall have it all. The Reason
is, because in this case it is presumed the Testators intention did not extend
to any not in rerum natura, when there were Children indeed, and at the same
time in being.

6. The Testator says [I give 100 l. to my four Neighbors, A. B. C. and D.
Provided they bestow 10 l. in a Tombstone to be set on my Grave] Although B.
should refuse to join with the rest therein, yet A. C. and D. shall have not
only the^r respective proportion of the 100 l. but also that part that should
have come to B. in case he had performed the Condition. Or, if he say, [I give
100 l. to A. and such of my Three Children as shall come to my Funeral] and
dies; neither of his Children are at his Funeral; In this Case A. shall have
the whole 100 l. because the Legacy is in the Conjunctive; were it in the
Disjunctive he could have but 50 l. Bart. in l. si tibi and ei. de Legate. 3.
and glos. in dict. L. and C. de Cad. toll. l. unica.. ubi autem. and. si non.
Conditio uni Conjunctorum infecta, in ejus persona deficiens, non minuit
Legatum alterius, imo augetur per jus adcrescendi.


7. Suppose the Testator says, I give 50 l. to A. B. And more than that 100 l.
to C. D. In this case C. D. shall have an entire 100 l. but no more. Glos. in
l. Si servus Legatus.. Si ita scriptum. de Legatis. 3.
Possibly the transposition of the words may alter the Case, and make the
Legacy worth 150 l. to C. D. As if he should say [I give to A. B. 50 l. and 100
l. more than that to C. D.] But suppose he should say [I give 100 l. to C. D.
more than I have given to A. B.] when indeed he had given nothing at all to A.
B. In that case the Legacy of 100 l. is good to C. D. notwithstanding that
false Implication to A. B. Gloss. ibid.


8. A. B. makes C. D. his Executor, gives in his Will 1000 l. to J. G. and
therein says, I desire that J. G. will pay the said 1000 l. to the College of
W. and dies. After the said College is dissolved, and before J. G. had
received the said 1000 l. from the Executor of A. B. the Question is, whether
J. G. shall now recover the 1000 l. from the said Executor (the College to
whom he was to pay it, being now dissolved) or whether it shall remain in the
Executor? It is resolved, that in case there was no fault in J. G. why the 1000
l. was not paid to the College before its dissolution, and the payment
prevented for no other Reason but because of the said Dissolution; J. G. shall
in such case recover the 1000 l. from the said Executor. Gloss. in l. pater
filium.. fidei commisit. de Leg. 3.


9. If a Testator bequeath 1(...) l. to A. B. and C. D. And after one of them
appears incapable of taking by the Legacy, the other shall have only 50 l. and
not the whole 100 l. l. Si Titio. de Legate. 2. and Gloss. ibid.
Yet there are, and they of the most Learned, who hold, That if one of the
Legataries be incapable, his proportion of the Legacy shall accrue to his
Collegatary, Gloss. min. in l. qui duos reos. de Leg. 2. and Bald. in l. ^am
quam. in fin. C. de Fidei commissis.
as is evident by the former Case of the Tombstone; and never fails where the
Legacy is in the Conjunctive, by the Law of Accression or jure Aderescendi.

10. A. B. pawned a Jewel with C. D. for 100 l. then in his Will makes his Son
his Executor, and orders that C. D. should sell the Jewel, and out of the
Proceed thereof pay himself the 100 l. and restore the overplus of the value to
his Daughter. Whether may the Daughter compel C. D. to sell the Jewel, and
restore her the overplus? It is held in the Negative. But she may compel her
Brother, who is her Fathers Executor, to Commence his Action at Law against C.
D. in order to the Premises. l. Si servus legatus.. qui Margarita. and gloss.
ibid. de Legate. 3.
Or if the Testator say, I will that C. D. receive 100 l. and restore the
Jewel, to my Daughter (not expressing of whom he shall receive the 100 l.) In
that case the Executor is liable for the 100 l. Gloss. ibid.


11. Suppose a Testator in his Will says, Whoever shall be my Executor for the
Goods and Chattels I have in Ireland, shall give 10 l. to A. B. in Dublin; the
Testator makes three Executors for his said Estate in Ireland, and dies. The
Question is, whether every of these Co-executors (each of them having
Administered to the said Irish Estate, and each of them having a part thereof
in his possession) is obliged to pay 10 l. to A. B? And whether that universal
word in the Legacy [whoever] has that force in it as to make each of them
obliged in the case for 10 l. each. It is Resolved A. B. shall have but 10 l.
in all to be paid by, from, and among all the three Executors. l. Si quis in
sundi. gloss. ib. de Legate. 1.
The Reason is Evident because they all make but one Representative, being
distinct rather in their persons, than in their Office.

12. A Testator having made A. B. and C. D. his Executors, in his Will faith,
That either A. B. shall pay 10 l. to J. G. in lieu of a Legacy, or C. D. alone
shall be his Executor; and dies. They both Administer. In this case J. G. may
sue both of them for the whole Legacy, and C. D. is as far forth liable to the
payment thereof as A. B. l. Si ex toto. De Legate. 1.


13. A Testator, whose Wife is big with Child, says, I will that if there be
any Daughter born to me, my Executor shall pay her 100 l. and dies. After the
Wife is delivered of Twins, viz. Two Daughters. In this case the Executor shall
pay 100 l. to each, unless it appear the Testator intended the contrary. Gloss.
in l. filiabus. de Legate. 2.
In like manner, if a man bequeaths 1000 l. to his Daughters (without other
words) and dies, and his Wife after his death be within due time delivered of
another Daughter, that Posthume Daughter shall claim proportionably with the
others in the 1000 l. if the Testator by his Will made no other provision for
her. Dict. l. filiabus.


14. A Testator bequeaths in this manner, viz. I give to A. B. 300 l. And I
will that my Executors do pay 100 l. thereof out of the Arrears of Rent due to
me out of such Lands, naming them, the other 200 l. out of such and such Goods
to be sold; after the Testator receives in his life time the said Arrears of
Rent, and Converts them to other uses, and dies without altering his Will. In
this case A. B. shall notwithstanding have the whole 300 l. The Reasons in Law
are, (1) Because it was no Condition but only a Demonstration that had relation
to the Legacy bequeathed. (2) Because a bare designation how or whence a Legacy
may be paid, set after a Legacy given, makes it not Conditional. l. quidam. and
gloss. ibid. de Legate. 1. and Bartol. in dict. L.


15. Suppose a Testator says, I bequeath some Money for the repairing of my
Parish Church (not expressing how much) In this case the Legacy in favor of
Pious uses, is good, though it be somewhat uncertain; And his Executor shall
expend so much Money as will suffice for the repairing thereof, unless it
require a vast Sum, at least much too great for the Testators Estate
conveniently to bear; In which case it shall be presumed the Testator intended
no more than his Estate would conveniently admit; and the Ordinary in such case
shall moderate the Sum with respect had to the Testators Estate. l. quidam. and
gloss. ibid. de Legate. 2.


16. A man possessed of Goods and Chattels in England and Ireland, makes his
last Will and Testament, and therein his Son, a Minor, his sole Executor, and
A. B. his Guardian, and the Overseer of his said Will, to whom he therein
bequeaths 100 l. and dies. A. B. willing to have himself excused from the said
Guardianship in part, refuses it as to the Estate in Ireland. In this case he
shall lose the whole Legacy of 100 l. because the Law is, That a Legatary
refusing the Office or Duty imposed on him by the Will, though but in part,
forfeits his Legacy in the whole. l. etiam si. de legate. 1. and gloss. ibid.
and Bart. in dict. L.


17. A Testator makes his last Will and Testament, and therein appoints A. B.
and C. D. his Executors; after does annex a Codicil to his Will, and therein
says, I will that A. B. one of my Executors shall give J. G. 10 l. when I
shall have given him the said A. B. 100 l. And dies without bequeathing him any
such 100 l. The Questions are, whether A. B. by reason of such words spoken by
the Testator may have a right to that 100 l? And whether he be obliged to pay
10 l. to J. G? They are both answered in the Negative. Gloss. in l. Titia. de
Legate. 2.
The reason in Law is, because words merely Enunciative, relating to something
that should be done in time past or to come, without expressing the very thing
it self, signify nothing as to a sufficient disposal of any thing, which is
not deduceable from any such bare Enunciations. Bart. in dict. L.


18. If the Testator says, I give thee 100 l. when thou shall Marry, and thou
art Married at that time when the Testator so made his Testament, and demandest
the 100 l. upon the Testators death. In this case thou shall have the 100 l. if
the Testator at the giving thereof were ignorant of thy being then Married. But
if he then knew thereof, thou shall not have it till thou art Married a second
time. l. si ita.. si pater. and gloss. ib. de Legate. 2.


19. If in two several and distinct Writings or Instruments, bearing one and
the same date, the same last Will and Testament be found written verbatim, save
that in the one there is mention made of a lesser Legacy to one, than there is
to him in the other; the lesser only is due. As thus; A. B. going beyond Sea
makes his last Will and Testament, the Tenor of which Will is exemplified or
duplicated in two distinct Papers, as if the one was only a Duplicate of the
other; only in the one of these is found a Legacy of 100 l. to C. D. But in the
other a Legacy only of 50 l. to him; whereof the Testator takes one with him to
Sea, the other he leaves at home behind him. In this case C. D. ought not to
have more than one of these Legacies, and that the lesser also, viz. That of
the 50 l. only. l. Sempronius. and gloss. ib. de Legate. 2.


20. A Testator being possessed of 800 l. value in Goods, appoints A. B. and C.
D. his Executors, and bequeaths 400 l. to A. B. And after says, whoever shall
be my Executor, shall pay 200 l. to J. G. and gives several other Legacies to
the full value of his 800 l. Estate, and dies. C. D. refuses the Executorship.
In this case A. B. is obliged to pay full 600 l. to the Legataries, though 400
l. of the 800 l. were first given to himself. l. Si Titio. and gloss. ibid. de
Legate. 2.
Which differs from the Law as now practiced, That after Debts paid a
Legatary-Executor may first satisfy himself.

21. Any words, though in themselves of a defective signification, yet if such
as whence the Testators mind or meaning is rationally deduceable and
consequentially Colligeable, are sufficient to uphold a Legacy; and therefore
if a Testator willing to bequeath 100 l. to A. B. does but say in his last Will
and Testament, I desire that A. B. would be contented with 100 l. Or that A. B.
would be satisfied with 100 l. or the like; It is a good Legacy to him of 100
l. l. Peto Luci. and gloss. ibid. de Legate. 2.


22. An imperfect Speech by the Testator, which in it self leaves the sense
incomplete, either spoken or written by the Testator in his last Will and
Testament, is legally reduceable to a good Construction for the upholding of a
Legacy, if the words precedent or subsequent hold good congruity therewith; as
thus, A man in his last Will and Testament inter alia says, [To my Son William
100 l.] In the words precedent he had said [I leave my Dwelling House to my
Daughter Anne] Or in the words subsequent he says [I give 10 l. to my Brother
George] In such case albeit the words [I Bequeath, or I Give, or I Leave] or
the like be omitted in that imperfect Speech relating to his Son William, yet
in regard they are joined with the words precedent or subsequent, it shall in
construction of Law be understood as if they were joined also to the words
relating to his Son William, by reason of its congruity therewith, and thereby
making the sense perfect. Otherwise if it were incongruous; As suppose the
Testator had said [That my Son William 100 l. or from my Son William 100 l.]
And in the words precedent or subsequent he had said as formerly; In such case
there would be no congruity with the said last imperfect Speech relating to his
Son William, nor can they be joined thereto without plain incongruity; and
therefore in that case the Rule aforesaid would not hold. l. cum pater. gloss.
in 22. cum impersecta. de Leg. 2.


23. A Testator makes three Executors, and appoints one of them by Name to take
care of his Funeral, for which purpose he does order him to receive 100 l.
before hand. The Testator being dead, he receives the 100 l. of his
Co-executors, but does not disburse above 60 l. about the Funeral. The Question
is, whether he shall retain the other 40 l. to his own use. The Answer is
Negative, for that it belongs to all the Executors alike. l. Lucius Titius.. A
te peto. and glos. ibid. de Legate. 2.


24. If a Sum of Money be bequeathed to certain persons, on condition of
something to be performed, the failure of one of them shall not prejudice the
Legacy of another; as thus, viz. The Testator makes his three Sons his
Executors, and in his Will says [I give to my Neighbor A. B. 100 l. and to
such of my Sons as shall come to my Funeral] and dies. Neither of his Sons are
at his Funeral. The Question is, whether A. B. shall have the whole 100 l. It
is answered in the Affirmative, and that there is nothing in this case to
diminish any part of the Legacy to A B. C. de Cad. tol. l. unica.. ubi autem.
and. si vero non omnes. l. si tibi and ci. Et gloss. ibid. de Legate. 3.
But if the words had been [I give to A. B. and such of my Sons as come to my
Funeral 100 l.] In that case A. B. should have only 50 l. The reason of the
difference is evident; for in the former case the Legacy is given
Disjunctively, but not so in the latter. As has been formerly stated and
Resolved.

25. Suppose a Testator in his Will says [I give 10 l. to A. B. And if he
chance to loose it, I give him 10 l. more] In this short case are three points.
(1) Whether the second Legacy be good? (2) Whether the Executor may require
caution of the Legatary, That he shall so secure the first 10 l. that he may
not be liable to pay him a second 10 l. (3) Whether in case A. B. lose the 10
l. twice, or thrice, or oftener, the Executor be still obliged to pay him 10 l.
more. The first of these points has its solution by answering the second and
third. Now the Law does not warrant the Executor to require such caution in
this case from the Legatary; to whom, if he should lose the 10 l. more than
once, the Executor is not obliged to pay a third 10 l. which resolves the first
point in the Affirmative. Fidei commissa.. si quis december. and gloss. mag. and
min. ibid.


26. A man dying intestate, A. B. pretended as if he would take out Letters of
Administrations of his Goods; the Intestate dyed indebted 100 l. to C. D. So
that A. B. might legally have been sued for it, if he had Administered to the
Intestates Goods as he pretended he would. C. D. makes his Will, and therein J.
G. his Executor, and gives 100 l. to the said A. B. saying withal that his
Executor might easily satisfy that 100 l. to the said A. B. for that he the
said A. B. owed him the said C. D. the Testator 100 l. by reason of his
Administration to the said Intestate. C. D. dies. After A. B. would not
Administer to the said Intestates Estate as he pretended, but demanded the 100
l. Legacy given him by C. D. The Question is, whether he ought to have it? It
is resolved in the Negative, because it seems to contradict the main intention
of C. D. the Testator, who gave him that 100 l. as real Administrator to the
said Intestate who owed C. D. 100 l. But after appearing no other than a
Pretender to the said Administration, the Law for the reason aforesaid excludes
him from being a Real Legatary to the said 100 l. dict. l. fidei commissa..
item. de Legate. 3.


27. A Testator says in his Will, That his Executor shall give his Lands
situate in S. to A. B. and to C. D. more than this 10 l. The Question is, of
what import the words [more than this] are in the Legacy of 10 l. to C. D? It
is held, That by reason of the words C. D. shall have the whole 10 l. and one
Moiety of the said Lands Devised in manner aforesaid. l. si Sic locutus. and
gloss. ibid. de Leg. 3.


28. A Legacy of 100 l. is given to A. B. on this Condition that he buy such a
House of C. D. which is worth 50 l. and give it to J. G. The Legatary A. B.
offers 50 l. for the House to C. D. He will not sell it him under 100 l. Q.
whether A. B. is obliged to give the 100 l. for the House, that so he may
deliver it to J. G. according to the Testators will and meaning? It is resolved
in the Negative; But he shall give the Testators value and estimate thereof,
viz. 50 l. to J. G. Gloss. in l. non dubium. de Legate. 3.


29. Suppose the Testator give thee 100 l. That therewith thou may do
something for a third person, specifying the person and the thing which the
Testator would have done. Thou demandest the 100 l. of the Executor; he
refuses to pay it thee unless thou give security to do therewith what the
Testator required. The refusal of payment by the Executor is good; thou shall
not have the 100 l. till thou give good security to do therewith as by the
Testator is enjoined. l. si tibi Legatum. and gloss. ibid. de Leg. 3.


30. Suppose a Testator gives 500 l. to one, 400 l. to another, and 300 l. to a
third. And after says in his Will That A. B. shall have as much as one of the
Legataries. The Question is, what A. B. shall have? Some have supposed, that he
ought to have 500 l. because in the greater the less is included; but the Law
which prevails in such case is otherwise; he shall have only 300 l. and no
more, because the Executor being burdened with such Legacies, ought to have it
in his power to give which proportion he thinks fit; And because it is a Rule
in Law, That in all doubtful cases relating to the quantity of a Legacy, the
least is to be understood. l. qui concubinam.. cum ita legatum. and gloss. ib.
de Legate. 3.


31. A. B. makes his last Will and Testament, wherein he disinherits his Son,
and makes a Stranger his sole Executor, gives diverse Legacies, and after in his
Will says, That in case his Will should hereafter happen by any means to be so
invalidated as to be pronounced Judicially null and void, that thereby he
should happen to dye Intestate, That then however his full purpose, mind and
resolution is, That from such Administrator ab. Intestato (whoever it should
happen to be) shall be given 100 l. to C. and 200 l. to D. and dies. After his
said Son does commence his Action and gets Judgment against the Will, which is
Judicially pronounced null and void; the Son obtains Letters of Administration
of his Fathers Estate ab Intestato. The Question is, whether the Son be obliged
to pay the Legacies left by his now Intestate Father? It is Resolved in the
Negative; for that not any thing now is vallid (in such case) which related to
his Fathers mind or meaning in the said pretended Will as aforesaid. L. nec
Fidei commissa. and gloss. ibid. de Legate. 3.


32. To conclude. A Testator writ his Testament with his own hand, and therein
said, That in regard he had found A. B. a very faithful Servant to him, and
that he had done him many eminent Services, he desired to leave him not by way
of a Legacy, but by way of Gratuity 100 l. which he would have his Executor to
pay him as a reward of his good Services, and dyed, Now in truth A. B. was such
a person as by Law was incapable of taking by a Devise. The Question is,
whether A. B. may demand the 100 l. not as a Legacy, but as a reward for his
Services aforesaid? It is held in the Negative; because it will be presumed it
was left him in that manner in fraudem legis, on purpose to defraud the Law,
which rendered him by reason of some legal Impediments incapable of taking by a
Testament; And for that a Testators Testimentary Confession of his being
obliged or in debt to a person in himself incapable, has no operation in the
Law, Cum quis.. Titia. and gloss. ibid. de Legate. 3.
other than to raise the Presumption so much the stronger, that it was made
only in fraudem legis, specially when such Confession is voluntarily made in
favor of a person incapable. Gloss. min. ibid.


CHAP. XXIII. Of Legacies Relating to Debts, with certain Cases in the Law
touching the same.
1. THings in Action, as Debts, are Deviseable by Will; therefore if the
Testator bequeath any Debt due to him on an Obligation, or a Contract, or the
like, the Bequest is good; for Obligations, as also Counterpanes of Leases and
the like may be Devised; only the Legatary cannot sue upon the Obligation in
his own Name, nor enter for the Condition broken upon the Lease, if there be
cause; but he may cancel, give, sell, or deliver up the Obligation to the
Obligor, or surrender the Counterpane to the Lessee. Perk. Sect. 527.
And it is an infallible Rule, That whatsoever may come to the Executor after
the Testators death in respect of his Executorship, may be Devised by the last
Will and Testament of the Testator. Therefore a Testator may bequeath a Debt
due to him, and if he does not make the Legatary his Executor as to that Debt,
and he who is his Executor, shall refuse to sue the Debtor, that so the
Legatary may receive it, in this case the Legatary may compel the Executor
either to recover it himself, and so to pay it to the Legatary, or to give him
power to sue for and recover it himself in the Executor's Name; And this the
Legatary may compel the Executor unto by conventing him before the Ordinary,
and on pain of Ecclesiastical censures to make him a Letter of Attorney for
recovery of the Debt to him bequeathed, in the Executor's Name, in case the
Executor himself does not sue for it for the Legataries use, who cannot
otherwise sue the Debtor, because he does not represent the Testators person.
But if it be such a Case of Action as is altogether uncertain, as where a man
has an Action against another for taking away his Goods, or for some Trespass
done, the Testator in his life time, or to compel another to make an Account,
or the like; such Cases of Action are not Deviseable.

2. Now the Law takes notice but of four ways, within the Circumference
whereof all Legacies relating to Debts do fall; As (1) when the Creditor
bequeaths to one what his Debtor owes him; Or (2) when he bequeaths it to the
Debtor himself; Or (3) when the Debtor bequeaths to the Creditor; Or (4) when a
third person bequeaths to a Creditor what his Debtor owes. Suppose therefore
that a Creditor should bequeath to one what A. B. owes him, without expressing
either the thing or the quantity; in this case he seems to bequeath his right
of Action, nothing else; So that the Testators Executor is no way obliged to
such Legatary further than to deliver him the Obligation or Bond, and yield his
Name (if need be) to the Action. l. si sic.. si mihi. ff. de Legate. 1.
Yea, though the quantity were expressed by the Testator, yet the Executor is
not bound to pay it to the Legatary, if the Testator joined the very person of
the Debtor himself with the execution or payment of the Legacy, as if he should
say [I would have A. B. receive the 10 l. of C. D. which he owes me] yet even
in that case, if the 100 l. cannot be recovered without Law, it shall be at the
Executors, not the Legataries cost; and at the Legataries, not the Executors
peril. Papon. in tit. de legate. Tritic. verse. Toutes fois, etc. and in Authen.
Nunc si. C. de Litigios. and dict. L. si sic.. ult.


3. Every Bond or Obligation is both Active and Passive, but in diverse
respects; Active in respect of the Creditor, Passive in respect of the Debtor:
Active, when the Creditor bequeaths to a third person what his Debtor does owe
him; Passive, when the Debtor bequeaths to his Creditor what himself owes to
the other. Between which two the difference is great; for when the Creditor
bequeaths, he bequeaths either to the Debtor himself, or to some other person;
In both which cases a Right is bequeathed, but with this difference, in the
former a Bond or Obligation is bequeathed, in the latter a Discharge or Release.

4. And when a Creditor bequeaths a Debt, it is not always material to insert
any certain Sum of Money in the Legacy of that Debt, for suppose the Testator
says [I bequeath the 10 l. which A. B. owes me] be it to A. B. himself or any
other; in that case a right rather than any certain Sum is understood to be
given; because if A. B. owed the Testator nothing, then nothing is bequeathed,
and so the Legacy Fruitless. l. si sic.. si mihi.. quod si. ff. de Legate. 1.


5. But now on the other hand, when a Debtor bequeaths what he owes, and the
Legacy be given to the Creditor himself; In that case it is very material to
see whether any certain Sum be expressed in the Legacy or not; for if there be,
as when a Debtor-Testator says [I bequeath to A. B. 10 l. which I owe him] In
that case not so much a bare right only, as a certain Sum of Money seems to be
bequeathed him; for which reason a Legacy of 10 l. will be good to A. B. albeit
the Testator owed him nothing. l. legavi. in fin. ff. de Liberat. Legate. and l.
2. C. de falls. cause.


6. But if there were no certain Sum expressed by the Debtor-Testator, as if he
had only said [I bequeath to A. B. what I owe him] It is a Fruitless Legacy, if
he owed him nothing.. Sed si uxori. Inst. de Legate.
In like manner, if a Testator says [I give my Wife what I had with her in
Marriage, or her Marriage Portion] if he had nothing with her in Marriage, the
Legacy signifies nothing; yet if he had said [I give my Wife 100 l. which I had
with her in Marriage, or for her Marriage-Portion] though in truth he had
nothing with her the Legacy shall be good, and is worth her 100 l. Instit. ibid.
Or having had 100 l. with her, shall in his Will say [I give my Wife 200 l.
which I had with her in Marriage] the Legacy is good for 200 l. yea though he
should therein refer himself to the Articles of Marriage, and add [as is
contained in certain Covenants of Marriage made between us] The Reason is,
because the Law more considers the thing it self when in terminis expressed in
a Legacy, than any false demonstration thereof. l. 3. c. de falls. cause. and l.
1. in fin. C. de Dot. prelegat.
Unless it can be sufficiently proved, That the Testator meant otherwise than
he spoke, or that he erred in supposing that to be true which was not so, In
which case the Legacy avails nothing, albeit a certain Sum were in terminis
expressed by him. l. 1. C. de falls. cause.


7. For which Reason the Legacy is not good in such case, unless he certainly
knew he owed nothing to the Legatary; otherwise it is, if he supposed he did,
when indeed he did not. Grass.. legatum. q. 59.
And the Reason why a Legacy given by a Creditor, is nothing worth though the
Sum be expressed, if nothing be due to him: And quite otherwise in the like
case if the Legacy be given by a Debtor; the Reason I say of this Difference
is, because the Creditor is understood to bequeath only a Debt, Bond, or
Obligation: but the Debtor does bequeath a certain Sum by Name, or the very
thing it self expressly.

8. A Testator in his last Will and Testament inter alia says, [whereas I have
in my custody a certain Instrument of Writing, wherein A. B. stands bound in
the Sum of 400 l. for the payment of 200 l. to C. D. I will that my Executor
shall restore the said Bond to C. D. or pay him 200 l.] After the Testators
death the Bond cannot be found among any of his Writings, nor any knowledge
thereof possibly had. In this case Judgment was given against the Executor, and
he condemned in 200 l. to C. D. as a good Legacy to him by the said Testator.
Anto. Faber. lib. 6. tit. 17. def. 17.


9. When a Debt is bequeathed, whereon nothing is due, the Bequest is
Fruitless, if the Testator believed it to be a good Debt, albeit the Sum or
quantity thereof were expressed in the same; But if the Testator when he
bequeathed such Debt, knew there was nothing due upon it, the Legacy is good.
Surd. Decis. 142.
And although he who bequeaths a Bond, bequeaths the Debt contained therein;
Mant. lib. 9. tit. 1. nu. 9.
yet he that bequeaths to his Debtor the Silver Cup or the like, which he had
of his in pawn for 5 l. does not thereby bequeath him that Debt of 5 l. l. 1.
ff. de Liberat, Legate.
The Reason is, because there is nothing but the Pawn or Pledge released, the
duty and personal obligation still remains. Note, that he who bequeaths his
Debts, is understood to bequeath his Credits, that is, the Moneys or what else
is owing to him; for Debts, as was before observed, are taken both Actively and
Passively; but in this sense of a Creditors bequeathing them, they are only
taken Actively.

10. If a Testator bequeath to A. B. whatever C. D. owe him, and C. D. at the
same time wrongfully detained the possession of certain Lands from the
Testator; these Lands shall pass by the Devise to A. B. as well as the Money
which C. D. owed the Testator; as has been adjudged; Thesaur. Decis. 235.
not at the Common, but Civil Law; for it is more than presumed, that at the
Common Law such words, though in a Will not Nuncupative but Written, are no
capable of being by any legal Intellect strained to a Latitude of that extent;
or whether he that bequeaths his Books of Account, or his Shop Books, shall
thereby be understood to bequeath the Debts contained therein, De Praetis. lib.
4. int. 3. dub. 7. nu. 22. and Mant. lib. 9. tit. 1. nu. 9.
as also the Moneys in the said Books Calendaried by way of Account, and
designed for Trade, as is likewise evident by the Civil Law. Pap Notar. 1. tit.
de Leg. verse. African. and l. qui fillam. ff. de Legate. 3. and ibi Cujac.


11. Although the Bequest of a Debt is a good Legacy so long as it is a Debt,
and the Bequest unrevoked, yet the Payment of a Debt to the Testator in his
lifetime extinguisheth the Legacy thereof formerly Bequeathed by him; Not so,
in case it were paid to his Executor soon after his Decease. l. si id quod. ff.
de Liberat. Legate.
And this holds true, albeit the Debt consisted in some certain specifical
thing, if it perished in the Testators time; otherwise the Legacy is good.
Bald. in l. qui post. Nu. 11. C. de Leg.
Likewise, the Testators giving an Acquittance to the Debtor does extinguish a
bequeathed Debt. l. non quocunque. qui caium. ff. de Legate. 1.
The Reason hereof is, because by all these ways the very substance it self of
the Debt, which was the thing bequeathed, is destroyed, l. fidei commissa.. si
rem suam. ff. de Legate. 3.
yet here Note withal, That if a Testator does demand a Debt, which he had
bequeathed, not with any mind of abating the Bequest, but fearing the failure
or future Insolvency of the Debtor, and shall after keep this Money by it self,
with some signification therewith what Money it was; in such case the Legacy is
good, notwithstanding such payment precedent; which holds yet more strong, in
case the Testator demands it not, but the Debtor himself comes and offers it,
and with such earnestness as the Creditor-Testator cannot well refuse it.
Mantic. de Conject. ult. vol. lib. 12. tit. 2. nu. 19.
And if afterward the Testator makes a Purchase with part or all of this money
which he so demanded, not with any mind of abating the Legacy as aforesaid, the
Bequest remains still good to the Legatary. dict. l. fideicomissa and dict. si
rem suam. ff. de Legate. 3. and Bald. ubi supra. nu. 7. and Alex. Cons. 157. n^.
7. in fin. vol. 7.
So that if I bequeath thee a certain Debt, and afterward demand and receive
that Debt, and it appear not to what end or with what intent I did this, the
Legacy of that Debt seems to be extinguished, unless I deposited the Money and
set it aside or apart for the design of the said Bequest. Al x. ibid. and Cas.
n did.. si rem suam.
And although whilst the Testator lived, the Debtor were judicially condemned
to him on the account of that Debt bequeathed, but not paid, the Legacy will
hold. l. nepoti. in fin. ff. de fund. instruc. and Bald. in dict. l. qui post.
nu 8. c. de Legate.
Or in case the Testator having bequeathed Money owing to him, shall receive
Goods in satisfaction of the said Debt, or it be legally so adjudged to him,
and shall preserve such Goods, the Legacy shall not be understood as void,
unless the Testator does after alienate the said Goods. Bald. ibid. nu. 12. and
Roman. Cons. 229. nu. 3.


12. A. B. and C. D. are jointly Indebted in 100 l. by Bond to E. F. who makes
his last Will and Testament and therein bequeaths in this manner, viz. [what A.
B. owes me I give to J. G. and what C. D. owes me I give to J. W.] In this case
it is said, that the Testators Executor is obliged to give the Action upon the
Bond to one of the Legataries, and the value of that Action to the other. l.
non quocunque gloss. in. fundus mihi. ff. de Legate. 1.
Which seems not over-consonant to Reason, for they both owed him but one 100
l. yet the Executor after this rate must pay the Legataries 200 l. Besides, in
the same Lawit is acknowledged, that if the Testator after his Testament made,
shall Release one of the said Debtors, the Legacy is void as to both the
Legataries, because the Release of one Joynt-Debtor is the Discharge of all the
rest. gloss. ibid.
Which plainly Implies there is but one Debt in the Case; and if that be
bequeathed twice, it can be due but once; the balance therefore seems more
equilibrous, if the 100 l. were equally divided between the two Legataries.

13. A. B. makes his last Will and Testament, and therein appoints his Executor
to give C. D. 100 l. provided that C. D. Surrender into his Executors hands a
certain Bond or Obligation than in the custody of the said C. D. wherein A. B.
the Testator stood bound to him the said C. D. in 40 l. and dies. C. D.
likewise dies before the said Bond or Obligation is surrendered. The Question is
whether the Executor of C. D. can claim the said Legacy of 100 l. It is
resolved, That if the said Bond or Obligation were in being, and in the
possession of the said C. D. at that time when the Testator made his Testament,
and that C. D. knew of the Contents thereof, his Executor shall not have the
Legacy of 100 l. because C. D. performed not the Condition of surrendering the
said Bond or Obligation to the Testators Executor) and therefore could not
transmit the claim of the Legacy to his Executor: But if it was not at that
time in being, or not in the power of C. D. or that he were ignorant of the
said Devise conditionally bequeathed, there seems an impossibility imposed on
the Condition of the Legacy to C. D. which makes the Condition void, and
consequently the Legacy pure and absolute to C. D. whereby it becomes
Transmissable to his Executor. gloss. in l. ab omnibus ff. de Legate. 1.
The Reason in Law is, because a Legataries death before the Existence of a
possible Condition does extinguish the Legacy; otherwise, where the Condition
is impossible. Bart. in dict. L.. in Testamento.


14. A. B. was obliged to C. D. in 10 l. Absolutely, in 20 l. Conditionally,
and in 40 l. at a day yet to come. C. D. in his last Will and Testament says,
[That whatever A. B. ought to pay me, I give and bequeath to J. G.] and dies.
In this case the 40 l. whose day of payment was not then come, is not comprised
within that Legacy to J. G. Because of that word [ought] otherwise, if he had
said, I give to J. G. what A. B. ought to pay me now or hereafter. l. si
scripsisset. and gloss. ib. ff. de Legate. 2.


15. A. B. makes his Son and Daughter his Executors, and does Devise certain
Tenements, Bonds, and Obligations to each of them. After in his Will says
[That he would have his Son pay all his Debts and Legacies, that so his
Daughter may enjoy her Legacy entire to her self, and undiminish'd] The
Question is, whether the Son ought to pay all his Debts and Legacies? So as
that the Daughter may have her full and entire part and portion? It is resolved
in the Affirmative. l. nomen debitoris. glos. in. uni ex haeredibus. ff. de
Legate. 3.
Yet understand it only as to her entire part and portion of her Legacy, not as
to what she might otherwise claim as an Executrix.

16. A Testator in his Will appointed, That his Executor should lend A. B. 100
l. for three years at two per cent Interest. Q. Whether A. B. is obliged to
give security by Bond with sufficient Sureties for repayment of the Principal
with the said Interest at the three years end? Some are of opinion that he
ought; but the Law is otherwise, and his own Bond is sufficient. l. fidei
commissa.. si haeres. and glos. ibid, ff. de Leg. 3. and l. omnibus. ff. de
Judic.


17. If a Bond or Debt by specialty be bequeathed to any one, the Executor is
discharged if he Assign the Debt or Action to the Legatary, albeit the Debtor
be Insolvant; as thus, A. B. makes his Will, and C. D. his Executor; in which
Will he says, I give to my Cousin J. G. the Bond or Obligation wherein J. S.
stands bound to me in 100 l. After he adds a Codicill, and therein forbids the
exacting the 100 l. of or from J. S. and moreover does in the same Codicill
require of his Executor C. D. That out of the Debt which N. O. does owe him he
should pay the 100 l. to his Cousin J. G. and dies. N. O. mentioned in the
Codicill is found Insolvant. The Question is, whether his Executor C. D. be
obliged to pay the full 100 l. to J. G. It is held in the Negative, and that
the Executor is Discharged from J. G. if he yield him the Action against N. O.
though Insolvant. gloss. in. Civibus. l. Lucius. ff. de Legate. 2.


18. A. B. owes the Testator 10 l. or a Horse, the Testator does bequeath the
10 l. to C. D. After the Debtor A. B. does deliver to the Testators Executor a
Horse, and is thereby discharged of the 10 l. because the Election was in him,
and the Legacy of 10 l. to C. D. is void. But suppose the Testator had
bequeathed the 10 l. to one, the Horse to another, and A. B. the Debtor having
the Election in him, paid the 10 l. to the Testators Executor; the Legacy of
the 10 l. in that case is good, and the Legacy of the Horse is void. Et vice
versa. Gloss. in l. ut haeredib. ff. de Legate. 2.
Or suppose that A. B. did owe the Testator 100 l. who says in his Will [That
how much Money my Executor shall recover from A. B. so much I give to C. D.] In
this case, the Legatary may compel the Executor to recover the whole 100 l.
for him from A. B. for this is no Conditional Legacy; because, if so, then the
Legatary could not sue the Executor, unless he had recovered the Money from A.
B. Gloss. ibid.


19. Debts by Bonds or Specialties are not comprised in a general Legacy; as
suppose the Testator does Devise to his Brother the one half of his Goods and
Chattels (except the House wherein he lives, left him by his Father, with all
the things therein) and make him his Executor of half of his Estate; and then
Devised to his two Uncles the other half, and makes them his Executors of that
Half. The Question is, whether all the things in the said excepted House to
belong to his said two Uncles, or to his Brother. In this case we must
distinguish between the things which were in the said Excepted House; for if
there were any Debts by Bonds, Specialty, or the like, they are not comprised
within the Exception made as aforesaid, but do belong both to the Brother, not
as a Legatary, but as Executor of a Moiety, and to the two Uncles as Executors
of the other Moiety; but if they are Silver, Houshold-goods, and other things
in the said excepted House, they belong to the two Uncles as Executors of a
Moiety, not to the Brother, who is barred by the said l) Gaius Scius. and gloss.
ibid. ff. de Legate. 2.
Exception. (r)

CHAP. XXIV. Touching Election in point of Legacies; To whom the Election of a
Legacy, expressed with too much Generality or Dubiety, belongs, whether to the
Executor or to the Legatary; with certain Cases in the Law touching the same.
1. AS preliminary to this, it is requisite to know, That a Legacy may be too
general, or of something too generally expressed, and that in a threefold
respect; As (1) when it refers to something that is understood by the Notion of
Genus generalissimum, as when the Testator says [I Bequeath something to A.
B.] In this case the Legacy is vain and Fruitless, because the Executor is
discharged by giving any thing, or the least of any thing; Or (2) when it
refers to something that is (if I may so say) sub-alternatively too general,
that is, such a general as is made up of innumerable distinct Specificals; as
if the Testator should say [I bequeath a living Creature to A. B.] In this case
also the Legacy is void, by reason as well of its supergenerality as
uncertainty; Or (3) when it refers to something less general, yet comprehensive
of many Individuals, for kind the same, but different in value or estimation;
as if the Testator should say [I bequeath a Horse to A. B.] Or, I bequeath a
Ship to A. B.] In this case it must be distinguished, whether such thing has
its Composition terminated by Nature, as Ox, Horse, etc. Or by the Art of Man,
as House, Coach, etc. In the former of these Cases the Legacy is good, and the
Executor (if there be Assets) must procure it for the Legatary, in case the
Testator had it not of his own at the time of his death. Gomez. Resol. tom. 1.
c. 12. nu. 32. and to. 1. c. 11. nu. 8 and Grass. l. legatum. q. 61. and Ang.
Matheac. lib. 2. c. 21. nu. 2. de Legate.
But in the latter Case, the Legacy is not good, unless the Testator were a
Proprietor thereof at the time of his Decease. Gomez. ib. and Vasq. de Succes.
Progr. lib. 3. 27. nu. 35. and Gras. dict. q. 61. and l. Si Domus. ff. de
Legate. 1. and Cujae. ad L. Si servus. cum homo. ff. de Legate. 1.


2) Now the Question is, when the Testator does Devise in such a general manner
as is before described to be Devisable, who shall have the Election, whether
the Executor or the Legatary? The first and Common answer is, That he shall
have it, to whom the Testator by his Will in the manner of his bequeathing
directs the Executative power of the Legacy, in case he has not otherwise
determined expressly the Election. For Illustration; The Testator says, [I will
that my Executor shall give A. B. a Horse] There the Executor Elects. Or thus,
[I will that A. B. shall have a Horse] there the Legatary Elects. But if the
Testator direct the Executative power to neither of them, than the Legatary
shall Elect, if the general Legacy be determined (as aforesaid) by Nature, and
it be found among the Testators Goods or Chattels; otherwise, the Executor
Elects, as when the general Legacy is determined by some Act of Man, Grass.
dict. l. legatum. quaest. 62.
for instance, in diverse Houses which the Testator has in the same
Corporation, and he Devises one of them, but describes not which; otherwise if
in diverse Corporations; for then it shall be understood of the House in that
Corporation where himself lived and dyed. Grass. ibid.


3. For the more transparent inspection into this matter, it is requisite
likewise to be known, and what indeed is plainly inferential from the Premises,
that there may be and frequently is such uncertainty in Legacies as does not
destroy them; This election, whereof we now speak, consists in such
uncertainties; But withal there are also such Obscurities, Dubieties, and
Ambiguities in some Legacies, as admit of no Election, but only a Declaration,
the Privilege whereof the Law ever Entitles the Executors and not the
Legataries unto. De Praetis. lib. 1. int. 1. dub. 3. Sol. 4. nu. 8.


4. Note, That if a Testator has but two things of the same kind, whereof he
indistinctly bequeaths one, the Legatary has the Election; if more than two,
the Executor. Charond. Obs. in verb. Electio. and l. qui duos. l. si quis..
penult. and l. legato.. ult. ff. de Legate. 1.
And if the Legatary having the Election shall delay it longer than need
requires, the Ordinary at the instance of the Executor may set the Legatary a
time, within which he shall determine his Election, on pain of forfeiting his
Election to the Executor. Fran. Grimand. l. 1. c. 26. De Usuris. l. Mancipiorum
l. si Optio. ff. de Opt Leg.
But if the Legatary happen to dye before his Election, his Executor shall have
it Ranchin. Decis. par. 1. Cons. 387. and Guide. Pap. quaest. 240. and charond.
Resp. lib. 4. cap. 95.


5. As it is a Question who shall have the Election, so likewise is it a
Question what or which the Elector may Elect. If the Election does belong to
the Legatary, and it be given him by the Testator, the DD. are much at variance
in the point; some holding that he may choose in that case the best of the
Devised Eligibles; Others say, not so, but in medio consistit Electio; Others
distinguish and say, That in such case if the thing Devised be found among the
Testators Goods he may choose the best, otherwise he must content himself with a
Mediocrity. De Prae^. lib. 1. int. 1. dub. 3. sol. 3. nu. 7. and l. unum.. si
rem. ff. de Legate. 2.
But the more received and approved Opinion is, That when the thing bequeathed
is the Testators, and he expressly give the Election to the Legatary, he may
then choose the best. l. 2. ff. de Opt. Legate.
And where ever the Law says the Legatary must regulate his Election, or take
the measure of his choice by a rule of Mediocrity, l. ulr. C. Commun. de Legate.
It is not meant of an Election given by the Testator to the Legatary himself,
but to a third person for him, who not choosing at all, the Law transfers the
choice not to the Executor, but to the Legatary. Cujac. Obs. lib. 23. cap. 14.


6. Where the Law, and not the Testator, does cast the Election upon the
Legatary, there and in that case he may not choose but what is inferior to the
best, where there are more things than two of the same kind, subject to the
Election. l. legato. ff. de Legate. 1. and De Praetis. dict. sol. 3. nu. 8.
On the other hand, when the Election belongs to the Executor, and the thing
generally Devised be found to be among the Testators Goods, and but two of that
kind, in that case the Executor may choose the worst of them for the Legatary.
l. apud Julianum.. Seio. ff. de Legate. 1.
Yea, though the Testator had more than two, or many of the same kind, so as
the general Legacy were of something inanimate, provided that that least or
worst be not decayed and altogether unprofitable, as Brass Money instead of the
real Diana, or decayed Wines instead of rich Canary. But when the general
Legacy is of things Animate, then the Executor ought to choose for the Legatary
as not the best, so not the worst, but at an equal distance between them both.
l. si haeres. ff. de Legate. 2.
But if the Legacy be not of generals, but of something certain and specifical,
yet which of them the Testator (he having many of the same kind) intended, is a
Non Constat; the Executor in that case may deliver the least; because now the
Question is not so much touching the Election as the Declaration, which the Law
ever gives to the Executor; for Election refers to uncertainties, but
Declaration to obscurities, as in the last precedent Case. l. in Obscuris. ff.
de Reg. jur. In obscuris sequimur quod Minimum est.


7. Suppose a Testator does bequeath a Horse or an Ox to A. B. which he will,
or which he shall choose; and he supposing an Ox only to have been given him
in the Will, makes no other demand of the Executor than of the Ox, who
delivers it him accordingly. Afterward finding his error and understanding that
he had it in his right to choose either a Horse or an Ox, demands a Horse and
restores the Ox. The Law is against him, and leaves him in this case without
Remedy. l. si is cui. and gloss. ibid. ff. de Legate. 2.
The Law is the same in case the Executor by the Will, having the Election in
himself, whether to give him the one or the other, but supposing a Horse only
to have been given him, does deliver it to him accordingly, and after finding
his Error would remand it, and give him an Ox; he cannot. Gloss. ibid.


8. If a man bequeath to A. B. a Horse or a Yoke of Oxen, and the Testator has
neither Horse nor Yoke of Oxen, nor that which he so bequeathed; yet is the
Legacy good, and the Executor chargeable therewith; In which case the Election
as to the value of the thing bequeathed, whether in the Executor or the
Legatary, may vary (as was formerly hinted) according to the Testators words in
the manner of the disposition it self. Perk. Sect. 511. 525.
And therefore if a man bequeath one of his Horses to A. B. not saying which
Horse, in this case A. B. shall have the Election, if there be more than one:
But if the Legacy be directed not to the Legatary but to the Executor, as when
the Testator says, [I will that my Executor shall deliver A. B. one of my
Horses] In that case the Executor has the Election, and may deliver which of
them, he will.

9. If the Testator says, [I give 10 l. to A. B. or C. D.] at my Executors
choice, or as my Executor shall choose; and the Executor shall after make choice
of one of them, and pay him 10 l. he is discharged from the other. But if he
will make choice of neither of them, each of them may demand the whole 10 l. as
if the Legacy were given to him alone; l. si Titio. and gloss. ibid. ff. de
Legate. 2.
and then he shall be preferred in this case who first Commences his Suit;
Bart. in dict. Leg. and Rubr. ibid.
In other Cases who first gets Judgment.

10. If there be a doubt and dispute between two persons pretending to the same
Legacy, to which of them it belongs; as if the Devise be to Thomas Styles,
without other description, distinction or discrimination of the Person, and
there be two of that Name, of equal respect with the Testator, or both alike,
his Friends or Acquaintance; In this case the Executor has his Election to.
deliver the Legacy to which of them he please. l. si quis servum. 3. ff. de
Legate. 2.
Yet some are of Opinion that in such case the Legacy is void and null by
reason of uncertainty. Gioss. ibid.


11. I Devise to A. B. my Dwelling House, if he does not choose my great Meadow
in Dales. This is all one as if I said, I Devise to A. B. my said House or
Meadow, which he will. l. cum ita. ff. de optio. Leg.
Or as if I said, I Devise to him my Meadow if he does not choose my
Dwelling House. In both which cases A. B. has his Election. Gloss. ibid.


12. If the Testator says that A. B. shall have one of his Horses, or that he
shall choose one of his Horses, which he will, and A. B. through a mistake does
choose a Mare; he has determined his Election, and though he repent of his
choice and would restore the Mare, he cannot choose again; Gloss. in L. servi.
ff. de legate. 1.
as also because Mares do pass in a Devise of all the Testators Horses. l
Martianus. ff. de Legate. 3. and Col. Lex. verb. Legate.


13. If a man having two Horses does bequeath one of them, but it does not
appear which, in regard the words of the Legacy are not directed either to the
Executor or Legatary, so as thence to infer unto which of them he intended the
Election, In such case the Legatary shall have the Election; because it being
certain that a Horse he bequeathed, but uncertain which, not expressing himself
at which certain Horse he aimed the Legacy: The Executor shall not in this case
interpret d) Gloss. in l. qui duos. ff. de Legate. 1.
his mind; for in all doubtful Cases it shall be construed in favor of the
Legatary.

14. A. B. Covenants with C. D. to convey him such a Field, or to pay him 50 l.
which of the two C. D. please. C. D. makes his Will, and therein gives to J. G.
whatever A. B. owed to him the said C. D. and dies. The Question is, what J. G.
can by this Devise recover from the Executor of C. D. The answer is, he may
compel him to Commence an Action against the said A. B. And as C. D. had his
Election whether he would have the Field or 50 l. which Election upon his
Decease came to his Executor: So now by virtue of this Devise that Election
shall be in J. G. as the Legatary of C. D. Gloss. in. si quis ita. l. si sic
legatum. ff. de Legate. 1.


15. A Testator having eight fat Oxen, says I give them all to A. B. or 10 l.
for each of them, at his own choice. A. B. does choose four of the Oxen, and
does demand 40 l. for the other four. This the Legatary may not do; for the
Legacy of all the Oxen is but one Legacy, and therefore may not be Divided. l.
neminem. ff. de Legate. 2. and gloss. in l. si ex toto. ff. de Legate. 1.
Also the value of the Oxen is but one Legacy; for which reason may that
neither be Divided. Gloss. ibid.
The Case is the same, if a man bequeath 50 Gallons of Sack or Five Shillings
for each Gallon, at the Legataries choice; he cannot divide the Legacy, but
must take it all in Sack, or all in Money; Otherwise if such Division were
Admissable, and the Testator should give such a Horse or Five pounds at the
Legataries choice, this absurdity would follow, the Legatary might take Fifty
Shillings, and one half of the Horse. in dict. glos.


CHAP. XXV. When and How Legacies are Null, or become void or voidable; with
Certain Cases in the Law touching Revocations.
1. THe Reason why Legacies and Bequests do so often prove Ineffectual, is not
so much because they were originally Null, or became afterward void or
voidable by any thing relating either to the State or Person of either the
Testator or the Legatary, or by reason of some accident happening to the thing
it self bequeathed: But because the just, honest, and self-denying Executor
has fully Administered (as the Common Plea is) and has not Assets wherewith to
satisfy the same. When the Legacy is originally void, it is understood as
Null; when void by some subsequent Act relating to the State or Person of the
Testator, then it is understood as Revoked; when by something relating to the
Legatary, then as forfeited; and when by some fatal accident happening to the
thing it self bequeathed, then it is understood as Lost.

2. Now a Legacy or Bequest may be said to be Originally Null, when the
Testator is a person Incapable of Devising at all, at least of Devising the
thing Devised; or when the Thing it self Devised is not legally Devisable, or
when the Testators manner of Bequeathing or Devising is altogether illegal; or
when the Legatary or Devisee is such a person as is not legally qualified to
take by a Devise. Likewise, the Legacy or Bequest is void or voidable by
something relating to the Testator, when there is just fear in the case, or
circumventing fraud, or immoderate flattery; It may be also by some kinds of
error or uncertainty. Also by a subsequent or latter Will, or by Revocation,
Cancellation, Ademption, Translation; as also for want of Assets. And when the
Legacy or Bequest is void or voidable by something relating to the Legatary, It
is commonly either by reason of some Incapacity in his person to take by a
Legacy or Devise, or by reason of some injury done the Testator by him and high
enmity betwixt them; or by endeavoring to conceal, sophisticate, or suppress
the Will, or to obtrude and set up another in stead thereof, charging it with
falsity; or by refusing to do some possible and reasonable thing incumbent by
way of charge on the Legacy; or by an unwarrantable assuming to himself by his
own Authority, and usurping on the Legacy without the Executors License,
consent, or delivery thereof; or by a total failure of some Condition annexed
to the Legacy; or by the Legataries own waver and voluntary refusal thereof; or
lastly by the Legataries death before the Testators, or before the condition
performed, or before it otherwise becomes due. Finally, the Legacy or Bequest
becomes void in respect of the thing it self bequeathed, when by some
providential and fatal accident without any neglect or default in the Executor,
the thing bequeathed does either totally perish, or is decayed as that it
becomes useless and unprofitable.

3. Such as are Intestable, are thence legally disqualified to dispose of any
thing by way of Legacy or Devise; and who they are, appears elsewhere. vid.
par. 1; cap. 7.
Testaments made and Legacies given by such, are void originally, and such as
are originally void by reason of any defect in the Testator, that defect
ceasing shall not be privileged with any subsequent Ratification. l. si filius
familias. ff qui test. fac. poss.
A Testamento ad Legatum valet Argumentum. An Original defect in the Testator
will make the Testament and all the Contents thereof defective also. l. si
quaetamus. ff. de Testa.


4. If the Manner of the disposition of a Bequest or Devise be illegal, it
renders the Bequest originally Null; as when the Testator wholly refers his
Will therein to the pleasure of his Executor or any other person, as if the
Testator should say, [I make such my Executors as my Son shall think fit] Or [I
give 10 l. to whomsoever my Executor shall please] l. illa Institutio. ff. de
haered. Just. ultima voluntas non debet exalieno arbitrio pendere. Bart. Rubr.
in dict. l.
There are several other ways whereby the manner of the disposition may be
illegal, and possibly the more in regard of that vast extent and latitude of
words, which the Law allows Testators in making Wills, and bequeaching
Legacies; No words, or language, or signs almost but may serve for a Bequest,
provided they be but sensible and intelligible. l. 2. in prin. Commun. Leg. and
l. legatis. C. de Legate. and l. fidei commissa. in prin ff. de Leg. and Alex.
Cons. 100. nu. 7. vol. 4.
Insomuch that though the Testator should quite hold his peace, and but Nod
thee a Legacy, whether he can speak or not, or whether interrogated thereunto
or not, the Legacy is good. l. natu. ff. de Legate. 3 and l and in Epistola. st.
de fidei commis^. and Mant. de Coniect. vul. vol. lib. 8. tit. 1. nu. 19.
Understand not this of the Testators nodding between sleep and wake, between
sense and no sense, but when by his Nod he makes an intelligible sign of his
mind and intention; the reason hereof is, because the Law more favors a
Testators Will than his words.. nostra. Inst de Legate.


5. If the thing bequeathed be not legally Devisable, it is a void Bequest. ubi
supra. cap. 6.
Or if the thing Devised or Bequeathed ceases to be the Testators, either by
any voluntary act of his own, or thereunto compelled by some urgent necessity,
the Legacy is extinguished. Jason. in. Sed si seperavit. l. caetera. ff. de
Legate. 1. nu. 4. 13 and 14.
Likewise, if by the Testator the thing bequeathed be in its very substance and
body so changed into another form, that it is not reduceable to its pristine
substance, In such case it will be presumed that the Testator has also altered
his mind, and the Legacy is void; otherwise in case it may again be reduced to
its former shape and fathion; Bart. in l. Servun; filii. si pocula (...). 1.
ff. de Leg. 1. and C. qua situm.. ll^d. ff. d Legate. 3.
for by the dissolution and change of the thing bequeathed into another form,
and by the Testator himself, the Law presumes his mind and intent to be changed
also. l. Seia.. abhaerede. ff. de aut. and arg leg.


6. Although the thing bequeathed be Devisable, yet if the Legatary be
incapable and legally disqualified to take by a Devise, the Legacy is as void
in effect as if it had never been bequeathed; Now as one contrary is
illustrated by another, so by observing who are the persons qualified to be
Testable, you may infer who are the illegatable; and as all are. Testable who
are not by Law specially prohibited, so are may take by a Devise whom the Law
has made no special provision against.

7. Every Legacy given by a Testator, circumvented by Fraud to Bequeath the
same, is void; l. non enim. ff. de. in offic. Test. and l. 1 ff. de excep. dol.
This is not to be extended to that kind of Fraud, which is known and
understood by the Notion of Dolus Bonus. Bald. in l. si quis aliq. test.
probib. C. and si chard. in Rub. ibid.
And albeit Fraud specially in the Testator himself in reference to his Will be
not to be presumed, l. ex hoc aedicto. alietare. ff. de alien. indic. mut.
cause. fact.
yet the Circumstances may be such as will render the suspicion thereof very
Conjectural, which with some Adminicular proof may serve to invallid the
Legacy, specially if Natural Affection, Piety, or Charity fall not under
consideration in the Case.

8. Likewise, if the Legacy were, as it were extorted from the Testator, or
being under a Fear did give the same, it is void. Bart. in l. fin. ff. si quis
aliq. test. prohib.
Here (as in several other Cases, purposely omitted to wave prolixity) the Law
makes many Ampliations and Restrictions. If there were at the time of
bequeathing a fear upon the Testator, it could not be (as it ought) Libera
voluntas. Yet understand, it must not be every fear, or a vain fear, but a just
fear, that is, such as indeed without it he had not made his Testament at all,
at least not in that manner, nor given such and such Legacies. A vain fear is
not enough to make either Testament or Legacy void; l. si quis ab alio. ff. de
re judicat.
But it must be such a fear as the Law intends, when it expresses it by a fear
that may Cadere in constantem virum, C. ad audientiam. and C. cum Dilectus. De
iis quae met. cause. fiunt.
That is, such a fear as may produce such terror as to cause a well resolved
person, specially in his sickness and weakness to do what otherwise he would
not. Now a less fear will serve to terrify a Woman in this case, and so the
Law understands it. Gloss. in c. cum locum. De sponsalibus.
But each of these must be well proved, otherwise they do no prejudice either
to the Testament, or any thing therein bequeathed. l. ex hoc aedicto..
alienare. ff. de aliena. judic. mutan. cause. fiunt.


9. Inordinate, Importunate and Immoderate Flattery destroys also the
disposition of a Legacy given to the Flatterer or any other by his
Cychophantick Solicitations and procurement; specially if fear preceeded such
Flattery; Peck. de Test. Conjug. l. 1. c 9 nu. 23. and Jas. Sichard. Menoch.
and alii.
and Fraud accompanied it; Sichard. in l. ult. C. si quis test. prohib. nu. 13.
Or in case the Testators understanding be but little, and the Legacy great;
Molin. in Apostill. ad. Dec. Cons. 489.
Or more especially if such immoderate Flattery proceed from such as have the
chief care of the Testator in his Sckness, as his Wife, Physician, or the like;
Molin. ibid. Peck. ibid. nu. 6 and in cap. 17.
Or in case there were a precedent Testament made by the Testator; Socin. Jun.
Council. 14. Vol. 2.
Or when the flattering words are spoken to a person much in Debt. l. generali.
and ibi Bart. ff. de usufract. leg.
In all these Cases specially it is, wherein Immoderie Flattery,
circumstantiated as aforesaid, shall invallid a Testament as well as the
disposition of a Devise or Legacy.

10. Touching Error in the Testator in reference to the Legacy or Devise, it
must be considered whether it be an Error of the Name, Person, or Quality of
the Legatary; Or whether an Error of the Quantity, Quality, Substance, Proper
Name, or Name Appellative of the thing bequeathed. If it be an Error only in
the Proper Name of the thing Devised, it does not hurt the Legacy, so as the
substance thereof be not also mistaken; as when a Testator Intending to Devise
Long-acre, Devises it by the Name of Black-acre, erring not in the Substance,
but only in the Proper Name of the thing Devised; In this Case the Devisee
shall have Long-acre. Otherwise it is, if it be an error in the Name
Appellative: As intending to Bequeath a Horse, he Devises a House. The Reason
of this difference is, Because the Names Appellative of things are Innumerable,
being ever so called, and of natural Constitution, as House, Horse, and the
like; and therefore an error therein is as injurious to Legacies, as an error
in the very Body or Substance of the thing it self Devised. But the Proper
Names of things being only such as are merely Accidental, and given or imposed
by them, are Mutable and may be changed by Men, such as Long-acre, Black-acre,
and the like; therefore an error therein only does not prejudice the Legacy. l.
si quis in fundi ff. de Leg. 1. and. Gloss ibid.
But if the error be in the Name Appellative; the Testator saying, I Bequeath a
Horse when he intends an Ox, the Legacy is not good; No, not of the Ox,
albeit his intention thereof were evident. gloss. ibid. verb. vocab.
The Law is the same in Case the error be in the Substance of the thing
Devised; as if the Testator intending to bequeath 5 l. does bequeath his White
Mare. l. quo^iens. ff. de haered. Insit.
Such an error is as destructive to a Legacy, as an error in the Name
Appellative thereof, gloss. in dict. l.
or as an error in the Person of the Legatary, which is as prejudicial to a
Legacy as either of the other; whence it is supposed by some, that Jacob was
not de jure his Father Isaack's Heir but Esau, because by an error he mistook
Jacob for his Son Esau, thereby erring in the very Person of the Legatary, and
in the very Body and Substance of the Person he meant and intended; the best
Salve in Law (not wading into the Mystery of Divine Preordination) for this is,
That Isaa(...)k did not altogether err or mistake in this matter; but doubted
only, in that he said, The Voice is Jacobs Voice, but the Hands are the Hands
of Esau; whence it may well be inferred, that Jacob, and not Esau, was de jure
his Heir; for though Error in the Person of the Legatary, or in the Body or
Substance of the thing Bequeathed does viciate the Legacy, yet a bare
Dubitation or Haesitation does not. gloss. min. in dict. l. quotiens.
And as touching an error only in the Quantity of the thing Bequeathed, such
error does not prejudice the Legacy, at least not so as to invalidate the same;
for if the Testator intending to Bequeath 20 l. does either speak or write but
10 l. the Legacy is good for 20 l. or intending to give only 10 l. says 20 l.
it is good only for 10 l. gloss. mag. ibid.
Or if 200 l. be written instead of 100 l. it is good only for 100 l. that is
not according to the scription, but according to the Testators intention. ibid.
And as thus it is Quantities Numerical, so also it holds in Quantities known
and distinguished from the other by being Quotative, or indeed more properly
Quantitative; as if a Testator intending to Devise all his Mansion House, does
express himself only by the one Moity or third part thereof. Jason in l. qui
quartam. ff. de Leg. 1. ubi valet Legatum, Licet Error in quantitate five
continua five discreta.
Likewise Error only in the Quality of the thing Bequeathed, does no more
vacate a Legacy, than does Error in the Quantity, provided the Substance of the
thing be not also mistaken: Angel. in dict. l. si quis in sundi. ff. de Legate.
1.
But an Error in the Quality of the Legatary, where such Quality was the Final
Cause of the Legacy, that is, such as without which the Testator would not have
given the Legacy, Mantic. de Conject. ult. Vol. lib. 4. tit. 5. nu. 16.
does viciate the same; because the Law presumes the Testators intention to
cease at the ceasing of the Final Cause thereof; otherwise if the Quality be
only such, as were merely a Demonstrative or Moving Cause; l. falsa.
demonstratio. in prin. ff. de Cond. and Them.
yea or an Impulsive Cause, if it be not by way of Condition joined with the
Legacy. Sichard. in Rub. de haered. inst. nu. 3. C.


11. Uncertainty is another Impediment to the validity of a Legacy, and will
make it void, Grass. These. Com. Opin.. Legate. q. 64.
unless by a sufficient proof you can reduce the Testators meaning to a
Certainty; so that if the Testator bequeath a Legacy to such a one (not naming
any body) as shall do such a thing; (naming the thing) this Devise is good to
him whosoever shall first perform the Condition before or after the Testators
death. If this Uncertainty refer to the person of the Legetary, the Legacy is
void; Bart. in l. quidam ff. de reb. Dubijs.
unless he who at first was uncertain does afterward by some future Event
become certain: dict. l. quidam. and ibi Bart.
As if the Testator should say; I give 100 l. to whomsoever shall make my Son
fit for the University. If it refer to the thing Bequeathed, and proceed of
Error, it is visible by the Premises in what Cases void or not; if it proceed of
too much Generality of the words of the Bequest, the Executor is discharged if
he give any thing to the Legatary; if it proceed of words too General relating
to any Specifical thing Bequeathed, limited not so much by Nature as by Man, as
House, Ship, or the like, the Legacy is void. Zas. lib. 1. sing. respons. in
prin. nu. 33. Alex. and Angel. in l. si Domus ff. de Legate. 1.
If it refer to Number, Weight, or Measure, the Bequest is unprofitable,
because never so little is enough in that Case, l. nummis. ff. de Leg. 3.
unless Bequeathed to some certain use, by which means it may be Regulated, and
so reduced to a kind of Certainty. If it refer to the Date of the Testament
wherein the Legacy was given, when there are Two such Wills in Dispute, neither
is good, gloss. in L. ult. C. de edit. Di. Adria. tol.
unless one of them be in favor of the Testators Children, or to Pious Uses;
in both which Cases the Presumption of Law affirms that Will (where Two are in
Being) which makes for either of them. Bart. in. l. 1. 1. ff. bon. poss.
secund. Tabul. and Sichard in l. ult. C. de Edicto. D. Adr. toll. and Mant. de
Conject. ult. Vol. lib. 2. tit 15. nu. 17.
But if both the Wills of the same Date relate the one to one of them, the
other to the other; in that Case the Testament which respects the Testators
Children shall be preferred; Ibid Mant. lib. 6. tit. 3. nu. 43.
and yet this Uncertainty does not always invalidate a Legacy to Pious Uses,
where there is no other Will of the same Date in the Case; for if the Testator
Wills, That his Goods shall be Distributed [without other words] the Law
supplies the sense, and interprets his meaning, to have it Distributed among
the Poor. In C. cum tibi. and ibi D D. omnes de Testam. and Bald. in Executor.
nu. 8. ff. de Execut. rei judic. Idem. in Conf. 296. nu. 1. Vol. 5.
It is presumed, the Law means where the Testator dies without Issue. This
Uncertainty does seldomarise from any dubious Expressions used by the Testator
relating to the person of the Executor or Legatary, in both which Cases both
Will and Legacies are void respectively; l. in tempus.. 1. eodemque ult. ff. de
haered. inst. and. incertis. inst. de Legib.
But it may often happen where the Testator has more Friends than one of the
same Name, of equal Degree to him, and Respect with him, as in Brothers or
Sisters Children, unless he add some Distinction, or other Circumstances make
it Evident whom he meant or intended; or unless it may (as was before hinted)
be Reduced to a Certainty by some future Event. l. quidam relegatus. ff. de
reb. dub.


12. Again, a Legacy or Devise may be void by the Testators making a latter
Will, and not inserting the same therein. Likewise the Testators voluntary
Alienation of the thing Bequeathed is an actual Revocation thereof. l. rem
legatam. l. si servum. ff. de adim. Legate. 2.
The Reasons are, because the Law thence presumes the Testator would not have
his Executor burdened with the Redemption thereof. l. unum ex familia.. si rem
tuam. ff. de Legate. 2.
As also because a Revocation in the Law has as much force to Revoke, as a
Disposition has to Dispose. l. si ita scriptum. Regula. ff. de Lib. and
Postth. and Bald in l. ult. nu 9 de Instit. and Subst.
Et Contrariorum eadem est Ratio. The like effect to make void a Legacy has
Cancellation, or when the Testator himself, or by his order, does totally
Cancel the Legacy; yet if a Legacy given to Pious Uses be found Cancelled, and
it appear not whether the Testator or any other by his direction did it, the
Law will presume it to be done not wittingly and willingly, but inconsulto and
unadvisedly. Bart. in l. proximae. in sin. ff. de his quae test. delen.


13. A Legacy or Devise may also be made void by Ademption, which is a taking
away of the Legacy by the Testator expressly in Fact, or in Construction of Law.
And this Ademption may be by the mere naked Will and Pleasure of the Testator,
without any Reason solemnly given by him for so doing. l. si jure. ff. de Leg.
3 and l. 3.. ult. ff. de adim. Leg.
And in a Codicil he may make an Ademption of that Legacy which he had before
Bequeathed in a Will; As thus, viz.

14. A. B. of London being bound for York, makes his last Will and Testament
before he begins his Journey, wherein he appoints C. D. and E. F. to be his
Executors. And commanded, That in Case he should happen to die at York, they
should give I. G. of that City 100 l. to bring his Body to London; and if any
Money of that 100 l. were left over and above the Charges of such his Funeral,
I. G. should have it. The same day A. B. makes a Codicil, and therein desires
his Executors, That in Case he dyed at York or on the Road, they should cause
his Body to be brought back to London, and there Buried by his Wife and
Children. After the Testator dies either at York or on the Road. The Executors
cause his Corpse to be brought to London, and there Buried as he appointed in
the said Codicil. The Funeral cost 60 l. I. G. demands the remaining 40 l. the
Law will not give it him, because in the Codicil there is an Ademption of the
Legacy expressed in the Will, and a Translation thereof to the Executors
employed in the Codicil.. qui filiu: l. alumnae. ff. eod.


15. In Cases doubtful the Presumption shall not be for an Ademption; l. 3.. si
duobus. ff. de adim. legate. and Bald. in l. si plutib. nu. (...): ff. de Legate.
1.
therefore where other Conjectures may be had, such Presumption shall cease:
For which Reason, if the Testator gives his House to one, and after in the same
Will give the same House to another; it shall not be Construed, as if he would
take the House from the first, but rather that he would have them both
Collegataries, unless there be very pregnant proof of the Testators intention
to the contrary. gloss. in l. ult. in fin. ff. de his quae poenae nomin. and
Bald. in l. Cohaeredi.. Coheres in fin. ff. de vulg. and Pup. Subst.
Otherwise if a Testator does Devise a House to A. B. and after give the same
House by Deed of Gift to C. D. in this Case the Devise to A. B. is Extinct. Or
if after he Buys the same House of C. D. and dies, and A. B. demand the House,
he cannot Recover it, unless he can prove that the Testator by a new
Declaration of his Will intended he should have it. gloss. in l. cum servus ff.
de adim. Leg.
Likewise if a Devised House be pulled down, and another built by the Testator
in the same place, the Devise is void, unless it can be proved that the
Testator intended otherwise. l. si ita Leg. ff. de Legate. 1.


16. The effect of an Ademption may also happen in defect of performance of
some Condition charged on the Legatary; but a Condition depending merely upon
the Testator himself works no Ademption, in Case it be never performed. The
Reasons in Law are, Because such a Condition, if deficient, shall be
understood, as if the Disposition were pure and simple without any Condition at
all; as also because such a Condition is not held as a Real Condition, but
rather as the counterfeit thereof. For Instance, suppose the Testator in his
Testament says, [I Will that A. B. shall have 20 l. if I so order it in my
Codicil, or if he does what I shall there Appoint him.] The Testator dies
without making any Codicil, or having made one, there appears nothing therein
appointed by him for A. B. to do; he shall have the 20 l. notwithstanding such
Condition, for the Reasons aforesaid. l. si quis ita and gloss. ibid. ff. de
haered. instit.


17. Another way whereby Legacies become void is when the Testator takes them
from one, and gives them to another, which the Law calls Translation, and which
is more than a bare Ademption thereof; for this does only take it away, but
that does not only so, but gives it to another, or takes it from one that it
may be given to another, or takes away one thing that another may be given; so
that Translation compriseth in it Ademption and Bequeathing. Argum. and Rub. in
tit. de adim. Legate.
[What I gave to A. B. I do give to C. D. It is a Translation to C. D. implying
an Ademption from A. B.

18. This Translation may be four ways, as either from one Legatary to another,
or from one Co-executor to another, or from one thing to another, or from a
pure, simple, and absolute Legacy to a Conditional one. gloss. in l. ^icut
adimi. ff. cod.
And it carries with it the same Conditions the Legacy had before it.
Translation, unless it be such a Condition as is inherent in the person of the
first Legatee: As if a Merchant-Testator should give in his Will 500 l. to his
Son John then in the Straights upon this Condition, if his Ship shall safe
arrive from the Straights. After he takes this Legacy from his Son John, and by
way of Translation gives it to his Son William at home without any Repetition
of the said Condition, and dies. In this Case, and notwithstanding such
Condition were not repeated in the said Translation, yet the Law implies it,
and William cannot claim the 500 l. till the Ship returns. Not so, in Case the
Condition were inherent in the person of John the first Legatee; as if the
Testator had said, [I give my Son John 500 l. upon this Condition that he come
home safe in my Ship from the Straights.] In this Case the Law will not imply
the Condition as repeated in the Translation to William, which was necessary in
the person of John. l. legarum. and Gloss. ibid. ff. eod.


19. Suppose a Testator gives A. B. a House simply, purely, and absolutely;
after in the same Will gives to the same A. B. the same House Conditionally;
and after says, I would not have my Executor to deliver A. B. the House which I
gave him Conditionally; In this Case the House is not due to A. B. on any
account, unless the Testator had expressly added withal, that he would have him
to have it purely and without any Condition. gloss. in l. fundo. and gloss. in
l. cum. centum. ff. cod.
Or if a Testator in his Will give A. B. 100 l. and in his Codicil 50 l. in
which Codicil he says, That he would not have his Executor to give him more
than 50 l. In this Case there is an Ademption of 50 l. from the Legacy of 100
l. given to A. B. dict. gloss. and l. si quis ita.. cum. Titio. ff. cod.


20. A Testator says, I give my House to John Styles, and my Ground to William
Styles; after in the same Will says, [What I gave to Styles my Will is to have
it taken from him.] And so it does not appear, from which Styles he intended.
In this Case the Devises are due to both the Styles; For if he had given a
Legacy to Styles, and no Evidence of which Styles, the Law would have been,
that it is due to neither; and therefore by paritie it shall in the other Case
be due to both, gloss. in l. sundo. ff. de adim. Legate.


21. A Testator gives 100 l. to his Daughter, saying withal, That if she will
not Marry with A. B. it shall be taken from her, and given to him, and dies.
After the Daughter also dies, and before she was capable of Marriage or
qualified for consent thereto. In this Case the Legacy of the 100 l. is not
Translated from her to A. B. because the Translation here seems to be threatened
Nomine poenae; and where there is no fault there ought not to be any
Punishment. l. sancimus. C. de poenis. and Mant. de. Conject. ult. vol. lib.
12. tit. 3. nu. 2. and Alij.


22. Legacies may be also void or voidable by reason of the Incapacity of the
Legatary to take by a Legacy or Devise, and this may happen several ways.
Generally whatever incapacitates an Executor for an Executorship, has the same
effect on a Legatary as to a Legacy. gloss. in l. 3.. fin. ff. de adimend. Leg.
and l. ex part. tit. cod. and Mant. de Conject. ult. vol. lib. 12. tit. 4. nu.
2.
But more particularly, if Capital and grievous Enmity happen between the
Testator and the Legatary, That alone by the Naked or Tacit Will of the
Testator, that is, without any solemn or express order from the Testator, is an
Ademption in Law of his Legacy, but if they happen to be after Reconciled, the
Legacy returns to its pristine validity, because every Man's Will is Ambulatory
(so the Law phrases it) to the very last Moment. The Law is very clear in this
Point, l. si inimicitiae. ff. de ijs quib. ut indign.
which tacitly so understands it. l. 3.. ult. ff. de adim. Leg.
Yea, this holds true, albeit the Testator himself were the first cause of the
difference between them; l. 4. ff. de adim. Legate. and Mant. lib. 12. tit. 5.
nu. 9.
because it is thence inferred, that he has changed his Mind: Yet the Law is
not in this Point without its Restrictions; for it will not hold in all Cases,
specially where the Legatary has deserved well of the Testator, nor shall
every light offense intervening work this Ademption. gloss. in l. fundo. ff: de
adim. legate. and l. si quis ita.. non solum. ff. eod.
But a Criminal Accusation will amount to this Capital Enmity: gloss. min. lit.
a. in l. filio.. Seia ff. de adim. Leg.
And therefore if the Legatary shall accuse the Testator of some Capital Crime,
he is understood as his Capital Enemy; and consequently the Law implies an
Ademption of his Legacy. Ibid.
Likewise the Law tacitly implies the same, in case the Legatary should
tacitly commit a Trespass on the Testators Wife, gloss. in l. fidei commiss.
in fin. ff. de Fidei V. Jason in l. sororem. nu. 5. tit. eod.
which is no less true in the Theory as to matter of Law, then common in the
Practice as to matter of Fact. Likewise if the Testator Bequeath to his Wife,
and she play the Whore, she forfeits her Legacy. Gloss. Bert. and alij
Communiter. in dict. l. fidei commiss. ff. de fidei. and Bert. in l. 1* ff. de
ijs quib. ut indign.


23. By the way observe, That an Executor is not deprived of his Executorship
by intervening Enmity between him and his Testator, as the Legatary is of his
Legacy; for albeit whatever invalidates an Executorship, is equally fatal to a
Legacy; yet this will not hold vise versa. For put the Case, That the Testator
makes A. and B. his Executors, and Bequeaths to A. 100 l. After there arises
very grievous Enmity between the Testator and A. the Co-executor and Legatary
also: For which Reason the Testator Resolves upon making another Will, and to
take from A. whatever he had given him. And having accordingly begun to make
such second Will, dies before he could finish the same, or therein say any
thing as to A. Whereupon A. as one of the Two Co-executors and Legataries,
claims both a Moiety of the Testators Personal Estate, and the Legacy of 100 l.
also. The Question is, whether he shall have both? It is answered Negatively;
He shall have a Moity of the Personal Estate, but not the Legacy; because a
Legacy may be taken away by the bare and naked Will of the Testator, that is,
by his Will Tacit and without any Solemn Formalities: But the Executorship not
so. gloss. in l. ex part. ff. de adim. Legate. Ratio est, quia Instit. haered.
(h. e.) Executores, est Caput Testam. gloss. min. ibid.


24. Add to this, That in Case the Legatary shall after the Testators death, in
his own Name Accuse the Testament of Falsity, he loses his Legacy. l. post
Leg. ff. de his quib. ut indign.
Likewise if he shall Surreptitiously get into his Custody the Testament, and
Conceal the same, he loses the Legacy therein Bequeathed to him. l. si
Legetarius. and ibi Paul. Castrens. in Summa C. de Legate.
Or if he Cancel the Testament, his Legacy is lost. l. si quis cum falso..
Divus. and l. si quis patr. ff. ad leg Corn. de fall(...)s.
Or by his own Authority, without the Executors Consent or Delivery, shall
usurp the Possession of what is Bequeathed him; In such Case he Forfeits his
Right thereunto; l. non dubium. C. de Leg. Si^hard. in dict. l. non dubium. and
Perk. tit. Testam. so. 94.
unless the Testator himself Licenced him so to do; Part. in l. T^io.. Lucius
ff* de Legate. 1. and alij.
Or that he had it in his possession at the Time of the Testators death, there
being Assets sufficient to pay his Debts; in which Case he may lawfully retain
the Thing Bequeathed to him, without the Executors delivery thereof, So^^n.
Council. 11. lib. 1. and Olden de Action. class. 2. Action 2. fo. 113
Or when he is as well Executor as Legatary; Sichard. in dict. l^ non dubium.
nu 13.
Or lastly, when the Thing is Bequeathed to Pious uses. Tiraque de privileg.
piae Causae. cap. 45.


25. Again; unless the Legatary survive the Testator, the Legacy will not be
due. (...). si post. ff. quando^ dies. leg. ced.
Otherwise, and if it be not Conditional, nor made payable at a future time
certain, it will be due immedately upon the Testators death. l. unie.. cum
igitur. C. de cad. tollend.
Therefore if the Legatary die before the Condition performed, or the day for
Payment be come, the Legacy is lost, l. intercidit. ff. de Cond. and Demond.
if that Time were limited not to a day certain, but uncertain. l. dies
incertus. ff. eod.
Otherwise, and the day be certain, though the Legatary dies before it comes,
the Legacy shall accrue to his Executors, for in that Case the Legacy was due
at the Testators death, though not payable till that day certain be come. l.
cedere di^m. ff. de verb. sig.
But if the day or time be altogether uncertain, the Legacy is then as if it
were Conditional; dict. l. dies incertus.
And the breach or non-accomplishment of a Condition in it self Lawful and
Possible, does either suspend or extinguish the Legacy. And as to that frequent
Condition relating to Marriage so commonly annexed to the Execution of a Legacy
it is not Impertinent here to insert. That albeit a Condition absolutely
against Marriage, is unlawful, yet not so if it be only against Marriage with
such or, such a Person, or with such kind of Persons, and therefore the
Condition is good, if the Testator gives his Daughter 100 l. under this
Proviso, That she Marry with a Merchant, or a Merchants Son, otherwise the
Legacy to be void; In which Case if she Marry first with a Merchant, and after
his decease with another who is not a Merchant, nor a Merchants Son, she shall
loose her Legacy. Mant. de Conject. ult. Vol. lib. 11. tit. 18 nu. 3.


26. Lastly, The Legacy is but equivalent to a Cipher by the voluntary waiver
and refusal of the Legatary declaring his dissent thereunto; As also by the
Actual and total destruction of the Thing it self Bequeathed; for if neither
the Quantity nor the Quality thereof can appear, the Legacy is void. l. si
sic.. 1. ff. de Leg. 1. and l. Titia. in prin ff. de Leg. 2. and l. cum post.
gener. ff. de jure dotis.
Hence it is, That the Bequest of a Debt is void, if Payment thereof be made to
the Testator in his life time; otherwise if after his death it be paid by the
procurement of his Executor. l. si is quod. ff. de Liberat. Legate.
But if the Testator himself does exact the Debt, the Legacy thereof is
extinguished.. tam autem corporales. Inst. de Leg. and l. si sic.. 1. in fin.
ff. de Legate. 1.
Otherwise if paid to the Executor, by whose default if any other thing
Bequeathed does perish, it shall be no loss to the Legatary; Paul. de cast. in
l. servum filij. si pocula, ff. de Leg. 1. and l. senatus. in tit. eod.
nor any loss to him, in Case the Legacy be something in general, as a Horse or
an Ox, not saying which; or in Case the Legacy consist in Quantity, as so many
Bushels of Corn, not saying of what Grain, or in what Garner or Granary; In
which, and other like Cases the Legacy is not void, albeit the Thing so
Bequeathed shall uttterly perish. l. incend. C. si cerpe. and l. non amplius..
1. ff. de Lagat. 1. Pasch. 4. Jac. in B. R. Kirton and Simpsons case. Cro. 2.
part. 115. and Hugh. Abr. ubi supra.


Upon Evidence in Trespass, the Case was, A. made his Will in writing, and
thereby Devised his Lands to E. H. and her Heirs, and afterward lying sick,
because the said E. H. did not come to visit him, he Affirmed, That E. H.
should not have any part of his Lands or Goods; It was the Opinion of the
Court, That it was no Revocation of the Will, being but by way of Discourse,
and not mentioning his Will: But the Revocation ought to be by express words,
that he did Revoke his Will, and that she should not have any of his Lands
given her by his Will.

Lands Devised by Will to one, and after a Feofment thereof Trin. 6. E. 6.
Dyer. 74. Hughs. ibid.
made by the Devisor to another; the said Devise is Revoked by such subsequent
Feofment. As in the Lord Bourchers Case, touching his Will made 23. H. 8.

Note, By all the Justices, upon an Evidence to the Jury in an Ejectione Trin.
30. El. in C. B. Ashby and Lavers case. Goldesb. 93. and
Firm, That if a Man has a Lease, and disposes of it by his Will, and
afterward surrenders it up, and takes a new Lease, and after dies; That the
Devisee shall not have this last Lease, because Hughs ibid. Vol. 3. tit.
Revocation. Mich. 31. El. C. B. Goldesb. 109, 110. vid. Cook. 4. part. 61.
Forse and Memblins case. and Hugh. ibid.
this was a plain Countermand of his Will.

A Feme Sole was Seized of Lands in Socage, and by her last Will Devised them
to I. S, in Fee, and afterward she took the Devisee to Husband, and during the
Coverture she Countermanded her Will, saying, That her Husband should not have
the Land, nor any other Advantage by her Will. It was Adjudged upon great
deliberation that it was a Countermand of the Will, the words being spoken
after Marriage; for the making of a Will is but the Inception thereof, and
takes not Effect till the Devisors death.

One Devised Lands to his Sister in Fee, and after made a Lease to her for Six
Years of the Lands to begin after his Decease, and delivered it to a Stranger
to the use of his Sister; which Stranger did not deliver it to her in the
Testators life time, and she Refused, and Claimed the Inheritance. In this Case
it was Resolved, because the Devise and the Lease made to one and the same
Person, beginning at the same time cannot stand together in one and the same
Person, That it was a Countermand of the Mich. 2. Jac. in C. B. Cook and
Bullocks case. Adjudg'd acc. Cro. 2. part. 49. and Hugh. Abr. ibid.
Devise. But it was there Agreed by all the Justices, That if the Lease had
been made to any other than the Devisee, they might stand together, and the
Lease should not have been a Revocation of the Will as to the Inheritance, but
only during the Term.

In an Ejectione Firm upon Evidence to a Jury. It was Resolved by the whole
Court, That if one makes his Will in Writing of Lands, and afterward upon
Communication says, That he has made his Will, but that shall not stand. Or I
will Alter my Will, etc. That these words are not any Revocation of the Will,
for they are words but in futuro. But if he says, I do Revoke it, and bear
witness thereof, hereby he absolutely declares to Revoke it in praesenti; and
it is then a Revocation. And in this Case it was Agreed by the Justices, That
as one ought to be of good and sane Memory at the disposing, so Mich. 16. Jac.
in B R. Cranvel and Sanders case. Cro. 2. part. 487. and Hughes ibid. Mich. 5.
Jac. B. R. Webs case. Adjudg. Roll. Abr. tit. Devise. lit. D. Mic. 1. Jac. B.
R. Goodwyn and Goodwins case. Yelv. Rep.
he ought to be of as good and sane Memory at the Revoking of it. And as he
ought to make a Will by his own directions, and not by Questions: So he ought
to Revoke it of himself and not by Questions.

If a Man Devise 20 l. to the Poorest of his Kindred, it is void by Reason of
the uncertainty whom the Court shall judge the Poorest.

A Legacy of 20 l. given by a Testator to his Daughter, to whom his Executor
gave Bond in 40 l. for payment thereof according to the Will. The Daughter
takes Husband, who sued the Executor in the Ecclesiastical Court for the
Legacy. The Ex-Executor pleaded payment according to the Bond; and because the
Ecclesiastical Judge would not allow the Plea, the Executor brought a
prohibition, showing by way of surmize the matter aforesaid. Tanfield Sergeant
moved for a Consultation, because the Suit was for a Legacy, which is of
Ecclesiastical Cognizance: And albeit the Executor pleaded Payment, which is
not there allowed, yet he ought not to have a prohibition, because Payment is a
good Plea in that Court; and if the Judge there will not allow it, the other
may appeal to the Superior Judge; and if this should be suffered in the Case
of a Legacy, then the Ecclesiastical Court should try nothing. But (according
to Gandy, Fenner, and Yelverton, Justices) the Surmize is good; for the
Executor by entering into Bond to the Daughter for Payment of the Legacy, had
Extinguished the Legacy, and had made the 20 l. Devised a Debt, Suable merely
at the Common Law, and not there.

A Stranger Disseises the Devisor; if he die before Re-entry, 39. H. 6. 18. b.
Roll. Abr.
the Devise is void.

If there be diverse Devises of one thing in the same Will, the Roll. ibid. lit.
T.
last Devise shall take effect. Co. Lit. 112. b.

If a Man Seized in Fee Devise the same to I. S. in Fee, and Mich. 38, 39. El.
B. R. inter Mountague and Jeffryes Agreed per Cur. and Council. Roll. ibid.
lit. V. 26. El. B. Wilcocks case. per Gawdey Roll. ibid.
afterward makes a Lease thereof to I. D. for Years; this is no Revocation of
the Fee, but only during the Years. Also if afterward he devise that Lease to
another for Life, yet that is not any Revocation of the Fee, but only during
the Estate for Life.

If a Man possessed of a Term for 40. Years, Devise the same to his Wife, and
after Lease the Land to another for 20. Years, and die; that Lease is not a
Revocation of the whole Estate, but only during the 20. Years, and the Wife
shall have the Residue by the Devise.

It appears therefore, that a Legacy may indirectly, and by Implication be
Revoked, as well as directly and expressly; also in part as well as in whole;
and the Will may stand where Legacies in that Will do not.

In a Replevin upon Evidence given, the Case was this. I. W. was Seized of the
Lands in Question, and of diverse other Lands; and by his last Will Devised all
his Lands and Tenements to A. W. of London in Fee. After which he made a
Feofment in Fee of the same Lands which he had Devised to the said A. and when
he Sealed the Feofment, he demanded and said, will not this hurt my Will? To
which it was Answered, That it would not: And he said, If this will not hurt my
Will, I will Seal it, and then he Sealed it, and a Letter of Attorney to make
Livery: The Attorney made Livery in some of the Lands, but not in the Lands in
Question; afterward the Testator dyed. It was said, That the Feofment was a
Revocation; for if the Testator had said, That this shall not be his Will, then
it had been a plain Revocation, and then the making of the Feofment is as much
as to say, That the Will shall not stand. But it was Answered, and Resolved by
the whole Court, That it Appeared, That the mind of the Testator was, That his
Will should stand, and when he made the Feofment, this was a Revocation in Law;
Mich. 29 El. in B. R. Gibson and Platlessee's case. Goldesb. 32, 33. vid. Owen
76. the same Case. Hugh's Abr. verb. Wills and Testaments.
and here is no Revocation in Deed; For he said, If this will not hurt my Will,
I will Seal it: And although that the Attorney made Livery in part, so as the
Feofment was perfect in part; yet for the Lands in Question, whereof no Livery
was made, the Will shall stand; for a Will may be effectual for part, and for
part it may be Revoked; and the Court told the Jury, That this was their
Opinion, and the Jury found accordingly.

The Case in Chancery was this, C. E. the Testator, 15. Jac. made his Will in
Writing, and thereby Devised Legacies to Charitable Uses, and to R. and W. his
Brothers, viz. to one 100 l. and to the other 1000 l. and other Legacies to his
Kindred; and made his Wife his Executrix, and Appointed his two Brothers to be
joined with her as Executors in Trust for his Wife; afterward 22. Jac. he sent
for several Persons to come to him; when they came, they demanded of him, What
Friend he thought best to be his Executor, and to see his Will performed? and
whether he Trusted any Person more than his Wife? He Answered, That his Wife
was the fittest Person, and therefore should be his Sole Executrix. Being then
moved to give other Legacies to his Father, Brethren, and Kindred; He Answered,
He would not leave them any thing, But Bequeathed to I. S. his God-son 30 s.
And being Requested by his Wife to give him a greater Legacy; He Answered, Thou
know not what thou do; do not wrong thy self, 30 s. is Money in a Poor
Bodies Purse: And the Testator spoke these words, Animo Testandi, and ultimam
voluntatem declarandi. And all this was set down in a Codicil: And the first
Will and the Codicil was proved in Communi forma. Whether this Codicil was a
Revocation of the Legacy given to the Two Brothers, was the Question, It was
Resolved both by the Civilians, and by the Judges of the Common Law, That it
was not a Revocation of the Legacies. Their Reasons were, Because there was an
Absolute Formal Will made in his Health, and there being no Speech made by him
of his Formal Will, nor of the Legacies thereby Devised. The Answer to a
Doubtful Question shall not take the Legacies before Devised: And his
Answering, I will not give them any thing: Upon such Doubtful Speeches to
Nullify a Will advisedly made shall not be permitted, without clear and
perspicuous Revocation, or words that do amount to so much: And thereupon upon
this Opinion of Mich. 2. Car. in Chancery. Eyres and Eyres case. Cro. 1. Par.
37. and Hug. Abr. verb. Wills, etc.
the Civilians and Judges, the Lord Keeper Decreed the Legacies to the
Brothers, the Codicil having made no Revocation of them.

CHAP. XXVI. Certain Positions or Assertions of Law for the better
understanding of this Subject of Legacies and Devises, with certain mixed Cases
touching the same.
1. IF the words of the Legacy be Doubtful or Ambiguous, the Motive inducing
the Testator, or the Cause of the Legacy is specially to be inspected. Rub. in
l. uxorem. ff. de Legate. 3.


2. In Cases Doubtful whether the Legacy be given Absolutely or Conditionally,
it shall be presumed as Pure, Simple, and Absolute, rather than Conditional.
gloss. min. lit. b. in. cum ita l. ut haered. ff. de Legate. 2.


3. In a Legacy Doubtful as to its value for want of some discriminating
description thereof by the Testator, that which is of the least value, belongs
to the Legatary. l. si ita. sit. and gloss. ibid. ff. de Legate. 1.


4. Likewise in all Dubious Legacies as to the Quantity thereof, the least is
generally to be understood. l. qui concubinam.. cum ita Legate. ff. de Legate. 3.


5. A Doubtful Legacy relating to Goods, shall be understood of such only as
the Testator had at the making of the Testament, for the clearing whereof the
Law casts the onus probandi on the Legatary. l. si ita. ff. de aur. and arg.
leg. and. Bald. in l. ult.. ult. nu. 2. verse. item si Test. C. de Appel.


6. Where the Doubt arises from the Testators words, the Ambiguity shall be
interpreted in favor of the Legatary. Mantic. de Conject. ult. Vol. lib. 7.
tit. 1. nu. 32.


7. In the Interpretation of Legacies the common usage of Speech is more to be
considered, than the exact propriety of the words. Anchor. q. 62. lib. 3. nu. 6.


8. Also the Testators sense and meaning is more to be considered than his
words. gloss. in l. fundo. ff. de adim. legate.


9. The Testators words are to be understood rather as he thought then as he
spoke or writ, that is, the effect of the Testament is guided, governed and
overruled more by the Testators Opinion, than as things are in themselves.
gloss. min. lit. a. in l quo loco. ff. de haered. Instit.


10. When the Testators words of Bequeathing seem to interfere one with
another, the latter words shall for the most part prevail. gloss. min. lit. f.
l. si mihi and tibi. ff. de Leg. 1.
Yet not always so; there are some Cases wherein Contrarium verum est. gloss.
mag. lit. a. nam and ^um. in dict. l


11. When the Testators mind and meaning is not as intelligible as it should
be, hold his words before the Glass of the Law to make it as visible as it may
be; the Law is the best, and indeed the only interpreter in all such Cases.

12. An imperfect Speech in Bequeathing a Legacy may be reduced to such as is
Equivalent to that which is perfect, if the Testators mind and meaning may
rationally be presumed. l. si in Test. ff. de Legate. 1.
For Instance. The Testator says,, [Let 10 l. to A. B.] without the words [be
given.]

13. Words of the Present Tense used in the form of a Devise, are ever to be
limited to the time of making the Testament. l. uxorem.. Testam. ff. de Legate.
3.


14. A Legacy may pass by Implication, as well as by expression; and a Devise
may be as well inferred from the Testators Intention, as from his Verbal
Disposition. Rub. in l. pater filium. ff. de Legate. 3.


15. A Bequest is good, albeit the Quality or Description of the thing
Bequeathed, (which the Testator had said in his Will he would there insert) be
omitted, provided the thing Bequeathed be not left at uncertainties. l. ibid..
vicos. 33. ff. de Legate. 2.


16. Words spoken by a Testator by way of Council, annexed unto, or inrerwoven
with words Bequeathing a Legacy, do not import any Condition as thence charging
the Legatary therewith. dict. l. cum pater.. 24. ff. de Legate. 2.


17. A Condition of Non-alienation annexed to a Devise, is not to be extended
to such an Alienation, as is absolutely necessary and unavoidable, but only to
such as is merely voluntary. Bart. in dict. L. ff. de Leg. 3.


18. A necessary Condition annexed to a Legacy does not make it Conditional; as
if the Testator having appointed A. B. his Exccutor, shall after say. I give I.
G. 100 l. if A. B. be my Executor. l. haec verba. and gloss. ibid. ff. de
Legate. 1.


19. Pronowns Relative, (as who, which, or the like) joined with a Word of the
Future Tense in a Bequest, do imply a Condition. As thus, the Testator says,
[That A. B. who shall be my Executor when I die; shall give C. D. 100 l.] which
is, as if he had said, [if A. B. be my Executor, he shall give C. D. 100 l.] l.
Stichum. ff. de Legate. 1.


20. Likewise a day uncertain set for the Payment of a Legacy, makes it a
Conditional Legacy. l. cum pecunia. quod ita. and gloss. min. and Bart. ibid.
ff. de Legate. 2.


21. An impossible Condition imposed upon a Legatary, shall not hurt him in his
Legacy. Inst. de haered. just.. impossibilis. and gloss. in. in Testam. l. ab
omnib. ff. de Leg. 1.
Albeit the Testator thought it Possible. l. servo ff. Con. Ind.

22. A Legatary cannot transfer his Legacy, if he die depending the Condition.
C. de cad tollend.. sin autem. and gloss. min. l. miles. ff. de Legate. 2.


23. That Condition needs no Expectation, whose Event has no Operation. l. si
quis ita. ff. de haered. inst.


24. A Legacy taken away under a Condition, is understood as given under the
contrary Condition. l. si. legatum pure. and l. legata inutiliter. ff. de adim.
Leg.
As if the Testator says, [A. B. shall not have 100 l. if my Ship which I
expect home, should chance to perish in the Sea.] In this Case A. B. shall have
100 l. if that Ship shall safe arrive.

25. The Legataries Legacy is not Transmissable to his Executors, if he die
before the accomplishment of the Condition thereunto annexed. l. intercidit.
ff. de cond. and demon.


26. Every Condition relating to a Legacy ought to be understood so, as may
admit a possibility of both Existence and Nonexistence. l. ex facto.. ult. ff.
ad Treb.


27. To find out the mind of the Testator, and to reach at the very Truth of
the Meaning, Respect must be had rather to the Time of his making the
Testament, than to the Time of his death. Roman. in Authen. similiter. nu. 93.
in fin. ad l. Falcid.


28. The Testators meaning in all probability is best interpretable by
reflecting on his usual Mode, and common Custom of speaking. l. si servus
plurium.. ult. ff. de Legate. 1.


29. All Dispositions made by a Testator must be understood under the
Qualification of Rebus sic stantibus. Bart. in l. quoties.. si duo. 5. nu. ff.
de haered. Instit.


30. The Testators Will ought to have such due Construction, as may enure
rather to the validity than nullity of the Dispositions therein made by him. l.
quoties and l. ubi est. ff. de reb. dub.


31. To prevent the Inutility of such Dispositions made by the Testator, he
shall be presumed (if possibly the Case will bear it) to have in his thoughts
what is not contained in his words. Bart. in l. quintus.. 1. nu. 3. ff. de aur.
and arg. leg.


32. A Legacy of Release or Discharge to Debtors, is not Extensive to other
than were Debtors at that time when the Testament was made; unless the Testator
Expressly Bequeath it otherwise. l. Aurelius.. 1. ff. de Lib. Legate. and Fulg.
Cons. 37.


33. To the Payment of an Annuity Bequeathed in a Will, it is sufficient if the
last Year were but newly begun when the Legatary dyed. l. a vobis. Rub. ff. de
Annuis. Legatis.


34. In Legacies of a perishable Nature or Quality, that interpretation ought
to be made, which may best prevent the destruction or pejoration of the Thing
Bequeathed. gloss. min. lit. e. l. fi ita quis ff. de Legate. 1.


35. Impossibility destroys a Legacy. Understand it of such a Moral
Impossibility as was such ab initio, and not of such as are so by some
Post-fact of the Executor that should pay the same.

36. The Bequest of a Debt to be due at a day yet to come, is good to the
Legatary though the day of Payment comes before the day of the Testators death.
gloss. min. lit. f. in l. si Creditori. ff. de Legate. 1.


37. The Onus probandi does not lie upon him, who has the Presumption of his
side, and such Presumption as is not disproved, or whose contrary is not
proved; and therefore if the Testator Bequeath the same Sum of Money more than
once to the same Person, the Legatary if he would have it twice, must prove it
was the Testators meaning to have it so. l. plane.. sed si. gloss. ibid. verb.
Divus Pius. and verb. ostendatur. and gloss. min. Litt. ff. de Legate. 1.


38. Things not Merchandable are not Devisable: Understand it specially of
things Sacred or Consecrated. l. cum servus. si vero. and gloss. mag. and min.
ibid. ff. de Legate. 1.
Nor things joined to an Edifice, otherwise than as the Edefice it self. l.
caetera. ff. eod.
In resemblance to what we hold for Law when we say, That things fixed to the
Freehold go not to the Executor, but to the Heir.

39. The Testator may empower the Legatary to Assume his Legacy of his own
Authority; C. de pign. l. Creditores. and gloss. in l. Lucius. ff. de Legate. 2.
otherwise he may not so do, but must have it by the Executors delivery.

40. If a Bond or Obligation of a Debt be Bequeathed, the Executor is
discharged by delivery of the same to the Legatary, and by yielding his Name
and Authority for the putting of the same in Suit in order to a Recovery
thereof for the Legataries use; but is not obliged to make the Debt good to
him, in Case the Debtor prove insolvant. Bart. in Rub. and gloss. min. in..
civibus. L. Lucius. ff. de Legate. 2.


41. In the Bequest of a Bond or Obligation is Comprised both the Principal
Debt, and such Interest also as is due on the same. Rub. in l. Nomen. ff. de
Legate. 3.


42. Where there is a limited Executor, and another with him as universal
Co-executor, that other in Construction of Law is Legatary as well as Executor.
gloss. min. lit. a. in l. ex facto. ff. de haered. Instit.


43. A Legacy once extinct by the Testators own Alienation thereof, though
after Repurchased by the Testator, is never Recoverable by the Legatary without
due proof of a Declaration de novo of the Testators intention to the same
effect. Rub. in l. cum servus. ff. de adim. Leg. and gloss. ibid.


44. The Testators Will depending on another Man's, is no Will. l. illa
Institutio. ff. de haered. instit.


45. The Reason of the Law, That Prius solvi debet aes alienum quam Legata.
dict. gloss. in l. ex facto.
That Debts must be paid before Legacies, is because the one is a necessary
Duty, the other a voluntary Bounty.

46. If a certain Quantity be twice Bequeathed, it is twice due, unless the
last Will of the Testator were expressed with an intent of Ademption of the
first. Rub. in l. cum centum. ff. de adim. Legate.
Understand this when it is in two Distinct Writings, as in a Testament and a
Codicil: For the twice Bequeathing to the same Person the same Quantity in the
same Writing does not Duplicate the Legacy; otherwise if it be in Two such
Distinct Writings as aforesaid. ibid. gloss. min. lit. a.


47. The Testators Erroneous Demonstration or Description of the Bounds,
Limits, or Situation of Lands Devised by him, does not prejudice the Devise,
provided he be not mistaken in the Land it self. l. patronus. sempronius. gloss
min lit. b. ff. de Legate. 3.


48. The Testators false Demonstration of the Thing Bequeathed, does not hurt
the Legacy, so as his Intention be Evident. Inst. de Leg.. huic and gloss. in.
quod si. l. si sic legate. ff. de Legate. 1.


49. If a Testator Bequeath part of his Goods to A. and says not what part,
the Legatary shall have a Moity of the whole. gloss. in l. si Titius. ff. de
Legate. 3.


50. If the Testator says, I give thee a part of my House, or the like; it is
as if he had said, I give thee one half of my House. gloss. de verb. sign. l.
nomen.. portionis. and gloss. mag. min. in l. Titius. ff. de Legate. 1.


51. There falls no more under the Notion of Goods, than what the Testator has
clear of his Debts. gloss. in l. cum autem. ff. de Legate. 1.


52. If I give 10 l. to A. and B. they shall have 10 l. between them, not 10 l.
each. l. si quis test. and gloss ibid. ff. de Legate. 1.


53. If a Man Bequeath all his Horses, his Mares are comprised therein. l.
Martianus. ff. de Legate. 3. and Call. Lex. verb. Legate.


54. By a Bequest of Lambs are understood such as are under a year old. l. cum.
quaereretur. ff. de Legate. 3.


55. By a Bequest of Cattle do pass all Four Footed Tame Beasts, that feed in
Herds, Droves, or Flocks, or otherwise. l. legatis. Pecoribus. ff. de Leg. 3.


56. Although Mares pass (as aforesaid by a Bequest of Horses, dict. l.. cquis.
yet not e contra; nor by a Bequest of Geldings.

57. Nor by a Bequest of Sheep do Rams or Lambs pass; yet in that Case the
Custom of the Place is to be observed; for in some places they are reckoned as
Sheep as soon as they are shorn; notwithstanding both Rams and Lambs shall pass
by a Bequest of a Flock of Sheep. l. servis.. Ovium. ff. de Leg. 3.


58. By a Bequest of Wool is understood not only that which is separate from
the Skin, but also such as is yet on the Skins of dead Sheep, washed or not
washed, so as it be not yet dyed, nor designed for some special or particular
use. Rub. and l. si cui lana. ff. de Leg. 3. and gloss. ibid.


59. By a Bequest only of Wool do pass the Skins also of dead Sheep whereon
the Wool is. dict. l.. sed an pelles.


60. By a Bequest of Birds do pass all Poultry, Geese, Pheasants, and all Tame
or Tamed Fowl. Rub. in dict. l. si cui lana.


61. By a Bequest of Wood or Lignum is only understood Fuel fit for the Fire,
not Silva, or Trees standing or cut, nor Timber fit for Building, which pass by
the word [Materials.] l. ligni. and glo. ibid. ff. de Leg. 3.


62. By a Bequest of Books are only understood Printed Volumes, not clean
Paper-Books. l. librorum. and glo. ibid. ff. de Leg. 3.


63. By a Bequest of Silver will pass Money and Plate, but not the Chest
wherein the Silver is. l. argento. ff. de Legate. 3.


64. By a Bequest of a Bond, Obligation, or Specialty does pass the Debt
therein contained, and vice versa. l. qui chirographum ff. de Legate. 3.


65. When a Testator Bequeaths a thing in certain; but having more of the same
kind, which he meant, is uncertain; in such Case the Executor, and not the
Legatary has the Election; as when the Testator having but two Horses in all,
gives one of them (not saying which) to A. B. the Executor, and not he shall
have the choice. l. si quis a filio. si quis plures. and gloss. ^bid. lit. a.
verb. Elegerit. ff. de Legate. 1.


66. Likewise when the Testator Bequeaths any thing Real and Immovable in
Certain, as his Field called Blackdown, when he has two Fields of that Name;
in this Case also the Election belongs to the Executor; to give unto the
Devisee which of them he please. l. legato. and gloss. ibid. (...), de Legate. 1.


67. But when the Legacy is of Generals, or Bequeathed in General, as a Horse,
an Ox, or the like; in such Case the Election is the Legataries, to choose only
in a way of Mediocrity. dict. l. legato
For,

68. When even by the Testators own words the Law gives the Election of the
thing Bequeathed to the Legatary, it is not intended that he shall choose that
which is the very best for himself, and the very worst for the Executor, but
shall moderate and regulate his choice between them both. gloss. mag. and min.
in. si quis plures. l. si quis a filio. ff. de Leg. 1.


69. But when the Election is Doubtful, as whether it does belong to the
Legatary or to the Executor; In that Case the Law in favor of Wills gives it
to the Legatary. gloss. min. lit. e. in. l. qui duos. ff. de Legate. 1.


70. A Legacy left by a Testator to his Parish Church, who after the making of
his Will does change his Habitation, is due not to the Parish where he dyed,
but where he lived when the Testament was made; Roman. in Auth. similit. nu.
93, C. ad L. Falcid. per l. si cognatis. ff. de reb. dubijs. and l. peto..
fratre. ff. de Leg. 3.
which yet is contradicted, as will speedily appear.

71. The words [Si, Donec, Quamdiu,] and the like, used in the Form of a
Bequest, though they seem to be of no great disconsonancy in their import, yet
do exceedingly alter the Case according to the diversity of their genuine
acceptations; for a Testators Relict having a Legacy given her of 10 l. per
annum if she shall remain a Widow, is obliged to give Caution for Repayment
(in Case she Re-marry) of what in the interim she shall receive by virtue of
that Legacy. Auth. cui relictum. de jndi. vidui. tollend.
otherwise if the words were, [untill she shall be Married, or so long as she
shall remain unmarried.] In both which Cases she shall only loose it de futuro,
but not be obliged to repay what she received de preterito. l. Filiae. ff. de
annuis Leg.


73. It is possible that a Legacy may be good, even where the Form of a last
Will or Testament is not observed; for a Soldier being abroad in Military
Service, wrote home to his Sister that he shouid speedily send her a Letter,
which he desired and charged her not to open until he were dead. Accordingly
soon after he sends her a Letter which she preserves without opening. The
Soldier is slain in the Wars. After she opens the Letter, wherein was found
written to this effect, That he would give her 100 l. It is a good Legacy to
the Sister. This also holds true in private persons; nor is it material whether
he be Absent or Present, that thus writes, l. miles. and gloss. ibid. ff. de
Legate. 2.
provided it be animo Testandi, and without any Revocation subsequent.

74. There are a few Cases wherein a Legacy is not Revocable, Four especially.
(1) When the Testator Swears never to Revoke it. Maschard. de probat. concl.
359. nu. 8. 19. and l. cum quis decedens.. Codicillis. ff. de Legate. 3.
(2) When it tends to Restitution for Goods ill gotten, or wrongfully taken and
withheld. (3) When the Testator gives it for the disburdening of his
Conscience. Idem. Conc. dict. nu. 21.
(4) When the Testator confesses in the presence of the Legatary accepting it,
that he owes him the Sum which he has Bequeathed him. Alex. Cons. 153, in fin.
lib. 2, Cons. and ibi Molinae. and Maschard. ibid
There are also, that add a Fifth, viz. When the Testator himself in his life
time delivers the thing Bequeathed to the Legatary. Aymon. Crave^t. sup. Rub.
de Legate. 1. post Bart.
But this the Law understands more properly as Donatio inter vivos than
Legatum; yet if such Legacy be mentioned in the Testament (as it must be, if
the Legatary has it under that Notion) and such Testament afterward prove
Null, that Legacy will be so also; the Reason is, because such delivery thereof
by the Testator alters not the nature of a Legacy, and will be understood to be
with an Implicit Referendo to the Testament it self. Cravet. ibid.


75. If the Testator in his Will does Appoint, That whatever he got by
Extortion, or any unlawful ways, shall be restored, without expressing what or
to whom) it signifies nothing by reason of uncertainty; l. qui Romae..
Augerius. ff. de verb. obl. and l. si cui.. Flav. ff. de solutio:
and which indeed is more a Debt than a Legacy. Ibid.


76. A Legacy left to one if he will, the Testator in the Bequest saying
expressly, I give A. B. 100 l. if he will accept of it; in such Case the Legacy
is lost, if the Legatary knowing thereof die before he has declared his Will
or Acceptance. l. si ita legate.. illi si volet. ff de Legate. 1. and l. si ita
expressum. ff. de Cond. and Them.
The Reason is, because the Legataries Will, and consequently the power of
accomplishing the Condition is not Transferrable to another. For,

77. The Legatary cannot Transmit his Legacy to his Executor or any other
before the day of payment thereof come. l. unica.. sin. autem C de cad. tollend.


78. An Annual Legacy, or a Legacy of an Annuity is payable at the beginning of
Every Year, unless the Testator does otherwise fix the times of payment. Car.
Tap. in l. Beneficium. ff. de constable. Prin. nu. 13. and l. nec semel.. 1. ff.
quando dies Legate. ced.


79. A Legacy left at a day uncertain when it will be, but certain that it will
be, is not due unless the day happen in the Legataries life time. Petr.
Bellapert. in ff. si qui cautio judic. cause. fac. non obtemp. l. si quis post
tres. nu. 24.


80. A Legacy given by the Testator to his Kindred in general, is due to such
as were not of Kin to him at the making of his Will, so as they be of his Kin
at his death. l. cum ita.. in fidei commisso* ff. de Leg. 2. and Jo. Ant.
^ubaeus. in. quidam recte l. Gallus Aquill^^s. ff. de Liber. and posth.


81. In an alternative Legacy, wherein the Executative words are directed
neither to the Executor nor to the Legatary, as when the Testator says, [I
give my House or 100 l. to A. B.] the Election belongs to the Legatary, not to
the Executor. gloss. in l. Lucio Titio. ff. de Legate. 2. and ibi Bart. Alber.
Bald. Imola. Paul. Angel. salic. Jas. cum mult. alijs.
The Reason is, because the Law so favors Testaments, as that they shall be
interpreted with as Extensive a Latitude as possibly may consist with the
Testators mind and meaning.

82. If the Testator says, I Bequeath or Commit my Estate as well as my Soul
to God.] Whoever has his Soul, his Parish Church shall have his Estate. Bald.
in pract. tit. de ult Vol. q. 12. nu. 2.


83. If the Testator in his last Will does give 100 l. to the Church, (without
other description thereof) and had but one Parish Church, it shall be intended
of that, if he dwelt in that Parish. Bart. in l. quae Conditio.. cum ita. ff.
de Cond. and Them.
If he gave it to St. Stephens Church in such a City, by Name, and none there
found so called, it shall be due to the Cathedral. Panorm. in cap. nos quidem.
nu, 13. de Testa. and Lapus. in Alleg. 87. nu. 6. and Felin. in c. dilectus.
col. 1. and Troil^s Malvctius in Tract. de oblat. par. 4. nu. 3.
If having two Parish Churches, (one where he made his Will, the other where he
dyed) shall say [I give 100 l. to my Parish Church] without other Distinction;
it shall be due to the Parish Church where he dyed, if he dyed an Inhabitant
thereof, and would there be Buried. Jo. Andrae. Gemin. Romans Anchor. Franc. and
Socin. quos resert and sequitur Boer. in q. 1^6.
Otherwise not, say some of the DD. but they are not clear in that Point.
Menoeh. lib. 4. Praes. 114. nu. 6.
Being also much divided in their opinion to which Church the Legacy is due,
when the Testator having at the same time, (as well when the Testament was
made, as when he dyed.) Two Parish Churches, his House and Habitation in each,
dwelling alike indifferently in each, a reputed Parishioner to each, does
Bequeath the said Sum of 100 l. to his Parish Church. To find out the Testators
Intention in a Bequest so Circumstantiated, the DD. raise their Conjectures
either from the consideration of the Testators choice of the Place for his
Enterment, as which of these two Parish Churches he desired to be Buried in; or
from the consideration of his most frequent converse, as which of these two
Parishes he was personally most conversant in; or from the consideration of his
Affection to the one more than to the other; and lay the greatest weight upon
that where he desired to be Buried, as being a Signal of his Affection to that
Parish Church more than the other, and accordingly give their determination
herein. And in Case there be not sufficient Evidence of his Affection more to
the one than to the other, the Law presumes the Legacy for that Parish Church
which is the poorest of the two; but if that neither can sufficiently appear,
then and in such Case the Bishop of the Diocese may gratify which Parish he
please, by Assigning it the whole Legacy; or otherwise may divide it betwixt
them both, as he shall think fit. Tiraq. d^. jur. primogen. q. 17. nu. 16. and
soc. in l. quae Conditio.. cum ita. nu. 4. ff. de cond. and demon. and Menoch.
ubi. sup. nu. 8.
But if the Testator himself Nominates the Church, and there be several
Churches of the same Name, and no sufficient Evidence which he meant or
intended; in that Case the Law presumes he intended that Church which was the
poorest of the Name. Bald. in l. si quis ad declinand. C. de Episo. and Cler.
and Angel. in (...). si quis in nomine. in Auth. de Ecclesiis. tit. and
Auchor.. Salicet S. ocin. and alij.


84. When a Testator gives a Legacy to a Man, willing him to live with his
Children, the Legacy is extinguished upon his not living with them, in Case the
Legacy were given him for the Childrens sake. l. illis libert. in fin. ff. de
cond. and them. and l. Seia. ff. de annuis Legate.
Otherwise if it were given him for his own sake, and not for theirs. Ita post
glo. Bart. and al. in l. 1. C. de Legate. and Decij Cons. 601. nu. 3.
But if it were given him on both Respects, viz. For the love the Testator bore
him, and that he might live with his Children; in that Case the Legacy shall be
good to him, albeit he does not live with them; because then the favor the Law
allows the Legatary, and for prevention of an Extinguishment of the Legacy
shall turn the Scale, especially if the Testator had more than an ordinary
Affection for him. Ibid. Dec. nu. 4.


85. If the Testator says, [I would not have my Executor to hinder A. B. in
his Legacy, or in what I have Bequeathed to him.] The Law does infer, that A.
B. shall take the Thing Bequeathed of his own proper Authority, without
expecting the delivery thereof to him by the Executor: Angel. in l. si res. nu.
1. ff. de rei vindic. (...) Jo. Cuter. (...). n^mo potest ff. de Legate. 1.
Which holds true, albeit the usual words of Bequeathing are omitted. For,

86. In the constitution of a Legacy it is not necessary the Testator should in
terminis say, I Give, Leave, Will, Devise, or Bequeath; it is sufficient if he
says, I would have A. B. to have such a Thing, or let my Executor suffer him
to have it, or let him see that A. B. have such a Thing] or any other words of
like import. l. damnas. esto. ff. de usu^ruct. Legate.


87. He that has the Letters of Administration cum Testamento annexo, is as
far forth obliged to pay the Legacies in such Will contained, as if the Will it
self had been legally proved. l. confi ciuntur. de Codicil.


88. If the Legatary be a person capable of a Legacy at the Time of the
Testators death, it is sufficient, albeit he were not so at the time when the
Testament was made. l. 3.. quando autem. ff. de jur. Filci.


89. If a Testator Bequeath 100. Bushels of Corn out of his Ground, there is
such a Tacit Condition in that Legacy, that if the Ground produce it not the
first Year, the Legatary may expect it the next, and so on successively till
the Legacy be complete. Jo. Guter. in l. nemo potest. ff. de Legate. 1. nu. 506.
post Bart.


90. A Testator says, [I give my Physic Books to my Son if hereafter he shall
study Physic; but if he make the Law his Profession, then let him have my Law
Books.] After the Son Studies both Law and Physic; in that Case he shall have
the Testators Books of both Professions. Bald. in l. fin col. 1. C. com. de l.
and Lanc. Gauliaula. in l. 2. ff. de verb. oblig.


91. A Legacy left by the Husband to the Wife so long as she shall abide and
remain in his House, is understood as a Legacy given her so long as she
continues in her widdowed Condition. Bald. in l. voluntatis. in fin. col. ff.
de fidei commiss. and Jo. d^ Barronibus. sup. Rub. C. de secund. Nupt. nu. 31.


92. If the Husband gives a Legacy to his Wife in this manner, viz. Item, I
Bequeath 100 l. to my Wife so long as she remain in my House, and with my Goods
for my Child till he come of Age; she loses her Legacy if in the interim she
Marry again, and dwell elsewhere with her second Husband. l. qui concubinam.
uxori ff. de Legate. 3. and Jo. de Barron. ubi supra. nu. 32.


93. Legacies and Bequests of a Dubious sense, ought to have such Construction
as may render them of use to the Legataries. l. Titia.. 1. ff. de Legate. 2.
For which Reason, if a Testator Bequeaths his Debts, he shall be understood to
have Bequeathed his Credits, Bald. in Rub. C. de reb. Cred. nu. 3.
In like manner if he Devise his Wood, or [Sylva] it shall be a Devise also of
the Fruit or Proceed thereof, That so the Legatary may have power to cut it
down, convert it into Ligna, and Sell the same; for otherwise the Devise would
be nothing worth to the Devisee. l. Divus. ff. de usu. and Hab.


94. When the Testators sense and meaning is somewhat dark and clowdy, it may
be Requisite in some Cases to have due Reflections on, or (as the Phrase now
current is) to take their Measures by the Quality of the Legatary; as if the
Testator should say, [I allow A. B. the use of some of my Horses, until my
Executor shall have Sold them.] In that Case, if A. B. be a Farmer, he shall
not use his Hunting-Horses nor his Coach-Horses, but his Cart-Horses and such
only as were employed about his Husbandry Affairs; otherwise and e contra if A.
B. were of a more refined Quality. (...)lenum.. equitij ff. de usu. and hab.
and Jas. in l. si Domus. nu. 6. ff. de Legate. 1. and l. si servus.. ult. ff.
^od*


95. If the Testator says, I Bequeath to A. B. whatever Debts are made,
contracted, and due to me that shall be found at my decease; A. B. shall in
that Case have only such Debts as were contracted at that Time when the
Testament was made, not such as were afterward made or contracted: The Reason
is, because those latter words, [which shall be found at my decease] are not
Augmentative but Restrictive as relating to the words precedent, and therefore
ought not to work an Extension of that Legacy, least a limiting and diminuting
Induction should operate an Augmentation. Curtius Jun. in Consil. 277. nu. 11,
12.
For if less Debts were found at the Testators death than had been made to him
at or before the making of his will, there could no more pass by this Legacy
than such, much less others that were made and contracted afterward.

96. In llke manner, if the Testator Bequeath all his Books to A. B. after Buys
many other Books, after makes another Will, wherein he ratifies and confirms
the first as to the Legacies therein Bequeathed. Even in this Case A. B. shall
not have the Books bought after the making of the first Testament. Romans sing.
503. and l. si ita. ff. qui dixit. probari. and l. Aurelius.. Testam. ff. de
Libera. Legate.
Because this Confirmation in such latter Will Ratifies nothing to any
Extension beyond what is adequate to the Legacy Bequeathed in the former.

97. But if the Testator shall say, I give A. B. all I can, or whatever I can
out of the Goods and Chattels which I have.] In such case, whatever shall be
afterward acquired of that kind by the Testator, is contained in such Legacy,
and shall enure to A. B. l. fi ita quis Test. ff. de Leg: 2. and Bart. in l. fi
ita. nu. 3. ff. de aur. and arg. leg. and Ruin. Cons. 160. nu. 14. lib. 2. and
Curt. Jun. in Cons. 109. nu. 18. and Bello. Cons. 5. nu. u.
Otherwise in case the Testator had limited the words of the said Bequest to
any certain place. Bart. ibid. nu. 5.


98. If a Testator says, [I Bequeath my things to A. B.] his Money does pass
by that Bequest, because of its Generality; Brechaeus. in l. 4. ff. dever sig
Otherwise if he says, [I Bequeath my Gold and Silver to A. B.] Ibid. and l.
cum aur. and arg. ff. de aur. and arg. Leg. Rei nomen Pecuniam continet, sed
non e contra, licet Pecunia rem significat. Res est Genus, Pecuniaspecies
Because such words are not Generical enough to be Moneys infallible continent,
for a Man may have very current Money that is neither Gold nor Silver.

99. A Testator gives 1000 l. to his Daughters, and dies. After his Relict is
delivered of another Daughter, by that Husband, Deceased. That Daughter shall
share with the other in 1000 l. Fornerius. in l. 164. de ver. sig. in prin. and
l. qui filiab. ff. de Leg. 1 and l. 5. ff. de Test. tut. and l. 5. ff. de oper.
lib.
Otherwise if the Testator had limited the Legacy to any Number of Legatees,
and said I give 1000 l. to my Three Daughters.

100. A Testator says, [I give a Portion of my Estate, or a Portion of my
Goods to A. B.] without expressing specially what proportion. In this Case he
shall have the one half or Moity thereof. Brechaeus. ubi supra. in l. 164. and
l. etiam ff. de usufract. and l. aetate.. si interrogatus. ff. de interrog.
act. and glo. in l. si Titius. ff. de Legate. 3.
The same Law in Case the Testator had said, [I give A. B. part of my Estate,
or I give him part of my Goods.] The Reason is, because a Dimidiety is the most
just and equallest part of the whole. Brechae. ibid. In Dubio Dimidia debetur.
l. 3. C. de Legate.
And the Case may so happen, as that Pars shall be taken Legally in one sense,
as well as Figuratively in another pro toto; as when a Testator Bequeaths to
his Wife that part of his House he most frequented and used to live in, she
shall have in that case not only this or that part of the House, as his
Bedchamber, or the like; but the whole of his Habitation that he made use of
with and for his Family. Accu^sius. in l. uxori. ff. de Legate. 3. and Brechae.
ibid.


101. If a Legacy be given between thee and a Child in the Womb, and that Child
after happen to be dead born, or never born, thou shall have the whole to thy
self, albeit the Testator Assigned each one his entire proportion thereof.
Fornelius. in l. 145. ff. de verb. sign.


102. If a Herd of Cattle or a Flock of Sheep be Bequeathed, whereof all of
each, save one, do die, the Legatary shall have that one. l. si grege. ff. de
Legate. 1.


103. By the Bequest of Bonds or Specialties, the Debts due or to be due
thereon, as also the right of Action for the same are Bequeathed. Likewise by
the Devise of a Purchase-Deed, the thing Purchased, together with all the
Testators Right, Title, and Interest to and in the same does pass to the
Devisee. l. qui chirographum. ff. de Legate. 3. and l. 1. C. de don.


104. A Bequest of Wines does convey the Vessels wherein they are to the
Legatary, not as if a Man in his Liquor should think (for no Man else will) the
Vessels were part of the Wines (as Meddals of Gold or Silver are part of such
Metals) but because the Testators intention in the Eye of the Law seems to
Bequeath them as Accessories to the Principal; Alceat. and Fornel. in l. 206.
ff. de verb. sig.
excepting such as by reason of the greatness of their Bulk and wide Capacity,
cannot without much difficulty be removed out of the Cellars where they are. l.
3. de tritic. ff. de vino and olio Legate.


105. If a Legacy be given to the Bishop of such a Diocese, without naming him,
and he happen to die before the day for payment thereof come, his Successors
shall have it; because it is presumed the Testator intended it not to that
person so dignified, but to the Dignity it self. l. quod principi. ff. de Leg.
2. and Bart. Bal. and Castr. in d. locum. and Menoch. lib. 5. Praes. 121. nu.
1. and. l. annua in ^in. ff. de Annuis Legate.
and because the Dignity is not, as the Person, Mortal, but Sempervive by
Succession. glo. in C. quoniam. Abbas. de Offic. de leg.
For the same Reason, a Legacy given to a King (who dies before it becomes
payable) accrews to the next Successor, because the Regal Authority never dies.
Bald. in Rub. C. de jur. fi c. lib. 10. nu. 14. and. ult. in Auth. Quomo. oper.
Episco.
Otherwise if the Legacy were given to A. B. (by name) Bishop of D. because
then the Person, not the Dignity is the Legatary; the Dignity being mentioned
only for distinction,

106. If a Legacy be given to the Child in the W^mb, and the Birth prove
Monstrous, that is, very contrary to the common form and shape of Mankind, as
with a Grows Beak instead of a Nose, or with the Face of an Ass instead of a
better; in such an ill favored Case the Legacy is void. Brechaeus. in l. 38.
ff. de. verb. sign.
Otherwise if it be Born only with some of the less principal Members imperfect
or Supernumerary, as with half a Thumb, or Two Thumbs, or Six Fingers on a
Hand, or the like. l. non sunt liberi. ff. de stat. hom.
But if the Birth (not accidentally) be imperfect as to its Integrals, or
defective as to its more Noble and more Principal Parts and Members, as having
but one Eye, or but one Hand, albeit the Creature has life the Legacy has
none. l. quod dicitur. ff. de lib. and postth. haered.
For although an Amplication of the natural Form in this Case does no
prejudice, yet a Mutation thereof will. dict. l. non sunt liberi.
understand not this, as if it did extend to Hermophrodites: For if they be not
in a double Capacity as to Legacies as well as other things, yet they are not
excluded a single Capacity; but in that Case it is provided, That that Sex
which most prevails with them in Nature, shall likewise prevail in Law, as to
the Legacy Bequeathed. l. quaeritur. ff. de stat. hom.


107. To conclude with the Pope, because much of the Law that treats of this
Subject (if I would have traveled that way) borders on his Dominions; it is
Asserted or Legended (which you please) by a very learned Author, That Nemo
praeter Papam potest alterare voluntates Testatorum. Jo. Guterius. in l. nemo
potest. ff. de Leg. 1.
It is nothing strange, that he who assumes a Power to dispose of Souls, should
alter the best faculty thereof; for the Wills Society is the Creatures Felicity.

(...).
FINIS.
INDEX GENERALIS: OR, An Alphabetical Table; Comprizing all the Material Points
of Chiefest Remarque in this Testamentary Abridgment, with Reference to each
Page and Paragraph.
A.
ACceptance of Executorship, in what Cases Compellable by Law. -- p. 91.. 2.
Accessorie Advantages to a Legatary between the time of making the Testament,
and the Testators death, -- p. 291, 292.. 19. Account, Executors Obliged to
Account, with the Ordinaries power therein. -- p. 150.. 1. Within what time
they are ^o Account. -- Ibid.. 2. Though it be Judicially made, yet it shall
not Prejudice Absent Creditors or Legataries, not being duly Summoned. --
Ibid.. 3. Whether Account lies against Executors for Money paid to their
Testators by virtue of the Privy Seal. -- p. 113, 114.. ult. It lies against
the Executor of an Accomptant, for Money received by his Testator, although
paid by Order frm the Lord Treasurer. -- Ibid. -- It lies not against the
Executor of an Accomptant except for the King. -- p. 128, 129.. 2. Actions
Maintainable by Executors or Administrators, p. 100, etc. Personal Actions in
the Testator are none in the Executor. -- Ibid.. 2. and p. 129.. 3. Actions
Maintainable against Executors or Administrators. -- p. 105. etc. Personal
Actions lie not against Executors, as such. -- p. 129.. 3. Whether Actions and
Right of Actions fall under the Notion of Goods Devised? or under the Notion of
Movables and Immoveables. -- p. 306, 307.. 1, 2. Administration, how it shall
be granted. -- p. 153.. 5. Whether it may be Granted by Word only, Ibid.. 5. --
p. 163.. ult. Whether it may be Granted Conditionally, and with an Ita tamen.
-- p. 162. In what case it may be Granted notwithstanding an Executorship.
Ibid. It may be Granted of the Goods of a Woman Covert Intestate. -- Ibid. Two
Letters thereof may be Granted, and both Good. -- p. 69, 70.. 5. What Acts
amount to an Administration. -- p. 162.. ult. To take in any of the Testators
or Intestates Obligations, and give others in stead thereof, is an
Administration, and alters the Property. -- Ibid. and p. 159.. ult. To whom of
right it belongs. p. 169, etc. Granted to an Executor of his own wrong, will
not Justify him. -- p. 162.. ult. To whom it belongs Durante Minoritate. p.
67, 68.. 4. When it ceases. -- ibid. -- Committed Durante Minoriaetate. -- p.
154.. 6. Granted by the Metropolitan where there is not Bona Notabilia, is
voidable not void; otherwise if Granted by a Bishop, when it appertains to the
Metropolitan. -- p. 167.. ult. In what Cases not voidable only, but void also.
-- p. 159, 160.. ult. Granted (a Caveat depending) void. p. 171.. 5.
Adminstrations, Fraudulent and Revokable. -- p. 164, etc. Whether to say
[granted by a Bishop] a good Plea, without showing that he was Loci illius
Ordinarius. And whether so of a Dean or Archdeacon. -- p. 155, 159, 160, 161,
etc.. ult. To say [Granted by A. W. LL Dr.] no good Plea, because not showed to
be Bishop or Ordinary. -- p. 161. Administration Durante Minori aetate cease
at the Age of 17 Years. p. 67.. 2. Administrator, What he is in Law. -- p.
151.. 1. His Origination. Ibid.. 2. What in a Notion distinct from Executors.
-- p. 151. After an Executors death, how the Law in that case provides. p.
152.. 3. Administrator of an Intestate Executor may not meddle with the first
Testators Goods. p. 69.. 4. He is an Assign in Law as well as an Executor. --
p. 161.. ult. In what case Acts done by a former Administrator are good
notwithstanding Letters of Administration after Granted to another. -- p. 165,
166.. 4. In Plea he must show not only who Granted his Letters of
Administration, but also that he had Legal power so to do. p. 158, 159.. ult.
What sales or disposals of Goods an Administrator may make Durante Minoritate
of the Executor. -- p. 156. Administrator (pendente Lite of a Citation to
Repeal) sells Goods, good; for he has Lawful power to Dispose etc. Otherwise
in an Appeal. -- p. 166.. 5. In what Case an Administrator only in pretense,
shall be no Legatary in reality. -- p. 318, 319.. 26. Advowson in Fee, how
Devisable. -- p. 288.. 5. Advowson in Gross not Devisable. -- p. 225.. 2.
Whether an Advowson may be Assetts. -- p. 122.. 8. Age, At what Age Minors may
be Devisors. p. 205.. 1. Age Superannuated into Dotage, Intestable. -- p. 13..
4. Alien, not Denison, whether he may be an Administrator. -- p. 170.. 4. Alien
Administrator, though Enemy, may Sue. -- p. 103.. ult. Alien, not Denizon,
intestable as to Lands. -- p. 226.. 3. Alienations Prohibited to Devisees, with
the difference between necessary and voluntary Alienations. -- p. 298.. 48. A
Tripartite Case in Point of Alienations prohibited by the Testator. -- p. 248,
249.. 49. All] How that word is to be understood. -- p. 311.. 14. Anabaptists,
by the Civil and Canon Law, Incapable of being Legataries. -- p. 207.. 2.
Animus Testandi, Necessary in every Testator in making a Will or Devise. -- p.
2.. 2. and p. 202.. 2. Annuity, when payable, if no fixed time be set by the
Testator -- p. 306.. 20. and p. 439.. 3. and p. 444.. 78. Apostates Intestable.
-- p. 21.. 4. Incapable of a Legacy. -- p. 206.. 2. Appellation of things ought
not to be besides the Testators Intention. -- p. 294.. 29. Appurtenances, by
that word shall pass Lands commonly used with a Message Devised. -- p. 272..
6. They are not where the one is Freehold, the other Coppyhold. -- p. 235..
ult. Arbitrament made in writing against a Testator, does not charge his
Executor. -- p. 108.. 6. and p. 110.. ult. Debt thereupon against an
Administrator not good. p. 109.. ult. Assent of an Executor, necessary to the
having of a Legacy. -- p. 162.. ult. Assent to a Legacy, whether it may be by
an Administrator Durante Minoritate. -- 67.. 3. Assets charging Executors. --
p. 118, etc. What? -- Ibid.. 1. Whether Damages recovered by Executors shall
be Assets. -- p. 119; 120.. 2. Whether an Advowson be Assets. -- p. 122.. 8.
How real Chattels may turn into Personal Assets. -- p. 123.. 9. Goods in
Ireland are Assets. -- p. 125.. ult. Goods fraudulently Conveyed, though in a
Strangers hand, shall be Assets. -- p. 126, 127.. ult. Mortgages redeemed by
Executors are Assets. -- p. 120.. 3. Increase be Merchandising with the
Testators Goods are Assets. -- Ibid. 4. Whether the Profits of Land Devised to
be Sold be Assets. -- p. 139.. 2. In what Sense Lands Devised to be Sold for
payment of Debts or Legacies, may be said to be Assets or not. -- p. 121, 122..
6. The mean Profits of Land Devised to be Sold by Executors, no Assets in their
hands, unless specially so appointed by the Testator. -- p. 273.. 1. But the
proceed of the Sale shall be Assets in them. -- Ibid.. 4. Money decreed in
Chancery to an Executor may be Assets. -- p. 112.. ult. And Damages Recovered
shall be Assets. -- Ibid. -- Goods Distrained or Impounded are no Assets. -- p.
111. Debts till Recovered or Released are no Assets. -- p. 121.. 5. Goods of a
Testator as Executor Indebted, are not Assets liable to his Debts in such
Executors Executor. -- p. 122.. 7. Goods retained by a Debtee-Executor, no
Assets as to Creditors. -- p. 123.. 10. Other Men's Goods in the Testators
possession, no Assets in the Executors hands. -- p. 123.. 11. The Testators
Debts paid with the Executors own Money, abate the Assets as to so much. -- p.
112, 113.. 12. Assumpsit, Actions thereon by or against Executors. -- p. 103,
104.. ult. and p. 107.. 5.
B.
Bastards, whether they may be Legataries. -- p. 206, 208.. 4. and. ult. Birds
Bequeathed, what passes thereby. -- p. 441.. 60. Bishop, he may not Devise the
Land belonging to his Bishopric. -- p. 225.. 3. A Devise given to a Bishop,
not naming him, and he dying before the day of Payment comes, the Legacy
accrews to his Successors. -- p. 448.. 105. Blind Men are nuncupatively
Testable, how otherwise Testable. -- p. 19, 20. Bona Notabilia, what, -- p.
43.. 1. The Law touching the same. -- p. Ibid. to p. 46. Bona Paraphernalia,
what, and to whom belonging. p. 85.. 1. Bonds and Specialties Devised, what it
signifies. -- p. 448.. 103. Books Devised, others after bought, what shall the
Legatary have. -- p. 447.. 96. Books of Account and Cash in the Chest pass not
by a general Devise of all a Man has in such a place. -- p. 302.. 5, By a
certain Number of Books Bequeathed, is intended so many Volumes, not Computing
several Books in one Volume. -- p, 302.. 6. and p. 442.. 62. Borough Tenure,
and by Custom Devisable, pass by Will Nuncupative. -- p. 5.. 3. and p. 224..
1.
C.
Captives, actually such, are Intestable. -- p. 14, 15.. 2. Cattle,; what is
to be understood by a Bequest thereof, and by that name. -- 441.. 55. Cause,
which is false, whether it viciates a Legacy, -- p. 214.. 2. Chattels, what;
the several kinds thereof. -- p. 79, etc.. 1. Real, Living, and Moveable. --
Ibid.. 2. Real, Inanimate and Immovable. -- Ibid.. 3. Personal, Living, and
Immovable. -- Ibid.. 4. Personal, Inanimate and Moveable. -- Ibid., 5.
Chattels not Entailable. -- Ibid.. 6. Chattels Real and Personal, what. -- p.
301.. 2, Chattels Devised for an hour, are Devised for ever. -- p. 301.. 1.
Several Cases in Law touching Devises of Real Chattels. -- p. 285, to 301. The
like touching Personal Chattels. -- p. 301, to 306. Chests Containing writings
of Inheritance, if locked, do belong to the Heir; unlocked, to the Executor. --
p. 82.. 6. Child in the Womb may be appointed Executor. -- p. 67.. 1. Also a
Legatary or Devisee. -- p. 208.. 3. and p. 283.. 1. and p. 315.. 13. The Devise
is good, though the Infant be ripped alive out of the Womb. -- p. 284.. 2. Good,
though it be a Devise in Remainder or in Tail. -- Ibid.. 3. How the Divident
shall be in case of Twinns unexpected. -- Ibid.. 4, 5. And what the Law in case
of Hermophroditality. -- Ibid.. 4. What the Law in case (a Legacy being given)
it prove a Monstrous Birth. -- p, 448, 449.. 106. Child unborn at the Testators
death, may share in the Legacy with those in being when the Testator dyed. p,
447,, 99. A Child in the Womb made Collegatary with one out of it, and after
Born dead, what proportion of the Legacy shall the living Child have. -- p,
448,; 101. Testaments made in favor of the Testators Children, their
Privileges. -- p, 8,, 3. Cases of Legacies in Reference to the Children of
Testators or others. p, 313, 314,, 5, 6. Circumstances not Restrictive, nor
joined to the Legacy or Devise, ought not to deteriorate the same. -- 290,, 14.
Codicil, what. -- p, 9. Its Etymon and Definition. -- Ibid., 1, 2. Codicils,
when, how, how many, and by whom they may be made. -- Ibid,, 3, 4.
Co-executors, how Constituted. -- p, 51, 52. They must all be joined in Suit.
-- p, 108,, 6. In what Case they may Sue one another. -- p, 101, 102,, 5. Their
Indivisibility in point af Power, Interest, and Pleadings. -- p, 86, etc. If
anyone of them be a Debtor to the Testator, it amounts to a Release, -- p, 75.,
2. Comminalty not Incorporate by the Kings Charter, is incapable to take by a
Devise. -- p, 206,, 2. Conditio, what. p, 23,, 3. The several Marks and Kinds
thereof. -- p, Ibid, etc. The Subject thereof very voluminous in Law. Ibid,, 1.
Several Questions in Law touching Conditions Resolved, -- p, 26,, 4. Conditio
and Modus, how they differ. -- p, 23,, 3, and p, 215, 216,, 4, Condition in
suspense, how then to proceed. -- p, 28, 29. Their several kinds and
Resemblances incident to Legacies. -- p, 213, to 217. Whether a false Condition
shall prejudice a Legacy. -- p, 215,, 3. Conditions may be employed as well as
expressed. -- p, 305,, 19. Implicit Conditions require Conditional
Explications. -- Ibid. Conditions Personal in the Legatary are not
transferrable to his Executor. -- p, 443, 444,, 76, 77, Tacit Conditions in
reference to the Executors Assent. p, 312,, 2, What words sufficient to express
or imply a Condition. -- p. 23.. 2. Condition to be annexed to a Devise of
Lands, not written in the Devisors life time, makes void the whole Devise. p,
266, 267,, 1. It cannot continue a Devised Estate for part, and defeat it for
the residue. -- p, 267,, 4. Being annexed to a Devise of Lands and broken, the
Heir, not he in Remainder, shall take advantage thereof. -- p, 268,, 6, 8. Yet
he may not enter where it is only a Limitation, not a Condition, -- p. 268,
269,, 9. A Condition contrary to Law is void. -- p, 268,, 7. Devising may be a
breach of the Condition of not Devising. -- p, 269,. 10. Condition of
Superstitious Uses vests the Land in the Crown. -- Ibid,, 11. What Provision of
Law in Case the Legatary die before Condition broken, or the time for
performance be come. -- p. 281,, 11. Conditions Testamentary in reference to
Marriage. -- p, 27, etc. Conditions directly against Marriage are unlawful,
with the Limitations thereof. -- p. 342, 343,, 25. Condition of Marriage is
annexable to a Legacy or Devise, but an unlawful Condition thereof is void. --
p, 279,, 1. Condition of Marriage with the consent of another, does oblige the
Legatary to Marry, but not to have such consent. -- Ibid,, 2. Condition of
Marriage with the Advice of another, obliges the Legatary to Ask it, but not
to follow it. -- Ibid,, 3. What in case the Legatary were Married before. --
Ibid.. 4. and p, 316,. 18. Though a Condition against Marrige be void, yet the
Legacy is not. -- p, 280,, 5. The Canon Laws Distinction in case of Conditions
directly contrary to Marriage. -- p, 280,, 9. Conditions of Non-alienation are
intended only of voluntary Alienations. -- p, 438,, 17. Conditions necessary
are as no Conditions. -- Ibid,, 18. Conditions employed by Relative Pronouns. --
Ibid,, 19. Positions in Law touching Conditions. p, 438,, 16, to 26.
Conditional Testaments, how and when such. -- p, 22, 23. The several kinds
thereof. -- p, 23, to 27. Confidence in a Feme Covert is not transferrable to
the Husband upon her death. -- p, 236. infin. Consent or Delivery by an
Executor, requisite to a Legacy or Divise. -- p, 440,, 39, etc. Corn standing,
is Devisable where the Land it self may not be. -- p, 225,, 2. and p, 304,, 13.
Corporations, or any Member thereof may not Devise the Land they have in right
of their Corporations. -- p, 225,, 3. Costs not payable by an Executor
Nonsuited on Judgment against him, p, 104,, ult, and p, 110,, ult, and p,
117,, ult. Given in Chancery against a Testator does not charge his Executor.
-- p, 108,, 6. Coverture nulls a Devise; it may revive by a new Publication
after the Husbands death. -- p, 289,, 9. Courtelage passes by the Devise of a
House. -- p, 237, in pr. Creditors made Executors. -- p, 74, to 77, They may
pay themselves first; the Limitations of that Rule. -- p, 75, 76,, 3. Custom
of London in reference to Executors or Administrators touching Debts by simple
Contract. -- p, 116, 117,, ult.
D.
Deaf and Dumb naturally, not Intestable absolutely. -- p, 19. Whether they may
make a Devise of Lands. -- p, 226,, 3. Death of the Legatary before the
existence of a possible Condition annexed to his Legacy, insignificates the
same. -- p, 325,, 13. Debet and Detinet, in what Cases; And in what Cases in
the Detinet only. p, 113,, 7, and p, 157,, ult. Debts Bequeathed. -- p, 321,
322, etc. and p, 440,, 36, 40, 41. and p, 446,, 95. What Debts not Devisable.
-- p, 440,, 38. Debts and Things in Action are Devisable by Will (some only
excepted) -- p, 321,, 1. Debts Bequeathed, how extinguished or not. p, 324,,
11. Debt Bequeathed twice, is due but once. -- p, 325,, 12. Debt Bequeathed to
Joint-Debtors. -- Ibid, Debt Bequeathed, the Executor is discharged by
Assigning the Bond to the Legatary. p, 326., 17. Debt is where the Bond is, but
upon a Contract it follows the Person, -- p, 157,, ult. Where Debt upon a
simple Contract may by the Custom be paid by an Administrator, as soon as a
Debt upon a Bond. -- p, 116, 117.. ult. Debt is Assets though the Debtor be
Administrator. -- p, 76,, 4. That can be no Debt in the Executor which was none
in the Testator. -- p. 107,, 6. Debt lies not against an Executor upon a
simple Contract of the Testator, but an Action of the Case only. -- p. 107,
108,, 6, and p, 109, and 115,, ult. It lies against them for Rent of Land
Leased to their Testator. -- p, 115,, ult. Debts by Bonds and Specialties are
not Comprised in a general Legacy. -- p, 327,, 19. Whether Debts, Bonds and
Specialties are Comprised under the Notion of Movables or Immoveables. -- p,
310,, 10. The Executors Method in paying of Debts. -- p, 142, etc. Debts upon
Record to be first satisfied. -- p, 108,, 7. In what case a Statute may be paid
before a Judgment. -- p. 137, 138,, ult. Debts to be paid before Legacies. --
p, 142,, 1. The Reason thereof in Law. -- p. 440,, 45. What Debts to the Crown
have Priority to the Subjects Debts. -- p, 143,, 3. Executors may satisfy
their own Debts before any other of equal quality and degree. -- p, 142,, 2.
What the Law is in Case of Debts for Rent upon Leases. -- p, 146, 147,, 9.
Declaration precedent Derogatory to the subsequent, does prevail against it. --
p, 302,, 4. An Exception to that Rule. -- Ibid. Deed of Purchase Devised, what
it signifies. -- p, 448,, 103. Delegates or Judges Delegate, whether they may
grant Letters of Administration. -- p, 158,, ult. Demonstrations false destroy
not Legacies. -- p, 210,, 3, and p, 441,, 48. Understand it of False Necessary,
not False Superfluous Demonstrations. -- p, 213,, 1. The difference between
that and a False Cause. -- p, 214,, 2. Designation how a Legacy shall be paid,
makes it not Conditional, nor Questionable whether it shall be paid. -- p,
315,, 14. Detinue, in what Cases it lies or not. -- p, 102,, 7, and, ult, and
p, 107,, 5. How it lies for an Infant-Executor against an Administrator Durante
Minoritate. -- p, 162,, ult. Devastavit, What, and in how many ways it may be;
in what Cases it lies; the Method of proceeding therein, and Execution
thereupon. -- p, 134, etc. Devise, what. -- p, 200,, 1. Its Requisites. -- p,
202,, 2. In what Court properly recoverable. -- p, 204,, 4. Refused to be
Delivered by Executors, what remedy. -- Ibid. What words or expressions
sufficient for a Devise. -- p, 209, etc. Wherein a Devise of Lands differs from
a Bequest of Goods. -- p. 4,, 2. Devise of a thing not in rerum Natura at the
Testators death, void. -- p, 292,, 20. It is as inferrable from the Testators
Intention, as intelligible by his expression. -- p, 295,, 36. An Omission of
what the Testator said he would make a description of, does not null a Devise.
-- p. 296,, 37. The same thing twice Conditionally Devised by two Testators to
several persons, how or in what Case good to either, or not. -- p, 297,, 41.
Devisable, what. -- p. 221, etc. and p, 311.. 15. Whether a Testator may
Bequeath what is not his own. -- p, 221.. 2. What things in particular may be
Devised. -- Ibid.. 1. How the Testator may Bequeath what is his Executors. --
p. 222, 223.. 3. A Bequest to one of what was his own before. -- Ibid.. 4. The
difference between the Common and Civil Law in this point of Devising what is
another man's. -- Ibid.. 5. Goods in Joint-Tenancy are not Devisable. -- p. 223.
6. Devisee, or Devisor, who may be such. -- p. 205, etc. Deuisee must be
capable of the Devise at the time of the Testators Death. -- Ibid. Devisee and
Executor, when the same person is both, by which shall he take. -- p. 102.. 7.
Devisees joined in the thing Devised, but disjoined in the manner of Devising,
How and in what case is the Devise to be apportioned. -- p. 297.. 43. Distress,
or power of distraining Devised, how it makes an Estate Tail. -- p. 250.. 13.
Distribution of Intestates, the Law now in force touching the same. -- p. 168,
169.. 3. Drunk, Dead-drunk; such are dead also in Law as to any Testability
Durante Bestialitate. -- p. 13.. 5. Dubious Cases, Rules in Law touching the
same. -- p. 437.. 1, to 8. and p. 446.. 9. In doubtful Cases the Legatary has
the Election. -- p. 331.. 13. They shall be construed in favor of the
Legatary. -- Ibid. In all doubtful Cases relating to the Quantity of a Legacy,
the least only is due. -- p. 319.. 30.
E.
Ecclesiastical Persons may not Devise the Lands or Goods which they have in
right of their Churches. -- p. 225.. 3. Elections, the Law touching the same.
-- p. 293.. 24. Two Elections in one Devise; in such case the Legatary shall
have the first, the Executor the second. -- p. Ibid.. 26. Election in Executors
to Accept or Refuse the Executorship. -- p. 91, etc. The Equity of Election to
be regulated by the Testators intention. -- p. 290.. 13. Election in a Debtor,
how it may frustrate a Legacy. p. 326.. 18. Election in point of Legacies, to
whom it belongs, whether to the Executor, or to the Legatary. -- p. 328, etc.
p. 442.. 66, to 70. and p. 444.. 81. The Election belongs to him to whom the
Testator directs the Executive power of the Legacy. -- p. 328.. 2. p. 329.. 4.
p. 330.. 8. Election does arise from tolerable uncertainties. -- p. 329.. 3.
It refers as well to the thing it self Bequeathed as to the Legatary or
Executor. -- p. Ibid.. 5. It is sometimes directed by the Law as well as by the
Testator. (...) p. 330.. 6. The Law in that case. (...) Ibid. Whether (...)
Election in the Legatary be transmissable to his Executor. -- p. 332.. 14.
Enmity in the Legatary against the Testator, how it voids the Legacy. -- p.
341.. 22. Entaile by a Devise, may by the same words be a Fee-simple by Deed.
-- p. 249.. 6. In what case the younger Son may have a pure Fee-simple, and the
Elder but an Estate-tail by the same words in a Devise. -- p. Ibid.. 7. Cases
in Law touching Devises of Land Entailed. -- p. 247, etc. How they may be
divested from one to another by Devise. -- Ibid., 1. The several ways of Entail
by Devise. -- p. 248, 249.. 4, 6, 8, 9. How with Cross Remainders. -- p. 250..
11. How with a Remainder Employed. -- Ibid.. 12. How of Rent as well as Land by
way of Devise. -- Ibid.. 13. How extending only to some, not all the Lands
therewith Devised. -- Ibid. The difference between Devises by Will and Grants
by Deed in point of Entail. -- p. 248.. 3. Entry upon a Lease (though before
Probate) vests the Term in the Executor, and if he die Intestate, in his
Administrator. -- p. 96.. 6. Equally to be divided] Whether those words make a
Tenancy in Common or Joint-Tenancy. -- p. 242.. Error or Mistake in the
Testator, in what case it may prejudice the Legatary or not. -- p. 295.. 35. If
it be only in the Situation of the Land Devised, it shall not prejudice the
Devise. -- p. 298.. 47. Estimate, or the wrong Estimate of a Legacy by the
Testator, alters not the Condition thereof. -- p. 292.. 21. Nor may an Executor
exceed it to the Legataries prejudice. -- Ibid.. 22. Exceptions frivolous, and
of a thing that is not, no prejudice to a Deuisee. -- p. 296.. 40.
Excommunicated Persons, in what sense Intestable or not. -- p. 22.. 8. Whether
incapable of a Legacy, or not. -- p. 26.. 2. Execution for an Administrators
Administrator in Damages upon Trespass. -- p. 105.. ult. Execution de bonis
proprijs, how to proceed therein. -- p. 131, 132.. 8. Execution after
Administration Revoked, void in Law. -- p. 160.. ult. Executor how Constituted.
-- p. 49, 50. The several ways thereof. -- p. 53. What words sufficient whereby
to Constitute Executors. -- p. 54.. 2. and p. 126.. ult. Who may not be
Executors. -- p. 55, 56. The power of an Executors Executor. -- p. 56, 57, etc.
The Executors Right exclusively to the Heirs. -- p. 97, 98, etc. Their Interest
and Possession. -- p. 88, etc. How it differs from that which they have in
their own Goods. -- p. 89,, 2. They cannot Bequeath what they have as
Executors. -- Ibid., 3. What Acts may be done by them before Probate. -- p. 94,
etc. What Actions they may maintain before Probate of the Will -- p. 95,, 4. In
what cases they may retain Goods of the Testators to satisfy their own Debts.
-- p. 96,, 7. In what Court they ought to Sue. -- p, 102,, 6. They are Suable
by Creditors, notwithstanding Imbezilment of the Testators Goods, -- p, 105,
106,, 1. How liable for their Testators breach of Covenant. -- Ibid,, 3. In
what cases liable or not to pay the Testators Debts of their own proper Money,
or may become chargeable de bonis proprijs. -- Ibid,, 7, and p, 108, 109, 113,
116,. ult. Though not bound by Name, yet they are chargeable with the Testators
Obligations. -- p, 107,, 5, They are not chargeable on a simple Contract of the
Testators. -- p, 128,, 1. They are liable for no more than comes to their
hands. -- p, 129, 130,, 4. In what case the Executors of a Substituted Devisee
may not claim Lands Devised under Limitations. -- p, 267,, 3. An Executor may
pleasure his Friend by Confessing the Action of one, and Traversing it with
another. -- p, 149,, ult. In what sense an Executor Revoked may be said to be
Revived. -- p, 34,, 2. An Executors Executor. -- p, 56, etc. Executor de son
tort, what, and what Acts may make him such. -- p, 59, etc. How far he is
chargeable, or not. -- p. 60, 61,, 2. He shall take no Advantage thereby. --
Ibid. He may not (as other Executors) retain Goods to pay himself. -- p, 63,,
5, etc. how an Executorship may be in several respects. -- p, 50, 51. How the
Executorship is to be performed when a King is made Executor. -- p. 50,, 2.
F.
Fee-simple, in what Cases and by what Words it passes by Will. -- p, 240, to
246. It may pass by Will, several other ways than it can by Deed. -- Ibid,, 1.
It passes by Will only by leaving Lands to ones pleasure or discretion. -- p,
238, in prin. It passes by Devising a power to Sell. -- p, 241,, 2. By the
Consideration of any payment. Ibid, By Devising to a Corporation for life. --
p, 242,, 5. By Implication only of the word [Heirs] -- p, 241, 242,, 3. By
General words. -- p, 243,. 8. By the word [Paying.] -- p, 243, 244,, 10. By
Devising the Bents. --, Ibid. By a General Implication. -- p, 244,, 11.
Whether Fee-simple passes in a Will by the Word [Assigns] without the Word
[Forever.] -- p. 242.. 5. Fee-simple Devised to one, is not Devisable to
another by the same Will. -- p. 243.. 9. Fee and not Leases, and Leases and not
Fee, in what Cases and by what words pass by a Devise. -- p. 244.. 12. Fee of
Land Devised to one, the Rent thereof to another, what the Civil Law in that
Case. -- p. 295.. 34. The Devise of a House though by the word Fee-simple
thereof may pass only an Estate for life. -- p. 255, 256.. ult. Felo dese,
Intestable as to Goods and Chattels, not so as to his Lands. -- p. 226.. 3.
Felons under Attainder are Intestable. -- p. Ibid,. 3. They are not Intestable
before Conviction. -- p, 20, 21.. 2. They are Incepable of a Legacy. -- p,
206.. 2. The Qualifications thereof. -- Ibid. Feme Covert, she may (without her
Husbands consent) make an Executor of those Goods whereof her self is
Executrix, or which she has as Executrix. -- p, 226.. 3. Yet she cannot Devise
them by Will. -- Ibid. Being Executrix, and under that Notion receiving Money,
she may release without her Husband. -- p. 71.. ult. Whether she may be a
Legatary to her own Husband. -- p, 208.. 3. She may not Devise Lands to her own
Husband, nor unto others either with or without his consent. -- p, 205.. 1. and
226.. 3. -- vid. Women Covert. Feme Sole, her Devise to him whom she after
marries, is void. -- p, 281, 282.. 13. Field, if Devised, the Edifice thereon
passes therewith. -- p. 295.. 33. Fraud or Covin in an Executors Payments,
shall not prejudice the Creditors. -- p. 147.. 11. Fraudulent Recoveries no
Bar to Creditors. -- p, 108.. 7. and. p. 113.. ult. Freehold Devised, not
Cognizable before the Ordinary. -- p, 205.. 4.
G.
Garden passes by the Devise of a House. -- p, 237. in prin. Gavelkind Lands,
Devisable by Custom. -- p, 224.. 1. An Estate-Tail thereof Devised. -- p, 251..
ult. Goods, What shall pass by a Devise of all Goods, Chattels, Movables and
Immoveables. -- p, 289.. 7. Goods in general Devised, what shall pass under
that Notion. -- p, 306, 307., 1. Goods in Common Devised by Implication. -- p,
302., 3. Grantees may be Devisees. -- p, 226.. 4. Ground Devised, the Edifice
thereon passes thereby, although Erected after the Devise made. -- p, 297..
42. The Ground whereon a House stood, which is after burnt, belongs to the
Devisee or Legatary, -- p, 304.. 14.
H.
Habendum, how to be construed in a doubtful Case of Devises. -- p, 243.. 7.
Have, or the word [I have,] in what case it shall be taken in the Present
Tense. -- p. 295,. ult. Heir, the different Acceptations of that word in the
Civil and Common Law. -- p, 202,, 1. In what case he may enter upon Lands
Devised to be Sold. -- p. 139.. 3. In what case he and not the Executor shall
have the mean Profits of Land Devised to be Sold. -- p, 273,, 3. He shall take
the Advantage of a Condition broken, that is annexed to a Devise of Land. --
Ibid,, 2. A Devise to one and his Heir, in the Singular Number, is but a Devise
for Life. -- p, 253,, 3. The Heirs Rights exclusively to the Executons. -- p,
83. In what case Heirs shall not take by a Devise, though they are therein
mentioned. -- p, 238, 239,. ult. In what case a Devise by that Word [Heirs,]
shall yet go to the Executors. -- p, 257, 258,, 1, and 3. Heretics, in what
Sense Testable or not. -- p. 21,, 3. They are Incapable of a Legacy. -- p,
206., 2. The Qualifications thereof. -- Ibid, Horse, one Devised to two
Persons, how the Divident to be apportioned. -- p. 304.. 15. By a Bequest, of
Horses shall Mares pass, if the Testator had no Horses. -- p, 303.. 10.
Hospital-Lands; or their Rents-Arreare, not Deviseable. -- p, 225.. 3. House
Devised, when the Testator had none, or many, or burnt, or ruined, pulled down,
demolished, or re-edisied. The Law in such cases. -- p, 294,, 27, and p, 296,,
39. House Devised with all things therein; how that shall be understood. -- p.
Ibid., 31, and p, 302, 303,, 7. The Ground whereon stood a House Devised, and
after burnt, is the Legataries. -- p, 304.. 14. Houses are Devisable under the
Notion of Lands. -- p, 224.. 2. and p. 301.. ult. Two Houses, and but one
Stable betwixt them, with which House Devised shall the Stable pass. -- p,
294., 30. Husband, being neither Executor nor Administrator to his Wife, is not
liable for her Debts after her decease. -- p. 130.. 5.
J.
Idiots Intestable, the Qualifications thereof. -- p. 12, 13,, 3, 6, and p,
14,, ult. Jewels Bequeathed, what pass under that Notion or not, in a Devise.
-- p. 306,, ult. In what case they are not to be put into the Inventory. -- p.
99., ult. If] in what cases that word amounts not to a Condition. -- p. 216,,
ult. Implication sufficient whereby to pass a Legacy or Devise. -- p. 235, in
fin. -- Whether Legacies may pass by an Implication of a contrary Condition. --
p. 211,, 5. Impertinences destroy not Legacies. -- p. 209, 210,, 2.
Impossibilities, only seemingly such, no prejudice to a Legacy, -- p. 304,
305,, 16. What Impossibility destroys a Legacy. -- p, 439,, 35. Impossibility
imposed on the Condition of a Legacy, voids the Condition but not the Legacy.
-- p, 325,, 13. Incapacity in the Legatary, how many ways it may happen. -- p.
341,, 22. Incestuous Persons how far Testable, or not. -- p. 21,, 5. Infant
incapable of Devising. -- p. 289,, 10. Whether a new Publication after Minority
gives life to a Devise that had none before. -- Ibid. Infant under the Age of
21 Years may not Devise Land. -- p. 226,, 3. Infant in the Womb, whether
capable of being a Legatary or Devisee. -- p. 208,, 3. Infant-Executor at what
Age he may Administer. -- p. 67,, 2. What his power is. -- Ibid.. 3. He is
bound by his own Release, if he receive the Money. -- p. 71,, 5. His Release
not good. -- p. 68,, 5. At what Age Administration granted during his Minority
shall cease. -- p. 67,, 2, and p, 69,, ult. His Release without consideration
void. -- Ibid. In what case he may have an Action of Detinue, but not of
Account. -- p, 71.. fin. Interpretation of a Devise ought to be with the
fairest advantage for the Devisee. -- p, 290,, 15. Several Rules in Law
touching the Interpretation of Testaments and Devises. -- p. 437, etc.
Intestables, their several kinds. -- p. 10. Inventory, whether it may be made
by an Executor before Probate of the Will. -- p. 95,, 5. Within what time it is
to be Exhibited. -- p. 97, 98,, 1. How and wherefore it is to be made, and what
to be inserted therein, -- p, Ibid., 2, 3, Inventories may be overruled by a
Jury. -- p. 107,, 4. Joynt-Executors must be all joined in Suit. -- p. 108,, 6.
vid. Co-executors. Joynt-Tenants, in what cases. -- p. 233,, ult, and p. 242,,
4, and p, 245. A nice distinction between-such, and Tenants in Common. -- p,
242,, 4. To whom Goods in Joynt-Tenancy belong at the death of either
Joynt-Tenant. -- p, 86., 2. Such Goods are not Devisable. -- p, 223,, 6. Issue,
A Devise made in general to the Issue, void by reason of uncertainty. -- p,
233, in prin. The difference between Issue Born, and not Born at the time of
making the Devise, in point of Entail or Joynt-Tenancy. -- p, 249,, 5. Jus
Representationis, what it signifies. -- p, 172,, 1. In the Line Transversall or
Collateral it holds only in the Brothers Children, not in their
Grandchildren. -- p, 177,, 1.
K.
Kindred and Consanguinity, how they differ. -- p, 170,, 3. Collateral
Kindred, how far and to what degree they may succeed each other. -- p, 179,, 4.
Kindred, or of Kin to the Testator at the time of his death, sufficient to take
by a Legacy to his Kindred, though they were not such when the Will was made.
-- p. 444,, 80.
L.
Lands Devisable by Will, -- p, 224, etc. What and how much thereof. -- Ibid,,
1. What may pass by a Devise under that Notion. -- Ibid,, 2. By and to what
persons Land is Devisable or not. -- p, 225, to 228,, 3, 4. By what kind of
Testament. -- p, 228,, 5. Lands may pass by Will where no Executor is named. --
p, 5,, 4. Lands may by the Common Law be Devised to whom Goods cannot by the
Civil Law be Bequeathed. -- p, 226,, 4. A Devise of another man's Land void. --
p. 228,, 5. Land twice Devised in the same Will to several persons, how both
may be good. -- p, 230, 231,, 4. Whether Lands new purchased pass by a Will
formerly made. -- p, 231,, 6, and ult. Leases for years pass not by a Devise of
Lands, if the Devisor had any Lands in Fee. -- Ibid,, 6. Customary Lands may
pass by a Will without Writing, other Lands not. -- p, 4, 5,, 3. Lands Devised
on a present Payment, or on Payment out of the Profits thereof, what different
Estates they create. -- p, 254,, 6. Lands Devised with Limitations, and upon
Condition. -- p. 266, etc. Land Devised by a Coppyholder to his Wife. -- p,
274, 275,, 7. Land Devised for life by the Husband to the Wife, not for her
Jointure, no Bar to her Jointure. -- p. 282,, 14. How the Devise of another
man's Land may become a good Devise. -- p. 228., 5. Devises of Land void or not.
-- p, 229, etc. p. 441,, 47. Several Cases in Law touching Lands Devised. -- p,
288, etc. Lambs Bequeathed, understand such as are under a Year old. -- p,
441,, 54. Lease simply for Lives, belongs neither to the Heir nor to the
Executor. -- p. 86,, 4. Lease made in trust by a Woman for her use, who after
Marries, enures not to her Husband, but to her Executor when she dies. -- p,
99,, ult. Leases of Terms of Years Devised. -- p. 256, etc. Though Devised for
99 Years, yet determinable upon one Life. -- Ibid., 2. Chattell-Leases pass not
by a Devise of all the Lands. -- p, 257,, 4, By a Lease for Years Devised for
Life does pass the whole Term, yet is it not an Estate for life. -- Ibid., 5.
By what words a Lease and the Interest of the Lessee may be Devised. -- p, 257,
258,, 6, The Residue of a Term is as Devisable as the Term it self. -- p, 258,,
7. A Devise of a Lease for Years may be in Law which does not so appear in
Fact. -- p, Ibid,, 9. The whole Term, though not named, shall pass by a Devise,
where no other can pass by Implication. -- p, 259., 10. Legacy, what. -- p,
200., 1. What Words or Expressions sufficient for a Legacy. -- p, 209, etc.
Whether the time of making the Testament, or of the Testators death, be the
more considerable in Legacies. -- p, 202, 203., 3, and p, 227,, 4. In what
Court Legacies are properly Recoverable. -- p, 204, 205,, 4. The difference
between Bequeathing a Legacy to one whenhe shall be of full Age, and to one to
be Paid when he shall be of full Age. -- p, 281., 12. Legacies and Devises in
respect of Marriage. -- p, 279, etc. What of her Legacy shall the Wife have, if
she Marry after her Election to the contrary. -- p, 280., 8. Legacies between
Baron and Feme. -- p, 279, etc. Legacies grounded upon wrong Suppositions in
the Testator, inherent in the very Body and Substance of the Legacy it self, do
not oblige his Executors. -- p, 305.. 17. Several Sums Bequeathed to the same
Party in two Instruments, both otherwise containing the same Will, the lesser
only is due. -- p, 316.. 19. Legacy forfeited upon nonperformance of some duty
enjoined. -- p, 446.. 92. Legacies referring to Debts, and Cases in the Law
touching the same. -- p, 321, etc. They fall under four Heads. -- p. Ibid., 2.
Legacies by Creditors to Debtors, and e Contra. -- p. 322.. 4, 5. to, 10 A
Legacy Bequeathed in fraudem Legis is void -- p, 320., ult. A Legacy of a Debt
is extinguished by payment of that Debt to the Testator. -- p, 324.. 11.
Whether the Testators not having what he Bequeaths voids the Legacy. -- p,
330.. 8. The same Thing twice Bequeathed, or Bequeathed unto two distinctly,
which of them shall have it. -- p. 331.. 9. A Legacy given indistinctly to A.
B. and there be two of the name, who shall be preferred to the Legacy. --
Ibid.. 10. If a Single Legacy be given only to one, though it be Devisable, yet
it is not Dividable. -- p. 332., 15. and ult. Legataries, who are incapable of
being. -- p. 206, 207.. 2 A Legatary refusing his Office or Duty imposed on him
by the Will, though but in part, looses his Legacy in the whole. -- p. 316..
16. In what case the Legatary shall have his Legacy presently, though it be
given him when he shall die. -- p. 280.. 6. What the Legatary that Marries
shall have, when more is Bequeathed him in case he Marries not, than if be does
Marry. -- p. Ibid.. 7. The Legatary must expect the Executors delivery of his
Legacy. -- p. 440.. 39. How one may be a Legatary in Construction of Law only.
-- p. Ibid.. 42. Whether a Legatary-Executor may after Debts paid first
satisfy himself. -- p. 317.. 20. A Legatary if capable at the Testators death,
sufficient for the Legacy, though he were not so when the Will was made. -- p.
446.. 88. Letter from one friend to another sufficient to contain a Will or
Devise. -- p. 212., ult. and p. 443.. 73. Letters of Administration, in what
case they may be granted. -- p. 154,. 7. To whom. -- p. 151.. 2. They may be
granted in England by a Bishop of Ireland. -- p. 155.. ult. Whether they ought
to be shown in Court by Administrators in Actions brought by them. -- p. 103,
104.. ult. Whether it be necessary to set forth in a Declaration by whom they
were granted. -- p. 155, 158, 159, etc. Whether they are to be granted in the
Province where the Intestate dyed, or in that where his Goods and Chattels were
when he dyed. -- p. 158.. ult. Being once granted, they are not Revokeable at
the Ordinaries mere Will and Pleasure. -- p. 165.. 3. He that has them cum
Testamento annexo is obliged to pay the Legacies as far forth as an Executor.
-- p. 445.. 87. How there may be two Letters of Administration at once in
being, and both good. -- p, 69, 70.. ult. They refer to the time of the
Intestates death, and not only to the time of granting them. -- p. 96.. 6.
Letters ad Colligendum, what the Law is in case thereof. -- p. 153.. 4. In what
cases they are to be granted. -- p. 93.. ult. They qualify for the Sale of
Perishable Goods. -- p. 69.. ult. Libellers incapable of a Legacy. -- p. 206..
2. Life or Lives in Reversion, Devises of such Estates. -- p. 254,. 7, 8, 9.
Estates only for Life Devised. -- p. 252, etc. A Devise to one (not saying How
long) is a Devise only for Life. -- Ibid.. 1. Several Instances of Devises only
for Life. -- p. 253.. 4, 5. A Devise for Life only by Implication. -- p. Ibid..
5. Limitation, the Devise of a void Limitation, is a void Devise. -- p. 262..
4. Livelihood, by a Devise thereof, and by that word Lands of Inheritance do
pass. -- p. 232.. ult. Loan of Money Bequeathed at under-interest, what
Security in that case requirable of the Legatary. -- p. 326.. 16.
M.
Madness or Insanity of Mind disqualifies for Testamentification. -- p. 11,
12.. 2. How it may Legally be proved. -- p. Ibid. Marriage-Conditions, how far
Matrimonial Conditions may be lawful or not. -- p. 27. vid. Conditions. Marble
Bequeathed, how to be understood in case Statutes made therewith are
Bequeathed, -- p. 303.. 9. Mares pass by a Bequest of Horses; not so e Contra.
-- p. 303.. 10. and p. 441.. 53, 56. Materials Bequeathed do not pass the Ship
that is after therewith built; nor does a Ship Bequeathed pass the Materials
that are after ripped therefrom. -- p. 303.. 8. Meaning, Mind, or Words of the
Testator, how to be interpreted. -- p, 437, 438.. 8, to 15. and p. 439.. 27, to
31. Mind or Meaning of the Testator any way expressed sufficient for a Legacy.
-- p. 209.. 1. and p. 211.. 6. Military Testaments, their Privilege. -- p. 7..
2. Mill joining to a House, in what case it shall pass by a Devise of the
House. -- p. 294.. 28. Minors, Male or Female, at what ages and of what things
they may make their Testaments. -- p, 11.. 1. Mistake in the Legataries
Election admits no Rectification or any further determination. -- p, 331.. 12.
Modus and Conditio. the difference between them in point of Devising. -- p.
215, 216.. 4. Moity or the one half is employed Legally. when a part (not
expressing what part) is Devised indefinitely. -- p, 293.. 23. By a Moity of
Goods Bequeathed does pass so much as was a Moity at the Testators death. -- p.
282.. 15. Money, whether Comprised under the Notion of Movables or
Immoveables. -- p. 309, 310.. 9, 12. By what words it will pass or not in a
Devise. -- p. 447.. 98. Diverse Law Cases touching Money-Legacies. -- p. 312, to
320. and p. 323, to 326. Mortgage-Money, to whom payable, whether to the Heir,
or to the Executor. -- p. 90.. 2. It is Devisable though before the day of
Payment. -- p. 288.. 3. Mortgages redeemed by Executors are Assets in their
hands. -- p, 120.. 3, Mortuary, what? when, where, how much, and in what cases
Payable. -- p. 148.. 12. Mothers, whether they are next of Kin to their
Children. -- p. 174.. 1. Movables or Immoveables Devised, what shall pass
under that Notion. -- p, 306.. 1, to 13. Whether Leases, Rents, Bonds or
Specialties, pass by a Devise of Movables. -- p, 288.. 6. Mute at Trial,
whether Testable, and how far. -- p, 226.. 3.
N.
Name of the Legatary not necessary, where there is other sufficient
description of the person. -- p, 227.. 4. Name mistaken in what case no
prejudice. -- Ibid. Name lost by Marriage in what case prejudicial. -- p, 235,
and 237.. ult. The force and energy of Names in Devises of Land. -- p. 297..
44. Nomine poenae, A Legacy so Devised, and failure made by the Executor, the
Legatary may take either the Legacy or the Penalty, but not both. -- p, 293..
25. Notes taken from the Testator and written, suffice for a Devise of Land. --
p. 6.. 8. Nuncupative Testament, what. -- p, 5.. 6, Not good for Land. -- Ibid,
and p, 228.. 5,
O.
Obligation made after a Contract, dissolves it. -- p, 133.. 10. what passes
by a Devise of a Bond or Obligation. -- p, 442.. 64. being Devised, they must
be Sued in the Executors, not the Legataries Name. -- Ibid. 321.. 1.
Obligations or Chattels Real in Right of the Wife as Executrix, not Devisable
by the Husband. -- p, 288.. 4. Office for Term of years and Saleable, is
Devisable. -- p, 309.. 7 computed among the Immoveables. -- Ibid. But a
Registers Office among the Movables. --. Ibid. Onus Probandi, on whom the Law
casts it in case of Dubiety in a Legataries claim, -- p. 440., 37. Or] how that
word is frequently understood for [And] in Devises. -- p, 299.. 50. How it
shall be taken for [And] to Create an Estate Tail by Devise. -- p, 250.. 10.
Ordinary, he may call Executors and Administrators to an Account -- p, 150.. 1.
and p. 168.. 3. Whether he has power to take Bond of an Administrator to
distribute, etc. -- p, 161.. ult. Whether he may compel the Administrator to
give Filial Portions. -- p. 168.. 2, 3. In what case the Ordinary is Suable
for the Debts of the deceased. -- p, 130.. 6. Ought] Of what force that word is
in some cases of Devises -- p, 326.. 14. Outlawed Persons, in what Sense
Testable or not. -- p, 21, 22.. 8, 9, 10. They are incapable of a Legacy. -- p.
207.. 2. The Qualifications thereof. -- Ibid. If Outlawed only in a
Persosonall Action they are Testable as to Lands, but Intestable as to their
Goods and Chattels. -- p. 226.. 3. Outlawed Executors may have their Actions.
-- p. 101,. 4. Whether Out-lawry in the Testator be any Plea for his Executor
in Bar of Debt. -- p. 110, 111.. ult. Ox Bequeathed, in what case the
Legatary cannot pretend so much as to his Hide. -- p, 305.. 18.
P.
Parents, whether they be next of Kin to their Children. -- p. 174.. 1. Parish
Church to be repaired, and Money for that end Bequeathed, (without expressing
how much) not void for uncertainties. -- p. 315, 316,. 15. Money Bequeathed
indefinitely by the Testator to his Parish Church (he having Two Parish
Churches) to which of them is it due. -- p. 442.. 70. Devises to a Parish
Church. -- p, 444.. 82, 83. Pars pro toto, in what Sense Legally so. -- p. 447,
448.. 100. Part Devised, but what part not expressed, is a Moiety employed. --
p. 293.. 23. and p. 310.. 11. and p. 441.. 49, 50. Paying] In what Sense that
word shall be construed only as a Limitation, not as a Condition. -- p. 267,
268.. 5. Payment not full, in what case Equivalent to none at all. -- p. 289..
11. Pious Uses, Testaments to that end, their Privileges. -- p. 8.. 4. Poor,
disagreement among the DD. touching Legacies to the Poor, in such general
words. -- p. 291.. 18. Pope, whether he may alter the Wills of Testators. -- p.
149.. 107. Portion of Goods (not expressing what proportion) Bequeathed,
signifies (...) M^ity. -- p. 447.. 100. Portions, or Filial Portions; the Law
in that case. -- p. 167, etc. Possibilities in Expectation are Devisable, as
well as Possessions in Actual Demes(...)es. -- p, 311,, ult. Presentations
void, not Devisable. -- p, 288,, 5. To whom belongs the Presentation in case of
Intestation. -- p, 82,, 6. Prisoners, In what Sense said to be Intestable or
not. -- p, 15,, 3. Privileged Testaments, what; the several kinds thereof. --
p. 7,, 1. Probate of Testaments, the Law thereof; when, where, how, by and
before whom, with the Fees thereof. -- p. 35, etc. In what case the Executor
may be compelled to Prove the Will, notwithstanding his former refusal, and
thereupon Letters of Administration granted to another. -- p. 165,, 2. What
Proof Requisite for the Probate of a Will. -- p. 40. etc. Prohibition, in what
Cases it does not lie. -- p, 113,, 7. In what Cases touching Lands Devised to
be Sold, a Prohibition may lie or not. -- p, 275,, 9. It does not lie in case
of the Husbands Release for the Wives Legacy. -- p. 282,, ult.
R.
Recovery by Fraud against an Executor, no Plea in Bar to a just Debt. -- p,
108, 109,, 7. Refusalls to Prove the Will. -- p, 39, 40,, 6. How to Proceed in
case of Refusal of Executorship. -- p. 91, 92,. 1. It is no absolute Bar to
a Subsequent Administration. -- p, Ibid., 3. It may be done by a Letter
Extrajudicially, as well as by a Judicial Act. -- p, 93,, ult. How Refusers to
Administer may yet afterward be admitted or excluded. -- p. 163,. ult.
Refusal in one to take by a Devise, shall not prejudice him in Reversion or
Remainder. -- p, 263., 9, and 13. Release or Discharge, in what Sense it may be
said to be Bequeathed. -- p, 322,, 3, and p, 439,, 32. To Release is a good
word to Devise Lands by. -- p, 235, in fin. A Release of Actions by an
Administrator whose Letters of Administration are after Revoked, is void. -- p,
216,, ult. Action for Executors upon a a Release. -- p. 103.. ult. Remainders
and Reversions Devised. -- p, 261, etc. What of that kind may be Devised. -- p,
Ibid,, 1. Remainders and Cross-Remainders by Devise of Estate Tail. -- p, 252,,
11. With Employed Remainders. -- Ibid,. 12. Remainders Entailed by Devise, and
by Deed, how they differ. -- p, 262,, 7. Remainders Devised to a Church,
accrews to the Parson thereof. -- Ibid., 8, He in Remainder or Reversion shall
not be prejudiced by the Refusal of him that should take by a Devise. -- p,
263,, 9, and 13. How the Issue of the Daughters (without naming them) shall
have the Devised Remainder in preference to the Issue of the Sons. -- Ibid.,
10. Several Cases wherein he in Remainder may Devise his Remainder. -- p,
Ibid., 13. Reversion of Land for life may be Devised by the Lessor,
notwithstanding a Feoffment in Fee. -- p, 264,, 16. Remainder of a Rentcharge
is Devisable to one, where the Land out of which it arises is Devised to
another. -- Ibid., 17. A Devise may be good for the Reversion of a Term, where
it is otherwise for the Rent. -- p, 264,, 18. Remainder Devised may be good,
where yet an Estate Tail precedes. -- Ibid., 19. He in Remainder may instantly
take, where the Devisee is incapable. -- Ibid., 20. Remainder may be Devised by
one to his own right Heirs. -- Ibid., 21. Reversion may be Devised by the name
of all a Man's Inheritances or Hereditaments. -- p. 265,, 22. Remainder Devised
to the next of Blood. -- Ibid., 23. In what case Remainder after Remainder
makes the former Remainder but an Estate for Life. -- p. Ibid., 24. Remainders
Devised, what void. -- p, 261., 2, and p, 262,, 3, to 6, and p, 264,, 15. A
Hundred Years to come Devised for Life, the Remainder over is a void Remainder.
-- p. 263,, 11. Remainder in Fee after a Lease, Devised by him in Remainder, is
a void Remainder if the Lessor Re-enter. -- Ibid,, 12. Remainder after a Fee
Devised, is Indeviseable, albeit such Devise were but Conditional. -- p, 263,,
14. A Term of Years by way of Remainder is Devisable, but a Devise by way of
Entail with remainders over, is void. -- p, Ibid,, 15. Rents Devised. -- p,
270, etc. As Devisable as the Land itself. -- Ibid,, 1. They are Devisable for
another man's life. -- Ibid,, 2. Rents issuing out of a Common, not Devisable
--, 3. Several ways of Devising Rents. --, 4. Reversion of Rents Devised upon a
false suggestion, a void Devise. -- p, 271,, 5. Rent Devised, in what case the
Land it self does thereby pass. -- p, 138,, ult. What Rent not Devisable. -- p,
225,, 2. In what case the Rent is due to the Heir, not to the Executor. -- p,
103, 104,, ult. Rent due to the Executors of the Husband of the Tenant in Dower
-- Ibid. Rent of Land in Fee received by Executors, no Assets, because
belonging to the Heir. -- p, 85,, 3. The Landlords Rent is payable by the
Executor for the Ground, whose fruit for the Term may be Devised to another. --
p, 298,, 46. Residue of a Term is as Devisable as the Term it self. -- p, 258,,
7. Residuary-Regatary has an Advantage, when others Refuse. -- p. 291,, 17.
Retainer of a Testators Goods by an Executor to pay himself, good -- p, 133,,
ult. and p, 149,, ult. Reviver of a Will Revoked. -- p. 34,, 1. Revocations
Testamentary, the several kinds thereof. -- p, 31,, 1. Revocations by
Marriage. -- Ibid,, 2. Revocation of a Will by a Wife after Marriage, whether
good or not. -- p. 236,, ult. Whether Revocation of Administration may (without
any Sentence in Court) be by the Bishop who granted it. -- p, 166, 167,, ult.
Revocations of Legacies and Devises. -- p, 331, etc. What amounts to a
Revocation of a Devise of Land. -- p, 228, in fin. Several Cases in Law
touching what shall amount to a Revocation or Countermand of a Legacy or
Devise. -- p. 443,, ult. Four Cases wherein Legacies are irrevocable. -- p,
443,, 74.
S.
Sale of Lands Devised to be made by Executors. -- p, 273, etc. with or without
the Assent of others. -- p, 274., 5. In what case it may or not be by one
alone, where there are Two or more Executors. -- p, 275, 276,, 10, 12. How it
becomes void for want of sufficient Authority. -- p, 175,, 11. In what Case it
may be made by the Executor of the surviving Executor. -- p, 276,, 13. It may
not be made by Executors refusing to Administer. -- p, Ibid,, 14. One Executor
refusing, the other may Sell, but not to the refusing Executor. -- p, 139,
140,, 5, and p, 275, 276,, 11. In what case void, if it be made only by some of
the Executors. -- p, 277,, 16. The difference between an Authority and an
Interest in Executors as to the Sale of Lands Devised to be Sold. -- p, 139,,
3. In what other cases it may be made by some without the other Executors. --
p, 139.. 4. In what case it may be made by the surviving Executors. -- p,
Ibid,, 5, and, ult. Whether a Sale of Goods by an Administrator (pendente Lite)
be good or not. -- p, 115,, ult, and p, 116,, ult, and p, 166,. ult. Scire
Facias, in what cases it lies or not. -- p. 102,. ult. and p, 108, to 112,.
ult. Seal Expedient, not Necessary to a Testament. -- p. 2. Sealing and
Subscription not necessary to a Devise of Land. -- p. 228,, 5. Security, in
what case requirable by an Executor from the Legatary. -- p. 319,, 29, and p.
326,, 16. Self-Murderers Intestable. -- p. 21,, 7. The Limitations thereof. --
Ibid. -- vid. Felo de se. Semini suo and Sanguini suo Devised, their difference
in Point of Entail. -- p. 249,, 4. Shall] how that word is taken for [Should]
in the Devise of a Term. -- p. 256, 257,, 1. Sheep, Flock of Sheep, Cattle,
Herd of Cattle Devised; the Law in case of increase or decrease thereof. -- p.
304,, 14, p, 441,. 58, and p, 448,, 102. Shop Devised; Chamber Devised; the
difference of Legal Constructions therein. -- p, 295,, 32. Signs, Becks, or
Nodds, whether Legacies may be Bequeathed by such only. -- p. 210,, 4. Silver
Bequeathed, what passes by that word, and under that Notion. -- p, 442,, 64.
Sodomites Intestable, -- p, 21,, 6. Incapable of a Legacy. -- p, 206,, 2.
Study, or Library Bequeathed; the Books therein, not the Place where they are,
are thereby to be understood. -- p, 302,, 6, and, 59. Subscription of the
Testators name, not absolutely necessary to a Tement. -- p, 4,, 2.
Substitutions of Executors, and by Degrees. -- p, 52, 53. Succession, the
Praetorian Law therein. -- p, 167, 168,, 1. The Method of Succession by the
Laws of this Realm. -- p. 169, 170,, 1. How the Civil Law understands it. -- p,
170,, 2. Succession in the Right Line descendent. -- p. 172, etc. In what cases
to be computed in Stirpes, not in Capita. -- p, 172, 173,, 2. How the
Succession goes by the Civil Law, and how by the Common Law, in case of
Semisanguinity or the Half. blood. -- p, 173, 174,, ult. Succession in the
Right Line Ascendent. -- p, 174, etc. The Method thereof by the Civil Law. --
p. Ibid., 2. How it stands when Collateralls concur with those of that Line. --
p. 175, 176.. 3. Whether by the Civil Law, Brothers and their Children may
Concur with their Parents in the Succession. -- p, 176,, 4. Succession in the
Line Transversall or Collateral. -- p, 177, etc. Two fold -- Ibid,. 1.
Regularly the whole Blood is ever in the Succession to be preferred in the
Transversall or Collateral Line. -- p, 177, 178,, 2. How the Succession runs
in case of no Children, but Kindred only by the Ascendent and Collateral Line.
-- p, 179, 180,, 5.
T.
Tenant in Tail may not by Devise be Barred from Alienating by a Common
Recovery. -- p. 248,, 2. The difference between him and Tenant in Fee as to
their power in Devising. -- p, 288,, 1. Testament, the true definition thereof.
-- p, 1. Six Legal Inferences thence, -- p, 2. It properly refers to Chattels.
-- p. 3. what Witnesses necessary to prove a Testament. -- Ibid., 2 It must be
in Writing where Lands are Devised. -- p, 4,. 2 Of Testaments Written and
Nuncupative. -- p, 4. How many ways Testaments become void. -- p, 29. Who may
die with two Testaments, and both good. -- p, 7.. 2. In what case the latter
Testament shall not null the former. -- Ibid. Testaments to be more favorably
construed than Deeds. -- p, 231.. 5, Whether the Testament must be shown in
Court in Actions brought by Executors. -- p. 103.. ult. Testate and Intestate,
how the same person in diverse respects may die both. -- p, 35.. 3. Testators
and Executors, Correlatives as to Chattels. -- p. 1. The Testators Will is his
own Law. -- p, 302.. 4. Traitors Intestable from the time of the Crime
committed. -- p. 226.. 3. and p. 20.. 1. The Limitations thereof. -- Ibid. They
are incapable of a Legacy. -- p. 206.. 2. The Qualifications thereof. -- Ibid,
Trees standing, not Devisable where the Land is not. -- p. 225.. 2. Trespass
Maintainable by an Administrator, or by an Executors Executor. -- p. 104.. ult.
Twice Bequeathing the same thing to the same person, when it may Duplicate the
Legacy, or not. -- p. 440, 441,. 46.
V.
Villains, in what sense they are Intestable. -- p, 14.. 1. Uncertain persons,
not capable of a Legacy or Devise, -- p. 206.. 2. Uncertaintie destroys the
Legacy. -- p. 227.. 4. What Constructions of Law to avoid Uncertainties. -- p.
293.. 24. and. p. 443.. 75. Universal Successor, Naked Executor, and
Particular Legatary; the difference between these Three. -- p. 289.. 8. Void
Testaments Originally such, or otherwise. -- p, 29, etc. Void or Voidable
Legacies. -- p. 332, etc. The true Reason why Testaments, and the Legacies
therein given, so often prove ineffectual. -- Ibid.. 1. The several ways
whereby they may become Void or voidable. -- p. 333.. 2. How void originally.
-- p. Ibid. and 334.. 3, 4. How by a Change or Alteration of the Property,
Substance or Form of the Thing Bequeathed, or of the mind of the Devisor. -- p.
334.. 5. How by an Incapability in the Legatary. -- p. 334.. 6. and p. 341..
22. By Fraud Circumventing the Testator. -- p. 334, 335.. 7. By Fear terrifying
him. -- p. 335.. 8. By Flattery Beguiling him. -- p. Ibid.. 9. By Error in the
Name Appellative, or Substance of the Thing Devised. -- p. 335, etc., 10. Or in
the Person of the Legatary. -- Ibid. Or in his Quality, if that were the Final
Cause of the Legacy. -- Ibid. Or by Uncertainty. -- p. 337,, 11. By making of a
latter Will. -- p. 338,. 12, By a Revocation in Fact or Law. -- Ibid. By
Ademption. -- p. 338,, 13, to 16, and 19. By Translation. -- p, 340,, 17. Which
is Four fold -- p. Ibid, and p, 341,, 18, 21. Or by Falsity charged on the
Testament by the Legatary. -- p. 342.. 24. Or by Concealment or Cancellation
thereof. -- p, and. Ibid. By the Legataries death precedent to the Testators.
-- p. 342,. 25. Or before Condition performed, or time of Payment be come. --
Ibid. Or by the Legataries own Waiver or Refusal. -- p. 443,, 26. Or by the
total loss and destruction of the Thing it self Bequeathed. -- Ibid. Or by the
Testators Alienation thereof, not Revivable without a new and Subsequent
Publication. -- p. 440.. 43. It may be void also upon the Legataries
nonperformance of some duty enjoined him by the Testator. -- p. 445.. 84. Use
or Occupation of a thing is Devisable for any time, but the thing it self not
Devisable for any time less than Forever, -- p. 301.. 1. What Uses are
Devisable. -- p, 288.. 2. Usurers Manifest and Notorious, not capable of being
Legataries. -- p, 206.. 2.
W.
Wages, Servants Wages, of what kind payable by Executors. -- p. 106.. 2. They
are payable before Legacies. -- p. 147.. 10. Warranty cannot be made by Will.
-- p. 230.. 3. Wast, what acts do amount to a Wast, how many ways it may be
Committed, and how it shall charge the Executor de bonis proprijs. -- p. 135,
etc.. 2, 3, 4. Wast Committed by one Co-executor shall not charge another. --
Ibid.. 4. -- vid. Devastavit. Wedge of Silver Bequeathed, the Vessel after made
therewith shall pass thereby. -- p, 303.. 8. A limitation thereof. -- Ibid.
Wife, her Advantage by the Civil Law, if she lives and dies in her Widowhood.
-- p, 280, 281.. 10. If she plays the Whore, she looses her Legacy. -- p, 341..
22. Two Wives in Being at once, the first only shall have the Legacy. -- p,
227.. 4. Will or Last-will, what, relating properly to Land. -- p. 2.. 2.
Written without the Testators precedent Order or Subsequent Affirmance, void.
-- p. 237.. ult. The Will of the Testator is a Law to himself -- p. 302.. 4. If
subordinated to the Absolute Will of his Executor, all Legacies therein
Bequeathed are void. -- p. 312, 313.. 3, 4. A Testator by making his Executors
Will Absolute, makes his own Will insignificant. -- Ibid. and p, 440,, 44. The
Testators Will is Ambulatory to the other world. -- p. 341.. 22. Will Tacit
and Implicit in the Testator sufficient to null a Legacy, not an Executorship
so easily. -- p. 341,, 23. Wills are capable of Devising, what Grants and Deeds
are not of Conveying: Or a Man may Devise by Will an Interest which he could
not Convey by any Act Executed in his life time. -- p, 258,, 8. Wines
Bequeathed; a Bequest thereof contains the Vessels which contain them. -- p.
448,, 104. Woman Covert, in what Sense Testable or not. -- p. 15, to 19.
Whether the Husband may Compel her to Accept the Executrixship; Or whether she
may accept it without or against his Consent. -- p, 72,, 1, 2, 5. Or whether he
may make himself her Executor. vid. Feme-Covert. Wood, what passes by a Devise
thereof, or by that Name.. -- p, 442,, 62. Wool Bequeathed, what is to be
understood thereby. -- p, 441,, 59, 60. Words of the Testator how to be
Construed. -- p, 437, 438,, 8, to 16, and p, 439,, 27, to 31, and, 34. They are
by Law ever Accommodated to the Testators mind and meaning. -- p. 255,, 11. Any
Words plainly Declaratory of the Testators Intention may serve for a Devise or
Testamentary Disposition. -- p. 297, 298,, 45, and p, 317,, 21, 22, and p,
445,, 85, 86. Words Comprehensive are not to be strained beyond a Legal
Rationality. -- p. 290, 291,. 16. General Words convey more by Implication
than Expression. -- p. 302,, 5. Words merely Enunciative signify little or
nothing. -- p. 316., 17. How the Copulative word [And] shall be taken for [That
is,] -- p. 308,, 3. How the Disjunctive word [Or] in Devises, is frequently
understood for the Conjunctive word [And.] p. -- 299,, 50. How the Word [Or]
shall be taken for [And] to Create an Estate-Tail by Devise. -- 250,, 10. How
the word [Shall] is to be taken for [Should] in the Devise of a Term. -- p,
256, 257,, 1. How the Word [All] is to be understood in certain Legacies. -- p,
311,, 14. In what Case the Word [If] does not amount to a Condition. -- p,
216,, 5. How the words [If, Until, So long as] do vary the Sense. p, 242,
243,, 72. What the Words [More than this] do signify in a Devise. -- p, 319,,
27. Of what force the Word [Ought] may be in some Cases. -- p, 326,, 14. In
what Cases the Words [Have, or I have] shall be taken in the Present Tense. --
p, 259,. ult. In what case the Word [Paying] shall be Construed only as a
Limitation and not as a Condition. -- p, 266, 267,, 5. What shall pass in a
Devise by the Word [Appurtenances.] -- p, 274,, 6, Writings, which concern the
Inheritance, do belong not to the Executor, but to the Heir, -- p. 82.. 6.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page. Line. Errors. Rectified. 080 32 And dies And D. dies 065 22
Administrator Executor 157 10 To By 232 11 Devise Dower 280 45 His Her 286 09
Of After 290 43 C. D. C. B. 291 26 C. D. C. B. 295 27 Issuers Issues 324 11 No
Not 327 18 To Do 302 42 She He 334 39 Are All 340 11 It Its 449 05 Society
Saciety 229 20 The words Without Surrender. Are omitted. 292 11 Death 436 42
Away.


