cartoon panel Behold Two Crafty Jesuits fighting,
Only to draw a Zealous Knight in,

I Charge ye keep ye Peace


cartoon panel Whom striving to apease their brangle,
That weak Old man does basely strangle.

(...) Oa^es


Berry Watching A Green cartoon panel See how they veiw him with delight,
Whilst Ladys dance and Pispot spright.

Was it not politickly done.


B

cartoon panel By watchful sentrie the are not seen,
For th'Devil thrusts his Paw between.

Hem Hem.


C D

cartoon panel It Is strange though how his joints are bended,
In Chair; and then again extended.

Stretch out his Legs


E

cartoon panel Our Towns They burn our goods they plunder,
By such sly tricks, 'twill make you wonder.

Jesuits disguised Trap.


Trap Cum Cruce.


F

Sr. W.W. Stop Theife.


cartoon panel You Will wonder more how they durst venture,
For killing King; to sign Indenture.

We deliver this as or Act and Deed.


To the Use of Doctor O.


This Indenture Tripartite made ye 24 day of April 1678 (...)

R.M.

cartoon panel Behold their General, a stout Tory.
Peters's fayme was only Glory.

Let Genl. Bellai^ Lead up ye Pilgrims


L^^utt. Genl. Peter's. We Will give no quarter


cartoon panel Powis might hope to mend his fortune,
What Staffords end was, we are certain.

We want our Pay.


Pay Mr: Genl. Stafford. Go to ye Treasurer my baggs are empty


There Is Pardons plenty


Dispensations. Pardons. Bulls.

The Popes Treasure. cartoon panel Their Chancellor nere studied Law,
Their Major General Camp nere saw.

Majr Genl. Ratcliffe. Where Is our Commissions


Ld Chancellr. Arunde^ On Langhornes Table

Bedloe saw them.


G

cartoon panel The pious Pilgrims inclination,
Was to pervert, and damn this Nation.

Spanish Pilgrims PLENARY INDULGENCE.

To Cross ye Seas we have made a Vow


But none knows how.


cartoon panel And Irish Tory with black Bill,
Would kill us all; if we sit still.

Irish Army lies Incognito. H

Where were these Bills made


At Bilboe and Salamanca.




A True Narrative of the Horrid Hellish Popish-Plot.
To the Tune of PACKINGTONS POUND,
The First Part.
The Contents of the FIRST PART.
How Sir Godfrey is Killed, his Body they hide,
Which brought out in Chair, a Horseback does ride:
How Jesuits disguised, our Houses do Fire;
How subtly they Plot, and King's Death Conspire;
Of diverse Great Lords drawn in, to their Bane;
An Army of Irish, and Pilgrims from Spain.
I.
GOod People I pray you give ear unto me,
A Story so strange you have never been told,
How the Jesuit, Devil, and POPE did agree,
Our STATE to destroy, and Religion so old.
To murder our KING,
A most Horrible Thing!
But first of Sir Godfrey his Death I must sing;
For how e're they disguise it, we clearly can see,
Who Murdered that Knight no good Christian could be.
The truth of my Story if any man doubt,
W' have Witnesses ready to Swear it all out.
II.
AT Somerset House there is plain to be seen,
A Gate which will lead you into the Back-Court,
This (1) Place for the Murder most fitting did seem,
For thither much People does freely resort:
His Body they tossed,
From Pillar to Post,
And shifted (2) so often, 't had like to have been lost;
To watch with (3) Dark Lanthorn the Jesuits did go,
But never mistrusted our Honest (4) Bedloe.
The Truth of my Story, etc.
III.
LEast such close Contrivements at length might take Air,
When as his dead Body corrupted did grow,
They carried him out in (5) Invisible Chair,
And set him a (6) Horseback to ride at So-Hoe.
His own (7) Sword to the Hilt,
To add to their Guilt,
They thrust through his Body, but no Blood was (8) spilt;
To Have it thought he was killed by a Thief, they did mean,
So they left (9) all his Money, and made his (10) Shoes clean.
The truth of my Story, etc.
IV.
TO show now the excess of Jesuitical Rage,
They this Loyal City to ruin would bring,
'Cause you Citizens are so Religious and sage,
And ever much noted for true to your King;
TO your Houses they go,
With (11) Fire and with Tow,
Then (12) pilfer your Goods, and it is well you escape so;
You Have seen how they once set the Town (13) all in flame;
And diverse times since have attempted the same.
The truth of my Story, etc.
V.
BY (14) Bedlo's Narration is shown you most clear,
How Jesuits disguised into Houses will creep;
In a Porter or Carman's (15) Frock they will appear,
Nay they will not disdain to cry Chimney-sweep;
Or sell you Small-Cole,
Then drop in some hole
A Fire Ball, or thrust it up by a long Pole;
But I now must relate a more Tragical thing,
How these Villains conspired to murder our King,
The truth of my Story, etc.
VI.
AT the (16) White-horse in April there was a Consult,
Where Jesuits a (17) Covenant wickedly frame;
The (18) Death of our Sovereign was the Result,
To the which at least (19) Forty all signed their name,
They would not do that,
IN the place where they sat,
Trusty Oats must (21) convey it, from this man to that;
To make sure work, by (21) Poison the Deed must be done
And Stabbed with a (22) Dagger, and (23) Shot with a Gun.
The truth of my Story, etc.
VII.
FOr fear at St. Omers, their Oats might be missed,
The agreed with a Devil to appear in his place.
In a Body of Air, believe't if you list,
Which squeek'd just like Oats, and moved with the same grace;
'T could Lie, it could Cant,
Turn eyes like a Saint.
And of our great Doctor no feature did want.
Thus Forty might Swear they (24) saw Oats every day,
But true Oats was here, and the Devil saw they.
The truth of my Story, etc.
VIII.
FRom Father Oliva (26) Commissions did come,
To raise a great Army much Treasure is spent:
The Old Man was resolved to take Post from Rome,
To ride at the Head of them was his intent;
Lord (27) Bellas' was fit,
Who can deny it,
To Command in his place, When Is Gout would permit;
Lord (28) Stafford was fittest to trust with their Pay,
Old (29) Ratcliff to range them in Battle Array.
The Truth of my Story if any man doubt,
W' have Witnesses ready to Swear it all out,
IX.
THE High-Treasurer's place the Lord (30) Powis did please,
Men of desperate Fortune often venture too far;
Lord (31) Peter's would hazard Estate, and his Ease,
And Life for the Pope too, in this Holy War;
Lord Ar'ndel of Old,
So Warlike and bold,
Made choice of a (32) Chanc^llor's Gown we are told.
All these did Conspire with the Lord Castlemaine,
Whose Plot was to catch his old Duchess again.
The truth of my Story if any man doubt,
W' have Witnesses ready to Swear it all out.
X.
GReat store of wild (33) Irish both civil and wise,
Designed to join with the (34) Pilgrims of Spain,
Thirty (35) Thousand being ready there all in good guise,
Had vowed a long Pilgrimage over the Main.
To arm well this Host,
When 't came on our Cost,
(36) Black Bills forty thousand, are sent by the Post,
This (37) Army lay privately on the Sea Shore;
And no man e're heard of them since nor before.
The truth of my Story if any man doubt,
W' have Witnesses ready to Swear it all out.
My Witnesses I bring, and produced the Record,
Do You think the are Perjured? It Is false and absurd,
Would the Godly hang Papists for Interest or Pique?
Would a Doctor Swear false for Ten Pound a Week?
FINIS.
Authors Quoted.
(1) Hi^l^ Trial, page 16. (2) viz. 4 Times, p. 18.16. (3) See the same Try. p.
18. (4) The same, page 31. (5) The same, page 69. (6) The same Trial, p. 20.
(7) The same, page 35. (8) Ibid. (9) Ibid. (10) See the Coroners Inquest. (11)
See Dt. Oates's Narrative page 22. (12) Ibid. (13) See the Pillar near London
Bridge. (14) Read Bedloes Narrative. (15) See Dr. Oates's Narrat. page 68. (16)
See Ireland's Trial, page 19. (17) Ibid. (18) Ibid. (19) The same Trial, page
26 (20) The same, page 20. (21) See Dr. Oates's Narrat. page 21. (22) The same,
Narrat. p. 47. (23) See Pickerings Trial, page 23. (24) See St. Omers
Certificate (25) See Jesuits Trial, p. 47. (26) See Dr. Oates's Narrative, p.
58. (27) Ibid. (28) Ibid. (29) Ibid. (30) Ibid. (31) Ibid. (32) Ibid (33) See
Lords Journal and Langhorns Trial, page 20. (34) Ibid (35) See Lords Journal,
p. 54. (36) See Colemans Trial, p. 23. (37) See Lords Journal and Langhorns
Trial, as above.
Some Notes on the Picture ^^ prevent Popish Cavils.
A. Read Greens Trial, page 16 and 17. B. This is the famous Spright with the
Chamber Pot, which did as certainly appear to the Popish Ladies, when they
danced about the Body, (...) it is certain, it did afterward appear to some
True Protestant Ladies in the same place. C. Hem, was the watchword to Perry
to open the Gate. See his Trial, page 19. D. and E. We may well suppose, the
Devil helped them when they passed invisible so close by the Centry: and we may
be more assured, they could not without some Diabolical Art make him (after so
many days being dead) bend his Legs to sit in the Chair, and then to stretch
them out stiff again, as he was found on Primrose-Hill. F. The Jesuits most
ingenious Game of Trap, which to understand you must read Bedloes Narrative of
the Fires, p. 16. and 17. Read it throughout: 'Twill show you plainly, how the
Papists burnt London; or if you desire to be confirmed in so necessary a belief
by an undeniable Authority, read the new Inscription on the Monument, and that
on the house in Pudding-Lane, which were purposely designed to convince all the
World of this Truth, and safely to convey it to Posterity. G. See Langhorns
Memoires, and L. C. J. Answer to Bedloes Articles. H. The Dr. does not tell us,
where these forty thousand Bills were made; but our reason tells us, that 'twas
very necessary they should be hammered as privately as possible (for fear of
Discovery) and therefore Bilb^^ and Salamanca, may pass far more probable than
London or any Town in England.

