THE True and Ready Way To Learn the LATIN TONGUE. Attested by Three
Excellently Learned and Approved Authors of Three Nations: Viz. Eilhardus
Lubinus, a German, Mr. Richard Carew, of Anthony in Cornwall; The French Lord
of Montaigne.

Presented to the Impartial, both Public and Private Considerations of those
that seek the Advancement of LEARNING in these NATIONS.

By Samuel Hartlib, Esquire

LONDON Printed by R. and W. Leybourn for the Commonwealth of Learning, MDCLIV.

TO The Right Honorable, FRANCIS ROVS, Esquire: SPEAKER of the PARLIAMENT Of
the Commonwealth of ENGLAND.
Mr. SPEAKER,
ALthough the Designs of this Age do tend, as I am verily persuaded, to a
thorough Reformation; yet hitherto we cannot see much more then the Overthrow
and Deformation of former Establishments: partly, because there is much rubbish
to be removed; partly, because it is not possible to build a new House where an
old one is standing, till the old one be pulled down. Yet no wise man will lay
his old habitation waste, till he know what to erect instead thereof: Hence it
is, that a New Model is commonly first prepared before the old one be removed.
I know not how far this Course has been taken by others, but in the Sphere
wherein I have walked, my Aim has been rather to take away the Difficulties
then to lay them open, rather to suggest a Remedy then to discourse of the
Disease; for there is no end of Complaints on all hands, seeing each Party does
lay open the others faults; and few or none tell us, how they ought to be
mended. For indeed it is easier to see a mote or a web in another man's eye,
then to take it out, and most men think themselves justified, when they have
condemned others, whose way is different from that which they have Chosen. And
although this seems to be in all other matters the Ordinary Practice; yet in
the Ways of Education, and the Reformation of Schools (the deepest foundation
of all other good Settlement both in Church and Commonwealth) it has not been
followed hitherto. But my honored Friend Mr. John Amos Comenius, and some
other Fellow Laborers and Correspondents in this Work with my self, have
studied to make as little Alteration as could be, seeking only the best
Advantages which upon the Ordinary Foundations of School-teaching could be
introduced: and in this Endeavor for a great many years we have Continued, and
many ways attempts have been made to facilitate the Course of Universal
Learning, and especially the teaching of Learned Tongues; and to abridge the
time which is spent, and to ease the toil which is taken therein: but when all
is done, we find after long experience, that it will be impossible to raise a
Firm and Commodious Building upon the Old Foundation; for which Cause I must
needs show now the weakness and defaults thereof. And because it is no small
difficulty and hazard to venture upon the contradicting of a Custom so
Universally received, as is the Grammatical Tyranny of teaching Tongues;
Therefore I am willing to make an Appeal, and seek out an Eminent Patron for
this bold Attempt, not doubting that Your Impartial Judgment, not wedded to
things, because they are Customary and received, will look into this thing with
a more single eye, to discern the truth of that which is offered, then others
can do, that are either so far engaged unto the Road-way, that they will not
think of any better Course to be taken; or suspect all New Designs as light
Projects of unsettled brains: but I hope Your Solid Judgment and large
Experience of my constant behavior will absolve me from the guilt of Levity,
in prosecuting all the Ways whereby Learning may be advanced. Seeing it has
been a great part of my Study above these twenty years; nor have I been alone
in this Work, but many others of great Worth and Abilities, have been obliged
to contribute their help unto me. Nor is it the Scope of this Treatise (wherein
others speak more then I) so much to overthrow what is in use, as to introduce
a Better, Easier, and Readier Way of Teaching: But how to Introduce the Way
which is here intimated into the Public Schools of this Commonwealth, will
be a matter of further deliberation then is fit for me now to enter upon; it
may be hoped, that the Honorable Committee for the Advancement of Learning,
will be inclined to reflect upon this matter, and consider the feasablenesse
thereof: and happily something as a Proposal in this Kind may be offered unto
them; wherein Your Grave Recommendation to set their thoughts a working may
have a special influence in due time; Therefore, lest I might seem at this time
troublesome more then is needful, I shall take my leave, and humbly subscribe
my self ver,

Your Honors most devoted and obliged Servant, Samuel Hartlib.

L. Verul in his Book of the Advancement of Learning.
ALL those things are to be held possible and performable, which may be
accomplished by some Persons, though not by every one; and which may be done by
the united labors of many, though not by any one apart; and which may be
finished by the Public Care and Charge, though not by the Ability and Industry
of Particular Persons. THE True and Ready Way to learn the Latin Tongue,
expressed in an Epistolary Discourse of Eilhardus Lubinus, before his New
Edition of the New TESTAMENT.
To The most Illustrious and High Prince, and Lord PHILIP, Duke of the
Stetinenses, Pomerans, Cassubians, and Vandals: Prince of Rugia: Earl of
Gutzcow: Lord of Lowenburg, and Butow; My very Good LORD; Grace and peace in
CHRIST JESUS.
I Shall endeavor, most Illustrious Prince, and my singular good Lord, to
perform that in this my Preliminarie Epistle, prefixed to this New Edition of
the New Testament, which I promised a great while ago, in matter of my
Judgment or Advice, such as it is; touching a certain Ready and Short Way and
Course, whereby the younger sort may seem to be in a possibility of being
brought to the Latin Tongue, without either great labor or long time. Any
honest man knows he is bound to make good to every private person, though
never so mean, those things which he has undertoo^^ how much more may I
conceive my self obliged to such a Prince! whom, even for his excellent Virtue
and rare Learning in such a Fortune, all the learned Commonwealths, throughout
the whole Christian World, do admire and reverence. And seeing I am not
ignorant of what I promised your Highness; and how free I have been in my
promises; there remains, it should seem nothing else for me, but either to
perform my promises, and indeed to perform them so, as may prove satisfactory
to my promising, and your Highnesse's expectation; or to run the hazard of that
thing with your Highness, which is to every good and discreet man most
precious. For since it would be very heavy to me to incur with any other the
brand of vanity, or at least of rashness; how much heavier would it be to me
to undergo the suspicion of that fault with your Highness? And to whose most
sound judgment bred, increased, and confirmed in the midst of Humane Arts and
Learning, I attribute so much; that while I here publicly expose this Counsel
of mine, concerning the matter propounded, to so many judgments of Learned
men, which I easily foresee will not be alike right and candid in all, and
whilst among all the learned Princes of all Germany, I make cho^^^ of You out
of the number of them all, as the Prince and Leader for the only and sole
Patron of this my undertaking: I see I must take pains herein chiefly, first of
all to approve this my cause to him in whom I reverently seek, and by Gods help
may find defense and Patronage thereunto; and to whom, if I shall, as I humbly
hope, make good proof thereof, I shall be the surer of many others, and put my
self to less care and trouble: which same yet I friendly beseech, whoever of
them shall vouchsafe to read and consider with me those things which I propose,
that whatever they are like to be, Explorata prius quam sint, damnata
relinquant.
They would be pleased not to pass their doom,
Until they fully to a trial come.


I know well what has befallen others, promising such matters as these, and
what does daily betide men indeed of no small note, and how exceeding hard it
is to pacify those Dictators and Monarchs of Schools, who crave to be heard
alone touching these businesses, and in affairs of this nature; and who are of
opinion, that the task of censuring is assigned to them only: As those be
like, who have either been otherwise instructed in Schools themselves by their
Masters, when they were formerly Scholars; or because they themselves, being
now Masters, teach their Scholars otherwise of their own accord. Et qui turpe
putant parere minoribus, and quae
Imberbes didicere, senes perdenda fateri.
And yielding to inferiors, count a shame,
And that their age, what youth learned, should disclaim,


Who also mete all things by the measure of their own private judgment, and do
sentence whatsoever is not agreeable thereto, absurd and impossible; not taking
into their consideration, that many New things are found out daily (though
these things are even ancient, and obvious to any one that makes enquiry) and
that one may find out more things then another, but not any one man all.
Therefore he, voluntarily lays himself open to be exploded with their hisses,
or torn with their bites, or stabbed with their writings, whosoever in this
Scholastical Commonwealth does never so little remove their Statutes, or has
not their Edicts and Ordinances in sacred esteem. Nevertheless, I have
adventured by Gods guidance, and favorable assistance, and trusting to, and
relying upon your Patronage, most High Prince, who are his Deputy or
Vicegerent, for the helping the Learned Commonwealth, and herein sacred
Divinity especially, in this last and festered age of the World, sick of so
many diseases and maladies, and herein out of love and affection to the Tongues
now a dying, and even now almost extinct, not only to set forth this New
Edition of the New Testament, and that at my own pains and charges (when none
of the Booksellers now mainly busied in thrusting out worldly trifles, would
bestow the cost upon this Work) whereby together with Piety, and the Words of
eternal life, three Tongues, either alone, or compared with one another, may be
readily read, and learned under one labor; and in a manner at once: But also
to expose to the judgments of the more learned this my Advice about learning
the Latin Tongue, set before this Edition of the New Testament; out of a very
good aim and endeavor of my mind (which he knows, from whom nothing is
concealed) and I would to God with success and an event answerable thereunto:
and this, questionless, to be exploded by many, to be entertained by few, and
perhaps by none: Whom yet let me wish so long to suspend and forbear their
approbation or dislike, till this my Invention, whether it be gold, or lead, or
even clay, when it is tried by the accurate examination of experience, may
either prove and manifest its integrity, and be received; or bewray his vanity,
and then at last be hissed out with its Author. Nor do I desire any thing
more, then that God would stir up some Patron of Learning and the Tongues, who
would vouchsafe to make trial of this matter; which very thing, if I shall
attain, I shall think I have got a very worthy recompense and reward for this
my own (call it as you will) diligence or laziness. And though this very
thing, whatever it be, is not conceived or brought forth by me just at this
time; forasmuch as I have been in travail with this conceit in my mind now for
this eighteen years and more; yet not even now, whilst I am delivered of it
fearfully and anxiously, had it seemed to me mature for the birth. Et quod
prodiret dias in luminis auras
Dignum --
And that which should deserve by proper right,
To come abroad into the open light.


If I had not thought it might be timely set against Barbarism now coming on,
and the overthrow of Learning and the Tongues; for resisting which, this
appears to be the only fence and remedy, which is left: if I had not likewise
begun to have proof of the certainty hereof by the Example of some at home; if
I had not, lastly, seen other very excellent men promise things of like sort,
with whom I dare be bold to undergo with so much the more confidence this
common hazard. And whose wholesome and rare Inventions touching this matter,
although I do not disallow, nor remain ignorant thereof, in that I have
conferred at large about this thing already, two years ago with one of the
chief of them, my old friend, and a very excellent man at Franckford at the
Main; and then also laid open to him my intent of setting out these things; yet
I divulge here none of those businesses which were invented by him, and I
hitherto not published, but leave them safe and sound to their Author. And
here only put forth those things which have already aforehand been devised by
me, touching the same, which, if they may sometimes chance to be compared
together with the Inventions of others, it will not be happily unprofitable. For
whether they agree with them, their consent will be beneficial; or whether
they disagree, their comparing may be of use. And which things, such as they
are, both learned men will judge, and Reason, being Umpire, will show; and
Experience, which I principally wish, being the discoverer, will declare. There
are Two things, which it stands me in hand to demonstrate, being about to
expose my Counsel or Advice touching the learning of the Latin Tongue. The
first is, that that common Way of learning the Latin Tongue, which is hitherto
used in Schools, is clogged with much labor, wearisomnesse, and difficulty.
The other is, that another plainer, readier, and shorter Way for the leading to
the Latin Tongue, may not only be made; but that we should also enquire,
explain, and show what that is, or peradventure may be. Now whether this way be
found out by me, Learned men will judge, and Experience it self, which I do
wish, will descry. Surely, if I should affirm that I have not been the
hindermost amongst them, who have sought or enquried for it, I should not lie.
My endeavors upon Plautus, the Prince of the Latin Tongue, will witness,
which I assayed now twenty years ago to translate into our own native Germane,
or Dutch language, that it might answer word for word, the Germane or High
Dutch put under the Latin, a in this Edition of the Testament: And a
Grammatical Book, into which are heaped together all the words of all the
Latin tongue, being brought into their ranks, and fitted to their precepts and
rules: And a Book which I have entitled, A Key to the Greek Tongue, and my
Paraphrases of the three Satyrists, wherein I have inserted the Poets words;
which very thing likewise I have endeavored in the Paraphrase of the New
Testament, with certain other things, which as yet lie hid at my house among my
papers or Note-books; In which surely, if I have not found* I have surely
sought certain short Cuts, or advantageous Courses for the overcoming of many
and great difficulties. For now a long time, and for many years this thought
has come into my mind, and busied, and troubled me, what should be the
Reason, that when all other Tongues, even those, which not only have nothing
common with our German Speech, as the Spanish and Italian; but those also in
whose pronunciation we, Germans, find by experience the greatest hardship, as
be the Polonian and the French, may in some reasonable sort be learned by many
Germans in two, or to be sure, in three years space, yea, out of Spain, Italy,
France, Poloniae, in Germany it self, in the Schools even of private Masters:
Only these Three Tongues, Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, in which the holy
Scripture, and Humane Learning, Faculties, Arts and Sciences are either extant
in writing, or are taught and learned by Interpreters, are learned in so long a
space of life's time, and with such miserable pains both to the Teacher and
Learner that some there are, who being spent and wearied out with the
tediousness and impatience of so wretched a teaching, do begin to hate and
forsake the study of Learning: others, who persevere, can hardly be brought
thither before they be eighteen, or even twenty years of age, so as they can
scantly at last with much ado sobbingly and stammeringly utter a few Latin
words, who the mean time scarce so much as slightly touch the Greek or Hebrew
Tongues. And which thing is to be the more admired, and has seemed to me no
other then monstrous, inasmuch as I am verily persuaded of this, (and whereof
neither any that is well in his wits, I think, will ever make doubt) that these
three Tongues have nothing peculiar and proper over other Tongues, whereby they
cannot be learned as well as others, by Use, Custom, and Exercise. Yea, which
formerly Infants and Children learned; the Romans or Latins, the Roman or
Latin; the Greeks, the Greek; the Hebrews, the Hebrew, to whom these Tongues
were proper and natural, together with the milk of their Mother or Nurse from
their Mothers, Nurses, Keepers that bare them about, Schoolmasters, and such
as lived in their houses, by Use and Custom, just as our Infants and Children
do learn their Mother, own-Countrey Germane Tongue. Which three Tongues also
others, to whom they were not Countreyly-peculiar, could long since learn by
Custom and Use in two years, certainly, that we may allow them so much time,
as may be enough and too much in three years space. For the Romans or Latins
learned the Greek Tongue at Athens; and the Greeks, the Latin at Rome; and
both these Greeks and Romans, the Hebrew Tongue among the Jews in Palestine;
as the Jews on the other part learned in Greece and Italy the Greek or Latin
Tongue by Use and Custom, which very thing whosoever shall consider with me
more accurately, he cannot doubtless choose but grant that some Means and Way
may be found out, whereby these Three Tongues, as formerly they could be
learned by Use, and Custom in a shorter space of time, even as other Tongues
are learned, so they may yet be learned. Now touching the vulgar Way of
instructing Children in Schools, though even I my self have sometime, being a
young Scholar at School, undergone it, and grown further into years have
discharged it, being appointed a Schoolmaster and Tutor for the teaching of
the younger sort, (indeed not without both very great irksomeness somnesse of
life and loss of time) to speak what I think, yea, as the matter is, being
indifferent what ever others are ready to think or speak to the contrary, it
seems to me to be such, and so introduced into Schools, just as if one out of
hired pains and study had been commanded to devise some Mean or way, whereby
Masters and Scholars too, might bring, and be brought on to the knowledge of
the Latin Tongue not without huge labors, great weariness, infinite toils;
and finally, not without a very long interval and space of time. Quae quoties
repeto, vel iniqua mente revolve,
Concutior toties, penitisque horresco medullis.
Which while I sean, or grieved to mind recall,
I shake with fear, and do a trembling fall.


In the first place the precepts of Grammar are so many times in a manner
increased, so often changed, as often as a new Moderatour is put in authority for
the School, and who except he brings something that is new, or at least alter
the old, he may seem perhaps the less learned to himself in his own judgment.
Certainly as often as a youth goes away from one School to another, so often is
his old Grammar to be unlearned, and a new one to be learned. By which things
the tender minds of the younger sort are not only hindered and troubled, but
also that Golden age is both worn out and tormented. And I pray you what end
and measure is there of these kind of Rules or Precepts? when as there are now
every where found more Grammatical Books in Schools, then there are Schools
themselves well near or upon the matter, forasmuch as they are oftentimes
changed in one School. And when all is done, what else is this Grammatical
teaching, but a stoppage and let to studies, but a wastful spoiler of childish,
yea, of youthful age, but a hanging, like torture of an ingenuous mind or
disposition, but lastly, a driver away of the best wits out of Schools? and
whereon hitherto, to the unvaluable and irrecoverable hurt and damage of man's
whole life, which is so short and so fleeting, is bestowed all that space of
childhood, stripling-age, yea truly in many, even of their youthful estate to
the 20th. year and upwards, That most pleasant Spring of a man's whole life, and
whose untouched flowers, and tenderest roses these most crabbed, and to
ingenuous and noble minds most unpleasing and formidable petty precepts of
Grammar do crop and pluck off, and whereof anon there is no more use: which a
little after are no more to be practiced or mentioned, but to be left off and
committed to oblivion. And yet in learning which, yea, in learning them by
heart, and presently in unlearning them so many years has been bestowed and
set over upon their account; as with which they might have learned these three
Tongues, and have been brought on to the Principles and Foundations of Arts,
and Faculties. Which things whilst I have often weighed and considered, I have
been moved, I confess more then once to think, and persuade my self verily they
were brought into Schools at first from some evil and envious Genius, being an
enemy to Mankind, by the means of certain unlucky Monks. There is moreover
another calamity not much inferior to the former: Scholars ought to love their
Masters as their own Parents; forasmuch as even they themselves are Parents,
not of bodies, but of minds. Now these for the most part they hate and fear,
yea oftentimes they dread and tremble at as Tyrants, and their tormenting
Executioners, being formidable for their rods and lashes, or jerks. All this
mischief is due well nigh to the inculcating of Grammatical precepts. Which
according to this vulgar way of teaching Children in Schools, are wholly to be
inculcated into boys, nor can they be inculcated, or put into their heads, but
by blows and stripes; because of what things Childrens age is not yet capable,
those things is naturally refuses and disdaines. Now what and how great a
calamity of Masters, and likewise of Scholars is this? the most boys hate
Schools, as houses of Correction, scourging places, or mere whipping posts, and
scarce ever come at them of their own accord, where this teaching of Children
is used as a medicine of minds to unwilling and forced Scholars by their
Masters whom they fly and hatefully abhor. A sick person is scarce ever
restored to his health by a Physician whom he hates; confidence indeed of the
ones good will toward the other can only do this. Now this is sometimes wholly
banished out of Schools, both by the Teachers and the Learners, through that
common teaching, whereby the Grammar is inculcated, which cannot choose but make
Masters themselves austere, harsh and erabbed, while they are enjoined to do
that, by which violence is offered to boyish age, and that which is contrary,
bad and hurtful to nature. For boys are bid to apprehend those things,
whereof that age is not yet capable; and are commanded to learn those things
without book, Tanquam ungues digitosque suos --
And to their coming so their minds do bend,
As they may have them at their fingers end.


Whose use is shown to them very slowly and sparingly, scarce in a most long
space of time in those few Examples. And to which Precepts Masters so oblige
and bind their Scholars and themselves; as if it were a thing impossible, that
they should know and be able to speak ought in Latin, except it be also added
according to what Precepts of Grammar, or Rules of Syntax, that may be so
spoken aright according to Art. Whereupon it often happens that even Masters
themselves cannot speak readily. He shall never speak promptly, and with
expedition, or quickly, who has tied and fettered himself with these Rules of
Grammar. I have sometime laughed at a dancing boy at Collen, who from a
continual Exercise of dancing had got him a kind of habit, and from thence
would now and then unawares as he was walking seriously in the streets, begin
to dance; for as he treading daily according to the measures and orders of
dancings had contracted this to himself; so these while they are bound only to
the Rules and Laws of Grammar, nor handle almost any thing else then Rules or
Precepts, and are more exercised in the Precepts of Art, then in the Use and
Examples of Precepts, they themselves will scarce ever learn to speak readily
or teach others. I could show this by memorable Examples, were they not
over-odious and too unworthy to be well brought to this place. To speak only
of Scholars, I saw a gentile youth of a brave towardliness, already seventeen
years old, or more, for the trying of whose proficiency and benefiting in
studies I my self with some others was made use of. He under his Master had
learned exactly at the fingers end the Precepts or Rules of Grammar, together
with the Examples which were added to the Precepts, but he could not rehearse
them otherwise then Parats, illud suum (...), that all hail, God save you, or
form of salutation of theirs, or then Pies or Crows recite men's words. For he
knew neither the Use of Rules nor Examples, but committed all things to memory
at the command of his Master, as if it were enough to learn the Latin Tongue,
to repeat the Rules of Grammar which thou do not understand, or of whose use
thou art ignorant; for scarce could he combine or put together three or four
Latin words stumblingly or stutteringly, as if he were troubled with the
hichet or yexing. Who will ever make question that he might, in that golden
time, wherein lie wore out the flower of his youthful age in those unhappy and
unprofitable Precepts, have been able to have learned three or four Tongues, if
he had used due Means to that End, and had had right teaching? Masters in
teaching these Rules, and Scholars in learning do in the Schools most miserably
tire and vex themselves lean with labors, wearisomnesses, and toilsome cares
more heavy then death; and with which, as Histories tell us, Dionysius the
Sicilian Tyrant was very well punished at Corinth, where, when he was deprived
of his Kingdom, he set up a Grammar School; and from whence the Satyrist not
without great reason exclaimes, Occidit miseros Crambe repetita Magistros,
Nam quaecunque sedens modo dixerat, haec eadem stans
Proferet, atque eadem cantabit versibus iisdem.
Twice boiled Colewort does poor Masters slay,
For what but newly he did sitting say,
The same he standing does relate, and sings,
In the same verses just those very things.


Whereupon it is no marvel indeed that Schoolmasters grow hard to please,
austere, crabbed, and way-ward, and thrust all the most excellent wits out of
Schools, which the nobler and the better they be, the more impatient they are
of this servile teaching in Schools; yea moreover, so great are the troubles
which Masters have in Schools, so great are their labors, if they desire to be
faithful and diligent, that Hercules could scarcely, if the fable were true, be
put to more in cleansing King Augeas stable. And which labors are yet as
little set by by the most; forasmuch as so small and mean a stipend is settled
thereupon for such immense toil and pains taking: and whose labors, if they
were to be recompensed and requited with their due reward and wages, a double,
threefold, yea, a fourfold greater stipend or allowance ought to be settled
upon them. Which very thing proceeds from this occasion chiefly, because by so
laborious, and (to say the truth) so preposterous a teaching through the
inculcating of Grammar-rules, Masters profit so little in so long a time by
teaching, and Scholars by learning. And though by these Grammar Rules so often
changed many blocks and impediments are laid in the way of youthful age; yet
could they be made never so exact, to which nothing could be further added, and
from which nothing could be any more diminished; were there also order taken by
the Emperors Edict, that there should not a jot of them be changed, and that
these Rules or Precepts should be commonly propounded in all Schools,
nevertheless could I hereby think that the teaching of Children were provided
for sufficiently. Because that these Rules even, whatever they may come to at
length, do not suit with Childrens age. For this is in all teaching to be
regarded above all things, that the teaching of them who are to be taught, be
fitted to their capacity; and from the unobserving whereof, all this mischief
in Schools hitherto seems to have been bred and sprung up. Now what, and how
monstrous an absurdity is it, to propound those things to childish age, for the
perceiving whereof it is not yet capable? and to require of Children, that they
accomodate or apply words of Art to the terms and names of Things, and to
propound to Children Entia Rationis, barely devised Beings, and Words of a
second Notion or intention, as they are called who know not as yet Things, and
the names of Things, Entia primae Intentionis, or Beings, whose meaning is to
be first understood: and to bid them give an account, why they speak Latin
right, before they can in any wise speak properly, and of the (...), before
they have knowledge of the (...)? Right as if one should ask a Countreyman the
reason, why the Loadstone draws iron, before he know it draws it; or one
that is unskilled in Mathematics, why in a Triangle three Angles are equal to
two straight ones, before he know that it is so. For neither is it possible for
these boys hitherto to know any word of the Latin Tongue, Noun, or Verb,
unless they know before, or together, what Figure, Case, Mood, Tense, Person,
etc. every one of them is; to learn any Phrase, any Sentence, unless before or
together they be able to give an account, by what Rule of the Syntax they may
speak so after this, and not after another manner. All which things are
contrived and appointed to this intent, that a boy first learn the terms of
Art, before he learn the names of Things. In the abridgments of the Grammar,
which are commonly used amongst us, there are reckoned an hundred and fourscore
words of Art and above; in the Syntax seventy and more Rules, with as many
Exceptions; and most of which are so obscure, that they can scant be understood
by those of greater age, who are already well grown, and more forward in
judgment and learning. Now what else are all these things at last, but so many
Impediments and Hindrances to Childrens age; yea, so many Mischiefs and
Gallowses set up for the same, so many trifling lets and encumbrances, with
which boys are detained and troubled in the same fashion that little young
chickens are fettered with the intanglements of women's hairs thrown out a
doors, and wrapped about* their legs? Verily, as if the Latin Tongue neither
could, nor ought to be learned, save with main and lamentable labor, and so
great a loss of youthful age. Now if anyone ask touching such words of Art
any of our Contrymen in our own Germane Tongue, which we have learned
without any Precepts, by Use only, and demand a Reason, why we speak in our
Tongue after this, and not another manner? he might well be judged to be mad,
as one who does not rest contented with the common Use and Custom of speaking,
Quem penes arbitrium est, and jus, and norma lequendi.
Whose mere arbitrament, and powerful sway,
Both Laws and Rules of Language do obey.


And which is the most certain Umpire, Mistress, and Judge above or beyond all
exception, but craves a reason, why we speak on this wise? to know which, there
is no need at all. But if upon this condition only men were to be esteemed to
have good knowledge and skill in the Latin speech, so far forth as they know
these words of Art, and are able to accomodate them to their speech, not so
much, forsooth, as Varro the most learned of the Latins, nor Plautus the
Prince of the Latin Tongue, should be thought to have spoke Latin, who were
perhaps ignorant, and no doubt very learnedly ignorant of these words of Art,
with which boys are tortured. If one were desirous to teach an Insant to walk,
and should set him not only upon slippery ice, but likewise put upon his feet
shoes laid with plates of most polisht iron, and moreover apply stilts to his
feet also; and were desirous first to teach him to go artificially, before he
can go even naturally, and on any fashion: he would be accounted indeed no
other then stark srantick. They truly in myopinion have long since been taken
with the like madness, who first of all brought into Schools this already for so
many ages used way of teaching boys by Rules and Precepts. And far madder then
which hitherto were those, who propounded to boys the Precepts of Grammar,
obscure in themselves, and besides that, enclosed in Verses, in Verses, I say,
so obscure, as may seem even to us who are further, grown in years, to stand in
need of some Oedipus to understand them. Whereunto belong also those so many
other Compendium's devised by many, and those which are accumulated every day
more then other: And those which are devised indeed out of a good intendment
and endeavor, but prove very unhappy in the event: so as those Compendium's or
near Cuts are found by mere Use to be no other then Dispendium's, or a long way
about and Impediments of youthful age. I saw one who went about to reduce all
the Rules of the Syntax into seven or fewer, which in our vulgar or ordinary
Books are found to be seventy and more; who while he labored to avoid
prolixity, fell into obscurity. When at length after full sore labors and
infinite tediousness, they are brought not as boys or striplings, but as
young men, to that pass, that they can make Latin on any sort, according to
those so often augmented and altered Rules and Precepts of Grammar, and can, as
the saying is, swim without a bark, and are brought on to read Authors, they
themselves now begin to speak Latin without any aid of Grammatical Precepts:
and here by and by again forget these very Grammatical Precepts, which they
learned being boys and striplings with grievous labor, of which truly there
is not, as has been aforesaid, any more Use. Now then how inestimable a loss
is it, to bestow twelve, nay fifteen years upon those things, and to wear out
the most precious time of life in learning them without Book, which are a while
after to be unlearned, certainly to be forgotten, and by them to hinder the
towardly growth of a tender wit; by them to offend and afllict; yea, to break
and weaken it, whereof that age is not yet capable, and which are afterward
unprofitable, and which are to be of that esteem those matters are of, which we
never learned? What should I say? that these Precepts likely within a little
while to be unprofitable are thoroughly learned by School boys, no otherwise;
nor are they any otherwise exacted, then if they were the Oracles of God,
without which we can neither be well here, nor hereafter. To which furthermore
may be added the mention of Masters, who require that to these Grammar-rules
their own Dictates and Precepts be well learned: and in the learning whereof,
if boys do but stick never so little, or stumble at them, presently comes the
Rod and lash in use. For hence it falls out that to Masters themselves, as
Diogenes said, (...); and (...), Scholar like become choler-like employments;
and hearing, grow wearing places: that the School to learners of an ingenuous
sport becomes a Gallows-like torture due to slavish Malefactors. And that
servile fear which boys get in Schools from this teaching, sticks by many all
their life long I knew a certain man, who devoutly and solemnly affirmed to me,
he learned the Grammar and the Latin tongue at School under so harsh and severe
Masters, that he oftentimes after he was grown to man's estate thought in his
dreams he still lived and trembled under his jerking Master. Now how much
better were it to teach boys in an ingenuous School with moderation and fair
dealing, and to bring good wits to the study of the liberal Arts, not
servilely, but courteously and tenderly? For what is thus learned, is welcome
to nature, and takes better and firmer hold; whereas on the contrary whatsoever
is violent goes against nature, and but seldom continues or lasts long.
Whereto likewise accrues this mischief no less then the former, that young
Scholars when they have scarcely with a great deal of labor learned a few
Latin names and words, they have eft-soones exercises set them, which are to
translate Dutch into Latin: that is, they are bid to make that which as yet
they never conceived. They would do far better and more handsomely, if they
were to turn things out of Latin into their own Dutch Tongue, or were to
express and construe Latin in Dutch. For into what Tongue any one desires to
translate another tongue, and by what Tongue as an Interpreter any one has a
mind to learn any other Tongue, that Tongue which he uses by way of
interpretation ought to be very well known unto him. Now what absurdity is it
to require of a boy to translate his Mother German tongue into Latin, which he
has not yet learned, but still learneth? which truly seems alike absurd; as if
a Virgin were bid to bring forth children. And hence moreover is that foul
matter, that Barbarismes and Germanismes do every where stain the purity of
Latin Speech; to wit, when boys are commanded by their own proper invention,
or of their own heads to conjoyn terms and words collected out of Dasypodius,
Vocabulary Sylva's, and Dictionaries according to the Precepts and Rules of
Grammar, and to form or frame to themselves the Latin Tongue according to the
Precepts of Grammar by their own industry. Which when they are not drawn out of
the full fountains of Latin, nay of Roman Authors, but out of shrunk-up,
dry, and liquorlesse rivolets of the Latin, and sometimes scarcely Latin
Speech; and that in a manner not by the guidance of Masters, but by the
unfortunate attempt of their very Scholars; we need not go far to seek, to say
as Persius has it; -- Vnde haec sartago loquendi
Venerit in linguas.
How this rude kind of speaking first began,
In harsh sounds like the hissing drying pan.


By what means comes in that unevenness of style among many, in which one may
every where meet with Barbarismes, Germanismes, and Solaecismes, and wherein
new words are coupled with those that are stale and out of use, and ancient
ones with such as are upstart and lately made; rashly, or by hab nab and
without any judgment; and in which there is nothing at all smooth, but some
such thing, or not unlike it indeed, as the Satyrist describes in the front of
the Art of Poetry. And if any shall ask me, since I mislike that usual and old
way of teaching, What other New One is it then, which I can approve of, or set
forth? I shall perhaps not absurdly give in that for an Answer here, which he
spoke: Quos fugiam teneo, quos sequar haud video.
I know full well whom I should strive to fly,
But whom I ought to follow do not spy.


Forasmuch as it is far easier for me in this place to show and confute
things which are false and amiss, then to affirm other that are better and
righter. Howbeit I am already determined here to expose and set before the
censures of good men, what I think of this matter, and what my meditations and
thoughts have formerly been concerning it. And which whatsoever they are, if
Experience it self, the touchstone for such businesses, were applied to them,
and might render a proof of the things which I am about to tell, I should be
conceited it would go better with them. But if I have not yet found the most
compendious way, nevertheless, I am confident and know these things whatever
they are, to be such, as if any one vouchsafe to make trial of them, they may
serve, as they say, to break at first the ice of that difficulty, wherewith
Schools are hitherto encumbered. And who need make any doubt that more may be
added daily to such Inventions? Certainly the very Exercise and Use thereof
will show every day more things that it may at length (all obstacles being
removed, which have made this. Way unto honest and pious Arts and Learning hard
to all, and to many invincible) declare it self to be plain and ready. Yea, if
I shall seem perhaps to have propounded nothing, which may be thought worth the
labor, I shall present at least an handle, and an occasion to others either to
enquire things not found out, or to show things found out to every one, and
not to envy Mankind that which God has showed them in the behalf of its
welfare, but to expose it to the whole World. For this is the nature of all
good men to communicate to all, for which things by how much the more and unto
the more they are communicated, by so much the more, and the rather do they
serve and suffice all. And now to begin from the first principlus of Reading,
and from the entrances and grounds of Letters, I think a boy before the fifth
or sixth year of his age, according to those powers of towardness and wit,
which put forth themselves, ought not to be put to this teaching: and that not
only for this Reason, because that tender age being as it were a little tender
branch, but even newly shot out, ought not to be swayed with this kind of
teaching (although it be likely to have little tediousness and trouble) as it
were with a certain burden: But also because in the mean time it ought to
learn its own Countrey-language, by which as an Interpreter it may learn the
Latin the better and more fully. And with which Mother Tongue the fuller
Children shall be endued, the sooner will they profit in those things which I
shall speak of. The mean while also that age being a little more confirmed,
will be the apter and sitter to receive Learning. For we must beware of these
two things before all other in all teaching, and in this especially, that we
offer not to pour a sirkin into him who can scarce take a spoonful; and that
we lay not many pounds upon him who can scarcely bear a few drams: That we do
not, I say, rashly impose ought, as it is done hitherto upon the age of
Children, which it may not be able to bear. The other is, that all those
things, which are on this wise, according to their capacity propounded to them,
be so imposed, and so required of them, that they may do nothing with an ill
will, by force and constraint, but perform all things as far as may be, freely,
and of their own accord, with a certain ready willingness or delightful
desire of the mind. Whence I am verily of opinion, that rods, and strokes,
those servile instruments, and such as do not well sort and agree with
ingenuous natures, ought not to be used in Schools, but to be far removed, and
to be applied to slaves and naughty servants that are of a servile inclination:
and such as in Schools timely bewray themselves by their own discovery, and are
timely to be removed thence, not only for the slownesse of disposition, which
is for the most part proper to servile natures, but also for that shrewdness,
which is for the most part joined with it: And to which if there be the
addition of the helps of Learning and Arts, they will be but turned into
weapons of wickedness, and be swords in the hands of boys, yea of mad folks,
for to cut their own and others throats withal. But there are other kinds of
punishments which would be made use of with ingenuous Children and liberal
minds, and wherewith they are sorer punished, and more cruelly vexed, then with
any the sharpest and smartest lashes of rods. As for instance, that those who
do not as they should do, who mind not what their Masters say unto them, who
obey not their Masters commands, or are otherwise found too negligent and
tardy, or taken in ill and unhappy turns, be set either in the lowest place
beneath all, or be enjoined while others sit to stand in some certain place set
apart, or severed from the other company for idle and lazy boys; or be made to
wear some mark or ensign of an ass, upon their shoulders, or to put on for a
while the habit of a fool in a play, or be punished with some such like kind
of penalties which the favorable discretion of Schoolmasters may easily
devise and find out, such a sort of punishment will not only more grieve and
fret to the heart generous and free natures, then if they were tormented with
the most exquisite dolours or pains of the body: but will also discern and
distinguish them from servile dispositions. For whosoever shall set at naught
or contemn this manner of punishment, and is led neither with any sweetness of
commendation, nor offended at or moved with the bitterness of dispraise: it is
an argument of a dis-ingenuous inclination, of an ignoble mind; and whereof
there can neither be any great hope or expectation to speak of, conceived. And
as the ser^ile and slothful are to be discerned and restrained by such a kind
of punishment; so contrariwise, fiery, forward, and quick dispositions are
still to be put on and further excited by more honorable places and higher
forms: That those who approve their towardness or diligence above others to
the Master, may obtain likewise a more honorable or eminent place then the
rest. Now what places are assigned to any one, whether the highest of reward,
or the lowest in matter of punishment, ought not to be assigned longer, then
any one shall deserve it either by naughtiness and negligence; or shall
maintain and keep it by goodness and diligence. For so it will be, that
neither the first shall trust in this their degree of honor, and as it comes
to pass slack in their diligence; nor the lowest despair, as if they could not
get out of the place of sluggards again by their diligence. Seeing both the
foremost, if they grow too negligent, may by the hindemost, being more
diligent, be cast down from their upper degree, and thrust out of their place;
that so the highest may be lowest; and again, the lowest and last by using of
diligence and industry, of the last may become the middlemost, yea the highest.
And better it were that there should be instituted such Exercises of a
laudable (...), or desire of honor, and new places allotted to one or other
in reference to every ones diligence or negligence, not every half year, after
the appointed Examinations, as uses to be in our Schools but every week, yea
truly every day, that so one after another might be stirred up and encouraged
to diligence by this commendable Emulation and Ambition. Now to touch some few
things by way of an Essay or fore-taste concerning the first Principles of
Learning, even the very Characters of Letters, how these may be learned by a
boy of five or six years of age compendiously without either long labor or
time. Passing painful and tedious is that way which is brought into Schools,
and used hitherto, when they learn out of A, B, C, Books to know the Letters,
to put them together in syllables, and to pronounce them; and so in conclusion
to read. For as to the knowing of the forms or shapes of Letters, and the
discerning of one from another, that hardship may be overcome far more
compendiously and easily, if certain Instruments be made to represent every
letter in its outward form, and such as may derive their names from several
letters. By which help Children may learn to know the Letters even a playing
with one another, out of doubt in a very few days. Now for these Letters, to
what Instruments and Images they are to be applied and expressed, the Manner
thereof has been devised long since not unhandsomely. Now I do not here, by
reason of the cavils of the preposterously wise, set out this Manner or way,
seeing it contains many things ridiculous, and which are fitted to childrens
age. Howbeit, they are such as may have that of the Poet verified concerning
them, Hae nugae in seria ducunt.
These petty toys display
To serious things a way.


And may bring boys even while they be at their sports with incredible saving
of time and labor thither; vvhither they are brought both by the woeful labor
of their Masters that teach, and tediousness of the boys that learn scarcely
in a long time, yea scarcely without rods and stripes. For visible Images or
Resemblances of this sort running into the eyes, fitted to the forms or
fashions of Letters, and marked with the names of Letters, are far sooner and
more thoroughly imprinted in the mind and memory of boys, and in their
impression stick far more firmly and closely. For the tender minds of younger
ones do ask; yea, mere nature and humane reason does require this, that those
things which ought to be comprehended by the mind in the treasury of the
memory, should be by some certain outward notes and figures, as it were helps
by the looking on of the eyes, and the sense of seeing imprinted upon the
understanding of the mind, and on the memory by a stronger imagination,
because that, as Naturalists know very well, there can be nothing in the
understanding, which is not before in the sense. And as that which has been in
the sense is more notable, or even more ridiculous, so it strikes or stamps the
imagination more strongly, and imprints its form upon the very memory more
inwardly, and so also sticks the surer and the longer in the memories treasury,
as it is known to those who profess an Artificial Memory, which is performed
by images and places. As for example, the letter L, not the turned, but the
running one, as it is called by Printers, being made very exactly in wood or
brass, is represented by that Instrument where with we measure linen, and
cloth, and other things. And that Instrument, seeing it is called in our
Countrey-Idiome or proper speech an Ell, and is sufficiently known to boys, a
man may easily bring it for to get the knowledge of the form of the Letter L
at once showing, or the first sight, and to express the naming thereof. The
same may be done in all the other letters, to which no less remarkable Images,
for effecting the same thing, may be accommodated. Now when by such like Images
of creatures, Instruments, or most known Things, and fitted to the letters,
figures, and namings, they have learned all the letters well; those letters on
some greater board or table being expressed in their own natural Characters
ought to be depainted, and propounded so great, that they may even be
manifestly seen by all at a right distance, and to which Letters those Images
of living Creatures or Instruments, (wherewith we said a little before the
figures and names of letters were to be expressed) being already fore-known to
Children, ought to be put and fitted very close, by this help a child may
easily learn to know the letters, and to express every one by it is own name.
Which thing when it is well done the order then of nature does further require,
that after this apprehension of single Letters, they learn to set them
together; and by sundry joynings together of letters, to express all
Syllables, which may arise thence. Here now in some other greater Table those
Letters, together with those aforesaid Images, being set over or above to the
vowels, and likewise to the consonants, may be so disposed one with another in
three lines; as the consonants from b to m, may be placed in the upper line;
the other consonants from n to z, in the lower, and the five vowels in the
middle place between the consonants in the middle line. From which letters thus
disposed or ordered, and already known to Children, Schoolmasters shall be
able to express any syllables whatsoever, and to show to children all the
variety of syllables, whether a Syllable consist of one letter being a vowel,
or of two, viz. a vowel and a consonant; or of three, as of one vowel and of
two or four, or lastly of five consonants* That so a passage may be absolutely
made through all the varieties of syllables; and that no syllable resulting
from the diverse composition of the consonants in the first and third lines,
with the vowels in the middle line, may in any wise be passed by untouched, or
not expressed, whether a vowel occupy the first, second, third, or fourth place
in a syllable. And the Master with some little pointing-stick passing through
all the variety of Syllables in the first, second, and third^ line, and laying
it on every letter, shall show what letters are to be brought together into one
syllable, and shall exercise the Children for some certain days in the
collecting of those letters into syllables. Which exercise shall teach Children
more fully the names of the Letters, when they are so often repeated, together
with those Images joined thereto, in which the forms, and appellations, or
callings of the Letters are expressed. And this exercise may hold and last so
long, till such time as they shall come to know those Letters well, whether
vowels or consonants, and also begin to understand, what articulate voice the
Letters joined together among themseves into some syllable, and to be uttered
with one breath and a single sound, may express. Now if this be not done in the
space of a few weeks, it shall be either long of the negligence and idleness
of Masters; or at least of the too gross dullness and stupidity of the boy,
which is to be taught. In which exercise, while the Master is employed, he
shall especially endeavor this, that all attend diligently, and that they be
every one set to the Table hung up, that they may show all the letters by
putting the little stick or wand upon them, or pronounce and express them,
being pointed out by the Master; or else be punished in the manner before
mentioned. For so it will come to pass, that by one, and that indeed an easy
labor, they may teach all; whereas otherwise when they are driven to teach
all, viz. every one in their own A, B, C, or Alphabeticall Books, they must of
necessity bestow and spend ten times more labor in teaching one, then in this
way which I have spoken of even in teaching an hundred, or more together.
Whereto also this is to be added, that, when so many, being equals, are taught
together with one and the same labor, they become inflamed and put into
courage by the emulation of one another, accounting it a shameful and base
business for them to be out-gone and left behind by their equals.

When they have now well learned these Letters by these helps of Images, and
have begun to express Syllables in Letters joined or put together, on that
manner as I have said, now these aids of figments or imaginary devices being
laid aside for one turn or two as yet, in the manner formerly explained; let
there be a passing through all the varieties of Syllables, that so they may
learn to know the Letters placed on that wise alone, and by themselves, without
such an Image, and to express any one in it self, and with others.

Now that all things which appertain to Reading, may be more fully and
abundantly learned, there are yet further two or more greater. Tables to be
used, wherein all the Syllables of two, three, four, five, or more Letters may
be expressed, not indeed as in the former Table, in Letters severed or
dis-joyned from one another, and in three lines only so disposed, as they
cannot but by the Masters guiding and showing with a stick put thereon be
brought into a Syllable, but so as they may be seen expressed in letters,
joined together one with another. And in these Tables, let the very whole
variety of Syllables, none at all excepted, be set expressly before the eyes in
joined letters. And let all and singular boys, without passing by any, be set
to these* in that order which shall seem fitting to their Masters, and let
them, taking a twig into their hands, note the several Letters which are to be
joined together in a syllable, by putting it thereupon, let them also express
them with an articulate voice in all the Syllables, to which the rest are to
attend diligently. Whence truly it will fall out, that in a little time both by
their eyes and ears they may very fully perceive all the diversity and variety
of the Letters either alone, or joined with others; as likewise of Syllables,
of which those innumerable words in the Latin Tongue, viz. Nouns and Verbs are
made up; nor may there be any thing left, which may in any sort further stop or
hinder them in reading.

When these foundations of Reading are on this manner well laid, then a further
progress may be made to the exercise of Painting or Writing, which thing is to
be referred to the trust of faithful Masters and Artists in that kind, who
shall at first by few draughts of Characters show the grounds of all the
Letters, and teach the Writing of them all easily and neatly.

Now that we may come at last by Gods help to learn the Latin Tongue
compendiously, and in as short a space of time as may be; to it there seems and
Twofold Course and Way may be taken and contrived. The one whereof is the
surest and readiest, by which the Latin Tongue alone may be dispatched, and
whereof I shall give notice in a few words hereafter. The other is a little
more painful, and more cumbersome, or ungain, by reason of our own
Countrey-German-speech, with which the Latin Tongue either always or for a
while marches jointly, no otherwise then a Roman Matron with her German
Interpreter; yet it is four times, as I relying on Gods assistance do verily
persuade my self, more ready or gainer then that wherewith Masters and Scholars
macerate themselves hitherto in Schools.

Now that which I signified a little before touching Reading, that this tender
age for the obtaining a speedier knowledge of the Characters of Letters is to
be helped with some certain Instruments or Images running into the eyes; the
same also I here repeat in the learning the Latin Tongue, especially when
children are to be taught: who are to be brought into a place where all things
which may be seen by the eyes, touched with the hands, set forth by the pensil
or the pen, even as many as we shall meet with throughout the whole world, to
be expressed in Latin words, may be showed to them in a well-disposed order*
For from these things falling under the sense of the eyes, and as it were more
known, we will make entrance and begin to learn the Latin speech.
Four-footed living Creatures, creeping Things, Fishes, and Birds, which can
neither be gotten, nor live well in these parts, ought to be painted. Others
also, which because of their bulk and greatness cannot be shut up in houses,
may be made in a lesser form, or drawn with the pensil, yet of such a bigness
as they may be well seen by boys even afar off. And I would to God, that among
so great a multitude and store of Books with which the world is now troubled,
and in so great covetousness and greediness of Stationers every way hunting
after gain, there might but have such a Book, as I have so often counseled and
persuaded the Booksellers, and Artists in the Low Countries unto, once come
forth into Print; in which all things whatsoever which may be devised and
written, and seen by the eyes, might be described, so as there might be also
added to all things, and all parts and members of things, its own proper word,
its own proper appellation or term expressed in the Latin and Dutch Tongue.
Which thing how great an advantage it would be like to bring to the learning of
the Latin Tongue, more fully and more quickly is incredible to be spoken. Now
the words for these things, albert they may extend themselves in number to some
thousands, yet by this means and help which I have named, they may be learned
of boys in the space of a few weeks. For as I have said formerly of Letters,
that outward view or survey of visible Things by the sense of seeing, sets a
stronger stamp upon the imagination, and the waxen Tables of the memory of
younger ones, and imprints the image and the terming of every thing far more
thoroughly and deeply, then if it were brought by the ears, as it were by more
uncertain messengers to the Memories treasury. For those things which are
visible, ought to enter by the sight, and not by hearing. As on the other side,
what things are perceived by the sense of hearing, as sounds, and all kinds of
voices be, those are subject to the judgment of the ears, and can no more be
seen or painted; then that Echo, the Painter whereof Ausonius jeers and laughs
at. In the vulgar or ordinary way of teaching, all things are referred to the
ears, which ought to be known and perceived by the judgment of the eyes. And
Schoolmasters have judged it sufficient, if Scholars could perceive only by
the ears the words or terms for things, notwithstanding they have never
hitherto seen or cast their eyes upon many of them. Visible things are first to
be known by the eyes, before their Appellations and words should be perceived
by the ears. For first, care ought to be taken that we may see Things, know
them, and discern them one from another, which is done by the benefit of the
eyes, before that there be the word for every thing, and a showing what term it
has, which thing is perceived by the sense of the ears. Moreover, the sight
comprehends things far surer then the hearing, whereupon he in the Comoedy had
rather have one eyewitness then ten ear-witnesses. And Horace says, Segnius
irritant animos demissa per aurens,
Quam quae sunt oculis subjecta fidelibus.
The ear not in such quick and moving wise
Conveys things to the mind, as do the eyes.


Yea rightly in this teaching is the one conjoined with the other, that both
the eyes and the ears may perceive and know those things which are proper to
them in particular. For appellations and terms of things expressed by the sound
of the tongue, are perceived by the ears; so on the contrary, the very Things
which are meant by these appellations and terms, are perceived by the eyes.
And the joining, together of these two is by far the profitablest and the
bravest course and passing sit and appliable to the age of Children. For as it
avails little in common and ordinary converse with men to know Things
themselves which thou can not express by their certain names and
appellations: So on the contrary, it will not benefit thee at all to learn and
know words, and to be ignorant of Things which are intimated thereby. For
none shall over-apply words to their own matters in a right manner, during
his ignorance of Things. There are such as these in abundance, which boys
learn out of Nomenclators, and other Lexicons, no otherwise then Parrats, who
understand not men's words, and know not what it is which they learn and
speak. And of which sort are the most of those Homoeoteleuta, or riming
verses, which were devised as Compendium's or advantages for the helping of
childrens age, out of a good intention truly, and would to God with event and
success answerable thereto, as are these, Manus and Pignus, Mors and Sors,
which in our own Tongue end in one Syllable, Handt, Pandt, Dodt, Lot. When
boys, for the most part are ignorant what Lot and what a Pavvn is. And what
does it profit one to know what Latin word answers to the Dutch, if he be
ignorant of that matter?

Therefore when boys are taught, what Latin word answers to the Dutch, the
thing it self which is signified by that Dutch or Latin word ought to be
showed them together, and all under one. Yea, those Things ought to be shown in
the first place, that they may observe and mark them well by their eyes and
fancies. Then the appellation and name of the Thing is to be added afterward.
And in this regard it were better, I suppose, that children, while they are
over-little, and remain ignorant, as yet of the vulgar namings of Things even
in their own Countreyspeech, were not put to this teaching. Whatsoever it be,
in vain are words learned, of whose Things we are still ignorant. Therefore let
Things themselves or at least the Images of Things, whether painted or
engraven, be exposed to the eyes of children, that they may know, what those
Things are whose appellations and names they get by heart, that so they may
learn somethings solidly. For by such helps childrens tender age is to be
assisted: and manifold are the benefits which it receives from hence. For they
both learn Things themselves, and the proper appellations of those very Things,
which they have perceived, and the genuine names and words in each Language, as
well in their own Mother, as in the Latin Tongue, which they ought to learn by
the interpretative Dutch. And this knowledge only is certain and solid, by
which a certain and solid foundation of the Latin Tongue is laid, the
beginning or entrance being made from Things falling under the sense of the
eyes, and those indeed most known, and daily obvious.

Furthermore, all Things which can be perceived by the sense of the eyes,
described or imagined, ought by some sure way, the beginning being made from
things more known, to be showed to children, and set before their eyes. The
beginning, I say, being made from Things more known, and from those Things
which first of all occur to children that begin to speak, and which they have
first of all begun to know, and to name with a stammering voice in their own
Mother Tongue, as are the Things which be in the House, in the Bedchamber, in
the Dining Room, in the Kitchen, in the Street, which are daily obvious to
them, and lie as it were in their way before them, or things themselves (which
if they be lightly had, are altogether to be preferred) or at least the
pictures of these very Things which are sufficiently known. That so there may
be a passage from the first most common Things to several others; and as it
were an ascent by little and little from the lowest to the higher. Living
Creatures as we have mentioned before, ought to be painted, and none but those
at the first which are known to Children that begin to learn the Latin Tongue.
Moreover, all those terms or words, whose Things thereby signified can be seen
and painted, may be taken out of the Nomenclater of that most excellent man
Hadrianus Junius, or others; Provided that the Exordium or beginning be made
from those which are more known. Here let there be presented and offered to the
eyes all Houshold-Instruments, Things belonging to Smiths or Carpenters craft;
Things appertaining to the Country, to War, to Shipping, to Fishing, to
Hunting, to Tailory, to Music, and to Sewing, whatsoever is to be met with in
the business of Books or Study in man's body, and in all its parts and members:
All living creatures, four-footed Beasts, Birds, Fishes, Worms, Insects,
Colors, Herbs, Trees, Fruits, all womenly Instruments, and those that belong
to Weaving, Baking, Riding, Playing, and Building, etc. Lastly, all those
Things which are set before the eyes, which if they cannot conveniently be had
in Things themselves, surely they may be painted. Let younger ones be brought
to these things, or to the Images of Things well known already from the
contemplation of the Things themselves, depainted in Tables, the namings of
which Things they shall first learn in their own, and then in the Latin
Tongue, which will be sooner then one would think effected. Now these Pictures
of several Things may be so drawn, as there may be three, four, or more
Pictures, according as the manner of several Things does require, painted in
greater pages, yet so as they may be well distinguished one from another by a
due space, and so as the Latin word joined with the Dutch being put under, may
be writ the next to them, in letters of that bigness, as may be read by boys
who have learned already to read, and so also furthermore as a certain line
drawn from the words written by the very Things, may show what words mark out
any of the Things. These Things thus painted and joined to their words, shall
answer to those first Elements of Letters. For as of those put together there
are made Syllables; so of these Things divided or compounded there are made
Sentences And this Way is natural and suitable to childrens capacity, of which
in all the teaching of children especially and before all things one ought to
have a due regard. Whence that common manner of teaching is the more to be
condemned, in which there are first of all words of Art propounded to boys,
whose Things signified by the words can neither be painted, nor counterfeited,
and in this respect are not to be conceived by the imagination of children. The
Tables and Pages in which these Images of visible Things, as I have said, are
painted, may be so composed, as they may be folded after the manner of leaves
in a great Book, and be set in a very notable place. In knowing these Things,
and in the explaining of them by their own words children ought to be so long
exercised, till they shall have already perceived these words in some sort. I
say, in some sort; for I would not have children be long stayed and busied in
the knowing of these naked and separate words, but timely to pass on to the
composition and division of these words, viz. to short Phrases and Sentences.
In these Sentences let not these words be propounded always in the Nominative
or first Case only, but also in the Second and Third, and the other Cases. Let
not, I say, these words be propounded alone, as hiterto they have been, but
with other words and terms joined in some certain Sentences. As for example,
let not these words as hitherto be propounded severally, or by themselves and
in the first Case, Panis, Bread; Felis, a Cat; Sella, a Stool; Meksa, a Table;
Scamnum, a Bench. For if they shall stand the longer in learning these Words
put sunderly, and in the first Case: by and by when they ought to join them
together with others, and to connect them in some Sentence, they do that for
the most part in the first Case, when the order of the Latin Speech requires
other Cases. Besides these words thus naked and set alone are learned of boys
far more difficultly then if they he joined with a Verb and a Noun, as it is
termed, Adjective in some short Phrase or little Sentence; as for example,
Panis in mensa positus est, The bread is set upon the table; Felis vorat Marem,
The Cat devours the Mouse; Puer sedet in sella, The boy sits upon the stool;
Cants jacet sub mensa, The Dog lies under the table; Puella dormit in scamno,
The Girl sleeps upon the bench. And if such like names be thus with other
words and terms in a short Phrase or little Sentence propounded to a child,
so as he may, considering the capacity of that age, perceive it: much profit
will redound from thence. For he will both learn all Things twice as soon, and
perceive twice, nay thrice as much, and be brought presently as it were into
the very use and benefit of the Latin. And examples in this sort of Sentences
may be so propounded, as the Nouns or names may pass through all the Cases,
Numbers, Declensions, Genders; and the Verbs through all Moods, Tenses and
Persons. For example, A boy will not so easily understand what that is which is
called Canis, Praesepe, Bos, Faenum, Cornu, etc. if they be asunder or apart,
as if they were propounded in some short and perspicuous Sentence; as suppose
in this, Cauisjacet in praesepi, The Dog lies in the Manger: Bos habet Faenum
in Cornu, The Ox has hay upon his horn. Just as in a picture, which consists
of one single Thing, and is expressed with one color or Monochrom in a single
living creature, or Instrument; as for instance, in a Sheep, Hog, or Sword,
every one being severed and set by themselves; it will never so much take or
affect the eye and fancy of the looker on, as some excellent picture, in which
all these are jointly, and in their color distinctly set before the eyes; as
for example, the Picture of furious Ajax, killing Hogs and Sheep with his
sword. And as a boy when he has already well learned the single Letters, will
learn to read far sooner, the more, and the timelier he is exercised in putting
together two Letters, and anon more into one Syllable, and in uttering them
with one single voice, then if: he should stay the longer upon the knowing and
pronouncing of single Letters set severally one by one. So also will a boy
learn to speak Latin far sooner, if after he has in some sort perceived the
Latin words joined together with their Things, (which may in that manner, as
has been formerly showed, be done by Gods help, within a few weeks) he be the
timelier exercised in these compounds of those simple words, Nouns and Verbs;
to wit, in Sentences and Phrases, then if he should be detained, and stay the
longer upon the learning the names of single Things or their Images. Therefore,
as Syllables are made of single Letters, and words of Syllables, consisting of
two, three, four, five, or more Syllables; so of single names, terms, and
words, there are made Phrases and Sentences, some consisting of fewer, others
of more words. Lastly, as words are made of Syllables; so are Speeches and
Sermons made of Sentences. Here then for the tender age of children a certain
way to the Latin Tongue might be made no less easy and ready then fine and
delightful, whereby both boys and Masters might by a good reformation find
this (...); this displeasure, leisure; and the Learner, this hateful torturing,
a grateful tutouring place; and the Teacher, this painful vocation, a gainful
vacation; that the School might be answerable to its own name, and be as it is
termed. Ludus literarius. Which verily will come to pass, if all those Things,
whosoever Images set out before in Pictures, and to which their own proper words
have been written, being after a sort perceived and known of boys already, as
in making up Sentences, names, and words are compounded one with another: So
also were Things expressed in the names and words of those Sentences shadowed
out and expressed in certain Pictures. So as among the single Pictures of
Things, not so much as any Picture of a Thing may be passed by, which may not
be once or twice compounded with others to set before the eyes, and express in
a rude Picture some brief and pleasant Sentence suited and sorted to the
capacity of Children. So as no word at least of those Things which may be seen,
or painted, be over-slipt. But I would have these members of Sentences so made,
as there may not be for the expressing of these several Sentences, or rather
members of Sentences more then three, four, or five Things to be imitated in
the Picture required. Now there is of such like Names visible and noted Things
(for I speak here of them only, from which the beginning of this teaching is
most rightly made) and which may be taken out of a Nomenclator and Lexicons,
and such have been noted by me a good while since, some certain number. And by
which names, in the expressing these Sentences with a Picture, a passage may be
so made, as not any name of those Things which are better known to children,
may be left untouched, to which may be adjoined Verbs and other parts of
Speech. Also out of these Sentences there may be taken exercises, in which they
may go through all Numbers and Cases in Nounes; and through all Tenses, Moods,
and Persons in Verbs, as we shall speak of afterward. Nor is there any reason
that any should be frighted with the multitude of Pictures, which are requisite
to express these members of Sentences, in the which the names of all Things
visible are contained. For these Things compounded one with another, are
absolved or dispatched in far fewer Pictures, then those single and simple
Things above mentioned, or not in many more however. For in these Pictures of
compounded Things, in which, as I have said, certain Sentences are expressed,
in one Picture three, four, five, or even more Things may be joined together.
For example, in expressing a Whetstone, and a Rasor, that remarkable History or
Fable of Accius Navius may be used and propounded in that Picture with this
inscription, Accius secat cotem novacula, Accius cuts a Whetstone in sunder
with a rasor. In this Sentence and Picture two Nouns and one Verb are
propounded. In the Picture, in which Equitat puer in arundine longa, A boy
rides upon a Hobbyhorse: four words are learned, two Noun Substantives, with
one Adjective, and a Verb. In the Picture, where Leo Asinum dilaniat curvis
unguibus, The Lion tears the Ass in pieces with his crooked paws; five words
are learned, three Substantives and an Adjective, and a Verb. But I would not
have these Sentences which are to be expressed in Pictures to exceed this
number of five, or the number six at the utmost. And by such like members of
Sentences and Pictures one may easily pass through the whole University of all
the more usual words in the Latin Tongue, by which visible Things are
signified. Which thing at the first will put one to some labor and charge, yet
not very much. But these Pictures once so made and procured may afterward last
always, and serve for the teaching an infinite of boys in the Latin Tongue.
And who would not redeem with a little cost so many years of man's life in many
thousands of children, whose turns this one thing, when it is once provided,
may serve? And which things whatever they cost will most largely recompense
their pains and charges which either a Prince or Commonwealth may easily
sustain. For a boy will learn in an hour even twenty or more such Sentences so
shown in a Picture, which being once and again repeated in the days following
will most firmly and constantly stick by him. There shall be contained
therefore in several Pages or Tables several Pictures of that bigness, as they
may be well seen by all even afar off, the Tables may be evenly joined together
in the manner of some great Book, and set in a very clear place. And there
shall be so many Books of this sort made, as are sufficient for the holding all
the Pictures, wherein the more known visible things are expressed, It will
hence certainly come to pass, that children may learn and learn indeed exactly
the terms of all visible Things of this manner, with many Verbs, and other
parts of the Latin Tongue. And in expressing which even learned and ancient
men do often either stick or stumble. Now such Latin Sentences and members of
Sentences which are to be expressed in Pictures, ought to be picked out with
singular choice. To which thing there should be used not only the most
memorable Sacred Histories of the Old and New Testament, expressed in their
Pictures, and explained in brief Sentences: for example sake, That God created
the heaven and the earth. The Serpent deceived our first Parents. Cain killed
his brother Abel. The Delugo overflowes the world. Fire from heaven burnoth
Sodom. Abraham is minded to sacrifice his son Isaac. And the other Histories
chosen with accurate judgment, so as they may be explained by adding such a
Sentence, whose Verbs and Nouns may be easily comprehended by children. But
also all notable things may be chosen out of Heathenish Histories and Fables of
Aesop, the Poets and others. A rude knowledge of which kind of Histories and
Fables, when children have as it were fore-tasted out of such manner of
Pictures and Sentences, afterward being striplings and young men, they will
not only more readily and quickly in the fuller reading of this sort of
Histories and Fables perceive all things, but also retein them in more
faithful memory. And in choosing this sort of Pictures that we may proceed in a
more certain way, all the terms of this sort of visible and more used Things
may be noted, and such a pleasant, short, and easy Sentence accommodated to
each, which may be expressed in such a Picture. For by that means the number
of this sort of Pictures will be easily shown; nor will there be over-passed
any term of any visible Thing untouched or omitted. Now what names of visible
Things may not as yet be comprised in this sort of Histories or Fables, may be
easily added in any kind of other Sentences, devised according to our
pleasure, and expressed in a Picture. And while Masters teach their Scholars
this sort of terms, Nouns and Verbs in these Pictures and Sentences, not only
the very Sentence which sets out in a few words the sum of the painted History
or Table, being written in greater letters, ought to be set as the title to the
Picture; but also to those two, three, or four Things, which are chiefly noted
in the Picture, to each their own Latin words, under which the Dutch may be
put, ought to be set the next in bigger letters, and by drawing a line, the
terms to be conjoined with their Things which they note; to the end, that the
weak judgment of children may not err in applying the several terms to their
Things. Now here Masters by the way should add, as they see good in these
Sentences, which are let to the Pictures, the most full, profitable, and
gallant exercises of the Latin Tongue, and such as are likely to be welcome
and pleasant to children, in which a passage may be made through the Cases and
Numbers in Nouns, and through the Tenses, Moods, and Persons in Verbs: As for
example, In the Picture of the Eagle feeding on the heart of Promethous; By the
Picture of the Eagle and the heart let the Latin terms be writ the next, to
which the Dutch may be put with this inscription writ over the Picture, Aquila
devorat cor Promethei, The Eagle devours Prometheus his heart, together with
the Dutch Interpretation, so put under, as the Latin may answer word for word
to the Dutch set under it. Here in few words that Fable may be expounded to
Children, that so all things may be more acceptable and more manifest, and
those things which are uttered may be more thoroughly imprinted in their waxen
memory. This example being both in the Picture, and in the Sentence exposed to
the eyes of Children, the Master may in the Noun, and in the Verb go through
the Cases, Numbers, Moods, Tenses and Persons. As in the Nominative or first
Case, Hic Aquila devorat cor Promethei. In the Genetive or second Case, Pictura
Aquilae qui devoravit cor Promethei. In the Verb, devorat, one may pass over
through Numbers, Moods, Persons, etc, And these exercises the Master may add
by the way in the sole examples, without any Dictates or Precepts. Yet we must
take heed, lest these exercises from one propounded example prove too long,
that one cannot likewise pass to the rest, and go over all things maturely and
in good time. These examples in this sort of exercises will happily seem
ridiculous and foolish to some; but nevertheless, such as are accomodated to
Childrens age, and by which there is a most certain or sure way laid to the
knowledge of the Latin Tongue. In the Pictures and Sentences written
thereunto, and in the exercises taken, as we have said, out of these Sentences,
Children for some such time, as shall be thought sufficient, shall be
exercised, as the Master may propound all things in Latin, and interpret them
in the Scholars own native Language. In which exercise, when they shall have
gone over for some courses, all these proposed Pictures of visible Things in
the Sentences written thereunto, and in the exercises taken therefrom.
Afterward, by turning or altering the order, the Master may propound to them
all those former things in Dutch, which the Children may be now enjoined to
express in Latin. Which thing while the Scholars are a doing, let the Masters
especially do their endeavor, and have a care, that not so much as any
Barbarism or Germanisme intervene. And for the use of this and the former
exercise let the terminations of Nouns and Declensions in their Numbers and
Cases; and of Verbs in the Moods, Number, and Persons of the Conjugations drawn
in two Tables hung up be propounded through which a passage may be made in
order so far as shall seem fitting, I say the bare terminations only, without
any names or appellations of Art. For this one and only thing transferred
hither out of the precepts of Grammar may perhaps not unprofitably be used. Not
as though we cannot want these helps; but that hothing may be left untouched in
these exercises, and that children may be brought on through all parts of the
Latin Speech.

These things being dispatched, when children are now brought on through all
these Pictures of Things visible and obvious, which being marked with certain
appellations, names and terms, are extant in the whole circuit or
circumference of the Latin Tongue, and are propounded either alone, or joined
with others; and have been exercised at their entrance in the single terms of
these Things, afterward in Sentences which have been compounded of these single
terms; first of all in expressing the Latin with the Dutch, then the Dutch
with the Latin. And even thus have begun by little and little to be made free
in the City of Rome, and to be brought as young Soldiers into the Latins
tents. Now in the end these helps of Images and Pictures being left, they shall
pass to a little freer and looser exercise of Latin Speech; and there are to
be added also other terms of Things, which are not comprehended by fight, nor
exposed to the eyes by the help of Pictures, but are comprehended by the other
Senses, the hearing, tasting, smelling, touching; and lastly, by the mind and
reason: and moreover, well near all Nouns, Verbs, and parts of Speech, as many
as are contained in the whole compass of the Latin speech, not so much as any
excepted. And which things they will now more easily perceive when they retain
those former things being indifferently known and taught already. For man's
memory, imagination, and reason has this peculiar, that the more Things it
knows, the more it can still further receive, and is thoroughly filled and
satisfied with nothing. Therefore those terms of the Latin Speech which are
yet remaining of Things Invisible, Verbs and Nouns may be collected into
Sentences that are brief, and comprehended in few words, so as the Sentences be
perspicuous, and suited to the capacity and benefit of this age, and that the
beginning be made always from those which are more easy, and let not any word
at all of the Latin Tongue of those Things especially which are more known,
and occur more often, be left untouched. And these Sentences may be chosen with
accurate judgment out of Forum Romanum, or the Promptuary of the Latin
Tongue, or rather out of the very Authors of the Latin Tongue, so as in them
may be seen not only all variety of Genders, Cases, Tenses, Moods, Persons;
but also that all the Rules of the Syntax may be touched, and that there may be
propounded a true, lively, and genuine Grammar in brief, perspicuous and
pleasant examples, not that bastard and adulterate one in precepts and terms of
Arts, of which childrens age is not yet capable. And by which examples, by
which use and exercise, if the Latin tongue can be learned in two, or surely,
three years space, to what end shall we sweat and toil ten, twelve or more
years? For the most certain, and most ready course of learning any Tongue is by
Use, and Exercise, and by Examples. Hard, troublesome, harsh, unpleasant, and
hindered with infinite difficulties is the way of learning by Precepts. Now
there is no reason that any one should suspect that these kind of Books, in
which all these Sentences, wherein the parts of the Latin Tongue are to be
contained, should be orderly digested, are not to be procured or got without
very great charges, and huge difficulties. Truly, if there were only just and
due rewards appointed for this business, whereof I have spoken, by those who
can, and even indeed ought: such a Book might perhaps sooner then one would
think be provided and produced, in which all those things might be contained in
order, which might be sufficient for this matter. And in delivering which
things, if Masters would go before with that faithfulness and diligence, which
is meet; and in rendering which, if their Scholars would but follow, they might
by and by be admitted to read, hear, and interpret with some benefit the
Authors of the Latin Tongue. And these things at length being taught and
perceived, Children may be exercised in the style of Latin speech both in
speaking and writing. For this should not be done hitherto, because it could
not be done well. Nor indeed should boys be driven rashly to speak and write
Latin by their own proper wit and invention without any aid or help, before
that they have got themselves, by these means which I have spoken of, the use
of this kind of Latin speech, and from such Things which they have not as yet
conceived, or which being conceived, they have not as yet brought to maturity,
there will arise (...), slender issues, and nothing but Germanismes,
Soloecismes, Barbarismes, aborts, disgraces, discredits, and basenesses of the
Latin speech. Now such a Book may be made without either great labor or cost,
in which all things may be contained which are hereto required, and which may
be used as common and general in all Schools, and which might be as the Portal
and gate of the Latin speech consisting, as has been said, of brief and
perspicuous Sentences, which Childrens age may not only comprehend, but also
comprehend with a certain pleasure and willingness of mind. Now in collecting
these Sentences, this pains, which I have so often mentioned, is chiefly to be
taken, that they be not only brief, but also Latin, and taken only out of
every the best Roman Authors, who have writ in Prose or Verse, Orators and
Poets, and that the beginning be made always from those which are most easy
and perspicuous. Which thing in reason will bestow that good and benefit upon
the learners, which will profit them all the time of their life, and be a
commendation and ornament to them, so as from thence they may contract to
themselves a fair, neat, ingenuous, pure and easy Latin style; not an
obscure, intricate, crooked, perplexed and uneven one, and such as the most of
the younger sort contract to themselves through the fault of their first and
bad teaching while they are under their hate Masters commanded to draw at their
own skill and discretion the liquor of the Latin Tongue out of impure rivulets
and cisterns. And for the collecting easily, and without any great toil these
which I have spoke of, brief and perspicuous Sentences, in which well nigh all
the parts, voices, words, nouns, verbs and terms of the Latin Tongue are
comprehended and contained, there is indeed a very large field set open Hither
may be referred Theological Aphorisms, and brief and notable Sentences taken
out of either Testament, and that out of the best and Latin version such as
these out of the Old: Creavit Deus hominem ad imaginem suam, God created man
after his own image; Non est bonum hominum solum esse, It is not good for man
to be alone; Pulvis, and in pulverem rever^eris. Dust thou art, and into dust
thou shall return. Out of the New: Deus ex Aegyptovocavit filium suum, God
called his Son out of Egypt; Mortui sunt qui petebant animam pueri, etc. They
are dead who sought the childs life, etc. Of which like Sentences there is
very fair and most clear plenty in the History of the Gospel, and in the
Epistles of the Apostle Paul. Also the Histories of the Old and New Testament
reduced in a few words into a concise and perspicuous Sentence: As Deus die
septimo quievit ab omni opere suo, God rested the seventh day from all his
work; Deus condidit Evam e costa viri Adami, etc, God made Eve out of the man
Adams rib, etc. Also out of the New, Magi ab Orient venerunt Hierosolymam,
Wise men came from the East to Jerusalem; Magi obtulerunt Christo nato curum,
thus, and myrrham, The wise men offered Christ when he was born, gold,
frankincense and myrrh, etc. Likewise the excellent Sentences of the Fathers;
as, Latet ultimus dies, ut observetur omnis dies, The last day is concealed,
that every day may be observed; Ecclesiae* arma sunt preces and lachryme, The
Churches weapons are prayers and tears; Maledictus qui florem JIuventutis
Diabolo, fecem Senectutis Deo consecrat, Cursed is he who consecrates the
flower of his youth to the Devil, and the dregs of old age to God. And such
other like. Also brief and witty common Sentences; Sustine and abstine, Bear
and forbear; Ferendum and sperandum. We must endure and hope; Patior ut potiar,
I sustain to obtain. Likewise out of Latin Authors, Quo se fortuna, eodem
favor hominum inclinat, The favor of men inclines the same way which Fortune
does; Vita sine literis mors est, An illiterate life is no other then death;
Nemo nisi a scipso laeditur, Every ones mischief is from himself; Unus quisque
suae fortunae faber est, Every one's the contriver of his own fortune; Qui vult
dicere quae vult, audiet quae non vult, He who speaks what he will, shall hear
what he would not; Famam multi, conscientiam pauci verentur, Many fear fame,
few conscience; Sic vive cum hominibus tanquam Deus videat, sic loquere cum Deo
tanquam homines audiant, Live so with men as God saw thee, speak so with God as
men heard thee; Altissima stumina minimo labuntur sono, The deepest river makes
the least noise. Also all the most choice and memorable verses out of the
Poets, as Hemisticks, Omne solum forti Patriaest, Each soil is the valiant man's
Country; Non omnis fert omnia tellus, No ground brings sorth all things; Non
omnia possumus omnes, There Is none good at every thing; Nocet empta dolor
voluptas, We like not pleasure which is bought with grief. And Hexameters; Quid
juvat aspectus, si non conceditur usus? To what end is the view without the
use? Percunctatorem fugito, nam garrulus idem est, Avoid a medler, for he loves
to prate. And a thousand others. Also in other kinds of Verses; Non si male
nunc, and olim sic erit, Though it may go ill now, it shall not do so still; Quem
dies vidit veniens superbum, Hunc dies vidit fugiens jacetem, He whom the
morning did surveyin pride, The evening grovelling on the ground espied. Also
all the choice ones of Mimus; Ab alio expectes, alteri quod feceris, That which
thou do to one, expect that from another. There may be likewise other
Sentences added taken out of the common life of men, yet with such choice are
they to be made use of, that they be both Latin, and withal easy. As, Recte
faciendo neminem timeas, Do well and fear no body; Sola miseriacaret invidia,
Misery only is without envy; Vbi nullum lumen, ibi nulla umbra; ubi nulla
felicitas, ibi nulla invidia, Where there is no light, there is no shadow;
where there is no felicity, there is no envy. Also the more select Proverbs;
as, Ne Hercules quidem adversus duos, Contend not with a multitude; Adversus
solemn (...) quitor, Speak not against conscience. And innumerable others. And
lest any one should think Grammar to be waved in such teaching, that shall be
taught not in Precepts, but in Examples: this order may be used in disposing
these, that we go through all the Declensions, Numbers, and Cases: As in the
first Declension, Dignum laud virum Musa vetat mori, Poetry preserves a worthy
man from the death of oblivion: In the Genitive case, Vitae summa brevis spem
nos vetat inchoare longam, The brevity of our life may check the length of our
hope: In the Dative and Ablative, Lis est cum forma magna pudicitiae, There Is a
great strife between beauty and chastity: In the Accusative, Barbam video,
Philosophum non video, I see gravity, but no Philosophy. Now in choosing such as
these in such plenty of Authors there can be no difficulty. We may travel
through all Verbs, and their Moods, Tenses, and Persons: As, Non amote Numici,
nec possum dicere quare, I do not love thee Numicius, nor can I give any reason
why I do not; Frustra ploras, quod recuperare non potes, In vain thou deplorest
for that which thou can not recover; Bis dat qui cito dat, He gives a thing
twice who gives it quickly. And especially let such examples be selected in
Verbs, in which the Preterperfect tense of the Verbs may be expressed: As,
Pauci quos aequus amavit Jupiter, Atque ardens evexit ad aethera virtus, They Are
Few kind Jove has viewed with loving eyes, And ardent virtue raised unto the
skies. We may travel through all the Rules of the Syutax: As in the first Rule,
Mali corvi malum ovum est, An ill bird lays an ill egg; Vir bonus and
malafortuna plerumque componuntur, A good man and bad fortune do many times go
together; Optimus animus pulcherrimus Dei cultus, That worship of God is the
best, which is performed with a good mind. Through all Genders, Numbers, and
Cases. After the same manner all the other Rules may be propounded, all the
precepts being removed, unless it be in the examples, and we may proceed
through all variety of construction, of the Noun, Pronoun, Verb, Participle,
Adverb, Conjunction, Preposition, Interjection, that no kind of plain or
figurative construction may be left out. And for this use there ought not only
to be gathered, as has been said, out of the Holy Scripture, and either
Testament and the Authors of the Latin Tongue, all most choice Phrases of
Speech, Forms and Sentences, in which may occur all the more common terms of
the Latin Tongue, verbs, nouns, and words, not so much as any word left or
omitted. In which, as in lively Examples, all the precepts of Grammar may be
shown, as in their use* ^o which aim and end let there be heaped together
terms and phrases out of all matters, wherewith these Things which are any
where to be met withal, in peace, or in war; in leisure, or in business may
be expressed purely and in good Latin. Under which consideration, there may be
added likewise hither the Principles of Geometry of a ^oint, of a Line, of a
Superficies, of a Body, of an Angle, of a Triangle, of a Quadrat, of a
Trapezium, being common notions and the very first foundations of Arithmetic
and Geometry, which children did formerly learn in Greece, and which things I
have experienced by very Use, that boys with us but of seven years of age
could learn by the Figures running into their eyes. There may be added the
Multiplications of single Numbers in themselves, which they call the Table of
Pythagoras, how many may be five times nine? seven times eight? nine times
seven? etc. which things by brief, pleasant, and ridiculous Examples and
Figures even painted, may be so exactly imprinted in the tender memory of that
age, as no forgetfulness afterward may blot them out or abolish them in the
whole time of their life. To these there should be added, and shown to children
all the circles in the Sphere, there should be shown them in the Celestial
Globe all the Signs in Heaven of the Zodiac, Northern and Southern. In the
Terrestrial Globe, and in the Geographical Tables there should be shown them
all the parts of the World, and the parts of parts. Artificial memory may
likewise be added to these things handsomely; by the benefit whereof a boy of
seven, or truly of eight years old may learn each Genealogy of Christ in
Matthew and Luke, to rehearse it backward and forward, all the Signs in
heaven, all the Names of the parts of the earth, being shown to him in a Tab^e
or Globe, the Names of all the Roman Emperors from Julius to the present
Matthias. Which memory, though it may seem to be of no great moment, for that
unless it be oftentimes now and then after certain, and those no very long
intervals of time be renewed, the images being extinct, and the order of the
places troubled or crossed, after a few weeks it is again extinguished and
defaced: yet it may be helped afterward by other Means and Ways in those
things, to retein whose Order may be thought to be worth the while, and quit
for cost, that it may be lasting, and not easily be obliterated.

Now here it may be demanded, in what Order should these Sentences be
propounded to boys in Schools? And indeed the matter it self and reason
teaches us, that Sentences taken out of Holy Scripture, and the Fathers do
challenge to themselves the former place. In the interim, as I would have
nothing in the whole University of the Latin Tongue to be baulked or
over-passed, which may not be produced once or twice in the use of Latin
speech: so for the order, I think, we ought not to be greatly solicitous. For
the very variety of Things, in which sacred shall be put with wordly, sweet
with profitable, serious matters with jesting, yet honest, and wholly remote
from all filthiness and obscenity, will shake off from boys all wearisomnesse
of learning, and will render them more prompt and expedite of thinking or
speaking ought concerning any business propounded in any place and time. In
which thing I shall nevertheless willingly follow the judgments of the more
learned. Yea moreover, the very use of this teaching and exercise, as the
Mistress of all these things, will perfectly teach, what order it may be
expedient to hold.

And by this means it will come to pass at length, that they may be learned in
all the parts, terms, nouns, verbs, words, and even in the least particles of
the Latin Tongue. And who in sound reason can ever come to these, who after
the Precepts of Grammar, in which for so many years boys are detained, as it
were in bonds and fetters, do propound at last some Author of the Latin
Tongue, and in exacting of that according to the Precepts of Grammar stay
oftentimes a year or two, and detain their Scholars; as for example, Tulli^s
Epistles, Terence, etc. yet in which although Roman Authors of the Latin
Tongue, many things, yea very many, and well near all occur which have not as
yet been fitted to that age of Children. Besides there are to be met withal in
these only a few terms and words, nor is there contained in them all the
variety of the phrases of the Latin speech. For these Authors writ of some
certain matter propounded to them, not out of that intent, that they might
teach boys in Schools the Roman Tongue, or that they might express in these
their writings all the variety and plenty of the Roman Tongue. These Authors
when striplings or youths have in Schools scarce lightly tasted, they are by
and by admitted to Arts and Faculties. And indeed many excellent things for the
Latin Tongue may be learned out of these Authors, but not by Childrens age,
nor in that manner and order. And hence it comes to pass, that when many in
Schools have learned after a sort the Principles of Latin speech out of these
Authors of the Latin Tongue, and afterward scarcely or at least slightly
touch other Authors of the Latin Tongue, but forthwith betake themselves to
Arts and Faculties, there is that scantinesse and lack of the Latin speech in
many, so as if they meet with any less frequent or more unusual Thing to be
expressed in Latin speech, phrase, or term, which may not be found in those
little Authors, which they have read and learned, they are quite at a stand,
they scratch their head, bite the nail, and are not able to unfold themselves,
or at the least they slyridiculously to general and common, or neighbor words,
which are more known, not signifying this but another thing.

I therefore am altogether of opinion, that these Exercises and Essays be
premised out of such a Book as may be called as it were Pandects of the Latin
Tongue, before they be put to those further Exercises of writing and Arguments,
as they call them, in which they are enjoined to turn Dutch into Latin, and
admitted to hear, and presently after to read Latin, Roman Authors. And
these being premised, at length Latin Authors are to be propounded to them,
yet so as they may be, without using any Dictates or Precepts explained to them
in a plain and perspicuous interpretation; and so as they may be dispatched in
as little a space of time as may be, that afterward even diverse others may be
subjoyned. For I speak of the teaching of boys in the Latin Tongue, not of
the teaching of young men who are more advanced, to whom the exercise of Logic
or Rhetoric is shown in Authors, which things neither may nor ought to be
propounded to boys.

And these things touching this First Way and Course, which seems may be laid
for boys and youths to learn the Latin Tongue, I have been minded to set forth
briefly, being about to reserve in the mean while for another place and time
many and choiser other things, which the nature of this Epistle does not admit;
If I shall understand, that these things which I have been willing to shadow
forth out of a good intent, and to write with the right hand, shall not be
received with the left hand, or be rejected and exploded. Now concerning that
other most expedite and certain Way of learning the Latin Tongue, I shall say
little or nothing here. Because that although it would be in it self the least
of all painful, yet it may seem rather to be wished for then to be obtained,
that, what ought to have been done long since many ages ago, may in this last
age of the world be excited and set afoot by some revived Charlemain, or Great
Patron and Parent of Learning and learned men; to wit, that the Latin Tongue
might be so learned, as the Greeks, Hebrews, Germans, Vandals and Scythians
learned it in former times; by going namely to Rome, and into Italy, at that
time, when as yet they used it pure and Roman. That, I say, it might be learned
without any native and mother tongue, by mere Custom, Converse, and Use, with
those who could speak the Latin and Roman Tongue very purely and readily. And
because such a Place where they speak in this sort the Roman Tongue only, is
not found in the world, it should be provided by Art.

This Way though it would be the most expedite and certain in it self, yet far
sooner and easier, and with less cost and provision might all things necessary
for this business be procured, then any one will believe. If so be some
Emperor or King, yea even some Prince or Magistrate in any Commonwealth,
would in this age vouchsafe to light a taper or torch; for the studies of
Learning and the Tongues being a dying, and almost extinct, and raise and
revoke from death and Hell not the Latin only, but also the Greek and Hebrew,
and other bordering Tongues, not only so profitable and necessary for Empires,
Kingdoms, Principalities, and Commonwealths, but also for the sick and already
dying Church of God. Now how small a thing were it, considering this so
profitable a business, to set up in Principalities or Kingdoms a Coenobium,
College, or Place suitable hereunto. How small a thing were it to call forth
to such places by good stipends, Worthy men, and such as are very skilful in
the Latin Tongue, who should use only the Latin Tongue, and that indeed pure
and Roman, and should be compelled to this very thing by certain and severe
Orders. Nor they themselves only, but also their Servants and Attendants, and
as they use to say, the Scullions in the Kitchen. I doubt not but these things
are like to be taught at by many, and perhaps never to be assayed by any one,
which nevertheless none can deny to be be certain and easy, but he who
forswears Wit and Reason. For although it may seem to be hard and difficult to
get such Men, Servants, Ministers, and other things which may be requisite for
this matter; nevertheless, if even indifferent stipends be set for each of
them; yea indeed, if some who are not unfit for this purpose, shall but be able
to maintain themselves, or have a livelihood from thence, all this difficulty
may be easily overcome. And there may be chosen to this purpose not only most
excellent Men, and such as are most skilful of the Roman Language, who would be
Presidents, Rectors and Governors in such a place, as in some Roman Colony.
But also Students accommodated and fit for that business, who would perform
those inferior offices. Boys and striplings might be sent hither as into a
Forum; Romanum. Who if they were altogether ignorant of the Latin Tongue, at
the first entrance the beginning thereof would be a little harder, and more
time would be required to learn it, yet not above the space of two years, as I
verily persuade my self. But if by such exercises and Essays, of which I have
spoken largely before, one might be brought to the first entries and portals of
the Latin Tongue (which might be done within two years) one might be brought
within a years space to the full Use and benefit of the Latin Speech, about
ten or however eleven years of age, to that knowledge of the Latin Tongue,
that one might then read Authors with profit, and then give ones mind to
other Tongues, and by and by to Arts and Faculties. And it might be wished that
those boys who should be seasoned with the Fundamentalls and Principles of the
Latin speech in that Way, which I have formerly explained, should be presently
entertained by such a Coenobium or Community, in which there might be only the
most pure use of the Latin and Roman speech, and should be exercised in it
for a year or two. Yet althought this later Way of which I have now begun to
speak, might be sufficient for them to learn the Latin Tongue, and might
within the space of two years, or not much more, dismiss one not ignorant of
the Latin Speech. Nevertheless, that former Way, which consists of the
Pictures of all visible Things, and of Sentences added to the same, might even
here be profitably used; so that it might be dispatched by the Latin Tongue
alone, to which as the one and only Tongue this place should be consecrated,
without any Dutch as Interpreter, which should be utterly banished out of this
place. Now what exercises might be instituted by alternate courses in such a
Roman Colony, Sacred, Serious, Sportive, and agreeable to ingenuous Children,
by which they might learn to express in the Latin or Roman speech whatsoever
shall occur in all the names, terms, words, phrases and forms thereof, and in
all the parts of a Man's life, and concerning what matters of humane life they
might explicate the meaning of the mind in pure Latin Language, I do not add
here. Well near all those things which may seem to absolve this whole
business, have been meditated by me long since, and might be set out, if God
should by any hap vouchsafe to excite a King, Prince, or Magistrate, by whom he
might deign to begin and complete a Work so laudable and profitable to
Mankind, and in it to the distressed Church of God, and all the parts of the
Commonwealth, and of men's whole life; (...): but these are but wishes. Indeed
I am confident by Gods grace, and verily persuaded of this; if such a Roman
Colonie, as I may term it, were set up, that the Roman Tongue might be learned
in it, no less quickly, and perhaps no less certainly and fully, then
formerly in the midst of Suburra or Forum Romanum. For as they who came out of
Greece or Palestine, or other parts of the world unto Rome to learn the Latin
Tongue might there forthwith by Custom and daily Use learn as much as could be
to express and utter vulgar Things, and such as occur daily in common life:
nevertheless, there did not occur there all the parts of a man's other life to
be expressed in their terms, forms, and Roman phrases. But all these things
might by some certain exercises appointed hereunto, be learned in such a Colony
as I have spoken of more fully and copiously. That so there might after two or
at the most three years, be sent forth, out of this Roman Colony, such as might
declare promptly and readily in the Latin and Roman speech the thoughts and
meditations of their mind touching all things which occur in man's life in
peace or war, in vacancy or employment. But if this might be done, as by Gods
help, I am verily persuaded, in a short interval of time, that ought to be
reputed and taken as a matter of vantage. These things, most Illustrious
Prince, I thought good by occasion of this Epistle, to expose to your
Highness, which I could wish were such, as might not displease it, which likes
only the best! I could wish also that others would accept of them in that
manner as they come from me. Whatsoever it may be, I have been willing to
provide for Children that they might be brought sooner and more maturely then
hitherto to those studies of wisdom, and principally, to that true and eternal
wisdom Christ Jesus, who bids Children come unto him, and says expressly, That
theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. And that I might be helpful to these, I have
been willing to set forth this New Edition of the New Testament, whose former
part I now publish. To wit, from whence Children might learn the Latin, and
straightway being striplings, the Greek Tongue. Yea, the very comparing of the
Tongues will not happily be unprofitable to Divines and learned men. I have
faithfully retained the Dutch Translation of Luther, to which I have been
forced sometimes to misplace the Greek Text; and that with this intent, that I
might accommodate these things to Children. In which matter, such as are more
skilful in the Greek Language shall pardon me, as also in many other things,
which I could not easily avoid in this my Design. I with reverence beseech
your Illustrious Highness to take these things, such as they be, in good
worth, and to reckon me among yours still

Datell at Rostoch, Mart. 18. An. Dom. 1614. Your most Illustrious Highnesses
Reverent, and Submisse Observer Eilhard Lubine,

THE True and Ready Way to learn the Latin Tongue: Expressed in an Answer to a
Quere, Whether the ordinary Way of teaching Latin by the Rules of Grammar, be
the best Way for youths to learn it? By the late Learned and Judicious
Gentleman Mr. Richard Carew of Anthony in Cornwall.
IN my tender youth I was by my Father put to School, and so continued for nine
or ten years to learn Latin according to the common teaching of ordinary
Schoolmasters, by the Rules of Lillies Grammar. Afterward I spent three years
in the University of Oxford, and three years more in the Middle Temple, one of
our Innes of Court. From thence I was sent with mine Uncle in his Embassage
beyond the Seas, unto the King of Poland, whom when we came to Dantzig, we
found to have been newly gone from thence into Sweden, whither also we went
after him; and in this journey, wanting the native Language of those Countries,
I was often enforced to use the help of the Latin Tongue, to buy such things
as we needed, and to confer with many Persons, being often employed by mine
Uncles direction, to deliver Messages and receive Answers both to and from many
great persons of the Dutch, Swedish and Polish Nations. And therein found a
great defect in the want of usual talking in former time in the Latin Tongue;
because I had often occasion to call for such things, and at other times to
mention such things as we did seldom or never meet with the names of the same
in our Books. After my return and short staying here I was sent by my Father
into France with Sir Henry-Nevill, who was then Ambassador Leiger unto Henry
the Fourth, that there I might learn the French Tongue, which Language, though
it seemed very hard to me in the beginning, because mine ignorante made me
unable to distinguish one word from another, and so imagine that those people
used to talk much faster then we did, in a little time, when by often-hearing
their talk, I began to discern the distance of one word from another, I found
they used to talk rather more deliberately then we do; and so by reading and
talking, I learned more French in three quarters of a year then I had done
Latin in above thirteen; wherein though I will not deny but the Use of my
Latin Grammar did something help me to make me the better apprehend the
Coherence of speech, yet I have ever since conceived, upon my learning by
practice, that usual Talking, and much Writing and Reading open a surer and
readier Way to attain any Tongue, then the tedious course which is used in the
Latin by construing and pearsing according to the Rules of Grammar, in
observing of the Number, Gender, Case, and Declension of all variable words;
partly because so much time is spent in the declination of every word,
according to the Forms set down in the Grammar; and partly in the over-loading
of the weak wits of youths with such a multitude of ordinary Rules, and such a
world of Exceptions in particular words, as are acknowledged to differ from the
general Rules, as is able to confound both the Memory and Understanding of men
of years; besides, the hard gnawing of the dry bones which are able to tire
their jaws, and take away the edge of their teeth, before they can break them
into such pieces, as will be fit for their weak stomachs, because after the
Grammar-fashion they are employed to transform them into so many several
shapes, as Art can devise to turn them into, and yet all this while they gain
the knowledge of the sense but of one word, whereas the Understanding of a
Language, requires the knowledge of the sense of all; and by the way which I
show not only the knowledge of many words, but of many sentences, are learned
with delight, in giving light to the understanding, by the excellency of the
Authors, which have left their Works for the bettering of the knowledge of the
after-ages, by the experience of their times. And at last there is more learned
by the practice of Reading, then there was in the long School-teaching. These
and many other things have made me a little to look after the Natural Course
of Learning, diverse Languages; and so I find that Languages were not first
devised by the Rules of Grammar, but the Rules of Grammar were framed according
to the common practice of Speech, which when in many Words and Phrases the
particulars differ from the general, they make up a huge number of Exceptions.
And that we find after the tongue has enabled boys and girls to pronounce
the words they hear, a few years practice makes their tongues run nimbly away
with any thing they desire to say, and as quickly apprehend what they hear, and
that with less offense to Priscian, and less study, though sometimes by
mischance they break his head, yet less and seldomer then great Clerks do in
other Languages. Because Common Use teaches them a speedier measure by their
practice then line and level could do. Besides, I find a great difference in
the very natural framing of the Languages, for in our English tongue a word
misplaced alters the sense exceedingly, as every one conceives the difference
between a horse-mill and a mill-horse, which is not so in Latin, and the Verb
in Latin is seldom joined with the same word we do in English, and the
Adjective commonly follows the Substantive, whereas we commonly put him before
the same, and say (a good man) they say (a man good;) and in common talk one
word serves instead of a Dictionary to help the understanding of another. By
which reason mine own Father learned of himself by continual Reading, the
Greek, Dutch, French, Italian and Spanish Tongues, only by Reading, without
any other teaching: And it is a thing plainly observed by a multitude of
persons who never learnt the Rules of Grammar, what Errors Foreigners commit,
as well in mistaking their words, as in their undue pronouncing of them, and
will as soon show their Errors, as if they had been directed by Grammar. I have
also conferred with many Gentlemen, who (having learned Grammar by Rule, and
foreign Languages by roat) have likewise acknowledged, how much more they
profited by practice then by precept, and likewise how much worse it sped with
those who followed the Grammar Rules of those foreign Tongues, then with
others who neglected them, and plied the practice of speech. I could wish
therefore that, when Children are first taught the Grammar, instead of that,
they were employed in much Reading and Writing, and turning their Latin Books
into English, and returning the same back again into Latin; whereby they
should in that wasted time of their youth, gain the knowledge of many good
Authors which they could not have time to read, and which by their dullness in
learning the Rules of Grammar, they are so tired with the difficulty thereof,
that they conceive an impossibility ever to attain it, and so quit it, though
they prove men of excellent Understanding when they come to ripeness of age.
And the Romans as ordinarily both men, women, and children as soon learned and
speak Latin, as English, French, Dutch, Welsh, and Irish, and all other
Nations do their Native Tongues. I have likewise found by practice the same
effect, but have been beaten out of it by the arrogant, ignorant, and obstinate
contradiction of too many others; as I was likewise hindered by that I was not
able to follow it my self, as I should have done, neither am I so foolish as to
reject Grammar, but would only have it taught (according to the nobleness
thereof, as one of the seven Liberal Sciences) to persons, who by ripeness of
Understanding are able to comprehend the Reasons thereof, and have known some
apter to learn in their youth the Rules of Logic and Rhetoric, then those of
Grammar (though they greedily desired it) which course if it were taken, I
think would make many of our English Gentry prove Scholars, which by the
ordinaryway could never learn it. And the help prescribed by the Gramar Rules,
how to put the Nominative Case before the Verb, the Accusative after, and to
join the Substantive with the Adjective; and the ordering of every word,
according to our English fashion, may be far more easily directed by placing
figures of Number to express their order, and by this means scarce any who go
to School, shall ever miss the writing of a good and swift hand, and attain
ten times more knowledge by reading so many wise Authors as have left their
writings for the instruction of posterity, by their diligent observation of the
means and fruits which show men to follow good, and avoid ill Actions. And I
hold it likewise very necessary for every Teacher to be as diligent in
observing the exceeding different nature of all their Scholars, according to
the dispositions of their persons and age, rather then according to their
common Rules; for some can learn the same thing better at seven then others at
fourteen; and yet those at the fourteen years end will many times overtake and
out-go the same persons, who so much out-went them before. And by this way
their time cannot be lost, for I take Learning to be ordained to teach
knowledge, that knowledge by practice may enable men by noble Actions to give
glory to God, and to do as much good as they can, during the course of their
whole lives.

Pharisaeos4 Christus1 Pastores5 malos,5 se7 vero6 multis3 argumentis3 bonum8
comprobat2 Pastorem.8 Dissidium2 propterea1 oritur.3 Lapides4 sollentium,3 and5
eum8 prehendere7 cupientium6 manus1 evadit.2

The True and Ready Way to learn the Latin Tongue, Practiced upon the French
Lord of Montaigne, and Recorded in his Essays, Lib. 1. Cap. 25. Page 84.
THe Athenians (as Plato averreth) have for their part great care to be fluent
and eloquent in their speech; The Lacedaemonians endeavor to be short and
compendious; And those of Creet labor more to be plentiful in conceits, then
in language. And these are the best. Zeno was wont to say, That he had two
sorts of disciples; the one he called (...) curious to learn things, and those
wear his darlings, the other he termed (...) who respected nothing more then
the language. Yet can no man say, but that to speak well, is most gracious and
commendable, but not so excellent as some make it: and I am grieved to see how
we employ most part of our time about that only. I would first know mine own
tongue perfectly, then my neighbors with whom I have most commerce. I must
needs acknowledge, that the Greek and Latin tongues, are great ornaments in a
Gentleman, but they are purchased at over-high a rate. Use it who list, I will
tell you how they may be gotten better cheap, and much sooner then is
ordinarily used, which was tried in my self. My late Father, having by all the
means and industry, that is possible for man, sought amongst the wisest, and
men of best understanding, to find a most exquisite and ready way of teaching,
being advised of the inconvenien cies then in use; was given to understand,
that the lingering while, and best part of our youth, that we employ in learning
the tongues, which cost them nothing, is the only cause we can never attain to
that absolute perfection of skill and knowledge of the Greeks and Romans. I do
not believe that to be the only cause. But so it is, the expedient my Father
found out, was this; that being yet at nurce, and before the first loosing of
my tongue, I was delivered to a German (who died since, a most excellent
Physician in France) he being then altogether ignorant of the French tongue,
but exquisitely ready and skillful in the Latin. This man, whom my Father had
sent for of purpose, and to whom he gave very great entertainment, had me
continually in his arms, and was mine only overseer. There were also joined
unto him two of his countrymen, but not so learned; whose charge was to attend,
and now and then to play with me; and all these together did never entertain me
with other then the Latin tongue. As for others of his household, it was
aninviolable rule, that neither himself, nor my mother, nor man, not maid
servant, were suffered to speak one word in my company, except such Latin
words, as every one had learned to chat and pratle with me, It were strange to
tell how every one in the house profited therein. My Father and my Mother
learned so much Latin, that for a need they could understand it, when they
heard it spoken, even so did all the household servants, namely such as were
nearest and most about me. To be short, we were all so Latinized, that the
towns round about us had their share of it; insomuch as even at this day, many
Latin names both of workmen and of their tools, are yet in use among them.
And as for my self, I was about six years old, and could understand no more
French or Perigordine, then Arabike, and that with out art, without books,
rules or grammar, without whipping or whining. I had gotten as pure a Latin
tongue as my Master could speak; the rather because I could neither mingle or
confound the same with other tongues. If for an Essay they would give me a
Theme, whereas the fashion in Colleges is, to give it in French, I had it in
bad Latin, to reduce the same into good. And Nicholas Grucchi, who has
written, De comitiis Romanorum; William Guerenti, who has commented Aristotle:
George Buchanan, that famous Scottish Poet, and Marke-Antonie Muret, whom
(while he lived) both France and Italy to this day, acknowledge to have been
the best Orator: (all which have been my familiar tutors) have often told me,
that in mine infancy I had the Latin tongue so ready and so perfect, that
themselves feared to take me in hand. And Buchanan, whom afterward I saw
attending on the Marshall of Brissacke, told me, he was about to write a
Treatise of the Institution of Children, and that he took the model and
pattern from mine: for at that time he had the charge and bringing up of the
young Earl of Brissack, whom since we have seen prove so worthy and so valiant
a Captain. As for the Greek, wherein I have but small understanding, my Father
purposed to make me learn it by art; But by new and unaccustomed means, that
is, by way of recreation and exercise. We did toss our declinations and
conjugations to and fro, as they do, who by way of a certain game at Tables
learn both Arithmetic and Geometry. For amongst other things he had especially
been persuaded to make me taste and apprehend the fruits of Duty and Science by
an unforced kind of will, and of mine own choice; and without any compulsion
or rigor to bring me up in all mildness and liberty; yea, with such kind of
superstition, that, whereas some are of opinion, that suddenly to awaken young
children, and as it were by violence to startle and fright them out of their
dead sleep in a morning, (wherein they are more heavy and deeper plunged then
we) does greatly trouble and distemper their brains, he would every morning
cause me to be awakened by the sound of some Instrument; and I was never
without a servant who to that purpose attended upon me. This example may serve
to judge of the rest; as also to commend the judgment and tender affection of
so careful and loving a father; who is not to be blamed, though he reaped not
the fruits answerable to his exquisite toil, and painful manuring. Two things
hindered the same; first, the barrenesse and unfit soil: for howbeit I were of
a sound and strong constitution, and of a tractable and yielding condition, yet
was I so heavy, so sluggish, and so dull, that I could not be rouzed (yea were
it to go to play) from out mine idle drowzinesse. What I saw, I saw it
perfectly; and under this heavy, and as it were, Lethe-complexion did I breed
hardy imaginations, and opinions far above my years: My spirit was very slow,
and would go no further then it was led by others; my apprehension blockish, my
invention poor; and besides, I had a mavelous defect in my weak memory: it is
therefore no wonder, if my father could never bring me to any perfection.
Secondly, as those that in some dangerous sickness moved with a kind of
hopeful and greedy desire of perfect health again, give ear to every Leache or
Empirick, and follow all counsels, the good man being exceedingly fearful to
commit any oversight in a matter he took so to heart, suffered himself at last
to be led away by the common opinion, which like unto the Cranes follows ever
those that go before, and yielded to custom: Having those no longer about him
that had given him his first directions, and which they had brought out of
Italy. Being but six years old, I was sent to the College of Guienne then
most flourishing and reputed the best in France, where it is impossible to add
any thing to the great care he had, both to choose the best and most sufficient
Masters that could be found to read unto me, as also for all other
circumstances pertaining to my education, wherein contrary to usual customs
of Colleges, he observed many particular rules. But so it is, it was ever a
College. My Latin Tongue was forthwith corrupted, whereof by reason of
discontinuance, I afterward lost all manner of use: which new kind of
institution stood me in no other stead, but that at my first admittance, it
made me to over-skip some of the lower forms, and to be placed in the highest.
For at thirteen years of age, that I left the College, I had read over the
whole course of Philosophy (as they call it) but with so small profit, that I
can now make no account of it. The first taste or feeling I had of Books was of
the pleasure I took in reading the fables of Ovids Metamorphosies; for being
but seven or eight years old, I would steal and sequester my self from all
other delights, only to read them: For So Much as the tongue wherein they were
written was to me natural; and it was the easiest book I knew, and by reason
of the matter therein contained, most agreeing with my young age. For of King
Arthur, of Lancelot du Luke, of Amadis, of Huon, of Bordeaux, and such idle
time-consuming, and wit-besotting trash of Books, wherein youth does commonly
ammuse it self, I was not so much as acquainted with their names, and to this
day know not their bodies, nor what they contain: So exact was my Discipline,
etc.

FINIS.

