The CASE of Francis Godolphin Esquire Nephew and Heir, and one of the
Administrators of Sir Will. Godolphin Knight. deceased, in Reference to the Bill
depending before the Honorable House of Commons for the better Discovery of
all Lands, and other Revenues given to Superstitious Uses, for Applying the
same to the Use of Greenwich Hospital.
THAT Sir William Godolphin died at Madrid in July 1696. seized of diverse Lands
in England, and possessed of a very considerable Personal Estate in England,
and diverse other Countries, to a very great Value.

The said Sir William Godolphin some few days before his Death, did make a
Nuncupative Will, and thereby did give to his Nephew the said Francis
Godolphin, all his Lands in England, and 7000 l. Sterling, and to the Children
of the said Nephew 4000 l. Sterling, and to his Neice Elizabeth Godolphin, Wife
of Charles Godolphin Esquire 4000 l. and to the said Charles Godolphin, 1000 l. and
to his Uncle Francis Bluet, 200 l. which said Nuncupative Will was reduced into
Writing in the Lifetime of the said Sir William Godolphin; But there being no
Executor appointed, nor any Disposition thereby made of the Residue of his
Personal Estate, Administration of the Goods of the said Sir William Godolphin,
with the said Will annexed, was granted by the Judge of the Prerogative Court of
Canterbury, to the said Francis Godolphin, and Elizabeth Godolphin, they being
his next of Kin.

Soon after the said Administration granted, it was pretended, That the said
Sir William Godolphin did in his Lifetime make or Assent to some Notarial Act,
by which he had Constituted certain Popish Priests his Testamentaries, ( i. e.
his Will-makers' and had given them Authority after his Decease to make his
Will according to such Directions as he had Communicated to them, and that by
such Notarial Act he gave to each of his said Testamentario's a Legacy, and
also diverse Sums of Money for Superstitious Uses, and appointed others therein
Named to Execute the Will that should be made after his Death, for the good of
his Soul, which he therein declared to be his Universal Heir, and he did
thereby Revoke all former Wills, Power to make Wills and Dispositions
whatsoever.

And it was further pretended, That the said Priests and other Testamentaries,
had, pursuant to that Authority, made and published a Will in the Name of the
said Sir William Godolphin after his Decease, whereby diverse Sums of Money were
given and appointed to diverse Popish Superstitious Uses, and some Endeavors
were made to set up and establish that pretended Will and Disposition.

Whereupon the said Francis Godolphin, and the said Charles Godolphin, did
apply themselves to the High Court of Parliament, and obtained an Act to pass
in the Tenth Year of His Majesty's Reign, whereby the said Administration
granted to the said Francis Godolphin and Elizabeth Godolphin, is confirmed and
established, and the said Power to make a Will is declared Null and Void; and
the declaring his Soul to be his Universal Heir, and all the Gifts and
Appointments made by the said Testamentario's, are also declared to be Void and
of no Effect.

By which Act of Parliament the said Francis Godolphin and Elizabeth Godolphin,
as Administrators of the Goods and Chattels of the said Sir William Godolphin,
and as his next of Kin, became entitled to all the rest and residue of the
said Sir William Godolphin's Personal Estate, not particularly disposed of by
the said Nuncupative Will, Except as in the said. Act of Parliament is Excepted
and Reserved.

The said Francis Godolphin is Heir at Law to the said Sir William Godolphin,
and as his Heir, is in possession of his Real Estate.

The Bill which is now brought into the Honorable House of Commons for the
better Discovery of all Lands, and other Revenues given to Superstitious Uses
for applying the same to the use of Greenwich Hospital, may Involve the said
Administrators in great Troubles in Relation to the said Personal Estate, and
also the said Francis Godolphin in relation to the Real Estate in case it
should pass, upon pretense that the said Sir William Godolphin did give or
appoint his said real or personal Estate, or any part of it to Popish
Superstitious Uses; And the said Bill being subsequent to the Act passed in the
Tenth Year of His Majesty's Reign in favor of the said Francis Godolphin and
Elizabeth Godolphin the Administrators, and being contrary herein to the said
former Act, may be looked upon as a Repeal of the said former Act, and defeat
that Establishment and Quiet in relation to the said Sir William Godolphin's
Estate, which was intended for the said Francis Godolphin and Elizabeth
Godolphin by the said former Act.

Wherefore it is humbly hoped by the said Francis Godolphin, That the
Honorable House will permit a Clause to be brought in and added to the said
Bill to save the Right of the said Francis Godolphin to the Estate of the said
William Godolphin, and that the said Bill may not in any sort defeat or alter
the said former Act, or any thing therein contained.

The CASE of Francis Godolphin Esquire Relating to the Bill for the better
Discovery of Lands, and other Revenues given to Superstitious Uses, for
applying the same to the Use of Greenwich Hospital, etc.


