GODS LOVE TO LONDON: OR, Londons Comforter.
Beloved City, though mine Arrows fly
So thick about thee, thousands weekly die,
And Death walks daily in thy open streets,
Would be destroying every one he meets,
And with his Club does march thy-streets around,
And all he can he fells unto the ground;
Yet still to seek my face thy mind is bent,
To trust in me thou wholly art intent;
Thy Lamentation clearly lets me see
Thou do return with loyal heart to me.
Proceed, O London! but a little while,
Upon my word, thou shall perceive my smile.
That domineering Giant I will fell,
And with one stroke I Will strike him down to Hell.
Then fear nor, London! I Am thy Rock and Aid,
I will not fail thee, be not thou afraid:
My love to thee is more then thou do know;
A little while, and thou shall find it so.
I see how earnestly thou do repent,
And how thy love most cordially is bent
To seek my glory: Now it does appear.
Cheer up thy heart, thou art to me most dear.
Then droop not in despair, be not dismayed;
I am thy Savior, be not thou afraid.
Thy Lamentation and thy good desire,
Has set my Love and Mercy all on fire.
As I am God, I never will thee fail,
But will consume thy foes, as with a Flail,
And make them flee as chaff before the wind;
For in thy sorrows they were most unkind.
Yet I Will not fail, I will not thee for sake;
Thou of rich showrs of Mercies shall partake,
And seel my love, my favor, and my smile,
Though at this time I srown on thee a while,
I do observe thy sorrow and thy tears,
How thy sad looks a mournful Livery wears;
I see thy countenance, and how you are bent
To stick unto me with a full intent.
I a truth I love thee; then esteem it so:
I will thee ease before I from thee go:
I will not fail thee, as I am thy God,
Nor will I long chastise thee with my Rod;
For thou, and all the world, shall ever see,
I will not fail them that do trust in me.
Therefore take comfort in thy greatest trouble;
For, for thy sorrows I thy joys will double.
I Am glad to see thy love, and thy good will,
And how that thou and thine my House does fill,
And do frequent it every Day of mine,
Both thou, and all the family that is thine;
And with subjection do thy self submit
Unto my will, and rev'rently do fit
To hear my sacred Word, and there do stay
To have a Blessing e're thou go'ft away.
I do take notice how dead Corps's fly
About thy streets, and how many do die
In every day; I see how they abound,
And take account how many go to the ground:
I daily see how Father, and the Mother,
The Son, the Daughter, Sister, and the Brother,
Do wring their hands, their hearts are so perplexed
For their dead Friends, and fear they may be next:
Thy Tears into my Bottle I do put;
I hear thy Cries, my ears shall not be shut.
As many days as thou have punishment,
So many years thou shall have hearts-content.
And if thou will submit thy self to me,
Such joy and comfort thou e're long shall see,
As will thee ravish, make thee leap for joy:
For thy grand Enemy I will destroy;
Nay, thou thy self shall fell him at thy foot,
And I Will stand by, and help thee for to do it.
Three smooth white Stones go fetch, and to me bring
Without delay, put them into a Sling;
Be not afraid, for I Will stand by thy side,
And when thou throwest, I the Stone will guide:
Faith, Prayer and Repentance, these three will
Fly with such force, thy Enemy they will kill:
These Stones will kill him sooner then a Dart,
If they be thrown out of an humble Heart;
That great Goliath at thy feet shall fall,
Though he be never so strong, or never so tall:
Thou shall his Neck break, and cut off his Head,
And trample on him when he lies dead.
LONDONS humble Reply.
What Love unspeakable, what store of Pity
Thou pourest forth on me, a sinful City!
For what am I, that thou should me regard?
My Prayers are not worthy to be heard.
My heart is ravished with those words of grace
Thou now have uttered; and thy smiling face
Has so revived me, that in thee I joy:
For thou have taught me how I shall destroy
My envious Foe, and promisest me aid,
Bids me take comfort, and not be afraid.
Is there a City this day under Sun,
That has a God so good? nay, if one run
And search the Worlds vast bulk, he never shall see
That God did more for any then for me.
I glory in my God; though now in trouble
My grief is great, my inward joys are double:
Although at present he does let me blood,
It is for my Souls health, and for my good.
It Is better I a while endure this sore,
Then with sharp punishment in Hell to roar.
I do commit my self, good Lord, to thee,
And daily hope I shall thy goodness see.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed in the Year 1665.


