A SUPPLEMENT TO THE Negro's and Indian's ADVOCATE: OR, Some further
CONSIDERATIONS and PROPOSALS for the effectual and speedy carrying on of the
Negro's Christianity in our Plantations (Notwithstanding the late pretended
IMPOSSIBILITIES) without any prejudice to their Owners.

By M. G. A Presbyter of the Church of ENGLAND.

St. Luke 18. 4.He would not for a while, but, etc. St. Mat. 21. 24.Afterward
he repented, and went. Who made you Ministers of the Gospel to the White People
only, and not to the Tawneys and Blacks also? Quakers Speech to the Ministers
of Barbados, p. 4. of Negro's Advocate. LONDON Printed by J. D. 1681.

But above all that accursed Tyranny used toward the Souls of those miserable
Wretches, can never sufficiently be bewailed, who are daily assaulted by those
professed Enemies of Christ, to turn Apostates to the Christian Faith, and to
deny that only Name given under Heaven, by which they can be saved: Whereby
they lie under a continual Temptation to abandon their Religion, that they may
obtain their Liberty. Breef for the Captives in Algiers. The Office for the
Baptism of such as are of riper Years, may be always useful for the Baptizing
of Natives in our Plantations, and others converted to the Faith. Pref. to Com.
Pr. Do in God's Name earnestly require that due and true Execution hereof be
had, -- As they will answer before God for such Evils and Plagues, wherewith
Almighty God may justly punish his People for neglecting this, etc. Act of
Vnif. 1. Eliz. Act. 26. 16. I have appeared unto thee for this purpose, to
ordain thee a Minister, and a Witness, both of these things, which thou have
seen, and of those things, in the which I will appear unto thee.

17. Delivering thee from the People, and from the Gentiles, unto whom now I
send thee.

18. To open their Eyes, and to turn them from Darkness to Light, and from the
power of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of Sins, and
Inheritance among them which are sanctified by Faith which is in the.

The PREFACE.
THe Agents and Factors for the Plantations, being lately required to give in
their Reasons, for their refusing to make their Negro's Christians, (as if any
Reasons against Christianity could be admitted!) they, it it seems, proved so
masculine and strong, that the Design was instantly given up for impossible. Of
these Reasons such as they are, Being no other then wha^ I had before taken
notice of Page 101, 102, 104, 109, 139. etc of the Negro's Advocate.
I have here given a Specimen; and in Answer thereto, (that the World may judge
of their Impossibility, and withal, see how easily our People are to be
satisfied in a business (even) of this Weight and Moment;) have opposed against
them only these three Proposals, as sufficient to complete the whole Work if
duly followed: First, That our Planters Interest in their Negro's and other
Slaves, be secured. Secondly, That the Ministers there, be both obliged and
encouraged (the only thing wanting) to preach to their People, touching this
Duty. Thirdly, That their Negro's Sunday-Labour and Polygamie be prohibited. By
the First of these, Their common pretense of Interest will be removed; and all
Color for complaining upon that account, would be washed off. Now why this
should be opposed or denied, I see not. For what Inconvenience or Prejudice can
ensue to the Owner (or to us) by having his Right secured? And his dearest
Mammon being safe, his Thoughts will be more at ease, and he may then be at
leisure to attend upon the Duties of Religion, and to serve Christ. Or how, in
the Second place, can the Ministers preaching hurt him, since at the end of the
Sermon he will be left to his former Liberty; nothing of Force or of Compulsion
being in the least required, or intended? Only twill be pressed upon his
Conscience, and the necessity of it will be laid before him; but whether he
will hear, or whether he will forbear, will remain as much at his own choice,
as it did before. Tho it may not be doubted, but that whilst some of the
looser sort shall, with the Athenian Atheists and Epicures Act. 17. only mock,
and make sport, (or, which is worse, Obstruct our Endeavors; others, like the
devout Areopagite, will be affected with the heavenly Doctrine, and persuaded
to cleave unto it, and to obey the Truth; And then our Labor will not be
wholly lost. But rather from these small beginnings, a great Door and effectual
will be opened unto us, notwithstanding the many Adversaries: And this little
Leaven may in time grow sufficient to season, not only the lesser Islands, but
also the vaster Continent of our America. It being Impossible that Christianity
should be without Followers, if allowed but Scope and Liberty, and a free
Course, tho other Means and Encouragements should be wanting. And for the
Third, The profit from thence arising, is so sordid and inconsiderable* and
withal so utterly inconsistent with ^hristianity (especialy Who have so high a
Veneration for the Sunday, even beyond all other Christians.
ours) that, no considerate or discreet Person who owns this, can do less than
abhor (pardon the Expression, I hope, it will not be offensive in this Case)
and be ashamed of that. Thus these insuperable Difficulties are, we see, in a
Moment put to flight, and a most smooth and easy Path is chalked out to this
Work, notwithstanding the Impossibilities. So that nothing besides a Supine
Sloth on the one hand, or direct Irreligion on the other, can cause any
further Stop to our Negro's Christianity; and we shall be for ever left without
Excuse, should it be any longer neglected, or opposed. And God may justly take
it out of our hands, and transfer it to others, who will do it. And then those
Myriads of People, who, if by us initiated into Christianity, might (so far)
have been a Strength and Defense to our Religion (in this time of its
distress,) being first Instructed in a way so opposite thereto, will afford the
same Advantage against it. So that to neglect or hinder this Work is a manifest
betraying of the Protestant Interest, and no less an advancing of Popery: which
they that do, can be no other than open Enemies to the King and Kingdom. Nor in
the last place, can the Ministers be displeased hereat, but rather be invited
to give God thanks for the opportunity. For, if this be not needful, neither is
their other Preaching; and all the World may as well be saved without
Christianity, as those Negro's. But if without becoming See Acts 4. ver. 12. As
also the late Alg. Breef, That only Name, etc.
Christians, they cannot be saved, then are we by this unfaithful Silence, as
much as in us lies, the cause of their Damnation. And here let no one think
strange of my earnestness herein, which I conceive to be my Duty both as a
Clergyman and a Christian: being also loath to be baffled (by such Paultry
Objections) in so good and righteous a Cause; To promote which, as it was the
sole End of my returning home from those parts, so I am fully purposed (by
God's assistance) not to desist from the pursuit (non si capiundos mihi sciam
esse inimicos omnes [Colonos]), notwithstanding any the greatest
discouragements whatsoever, until arrived within a prospect of its
accomplishment.

Salus hominis opus dignum Deo. Tert. A SUPPLEMENT to the Negro's and Indian's,
ADVOCATE, OR, Some further PROPOSALS, etc.
BEfore we enter upon this Debate, I.
to prevent all troublesome Clamors and Objections against it, upon the score
of Interest, this Position should first be laid down, and as a Principle fixed
and Eternal, and from which a true Christian ^a not recede, be resolved on,
(viz.) That no Interest how great or (otherwise) just soever, may be admitted
to stand in Competition with Christianity. The Question (else) being the same,
as between Christ and Barabbas* that is, whether of the two, Religion and the
Glory of God, with the good of Souls; or worldly Pelf and filthy Lucre shall be
preferred. Were this done they would quickly find out expedients to save their
Interest.
And then this Position being first laid down, afterward to fall to
considering of the best Expedients for the carrying of it on, with the least
prejudice to that Interest; if any such would happen to interpose. And this
would be to act like Christians; and might (besides) in the end prove as little
hurtful to any just Interest, as that other Method so much in fashion, of
consulting Interest first, and then leaving Christianity to be contented with
such favors and kindnesses, as the Devil and Mammon shall at last please to
afford her.

And here also in this Consideration, we are especially to avoid Splitting upon
this Solecism, [This Part of the verse] is not found in the present
Translation, but in some other it is, particularly that of Geneva.
both in Policy and Discretion, and against which, Ecclus has so wisely
cautioned us, chapter 37. v. 11. [Not to ask Counsel for Religion of one that has
no Religion, nor of Justice of him that has no Justice] nor of a Coward about
Matters of War, nor of a Merchant concerning Exchange, nor of a Buyer
concerning selling etc. for such will counsel for themselves, ver. 8. So
likewise for a Christian not to be guided or led by Self-ended Men, Enemies to
his Profession, in these Debates and Proposals made for the Advancement of it.
Such being only like to raise Obstructions, as hitherto* they have always done;
and (as lately) to render that for impossible, which has not the least
difficulty in it, where a right Method is used for effecting it.

No more are we to proceed herein, by the sole Advice of Persons unacquainted
with the true State and Condition of the places where this Settlement or
Conversion is to be wrought. Such, tho never so discreet and wise as to other
matters here at home, being as it were wholly blind and in the dark, as to
Affairs there* And therefore are almost equally unlikely, even with the former,
(unless by accident) to give proper and fit Directions for the happy promoting
and carrying on of any good Design, whether in Church or State, for the benefit
of those Parts.

These things being agreed on, II.
we must then fall to consider of the People amongst whom we are to take our
lot, and thereto to have an especial regard: As, whether they be Slaves,
subject to the English, such as most of the Negro's there are; or free People
living of themselves, either amongst, or distant from* the English; such as
most of the Indians on the Continent (in Virginia, etc.) are. Or lastly*
whether this is to be performed by way of further Settling and Establishment,
even amongst the English themselves, which also is no less necessary. In all
which Cases, we are to act only by prudential Rules, and to proceed therein by
different Methods and Ways: That, it is possible, being less fit or convenient
for the one, which is only proper and necessary for the other; and so also on
the contrary* Nor in any of these is any thing of Force, or of Compulsion to be
used* but all must be carried on quietly and by degrees, as God shall please to
favor our Endeavors with suitable and prosperous Opportunities.

Now concerning the Negro's, III.
whom I should think fit to be first taken in hand (as being the easiest Task,
would their How much fuller of Generosity and Zeal for their Religion, the
Algier Pirates and (see the Brees) than these* nominal Christians? For those do
invite their Slaves and Captives with the assurance of Liberty* to embrace
their Superstition: whilst these to avoid that danger, do industriously
conceal their Religion from them.
Owners be persuaded to consent thereto; and the most absolutely necessary,
this neglect being the most scandalous, and withal, the most impossible to be
defended or excused:) The first and great step will be to procure (what I but
just mentioned) their Owners conf^^t, as being to be supposed averse* thereto:
not altogether, as is here believed, out of Interest (it being already secured
to them by Laws of their own;) but by reason of the trouble, and the fancied
needlessness of the Work; and to prevent all danger from their Slaves being
furnished with knowledge, consequent, they conceive, thereto. However, because
they pretend the other (and something there may be in that too,) to take off
that pretense, it will be requisite,

1. That a Such a Law could not, as has been feared, be any Precedent for
Slavery, where it has before been always practiced; and they having already
made Laws among themselves for the same purpose. * Till such a Law may be
obtained, the Bermudian Caution of Indentures for ninty-nine Years Service
might be used, that is, if they think their own Laws not sufficient.
Law be enacted to confirm such Laws of theirs, as are or shall be hereafter
made to secure their just Interest in their Slaves; That they may thereby be
continued in their present State of Servitude, notwithstanding their being
afterward baptized.

2. That all unjust Interests, and ungodly Advantages arising from their Slaves
Sunday-labour and Polygamie (neither of them sufferable among Christians) be
upon severest Penalties prohibited; and this as well to the unbaptised, as to
the rest. Nor will this (but much less the other) be grievous to the Slave, as
is pretended; There being some of them that live single; Others that content
themselves only with one Wife; And the rest taking the Liberty of more, only
out of a Licentious and rambling humor, and by their Master's Connivance and
Toleration; Who esteeming them but as Cattle, and desirous of their Increase,
are apter to encourage, than to restrain them from it. But having such an
absolute Authority and Command over them, might with a bare check, or but a
frown, break them of it. And this may be inferred from the Virginia Negro's;
who, tho imported from the same places, are not (so far as I could learn)
addicted to Polygamie; but rather of themselves choosing to follow the Custom
of the English, to whom they are Slaves there.

These pretenses being thus fairly removed, IV.
if any Aversion still remains, (as it is to be feared there will, and that for
the truest Reasons (viz.) Of the trouble, and of the supposed needlesness of
this Work, etc.
above mentioned,) they must afterward be invited thereto by good Sermons and
Books, Preached and Writ upon this Subject, and by discoursing with them in
private. As also by the Example of the Ministers themselves in their Families.
And lasty, (and which will do more then all the rest) by Encouragments from the
Government. Likewise, it might be remembered, what I have heard affirmed, that
there is a certain Clause, always inserted in their Charters and Patents, for
Whether this be so or not, I am sure, it is the chief reason Assigned by most of
our Writers and Historians for God's goodness to us in these Discoveries.
the Propagation of Christianity there; never hitherto (except by the
New England Men) in the least complied with; but rather with their utmost care
and vigilancie obstructed by them.

Another way, V.
and which it is possible might prove most effectual, would be to get this
impiety decryed here in England, where our Planters have an extraordinary
Ambition to be thought well of, and thereby to shame them into better
Principles. Now this is to be done; First, by sending some grave and discreet
Men, (Persons of Esteem and Repute with the more eminent Merchants here, who
trade into those parts,) to persuade and convince them of the Duty and
Necessity thereof, This they would do of their own accord, were but that
necessity of Christianity 1. once resolved on.
and to invite them to endeavor the procuring of such a Law, as I have before
mentioned. Also by Sermons at Court, and in the City, especially this ensuing
Lent; this being as much (perchance a great deal more) needing to be repented
of, because as likely to provoke God's Wrath, as other sins. And lastly by the
Ministers frequent inveighing against this impiety, in other of the chief
Cities and Seaport Towns, to which the Traders from those places do most
resort. But above all a General Fast to implore the divine Benediction upon
this Work, would give the World such notice, and so inflame the public Zeal at
the news of this strange Irreligion, that nothing can be supposed more
conducive to the destroying of it. For hereby each good Christians Mouth must
upon every occasion be opened against them, and so in a short time would force
them to yield. And when in the Plantations it should come to be understood that
their impiety was so decryed and odious here, it would go near to fall even of
it self. Besides the Quakers (who with the New England and Men,
are the only Witnesses of this Truth in those Parts; and whose Meetings the
Negro's are therefore strictly prohibited) might be something instrumental
hereto, and would be good enough to help to dispute them out of their brutish
Gentilism.

Now for the Ministers in the Plantations, VI.
it will be requisite that they be obliged each first Sunday (at least) of
every Month, to preach to their Charges upon this Subject, and earnestly to
press it upon their Consciences, But more especially to be exemplary therein in
their own Families; both Catechizing and Baptising their Slaves, (where they
have any) as soon as they shall be found fit, and that openly in the Church,
for the Ex^mple of others.

And that no Awe nor Fear may remain upon their Spirits, it will be requisite
that a sufficient Maintenance be settled upon them for life, without
dependence upon the Arbitrary favor of Vestries. The several Governors also
should be obliged to protect them therein against abuses. But to put the
sharper edge upon their Zeal, some certainty of Preferment should be proposed
to them upon their return for England, after some 5 or 7 Years continuance in
this service there. The want whereof (at least in the Performance) both will,
and has been, the great occasion of this sad neglect hitherto, and the very
bane of all Religion in those parts. It being apt to be looked upon as want of
Discretion, for Men to draw upon themselves nothing but ill usage there, to be
certainly entertained with worse here; and as one says, to adventure the
getting of broken Heads in the Churches service, afterward at their return to
be rewarded with that which shall break their Hearts too. Besides, there should
some regard be had of their Degrees in the Universities; as also for enlarging
the Term for Lapse of livings, (or provision for Admission by Proxy;) The
Term at present prescribed and limited by Law, being much too short and narrow
to make a Patron's kindness useful to a Minister abroad upon this Service. And
it being but an an ill Encouragoment, and no way becoming Christian Government
for Men (running such Hazards, upon so important a Work), thereby to be placed
under greater disadvantages, than they could, had they remained idle at home.

Now for the Planter's late Objections against this Work, VII.
as I have heard them represented (and I believe they are the best they had),
tho I have before taken notice of them (which their being both asserted and
credited here, does very much Justify) yet I shall again repeat and briefly
answer them, Even to the Brutality of their Negr^s.
such as they are, being indeed either false, or frivolous, or both: and such
as will suffice to satisfy us, that they who can openly affirm and maintain
such things here, may not be unapt to believe and practice worse there. But
they are these;

1. They object their Negro's want of English; Whereas it is certain that there
are some thousands of them, who understand English, no worse than our own
People. Let them begin with those.

2. That it would make them less governable; As (...). Chapter W. late Governor of
M^^s, and St. Christophers, and who has been amongst them, will (...).
the contrary to which is experimentally known amongst their Neighbors, both
French and Spaniards in those parts. Now 'twould be too great a blemish to the
Reformation, to suppose that Popery only makes its Converts better, but
Protestancy worse; as this Allegation being admitted, it must be granted. And
to prevent any fond conceit in them of Liberty, (an especial Branch of the
same Article,) if there be any such danger, let two or three of each great
Family be first baptized; whereby the rest seeing them continued as they were,
that Opinion would soon vanish: As may be concluded from the like Experiment
upon another like foolish persuasion, (viz.) of their returning into their own
Country upon their Death; confuted by fixing Negro's Head upon a Pole. Besides,
there cannot be the least ground for this fear, unless all, whether fit or not,
should at once be baptized, which were a madness to suppose. Nor is it to be
imagined that they should only be baptized, the bare outward Rite being little
available, without understanding it; Which would take them off from harboring
such idle Hopes and vain Imaginations, if before embraced by them.

3. As for their pretended Aversion to Christianity, the contrary thereto is
known of most of them. And tho it is to be confessed that some are more
careless and indifferent (having bin taught by the English to be needless for
them) yet for the general they are observed to be rather ambitious of it. Nor,
I dare affirm, can any single Instance of such aversion in any one of them, be
produced.

4. As to their (alike pretended) Stupidity, there is as little truth therein:
diverse of them being known and confessed by their Owners, to be extraordinary
Ingenious, and even to exceed many of the English. And for the rest, they are
much the same with other People, destitute of the means of knowledge, and
wanting Education.

5. One thing more there remains to be added, of which, tho they may be most
afraid, yet they carefully keep it to themselves, and that is the possibility
of their Slaves Expectation, not of Freedom, See Negro' s Advocate, p. 40. 41,
11. etc.
but of more merciful Usage from them. (which is but reason they should have,
whether made Christians or not;) As, That their frequent Emasculatings,
Amputations of Legs, cropping off of Ears (and of Heads too), scant Allowance*
for Food and Clothes, and (often) no less working, than starving them to Death,
and their unmerciful Correction of them; will not be so commendably practiced
upon them, when (nor now by) Christians, as they are thought safe and allowable
in their present State of Brutality and Gentilism. And this is the true meaning
of their second Objection, wherein they pretend it will make them less
Governable.

And thus I suppose it is evident enough, VIII.
how thin and slender their Fig-leafe Reasons and Objections against our
Negro's Christianity, are: Yet have been thought sufficient hitherto, (and, may
they be suffered, are still like) to be made the pious Pretenses for the
hindering thereof; And at the same time, for allowing a free Course to
Gentilism, and that under a Christian Government; Which had it not at first
been permitted to these, perhaps that other had never happened.
together with the permission of innumerable other the grossest Impieties.
Which rather than they should be any longer continued, and God be thereby
dishonored, it were preferrable that the places themselves were all under
water. But however, in the mean time, a more accursed Tyranny over the Souls of
those miserable Wretches, (I speak only the Language of the late Breef) has
thereby been exercised, then that never sufficiently to be bewailed, (to the
Honor of Church and Nation be it spoken,) practiced upon their Captives, by
the less inhumane Who do endeavor to save their Souls, (would their way do it)
while they detain in bondage their bodies.
Algerines.

IX. Yet now after this, if difficulties shall still be urged, (as no doubt but
there will) and this Work upon that stale pretense must be further neglected
and deferred; I shall in opposition thereto, be bold to make some few demands:
As, what those difficulties should be, which are so much greater, it seems,
than those our Ancestors encountered with, even in Pagan Regions, and happily
overcame? Whether we ever tried how difficult the Work was, thereby to satisfy
our selves, whether (indeed) it be such as it is apprehended (or, at least,
pretended?) And whether such a trial would not justify us more, than thus,
without trying, to conclude it Impossible? But if it be impossible, why do we
pray for it, since all such Prayers must be vain and superfluous and therefore
unlawful; and why then are they not razed out of our Liturgy? But is it
impossible for us to endeavor the securing of our Peopl's Interest, Or for the
Ministers there, to preach to them, and to press the necessity of this Duty to
their People; Which they have before Vowed to do, sealing the same with the
blessed Sacrament, at their Ordinations; Or to begin at home, with those of
their own Families? Or suppose they should be still backward, are there no ways
to stir them up, and to provoke their Industry, as well to this, as to other
(less necessary) Works; Or cannot they be minded thereof by Letters and
Precepts (Valiant quantum valere possunt) armed with suitable Motives and
Arguments to excite their Zeal, never omitted in any case else, where the
design has been thought worth the pains and trouble of attempting? And why
should the promoting of Christianity (under a Christian Government, and even in
Christian Families,) be now so much harder, than heretofore it was amongst
Heathens and Persecutors? or for Protestants, than for Papists? and for Us,
than for the New England Men? Or, that having formerly been able to reduce the
wildest Outlaws, it should prevail nothing upon better People, pretendedly (at
least) its Friends, and (outwardly) Professors of it; And who (especially after
sufficient means used for their Conviction, and the Necessity thereof made out
to them) must have far less pretense of Reason for opposing it, than the old
Gentiles had?

Now if these things be Impossible, or Difficult, I must then confess, that we
still may, with as little Conscience and Christianity as we have done hitherto,
let this Work sleep and rest till another Age, when the Times shall prove more
auspicious, and the Powers more favorable, and those obstructing Difficulties
and Impossibilities shall be all removed; That is, till the Evil be grown
master ess, and the Curse of God, now in the pursuit, has overtaken us, and
fully revenged the Cause of his Name, and of the numberless Souls* who already
have, and are hereby still in danger to perish through this most unchristian
and scandalous Neglect; and which till it ceases, and this See the Coll. for
the late Fast, December. 22. 1680. and the Aig: Brief.
accursed thing be removed from among us, and (to use the Philistine Sages
expression, 1 Samuel 6. 5.) We do give Glory to the God of Israel, In vain shall
we expect, that he will lighten His hand from off us, and from off our Gods;
(our Princes and Rulers,) and from off our Land.

In short, there is nothing upon Earth more fecible than this Design, were it
but heartily undertaken, and, as I have said, a right Method used for the
effecting of it. But if we shall suffer our selves to be baffled and frightened
out of our Understandings and Reason by bold Affirmers, As if St. Paul should
have asked Elymas the Sorcerer leave (Act 13.) to preach to the Deputy.
Enemies to Piety and to all Religion, and who make Mammon their God; and
shall quietly and contentedly sit down satisfied with their idle and false
pretenses, Victi uno verbo, quam cito?
without the inquiring into the Merit and Truth of them; As it is a most
infallible Sign of our little Affection thereto* So it is as sad an Omen of the
less hopes, or even possibility, of its being ever effected, but by other
hands; which it will not be Honorable, Happy nor Safe for us to expect; or see.

And so much shall suffice for this first-part, touching the promoting of
Christianity amongst our Negro-Slaves in the Plantations: Concerning the free
Tributary Indians and the English (each of them a Task of the like difficulty
with the former, I shall hereafter speak* as what I have now said shall find
Approbation.

Phil. 1. 28. In nothing terrified by your Adversaries, which is to them an
evident taken of Perdition, but to you of Salvation.

Magna est-veritas [Christiana]* and praevalebit.

FINIS.

