THE TRUE PRESERVER and RESTORER OF HEALTH: BEING A CHOICE COLLECTION OF Select
and Experienced REMEDIES for all Distempers incident to Men, Women and
Children. Selected from, and Experienced by the most Famous Physicians and
Chyrurgeons of Europe.

TOGETHER WITH Excellent DIRECTIONS for COOKERY; AS ALSO FOR PRESERVING, and
CONSERVING, and making all Sorts of METHEGLIN, SIDER, CHERRY-WINE, etc.

WITH THE Description of an Ingenious and Useful ENGINE for Dressing of Meat and
for Distilling the Choicest Cordial Waters, without Wood; Coals, Candle of Oil.

Published for the Public Good, by G. Hartman, Chemist.

London, Printed by T. B, for the Author and are to be sold at his House in
Hewes-Court in Blackfriars. 1682.

TO THE Truly Noble and Generous LADY THE LADY ANNA, Countess of Sunderland,
etc.
MADAM,
IT IS the Fate of Books that treat of Subjects too subtle and delicate for
Vulgar Eyes (and such are all Treatises of the Mysterious Science of PHYSIC)
though never so useful and necessary, to meet with a general Neglect and
Discountenance in the World, unless recommended under the Patronage of some
Illustrious Name. There is a peculiar Charm in the Virtues of Great Personages,
to Authorize whatever they Protect, and to command a Respect for all that is
honored with their Umbrage, from the most sullen and obstinate. That they are
pleased to honor any thing with their Regard, convinces common Judgments more
of its worth, and endears it more to them than a thousand Arguments: for there
indeed they find the Force of Reason embodied, which otherwise is as invisible
to them as Angels. Such, Madam, was my Case, and such a generous Protection I
stood in need of, when it pleased Providence to relieve me in this Perplexity,
by bringing into my thoughts the Consideration of all your shining Virtues and
Excellencies, whose Luster was so bright, that it could not but reach me,
though wrapped up in never so much privacy and obscurity. I considered that your
profound and unfathomed Knowledge could defend this poor Piece from the
Ignorant; that your admirable Sweetness, Generosity and Majestic Heroickness
could patronage it from the Envious and Impertinent; and to Crown all, that you
had Goodness enough to receive it into your Patronage: I was also encouraged to
this Presumption, from the Splendour you derive from the Noble Ancient Family
you sprung off: And hence I take the Boldness to acquaint your Ladyship, that
these have some Relation to your Ladyship, they being the Collections for the
most part (which I had hitherto reserved) of your incomparable Kinsman, and my
truly Honorable Master, Sir Ken^lm Digby; whom I had the Honor to serve for
many years beyond the Seas, as well as in England; and so continued with him
till his dying Day, and of whose Generosity and Bounty I have sufficiently
tasted, and no less of your Illustrious Father's, both before and after my
Glorious Master's Decease; so that this Trouble I give your Ladyship (who is
the true and undoubted Inheritrix of all your Noble Fathers Virtues results
from the Innate Candor and Goodness of your Illustrious Stem.

What I have here Collected, having implored your Ladyships Pardon for my
Boldness, I most humbly Lay at your Ladyships Feet; and remain,

MADAM, Your Ladyships most Humble Servant, GEORGE HARTMAN.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
THis is the second Time I adventured to come forth into the world in Print. My
first Treatise was a Collection of rare Secrets in Chemistry, left me by that
worthy Man Sir Kenelm Digby, my Honorable Master, which I reserved by me till
of late I Published them for the sake of all ingenious Admirers of the Noble
Science of Chemistry; wherein the Reader may find Excellent Chemical Medicines,
to which I refer him. And now for the more public Benefit of the Community, I
have handed this also into the Press, being a very choice Collection of
Excellent Receipts and Medicines for all sorts of Distempers that are incident
to the Body of Man; made or approved of by Sir Kenelm himself, or communicated
to me by Eminent Physicians or Chyrurgeons in my Travels through Italy, France
and Germany, and were reserved till now by me for my private Use, till out of
Conscience of my Duty to the Public, I have sent them abroad into the world;
whereby any private Person, or Mistress of a Family may prepare their own
Physic for themselves or Family, according to my Directions in this Book,
without the expense or hazard of costly, and oftentimes adulterate Apothecaries
Preparations. Hereby also well disposed worthy Ladies and Gentlewomen, that
take delight in the Charitable Office of being their poor Neighbors
Physicians, and administer ^hysick to their Body, as well as Food to their
Stomach, may be furnished with Excellent Medicines against all Distempers, and
the manner how to prepare them in their Houses, in order to the facilitating to
them so good a Work.

There are likewise very safe and useful Instructions for Midwives and
Childbearing Women.

Besides, here are Excellent Directions for Cookery, for Preserving and
Conserving, and of making Sweetmeats, etc. with the best way how to make
Metheglin, Sider, and all Wines, etc. As likewise the Use and Manner of making
that Ingenious Engine for dressing of Meat without Wood or Coals which is very
useful for Sea-Captains, etc. In short, I may with Confidence say, that
considering both the generality of the Medicines provided against all Maladies,
and the Usefulness of them, the World has not yet seen such another Piece.

Reader, I have no more to acquaint thee, but to beg thy kind Acceptance of
these my Endeavors to serve the Public in my Sphere; and recommending thee to
the Physician of Soul and Body, I remain,

Thine to my Power, G. Hartman.

The INDEX.
A.
A Gues and Fevers 60, 68 To make Cock-Ale. 175 Apoplexy, to cure 247 Abortion,
to prevent it. 301, 306
B.
Bruises and Swellings. 218 Balsoms and Oyntmens; The true Description of
Lucatellus Balsom 241, 255 Hard and sore Breasts of Women lying in 321 Back to
strengthen. 325
C.
Against Consumption, Page 1, till 32 Consumption of the Liver 17 Cold or
Cough, to cure 20 Colic of all kinds 561 Canker in the Mouth 118, 119 Cordial
Waters, 128, till 160 Corns on the feet, to cure 240 Cordials after Physic, to
comfort and settle the Stomach, and cause Rest and Sleep 159 A Cordial Elixir
of Dr. Mynsight 158 Conception to procure 292, 295 Signs and Rules of
Conception 297 Childrens Distempers to cure ^27, 333 Cosmeticks for the Face
and Skin 337, 347 Cerecloths 259 Sir Walter Rawleigh's great Cordial 166.
D.
Dropsy, to cure 37, till 45 Deafness to cure 94 Diet-Drinks for several
Distempers 184, 197.
E.
Eyes sore to Cure 82, 93.
F.
Falling Sickness to cure 78, 80 Flux and Looseness 229 Frenzy or Madness to
cure 100.
G.
Gout and Sciatica 209, 217 Glisters for several Distempers 279
H.
Sharp Humors to dry up with ones own Water. 2 Scald Head to cure 103 For a
Cold or stuffing in the Head, to draw Rheum from it 105 For Dizziness and
Swimming in the Head, a Cordial Water 154.
I.
Juleps to comfort and cool 161, 162 Jaundies black and yellow to cure 233, 236
Itch to cure 253 For the Itch a Purge. 273.
K.
Kings Evil to cure 188, 189 Kibes and Chilblains to cure 263.
L.
A Drink to cool and temper a hot Liver 191.
M.
Megrim and Headache 99, 106 Melancholy to help 107, till 117 Diseases in the
Mouth to cure 118 Miscarriage to prevent 301, 306.
P.
Pluresie to cure 221 Piles and Hemorrhoids 225, 228 Palsy to cure 247, 249
Plague-water, See the Chapter of Cordial Waters. 128 Preservatives against the
Plague 68 Plasters, for several Uses, with their Virtues 226 A Plaster for
the Stomach, that has done notable Cures 114 Plaster for the Back, by Sir K.
D. 326 Pill of Elixir Proprietatis 164 Sir Kenelm Digby's Pills for the Head,
Stomach, and Joints 165 Dr. Floid's Stomack-Pill 166 Dr. Die's Excellent Pill
ibid. Pectoral Pills 168 Purges of several sorts 272, 273, 275 Perfumes for
Chambers and Rooms of Entertainment 349 Perfume for Tobacco taken in a Pipe
348.
Q.
Quinsie and sore Throat to cure 122.
R.
Rickets to cure 1 Rupture to cure 235 A Cere-cloth for Ruptures 259.
S.
Scurvey to cure 33 Stone and Gravel 36, 46, 56 Scurvey-Grass Ales 173, 182,
184 Distemper and Weakness of the Stomach to help, 112 116 Scurvey in the Mouth
to cure 122 Sciatica to cure. 214.
T.
Toothache to help 121, 125 Tetters and Ring-worms to cure 237, 255 To fasten
loose Teeth, and preserve and strengthen the Teeth and Gums, and cure the
Scurvey in the Mouth 122 Terms to provoke 181 Childrens Teeth to make them come
without pain 327 For the Teeth and Gums 118.
W.
Warts to take away from any part of the Body 239, 240 Women's Distempers to
cure 281, 291 Whites to stop 287 Women's Longings, and marking of their
Children, 305, 318 Women lying in. 318, 322 Hard and sore Breasts to cure 321,
322 Cordial Waters distilled, and their Virtues 128 Wounds to cure by Sir
Kenelm Digby's Sympathetical Powder 234 Its Preparation ibid. Waters to
beautify the Face and Skin, and to preserve the Complexion of Ladies 337 Sweet
Waters to make. 351.
An INDEX of the Second Part.
A.
Apples to stew 44
B.
Beef to stew the French Way 16 Beef a-la-mode ibid. To bake Pigeons, Teals, or
Wild-Duck, that will keep a quarter of an year 17 Broth as it was made for the
Queen 37 To boil Beef short and tender 61.
C.
Cakes to make 47 A nourishing and strengthening Cawdle ibid. To pickle Capons
23 Capon in white Broth 26 A nourishing boiled Capon 18 A nourishing Almond
Cawdle for weak persons 41 Collops of Veal 29 Conserves of Roses to make 74, 75
Cheese-Cakes. 50 Small Cakes excellent 50 Carp in Short Broth 60.
E.
An Estuvee of Veal the French way 15 Eels to stew the French way. 59.
F.
Fricasie of Pigeons 12 Fricasie of Chickens 13 Flummery to make 43 Fricasie of
Veal. 52.
G.
To keep Goosberries green and fresh all the year 78 Grapes to keep green and
fresh all the Winter 78 Gelly of red Currants 72 Gelly of Quinces. 67
H.
To make a Hutchpot 15, 16 To stew a Hare the French Way 17 Hare-Pies excellent
29 Hartshorn Gelly. 57, 58.
M.
Metheglin to make 1 till 32 Mutton to bake like Venison 19 Minced Pies to make
27 To roast fine Meat 28 Marmelade to make 73, 79 To bake a Shoulder of Mutton
like Venison 32 Oatmeal Pap 42, 43 Mustard to make 55 Marmelade of Pippins 66
Marmelade of red Currants. 71.
P.
A plain wholesome Posset 39 English Potage 36 A good Potage for Dinner 35 Potage
de Sante 34 A Sack Posset. ibid.
S.
Sweetmeats of all sorts to make 79, 80 Spinage-Broth 32 Syrup of Apples 69
Scotch Collops. 51.
T.
To sowce a Turkey like Brawn or Sturgeon 22 A Tansie. 55.
V.
To stew a Breast of Veal. 30.
W.
Green Walnuts to preserve 77 Wardens to stew, or Pears. 44.
Of the Usefulness and Convenience of this ENGINE
1. IT is very convenient for Distilling all Sorts of Waters, whether strong or
weak, yea^ the choicest Sort of them, it is far beyond any Limbeck or cold
Still.

2. You may Distill by it either in Balneo Mariae or in Sand.

3. It requires so little Fire, that you may Distill a whole Day with two
pennyworth, of Charcoal, and may draw about four or five quarts of Cordial
Water in a Day.

4. You may set it upon a Table or in the window; so that you need not stoop to
it, and you need not fear burning of any thing whereon it stands.

5. It serves also for Digesting and Extractg of Tinctures and Extracts, etc.

6. The Furnace marked B will serve you better than a Chasingdish for boiling
your Syrups upon it, and for preserving and candying and making of Gellies, etc.

7. This Engine also very convenient for boiling and stewing all Sorts of meats
and Fricasies, etc. It is the neatest and cleanliest way of dressing Meats, and
will be sooner done, and the meat dressed in it is more tender and savoury than
that which is dressed the ordinary way.

8. You may use it with its Furnace with Char-Coal, or with its Lamp, with
Rectifyed English Spirit; such as the Distillers fell for 1. s. 6 d. the quart,
which burns all away, and for two pennyworth of Spirit you may dress a Dish
of meat.

9. By means of the Lamp you may boil Coffee, Tea and Choccolet, setting the
Pot upon a Trefoot and the Lamp under it.

10. It is a very convenient thing for Masters and Commanders at Sea, to dress
Meat in it in their Cabin.

11. It is also very necessary for a small Family or for Lodgers, to boil or
stew Meat in it, chiefly in the Summertime.

This ENGINE finding a general Acceptance because of its Usefulness and
convenience, since I Printed my Book, and since I devised the Furnace to it. I
thought it convenient to make a new Draught of it, and to give a full
Description of it: And whereas some persons may be desirous to know, whether
the thing will do what I speak of it, I thought it necessary to set down here
the Names of those Persons, which have lately had the said Engine, of whom they
may be informed.

The Names of those Persons that had it before I made the Furnace to it, when
it was only used with the Lamp.

My Lady Oxenden, Captain Warren Commander of a Barbados Ship in Wappin,
Captain Travany Commander of the Queens Frigot, Mr. Rush Distiller in Wappin,
Mr. Devereux, Mrs. Pellet, Mrs. Purse at St. Jameses, Mr. Nealer Master of a
Ship.

A Catalogue of the Names of those persons that have had this Engine, made by
my directions since it was used with the Furnase within this three Months.

The honorable Esquire Boil, Dr. Faber in three Crain Court, Dr. Weidenfield in
Moor fields, Mr. Cas^ire in Gracious-street, Cap. Paldin in great Russel
street, Colonel Howard, Esquire. Daugly, My Lady Johnson in Hattengarden, Madam
Owen ditto, Madam Keckwich ditto My Lady Smith in St. John's, My Lady Blake
ditto, My Lady Greenfeld in York-street, one made of Brass, My Lady Bridgeman
ditto, Countess of Bedford in the Strand, Countess of Portland, Pellmail, My
Lady Dixon ditto, My Lady Temple ditto, Madam Atkins in Cabidge-Lane, Mrs.
Duncomb in Exeter-Exchange-Court, My Lady Carterick in Fret-street, Soho, Mrs.
Mansfield in Broadstreet: Mrs. Ensworth in Basen-hall street, Mrs. Slayter
ditto Mrs. Dumstead in Grub-street, Mrs. Broughton in Black Friars, Mrs.
Willoughby in Coven Garden, Mrs. Herbert in Three Crane Court, Mrs. Herbert one
sent into Wales to a Friend, Mr. Whitehall Goldsmith in Lumbard street, Mrs.
Hoskins at Retheriff, Mrs. Braddyll in St. Bartholemew Close.

Most of these Engines have been made of Tin by Mr. Waterman in Four Dove Court
in St. Martins, whom I have instructed to make them well as for the Tin-work.

An Explication of the Parts of this ENGINE.
A The whole Engine. B The first Furnace with a Firestone and a Grate C The
Ashhole D The Hole to put the Fire in. E The Second Furnace, wherein stands the
Balneum or Stew Pan. F The Balneum or Stew Pan G The Cover of the Stew Pan with
a hole in it, so big that the upper part of the Cucurbite may come through it.
H The Cover of the Hole of the Stew Pan to cover it, when one has a mind to
boil or stew meat in it.

The Cucurbite K The Glass Head L a little Hole in the Cover of the (...) with
a little shutter to put more Water into the Balneum, when it consumes by
Distilling. M The Door of the Firehole sliding up and down. N A piece fastened
like a Spring to hold up the Door O The Lamp made of Tin. P A Spout to fit on
the Beak of the Glasshead.

Directions how to use this ENGINE for Distilling in Balneo Mariae, which is
the best way for Distilling the choicest Waters.
Having put your Materials (which you mean to distill) into the Body or
Cucurbite marked I, place the same into the Balneum F, which being filled with
Water and placed into its Furnace E put on its Cover G to keep in the heat of
the Water: Then put on the Glasshead and Lute it with a strap of Paper, smeared
over with paste made of flower and water; then fit on the spout to the beak of
the Glass Head with some Paper, and this is called Distilling in Balneo Maria,
when the Body or Cucurbite stands in water.

But if you will Distill in Sand, you must have a Pan or Balneum made of Brass
(for Tin would melt and unsoder) then having but first an Inch thick of Sand in
the bottom, put your Cucurbite upon that, with the Ingredients, and then fill
up the Pan with Sand round about the Cucurbite, and give a gentle Fire, and
this is called Distilling Sand.

diagram of distillation engine A useful and necessary Engine for distilling
all Sorts of waters, either in Balneo Mariae or in sand: As also for boiling and
Sterving all Sorts of meats, either with charcoal or by a lamp with Spirit.


CHAP. I. Of Choice and Experimented Remedies in all affects of the Breast and
Lungs, as Consumption, Phthisic, Asthma, shortness of Breath, streightness of
Breast, Coughs, spitting of Blood. etc.
A very excellent Pectoral Syrup against a Consumption, ordered by a Physician
for a great Lady.
TAke Ceterach, Maidenhair, Coltsfoot, Aniseeds, Liquorice, of each one ounce;
Scolopender, Lungwort, Knotgrass, of each one handful; Root of Elecampane, half
an ounce thirty large Raisins of the Sun slit and stoned, fifteen Figs cut
small, two Radishes cut small, shred Herbs small, and bruise the Roots and
Seeds; put them all in a large Pipkin, and pour thereon five quarts of
Springwater, let it boil gently upon a moderate fire, until two quarts of the
water be consumed, then strain it: To the strained liquour put two pound and
half of double refined Sugar, clarify it with whites of Eggs, and boil it to
the consistence of a Syrup; whereof take one spoonful at a time, by it self,
three or four times a day, in the Morning fasting, before Dinner, at four in
the Afternoon, and at Night going to Bed; let it run easily down your Throat;
you may take of it also at any time in the Night when there is occasion.

The Description of an Excellent Pectoral Decoction against Consumption, Colds,
Coughs, Asthma's, etc.
TAke Paulsbittanny, Maidenhair, white Horhound, of each two handfuls; Root of
Elecampane, Liquorice, Florence Orris, of each two ounces; Flowers of Borage,
Bugloss, Roses, red Poppies, of each one handful, Coltsfoot half a handful,
Nettleseed, Carduusseed, Aniseed, sweet Fennelseed, of each half an ounce;
Calamus Aromaticus, Lignum Vita, China Root, of each one ounce; Cinnamon
Galingal, Cardamums, Cloves, of each three ounces. Boil all in ten quarts of
water to six quarts, then strain it, and put into it three pound of refined
Sugar; drink it warm four ounces at a time three times a day.

Decoction for the Lungs.
TAke Maidenhair two handfuls, Hysop, Pennyroyal, of each half a handful, Roots
of Florence Orris three drams, Elecampane one dram and half, Liquorice scraped
and bruised, half an ounce, large Figs one ounce and half; cut the Herbs, and
bruise the Roots, and boil it in two quarts of Fountain Water to a quart, then
strain it, and put to it one ounce tinckture of Safron; then sweeten it with
Sugarcandy or Loaf-sugar; and take six spoonfuls of it warm three or four times
a day.

The Tincture of Safron you may make presently, by putting half an ounce of
Safron into a Bottel or Phiol, and then pouring upon it half a Pint of good
Brandy; (if you have not Rectified Spirit of Wine) set the Bottel in a warm
place, and shake it some times, and the Brandy will extract the Tincture out of
the Safron, and leave it as white as straw which then has no more virtue.

Another most Excellent Pectoral Decoction or Drink.
TAke half an ounce of French Barley, boil it in two quarts of Fountain Water
for a quarter of an hour; then put into it Raisins of the Sun stoned six drams;
Jujubes, Sebesstens, of each twelve in number; fat Figs, Dates stoned, of each
six in number, all cut small; let all these boil with the Barley another quarter
of an hour; then put to them Lungwort, Scabious, of each one handful, Hysop,
Politrice, Flowers of Coltsfoot, of each one pugil; (that is, as many as you
can hold between two fingers and your thumb) Liquorice scraped and bruised two
drams; let them boil all together a little more than a quarter of an hour; then
strain it when it is half cold.

It is an excellent Pectoral, curing Obstructions, and most other Diseases of
the Breast and Lungs, as Coughs, Asthma's, or shortness of Breath, Phthisicks,
hoarsness, etc. The Patient may take about half a pint of it warm, Morning and
Evening

Doctor Hornick his Excellent Pectoral Water against a Consumption.
TAke the Liver of a Calf, and the Lungs of a Fox, the herb Lungwort,
Liverwort, Sage, Rue, Hysop, of each one handful; Elecampane, the Root of Flag,
of each half an ounce; Aniseeds, Carrawayseeds, sweet Fennelseeds, of each half
an ounce; flowers of Borage, of Bugloss, of each two drams: Cut them all very
small, then infuse them for twenty four good hours in two quarts of good old
Mallago, and Scabious, and Garduus-water, of each four ounces; Hysop-water two
ounces, then distill it, and sweeten it with Sugarcandy; drink a little Glassful
thereof two or three times a day.

This Water is much recommended against a Consumption; It comforts and
strengthens the Lungs and Liver; facilitates Expectoration, attenuates the
tough and thick Phlegm, expells wind out of the Stomach and Bowels, and opens
the obstruction of the Lungs and Liver.

Another Pectoral Water distilled.
TAke Scabious, Paulsbittany, of each two handfuls, Maidenhair, Sage, Hysop,
Horhound, Liverwort, of each one handful; Flowers of Borage and Bugloss, of
each one handful, Elecampane, Florence Orris, Roots of Parslee, of each half an
ounce; Aniseeds, sweet Fennelseed, Nettleseed, Cinnamon, Safron, of each half a
dram; Cut the Herbs, and bruise the Seeds and put them all into a fit Vessel,
and pour upon them three quarts of good old Wine; stop the Vessel close, and
let it stand to infuse for a week, then distill it, to the water distilled add
Sugarcandy, Spanish Juice of Liquorice one ounce, Salt of Tartar six drams,
drink thereof two or three times a day one ounce at a time.

This is recommended as the greatest and best Pectoral: It not only opens all
obstructions of Lungs. helps Colds, Coughs, Asthma's, spitting of Blood and
Matter, but also gives ease in all pains of the Stone.

Dr. Scroderus his Asthmatick Water against Phthisick, shortness of Breath, It
comforts a weak and cold Stomach, and expells Wind, and helps fainting Fits.
TAke Coltsfoot, Sage, Marjoram, Hysop, white Horhound, of each half a handful;
Roots of Elecampane, of Jentian, of each three drams; Cloves, Ginger,
Cardamoms, of each two drams and half; Florence Orris, Polipod of the Oak,
Liquorice, Jujubes, Sebenstens, Currants, sweet Almonds, of each three drams;
Squils dried half a dram, of seeds of Nettles, Fennel and Basil, of each three
drams; four soft Figs cut small; bruise all the Roots and Seeds, and shred the
herbs, put them all into a Vessel, and pour thereon two quarts of Sack, three
Pints of Nants Brandy, one ounce of Honey; stop the Vessel close, and let them
stand to digest for ten days, then distill it, sweeten the distilled Water with
the best refined Sugar to your taste, and drink thereof one ounce at a time,
two or three times a day.

Dr. Salmon his Pectoral Wine.
TAke Rhenish Wine two quarts, Salt of Tartar, Aniseeds, Corianderseeds,
Carraways, of each one ounce; bruise them all, and digest them into the Wine
for ten days, then strain it; To the strained liquor add Spanish Juice of
Liquorice four ounces; dissolve it in the Wine by the warmth of a Balneum; or
put it into a Coffy-pot and close it well, and set it in warm water; and being
well-setled, pour off the clear Liquor, and keep it for use.

Salmon recommends this as an admirable Pectoral, curing most Diseases of the
Breast and Lungs; as the inveterate Cough, Asthma, Phthisick, Inflammation or
Impostume of the Lungs, with a shortness of Breath, pains of the Side and
Stomach, and obstructions of both Liver and Spleen.

A most Excellent Pectoral Syrup against Asthma, Consumption, of a famous
Physician.
TAke French Barley two ounces, Roots of Fennel, of Elecampane, of Liquorice, of
Smallage, of Butterburr; Raisins of the Sun stoned, of each one ounce and half,
twelve Dates; Jujubes and Sebestens, of each thirty; Leaves of Coltsfoot, of
Lungwort; the tops of Hysop, of white Horhound, Maidenhair, of each one
handful; Aniseeds, Cottonseed, of each half an ounce; flowers of Coltsfoot, of
Butcher-Broom, of each half a handful.

The way of making this Syrup, is thus; boil the Barley in nine quarts of water
for half an hour, then put in the Roots of Butterburr, of Smallage, of
Elecampane and Fennel, all well cleaned and cut small; let them boil also for
half an hour, then put in the Dates, Jujubes, Sebenstens and Raisins all cut
small, then let them boil with the Eest for a quarter of an hour, then put in
the herbs cut small, which boil also for a quarter of an hour longer; then put
in the Liquorice and the Seeds bruised, and the Maidenhair, and the Flowers;
and having boiled only five or six wallops, take the Decoction off from the
fire; and when it is half cold strain it, then put in five pound of double
refined Sugar; and having clarified it with the white of an Egg, boil it to the
consistence of a Syrup, with a very slow fire; then being cold, you may
aromatise it with six drops of Oil of Aniseeds, and two drops of Oil of Cinnamon
mixed with about an ounce and half of fine Sugar in fine powder.

This Syrop is good to cut and expectorate the cold and tough Phlegm of the
Lungs, and of all those parts which serve for respiration; It gives chiefly
great ease and relief to those that are troubled with Asthma's, Phthisick, and
shortness of Breath, with old and inveterate Coughs; for it opens the Pipes,
and brings away the Phlegm which stopped them. One may call it the Palsom of
the Lungs, and chiefly of those of aged Persons; one may take a spoonful of it
at any time in the night, and in the daytime; some distance before and after
meals, and so continue the use thereof, or begin again according as you see it
needful.

Another Excellent Syrup for those that spit Blood, experienced by Squire Boil.
TAke Comfry Roots six ounces, leaves of Plantine two handfuls; beat them well
together in a stone Mortar, then press out the Juice, which strain through a
linen cloth; let it settle, then boil it up to a Syrup, and clarify it with
the white of an Egg.

Take a spoonful of this Syrup several times a day, and at any time in the
night. If you will use this Syrup presently, you may only use equal parts of
the Juice and Sugar; but if you would keep it all the year long, you must take
two parts of Sugar to one of Juice.

Another Remedy for spitting of Blood.
TAke Leaves of Coltsfoot, half a handful, shred it very small, then fry it
with a little Bacon; then put to it the yolk of an Egg, and stir it well
together; eat it in the morning fasting; continue this for some time.

A Broth with Chinaroot for a Consumption used by a great Lady.
TAke Chinaroots thin sliced two ounces, white and red Sanders, of each three
drams, put them into a large Pipkin, and pour upon it four quarts of fair
water; cover it close, and let it stand to infuse in a warm place, or in hot
water for twenty four hours; then put to it a good Pullet, or two Chickens; let
it boil, and scum it well; then put into it two handfuls of five-leaved-grass,
Maidenhair and Hartstongue, of each half a handful; twenty Dates cut small, a
little Mace, with the under-crust of a Manchet; let all these boil together
until two quarts be consumed; then take out the Pullets or Chickens, and stamp
them in a clean stone Mortar, then put it in the Broth again and let it boil
for half an hour longer, then strain it, and press out all the Broth from the
Pullet: If you please you may sweeten it with Sugarcandy.

Drink of this Broth warm early in the Morning, and sleep after it if you can,
and another draught at four in the Afternoon, and when you go to rest,

Another Broth for a Consumption.
TAke Conserves of Roses one ounce, Conserves of Borage and Buglos-flowers, of
each half an ounce; Pine Apple-kernels, and Pistacios, of each half an ounce,
yellow Amber in powder two drams; beat and mix them very well in a stone
Mortar, then take a Pullet and put all these Ingredients in the Belly of it,
then sow it up clo^e, and boil it in three quarts of water; when it has boiled
one hour, put into it Egrimony, Endive, Succory, Sparrowgrass-roots,
Fennel-roots, Caper-roots, and Raisins of the Sun stoned, of each one handful;
let it not boil until the Pullet be pretty tender, then take it out and beat it
in a stone Mortar, then put it into the liquor again, and let it only boil five
or six wallops, then strain it, and press out all the substance of the Pullet,
then put to the Broth a little red Rosewater, and half a pint of white Wine.

Drink of this Broth warm in the Morning in your Bed, and sleep after it if you
can, drink another draught of it in the Afternoon, and at Night going to Bed.

Another restoring Broth against a Consumption.
TAke two or three Marrowbones of on Ox, break them, and boil them in four
quarts of water until two quarts be consumed; then strain the liquor and let it
cool; then put it in a Pipkin with a young Cock, and a Knuckle of Veal, with
the under-crust of a Manchet, two ounces of Raisins stoned, six Dates cut
small, and a little mace: let all boil togerher with a gentle fire until half
be consumed, then strain it; make an Emulsion with a few Pistacios with some of
this Broth; then put this Emulscion to the rest of the Broth, and drink thereof
warm three times a day, and so continue for some time.

Another restoring Broth for sick, and convalescent Persons, by Sir K. Digby.
TAke two spoonfuls of Frenchbarly, scall'd it in two waters, throw away the
waters, put the Barley into a Pipkin with a Crag-end of a Neck of Mutton, and a
Knuckle of Veal; pour thereon a sufficient quantity of fair water, and let it
boil, scumming it well, when it has boiled one hour put into it a Pullet, and
let it boil an hour longer, then put in a large quantity of Sorrel, Lettuce,
Purslain, Borage and Buglos, and boil an hour more, three hours in all: Before
you put in the Herbs, season the Broth with Salt, a little Pepper and Cloves,
then strain out the Broth, and drink it warm.

Another restorative Broth for weak and consuming Bodies.
TAke of the best Chinaroot thin-sliced half an ounce, infuse it twenty four
hours in a Pottel of Springwater, in a Vessel close stopped, and set in hot
water; then put therein a small Chicken, or a little piece of a Neck of Veal,
boil it gently, and put into it a Succory-root scrapt and pitthed; leaves of
Agrimony, Buglos, Ceterach and Endive, of each one handful; Hartshorn two
drams, with a Crust white Bread; boil it to the consumption of half the liquor;
then strain it, and being sweetened to your taste with fine Sugar or
Sugarcandy, drink off warm early in the Morning, and about four in the
Afternoon about a third part of a pint; continue it for the space of three
weeks taking it every day.

A Cordial Broth against a consuming heat in the Body.
TAke a piece of Veal or Mutton, and a good Chicken, half an ounce of
Hartshorn, and as much Ivory, one handful of Currants, Roots of Sparrowgrass,
Fennel and Parslee-roots, a few of each sliced and bruised; Borage and
Bugloss-flowers, of each one handful, with a little bundle of sweet herbs,
namely sweet Marjoram; Rosemary, Thime, Wintersavory, a sliced Pippin or two,
and a Crust of white Bread; put all these in when the meat is well scummed and
has boiled awhile; you must take three quarts of Springwater, and boil it to
the consumption of half; strain it, and drink thereof warm two or three times a
day. It strengthens nature, and allies the consuming heat in the Body.

An other Excellent Broth for Cansumptive Persons.
TAke Parslee and Fennel-roots two of each, Elecampane, and Piony-roots, of
each half an ounce; Maidenhair, Coltsfoot, and unset Hysop, of each one
handful; Liquorice bruised one ounce; ten Figs, four Dates sliced; Raisins
stoned four ounces; two flakes of Mace; Aniseeds bruised two spoonfuls, and a
little Safron; put all these into the belly of a good Cock about a year old or
more; sow up the vent and the skin of the Neck very close; boil it in a Gallon
of Springwater, scum it very clean, and put into it a spoonful of good flowery
Oatmeal and one pugil of Thime; let it boil gently with a moderate fire to the
consumption of a quart, then strain it and press it gently. Drink of this
morning and evening warm eight or ten spoonfuls at a time.

An Excellent Snail-Broth for a Consumption.
TAke an hundred of Snails with their shells, wash them in water and salt, then
wash them three or four times more in fair water to wash away all the salt,
then bruise them with their shells; then take a red Cock-chicken, Borage,
Buglos, Agrimony, Cinquefoyl, Violet-leaves, of each one handful; a Mallowroot,
a Fennelroot, a Succoryroot, and a Blade of Mace; boil all these in a
sufficient quantity of water; then strain it, and drink thereof every morning,
and about four in the afternoon.

A comfortable restorative Broth for the Stomach.
TAke Sassafrase three ounces, of China sliced one ounce; infuse it all Night
in Springwater; the next morning put thereto a Cock well-dressed, and three
handfuls of Raisins of the Sun stoned, or of Prunes, or of both if you like it,
and a little bundle of Rosemary, Thime, and a Crust of Manchet-bread, and at
the latter end a little whole Mace; let it boil close covered until half is
consumed, then strain it, and take thereof a draught every morning very warm,
and another to bedward.

An Excellent purging Broth to preserve Health.
TTake a Knuckle of Veal, cut away all the flesh and fat, then break and bruise
all the Bones, and boil it in a Gallon of fair water, scum it clean, and then
put thereto four ounces of Raisins stoned, two ounces of Currants, two
Fennelroots, and one Succoryroot, and a small quantity of Endive, of Violet and
Strawberry-leaves, of Liverwort and Scabious, of each half a handful; boil
these till half the liquor is consumed; then take it from the fire, and put
into it one ounce of the best Sena, half an ounce of Tamarisk, and two drams of
Epithimum; set it on hot Embers, and let it simper for an hour, then strain it
from the Ingredients; this proportion will serve four days, being taken in the
morning warm, and so likewise in the Evening.

A Capon-Drink against a Consumption.
FLea a lean Capon, quarter it and break all the bones; then a quart of red
Rosewater, and as much of Carduus water, with one pound of White Sugar Candy
finely beaten, six of the best Pippens pared and sliced from the Coars, two
Lemmons sliced, a little Cinnamon cut in small pieces, a little sweet Marjoram
and as much mother of Time, with a few Coriander Seeds prepared; put all these
into a new earthen pot, prepared, first one layer of the Capon, and then a
layer of the Ingredients; they being thus laid by degrees throughout in several
lays, put in the Rose and the Carduus Waters, then lute up the Pot with Rye
Past so close, as no Air may get in, nor heat breath out; this done set the pot
into a pot of boiling water, and let it boil twenty four hours, and then take
out the Capon and stamp it in a Mortar, and put it again into the liquor, and
strain it through a Gelly bag and drink thereof half a porringer at a time: It
is very restorative.

Another Capon-drink for the Consumption.
Take two Capons, and parboil them with a soft Fire, for an hour, till the
Blood is quite gone; then take the Peels of two good Limons or more, cut away
the shanks of the Capons, and break the Capons in a great Mortar, till the
Bones are crushed small; which done, make a bag of fine Bolter, and take four
Gallons of strong Beer or Ale new from Tunning, and make in the Vessel a
Bung-hole, wherein put the Bag, with the Capons and Limon peels in it, and lay
a Stick cross the Bung-hole, and fasten the mouth of the Bag thereto, so that
the bottom of the Bag may touch the bottom of the Vessel, and not lie flat at
length; let it steep therein three days and nights, leaving the Bung-hole open,
that it may work, and after working, close the Bung-hole, and let it rest a day
and a half, and then draw it into Bottles, and three days expired, drink
thereof: It will continue good six weeks.

For the Consumption of the Liver.
Take a Gallon of the strongest Ale wort can be gotten of the first running and
strength of the Ale, the Brewers commonly sell it for six pence a quart, boil
it in an earthen pot, till it is as thick as an Electuary; after it begins to
thicken in the boiling it must be continually stired, otherwise it will burn
to, and be worth nothing; the whole Gallon will make but a quart of Syrup, or
thereabout; put it into a Gallipot, and keep it for your Use, and in the
Morning fasting, at four in the Afternoon, and when you lie down to rest,
daily, take a spoonful or two, and you will speedily find, by God's Blessing,
Amendment. It is the same thing to boil many Gallons at a time as one, and the
Trouble of making them may be saved.

Arare Medicine for a Consumption, though much decayed therewith.
Take two Quarts of new Red Cow's Milk, the more Stroakings the better; put it
into an earthen Vessel of three Quarts, that it may have room to boil; then put
into it two ounces of Syrup of Roses, and as much brown Sugar Candy; stop it
very close with Paste, and put it into an Oven with Household Bread; take of
this for your ordinary Drink, especially first and last every day, a little
warm. This has done great Cures in that kind. You may do well to add to it two
ounces of Syrup of Coltsfoot, or rather Syrup of Ground Ivy.

Another.
Take a hinder Leg of Beef, cut out all the Sinews, and a little of the Flesh
with them; then take a pretty quantity of the Pith of an Ox, six Dates, and a
little whole Mace; put all these into a Stone Pot with half a pint of white
Wine; paste it up close, that no Steam vapor out, or Air get in: Which done,
set it in a Pot of seething Water, and keep it boiling twelve hours; after
which, strain it: Take of this in foam other Broth, as much as the Stomach will
well bear. If you please, you may add to it some Flowers of Rosemary, or a
little sweet Marjoram, before luting of the Pot.

An Excellent Electuary very good for a violent Cough caused by a sharp thin
tickling Rheum.
Take Conserve of Roses, and work into it by strong grinding and beating in a
Mortar, as much as you can of pure Olibanum, (white Frankincense) in very
subtle Powder, so that the Consistence be very stiff of the Frankincense: Of
this, take as much as a good Hazel-Nut in a Spoon, with a little Syrup of
Violets about it, or Syrup of Ground Ivy; take it in the Morning and at night,
and somimes in the day if need be: This has been often approved.

Another very Excellent Electuary for a violent Cough and Obstructions of the
Lungs, much Approved.
Take Conserve of Ground Ivy two ounces, Conserve of Red Roses one ounce, Lapis
Hematites, Crabs Eyes, reduced into a fine powder, of each three drams,
Frankincense in fine powder two scruples; Oil of Cinnamon and Mace of each three
drops, Syrup of Comfrey-Root, and of red Poppy of each half an ounce; Make it
up into an Electuary; whereof take the quantity of a Nutmeg, in the Morning
fasting, and at Night.

A very good Posset for a Cold or Cough, be it never so violent, which has
cured many Persons both young and old.
Take a Quart of Milk, and make a Posset thereof with a pint of Ale; then
strain it, and put into it two spoonfuls of Aniseeds beaten, two Pippins sliced
with the parings, and a stick of Liquoras bruised, and a quarter of a pound of
Raisons stoned; let it boil gently for half an hour; then strain it again, and
drink a draught thereof warm with a little piece of fresh Butter in it: Take it
two or three times a day.

Another Electuary for the Cough and Rheum falling upon the Lungs.
Take half an ounce of cons. Roses, a spoonful of Syrup of Violets, 3 spoonfuls
of Honey, Frankincense in fine powder, and Flower of Sulphur, of each one dram,
mix them well to an Electuary; which take upon the bruised end of a Liquoras
stick.

The Lady Garret's Excellent Remedy for a Cold or Cough; Approved.
Take Fennel and Parsley Roots, four of each, wash and scrape them, and take
the pith out of them; Maidenhair, Rosa Solis flower, of each one handful;
Liquoras, Coriander, and Aniseeds one ounce, five leaves of Hart's-tongue,
Lungwort and Liverwort, of each a handful, Raisins stoned half a pound; shred
the Herbs, and bruise the Seeds, and put them all in a pottle of Spring Water
in a pipkin close covered; which set on hot Embers for a whole day, till the
Liquor be half consumed; then strain it without pressing it; then sweeten it
with brown Sugar Candy, and drink thereof Morning and Evening.

Dr. Harvey his Excellent Snail-water against Consumptions and Hectic Fevers.
Take a pound of Garden-Snails with their Shells, especially those that are
about Vines; wash them well with water and a little salt; then wash them once
or twice more with fair water, to wash off the salt; then bruise them with
their shells to a Mash in a stone-Mortar: add to them Ground Ivy, Spedwell,
Lung-wort, Scabious, Burnet, Coltssoot, and Nettle tops, of each a handful;
English Liquoras, half an ounce; Dates stoned twelve in number; of the four
great cold Seeds, of each one dram and a half, Saffron a scruple, put them with
the Snails in a new glazed Pipkin, or a Tin Coffee-pot, which is better, and
pour on them a quart of Spring water; fasten the Cover close to the pipkin, by
pasting it round with Dough: Set the pipkin in a Kettle of hot water over the
fire; let it stand therein for twelve hours; then strain it, and press out the
Liquor, dissolving into it while it is warm a quarter of a pound of clarified
Honey, put it up in Glass-Bottles, and keep it in a Cellar.

Note, That the Herbs must be shred, the Seeds bruised, and the Liquoras cut
small.

This water cools the heat of the Hectic Fever through the cool, clammy, and
glutinous substance of the Liquor of Snails: It repairs the parts consumed, it
facilitates expectoration, that is, it makes the tough Matter and Phlegm come up
easy by Cough, through its lenifying quality, whereby it sweetens the Humors,
by allaying those gnawing Salts that prey on the Lungs. Some would have this to
be distilled; but in the distilling of the Snails, there is no part of the
unctuous or glutinous Liquor that comes over or passes the Alembick, but
remains in the bottom of the Still, and a mere Phlegm and Elemantary water
comes over, which has not power to do the Effects abovementioned. For this,
and other Reasons, the Doctors commend the aforesaid Water. This Water is also
good for Rickets in Children. I have been told by several credible persons, who
have seen the experience of it, that many persons have been recovered out of a
Consumption by eating Snails boiled in Milk; the Snails washed with water and a
little salt, and then washed again once or twice to wash off the Salt, and then
stamped with their Shells, as in the foregoing Receipt, then boil them in Milk,
and having strained it, grate some Nutmeg in it, and so eat it.

The Syrup of Turnips is very good for a Cough or Consumption. Make it thus.
Bake a quantity of Turnips pared, in a pipkin close covered, in an Oven with
Houshold-bread, then press out the Liquor as hard as you can: Take of this
Liquor one pint, Hysop-water half a pint, boil it with brown Sugar Candy to a
Syrup, and clarify it with the White of an Egg.

Another Remedy against a Cold or Cough.
Take a pint of Hysop-water, a quarter of a pound of Sugar Candy, a spoonful of
Aniseed bruised, and a small stick of Liquoras scraped and bruised, a Pippin
sliced with the parings) let this stand together all night, the next morning
boil it a quarter of an hour; then strain it, and take three or four spoonfuls
of it at a time warm, in the Morning and at Night when you go to bed, and at
any time in the Day.

Another Remedy for a Cough or Cold from an Eminent Lady.
Take Hysop, Raisins of the Sun stoned, and Figs sliced, of each a small
handful, Aniseeds bruised two spoonfuls, Coltsfoot a good handful; shred the
Herbs, and put all together into a Gallon of Spring Water; boil it until above
half be consumed, putting into it toward the latter end a good stick of
Liquoras scraped and bruised; then strain it and stir in it three or four
Spoonfuls of Honey. Drink thereof warm four or five spoonfuls at a time in the
Morning, Afternoon, and at Night.

An Excellent Electuary for a Cough or Consumption.
Take Enulacampana-roots, boil them a little in Water, then pour away the
Water, and boil them again in fresh water until they be tender; then mix them
with as much of the Pap of roasted Pippins, the weight of these both of brown
Sugar Candy in fine Powder; stamp these well together in a Stone-Mortar to a
Conserve.

Take of this every morning the quantity of a Walnut for a week or fortnight,
and afterward take it but three times a week.

Another Experimented Remedy for Asthma, Shortness of Breath, Straitness of
Breast and Oppression of the Stomach, etc.
Mr. Newel told me a Friend of his being much troubled with the Diseases above
mentioned, took for some time every morning three spoonfuls of the best Sallet
Oil he could get, with a little Sugar; this he continued for some time, and was
perfectly cured.

I have been told, that several persons have been cured of dry consumptive
Coughs, by drinking every Morning a good Draught of Posset Drink, and then
taking three spoonfuls of good Sallet Oil after it; in the Posset was boiled
some of the Moss that grows upon Oaken pales a good handful in two quarts;
the Posset was repeated at night without the Oil, drinking it warm, and
sometimes in the Afternoon, taking sometimes at night one of Matthews's Pills,
drinking the Posset after it, going to bed.

Some have been cured of dry Coughs by the Use of this Posset alone boiled with
the white Moss that grows upon Oaken pales, drinking it warm three times a
day.

Another Excellent Remedy against Consumpion, Experimented by Dr. Bates.
Take Coltsfoot, Succory, Endive, Borage Liverwort, of each six handfuls,
shred them all, very small, put them in a Gallon of new Milk, let them steep
all night, in the morning distill them.

Take of this water, and of Red-Rose-water, of each three spoonfuls; put this
to half a pint of Red Cows Milk, sweeten it with Sugar of Roses, and so drink
it warm; repeat the same in the Afternoon, and at night when you go to bed.

This is a very good Remedy; the water is good against Hectic Fevers; and the
use of the Sugar of Roses is good when there is any Looseness.

The Syrup of Ground Ivy is a very Sovereign thing in all consumptive cases; it
is pectoral, cephalic, and vulnerary, and heals the Ulcers of the Lungs; the
best time of making it is in May. The way of making it is thus: Take the Leaves
and Stalks of it, cutting only the Root, then wash it, and drain it well; then
shred it a little, and stamp it to a Mash in a stone-Mortar, then press it in a
hair-bag in an Apothecaries Press, to get out all the Juice; which being
settled, power it off; and let it boil a walm or two, and the curd or dross will
rise on the top of it; which scum off, then take two pounds of Sugar to a quart
or Juice, and having clarified it with the White of an Egg, boil it to the
Consistence of a Syrup.

For a Cough of the Lungs, or any stuffing or obstruction in the inward Parts;
which has often been approved, and found effectual by many.
Take a Cock, dress him, and cut him all to pieces, and bruise all the Bones of
him; then take of Aniseed bruised four ounces, Muiliene, and Lungwort shred
small, of each a handful; a Fennel-Root also shred small: put all these to boil
in a pottle of spring water for three hours close covered, and as the Liquor
consumes, supply it with a quart of Hysop-water, and at the latter end put
into it two ounces of Liquoras bruised; then strain it out, and press the
Ingredients a little; then put into the Liquor two ounces of brown Sugar Candy
in powder. Take of this Liquor half a pint at night instead of a Supper, as hot
as you can drink it, and lie down upon your back for a quarter of an hour. Do
the like in the Morning before you rise, and fast three hours after it.

An Excellent Receipt for an old Cough, though never so great, used by my L.
Hatton.
Take Raisins of the Sun stoned, and Figs washed and sliced of each two ounces,
unset Hysop a handful, Enulacampana dried and bruised two ounces, Aniseeds
bruised one ounce, boil all these in a gallon of small Ale, till half is
consumed; then strain it, and put to it Honey and sweet Butter, of each four
ounces, Safron dried and powdered, half a dram: boil them again gently till they
be well incorporated. Drink of this Liquor warm, half a pint in the morning and
at night. This Proportion made twice, has cured Coughs of long continuance,
and has been often approved.

Dr. Hakins his Excellent Remedy for a Cold or Cough, as also to strengthen the
Lungs, if there be any Defect in them.
Take three ounces of Enulacampana, scrape off the Rind, and cut it in thin
slices, then boil it in three pints of Conduit-water, till it comes to a pint
and a half; then put therein a pound of fine Sugar, and let it simper a little
on the fire; then take it off, and let it cool, and it will be a perfect Syrup,
whereof take three spoonfuls morning and evening.

An Approved Remedy in all Assects of the Breast and Lungs, as Colds, Coughs,
Asthma, Phthisick, Hasing, or Wheezing, and Rattling in the Pipes.
Take the best old Malago, and distill it in a Glass Cucurbite in Balneo Mariae;
when you have drawn off the Spirit, change the Receiver, and continue the
distillation, drawing off the phlegm until there remain in the bottom a
Substance like Honey; which power out, and mix it again with the phlegm that you
distilled off last.

Drink of this Liquor two or three times a day, putting into every draught a
few drops of the odoriferous Spirit of Benjamin; which you may prepare thus:
Put a Pound of Benjamin into a low Cucurbite of Glass, and distill it in B. M.
or in a Sand Furnace, and there will first come over a clear Liquor, which will
have all the odoriferous Scent of the Benjamin; which is a most excellent thing
for the Breast and Lungs.

A Remedy for the Lungs when they are stopped with Phlegm, etc.
Take Enulacampana root well dried, Liquoras and Aniseeds, of each an ounce,
Flower of Sulphur, half and ounce, Sugar Candy, six ounces; make all into fine
Powder, and take thereof half a spoonful three times a day.

Also take the following Decoction.
Take a Pottle of Hysop-water, Maidenhair, Scabious, Coltsfoot and Horehound,
of each a handful, Aniseeds and Liquoras bruised, of each one ounce, Figs
sliced, Raisins of the Sun stoned, Dates sliced, of each three ounces; boil it
all to a quart, and sweeten it with fine Sugar: Take a small draught of this
warm, in the morning fasting, and at four in the Afternoon, and at Night, and
as often as you think good.

An Excellent Mead for the same.
Boil one Gallon of Honey with half a pint of Water, and scum it clean, then
add four Gallons of Water, and boil it gently for two hours, scumming it all
the while; then put into it four ounces of Raisins of the Sun stoned,
Enulacampana roots two ounces, Fennel roots, Marsh mallow roots, and Polypode,
of each one ounce, Maidenhair, Coltsfoot, Sage, Betony, Scabious, and Hysop,
of each a handful, Aniseeds one ounce; put all these Ingredients into it so
soon as there rises no more scum; then let it cool, and work it with yeast, and
Tun it. Drink thereof warm at pleasure: It is excellent for the Breast and
Lungs.

Against the Rising of the Lungs, an Excellent Remedy.
There is nothing better than the water of Enulacampana roots, stamp the green
Roots in a stone-mortar, and mix with them half as much of green Liquoras; then
distill it in a Glass-Still. Take of this Water half a spoonful at a time,
whenever the raising does trouble you, mix it with as much Muscadine or old
Malago; or take it in the water of Ladies Mantel, or Leons foot, if you cannot
take it alone.

To make Excellent Lozenges against a Cold, Cough of the Lungs, and Consumption.
Take one pound of fine Sugar in Powder, Liquoras and Enulacampana finely
powdered, of each four ounces; put them into a little earthen Pan, and moisten
them with two or three spoonfuls of Unset Hysop-water, distilled when it is in
its Flower; then sprinkle into it a little powdered Pepper, and cast them upon a
Pieplate with Flower strewed on it, when it is cold, form them out.

Lozenges to hold under the Tongue against Cough Defluxions and Rheumes.
Take Mastick, Nutmegs and Orrice roots in fine Powder, of each half an ounce,
red Storax, and Frankincense, of each an ounce and half, Raisins stoned, and
Sugar penidies, of each two ounces: make a Paste thereof with Mead, and form it
into Lozenges, about the bigness of a small Bean a piece. Hold one under your
Tongue at your pleasure night and day; but especially when you are laid to
rest, and let it dissolve of it self.

To make white Lozenges for the Breast and Lungs, Cold, Cough, and Rheum in the
Head.
Take fine Sugar four ounces, white Sugar Candy and Penide-Sugar, of each one
ounce, Florence, Orice-root in fine powder, two drams. Liquoras in powder three
drams, fine Starch-flower three drams. Mix them all together, and with
Gum-Dragant steeped in Rose Water, make Lozenges.

To make Penide Sugar.
Dissolve fine Sugar in Barley-water over a gentle Fire, and clarify it with
Whites of Eggs twice; then strain it, and boil it gently, until it rises up in
great bubbles, and being chewed, sticks to your Teeth. Then power it upon a
Marble-stone, anointed with Oil of Almonds (letting first the bubbles sink,
being removed from the Fire, and almost cold) keep it up in a body as near as
you can, by bringing back the outside to the middle with your Fingers, being
rubbed with a little starch flower. When it is grown almost quite cold and
ropy, draw it out in Threads, and twist them in what shape you please.

CHAP. II. Of Exquisite Remedies against the SCURVEY.
The Compound Horseradish Water against the Scurvey.
TAke of Garden and Sea-Scurvey-Grass, of each three pound, stamp them, and
press out the Juice of them, which mix with Juice of Watercresses, and
Brook-lime, of each three quarters of a pint; to this Mixture add two quarts of
the best white Wine, six Limons cut into small slices; fresh Briony roots two
pound, Horse-radishes one pound Winters bark four ounces, Nutmeg two ounces;
steep them all for three days, then distill it. The best way of distilling this
water is in our Engine prefixed to the Book of Cookery, if you have not an
Alembick with a Refrigeratory or Bucked head, or a Worm; for if you distill it
in an ordinary Still, you will lose a great part of its volatile Spirit, it
being composed of all volatile things. You may also distill it in a Tin
Cucurbite with a Glass-Head in a Sand Furnace; that is, an Iron Pot set up in
Brick-work, as they do a Copper, and instead of a Glass Cucurbite, have one
made of Tin, which will last many years, whereas a Glass one will be apt to
break; to which fit a Glass-head, as is described in the page of our Engine, and
having put Sand in the bottom of the Iron Pot, about an Inch thick; set the
Cucurbite upon that, and having fitted the Head and Receiver to it, and luted
all the Junctures with Paste and Paper, fill the Pot with Sand round about the
Cucurbite, and make a fire in the Furnace under the Pot.

The Virtues of the aforesaid Water.
It is not only prevalent against the Scurvey, but it is also very good against
the Dropsy, and the Stone and Gravel, both in the Reins and Bladder, Strangury
of Urine, etc. for it is very diuretic; it is good against the Green Sickness,
Stoppage of the Terms, and cleanses the womb; it opens Obstructions of the
Liver and Spleen, and purifies the Blood: The Dose is from one spoonful to two
or three, in Rhenish wine, morning and evening; you may also take it in a smart
water, which is very good for the Stone and Gravel.

To prepare an Excellent Antiscorbutick Wine of Dr. Mynsycht, in Scroderus
Dispensatory.
Take the Juice of Scurvigrass, of Watercresses, of Brooklime, of Sorrel, all
depurated, of each a quarter of a pint; Rhenish wine, two quarts; roots of
Horseradish, Enulacampana, of Flower-de-luce, cut into thin Slices, of each an
ounce and an half; Seeds of Rocket bruised one ounce, two Nutmegs bruised; put
all into a Stone Bottle, stop it very close, and keep it in a cold place for
Use.

It universally evacuates all evil humors; curing the Scurvey to a wonder. It
is recommended to be a perfect and infallible Experiment to purify the Blood,
being taken morning and night, a quarter of a pint at a time.

The manner of depurating Juyces is thus:
Let your Juyces settle for twelve hours, then power it off gently from the
gross impurities settled at the bottom; boil it gently in a Pipkin, and take off
the Scum or Cords, letting it boil only a walm or two, then strain it.

The Countess of Arundel's Scurvigrass-Ale.
Take Garden and Sea-Scurvigrass of each six handfuls, Fumitory and Ground Ivy
(or Ale hoof) of each six handful, of Brook-lime three handfuls, of
Watercresses six handfuls, of Horseradish half a pound; wash them very clean,
and dry them in a Linen Cloth; then shred them and stamp them a little in a
Stone-Mortar, then take a bag of Boulter-cloth, and put it into the Bung of
your Barrel, and put a Gad of Steel in the bottom of it to sink it down; keep
the upper end of the bag out of the bung, and put into it your Ingredients;
then put into it three Gallons of new Ale, and after three or four days drink
of it, a draught in the Morning fasting, and another an hour before Dinner, in
the Afternoon with some moderate Exercise after it: Also taking a gentle Purge
before you use this Drink, as some gentle Night-Pills, or the like.

CHAP. III. Of Choice and Experimented Remedies against the DROPSY.
A very Good and Approved Remedy against the Dropsy, wherewith a Great Lady
was cured.
TAke Smallage, Thyme, Hysop, Watercresses Penyroyal, Nettle tops, of each a
handful, Caraway Seeds, Calamint, Elecampane roots, of each one ounce; boil it
in six quarts of running water, until half be consumed; then strain it: then
put to this Liquor a pottle of Canary Sack; add Liquoras scraped and bruised
two ounces, sweet Fennel-seed one ounce, Cummin seed, and Alexander seeds, of
each two drams: boil all these together again for half an hour; then strain it,
and keep it for Use.

Take nine spoonfuls of this Liquor in the Morning fasting, and as much about
three or four in the Afternoon, and continue it for some time together.

Another very good Diet-Drink against the Dropsy.
Take Polipode of the Oak six ounces, the Bark of Lignum vitae, three ounces,
Sassafras four ounces, Sena six ounces, Aniseeds three ounces, Epithymum,
Stechados, of each half an ounce, Raisins of the Sun stoned, half a pound,
Hermodactyles three ounces; Agarick, Rhubarb, China root, of each half an
ounce; Liquoras four ounces; put all these (being well bruised) into two
Gallons of Ale, and six quarts of white wine; let them infuse all night, then
boil it in a Vessel close covered for two hours and a half, then strain it
being cold.

Let the Patient drink of this Liquor three times a day, half a pint at a time,
viz. in the Morning early, and another draught an hour or two before dinner,
and about four in the Afternoon. Boil the remaining Ingredients in Ale as
before, and drink of this second Liquor at meals, and at any other time,
drinking no other Liquor but these two.

Let your Diet be of Roast-meat, of Mutton and Fowl, but not Veal, eating often
Raisins of the Sun, with Biskets instead of a Supper.

Another Approved Remedy against the Dropsy.
Take quick good midling Ale, and put therein a sufficient quantity of the best
Wormwood, let it stand over night, the next morning take three or four Cloves
of Garlic, peel them, and then prick them with a Needle in three or four
places, then swallow them whole if you can; if not, you may cut them less: then
drink a good draught of the Wormwood-Ale after it; and then do upon it as much
Exercise as conveniently you can; at Dinner eat what you will of good wholesome
Diet, but at night sup not, or but very little; and at going to bed take the
Cloves of Garlic again, and drink a good draught of the Wormwood-Ale after it,
a in the Morning. Continue this till you are well, which usually is in twenty
or thirty days; But during the Cure, you must every morning and night use the
following Bath or Fomentation: Take three Gallons of Conduit-water, and boil in
it five or six handfuls of Mallows, and two pound of fresh Mutton-Suet (that
which is next the Kidneys) skinned and shred small, and half a peck of Wheat
bran; boil it till the Fat be thoroughly melted, and the Virtue of the Mallows
drawn out into the Liquor; then strain it into a Tub or a large wooden Bowl,
and bath your feet and legs therein for half an hour or an hour, fomenting the
legs with the Herbs as hot as you can endure it. This will draw much water from
the legs; for after you have taken the Garlic and Wormwood-Ale awhile, it will
drive the humors into the legs and feet, which will be much swelled with it,
and pit much; but the Bath will draw all the Humors and Water out of them. This
has often been experienced with happy success.

You may also use the following dry Bath: Take yellow Amber the worth of three
pence, or four pence; pulverize it, and mix it with a quart of good
Wine-Vinegar, then take a Brick and make it hot, but not red hot; put it into a
Tub, putting some Ashes under it; then power upon the Brick the mixture of the
Vinegar and Amber, and hold the swelled legs over the smoke of it, covering the
Tub well with Sheets or Blankets, that none of the Smoke may come out, and
immediately the Water will come out of the Legs, and they will be cured, whether
they be swollen with the Dropsy, or with any other bad Humor.

Sir Kenelm Digby relates, that an Eminent person of Quality was exceedingly
overgrown with the Dropsy, and his Belly swelled to a prodigious Bigness, he
sat in a sweating Stove, such as men use to sweat in, and used this Remedy,
pouring the Liquor with the Amber upon hot Bricks laid upon Ashes, to save the
wood from burning; when the Bricks grew cold, they changed them, putting in
other hot ones, and in a little while it melted him away to an incredible
proportion; but whilst he was in that Steam, he felt a wonderful active heat
piercing into his Body. The Stove was covered close at the top with Sheet and
Blankets, leaving only his Head in the Air, with the Clothes fastened about his
Neck. Once sweating thus served his turn; all his Servants with fresh hot
Napkins could not suffice to wipe dry the sweaty water that ran out of his Body.

Another Excellent Remedy against the Dropsy, which Dr. William gave to Sir K.
Digby.
Take Elder wood, and pare off first the gray outward Bark, then scrape off the
inner green Rind, whereof take four handfuls, and one handful of Wormwood: then
take two quarts of Beer, and as much Ale, and two quarts of white Wine, put
them together with the Ingredients, into a large Stone Bottel, stop it close,
and let it stand so three or four days, that the Liquor may imbibe to it self
all the virtue of the Ingredients; then strain it and bottle it up into quart
Bottles; which being stopped close, it will grow very quick and pleasant. Drink
of this at Meals, and all times when you have need to drink. If you add to this
Composition two handfuls of the inner Rind of the Root of Ghost, it will be more
efficacious, as you will understand by the following Remedy. If you find the
Drink, too strong of the Ingredients, you may add more Beer, and Ale, and Wine.
The Doctor said that the mixture of the several sorts of Liquors will cause the
Patient to make water in abundance.

Another Experimented Remedy against the Dropsy, wherewith a man was cured who
had been in the Hospital, but without Benefit, or Hope of Cure.
Take the Root of the Shrub called Ghost (it grows upon Hills and upon Heaths,
it is full of Prickles and yellow Flowers) pare off the outward Bark, which
throw away, then scrape off the inner Rind, and fill a pint-pot therewith
loosly; then fill it up with Rhenish or white Wine; let it stand to infuse all
night, the next morning drink a good Glass full of it, and continue it till you
are cured.

A Famous Cure of a desperate Dropsy by a Diet of Garlic, performed by Dr.
Farrar, upon an Eminent Lord.
Having well purged the Patient first with some fit Purge to carry away
waterish Humors, the Doctor ordered him the following Diet of Garlic: Make
some moderate Broth of Mutton, Chickens, and Capon or Hen, but not Veal; it
must not be too strong of the Meat, nor too weak, but such as you may drink all
the day; for you should drink no other Liquor. You must make but about a Pottle
of Broth at a time, by reason it will not keep; and for this quantity, you must
take a Gallon of Water, into which, put above a handful of Garlic, and
Rosemary, Thyme, Penniroyal, sweet Marjoram, Fennel roots, and Parsley roots; as
also Currants, and a sufficient quantity of Salt. And after some days taking the
Broth, put into every draught you take of the Broth, a spoonful or more of the
Juice of Garlic, made by stamping raw Garlic, and then pressed out. But if
you cannot bear it always to take this Broth, then use the following Decoction.

Take Sarsaparilla twelve ounces, China root five ounces, Sassafras three
ounces; cut all these very small, and power upon them so much Fountain Water as
may cover them the breadth of three fingers; let them infuse in a Pipkin,
which, set in a Kettle of hot water for the space of four hours; then throw
away this water; and stamp the Ingredients in a Stone-Mortar; then boil them in
ten quarts of Fountain Water, in a Vessel close covered, till four quarts of it
be consumed: Of this Decoction drink without any other Liquor but the
Garlick-broth, taking sometimes the one, and sometimes the other.

Another Drink.
Take all the aforesaid Ingredients in the same manner prepared and stamped,
and put them into a Bag, and hang them in a clean Vessel filled with Beer; to
every of the Ingredients you must take a quart of Beer. Either of these Drinks
is only in case you cannot bear the Use of the Garlick-broth, which alone will
dispatch the Cure much the sooner, if you can bear it.

This course of the Garlick-broth is for all Obstructions and Superfluity of
cold, raw Humors (clogging the Brains) as well as for the Dropsy.

To strengthen the Liver, use the following Electuary.
Take Powder of Turmerick, make an Electury of it with Sugar, add to every
ounce of it three drops of Oil of Aniseeds made by distillation, and if you put
a little Ambergreece to it, it will be better. Take of this Electuary two or
three times a day the quantity of a hazel-nut; but take not above one ounce in
a day.

Besides this, to strengthen the Stomach, use this following Stomacher.
Take Wormwood, Marjoram, Rosemary, Rue, of each one handful; Cloves, Cinnamon,
Mace, of each an ounce; bruise these Spices, and mix them with herbs shred
small, and make a Stomacher thereof, and apply it. And you may likewise anoint
your Stomach and Region of the Liver with Oil of Nutmeg and Oil of Roses.

Dr. Farrar gave this Receipt to Sir K. Digby, who recommended him to the Lord,
and Sir. K. made the Bargain between the Lord and the Doctor, who was to have
five hundred pound for his Cure; and I heard Sir K. say, that after twelve or
thirteen days, the Patient began to piss in great abundance, and so very
stinking, noisome, roping Matter, that the Nurse which emptied the Pots, was
scarce able to endure the stench and noisomness of it: And continuing the
Remedy, the Lord was perfectly cured.

The Silver Pills, as we prepared them in Sir K. Digby's Elaboratory, are also
a specific Remedy against the Dropsy; the description thereof is in Sir
Kenelm Digby's Collection of Chemical Secrets, Printed for me in 1682.

A very good Plaster to be applied to the Belly for the Dropsy.
Take Rue, Camomil, Melilot, Calamint, of each two ounces; beat them small, and
boil them in Wine, and Oil of Dill; then add Gummi Caranae, Gum of Wax, of each
as much as suffices to make a Plaster.

CHAP. IV. Of Choice and Experimented Remedies against the Stone and Gravel.
Dr. Mynsycht his Stone-breaking Wine.
TAke whole Barley, red Cicers, of each one ounce and half; Roots of
Rest-harrow, of Eringo, of Liquoras, of each one ounce; roots of Stone-Partly,
half an ounce; Juniper Berries bruised, Winter-Cherries, of each one dram;
Gromwel seeds, Haws, Seeds of Mallows and Marshmallows, of each one dram and
half; flowers of Broom and Violets, of each one dram; dried Figs and Sebestens,
of each twelve in number; cut and bruise them all, and put them to infuse in
Rhenish wine and Rainwater, of each three pints, for four and twenty hours;
then boil it until a third part be consumed; then strain it being cold, and to
the strained Liquor add a quarter of a pound of refined Sugar, and keep it for
Use.

It is much recommended to be of great Use in Diseases of the Reins; it
provokes Urine, and the Terms, breaks, dissolves, and expels the Stone, whether
in the Reins or Bladder; it opens and dissolves all slimy and Tartarous Matter
obstructing those Passages. Drink a good draught of it every morning fasting.

A most Precious Spirit to break and bring away Stone and Gravel.
Take roots of Elecampane, Burnet, Parsley, stones of a Perces head, Crabs Eyes,
Goats-blood, of each one ounce; seeds of water-Carrots, white Saxifrage,
Fennel-seed, Aniseed, Gromwel-seed, Roman Nettles, Broom, Juniper berries,
Winter-Cherries, of each half an ounce; Pepper, white, black and long, of each
two drams; bruise all the Ingredients; and mix them, and digest them in Spirit
of Wine for twenty days; then distill it in Balneo Mariae; then dissolve in the
distilled Spirit, Salt of Crystal two drams; then take a hundred Monkey-pease,
or Hoglice (those that roll themselves round when they are touched) bruise
them, and infuse them in the Spirit, until the Tincture is extracted; then
filter it, and keep it for Use.

This breaks the Stones in both Reins and Bladder, and brings it away by Urine,
as also the Gravel. Take it in Arsmart water; the Dose is from one spoonful to
three. It is a great Specific in this Case.

Another Stone-breaking Spirit.
Take the shells of an Estridge Egg, pulverize it, and digest it in Spirit of
Salt, until it be dissolved, and the Egg-shells appear in bits; then filtre,
and keep it for Use.

This Medicine was invented by the Emperor's Physicians, and as Closseus says,
is second to none against the Stone and stoppage of Urine; it opens strongly,
forces away the Stone and Gravel, expels Water in Dropsies, provokes the Terms,
and sometimes purges by Stool.

Dr. Bacon's Remedy against the Stone and Gravel, which he gave to Sir Kenelm
Digby.
Take four Gallons of running water, four pound of fine Sugar in Powder, Eringo
roots, and Raisins of the Sun stoned, of each one pound; a Branch of fresh
Rosemary: Boil all these together till half be consumed; then work it up with a
little Yeast; then Tunn it, and put the Peel of a fresh Limon into it: when it
has done working, you may bottle it if you please: of this drink morning and
evening, and whenever you are adry. The said Doctor has had great Experience
of this.

The L. of Denbigh his Remedy against the Stone, unto which he attributes his
Cure of the Stone, as he told Sir K. Digby.
Take a good ounce of Melon-seeds, and near a quart of small quick Beer, and a
little Rhenish wine; brew the chief quantity of the Drink with the yolks of six
new laid Eggs, and draw, the Milk out of the Almonds with another part of it,
add a little Spirit of Clary, and as much Virgin-Honey as will sweeten it; then
mingle and brew all together, and drink a large draught thereof.

This Drink is also very healing, and very strengthening every way, If you have
not good Melon-seeds, you may take a good quantity of blanched Almonds, and you
may put in Juice of Orange, and what you please.

An Experienced Remedy for the Stone and Gravel, and Stoppage of Urine.
Take wild Carot-seeds one dram, bruise them a little, and power upon them a
draught of white wine; stop the Bottle close, and let it stand all night; the
next morning strain it through a linen Cloth, and drink it.

This cured a Gentleman in France, who was much troubled with Stoppage of
Urine, and Viscosities; which they called the Stone; once taking this Remedy,
preserved him from all inconveniences of Urine for half a year. When the
Disease grew again upon him, he took again this Remedy.

Another for the same.
A Gentlewoman told me that she was much troubled with the Gravel, Strangury,
and stoppage of Urine, so that in ten days time she did not make a pint of
water, which was a great torment to her; she was taught to take Oil of Olive
and Milk, of each a quarter of a pint, and a spoonful of honey; mix all
together, and drink it blood-warm. This opened the passage of Urine, and caused
her to make water in abundance, with Gravel, and she was perfectly cured. Oil
of sweet Almonds would have been better than Sallet Oil.

Sir K. Digby's Remedy for the Gravel and Strangury, and Stoppage of Urine,
which I prepared many times for him, and by which he found great Relief.
Take the white of a new-laid Egg, and beat it well with a Spoon in a Porringer
for a quarter of an hour; then let it settle, and take off the Scum; mix the
clear with two spoonfuls of white wine, and four spoonfuls of red-Rose-water,
and put to it one ounce of Sugar Candy in powder; mix all well together, and
take it in the morning fasting, and another at night going to bed. Continue
this six or seven days.

Another very precious Remedy against the Stone, Gravel, Stoppage and Strangury
of Vrin, of Dr. Horstius.
Take Saxifrage roots one ounce; Jews stone one ounce and a half, asparagus and
Scordium, of each half a handful; seeds of Parsley, Bishops weed, Ivy of the
wall, broom, bay berries, of each two drams; prepare them all, and power thereon
a sufficient quantity of Rhenish wine; digest it in the Sun, or in warm Sand
for twenty days.

It is an excellent Remedy against the Stone and Gravel, Ulcers in the Reins
and Bladder; it is good against the Colic, it provokes Vrin and the Terms. The
Dose is seven or eight spoonfuls in morning fasting.

Another Remedy against the Stone and Gravel.
Make a Posset of a quart of Milk, Ale and white wine, a quarter of a pint;
then having taken off the Curd, put into the Posset Parsley roots, Leaves of
Pellitory of the wall, and Mallows, of each a handful, water cresses half a
handful, two sprigs of Thyme, Liquoras bruised one ounce; shred the herbs, and
let all boil until there remain but a quart, which sweeten with Sugar Candy,
and drink a Draught of it in the Morning, or at any time before meat.

Dr. Horstius his great and approved Water to break, dissolve and bring away
the Stone and Gravel.
Take of the Juice of Leeks, Onions and Radishes, of each two pounds; Juyces of
Limons, Pelitory and Mouse-ear of each half a pound, Calx of Crystal,
Pigeon-dung of each half a pound; digest it for ten days, then distill it.

This is recommended to be one of the most excellent Medicines yet known
against the Stone and Gravel: Dr. Salmon says he has known it do wonders, even
in desperate Cases: You may give it from one dram to half an ounce at a time,
in some fit Vehicle, as Rhenish wine, or Allone, or in Perficary water.

Note, That if you add to the Composition two pound of Monkey-pease, the head^
of them being pulled off, and thrown away, and then the Bodies bruised, it will
be much the better.

A Remedy to provoke Urine, much approved.
Take a black Flint stone that strikes Fire, heat it red hot in a strong fire,
then put it into a pint of white wine, and cover the pot, and when it is
thoroughly quenched, let the Patient drink it clear off.

Another for the same.
Take Horse-dung new made, boil it in Malago; then strain it, and lay the
Horse-dung very warm between two clothes, or Plaister-wise from the Throat to
the bottom of the Belly, eight or ten Inches broad; apply it at night, the
Patient lying upon his Back: apply hot Tiles on the outside to continue the
Heat.

This has been proved by many with good success.

To provoke Urine in an hours time, mix fine Powder of Saffron with black Soap,
and apply it to the Navil, being spread on Leather.

Sir Kenelme Digby's Excellent Remedy against the Stone, which the Lady Digby,
Sir Kenelme's Mother usually took, and found the greatest Benefit by it.
Gather the Leaves of Golden-rod when it is in its greatest vigor; dry them in
the shade, and when you are troubled with the Stone or Gravel, take one ounce
thereof (made into subtle Powder) in a small Glass of white wine and Milk, of
each a like quantity; repeat this as often as there is cause for it.

When the Herb is fresh and green, you may boil a handful of it in white wine
Posset Drink, and drink it instead of the dried Herb, which is to keep all the
year.

The Lord Ruthen's Receipt to prevent the growth of the Stone and Gravel.
Take French Barley a handful, wash it in several waters, Marsh-mallow roots,
half a handful, Liquoras two drams, sweet Fennel seed, a spoonful; boil these
in a Pottle of Spring Water till a Pint is consumed or more; then strain it,
and dissolve in it a dram of Gum Arabic.

Drink of this cold in the Morning fasting, and as often as you please, till it
gives you ease.

Another very good Remedy against the Stone and Gravel in the Kidneys.
Take of Mallows and Pelitory of the wall of each a handful; sweet Fennel
seeds, Grumwel seeds bruised, and Raisins of the Sun stoned, of each one ounce,
Liquoras scraped and bruised half an ounce, ten Figs sliced; boil all these in
a quart of new Milk (till a fourth part is consumed) then strain it, and with
white wine and small Ale, of each three quarters of a Pint make a Posset; drink
thereof at pleasure, half a Pint at a time, adding to it a spoonful of Syrup of
Marshmallows to every draught.

Another very good Remedy for the same, much approved.
Take Saxifrage, Pelitory of the wall, wild Thyme, young Radishes, Leaves and
Roots, Parsley Leaves and Roots, the tops of red Nettles, red Sage, and
Harrs-horn rasped, of each a handful; shred them all very small, or rather
stamp them, and infuse them all night in a Gallon of new milk; the next morning
distill it with a moderate heat. Drink of this Water with Syrup of Marshmallows.

Another for the Stone and Gravel, and for Strangury and Stoppage of Urine,
much approved.
Take the Fat of a Buck Rabbit, melt it, and anoint the Back and Reins with it.

This will open the Passage of Urine wonderfully. A Child was cured with this,
so that in twenty four hours it made four Pots full of Vrin.

Diet for prevention of the Stone and Gravel, or to be observed by such as are
troubled with it.
Forbear eating of Eggs, all salt and tart meats and sauces, Pork, Milk, or any
thing made of Milk, except Possets, Cabbage, Colworts, Colli-flowers, and such
like; let your Diet be Mutton, Veal, Rabbit and Fowl, and the quantity
moderate; let your Drink be of the midling sort, and not too stale; forbear
drinking Claret, drink Spanish Wine rather than French.

CHAP. V. Select Remedies against all sorts of COLLICKS.
Dr. Turner's Remedy for the Cholick and Stone.
TAke two drams of Jet, one dram of Elder-flowers, Date-stones, one Nutmeg,
Parsly-seeds, and Gromwel seeds, of each a spoonful; let them be all powdered
and finely searced; take the weight of sixpence thereof in a draught of
Posset Drink made with Ale and white Wine; take it in the Morning fasting, and
about four in the Afternoon.

Another for the same.
Drink of the distilled water of Parsley in white Wine or good Ale; it helps
the Colic or Strangury, and consumes the Stone.

Another for the Colic, Stone, Strangury and Dropsy.
Take Sena one ounce, Ginger, Aniseeds, Liquoras, Mace, Nettle-seeds, and great
Saffron, of each two penny weight, Cinnamon three penny weight; reduce it all into
a fine Powder, and take half a spoonful thereof in Posset, Wine, Ale or Broth.

A present Remedy for all kind of Colic whatsoever.
Take Mint, Sage (both of them dry) of each two handful; digest them in a
Pottle of the best Spirit of Wine in a Cucurbite for eight days; then distill it
in Balnco Mariae, taking but a third part of it; the rest is good, but in a
weaker degree. Take of the first Spirit a dram and half in two ounces of white
Wine.

For the Wind-Collick and Stone-Collick.
Take four long Pepper Corns, two Races of Ginger, both bruised, two sprigs of
Rosemary, the shells of two new-laid Eggs in fine Powder, the inner Skins being
taken away; boil them together for a quarter of an hour in a pint of white
Wine; then beat the yolk of an Egg in a little white Wine, let it boil a walm,
and brew them together with two ounces of Loaf-Sugar; drink it warm going to
bed.

This has helped very many.

Another for the Wind-Collick and Stone.
Take four hard red Onions, boil them in three pints of strong Ale till a quart
is consumed; then strain it, and drink it warm.

For the Colic and griping of the Guts.
Take Sage and Mint, boil them in a fit proportion of Claret Wine; then strain
it, and sweeten it with a little Sugar, and drink it warm.

Another for the same, from the Lady Drury.
Take a green Turf of Grass, and lay it to the Navil, the green side next the
skin, and let it remain there till you find ease.

Another for the Colic, Pain in the Stomach, or Worms.
Take a spoonful of the Powder of dried Oaange peels, drink it in Wine, Broth,
or warm Ale.

For the Colic or Ulcer in the Kidneys.
Make a Posset of Milk and white Wine, put thereto three spoonfuls of red
Nettles, and an ounce of Syrup of Althaea. Take this proportion for three
Mornings together, and by God's assistance, it will ease you of the pain.

For the Wind-Collick.
Take Columbine Leaves, Camomile, red Sage, of each a handful; stamp and press
the Juice out of them; put as much Beer to it as will make a Posset; and having
taken off the Curd, put into it Ginger and Nutmeg at discretion, and drink it
warm.

CHAP. VI. Of Remedies against all sorts of AGUES and FEVERS.
A Remedy against an Ague.
TAke a large Nutmeg, and grate half of it, and mix it with the yolk of an Egg
beaten; then put to it five or six spoonfuls of Plague-water; shake it well
together, and let the Patient drink it an hour or two before the Fit, or as soon
as he perceives that his Nails begin to change blew; repeat this until it be
cured.

This is a very wholesome Medicine, it strengthens the Back wonderfully, and
cannot be taken too often.

Another for the same.
Take a spoonful of good strong Mustard, mix it with a draught of hot Ale, and
let the Patient drink it whenever he perceives his Fit will come upon him.
Repeat this two or three times if it cures not the first time.

Another for the same.
Take four spoonfuls of the Juice of red Nettles, mix it with eight spoonfuls
of strong Ale, give this to the Patient warm an hour or two before his Fit; let
him lie warm covered in bed to sweat, with Bottles of hot wather at his feet
and under his Armpits to cause Sweat.

You need not give so much of the Juice to a Child; proportion it according to
their age: This quantity here set down is for midling persons. If his Fit be
uncertain, let him take it so soon as he feels any emotion of his approaching
Fit.

Another Remedy for an Ague.
Take of Rue and Peniroyal each a handful; boil them together in a Posset made
of Ale and Milk; drink a good draught thereof warm in a Morning fasting, and
when you go to bed; continue this for three days together.

This cured a Woman that gave suck.

Sir Kenelm Digby's Remedy for the Ague, which has cured many.
Take three drams of Venice or London Treacle; put it into a quarter of a pint
of white Wine, and put it into a little pot very close covered, let it stew
simpringly for half an hour, stirring it sometimes. Let the Patient take this
an hour or two before his Fit, shaking it well together, and drinking it warm,
let him go to bed, and cover himself warm to sweat. Repeat this two or three
times.

This Medicine was fetched far and near, and it was delivered to all that came
for it; and many persons were cured by it, both rich and poor; as also several
of Sir Kenelme 's Family. It is a wholesome and safe Remedy.

A Plaster for the Ague.
Take Hops and Salt, of each a handful, Corants a quarter of a pound; stamp
these together in a Mortar, and lay it to the wrists.

Another Plaster.
Take Linseed, and bruise it well in a Mortor; make it into a Pultice with the
Patient's own water, and lay it to the wrists.

Another.
Take of the Leaves of strong Tobacco six drams, Corants a small handful; beat
them together in a Mortar; then mix them with so much Turpentine as will make
them into a Salve; which spread upon Leather, and lay it to the wrists. Spread
it an inch thick, and lay it on twenty four hours before the Fit.

It will cure either a Tertian, Quotidian, or Quartan Ague.

The Countess of Kents Powder, according to Sir Kenelme Digby's Method, and as
it was prepared by his Order in his Laboratory, and as I prepare it now.
Take four ounces of black ends of Crabs-claws, taken when the Sun is in the
Sign of Cancer, Crab's-eyes, fine Pearls and Corals prepared, of each an ounce;
yellow Amber, half an ounce; roots of Contrayerva, Virginian Snakeroot, of each
six drams; Oriental Bezoar three drams; of the bones that are found in the
hearts of Stags, four scruples; reduce all into a subtle Powder, sprinkle the
Crabs-claws and Crab's-eyes, and the Powder of Pearls and Corals with a little
Juice of Limon to make it ferment a little: Then the next day mix all well
together, adding one ounce of Tincture of Saffron, and power upon the Mass (when
you incorporate it) three or four spoonfuls of Spirit of Honey, or Jelly of
Hartshorn, and Jelly of the Skins of Vipers that have been dried in the
shadow. Then add to this Composition one ounce of Trochisque of Vipers; grind
it all well together to make it well incorporate; then make it up into little
Balls, and let them dry, and keep them for Use.

The Virtues.
This Powder is a most Sovereign Remedy in all Pestilential and Epidemical
Distempers, in all Malignant, spotted or Purple Fevers; it drives out the Small
Pox and Measles, drives the Venom from the Heart, and hinders the Vapors to fly
up to the Head and Brain; it is sudorifick, and drives out by transpiration all
bad humors, resists Corruption, and corroborates and strengthens Nature.

The Dose is from six to twenty or thirty Grains, and in an extremity of the
Plague one may give it from thirty to forty grains.

Sir K. D. had this Powder always ready by him in his Closet; and many persons
of Quality far and near sent to him for some of it, when any of their Children
had the Small Pox or Measles, and never any did miscarry of all that took it.
It is also good against the biting of mad Dogs, stinging of Vipers, and other
venomous Beasts.

A Cordial Julep to be taken with this Powder in the hot Fit of an Ague and
Fever.
Take of the Countess of Kents Powder twelve grains, Cochincle two grains;
grind them together, and let the Patient take it in a spoonful of the following
Cordial Julep, drinking four spoonfuls more of the said Julep after it; this
must be given when the hot Fit has been one hour upon him, and once in two
hours let him take five spoonfuls more of the said Julep, and so continue as
long as the hot Fit lasts.

The Cordial Julep.
Take of the Elixetary-Milk-water, six ounces, of Plague-water three ounces;
double refined Sugar six drams, mix them together. This was ordered by Dr.
Brooks.

The Preparation of this Water you shall find in the Chapter of Cordial Waters.

Another Julep to cool in Fevers.
Take twelve parts of water, and two of Honey, boil them very gently together,
until you have scummed away all the Scum that will rise, and have clarified it
with Whites of Eggs; then take it from the Fire, and put to it one part of
Vinegar, and let it run twice or thrice through a Hypocras-Bag. Drink three or
four spoonfuls of it Morning, Evening, in the Night, once in two hours, or when
you will.

This hinders the Fermentation of sharp Humors, and their flying up to the
Head.

A refreshing and cooling Drink in a Burning Fever.
Take four Quarts of Fountain Water, and five spoonfuls of French Barley, scald
the Barley first in two or three waters, then boil it with half a pound of
Corants, until a Quart be consumed; then put into it two handfuls of
Wood Sorrel, and as much common Sorrel shred small, and stamped; let them
infuse in the Decoction for an hour without boiling; then strain it, and drink
thereof with the Juice of an Orange and a little Sugar.

An Excellent Julep of Lemons for a Calenture, to Burning Fever.
Take Limons and peel them, then press out all the Juice from them, which being
settled four and twenty hours, power off the Clear, and strain it, or filtre it,
and digest it in a stone-bottle in hot water or in Sand, for twelve days; then
filtre it again, and digest again as before: repeat this until it settle no
more faeces; in the mean time calcine the yellow Rind or Peel of the Lemons,
and with distilled water draw the Salt out of the Ashes; put this Salt to the
purified Juice; and digest them for some time together; then put it into little
Vials, of an ounce a piece, which is the Dose for a big body.

Two Dose of this will cure the greatest Burning Fever: it is best to give it
by it self; but if the Patient does not like the Taste of it, you may mix a
little Sugar with it.

This is much better than the Syrup of Lemons; for in the boiling there
evaporates away the greatest part of that which is the best of the Lemons. This
will keep good five or six years.

Dr. Farrar his approved Remedy for a Purple Fever.
Take Cochinele in fine powder thirty or forty grains to a person of twenty
years, give it in some fit Cordial Water, or in Wine, if you have no Cordial
Water at hand. If the Patient be younger, proportion it to his Age; as seven
grains to a Child of three years old, eighteen grains to one of 6 years; after
twice or thrice doing this, and keeping the Patient warm, the Disease will
break out in Spots: But fail not to give it once or twice after they are
stricken out.

Mr. Busson, a famous Surgeon in France, his Approved Remedy for a Burning
Fever, wherewith he cured many, and one in Sir Kenelm's presence.
Take of the Leaves of Honisuckle a good quantity, stamp them in a Mortar, put
as much fair water to it as will make a Glister; then strain it, and put it
into the Bladder or Syringe, and give it the Patient not quite cold, but
blood-warm.

It opens the Body, and cools the Veins.

A Drink good in a Burning or Intermitting Fever, or in the hot Fit of an Ague.
Take Whey, or Posset drink, if you have not Whey; boil in Borage, Bugloss,
Purslan, Endive, Succory, Sorrel, Violet Leaves, Lettice, Knot-grass, and
Mallows, with a Parsley root, and a Fennel root, all shred small; let them boil
until the strength is out; then strain it, and let the Patient drink thereof
blood-warm all the time of the Fever.

CHAP. VII. Select Remedies against the PLAGUE.
The King of Poland's Preservative against the Plague.
TAke the best Wine-Vinegar, six quarts, Juice of Celandine clarified, nine
pints, Leaves and Roots of Avens, Roots of Elecampane, of each one ounce; Roots
of Angelica, Zedoary, Juniper Berries, of each two ounces; Sage one handful;
digest this two days in a gentle heat; then strain it, and keep it in Bottles
clean stopped.

This is a powerful Remedy, both for preserving from, and curing the Plague,
and other Malignant Fevers: It also clears the Eyesight to a wonder, taking a
little Glass-full of it in the Morning fasting.

It is recorded that no man that drank this Medicine in the Great Plague 1592.
was infected with it, but was preserved from it and all other Diseases.

Another great Preservative against the Plague.
Take Sage, Leaves of Elder, of Rubus Idens, Rue, Rosemary, Wood Sorrel, of
each half a handful; stamp them all together in a stone-Mortar; then put them
into a stone-Pitcher, or other like Vessel, and power upon them a pint of good
white Wine, and a pint of Vinegar; let it stand to infuse for four and twenty
hours; then strain it, and add to the strained Liquor half a pint of
Angelica-water; then dissolve in it Mithridate and Venice-Treacle, of each one
dram. Take of this Liquor one spoonful in the Morning and at Night, and you
shall be preserved: And if you fear you have taken any infection, take two or
three spoonfuls of it, and go to Bed, and procure Sweat.

The Great Antidote and Preservative which Sir Kenelm Digby bid me get prepared
for his Family, when that Great Plague began in London in the year 1665, was
thus:
Take a pound of the Leaves of Wood Sorrel, and pound them by themselves half
an hour; then take three pound of fine Sugar in powder, and mix these together,
and keep it stirring and beating for three hours more; and then take four
ounces of Mithridate or London- Treacle, and pound them all together for half
an hour longer, which makes four hours in all; then put it up in Gally-pots,
and tie it up close with a Bladder, or Leather, or Paper.

In time of Infection, take the quantity of a large Nutmeg every Mornng
fasting; and if you have taken any Infection, or if you find your self stricken
with any Disease at the Heart, or pain in the stomach, take almost as much
more, and go to Bed, and procure a moderate Sweat for an hour: Of this I took
my self, and went up and down the City every day in the time of the Plague, and
through God's Blessing was preserved, and all those that took it.

To preserve one in time of Infection, Sir Kenelm says, it is good to eat a
little of the Tops of Rue with Bread and Butter, and a little very old strong
Cheese in the Morning, and to drink a Glass of Stomack-water, Claret Wine, or
wine and water after it.

An Excellent Perfume to burn and perfume the House in time of Infection.
Take Talk, and reduce it to Powder, and mix it with Vinegar, and burn it upon
a Fire-shovel of Coals, and your House will be preserved from any infectious
Air. This has been sufficiently experienced.

Another Perfume.
Take Roots of Angelica dried and pulverised; mix this powder with Vinegar, and
let it steep therein three or four days; then put of this mixture upon a hot
Brick every Morning and Night.

In Germany and Holland in time of Infection, they burn Juniper Berries on a
Chaffin-dish of Coals, or upon a fire-shovel of Coals, and so go about the
house with it, and into every Rohm. If the Juniper Berries be bruised, and mixed
with Vinegar; and then burned it will be more effectual.

My Lady Allens Plague-Water.
Take Rue, Egrimony, Wormwood, Salendino, Sage, Balm, Mugwort, Dragons,
Pimpernel, Marigolds, Fetherfew, Burnet, Sorrel, Scabious, Wood-bittany, brown
Mayweed, Avens, Turmantil, Carduus Benedictus, of each a handful; Rosemary two
handfuls; Angellica, Burdocks, of each one handful; shred all these together
very small; then steep them in the best white Wine, as much as will cover the
Herbs; then slice in a half quarter of a pound of Elecampane-roots: let all
these lie in steep three Days and Nights, stirring them once in twelve hours;
covering the Tub close when you still it; lay it not above an Inch thick in the
bottom; save the first running by it self.

The London-Plague-Water.
Take Roots of Angelica, Masterwort, Butterbur, Piony-roots, of each four
ounces; Vipers-grass, Verginian Snake-roots, of each one ounces; leaves of Rue,
Rosemary, Balm, Carduus Benedictus, Scordium, Marigold with the flowers,
Dragon, Gotsrue, Mint, of each two handfuls; shred the Herbs, and cut the
Roots, and stamp them a little; and infuse them for two days in six quarts of
Nants-brandy; then put thereto six quarts of fair Water, and distill it in a
Limbec, drawing from it two Gallons, which put up in Bottles, and hang two
drams, of Safron in it, tied up in a rag; or make the Tincture of two drams of
Safron, with the first running; and mix that with the rest of your water. To
every quart of this water put two ounces of fine Sugar.

This is an excellent thing against the Plague, and all malignant Distempers;
as the small Pox, Measles, Malignant, spotted and purple Fevers, etc. The Dose
is from one ounce to two in Angelica, or Sage-water, sweetened with Syrup of
Clove Gilly-flowers: you may also make a Julep of it with Alexite^i Milk-water,
as is directed in the Chap. for Fevers.

Dr. Burges, his sovereign Antidote against the Plague.
Take Sage, Rue, of each one handful; shred and stamp them, and boil them in
three pints of Malmsy till a pint is consumed; then strain it, and set it over
the fire again, and put it a pennyworth of long Pepper; Ginger half an ounce;
Nutmegs and Cloves, of each two drams; beat and mix them together, and let it
boil a Walm or two; then put into it one ounce of Methridate, and half an ounce
of Treacle, and a quarter of a pint of hot Angelica-water. Take of this a
spoonful at a time every Morning during the Contagion; and if already infected,
take two spoonfuls and sweat upon it.

Under God you may be confident of this sovereign Antidote; for there has
never been Man, Woman or Child, yet heard of, that made timely use of it, that
it has not secured. It is excellent also in the small Pox and Measles, or any
malignant Fever.

Another very sovereign Antidote.
Take choice Myrrh, Cinnamon, Aloes, Succotrina, of each three drams;
Bolarmoniach, Mastick, Lignum-Aloes, Cloves and Mace, of each half a dram;
powder the Myrrh, Aloes, and Mastick together by themselves, and the other
Ingredient together by it self; then mix them well together; and keep it in a
Glass close stopped.

Take every Morning early two penny-weights of this powder in a Glass of white
Wine mingled with a little water; and you may boldy venture, without fear under
God, among the infected without danger.

Sir Walter Raleigh's Experiment to draw forth a rising or Plague Sore.
Take a Cock-Chicken, pull the Rump bare, and hold it close to the sore till
the venom is drawn out, for then the Chicken will die; but you must apply fresh
till the Chicken lives.

A sovereign Remedy against the Plague.
Take Elder-leaves, Rue, red Sage, and red Bramble-leaves; stamp and strain
them severally with a quart of white Wine for all the several strainings; then
mix it all together, and add some white Wine-vinegar, and Syrup of Wormwood;
drink a spoonful of this Morning and Evening; and God willing it will secure
you; for there is no Medicine more effectual than this. If the Sore appears,
use the Rump of the Chicken abovementioned.

In the Chapter of Cordial Waters you will find more Plague-waters.

An approved Remedy to cure the biting of a mad Dog, whether Man or Beast.
Take a handful of Rue, shred and stamp it; one dram of Treacle, and a spoonful
of the shavings or filings of Tin; put all these into a quart of Ale, and boil
it till half be consumed; then strain it; and give the Patient thereof two
spoonfuls, twice a day, Morning and at Night.

A most excellent Remedy against the biting of mad Dogs, Vipers, Serpents, or
Snakes, experienced by a famous Surgeon
Take of the lesser Consolida, or Larks-spur; Chervil the white ends of Leeks,
the tops of Broom, of each two handfuls; a little new Cream of the
Morning-Milk, and a good handful of Salt; stamp them all together in a
stone-Mortar, and with Juice rub the part grieved, which will be hard in the
Flesh, and sometimes black; then lay the mark upon the part poultiswise, and
tie it fast on with Rouls: the swelling will assuage in a short time, and the
evil will be cured. Sir Kenelm D^ relates, that the said Surgeon had cured
some with this Remedy, whom other Chirurgions would have cut off the Arms or
Legs bitten by venomous Beasts; and that among the rest, he cured a man in Sir
Ks. presence, whose Arm was as black as Ink, being bitten by a Serpent.

Against Venom or Poison
Take Seeds of Sage, bruise them, and boil them in Goats Milk, what quantity
you please, till it is wasted to a third part. Drink thereof three days; It is
a very sovereign and effectual Remedy.

For biting of a mad Dog.
Take rusty Bacon stamp it well with Bittony, Agrimony, of each equal parts,
apply it to the Wound.

For biting of a Serpent, or any venomous Creature.
Drink the Juice of Plantine; and stamp Celendine and Plantine together, of
each a like quantity; temper them with Urine, the staler the better, and apply
it to the sore; it will assuage the swelling, and draw out the venom.

Also anoint the place with the Oil of shell-Snails being pricked with a Needle,
and lay thereto a Snail unprickt.

CHAP. VIII. Select Remedies against the FALLING SICKNESS.
A very Efficacious Remedy against the Falling Sickness, wherewith Sir Kenelm
Digby cured a Minister's Son at Frankfort in Germany, in the Year 1659, to
which I was an Eyewitness.
TAke of the Skull of a Man that died of a violent Death, of the parings of
Nails of a man, of each three drams; Reduce this to a fine Powder, and grind it
upon a Marble-stone; then take Polypode of the Oak dried two drams, Misleto of
the Oak gathered in the wane of the Moon half an ounce, Misleto of the
Tile-tree two drams, Piony roots half an ounce; reduce all into a subtle
Powder; then take six ounces of Sugar, boil it to the consistence of Sugar of
Roses; then mix all the Powders with it, and stir them well together over the
fire, that they may well incorporate together; then take it from the fire, and
make it up into Tablets or Lozenges, about a dram a piece; whereof, give one in
the Morning fasting, and another two or three hours after Dinner, and another
two hours after Supper: Continue this so long as the Lozenges last.

Another for the same.
Sir Kenelm Digby relates, That in the year 1663. the Lady Warwick told him,
That a Daughter of her Husband's Elder Brother had the Falling Sickness in the
greatest extremity; so that she fell like a Logg seven or eight times a day,
without any motion; They had put her into the hands of the Ablest Physicians in
England, who in effect could do her no good. A Gentleman, one of their
Neighbors, undertook the Cure, and performed it thus:

Take true Misleto of the Oak, the Leaves, the Berries, and all the tender
Branches, dry it gently in an Oven, after the Bread is drawn; then reduce it to
a fine Powder; of which, give as much as will lie upon a Shilling for one of
ripe years; for middle-aged, a Sixpence; for a Child, a Groat: Give it Mornings
and Evenings in Cowslip-water, three days before, and three days after the Full
of the Moon; Repeat this Remedy for some Months together.

This Cured also my Lord Herbert 's Son, and many other persons of Quality.

The best time to gather the Misleto, is in the Month of September, when it
bears Berries, and in the waning of the Moon.

Dr. Mynsight his Excellent Remedy against the Falling Sickness.
Take Sena two ounces, Turbith, Mechoacan, of each half an ounce; Raspings of
Elkshoof and Man's Skull, Nutmegs, of each two drams; Roots and Seeds of Peony,
Misleto of the Oak, of each half a dram; Cardamoms, Cassia ligna, Cloves, of
each one dram; Flowers of the Male-Peony, of Lilly-convallis, of Lavender, of
the Tyle-tree, of each half a dram; Rhenish Wine, one quart and half a pint:
Digest it for two days in a warm place; then strain it, and sweeten it with
double refined Sugar, three ounces.

This has been confirmed by many Experiences, to be a singular Remedy against
most Diseases of the Head and Brain; and Dr. Mynsight says it is a Divine
Remedy against the Falling Sickness, taking three or four ounces of it in the
Morning fasting.

CHAP. VIII. Of Choice Remedies against all Diseases of the EYES, and to
strengthen the Sight.
An Excellent Water against Dimness of Sight.
TAke Benjamin one ounce, pure Honey, half a pound, water of Fennel and Rue, of
each two ounces; Marjoram-water, one ounce; mix them together, and distill it in
a glass Still, or in our Engine.

This Water has made some see that have been quite blind, washing twice or
thrice a day with it: It strengthens the Sight wonderfully.

Dr. Scroderus his Excellent Water for the Eyes.
Take water of Eyebright, of Fennel, Vervain, of each three ounces; Juyces of
Celan, dine, Rue, of each two ounces; long Pepper; Cloves, Nutmegs, Saffron, of
each one scruple, Rosemary flowers, half a handful; Sarcocol-Aloes, of each
three drams; Galls of Partridges, one ounce; cut and bruise all small; then add
Sugar, Honey of Roses, of each one ounce; put all into a Glass Alembick, and
distill it in Balneo Mariae with a gentle fire; to every ounce of this Water put
one dram of rectified Spirit of Tartar.

This Water being dropped into the Eyes two or three times a day cures Suffusioon
or Catarachs, Pearls, Films, and other defects of the Eyes; as Experience has
often testified.

Another for the same.
Take white Vitriol, two drams; Barberries husked, three drams; Rose and
Fennel-water, of each one pint; boil them with a gentle fire to the consumption
of half; then add Cmaphir tbree drams; then filter it through gray paper; and
keep it for use.

This Water takes away Films, Spots, Pearls, and other things which dim the
Sight.

A Green Eye-Water, much Approved.
Take Verdigreece two drams; yellow Orpiment one dram; white Wine and
Rose Water, of each five ounces; boil it gently five or six Walms; then take it
off, and leave it upon the Faeces without straining it.

This Water being dropped into the Eyes, cures the Pin and Web, takes away the
Heat and Inflammation of the Eyes.

A Water against Heat, Redness, and sharp Rheum of the Eyes.
Take Rosewater, Eyebright-water, of each two ounces; of Trochisci albi Rhasis,
one dram; prepared Tutia, twenty grains; mix them together, and keep them in a
Glass for Use; wash the Eyes therewith two or three times a day.

Another Water for the Eyes.
Take Rose, Plantane, and Fennel-water, of each two ounces: Tutia prepared, two
drams; Fennel-seeds beaten, half an ounce; mix it all together, and keep in a
Phyol close stopped: when you use it, strain a little of it, and wash the Eyes
there with two or three times a day.

An Ointment good for the Eyes
Take Spirit of Wine, two Spoonfuls; Spirit of Therebintin, one spoonful; the
yolk of a new-laid Egg, and a spoonful of fresh Butter; beat and mix it
together, and put a little of it into the corner of the Eye.

Dr. Salmon's Excellent Eye-Water.
Take Rose Water three quarts, white Vitriol, five drams, digest them ten days;
then filter it; then digest it ten days more; then filter it again, and add
Saccharum Saturni, six drams, Camphire half a dram; digest again twenty days;
then boil it, and filter it, and keep it for Use.

The Author says he has made many see which had been blind several years with
Films, Pearls, and other things, by barely washing the Eyes therewith four or
five times a day for some time. It cures all manner of red and blood-shot Eyes,
and Rheumatick, sore and inflamed; for which it is to be esteemed as a Jewel.

A precious Water for the Eyes, that has restored the sight after some years
lost in a short time.
Take red Rose-leaves dried, Smallage, Maidenhair, Hysop, Endive, Succory, red
Fennel, Ribwort, Celandine, Eyebright, of each two handfuls; wash them, and dry
them, and steep them in white Wine for twelve hours; then distill it, and wash
the Eyes with the water.

Another Eye-water excellent for Pin or Web.
Take white Wine, red Rose Water, each a pint; put them into a bottel; and add
to it, Aloes, Hepatick, Lapistutia, in fine powder, and of the finest Sugar, of
each four ounces; stop the bottel close, and set it in the hot Sun for a
month, shaking it two or three times a day.

This Water is most Excellent, for any Pin, Web, or Film upon the Eyes: It also
takes away the itching, heat, and soreness thereof.

Another precious Water for the Eyes.
Take Ground Ivy, Celandine, and Daisies, of each one handful; stamp them with
a little fine Sugar, or Sugarcandy in a stone-Mortar, then add half a pint of
Rose Water; then press it out, and put the liquor in a bottel, and keep it for
use.

This is recommended to be one of the best Eye-medicines that can be made. It
takes away all manner of Inflammations, Spots, Webs, Itchings and smartness in
the Eyes; strengthens the Sight, and restores it though near lost. Dip a
Feather in it, and drop it into the Eye.

Another Excellent Water, for sore, red, or blood-shot-Eyes.
Take Lapae Calaminaris the worth of a groat, make it red-hot in the fire, then
quench it in a pint of white Wine; do this nine times presently one after
another; then grind some of the same Stone to fine powder, and put it into the
Wine; put all into a Glass well-stopped, and drop some of it into the Eyes with
a feather.

For a Pearl in the Eye.
Take an Egg, make a hole in it at one end, and shake out the white and yolk;
then take the Cocktread, and put it into the shell again, with the quantity of
a Haslle-nut of Honey, and the quantity of a Pea of white Copperas; then fit up
the shell with Conduit-water, and set it to boil gently upon hot Embers, till
half of it be consumed; then filtre it, and drop frequently thereof into the
Eyes; it will continue good a Fortnight.

An Approved Water for the Eyes; especially for the thick Cream growing over
the sight of the Eyes.
Roast an Egg very hard; then peel it, and cleave it in the middle, and take out
the yolk; then put into it a small piece of Alum, and while it is hot join it
together again) then put it in a Cloth, and wring it very hard, and save the
water that will drip from it; then put into this Water a little fine powder of
Ginger; mix it together, and drop it into the Eye with a feather two or three
times a day.

For sore, red, and blood-shot-Eyes.
Take green Parsley, stamp it very well with the white of an Egg; lay it to the
sore Eyes; it will soak out the Blood, and take away the redness.

A Drink for dimness of sight caused by swimming in the Brows.
Take a handful of Suddernwood, boil it in a quart of white Wine; sweeten it
with Sugar; and drink thereof Morning and Evening.

Another Drink, which cures all Pains, Inflammations, Soreness and Defluctions
in the Eyes. Much approved of by Sir Kenelm Digby.
Take a handful of Ground-Ivy-leaves, and stalks, wash it clean, and swing it
in a Cloth; then shred it, and stamp it a little; then boil it in a quart of
good Ale to a pint; then strain it; and take half a pint of it in the Morning
fasting, and the other half at Night going to Bed.

This is as admirable also to cure all Headache, Coughs of the Lungs,
Consumptions, Stone and Gravel. It also cures the Jaundies, Obstructions of the
Liver and Spleen.

Another Remedy for the Eyes.
Take English Copperas four ounces; grind it with one ounce of Camphir; put
this in a Pipkin, and cover it with a Poringer, with some weight in it to keep
it down; then set it upon gentle fire, to calcine it; and when it is hard take
off the Pot and let it cool; then take out the matter and grind it to powder;
and add four ounces of Bolarmoniac; then sift it finely. Take of this powder
half an ounce, put into it a quart of water, and boil it together; then put it
in a Glass, and keep it for use. Dip a little green Sarsenet in it, and shut
your Eyes, washing only the Eyelids, except they be very ill and inflamed, and
then you may drop some into them; and if you find it too strong of it self,
take one spoonful of it, and two spoonfuls of Rose Water, and so use it.

To restore a decayed sight, and refresh and strengthen the Memory.
Take Eyebright gathered in August, before Sunrising; make it into small
bundles, and hang them up to dry where the Sun comes not; then bruise them
grossly, and infuse them in white Wine; and drink thereof three or four times a
day, leaving the Wine always upon the Herbs.

An Excellent Remedy to strengthen the Optic Nerves, help a weak sight, and
kill a Pin or Web.
Take a handful of Mayweed, two Munky-pease; (some call them Sows or Hog-lice,
these which roll themselves round like a Pepper-corn when you touch them.)
stamp and strain this together into a quart of Ale, putting in a little Ale to
strain with. Drink of this till you find help; which God willing you will do in
three or four quarts.

Another Excellent Water for the Eyes to strengthen the sight.
Take three quarts of Mallago-Sack, six ounces of Ship Bisquets, four ounces of
white Sugarcandy; reduce them to fine powder, two handfuls of dried
Elder-flowers; let them infuse twenty four hours; then distill it in Balneo
Mariae; and with a piece of soft Sponge bath your Eyes therewith Morning and
Evening when you go to Bed, and at any other time.

To stay a great flux of Rheum in the Eyes, often proved.
Take the white of an Egg, beat it until it is all froath; then let it settle,
and cut a round piece of Sheeps-leather, prick it full of holes, and wet it in
the Egg-water, taking off the froth; then scrape over it some Bolarmoniach, and
apply it to the Temples; but if the humor abound, then lay a piece along the
Forehead at Night when you go to Bed. Let it reach over the Temples.

To draw back Rheum from the Eyes.
Take a red Colewort-leaf, as much in quantity of red Sage, and a little
Bay Salt, stamp them together, and put it in a Linen cloth, and lay it in the
hollow of the Nape of the Neck; use it two or three Nights together; and God
willing it will draw the Rheum from the Eyes.

Another approved one for a Pin or Web.
Take white Sugarcandy in fine powder, Honey and red Rose Water, of each one
handful; boil it together, and scum it clear, and drop it into the Eye.

Another to dry Rheum, to strengthen and cleanse the sight.
Take Rose Water, one ounce, and a spoonful of white Wine; Tutia, one dram;
Aloes, Epatica, and white Sugarcandy, of each twenty grains, all in fine
powder; put all into a bottel; and drop thereof now and then into the Eyes.

For redness, soreness, itching, heat, and inflammations of the Eyes.
Take Celendive, three-leav'd-grass, Daisy-leaves, and Ground Ivy, of each one
handful; pick, wash, and drean them; then stamp them, and put in four spoonfuls
of white or red Rose Water; then strain it, and put into it the bigness of a
Wall-nut of white Sugarcandy; keep it in a Glass for use.

It is very good for the purpose aforesaid: the Ground Ivy is Alehoof.

Another for the same, and to strengthen the Sight.
Take Rose and Plantine-water, of each two ounces; Aloes, Epatica, half a dram;
white Copperas, two drams; white Sugarcandy, one dram; boil them with a soft
fire; being cold put it in a Glass for use; drop thereof into the Eyes.

Another for the same.
Take Plantine, two handfuls; Housleek, one handful; stamp and strain them, and
let the Juice settle; then power off the clear, and add half as much Rose Water,
the fourth part of a spoonful of powder of white Sugarcandy, and quench in it
Lapis Caluminaris the bigness of a Wall-nut. Drop four drops of this water into
the Eyes, Morning and Evening, lying upon your back.

For a Pearl in the Eye.
Take Hemlock, stamp it in a stone-Mortar; then put little Honey to it, and
work them well together: If the Pearl be in the right Eye, apply a Plaster of
it to the left Wrist, if in the left Eye, to the right Wrist; let it continue
there three or four days.

Another for the same.
Take the Marrow that is in a Goose-wing, mingle with it Ear-wax, and work them
well together; and anoint the Eye with it, and it will kill the Pearl.

For a prick with a Bush, stripe or blow in the ball of the Eye.
Take the white of a new-laid Egg, beat it, and then mix it with Honey; set it
over a soft fire, and keep it stirring that it may not curdle; then spread it
on a little Flax, and lay it on the Eye, changing it every Morning and Evening;
and by the blessing of God it will help it.

Another for a stroke or blow in the Eye.
Take Juice of Smallage, Juice of Fennel, and the white of a new-laid Egg, beat
them well together, and apply it to the sore Eye.

Another for a stroke in the Eye.
Stamp Wormwood with the white of an Egg, and lay it warm three days together
to the Eye or Eyes; then wash the Eye with Plantine-water and Honey.

A precious Water for the Eyes.
Take Smallage, Fennel, Plantine, Egrimony Bittony, Eyebright, Scabious, Rice,
Pimpernel and Sage; shred them all small, and steep them in the Urine of a
male-Child, with a little Frankinsens; then distill them. Bath the Eyes with
this water.

CHAP. IX. Mr. Lochers, an able Apothicarry of London, his excellene Oil for
Deafness; approved by himself, and given to Sir K. Digby.
TAke Oil of bitter Almonds, and Oil of Spicknard, of each six drams; black
Hellebore, half a scruple; Coloquintida, half a d^^; Oil of Exceter, two drams;
Juice of Onyons, Juice of Rue, of each two drams; boil these gently till the
Juices be consumed; then strain it, and add two drops of Oil of Aniseed, and
one of Oil of Oryganum. Power a drop or two of this Oil into the Ear, and lie
upon your Bed with that Ear upwards that you intend to drop into; lie still for
a quarter of an hour after; then drop into the other if it require. It is to be
continued a Month or two, or three, as you find benefit: when you have dropped
into the Ear, you must stop it with a little black wool dipped in the Oil.

This has curcd many of thick hearing and noise in the Ears, come by cold or
sickness

Another Remedy much approved for the same.
Take a large Eel, flaw it, and cut it into three pieces; then stick them with
Rosemary and Sage, and bake them in a pan in the Oven, laying them upon two
sticks in the pan to keep them from falling into the liquor in the bottom; then
strain the liquor, and scum off the Oil or Fat; whereof take four spoonfuls,
and as much spirit of Wine; mix them together; take of this mixture two
spoonfuls; of Juice of Onyons, and Juice of the white ends of Leeks, of each
one spoonful; put all into a Phiol, and stop it close, and shake it well for an
hour, to make them well incorporate together: power two or three drops of this
into the Ear: and in all things observe the directions as in the former.

This was given me by a worthy Gentleman at Paris, who assured me he had cured
the Governor of Callais his Sectreary with it, who had been deaf near twenty
years; his deafness coming by a sickness.

Another Excellent Remedy for the same.
Take an hundred of the large Ants Eggs, black Hellebore, Radishes sour bread,
sweet Almonds, white Amber, of each one ounce; Pulp of Coloquintida, Castor,
Leaves of sweet Marjoram, Wormwood, Savin, Rue, of each two drams; bruise and
mix, and infuse them in two quarts of spirit of Wine rectified; digest them
twenty days; then distill it in Balneo Mariae; then put into the distilled
spirit an hundred live Munky-pease bruised; digest again for twenty four hours;
then filter and keep it for use.

Put a few drops of this Spirit into the Ear Morning and Evening, stopping the
Ear with black Wool immediately; and it will take away the difficulty of
hearing and deafness; as also all kind of noise, continue it till you are cured.

Another Remedy for Deafness.
Take of the Juice of Bittony, mingle it with a Woman's Milk that gives suck to
a Boy; dip black wool therein, and put it into the Ear; use it eleven days
together or more; if in that time you find any benefit by it, then take Milk,
boil it with Oatmeal, and Juice of Bittony; and lay it poultiswise over the
Ears Night and day; and continue it for some time.

Another Remedy against Deafness that comes of Cold.
Take a ranged Loaf of Bread of a mean scantling, well leavened and baked, cut
it asunder in the middle, and lay both the parts very hot to both the Ears,
first laying a linen Cloth doubled next to the Skin as thin as the Patient can
endure the heat; bind them on fast with a Cloth fastened on the head, and let it
continue as long as the Patient feels any warmth, and then he may take another;
if the Cold be great, you must use it for two or three Mornings together; take
heed of taking Cold when you leave them.

Dr. Clodius his Remedy against Deafness.
Drop into the Ear one drop (no more) of Oil or Quintessence of Rosemary (which
will not burn or pain them) and after it is soaked in, by lying with that Ear
up, stop the Ear with black wool dipped in the Spirit of Rosemary. Repeat the
Drop after a day still as you find need.

This will cure a Deafness caused by Cold and Humors clogging and benumming the
Ears, and causing sometimes pain in them.

Another for the same.
Take red Mint or Horse-mint, mortify and squeeze it in the hand till it
renders Juice; then take it with its Juice, and put it in the Ear; change it
often; this will help the Deafness if the person has heard before.

Another for the same.
Take Rue, Rosemary, Sage, Vervain, Marjoram of each a handful; of Camomil two
handful; stamp them to mash, and mould them, Rie-Dough, make thereof, one Loaf,
bake it as other Bread; then cut it in the middle, and as hot as may be
suffered bind to your Ears, and keep them on warm and close for one day.

CHAP. X. Select Remedies against the MEGRIM and HEADACHE
A Sovereign Remedy for all Headache, much approved.
TAke a good handful of Ground Ivy or Ale-hoof, wash it clean and swing it in a
Cloth, then shred it and stamp it a little, and boil it in a quart of strong
Ale to a pint: Give half of it in the Morning fasting, and half at night going
to bed.

This cures also all Pains, Inflammations and Defluxions in the Eyes; it is
good against the Jaundies, Coughs of the Lungs, Consumptions, Stone and Gravel,
Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen. Sir Kenelm says, That the Herb being
stamped, and applied to a Felon like to a Cataplasm, cures it marvellously and
speedily: it is admirable for old Sores, which if they need cleansing, you may
add a little Copper as and Honey.

An Approved Remedy for Frenzy and Madness.
Sir Kenelm Digby relates, that he was assured by a person of Credit, that one
cured a woman that had been mad some years, by giving her a draught of the
Juice of Ground Ivy, or Jill-go-by-th' ground, at once taking; and they tried
it afterward upon several others, and it had always the same infallible effect.

Another Approved Remedy for Frenzy and Madness.
Take the Juice of Sage, of Burnet, and of Ground Ivy, and give it to the
Patient to drink.

For the Headache.
Take red Rose Leaves dried, mix them with Wheat Flour, Vinegar, and Oil of
Roses, and some Housleek; boil them together until it be thick; the spread it
upon a Linen Cloth, and lay it upon the Forehead, and Temples, and it will
ease the pain.

The Conserve of Rue is excellent for the Head and Brain preserving against
Apoplexy, Paralisie, and the like. Make it thus; beat two parts of fine Sugar,
with one of Rue into a Conserve; eat thereof in the Morning fasting about the
bigness of a large Nutmeg.

Another for the Headache or Megrim.
Take of the Ointment called Vnguentum desicativum Rubrum, one dram; Mastick
powdered, two drams; mix them, and make them into a Plaster; which spread upon
Leather, and lay it to the Temple on the pained side, or on both sides, and
renew it every other day until the pain cease. This I have approved.

Another for the same.
Take a spoonful and half of the Whites of Eggs beaten, a spoonful of white
Wine-vinegar, Pepper in powder, and Frankinsens, of each two drams; a spoonful
of Honey; mix all these well together, with as much Wheat Flour as will make
it into a Plaster, whereof make a Plaster, taking it all, and apply them to the
Temples, changing them every Morning and Evening.

An Epitheme for the Forehead to take away the Headache.
Take four ounces of Rose Water; Oil of Roses, one ounce; Rose-vinegar half an
ounce; mix them together, and beat the white of an Egg therein; dip
Linen Cloth In it, being milk warm, apply them to the Forehead.

It asswages the pain of the Head, and repelleth hot vapors.

Another for the Headache.
Boil Camomil and Bittony in red Wine, and drink thereof.

For noise in the Head, or troubling in the Ears.
Take a green Ashen-stick, and put one end into the fire; and out of the other
end will issue forth waters, which must be saved and mixed with a little Sivet;
drop thereof a drop or two into the Ear, and immediately stop it with a little
black wool moistened in the same; lie still a quarter of an hour with that Ear
upwards you dropped into; then drop also into the other in the same manner.

An approved Medicine for a scald head.
Take half a peck of Oyster-shells, where the Oysters are newly taken out, burn
them in a clear fire, and when they are well calcined reduce them to a fine
powder, and sift them as fine as flower; then mix it with unguentum album so
that it be pretty stiff; keep it in a Gally-pot for use; it will last a year.
Anoint the Head with it every day.

This is good also to dry up a waterish, itching humor in any part of the
Body.

Another for a scald head.
Take Oil of Olives, two ounces; put it into a dishful of clear running water;
stir and beat them well together, as you would make Butter; then add some fine
powder of Brimstone, and May-butter, and make an Ointment thereof and anoint
the head therewith.

Another for the same.
Take Rosen, half a pound; Pitch, two ounces; then put into it the bigness of a
small egg of Hogg-fleet; (Barrows-grease) let them boil a little together,
stirring it well; then take it off, and keep it in a Gally-pot for use.

Clip off all the hair from the scald head, as close as possible may be. Then
whiles the Ointment is yet warm, spread it upon new Lockerum that was never
washed in Soap, and out them into diverse Plasters, and keep them by you; you
may make as many at once as will serve a month; when you lay them on, warm them
a little before the fire only to make them stick; dress it twice in a week; and
when you see that the Plasters have taken away the hair, and that the head is
as bare as ones hand; then dress it but once a week: you must pick off that
hair with the point of a Knife that the Plasters bring not off with them; which
you must do every time you dress it till all the hair is clean come of: Begin
to dress it Michaelmas, and continue it till March is past: and when the Head
and Skin looks white, then it is a Cure; but as long as it looks red it is not
cured; therefore dress it until it looks white. The hair you clip off from the
Patients head, you must burn, and mix the ashes with the Ointment while it is
boiling.

For the Headache.
Take Cloves, Mace, Nutmeg, of each one dram; fine Sugar, half an ounce; reduce
all to a fine powder; and take the fourth part thereof in a Cup of warm Posset
made with Ale. It is very effectual. Also the Juice of Ground Ivy snuffed up in
the Nose, does purge the Head, and does often cure very great and old pains in
the Head.

Another for the Headache, and to draw humors out of the head and face.
Take a new-laid Egg, open the top, and put out part of the white, then put in
some powder of Commin-seed by degrees, and powder of Aniseed; then close up the
Egg with course paste; then set it in the Embers to roast leasurely till it is
very hard, and then cut it in the middle, and lay it hard to the Nape of the
Neck.

It is approved.

For a Cold and stuffing in the Head, to draw Rheum from the Head, and comfort
the Brain.
Take an Orange, and pare off very thin the yellow Rind; roll it up
conveniently to thrust up into the Nostril, turning the inner moist side
outward to be next your flesh within the Nose; put a roll into each Nostril.

It will cause sneesing, and will make much water run down at the Nose, and
comfort the Brain.

Dr. Scroderus, his Cephallick Wine for the Head and Brain, etc.
Take Roots of Avens, two ounces and half; of Succory, one ounce and a half; of
Elecampane one ounce; Cetarach, Paulsbittony, Carduus, Liverwort, Centory, of
each, one handful; dried Orange-peels, half an ounce and two drams; cut the
Herbs, and bruise the Roots and Barks, and infuse them in a Gallon of Rhenish
Wine for three or four days, shaking it often; then strain it, and drink a
Glass-ful thereof every Morning fasting, and another at Night going to Bed.

It rectifies all Distempers of the Head and Spleen; it is also excellent for
the Breast and Lungs; and is excellent in cuting of Catarachs.

A most Excellent Powder for pain in the Head and Stomach.
Take Aron-Roots, cut them small, and steep them in white Wine twelve hours;
then power of the Wine, and power fresh Wine upon it, and let it steep as long;
then dry them, and reduce them to powder. Take of this powder two ounces;
Acorus, Burnet, of each one ounce; Crab's-eyes, half an ounce; Cinnamon, three
drams; Salt of Wormwood and Juniper, of each half an ounce; Sugar of Roses, one
ounce; pulverise, and mix them together, and keep it in a Glass stopped.

This powder is a good Cephalic and stomatick; is excellent against the
Megrim, Vertigo, Melancholy, Coldness and Weakness of the Stomach, Wind,
Stone, Quartan Agues, and all Tartarous Obstructions. Dose, from one Dram to
two in a little Canary.

The Lady Lusons Receipt to make one sleep in Frenzy and madness.
Take the Gall of a Hare, boil it in white Wine, and let the Patient drink
thereof, and it will cause him to sleep until you give him Vinegar.

CHAP. XI. Mrs. Rutherges Cordial Electuary against MELANCHOLY.
Against Melancholy
TAke Conserves of Roses, of Borage-flowers, of Cowslip-flowers, of Clove
Gilly-flowers, of each one ounce; of preserved Citrons, two ounces; of
Alkermess, half an ounce; preserved Nutmegs, preserved Mirobolaus, of each half
an ounce; Bezoar, fifteen grains; Tincture of Safron, half a dram; mix them
together, and make it up in an Electuary, with Syrup of Clove Gilly-flowers,
adding two or three drops of Oil of Cinnamon.

Another against Melancholy.
Use to drink before Meal a Glass of Clarret, with a spoonful or two of Syrup
of Clove Gilly-flowers: after meals eat some Marmalade of Quinces, or preserved
Citrons.

A Drink very good for the Head and Eyesight.
Take Bittony, Eyebright, Agrimony and Plantane, of each two handfuls;
Ground Ivy, three handfuls; shred them and stamp them, then boil them In six
Gallons of strong Wort fot three quarters of an hour; then strain it through a
Seive, and let it cool, and throw the herbs away; when it is fit put Yest to
it, and put it up into a Runlet, and when it has done working, close it up,
and after seven days, broach it, and drink of it at all times when you are
thirsty: When it is half spent make more, and use it for two months together in
the Spring, or in the Summer.

To purge the Head.
Take the Root of Pellitory of Spain, and chew it to and fro between your Teeth
a good while; it will purge the Head, and fasten the Teeth.

Against Hypocondriack Melancholy.
Set Horse-fleeches to the Fundament; and at Spring and Fall purge with
Mechoacan Ale, or some other easy purging Ale for a Fortnight together; then
take Conserve of Roses, two ounces; Conserves of Bugloss and Marygolds, of each
one ounce; Cinnamon in powder, one dram; mix them unto an Electuary with the
Syrup of Poppies.

Take thereof the quantity of a Nutmeg three times in a week, when you go to
Bed.

For the Head, and to strengthen the Memory.
Anoint the Temples of the Head once a month with the Gall of a Partridg; also
rub the Soles of your Feet with mustard made with Vinegar.

Another Excellent Electuary against Melancholy, by Mr. Cranish.
Take Conserves of Borage and Bugloss-flowers, of each half an ounce;
Confection of Alkerns, one ounce; Diambra, a penny-weight; Conserve of
Rosemary-flowers, half an ounce; Orange-flowers candid, half an ounce; of the
yellow Rind of Citron in powder, a penny-weight; Aromaticum Rosatum, two
penny-weights; two leaves of Gold; incorporate these well together, and make
thereof an Electuary; and take of it every Morning fasting, and at any time
when you are afflicted with pensiveness and Melancholy.

A Cordial and Stomatick Electuary, by Sir B. B.
Take Ginger, Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs and Galingal, of each one ounce; Cubebs,
Coral and Amber prepared, of each two drams; Fennel-seeds, Dilseeds, and
Caraway-seeds, Liquorice and Aniseeds, of each two ounces; reduce all into a
very subtle powder, and make them into an Electuary with Conserve of Roses, and
a sufficient quantity of some Cordial or Pectoral Syrup.

It comforts, strengthens and warms the Stomach, and the Heart; expells Wind,
and gives ease in the Colic and Iliack Passion; and is a good Pectoral; take
the quantity of a large Nutmeg of it three times a day.

An Electuary for a Cold or Cough.
Liverwort, Hartstongue, Maidenhair, Hysop, Coltsfoot, Germander, Horhound, and
Agrimony, of each one handful; shred them small, and boil them in two gallons
of Spring or Conduit-water, until it is consumed to a quart; then strain it,
and put into the water a quart of Honey and two ounces of the choicest
Elecampane root dried, and reduced to fine Powder; boil these together to the
consistence of an Electuary, stirring it continually to prevent burning to;
then put it up, and keep it for Use.

Take the quantity of a Nutmeg in the Morning, and at Night, and in the
Afternoon, and in the Night, or at any time whenever the Cough troubles you.

An Electuary for Shortness of Breath and Phthisicks.
Take Manna two ounces, Sugar penides, three ounces; Fox Lungs reduced to
Powder, two ounces; Oil of Almonds, an ounce; Cassia new drawn, half an ounce;
make an Electuary with Syrup of Hysop, or Ground Ivy. Take half an ounce of it
in the morning fasting, and two hours before Dinner, and in the Afternoon and
at Midnight.

It is excellent for Asthma and Phthisick, and when the Lungs are stopped with
Phlegm, so that the Patient cannot but with difficulty draw his Breath.

Another Pectoral Electuary for stopping in the Breast and Pipes.
Take Elecampane, Hysop, Liquoras, Ginger, Aniseeds, Cinnamon and Galingal; all
reduced into fine Powder, of each a dram; boil them in six ounces of clarified
Honey; add two ounces of brown Sugar Candy; while it is hot, stir them all
together: Take the quantity of a Nutmeg of it Morning and Evening, in the
Night, and in the Daytime; let it go down leisurely, and drink not soon after
it.

This has cured many of Stoppage in the Breast and Pipes.

Dr. Franck his Electuary for a Cough or Cold.
Take Elecampane root dried and made into fine Powder half an ounce; Liquoras
and Sugar candy, both in fine Powder, of each three spoonfuls; make an
Electuary with clarified Honey. Take the bigness of a Nutmeg of it in the
morning, and when you go to bed; let it go down leisurely, and if the Cough
troubles you in the night time, take also of it.

This has helped extreme great Colds or Coughs. These Pectoral Electuaries
were left out in the first Chapter.

An Electuary to comfort the Brain and Stomach, and sweeten the Breath.
Take Sage two handful, Rosemary flowers an ounce and a half, Cloves five
drams, Cinnamon a dram, Nutmegs a Scruple, all in fine Powder; make it into an
Electuary with Clarified Honey: Take of it half a spoonful in the Morning, and
presently drink after it a Cup of burnt Claret.

Another Electuary to comfort the Spleen and Stomach.
Take Sarsaparilla one ounce; the rind of the Root of Tamarisk, three drams; of
the Root of Zedoary, two scruples; Purslane-seeds, one dram; reduce all into a
fine Powder, and with Syrup of Citrons, and Syrup of the Juice of Borage, a
sufficient quantity; make an Electuary.

An Electuary to comfort the Stomach, and prevent engendring gross Humors in
the Brain.
Take Cinnamon one dram, Lignum Aloes and Mace, of each half a dram; Cloves, one
scruple, and fine Sugar or Sugar Candy, half an ounce; reduce them all into
very fine Powder, and with Wormwood water make it into an Electuary; and take
thereof two or three drams in the Morning fasting three hours before Dinner; or
make it into Lozenges of two or three drams a piece, and eat them in like
manner.

A most Excellent Electuary to strengthen the Stomach and Liver; which is also
very good against the Scurvey.
Take green Ginger preserved, it is sold by the Confectioners, and Conserve of
Roman-Wormwood, two ounces; Conserve of Wood Sorrel, two or three or four
ounces (more or ess, as you conceive your Liver shall require) beat and work
them together into a Pulp. Take thereof the quantity of a large Nutmeg two or
three times a day.

You may make the Conserves by beating the herbs raw with two or three parts of
fine Sugar to one of Herbs.

A Cordial Drink for weakness of the Stomach, and want of Digestion.
Take three pints of good Claret Wine, and half a pint of Mint-water; of
Cinnamon and Nutmeg, of each half a dram; of fine Sugar four ounces; reduce the
Ingredients to Powder, and put all into a Coffee-pot, and cover it close,
stopping the Pipe of the Coffee-pot, and let it stand in hot water for twenty
four hours, but let not the Water boil: Then take it out, and strain it through
a Hypocras-bag. Drink of this warm a Sack Glass-ful at a time.

If you have not a Coffee-pot, you may use a stone Jugg or Bottle, stopping it
close, but let it not be full.

A very Excellent Plaster for the Stomach, that has done notable Cures.
Take Mithridate, spread it pretty thick upon Leather, then strew upon it all
over some grated Nutmeg, laid also pretty thick on; and cover this with another
Leather like the former, sewing them together round about the edges: lay this
to the pit of the Stomach. The bigness of the Plaster is to be a hands-breadth
round.

It is excellent for all Indigestions, Weakness and Pain in the Stomach, which
causes Looseness.

Another Cordial Drink for a weak Stomach and want of Digestion, devised by Dr.
Mynsight.
Take Cinnamon, Mint, half an ounce, Mastick, Galingal, Cloves, of each two
drams; Calamus Aromaticus, Cardamom, Ginger, of each half a dram; Lignum Aloes,
Roots of Burnet and Zedoary, of each half a dram; reduce them all to Powder,
and digest them in a quart of Canary Wine, in a warm place, or in Sand, or B.
Mariae, until the Tincture is extracted; then strain it, and take thereof a
small Draught Morning and Evening with a few drops of Spirit of Vitriol.

It warms and comforts the Stomach, and is excellent against trembling,
fainting and swooning Fits and Vomiting.

Another, by Dr. Mily.
Take Cinnamon, half an ounce, Cloves, Mace, and Nutmegs, of each half an ounce;
seeds of Anise, Coriander, and Ginger, of each two drams; bruise them, and
digest them in five dints of Rhenish Wine; then strain it, and sweeten it with
fine Sugar to your Taste. Drink thereof a quarter of a pint at a time.

It comforts and warms a weak and cold Stomach, causes a good Appetite and
Digestion, and rectifies most Distempers of the Head and Brain.

My Lord Chesterfield's excellent digestive Powder to comfort the Stomach after
Meat, or otherwise.
Take sweet Fennel-seed, half an ounce; Coriander seeds, one ounce; shavings of
Hartshorn and Ivory, of each half a dram; Cinnamon and Pear, or Crab's-eyes, of
each half a dram; Sugar of Roses, two ounces; white Sugar Candy, three ounces;
reduce all these severally into a subtle Powder, and then mingle them together,
and so take thereof; keep it in a warm place. Dose so much as will lie upon the
point of a Knife.

Dr. Riverius his infallible Remedy to stay a Vomit.
Take the true Salt of Wormwood, half a dram, mix it with the Juice of half a
Limon, and give it the Patient to drink; you may mix it with a little
Mint-water.

It is a Sovereign Remedy which I have often approved with great success: it
has never failed.

To cheer the Heart, and comfort the vital Spirits, and prevent Melancholy.
Take of Hartshorn, one handful; of the Roots of Celandine, Flowers of Borage,
and of Langue de Beuf, of each a handful; shred the Herbs small, or stamp them
a little, and steep them in a Gallon of Brandy for a night; then distill it; the
distilled water sweeten with Sugar, and hang two drams of Saffron in it tied up
in a Sarcenet Bag. Drink a little of it in the Morning fasting.

Another Cordial to cheer and comfort the Heart, prevent Melancholy, and make
the Body lightsom.
Take a pint of Rhenish Wine, half an ounce of Cinamon-water, Water of Baum,
Bugloss, and Borage, of each half an ounce, Juice of Limons one ounce, half a
pound of Sugar Candy; sees them together in a little strong glass-Bottle,
setting it in boiling water; drink thereof a quarter of a pint in the Morning
fasting in-the Summer Season.

In the Winter season take a pint of Malmsie, or Muscadine, Cinnamon, Cloves and
Ginger, of each two drams; Grains of Paradise, one dram, Sugar, two drams; Musk
one grain; bruise the Spices, and boil all together in a Bottle of Water; then
strain it, and take a quarter of a pint thereof fasting.

CHAP. XII. Select Remedies for all Diseases of the MOUTH.
This Chapter contains Choice Remedies for the Teeth and Gums, Scurvey in the
Mouth, etc.

For a Canker in the Mouth.
TAke the Leaves of Woodbine, of Bramble, of Columbine, of each one handful; a
little Rosemary; shred them, and boil them in fair water to the consumption of
half; then strain it, and put into the Liquor two or three spoonfuls of Honey,
and a piece of Roch Alum in Powder, and three or four spoonfuls of Vinegar.
Gargle the Mouth with the Water, and rub it with the Herbs three or four times
a day, or oftener if need be.

Another for the same.
Take Honisuckles, Plantane, and Sage, of each a handful; Daizy Leaves, an
ounce; boil them in a quart of Water till they come to a pint; then put to it
Vinegar and Honey, of each one spoonful, and a little Allom and white Salt.

Another Approved Medicine for a Canker in the Mouth.
Take a Pint of Wine-Vinegar (the red is best) Herb of Grace, Red Mints, Red
Sage, and Rosemary, of each a sufficient quantity, shred them small, and boil
them together in the Vinegar; then put into it a spoonful of Honey, the bigness
of a Walnut of Allom, and half a spoonful of white Salt. Wash the Mouth well
therewith.

It is a present and infallible Remedy which has Cured many.

An Excellent Gargle for Inflammations of the Mouth, Jaws, and Throat,
desperate Squinsies, and other Diseases of the Mouth.
Take Poppy-water, Plantane water, of each an ounce; clarified Juice of
Self-heal, two ounces; Diamoron, six drams; Saltpetre, four drams; mix them
together, and gargarize with it often.

Another for the same.
Take Album Grecum, two drams; Liquoras scraped, one ounce; Roch Allom, one
dram; boil them a little in Rose and Poppy water, and Self-heal water, of each
a sufficient quantity, then strain it. Take of this Decoction one pint, Rhenish
or White Wine, a quarter of a pint; Diamoron and Dianucum, of each half an
ounce; mix them together, and make a Gargle, and use it often in a day.

Dr. Scroderus his Water against the Distempers and Inflammations of the Throat
and Palate.
Take Leaves of wild Pear Tree, Parsley, Sanicle, Woodbine, Water-Germander,
Cinquefoil, round Birthwort, of each two handful; Thorough-wax, four handful;
Stale Ale, six quarts; bruise the Herbs, and put all into a Vessel close
stopped, and let them ferment for three weeks; then add three ounces of Album
Graecum, and distill them.

It is excellent against all Inflammations of the Throat and Palate, and
Soreness of the Mouth. Drink two or three spoonfuls of it in the Morning, in
the Afternoon and at Night; likewise gargle often with it, or dip a linen Rag
into it, and wrap it about the Throat.

An Excellent Water to cure the Squinsie, sore Throats, Cankers in the Mouth,
Heat and Inflammations, Bleeding of the Gums, and to fasten and whiten the
Teeth.
Take Waters of Self-heal, Poppy-water, of each four ounces; Diamoron, Syrup of
dried Roses, of each an ounce; Spirit of Sulphur, half a dram; mix them
together; and gargle your Mouth with it.

An Anodine Gargle for the Toothache.
Take Roots of Pelitory of Spain, two drams; Ginger, Olibanum, of each half an
ounce; Red Sage, Henbane Seeds bruised, of each one dram; Long Pepper, Opium,
of each a scruple; boil these in a pint of Vinegar; then strain it, and
gargarize with it.

It gives present ease in all Pains of the Teeth.

Another Excellent Gargle against the Squinsie, sore Throat, Tumors, and Pain
of the Mouth and Jaws.
Take Milk hot from the Cow, Album Graecum, half an ounce; Honey of Roses, two
spoonfuls; Verdigreece, half a dram; boil them a little; then strain it out,
and gargarize with it often:

It cleanses and heals Ulcers.

An Approved Remedy for the Toothache.
Take a little Cotton, and imbibe it with Lucatellus 's Balsom, and so put it
into the hollow Tooth.

This cured a Person that had the Toath-Ach in great Extremity, and had tried
many Medicines in vain; after a little while he had used this Medicine, the
Pain ceased, but came again within a week after: Then he applied the same
Remedy a second time, and the Pain soon ceased, and never came again, though
before he was very often subject to this Pain.

An Excellent Water for the Scurvey in the Mouth, and to fasten loose Teeth, to
preserve and strengthen the Teeth, and Gums, etc. often approved.
Take Allom, one dram; Bolearmonick, two drams; Myrrh, half a dram; pulverize
them, and put them into a pint of Claret, and when you use it, shake it well,
and take a spoonful of it in your Mouth, and rub the Teeth and Gums with it:
you may warm it.

Another for the same.
The Oil of Myrrh is a most excellent thing to preserve the Teeth and Gums, and
to fasten loose Teeth.

Make it thus:
Take fine chosen Myrrh in subtle Powder, put it in the Whites of hard Eggs,
which set in a Cellar in a Basin, putting some Sand in the bottom of the Basin,
to set the Whites of Eggs in, that they may stand upright, and the Myrrh will
all dissolve into an Oil; which is very excellent: mix this Oil with some Oil
of Sage, made by distillation, and put them into Canary wine, wherein dissolve
a little Salt. Wash your Teeth and Gums with this.

Another Remedy for the Toothache
Take Mastick and chew it in your Mouth, till it be as soft as wax, then put it
into the hollow Tooth, and let it remain till it is consumed, and it will
certainly take away the Pain thereof.

Sir Kenelm Digby 's Sympathetical Powder has cured many Persons of the
Toothache; the Preparation whereof, with its Use and Virtues, will be set down
in another Chapter below.

Dr. Mynsight his Excellent Remedy for the Toothache.
Take the Shaving of Lignum Vitae (which you may have at the Turners) Shavings
of Sassafras, Sarsaparilla, of each an ounce; Roots of Pelitory of Spain; Raw
Allom, Nitre, of each half an ounce, Seeds of Staves-acre, and of Henbane, of
each two drams, Opium, Cloves, Mother of Thyme, Organy, Saffron, of each a
dram; reduce to powder what is to be powdered, and then mix them well together,
and put them into a Bottle or Matress, and power upon them good Nantz Brandy and
Vinegar, of each one pint and half; keep it in a warm place, or set it in warm
water for some days; shaking it often, let the Bottle be stopped very close
with a Cork, and tied with a Bladder.

Take a little of this Liquor in your Mouth, and hold it on that side the Teeth
ache, and the Pain will cease immediately; also given inwardly, and used
outwardly, it is one of the greatest Anodines in the world, eases Pain, and
causes Rest. Dose is half a spoonful in a little Wine.

To Cure the Toothache, by the Lady Jennings.
Take white Hellebore, infuse it in white Wine Vinegar, over a Chasing-dish of
Coals; then take half a spoonful of it, and hold and gargle it in that side of
your Mouth where the Pain is, and it will give you present Ease. Proved by Mr.
Bearson.

Another against the Toothache, and Rheum in the Teeth and Jaws.
Take a quart of old Crab-Verjuice, put it into an earthen Pipkin; put thereto
Roch-Allom, the quantity of a Walnut, a few Cloves bruised, Rosemary and Thyme,
of each one Branch; boil all together to a Pint; when it is cold, put it into a
Bottle, and take a spoonful of it warm in your Mouth, and gargle with it on
that side the Humor and Pain lies, it will dry and stay the Rheum, and not
draw it, and will fasten the Teeth infallibly. Proved by Mr. Fleetwood.

An Opiate for the Toothache.
Take Camphire, two drams; Opium, one dram; Castor, half a dram; pulverize
them, and mix them with Syrup of Clove-gilliflowers over the Fire, that they
may well incorporate to an Opiate.

It is excellent to assuage the Toothache; when any of the Teeth are rotten and
hollow, put but a little into the hollow of the Tooth, and let it remain there;
and renew it as often as need requires.

A most Excellent Opiate to cleanse and whiten the Teeth, which is much used
by, all the Nobles in France.
Take Pumice stone burnt, White Coral, Cuttle-fish Bone, and Cream of Tartar,
Florence-Orrice-root, of each an ounce; reduce them all to a fine powder;
Sal-armoniack pulverized, two drams; Musk and Amber, of each six grains; grind
them all together upon a Ma^ble Stone, or in a Stone-Mortar, with an Iron
Pestle; adding so much Honey of Roses by degrees as will make it into an Opiate
by girnding.

Then put it up in Gally-pots, and keep it for Use. Rub your Teeth with it.

Ladies that do not love the smell of Amber and Musk, may leave it out, and it
will be never the worse for it, and it may be perfumed by adding a few drops of
Aromatic Oils; as Oil of Cloves, Cinnamon, Essence of Orange and Limon Peels,
etc.

An infallible and much experienced Remedy to cure the Toothache, and to fetch
out the Worms that are in the Gums and hollow Teeth.
Take Henbane Seeds well bruised, two spoonfuls; Bees Wax four ounces: shred
the Wax, and make it soft in warm water; then mix the Seed well with it, and
make a Candle thereof with Cotton Thread; hold the Candle being lighted, in your
Mouth, letting the Heat and Smoke of it go into your Mouth as much as may be
endured; and hold your Mouth over a Poringer full of Water, and the Candle will
draw out the Worms, and they will fall with the Rheum into the Water, so that
you shall see some of them alive.

This has been sufficiently experimented.

You may also put the end of a Funnel to the Tooth, and so hold the Candle in
the Funnel, holding your Mouth over the Water.

CHAP. XIII. Select CORDIAL WATERS Distilled.
This Chapter contains the choicest Cordial Waters; with the true description
of that famous Water called the Queen of Hungarys Water.

The Lady Hewits great Cordial Water for all cold Diseases, to comfort the
Stomach, the Spirits, the Head the Heart, to stay the Rheum, the Hiccock, the
bloody Flux, against the Plague, the Meazles, the small Pox, the Palsy, the
Dropsy, and the Consumption of the Lungs. Copied from a Receipt in my Ladies
Daughters hand; which she gave to the Countess of Monmouth.
TAke Roman Wormwood, Sage Bittony, Speremint, unset Hysop, Setwel, Thyme,
mother of Thyme, Bawm, Pennyroyal, Saincle, Salendine, Watercresses,
Hearts-ease, Field-dazies Flower, Leaf and Roots, Angellica, Germander,
Callamint, Tamarix, Coltsfoot, Carduus Benedictus, Avens Valerian, wild
Marjoram, Saxafrage, Pellatory of the Wall, Pimpernel, Varvain, Parsley,
Rosemary, Savory, Scabious, Egremony; of all these one handful picked; a quarter
of a peck of Rosemary-flowers; half a peck of Cowslip-flowers, half a peck of
red Roses; of Camomile, Madienhair, sweet Marjoram, Plantane, Cumphry, Yerrow
and Rue; as much of these as shall remain, being picked out of a handful of
each: of Aromaticum Rosarum, three drams; Spicknard, two drams;
Elecampane-Roots dried, Calamus Aromaticus; Galengal, Cubebs, Carda Noman,
Grains, Pepper, Lignum, Alces, Thin, Veroinca, Juniper Berries, one dram;
Zedoaria, two drams; Ginger, Cinnamon, Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, Mellelet-flowers,
of each two drams: then take Fennel-seeds, Parsley-seeds, Annyseeds,
Caraway-seeds, of each two drams; Hartshorn, one pound; all your Drug-spices
and Seeds, being beaten somewhat gross; and all your Herbs being washed, wrung
in a Cloth, and shred: put them all into an earthen pot, with two gallons of
the strongest Sherry-Sack, to steep all Night; your Drug-spices and Seeds,
being to be put into the midst of the herbs: Then when you still, which must be
the next day, out of the whole quantity you must draw a quart of the first,
which is best; then a pint of the second which is next in goodness; and mingle
those three pints together, which is the usual water; and if it prove too
strong, put a little more of the weaker sort to it: The third and last sort is
for other uses, as hereafter; you must Aromatine each Pottle of your first
useful and drinking Water, with thirty grains of Beaser; twenty four grains of
Musk, twenty grains of Ambergreece; one pound of Sugarcandy; two drams of
Coral; two drams of Pearl, and one dram of Amber: all must be beaten very
small, and must be stirred twice a day till it be dissolved.

Another very precious Cordial Water of very great virtue, called the Golden
Palsie-Water; Copied from my Lord of Portland's Copy that he had from my Lady
Lovelace; composed by Dr. Mathews
Take flowers of Lavender, two quarts; spirit of Wine, one gallon; and half
digest them in a glass-bottel close stopped in the Sun for six days; then
distill it in an Alembick, with its refrigeratory, and keep the Spirit. Take
flowers of Sage, of Rosemary, of Bittony, of Borage, of Bugloss, Lillies of the
Valley, and Cowslips, of each half a handful; put them all into a gallon of
Spirit of Wine; and put into them leaves of Bawm, of Fetherfew, tops of
Rosemary, and flowers of Steehas, and Bayberries, of each half an ounce; power
upon them the foregoing Spirit of Lavender-flowers, and digest them twenty four
hours; then distill to dryness; then put into this Spirit the thin yellow Rind
of Citron-peel, and Piony-seeds husked, of each three ounces; Cinnamon, Mace,
Nutmegs, Cardamoms, Cubebs, yellow Sanders, of each two drams; wood of Alves,
half a dram; bruise them all, and digest for twenty four hours; then strain it,
and put it up in a large glass-bottel, and hang in it the following Ingredients.

Take Pearls ground to subtle powder, one dram; Ambergreece, Musks and Safron,
of each half a scraple; red Rose dried, and red Sanders, of each two drams; red
Sanders, Citron-peels, dried all in subtle powder, of each one dram; put them
all in a Sarsenet-bag, and hang it in the Spirit.

Note, That in the old Copy the quantity was double both of the Spirit and of
Ingredients; and the digestion was to be continued six weeks; but being
corrected by a judicious Physician, who judge twenty four hours to be a time
long enough for such rectified Spirits to extract the powers end virtues of any
ordinary vegetable, especially its flowers and leaves.

The Virtues.
It is of exceeding virtues against the Palsy, Apoplexy, the Falling
sickness, and all cold Distempers of the Head, Brain and Womb: It chears and
comforts the Heart, the Animal and vital Spirit, warms, strengthens, and
comforts a weak and cold Stomach, and recovers lost appetite: It is excellent
against Fats, Vapors, Convulsions, Megrim, Vertigo loss of Memory, dimness of
sight, Melancholy, swounding Fits, and Barroness in Women. You may take half a
spoonful to one whole spoonful of it in Ganary, or in black Cherry-water, or
Syrup.

Note, That in every Distillation you must distill to dryness, because thn
Spirit of Wine is rectified. The flowers are to be put into the Spirit of Wine
when they are in their prime: and that infusion kept till the other things are
ripe and fit to be put in.

Another great Cordial Water of great virtue.
Take great Ants that are full of Eggs, and in the full of the Moon, in May or
June, two handfuls; put them into a glass-bottel, and power upon them so much
Spirit of Wine as may cover them the breadth of three fingers; digest them in
the Sun until they turn to water by putrefaction; into one pound of this water
put flowers of Rosemary, Borage, Bugloss, Roses, Marjoram, Bawm, of each one
handful; Castor, four ounces; Confection of Ana Cardimus; two ounces; Diamoschu
dulcis, one ounce, waters of Bugloss, Bittony and Tile-flowers, of each one
pound; bruised Cinnamon, one ounce; digest them together forty days; then
distill it in Balneo Mariae: If you burn the remaining Feces to ashes, and
extract the Salt out of it, and put it to the distilled Spirit, it will be more
efficacious. It is both Cephalic and Pectoral; cures Consumption, and by
reason of the Ana Cardimus wonderfully strengthens the Memory, fortifies the
Brain, and strengthens Nature, and is much recommended to beget courage. It
attenuates, expels Wind, and is vulnerary: It revives the heart; warmeth and
comforts a weak and cold Stomach. Dose, two or three spoonfuls in Sack, or any
other fit vehicle.

A rare Cordial Water against Frights; excellent for Women with Child to
prevent miscarrying, Dr. Scroderus.
Take Lillies of the Valley, two handfuls; infuse them in three quarts of
strong white Wine for a fortnight; then distill it in Balneo Mariae, into the
distilled water put Cinnamon, one ounce and half; Cubebes, half an ounce; Cloves
three drams; Mace, Calingal, Ginger, Zedoary, Safron, of each two drams, bruise
them all grossly, and let them infuse in a Vessel close stopped for some days in
the Sun: then put into each Lavender-flowers, of each one handful; let them
digest for some days longer; then distill it in Balneo Mariae: If you calcine
the Feces, and attract the Salt out of them, and put it to the water it will be
more effectual.

It is very proper for Women with Child being frighted; It prevents
Miscarrying, and strengthens the Womb, and the Child. It is a great Cordial:
Childbearing Women ought never to be without it.

The Alexitery Milk-water
Take of Carduus Benedictus, six handfuls; Wormwood, four handfuls, Speremint,
two handfuls; shred them small, and stamp them a little; then power upon them
two gallons of new Milk; let them infuse for six hours, and distill it in a
cold Still or in an Alembeck, taking off the head sometimes, and stir the
matter well with a stick, else the milk will grow in a Cake at the top and
hinder the water from rising.

My Lady Newports Excellent cooling Stomachal, Alexitery Milk-water.
Take Angelica, one part; Mint and Carduus Benedictus, of each four parts;
Wormwood, two parts; shred them small, and bruise them a little, and put them
in an ordinary Still, and power upon them enough new Milk to soak them but not
to have the Milk swim much over them. Distill this as you do Rose Water;
stirring it some times with a stick to keep the Milk from growing to a Cake.

When you will drink this water alone, sweeten it with fine Sugar to your
Taste. You may drink a Wine-glass-ful at a time.

Dr. Scroderus, his Excellent Cordial Water fall Women; which is esteemed as a
Panacea among or the Noble Ladies of the Palatinate.
Take Cinnamon, Nutmeg, Mace, Ginger, Cloves, Grains of Paradise, Cubebes,
Cardamom, of each one ounce and a half; long Pepper, half an ounce, Galingal,
Zedoary, of each one ounce; pulverise them every one by themselves, then mix
them together; then take leaves of Sage, Mint, and Bawm, of each one handful;
shred them small, and mix them with the other Ingredients, and power upon them
three quarts of good white Wine; let it stand to infuse for fourteen days close
stopped; then distill it in a Balneo, or in an Alembick well tinned within.

It strengthens the Womb, cures the Suffocation thereof, expels Wind out of
the Stomach and Bowels; It also strengthens and warms the Stomach, and a cold
Womb; and that so successfully, that all the Noble Ladies of the Pallatinate
esteem it as a Panacea or Alheal.

Dr. Scroderus his second Cordial Water of great Virtues.
Take Tops of Rosemary, sweet Marjoram, Sage, Bawm, of each one handful;
Cinnamon, grains of Paradise, of each one ounce; Mace, Galingal, of each two
ounces; Nutmeg, Cloves, Ginger, of half an ounce; Juniper Berries, two ounces;
bruise the Spices and Seeds, and shred the herbs small, and infuse them all in
three quarts of Rhenish Wine for a month; then distill it.

This Water cures the Headache, Megrim, Vertigo, Melancholy, illness of the
Stomach stinking Breath; It causes fruitfulness, facilitates Delivery; It
strengthens the Stomach and the Womb, and it is good against the Palsy and
Apoplexy.

Dr. Horstius, his most excellent Cordial Water for the Head, and for the Womb.
Take Nutmegs, Mace, Ginger, grains of Paradise, Cloves, half an ounce;
Rhubarb, one ounce; Castor, Spicknard, of each half an ounce; Oil of Bays; let
the Spices be whole, and infuse them in the best Canary or French Wine seven
quarts; digest them in a glass close stopped for ten days; then strain it, and
beat the Spices to a Pulp, then digest them together again for three days; then
distill it in Balneo.

This Water is as good for the Head as for the Womb; It cures most Diseases of
both; It is exceeding good against the Epilepsie, and Fits of the Mother,
obstructions of the Spleen and Liver: It is good against Melancholy, ann gross
vapors ascending to the Head.

Another great Cordial Water of very great virtues, which causes fruitfulness,
and procures Conception.
Take of the great Ants or Pismires which are full of Eggs; and in the full of
the Moon, in the month of May or June two handfuls; Spirit of Wine rectified so
much as may cover them the breadth of three fingers; digest them in a close
Vessel till the next full of the Moon; or until they turn to water by
putrefaction: Then to a quart of this water take flowers of Rosemary, Roses,
Bugloss, Borage, Marjoram, Bawm, of each one handful; Castor, four ounces ^
Confection of Ana Cardimus, two ounces; Diamoschu dulcis, one ounce; bruised
Cinnamon, one dram; waters of Bugloss, Bittony and Tile-flowers, of each one
pint; digest them for forty days; then distill in Balneo Mariae.

This is a great Cordial, and Pectoral; it is Cephalic, and vulnerary, and
wonderfully strengthens the Memory, and fortifies the Brain; it strengthens
Nature, and some thinks begets Courage; causes fruitfulness, and procures
Conception.

A rare Water against Hectich-Fever.
Take Hysop, Ground Ivy, Rosa solis, Centory, Maidenhair, Sorrel, Cinkfoyl,
Scabious, Succory, Burnet, Dandikeon, Yarrow Agrimony, Hauls bittony,
Watercresses, of each half a handful; of the four greater cold Seeds, of each
half a dram; flowers of Borage, of Bugloss; Roses, Poppies, two pugils; Roots
of Elecampane; Succory, Burnet, of each thirty six; Crayfish-shells, Snails
bruised, of each twenty in number; of a Calves Lung, half a pound; water of
Liverwort one pint, or instead thereof water of Dandy Leon, being all prepared,
power upon them so much of Goats Milk as will soak them well; let them stand to
infuse for five or six hours; then distill it in an ordinary Still.

This water is very powerful against Hectic Fevers, and most Diseases of the
Lungs; as Phthisick, shortness of breath, Asthma; it destroies Accidities; It
nourishes and restores in Consumption being taken Morning, Noon and at Night
before Supper; the Dose is about two ounces.

The Lady Elizabeth Gilfords Cordial Water.
Take four quarts of Nants-Brandy, put therein Borage-water and Poppy-water, of
each a pint; Sugarcandy, two pound; Figs shred and Raisins stoned, of each one
pound; red Roses clipped and dried, two handfuls; red Mint, one handful;
Rosemary-flowers, half a handful, and as much Hysop; a few Cloves bruised; put
all these in a large double Glass, with a narrow mouth; (such as Apoticaries
have in their Shops) stop it close, and set in the Sun for two or three months.
It is an excellent Cordial and Pectoral Water good for the Head and Stomach,
Breast and Lungs.

The Lady Bagnals Cordial Water; much Approved.
Take Angelica leaves two handful, Carduus six handful, Baum and Sage, of each
five handful; Angelica seeds, and sweet Fennel seeds, of each five ounces;
Liquoras bruised, two ounces; shred three Herbs, and bruise the Seeds, and put
them to steep in two Gallons of the best Canary, with the Cordial powder of
Aromaticum Rosatum, Diamuscus dulcis, of each one ounce; let them stand four
and twenty hours; then distill it with a gentle Fire; then put to the distilled
Water Sugar dissolved in Rose Water.

Dr. Stephens's great Cordial Water for Women.
Take Cinnamon, Cloves, Galingal, Ginger, Nutmegs, Grains of Paradise, Aniseeds,
sweet Fennel-seeds, and Caraway seeds, of each one dram; Thyme, Mother of
Thyme, Mint, Sage, Penniroyal, Pelitory of the wall, Rosemary, red Roses dried,
Flowers of Camomil, Origany of Lavender, of each a handful; shred the Herbs,
and bruise the Seeds and Spices, and infuse them for twelve hours in a Gallon
of French wine; then distill it, and save the first, second and third Running,
by themselves.

It is Cordial, strengthens the Heart, comforts and revives the Spirits; being
given to a Woman in Labor, it facilitates the Birth, and causes a good
Delivery; and after Delivery, it brings away the After birth, cleanses the Womb
of Impurity, and restores Strength; it comforts the Stomach, and is good
against Swooning and fainting Fits, and Fits of the Mother. It is good against
the Stone and Gravel; and preserves Youth.

Dr. Mountford's Cordial Water.
Take Angelica leaves, half a pound, Angelica seeds, and Carduus Benedictus, of
each six ounces; Leaves of Baum and Sage dried, of each four ounces; sweet
Fennel-Seeds, nine ounces; Liquoras, half a pound; Species of Aromaticum
Rosatum dulce, and Diamocum dulce, of each one ounce; infuse them in thirty two
quarts of Sack for five or six days; then distill it in an Alembick, and draw
off ten quarts of the strong, to which add white Sugar candy, half a pound, and
half a pint of Rose Water; tie it up close, and keep it for Use.

Aqua Mirabilis, Sir Kenelm Digby 's Way.

Take Cubebs, Galingale, Cardamoms, Melilot flowers, Cloves, Mace, Ginger,
Cinnamon, of each half a dram; Juice of Celandine, one pint; Juice of Speremint,
and Juice of Baum, of each half a pint; Flowers of Cowslips, Rosemary, of
Borage, Bugloss and Marigold, of each two drams; bruise the Spices, and infuse
all with the Juices in three pints of Sack, one pint of strong Angelica water,
and half a pint of red-Rose water; let it infuse twelve hours; then distill it
in a Glass Still, and first lay Harts-tonge leaves in the bottom of the Still.
Keep the first, second and third Runnings by themselves.

This is a great Cordial, it comforts the Heart, Stomach, and Vital Spirits; it
strengthens the Head and Memory, preserves Youth, and procures a good Color.
It is Cephalic, and Pectoral, it expels Wind, and is of great force against
the Cholick, pains in the Side and Stomach; it comforts and warms a cold
Stomach, and strengthens it; it is good against Coughs, Shortness of Breath and
Asthma's, as also for most Diseases of the Head and Brain: It revives the
Spirits, and helps swooning Fits. It is a counter-poyson and Antidote against
the Plague, and all malignant Fevers and pestilential Distempers, and preserves
from the Apoplexy. The Dose is one ounce, in Rosemary Water, Sack or any other
Cordial Water.

Dr. Augustine's Excellent Rosemary-Water.
Take the Tops and Flowers of Rosemary in the midst of May, gathered before
Sunrising, of each one handful; four or five good Elecampane Roots, of Red
Sage, two handfuls; stamp them in a stone-Mortar; then take Cloves, Mace, and
Cubebs, of each three ounces; Aniseeds half a pound; bruise them all severally;
then mix all together with the Herbs, and put all into a large stone Bottle or
Jugg, and power upon them six Gallons of good white wine; stop it very close,
and set it in the ground fifteen days; then distill with a gentle Fire; and
sweeten it with fine Sugar.

This is a most precious Cordial Water, it rectifies all Distempers of the Head
and Stomach comforts the Heart, revives the Spirits, and is excellent against
the Palsy and Apoplexy, all fainting and swooning Fits, and Fits of the
Mother, Falling Sickness, Convulsions, Megrim, Vertigo, Lethargy, and other
Diseases of the Head: Use it both outwardly and inwardly.

An Excellent Approved Water against all Infections, all cold Diseases of the
Head and Stomach, for the Dropsy, Palsy, preserving Health, expelling all
Tumors; Devised by the King's Physician.
Take what quantity you please of Bawm-water, and to every pint thereof take
Aniseeds, Liquoras, of each two ounces; bruise them, and infuse them in the
water four and twenty hours; then put into the Still Treacle, four ounces; Sage
and Celandine, of each a good quantity; power the rest upon them: then sprinkle
over them one ounce of Bole-armenick in fine Powder; distill it with a moderate
Fire.

Dr. Butler's Admirable Cordial Treacle-Water.
Take one ounce of raspt Hartshorn, boil it in three pints of Spring Water, to
a quart; then take Roots of Gentian, Elecampane, Cypress and Tormentil, of each
one ounce; of the Flowers of Borage, Bugloss, Rosemary, and Marigolds, of each
two ounces; Citronpeels one ounce: then take one pound of the best
Venice-Treacle, and dissolve it, six quarts of good strong white wine, and
three pints of red-Rose water; infuse all together in a Vessel close stopped,
stirring it sometimes for two days; then distill it in a Glass Alembick, or in a
Copper Alembick, with its Refrigeratory or Bucked Head: Keep every Running by
it self, and mix them as you best like, and spend the weakest first, sweetning
it with Sugar.

It is an Excellent Cordial, it comforts the Heart, revives the Spirits,
prevents swouning and fainting-fits, is very good against Agues and Fevers,
Worms and small Pox, to drive the Venom from the Heart. It is excellent against
the Plague and Infection, all Epidemical and Pestilential Diseases. Dose two
spoonful of the strongest for aged People, and of the small for Children.

Dr. Bnessius, a Physician at Paris, his Cordial Water of green Walnuts, as he
makes it every year; He gave the Receipt to Sir Kenelm Digby.
Take a good quantity of the Flower or Bloomings of the Walnut-Trees, it is a
long green Excrescence, and is the first thing that buddeth out; stamp them in
a stone Mortar, and press out all the Juice from them in an Apothecaries Press:
distill this Juice in a Glass-Still in Balneo Mariae, or in Sand, and keep the
Water, save also the Mark that you p^essed the Juice out of. Then when the Nuts
are as big as Hazle Nuts, take also a quantity of them, and stamp them, and
press out the Juice; which distill there remains in the bottom a thick Substance
like an Extract; whick keep, as also the Water. Then when the Nuts are growing
big, and have but a Jelly in them instead of a Kernel, and are fit to preserve,
take a quantity of them, and stamp them, and press out the Juice; which distill
as before, to a like Consistence as the other: Mingle your three Waters
together: and this is his Water of Walnuts, which is a great Cordial, and is
Diaphoretick: It is much recommended for the Cure of Agues, and intermitting
Fevers, and all malignant Fevers. It fortifies the Stomach, Head and Brain, is
good against the suffocation of the Mother, it is good against the Colic
caused by Wind and Phlegmatic Matters. The Dose is from three or four ounces to
seven or eight.

I saw a Letter from a Person of Quality at Paris, to Sir K. Digby, wherein he
related to Sir K. that he had cured himself of a Quartan Ague by taking a Glass
full of the said water which he had made, taking it as soon as he found the
least Symptom of the approaching Fit, he went to bed and covered himself very
warm, and fell asleep, and had no Fit at all that time nor never after.

The thick Consistences which remain after the distillation of the Juices, the
said Doctor puts together, and when he has evaporated them to a fit height
for making of Plasters (if they were not so already by their distilling) he
puts to them (removed from the Fire) a little Venice-Turpentine about an
eighth or tenth part, or a little more, and a little Powder of Cinnamon and
Cloves, and a little wheat flour to thicken it, also a little Salt, and kept
it in a Pot all the year; of this he makes Plasters for the Stomach, from the
Sternum to the Navil, and six or eight fingers breadth; which let remain on as
long as it will stick, taking it off sometimes to wipe away the Water.

This comfrots and strengthens the stomach wonderfully when it digesteth not
well.

You should so proportion your Substances or Nuts as to have about a like
quantity of juice of each.

For Crudities and indigestions of the stomach when a looseness follows,
(which usually comes from eating more than one can digest) he prescribes two
or three days very slender diet; and to eat one Morning three or four candid or
preserved green Walnuts, and to drink a little burnt Claret after them, or raw
Wine, eating a mouthful of bread: this settleth the Stomach very right.

The way how to candite and preserve green Walnuts will be set down in the
Chapter of preserving and candying.

A rare Cordial Water called the Royal Aqua Vitae.
Take Lignum, Aloes, Roots of Zedoary, Angelica, Carline, Thistle, and
Valerian, of each one ounce; Cinnamon, Mace, and Citon-rind, of each six drams;
Cloves, lesser Cardamoms, and sweet Fennel-seed, of each half an ounce; flowers
of Rosemary, Sage and Marjoram, of each two small handfuls, which is to be
bruised, and put them into a stone Jugg or Bottle with Spirit of Wine and
Malmsey Wine, of each four pints; stop the Vessel close and them macerate in a
warm Bath for three days, then distill them in a sand Bath, or in Balneo Mariae,
dissolving in the distilled water fine Sugar, then put it up for use. And if
you would have it perfumed, you may dissolve in it Ambergreece and Musk, of
each half a dram.

This Water is much esteemed and used by all the Nobles in France: The
perfection of it is, that although there be not many Ingredients, yet they are
of great virtue. It fortifieth the Brain, Head and Stomach, strengthens the
Memory, comforts the Heart, reviveth the Spirits when enfeebled by the
distillation of the Spirits, or overpressed by the abundance of ill qualities
or bad humors. It is to be taken fasting, from one spoonful to three in some
proper liquor.

A Cordial Water, or Spirit of Cinnamon.
Take chosen Cinnamon bruised, one pound, Aqua Vitae, three pints; the best
Rose-waeter, two pints; let them digest a day or two close stopped; then distill
it in dn Alembick with a Refrigeratory, or in a Glass Cucurbite, or a Tin
Cucurbite with a Glass-head: such as described in our Engine: The first pint
will be pretty good, and the last milky and sweet of the Cinnamon, but strong of
the Spirits. You may distill this till you perceive it comes no more strong of
Cinnamon. Keep every one of these three Waters in a Vessel apart close stopped.

The spirituous Water of Cinnamon, is good speedily to comfort and fortify all
the noble parts, and principally the Heart: for which reason it is given with
great success in swooning and faming Fits. It comforts and strengthens the
Stomach, excites natural heat thereof, helps Digestion, stays Looseness,
expels Wind, and eases Chollicks which are caused thereby. It is much
recommended to strengthen Women in Labor, to facilitate the Birth, and case
their pains. It is also very good to provoke the Terms, and to exhail the
vapors that rise in the Matrix. It is given alone of the first runnings mixed
together, from half a spoonful to a spoonful when there is any necessity; but
when you take it often, it is better to keep to the lesser Dose.

Sir Kenelm Digby says, that Lignum Cassia makes a much finer Spirit than
Cinnamon; he made it thus, as I make it now.
Take four ounces of the quilled sort, which is the finest and best; bruise it
well, and put it into a gallon of Mallago-Sack Digest them together three or
four days in Balneo; then distill it with a very gentle heat: If you will rest
there, severe the first, second and third runnings as the custom is; but if you
will have it richer of the Wood, distill off all together as long as it comes
with vigor, and put that liquor upon fresh Cassia, and digest as before, and
then distill: repeat this till it be as strong as you desire; but the last time
you put fresh wood you may keep three runnings each apart; you may also distill
it with three parts of Wine and two parts of Rose Water; then sweeten it with
Sugar.

A Corda^l Water of Clove Gilly flowers.
Put Aqua Vitae, or Sack upon Clove Gill-flowers; digest them two days; then
distill it in a Glass Body, laying other Clove Gilly-flowers upon the mouth of
it upon a Boulter-Cloth: (that the spirit rising and passing through the
flowers may tinge it self of a beautiful color) then distill the Spirit as
strong as you like it, which sweeten with Syrup of Clove Gilly-flowers, Sir K.
D.

A Lemon-Water.
Pare of the yellow thin Rinds of Lemons, so thin as to make Chips, which will
be as low as the Pores go; and put them into a Glass-body with a Head and an
Alembeck, and distill them in Balneo with a gentle heat: you shall have a very
sprightful water; (with Oil swimming upon it, which conserves it) whereof a
little will aromatise Wine or any Liquor, and make it very pleasant. Sir. K. D.

If you distill Rasps in a cold Still, and put a little of that Water into
Sack, or other Wine, or into Claret or white Wine and Water; it will aromatise
it very strong of Rasps, (without changing the color) and make it very
pleasant: two or three spoonfuls is sufficient to a quart of Sack Sir K. D.

An Excellent Orange-water, or Spirit.
Take the parings or Chips of the Rind of an hundred Oranges into a Cuburbite,
so large that they fill not above a third part full, power upon them three
quarts of good Aqua Vitae; then put on the Head and Alembeck, and lute it well
with paste and paper, stop the Vessel of the Alembeck, and let it stand to
digest three or four days; then distill it with a gentle heat in Balneo; keep
the first quart by it self, for it will be excellent good; then change the
Receiver, and the Oil will come over with the rest of Liquor, when it begins
to come weak leave off distilling. Mingle one pint of excellent Syrup of Clove
Gilly-flowers with the first quart; and it will be an excellent Cordial Water:
you may aromatise it with Ambergreece if you love Amber.

A Cordial Water very good for Women; from a great Lady.
Take Penyroyal, red Sage, sweet Marjoram, and Rosemary-flowers, of each one
handful; pick them well, and rub them in a Cloth; then shred them small, and
put them into a stone Jugg, and pour upon them one Gallon of Sack; stop it
close, and let them digest two days; then distill it carefully; the best way of
distilling this Water, is in a Cucurbite with a Glass-head, and in Balneo
Mariae. If you distill it in a a cold Still, you must give a gentle fire,
keeping wet Napkins upon the top of the Still to keep it cool: sweeten it with
fine Sugar, or Sugarcandy; and hang a little Sarsenet in it with two drams of
Safron.

The Grand Duke of Florence, his Excellent Caelestial, or Imperial Water of
great virtues, which he gave to the Duke of Vandome, who gave it to Sir Kenelm
Digby.
Take of Turbit, that which is white and Gummish, two ounces; Mastick, Nutmegs,
Cinnamon, Cubebs, of each half an ounce; yellow Sanders, two ounces; bruise all
these and put them in a Glass-body; and put into them two ounces of Venice
Turpentine, and two pound of white Honey; then power upon them two quarts of
very good Spirit of Wine, or Nants Brandy; stop the Vessel very close, and
digest it two days; then distill it in Balneo till it begin to come whitish;
then take the Vessel out of the Balneo, and set it in a sand Bath; and having
changed the Receiver, distill it by degrees, and you will have a whitish water;
to which add half a pound of newly drawn Oil of Spicknard, and prepared Pearls,
and Corals, of each hair an ounce; an ounce of Cream of Tartar, in subtle
powder; stop it close, and keep it for use: then increase the fire, and distill
to dryness, and you shall have a reddish, Oylish Water; which keep also by it
self.

The first clear Water, is a most sovereign Remedy for the Wind and
Stone-Collick, and for any pains of the Stomach; it is also good for Surfeits,
and excellent for obstructions of the Spleen and Liver: It purifieth the Blood,
comforts the Brain, and strengthens the Memory. It is a sure and infallible
Remedy for the Fits of the Mother, as also the Convulsion Fits and
Falling Sickness: the Dose is half a spoonful; with as much of any distilled
Water, or in fair water.

The second whitish Water is an excellent Remedy for the Stone and Gravel: it
is also very good for Sores and Wounds, Ulcers and Fistula's, warmin a little
of it, and bathing the parts afflicted therewith, it cures the Noli me tangere,
Erisipelas, or St. Anthonies fire.

And if you mix some of the first water with it, it will be more efficacious.

The reddish Water, is an infallible Cure of the Hemoroids and Piles.

It is also excellent for the Gangreen and Wounds.

An Excellent Cordial Water for Surfeits, and for an Ague.
Take six quarts of Aqua Vitae, put into it a peck of red Poppy-flowers; let
them infuse twenty four hours in a Glass close stopped; then strain it, and
press it well, and put the clear Liquor into the Glass again, with Figs and
Raisins stoned, of each two ounces; Aniseeds beaten, half an ounce; all tied up
in a Bag; set this in the Sun for ten or twelve days: For an Ague, take two or
three spoonfuls of this Water, and dissolve in it the bigness of a Hasle-nut of
London-Treacle an hour before his fit; and let him stir upon it, and do what
moderate exercise he can, and fast four or five hours after it.

Sir Kenelm Digbys Cordial Poppy-Water, for Surfeits, as he had it prepared
every year for his Family; is thus,
Take a wide mouth-Glass of six quarts, and out into it five quarts of the best
double stilled Aniseed-water; then thrust in as many red Poppy-leaves as will
fill it top-full; and let them infuse twenty four hours; then strain and press
them out, and put in as many fresh Poppies, and let them infuse as long; then
strain them again, and put in fresh, and let them infuse six or seven days;
then strain and press them well from the Liquor; and then strain the liquor
from the Dregs: then put into it six ounces of stoned Raisins of the Sun, and a
pound of stoned Cherries; and half a pound of fined Sugar; then stop the bottle
very close.

This is an excellent Surfeit-Water, and very efficatious. Sir Kenelm Digby's
Cook-woman had once surfeited her self, by eating of those venoms and dangerous
fish called Mussels, she was very bad, her heart and Stomach very much
oppressed, and her Body was full of red spots; she took a Cup of this Surfeit
water, and was perfectly cured: and I my self have had experience of the good
effects of this Water; having at one time surfeited my self by eating of those
Mussels, so that I found my Heart and Stomach oppressed in such a manner, that
it seemed as if there lied a very heavy burden or weight upon my Stomach, and
could scarce fetch my breath; thy Face and the white of my Eyes was as red as a
Scarlet; They gave me a Glass of this Surfeit-water and it presently cured me.

The Lady Dacreses Cordial of black Cherries, wherewith she was cured of a
great dizziness giddiness and swimming in her Head; and many others have found
the like effects of it. Sir K.D.
Take four pound of black Cherries, squeeze out first all the Juice from them;
then bruise the rest with their stones in a stone-Mortar, then put them with
the Juice into a Bag, with Bawm, and tops of Rosemary shred very small or
stamped, of each one handful; Cinnamon and Nutmeg, of each half an ounce; then
power thereon two quarts of Sack; stop it close, and let it stand twelve hours;
then distill it, and draw so much of it that it be weak like Aqua Mirabilis;
sweeten it with Sugarcandy to your taste.

The said Lady distilled this in an ordinary, cold Still; but Sir K. D. says
he thinks it were better to distill it in a Cucurbite; you may have one made of
Tin; (which will serve you many years, whereas a Glass one is very apt to
break) and fit a Glass-head to it, and so you may distill either in a
sand-Bath, or in Balneo Mariae. It is a pleasant Cordial Water; drink a little
Wine, a Glass-full at a time, in the Morning fasting, and at Night going to Bed.

My Lady Poltney told Sir Kenelm Digby that she had known black Cherrie-Wine do
great effects in that case: Make it thus;
Press out the Juice from black Cherries, and then bruise the rest with the
stones, and press that again; then put both Juices together, and let them
settle; then put the clear into bottles, with a lump of Loaf-Sugar into each
bottle to make it work; after it has wrought, and is ripe, drink of it.

The true and genuine Receipt of that famous Spirit, called the Queen of
Hungaries Water; so called by reason of the wonderful effects which a Queen of
Hungary received by it at the age of seaventy two years.
Take four pound of Rosemary flowers, gathered in a fair Morning, two or three
hours after Sunrising, and picked from all the green part; put them into a
Cucurbite, and power upon them three quarts of Spirit or Wine well rectified;
press down the flowers into the said Spirit, and then cover the Cucurbite with
its Head and Alembeck) lute well all the Juncture with paste and paper; then
place it in a sand Bath, and lute a Receiver to it; then leave it so until the
next Morning; then distill it with so moderate a fire, that whilst the Spirit
distilleth the Head may not be so much as warm; or to hasten the distillation,
you may cover the Head with a linen Cloth doubled several times, and dipped,
in cold water, and dip again, and cool the Head seleral times; continue the
distillation until you have drawn about three quarts of Spirit, which will be
very pure, and charged with the best and volatile substance of the flowers;
then take out all the fire, and let the bath cool; unlute the Vessels, and put
the Spirit into a Bottle well stopped; then strain and press out the liquor
that remains in the Cucurbite, and clarify it; then put it into the Cucurbite
again, and distill it until it remains in the bottom of the consistence near
as thich as Honey, or a thick Syrup, which put into a Pipkin well glazed, and
boil it over a gentle fire to the thickness of an ordinary Extract: Put the
last Spirit into a bottle by it self.

The great fame and reputation of this Water, and the great Vent for it in
Germany and France for many years since, has caused several persons, as
ignorant as wicked, to prepare it after their manner, taking only the tops of
Rosemary, with the flowers instead of the pure flowers well picked, which makes
the scent of the Water stronger, but more tart and unpleasing as well as the
taste; and instead of rectified Spirit of Wine, make common Aqua Vitae serve
their turns.

The true Spirit of Rosemary-flowers well prepared, is a most sovereign thing
against all cold Distempers of the Head and Brain. It is also an excellent
Remedy against all cold Diseases and affections of the Nerves and Joints;
against Rheumatisms and cold Gouts. It cures the Headache, dissolves and
dissipates the vapors that causes the Megrim and Vertigo, strengthens the
Memory, helps deafness and noise in the Ears by dropping two or three drops
of it into the Ear; strengthens and clears the sight, by washing the Eyelids
therewith, and dropping of it into the Eyes; it heals Contusions, Bruises and
Swellings; it asswages the Toothache, fortifies and strengthens the Stomach and
Bowels, creates an Appetite, and helps Digestion; it opens obstructions of
the Liver and Spleen, as also the Womb, suppressing the vapors thereof. It is
of great power to preserve and strengthen natural heat, and to ease aged People
of a great many of those Diseases that attend upon old Age. The Dose is from
half a spoonful to a whole spoonful in Wine, or any Cephatick Cordial Water:
For the Headache, Megrim and Vertigo's, you may snuff up a little of it into
the Nostrils, and apply it with a linen Cloth doubled to the Temples and
Forehead; and in the same manner it is to be used for Bruises and Swellings,
Rheumatisms and the Siatica. It whitens, softens, and smoothens the Skin,
preserving the Complexion and Beauty thereof, being used either alone, or mixed
with wild Tansie-water, Water of Lillies, or Water Lillies, or May-dew
distilled. In short, there is hardly any Remedy to be found that produces so
many and good effects as this Spirit, as several famous Authors confirm and
testify, as well as Experinece can testify.

The second Spirit you distilled from the Liquor pressed out, is also good, and
may produce good effects, for it will stay longer in the Stomach than the
first, by reason it contains less of the volatile part of the flowers. The
Dose must be doubled.

A most precious Cordial Elixir of Dr. Mynsight.
Take red Roses dried, Mint, Bawm, white Sanders, Cinnamon, Orange and
Citron-peels, of each half an ounce; Lignum, Aloes, and Mace, of each two
drams; Seeds of Coriander, of Angelica, of Anise, of sweet Fennel, of each half
an ounce; Spicknard Galingal the less, Safron, Cardamoms, Cloves, of each half
a dram; prepare and bruise them all, and put them into a Cucurbite, and having
powered thereon three quarts of Spirit of Wine, and two quarts of
Damask-Rose-water, fit on the Head, and lute it well, and let it stand to
digest eight days; then distill it so long till you have seven pints of water:
In this Water put Lignum C^ssia well bruised, two ounces, Safron, half a dram,
Juice of Alkerms; let it stand to digest for some days; then strain it and
sweeten it with fine Sugar or white Sugarcandy.

It is a most excellent Cordial, and very odoriferous: It exhilerates and
comforts the Heart, revives the Spirits, comforts the Brain and Stomach,
augments natural heat, causes a good digestion, expels wind, and is a most
incomparable Remedy against the Chollick and griping of the Guts; it takes aw^y
Colds, and opens Obstructions of the Lungs, Liver and Spleen; preserves
Health,; and as the Author says, keeps back gray hair, and prolongs life.

Those that love Amber and Musk, may put into the distilled Water with the
other Ingredients, Ambergreece and Musk, of each half a scruple, ground
together in a little Mortar with a little Sugar, and then tied up in a little
Sarsenet; or you may perfume it at any time, as you use it with a drop or two
of the Tincture of Amber set down in the Chap. of Perfumes. The Dose is one
spoonful or two.

Cordials to be taken after Physic to comfort and settle the Stomach, and to
cause Rest and Sleep.
Take of Alkermess, one dram and half; Syrup of Cowslips, a good spoonful;
Dragon and red Poppy-water, of each one ounce; mix them and take it when you go
to Bed.

Or take of the Conserve of Clove Gilly-flowers, two drams; Diascordium, one
dram; Syrup of Cowslips, one spoonful; mix them with Strawberry-water, Lettice,
Carduus, or Rose Water, and take it Bedward.

Or take Conserves of Roses and Methridate, of each the quantity of a
Hasle-nut; mix them with some Cordial Waters and Syrup.

Another Excellent Cordial to cause Rest and Sleep in a Fever, or when one is
oppressed with pain, as also in a Surfeit, or after Physic.
Take Confection of Alkerms, one dram and an half, Diascordium, one dram; Syrup
of Clove Gilly-flowers a good spoonful; mix them very well with two ounces of
Dragon-water, or red Poppy-water, or Carduus-water, as the Disease requires. It
is an excellent Cordial.

Dr. Farrar, his great strengthening and restoring Cordial Electuary and Drink.
Take Conserves of Rosemary-flowers, Conserve of Borage-flowers, Conserve of
Clove Gilly flowers, of each half an ounce; Electuary of Diasatirrion, one
ounce; Candid Ringo-Roots, six drams; Venice-Treacle, two drams; Nettle-seeds,
and Seeds of Rocket, of each half a dram; Species Diomoschi duleis, two
scruples; Syrup of Stoechado's, so much as will suffice to make it up into an
Electuary. Take the quantity of a Nutmeg of this Morning and Night, or when you
will, and drink a little of the following Decoction after it.

Take Leaves of Sage, of Organy or wild Marjoram, Rosemary and Nettle-tops, of
each one handful; Chamaede, Chamepit, Stoechao's, of each half an handful;
Seeds of Nettles, of Rocket, and of sweet Fennel-seeds, of each three drams;
Roots of Pellitory of Spain, half an ounce; shred them all small, and boil them
in a quart of Fountain Water; then strain it, and mix the strained liquor with
a pint of old Mallago-Sack.

This strengthens Nature wonderfully, and is excellent for old Men, taking a
little glass-full after the foregoing Electuary.

CHAP. XII. Select Cordial JULEPS.
An opening, purging and cooling Julep for Choler and burnt Humors.
TAke French Barley, two spoonfuls; Succory with the Roots, of Maidenhair,
Liverwort, and Sorrel, of each half a handful, Roots of Fennel and Grass, of
each half an ounce; of the four cold Seeds beaten, of each two ounces; boil
them in a sufficient quantity of Fountain Water, a pint and half; then strain
it, and infuse in it half an ounce of Sena; then take Tamarins and Polipode, of
each three ounces; Mechoacan, Jallop, and Hermodactils, of each two ounces;
Currants bruised half an ounce; of Borage, Bugloss and Rosemary-flowers, of each
half an ounce, if they are to be had, if not you may leave them out: bruise
them all, and infuse them warm in a sufficient quantity of Succory-water; then
boil them until there remains a pint; then strain it, and infuse in it four
scruples of Rubarb in thin slices, and three ounces; then strain it again, and
add Syrup of Roses, and Cream of Tartar, of each one ounce; then add the first
decoction: Take of this a quarter of a pint every Morning as long as it lasts.

A cooling, opening, Cordial Julep, good in Feverish Distempers.
Take Succory-water, four ounces, Rose Water, two ounces; Syrup of Violets, of
Rosae Salutive, of each half an ounce; Spirit of Vitriol, fifteen or sixteen
drops; mix and shake them together, and take thereof two or three spoonfuls at
a time.

Another Cooling Julep.
Take Barley-water and Sorrel-water, of each half a pint; Syrup of Violets, and
Syrup of Juice of Citrons, of each one ounce; Spirit or Oil of Vitriol, twelve
or fifteen drops, or so much as will make it of a grateful ascidity.

A Cordial Julep against Melancholy, Vapors and Palpitation of the Heart.
Take Bawm-water half a pint; Borage and Rose Water, of each two ounces; a few
drops of Oil of Sulphur; in which infuse cold, one scruple of Safron for four
hours; then strain it, and dissolve in it one ounce of manus Christi;
Confection of Alkermes, one ounce; Syrup of Citrons and Clove Gilly-flowers, of
each half an ounce; mix all and make a Julep.

It is comfortable and refreshing, as also restorative. Drink a spoonful or two
at pleasure.

Dr. Mynsight, his excellent Cordial and cooling Julep.
Take half an ounce of Endive-water; of Sorrel and Rose Water, of each half a
pint; of Water Lillies and Scabio's, of each six ounces; Cinamon-water, two
ounces; Syrup of Violets or Roses, half a pound; Juice of Limons, two ounces;
mix them, and add Spirit of Vitriol so much as to give it a grateful ascidity.

It is an excellent Remedy in a burning Fever, in a spotted, purple, malignant
Fever, and all other malignant Distempers. It is a very excellent thing; it
cools Insflammations, quenches Thirst, moistens a dry body, and is a pleasant
Cooler, being cordial. The Dose is five or six spoonfuls.

A most excellent Cordial, cooling Tincture of Roses
Take two quarts of water, make it boiling hot; then power it into an earthen or
white Basin, or a deep Pan, and put into it two or three spoonfuls of Spirit of
Vitriol, and stir it with a clean wooden stick; then put into it a good handful
of red dried Roses of that year; stir them well, and thrust them even in the
liquor, then cover it, and let it stand to cool; then strain it without
pressing the Roses, and you shall have a Tincture as red as a Ruby. Be sure you
do not make it in any Tin or Powter Vessel, for it will lose the color.

It is a very pleasant Cooler, and a great Cordial, and strengthens the Liver,
the Kidneys, and the Stomach; It is excellent in Fevers.

A Cordial Water to prevent and cure the Apoplexy.
Take Tops of Marjoram, Jilly-flowers, of Lillies of the Valley, of Rosemary,
Lavender, Sage, Primroses, of each three handfuls; infuse them in Spirit of
Wine rectified, and Orange-flower-water, of each three pints; set it in the Sun
for eight days; then distill it in a sand Bath, and keep the Water.

This Water is excellent to fortify the Brain and the noble parts; and is
given from half a spoonful to a whole one, as well to prevent as to cure the
Apoplexy, and all Diseases of the Brain.

The best way to distill a most Odoriferous and Spirituous Rose Water, far
beyond any that can be drawn by ordinary means, and as much to be commended for
its pleasant and penetrating Odor, as for its Virtues.
Take 20 pound of Damask-Roses picked, stamp them in a Stone-Mortar with a
wooden Pestle; mix and beat with them by degrees one pound of gray Salt
powdered; put it into a large earthen Pitcher, or into two, crush and stamp
them down very close, and order it so that the Pitcher may be quite full; then
stop it up close with a Cork fitted to it; then close it up with yellow Wax
made warm, so that no Air can get in; then tie a Bladder about it, and set it
in a Cellar for six weeks: Then open the Pitcher, and you shall find the Roses
to have a kind of smell of Wine, which is a Sign of their fermentation, and of
the aptness of the spiritual parts to separate from the terrestrial, and to
ascend in distillation. Take out a pound of these fermented Roses, and distill
them in a Cucurbite in Balneo Mariae, between lukewarm and boiling hot, until
the Roses remain almost dry; then take them out, and make the Cucurbite clean,
and put into it seven or eight pound of fresh Roses out of the Pitcher,
stopping the Pitcher up close again; then power upon the Roses the water that
you distilled; distill it as before, until the Roses be almost dry, then take
them out, and put in fresh Roses, and power upon them the distilled water, and
distill again as before: Continue doing, thus till you have distilled all your
Roses; and thus you shall have a most Odoriferous Rose Water, which will smell
all the House over while you are distilling: and you may pickle what quantity
of Roses you please whilst they are in their season, and several Pitchers with
them instead of one, and you may distill them when you please, at Michaelmas, or
at Christmas; for they will keep good a long time, provided your Pitchers he
well stopped and closed. Thus they commonly do them in Germany and in France.
And of this Rose Water you may draw an inflamable Spirit, that will burn like
Spirit of Wine, by rectifying it in a Mattress with a long Neck with a Head
upon it.

Sir Walter Raleigh's great Cordial according to the Counsel and Advice of Sir
Ken. Digby and Sir Alexander Fraiser, first Physician to his Majesty.
The first Ingredients of Animals.
Hartshorn calcined in the Vapors, Distillations, and Circulations of Spirit
of Wine, with some rasp'd Hartshorn, both powdered, of each an even quantity,
in all four ounces.

The Second.
Oriental Bezoar-stone reduced into inpalpable Powder, three ounces.

The Third.
Oriental prepared Pearl, two ounces.

The Fourth.
Of the Flesh, Hearts and Livers of Vipers, they being first stripped of their
Skins, and dried in a Glass-bottom in Mary's Bath, until they are fit to be
reduced into Powder, three drams; put two drams thereof to the Vegetables, and
add one dram to the Powders.

The Fifth.
Musk powdered with some white Sugar Candy in a Marble or Stone Mortar, thirty
grains, and afterward dissolve it in a vaporous Bath with Spirit of wine in a
Pelican, and draw off the Spirit again with a gentle heat of the same Bath,
unto the consistency of a thick Syrup, which must be afterward mixed with the
other things.

The sixth.
Ambergris, four drams powdered in a Marble, or stone-Mortar, with some
white Sugarcandy so long till they are perfectly united, which will be very
troublesome without the subtle and fiery Oil of rectified, and thrice passed
over most pure salt of Tartar in Mary's Bath; therefore this mixture of Sugar
and Ambergris must be put in a Glass-bottle, and power over it of this subtle
Oil until it overtops it the breadth of four fingers; then close the Vessel,
and place it in a vaporous Bath until it be united by dissolution; then siltre
it through Cotton into a glass-Viol, and being cooled, there will be united of
these three Bodies, a Butter or Cream most delicious and pleasing, which
already of it self is a great Cordial: thus the Ambergris must be prepared
for this Operation.

The Tincture of Coral to be taken as in the Author's first Receipt; and strike
down the Pearl with Oil of Vitriol, and Oil of Sulphur, equal parts for that is
the best way.

Vegetives, and first Roots.
Which are the Angelica, Tormentil, and round Birthwort-roots, of each one
ounce; the Fraxinella, or white Dittany-Roots, the Carline, the Contra Yerva
and Gentian-Roots, the Serpentary of Virginia, the Valerean and Zedoary-roots,
of each half an ounce: the fittest time to gather these Roots, is the beginning
of the Spring.

Secondly, Plants.
Which are Bittony. Carduus Benedictus, So^rdium, or Water-Germander, the
Dittany of Creet, Marjoram, Mints, Bawm and Seddual, of each four handfuls:
these Plants to be gathered a little after Sunrising in a serene, dry day, the
Dew being dried off, and not after Rain.

Thirdly, Flowers.
Which are, Borage and Bugloss-flowers, Clove-gilly-flowers, the red Rose,
Rosemary-flowers, Rosa solis, the Marygold and Elder-flowers, of eacn one
Pottle; Safron, half an ounce; flowers of Nutmegs or Mace, two ounces.

Fourthly, Fruits and Berries.
Namely, Cardamoms, Cubebs, Alkermes-Berries, Juniper Berries, Cloves and
Nutmegs, of each one ounce; the Juice of Alkermes, of which all over Europe is
made the Confection of Alkerms, is supposed better than the dried Berry, as in
the Authors Receipt.

Fifthly, Barks and Rinds.
Which are, Sassafrass and Cinnamon, of each four ounces; Limon and
Orange-rinds, of each two ounces.

The Vegitables, if they be dry must be put into gross powders, if green, they
must be cut very small with Sissers, for shredding with a Knife will waste the
Juice.

Sixthly, Woods.
Wood of Aloes and Sassafras of Virginia, of each four ounces: These Woods must
be extracted in a pure and simple Spirit, or some of that Spirit drawn off from
the course extract, to perform which, there needs no more than to proceed
simply in the same manner as before in the digestion and filtration of the last
Extract; then mix this resinous Extract with the Sugar, the Extracts, Powders,
Syrup, which must be done by dissolving gently with some of its proper Spirit
in a Pan; and thus unite it gently with some Syrup before it be joined with the
rest, otherwise it will remain in lumps, and will not dissolve in the Stomach
with ease enough to communicate its virtue when it is needful a Cordial should
operate.

Seaventhly, Minerals.
Minerals, which are the Oriental Bole, or Bole of Arminia, the sealed Earth,
or Terra sigillata, Coral, the Vnicornu minirale, or white Loadstone, of each
four drams; Gold, two drams.

To prepare these Earths, that is to say, the Oriental Bole, and sealed Earth;
you are to take some of the liquid Extraction of the Vegetables aforesaid,
which enter into this great Cordial and Water these two Earths therewith into a
Glass-boy till they are reduced into a liquid Pap; then draw off this Liquor by
distillation, with a gentle heat of a vaporous Bath; and this continue for
seven times, or rather till the Operator can find out by the taste of the
Earths that they are sufficiently impregnated with the savor and virtue of the
Cordial Plants for then it is time to leave off; drying what is in the Vessel
in the same degree of heat till there appears no more moisture in the head of
the Alembick, nor a drop of Liquor pass through the Neck of the Alembick; put
afterward these Earths, thus impregnated, in a glass-Viol very well stopped to
enter them afterward into our composition; reduce the Vnicornu minorale into
subtle powder.

Then all these various Ingredients must be mingled well together on a grinding
stone as before, and by degrees mingled with the Sugarcandy, which must be a
pound and half, the Musk and Ambergris according to Art,

Before you take this Cordial, examine your Stomach, and if it be troubled with
some sudden indispositions which may cause a nauseousness or sickness, by
reason of some sharp, malignant humors that sojourn in the bottom of the
Ventrickle; in this case the Stomach ought to be cleansed with a simple,
natural, gentle vomit, that indispositions of the Stomach may not be attributed
to the Remedy; and then this great Cordial to be made use of in all seasons,
from all sorts of persons, of what Sex or Age soever, but still with the advice
of a Physician: Its Dose is, from six grains to half a dram, to preserve and
maintain health; and from half a scruple, or twelve grains to a dram or four
scruples, when concerns the care of such Diseases to which it is appropriated,
which only belongs to the Physician to discover; who not only knows the virtue
of this great Cordial, but also examins the disposition of the subject, both in
health and sickness who is to receive it; reflecting upon the Time, Dose, Age,
Sex, Temper and Climate.

A Cordial to procure Sleep and Rest.
Take a quart of the best unsophisticated Claret Wine; put into it a handful of
Cowslip-flowers; one handful of Borage-flowers, and a slip of Rosemary; set it
on the fire, and when it is ready to burn, smother it in the first flame, and
keep it in the pot till it is cold; then strain it, and put thereto three
ounces of Clovegilly-flowers well mingled together, and every Night at your
going to Bed, take a Wine-glass of it, you must not warm it the second time.

CHAP. XIII. Select Phisical ALES and DIET-DRINKS.
The Earl of Linsey's Scurvy-grass-Ale, whereby he was cured of the Scurvy and
Dropsy.
TAke half a peck of Sea-Scurvy-grass-leaves, eight handfuls of Sage; two
handfuls of Wormwood; one handful of Horse-radish-roots sliced; two ounces of
Scurvy-grass-seed; two pound of Raisins of the Sun stoned; one handful of
Wood-Bittony, and the peels of two Oranges; put them into a thin bolter Bag,
and hang them in twelve gallons of small Ale after it has done working, and
after it has stood a week, drink thereof.

The Lord Linsey was much troubled with the Scurvy, Dropsy, and pitting of his
Legs, of all which this Ale quitted him; his use was to take a draught of it in
the Morning fasting at least two hours before Meat, and another in the Evening,
and sometimes also at Meals: It caused a good digestion of his Meat, and
fortified his Stomach, and made him more vigorous.

Sir Kenelm Digby's Scurvy-grass-Ale, which he made frequent use of.
Take Sea and Garden-Scurvygrass, of each half a peck, and two ounces of the
Seeds; eight handfuls of red Sage; English and Roman Wormwood; one handful of
Horse-Radish-Roots sliced; two pound of Raisins of the Sun stoned; one handful
of Wood-Bittony; two Oranges stuck with Cloves, or bruised Cloves, and two or
three Oranges more slightly stamped with the other Ingredients; put them all
into a thin bolter Bag, and hang it in an empty Vessel of a fit seize; but
first put some weight into it to make it sink, and hang it so with a string
fastened about the Bung-hole, as the lower part of the Bag may only rest upon
the bottom of the Barrel, and the upper part hang by the string; then turn upon
it twelve gallons of midling Ale, that so it may serment and better draw out
the virtue of the Herbs. This was the only Ale that Sir Kenelm made use of in
the time of his health, both for himself, and for those of his Family that
would drink of it.

Cock-Ale.
Take an old red, or other Cock, and boil him indifferent well; then flea him
skin-clean-off, and beat him flesh and bones in a stone-Mortar all to mash;
then slice into him half a pound of Dates; two Nutmegs quartered; two or three
blaids of Mace; four Cloves; and put to all this two quarts of Sack that is
very good; stop all this up very close that no air may get to it for the space
of sixteen hours; then Tun eight gallons of strong Ale into your Barrel so
timely as it may have done working at the sixteen hours end; and then put
thereinto your Infusion and stop it close for five days; then bottle it in
stone-Bottles; be sure your Corks be very good, and tie them with Packthread;
and about a Fortnight or three weeks after, you may begin to drink of: you must
also put into your Infusion two pound of Raisins of the Sun stoned.

Another Cock-Ale.
Take an old Capon or Cock, pull, draw and perboil it, and cut off the Head and
Legs; then beat it to a mash (as before) in a stone-Mortar; then take four
Nutmegs; an ounce of Mace; if you will, as many Cloves, which being all
bruised, put to the Cock, and power on it all two quarts of good Sack; let this
steep four and twenty hours in an earthen Pipkin; then take a pound of Dates;
four pound of Malago Raisins; and if you please twelve Eggs-shells and all; but
first beat the Dates and Raisins; and then mix all with your Infusion. For this
quantity you must take eight gallons of small Ale; and when it has done
working, put in all your Preparation; let it stand three days, after which draw
it into Bottles, and let it be nine days before you begin to drink of it.

An Ale or Drink to cure a Consumption. Approved.
Take half a Pound of blanched Almonds grossly beaten; four ounces of Aniseed;
and three ounces of Liquoras bruised; red Roses, Hysop and Purslain, of each
three ounces, a little bruised; boil these in two gallons of Alewort, the first
running to one gallon; then (when it is cold) put into it a quart of Malmsey;
afterward bottle it, or keep it close in a stean pot: Drink of it in the
Morning fasting, and in the Evening two hours before Meat.

It preserves from a Cough, strengthens the Constitution, and cures a
Consumption.

An Excellent purging Ale, or Diet Drink to be used in the Spring and Fall, to
open Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and Mesera^cal Veins, cleanse the
Blood, purge Choler, Phlegm, and Melancholy, cure Itch and Scab.
Take Agrimony and Scabious, of each a good handful; four Madder-roots, two
red-Dock-roots, Aniseeds one ounce, Cinnamon half an ounce, Mace two drams,
three Nutmegs, Liquoras two ounces and a half, Hermodactils and Polipody, of
each three ounces; Sena four ounces, Sarsaparilla two ounces; bruise the
Spices, cut the Roots, and slice the Liquoras; put them into a Bag, and hang
them in some five gallons of midling Ale, and after three or four days drink a
Draught every morning seven or eight days together.

Mochoacan Ale to purge the Dropsy.
Take four ounces of Mochoacan, three ounces of Hermodactyls, three ounces of
Lignum vitae, three Races of Ginger, two Nutmegs; cut all these in thin slices;
put them into a Canvas bag, and hang them in two gallons of new tunn'd Ale
before it has worked, with a stone in the bottom of the Bag, and after it has
done purging, power in Endive and Cichory-water, of each a pint; and after seven
days, drink such a proportion (as may give you some four Stools a day) every
Morning fasting, and if your Body be extraordinarily subject to any Infirmity,
either hereditary, or by disordered Diet, add such Herbs as are most pertinent
to the Nature of your Disease.

This Purgation of Mechoacan is so wholesome and effectual, that if it be drunk a
fortnight at Spring and Michaelmas, it will not only take away the Causes of
the great Dropsy, and all kind of Agues, the Stone, and Accidents of the
Brain, and infirmities of the Spleen, but also restore the Complexion to an
excellent Habit and Color, defending the Body from a number of Inconveniences

A Purging Ale by Dr. Butler, Physician to King James
Take Sea and Garden Scurvi-grass, of each a peck, Sena and Polipody of the
Oak, of each four ounces, Sarsaparilla six ounces, Caraway seeds and Aniseeds,
of each half an ounce, Liquoras two ounces, Agrimony and Maidenhair, of each
two indifferent handfuls; cut the Sarsaparilla, scrape and slice the Liquoras,
then let them be altogether grossly beaten, then put a Gad of Steel into the
bottom of a Canvas Bag to make it sink, and upon that all the former
ingredients, and hang it in a Vessel of a fit size, and Tunn upon it four
gallons of good Ale; after four or five days you may drink of it, and when it
begins to grow stale, draw it into Bottles, and Cork it close, and set it in a
cool Cellar upon the Stones, or in Sand.

If you would have it more purging, increase, or double the proportion of Sena.

The Dock-Ale to clear the Blood, and open the Obstructions of the Liver.
Take the same quantity of Ale, and wipe half a peck of Dock-roots, and slice
them, two good handful of Succory roots, one good handful of common Sorrel
roots, slice all these, and put them into a Bag, and hang them in the Ale as
the former, and when it has hung a week, Bottle it up.

An Excellent purging Ale prescribed by D. Wright, with the Minium Plaster,
for any Ach or swelling.
Take two gallons of Wort not thoroughly boiled, and three handful of Dock-roots
sliced, boil them therein till a pottle be consumed, then add thereto
Liverwort, Endive, Succory, Fumitory, Scabious, Agrimony, of each three
handful, and boil them in the same Liquor till another pottle be exhausted;
then when it is cold, strain it, and put this Liquor to three gallons of Wort
boiled perfectly well; let them both be of one and the same temper when they
are mixed; then hang therein in a Bag (with a Gad of new Steel) the following
Ingredients: Dry Scurvigrass three days by the Fire, or in an Oven upon Sieves,
in a temperate heat, that it may dry leisurely; when it is reasonable dry,
shred a pound of it, then take three ounces and a half of Sena, one ounce of
Jalap, one ounce of Rhubarb, three ounces and a half of Garaway seeds, a
handful of Orange peels, half a handful of Citron peels, half an ounce of
Sassafras, and a dram of Nutmegs, slice what is to be sliced, and then bruise
them together grossly, and hang (with the Gad of steel) in the Bag as aforesaid,
adding to them two handful of wheat-bran; this for four gallons of Ale or Beer
prepared according to the former direction.

The Minium Plaster to be used with this Ale if occasion be.
Take half a pound of red Lead finely searced, a pound and half of Oil of
Roses, and half a pound of yellow wax, slice the wax, and melt it gently with
the Oil; when it is melted, put in the Red Lead, and stir it continually upon a
gentle heat, until it begin to be brown, and then until it be cold. When you
would mix it with Diachylon, take equal proportions of that and the Red Lead.

A purging Ale for the green Sickness.
Take of Sena half a pound, Polipody four ounces, Epithmium two ounces, Agarick
and Rhubarb, of each one ounce, sweet Fennelseed and Aniseed, of each an ounce
and half, Sarsaparilla five ounces, Sassafras one ounce, Liquoras half an
ounce; make a Bag for three gallons of new Ale, and about two or three days
after it has done working, drink of it both Evening and Morning, without
intermission, the quantity of five ounces, and about two or three days after
the ending of it; let blood in the Arm, then rest a day; after which, take the
Steel-wine for a Fortnight; after that, rest two or three days: and lastly,
take the Pills de Tribus Fernelii, Dose half a dram, more or less, as you find
cause, at least half an hour before Supper, thrice in a week.

A purging Ale or Beer, very good against Melancholy, Phlegm, Choler, and all
terrestrial Humors, to purify the Blood, and quit the Scurvy, etc.
Take the Juices of Sea and Garden Scurvy Grass, Tops of Hops, Apples,
Fumitory, Agrimony, Cicory, Borage, Baume, Scabious, Liverwort, and Mugwort,
all stamped together, four ounces; Roots of Polipody of the Oak, two ounces,
the Roots of Asparagus, Borage, Bugloss, Sorel, Cicory, Red Dock, Elecampane,
and Grass-roots, of each half an ounce, the inward Rinds of the young Sprouts
of Ash, the Rinds of Capers and Tamarisk, of each three drams, Liquoras and
Epithimum, of each a dram and half; Maidenhair and Agrimony, of each two good
handfuls, Broom Flowers, Violets, Borage, Bugloss, of each a good half handful,
the four greater and four lesser cold Seeds, of each four drams, Sena six or
eight ounces, Rhubarb one ounce, Mechoacan, one ounce and half, Fennel-seed,
Aniseed and Caraway-seed, of each six ounces, Shavings of Ivory, Hartshorn,
yellow Saunders and Sassafras, of each half an ounce, Ginger two drams, and one
Nutmeg; prepare all these according to Art, and make a Bag to ferment and work
in six gallons of midling Ale, or eight Shilling Beer, and offer it has
wrought, put in the Juyces; it purges adust burnt Humors, and opens
Obstructions of Liver and Spleen.

Another, to be used in the Spring for Scab and Itch.
Take red Endive, Cicory, and Scabious, of each one handful, Sena three ounces,
Lignum vitae, shaved or chipt, four ounces; a red Dock root or two pith'd and
shaved; put them into a Canvas Bag, and let it work in a gallon of strong new
Ale, and so drink a good draught every Morning fasting, and an hotr after
Dinner, using Exercise.

A purging Ale for the Spleen and Liver.
Take the Roots of Monks Rhubarb, and red Madder, of each half a pound, four
ounces of Sena, and two ounces of Ginger, Scabious and Agrimony, of each a
handful; with a Horseradish root; wipe and slice your Roots, and put all
together into a Canvas Bag, with half an ounce of Rhubarb sliced; hang this in
three gallons of strong Ale; when it is Tunn'd up, let it so continue the space
of a week, and then draw it out into Bottles.

An Excellent purging Ale or Diet-Drink for Spring or Fall.
Take Sena of Alexandria, Polipodium, and Ashen Keys, of each four ounces,
Aniseeds, sweet Fennel seeds, Bayberries hull'd, and Sassafras sliced, of each
two ounces; Rhubarb two drams; slice all that are to be sliced, except the
Sena; put them all into a Boulter, or thin Bag, and hang it in three gallons of
the strongest Ale, not hopp'd, when it has stood four days after working,
drink thereof first in the Morning, and last at Night, a pint at a time, or
thereabouts, beginning with it first at Night, and take Posset Drink, or warm
Broth, some two hours after you drink it in the Morning, to forward the working
of it, keep warm, and use moderate Exercise.

This is excellent against Dropsical Humors to cleanse the Blood, and purge
Phlegm, and Collar, expell^th Winds in the Stomach, and very much strengthens.

Sir Kenelm Digby's Wound-Drink for any Fistula, Corroding Ulcer, or old Sore,
or the King's Evil, wherewith he did a great Cure at Frackfort in Germany where
I was with him, as you may see at the end of this Receipt.
Take a good handful of Sage, and as much of Rue after they are well picked from
the stalks; chop and bruise them a little; but see that none of their Juice be
severed from them; put these into a thin Bag of boulter-Cloth, and hang it in
four gallons of ordinary small Ale well brewed as soon as it is Tunn'd; at the
same time take three hundred of live Munky-pease, otherwise called Sows,
gathered under Wood, Timbers and Stone; but you must be sure to take those that
roll themselves round when you touch them like Pepper-corns, which the other,
flat, sort do not do but run away when you touch them; pull off their heads,
and throw them away, and bruise their Bodies with a little of the Ale, that you
may get all the substance and moisture out of them, which pour into the rest of
the Ale, and put their Skins into the Bag among the Herbs that so you may lose,
nothing of them; after it has wrought sufficiently, begin to drink of it at
Meals, and at all times you have occasion to drink: and continue the use of it
till you are cured, drinking no other Liquor all that time: and to make it more
grateful to the Taste, may you add one fourth part of white Wine: before one
Vessel is near spent prepare another, that you may always have one under
another, and keep a slender and wholesome Diet; forbear eating salt-Meat, or
salt-Fish.

With this Drink Sir Kenelm Digby cured Sir William Curtious his Daughter at
Franckforth in Germany of a coroding Ulcer in her Leg after many Remedies taken
in vain; which had so mortified the place by the long continuance of it, that
the Leg was shrunk, and was shorter than the other by at least two inches.

It is not to be wondered at, That this Drink should do so great effects; (it
being composed of so few Ingredients) since all famous Authors ascribe such
wonderful virtues to these Creatures, and that experience testifies; That they
cleanse, resolve, and purify to a wonder; They dissolve the Stone in both
Reens and Bladder to a slime and bring it away: They open Obstructions, cure
the Jaundies, all Obstructions, stoppage and Strangury of Urine; They help the
Colic Astthma and shortness of Breath, restore lost Appetite. They are
excellent, and much recommended for the curing of all sorts of Cancers, and
schirrous Tumors in what part of the Body soever, the Kings Evil, all sordid,
inveterate and rebellious Ulcers, and old Sores. The same Drink cures the
King's Evil to admiration. Dr. Salmon says, that he orders two hundred of them
to be bruised and strained into a quart of White or Rhenish Wine, or Ale, and
so to be continually drunk for a time. Being dried, and the Powder mixed with
Honey, and applied, cures the Squinsie, and sore Throat.

Another Diet-Drink for the Kings Evil, Fistulaes, sore Breasts, Legs, or any
other Sores, or Ulcers.
Take Sanicle, Agrimony, Avens, wild Bugloss, red Bramble, Dandilion,
Wood-Betony, Ribwort, wild Daysie-Roots, and Leaves of Mugwort, Plantane and
Wormwood, of each two handfuls; of the Raspings of Lignum Vitae, of each one
handful; which you may buy of the Bowl-Turners, one pugil of Hartshorn; shred
and bruise all the Herbs until the virtue is boiled out of the Herbs; then
strain and press out all the Juice from the Herbs; then set the Liquor on the
fire again, and clarify it with whites of Eggs, and so much Honey as will make
it drink pleasant and not sharp; then boil it a little more; then let it cool;
then take three spoonfuls or Monky-pease, or Sows, such as in the foregoing
Receipt pull off their Heads and through them away; bruise their Bodies with
some of the Liquor, and press out all their substance into the Liquor when it is
cold, then botle it up, and it will keep a complete year. Drink thereof two or
three times a day, using some fit Purgations before the use of this Drink.

Mr. Barnet's Excellent Diet-Drink, wherewith he cured three of his Children of
the King's Evil; he had it from an able Physician.
Take Sarsaparilla, Bark of Lignum Vitae, of each three ounces; China-Root,
Polipode of the Oak, Sassafrass and sweet Fennel-seed, of each two ounces;
Elecampane, one ounce; Stechadoes, half on ounce; of the Raspings of Lignum
Vitae, four ounces; bruise them all, and infuse them in three gallons of
Fountain Water for twenty four hours; then boil it gently for two hours in a
Vessel close stopped; then put into it two handfuls of tops of Rosemary; four
handfuls of Arch angel-flowers; two ounces of Liquoras bruised, and two ounces
of Maidenhair; let them boil an hour longer; then take it off and strain it;
and being cold, put into it two ounces of Sena; and let it infuse all Night,
the next Morning strain it again, and drink a good draught of it in the Morning
fasting, the like at four in the Afternoon, and another at Night; continue the
use thereof till you are cured. Note, the Patient during the use of this Drink,
must abstain from all gross Meats; as Beef, Pork, Bacon or any salt Meat, or
Fish; as also from Milk, Butter and Cheese. After the first Draught in the
Morning, he may eat a Mess of Water-grewel about two hours after.

Another approved Drink for the King's Evil, though broken out in diverse places.
Take Herbrob, Mugwort, Smallage, and Agrimony, of each four handfuls; shred
and stamp them alitle; then take three hundred of Munky-pease, or Sows, and
bruise their Bodies, throwing away their heads, and squeeze out all the Juice
from them with a little white Wine) then put their husk among the Herbs, which
put into the bag of Boulter-cloth, and hang it in four gallons of new ordinary
small Ale well brewed; then put into it the Juice of the Sows and white Wine;
and after it has wrought sufficiently, drink of it at Meals and at all times;
drink no other Drink till you are cured, which may be in a Fortnight or a Month.

The Author says he gave this Drink to one for a swelling and humor in her
Nose, whom it cured.

It will cure the Evil of any sort, broken or otherwise. He says that it has
cured those that had the Sores or Evil broken out in every Joint; taking no
Drink for a month, at Spring and Fall.

Besides this Drink, you may apply outwardly the following Remedy when the Evil
is broke out.

Take Garden-Snails, with their Houses, and beat them in a Mortar with a little
Parsley into the consistence of a Plaster, and so apply it to the Sore or Sores
and change it every Morning.

Dr. Farrar affirmed to Sir K. Digby that he had cured with this Remedy a most
contumacious, foul, inveterate King's Evil several times touched by the King,
and wrought upon by the best Chirurgions, and given over as desperate: He says
it is also good to take away the raging pains of the Gout.

Another Infallible outward Remedy for the King's Evil.
Take Garden-Snails; beat them in a stone-Mortar with their shells; then put to
them the Dung of a Hen new made so much as she voids at once; put to it a piece
of Rye-bread an Inch square, with the yolks of two new-laid Eggs, and one ounce
of Oil of Lillies; mix and grind all these well together till it is like a
Poultice; then heat it, and lay it as hot as can be endured upon the Sore or
Sores, and renew it every Morning fresh till it is whole: Note the Party must
take first some Purge to cleanse the Body before the use of this Remedy.

An Experimented Wound-Drink, or Potion, which Cured a Gentlewoman of an Ulcer
in the Reins in six weeks space, as Sir K. Digby relates.
Take Leaves of the large Comfrey, Agrimony, Mugwort, of each two handful,
Mumia, half an ounce, Paul's Betony, or Speedwel, six handfuls; shred the
Herbs, and powder the Mumia, and boil them in a sufficient quantity of white
Wine and Water in a Vessel close covered; then power off as much as you can of
the Clear, and then distill the remaining, and put the distilled Water to the
clear Decoction that you powered off. Take of this a little Glass-ful in the
Morning fasting, and as much at four in the Afternoon.

This cured also a Gentleman, who being cut of the Stone, could not be healed.

A very good Diet-Drinks for the perfect Cure of the Dropsy and Scurvey.
Take Wormwood, Maidenhair, Betony, Agrimony, and Fumitory, of each a handful;
red Dock Roots, and Madder Roots, of each three ounces, Polipode two ounces,
Sena five ounces, Rhubarb sliced thin, two ounces, Mace, Nutmeg, Galingale and
Cloves, of each two drams, Mechoacan thin sliced, Hermodactils, two ounces,
Sarsaparilla four ounces; shred the Herbs, and stamp them; and bruise the Roots
and Spices; put all into a Bag, and hang it in six gallons of six shilling
Beer, with a pint and half of Juice of Watercresses, and two pints of Juice of
Scurvigrass; and let it work together six or seven days, and then drink thereof
as often as you please.

Note, That you must not fill the Vessel too full; for it must not work ever.
You may add to the Composition half a pound of Horseradish Roots bruised.

An Excellent Drink to cool and temper a hot Liver.
Take two Gallons of Whey new made, boil therein one Fennel Root, and one
Mallow Root, their Piths taken out, and the Roots bruised; Sena two ounces,
Borage, Bugloss, Violet-leaves, Endive, Succory, Agrimony, Sorrel, Scurvigrass,
Watercresses, and Cinquefoil, of each a handful, Liquoras six drams, sweet
Fennel-seeds, one ounce, Cloves, Mace, Cinnamon, and Juniper Berries, of each
two drams; shred the Herbs, and bruise the Seeds, and let them boil in the Whey
till two quarts be consumed; then strain it into an earthen Vessel, and being
cold, put into Bottles, and keep them in a Cellar. Drink thereof a Draught in
the Morning as soon as you are risen, and another an hour before Supper;
continue the Use thereof for some time, the longer the better for your health.

It is good also for the Stomach, but especially for a hot Liver.

An Excellent Diet-Drink for the Gout, Dropsy, Scurvey, or any humid Disease.
Take three ounces of Sarsaparilla, Sassafras, and Liquoras, of each two
ounces; China root one ounce; boil all these in a new earthen Pipkin, in six
quarts of Spring Water with a gentle Fire, until it comes to four quarts; and
half an hour before you take it from the Fire, put in half an ounce of Cinnamon,
and six drams of Sena; strain it, and drink thereof three weeks together
without any Drink all that while; and eat nothing in the mean time but roasted
Mutton, and Fowl or Rabbit, without Sallet.

A Drink for a burning Scab or a salt Humor.
Take of Lignum vitae half a pound, of the Bark of Lignum vitae, Aniseed and
Liquoras, of each one ounce, Honey ten ounces, Violet leaves, Strawberry
leaves, Hart's-tongue and Liverwort, of each a handful; French Barley two ounces,
Raisins of the Sun stoned one pound and a half, twelve Figs sliced; stamp the
Herbs, and boil all these in three quarts of Spring or Conduit water to two
quarts; strain it, and give a draught of it Morning, Noon and Night, drink it
cold.

An Ointment to be used with this Drink.
Take white Lead, Litarge of Gold, Litarge of Silver, and Sulphur, of each an
ounce; reduce all into a fine powder, and make an Ointment thereof with Sallet
Oil and Vinegar, of each four ounces; grind the powder with them by little and
little in a Mortar, putting in some Train-Oyl, and sometimes Vinegar.

A Singular Remedy very much approved, for a scorching and itching Humor, that
waters and itches; which cured a Gentlewomans Arm which did abound with very
ill disposed waterish Humors.
Take Fumitory four handfuls, Langue de beif and Scurvey grass, of each one
handful; Madder two ounces, Hart's-tongue one ounce, Rhubarb sliced, and Sena,
of each half an ounce, sweet Fennel-seed bruised one ounce, Roots of
Elecampane, and red Dock both bruised, and Currants washed and bruised, of each
half a pound; boil them all in two Gallons of Ale to a Gallon; then strain it,
and drink a pint thereof in two draughts every Morning fasting at two hours
distance; taking the last draught three hours before Dinner.

Note, That it is much better to boil it in clarified Whey.

An Ointment which she used with the Drink.
Take Sheeps Suet well tried one pound; boil it in a pint of Plantane water,
and a pint of the Juice of Housleek, over a gentle fire, till a pint is
consumed or more, and out a pint remaining, let it stand till it is cold; then
take off the Fat that is upon it, and with the Liquor bath the Parts with a
Sponge; and having well bathed it, anoint it with the Fat you took off, and
continue it till you are well, as also the Drink.

A most Excellent Drink for prevention of the Stone and Gravel, whether in the
Reins or Bladder, and for many other Diseases; much Experienced by a famous
Physician in France, who using it three times a year, viz. just before Easter,
in the heat of Summer, and at Michaelmass, preserved himself by it to the Age
of 122 years in perfect health.
Take two quarts of Oats, the clearest and soundest you can get, wash them well
in several waters, and rub them between your hands, then drain them, and boil
them in five quarts of Fountain Water, with a good handful of Dandelion-roots
well washed and stamped in a stone Mortar; let them boil an hour, then strain
it, and put into the Liquor four ounces of Honey, and half an ounce of Sal
prunella; let it boil a quarter of an hour, then pour it into an Earthen
Vessel, and let it cool; then put it into Bottles.

Take of this two Beer-glasses full in the Morning fasting, taking the last
Glass two hours before Dinner, and another in the Afternoon; and continue it
for a fortnight, without observing any Diet, or keeping House.

It is much recommended to be very wholesome; it cleanses the Reins, is good
against the Stone and Gravel, purifieth and strengthens the Lungs; cures all
Fevers and Agues, even Tertian and Quartains, opens Obstructions of the Liver
and Spleen, helps all sorts of Colicks, and pain in the side, the Scurvey,
Dropsy, Heaviness and Weariness of the Body, revives the Senses clears the
Sight, sharpens the Appetite, and causes rest in the Night, strengthens Nature,
and preserves Health: It may be taken at any time without danger.

A Diet-Drink against Melancholy.
Take Sena two ounces, Fumitory, Hops and Borage, of each a pound; boil them in
two Gallons of Spring Water, to one gallon; then strain it, and sweeten it with
Sugarcandy or Honey, and after a weeks time drink a draught of it in the
Morning fasting, and another about four in the Afternoon.

Another for the same.
Take a pint of Aqua vitae, and a quart of Rose water, four ounces of Liquoras
bruised; three ounces of Aniseed bruised; boil all together with a gentle fire
to a pint, then strain it, and take frequently thereof in the Morning fasting.

My Lord Brunkard's Diet-Drink for the Scurvey and Dropsy.
Take of Lignum vitae and Sarsaparilla, of each eight ounces, Sassafras one
ounce, Rosemary, Marjoram, Ground Ivy, Thyme, Bark of the Roots of Capers, Sea
and Garden-Wormwood, of each a handful, an Orange Peel stuck with Cloves, and
of quartered Nutmegs; put them all in a Bag, and hang them in half a Barrel of
six shilling Beer; drink thereof when you are thirsty, the staler it is, the
better.

A Rare and Excellent Drink of great Virtues for the Cure of several
Distempers, learnt of a Gentleman, who at his Death confessed he had done many
wonderful Cures with it.
Take half a pound of quick Lime new from the Kiln, power upon it a Gallon of
fair water; let it stand eight hours; then pour off the Clear, and strain it
through a Sieve with a gray Paper in it; put into this Liquor one pound of blew
Currants beaten, Liquoras bruised, Aniseeds bruised, Sassafras, of each four
ounces, Mace two drams; let these infuse in the Water twelve hours; then strain
it again, and put it in Bottles for Use.

This Drinks Cures all manner of Obstructions, inward and outward Ulcers,
strengthens Nature, purifieth the Blood, and is good for the Scurvey and
Dropsy; it cures Consumption and shortness of Breath; it is excellent against
the Stone and Gravel, Strangury and retention of Urine: it creates an Appetite
and causes a good Digestion; it kills Worms, and is an admirable Remedy against
the cold Palsy.

Drink of it three times a day, half a pint at a time, with a little Syrup of
Ground Ivy.

CHAP. XIV. Select Syrups.
A very good Syrup against cold Diseases of the Head, Brain and Sinews, as the
Palsy, Apoplexy, Falling Sickness, Cramp, and Water distilling out of the Head
lying in Bed.
TAke of the Flowers of Stechados, four ounces; Thyme, Calamint, Organum, Sage,
Flowers of Betony and Rosemary, of each an ounce and half, Seeds of Rue, Piony
and Fennel, of each three ounces; boil them in five quarts of running water
till half is consumed; then strain it, and boil it up to a Syrup with Sugar and
Honey, of each two pound; then take Ginger, Cinnamon, Calamus Aromaticus, and
Nutmeg, of each two ounces; bruise them, and tie them up in a course thin
Cloth, of loose and open Threads, and hang it in the Syrup.

A very good Syrup against the Scurvey, and to sweeten and attemper the Blood.
Take of the Juices of Scurvigrass, Brook-lime, Fumitory, Watercresses, of
Bugloss, and of Pippins, or Permains, of each half an ounce; of the Bark of
Roots of Capers, and Polipode of the Oak, of each half an ounce; Epithymum,
Bawm, Agrimony, Maidenhair, Broom-flowers, and Borage-flowers, of each half an
ounce; shred the Herbs small, and bruise the Roots, and boil them all to a pint
and half; then strain it, and boil it to a Syrup, with a sufficient quantity of
Sugar: Use it with White or Rhenish Wine.

An Excellent Syrup to clear and open the Breast and Lungs; often Approved.
Take Liquoras small sliced ten ounces, Maidenhair five ounces, Hysop two
ounces; put all these into a Pottle-pot, and power thereon a quart of
Spring Water; set the Pot into a Kettle or Pot of hot water on the Fire, and
keep it almost boiling hot for fourteen hours, and as the Water consumes in the
Kettle, fill it up again with hot water; then strain it, and put the Liquor in
a clean Posnet, and put to it clear Honey, Sugar, and Sugarcandy, of each ten
ounces; put into it the White of an Egg beaten; then set it on the Fire, and
when the Scum rises, take it off, then strain it, without pressing it; then set
it on the fire again, and put into it a quarter of a pint of Rose Water, and
boil it up to the Consistence of a Syrup. Take thereof in the Morning fasting,
and at four in the Afternoon, and when you go to Bed, and at any time in the
Night, if you are troubled with a Cough.

It has done much good to many; it will keep a long time, being kept in a
Glass stopped with a Prune, and tied on with a Bladder.

A Comfortable Syrup against Melancholy.
Take the clear Juice of Borage, of Bugloss, and Pippins, of each half a pound;
Juices of Sorrel, Hops and Endive, of each two ounces; Cinnamon and yellow
Sanders, of each one dram, Clarify the Juices with the White of an Egg, and
boil it to a Syrup with one pound of Sugar: Then take Cochines one dram,
Saffron half a dram, Lignum Aloes rasped one scruple; tie them up in a thin
Cloth, and hang it in the Syrup.

Another Syrup of Pippins against Melancholy; by Dr. Friar.
Take twelve large Pippins, cut them through the middle, and core them, but
pare them not; boil them in two quarts of Water, with a gentle Fire to a quart;
then strain it through a Hypocrass bag, without crushing them; then boil the
Liquor to a Syrup with a sufficient quantity of Sugar; then take four grains of
Ambergreece, and ten grains of Saffron; put it in a little Tiffany bag, and
hang it in the Syrup: Take of this Syrup now and then two spoonfuls, with four
spoonfuls of Borage-water, and eat now and then the quantity of a small Walnut
of Conserve of Borage, drinking the said Draught after it.

This Course is Excellent to Cure and prevent Melancholy.

Syrup of Clove-Gill flowers.
Take of the best and fragrantest Clove Gilli-flowers one pound, the Whites
clipped off, put them in a Pipkin, and power upon them so much hot water as will
cover them; crush them well down, and let them stand all night; then strain
them, and warm the Liquor gently, and dissolve in it fine Sugar in fine Powder;
three pound of Sugar will suffice for a quart of Liquor; but take great heed
you do not boil it; for all Authors forbid; because in the boiling of it, you
will lose all the fragrant and cordial Spirits of the Flowers. If you find that
your Syrup is too thin with three pound of Sugar to a quart of Juice, then you
may take four pound to one quart of Juice. Some Women do admire that this Syrup
should keep, not being boiled; but I can assure you upon experience, that it
will keep as well as if it had been boiled, and I am sure that it is a great
deal better, and more cordial, for the reason which I have given.

Note, That some let them stand four or five days before they strain the Liquor.

To make the best and richest Syrup of Clove-Gilli-flowers.
Take what quantity you please of the best Flowers, their Whites clipped off;
then take double the quantity of them of fine Loaf-Sugar powdered and sifted;
put some of the Flowers into a Crock or Pitcher, and on the top of them some
Sugar, then another Lay of Flowers upon the Sugar, and Sugar upon them, and so
continue till all your Flowers and Sugar are laid; then set the Vessel in a Pot
or Kettle of boiling water, stopping the Pitcher, and laying a weight upon it
to keep it from rising in the Water; keep the Water boiling for seven or eight
hours, having another Vessel of boiling Water ready to supply it as it wastes;
for it must be always kept filled up to reach as high as the Flowers in the
Pot; after this, power it hot through a Hair-Sieve into a Basin; and when it is
cold, bottle it up, and stop it close, and you shall have a most rich Syrup
very Cordial and Odoriferous, far beyond all compare; but if you would have
more in quantity, and not so rich, power some white Wine upon the Flowers and
Sugar before you set it to boil, and you will have also a very fine Syrup:
After this manner you may make Syrup of Roses; but you need not clip the Roses,
and single refined Sugar will serve.

An Excellent Syrup of Aqua Vitae for a Cold or Cough, or Shortness of Breath.
Take half a pint of the best Nantz-Brandy, put it in a Silver or Pewter
Porringer, set it upon Embers, and put into it four ounces of powdered Sugar
candy; when it is warm, sire it with a Paper, and let it burn until it goes out
of it self, and leaves a Syrup behind, but you must stir it all the while with
a Silver Spoon.

Take of this Syrup two parts, and mingle it with one part of Oximel of
Squills, which is a most Sovereign thing for the Breast and Lungs, Phthisick,
Astma, and Shortness of Breath.

Syrup of Corn Poppy-flowers.
Take Fresh red Poppies two pound, infuse them in warm water for twelve hours;
then strain the Liquor, and infuse fresh Poppies in it as before; then strain
it again, and with an equal quantity of Sugar make a Syrup in Balneo Mariae.

It is Excellent in Fevers, causes Rest, eases the Cough, and all other Pains,
and the Colic, abates the Rage of the Plurisie, eases the violent pain of the
Stone, stops all sorts of Fluxes, the Whites in Women, the Looseness and bloody
Flux. The Dose is from one Spoonful to two.

To make Syrup of Aniseeds, by Dr. Quirceton.
Take Aniseeds bruised two ounces, infuse them in a quart of Sack for three
days; then strain it with one pound of Sugar; boil it very gently to a Syrup.

This Syrup is good for the Breast and Lungs, expels Wind, eases the Colic,
provokes Urine, and cleanses the Reins: Mothers and Nurses should never be
without this Syrup; for it is an excellent thing to give to young Children for
the Gripes; to which they use to be very subject.

A most Excellent Syrup to restore such as have been lingering in a long and
wasting Consumption.
Take the Flesh of Snails four ounces, French Barley two ounces, Dates one
ounce, Raisins, Liquoras, of each six drams, Sebestens and Jujebs, of each
twelve in number, seeds of Cotton, Mellons, Cucumbers and Gourds, of each half
an ounce; seeds of Lettice and white Poppies, of each two drams, the Herbs
Coltsfoot and Lungwort, of each a handful; bruise the Seeds, stone and bruise
the Raisins, and shred the Herbs, and the other Ingredients, and boil them all
in three quarts of Water to two quarts; then strain it, and boil the Liquor to
a Syrup with two pound of Sugar, and Sugar of Roses, and Diatragagant Frigida,
of each five ounces, which you must have of the Apothecaries. Dose, two, three,
or four ounces at a time.

Several other Pectoral Syrups; as Syrup of Ground Ivy, of Turnips; Syrup of
Ale, and others you have in the Chapter of Remedies for the Breast and Lungs.

CHAP. XV. Select EMULSIONS or ALMOND-MILK.
To Make Emulsions or Almond-Milk.
Take sweet Almonds, six ounces; blanch them, and stamp them in a stone-Mortar
with a wooden Pestle, pouring to it a quart of Barley-broth; but you must not
make it too thin in the Mortar; for then you cannot beat it, for it will
spatter about; when you have beat it well, power more of the Barley-broth to it
to make it thin; then strain it, and press it either through a clean Sieve or a
Cloth; then beat the remainder again with a little more Barley-broth; then
strain it again as before; repeat this so often till you have got the Milk out
of the Almonsd, and that you have employed all your Barley-broth; then sweeten
it with Sugar; and if you will, you may scald it on the Fire without boiling it
and it will be like Milk.

It is very nourishing, and good against Consumptions, and cures the Ulcers of
the Lungs, and is refreshing and strengthening.

An Emulsion for heat in the Reins and Kidneys.
Take of the four greater cold Seeds, of each half an ounce; Seeds of Lettice
and white Poppies, of each two drams, with Barley-broth, one pint; make an
Emulsion, and sweeten it with Syrup of Water Lillies, three ounces

It is excellent to cool the Reins and Kidneys, and take off the Heat and
Sharpness of Urine. Drink a little draught of it cold two or three times a day.

A Emulsion good in a Fever.
Take of the greater cold Seeds, of each three drams; Hempseed, two drams;
white Poppy-seeds, one dram; beat them and make an Emulsion, with Jelly of
Hartshorn and Poppy-water, of each half an ounce, and sweeten it with Syrup of
Corn-Poppies.

It is excellent good in a burning Fever, pestilential Diseases and in the
Plurisie.

A very good Emulsion for a sharpness and gnawing in the Stomach.
Take white Poppy-seeds, two drams; French-barley beaten, half an ounce; twelve
blanched Almonds, with Bawm-water and an Alexitery-Milk-water, make an
Emulsion, to which add fine Sugar and red Rose Water, of each one ounce and a
half: Drink of this as often as you please.

CHAP. XVI. Select Remedies for the GOUT and SCIATICA.
A Rare Ointment to assuage the Swelling and raging pain of the Gout.
TAke of the slender Sprouts of Dwarf-elder in the Month of March, when they
spring up out of the Ground from the Roots, and are about a fingers length, of
each four handfuls; stamp them, and press out all the Juice from them as hard
as you can; then boil this Juice in a pound of Hog's Grease over a soft fire for
two hours; or you may boil the Herb stamped in the said Hog's Grease, and then
strain it and press it out as hard as you can.

This was given me by a worthy Gentleman, who esteemed it much, because he
being much troubled with the Gout made much use of it, and found great benefit
by it. It asswages the swelling and raging pain thereof, and gives ease, and
strengthens the part afflicted. In the Running Gout, Numness and Raging pain in
the Hands, Fingers, and other parts; I have often approved it with great
success after many other Remedies used in vain. The part grieved, must be
bathed with it as warm as can be endured, and well chafed in before a Fire.

An Excellent Poultice, or Plaster to assuage the raging pain and swelling of
the Gout.
Take a quantity of the whitest part of Pigeons Dung; mix it with equal parts
of good Mustard; temper it with a little Vinegar; then take the Grease of a
Puppy-Dog, so much as will make it into an Ointment or Salve; then take a pint
of Garden-Snails, and stamp them with their shells, with a handful of Parsley;
then mix and incorporate all well together, and spread it upon Leather and
apply it. Parsley and Snails alone stamped and pownded together are good for
the hot Gout.

A certain and infallible Remedy to prevent and cure the Fits of the Gout.
I knew a Gentleman in Germany, who always cured and prevented his Fits of the
Gout (whenever he perceived the least symptom of its approaching) by the
following Remedy.

He took a good quantity of the Herb-Mullin dried, which being shred, and our
small, (the stalks, leaves and blossoms) was boiled in a good quantity of the
water taken out of the S^^^^'s Trough wherein he squenches his Irons; when the
water had drawn out the virtue of the Herb, and that it was tender, and being
taken off from the Fire there was put in a large proportion of Chalk in powder;
In this Bath he bathed his Feet, Legs and Knees in a Tub, in which he continued
bathing until it grew cold: Then he caused a great Hole to be dug in his
Garden, into which this Bath with all the said Ingredients was put, and then
the Earth thrown upon it. Thus bathing but once did always prevent his Fit of
the Gout, and freed him from all inconveniency of it for half a year: when he
perceived it would grow again upon him, he used again this Remedy, which did so
prevent it, that he was never troubled with any lameness, swelling or pain at
all; to which I was an Eyewitness; and I heard him say, that if he did not use
this Remedy to prevent it, he would have very shrewd and racking Fits, which
would confine him to his Bed for a Month or six weeks: he caused the Herb to be
gathered in the Summer when it was in its vigor; which is in June; it is called
Verbascum in Latin.

The Spirit of Salarmoniack mixed with Brandy, and the parts grieved bathed
therewith with Linnen-Clothes, and then some Linnen-Clothes laid over it does
give great ease in the Gout, and strengthens the Party much. I knew a Gentleman
at Leons in France, who always used it, and found great benefit by it.

A Bath for the Gout, used by Sir William Paddy.
Take a gallon of new Grains, and a quart of Bean-meal; five ounces of
Commin-seeds beaten; a good handful and half of Roman Wormwood; a good handful
of red Rose-leaves dried; three spoonfuls of Bar-salt, and one good spoonful of
Honey; beat all these together with so much Beer as will suffice to make it to
a temperate; set the Patient's Leg therein the space of half an hour; and upon
a light supper use it again at Night going to Bed, and dip woolen-Cloths
therein, and foment the Legs therewith as hot as may be well endured.

Dr. Holsatius of Cullen, his Bath for easing the Gout.
Take four ounces of Frogs-spawn-water; one ounce of Mullen-water; powder of
Mirrh, one dram; Oriantal Safron, half a dram; reduce them to fine powder, and
mix them well together; bath and foment the afflicted part therewith.

Another Plaster for the Sciatica, or any kind of Gout.
Take Deers Suet, yellow Wax, Pitch and Rozin, of each one pound, Frankensence,
two pound; beat the Gums severally; then take a pan with a broad bottom, set it
upon the Fire, and put into it, first the Pitch, Wax and Deers-suet; stir them
with a stick; and when they are well melted, put in the Rosin; and when that is
melted put in the Frankincense; and as soon as it begins to rise, take it
from the Fire for fear it should inflame; then put into it the other Gums; stir
them well together; and when they are well incorporated, strain it through a
Canvas-Cloth; when it is cold anoint your hands with Butter, and make it up in
Rowls;

Or you may spread it upon Leather while it is warm, and so apply it, using
with it the Drink aforementioned.

A most sovereign Ointment for the Gout.
Take the eldest Gander you can get, make him ^eady and draw him, but let no
water touch him, take Sheeps Tallow, fresh Hog's Grease, Pitch, Honey, and black
Soap; new Wax, two ounces; a quantity of Salt, Frankincense, in powder, three
ounces; the flesh of an old, fat Cat, Meal or Flower of Beans, and the Soot of
a Chimney, of each one handful; mix them well together, and put all into the
Ganders Belly, and sow him up close and roast him so long till he will drip no
more, then put up your Ointment and anoint the part grieved therewith.

A good Purge for the Sciatica, or any kind of Gout.
Take Aloes, Hermodactils and Scammony, of each half a dram; reduce them to
subtle powder, and make Pills thereof, with Juice of Roses, or with Syrup of
Roses; and for a Fortnight together take every third day, one dram in the
Morning,

Use also the following Plaster.
Take two ounces of Pitch; one ounce of Tar; two drams of Treakle, one ounce
and half of Rosin; one ounce of Honey; boil and stir them till all is melted
and well incorporated and united together; then spread it on Sheeps-leather
pricked full of holes, and apply it as hot as can be endured.

Another for the Sciatica by Dr. Frank.
Take a quart of Sack, the bigness of an Egg of Saltpeter; boil them together
till a fourth part is consumed, then take new Cotton-Cloaths, and dip them in
it, and wring them a little, and foment the pained place, spreading them upon
it one after another many times until the pain cease.

Another Remedy for the Sciatica and Rheumatism.
Take Storax liquid, yellow wax, new Pitch, and Honey, of each four ounces;
Cinnamon, Pepper, of each one ounce; put all these (in powder) together into a
new pot and let it boil but one walm, stirring it carefully all the while; then
take it from the Fire, and put into it four ounces of Aloes, and one ounce of
Oil of Lillies; stir them well together to make them incorporate; then put the
Pot again upon hot Ashes, and stir it until it be of the Consistence of an
Ointment; which spread warm upon Leather, and apply it; but if your Disease be
in a whole Thigh, then you may spread it upon a whole Lambs Skin.

You may leave it on seven or eight days, if it require. If the Disease come
again, put the Plaster on again. This Medicine will keep a long time.

Another Bath for the Gout; by Dr. Ruland.
Take Juniper-berry-wood cut small, three pound; Mint, Camomil, Linseeds, of
each half an handful; bruise the Seeds, and shred the Herbs, and boil them in a
sufficient quantity of water to make a Bath; by the use of which the pain went
away and the Party was perfectly cured.

A Drink for the Gout. Dr. Scroderus
Take Germander, Groundpine, tops of Sage, of each one pound and a half;
Primrose, Rosemary, of each half a pound; Misleto of the Oak half a pound;
China-Root sliced three drams; digest them all in fifteen quarts of Rhenish
Wine for ten days, then strain it. Drink thereof two or three times a day.

It is also good against the Sciatica and Rheumatism.

Another Drink for the Gout.
Take Hermodactils, Sena, of each one ounce; Turb^th, Mechoacan, Ana, one ounce
and a half; Leaves of Ground Ivy, Vervain, of each two drams; Seeds of Fennel,
Aniseeds, of each one dram and a half; Cardamoms, Cinnamon, Mace, Safron, of
each one dram; Flowers of Mullion, Rosemary, Flower de luce, of each half a
dram; bruise and prepare them all, and infuse them in eighteen quarts of
Rhenish Wine in Balneo Marie for two days; then strain it and sweeten it with
fine Sugar, and drink thereof three ounces a time with one dram of Cream of
Tartar in the Morning fasting for some days.

It is prevalent against the Gout and several affects of the Stomach, Liver and
Spleen; It draws thick Phlegm from the Joints and remote parts.

An Approved Remedy for the Sciatica in the Hip, or any kind of Gout
Take two ounces of Burgundy Pitch, Oxicrocium and Gum Caranna, of each an
ounce; melt and mix them well together; spread it on Leather, and apply it to
the part for nine days. It has cured many.

When you use the aforesaid Plaster, use the following Infusion.
Take Sena half an ounce, Epithimum, Raisins stoned, Fennel-seeds, and Ginger
of each half a dram; put them in half a pint of Whey; then make them warm, and
let it infuse twelve hours, then warm it again, and strain it, and drink it all
off in the Morning fasting.

Use also the following Drink to give every day two or three Stools.
Make a strong Decoction of Lignum Vitae, put into it Sena, Hermodactils, of
each four ounces; Epithimum two ounces, Turbith one ounce, Coloq^inrida half an
ounce; let them infuse in warm Sand, or in a Kettle of warm Water in a Vessel
close stopped for twenty four hours; then strain it, and drink thereof every
Morning fasting, and at Night; take of the distilled Water of Lignum Vitae one
ounce, with half an ounce of Syrup of Cowslips; and use to eat the quantity of
a Nutmeg of an Electuary made of Conserve of Cowslips four ounces, Conserve of
Sage-flowers, and Rosemary-flowers, of each two ounces, Conserve of Roses one
ounce; make them into an Electuary.

For a Prick that does foster, rankle and burn, a present Remedy.
Take Burnet, stamp it to mash, then spread it on a Cloth, and apply it to the
place; it will speedily help it.

CHAP. XVII. Select Remedies for Bruises and Swellings.
A Pultice to open an Impostume, and to ripen a Bile.
TAke one handful of Sorel, twelve Figs sliced, half a pint of the Juice of
Sorel; boil this together until it be very tender, and put to it some wheat
Flower, and Hogs Grease, and lay it warm to the place, changing it twice a day;
continue this till it be drawn out.

Another for the same; much Approved.
Take the Whites of two Leeks, and wrap them up in a wet Linen Cloth, and bake
them under hot Embers, so that they be only soft and no more; then pound them
in a Stone-Mortar, with a piece of Hog's Grease; spread this pretty thick, and
apply it, changing it once in seven hours; and in three times changing it, the
Matter will be all drawn out.

With this Cataplasm you may also Cure Deafness and Noise in the Head and Ears.

Mr. Stockdeal's Approved Remedy for a Bruise and Swelling.
Take a pint of fair Water, and boil in it a handful of Salt, then bath the
part swelled therewith as hot as you can endure it.

With this he cured himself of a great Bruise and Swelling upon his Foot, which
was caused by a piece of Brick that fell upon it from the Top of a Chimney.

Another infallible and often Approved Remedy for a Bruise and Swelling, to
discuss the Humors and Tumor.
Take some Tow of Flax or Hemp (of Flax is best) and moisten it with Nantz-
Brandy; then spread it over with Honey, then sprinkle some of the Brandy upon
the Honey, and having bathed the swelled part with a little Brandy, lay it on.

This cured a Boy who fell upon his Face, and a Knob as big as an Egg swelled
presently upon his Forhead; they laid this Remedy to it, and by the next
Morning it was well. The like happened to a Girl, a Gentleman's Daughter, and I
coming into the House when it was newly done, advised them to use this Remedy,
which they did, and the next day all the Swelling was gone. A Servant Maid fall
down the Stairs, and exceedingly bruised her foot and A^kle-Bone; whereupon it
swelled very much; her Mistress seeing me go by, called to me, and told me of
the Accident that happened to her Maid, asking my Advice; I advised her to use
this Remedy; which she did, and it was perfectly cured. It is a great
Discussive of Humors.

CHAP. XVIII. Select Remedies against the PLURISIE.
An Infallible Remedy for a Plurisie, Experienced by Mr. Trear, a Famous
Surgeon, and also by Dr. Tresfel.
TAke a Pippin, open it at the Top, and take out the Core; then fill it with
white Frankincense; then stop it again close with the piece you took out at the
top, and roast it in hot Ashes; then beat it to Mash, and let the Patient eat
it.

Another Approved Remedy for the same.
Take three of the biggest round Balls of Horse-Dung, break them in pieces, and
boil them in a quart of white Wine, till a pint is consumed; then strain it,
and sweeten it with Sugar; and let the Patient drink a good draught of it, and
keep him warm in his Bed.

Another very Excellent Remedy for the same.
Let the Patient drink a good Glass-full of the Juice of Chervil, which is a
great purifier of the Blood. It has cured many.

Another Remedy for the Plurisie, in case Bleeding cannot be admitted.
Take fine wheat flour, make and bake a Cake of it, which cut through the
middle, parting one side from the other, and spread upon the Crumb of each of
them Treacle or Mithridate, and apply each side of the halves to each side of
the Patient; and use at the same time the Drink made of the Horse-Dung, boild
either in Wine or strong Ale. Stone-Horse dung is best.

A Purge for the Plurisie.
Take half an ounce of Sena, French Barley and Liquoras, of each an ounce;
Raisins, Tamarins, and Maidenhair, of each half an ounce, Violet and
Strawberry-Leaves, of each an handful; boil all of them in a Pottle of water to
a quart; then strain it, and drink a draught thereof every Morning for four or
five days together; and if you have not four or five Stools in a day, take
another Draught at two in the Afternoon.

For the Cramp.
Take Oil of Earthworms, and anoint the Hams well therewith, the Calves of the
Legs, and under the Knees forward.

Another.
Take a fresh Eel, flay it, and dry the Skin, and tie it about the place
afflicted, or put it over the place, between the Blanket and Sheet, when you
are laid in Bed.

Another for the same.
Take Bawm and Rosemary, of each a handful, shred them very small, and chop or
stamp them; then put them in a Dish upon a Chafingdish of Coals, cover the Dish
with another; and when the Herbs are very hot, apply them to the place
afflicted.

For the Falling of the Uvula, which some call the Palate of the Mouth.
Sir Kenelm Digby says it is an infallible Remedy for the Falling of the Uvula,
to do thus: Gag your self with the Joint of your Thumb, whose one end joyneth
to the Hand, and the other is the middle Juncture of the Thumb: let your two
Rows of Teeth rest upon these two ends of that Joint, so as to make you gape
wide; keep your self gaping thus as long as you can, all the while sucking in
your Breath. When you are weary, take out your Thumb and rest; then repeat it
again, and ^^st again when you are weary; you shall not have done so twice, but
your Uvula will be restored to its due place.

CHAP. XIX. Select Remedies for the PILES and HEMORHOIDS.
Excellent Remedies for the Piles
TAke white Lead in fine powder, one dram, burnt Alum, two drams; mix them
with Hog's Grease and Plantane-water, and then anoint the grieved place
therewith.

Another infallible and often approved Remedy against the Piles
Take Pilewort, stamp it and mix it with fresh unsalted Butter, (in May)
working into it as much of the Herb as you can maake it well take in, so that
the Butter be highly green; then melt it over the fire, and let them boil
gently till the Butter have taken in all the Juice and virtue of the Herb, and
the superfluous moisture be evaporated: In a word, you are to make the Butter
as strong as you can of the Herb, and that it be of a perfect green color, and
no fermatick moisture remaining with it; when it is cold, it will be firm and
hard^ With this anoint the Piles, putting unto them as in the foregoing Receipt.

An approved Remedy against the Hemorhoids.
Take of the best and fattest Figs, six in number; cleave them through the
middle, lay them in a Porringer, and power upon them some good Brandy to cover
them two good fingers breath; then set the Brandy on a fire, and let it burn so
long as it will, and your Figs will then be very tender and soft; then apply
one of them as hot as can be endured to the swelled Hemorhoids that comes out,
and let it remain until it grows cold, which will be less then half a quarter
of an hour; then apply another half of Figs as before, and so continue till you
have used all the twelve half Figs; and to that end you must keep them warm by
the fire.

This will give you perfect ease, (though the pain were never so great before,
and will take away all the swelling and knobs upon the Veins, and make them
retire orderly into the Body.

Dr. Bates his Remedy for the Piles, wherewith he cured himself when he had
them in the greatest extremity that could be; he gave this Receipt to Sir
Kenelm Digby.
Take flower of Sulphur, one part, fine Sugar, three parts; make this into
Tablets or Lozenges, with Gum Tragant soaked in red Rose Water into a Mucilage;
make them round and flat, and about one dram a piece, Eat of these four or five
times a day one at a time: doing thus, it gave him three or four stools a day;
and in a little while he was perfectly cured of his Piles. This has cured
many, both Men and Women.

A Remedy for the Hemorhoids.
Boil a pint of Milk, and in the boiling slake it as often as it rises with
Plantane-water; so continue doing till you have used a pint of Plantane-water
in slaking the Milk; then take it off of the fire, and put thereto three ounces
of Mel rosatum, Drink of this at pleasure.

Another for the same.
Take the whites of two Eggs, and four ounces of fresh Butter out of the Churn,
well-washt, and one ounce of Safron; work these well together, and put
frequently a little up into the Fundament; and if the pain continue, add to the
Composition, two handfuls of Nightshade, which will make it much more effectual.

Another.
Make an Ointment with the Roots of Pilewort stamped, and Mutton-suet shred;
boil them together over a soft fire; then strain it and use it.

Another Remedy for the Hemorhoids.
Take the third part of a pint of Milk, and as much Smiths water out of the
Forge, wherein quench Gads of Steel many times; then put into it two ounces of
the Juice of Clary, and so give it for a Clister lookwarm.

Another for the same.
Take the fat of an Eel and the Yolk of an Egg, of each one spoonful, beat them
together: In this roll a Lint, so as to make it take up as much as you can, and
put it into the Fundament, and lay also a Pledget covered with the like
Ointment upon the outward swelling; and this will give some case presently.
Change your Tents and Pledgets as they grow dry and hot; and in a small time
the Veins will be open and run, and it will be well. The fat of Eel is made by
boiling Eels in water, and skimming off the fat: or if you roast an Eell, take
the fat that dripped from it; or you may bake it as when you prepare the Oil
for deafness

CHAP. XX. Select Remedies for all sorts of FLUXES and Looseness.
A certain and often approved Remedy for all sorts of Fluxes or Looseness, old
Hepatical, and bloody Fluxes.
TAke filings of Steel, (which you may buy of the Needle-makers) four ounces;
put them in a well-glassed Pipkin, and pour thereon a quart of deep red Wine,
(that which is used to color white Wine) let it boil until about three parts
of Wine is consumed, stirring it often; then strain it while it is hot: give of
this two or three spoonfuls in warm Broth or Ale in the Morning fasting for
some time together.

This I have often approved with happy success even in a bloody Flux.

Another for the same.
Take a pint of Claret Wine, and put into it two pennyworth of Cinnamon and as
many Cloves; boil this gently close covered till half be consumed; then make a
Toast or two of light Bread, and cover them with Sugar; then strain the Wine
upon them: eat them for Dinner, and the like for your Supper, eating no other
sustenance that day. It uses to cure in a day.

Another for the same.
Take of the ourtward Bark of an old Oak, (the rough part a little scraped off)
two ounces; Canamon, one ounce; two sound Nutmegs sliced thid; eighteen black
Pepper-Corns, and as many Cloves; bruise them all, and boil them in two quarts
of New Milk until a pint be consumed; then strain and divide it into four
parts. Take one of these as hot as you can drink it early in the Morning, and
another about ten a Clock, and another at four in the Afternoon, and the fourth
at Night when you go to Bed, and make fresh every day. The first draught will
take away the pain and griping, and then afterward it is not necessary to take
it so very hot: It does not bind it suddenly, but smootheth and heals the
Guts, and strengthens the Stomach, and if the Patient have lost his Appetite so
that he can eat nothing, as usually happens in great Fluxes: this Milk gives
him sufficient nourishment.

An excellent Clister to cure any Flux or Looseness.
Take a handful of Barley-meal, with all the Bran in it; or take a good handful
of Barley and beat in a Mortar to a fine powder; Wheat Bran and dried Roses, of
each one handful; boil these gently in a glassed Pipkin, covered in three pints
of water for three quarters of an hour; then strain it through a Linen Cloth,
and press it hard to get out all the thick and slimy substance of it. This is
enough for two Clisters when carefully done. Take half of it and put into it
the yolk of two Eggs, and one ounce of Mulrosat; and give it duly warm. He may
keep it three or four hours without trouble, because the quantity is less than
of an ordinary Clister, and that it is of a Balsamic and comforting quality to
the excoriated Guts. It is an excellent Remedy to any sharp tormenting Flux,
when the Cuts are enflamed, excoriated and ulcerated, either through ordinary
causes, (as by eating Fruit, or the like) or by taking Mercury to flux one by
Salivation, you will presently find ease at the first taking it; but it is well
to repeat it once or twice a day.

Dr. Butler's Remedy for a Flux.
Take the Root of Holly-oak, Elder-tree-Roots and Plantane-Roots, of each a
like quantity; cut them small, and boil them in red Wine or Ale; Drink thereof
as often as you please and need requires: If it be distastful sweeten it with
Loaf-Sugar.

A Remedy to cure the Bloody Flux, and heal the Ulcers in the Guts caused
thereby.
Take the inner Rinds of a supling Oak, of about twenty years growth, two
handfuls; cut them into small pieces, and boil them in a quart of Milk; when it
is ready to run over shake it with cold water, and so boil it, and shake it
five or six times; let the Patient Drink half a Pint at a time, adding a little
Pepper grossly beaten; boil also of the same Bark in water with a little
Cinnamon; and drink thereof at Meals besides the other.

To cure a Bloody Flux, bloody Urine, or spitting of Blood.
Take Shepherds-pouch and Plantane, of each a like quantity; stamp them, and
boil them in Spring or Conduit-water; mixed with the distilled water of red
Nettles, add thereto a little fine Sugar; and drink it every Morning and
Evening.

CHAP. XXI. Select Remedies for the JAUNDIES.
Dr. Farrar, his excellent and often approved Remedy for the Jaundies, of any
kind black or yellow.
Take eight ounces of chosen Currants well washed, and picked from all the
little stalks; put to them one ounce of choice Rhubarb in fine powder; beat
them together in a mortar seven or eight hours. Take of this every morning
fasting, and at Night about the quantity of a small Walnut.

It purifieth the Blood, and strengthens the Liver wonderfully, and if
centinued, carries away the p^ccant humors of the Body.

This is a sovereign Remedy for a Flux or Looseness as well as for the Jaundies.
I my self had once a great Flux for a Fortnight; and Sir Kenelm ordered this
Remedy for me, and it perfectly cured.

Another approved Remedy for the yellow Jaundies.
Take Goose-Dung gathered in the Springtime, and dry it in the Sun, and
Sugarcandy, of each one ounce; pulverize them and give it from one dram to two
in white Wine. It perfectly cures it at three or four times taking.

Another approved Remedy for the same.
Take Hemp-seeds, bruise them and boil them in milk; then strain it, and drink
thereof warm two or three times a day. This cured a great Lady.

Another approved Remedy for the yellow Jaundies.
Take Celandine (the whole Plant) one handful; Leaves and Flowers of Hypericon,
of each half a handful; Roots of Hog-fennel, the inner Bark of Elder, of each
three drams; boil them in Rhenish Wine and water of Hartstongue, of each one
pint; then strain it and put into the strained Liquor powder of Goose-dung and
Safron, of each three drams tied up in a Rag, sweeten it with Sugar.

It perfectly cures the Jaundies at thrice taking divide the whole quantity
into three Doses, and take them for three Mornings together.

Another, Remedy for the yellow Jaundies, that when some have been entering into
the black, have been cured by it.
Take Jean Treackle, two ounces; powder of Turmerick, one ounce; Safron, one
dram; a Nutmeg grated, and as much Honey as will sweeten it: work it into an
Electuary, which put up into a Gally-pot, and take of it the quantity of a
Nutmeg three or four times a day.

CHAP. XXII. Select Remedies against Ruptures.
To make an Excellent Ptisan for a Rupture; the Use whereof cured a great Lady
of a great Rupture in a Fortnights time, and likewise many others.
TAke Solomon's Seal, Agrimony, Milt-wast, Maidenhair, Roots of Strawberries,
of each a handful; pick and wash them, then shred them; and stamp them in a
Stone-Mortar; and boil them in two quarts of white Wine; but let the Vessel be
close stopped that nothing may expire; then strain it out, and press it hard;
Drink of this Liquor a good Glass-ful in the Morning fasting; and an hour
after, drink another; and continue this, taking two Glass-ful every Morning
till you are cured.

An infallible and often approved Remedy for a Wind-Rupture.
Take fresh Cows-dung, heat it in a Pot or Pan, then spread it thick upon
Leather, as a Cataplasm, and strew upon it some Commin-seeds bruised; then
apply it to the Rupture as hot as may be endured; when it grows cold, put on
a new one: Continue this for two days.

This has Cured several Children of a Wind-Rupture. It is a Sovereign Remedy
in that Case. The Child must lie upon the Back.

Another Plaster for the same.
Take Polipode of the Oak, and Elecampane, beat them small in a Mortar; then
temper them with Oil of Bays, and lay it under the Truss, changing it every
Morning; Continue it for a Month.

Another Remedy for a Rupture.
Make Potage with Mutton, and boil in it Plantane and Daizy-Leaves and Roots,
Sanicle, Scabious, and Polipode, of each a handful, two Leaves of Comfry; eat
thereof for two or three days; and in the Morning fasting, and at Night when
you go to Bed, drink Posset made with Ale; and boil some of the said Herbs in
it; then strain it, and mix the Herbs with a double quantity of Sanicle, stamp
them, and stew them with Sheeps Suet, and apply it under the Truss; when you
have drank the Posset, lie on your Back an hour at least.

CHAP. XXIII. Select Remedies for Tetters and Ringworms.
An Ointment to Cure a Tetter or Ring-worm.
TAke Lytharge of Gold in very fine Powder, half a pound, Wine-Vinegar, five
ounces, Oil of Roses one pound; grind the Lytharge in a Mortar, putting to it
by turns, sometimes Oil, sometimes Vinegar, till by a continual grinding and
st^^^ing, the Vinegar does no more appear, and that it comes to a whitish
Ointment.

It is good against Inflammations, Burnings, and Scaldings, it is cooling,
drying and anodine; it dries, skins and heals Sores and Ulcers, cures Scabs,
Tetters, Ring-worms, and other Deformities, and Discoloring of the Skin.

Another Approved Remedy for a Tetter or Ringworm.
Take Boars-grease four ounces, Quicksilver mortified, and Verdigreece, of
each an ounce; Camphire one dram, Black Soap and Mustard, of each one Spoonful;
Juice of the Leaves of Walnuts, three or four Spoonfuls; grind this all
together in a Stone Mortar, or on a Painters Stone; then put it in a Gallipot:
Anoint the Tetters or Ring-worms with it Morning and Evening until it kills and
heals them.

This is an absolute Remedy, which has Cured many.

Another Remedy for Tetters and Ring-worms, Itch, and Scabs, etc.
Take Water of sharp-pointed Dock four ounces, Borax three drams, common Salt,
one dram; Vinegar of Squils one ounce; mix them together.

It is excellent against all manner of Scabs, Itch, Ulcers. Tetters and
Ring-worms, Morphew, and other Deformities of the Skin.

To take away Warts and Corns.
Take Sal Armoniack, Roman Vitriol, and Verdigreece, of each two ounces, Alum
one ounce, Calx vive half an ounce; distill them in a Glass Alembeck, the Phlegm
comes first; which cast away; the Spirit follows, which reserve for Use.

It takes away Warts and Corns by often touching them.

To take away Warts from any part of the Body.
Anoint them with Oil of Sulphur two or three times a day, and they will fall
off.

Another.
Take a few Snails, put them in a Glass with a little Salt, and in two or three
days there will be a Liquor; with which anoint the Warts, and they will wear
away.

Another for the same.
Take the green Leaves of Marigolds, mash them as small as green Sauce; then
rub the Warts with it, and squeeze some of the Juice upon them.

For Corns in the Feet.
Take a little Copperas, and as much Bay Salt, and the quantity of them both of
white Wine; boil them till they are dissolved, then wet therein a little black
wool, or a Linen Rag, and bath the Corns therewith every Morning; then put to
them a Plaster of Diapalma, and in a short time they will wear all away.

Another for the same
Take Galbanum two drams, steep it in Wine Vinegar until it is as soft as
Salve; apply it to the Corns, being first close pared until they wear away,
which will be in a short time; you may anoint them with it, and then lay a
Plaster of Diapalma upon it.

Another.
Take Operment-Allum and Vitriol, of each two drams; reduce them to a fine
Powder; then temper it with Honey to an Ointment, and anoint the Corns
therewith, being first pared, and lay a Plaster of Diapalma over them, and
they will wear away in a short time.

CHAP. XXIV. Select BALSOMS and OINTMENTS.
The true and genuine Description of Lucatello's Balsome, according to Sir
Kenelm Digby's Receipt, as he caused it to be prepared for his own Use.
TAke three pints of the best Sallet Oil, which wash first with good Claret
wine, then wash and beat one pound of the best Venice-Turpentine in several
white-Rose-waters, till it be very white and Liquid; likewise scrape or shave
very thin half a pound of the best and purest yellow Bees Wax, and take six
spoonful of pure right Canary, and put the Wax and Sack into a good sound new
glazed Pipkin of four quarts, and put it on a Trevit, over a gentle Charcole
Fire; when the Wax is melted, take it from the Fire, and put into it the
Turpentine by degrees, still stirring it very well; then put in the Sallet Oil,
and stir it all very well together for a pretty while; then set it on the Fire
again, and let it boil very gently, stirring it carefully all the while: when
you perceive all to be perfectly united together, take it from the Fire, and
set it by to cool for one Night; the next Morning take a big Stick or Bedstaff
very clean, and put it through the Matter in the Pipkin till it touch the
bottom, and set it on one side, that all the extraneous Moisture may run out,
and drain very clean: after all which is entirely drained out, set the Pipkin
on the Fire again, and when the Matter is very well melted, strew into it by
degrees with your Finger one ounce of pure good red Saunders, reduced (by it
self without any mixture) with beating and searcing in the finest Scarce, into
the subtilest Powder that possibly can be: Then take the Pipkin from the Fire,
and stir it exceedingly for at least a quarter of an hour, that the Saunders
may be perfectly mixed and incorporated with the rest of the Unguent, and then
set it on the Fire again to boil very gently, till it become into the perfect
state and consistence of an Unguent, stirring it very carefully all the while.
When it is so, take it from the Fire, and add to it one ounce of pure good
natural liquid Balsom, and one ounce of the best Oil of Hypericon, or St.
John's Wort, and stir all exceeding well together for a long time, till it be
perfectly cold, and of a firm Consistence; then put it into well glazed earthen
pots, fast tied with Papers and Bladders, and Leaden Covers over them, made in
manner of a Pipkin-Cover to shut upon them like a Box-lid, and set them hollow
in the ground a yard deep from the top of the Pots (if the place will allow
them to remain dry so low, which must be considered) and arched round about,
and over them with sticks strong enough to bear the weight of the Earth, and
keep it from falling close about them; and then cover the Vault very well with
the Earth you dug out, that the Vapor and Steam which rises from the Earth
below, may not breath out, but circulate about the Pots, so to make them
ferment and homogeneate, and so let remain the space of two Months.

The Virtues of the said Balsom.
It cures any Wound, if it be very deep, by Syringing, and Tenting with Lint
dipped therein, and Anointing the Parts about; if not very deep, by only
anointing and applying it with Lint; it will assuage the Pain, and preserve
from Inflammation, it draws out broken Bones, Splinters or Thorns, or any
thing that may putrify or fester, and helps very speedily in any part of the
Body whatever, presupposing that the Vitals be not touched; it cures Ulcers in
the Body, being dissolved in six spoonfuls of good Sack, the quantity of a good
Nutmeg, (or in Milk) and taken down warm, or any inward Bruise caused by a fall
or otherwise, or any Stitch, being taken in Sack as aforesaid. One of Sir
Kenelm's Servants was troubled with a sore Pain and Stitch, extending from his
right Pap to his Backbone, and the parts round about, which this Balsom, made
according to Sir Kenelm's own Receipt, and taken in Sack as aforesaid, quitted
him clearly of, the first, second, and third time, although the third time he
was much distempered with an Ague and Fever, which he grew well of in a short
time after; and imputed the Cure to the Balsom and Sack: It is also excellent
good so taken, against a Consumption. It also heals outward Bruises,
anointing the grieved part therewith, and keeping it warm after anointing. It
heals a Fistula or Ulcer, though never so deep, in any part of the Body, by
anointing warm, and applying to it a Plaster thereof; as also Cuts, Burns,
Scalds, anointing and applying it with Lint, it helps Ach in the Bones or
Sinews, the parts being kept warm after anointing; it eases the Headache, by
anointing the Temples and Nostrils; it very much avails for Digestion,
anointing the Stomach and Navil therewith very warm going to Bed: It is good to
prevent Infection in the time of Pestilence, anointing the Lips and Nostrils
there with before going abroad in the Morning, it will secure you that day,
taking also some two Drams in Plague-water. Lastly, it mitigates the Sharpness
of Urine, and cures any venomous Biting or Stinging.

An Excellent green Balsom or Oil for green wounds, Bruises, Strains, or
Wrenches; called the Countess of Chesterfield's green Balsom Oil.
TAke a quart of the best old white Wine three pints of the best Oil Olive,
mingle them together, then put into them these Herbs following, being first
bruised; half a pound of the Flowers and Leaves of St. John's Wort, Carduus
Benedictus, Sage and Valerian, of each a pound; let them infuse therein four
and twenty hours; then set the Pot or Glass they are in, into a Kettle of
Water, with store of Straw in the bottom to secure the Glass from breaking, and
so let it boil in the Kettle with a moderate heat till the Wine is quite
consumed, which will be in four or five hours, sometimes stirring it, and have
in readiness warm Water, to supply it as it boileth away; The Countess did boil
it in a well Leaded Pipkin, on a gentle Charcole Fire; having boiled it very
well, strain it through a strong Canvas Cloth, and set it on the Fire again,
and add unto it a pound and half of the best Venice Turpentine, and boil it
again the space of a quarter of an hour; which done, put more into it of these
Gums following, Olibanum, in subtle powder, five ounces, Powder of Myrrh, three
ounces, Dragons Blood, one ounce, and so let them boil all together with a
sober Fire a quarter of an hour, and then take it from the Fire, and put it up
in a great Glass when it is cold, and every Morning a little before Sunrising;
set it in some convenient place without doors, where it may have the greatest
heat of the Sun, and take it in at night; thus do for the space of ten days
together, if the Weather permit; pricking the Paper that covers the Glass
full of Holes all the while it stands in the Sun, to prevent the breaking of
it.

When you have Use of this Balsom for a green Wound, warm some of it in a
Saucer, and with a clean Feather anoint and wet the Wound very well with it, as
hot as the Party can suffer it; then wet as much Lint as will fill the Wound,
in the warm Balsom, and lay it in the wound; then take a fine Cloth, and wet
also in the Balsom, and lay upon the Lint, and thereon a piece of Bladder well
rubbed; dress it twice the first day, that so it may the better soak out the
Blood; but afterward once in four and twenty hours.

The Use of the same for a Bruise or Wrench.
Set some in a Saucer before the Fire, but not on Coals, and when it is warm,
wet your Fingers in it, and gently rub and chafe in the Oil where the Bruise
is, before the Fire an hour together; then wipe your hands on a fine Linen
Cloth, and bind up the pained place with the Cloth upon it; dress it thus twice
a day, and in four or five days, with God's Help it will be perfectly well.

The Lady Barington's Rare Balsom for the Palsy, Apoplexies, and weak Sinews,
or old Strains, etc.
Take two quarts of very strong Aqua-vitae, or Spirit of Sack; infuse in it one
pound of Imperatory, Sarsaparilla, and Castorum, of each half an ounce, bruise
all these a little, and add to them two handful of ordinary Lavender Flowers,
and Sage-flowers, of each one handful; steep these Ingredients in an earthen
Pitcher that is well glazed on the Inside; so stop it with a Cork and a Bladder
very close, and keep it in a Chimney Corner, where there is a constant fire
kept, for the space of four days and nights, setting the Pot often on warm
Embers, shake the Vessel twice or thrice a day all the time; then take nine
drams of Camphire dissolved in half a pint of the strongest Spirit of Wine;
when the time of Infusion is expired, put the Vessel in a cool Cellar to settle
the Spirits, and when you feel the Pitcher well cooled, then open it, and stir
into it the dissolved Camphire and Spirit of Wine; then pass it two or three
times through an Hypocras-bag, so keep it in Glasses very close stopped. This
Balsom is always to be used cold, the Spirits are so quick, that it will vapor
all away: When you use it, put some of it into a Spoon, and rub it in till it
be dry; for the Palsy rub the Mould of the Head, and Nape of the Neck; it is
good for all parts where there is any Contraction of the Sinews, or debility of
the Nerves; for the Gout or any Crick, or Aches, rubbing the Places; it is very
good for any Distemper that proceeds from Cold, and also for the Headache,
rubbing the Temples: This Balsom must be always close stopped, and kept in a
cool place, and that it may be seldom opened, take in little Glasses for your
daily Use: it must be used Night and Morning, rubbing it well into the place.

For the Dead Palsy.
Sir Kenelm Digby relates, That Madam de Monpesson told him, that a certain,
and by her often approved Remedy for the Dead Palsy, is this:

Shred Onions small (the white are best) and and put them into an earthen pot
or pan (uncovered, or but slightly, to keep out the dust) and set it in an Oven
moderately hot, to bake, stirring the Onions sometimes: let them bake till they
are become Pap; make a thick Cataplasm of this, and lay it upon the benumbed
part; change it every twenty four hours, and continue it till you are well. If
it be an universal Paralisie, you must use the Cataplasm all over.

An Ointment for the Palsy.
Take Sage, Rue, Savin, Lavender, Sothern-wood, Rosemary, Laurel, Mullin,
Primrose, Cowslips, Betony, Avens, Watercresses, Mallows, the Leaves and
Berries of Ivy and red Nettles, of each a handful, stamp them all, and strain
them, and mix the Juice with red Wine; let it stand six or seven days; then
boil it, and add boars Grease, Cats Grease, Fox Grease, Castor; when they are
well boiled, strain it through a Canvas into a Basin, and add Wax and Rosin.

An Ointment for the dead Palsy.
Take two pound of fresh Butter, melt and scum it clean, then take red Sage,
Dill, Bay Leaves, Rosemary, Thyme, Costmary, Tansie, Lavender leaves,
Winter-Savory, Maudlin, Penniroyal, Speremint, Camomil, Lavender-Cotton, of
each a quarter of a handful; then take two handful of Angeltouches, wash them
clean, and dry them in a Napkin; then shred them all very small, then warm the
Butter, and strew all into it, stirring it over a soft fire till it comes to a
green Ointment; then strain it, and let it stand till it is cold.

It must be made in May.

The true Balsom, or the Oil of St. John's Wort.
Take Tops and Flowers of St. John's Wort when they are near ripe, two pound;
stamp them in a Stone-Mortar, and put them into a stone Jugg, and power upon
them Oil Olive four pound, good strong wine, half a pint; stop it close, and
set it in warm water for twenty four hours, or in a Sand-Furnace; then put it
into a Kettle of water, and let the water boil, stirring the Ingredients
sometimes with a wooden Spatula; then strain it, and press it out strongly;
then take the same quantity of the Tops and Flowers of St. John's Wort, and put
them into the Pitcher, and power the strained Oil upon them; let it digest as
before; then set it in boiling water as before; then strain and pour it out;
repeat a third time with new Tops of St. John's Wort; then strain and press it
hard, and keep the Oil for use.

Then to make this Oil more efficacious, having separated it from the Faeces
and Moisture, set it over a gentle Fire, and put into it 2 pound of
Venice-Turpentine, and stir and incorporate them well together; then take it
from the Fire, and mix with it three ounces of Tincture of Saffron, stir them
well together, and keep the Oil for Use.

This Oil thus prepared is an effectual Balsom, it warms, attenuates,
dissipates and dries; and therefore is very proper against all Pains, Aches,
and Numness proceeding from Cold; particularly against all sorts of Infirmities
and Weakness in the Joints, the Sciatica, and all sorts of Gouts; it cases the
pain of the Teeth: It is an excellent thing to heal all sorts of Wounds,
together with those of the Nerves; for it glutinates and cicatrises, it extends
shrunk Sinews, and strengthens them; it is good for Burnings and Scaldings, it
is good against Convulsions, being given inwardly.

This Balsom is also mixed in vulnerary Injections, in Digestives, in
Cataplasmes, and in the Composition of Lucutella 's Balsom made after Sir K.
Digby 's Receipt.

Dr. Scroderus his Balsom against the Plague.
Take distilled Oils of Rue, of Citron, of Angelica, of each half a Scruple,
Oil of Amber rectified, five drops, of Camphire three ounces, Oil of Nutmegs by
expression, half an ounce; mix them and make a Balsom.

It is an excellent Preservative in time of Infection; anoint the Temples,
Nostrils, Stomach and Pulses therewith; and take every Morning fasting the
quantity of six or eight grains in a little Canary.

A most Excellent Balsom to dry up all running and moist Sores, Issues, moist
Scabs, old and running Ulcers, and is a most miraculous thing to cure scald
Heads.
Take Amiantum four ounces, burnt Lead twelve ounces, Tutty prepared, two
ounces; Calcine and Powder them; then steep them in Vinegar for some Months,
stirring them once a Month; after boil it for a quarter of an hour, and let it
stand till it is clear; then take of this clear Vinegar, Oil of Roses, of each
a like quantity; beat them together into a white Balsom.

Dr. Hartmannus his approved Balsom, which cures any green Wound or Cut in
twenty four hours.
Take Oil of St. John's Wort, Oil of Earthworms, Turpentine and Mastick, of each
one ounce; mix and incorporate them over a gentle Fire; then put it up, and
keep it for Use. Apply it warm with a little Lint.

To make a green Ointment suddenly for any Scalding or Burning.
Take fresh Cows-dung and Hog's Grease, of each equal parts, mix and incorporate
them well together over a gentle Fire.

An Ointment to break and open all Impostumes, Biles, and Plague Sores.
Take Oil of Olive two pound, white and yellow Wax, Rams Fat near the Kidneys,
pure Rosin, black Pitch and Venice-Turpentine, of each half a pound, choice
Mastick in fine powder two ounces; mix them, and make an Ointment according to
Art.

This Ointment is very effectual to break all sorts of Apostemes, as also
Pestilential Carbuncles and Venereal Buboes. The Consistence of this Ointment
is harder than of other Ointments. It is to be used from the first breaking of
the Aposteme, till the Cure be perfect.

An Approved Ointment for the Itch, by Dr. Scroderus.
Take Litharge and white Lead, of each half an ounce, Vinegar half an ounce,
Oil of Roses four ounces, Sulphur vive six drams, Salt three drams, Turpentine
half an ounce, fresh Butter three ounces; mix them and make them an Ointment.
Anoint with it Morning and Evening, and it will kill the Itch in about a weeks
time.

An approved Ointment for cold or hot swelling Humors: It is a singular Remedy.
Take Vnguentum de Althaea, and anoint the place swelled with it, warm for hot
Humors, and lay some spread on a Cloth, to the Swelling, renewing it twice a day.

If it be a cold swelling Humor, then take an ounce of Vnguentum de Althea, and
Oil of Peter half an ounce; mingle them well together, and anoint the place
with it, and apply some on a Cloth or Paper.

A most Sovereign Green Ointment which cures all Strains, Bruises, and
Swellings, Aches, Kibes, Cuts, Cramps, Scaldings, and Burnings, and all outward
Griefs. It eases the Sciatica, and all Swellings in the Face and Throat, yea
though they look red, and have an Ague in them.
Take young Bay Berries, and Wormwood, of each half a pound, red Sage and Rue
of each a pound; gather them in the heat of the day, and pick them, but wash
them not; stamp them to a Mash in a Mortar, then take fresh Suet picked and
shred, four pound; beat them well together till they are well incorporated;
then put to them two quarts of good Oil, work it well together with your hands,
till it be all of one color and softness; then put it into an earthen Pan, and
let it stand close covered in a cold place for eight days; then boil it gently
for seven or eight hours, stirring it very well all that while; and when it
has boiled about four or five hours, put in four ounces of Oil of Spike; you
shall know when it is boiled enough, by taking a drop thereof in a clean
Sawcer, if it appear of a sad green, let it still boil till it look of a fair
green; then strain it, and keep it close in a Gallipot; it will keep it seven
or eight years.

A most Excellent Ointment much approved, for Tetters and Ring-worms, Itch and
Scabs, Itching and Waterish Humors, and all other Maladies and Infirmities of
the Skin.
Take Litarge of Gold in very fine Powder, two ounces, Vinegar four ounces, Oil
of Roses, half a pint, grind the Litarge in a Mortar, pouring to it sometimes
Vinegar, and sometimes Oil; stir it continually till the Vinegar do no more
appear, and that it come to a whitish Ointment.

This Ointment cured a man who had a very Malignant Tetter all over the
back-sid of his Hand for many years, he had tried many Remedies in vain, but at
last getting the Receipt of this Ointment, he presently made it, and it
perfectly Cured him in a short time, as he related to me himself.

CHAP. XXV. Select PLASTERS and CERE-CLOTHES.
A most Excellent Plaster called the Emperor's Plaster.
TAke red Roses dried one ounce and half, Bistort roots, Cypress-Nuts, all the
Saunders, Mint, Coriander seeds, of each three drams, Mastick half an ounce,
Hipocystis; Acacia, Dragons Blood, sealed Earth, fine Bole, red Coral, of each
two drams, Turpentine washed in Plantane water, four ounces, Oil of Roses three
ounces, white Wax a pound, Pine Rosin, Juices of Plantane, Housleek, Orpin, of
each an ounce; the Wax, Rosin and Pitch being melted, put to them the
Turpentine and Oil; then the Hipocystis and Acatia dissolved in the said
Juices; and lastly, the Powders, to make an Emplaster according to Art.

It is much recommended to heal, strengthen, cool, dry and bind; being applied
to the Crown of the Head shaved, it is good against a Consumption, stops the
Rheum that falls upon the Lungs; applied to the Back, it strengthens it much,
and removes Pains thence; applied to the Belly, it is said to stop a Looseness;
it is also very good to strengthen weak and luxative Joints, and confirm feeble
Limbs.

An admirable Plaster devised and prepared for the Use of the late Archduke
Leopoldus in Flanders.
Take white Virgin-Wax one pound, Emplastrum gratia Dei two ounces, Diapalma an
ounce, Diacolon and Corimbum of each two ounces, powder of Orrice roots one
ounce, Mercury precipitate half an ounce, Cinnabre in fine powder, one ounce,
Storax dissolved in Spirit of Wine, and strained one ounce, Musk three grains;
slice the Wax and Plasters thin, and melt them in a glazed Pipkin, stir them
well together continually, till they are all dissolved; then put in the Cinabre
and Precipitate, and after the Storax and Orrice, stirring them continually;
then put in the Musk dissolved in a little Rose Water; and last of all put in
four ounces of Spirit of Wine by little and little; for it will make the
Composition to rise very high, and if it boil over, that the Fire take hold of
it, it will be spoiled, and you cannot quench it.

The Experimented Virtues of this Plaster, are as follows,
1. It eases the Pain of the Head, being applied to the Forehead and Temples.
2. It heals all Bruises and Swellings, all Cuts, Wounds, Sores and Ulcers. 3.
It cures the Toothache, being applied to the Cheeks and Temples. 4. It
dissolves any Swellings or Tumors about the Eyes or Throat, proceeding from
cold Causes, as Squinsies, and the like.
It is a most excellent Application for an Issue; and to that end it was
prepared for the said Archduke Leopoldus.

The Lady Howlands Excellent Cere-cloth, by her much approved, for any Bruise,
Ach, or little Gout, to stanch the Blood and heal any Wound,
Take red Lead one pound, put it into a pint of Sallet Oil, boil them gently on
Embers, stirring them well until it grows somewhat thick; then drop a little
upon a Plate, and if it stick fast, it is enough; then remove it from the Fire,
and put in half a pound of yellow Wax sliced, and four ounces of Rosin, set it
on the Fire again, but let it not boil; dip in some linen Cloths for
Cere-cloths, whilst it stands on the Fire, and hold them before the Fire to run
off as long as as any will run, letting it run upon some thing to save what
runs off; and when they are cold, lay them up. You may make some of the
Composition up in Rolls for Salve.

An Admirable Cere-cloth for a sore Breast, Impostum, Fellon, Green and Old
Wounds.
Take of the best Virgin-Wax half a pound, Oil of Olive, and Oil of Roses, of
each half a pound; melt them well together, and let it cool, then add half a
pound of white Lead in fine Powder, and set it over the Fire again, and let it
boil half an hour, then add Myrrh, Mastick and Frankincense, of each two
ounces, all in fine Powder, and set it boil half an hour longer; lastly, put in
half an ounce of Camphir, and keep it stirring continually all the while. Dip
Clothes therein for Cere-cloaths, and make the rest into Rolls for Use.

A most Excellent Cere-cloth for Ruptures and Burstenness.
Take Powder of Mastick, Mummy, Frankincense, yellow Amber, Gum Arabic and
Tragacant, Aloes, Balaustians and Roses, of each half an ounce, Dragons Blood,
fine Bolearmony, Bloodstone, of each six drams, Oil of Roses three ounces, Oils
of Myrtle and Mastick, of each two drams, with Wax and Rosin, as much as will
suffice; make a Cere-cloth, and dip Linen Clothes therein.

This is a most Excellent thing to cure Ruptures, as the dexterous Volkerus
Frisius has often proved: It also strengthens weak Limbs; apply it under the
Truss.

The Description of that Famous Plaster called Manus Dei, The plaster of
God's Hand, which is so famous in France, and has been much used for a long
time, so that many Ladies of Quality take the pains to make it, and distribute
it to the Poor (as Monsieur Charras relates in his Royal Dispensatory) whom he
advises to observe well the Directions here given for its Preparation.
Take Common Oil eight pound, Litharge of Gold finely powdered four pound,
yellow Wax two pound, Venice-Turpentine one pound, Galbanum, Opoponax, Sagapen,
Myrrh, Olibanum, Mastick, of each eight ounces; Oil of Laurel, six ounces,
Lapis Calaminaris, and Loadstone, long and round Birthwort, of each four ounces.

Grind the Lapis Calaminaris and Loadstone upon a Marble Stone, moistning it
with Plantane water, and dry them: Beat together in a large Brass Mortar the
two Birthworts, and the Myrrh and Mastick apart; sift all the Powders together
through a Silk Sieve; then put the Galbanum, Ammoniac, Opoponax, and Sagapen,
all well bruised, into an earthen glazed Pot, and dissolve them over a gentle
Fire, in about a quart of good Vinegar; strain them hot through a strong Cloth,
and having well pressed them, put that which remains in the Cloth into the Pot
again, and power upon it fresh Vinegar, and dissolve it over the Fire as before;
strain and press it as before; then evaporate the superfluous Vinegar over a
gentle Fire by degrees, and boil the Gums till they are sufficiently thick;
then incorporate the Turpentine with them, and keep the Composition apart.

Then put the Litharge in fine Powder into a Copper or Brass Pot tinned, and
incorporate it cold with Oil, stirring them continually with a large wooden
Spatula; then add to them three pints of fair water, and boil them over a good
Fire, stirring them without intermission till it be of the Consistence of a
solid Emplaster before you add the Wax; then melt the Wax in it; then take the
Pot from the Fire, and stir it till it be somewhat cold; then add to it the
Gums and Turpentine incorporated before, and then the Oil of Laurel; and lastly
the Powders, and be sure that all the Ingredients be well united and
incorporated together.

This Plaster I made once at Paris with a Physician. It is every day
successefully used for the Cure of all sorts of Wounds and Ulcers, whether new
or old, Contusions, Tumors, Bruises and Swellings; it mollifies, digests,
dissolves, and brings to Suppuration such Matters as require it; for it never
suppurates those which may be dissipated by transpiration, or otherwise and
when it has ripened and drawn the Matters forth, it draws no more, but
cleanses, cicatrizes, consolidates, and heals all together,

A Water which has done such wonderful Cures in all manner of Wounds,
Swellings, Ulcers, Cankers, Tetters and Ringworms, Itch and Scabs, Fistulaes,
etc.
Take Bolearmenick and white Vitriol, of each four ounces, Camphir one ounce;
put the Camphir and Vitriol in a little Pot upon the Fire, and boil them
together till they become thick; then stir them till they become hard; then let
it cool, and powder it finely, and having powdered the Bolearmenick, mingle the
Powders together, and keep them in a Bladder. Take a quart of fair Water, and
let it boil; then take it off, and put into it a good spoonful and half of the
said Powder, put it into a Bottle, and shake it twice a day for a fortnight. If
you desire to have it stronger, Powder one ounce of Allom, and mingle it well
with the Powder before you put it in; when you will use it, power off the Clear,
and make it hot, and bath the Sore with it as hot as may be endured, and lay
double Clothes over it dipped in the Water. Note, That a large Oyster-shell is
said to be best to heat it in, but by no means in any Metal.

To dry up sharp Humors with ones own Water, and to Cure Kibes and Chilblains.
Sir K. Digby relates, That a certain Lady had a Humor broke out at her Heel,
which neither Physicians with Purgings and Diet-Drinks, nor Surgeons with
Ointments could heal and dry up; it was healed in three or four Fomentations
with her own Urine newly made, and some white Salt dissolved in it, all warmed,
and then with Linnens doubled foment the place by the Fireside for a quarter
of an hour; then bind on a clean dry Linen, and compress to it; do thus
Morning and at Night. It cures all Kibes and Chilblains, even after they are
broken; and if used before they are broken, it will prevent them.

CHAP. XXVI. Select PILLS.
Pills of Elixir Proprietatis, as we prepared them by Sir Kenelm Digby's Order
in his Elaboratory.
TAke of the best Aloes Succotrina pulverized half a pound, Myrrh grossly
powdered six ounces; Mastick in Powder four ounces, Saffron two ounces; put
them in bold Heads every one apart, and extract the Tincture according to Art;
the Aloes and Saffron with common Brandy, but the Myrrh and Mastick with good
Spirit of Wine, often shaking them; then mix the Tinctures together, and in a
Glass Cucurbite in Balneo Mariae abstract all the Spirit of Wine, till the
Matter remain in the Consistence of Honey; then power it out into a white Basin,
and in Sand evaporate it to the Consistence of a Mass of Pills.

They strengthen the Head, Stomach and Heart, hinder Putrefaction, cause a good
Digestion and a good Appetite, cure the Scurvey, and are a good Pectoral. They
are a good Preservative in Pestilential times, cleansing the Body of such
Humors as might be apt to receive the Infection; and to that end Sir Kenelm
caused them chiefly to be prepared in the beginning of that great Sickness in
London in the Year 1665. The Dose from one Scruple to half a Dram, to be taken
at Night before or after Supper.

Sir Kenelm Digby's Excellent purging Pills for the Head, Stomach and Joints,
which he took usually himself.
Take Aloes Succatrina, choice Scammony, and Pulp of Coloquintida in subtle
Powder, of each an ounce; make them into a Mass for Pills with a sufficient
quantity of Syrup of Stechados; the Dose is from one Scruple to half a dram, or
two Scruples in the Morning.

They are a most Excellent Cephalic; they cleanse and strengthen the Head and
Brain, quicken the Senses, clear the Eyesight, expel Wind from the Stomach and
Bowels, are excellent against the Scurvey and Dropsy, Jaundies, Obstructions
of the Liver and Spleen.

Dr. Floyd's Stomach-Pill, which he usually took himself.
Take of the aforesaid Pill of Sir Kenelm's, of Pil. Aggregativae, of each two
drams; Hiera cum Agarico, Stomack-Pills with Gums, of each half a dram; make
them up into a Mass with Syrup of Betony. Dose is one Scruple, or half a Dram
over Night, and two Scruples or one Dram in the Morning, taking a convenient
time after them Broth or Posset Drink. They are also very good for the Head.

Dr. Dies his Excellent Pill, wherewith he cured himself of a Malignant Tetter
as he relates in the following.
Take Extract. Rudii, one scruple, Mercurius dulcis twenty four grains,
Antimony diaphoretick, Salt of Wormwood and Tartar Vitriolate, of each half a
Scruple, Oil of Juniper Berries, four drops; make these into Pills with Venice-
Turpentine, and gild them.

I my self having had a Tetter upon my left Heel, which with an Ointment I
healed, and made perfectly well in appearance; but the Cause remaining, the
Effect ceased not, but it still broke out again, and at last in such extremity,
that it was spread over both my Ankles, and upon my Instep, both ends within a
fingers breadth were met quite round my Heel, and was grown so exceeding sore
and painful, as from the Heel upwards all along the Calf of my Leg, Ham, and
all along the back part of my Hip, and hard Lumps and Knots, as if the Veins
and Sinews had been cracked; whereupon I betook my self to these Pills,
doubling the quantities of the Composition of them; the former proportion being
for six Pills to be taken two Mornings, three at a time, and formed it into
twelve Pills for four Mornings; which I took in manner following, three the
first Morning, and three the second; the third Morning I omitted; the fourth
Morning I took three more; the fifth I likewise omitted, and the sixth Morning
I took the three last Pills, in all twelve; which so clearly took, away and
corrected the Humor immediately, that I was never after troubled with the like
in that Part, nor in any other, using withal some proper Ointments to the Sore.

Pills for the Sciatica or any kind of Gout.
Take Aloes and Hermodactils, of each one dram, Diagridium half an ounce;
reduce them to a very fine Powder, and make into Pills with Syrup of Roses;
Take every day one dram, for a Fortnight together.

Pills excellent for the Head and Stomach.
Take Aloes and Turbith, of each half an ounce, Pulp of Coloquint and Agarick,
of each one dram, Scammony two drams, Mastick and Bdellium, of each two drams,
Ginger, Cinnamon, Aniseeds, Leaves of Wormwood, of Mint, of each two drams;
reduce all to a fine Powder, and make them into a Paste for Pills with Oximel
of Squills; put them in a Gallipot, and keep them for your Use. The Dose is one
dram for one that is easy to move, and a dram and a half for one that is hard
to move.

Excellent Pectoral Pills for the Breast and Lungs.
Take Tears of Storax two drams, Juice of Spanish Liquoras one dram and a half,
Tincture of Saffron four scruples, Labdanum, Olibanum, choice Myrrh, and
Extract of Opium, of each a dram; Ambergease a scruple, Syrup of Citron Peels,
as much as suffices to make a Mass for Pills.

These Pills are excellent to stay Defluxions that fall upon the Lungs, and to
assuage the violence of Coughs: The Dose is from five or six, to eight or ten
Grains at Night.

CHAP. XXVII. Select PURGES.
A Purging Whey, by Dr. Jackson.
TAke a Pottle of new Whey, boil in it Succory, Fennel and Parsley Roots, of
each a handful, having first scraped, slit and taken out the Piths very clean,
also one pugil of Damask Rose Leaves, with ten or twelve Leaves of red Sage,
and two or three Tops of Rosemary; boil it to a Quart, then beat two Whites of
Eggs very well, and put into it remaining on the Fire, which will make a kind
of Curd, that will rise together with the aforesaid Ingredients, skim all these
off together very clean, then take a scruple or half a dram of Saffron in
Powder, bind it in a fine clean Rag, and let it boil in the Whey a while, then
squeeze it out by degrees, till the Saffron is all infused in the Whey; then
strain it, and put it into a Glass or Earthen Pot.

This is to be drunk at three equal Draughts, an hour between each Draught,
continually walking all the time, and drunk cold; it must be made over night,
and drunk every Morning ten days together, fasting five hours after it.

Take Borage flower, or Bugloss flower water six ounces, sweeten it with fine
Loaf Sugar, or rather with Conserve of Violets; one ounce of this is enough to
drink each Morning cold, whilst the Body is costive, and eat Barley Growel.

Another Purging Whey.
Take fresh ripe Rose Leaves, the Whites cut off two ounces, Rhubarb sliced,
two drams and a half, Indian Spick one dram and a half; bruise them and infuse
them in half a pint of Whey over Night, the next Morning strain it, and drink
it.

It is an exceeding good cooling Purge; it cleanses the Blood, and purges
Choler, and takes away Salt and sharp Humors, and operates without Disturbance
or Molestation.

Another purging Infusion of Whey.
Take Flowers of Borage, Bugloss, Fumitory, Epithimum, of each half a handful,
Polipode of the Oak six drams, Fennel seeds two drams, Sena a dram and a half;
shred the Herbs, and bruise the Seeds, and infuse them in three Pints of Whey,
set the Vessel in warm water to digest two days; then strain it, and add two
ounces of Honey of Roses; and take thereof from three ounces to six ounces.

It temperates and expells adust Humors, abates the Heat of Fevers, and
cleanses the Skin from Scabs and Heat.

Monsieur Boucaud his Purging Infusion, which purges universally all Humors,
and is very good to Purge and Prepare the Body before one enters into a
Diet-Drink, or at any other time.
Take Succory one handful, French Barley one Spoonful; boil them together in a
pint of fair water to half a pint; then strain it, and let it cool well; then
put into it Sena two drams, Rhubarb one dram, Agarick half a dram; let them
infuse twenty four hours; the next Morning strain it without pressing it, and
put into it half an ounce of Syrup of Limon, and one ounce of Syrup of Violets.

The said Mr. B. took this usually himself, and found it operate well and
pleasantly without disturbance; it is a very good Purge both for men and women;
it is good to cleanse a Woman after her lying in; you may diminish the Dose as
you see occasion.

A Purging Powder good against the Sciatica or Hip-Gout,
Take Seeds of Dwarf-Elder, Turbith, Hermodactils, Sena, and white Tartar, of
each a dram, Cinnamon two drams; make all into a fine Powder for four Doses to
be taken for four Mornings every third day.

Dr. Quercetan's Purging Decoction for Ladies.
Take Sena six drams, Strawberry-water half a pint, infuse them in a close
Vessel a Day and Night; then add a spoonful of Juice of Limons, and two
Spoonfuls of Juice of Pearmains, Sugarcandy two drams; boil it a walm or two,
and clarify it with the White of an Egg, and a little Cinamon-water.

This was invented to pleasure Ladies with, being very pleasant in Taste, and
Purging gently, without griping or making sick.

Another Purging Decoction, called the Bitter Decoction.
Take the Tops of lesser Centery, Flowers of Camomil, of each one Pugil, Roots
of Gentian half a scruple, Seeds of Carduus bruised one dram, Sena two drams, a
little sliced Ginger to correct the Windiness of the Sena, Cream of Tartar half
a dram; steep them all in half a pint of fair water all Night; the next Morning
boil it only a walm or two, and then strain it, and if you will have it work
strongly, you may add to the strained Liquor an ounce of Syrup of Roses, or
half an ounce of Syrup of Buck-thorn Berries.

It opens Obstructions, and is prevalent against Agues and Fevers; it eases
Pains of the Breast and Spleen, and is good against the Green Sickness, and
Stoppage of the Terms, etc.

A very good Purge for the Itch.
Take Tamarinds half an ounce, sharp-pointed Dock-root two drams, Fumitory and
Succory, of each half a handful, white Tartar half a dram, Ginger one scruple;
shred the Herbs small, and stamp the Root, and boil it in a sufficient quantity
of fair water till there remain about a quarter of a pint, to which being
strained, add one ounce of Syrup of Roses, and two drams of Syrup of Buck-thorn
Berries, and take it in the Morning.

It is a good and approved thing for the Intention.

An Universal Purging Potion.
Take Sena two drams, Ginger one scruple, Rhubarb a dram, Agarick two scruples,
sweet Fennel seeds half a dram; Cinnamon a scruple; bruise them all, and steep
them all Night in a little more than a quarter of a Pint of the Decoction of
Currants: Press the Liquor the next Morning through a Strainer; and dissolve in
it one ounce of Syrup of Roses.

Another Universal Purge.
Take six Damask Prunes, a handful of Agrimony, half an ounce of Polipode
roots, one ounce of Currants, half an ounce of Sena, one dram of Aniseeds;
bruise them, and boil them gently in half a pint of water; strain and press it,
and sweeten it with brown Sugar.

Another Universal Purge.
Take of Sena half an ounce, sweet Fennelseeds bruised a dram; steep them all
night in a little more than a quarter of a pint of Posset made with Ale; the
next Morning boil it a walm; then strain and press it out; in the Liquor
dissolve an ounce of good Manna while it is hot; then strain it again, and
drink it.

A good Pectoral Purge for Consumptive People, etc.
Take Roots of Marshmallows and Liquoras, of each two drams, sweet
Fennel-seeds half a dram, yellow Saunders a scruple, cream of Tartar half a
dram, bruise the Roots and Seeds, and boil them in half a pint of water, with a
spoonful of French Barley till near half is consumed; then strain it, and whilst
it is hot, dissolve in the Liquor an ounce and half of Manna then strain it
again, and drink it.

I will recommend here to the Public a most Excellent Purging Powder, which
Sir Kenelm Digby made much Use of in his Family.
Take Scammony, the purest and best an ounce, Powder it grossly, and spread it
upon a piece of brown Paper, then take some Fire in a Fireshovel, and put upon
it some Brimstone, hold the Paper with the Scammony over the Flame of Brimstone
until you see it grow moist; then Powder it finely, and mix it with six drams
of Diaphoretick Antimony, and two drams of Cream of Tartar, both in subtle
Powder, grind them together to incorporate, and mix them well: then put it in a
Glass Vial; and stop it close.

This Powder was called Cornachine, by reason that Cornachine, a Physician of
Bisa in Italy, was the Inventer of it, and had made a great Commentary upon it.

It has done wonderful Effects; it operates quickly, safely, and pleasantly;
it gently purges superfluous Humors from the Bowels, and roots up the Cause and
Matter of Agues, Fevers, and many other tedious Diseases, as Monsieur Charras
relates in his Royal Dispensatory. Dr. Scroderus in his Chemical Dispensatory
also recommends it as one of the best Purgatives that can be prepared. Sir K.
D. recommended it to me for the same. The Dose is from half a scruple to half a
dram, or a whole dram. It is to be taken in the Morning fasting in white Wine,
Broth, in the Yolk of an Egg, in a little Syrup, or in some Confection.

The Diaphoretick Antimony you may buy for six pence an Ounce, the Scammony for
ten pence the Ounce, and the Cream of Tartar one penny the Ounce. This Powder
is easy to give to Children for the Itch or Scab, as also for the Worms.

CHAP. XXVIII. Select VOMITIVES.
A Gentle Vomit.
TAke of Hemetick Wine, and Oximel of Squills, of each an ounce; mix them
together, and take it, taking Posset Drink with a Spoonful of Oil of sweet
Almonds in every draught, to make it come up easy.

Another.
Dissolve two drams of Saltpeter in fat Broth, and drink it.

Another.
Take three drams of Broom-flowers, boil them in half a pint of small Ale for a
quarter of an hour, then strain it, and drink it warm.

Another.
Take a dram of Nettle-seeds poudred, or a dram of the inner Bark of Walnut
Tree powdered, or three drams of Radish-seeds powdered, taking them in fat
Broth unsalted or in Posset.

Another, which I have known used by Sir Kenelm Digby.
Take a Pint of Lukewarm water, put into it six or eight spoonfuls of Sallet
Oil, and drink it off Lukewarm.

The Antimonial Cup made of well purified Regulus of Antimony cast in Moulds,
is a very useful thing in a Family; when you have a mind to use it, fill it
with white Wine, and put a Clove or two in it, and a little Mace, and let it
stand all Night, the next Morning drink the Wine, and it will taste of nothing
but Wine, and will work safely first by a Vomit, and then by stools also; when
it works, drink Posset with a spoonful of Oil of sweet Almonds in every
Draught, or sweet Sallet Oil, to facilitate the Vomiting.

If it be taken in the beginning of an Ague, when they have had but a Fit or
two, it commonly carries it off, being taken half an hour before the Fit. The
Virtue of this Cup will never diminish; for it will have the same Operation an
hundred year hence that it had when it was newly made. And according as you
would have it work, either gentle or strong, you may put the Wine in sooner or
later at Night.

CHAP. XXIX. Select GLISTERS.
A Glister for the Colic and Griping of the Guts.
TAke Roots of Mallows, and Marshmallows with the whole Plant, of each an
ounce and a half, French Barley an ounce, Flowers of Camomil, and Elder flowers,
of each half an ounce; boil them in a sufficient quantity of Water; then strain
it, and add to a Pint of the Liquor three ounces of Linseed Oil, and an ounce
of Cassia extracted, Aloes half an ounce, Nitre an ounce and a half; mix them,
and give it duly warm.

It powerfully expels Wind, loosens the Bowels, and eases the Colic and
Gripings.

Dr. Scroderus his Emollient Glister.
Take of the Emollient Herbs, which are Leaves of Mallows, Violet Leaves,
Beets, Herb Mercury, of each a handful, Roots of Althaea an ounce; Camomil
flowers half an ounce, five Figs sliced; boil them in a sufficient quantity of
fair water to a pint; then strain it, and put to it Cassia four drams,
Benedicta laxitiva one ounce, Sal Gem a scruple, Oil of Olive, or Oil of Roses
three ounces, brown Sugar an ounce; mix it, and give it.

It loosens and mollifies the Bowels, evacuates their Slime and Filth, and
cleanses them from Wind and Water, and is good in Fevers.

A very good Common Glister.
Take of the Emollient Herbs, of each a handful, Camomil flowers half a
handful, sweet Fennel seeds half an ounce, Linseeds two drams; cut the Herbs,
and bruise the Seeds, and boil them in Water to a Pint, then strain it.

CHAP. XXX. Select Remedies relating to WOMEN-KIND.
Containing Excellent and Approved Remedies for such Distempers as are
particularly incident to Womankind.
Concerning the Retention or Stoppage of the Monthly Purgations.
THe Retention of them comes of Opilation in the Matrix, abundance of gross
Blood, or after great Evacuation, or Fatness of the Womb; They are Cause of
many Evils, as swollen Legs, weak Backs, Pains in the lower Parts of the Belly,
Drowsiness, Retention of Urine, a weak Stomach, Loss of Appetite, and want of
Digestion, Vomiting, Shortness of Breath, Loss of Complexion, Vapors, and Fits
of the Mother and Spleen, etc. If the Retention come of thickness of the Blood,
it is good for the Patient to use the Bath afterward set down. If the
Retention come of cold and Phlegmatic Humors, then it is good for her to take
twice a day four ounces of the Decoction of Alexanders, Smallage roots, Cinnamon
and a little Safron, and fast four hours after it, forbearing of eating Meats
that breed gross and moist Humors, and gross Blood, as Beef, Pork, Veal, Fish,
and the like. Let your Diet be Fowls, Birds, Partridges, Rabbits, and the like,
or Mutton; and drink white or Rhenish Wine, or Mead or Metheglin; using in your
Broth the following Ingredients, viz. Aniseeds, sweet Fennel-seeds,
Commin-seeds, Caraway-seeds, Smallage-roots, wild Thyme, Rosemary,
Parsly-roots, Spinach, Madder, Cinquefoil, Hart's-tongue, Lupins, Organs,
Valerian, Savory, Sothernwood, Garlic is an excellent thing if you like it,
Balm, Carduus, Horehound, Cinnamon, and such like, using a few of either sorts
of them; they thin and subtilize the Blood, and open the Passages that descend
to the Matrix.

A Bath to provoke the Terms.
Take Mugwort, Motherwort, Mother of Thyme, Bawm, Fumitory, Camomil, Lavender,
Organy, of each a handful; Juniper Berries bruised an ounce and an half, Madder
roots, Parsley roots, Polipode and Valerian, of each three ounces; let them boil
in a sufficient quantity of Water to make a Bath, and let her sit in it as hot
as can be endured, and when she comes out of the Bath, going to Bed, let her
take a Decoction of Bugloss and Borage, or the Decoction of Madder in fair
water, with a little Syrup of Fumitory. If you cannot have all these Herbs, you
may take only some Camomil-flowers and Peniroyal; for the hot water alone will
be effectual in this Case, bathing in it.

A Physical Course for provoking the Terms
Take of the Powder of Hiera Picra simple, of the Pills de tribus Fernelii, of
Agarick Trochiscated, of each a scruple, of Castor half a scruple, of the
Chemical Oil of Thyme, four drops; make these up into Pills with Syrup of
Mugwort; let her take them immediately after her first sleep, and sleep again
upon them. The next day following, let her take the following Decoction.

Take Ale and white Wine, of each a Pint and half, unset Hysop, Peniroyal,
Mugwort, Germander, of each a handful; Madder, Smallage, Parsley, and Fennel
roots, of each an ounce, Juniper Berries, and Cinnamon bruised, of each half an
ounce; boil them well, and having strained the Decoction, sweeten it with four
ounces of Syrup of Mugwort. Drink thereof twice a day, in the Morning, and at
four in the Afternoon; and four days before their accustomed time of flowing,
open the Vein in the Foot, and bleed about three or four ounces, to invite them
downwards.

An Excellent Medicinal Wine to provoke the Terms, by Dr. Mynsicht.
Take Tartar vitriolate, Roots of Scorzonera, of each an ounce and a half,
Filings of Steel, (from the Needle-makers) an ounce, Galingal the less, Lignum
Cassiae, of each a dram, Safron a scruple; bruise them, and put them in three
pints of white Wine, let it stand two or three or four days, often shaking it,
then strain it.

This Wine opens all Obstructious of the Liver, Spleen and Womb; it provokes
the Terms, cures the green Sickness, expels Wind, discusses Swellings, and
Hydropical Humors, cures the evil disposition in Virgins, weakness of the
Stomach, and want of Appetite and ill Digestion. Young People should take it
five or six days before the New Moon; but elder women as many days before the
Full Moon. The Dose is from four Spoonfuls to six or seven in the Morning
fasting, and to continue the Use of it till they appear.

Another Approved Remedy for the same.
I was assured by a Gentlewoman of Credit, that a Daughter of hers, at twenty
years of Age, having never had her Purgations, was cured by the following
Remedy.

Take a pound of the smallest new Nails, put them in a quart of white Wine, let
it stand four and twenty hours; then drink thereof warm a quarter of a pint in
the Morning fasting; when you have taken three Doses of it, put into it a pint
of Wine more, and let it stand for some time upon the Nails; then take of it
till you have taken it all; this has been approved upon many others: you may
put in with the Wine a few Orange Peels, and Cloves.

An Experimented Remedy for the immoderate Flux of the Terms.
Take a dram of the Scrapings or Filings of the Skull of a man, put it into a
glass of white Wine, let it infuse all Night in, and in the Morning take it
fasting. In two or three times taking it every Morning, it will cure it. It is
an Approved Remedy*

A Physical Course to provoke the Terms, prescribed by a Learned Physician to a
Lady of great Quality.
Take the Roots of white Ditany, Madder, and round Birthwort, of each half an
ounce, Orrice and Asaribecca Roots, and sweet Flag Roots, of each three drams,
Orange peels and Cinnamon, of each two drams, Juniper Berries six drams, Fennel
and Commin seed, of each one dram, Tops of Wormwood, Mugwort, Horse-mint and
Germander, of each half a handful, Flowers of Elder, Savin and Rue, of each a
handful, Saffron half a dram, Filings of Steel an ounce; tie the Steel up in a
Rag, and shred and bruise all the Ingredients; infuse them in four pints of
strong white Wine for twelve hours; then strain it, and drink thereof three
times a day: and after five or six days taking of it, use the following Purge.

Take Sena a dram and a half, Cassia two drams, Rhubarb half a dram, sweet
Fennel seeds and Cinnamon, of each a dram and a half, Savin one pugil. This is
for two Potions to be taken for two Mornings together.

After Purging, take the following Electuary.

Take Conserves of Wormwood and Mint, of each half an ounce, Conserve of Rue an
ounce, Candied Elecampane Root half an ounce, Cinnamon finely Powdered, and
Crocus Martis aperitive, of each a dram, of Oil of Mace and Cinnamon, each six
drops; mix it, and make an Electuary, whereof take the quantity of a large
Nutmeg three times a day.

An approved Remedy to stop the Abundance of the Terms.
Take a handful of red Dock Roots the yelllowest and best; slit them, and boil
them in a Gallon of Conduit-water, scum it, and put in it Raisins of the Sun
stoned two handful, Liquoras bruised two ounces; boil it until a third part be
consumed; then strain it, and make Almond Milk thereof with Blanched Almonds.

A good Remedy for the Whites, much Approved.
If the Woman wants her Monthly Terms when she has the Whites, they must by
no means be stopped till the Terms are brought down; for it is very dangerous.
Let all the Means then be used to provoke and bring them down first; and then
to stop the Whites, take the following, after some fit Purgation once or twice
before.

Take the Ceruse of Antimony, that is diaphoretick Antimony, about fifteen
grains for a Dose in a little white Wine, in the Morning fasting, two or three
times a day.

Another for the same.
Take Garden-Tansie a handful, great Dock Roots that are young and without
Buds, two ounces; shred the Herb, and bruise the Roots, and boil them in a
quart of Milk; drink a Draught thereof warm, sweetened with Sugar of Roses, and
Nutmeg grated in it.

You may also take the following Pills, and drink a Draught of the said Milk
after them.

Take Venice-Turpentine an ounce, Dragons-Blood, Nutmegs grated, and
Bolearmenick, of each a dram; mix them, and make a Mass for Pills; Take thereof
a dram for a Dose.

The following Electuary is also very good, the Body being Purged first.
Take Conserve of red Roses four ounces, Conserve of Succory two ounces, red
Coral in subtle Powder, Snakeweed, Tormentil Roots, and Shavings of Ivory, of
each two drams; with Syrup of Mirtles make an Electuary, and take thereof the
quantity of a large Nutmeg every Morning.

Another Approved Remedy for the Whites, and so the Heat in the Back and
Kidneys.
Take four good sound Nutmegs, put them in the middle of a Household Loaf of
Bread; then let the Loaf be baked, and take out the Nutmegs; then beat the
white of a new laid Egg to an Oil, let it settle, and take off the Froth, and
mix the White with four spoonfuls of Rose Water, and as much Plantane-water;
then sweeten it with fine Sugar, and grate into it half of one of the Nutmegs,
and drink it in the Morning fasting for seven days together.

This cured a Woman that had taken many Remedies in vain for the said
Distempers: It strengthens and cools the Reins, and is good against the Stone
and Gravel.

An Approved Remedy for the Fits of the Mother, and for the Vapors
Take Roots of round and long Birth-wort, Piony, and lesser Valerian, of each
two ounces, Castor one ounce, Tops of dried Wormwood, Mugwort, Fetherfew,
Tansie, Elder, and Camomil Flowers, of each a handful; having bruised and cut
them all together infuse them in two quarts of rectified Spirit of Wine; then
distill them according to Art, and keep the Spirit for Use.

This Spirit is very effectual to open the Obstructions of the Matrix, and to
suppress the Vapors and Fits that arise from it; you may take of it from one to
two or three drams at a time, in some distilled Waters; it may also be put into
the Nostrils, applied to the Temples, or upon the Navil.

I have an incomparable Essence or Spirit of a Chemical preparation, which is
so effectual beyond all compare for the Vapors and Fits of the Mother, etc,
that several Women which could have no Children live, by reason of their Vapors
and Fits, till they took of it, had their Children live afterward, and were
perfectly Cured of that Distemper.

A Remedy for a Bloody Urine, whether in Man or Woman; also for a Bloody Flux,
or Spitting of Blood.
Take Shepherds Purse, and Plantane, shred them, and boil them in fair water;
then strain it, and sweeten it with fine Sugar; drink thereof Morning and
Evening.

Another for the same.
Take the Earth of Swallows Nest, steep it in hot Water; then strain it, and
let the Patient drink thereof two or three times a day.

A Remedy for one that cannot retain Vrin.
Take a Mouse newly killed, burn it to Ashes, with the Skin and Hair, give a
pretty quantity of it in Ale; or dry the Mouse in an Oven, so that you may
reduce it to Powder; which give to drink in the same manner.

Another for one that cannot keep his Water.
Take Conserve of Hips three ounces, of red Roses an ounce, Crabs Eyes a dram,
Roots of Tormentil two drams, Syrup of Purslan, as much as suffices to make an
Electuary. Take thereof the quantity of a large Nutmeg twice a day. Drink after
it a Draught of the following Decoction.

Take Succory Roots six drams, Leaves of Lettuce, Purslan and Horse-tail (an
Herb) Shepherds purse of each a handful, the four greater cold Seeds, Purslan
Seeds and Sorrel Seeds, of each a dram, red Roses dried a handful; bruise the
Seeds, and shred the Herbs, and boil them all in a sufficient quantity of Water
to a pint and a half; then strain it, and dissolve in it Gum Tragant and
Arabic, of each two scruples; then add two ounces of Syrup of Purslan: The
Dose is a quarter of a pint.

Let the Patient wear about the Neck a little Bag with the Powder of a dried
Toad Calcined, which alone many times is said to Cure this Disease.

CHAP. XXXI. Select Remedies to procure CONCEPTION.
Of choice and experimented Remedies to procure and forward Conception;
prescribed by several learned Doctors.

An excellent Remedy to procure Conception.
TAke of Syrup of Motherwort, of Syrup of Mugwort, of each half an ounce; of
Spirit of Clary, two drams; of the Root of English Snakeweed in fine powder,
one dram; Purslain-seed, Nettle-seed, Rocket-seed, all in subtle powder, of
each two drams; candid Nutmegs, Eringo-Roots, Satirion-Roots, preserved Dates,
Pistaches, Conserve of Succory, of each three drams; stamp and work all these
Ingredients in a Mortar to an Electuary; then put it up into Gally-pots and
keep it for use.

Take of this Electuary the quantity of a large Nutmeg in a little glassful of
white Wine, in the Morning fasting, and at four in the Afternoon, and as much
at Night going to Bed; but be sure not to do any violent exercise.

Another experienced by the Countess of Arundel.
Make a Syrup of Eringo-Roots, and take thereof three times a day, in the
Morning fasting, and in the Afternoon, and at Night; having first prepared the
Body with some gentle Purge. The foregoing Remedy is more effectual.

Another approved Remedy to procure Conception.
Take of Clarified Honey, 3 drams, of Linseed and shavings of Ivory, of each an
ounce, Borage three ounces; beat it into an Electuary with four ounces of fine
Sugar, Musk and Amber, of each one scruple and a half; Oil of Cinnamon, two
grains; Oil of Cloves and Mace, of each one grain: Take of it Morning and
Evening.

Dr. Scroderus, his Cordial Drink to cleanse and strengthen the Womb and
procure Conception.
Take Bawm, Penyroyal, Maidenhair, Sage, Calaminth, Mugwort, of each half a
handful; Shenath, half a dram; Marygolds, Wall-flowers, of each two pugils;
(that is as much as you can hold betwixt two Fingers and the Thumb) Nutmegs,
Mace, Cubebes, Cardamoms, grains of Paradise, Zedoary, of each one dram;
prepare them all, and infuse them in two quarts of Canary Wine for some days in
a Bottle close stopped; then strain it, and sweeten it with fine Sugar to your
Taste; drink thereof three times a day. This I know an approved Remedy.

Dr. Mynsight, his Bath against Barrenness much approved.
Take Roots of Madder, of Parsley, of Polipode of the Oak, Valerian, of each
three ounces; Seeds of wild Rue and Darnel, of each two ounces; green
Juniper Berries, of each one ounce and a half; Leaves of Motherwort, Mother of
Thyme, Bawm, Mugwort, Fumitory, Marjoram, Lavender, Agrimony, Mellilot, Mullin,
Camomil, Calamint, Organy, of each one ounce; shred and bruise them and boil
them in a sufficient quantity of water for a Bath.

Let the person sit therein in a bathing Tub, as hot as can be endured,
repeating it every day for fifteen or twenty days, abstaining all the while
from Venery. The Author says it is an approved thing for the intention.

She may also at the same time use either the Electuary with the white Wine, or
Dr. Scroderus his Drink.

By using the said Remedies, and abstaining all the while from Venery, she will
be very apt afterward to conceive; for the parts will be very well disposed:
It is much observed also, that Women after long absence from their Husbands,
when they come again usually soon conceive.

Note, That the greater the woman's desire of Copulation is, the more subject
she is to conceive.

Women are most subject to conceive a day or two after their monthly Terms are
stayed.

It is good to eat Crabs, Lobsters, Prawns and Shrimps, for they are fruitful
Creatures, and very nutritive; as also Pigeons and Sparrows; half a dram of
Castor, being taken in powder, or a scruple in Malmsey Wine in the Morning, is
good to procure Conception;

As also the stones of a Fox dried and beaten to powder, and a dram taken in
milk in the Morning.

As also the stones of a Boar taken in the like manner.

A Plaster of Labdanum spread upon Leather, and applied to the Region of the
Womb, mightily disposes it to Conception.

Dr. Farrar, his great Venereal to procure Conception.
Take Conserve of Rosemary-flowers, of Borage-flowers, and of Conserve of
Clove-gilly-flowers, of each half a dram; of the Electuary of Diasatirion, one
ounce; candid Eringo-Roots, six drams, old London or Venice Treacle, two drams,
Seeds of Rocket, and of Nettles, of each half a dram, Species Diamoth. dulcis
two scruples; make it up into an Electuary with Syrup of Stechados as much as
will suffice. Take the quantity of a Nutmeg of this Electuary Morning and
Night, or when you will, and drink a little of the following Decoction after it.

Take Leaves of Sage, of Organy, Rosemary, Calamint, Nettles, of each a
handful, Chamedee, Chamepit and Stechados, of each half a handful; of
Nettle-seeds, Rocket-seeds, and sweet Fennel-seeds, of each three drams, Roots
of Pellitory of Spain half an ounce; boil all these in a quart of
Fountain Water; then strain it, and put to it a pint of Malago Sack.

I could tell some great Secret to Women; which for several Reasons I omit to
publish here; but if any Lady desires it of me, I shall very freely communicate
it to her.

CHAP. XXXII. Rules and Signs of CONCEPTION.
Certain Signs, whereby Women may know when they have Conceived.
AUthors have left many Ways for Women to know whether they be with Child or
not, which proves true indeed in many Women, but not in all; Some of them I
shall relate here.

1. A Coldness and Chilliness of the outward parts after Conception; for the
Heat retires inwardly to make the Conception.

2. The Belly grows very flat first of all, because the Womb closes it self
together, to nourish and cherish the Seed.

3. The Breasts begin to swell and grow hard, not without Pain and Soreness.

4. The Tops of the Nipples look redder than formerly.

5. Wringing or griping pains like Cramps, happen in the Belly about the Navil.

6. Loss of Appetice to Meat, and illness after Meat, and weakness of the
Stomach.

7. The Veins of the Breasts are more clearly seen than they were wont to be.

8. It is a good Sign when the Veins in the Eyes are clearly seen, and the Eyes
seem something discolored.

9. Diverse Longings and Appetites are engendered.

10. If under the lower Eyelid the Vein be swelled, and the Veins in the Eyes
appear clearly, and the Eye something discolored, if the Woman have not her
Terms at that time, nor watched the Night before, you may certainly conclude
her to be with Child; and this appears most plainly just upon her Conception,
and the first two Months. This Mr. Culpepper says he has known to be true, and
never to fail.

11. Put the Urine of the Woman in a Glass, and stop it, and let it stand three
days, and then strain it through a fine Linen Cloth, if you find small living
Creatures in it, she is most assuredly conceived with Child.

12. Take a green Nettle top, and put it into her Urin, and stop it close, and
let it stand all Night, the next Morning take it out, and if it is, full of red
Spots, she is with Child; if not, the Nettle will be blackish.

And thus much for Prognostics, whether a Woman be with Child or not.

CHAP. XXXIII. Other Rules and Signs of Conception.
Rules to know whether a Woman bears a Male or a Female.
AUthors give these to be Signs of Conception of Males,

1 The Woman when she rises up from a Chair, or the like, does sooner stay her
self upon her right hand than on the left.

2. The Belly lies rounder and higher than when it is a Female.

3. The Child is first felt on the right side, because (according to
Hypocrates) the Male-Children lie on the right side of the Womb.

4. The Woman breeds Boys easier and with less Trouble and Pain than Girls, and
carries her Burden not so heavily, but is more nimble in moving.

5. The right Breast is more plump and harder than the left, and the right
Nipple redder.

6. The Woman's Complexion is more clear, and not so dull and swarthy as when
she bears a Girl.

7. Let a drop of her Milk fall into a Basin of fair Water, if it sinks to the
Bottom, she bears a Girl; but if it swims and spreads abroad, it is a Boy.

CHAP. XXXIV. Select Remedies to prevent Miscarriage. Containing Approved
Remedies to prevent Miscarriage in Women; as also certain Experiments relating
to Women, especially Childbearing, Practiced by that skilful Midwife Mrs.
Partridge, alias Covet.
Directions how to govern a Woman in her first Conception, that she may know
how to foster it, and hold it fast till the time of Maturity; and then how with
ease and good speed to bring it into the World, and after the great Work of
Labor, to reduce her self to her wonted Health.
First, To preserve her Infant, and to prevent Miscarriage, the following
Remedy is commended to be taken.
TAke Coriander Seeds two drams, Roots of Bistort, Shavings of Ivory and Red
Coral prepared, of each a dram, of white Amber and Crystal, of each a scruple;
reduce all to a fine Powder, and made it up into Tablets or Lozenges with four
ounces of Rosewater and half a scruple of Confection of Alkermes; make them of
a dram apiece; take one of these Tablets every other Morning; they are very
cordial and strengthening of the Womb.

Also take every other Morning between a rear Egg new laid, putting in it some
fine powder of Pearls or Coral.

Signs of Miscarriage.
If her Breast (after filling) should begin to lessen and fall, which is a Sign
of future Miscarriage, let her apply the following Cere-cloth.

Take Roots of Bistort and Coriander seeds, of each two drams, of unripen'd
Galls, red Saunders and Hypocistides, of each a dram, Labdanum, and Mastick, of
each half an ounce; Frankincense and Bdellium, of each two drams; Powder what
is to be powdered, and with Oil of Mastick, Turpentine and Wax make two or
three Cere-cloaths, and apply them sometimes to her Loins and Seeds, and
sometimes to the Region of the Womb under the Navil.

She must avoid all sudden and violent Motions, both of Mind and Body, as
Sneezing, Coughs, Frights, Anger and Passion.

If a Woman with Child fears Miscarriage, by being frightened, let her have by
her some of Dr. Scroderus's Cordial Water against Frights; the Description
whereof you have among the Cordial Waters, and take a little of it.

Another Remedy to prevent Miscarriage.
Take a Sprig of Rosemary and Bawm, a few Cloves, and a little Nutmeg; put them
into a pint of Claret Wine, and burn it; then beat the Yolks of three new laid
Eggs, and having taken the Wine from the Fire, brew them with the Wine; then
take the Cock-treadles of six Eggs, and the White of one, and beat them to an
Oil; then take off the Froth from it, and mix the Oil with the Wine, and brew
all together; then sweeten it with fine Sugar, and let the Woman drink of it
four Spoonfuls whenever she begins to feel any Pain in her Back or Belly.

Dr. Goff's Remedy to prevent Miscarriage.
Take a Fillet of Beef, let it be half roasted, then take half a pint of
Muskadine, Sugar, Cinnamon, Ginger, Cloves, Mace, Grains of Paradise, and
Nutmegs, of each a dram; bruise them, and make a Sauce; then take the Beef from
the Fire, and being hot, divide it into two pieces, and wet the insides of them
in the Sauce; then apply the one to the Region of the Womb under the Navil, and
the other to the Reins of the Back, as hot as can be endured; tie them on fast,
and keep them on at least twenty four hours, or longer if she can.

In France, whenever they fear that a Woman is in danger to miscarry, they
presently give her the following Remedy to prevent it.
Take a penniworth of stitching Silk of a red crimson Color, double the Threads
as often, and as short as you can, then clip it as short as you can with
Scissers, so that it be as short as Shavings; then mix this with a new-laid Egg
boild but a little, so that the White of it may be but curdled; let the Woman
take this.

This they hold as a present and infallible Remedy, which I have seen used many
times; it is used by rich and poor.

Of the Causes of Miscarriage.
The ordinary Causes of Abortion are the following:

1. A weakness or foulness of the Womb; when it is weakened or offended by
viscous, slimy, or slippery, phlegmatic or watery Humors, so that it cannot
retain the Fruit received.

2. Being extremely bound in Body, and forcing to stool, forces the Child down.
Hypocrates says the Disease Tenesmus coming upon a woman with Child, causes
Abortion. Tenesmus is a Disease when people have a great provocation to stool,
yet can do nothing.

3. The Emroids or Piles many times cause Miscarriage; for which I have given
you several excellent and approved Remedies: which see in their places.

4. Hunger starves the Child in the Womb, and Surfeiting by much eating and
drinking, strangles it. Fat women are subject to miscarry because of the
slipperiness of their wombs. Forbear strong Purges or Vomits; but if you are
subject to be costive, use gentle means to keep the Body open.

Abortion also is caused either by Blows, Anger, Sorrow and Grief, Running,
Leapings, Liftings, immoderate Exercise, etc.

The surest way is to prevent Miscarriage before the Child is conceived, by
cleansing and strengthening the womb by such Medecines as procure and forward
Conception afterward; And to those which I have given you before for that
intention, I will add these following.

Drink Wine wherein the Mother of Thyme has been boiled, which is excellent
for that Intention.

The Seeds of Mandrake are said to cleanse and purge a foul womb, cool a hot
womb, and moisten a dry womb; you may take half a dram of them bruised in a
little white Wine.

To Women with Child to prevent Miscarriage, Culpepper recommends to drink a
Draught of Sage Ale every Morning; he says it will do her more good than she is
aware of; if you desire to know more of it, you may read his Book. He also
recommends Tansie-Ale, as you make Sage-Ale (a Draught being drunk in the
Morning) to be a Sovereign Remedy for such Women as are subject to miscarry; he
does not teach how to make it; but it is done by stamping the Sage or Tansie,
and putting it in a Bag of loose Bolter-cloth, and hang it in a Rundlet of Ale.

He advises also Midwives to keep a Syrup by them made with the Juice of
Garden-Tansie clarified, and boiled to a Syrup with double weight of Sugar, and
to give a spoonful of it whenever any Signs of Abortion appear; as also to
stamp Garden-Tansie, and sprinkle it with Muskadel, and apply it to the Navil.
It is a most excellent Remedy.

CHAP. XXXV. Of Women's Longings, and of Marking their Children.
Being it comes fittest in this Place, I will insert here what Sir Kenelm Digby
relates in his Discourse made in a Solemn Assembly of Nobles and Learned Men at
Montpelier in France, touching the Cure of Wounds by the Powder of Sympathy: He
says thus;
I Cannot forbear but I must make some Digression here, to unfold some other
Effects of Nature, which we see often, and are not less curious than the most
principal which we treat of, and will seem to be derived from obscure Causes,
notwithstanding in many Circumstances they depend on the same Principles, and
in many much differing; it is touching Moles and Marks which happen to Infants,
when their Mothers, during the time of their Pregnancy, have longed after some
particular things.

To proceed after my accustomed manner, I will fall to exemplify.

A Lady of great Quality, which many of this Assembly know, at least by
Reputation, has upon her Neck the Figure of a Mulberry, as exactly as any
Painter or Carver can possibly represent one; for it bears not only the Color,
but the fit proportion of a Mulberry, and is as it were, embossed in her Flesh.
The Mother of this Lady being with Child, she had a great mind to eat
Mulberries, and her Imagination being satisfied (she being under the Tree) one
of them casually fell upon her Neck, the sanguine Juice whereof was soon wiped
off, and she felt nothing at that time: The Child being born, the perfect
Figure of a Mulberry was seen upon her Neck, in the same place where it fell
upon the Mothers; and every year in Mulberry Season, this Impression, or rather
Excrescence of Flesh did swell, grow big, and itch.

Another Maid which had the like Mark of a Strawberry, was more incommodated
therewith; for it not only inflamed and itched in Strawberry Season, but it
broke like an Impostume, whence issued forth a sharp corrosive Humor.

To know the Causes and Reason of these mavelous Effects, I refer the Reader
to the Reading of the said Sir K. Digby's Book; wherein he relates also the
following.

Permit me, my Lords (says he) to enlarge my Digression a little further in one
word, to re-account unto you a mavelous Accident, known all over the Court of
England, in confirmation of the Activity and impression which the Imagination
of the Mother makes upon the Body of the Infant whereof she was big. A Lady
that was my Kinswoman (she was the Niece of Fortescu, the Daughter of Count
Arundel) came to give me Visits sometimes in London; she was fair, and of a
good Feature, add she knew it well, taking great complacency, and not only to
keep her self so, but to add what she could further; thereupon she was
persuaded that the Patches and Flies which she put upon her Face, gave her a
great deal of Ornament, therefore she was careful to wear the most curious
sort; but as it is very hard to keep a moderation in things which depend more
upon Opinion than Nature, she wore them in excess, an patched most of her Face
with them; although that did not much add to her Beauty, and that I took the
Liberty to tell her so accordingly, yet I thought it no opportunity then to do
any thing that should give her the least distaste, since with so much civility
and sweetness she came to visit me. Nevertheless, one day I thought good in a
kind of drolling way, (so that she might not apprehend any Coffeehouse) to
tell her of it; so that I let fall my Discourse upon her great Belly, advising
her to have a care of her Health, whereof she was somewhat negligent, and
according to the Custom of young vigorous women, which know not yet what it is
to be subject to Indispositions, she kindly thanked me for my care herein;
saying, That she could do no more to preserve her health than she did, though
she was in that case: you should at least, I replied, have a care of your
Child: O for that, said she, there is nothing that can be contributed more. Yet
I told her, See how many Patches you wear upon your Face, are you not afraid
that the Infant in your Womb may happily be born with such Marks on its Face?
But, said she, what danger is there that my Child should bear such Marks,
though I put them on artificially? Then you have not heard, I replied again,
the mavelous Effects that the Imaginations of Mothers work upon the Bodies of
their Children, while they are yet big with them, therefore I will reaccount
unto you some of them; so I related unto her sundry Stories upon this Subject;
as that of the Black Queen of Aethiopia, who was delivered of a white Boy,
which was attributed to a Picture of the Virgin Mary with our Savior Christ,
which she had near the teaster of her bed, whereunto she bore great devotion. I
urged another of a woman who was brought to bed of a Child all hairy, because
of the Picture of St. John the Baptist in the wilderness, when he wore a coat
of Camels hair. I re-accounted unto her also the strange Antipathy which the
late King James had to a naked Sword, whereof the Cause was ascribed, in regard
some Scotch Lords entered violently into the Bedchamber of the Queen his
Mother, whilst she was with Child of him, where her Secretary, an Italian, was
dispatching some Letters for her, whom they hacked and killed with naked Swords
before her face, and threw him at her feet; and they grew so barbarous, that
there wanted but little but that they had hurt the Queen her self, at least her
Skin was raised in diverse places. Bucanan makes mention of this Tragedy. Hence
it came that her Son King James had such an Aversion all his Life time to a
naked Sword, that he could not see one without a great emotion of the Spirits,
although otherwise courageous enough, yet he could not overmaster his Passion
in that particular. I remember when he dubbed me Knight, in the Ceremony of
putting the point of a naked Sword upon my Shoulder, he could not endure to
look upon it, but turned his face another way; insomuch, that instead of
touching my shoulder, he had almost thrust the point into my eyes, had not the
Duke of Buckingham guided his hand aright. I alleged her diverse such Stories
to make her apprehend that a strong Imagination of the Mother might cause some
notable impression upon the Body of her Child to its prejudice. Moreover, I
pray consider how attentive you are to your Patches, and that you have them
continually in your imagination; for I observed that you have looked upon them
ten times since you came to this Room, in the Looking-Glass. Have you therefore
no apprehension that your Child may be born with half Moons upon its Face, or
rather that all the Black which you wear up and down in small portions, may
assemble in one, and appear in the middle of its Forehead, the most apparent
and remarkable part of the Visage, and may be as broad as a Jacobus, and then
what a Grace would it be to the Child? O me, said she, rather than that should
happen, I will wear no more Patches while I am with Child; thereupon at that
instant she pulled them off, and hurled them away. When her Friends saw her
afterward without Patches, they demanded how it came to pass that she who was
esteemed to be one of the most curious Beauties of the Court, in point of
Patches, should so suddenly give over the wearing of them; She answered, that
her Uncle, in whom she had a great deal of Belief, assured her, that if she
wore them during the time she was with child, the Infant would have a large
black Patch in the midst of its Forehead. Now this Conceit was so lively
engraven in her Imagination, that she could not be delivered of it; and so this
poor Lady that was so fearful that her Child might bear some black Mark in its
Forehead; and so it happened, that it was born into the World with a spot as
large as a ten Shilling piece of Gold in its Forehead; it was a Daughter she
brought forth, very beautiful throughout, this excepted.

I need not tell you of your Neighbor of Carcassona, who lately was brought to
bed of a prodigious Monster, exactly resembling an Ape, which she took pleasure
to look upon during the time she was with Child; for I conceive you know the
Story better than I. Nor that of the Woman of St. Maxent, who could not forbear
going to see an unfortunate Child which was born without Arms; and she her self
was delivered afterward of such a Monster.

Another dreadful Example Sir Kenelm relates, which happened to a Woman with
Child, who was so curious as to go and see the Execution of a Malefactor.

Several others he relates; which for Brevity sake I omit to relate here. What
I have set down is by way of Caution and Divertisement.

CHAP. XXXVI. Select Remedys to cause a good Delivery.
A most Soverain and often approved Remedy to be used before Labor to cause a
good Delivery, with ease, security, and very little pain etc.
TAke a good large onion, or two lesser, peel and slice them, and in a
drying pan fry it with two or three spoonfuls of the best sallet oil til it be
tender; then put all into a pipkin with a glassfull of water, and boil it well
together, then strain it out and drink that warm in the morning fasting without
any salt in it. Continue this for a fortnight or three weeks, beginning
immediately before the time expected for Delivery: This course will so dispose
the parts of the woman with Child, that she shall be brought to bed with
security, with ease and with very little pain: and if the Child should be
turned in the mothers womb, it will bring it to rights before labor. Sr.
Kenelme Digby relates that women that have had most dangerous labors till they
took this have had no difficult, but very easy and speedy labors, what woman
with Child would neglect to take the said remedy, being so easy and of so good
effects, and what Midwife would not persuade a woman she is to deliver, to take
it before the time of her Labor, to prevent a dangerous and difficult Labor.

A Drink before Labor to cause a good Delivery.
Take Wood Bettony one handful, blew figs sliced four ounces and Liquorice
bruised one ounce, boil them all in a pint of running water and white wine of
each one pint to the consumption of a third part, then strain it and press it
a little, drink thereof a good draught warm every morning fasting for a
fortnight or three weeks before the time of Labor. It is an approved remedy
for the Intention.

A safe Remedy to facilitate the Birth in Labor.
Take of Chosen Cynnamon one ounce, white amber six drams, myrrh one scruple,
reduce them all to a subtle powder, and in the time of Labor the Child being
nigh pitched, give her thereof as much as will lie upon a six pence in a little
Canary Sack.

Another to Cause a speedy Labor.
Take three or four drops of the Chymmical oil of nutmeg in a spoonful of
Clarret burnt only with Cynnamon, also in hard Labor, let her drink a
spoonful or two of another woman's milk, it will cause her speedy Delivery.

The Labor Powder to facilitate the Birth.
Take Date stones, Amber, Saffron, and Cummin seeds, beat and searse them all
severally into very fine powder, take of each as much as will lie upon a groat,
but double so much of the Cummin seeds, mingle them all together, and when the
woman is in her greatest extremity give her a spoonful of it in Mace Ale: This
is also an effectual remedy to bring away the After-Burthen. These remedies are
approved to be safe sure and effectual.

I was once with Sr. Kenelm Digby in his Chamber, when a Midwife came to him
and told him that a woman had been in labor three days, and that she could not
be delivered though the Child was nigh pitched, and having heard that Sr.
Kenelm had a powder that would facilitate the Birth, she prayed him to give her
a little of it; Sr. Kenelm went into his closet and brought out a little powder
in a paper, and gave it her desiring her to give it to the woman in a little
burnt Clarret, and an hour after she had taken it to send him word how she did.
And within less than an hour she sent to thank him, and that she was delivered
of a lusty boy within half an hour after taking it. Upon that I asked Sr.
Kenelm whether it was a Chymmical preparation, and he told me it was nothing
but a dram of myrrh in subtle powder.

An Infallible and much approved remedy to bring away the After Burden, or any
fowlness or a dead Child, and to cure the After throws and Gripings, after a
woman is delivered,
Take the inward wrinkled skins of Gizards of Hens that are laying of eggs,
wipe them clean and lay them by to dry, when you have need to use them beat
them to a fine powder, of which give one dram for a dose in a little white
wine: you will see the effects of it in a short time, If it be needful you may
repeat the dose once or twice the same day. Women and Midwifes should never be
without this remedy.

An Excellent Powder to assuage the pains after Delivery.
Take the Roots of Athamantick Spignel, and bigger Comfry of each two drams,
Amber in fine powder, Peach kernels cleansed, of each one dram and a half,
Cynnamon, Mace, and Saffron of each two scruples, mingle them and make a powder
for use.

This Powder is highly esteemed to assuage the tormenting pains that happen to
most women after delivery; it is to be given in broth, from one scruple to two.
In Monsieur Charras's Royal Dispensatory, who says also, that it is credibly
affirmed that the blood which Issues from the navil when the Midwife cuts it, a
spoonful of it given hot is a soverain remedy to prevent and appease these
pains.

Another Remedy after Labor, to take away the pains and pangs which many times
attend women newly delivered.

Let her drink a draught of Beer boiled with a spoonful of Camomil flowers:
and in greater pains let her take six ounces of the oil of sweet Almonds fresh
drawn.

CHAP. XXXVII. Select Remedies for Women Lying in.
An Excellent Cerecloath to be laid upon the Breasts after Chilabearing.
TAke oil of Roses six ounces, Perriwincle bruised three ounces, juice of mint
and lesser Sage of each one ounce and a half, Boil them over a soft fire til
the juice be consumed, then strain and press them out, into the strained oil
put yellow wax cut small, three ounces; when the Ingredients are half cold, and
half an ounce of choice Mastich finely powdered stir them well together, and
then dip the clothes in it.

This Cerecloath is very proper to prevent the breasts from growing big after
Child bearing; as also to change the course of the milk and to turn it
downward. The Cerecloath must be laid hot upon the breasts, and wrapped up with
warm clothes and be continually applied til the milk be gone.

Another Remedy presently made to dry up the milk in Women's breasts.
Take Aqua vitae and sweet butter, melt them and beat them well together, and
anoint the breasts therewith, laying a brown paper upon them, and as often as
the paper dries anoint again, til the milk be dried up. This is also good to
keep the Ague out of the breasts.

To increase women's milk.
Take fennel seeds bruised, and boil them well in barley water, and let the
Nurses and Suckling women drink very often, in winter warm, in Summer cold, and
let them forbear drinking much strong drink or wine, for they are hot and great
dryers up of milk.

Another to increase milk.
Boil sweet Fennel seed and Anniseeds bruised in Posset drink, and drink
thereof.

Authors write that the hoofs of the forefeet of a Cow dried and powdered, and a
dram of the powder taken in the morning in any convenient liquor increases milk.

The Thistle called our Ladies thistle, is an excellent thing to increase milk.

If the Child be much troubled with wind and gripings, let the Nurse use Fennel
seed or Anniseeds in her broaths or in posset drink.

A Remedy for a sore breast that comes of curled milk in Childbed, and to dry
up the milk.
Take half a pound of Hogs grease, yellow wax one ounce, Burgundy pitch five
ounces, Venice Turpentine one spoonful, Honey two spoonfuls, put all these in
a skillet with a little fair water, and boil them over a gentle fire, for a
while scumming it, then pour it into a pan to cool, when it is quite cold turn
it out of the pan as a cake, and scrape off all the soft dregs that are at the
bottom; then melt it again and dip linen clothes in it to make Cerecloaths,
and apply them.

For an Ague in a Woman's Breast.
Take the Leaves of Hemlock, fry them in unsalted Butter, and as hot as can be
endured lay it to the Breasts, and lay a piece of Flann el warm over it. This
is good also for any Swelling in any other Part.

An Admirable Poultice that has cured many Women of hard and sore Breasts.
Take Turnips and boil them well in Water, so that they be very tender; then
squeeze out the water clean from them, and stamp them to Mash, and mingle with
them some fresh Butter unsalted, and apply this warm to the Breasts
Poultice-wise upon a thick Cloth very large; change it Morning and Night. In
three days it perfectly cures, though before the pain and hardness has been
very great.

The Countess of Dorset 's Remedy for a hard and sore Breast, wherewith she was
cured her self of a hard and sore breast.

Take chosen Jollop, reduce it to fine powder, which keep in a glass stopped:
take half a dram, or one dram, or four scruples of it in a little white wine
and sugar, and by this you will increase or diminish the Dose to the need.
Continue this for a month continually. And always keep over the breasts a
linen cloth that has loose slox of flax stitched upon it, in such sort that
there may be no hardness felt any where; let it be very thick and warm.

A most excellent Cataplasme for cancered breasts; to take away and cool and
dissolve the swelling and hardness, if it be dissolvable; and if not to make it
break and separate with ease and without sharpness.

Take an old mellow Pippin, cut off a cap at the top of it, and take out the
Coar leaving the side of the Apple whole; then fill it with Hogs grease, and
cover it again with the cap, and roast the apple to pap, then take off the
skin, and mingle the pap and the grease perfectly well together, and spread it
thick upon linen and apply it warm to the breast covering it with a bladder.
Sr. Kenelm Digby relates that a Chyrurgeon cured a Lady of great quality with
this of a cancered breast.

For aches, and soreness in women's breasts, or in any part of the body an
approved Remedy.
Cause a Dyer to dye you some thick spongy flannel, of the blew color called
Coventry-blew, when it is dry dye it again, dye it thus five times, at last the
dye will be so deep that it will look almost black; lay of it on a good deal
beyond the pained part on all sides; keep it thus continually covered and warm
with it.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Select Remedies for the Back.
For weakness in the Back.
TAke Dates stone them and take out the inner hard white skin, then stamp them,
and mix them with the pith of an Ox, beat and work them well together; then
add to it eggs, and grated bread, mix them all well together with a sufficient
quantity of cream, fry them and eat thereof in the morning fasting strowing
sugar upon it.

Another.
Take the pith of an Oxone pound Ale and Muscadine or Alegant, or old Malaga,
of each one ^ynte, Rasins of the Sun stoned half a handful, Currants four
ounces, ten or twelve dates sliced, a stick of Liquorice bruised, Anniseeds
half an ounce; boil all these to the consumption of half, then strain it, and
drink thereof warm in the morning fasting, grating nutmeg into it.

Another for weakness in the Back.
Take the Kidneys of an Ox or Steer, slice them very thin; then stew them
easily in a quart of water close covered, to the consumption of half, then add
half a pynte of Red Rose water, and as much Alegant or Muscadine, add Sugar and
grated nutmeg; take thereof four or five spoonfuls in the morning and at four
in the afternoon, for a week together; then intermit a week, and then take it
again another week if you think it need.

Another to strengthen the Back, and to restore marrow in it.
Take the pith of an Ox, half a handful, blew Currants washed and bruised two
ounces, boil them together in Allegant or Muscadine, then mix it with the yolks
of two new laid eggs, and grated nutmeg, and take a spoonful or two warm in
the morning fasting.

Another often approved Remedy for a sprain in the Back, and to strengthen it.
Take the yolk of a new laid egg, beat it with a glass-ful of Muscadine,
Alegant, or old Malaga, then warm it well and grate nutmeg in it, and drink it
twice a day.

For a Crick in the Back, an outward Remedy.
Take the marrow of the bone of a Horse, warm it and anoint the Back with it,
it will give speedy ease, and in four or five times anointing perfectly cure it.

For heat in the Back and Reins.
Take Rose water, and infuse therein red and yellow sa^^ders, and red rose
leaves, let it infuse for twelve hours, then bathe your Back very well
therewith, it will assuage the heat, and greatly comfort the Reins.

For pain in the Back.
Take Comfry roots and stamp them and boil them in posset; drink thereof four
or five days together, Also take Knot grass, shred it and mix it with butter,
and make Tansie thereof, and eat it; it much avails to the said Cure.

Sr. Kenelm Digby's Excellent astringent Plaster for the Back.
Take Comfry Roots, Knot grass, Cinquefoil roots, Budweed or Bawdweed of each
two good handfulls, stamp all these and put to them a quart of the best sallet
oil; let it boil softly til the oil has extracted the virtues of the Roots,
then strain it; then put to it four ounces of Venice Turpentine, and as much of
Virgin wax, and two ounces of Pitch.

For an Ach in the Back.
Take Lilly roots, Camomile, Anniseeds, of each a good handful, stamp them
together and fry them in Hogs grease with a little Clarret wine, make a
plaster thereof and apply it to the Reins.

An Approved Remedy for a Sprain in the Back.
Take good Muscadine, or in want thereof good old Malaga, and a spoonful of
Madder, incorporate them well together, give it the Patient to drink for three
mornings together; and if need requires he may take it three times a day.

CHAP. XXXIX. Select Remedies Relating to CHILDREN.
Of Choice and Approved Remedies for such Diseases as are incident to Children.
A Rare Balsom for Children breeding teeth, to make them come without pain.
TAke two or three River Crabs, and beat them in a stone Mortar, then moisten
them with a little water of blew bottles, and press out two ounces of the
juice: take also two ounces of muscilage of Marshmallow roots, put them
together with May butter, or other fresh unsalted butter three ounces, Hens fat
and Ducks fat of each two drams, put them into a pipkin, and boil them over a
gentle fire, to the consumption of half the moisture, then strain them and add
Sugar candy finely powdered four ounces, the yolk of one egg, Musk and Amber
grease of each six grains.

This Balsom has been much experimented by many Persons of Quality in France
for its Excellency, to soften the gums of Infants, whose teeth are ready to
cut, their Nurses must be careful to anoint their gums often with it: The use
of it is no way inconvenient; and being pleasing to taste and wholesome, it can
do no harm though it should be swallowed. In Dr. Cnarra' s Royal Dispensatory.

Another Balsom for the same.
Take the brains of a Hare either roasted or boiled, mix it with honey and
unsalted butter and a little distilled water of Cullendine; anoint the Child's
gums frequently therewith.

An approved Remedy for the Rickets.
Take roots of Smallage, Parsley, Fennel, and Angelica of each a handful, slice
them and boil them in distilled waters of Angelica, unset Hysop and Colts foot,
of each one part till they are tender, then strain it and boil it up to a
syrrup with white honey, Then take a stick of Liquorice and scrape and bruise
one end of it, and give the Child with it one spoonful of the syrrup in the
morning, at four in the afternoon, and at night.

A Bath for the Rickets, Liver grown or opilation of the Liver in a Child.
Take a Sheeps head with the wool on it, cleave it in the middle, and boil it
til it be tender, and that the bones slip clean out of the flesh, boiling with
it, Smallage, Camomile, Primrose leaves, and Hysop of each four handfulls, then
bathe the Child all over with this broth as hot as it can endure twice a day;
then mash the herbs with the flesh and bind it warm to the joints that are weak.

It is a certain and much approved Remedy.

Another Approved Remedy for the Rickets.
Take a quart of new milk, boil it with a handful of Sanicle shred small, til
a pynte be boiled away, let the Child drink of it warm in the morning fasting;
and let it neither eat nor drink within an hour after it. And at night boil a
handful of Red mint in a quart of milk, and let the Child eat it last at
night. Continue this for a month.

An Ointment for the Rickets.
Take Sanicle, and red mints of each two handfulls, shred them small and stamp
them, then boil them in a pound of fresh butter, then strain and press it out,
and anoint the Child's breast, Arms and Gullet-Bones with it warm before the
Fire.

Another for the same.
Take a peck of Garden Snails, stamp them with their shells, and put them in a
Canvas Bag, which hang up, and put something under it to receive the Liquor that
drops from it; wherewith anoint the Child's Limbs, and every Joint that is weak,
before the Fire every Morning and Evening.

It is credibly affirmed that it has cured Children that have been extremely
weak, and could not go alone in a Weeks time.

An Excellent Remedy for Convulsion-Fits and Falling Sickness.
Take Piony Roots fresh dug, scrape of them with a Knife, and apply it to
the Soles of of the Feet.

Another often approved Remedy for the same
Take of the Skull of a man's Head, and of the Stone which is found in some
Ox-galls, both in fine Powder, of each ten grains; give it in a spoonful of a
Cordial made with black Cherry water, and Piony water, sweetened with Syrup of
Piony Flowers; give one Dose at the beginning of the Fit, and another after the
Fit. It is an experimented Remedy, and has cured many.

For the Small Pox and Measles.
Take two or three grains of Saffron, and dry it well by the Fire, then put it
in a little Rag, and tie it up, and infuse it in Posset-Ale, and press it, or
in Mace-Ale, or white Wine, till all the Virtue is drawn out, give that to the
Patient to drink, and keep him warm. If he have Soreness in the Throat, do
this: Take a quarter of a spoonful of dried Saffron, tie it in a linen Rag,
and boil it in half a pint of Milk till it be very yellow; then boil in it a
Stay of Linen, and put it warm and moist under the Throat; when it is cold and
dry, put on another in the same manner, and therefore you must have at least
two of them, that one may heat in the Milk whilst the other is about the Throat.

This will certainly take away all Pains of the Throat in six or eight hours.
Sir K. Digby.

To drive the Venomous Vapors from the Heart and Head in the small Pox and
Measles, Malignant Fevers, and Epidemical Distempers, with great success.
Take Seeds of Citron an ounce, Seeds of Carduus Benedictus an ounce and a
half, beat them well, and draw out all their Pulp with a quart of Scablous
water, or Carduus, or Marigold-water, and sweeten it with two or three ounces
of Sugar. Drink of this as often as you have a mind to drink, a little warmed.

To prevent the Marks of the Small Pox.
When the Pustules begin to dry, anoint them with ordinary Vnguentum album.
This Sir Kenelm Digby says did preserve all his Children from any Marks.

Dr. Charras his Ointment which he highly recommends to prevent the Scars and
Marks of the Small Pox.
Take Litharge of Gold in fine Powder, and white Lead or Ceruse washed in
Rosewater, of each an ounce; Oil of the greater cold Seed, and of bitter
Almonds, and Oil of Eggs, of each half an ounce, Nightshade and Plantane-waters
as much as suffices; make it into an Ointment by grinding it in a Stone-Mortar,
pouring to it sometimes of the Oils, and sometimes of the Waters.

A Remedy for a Child that cannot hold its Water, whether Male or Female.
Take the Navil-string of the Child when it is ready to fall from him, dry it
and powder it, and give it the Child in two spoonfuls of small Beer in the
Morning fasting.

A Remedy for breaking out of young Childrens Heads.
Take fresh Butter and Ale, and boil it together till it be like an Ointment;
anoint the Child's Head and Face therewith.

Or take pure Sallet Oil and Vinegar, and beat them together, and anoint the
Head therewith.

Or take Butter and Salt, and fry them together till it be black, and anoint
the Child's Head with it.

It Is said, the Urine of the Father and Mother being mixed together, will cure
Childrens breaking out.

Dr. Riverius his infallible Remedy for Worms in Children.
There is nothing more effectual than the following Remedy, which has been so
often experienced by that Famous and Learned Dr. Riverius; which is thus:
Take Calomelanos eight grains, Scammony six grains; grind them to a subtle
Powder, and give it in the Morning in a spoonful of any Liquor. This I have
often experienced with good success. The Calomelanos you may buy of the
Chemists.

CHAP. XL. The Cure of Wounds by the Powder of Sympathy.
The true Preparation of the Powder of Sympathy, as it was prepared every year
in Sir Kenelm Digby's Elaboratory, and as I prepare it now.
TAke good English Vitriol, which you may buy for two pence a pound, dissolve
it in warm water, using no more water than will dissolve it, leaving some of
the Impurest part at the bottom undissolved; then power it off and filtre it,
which you may do by a Coffin of fine gray Paper put into a Funnel, or by laying
a Sheet of gray Paper in a Sieve, and pouring your water or Dissolution of
Vitriol into it by degrees, setting the Sieve upon a large Pan to receive the
filtred Liquor; when all your Liquor is filtred, boil it in an earthen Vessel
glazed, till you see a thin Scum upon it; then set it in a Cellar to cool,
covering it loosly, so that nothing may fall in; after two or three days
standing, power off the Liquor, and you will find at the bottom and on the sides
large and fair green Christals like Emerauds; drain off all the Water clean
from them, and dry them; then spread them abroad, in a large flat earthen Dish,
and expose them to the hot Sun in the Dog Days, taking them in at Night, and
setting them out in the Morning, securing them from the Rain; and when the Sun
has calcined them to whiteness, beat them to Powder, and set this Powder again
in the Sun, stirring it sometimes, and when you see it perfectly white, powder
it, and fifth it finely, and set it again in the Sun for a day, and you will
have a pure white Powder, which is the Powder of Sympathy; which put up in a
Glass, and stop it close. The next year when the Dog Days come, if you have any
of this Powder left, you may expose it again in the Sun, spreading it abroad to
renew its Virtue by the influence of the Sunbeams.

The way of Curing Wounds, with it, is, to take some of the Blood upon a Rag,
and put some of the Powder upon the Blood, then keep only the Wound clean, with
a clean Linen about it, and in a moderate Temper betwixt hot and cold, and
wrap up the Rag with the Blood, and keep it either in your Pocket, or in a Box,
and the Wound will be healed without any Ointment or Plaster, and without any
pain. But if the wound be somewhat old, and hot, and inflamed, you must put
some of this Powder into a Porringer or Basin full of cold Water, and then put
any thing into it that has been upon the wound, and has some of the Blood or
Matter upon it, and it will presently take away all Pain and Inflammation, as
you see in Sir Kenelm's Relation of Mr. Howard.

To stanch the Blood either of a Wound or Bleeding at the Nose, take only some
of the Blood upon a Rag, and put some Powder upon it, or take a Basin with
fresh water, and put some of the Powder into it, and bath the Nostrils with it.

CHAP. XLI. Containing the choicest and rarest Cosmeticks to beautify
smoothen, soften, and whiten the Face and Skin, and to preserve the Beauty and
Complexion of Ladies; devised by several Learned Physicians, and used by
Queens, Princesses, and other great Ladies in France, Italy, Germany and
England.
The Word Cosmetick signifies Adorning or Beautifying.
A rare Cosmetick Water of Dr. Scroderus,
TAke the Whites of fifteen Eggs, the Juice of one Limon three ounces, of
Snails, white Lead a pound, Camphir and Borax, of each a dram and a half,
Myrrh two drams, Frankincense and Mastick of each half an ounce; bruise them
all, and infuse them twenty four hours in water of Bean-Flowers, and water of
Elder-Flowers, of each a pint and half; then distill it in a Cucurbite in Balneo
Mariae, and keep the Water for Use. It softneth, whiteneth, and smootheth the
Skin.

Another more precious Cosmetick, or beautifying Water; by Sir Kenelm Digby.
Take white Lillies six drams, Florence Orrice Roots, Beans, Cicers, Lupins, of
each half an ounce, fresh Bean-flowers a handful, Gum Tragant, white Lead, fine
Sugar, of each half an ounce, Crumbs of white Bread, (steeped in Milk) an ounce,
Frankincense, and Gum Arabic of each three drams, Borax, and feathered Allom
of each two drams, the White of an Egg, Camphire a dram and a half; infuse them
four and twenty hours in a sufficient quantity of Rose and Bean-flower water,
equal parts; then distill it in B. M.

This Water smoots, whitens, beautifies and preserves the Complexion of Ladies.
They may wash their Faces with it at any time, but especially Morning and
Evening.

Another Cosmetick water
Take two young Pigeons, gut them and cut them into pieces, Crumbs of white
Bread half a pound, peach-kernels, and the four greater cold Seeds cleansed and
bruised, of each four ounces, the whites of twelve Eggs, and the Juice of four
Limons; infuse them twelve hours in two quarts of Milk, then distill them in B.
M. To the distilled water add Borax, Camphire, Sugarcandy, and burnt Allom, of
each three drams; set them three days in the Sun, then let them stand fifteen
days in a Wine-Cellar; then filtre it through gray Paper, and keep it for Use,

This is an Excellent Cosmetick-water, and has all the Virtues of the former,
and is to be used in the same manner.

Another Cosmetick-Water.
Take fine Sugar one pound, Roch-Allom three ounces, white Poppy-seeds bruised,
Flower of Beans, of Water Lillies, and of the greater Housleek, of each a
handful; the Juice of four Limons, the Crum of two white penny-Loaves; bruise
what is to be bruised, and put them all into a Glass Alembick, and power upon it
Goats Milk, or Black Cows Milk, and white Wine, of each a quart; distill it in
Balneo Mariae, and keep the Water for Use.

This Water is good to smooth, whiten, and preserve the Complexion of Ladies,
washing their Faces therewith.

Some Receipts of Cosmeticks which I took out of the Countess of D' Hospital,
her Book which she sent me at Paris.

A Cosmetick water used by the Queen.
Take the whites of two new laid eggs, beat the shells of them to powder, and
put them in a quart bottle, with the whites, and let them be beaten together,
for three hours; then put into it four ounces of burnt Alum in fine powder,
beat it two hours longer; then put into it three ounces of white Sugar candy in
powder, and beat it also for two hours, then put in it four ounces of Borax
also in powder, and beat it also; then take a pynte of water that runs from
under the wheel of a mill, and put into it four ounces of white Poppy seeds
well beaten mix them well together, so that it be like milk, then pour that
into the quart bottle with the other things: at four several times, beating it
every time the space of two hours; then strain it through a fine white linen
cloth; and having put it into the bottle again let it be beaten for two or
three hours longer. And to know when it is well made and well beaten is, when
it froths the breadth of three fingers above it. It will keep a twelve month.

It is a very good Cosmetick, it whitens smooths and softens the skin, use it
only three times a week.

To wash and prepare night gloves to keep the hands white, smooth and soft.
Take pure white wax four pound, Spermacetis two ounces, oil of the greater
cold seeds cleansed and drawn without fire, and Magistery of Bismuth or
Tinglass (prepared as shall be set down afterward) of each three drams, Borax
and burnt Alum finely powdered of each half a dram, put them all into a Pipkin
which set in a Kettle of hot boiling water, and when they are melted, stir them
well together, to incorporate them. Then having washed first your gloves in
several waters and steept them twelve hours in cream dip them in this
composition whilst it is hot.

The said Composition is good also to dip clothes in and spread them for to
line women's masks, it preserves the Complexion of Ladies. The Ladies in France
use it for both. It is also a good Cosmetick, anointing the face with it at
night going to bed, washing it often in the morning with some Cosmetick water.

I have two choice Receipts more for the face (which I Coppied out of the said
Countess's Book) which Maria de medicis the Queen of France used her self. The
said Countess's mother gave fifty pistols in gold for them to him; who always
prepared them for the Queen, as was subscribed at the bottom of the Receipts.
forbear to publish them her; but I shall be very willing (without any Interest)
to communicate them to any Lady that shall desire them of me.

The Preparation or Magistery of Bistmuth or Tinglass.
Though this be a Chemical preparation, yet that Ladies may be sure to have it
true and well prepared, I will set down here directions how any Lady may
prepare it with ease and pleasure.

Let a Chemist prepare you an Aqua fortis with equal parts of Niter and Alum,
but be sure he do not sell you a common one made with Niter and Vitriol. Then
take four ounces of Bistmuth, let it be beaten to a fine powder, then wash it
so often till the water come from it very clear; then dry it and put it into a
small glass cucurbit, set it upon a round, under a chimney, and pour upon it by
little and little twelve ounces of your Aqua fortis, pour in but about the
quantity of a spoonful the first time, it will presently begin to work upon
the Bistmuth, and a thick black smoke will ascend, which being almost past,
pour in a little more of your Aqua fortis; and the ebulation and fumes being
over, pour in more, and so continue til you have poured in the twelve ounces of
Aqua fortis. And if you see that it is not all dissolved after having stood
some time; set the Cucurbite upon a little sand in an earthen pan, and set the
pan upon a Chasing dish of coals, and the Aqua fortis being warm will soon
dissolve all the Bistmuth; when all is well dissolved let it cool, there will
remain a few black feces in the bottom which cannot be dissolved, pour it into
a white basin full of fair water leaving the said black dreggs behind, and it
will immediately turn it as white as milk, let it stand five or six hours until
the water be very clear, and the white powder be settled to the bottom, pour
fresh water upon it and let it settle as before, then pour it off gently
without stirring the powder, and put on fresh fair water; do thus ten or twelve
times that the powder may be well dulcified, and freed from all the acrimony of
the Aquafortis; then dry it in the shadow between two papers spreading it
abroad upon the paper.

You shall have a pure white Magister, which some have called the white of
Pearls; which is a most excellent Cosmetick fit for all Deformities of the
skin, and to preserve and beautify the Complexion of Ladies and smooth the
skin; for which it is recommended by all Authors, and is much in use among the
Ladies in France; I have many times prepared it for Ladies of great quality at
Paris, you may make a Pomatum with it thus: Take one ounce of white Virgins
wax, and four ounces of Oil of sweet Almonds, drawn without fire, or four
ounces of Oil of the great Coldseeds, and one dram of the said Magistery, and
so use it either at night or in the morning.

A rare Cosmetick of Ox-gall.
Take two pintes of Ox-galls, digest it twenty four hours in a bottle set in
warm water, then take Roch-allum and Salt of Glass or Sand powdered, of each
half an ounce, mix them with the Oxgalls, and put them together into a Mattress
or in the same bottle, stop it carefully, and set it in the Sun shaking the
bottle three or four times a day, then filtre it through gray paper, then take
one ounce of Porcellane finely powdered, dissolve it in Spirit of Vinegar, then
take Borax and Spermacety of each half an ounce, Sugar candy an ounce and half,
Camphir and sweet Sublimate of each one dram and a half; mix them all well
together and put them into the bottle, stop it close and set it in the Sun
again for ten days, and shake it often; then filtre it again, and keep the
Liquor for use.

This preparation is highly esteemed by all the Noble Ladies in France, for
clearing the Face from Morphew, Freckles, and Sun-burning; and to defend it
from Sun-burning. The face must be washed with it Evening and morning; and in
the morning you may wash afterward with water of Lillies or Water Lillies. You
may travel in the Sun all day long with the face anointed with it, and wash at
night to prevent Sun-burning. Monsieur Charras has it in his Royal
Dispensatory.

Dr. Scroderus's Cosmetick of Oxgalls which he highly commends in his Chemical
Dispensatory is thus.
Take of Oxgalls what quantity you please, dry it by degrees in the Sun, then
extract a tincture of it with Spirit of Wine, which filtre and keep it for use.

It is a most excellent Cosmetick procuring a most beautiful white Skin even to
admiration; the face must be anointed with it two or three times over at night,
washing it the next morning when you make your self ready with Bean-flower
water, or water of Water Lillies, or with one of the Cosmetick waters that are
set down before.

Dr. Scroderus his Virginal-milk, which is a rare Cosmetick, taking away
Freckles and Morphew in the Face.
Take waters of Nightshade, Lettice, Lillies and Sorrel, of each two ounces,
mix them together, and dissolve therein one ounce of Litharge of Silver, white
Cerus three drams, Camphir one scruple, set it in the Sun for some days shaking
it often, then let it settle and filtre or strain it.

The Author recommends this highly, not only to Beautify and whiten the face,
but that it is of so smoothing a nature, that it will make a wrinkles Brow
smooth; it stops bleeding and takes off Freckles Morphew and Scabs.

Oils of Sale, which are said to whiten and beautify the Face and Skin in
other places, and to blanch Pearls and Scarlet being dipped therein. You may
see them in my Book of Sr. Keneln Digby's Chemical Secrets Printed for me in
the Year 1682.

A Paste for the hands.
Take bitter Almonds blanched half a pound, stamp them in a Stone Mortar,
sprinkling them with never so little Aqua vitae, then add the yolk of two Eggs,
white Honey and Orrice-roots finely powdered, one ounce, mix and reduce them to
a Paste.

It is Excellent to cleanse the hands, and easily prepared. There is no need of
wetting it, for it may be used as it is.

An Incomparable Balsom for the Hands.
Take Venice Soape dissolved in juice of Lemmons, half a pound; white Virgin
Honey two ounces, Venecian Talk, Sugarcandy and Orrice roots all reduced to a
fine powder of each half an ounce, Salt of Tartar, Borax and Spermaceti of each
two drams, Peruvian Balsom one dram, Oil of Lignum Rhodium Oil of Cinnamon and
Cloves of each one scruple and a half, and if Ladies like the smell of Musk and
Amber, they may add ten grains of each.

Cut the Sap small, and put it into an earthen glazed pot, and dissolve it over
a gentle fire, in two ounces of juice of Limons; then add the Honey, the
Spermaceti next, with the Balsom: Then take the pot from the fire, and by
degrees incorporate the powders, and lastly the distilled Oils, and Amber and
Musk. The Talk must be laid before a quick fire, for a quarter of an hour, then
pulverized in a Mortar heated, heating also the end of the Pestle.

This Balsom is of an Incomparable and comfortable Odor. It whitens cleanses
and smooths the skin beyond any Paste or Pomatum that can be prepared. It Is
enough to rub the hands with it; nor is there any need of washing afterward.

Another Perfume.
Take Coals of Rosemary-wood pulverized, Labdanum two ounces, Storax and
Benjamin, of each an ounce, Roots of Cyprus, Aromatic Reed, Mastick, and
yellow Amber, of each two drams, Cloves a dram, Musk, Ambergrease, and Civet,
of each ten grains; reduce all to a fine Powder, and make it up into little
short Candles or Sticks with the Mucilage of Gum Tragant steeped in
Orange-Flower-water; dry them, and use them as the former.

Another richer Perfume; being pleasant and wholesome, to perfume Tobacco taken
in a Pipe.
Take Balm of Peru half an ounce, seven or eight Drops of Oil of Cinnamon, Oil
of Cloves five drops, Oil of Nutmegs, of Thyme, of Lavender, of Fennel, of
Aniseeds (all drawn by distillation) of each a like quantity, or more or less
as you like the Odor, and would have it strongest; incorporate with these half
a dram of Ambergrease; make all these into a Paste; which keep in a Box; when
you have filled your Pipe of Tobacco, put upon it about the bigness of a Pins
Head of this Composition.

It will make the Smoke most pleasantly odoriferous, both to the Takers, and to
them that come into the Room; and ones Breath will be sweet all day after. It
also comforts the Head and Brains. Approved by Sir Kenelm Digby.

CHAP. XLII. Select PERFUMES.
An Excellent Odoriferous Perfume for Chambers and Rooms of Entertainment, much
used in France.
TAke the powder of Willow coals three ounces, Labdanum two ounces, Storax and
Benjamin, of each half an ounce, Mastick, sweet Taccamahacca, and yellow Amber,
of each two drams; Lignum Rhodium a dram and half; reduce them all into a
subtle Powder, and make them up into small Candles with Gum Tragant steeped in
Rosewater, then dry them in the shadow; kindle the narrow end of them, and set
them in a Candlestick, or heat the Pin of a Save-all, and then thrust it into
the bigger end and so set it upon a Candle-stick.

A Famous Odoriferous sweet Water called the Angel's Water.
Take Roots of Florence Orrice and Benjamin, of each an ounce and half, select
Storax six drams, Lignum Rhodium half an ounce, Aromatic Reed, and Labdanum,
of each two scruples, Flowers of Benjamin a scruple; pulverize them all, and
put them into a Mattress, or in a strong Bottle, and pour upon it a pint of
Rose Water, and half a pint of Orange-flower-water; Stop the Bottle or Mattress
very close, and set it in lukewarm water for twenty four hours; then distill in
a Cucurbite in Balneo Mariae, and keep the water for Use: If you please you may
mix it with Musk and Ambergrease; or you may put in it a few drops of the
Essence of Amber, afterward set down.

This Water is called The Angels-Water, because of its sweet and pleasing
Odor; you may, after you have infused the Ingredients in the Waters, strain
the Infusion, and having dissolved in it the Musk and Ambergrease, keep the
Liquor for Use, without distilling it. Of the Sediments you may make sweet Bags
to put among Clothes and Linen.

The Countess of Dorset her sweet Water.
Take Rose-Leaves, Bay Leaves, Lavender, sweet Marjoram, Eglantine, and Pinks,
of each two handful; Cloves and Cinnamon, of each an ounce; bruise all these,
and pour upon them two quarts of strong Ale (that is near the Grounds) let them
infuse twenty four hours, then distill it, and draw it till the Ingredients
remain almost dry.

The Essence of Musk and Ambergrease drawn with Spirit of Wine.
Take a dram of Ambergrease, and half a dram of Musk, powder them, and put them
in a small Mattress with a long Neck, and power upon them four ounces of Spirit
of Wine; then stop it very close, and cut the Cork even with the Neck of the
Mattress after you have thrust it in as far as you can, then close it all over
with Spanish Wax; then put the Mattress in a little earthen pan with Sand at
the bottom, and set it in the Sun in the hottest time of the year, putting
behind the Glass a Tin Leaf to receive the Sunbeams, and reverberate them upon
the Glass, shake it sometimes, and the Amber and Musk will dissolve in the
Spirit of Wine, and will tinge it of a red color like a Ruby; which power out
into a Glass Vial, which stop well, and tie a Bladder about it.

In all things where the Ambergrease is used, two or three Drops of this
Essence will go further in the Aromatizing of it, than a whole dram of
Ambergrease in substance: One Drop of it Perfumes for ever whatsoever it
touches that can imbibe it.

The End of the Medicinal Part.
EXCELLENT DIRECTIONS FOR COOKERY; TOGETHER WITH The Description of an Useful
ENGINE serving for the same; and likewise for Distilling the Choicest and Best
Cordial Waters.

AS ALSO SELECT RECEIPTS FOR PRESERVING, CONSERVING, and CANDYING, etc. WITH A
COLLECTION Of the Choicest Receipts for making of METHEGLIN, SIDER,
CHERRY-WINE, etc.

The SECOND PART.

LONDON, Printed by T. B. for G. Hartman Chemist. 1682.

(...)

6. It is very convenient for a small Family, or For Lodgers, especially in the
Summer time for dressing their meat in it, without making a fire which would
heat the Room.

7. The Door of the ENGINE being shut the Lamp where the Spirit burns, is not
seen; so that if any body comes into the Room he will not know what it is,
unless you show it him.

Of the several sorts of Meats, which may with great convenience be dressed in
this ENGINE, both the English and the French way, with Excellent Direction how
to do them.
1. An Excellent and Savoury Fricasie after the French way, either of Pigeons;
Chickens, Veal Lamb, Mutton, Rabbits, Lamb-stones or Sweet-breads. 2. A Leg of
Lamb boiled. 3. Stewed Veal the French Way. 4. Stewed Broth the English way. 5.
Stewed Rabbits the English way. 6. A Hare stewed after the French way, which
they call Lieore en Civette, which is exceeding Savoury Meat. 7. A Hutch-pot
the Dutch way, which is excellent Meat. 8. Pottage both English and French. 9.
Beans and green Pease. 10. Milk-Pottage and Rice Milk, Cawdles, and
Water Gruel, etc. 11. A Carp in short Broth the French way.
(...) ordinary way. You must order the quantity of Eggs according to the
quantity of your meat either more or less.

To stew a Rump of Beef Mrs. Herbert's way.
Take a Rump of Beef, and Season it with pepper, Salt, and Nutmegs grated and
mingled together; Season and rub it on the bonyside, and lay it in your Engine
or in a Pipkin with the fat side downward. Pour upon it three pintes of
Vinegar, and as much water, and three great onions, and a bunch of Rosemary
tied up, Stew them three or four hours together with a soft fire, being close
covered. Then dish it up upon Sippets with some of the Gravy blowing off the
Fat from it. Elder Vinegar is better than ordinary Vinegar.

To make Red-Deer that will keep a quarter of a year, and is Excellent Meat.
Take a piece of the buttock of Bief, the leanest of it; and beat it with a
Rowling-pin the space of an hour, till you think you have broken the grain of
it, and have made it very open both to receive the saucing drink, and also to
make it tender. Then let it lie two days and two nights in Vinegar and
Clarret-wine, of each one pint, with two Nutmegs beaten. Then take it out and
Lard it with Lards as big as your biggest finger, Rolled in pepper and salt.
Then take Pepper, Cloves, Mace, and Nutmeg or Jamaica Pepper; Beat and mix them
all together, and season it very well all over, and so Bake it in Pye-paste,
and let it stand five or six hours in the Oven. Then when it is cold, put it in
the saucing-drink aforesaid, and if it be kept close it will keep a quarter of
a year.

A most Excellent and Savoury Estuvee of Veal the French way.
If instead of a Fricasie of Veal, you would have an Estuvee, take a Leg or a
Fillet of Veal, and cut it into thin slices, and beat them with the back of a
great knife, and stem them simpringly in White Wind and water, of each equal
parts with a good lump of butter or Bacon, or some of them both; seasoning it
with pepper and salt, a little bundle of Thyme and Parsley, and an Onion if you
like it. When it is enough put to it some yolks of Eggs, beaten with White Wind
and Verjuice or Vinegar, and some Nutmeg grated, and some shred Parsley, pour it
into the meat and stir it all well together over the fire, till the sauce be
thickened. It is an Excellent Dish of Meat.

To make an Hotchpot.
Take a piece of Brisket-beef, a piece of Mutton, a Knuckle of Veal, a good
Cullender of Pot Herbs, Carrots, Onions, and Cabbage, a little broken. Boil all
these together until they be very thick.

Another Hotchpot.
Take a Brisket Rand of Beef, any piece of Mutton, and a piece of Veal, put
this with sufficient water into your pot, and after it has been skimmed, put
in a Cullender full of Pot Herbs, a piece of Cabbage, all half cut; a good
quantity of onions whole, six Carrots cut and sliced; let it all boil till it
be almost a Gelly, and stir it often left it burn.

To Stew Beef the French way.
Take good fat Beef, slice it very thin into small pieces, and beat it well
with the back of a Chopping-knife, then put it into your Stew Pan or Pipkin,
and cover it with Wine and Water; and Season it with Spice and salt, and put to
it a handful of good herbs, and an Onion with Anchovies, let it boil two
hours: a little before you take it up, put in a few Marigold-flowers, and serve
it up on Sippets.

The best way to make Beef alamode, which is exceeding good meat.
Take of the Fillet of Beef and the lean of Pork, shred them together and
season it; then take Bacon and cut it into big Lardons, roll them in Pepper and
Salt, and lay them between the meat in the Stew Pan, and let it stew easily in
its own broth, and it will be exceeding short and tender; and will taste like
Venison. You may also make an excellent Pie or Pasty of this; putting some
Butter upon it.

To Stew a Hare the French way, which they call Lievre en Civette, which is
Excellent Savoury meat.
Cut your Hare in six or seven pieces, then Lard them with great Lardons rolled
in Pepper and Salt, then put it into your Stew Pan, with Pepper and Salt, and a
few Cloves and an Onion, with a bundle of Thyme and Parsley tied together; then
pour water upon it and half a pint of White wine; with half a glass full of
Vinegar, with a few Laurel Leaves and some Orange-peels.

To Bake Pigeons, Teals, or Wild-Ducks, that will keep a quarter of a Year, and
are Excellent Meat.
Season them duly with Pepper and Salt, then Bake them in an Oven with store of
Butter and some Clarret wine; let the Pot be covered, when they are Baked, take
out the pot and the Birds out of it, and wipe them very dry; then put them into
the pot again without any Liquor, and pour upon them the Butter that was upon
the Liquor, being first clarified, and as much Butter more, as needs to cover
them three fingers breadth. Being melted and clarified, they may put a few
Bay Leaves between the meat and the Butter.

Excellent Pyes of Red-Deer, made by Sr. Kenelm Digby's French Cook at
Franckfort.
Lard the lean of the meat very well, with great Lardons rouled in Pepper and
Salt; then laying under it a Cake of a fingers thick or Beef Suet, first
chopped small and seasoned with pepper and salt, then beaten into a Cake fit
for the meat, and another such Cake upon the Deers flesh, then Bake it well in
strong Crust, and soaked two or three hours in the Oven after it is Baked
enough, which requires six good hours. If you use no Suet, put in Butter
enough.

A Savoury and nourishing boiled Capon from Count Trino at Milan.
Take a fat and fleshy Capon, or a like Hen; dress it in the ordinary manner,
and cleanse it within from the Guts, etc. then put in the Fat again into the
Belly, and split the Bones of the Legs and Wings (as far as you may, not to
deface the Fowl, so as the Marrow may distill out of them; add a little fresh
Butter and Marrow to it; season it with Salt, Pepper, and what other Spice you
like, as also savoury Herbs. Put the the Capon with all these Condiments into a
large, strong, sound Bladder of an Ox, (first well washed and scowred with red
Wine) and tie it very close and fast at the top, that nothing may owse out, nor
any water get in (and there must be void space in the Bladder, that the Flesh
may have room to swell and ferment in; therefore it must be a large one) put
this to boil for a couple of hours in a Kettle of water, or till you find by
touching the Bladder, that the Capon is tender and boiled enough. Then serve it
up in a Dish, in the Bladder (dry-wiped) which when you cut, you will find a
precious and nourishing Liquor to eat with Bread, and the Capon will be short,
tender, most savoury, and full of Juice, and very nourishing.

I conceive that if you put enough Oxe-Marrow, you need no Butter, and that it
may do well to add Ambergrease, Dates sliced and pithed, Raisins, Currants, and
a little Sugar; I suppose Gravie of Mutton may not be amiss.

Peradventure this might be done well in a Silver Flagon close luted, set in
Balneo bulliente, as I make the nourishing Broth or Jelly of Mutton or
Chickens, etc.

To bake Mutton after Venison fashion.
Take a large fat Loin of Mutton (or two) boned after the manner of Venison;
season it well to your Taste with Pepper and Salt; then lay it to steep all
night in enough of the Sheeps Blood, to cover it over and soak well into it;
then lay it into the Paste with all the clotted thick Blood under it, upon it,
and hanging about it. You may season the Blood with Pepper and Salt before you
lay the Meat in it; but though you do not, it will not be amiss, so as the Meat
be seasoned high enough. Then bake it as you do an ordinary Pasty; and you may
put Gravy of Mutton or strong Broth into it; you may do it in a Dish with
Paste, as my Lady of Newport does her Venison. This way of steeping in Blood
before you bake it, is very good also for Venison.

My Lady Glin uses her Venison Pasties thus:
Boil the Bones (well broken) and remaining Flesh of the Venison from whence
the Meat of the Pasty is cut, in the Liquor wherein Capons, and Veal, or Mutton
have been boiled, so to make very strong Broth of them. The Bones must be
broken, that you may have the Marrow of them in the Liquor; and they must stew
a long time (covering the Pot close) that you may Make the Broth as strong as
you can; and if you put some Gravy of Mutton or Veal to it, it will be the
better. When the Pasty is half baked, power some this Broth into it, by the hole
at the top, and the rest of it when it is quite baked, and wants but standing
in the Oven to soak; Quaere, rather to put it all in at once when the Pasty is
sufficiently baked, and afterward let it remain in the Oven a good while
soaking. You may bake the bones (broken) with the Broth and Gravy, or for want
thereof, with only water, in an earthen pot close stopped, till you have all
the Substance in the Liquor, which you may power into the Pasty an hour before
it is baked enough.

If you are in a Park, you may soak the Venison in the Blood of the Deer, and
cover the flesh with it clotted together when you put it in Paste. Mutton Blood
also upon Venison is very good. You may season your Blood a little with Pepper
and Salt.

To bake Venison in Pots to keep all the Year.
After you have boned and skinn'd it, proportion it as you would have it to the
bigness of your pots, then to make your Season for it, take of black Pepper two
parts, and one of white; take of Nutmegs, Cloves and Ginger, a like quantity;
mingle it with your Pepper, so as not to make it so high as the Pepper, and put
thereto a sufficient quantity of Salt; with this season your Venison, and as
you lay it into the Pots, have some small flakes of Mace, and Bay Leaves, and
young Onions, and lay a Lay of them in the bottom, middle and top, and on the
top add to it a little whole white Pepper, let your Pots be set into a very hot
Oven, and let them stand full seven hours; then draw them, and turn the Pot
with the bottom upwards; after a while all the Gravy will be run out, and then
take the Pot easily off, and pull from the Meat the Onions and Leaves as clean
as you can, and put your Pots gently on again, and let them stand so long until
the Fat of that which came out of the Pots be so cold, that it may be taken off
the Gravy; then melt this Fat again, and so far as it will go when it is clean
scumm'd, put in each Pot an equal proportion, then take of good sweet Butter
such a quantity as will fill up the Pots to be three Inches above the Venison,
but be sure the Butter be very well clarifi'd, then after two days standing,
tie it very close with Paper and Leather, that it take no Air.

Do it the same way leaving out the Onions if you please.

Te Souce a Turkey like Sturgeon or Brawn my Lady Cornwallis her way.
Take a good fat Turkey or two, dress them clean, and bone them; then tie them
up in the manner of a Sturgeon, with something clean washed; take your Kettle
and put into it a pottle of good white Wine, a quart of Water, and a quart of
Vinegar, make it boil, and season it with Salt pretty well, then put in your
Turkeys, and let them boil til they be very tender; when they are enough
boiled, take them out, and taste the Liquor, if it be not sharp enough, put
more Vinegar, and let it boil a little; then put it into an earthen Pot that
will hold both Turkeys; when it is cold enough, and the Turkeys through cold,
put them into the Liquor in the pot, and be sure they be quite covered with the
Liquor; let them lie in it three weeks or a month, then serve it to the Table
as Sturgeon, with Fennel on it, and eat it with Elder-Vinegar.

You may do a Capon or two put together, in the same manner; but first larding
it with great Lardons rouled in Pepper and Salt. A shorter time lying in the
Pickle will serve.

To pickle Capons; my Lady of Portland's French Cook.
Take two large fleshy Capons, not too fat, when you have drawn and trussed
them, lay them upon a Chasing-dish of Charcole to singe them, turning them on
all sides till the Hair and Down be clean singed off; then take three pound of
good Lard, and cut it into Lardingpieces about the thickness of a two-peny
Cord, and Lard it well, but first season your Bits of Lard with half an ounce
of white Pepper, and a handful of Salt, then bind each of them well over with
Packthred, and have ready over the fire about two gallons of Beef-Broth, and
put them in a little before it boils, when they boil, and are clean scummed,
then put in about six Bay Leaves, a little bunch of Thyme, two ordinary Onions
stuck full of Cloves, and Salt, if it be not already salt enough for pickle;
when it has boiled about half an hour, put in another half ounce of beaten
white Pepper, and a little after put in a quart of white Wine; so let it boil,
until it has boiled in all an hour, and so let it lie in the pickle till you
use it, which you may do the next day, or any time within a fortnight; instead
of Broth, you may use Water, which is better, in case you do four or six, which
of themselves will make the Pickle strong enough.

If you will keep them above four days, you must make the Pickle sharp with
Vinegar. See See my Lady Cornwallis pickled Turkies in her foregoing Receipt.

My Lady Newport's baked Venison.
My Lady Newport bakes her Venison in a Dish, thus: A Side or a Hanch serves
for two Dishes. Season it as for a Pasty; live the Dish with a thin Crust of
good fine Paste, but make it pretty thick upwards toward the brim, that it may
be there Pudding Crust. Lay then the Venison in a round piece upon the Paste in
the Dish; that must fill it up to fill the Pudding, but lie at ease. Put over
it a Cover, and let it overreach upon the Brim with some carved Pasty-work to
grace it, which must go up with a Border like a Lace, growing a little upwards
upon the Cover, which is a little arched up, and has a little hole in the top,
to power in unto the Meat the strong well-seasoned Broth that is made of the
broken Bones and remaining lean Flesh of the Venison. Put a little more Butter
or Beef Suet to the Venison before you put the Cover on, unless it be exceeding
fat. This must bake five or six hours or more, as an ordinary Pasty. An hour or
an hour and half before you take it out to serve it up, open the Oven, and draw
out the Dish far enough to power in at the little hole of the Cover the strong
Decoction of the broken bones and flesh; instead of a Decoction in water, you
may boil it by it self in Balneo, in duplici vase, or bake it in a pot with
Broth and Gravy of Mutton; then set it in again, to make an end of its baking
and soaking. The Meat within (even the Lean) will be exceeding tender and like
a Jelly, so that you may cut all of it with a Spoon. If you bake a Side at once
in two dishes, the one will be very good to keep cold; and when it is so, you
may (if you please) bake it again to have it hot, not so long as at first, but
enough to have it all perfectly heated through. She bakes thus in Pewter Dishes
of a large size.

Mutton or Veal may be thus baked with their due seasoning; as with Onions, or
Onions and Apples, or Larding, or a Cawdle, etc. Sweet-breads, Beatilles,
Champignons, Treuffles, etc.

My Lady of Monmouth Boyleth a Capon with White-Broath thus:
Make reasonable good Broth, with the scragends of Necks of Mutton and Veal:
(of which you must have so much as to be at least three quarts of White-broath
in the dish with the Capon, when all is done, else it will not come high enough
upon the Capon) beat a quarter of a pound of blanched Almonds with three or
four spoonfuls of Cream; and if you will, a little Rose Water, then add some of
the Broth to it; so to draw out all their substance, mingling it with the rest
of the broth. Boil your Capon in fair water by it self, and a Marrow-bone or
two by themselves in other water; likewise some Chestnuts (instead of which you
may use Pistacheos, or macerated pine kernels) and in other water, some
Skirrets or Endive, or Parsley roots, according to the season. Also plump some
Raisins of the Sun, and stew some sliced with Sugar and water, when all is
ready to join, beat two or three new laid eggs (whites and all) with some of
the white broth that must then be boiling, and mingle it with the rest, and let
it boil on; and mingle the other prepared things with it, as also a little
sliced Oringiado, (from which the hard Candy Sugar has been soaked off with
warm water, or a little pill of Orange, (or some Limon pickled with Vinegar and
Sugar, such as serves for Sallets) which you throw away after it has been a
while boiled in it; and put a little Sack to your broth, and some Amber-grease
if you will, and a small portion of sugar; and last of all, put in the marrow
in lumps that you have knocked out of the boiled bones. Then lay your Capon
taken hot from the Liquor he is boiled in, upon Sippets and slices of toasted,
dried, light bread, and pour your broth and mixture upon it, and cover it with
another dish, and let all stew together a while: then serve it up.

Of Boiling the Capon in the weak broth of Mutton and Veal, instead of water;
so to make the broth the better.

You must remember to Season your Broth in the due time, with Salt and such
Spices as you like.

Minced-Pyes.
My Lady Lusson makes her finest Minced-Pyes of Neats-Tongues, but she holds
the most savoury ones to be of Veal and Mutton equal parts, very small minced.
Her finest Crust is made by sprinkling the flower (as much as it needs) with
cold water, and then working the paste with little pieces of raw butter in a
good quantity; so that She uses neither hot water nor melted Butter in them;
and this makes the Crust short and light. After all the meat and Seasoning, and
Plumbs and Citron-Peel etc. is in the Coffin, She puts a little ambered Sugar
upon it, thus: Grind much two grains of Amber-grease, and half a one of Musk,
with a little piece of hard Loaf-sugar. This will serve six or eight Pyes
strewed all over the top, then cover it with the lid, and set it in the Oven.

To Roast fine Meat.
When the Capon, Chickens or Fowl, have been long enough before the fire to be
through hot, and that it is time to begin to baste them; baste them once all
over very well with fresh Butter, then presently Powder it all over very thin
with flower. This by continual turning before the fire, will make a thin crust,
which will keep in all the juice of the meat: therefore baste no more nor do
any thing to it till the meat be enough roasted: Then baste it well with Butter
as before, which will make the Crust relent and fall away; which being done,
and that the meat is growing brown on the outside, besprinkle it over with a
little ordinary white salt in gross grains, and continue turning till the
outside be brown enough.

The Queen uses to baste such meat with yolks of fresh Eggs beaten thin; which
continue to do all the while it is Roasting.

Savoury Collops of Veal.
Cut a Leg of Veal into thin Collops, and beat them well with the back of a
knife, then lay them in soak a good half hour, in the yolks of four Eggs, and
two whites very well beaten; and a little small shredded Thyme mingled with it,
then lay them in the Drying Pan wherein is boiling butter, and pour upon them
the rest of the Eggs that the Collops have not imbibed and carried with them,
and fry them very well, turning them in due time. Then pour away all the
butter, and make them a sauce of Gravy, seasoned with Salt and Spice and juice
of Orange at last squeezed upon them.

To make Excellent Hare-pyes.
Mrs ^^^^le makes Excellent Hare Pyes, thus: (...) ^he flesh of as many Hares
as you please very small, then beat them strongly in a Mortar into Paste, which
Season duly with Pepper and Salt, Lard it thoroughly all over with great Lardons
of Lard, well rolled in Pepper and Salt; put this into a straighter earthen pot
to lie close in it. If you like Onions, you may put one or two quartered into
the bottom of the Pot, put store of sweet butter upon the meat, and upon that
some strong red, or Clarret wine. Cover the Pot with a double strong brown
Paper, tied close about the mouth of it; set it to Bake with Household bread (or
in an Oven as a Venison Pasty) for eight or ten hours, then take it out the
pot, and thence the meat, and Pour away all the Liquor, which let settle, then
take all the congealed Butter, and clarify it well; put your meat again into
the pot, and put upon it your clarified butter, and as much more as is
necessary; and I believe the putting of Clarret wine to it is better now; and
to omit it before. Bake it again, but a less while, pour out all the Liquor
when it is baked, and clarify the Butter again, and pour it upon the meat, and
so let it cool, The Butter must be at least two or three fingers breadth over
the meat.

To Stew a Breast of Veal.
Take a Breast of Veal half Roasted, and put it a Stewing with some Wine and
Gravy, three or four yolks of Eggs minced smal^ pretty quantity of sweet herbs
with an Onion, Anchovies or Limon, stick it either with Thyme or Limon Peels,
and season it to your liking.

To Stew Beef.
Take very good Beef, and slice it very thin, and beat it very well with the
back of a knife, put to it the gravy of some meat, and some wine or strong
broth, sweet herbs a quantity, let it stew till it be very tender, season it to
your liking, and garnish your dish with Marygold flowers or Barberries.

A Sallet of cold Capon.
It is a good Sallet, to slice a cold Capon thin, mingle with it some Sibbalds
Lettice, Rocket, and Tarragon sliced small, season all with Pepper salt Vinegar
and Oil, and sliced Limon, a little Origanum does well with it.

Tender Brawn sliced thin, and laid Sallet-wise in a dish as the sliced Capon,
and seasoned with Pepper, Salt, Vinegar, and Oil, with a little Limon; is also
a very good Sallet.

Marrow-Puddings.
Take the pith of Beeves, a good spoonful of Almonds, very small beaten with
Rose water, beat the pith when the skin is taken off very well with a spoon,
then mingle it with the Almonds, and put in it six yolk of Eggs well beaten,
and four spoonfuls of Cream boiled and cold, it must be very thick; put in a
little Amber-grease, and as much Sugar as will sweeten them, and a little salt,
and the marrow of two good bones cut in little pieces. When your Beeves Guts
are seasoned, fill them up and boil them.

To make Excellent Black Puddings.
Take a quart of Sheeps blood, and a quart of Cream, ten Eggs, the yolks and
the whites beaten well together, stir all this Liquor very well, then thicken
it with grated bread and Oatmeal finely beaten, of each a like quantity;
Beef Suet finely shred, and marrow in little Lumps; Season it with a little
Nutmeg and Cloves and Mace, mingled with salt, a little sweet Marjoram Thyme
and Pennyroyal shred very well together, and mingle them with the other
things; some put in a few Currants, then fill them in cleansed Guts and boil
them carefully,

To make a Shoulder of Mutton like Venison.
Save the blood of your Sheep, and strain it, take grated bread almost the
quantity of a penny loaf, Pepper, Thyme, chopped small, mingle these Ingredients
with a little of the blood, and stuff the Mutton, then wrap up your shoulder in
the Cawl of your Mutton, and lay it in the blood twenty four hours, prick the
shoulder with your knife to let the blood into the flesh, and so serve it with
Venison sauce.

To make Spinage-broath
Take Strong broth, and boil a Neck of mutton and a Marrowbone in it, and skim
it very well, then put in half a pound of French Barley, and a bundle of sweet
herbs, and two or three blades of large Mace, let these boil very well, then
mince half a peck of Spinach, and two great Onions very small, and let it boil
one hour or more, Season it with Salt as you please, and send the Mutton and
the Marrow bone in a dish with French bread or Manchet, to the Table.

To make a boiled Sallet of Spinach, put the herbs without any Liquor in a dish
upon a Chafing Dish of coals, and stir them continually for fear of burning,
and much moisture will stew out from them in half, or three quarters of an
hour; Squeeze away all the Liquor you can wring out. Then stew the dry herbs
very well with store of fresh Butter.

Monsieur de Bourdeaux used to take in a Morning, a Broth thus made.
Make a very good Broth (so as to gelly when it is cold) of a lean piece of a
Leg of Veal, the crag end of a Neck of Mutton and a Pullet, seasoning it with a
little salt, Cloves, and pepper, to your mind. [Mrs. S.K. used to put stoned
Raisins and Currants to it] Beat some of it with a handful of blanched Almonds,
and twenty husked seeds of Citron, and strain it to the whole; put Sugar to it,
and so drink it warm as an emulsion.

Another.
Make strong Broth with a piece of Beef, Mutton, and Veal, adding a piece of
the sinnews of the Leg of Beef; seasoning it with two great Onions quartered,
some Cloves and white Pepper, in due time, put in a Capon, or take some Broth
out to boil it in. But before you put in the Capon, take out some of the broth,
in which Boil and Stew Turnips first prepared thus: fry them in scalding Butter
till they be tender, then take them out with a holed skimmer, and lay them in a
holed dish warmed set in another whole dish. When all the Butter is quite
drayned out stew them in a Pipkin in the Broth as is said above. When you will
make up your pottage, put some Ladles full of the broth of the great Pot
(driving away the fat with your Ladle) upon slices of scorched bread in a deep
dish. Let this mittonner a while, then lay the Capon upon it, and pour the
Turnips and broth of them over all. A Duck in lieu of a Capon, will make very
good pottage, but then it is best to fry that first as the Turnips, then Boil
it.

Monsieur Vidales good Portage de sante is thus made.
Make a good and well Seasoned Bouillon with lean Beef, Mutton, and Veal; in
which boil a Capon: Boil with it either Cabbage or Turnips or whole Onions, the
first two you put into the broth all over the dish; but the Onions you lay all
round the brim when you serve it in. Whilst the meat is boiling to make the
Bouillon, you must roast a fleshy piece of Beef, (without fat) of two or three
pound; and when it is half roasted, squeeze out all the juice, and put the
flesh into the Pot with the rest of the meat to Boil; which will both color
and strengthen it. When you find your Bouillon good, pour it into the dish
where your bread lies sliced (which must be very light and spongy) and dried
first, after it is sliced (and let it mittonner a little, then pour the gravy
of Beef upon it (or of mutton) and lay your Capon upon it, and lay on your
Roots round about it. It is best to boil by themselves in some of the Bouillon
in a Pot apart, the Roots or Onions.

A good Pottage for Dinner is thus made.
Boil Beef, Mutton, Veal volaille, and a little piece of the lean of a Gammon
of the best Bacon, with some quartered onions (and a little Garlic, if you
like it) you need no salt if you have Bacon; but put in a little Pepper and
Cloves. If it be in the Winter, put in a bundel of sweet herbs, or whole Onions
or Roots or Cabbage, if Season of herbs, boil in a little of the broth a part,
some Lettice, Sorrel, Borage, and Bugloss etc. till they be only well
mortified. If you put in any gravy, let it boil or stew a while with the broth;
put it in due time upon the toasted bread to mittoner etc. If you boil some
half roasted meat with your broth it will be the better.

Another.
Make a good Strong broth of Veal and Mutton, then take out the Meat, and put
into it a good Capon or Pullet, but first, if it be very fat, parboyl it a
little to take away the oyliness of it, and then put into the broth, and when
it has boiled a little therein, put in some grated bread a faggot of sweet
herbs, two or three blades of Mace, and a peell'd Onion, when it is ready to be
dish'd up, take the yolks of six Eggs, beat them very well with two or three
spoonfuls of White wine. Then take the Capon out of the broth, and thicken it
up with the Eggs, and so Dish it up with the Capon, and toasts of White bread,
or slices which you please, and have ready boiled the Marrow of two or three
bones, with some tender boiled white Endive, and strew it over the Capon.

Quaer. Of Beating some blanched Almonds with some of the broth, and then
putting it to the rest whilst it is Stewing.

For plain Savoury English Pottage.
Make it of Beef, Mutton and Veal, at least adding a Capon, Pullet or Pigeons.
Put in at first a quartered onion or two, some oatmeale or French Barley, some
bottom of a Venison Pasty Crust, twenty whole grains of pepper, four or five
Cloves at least, and a little bundle of sweet herbs, store of Marigold flowers.
You may put in Parsley or other herbs.

A good Savoury Strong Broth as it was made for the Queen on mornings.
Make very good Broth, with some lean of Veal, Beef, and Mutton; and with a
brawny Hen or young Cock. After it is scummed, put in an Onion quartered (and
if you like it a clove of Garlic) a little Parsley, a sprig of Thyme, as much
Mint, a little Baum, some Coriander seeds bruised, and a very little Saffron; a
little Salt, Pepper and a Clove. When all the substance is boiled out of the
meat, and the broth very good, you may drink it so; or pour a little of it upon
toasted sliced bread and stew it till the bread have drunk up all that broth;
then add a little more, and stew; so adding broth by little and little, that
the bread may imbibe it and swell, whereas if you drown it at once, the bread
will not swell, and grow like Jelly; and thus you will have a good Pottage. You
may add Cabbage or Leeks, or Endive, or Parsley Roots, in the due time before
the broth has ended boiling, and time enough for them to become tender. In the
Summer you may put in Lettice, Sorrel, Purslane, Borage, and Bugloss, or what
other Pot Herbs you like. But green herbs do rob the strength and vigor and
cream of the Pottage.

The Queens ordinary Bouillon de fante in a morning, was thus:
A Hen, a handful of Parsley, a sprig of Thyme, three of Spearmint, a little
Baum, half a great Onion, a little Pepper and salt, and a Clove; as much water
as would cover the Hen; and this boiled to less than a pint, for one good
pottinger full.

An Excellent and wholesome Water-grewell is thus made.
Into a Poshet of two quarts of water, besides the due proportion of beaten
Oatmeale, put two handfuls of Wood Sorrel a little chopped and bruised, and a
good quantity of picked and washed Currants tied loosely in a thin stuff bag,
(as of Bolter cloth) boil these very well together, seasoning the Composition
in due time with Salt, Nutmeg, Mace, or what else you please; as Rosemary, etc.
when it is sufficiently boiled, strain the Oatmeal, and press out all the juice
and humidity of the Currants and herbs, throwing away the insipid husks; and
season it with sugar, and butter, and to each pottingerfull two spoonfuls of
Rhenish wine and the yolk of an Egg.

Venison or Mutton etc. is well baked in a Lattin Coffin; but then you must
Line it within with Paste to have Pudding Crust, and cover it with Paste as a
Venison Pasty. The Coffin must be near a hands breadth high, and more long than
broad. You may have of several sizes, to Bake from a Side of Venison to half or
a quarter. To Bake Mutton etc. in a Stewing manner, you must have a Cover to it
of the same, like a Box.

To make ordinary plain wholesome Posset, when you Sup not, Do thus:
Put a Pint of good milk to boil; as soon as it does so, take it from the
fire, to let the great heat of it cool a little; for doing so, the Curd will be
the tenderer, and the whole of a more uniform consistence. When it is pretty
well cooled, pour it into the pot, wherein is about two spoonfuls of Sack, and
about four of Ale, with sufficient Sugar dissolved in them. So let it stand a
while near the fire, till you eat it.

Mr. May makes thus his Smallage Grewell, that he takes constantly for his
Breakfast (and after his Pellets of Butter and Liquorice) in the Spring. In a
Marble Mortar beat great Oatmeale to meal (which requires long beating) then
boil it three or four hours in Spring Water, to a Posnet full of two or three
quarts of water, he puts not above half a pottinger full of Oatmeale, before
it is beaten; for after beating, it appears more. To this quantity he puts as
much Smallage as he buyeth for a penny which makes it strong of the herb, and
very green. Chop the Smallage exceeding small, and put it in about a good half
hour before you are to take your Poss^et from the fire. You are to season your
grewell with a little salt at the due time; and you may put a little Nutmeg and
Mace to it. When you have taken it from the fire, put into it a good proportion
of Butter, which stir well, to incorporate with the Grewell, when it is melted.

Grewel of Oatmeal and Rice.
Doctor Pridion ordered my Lord Cornwallis for his chief Diet in his Looseness,
the following Grewel; which he found very tastful:

Take about two parts of Oatmeal well beaten in a Mortar, and one part of Rice
in subtle Powder; boil these well in water, as you make Water-Grewel, adding a
good proportion of Cinnamon to boil also in due time; then strain it through a
Cloth, and sweeten it to their Taste. The Yolk of an Egg beaten with a little
Sherry Sack, and put to it, is not bad in a Looseness; at other times you may
add Butter; it is very tastful and nourishing.

To make a pleasant and wholesome Flummery Cawdle.
Take some Lumps and Spoonfuls of Flummery when it is cold, boil it with Ale
and white Wine, then sweeten it with Sugar to your Taste.

A Nourishing Almond-Cawdle for weak Persons.
Take four ounces of blanched Almonds, stamp and strain them with a quart of
good Ale, then boil it gently, and put to it the yolks of two new-laid Eggs,
and season it with Sugar; it is very nourishing for weak Persons.

Another strengthening Cawdle.
Take a quart of the best strong Ale-wort of the first running, and put into it
three Dates shred small, one Nutmeg grated, a small stick of Cinnamon, and three
Leaves of Comfry, boil them all together to a pint, then put thereto half a
pound of of the Pith of an Ox, and a pint of good Muscadine; let it boil three
or four walms, and then add a pint of red Rose Water, and twelve yolks of Eggs,
sweeten it with white Sugar candy to your Taste.

An Emulsion or Almond-Milk, to strengthen, cool, and to induce Sleep.
Take half a pound of blanched Almonds, beat them in a Mortar, sprinkling them
now and then with Barly-water, then when they are well beaten, put more Barley
water to them, and strain it through a Cloth; beat the Almonds again with that
remains in the Cloth, and strain them again with more Barly-water; do this
again till you get all the Milk out of the Almonds, and that you have employed
a quart of Barly-broth; then put them to two ounces of Rose Water, and four
ounces of fine Sugar, and so drink it.

Very good Oatmeal Pap, by Dr. Colladon.
Put beaten Oatmeal to soak an hour or two in Milk, as you do in Water when you
make Flummery, then strain it out into a Posnet through a sitting Strainer; and
if you judge it too thick of the Oatmeal for sufficient boiling, add more Milk
to it: Set this to boil, putting then into it a Lump of Sugar (about as big as
a little Walnut) and stir it well all the while, that it burn not to. About an
hours boiling is sufficient; by which time it should be grown pretty thick; put
then a good Lump of fresh Butter to it, which being well melted and stirred
into the Pap, and incorporated with it, take it from the fire, and put it into
a Dish, and strew some fine Sugar upon it, or mingle some Sugar with it to
sweeten the whole quantity. You may season it also with Rose Water, or
Orange-flower-water, or Ambergrease, or some Yolks of new-laid Eggs. You may
put in a very little Salt at the first.

Wheaten Flummery.
In the West-Countrey they make a kind of Flummery of Wheat Flour, which they
judge to be more hearty and pleasant than that of Oatmeal, thus; Take half or a
quarter of a Bushel of good Bran of the best Wheat (which contains the purest
Flower of it, though little) and is used to make Starch, and in a great wooden
Bowl or Pail let it soak with cold water upon it three or four days; then
strain out the Milky water from it, and boil it to a Jelly, or like Starch;
which you may season with Sugar and Rose and Orange flower-water, and let it
stand till it be cold and gellied; then eat it with White or Rhenish Wine, or
Cream, or Milk, or Ale.

Pap of Oatmeal-Panado.
Beat Oatmeal small, put a little of it to Milk, and let it boil stewingly till
you see that the Milk begins to thicken with it; then strain the Milk from the
Oatmeal (this is, as when you soak or boil out the Substance of Oatmeal with
Water, to make Flummery) then boil up that Milk to the height of Pap; which
sweeten with a little Sugar, and put to it some yolks of Egg dissolved in Rose
or Orange-flower-water, and let it mittoner a while upon a Chafing Dish; (
quaere, of a little Sack, if it turn not the Milk) and a little Butter, if you
like it; you may boil a little Mace in the Milk.

Another.
Beat a couple of new-laid Eggs in good, clear Broth; heat this a little,
stirring It all the while; then power this upon a Panado (made thick) of the
same Broth; and keep them a little upon the Chafing Dish to incorporate,
stirring them all the while; quaere of putting to it a little Wine: also, Juice
of quick Oranges.

To stew Wardens or Pears.
Pare them, put them into a Pipkin, or into our Engine, with so much red or
Claret Wine and Water, of each at much as will near reach to the top of the
Pears; stew or boil them gently till they grow tender, which may be in two
hours; after a while, put in some sticks of Cinnamon bruised, and a few Cloves;
when they are almost done, put in Sugar enough to season them well, and their
Syrup; which you power out upon them in a deep Plate.

To stew Apples.
Pare them, and out them into Slices; stew them with Wine and Water as the
Pears, and season them in like manner with Spice; toward the end sweeten them
with Sugar, breaking the Apples into Pap by stirring them. When you are ready
to take them off, put in good store of fresh Butter, and incorporate it well
with them, by stirring them together. You stew these between two Dishes; the
quickest Apples are the best.

A Sack-Posset as Sir Kenelm's Housekeeper made it for him.
Take three pints of Cream, boil in it a little Cinnamon, a Nutmeg quartered,
and two spoonfuls of grated Bread, then beat the yolks of twelve Eggs very well
with a little cold Cream, and a spoonful of Sack; when your Cream has boiled
about a quarter of an hour, thicken it up with the Eggs; then sweeten it with
Sugar, and take half a pint of Sack, and six spoonfuls of Ale, and put it into
the Basin or Dish you intend to make it in, with a little Ambergrease (if you
please) then power your Cream and Eggs into it, holding your hand as high as
conveniently you can, gently stirring in the Basin with a Spoon as you power it:
so serve it up. If you please you may strew Sugar upon it.

You may strew Ambered Sugar upon it as you eat it, or Sugar beaten with
Cinnamon, if you like it.

Sillibubs, by the Lady Middlesex.
My Lady Middlesex makes Sillibubs for little Glasses with Spouts, thus; Take
three pints of sweet Cream, one of quick white Wine (or Rhenish) and a good
Wine-Glass full (better than a quarter of a pint) of Sack; mingle with them
about three quarters of a pound of fine Sugar in powder: Beat all these
together with a whisk till all appears converted into Froth. Then power it
into your Sillibub-Glasses, and let them stand all Night. The next day the Curd
will be thick and firm above, and the Drink clear under it. I conceive it may
do well to put into each Glass when you power the Liquor into it, a Sprig of
Rosemary a little bruised, or a little Limon-peel, or some such thing to
quicken the Taste; or use Amber-Sugar, or Spirit of Cinnamon, or of Lignum
Cassiae, or Nutmegs, or Mace, or Cloves, a very little.

A Receipt for a Tansie.
Spinach, Sorrel, Tansie, Wheat, a Quart of Cream, Bread (the quantity of a
twopeny Loaf) twenty Eggs, and half the Whites, one Nutmeg, half a pound of
Sugar, and the Juice of a couple of Limons.

Spinach is the chief Herb to have the Juice; Wheat also is very good, when it
is young and tender. You must not take much Sorrel, for fear of turning the
Cream, but less Tansie; so little that it may not taste distinctly in the
composition; I doubt there is too much Bread. The Juice of Limons is put in at
the end of all. You may lay thin Slices of Limon upon the Tansie made, and
Sugar upon them.

To make a Cake my Lady Cambden's Way.
Take three pound and a half of Flower, a penniworth of Cloves and Mace, and a
quarter of a pound of Sugar and Salt, and strew it on the Flower, there being a
hole in the middle; then take the yolks of eight Eggs well beaten with a
spoonful and half of Rose Water; take likewise a pint of thick Cream, and a
pound of Butter, melt them together, and when it is so, take three quarters of
a pint of Ale-yeast, and mingle the yeast and Eggs together; then take the warm
Liquor, and mingle all together; when you have done, take all and power it into
the Bowl, and so cover the Flower over the Liquor, then cover the Pan with a
Napkin, and when it is risen take four pounds of Currants well washed and half a
pound of Raisins sliced, and let them be well dried and hot, and so stir them
in; when it is risen, have your Oven hot against the Cake is made, and let it
stand three quarters of an hour; when it is half baked, Ice it over with fine
Sugar and Rosewater, and the Whites of Eggs, and Musk and Ambergrease.

When you mingle your yeast and Eggs together for the Cake, put Musk and Amber
to that.

To make a good Cake as Sir Kenelm's House keeper made it for him.
Take four quarts of fine Flower, two pound and a half of Butter, three
quarters of a pound of Sugar, four Nutmegs, a little Mace, a pound of Almonds
finely beaten; half a pint of Sack, a pint of good Ale-yeast, a pint of boiled
Cream, twelve Yolks and four Whites of Eggs, four pound of Currants: When you
have wrought all these into a very fine Past, let it be kept warm by the Fire
half an hour before you set it into the Oven. If you please you may put into it
two pound of Raisins of the Sun stoned and quartered.

The Ice for this Cake.
Take the Whites of three new-laid Eggs, and three quarters of a pound of fine
Sugar finely beaten, beat it well together with the Whites of Eggs, and Ice the
Cake. If you please, you may add a little Musk or Ambergrease.

Let your Oven be of a temperate heat, and let your Cake stand therein two
hours and a half before you Ice it, and afterward only to harden the Ice.

My Lady Harvey's way to make a Caroway Cake.
Take three pound and a half of the finest Flower, and dry it in an Oven, one
pound and a half of sweet Butter; and rub it in the Flower until it be crumbled
very small, that none of it be seen; then take three quarters of a pint of new
Ale-yeast, and half a pint of Sack, and half a pint of new Milk, six spoonfuls
of Rose Water, four yolks and two whites of Eggs; then let it lie before the
Fire half an hour or more; and when you go to make it up, put in three quarters
of a pound of Caroway Comfits, and a pound and a half of Biskets; put it in the
Oven, and let it stand an hour and a half.

Mrs Stockdels Excellent small Cakes, which are much esteemed at Court; the
King himself has eat of them.
Take three pounds of very fine Flower, one pound and half of Butter, and as
much Currants, and as much Sugar, seven Eggs, one half of the Whites taken out,
and knead all well together into a Paste, adding one Nutmeg grated, and a
little Rosewater; so make them up about the bigness of your hand, and bake them
upon a Plate of Tin.

To make Excellent Small Cakes.
Take three pound of very fine Flower well dried by the Fire, and put to it a
pound and a half of Loaf-Sugar sifted in a very fine Sieve, and dried, three
pound of Currants well washed and dried in a Cloth, and set by the Fire; when
your Flower is well mixed with the Sugar and Currants, you must put in it a
pound and a half of unmelted Butter, ten spoonfuls of Cream, with the yolks of
three new-laid Eggs beat with it, one Nutmeg, and if you please three spoonful
of Sack; when you have wrought your Paste well, you must put it in a Cloth, and
set it in a Dish before the Fire till it be through warm; then make them up in
little Cakes, and prick them full of Holes; you must bake them in a quick Oven
unclosed.

Afterward Ice them over with Sugar. The Cakes should be about the bigness of
a handbreadth, and thin, of the size of the Sugar-Cakes sold at Barnet.

Mrs Ragly's Cheese-Cakes.
Take twelve quarts of Milk from the Cow, turn it with a good spoonful of
Runnet; break it well, and put it into a large strainer, in which roll it up
and down that all the Whey may run out into a little Tub; when all that will is
run out, wring out more; then break the Curds well; then wring it again, and
more Whey will come; thus break and wring till no more come; then work the
Curds exceedingly with your hand in a Trey, till they become a short uniform
Paste; then put to it the yolks of eight new-laid Eggs, and two Whites, and a
pound of Butter; work all this long together, in the long working (at the
several times) consists the making them good; then season them to your Taste
with Sugar finely beaten; and put in some Cloves and Mace in subtle Powder;
then lay them thick in Coffins of fine Paste, and bake them.

My Lady Diana Peter's her Scotch Collops.
Cut a Leg or two of Mutton into thin Slices, which beat very well; put them to
fry over a very quick Fire, in a Pan first glazed over, with no more Butter
melted in it than just to besmear a little at the bottom of the Pan; turn them
in due time: There must never be but one Row in the Pan, nor any Slice lying
upon another, but every one immediate to the Pan. When they are fried enough,
lay them in a hot Dish covered, over a Chafingdish; and power upon them the
Gravy that runs out of them into the Pan. Then lay another Row of Slices in the
pan to fry as before, and when they are enough, put them into the Dish to the
other. When you have enough by such repetitions, or by doing them in two or
three Pans all at a time, take a potttinger full of Gravy of Mutton, and put
into it a piece of Butter, as much as a Walnut, and a quartered Onion, if you
will (or rub the Dish afterward with Garlic) and Pepper and Salt, and let
this boil to be very hot; then throw away the Onion, and power this into the
Dish upon the Slices, and let them stew a little together; then squeeze an
Orange upon it, and serve it up.

A Fricasie of Veal.
Cut a Leg of Veal into thin Slices, and beat them; put about half a pint of
water, or Flesh-Broth to them, with some Thyme, Marjoram, and an Onion or two
quartered, and a little Butter; boil them till they be tender, having seasoned
them with Salt and about twenty Corns of whole white Pepper, and four or five
Cloves. When they are enough, take half a pint of white Wine, and four yolks of
Eggs, a quarter of a pound of Butter (or more) a good spoonful of Thyme, sweet
Marjoram and Parsley, all minced small (more Parsley than of the others) a
pottinger full of your Gravy. When all these are well incorporated together
over the Fire, and well beaten, power it into the Pan to the rest, and turn it
continually over the Fire til all be well incorporated and thickened; then throw
away the Onion and first Sprigs of herbs, Squeeze an Orange to it, and so serve
it up hot.

A Tansie.
Take three pints of Cream, fourteen new-laid Eggs (seven Whites put away) one
pint of Juice of Spinach, six or seven spoonful of Juice of Tansie, a Nutmeg
(or two) sliced small, half a pound of Sugar, and a little Salt; beat all these
together; then fry it in a Pan with no more Butter than is necessary. When it
is enough, serve it up with Juice of Orange, or Slices of Limon upon it.

My Lady Middlesex's Excellent Slip-Coat Cheese.
Take of good Morning Milk, putting Cream to it; a quart of Cream is the
proportion my Lady uses to as much Milk as both together make a large round
Cheese of the bigness of an ordinary Tart-plate, or Cheese-plate; as big as an
ordinary first Cheese that the Market-women sell, which they call Cream-Cheese.
Thus for want of Stroakings at London, you may take one part of Cream to five
or six of Morning-Milk, and for the rest, proceed as with Stroakings, and these
will prove as good.

To make Slip Coat Cheese, as Sir Kenelm's Housekeeper made them for him.
According to the bigness of your Moulds, proportion your Strokings for your
Cheese-Curds, to six quarts of Stroakings, take a pint of Spring Water; if the
Weather be hot, then let the Water be cold, and before you put it into the
Stroakings, let them stand a while to cool after they are milk'd, and then put
in the Water with a little Salt first stirred in it; and having stirred it well
together, let it stand a little while, and then put in about two spoonful of
good Runnet, stir it well together, and cover it with a fair Linen Cloth, and
when it becomes hard like a thick Jelly, with a skimming-Dish lay it gently
into the Moulds; and as it sinks down into the Moulds, fill it still up till
all be in, which will require some three or four hours time; then lay a clean
fine Cloth into another Mould of the same size, and turn it into it, and then
turn the skirts of the Cloth over it, and lay upon that a thin Board, and upon
that as much weight as with the Board may make two pound or thereabouts; and
about an hour after, lay another clean Cloth into the other Mould, and turn the
Cheese into that; then lay upon the Board so much as will make it six or seven
pound weight; and thus continue turning of it till night; then take away the
weight, and lay it no more on it; then take a very small quantity of Salt
finely beaten, and sprinkle the Cheese all over with it as slightly as can be
imagined. Next Morning turn it into another dry Cloth, and let it lie out of
the Mould upon a plain Board, and change it as often as it wets the Cloth,
which must be three or four times a day; when it is so dry, that it wets the
Cloth no more, lay it upon a Bed of green Rushes, and lay a Row upon it; but be
sure to pick the Bents clean off, and lay them even all one way; if you cannot
get good Rushes, take Nettles or Grass. If the Weather is cold, cover them with
a Linen and Woolen Cloth; In case you cannot get Stroakings, take five quarts
of New Milk, and one of Cream; ift the Weather be cold, heat the Water hot tha^
you put to the Stroakings; turn the Cheese every day, and put to it fresh of
whatsoever you keep it in. They are usually ripe in ten days.

To make Mustard my Lady Holmeby's Way.
My Lady Holmeby makes her quick fine Mustard thus; Choose true Mustard Seed,
dry it in an Oven after the Bread is out; beat and searce it to most subtle
Powder; mingle Sherry-Sack with it (stirring it a long time very well) so much
as to have it of a fit consistence for Mustard; then put a good quantity of
fine Sugar to it, as five or six spoonful (or more) to a pint of Mustard, stir
and incorporate all well together. This will keep good a long time: Some do
like to put to it a little (but a little) very sharp Wine-Vinegar.

To make Bolonia Puddings as they make them at Milan in Italy, which are better
than those of Bolonia.
Take seventeen pound and a half of a fore-quarter of Pork, and three pound and
a half of lean Buttock Beef, chop them well together, but not too small; then
put to them a pound and half of Salt well dried and powdered, and three ounces
of white Pepper grossly bruised; mix and knead them all well together like
Paste; and if you will have them fat, you may put to them a pound or two of the
Fat or Bacon of the Hog cut in square Dice; put thereto when you knead it, a
Glass-ful of deep red Wine; then fill your large Beef-Guts with this, being
first well scowred and cleansed from all the slime, by turning them; then wipe
them dry before you fill them: In filling them, you must squeeze, and press
down the Meat very hard, that all the Wine may get out of them, and that they
may be stuffed very close; then tie them fast with Packthred, and hang them up
over the Mantle-tree in the Kitchen, not in the Chimney, for they would dry too
fast; leave them there for three weeks, then hang them in a Garret, where the
Wind and Air comes in; and when they are well dried, take them down and wipe
them, then grease them over with Sallet Oil, and lay them in a Box in Hay, and
they will keep good all the year long. You may cut your Guts of the length of
eight or nine inches, or twelve inches long, and tie them first at one end
before you fill them. When you will use them, boil one or two at a time in fair
water for an hour, and when they are cold, cut them in round slices, and they
will look pure red and white, and are excellent Meat, better than any
Neats-tongue, they will keep good a fortnight after they are boiled. These
Puddings I have often made in England, and kept them all the year long; and
they have been exceedingly praised by all those that did eat of them.

To make Hartshorn Jelly.
Take four pounds of Hartshorn rasped, boil it in two quarts of Water til it
be a Jelly, which you may try upon a Plate (it will be so in four or five hours
gentle boiling) and then strain the clear Liquor from the Horn (which will be a
good quart) then set it on the Fire again, with fine Sugar in it to your Taste,
with half a pint of white Wine or Sack in it, and a Bag of Spice containing a
little Ginger, a stick of Cinnamon bruised, and a Nutmeg quartered, and two or
three Cloves bruised. As Soon as it begins to boil, put into it the Whites of
three or four Eggs beaten, and let it boil up gently, til the Eggs harden into
a Curd; then pour into it the Juice of four Limons, and take it presently off
the Fire, and run it through an Hypocras Bag.

My Lady Paget's Hartshorn Jelly.
Take a small Cock-Chick when it is scalded, slit it in two pieces, lay it to
soak in warm water until the Blood be well out of it; then take a Calves-foot
half boiled, slit it in the middle, and pick out the Fat and Black of it; put
these into a Gallon of fair Water, scum is very well; then put into it an ounce
of Hartshorn, and half an ounce of rasped Ivory; when it is half consumed,
take some of it up, and if it jelly, take it off, and put it into a Basin; then
beat the Whites of four Eggs, with four spoonful of Rosewater, and put it to
the Jelly, with a quarter of an ounce of Cinnamon well bruised, one flake of
Mace, three or four thin slices of Ginger, one top of Rosemary, and two or
three of sweet Marjoram, sweeten it with fine Sugar, then set it over a
Chafing Dish of Coals, and stir it well; then cover it close, and blow under it
to make it boil, till the Curd hardens; then wring into it the Juice of half a
Limon, and take it presently from the Fire, and strain it: If you would have it
more Cordial, you may add one Grain of Ambergrease, and half a Grain of Musk,
ground with a little Sugar.

The Way to dress Poor John, to make it very tender and good Meat.
Put it into a Kettle in cold Water, and so hang it over the Fire, and let it
soak and stew without boiling for three hours, but the Water must be very hot;
then make it boil two or three walms: By this time it will be very tender, and
swelled up; then take out the Backbone, and put it to fry with Onions, if you
put it first into hot water, (as Ling and such Salt-fish) or being boiled if
you let it cool, and heat it again, it will be tough and hard.

Buckorn is to be watered a good hour before you put it to the fire, then boil
it till it be tender, which it will be quickly, then Butter it as you do Ling;
and if you will put Eggs to it.

To Stew or Dress an Eel with Ragust the French way.
Cut the Eel in pieces and put them into your Stew Pan, with white wine,
Butter, Sibbalds, and Parsley shred, some Capers, Salt and Pepper, and a few
chippings of bread to allay the sauce; when it is enough, serve it up, and if
you will you may make a white sauce to it with whites of Eggs and Verjuice, or
white wine and Vinegar.

To Stew a Carp in Short Broth.
Cut the Carp in pieces and cast them into White Wind, or half water and half
white wine, Season it with Pepper, Salt, and Cloves, some Limon or Orange-peel;
put into it a bundle of Parsley and Thyme, with an Onion if you will; let it
stew easily till there remain but a little Broth or Sauce, then put into it
some Butter and some Parsley shred very small, then serve it up.

Salmon in Short Broth.
Boil it in Wine, Water and Vinegar, till it be tender, then put into it a
piece of Butter, which will enter into the fish; then take it out and put it in
a Cloth and eat it with Vinegar. you may make also a sauce to it, with Butter
and Anchovies, which is an excellent Sauce for it.

Monsieur St. Ebremonds way of Stewing Oysters.
Take what quantity you will of the best Oysters to eat raw, open them, putting
all their water with the fish into a Basin. Take out the Oysters one by one
(that you may have them washed clean in their own water) and lay them in the
dish you intend to Stew them in. Then let their water run upon them through a
fine linen, that all their foulness may remain behind. Then put a good great
Lump of Butter to them, which may be (when melted) half as much as their water.
Season them with Salt, Nutmeg, and a very few Cloves. Let this boil smartly,
covered, when it is half boiled, put in some Crusts of light French Bread, and
boil it on till all be enough, then serve them up.

My Lord of St. Albans's way to Boil Beef most tender and short.
Take a Rump or Brisket of Beef, keep it without Salt as long as you may
without danger to have it smell ill; for so it grows mellow and tender, which
it would not do if it were presently salted. When it is sufficiently mortified,
rub it well with Salt: let it lie so but a day and a night, or at most two
nights and a day. Then boil it in no more water then is necessary, boil it
pretty smartly at first, but afterward but a simpring or Stewing Boiling,
which must continue seven or eight hours. Sometimes he boyls it half over
night, and the rest the next morning; If you should not have time to Salt it
you may supply that want thus: When the Beef is through boiled, you may put so
much Salt into the Pot as to make the Broth like brine, and then boil it gently
an hour longer; or take out the Beef and put it into a deep dish, and put to it
some of his broth made brine, and cover it with another dish, and stew it so an
hour. A Hanch of Venison may be done the same way.

OF PRESERVING, CONSERVING and CANDYING, etc.
Apples in Gelly my Lady Pagets way; set down by Sir Kenelm Digby.
MY Lady Paget makes her fine Preserved Pippins thus: They are done best when
Pippins are in their prime, for quickness; which is in November. Make your
Pippin-water as strong as you can of the Apples, and that it may be the less
boiled, and consequently the paler, put in at first the greatest quantity of
pared and quartered Apples the water will bear. To every pint of Pippin-Water,
add (when you put the Sugar to it) a quarter of a pint of fair Spring Water
that will bear Soap, (of which sort only you must use) and use half a pound of
Sugar, the purest double Refined. If you will have much Gelly, two Pippins
finely Pared and whole, will be enough; you may put in more, if you will have a
greater Proportion of substance to the Gelly. Put at first but half the Sugar
to the Liquor, for so it will be the paler. Boil the Apples by themselves in
fair water with a very little Sugar, to make them tender; then put them into
the Liquor, and the rest (the other half) of the Sugar with them. Boil them
with a quick fire till they be enough, and the Liquor do gelly; and that you
see the Apples look very clear, and as though they were transparent. You must
put the juice of two Limons and half an Orange to this, in the due time. Every
Pippin should be lapped over in a broad Pill of Orange; which you must prepare
thus: Pare the Orange broad and very thin, and all hanging together; rub it
with salt, PricK it, and boil it in several waters, to take away the bitterness
and make it tender. Then the Orange Peels must be Preserved in ordinary manner;
and it imports not though they be done many days before the Apples be ready,
and kept in syrrup. Preserve it by it self with sufficient quantity of Sugar,
when it is thoroughly done and very tender (which you must cast to do before
hand, to be ready when the Apples are ready to be put up) take them out of
their Syrup, and lap every Pippin in an Orange-Peel, and put them into a Pot or
glass, and pour the Liquor upon them; which will be Gelly over and about the
Apples when all is cold. This Proportion of Liquor, Apples, and Orange-Peels,
will take up about three quarters of a pound of Sugar in all. If you would keep
them any time, you must put in weight for weight of Sugar.

Sir Kenelms Observation.
I conceive Apple- John's instead of Pippins, will do better; both for the Gelly
and substance, and especially at the latter hand of the year; and I like them
thin sliced, rather than whole; and the Orange-Peels scattered among them in
little pieces or Chips.

My Lady Barclays's Sweet-meat of Apples.
My Lady Barclay makes her fine Apple-gelly with slices of John-Apples,
sometimes She mingles a few Pippins with the John's to make the Gelly, but She
likes best the John's single, and the cooler is paler. First fill the Glass with
slices cut round-wise, and then pour the Gelly into it to fill up the
vacuities. The Gelly must be boiled to a good stiffness, then when it is ready
to take from the fire, put in some juice of Limon, and of Oranges if you like
it; but these must not boil, yet it must stand a while upon the fire slewing in
good heat, to have the juices incorporate and penetrate well. Amber-grease does
well in this Sweet-meat; Gelly and slices of Golden-Pippins, made as of John
Apples and Pippins are exceeding good.

Mrs. Marbury the Queens Preserving-Woman, makes her Apples in Gelly thus:
Cut your Apples into quarters (either pared or unpared) boil them in a
sufficient quantity of water till it be very strong of the Apples. Take the
clear Liquor, and put to it sufficient Sugar to make Gelly, and the slices of
Apple; so boil them all together till the slices be enough and the Liquor
Gelly; or you may boil the slices in Apple-liquor without Sugar, and make Gelly
of other Liquor, and put the slices into it when it is Gelly, and they be
sufficiently boiled. Either way, you must at the last put some juice of Limon
to it, and Amber ana Musk if you will. You may do it with halfs or quartered
Apples, in deep glasses; with store of Gelly about them. To have these clear,
take the pieces out of the Gelly they are boiled in with a slice, so as you may
have all the Rags run from them, and then put neat clean pieces into clear
Gelly. The other Gelly is as good to eat, and will serve as well for glasses,
in which you stand not so much upon the outward beauty.

Dr. Bacon his Syrup of Apples.
You may make an Excellent Syrup of Apples thus: Slice a douzen or twenty
Pippins into thin slices; and lay them in a deep Dish S. S. S. with pure double
Refined Sugar in powder. Put two or three spoonfuls of water to them, and cover
them close with another dish, cutting their joining that nothing may expire.
Then set them into an Oven, and when you take out the Dish, you will have an
Excellent Syrup, and the remaining substance of the Apples will be insipid.

You may proceed with Damsons in the same manner (or other Plumbs) and you will
have excellent stewed Damsons, (as fair as Preserved ones) swimming in a very
fine Syrup.

To make Excellent Marmelade of Pippins.
Take the quickest Pippins when they are newly gathered and are sharp; pare and
coar, and cut them into half quarters, put to them their weight of the finest
Sugar in powder. Put them into the Preserving-Pan, and pour upon them as much
Fountain Water as will even cover them. Boil them with a quick fire, till by
trying a little upon a plate you find it gellieth when it is cold; then take it
from the fire, and put into it a little of the Rind of Limons rasped very
small, and a little of the yellow Rind of Oranges boiled tender, (casting away
the first water to correct their bitterness) and cut into narrow slices (as in
the Gelly of Pippins) and break the Apples with the back of the
Preserving-Spoon whilst it cools. If you like them sharper, you may put in a
little Juice of Limons a little before you take the Fan from the fire. When it
is cold, put it into Pots, this will keep a year or two This is the juice of
Apples (strained out of Rasped Apples in such sort as you make Marmelade of
Quinces, with the juice of Quinces would not be better than fair water, to boil
your Apples and Sugar in.

Gelly of Quinces as it was made by Sr. Kenelms Direction, and the Receipt set
down by himself.
The Quinces being very ripe, and having been long gathered, I took twelve
Quinces in quarters, and the juice of sixteen others, which made two pound of
juice, and I made a strong Decoction of about twenty four others, adding to
these twenty four (to make the Decoction the stronger and more slimy) the Coars
and Parings of the twelve in quarters, and the Coars and Parings of the twenty
four and the Quinces sliced, All these boiled about an hour and half in ten
pintes of water, then I strained and pressed out the Decoction, and had between
four and five pounds of strong Decoction. To the Decoction and Syrup I put
three pound of fine Sugar, which being dissolved and scummed, I put in the
quarters often turning them, and in near three quarters of an hour it was
enough. When it was cold, it was store of firm clear red Gelly, and the
quarters very tender and well penetrated with the Sugar. I found by this making
that the juice of Quinces is not so good to make Jelly, it makes it somewhat
running like Syrup.

Preserved Quinces made by Sr. Kenelm's Directions and set down by himself.
When I made Quinces with Gelly, I used the first time these proportions, of
the Decoctions of Quinces three pound, of Sugar one pound three quarters, flesh
of Quinces two pound and half; The second time these, of Decoction two pounds
and half, Sugar two pounds and a quarter, of flesh two pounds three quarters. I
made the Decoction by Boiling gently each time fourteen Quinces in a pottle of
water, an hour and half, or two hours; so that the Decoction was very strong of
the Quinces. I boiled the parings with all the Substance of the Quinces in
thick slices, and part of the Coar (excepting all the kernels) and then let it
run through a loose Napkin, pressing gently with two plates, that all the
Decoction might come out, but be clear without any flesh or mash. The first
making I intended should be Red, and therefore both the Decoction and the whole
were boiled covered, and it proved a fine clear Red. This boiled above an hour,
when all was in. The other boiled not above half an hour, always uncovered; (as
also in making his Decoction) and the Gelly was of a fine pale yellow. I first
put in the sugar upon the fire with the Decoction, and as soon as it was
dissolved, I put in the flesh in quarters and halfs, and turned the pieces of
them in the Pan; else the bottom of such as lay long unturned, would be of a
deeper color than the upper part. The flesh was very tender, and good, I put
some of the pieces into Jarr-glasses (carefully, not breaking them) and then
poured Gelly upon them; then more pieces, then more Gelly etc. all having stood
a while to cool a little.

Mrs. Marbury the Queens Preserving-Woman, Her fine white Gelly of Quinces*
Take Quinces newly from the Tree, wipe them clean, and boil them whole in a
large quantity of water,, the more the better, till the Quinces crack and are
soft, then press out their Juice hard, but so, that only the Liquor run out;
but none of the Pap: Take three pound of this strained Liquor being settled,
and one pound of fine sugar, and boil them up to a Jelly, with a moderate fire;
they may require near an hours boiling to come to a Jelly. The Trial of that
is, to take a tin Plate and wet it with fair water, and drop a little of it
upon the wet Plate, if it stick to the Plate, it is not enough; but if it fall
off, (when you slope the Plate) without sticking at all to it, then is it
enough: Then put it into flat shallow Tin forms, first melted with cold water,
and let it stand in them four or five hours, then reverse the plates that it
may shale and fall out, and so put the parcels up in Boxes.

White Marmelade of Quinces the Queens way.
Take a pound and a half of flesh of Quinces sliced, one pound of sugar, and
one pound of a Decoction made very strong, of Quinces boiled in fair water;
boil these with a pretty quick fire till they be enough, and that you find it
Gellieth; then proceed as in Sr. Kenelms way.

The Lady Baths's way of making White Marmelade of Quinces.
Take six pound of the flesh of Quinces, and two pound of sugar, moistened well
with the juice of Quinces, Boil these together, first gently till the Liquor be
swelled out of the Quinces, and have dissolved all the Sugar, then very quick
and fast proceed as in Sr. Kenelms way, bruising the Quinces with a Spoon, etc.
till it be enough. This will be very fine and quick in Taste.

Paste of Quinces with very little Sugar, as they were done for Sr. Kenelm
Digby.
To one pound of the flesh or solid substance of Quinces, (when they are pared,
coared, and quartered) take but a quarter of a pound of double-Refined purest
Sugar. Do thus: Scald your flesh of Quinces in a little of the juice of other
Quinces, that they may become tender as if they were Codled; then beat them in
a Mortar, to subtle, uniform, smooth Pulp; (which you may pass through a
Searse) In the mean time let your Sugar be dissolved and boiling upon the fire.
When it is of a Candy height, put the Pulp of Quince to it, and let it remain a
little while upon the fire, till it boil up one little puff or bubling; and
that it is uniformly mixed with the Sugar. You must stir it well all the while,
then take it off, and drop it into little Cakes, or put it thin into shallow
glasses; which you may afterward cut into slices. Dry the Cakes and Slices
gently, and by degrees in a Stove, turning them often; these will keep all the
year, and are very quick of taste.

To make Excellent Marmalade of red Currants, by Mrs. Marbury,
Take the Juice of red Currants, and put into it a convenient proportion of
entire Currants cleansed from the Stalks and Buttons at the other end; let these
boil a little together. have also ready some fine Sugar boiled to a
Candy-height; put to this of Currants at discretion, and boil them together till
they be enough; and bruise them with the back of your Spoon, that they may be
in consistence of Marmalade; which put in Pots when it is cold. You need not
stone the Currants when you put in the Juice, unless you please.

Excellent Jelly of red Currants.
Set them over the Fire, that their Juice may sweat out; pressing them all the
while with the back of your preserving Spoon, to squeeze out of them all that
is good; when you see all is out, strain the Liquor from them, and let them
stand to settle for five hours, that the gross Matter may sink to the bottom;
then take the pure Clear, and to every Pint of it put three quarters of a pound
or fine Sugar, and boil them up with a quick Fire till they come to a
Jelly-height (which will be in less than a quarter of an hour) which you may
try with a drop upon a Plate; then take it off, and when it is cold enough, put
it into a Glass. You must be careful to scum it well in due time: the thick
Settling will serve to add to the Marmelade of Cherries, or the like.

To make Jelly of Currants with the Fruit whole in it.
Boil four pound of Sugar to a Candy-height, and clarify it with Whites of
Eggs; then put it into five pound (or at discretion) of pure red Currants; boil
them together a little while till it be enough to become Jelly; then put into
it a good handful or two of whole Currants, cleansed from the Stalks and black
Ends, and boil them a little till they be enough; you need not boil the Juice
before you put it to the Sugar; but let it be very clear and well-strained, and
scum it well whilst it boileth with the Sugar.

To make Marmalade of Cherries.
Take a pound of fine Sugar to four pound of the best Kentish Cherries, stone
them, and put them over a gentle Fire, that they may not boil, but resolve much
in Liquor; take out with the Spoon much of the thin Liquor, leaving the
Cherries moist enough, but not swimming in clear Liquor; then put to them your
Sugar in Powder, and boil it up quick, scumming away the Froth that rises. When
it is well incorporated and clear, strew in a little more of the Sugar, which
course will make the Color the finer; when they are boiled enough, take them
off, and bruise them with the back of a Spoon; and when they are cold, put them
up in Pots. This will keep well all the Year.

To make a fine Marmalade of Currants with Juice of Raspes and Currants, as Madam
Mancy made it for the Queen.
Take three pound of Cherries stoned, half a pound of clear Juice of Rasps, and
one pound of the Juice of red Currants, and a pound of fine Sugar; put them
altogether into the Preserving-Pan; boil them with a quick Fire, especially at
the first; skimming them all the while, as any Scum rises. When you find them
of a fit Consistence with a fine clear Jelly, mingled with the Cherries, take
them from the Fire, and bruise the Cherries with the Back of your Spoon, and
when they are cold, put them in Pots. Peradventure to keep all the year, there
may be requisite a little more Sugar. It is a very fine Sweet-meat.

To make Conserve of red Roses Dr. Glisson's way.
Take a pound of red Rose Leaves (well picked, and the nails cut off) in about a
quart of Springwater, till the Water has drawn out all the Tincture of the
Roses into it self, and that the Leaves be very tender, and look pale, which
may be in half an hour, keeping the pot covered while it boileth; then pour the
tinctured Liquor from the pale Leaves, pressing it gently, and set it upon the
Fire by it self to boil, putting into it four pound of double refined Sugar;
boil it till it be a high Syrup, very near a Candy height, but not to flake or
candy, then put the pale Rose Leaves into this high Syrup, and presently take
it from the fire, and stir them exceeding well together, to mix them uniformly.
If you put it into Pots while it is yet thoroughly warm, and leave them
uncovered some days, putting them in the hot Sun or Stove, there will grow a
fine Candy upon the top, which will preserve the Conserve without a Paper upon
it. The Color both upon the Rose Leaves, and the Syrup about them, will be
exceeding beautiful and red, and the Taste excellent; and the whole Composition
very tender and smoothning, and easy to digest in the Stomach, without
clogging it, as does the ordinary rough Conserve, made of raw Roses beaten with
Sugar, which is very rough in the Throat. When you have begun a Pot, and have
taken some out, you must always keep a Paper lying close upon the Conserve, or
else it will be apt to grow moldy on the top where you have broken the Candy
that was upon it. The Conserve of Roses is very good for Colds and Coughs, and
for the Lungs; it is also exceeding good for Sharpness and Heat of Urine, and
Soreness of the Bladder, eaten much by it self, or drunk with Milk, or
Distilled Waters of Mallows and Plantane, or Milk-water.

Dr. Bacon's Way of making Conserve of Roses.
Take twelve pound of the best Lump or Kitchen-Sugar, boil it with
Spring Water, and clarify it with Whites of Eggs, taking away all the Skum;
then boil it to a Syrup, and when it is half boiled, begin to beat your
Rose-Leaves, being picked, and the white Nails cut off beforehand; put half a
pound of them to every pound or Sugar into your Mortar, and beat them well,
squeezing into them as you beat them, the Juice of two Limons, which brings out
their Color finely. You must have finished beating your Roses by then the
Sugar is come by boiling to a high Syrup (for if you should let them lie still
in the Air but a little while, they would grow black, and of ill color) then
with your Ladle put the Roses to the Sugar, and stir them well in it, to
incorporate all well and uniformly together; let them boil gently, and a thick
scum of the Roses will rise, which you must scum off from time to time
continually as it rises, and reserve it in a Pot by it self; for it will be
good hard Sugar of Roses. and may be about an eighth or ninth part of the
whole. After it is clear from Scum, and boiled near a quarter of an hour, with
the Roses in it, and that you see by a drop upon a plate, that is of a due
consistence, take the pan from the fire, and stir all well together, and put it
into pots, which leave uncovered ten or twelve days, setting them in the hot
Sun all the day long during that time, to give the Roses a fine hard Crust or
Candy at the top. If the Sun favor you not, you may use a Stove. After twelve
days tie Covers of Paper upon the Pots.

Dr. Bacon uses to make a pleasant Julep of this Conserve of Roses, by putting
a good spoonful of it into a large drinking-Glass or Cup, upon which squeeze
the Juice of Limon; work these well together with the Back of a Spoon, putting
water to it by little and little, till you have filled up the Glass with
Spring Water; so drink it. He strains it sometimes, and then it is a beautiful
and pleasant Liquor.

To preserve green Walnuts as they are done in France and Germany.
Take green Walnuts when they are of a fit bigness to preserve, which is about
the beginning or the middle of July; pierce them through three or four times,
and put them in fair water for three or four days, shifting the water twice a
day; then boil them in fresh water for a quarter of an hour; then throw away
this water, and power fresh boiling water upon them, and boil them therein till
they be tender, but not too tender; then power off the Liquor, and to twelve
pints thereof, take six pounds of ordinary brown Sugar; dissolve the Sugar in
eleven pints of the water; boil it up and clarify it with Whites of Eggs; so
soon as it boileth, put in the other pint of water which you kept for that
purpose, and as the Whites of the Eggs rise, put them down again; then strain
it through an Hypocras Bag, and when it is cold, boil it up to a Syrup. Then
stick your Nuts with Cloves and Cinnamon, and put them into your pot, and when
your Syrup is cold, power it upon them, so much of it that they may be just
covered; and let it stand four and twenty hours, and the Syrup will be very
thin, by drawing out the water that was in the Nuts; power it off, and boil it
up again, and when it is cold, pour it upon them again; and when it has stood
four and twenty hours, power it of, and boil it again to its due Consistence;
then being cold, power it on again; and as long as you see that the Syrup
grows thin, you must still boil it again.

Preserved Walnuts are very Cordial, Pectoral, and Stomachal; they strengthen
the Stomach, and cause a good Digestion, and are excellent in Fluxes and
Looseness; they expel Wind out of the Stomach and Bowels, and are a most
Sovereign Antidote against the Plague and infectious Air.

To keep Goosberries green and fresh, so that you may make a green
Goosberry-Tart at Christmas.
Take green Goosberries when they are full grown, put them fresh gathered
without much handling them, into Stone-Bottles; stop them very close, and put
store of wax about the Corks, then bury the Bottles in the ground, or under a
heap of Coals in the Cellar, and they will keep fresh and green all the Winter
long.

To Preserve Grapes green upon a Vine all the Winter.
Cut a Branch of the Vine, that is full of clusters of Grapes; close up both
ends of the Vine, with store of warm wax; then lay the Vine along upon nails
under the Roof of a Chamber, and let it remain there with the grapes upon it,
and they will keep green and fresh all the Winter long, without rotting or
withering.

My Lady Wendibanks Curious Red Marmelade of Quinces.
Take six pound of flesh of Quinces, and as much pure Sugar, and eight pints of
juice; Boil this up with a quick fire, till you have scummed it; then pull away
all the coals, and let it but simper for four or five hours remaining covered,
renewing from time to time so little fire, as to cause it so to continue
simpring; But as soon as it is scummed, put into it a handful of
Quince-kernels, two Races of Ginger sliced, and fourteen or fifteen Cloves
whole; all these put into a Tiffany bag tied fast, when you find that the
color is almost to your mind make a quick fire and boil it up apace; then
throw away the bag with the things in it, and put up your Marmelade, when it is
cold enough.

Another by the same Lady.
Put the Quinces pared and sliced into a Pot as above; and to every pound of
this flesh put about a quarter of a pint of fair water, and put this into a
Kettle of boiling water, till you perceive all the Juice is boiled out of the
Quinces. Then strain it out, and boil this Liquor till you perceive it gellieth
upon a Plate. Then to every pint of Liquor put a pound of Sugar, and boil it up
to a Gelly, skimming it well, and you will have a pure gelly.

To make a very Beautiful and clear Paste of Apricocks, which tastes most
quick of the fruit; from the same Lady.
Take six pound of Pared and sliced Apricocks, put them into a high pot, which
stop close, and set it in a Kettle of boiling water, till you perceive the
flesh is all become an uniform Pulp; then put it into your Preserving-pan and
boil it gently, till it be thick; stirring it carefully all the while. Then put
two pound of pure sugar to it, and mingle it well and let it boil gently, till
you see that it comes to such a thickness and solidity, that it will not stick
to a plate. Then make it up into what form you please. In this manner you may
make Paste of Rasps and Currants.

To make a Pleasant and Beautiful Sweet-meat of Rasps and Currants.
Boil Rasps in such a Pot, (as in the foregoing Receipt) till they be all come
to such a Liquor; then let the clear run through a Strainer, to a pint whereof
put a pound of Red Currants, (first stoned and the black ends cut off) and a
pound of Sugar. Boil these till the Liquor be gellied, then put it in glasses,
it will look like Rubies in clear Gelly. You may do the like with Cherries
either stoned and the stalks cut off, or three or four capped upon one stalk,
and the stones left in the first, and boiled in Liquor of Rasps.

A COLLECTION OF CHOICE RECEIPTS For Making of METHEGLIN, SIDER, CHERRY-WINE,
etc.
METHEGLIN is esteemed to be a very wholesome Drink; and doubtless it is so,
since all the world consents that Honey is a precious Substance, being the
Choice and Collection which the Bees make of the most pure, most delectable,
and most odoriferous Parts of Plants, more particularly of their Flowers and
Fruits. Metheglin is therefore esteemed to be an excellent Pectoral, good
against Consumption, Phthisick and Asthma; it is cleansing and diuretic, good
against the Stone and Gravel; it is restorative and strengthening; it comforts
and strengthens the Noble parts, and affords good Nourishment, being made Use
of by the Healthy, as well as by the Sick.

My worthy Master, that incomparable Sir Kenelm Digby, being a great Lover of
this Drink, was so curious in his Researches, that he made a large Collection
of the choicest and best Receipts thereof, which you have here inserted, with
the Names of the Persons which communicated them to him.

My Lady Hews's Receipt to make White Mead.
TAke Rosemary, Time, Sweet-bryer, Egrimony, Wood-Bettany, Eie-bright, Scabius,
of each a like quantity; Roman wormwood of each of these a proportion, which is
to every handful of these herbs a sixteenth part of a handful of these latter,
steep them a night and a day in a wooden Bowl of water covered, the next day
boil them very well in another water, til the color be very high, then take
another quantity of water and boil the herbs in it til it look green, and so
let it boil three or four times or as long as the Liquor looks any thing
green; and so let it stand with these herbs in it a day and a night, to every
gallon of this water put a quart of pure clear honey, the Liquor being first
strained from the herbs, your Liquor if it be strong enough will bear an Egg
the breadth of three pence above water; when you have put your Honey into the
Liquor, you must work and Labor it together a whole day until the Honey be
consumed, Then let it stand a whole night in clearing, then put it into a
kettle, and boil it for one quarter of an hour with the whites and shells of
six Eggs, so strain it clean and let it stand a cooling, then put it into a
Barrel and take Cloves, Mace, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, and beat them together, put
them into a linen bag hanged by a thread in the Barrel, if you will have it
work, and you may drink of it presently, take the Whites of two or three eggs a
spoonful of Barm, two spoonfuls of Wheat Flour, beat all these together, let
it work before you stop it up, then afterward stop it well with clay and Salt
tempered together, to keep it the longer moist.

Sr. Edward Baintons's Receipt to make white Metheglin, which my Lord of
Portland (who gave it to Sr. Kenelm Digby) said was the best he ever drank.
Take Sweet marjorum, Sweet Bryar buds Violet leaves, Strawberry leaves, of
each one handful, and a good handful of Violet flowers; (the double ones are
the best) broad Time, Borage, Agrimony, of each half a handful; and two or
three branches of Rosemary, the seeds of Caroway, Coriander, and Fennel, of
each two spoonfuls; and three or four blades of large Mace. Boil all these in
eight gallons of running water, three quarters of an hour, then strain it, and
when it is but blood warm, put in as much of the best Honey as will make the
Liquor bear an Egg the breadth of six pence above the water. Then boil it again
as long as any Scum will rise. Then set it abroad a cooling, and when it is
almost cold, put in half a pint of good Ale-barm, and when it has wrought til
you perceive the Barm to fall, then Tun it, and let it work in the Barrel til
the barm leaves rising, filling it up every day with some of the same liquor.
When you stop it up, put in a bag with one Nutmeg sliced, a little whole Cloves
and Mace, a stick of Cinnamon broken in pieces, and a grain of good Musk.

You may make this a little before Michaelmas, and it will be fit to drink at
Lent.

My Lady Grovers Receipt to make white Mead which is very Excellent.
Take to four gallons of water, one gallon of Virgin honey, let the water be
warm before you put in the honey, and then put in the whites of three or four
Eggs well beaten to make the scum rise, when the honey is thoroughly melted and
ready to boil put in an Egg with the shell softly, and when the Egg rises
above the water to the bigness of a groat in sight, it is strong enough of the
honey, the Egg will quickly be hard and so will not rise, therefore you must
put in another if the first do not rise to your sight, you must put in more
water and honey proportionable to the first, because of wasteing away in the
boiling, it must boil near an hour, you may if you please boil in it a little
bundle of Rosemary, Sweet Marjorum, and Time, and when it tastes to your
liking, take it forth again, many do put sweet Bryar berries in it which is
held very good; when your Mead is boiled enough, take it off the fire, and put
it into a Kive, when it is blood warm, put in some Ale barm to make it work,
and cover it close with a blanket; in the working the next morning Tun it up,
and if you please put in a bag with a little Ginger, and a little Nutmeg
bruised, and when it has done working stop it up close for a month, and then
Bottle it.

Dr Floyds Receipt to make Methaglin which is highly Commended.
Take Spring water and boil it with Rosemary, Sage, Sweet margerum, Baum and
Sassefras, until it has boiled three or four hours, the quantity of herbs is a
handful of them all to one gallon of water, of each a like proportion, and when
it is boiled, set it to cool and settle until the next day; then strain your
water and mix it with honey, until it will bear an Egg the breadth of a groat
above the water, then set it over the fire to boil, take the Whites of twenty
or thirty Eggs, and beat them mightily; and when it boyls pour them in at
twice, stir it well together, and then let it stand until it boyls apace before
you scum it, and then scum it well and then take it off the fire, and pour it
in earthen things to cool, and when it is cold, put to it five or six spoonfuls
of the best yeast of Ale you can get, stir it together and then everyday scum
it with a bundle of feathers, until it has done working; then Tun it up in a
Cask that Sack was in, and to every six gallons of Metheglin one pint of Aqua
vitae or a quart of Sack, and a quarter of a pound of ginger sliced, with two
or three Limons and Orange-peals in a bag, to hang in it.

When this Lady made this Meade, She used to make a Rundlet of ten or twelve
gallons at a time, to which the Whites of Eggs abovenamed, was a fit
proportion.

My Lady Salisburies Receipt to make Mead.
Take to six quarts of water a quart of the best Honey, and put it on the Fire,
and stir it till the Honey is melted, and boil it well as long as any scum
rises, and now and then put in some cold water, it makes the scum rise clear
off, and keep your Kettle up as full as you put it on; when it is boiled
enough, about half an hour before you take it off, then take a quantity of
Ginger sliced, and well scraped first, and a good quantity of Rosemary, and
boil both together; for the Rosemary and Ginger, put in to please your own
Taste, more or less; and when you take it off the Fire, strain it into your
Vessel, either into a well seasoned Tub, or a great Cream-pot, and the next
Morning when it is cold, power it softly the Top from the Setlings, into another
Vessel, and then some little quantity of the best Ale-Barm to it you can get,
and cover it with a thick Cloth over it in the Summer, and the Winter it will
be longer ripening, keep it warmer covered, in a close place; and when you go
to Bottle it, take with a Feather all the Barm off, and put it into your
Bottles, and stop it close up; in ten days you may drink it; and if you think
six quarts of water be too much, and would have it stronger, then put in a
greater quantity of Honey.

My Lord Gorge his Mead.
Take a sufficient quantity of Rainwater, and boil in it the Tops of Rosemary,
Eglantine, Betony, Strawberry Leaves, Wall-Flowers, Borage and Bugloss; of each
a handful, a sprig of Bays, and two or three of Sage; then take it off the
Fire, and put a whole raw Egg in it, and power in so much Honey till the Egg
rise up to the Top; then boil it again, scumming it very well, and so let it
cool; then Tun it up, and put Barm to it, that it may ferment well; then stop
it up, and hang in it such Spices as you like best: it will not be right to
drink under three or four Months.

The Lady Vernon's White Metheglin.
Take three gallons of water (Rainwater is best) boil in it broad Thyme,
Rosemary, Peniroyal, Muscovy, of each three handful; then put it into a
Stone-pan to cool, and strain away the Herbs, and when it is cold, put in a
quart of Honey, and mix it very well; then put to it one Nutmeg, and a little
Cinnamon, Cloves and Ginger, some Orange and Limon Peels; then boil it very
well, and scum it very well, while any will rise; then put in your Spices, and
try with a new laid Egg, and the stronger it is, the longer yon may keep it;
and if you will drink it presently, put it up in Bottles, and rub the Corks
with Yeast that it may touch it, and it will be ready in three or four days to
drink, and if you make it in the Spring, put no Spices but Cloves and Cinnamon,
and add Violets, Marigolds, Cowslips and Gilliflowers, and be sure to stop your
Vessel close with Cork, and to this put no Yeast, for the Gilliflowers will set
it to work.

My Lady Gargrave's Metheglin.
Take a Gallon of Honey, put to that four gallons of Water; stir them well
together, and boil them in a Kettle till a gallon be wasted; which boiling and
scumming, then put that into a Vessel to cool; when that is almost as cold as
Ale-wort, then clear it out into another Vessel; then put Barm upon it as you
do to your Ale, and so let it work, and then Tun it up into a Vessel, and put
into it a Bag with Ginger, Cloves and Cinnamon bruised a little, and so hang the
Bag in the Vessel, and stop it up very close; and when it has stood a month or
six weeks, bottle it up, and so drink it.

My Lady used to put a little Limon peel into some of her Metheglin, for those
that liked that Taste; which most persons did very much.

My Lord Herbert's Receipt to make Metheglin.
Take fair water and the best Honey, beat them well together, but not in a
wooden Vessel; for wood drinks up the Honey; put it together in a Kettle, and
try it with a new-laid Egg, which will swim at the top if it be very strong;
but if it bobb up and sink again, it will be too weak; boil it an hour, and put
into it a bundle of Herbs, what sort you like best, and a little Bag of Spice,
of Nutmeg, Ginger, Cloves and Mace, and Cinnamon; scum it well all the while it
boils; when it has boiled an hour, take it off, and put it into earthen Pans,
and so let it stand till next day; then power off all the clear of it into a
good Vessel that has had Sack in it, or white Wine: hang the Bag of Spice in
it, and so let it stand very close stopped, and well filled, for a month or
longer; then if you desire to drink it quickly, you may bottle it up, if it be
strong of the Honey, you may keep it a year or two; if weak, drink it in two or
three months: one quart of Honey will make a gallon of water very strong; a
sprig or two of Rosemary, Thyme and Marjoram are the Herbs that should go into
it.

My Lady Pooley's Receipt to make Metheglin.
Take eight gallons of water, set it over a clear fire in a Kettle, and when it
is warm, put into it sixteeen pound of very good Honey, and stir it well
together till it be well mixed, and when it boileth, take off the Scum, and put
in two large Nutmegs cut in quarters, and so let it boil at least an hour; then
take it off, and put into it two good handfuls of grinded Malt, and with a
white staff keep beating it together till it be almost cold, then strain it
through a hair-Sieve into a Tub, and put to it a wine-pint of Ale-yeast, and
stir it very well together; and when it is cold, you may if you please, Tun it
up presently into a Vessel fit for it; or else let it stand and work a day; and
when it has done working in your Vessel; stop it up very close; it will be
three weeks or a month before it be ready to drink.

My Lady Roberts her Receipt to make white Metheglin.
Take Rosemary, Thyme, sweet Briar, Penniroyal, Bays, of each a handful; steep
them four and twenty hours in a Bowl of fair water, covered close; the next day
boil them very well in another water till the color be very high; then take
another water, and boil the same Herbs in it till it look green, and so boil
them in several waters till they do but just change the color of the water;
then it must stand four and twenty hours with the Herbs in it: the Liquor being
strained from them, you must put in as much fine Honey till it will bear an
Egg; you must work and labor the Honey with the Liquor a whole day till the
Honey be consumed; let it stand a Night a clearing; in the Morning put your
Liquor a boiling for a quarter of an hour with the whites and shells of six
Eggs, so strain it through a Bag, and let it stand a day a cooling, so Tun it
up, and put into the Vessel in a Linen Bag Cloves, Mace, Cinnamon, and Nutmegs
bruised all together; if you will have it to drink presently, take the whites
of two or three Eggs, a spoonful of Barm, a spoonful of wheaten Flower; then
let it work before you stop it, afterward stop it well with Clay and Salt.

My Lady Mary Astons Receipt to make Metheglin.
Take five gallons of water, and to that take one gallon of good white Honey,
then set it on the fire together, and boil it very well, and scum it very
clean; then take it of the fire, and set it by; then take six ounces of good
Ginger, and two ounces of Cinnamon, one ounce of Nutmegs, bruise all these
grossly, and put them into your hot Liquor, and cover it close, and so let it
stand until it be cold; then put as much Ale-barm to it as will make it work,
then keep it in a warm place, as you do Ale, and when it has wrought well, Tun
it up as you do Ale or Beer, and when it is a week old, drink of it at your
pleasure.

The Countess of Cork's Receipt to make white Mead.
Take six gallons of water, and put in six quarts of Honey, stirring it till
the Honey be thoroughly melted; then set it over the fire, and when it is ready
to boil, scum it clean, then put in a quarter of a ounce of Mace, so much
Ginger, half an ounce of Nutmegs, sweet Marjoram, broad Thyme, and sweet Briar,
of all together a handful, and boil them well therein; then set it by till it
be thoroughly cold, and Barrel it up, and keep it till it be ripe.

Another from the same Lady.
To every gallon of water take a quart of Honey, and to every five gallons a
handful of sweet Marjoram, half a handful of sliced Ginger, boil all these
moderately three quarters of an hour; then let it stand and cool, and being
lukewarm, put to every five gallons about three quarts of Yeast, and let it
work a Night and a Day, then take off the Yeast, and strain it into a Rundlet,
and when it has done working, then stop it up, and so let it remain a month;
then drawing it out into Bottles, put into every Bottle two or three stoned
Raisons, and a Lump of Loaf-Sugar; it may be drunk in two months.

My Lady Fortescu's Receipt to make Metheglin.
Take as many gallons of water as you intend to make of Mead, and to every
gallon put a quart of Honey, and let it boil till it bear an Egg: To every
gallon you allow the white of an Egg, which white you must remove and break
with your hand, and put into the Kettle before you put it over the Fire: before
it boils, there will arise a scum, which must be scummed off very clean as it
rises: Put to every gallon two Nutmegs sliced, and when it has boiled enough,
take it off, and set it a cooling in clean Wort-Vessels, and when it is as cold
as Wort, put in a little Barm, and work it like Beer, and when it has done
working, stop it up, and let it stand two months.

My Lady Gerrard's Mead.
My Lady Gerrard makes her Mead with a little Rosemary and sweet Marjoram, but
a large quantity of Bryar-Leaves, and a reasonable proportion of Ginger. Boil
these in the Liquor when it is scummed, and work it in due time with a little
Barm, then Tun it in a Vessel, and draw it into Bottles after it is
sufficiently settled. Whites of Eggs with the shells beaten together, do
clarify Mead best, and leave a benignity in it, as my Lady Fortescue (Wintour)
conceives. If you will have your Mead cooling, use Violet and Strawberry
Leaves, Agrimony, Eglantine, and the like, adding Borage, and Bugloss, and a
little Rosemary and sweet Marjoram to give it Vigor. Tartar makes it work well.

To make Metheglin my Lady Willoughby's way.
Take four gallons of running water, and boil it a quarter of an hour, and put
it in an earthen Vessel, and let it stand all Night, then next day only take
the water, and leave the Settling at the bottom, so put the Honey in a thin bag,
and work it in the water till all the Honey is dissolved; take to four gallons
of water one gallon of Honey; then put in an Egg, if the Honey be good, that it
be strong enough, the Egg will part of it appear on the top of the Liquor, if
it do not, put more Honey in it till it do; then take out the Egg, and let the
Liquor stand till next morning; then take two ounces of Ginger, and slice it,
and pare it, some Rosemary washed and stripped from the stalk, dry it very
well; the next day put the Rosemary and Ginger into the Drink, and so set it on
the fire; when it is almost ready to boil, take the Whites well beaten of three
Eggs with the shells, and put all into the Liquor, and stir it about, and scum
it well till it be clear; be sure you scum not off the Rosemary and the Ginger;
then take it off the fire, and scum it, let it run through a hair sieve, and
when you have strained it, pick the Rosemary and the Ginger out of the
Strainer, and put it into the Drink, and throw away the Egg-shells, and so let
it stand all night; the next day Tun it up in a Barrel, be sure the Barrel be
not too big; then take a little Flower, and a little Bran, and the white of an
Egg, and beat them well together, and put them into a Barrel on the top of the
Metheglin after it is Tunn'd up, and so let it stand till it has done working,
then hoop and stop it up as close as is possible, and so let it stand six or
seven weeks; then draw it out and bottle it; you must tie down the Corks, and
set the Bottles in Sand five or six weeks, and then drink it.

To make Mead or Mead the Lady Says way.
Take to every gallon of water a quart of Honey, and set it over a clear fire,
and when it is ready to boil, scum it very clear; then take two handfuls of
sweet Marjoram, as much Rosemary, and as much Bawm, and two handfuls of
Fennel-roots, as much Parsley-roots, and as many Asparagus roots, slice them in
the middle, and take out the Pith, wash and scrape them very clean, and put
them with your Herbs into your Liquor; then take two ounces of Ginger, one of
Nutmegs, and half an ounce of Mace, bruise them, and put them in, and let it
boil until it is so strong that it will bear an Egg; then let it cool, and
being cold, put in three or four spoonfuls of Ale-yeast, and so scum it well,
and put it into a Rundlet, and it will work like Ale, and having done working,
stop it up close as you do new Beer, and lay Salt upon it.

Mrs. Conquests Receipt to make Metheglin.
In every three gallons of water, boil Rosemary, Liverwort, Baum, of each half
a handful, and Cowslips two handfuls, when the water has sufficiently drawn
out the virtue of the herbs, pour all into a Tub, and let it stand all night,
then strain it, and to every three gallons of the clear liquor (or two and a
half, if you will have your drink stronger) put one gallon of Honey, and boil
it til it bear an Egg, Scumming it til no more scum will rise, which to make
rise the better, put in now and then a pottinger full of cold water, then pour
it into a Tub, and let it stand to cool til it be bloud-warm; and then put by
degrees a pint of Ale-yeast to it to make it work, so let it stand three days
very close covered. Then Scum of the yeast and put it into a seasoned Barrel;
but stop it not up close til it have done hissing. Then either stop it very
close if you will keep it in the Barrel, or draw it into Bottles.

Put into this proportion Ginger sliced, Nutmegs broken of each one ounce,
Cinnamon bruised half an ounce in a bag, which hang in the Bung with a Stone in
it to make it sink.

Sometimes She adds two handfuls of sweet bryar leaves, and one of Bettony to
this proportion of water, or one gallon more.

To make Sr. William Pastons's Meade.
Take ten gallons of Spring Water, and put therein ten pintes of the best
honey, let this boil half an hour and scum it very well, then put in one
handful of Rosemary, and as much Bay Leaves, with a little Limon-peel, Boil
this half an hour longer, then take it off the fire and put it into a clean
Tub, and when it is cool Work it up with yeast as you do Beer. When it is
wrought put it into your Vessel, and stop it very close; within three days you
may Bottle it, and in ten days after it will be fit to drink.

White Mead as it was made for Kenelm Digby, by his Direction.
Boil what quantity of Spring water you please three or four walms, and then
let it settle twenty four hours, and pour the clear from the settling.

Take sixteen gallons of the clear, and boil in it ten handful of Eglantine
Leaves, five of Liver-wort, five of Scabious, four of Baum, four of Rosemary,
two of Bay Leaves, one of Thyme, and one of Sweet Marjoram, and five Eringo
Roots splitted, if you can get them; when the water has drawn out the virtue
of the herbs (which it will do in half an hours boiling) let it run through a
strainer or sieve, and let it settle so that you may pour the Clear from the
Dregs. To every three gallons of the clear, take one of pure Honey, and with
clean Arms stripped up, laid it for two or three hours to dissolve the honey in
the water, lade it twice or thrice that day. The next day boil it very gently
to make the scum rise, and scum it all the while, and now and then pour to it a
Ladle full of cold water, which will make the scum rise more; when it is very
clear from scum, you may boil it the more strongly, til it bear an egg very
high, that the breadth of a groat be out of the water, and that it boil high
with great walmes, in the middle of the Kettle. (which boiling with great
Bubbles in the middle, is a sign it is boiled to its height) Then let it cool
til it be Lukewarm, at which time put some Ale-yeast into it to make it Work
as you would do Ale; and then put it up into a fit Barrel first seasoned with
some good sweet White wine (as Canary Sack) and keep the Bung open til it have
done Working, filling it up with some such honey-drink warmed, as you find it
sunk down by working over. When it has almost done working, put into it a bagg
of thin stuff, (such as Bakers use to Bolt in) fastened by a Cord at the Bung
containing two parts of Ginger sliced, and one a piece of Cinnamon, Cloves, and
Nutmegs, with a pebble stone in it to make it sink, and stop it up close for
six months or a year, and then you may draw it into Bottles, if you like
Cardamum seeds you may add some of them to the Spices. Some do like Mint
exceedingly to be added to the other herbs.

If you will have it stronger, put but two gallons and a half of water to one
of honey.

You may use what Herbs or Roots you please either for their taste or virtue;
after the manner here set down.

If you make it work with yeast, you must have great care to draw it into
Bottles soon after it has done working, as after a fortnight or three weeks:
for that will make it soon grow stale, and it will thence grow sour and dead
before you are aware, But if it work singly of it self, and by help of the Sun
without admixtion of other Leaven or yeast, it may be kept long in the Barrel
so it be filled up to the top, and kept very close stopped.

I conceive it will be exceeding good thus: When you have a strong honey Liquor
of three parts of water to one of honey, well boiled and scummed, put into it
(as soon as you take it from the fire) some Clove-gilliflowers first wiped and
all the whites clipped off, one good handful or two to every gallon of Liquor.
Let these infuse thirty or forty hours: then strain it from the flowers; and
either work it with yeast or set it in the Sun to Work: when it has almost
done working, put into it a bag of like Gilliflowers (and if they be duly
dried, I think they are the better) hanging in it at the Bung. I conceive that
bitter and strong herbs, as Rosemary, Bays, Sweet marjorum, Thyme, and the
like, do conserve Mead the better and longer; being as it were instead of Hops.
But neither must they no more then Clove-gilliflowers, be too much boiled; for
the volatile pure Spirit flies away very quickly: therefore rather infuse them.
Beware of Infusing Gilliflowers in any Vessel of Metal (excepting silver) for
all metals will spoil and dead their color. Glazed earth is best.

My Lady Dormers Receipt to make Metheglin.
Take four Gallons of water, and one of Honey; boil it and skim it; then put
into it Liver wort, Hart's-tongue, Wild-carrot, and Yarrow, a little Rosemary
and Bays, one Parsly-root, and a Fennel-Root: let them boil an hour altogether,
you may hang a little bag of Spice in it if you please: when it is cold, put a
little Barm to it, and let it work like Beer. The Roots must be scraped, and
the Pith taken out.

My Lady Morrices Receipt for Mead.
My Lady Morris makes her Mead thus: Boil first your water with your herbs,
Those She likes best, are Angelica, Baum, Borage, and a little Rosemary (Spirit
of Myrrh; if the taste here be good) (not half so much as of any of the rest) a
handful of all together to two or three gallons of water. After about half an
hours Boiling, let the water run through a strainer (to sever the herbs from
it) into wooden or earthen Vessels, and let it cool and settle. To three parts
of the clear put one (or more) of Honey, and boil it til it bear an Egg,
leaving as broad as a shilling out of the water, skimming it very well, Then
pour it out into Vessels as before, and next day when it is almost quite cold
pour it into a Sack-Cask wherein you have first put a little fresh Ale-yeast,
about two spoonfuls to ten gallons, hang in it a bag with a little sliced
Ginger, but almost a pottinger full of Cloves, cover the bung lightly til it
have done working, then stop it up close. You may keep and draw it a year or
two after. It is excellent good.

Her Sister makes Hers thus.
Dissolve your Honey in the water til it bears an Egg higher or lower
according to the strength you will have it of, then put into it some
Sea-wormwood, and a little Rosemary, and a little Sage; about two good handfuls
of all together to ten gallons: when it has boiled enough to take the virtue
of the herbs, skim them out, and strew a handful or two of fine wheat flower
upon the boiling Liquor. This will draw all the Dregs to it, and swim at the
top, so that you may skim all off together; and this She holds the best way
of clarifying the Liquor, and making it look pale. Then pour it into Vessels as
above to cool, let it stand three days, then Tun it up into a Sack Cask,
without yeast or Spice, and keep it stopped til it work; then let it be open
til it have done working, filling it up still with other honey drink. Then stop
it up close for a year or two; you may at first stop it so that the strong
working may throw out the stopple, and yet keep it close til it work strongly.
She says that such a small proportion of Wormwood, gives it a fine quick
taste, and a pale color with an eye of green. The Wormwood must not be so much
as to discern any the least bitterness in the taste; but that the composition
of it with the honey may give a quickness. The Rosemary and the Sage, must be a
great deal less than the Wormwood; sometimes She stops it up as close as soon
as she has Tunned it, and lets it remain so for three months. Then pierce it,
and draw it into Bottles; which stop well and tie down the stoppels; this will
keep so a long time. She uses this way most, It makes the Mead drink exceeding
quick and pleasant, when you pierce the Cask it will fly out with exceeding
force; and be ready to throw out the stopper and Spiggot.

My Lady Shanons Receipt to make the best white-mead.
Take to every Gallon of water a quart of Honey, and to every five gallons a
handful of Sweet Marjoram, and half a handful of sliced Ginger, boil these
moderately three quarters of an hour, then let it stand and cool, and being
Lukewarm, put to every five gallons about three quarts of yeast, and let it
work a night and a day, then take off the yeast, and strain it into a Rundlet,
and when it has done working stop it up, so let it remain a month; then draw
it out into Bottles, and put in every Bottle two or three sliced Raisons, and a
Lump of Loaf-Sugar; it may be drunk in two months, you must let the water boil
before you put in the honey, Sweet Marjorum or Ginger.

My Lady Lusson's Receipt to make Mead.
Take four gallons of water, two quarts of Honey, two ounces of Ginger, one
ounce of Nutmegs, a good handful of Rosemary tops, and a like handful of
Bay Leaves, two ounces of dried Orange Rind or Peels. Boil all these til it be
so strong as will bear an Egg and not sink: When it is so far cooled as new
milk from a Cow, Work it up with yeast or barm during twenty four hours, and
then Barrel it up: And after three months you may Bottle it up at your pleasure.

As you desire a greater quantity of the Drink you must augment the Ingredients
according to the proportions above recited.

My Lady Bridges her white Metheglin.
To three Gallons of Spring Water take three quarts of Honey, and set it over
the fire till the Scum arise pretty thick; then take off the Scum, and put in
Thyme, Rosemary, and Maidenhair, of each one handful, and two handfuls of
Eglantine Leaves, if you can have them, and half a handful of Organe. The
Spices, Ginger, Nutmegs, Cinnamon, and a little Mace; and boil all these
together near half an hour; then take it from the fire, and let it stand till
it be cold, and then strain it, and so Tun it up, and stop it close; the longer
you keep it, the better.

Sir John Arundel's Receipt to make white Mead.
Take three gallons of Honey, and twelve gallons of water, mix the Honey and
water together till you think the Honey is dissolved; so let it stand twelve
hours, then put in a new-laid Egg, if the Liquor bears the Egg, that ye see the
breadth of a groat upon the Egg dry, you may set it over the fire, if it does
not bear the Egg thus, you must add a quart or three pints more of Honey to the
rest, and then put it over the fire, and let it boil gently till you have
scummed it very clean, and clarified it as you would do Sugar with three whites
of new-laid Eggs; when it is thus made, clean them from all Scum, let it boil a
full hour till the fourth part is wasted; then take it off the fire, and let it
stand till the next day, then put it into your Vessel; when it has been in the
Barrel five or six days, bake a white Toast, and dip it in all yeast, so put
the Toast into the Barrel, and let it work; when it has done working, stop it
up very close, this will keep three quarters of a year, and you may drink it
within half a year; if you please, you may add in the boiling what Herbs you
like the Taste of, or what is Physical.

My Lord Hollis Way to make Hydromel.
In four parts of Spring Water dissolve one part of Honey, or so much as the
Liquor will bear an Egg boyant to the breadth of a Groat; then boil it very
well, and let all the Scum be taken away; he adds nothing to it but a small
proportion of Ginger sliced; of which he puts half to boil in the Liquor
after all the Scum is gone, and the other half he puts into a Bag, and
hangs in the Bung when it is tunn'd. The Ginger must be very little, not so
much as to make the Liquor taste strongly of it, but to quicken it. I should
like to add a little proportion of Rosemary, and a greater of sweet-Briar
Leaves in the boiling; as also, to put into the Barrel a Toast of white Bread
with Mustard, to make it work: he puts nothing to it, but its own strength in
time makes it work of it self. It is good to drink after a year.

Morello Wine.
To half an Aeme of white Wine take twenty pounds of Morello Cherries, the
Stalks being first plucked off; bruise the Cherries, and break the Stones. Power
into the Wine the Juice that comes out from the Cherries, but put all the solid
Substance of them into a long Bag of Boulter Cloth, and hang it in the Wine at
the Bung; so that it lie not in the bottom, but only reach to touch it; and
therefore naple it down at the mouth of the Bung; then stop it close; for
variety, you may put some clear Juice alone of Cherries (but drawn from a
larger proportion of Cherries) into another parcel of Wine. To either of them,
if you will aromatize the Drink, take to this quantity two ounces of Cinnamon
grossly broken and bruised, and put it in a little Bag at the Spigot, that all
the Wine you draw may run through the Cinnamon.

You must be careful in bruising the Cherries, and breaking the Stones; for if
you do all at once, the Liquor will sparkle about; but you must first bruise
the Cherries gently in a Mortar, and rub through a Sieve all that will pass,
and strain the residue hard through your hands; then beat the remaining hard
mark so strongly as may break all the Stones; then put all together, and strain
the Clear through a subtle Strainer, and put the Solid or Substance into the
Bag to hang in the Wine.

Currants Wine to cool the Liver, and cleanse the Blood.
Take a pound of the best Currants clean picked, and power upon them in a deep
strait-mouth'd earthen Vessel six pounds or pints of hot water, in which you
have dissolved three spoonfuls of the purest and newest Ale-yeast; stop it very
close till it ferment, then give such vent as is necessary, and keep it warm
for about three days, it will work and ferment. Taste it after two days, to see
if it be grown to your liking; as soon as you find it so, let it run through a
strainer to leave behind all the exhausted Currants and the Yeast, and so bottle
it up; it will be exceeding quick and pleasant, and is admirable good to cool
the Liver, and cleanse the Blood; it will be ready to drink in five or six days
after it is Bottled; and you may safely drink large draughts of it.

Mrs. Evelin's Way of making Cherry-Wine.
Take twenty four pound of the best ripe Cherries; bruise them well, that all
their Juice may issue forth (if you also break the Stones, the Wine will have a
bitterness, not ungrateful) let them continue so to ferment twelve hours (which
will give the Wine a deep color, by fermenting upon the skins) then let them
run through an Hippocrass or gelly-bag, putting the whole Mash into the Bag. In
the Vessel that the Liquor runs into, put one pound of the best double
refined Loaf Sugar in subtle Powder; which will be melted by the Liquor; then
put it into Bottles, filling them up above half way their necks, within a good
inch of the Corks. This will keep a year or more, and be exceeding pleasant and
stomachal, and will have no dregs in it, and be of a pure deep Claret color;
multiply this quantity, keeping the proportion of Sugar, as much as you will.
This quantity will make about six quarts of Wine. It is the running through the
Bag that makes it so clear. I should like to put it into Barrels after it is
bien cuve, to let it ferment more there. I think less Sugar would serve the
turn.

The Lady Newport makes it near after the same manner; but she first picks the
stones as well as the stalks from the Cherries, then breaks them very well with
Hands or a Ladle, and after twelve hours fermenting together, strains them
through a Napkin, wringing it very well, to press all out that can come, which
she puts into Barrels to ferment with Sugar; and after a long time settling,
draws it into Bottles; it will draw well to the last if you drink it out of the
Barrel without Botling.

Mrs. Marbury's Receipt to make Syder.
Take a peck of Apples and slice them, and Boil them in a Barrel of water, til
the third part be wasted; then cool your water as you do for wort, when it is
cooled you must pour the water upon three measures of grownd Apples; then drayn
out the water at a Tap three or four times a day, for three days together; then
press out the Liquor, and Tun it up; when it has done Working then stop it up
close.

Sr. Paul Neals Way of making Syder.
The best Apples make the best Syder; as Pearmains, Pippins, Golden-pippins,
and the like; Codlins make the finest Syder of all, (they must be ripe when you
make Syder of them, and is in prime in the Summer Season, when no other Syder
is good: but lasts not long, not beyond Autumn. The Foundation of Making
perfect Syder, consists in not having it work much, scarce ever at all; but
at least no second time; which ordinary Syder does often upon Change of
Weather, and upon Motion, and upon every working it grows harder. Do then thus:
Choose good Apples, Red-streak are the best for Syder to keep, Gennet-Moils the
next, then Pippins, let them lie about three weeks after they are Gathered;
then stamp and strain them in the ordinary way into a wooden Fat that has a
Spiggot, three or four fingers breadth above the bottom. Cover the Fat with
some hair or Sackcloth, to secure it from any thing to fall in, and to keep
in some of the Spirits, so to preserve it from dying; but not so much as to
make it ferment. When the juice has been there twelve hours, draw it by the
Spiggot (the Fat inclining that way, as if it were a little Tilted) into a
barrel; which must not be full by about two fingers, leave the bung open for
the air to come in upon a Superficies all along the Barrel, to hinder it from
Fermenting; but not so Large a Superficies as to endanger dying, by the ayrs
depredating too many Spirits from it: the drift in both these setlings is, that
the grosser parts consisting of the substance of the Apple, may settle to the
bottom and be severed from the Liquor; for it is that which makes it Work again
(upon motion or Change of Weather) and spoils it. After twenty four hours draw
off it, to see if it be clear by the settling of all the dregs, above which the
spigot must be. If it be not clear enough, draw it from the thick dregs into
another Vessel; and let it settle there twenty four hours. This Vessel must be
less than the first, because you draw not all out of the first. If then it
should not be clear enough, draw it into a third, yet lesser than the second,
but usually it is at the first. When it is clear enough draw it into Bottles;
filling them within two fingers, which stop close; After two or three days
visit them, that if there be danger of their Working (which would break the
Bottles) you may take out the stopples, and let them stand open for half a
quarter of an hour, then stop them close, and they are secure for ever after.
In cold freezing weather set them upon bay, and cover them over with hay or
straw. In open weather, in winter, transpose them to any other part of the
Cellar to stand upon the bare ground or pavement. In hot weather set them in
Sand. The Syder of Apples of the last Season as Pippins, not Pearmains, (not
Codlins) will Last til the Summer grow hot, though this never Work, it is not
of the nature of stummed wine, because the naughty dregs are not left in it.

Mr. Web's way of Making Bragot.
He takes the first Running of strong Ale, and boyls a less proportion of honey
in it then when he makes his ordinary Mead, but double or treble as much Spice
and herbs. As for example, to twenty gallons of the strong Wort, he puts eight
or ten pound (according as your taste likes more or less honey) but at least
treble as many herbs and treble as much Spice as would serve such a quantity of
small Meade (for to a stronger Mead, you put a greater proportion of herbs and
Spice, then to a small; by reason that you must keep it a longer time before
you drink it; and the length of time mellows and tames the taste of the herbs
and Spice) and when it is Tunned in the Vessel (after Working with the Barm)
you may hang in it a bag of bruised Spices (rather more then you boiled in it)
which is to hang in the Barrel all the while you draw it.

He makes also Mead with the second weak Running of the Ale, and to this he
uses the same proportions of Honey, Herbs, and Spice, as for his small Mead of
pure water; and uses the same manner of boiling, working with yeast, and all
other circumstances as in making of that

FINIS.

