The REVIVAL: Or Directions for a Sculpture, describing the extraordinary Care
and Diligence of our Nation, in publishing the Faith among Infidels in America,
and elsewhere; compared with other both Primitive and Modern Professors of
Christianity.
FIrst, Draw in a Quarter on the right Hand, the Vision of the Sheet let down,
Acts 10. representing the Gospel to be preached to all sorts of People thro-out
the World: St. Peter himself placed on the House top, and delivering this
Oracle, God is no respecter of Persons, but in every Nation, etc. Over this
write, St. Peter's Vision, Acts the 10th. Under it, Veritas Christiana: or
this, Nothing common, etc.

On the left Hand opposite to this, Draw St. Philip preaching to, and baptizing
the Ethiopian Eunuch, according to the usual Figures thereof: therein showing
the Calling and Conversion of the Blacks or Negro's, comprehended more at large
in the former Vision, but herein more particularly expressed. Over it write,
St. Philip and the Eunuch, Acts 8. Under it, Fac similiter, St. Luc. 10. 37.

Under the former right Hand Quarter, describe in another like Quarter, some
one or more of the Preachers of New England, in their customary and usual
Habit, preaching to the Natives there. Over this, write their known Motto, Come
over and help us, Act. 16. 9. Underneath it put, The Shame of others.

Opposite again thereto, place the Friars and Roman Missioners, with their
shaven Crowns, Crosses and Habits, preaching to the Heathen, as well of Africa,
as of Asia and America. Over this, (to those that shall less value their
Conversions and Labors therein) write, Fac meliora; And underneath, The
Reproach of Protestants.

Under all these describe in one piece at large, an Overseer (or Baily to some
English Planter in America) whipping and most unmercifully tormenting a poor
Negro-Slave under his Governance, for no other Crime, but for having been that
day (Sunday) baptized. In his right Hand (held aloft) place a long Willow Rod
with five smart Sprigs growing out of one Joint about one third part from the
end of it; and by him a large Bundle of the like Rods to be spent upon the
Wretch, for that Offense: Out of his Mouth these Blasphemous Words proceeding,
Ye Dog, as you were baptized in the Morning with Water, so in the Afternoon ye
shall be baptized in Blood. The Negro tied by both his Wrists up to a Rafter or
Beam; deep marks of each Stroke appearing upon his Flesh, and drops of Blood in
abundance issuing or starting out of his Body, Tho but a few were concerned in
this horrid Fact, yet our whole Nation are guilty by conniving at, or not
protesting against their Impiety in the suppression of Christianity.
stripped quite naked; he withal expressing this pathetical Expostulation, How
long, Lord God! Over this write, English Zeal for promoting Christianity among
Infidels; or this, Valiant for the Truth, Jer. 9. 3. And close under it, There
was no such Deed done nor seen, etc. Judge. 19. 30.

Last of all add this of St. Paul, Romans 11. 14. If by any means I may provoke
to Emulation, etc. Or this, of 1 King. 18. 27. Peradventure he sleeps, and
must be awaked.

Here write, Place this Figure before, p. 111. of The Negro's Advocate.

Be not ashamed to confess wherein thou have transgressed, and resist not the
Truth. Ecclus. 4. 25, 26.
London, Printed by J. Darby, 1682.


