THE HOLY LIMBECK: OR, A Semicentury of Spiritual Extractions: Wherein The
Spirit is Extracted from the Letter of certain eminent places IN THE Holy
Scripture: And a Compendious way discovered for the Spiritual-improvement of
the literal Sense, in order to the better understanding of the mind and
meaning of the Spirit therein.

By Jo: Godolphin, L.L.D.

London, Printed by John Field For Edmund Paxton, and are to be sold at his
Shop in Paul's Chain, over against the Castle Tavern near the Doctors Commons.
1650.

TO THE READER.
THou may not, Reader, expect any exact Method here, there being no
Obligation of art on such Stillatories as these thereunto; neither may thou
expect a

(...) (...) were opened, and they saw that they were naked;] stripped of the
Image of God, of that purity and righteousness wherein they were created, Eccl.
7. ult. naked of the favor of God, naked to the subsequent temptations of the
envious one, to the subtle insinuations of that fawning Serpent. Conscience,
that before was Virtues Guardian, now becomes Deaths Herald; an imperfect Idea
of Gods Image defaced: in some, Natures curb through Gods providential care; in
others, the Graces magazine by the operation of a higher and supernatural
light. That nakedness which was before the Creators glory, now becomes the
Creatures shame; once the emblem of Innocence, the character of Truth, now the
livery of Pride, the purchase of a Lie. Come, buy of Christ white raiment, that
thou may be clothed, and that the shame of thy nakedness do not appear, Rev.
3.18.

And they sewed them Fig Leaves together, and made themselves Aprons.] What?
could a Fig-leaf hide them from God, whose eyes are in every place? Prove. 15.3.
A Fig-leaf cover them from him whose eyes run to and fro throughout the whole
earth? 2 Chronicles. 16.9. or cloud them from his presence, whose very eyelids try
the children of men? Psalm. 11.4. Could they think a Fig-leaf to be a plaster
of breadth sufficient to salve a Leprosy as epidemical as the world is wide?
Could an Apron of Fig Leaves hide a worldful of Impieties? Could a Fig-leaf
shelter their Rebellion? hide their Unbelief? cover their Ingratitude? shadow
their Pride? cloak their Ambition? cloud their Contempt of Gods Truth?
dissemble their Faith in crediting the Devil? palliate their Sacrilege? excuse
their abuse of the Creatures to wanton lust? or conceal the Temporal and
Spiritual murder of themselves and their posterity? Such Fig Leaves Aprons are
never out of fashion, are made and worn by their naked Issue to this day. The
Atheist wears the Fig Leaves of Ignorance, and the Ignorant the Livery of an
Atheist; the Profane garb themselves with the Fig Leaves of gallantry and
heroic minds; the Idolater has whole Groves of Fig Leaves, to shadow his
worshipping the Host of Heaven; the Heretic sows his Fig Leaves in his brain,
and has an Apron for every Heresy; the blind Ceremonialist sitting still on
brood on his Superstition to hatch Promotion, would fain shroud his Romish
Judaism under the withered Fig Leaves of wellworn Antiquity, or the more
substantial Aprons of Order and Decency; the Hypocrite, that Janus of Religion,
has his fine-spun Apron, broad Fig Leaves of very specious Sanctity, as if
Piety pretended, were not Iniquity doubled; the Laodicean has his Fig-leaf
Aprons of a golden Mean, holding it no good policy to engage too far for God,
lest Times of Persecution prove too hot for his lukewarm Faith; the Moral
honest man stands much on the Fig Leaves of his Legal Righteousness, and thinks
because he is not what he might be, he is what he ought to be; the highway
Christian thinks himself privileged by that style to commit the worst of
villainies, under the Fig Leaves of an outward Profession, that if he speak for
God he may practice for the Devil; the State-Politician to legitimate the
spurious oftspring of his projecting brain, has the fading Fig Leaves of his
Princes favor, and the plausible Rhetoric of all affable humility, to cloak
the sprouting designs of his unlimited Ambition; dazzling the judgments of the
wise by his ambodextrous compliance, attracting by his powerful influence the
Stargazing Multitude to admire the Comet of his rare Endowments, whilst
himself lies forging in the Vault of his double heart, some sugared Poison for
the ruin of them both; the envious man covers the venom of his heart with the
Fig Leaves of equivocating kindeness, and under the vizard of much sweet
deportment, will handsomely beguile you to become his instrument of your own
destruction; the Covetous man weaves specious pretenses of impartial Justice,
and therewith makes Fig-leaf Aprons for his sordid Oppression, calls his
Covetousness, Praiseworthy providence; his Extortion, Damage-recompence; and
his Usury nothing but Consideration-money, in token of gratitude; the Proud,
for want of other Fig Leaves, will glory in an apish-fond-affected humility;
the Drunkard thinks himself the only good Companion, and rusheth into all
excess of Riot, under the notion of good-fellowship; the Adulterer wallows in
the mire of his lust, and glories in his shame, that it more tends to Natures
credit then his disgrace; more an ornament wherewith he is well qualified, then
a vice whereby he is heaven-exclude, 1 Cor. 6.9. and acts the beast under the
Figleaf of a venial sin. Thus the accursed progeny of the first Adam, are still
vainly sewing Fig Leaves together for their nakedness, whilst the newborn
Issue of the second, covered with the white Robes of his Righteousness, are
clothed with the garments of salvation, Isa. 61.10. and shall stand before the
Throne, and before the Lamb, with palms in their hands, Rev. 7.9. when these
Fig Leaves shall be useless, save to kindle the fuel of chaff and stubble to
everlasting burnings, 2 Pet. 3.7. and be the sad Remembrancer of their Parents
Apostasy, when they sewed Fig Leaves together, and made themselves Aprons,
Genesis 3.7.

The first Martyr.
And Cain talked with Abel his brother; and it came to pass when they were in
the field, that Cain rose up against Abel, and slew him,

Genesis 4.8.
ANd Cain talked with Abel his brother,] So did Esau with his heart, when
resolved on the like fratricide, Genesis 27.41. Trust not any brother that will
supplant, Jer. 4.9. the honiest tongue may have the strongest poison of Asps
under it. Solomon disswades thee from going into thy brothers house in the day
of thy calamity, Prove. 27.10. Envy not the wicked, yet familiarize not thy self
with them, for their heart studieth destruction, and their lips talk of
mischief, Pro. 27.10.

And it came to pass when they were in the field,] Solitary places are the
Devils vaults, witness the Garden, when he beguiled the first Adam, Genesis 3.
witness the Wilderness, when he tempted the second, Mat. 4.1. God said betimes,
It was not good for man to be alone, Genesis 2.18. Chaste Joseph knew it well,
Genesis 39.11. And woe to him (says the Preacher) that is alone, Eccles. 4.10.
indeed the field is the proper place of blood for man to act the beast in; But
he that formed the eye, shall he not see? Psalm. 49.9. yes; and the man of blood
shall not live out half his days, Psalm. 55.23.

And Cain rose up against Abel, and slew him.] Here the Serpents seed has
bruised the heel of the woman's, Genesis 3.15. The seed of all true Religion slain
from the beginning of the world. Innocent Abel! the first Martyr that suffered
for Religion, and lively Type of Christ, of Christ the Prince of Martyrs; the
heel of the blessed Seed bruised, a Type of what the Head himself should
suffer. Bloody Cain! the first Apostate after that first Evangelical Promise,
the first builder of that spiritual City of the Wicked, the Seed of the
Serpent, founded in his brothers blood; the true portraicture whereof is
Mystical Babylon or Rome, founded by Romulus, by the like example of
fratricide, in the murder of his brother Remus, the Seat of the Beast and of
the Whore (by whose Authority Christ himself was slain) since drunk with the
blood of his Saints, and still breathing out blood and slaughter to every Abel,
that refusing to communicate in her Spiritual Whoredoms, will not with her
offer the earthly Sacrifice of Cain, the fruits of the ground, which has
nothing of Faith or the Spirit in them. Thus Goodness and Envy, like Rebecca's
Twins, the one is never born without the other; If God has more respect to
Abels, then to his brothers Sacrifice, by his brother shall himself be
Sacrificed: Goodness is ever accompanied with danger, and he indeed is only
Martyr-proof, that dares be good. The wicked would be rather blind, then see
Religion thrive, or virtue flourish: had God loved Abel less, Cain would have
loved him more; his favor with God, purchased his Brothers hate, so that he
needed not to have slain Abel, whom he had murdered before, For whosoever but
hates his brother, is a murderer, 1 John 3.15. Both these Brethren did
Sacrifice to the Lord, yet Cain must have Abels blood, for offering that in
faith, which himself did with a false heart: How parallel does this run to the
Cains of this Age? who with the faithful once walked in the House of God as
Friends, yet now style them Enemies to God for the service of his House; is not
this to slay thy Brother? Nothing acutes the Spirit of a man to assay some
desperate design, as desire of revenge; and he that is caught in this whirlwind,
lives like the Salamander in the fire; 'twas desire of revenge that hurld
Charles the Sixth of France, incensed against the Duke of Britain, into a
Bedlam-Lunacy; discontent and emulation beget this passion; if sin get not
Priority of Honor from desert, desert shall have Priority of Fate. Cain here in
reference to his Brother Abels death, deals with his Fathers Posterity, in
respect of Gods glory, as the rich Man in Quintilian did with his garden
Flowers in respect of his Brothers profit, poison them all, because his
Neighbors Bees should suck no more Honey from them; and hazards eternal life,
only to abreviate his Brothers temporal, looking at him, as they in Lucians
Rock of Honor, with an envyous eye, proud of his own ruin for another damage.
Every other sin has some pleasure in it, or admits excuse, envy alone wants
both. Angebat illum non proprium peccatum, sed fratris prosperitas, says
Theodoret, 'twas his Brothers happiness that galled him. Presidents hereof
Divine and Humane, we may fly and read; Jacob and Esau, Saul and David, Rachel
and Leah, Genesis 30.1. Joseph and the Patriarchs. David also had a touch of this
vice by his own confession, in Psalm 37. but all these syllable'd to a word,
cannot spell Cain, cursed Cain, yet reprieved and life continued, even for the
same cause that other Murderers lose it, that he might live a stigmatized
example in this unpeopled condition of the worlds nonage; branded, to the
terror of all that should afterward behold the spectacle; cursed from the
earth, drunk with his Brothers blood, now spews out his own; banished the
presence of God, to become the lively Image of the deadly state of sinners out
of Christ; dead whilst alive, a moving Sepulcher, the Devils Captive,
damnations firstborn, Hells heir, Heavens exile, and the Earths vagabond; his
own fury a horror to himself, indeed Hells Compendium: O tremble then thou man
of blood, whosoever thou art, guilty of murder either by the Tongue or Sword!
Tremble ye Persecutors of the Saints of God, their blood shall never quench
Hell, sheath your malice yet; swell not against conviction of Conscience, for
in those Orient days of Gospel Light, it is not possible you can think to do
God good service by slaughtering the lambs of heaven. Remember, God is a Spirit
Infinite, his very Essence proclaims what kind of Worship he does challenge
and expect from his Creatural Image. Touch not any Cains blemished Sacrifice;
offer with righteous Abel, and if thou suffer with him, Amen: Welcome to the
Marriage of the Lamb; thy blood shall from the Altar cry for Justice, not
unequivalent to that on Cain, when he slew his brother, Genesis 4.8.

The Holy Walk.
And Enoch walked with God,

Genesis 5. ver. 24.
ANd Enoch walked] not in the counsel of the ungodly, Psalm. 1.1. not in the
ways of evil men, Prove. 4.15. not in froward and strange ways, Prove. 21.8. not
in the broad way that leads to destruction, Matt. 7.13. not in the way of
bribery, Isa. 33.15. whose Tabernacles shall be consumed by fire, Job 15.34.
not in the company of riotous men, Prove. 28.7. not in ways seeming right only
in his own eyes, Prove. 12.15. not in ways of discord, but in love, Ephesians. 5.2.
not disorderly, 2 Thessalonians. 3.6. not after the imaginations of a corrupt heart,
Ier. 9.14. not as driven with every wind of Doctrine, Ephesians. 4.14. not as a
stumbling block in the way of the blind, Levit. 19.14. not without wisdom
toward them that are without, Col. 4.5. not wandering from God, Psalm. 119.10.
nor turning aside from his Commandments, Deuteronomy. 17.20. not walking after the
flesh, but after the Spirit, Romans 8.1. And

With God,] before him with a perfect heart, Genesis 17.2. in his Statutes,
keeping close to his Commandments, Levit. 26.3. in all the ways which the Lord
his God commanded him, Deuteronomy. 5.33. Ier. 7.23. in the ways of righteousness,
wherein is life, Prove. 12.28. in the good way, Ier. 6.16. walking in his house
with a perfect heart, Psalm. 101.2. doing the will of God from the heart, Ephesians.
6.6. perfecting holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1. believing with all his
heart, Acts 8.37. living in all good Conscience before God, Acts 23.1. always
void of offense, Acts 24.16. seeking the Lord with his whole desire, 2 Chronicles.
15.15. in whose heart God has so put his fear, as that he shall not depart
from him, Ier. 32.40. giving himself unto Prayer, Psalm. 109.4. continuing
instant therein, Romans 12.12. meditating on Gods Precepts, Psalm. 119.15. holding
fast the mystery of Faith in a pure conscience, 1 Timothy 3.9. always speaking the
truth in love, Ephesians 4.15. refraining his feet from every evil way, Psalm.
119.101. yea, hating every false way, Psalm. 119.104. abhorring that which is
evil, and cleaving to that which is good, Romans 12.9. regulating his
conversation by the rule of Gods Word, Psalm. 119.9. delighting himself in the
Almighty, Job 27.10. and in the Law of the Lord, Psalm. 1.2. and in his
Statutes, Psalm 119.16. worshipping God in the Spirit, Phil. 3.3. whose
confidence is in the Lord only, Prove. 3.26. having none in the flesh, Phil.
3.3. conformed to the image of the Son of God, Romans 8.29. and ordering his
conversation aright, Psalm. 50.23. taking such heed to his ways, Psalm 39.1.
that they all please the Lord, Prove. 16.7. walking still in the day without
stumbling, John 11.9. uprightly, Psalm. 15.2. righteously, Isa. 33.15. worthy
the vocation wherewith he was called, Ephesians. 4.1. worthy of the Lord, Col. 1.10.
circumspectly, not as a fool, Ephesians. 5.19. honestly toward them that are
without, 1 Thessalonians. 4.12. committing all his ways unto the Lord, Psalm. 37.5. like
a peculiar vessel, zealous of good works, Tit. 2.14. and undefiled in the ways
of the Lord, Psalm. 119.1. all the preparations of whose heart is from the Lord,
Prove. 16.1. whose help, Hos. 13.9. and whose hope is in the Lord his God, Psalm.
146.5. in whom the Lord has not beheld iniquity, Numb. 23.21. for he walks
in Christ, as having received a promise of him, Col. 2.6. indeed as a just man
like Noah, Genesis 6.9.

Mark then the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that man is
peace, Psalm. 37.37. whereof there is none, says my God, to the wicked, Isa.
48.22. Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is
perfect, Matthew. 5.48. Fear God and eschew evil, for which God himself to the
Devils face honored Job with the high Characters of perfection and uprightness,
Job 1.8. Walk before God, and be thou perfect, Genesis 17.1. Noah was a just man,
and perfect in his Generation; why? because he walked with God, Genesis 6.9.
Perfect, even this side heaven, which is more then Paul would ascribe unto
himself, Phil. 3.12. Perfect, though not in regard of parts and degrees, yet in
regard of the truth and soundness of Grace, 1 Pet. 5.10. Sanctify therefore
your selves, and be ye holy, for I am holy, says the Lord, Lev. 11.44. Walk in
holiness and righteousness before him all the days of your life, Luke 1.17. See
that on your hearts be written, on your lips imprinted, and on your hands
engraven, nothing but holiness to the Lord, Exodus 28.36. have all your fruit
unto holiness, that your end may be everlasting life, Romans 6.22. stablish
therefore your hearts in holiness, 1 Thessalonians. 3.13. then perfect it in the fear
of God, 2 Cor. 7.1. and thus, like Enoch, walk with him, Genesis 5.24. and thou
shall never see the second death, John 8.51.

The Ark.
But with thee will I establish my Covenant, and thou shall come into the Ark,

Genesis 6.18.
SIn and Judgment are both ripe together, the overflowings of the one presage
a deluge of the other: Let favor be showed to the wicked, yet says the
Prophet, will he not learn Righteousness; but when judgments are in the earth,
the Inhabitants of the world become better Scholars, Isa. 26.9,10. Yet forty
days and Nineveh shall be destroyed, Ion. 3.4. but Nineveh repented, and was
not, ver. 10. yet seven days and the world shall be drowned, Genesis 7.4. but Noah
believed and was not, Genesis 6.8. Sin is so antypathal to the holiness of God, as
it made him repent man's Creation, and grieved him to the very heart, Genesis 6.6.
A few drops of true penitential tears might have saved the whole world from
drowning, and have caused God (in all holy sobriety be it spoken) to have
repented of his repenting. The world was now One thousand six hundred fifty six
years old, when God opened his Chamber windows, those heavenly Sluices, and
Epitomized the whole Creation in an Ark; indeed a very lively Type of the
Church of God, the Ark of all the faithful; But where are the Mountains of
Ararat? Compute as many years from our Saviors Incarnation, as was to the Flood
from the worlds Creation; and by the late asswagement of the Antichristian
waters in all the world, as by the returns of some Doves (sent forth the Ark
for that purpose) with Olives in their mouths, and by the non-returns of others
we may probably conjecture, there may be no great disparity of years 'twixt the
Rest of Type and Antitype. Indeed judgment is already begun at the house of
God, now what shall be the end of them that obey not the Gospel; nay, of them
that strike a League with Hell as much as in them lies, to ungospel the Gospel,
trampling on the blood of the Covenant, counting it an unholy thing: Thus the
mystery of Iniquity still continues working, till that Antichristian Leviathan
be revealed, whom with his gygantick brood the Lord shall consume with the
Spirit of his mouth; But with the Faithful he will establish his Covenant, and
they shall come into his Ark, Genesis 6.18.

Blood for Blood.
He that sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed,

Genesis 9.6.
IT is murder not to punish it: If detraction be breach of Charity, or to deny
a perishing beast the courtesy of our aid be Inhumanity, what merits he that
transforms the Image of God into the substance of Death: To acquit the
Murderer, is to be guilty of his life, and without true penitence he shall dye
by that Book which saved him: He that refuses to undefile the Land of that
blood wherewith it is polluted, by taking satisfaction for the life of a
Murderer, delivers up the whole body of a Nation to the judgments of God; to
keep an ulcerous member from the Justice of man, does what in him lies to
justify the Executioner of Hell against the Charter of Heaven; twice murders
the innocent that was slain before, entails the guilt of blood on the Land and
his own Posterity, commits in one act Oppression and Sacrilege, by denying
Justice to quick and dead, and basely self-murthers his own soul.

Butchery, with the Jew, is honored above the Liberal Sciences, and long
experience requisite to that Arts perfection; they have a Book of Shamble
Constitutions, and in the most difficult cases they consult with some Learned
Rabbi, that the Jew Butcher had need be half a Physician in Anatomizing, and
half a Rabbine in cases of Conscience; and who knows but that many of those
Jewish Physicians, which in our days practicing murder, kill by Authority,
after a Prentiship served in the Drugsters slaughtershop, came themselves
(whither they send others) from the Shambles.

But who shall shed his blood that sheds his own? that wilfully neglects the
means of life? that makes this poison his Evening-draught? this Knife his
Cutthroat? that Bough his Gallows? or yonder Pool his Grave? that kills
himself dead-drunk? that eats himself Carrion-dead, gluttonously biting of his
third of life, whilst he delves his grave with his own teeth? that exhausts
his vitals in a stews, and fornicates with hell? who thus becomes his
self-destroyer, is a Rebel to that God that made him, a Vagabond from his
presence for ever; is an Enemy proclaimed in Hell to all Religion; is a Traitor
to Reason; ^n Apostate to Sense; a Fool ^o the very Bruits; and a Slave to the
Devil. Who shall shed his blood that hates his brother? for he is a murderer
too, 1 John 3.15. that restrains charity, or usurps revenge, the Prerogative
Royal of the most High: Who shall shed that Pastors blood that starves his
Flock, or erroneously mis-guides them by his life or Doctrine, like Sheep unto
the slaughter? who shall shed that Lawyers blood, that most butcherously cuts
his innocent Clyents throat, by betraying his righteous Cause for a bribe,
ore-ballancing an honest Fee, prostrating the nakedness of truth to the foul
insultings of corrupt injustice? that withholds the truth it unrighteousness?
that Janus like, looks both ways at once, and has an Ambodextrous tongue to
suck blood from both, yet distribute right to neither? Who shall shed that
Empericks blood, that kills others that himself may live? that practices on the
Bodies of men with less conscience then he takes fees; and destroys more lives
by his desperate ignorance, then the Judicious Physician by his Chemical
Practice? Who shall shed the Machivilians blood, that like the Wolf in the
Breast, gnaws out the bowels of his Country; and to feed his vulturous
designs, preys on that State that bred and fostered him; and rather then have
his invisible projects countermin'd, will cap in hand petition the Devil to
summon a Council in Hell, that may furnish him thence with Auxiliary Legions to
come in for his assistance? Lastly, Who shall shed the Usurers blood, that
sucks out the Vitals of his Neighbors Estate with Jewish Exaction, and then
extorts his very Liberty from him, even Natures Prerogative, till the last gasp
of all his Fortune be conveyed him; and having only reserved to himself for
term of life, a few years of beggary and too late repentance, entails the
remainder of his misery to his injured innocent Posterity; whilst his own sad
soul, to prevent the ghastly hungerbits of merciless Famine, does often career on
the resolves of some desperate courses to the Shipwreck of his Conscience; that
so being now undone in soul and body, state and posterity, he may go to his
grave (if it be his happiness to have one) completely miserable. But let none
of these forget, That there is a God that judges the earth, and has enacted,
That whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed, Genesis 9.6.

Babel.
Go to, let us go down, and there confound their Language,

Genesis 11.7.
BUt yet one Century of years expired since the Deluge, and behold, the Sons of
men ripe for a second confusion! they are now scaling Heaven, not by Faith, but
Presumption, are daubing up a stately Molehill, as if they meant to ore-top
the most High, overpower the Almighty, mighty, parley with their Creator, go
to Heaven in a carnal way, or at least secure themselves from future Deluges,
by erecting this Castle in the air for a place of retreat; but the Lord
descends from on high, blows off the Pyramide of their Pride, by sweeping away
their Cobweb Edifice with the besom of Confusion.

Of these proud Masons, oNimrod was the chief, the Captain, the Master Workman,
the first Tyrant, and (as some suppose) the first that brought Idolatry in
fashion; indeed he erected a very stately Idol, for such ambitious fools to
worship as imitate the vapor of his brain: To establish themselves a Name in
all the Earth was their grand design, they would fain be great, and high enough
to peep into heaven; but the dissipation they doubted, was the judgment they
suffered; their attempting the prevention of what they feared, prevented their
accomplishing of what they projected; and the foundation they had laid whereon
to build their greatness, became the groundwork of their ruin. They called a
general Council or rebellious Confederacy, and voted for a Tower, whose top
should reach unto Heaven; A Fabric of that height, would require a Basis
deeper then the Earth; but he that will ascend Heaven, must not lay his
foundation in Hell: no question but this ambitious rout; in the results of
their desperate resolves, were as well compact as their building, and that as
uniform as their Language; but as they went up, the Lord came down, scattered
the one, and confounded the other.

Had these men been at Jerusalem, when the Apostles inspired with the gift of
Tongues became such expert Linguists, they might have seen the like power in a
contrary effect to this of Babylon; this came by the sin of man, that by the
mercy of God; the one from Babylon, the other from Jerusalem: No marvel then
that at this day are such audacious Theomachists in mystical Babylon, where
that proud Antichristian Nimrod exalting himself above God, sits in the Temple
as God. Indeed the whole Christian Earth was once of one Language and of one
Speech; but when Babylon sadled her Ass, and took a Journey to Rome; when they
said, Go to, Let us make Martyrs, and burn them thoroughly; when they took the
brick of their own inventions, in stead of Sions Stone, a tried and precious
Stone, Isaiah 28.16. and the frothy slime of their own brain, for the
welltempered mortar of the infallible word; and said, Go to, Let us build us a
City of Spiritual Whoredoms, and a Tower of Merits, whose top may reach unto
Heaven, no marvel then, I say, that the Lord should at the brightness of his
coming, scatter those Idolatrous Vermin, or Jesuitical Imps, like dust before
the wind upon the face of all the earth, and with the Spirit of his mouth
confound the Language of the beast, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.

Abram's Call.
Now the Lord had said unto Abram, Get thee out of thy Country, and from thy
kindred, and from thy fathers house, unto a Land that I will show thee,

Genesis 12.1.
IT is the perfect freedom of a child of God, to come and go at his Command,
out of whose service to be manumitted, is the dishonorablest Vassalage under
the Sun. Our obedience to God admits not the Sophisms of flesh and blood; to
debate the point of obedience with God by delays, is to enter our selves the
Devils slaves without dispute: He that asks leave of his lust to part with it,
in obedience to God, seems to take leave of his God, and part with him in
obedience to his lust: Nay, if the Land of thy Nativity, or the vastness of thy
Possessions; if the honors of thy State-Offices, or the Profits of thy
Corruption therein; if the quality of thy Birth, or the vanity of thy
pleasures; if the exquisiteness of thy Endowments, or the popular Hosanna's of
Idolatrous Flattery; if the Wife of thy Bosom, or the issue of thy Loins; if
all or any of these counterballance the least of Gods Commands, in the scale of
thy judgment or affection, go sacrifice to thy God of flesh, and be thine own
slave, for thou art not yet selfess enough to be employed in the service of the
Most High; indeed, God is able of the stones to raise up children unto Ahraham,
so there may be hope of thy heart; but till with him thou can deny thy self
the present possession of the whole earth, for a bare reversion of Heaven; till
with him thou can answer Gods Call, and exchange thy Country here, for a
better hereafter, thy Fathers House below, for those Mansions prepared above,
thou may not expect a Canaan in his bosom, Luke 16.22.

God in the Mount: OR,
In the Mount of the Lord it shall be seen,

Genesis 22.14.
NOt in the Mole-hills of men, God never trifles away his Miracles, he works no
wonders beneath the highest pitch of Humane power: A Miracle does presuppose
impossibility in all below that power which wrought it; where the power of the
Creature ends, the Almightiness of the Creator begins; Miracles of Mercy are
not wrought, till the exigency of the Creature calls for the mercy of a
Miracle; it stands not much with Gods honor, to interpose his power in doing
that for the Creature which he has empowered the Creature to do for himself;
should God come in to man's help, before the cure is past the help of man, the
goodness of his mercy would anticipate the glory of his power, and the freeness
of his love obstruct the actings of Faith.

In the Mount of the Lord it shall be seen.] Therefore not in the Valley of
Despair, nor on the Pinnacle of Presumption, unless to cut off the one, Numb.
15.30. or destroy the other, Mat. 27.5. When therefore Poverty does pinch, or
nakedness benumb; when Persecutions flames threaten either to scorch thy soul,
or burn thy body; when the floods thereof menace either shipwreck to thy
Conscience, or a Land-deluge to all thy sublunar interests: when the proud
Nimrods of the earth first foam out their Juliantick rancor, to poison thy
sacred chastity with their Scorpion-Blasphemies, and then ingulph thee locked
in irons, to suffocatethee with milder damps in their hell-typifying dungeons,
the portraict of their own black souls; when such Tyrants, prodigal of their
Engines, and their grand Master, by the juncture of all his infernal Imps, call
a Council in hell to persecute thee on earth, Cast not away thy confidence, the
Saints themselves were under a Cloud before thee, and it was Isreal's Proverb,
The Lord will be seen in the Mount, Genesis 22.14.

Modest Contentation.
I have enough, my Brother, keep what thou have unto thy self,

Genesis 33.9.
THe gift of refusing gifts, is a gift greater then man can give; he that can
shut his hands against the rich, will open them to the poor: It is a subtle
piece of thriving policy, to repulse some advantages of gain; and the speediest
way to abound in every thing, is to be self-denyingly contented with any thing:
No man thinks he has enough, but he that knows he has more then he does
deserve; and no man enjoys what he does possess, but he that covets no more
then he does enjoy; he that can repulse the temptations of gain, gains by such
temptations, whilst the assaults of the repulsed Enemy recoyls to the damage
of the Assaylant. The mind contented is a fortress impregnable, it is not
whole vollies of Bribes, nor the Canon of Commands Royal, though charged with
the highest Titles of Honor, or Provenues of State-offices, can make the least
breach on the naked outworks of his unprojecting and well-contented mind; but
the unsatiable and idolatrous wretch, supposing gain to be godliness,
acknowledges no other Infinite then his own unplenable desire, whilst the
other in every estate practicing Paul's well learned Lesson of Contentment,
subscribes to godliness as his greatest gain; he takes possession of his own
heart, and enjoys himself; he is tenant to no man's estate for term of lust; he
is under his high Lord, his own heart-Lord, and thence can command his desires
to do homage to none but the Providence of God. This disposition unkennels the
greedy dogs (as the prophet Isaiah, speaking of blind watchmen, Isa. 56.11.
styles them) That can never have enough, and shows us the hideous darkness of
the infathomable gulf of the ravenous desires of the Canibals of this age.
Profane Esau (now no more rough but courteous Esau) may rise in judgment
against the Wolves of this Generation, for he so far abhorred such violence,
that he modestly refused even what was freely presented him, and said, I have
enough, my brother, keep what thou have unto thy self, Genesis 33.9.

I am that I am. Exodus 3.14.
TO define God, is more properly a Paradox then a Precept in Divinity; indeed,
a secret too Mataphysical for the most Logical eyesight of any created
understanding. What God is not, we know; what God is, we know not: If thou
would fain sublime thy self to a sight of him who is invisible, look with the
eye of Faith through the prospective of Christ; and the best way to define God,
is to endeavor the practice of that description he makes of himself, in the
Mystery of his Word and Volumn of his Works. To define an Infinite, is a kind
of Blasphemous Contradiction; and he that thinks he can suppose an exact
definition of God, is one of the Fools that says in his heart There Is none.
Can thou find out an end for Eternity, or beginning for Sempiternity? art
thou too strong for Omnipotency? can thou circumcircle Immensity? can thou
confine Ubiquity, or confute Omnisciency? can thou exclude Omnipresency? then
may thou in part tell me what God is: Beware of limiting the Holy One of
Israel; if thou can see of God more then his back-parts, thou have better
eyes then Moses had, whose Commission if the Israelites question, behold it
ratified by that eternal Subscription, I am that I am, Exodus 3.14.

Loyal Disloyalty.
They feared God, and did not as the King of Egypt commanded them, but saved
the men children alive,

Exodus 1.17.
TO obey Caesar for God, is the Subjects duty; to obey him for himself, the
Salves vassalage: To obey the commands of Caesar, wherein he disobeys the
Commands of God, is to make thy Loyalty to thy Prince guilty of rebellion to
thy God: To obey God for Caesar, is Mercenary Religion, to obey him for
himself, is Filial Obedience: To obey the Commands of God, wherein they
contradict the Commands of Caesar, is to render thy fear of God unguilty of
over-honoring thy Prince: To have absolute command over all the Creatures, is
only the Creators Prerogative-Royal; to obey this absolute Monarch above all
Sublunary Potentates, is the Christians Prerogative-Loyal. When Humane Laws
jarring with Gods, make a discord in Heaven, thy obedience to the former may
not make it harmony on earth: Our Allegiance to Caesar must swear fealty to
Gods supremacy, that if at any time thy obedience to God be unduly convicted of
disloyalty to thy Prince, thy Appeal lies to the Chancery of Heaven: Gods Will
is a Law, yet his Peoples Obedience no Slavery, but perfect Freedom; the Prince
his Will is a Law too, where he has none but Slaves to His Subjects: Where the
Engines of State Policy make the wheels of the Peoples Obedience run Counter to
the Primum Mobile, or main Spring of Gods revealed pleasure, it may be feared,
lest the frame of the whole work, and the body of the Land retrograde to the
first Chaos of Confusion: Obedience to man rather then God, is as the sin of
Witchcraft; yea, the Prince who delivers not his Commands from God, or derives
not his Commission from Heaven, neither fears God nor honors himself; and
whosoever obeys him in such Commands, is guilty of that obedience, as Treason
against the highest Majesty: A special Command from God, legitimates a thing
unlawful in it self, it had not been murder in Abraham to have slain his Son;
but thus it is not with Princes on Earth, therefore the Egyptian Midwives
approved their loyalty to God, by their disloyalty to Pharaoh; for, They feared
God, and did not as the King of Egypt commanded them, but saved the
men-children alive, Exodus 1.17.

Heavenly Eloquence.
Go, and I will be with thy mouth, and teach thee what thou shall say,

Exodus 4.13.
THe Spirits dictates are the Saints best Rhetoric; the plainest Language
where the Spirit is Orator, is too profound for the deepest apprehension of
mere natural judgments; not he that has most learning, but he that has most
grace is best learned; he that is seen in all Arts and Sciences is held an able
man, but he that has learned Christ is the best Scholar. A poor weak
Christian that does practice Christ, speaks his Language with more grace then
the most exquisite Orator of mere nominal Christians, and has more persuasive
Rhetoric in his sweet Conversation, then many of our learned Gownmen in their
life and Doctrine. There are a Generation of men in this refined and
new-modell'd Age, that have fled exceeding high in their expression, some think
they have out-shot all objects of reason to comprehend, and of faith to
believe; as if too mysterious to make reasonable sense of, and too
superluminary to conclude nonsense; this is not heavenly Eloquence: Others
there are that draw their Language to so fine a third, that it often breaks in
the spinning, and naught but a Spider crawls from the Web; sometimes it breaks
into sense ridiculous, and sometimes into errors venomous, now into
self-interest, and anon into faction; or if the third hold, it serves only to
s^w Pillows under the drowsy declensions of most uncorrupted Patrons; neither
is this heavenly eloquence: The great Doctor of the Gentiles, Paul, that
Gospel-Orator, accosted not the Corinthians with the perswasible inticements of
man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of Power; and this was
heavenly Eloquence: for when the Spirit prompts the heart, the tongue cannot
but speak eloquently; the volubility whereof flowing only from some principle
of nature, is but as the wagging of an Apsenleaf, compared with the Seraphick
Language of a gracious heart, where the Spirit gives utterance: Such Language
Christ promised his Disciples when called to attest his Truth; and such
Language God promised Moses when he employed him as his Agent into Egypt, to
uninslave his bondag'd people, saying, Go, and I will be with thy mouth, and
teach thee what thou shall say, Exodus 4.13.

Jehovah-nissi. Exodus 17.15.
THey who in their spiritual warfare list themselves under Gods Command to
fight the Lords Battles, not only have Christ for their Captain, but even the
Lord of Hosts for their Jehovah-nissi, the Lord for their Banner: Suppose the
Generalissimo of all the infernal Janissaries muster up all his Forces, and
draws them into Battalia against thy naked soul, ranking the honors, profits
and pleasures of this life on the right wing, the hideous troops of all thy
fearful sins on the left, placing thy most conquering lusts in the main body,
keeping whole Regiments of that gallant Brigade of most specious Sanctity
(whose leader is Spiritual pride) for a Reserve, with diverse ensnaring
temptations lying in Ambush, with as many occasions and opportunities of
sinning, as so many Scouts to discover the state, posture and motion of thy
soul; all this supposed, yet the being on thy side thou need not to fear,
For in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength, Isa. 26.4. He is the
Church-Militants Banner, against which the gates of hell shall not prevail: To
the wicked the Lord is a consuming fire, dissolving them like the fat of Lambs;
but his Church, like Moses his Bush, is preserved in the midst of fiery
persecutions, to luster forth as well the glory, as the power of the Almighty.
The Church never yet fought with the Prince of the Air, but either won the day
by being victorious, or gained by being persecuted: And why? because the Lord
was her Banner; and indeed, where the Lord of Hosts leads the Van, Victory must
needs attend the Rere: When that stripling David was to Duel that monstrous
Goliath, he advanced toward him only in the name of the Lord of Hosts, 1 Samuel
17.8. Whilst Moses's supported arm was Gods Standard, Joshuah defeated the
uncircumcised Amalekites; Therefore Moses built him an Altar, and called it
Jehovah-nissi, Exodus 17.15.

Stand still.
Fear ye not, stand still, and see the Salvation of the Lord,

Exodus 14.13.
DIstrust, the Brat of slavish fear, is the first step leads downward to
Despair; he that will not trust God on his word, will scarce confide in his
miracles: To fancy safety out of Gods protection, is an argument of wretched
security, and little policy; but to doubt his protection in the midst of his
encompassing mercies, an argument of more ingratitude, and less faith: As it is
most desperate presumption, and an ungracious tempting of God, to stand still
when he opens us a door of flight, and as it were bids us fly for our life,
either by revealing us his Will by his Word, or by whispering it in our hearts
by his Spirit, or by proclaiming it by his past or present deliverances; so is
it a no less desperate Cowardice, and most Atheistical distrust, to fly when
God bids us stand, either by shutting against us the door of escape, or by
giving us pledges of victory, or promises of protection. It had been a strange
piece of self-enslaving and rebellious madness in Peter, to have staid in
prison when the Angel unshackled him, and opened the door; yet but an
ill-purchas'd freedom in Paul to have bribed Felix Cesaria's Governor for his
enlargement: In our inevitablest straights, we are in all humble observance and
faithful patience to attend the pleasure of God, without disputing the Justice
of his Providence, and by a holy recumbancy, without the least murmuring
distrustfulness, to acquiesce in the Faith of his Promises: The invisible
Politician may and is often brought to his wits end, but a just man is never at
his Faiths end: Art thou degraded in the world, and undeservedly persecuted?
stand still, keep an eye to the promise, and be strong in the faith: Art thou
fortune-fallen, become poor, and through no default of thine cast into prison?
stand still, remember the Lord hears the poor, and despises not his
Prisoners, Psalm. 96.33. Art thou engaged in any combat at home with Monsters,
like Paul's Ephesian Beasts, or in any desperate hazard of life? stand still,
never forgetting who it is that has calculated even the very hairs of thy
head: Thus what once Moses said to the unbondaged, yet murmuring Israelites,
let me say to the Redeemed, yet distrustful people of God, when pursued by the
heart-hardned Pharaohs of this age, Fear ye not, stand still, and see the
Salvation of the Lord, Exodus 14.13.

Let me alone.
Let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot, etc.

Exodus 32.10.
TO will and to do are all one with God; it is the Prerogative-Royal only of
the Almighty, to be able to do whatsoever he pleases to will; whatsoever he
will he does, but all that he can he does not. Now the power of the Creature,
flows from that in the Creator; hence it is that the more we are formed into
his likeness, the more prevalency we have with him, and the more victory over
our selves. A just man is a wonderful strong Creature; I can do nothing to
Sodom, says God to Lot, till thou be gone thence, Genesis 19.22. Thus the free
condescendency of the Highest, vouchsafes such a voluntary restraint of his
Justice, as the prevalent integrity of a righteous man in favor with God, seems
to overpower even the Almighty. The faithful are Gods favorites; rather then
their Petition shall be laid aside, his own Mercy shall say Amen unto their
Prayers. Faith is such a solicitous grace, such an importunate beggar, as it
will never leave God alone; yea, the very wicked of the Earth fare the better
for the Prayers of the godly; see it in the case of Sodom, Genesis 18. and here
those Israelites might have been led to the slaughter like the Calf they
worshipped, had not this Moses (refusing to be the Adopted Grandchilde of the
King of Egypt, though his Daughter might have challenged him by Providence,
Exodus 2.5.) now become such a Favorite in the Court of Heaven, that God himself
must as it were importune him to slack his importunity, and sue to him to
withdraw his suit, and say, Let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot against
them, and that I may consume them: and I will make of thee a great nation,
Exodus 32.10.

The right Interpretation of Scripture.
Ye shall put nothing to the word which I command you, neither shall ye take
ought therefrom,

Deuteronomy. 4.2.
When thou read the Scripture, let the Text interpret the Text, and grope
not to wind thy self out of the Labyrinth of those sacred Oracles by the clue
of thine own private spirit, nor conceit thy self wiser then the Omniscient. To
wrest Scripture, is to father a lie on the Spirit of Truth; and he that betrays
the Word to a sense the Spirit never meant it, Sophisticates the great Seal of
Heaven, and has no share therein, the Plagues therein denounced only
excepted: Whether then thou read to thy self, or expoundest to others, do
not gloss the holy Text with unintelligible notions, the Bastard-comment of a
Weathercock-faith, nor bespatter the splendour of such a glorious Light, with
the scarce vapor-proof atoms of an erroneous muddy judgment: Many Revelations
are arrived of late, some no question came from beyond the world, are
Commissioned from Heaven, have the Seal of the Spirit indeed, whose authority
admits not of dispute; such only are the faithful interpreters of the holy
Language: other Revelations there are, which came from below the world, are
Commissioned from Hell, have the Seal of the Beast on them; these also pretend
a title to our faith, but believe not every Spirit, 1 John 4.1. To take the
crutch from the Lame by the impudent assertions of a blind, yet wilful
judgment, is the inhumanest piece of imperious ignorance in the world; and to
mis-guide the doubtful Pilgrim under pretense of a more compendious way to the
New Jerusalem then was ever yet discovered, is to incur the curse of Heaven,
the thanks of Hell, and the blackest guilt of the highest murder. No Scripture
may be construed by the corrupt Dictionary of any ill-byass'd Spirit, or
according to the Analogy of private interests; he that strains the Scripture to
a note the Spirit never tuned it, perverts it to his own destruction: Ye shall
put nothing to the word which I command you, neither shall ye take ought
therefrom, Deuteronomy. 4.2.

The Foundation of Knowledge.
The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom,

Prove. 1.7.
OF all creatures, Sub-angelical Man is the noblest; of all the parts of Man,
the Soul; of all the faculties of the Soul, the Understanding; which if not
exercised about her genuine object, the Gospel-fear or true worship of her
Creator, merits not the name of Sense; and he that bottoms his knowledge, or
lays the Foundation of his wisdom on any other Basis, builds but on the sand
with hay and stubble, and shall find the edifice soon prove more brittle, then
the shell of that brain which built it. Christ the wisdom of the Father is the
Cornerstone of ours; and if other Foundation any man has laid, the structure,
if it prove not his Babel in this world, will undoubtedly a Tower of Shilo in
that to come. Whose wisdom begins not with the fear of God, ends in his eternal
displeasure: If our wisdom commence with the fear of the Lord, his grace will
accompany the progressions thereof, and his glory crown the event: Without this
fear there may be wit, not wisdom the gravest Sages, without (...) are but the
most decent fools; and the choicest extractions of their unsanctified brain,
but the Chemistry of vaporing profaneness, or at best, the high Magic of most
learned Lunacy; For the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, Prove. 1.7.

The poor Man's Advocate.
Withhold not good from them to whom it is due, when it is in the power of thy
hand to do it,

Prove. 3.27.
ROb not the Poor of the Tribute of thine Alms, lest at the general Assize or
Grave-delivery they indict thee of Sacrilege. The poor man's Box is Gods
Exchequer, and he that adds not to it, takes from it. There is not a mite given
in charity on earth, but is recorded for a pound in Heaven; yea, a Cup of cold
water flowing from the bowels of Compassion, may so swell, that out of his
belly shall flow even Rivers of Living water: There Is not a poor man that asks
a penny of thee, but thou art so much indebted to him, that in case he commence
his Suit in Forma Pauperis, and prefer a Bill in the Chancery of Heaven by way
of Petition against thee, it may be feared an Ite Maledicti may issue forth to
thy everlasting and inevitable ruin. Thou owe God more for the Poors asking
a penny of thee, then they could thee, had thou freely given them a pound; for
in the one thou owe God praise for the opportunity of doing good; but in the
other they have but their own due, and thou do but thy duty: Wherefore,
Withhold not good from them to whom it is due, when it is in the power of thy
hand to do it, Prove. 3.27.

The contented Spirit.
Drink waters out of thine own Cistern, and running waters out of thine own
Well,

Prove. 5.15.
DIspleasure not a friend to be a slave to thine own lust, thy rags are Robes
with contentation; if thou have not a mite for the Poor, endow them with thy
Prayers; feast on thine own Lentils; quaff thy penitential tears, in stead of
luscious wines, and count thy sins in stead of pounds; keep thy thoughts at
home, and let not thy ambition climb beyond thy Makers pleasure; crack not the
Misers heart strings by countermining policy to rob him of his covetousness: If
thou have a yolk and a shell, never keep house at another man's Table; its
better be a Snail in his shell, then a Lion in a Grate: Give the Devil his due,
and plunder no man: Do not cut a purse by Law, nor lay the foundation of thine
own curse upon the ruins of another happiness: Let both eyes be but
single-sighted, and let not thy tongue be double-hearted: Rejoice in the wife
of thy youth, but let thy Neighbors alone: Drink waters out of thine own
Cistern, and running waters out of thine own Well, Prove. 5.15.

The Arm of Flesh.
Cursed is he that makes flesh his Arm,

Jer. 17.5.
HIs is but a winged prosperity, whose happiness is centered in his riches; and
his no stabler honor, whose ambition in the peoples breath; the one builds
Castles in the air, and the other inhabits them; the one counts himself in
heaven, when his neighbor is in hell, or in his debt; the other blesses himself
as sufficiently immortal, if some courteous Historian may be purchased to foist
his noble acts into the Margent of a Chronicle; the one erects the golden Calf,
and the other worships it, both are an abomination to the Lord: For what
greater dishonor can be done the Creator, then to attribute his Attributes to
the Creature. When the Sword gives Laws, the well-lined bags of the one will
prove but pin-proof; and when Deaths Herald summons the surrender of the Souls
Citadel, titles of Honor will prove but a Cobweb-guard for the other: It is
not Armies of men can secure thee in a Famine, nor thousands of Granaries in a
Pestilence, nor either of these supply its proper defect if thou rest thereon;
whole vollies of prayers, unless levied by the eye of Faith, cannot prevent the
incursion of the least of all Gods judgments: All the policy of the world
knows not how to quench the least flash of Lightning; the highest endowments of
the most refined brain, the noblest spirit of the mightiest Champions; the
eloquentest beauty amongst Natures darlings, have not Rhetoric enough to
persuade Death to desist, though for an hour: He that speaks by his own
eloquence, may gallantly plead the posthaste of his own ruin; he that fights
upon his own strength, is in actual war with himself; he that prays by his own
spirit, has them heard by his own ears: Say not then to either of these, This
shall be my Sanctuary; for, Cursed is he that makes flesh his Arm, Jer. 17.5.

Custom in Sin.
Can the Blackmore change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? then may ye also
do good that are accustomed to do evil,

Jer. 13.23.
CUstom is a Law to the wicked, says Solomon in his wisdom; yet though sin and
thou are Twins by nature, let not thy natural corruption practice it self into
a habit, lest the Devil claim thee by prescription: Hell has some title to the
Customary sinner, for all such desperate shipwracks of Faith fall within the
Devils Royalty. To habituate our selves in evil, is what in us lies to divest
our selves of all possibility of doing good; and he that from the cradle to the
crutch sins away an age, may as soon command his gray hairs to resume their
youthly color, as incline a thought to Piety without a Miracle of Mercy: Every
Customary sin, like the sin of hypocrisy, has more then one sin in it, every
such sinner keeps the Records of Hell, and is the Devils best Customer: Its
easier for the Devil to speak truth, then for the Customary sinner to act it:
He that accustoms himself to lie, will sooner perjure his conscience, then
confine himself to truths; he that accustoms himself to theft, will sooner be
hanged for a rush, then deny himself the guilt of murder to purchase a purse;
he that accustoms himself to be drunk, will sooner starve his posterity then be
manacled to the rules of sobriety; he that accustoms himself to women, will
sooner be pox'd, then be wedded to chastity; and he that accustoms himself to
swear, will rather be damned then be out of fashion: Can the Blackmore change
his skin, or the Leopard his spots? then may ye also do good that are
accustomed to do evil, Jer. 13.23.

Prevalency in Importunity.
He had power over the Angel, and prevailed,

Genesis 32.28.
AWaiting Importunity is the child of Faith, but impatient solicitousness the
brat of Presumption: To wrestle with the Lord by believing, is Saint-like, but
to fight with him by presuming, Devilish. To the woman of Canaan Christ said,
Be it unto thee even as thou will; but to Zebedees wife, Ye know not what ye
ask: The graceless Judge who neither feared God nor regarded man, was yet
conquered by an Importunate Widow. Let me alone, says God to Moses, when
Israel was at their Calf-Idolatry, as if his importunity had even bound (with
reference be it spoken) the hands of the Almighty, and prevailed with him to
repent of the evil he intended them, Exodus 32.14. Heavens gate flies open at
the importunity of a Righteous man, where Gods will takes place of ours, and
patience has her perfect work; and again, Heavens windows shall not open for
three years and an half together, if Elias pray so, James 5.17. Indeed the
Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent only take it by main
force of Faith: There is nothing too hard for a zealous Importunity, which is
not improper for God to grant, or thee to crave. Faiths wings in prayer flies
up the soul toward Heaven, no higher then importunity swiftens them; If
without this our prayer be fled Heavenwards, though it took wing at the heart,
it will not light in the bosom. Faith apprehends a fit object, Hope takes
level, to both which Importunity becomes that secret virtue which conveys the
arrow to the mark: Though Jacobs holy Wrestler, when he saw he prevailed not,
touched his thigh out of joint, yet his faith remained sound enough to wrestle
a blessing from him through the force of his importunity: Thus by his strength
he had power with God; yea, He had power over the Angel, and prevailed, Genesis
32.28.

A Caveat for Charity.
Take heed that ye do not your alms before men to be seen of them,

Matthew. 6.1.
When thou castest thy bread on the waters, let thy right hand conceal it from
the left, for a good work ill done, belies the intention of the Spirit, and
scandals the truth of holiness. He that gives his alms to be seen of men, sells
the reward of piety, to purchase the curse of pride; the sure promises of God,
for the vain applause of men; that the poor are more beholding to his vanity
then his charity, whose bounty they highly gratify, if they pray God to
forgive him his hypocrisy. In a fit of good nature (if nature can be so) a man
may drop an alms or two, but this is mere moral charity; the wretched
Canker-worm of mankind may, in hope to do his Coffers right, by taking Gods
promise for their security, lend the poor an alms upon pawn of his Prayers
Interest, but this is mercenary Charity: The gluttonous Epicure, that in his
jollity denied the Poor the crumbs he gave his dogs, may on his deathbed erect
them an Hospital, but this is thanks-worthless charity; the profane person in
his gallantry may be very noble to the poor, but this is vainglorious charity;
the Hypocrite may embrace the Poors necessity as his alms opportunity, yet have
but Pharisaick charity; the good meaning man may give liberally to the sound
Criple, but this is blind charity; the heart-melting, yet purse-frozen
Christian, may give large and fair words, but this is cold charity; and all
these shall have their reward: Take heed therefore how ye do your alms, Matthew.
6.1.

The Pharisees Prayer.
God, I thank thee, that I am not as other men are, etc.

Luke 18.11.
A Proud Prayer is a blemished Sacrifice; and he that with this Pharisee
justifies himself as righteous when he should confess his sins, worships the
unknown God of his Merits, sacrificing his brain to the Calf of his lips, and
his Auditors ears to the Dagon of his brain. Self-idolatry is a most exquisite
piece of Spiritual witchcraft, it changes the Pulpit to a Stage at the turn of
a hand, the breathings of a Spirit into strange Convulsions of Wit; it makes
but one thing of Idol and Idolater, but one thing of every vain Babbler and this
Pharisee.

In this Prayer, yea in these few words thereof, where are no less then three
lies, and another sin in each, [God,] He meant nothing less, therefore lied,
and took the Name of God in vain; [I thank thee] gratitude implies some
humility, therefore lied and dissembled that grace which he wanted; [I am not
as other men are] another lie accompanied with Spiritual Pride and Arrogance,
beside a running vein of hypocrisy throughout the whole; hence it is, that
Simulata Pietas becomes Duplex Iniquitas. What a most gross Pharisee was this?
and can any in this age be so ridiculous in the sight of God, or rather
superlatively odious to the most High, as with the damned Angels and this
Pharisee, to usurp more holiness then God vouchsafes them, and dissemble more
then ere was in them: Such an Hypocrite is a Proteus in Religion, that would
fain be Canonized for his Tongue-devotion. A fair blazoned Catalogue of good
works, is not the Argument of Prayer; nor a long Prayer, the infallible
Argument of a good work: Let the Proud Pharisee court Heaven with his
complement, and accost the Lord with thanks that he is not as other men are;
but let my Prayer be, Lord, be merciful to me a sinner, Luke 18.13.

The Key of the Grave.
And when he thus had spoken, he cried with a loud voice, Lazarus, come forth,

John 11.43.
NO wonder he should open another grave whilst himself lived, that could
unlock his own when himself lay dead and buried in it: If Peter can by the
power of Christ speak men dead with one word, Acts 5.5. no question but himself
can speak them alive again by another: He that has prevailed over the gates of
Hell, may easily command the door of the grave; the power that opened the earth
to let Corah in, may well open it again to let Lazarus out: The Resurrection
shall be anticipated, the Graves shall yield their dead before the time, rather
then the power of Christ shall admit dispute for the want of a miracle.

Draw the Curtain: Art not thou this Lazarus? Lazarus dead and buried? or
Lazarus raised and revived? Lazarus had been but four days in the grave, and
Martha concludes him to stink, and objects it in bar to Christ's proceedings:
How many times four years have thou layen dead and buried in the grave of sin,
which may conclude thee also exceeding noysom in the nostrils of God? yet he
never objected it as a bar to thy faith: Is not every faculty of thy soul, as
well as each member of thy body, by reason of a long continuance among the
dead, become all putrified, and nothing but corruption? Is not every sin a
grave for one faculty or other? have thou not as many graves as sins? is there
no corruption in thine heart? none in the will? none in the affection? none in
the judgment? nay, would you think this Land and Nation were quite rotten,
dead and buried? and that it were now but the disturbed ghost of a body
Politic, that came to an untimely end by being her own Executioner? would you
think that Judicatories, Pulpits, Magistracy and Ministry were all dead,
buried, rotten, and full of corruption? I conclude nothing, only offer these
things to thy consideration; yet this I say, That supposing a verity in all
this, yet if there be faith enough to believe, there is some hope, yea an
assurance, That though the soul even-stink again, by reason of Custom in sin,
yea, though the Devil himself roll a stone at the door of thy heart, not only
to bolt in the corruption that is already there, but also to harden it against
the very means of Vivification, yet Christ's blood having cried with a loud
voice, Lazarus comes forth, John 11.43.

Judas his Epitaph.
From the Ministry and Apostleship Judas by transgression fell, that he might
go to his own place,

Acts 1.25.
THe saddest Epitaph that ever enshrined the memory of a dead Apostle; it seems
he was degraded from his Apostleship, before he went to his own place: What,
had he a propriety in that place by purchase? doubtless even in this life he
had the Livery and Seisin thereof in his conscience, though he were not put
into actual Possession till the Conveyances were sealed with his own blood: But
what call you this place? where was it seated? how situated? whose was it
anciently? was Judas such an eminent person in his country, that Peter could
possibly imagine that there could be no man ignorant of that Place, which was
so properly his own? no question but the temper of that Expression has more of
the Spirit in it, then a thousand of those uncharitable Ignorations which
thunder men to hell ipso verbo, before they understand whether they ever had
their teeth set on edge by Judas his Sop, or in their practice consented to the
Crucifying of the Lord of glory.

Its worth an Eligie, seriously to consider on how many of our monumental
Sepulchers the Inscription of this Epitaph may rank it self, among the Elegiack
Panigericks of our supposed Worthies: Doubtless if Judas, who confessed the
fact and condemned himself, be gone to his own place, such as make repetition
of his damnable Doctrine, but equivocate the act and justify themselves, will
post after him. By nature we are all the children of wrath and heirs of hell,
take heed therefore of going to thy one place; estrange thy self from the place
of thy nativity, endeavor for an inoculation into a beter family, that when
thou art hence departed, posterity passing by thy Monument in the Chronicle of
this life, may not read this Epitaph, That thou art gone unto thy place, Acts
1.25.

The Idolatrous Hosanna.
And when they heard these sayings, they were full of wrath, and cried out,
saying, Great is Diana of the Ephesians,

Acts 19.28.
NOthing more perilous to the persons and estates of men, then to maintain a
false Religion, when the errors thereof are discovered by the light of the
Gospel; herein Demetrius was his Crafts-master, and rather then the Ephesian
Lady shall suffer in her reputation, he will make her free of the Company of
Silversmiths, and the learned Town Clerk shall search the Records to derive her
descent from Jupiter, and he as zeaous for the Law, as the other for the
Worship: Thus each in his Profession makes his Religion dance to the tune of
his own private interests.

Are there no Mechanical gods among us? none who condemn the Town Clerk, yet
justify Demetrius? that will not refer the matter to the Touchstone of the Law
of Gospel? yet cry up the Idol of their own handicrafts institution. Was there
a Diana in Ephesus? may I not say there are five for one in England? which
bring no small gain unto the Craftsmen: And that each man's Religion may pass
for current money, behold it stamped with Demetrius his Inscription, Great is
Diana of the Ephesians, Acts 19.28.

The Eutychian Sluggard.
He fell down from the third loft, and was taken up dead,

Acts 20.9.
IT was a mercy that he escaped so, that the Earth was betwixt him and the
bottomless Pit, and that he stopped tumbling before he came into Hell. He is
extreme drowsy whose body is not kept from sleeping at that Word, which is
able to awaken his conscience, though it slept a nap of an Age long; It seems
this sluggard was in no little sleep, whom such a fall could not awaken, for he
was taken up dead; he must needs sleep whom the Devil rocks; but undoubtedly,
him whom the Lord finds not always watching, the Devil may one day catch
napping.

There are more Sermon-sleepers then Eutychus dreamt of; have you never seen a
man sleep at Sermon with his eyes open, but his ears shut? bid such an one
repeat you the Sermon, and he will tell you his dream: have you never observed a
man at a Sermon to sleep very attentively, that heard, all, understood, little,
and practiced nothing: It seems there may be deaf hearers as well as dumb
Preachers. Thus there are more ways of sleeping at a Sermon then one, and for
him that cannot refrain, it would be less Hypocrisy to go to Hell in a
feather-bed at home; for Eutychus slept but once that we hear of at a Sermon,
yet be fell down from the third lost, and was taken up dead, Acts 20.9.

Paul's Viper.
There came a viper out of the heat, and fastened on Paul's hand,

Acts. 28.3.
What, Come from a wreck at Sea, to perish by a worm on shore? so thought the
kind Barbarians; and thence presently conclude, that this Paul had a viperous
hand in committing murder, and must suffer, though not by the violence of wind
and seas, yet by the venom of this viper or their tongues; though he had no
sooner shook hands with the Beast without prejudice, and committed it to the
fire without the leust hurt to his little finger, but they instantly fall a
deifying him, and then farther transgress by their idolatry, then they had done
before by their uncharity.

It is a courteous piece of Barbarism, to entertain distressed Strangers
without charity; and the one half of our notorious Alms we should doubtless
find, if the Trumpet were impartially sounded to be scarce equivalent
humanity: They endeavor the preservation of his person, but the ruin of his
reputation, yet at the turn of a hand are ready to Sacrifice to him. And
wherein do we exceed these Barbarians, unless it be by executing as well as
condemning the innocent? there is a certain kind of pestilent venom disgorged
out of the stomachs of most men, through the overflowings of the gall; better
it were that these were purged, then vomited out; for proceeding from the
inflammation of an incendiary spleen, it sticks closer to the reputations of
men, then the viper which came out of the heat, and fastened upon Paul's hand,
Acts 28.3

The just Man's Anchor.
The just shall live by faith,

Heb. 10.38.
NEutrality in a good cause, is a strong argument of a weak faith; and perverse
resolvedness in a bad, no shallow Test of deep presumption. In times of
persecution, Gods promises are the godly man's Sanctuary, who even in the midst
of the flames, at once both smiles at the Tyranny, and pities the folly of his
Persecutors: the approach of an enemy may fright him from his House, not from
his Habitation; his House is in the body, but his home in Heaven: In the
hottest pestilence he fears only the infection of sin; and when War produces
a Famine, he feeds on the peace of a good conscience: Though the floods of
Confusion inundate the foundation of Magistracy; though the Stars of the
Gospels Firmament fall, and the light thereof be turned even into Egyptian
darkness that may be felt; though the Earth yawn to embowel mankind, and the
grave starve for want of nourishment; though Hell had no more work left to do,
but to tempt and persecute, yet The just shall live by faith, Heb. 10.38.

The Devil put to flight.
Resist the Devil, and he will flee from thee,

James. 4.7.
When Hells Generalissimo, with Legions of potent temptations, besieges the
naked fortress of thy unfortified soul; up, sound an Alarm to thy Faith, press
all the graces of the one, and faculties of the other for Gods service; levy
thy prayers under the Conduct of Gods Spirit, list them under the Merit's
Banner of the Captain of thy Salvation; look well to the outworks of thy moral
actions, but narrower to the inner line of thy treacherous thoughts; round the
watch of thy whole man with care and constancy, keep a special watch at three
of thy Cinque Ports; let Faith be the Captain of the Main-guard, kept at the
door of thy heart; cashier all cowardly thoughts, and such as hold
correspondence with the Enemy; let not Hypocrisy as a Spy sneak in and out thy
Garrison; let the Watchword be Emmanuel, and let a party of faithful Prayers be
ever sallying out, till Relief be sent from Heaven with a supply of Grace in a
Sufficiency thereof: Resist the Devil, and he will flee from thee, James 4.7.

Balaams Ass.
The dumb Ass speaking with man's voice, forbad the madness of the Prophet,

2 Pet. 2.16.
COvetousness is sufficiently detestable in such as wait but on their private
callings, far more odious in those that on State Affairs, but most abominable
in those that on the Altar: To dishonor that God which made the earth, for the
dross of it, is the ignoblest of ingratitudes; and for the menial servants of
the high Lord of heaven and earth, to become the mercenary slaves of men, to
discredit that Master whom they pretend to serve, is the inexemplariest
president of the horridst rebellion. Some have had a strange dream of the
Resurrection of Beasts, and thence most grossly held, that Creatures merely
Sensitive shall rise again; truly I know no better Argument to back this beast
with, then to interpret that opinion to be understood of this dumb Ass, to rise
in judgment against the madness of many the supposed Prophets of our days; for
though as the tree falls, so he shall lie, yet I cannot say, That he that lives
and dies a beast, shall rise so. Time was (I spare the present tense) when many
learned Prophets for a mess of pottage sold the truth, to Anathematize the
pillars thereof; methinks they are somewhat excusable, for they were mad; the
silliest of all Animals here wonderfully qualified, at once both to publish and
reprove their Lunacy: Beware then, thou that art in the Lords Embassy, or
oftener in thine own service under that notion, make not a trade of that which
may and should be bought without money; neither set the gifts of God to sale;
be not tempted by the baits of men to tempt the Almighty, to counterdict his
determinate purposes; neither let the rewards of the wicked ensnare thee, to
the prejudice of the faithful servants of God, lest they condemn thee of less
understanding then the Horse or Mule; for, The dumb Ass speaking with man's
voice, forbad the madness of the Prophet, 2 Pet. 2.16.

The Spirits Touchstone.
Believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits, whether they be of God or no,

1 John 4.1.
LOok well to thy faith, there are many false Prophets risen up amongst us:
Anchor it on firm ground, Religion blows too many ways: All Prophets are not
Michaiahs; believe them not one Doctrine the sooner, for circumcising the Text,
to come to the Cushion ere the matter, beating it down in stead of sin, and
pressing it more then the Point they handle: All Prophets are not Micaiahs;
believe them not one Corollary the sooner, for Metaphisicking the Temples into
Schools, and learnedly confuting their own Objections, to salve their own
Credits more then their Auditors souls: All Prophets are not Micaiahs; believe
them not one Sycophantick lie the sooner for their multitude, or the high
qualifications of their Chaplainship; King Ahab had four hundred, and a lying
Spirit in them all. Gods word is the Spirits Touchstone, thereby thou may
distinguish the Wolf from the Lamb, and the Serpent from the Dove: Commit not
thy souls freight to the faith of every wind, nor thy faith to the wind of
every Doctrine, lest thou make Shipwreck of both: Believe not every Spirit,
but try the Spirits, whether they be of God or no, 1 John 4.1.

Simon the Cross-bearer.
And as they came out, they found a man of Cyrene, Simon by name, him they
compelled to bear his cross,

Mart. 27.32.
WE read of no less then four Simons in the Gospel, Simon Peter firnamed
Bar-jona, Matthew. 16.17. the Fisherman-Apostle, Matthew. 4.18. Simon Magus the
Samarian Sorcerer, Acts 8.9. Simon Zelotes, Luke 6.15. the Canaanite, Matthew
10.4. and this Simon of Cyrene, Matthew. 27.32. who bare that Cross, which bare
that Christ who bare our Sins, Isa. 53.11. what a heavy weight was that? were
there as many worlds as atoms in this, and each of them multiplied by the
highest of numbers, they were all too light to balance the least chip of this
Cross: To style him the Gospel- Atlas, is too diminutive an Epithet: What, did
Simon bear Christ's Cross? a load that would have made the very Pillars of
Heaven and Earth to crack again? No, Christ bare his own Cross; none but himself
could bear that Cross, and our Curse; indeed Simon bare that wooden Cross the
stony Jews prepared out of Jerusalem's Oaks; and Simons Apes, at this day, bear
that Golden Cross the leaden Priests, or Demetrian Romanists, prepare for the
Worship of their Ave-Diana: If Simon had born Christ's Cross, he should have
been Simon the Martyr of Gyrene; Simon may be said to bear the Cross of Christ,
but not Christ's Cross.

Thus many are erroneously supposed Christ's Cross-bearers, when oft-times they
are no better then Christ's Crucifiers: And thus if a covetous wretch, that is a
Piety-pretender, be summoned to disburse for Christ's State-service, he will
suffer in person by imprisonment, rather then in his bounty by enlargement; and
submit himself to be shut fast, rather then his Coffers to be opened; yet plead
Conscience, as if it were that only which is so straight-laced, whereas indeed
his purss-strings are shrunk, yet then proclaim himself as one of Christ's
Cross-bearers, when mean while, like Covetous Judas, he is but his own
Budget-bearer: Monsters in nature there are; if there could be Monsters in
Grace, the Hypocrite must be one of the ugliest. All sufferers are not Christ's
Cross-bearers, nor all dyers for Religion, Martyrs; But if thou suffer, not in,
but for a good cause, and for a good conscience, then art thou one of Christ's
happy Cross-bearers: if thou patiently bear reproach, contempt, and the scorn
of men for the Gospels sake, then may thou more properly be said to bear
Christ's Cross, then the Man of Cyrene, Simon by name, whom they compelled to
bear his Cross, Mar. 27.32.

The Soldiers Mistake.
They parted my garments among them, and upon my vesture did they cast lots,

Mat. 27.35.
Was there ever a fairer distribution of such sacrilegious plunder? yet who
but a Prophet could have thought, that those Robes which apparelled the Son of
God, should ever have clothed such impious varlets?

They parted his garments among them,] There may be Rents, Sects and Divisions
in the Church, among the visible members thereof; but the seamless Vesture,
Truth, the Churches pure and unblemishable Ornament, maugre the prophanest
violence of the rudest Soldier, shall ever remain inviolably whole, perfect and
entire. Naked wretches! what covert gave these Ornaments to your shameful
infidelity? what beauty to your deformity? what luster to your ugliness? you
embrace a Shadow, and let the Substance vanish.

No wonder the members are left naked, when the body is divested: But are these
ignorant Soldiers the only mistaken creatures? are there not others who wear
Christ's Livery, yet crucify their Savior? none who put him to death, that they
may part his garments among them? none that wear the costly Ornaments of
Ceremonial Worship, yet are naked in regard of the true Ornament of Faith, and
the living object thereof? Are there none that rest upon duties, yet murder
their Christ in their daily practice? no hypocrites, that put on the outside of
Religion, yet line it with Martyr-Scarlet? none that garb themselves according
to the season of the times, and temper of Promotions Clime, wearing that
Religion which is most in fashion, though never so unbeseeming the quality of a
true Christian, or unfit for the soul that wears it, cutting the size of their
Conscience by the measure of their ambition, not their Religion by the rule of
Gods Word? Are there none who seem to put on Christ's Livery at every duty, at
every Sermon, on every Sabbath, yea at every meal, yet divest themselves of the
garments of his Righteousness? Thus all the world's mistaken: The Soldier's was
an ignorant mistake, but ours a wilful; they left the substance for the shadow,
we take the shadow for the substance: What Is the difference? they crucified one
Christ, we new make another; they out of the rude deportment incident to their
profession, part among them his garments whom they crucified; we, by the dirt
of our hypocritical performances, bespatter his garments whom we profess to
hallow: All which is now come to pass, that it might indeed be fulfilled what
was spoken by the Prophet, They parted my garments among them, and on my
vesture did they cast lots, Psalm. 22.18.

The learned Babbler.
Then certain Philosophers of the Epicureans, and of the Stoics, encountered
him; and some said, What will this Babbler say?

Acts 17.18.
What makes Paul at Athens? knew he not that the Inscription of Antiquity on
the one side, and the Test of the Learned stamped on the other, makes a
current Religion of the grossest Superstition? knew he not, that he was to
buckle with a whole Academy of Idolaters, and that nothing obstructed the
propagation of the Gospel, in the purity and simplicity thereof, so much as the
unsanctified superfluities of Humane wisdom? Grant this, yet were there any
Lectures of Jesus in the Attick Schools? or had the body of Philosophy any
knowledge of a Resurrection? or could it Syllogistically conclude a Trinity of
Persons from the premises of one most absolute, pure, simple, undivided Divine
Essence? This was a mystery too Metaphysical for the profoundest Sophies in
Athens; thence say they, Let us hear what this babbling fellow will say.

And are there no English Athenians, that hold the spirituality of
Gospel-discourse to be mere babbling? the preaching of Jesus to be the setting
forth of some strange God, or some new Doctrine? little dream our Holy Day
Formalists, that there is any Athenianism in their Devotions, whilst they value
the sincere, plain, and uninticing words of the wisdom of God, but as the
preterfluous evacuations of overcharged clouds, and the demonstrations of the
Spirit, but as the Ignis Fatuus of a Superzealous Comet* Little dream our
Eutychian Sermon-sleepers, that they are guilty hereof, when they nod it as
plainly and distinctly as ever any Athenian spoke it: Little think our
Philosophical Longobards, our universal Scholasticks, Learnings Standards, that
their self-elation contracts this guilt, when Idolizing their own endowments,
Herod-like they sacrilegiously rob God of that honor which is his, by casting
the Cob-web vail of their usurped Hosanna's over Natures more refined
qualities, to detract from the Fountain of Wisdom, from the wisdom of the
Highest; insomuch, as were Paul himself to be sent in a second message, they
would boldly accost him with this Salutation, What will this Babbler say? Acts
17.18.

The Athenian Inscription.
As I passed by and beheld your devotions, I found an Altar with this
Inscription, TO THE UNKNOWN GOD; whom ye ignorantly worship,

Acts 17.23.
THis nigh seems no less Atheistical then Superstitious: To disacknowledge the
known God, may stand as a Maxim in Atheism; to acknowledge the unknown God, as
a Paradox in Superstition: To worship we know not what, is the center of all
Idolatry: and as Atheism stands at the right hand of Profaneness, so
Superstition on the blind side of Ignorance: No wonder Ignorance is held the
Mother of Devotion, when any thing becomes the Idol of Ignorance. Ask the mere
nominal Christian, the morally religious man, that to gain heaven will not have
his Religion tread out of his Ancestors steps, for fear of profaning their
Canonized dust; nor that heaven should suffer the least violence by him, lest
himself suffer the stigm of Sect or Schism in the Pot-opinions of his
right-elbow friends; that will not omit morn or evening prayer, for fear he
should not with a quiet conscience use his accustomed liberty in the intervals;
ask this man's Prayer, whose Superscription has it? if the God were Known, I
doubt we might read Duty on the Altar, and Infidelity in the Heart: Ask the
Ignorant soul what Inscription is on his Altar, whence so much strange incense
is vanished into smoke; he knows not whither, and you will find this
Inscription, TO THE UNKNOWN GOD, on the altar of his heart, or David was no
Prophet, Psalm. 14.1. Who thought the fool such a cordial Atheist? or Ignorance
such a zealous blind devotist? it seems Superstition and Atheism are very near
allied: O that the Lord, when he passes by and beholds our Devotions, may not
find Altars with this Inscription, TO THE UNKNOWN GOD, whom we ignorantly
worship, Acts 17.23.

The Female-Preacher.
Likewise, ye wives, be in subjection to your own husbands, that if any obey
not the word, they may without the word be won by the conversation of the wives,

1 Pet. 3.1.
THe Female-preacher! what new preposterous Doctrine is that? does not the
Apostle writing to the Corinthians, silence that Sex in the Church, 1 Cor.
14.34. and thence issue a peremptory inhibition? says he not in the following
verse, that It is a shame for women to speak in the Church? how stands it then
with the modesty of their Sex? are there in these latter days such effusions of
Spirit, as women may now wear a Pulpit, to make that their glory, which
primitively was their shame? it is so without a paradox in the Oeconomicks of
Divinity; a sweet and gracious conversation, does Preach most excellent
Gospel-Doctrine; a virtuous life, is a visible word of truth, it takes God for
the Text, Truth for the Doctrine, and Holiness for the Use; it does Preach in
its practice, yea so powerfully, that oft-times faith comes by seeing: The
virtuous conversation of the wife, does sometimes prove a happy Sermon to the
husband; modesty in her, will Preach chastity to him; her saying little,
reproves his rage; her wise home-keeping, is an use of conviction to his
sociable profuseness; her charity condemns his Nabalism; her circumspection,
does most powerfully press the point of Parental Providence, and often prevents
the husband from turning Infidel or worse; her tenderness does teach him
kindeness; and when she preaches love to him, she takes the Text out of her own
Obedience: The practice of her subjection to him, does Preach the duty of his
to Christ; and indeed he preaches best, that best practiceth: To practice the
Sermon we hear, is the best way of repeating it; but to repeat the Sermon we
see, is the ready way to practice it: Such a visible Sermon, is every graceful
action proceeding from a virtuous and obedient wife; and if ever the devout
Conversation of the wife prove the savor of life unto life for the husband; if
ever the wife of his bosom procure him a place in Abraham's, all her piety to
her God must be attended on with discreet loyalty to her husband, else in vain
had the Apostle enjoined Wives to be in subjection to their own husbands, that
if any obey not the word, they might without the word be won by the
conversation of the wives, 1. Pet. 3.1.

Crumbs from the Table.
But he answered and said, It is not meet to take the childrens bread, and cast
it to dogs: And she said, Truth, Lord; yet the dogs eat of the crumbs which fall
from their masters table,

Matthew. 15.26,27.
Christ's Offals are a feast to the humble soul, where there is a hungry faith,
whereas his rarest dainties are but nauciated by the proud and full-fed
Christian: Faith without humility flies up the soul to the Pinnacle of
Presumption, and humility without faith often lights it in the Valley of Despair:
The children and the dogs must not sup at one Table; Christ is no Gospel-pearl
for Swine, Legion is more welcome to such a Heard, then he to such a Legion. To
this latter Age of ours, indeed times dotage, to this old decrepid bow-back'd
world is served in Christ's second course, the choicest rarities of
Gospel Truths; but we have so apishly alamoded even our very pallates, and so
adulterated the substantial food of wholesome Doctrine, by the leaven and saucy
Compounds of our own Traditions, that our poor souls do even starve, whilst
our consciences surfeit; such is the scarcity of nutrifactive Truths under such
plentiful varieties of new-dress'd dispensations: When servants feast it, woe be
to the childrens bread; when Stewards feast dogs with the childrens bread, who
hungers for the masters crumbs? where is now the Masters Table? who keeps forth
the Lords house? is there no provision made for the Lords Table? where are the
Stewards? is there a dearth in Heaven? is not that sheet which epitomized the
Creation for Peter's appetite, Acts 10.11,12. broad enough to cover the Lords
Table for our faith? or are there no Guests at leisure to sup with the Lord?
happily this man has bought a piece of England, that man a yoke of Offices,
the third happily has married a wife of his own canonizing; but are there no
poor souls in the highways, no maimed consciences, that on their recovery would
rejoice at the crumbs which fall from this Table? its worth our tears to
acquaint the Master, how those sharp-set dog-like appetites, which were not
worthy the crumbs of his Table, have in revenge snarl'd his Table into crumbs;
yet It is not meet to take the childrens bread and cast it to such dogs, though
the dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from their masters table, Matthew. 15.26,27.

The Camel traveling through the needles eye.
It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, then for a rich
man to enter into the kingdom of God,

Matthew. 19.24.
IS Heavens gate less then a needles eye? no wonder few there be that find it,
Matthew. 7.14. or is it the rich man's greatness that obstructs his passage and
denies him entrance? indeed our Savior entitles the Poor to a propriety in this
Kingdom, Luke 6.20. and its the only inheritance that usurping Ahabs could
never yet plunder from our poor and innocent Jezreelites. But why so difficult
a thing for rich men to enter heaven? because so facile a thing for hell to
enter them. Though it be even a Proverb with Solomon, Prove. 14.20. That the
rich has many friends, yet he may not expect to be Abraham's bosom-friend;
there is not a drop of water for him in heaven, who has not a crum of bread for
Lazarus on earth. It Is possible that Creatures of a larger bulk then Camels,
may by the dexterity of the Artist pass through a needles eye in some exquisite
acupicture piece; so you may find the Portraict of a rich man in the picture
of a parable, but a great gulf-wide from heaven: It is the invelleity of the
Creature, which often times renders that impossible, which in it self is
feazible; and if Heaven were an earthly Paradise, or Eternity could be rated
and purchasable at twenty years value, the rich being here but Tenants at Will,
at most for Term of Life, it should cost them an Hospital, but their souls
should have a reversion in Heaven; were that transparent anonimity, 1 Cor. 2.9.
and 2 Cor. 12.4. but penetrable by such blunt and sensual dross: Go to now ye
rich men, weep and howl, etc. Jam. 5.1. Indeed without are dogs, Rev. 22.15.
what sad news is this? news more desperate then a Bankrupts debt; Is there no
possibility of entrance into heaven for the rich? has that Saint, whom the
Romanists idolize as the Clavis of Heaven, wept out all his Apostasy, yet no
room but at the Italian Ephisus for a little bribery? have the Mammonists on
earth nothing to do with Heavens Exchequer? dare we say such a man is not in
Heaven because he dyed rich? God forbid; our Savior never superfluated any
Truth; he says, A rich man shall hardly enter into heaven, Matthew. 19.23. but
all difficulties imply a possibility; and if but a grain of faith can cause
Mountains of earth to skip into the Sea, Matthew. 17.20. and 21.21. can it not as
easily convey a few earthworms into heaven? only it is easier for a camel to
go through the eye of a needle, then for a rich man to enter into the kingdom
of God, Matthew. 19.24.

Rabbi, Rabbi.
Then spoke Jesus to the multitude, and to his Disciples, saying, The Scribes
and Pharisees sit in Moses seat, etc. and love the uppermost rooms at feasts,
and the chief seats in the synagogues, and greetings in the markets, and to be
called of men, Rabbi, Rabbi,

Matthew. 23.1,2,6,7.
AS there is not a vainer puff of pride, then hypocritical humility; so there
is not a more ridiculous piece of folly, then a serious affected gravity, where
ambition is worn with the wrong side outward: The Peoples Hosanna bred Vermin
in Herod, that he became even worms-meat above ground, Acts 12.23. and 'twas
the Scribes impudence to have that Chair for their Pulpit, which cost the
ambitious Sons of Levi a Journey under ground, Numb. 16.32. Though it be not
denied but they were learned Expositors of the Law, yet we see not what
niceties thereof they or their surviving hanging-sleeves at this day, can plead
in Bar to that Action of Damage, which the poor man's Advocate has commenced
against them in Mat. 23.4. The Jews Proverb was, The People of the Land are the
footstool of the Pharisees: ours may be, The footstool of the People are the
Pharisees of the Land. The Scribes were the Law-Criticks; The Pharisees
Gospel-mimicks; The Scribes being Lawyers, made no conscience of washing their
hands after a bribe, as the other before a feast, Mark 7.3. nor with much
difficulty obtained the Hypocrites portion; but the Pharisees took more pains
for eternal pains, and were more exact in going to Hell: It would nonplus a
Synagogue of Rabbis, to riddle whether they were more swollen with Ambition, or
over-scurfed with hypocrisy: It is not worth one dram of Super-rational Faith,
to believe the lying Spirit in Ahab's Prophets, was no other then the Spirit of
Naboth, whom he had formerly slain; yet the creating Vote of this Supercilious
Generation, is sufficient to Enact it in the Talmud for a tradition of faith to
Posterity: Those whited-Sepulchres, would far better become a Charnel-house
then Moses Seat. They had an excellent faculty of paying Tithe to a grain, but,
Woe to widows Houses when they said their Prayers; It was their charity to loud
Music, that made them ambitious of it to the Poor: Their devotion was very
zealous for the Chief Seats in the Synagogues, and the uppermost Room was their
best Cheer at a Feast, where they had a very good stomach to feed on the Chair
at the Tables end: If this generation of Vipers can answer our Savior, how they
can escape the damnation of Hell, Matt. 23.33. then let those blind guides be
greeted in our Markets (as too frequently they are) with the idolatrous
salutations of Rabbi, Rabbi.

Peace, be still.
And he arose, and rebuked the wind, and said unto the sea, Peace, be still:
and the wind ceased, and there was a great calm,

Mark 4.39.
Whilst Christ slept, the winds awaked; whilst he lay down, the storm rose:
when Christ arose, the winds fell; and when he spoke, they held their peace:
when Christ took his rest, the Ship took none; but silence commanded, and the
Winds, the Sea, the Ship, and all are pacified: Where Is the miracle? Shall not
the Sea become a standing Pool, when he rebukes the wind, at whose rebuke the
waters were unchanell'd, and the foundations of the world discovered? Psalm.
18.15. shall not the troubled Ocean become a bed of rest for him, who lays
the Beams of his Chambers in the Waters? Psalm 104.3. or shall not he bridle
the wind, who makes the clouds his Chariot, Psalm. ibid. shall not he that
brings the winds out of his Treasuries, Psalm 135.7. whistle them back again?
shall not he clip the wings of the wind that flies thereon? Psalm 18.10. shall
not that stormy wind fulfill his word, Psalm 148.8. whose word fills full the
wind with storms? Psalm 107.25. shall not his voice still the Seas, Psalm 65.7.
at whose presence the Earth trembles? Psalm 18.7. shall not he that gives snow
like wool, Psalm 147.16. scatter the Sea-froth like ashes? shall not his path
be plain, Psalm. 27.11. whose way is in the sea? Psalm. 77.19. No wonder his
mercy should still the surface of the waves, Psalm. 65.7. whose wrath shakes the
foundation of the hills? Psalm. 18.7. Say then the world were all afloat with
blood, and in unconstant motions; say Antichristianism blew a storm, that
whilst the Master-Pilot seemed to have slept, the doubtful Mariners, shifting
the sayls of their Religion with the wind of every doctrine, had anticipated
their danger by the self-shipwrack of their own faith; say Truth, the Churches
Cargaison, lay at the mercy of the insulting waves, or tumult of the People,
Psalm. 65.7. say all the blood from righteous Abel to Zacharias, slain between
the Temple and the Altar, emptied it self into the bloody Ocean of these latter
ages, Cannot he that turned the Red Sea into dry Land, Psalm 66.6. repeat one
wonder in a Gospel-season? say the East and Western storms of persecution,
together with intestine whirlwinds, threaten inevitable ruin to the distressed
Vessel, cannot that High Lord, to whom the wind and sea owe their Allegiance,
silence those Euroclydons, sponge those impetuous Waves, and land his Ark upon
the Ararat of his holy Hill in Sion? or say the State, full fraighted and deep
laden with the invalluable riches of that long-acquiring, yet perishable
treasure of all Civil Happiness, were in the Bedlam-surges of a Civil War, so
tossed and fluctuated by the violence of factious winds and gusts of
Machivilianism, that all the Steersmen seemed beside their Compass, and every
common Mariner ready to make Ship-wreck of a good conscience on the open
ledges of most desperate profaneness, or invisible Quicksands of some
dangerous Opinion; yet he before whom all nations are as nothing, Isa. 40.17.
can soon annihilate the stirs of one: he that stilleth the noise of the Waves,
can quickly appease the madness of the People, Psalm. 65.7. if he touch the
Hills they smoke, Psalm. 104.3. and if he touch the heart (though as hard and
lofty as the other) shall it not melt? Doubtless, he that rebuked the wind, and
gave to the sea his decree, Prove. 8.29. can as easily muzzle the rage of wicked
men, and say to the Church, Peace; and to the State, Be still.

The Charitable Martyr.
And he kneeled down, and cried with a loud voice, Lord, lay not this sin to
their charge; and when he had said this, he fell asleep,

Acts 7.60.
A Good evening Prayer to bedward, a set form of charity, not unworthy our
every nights practice, if Stephens heart be our bedfellow: To forgive an
Enemy, is the gallant'st way of conquering; and he that can dye pardoning his
persecutors, survives their malice in his immortal charity: Revenge justifies a
wrong, but patient forgiveness heaps coals of fire on the Marble-wretch, till
by confession, through the repercussions of a self-inditing conscience, he
drops out all the blood he formerly had sucked, and his frozen heart be
thoroughly dissolved. Behold this soft-hearted, though stoned Saint, call him
Stephen the Baptist to Christ's death, Luke 12.50. Mat. 20.23. this Pelican of
Martyrs, how to the life he dies in charity: Not to bless them which curse us,
is the ready way to double that curse upon us; and by the not forgiving such as
trespass us, we not only unpray our prayers, and deprecate our own happiness,
but we pray God we may be damned; we endeavor to delude God by our fraudulent
petitions, we give our selves the lie, and the world our hypocrisy. To forget
an injury, is more then nature can promise, yet to forgive it, is less then
charity commands or grace can perform; for to pray for an Enemy implies more
then forgiveness, and any thing less then forgiveness implies nothing less then
revenge: To forget injuries is the best use we can make of an ill memory; to
forgive them, is a capital sign of true charity; but to do good for evil, is
the happy evidence of sound Religion: Since it is no Comet among the vapors of
this age, to account him a man of the best stomach, that can digest least
wrongs, let this stand for no Paradox, That the meekest mind has the highest
Spirit, Psalm. 127.6. An injury well remembered, is ill retained, and half
revenged; If ever thou hope thy charity should live after thee, let the
injuries of others dye before thee; and if ever thou expect thy blood should
cry [How long Lord?] under the Altar, let it cry [Forgive Lord] over thy Grave:
Thus Stephen kneeled down, and cried with a loud voice, Lord, lay not this sin
to their charge; and when he had said this, he fell asleep, Acts 7.60.

Reliance on Providence.
Therefore take no thought, saying, What shall we eat? or what shall we drink?
or wherewithal shall we be clothed? for your heavenly Father knows that ye
have need of all these things,

Mat. 6.31,32.
NOt to believe God, is to give him the lie; and not to acquiesce in his
Promises, does as well dispute the point of his Power, as question the
infalibility of his Truth: Gods promises are the Patrimony of the faithful,
whereby they keep heaven in hand, but let out the lower world to inferior
Peasants: Gods Providence is the younger brothers Inheritance, and a fair one
too, or Joseph's Vice-Royalty, Genesis 41.40. was but a dream. Rather then Elijah
shall want a Providence to feed him in a famine, or Sampson the like to feast
him, the Raven of Fowls shall be a Cater for the one, and the Lion of Beasts an
Epulary for the other; yea, the Lion and the Raven, though the prey-Creatures
of earth and air, yet seek their meat of God, Psalm. 104.21. and 147.9. whereas
the earthly minded (who know no better Providence then their own) make a god of
their Meat, Phil. 3.19. a whole flock of such Peacocks, that glory in their
train, is not worth one Sparrow, which lights not on ground without a
conveyance of Providence: If Solomon's gallantry came short of those withering
blushes, that but enameled the earth, well worth the trusting is that
Providence, with the care of that earth he refined for the superscription of
his own image, to enamel it with the graces of his Spirit. To call this unhappy
accident, or that unexpected circumstance, the issue of Chance or Fortune, is
but a rustic piece of sophistical Atheism: There Is not a hair of thy head but
is placed to account in the the Diary of Providence, the number whereof though
incalculable, yet comes far short of ballancing the summa totalis of thy sins:
And though for want of better spectacles, that seems Chance in respect of us,
which is Providence in respect of God; yet that Sect of Understanders, who
refer all things to Gods absolute will in a way of fatal necessity, do as much
calumniate that superintendent Attribute of his Mercy, as the other detract
from the irresistability of his Power: If thou would live by Providence, take
God to his Word; for Providence without a promise, may be large Bounty without
the least mercy: Now, all his promises are Yea and Amen: Therefore take no
thought what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink, or wherewithal, etc. Matthew.
6.31,32.

See thou do it not.
And I fell at his feet to worship him; and he said unto me, See thou do it not,

Rev. 19.10.
'TWas well prevented; the Prophetical Divine was within a foot of Idolatry:
There was but an Almost between Agrippa and a Christian, and there was no more
between John and an Idolater; the one had almost overtaken, by his Faith, that
Scribe or discreet respondent in the Gospel, traveling on the Dromedary of his
works to the Kingdom of God, from which he was not far, Mat. 12.34. the other
was as fast posting to the Kingdom of Satan, had he not in the way, when he
fell, stumbled on a Vide ne feceris. Had not the Angel entered a caveat, the
Divine had proved a most false Will-worshipper; thus he that was so well seen
in the visions of God, was dazzled with too much light.

And are not the Saints then much engaged to those Sacrilegious Idolists of the
western Babylon, for doing them more honor then Angels dare admit of; indeed,
unless their worship were better, its no matter who had it, if God could be so
satisfied. Idolatry is the Epidemical sin of the world; there is scarce a Nation
this side Heaven, a people in any Nation, a profession in any people, a person
in any profession, a soul in any person, or a faculty in any soul, to whom it
may not be said, See thou do it not. Not to do what we are commanded, is
Disobedience or Rebellion; to do what we are not commanded, uperstition; and to
do what we ought, in that way we ought not, Idolatry: If we worship the true
God in a false way, we make an Idol of God; if we worship a false god in the
true way, we make a god of an Idol. Indeed, all thoughts cogitable, all words
articulable, and all actions performable by the Creature, as they tend either
to the honor or dishonor of the Creator, so have they in them a true worship,
or downright Idolatry: For Covetousness, which is idolatry, Col. 3.5. may not
be measured only by thy purse-strings, but dilates it self to all the evils
man naturally covets to commit: Thus the whole world makes but one Idol; to our
Savior it was the Devils gratituity, if he would condescend to worship him; to
us it is the Devils Dagon which he has set up for all People, Nations and
Languages, at the sound of the enchanting Music of his temptations, to fall
down and worship, or be cast into the burning fiery Furnace of Persecution; and
where shall we find a trusty Daniel? indeed we have many that will burn,
rather then fall to the least superstition; yet take them out of the road of
notorious idolatry, and let the Idol be compounded of Spiritual Pride,
invisible Covetousness, Equivocated Love to earthly Temporals, or any other
materials of their own Ingredients and Erection, and you shall find
Christendom nonplus'd to parallel such a Trinity of unidolatrous Children:
insomuch that as the corrupter ages have been ever bowing to the great Idol of
Antichristianism, which mystical Nebuchadnezzar has set up; so the more
refined times to the brazen Serpent in their own hearts, those dregs of
remaining corruption, to which the most superstitionless Saint would fall down,
worship, and finally Sacrifice, did not the Angel of the Covenant by his Spirit
intervene with a See thou do it not, Rev. 19.10.

The mad Prodigal.
And when he came to himself, he said, How many hired servants of, etc.

Luke 15.17.
ANd when he came to himself] Why, whither went this younger brother? how far
had he been from himself? truly he had been with Swine; you may guess what his
Profession was, when he parted from sober company; he asked leave of his
father, to take leave of himself, and parted from himself, when he bad reason
adieu: That charity begins at home, was the first thought that came to the
Prodigal, after the Prodigal came to himself; and it was a happy escape, that
during his desperate Lunacy for want of Acorn husks, he had not made use of an
Oaken bough: He began to go out of himself, when first he would fain be his own
man; but when he came again to himself, he was half way home to his own
happiness: He begged heartily for his own curse, when he first asked his
Fathers blessing; and had not the swine fared the better of the two, the herd
should be drowned ere himself would cry Peccavi.

Swine and Drunkards, meet Companions; Swine and Lustmongers, very fit
Sty-fellows, Hogs and Epicures, Boars and Hell-Stalions, Sows and Harlots, Pigs
and Prodigals; pity such proper English that runs so naturally, should ever
know any other construction then what the nature of the beast admits.

Though this be but a Parable, yet here is a Parent and a Prodigal, a Blessing
and a Curse, an elder and a younger brother, a faithful and unfaithful servant,
a penitent child, and a pardoning Father, a selfjustifying servant, yet a wise
rewarding Master; indeed the whole mystery of man's Salvation: In which Parable,
He that has an ear to hear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto his
Conscience; and unless he resolves to dye in this Bedlam, and perish in the
other, he will be of this Prodigals mind, When he came to himself, and said,
etc. Luke 15.17.

The true Ornament.
Whose adorning, let it not be that outward adorning, of plaiting the hair,
etc. But let it be the hidden man of the heart,

1 Pet. 3.3,4.
HOw? is not plaiting the hair a commendable Ornament? with what deformed
beauties then is this Age disfigured? how handsomely it makes it self ugly? what
pains it takes to be ridiculous? better the brain were out of his place, then
the excrescency thereof, or the whole head ache, then one hair not well: How
many happy Goodmorrows might the soul bid it self, by asking blessings of her
heavenly Father, whilst she stands sacrificing the precious Morn to the Idol in
the Looking-glass? how many Virgin-Oraizons might be early up at heaven, whilst
the ingenious fancy is so zealous at new-modelling that careful careless
Love-lock, or the Woodcocks snare, as if there were some Gordian Magic in each
curl? But does this refer only to the Feminine? then is this Age
Hermophrodited; is not he the most admired Comet, that can be most fantastic?
Some are so well read in the Glass and Comb, as to divide a hair, and again
reconcile them with a wet finger, others curl them with a powder; doubtless
both these do stand very much on their heads; no wonder their Brain-shell is so
addle, when the choycest of their Intellects walk with its heels upward, that
the whole Microcosm can espy no other Horoscope then that of the Antipodes: You
may guess the substance of what is within, by the dust of what is without; and if
ever a Wit did put a Solecism upon his own brain, 'twas when he first went to
School to adorn his head on the outside, for every sober man wears his head
with the wrong side outward; but he whose head came newly out of a Mill-sack,
makes more of the offals of his Cranium, then the brain it self is worth.

And is this then the grave Christians Ornament? Away, you that profess piety,
blazon no more vanity, such dusty cob-webs are no metal for the Helmet of your
Salvation; be not so vainly ingenious in dressing but a Virmins Forest, with
such odoriferous curls; it is but a spans length off, and other Virmin by the
dust and oyncture of your own rottenness shall do it for you: Shall not he that
covers himself with a cloud, Lam. 3.44. that puts on the garments of
vengeance for clothing, and is clad with zeal as with a cloak, Isa. 59.17. send
baldness in stead of well-set hair? Isa. 3.24. and smite with a scab the crown
of the head? ver. 17. he that clothes the grass of the field shall strip thee
naked: If ever therefore thou hopest to put on the garments the four and twenty
Elders wear about the Throne, Rev. 4.4. or if ever thou expectest to be clothed
with immortality of bliss, away with the bravery of your tinckling Ornaments,
with the wimples and the crisping pins, Isa. 3.18,22. the Prophet there
compares your Cauls and Tyres to the Moon; no wonder sober minds conclude you
Lunatic.

And you that are the Amazons of the Age, but of the Masculine-Gender, that
take your pastime in War, yet walk as if shod with the preparation of the
Gospel of Peace; if you must needs wear Arms in Halcyonian days, put on the
Shield of Faith, the Breast Plate of Righteousness, and the Helmet of
Salvation; Belt your selves with the Girdle of Truth, but do not draw the Sword
of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, out of any other Scabbard then the
Scriptures: This is that true Ornament, which becomes every sober, wise, grave,
modest and true Christian, Whose adorning, let it not be that outward adorning
of plaiting the hair, etc. But let it be the hidden man of the heart, 1 Pet.
3.3,4.

News from the Grave.
They have taken away the Lord out of the Sepulcher, and we know not where they
have laid him,

John 20.2.
TAken him away! did the high Priests bribed Soldiers tell her so? what
incredible News is this? none but a Sadduce will believe it: Thou art mistaken,
Mary, the Lord was never there; there is no circumscription by a Sepulcher of
him that fills Heaven and Earth; though a Manger cradled the Babe, no Grave can
comprehend the Lord; was this Sepulcher larger then Solomon's Temple? or will he
whom the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain, 1 Kings 8.27. be confined by a few
clods of earth? Indeed, the Angel bad the two Mary's, See the place where the
Lord lay, Matthew. 28.6. but the Lord himself told the Thief, To day shall thou
be with me in Paradise, Luke 23.43. Thus the body of the Lord was in the Grave,
but not the Lord of the Body.

If the Resurrection be such a mystery of Faith to such as were Co-temporaries
with the First Fruits thereof, Acts 23.26. no wonder now it is such a miracle of
Grace to practice the Faith thereof: If the case of non-Resurrection does
undistinguish the reasonable soul from Bruits, no marvel the Sadduces of this
Age are such beasts to deny it; yet if Christ's own Disciples in this high point
of Faith, could scarce believe their eyes, it is more then an O Altitudo of
Mercy, if the news at Jerusalem pass for current at the other end of the world:
It Is an unsavory Quaere, to ask with what body Lots wife shall arise; and but a
shallow Hypothesis, whether Aarons Rebels, or Aarons two Sons, shall rise
first: He that surfets himself to death with the luscious Mummia of another
man's Corpse, shall doubtless bring out of the Grave as much as he carried in,
yet the other rise never the leaner: Though he surfeted with the others
Epigastrium, or happily dyed with a piece of his belly in his mouth, yet do not
think that he shall rise with two Diaphragmes, or the other be answerable as a
Murderer for the body he destroyed, after he was dead: The veriest Cannibal in
all Tartary shall rise but with one body, though a thousand be incorporated
with him; and if ever there come any Feminine Mummia out of Egypt to the
Drugsters shambles, thou may eat it without the least danger of rising an
Hermophrodite: That such Parables are incredible with the highest mere
Naturalists, is no news to the weakest Christian, who has more grace then to
doubt what he has no reason to believe: If there be such a Sadduce in England,
as to deny the Resurrection, he must needs be beholding to a Pythagorian
Metempsycosis, to bespatter one Heresy with the dirt of another; for, admiting
that ridiculous old Fable of the Souls progress from one body to another by
Traduction, from such absurd premises might possibly follow, the conclusion of
the worlds non-conclusion to the perpetuation thereof, to prevent a
Resurrection: It is not without all controversy, whether the Christian
demi-Jews of late, or the Jewish demi-Christians of old, are deepest buried in
the Ignorance of a Resurrection; they took our Savior to be John the Baptist,
or Elias, or one of the Prophets, as if one of their souls were passed by a
kind of Transmigration into our Saviors body; these take. Paul, or Apollo, or
Cephas to be our Savior, as if his very Personality were passed by a Mystical
Union into one of their Souls: Thus the naked Ignorance of any Fundamental
Truth, ever ends in Heresy; which Heresy persisted in, ever concludes in
blasphemy: It was Mary's complaint here upon a mistake, That they had taken
away the Lord out of the Sepulcher, and she knew not where they had laid him:
Methinks I hear Mary's echo at this hither end of the world (may it be but
the like mistake) resounded by many of us that pretend to look so much after
him; viz. That they have taken away the Lord out of the Sanctuary, and we know
not where they have laid him.

FINIS.
Imprimatur

1o Martii, 1649. Joseph Caryl.


