A SERMON OF The NATIVITY of our LORD, Preached before the Queen Dowager, IN
Her Chapel at SOMERSET HOUSE, On Christmas Day. 1686.

By Thomas Godden D. D. Preacher in Ordinary to her Majesty.

Published by Her Majesty's Command.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
for his Household and Chapel. 1686.

A SERMON Preached before her MAJESTY THE Queen Dowager On Christmas day, Anno
1686.
LUKE 2. 15. Pastores loquebantur ad invicem, transeamus usque ad Bethlehem,
and videamus hoc verbum quod factum est, quod Dominus ostendit nobis.

The Shepherds said one to another, Let us now go even to Bethlehem, and see
this word which is made (or this thing which is come to pass,) which our Lord
has made known to us.


THE fullness of time for the Redemption of Man being come, a time, when all
things were in quiet silence, and the Night was in the midst of her swift
course, the Omnipotent Word of the Eternal Father descended from his Royal
Throne, and took up his lodging in a Stable of Bethlehem. No sooner was he
arrived there, but he presently dispatched an Angel to carry the news of his
Birth to certain Shepherds, who were at that time keeping the watches of the
night over their Flocks in the Fields adjoining. The Messenger, to show that he
was the Minister of the Sun of Justice, clothed himself with a glittering Robe
of Light, and so great was the Brightness which enlightened the place, that the
Gospel calls it, Claritas Dei, the Brightness of God; Psa. 138. 11.
and those words of David may be said to have been then literally fulfilled,
Nox sicut dies illuminabitur, that the Night should be as light as the Day.

The Shepherds terrified as well with the presence of the Angel, who stood
beside them, as with the unusualness of the Light, which shone round about
them, were ready to fall to the ground for fear, when the Heavenly Ambassador
bid them be of good cheer, for that he came not to bring them tidings of dread
and terror, but of joy, and great joy to them, and to all People, that on this
Bright day there was born in Bethlehem, the Savior of the World. And that
their own experience might further satisfy them of the truth of what he had
said, he gave them a Sign, by which, if they would take the pains, they might
find the Newborn Infant, Hoc vobis signum, This, said he, shall be to you a
Sign; you shall find the Infant wrapped in Swadling-clothes, and laid in a
Manger: O King of Glory! Is not this the day in which the Angels invite the
Daughters of Sion to go forth, and behold thee in the Diadem with which thy
Virgin Mother Crowned thee in the day of thy Espousals in her purest Womb? And
must a Manger be thy Cradle? O Treasure of Heaven! who would have sought for
thee in a little Hay or Straw? Who would have thought to have found thee in a
Manger of Beasts? Surely the Shepherds, who were terrified with the Light, must
have been much more surprised with the seeming disproportion of the Sign, had
not a multitude of the Heavenly Host presently joined themselves with the
Angel, praising God, and saying, Gloria in altissimis Deo, Glory be to God in
the highest, and on earth peace to men of good will.

With this Canticle of Joy the Angels returned into their former Heaven above,
Stabulum visum est esse Coelum in Terra. Epiphan. Orat. de Deipera.
and where may we think were the Shepherds Souls* but in the new Heaven below
in the Stable of Bethlehem; and that their Bodies might be there too, to pay a
double homage to this Newborn King, Loquebantur ad invicem, They said one to
another, Let us now go even to Bethlehem, and see this word which is made,
which our Lord has made known unto us. And the resolution was no sooner taken,
but presently put in execution. But give me leave, devout Shepherds, to ask
you, whither away so fast? Were not you keeping the watches of the Night over
your Flocks? And will you now leave them in the open Fields? Are you not
afraid, that they may go astray in your absence, or the Wolves break in and
devour them? No, we are going to find out the Lamb, which is come to take away
the sins of the world: This Lamb will take care both of the Shepherds and the
Flocks; And should we sustain any loss for his sake, it would still be our
greater Gain. Piously resolved indeed; But have you forgotten what happened of
old to another of your Profession, when God appearing to him in the Bush, he
said as you do now, Exodus 2.
I will go and see this great Sight? Have you forgotten, I say, how he was
commanded not to draw near, but to stand at a distance, and put off his Shoes;
and how he turned away his Face, that he might not see? And are you not afraid
to meet with the same prohibition he did? Nothing less. The Scene is now
changed. God in a Burning Bush is an Object of Terror indeed; but God in
Swadling-clothes and laid in a Manger, is so great an Attractive of Love, that
we fear nothing but to lose time to go to see it. They went therefore with
haste, and being admitted by the Sacred Virgin, (whose leave no doubt they
would ask) to see and adore their Newborn Savior, the Evangelist says, That
they returned glorifying and praising God for all that they had heard and seen,
as it had been said unto them.

This is the Sum of what is contained in the second Gospel of this Great Day.
What I have made choice of for the Subject of your present Entertainment, is
the Pious Resolution of the Shepherds to go to Bethlehem. That we may enter
with like Devotion into the consideration of this Great Mystery, and return, as
they did, glorifying and praising God for all we shall hear and see, let us
instead of asking leave of the Virgin Mother to visit the Manger, humbly beg
her Intercession at the Throne of Grace, for a Blessing upon my Endeavors,
saluting her with the words of the Angel,

Ave Maria.
Transeamus usque ad Bethlehem, etc.
The shepherds said one to another, Let us now go even to Bethlehem, and see
this word which is made, which our Lord has shown unto us.
It Is the Opinion of St. Cyprian and others of the Fathers, that these
Shepherds at the same time that the Angel made known unto them the Nativity of
the Savior of the World, the so long expected Messiah, had their
understandings illuminated by the Holy Ghost, to know and believe, that it was
He of whom the Prophet Esaias had foretold, that his name should be called
Emmanuel, that is, God with us, and who should verify those glorious
Attributes given him by the same Prophet of Admirabilis, Isai. 9. 6.
Deus, Fortis, Princeps Pacis, that is, of Wonderful, God, Mighty, and Prince
of Peace. Magisterio Spiritus Sancti intus edocti, quem Parvulum vident
confitentur Immensum. And hence it is, that whereas the Words of my Text in the
Original are capable of a double Translation, (...).
that is of being rendered in English, Let us see this Thing which is come to
pass, or let us see this Word which is made, I have made choice of the latter
with Venerable Bede, Verbum quod semper erat, videamus quomodo pro nobis factum
sit. Quod enim videre non poteramus, dum erat verbum, videamus factum, quia
Caro est.
as more suitable to the Intention of the Shepherds, and more expressive of the
Mystery we celebrate this day of the Word being made Flesh for our sakes.

Taking the Words therefore in this sense, two things offer themselves at the
first View to our Consideration. The first is, the Resolution of the Shepherds
to go to Bethlehem, Transeamus usque ad Bethlehem. Let us now go even to
Bethlehem. The second, the End they proposed to themselves in going thither,
which was to see the Word which was made. And accordingly I shall divide my
Discourse into these two Principal Parts. In the first I shall let you see the
Devotion of the Shepherds in so readily resolving to go seek their Newborn
Savior. In the second, the End we are to propose to our selves in seeing this
word which was made Flesh, as the Creed declares, for us men, and for our
Salvation. For us men, I say, as the Object of our worship; and then again, for
our Salvation, as a Pattern drawn by God himself for our Imitation.

I begin with the first, the Devotion of the Shepherds in their Resolution to
go to Bethlehem.

The First Part.
Devotion, as it denotes a particular Virtue, is defined by St. Thomas to be a
Preparation or disposition of the Will, Sum. 22. q. 82. a. 1o.
by which a man promptly and readily, tradit se, gives himself up, or (as we
use to say) devotes himself to execute the things which belong to the service
of God. Some of these things are expressly commanded by God himself, others
intimated only or commended, as pleasing to him. And whereas there is this
difference between them, that every Command of God is a sign of his Will, but
every Signification of his good pleasure is not a Command, it is manifest, that
as the Perfection of Devotion on consists in a readiness to comply with both,
so it shows it self chiefly in the Execution of the latter. And such was that
of the Shepherds of my Text. They went to find out the Newborn Christ, without
being commanded. The Angel, as you have heard, gave them a Sign, by which, if
they would take the pains, they might find him, which was that they should find
him wrapped in swadling-clothes, and laid in a manger. But it is no where
expressed in the Gospel, that he bid them go. We do not read that the Angel
said unto them, Ite Pastores, Go to Bethlehem; but only, Hoc vobis signum: This
shall be to you a sign, and yet they presently resolved to go. And we need not
go far to seek the Reason. The Angel in the Proclamation he made of Peace upon
Earth, when he returned to Heaven, sufficiently signified them to be men of
good will, that is, Psalm. 1.
as holy David describes such Persons, Men, whose Wills are in the Law of God:
In lege Domini voluntas ejus: Psalm. 36. 31.
and the Law of God in their wills. Lex Dei ejus in cord ipsius. And where the
Will and the Law are thus reciprocally in each other, in order to the Service
of God, a Command serves but for a Sign, and a Sign becomes a Command.

1. To Men of Good Will, a Precept serves them but for a Sign, to point out
what they are to do. And this is what the great Apostle St. Paul gives us to
understand, 1 Timothy 1. 9.
when he says, that Lex Justo non est posita. The Law is not made for the Just
man, but for such as are unjust and refractory. And why not for the Just Man
also, if he cannot be just without the Observance of it? But because, as you
heard before, the Will of a Just Man is in the Law, St. Aug. in Psalm. 1.
and not under the Law. It Is on thing says St. Austin to be in the Law, and
another to be under the Law. He whose Will is in the Law, Secundum legem agit,
acts indeed conformable to the Law. But He whose will is under the Law,
Secundum legem agitur, is driven or forced by the Law. The Law like a severe
Adversary stands over him with threats and menaces to compel him to the
performance of what it commands; and therefore our Savior, as the same St.
Austin expounds his words, De Sermon.
Matthew. 5. 24. bids us to agree with this Adversary, Dom. c. 21.
that is, to conform our wills to his, quickly whilst we are in the way of this
life, lest at any time, (and we know not how soon) he deliver us to the Judge,
and the Judge to the Officer, and we be cast into a Prison, from whence there
shall be no delivery, till we have paid the uttermost farthing, Nihil sic
adversatur peccantibus ac praeceptum Dei, Nothing so opposite to sinners as the
Law of God; because their Will is in the Sin they would commit, and not in the
Law. Nothing so agreeable to the Just as the Law, of God, because their Will is
in his Law that they may not sin. To those the Law is a weight which lies heavy
upon them, and presses them down; to these, it is a weight also, St. Aug. In
Psalm. 59.
but such as that of Wings, which bears them up, and carries them, Christi
sarcina pennas habet, to those it is a Curbing Bitt, which restrains their
licentious and irregular appetites; to these a Gentle Bridle, Froenum quo
pulchre agitur St. Chrisost. Hom. 2. in 1 Timothy 1. In morali.
which serves only to turn them into the way they are to go: To those, it is a
Rod of Iron, which compels them for fear not to do, what otherwise they would,
Reges eos in virga ferrea, thou shall rule them, (that is the Refractory) in a
Rod of Iron. Psalm. 2. 9.
To these a Rod of Direction, to point out to them, what their Wills are ready
to perform. Virga directionis, Virga Regni tui; The Rod of thy Kingdom (and
such are the Just) is a Rod of Direction. In a word, Psalm. 44. 8.
such is the force of Love, that if it possess the Heart, that which is a
Precept to the unjust and refractory, serves but for a Sign to men of Good
Will. But this is not all. It Is the Property of Love to dilate the Heart it
possesses, and render it so pliant to the motions of Grace, and ready to
execute what is pleasing to God, that,

2. To men of Good Will a Sign becomes a Command. Their hearts like that of
David are doubly ready, Paratum cor meum, Deus, Paratum cor meum, ready to do
what God commands: And again, Ready to do what he signifies only to be his Good
will and Pleasure. Their Will (as I said before) is in the Law of God, and the
Law of God in their Will. And what is the Product of this Happy Union, but that
the Will, as considered in the Law changes a Command into a Sign, because it
performs it willingly; and the Law, as considered in the Will, improves that
which is but a Sign into a Command; because the Will performs it exactly. This
is the Happy State of Men of Good Will, Let them but have a Sign, an Intimation
of what they are to do; Their Hearts are ready, and they presently set
themselves to put it in execution.

What moved the Wisemen of the East to undertake so long and dangerous a
journey, to find out, and adore the Newborn King of the Jews? All the Account
they give of it, is, vidimus stellam ejus, that they had seen his Star, that is
his Sign, in the East. They had heard, if not read, what Balaam had prophesied
of old, that a star should arise out of Jacob. Number. 24. 17
They expected the rising of this Star; and no sooner did it appear, but, as
the Church represents their devotion in one of her Antiphons, they said one to
another, Hoc signum Magni Regis est, This is the Sign of the Great King, who is
to be born, Eamus and inquiramus eum, let us go and enquire him out, and
offeramus ei munera, Aurum, Thus, and Myrrham, and offer to him Gifts, Gold,
Frankincense and Myrrh. And what can be more Parallel to the devotion of the
Shepherds in my Text? No sooner had the Angel given them a Sign, by which they
might find out the same Newborn Savior of the World, but presently they said
one to another, Transeamus usque ad Bethlehem, Let us now go even to Bethlehem.
Those wisest of Kings saw but the Sign, and went without delay, vidimus and
venimus. These faithfullest of Shepherds heard but hoc, vobis signum, this
shall be a Sign to you, and went with have, venerunt festinantes. O the
Incomparable Devotion both of Kings and Shepherds! How happy should we be,
would we follow their Example, and not neglect, or (which is yet worse) reject
so often as we do the Holy Inspirations which God is pleased from time to time
to give us for the amendment of our lives, and settling our selves after a more
serious manner to his service, to comply with the modes of the world, and our
own Ease and Humor? O how different is this Comportment from that of these
Kings and Shepherds? A Sign is to them, a Precept, and an Intimation in lieu of
a Command. And by whom may we think were they inspired with this devotion, but
by the Divine Infant himself, whom they went to seek, of whom Albertus Magnus
says, Voluntas and Complacentia Patris Summum Praeceptum fuit, that the Good
Will and Pleasure of his Father, in order to man's Redemption, was to him as
the greatest and strictest of Commands.

God, when he vouchsafes to speak to us of himself, is pleased to speak to us
after our own manner, and in our own language; And we can speak no otherwise of
him. Whatever we affirm, says the Great St. Dennis, Affirmationes de Deo sunt
incompactae. St. Dionys.
of God, is by reason of the narrowness both of our thoughts and words,
incompetent and unsuitable to what he is in Himself, as always carrying some
tincture of Imperfection in it. Whilst therefore I endeavor, as I may, to
express what my own low Thoughts have been able to conceive of this Gracious
Concurrence of the Son, with the Good Pleasure of his Father, in relation to
the great design of his Incarnation, and perhaps in words not reaching my own
Conceptions, your Pious and Charitable attention, will, I hope, help to supply
the defect of the one, and make allowance for the other.

The Eternal Father (whose Goodness is equal to his Knowledge,) foreseeing
from all Eternity the Fall of Man, out of the Bowels of his Mercy, designed
forthwith to repair it, and that by the Incarnation of his Son. This amongst
many other means, which were present to his Infinite Wisdom, he was pleased to
make choice of, as most conducing to his own Honor, and the redress and
advantage of man. But how was this Great Design to be brought about? By laying
a Command on his Son to take our Nature upon him? St. Tho. 1. p. q. 43.
No, For, (as St. Thomas observes,) a Command supposes Inferiority in the
Person to be commanded; and Catholic Faith tells us, that in the most Holy
Trinity there is no Inferiority or Subjection: No one of the Persons Higher or
Lower, Greater or Less than another, but as they are All Co eternal in
Duration, so are They Coequal in Dignity and Authority. There could be no
place for a Command, where there was no Inequality; Nor even for Counsel, as
supposing an Advantage of Wisdom in the Giver, in respect of the Person to whom
it is given. What then remained, but (if I may be permitted to speak according
to our imperfect and incompetent manner of conceiving in this Life) an
Intimation of the Fathers Good Pleasure to his Son; presenting him in the
Comprehensive Knowledge, which he communicated to him of all things both Future
and Possible, together with his Essence, a Prospect (as I may call it) of a
Humane Body, so to be framed, as might serve for a decent Tabernacle for the
Divinity to dwell in, and a fit and proper Instrument for Him, who was the
Word, to accomplish the Redemption of man, by uniting himself to it. How
readily he concurred with his Consent to this Gracious Intention of his Father,
thus communicated to him, is seen by the Blessed in Heaven, in the Unity of one
and the same Will in Both; but can be discerned only by us in this state of
Obscurity in it is Effect, as in a Glass which reflects the Beams that are
darted upon it. And such is the account which the Royal Prophet gives of its
Execution in his 39th Psalm, where he represents the Son at his coming into the
World, addressing himself to his Father in these words, Sacrificium and
Oblationem noluisti, I see, O my Eternal Father, that Sacrifices and Oblations
are rejected by thee, as insufficient to make satisfaction for the sins of men,
and to appease thy wrath so justly enkindled against them. But withal I see,
Corpus aptasti mihi, that thou have framed a Body fit for me, and me alone, as
the means thou have made choice of for this great work. And what follows then,
but Ecce venio, Behold I come?

Nor was a like concurrence of the Holy Ghost wanting to the completing this
Great Design, as may be gathered from those words of the Angel to the Blessed
Virgin on the day that it was to be put in execution, when he told her, that
the Holy Ghost should come upon her, and the Power of the Most High should
over-shadow her, and therefore the Holy Thing, which should be born of her,
should be called the Son of God. Thus as the Great St. Leo excellently
observes, Sermon. 3. Pentecost.
Divisit sibi opus nostrae reparationis misericordia Trinitatis, the Three
Persons of the most Sacred Trinity, in that coeternal and mutual design they
had of repairing lost man, divided (as I may say) the work of his Redemption
amongst them, not by way of Command, but out of that pure Mercy and Goodness,
which is the same in them All. Pater (as the same St. Leo goes on) ut
propitiaretur; Filius, ut propitiaret; Spiritus Sanctus, ut igniret. The
Father, by communicating together with his Essence his Propension to accept of
a Propitiation for the sins of mankind: The Son, by mutually concurring to make
the propitiation; and the Holy Ghost, by as readily undertaking to execute what
was the Good Will and Pleasure of Both. From all which it appears, that tho the
Son (the decree of the Incarnation supposed) received a Command from his Father
to lay down his Life for the Redemption of Man, (as considered subsisting in
our Humane Nature, and in that consideration Inferior to him) yet the Sourse
and Origin of his undertaking to make a Propitiation for our sins, was not any
Precept (of which, as considered subsisting only in the Divinity he was not
capable, being equal to his Father,) but a communication only, he received in
his divine Procession from him, of his good will and pleasure, that he should
unite himself personally to our humane nature to redeem us. And as he, most
willingly and readily concurred with this gracious design, (but in a manner
infinitely transcending what the understandings of the Highest Angels are able
to comprehend;) So as soon as he was born into the world he inspired the
Shepherds to do the like: He only gave them a Sign or Intimation by which they
might find him, and presently without delay they resolved to go seek him out.
Loquebantur Pastores ad invicem, The Shepherds* said one to another, Let us now
go even to Bethlehem.

Thus, Dear Christian Auditors, was this Divine Lover of our souls pleased both
to prove and make known to us the devotion of the Shepherds, when he came into
the world: And now that he has finished his dispensation upon Earth, and is
returned to Heaven; has he left us no Sign of his Good Will and Pleasure, to
provoke our Love, to solicit our affections and show our devotion to him?
Yes: Corpus aptavit nobis, he has left us also a Body, the same Body which his
Father framed for him, and he gave to the Shepherds; but in a different manner
to them and to us: to them as wrapped in Swaddling clothes, and laid in a
Manger: Hoc vobis signum. To us, clothed with the forms of Bread and Wine, and
laid upon the Altar, Hoc nobis Signum. And what greater Sign could he give us
of his Love, than to give us that very Flesh to be our Food, which he had given
for the Life of the World? Admirable is the Reflection which St. Hom. 61. ad
Pop. Antioch.
Chrisostom makes upon this passage. Mothers, says he, oftentimes put forth
their Children to be nursed and fed by others, Ego autem non ita; sed carnibus
meis alo, and meipsum vobis appono, vos omnes generosos esse volens, etc.
But not so I, (and he speaks in the Person of Christ,) I feed you with my own
Flesh; I set my self before you for food, so to breed Generous Spirits in you,
and fill you with hopes of future Glory; since you cannot think, but that I,
who have given my self to you here, will do it in a much more excellent manner
hereafter. Volui Frater vester fieri.
That I took Flesh and Blood upon me, was out of the desire I had to become
your Brother; Vobis vicissim ipsam Carnem and Sanguinem, per quae Cognatus
vester factus sum, trado.
and now behold I give the same Flesh and Blood to be taken by you, by which I
became so nearly related to you. These are the words of that Great Father and
Light of the Church St. Chrysostom, by which he declares the Faith of the
Church of his time (which was between the Third and Fourth of the four first
General Councils) to be the same which the Catholic Church professes at this
day.

And now, dear Christans, that this Divine Lover of our Souls has left us so
great a Sign and Pledge of his good Will and Love, shall we not make have with
the devout Shepherds to go to Bethlehem? Bethlehem in English signifies The
House of Bread. St. Greg. Hom. 8. in Evang.
And St. Gregory observes, that our Lord would have the Place in which he was
to be born, to be called long before by this name, to signify to us, That He
who appeared there in our Flesh, is the Living Bread, which came down from
Heaven to nourish the Souls of his Elect to everlasting Life. And now, as I
said, that he has given us so incomparable a Sign of his Good Will and
Pleasure, shall we not make have with the Shepherds to Bethlehem? Shall we let
this Holy Time pass over, or rather shall we Trifle it all away in Pastime and
Merriment, without ever approaching to this Holy Table? Such was the Fervor of
the First Christians, that they were wont to communicate every day. And
necessary it was in those times of Cruel Persecution, to arm themselves daily
with the Bread of Life against the fear of Death. But no sooner was Peace
restored to the Church in the beginning of the fourth Age, but Piety began to
languish; (So much more hard is it for Virtue to bear up against a Prosperous,
than an Adverse Condition) which gave St. Chrysostom, before that Age was
ended, cause to inveigh so frequently as he does, against such as were present
at the Divine Mysteries, without communicating. But the Malady went on
increasing, and Christians grew so tepid in the performance of this Duty, that
the Council of Agde in the beginning of the sixth Age, Conc. Agath. An. 506.
thought fit to declare, that those who did not communicate at the Three Great
Feasts of the year, Christmas, Easter and Whitsontide, were not to be believed
to be Catholics, nor reputed for such: And the Council of Tours in the
beginning of the Eighth Age, Conc. Turon. 3. An. 813.
found it necessary to admonish them anew to communicate, if not oftener, yet
three times at least in the year, viz. at the three aforesaid Feasts. And if
the Church in these later times, as still more remiss, have thought good to lay
no farther obligation upon all the Faithful of both Sexes, than of receiving
once a year, and that at Easter, yet the Addition of the words, ad minus, (that
it must be done then at least) sufficiently shows the desire she has that they
would do it oftener, and that a Command were not at all necessary to compel,
where there is so great an Attractive of Bounty to invite. Lex Justo non est
posita. This Law was not made for the Just, for men of Good Will, who are led
by the Spirit of Love, but for such servile and degenerous Spirits, as are
acted only by fear of Punishment: And it is much to be feared, that those who
in this matter, will do no more than just what the Letter of the Law obliges,
would not do that neither, but for fear of the Censure annexed.

O the Prodigious sloth and negligence of such careless Christians, whom so
great Signs and Pledges of their dear Saviors Goodness cannot draw, without
the necessity of a Precept to drive them to him! What will they pretend for
their excuse? That they cannot, that is, will not leave their Sins? Few will be
willing to own this, but such as have lost all fear of God's Justice, and care
of their own Souls. Will they say they have no time? But has God then given us
365 days in a year, and shall not we afford to give him one at least in the
hundred? Or finally, will they pretend, that they do not find themselves worthy
to come oftener than once a year to this Divine Table? This indeed carries some
show of Religion in it, St. Cyril. Alex. l. 4. in Jo. c. 17.
but such as St. Cyril doubts not to call damnosam Religionem: Amischievous
sort of Religion, which the Devil makes use of to persuade remiss and slothful
Christians, to deprive themselves of the Food of Life: But alas! as the same H.
Father says, if they find themselves not worthy now, when will they make
themselves so? will it be easier to do it after Ten or Twelve months, than
after One, or Two, or Three? Or will it require less pains to make themselves
worthy, after their sins by long continuance, and repeated Acts, have taken
deep root in their hearts, than whilst they are yet Green and Tender? Caveamus
ne loco laquei damnosam Religionem Diabolus nobis praetendat, Let us beware,
that our Enemy do not ensnare us to our ruin under a feigned pretense of
Religion: or rather, let none be deluded with such irreligious pretenses as
these to make him abstain from frequenting this Holy Table. And that we may do
it worthily, let us go with these devout Shepherds to Bethlehem, and there see
the Word which is made Flesh for our sakes, first to adore him as our God and
Savior, and then to adorn our souls with those virtues of which he has given
us so precious an Example, which is the subject of my Second Part.

The Second Part.
Videamus hoc verbum, quod factum est.

Let us see this Word which is made.


It Is so natural to man, who draws all his knowledge from the impressions of
his Senses to desire to see what he is to worship, that not being able to see
the true God with his eyes, he fell to worshipping the Creature, Romans 1. 23.
rather than the Creator, changing as St. Paul says, the Glory of the
Incorruptible God into an Image made like to corruptible man, and to Birds and
four-footed Beasts, and Creeping Things. Thus did they become vain, as the same
Apostle says, in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened,
resolving to worship what they saw, because they could not see, whom they were
to worship. Four thousand years had this error overspread the World, excepting
only the little corner of Judea, when God commiserating the sad condition of
man, Sermon. 147.
and knowing, as St. Peter Chrysologus says, visendi se desiderio cruciari,
lassarique mortales, with what anxiety men desired to see him, and that nothing
could content them, but a visible deity, unde se visibilem faceret, hoc elegit;
out of his Infinite Goodness was pleased to take upon him the nature of Man,
that he might be seen by them. This remedy alone was left to cure the blindness
of humane nature, because this Object alone was able to draw the Eyes of Men
from all other visible things, and fix them upon it self. And of this our
Savior himself was pleased to give us a Figure in the miraculous cure he
wrought upon the Blind man, Joh. 9. by anointing his Eyes with a mixture made
of his sacred Spittle and the dust of the Earth, in which was represented the
union of the divine wisdom with humane nature, caecatis luminibus, (as St.
Anselm elegantly expresses it) collyrium suae Incarnationis apponens, applying
the Eye Salve of his Incarnation to the Eyes of Men, that those who could not
behold him in the splendors of his divinity, might see him appearing in the
form of man. O the Riches of the Goodness and Mercy of God, in condescending
thus graciously to the weakness of our nature, and making himself visible, to
satisfy the desire we had of seeing with our Eyes the God whom we are to
worship! This the devout Shepherds did, as you heard before, when they found
him in his Crib; and this must we do, as often as we present our selves before
him at his Altar.

But was this all? Was this the only End, why he was pleased to appear to us in
this visible manner? S. Aug. l. 83. Quaest. Q. 25
No: St. Austin tells us of a farther design he had in it, when he says,
Sapientia Dei hominem ad exemplum unde viveremus suscepit, that the wisdom of
God, that is, God the Word, the second Person of the Trinity, took the nature
of man upon him, to give us an example how to live well by living like him.
It Is the particular Privilege of this Divine Word made Flesh for our fakes,
that whereas other words are, properly speaking, the Objects not of the Eyes,
but of the Ears, this Word not only speaks to our Ears by his Doctrine, but
much more to our Eyes by his Example. And hence it is, that that great devote
of our Saviors Nativity, St. Thomas de Villa Nova, calls the Manger, in which
he first appeared, Sermon, 1. de Not. Dom.
Magna Cathedra, the Great Divinity-Chair or Pulpit, which his Eternal Father
had prepared for him, as soon as he should make himself visible in our nature,
to teach us the Doctrine of Salvation.

Draw near then, O Christian Souls, and hear, or rather see (says this Holy
Saint) the Lessons which the Word made Flesh preaches to your Eyes from the
Pulpit of his Crib. Discite Paupertatem, Learn of me, says he, to be truly
Poor, that is, you who are Poor not to repine at your condition, and you who
are rich, not to set your hearts upon the riches of this World, but to abridge
your selves in superfluities to communicate to those who are in want, because I
who am the Lord of the Universe, and can dispose of all that is in it, at my
pleasure, have no other Mantles to shroud my tender Body, but such as a Poor
Carpenters Spouse could provide me with, and no other Cradle to repose my head
in, but a Manger. Discite Humilitatem, Phil. 2. 3.
Learn of me to be truly Humble, each esteeming other better than themselves;
because I, who am the most High, have humbled my self so low, as to become the
Companion of Beasts. Discite Mansuetudinem, Learn of me to be truly Meek,
forgiving from your hearts those that offend you, since I, who am the Person
offended, do here water my hard Couch with my Tears to make an atonement for
the sins you have committed against me. Discite Patientiam, Learn of me to be
Patient in all your sufferings, because I, who am Omnipotent, lie here exposed
in an open Stable to the contempt of the World, and the rigor of the Elements.
Discite Obedientiam, Learn of me to be Obedient to your Superiors, because I,
who am the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, have submitted my self as a little
Infant to the disposal and conduct of a young and unexperienced Virgin. Discite
Charitatem, Learn of me to love your Neighbors for my sake, since I, who am
true God of true God, have made my self man for yours. Discite denique verum
bonorum omnium hujus saeculi contemptum. Lastly, Learn of me a true and real
contempt of all the Goods of this World, since I, who am the wisdom of God,
have despised and rejected them as false and counterfeit, to teach you by my
example the true way to Heaven.

These are the Lessons which this divine Word preaches to our Eyes from the
Pulpit of his Cribb. And if the Scholars of Pythagoras had so great a
veneration for their Master, that whatever he said, they believed it, because
he said it, quia ipse dixit; Now that a greater than Pythagoras is here, now
that God himself is become both our Master, and Pattern in his own Person,
shall we not much rather do what we see him do, quia ipse fecit, because he has
done it, and not only so, but quia ipse factus est, because himself was pleased
to be made man, that we might see him with our Eyes, and learn from his Example
the true way to Bliss? And when shall we do it, if we do it not now?

Holy David, astonished, (as we may say) to see the general depravation of
Mankind in his time, how their hearts were bent upon nothing, but the Love of
the things of this world, as their only happiness, calls upon them to bethink
themselves of their Error in these words, Psalm. 4. 3.
Filii hominum usquequo gravi cord! Ut quid diligitis vanitatem, and quaeritis
mendacium? O ye sons of men, how long will you let your hearts lie grovelling
upon the Earth! Why will you set your affections upon vanity, and seek after a
lie, meaning the transitory and deceitful goods of this world? And St. Austin
to extenuate, St. Aug. in Psalm. 4.
as it were, in some measure their fault, subjoins, Saltem usque ad adventum
Filii Dei error vester duraverit, that possibly this error of theirs might
continue till the coming of the Son of God into the world. But then considering
the depraved lives of too many Christians, he changes the Prophets usquequo,
and cries out himself Quid* ultra graves cord estis? O ye sons of men, why are
your hearts still possessed with this Error, now that the Son of God is come in
the Flesh to teach you the true way of Life? Quando habituri finem fallaciarum,
si praesente Veritate non habetis! O, when will you make an End of suffering
your selves to be cheated with the Fallacious Maxims and Fashions of the
world? if you do it not now that Truth it self has taken a Body, and presents
it self visible to your very Eyes to teach you by its own Example what you are
to choose, and what to avoid.

Is it possible, dear Christians, that we can think that to be Good and
desirable, which He, who is Truth it self, has rejected and contemned, or that
to be vile and contemptible, which He has made choice of and embraced? If our
Judgment and Conduct be not conform to his, one of the two must follow, Either
that he was deceived, or we are mistaken. And no doubt, but the mistake will be
found to be on our side, if we think to go to Heaven by any other way, than
that by which He went himself. If He who was Innocent, chose not only to walk
upon Thorns in this World, but wore them for a Crown upon his Head, must we,
who are the Criminals, expect to have the way strewn with Flowers, and our
Temples crowned with Garlands of Roses? Let me tell you, dear Christians, that
it is as much an Article of our Faith to believe the way to Heaven, as to
believe Heaven it self: And if He who has told us, there is such a Place
prepared for us, as Heaven, if we take the Right way to it, has told us also,
Matthew. 7. 14.
that that way is no other, than what himself calls, The strait way, viz. the
mortifying of our sensual appetites, renouncing the Pomps and Vanities of the
World, crucifying the Flesh with its inordinate desires, bringing the body into
subjection to the spirit, by Praying, Fasting, and other Penitential Works,
giving what is above necessity, and true Christian decency, in Alms to the
Poor, denying our own Wills, patiently bearing the Afflictions and Crosses
which God sends, meekly forgiving those that offend us, and the like Christian
Duties; either we believe this to be the only way to Heaven, or we do not? If
we do not, why do we believe there is such a Thing as Heaven at all, since He
who has told us the one, has told us the other also. When he said of himself,
Ego sum via, Joh. 14. 6.
veritas and vita, I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life, he placed Truth in
the middle, between the Way and the End, as Equally engaged for both.

But then again, if we do believe, the strait way, and which himself made
choice of, to be the only way to Heaven, why do we choose to walk in the Broad
and beaten Road of the world, as if that would bring us thither? Is it by
pleasing the Senses, pampering the Body, mispending the time which God has
given us to work out our salvation with fear and trembling, in indulging to our
own ease the best part of the day, and throwing away the rest in vain, and too
often Criminal Conversations and Pastimes, and the Riches He has bestowed upon
us, to secure our own Salvation by relieving his poor and necessitous Brethren,
in purchasing to our selves, all that may conduce to the gratifying of our
Fancies, and the satisfying of our sensual appetites; Is it, I say, by doing
these things, that we can think at last to arrive at Heaven? O no; we are
convinced of the contrary both by the Doctrine and Practice of God himself made
Man for our sakes. And when shall we put an End to this fatal Cheat, if we do
it now? Let us then no longer suffer our selves to be deluded with the vain and
transitory things of this world. But transeamus usque ad Bethlehem, passing
over, let us with the devout Shepherds go to Bethlehem; and see this Word which
is made Flesh for our sakes, which our Lord has shown unto us. Let us in a
word, see and do according to the Pattern which is shown us in the Manger,
purifying our hearts from all sinful affections, and transcribing those
Virtues, of which this fair Original has given us so lively an Example, into
the Copy of our own lives. So shall we be prepared worthily to receive him here
under the Sacramental Veils, in which he lies wrapped upon the Altar, no less
truly, than he did in his Swadling-clothes in the Manger; and be found worthy,
when he shall come the second time into the world with great Power and Majesty,
to behold him face to face in his Glory; which God of his Infinite Mercy grant
us all, to whom in Unity and Trinity be all Honor and Glory now and for ever.
Amen.

FINIS.

