THE HOLY ARBOR, CONTAINING A Body of Divinity: Or the Sum and Substance OF
Christian Religion. Collected from many Orthodox Laborers in the LORDS
VINEYARD; For the Benefit and Delight of such as Thirst after RIGHTEOUSNESS.

First Methodically and Plainly Treated of, Then Annalized and Applied at
large, By John Godolphin. J.C.D.

Wherein also are fully Resolved the Questions of whatsoever Points of Moment
have been, or are, now Controverted in DIVINITY.

Together with a large and full Alphabetical Table of such Matters as are
therein contained, or occasionally handled, Either by way of Exposition,
Controversy, or Reconciliation.

LONDON: Printed by John Field for Edmund Paxton, near Doctors Commons; And
William Royhould at the Sign of the Unicorn in S. Paul's Churchyard, near the
West End. 1651.

The Curtain drawn: OR, The Front-Door of this HOLY ARBOR Unlocked and laid
wide open.
A Laughing Horizon, a smiling Sky,
The rightside-Prospect of the Lefthand-eye,
First lights thee, Reader, to discover more
Then Janus could, had he four eyes before.
Though Lynceus wore a pair of eyes behind,
Without this Spectacle he would be but blind.
Here Wisdom's Monarch in his Marble chair
By his acuteness can divide a hair
Of the profoundest Notions, and contain
The world within the nutshel of his Brain,
Whose towering Eagle-eye can never want
The strength or cunning of the Elephant.
On this hand stands a Gospel-Prophet, such
As does not care for Circumcising much
Thy Praedial Fruits; The world, I hear him say,
But one Nights lodging by, not in the way
To heaven is. The other side holds out
A studious Artist musing, he no doubt
Is sounding, What the depth of Humane things
And finds them all but well-tuned Fiddle-strings.
These hold forth Knowledge to the life; then be
Persuaded to become One of the Three.
Let fall thine eye one glance, and thou shall see
The Church her Motto or Epitomy,
The staming Bush not burnt; the Church indeed
Is heart-whole, though her Members ever bleed.
Truth's Emblem in her HOLY ARBOR stands,
The Light of Sun and Scripture in her hands,
Tramp'ling on all the Harness; of War;
'Yond Archimedes reach a Virgin-star;
She lives, lives chaste, and from pollution free,
Maugre Romes Murder and Adultery.
The world her Pedestral; in flames, because
It will no Loyalist be unto her Laws,
Idolater, Jew, Turk, Insidel, turn
Any thing, rather then a Martyr burn;
Hence flames the World indeed, whose Fate that read
Shall find her in her ashes buried,
'Cause from her Nonage to her riper youth
Thence to her dotage she despised the Truth.
When Shilo's Scepter now breaks forth the Skies,
High time the Saints all pray, Let God arise.
Thence downward cast thy fight, exactly there
Observe, and then tell me if ever were
More true Devotion in a Woman's breast,
Then to the life is there by her expressed;
See how she prostrates all her self o'th ground,
As if she meant the Earth should down resound
To sad Souls below, what a Savior they
Lost by their worship to a god of clay.
Her breast kisses the dust, her heart the Skies;
Faith is compounded most of wings and eyes.
A Lowering Horizon, a dismal Sky,
The leftside-Prospect of the Righthand-eye;
Hell-black, night all over, enough to fright
An Eagle blind, or blind men to their sight:
Ravens, Batts, Owls, Shrich-owls, what not, that can
Paint the Darkness of an unknowing man;
A Man-monster; whose hollow head may pass
For like, but not so wise, as Balaams Ass.
Claws that can wound, corrode, and scratch the best,
Yet has not wit to feather his own nest,
That when his Claws are blunt, rather then fail,
He can make use of the Scorpions tail.
Scarce a Creature, who, when his tongue is loose,
Does staulk, and hiss, and gaggle like a Goose,
That knows no more then Tom, then he no more
Whose brain leaks all out at his nose before,
Swear by his vast estate who only can,
That sure he was intended for a Man;
He Is now become, so to both Sexes knit,
An Epidemical Hermophrodite;
Old Superstitions blear-eyed Mother,
Schism's, Error's, Heresie's Foster-brother,
A Demi-Signpost guilt, or an empty Cask,
A Woodcocks brain that is troubled with the Lask.
A man would think him something that were made
For money, to draw Custom to the Trade
Of Ginns and Roadnets. Scan this, and great chance
If all together spel not Ignorance.
Convey thine eye a little lower, see
The ghastly Draught of Hell's Epitomy
Disgorging Error; Heaven does engage
A branded sword, lest it infect this Page.
Her twilights both are vayl'd, she cannot see,
She Is so besmeard with foul Hypocrisy.
A pair of Spectacles in this hand goes
For eyes, which better would become her nose;
In that a Mole, though Blind, can undermine
Deep-laid Foundation; then look well to thine.
She Is snared, she that so much Liberty taught
To Others, is now her self in Engines caught.
May the snare prove strong, may't ne;e be broken
Till her mouth be stopped, or her eyes be open.
Lastly, Observe a Superstitious Ape
Cased in a Friars Frock without a Cape,
Which, when his Zeal grows cold, serves as a Charm
To re-inflame 't and keep his Worship warm.
If this new Father were but at the Court
Of Rome, doubtless 'twould make most exe'lent sport
Are there not many such? why not an Ape
Like him, as well as he in the others shape?
Reader, this Holy Arbor's door the have seen
Wide open; Be serious now, and enter in.
scenes from the preceding poem The Holy Arbor Containing ye whole Body of
Divinity or A Cluster of Spiritual Grapes, gathered from the Vines of certain
Modern and Orthodox Laborers in the Lords Viniard; Pressd For the Spiritual
delight and benefit of all such as thirst after Righteousness

By Jo: Godolphin. I.C.D
Wisdom's monach, eagle, and elephant martyr, burning bush, Shilo's scepter
Exumat Deus

Ema nuoll

devoted woman Ad te Domine

Ad te mi Jesu.


owls, bats, man-monster with scorpian tail blind woman of hypocrisy ^
dissipentur inimici

ape wearing Friar's frock Printed by John Field for Edmund Paxton near
Doctors Commons and William



TO THE TRULY HONORABLE, THE POOR in SPIRIT.
Right Humble,
THe mighty Nazarites Riddle, Out of the Eater came Meat, and out of the Strong
came Sweetness, Judge. 14.14. was the second Course served in at his
Marriage Feast; which by way of Allusion may not unaptly be applied to you:
Came not the Spirit of God upon you at the Conquest of that devouring Lion, in
the fierce Assaults of his ingenious Temptations? At your return from which
Spiritual Combat, began you not to feed on the Peace of Good Consciences, when
the Word of the Lord became as Honey in your mouths? Is not this a Riddle to
the Uncircumcised of the World?

In Congratulation of which no common Victory, is this Address no less properly
then humbly prostrated to you only, as the most faithful Guardians of this
Holy Arbor; whose unfenced Ambulage, when spiced at your approach by the
fragrancy of your Innocence, craves the Subterfuge of your Prayers.

As for those extravagant Weeds which grow so far beside the Alley of your
Conversation, they are left to the Euroclydons of the Air: But for the Errata's
only of the Artist, they may fall within the ambit of your Charity, to
dictionate according to the Rule thereof.

The Civil man, that looking through the crevice of Morality, spies Religion
afar off, will doubtless pretend a Right to many precious Flowers in this
Arbor, as legally descended to him from his Pharisaick Parents, under a Title
of much supercilious Sanctity, and no little Righteousness; whilst the
pestilent air of sulphur'd-mouthed Prophaners, enhazard the fairest leaves of
withering into waste paper: But since neither the Usurping Hypocrisy of the
one, nor the Malicious Satanity of the other, was ever yet Prayer-proof; Be it
your delight to engage your interest with Heaven; Be it your Spirits holy
Rapture, to wrestle with the Angel of the Covenant: Mount Elisha's Chariot, and
travel a Prayers journey for a Flaming Sword.

Yours in all Faithful Observance, J. G.

To the Reader.
BY the late unseasonableness of the Weather, thou may guess (Reader) what
little cause there is to promise this ARBOR any assurance of a flourishing
Condition; the Air being still so generally distempered, yea frozen to such an
habit of coldness to every thing that is substantially good. To tell thee what
unwholesom fogs still poison the Judgments of men, what blasphemous vapors are
yet exhaled out of hell, by the black Magic of a Reprobate Sense, is not my
purpose, nor shall be thy entertainment.

In this Arbor thou may walk secure from those whirlwinds of Doctrines,
which in bryar-paths and ensnaring Pamphlets ravish the innocent, and often times
hurry the humblest mind to the highest pinnacle of Presumption. Here blow no
gusts of shifting Opinions to menace danger to the Vessel; no ill dews of
Pride, Formality, or Hypocrisy, to stain the Flowers of this Arbor, which are
all so self-interestless, as that they fade into a dead letter, without the
influence of a pruning hand.

When the late unseasonable showers of Blood had nigh deluged Gods Vineyard,
this Arbor lay sheltered in the Ark of his special protection, even in the
bosom of his super-deluging mercies, when the Land seemed to labor under
Egypt's plagues in a Gospel-season; when our Rivers were turned into blood; and
Lusts bred of our slimy affections came even like Frogs into the Closet of the
hearts both of Prince and People; when the dust of our carkases were turned
into Vermin, and the Lusts of all Nations monopoliz'd by this like Swarms of
Flies, multiplied and corrupted the whole Land, when as if there had been a
very grievous Murrain of Beasts, we might read Famine in the cheeks of the
Land, which were but lean, though very sanguine; and many of our Members
touched with the plague of Boil and Blayns; when God shot the Arrows of his
Vengeance like Hailstones on man and beast, and sent Armies of Locusts into
our coast; when Darkness, which might be sadly felt, seized on our
excommunicated Souls, and many of our Firstborn fell by the sword, even when
the furious Pharaohs were unequipaged, whilst the Servants of the Most High
waded under his Canopy through a sea of blood; when a general Apostasy from the
Truth received, back-clap'd the Demetrian Craftsman to shout, Great is Diana of
the Psudoprotestants; when these and many other fearful violfulls were pouring
out on this exceeding sinfully sinful Nation, then, even then, in that lowering
age, were the seeds of these Flowers sown in hope of a better Resurrection.

Thou see ( Reader) in what a turbulent and improper season this Arbor
received its first plant, yea and from a hand which has no other warrant to
touch the Sacred Oracles, then the general Calling of a Christian, which to a
sacrilegious Monopolist may seem no little piece of audacious Uzzaism, more
then an aliquantity of irresponsible Presumption, by reason of such
irregularity of Motion in so improper a sphere.

These Grapes thus unseasonably gathered in the Fall of more then the Leaf, in
the Autumn of true and sound Religion, when the Sun of Righteousness withdrew
his influence, and stood as at a distance from our Horizon; Wonder not if some
seem even rotten-ripe, though I dare promise thee none are juyceless; And know,
that though here are few, but happily thou have had a taste of in thy Christian
perambulation through the Church's Vineyard, yet remember the same Vine often
times proves better in one soil then in another, and sprouts fairest when her
unfolded arms are widest spread; and if any disrelish thy gust, impute it not
to the sowreness or sharpness of the Grape, but to the indisposition of thine
own Palate.

To say these Grapes came all from this or that man's Vine, is a greater piece
of Sacrilege then I would wish any unfrantick Mind to usurp: And for my self,
if I challenge more then the Gathering, and Digesting them into the method thou
see, let me be numbered among the Pulpit-Diurnalists. Nor was it ever
intended, that herein should be more then was sufficient for intimation to an
industrious Genius, what in this kind might for the Church of God be
completed by a more skilful hand.

In a Medicinal sense this Arbor may not improperly be styled The Souls
Physick-Garden; for the Flowers enamelling it, contain most Sovereign Virtue
for each Spiritual Malady: What thine is, let Conscience speak; but say not
thou art well, for he who says he has no sin, deceives himself: And indeed,
never was Age more guilty of this Self-deceit, then this; wherein men say in
their Hearts, and proclaim in their Lives, That there is no God, whilst they
meanwhile become their own Idols, by sacrificing to the Calf of the Lip and
the Viper in the Brain.

Look we into the state of the Body Politic, and wiser men then Empericks
tell us, Many Epidemical Diseases are too discoverable therein: But where the
Patient deserves our Prayers, the Press has no warrant for Invectives; and
it is no improvident wisdom to be silent, where our judgments are Non-pluss'd.
Sufficient for the Public is the evil thereof.

Physicians tell us, The Cure is half way home, when the Malady is known; but
experienced Symptoms are oft-times very false Prophets, otherwise he that is
carried about with every wind of Doctrine, might without breach of the least
Link in Charities Chain, be styled Errors Weathercock: 'Twere not amiss to
prescribe such the Word of Truth, as a Pillow for their Faith to rest on, till
the Vertigo or Giddiness in the Brain be evaporated; also to advise them what
Doctrines they swallow, till trial be made whether the Spirit be of God or no.

There are some within the Pales of Spiritual Bedlam, that are in such a
continual Burning Ecstasy, as they can seldom or never repose their Thoughts in
any Spiritual Rest, but are ever and anon babbling Scripture, without sense, or
any feeling of the Power thereof; Spiritual Expressions without Affection, and
Divinity without Sense: Their Eyes are Blood-shot, and the whole Creature is
become so Self-resolved, as no bands, either Civil or Religious, Natural or
Politic, can restrain, not their Liberty, but their Fury. These Symptoms give
it to be a Spiritual Frenzy, caused at first by Spiritual Pride, and now
attended on by desperate Presumption: If the Cephalic Vein of Ignorance were
speedily opened, and an infusion taken of Humility and Knowledge to the weight
of their Zeal, probably the Cure would follow. Others have the faculties of
their Souls so chained and manacled to Carnal Objects, as that they cannot
exercise them about Holy Duties, but are quite dead to Good Works, and wholly
forget the Duties both of their Public and Private Callings, otherwise then
relating to a Carnal Interest; yea, are so Spirit-bound, that they cannot hear
a Sermon without nodding to the Preacher, that they must take a nap or two; nor
say their Prayers, but between sleeping and waking; begin them in a Fog, and
conclude them in a Dream. In this Spiritual Lethargy, if the still voice of the
Gospel be but Cradle-Musick, the Thunder of the Law should be the
Graves-Expositor.

It is within the Bill of Mortality to find some, who having lost the Function
of Vital Graces, all checks of Conscience, all sense of Sin, all motions of the
Spirit, lie gasping for Spiritual Life, while the breath thereof is checked by
Customary sinning: This is a Spiritual Apoplexy, only the Spirit of God can
restore that Soul. But to lose the use of some special Grace for a time, the
operations of this or that gracious Quality, is a most common defect incident
to the soundest of Gods Servants; now to suffer an eclipse of his Favor, anon
the Motions of his Spirit, then the comfortable sense of Assurance; sometimes
to be wavering in the Faith, at other times to be nigh swallowed up in
Doubtings, are all the Symptoms of a Spiritual Palsy. He that is thus
affected, must give himself unto Prayer, That God would fix and stablish his
Heart, confirm his Faith, and cause the influence of his Love to revive his
Hope, sealing it up unto full Assurance.

To commit the Sins we would not, is the Epidemical Disease of the most
Regenerate, and we are all naturalized unto daily failings. This is a Spiritual
Epilepsie, or the Falling Sickness; hereditary, thence the more difficult to be
cured; yet the Righteousness of Christ well applied will do it, if as thou
fallest, thou rise again by sound Repentance, and so keep to the strict Diet of
New Obedience. But if a Soul be suddenly taken with strange and violent Fits of
some desperate Sins, who formerly had been unaccustomed thereto, acquiescing
all his time under the silence of a calm Conscience, and now rusheth into
horrid acts of the grossest Enormities: Conclude that Soul in a Spiritual
Convulsion, the very Heart must be let Blood by sound Repentance, till the
Corruption of the Inner-man, the evil Affections, and vicious Inclinations,
which held a candle to the Devil to level his Temptations, be all discordiated.

Let the dark Understanding that discerns not Spiritual things, the Mystery of
Salvation, Excellencies of Christ, or Beauties of Holiness, take Bartimeus for
his Guide, and pray fervently for Spiritual Eye Salve, that Christ would touch
and unseal his judgment; but if his Eye offend him, or any Lust as tender to
him as the Apple thereof, Exoculation is the Remedy prescribed, Matthew. 5.29.
And he, who has an Imposthume in his Ears, when God talks with him in the
language of his Mercies or his Judgments, of his Word, his Spirit, or his
Works, wants an Ephatha. But seldom are his Lungs Ulcerless, whose Heart is not
in Charity; yet let not such unsheath the Razor in his mouth, and possibly the
Disease may not be mortal. Or say the Soul is imposthumated by corrupt
Affections, through a long continuance of slimy distillations and unclean
thoughts from the heart, to the obstruction of the Spiritual Breath, whereby
the Graces languish, and the Vitals thereof decay: Is not this a Spiritual
Hectique, a Consumption in the highest degree? Must not that Soul be cleansed
from all filthiness both of the Flesh and Spirit? and make a constant use at
every Spring to sin, and fall from Grace, the Diet-drink of Repentance? Add to
this the Restorative of Faith (whose principal Ingredients are Gods Promises
and Christ's Righteousness) then keep to the strict Diet of a
Gospel-Conversation, and by the Mercy of God through the Merit of Christ that
Soul shall recover.

Pantings of the Heart after a full Meal of Spiritual Dainties, or upon a full
stomach after some plentiful Feast of Heavenly Manna, is no strange Malady in
the child of God. If those pantings proceed from a fullness of the Spirit, and
not from an emptiness of Grace; if they are after Christ and his Righteousness,
not after the World and its Vaingloriousness, its then a blessed Malady, and
the Cure is mortal; in this case trouble not the Physician. But if those
pantings of the Heart be through too much vacuity of Grace, occasioned by
worldly Cares or carnal Grief, whereby follows a loss of Appetite to that Food
which came down from Heaven, thereby rendering the stomach unapt for digestion
of Spirit-savoring Meats; In this case such things as callifie and corroborate
the Heart, are not improper: Let therefore thy Prayer be as Frankincense, thy
Humility as Camomil, thy Faith as Mastick, thy Penitence as Wormwood; of each a
like quantity, in this Distemper, will afford an excellent Plaster to apply to
the Heart.

Obedience to the sixth Commandment, is a sovereign Remedy against a Spiritual
Plurisie; and if thou spit Blood, the Rule Paul prescribes the Romans, Romans
12.18. is very proper for thy Constitution. Also Envy, Pride and Ambition, are
very Tympanous Maladies, which in time engender a Spiritual Dropsy; but
Charity, Humility and Self-denial, will evacuate those flatuous Humors.
Likewise Abstinence is the only Cure after a Surfeit of sin, to which add
Fasting and Prayer. But if thou art troubled with the Stone, I mean in the
Heart, Remember who was David's Key-keeper; who, were thou all Adamant, can
filiarize thee unto Abraham.

The immoderate heat of any Lust, which has its origination from the Heart,
will in time spread it self by the Faculties into the whole Soul, and impede
the operations of Grace: This is a Spiritual Fever, whereof there be diverse
kinds. If this be thy Malady, whether a Burning-Feaver through the violence of
some strong Temptations, Satan's fiery Darts, or through the Inflammation of
some inordinate Lust; or whether a Putrid-Feaver, through the foul corruptions
of Nature and filthiness of sin; or whether a Quotidian-Feaver, whereby the
whole course of thy life is but as one fit of sin; or whether a Tertian or a
Quartan-Feaver, wherein, through the intermission of the opportunities and
occasions of sin, thou enjoyest some intervals of a better disposition, though
no health; or whether a Hectique-Feaver, whereby a sinful slame is kindled, not
only in the mere Natural Qualities and Inferior Inclinations of the Mind, but
also in the more Noble Faculties and higher Region of the Soul, which through
the habitualness of that equal Heat in all the Faculties alike, renders thee
insensible of thy Malady, and thence nigh incurable: Be it either or all of
these, do but savingly Believe in the Physician, and thy Faith shall make thee
whole; but then be sure to persevere in the Faith, and beware of Relapses.

Some say the Times are very Leprous, and that the people are pestered with
very venomous Botches; That the Gangrene of Envy has almost unbowell'd them,
and the Scurf of Hypocrisy strangely deformed them; That the Ulcer of
Injustice has cast a perpetual Odium on them, and the Appetitus Caninus of
Covetousness has made but one Morsel of them; That the Wolf of Sacrilege has
devoured the Breasts which gave Christendom suck in her old Age; That though
the Land has had a Bloody Issue of nigh Twelve years running, yet never could
have so much as a touch at the Hem of Christ's Garment; That the belching of
Blasphemy in a Convulsion of Willworship, is as common as the disgorging of
Oaths to unsurfet the high stomachs of the proud and profane. If these or the
like be the Epidemical Maladies of these latter days, wherein the Devil is put
to his Wits end, then let me prescribe this Holy Arbor as a standing
Pharmacopeia, not for the shelf of every closet, but for the closet of every
heart; wherein there is not a Drug that has the least allay of any Poison in
it, nor a dangerous or obstruse Ingredient: for the cautious Artist considering
how untowardly ruder hands have gone to Composition with Divine Truths, what
spurious Extractions have been thence drawn, and what Mischief has thence
followed; knowing also what rural judgments and tender Spirits may meet
herewith, his care was greatest how he might be plainest.

The first and rarest Flower, as Portal to this Holy Arbor, that presents it
self to thine eye, is, The Sacred Mystery of the Holy Trinity; indeed a Mystery
visible only to the eye of Faith. The unhappy Jews and Turks glance at the
sight of a Deity, but to this day discern not Three Persons in one Godhead. The
Gnostics and Valentinians have their false Multiplying Glasses to see more
Gods then One, but want the Prospective of Faith to descry a Trinity of Persons
in one and the same Eternal Essence. Such a Deceptio visus has so falsely
presented the Eunomians with Three Gods or Spirits, not distinguished only,
but divided also, as that they could never see Three Persons in one only
Godhead. The Apollinarians superacted their ridiculous Faith, and grossly held a
Quaternity, not a Trinity of Persons, was to be Worshipped. The purblinde
Noetians and Hermogenians had sight enough to acknowledge the naked Name of
Three in the Godhead, yet denied the Persons. The Patripassians, that
blasphemously held the Father became Flesh and suffered, never saw into this
Mystery. The sacrilegious Arrian Heretics (who make Israel to sin) grant
indeed the Names and Persons of Three, yet deny the Son and the Holy Ghost
their Divinity, yea the whole Trinity their Properties. The profane
Trinitarians acknowledge Three Persons with their Lips, yet deny their Divinity
by the Infidelity of their Lives: Thus rendering themselves guilty of more
knowledge then they practice, and consequently not of fewer stripes then are
menaced. All these are excluded this Arbor, and an entrance open only for such
as by the Heaven-piercing eye of Faith can see into the Mystery of this
glorious Truth, and steadfastly Believe, That there are Three that bear Record
in Heaven, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and these Three are One, 1 John 5.7.

The next Flower in order, is the Word of God, Truths Standard, the sacred
Oracles of the Holy Scripture; which while the Prophets, Evangelists and
Apostles penned, the Spirit held their hands. If there be any Wretch so much an
Infidel, under the notion of a Christian, possessed with the spirit of
Contradiction to this Basis of all Truths, I conjure him by the Author of that
parallelless Work, That he haunt not this Holy Arbor, whilst I leave this
Memento with all selfless Christians, Thou shall put nothing to the word that I
command thee, neither shall ye take ought there from, Deuteronomy. 4.2.

The next concerns the Law and Gospel; I dare not discouple what God has
joined together. The Law, that Touchstone of all our works, without which we,
had not known sin, Romans 3.20. Far be it therefore from all right by assed
Christians, to rebel in their hearts with the Libertines of any Outlawed
Generation, That the Law is now totally repealed, as if the Law were the
transgression of the Gospel: for, though the Law of it self made nothing
perfect, Heb. 7.9. yet is the Law in it self a perfect and undefiled Law,
converting the soul, Psalm. 19.7. whence the Royal Prophet in other places sets
it down as a special character of a righteous man, That the Law of his God is
in his heart, Psalm. 37.31. or that his heart is Gods Law-keeper, Psalm. 40.8.
yea, Blessed are they styled, who sincerely walk in the Law of the Lord, Psalm.
119.1. and ver. 165. he proclaims Peace to them that love this Law: you may
guess then at the cause of War. No marvel that notwithstanding our many
Fastings and Prayers God still threatens us with War, For he that turns away
his ear from hearing the Law, even his prayer shall be abomination, Prove. 28.9.
And though now the Righteousness of God, which is by Faith, is manifested
without the Law, Romans 3.21. yet God forbid that we should thence make void the
Law through Faith, whereby we establish it, Romans 3.31. We acknowledge, That by
the deeds of the Law no flesh shall be justified in the sight of God, Romans
3.20. nevertheless we must acknowledge, That the Law is holy, Romans 7.12. and
spiritual, v. 14. And though Christ be ineffectual to them who expect
Justification by the Law, Gal. 5.4. himself being the end of the Law; that is,
the Accomplisher thereof, for Righteousness to every one that believes, Romans
10.4. And though as many as be led by the Spirit, are not under the Law, that
is, not under the Bondage or Curse of the Law, Gal. 5.18. And though now, Faith
being come, we are no longer, like untuter'd Learners, under a Schoolmaster,
that is, the Law, Gal. 3.25. All this premised, yet know ye not that the Law
has dominion over a man for term of life, Romans 7.1. Know ye not that Christ
came -- What to do? to destroy the Law? no, but to fulfill it, Matthew. 5.17. and
in the 18 Verse most pathetically asseverates us an Assurance, That one tittle
shall in no wise pass from the Law till all be fulfilled: Wherefore let Heaven
and Earth know, That it is easier for them both to pass, then one tittle of the
Law to fail, Luke 16.17.

With the Law not improperly is joined the Gospel, that Olive Dove of Man's
Salvation; wherein Christ proclaims himself an Ark for all the Gospel-
Noachims, against the Deluge of his Fathers Wrath. The light of this Gospel
shines both on the just and unjust; but the beams thereof have happy influence
only on the Heirs of Grace, melting the hearts of such into Faith and
Repentance, whilst they harden the cley-hearts of carnal Worldlings into
stupidity and searedness of Conscience, whose Minds the god of this World has
blinded, 2 Cor. 4.4. yet the express Command for Dispensation thereof, is as
Catholic as Christ or words could make it; when being Risen from the Dead, he
accosted his Disciples, saying, Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel
to every creature, Mark 16.15. So that if the Gospel be hid, it is hid to them
that are lost, 2 Cor. 4.3.

In the next place stands the Ministerial Function, the highest employment that
ever the Lord of Heaven vouchsafed the Sons of men. If the Ministers of the
Word would sit down satisfied with the Styles and Titles given them in
Scripture, they needed no other Herald to blazon the Nobleness of their
Calling, nor any Stellicidiaries to invite the Hosanna's of the People. Are
they not called The Salt of the Earth? the Builders of Christ's Body? Gods
Fellow-workmen? Christ's Ambassadors? the Stewards of the House? the Fathers of
the Church? Fishers of men? Ministers of the Spirit? Builders of the Temple?
Shepherds of the Sheep? Planters and Waterers of the Garden? the Lords Harvest
men? his Vine-dressers? Watchmen of the City? Trumpeters of the Host? yea Stars
of the Firmament, Rev. 1.10. It were worth a National Fast, that all such as
are thus highly dignified, were or might be responsibly qualified: Attribute we
therefore none of these Titles to any such as are unfaithful in their Embassy,
not to unsavory Salt, not to the Ignorant or Idle, not to the Scandalous nor
the Mercenary, not to the Contentious nor the Covetous, not to the Proud nor to
the Superstitious, into whose Minds the subtle Sophister of all Ages has
specially in this foisted such specious Qualifications, and such self-deceiving
Equivocations to palliate those sins, as if in order to Life and Doctrine, he
would feign persuade the World, to spite the POPE, the CLERGY could not err.

Next follows the Hearing of the Word; by this comes Faith, without this
posteth Atheism; yet take heed what ye hear, Mark 2.24. yea and how ye hear,
Luke 8.18. Away therefore with itching ears, with prejudicate thoughts, with an
impreparatory heart, with presumptuous self-conceits: Away with distracted
Cogitations, unsanctified Affections, turbulent Passions, sublunar Cares,
careless and extravagant Attention: Away with carnal Security, with vain
Dissension of Opinions touching the Truths delivered: Away with overchargings
of Nature, with drowsy Faculties, with Unbelief, Hardness of Heart, Pride and
uncharitable Thoughts, ever Remembering that it is (or should be) the Word of
God and not of man, 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. not a tittle whereof shall go unfulfilled,
Matthew. 5.18. till it become the savor of life unto life, or of death unto
deeper condemnation, 2 Cor. 2.16. Take heed therefore how ye hear, Luke ibid.

After the Word, in order follows the Sacraments, which though they confer no
Grace ex opere operato, yet are effectual Signs and Witnesses of Gods
incomprehensible Benevolence to man-wards: For of Baptism says our Savior, He
that believes and is baptized shall be saved, Mark 16.16. And of his Supper,
he says, This is my Body which is given, Luke 22.19. and broken for you, 1
Cor. 11.24. This is my Blood of the New Testament, that is shed for many for
the remission of sins, Luke 22.20. Indeed a Sacrament is a Covenant of Gods
free Favor to us, confirmed by some outward Sign or Seal instituted by himself.
Thus was the Tree of Life a Sacrament to Adam, Genesis 2.9. The Rainbow to Noah,
Genesis 9.9, 13. The smoking Furnace to Abraham, Genesis 15.17, 18. The Fleece of
Wool to Gideon, Judge. 6.37. The Dyal to Hezekiah, 2 Kings 20.7, 11. The
Sacrifices, Circumcision, and the Paschal Lamb, to the Jews; Baptism and the
Lords Supper to the Faithful under the Gospel, Mat. 28.19. Luke 22.19.

In the next place stands Prayer, the Souls Incense, whereby she is winged for
Heaven. Wonderful are the Works wrought by Prayer, not as a Cause, but only as
an Instrument sanctified by God, and effectual to the Righteous, if it be
fervent, Jam. 5.16. This Fervency is that Magnetic Virtue in Prayer which
attracts Heaven to Earth; but the fervent Prayer of an unrighteous man avails
little, save to betray his sinister dexterity in vanifying so excellent a Gift,
which in such, the Lord knows, too often comes within a breaths breadth of
Blasphemy. But let the Faithful be exceeding cautious whom they censure in this
case, lest they chance to touch the Apple of Gods eye; and let him that prays
pray fervently, for Faith is full of vigor, full of life, and God loves a
sprightly Faith; yea, the Promise made to the Prayer of a Righteous man, is not
otherwise annexed then on the condition of Fervency: which we may not dream is
confined to the activity of external gestures, or volubility of a
never-stammering tongue, but chiefly consists in the sincerity of the
Supplicant, in the extent of his Faith, and cordiality of his Desires.

Next follows the Lords Prayer, if we have not forgot that there is such a
thing in rerum natura Spiritualium. It Is worth a Catechism to ask the Worlds
Favorites, Which of them, that do so highly adore this Prayer, can truly say
Our Father: Most can say, but few can pray it: Others disuse it under the
notion of a set Form of Prayer; but set Forms of Prayer quatenus such are not
prohibited. This is indeed a set Form of words for Prayer, but no set Prayer,
as is generally mis-thought; for it is a Prayer to none but such as can pray it
in Faith. Nor can there properly be said to be any such thing as a set Prayer,
for (in submission to better judgments) I conceive the motion of the Spirit in
Prayer, is that which denominates Prayer to be Prayer; which Spirit is not
confineable by this or any set Form of words, as may appear, 1 Samuel 1.15. For
the motion of the Spirit in one praying the same words of another, may be more
extensively Spiritual in that one then in the other; which could not be, if the
very words set in that Form, Method and Order, could confine the Spirit: And
hence it is that all that can say the Lords Prayer, cannot pray Our Father; for
my voice may be articulate enough without Faith, but without Faith and the
Spirit that articulate sound cannot properly be called a Prayer, though
articulated by the form of words in the Lords Prayer. Thus though many say the
same form of words for Prayer, yet they may not be said to pray the same
Prayer; yea one and the same person at sundry times praying the same form of
words, may not infallibly be said to pray the same Prayer, for it varies
according to the measure of the Spirit in the person praying, which may not be
one and the same in the same person at all times, though the form of words be
still the same: for as there are diverse operations of the same Spirit in diverse
persons, yet not opposite each to other; so there may be diverse motions of the
same Spirit at diverse times in one and the same person, yet not contrary each
to other: for who can say he has the same measure of the Spirit at all times
alike? Now then, if any one can compose a set Form of the Spirit, which no
Creature dare usurp; or confine the Spirit to a set form of words, which Angels
want Rhetoric to do, then possibly may he make a set Form of Prayer. Call it
then not a set Form of Prayer, but a set Form for Prayer. To think the Spirit
can be stinted by words set in this or that Form, is a popular Mistake, because
the Spirit has an extent beyond both the Restraint of the strictest words, and
the sublimest signification of any words; and because the Spirit of Faith,
which is the Causa sine qua non of Prayer, is not limitable by words; indeed
the gift of Elocution, the gift of Utterance, the subject matter to be prayed
for, and the like, may be stinted by words; but the grace of Faith, the grace
of Love, the grace of Zealous Fervency, such special operations of the Spirit
in Prayer cannot be stinted by words, nor can set words limit them; because
when they are wound up to the height, they have still an implicit voice in
the heart, beyond whatever can be uttered by the tongue: And this is known in
Scripture by the pouring out of the heart before God, 1 Samuel 1.13. Psalm. 62.8.
Insomuch that when a soul in Faith prays, as we say, ex tempore, even then the
words of the tongue, though unlimited, yet comes often times far short of the
language of the heart, which is the Spirits proper Dialect, and which could not
be, if words might restrain the Spirit. Indeed if the Spirit were only in the
words, or wholly confined to the words, then must it be stinted by the words.
Thus a set Form for Prayer is a stinting of the subject matter to be prayed
for, and that by the stinting of the words; but is not a stinting of the
Spirit, which is too Spiritual to be limited by words. If I can pray in the
liberty of the Spirit without any words at all, no question but I may pray in
the liberty of the Spirit with any words aptly composed for Prayer, so long as
the Spirit is not circumscriptible by words; for though the words of a Petition
confine me to pray, Thy Kingdom come, as the subject matter to be prayed for in
that Petition, yet my Spirit is left at liberty to pray that Petition in Faith,
Zeal and Fervency, proportionable to the measure of the Spirit vouchsafed me,
and not to the method and the number of the words prescribed me: For the
operation of the Spirit in Prayer, refers to that Love which the Author of the
Spirit bears to the party praying, and not to any form of words composed for
Prayer. Besides, a Prayer prayed ex tempore, without any premeditated or
preceding composure of words into a certain Form, is not only to the
joynt-Supplicant Auditors, but also to the party himself praying viva voce a
set Form for Prayer: for he cannot pray at all viva voce without a Form set,
either premeditatively set, or set ex tempore, the latter whereof is as well a
set Form in all audible Prayers as the other, and that not only to the
co-Supplicants, but also to the party himself audibly praying, because words
must necessarily fall within those bounds the Composer frames them, and no
other; whereby at last they become a Form set, whether premeditatively framed,
or framed ex tempore, and that as well to him that frames and prays them
audibly, as to them who join therein with him; so that if the Spirit be stinted
by the one, it is stinted by the other also: and consequently we could not
audibly pray at all without stinting the Spirit, were that common Assertion
true, That the Spirit is stinted by a set form of words. Indeed if there could
be a set Form of the Spirit, and consequently a set Prayer indeed, then it
might be granted that thus the Spirit might be stinted. And thus we grant, That
there may be a set form of words for Prayer, but no such thing as a set Prayer,
for that is only of the Spirits composure, which is no way subject to words.
And so this may stand for a Conclusion, That no words whatsoever, be they never
so defectively or comprehensively composed into any Form for Prayer, can be
properly said to lay a restraint on the Spirit, which with no words or any
words has still its liberty in the fervent Prayer of Faith. Yet to prevent
Misunderstandings, we may not think but a set Form of words for Prayer does
stint and limit the Petitions, though not the Spirit wherein and wherewith they
are petitioned. Nor is this so said in vindication of set Forms for Prayer, as
to lessen at all the excellency of Extemporal Prayer, for the Spirit has its
liberty in both. And as I hold set Forms of petitions for Prayer may be of most
excellent use to such as have Faith and a measure of the Spirit, yet want the
gift of Elocution; so I likewise hold, That they are but of subordinate use to
them whose infirmities are helped and supplied by the Spirit without them; and
that all Prayers whatever ought to carry in them, touching the matter and manner
of them, a Resemblance parallel to that Form for Prayer which Christ set and
taught his Disciples, and in them us. From which therefore let no man for
fashions sake think himself exempted, because it is a set Form; for is not the
extemporal Prayer of another man in my audience a set Form to me, yea and to
himself also, being extemporally, though not premeditately set? Or are we
exempted from it because some Idolize it? Is the sin of Commission in one, a
warrant for the sin of Omission in another? Or are we indeed exempted from it
under a pretense of the Spirits being stinted by it? Is not all that is
supplicable or can be prayed for, therein comprehended, if the Rejecters
thereof understood it? Or does the excellency of that Prayer too much eclipse
the luster of our own, both being prayed in Faith? Are we so Prayerproud? Does
it not rather supply the defects of our own? Or is the bare verbalizing of that
Prayer in the faithless and ignorant, a ground sufficient for the godly to deny
it their Zeal, their Faith, their Hearts? Are we exempted from it under a
supposition that it is too Good for sinners? Is not this rather an Idolizing of
the words? Have we no relation to it, because Christ taught it only to his
Disciples? Absist. Must not the Faithful pray it, because the Wicked babble it?
Shall I reject Scripture because the Devil has used it? Must we never pray it,
because it may not always be absolutely necessary? may it therefore be never
expedient? Hence then never let any sober Christian more undervalue this Form
for Prayer, for the reason only of others thinking too highly of it; nor
admire it for the reason of others vain undervaluing it; but pray it in
Knowledge, Faith and Fervency, without which the words are as a dead letter.
This Form is completely Comprehensive of all things petitionable, whether
Spiritual, Temporal or Eternal; an exact Epitomy of what God has promised to
give, or man has leave to ask. It is that Form of words for Prayer which our
Savior taught his Disciples, commanding them, when they pray, to say, Our
Father which etc.

Next follows that Creed, which vulgarly is styled Apostolical, whereby we make
Confession of that Faith which believes in one God, even the true God, one in
Essence, Deuteronomy. 6.4. Three in Persons, 1 John 5.7. The Father the Creator, Psalm.
134.3. the Son the Redeemer, Romans 5.18. the Holy Ghost the Sanctifier, 1 Pet.
1.2. which Believes that the Holy, Ephesians. 1.3, 4. and Catholic Church, Isa.
54.2. consists of the Faithful people of God; which Believes that there is a
Communion of Saints, Ephesians. 4.15, 16. Pardoned of all sins, Isa. 44.22. Appointed
to Rise from Death, and to enjoy Eternal Life both in Body and Soul, Joh. 6.39,
40.

In the next, a word of the Decalogue in general; How in the Table of man's
Heart it stood engraven before it was repeated in stone; Also how and in what
manner the Law was given; How many ways the Decalogue's divided; with Rules
concerning the substance and meaning thereof in general. Various and voluminous
are the Expositions on the Commandments; but here as in a Map, quasi uno
intuita, thou may descry the whole Region of the Law of God: The same may be
said of the whole Work, as it stands in relation to the subject it treats of.
Now because we are not under the Law but under Grace, some have dreamed, That
the Enacting of the Gospel has Repealed the Statutes made when Moses was
Speaker; the Lord awaken them. Do we now make void the Law through Faith? God
forbid; yea, we establish the Law, Romans 3.31. David, a man in request with God,
a man after his own heart, took the Testimonies of God for his Heritage for
ever, made them the joy of his heart, and resolved to keep the Commandments of
his God, Psalm. 119.112, 115. and in ver. 126. he says, It is time for thee, O
Lord, to work, for they have made void thy Law; and in the next Verse most
passionately declares his affection, saying, I love thy Commandments above
gold, yea above fine gold. A plain Discovery why others reject them. But, if
thou will live, keep the Commandments, Prove. 7.2. keep them exactly,
universally, constantly, cheerfully and sincerely. Have no Gods but One, and
that the only true God. Worship no Created thing. In vain do not take Gods
Name in thy thoughts, actions or otherwise. Consecrate the Seventh day.
Reverence thy Superiors, but not with Religious Worship. Commit no Adultery by
the eye or otherwise. Do not play the Thief in thy Calling or otherwise. Give
no false Testimony; and endeavor after that excellent gift of Contentation.
Thus, with holy David, have thou respect to all the Lords Commandments, and
that continually, Psalm. 119.117. for, the Lord shows Mercy unto Thousands of
them that love him, and keep his Commandments, Exodus 20.6.

The next is touching the Infinite Love of God to Man, The Decree of Election,
according to the good will and pleasure of God from all Eternity; The Creation
of all things out of nothing, without any Instruments, Means, Assistance or
Motion, only by the Word of God alone; The Redemption of Man by the Imputation
of the sufferings of the punishment due for sin in the person of our Mediator;
Vocation, whereby we are called from Darkness to Light, from a state of Nature
to a state of Grace, from out of the World to the Kingdom of Heaven, from being
Limbs of Satan to be Members of Christ, from Children of Wrath to become the
Heirs of Heaven; Justification, whereby God absolveth true Believers from the
guilt of sin, by the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ; Sanctisication,
or the inward changing of a justified man, purged from all the corruption of
Nature, and endued with inward Righteousness, whereby the Image of God is
restored in him; Adoption, whereby the justified, through the Union they have
with Christ, are accounted of God as his own Children; Regeneration, or the
repairing of the decayed estates of our souls, the Holy Ghost actuating the
hearts of Gods Elect to a free, constant and faithful exercise of a holy life;
Conversion, or mutation of a corrupt Mind, Life and Will, into a good, stirred
up in the Chosen by the Holy Ghost, through the Preaching of the Gospel;
Repentance, that inward and continual sorrowing and mourning for the Commission
of sin, joined with Faith, Humiliation, and a constant turning from all sin
unto God, with a hatred and loathing thereof, thus accompanied with both inward
and outward amendment; and New Obedience, whereby a man is renewed unto that
whereunto he was enabled by Creation; whereby being endued with Faith and
Repentance, he does, according to the measure of Grace received, endeavor to
yield Obedience to all Gods Commandments with the whole man: for which end even
the Revelation of the Mystery which was kept secret since the World began, was
made known to all Nations, Romans 16.26.

The next speaks of Fasting, that holy and extraordinary Abstinence from the
commodities of this life, for our better humiliation and preparation to Prayer,
when any Judgment on our selves or Brethren is either threatened, feared, begun
or executed. How this part of Divine Worship has been of late years profaned
in this Land, may to this day be read in the Euroclydons of Gods fearful
Judgments; Insomuch as its now necessary that we Fast for our Fasts: For did
we not Fast to Wrath, to Revenge, to Strife, to Envy, to Debate? Did we not
Feast our Lusts, when naught but the posture of a Bulrush could denote our
Fasting? Did we not Fast at Noon to surfeit at Night? Did we not even then
afflict our Brethren in stead of our Souls? Did we not find pleasure in the
day of our Fasts, and exact all our Labors? Did we not draw Iniquity with cords
of Vanity, even then when we should have loosed the Bands of Wickedness? Did we
not even then load on weights grievous to be born, in stead of undoing the
heavy Burdens? Did we not even then also receive the gain of Oppression, in
stead of letting the oppressed go free? Did we not then likewise take the staff
of Life from such as were half famished before, in stead of dealing our bread
to the hungry? Did we not then also cast the poor out of their own Dwellings,
in stead of bringing them that were cast out into our own? Did we not even
strip the very dead of their shrowds, in stead of covering the naked? In a
word, Did we not at our Fasts invite the Devil to a Feast? Is it such a Fast
that I have chosen? says the Lord, Isa. 58.5. Did ye at all Fast unto me, even
to me? Zech. 7.5. This is a lamentation, and must be for a lamentation.
Wherefore Fast of thy Fasts, O Nation, Repent of thy Repentance, lest the Lord
forbid his Prophets to pray for thee, Reject thy Cry when thou Fast, and
consume thee by the Sword, the Famine, and the Pestilence, Jer. 14.11, 12.

Next follows a word of Holy Feasting, seasonable only at the receiving of
Benefits or removal of Evils; wherein we are to have a special eye and regard
to those Four Graces; viz. Thanksgiving, Fear, Temperance and Charity, without
which it may be feared lest the Lord deal with us as he threatened Israel, and
turn our Feasts into mourning, Amos 8.10. yea, spread the dung, even the dung
of our Feasts, on our Faces, Mal. 2.3. For when we Feast, do we not eat to our
selves, and drink to our selves? Are there not spots in our Love Feasts? Do we
not Feast with the Leaven of Malice and Wickedness? Is it with the unleavened
Bread of Sincerity and Truth? Wherefore, though at such times a more free and
liberal use of the Creature is not unseasonable, yet ever remember, that it is
better to go to the house of Mourning, then to the house of Feasting: But if
thou will make a Feast, obey our Saviors command, and call the poor, the lame,
the maimed, and the blind, Luke 14.13.

Lastly, Ecclesiastical Discipline, that keeps the Key of Life and Doctrine,
offers it self to our consideration: Without which every man is at liberty to
write, act and speak according to the pleasure of his profane and blasphemous
Heart; without which we may expect the fall of the Walls of the holy Vineyard,
and a breach open for the Wild Bore of the East, and the little Foxes of the
West to devour the Grapes; without which the Magistrate wears a Sword without
point or edge; without which Vice lords it, and Virtue's enslaved; without
which the Children starve, whilst holy things are given to Dogs; without which
the desperate Wills of prophanest men establish Iniquity as a Law to be obeyed
on pain of Martyrdom. Submit thy self therefore to this and every Ordinance of
God, who has sealed a Commission to his Church with an Amen to it, That
whatsoever they shall bind on Earth shall be bound in Heaven, and whatsoever
they shall loose on Earth shall be loosed in Heaven, Matthew. 18.18.

Thus (Reader) having showed thee the way to this Holy Arbor, the Door is open;
only let me whisper this word in thy Heart at parting, That thou take heed how
thou Read, not knowing but the Trump may Sound ere thou arrive at the other
end of this Arbor. The Lord grant This may not then Rise in Judgment against
either of our Errata's.

J. G.

THE HOLY ARBOR.
CHAP. I.
. 1. The Trinity.
ONe of the deepest Mysteries of our Religion, is, That God is the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost; and again, That the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost are one and the same God: So it is one of the most mysterious points of
our Faith, To believe in one God, who is distinct in three Subsistances or
Persons, called, The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, who are three in
person; and again, they three are one, not in person, but in nature. By Nature
is meant, a thing subsisting by it self, that is common to many: By Person is
meant, a thing or essence subsisting by it self, not common to many, but
incommunicable. In this Mystery of the Trinity, the Divine Nature is the
Godhead it self, simply and absolutely considered; and a Person is that which
subsisteth in this Godhead, as the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. If any
man would conceive in mind rightly the Divine Nature, he must conceive God or
the Godhead absolutely; if any of the Persons, then he must conceive the same
Godhead relatively, with Personal properties. Thus the Godhead considered, with
the propriety of Fatherhood or Begetting, is the Father; and conceiving the
same Godhead, with the propriety of Generation passively taken, we conceive the
Son; and the same Godhead, with the propriety of Proceeding, we conceive the
Holy Ghost. Neither may it seem strange to any, that the names of Nature and
Person are used to set forth this Mystery by, for they have been taken up by
common consent in the Primitive Church, and are contained in the Scriptures,
Heb. 1.3. Gal. 4.8.

This Mystery may well be conceived by a Comparison borrowed from Light: The
light of the Sun, the light of the Moon, and the light of the Air, for nature
and substance are all one and the same light; and yet they are three distinct
lights: The light of the Sun being of it self, and from none; the light of the
Moon from the Sun; and the light of the Air from them both: So the Divine
Nature is one, and the Persons are three, subsisting after a diverse manner in
one and the same Nature. The three Persons are one, not simply, but one in
Nature; that is, Coessential, or Consubstantial, having all one Godhead,
because there is one God and no more in Nature; considering that the thing
which is Infinite, is but one, and is not subject to multiplication. And as
these three Persons are one in Nature, so whatsoever agrees to God, simply
considered, agrees to them all three: They are all Coequal and Coeternal; All
most Wise, Just, Merciful, Omnipotent, by one and the same Wisdom, Justice,
Mercy, Power. And because they have all one Godhead, therefore they are not
only one with another, but also each in other, the Father in the Son, the Son
in the Father, and the Holy Ghost in them both: And we must not imagine that
these three are one God in this sense, as though the Father had one part of the
Godhead, the Son another part, and the Holy Ghost a third; for that is most
false, because the Infinite and most simple Godhead, is not subject to
Composition or Division, but admits a Distinction without any Separation. And
whereas it is said, That the Son and the Holy Ghost have their beginning from
the Father, we must know, that it is not a beginning of their Nature, or of
their Godhead from the Father, but of their Person only: for the Godhead of
all three Persons is uncreate, and unbegotten, and proceeding from none. So
also whereas it is said, That the Son and the Holy Ghost have received all
their Attributes, as Wisdom, Knowledge, Power, etc. from the Father, we must
know, That that which the Son receives of the Father, he receives it by
Nature, and not by Grace; and he receives not a part, but all that the Father
has, saving the personal propriety: So the Holy Ghost receives from the
Father and the Son by Nature, and not by Grace.

Now the distinction of the Persons is notably set forth unto us in the Baptism
of our Savior Christ, Matthew. 3.16, 17. where it is said, that when Jesus was
baptized, he came out of the water; there is the second Person: And the holy
Ghost descended upon him in the form of a Dove; there is the third Person: and
the Father, the first Person, pronounced from Heaven, that he was his only
beloved Son, in whom he was well pleased. Again, the Trinity is proved 1 John
5.7. This is the Mystery of all Mysteries to be received of us all, namely, The
Trinity of the Persons in the Unity of the Godhead. The Persons are they, which
subsisting in one Godhead, are distinguished by incommunicable properties, 1
John 5.7. Genesis 19.24. John 1.1. They are Coequal, and distinguished not by
degree, but by order: Divided they cannot be, by reason of the infinite
greatness of that most simple Essence, which one and the same is wholly in the
Father, wholly in the Son, and wholly in the Holy Ghost; so that in these there
is diversity of Persons, but Unity of Essence: The Communion of the Persons, or
rather Union, is that by which each one is in the rest, and with the rest, by
reason of the Unity of the Godhead; and therefore every each one does possess,
love and glorify another, and work the same thing, John 14.10. Prove. 8.22, 30.
John 1.1. and 5.19. Again, a Person is a distinct subsisting of the whole
Godhead, and an individual Understanding, and an incommunicable Subsistence,
living of it self, and not sustained by another: So that the three Persons in
the Trinity, are not three several Substances, but three distinct Subsistences,
or three diverse manner of being of one and the same Substance and Divine
Essence. The Divine Essence is one and the self-same thing, truly subsisting in
the three Persons: Now the Essence does not beget an Essence, but the Person of
the Father begets the Person of the Son, and the Holy Ghost proceeds from
the Father and the Son, by an eternal and incomprehensible spiration. And thus
the three Persons make all one Divine Essence and one God, being in Nature
Coessential, in Dignity Coequal, in Time Coeternal, in Greatness
Incomprehensible, in Power Irresistible, in Will Unchangeable, in Place not
Circumscript, every where present without sight, the First and the Last,
without Time, making all things mutable, without any passive mutability in
himself. In this Mystery of the Trinity, how in that most simple and single
Essence of God, there should be three in one, and one in three, Differing, but
not divided, Several, but not sundred, All one for their Nature, All distinct
for their Persons, is a secret of secrets, rather steadfastly to be believed,
and reverently to be adored, then over-curiously to be searched into.

Again, in the Divine Essence there be three distinct Persons, the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost; God the Father is indeed the beginning of the Godhead,
but yet in respect only of the order of the Persons: For in the Godhead we may
not seek for any first or last in degree, or dignity, or time, but only in
order of existing or working: The Son is the Wisdom of the Father, begotten of
the Father before the world; The Holy Ghost is the infinite Power proceeding
from the Father and the Son. The Scripture ascribes to the Father the
Beginning of working; To the Son, Wisdom and Counsel; To the Holy Ghost, Virtue
and Power: Notwithstanding, they be alike in all things in respect of Eternity,
Dignity and Power, because there is one most undivided Divine Essence common to
them, and so they be one God. There be three which bear witness in Heaven, the
Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, and these three be one, 1 John 5.7. And
although the word Creator is given to the Father, Redeemer to the Son, and
Sanctifier to the Holy Ghost, yet in truth they are common to all three Persons
in one Essence: And though the Father is said to be the First, the Son the
Second, the Holy Ghost to be the Third; yet one is not more ancient then the
other, as the Father more ancient then the Son, or the Son then the Holy Ghost,
but all of a like Coeternity; for the Persons are one after another in order of
Nature, but not of Time, John 1.1, 2. Genesis 1.2, 26. The things they have in
common, in regard of their work, are to Create, Genesis 1.26. John 1.3. to Redeem
and to Sanctify, Isa. 43.1. and 49.7. The Creation is given to the Father,
Redemption to the Son, Sanctification to the Holy Ghost, not as they are simply
an operation or work (for so should other persons be excluded from it) but in
respect, for the order and manner of working, which is peculiar and proper to
every one of them, in producing and bringing forth the same external work: So
that our Creation, Redemption, Sanctification, are each appropriated to some
one Person of the Trinity, and yet all three Persons have their joint working
in them: For the works of our Creation, Redemption and Sanctification, are the
operations of the Godhead outwardly, that is, external operations, which God
works on his Creatures; and they are undivided, that is, common to the three
Persons, which they by common Will and Power work in the Creatures, by reason
of that one and the same Essence and Nature of the Godhead, which they have;
All the Persons therefore Create, Redeem and Sanctify. Again, Essence is a
thing subsisting by its self, the very Being of God, Absolute and Communicable;
Person is a thing subsisting, Individual, Living, Understanding, not sustained
in another, neither part of another: Essence is the Being of God; Person is the
manner of this Being, which is threefold, and so makes three Persons: The
Essence is Absolute and Communicable; the Person Respective and Incommunicable.

By the name of Trinity, are understood the three manners of Being in God; that
is, three, not Essences, but Persons of the same Divine Essence. Now Trinity
and Triplicity, as also Trinal and Triple, differ; for that is said to be
Triple, which is compounded of three Essences, or is distinct by three
Essences; but Trinal is in Essence but one and most simple, though it has
three manners of Being. God therefore is not Triple, because there are not more
Essences; but Trinal, because he being one according to his Essence, is three
according to his Persons, yet still but one God: So that there is one Existence
or Essence of the three, which is from none, but of it self, because it is but
one; but the manners of the Existence are three. Wherefore as concerning
Existence, Being or Essence it self, the three Persons are of themselves; as
concerning the manner of Existing or Being, the Father is from none, but of
himself, the Son of the Father, the Holy Ghost from both; the Son begotten, the
Holy Ghost proceeding. As it is one thing to be a Man, another thing to be a
Father or a Son, yet one and the same is both Man and Father; but he is Man
absolutely, or in himself, or according to his own Nature, and Father in
respect of another, viz. his Son. So it is one thing to be God, another thing
to be the Father's Son, or the Holy Ghost, and yet one and the same is both God
and Father; God, in respect of himself, or his own Nature; Father, in respect
of the Son.

Now though this be alike in God and Man, that both do communicate to another,
not his Person, but his Essence; yet is there an exceeding dissimilitude in the
manner whereby the Divine Essence being infinite, and the Humane being created
and finite, is communicated to another: For in Men, in the Father and the Son
the Essence is as distinct as the Persons themselves, the Father and the Son
being not only two persons, but also two men distinct in Essences, so that the
Father is not that man which is the Son; but in God the Persons are so
distinct, that yet the Essence remains common, one and the same; and
therefore there are not three Gods, but the Son is the same God in number,
which is the Father and the Holy Ghost. Again, in Persons Created, he that
begets, does not communicate his whole Essence to him that is begotten, for
then he should cease to be a man, but only a part; but in uncreated Persons,
he that begets or inspireth, communicates his whole Essence to him that is
begotten or proceeds; yet so, that he who communicates does retain the same
Essence, and that whole: And the Reason of both Differences, is, Because the
Essence of Man is finite and divisible, but the Essence of God infinite and
indivisible; and therefore the Deity may, being the same, and whole or entire,
be together both communicated and retained, whereby the Persons are not any
thing separated from the Essence, but each of them are the very self-same whole
Essence of the Divinity; wherefore God or the Divine Essence, is the Father, is
the Son, is the Holy Ghost. Thus the three Persons in the Trinity are all one;
one in Nature and Essence; one in Will and Consent; one in Virtue and Power:
what the one does, the other does also, the difference is only in the manner of
working. This Mystery of the Trinity and Unity, was taught from the beginning
of the world; howbeit, the fuller revelation of it was reserved to the times of
the Gospel, when the light of this Truth outshined the Sun at noon, Matthew.
28.19. 1 John 5.7.

The Doctrine of the Trinity of Persons in the Unity of the Godhead, must be
held and retained for these Reasons; viz. 1. Because by it we may distinguish
the True God from all false gods and idols. 2. Because among all other points
of Religion, this is one of the chiefest, being the very foundation thereof:
For it is not sufficient for us to know God as we can conceive of him in our
own imaginations, but we must know him as he has revealed himself in his Word;
and it is not sufficient to Salvation to believe in God confusedly, but we must
believe in one God distinct in three Persons. 3. This Doctrine directs us in
the worshipping of God aright: For Unity in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, is
to be worshipped; one God must be worshipped in the Father, in the Son, and in
the Holy Ghost: And if we worship God the Father, without the Son and the Holy
Ghost, or the Son without the Father and the Holy Ghost, or the Holy Ghost
without the Father and the Son, we worship nothing but an Idol. Again, if we
worship the three Persons not as one God, but as three Gods, then likewise we
make three Idols.


The difference of Essence and Person is to be observed and held for these
Reasons: 1. Lest the Unity of the true God be distracted. 2. Lest the
Distinction of Persons be taken away. 3. Lest another thing be understood by
the name of Person, then the truth of Gods Word declares.


That in one Divine Essence are subsisting three Persons, the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost, each of which is one and the same true God; or that one true God is
three Persons truly distinct, and those three Persons are one only true God,
is proved thus; viz. 1. By Testimonies of Scripture, partly out of the Old
Testament, as Genesis 1.2. Isa. 61.1. partly out of the New, Mat. 28.19. Joh.
14.26. and 15.26. 2 Cor. 13.13. 1 John 5.3. Tit. 5.3. Ephesians. 2.18. Gal. 4.6. 2.
By those places of Scripture which give unto those three, the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost, the Name of Jehovah and true God; for those places wherein
those things which are spoken of Jehovah in the old Testament, are in the new
referred expressly and most plainly to the Son and the Holy Ghost. 3. By those
places which attribute the same whole Divine Essence to the three Persons, and
show that the Son is the proper Son of the Father, most truly begotten of him;
and that the Holy Ghost is the Spirit of the Father and the Son; the Son
therefore and the Holy Ghost have the same, and that whole Essence of the Deity
which the Father has; the Son has it communicated of the Father, by being
from everlasting born of him, and the Holy Ghost of the Father and the Son, by
proceeding from them. 4. By the places which give unto the three the same
Attributes or Properties, and perfections of the Divine Nature, as Eternity,
Immensity, Omnipotency, etc. 5. By those places which attribute to the three
the same effects or works proper unto the Deity, as Creation, Preservation,
Government of the World, also Miracles, and the Salvation of the Church. 6. By
those places which yield to the three equal honor and worship, and such as
agrees to the true God alone.


The three in the Trinity are called Persons, Because they have proper things
to distinguish them, in regard either 1. Of themselves, as 1. Father, to beget,
and to be of himself, Joh. 5.26. and 1.14. 1 John 5.1. 2. Son, to be begotten,
and to be the second Person, Joh. 1.14, 18. 3. Holy Ghost, to proceed both from
the Father and the Son, Mat. 3.16.
2. Of the Creatures, as 1. The Father works through the Son by the Holy
Ghost, Ephesians. 2.10. Romans 11.36. 2. The Son works from the Father by the Holy
Ghost, 1 Cor. 8.6. Joh. 1.3. 3. The Holy Ghost works from the Father and the
Son, Genesis 1.2. Joh 33.4.



The things wherein they communicate with themselves are these; viz. 1. One is
in another and possesses another; as, the Father is in the Son, and the Son in
the Father, and the Holy Ghost in them both, Joh. 10.30, 38. and 14.10, 11. 2.
They have glory one of another, Joh. 17.4, 5, 22, 24, 26. 3. They delight one
in another; as, the Son is a delight to the Father, and the Father to the Son,
and the Holy Ghost to them both, Mat. 3.17. Joh. 5.20.


The order of working in the Three Persons of the Trinity; viz. 1. The Father
Creates, but immediately, by the Son and the Holy Ghost; the Son from the
Father, and the Holy Ghost from the Father and the Son. 2. The Father and the
Holy Ghost Redeem us, but mediately, by the Son; but the Son immediately, from
the Father by the Holy Ghost. 3. The Father and the Son Sanctify us, but
mediately, by the Holy Ghost; but the Holy Ghost immediately, from the Father
and the Son.


In this deep Mystery of our Religion, we must be guided wholly by Faith, and
endeavor to believe this Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity, though we are
not able to reason the truth thereof by Natural demonstrations.

Behold, the sacred Riddle of Divinity;
One Godhead in a holy Trinity
Of Persons, or three Persons all in one
Most undivided Deity alone:
Distinct in Persons, not in Essence; no,
The Godhead's not divided, think not so:
For it is not subject to division,
Nor admits of any Composition,
But distinction without separation;
As is most evident by Man's Creation, Genesis 1.26.

. 2. Gods Word.
THe Word of God is the Wisdom of God, James 3.17. concerning the truth which
is according to godliness, being given by inspiration of God, 2 Timothy 3.16. the
original being from heaven, not earth, Joh. 3.27. and the Author thereof being
God, not man, 1 Cor. 2.10. by which Word God alone does only bind the
Conscience, by causing it in every action to excuse for well-doing, and accuse
for sin. Now this Word of God is the holy Scripture, in which name are to be
understood all and only those Canonical Books of the Old and New Testament, of
whose Authority was never any doubt in the Church; which we receive as
Canonical, not so much because that the Church does so receive and allow them,
as for that the holy Spirit in our hearts does testify that they are from God:
Touching which, this is a Truth must be held of us, That no part of the
Canonical Scripture inspired of God, such as was committed as the Lords
Treasure to the Church, for the perpetual instruction thereof in Faith and
Obedience, is lost and perished, nor can be lost or perish; so that no one
Oracle or Sentence of God can fall away. Indeed these sacred Books may be
despitefully abused by men many ways, but they can never be finally lost and
wholly extinguished, for the works of God remain for ever and ever: And as for
any sandy Supposition contrary to this Truth, let the vain Supposer answer,
What Error more can be convinced, what Comfort more can be received, what Vice
more can be corrected, what Truth more can be published, what Grace more can be
commended to the Church, out of those Books which he so fondly supposes to be
lost? Beware therefore of doubting of Gods Providence herein, shaking thereby
the Faith of the Church: Whosoever thus goes about to strike at the foundation
thereof, the least dust that falls from the Building, will crush the
presumptuous Underminer into bottomless destruction.

The Scripture is a Doctrine inspired by God, to make us wise unto salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16. Romans 1.16. and contains all things necessary (to be known and
believed) for the salvation of man, Joh. 20.31. 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. the whole
being as it were compendiously comprised in the Decalogue, the sum of the Law,
and in the Creed, the sum of the Gospel. As for all the fundamental Points of
Christian Religion, necessary to salvation, they, notwithstanding the darkness
of some Mysteries herein contained, are clearly and plainly set down, so as the
humble and obedient heart may distinctly, without wavering and gainsaying,
conceive and believe them: Thus not unfitly is the Scripture compared, in
regard of the perspicuity thereof, to a Foord over which a Lamb may wade; and
in regard of the difficulty thereof, to a Sea wherein an Elephant may swim. Now
though all things necessary to be known are herein contained, yet are not all
literally expressed, as the Baptism of Infants and Original Sin, which
notwithstanding are distinctly and demonstratively inferred thence; and so are
all things that belong to Faith and Obedience, whatsoever we are to believe or
to practice: So that the letter of the Scripture may be alleged, and yet the
word of God missed, as by all Heretics; and a man may swerve from the letter,
yet allege the true word of God; therefore it is nothing less then necessary,
that we be diligently familiar, and well acquainted with this word of God.
Josephus tells us, The Jews knew the Scriptures as well as their own names;
many of us may tell the Jews, We scarce know the names of the Scriptures; Most
inexcuseable Ignorance, sad and lamentable! for we are bound to know the
Scriptures themselves, that by them we may come to knowledge, by knowledge to
faith, by faith to obedience, and by obedience to salvation.

Touching the Apocryphal Books (to which the Imps of Rome, as to their own
Traditions, give power equal to the Canonical Scriptures) they were not penned
by the Prophets the Lords Secretaries (as the Scriptures were) nor ever
committed of trust to the Israelites: They contain certain things disagreeing
from the true Scriptures of God, and no proof that they were penned by the
Spirit of God, therefore there is no warrant for the equalling them in Credit
or Authority with the Scriptures. Besides, one main property of the Books of
the Old Testament, is, That every one of them was written either by Moses or
some other of the Prophets in the Hebrew tongue, the native language of the
Jews; but the Apocryphal Books were penned by some other in the Greek tongue,
which was not the language of the old Prophets, so that they are no part of the
Law or of the Prophets. And yet as the presumptuous Papists make the Apocryphal
Books of equal Authority with the Canonical; so others have more blasphemously
long since obtruded for Canonical, the fatherless brood of other Books unto
these; as, The third and fourth of Esdras, An Appendix of Job, A Preface to the
Lamentation, The third and fourth of the Maccabees, a Book called (...), The
Book of Enoch, The Gospel of Thomas and of Matthias, The Acts of Peter; and in
the year 1120, a certain new Gospel, called Evangelium Aeternum, was found out,
being full of Blasphemies: All which and the like are damnable presumptions,
plainly forbidden by the Lord, Deuteronomy. 4.2. and most fearfully threatened, Rev.
22.18, 19. So then, to withstand the Devils suggestion against the Divine
Authority of the true sacred Seriptures, it is very necessary to have our
judgments well informed therein; to pray for the Spirit of Revelation or
Inspiration, which may inwardly testify to our Spirits, That God is the Author
of the Scriptures; which Principle we must hold undeniable, and give no place
to doubting about these uncontradictable Truths.

The Scripture is said to be the Word of God, in regard of 1. The Author, who
is God himself, 2 Timothy 3.16. 2. The Matter, which is Gods Will, Ephesians. 1.9. 3.
The End, which is Gods Glory, Ephesians. 3.10. 4. The Efficacy, which is Gods Power,
Romans 1.16.


Touching the Scriptures, we are principally to consider these 4 things: 1. Who
is the Author of them, that is (as has been showed) God himself, Gal. 1.11,
12. 2. Who are the instrumental Causes, they are (as has been likewise showed)
the Prophets and Apostles, 2 Pet. 1.21. 3. To whom they belong, even to all
sorts and degrees of men and women, Psalm. 111.2. and 119.9. 4. What is the
property thereof, viz. All Sufficiency, without any patching of men's Decrees or
Inventions, to teach the true knowledge of God, 2 Pet. 1.16. 1 Cor. 1.17.


(...) the Scripture is the Word of God and (...) Doctrine of infallible Truth
and certainty, may be firmly proved from these unanswerable Arguments, drawn
from Scriptur^it self. 1. From the Causes thereof, wherein consider, 1. That
the first and principal is the Author thereof, even God himself, to him do the
Scriptures refer themselves, and also show how God is their Author. Now nothing
is falsely ascribed to God, but God in time will bring the same to naught; and
therefore if the Scripture had not been Gods Word, it would long ago have
vanished. 2. The cause Conservant; for the Devil by wicked men and Heretics,
has labored to take away Gods Word from men's hearts and hands; but yet it is
still preserved in the Church, which argues that it is kept by a greater power
then is in all men and all Angels; that is, by the power of God. 3. The causes
Instrumental; they were holy men of God, Prophets and Apostles, who for virtue
und piety exceeded other Writers far beyond all comparison, and if they had
been mere Politicians, their writings would have showed it; for the Penmen of
holy Scripture have herein faithfully registered their own faults, which no
politic person would have done.
2. From the Matter thereof, which stands 1. In doctrine, which is The Law, set
forth in most excellent purity, nothing being therein against it or common
Equity: The Law is perfect Reason, the Gospel above Reason, yet not contrary to
Reason. The Gospel, wherein is set down Doctrine altogether above man's Reason,
touching Christ's Incarnation, and man's Redemption by his death; and although
these things be above Nature, yet we find them true, wholesome and good, in
experience of conscience, which also proves that they are the Word of God. Men
may devise strange things above Nature, but they can never be wholesome to the
conscience.
2. In style; the phrase is plain and familiar, and yet in any one speech there
is more majesty then in all the writings of men.
3. From the End thereof; for it sets up Gods Worship and man's Salvation, and
yet gives nothing to Men or Angels, but all to the glory of God: but for the
writings of men, they do either directly, or by insinuation, ascribe something
to the writers thereof. 4. From the Effects thereof: For 1. Though it is
against our corrupt Nature, crossing and condemning the same, yet it wins
men to the love thereof, and to obedience thereto; which could not be, unless
it were the Truth of God, for we abhor and detest the words of men that be
against our Nature. 2. It serves notably to comfort a man in all distresses
whatsoever, even in the pangs of death, when no word of any man can do him the
least good, but only his word that is the Lord of our soul, and the God of our
life.
5. From the two properties of Scripture 1. Antiquity: Among humane writings we
have none of certainty in things they record, that go so high as the Creation;
but the Scripture sets down things done from the beginning. 2. Mutual Consent:
for though the Books of Scripture were written by diverse men, in sundry Ages
and Times, yet all agree within themselves, there is no contradiction in
Scripture; but the writings of men have not this consent, no not in the same
Author, whom commonly we shall find contradicting himself.
6. From the signs and true miracles thereof; as the parting of the Sea, the
staying of the Sun and Moon, and many others, yea the Incarnation of the Son of
God, the Miracle of miracles. 7. From the Contraries: Contrary to the word of
God is the will of the Devil, and man's corrupt Nature; the Devil hates
Scripture, and man's corrupt Nature repines thereat, when it is checked and
controlled thereby: Now that which is contrary to these two, must needs be holy
and true, and that is the word of God. 8. From Testimonies, whereof there be 2
kinds; 1. Of holy Martyrs, who in all ages have sealed the truth thereof,
preferring the word of God before their own lives; whence it is truly said,
Sanguis Martyrum semen Ecclesiae: And though Heretics have dyed for falsehood,
yet there is great difference in their ends; the true Martyrs have unspeakable
joy in the Spirit in their torments, but Heretics have no such joy, but a
natural senseless blockishness, whereby they undergo these torments. 2. Of Gods
Spirit, which is the principal testimony; for when men begin to learn and obey
the word of God, then the Spirit of God settles their Conscience in the
persuasion of the truth of Scripture, which is infallibility it self.



The Testimony of the Holy Ghost touching Gods Word, is obtained and discerned
from the Testimony of man, by doing these two things: 1. By resigning our
selves to become truly obedient to the Doctrine taught, John 7.17. 2. By
praying unto God for his Spirit, to certify our Consciences, that the Doctrine
revealed is the very Doctrine of God, Mat. 7.7, 8. Luke 11.13. Jam. 1.7.


The Majesty of the Scriptures consists chiefly in these three excellencies:
1. In the Majesty of the Spirit of God, which shines in them. 2. In the
Consent of all the parts among themselves. 3. In the Fulfilling all the
Prophesies delivered long before, yet accomplished precisely each of them in
their proper place.


The Authority of the Scripture does not (as the Papists affirm) depend on the
Church, for these Reasons: 1. The reproach of God, by making the Testimony of
man's voice greater then the voice of God. 2. Our Comfort; for Faith is grounded
on approved witness, therefore not on man. 3. The truth of God is plainly
exposed to the mocks and scoffs of the wicked, if we affirm that our Religion
is from God only because our selves say so. 4. Because the Authority of the
Church depends on the Scripture. 5. The Scripture it self is in many places
against this opinion, John 5. 1 Cor. 2. 1 John 5.


The Popish twofold Scripture. 1. Inward Scripture, or a consent of Doctrine
written by the Holy Ghost in the hearts of all Catholics, and this (say they)
is right Scripture. Unparalleld Blasphemy! 2. Outward Scripture, which is
written in Paper or Parchment, which has no certain sense (as they falsely
affirm) but as the present Church determines thereof: but this is a devilish
Doctrine, abolishing the true Word of God, and setting up the Opinions of their
own hearts.


The three Heads whereby the Scriptures distinguish the true God from all false
and feigned gods. 1. That God is a Spiritual Essence, Eternal, of infinite
power, wisdom and goodness. 2. That God did not only make all things in six
days of nothing, but also that they are still preserved and governed by his
wisdom and providence, nothing coming to pass by Chance or Fortune. 3. That God
is perfectly just, and perfectly merciful.


The whole Scripture may be divided into the Law and the Gospel, sometimes
called the Old and New Covenant; both which make but one in substance, though
they are two in circumstances or administration: So that the New agrees with
the Old, in respect of God, in these particulars: 1. The same is the Author of
both Covenants. 2. The same parties are joined in both Covenants, that is, God
and Man. 3. The same is the Mediator of both: Moses indeed is called the
Mediator of the Old Testament, but as a Type only of the true Mediator Christ:
So that there is but one mean of reconcilement, one faith, one way of the
salvation of all who have been or shall be saved even from the beginning of the
world unto the end, Heb. 13.8. 4. The principal Conditions whereby we are bound
unto God, and which are called the substance of the Covenant, are both before
and after Christ all the same; for in both God promises remission of sins to
believing and repentant sinners; in both men are bound to repent and believe.
Thus the Promise of Grace is in both the same, that is, Remission of sins, the
giving of the Holy Ghost, or regeneration and life everlasting, to be given by
and for Christ the Mediator to those only who believe; understand it not in
particular of the circumstances of grace, but in general of grace it self,
which was promised.


How the old and new Covenant differ in respect of God. 1. In the Promises of
Corporal benefits; for in the Old they were special, certain and definite, in
the New they are only general. 2. In a circumstance of the Promise of Grace;
for in the Old they were reconciled to God, and for the Messiah sake, who
should come or be exhibited; we in the New are saved for him being come and
exhibited. 3. In the signs or symboles of the Promises; in the Old were many
and diverse signs and Sacraments; in the New few and plain, even Baptism and the
Supper of the Lord. 4. In the old Covenant were types and figures of good
things to come, and so all things were the more obscure and dark; in the new is
an accomplishment and exhibiting of these things, and so all things more clear.
5. In the Old the pouring out and effusion of the gifts of the Holy Ghost is
more narrow and sparing, in the New more large and plentiful. 6. The Old was
but for a time, during until the coming of the Messiah; the New is for ever.


How the old and new Covenant differ in respect of men. 1. In the Old the
Church stood bound to the obedience of the whole Mosaical Law, Moral,
Ceremonial, Civil or Judicial; in the New we are bound only to the Spiritual
or Moral worship, and the use of the Sacraments. 2. The Old was made and tied
to one certain Nation, the people of Israel; but the New belongs to all
Nations, the Church is Catholic and Universal.


Such things as may rightly be gathered from the Scriptures, are even as if
they were written therein: For in the Scriptures 1. Some things are not indeed,
and yet are said to be; as, that God sits, that he has eyes, ears, hands,
mouth, and such like. 2. Some things are indeed, and yet are not said to be
expressly; so that though the same words be not there, yet the Doctrine is; as,
that the holy Ghost is God, that he proceeds equally from the Father and the
Son, That there are two Sacraments, That Christ is God of himself, and
Consubstantial with the Father; and yet indeed these are there plainly enough
expressed, though not in the self-same, and just so many words. 3. Some things
neither are, neither are said to be; as, that an Image and an Idol are things
different in themselves. 4. Some things are, and are said to be; as, that there
is one God, and one Mediator between God and Man.


As the Scripture is the pure word of God, so this word is only, properly and
truly the right sense and meaning of the Scripture: For except that be warily
observed, and carefully found out, there may seem in some words to be matter 1.
Of Falsehood, as when it is said, That the Son knows not the day of Judgment,
Mat. 13.32. that is, as he is Man. 2. Of Heresy; as, that the Father is
greater then the Son, Joh. 14.28. Christ being taken again in the same sense.
3. Of Contradiction; as betwixt that which Christ said (My Father is greater
then I) and that which the Apostle said, (that Christ Jesus thought it no
robbery to be equal with God, Phil. 2.6.) in all which senses, respect must be
had to Christ, either as he is Man, or as he is God.


Heretics and other wicked men falsify the word of God four ways: 1. By
leaving out something of moment out of the Text. 2. By adding somewhat of their
own which may make for them. 3. By perverting it, which they do two ways: 1. By
taking that literally, which is meant figuratively. 2. By taking that
allegorically, which was spoken properly.
4. By misapplying or turning the places which they allege, to another thing
then was intended by the Holy Ghost.


All sorts of men are bound to have knowledge in the Scripture, for these
Reasons: 1. Because God has appointed such as are Governors over others, to be
Teachers of them that belong to their charge, therefore none ought to be
without knowledge, Ephesians. 6.4. Genesis 18.19. 2. Ignorance is the cause of all
error, because the natural man perceives not the things that are of God. 3.
The want of knowledge is the cause of sundry fearful Judgments, spiritual and
temporal, Hos. 4.4, 6. both inward and outward, Is. 1.3, 7.


The Scripture is difficult in four respects: 1. In regard of the matter: Many
profound and deep mysteries are contained therein; as, the Trinity of persons
in the Unity of the Deity, and the Hypostatical Union of the two Natures of
Christ in one person; yet so plainly opened in Scripture, as we may well
believe these things to be so, though we cannot fully conceive how they should
be so. 2. In regard of the manner of writing: Many abstruse phrases are therein,
as diverse Hebraisms, Metaphors, Allegories, and other Tropes and Figures, which
by diligent study of the Scriptures, and careful use of the means, may be found
out. 3. In regard of the persons who read them: Natural men are not capable of
the things of the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.14. he that is Spiritual discerns
all things, 1 Cor. 2.15. for God gives unto him the Spirit of revelation, Ephesians.
1.17. 4. In regard of the manner of searching them; for if men cursorily and
carelessly read the Scripture, no marvel if they understand little or nothing
thereof.


The Reasons why the Scripture is in some respects difficult: 1. To declare
unto man his natural blindeness, and to suppress all self-conceit; for by the
Mystery of the Word, the wisdom of man is found to be foolishness. 2. To keep
holy things from dogs; and so to make a difference betwixt the child of the
kingdom and the wicked. 3. To maintain the divine Ordinance of Preaching and
Expounding the Scriptures. 4. To raise up in us an appetite after the Word, and
an high esteem of it, and to keep us from loathing it: By the perspicuity of it
we are kept from starving, and by the difficulty of it from loathing it. 5. To
stir us up diligently to study and search the Scriptures, and carefully to use
the means whereby we may find out the hidden treasure in it. 6. To make us to
call upon him who is the Author of the Scripture, to give us the Spirit of
Revelation, and not to read or hear the Word without faithful and earnest
prayer.


For our help in the finding out of the true sense of the Scripture, there are
diverse profitable means: As 1. Understanding of the Original Tongues, because
diverse Errors and Heresies have been drawn from Translations, and every
language has some kinds of speech proper to it self. 2. Skill in the Arts,
whereby proper and figurative speeches and phrases may be discerned and
distinguished, and the true construction of words, with the just consequents of
arguments may be discerned. 3. Knowledge of the Analogy of Faith, that is, of
the fundamental points of our Christian Religion, that no sense be made
contrary to any of them. 4. Observation of the scope of that place which is
interpreted, and of the circumstances going before and following after. 5.
Comparing one place with another, as the obscure places with the perspicuous:
Thus the meaning of many Types and Prophesies in the Old Testament may be
understood, by the application of them in the New. 6. Prayer, for thereby the
Spirit of Revelation is obtained, Ephesians. 1.17. 7. Faith and obedience in and to
Gods word, so far as it is made known.


The four graces needful to use the Scriptures aright: 1. Knowledge, whereby in
all things that we do, we may be able to judge what is the good will of God,
what is pleasing and acceptable to him, Romans 12.2. Ephesians. 5.17. This knowledge is
attained by diligent reading of the word, by meditation on what we read, by a
reverend conferring thereof, and by a careful humble attention to the preaching
thereof. 2. Wisdom, which teaches us rightly to apply the word, and that both
in the true sense and meaning of that particular place which we allege, and
also according to the present matter for which it is alleged; otherwise we
pervert the Scripture to our own destruction, 2 Pet. 3.16. 3. Faith, whereto
the power of the Scriptures is restrained; for the Word is the power of God to
every one that believes, Romans 1.16. without this all knowledge, all wisdom is
in vain. 4. Obedience; for in Religion a man knows no more then he
practices: Happy only which so know, as to do what they know, John 13.17. by
neither carelessly neglecting that which is commanded, nor by preposterously
doing that which is forbidden.


The Scripture contains matter concerning all sorts of persons and things which
may be reduced to these 5 Heads: 1. Touching Religion and the right worship of
God, they teach how to serve him, and what to believe of God or Man. 1.
Touching God, that he is one in Essence, and three in persons. 2. Touching our
selves, 1. That by Creation we were made good, holy and righteous. 2. That by
our Fall we are become wretched by reason of sin, and not able of our selves to
think one good thought, or to stir one foot forward toward the Kingdom of
heaven. 3. That by Regeneration we are born again, and made the Sons of God by
Adoption, and by faith we lay hold on Christ, our Wisdom, our Sanctification,
our Righteousness, our Redemption.
3. Touching the Church, That it is the company of the Faithful that have been
from the beginning: By them also are we led to know the two Sacraments, and
what to believe of the general Judgment that shall be of the godly and ungodly.
2. Touching Kingdoms and Commonwealths, and touching the Duties of Magistrates
and Subjects, they inform us how the one ought to rule, and the other to obey;
and neither the one nor the other do their duties for conscience, till the Word
inform them. 3. Touching Families and Houshold-affairs, in which are Husband
and Wife, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants; no duty required of them
is omitted, but all contained herein. 4. Touching the private life of every
particular person, how to behave our selves in the whole course of our life. 5.
Touching the common life of all men; we learn in them how to lead our lives in
every estate, whether we be rich or poor, whether we be high or low; we can be
in no estate, but we shall find sufficient store of heavenly precepts and
examples to teach us the way wherein we should walk.


The way to profit by the Scriptures. 1. We must have recourse by prayer to God
the Author of the Scriptures, he only is able to unlock them, and so to bring
us into the secret chamber of his presence. 2. We must keep such order in the
reading of them, as may stand with our Calling and state of life, and take all
opportunity to do it, redeeming this day what we omitted the last. 3. We must
understand to what ends and uses they were written; as 1. To teach, that we may
learn the Truth. 2. To improve, that we may be kept from error. 3. To correct,
that we may be driven from vice. 4. To instruct, that we may be settled in the
way of well-doing. 5. To comfort, that in trouble we may be confirmed in
patience, and hope of an happy issue.
4. We are to remember that the Scriptures contain matter concerning all sorts
of persons and things. 5. We must have the Doctrine of the Scriptures
plentifully dwelling in us, not in the mouth, but seated in the heart, that we
may be able to rise up being fallen, to stand in the truth, to continue unto
the end.


The several kinds of neglecters of the Scriptures, and consequently
self-enemies to their own souls. 1. Such as care not to read it or hear it at
all; of all Books they least respect the Bible. 2. Such as seldom read it,
having fair bound Bibles, only to keep them company at Church. 3. Such as
read much, but do only read, never search the Scripture, to find out the
true sense and meaning thereof. 4. Such as read, and seek out the true sense
also, but only to understand the truth of the History, or to maintain
discourse, not to be edified in faith, or to have their sins mortified. 5. Such
who in searching out the true sense of Scripture, trust to their own skill, wit
and understanding, and neglect the preaching or Ministry of the Word. 6. Such
who do all they can to be expert in Gods Word, but with a traiterous mind, to
fight against the truth thereof, as Heretics and such like.


Three points to be observed in interpreting of the Scripture. 1. That the
phrase be considered, and the proper sense of the words found out. 2. That the
order and coherence of the members or parts of the Doctrine which is contained
in the Text of Scripture, be declared. 3. That the Doctrine be applied to the
use of the Church, which it has in confirming true opinions, or refuting
errors, in knowing of God and our selves, in exhorting, in comforting, in
directing our life.


The way how to decide doubtful places of Scripture 1. To respect the Analogy
of Faith; that is, to receive no Exposition which is against the ground of
Doctrine, that is, against any Article of Faith, or Commandment of the
Decalogue, or against any plain Testimony of Scripture. 2. To examine the
Antecedent and Consequent matter of that place which is in question. 3. To
resort to such places of Scripture as teach the same more clearly. 4. To confer
like places together, where though the same words be not spoken of the same
thing, yet the like words and form of speaking are used of the like things. 5.
When the Controversy is thus judged, we may lawfully also descend to the
consent of the Church. 6. An ardent and daily invocating of God, that we may be
guided and taught by his holy Spirit.


The two proper effects of the Scriptures are, 1. To teach Doctrine, 2 Timothy
3.16. By 1. Laying out of Truth. 2. Confuting of Errors.
2. To exhort out of it, 1 Timothy 6.2. By 1. Stirring up to God. 2. Turning back
from evil.



The chief Graces which are obtained by the Scriptures. 1. Vocation; we are
called by the Spirit inwardly, and by the Word outwardly, 2 Thessalonians. 2.14. 2.
Justification; which is an action of God, imputing the righteousness of Christ
to us, which is apprehended by Faith, which comes by hearing the word, Romans
10. 3. Sanctification; for we are sanctified by the word of God, Joh. 15.3. 4.
Knowledge; which is by the word, 1 John 4.6. 5. Faith; which comes by hearing
the word preached, Romans 10.17. 6. Repentance; Peter preached the word, and
converted three thousand, Acts 2.38, 41. 7. Hope; for by patience and comfort
of the Scriptures we have hope, Romans 15.4. 8. Love; for it comes of God by his
Word and Spirit, 1 John 4.7.


The consideration of the Scriptures Author, being God, presents us with a
fourfold use. 1. That they want not, nor stand in need of the confirmation and
approbation of the Church or of men. 2. That God himself, who is the inspirer
of them, is the best interpreter of them, and the sole and sovereign Judge
thereof, 2 Pet. 1.20. 1 Cor. 2.10, 11. 3. That the Minister must preach unto
the people, not the invention of his own brain, not the conceits of his own
wit, not the excellency of words, not the enticing speech of man's wisdom, but
in the plain evidence of the Spirit, and of power, 1 Cor. 11.23. 1 Pet. 4.11.
4. That it belongs as a special duty to the people of God, to receive, read,
study, reverence, obey, and keep the Doctrines delivered in them, forasmuch as
they proceed from such an Author, Heb. 2.2, 3.


All our words and actions must be directed by this precious Word of God in the
holy Scriptures; which is also of a fourfold use, much resembling the former:
1. To teach us the perfection and All Sufficiency of the word of God, not
needing the rags of Popish Traditions to be patched unto it. 2. To direct and
inform the Ministers what to teach the people, the people what to believe,
wherein to rest, whereupon to build their Faith, and to settle their
Conscience. 3. To reprove those that desperately rush on in the course of their
life, not caring what they do, never consulting with God, or resolving as from
God or his Will. 4. To admonish us to be careful how we read the Scriptures,
to take profit by reading them, that so we may have direction in all our ways,
and learn how to please God, and to abstain from all things that do displease
him.


The manifold use of the Scriptures, appears by the admirable benefit of well
using it; there being no Error in judgment but may be refuted, no Corruption
in life but may be redressed, not any true sound Doctrine but may be proved and
maintained, not any Virtue or Duty but may be warranted, and the practical
performance thereof directed hereby, 2 Timothy 3.16. yea, it is a light to the
blind, a guide to the wanderer, a comfort to the distressed, a counselor to
the doubtful, Ps. 119. and a teacher to the unlearned, Prove. 1.4. Lastly, our
Savior Christ, the Prophets and Apostles, all by the Spirit of God have here
revealed unto us more then all the wise men of the world did ever know; whence
we have just reason to magnify the Books of Scripture, far above all humane
writings, the choycest whereof, compared with this holy Writ, are but waste
Paper: for these sacred Books fully set out unto us the nature and estate of
true felicity, when the profoundest Tract of humane works could never yet reach
to the shadow thereof. Let us therefore, in reading, hearing, expounding,
conversing, practicing, in every action that concerns this sacred Word, always
account of it as the Word of the Ever-living God; and with the joint powers and
faculties both of soul and body maintain it, against all devilish Atheists,
that in word or life deny it, seducing Heretics that corrupt it, and all
enemies that oppose it, or rebelliously rise against the Scepter of it.

Lo here the sacred Oracle of God,
The just man's Anchor, and the sinners Rod;
The lame man's Crutch; the blind man's Eye; the Tree
Of Life, or Type of Immortality;
A Well of living Waters: Drink of this,
And thou shall thirst no more, but after Bliss;
The depth whereof the Natural man never saw.
Pray then thou may have wherewithal to draw
Heavens Library, Gods Spirit The Author: Take heed,
Tempted Man! with what Spirit thou do read.
. 3. The Law and Gospel.
THe Law of God is a Doctrine delivered of God at the Creation, written in
Adams heart, published by the Ministry either of Angels or of men, and
afterward repeated and renewed of him by Moses and the Prophets, teaching what
we ought to do, and what not to do; binding reasonable Creatures, always
promising to perfect performers of obedience, eternal life, condemning
eternally them who perform not this obedience, except Remission be granted for
the Mediators sake. Before the Fall, this Law was possible to all men, as to
Angels; and if now it be impossible, it is our own fault, for God commanded
them when they were possible, neither has he lost the right of requiring that
now, which we lost the power of performing of then at our Parents first birth;
yea, after our second birth in Christ (being still in this life but in a state
of imperfection) it is impossible, though God commands us to crave and desire
of him in this life the perfect fulfilling of the Law: So that God charge no
more upon us, then he had enabled us to do, and had given us strength to
perform; and if there be any impossibility to do it, the fault rests in our
selves, and not in God: for man by his first Creation was able to keep the
whole Law without sinning, for he was made after Gods own Image. God (says
Solomon) made man righteous, Eccl. 7. his heart was full of divine
understanding, his will was altogether right, his affections holy, his power
absolute to persist and continue such always; but as his nature now is, he
cannot keep the Law of God, neither the whole nor any parcel thereof, but is
altogether corrupt, his understanding darkened, his will crooked, his affections
impure, and his best strength weakness, toward the running of the race of Gods
Commandments; yea, though assisted by Gods grace, and regenerate, yet does not
perfectly fulfill the Law, but fails still in many things: for though a man be
now Spiritual, and guided by Gods Spirit not to sin as men natural, 1 John 3.9.
yet the flesh, the old man, corrupt Nature, is not altogether expelled, but
remaining for their humiliation, and the exercise of Grace in their Spiritual
combat, hinders them from doing perfectly the thing they would, and swayeth
them oftentimes to the thing they would not. Thus though the Law exacteth such
perfect obedience, as no man in this life is able to yield, as appears Acts
13.38. Romans 8.3. and 3.20. Gal. 2.21. yet we must know, that it is impossible
only to Nature, but not to Grace; which is thus to be explained. It is
possible to Grace, because Grace covers our failings, not that a man in Grace
can perfectly fulfill all things.

Christians are not bound at all to the observation of the Judaical Ceremonies;
nor are the Judicial Laws of the Jews necessarily to be received or established
in any Commonwealth: yet no Christian man whatsoever is freed from the
obedience of the Moral Law, for that remains for ever a Rule of obedience to
every child of God, though he be not bound to bring the same obedience for his
Justification before God; for he is accursed (says the Law) that fails in
any Commandment, except (says the Gospel) he be reconciled again in Christ,
and in him have the pardon of his transgressions. Whence this is one main
difference betwixt the Law and the Gospel, That the Law leaves no place to
repentance, nor affords any means to resume that which is lost, or recover
that which is decayed: Hear the thunder of the Law, Cursed is every one that
continues not in all things which are written in the Book of the Law, to do
them, Gal. 3.10. Listen to the still voice of the Gospel, Repent, Mat. 3.2. and
4.17. Sin no more, Joh. 5.14. and 8.11. Turn you, turn you from your wicked
ways, for why will ye dye? Ezekiel. 33.11. In this respect the Law may be
resembled to Abishai, the Gospel to David; both of them found their enemy:
Abishai would presently have smote him dead; but David wakes him, tells him the
danger he was in, and advises him to look better to himself, 1 Samuel 26.8, etc.
Thus the Law sets forth the rigor of Gods Justice; the Gospel the riches of his
Mercy: Now indeed a man cannot see his sins to purpose, without the spirit of
Bondage, for that must make the Law effectual, as well as the Spirit of
Adoption does the Gospel; that is, except God himself press the Law in our
hearts, the Ministers discover our sins to no purpose; they may as soon shake
the earth it self, as the heart of a sinner, without the work of God: therefore
the first work of the Holy Ghost, is to awaken a sinner, to set upon him his
sins, that he may be fit to receive Christ.

The Law in general, is that part of Gods Word which commands things just,
honest and godly; and being thus conceived, it is threefold^ or the parts
thereof are three: 1. The Ceremonial Law, concerning Ceremonies, binding the
Jews until the coming of the Messiah, that they should be Signs, Symboles,
Types or Shadows of Spiritual things to be fulfilled in the Gospel of Christ;
this Law prescribed to the Jews Ceremonies, Rites and Orders, to be performed
in the Worship of God; and is laid down in the Books of Moses, especially in
Leviticus: it concerned the Jews only, and is now wholly abrogated. 2. The
Judicial Law, which is that part of Gods Word which prescribed Ordinances for
the Government of the Jews Commonwealth, and the Civil punishment of offenders:
Indeed their whole Civil Order or Government, that is, of the Offices of
Magistrates, Judgments, Punishments, Contracts, and of the distinguishing and
bounding of Dominions, binding all Abraham's posterity until the coming of the
Messiah, that they should be Types of that Order which should be in Christ's
Kingdom, that is, of the Spiritual Regiment of the Messiah: This did indeed
principally concern the Jews; but yet so far forth as it tends to the
establishing of the Moral Law, having in it common Equity, it concerns all
people, in all times and places. 3. The Moral Law, which teaches us what to
do, and what not to do, binding all reasonable creatures to perfect obedience,
both internal and external; so that it may fully be described in these three
points: 1. That part of Gods word concerning righteousness and godliness, which
was written in Adams mind by the gift of Creation, and the remnants of it be
in every man by the light of Nature; in regard whereof it binds all men. 2. It
commands perfect obedience, both inward in thought and affection, and outward
in speech and action. 3. It binds to the curse and punishment every one that
fails in the least duty thereof, though but once, and that in thought only,
Gal. 3.10. The sum of the Moral Law is propounded in the Decalogue or Ten
Commandments, which many can repeat, but few do understand.



The Ceremonial Law must be considered in a double respect: 1. In regard of the
observation of it in Gods worship, and so it is wholly abrogated. 2. In the
scope and substance of it, which is Christ crucified, with his benefits, whom
it shadowed out; thus it remains still, and is now more plain then ever it
was.


The Ceremonial Law ceased at the coming of Christ, for these Reasons: 1. There
is no more use of a candle when the Sun is risen, nor of the picture when the
person is present: Thus was it between the Mosaical Ceremonies and Christ. 2.
The renting of the vail of the Temple at Christ's suffering, and the destruction
thereof not long after, show the same. 3. Christ was a new High Priest after
the order of Melchisedeck, who was greater then Aaron, and therefore his order
was to cease at the coming of this worthier. 4. Christ's coming made us to be of
age, when as before men were children, and nothing differing from servants.


Again, the Ceremonial and Civil, or Judicial Laws, are wholly abrogated as
touching obedience, so that there is no necessity any more of observing them:
1. Because they were to continue only unto the coming of the Messiah, Genesis
49.10. Ephesians. 2.14. 2. Because the Messiah being exhibited, the Types cease, such
as were the Ceremonial Laws, Col. 2.17. yet is not the Moral Law in like manner
abrogated; for this after Christ was exhibited, ceased indeed as touching the
curse and constraint, but not as touching obedience: for Christ fulfilled not
the Law, and redeemed us from the curse of it, that we should continue and
persist in sins and enmity with God.


The use of the Ceremonial and Judicial Laws, against Anabaptists that would
shut the Old Testament out of the Church of Christ, and under pretense of his
Spirit, be a Law unto themselves: 1. The first and principal use of the
Ceremonial and Judicial Laws of Moses, was to serve as a Schoolmaster unto
Christ and his Kingdom. 2. By these God would have his own people sorted out
from others, for his own glory and their salvation. 3. Obedience, or the
observing of the Moral Ordinances. 4. An exercise and a testification of their
obedience toward God. 5. Unto most of the ceremonies, such as signified
Christ's benefits, was proper and peculiar the sealing of Gods Covenant, or the
confirmation of faith, to signify what benefits God would give by the Messiah
to believers. 6. They served for the preservation of that Mosaical Regiment
until the coming of the Messiah. 7. Although they are now so abolished, as the
observation of them is not now required as concerning the Types, yet these
things are perpetual, which are signified by them, and therefore are a
confirmation of the new Testament, as well as the Oracles and Prophesies of the
old, concerning the Messiah and his kingdom, for types are visible promises.


The difference betwixt the Moral, Ceremonial and Civil or Judicial Laws. 1.
The Moral Law is known by Nature, Romans 2.15. and from the Creation, because Men
and Angels were created according to the Image of God: The Ceremonial and
Judicial Laws are not known by Nature, but are instituted according to the
diversity of causes and circumstances. 2. The Moral Law was published and
written by God himself, and using the mediation of Angels, which was not
altogether so with the other Laws. 3. The Moral Law binds all men, and in part
the Angels also; the Ceremonial and Judicial Laws were only prescribed unto
the people of Israel. 4. The Moral Law was first given as most worthy, the
other afterward, as not so much to be regarded in respect of it. 5. The Laws of
the Decalogue are perpetual, the other were delivered at a certain time, and
again abolished. Thus the Moral Law engraven in Tables of Stone, was kept in
the Ark, which was a sign that it should last perpetually, but the other Laws
were to last only to the fulfilling of all by Christ. 6. The Moral Laws speak
of both internal and external obedience, the other of external only; albeit,
neither does this please God, without the internal and moral obedience. 7. The
Moral Laws are not limited by certain circumstances, but are general, the
Ceremonial and Civil Laws are more special. 8. The Ceremonial Law has been
oftentimes broken without sin, but the Moral Law never without some special
countermand from God, as when Abraham was bid to kill his Son, and the
Israelites to rob the Egyptians, Exodus 12.36. 9. The Ceremonial and Civil Laws
are types or figures of other things, for whose cause they were ordained; the
Moral signify or prefigure nothing, but are signified by the Rites and
Ceremonies. 10. The Moral Law being neglected, makes men worse then Infidels,
yea then bruit beasts, Isa. 1.3. but the Ceremonial neglected, made men only
worse then the servants and peculiar people of God. 11. The Moral are the
principal service and worship of God: The Ceremonial and Civil serve for the
Moral Ordinances, that obedience to them be rightly performed. 12. The
Ceremonial Law was very chargeable and costly, burthensom and grievous; but the
Moral Law requires only the right disposition of the heart, and then
obedience in practice will easily follow. 13. The Ceremonial give place unto
the Moral; the Moral give not place unto the Ceremonial.


The Moral Law, the Natural Law, and the Decalogue do differ thus: 1. The
Decalogue is the sum of the Moral Laws, which are scattered throughout the
whole Scriptures. 2. The Natural Law does not differ from the Moral in nature
not corrupted, but in nature corrupted; a good part of the Natural Law is
darkened by sins, and but a little part, only concerning the obedience due to
God, was left remaining after the Fall; for which cause God has in his Church
repeated again, and declared the whole Sentence and Doctrine of the Law.


The difference between the Law and the Gospel: 1. In the manner of their
Manifestation: The Law is known by Nature; the Gospel was manifested from
above: the Law is Natural, and was in man's Nature before the Fall; but the
Gospel is Spiritual, revealed after the Fall in the Covenant of Grace. 2. In
their Matter or Doctrine: The Law teaches us what to do and perform; the
Gospel teaches how we may be such in Christ. 3. In their Promises: The Law
promises eternal life and all good things, with a condition of our own proper
and perfect righteousness and obedience remaining in us; the Gospel promises
the same with a condition of Faith in Christ, whereby we embrace his obedience
performed for us. Now with this condition of Faith is joined by an indissoluble
knot and bond, the condition of new-obedience. Thus the Law promises life to
the worker and doer of it, Romans 10.5. but the Gospel offers salvation to him
that works not, but believes him that justifies the ungodly, Romans 4.5. not
considering Faith as a work, but as an instrument apprehending Christ, by whom
we are made righteous. So the Law sets forth Gods Justice in rigor, without
Mercy; but the Gospel sets out Justice and Mercy united in Christ: therefore
the Law is called the Ministry of condemnation and of death, 2 Cor. 3.7, 9.
but the Gospel shows mercy to man's sins in and by Christ, if we repent and
believe. Thus the Law requires a perfect righteousness within us, but the
Gospel reveals our acceptance with God by imputed righteousness.


In like manner the difference between the Righteousness of the Law and that of
Faith, stands thus: 1. The Law requires it of our selves; but Faith calls us
from our selves to seek it in Christ. 2. The Law requires us to observe and do
all that it commands, otherwise it threatens the curse; but Faith requires
only that we truly believe. 3. The righteousness of the Law coming from our
selves, should set up Merit and put away Grace; but that of Faith which is from
God, takes away Merit, and sets up Grace.


As there is a double keeping of the Law, 1. A strict and exact keeping of it.
2. An Evangelical keeping of it, that is, when we desire and endeavor to fulfill
the Law in all things.


So accordingly there is a double curse: 1. A curse that follows the breach of
the Moral Law, that belongs to all mankind till they be in Christ. 2. An
Evangelical curse that follows upon the Evangelical breach of the Law. This is
the curse of the Gospel, which cannot be repealed, and is more terrible then
the curse of the Law.


Which curse consists in four things: 1. A separation from Grace, Goodness and
Holiness. 2. A separation from the presence of God, that is, from the joy,
influence and protection of God. 3. A curse on the outward estate, wherein a
man may be cursed in the midst of plenty. 4. The eternal curse at the day of
Judgment: And in this fourfold curse we must note, that men may be cursed,
though the curse be not executed.


Though no man can perfectly keep the Law, yet is it of most excellent use
these three ways: 1. To humble us, in regard of our miserable estate hereby
discovered. 2. To be a Rule of good life unto us. 3. To be a Schoolmaster to
bring us unto Christ, driving us unto him as our only Refuge, to be made
righteous by faith, Gal. 3.24.


God wills us to desire in this life the perfect fulfilling of the Law, for
these Reasons: 1. Because in those that desire it, he will at length effectuate
it hereafter. 2. That we may now go forward in godliness, according to Gods
rule. 3. That by this desire of fulfilling the Law, God may exercise us in
Repentance and Obedience.


This perfection is here two ways to be understood: 1. As it is opposed to
imperfections and wants, and this is perfection of degrees, whereby the Law is
kept without failing in any thing: Thus no man can keep the Law. 2. As it is
opposed to hypocrisy, and this is called perfection of parts, whereby what is
outwardly professed, is inwardly embraced, so that as the outward part makes a
good show, the inward part is also right and sincere: Thus David, Josiah and
others are said to be perfect, and not otherwise; and thus every regenerate man
can and does approve himself in some measure for perfect, though amidst great
weaknesses.


Again, a man may be said to be perfect 1. Comparatively, in regard of others
that are more imperfect. 2. In endeavor, when a man sets himself so much as
possibly he can to keep, not some, but all and every of the Commandments of God.


Though the Law is impossible even to the regenerate in respect of God, that
is, as touching the perfect inward and outward obedience of the Law, yet is the
Law thus possible to them, and them only: 1. As concerning outward Order and
Discipline. 2. By the benefits of Justification and Regeneration, both which we
obtain by Faith. 3. As touching the beginning of inward and outward obedience
in this life, 1 John 5.3. and as concerning the imputation of Christ's
Righteousness.


Christ fulfilleth the Law three ways; viz. 1. By his doctrine, 1. By teaching
it, that is, by repurging and purifying it from errors and corruptions, and by
restoring the true doctrine and understanding thereof, Mat. 5.6, 7. and by
restoring unto it his proper meaning and true use, as when he corrected the
corrupt interpretations thereof by the Pharisees. 2. By revealing the right way
whereby the Law may be fulfilled.
2. By his person, 1. By paying sufficient punishment for our sins, Romans 8.3.
By becoming accursed to the Law, in suffering death upon the Cross for us. 2.
By his own Righteousness, Heb. 7.26. By performing perfect obedience unto the
Law, doing all that the Law required: Thus was he said to be under the Law,
Gal. 4.4.
3. In men, of 2 sorts: 1. Elect, in whom he fulfilled the Law two ways: 1. By
creating Faith in their hearts, whereby they lay hold on Christ, who for them
fulfilled it. 2. By giving them his own Spirit, thereby reforming them unto the
Image of God, Romans 6. and 7. making them endeavor to fulfill the Law, which in
Christ is accepted for perfect obedience in this life, and in the life to come
is perfect obedience indeed.
2. Unbelievers, in whom Christ fulfilleth the Law, when he executes the curse
of the Law upon them; for that is a part of the Law, and the execution and
enduring of the curse is one fulfilling of the Law.



The uses or ends of the Law; viz. 1. Maintenance of Order and Discipline, as
well in the regenerate as unregenerate. 2. That we may know that God is, and
what he is. 3. The knowledge of sin. 4. A preparing to fearful horror in the
thoughts and consciences of the wicked. 5. A mean whereby Repentance may be
kindled and increased in Gods children. 6. A Level or Rule of living unto the
faithful.


The principal uses of the Moral Law: 1. The preserving and maintaining of
Discipline both in the Church and without also, 1 Timothy 1.9. 2. The
acknowledgement and accusing of sin in the regenerate and unregenerate, Romans
3.20. 3. An instructing and informing concerning the true service and worship
of God; and this use of the Moral Law is proper to the regenerate, Jer. 31.33.
Psalm. 1.2. and 119.50.


The less principal uses of the Moral Law: 1. It is a Testimony of God, that
there is a God, as likewise who and what he is. 2. It is a Testimony of the
excellency of man's Nature, which was before the Fall, and which shall be in the
life to come. 3. It is a Testimony of eternal life, for in this life it has
not its end in us.


How far the whole Law is abrogated: 1. As touching Justification; because
Judgment is not given according to the Law (for that Judgment would condemn
us) but according to the Gospel. 2. As touching constraint, we are under Grace,
and therefore we are stirred up by the Spirit of Christ to yield voluntary
obedience unto the Law: for now the Law does not wrest obedience from us as a
Tyrant, because Christ begins voluntary and free obedience in us by his
Spirit.


The causes or the chief ends for which the Sacrifices under the Law were
instituted and ordained: 1. To maintain the public Assemblies of the faithful,
and their meetings together to serve the Lord. 2. That they might be shadows of
good things to come, to put them in mind of Christ and his sacrifice, who is
therefore called The Lamb slain from the beginning of the world, Rev. 13.8. 3.
They were as the Sacraments of the Church, and Testimonies of Gods infallible
promise made to the Fathers touching salvation in the Messiah to come. 4. They
served to be as an open confession of their Faith, what God they served, and in
whom they believed, and that they hated and detested the vanity and the
Idolatry of the Gentiles. 5. They were also a Testification of their
thankfulness for sundry benefits received, that thereby they might be taught to
acknowledge from whence they came. 6. They served for the maintenance of the
Ministry, and consequently for the furtherance of the worship of God, Deuteronomy.
18.3, 4. 1 Cor. 9.13.


Under the Law the Priests as Priests 1. Were ordinary Ministers of the old
Church. 2. Were appointed by men. 3. Were tied to the Doctrine of Moses and the
Prophets, which they learned not from God immediately, but mediately by men. 4.
They might err in Doctrine and Counsels, and did err often, when they
departed from the Rule of the Prophets.


So that the difference between the Priests and the Prophets stands thus: 1.
The Priests were ordained out of one certain Tribe, the Levitical; but God
raised up Prophets out of any Tribe. 2. The Prophets were called
extraordinarily and immediately by God himself, and so received from him the
Doctrine which they were to declare to men. 3. They were so guided by the
special motion of the Holy Ghost, that they could not err in that Doctrine
which they uttered to men in the name of God; but with the Priests it was
otherwise.


In the Law, as the Priesthood, so the Priest was twofold: 1. Signifying or
typical, who was a person appointed by God 1. To offer typical Sacrifices. 2.
To make intercession for himself and others. 3. To declare to the people the
Doctrine of the Law, and the Promise of the Messiah and true Sacrifice which
was to come.
2. Signified, that is, Christ, of whom the most notable Type was the High
Priest himself.


The things that were proper and peculiar to the high Priest only: 1. He alone
entered into the Tabernacle, called The Holiest of all, or Sanctuary, and that
but once every year. 2. His raiment was more gorgeous then the vesture of the
other Priests. 3. He was set over the rest. 4. He only was consulted with in
matters doubtful, touching Religion or the Commonweal. 5. He did therefore
govern and order some Counsels and Offices of the State and Kingdom, and did
see that all things were lawfully administered.


They that were under the Law were of three sorts; viz. 1. Israelites, which
were of Abraham's posterity, and were necessarily bound by the Law to observe
Circumcision and the Ceremonies. 2. Proselytes, who of the Gentiles were
converted unto the Jews, and did more and more, for confirming of their faith,
submit themselves unto Circumcision, and the whole Ceremonial Law. 3. Those of
the Gentiles who were converted unto the Jews, but did not observe the
Ceremonies; these embraced only the Doctrine and Promises of God: And unto the
Gentiles and Proselytes it was free to keep or not to keep Circumcision and the
Ceremonies.


Four special Sects among the Jews under the Law: 1. The Essens, who were like
Popish Monks and Friars, which did separate themselves from the people, vowing
and dedicating themselves to live in perpetual Sanctity. 2. The Sadduces, who
did expound the Law according to the letter and syllable, and withal denied the
Resurrection and Immortality of the Soul, as appears Acts 2.3, 8. 3. The
Pharisees, who did forsake the common Exposition of the Scribes, and taught and
framed a more exact and strict Exposition of the Law, according to the
Traditions of the Fathers: These Pharisees were by office Scribes, as appears
by comparing Joh. 1.29. with ver. 24. 4. Herodians, who (as some think) were
Courtiers, who held and taught that Herod was the Messiah.


The Church of Rome erreth grossly in Confounding the Law and the Gospel, under
pretense that the Precepts of both are the same for substance; that both
require righteousness, both promise life and threaten death; both command
faith, repentance and obedience: Put his opinion overturns true Religion, and
is erroneous, for these Reasons: 1. Adam in his innocence knew the Law, but he
knew nothing then of believing, in Christ; and though both require
righteousness, promise life and threaten death, yet the manner is far different.
2. Likewise they differ in the commanding of faith; for the Gospel commands
faith, not as a work done, as the Law does, but as an instrument laying hold on
Christ. Again, the Law commands faith generally, as to believe in God, and to
believe his word to be true; but besides this, the Gospel requires a particular
faith in Christ the Redeemer, whom the Law never knew. 3. The Law commands
not Repentance, for the knowledge of the Law was in Adams heart, when he needed
no Repentance: True Repentance therefore is a saving Grace, wrought and
commanded only by the Gospel. 4. Though obedience be commanded both by the Law
and the Gospel, yet not in the same manner: The Law commands obedience every
way perfect, both in parts and in degrees, and allows no other; but the
Gospel in Christ approves imperfect obedience, that is, an endeavor in all
things to obey and please God, if it be without hypocrisy. Again, the Law
commands obedience as a work to be done for the obtaining of salvation, but
the Gospel requires obedience, only to testify our faith and thankfulness to
God.


This is not the only Error touching the Law; there are certain people in the
world, living under a Christian Climate, known by the Name of New-Libertines,
who say, The Old Testament is abrogated; others think us necessarily tied to
all the Judicials of Moses; boldly affirming, That the Laws Judicial of Moses
belong as well unto Christians, as they did unto the Jews: Others have
entertained an Opinion, That Love was now come in the place of the Ten
Commandments: Others will not have Gods Law to be preached, nor the Conscience
of sinners to be terrified and troubled with the Judgments of God; yea, it
has been held, How that it was utterly unlawful for the Elect, so much as to
think, much less to speak or hear of the fear of God which the Law preaches.
Now the common Objection of such men is, That Christians are not ruled by the
Law, but by the Spirit of Regeneration, according as it is said, Ye are not
under the Law, but under Grace. Again, the Law is not given unto the righteous
man, therefore it is not to be taught in the Church of Christ. But the Answer
hereto is as ancient as the Error; Christians indeed are not ruled, that is,
are not compelled and constrained by the Law and fear of punishment unto
whatsoever Discipline or Order, like as are the wicked; but yet they are taught
and instructed by the Law of God, what worship is pleasing unto God: and the
Holy Ghost uses the voice of the Law, to teach and incline them to an
obedience, not constrained or hypocritical, but true or voluntary; so that not
only the Law commands them what to do, but the Spirit also of Grace does
give them ability to obey: For this is not to be under the Law, and the Law not
to be given to the righteous; so that the Bond and Doctrine remains, although
the Condemnation and Constraint be taken away. Let no Christian man whatsoever
therefore think that he is freed from the obedience of the Moral Law; for the
compleatness and perfection of our wisdom and salvation which we have in
Christ, does not exclude, but include rather and comprehend the Doctrine of the
Law: Think not that Christ came to destroy the Law or the Prophets; no, he came
not to destroy, but to fulfill them, Mat. 5.17. neither think that we make the
Law of none effect through faith, for thereby we establish the Law, Romans 3.3.
which shows us what is to be done; and the Gospel, by the Spirit of
Regeneration, ministers unto us power both to will and to do.

The word Gospel signifies Good tidings; but it is generally taken for that
Doctrine which contains the Promise of forgiveness of sins to the penitent,
and life everlasting, made unto us of God in the Word by his Son. It is the
Doctrine made manifest of God by his Son the Mediator, presently after the fall
of mankind into sin and death, promising all believing and repentant sinners
remission of sins, and their receiving into favor and life everlasting, freely
to be granted through and for his Son the Mediator: By which Doctrine the Holy
Ghost does forcibly kindle and work in the hearts of the chosen, faith,
repentance, and the beginning of everlasting life. This Gospel is the Key which
opens the Kingdom of Heaven to all Believers, and shuts it against
Unbelievers; when by the commandment of Christ it is publicly declared to all
and every one of the faithful, that all their sins are pardoned them for the
Merit of Christ, so often as they embrace by a lively faith the Promise of the
Gospel; but on the other side it is denounced to all Infidels and Hypocrites,
That so long the wrath of God and everlasting damnation does lie on them, as
they persist in their wickedness, Joh. 20.23. Mat. 16.19. according to which
Testimony of the Gospel God will judge them, as well in this life as in the
life to come.

This Gospel was first made known in Paradise, Genesis 3.15. and afterward God did
spread it abroad by the the Patriarchs and Prophets, Genesis 22.18. and 49.10, 11.
Romans 1.2. shadowed it by Sacrifices and other Ceremonies of the Law, Joh. 5.46.
Heb. 10.7. and lastly accomplished it by his only begotten Son, Romans 10.4.
Gal. 4.4. Heb. 13.8. All those things which are promised us in the Gospel, are
necessary for a Christian man to believe, Joh. 20.31. the sum whereof is
briefly comprised in the Creed of the Apostles, or the Articles of the
Catholic and undoubted Faith of all Christians. So that these Promises of the
Gospel are limited with the condition of Faith and Repentance, being indefinite
in regard of whole mankind, and universal only to Believers; and therefore
men are not brought within the Covenant by the supposed Doctrine of Universal
Grace and Redemption: for had there always in the Old Testament such an
Universal Grace been given to all, whereby they might be saved if they would,
they would never have thought so grossly of God as some of them did; nor could
the Heathen have had such carnal conceits of God as we find they had, had they
had but one spark of true knowledge of the Messiah: and therefore howsoever the
Heathen had so much knowledge of God, as made them without excuse, yet we are
to hold, That before Christ's coming they were left to themselves, and forsaken
of God in his just Judgment, in regard of his special grace and favor; yea, in
the first Age of the world there were some that were the sons of God, others
the daughters of men, Genesis 6.2. After the Flood, some the children of the
Flesh, others the children of the Promise, Gal. 4.29. And under the Law, a
people of God, and no people, Hos. 1.10. which distinction of man and man,
people and people, could not be, were the opinion of Universal Grace otherwise
then false and erroneous. The Gospel indeed, which is that part of Gods Word
touching remission of sins and salvation, is by our Savior commanded to be
preached to all Nations; and though the Promises therein contained are near us,
yet unless God clear them, we see them no more then Mary Magdalen did Jesus,
though he stood near enough to her, or the Disciples with whom he conversed on
the way, or Hagar the Well, till their eyes were open; but to as many as are
Gods chosen, this his soft voice, or the voice of the Gospel, is said to be a
clearing of the Promises, and the immediate Testimony of the Spirit, both which
always go together, and are never disjoined; and to them only does God impute
for perfect righteousness the Merit of Christ set forth in this Gospel, and
restores salvation unto them, for that in them alone he obtains the end both
of his Creation, and of his delivery and Justification, even his praise and
glory, for they only acknowledge this benefit of God, and yield thanks unto
him for it, the rest despise it.

The truth and certainty of the Gospel, that is, of the Promise of Grace,
appears, 1. By the Testimony of the Holy Ghost. 2. By the Prophesies which
have been uttered by the Prophets and other holy men. 3. By the fulfilling of
these Prophesies, which was accomplished in the New Testament. 4. By the
Miracles whereby the Doctrine of the Gospel was confirmed. 5. By the end or
property of the Gospel, because that alone shows the way how to escape death
and sin.


It is called the Gospel of Peace, in a double respect: 1. Of the subject
matter, which is the Peace and Reconciliation which Christ the Mediator made
between God and Man. 2. Of the effect, being to work peace in them that hear
and believe it; the Spirit first moving us to embrace the Reconciliation
offered therein, and then quieting our Conscience.


The proper effects of the Gospel are faith, Romans 10.17. and 1.16. 2 Cor. 3.8.
and our whole conversion unto God, Justification, Regeneration and Salvation,
which are the effects of faith: And herein the Gospel mainly differs from the
Law; for the Law is the Ministry of death, and kills; but the Gospel is the
Ministry of life and of the Spirit, that is, it has the forcible operation of
the Holy Ghost adjoined, and quickneth. The Law by it self without the Gospel,
is only the letter, that is, the outward preaching, and bare knowledge of
those things which we ought to do; teaching indeed our duty, and that
righteousness which God requires at our hands, but not enabling us to perform
that righteousness, neither showing us any hope to attain thereunto by another,
but rather accusing and condemning our unrighteousness; but the Gospel is the
instrument of the Holy Ghost, which he properly uses to kindle faith in us,
whereby we who before were dead are again quickened, and receive strength to
perform the Law: For through faith in Christ our Mediator the Law cease to be
unto us the Ministry of death, and is become Spiritual, that is, the
instrument of the Holy Ghost, whereby he forcibly moves our hearts to serve
God.

Perfect Obedience is the Laws Command,
Do this and live; which Morally does stand
For ever: But Man's fallen, and has not power
Now to obey it perfectly an hour.
Man, thank thy self; before thy fatal Fall
Thou had sufficient power to keep them all.
Behold the Gospel, th'Olive-Dove of Peace;
As Sin, so Grace hence much more does increase.
Sin not therefore, sin not; Oh do not grieve
That Blessed Spirit, but Believe and live.
. 4. The Word Preached.
IT has been accounted State Policy to defend little Preaching and less
Hearing, but Ignorance can uphold no Kingdom: Religion and the knowledge of it,
is the Pillar both of Church and State; the want whereof is the cause of
Tumults, Insurrections and Seditions: True Religion is a Bulwark and a Castle
of Defense to any Kingdom, the very chariots and horsemen of Israel, 2 Kings
2.12. Now the Preaching of the Word of God, is properly the Expounding of some
part thereof, teaching hence the duties to be followed, and the sins to be
avoided, and exhorting to do accordingly; so that every discourse upon a Text
of Scripture is not Preaching; but he that so Expounds and applies the Word,
that his Ministry may be as salt unto his hearers, he it is that Preaches the
Word indeed: And they who may Preach this Word of God, are only such as are
outwardly sent of God ordinarily; and when extraordinary necessity requires,
then all such as are inwardly stirred up and enabled thereto by the Spirit of
God. The Word Preached by the inward operation of Gods holy Spirit, is the
ordinary means of working in our hearts Faith, the instrument of our
Justification and Salvation; and this Word thus working Faith, is the Gospel:
For the Law drives to despair, but the Gospel erecteth by Hope, the Law
threatens and fills with fear, the Gospel promises and fills with
comfort; the Law shows our miserable estate, and what need we have of a
Savior, the Gospel shows a remedy against this misery, and points out unto
us our Savior.

The Preaching of the Word, and the Administration of the Sacraments, are all
one in substance; for in the one the will of God is seen, in the other heard:
which ought to be dispensed purely, plainly and sincerely, without the mixture
of humane Inventions. This was Paul's special care, My word and my preaching
(says he) stood not in the enticing speech of man's wisdom, but in plain
evidence of the Spirit and of power, that your faith should not be in the
wisdom of men, but in the power of God, 1 Cor. 2.4, 5. Indeed there is a place
for Arts and Tongues, and humane learning, with every dispenser of the Word,
wherein he may use them with great commendation, as in his private preparation,
but not in the public dispensation, whereby he seasoneth men's hearts unto God;
that the Word of God alone must do, for to it alone belongs the Promise of the
Spirit, Isa. 59.21. and therefore must he use great discretion in this
Ministry, endeavoring so to speak, that the Spirit may take delight to
accompany the same; otherwise he may discourse a year of Sabbaths, till he has
made his Lungs dryer then his matter, yet all will be to as vain a purpose as
his humane wisdom was; for that only is true preaching, which expels the
natural ignorance of man's heart, and gives this light of knowledge to the mind
and conscience, which leads men unto God. Again, Ministers in dispensing Gods
Word, must content themselves with the Testimony of Scripture alone, for the
end of the Ministry is to work and confirm Faith, and to settle and build up
the Conscience in the truth of Religion, and matters concerning Salvation,
which no other word can do, save only the Word of God in Scripture, that has
sufficient authority in it self, from which Conscience cannot appeal.

The order to be observed in Preaching: 1. The Law is to be proposed, that
thence we may know our misery. 2. That we may not despair after our misery is
known unto us, the Gospel is to be taught, which both gives us a certain hope
of returning into Gods promised favor by Christ our Mediator, and shows us
the manner how we are to repent. 3. The Law is again to be taught, that it may
be the level and square of our actions, lest after we attain unto our delivery,
we prove careless and wanton.


The Duties required of Ministers in the delivery of the Word: 1. It behooves
them to set themselves as in Gods presence, and consider that they are his
Messengers, and speak in his name, and are as it were his mouth. 2. To aim at
his glory who has called them, not at their own. 3. Duly to come well prepared
and provided, as a wise Scribe taught to the Kingdom of heaven. 4. To regard
not only the matter which they handle, but the manner of handling. 5. Not to
gird and glance at sin to show his own wit, but to pierce the very heart of it
with the two-edged Sword of Gods Word. 6. To speak to the people with
understanding, not flying aloft, above the reach and capacity of those to whom
they speak. 7. To content themselves with the purity and simplicity of the
Word, which is sufficient in it self to expound it self, and able, yea only
able to give direction and satisfaction to the Conscience.


The whole Exercise consists 1. Of Prayer, 1. Before exercise, and therein we
must in the Name of Christ 1. Confess our sins: And for the better performance
whereof, we must remember, 1. The Majesty of God. 2. The Mercy of God. 3. Our
own Unworthiness.
2. Crave pardon for the same. 3. Desire the continuance of Gods mercies, and
the assistance of his Spirit Generally, in all things. Particularly, for that
Exercise.

2. After exercise, consisting of these 2 parts: 1. Invocation, which is twofold
1. Particular, as for the sanctifying of the particulars that have been
propounded. 2. General, as for the Church Generally, every where. Particularly
1. For the Commonwealth. 2. For Rulers in Authority. 3. For the People and
Commons.


2. Thanksgiving for Gods Mercies bestowed 1. Upon the whole Church every
where. 2. Upon these Realms, or upon any part or member of the same.


2. Of Interpreting and handling of the Word: And in the deducting of the same
these two things are to be stood upon, 1. A preparation unto Doctrine, wherein
is showed, 1. The Coherence of the Text with the former, if there be any, or
else the occasion of the Text. 2. The drift of the Spirit of God in that parcel
of Scripture that is handled. 3. The Division of it into the parts. 4. The
Paraphrase or sum of the words.
2. Doctrine it self; in the pursuit whereof 3 things are to be observed, 1.
The gathering of the Doctrine, 1. Out of the Coherence. 3. Out of the drift. 3.
Out of the Division. 4. Out of the words themselves, 1. In the Sense. 2. In the
Meditating of them.

2. The proof of the Doctrine, which is either by 1. Reason, taken out of the
word. 2. The Text it self.
3. The use of the Doctrine, which is 1. For Knowledge, 1. To confute Falsehood.
2. To confirm Truth.
2. For Conscience, 1. To comfort the afflicted. 2. To humble the proud.






The word of God must be preached with boldness, Ephesians. 6.19. which is manifested
1. By an equal and impartial preaching of the word without respect of persons.
2. By a declaration of the whole truth of God as occasion requires, concealing
no part thereof for any by-respects of favor, fear, reward or danger, Acts
20.27. 3. By a grave, plain, free delivery of Gods word, without affectation or
popular applause, Gal. 1.10. 4. By reproving sin, and that with authority, Tit.
2.15. that transgressors may be ashamed and tremble. 5. By despising all shame,
fear, reproach and disgrace, which by profane and wicked persons may be
brought upon the Ministers for performing their Calling as they ought.


Repetition of the same points that have been formerly handled, is very
expedient, for these Reasons: 1. Because men are commonly dull in hearing,
slack in coming, weak in remembering, and fow in practicing. 2. Because it is
safe and sure for all hearers to have often repetitions; many witnesses make
sure work, and confirm strongly and steadfastly the things taught, Phil. 3.1. 3.
Because repetitions work a deeper impression in us, and serve to beat it into
the Conscience, as well as into the understanding; but the best repetition, is
when we make repetition of it to our selves by practicing it.


The end and purpose of Gods instituting the Ministry of the word was, 1. That
God may be invocated and magnified in this life by mankind, not only
privately, but also by the public voice of the Church. 2. That the public and
ordinary preaching of the Doctrine, the pouring out of prayers, and giving of
thanks, and the use of the Sacraments, may be an exercise to stir up and
cherish faith and godliness, as which without exercise does easily through our
infirmity wax cold. 3. That men may provoke one another by their example unto
godliness, and to the magnifying and praising of God, Psa. 22.22. 4. That there
may be preserved and maintained a consent and agreement in the Church, in the
Doctrine and Worship of God, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. 5. That the Church may be seen
and heard among men, and may be discerned from the other Blasphemous and
Idolatrous multitude of men; and that the Elect may be gathered to the true
Church, and the Reprobate be left the more excuseless, Romans 10.18. 6. That God
may apply himself unto our infirmity, by teaching men by men. 7. That God may
show his love toward men, in that he vouchsafes to admit them to be Ministers
of that great and weighty work, which also the Son of God himself did
administer. 8. That by this exceeding love of God to us sons of men, we might
be won in all humility and thankfulness to receive the word, and in obedience
to practice the same in our life and conversation.


Our obedience toward the Ministry, comprehends, 1. Reverence, that is, an
acknowledging of Gods Order and Will in the ordaining and maintaining of the
Ministry, and in the gathering of his Church by it; that is, a declaration
both in words and deeds of this our acknowledgement and judgment of the
Ministry, 1 Cor. 4.7. 2. Love, whereby we gladly both frequent divine
Assemblies, and hear and learn the Doctrine of the Church, and wish well unto
the faithful Ministers of the Church, not only in respect of that duty of
charity which we owe, but also in respect of the Ministry which they
discharge. 3. Obedience in those things which are belonging to the Ministry;
whereunto belong the works of love toward God and our Neighbor, even the whole
life of a Christian, which is that Spiritual and Moral Sabbath. 4.
Thankfulness, that is, such duties as tend to the preservation and maintenance
of the Ministry, that it may be honestly provided for; for God will have his
ministry to be maintained to the end of the world. 5. Lenity and moderation in
bearing with such infirmities of the Ministers, as do not enormously or
manifestly corrupt or hinder the Ministry, and hurt the Church by offense, 1 Timothy 5.19.


It is the duty of all men to further the work of the Ministry, and by all
means to promote it: which may be done by these means; 1. By commending to God
by Prayer the Ministry of his own Ordinance, and that he would send able
Ministers where they are wanting, Matthew. 9.38. and continue them where they
are, and by our thankfulness to him for bestowing this gift on us, which he
has denied to many places and people. 2. By repenting of those sins which may
hinder either the obtaining or continuing of it, Isa. 62.7. 3. By making a
reverend use of this gift of God, in being subject unto it, governed and
reformed by it, Heb. 13.7. 4. By lamenting the state of the Church, which is
destitute or deprived of this gift, Psalm. 74.9. 5. By providing in time of
vacancy sufficient men, whom God must choose, before we make choice of; Patrons
shall one day answer to God for the souls of such as perish through their
default. 6. By acknowledging our selves unworthy of so great a blessing, and by
giving up our whole selves unto God for it.


To despise and resist the Ministry of the word, or the Ministers therein, is
to despise and resist even God himself: 1. Because they come not in their own
name, neither do they discharge their own Message; they are no other then the
mouth of God, they come not from themselves, neither for themselves, their
Authority and Calling is from God, 1 Cor. 3.5. 2. God does account all things
done to them, in the execution of their Ministry, as done to himself, Matthew.
10.40. Let their profane Persecutors of these Times seriously consider hereof.


The greater our means are to prevent sin, the more we offend, if we reject
those means: 1. Because such sin against knowledge, having the word to instruct
them, and their own consciences to convince them; knowledge makes every sin
the greater, Luke 2.47. Joh. 15.22. 2. Because it argues obstinacy, and
hardness of heart, and wilfulness, which makes the sinner the more sinful.


The parallel of the Ministry of the word and Salt, as it is comparatively set
down in Mat. 5.13. 1. Salt will bite and fret being applied, the nature thereof
being hot and dry; so the Law being applied, does rip up men's hearts to make
them see their sins; it does fret and bite them by the curse thereof, to cause
them to renounce themselves. 2. Salt makes meat savory unto our taste; so the
Gospel being preached, and men thereby feeling their corruptions like
rottenness in their souls, may by the blessing of the Spirit be thereby
seasoned with Graces, and so reconciled unto God, and made savory in his sight.
3. Salt preserves meats from putrefaction, by drawing out of them superfluous
moistness; so the Law and the Gospel being continually dispensed, sin and
corruption may be daily mortified and consumed both in heart and life, and
expelled thence like superfluous humors.


In this calling of the Ministry, there be especially four kinds of unsavory
Salt. 1. The blind watchmen that have no knowledge, and dumb dogs that cannot
bark, Isa. 56.10. that is, such as either cannot or will not dispense Gods word
for the salvation of men's souls. 2. Heretical teachers, who preach false and
damnable doctrine, such as does not season, but poison and destroy the soul,
Deuteronomy. 30.1, 2. 2 Timothy 2.17, 18. 3. Such as teach indeed true doctrine, but
misapply the same, sowing pillows under the elbows of the wicked, having smooth
tongues in respect of sin, yet are full of close invectives against the better
and godlier sort. 4. Such, who though they teach the truth, and generally apply
it well, do yet lead scandalous lives, whereby their unsavory conversation
hinders the seasoning virtue of the word.


There are six conditions required to the Calling of a Minister: 1. That he
feel within himself an inward Calling. 2. That he be of a good Conversation. 3.
That he be of sound Doctrine. 4. That he be apt to teach. 5. That he be
lawfully chosen of the Church. 6. That he perform his Office diligently toward
the flock committed to his charge.


The properties of godly Pastors: 1. They must be diligent to know the state of
their flocks, and to take heed to their herds, Prove. 27.23, 24. 2. They must
not be discouraged by the ungodly speeches and venomous tongues of wicked men,
thereby to grow negligent in their functions. 3. They must not be afraid of the
faces and frowns of men, Ezekiel. 3.8, 9. Jer. 1.17. 4. They must wisely apply the
word to the necessity, capacity and understanding of all, and giving to every
one his portion of Spiritual nourishment in due season.


In like manner the duties and functions of Ministers, are 1. Faithfully to
propound and deliver the true and sound Doctrine of God, that the Church may
know and understand it. 2. Rightly to administer the Sacraments. 3. To go
before and shine unto the Church, by the example of Christian life and
conversation. 4. To give diligent attendance unto their flock. 5. To yield
their service in such judgments as are expressed by the Church. 6. To take
care that regard and respect be had of the Poor.


Ministers must have these three things in some measure at least: 1. A care to
win the people, a desire to convert them, and an earnest hunger and thirst
after their salvation. 2. They must labor earnestly to work their conversion,
and not cease or hold their peace when they see them untoward, but hold on in a
constant course. 3. They must testify their sorrow for their people, and mourn
for the hardness of their hearts, and be heartily grieved to see their
unprofitableness.


Why all Ministers must be proved and tried before they be admitted to this
sacred function: 1. Because they have the price of the blood of Christ
committed unto them, Acts 20.28. 2. Because there are many subtle deceivers
that transform themselves into Angels of light, 2 Cor. 11.13, 14. 3. The office
of Deacons was a function of less duty in the Church, yet they were not to be
admitted without due trial and examination, Acts 6.3. 4. It makes them the more
regarded and better accepted ever as the Ministers of Jesus Christ, and it will
procure more authority to their person. 5. It will shut the door of this sacred
function against all insufficient and unworthy presumers, that run before they
are sent.


The Titles given to Ministers in the holy Scripture, whence appears the
excellency and the weighty charge of their Function: The Salt of the earth, The
Builders of Christ's body, The co-workers of God. The ambassadors of Christ, 2
Cor. 5.20. The stewards of the house, Tit. 1.7. The fathers of the Church, 1
Cor. 4.15. Fishers of men, Mat. 4.19. The Ministers of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.6.
The Builders of the Temple. The Shepherds of the sheep, Ephesians. 4.11. The Planters
and waterers of the Garden, 1 Cor. 3.6, 7. The Watchmen of the City, Ezekiel.
33.7. Heb. 13.17. The Trumpeters of the Host, and Stars of the firmament, Rev.
1.20. Dan. 12.3.


The Ministers of the Word must be men of sobriety, constancy, piety, humility,
patience, stayedness, wisdom, judgment, diligence, courage, gravity, and
moderation of all their affections: 1. Because it appears they have many Titles
given them in Scripture, every one whereof carries some instruction and
admonition with it to the Conscience. 2. Because the Ministry is a high
Calling, of great importance and worthiness, standing up not only in the place
of the people to offer up their prayers to God, but in the room of God to
declare his will to them. 3. Lest their Calling be blemished, and their
Ministry reprehended, if in their profession they adorn not the Gospel by
their unblameable walking. 4. Because they are to utter the word of wisdom,
whereby both themselves and their hearers shall be made wise unto salvation.


They ought principally and in the first place to look to themselves, and that
for these Reasons: 1. Because unless they be doers as well as speakers, they
utter words with their own tongues that shall condemn themselves; not unlike
Vriah, who carried about him a Letter to further and procure his own death. 2.
They cannot with comfort and conscience preach to others, unless in their own
persons they be practisers of those things they teach; they may save others,
themselves they cannot. 3. Such as are teachers and not doers, do seduce the
people, pulling down by the left hand of evil life, faster then they build up
by the right hand of wholesome Doctrine.


They ought not to withhold the delivery of the word, they must not give over,
though they see no fruit at all to proceed of their labors: 1. Because they
know not when God may be pleased to bless their labors, and hear their prayers,
and save the souls of those that are rebellious against him, 2 Timothy 2.24, 25,
26. 2. They have the example of God, he is patient and bears long with the
vessels of wrath, as Christ says of Jerusalem, Mat. 23.37. 3. Because they
shall have no less recompense, if they be fonnd faithful in their Calling, then
if they had gained many thousand souls unto God, 2 Cor. 2.15. 4. He that
holds not out unto the end, makes all his former pains prove but lost labor,
and fails in the discharge of his Calling; for the word may be the savor of
life unto him, though the savor of death unto others, that carelessly neglect,
or obstinately resist the same.


Seeing Ministers must be faithful in their Calling, it follows that they may
not be 1. Ignorant; not able to break the bread of life, that hinder the
Kingdom of God, and greatly advance the Kingdom of Satan: Such are much like
Jeroboams Priests, 1 Kings 12.31. and 13.33, 34. fit instruments to further
Idolatry, and to promote all manner of impiety. 2. False Teachers; these also
destroy the souls of the people by false Doctrine; the former did starve them,
these do poison them: by both ways the people perish. 3. Idle and unprofitable;
which clothe themselves with the fleece of Christ's flock, but feed not his
sheep: Idle persons in any Society are thieves, Ephesians. 4.28. Surely then these
persons are sacrilegious ones, incurring the just rebuke of Spiritual theft and
felony. 4. Unskilful; not being able to divide the word of Truth aright, yet
usurping the Pulpit, not to preach, but to abuse the place, the people,
themselves, the Word, nay God himself. 5. Scandalous, who pull down with one
hand faster then they build with another; they wait indeed at Gods Altar, but
are the servants of Satan. 6. Flattering teachers, that few pillows on every
elbow, dawbing with untemper'd mortar; they preach to please men, and are
afraid of displeasing.


The two parts of a Ministers Office, which must always go together: 1.
Doctrine; for Gods word must be preached that men may hear it. 2. An
unblameable Conversation, bringing forth good works, that men therein may see
the will of God; for the Minister must not only by Doctrine instruct the ear,
but by a godly life exemplify his Doctrine unto the eye, 1 Timothy 4.12. Be unto
them that believe, an example in word and in conversation.


The course which is to be used by Gods Ministers in the preaching and
dispensing of his holy Word: 1. They must preach, and dispense and publish the
Word of God to all men without exception; Grace though it be not Universal, yet
in the Ministry of the Word it must be offered to all, good and bad. 2. They
must observe what fruit and effect the Word has with them, whether it work
reformation of life in them or not. 3. Having waited for their conversion, they
must labor to convince their very Consciences of the truth which in heart and
life they deny; but if after all this, they give evident signs of malicious and
obstinate enmity against the Word, scorning and railing at the Doctrine of God,
and on the Ministers thereof, then are they to be cast out by the Church, and
to be barred from the word of life, until they repent.


The peoples duty toward their faithful Ministers: 1. They must pray for their
Minister, that the Lord would give him wisdom and knowledge in all things, 2 Timothy 2.7. 2. The Church must take notice what her power and authority is in
choosing of Ministers; it has no absolute authority to ordain unworthy men,
and obtrude them on the people. 3. The people must so demean themselves toward
their faithful Pastors, as that they may have occasion to rejoice in their
Calling and charge over them, that they may see they have not labored in vain,
Heb. 13.17. 4. The hearers must not spurn at, despise, contemn or hate their
persons, but they ought to joy in the joy of their Ministers, 2 Cor. 2.13. 5.
We ought to be ready to hear and obey in all things delivered and made known
unto us out of the word, not singling out what we list in part to follow, and
cast the rest from us. 6. We must love them sincerely and heartily; this will
cause reverence and regard of them, we must account them as our Spiritual
fathers, 1 Cor. 4.15.


The Word preached, without the Spirits Ephphatha, is a dead letter, and
without a Conversation that keeps harmony with the purity of Doctrine, but the
dumb sound of an empty vessel: The experience of the fruit and efficacy of the
Word in the Ministers own person, is the best Commentary he can have, for the
opening of it unto others; without which (like Noah's Ark-Carpenters) after
they have built for others, may themselves perish at the general Deluge.

This Key by sacred Dispensation
Unlocks the Mystery of Man's Salvation;
The Saints highway to Heaven, to them the breath
Of life; the thunder of Eternal death
To such as come to greet it with a scoff,
Or by their lives deny the power thereof.
The people once for fear of death denied
To hear the voice of God; and jointly cried,
Let Moses speak: A happy change God gives,
Only by hearing of his voice man lives.
. 5. The Word Heard.
AS the contempt of the Word is an abridgement of all sin gathered together in
one; so the practical embracement thereof, is the powerfullest Antidote against
the poison of any sin: Practice must be ever joined with knowledge of the word,
for not the hearers of the Law, but the doers thereof shall be justified before
God, Romans 2.12. And such as are hearers only, and not doers of the Word,
deceive but their own souls, James 1.22. Yea, when in admiration at Christ's
Doctrine, she that bare him was pronounced Blessed, he replies, Nay, rather
blessed are they that hear the word of God, and keep it, Luke 11.27, 28. So
that it is not (as our lives seem to maintain) the sitting and hearing, and
after repeating of the Sermon, which God only requires; for to hear as God
would have us hear, is another thing: It is like the Lessons in Music, which
we have never learnt till we be able to practice. To understand what Faith is,
what Love is, what Patience is, is nothing; but to have Faith, to have Love, to
have Patience, is the true hearing. Since then it is our duty to live in the
practice of that we hear, be it our duty also to pray to God the Father in the
name of Christ, That he would vouchsafe his Spirit unto us, whereby our hearts
may be inclined, disposed and bent to an unfeigned love and obedience of his
Precepts delivered in his Word; yea, our prayers must be for the performance of
such obedience in our life, as that our Consciences may not only not accuse
us, but also excuse us before God in regard thereof, or at least in regard of
our true endeavor and desire to obey. But disobedience to the Word (which in
its kind God hates as the sin of Witchcraft) is the common sin of this Age;
men content themselves with the bare action of hearing, like the Papists, who
think God is well served with the work done: but the work is not indeed done,
till we conscionably practice what we hear. Thus the principal thing we omit,
which is the treasuring up of Gods Word in our hearts, that upon just occasion
we might practice the same; yea, which is yet more deplorable, we are so far
from yielding conscionable obedience to the Word, that the endeavor thereunto
is commonly judged Superfluous niceness, and overcurious preciseness: Which
most damnable Censure, together with this sin of hearing and not doing, will
continue (as it has brought already) many fearful Judgments upon us, unless
by timely true Repentance it be cut off; yea, this very Word which God has
graciously ordained as the ordinary means of our Salvation, if now heard
unpractised, will one day prove the savor of death to our eternal Condemnation.
Consider this therefore, thou that centrest Religion in Formality; consider it
seriously, as thou expectest Heaven or fear Hell; for being now premonished,
this very subject thou now read stands on Record against thee to the great
and terrible Day of Judgment.

To the profitable hearing of Gods word, three things are required: 1. A
preparation before we hear, which consists 1. In removing all impediments. 2.
In using all good helps and means to further us.
2. A right disposition in hearing. 3. The duties to be practiced after hearing.


Rules of direction to be observed in preparation before hearing: 1. We must be
swift to hear, James 1.19. by disburthening our selves of all impediments. 2.
We must lift up our hearts to God in Prayer, that he would give us the hearing
ear. 3. The hearer must in hearing set himself as in the presence of God.


The lets and impediments hindering the effectual hearing of the Word, which are
to be removed and avoided before we come to the hearing of the same: 1.
Presumption, when the hearer presumes of his own parts, able to teach his
Teachers: And in this may be included Prejudication, for we must take heed of
all sinister affection to the Ministers person, Luke 10.16. 2. Troubled
affections, specially rash anger, either against his Teacher or others; for we
must take special heed of corrupt affections, as envy, hatred, malice, guile,
anger, and the like, 1 Pet. 2.1, 2. 3. The immoderate desire of riches and all
worldly cares, Mat. 13.22. 4. Overcharging our selves with too much eating and
drinking. 5. Itching ears, 2 Timothy 4.3. See the place. 6. We must put off our
shoes from off our feet, that is, the dirty and filthy affections of our souls,
Exodus 3.5. 7. We must shake off the sin of Unblelief, being fully persuaded
that it is the Word of Truth. 8. All carelessness and carnal security, and come
with thirsting souls, 1 Pet. 2.2. 9. We must take heed of dissentions, and
diversity of opinions about the Truth, 1 Cor. 11.17, 18. 10. Hardness of heart,
whereby the word is made as a dead letter, effectual only to our condemnation:
This is a fearful sin.


The helps and means to be used before the hearing of the Word: 1. Godly
meditation; seriously to consider as we go, and to meditate whither we are
going. 2. To meditate of the Corruptions we are most addicted to, and of the
Graces we most want. 3. To consider to what end we go to hear to the word of
God. 4. Before we go we must resolve to suffer our selves to be reproved, as
well as instructed. 5. We must use earnest and fervent Prayer, 1. For the
Minister, that God would give him the door of utterance. 2. For our selves,
that God would bless his word unto us. 3. For others, that God would bless his
word unto them also.



Rules of direction to a right disposition, and the several duties required in
the time of hearing: 1. When the Word of God is in delivering, every hearer
must hear with judgment; that is, His own private judgment. The judgment of
the Minister. The judgment of the Holy Ghost.
2. Every hearer must have care that the Word of God be rooted and grounded in
his heart, like good seed in good ground. 3. We must set our selves as in the
sight and presence of God, who sees our very thoughts, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. 4. To
hear with fear and trembling, because it is not the word of any mortal man, but
of the ever-living God. 5. With reverence, not looking so much on the person of
the Minister, as on God speaking in him. 6. With alacrity, cheerfulness and
willingness, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. Mat. 13. 7. With meekness and submission to
whatsoever is delivered, Jam. 1.21. 8. With attention, restraining our hearts
from wandering from the delivered word, Luke 19.48. 9. We must fit and
accommodate our selves to every part of the Sermon, properly applying the same
to our selves. 10. We must hear with faith, believing the word preached to be
the truth of God himself, Heb. 4.2. 11. With constancy, without tediousness,
not thinking the time long.


For the rooting of the word of God in our hearts, there are four things
specially required: 1. A true and right understanding thereof. 2. It must be
mingled with faith, Heb. 4.1. that is, General, to believe it. Special, to
apply it.
3. We must labor to be affected with the word, 2 Chronicles. 34.27. 4. The word of
God must dwell plenteously in us, Col. 3.16.


The means to remove hardheartedness in hearing of the Word: 1. They must labor
to be touched in heart with the sense and feeling of their Spiritual poverty,
and want of Gods favor in the pardon of their sins. 2. To hear the word of God
with an honest heart, joined with a constant purpose of not sinning. 3. To be
as careful to bring good affections as a good understanding.


The frequent and most common impediments that hinder the effectual and saving
hearing of the word: 1. Straying and wandering thoughts, thereby making our
selves but Idolhearers. 2. Undecent and unsavory gestures, as a wandering eye,
gazing and gaping after every occurrent and occasion that offers it self. 3.
Removing of the body, not only shifting and stirring it up and down, but
arising out of our places, and removing to place other, or beckening with our
hands, or nodding with our heads. 4. Unreverent talking and uncivil laughing,
as if the place of Gods public Worship, were a Theater for Sights, or a place
of Mart and Exchange, where every one might single out Companions. 5. A secure
and senseless sleeping, when we have drowsy ears and hearts. 6. A careless
coming, and a shameless departing out of the Church, and a seperating of our
selves from the Congregation, before it be dismissed and dissolved.


The duties required after hearing the word: 1. It must be treasured up in our
hearts, and practiced in our lives, Psalm. 119.11. 2. Serious meditation,
examination and application of what we have heard; we must meditate on the Word
with lifting up of the heart unto God. 3. We must have experience of the Word
of God in our selves, Psalm 34.8. 4. Beside our Self-examination after we have
heard the Word, Psalm. 119.59. we must be obedient unto it, and testify our
obedience, Jam. 1.22. 5. Godly conference touching the particulars of the
Sermon: This confirms the memory, and helps very much to further knowledge and
edification. 6. We must use prayer unto Almighty God, as well private as
public, for a blessing on what we have heard. 7. Above all, we must constantly
endeavor to practice what we have heard, for only they receive the blessing,
Luke 11.28.


The causes of not profiting after hearing the word, are chiefly of these two
sorts: 1. The sins of the hearers, which principally are Hardness of heart.
Worldly cares.
2. Ordinary and usual defects of natural gifts, as want of capacity, memory,
and the like.


They that submit themselves to hear Gods Word, are sundry ways bound to
perform obedience: 1. By the Law of Creation, as they are Gods Creatures. 2. By
the Law of Redemption, as they are Christ's servants, bought by his precious
Blood, ransomed from death to life. 3. In regard of their Adoption, as they
are, or at least hold themselves to be his children in Christ. 4. In regard of
his merciful providence, whereof we have daily experience.


The Word of God heard must be obeyed, for these Reasons: 1. To incline our
hearts to walk in his ways that we have learned, is an infallible sign that we
truly fear God, Genesis 22.13. 2. Obedience is always joined with Recompense, God
rewarding it to the full, who is a most rich Play Master, no man shall serve him
for naught, Psalm. 19.11. 3. If we hearken unto him, he will hearken unto us; if
we be not backward to serve him, he will not be behind hand to serve us, Isa.
58.9. 4. They are to be obeyed that have no absolute Authority, but are
themselves under the Authority of others; much more ought the Lord himself to
be obeyed, who is above all, and all under him. Thus from the less to the
greater did the Centurion reason, Matthew. 8.8, 9. 5. The Rechabites obeyed
Jonadab their father, and received a blessing for their obedience, Jer. 35.8,
13, 14. shall we make less account of God? if we have given reverence to the
fathers of our flesh, shall we not much rather be in subjection to the Father
of Spirits, and live? Heb. 12.9. 6. There is a special relation between God and
his people; the Subject owes obedience to his Prince, the Servant to his
Master, the Child to his Father; God is all in all, he is our King, we his
Subjects; he is our Master, we his Servants; he is our Father, we his Children,
Mal. 1.6.


Reasons to enforce us to be careful how we hear; viz. 1. Because it is the
word of God himself, and not of any mortal man, 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. 2. Because not
one jot or tittle of this word shall go unfulfilled, Mat. 5.18. 3. It becomes
the savor of life unto life, or of death unto deeper condemnation, 2 Cor. 2.16.
4. The word is the ordinary means of our Salvation, which God does use to save
those that be his, Romans 1.16. 5. Because it is four to one whether we hear as
we ought: For 1. Some hear but understand not. 2. Some hear and understand, but
affect it not. 3. Others hear, understand and affect the word, yet practice
not. 4. And of many hearers, but few good, Luke 8. Mat. 13.
6. Because without profitable hearing when we may and ought, we are damned,
Heb. 2.1, 2, 3. and 12.25. 7. Without this we neither love God nor know him;
without both which we cannot be saved, Joh. 14.23. and 1 John 4.6. 8. Because
this word preached, leaves us without excuse at the day of Judgment, Joh.
15.22. 9. If we hear as we ought, God accepts of us, and prefers us above
all other people, Exodus 19.5. 10. Without careful and profitable hearing, we
can never attain to saving Faith, whereby we are saved, Romans 10.


Take heed how you hear, was often in the mouth of our Savior, and must be
always in the ears of such as will hear well: This caution does the wiseman
give, Eccl. 5.1. Take heed unto thy feet when thou entrest into the house of
the Lord, and be readier to hear, then to offer the sacrifice of fools; that we
may therefore come prepared to the hearing of the word, it is necessary that we
be humbled for our sins, that we purge our hearts of sinful affections, pray
for a right disposition, and meditate upon the excellency of the word, and our
own need thereof; for we are naturally blind, the word is a light sent from
Heaven to enlighten us in our darkness; we are assaulted by many potent
enemies, the word is a sword to defend us; we are in poverty and want of
Spiritual Graces, it is a precious treasure to enrich us; if we decay in
holiness, it is food to nourish us; we are become filthy and polluted by reason
of our sins, it is a sweet savor to perfume us, salt to season us: it is the
power of God unto Salvation.

Who scorn this Pearl, so preciously divine,
Have lost the name of Men, Christ calls them Swine. Mat. 7.6.

Some bolt their ears, and will not hear God's Call;
Others will hear, but practice naught at all:
The one incur the guilt of Self-exclusion;
The Other listen to their own Confusion.
Would thou be saved? lost man! Lo here is that Word
That kills or cures, a Balsam or a Sword;
It Is as thou do apply't: Believe, it says,
And live; it is the instrument of Faith.
CHAP. II.
. 1. Sacraments.
SAcraments are sacred Signs and Seals set before our eyes, and ordained of God
for this cause, That he may declare and seal by them the Promise of his Gospel
unto us; which is, That he gives freely Remission of sins and life
everlasting, not only to all in general, but to every one in particular that
believes, for that only Sacrifice of Christ which he accomplished upon the
Cross: I say, They are sacred Signs and Seals object to our eyes, ordained and
instituted of God, that by them he might the more declare and seal the promise
of his Gospel unto us. Now a Sign and a Seal differ one from another, as a
general thing from a thing more special; for every Seal is a Sign, but not
every Sign a Seal: A Seal certifieth and confirms a thing, a Sign only
shows: Sacraments therefore serve in the same stead that Pledges do; for both
they signify that there is something promised unto us, and withal they assure
and confirm the same unto us, in regard whereof it is added that they are
Seals. So the nature of the Sacraments is, That the Signs be understood
corporally, that the things signified must be taken Spiritually, and that the
visible things be not the signified things, but only Signs and Pledges of them.

Believers under the Gospel have only two Sacraments or Signs of the Covenant,
that is, Baptism, succeeding Circumcision, and the Supper of the Lord,
prefigured by the Paschal Lamb; and both these preach Faith, that to our
outward senses, which the Gospel does to our understandings; being Sacramental
Rites ordained of God in the Church, to be adjoined to the Preaching of the
word, that the Promises of God made therein may be confirmed in us more and
more: For Christ committed the Office of administering the Sacraments to them
alone, to whom the Preaching of the word is committed, without the which the
Sacraments ought not to be administered, for they be Seals of it; and the end
both of the Word and Sacraments is to lead our Faith unto the Sacrifice of
Christ finished on the Cross, as to the only ground of our Salvation, the Holy
Ghost teaching us as much by the one, and assuring us it by the other. For as
by Baptism God does witness that we be received of him into Covenant, through
the communion of Christ and his gifts: So by the Supper he assures us that we
be held and kept in, until we be received into the heavenly life; yet has not
God tied his Grace to the Sacraments, so that the want of Baptism does not
condemn, but the contempt of it. And this Covenant between God and man, is a
mutual Promise and Agreement made by our Mediator, confirmed by solemn Tokens
(which are these Sacraments) whereby God binds himself to remit their sins
unto them that believe, and to give unto them everlasting life, for and by his
Son our Mediator; and men bind themselves to receive this so great a benefit
with true Faith, and to yield true obedience unto God.

The matter signed and signified in both Sacraments is Jesus Christ, the
Covenant of God, and the Righteousness of Faith according to the Promise of the
Gospel; the Signs being, as was said, appointed of God to be as his Seals to
confirm and assure us, That he will give us according to his Promise, the
things which are signified and assured unto us by them: The Rites and
Ceremonies which are not commanded, or are not instituted to this end, as to be
Signs and Tokens of the Promise of Grace, are not Signs and Tokens of the
Church; for a Sign can confirm nothing, but by his Consent and Promise from
whom the thing promised and signified is expected and looked for; no Creature
therefore can institute any Signs or Pledges of Gods will: And if in a
Sacrament any other then the right outward Sign be used, or though the right
outward Sign be used, yet if it be changed into the inward grace, it cease to
be a Sacrament: The right use therefore of the Sacraments, is then when as the
faithful keep those Rites which God has commanded, to those ends for which the
Sacraments were instituted by God; The institution consists in the Rites,
Persons and Ends, the violating whereof breeds an abuse.

Sacraments are as it were visible words; in the institution whereof, three
things are to be observed: 1. The Signs and Sacramental Rites. 2. The Spiritual
and invisible things signified by the Signs. 3. The Analogy or Agreement of the
Signs with the thing signified.


Three conditions required in true Sacraments: 1. That they be ordained of God.
2. That there be a Commandment of God for us to use them. 3. That there be also
a Promise, by the which it is assured that we shall be partakers of the things
that are represented by them.


Or thus; God alone has Authority to institute and ordain a Sacrament: which
institution contains two things 1. The appointing and commanding of the Rites
and Ceremonies. 2. The Promise of Grace annexed to this Rite, whereby God
promises that he will give the thing signified unto such as lawfully and
rightly use the Sign, that is, with Faith and Repentance.


Again, the conditions required in a Sacrament of the New Testament properly so
called, are these: 1. It must have for the original cause, Christ instituting.
2. For the matter and form, a visible Sign or Element, and an audible form of
words. 3. For the end and benefit of it, it is a Seal of saving Graces. 4. For
the extent of it, it must be common and necessary to all Christians, of what
degree soever, at one time or another.


In Sacraments the Signs differ from the things signified: 1. In substance; for
the Signs are Corporeal, Visible, Earthly; the things signified, are Heavenly,
Invisible, Spiritual. 2. In the manner of receiving; the Signs are received by
parts of the Body, and therefore also of unbelievers; the things signified are
received by Faith only and the Spirit, and therefore of the faithful only. 3.
In the end or use; the things signified are given for the possessing of life
eternal, they are indeed some part of the beginning thereof: The Signs are
received for the Sealing and Confirming of our faith concerning the things
themselves. 4. The things signified are necessary, and necessarily received of
all the Members of the true Church: The Signs are received only of them who
are able to receive them.


To the difference of Sacraments from other sacred things, appertain these two
properties: 1. That they are ordained and instituted of God. 2. That they are
instituted to this end, that God may by them seal and assure unto us his
Promise.


The Sacraments do differ from the Word, in these particulars; viz. 1. In
substance and nature; as thus: 1. Words signify according to the appointment
of men, whom it pleased that things should be so expressed and signified: Signs
signify according to a similitude which they have with the things signified.
2. Words we hear and read; Signs we perceive by feeling, seeing and tasting.
3. Words signify only; Symboles and Signs confirm also.
2. In the Persons; for the word of the Promise and Commandment is proposed,
without any difference, to all; To the unregenerate, that they may either begin
to believe and be regenerate, or may be left without excuse; to the regenerate,
that they may the more believe and be confirmed: The Sacraments are given only
to the members of the Church. The Word is preached to all at once; the
Sacraments are given to every member severally. 3. In their Use; for the word
is the instrument of the Holy Ghost, whereby he begins and confirms our
Faith: therefore the Sacraments must follow the word: The Sacraments are the
instruments of the Holy Ghost, whereby he begins not, but only confirms
our Faith, and therefore the word is to go before them. 4. In their Necessity;
the word is necessary and sufficient unto Salvation in them who are of an
understanding age, for Faith comes by hearing: but the Sacraments are not
precisely and absolutely necessary unto all, for not the want, but the contempt
of them condemns. 5. In the Manner of working; the Sacraments by gesture, the
Word by speech declares unto us the will of God. 6. The Word may be without
the Sacraments, as both in private and public expounding of the Scripture, and
that effectually also, as was apparent in Cornelius, Acts 10. but the
Sacraments cannot be so without the Word. 7. The Word is that which is
confirmed by Signs annexed unto it; the Sacraments are those Signs whereby it
is confirmed. 8. The Word is to be preached unto those only who are of
understanding, but the Sacrament of Baptism may be given unto Infants; so was
the Sacrament of Circumcision, in whose room Baptism succeeded: but the
uncharitable Anabaptist will not strike sail to this Truth.


The Sacraments and the Word agree in these particulars; viz. 1. Both exhibit
the same things unto us, the same benefits, the same grace, the same Christ. 2.
Both are from the Holy Ghost, and so both also confirm and establish Faith. 3.
God instituteth both, God offers both. 4. God accomplisheth both by the
Ministers of his Church; by whom he speaks with us in his word, and gives
those Signs in his Sacraments.


The Sacraments of the old and new Testament differ thus: 1. In Rites, whereof
change and alteration was made at Christ's coming, that thereby might be
signified the ceasing of the Ceremonies of the Law, and the beginning or
succeeding of the Gospel. 2. In multitude and number; under the Law were more
in number, and more laborious; now are fewer, and more easy Rites. 3. In
signification; those signified Christ to come, these Christ that was come. 4.
In binding and obliging men; the Old bound only Abraham's posterity, ours bind
the whole Church of all Nations and Countries. 5. In continuance; the Old were
to continue but until the coming of the Messiah, the New to the end of the
world. 6. In clearness; they were more obscure and dark, because they signified
things to be manifested; but these more clear and plain, because they signify
things already manifested.


How the Sacracraments of the old and new Testament agree: 1. In the Author,
God alone can ordain Sacraments. 2. In the things signified, or in substance;
for by the Sacraments of both Testaments the same things are offered, signified
and promised unto us, even Remission of sins, the gift of the Holy Ghost, and
that by Christ alone, who is yesterday, to day, and the same for ever.


The Sacraments work and confirm faith in us, but not without us, as the Holy
Ghost does: For 1. The Holy Ghost works and confirms faith in us as the
efficient cause thereof, the Word and Sacraments as instrumental causes. 2. The
Holy Ghost wheresoever he dwells is effectual in working, the Sacraments are
not so.


The ends of the Sacraments are 1. To be Signs and Seals of the Covenant. 2.
The distinguishing of the true Church from all Sects whatsoever. 3. The
profession and testification of our thankfulness and duty toward God. 4. The
propagation and maintenance of the Doctrine, for they may not be without the
use of the Word, and explication thereof. 5. An occasion thereby given to the
younger sort, to enquire what these things mean, and so an occasion also of
explicating and preaching the benefits of Christ unto them, Exodus 13.14. 6.
That they may be the bonds of mutual dilection and love, 1 Cor. 12.13.


The right use of the Sacraments, 1. When the Rites ordained of God are rightly
and truly observed, and not corrupted. 2. When those persons use those Rites
for whom God ordained them, that is, the household of Christ only, such
Christians who by profession of faith and true repentance are the citizens of
the Church, Mat. 3.6. 3. When the Rites and Sacraments are used to that end for
which they were instituted.


Sacramental union consists in two things: 1. In a similitude and proportion
of the Signs with the thing signified. 2. In the joynt-exhibiting or receiving
of the thing, and in the lawful and right use.


The Sacramental union consists not in a presence of the Sign and the thing
signified in one and the same place, much less in any transmutation or
transubstantiation; but it is when the faithful, and they only, do in the
lawful and right use receive the Signs of the Ministers, and the things
signified of Christ; and when we so receive both, that is, the Sign and the
thing signified, the same is called Sacramental union; whereby appears, that
this conjunction of things with their Signs or Sacramental union, is not
corporal or local.

Here Actions speak, and representing Signs
Language the Contents of the upper lines;
Words visible: The One inducts us into Grace,
The Other does establish; both run one race
To man*s Salvation; both proclaim the Power
And Goodness of our blessed Savior,
That he which measures Heaven with a span,
Should yet descend to Covenant with Man;
And be so far beyond expression good,
As both to cleanse and feed us with his Blood.
. 2. Baptism.
BAptism is a Sacrament instituted by Christ in the New Testament, whereby we
are washed with water In the Name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, to signify that we are received into favor for the Blood of Christ shed
for us; and also to bind us, that hereafter we endeavor in our actions and
deeds truly to testify newness of life. Baptism is necessary in part and
respectively, so as it is a mark of the true Church, as it is a Seal of the
Covenant, and as it serves to enter and admit Infants into the visible Church;
but it is not absolutely or simply necessary, so as the party that dies without
it, remains in the state of damnation, and cannot be saved: for the Seal of the
Covenant differs from the Covenant it self, to which this Seal is but annexed
and depending upon. Indeed the Covenant of Grace, and our being in Christ, is
absolutely necessary; but the bare want of Baptism (when it cannot be had) or
privation of it in this case is pardonable, and does not condemn the party
unbaptized: The thief upon the Cross was saved, though he were never Baptized,
Luke 23.

Infants born of believing Parents, are holy before Baptism, and Baptism is a
Seal of that holiness, 1 Cor. 7.14. The children of believing Parents are holy,
Romans 11.16. therefore the children of the faithful are not to be denied this
Baptism, because God has promised in the person of Abraham, that he will be
the God of the faithful, and of their seed; as also for other reasons set down
in the Scripture: For seeing Infants belong as well unto the Covenant and
Church of God, Genesis 17.7. as they who are of full age; and seeing also unto
them is promised Remission of sins by the blood of Christ, Mat. 19.14. and the
Holy Ghost the worker of Faith, Luke 1.14, 15. as well as unto those of full
growth, they are by Baptism to be ingrafted into the Church of God, and to be
discerned from the children of Infidels, Acts 10.47. as in the Old Testament
was done by Circumcision, in whose place Baptism succeeded in the New, Col.
2.11, 12, 13. And though Infants have not indeed an actual faith, yet they have
an inclination to believe, which the Holy Ghost, as is fittest for their
capacity and condition, works in them: So that we must judge of the Infants
of the faithful according to charity, who have interest in the outward
Covenant, until by infidelity when they come to years of discretion, they shall
cut off themselves; grounding our selves upon the Promise of God made to
Abraham, Genesis 17.7. yea, the resolution of Beza in his Tenth Epistle is, That
the children of Excommunicated persons may be Baptized: And though (to be
Baptized) actual faith be required in those of understanding, yet in Infants
born in the Church, is required an inclination only to this actual faith,
which they have after their manner potentially, though not actually; and to be
born in the Church of believing Parents, is unto Infants in stead of profession
of Faith and Repentance.

Hence may it appear how far from this Sacrament of Baptism the Anabaptists
derogate, by making it but an idle Ceremony; acknowledging indeed some of the
ends and uses thereof, but restraining the efficacy thereof, and so take away
the chiefest comfort and truest benefit the Church reaps thereby. Many indeed
are Baptized, which receive not the Graces propounded and offered therein, but
the fault is not in that no Grace accompanies that Sacrament, but in that they
receive it not, but afterward when they come to years of discretion, they
reject the Grace which appertains thereto: What if some believe not, shall
their unbelief make the faith of God without effect? God forbid, Romans 3.3. and
Baptism is no natural means of working Grace, as if the Grace which is sealed
up thereby, were inherent in the water, or in the Ministers act of sprinkling
it, but it is only a voluntary instrument which Christ uses, as it pleases
him, to work what Grace or measure of Grace seems best to him; so as Grace is
only assistant to it, not included in it: yet in the right use thereof Christ
by his Spirit works that Grace which is received by it, in respect whereof
the Minister is said to Baptize with water, but Christ with the Holy Ghost,
Mat. 3.11. So that unto true Baptism must concur a death unto sin in him that
is Baptized, and a new birth unto righteousness, otherwise his Baptism is vain;
for it is not the washing away of the filth of the flesh, but the stipulation
of a good Conscience, 1 Pet. 3.21. The use of this Sacrament without faith does
not save, therefore with faith it does save; the want of this Sacrament does
not condemn, yet so as that want be without contempt; so some may be saved
which are not Baptized, but none can be saved which do not believe: For the
bare water in Baptism is not sufficient unto Salvation, neither is it changed
into the very Blood of Christ, neither is the Blood of Christ present in the
water, or in the same place with the water, neither are their bodies who are
Baptized, washed therewith visibly; neither is the Holy Ghost by his virtue
more in this water then elsewhere, but in the right use of Baptism he works in
the hearts of them who are Baptized and Spiritually sprinkled, and washes them
with the Blood of Christ, and uses this external Symbol or Sign as an
instrument, and as a visible word or promise to stay and stir up the faith of
them who are Baptized.

Now all they, and they alone receive Baptism to the right use, who are
renewed, or renewing and are Baptized to those ends whereto Baptism was by
Christ instituted. And as the Covenant once made with God, is also afterward,
after sins committed, perpetually firm and of force to the Repentant: So also
Baptism being once received, confirms and assures the Repentant all their
life time of remission of sins, and therefore it ought not to be reiterated nor
deferred; neither yet are all those who are Baptized with water, whether they
be of understanding or Infants, partakers of the Grace of Christ, for the
everlasting Election of God, and his Calling into the Kingdom of Christ, is
free. And as for the wickedness of the Minister Baptizing, it makes not the
Baptism void, or of no effect and force unto them so Baptized, so that it be
administered into the Promise and Faith of Christ; and therefore also the true
Church does not Baptize them who have been Baptized of Heretics, but only
must inform and instruct them with true Doctrine concerning Christ and Baptism.

Lastly, touching the use of Godfathers and Godmothers, it is not at all
necessary, nor by God required to the Sacrament of Baptism; for Christ has not
in any of his Institutions so much as intimated the use of such Sureties; and
the whole Congregation are witnesses of the childs admission into the Church,
the Parents being bound to perform what is required for the childs education.

The words used in Baptism signify, 1. That Baptism was instituted by the
Commandment and Authority of the three Persons in the Godhead. 2. That these
three Persons confirm unto us by their own testification, that they receive us
into favor, and perform that unto us which is signified by Baptism, which is,
Salvation, if we believe and be Baptized. 3. That he which is Baptized is bound
to the knowledge, faith, worship, trust, honor and invocation of this true God,
who is the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.


Baptism comprehends 1. The Sign, which is water. 2. The Ceremony, as the
sprinkling of water. 3. The things themselves, which are 1. The sprinkling of
the Blood of Christ, and the imputation of his Righteousness. 2. The
mortification of the old man, and putting on of the new. 3. The quickening of
the new man into a certain hope of the Resurrection to come by Christ. 4. The
Sign, which not only signifies, but also confirms. 5. The Sign, which has
that authority and power of confirming from the Commandment of God.



That Baptism testifies and confirms the will of God touching his bestowing
Salvation on us, may appear thus: 1. Because we are Baptized in the Name of the
Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; that is, we are assigned, deputed
and claimed to be his own. 2. Because God has promised Salvation to him who
shall believe and shall be Baptized. 3. By several Testimonies of Scripture, as
Acts 22.16. Mark 16.16. Romans 6.3. Tit. 3.5. 1 Pet. 3.21.


The use of Baptism is twofold: 1. It serves to be a Pledge or Token of Gods
favor toward us. 2. It serves to be a notable means of our death unto sin.


Baptism is a Pledge of Gods favor to us principally three ways: 1. It seals
to us the free pardon and forgiveness of our sins, Acts 2.38. 2. It is a Pledge
of the virtue of Christ's death, Romans 6.3, 4. 3. It is a Pledge unto us of the
life of Christ, and of our fellowship with him.


Baptism is also a means of our death unto sin three ways: 1. By putting us in
mind of mortifying the flesh, and crucifying our own corruptions. 2. It
causes us to dedicate our selves wholly unto God in Christ. 3. It causes us
to labor to keep and maintain peace and unity with all men, but especially with
Gods people.


To be Baptized into the death of Christ, is 1. To be partakers of Christ's
death, no otherwise then if our selves were dead. 2. To dye also our selves,
which is to mortify the lusts of our flesh: This mortification God promises
us in Baptism, and binds us unto it.


Baptism is a means of our sanctifying and cleansing, in these respects; viz.
1. In that it does most lively represent and set forth even to the outward
senses the inward cleansing of our soul by the Blood of Christ, and sanctifying
us by the Spirit of Christ. 2. In that it does truly propound or offer the
Grace of Justification and Sanctification to the party Baptized; whence it is
described to be the Baptism of Repentance for remission of sins, Luke 3.3. 3.
In that it does really exhibit and seal up to the Conscience of him that is
Baptized, the said Graces, whereby he is assured that he is made partaker
thereof: Thus was Circumcision to Abraham, Romans 4.11. 4. In that it is a
particular and peculiar Pledge to the party Baptized, that even he himself is
made partaker of the said Graces, therefore every one in particular is Baptized
for himself.


By the Sacramental Rite of sprinkling in Baptism, are signified two things: 1.
That our souls are sprinkled with the blood of Christ, that is, be indeed
partakers of the Merit of his death, by the which we obtain full forgiveness of
sin. 2. That we are regenerated into a new life; therefore is Baptism called by
Paul, the laver of regeneration.


The washing in Baptism is of two sorts, Mark 1.4. 1. The washing of blood,
when we are washed by the blood of Christ, which is the Remission of sins for
the bloodshed of Christ. 2. The washing of the Spirit, when we are washed by
Christ's Spirit, which is our renewing by the Holy Ghost; that is, The changing
of evil inclinations into good, and also to have in our will a heart, a desire
and endeavor to obey God; which although not perfect in this life, yet the
beginning thereof is here in all the godly.


Observe principally, and that always, these two things in Baptism; viz. 1.
That it be rightly done, wherein are required Some things as necessary. Some
things only as expedient
2. That it be seasonably done, not carelessly posted over, nor unnecessarily
deferred.


The things necessary in the right performance of Baptism are these especially:
1. That the child be baptized by a Minister of the Word, Matthew. 28.19. 2. That
it be baptized with the Element of water, the only Element sanctified to this
purpose, John 3.5. 3. That the form prescribed by Christ, Matthew. 28.19. be
exactly used; whereby the unity of the Godhead and Trinity of Persons is
plainly set forth. 4. That the proper Rite be used of applying the water to the
body of the child, so as at least the face of the child be sprinkled
therewith.


The things expedient in the right performance of Baptism: 1. That the child
be Baptized in a public place, where Gods people ordinarily meet together,
being set apart for the worship and service of God. 2. That such a time be
chosen out, as an Assembly of Saints may be there present, because Baptism is
one of the solemn parts of Gods public worship, a pledge of our incorporation
into the body of Christ, and communion of his Saints.


Parents ought to make choice of their childrens Names, Genesis 17.19. Mat. 1.21.
Luke 1.21. which are to be given them at their Baptism, for these Reasons: 1.
That their Names may be a Testimony of their Baptism. 2. That so often as they
hear their Names, they may be put in mind of their Baptism. 3. That they may
know how by Name they are given to Christ to be his Soldiers, and therefore
there must be no starting from him. 4. That they may be assured, that being
Baptized with water and the Spirit, by Name they are Registered in Heaven.


Directions for choice of Names in Baptism fit and beseeming Christians: 1.
Such as have some good signification, and warranted by the Scripture; as John,
The grace of God; Jonathan, The gift of God; Andrew, Manly; Simeon, Obedient;
Hannah, Gracious, etc. 2. Such as have in times before mentioned in Scripture,
been given to persons of good note, whose life is worthy our imitation. 3.
Names of our own Ancestors and Predecessors, to preserve a memory of the
family, Luke 1.59, etc. 4. Usual Names of the Country, which custom has made
familiar, so as they give not offense through any unfit signification thereof.


The right and lawful use of Baptism, is 1. When the Ceremonies or Rites
instituted by Christ in Baptism are not changed. Away then with Popish Oil,
Spittle, Cross, Exorcism, or Conjuration. 2. When Baptism is given to them, and
them only, for whom it was instituted, which are all the converted, or members
of the Church. 3. When Baptism is used to that end for which it was instituted;
not for the healing of Cattle, Christning of Bells, Ships, or the like.


It is necessary that the Word be always joined with this Sacrament of Baptism,
for these Reasons: 1. A Sacrament without the Word is but an idle Ceremony, no
more then a Seal without the Covenant, for it is the Word that makes known the
Covenant of God. 2. It is the Word which makes the greatest difference betwixt
the Sacramental washing, and ordinary common washing. 3. By the Word the
ordinary creatures which we use are sanctified, 1 Timothy 4.5. much more the holy
Ordinances of God, whereof Baptism is one of the principal; besides, the Word
opens the nature, efficacy, end and use thereof, plainly declaring the
Covenant of God sealed up thereby.


The common errors and corrupt practice of men touching Baptism: 1. The corrupt
opinion of Anabaptists, who deny the lawfulness of Baptizing Infants. 2. When
Parents regard not by whom their children are Baptized, whether Heretics,
Idolaters, Laics or Women. 3. When children are unhappily CROSSED in Baptism,
by missing of Christ's institution. 4. When upon niceness or state the Parents
private house must be preferred before the place of Gods public worship, and
the child must be Baptized at home, rather then in the Congregation. 5. When
the child is brought to be Baptized, accompanied only with the Midwife and
three Witnesses, as if the walls of the Church added to the honor of the
Sacrament. 6. When upon state or any by-respects, this Sacrament is deferred
longer then is meet. 7. When Heathenish, Idolatrous or ridiculous names are
given to children.


The Anabaptists wrongfully deny Baptism to Infants born in the Church, for
these Reasons: 1. The Grace of God is universal to all the faithful, and
therefore the Sign or Seal of Grace is universal, and belongs unto all, as
well young as old. 2. Baptism is unto us as Circumcision was unto the Jews; but
the Infants were Circumcised, therefore the children of Christians are to be
Baptized. 3. Children belong unto the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 19.14. and are in
the Covenant; therefore the Sign of the Covenant is not to be denied them. 4.
Christ gave in commandment that all should be Baptized, Mat. 28.10. Therefore,
etc. 5. Christ has shed his blood as well for the washing away the sins of
children as of the elder sort; therefore it is very necessary that they should
be partakers of the Sacrament thereof.


Again, children may and ought to be baptized in their infancy, for these
Reasons; some whereof are the same, others border on the former; viz. 1. Gods
Commandment concerning circumcising children, in room whereof Baptism succeeds,
Col. 2.11, 12. 2. The Jews practice in a faithful observance of this Ordinance,
as of Abraham, Zachary, Elizabeth, Joseph and Mary. 3. The practice of the
Christians, who believing were themselves and their whole household Baptized,
Acts 16.15, 33. under which whole household children might probably be
comprised. 4. Christ embracing and blessing such children as were brought to
him, and rebuking those that would have kept them from him, Mat. 19.13. 5. Gods
promise made to them, Genesis 17.7. Acts 2.39. as the seal for confirmation
whereof God offers Baptism. 6. The right they have to Gods Kingdom, Mat.
19.14. Baptism is an evidence of that their right. 7. The constant continued
custom of the true Catholic Church, which ever since the Apostles time has
afforded the Sacrament of Baptism to children.


Touching the necessity of Baptisms we must know that things are said to be
necessary two ways; 1. Absolutely, so as the thing cannot possibly be without
it; thus Baptism is not absolutely necessary as a cause; for then should it be
equal to Gods Covenant, Christ's Blood, and the work of the Spirit. 2. By
consequence, so as according to that course and order which God has set down,
things may not well be without them: Thus Baptism is by consequence, and that
in a double respect: 1. In regard of Gods Ordinance. 2. In regard of our need
thereof, by reason of our dullness in conceiving things Spiritual, and of our
weakness in believing things invisible.



To this Sacrament of Baptism the Papists attribute too much, making it a plain
Idol by their opinion, 1. Of the necessity thereof, in such degree as that they
hold if any dye unbaptized he cannot be saved. 2. Of the efficacy thereof, in
such degree as they hold it gives grace by the work it self; thereby equalling
it to the very blood of Christ, taking away the peculiar work of the Spirit,
and the use of the grace thereby.


The differences of Circumcision and Baptism; viz. 1. In Rites; for the same
are not the Rites of Circumcision and Baptism. 2. Circumcision promised grace
for the Messiah to come, Baptism for the Messiah exhibited. 3. Circumcision had
a promise of a corporal benefit, a testimony that God would give a certain
place for the Church in the Land of Canaan, until the coming of the Messiah;
Baptism has no promise in particular of any temporal benefit, other then what
flows from the influence of a a general promise made to godliness, 1 Timothy 4.8.
4. Circumcision did bind to the observing of the whole Law, Ceremonial,
Judicial and Moral; Baptism binds us only to faith and amendment of life,
that is, to observe only the Moral Law. 5. Circumcision was instituted for the
Israelites; Baptism was instituted for all Nations that are desirous and
willing to come unto the society of the Church. 6. Circumcision was to continue
until the coming of the Messiah; Baptism shall continue until the end of the
world.


Baptism and Circumcision agree thus: 1. In the chief and principal end,
whereas in both is sealed the Promise of Grace by Christ, which is always one
and the same. 2. By both of them is wrought our receiving into the Church. 3.
By both is signified Regeneration; ye are circumcised in Christ with
Circumcision made without hands: For as Circumcision in the old Law was a token
how the corrupt and carnal affections of the mind should be subdued, and that
the Lord required not so much an outward of the body, as an inward circumcision
of the heart, Deuteronomy. 18.16, 30. Acts 7.51. So Baptism tells us, that being
once dead unto sin, we are to live unto righteousness, that all we that have
been Baptized unto Jesus Christ, have been Baptized unto his death, etc. and
must walk in newness of life, etc. Romans 6.3. For we have put on Christ by
Baptism, Gal. 3.26.


The Reasons why Christ was circumcised, 1. That he might signify that he was
also a member of that circumcised people. 2. That he might show that he
received and took our sins on himself, that he might satisfy for them. 3. That
he might testify that he did entirely and fully fulfill the Law on our behalf.
4. The circumcision of Christ was a part also of his humiliation and suffering.


Reasons why circumcision is abolished; viz. 1. Because the thing signified,
which was the Messiah, is exhibited. 2. Because circumcision was instituted for
the severing of the Jews from all other Nations; but now the Church, that
difference being abolished, is collected and gathered out of all Nations.


The chief and proper ends of the institution of Baptism; viz. 1. That it
should be a mark whereby the Church may be discerned from all other Nations and
Sects, which is as it were gathered by the Word and Baptism. 2. To be a
confirmation of our faith, that is, a testification that Christ washes us with
his blood, that he bestows on us Remission of sins, Justification and
Regeneration; or, To be the sealing of God, and also the sealing or obsignation
of the Promise of Grace, and a testimony of Gods will, that he gives us these
gifts at this present, and will give them ever henceforward. 3. To be a
testification of our duty toward God, and a binding of us and the Church to
the knowledge and worship of God, into whose Name we are Baptized, we bind our
selves in Baptism to thankfulness; namely, to Faith, that is, to receive the
promised benefits with faith, and then withal unto repentance and amendment of
life. 4. To be a signification or an advertisement unto us of the Cross, and of
the preservation of the Church therein, and deliverance thereof from it, Mat.
20.22. In regard whereof Baptism is compared unto the flood; for as in that
general Deluge some were shut into the Ark, the rest of mankind perishing; so
in the Church, they who cleave unto Christ, although they be pressed with
calamities, yet at length in their appointed time they are delivered. 5. To
signify the unity of the Church; for Baptism is a binding of the members of
the Church among themselves to mutual love, because when it severeth and
distinguishes the members of the Church from others, it does also join and
unite them among themselves. 6. To be a Token and Symbol of our receiving and
entrance into the Church: Hither appertain all those places in Scripture, in
which those who were become Christians, are said to have been presently
Baptized. 7. To be a means of preserving and propagating the Doctrine of the
free Promise through the death of Christ; that the Baptized may have occasion
to teach and learn who is the Author, and what is the meaning or signification
of Baptism.


The Type of Baptism was Noah's Ark born up by the waters, wherein the Church
which then was in Noah's family, was saved, 1 Pet. 3.21. And though Baptism be a
mark of the true Church, yet may not the Papists thereby challenge theirs to be
the true Church; for Baptism severed from the true preaching of the Word, is no
sufficient note of a true Church: for the Israelites had circumcision, and yet
the Lord says, they were not his people, Hos. 1.9. Again, they overturn the
inward power of Baptism, by denying Justification by Faith alone in Jesus
Christ. And as for the bastard-Rites and Ceremonies invented and patched by men
to Baptism, as hallowing of the Water, Tapers, Exorcisms, Chrism, Salt,
Crosses, Spittle, and such like, they are not of the true Church, but a
corruption of the Sacrament: And as these men attribute too much to this
Sacrament, holding that it gives Grace ex opere operato; so on the other side,
there are other giddy heads, who number Baptism among things indifferent, and
so to be used or refused at our discretion. Lastly, seeing the administration
of the Sacraments is a part of Ecclesiastical Discipline, or rather Doctrine
indeed, they that are not called thereto, and especially women, may not in any
case usurp the power and authority to Baptize.

Christ's Herald sent by Proclamation
To enter our Initiation,
Sprinkled the Water, and the sacred Blood,
Made the faithful, though sinful, appear good.
This is Bethesda 's Pool, or Siloam's stream,
Whereof the frothy Anabaptists dream
The right use to Infants daign'd may not be,
Though some of Abraham's Posserity.
Thus Christ himself they proudly Countermand,
Whose word, when all the world's dissolved, shall stand.
. 3. The Lords Supper.
THe Lords Supper is a Sacrament instituted and appointed of Christ unto the
faithful for a memorial of him, whereby Christ does certainly promise and seal
unto the faithful, That his Body was offered and broken on the Cross, and his
Blood shed for them, as truly as they see his Bread broken, and Cup distributed
to them; and that he does as certainly with his Body crucified and his Blood
shed, feed and nourish the Souls of the faithful unto everlasting life, as
certainly as their bodies are fed with the bread, and the cup of the Lord is
received from the hand of the Minister, which are offered to them as certain
Seals of the body and blood of Christ, and bind them to mutual dilection and
love. The Evangelists show it was instituted of Christ the same night he was
betrayed, after that he had supped, and had eaten the Easter-Lamb according to
the Law; yet is it so called, not so much because it was the night wherein
Christ was betrayed, as to show that it is indeed a Spiritual Supper given of
God unto the faithful: It is indeed the Sacrament of our Redemption by Christ's
death; insomuch as to such as worthily and with faith receive the same, the
bread which is broken, is a partaking of the body of Christ, and likewise the
cup of blessing, is a partaking of his blood: Such therefore as declare
themselves in confession and life to be Infidels and ungodly, are not to be
admitted to this Supper, lest thereby the Covenant of God be profaned, and the
wrath of God stirred up against the whole Assembly, 1 Cor. 11.20. Wherefore the
Church by the commandment of Christ and his Apostles, using the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven, ought to drive them from this Supper, till they shall
repent, and change their life and conversation.

The Signs of the Lords Supper are twofold: 1. Representing Signs; as, Bread,
Wine; the breaking and pouring out. 2. Applying Signs, which do appropriate the
same; as the giving and receiving of bread and wine; the first serves to renew
our knowledge, the other to confirm it.


As the Signs in the Lords Supper are 1. Bread broken and eaten. 2. Wine
distributed and taken.


So the things signified are 1. Christ's body broken, and blood shed. 2. Our
Union with Christ by faith.


The breaking and communicating of Christ's body, is signed by the breaking and
receiving of the bread, for two causes: 1. Because Christ commands those
Rites, unto which we ought to give no less credit then if Christ himself did
speak unto us. 2. Because he annexeth a Promise, That they who observe those
Rites with a true faith, must be assured and certain that they have communion
with Christ.


The similitude or proportion of the Signs with the thing signified; viz. 1. As
the bread and wine nourish our body to temporal life; so the body and blood of
Christ nourish our souls unto life Spiritual and Eternal. 2. As the bread and
wine are received by the mouth, so the body and blood are received by faith. 3.
As the wine is severed from the bread to signify the violence of Christ's
death; so his blood was sundred from his body, signified also by the breaking
of the bread; and as the bread is eaten being broken, so the body of Christ is
received being sacrificed. 4. As in corporal food is required an appetite unto
it; so in this Spiritual food is required faith. 5. As of many corns is made
one loaf; so are we being many made one body.


The manner whereby Christ's body and blood does nourish us, is 1. The respect of
his merit; for us Christ's body is given, and his blood shed for us, and for the
body and blood of Christ we have eternal life given unto us. 2. When we receive
that merit; that is, when we believe with a true faith, that for it we shall
have eternal life. 3. When the same Spirit uniteth us by faith unto Christ, and
works the like in us which is in Christ, for except we be grafted into Christ
we do not please God.


The remembrance we are to have of Christ in receiving the Lords Supper,
consists 1. In the memory of Christ's benefits. 2. In faith, whereby we apply
Christ and his merit to our selves. 3. In thankfulness or public confession of
his benefits.


The Sacramental Rites of the Lords Supper are twofold: 1. Respecting the
Minister, which are twofold: 1. To take the bread and wine, to break the one,
and to pour out the other; that is, that Christ suffered for our Redemption. 2.
To give the bread broken, and to deliver the wine poured out; that is, that God
does offer and give Christ unto us, together with all his benefits.
2. Respecting him that comes to the Lords Table; it is required that he
receive, eat and drink the bread and wine given unto him; that is, that in the
Supper we do truly receive Christ, eat his body and drink his blood, by the
which we are nourished into the hope of eternal life, if we do not cast him
from us through unbelief.


The properties belonging to a fit guest at the Lords Table: 1. He must be
bidden, Luke 14.8. 2. He must be humble, Luke 14.9. 3. He must have knowledge
of the person to whose Table he comes. 4. He must bring a Spiritual appetite to
eat. 5. He must put on Christ, his wedding garment, Romans 13.14. 6. He must be
ravished within himself, concerning the use of these mysteries. 7. He must be
sober in using them. 8. Cheerful in receiving them. 9. Loving to his
fellow-guests. 10. Thankful to the Master of the feast.


To the right use of the Lords supper, three things are required: 1. A right
preparation, which chiefly consists in knowledge, prayer, self-examination,
contrition and repentance, faith, a resolution against sin for the future, and
charity; for this Sacrament is a Communion whereby all the receivers jointly
united by love, do participate of one and the same Christ. 2. A right
receiving; wherein is specially required the renewing of our knowledge or
general faith, which is renewed principally by meditation in the use of the
Supper, and the renewing of our special faith in Christ. 3. A right use of it
afterward, when we must give God thanks for so great a benefit, 1 Cor. 11.26.
and look to receive by it increase of faith and repentance, to rise from sin,
and to receive power against the Devil.


The Rule of examination must be the Law of God, and the thing chiefly to be
examined is sin, 1. In thought, and therein these especially: Idle thoughts.
Lascivious thoughts. Treacherous politic thoughts. Blasphemous thoughts.
2. In word, and therein such as these: Idle words, Angry and rash words.
Filthy and immodest words. False and untrue words. Cursing and imprecating
words. Charming and Necromantick words. Words immediately agains: God, as
Oaths and Blasphemies.
3. In deed: Some whereof are of Commission. Others of Omission.



We must also examine our Graces, and therein 1. What Knowledge we have, Prove.
19.2. Of God. Of our selves. Of the Covenant of Grace. Of the nature and use of
this Sacrament.
2. What Faith we have, Acts 8.37. 3. What Repentance we have, Exodus 12.8. 4.
What Obedience we have, Psalm. 26.6. 5. What Love we bear to our brethren, Mat.
5.23, 24.


The examination of our knowledge, is by inquiring of our hearts whether we
know 1. God; that is, acknowledge him the true God, and him alone. 2. Our
selves; that is, acknowledge our selves to be 1. Sinners, and that both
Originally. Actually.
2. Accursed sinners, deserving the wrath of God. 3. Burdened sinners, weary
and heavy laden, desiring Christ to refresh us.
3. The Passion of Christ, not so much to talk and discourse of it, as to know
and apply the virtue of it.


We may examine our Faith by these marks 1. Whether we can from our hearts
renounce our false supposed goodness, and can wholly rely upon Christ in the
matter of our salvation; for this Nature cannot do. 2. Whether we have peace of
conscience arising from the apprehension of Gods love in Christ, and our
reconciliation with him.


Again, our Faith which is the wedding garment, may be examined by these
particulars; viz. 1. Whether we believe that Jesus Christ is the Messiah and
Savior of the world. 2. That he was crucified, and shed his blood. 3. That the
merit of his Passion is able to save sinners. 4. That this merit is conveyed
unto us in the Sacrament, being rightly administered and duly received.


In the examination of our faith, we must also enquire 1. Whether we have only
a general Faith, an historical temporal Faith, or a legal Faith; none of which
alone does save. 2. Whether we have an Evangelical Faith in the Promises of the
Gospel, approving to our own hearts on true and sound ground that they belong
to us in particular, and so a Justifying Faith; without which we may not dare
approach the Lords Table.


So also we must examine whether we have these five things required in Faith;
viz. 1. A true understanding and knowledge of God and his will in his Word. 2.
A true consent and assent in the heart, that it is Gods word, and all of it
most true. 3. A profession and approbation of it. 4. An application of Christ
upon a sound ground to be thy Savior in particular. 5. A continual declaration
of our faith, by the diligent and constant practice of good works.


Lastly, we must examine whether we are not given too much to presumption or
desperation; either of which are main lets and hindrances unto Faith: Then we
must try our Faith by the marks of it: 1. Toward God, as 1. Peace of
Conscience. 2. Love toward God. 3. Hope of Salvation. 4. Constancy in the
faith and truth of Christ. 5. Boldness to come to God. 6. Confession of his
truth. 7. Obedience to God and his Word.
2. Toward our Brethren; as 1. Mutual concord in Religion. 2. Brotherly love,
that we can forgive, forget, do them any good, and pray for them.
3. Toward our selves; as 1. Patience, rest in God, and joy in afflictions. 2.
A deadly hatred of sin.
4. Against sin, the world and the Devil, conquest and victory.


We may know whether we have Repentance or not, by enquiring of our own hearts
1. Whether we have a godly sorrow for sin, whereby we are displeased with our
selves, because by sin we have displeased God. 2. Whether there be in us a
changing of the mind, and a purpose to forsake sin, and ever after to please
God. 3. Whether we do daily break off our sins, and abstain from inward
practice, keeping under our corruptions and ungodly thoughts. 4. Whether we
mourn for the present corruption of our nature. 5. Whether we have been
grieved, and craved pardon for our late sins, even since we were last partakers
of the Lords Table.


In Repentance we must examine 1. Whether it be from the heart, in truth and
uprightness, or only in hypocrisy. 2. Whether it be from the whole heart, or
whether we use not double-dealing with God. 3. Whether we return from all our
sins, or only from some, living still in our sins. 4. Whether we repent (as we
sin) every day or no; or only for a fit, and return to our sins again. 5.
Whether we behave our selves uprightly both before God and men, publicly and
privately; or whether we do not rather seem better then indeed we are, and so
commit horrible and shameful sins in secret.


Again, in our Repentance we must examine 1. Whether we have acknowledged sin
to be sin, with the circumstances and punishment thereof. 2. Whether we are
truly humbled inwardly and outwardly for them. 3. Whether we have a godly
sorrow for them, which brings forth a circumspect care, a clearing of our
selves, just indignation, filial fear, earnest desire, fervent zeal, and a holy
revenge. 4. Whether we do often call to God for mercy and pardon in Christ's
Name. 5. Whether we have fully purposed and resolved to amend our lives, and
turn unto God with the whole man: And this resolution must be forthwith put in
practice, and continued to our lives end, for otherwise we but mock God, and
deceive our own souls.


The truth of Faith and Repentance may be known by these notes; viz. 1. If our
faith be directed upon the right object, which is Christ alone. 2. If there be
a hungring and thirsting after his body and blood. 3. If we have a constant and
a serious purpose not to sin. 4. If there follow a change in the life. The
companions of Repentance are a broken and a contrite Spirit, a bitter soul, and
oftentimes a weeping eye; but the infallible Rule to examine our Repentance,
and to know whether it be true or false, is by observation of the subsequent
course of our life.


Our Obedience (which is an Evangelical keeping of Gods Commandments) may be
examined by the properties thereof, which are five: 1. It must be free, without
constraint, Psalm. 110.3. 2. Sincere, without hypocrisy, 2 Timothy 1.5. 3.
Universal, not to some, but to all the Commandments, Psalm. 119.6. Jam. 2.10. 4.
Perpetual, till the hour of death, Mat. 24.13. 5. Personal, in regard of our
personal calling, 1 Pet. 5.1.


The Reasons why we must examine our obedience, are especially these: 1.
Disobedience is as the sin of Witchcraft, 1 Samuel 15.23. 2. Obedience is better
then Sacrifice, 1 Samuel 15.22. 3. It is a fruit of Faith, Romans 8.1. 4. By this
examination we shall be moved to repent, Jer. 31.19. 5. Without it we cannot
appear before God, Jer. 7.9.


Our love to our brethren may be examined by these signs: 1. If we be not
overcome with evil, Romans 12.21. 2. If we overcome evil with goodness, Romans
12.21. 3. If we can pray for him, Acts 7.60. 4. If we can yield to him, Genesis
13.19. 5. If we can conceal his infirmities, Prove. 11.12, 13. 6. If we can
converse friendly with him, Genesis 34.4. 7. If we can depart sometime from our
right, Genesis 13.10. 8. If when we may, we avenge not our selves, 2 Samuel 19.23.


The parts of Love required of all such as come to the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper: 1. Gentleness, and not without just cause to be moved to anger. 2.
Patience and long-suffering, when just cause of anger is offered. 3. Goodness,
not admitting envy or the like against any enemy, but loving him, and being
ready to forgive him. 4. Tenderness, and being affected with grief at the sight
of other men's miseries. 5. Freedom from evil thoughts against thy Neighbor,
interpreting all things to the best if it may be. 6. Yielding, rather then
contend, from something of a man's own right, as Abraham did to Lot. 7.
Humbleness of mind, seeking reconciliation when offenses have been. 8. Care to
save a Neighbor from hurt, damage or hindrance in any thing appertaining to
him. 9. Abstinence from private revenge, in speech or in deed, and forgiveness;
whereof are three kinds, 1. Of revenge, when men are content to lay aside all
hatred and requital of evil. 2. Of Penalty, when being wronged they are content
to put the matter up, and not proceed to punishment. 3. Of Judgment, when a
man is willing to esteem and judge things ill done as well done, and an enemy
as a friend: The first of these three is necessary before the receiving of the
Lords Supper.
10. Bountifulness toward the Poor: Our charity may be examined by looking
into our own souls, whether we have unfainedly forgiven all the world, and can
cheerfully, without grudging or worldly applause, receive into our compassion
the distressed: Then ought we to reflect on time past, whether we have taken
all advantages to exercise our charity.


Consider further about true examination, these four things; viz. 1. Who must
examine; viz. All, every man that can. 2. What must be examined; viz. our
selves, and therein Our sins, all, every one of them. Our graces, What we have
attained to. How we have increased them.

3. The manner how we must examine our selves; viz. by the golden Rule of Gods
word. 4. The time when we must examine our selves, and that is fourfold; viz.
1. Every night and morning, Psalm. 4. 2. In time of Gods Judgments. 3. Upon our
deathbeds. 4. Before the Sacrament.



There are three sorts of examiners; viz. 1. Some who examine themselves by
themselves, following their own reason, ways and humors, who an hour or a day
before the Sacrament, or in the very time of receiving, think of their sins. 2.
Some examine themselves by others, and if they find themselves better then
any, think themselves best of all, at least good enough; these perish by their
own conceit. 3. Others who impartially examine themselves by the Rule of Gods
Word, and only these indeed are the true examiners.


Reasons to enforce examination before we receive the Lords Supper: 1. Without
this examination we can never repent and so be saved, Rev. 2.5. 2. Otherwise we
eat and drink unworthily, and are guilty of the body and blood of Christ, 1
Cor. 11.27, 28. 3. Without it we eat and drink our own damnation, being not
rightly prepared. 4. Because otherwise we are unfit to perform any service to
God as acceptable to him.


From this right examination enjoined us before our approach to the Lords
Table, we are taught, 1. That children are not capable of this Sacrament, 1
Cor. 11.28. 2. That ignorant persons must not approach to this Table, 1 Cor.
11.24. 3. That mad people are not to be admitted to this feast, 1 Samuel 21.15.
4. That such as intend to live in their sins, must not dare to approach unto
this Communion, 1 Cor. 11.27. 5. That such as do not try themselves cannot
come. 6. That such as do try themselves, must come after trial, and may come
with much comfort.


The manner how we must be disposed in the action of receiving; viz. 1. When we
see the Minister take bread and wine, we must consider the action of God,
whereby he sent Christ to work our Redemption. 2. When we see the bread broken,
and the wine poured out, we must consider 1. The bitter Passion of Christ for
us in suffering. 2. Gods infinite love to us, who sent Christ to redeem us his
enemies. 3. Gods wrath toward us for our sins, which nothing could satisfy
but the death of Christ. 4. We must detest those sins of ours, which caused
Christ thus to suffer.
3. When the Minister distributeth bread and wine, we must consider, that as it
is truly offered unto us by man, so Christ is truly offered unto us by God. 4.
In receiving the bread and wine, we must apprehend Christ by faith. 5. In
eating that bread and drinking that wine, we must apply Christ particularly to
our selves, and be persuaded, that as bread and wine is made the nourishment of
our body, so Christ's body and blood is made the nourishment of our souls.


Again, consider these inward actions in the time of receiving the Lords
Supper; viz. 1. We must remember the Passion of Christ, with the circumstances,
torments and virtue thereof: This remembrance must be 1. Humble, to debase us
for what we had deserved. 2. Effectual in us toward God, our selves and our
Brethren. 3. Perpetual, not at the present time only. 4. Thankful, to magnify
the mercy of God.
2. We must give thanks to God for sending Christ to work out our Redemption, 1
Cor. 15.57. that is, we must thank him by obeying him in keeping his
commandments, and not by word only. 3. There must be a discerning of the Lords
body; that is, 1. To consider of the bread and wine, not as things common, as
they were before, but as consecrated to a holy use. 2. We must come hereunto as
unto mystical meat, not as to carnal. 3. We must feed on Christ by faith, as
verily as we eat the visible Signs with our bodily mouths.
4. There must be an Annunciation of the death of Christ, that is, a showing
forth of the Lords death, 1 Cor. 11.26.


This duty of showing forth the Lords death is twofold: 1. Partly inward,
consisting in the inward application and godly meditation of 1. The wrath and
justice of God against sin. 2. The greatness of sin, which nothing could do
away but Christ's death. 3. The mercy and love of Christ in dying for us.
2. Partly outward, in outward celebration and public declaration, Romans 10.10.


After we have received the Lords Supper, we must labor 1. To feel in our
selves the hatred and death of sin, and the entrance of grace. 2. To perform
that in our life following, which we promised in our preparation. 3. To
meditate where we have, and what we have done; which seals a blessing or a
curse. 4. To think every day of the mercy of Christ, and daily to render thanks
and praise for it; which thanksgiving must not be only in words, but in every
action of our life. Psalms proper for thanksgiving are the 8, 23, 66, 103. 5.
To express our charity by Almsgiving to the Poor. 6. To use all care and
caution not to fall into our old sins, lest the latter end be worse then the
beginning; and that not only for the present, but ever after we renew our
faith and repentance.


Praise and thanksgiving is required as necessary, and as a special duty to
God, when we have tasted of his bounty and loving kindeness, and especially for
Spiritual blessings: 1. Because it is the will and pleasure of God, who is so
good unto us, as to require it of us, who can give him nothing else; and this
reason the Apostle gives, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17, 18. 2. Because of all Sacrifices, this
of praise and thanksgiving is the chief and principal, as well in respect of
the enduring and continuance of it, as in respect of the use and end of it. It
was in Paradise before the Fall, it was before the Flood, it was before the
Law, under the Law, under the Gospel, and shall continue for ever: It is
performed of Men and Angels, in heaven and earth, it shall never end, no not
when other exercises of our Religion shall cease, Rev. 5.13. and 11.17. 3.
Because it is not only the end of the other works of Religion, but also the
end of the works of God: It is the end of our Election, Ephesians. 1.5, 6. of our
Creation, Prove. 16.4. of our Redemption, Luke 1.68, 74, 75. Ephesians. 1.3, 7. of our
Justification, 1 Cor. 1.31. It is the end of our Sanctification, of our
Salvation, and of our Glorification, to give all praise, all power, all honor
and glory to him that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for evermore. 4.
The worthiness and excellency of this exercise is manifestly proved by the
unwillingness and untowardness of our corrupt Nature to perform it; we are
ready enough to pray for the gift, not so ready to praise the giver; fervent in
asking, cold in thanksgiving.


The impediments to be removed, and the means to be used that we may rightly
discern the Lords body in receiving it, are these; viz. 1. Carnal and natural
weakness in the mind: The Remedies whereof 1. Endeavor to get out of our
natural state of life. 2. Earnest endeavor for the Spirit of God. 3. Frequent
and fervent Prayer.
2. Ignorance; the Remedies whereof are 1. A serious consideration of Gods
Judgments against it, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. 2. To search the Scriptures, and to be
conversant therein. 3. To have recourse to godly Ministers.
3. Hardness of heart; the Remedies whereof are 1. To avoid the occasions, as
custom in sin, carnal security, contempt of the word, and the like. 2. To let
the word have admittance to us, to enter and take place in us. 3. We must pray
unto Almighty God to soften our hearts. 4. We must take heed of the slights of
Satan, and of the deceitfulness of sin betimes.
4. An unregenerate Will; the Remedies whereof are 1. To deny and renounce our
selves with all we have. 2. To call often upon God with fervency, to guide us
by his Spirit, as we may be able to resist our lusts.
5. We must shake off the custom of sinning, the sin of unbelief and
impenitency, carnal wisdom, presumption of our own knowledge, pride and
vainglory, forgetfulness of God and his word, and such like.


If therefore we would come worthily to the Supper of the Lord, 1. We must (as
has been said) try our selves by the Law of God, whereby comes the knowledge
of sin, Romans 3.20. and 7.7. 2. We must labor to understand and believe the
common corruption of all mankind, standing partly in Original sin, and partly
in the fruits thereof, Romans 3.9. 3. We must feel the curse of everlasting death
due to us, Gal. 3.10. 4. We must learn what Covenant God has made with us
touching Grace and Mercy, that we may be raised up to comfort in the Son of God
our Redeemer. 5. We must fervently desire to be made partakers of the Lords
Supper, and feel how much we stand in need of it. 6. We must consider the
correspondent proportion between the Signs and the thing signified.


Unworthiness in receiving the Lords Supper is twofold; viz. 1. Of an evil
Conscience; as when a man lives in any sin against his conscience: Take heed of
this, for it is proper to the Reprobate. 2. Of infirmity; as when a man truly
repents and believes, and makes conscience of every good duty, but yet sees and
feels wants in them all, and in regard whereof himself unfit for the Supper;
but this may not justly hinder from coming to this Sacrament.


So that there are two sorts of men who receive unworthily; viz. 1. Those that
are not yet in Christ. 2. Those that are within the Covenant, but yet come
remissly and negligently.


The wicked receive in the Lords Supper, 1. The bare Signs only, as bread and
wine. 2. Those Signs to their condemnation, or they eat their own condemnation;
that is, through incredulity and abusing of the Sacrament to be abalienated,
and repelled from Christ and all his benefits, and so to draw upon themselves
temporal and everlasting punishments, except they repent.


The wicked in the use of the Sacrament receive nothing beside their own
condemnation, but the bare Signs only, and that for these Reasons: 1. Because
the benefits of Christ are received only in the right use of the Sacrament. 2.
Unto whom nothing is promised in the word, to him the Sacraments seal nothing.
3. Spiritual things are received by faith, which the wicked have not. 4. To be
wicked, and to receive the Sacrament truly and entirely, implies a
contradiction.


The causes for which the wicked are said to eat unto themselves damnation;
viz. 1. Because they profane the Signs, and consequently the thing signified,
by laying hold on those things which were not instituted for them, but for the
Disciples of Christ. 2. Because they profane the Covenant and Testament of
God, by taking to themselves the Signs and Tokens of the Covenant, and so would
make him the Father of the wicked. 3. Because they tread under foot the blood
of Christ, by not receiving his benefits by faith, when as they profess they
do, and so mock God. 4. Because they condemn themselves by their own judgment,
for they accept of this Doctrine, yet are conscious to themselves that they are
hypocrites, and so condemn themselves.


All deadness and hardness of heart must not keep us from the Lords Table; for
it is twofold; viz. 1. Sensible, which is in Gods children, which they bewail;
this may not discourage the Communicant from approaching the Table. 2.
Insensible, which is a great and dangerous Judgment, and one proper to the
Reprobate.


They only are to be admitted to the Supper of the Lord, who by their
confession and life profess faith and repentance; and the Reason is, 1. Because
the Church should profane Gods Covenant, if it should admit unbelievers and
men impenitent; for he that does a thing, and he that consents to it, are
both guilty. 2. Because if such should be admitted, the Church should stir up
the anger of God against her self, as of whom wittingly and willingly this
should be committed.


The Supper of the Lord is often to be celebrated, for these Reasons; viz. 1.
Because of the words of institution. 2. Because in respect of the end and
purpose of the institution, for it must be done in remembrance of Christ.


The Sacrament of the Lords Supper is not to be omitted, when it is administered
in the Congregation whereof we are members; for they were to be cut off from
the people, who neglected the Passover, but this Sacrament is greater then it,
in two respects; viz. 1. This Sacrament is more clear, because it does more
lively represent Christ exhibited in the flesh, but the Passover only
represented Christ which was to come. 2. Because the mercy we are now to
remember, is greater then that of the Passover, the one being our Redemption
from Sin and Hell, the other our deliverance out of Egypt; though that was not
all.


The resemblances between the Passover, and the Supper of the Lord; viz. 1. As
one is called the Lords Passover, Exodus 12.12. so this is called the Lords
Supper, 1 Cor. 11.20. 2. God calls the Lamb the Paschal Lamb, because the
Angel in the common destruction passed over the houses of the Israelites; so
Christ calls the Bread by the name of his body that was broken for us, Luke
22.19. 3. In the Passover the Lord says, This shall be for a memorial, Exodus
12.14. so Christ says, Do this in remembrance of me, Luke 22.19. 4. God says
of the Lamb, Take ye, Exodus 12.5. Christ says of the Bread, Take ye, Mat.
26.26. 5. God says of the Paschal Lamb, Eat ye, Exodus 12.11. Christ says of
the Bread, Eat ye; of the Wine, Drink ye, etc.


Christ would at the last Supper of the Passover, institute this his Supper,
for these Reasons: 1. That now an end was made of all the old Sacrifices, and
he did substitute a new Sacrament which should succeed and be observed, that
Paschal Sacrament being abolished. 2. That the same thing might be signified,
difference of time only excepted; the one signifying Christ to come and to be
sacrificed, the other come and sacrificed. 3. That he might stir up in his
Disciples and in us greater attention, and marking of the cause for which he
did institute it, doing nothing before his death, but what was of most weight
and moment.


The absurdities following upon, and Reasons against Popish Transubstantiation
of the bread into the body of Christ in the Supper of the Lord; some whereof are
also against Consubstantiation: 1. If the bread and wine be turned into the
very body and blood of Christ, then shall be no Signs in the holy Supper, and
then no Sacrament, for Sacraments cannot be without visible Signs. Thus it
overthrows the Sacrament consisting of two parts, a visible Sign, and an
invisible Grace signified: but if bread were really the body of Christ, then
there could be no outward Sign to represent the inward Grace. 2. Christ's blood
should be separated from his body, which can never be. 3. The body of Christ
should be infinite, and therefore he should not be a very man, nor truly
ascended; for by making the body of Christ to be in more places then one at the
same time, the nature of a true body is destroyed. 4. That then the wicked and
hypocrites (as well as the godly) coming to the Supper, should then receive
Christ, and be indeed partakers of the body and blood of Christ, yea irrational
creatures, which is horrible Blasphemy to imagine and determine. 5. It makes
two Christ's, one that gives, another that is given; one at the Table, another
in the mouths and stomachs of the Disciples. 6. The Apostle calls it Bread
oftentimes, even after consecration, 1 Cor. 10.16. and 11.26, 27, 28. and
Christ instituted this Supper before he was crucified. 7. If the body and blood
of Christ had been really in the bread and wine, Christ should have eaten
himself, even his own body, and drank his own blood, and have given his dead
body with his living hands. 8. This communion is common to the Fathers and us,
but the Fathers could not communicate any otherwise with Christ, then by faith
in the Word and Old Sacraments. 9. Christ is ascended really with his body into
heaven, which must contain him until his coming again, Acts 3.21. and 1.11.
John 16.28. Matthew. 26.11.


The great and wide difference between the Lords Supper and the Popish
blasphemous idolatrous Mass: 1. The Supper of the Lord testifies to us that we
have perfect forgiveness of all our sins for that only Sacrifice of Christ,
which himself once fully wrought on the cross, Heb. 7.27. But in the Mass it is
denied that the quick and the dead have remission of sins for the only Passion
of Christ, except also Christ be daily offered for them by their Sacrificers.
2. The Supper of the Lord testifies also that we by the Holy Ghost are grafted
into Christ, who now according to his humane Nature is only in heaven at the
right hand of his Father, Heb. 1.3. and there will be worshipped of us, John
4.21, 22, 23. But the Mass teaches that Christ is bodily under the forms of
bread and wine, and therefore (say they) is to be worshipped in them: So that
the very foundation of the Mass is nothing else then an utter denial of that
only Sacrifice and Passion of Christ Jesus, and an accursed Idolatry. 3. The
Popish Mass changes, or rather abolished the Rite instituted by Christ, for it
takes away the cup from the people, and most presumptuously adds many toys.
4. The Mass transformeth the Sign into the thing signified, for it denies that
there is any bread or wine remaining. 5. In the Mass the Papists make other
gifts to be, then which are found in the Word and Sacrament, or in the Promise
annexed unto them; as Merit even by the work it self wrought, Remission of sins
for the dead, and healing of Men, Oxen, Swine and Cattle diseased. 6. The Mass
is repugnant to Christ's Priesthood; because he is only the High Priest who
has power to offer himself: yet his Unholiness the Pope, with his companions,
most impudently pulls this honor to himself. 7. The Mass is repugnant to the
Doctrine of Grace and Justification, which teaches, That in this life only is
the time of obtaining favor by faith alone, for the only Merit of Christ; but
the Papists neglecting faith, and rejecting Christ's Merit, have substituted in
place thereof this Idolatrous Mass. 8. The Mass most ridiculously imagines
that Christ's body does descend into our bodies, and there remains so long as
the forms of bread and wine remain; but the Supper teaches us, That we are
made members of Christ by the Holy Ghost, and ingrafted into him.


Bread is called the Lords body, and wine his blood, for these Reasons: 1. That
all the faithful may acknowledge the dignity of this Sacrament. 2. That we
remain not in the outward bread and wine, but be intent upon the thing
signified. 3. That we may come with the greater devotion to this Sacrament. 4.
That we may be most firmly assured, That as outwardly we are partakers of bread
and wine; so inwardly we are partakers of Christ and his benefits.


Rules to be observed, that we may in receiving the bread and wine, rightly
discern the Lords body: 1. Take every thing in its own nature and kind; do not
with Papists take the Sign for the thing signified, nor the earthly thing for
the heavenly. 2. Use every one of them in the manner appointed by Christ, and
with such reverence as is due unto them. 3. Use them to their right ends; as 1.
A commemoration of Christ's death. 2. For a nearer communion with Christ.



The difference between the Lords Supper and Baptism: 1. In Ceremonies and
Rites. 2. In the circumstances of the institution and use, or in the
signification of the Ceremonies; for Baptism is a Sign of the Covenant entered
and made between God and the faithful, the Supper is a Sign of the continuing
of that Covenant: The same thing, that is, washing away of sins by the blood of
Christ, is sealed both in Baptism and the Supper, but the manner of sealing is
diverse, and the one is but once, the other often. 3. In Baptism is required
confession of faith and repentance in the elder sort newly converted; in
Infants it is sufficient, if they be born in the Church: but in the Supper is
added a further condition of examining himself, and of remembering the Lords
death.


It is not absolutely necessary (as some superstitiously suppose) to come
fasting to this Sacrament, and that for these Reasons; viz. 1. Because the
Paschal Lamb was not so eaten. 2. Because Christ did it after Supper. 3.
Because in the Primitive Church many places observed Christ's time to
communicate, at the evening, especially at Easter and Whitsontide. 4. Because
some are so weak, that they cannot stay so long fasting. 5. Because many
abstained in superstition, as thinking they eat the very body, and drink the
very blood of Christ. 6. Because our preparation stands rather in the
purifying of the heart, then purging of the stomach.


The ends of the Lords Supper: 1. That it might be a confirmation of our faith,
that is, a most certain testification of our communion with Christ. 2. That it
might be a public distinction or mark, discerning the Church from all other
Nations and Sects, for the Lord appointed it for his Disciples, and not for
others. 3. That it might be our testification to Christ and the whole Church;
which is, a public confession of our faith, and a solemn binding of our selves
to thankfulness, and the celebration of this benefit. 4. That it might be a
Bond of the Churches Assemblies and Meetings. 5. That it might be a Bond of
mutual love and dilection; for it testifies that all are made the members of
Christ under one Head.


Lastly, remember that the right and lawful use of this holy Supper consists
in these three things especially: 1. When the Rites and Ceremonies instituted
by Christ, are retained and observed. 2. When the Rites are observed of those
persons for whom Christ did institute them; not for his enemies, but his
Disciples, which are the faithful. 3. When the Supper is received for the right
end, which chiefly is the commemoration of the Lords death.


History tells us, That Victor the Third, Bishop of Rome, was poisoned by his
Subdeacon when he took the Cup; and Henry the Seventh, Emperor of Luxelburge,
was also poisoned in receiving the Bread at the hands of a Monk: I hope the
blasphemous Idolaters of Rome will not presume to say, That that Wine which
Pope Victor drank, and that Bread which the Emperor did eat, was the very Body
and the very Blood of Christ. Again, they who eat Christ in the Lords Supper,
as the Fathers before his Incarnation, did eat him in Manna and the Paschal
Lamb, cannot be said to eat Christ corporally, for at that time he was not
born; now all the faithful eat Christ in the Lords Supper, as the Fathers
before his Incarnation did eat him in Manna and the Paschal Lamb, 1 Cor. 20.3,
4. therefore the faithful can no way be said to eat Christ corporally: yet we
hold, that the faithful in the Supper do truly receive and eat, but by the
Spirit and by Faith, the very true Body of Christ the which was crucified for
us, and so far forth as it was delivered up for us; and that they drink his
Blood which was shed for us for the Remission of sins, and that indeed the Body
is present and the Blood is present, but unto the Spirit and unto the inward
man: for unto the Spirit, all things which he receives by faith, are in truth
present according to that, That Christ dwells in our hearts by faith: And no
distance of place can effect, that the things we receive by faith should be
absent from us; even as the Sun cannot properly be said to be absent from the
eyes of which it is perceived.

This is the Bread of life, this is the way
Our blessed Savior does himself convey
Into our hungry Souls, when he combines
His Grace unto the Elemental Signs.
Make room then, purge thy Soul of every sin,
That so the King of Glory may come in
With Angels food: Alas, they, when they fell,
Fell without it to our just portion, Hell!
Feed, but with faith, remember what it cost,
Without thy wedding garment thou art lost.
CHAP. III.
. 1. Prayer.
TRue Prayer may briefly be decribed to be that which is poured out from the
heart (the Holy Ghost stirring it) unto God, with this confidence upon the true
persuasion of Gods love toward us, That we shall be heard for Christ the
Mediators sake: And it has the chief place among Good Works, yielding us the
greatest testimony of our Salvation, by enabling us to perform other good
Duties. Or thus; Prayer is a Petition joined with an ardent and earnest desire,
whether uttered in words or not uttered, whereby we ask of the true God
revealed in his Word, those things which he has commanded to be asked of him;
proceeding from an acknowledgement of our necessity and misery, with humility,
repentance, and confession of our own unworthiness, made in true conversion
unto God, and in a confidence and sure trust in Gods Promises, for Christ's sake
our Mediator.

For the right understanding of which Promises, this Rule must be remembered,
That the Promises of God are not made directly to the work of Prayer, but to
the person that prays; and yet not to him simply, as he does this good action
of Prayer, but as he is in Christ, for whose Merits sake the Promise is
accomplished: whereby it is most evident, That our Prayer is not the cause of
the blessings we receive from God, but only a way and instrument in and by
which God conveyeth his blessings unto his children, in whom is required in
Prayer a special particular faith to apply to themselves the Promise of God
concerning that thing which they ask in Prayer; which special faith we can
never bring with us in Prayer, unless we have a special saving faith, whereby
we believe our reconciliation with God in Christ. So that the unfeigned desire
of a touched heart, is a Prayer in acceptance before God, though knowledge,
memory and utterance to frame and conceive a form of Prayer in words be
wanting, Psalm. 10.17. for Prayer is not a work of the memory, or a work of the
wit, but the work of a sanctified heart, it is the work of Gods Spirit; the
very essence whereof consists in making known the inward desires, 1 Samuel
1.15. Psalm. 62.8. always in the mediation of Christ, by reason of the infinite
Majesty of God, and sinfulness of the creature, with awful fear and inward
reverence, manifested with seemly words (if it be oral Prayer) befitting our
matter, not overcurious, nor careless, with reverent, Psalm. 95.2, 6. and
humble gesture, Ezra 9.5, 6. to express which, kneeling is most proper; Paul
uses it, Ephesians. 3.14. Acts 2.30. if we cannot conveniently kneel, then stand; so
did the poor humble Publican when he prayed, Luke 18.13. other gestures when no
necessity requires, argue little reverence, less humility: we must also come
in assurance of faith to be heard and accepted, Heb. 10.22. Jam. 1.6. which is
strengthened by meditation on the Promises concerning such things as we pray
for, 2 Samuel 7.27, 28. which full assurance, as a lusty gale of wind, carries
our Prayers with full fail to heaven, the desired Haven; wavering and doubting,
like opposite uncertain winds, carry them to some other place, and so they
return without speeding.

The supplicant must also be lowly in mind, and holy in life, Isa. 1.15. the
blind man knew God heard not impenitents, Joh. 9.31. he must have a true
understanding, sense, and earnest desire of what he prays for in sincerity of
heart, and fervency of spirit, Jam. 5.16. for Prayer ascends no higher then
faith and fervor of Spirit carry it: Yet notwithstanding which earnestness and
fervency in Prayer, it may be no true Prayer, as the wicked man's prayer made in
his extremity, which is termed but howling, Hosea 7.14. So a thief is earnest
with a Judge to spare him, but this is but carnal earnestness.

Thus God takes our prayers by weight, not by number, not by labor, not by
earnestness, which is a thing that may come from the flesh, but if it come from
his Spirit, he accepts it, and then though we may have a secret answer to our
prayers, yet may we wait long before the thing it self be given us, but then
God continues a secret strength to us, that we may wait and hold out; yea,
though we never have any request in this world granted, yet we must think this
sufficient, that we can and do pray unto God; for by whose Grace have we always
continued in prayer, but by the gift and Grace of God? God indeed answers some
sooner, some later, some he answers quickly, and some he defers longer; but
importunity will prevail with him, so as thou shall have Christ, and after thou
have him, thou must look to the Privileges thou have by him; only remembering
as the privileges thou have by him, so the condition of after-obedience: For
Prayer is the means which God has sanctified to unlock the closet of his
Graces; and he being the Fountain of all Blessings, if we use not Prayer
aright, it may be truly said to us, as the woman of Samaria spoke, Joh. 4.11.
Thou have nothing to draw with, and the well is deep, from whence therefore
can thou have that living water? yea, what the Lord did miraculously to
Stephen, when he opened the heavens, and showed himself to the outward view,
that he does ordinarily to the Saints in prayer, he shows himself to their
minds and inward affections.

Touching the time of Prayer, if it be the secret and lifting up of the heart
to God (called Ejaculation) then pray continually, pray without ceasing, Ephesians.
6. but if it be a set and solemn prayer, either in private or in the
Congregation, the Word of God appoints no precise hour for this kind, because
now there is no difference between time and time, in regard of Conscience, for
performing the worship of God and the duties of Religion, the Lord's Day only
excepted. In the New Testament the distinction of days and hours is taken away;
Paul was afraid of the Galatians, because they made difference of days, times,
months and years, in respect of holiness and Religion, Gal. 4. And as touching
the place of Prayer in regard of Conscience, Holiness and Religion, all places
are equal and alike in the New Testament, since the coming of Christ; the house
or field is holy as the Church, and if we pray in either of them as we ought,
our prayer is as acceptable to God, as that which is made in the Church: for
now the days are come foretold by the Prophet, Mal. 1.11. which Paul expounds,
1 Timothy 2.8. yet nevertheless, for order, decency and quietness sake, public
prayer is to be made in public places, as Churches and Chapels appointed for
that use. But undeniable it is, that all places are alike in respect of Gods
presence and of his hearing, for he is Omnipresent, wheresoever a man has
occasion to pray, there God is; which concerns them to consider, who make the
Church a more holy place for prayer then other-where, and therefore reserve all
or most of their prayers till they come thither, forgetting that wheresover two
or three of the faithful are gathered together, there God is in the midst of
them: for now difference of place in respect of Gods presence is taken away:
God is as well in the field and in the private house, as in the Church: and yet
Churches are ordained and used in a godly policy, because a Congregation may
more conveniently there meet to their mutual edification, in the public
exercise of the Word and Prayer; otherwise private houses were as good places
for Gods worship as Churches, if they were decent and convenient for
edification, for now in all places men may lift up pure hands unto God, 1 Timothy
2.8. where it plainly appears, That after the coming of Christ (by whom the
partition wall was broken down, and both made one people to God) all places
were sanctified for prayer, so as under the Gospel no one place is more holy
then another; yet it being Gods will to be worshipped publicly, needful it is
that there should be places fit for that purpose. Thus the Corinthians had one
place to worship God in, 1 Cor. 11.20. though certain of the Inhabitants of
Philippi went out to a Rivers side to pray on the Sabbath day, Acts 16.13. but
that was in time of persecution.

The Father, Son and Holy Ghost is to be prayed unto; we may pray unto the
whole Trinity, but more properly unto the first person, God the Father, in the
Name of God the Son, by the assistance of God the Holy Ghost: So we pray unto
the whole Trinity, yet as the first person is the Fountain of the Deity, we
pray the Father by the Son through the Holy Ghost; nor is it strange that we
pray unto Christ, for whose sake only we are heard in our prayers, for we pray
unto him as he is the second person; we have our prayers heard through him as
he is our Mediator, thus distinguishing his person from his office.

Prayer in general is twofold: 1. Public, wherein words must be always used in
a plain, known, distinct voice. 2. Private, wherein the voice is profitable,
but not simply necessary.


Two Rules of gesture in public Prayer: 1. It must always be comely, modest,
decent and uniform. 2. It must serve as much as may be to express the inward
sincerity of the heart without hypocrisy.


Again, there is a twofold Prayer: 1. One that is the voice of our own spirit.
2. Another that is the voice of Gods Spirit in us; that is, when the Holy Ghost
has so sanctified the heart, when he has put it into such a holy frame of
Grace, that the heart comes to speak as it is quickened, acted and moved from
Gods Spirit.


This Spirit of Adoption makes us 1. Earnest and fervent in prayer. 2. Bold and
confident (to God as to a Father) so that we may know the voice of Gods Spirit
in our prayers, by our boldness to, and confidence in him; for wicked men come
to God as to a stranger, the Saints as to a friend.


Prayer is one part of that holy worship of God, called Invocation, whereof
there are four parts: 1. Supplication, when we entreat God to remove some evil
from us. 2. Prayer, whereby we beg at the hands of God the gift of some good
thing unto us. 3. Intercession, when as we entreat the Lord to grant some good
thing unto our brethren, or to remove some evil from them. 4. Thanksgiving,
whereby we give laud and thanks to God for blessings received either by our
selves or by our brethren.


The distinctions of Prayer in regard of the manner thereof; viz. 1. Mental,
which is an opening inwardly of the desires of a man's heart to God, without any
outward manifestation of the same by word, Neh. 2.4. Exodus 14.15. 1 Samuel 1.13.
2. Vocal, and is that which is uttered with words, 1 Kings 8.23. 3. Sudden,
when upon some sudden occasion present, the heart is instantly lift up unto
God, whether by sighs or words; they are called Ejaculations of the heart, and
argue a holy familiarity with God, yea a heavenly mind. 4. Composed, when a
Christian sets himself to make some solemn prayer unto God, whether it be in
the Church, family, closet, field, or any other place, Dan. 6.10. to this kind
of Prayer, preparation beforehand is very needful, Eccl. 5.2. 5. Conceived,
being that which he who utters the prayer, inventeth and conceives himself;
which is very expedient and needful, for these Reasons: 1. It manifests the
gift and power of the Spirit, who can give both matter and manner, words and
affections, who can suggest what to pray, and how to pray. 2. Every day we have
new wants, new assaults, new sins, and our petitions must be made according to
our present wants, our supplications according to our particular assaults, and
our confession according to our several sins. 3. As God daily continues and
renews old blessings, so also he adds new to them.
6. Prescribed, when a set constant form is laid down beforehand, and either
conned by heart or read: This is a good help to weak Christians, if they
endeavor to pray with the Spirit and with understanding. 7. Public, when an
Assembly of Saints publicly with one joynt-consent, call upon God by the mouth
of the Minister, Joel 2.16, 17. Neh. 8.1, 6. For the manner of which public
prayer, two things are very requisite; viz. 1. Unanimity, respecting the heart
and affections, for which an audible and intelligible voice is necessary. 2.
Uniformity, respecting the outward reverent carriage, and humble gesture in
prayer.
8. Private, which is made by one alone, or by some few together, 2 Kings 4.33.
Luke 9.28. Acts 10.30. This especially belongs to the Master of a Family. 9.
Secret, which is made by one alone, none being present but God and he that
prays: This may be in a close chamber or closet, Mat. 6.6. or on a desolate
Mountain, Mark 1.35. or in a secret field, Genesis 24.63. or on any house top.
Acts 10.9. or in any other place, 1 Timothy 2.8. 10. Extraordinary, which after an
extraordinary manner, even above our usual custom, is poured out before God,
consisting partly in ardency of affection, as in Christ, Luke 22.44. Heb. 5.7.
in Moses, Exodus 32.32. and in the King of Nineveh, Jonah 3.8. and partly in
continuance of time, as Jacob a whole night, Genesis 32.24. so did David, 2 Samuel
12.16. and Christ, Luke 6.12. Moses a whole day, Exodus 17.12. so did Joshua and
the Elders of Israel, Josh. 7.6.


We must pray 1. For the glory of God, always, and that without any limitation
or condition. 2. For our own good: 1. The salvation of Soul, and that without
any condition. 2. In this present life, but with this condition, so far forth
as it may stand with Gods glory, and be for our own good.



The conditions and circumstances of true prayer; viz. 1. A direction of it
unto the true God, and him only. 2. In the mediation of Christ; not without a
Mediator, as Pagans, nor in the name of any other Mediator, as Papists. 3. The
knowledge of Gods Commandment in requiring us to pray, else we doubt of being
heard. 4. The knowledge of those things which are to be asked, else we mock
God. 5. A true ardent desire of those things which are to be asked, else we are
hypocrites. 6. A thorough sense and feeling of our own wants, else we pray not
at all. 7. Lowliness of mind, self-denial, impartially weighing our own
baseness: Humiliation; that is, true Repentance, 1. Because God owes us
nothing. 2. We are his enemies before our conversion.
8. A considence and full persuasion of being heard for the Mediators sake,
Heb. 10.22. To this purpose meditate on the Promises. 9. In fear; before prayer
meditating on the excellency and glory of God, in prayer holding our hearts
close with God that they wander not. 10. With seemly words befitting the
matter, not strained nor careless. 11. With reverent, submiss and humble
gesture. 12. In holiness of life; for the prayer of a righteous man avails
much, Jam. 5.6. yea the prayer of a faithful man is more forcible then the
power of a whole Army; witness Moses against Amalek, Exo. 17.11. 13. In
sincerity of heart, and with fervency of Spirit, even an hungring, thirsting
and longing desire.


Other conditions in an acceptable Prayer to be observed; viz. 1. We must ask
while the time of Grace and Mercy remains; for if the day of Grace be once
passed, we shall be excluded with the foolish Virgins, Mat. 25.8, 9. Now the
time whilst God offers mercy to us in his Word, is the acceptable time, this
is the day of Grace. 2. We must not ask as seems good unto our selves, but
according to Gods will, and as his word allows, lest we be denied with the
sons of Zebedee, for asking we know not what, Mat. 20.22. 3. We must not doubt
of Gods granting us those things which we ask according to his will, for the
wavering minded man shall receive nothing of God, Jam. 1.5, 6. 4. We must refer
the time and manner of Gods accomplishing our requests to his good pleasure,
lest with the Israelites we seem to limit the Holy One of Israel.


Rules to be observed, that we may conceive aright of God in Prayer: 1. We must
not conceive him in the form of any earthly or heavenly, bodily or Spiritual
creature whatsoever; for thus not to conceive him, is a degree of conceiving
him aright: We must not frame in our minds any Image of God at all, as that he
should be like unto man, or any other creature; but we must conceive of him
both in his works as our Creator, Governor and Preserver, and also in his
properties as most wise, most just, most holy, merciful, etc. Thus we may
better conceive of him by his Works and Attributes, then by his Nature. 2. We
must conceive that God is one in Substance, and three in Persons: We must not
confound the Persons, nor divide the Substance, but conceive of one God in
three Persons, and three Persons in one and the same Godhead; so he must not be
conceived absolutely, that is, out of the Trinity, but as he subsisteth in the
Person of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost. 3. When we direct our prayers or any
worship to any one Person of the Trinity, we must include the rest in the same
worship; yea further, we must retain in mind the distinction and order of all
the three Persons, without severing or sundring them.


The whole Trinity has a work in this holy exercise of Prayer: For The Holy
Ghost frames our Requests, Romans 8.26. The Son offers them up unto the
Father, Rev. 8.3. The Father accepts them thus framed and offered, Romans 8.27.


The helps of preparation to Prayer; viz. 1. Meditation 1. Of the Majesty of
God to whom we pray. 2. Of the matter of our prayers, which are for Temporal
things. Spiritual things. Eternal things.
3. Of our own corruption and want of Grace.
2. A steadfast belief to persuade our selves that there is a God, one in
Essence, three in Persons, rewarding those that call upon him, and whereby we
lay hold on Christ, assuring our selves of the power, goodness, mercy and
bounty of God, Heb. 11.6.


Before Prayer these things are necessary: 1. Repentance, and after sins
committed, a still renewed repentance. 2. Reconciliation, if need require, to
our brother. 3. Preparation in heart and mind, as one that is to speak
familiarly with God; in which preparation these things are required: 1. The
mind is to be emptied of all carnal and worldly thoughts. 2. A consideration
of the things to be asked. 3. A lifting up of the heart to God. 4. The heart
must be touched with a reverence of the Majesty of God.



The impediments to be removed before we can pray: 1. Pride, for God abhors the
proud, Prove. 16.5. he hears them not, Job 35.12. 2. An absenting our selves
from the word, a careless and negligent hearing the same, a deriding, scorning
and contempt of it, Prove. 28.9. Zech. 7.13. 3. Cruelty, oppression, and
unmercifulness toward the poor, Pro. 21.13. 4. All corrupt affections, as
anger, malice, hatred, discord, wrath, envy, 1 Pet. 3.5, 6, 7. 5. A delight in
sin, taking pleasure in it, and making a sport of wickedness, Psalm. 66.16.


Special Duties required in the act of Prayer: 1. Our prayer must be the speech
of the soul and heart, not of the tongue only, Psalm. 25.1. 2. In the mind the
right understanding of what we ask. Mat. 20.22. 3. In the heart, 1. Reverence,
in regard of Gods Majesty, Mal. 1.6. 2. Humility, in regard of our own
unworthines, Ge^, 18.27. Ps. 51.17.
4. Every Petition must proceed from a lively sense of our poverty, specially
in Spiritual matters, with an earnest desire to have them supplied, Acts 237.
5. Every Petition must proceed from a saving and a justifying faith, being
fully persuaded in our hearts, that God both can and will grant our requests,
Jam. 1.6, 7. 6. Every Petition must be grounded on Gods word, and not framed to
the carnal conceit and fancy of man's brain, and be only for good things, 1 John 5.14. 7. Our Prayer must in the name, merit and mediation of Christ alone,
be presented to God alone, not to Saints, Angels, the Virgin Mary, or any other
creature. 8. We must pray by the help of the Spirit, it must be the voice of
Gods Spirit speaking in our Spirit, Romans 8.26. 9. We must pray for our brethren
as well as for our selves, for our enemies as well as our friends, Mat. 5.44.
10. Our Prayers must be without vain repetitions, much babbling, and wandering
thoughts. 11. Every Petition must be made in obedience; that is, we must have a
Commandment enjoining us to ask the thing we pray for, and a Promise to assure
us that it shall be granted; and yet here this Caveat must be remembered, That
we leave both the time and the manner of accomplishing our requests to the good
pleasure and wisdom of God. 12. There must be instancy in the act of Prayer,
and perseverance till the thing asked be granted. 13. Every true Prayer must
have in it some thanksgiving unto God for his benefits received.


It appears from what has been said, That in Prayer these five things are
necessarily to be looked into: 1. The affection of him that prays; viz. he
must be sensible of his wants and sins. 2. The causes of Invocation, whereof
Gods Command is the chiefest. 3. Who is to be prayed unto; viz. God only, not
Saints nor Angels. 4. In and through whose name and mediation we are to pray;
that is, in the name and mediation of Christ only. 5. What we are to pray for;
viz. Blessings Temporal, Spiritual, Eternal.


To the affection of him that prays, is required, 1. That he divest himself
of all vain thoughts of his own worth. 2. That by a steadfast faith his soul be
inflamed, as it were all afire to pray. 3. That he be truly sensible of his own
wants. 4. That he prostrate himself before the Lord in true penitence. 5. That
his prayer be serious and persevering.


The causes of Invocation, are 1. The Command of God, who has required this
service from us. 2. The Promise of God, for the hearing of the prayers of such
as cry unto him. 3. The sense of our own misery and wants, with the distress of
the whole Church. 4. Our victory over temptations. 5. That our heart by the use
of prayer may be inflamed after the true worship of God. 6. The example of
Christ and all the Saints, whose greatest care was to call upon God.


God only is the true object of prayer, and is alone to be prayed unto, for
these Reasons: 1. He only knows, Jer. 17.10. whether our desires come from
the heart, or only from the teeth outward, and so knows whether it be true
prayer or no. 2. He only is every where present, Jer. 23.23. in all places, to
hear the suits of all persons. 3. He only is Almighty, Jer. 32.27. able to
grant what suit soever we shall ask.


God only, not Angel, Saint, nor any other Creature, is to be prayed unto, and
that for these Reasons; viz. 1. We must pray to none but to whom we say, Our
Father, Mat. 6.9. 2. In whom alone we must believe, to him alone must we pray,
Romans 10.14. 3. To whom alone and only we can ascribe Omnipresence,
Omnipotency, Omnisciency, and the like, to him alone must we pray, 1 Timothy 2.8.
4. It is the Commandment of God himself, that we should serve and worship him
alone, Mat. 4.10. 5. No creature can be helpful to any other, further then God
suffers and enableth it. 6. It is no sufficient ground to move us to call
upon a creature, because it may be helpful, for then any unreasonable creatures
might be prayed unto, which is a most unreasonable thing for any reasonable man
to do. 7. Difference must be made between Civil and Divine religious prayer,
which is made to God alone, with assurance of faith, and persuasion of Divine
Attributes in him, together with religious Adoration, which is proper to the
Divine Majesty, Rev. 19.10. and to be performed to no creature, neither Angel,
Rev. 22.9. nor Man, Acts 10.26. But Civil prayer is that which is made only in
civil respects, requesting that of man, which we are persuaded he is able to
help us in. This is not properly Prayer.


Christ must be prayed unto in a double respect: 1. As God, the giver of all
good things, together with the Father and the Holy Ghost. 2. As a Mediator and
Intercessor, that in and through him we may be heard, that he would pray the
Father for us, and that he would prefer unto him all our sighs and petitions;
For he is a Priest for ever, Psalm. 110.


The things to be asked in Prayer, are 1. Spiritual, which we are to pray for
without any exception or condition. 2. Temporal, with this condition, If it be
Gods will and pleasure; so also in things Spiritual less necessary to
Salvation, as Hope, Joy in the feeling of Gods mercy in distress, etc.


Though corporal and other things not simply necessary to Salvation, are not
simply to be prayed for, yet conditionally, for these Reasons: 1. That the
desire of corporal things may be an exercise of our faith, and confirm our
trust and confidence of obtaining things Spiritual, and available to Salvation.
2. That we may consider and confess the providence of God, that nothing befalls
us by chance or fortune.


The Reasons why God would have us obtain by Prayer what he has determined to
give: 1. That we may be kept in some fear and reverence of him. 2. That he may
the more declare his love by hearing our complaints. 3. That we may be the
better acquainted with his excellent majesty. 4. That we may give him the
acknowledgement of all good things.


God uses to grant our Prayers two ways: 1. By giving the very thing it self
we ask. 2. By giving something answerable thereto, when not the thing it self.


God never grants some men's requests, for these Reasons; viz. 1. Because they
make their prayers, but not according to his will, either failing in the time,
as did the foolish virgins, Mat. 25.11, 12. or in the thing they ask, as did
the sons of Zebedee, Mat. 20.22. 2. Because they doubt and waver in prayer, for
such shall receive nothing of the Lord, Jam. 1.6, 7. 3. Because they ask it for
wrong ends, as not so much to promote Gods honor thereby, as to consume it on
their own lusts, Jam. 4.5.


So God sometimes defers his answer, for these Reasons: 1. When we ask amiss;
which may be done though the heart be right, as out of mistake, or out of want
of judgment, though it may be the intention be good. 2. When we are not fitted
for mercies, yet God then tenders us in the case we are in. 3. To make us pray
the more fervently, and to make us prize his blessings the higher. 4. When it
crosses some other secret passage of Gods providence. 5. To keep us in
humility, and prevent Spiritual pride; thus Paul was denied the removing of the
buffeting of Satan.


Though God knows our wants before we pray, yet ought we to pray, for we pray
not to inform the Lord of our wants, but for other causes; as, 1. To stir up
our hearts to seek unto Gods presence and favor. 2. To exercise our faith in
the meditation of Gods Promises. 3. To ease our woeful hearts, by pouring them
out unto the Lord. 4. To testify our obedience unto Gods Commandments, and our
trust in his Providence, for the receiving every good thing we desire,


Our reverence in prayer must show it self 1. In the holy disposition of the
heart and affections toward the Lord, when the mind is not carried away with
by thoughts, but applies it self wholly and only to the present service it
has in hand. 2. In the comely gesture of the body, beseeming so holy an
action, done to so high a Majesty. 3. In the humble and reverent uttering of
our requests, having beforehand well considered the things we are to utter
before God.


It is necessary that the Spirit should pray, and so we pray in the Spirit, for
these Reasons: 1. In regard of our natural estate we have no ability to pray, 2
Cor. 3.5. 2. In our regenerate estate we are no longer able to do any good
thing, then the Spirit helps and assisteth us; we have still need of the
present, effectual and continual work of Gods holy Spirit, Phil. 1.6. 3. Though
we knew how to pray, yet would not our prayers be acceptable to God, except
they came from his Spirit; for as God knows the meaning of the Spirit, so the
Spirit knows the will of God, Romans 8.27.


The means to pray aright in the Spirit: 1. Labor for Gods sanctifying Spirit,
which is gotten by the Ministry of the word, 2 Cor. 3.8. 2. Having the Spirit,
we must go along with him, and follow his good motions, pouring forth those
desires which he suggesteth unto us, giving unto God that which is Gods, Mat.
22. 3. We must take heed that at any time we grieve not the holy Spirit of God,
which may be done two ways, 1. By quenching the good motions thereof through
carelessness, 1 Thessalonians. 5.19. 2. By resisting the Spirit through our rebellion,
Acts 7.51.



Prayer must be always accompanied with thanksgiving; the matter whereof may be
thus distinguished; viz. 1. In regard of the nature and kind of benefits, and
they are either Good things bestowed, or Evil things removed.
2. In regard of the quality of them; viz. 1. Spiritual blessings; which are 1.
Bestowed here on earth; in the rank whereof must be accounted these four: 1.
The ground of them, which is Election. 2. The meritorious cause of them, that
is, our Redemption; under which must be comprised, 1. The price of our
Redemption, which is Christ's Blood. 2. The special fruits thereof, as
Reconciliation, Adoption, Remission, Imputation of Righteousness, etc.
3. The means of applying the benefits of our Election and Redemption, namely,
the effectual operation of Gods Spirit, under which are comptised Vocation,
Regeneration, Sanctification, and such sanctifying Graces as we find and feel
in our selves wrought; as Knowledge, Faith, Hope, Love, Repentance, Patience,
New-Obedience, etc. together with the blessed fruits of them, as Peace in
Conscience, Joy in the Spirit, holy security, etc.
4. The means which he Spirit uses to work and increase all these Graces are
to be remembered, as The Ministry of the Word and Sacraments, and other holy
Ordinances of God, together with liberty of the Sabbaths, of good and faithful
Ministers, of public Assemblies and the like.

2. Reserved in heaven, such as eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor has
entered into the heart of man.
2. Temporal, and therein such as concern 1. Mankind in general. 2. The whole
Church 3. The Commonwealth. 4. Families. 5. Our own persons.

3. In regard of the manner of bestowing them: 1. Already given. 2. Promised to
be given.
4. In regard of the persons on whom they are bestowed; viz. Our selves. Others.



Evils removed, for which thanks is to be given, are Public, Both Spiritual.
Private, Both Temporal.


In like manner thanksgiving is Public, For Good things bestowed. Private, For
Evil things removed.


Proofs of Scripture applied to particular occasions of thanksgiving; viz. 1.
For all manner of Spiritual blessings in general, Ephesians. 1.3, etc. 2. For the
Author of them all, Christ Jesus, Luke 2.13, 14. 3. For the outward means of
working these Spiritual blessings, Coloss. 1.3, 4, etc. 4. For the inward
efficacy of Gods Spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 1.2, 5. 5. For Temporal blessings; Christ
gave thanks for food, Joh. 6.11. Hannah for a child, 1 Samuel 2.1. Jacob for
riches, Genesis 32.10. and Abraham's servant for prospering his journey, Genesis
24.48. 6. For blessings on others; thus the Queen of Sheba praised God for his
blessings on Israel, 1 Kings 10.9. and the Christian Jews for the Gospel
revealed to the Gentiles, Acts 11.18. 7. For public blessings concerning the
Church, Col. 1.3, 6. Acts 2.47. and 4.24. 8. For the Commonwealth, 1 Kings
1.40. and 8.62, 66. 9. For general blessings on mankind, Psalm. 8.1, 6. 10. For
blessings on ones Family; thus is Jacob thankful, Genesis 35.7. 11. For private
blessings; Leah praised God for a son, Genesis 29.3. and Hezekiah for his health,
Isa. 38.19. 12. For evils removed, Exodus 15.1, etc. Psalm. 124.6. 13. For
public Spiritual evils removed, as Idolatry in Hezekiahs time, 2 Chronicles. 29.30.
14. For private Spiritual evils prevented, 1 Samuel 25.32. 15. For adversity Job
blessed God; and the Apostles rejoice for suffering, Acts 5.41. 16. For good
things promised and not enjoyed, Heb. 11.13.


General directions for thanksgiving; viz. 1. That we lift up our eyes unto the
Author of all blessings, being persuaded that they are brought unto us by Gods
good guiding Providence, and not by chance or fortune. 2. That we be well
instructed in the ground or cause which moves God to do the good which he
does, even his own Free Grace, Ezekiel. 33.19. A gift, the more free it is, the
more praiseworthy. 3. That we take particular distinct notice of Gods
blessings, and so particularly acknowledge them, and accordingly give thanks
unto the Lord for them. 4. That we accept Gods blessings as tokens of his love
and favor, and accordingly rejoice in them, Psalm. 138.2. 5. That we observe
what God has bestowed on us above others, and what others want that we have,
Psalm. 147.19, 20. 6. That we duly weigh how unworthy we are of the very least
of Gods favors, even the least crumb we eat, or drop we drink: Thus did Jacob,
Genesis 32.10.


Particular directions for extraordinary and solemn thanksgiving; viz. 1. A day
must be set apart and sanctified thereto: Thus was it in Esthers time, Esth.
9.17, etc. 2. Assemblies must meet together: Thus Jehoshaphat assembled the
people on a day set apart to praise God solemnly, 2 Chronicles. 20.26. 3. The solemn
worship must on that day be performed to God. 4. The sanctification of that day
must be helped by preaching the Word; which help the people of God desired and
obtained in Ezra's time, Neh. 8.1, etc. 5. A solemn Vow and Covenant must then
be made with God, to bind us more carefully and more conscionably to testify
the truth of our thankfulness, by our constant and faithful subjection to his
will, 2 Chronicles. 15.12, etc. 6. Psalms of praise must then be sung: This help the
Psalmist does much press, Psalm. 81.1, 2, etc. 7. It is meet that feasts be then
made; in time of Rejoicing, the creatures may be more liberally used then at
other times, but with respect to sobriety and charity.


By prayer is love wrought four ways, 1. It obtains it, for when we cry
earnestly, God will not deny us. 2. It brings us to communion with God, to
converse and be familiar with him, which breeds love. 3. In prayer God shows
himself; when we are much in calling upon, and praising God, he delights to
show himself to such a man, yea at such a time for the most part. 4. It
exercises love; if thou would be abundant in love, be fervent and frequent
in prayer.


The properties of right confession of sins in prayer to God: 1. We must
impartially confess to God, to the best of our knowledge and remembrance, our
special and particular sins. 2. We must set out our sins in their right
colors, making them appear vile and heinous as they are. 3. It must proceed
from the heart, Jer. 31.18. hypocritical confession is no confession. 4. We
must confess our sins with an hatred of them; for many hypocrites confess (like
Judas) their particular sins, but it is of custom, without conscience, or of
passion, without remorse, or of fear, without change; whereas the sins that are
in us should more grieve us, then the Judgments that are upon us. 5. Our
confession must not be extorted or enforced, but freely and willingly
performed, otherwise it is not true confession. 6. In our confession this must
be observed, That we ought not so far to dwell upon the meditation of our sins,
that we forget the mercies of God, and faith in his Promises, and forgiveness
of our sins. 7. It belongs to us and our confession, ever to join prayer to
God for the pardon of our sins, without which all is vain. 8. We ought so to
confess our sins, as that we have also a full purpose to leave and forsake
them; we may not think to find mercy, so long as we continue in that for which
we crave it.


The vain repetitions in prayer, condemned by our Savior Christ, Mat. 6.7.
comprehend many abuses in the manner of prayer; viz. 1. Mere babbling, when words
are used for prayer, which contain neither requests unto God, nor giving of
thanks, nor confession: Such is the use of the Ave-Maria, or the Angel Gabriels
Salutation to the Virgin Mary; yea, the rehearsal of the Ten Commandments and
of the Creed for Prayers, is but mere babbling. 2. Ignorance in prayer, as
prayer in an unknown tongue; and thus many sin, that use the Lords Prayer,
without understanding of the words. 3. Cold and dull praying, when the lips
draw near unto God, but the heart not affected therewith. 4. Superstitious
prayers, when as Gods worship is measured out by set numbers: This opinion
takes place with our common people, for they think that God is served by the
work done, if the words be said they think all is well. 5. Rash praying,
without due preparation, when men pray only on the sudden, by the motion of
the Spirit, as they call it; too many are of this mind, as allowing no set
form of prayer to any sort of people: but however conceived prayer be most
comfortable, yet without due preparation of the heart, it is most subject to
vain repetitions. 6. All vain and superfluous speech in any manner of
Invocation, wherein the heart is not affected according to the will of God.


Perseverence in prayer is grounded on Gods wise disposing Providence, and is
necessary to all faithful Christians, for these Reasons: 1. Because the
Sacrifice of true prayer, is a sweet and delightsom Sacrifice to God, Heb.
13.15, 16. 2. God thus tries the faith and patience of his Saints, whether
they can and will continue to wait upon him. 3. By perseverance, prayers move
more earnest and fervent, but as for cold prayers, God will spew them out, Rev.
3.16. 4. God thus moves his children to search their hearts, to see if they
can find any cause in them why God hears them not, Jos. 7.6, etc. 5. God
does thus commend his blessings so much the more unto us; for good things much
desired, often craved, long expected, are the more welcome when they are
obtained, and we moved to be the more thankful for them, Prove. 13.12.


The Signs of extraordinary ardency in prayer are such as these; viz. 1.
Extraordinary distemper of the body; thus was it with Christ, Luke 22.44. and
Nehemiah, Neh. 2.2. 2. Unusual motion of the parts of the body, as in Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.13. in Solomon, 1 Kings 8.22. in the Publican, Luke 18.13. and in Christ
himself, Mark 14.35. 3. Deep sighing and groans, as in David, Psalm. 38.9. The
sighs of the Spirit are inexpressible, Romans 8.26. 4. Loud crying; David roared
all the day, Psalm. 32.3. Christ cried with a loud voice, Mat. 27.46. 5. Often
inculcating and repeating the same petition: Thus did Christ, Mat. 26.39, 42,
44. So did Daniel, Dan. 9.18, 19. This is far from babbling or vain repetitions.
6. Tears; these Christ poured forth, Heb. 5.7. So did the sinful woman, Luke
7.38. yet tears simply in themselves are not acceptable to God, but only as
they are Signs of true Prayer, when they proceed from a broken heart and a
contrite Spirit.


The faults or abuses in our prayers; viz. 1. When we make our prayers unto any
other then God, or unto him in any other name then in Christ. 2. When the power
or grace of God is tied to some certain prayers, to a certain number or set
form. 3. When God is prayed to only with the mouth, without the heart. 4. When
any prays unto God with a vain opinion of his own righteousness. 5. When any
impenitent person, or that laboreth not to amend his life, prays. 6. When a
man prays without faith.


The duties required after Prayer viz. 1. A particular faith, whereby he that
prays must be assured that his particular request shall be granted. 2. We
must with patience and hope expect the fulfilling of our requests. 3. We must
use all good means, whereby we may shun those things we pray against, or attain
to these blessings and graces we pray for: we must do and practice that which
we pray for, and use all lawful means that we can to obtain it. 4. We must take
heed of fainting or growing weary, but labor to persevere and hold out; which
implies these three things; viz. 1. When we cleave to Christ constantly. 2.
When we will take no denial. 3. When we are content to wait in prayer, and not
give over.



We are bound to desire the prayers of others, for these Reasons: 1. For the
testification of the earnestness of our desire. 2. To show that we acknowledge
a Communion of Saints, which perform mutual duties one to another. 3. We
manifest a sense of our own weakness, yea much humility. 4. We maintain mutual
love, which consists not only in offering and doing kindenesses, but also in
craving and accepting the like.


We are also bound to pray for others as well as our selves; Because 1. Therein
we acknowledge God to be not only our own Father, but also the common Father
of others, in which Christ taught us to say, Our Father. 2. Hereby we perform a
duty of Love, one of the most principal duties that be; it is an act both of
Charity and Justice, they which neglect it, sin, 1 Samuel 12.13. 3. There is no
one thing wherein and whereby we can be more beneficial, and do more good to
any, then in and by faithful and fervent prayer.


They are justly to be reproved who pray not for others: and they are of three
sorts; viz. 1. Such as will take no notice of others necessities; of such
complained the Church of the Jews in her captivity, Lam. 1.12. These bewray too
much self-love. 2. Such, as who though they take notice, yet are not at all
moved to any compassion; of such the Prophet Amos complains, Amos 6.6. These
discover too great senslesness and plain inhumanity. 3. Such, who though they
be moved, yet perform not this duty, because they think it an idle frivolous
thing, nothing available and profitable; of such Job speaks, Job 21.15. These
manifest too much distrust in God, and plain Atheism.


They are not to be prayed for whom we know our prayers cannot help: These are
1. All such as are dead, for their estate is unchangeable. 2. They which sin
against the Holy Ghost. 3. They concerning whom God has given an express
command and charge to the contrary, and who are expressly and apparently
rejected of God; for who pray for such, gainsay the revealed will of God: Thus
we read not that Samuel prayed for Saul, after the Lord expressly forbade him, 2 Samuel 16.1. and thus the Lord forbade Jeremiah to pray for the people, Jer. 7.16.


Motives to public prayer. 1. The more public prayer is, the more honorable
and acceptable it is to God, because it is an honor to him, even when one
faithfully prays unto him; and that it is the more acceptable, his promise
shows, Matthew. 18.28. 2. It is more powerful; thus to prevent a Judgment, or
rather to remove it, the Prophet assembles all the people together to pray,
Joel 2.16, 17. So did the King of Niniveh, Jonah 3.8. 3. It is a sign of
communion, an outward sign whereby we manifest our selves to be of the chosen
and called flock of Christ. 4. It is an especial means of mutual edification,
for thereby we mutually stir up the zeal, and inflame the affection of one
another. 5. The neglect of it is a note of profaneness; from which blame
Seperatists and Schismatics, though they would seem very Religious, cannot
well acquit themselves; they are not of David's mind, who mourned when he could
not come into the house of Prayer, Psalm. 48.1, etc. These would too untimely
separate the Tares from the Wheat before the Harvest.


Prayer in a Family is very necessary, because 1. A Family has need of
peculiar blessings, beside the common which in the Church are prayed for; yea,
and has received many, for which peculiar thanks is to be given. 2. A true
Christians house (if Gods worship, a principal part whereof is Prayer, be there
from time to time performed) is made Gods Church, which is a great honor unto a
Family, Romans 16.5. Phil. 4. 3. By prayer a Christian brings Gods blessing into
his house; for where God is called upon, there is he present to bestow his
blessings, as he blessed Obed-Edom and all his household, while the Ark was in
his house, 2 Samuel 6.11.


It is very needful that secret prayer be added both to public prayer at
Church, and private prayer in a Family, and that for these Reasons: 1. Hereby
we may more freely pour out our whole hearts to God, and make known our mind.
2. This kind of prayer affords the truest trial of the uprightness of a man's
heart; for a man may a long time continue to pray in the Church and in a
Family, and his prayer be mere formal, even only for companies sake. 3. This
argues great familiarity with God. 4. It brings greatest comfort to a man's
heart; and they which content themselves with Church and Family-prayers, have
very just cause to suspect themselves. 5. Such Wives, Children, Servants, and
other inferiors, as live in any house under profane Governors, that will not
have prayers in their Families, may by this kind of prayer make supply thereof
unto their own souls, for none can hinder secret prayer.


The difference betwixt praying and wishing; viz. 1. Wishes are sudden and
inconsiderate, straightway ceasing; Prayer is with deliberation, and gives not
over without speeding of the thing desired. 2. Wishes are without respect of
the means and care of right or wrong in attaining the thing wished for; Prayer
is with submission to the lawful use of the means, and care of prevailing by
right only. 3. Wishes are for the most part of things worldly; Prayer is
chiefly for things Spiritual and heavenly, one only Petition of six in the
Lords Prayer being for things Temporal. 4. Wishes are sometimes for things
Spiritual and heavenly, but very unconstant, as Balaams wish, Let me dye the
death of the righteous; but Prayer persevereth, like Jacob wrestling with God.


Reasons to enforce us to the practice of this duty of prayer: 1. Prayer is one
of the most principal parts of Gods worship, for herein we acknowledge him to
be the Giver of all good things, the Searcher and knower of all hearts; and
hereby we testify the Faith, Hope and Confidence we have in God: it is called,
The calves of our lips, Hosea 14.2. because it is a Sacrifice well-pleasing to
God. 2. By prayer we do obtain, and also continue and preserve unto our selves
every good grace and blessing of God, specially such as concern eternal life;
for God promises his Spirit to them that ask it by prayer, Luke 11.13. 3. The
true gift and Spirit of prayer is a pledge of the Spirit of Adoption, and
therefore the Spirit of prayer is called the Spirit of Grace, Zech. 1.3. 4. By
prayer we have Spiritual communion and familiarity with God; for in preaching
of the word God speaks to us, and in prayer we speak to God, and the more we
pray, the nearer and greater fellowship we have with him. 5. It is specially
commanded of God as a special means to obtain all blessings, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. 6.
The gracious Promises God has made unto effectual prayer, may allure us to
pray, Mat. 7.7. 7. Consider the efficacy, power and force of prayer, Jam. 5.16.
8. The excellency thereof, and the privilege we have by it, to have free
liberty to come to God. 9. The profit of prayer, for it has the promise of
this life, and of the life to come, Romans 10.12. 10. The necessity thereof, for
without it we show our selves destitute of Grace, and so in the state of
condemnation, Jam. 4.2.


Motives to prayer repeated: 1. Gods express charge and command; David obeyed
it, Psalm. 27.8. and indeed this of it self were fully sufficient without any
other motives. 2. Gods worship, Prayer being the most principal, especial and
proper part thereof. 3. The honor of God, for he is not by any thing more
honored then by Prayer, by which we do acknowledge him to be 1. Every where
present, and in every place to hear his children. 2. To be the Fountain of all
Blessings, therefore we give the praise thereof to God. 3. To be a God full of
pity and compassion, which makes us to lay open our griefs and distresses to
him. 4. To be an Almighty God, able to give whatsoever we desire. 5. To be a
bountiful God, who gives to all liberally, and upbraideth not. 6. To be a God
true of his Promises, therefore we crave the accomplishing of them.
4. The necessity of prayer, for it is the means which God has appointed to
obtain every good thing, Mat. 7.7. Jam. 4.7. 5. The utility or profit we
receive by this duty of Prayer, which is exceeding much, and very beneficial to
us many ways; as 1. To obtain every good thing; Christ has passed his most
certain and general Promise for it, Joh. 16.23. 2. To prevent Judgments
threatened, Jer. 26.19. and remove them being inflicted, Jam. 5.18. 3. To
preserve, nourish and strengthen in us all Spiritual graces, Col. 1.9, etc. 4.
To obtain pardon and remission of sins, Acts 8.22. 5. To subdue in us the power
of sin, Psalm. 19.13. experience can well witness this to those that use prayer.
6. To sanctify all Gods creatures to our use, and whatever we do, 1 Timothy 4.5.
usurpers are they that use them otherwise.
6. The efficacy thereof, for it prevails over all Creatures reasonable or
unreasonable; and of reasonable, both visible, as Man, and invisible, as
Angels, whether evil or good; yea it prevails with God himself: Examples of
all which may be these; Daniel by prayer stopped the mouths of the Lions, Dan.
6.22. David's prayer turned Achitophels counsel into foolishness, 2 Samuel 15.31.
Thereby the Devil, even when he is surest possessed, is cast out, Mat. 17.21.
At Elisha's prayer a mountain was full of horses, and chariots of fire round
about him, 2 Kings 6.17. By prayer Jacob had power over the Angel (which was
called, The Angel of the Covenant, Christ Jesus, true God, Hos. 12.4.) who
therefore was called Israel, because he prevailed with God, Genesis 32.28.
7. The great honor thereof, whereby the Saints have a free access to the
glorious Throne of Grace.


The Romish Church does neither know, nor teach, nor practice the duty of
prayer aright, and that for these Reasons: 1. They pray not in knowledge, but
in a strange tongue, and allow of Ignorance as the Mother of Devotion. 2. They
commend doubting, and speak against Assurance, and so pray not in faith nor
obedience. 3. They pray not in humility for mercy for their sins, for they
think to merit by their prayers. 4. They direct not their prayers to God only
in the name of Christ, but to God and his Saints, making the Virgin Mary their
Mediatress.


In the close of all, take this seasonable direction with thee touching praying
for or against our Enemies; We may lawfully pray against the evil cause that an
evil man maintains, but not against the person of that evil man: Now if any
extraordinary man has truly and indeed the Spirit of discerning, to judge
whether Gods and his enemies be incurable, and has a pure zeal to Gods honor
therein, he may lawfully pray against such their very persons, as David did in
the 109 Psalm.

Prayer, the Souls Incense, sent by faith to God,
Attracts his Blessings, and diverts his Rod:
It does acquaint us with the Lord, and makes
A trembling Terror cease The Infernal Snakes:
It makes the weak victorious, yea, the Sun
Stand still, Go back: It stays a Plague begun.
When The Earth had in a Burning-Feaver layen
Full three years space, it caused a gracious Rain;
It wings the Soul for that Celestial good,
Which eye, ear, heart never saw, heard, understood.
. 2. The Lords Prayer.
WE must imitate and follow the matter and form of the Lords Prayer in all our
prayers, but are not so tied to the very words of this Prayer, but that we may
freely use them or other words at our pleasure; for our Savior himself
oft-times prayed in other words, and so did the Apostles; neither is there such
virtue, as that by the bare repetition of them, we can bind God to grant our
requests, or that we should never pray in other words: But as the Ten
Commandments contain all things to be done of us, the Creed all things to be
believed by us, so the Lords Prayer does comprehend all things to be asked by
us of Almighty God.

Some think it is to be used only as a Direction, by which we may learn how
and what to pray, and that the words themselves are not to be used; others
think it the only Prayer to be used at all times, and upon all occasions: The
former opinion grounds it self on Mat. 6.9. the latter on Luke 11.2. The truth
is, the use of this Prayer is not only to direct for matter, or for words, but
for both; but in praying the very words, take heed lest the tongue run without
the heart, as it must needs do in those that ceremoniously rehearse them,
making haste to have done, before they ever truly began. Wherefore to pray
these words rightly, he that prays must in some convenient measure understand
them, and have his mind taken up with them, in the uttering, the heart still
conveying it self into the meaning of every petition; and if thus this Prayer
be said, it is well used alone, or added to other prayer. Now we must know,
That other prayers, though differing from this in order, yet if consonant
thereto in matter, may also be used by us; for otherwise Paul in his Epistles
would not have used such variety of order and manner in thanksgivings, requests
and deprecations for his Spiritual children, for himself, and for the whole
Church: So that though this order be generally to be followed, yet neither is
it always necessary, nor yet is it a swerving from this Direction, though some
of these petitions only be asked in some of our prayers, and others be
omitted. But the error is, when we go beyond the Rules here given us, doting
too much upon worldly things, or having proud, unfaithful or malicious hearts,
we make our prayers the labor of polluted lips.

In the Lords prayer are contained 1. A preface, and therein a compellation
(Our Father) wherein seven things are to be considered: 1. Who is to be called
upon; that is God, whom we are to call by the Name of Father: wherein we must
observe, That Father here is not the Name of one Person only, but of the whole
Essence. 2. That God will hear such as call upon him, because he is their
Father. 3. That he is able to grant and answer their requests, for he is in
heaven. 4. Who ought and also are able to pray aright, and they are the Sons of
God. 5. That Faith is here required, for by Faith we become the Sons of God. 6.
Through whom we must pray; that is, in the Name of the only begotten Son of
God. 7. The difference betwixt the prayers of Christians, and of Turks or Jews,
for ours are made by faith in Christ.
2. Six requests; viz. 1. Hallowed be, etc. which is then done, when the true
knowledge and glory of God is celebrated by men. 2. Thy Kingdom, etc. that is,
let thy Church be extended, multiplied, preserved, enlarged and guided by thy
Spirit. 3. Thy will be, etc. which is then done, when we obeying the will of
God, do what he commands us. 4. Give us, etc. that is, all things which
pertain to our sustentation in this life. 5. Forgive us, etc. that is, our sins
and infirmities; and here note, That our forgiving others is not the cause, but
the consequence or effect of Gods forgiving us, and the sign of our remission.
6. Lead us not into Temptation; that is, 1. That God would not suffer us to be
invaded or set upon by the wicked suggestions of Satan. 2. Nor be drowned in
the pleasures of sin. 3. Nor by consent fall into the snares of Temptation: But
deliver us from evil; that is, generally all things hurtful to our selves, the
Church or State.

3. The Conclusion, For thine is the Kingdom, etc. which is added as a Reason
of all the Petitions, to strengthen our faith, and therefore we add a note of
confidence, and say, Amen: which particle is not as a part of the Prayer, but
as a note of our desire, wherewith we wish we may be heard; and of our faith,
whereby we believe we shall be heard.


The Lord used this kind of Proeme, because he will be called upon with due
honor, which consists 1. In the true knowledge of God. 2. In true confidence
in him. 3. In obedience to him; which compriseth 1. True love. 2. True fear. 3.
Hope. 4. Humiliation. 5. Patience.



Again, of the six Petitions in the Lords Prayer, 1. The three former concern
Gods glory: 1. Hallowed be thy Name; that is, that the Name of God may be
glorified in his Titles, words and works. 2. Thy Kingdom come; that is, that
the number of true Believers may be daily increased, that Gods Kingdom of Grace
being enlarged, his Kingdom of Glory may be hastened. 3. Thy will be done; that
is, that all the people of God may upon earth as readily obey Gods will, as the
Angels and Saints in heaven.
2. The three latter concern our selves: 1. Give us, etc. that is, all temporal
things necessary for this life. 2. Forgive us, etc. that is, that God would
freely forgive us all our sins, as we do from our hearts forgive the offenses
of men against us. 3. Lead us not, etc. that is, that the Lord would not suffer
us to be carried away by the Temptations of the World, the Flesh or the Devil.



The excellency of the Lords prayer stands in these things 1. In the pithy
shortness of it, for in few words it comprehends endless matter. 2. In the
perfection of it, for it contains in it whatsoever is to be asked in prayer;
in which respect it is properly called the Abridgement of the whole Gospel. 3.
In the order thereof, which is most exquisite. 4. In the acceptance it has
with God the Father; for it contains the words of Christ his Son, in whom the
Father is well pleased.


The excellency of this Prayer shows, 1. That if any set form of prayer may
be used, then this may, being indicted by the Mediator of the Church; therefore
let such as deny the use of it, better consider hereof, when as for the space
of One thousand five hundred years after Christ, there were never any that
disallowed it. 2. That the practice of such who conclude their prayers with
this, is commendable; for hereby, as by a most perfect and excellent prayer,
the wants and imperfections of our prayers are supplied. 3. That such who
gather from the perfection and excellency of this prayer, that it alone is to
be used, are deceived, for Christ's intent was rather to commend this prayer
unto us for matter and manner, then for the words. 4. That though it be a most
perfect prayer, yet is it only general; but every true Believer needs
particular prayers, whereby in special form and manner his particular state and
condition may be sent up unto the Lord; yet so, as they be always suitable unto
this form here prescribed.


Two extremes are here to be taken heed of: 1. Too much confidence in the words
of this Prayer often repeated, as some Popes of Rome have granted great Pardons
to seven Paternosters, and as many Ave-Maries, said over every day, or on some
days, and in some places, which is gross and superstitious. 2. Too much
detracting from this Prayer, by accounting it no better, or not so worthy as a
man's own conceived prayer, which is derogatory and arrogant.


Our Savior Christ having forbidden his Disciples all carnal and superstitious
kind of praying, prescribed them this holy form, Matthew. 6.9, etc. The use
whereof is a form of Direction, learning thereby what to ask, what first and
chiefly, with what affections and assurance; for if we were left unto our
selves, we should greatly err in praying, asking oft-times those things that
are not good for us, and against the will of God, out of a fleshly mind;
therefore has the Lord reduced all things, which we may ask, into these few
short Petitions, and out of any carnal presumption to transgress these bounds,
is not to offer a pleasing Sacrifice, but as it were with strange fire to
provoke him, as did Nadab and Abihu, Lev. 10.

Some, in a superstitious notion;
Suppose this Pattern of Devotion
Stands chiefly in the words, and can expel
Poison, and Counter-charm the Powers of Hell.
Blind Idolist! unless the heart language shall
The words, the words are ineffectual.
Since thou have given us (Lord) compactly choice
Words and matter both, give us too thy voice,
Thy Spirits voice in ours, that so we may
With Faith, Love, Zeal, as thou have taught us, Pray.
. 3. Our Father.
CHrist Jesus only is the Son of God by Nature, for which cause he is called
the only begotten Son of the Father, Joh. 1.18. And we are Sons only by
Adoption and Grace; and therefore when we call God Father, we must not think
any thing singularly of our selves, as if he were our Father specially, but the
common Father of us all that believe: And we say, Our Father, not My Father,
because we ought to pray for all the children of God, as well as for our
selves. And here observe, That here and always the Name of Father, as also the
Name of God, when it is opposed to the Creatures, is taken essentially, not
personally; but when it is put with another person of the Godhead, it is taken
personally. Our Father] that is, O Lord God, thou art the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and in him our most merciful Father, by Adoption and Grace; yet
here again observe, That we do not here pray to the Father only, but to the
whole Trinity: yet as the first Person is the eternal Fountain of the Deity, we
pray to the Father, by the Son, through the Holy Ghost; nor may it seem
strange, that Christ, who as he is Man is our Brother, and is not ashamed to
call us his Brethren, Heb. 2.11. is called our Father; for as he is God, he is
our Father, and therefore called, The Father of Eternity, Isa. 9.6.

Christ by this word [Our] in the very Proeme of his prayer, does admonish us
of mutual love; 1. Because there is no true praying without the true love of
our Neighbor, neither can we be persuaded that God hears us. 2. Because
without the love of our Neighbor there is no true faith, and without faith
there is no true prayer.


Christ wills us to say [Our Father] not [My Father] for these Reasons: 1.
Thereby to raise in us a confidence and full persuasion that we shall be heard;
for because the whole Church does with one consent pray unto him, he does not
reject her for his Promise sake. 2. To teach us that we hold each member of the
Church as our brother, Genesis 13.8. 3. That in prayer we must consider Christ and
his Church as one body, and make him our Father, who is the Father of Christ
our elder brother; his by generation, ours by regeneration; his by Nature, ours
by Grace. 4. That we must pray as well in charity for others, as for our
selves, James 5.16. Now they whom we are to pray for, may be distinguished into
this rank or order: 1. All such as are effectually called by the preaching of
the word. 2. For all such as God in his eternal secret Counsel has appointed
unto life, but are not yet called from their wanderings to be of one sheepfold
under one Shepherd, Joh. 17.20. 3. For particular persons, of whom we have
received benefit, under whose Government we live, or which be more dear or near
unto us in the flesh, 2 Cor. 9.12. 4. For such as whose necessity is more
specially made known unto us, as of danger or distress, Jam. 5.14. 5. For men
generally of all estates and conditions, 1 Timothy 2.3. as Jews, Turks, Heathen,
and seduced Papists. 6. For our Enemies, and those that hate us, Matthew. 5.41.



God the Father is the Father 1. Of Christ 1. By Nature, begetting him as he is
the Son, of his own Substance, before all worlds, by communicating unto him his
whole Essence or Godhead. 2. By the Grace of personal Union, as Christ is Man;
for the Manhood of Christ does wholly subsist in the Godhead of the second
Person: and therefore Christ, as he is Man (not his Manhood, which is a Nature,
not a Person) may well be called the Son of God.
2. Of us, not by Nature, or in regard of personal Union, but by the Grace of
Adoption in Christ, Gal. 4.4, 5. And this Grace we receive when we truly
believe in his Name, Joh. 3.12. Gal. 3.26.


The Name of Father in this place is taken Essentially, for these Reasons; viz.
1. Because the Name of Father is not here put with another person of the
Godhead, but with the Creature of whom he is invocated. 2. The invocating of
one person does not exclude the others, when mention is made of their eternal
and outward works. 3. We cannot consider God the Father, but in the Son the
Mediator. 4. Christ has taught us to invocate him also, and he gives the Holy
Ghost; For we have received, not the spirit of bondage to fear again, but the
Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father; And the same Spirit bears
witness with our spirits, that we are the children of God, Romans 8.15, 16.


Again, God is called Our Father, 1. In respect of our Creation, Luke 3.38. 2.
In respect of our Redemption, and receiving into favor by his Son our Mediator,
for whose sake we are adopted. 3. In respect of our Sanctification, or
Regeneration by the Holy Ghost in Christ.


The Instructions arising from this Title Father here given to God: 1. We must
hence learn whom to direct our prayers unto, not to Saints, Angels, or any
other creature, but to God alone, for these Reasons: 1. Because this is a
perfect pattern of true prayer, wanting no direction for the right performance
of this part of God worship. 2. Because God only is the Author and giver of
all good things, Jam. 1.16. therefore we must ask them of him alone. 3. Because
the Lord only, who is Infinite and Omnipotent, can hear all men's prayers at
all times, and in all places.
2. We may hereby see in what order we must direct our prayers unto God the
Father, in the Mediation of the Son, by the Assistance of the Holy Ghost;
neither severing the persons from the Godhead, nor the Godhead from the
Persons, whereof the Father is first, the Son is the second, the Holy Ghost the
third in order, though not in time or greatness. Thus must we worship him, even
one God in three Persons, and three Persons in one God. 3. In this Title
Father, we see the true ground of that boldness wherewith Gods children come
before God in prayer; namely, that interest in the Covenant of Grace in Christ,
in whom God is become their Father. 4. We are hereby taught how to dispose our
selves toward God when we come before him in prayer, namely, as children; and
this stands especially in four things: 1. In due reverence both of heart and
gesture. 2. In true humility, from our hearts renouncing our own merit, and our
own wills, and relying wholly on Christ's Righteousness, and on the will of God
in him. 3. In true contrition and sorrow of heart for our own sins, whereby we
have offended God, who has been so gracious and merciful a Father unto us in
Christ. 4. In a sound purpose of heart to break off the course of all sin, and
to walk before God in new obedience to all his Commandments.



The Instructions arising from the words Our Father. 1. We must apply to our
selves all the Promises of God in Christ touching Righteousness and life
everlasting; for he that makes them is our Father, therefore they belong to us
that be his children. 2. This teaches us when we pray, to be mindeful of Gods
whole Militant Church and People. 3. Hence we learn how we must come affected
toward our Brethren, when we pray to God, namely, lovingly and peaceably, as
to children of the same Father. 4. Here we see that all true Believers, whether
high or low, poor or rich, are in equal condition in regard of God, for here
Christ teaches every one to say, Our Father.


Hence it follows, That wicked men living in sin cannot pray, all their
supposed praying is but a vain beating of the Air with a sound of words;
neither shall they speed otherwise then Esau did, though they cry aloud with
strong and bitter cries; yet pray they ought, it being a common duty required
of all men; but pray they cannot, yea they sin if they pray, such a maze or
labyrinth does sin bring them into; but true Believers with confidence approach
the Throne of Grace, and in an holy boldness say, Our Father.

Father, a word of Faith does seem to be,
And [Our] no less importing Charity:
The one proclaims, If thou will live, Do this;
The other says, Believe, and thou have bliss.
The Law and Gospel both comprised be
In this most happy short Epitomy.
Blessed Savior, in two words thou have taught us all
We can thy Love, or our Salvation call.
This does with mutual tenderness combine,
As thou art Ours, so grant we may be Thine.
. 4. Which art in Heaven.
HEaven here signifies the habitation of God, of the holy Angels, and of
blessed men; and God is said to dwell there, not that he is there only (for he
is every where) but because his Majesty, power and glory is more apparent in
heaven then in earth, and does also there immediately show and manifest
himself: whence we learn with reverence to pray unto him, being our Father most
glorious and most powerful; for to be in heaven, what is it but to be above all
things, and to have them in subjection? Psalm. 115.3. So that we say (Which art
in heaven) because there he shows himself chiefly to the Saints, Eccles.
21.24. and from thence he manifestth himself to man, Psalm. 57.3.

There is mention made of three Heavens in Scripture: 1. The Air, in which we
breath, Genesis 1.26. 2. The Sky, in which are the Stars, Deuteronomy. 1.10. 3. The
Heaven of Heavens, in which Christ, the Angels, and Saints departed are, 1
Kings 8.27. called by Christ, His Fathers house, Joh. 14 2. by Paul, Paradise,
2 Cor. 12.4. by Matthew, The Throne of God, and The City of the great King,
Mat. 5.34. This is the heaven here specially understood, being as it were Gods
Mansion House.


God by an excellency is said to be in heaven, and that in three especial
respects: 1. To show that there is no proportion betwixt him and Earthly
Potentates, for he is infinitely more excellent then any under heaven, Psalm.
113.5. 2. To show that he has his eyes continually on all his servants; he
sees every thing that they do, as one placed above and over them, Psalm.
102.19. and 33.19. Prove. 15.3. 3. To show that he is Almighty, able both to
recompense his faithful servants, Psalm. 123.1. and also to execute vengeance on
those that are unfaithful to God, and cruel to his servants, Eccles. 5.8.


The Lord commands us to say (Our Father Which art in heaven) for these
Reasons: 1. Thereby to show the opposition and contrariety of earthly fathers
and this Father. 2. To raise up in us a confidence that God hears us. 3. To
raise a reverence of him in us. 4. That we call on him in fervency of Spirit.
5. That the mind of him that worshippeth be lifted up to heavenly things. 6.
That heavenly things be desired. 7. That the error of Ethnicks might be met
withal, who think that they may worship God in Creatures; as also of the blind
Papists, who suppose they may worship the God of heaven in an Image of Earth.
8. To admonish us, that we are not to direct our prayers to a certain place, as
in the Old Testament.


God is said to be in heaven, 1. For his glory, which does most shine in the
third heaven, it being there most manifested to the holy Angels and blessed
Saints by an immediate vision and fruition. 2. There there is not only a
natural, but also a supernatural and extraordinary demonstration of his
glorious Attributes, of Justice, Mercy, Power, Wisdom, etc. 3. From his purity
and holiness, even as heaven is pure, and not obnoxious to corruption, in such
manner as the inferior bodies are. 4. For his excellent, majestical and
inaccessible brightness, even as the most shining heavenly Creatures, the Sun
and Stars, which are but dim Creatures in respect of his glorious brightness;
and all this serves to breed in us humility and reverence in coming before the
Lord.


This Prayer begins not with a Preface of Gods Sovereignty, Omnipotency,
Justice, etc. but with this of Paternity, and that in Heaven, for these
Reasons; viz. 1. His Sovereignty would terrify us, because we have rebelled.
2. His Omnipotency would amaze us, being dust and ashes. 3. His Justice would
affright us, being guilty of our sins. 4. His Paternity does allure us, as
prodigal sons, coming to a liberal and merciful Father, Luke 1.15, 18. yet so
as he is in heaven, whereby we are held back from unreverently presuming on
this paternal style; he is so graciously pleased to vouchsafe us that filial
honor to entitle him by.


From this place of God the Father (in heaven) we may draw these necessary
Observations: 1. That the eye of Faith is needful to behold him withal, for
heaven is too high for any bodily eye to pierce into; but by faith Moses saw
him who was invisible. 2. Though Potentates have none on earth above them, yet
in heaven there is one higher then the highest of them. 3. That they who cannot
be heard on earth, have yet one to Appeal unto. 4. That the command under which
earthly Princes are, is far greater then that which themselves have: Their
Commander is in heaven. 5. That the poorest and meanest that be, may have as
free access to God, as the wealthiest and greatest, and their suit shall be as
soon received, Job 34.19. 6. That the great ones on earth have as great cause
to fear the revenging hand of God for any sin, as mean ones.


These words (Which art in heaven) instruct, us, 1. Toward what place we are
to address our selves in prayer. 2. When we pray, to come before God with
reverence, godly fear, and filial trembling; Remember therefore to use all
reverence in prayer. 3. To ask of God in prayer heavenly things especially,
Luke 11.13. other things as helps only to them. 4. To make it our principal
care how we may come to heaven, for there our Father is; and though our bodies
be on earth, yet in affection and desire our souls should mount to heaven. 5.
That God is therefore able to grant our requests, 1 Kings 8.30. 6. That we may
pray with confidence unto him, Psalm. 123.1. 7. That in prayer our heart must be
in heaven, 1 Kings 8.48. Psalm. 25.1. This is the true worship, Joh. 4.23. 8.
That we are here as Pilgrims, and that our conversation must be in heaven,
Phil. 3.21. Heb. 13.14. 9. That we must look for all graces and helps from
heaven, Jer. 1.17. 10. That by Pilgrimages we need not seek to God, Psalm.
145.18. 11. That he differs far from earthly parents, who would help, but
cannot oftentimes. 12. That no creature can hurt us, Psalm. 2.4, 5. and 118.6.
Romans 8.30. 13. That we must prefer him before earthly parents, Mat. 8.22. 14.
That we also shall be with him in heaven.


God is said to be in heaven, not as though he were included in the Circle of
the Heavens; for the Heavens, and the Heaven of Heavens is not able to contain
him, 1 Kings 8.27. and indeed he is neither included nor excluded, being
Infinite, and so every where: but because his Majesty and glory is most eminent
in the highest Heavens to his Saints and Angels; and thence does he manifest
himself unto us in his Power, Wisdom, Justice and Mercy, while we are on earth,
for Heaven is his throne and Earth is his footstool, Isa. 66.1. Thus the words
[Which art in Heaven] are not spoken circumscriptively, as though God were
contained in the Heaven, or as though, if the Heavens were not, God could not
be, as the Inhabitants of the Earth cannot be when the Earth cease, for God
was before all Heavens, and Earth and Creatures; but because his glorious
Presence and Attributes are most eminently visible in Heaven, and also to set
forth his most mighty power, Psalm. 115.3. he is by an excellency said to be in
Heaven.

Heaven is thy Throne, Great God, how then dare we,
Who but the Creatures of thy Footstool be,
Look Heaven-wards, and cast an eye aloft,
Or lift hands to, against which we have so often?
This Charter thou have sealed us by thy Son,
The Privilege of our Adoption.
Heaven thy Throne! Vanish distrust, carnal fear,
Thou can our Prayers grant as soon as hear:
But teach us by thy Spirit this holy skill,
To ask in Faith what answers to thy will.
. 5. Hallowed be thy Name.
BY the Name of God, is meant the whole worship of God; or Gods Name is any
thing that may be referred unto God, in which he may be considered; as his
Word, his Sacraments, his Servants and his Works: So that by the Name of the
Lord we are to understand That, whatsoever it is, whereby the Lord is made
known unto us, according to his most glorious Attributes, as Wisdom, Power,
Justice, Mercy, etc. and this may be either by his Titles, his Word or his
Works. Now we must know, That Gods Name cannot be more sanctified in it self,
then it is; but the sanctifying of it that we here pray for, is, That it may be
sanctified in us, which may be when it hears well by our walking worthy of
this holy Name, which is amongst us called upon and professed; for contrariwise
it is said to be blasphemed, Romans 2.24. And whereas thy Name, O Lord, is used
as unholy by profane worldlings, vindicate and deliver it from such abuses,
and make us to stand for thine honor against such; and provide for the
preservation of the same, from being used as a common thing, working in all thy
people an holy consent to hallow it together, abstaining from all common
unworthy usage thereof: And open our eyes, that we may know thee aright, and
may discern thy Power, Wisdom, Justice and Mercy, and enlarge our hearts, that
we may sanctify thee in them, by making thee our Fear, Love, Joy and
Confidence; and open our lips, that we may bless thee for thy goodness; yea,
open our eyes, that we may see thee in thy Works, and strike our hearts with
reverence of thy Name appearing in them; and grant, that when we use any one of
them, we may honor thee in our sober and sanctified use thereof.

This Petition comes in the first place, because it is the end and scope of all
the other, for the end of all things must be Gods glory; and it is placed
before [Thy Kingdom come] to teach us, That no man can be a true Subject of
Gods Kingdom, unless that in his heart he makes principal account of Gods
glory. Thus the first of the three first Petitions in the Lords Prayer
concerning God immediately, concerns Gods glory it self; The other two, the
means whereby Gods glory is manifested and enlarged amongst men: For Gods glory
is then manifested, and his Name hallowed among men, when his Kingdom does
come, and his Will is done. And this order of the Petitions (that the first
three concern Gods glory, the other three our selves) teaches us how gracious
the Lords is toward us sinful men, allowing us if we come with one request for
the advancement of his glory, to come with another for our own benefit; if with
three for him, with three for our selves also: but first in order are his
three; for if we seek our selves first and chiefly, we ask in vain.

The order of placing the Petitions concerning Gods glory first, and then those
concerning our selves, teaches, 1. That God is absolutely to be respected, and
for himself, but Man for Gods cause. 2. That the first and main thing by the
Lord intended in Creating all, is his own glory; and whatsoever is good for
man, is subordinate to this, and only so far forth to be sought after, as it
makes for Gods glory. 3. That the glory of the Lords Name is so dear unto him,
as that he did not only make it his Mark in the Creation, but in every
particular duty done by man, he sets it still as his Mark; as here in
Prayer, in giving the Law, in the Gospel: at the very Nativity of the Blessed
One, the Angels are heard lauding and glorifying God.


The Name of God signifies, 1. God himself, Psalm. 116.13. 2. Gods Commandment
and Charge, his Divine Will and Authority, Mat. 28.19. 3. The Divine
Attributes, Properties and Works of God; in which signification it is here
principally understood.


Holy signifies 1. All the Properties of God; for all the virtues of God are
holiness. 2. That holiness which is in his Creatures; that is, their conformity
with God, which is begun in the godly, and is perfect in the Angels. 3. The
ordaining and appointing of things to holy uses: The word of Hallowing, is here
taken in all these three senses.


To hallow or sanctify, is in Scripture used three ways; viz. 1. Of us, 1.
When we hallow or sanctify our selves and others; that is, when as touching
external and outward things, we prepare our selves and others to glorify God.
2. When we hallow and sanctify God; that is, 1. When we acknowledge God to be
holy, or to be such as he has declared himself in his word and works. 2. When
we profess God to be holy, and so magnify him according to his will, both in
mind and word, as also in deed and works. 3. When we refer the true Doctrine,
knowledge and profession of Gods holiness, and likewise our Prayers and
actions, and even our whole life unto that end whereunto we ought, and whether
God has commanded it to be referred, that is, to the glory and worship of God
himself.

2. Of God, when he does sanctify others 1. Inwardly, by his holy Spirit. 2.
Outwardly, by his word, which he effectuateth 1. By seperating them from their
sins. 2. By reviving and quickening them by his holy Spirit. 3. By the
continuing of both.

3. Of Christ 1. Passively, because 1. The word was ordained and consecrated by
the Father to the Office of the Mediatorship. 2. The humane Nature of Christ
was consecrated out of that whole lump or mass; that is, was selected from
among all Creatures to the union with the Word. 3. His humane Nature was
preserved from sin, for the performance of the Mediatorship. 4. Because Christ
is hallowed and sanctified of us.
2. Actively, because he sanctifies 1. Himself, 1. As he is the Word; the Word
did sanctify with his Father that flesh which he took, by preserving the same
from sin, and by endowing it with all gifts. 2. As he is Mediator he sanctified
himself, by his voluntary obedience toward his Father, in offering himself a
Sacrifice for us.
2. Us, 1. By imputing his own Righteousness. 2. By a real communicating of his
holiness, which is wrought by the Holy Ghost.





When we desire that the Name of God may be sanctified or hallowed, we desire
1. That God would enlighten us with the knowledge of his holiness. 2. That he
would give us a mind to profess the same in words and deeds; or that he would
give us Faith and Repentance, whereby we may glorify him, and sever him from
Idols or profane things; or that he would new frame and regenerate us By
Knowledge. By Profession. By Conformity.
3. That he would give us a mind to profess that holiness of his Divine Name
to his own praise and glory.


Again, to hallow or sanctify, signifies 1. The purifying of a thing which
before was corrupt and unholy: Thus mystically it was showed to Peter, that God
had sanctified the Gentiles, Acts 10.15. 2. The seperating of any thing common
to an holy use: Thus Aaron and his sons are said to be sanctified, and their
vestments, and the vessels of the Temple. 3. The acknowledging of a thing to be
holy, and declaring it by giving all due observance and respect thereunto, so
that the holiness thereof may be made more famous and notable among all men.
And thus in this sense we do pray, Hallowed be thy Name, whether we do speak of
thy Titles, behold thy Creatures and works of Providence, receive thy
blessings, or be conversant in the exercises of thy Word and Sacraments, or of
any other Divine Ordinances.


Gods Name is generally sanctified or hallowed by us these five ways: 1. That
we sing his praises, read his word, and speak reverently of him. 2. That in
adversity he be praised of us both in heart and mouth. 3. That so often as need
shall require, we make a free confession of his Truth, and lead a life
agreeable to the same confession. 4. That we pray unto him, and from our heart
give him thanks. 5. That when it shall be necessary, we lawfully swear by his
Name.


More specially thus, Gods Name is hallowed by us 1. In himself, and that by
three actions: 1. When we conceive of God in our minds, and acknowledge him as
he has revealed himself in his Word. 2. When we love the Lord above all, fear
him above all, and put our whole trust in him in all estates. 3. When we praise
and laud the Name of God for his infinite goodness to us.
2. In his word, and that three ways: 1. When we acknowledge the Wisdom, Mercy
and Power of God in it. 2. When we have a reverent estimation of the Word in
regard of Gods Image therein. 3. When we use it in a sanctified and holy manner,
giving our selves to be ruled and guided thereby.
3. In his Creatures, by three special actions: 1. When we acknowledge the
wisdom of God, and his powerful hand in every Creature. 2. When we have a
reverent estimation of the Creatures, and use them in Christian sobriety, in
regard of the stamp of Gods power and wisdom which appears in them. 3. When
we sanctify the moderate use of them by the Word and Prayer, 1 Timothy 4.5.



This Petition in the Lords Prayer (as every one of the other) contains 1. A
Supplication, That we and all the people of God may glorify the holy Name of
God in our affections, loving him with all our hearts, with all our souls, and
with all our might, fearing him above all, and putting our whole trust in him;
in our Devotion, with pure minds lifted up to him only, to pray; and in our
speeches, swearing rightly and reverently by his Name, when we are required
thereto; and never making mention of him but with high reverence, and in all
our natural and civil actions. 2. A Deprecation against the sins contrary to
the said Duties, as Self-love, and of the world, Fear of men, Trust in the Arm
of Flesh, Corrupt worshipping of God, Neglect of his worship, Errors in speech
to the dishonor of his Name, Cursings, Swearings, Perjuries, Neglect of Vows,
Giving Gods honor to Creatures, Swearing by them, also Errors in action, and
lastly, all thinking or speaking unworthily of the Works of God, by murmuring,
cavilling, objecting against them, or slighting them, as things falling out by
Chance or Fortune; and for strength to overcome all these Corruptions, we pray,
Hallowed be thy Name. 3. A Thanksgiving, which is for these Corruptions
mortified and purged, and for the contrary revived and settled to the praise of
Gods Name, when in deed and in truth we find them to our comfort in some
measure in our hearts; and for his grace in other men, by whom his Name has
also glory, whilst they consent together with us in things tending to the
honoring of God.


All which in this first petition may be abbreviated thus: 1. The Supplication;
we pray thee, Let thy Name be hallowed. 2. The Deprecation; we pray thee, Let
not thy Name be unhallowed. 3. The Thanksgiving; we thank thee for disposing us
to the manifying and giving glory to thy grace and goodness, and so, Let thy
Name be hallowed; that is, Suffer not Sin, Satan or the World to reign in us,
but by thy Word and Spirit rule in our hearts, giving us grace to be guided
thereby in all our ways.


The wants which we bewail in this Petition: 1. Our own and others pride of
heart, that we labor more for our own credit then Gods glory, Luke 18.11. 2.
Our hardness of heart, that we cannot as we ought see Gods glory in his
Creatures, Mark 6.52. 3. Our unthankfulness for his many favors to mankind
above all creatures, Psalm. 51.15. 4. Our impiety, that in our lives we dishonor
God, Psalm. 119.136.


In this Petition we are taught, earnestly to desire of God those Spiritual
Graces which enable us to glorisie his Name in our selves and others; which are
these especially: 1. The true knowledge of God as he has revealed himself in
his Word and Works. 2. To sanctify God in our hearts, by loving, fearing and
trusting in him above all. 3. The Calves of our lips, which is a Sacrifice of
praise to God for all his mercies, Psalm. 50.23. 4. To see Gods hand in all his
Works, how mighty, wise, just and gracious the Lord is. 5. To reverence the
works of God, for his Mercy, Justice, Power, etc. appearing in them. 6. To use
all his Creatures reverently, sanctifying the same unto our selves by the word
and prayer.


As we pray that Gods Name may be hallowed, so we must be careful to sanctify
the same in our Conversation: For which end we must have regard to these three
things: 1. That our lives be unblameable, not tainted with any sin: Away
therefore with Idolatry, blasphemous Oaths, cursed speeches, with
Sabbath-breaking, and all other sins against the second Table. 2. We must
propound the right end of our life every day in our Calling and Conversation;
viz. Gods glory, and not our own praise, profit, pleasure or honor. 3. When God
offers occasion by any work of his Providence, we must endeavor to glorify and
magnify his Name therein, whether they be acts of his Mercy or of his Justice.


We must thus labor to hallow Gods Name, for these Reasons: 1. Because it is an
honor even due unto him, Rev. 4.11. 2. It is a credit to us also. 3. We thereby
testify how we esteem of God. 4. The contrary argues impiety, Exodus 5.2. Isa.
36.20. 5. He has severely punished the profanation of his Name, Exodus 14.28.
2 Kings 19.37. Isa. 37.36, 37. Acts 12.23. 6. He created us for this purpose,
Prove. 16.3. 7. As all men account of their Names, Eccl. 7.1. so God does highly
of his. 8. It is not only holy in it self, but gives holiness to all other
things that are holy. 9. Moses and Aaron entered not into Canaan, because they
did not sanctify the Word amongst the children of Israel, Deuteronomy. 32.51. Number.
20.12. 10. The Lord himself proclaims, That he will be sanctified in them that
come near him, and that before all the people he will be glorified, Lev. 10.3.


If we say, Hallowed be thy Name, with our mouths, and profane it in our
lives, we bewray a false heart, and discover the rotten profession of most
damnable hypocrisy; by this unchristian contradiction rendering our selves more
odious in the sight of God, then base dissemblers are in our own estimation:
Let therefore the practice of our lives demonstrate the sincerity of our
hearts; keep tune with the Music of our lips when we sing, Glory to God on
high; and in an holy sympathy echo forth the Devotion of our souls, when we
pray, Hallowed be thy Name.

May all our Thoughts, Words, Actions sanctify
Thee, Holy Father; May this Prayer be
In all our Thoughts, in all our Words still prayed,
In all our Actions still devoutly said:
And may our Hearts to this Petition be
Joined, to make up this holy Harmony.
Touch thou the strings thereof, and then no fear
Of jarring discord to ascend thine ear:
Thy Servants with thy holy Spirit inflame,
Thy Church shall practice, Hallowed be thy Name.
. 6. Thy Kingdom come.
GOds Kingdom is the Rule that he does exercise over his Creatures; generally
over all, the whole world, specially over his Elect, over his Church, howsoever
now dispersed into many places, yet making but one Kingdom, which is partly in
Heaven Triumphant, partly upon Earth Militant, till the last great Day, when in
Heaven only it shall be everlastingly glorious. Now besides this, there is a
Spiritual Kingdom, an inward Spiritual Kingdom of God, which is over all those
in whose hearts his Laws are written to do them, and the holy Spirit rules and
bears sway; and happy is that man who is thus of his Kingdom. Let thy Kingdom
come; that is, Let it by continual increase be augmented, and always by a new
enlargement and accession be extended and multiplied, which thou, O Lord, in
thy Church do hold and possess: wherein we desire, That the number of true
Believers may be daily increased, that Gods Kingdom of Grace may be enlarged,
and his Kingdom of Glory hastened. Thus let thy Kingdom come, outwardly thy
Power and Providence being exercised, and inwardly Grace being increased, and
Glory hastened. Let nothing hinder the coming of thy Kingdom, neither the Devil
nor wicked men, neither in the Magistracy, Ministry nor People, neither
infidelity, impenitency, any reigning sin, or negligence; but let thy Kingdom
come to us that be pilgrims and strangers here on earth, prepare us for it, and
enter us into it that be yet without; renew us by thy Spirit, that we may be
subject to thy Will; confirm us also in this estate, that our souls after this
life, and both souls and bodies at the Day of Judgment may be fully glorified;
yea, Lord, hasten this glory to us, and to all thine Elect. And here also
implicitly we acknowledge our opposite disposition to Gods Kingdom, and bewail
it: For this imports, That there is another Kingdom, even the Kingdom of Satan,
which is a Kingdom of darkness, full of disorder and confusion through sins,
which greatly hinders and annoyeth Gods Kingdom of Grace especially: This is
that Tyrannical Regency, by which as the Prince of Darkness, he (by Gods just
permission) rules in the children of darkness, and rages against the children
of light, 2 Cor. 4.4. Rev. 12.3. erecting up two other Kingdoms, the one of
Sin, Romans 6.12.5.21. the other of Death, Romans 5.14. all which are Enemies to
this Kingdom we pray for.

This Petition does in order next follow, Hallowed be thy Name, because it is
the first means by which Gods Name is hallowed; and next to the hallowing of
his Name, we ought chiesly to pray, That Gods Kingdom may come, Mat. 6.31. And
it is also placed before Thy will be done, to teach us, That no man can rightly
do the will of God and please him, unless he be of his Kingdom, and delivered
out of the Kingdom of Darkness by faith in Christ, and the Spirit of
Sanctification; he shall do his will indeed as a vessel of wrath, being
overruled by his Almighty power, but not as a vessel of mercy, out of a good
heart to be accepted. Thus no man can ever do Gods will in any thing, till such
time as Gods Kingdom be erected in his heart, because no man can do Gods will
that is not Gods Subject, Joh. 1.24. neither can any man keep Gods Law, but by
Gods grace, Psalm. 119.32. Conclude we therefore, That Gods Kingdom is that
Spiritual Rule, which God through Christ does by grace begin in us in this
life, and by glory will accomplish in the life to come, Dan. 2.37. Mat.
25.37.6.31. Romans 14.17.

The kingdom of God is threefold; viz. 1. The Kingdom of Power, Psalm. 99.1. By
this he rules Satan and all his enemies, Psa. 2.9.145.13. commands all
creatures, and preserves his own people. This Kingdom is external, and is a
government of all. 2. The Kingdom of Grace, Mat. 3.2. By this he rules the
godly, and raigns in their hearts by his Word and Spirit, Luke 17.20. This
Kingdom is internal, and a government of the Elect. 3. The Kingdom of Glory,
Luke 23.42. By this he crowns the godly with Celestial happiness. This
Kingdom is eternal, and a government of the departed out of this life into
heaven.


The kingdom of God signifies these particulars; viz. 1. The sending of the Son
our Mediator. 2. The ordaining and maintaining of the Ministry of Christ. 3.
The gathering of the Church by Christ out of mankind by the voice of the
Gospel, and the efficacy of the holy Ghost, beginning in us true Faith and
Repentance. 4. The perpetual Government of the Church. 5. The preservation
thereof in this life, and protection against her enemies. 6. The casting away
of her enemies into eternal pains. 7. The raising of the Church unto eternal
life. 8. The glorifying of the Church in eternal life, when God shall be all in
all.


We therefore, when we pray, Thy Kingdom come, desire that God will by his Son
our Mediator 1. Preserve the Ministry which he has ordained. 2. Gather his
Church by the Ministry of his Word, and the working of the Holy Ghost. 3. Rule
his Church gathered, and us the members thereof, with his Holy Spirit. 4.
Defend us and his whole Church against our Enemies and Tyrants. 5. Cast away
his and our enemies into eternal pains. 6. At length deliver his Church, and
glorify us in the world to come.


Again, The Kingdom of God is twofold; viz. 1. General, which is his absolute
Power and Sovereignty, whereby he rules all things, in Heaven, in Earth, and
in Hell, even the Devils themselves, Psa. 103.19. This we acknowledge in the
conclusion of the Lords Prayer, but pray not for it in this Petition, because
nothing can hinder it. 2. Special, which is that whereby he Rules his Elect and
chosen people working his will in them by his Holy Spirit: And called special,
because it is not exercised over all the World, but only over all the elect,
who^ he has ordained unto eternal life: This special Kingdom of God is
twofold; viz. 1. Of Grace, which is a Spiritual estate, because 1. It is
principally exercised in the Conscience. 2. This Regiment in the Conscience is
by the Spirit of God.
Wherein God makes men willingly subject to the written word of his Spirit,
which is a voluntary subjection of the whole man in soul and body and Spirit,
to the Will of God revealed in his Word. This subjection (which indeed is
perfect freedom) stands in these 3 things especially, Romans 14.17, 18. 1. In
Righteousness; that is, 1. In Christ's Righteousness imputed. 2. In the
Righteousness of a good Conscience, the ground whereof is Sanctification by the
Spirit, which Christ gives to whom he justifies.
2. In Peace; that is, Peace of Conscience toward God, and peace with Gods
Church, yea with all Creatures, so far forth as is needful for them: Under
which is comprehended love; for as Righteousness concerns the person in soul
and body, so Peace respects all duties and actions of the life: Righteousness
is the Root whence springs this Peace; for when the heart is sanctified, the
life is reformed. 3. In Joy in the Holy Ghost; which is a fruit of both the
former, respecting especially the state of affliction: for when a man is
justified and sanctified, and has peace toward God, then arises in his heart
a Spiritual delight in God in all estates. Now whosoever has these three
branches of this Spiritual subjection, is a good Subject in the Kingdom of
Grace.
2. Of Glory; which is the blessed estate of Gods Elect in Heaven, whereby God
in Christ becomes all things unto them immediately, all things needful to the
perfection of felicity: The state of grace in this life, is the beginning and
entrance to the state of glory; the state of glory in the life to come, is the
perfection of the state of grace: And this special Kingdom of God in both these
estates, do we in this Petition pray for.



Understand therefore this Petition of the special Kingdom; the coming whereof
is in four degrees; viz. 1. Let it be erected where it is not. 2. Let it be
confirmed and continued where it is; Let it not be abolished by Persecution,
corrupted by Heresy, vanish by Hypocrisy, or degenerate and grow into the
contrary by Profaneness. 3. Let it be restored where it is decayed or
corrupted in doctrine or manners; Restore such as are fallen by weakness, and
purge the Errors of such as are seduced. 4. Let it be perfected and made
complete, by hastening the Marriage-day, the eternal Jubilee of Joy,
unconceiveable, much more unutterable, such as neither eye has seen, nor ear
heard, nor heart conceived; and by finally destroying Sin, Death, the Devil,
and every enemy.


Thy Kingdom come] that is, to us men in the world: and then it comes, when
God does erect and establish the same in their hearts. Now unto perfection it
comes by five degrees; viz. 1. When God gives unto men the outward means of
Salvation, wherein he does reveal his grace and favor in Christ. Thus the
Gospel preached, is called, The word of the Kingdom, Mat. 13.19. and The
Kingdom of God, Luke 11.20. and 17.21. 2. When the word preached enlightens the
mind, so as a man knows and understands the mystery of the Gospel, which is
the Law of this Kingdom. 3. When a man is thereby regenerate, and so brought
into this Kingdom, for by Regeneration we have effectual entrance into the
state of grace, whereby Christ rules in us by his word and Spirit, and we yield
subjection unto him. 4. At the end of this life, when the body goes to the
earth, but the soul to God that gave it, being translated to the joys of
heaven, in the glory of this Kingdom. 5. At the last Judgment, when body and
soul being reunited, are both made partakers of this Kingdoms glory: And this
is the full and perfect coming of it.


In this kingdom are observable these things especially: 1. That Christ is
King, Mat. 2.2. 2. That the Subjects are true Christians, Psalm. 2.8. Angels and
Saints. 3. That the Laws are the Word, Psalm. 119.105. and the efficacy of the
Holy Ghost. 4. The enemies are Satan, Sin, Death, Hell, Damnation, the Flesh,
the World, and the Wicked, Ephesians. 6.12. Romans 6.12. and 8.1. 1 Cor. 15.51. Gal.
5.17. Genesis 3.15. 5. The Rewards are the good things of this life, and eternal
happiness in that to come, Mark 10.30. 6. The Chastisements are afflictions,
Heb. 12.6. 7. The Weapons are Faith, Hope, Love, the Word and Prayer, Ephesians.
6.16. 8. The Time of it is to the worlds end, Mat. 28.20. 9. The place is this
world and the world to come, Rev. 5.10. Mat. 25.34. 10. The Officers are
Preachers, 2 Cor. 5.20. 11. The Vicegerents are Governors, Isa. 49.25. 12. It
is exercised upon the Conscience of man, Romans 14.17.


Again, the Head or King of this Kingdom, is God the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost: There is but one King, because there is but one God. 1. The Father
is King, and Rules by the Son and the Holy Ghost. 2. The Son is King, because
1. He sits God at the right hand of God, and Rules with equal power with
the Father. 2. He is Mediator, by whom God works immediately, and gives the
Holy Ghost.



The enemies of this Kingdom are 1. Partly in the Church; as Hypocrites, who
challenge to themselves the Name and Title of the Kingdom, when as they are
nothing less. 2. Partly without the Church; as Turks, Jews, and all such as
defend Errors against the ground and foundation of the true Religion.


It appears from what has been said, That the Kingdom of God comes to us four
ways; viz. 1. By the Preaching of the Gospel, whereby is revealed the light of
the true and heavenly Doctrine. 2. By Conversion; when some are converted, and
are endued with Faith and Repentance. 3. By making progress or increase; when
the godly receive increase, or when the proper gifts or blessings of the
faithful are augmented, with perpetual increase in the godly or converted, Rev.
22.11. 4. By Consummation, or full accomplishment, when the godly shall be
glorified at the second coming of our Lord.


We ought to desire that the Kingdom of God may come, for these Reasons
specially: 1. For the glory of God, or in respect of the first Petion; because
that we may sanctify and hallow his Name, it is required that he Rule us by
his Word and Spirit. 2. Because God will give his Kingdom only to those that
ask it.


The wants we are to bewail, taught us in this Petition, concern either our
selves or others: 1. We must lament and mourn for our own miserable estate by
Nature, whereby we are the servants of Sin, and so in bondage and thraldom
thereto, Joh. 8.34. And the best of us do but weakly yield to Christ's Scepter,
and where Sin reigns, there the Devil has dominion. 2. We must bewail the
sins of all the world, in the transgression of Gods Law, whereby God is
dishonored, his Kingdom hindered, and the Kingdom of Darkness furthered: We must
therefore bewail that there be so many hinderers of Gods Kingdom, as namely,
the Flesh to infect, the World to allure, the Devil to seduce, Antichrist to
withdraw, the Turk to withstand, and the Wicked to trouble men that should be
Subjects of this Kingdom. Pray therefore, Thy Kingdom come.


The helps which further Gods kingdom and are to be desired of us; viz. 1. The
Preaching of the Gospel, and all other divine Ordinances, whereby Gods Kingdom
is erected and maintained; that they may be where they are not, and may be
blessed where they are vouchsafed: and herein for godly Magistrates and
faithful Ministers. 2. That God would enlighten the eyes of our minds, that we
may see the wonders of his Law, that so the Lords ordinances may be blessed
unto us. 3. That we may be wholly subject unto Christ, and that of Conscience,
not only in our outward behavior, but in mind, heart, will, and in all our
affections, that we may grow in grace, and in the saving knowledge of Christ
Jesus. 4. We must desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ in the Kingdom
of glory; for this end, that we may make an end of sinning, and become more
obedient Subjects unto Christ, yea wholly ruled by him; though for the good of
others we must be content to live. 5. That both by the hour of death, and by
the coming of Christ to Judgment, this Kingdom in us and all Gods chosen, may
be accomplished; that Satan being trodden under our feet, and the power of
death destroyed, God may be all in all, 1 Cor. 15.28. 6. That Christ would come
in Judgment, when all things shall be subdued unto God, and all his obedient
Subjects shall be fully glorified: This we may desire in heart, though we must
leave the time to Gods good will and pleasure, still waiting for it by faith in
his Promise. 7. That God would enlarge his Sanctuary here on earth, gather his
elect more and more, and still defend and maintain his Church in every place in
the world: when these desires affect our souls, then do we truly say, Thy
Kingdom come.


The duties to be practiced by us, that Gods Kingdom may come; viz. 1. We must
labor for true humiliation and conversion, else we cannot enter into the
Kingdom, Matthew. 8.3. Joh. 3.5. nay otherwise we do but mock God, by saying well
and doing nothing. 2. We must be careful to bring forth the fruits of Gods
Kingdom, which are Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14.17.
3. We must hence learn to be contented in all estates of this life whatsoever;
the hope of this Kingdom which we here pray for, must swallow up all the
sorrows that earthly calamities can bring upon us, Luke 12.32. 4. We must all
labor in our places and callings to bring one another into this kingdom; one
neighbor another, and one friend another, Ezc. 18.30. 5. Hence we must learn
every day to prepare our selves to dye, for by death our souls enter into the
glory of this Kingdom which we pray may come unto us: whence appears the
monstrous hypocrisy of the world, whose practice flatly contradicts their
prayer.


Of this Petition, 1. The Supplication is for the continuance of Gods gracious
Providence over his general kingdom, and of all good means and furtherances of
his special kingdom, his Church. 2. The Deprecation is against all impediments
and lets of Gods general kingdom, as Anarchy, Tyranny, wicked Laws, etc. and
against all hindrances of his special kingdom, as Toleration of Idolatry,
Heresy, Ignorance, Idleness, Infidelity, Impenitency, Hardness of heart, etc.
3. The Thanksgiving is for the Lords exercising his kingdom, in the right
ordering of the world, punishing the wicked, rewarding the godly, spreading the
glorious beams of his Word, enlarging his kingdom; for worthy Magistrates, and
faithful Ministers; for Faith, and all Spiritual graces.


In this glass we read the superstitious vanity of ignorant souls, The rotten
hypocrisy of formal Professors, The cursed Rebellion of profane worldlings,
The Antichristian Tyranny of Idolatrous Papists: All which, as we tender the
Sovereign Power of Christ's Scepter, the Prerogative of his Royalty, and the
eternal happiness of our own Souls, let us carefully avoid, as by making it the
language of our hearts, so the loyalty of our whole lives, to practice Thy
Kingdom come.

A new-hatch'd old-laid Heresy appears,
That here on Earth yet full One thousand years
Christ's Kingdom is to come, and triumph shall
With all his Saints in Pomp Majestical.
Fond Dreamers! Call ye this Terrestrial?
Which figures that which is Spiritual.
Reign in our hearts, O Lord; Protect, augment
Thy Church; This is thy proper Regiment:
Cast down thine Enemies; Complete the sum
Of thine Elect: So let Thy Kingdom come.
. 7. Thy Will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven.
THis Petition in order follows Thy Kingdom come, to show, That where Gods
kingdom is set up, his will is endeavored after, and preferred always, and not
our own will: It depends indeed on both the former Petitions, for Gods Name is
hallowed when his will is done, and his kingdom comes, when by doing his will
we testify our selves his obedient Subjects. Wherein we desire, that we and
all the people of God upon earth may as readily obey Gods will, as the Angels
and Saints in heaven: So that this Petition is propounded in a Comparison, the
former part whereof respects the grace of Obedience which we pray for, the
other the right manner of performing it; wherein we must note, That this
particle (As) does not betoken the degree, but the kind of doing Gods will,
which is the beginning of performing Gods will with continuance and increase
thereof, not the Consummation, perfection and full accomplishment thereof,
which yet we are to desire here, that at length we may obtain it; which though
it be impossible in this life, yet are we to pray for it as children ravished
with the desire of Gods glory. Thus, we pray not here to perform obedience
equal in measure and degree of perfection, to the obedience of the blessed
Angels and glorified Saints in heaven, but such as is like unto it; for this
note of Comparison here imports a likeness and resemblance, not equality, in
doing the will of God cheerfully, without murmuring; speedily, without
delaying; generally, without omitting; sincerely, without dissembling;
constantly, without forbearing; and perfectly, without halting, even as the
Saints and Angels in heaven. Now as many as truly be in Gods Kingdom, cannot
but thus immediately do Gods will; for obedience to Gods will is an effectual
sign that the kingdom of God is in us, 1 John 1.3. into which, not every one
that says, Lord, Lord, shall enter; but such alone whose actions say, Thy will
be done, Matthew. 7.21.

Gods will is either Secret or Revealed, according to that of Moses, The secret
things of the Lord belong unto the Lord, but (...) revealed to us (...) our
children: Yea we must know, That Gods will is only one considered in it self,
as God is one; but for our understanding it may be thus distinguished: 1. His
absolute or secret will, which is the will of his good pleasure, whereby,
according to his eternal Counsel, he determines all things, what shall be done,
or what shall not be done, and in what manner; and is touching the number of
those that shall be saved, The Day of Judgment, The time of the Jews
Conversion, The final confusion of Antichrist, And particular estates of other
men, The particular afflictions and crosses appointed for us, The day of our
death, and such like. This absolute will extends over all Creatures, and over
all their actions, Ephesians. 1.11. Mat. 10.26. and is hidden from us till he reveal
it by the event; which being his secret will, because unknown, and therefore
uncertain to us, we may not rashly presume on; for in these things we here
pray, That we may rest contented in the Lords good pleasure. 2. His revealed
will, being whatsoever is manifested in his word and works to be his will,
concerning both faith and practice. This we are precisely to follow, for here
we pray that it may be answerably done as it is required. Thy will, that is,
not my will; thy will only, not thine and mine also, betwixt which two there
is no proportion; thy will both for matter and manner; and thy will, though
contrary unto, or against my will. As it is in Heaven; as by the Inbitants of
heaven, that are free from all temptations and discouragements.


When we say, Thy will be done, it is not meant of the absolute or secret will,
but of the revealed will of God; and that for these Reasons: 1. Because the
Absolute will of God is always done, and cannot be resisted, Isa. 46.10. Romans
9.19. but his Revealed will is generally transgressed by men, who do that which
seems good in their own eyes, notwithstanding Gods revealed will to the
contrary. 2. Because a man may dissent from the absolute and secret will of God
without sinning, so be it he still submit himself to the will of God, resting
therein when it is revealed. Thus Abraham prayed for the safety of Sodom (yet
submissively) which God willed and decreed to destroy, Genesis 18.23, 27. and
David for the life of his child, which God would have to dye, 2 Samuel 12.16,
24. and our Savior Christ for the removal of that Cup which God had absolutely
decreed that he should drink of, Mat. 26.39. yet submitting his will unto his
Fathers, with all cheerfulness of obedience.


The special Branches of Gods revealed Will: 1. The Conversion of a sinner,
Ezekiel. 33.11. and obedience to his Commandments. 2. That we deny our selves, and
rely wholly on our Savior Christ for salvation, Joh. 6.40. 3. Our
Sanctification in Soul, in Body and in Spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 4.3. 4. That every one
that lives in the Church of God, beside his general calling of a Christian,
should have a particular Calling to live in, wherein he must seek the glory of
God in the good of others, 1 Cor. 7.20, 24. and love our Brethren, Joh. 13.14,
15. 5. To subject our selves unto the hand of God in all crosses and
afflictions whatsoever, Acts 21.14. to labor for the knowledge of Gods will,
Joh. 17.3. and for holiness of life, Ephesians. 1.4.


Hence it appears what the will of God signifies; viz. 1. The Commandment of
God, Psalm. 103.21. 2. Events, or rather Gods Decree concerning Events, Mat.
26.39. Isa. 46.10.


Be done] There be two degrees of doing Gods will: 1. Evangelical obedience
prescribed in the Gospel; that is, a sincere endeavor according to all the
power of grace that God has given us, to do the will of God, and this
especially is here meant. 2. Legal, commanded in the Law; that is, a perfect
fulfilling of the Law, and of Gods will, but this is not attained to in this
life: Of perfections there are three kinds; viz. 1. A perfection of Sincerity,
which was in Hezekiahs obedience, Isa. 38.3. 2. A perfection of Parts, which
was in Zachary and Elizabeth's obedience, Luke 1.6. 3. A perfection of Degrees,
which was only in the first and second Adam, and is now only in the holy
Angels.



In earth as it is in heaven] which in this Petition our Savior Christ adds,
1. To prescribe and draw us a pattern of obedience, and example of perfection,
to imitate in likeness and resemblance, though we cannot in equality; which
likeness stands in these four things especially: 1. In cheerfulness and
willingness, for the Angels readily obey Gods commands. 2. In priority; the
Angels prefer to do the will of God before all other things. 3. In speed and
quickness, without delay or slackness. 4. In faithfulness and sincerity.
2. That by this desire of perfection we may be assured, that God will give us
here the beginning, and the perfection in the life to come.


That Gods will may be done, in this Petition we desire 1. That we may have
grace to deny our selves, our own wills and affections; which Self-denial
consists of two parts; viz. 1. That we may be ready to renounce all our
affections, which are disagreeing from the Law of God. 2. That we may be ready
to execute the will of God, willingly submitting our selves thereto in all
things.
2. That Gods word may be Preached diligently and faithfully, because his will
is revealed therein; and that God would incline and dispose our hearts toward
his holy word, that we may not only know, but obey Gods revealed will, Psalm.
119.27,36. 3. That Magistrates in a Commonwealth, and Masters in a Family, see
to the practice of doing Gods will, in the performance of the duty and calling
both of all in general, and of each in several, that we may rightly and duly
perform the duty committed unto us, whether common or proper. 4. That every one
for himself may walk in the obedience of God; without pride in prosperity, and
without murmuring in adversity, because it comes unto us by the will of God.
5. That God would turn the hearts of all men from sin, and bring them every
where to the obedience of his will. 6. That Events, such as are not contrary to
Gods will, that is, that such things may come to pass which so please him. 7.
That God would bless and prosper our actions and counsels, that no other Events
may follow them, but such as himself knows may most serve for his glory and
our salvation. 8. That God would hasten that time and state unto us, wherein we
shall perfectly do the will of God, that is, our state of glory.


Rules of obeying Gods will: 1. Obey Gods will absolutely and for himself; obey
man only in God, and for God. 2. Obey God in the manner, as well as in the
matter which he commands. 3. In doing the works of piety, let them give place
if unfaigned necessity require, and calls to a work of Charity. 4. Let the
works of thy private Calling give place to works of the public calling and
general; as if thou be laboring on the six days, the Lord calling to his House
by his worship there, thou must attend it, Lev. 23. 5. The works of a general
common calling must give place to the works of a special undoubted calling,
being contrary, if a man at any time has such.


That all our obedience to Gods will may be the better accepted of him, it must
have these three properties: 1. Cheerfulness and readiness; God loves the
cheerful giver. 2. Sincerity, which is heartily and from the Spirit approving
our selves to God, and not affecting the applause and praise of men. 3.
Universality, which is in all and every particular thing; thus Job is approved,
obediently professing his subjection to God, though he should aggravate his
misery and kill him.


The way how to become cheerful doers of the will of God; or the duties
required by this petition to be practiced by us, that Gods will may be done: 1.
We must prove what is the good and acceptable will of God, Romans 12.2. that is,
we must by often trial of our actions by the Word of God, become expert in Gods
will, and esteem highly of it, be it never so contrary to carnal Reason: Thus
Abraham did, Genesis 22.3. 2. We must lay aside our own wills, and be possessed
with a base conceit thereof, not leaning thereon. 3. We must labor for a true
persuasion of Gods mercy in the pardon of our sins, and for the salvation of
our souls, whereby we may show our selves thankful to God for so great a mercy.
4. We must consider that we are the Temples of the Holy Ghost, which is a
wonderful dignity to sinful men; and in regard hereof we must stir up our
selves so to live, that we make not sad the Spirit of God which dwells in us.
5. We must consider the blessings of God bestowed on us both in soul and body
one by one, and this will move us to love God; which love we shall show in
doing his will, 1 John 5.3. 6. Let us consider the threatenings of God against
sin, and his Judgments upon them that live in sin, and these will help to
restrain our corruptions that they break not forth into action. 7. We must be
strict in the matter of sin, making conscience of every evil way; yea, even of
the first motions unto sin, that never come to consent: for this Petition for
obedience, respects not only our words and deeds, but also our secret
thoughts, for even they must be brought to obedience unto God, 2 Cor. 10.5. 8.
We must seek to cut off all things that hinder us from doing Gods will; we must
use Spiritual means, and pray for the Spirit to mortify and crucify the lusts
of the flesh, Romans 8.13. which makes us rebels against God in transgressing his
will. Now the ground of this work is the death of our Savior Christ, applied
by true Faith to our corrupt hearts. 9. We must not live inordinately, but in
that sort which God has enjoined Christians in his word; every one godly in
the general calling of a Christian, and faithfully and conscionably in his
particular calling, whether of Church, State or Family. 10. We must endeavor to
subject our selves patiently to the will of God in all afflictions whatsoever,
for it is the will of God, that through manifold afflictions we should enter
into his Kingdom.


This Petition teaches us to bewail 1. Our natural disposition, whereby we are
prone to rebel against the will of God. 2. Our natural hypocrisy, even that
which remains in us after grace received. 3. Though we have never so much
grace, yet to lament and bewail our want of obedience in all good duties,
because the best of us all fail in the manner of doing them. 4. Our impatience,
that when God lays any crosses upon us, we cannot as we ought endure them
patiently and thankfully. 5. Our slack and imperfect obedience, yea privy
pride, proud presumption, deadness of Spirit, secret hypocrisy, and other
weaknesses incident to us even in our best services. 6. The sins of others,
whereby they disobey the will of God, and so rebel against him, whereby he is
dishonored; and therefore must we be passionately grieved for the sins of
others, and labor to reclaim them.


In the supplication of this petition we pray, 1. For grace to deny our own
wills and ways. 2. For understanding of the will of God, which without it we
cannot perform. 3. For faith, whereby to believe that the will of God revealed
unto us, is the will of God. 4. For power to obey the holy whole will of God,
which is both active in doing, and passive in suffering.


In the deprecation of this Petition we pray against 1. Rebellion, or an
obstinate offending against the known will of God. 2. Profaneness, which is an
undervaluing estimation of holy duties. 3. Hypocrisy, which is a drawing near
to God with the lips, but estranging the heart from him. 4. Natural Corruption,
which draws away to disobedience, enticing to evil. 5. Wea riness in
well-doing, a refusing to go forward, and a turning back again. 6. Impatience,
murmuring at crosses, and discontent at Gods Providence.


The thanksgiving of this Petition is 1. For disobedience and sin in any
measure mortified. 2. For the knowledge of Gods will, for faith and desires in
truth to obey the will of God in all things all the days of our life.


In this Petition we are taught to frame our lives to an holy imitation of the
blessed Angels; which will not stand with their humor, who account zeal in
Religion affected preciseness: But such as call God Father in sincerity, must
set before them the obedience of the holy Angels, as a pattern for their
imitation to a like resemblance, although not to a like equality of perfection.
Now in them we may observe these things for us to follow: 1. They desired
before Christ's Incarnation to look into the mystery of our Redemption wrought
by Christ, 1 Pet. 1.12. much more does it concern us to be diligent searchers
out of this mystery in the Gospel. 2. The Angels are maintainers of true
Religion, and of the worship of God, for the Law was given by Angels, Gal.
3.19. they brought the Apostles out of prison to preach the Gospel, they are
enemies to Idolatry, Rev. 19.10. Herein also let us be their followers. 3. The
Angels were always nigh unto Christ at his Nativity, Luke 2.9, 10. in his
temptation, Mat. 4.11. in his Agony, Luke 22.43. in his Resurrection, Mat.
28.2. and Ascension, Acts 1.10. And so should we perform unto Christ all the
service we can. 4. They are always praising and lauding the Name of God; so
should we labor to have our hearts enlarged for his glory, and our mouths
filled with his praises. 5. They be serviceable for our good, if we be Gods
children, though they be far better then we are, Heb. 1.14. So must we employ
our selves in soul, body, calling, credit, and all we have, for the good of
men. 6. They are joyful when sinners are converted from sin unto God, Luke
15.10. and are grieved when men by sin dishonor God; the like affections should
be in us: for in the world to come we shall be like the Angels in heaven in
glory, Mat. 22.30.


This pattern of Angelical obedience, here propounded for our imitation, must
teach us, 1. To acknowledge and bewail the natural hardness, deadness, and
untowardness of our hearts in yielding obedience to the will of God. 2. To
bewail the want of sincerity and faithfulness in doing Gods will; our maimed
and defective obedience shows how far we come short of this Angelical example:
Many content themselves with the outward service of the body, and never regard
the inward worship of the heart; and others have respect to outward duties of
piety, that concern God, but for uprightness and mercy toward men, they little
regard. This the Angels do not.


This Angelical example informs our judgment what honor we are to give to the
blessed Angels, namely, the honor of imitation, and not of any divine worship:
for when John would have worshipped the Angel, he forbade him, saying, See thou
do it not, worship God, Rev. 19.10. From all which let us be persuaded to begin
our heaven upon earth, by resembling, though not equalling, the Angels in
obedience; that so with them and all the Host of Heaven we may sincerely say,
Thy will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven.

How many say, Gods will be done; and yet
The Idol of their own Will Worship set
In stead thereof? How many vainly say
In Prayer, what they practice to unpray?
Or with the words conclude the work, as though
The will of God were done by saying so.
Help, Lord, for of our selves we proudly draw
Back from thy Will, and make our own a Law:
Assist us by the Spirit of thy Son
To keep thy Law; then shall Thy will be done.
. 8. Give us this day our daily bread.
UNder the name of Bread, by that usual figure Synecdoche, our Savior Christ
compriseth not only all corporal blessings, and such as are necessary for this
life, but also the profitable use of them. Give us;] that is, Bestow, bless and
sanctify all temporal necessary good things unto us; Sanctify all outward
comforts unto us, which by reason of sin stand accursed, that they may not be a
destruction to us in the use of them, as we deserve: Bestow, uphold, continue
and maintain that which thou have given us; Bless, make prosperous and wholesome
our meats and drinks, for the strengthening of our bodies, and refreshing our
Spirits, so as we may be enabled in the strength of thy blessing, to serve thee
in our Callings as thou have commanded. This day] that is, we desire not such
abundance for so long a time, as whereby our dependence upon thee should be cut
off, but to be content with things necessary for the present, and to wait upon
thee for the future from day to day. Daily bread] that is, Bread for our
substance, such as Nature does require to uphold it; no dainties or costly
feastings, but only necessary food and clothing, whereby the substance of our
bodies may be continued, and not pine away. Our daily bread] that is, not the
bread, the clothes, the substance of another, but such things honestly gotten
by our labor, through Gods blessing upon us, according to the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians.
3.2. And the wealthiest in the world may not think himself too rich to beg this
daily bread, for he knows not ere the day pass, to what extremity, with Job, he
may be brought.

This Petition follows immediately Thy will be done, because to have things
necessary for our maintenance, is a stay and help unto us, the more cheerfully
to do the will of God, and keeps us from unlawful enterprises; and because the
Rule of seeking things temporal must not be our own, but the will of God. So
likewise this Petition in order is placed before this ( Forgive us our
Trespasses) not for that the things of this life are to be sought before those
that concern the life to come, for this is forbidden, Joh. 6.27. but to provide
against our infirmities, whereby we distrust God for food, raiment, and worldly
deliverances, when we profess that we believe in him for the remission of sin,
and deliverance from damnation; and to provide for the strengthening of our
faith touching things eternal, by ascending from these his gifts below, wherein
we taste of his goodness daily. By which order we are taught to consider the
corruption of man's Nature, which ought in the first place to seek things
Spiritual; but because we live rather by Sense then by Faith, we do principally
desire things corporal. Again, hereby appears Christ's mercy unto man, in that
by this order he descends to our infirmity, who rather depend on him for the
pardon of our sins, then trust him for our provision in this life; which argues
we are but of little faith, Matthew. 9.5. Lastly, by this order we are taught to
depend upon him for the forgiveness of our sins: for when we see that he is
here so careful for our bodies, he will doubtless be more careful to provide
for the good of our souls, Romans 8.32.

The Reasons why in this Petition Christ adds ( This day) 1. To meet with our
distrustfulness and covetousness, and to reclaim us from both these vices. 2.
That we should depend on him only; as yesterday, so this day; as this day, so
to morrow and for ever. 3. That the exercise of faith and prayer may be always
continued in us.


The Reasons why Christ calls it, Daily bread. 1. Because he will have us
daily to desire as much as may for every day suffice us. 2. Because he will
bridle our raging and endless lusts and desires; for we are not to be
inordinately careful for any thing, but to depend upon Gods Providence. 3.
Because he will have us to know, That as we expect daily our supportance from
God, so are we daily to praise him for it.


From this circumstance of time ( This day) we are taught, 1. To acknowledge
Gods particular providence upon us from day to day, whereon we must depend
continually for all things needful, though we see no reason thereof. 2. To
bewail our distrustfulness of Gods providence for temporal blessings. 3. To
moderate our care in seeking for the blessings of this life; yet we must
exercise our selves in the use of lawful means to provide things honest and
necessary, otherwise we shall tempt God: but this care must not overbalance
our dependence on him. 4. To sanctify the Creatures by prayer and thanksgiving
when we use them; for as we pray for them, so we should glorify God for his
blessing upon them daily as we use them. 5. To make it our practice every day
to pray unto God for his blessings.


For what Reasons Christ wills us to desire our bread, not mine, thine or
another man's bread, 1. That we should desire those things which God gives us;
for the bread is made ours by Gods assignment and appointment. 2. To admonish
us to abstain from that which is other men's, and to eat our own bread in the
labor of our hands, by an honest and lawful Calling, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10. 3. That we
may use them with a good Conscience. 4. Because the children of God only have
a propriety in these outward good things through the gift of God (being all
forfeited by Adams fall) so that the wicked be but usurpers of them.


The Reasons why in this Petition we desire corporal blessings, 1. In respect
of Gods Commandment, both general, Mat. 7.7. and special, Mat. 6.9. 2. In
respect of Gods Promise; and he has promised them, That we should thereby have
a Spiritual, not a flesbly security, Mat. 6.32. 3. In respect of Gods glory,
that we may ascribe them to his Providence, and not think they come by chance
unto us. 4. Because the desiring and expecting of these blessings, is the
exercise of our confidence in the Promise of Grace, or the exercise of our
Invocation, Faith and Hope. 5. That we may do the will of God here on earth,
which without it we cannot, Psalm. 115.18. 6. That the desire of these blessings
may be a confirmation in our minds, and a profession before the world, that
God is he who gives even the least benefits as well as the greatest. 7. For
our comfort, that we may know that the Church shall ever be preserved, when God
hears us according to his Promise.


The manner how corporal blessings are to be desired: 1. With a confidence and
full persuasion of Gods favor; because otherwise God might answer, We are not
of them unto whom he has promised these things. 2. With a condition of Gods
will and pleasure, with a submission of our will to Gods will. 3. With faith
and belief of Gods hearing us, that he will give us so much as suffices. 4. To
this end, as thereby to serve God and our Neighbor.


The bread in this Petition cannot (as some would have it) be understood of
Spiritual food, for these Reasons: 1. Because this prayer is a perfect pattern
for our direction in all things, the temporal not excluded, whereby we
acknowledge Gods Providence to be extended even to the smallest things of this
life; to make profession whereof to his great glory, is not unworthy this most
divine Prayer. 2. Because our Spiritual food is asked in the second Petition,
the coming of Gods Kingdom being the bestowing of his Grace, and specially of
Christ the Fountain of all Grace upon us; and we are bound to pray that God
will ever give us this bread, Joh. 6.34. but we are taught that this bread is
not here meant. 3. Because the bread here asked is but for This day; which does
imply a fading or wasting away, so as that we still have need of new bread
every day, which cannot be so properly said of our Spiritual food: Understand
it then of all things necessary for our sustenance.


How the bread is made good and saving unto us: 1. If we receive it with faith,
with that mind, after that manner, and to that end which God requires; that
is, if we stick not in the Creatures, but pierce with our minds unto God
himself, the Creator of all things, and Fountain of all benefits. 2. If we
desire that he will give to the bread obtained and received from him, a force
and virtue of nourishing and sustaining our bodies.


That God may Give us this day our daily bread, let us remember every morning
1. To give him hearty thanks for all his mercies, bodily and Spiritual, and his
late preservation of us. 2. To make an humble confession of our sins, with an
earnest desire of pardon, joined with contrition of soul and amendment of life.
3. To ask such necessaries as are requisite for our soul and body, with
fervency craving his blessing upon the labor of our Callings the day to come.


The Reasons why we ask all corporal blessings under this name of Bread: 1.
Because bread is absolutely necessary for man's life, Psalm. 104.15. 2. To teach
us frugality in using Gods Creatures, Joh. 6.12. 3. To make us content with
whatsoever God sends, Phil. 4.11. 4. To make us thankful if God give more
then bread, Psalm. 23.5. 5. Because in ancient times bread was man's most
ordinary food, as appears, Genesis 18.5. Psalm. 104.15. Mark 8.4.


How God does give bread: 1. By blessing the earth with increase by seasonable
weather, Hos. 2.21. 2. By placing us in some honest Calling, Psalm. 28.2. 3. By
giving us the staff of bread, Lev. 26. that is, power to his Creatures to
nourish us. 4. By making this bread not only wholesome, but also holy unto us,
that by it we may the better serve him.


The Reasons wherefore we call that bread ours, which is Gods gift: 1. To
magnify Gods gracious bounty, who makes that ours which is not due unto us, 1 Timothy 6.7. Job 1.21. 2. Because God has ordained it for our use. 3. As Christ
is ours for the good of our souls, 1 Cor. 1.30. so Gods Creatures are ours for
the good of our bodies. 4. It is ours, because we get it by our honest labor,
Genesis 3.19. Eccl. 11.6. 5. It is sanctified unto us by the word and prayer, 1 Timothy 4.


In this Petition we are taught, 1. To beware of Covetousness, whereby we are
discontent with our estate, and with the Israelites, murmr that we have no
more but Manna. 2. To practice Sobriety, and moderation in diet, apparel, and
all other things appertaining to this life. 3. To ask of God every bit of bread
we eat. Away then with all Chance and Fortune, and let us learn to acknowledge
Gods providence in all things. 4. Like obedient children to ask of God our
daily food, and to receive it as a gift of mercy from the hand of our Father.
Away then with Merit by man's works, for if bread be of Mercy, Life everlasting
cannot be of Merit on man's part. 5. To beware of distrustful care; for that
which Christ bids us ask, God undoubtedly will give, because it is according to
his will, if we ask in faith, and make a sober use of the means that be lawful;
and look, if temporal blessings fail, for a good supply in Spiritual Graces. 6.
To learn to receive our bread from God, or any other temporal blessing we
enjoy, as a fruit of Christ's Passion, which is the Foundation of every good
gift and blessing of God. 7. That every one should have a lawful Calling, and
therein so employ himself, that he may eat his own bread, 2 Thessalonians. 3.12. 8.
That all fraud, injustice and cruelty in the getting of temporal things, is
condemned; for we pray for our own bread, gotten by honest labor, that we eat
not the bread of violence, Prove. 14.17. and 20.17. 9. That we must labor to be
in Christ, 2 Cor. 13.5. endeavor to maintain our estate, Genesis 30.30. and impart
our goods to the poor, Prove. 19.17. 10. That community of goods is an
Anabaptistical fancy, Josh. 13.7. and not commanded in the word; for what need
of a Law against Theft, if all things were common?


In the Supplication of this Petition we pray for all things needful for us in
this present life, not being measured by our own will, but by the will of the
Lord: These things are 1. General, concerning us all; as 1. Peace and
tranquillity, through which small things become great; whereas by discord great
things decay and come to nothing, 1 Timothy 2.2. 2. Seasonable weather, that the
heavens may answer the earth, the earth may answer the Corn, the Corn may
answer us, as is promised of God to such as he favoreth. 3. Worthy and virtuous
Governors of the Commonwealth, by whose care Peace may be maintained. 4.
Healthfulness, strength and ability of the people, and the increase of them to
our mutual comfort, and the dismaying of our enemies, Psalm. 144.12. 5. Victory
over our enemies that rise up against us.
2. Special; viz. 1. An honest disposition to labor in our particular Callings,
to get and preserve such things as are for our maintenance; he must not eat
that will not work, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10. no man is privileged to be idle. 2. Good
success through Gods blessing on our labor. 3. A charitble disposition in us to
relieve the impotent poor, for we pray for our, not my daily bread. 4. The
Sanctification of the Creatures, which is, when we are sanctified that receive
them, for without this there cannot be a comfortable use of them. 5. The
blessing of God to make the Creatures nourishable unto us; for neither they in
themselves, nor we in our selves, have wherewithal to convert them to
nourishment. 6. Contentation and resting upon Gods Providence in our greatest
wants and dangers. 7. Humility and lowliness of mind, because we are all
beggars; it is of Alms that we have any thing, we have nothing of our own, and
without the Lords liberality we cannot be sustained.



In the Deprecation of this Petition, we pray with submission to the will of
God, 1. Against unseasonable weather, pestilent influences and vapors, plague
and all contagious diseases, unhealthful constitutions, and extreme poverty. 2.
Against idleness, improvident Magistrates, Invasion of Enemies, and Civil War.
3. Against discontent, murmuring, trust in the Arm of Flesh, covetousness, and
worldly cares, hard-heartedness, prodigality, unjust and unrighteous dealing,
and against all things that defile man, and make the creatures unclean and
accursed unto him; as pride in abundance, discontent in want, negligence in
men's callings, unfaithfulness in dealing, improvidence in getting, Parsimony in
hoording, ingratitude in prodigally spending, unmercifulness in not giving to
the poor, unthankfulness for Gods Creatures, all abuse of the gifts of God, and
the like.


The Thanksgiving of this Petition, is, For all and every the benefits of this
life, both general and special, even for all such things as before we prayed
for, and for freeing us from any evils wherewith we have been bodily oppressed;
yea, we thank God that he has hitherto so bountifully provided for us and
others; that we have a sufficiency for our present estate, and do see his
blessing in the getting, having and using of all his Creatures: for had we the
Royalty of the whole world, yet without the blessing of Almighty God, miserable
were our condition; so that had we the fowls of the Air at command, all the
fish in the Sea in a net, all the beasts of the Field at our shambles, all
Creatures in the world at our command and service, yet had we need in all
humility to address our selves to the Throne of Grace, and say, Give us this
day our daily bread.

What have we that we have not, Lord, from thee?
Save our own Natural impurity;
Which poisons all the sustenance we take,
Unless thou bless it for our Saviors sake.
Vouchsafe us, Lord, this day our daily bread;
Without which Staff of life Mankind is dead:
One Crum for Jesus sake; the Crumbs are all
We crave; the Crumbs that from thy Table fall.
Such Alms are precious, when thou do dispense
Thy Blessing with those gifts of Providence.
. 9. And forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.
IN this Petition we pray, That God would freely forgive us all our sins and
trespasses against his Laws, as we do from the heart forgive the offenses by
men committed against us. The word Trespasses in this Petition, is by Matthew
called Debts, and by Luke, Sins; for sins are debts, because we owe obedience,
of which we fail by sin: and because as by debt a man is in danger of
imprisonment, so by sin, of being cast into the prison of Hell, whence Christ
has ransomed all Believers by paying the debt. Thus the word Debt is a
figurative kind of speech, taken from bargaining, wherein God is resembled to
the Creditor; man is the Debtor, the Law is the Bond or Obligation, and Sin is
that Debt of ours, for which we stand bound to God by the Law: which appears by
this, That in the Evangelists the words Sin and Debt are used promiscuously; as
Luke 11.4. compared with Mat. 6.12. Now sin makes us debtors unto God, not that
we owe it him, for we are bound by the Law to the contrary obedience; but
because upon default of obedience unto God, whereto we are bound by the Law, we
are bound for our sins unto punishment, which is as it were a second debt. Thus
Christ calls all our sins Debts, Matthew. 6. both Original and Actual, both of
Fact and of Omission, because they make us debtors to God, either of obedience
or punishment, which we are to pay.

Forgive us] that is, Seeing we are not able to pay the debts occasioned by our
sins, accept of the satisfaction made by the All-sufficient Lord Jesus, and for
his sake, Let not our debts be required at our hands, or any of them, for the
least of which we are never able to answer: So that this Forgiveness here
asked, is a free and full discharge from sin and the punishment thereof,
without any satisfaction on our part; and this God does, when he is content for
Christ's sake not to impute sin unto us, but to account it as not committed, and
the punishment as not due unto us, being fully and freely contented with the
All-sufficient satisfaction made by Christ in his Death and Passion.

Vs] who are grievous sinners, and are for ever forlorn without this mercy. Us,
that by faith do believe our sins are pardoned, helping us against doubting,
and confirming our faith. Us, who believe, continuing to us this thy grace unto
the end, whereby we may daily have sin expiated and done away, as by our
weakness we are daily prone to sin.

Our Trespasses] that is, The infinite sins which proceed properly and
naturally from us, as from a most corrupt fountain, and are no way to be
imputed to thy Majesty as the Author thereof, or to Fate or Constellation, or
to the Devil only, though he seeks to bring us thereto; for every man is
drawn away by his own concupiscence, Jam. 1.14.

As we forgive, etc.] This is the condition upon which we desire mercy at the
Lords hands, which chiefly consists in the reconciliation of the mind; for
though we demand satisfaction where there is ability, yet remitting the malice,
the Lord requires no more at our hands, unless in the case of extreme poverty:
so that a Trespasser may be forgiven, and yet lawful satisfaction required; and
a Debt may be forgiven, and yet the Condition here set down not performed; viz.
if the mind be not reconciled, but continues still offended. Now though a
trespass be forgiven by man, yet may it be retained before God; and though not
forgiven by man, yet may it be by God, upon the unfeigned humiliation and
repentance of the Trespasser. And although this forgiving of others is set as a
condition required, that we may be forgiven, yet it is not for our forgiving of
others, that God will forgive us; but this condition is put to teach us, That
when we come to God in prayer, we should not come in wrath, or hatred against
other men, or with a desire of revenge, for this is contrary to the good Spirit
of Prayer. So then, we must here observe, That our forgiving of others, is not
a cause of our forgiveness, but one effect of our Justification, and a token of
the Image of God in us: For this condition imports, That we must exercise mercy
toward our brethren, and so break off the course of our sins, if we look for
mercy at Gods hands; for the words in this Petition are comparative, betokening
a likeness and similitude between Gods forgiving and ours, which must be
rightly understood, because our forgiveness is mingled with much corruption
through want of mercy; and therefore we must not understand it of the measure
of forgiveness, nor yet of the manner simply, but especially of the very act of
forgiving: And the force of the Reason stands thus, If we who have but a drop
of mercy forgive others, then do thou who art the Fountain of Mercy forgive us.
Understand further, That a man forgives a trespass only as it is a damage unto
man; but as it is a sin against God in the transgression of the Moral Law, so
God only pardons it.

These words thus understood, must be conceived as a Reason drawn, not from the
cause or like example, but from the sign or pledge of Gods forgiveness; for God
has made a Promise to forgive us, if we forgive our brethren their trespasses,
Mat. 11.25. Lastly, the order of this Petition follows, That wherein we crave
the needful good things of this life, teaching that the main hindrance thereof
is sin, which till it be removed, hinders that we cannot enjoy the good we
desire, nor be freed from the evil we decline; and that by having our daily
bread, we should lift up our minds for Spiritual blessings unto God, Luke
11.13. and that it is nothing at all to have our daily bread, unless God give
us also the pardon of our sins.

In this Petition we pray, 1. That God would forgive us all our sins, in
thought, word and deed, both Actual and Original. 2. That he would remit unto
us the punishment that is due unto us for sin both here and hereafter.


In this Petition Christ wills 1. That we acknowledge our sins. 2. That we
thirst earnestly after the remission of our sins. 3. That our faith be
exercised, because this Petition confirms our faith, yea and flows from
faith.


For what Reasons we are to pray for remission of sins; viz. 1. That we may be
saved, because without remission of sins we cannot be saved; for it is the very
nature of sin, to hinder us from all good things here, Lev. 26. and of Gods
Kingdom hereafter, Psalm. 15.2, 3. Rev. 21. 2. That we may be put in remembrance
of the remnants of sin, which are even in the holiest men; and that to this
end, that Repentance may evermore increase. 3. That we may desire and receive
the blessings prayed for in the former Petitions. 4. That Gods goodness may be
manifested, and we moved to meditate of his infinite mercy to man, when even
the Angel^ that sinned he spared not, 2 Pet. 2. and also assured, that though
(...) by sin forget to perform the obedience of Sons, yet God still (...) the
compassion of a Father.


How sins are said to be discharged: 1. When they are discharged by the person
which co^^itted them; so the devils and damned discharge their debts by
suffering Mat. 18.34. and 25.41. 2. When they are paid by another, and so are
our sins discharged by Christ, Gal. 3.14. which satisfaction may be called
forgiveness in a threefold respect: 1. In respect of us, who n^ther do nor can
confer any thing to this satisfaction, Luke 17.10. 2. In regard of Christ, who
alone does forgive them, Mat. 9.2. and we no way are able to requite him, Psalm.
103.1. 3. In respect of God the Father, who in love gives his Son, and
accepts his obedience as our satisfaction, Joh. 3.16.



From these words [ Forgive us] we may learn, 1. That as we sue for our own
pardon, so must we with the ^^ints sue for others, Exodus 38.32. 2. That we must
be sorry when men do sin, Psalm. 119.136. 3. That we may not uncharitably
discover men's sins, Gal. 6.1, 2. 4. That we must not cause any man to sin,
Prove. 7.18. Genesis 39.8. 5. That we must not delight in any sin, Psalm. 119.104.
6. That we must forgive our brethren, Genesis 50.21.


There are three kinds of debts in sin; viz. 1. A debt of Obedience, which we
owe to God, but have not paid it, through our transgression of the Law, Genesis
2.17. and 3.6. 2. debt of Punishment, because we have transgressed, Romans 6.23.
3. A debt of Purity, which we owe by reason of our corruption after our
transgression, Romans 8.12. And against all these debts we must seek that we may
get our discharge in this life, that we be not tormented in the life to come.


The Reasons why sin is called a Debt to man: 1. Because we owe love, which is
thereby broken, Romans 13.8. 2. Because we owe punishment for doing wrong, Judge.
1.8. 3. Because we owe satisfaction for the wrong done, Lev. 6.4.


These words ( As we forgive our debtors) are added for these Reasons: 1. That
we may rightly desire remission of sins; that is, with faith and repentance, a
sign and token whereof is the love of our Neighbor. 2. That when we find in
our selves true faith and repentance, we may so have a certain argument and
comfort in us, that we are of the number of them to whom remission of sins is
promised, and that therefore we shall doubtless obtain the same.


All offenses that are done to us of others, may be reduced to these three
Heads: 1. Such as do only displease us, but bring no loss or hurt to us. 2.
Small injuries, such as do not only displease us, but withal bring some little
hurt to us, either in our life, goods or goodname. 3. Greater injuries, such as
are not only offensive to our persons, but withal do prejudice our life, and
bring a ruin upon our estates, both in goods and good-name.


The forgiveness between man and man, is fourfold; viz. 1. Of Revenge; that is,
when we requite not evil for evil, either by thought, word or deed: This
belongs to all men. 2. Of private Punishments, when men return not
punishments for injuries done, by way of requital; though we cannot forgive
wholly and perfectly, yet we may truly and sincerely. 3. Of Judgment, when we
judge not an injury done to be an injury. 4. Of Satisfaction, when it is due
for some hurt done: Now man is said to forgive man, when he does pardon either
the wrong done, Genesis 50.21. or the punishment appointed for the wrong, 2 Samuel
19.23. or the satisfaction which the offender is bound to make, Luke 7.4. or
all of them as occasion is offered, Mat. 18.32.


The conditional words of this Petition are useful to us many ways; viz. 1. To
inform us, that asking of pardon and testimony of Repentance go together; he
that receives the one, must express the other, for where God gives pardon,
there also he gives grace to repent, and mercy is not granted but on condition
of repentance, Acts 2.37, 38. 2. To teach us to forgive our brethren, every day
to renew our repentance, and to humble our selves; and to let us know, That we
are bound to forgive all persons, Gol. 3.12. all sins, Prove. 10. and at all
times, Mat. 17.22. when men offend us; and that fully. 3. To afford us a
notable sign of pardon of sin; namely, our forgiving of, and mercy to our
brethren. 4. To admonish us to beware of the common sin of this Age, which is,
desire of revenge, spite and grudging; for if we forgive not, we pray in effect
that God would not forgive us, yea we curse our selves. 5. To discover unto us
the gross hypocrisy of our Nature, for so often as we make this Petition, we
make profession of reformation of life in new obedience; for this one branch of
brotherly Reconciliation here professed, does presuppose our Conversion from
all sin, since true Repentance for one sin, cannot stand with a purpose to live
in any other. 6. To stir us up to hunger after love, mercy, gentleness,
meekness, and to endeavor to practice the same continually; living in peace, 2
Cor. 13.11. laboring to make peace, Mat. 5.9. and showing all tokens of love to
our adversaries, that they may assure themselves we have wholly forgiven them.
7. To show us the way how to keep true peace of conscience for ever; for when
we are at one with God and man, we have a blessed peace: and this is by calling
upon God for the pardon of our sins every day, and by following after peace
with men in the practice of forgiveness and reconciliation, which is never
sincere without repentance. 8. To acquaint us, That no man living in malice can
say the Lords Prayer as he ought to do, Mat. 5.24. and that is a sign of grace
to forgive, Mat. 17.32. 9. To exclude from pardon all such as persecute the
Saints of God, till they repent, and practice as they pray in this Petition.


By this Petition we are taught, 1. To bewail our carnal security, going on
from day to day in sin, without thought of the debt thereby. 2. To rely and
settle our hearts in all estates, in affliction, temptation and death it self,
on the mere mercy of God in Christ, by faith in his Blood for the pardon of our
sins. 3. Not to lie down in the sins we daily commit, but renew our estate by
true humiliation and repentance; which consists in daily examination,
confession, contrition, supplication and conversion. 4. To use this Petition as
a remedy against despair, which must not embolden any to sin presumptuously,
for the Lord has said he will not be merciful to that man, Deuteronomy. 29.19. 5.
That no man possibly can fulfill the Law, for the Apostles themselves were
commanded to ask pardon for sin every day; whereby it is plain they could not
fulfill the Law, much less can we. 6. In all godly manner to endeavor after what
we pray for; for it is gross also; hypocrisy daily to ask the pardon of sin,
and still to continue in the daily practice thereof. 7. Not only to pray for
the pardon of our own sins, but of our brethrens also; whereby we are taught,
that the good estate of their souls should be dear and precious to us.


In the Supplication of this Petition we pray for what soever tends to the
forgiveness of our sins; as 1. The knowledge of our sins, without which the
tongue may pray for pardon, but the heart cannot. Thus many poor and miserable
souls ignorantly deceive themselves. 2. Grace to acknowledge our sins, for he
that hides them shall not prosper, Prove. 28.13. and all that know them do not
confess them, or else some way justify themselves. 3. Grace to be truly
humbled for sin, and that in the sense of Gods curse due for it; else we are
still in our sins, and cannot pray to speed. 4. Justification through the death
and bloodshedding of Christ, Romans 4.25. That Christ's righteousness may be made
ours, and our sins laid upon him, for his mercies sake. 5. Love and charity
toward our brethren; that God would give us a heart to be reconciled to them,
pardoning their offenses against us.


The Deprecation of this Petition is against all things that may shut up Gods
mercy and goodness from us; as 1. Blindeness of mind, and ignorance of our
inward estate, which is through ignorance of the Law. 2. Hardness of heart,
which keeps from repentance. 3. Despair of Gods mercy and goodness, which
drives from God to the Devil. 4. Presumption, which is the promising of
happiness to ones self on false ground. 5. Continuance in sin, and the least
opinion of our own Righteousness. 6. Malice and thirsting after revenge, when
injury has been offered us: To prevent and avoid which, we must consider 1.
How much the Lord has forgiven us for Christ's sake. 2. That both the Lord
Jesus and all holy men have forgiven and prayed for their enemies; the Devil
alone is an implacable enemy. 3. That the way of grace is thus stopped up, and
consequently the way of glory.



The Thanksgiving of this Petition, is, For illumination to see our sins, for a
sight and sense of our sins, and for blindeness Spiritual expelled; for
Sanctification to turn us from sin, for hard hearts mollified, and for the
extremes and bars of Grace, Despair and Presumption, removed; for Justification
to deliver us by the death of Christ from all sin; for Love abounding, where
offenses against us abound, and for Malice banished and purged out of us; that
howsoever we sustain many grievous wrongs at the hands of men, yet are we
contented, yea cheerfully willing to forgive them all, even as God for Christ's
sake has forgiven us.

The Moral Law does to Obedience bind
The Universal Race of all Mankind:
Which not performed by us, we must endure
The penal Statute of the Forfeiture;
'Less he, who as our blessed Surety stood,
Cancel the Obligation with his Blood.
This for the Faithful's done; it is now our part
To Cancel, to remit with all our heart
Others their Debts; that we for ours never may
Be called to Account at the Grand Audit-Day.
. 10. And lead us not into Temptation, but deliver us from evil.
THis Petition in order is immediately subjoyned after the other, craving the
pardon of sin, to teach us, That this is not the only care of Christians to
seek to have sins pardoned, but for the time to come earnestly to strive
against and resist it; the Christian man's life being a continual warfare: So
that there be two Petitions for the soul, but one for the body; teaching us,
That our care for the estate Spiritual, ought to be double to our care for
things Temporal.

Lead us not into Temptation, but, etc.] that is, Suffer us not to be tempted
above our power, or so that either we sin, or wholly revolt from thee; but
strengthen us in our Temptations by thy holy Spirit, and deliver us from evil
as the cause thereof: wherein we pray, That the Lord would not suffer us to be
carried away by the Temptations of the World, the Flesh, or the Devil, to the
committing of sin, but that he would deliver us from the evil of all
Temptations, both of sin and damnation. Lead us not into Temptation which we
cannot bear; so Augustine: Redeem us from evil, that we be not carried by
Temptations; so Calvin. And we pray thus, not that we may always be free, which
cannot be, but that we may not be overwhelmed, overcome, and made subject to
Temptations, when we are by them assaulted.

But deliver us from evil] that is, Withdraw not thy Grace from us, leave us
not to our own lusts, neither deliver us over to Satan to be hardened, but in
all assaults stand thou by us, that our faith may not fail, and deliver us from
the evil both of sin and punishment: So that the meaning hereof may be this, O
Lord, we are every way subject to Temptations, and by our sins we deserve to be
left therein to the malice of Satan, and to the power of our own Corruptions;
yet we beseech thee not to forsake us in any Temptation, but give an happy
issue thereto, still upholding us by thy Grace. Now here we must observe, That
God is said to lead a man into Temptation, only as Temptation is a punishment
of sin, and only by permission, leaving the party to himself and Satan's
malice, for some former transgression: For, God tempts no man to destroy him,
or to cause him to sin, but to try and exercise his Graces in him; wherefore
this Petition which Christ taught us, speaks not simply of all trial and
manifestation of our faith and godliness, unto which David offered himself of
his own accord, Psalm. 26. For, God tempts not to evil, but man when he is
tempted, is tempted by his own evil concupiscence, Jam. 1.13, 14.

The words themselves contain one only Petition (though some have thought
otherwise) consisting of two parts: 1. The Petition it self, Lead us not into
Temptation; or a Petition of delivery from a particular future evil. 2. The
Exposition thereof, more general for delivery from all, as well present as
future evil.


There be two causes of temptations, and consequently two sorts thereof: 1.
From God, for the trial of our faith, godliness, hope, patience, constancy, and
obedience by the Cross: So God is said to have tempted Abraham, Joseph, Job and
David. This is good and holy, when as God tempts a man, which is an action of
God, whereby he proves and tries man, to make manifest unto man himself, and
unto others, what is in his heart, for God knows well enough before he tries
him. This is called Good, both in respect of the Author, which is God, and in
respect of the end, which is the good of his servants: And this we here pray
not against. 2. By the Devil, our Flesh; and wicked men, which is every
soliciting to sin, which soliciting it self is also sin. This is evil, being a
wicked motion, allurement, or persuasion, arising partly from our own
corruption, and partly from the suggestion of the Devil, whereby man is
provoked to sin against God in the transgression of some Commandment. Now by
Nature man is prone to be tempted, Genesis 31. Sin is a deceitful tempter, Heb.
3.13. and Satan is a subtle, cruel and diligent tempter, 1 Pet. 5.8. And this
is that we pray against in this Petition.


Temptations are of diverse sorts; viz. 1. Whereby God tries man, 1 Kings
10.11. searching into his heart, whether by affliction or otherwise, for
Reasons best known unto himself. 2. Whereby man tempts God, as by murmuring
and refusing to believe, and to rest on his Providence, without seeing evident
present Signs of his goodness; seeking after new miracles, trusting in outward
means, prescribing God a time or manner of deliverance, impatient at his
corrections, adventuring upon needless apparent dangers without warrant, or
burthening the faithful with vain and needless Traditions. 3. Whereby man
tempts man, seeking to circumvent him, by trying him with politic devices.
Thus the Pharisees are said to have tempted Christ, Mat. 22.18. 4. Whereby man
tempts himself, his corrupt heart alluring and drawing him to sin, Jam. 1.14.
5. Whereby the Devil tempts man, and provokes him to sin: From these two
last Temptations, of the Flesh and the Devil, that is, corrupt and evil motions
of the mind, we desire here to be delivered; from the third we pray to be kept
in the fourth Petition; from the second in the second Petition: From the first
we pray not to be kept, but rather that the Lord would try us, and use all
means he sees best to further our Sanctification.


The four degrees of Temptation, by which it proceeds till it bring a man to
destruction, unless it be cut off, Jam. 1.14, 15. 1. Suggestion; when the mind
conceives a wicked thought, put in by Satan, or arising from natural
corruption. 2. Delight; when the evil thought conceived, and for a time
retained in the mind, descends to the heart, and there pleases the will,
and delights the affections. 3. Consent; when the will yields to the evil
motion, and the heart resolves to practice it. 4. Perfection; when a Sin is
often committed, and by custom becomes as it were ripe, whereupon follows
destruction: Now a man is led into temptation, when he is left of God to an
evil motion, suggested into his mind, so as he gives consent unto it, and goes
on to the practice of it.


To be led into Temptation, is to be possessed and held by the Temptation,
after it has assaulted us: For in every Temptation there be two actions; viz.
1. One of God, whereby in his just Judgment he leaves a man to himself, or to
the malice of Satan. 2. Another of man himself, whereby being left of God, he
enters into the midst of the Temptation, as it were plunging himself into it.


How the Lord is said to lead into Temptation: 1. By withdrawing his Grace,
without which every man falls, and is not able to stand in the day of
Temptation, Psalm. 119.8. 2. By leaving a man to his own lusts, by which as by a
violent Torrent he is carried quite away, Romans 1.24. 3. By delivering over unto
Satan, for the punishment of former notorious Sins, to be hardened; as in
Pharaoh and Saul.


The Reasons for which the godly may be led into temptation, 1. To keep them
under, that they be not proud of Gods Grace, 2 Cor. 12.7. 2. To winnow the
chaff of Sin from Gods Corn, Luke 22.31. 3. That Gods power may appear in man's
weakness, 2 Cor. 12.9. 4. That his mercy may be seen in keeping them from a
final fall, Luke 22.32. 5. That they may be like Christ their Head, Romans 8.17.
6. That they may acknowledge that all strength is from God, 2 Cor. 3.5. 7. That
by this they may know themselves to be Gods children, who alone are so tempted,
that they recover in Temptation, Psalm. 37.24.


How many ways God is said to tempt man: 1. By afflictions, as he did the
Israelites, Deuteronomy. 9.3. 2. By Commandment, as he did Abraham, Genesis 22.1. 3. By
prosperity, as he did David, 2 Samuel 12. 4. By offering objects, as he did Eve,
Genesis 3.


The Graces to be desired of God, which are helpful against Temptation; viz. 1.
Spiritual heed and watchfulness to prevent Temptations, and to avoid the
occasions thereof. 2. Grace to pray in the time of Temptation, that God would
lessen and moderate the violence and force thereof. 3. That in Temptation God
would be so far from withdrawing his Grace from us, that he would then add
Grace to Grace, even new Grace unto the former. 4. That in continuance of
Temptation when it abides long upon us, God would strengthen us to hold out.
5. That he would give us patience to bear the irksomness and the trouble of it.
6. That in the end of it God would give a comfortable issue for his glory and
our own good.


The Christian Armor against Temptation: 1. Truth or verity, whereby a man
professes true Religion, and endeavoreth himself in the practice of all the
duties of Religion in sincerity; his speeches and his actions are suitable,
proceeding from an honest heart, that truly means whatsoever the tongue
utters or himself practices. 2. Justice or Righteousness, when a man leads
his life unblameably and uprightly. 3. The preparation of the Gospel of Peace;
that is, when we find our affections so cleave unto Christ, that by way of
thankfulness for the glad tidings of Salvation by Christ revealed in the
Gospel, which promises pardon of Sin and life everlasting by Christ, we can
deny our selves, take up our Cross, and follow him. 4. The shield of Faith, by
which a man lays hold on the Mercy of God in Christ for his salvation, and
under it shrowds himself against the fiery darts of Satan. 5. Hope, by which we
wait for that salvation which we apprehend by Faith.


Remedies against Temptation to Covetousness: 1. We must meditate, That God
has taken upon him to be our careful Protector, Psalm. 23.1. 2. That this Sin
is the root of all Evil; and that every covetous man is an Idolater, Col. 3.5.
3. That our life stands not in abundance, Luke 12.16. and that Christ and his
Disciples were poor, Mat. 8.2. 4. That we shall carry nothing with us, Job
1.21. and that we must give account of our getting, Luke 16.2. 5. That it will
hinder us in the service of God, Luke 14.18, 19. and make us unwilling to dye,
Eccles. 41.1. 6. That our riches may suddenly be taken away from us, Prove.
23.5. or we from them. 7. That rich men come hardly to heaven, Luke 18.24. and
many woes denounced against them, Amos 6.1.


Remedies against Temptations to Pride: 1. We must meditate, That we must not
be proud, because we have all things of gift, 1 Cor. 4.7. 2. That God resists
the proud, 1 Pet. 5.5. and that we are but dust and ashes, Genesis 18.27. 3. That
pride hinders a greater largess of Grace, Luke 18.24. and that it cast Angels
out of Heaven into Hell, 2 Pet. 2.4. 4. That if it be in Apparel, I have more
need to be humbled for my shameful nakedness, Genesis 2.25. 5. That Christ left me
an example of humility, Mat. 11.29. but pride argues me a Son of the Devil, for
it is Signum Reproborum. Hieron. 6. That pride is the causer of contentions,
Prove. 13.10. and that by it we make others to contemn us, Esth. 3.2.


Remedies against Temptations to Adultery: 1. We must meditate, That God sees
us, Prove. 5.21. and will punish us, Genesis 20.3. 2. That we are members of
Christ, 1 Cor. 6.15. and our bodies the Temples of the Holy Ghost. 3. That
Adulterers shall not inherit heaven, 1 Cor. 6.9. they seldom repent, Prove.
7.26, 27. 4. That for the whorish woman a man is brought to a morsel of bread,
Prove. 6.26. 5. That we wrong the Church and Commonwealth, by obtruding on both
a bastardly generation; for neither, without evidence, know their true
children. 6. That as thereby we endanger our souls, so we decay our bodies, and
when we are dead, our memory is more rotten above ground, then our carcases
under it, leaving behind an inexpungeable blot, Prove. 6.32, 33.


Remedies against Temptations to Gluttony and Drunkenness. 1. We must meditate,
That Solomon commands us at great Tables to put our knives to our throats,
Prove. 23.1. That we thereby abuse our own bodies, Luke 21.34. The good
creatures of God, Ephesians. 5.18. and that which might do good to the poor, Mat.
14.4, 5. 2. That by them we are made unfit for Gods service, 1 Cor. 10.7. and
that these sins are the main instruments of other sins, Prove. 23.33. 3. That
all civil Nations have detested these sins; that we are unfit to keep any
secret, and become a scorn to the sober, Genesis 9.22. 4. That since Christ tasted
gall and vinegar for us, why should not we abstain from surfeiting and
drunkenness for him?


Remedies against Temptations to Despair of Gods mercy; viz. 1. We must
meditate, That we were by Baptism received into the Church, and it has been to
us the laver of Regeneration, Tit. 3.5. 2. That we once heard and believed the
word, and therefore we shall stand ever by this faith, 2 Cor. 1.24. 3. That our
Election is in Gods keeping, and therefore Satan can never steal it away, Ephesians.
1.4. for that the calling of God is without Repentance, and whom he loves, he
loves to the end, Romans 11.29. Joh. 13.1. 4. That we know by our love of the
brethren, that we are translated from death to life, 1 John 3.14. That we
desire to believe in Christ, and to run the ways of his Commandments, Mark
9.24. 5. That we hate sin with an unfeigned hatred, 1 John 3.9. and that we are
sorry that we can be no more sorry for our sins, which to us is an argument of
faith, 2 Cor. 7.10. 6. That Christ's Merits are far greater then our sins, and
he is the propitiation for our sins, Joh. 1.29. 7. That though the righteous
fall, yet he shall rise again, for God supporteth him with his hand, Psalm.
37.24. 8. That the Spirit does, though very weakly, witness to my Spirit, that
I am the child of God, Romans 8.16.


Remedies against Temptations to presume of Gods mercy: 1. We must meditate,
That God bids us not be high-minded, Romans 11.20. and that Security destroys
more then any Sin, Luke 17.26. 2. That he is blessed who fears always, Prove.
28.14. and that we must work out our Salvation with fear and trembling, Phil.
2.12. 3. That as God is a God of Mercy, so is he also a God of Justice, Deuteronomy.
9.20. 4. That the more I presume, the more subject I am to fall, Luke 22.33,
34. and Satan's main weapon to vanquish me, is this, That God is merciful, Romans
6.15. 5. That the longer we continue in sins, the more hardly may we leave
them, 2 Samuel 3.16. 6. That even David prayed to be kept from Sins of
presumption, Psalm. 19.13.


In praying that God will deliver us from evil, we desire, 1. That he would
send no evil on us, but deliver us from all evils present and to come, both of
crime and pain. 2. That if he send on us any evils, that he would mitigate them
in this life, and turn them to our salvation, that they may be good and
profitable unto us. 3. That he will at length in the life to come, fully and
perfectly deliver us, and wipe away every tear from our eyes.


By Evil is not meant Satan only, for it comprehends all our Spiritual
Enemies, and that for these Reasons: 1. The Title, Evil, is not only given to
Satan, but to Sin also, Romans 12.9. and to the World, 1 John 5.19. and to the
Flesh, that is, the corruption of our Nature, for that is the evil treasure of
the heart, Mat. 12.35. 2. That advantage which the Devil has against us, is by
the World, the Flesh, and Sin, as his Agents and Instruments in Temptation
against us; and therefore with that evil one the Devil, Sin, the World and the
Flesh must be understood.


That which we pray for we must endeavor to practice; and therefore our special
care must be 1. To resist the Devil, and to keep our selves from the assaults
of Satan unto Sin. 2. To beware of all Satanical practices, by using Charms,
seeking to Witches, or the like, as means of help in any distress. This is
gross hypocrisy, to pray against the evils of Satan, and to give our selves to
the practice of them. 3. Not voluntarily to thrust our selves into such a place
as is haunted by the Devil, nor to meddle with it or him, without a warrant and
calling from God, to whom we must betake our selves by humble and earnest
prayer. 4. We must avoid the company of evil persons, Prove. 1.10. Genesis 39.10.
5. Not live in places where evil is practiced, though we might gain much by it,
2 Cor. 6.17. 6. We must take heed of evil speeches, which may corrupt our
selves and others, Ephesians. 4.29. 7. We must hide Gods word in our heart, that we
do not sin against him, Psalm. 119.11.


In these words of this Petition, we pray against Satan's slights and policies,
which he exercises against all men, but especially against Gods children, for
their ruin and destruction. They are many, but these six are most dangerous
policies of Satan, which we are as well to watch as pray against: 1. When men
have many good things in them, as knowledge in the mystery of Salvation, beside
Moral virtues, then the Devil labors that concupiscence may still reign in
their hearts, by their living in some sin or other, whereto they are naturally
inclined. 2. When Satan cannot procure some strong Corruption to reign in the
child of God, then he labors to get him to commit some offense or sin, whereby
the Name of God may be dishonored, his Profession disgraced, his Conscience
wounded, and Gods children offended. 3. When the child of God is fallen into any
sin, then the Devil labors to to cast him asleep therein, that he may lie in it
without remorse, and so never repent. 4. When the Lord vouchsafes to men the
means of Salvation, then Satan labors to make the same void and of no effect,
that so they may not only miss of Salvation, but be condemned the more deeply
for the neglect and contempt of the means. 5. When he cannot work his will
inwardly in their souls as he desires, then he essays to do them mischief by
some outward Satanical operations. Thus he plagued Job. 6. Satan labors to
bring Gods children to some fearful and miserable end, not so much for the
bodily death, as in regard of the inward horror and terror of Conscience; for
the extremity of his power and malice at a man's last gasp, he hopes will be
most powerful; and if he be not restrained, he will endeavor to make him dye in
presumption or despair.


How many ways God is said to deliver us from evil; viz. 1. By preserving us
from committing sin, Genesis 20.6. and by freeing us from Judgments due unto sin,
2 Samuel 12.13. 2. By keeping us from the hurt of sin and afflictions, Psalm.
91.13. and by turning all those sins which we commit, and the afflictions which
we sustain, to our good, Psalm. 51.1. and 119.67, 71. 3. By bridling Satan that
he cannot subdue us, Romans 16.20. 4. By giving us his holy Spirit, that by a
lively faith we overcome all evil, Romans 8.2. 5. By no means, Mat. 4.2. by small
means, 2 Kings 4.3. by ordinary means, Josh. 5.12. by extraordinary means, 2
Kings 6.16. contrary to all means, Dan. 3.25. 6. By Christ Jesus, who overcame
the World, by obeying; the Flesh, by suffering; and the Devil, by triumphing
over him in his Cross, Joh. 16.33. 1 Pet. 4.1. Col. 2.15.


The wants we bewail in this Petition; viz. 1. The Rebellion of our wicked
Nature, by which we resist the Spirit of God, Romans 7.14, etc. 2. Our readiness
in each little Temptation to yield up our selves to the committing of sin, Luke
22.45, 46. 3. That we cannot enough mourn for the remnants of our bondage,
whereby we are kept in the power of Satan. 4. That so many fall by Satan's
Temptations, Psalm. 119.136. 5. That we cannot here get mastery over our own
Corruptions, 2 Cor. 12.8. 6. That we love so this Spiritual Sodom, in which we
are subject to, and fall by Temptation, Genesis 19.16. 7. The Tyranny of Satan our
Adversary, going about each way to subdue us, Mat. 9.12.


This Petition being negative, the Deprecation thereof is first to be
considered, which is 1. Against Temptation, as it may be a means to draw men
from God to sin, 2 Cor. 12.7, 8. 2. Against Afflictions, as they are
punishments of sin, Curses from God, motives to impatience, or means to make us
take Gods Name in vain, Prove. 30.9. Against grievous afflictions long
continuing, to make us despair of Gods Mercy, or hearing our prayers. 3.
Against Spiritual desertion, or forsaking of Gods Spirit; which if gone, all
power to stand, and all Spiritual comfort is gone also: for it is in us the new
life, the Spirit of the soul. 4. Against Solicitations to sin, either by the
Devil, the World or the Flesh. 5. Against Sin, even when we are most solicited
and tempted, because we shall meet with temptations, yet that we may not be
overcome and made slaves unto Sin. 6. Against future relapse into Sin;
blindeness of mind, hardness of heart through custom in sinning, or through
some notorious sins committed. 7. Against backsliding from the Truth, either in
part or in whole; all sorts of Judgments, temporal or eternal; and what hurt
soever may befall, either by prosperity or adversity. 8. Against sudden death,
that we may not be prevented of Repentance for renewed trespasses and eternal
death, the greatest evil of punishment.


The Supplication of this Petition, is for such things as are best for us,
preserving us from Sin and damnation; as 1. The Spirit of Grace, which is
threefold: 1 Light of understanding of the holy Scriptures, whereby we are able
to use them. 2. Stedfastness of faith, whereby, as by a shield, the fiery darts
of the Devil are repressed; which also is of virtue to purify the heart. 3.
Patience in bearing any cross or affliction, whereby we are tempted at any
time, that in stead of sin, the issue thereof may be hope, Romans 5.3.
2. The helping hand of the Lord to turn evil into good unto us; and this he
does 1. By Humiliation, and casting us down under and for these things; as
Nebuchadnezzar the proudest, and Saul the bloodiest Persecutor. 2. By
alienating and estranging our affections from the world and worldly things by
affliction. 3. By framing us by the Cross to a more careful obedience for the
time to come, Psalm. 119.71. 4. By prevention, the Lord punishing us in this
world, that we may escape in the world to come, 1 Cor. 11.32.
3. Everlasting life; that God for his mercies sake in and through the
meritorious satisfaction of our Savior Jesus Christ, would bestow this infinite
good upon us.


The Thanksgiving of this Petition, is, For that in the former things which we
pray for, God has so enabled us to resist, as that neither the corruption of
Nature, enticements of the World, the policies of Satan, nor present
Affliction, has so subdued us, but that we are able to rise again; as also for
good arising to us by Temptations, and deliverance from the punishments by our
sins deserved.

Since first the proud aspiring Angels fell,
There was no want of Policy in Hell:
The Devil knows by Observation,
The pulse of each man's Inclination,
The tide of all our Actions; yea, he knows
How low our Graces ebb, how high Sin flows;
How the least spark of any Lusts desire
Kindles the Heart, and sets the Will on fire.
Help, Lord; let not the World, the Flesh or Devil
Prevail, but still Deliver us from evil.
. 11. For thine is the Kingdom, the Power and the Glory, for ever. Amen.
THis Conclusion is added as a Reason of all the Petitions, to strengthen our
Faith, that God being both able and willing, does grant all our Requests made
unto him in the Name of Christ, and therefore in the end we post-adde a note of
Confidence, and say, Amen; which is originally an Hebrew word, yet used in all
Languages: It signifies Truth or Faith; the uttering of it after a Prayer,
implies an Assent unto the Prayer, together with carnestness of desire, and
Faith for the obtaining that which is prayed for. Thus the people were
commanded to say, Amen, Deuteronomy. 27.15, etc. and accordingly was it practiced,
Neh. 8.6.

For thine is the kingdom] that is, both general over the World, and special
over thy Church and Chosen; both thy Kingdom of Providence and of Grace: And in
this faith do we pray unto thee, submitting our selves as thy Liege-people.

The Power.] that is, The Almighty power, whereby thou art able to do all
things whatsoever thy people ask and beg of thee; there is nothing out of thy
power, but we are without all power and might in our selves to help our selves,
therefore our eyes of Faith wait upon thy power.

And the Glory] that is, Thou shall make thy glory shine more and more in being
beneficial unto us, thy Faith and Religion shall be the more esteemed and
reverenced, the end of all that thou do for us shall be thine eternal praise;
thine is the excellency and majesty, which Property rightly and only belongs
to thee, thou alone having an absolute Sovereignty over all things, and Power
answerable to dispose and govern them at thy pleasure; yea, we give thee all
glory in confidence of thy goodness, and say, Amen, in token that we verily
believe it shall be so with us as we crave, and do with all fervency beg, O
Lord, let it be so, do thou subscribe to our desires, and say, So be it.

These words are a Reason of the former, touching which we must observe two
things in general: 1. That they are not a Reason to move God, whose will is
unchangeable, but to persuade the child of God who prays thus, that God will
grant his requests. 2. That this Reason is not peculiar to the last Petition,
but general, belonging to them all.


The Reasons for the propping of our faith and assurance in our prayers,
contained in this conclusion, are taken 1. From the Kingdom of God; a good King
delights in the welfare of his Subjects, how much more does the King of kings,
who is Goodness it self, in the happiness of his? He will hear, defend and
preserve his Subjects. 2. From the Power of God, being mightier then all our
Enemies, which joined with his Sovereignty and Goodness, we need not fear
though we were in the paws of Lions, or the mouth of the Grave. 3. From his
Glory, which is the end or final cause of our Requests, for we desire these
things for his glory, therefore will he grant whatsoever in our prayers may
redound to his honor and glory. 4. From the eternity of his Kingdom, Power and
Glory, being for ever and ever; therefore he cannot be weary of our prayers, no
time can period his goodness. 5. From our confidence expressed in the last
word, Amen; for the Lord will grant unto us whatsoever we believe shall be
granted, when we ask.


The Kingdom of God is twofold: 1. The Kingdom of his Providence, whereby he
rules and governs all things in heaven and earth, even the Devil, and all his
Angels and Instruments. 2. The Kingdom of Grace, whereby he governs his Church
by his Word and Spirit, and both these are here to be understood.


Further, Gods kingdom in this place imports, 1. That he is All-sufficient of
himself to do all things whatsoever, needing no help or instrument beside his
Sovereign will, Genesis 17.1. 2. That he has an absolute Sovereign Right, Title
and Interest, to and in all things in heaven and earth. 3. That he has
Sovereign Rule and Authority over all things in heaven and earth; yea, over
Hell it self, and all the powers and principalities thereof, governing all
things whatsoever as he pleases, and bringing them into an absolute subjection.


The kingdom is here called God's, and appropriated to him alone, for these
Reasons: 1. To show that God has his Kingdom of himself and from himself
alone; thus the Kingdom of Grace and Providence are both his. 2. To distinguish
God from earthly Kings; for though they have a Kingdom, Power and Glory, yet
they have all these from God, not of themselves, and only for a certain
limited time; but God has them all of himself alone, not from any other, and
that for ever and ever.


Thine is the Power] that is, Gods Power is his own, of himself alone, not
received from any other, to distinguish the true God from all Creatures, who
have it not of themselves, but from God. By power is meant an ability in God,
whereby he can do whatsoever he will: For the better conceiving whereof,
observe these two things: 1. That God is not only powerful, but even Power it
self in regard of his Nature, as he is Goodness, Wisdom, etc. Angels and men
are called powerful, as receiving power from God; but God only is Power it
self, because his Nature is Infinite in power, as in all his other Properties.
2. That Power and Will in God are one and the same: for our better conceiving
of them, they may be distinguished, but in themselves they differ not; for Gods
willing of a thing is the effecting and doing of it: It is not so in us, for we
will many things that we cannot do, but whatsoever God wills, that he does.


By appropriating glory to God is here meant, 1. That God has made all things
for his own glory, Prove. 16.4. 2. That whatsoever we ask, are means of his
glory, Joh. 12.28. 3. That the things we ask, shall be referred to his glory, 1
Cor. 10.31.


The Reasons why Gods Kingdom, Power and Glory is said to be for ever and ever:
1. Because in themselves they are everlasting, Psalm. 45.6. and 102.28. and
145.13. 2. Because of us they should never be forgotten, Psalm. 145.2, 3. 3. To
distinguish it from earthly Dominions; all which have their periods, both in
Government and Governors, Psalm. 119.96. Isa. 40.6. 4. To show forth the dignity
of Gods Church and his Children, who have a Father whose Kingdom is
everlasting, and everlastingly shall reign with their Father in his Kingdom of
Power, Glory and Eternity.


Of this word Amen, there is a double use: 1. To express our desire and wish,
that we may be heard. 2. To testify our faith in the assurance of receiving
those things that we crave; both which are to be practiced in prayer, and are
expressed by Christ, Mat. 11.24.


From the union of the word Amen, with our Petitions, we learn 1. That every
child of God may believe particularly and certainly the pardon of his own
sins, and endeavor to attain thereunto, if as yet he cannot. 2. That all prayer
ought to be made in a known tongue, for else the Assent and Affiance of the
heart cannot be given together.


This Conclusion of the Lords Prayer, thus conceived and understood, is useful
to us many ways: 1. For a ground of trust and confidence in God in all
distresses; for as the Kingdom is his, we are his Subjects, and he is willing
to help; as the Power is his, we are assured he is able to help us; and as the
Glory is his, he will show mercy to his people, and hear their prayers, Psalm.
50.15. 2. To teach us, that Prayer and Thanksgiving must always go together. 3.
To show us a way how to obtain our requests in prayer; we must confess our own
unworthiness, and give all Praise, Glory and Honor to God. 4. To let the
proudest of us know, that God is to be feared above all Creatures. 5. To move
us to love God, and to yield all cheerful obedience to him.


The Reason why there is here mention made only of these three Properties of
God, is (as some think) to point out the three Persons: For the Kingdom is
Christ's, 1 Cor. 15.35. Power, the Holy Ghosts, Romans 15.13, 19. and Glory, the
Fathers, Romans 6.4. though indeed we may not limit our conceit of them, but
understand them in prayer, as of the Trinity of Persons in the Unity of the
Godhead, so of the Unity of the Godhead in the Trinity of Persons.

Our Father which in Heaven art, Thy Name still
Be hallowed; Thy Kingdom come; Thy Will
Be done in Earth as it is in Heaven: Give us
This day our daily Bread; And forgive us
Our Trespasses, as those forgive do we
That Trespass against us: And let us not be
Into Temptation led; but deliver
Us from all evil: For thine for ever
The Kingdom, Power and Glory is. Amen.
The Kingdom, Power and Glory is. Amen.
CHAP. IV.
. 1. The Creed.
THe sum of those things which are to be believed, are comprised in the Creed,
commonly called, The Symbol of the Apostles, because it is a token or
profession, whereby the Church, with her Members, is discerned from all her
Enemies, and from all other Sects. This Symbol is a brief and summary form of
Christian Doctrine; or a brief sum or Confession of the Points of Christian
Religion, or Evangelical Doctrine; the Articles whereof are the Square or Rule,
whereunto the Faith and Doctrine of all Orthodox and right believing Christians
ought to agree. This self-same Symbol is called also Catholic, because there
is but one Faith of all Christians; and though there were new Symboles made, as
that of Athanasius, of Nice, of Ephesus, of Calcedon, yet is there not a
diversity of Faiths: for these are not other from this Apostolic Symbol, but
certain words are added as an Explication of this, by reason of Heretics, by
whom because of the shortness thereof, this was depraved. There is no change
either of the Matter or of the Doctrine, but only of the form of declaring it,
as easily may appear by comparing them together.

This Creed is called Apostolic, or the Creed of the Apostles, for these
Reasons: 1. Because it contains the sum of the Apostolic Doctrine. 2.
Because the Apostles delivered that sum of Doctrine to their Scholars and
Disciples; which the Church afterward held as received from them: not that the
Apostles composed the form of this Creed, but believed and preached the subject
matter of it.


The ends why the Creed was penned by the Apostles, and left unto the Church,
were these: 1. To be a Rule of faith, and preservation from Heresy. 2. That it
might be a mean of distinguishing betwixt true Christians and Heretics. 3.
That every man entering the profession of Christianity, might continually have
before his eyes that Faith for which he should suffer persecution, and to the
defense whereof he should stand unto the death. 4. That every one of the
Catechumeni (which were new converted Christians) might have in a readiness
what to answer and believe, at their initiation thereinto.


The principal parts of the Apostolic Creed are three: 1. Of the Father, and
our Creation. 2. Of the Son, and our Redemption. 3. Of the Holy Ghost, and our
Sanctification.


Though our Creation, Redemption and Sanctification are each appropriated to
some one person of the Trinity, yet have all three Persons their joynt-working
in them: For the Creation is given to the Father, Redemption to the Son, and
Sanctification to the Holy Ghost, not as they are simply an operation or work
(for so should the other persons be excluded from it) but in respect, for the
order and manner of working, which is peculiar and proper to every of them, in
producing and bringing forth the same external work: Or thus, The works of our
Creation, Redemption and Sanctification, are the operations of the Godhead
outwardly; that is, external operations, which God works on his Creatures;
and they are undivided, that is, common to the three Persons, which they by
common will and power work in the Creatures, by reason of that one and the same
Essence and Nature of the Godhead which they have; but in respect of that order
of working which is between them, it is otherwise: For the Father Creates, but
mediately, by the Son and the Holy Ghost; the Son from the Father, and the Holy
Ghost from the Father and the Son: The Father and the Holy Ghost Redeem us, but
mediately, by the Son; but the Son immediately, from the Father by the Holy
Ghost: So the Father and the Son Sanctify us, but mediately, by the Holy
Ghost; but the Holy Ghost immediately, from the Father and the Son.

The Christians Faith, or Faith's Epitomy,
Or Ensign of true Christianity;
The Faith for which the valiant Martyrs fought
With all the Princes of the Air, and sought
For life by losing it; quenching the flame,
Not by their Blood, but with new fire, which came
From their resolved Faiths Spiritual eyes;
From whose most zealous spicy flame did rise
In Heaven a Crown of Immortality,
On Earth the Phoenix of their Memory.
. 2. I believe in God, the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth.
THat is, I believe that God is my Father, as by Generation and Creation, so by
Regeneration and Adoption, able to do all things as it pleases him, the
Creator of the whole world, and the Lord and Governor of the same. I believe;
not we believe (with the Papists) as the Church believes; but every man must so
believe, as to be able to give an account of his Faith when lawfully called
thereunto. Now it is one thing to believe God, another thing to believe in God;
To believe God, shows only a Faith of knowledge, or historical Faith; To
believe in God, declares true Faith or confidence, that is, to be persuaded,
That whatsoever God is, and is said to be, he is all that, and refers it all
to our safety, for his Sons sake; that is, to resolve that he is such an one to
me in particular.

God is to be considered in the three persons, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, a
person being nothing else but a manner of being in the Godhead. Now no man is
able to know God according to the excellency of his own Nature, Joh. 1.10, 18.
but the Scripture delivers us such a knowledge of him, as is both necessary and
profitable for us, Romans 1.19, 20. We must therefore acknowledge God to be such
as himself has manifested himself to be; and though he cannot be defined,
because he is Immense, and because his Essence is unknown to us, yet may he be
described by his Attributes and Properties, the persons and principal works,
which may be thus:

God is a Spiritual Essence, a Spirit, John 4.24. or simple Spiritual Essence,
Exodus 3.13. an everlasting Spirit, 2 Chronicles. 3.17. Infinite, Psalm 139. Jer.
23.24. most holy, Isa. 6.3. only wise, 1 Timothy 1.17. most just and most
merciful, Exodus 34.6, 7. Almighty, Rev. 1.8. And he is but one, Exodus 10.3.
Living, Psalm. 84.2. True, Jer. 10.10. without body, parts or passions, John
4.24. of infinite power, Ezekiel. 10.5. wisdom, Psalm. 147.5. and goodness, Psalm.
106.1. The Maker, Genesis 1.1. and Preserver of all things, Mat. 10.29, 30. other
from all the Creatures, Incomprehensible, most perfect in himself, Immutable,
of an immense Power, Wisdom and Goodness, True, Just, Pure, Merciful, most
free, angry and wroth with sin, of whose days there is no beginning nor ending,
Rev. 1.8. And in the Unity of this Godhead, there be three Persons of one
Substance, Power and Eternity, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, 1 John
5.3.2. Cor. 13.13. Or, which Essence is the eternal Father, who from
everlasting begot the Son according to his Image, and the Son who is the
Coeternal Image of the Father, and the Holy Ghost proceeding from the Father
and the Son: And the Eternal Father, together with the Son and the Holy Ghost,
has created Heaven and Earth, and all Creatures, and works all good things
in all: And that in Mankind he has chosen unto himself and gathered a Church,
by and for the Son, that by his Church this one and true Deity may be according
to the word delivered from above, acknowledged, celebrated and adored in this
life, and in the life to come: And lastly, he is the Judge both of the just and
unjust.

The Name Father, as it is opposite to the Son, is understood personally, or it
signifies the first person of the Godhead, as here; but as it is referred to,
or compared with the Creatures, it is taken essentially, signifying the whole
Divine Nature, which is the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost: And Creation
is here ascribed unto God the Father, because he is the Fountain, as of the
Divinity of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, so also of those Divine operations
which he works and performs by the Son and the Holy Ghost. Now that God is,
we know many ways, but chiefly by our own Consciences, accusing us for secret
sins, which cannot be but unto an infinite wisdom, that knows the most secret
thoughts of the heart, such as is or can be neither Man, Devil nor Angel, but
God only.

All the Doctrine concerning God, is either 1. Of his Nature, which is taught
in the Law and Gospel. 2. Of his Will, which is seen and made manifest in His
Commandments. His Threatenings. His Promises.
3. Of his Works, which are The Benefits The Judgments of his Will, which are
to be beheld in the Creation. Fall. Restoring of Man.





The devils believe there is a God, and tremble; if any Atheist has less faith
then they, and doubt the truth thereof, he may believe it from these Reasons;
though as he is not worthy any, so the truth hereof is above all: 1. The
beautiful and goodly order of Nature, beheld in the Creatures and frame of the
great body of the world, Romans 1.20. 2. The preservation and government of the
world created, Acts 14.17. 3. The Nature and excellency of man's mind; the soul
of man, endewed with excellent gifts of Understanding and Reason. 4. From the
notions of general Rules and Principles naturally engendered in the mind of
man; yea, the natural notion of this Principle, That God is; 1. Because every
one has experience hereof in himself. 2. All wise men confess it. 3. All
Nations consent in it.
5. From the terrors of Conscience, which are stricken in the minds of the
wicked, after that they have sinned. 6. The punishments of the wicked which
they suffer, besides the torments of Conscience. 7. From Bodies Politic, which
are wisely ordered and regulated by Laws. 8. From the order and nature of
efficient causes, and from the final causes of all things. 9. From certain and
evident foretellings and clear significations of future Events. 10. From
heroical and noble instincts of mind.


For what Reasons the voice of Nature concerning God, is not wholly to be
rejected or contemned by reason of the insufficiency thereof: 1. God will also
out of the Church bridle the lewd and dissolute, by the testimonies which their
Conscience and punishments give of his will, Anger and Judgment, and according
to them also will he have the manners of men regulated. 2. He will have man's
Corruption and his own Justice made more perspicuous and clear, in punishing
them who stubbornly withstand the known truth. 3. He will by natural
testimonies, men's Consciences showing the imperfection thereof, have men
stirred up to seek the true God in the Church, Acts 17.26, 27. 4. He will have
also them who are converted to him, to be more confirmed by the consent of
Nature and the Word, as the often alleging of Natural testimonies in the
Scripture declares. 5. He will (the imperfection of Natural knowledge being
considered) have men's ignorance concerning God acknowledged, and his mercy
magnified, who discovers and opens himself in his Word.


There is nor can be but one God for these Reasons: 1. The sufficient
testimonies of Miracles and Prophesies, and other works. 2. His own Authority
and Majesty, which admits no fellows. 3. That which is greatest perfection
can be but one, for the whole is perfecter then any part thereof. 4. There can
be but one chief God, but one Omnipotent, but one Infinite. 5. There can be but
one chief Cause, and more Gods would be unperfect or superfluous.


How God does describe himself in Exodus 34.6. viz. 1. He is Jehovah; that is,
he is a constant friend to whomsoever he is a friend, he is always the same;
that is, I am that I am, that is, whatsoever the Lord was from eternity, the
same he is to eternity, there is no change in him. 2. He is strong, that is,
Almighty; that is, he has all Excellency in him, and that in the highest
degree. 3. He is Merciful, exceeding pitiful, exceeding ready to forgive,
though our sins be many and exceeding great: None so ready to forgive as God,
for if he were as man, if he were not God, could he bear with us as he does?
Jer. 3.2. 4. He is Gracious; that is, though there be no worth found in us, yet
he is ready to do us good. Now to be gracious, is to do things freely, when
there is no motive, for Grace is nothing but freeness. 5. He is Long-suffering;
that is, though we provoke him out of measure, he continues patient, we cannot
weary him out, (...) his mercy endures for ever; though our sins are often
repeated, yet he as often repeats his Mercies. 6. He is abundant in Kindeness;
that is, though he be so great a God as he is, yet he is exceeding ready to
bear with us, he is not harsh, but ready to grant what we ask according to his
will. 7. He is abundant in Truth; that is, we shall find him as good as his
word, he is engaged, we have many Promises he has made us; nay, abundant in
Truth; that is, his performances exceed, they run-over, he will be better then
his word, whatsoever he has said, he will more then do it. 8. He is a God
reserving mercy for Thousands; that is, when any of us do him faithful service,
he cannot content himself to do good to our own persons, but to our Children
and to our Generation: So David's love extended not to Barzillai and Jonathan
only, but to their posterity also. 9. He is a God forgiving Iniquity,
Transgression and Sin: Those three words are put in, that we may know he
forgives sins of all sorts; and signify, That he is still and still forgiving
Iniquity, Transgression and Sin.


God is said to be 1. An Essence; that is, a thing which 1. Has his Being from
none, but from himself. 2. Is preserved or sustained of none, but subsisteth by
himself. 3. Is necessarily. 4. Is the only Cause unto all other things of
their Being.
2. Spiritual: 1. Because he is Incorporeal, as being Infinite and Indivisible.
2. Because he is Insensible, as experience sufficiently manifests. 3. Because
both himself lives, and is the Author of all life both Corporal and Spiritual.
3. Intelligent: 1. Because he is the cause both of the mind of man, and of
the notions shining in it, and also of the order which is in the nature of
things and Common-weals. 2. Because all intelligence or understanding of the
Creature comes from him, both in respect of the faculty, as in respect of the
operation.
4. E^ternal, without beginning or end of Being, Psalm. 90.2. and is so to us,
that we may oppose the certain hope of eternal blessings, grounded upon his
Eternity, against the shortness of mortal life, and against the frailty of man's
condition. 5. Other from all his Creatures, which we must hold 1. Against
Philosophers, who will have the World or Nature it self to be God. 2. Against
those who imagine the Creatures, either all or some, to spring from the very
Essence or Nature of God, deriving it self, as they speak, into others by
propagation. 3. That all profane, unworthy and idolatrous cogitations of God
may be excluded: 4. Because there can neither be nor be imagined any similitude
between a finite and an Infinite Nature.
6. Incomprehensible or Immense, for 1. He cannot be comprehended in the
cogitation of any creature. 2. The Deity cannot be comprehended or
circumscribed, in place, in space, or any limits; that is, his Essence is
Immense, neither to be extended, nor divided, nor multiplied: Therefore it is
all every where one and the same.
7. Most perfect in himself. 1. Because he only has all things which may be
desired to perfect felicity and glory. 2. Because he receives no part of this
most absolute felicity from any other, but has all things in himself and of
himself, and is alone sufficient to himself for all things. 3. Because he is
not for himself only, but also for the creating, preserving, guiding and
furnishing of all and every Creature so sufficiently, that he alone does give
to all of them, all good things meet and necessary for them, as well eternal
and heavenly, as terrene and temporal, neither yet does depart from any part of
his power or his happiness.
8. Unchangeable: 1. His Essence, and whatsoever is proper thereto, cannot be
augmented or diminished. 2. His Nature and Will cannot be changed. 3. Himself
has no need to transport himself from place.
9. Omnipotent: 1. That whatsoever he will, or whatsoever (not impairing his
Nature or Majesty) he is able to will, he is also able to perform. 2. That he
is able to perform all those things, without any difficulty or labor, even with
his only beck and will. 3. That all the force and power of working and
effecting any thing, is so in God only, that there is not the least ability or
efficacy of any Creature, but what he continually imparteth and preserves at
his pleasure.



The five Properties of God (which ought to stir us up to obey him) contained
in the Exhortation to obedience annexed to the second Commandment: 1. He
calls himself our God; that is, our Maker and Savior, and the Author of all
good things; hereby advertising us, what execrable unthankfulness it is to
revolt from the true worshipping of him unto Idolatry. 2. Mighty; that is, in
power, as well to punish the obstinate, as to reward the obedient. 3. A jealous
God; that is, a most sharp defender of his own Honor, wonderfully displeased
with such a revolt from him, or violate and impair his Worship and Honor. 4. He
calls himself A God which visits the sins, etc. whereby he increases his
anger to take vengeance of the Ancestors sins in their Posterity, even to the
fourth degree and descent, if they partake with the sins of their Ancestors. 5.
He says, that He is a God which shows mercy unto Thousands, etc. here he
extends his punishments unto the fourth Generation, but his mercy unto
Thousands; thereby to signify, That he had rather show Mercy then Anger, and
so by this means to allure us the more to love him; and worthily excluded is
that man, who abuses such Infinite Mercy.


The use we are to make of the description of God: 1. As God is a Spirit, let
us worship him in Spirit, and abhor Images and Idols. 2. As he is a Spirit, let
us not be offended or stumble at this, That we never see him, calling it
therefore into question whether he be or not; when we are Spiritual, we shall
see him as he is, Joh. 3.4. 3. Let us acknowledge from whence we have our being
and life, Acts 17.28. 4. As he is Infinite, let us in no place adventure to sin
on any vain conceit, because it is secret, for wheresoever we be, God is
present. 5. As he is most Holy, let us prefer Holiness as the greatest
excellency, without which no man shall see God. 6. As he is only wise, let no
man use his wit secretly and closely, to contrive evil against his brother, or
by any unlawful policy to circumvent him. 7. As he is most Just, let no man
presume to go on in sin, hoping for mercy without repentance. 8. As he is most
Merciful, let no man that is cast down for his sins, despair. 9. As he is
Almighty, let us fear him, and put our whole trust in him, in all times of
danger and distress. 10. As of whose days there is no beginning nor ending, let
us be humbled in the Consideration of Gods Eternity, seeing our selves are so
momentary.


The Attributes of God are the main Supporters of our faith, as thus: 1. His
Holiness makes the believer approach before him in an utter abnegation of
himself, and in the mediation of Christ, knowing that in himself he is all over
polluted and defiled with sin. 2. His Wisdom makes the Believer subject to God
in all estates of prosperity and adversity, even against his own sense and
natural Reason, knowing that God is wisest, and best knows what estate is
fittest for him. 3. His Truth makes the Believer judge him, who has promised
that which he believes, to be faithful and true; he that believes has sealed
that God is true, Joh. 3.33. 4. His Power makes the Believer assent to the
possibility of performance of those Promises which God has made to his
children, of things which seem impossible. 5. His Mercy makes the Believer
believe the pardon of his sins, being fully persuaded that he is infinite rich
in mercy, otherwise he could not believe the pardon of his sins.


When we read in Scripture of eyes, ears, mouth, face, hands, heart, head, arms
and feet ascribed to God, we must not imagine that God is like unto us, or has
a bodily shape, whereas he is a Spirit; or that these parts are ascribed to him
properly, but only for our better capacity and understanding, signifying unto
us his gracious Attributes; as by his eyes, his Omnipresence; by his mouth, his
Word; by his hands, his Providence; by his arms, his Power; and by his face, 1.
The invisible Nature and Essence of God, Exodus 33.23. which no mortal man can
see and live. 2. The Favor of God, as also all his Benefits, Deliverances and
Graces, Dan. 9.17. Psalm. 80.3. 3. Revenge and Punishment, and the signs of his
Anger, Lev. 20.3. 4. The place of Gods Worship, where his face and favor is
perceived through delivery of the Doctrine of Godliness; From this was Cain
banished, Genesis 4.14. Hereof David complains, 2 Samuel 26.49.


Now to believe in God Almighty, is to be believe in such a one 1. Who is able
to do whatsoever he will. 2. Who does all things even with his beck and word
only, without any difficulty. 3. Who alone has power to work all things; and
is Author of that power which is in all his Creatures. 4. Who is also unto me
Almighty, and both can and will direct all things to my safety.


The Power of God is twofold: 1. Absolute; whereby he can do whatsoever can be
Infinite, and yet will not: hereby he could of stones raise up Children unto
Abraham. 2. Actual; whereby he most powerfully does all things which he
wills: Thus his Power in saving us, depends upon his Will, not his Will
upon his Power.


So also are the works of God of two sorts: 1. General; which are divided into
the works of 1. Creation. 2. Preservation. 3. Administration.
2. Special; which are wrought in the Church and Company of Elect, to justify,
sanctify and glorify them; and are either works Of Reparation, and restoring:
or, Of perfection and accomplishment.



Again, the Power of God is 1. Infinite, 1. In its own Nature, and of it self.
2. In regard of the diversity of objects unto which it does extend it self. 3.
In regard of the manifold effects it is able to do and bring to pass. 4. In
regard of the action of this Power, by which it works and can work, Ephesians. 1.9.
2. Universal, over all the works of God, Mat. 28.19. 3. Immutable,
everlasting, to crown us if we obey, to condemn us if we disobey. 4. It is most
certain, for it is shown in raising Christ's body from death.


God is called a Father, 1. In respect of Christ his only begotten and natural
Son. 2. In respect of all Creatures, as he is Creator and Preserver of them
all. 3. In respect of the Elect, whom being adopted in his Son, he regenerateth.


The duties to be performed by us to show our faith in God the Father, are
these four: 1. We must obey his Will, he is our Father. 2. We must be like unto
him, and bear in us some resemblance of his Majesty, Ephesians. 5.1. 3. To moderate
our care for worldly things, he is our Father. 4. To look up to God upon every
accident, and to consider his anger against sin, when we suffer any way
whatsoever; and if it falls out well unto us, to be thankful to him, as from
whom alone all good comes.


That God the Father Almighty is the Maker of Heaven and Earth, or that the
World was Created by God, may beside the Testimonies of Scripture, be proved by
Reasons, such as these: 1. By the Authority of God himself avouching the same.
2. The Originals and Beginnings of Nations show it. 3. The novelty and lateness
of all other Histories, compared with the Antiquity of the Sacred. 4. The Age
of men decreasing, show a former and better strength, and that not without some
first Cause. 5. The certain course and race of Times, even from the beginning
of the World to the exhibiting of the Messiah. 6. The order of things
instituted in Nature. 7. The excellency of the mind of Men and Angels. 8. The
principles, or general Rules and natural notions engendered in our minds. 9.
The tremblings of Conscience in the wicked. 10. The Constitution and Founding
of Common-weals. 11. The ends of all things profitably and wisely ordained. 12.
The very order of Causes and Effects, which cannot be carried backward or
forward infinitely.


To Create signifies 1. To order or constitute. 2. To make something of
nothing, without any motion, with a beck or word only. 3. The continuating of
Creation, or Creation continued, which is the Providence of God.


How God made the world. 1. The World was Created of God the Father, by the Son
and the Holy Ghost, Genesis 1.2. Joh. 1.3. Job 33.4. 2. Most freely, without any
constraint, not by any absolute necessity, but by necessity of Consequence,
that is, by the Decree of his Will: which Decree, though it were Eternal and
Unchangeable, yet was it most free. 3. With his beck only, or will, without
labor, wearisomness, motion, or any change of himself; that is, not by any new
action of his, but by his forcible Will only, which from everlasting would
that things should on a sudden exist and be, at such a time as he had freely
appointed and decreed, Isa. 40.28. 4. God created the World and all things
therein of nothing, not of any preexistent or fore-being matter, but of no
matter; not of the Essence of God, nor of any matter Coeternal with God. 5. He
Created it at a certain and definite time, and even at the beginning of times,
not from everlasting. 6. God Created all things most wisely, very good, that
is, every thing in its kind and degree perfect. 7. He did it all, not in a
moment, but in the space of six days, which (if it had so pleased him) he could
have made in an instant.


The end or final causes of the Creation of all things: 1. The first and chief
End is the Glory of God. 2. The manifesting, knowledge and contemplation of his
Divine wisdom and goodness, shining in the very Creation of all things, Ps.
19.1. 3. The Administration and Governing of the World, which is his
Providence. 4. To gather a Church of Angels and Men, who should acknowledge and
magnify this great and wonderful Creator. 5. That all other things might serve
for the safety both of the soul and body of man, as also for the life,
necessity and delight of men, Genesis 1.28. Psalm. 8.26.


The use of the doctrine of the Creation of the world; viz. 1. That the glory
of the Creation be given wholly to God, and his wisdom, power and goodness
therein acknowledged. 2. That neither the Son nor the Holy Ghost be excluded,
but each have their own parts yielded them therein. 3. That as the world was
created of God by the Son and the Holy Ghost, so also we must know that by them
Mankind is restored. 4. That seeing God created all things of nothing, we must
know that he is able to restore them, being corrupted and ruinated, into their
first state again. 5. That we must not refer the original of corruption to God,
but know that it was purchased by the faults of Devils and men, Joh. 8. 6. That
knowing God, as in the creating, so also in the maintaining and governing of
all things, not to be tied to second causes, or to the order by him settled in
Nature, but that he may either keep or alter it, we should with confidence and
full persuasion look for, and crave those things which he has promised, yea
those things which in respect of second causes seem impossible. 7. Seeing all
other things were created for man's use, profit or happiness, we above all other
creatures, especially being Redeemed from sin and death to Righteousness and
life, should for ever celebrate the wonderful known goodness of God. 8. That we
knowing God (in as much as of nothing, and through his mere goodness he created
all things) to owe nothing to any, but all his creatures to owe themselves and
all that they have to him their Creator, should confess that to be most just
whatsoever he shall do concerning us and all his creatures, Jer. 45.4. 9. That
we should refer the use of all things to the glory of God, since that we have
received all good things from him. 10. That seeing the works of God were
therefore created and placed before our eyes, even for us to behold them, we do
not idly but earnestly, and as much as every man's ability, occasion and
vocation permits him, contemplate and consider them, and therein celebrate
the wisdom, power and goodness of the great Creator.


The Power of God is the very Essence of God; it is an essential Property in
God, working and effecting all things in all things, by determining and
executing all things that he will: And the Providence of God is a
joynt-operation of his infinite Wisdom, infinite Justice, and infinite Mercy;
it is the Eternal, most free, unchangeable, most just, wise, and good counsel
of God, whereby he works all good things, and permits also evil things to
be done, and directs all things both evil and good, to his own glory and the
safety of his chosen; yea, it is his Almighty Power every where present,
whereby he does uphold and govern the world, with all the creatures therein; so
that nothing comes to pass by Chance, Fortune or Destiny, but by his Fatherly
Counsel. So that to believe in God the Creator, is to believe that God who has
created all things, and governs them by his Providence, has created me and
the faithful in the world, to celebrate and serve him, and all other things to
serve for our safety: All things are yours, and you are Christ's, and Christ is
Gods.

Most Holy, Just, Spiritual Essence,
All Power, all Mercy, all Intelligence,
Thou Father of our Savior Christ, whereby
Thou daign'st thy Faithful ones Paternity
By that most Free Grace of Adoption,
Or New Birth of Regeneration.
Thou Almighty wonderful Creator,
Gracious Preserver, most wise Governor
Of the world, Help my Unbelief; in me
Confirm thy Faith, for I believe in thee.
. 3. And in Jesus Christ his only Son, our Lord.
THe whole History of Christ may be comprehended in his Divinity, his Humanity,
his Office, and his Theanthropeity. Christ is very God, Joh. 1.1. Mat. 1.23.
and very Man, Genesis 3.15. Isa. 7.14. God and Man, and that in one person, Joh.
1.14. Phil. 2.6, 7, 9, 11. 1 Timothy 2.5, 6. and the Savior of Mankind, 2 Cor.
5.18. Joh. 1.20. 1 John 2.2. So that in Christ are two perfect Natures, whole
and distinct, and double Properties also, and operations natural; but one
person, subsisting in both these Natures, Divine and Humane: for it was
requisite that one and the same should be Mediator both by Merit and by Power.
Now Christ as concerning his person has but one Father and one Mother; a
Father as touching his Godhead, a Mother as touching his Manhood; the Virgin
Mary, of whose substance he was conceived by the power of the Holy Ghost, Gal.
4.4. 1 Timothy 2.5. So that though each Nature has its property remaining
distinct to it self, yet are they so joined, as they make but one person in
Christ, who was whole God, and whole Man; whole God also with his body, but not
according to his body, God; whole Man also with his Godhead, but not according
to his Godhead, Man: So also whole Adorable with his body, but not according to
his body, Adorable; whole Increate also with his body, but not according to his
body, Increated; whole Formed also with his Godhead, but not according to his
Godhead, Formed; whole Consubstantial with God also with his body, but not
according to his body, Consubstantial; as neither also is he according to his
Godhead Coessential with men; but he is according to the Flesh Consubstantial
unto us, existing also in his Godhead: For when we say he is according to the
Spirit Consubstantial with God, we may not say he is according to the Spirit
Coessential with men: And contrarily, when we affirm him to be according to the
Flesh Consubstantial with men, we may not affirm him to be according to the
Flesh Consubstantial with God. The distinction and unconfoundableness of the
Nature and Properties of the Word and the Flesh must thus exactly, not with a
running eye, but warily be observed, that we may avoid the bringing in of a
Division of one most undivided person.

Touching Christ, in the Creed we learn to believe these two things: 1. His
Humiliation, whereof there be three degrees: 1. His Incarnation; not by turning
the Godhead into the Nature of Man, but by taking Man's Nature to the Godhead,
that so one person might be both God and Man. 2. His Suffering death on the
cross for our sins. 3. His Descension into Hell, that we might be delivered
from Hell and everlasting death.
2. His Exaltation, whereof there are also three degrees: 1. His Resurrection
from death to life, and his Ascension. 2. His Honor, Power and Authority in
Heaven and Earth, together with God the Father, by sitting at his right hand.
3. His coming at the end of the World, to judge all that shall then be found
alive, and all that have dyed since the world began.



Christ 1. In respect of his Divinity, is the Image, not of himself, neither of
the Holy Ghost, but of his eternal Father, coeternal, consubstantial and
coequal with his Father in Essence, in essential properties and works, and is
that person by which the Father does immediately reveal himself in creating and
preserving all things, but chiefly in saving the Elect. 2. In his Humane Nature
he is the Image of God, and that of the whole Trinity, because the three
Persons together bestowed on Christ's Humanity these gifts, Properties and
Majesty, which are the Image of God.


To believe in Jesus, is to believe 1. That he is the Savior of Mankind. 2.
That the Son of God, born of the Virgin Mary, is this Jesus the Savior, whom
God will have us acknowledge, hearken unto, and worship, Mat. 1.12. 3. That he
alone does fully and perfectly deliver us from the evils of crime and pain. 4.
That he is not only the Savior of other the chosen of God, but mine also. 5.
That he is not our Savior by his Merit only, but also by his efficacy and
effectual working.


Christ is called The firstborn, in four respects; viz. 1. According to his
Divine Nature, being begotten of the Father before all creatures, and of the
same substance with him, Coloss. 1.15. Romans 8.29. 2. According to his Humane
Nature, even as he took upon him our flesh, and was born of the Virgin Mary, so
he was also her first born, Mat. 1.25. Luke 2.15. Not that the blessed Virgin
had other after him, but because she had none before him. 3. Because he was the
first that rose out of the grave, and made a way for us unto everlasting life,
therefore he is called The firstborn from the dead, Col. 1.18. 4. As the
firstborn was set apart, and then sacrificed unto God; so Christ was separated
from sinners, Heb. 7.26. as the unspotted Lamb of God, holy and acceptable, and
then made a perfect oblation of himself, not for himself, but for the sins of
his people, Heb. 7.27.


Christ is said to be our Lord, in three respects: 1. By right of Redemption,
because he has ransomed us from our sins. 2. By the right of Conquest, for he
has subdued the Devil, who had us in his power, Heb. 2.15. 3. By the right of
Spiritual Marriage, because he is to the Church as the Husband is to the Wife.


So likewise Christ is our Head, in three respects: 1. In respect of his
perfection, because he is both God and Man; and in gifts, as touching his
Humane Nature, exceeds all creatures, Col. 2.9. 2. In dignity, order, glory,
majesty, power and authority, which in his Humane Nature glorified, he now
openly shows forth and declares, Heb. 1.2. and 3.6. 3. In respect of his
Office, for he is over every member of the Church, he rules, governs,
quickneth, nourishes and confirms them.


We are also in three respects the members of Christ 1. Because by Faith and
the Holy Ghost we are joined unto him, and also are knit together amongst our
selves as the members to the Head, and one with another. 2. Because we are
quickened and guided of him, and from him as the Fountain we draw all good
things; so that except we continue in him, we have not eternal life in us. 3.
Because as in man's body are diverse faculties and functions of the members; so
are the gifts and functions diverse of the members of Christ in the Church.


Jesus is called Messiah, or Christ, or Anointed, 1. Because he was appointed
of his Father from everlasting the Mediator, that is, the chief Prophet, Priest
and King of the Church, Joh. 7.28. 2. In respect of the gifts of the Holy
Ghost, which were poured on him thick, abundantly, and most perfectly, Joh.
3.34.


The Anointing of Jesus signifies, 1. The ordaining of the Son of God to the
Office of the chief Prophet, Priest, and King of the Church. 2. The especial
communicating of the gifts of the Holy Ghost, necessary for this Office. 3.
Gods approbation and prospering of this Office, Isa. 53.10. Now we must not
here understand Christ's Anointing, as if it were a Typical, Ceremonial or
Sacramental Anointing, but real and Spiritual; that is, he received the thing
it self, which was prefigured and signified by the Ceremonial Anointing, which
was the Holy Ghost, Psa. 43.97. Heb. 1.9.


Christ as touching his Office was Anointed of God to be 1. A King; by his
Divine Power delivering us from the Tyranny of our Enemies, Devil. Sin. Death.
Making us Subjects to his Kingdom, Ruling us and his whole Church, By the
Scepter of his Word. By the Power of his Spirit.
2. A Prophet; by declaring all the Will of God unto us by his word, giving us
the Holy Spirit to understand, consent to, and obey it. 3. A Priest; by making
an Atonement, by offering up himself once for all, by offering on the Cross his
Body and Blood for us to God the Father, that he might make satisfaction for
our sins.


Christ's Royal Office is 1. To Rule by his Word and Spirit his Church gathered
out of all Nations, from the beginning of the world. 2. To defend and preserve
this his Church in this life, against all both inward and out ward foes. 3. To
make his Church partaker of the blessings of his Kingdom, and to adorn her,
being raised up from the dead, with everlasting glory and bliss. 4. To overcome
and rule his Enemies by his might and power, and at last to thrust them down
into eternal torments.


The Office of Christ's Prophetical function, for which he is called The Word;
viz. 1. To open and declare unto men, God and his secret Will, of saving
Believers by and for him, showed unto him immediately of God himself. 2. To
refine and purify the Law and Worship of God from corruptions, Mat. 5.6, 7. 3.
To open the Promises of the Gospel concerning himself, to be born, to suffer,
and to dye concerning Remission of sins, our Reconciliation unto God, and of
Salvation and Everlasting life. 4. At length also assuming and taking to him
Humane Nature, to teach as by his voice the will of God concerning us and
toward us, and to confirm this Doctrine of Miracles. 5. Not only to give
Oracles and Prophesies, to open the will of God by Prophets, and to teach and
expound it himself; but also to ordain and institute the Ministry of the Word
and Sacraments; that is, to call and send Prophets, Apostles, and other
Ministers of the Church, and to furnish them with gifts necessary to this
Ministry, Joh. 20.21. 6. To give the Holy Ghost, Mat. 3.11. 7. To be through
his own and others Ministry effectual in the hearts of the hearers; that is,
to open and lighten our minds by his Spirit, that we may understand his voice,
Luke 24.45. 8. To effectuate also that which by the efficacy of his Spirit he
speaks in our hearts; that is, to move our will to yield assent and obedience
to those things we learn and know, Ephesians. 5.25.


The four principal parts of Christ's Priesthood: 1. To teach men both outwardly
by his voice and the voice of his Ministers, and inwardly by the efficacy of
his Spirit. 2. To offer himself a Sacrifice and a Ransom, full, sufficient and
acceptable unto God for the sins of the world. 3. To make continual
Intercession for us to the Father. 4. To apply his Sacrifice unto all those for
whom he prays.


Again, the distinct parts of Christ's Priesthood may be these two: 1.
Satisfaction, which consists partly in suffering, partly in obedience. 2.
Intercession, in that he is become our perpetual and perfect Advocate, that
thereby God might be appeased, and we reconciled unto him; the fruit whereof
is, that we are Cleansed from the guilt of sin. Redeemed from the wrath of God.
Ransomed from the curse of the Law. Justified before God. Delivered from the
burden of Ceremonies. Freed from fear of condemnation.



How the Church of Rome does endeavor to overturn both the Regal, Priestly and
Prophetical Office of Christ: 1. His Regal Office, by making the Pope the Head
of the Church, and giving him power to make Laws to bind the conscience as
Gods Laws do. 2. His Priestly Office, by their Massing Priesthood, wherein they
daily offer up an unbloody Sacrifice for the sins of the quick and the dead. 3.
His Prophetical Office, by saying the Scriptures are imperfect without
Tradition; in giving liberty to the Pope to make new Laws, and to expound the
Scriptures, as Supreme Judge. These things they teach, and therefore that
Church is not worthy to be counted a Member of Christ's Church.


How Moses is said to write of Christ: 1. Because he recounteth the Promises
concerning the Messiah to come: In thy seed shall all Nations be blessed, Genesis
12.3. God shall raise you up a Prophet, Deuteronomy. 18.11. A Star shall rise out of
Jacob, Numb. 24.17. 2. He restrains the Promise concerning the Messiah unto
certain persons, of whom he was to be born; by which afterward the Promise of
the Messiah was more and more renewed and revealed. 3. The whole Levitical
Priesthood and ceremonial Worship had a respect, and were referred unto Christ,
as the Sacrifices, Immolations, Altars, Temple; yea, the Kingdom also and the
Kings were a Type of the Kingdom of Christ.


Christ our Mediator is said to be man perfectly just, fulfilling the Law four
ways: 1. By his own Righteousness, performing such perfect obedience as the Law
required. 2. By paying sufficient punishment for our sins. 3. By fulfilling the
Law in us, by his Spirit, when he regenerateth us by it. 4. By teaching it, and
by purging it of errors and corruptions.


Why Intercession for us to the Father, is proper only to the Son: 1. Because
himself living on earth in the time of his flesh, was made a Suppliant and a
Sacrifice for us unto the Father. 2. Because he earnestly will, according to
both Natures, that the Father for his Sacrifice once accomplished on the Cross,
remit unto us our sins, and restore unto us righteousness and life. 3. That the
Father looking upon the Sacrifice and will of his only begotten Son, receives
all Believers into his grace and favor.


Christ our Mediator is a Reconciler of God and men: Now to Reconcile
signifies, 1. To make Intercession or entreaty for him who offends, unto him
who is offended. 2. To make Satisfaction for the injury offered. 3. To promise
and to bring to pass, that the party who has offended offend no more; for
except this be brought to pass and effectuated, the fruit of the Intercession
is lost. 4. To bring them to an Atonement and Agreement, who were before at
enmity.


(The Office of a Mediator being to deal with both parties, both the offended
and the offender) with God the party offended, our Mediator had necessarily to
do these things; viz. 1. To make Intercession for us, and to crave pardon of
him for our faults. 2. To offer himself for to satisfy. 3. To satisfy indeed
the Justice of God, by suffering for our sins punishment sufficient, though
Temporal. 4. To crave and obtain of God, that he would accept of this
satisfaction as a price of sufficient worthiness, for which he would account us
children, pardoning our sins. 5. To be our Surety, that at length we will leave
off to offend him by our sins; without this Suretiship, Intercession finds no
place with men, much less with God.


With us the parties offending, our Mediator does these things, 1. He is the
Messenger or Ambassador of God the Father to us, to show or open this Decree of
the Father, That he does present himself to make satisfaction for us, and that
God will for this satisfaction pardon us, and receive us into favor. 2. He does
perform this satisfaction, by pouring out of his own blood. 3. He does impute
and apply that satisfaction unto us. 4. He does cause us, by giving his holy
Spirit unto us, to acknowledge this so great a benefit, and to embrace, and not
reject it. 5. He does by the same Spirit cause us to leave off to sin, and
begin to be conformable to Gods Law; that is, he does regenerate us, and
restore the lost Image of God in us. 6. He preserves, maintains and shields us
in this Reconcilement, against the Devil and all our Enemies, yea against our
own selves, lest we revolt again. 7. He glorifies us, being risen again from
the dead, and so perfects our Salvation.


It was necessary that our Mediator should be true Man, for these Reasons: 1.
Because it was Man that sinned. 2. That he might suffer death. 3. That he might
help and relieve our infirmities. 4. That he might be our Brother and our Head,
and we his Members, Heb. 2.14. 5. Because of Gods Justice and Truth.


It was requisite that our Mediator should be true God, for these Reasons: 1.
That he might be able to sustain the infinite wrath of God, or grievousness of
punishment, which should be temporal, yet equivalent to eternal pains. 2. That
his punishment might be a sufficient and full worthy Merit and Ransom, for the
purging of the sins even of the whole world, and for the repairing of that
righteousness and glory which they had lost. 3. That he may restore by his
forcible operation and power, the Image of God in us. 4. That he should make
known unto us the Secret Will of God concerning the receiving of Mankind again
into favor, Job. 1.18. 5. That he might give the Holy Ghost, by whom he might
bestow on us, maintain and perfect in us the Benefits purchased by his death;
as Remission of Sins, Righteousness, New-obedience, and life everlasting, Joh.
15.26.


Mere man, or any creatures, could not have wrought out our delivery, for these
Reasons: 1. Because the Justice of God does not punish in other creatures that
which man has committed. 2. No creature could sustain temporal punishment
equivalent to eternal. 3. He who is himself defiled with sin, cannot satisfy
for others. 4. Because the punishment of a mere creature, would not be a price
of sufficient worthiness and value for our delivery. 5. Because the delivery of
man is wrought after a sort also by Regeneration.


The Benefits of the Mediator; viz. 1. Our wisdom, 1. Because he is the matter
or subject of our wisdom, 1 Cor. 2.2. 2. Because he is the Cause or Author of
it, and that three ways: 1. Because he has brought out of the Bosom of the
Father, the Doctrine of our Redemption. 2. Because he has ordained, and does
preserve the Ministry of the Word. 3. Because he is forcible and effectual in
the hearts of the chosen, making them yield their assent to the Word or
Doctrine.

2. Our Righteousness; that is, our Justifier, for in him our Righteousness is
as in the subject. 3. Our Sanctification, because he does Regenerate us by his
holy Spirit. 4. Our Redemption, because he finally delivers us.


The Theanthropeity of Jesus is of this fourfold use; viz. 1. That as often as
this Name comes in our minds, we may think our selves without Jesus to be a
people utterly lost. 2. That we may be admonished to seek Salvation from him
alone, for Jesus is the only Son of God. 3. That we may oppose this Name to
Despair, to the greatness of sin, to our own unworthiness, and to the power of
the Devil. 4. That we may know that in this Name is compendiously contained the
whole Gospel.


The duties to be performed by us, to show our faith in Jesus Christ: 1. A
thankful admiration of this unspeakable favor of God, in giving Christ unto us.
2. An humbling of our selves to seek the good one of another, as Christ did for
ours. 3. To be lifted up in heart to heaven, where our Nature sits at the right
hand of God. 4. To yield all due reverence to this Lord and gracious Jesus of
ours.


There is but one Mediator, 1 Timothy 2.6. and the Reason is, Because the Son
only is Mediator, and can perform the Office of the Mediator; and there is but
one only natural Son of God, therefore the Papists will one day sadly find
themselves mistaken: And this Christ our Mediator, is a Pacifier and Reconciler
of God and Men, as well by merit and desert, as also by efficacy and forcible
operation; that is, a middle person between God offended and angry with and for
sin, and mankind offending and subject to the wrath of God; To reconcile men
unto God, restoring them into favor, causing men to love God, and God men, and
that by making entreaty and satisfaction to Gods Justice for them, and applying
forcibly and effectually unto them his Satisfaction or Merit; Regenerating
them, that they may cease from sinning, and hearing their groans and petitions
when they call upon him. And it was necessary that our Mediator and Deliverer
should be such a one as was very Man, and that perfectly just too, because the
Justice of God requires, that the same Humane Nature which has sinned, do it
self likewise make recompense for sin; and, because he that is himself a
sinner, cannot make recompense for others, 1 Pet. 3.18. And that he should be
also very God, that he might by the power of his Godhead sustain in his flesh
the burden of Gods wrath, Isa. 53.3. and might recover and restore unto us
that Righteousness and life which we lost, 1 John 1.2.

You that Believe in Merits of your own,
And Sacrifice unto the God Unknown;
That think a Pardon sent from Rome can make
A Sin no Sin, even for Saint Peter's sake;
That do believe in Antichrist, and hope
To find or make a Savior of the Pope,
Fall down before your Dagon: But let all
That profess one Faith Apostolical,
Believe in God, and by one Faith accord
In Jesus Christ his only Son, our Lord.
4. Who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, Born of the Virgin Mary.
Christ's flesh was conceived by the Holy Ghost, not that he transfused or
passed his substance into the flesh begotten, but because in miraculous sort he
formed in the Virgins womb of her substance the body of Christ; so that it
should not be contaminated or polluted with Original sin: for he could not be
conceived in such sort by the Holy Ghost, that his flesh should issue from the
Spirits substance. And this blessed Virgin, descended of the Lineage of David,
to answer to the Divine Oracles, as also for that our Faith might be the more
confirmed to believe he was the very Messiah promised to descend from the loins
of Abraham and David. And in that this happened in the Reign of Augustus, very
observable is the completion of the Divine Oracles, and justly to be condemned
the blindeness of the Jews: Nor less deceived are they which hold the Virgin
Mary to have been conceived without Original sin, contrary to the tenor of the
Scriptures, and her own confession, who acknowledged her self to have needed a
Savior, Luke 1.47. for she was born after the common course of the Nature of
man; and what need was there that Christ Jesus should be conceived by the Holy
Ghost, if he might have a pure conception free from Original sin without it?
Neither is it necessary to Salvation, to believe it as an Article of Faith,
That Mary the Mother of Christ lived always a Virgin.

In the Humanity of Christ, six things are principally considerable; viz. 1.
His Conception and Nativity. 2. His Death and Passion. 3. His Burial and
Descension into Hell. 4. His Resurrection. 5. His Ascension into Heaven, and
his sitting there at the right hand of the Father. 6. His coming again to
Judgment.


Touching the conception or Nativity of Christ, these six things are to be
observed: 1. That the News thereof was brought by an Angel. 2. That he was
conceived by the Holy Ghost; that is, by the power and virtue of it. 3. That he
was Born of a Virgin. 4. That the Mother of our Lord was espoused to a man. 5.
That the blessed Virgin was of the Lineage of David. 6. That he was born in the
time of the Reign of Augustus.


In the Angels Annunciation observe these three things: 1. The Salutation,
which declared the free love of God to the Virgin. 2. The delivery of the
Message, That of her should be born the Son of God. 3. That she should be
overshadowed by the Divine Power of the Holy Ghost.


Christ's conception by the Holy Ghost, signifies three things; viz. 1. That
the mass of his Humane Nature was created or formed in the womb of the Virgin,
miraculously and beside the order of things disposed of God in Nature, by the
immediate operation of the Holy Ghost, without the substance of man. 2. That
the Holy Ghost did in the same moment, and by the same operation, cleanse this
mass, and from the very point of the conception sanctify it; that is, he
caused that Original sin should not issue into it. 3. The Union of the Humane
Nature with the Word, or the uniting of his flesh unto his Godhead.


Christ was conceived by the holy Ghost for these Reasons: 1. Lest being born
of flesh he should not be clean. 2. That he might be a pure Sacrifice and
sufficient Ransom for our Redemption, 2 Cor. 5.12. 3. That being pure and holy,
he might purify us of all sin, that he might also sanctify us by his sanctity
and holiness. 4. That we may know he spoke the very will of his Father, that
whatsoever this Son speaks, is the will of God and the Truth.


Christ was born of the Virgins substance, chiefly for these Reasons: 1. That
we may know Christ our Mediator to be the true seed of David. 2. That the
Prophesies might be fulfilled, Genesis 3. and 49. Isa. 7. That it may certainly
appear unto us, That this Jesus, born of the Virgin, is that Messiah promised
to the Fathers. 3. That this Christ's birth of a Virgin, might be a Testimony
that he is pure and without sin, sanctified in the womb of the Virgin, by the
virtue of the Holy Ghost. 4. That it might be a sign or figure of our Spiritual
Regeneration, which is not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the
will of man, but of God, Joh. 1.13.


For what Reasons the Mother of our Lord was espoused to a man: 1. That hence
the honor of marriage might be commended unto us. 2. That the chastity and good
name of the Virgin might be provided for. 3. That Joseph might be as a Guardian
to the Virgin, as a Fosterfather to the child. 4. Lest the blasphemous enemies
should say, That the Christ of the Christians was unlawfully born.


To believe in the Son of God, conceived by the Holy Ghost, is to believe 1.
That he was made man after a mavelous manner, and that he was made one Christ
of a Divine and Humane Nature. 2. That he being so holily conceived and born,
does purchase for us the right and power to be the Sons of God.


In this Article of the Creed we believe, 1. That there be two Natures in
Christ our Mediator, that in one and the same Christ are Properties diverse and
contrary, Divine and Humane, Finite and Infinite, Passible and Impassible, and
such like. For the proof of his Divine Nature, or that the Eternal Son, called
The Word, is another Nature from the Flesh taken, and a subsistence even before
the Flesh born of the Virgin, read Joh. 1.14. Heb. 2.14, 16. 1 John 4.2. who
being in the form of God, took on him the form of a Servant, Phil. 2.6. In the
Beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and that Word was God, Joh.
1.1. Many other are the quotations of Scripture, to prove his Divine Nature; as
Psalm. 2.7. Acts 13.33. Heb. 1.5. Joh. 17.3. Matthew. 1.23. Heb. 1.3. Joh. 2.19. 1 Timothy 3.16. Joh. 6.51. 1 Pet. 3.19. as also his Humane Nature, Romans 1.3. and
9.5. Luke 1.31. Heb. 2.11. Luke 1.42. and 2.7. Gal. 4.4. and 3.16. Heb. 2.16.
Mat. 26.38. Luke 2.52. Joh. 10.18. Luke 23.46. 1 Cor. 15.21. Ephesians. 5.30. and
4.12, 16. Joh. 5.56. Romans 8.11. Genesis 3.15. and 49.10. Isa. 7.14. Matthew. 10.18,
23. Luke 1.27, 31, 34. and 2.40. Mat. 4.2. Joh. 4.7. and 19.41. Mark 4.38. Mat.
27.50. Mark 15.37. Luke 23.46. Joh. 19.30, 33. 2. That these two Natures make
but one person in Christ; or that in Christ are two perfect Natures, whole and
distinct, and double properties also, and operations natural, but one person;
for it was requisite that one and the same should be Mediator both by Merit and
by Power: But they who make two persons, make also two Christ's, with Nestorius,
the one a Man passive, and crucified, the other God, not crucified, and only
assisting the Man Christ by his Grace. But this Heresy has been long since
confuted and condemned. And that the Divine and Humane Natures of Christ are
united in one person, accords with the holy Scripture, Joh. 1.14. Mat. 3.17.
Ephesians. 4.10. 1 Timothy 2.5, 6. for his Humane Nature was at once both formed and
assumed of the Word into unity of person, and made proper unto the Word; before
or without which assumption or personal union, it neither was, nor had been,
nor should be.


Some Heretics of old have proudly said,
That of the substance of the blessed Maid
Christ's flesh never formed was, but that 'twas brought
Down from Heaven into her womb; others thought
He had not true and real flesh indeed,
But in appearance only. Be It our Creed
To believe he was true God, true Man; one
Only natural Son of God alone;
Two Natures, whole, perfect, distinct, to be
One undivided personality.
. 5. Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was Crucified, Dead and Buried; He
descended into Hell.
THis Pontius Pilate was a Heathen Judge, set over the Province of the Jews by
the Roman Emperor, under whose Government Christ began to execute his office
for which he was sent, and continuing therein, and working Miracles, was
spitefully entreated of the wicked Jews for the space of three years and
upward, then villanously betrayed by one of his Disciples, apprehended, abused
and crucified, being full Thirty three years of Age and upward; though his
certain Age is not infallibly set down by any.

Dead] that is, On the Cross he gave up the ghost, was after pierced to the
very heart, so that water and blood came out; and being found certainly dead,
he had not his legs broken as theirs were who had been crucified with him. And
Buried] that is, for the more certainty that his Spirit was departed out of his
body, and as for the confirmation of his death, so for the mystery of our not
only death, but burial unto sin figured thereby, he was taken down from the
Cross, and laid in the Grave or Sepulcher. Now it is one thing to believe that
Christ suffered, another to believe in Christ which suffered; for that is only
to have an Historical Faith of Christ's Passion, without reposing any confidence
therein: but this is to believe not only that Christ suffered, but also to
repose and place our trust and confidence in Christ's Suffering and Passion.

For the right apprehension of the suffering of Christ being God-Man, know,
That the Deity simply considered in it self and by it self, could not dye; but
that person which was God, both could and did dye: For the Son of God assuming
an Humane Nature unto the Unity of his Divine Nature, and uniting them together
without confusion, alteration, distraction, separation, in one person, that
which is done by the one Nature, is done by the person; in which respect the
Scripture often attributes the Suffering of Christ to the other Nature, 1 Cor.
2.8. Acts 20.28. And though the Divine Nature of Christ suffered not, yet did
it support the Humane Nature, and added dignity, worth and efficacy to the
suffering of that Nature; yea, it had also proper and peculiar works, as to
Sanctify his Humane Nature, to take away our sins, to reconcile us to God, and
the like. And this must be cautiously observed by us for a Rule, That Christ is
not dead for us, except we be dead to sin; neither is he risen again for us,
except we be risen again to newness of life. And take this for a most sure
Principle, That we are not Redeemed, except we be Sanctified; for he did not
Redeem us from sin, that we should commit it afresh and serve it again. It is
one thing to know that Christ dyed, another thing that he dyed for us; and it
is one thing to discourse passionately of his death, another to feel the
operation thereof within us: Labor therefore to be so affected therewith, as
that it may effectually prove thy death unto sin.

Christ descended into Hell for us, when after the very time of his Passion, he
continued for a time in the state of the Dead, and was under the power of the
Grave. This Article of Christ's Descension into Hell, is to be understood of the
Grave, not of his Souls going down locally into the place of the Damned, not
only of those inexpressible, yea unconceiveable torments which he suffered in
his Soul under the eclipse of Gods favor, yea under the fearful wrath of God,
which though in respect of us was to be eternal, in him was made temporary,
having end, because himself is Eternal and Infinite: So that to believe in
Jesus Christ which descended into Hell, is to believe that Christ was for a
time in the state of the Dead, and held under the power of the Grave.

To believe in Christ which suffered, is to believe, 1. That Christ from the
very moment of his conception sustained calamities and miseries of all sorts
for my sake. 2. That at that his last time he suffered all the most bitter
torments both of body and soul for my sake. 3. That he felt the horrible and
dreadful wrath of God, whereby to make recompense for mine and others sins, and
to appease his wrath against Mankind.


Mention is made of Pilate in Christ's Passion, for these Reasons: 1. Because
Christ would receive from the Judge himself a Testimony of his Innocence. 2.
Because it was requisite he should be solemnly condemned, that all the world
might know, that he, though innocent, was condemned. 3. That we might be
advertised of the fulfilling of the Prophecy, Genesis 49.10. The Scepter shall
not depart from Judah, etc. 4. For that his innocence might appear, he was not
to be privily taken away by the Jews, nor to be drawn to death by tumult or
disorderly.


In the sufferings, Death and Passion of Christ, these things are specially to
be considered: 1. The History it self of Christ's Passion, agreeing with Gods
Sacred Oracles and Prophesies. 2. The cause of his Sufferings. 3. The fruit or
effects of Christ's Passion. 4. His example, that we are also to enter into
eternal life and heavenly glory, by death, as did Christ. 5. The due Meditation
in the whole.


The History of Christ's passion runs thus: 1. They apprehend him as they would
a Varlet that had done some outrage, coming unto him with swords and staves in
the night time. 2. They carry him first to one High Priest, then to another,
then to Pilate, then to Herod, and back again to Pilate; amongst whom he is
mocked, laughed at, scornfully entreated, and buffeted, questioned withal,
spitted on, and crowned with Thorns. 3. They compel him to carry his heavy
Cross, till he nigh fainted under the burden, being without all pity and
compassion toward him. 4. Though they could not charge him justly with any
fault at all worthy the least punishment, insomuch as Pilate that Heathen Judge
would have acquitted him; yet they cried out, Crucify him, Crucify him, and
had rather one Barabbas a Traitor and a Murderer should be released then he.
5. They hung him up between two Thieves; the most harmless and innocent man in
the world, is numbered amongst the wicked and evil doers. 6. Not content to
pierce his hands and feet with nails, by fastening him to the Cross, but like
hard-hearted wretches, they gave him vinegar mingled with gall to drink in his
great heat and thirst, and upbraided him with scoffs when he was on departure.
7. Not astonished at the wonderful darkness, The renting of the Temples vail,
The opening of Graves, The coming forth of the Dead; their malice expired not
with him, but even after he was dead, they pierced him with a spear even to the
heart, Joh. 19.34.


In the cause of Christ's Death and Passion, consider these four: 1. The object
moving; that is, Man's Misery, and the Devils Tyranny. 2. The efficient cause:
1. Impellent Internal, being the love of God toward his creatures. 2. The
Obedient, which was the very Son of God obedient to his Father. 3. The
Instrumental, as the Devil, the Scribes, Pharisees, and the rest.
3. The Formal cause, being the Passion it self historized by the Evangelists.
4. The Final cause: 1. That God might be glorified for his Justice and Mercy.
2. That Salvation might be purchased for Man, who was lost by reason of sin. 3.
That Christ might destroy the works of the Devil, 1 John 3.



The fruit or effect of Christ's Death, is twofold, 1. General: Christ by his
Passion conquered The Devil, whom he has bound. Hell, which he has spoiled.
Death, which he overcame. The World, which he despised. The Punishment, which
he has suffered. Heaven, which he has opened.
2. Special: 1. Obedience is performed to God. 2. The Devil is vanquished. 3.
Man is freed from sin, and justified. 4. An Equalification of Jew and Gentile.
5. Death is disannulled.



The Meditation of our Saviors Passion, consists chiefly in these six
particulars; viz. 1. How great was the Wrath of God for sin, which could not be
appeased, but by the death of his only begotten Son. 2. How infinite was the
Mercy of God the Father, who would rather his Son should undergo the most
ignominious death, then that Man his creature should perish. 3. How
unconceiveable was the Love of the Son of God, who for Man's sake took upon
himself the wrath of his Father. 4. We must apply the Merit of Christ's Passion
to our selves by faith, his Obedience being made our Righteousness, whereby
through faith we appear to God, not as sinners, but justified. 5. What the Lot
of the Righteous is in this world, who must suffer with him, that they may be
glorified with him, Romans 6. 6. That our future life may be formed into a better
mould, Romans 6. being dead unto sin, by the power and efficacy of his death.


The Reasons why Christ suffered so ignominious a death: 1. That we might know
the curse due for our sins to have layen upon him, and so should be stirred up
to the greater thankfulness, considering how detestable a thing sin is, that it
should call for so ignominious a death. 2. That it might be an exasperating of
the punishment, and so we so much the more confirmed in a true faith. 3. That
the Truth might answer to the Types and Figures, and so we might know that they
are all fulfilled in Christ.


The causes of Christ's Burial; viz. 1. That we might know that he was dead
indeed. 2. That the last part of his Humiliation, whereby he did debase himself
for our sakes, might be accomplished. 3. A certain Type was thereby to be
fulfilled; it was foretold by the Type of Jonas. 4. He would be Buried, that we
might not be afraid of the grave, but might know that our Head, Christ Jesus,
had laid open the way unto us by Death and the Grave, to celestial Glory. 5.
That we might know how we are indeed delivered from death; for in his Death, a
testimony and record whereof is his Burial, consists our Salvation. 6. That
it might be manifest, That he was able indeed to rise again, and that his
Resurrection was not imaginary, but the real and true Resurrection of a
reviving corpse. 7. That we being Spiritually dead, that is, to sin, might rest
from sin.


The duties required of us, to set forth our Faith in Christ crucified, are
these, viz. 1. Godly sorrow in bewailing our sins, the only cause of these
great sufferings of our dear Savior. 2. The mortification of our fleshly
members and sinful concupiscences, and that for three special causes: 1. By
continuing in sin, we make our selves accessary's of Christ's death. 2. Because
all such as unto whom Christ's death is effectual to do away their sins, are
conformable unto him in his Death and Burial. 3. Because no man following the
trade of sin, can be Christ's Disciple.
3. Patience, and joy in suffering any thing for Christ's sake and the Gospel,
and that chiefly for two causes: 1. By suffering we are made like unto him,
Mat. 10.25. 2. Because in suffering for his Truth, he does grace us, forasmuch
as he does take us for his Martyrs and Witnesses.
4. To remain unterrified with the pangs and approaching of death unto us,
because Christ in dying overcame death, and took away the sting thereof. 5. For
this infinite love of Christ toward us, to love him most earnestly again, and
all his members, the Faithful, for his sake.


That Christ descended into Hell, all found Christians acknowledge; but in the
interpretation of this Article, there is not that consent as were to be wished:
For the dissent of Opinions touching the same, they may be all comprised in
these; viz. 1. Some hold the words ( He descended into Hell) merely literally;
that is, into the place of the damned, or some lower place thereabout: They
which understand it of the place of the damned, say, That he went thither to
triumph over all the damned ghosts and devils, as a most glorious Conqueror
both of Death and Hell, the most powerful Enemies; or that as God only and not
Man, he descended powerfully and effectually, but not personally, into Hell;
and that the Deity exhibited it self, as it were present in the infernal parts,
to the terror of the Devil and other damned Spirits. They which understand it
of some place thereabout, say, That he went thither, and that by a local
descension (as the Papists assirm) to deliver the Fathers and Patriarchs, that
were detained, as they dream, for their Original sin in Limbo. The grounds
pretended for both, are alleged out of Ephesians. 4.9. 1 Pet. 3.19. Psalm. 16.10.
Acts 2.25. But they that stand for Limbo, allege Heb. 9.8. and 11.39. 2.
Others hold them literally, but expound (...) the Grave, saying, That he dyed,
and was buried; that is, anointed to the Burial, and descended into the
Sepulcher. 3. Others interpreting (...) the Grave, make the descent figurative,
thus; He descended into Hell; that is, remained in the grave until the third
day: these suppose he descended into Hell as Man only; and that, as some
think, in Body only, as when death as it were prevailed over him lying in the
grave; as others deem, in Soul only, when he went unto the place of the
Reprobate, to the increasing of their torments. 4. Others interpret it as an
Idiom or phrase peculiar to the Greeks (...), He descended into Hell; that is,
was in the state of the dead, for thus the Greeks were wont to speak of a man
departed, whether good or bad. This Opinion takes best. 5. Others hold it to be
merely figuratively spoken, That Christ descended into Hell, as God and Man in
one person, That in Body and Soul he went as it were into Hell, when upon the
Cross and elsewhere he suffered the terrors and torments prophesied of, Isa.
5.3, 6, 10. Psalm. 116.2. and mentioned Mat. 26.38. or 27.46. Luke 22.42. when
he suffered the torments of Hell, viz. The anger of God against the sins of all
the Elect, poured forth upon his Soul, driving him into that bloody Agony in
the Garden, and making him on the Cross cry out, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? This Opinion takes with many. Now of all these, that which stands
for Limbo must not remain unexpunged, as by reason of sundry positive Reasons
of Scripture to the contrary, so also in regard of the impertinency of the
places alleged.


How Christ's temporal punishment is said to be equivalent to eternal: 1. In
respect of the worthiness of the person, for it was the only begotten natural
Son of God that did suffer. 2. For the grievousness of the punishment, because
he sustained the torments and sense of the wrath of God, and the horror of
death for the whole world, Psalm. 118.5. Hence it was that Christ so trembled at
his death, when many Martyrs have entertained an ordinary death without it.


The use of this Doctrine of Christ's Passion, teaches us, That sin is most of
all to be eschewed by us, which could not be expiated but by the death of the
Son of God; That we ought to be thankful for this his so great a benefit of
unspeakable grace and favor bestowed on us; and that all our sins, how many,
how great, and how grievous soever they be, are expiated and done away by the
death alone of Christ: Yet know, That whereas it is frequently affirmed in
Scripture, That Christ dyed for all, it is not meant generally for every
particular person, but restrictively for all sorts of people, that is, for
Believers of all sorts, both of Jews and Gentiles.

Behold the Son of God, come from the Womb
Unto the Cross, to drop into the Tomb:
He that is Life Eternal, the Most High
And Mighty Lord of Life, vouchsafes to dye:
He that fills Heaven and Earth, is pleased to have
His lodging in a Cradle and a Grave.
Blind Jews! before your Day was turned to Night
At Noon, ye could not see for too much light.
Gentiles, believe; or know this for no news,
Your Sins will prove new Crucifying Jews.
. 6. The third day he rose again from the Dead; He ascended into Heaven, and
there he sits at the right hand of God.
TO believe in Christ risen from the dead, is to believe that he shook off
death from himself, quickened his dead body, reunited his body unto his soul,
restored unto himself a blessed, celestial and glorious life, and that by his
own proper power. And I also believe, That he therefore rose again from the
dead, that he might make us partakers of his Righteousness, Sanctification and
Glorification, which he has purchased for us by his merit. This is that Holy
One, of whom David prophesied, that He should not see corruption, Psalm. 16.10.
who but a little before his death told his Disciples himself, that The third
day he would rise again, Mark 9.31. and 10.34. The accomplishment of which
Truth, stands on sacred Record, both by his appearing (after that he was risen
from death to life) to Mary Magdalen, Joh. 20.14. to diverse women, Mat. 28.9.
to two, Luke 24.13, 15. to ten, Joh. 20.19. to all the Disciples, to more then
five hundred at once, 1 Cor. 15.6. to sundry persons by the space of forty days
together, Acts 1.3. and by the testimony also of the Apostles, Peter, Acts
1.22. and Paul, Acts 17.2, 3. So that whoever is a perverse Sadduce to this
Truth, strikes at the very Root of the Christian Religion.

He ascended into Heaven] that is, he being revived from the dead (his soul
coming again into his body) walking here a while upon the Earth for the space
of forty days, eating and drinking sometimes with his Disciples, not for any
need of sustenance, but for the more assurance of his Resurrection, and
offering his body to be felt and handled, comforting and instructing them, and
then in the open sight of them all, he went up body and soul into the Heavens,
they looking and marvelling at it. This was foretold by David, Psalm. 68.18. and
by Christ himself, John 14.2. and 20.17. was prefigured in Enoch, Genesis 5.24.
and in Elias, 2 Kings 2. and witnessed, Acts 1.22. Ephesians. 4.10. so that Christ's
Ascension is a local, true, real, and visible Ascension, Translation, or
removing of Christ's body from Earth into Heaven, which is above all visible
Heavens, to Gods right hand, where he now is, and whence he shall come to
Judgment, Acts 1.11. This his Ascension must be understood of his Humanity
only, for his Divinity was always in Heaven.

And there he sits at Gods right hand] that is, he is a person equal to God
in Power and Glory, by whom the Father works immediately; or to sit at Gods
right hand, is to reign in equal Power and Glory with the Father: for Christ
does all things likewise as does the Father, and is endued with the same Power
with the Father, which also he exercises: He is that person Omnipotent, by
which the Father governs all things immediately; but especially by which he
defends the Church against her Enemies; and this indeed is the proper meaning
of Christ's session at the right hand of the Father.

How Christ rose again: 1. He rose by his own power, even by his Godhead, John
2.19. 2. He being truly God and Man, rose according to that Nature, according
to which he suffered, Luke 24.39. 3. He did rise truly and indeed, so that his
soul did truly and indeed return into his body. 4. He rose the third day, as it
was foreshadowed in Jonas.


Why Christ rose again: 1. In respect of the Prophesies which were uttered of
him, Psalm. 16.10. Mat. 17.23. 2. He rose for his Fathers and his own Glory,
Romans 1.4. 3. For the worthiness and power of the person that rose, being Author
of life it self. 4. In respect of the Office of the person which rose, his
Meadiatorship. 5. He rose for us, and that in three respects: 1. For our
Justification, Romans 4.25. 2. For our Regeneration. 3. For our Salvation and
Glorification.



In the Resurrection of Christ, observe these 2 things; viz. 1. His victory and
triumph over Death and Hell: 1. He declares himself to be very God, rising
again by his Divine Power. 2. By his Resurrection he subjecteth to himself all
things, both in Heaven and Earth. 3. He manifested himself to be that blessed
Seed, that had broken the Head of the Serpent; that is, had overcome the
Kingdom of Satan.
2. The fruit and benefit which accrews unto us by it; viz. 1. Thereby we know
him to be the Messiah, in whom the Prophesies were fulfilled. 2. We are
confirmed and warranted by Christ's Resurrection: 1. Of his Merit, that he has
fully and perfectly satisfied for our sins. 2. Of the application of his
Benefits, which could not have been bestowed, if he had not risen.
3. The Gift whereby we are justified; he vanquished Death, that he might make
us partakers of that Righteousness which he had gotten us by his death, 1 Cor.
15.16. Romans 4.25. 4. The Gift of the Holy Ghost, by whom Christ regenerateth
us, and gives us eternal life. 5. The Virtue which is conveyed into all
Believers, enabling them to rise from sin. 6. A President or Seal of newness of
life; we are also stirred up by his power to a new life, Romans 6.4. 7. Our
continued Preservation by his perpetual and applied Righteousness. 8. The
Resurrection of our Head, Christ, is a cause and pledge unto us of our glorious
Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.12. Romans 8.11. 9. The consummation and perfecting of
all his benefits, and the final glorifying of his Church.



For what causes the Resurrection of our Bodies is the fruit of Christ's
Resurrection: 1. Because Christ is our Head, and we his Members. 2. Because he
has abolished our sin, the cause of death. 3. Because as the first Adam
received blessings for all, and lost them all; so the second Adam received
gifts for others, and communicates them with us. 4. Because the same Spirit
dwells in us, which is in Christ, Romans 8.11. 5. Because Christ is Man, for by
Man came the Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.21. But here take notice, That there are
other causes for which the wicked shall rise again, even the just Judgment of
God, whereby he has appointed them to eternal pains: for the same thing may
have more effects and diverse causes, as it relates to several respects.


The Duties arising from our Faith in Christ, touching his Resurrection: 1. To
live as those that be at peace with God; for as he dyed for our sins, so he
rose again for our Justification, Romans 5.25. and being justified by faith, we
have peace with God, Romans 5.1. 2. To rise up to newness of life: The Signs of
which spiritual life, are chiefly these four; viz. 1. An heavenly mind, Col.
3.1. 2. An holy and innocent life, Ephesians. 4.24. 3. Greater joy in the Grace of
God through Jesus Christ, then in any thing either of pleasure or profit in
this world, Phil. 3.8. 4. Growth and increase in Sanctification, 1 Pet. 3.18.



In Christ's Ascension, and sitting at the right hand of the Father, consider
these three things; viz. 1. His Command to his Apostles at his Ascension,
whereby the glad tidings of his Resurrection and Ascension was not to be
confined within Judea. 2. The Consequents thereof: 1. He opened for us a way to
heaven, before shut up by our sins. 2. Being now gone into Heaven, is yet
present with us, even to the end of the world. 3. We have au advocate with the
Father. 4. That now sitting at the right hand of the Father, he has so
established his Kingdom, as the Gates of Hell in vain oppose it.
3. The Use hereof, That we being conversant here upon Earth, should have our
conversation in Heaven, whence we expect the return of our Judge.


Why Christ ascended; viz. 1. For his own and his Fathers glory: 1. For he was
to have a celestial Kingdom, Ephesians. 4.10. 2. It was meet that the Head should be
glorified with excellency of gifts above all the blessed, as being Members of
that Head.
2. In respect of us: 1. That he might gloriously make Intercession for us by
his virtue, efficacy and will. 2. That we might also ascend, and be assured of
our Ascension, John 14.2. 3. That he might send the Holy Ghost, and by him
gather comfort, and defend his Church from the Devil and all her Enemies, unto
the worlds end, John 16.7.



The benefit we receive by Christ's Ascension; viz. 1. He makes Intercession to
his Father in Heaven for us, 1 John 2.1, 2. And this his Intercession
signifies, 1. The perpetual virtue and strength of Christ's Sacrifice. 2. Both
wills in Christ, both Humane and Divine, propitious and favorable to us,
whereby he will that for his Sacrifice we be received of his Father. 3. The
Assent of his Father, approving this his Sons will, and accepting the value of
of his Sacrifice as our sins Ransom.
2. Our Glorification or Ascension: for seeing Christ our Head is ascended, we
are certain that we also shall ascend into Heaven, as being his Members, having
a sure pledge, that he who is our Head will lift up us his Members, John 14.2.
3. He sends us his Spirit, in stead of a pledge between him and us, John
14.16. 4. It is a Testimony, 1. That our sins are fully pardoned us who do
believe. 2. That Christ is indeed Conqueror of Death, Sin and the Devil. 3.
That we shall never be left destitute of comfort. 4. That Christ will for ever
defend us.



What the right hand of God signifies: 1. The Omnipotency or exceeding virtue
of God. 2. Perfect Glory, perfect Dignity, and full Divine Majesty.


What is meant by Christ's session at the right hand of the Father: 1. The
perfection of Christ's Divine Nature; that is, the equality of the Word with the
Father, which he did not receive, but ever had. 2. The perfection of Christ's
Humane Nature, which compriseth, 1. The personal union of the Humane Nature
with the Word: For in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, Col.
2.9. 2. The Collation or bestowing of gifts on him far greater and more in
number then are bestowed on all Men and Angels.
3. The perfection or excellency of the Office of the Mediator; that is, the
Prophetical, Priestly and Royal Function, which Christ now, as the glorified
Head of his Church, does in his Humane Nature gloriously exercise in Heaven. 4.
The perfection of Christ's honor; that is, the Adoration, Worship and Reverence,
which is yielded unto him both of Men and Angels, Heb. 1.6.


The benefits we receive by Christ's sitting at the Fathers right hand, are all
the benefits of the Kingdom and Priesthood of Christ glorified: 1. His
Intercession for us. 2. The gathering, governing and guarding of his Church by
the Word and Spirit. 3. His defending of the Church against her enemies. 4. The
abjection and destruction of the Churches enemies. 5. The Glorification of the
Church.


The difference of Christ's Ascension and ours stands thus: He ascended by his
own power and virtue; we shall not by our own, but by his, John 3.13. He
ascended to be Head; we to be his Members: He to glory agreeable for the Head;
we to glory fit for Members: Christ's Ascension was the cause of ours, but it is
not so of the contrary.

Whom seek'st thou, Mary? What, is Jesus he?
He goes before thee into Galilee.
This was the Angels voice: Nor was the news
Less strange to his Disciples then the Jews;
Though herein for himself he did no more,
Then what he did for Lazarus before.
He Is now ascended, and has verified
What Enoch and Elias typifi'd:
He sits at Gods right hand, and has thereby
In Earth all Power, in Heaven all Majesty.
. 7. From thence he shall come to judge both the Quick and the Dead.
THe last Judgment shall be a manifestation, or declaration, and separation of
the just and unjust, who ever have lived, or shall live from the beginning of
the world unto the end, proceeding from God by Christ, and a pronouncing of
Sentence on these men, and an execution thereof, according to the Doctrine of
the Law and the Gospel; which Execution is not an annihilation, or final
destruction of the Body and Soul, or a perpetual senslesness, but an infinite
and endless continuance of those Torments, which the Wicked in this life
despairing, do begin to feel, forsaken and abjected of God, subject to all
torments both of Body and Soul. And in this last Judgment, Absolution to the
godly shall be principally according to the Gospel, but shall be confirmed by
the Law; Condemnation to the wicked shall be principally by the Law, but shall
be confirmed of the Gospel: Sentence shall be given on the wicked according to
their own Merit, but on the godly according to Christ's Merit, applied unto them
by faith; a Testimony and Witness of which Faith, shall be their Works. Now the
Judge shall be Christ, John 5.22. neither yet are the Father and the Holy Ghost
removed from this Judgment; but Christ immediately shall speak, and give
Sentence, and that in his Humane Nature; and when he speaks, the Father shall
speak by him: so that the Judgment shall belong to all the three persons of
the Godhead, as concerning their Consent and Authority; but unto Christ, as
touching the publishing and executing of the Judgment: yea, and the Church
also shall judge, as touching the Allowance and Approbation of this Judgment,
whereunto they shall then subscribe, Luke 22.30.

What Christ's coming to Judge both the Quick and the Dead signifies: 1. That at
the second coming of Christ, shall follow the renewing of Heaven and Earth. 2.
That the self same Christ shall come, who for us was born, suffered, and rose
again. 3. That he shall come gloriously to deliver his Church, whereof I am a
Member. 4. That he shall come to abject and cast away the wicked.


The Reasons why, or causes for which Christ-Man shall be Judge, are these: 1.
Because the Church is to be glorified by the same Mediator, by whom and for
whom it was justified, Acts 17.31. 2. That we may have comfort and consolation,
knowing him to be our Judge, who has purchased us with his blood. 3. To
deliver his Church, and cast away the wicked. 4. The Justice of God, because
they have dealt contumeliously with the Son of Man, Zech. 12.10. 5. Christ-Man
must be Judge, because he must judge men; therefore he must be beheld of all:
But God is invisible. 6. That he may the more confound the wicked, his Enemies,
who shall be forced to behold him their Judge, whom they have so much
withstood, so wickedly dishonored.


The Day of the Lord, or the time of Judgment is twofold: 1. General, when
Christ shall come to judge the Quick and the Dead in the end of the world. 2.
Particular, at the day of our death, when every particular soul must appear
before the bar of Gods Tribunal, and give an account of what it has done.


How Christ shall come to Judgment: 1. Truly, visibly and locally, not
imaginarily, Mat. 24.30. 2. He shall come furnished and prepared with glory and
divine Majesty, with all the Angels, with the voice and trump of the Archangel,
and with divine Power. 3. The dead shall be raised, and the living changed. 4.
The world shall be dissolved with fire, not annihilated, but purified. 5. He
shall come suddenly, to the great joy and comfort of all his.


How the Devil is said to be already judged, yea and the wicked also: 1. By the
Decree of God. 2. In the Word of God. 3. In his own Conscience. 4. As touching
the beginning of his Condemnation.


For what causes the last Judgment shall be: 1. The chief and principal cause,
is the Decree of God. 2. A less principal and subordinate cause, is, both the
Salvation of the Elect, who are here vexed, and the Damnation of the wicked,
who here do flourish. 3. Because of Gods Justice, whereof in this life is not a
full and perfect execution.


The threefold effect of Christ's coming to Judgment: 1. A gathering together
at the sound of the Trumpet both of the dead and the living, Dan. 12.2. 2. A
separation; the Elect shall be set at his right hand, the Reprobate at his
left, Mat. 25.33. 3. The Judgment it self, the Elect shall be with him, the
Reprobate shall be cast into Hell, Mat. 25.46.


The execution of the last Judgment shall be thus: 1. By the force and virtue
of the Divine Power of Christ. 2. By the Ministry of the Angels. 3. The World,
Heaven and Earth shall be dissolved by fire at the execution of this Judgment;
there shall be a change of this present state, and a purifying of the
creatures, but not a consuming of them. 4. This change shall come suddenly. 5.
There shall be a casting of the wicked into everlasting pains, and an advancing
of the godly into everlasting happiness and glory.


Why God would have us certain of the last judgment, viz. 1. In respect of his
glory, that we may be able to refute Epicures, who account this heavenly
doctrine of the divine Judgment to come for a fable. 2. For our comfort, that
amidst our evils and miseries we may know there shall come a time when we shall
be delivered from this corruption and rottenness. 3. That we may retain and
keep our selves in the fear of God, and our duty, and that others also may be
reclaimed from evil. 4. That the wicked may be left excuseless, for they are
warned sufficiently that they should be ready at every season.


For what Reasons God would not have us certain of the time of the last
Judgment: 1. That he might exercise our faith and patience. 2. That he might
bridle our curiosity. 3. That he might keep us in his fear, in godliness, and
in exercising of our duty.


Why God deferreth the last Judgment: 1. To exercise Faith, Patience, Hope and
Prayer in the godly. 2. That all the Elect may be gathered unto the Church. 3.
That he might grant unto all a time and space of Repentance, as at this time,
and that he might leave the wicked without excuse, Romans 2.4.


There are a certain sort of people that superstitiously sit up all night at
certain times of the year, fondly, conceiting that Christ will come to
Judgment on one of these nights; but such most grossly err, and that these
four ways especially: 1. In that they prescribe certain set times for Christ's
coming, whereas no man knows it, Mat. 24.36, 42. 2. In that they conceit he
shall come in the night, from that Text, Luke 17.34. which is uncertain, the
night being there taken as a part for the whole, by the figure Synecdoche, and
he calls it the Day, Luke 17.30. 3. In that they imagine, That they which are
asleep when Christ comes, cannot be well prepared to meet him; whereas
Repentance makes the soul prepared at all times. 4. In that they interpret the
Precept of Watching, to bodily watching of the Eye; whereas it is not meant of
that only, but of the heart also.


This Judgment shall be in the end of the world, whereof there are three
parts, The one before the Law, another under the Law, the third under the
Gospel, or under Christ, which is called The end of the world, The end of days,
The last time, because there shall not be so long space between Christ's first
coming and his second, as was from the beginning of the world unto his first
coming: But of that day Christ himself, as Man, knows not, Mark 13.32.

Tremble, O Earth; Tremble, and be afraid!
Behold the Son of God, he that was laid
At first in Swathing-bands, then in a shroud,
Comes with Thousands of Angels in a Cloud
To judge both Quick and Dead. Silence! Who may
Language the Joy or Horror of that Day,
When all from Adam shall be changed, or rise
To meet their Judge or Savior in the Skies,
To hear the Sentence of Eternal Rest,
Or that which is too sad to be expressed.
. 8. I believe in the Holy Ghost.
WHich is as much to say, As I acknowledge the Holy Ghost to be God, and so
confess him to be one with the Father and the Son; also I acknowledge his
Office of Sanctifying, and making holy the people of God: And as I depend upon
God the Father as my Creator and daily Protector, and upon God the Son as my
Redeemer and daily Mediator, so I depend upon God the Holy Ghost as my
Comforter, and the worker of Grace and all Virtue in me, being of my self a
lump of Sin, and mass of Corruption; yet I acknowledge not three Gods, but one
God, a Trinity of persons in Unity of Godhead: So that the Holy Ghost is the
third person of the true and only Godhead, proceeding from the Father and the
Son, and Coeternal, Coequal and Consubstantial with the Father and the Son, and
is sent from both into the hearts of the Elec^, to sanctify them unto eternal
life: And though extraordinary Revelations are ceased, yet the Holy Ghost in
and by the Word, reveals some things unto men, for which cause he is called,
and that truly, The Spirit of Revelation. Now that the Holy Ghost is very and
eternal God, appears from his creating of all things, Genesis 1.2. Psalm. 104.24,
29, 30. And Christians are to be Baptized in the Name of the Holy Ghost, Mat.
28.19. as well as of the Father and the Son. As God he chooses, assigns and
sends forth men for the Ministry of the Gospel, Acts 13.2, 4. As God he
decrees Orders for his Church and People, Acts 15.28. As God he is to be
invocated and prayed unto, as well as the Father and the Son, 2 Cor. 13.13. The
Holy Ghost is of one Substance, Majesty and Glory with the Father and the Son,
for these three, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, are one, 1 John 5.7.
who proceeds from the Father and the Son; for the Father sends the
Comforter in the Name of the Son, Joh. 14.16. and the Son sends the
Comforter, the Spirit of Truth, from the Father, Joh. 15.26. And whereas we
believe the Holy Ghost to have proceeded from the Father and the Son,
understand, Proceeding is here a communication of the Divine Essence, whereby
the third person only of the Godhead receives from the Father and the Son, as
the Spirit from him whose Spirit it is, the same whole Essence which the Father
and the Son have and retain.

Of God the Holy Ghost three things are to be considered by us; viz. 1. What
the Holy Ghost is; viz. of the same Essence with the Father and the Son, a
distinct person proceeding from both. 2. The Office of the Holy Ghost which
does sanctify us many ways: 1. Because he is the key of all heavenly
Treasures, illuminating our understanding to receive the Mystery of Faith. 2.
Because he is the Earnest of the Promises. 3. Because he is the Seal wherewith
the Truth of the Divine Promises is signed and sealed in our minds. 4. Because
he is the Minister of Truth, guiding us in the way of all Truth. 5. Because he
is the Author of light, expelling the darkness gathered by sin. 6. Because he
is the Fountain of Wisdom and Understanding. 7. Because he is the water that
purges us from all filth, consecrating us into the Holy Temple of God,
fertilizing us to bring forth the fruits of Righteousness. 8. Because he is the
Fire that purges away the corruption of our minds, enflaming our hearts with
the love of Righteousness.
3. Our Faith in the Holy Ghost: 1. That we believe in God the Holy Ghost. 2.
That we believe the Office of the Holy Ghost. 3. That by our sins we grieve him
not.



Concerning the Holy Ghost we believe, 1. That he is true and coeternal God
with the Eternal Father and the Son, Genesis 1.2. 1 Cor. 3.16. 2. That he is also
given unto us, Mat. 28.19. to make us through a true faith partakers of Christ
and all his benefits, Gal. 3.14. To comfort us, Acts 9.13. and to abide with us
for ever, Joh. 14.16.


That the Holy Ghost is a person of the Godhead, is proved by these Reasons: 1.
By his visible Apparitions, Luke 3.22. 2. Because he is called God, 1 Cor.
3.16. Acts 5.3, 4. 3. Because he is the Author of our Baptism, and we are
Baptized in his Name. 4. The Properties of a person are all attributed unto
him, Luke 12.12. Joh. 16.13. 5. Because he is plainly distinguished from the
gifts and graces of God, 1 Cor. 12.4, 11.


The Holy Ghost is a person distinct from the Father and the Son, for these
Reasons: 1. He is called a Spirit, and none is his own Spirit, his own Father,
his own Son. 2. The Holy Ghost in express words is called Another from them
both, Joh. 14.16. 3. He is sent of the Father and the Son, Joh. 15.26.
therefore another from them both. 4. The Holy Ghost has distinct Attributes or
Properties personally from them both.


That the Holy Ghost is equal with the Father and the Son, is thus plainly
manifested: 1. The Essence of the Father and the Son is communicated unto him.
2. It appears by those Divine Attributes and Properties which are attributed
unto him. 3. The same Divine Works that are attributed to the Father and the
Son, are also attributed unto him, Job. 33.4. 4. Equal and the same honor is
given to the Holy Ghost, as to the Father and the Son, 1 John 5.7. 5. Those
things which are spoken in the Old Testament of God or Jehovah, are applied to
the Holy Ghost in the New. 6. The Holy Ghost is the Father and the Sons Spirit,
and there is but one God.


Why this third person of the Godhead is called Holy: 1. Because he in himself,
by himself, and of his own nature, is holy. 2. Because he is the immediate
Sanctifier of others.


For what reasons this third person of the Godhead is called a Spirit: 1.
Because he is a Spiritual Essence, or Substance Incorporeal and Invisible. 2.
Because he is inspired of the Father and the Son; they move by this Spirit. 3.
Because himself inspireth, and immediately works motions in the hearts of the
Elect. 4. Because he is God equal with the Father and the Son, and the same
God; and God is a Spirit.


The several Titles of Commendation given to the Holy Ghost in Scripture. viz.
1. The Spirit of Adoption, because he assures us of the Fatherly goodwill of
God in Christ toward us. 2. The Earnest and Seal of our Inheritance, because
he assures us of our Salvation, 2 Cor. 1.21. 3. The Spirit of life, because he
mortifietli the old man, and quickneth the new, Romans 8.2. 4. Water, whereby he
cleanses us, refreshes us nigh dead in sin, and makes us fruitful to good
works. 5. Fire, because he consumes daily our concupiscence in us, and
kindles in our hearts the love of God and our Neighbor. 6. The Fountain,
because all celestial Riches do flow unto us from him. 7. The Spirit of Prayer,
because he is the souls voice in the chosen. 8. The oil of gladness, because he
cheareth and refreshes us in all our troubles. 9. The Comforter, because by
working faith in us he causes us to exult in afflictions. 10. Intercessor,
because he makes requests for us with sighs and groans that cannot be
expressed, Romans 8.26. 11. He is called, The Spirit of Truth, of Wisdom, of Joy,
of the fear of God, of Boldness, and the like, Joh. 14.16. Now some of the
ungodly may have the Holy Ghost, as concerning some gifts of the Holy Ghost, as
Saul and Judas had; but they have not the Spirit of Adoption, for the same
Spirit does not work the same things in all; for he works Adoption and
Conversion in the Elect only.


The operations of the Holy Ghost are twofold: 1. External, common to all men,
for he illuminates every one that comes into the world. 2. Internal, special
and proper to the godly, not only illuminating their minds, but proceeding to
their hearts, moving the affections, and becomes unto the whole man, 1. A
Spirit of Sanctification. 2. A Spirit of Intercession. 3. A Spirit of
Consolation.



The Office and Operations peculiarly attributed to the Holy Ghost in
Scripture; viz. 1. To teach and illuminate, Joh. 14.26. and 16.13. To enlighten
men's minds with the knowledge of the Gospel, and to reveal unto them the good
will of God, and way to happiness; whence he is called The Spirit of
Revelation, Ephesians. 1.17. 2. To persuade their hearts of the truth of those things
which he has revealed to their understandings, by the virtue whereof they
taste of the good word of God, Heb. 6.5. 3. To Regenerate; that is, to work
Faith and Repentance in the hearts of the chosen, Joh. 3.5. 4. To conjoyn us
with God and Christ, and to make us partakers of all his benefits, 1 Cor. 6.11.
5. To Rule and guide; that is, to instruct and incline us to all duties due to
God and Man. 6. To Comfort, Joh. 14.16. in all perplexities and miseries
whatsoever. 7. To Confirm, to make courageous and bold in and for the
maintenance of the Truth, being moved to acknowledge and profess the Gospel to
be the Word of God. Many other are the Works of the Spirit; but that
Unpardonable Sin against the Holy Ghost, is committed against him, in regard of
these Operations of the Spirit, so as it is against the Truth of God which the
Spirit has revealed to a man, and evicted and persuaded his heart of the
certainty thereof.


How the Holy Ghost is 1. Given: 1. After an ordinary way, by the Ministry of
the Word and the use of the Sacraments. 2. In manifesting himself unto us
through the studying and meditation of the Gospel. 3. He is given by working a
desire of him in the Elect: for he is given to them that desire him, Luke
11.13. and is received by faith.
2. Retained: 1. By meditation in the Doctrine of the Gospel, and by studying
to prove it thereby, Psalm. 1.2. 2. By continuance and increase of Repentence
and amendment of life; that is, by a desire of bewaring to offend against our
knowledge or Conscience, Matthew. 13.12. 3. By daily and earnest prayer and
invocation, Luke 11.13. 4. By applying Gods gifts to their right use; that is,
to his glory, and our Neighbors good, Luke 22.32.
3. Ecclipsed in its present comforts: 1. By neglecting the Word and Doctrine,
and by neglect of Prayer. 2. By carnal Security, and by giving our selves to
commit sin against our Conscience. 3. By abusing the gifts of the Holy Ghost,
as when they are not employed aright.



The duties following upon our faith in the Holy Ghost: 1. To keep our bodies
holy and pure, as the Temples of the Holy Ghost, and not to defile them by
uncleanness. 2. To believe without doubting whatsoever is contained in the holy
Scripture; because that all were given by inspiration of the Holy Ghost, and
were set forth by holy men, not of any private motion, but as they were moved
by the Holy Ghost, 2 Timothy 3.16. 2 Pet. 1.21. 3. To use all our gifts to the
honor of God, for it is the holy Spirit of God from whom we receive them all.
4. To submit our selves in all things to the government of Gods Spirit, and not
follow the sway of our own Natures; for he is our guide, and will lead us into
the way of all Truth.


Eternal Breath! O let thy blessed air
Imbreathe us with new life, or else repair
The ruins of our Souls: Blow and refresh
Our dim-burning Zeal, but blow out the Flesh:
New-mould us fit for Mercy, and make good
The Charter Christ has sealed us with his Blood.
Vnscale our Understandings, make us see
The Crown of Hope 'yond hope, Faith's Mystery:
Inflame our Souls with holy fire, and then
Our Souls thy fire shall flame thee back again.
. 9. The Holy Catholic Church.
Concerning the holy and Catholic Church of Christ, we believe, That the Son
of God does from the beginning of the world, Joh. 10.11. Genesis 26.4. to the end
thereof, Romans 8.29. gather, defend and preserve unto himself by his Spirit,
Isa. 59.21. and Word, Acts 2.46. out of whole Mankind, Mat. 16.18. Joh. 10.28.
a company chosen to everlasting life, 1 John 3.21. and agreeing in true faith;
And that we are lively Members of that Company, 1 John 2.19. and so shall
remain for ever, 1 Cor. 18.9. To believe in which holy Catholic Church, is to
believe the Doctrine thereof, wherein she follows Christ, the Prophets and
Apostles, the only sure ground and pillar of Truth; and that in this visible
Company and Society are some true Repentants and truly converted, and my self
to be a lively Member of the invisible and visible Church: So that to believe
and confess the Doctrine of Salvation taught and delivered by the Prophets and
Apostles, is an infallible and inseparable note of a true Church of God; for
Gods Church is nothing else, but a company of Gods people, called by the
Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, unto the state of Salvation; so that out
of the Church there is no Salvation ordinarily: In which regard Noah's Ark was a
true Type of the Church, none being saved from drowning that were out of it.
And none but such who are of Christ's body, shall partake of the benefits of his
Office; for himself says, He prays not for the world, Joh. 17.9. In which
respect also out of the Church no Salvation, for the body being the true
Catholic Invisible Church, he that is not a member of this body is out of the
Church, and so has not Christ to be his Head and Savior: Yea, the Church is
also Christ's Spouse; the many espousal Titles which in Scripture are given to
Christ and the Church, in mutual relation of one to another, evidently
declares as much: He is styled a Bridegroom, she a Bride, Joh. 3.29. He
Well-beloved, she Love, Cant. 1.13, 15. He an Husband, she a Wise, 2 Cor. 11.2.
He an Head, she the Body, both one flesh, Ephesians. 5.23, 31. Thus the Church being
the Communion of Saints, sanctified in Christ Jesus, confessing him the Son of
the living God, in every place knit in one Church as the Body, and every Member
unto Christ as unto one Head, it is most evident that no man can be saved out
of the Church: for whomsoever God has chosen and elected to the end, which is
eternal life, them he has chosen to the means, which is the inward and outward
calling. But here note, That Infants born in the Church, are in charity to be
reputed of the Church, till at their mature Age their life notoriously express
the contrary.

The Church is called Catholic or Universal, because it is not now tied to
any certain place or people, as it was under the Law, before the coming of
Christ. Now the Doctrine of the true Church consists in the Sentences and
Decrees, which we are bound by the Commandment of God to believe and obey; and
no Doctrine is to be proposed to the Church, that is repugnant to the holy
Scripture, or not contained therein. And the Church has Authority to judge and
determine in Controversies of Faith, according to Scripture; to interpret and
expound the Word of God, with respect to the Analogy of faith, Romans 12.6. And
though she be the Witness and Keeper of Gods written Word, yet may not enforce
any thing to be believed as necessary to Salvation, that is either contrary or
beside the Word of God.

The visible Church is a company among men, embracing and professing the true
and incorrupt Doctrine of the Law and the Gospel, and using the Sacraments
aright, according to Christ's Institution, and professing Obedience unto the
Doctrine; in which company are many ungenerate or hypocrites, consenting
notwithstanding to the Doctrine. The invisible Church is a company of those
which are Elected to eternal life, in whom a new life is begun here by the Holy
Ghost, and is perfected in the world to come: They which are in this invisible
Church, never perish, neither are any hypocrites therein. And it is called
Invisible, not that the men are invisible, but because their Faith is so, that
we cannot certainly discern the godly from the hypocrites. And although this
Universal invisible Church, is that Militant Church which remains as yet in
the field, and is fighting on Earth, yet it is, and lies hid in the visible
Church; so that in this respect, there is as it were no more difference between
them, then between a whole and a part. Now those visible Churches which refuse
to be governed by Christ's Word, but are by Humane Traditions playing the
Adulteresses by committing Idolatry, are not of this Catholic Church which is
subject to Christ; neither are Infidels that defy Christ, Heretics that deny
him, Ignorant persons that know not his Will, Profane persons that despise,
Worldlings that lightly esteem him, nor any that persecute or scorn him in his
Members. Thus many have a Name of being of the Church, who indeed are not. And
as for the Church of Rome, they are departed from the Truth, they have denied
the Faith, they have defiled themselves with Idols, they will not have Christ's
Righteousness imputed to them; they set up their own Works, and seek
Justification by them; they will not receive Christ to be their only King and
Priest, they will merit Salvation for themselves, and therefore they are not a
true, but a false Church.

The word Church signifies an Assembly called together: which calling is
twofold; viz. 1. Outward, which is common to all that make profession of the
Gospel; in this respect it is said, Many are called, but few are chosen, Mat.
20.16. 2. Inward, which is proper to the Elect; none but they, and all they in
their time, shall both outwardly be called by the Word to a profession of
Christ, and also inwardly and effectually to believe in Christ, and obey the
Gospel. These make that Church whereof Christ is properly the Head and they the
Body, and that in these respects: 1. They are under Christ as a Body under a
Head. 2. They receive Spiritual life and grace from Christ, as a body natural
receives sense and vigor from the head. 3. Christ governs them as a Head the
Body. 4. They are subject to Christ as a Body to the Head.



This Metaphor of a Body, implies two things; viz. 1. A mystical Union with
Christ, by virtue whereof they who are of Christ's Body, 1. Receive Grace and
life from him, Ephesians. 4.15, 16. 2. Are guided and governed according to his
Will. 3. Seek to honor him in all things they do. 4. Are offended and grieved
when he is dishonored by others.
2. A Spiritual communion with the Saints, being Fellow Members; by reason
whereof 1. They love the Brethern, 1 John 4.11. 2. They are ready to succor
such as are in distress. 3. They will edify one another, Ephesians. 4.16. 4. They
retain a mutual sympathy, rejoicing and mourning one with another, 1 Cor. 12.26.



Again, Christ is Head of the Church in two respects: 1. In regard of his
Dignity and Dominion over the Church, Col. 1.18. The causes whereof are 1. The
good pleasure of God his Father. 2. The Dignity of his person being God-Man. 3.
The Merit of his Sacrifice, whereby he has redeemed and purchased his Church
unto himself. 4. The Omnipotency of his power, whereby he is able to protect.
5. The All Sufficiency of Spirit, whereby he is able to give to every member
all needful grace.
2. In regard of the near union betwixt him and the Church.


All things requisite to join husband and wife together, do fitly concur
betwixt Christ and the Church: 1. They are persons fit to be joined: Though
Christ be God, yet for this end he became man, Joh. 17.19. And though the
Church were impure, yet for this end is she cleansed and sanctified. 2. They
have their Parents consent: for God is the common Father of both, Joh. 20.17.
And God has given Christ to the Church, Romans 8.32. and the Church to Christ,
Joh. 6.39. 3. They have given their mutual consent each to other, Cant. 2.16.
4. He bears an husband-like affection to her, and she is willing to yield a
wife-like subjection to him, Ephesians. 5.23, 24. 5. He has given her many favors
and gifts as pledges of his love, Ephesians. 4.8. And she, in testimony of her
faithfulness, was under the Law circumcised, and is under the Gospel baptized.
6. He has prepared a place of habitation for them both together, Joh. 14.3.
and she earnestly desires to be with him, Rev. 22.17, 20. 7. He will assuredly
perform all the offices of a kind husband; as, to love her, bear with her,
provide for her, and the like: Let the Spouse endeavor therefore by all good
means to maintain the honor of her place, despising the world, preserving her
chastity, and yielding all love, reverence and obedience to this blessed
Bridegroom, who bought her with his Blood to endow her with immortality.


The Privileges of Christ's Spouse, the Church, the Saints, his faithful ones;
viz. 1. Christ is made a yoke-follow with his Church; he puts his hand under
all her burdens to make them the more easy, yea the great burden of Gods
wrath has he wholly taken on himself. 2. Christ is 1. As her Champion, to
answer all challenges sent unto her. 2. As her Advocate, to plead and answer
all complaints made against her. 3. As her Surety, to discharge all her debts,
even all in all for her and to her.
3. All his honors, goods and privileges are hers; she has a right to them
and a part in them, she is a coheir with him, Romans 8.17.


The marks to know the true Church by; viz. 1. The profession of the true,
incorrupt and rightly understood Doctrine of the Law and Gospel. 2. Her Badges
and Signs, which are the two Sacraments truly administered. 3. Obedience toward
God and his Doctrine, both in Life and Manners.


The Titles which Paul gives the Church; viz. 1. The House of God, who dwells
therein, defending and guiding it by his holy Spirit. 2. The Pillar of Truth,
because by the Ministry thereof God preserves and keeps Truth in the world.
3. The Mother of all the faithful, because God therein has begotten us with
the incorruptible seed of the Word, and has put us over unto it, to be guided
and brought up in faith.


For what Reasons the Church is called Holy: 1. Because, as Paul says, It is
sanctified, after that he has cleansed it by the washing of water through the
word; that is, made clean from all sin by the precious Blood of Christ, daily
presented to us both in the Word and Sacraments. 2. For that the Members of it
being Regenerated by the Holy Ghost, and sanctified, do apply themselves
diligently to holiness of life. 3. Because all true Christians are Spiritual
Priests by an holy Unction. 4. Because the holy Trinity dwells in it: Christ
will send the Comforter. 5. Because it is sanctified by Invocation:


The Church is 1. One only; because as it does acknowledge one only High
Priest, Jesus Christ; so one only Religion in Faith, Hope and Love: which
Unity one Spirit conserveth by the Word and Sacraments. 2. Holy, purged by the
blood of Christ, 1 John 1. 3. Catholic in respect 1. Of Place; not tied to
Rome, but spread through the whole world. 2. Of Men; not tied to the children
of Abraham after the flesh. 3. Of Time; for it has and shall be for ever,
Christ is with it to the end of the world.
4. Inconquerable; Lifted up, even as Mount Sion, impregnable, so as the gates
of hell shall not prevail against it.


Though the Church be only one, which is the Spouse and Mystical Body of
Christ, yet in regard of man, it is considered in a double respect; viz. 1.
Visible, which is that company of the faithful, gathered together in the Name
of Christ, to be instructed and confirmed in his Faith, by the sincere
preaching of the Word, as also the true use of the Sacraments, which is called
the Militant Church, because it warreth with the Devil, the World and the
Flesh. 2 Invisible, being all the Elect, which may be divided into three parts:
1. They which are already received into heaven, called thence the Triumphant.
2. They which do yet live on the earth, called Invisible, because their faith
and conscience to Godward is not perfectly known unto men. 3. They that are yet
unborn.



The Reasons for which the true Church ought to be discerned from all other
Churches; viz. 1. Because of the Commandment of God, 1 John 5.39. 2. For the
glory of God, who as he will not be coupled with Idols, so will he have his
Truth severed from lies. 3. For our own Salvation, that the faithful may know
which to join themselves to, and of what Kingdom they are. 4. For the better
confirmation of our faith and comfort, when as we see that to be rightly in our
Church, which is wanting in others. 5. Lest we being deceived, should embrace
the Doctrine of some other Church or Sect for true Religion. 6. Lest we be
partakers of the punishments which are to come on such men, Rev. 18.4. 7. That
the wicked may be left unexcusable.


Why God oftentimes suffers for a while his Enemies to prevail over his
Church: 1. Because his own people sin against him, and therefore he is even
compelled to correct and chasten them, howbeit in mercy not in fury; for their
instruction, not for their destruction, that they may not be condemned with the
world: For as the Bush which Moses saw in the Wilderness, though in the midst
of a fire, yet not consumed; so is the Church on Earth in the midst of
Persecution, yet not overcome. 2. That his children may learn to rest in God
alone, and not on themselves, or upon the Arm of flesh, rather then upon the
living God. Thus profited Manasseh more in the Prison at Babylon, then on his
Throne, 2 Chronicles. 33.11, 12. 3. To harden the hearts of the Enemies, that they
may run forward to their own confusion, and fill up the measure of their
iniquity.


The difference between the Church before the coming of Christ and now since,
is fourfold; viz. 1. The Church before Christ did set him forth, his Death and
Resurrection, but darkly, by certain outward ceremonies, as Sacrifices, Lights,
Washings, and the like. 2. This consists in Reformation of life; for as the
knowledge of Christ is now greater, so also the efficacy and working of the
Holy Ghost is far greater, which mortifieth our flesh, so as we do more
earnestly obey his Commandments, according to the Promises declared by the
Prophets (some special gifts granted to some special men, as Moses, Elias, and
others, who went far beyond us, only excepted.) 3. In that everlasting life
was but obscurely and darkly offered to the Israelites, wrapped or folded up
only in earthly Promises. 4. The Church under the Law, was as it were bounded
with the borders of Judea, or shut up within that country; but now it is
dispersed and scattered throughout the whole world, neither is it tied to any
one place, time or people.


The difference of the true doctrine from others; viz. 1. This Doctrine was
delivered from God, other Sects are sprung from men, and have been invented by
Devils. 2. True Religion has firm Testimonies, both Divine and Humane, such as
quiet Consciences, and convince all other Sects of Error. 3. In the Doctrine of
the Prophets and Apostles is rightly delivered the whole Law of God, and both
the Tables of the Law are perfectly kept; other Sects cast away the principal
parts of Gods Law, the Doctrine concerning the true knowledge and Worship of
God contained in the first Table, and reject the inward obedience of the second
Table. 4. The whole Gospel of Christ rightly understood, is in the true Church
alone taught, and in this true Doctrine alone contained; other Sects are either
quite ignorant of it, or do patch some little part of it out of the Doctrine of
the Apostles, unto their own Errors.


True Christian Religion consists especially in five principal points,
distinguished thereby from all other counterfeit Religions: 1. It makes all
the chief Points of the Doctrine thereof to agree with the nature of the true
God, in the knowledge of whom it strengthens and keeps the godly. 2. That it
establishes the glory of God in the Salvation of men, and so the godly are
more and more confirmed in the certainty of their Salvation. 3. That it joyneth
good Works with our Salvation by a most near band, although it be no way
grounded upon them, so that the faithful cannot take any matter of boasting in
them. 4. That it opens a way for us unto God, to crave of him all things
necessary for soul or body, for this life or that to come. 5. That it yields
to the godly matter of patience and joy in adversity, yea also Assurance in the
greatest dangers, and not without much circumspection, care and watchfulness in
the most prosperous condition.


The difference between the Church and Commonweals; viz. 1. Commonweals are
distinct in diverse places and times; the Church is always one and the same. 2.
The States of the World have many Heads; the Church but one, and that in
Heaven. 3. Kingdoms are governed by men's Laws; the Church by the Holy Ghost and
Gods Word. 4. The civil State requires outward obedience only; the Church
both inward and outward. 5. States give Power to Civil Magistrates to alter and
make new Laws; the Church is so tied to the Word of God, as she may not add
to, or detract ought from it. 6. The civil State has Corporal Power; but the
Church punishes by denouncing Gods Wrath out of the Word of God. 7. In the
Church are always some Elect and holy, but not always in the Commonwealth.


The Office and Authority of the Church, as concerning the Scriptures, 1. It is
as the Keeper of the sacred Rolls and Records, to preserve them, not to
authorize them. 2. It is as a Touchstone to distinguish them from counterfeit
Scriptures, not to make that Scripture which is no Scripture. 3. It is as the
voice of a Crier, to preach, publish, promulgate and teach the Truth, but
cannot add to, or take from it, nor authorize, nor alter or change it. 4. It
is as an Interpreter and Expounder of the Scriptures according to the
Scriptures.


How the Church may be said not to err: 1. The whole does not err, though
some Members do. 2. It does not err universally, though in some points of
Doctrine it may. 3. It erreth not in the Foundation.


As the Church may ordain ceremonies tending to order, decency, unity and
edification; so has it no power to appoint what she please: For she may not
decree any Rites or ceremonies that are 1. Idle or unprofitable, but must all
tend to edifying. 2. For their nature impious, like the Ordinances, Manners and
Idols of our Forefathers, Ezekiel. 30.18. Teachers of vanity, Jer. 10.8. and of
lies, Heb. 3.10. 3. For use Superstitious, like the Brazen-Serpent Hezekiah
brake, 2 Kings 18. 4. For their worthiness in the eyes of the ordainers, either
of equal price, or of more account then the very Ordinances of God, so as for
the performance of them the Laws of God must be left undone, Mark 7.8, 13. 5.
Against the liberty of Christians, to the intangling of them again with the
yoke of servile bondage, Gal. 5.1. 6. For their weight over-heavy, and grievous
to be born, Luke 11.46. 7. Any way contrary to the Commandments, Will and Word
of God, Mat. 15.13. 8. They must not be too many.


The duties to be performed by us in believing the holy Catholic Church: 1.
To renounce and abandon all wicked Societies, because we profess fellowship
with Saints, betwixt whom and these there is no agreement. 2. To be companions
of Saints; viz. of such as be of an holy life, and not to think it a disgrace
to be holy and pure; and to be of a good and pious life, separate from the
profane multitude. 3. To walk in the light of Gods holy Word by virtuous
living, because of our fellowship with Christ, and through him with God the
Father, for God is light, 1 John 1.7. 4. To do good unto all, but especially to
those of the household of faith, in being like-affected toward them, not only
in distributing our temporal, but spiritual goods. 5. To be comfortable in all
our Sufferings, because our Head is not without a sympathy and feeling of our
miseries, and will not suffer us to be tempted beyond what we are able. 6. To
have heavenliness within us, by leading an heavenly life whilst we live upon
earth, because there is a communion betwixt us and the Saints in heaven.


When Tyrants Storms of Persecution raise,
And when Religion blows too many ways;
When Rome 's Euroclydon does roar like Hell,
And that Whores Cup does to a Deluge swell:
This is that Ark, which, when the Floods abate,
Does land the Faithful on Mount Arrarat.
Truths Pillar, wreathed with Innocence and Love,
Whose Stems below, and Basis is above:
Christ's black, yet comely, and beloved Spouse,
His own true Vine, thrice happy are the Boughs.
. 10. The Communion of Saints.
THe Communion of Saints, is that holy and sweet fellowship which all the
Members of Christ's Church have with their Head Christ Jesus, and one with
another, whether they are Believers here, or departed. Nor is this the least of
Christ's benefits bestowed on the Church by the Holy Ghost: For herein all the
Saints have the same Reconciliation, the same Redemption, the same
Righteousness, the same Sanctification, the same Salvation, by and for Christ;
All the Saints have the same benefits common, which are necessary to Salvation,
Ephesians. 4.4. And all the like special gifts, though not all a like measure, but
are so distributed to every Member, as that some excel others in gifts and
graces in the Church: for the gifts of the Holy Ghost are diverse, and to every
one of us is given grace, according to the measure of the gift of Christ, Ephesians.
4.7.

The chief part of the Communion of Saints, is the union or coherence of all
the Saints; that is, of the whole body of the Church, with Christ the Head, and
of his Members among themselves, which is wrought by the Holy Ghost, even by
the same Spirit, who dwells in Christ the Head, and in all his Members: So
that to believe the Communion of Saints, is to believe, That the Saints (of
which number I must needs certainly be assured my self to be one) are united by
the Spirit unto Christ their Head, and that from the Head gifts are poured down
unto them, both those which are the same in all necessary to Salvation; as also
those which being diverse, and diversely bestowed upon every one, are requisite
for the edification of the Church: And that they are by the same Spirit
likewise united among themselves. The mystical union between Christ and every
true Believer is not only in regard of soul, but of body also; which being
once knit, shall never be dissolved, but is eternal: whereupon, the dying,
dead, rotten and consumed body remains still a Member of Christ, abides
within the Covenant, and is and shall be ever a Temple of the Holy Ghost.
Touching which union in regard of the soul, Christ dwells therein, or in the
heart of every true Believer, as the soul in the body, and acts the soul, as
the soul acts the body, without whom the soul is dead to all goodness: So that
if thou find that thou art no more able to pray, nor no more able to do any
duty then thou wast before, that thou live in thy lusts as much as ever thou
did, that thou have not that new heart, that new Spirit, that new affection
which the Scriptures speak of, then be sure that Christ dwells not in thy
heart, thou have no communion with him or his Saints.

The Union of Christ and the Church is a great Mystery, Ephesians. 5.32. not to be
measured with the line of our own Reason, which can never fathom the depth
thereof; a Secret that could not be opened but by Divine Revelation, nor being
opened, can be conceived, but by the illumination of the Spirit. Thus though it
be above our capacity, yet being revealed, we must believe it, as we do the
mystery of the Trinity, of Christ's Eternal generation, of the Personal Union of
his two Natures, of the Proceeding of the Holy Ghost, and the like. So that in
our Meditation of this Mystery, we must conceive no carnal, no earthly thing of
it, because it is a Mystery; it is altogether Spiritual and heavenly. From the
natural Union of our head and body, and from the Matrimonial Union of man and
wife, we may by way of resemblance but help our understanding in the Union of
Christ and his Church; but notwithstanding the comparisons, we may not draw the
Mystery it self to any carnal matter, for it is only and wholly Spiritual.
This plainly discovers the strange folly of the Papists, who make our Union
with Christ merely carnal, conceiving it to consist in a corporal commixion of
Christ's flesh with ours; in which conceit there is a great deal of gross
absurdity, no great Mystery. Now the manner of our Union with Christ, is not by
being united only to his Humane Nature, but by being united to Christ's Person,
God-Man: For as his Divine Nature in and by it self is incommunicable; so the
Humane Nature simply considered in and by it self, is unprofitable: for the
Deity is the Fountain of Life and Grace, which through the Humanity of Christ
is conveyed unto us. And though he be in heaven and we on earth, yet this Union
being supernatural and Spiritual, there needs no local presence for the
making of it; the Spirit of Christ being conveyed into every of the Saints, as
the soul into every part of the body, makes the Members one Mystical Body their
Head.

What the communion of Saints signifies: 1. The Union of the Church with
Christ, and of his Members among themselves. 2. The communion or participation
of all Christ's benefits. 3. The distribution of special gifts, bestowed on some
Members for the good of the whole body. 4. An obliging or binding of all the
Members to employ and refer all their gifts to the glory of Christ their Head,
and to the Salvation of the whole Body, and of every Member mutually.


The faithful are called Saints in three respects: 1. Imputatively; that is, in
respect that Christ's sanctity and holiness is imputed unto them. 2.
Inchoatively; that is, in respect that conformity and agreeableness with the
Law, is inchoated or begun in them. 3. In respect of their separation; because
they are selected and separated from all other men.


Union is taken three ways: 1. Essentially; so God is not one with us, nor we
with him: for there is no proportion between finite and infinite. 2. Personally
or hypostatically, as when things are so joined, that they make one person;
neither thus is God one with us, or we with him. 3. Spiritually, which is the
conjunction of us with God, and God with us, whereby we are one with him in
Christ, and he in Christ with us: Thus we are said to be in Christ as our
Savior, not as God only, or Man only, but as both, one Christ.


The Bond whereby we are united to Christ, is twofold: 1. One on Christ's part,
even the Spirit of Christ, 1 John 4.13. 2. The other on our part, which is
Faith, Ephesians. 3.17.


So likewise we are said to be in Christ two ways; viz. 1. In regard of the
external conjunction of his Body the Church, by which we are initiate into his
Name by Baptism: This is common both to true and false Christians. 2. By the
true internal coadunation or conjunction of the Spirit, which is proper only
to the Elect.


The three special Virtues which unite us to Christ: 1. Faith, the hand whereby
we lay hold on him, as he by his Spirit does on us. 2. Hope, the anchor whereby
we hold fast what we have laid hold on, maugre all the storms and assaults of
Satan. 3. Love, the glue or sodder whereby we are thus knit and united to him,
and become one with him.


Christ is said to be present with us, in five respects; viz. 1. By his Spirit
and Godhead. 2. As touching our faith and confidence wherewith we behold him.
3. In mutual dilection and love. 4. In respect of his Union with Humane Nature;
that is, in the conjunction of the soul with the body. 5. In respect of that
hope which we have of our consummation or coming unto him.


Christ's Humanity is present with all the Elect, in whatsoever places they be
dispersed through the whole world, not by any substantial presence of the flesh
in the Bread, and within their bodies, but 1. By the efficacy and perpetual
value of his Merit, 1 John 1.7. 2. By the efficacy also of his Humane Will,
Psalm. 110.4. Heb. 5.6. 3. By conjunction and union; not by any natural
connection of Christ and our flesh, but by Faith and the Holy Ghost, in Christ
our Head, and dwelling in us his Members, Ephesians. 3.17. we are Members of his
Body, of his Flesh, and his Bones, and of they twain shall be one flesh, Ephesians.
5.30. This is a great secret.


We have communion with God three ways: 1. If we walk not in darkness; that is,
if we do not the works of darkness. 2. If we walk in the light; that is, if we
practice what we know of the light, 1 John 1.6, 7. 3. By the blessed Sacraments.


The Signs of true communion with God: 1. A true love toward our Brethren,
giving no just occasion of evil or offense. 2. A true and lively faith in
Christ, apprehending his Merits, and applying him to be our Savior, Joh. 12.46.
3. A true following of Christ; that is, in his love, patience, humility,
obedience.


The Privileges of the Saints, which arise from their Union with Christ their
Head, are many, and great and sure, respecting This life. The time of death.
The life to co^^.


The Privileges in this life, which the Saints have by virtue of their Union
with Christ; viz. 1. A most glorious condition, which is to be a part of
Christ, a Member of his body. 2. The Attendance of good Angels, who are sent
forth to minister for them, who shall be heirs of Salvation, Heb. 1.14. 3. An
Honor to make even Christ himself (as he is Head of the Church) perfect; the
Saints being Members, the Church is said to be the fullness of him that fills
all in all, Ephesians. 1.23. which is to be understood of that voluntary condition
which Christ was pleased to descend unto, to be the Head of a Body, the Head of
his Church, the Saints. 4. A kind of Possession of heaven while we are on
earth, Ephesians. 2.6. Joh. 5.24. 1 John 5.12. This is somewhat more then Hope,
serving to strengthen it, and to give us assurance of that heavenly
Inheritance. 5. A most happy kind of Regiment under which the Saints are, even
such an one as the Members of an head are under, which Rules not as a cruel
Lord and Tyrant, but meekly, gently, with great compassion and fellow-feeling.
6. An Assurance of sufficient supply of all needful things which the Saints
want, and of safe protection from all things hurtful; if it seem otherwise at
times, Christ in his wisdom sees it fit it should be so. 7. A Right to all that
Adam lost, for Christ is the Heir of all, Heb. 1.2. whence the Apostle says,
All things are yours, 1 Cor. 3.21. The wicked then must needs be usurpers, for
they are not of the body. 8. A Right to more then Adam ever had, even to Christ
himself, and all that appertains to him; as, to the purity of his Nature, to
the perfection of his Obedience, to the merit of his Blood, to the power of his
Death, to the virtue of his Resurrection, and the efficacy of his Ascension. O
blessed Union! and thrice blessed they that have a part therein.


The Privileges which the Saints by their Union with Christ receive in the
time of Death, even all that time that passes from the departure of the Saints
out of this world unto the general Resurrection: 1. When Soul and Body are
separated one from the other, neither is separated from Christ, so as to be
left to destruction; for though the bodies of the Saints be consumed with
worms, they are not utterly destroyed, as appears by the Metaphor of sleep, 1 Thessalonians. 4.13. 2. The Bodies of the Saints are not only not utterly destroyed,
but shall be glorified bodies; for the rotting of the body is but as the
rotting of corn in the earth, that it may rise a more glorious body, 1 Cor.
15.36. Thus the Saints are said to sleep in Jesus, 1 Thessalonians. 4.14. and to be
dead in Christ, verse 16. 3. The Grave is as a Bed to the bodies of the Saints,
quietly to repose therein till the day of Resurrection and Reunion with the
Soul; but it is a Prison to the wicked, to hold them fast until the day of the
General Assize: indeed the bodies of the wicked shall also rise again, but to
be for ever tormented in Hell.


The Privileges after death which the Saints have by virtue of their union
with Christ, may be referred to these: 1. Their Resurrection; which simply
considered in it self, is not the Privilege of the Saints, but Resurrection of
life; to the wicked appertains the Resurrection of condemnation. 2. Their
Glory in heaven.


The Signs of certainty of heavenly Communion with God, set down in the first
Epistle of John: 1. Remission of sins. 2. The sanctifying Spirit. 3. Holiness
and uprightness of heart and life. 4. Perseverance in Knowledge and Obedience
of the Gospel.


What is meant by Gods communicating himself to, and dwelling among his Saints
and people: 1. The effect and efficacy of his Presence, whereby he possesses
and governs the Faithful, which are his Temple to dwell in, enlightening them
to know, and guiding them to practice his Will. 2. That his Presence is
perpetual, permanent and continual. 3. The manner of his Presence, not by the
infiniteness of his power, as he is present with all his creatures, to sustain
and uphold them, but by his Grace and gracious effects uniting us to Christ,
Regenerating us to be lively members of his body.


The presence of Gods grace is twofold; viz. 1. Privately, after a secret manner
hid from the eyes of the world: This is in crosses and tribulations, wherewith
God suffers the Elect to be afflicted and exercised. 2. Publicly, when as
God does declare and manifest the presence of his grace in the Elect, so as the
wicked are compelled to acknowledge his Divine Power and Presence in them.


The Duties required of the Saints by virtue of their communion with Christ,
and among themselves; viz. 1. Confidence in Christ, Heb. 3.6. 2. Subjection
answerable to his manner of governing us, Matthew. 6.10. 3. A cleansing of our
selves from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, 2 Cor. 7.1. 1 Cor. 6.15. 4. A
conformity unto the Image of Christ in true holiness and righteousness, Ephesians.
4.24. 5. Heavenly affections, Col. 3.1, 2. where our Head is, there ought our
heart also to be. 6. Courage against death, Luke 12.4. Heb. 11.35. seeing that
in death we are Christ's, what cause have we to fear it. 7. Love to the
Brethren; without which it is impossible to have any communion with the Saints.
8. A mutual sympathy and fellow-feeling, as Fellow Members of that body whereof
Christ is Head.


Motives to be Spiritually united unto Christ; viz. 1. The Excellency of it; we
shall live with him as our elder Brother perpetually in the heavens. 2. The
Profit of it; we are freed thereby from Sin, Hell, Death and Damnation, Romans
8.1. 3. The Necessity of it: For 1. Without this Union we are strangers from
God. 2. All our Happiness and Salvation depends on it. 3. Without it the
Redemption by Christ does us no good. 4. We cannot be saved without it, but
must necessarily and unavoidably perish for ever.



The Signs to approve this Union are the effects of it; viz. 1. To deny our
selves. 2. To mortify the deeds of the flesh. 3. To raise us to newness of
life. 4. To be weaned from this world, and to seek Christ. 5. To knit our
selves in the Unity of Faith and Hope toward Christ, and love toward men.


This Union of Christ with his Members, and of his Members mutually among
themselves, is confirmed by many places of Scripture, as Joh. 15.5. 1 Cor.
6.17. and 12.13. 1 John 4.13. whence appears the gross absurdity of those men,
who fancy this Communion to be a Subsistence or personal being of Christ's body
among our bodies, or of our bodies mingled with his; which is also sufficiently
refuted by that frequent comparison of the Head and the Members: for those are
coherent and grow together, but are not in a mixture, nor mingled one with
another: Whence also we may easily judge of that Communion which is in the
Sacraments.

Rome makes this Spiritual Union
A Carnal Corporal confusion:
The Worldling thinks this Holy Mystery
A Paradox of too much Piety.
But all the Saints who sympathize in Faith,
Know what the Apostle to the Corinths says,
How by one Spirit we are all Baptized
Into one Body; 1 Cor. 12.13.
which must be agniz'd
By all the Faithful, for it paints
The sweet Communion of the blessed Saints.
. 11. The forgiveness of Sins.
BY which Article is understood, That all our sins, wants and imperfections,
Original and Actual, as well in the committing of evil, as in the omitting of
good, in thought, word and deed, are covered, healed and released, through the
Righteousness of Christ imputed unto us: which being apprehended by faith, and
applied unto us, does not only make them as if they had never been, but also
justifies and discharges us, causing us to appear blameless and spotless in
the sight of God. This forgiveness of Sins comprehends under it, as it were
in a short sum, all the Mercies of God, Isa. 40.1. Psalm. 32.1, 2.7. it being
the Will of God, which to the Faithful and Elect imputes not any sin, and
therefore does in like sort love them, as if they had never sinned, and
delivers them from all punishment of sin, and gives them Eternal life
freely, for the Intercession and Merit of Jesus Christ the Son of God, our
Savior and Mediator: So that Remission of sins is from God only; the Ministers
indeed and the Church, are said to remit sins, but only as they are signifiers
and declarers of Gods Remission, when according to the Commandment of God, the
Church denounces to the Repentant: And one Neighbor remits Trespasses unto
another, as concerning the personal pardoning of the offense; but God only
freeth us from the guilt of sin, by his own Authority, and that freely in
respect of us, though it cost Christ full dear. Now the only ground upon which
we are persuaded of the forgiveness of our sins, should be, That we have
Christ; For he that has the Son has life.

This is the greatest of all the Promises, in laying hold whereof, the
understanding must be rightly informed what ground a man has to do it, not in
a confused manner without a clear knowledge of the progress of Faith; and then
it is the work of God only, to draw the will to take the Promises, after that
the understanding rightly apprehends them, for both these are required in a
justifying Faith. From all which it appears, That it is not a Doctrine of Pride
and Presumption (as the Synagogue of Rome teaches) to believe the Remission of
our own sins; for generally to believe that God forgiveth sin, or that some men
have their sins forgiven, is no Privilege of the Church, but the common faith
of the Devils, James 2.19. All the Articles contain the confession of a special
Faith, and a particular application to our selves. As I must believe God the
Father to be my Creator, the Son my Redeemer, the Holy Ghost to be my
Sanctifier; so I am bound to believe the Remission of my own sins, the
Resurrection of my own body, and that life everlasting shall be given to me:
This special Faith must be the Faith of us all, Gal. 2.20.

The forgiveness of our sins is known by these two signs; viz. 1. By an humble
and hearty Confession of our sins unto God, wherein we must acknowledge all our
main sins, both Original and Actual, our guiltiness before God, and our just
desert of Damnation for the same. 2. By the rightly pacified Conscience, which
is done by Faith in the heart: And the Peace here meant, is such a Peace as
comes after War, after conflicts for sin, after knowledge of Gods displeasure
with thee, after the sense hereof, and after all this, a knowledge of
Reconciliation again. Now many in an evil estate live and dye peaceably; but
deceive not thy self, that is only because they were never acquainted with the
Doctrine of Justification and Sanctification, because they never saw the
danger: for to be sure that I am free from a danger, and not to know a danger,
is all one, and does breed a like confidence and security. Thus as it is a
great mercy to have a true and sound Peace: so to have a Peace not well
grounded and bottomed, is the most dangerous Judgment in the world. That thou
may therefore the better judge whether thou have this Sign of the
forgiveness of thy sin, know, That this Peace is threefold: 1. With God,
properly called Reconciliation; God in Christ at one with Man, Man through
Christ at one with God. 2. With our selves, when the conscience sanctified
cease to accuse, and the affections subject themselves to the enlightened
mind. 3. With our Christian Brethren.



Arguments to persuade us of the forgivenes of our sins, if we come unto
Christ: 1. By the Scripture-expressions so frequently ratifying this Truth. 2.
By Christ's Practice when he was on earth. 3. Otherwise Christ's Blood should be
shed in vain. 4. By the Example of others pardoned. 5. Else no flesh should be
saved. 6. God should not else be worshipped and served. 7. By the infiniteness
of Gods Mercy.


The universality of Gods Promises touching the forgiveness of sins, is
threefold: 1. Without exception of Time; for, At what time soever a sinner
shall repent him of his sins, I will put away his iniquity, says the Lord. 2.
Without exception of sins; for, Albeit your sins were as scarlet, they shall be
made as white as snow, Isa. 1. 3. Without exception of person; for, Whosoever
shall depart from his wicked ways, and turn unto God, he will receive him.


The Duties to be performed of us, in believing the forgiveness of sins to the
faithful; viz. 1. To pray unto God earnestly every day, above all things of
this world, for the pardon of our sins, because this is so great and wonderful
a grace. 2. To love the Lord and our Savior Jesus Christ with all our hearts,
and with all our might, because God is the Author of this great grace, Christ
Jesus has merited the same for us. 3. To break off all our sins by
Righteousness, and not continue any longer therein, because we have been enough
endangered through sin, and are still in the same danger, if we continue in it.
4. Not to have in any account the Popes Indulgence for sins, but to abhor his
Blasphemous Pardon for them, seeing this is in Gods power only.


Four Grounds of possibility of Pardon, be the sin never so great: 1. That the
Mercy of God is infinite, yea above all his Works. 2. Men of years living in
the Church of God, and knowing the Doctrine of Salvation, shall not be
condemned simply for their sins, but for continuing and lying in them. 3. It
pleases God many times to leave men to themselves, and to suffer them to
commit some sin that wounds Conscience; but yet we may not hence think that
he is the Author thereof, but our own depraved Nature. 4. The Promises of God
touching Remission of sins and life eternal, in respect of Believers, are
general; and in regard of all and every man, indefinite.


This Doctrine of forgiveness of sins does teach us, 1. To acknowledge our
selves before God to be grievous sinners, to have godly sorrow for them, and to
seek pardon by daily Prayer for the forgiveness of them. 2. To have a
circumspect care and fear not to offend God at any time, yea a most earnest
desire to please him better then we have done, Psalm. 103.3, 4. Joh. 5.14. 3. To
return all praise and thankfulness to God for this so infinite Mercy, which
appears in nothing more then in the forgiveness of our sins. 4. To show back
again our love toward our heavenly Father, according to the measure of his love
toward us; the greater sins he has pardoned, the greater love should be
returned. 5. That the receiving of this Mercy from God, must work in us mercy
toward our brethren, Luke 6.36. Ephesians. 4.32. Col. 3.13.


The sum of this Article may be this, Remission of sin is Gods Will, not
imputing to the Elect, to all of them, and to them only, their sins, but
Christ's Righteousness: which Remission of sins is the work of all three Persons
of the Deity, granted for Christ's Intercession and Merit, but freely in respect
of us, and is received by Faith, through the working of the Holy Ghost, upon
our Conversion and Repentance.

You that are skilled in Physiognomy,
Have ye observed in men Condemned to dye,
How to the life they do resemble Death,
Or's if they lived by Artificial breath?
But, traveling to their Execution, say,
A Pardon overtakes them in the way,
How then the Scene is altered, they survive
Themselves, and seem to be now twice alive.
Draw the Curtain; Read, The Gospel says,
The Pardon's sealed, and it is ours by Faith.
. 12. The Resurrection of the Body.
THe Resurrection of the Flesh, is a restoring of the substance of our Bodies
after Death, even of the same matter whereof they now consist, and a reviving
and quickening of the same bodies with life incorruptible, by the same Immortal
Soul whereby they now live, which God will work by Christ in the end of the
world, by his Divine Virtue and Power: which restoring also shall be of the
Elect unto the Eternal Glory of God, but of the Reprobate unto Eternal Pains.
Thus although the body after death lie rotting in the Grave, yet at the last
day it shall be raised again by Gods great Power; and being joined to the Soul,
shall stand before Gods Judgment Seat, to give account of all it has done,
whether good or evil, and be rewarded accordingly. When Christ as Man (for thus
only he can remove from place to place, his Godhead ever filling all places)
shall come down visibly and openly, with great Glory, and Troops of Angels
about him, to Judge those that shall be then living, for the world shall be
full of people even to the hour of his coming; and then the Dead being raised
out of their Graves, even all from the first Adam, shall be joined with the
living (who shall only in stead of dying be changed) and thus all people
together, of all Countries and Nations, shall be presented before his Tribunal,
to receive Sentence according to the Equity, yea and Justice of his Gospel,
whether of Absolution, to pass into the Kingdom of his Father, or of
Condemnation, into the Kingdom of Hell, with the Devil and his Angels for ever.

Now though amongst those that dye, some are crooked through Age, some tender
Infants, some Blind, and some Lame, yet at the Resurrection these weaknesses
shall be done away to the faithful, and strength, perfection and comeliness
shall be to every one of them. The bodies indeed of the Elect shall rise in the
same substance as the bodies of the Reprobate, but diverse in quality, not to
be corrupted or altered any more: And these qualities of the bodies of the just
after the Resurrection, shall be Clarity, Mat. 12. Impassibility, 1 Cor. 15.
Agility, Wisd. 4. and Subtilty; now the condition of the unjust shall be quite
contrary to the blessed: So that although the Resurrection is one of the
Privileges which the Saints, by virtue of their Union with Christ, receive
after death, yet Resurrection simply in it self considered, is not the
Privilege of Saints, but Resurrection of life; to the wicked appertains the
Resurrection of condemnation. The benefit of Resurrection, arises from the
Glory which follows thereupon in Heaven, where the Saints shall shine as
Precious Stones, Rev. 21.11. yea, as the Firmament, Dan. 12.3. as the Stars and
as the Sun, Mat. 13.43. be like Christ himself, 1 John 3.2. and appear with him
in glory, Col. 3.4. This glory of the Saints extends both to Soul and Body,
to the whole person: In regard of their Souls, they shall be all glorious
within, Psalm. 45.13. for they are Spirits of just men made perfect, Heb. 12.23.
perfect knowledge, wisdom, and all manner of purity shall be in them, 1 Cor.
13.12. In regard of their Bodies, they shall be fashioned like to Christ's
glorious body, Phil. 3.21. and that in Incorruption, Immortality, Beauty,
Brightness, Grace, Favor, Agility, Strength, and the like, such as indeed the
tongue of Men or Angels is not able to express: Suffice it to our ravished
Admiration, That the Saints, in regard of their persons, shall there be
advanced to the Honor and Dignity of Christ, so far as they are capable of it.
The Resurrection we are to hope for, as it is an effect of Gods Counsel; and to
believe it, as it is the Counsel it self, and Purpose of God.

Touching the Resurrection of the Flesh, know, 1. That we shall rise with the
self same bodies, 1 Cor. 15. Phil. 3. Job 19. 2. That our bodies shall then be
incorruptible. 3. That the good and evil shall rise, with all and every part of
the body. 4. That being risen, they never dye more.


Touching the Resurrection we acknowledge, 1. That our bodies are all frail and
weak, and how many years soever they continre, yet fall to the ground they
shall at last, even as they were taken out of it. 2. That howsoever or
whenever they fall, yet they shall be raised again by a supernatural Power,
the Souls being reunited unto them. 3. That all this shall be in the last day,
together, in a moment, at the sound of a Trumpet, and not some at one time,
some at another. 4. That being thus raised they must come to Judgment, all the
secretest things that ever they did being laid open, and the hidden things of
all hearts being manifested.


The Resurrection proved by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 1. If there be no
Resurrection, then Christ is not risen from the dead, 1 Cor. 15.13, 15, 16. but
he is already risen, Romans 6.9. And if the Head be risen, then shall the Members
also rise. 2. If no Resurrection, then of all men the Believers were most
miserable, ver. 19. for their portion in this life is mourning, whilst the
world rejoices, Joh. 16.20. But they are not most miserable, for Christ has
pronounced them Blessed, Mat. 5.4, 6, 10, 11. 3. If there should be no
Resurrection of the godly from death to life, then the first Adam should be
more powerful and mighty then the second; so that the second Adam should be
impotent and weak, if he should not be able to deliver them from the jaws of
death. 4. All our enemies, and the enemies of Christ, are to be taken clean
away, and made subject to Christ and to us; the last of which is death, 1 Cor.
15.26. 5. If there were no Resurrection of the flesh, then the Epicures and
Libertines taught well, That we should follow our pleasures and delights in
this life, ver. 32, which were a damnable pernicious Doctrine to be taught and
heard in the Church of God, opening a gap to all profaneness, and shutting up
all practice of Piety.


The duties required of us in acknowledging the Resurrection: 1. To live as
those that expect the Resurrection, and not like those who live as if they
thought they should ever continue in this world; for we must all dye or be
changed. 2. Not to live as they that deny the Resurrection, whose hope is only
in this world, not in surfeiting and drunkenness, chambering and wantonness,
but in sobriety, temperance and chastity. 3. To keep a good Conscience before
God and men; because at the day of the Resurrection every Conscience shall be a
Book opened, and all the world shall read, whether it be good or bad. 4. Both
to abstain from judging and censuring others, and to neglect men's judging of
us, if so be our offenses judge us not; because there is one Judge of all, and
it is such Presumption to take his Office out of his hands, in judging these to
be Hypocrites, these Reprobates, and these damned Creatures, that whosoever uses
it, shall not escape the Judgment of God, Romans 2.1. which follows on the
Resurrection. 5. To bear all our bodily imperfections and sicknesses patiently,
because in the Resurrection all shall be done away, weakness shall be strength,
deformity shall be beauty, Natural shall be Spiritual. 6. To bear patiently all
crosses and injuries in this world, not seeking to revenge our selves, because
the time shall come when all wrongs shall be righted. 7. Not to suffer our
hearts to be taken up with any earthly thing, but to have our hearts still set
upon the New Heaven and the New Earth, the glory whereof abides for ever and
ever. 8. To speak of Gods praises with our Tongues, with our hands to work the
thing that is good, with our feet to run to Religious Exercises, with our
mouths to glorify God in daily Prayer, with our ears to hearken to his holy
Word, with our bodies to practice sobriety, with our eyes to be shut from
wanton looks, and to serve God with all our Members, because they shall all
rise again, be honored, and become Spiritual. 9. To be ever vigilant and
watchful, because we know not when our change shall be, and because the coming
of the Lord will be sudden.


Again, beside Paul's proofs of the Resurrection, to the Corinths, and
Testimonies of Scripture, Job 19.25. John 5.28. John 6.40. Reasons may thence
be drawn to confirm this truth: 1. God promises eternal life not to the Soul
only, but also to the body of the godly; and contrarily, to the ungodly he
threatens eternal Punishment and pains both of soul and body; and these
Promises and Threatenings of God must be fulfilled, for the certainty of them is
unchangeable: but they could not be fulfilled, if the dead should not rise. 2.
The Mercy of God is perfect, as which extends it self to the whole man, and
which will have us wholly saved; therefore our bodies also shall rise again. 3.
The perfect Justice of God requires, that the same wholly whereby they sin,
should be punished with eternal pains; but the wicked both in their whole body
and in their soul do sin, therefore their bodies also must be raised again. 4.
Christ is a perfect Savior, because he has saved and reconciled to God whole
Man; therefore our corrupt body also shall be raised by Christ. 5. God is the
God of the whole Man, not of a part only. This Reason Christ uses against the
Sadduces, Mat. 22.31. 6. God published his Law unto Man after the Fall;
therefore he will have man once keep it, but that is not done in this life,
therefore it shall be done in the life to come, and therefore men shall rise
again.


The comfort we have by our Resurrection; viz. 1. Our souls after they shall
depart out of our bodies, shall presently be taken up to Christ, Luke 23.43.
Phil. 1.23. 2. Our flesh being raised up by the power of Christ, shall be again
united to our souls, and shall be made like to the glorious body of Christ, 1
Cor. 15.53.


The use our Faith may make of the Resurrection: 1. Our Faith may herein
comfort us in all distresses whatsoever. 2. It will mitigate the sorrow we
entertain for the dead. 3. It will lessen our fear of death, while we believe a
better life after death. 4. It will make us swift to good works, and to deserve
well of those with whom we are to have eternal Society hereafter. 5. It will
withhold us from evil, that we defile not our souls and bodies, preserved by
the Blood of Christ, to live with God, Angels and Saints.


Isreal's descent into the Red Sea, and the Lords deliverance of them thence,
The flourishing of Aarons Rod, Ezekiels Vision of dead bones, The Jews
Captivity in, and deliverance from Babylon, and Jonahs preservation in and from
the Belly of the Whale, are all Types of the Resurrection: And if the Doctrine
of the Resurrection be shaken and overturned, then all Religion is pulled up by
the Roots; let us therefore beware of such Vipers as lurk in the bosom of the
Church. There were even among the people of God Sadduces, that taught that man
perished wholly, and that after death there should be no rising or returning to
life, but that he perished as the Beast, Mat. 22.23. And in the Church of
Corinth some were found, which said, There is no Resurrection of the dead, 1
Cor. 15.12. Some have confessed indeed the Immortality of the soul (so also did
some of the Heathen) but touching the Resurrection, they have fancied it to be
in this life, and not after death; as if the Resurrection were nothing else but
Regeneration, a dying to sin, and rising again to newness of life; or not
unlike to Hymeneus and Philetus, who said, That the Resurrection was already
past, 2 Timothy 2.18. This Heresy, for its continuance, is not a little beholding
to the Family of Love, who hold that Heaven and Hell are in this life, and no
other Resurrection of the body, or day of Judgment, or coming of Christ, then
in this world: Nor is it much less beholding to the Anabaptists, who deny that
the same bodies which now we have, and shall lie in the dust, shall ever rise
again; but hold, That God at the second coming of Christ will make us new
bodies: This is to maintain a New Creation of new bodies, and to deny the
Resurrection of the former. But all those Heresies we are to abandon, and to
let our Faith close with the Will of God, revealed in his Word, as we tender
the benefit we expect by the Resurrection.

You that are crumbled into Dust, or gave
Your living Bodies to a fiery Grave;
Or say those Corpse, which should the Worms have fed,
The Fin-wing'd scaly Creatures nourished,
Converting Flesh to Fish: Grant this, and shall
Those Bodies we may now just Nothing call
Arise again? It Is so: The Scripture says,
They shall, and Reason must give place to Faith.
Who could raise seed to Abraham of Stones,
Can re-incarnate Dust and rotten Bones.
13. And Life Everlasting. Amen.
BY Life Everlasting, is meant that ever-enduring happiness, and all those joys
which the Lord imparteth to all his Elect in the world to come; not only Life
in, but Joy; not only Joy, but Riches; not only Riches, but Glory; and all
these not in some measure, but in excess; not mixed, but absolute; without
grief, without want, without dishonor; not by intermission and fits, but
continually; not after some long time to end, but everlastingly. This is the
blessed estate of the faithful in the world to come, without end or misery, in
joys unspeakable in body and soul; that habitation or dwelling of God in Angels
and Men by the Holy Ghost, and the true knowledge of God, his Will and all his
Works, kindled by the same Spirit in their hearts, and true and perfect
Righteousness and Wisdom, that is a perfect conformity and correspondence of
their will and powers and operations, with the Mind and Will of God; as also a
joy resting on God, and a sufficiency of all good things in God, as touching
both soul and body, which shall never be interrupted, hindered, or have an end,
which is given to all the Elect, and to them only, Joh. 10.28. Now as they are
Elected, so they are but chosen to Eternal life: but as they are converted, so
they are in part admitted unto it, and begin to be put into possession of it.
Thus the souls of the faithful departed, do in a most happy and blessed estate
tarry and wait for their full deliverance and Redemption, in the Resurrection
and Glorification of their bodies; in the mean time resting from their labors,
being in the hand of God, the true Paradise and Kingdom of Christ, are received
of him, and gathered to the souls of the faithful which are perfected, and to
Abraham the Father of all which believe. Whence this Article is added in our
Creed, to signify, That the just shall not rise again to misery, or to a
momentary felicity, but to eternal blessedness: The main difference betwixt our
estate in this world and in the world to come, being, That here we must believe
what we know but in part; there we shall perfectly know whatsoever is to be
believed.

The comfort which the faithful take in this Article of Everlasting Life, is,
That forasmuch as they feel already in their hearts the beginning of
Everlasting life, 2 Cor. 5.2, 3. it shall at length come to pass, That after
this life they shall enjoy full and perfect bliss, wherein they shall magnify
God for ever: which blessedness, neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard,
neither has any man in thought conceived it, 1 Cor. 2.9. and which life we
begin to live, the soul enters into it at the time of every faithful ones
bodily death, and the body also at the time of the general Resurrection; for
there is no sleeping of the soul, as some dream, neither any other place to
keep it in, nor ever was.

To believe everlasting life, is to be assuredly and certainly persuaded, 1.
That after this life, there shall be also a life wherein the Church shall be
glorified, and God magnified of her everlastingly. 2. That I also am a Member
of this Church, and therefore partaker of everlasting life. 3. That I also in
this life have and enjoy the beginning of life eternal.


Life is threefold: 1. Of Nature; wherein the good and bad promiscuously live
together. 2. Of Grace; wherein only the Sons of God in the Spiritual Kingdom
of Christ live in this life; it is the same with that death whereby they dye to
sin. 3. Of Glory, in the blessed presence of God for ever: Contrary to that
death wherewith the bodies and souls of the wicked shall be tormented eternally.


That is Everlasting 1. Which has neither beginning nor ending: So God is
everlasting. 2. Which has no beginning, but has an ending: So the Decrees of
God. 3. Which has a beginning, but shall have no end; as everlasting life.


Three degrees of eternal life: 1. In this world, when we begin to repent and
believe in Christ, and have true peace of Conscience. 2. In death, for that
cuts off all sins, both Original and Actual. 3. When body and soul reunited, go
both together into everlasting Glory.


We may claim to our selves everlasting life by a double Right through Christ;
viz. 1. Because for us he has fulfilled the whole Law. 2. By Right of
Inheritance; for Christ being made ours, we are the children of God, Romans 8.17.


How far we are in this life made partakers of heaven and everlasting life: 1.
The purchase of it is made; for Christ by his Blood has purchased it. 2. We
have received the first fruits of it, as Peace of Conscience, Joy in the Holy
Ghost, free access unto the Throne of Grace with confidence in Christ, and the
like. 3. We are actually entered into the Kingdom of Grace, which is the
beginning and a part of the Kingdom of Glory. 4. We have the earnest of the
Spirit, as a Pledge and Pawn till we come to the full possession of the
purchased Inheritance. 5. Christ our Head has full and actual possession;
whereupon we being Members of his body are in him exalted and set in heavenly
places.


In this life not only we may, but we ought also to be assured of everlasting
life, otherwise we shall never have it: And we may thus by these infallible
signs be assured of it; viz. 1. By Faith, by a full persuasion of the good will
of God toward us. 2. By the beginning of true Repentance. 3. By the Peace of
Conscience, by a desire of, and joy in God.


Eternal life is called a Rest; and that for these two Reasons: 1. Because then
and there we shall Rest from all our works; that is, from our sins: for then we
shall sin no more, but shall know God, even as we are known. 2. We shall Rest
from all troubles and miseries of this life, Rev. 14.13. hence it is called
Abraham's bosom, Luke 16.22, 23. which in the faithful is even in this life
begun by the outward Ministry of the Word, and the inward Ministry of the
Spirit; the consummation whereof hereafter shall never be given, to whom the
beginning thereof, that is, Faith and Conversion, has not arrived in this life.


The life of Life Everlasting, is, the Beatifical Vision, or the perfect Vision
of God, when Gods Elect shall see him as he is, 1 John 3.2. Yet that we be not
deceived herein, we must know that perfect sight is twofold; viz. 1. Simple
Perfect Sight, when man sees a thing wholly as it is in it self; and thus God
is not seen by the mind of man. 2. Comprehensive Perfect Sight, when the
creature sees God, so far forth as it is capable of his knowledge; and thus
shall men see God in the world to come perfectly, and be filled therewith,
though they know him not wholly as he is in himself; even as a vessel cast into
the Sea may be perfectly full of water, though it receive not all the water in
the Sea.


The duties of this faith are these: 1. Carefully to break off those sins, the
doers of which are expressly threatened, that they shall never enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Gal. 5.19. 2. To strive to enter, and to
walk on in the way that leads to everlasting life, and never to go out of it
to our dying day, and this is the way of good works, Joh. 5.29. 3. To use the
remembrance of eternal life, as a salve against all sores, as a Cordial to
comfort our hearts against our greatest heaviness. 4. To pray that this time
might be hastened wherein we shall enter into life, and even to rejoice when we
see it approach to any of us in particular.


Amen, signifying verily, certainly or undoubtedly, is added, for these
Reasons: 1. To show that we do not in word only believe those things, whereof
we have made confession, but from our very hearts. 2. Not waveringly, but
certainly, and without doubting. 3. Not as if we were secure for our firm and
steadfast belief of these things, but earnestly craving this Faith at the hands
of God; and thus it is as much as So be it.


Amen in the close of our Prayers (as well as of this Confession) does not
only express our desire of the things we ask, but also testifies our Faith in
assurance of Receiving them according to our lawful desire: So that it is not
here to be taken (as it is commonly) only for a bare assent of the people
answering the Minister in the Congregation, but as a declaration of Faith both
in Minister and People.

Here words are of no use, expressions vain,
The humblest fancy a presumptuous strain.
Bright Cherubins! a Quill from off your Wings
Might reach this Note; which should the low-tun'd strings
Of Mortal Tongues endeavor to express,
Would (if 't were possible) but strain it less:
And though the blessed Music of your Quire
We cannot understand, we may admire.
Meanwhile our Faith shall rest in Hope in this,
That know we shall, when we enjoy your Bliss.
CHAP. V.
. 1. The Decalogue.
THe Commandments were given about Two thousand five hundred years after the
Creation; not that men were left all this time without Law, for there was a Law
written in their hearts, Romans 2.14. but to make that more plain, which by the
corruption of Nature was become very dim and much defaced; so that as long as
men have been, there has also been a Law, although not expressed in words, yet
written in the heart: wherefore if it be well observed, we shall find, That
even before the giving of the Law, all the Precepts of the Ten Commandments
were in a manner known and acknowledged, though they require whatsoever was
commanded Adam in his Integrity, and whatsoever was commanded since, Genesis 2.16,
17. Exodus 20. The Law being that which God himself delivered to his people by
the hand of Moses, which also with his own finger he wrote in two Tables of
Stone, called The Moral Law, because it shows the Virtues to be followed, and
the Vices to be avoided; as also to distinguish it from the Ceremonial Law,
which comprehends the Ceremonies prescribed by God in the old Church; and
from the Judicial and Political Laws, which contain Judgments, and the
Penalties to be inflicted on the breakers of this Moral Law: The sum whereof is
this, The First Table, containing the four first Commandments, Commands all
the Duties which man owes to God; The Second Table, containing the six last
Commandments, commands all that Man owes to Man, according to the Will of
God. For the Commandments of the Latter Table are to be referred to the first,
that is to say, They are to be kept, not indeed so much for our Neighbors sake,
as for Gods sake, of whom they are commanded: the First Table being
immediately, the Second mediately referred unto God; the Commandments whereof
are not notwithstanding less then those of the First Table, but the principal
service of the First Table, is greater then the principal service of the
Second, Matthew. 22.37, 38.

Instances of Scripture proving that the Decalogue was in man's heart before it
was written in the two Tables of Stone: 1. The First Commandment was known unto
Abraham, when as almost in so many words the Lord said unto him, I am God
All-sufficient, stand before me, and be upright, Genesis 17.1. And Jacob said, Put
away the strange gods, Genesis 35.2. 2. The Second was also known unto Jacob, for
he purged his house from Idols when he was to build an Altar in Bethel, Genesis
35.2. Acknowledging hereby that this was a Corruption, which the true God would
be offended at. 3. The Third Abraham also seems to have well known, when he
swear by the true God unto Abimelech, to confirm his League, Genesis 21.23. And
Jacob, when he swear unto Laban by the fear of his father Isaac, Genesis 31.53. 4.
The Fourth is recorded by Moses to have been given in Paradise, Genesis 2.2, 3.
And is likewise set down in Exodus 16.23. 5. The Fifth Jacob showed in his
practice, when he followed his Fathers direction in taking a wife; and his
children by going at his command into Egypt; and Joseph's nourishing him there
in his old age: Shem and Japheth reverencing their Father Noah, are blessed;
but Ham scorning him, is cursed in his Son Canaan, Genesis 9.25, 26. 6. The Sixth
was written in Cain's Conscience, which made him cry, My sin is greater then
can be forgiven; and God expressly forbids it, Genesis 9.6. 7. The Seventh was
to be seen in the Sons of Jacob, when they said, Should he make our Sister a
whore? Genesis 34.31. In Joseph, when his Mistress tempted him, Genesis 39.9. and in
Judah, when he commanded Thamar to be burnt, Genesis 48.2. 8. The Eighth Laban
urges upon Jacob, Genesis 31.30. who acknowledges Death to be due for it, Genesis
45.5. And Jacobs Sons say, God forbid that we should steal, Genesis 44. 9. The
Ninth, Heathen Abimelech showed to be written in his heart, when he complained
of Abraham's false testimony touching his Wife, Genesis 20.9. and 26.9. And of
Isaac's for the like; yea, and Judah kept promise, not lying or deceiving, Genesis
38.20. 10. The Tenth Abraham shows to be written in his heart, when having
recovered the goods of Sodom, he coveted none of them being other men's; and it
was sin to look on a woman to lust after her, and punished even in Kings, Genesis
12.17. and 20.7.


The manner how this Law was given; viz. 1. There was great preparation three
days together, the people were sanctified according to the manner of those
times, by Washings and Purifyings: So let us prepare our selves by prayer,
before we come to hear the Lord speaking unto us in the Ministry of his holy
Word. 2. A strict charge was given them, That neither man nor beast on pain of
death should come near the Mount, whence the Law was to be delivered: how much
less mercy deserved the Transgressors of these glorious Laws? 3. The Lord
descended with great terror, the Trumpet sounding, the Earth shaking, and
Lightnings flying about: Showing with what fear of offending against those
weighty Laws they were to be received into the heart. 4. Almighty God himself
spoke all these words in the hearing of all the people, and afterward writ them
in two Tables of Stone with his own finger; intimating hereby the perpetuity of
them, and how stony-hard our hearts be, that the finger of God alone is able to
imprint them there. 5. When Moses had broken these two Tables, the Lord writ
the same words in two other Tables: So man's heart by Gods Creation had all the
Laws written in it, but after his Fall it was without any letter thereof in
effect, until that the Lord writ them anew. 6. At Moses his return from the
Lord with these Laws, his face did so shine, that the people were not able to
look on him till he veiled it; neither could the Jews, nor any of the Gentiles,
be able to see into the end of the Law, Christ Jesus, till the Lord took away
their vail of blindeness and hardness of heart, 2 Cor. 3.13, 14.


The Decalogue is divided after a threefold manner; viz. 1. It is divided by
Christ and Moses into two Tables; the former whereof comprise our duty toward
God immediately; the Second our duties toward God mediately. 2. It is divided
into Ten Commandments, whereof four are ascribed to the First, and six other
unto the Second Table. 3. It is divided according to the things themselves,
which are commanded or forbidden in the Decalogue; now generally is commanded
the Worship of God, and that which is contrary thereto is forbidden.


The worship of God, being that which is generally commanded in the Decalogue, is
1. Immediate, when Moral works are immediately performed unto God; which is 1.
Internal, which consists partly in this, that we worship the true God, and
that that be performed unto the true God, which is commanded in the first
Commandment; partly that the manner or form of Worship be right and lawful,
whether it be internal Worship or external; which Form is taught in the Second
Commandment. 2. External; which is 1. Private, which contains the private
Moral works of every one, which are always to be of every man in particular
performed; and this private Worship is delivered in the Third Commandment. 2.
Public, which consists in sanctifying of the Sabbath, and is delivered in
the Fourth Commandment.

2. Mediate, when Moral works are performed to our Neighbor, in respect of God,
delivered in the Second Table; which likewise is 1. External, which consists
partly in the duties of Superiors toward their Inferiors, and so of the
contrary of which duties (as also of Civil order comprised under them) is
spoken in the Fifth Commandment; partly in the duties of one Neighbor toward
another, which are ratified in the rest of the Commandments. 2. Internal, which
consists in the internal affection of the heart, being the very uprightness
of men's affections toward their Neighbor, which is to be included and
understood in all the former Commandments, and is prescribed in the Tenth and
last Commandment.



In what respect the Second Table is said to be like unto the First; viz. 1. As
touching the kind of the chief Worship; also in respect of the Ceremonial,
which are not the chief Worship of God. 2. As touching the kinds of Eternal
Punishment; because the transgression of both Tables meriteth eternal
punishment. 3. As touching the unseparable coherence of the Love of God and our
Neighbor; which love of God is declared and exercised by our love to our
Neighbor.


The Reasons for which obedience is to be yielded to the Second Table: 1. That
in this Obedience God himself may be worshipped, and our love toward him
showed by our love toward our Neighbor for his sake. 2. That by the love of
our Neighbor, our conformity with God may appear. 3. That the Society of
Mankind may be preserved, which was ordained of God for the celebration and
magnifying of his Name.


Certain Rules concerning the substance and meaning of the Decalogue in
general, and for Expounding the Commandments, viz. 1. The Moral Law or
Decalogue is to be understood according to the Interpretation of Scripture, not
according to the sense or judgment of man only, or of Moral Philosophy. 2.
The Decalogue requires in all the Commandments, obedience both external and
internal, charge the understanding, heart and affection; commands perfect
obedience, not in parts only, but also in degrees; not only in all the
duties, but also in the degrees of these duties. 3. The obedience of the First
Commandment must be the motive or final Cause of our obedience toward the rest
of the Commandments, otherwise it is not the Worship of God, but hypocrisy,
whatsoever we do. 4. We must above all things consider the drift or end of each
Commandment, for the end of the Law shows the meaning thereof, and by the end
we shall judge aright and easily of the means. 5. We must know, that the same
virtue is often in a diverse respect commanded in diverse Commandments; that
is, the same virtue is required for performing of obedience unto many
Commandments. 6. In Affirmative Commandments commanding Virtues, are
comprehended the Negative, forbidding the contrary Vices; so likewise in
Negative Commandments are comprehended the Affirmative Virtues. 7. We must take
heed that we restrain not the Commandments, and take them too straightly; for in
the General all the Specials, and in the chief Special, the next allied
Specials, and in the Effect the Causes be contained: So that under one kind
manifest are all of like sort, whether commanded or forbidden; yea, and the
Means whereby the things are done, are also commanded or forbidden. 8. The
Obedience or Commandments of the Second Table yield or give place to the
Obedience or Commandments of the First Table: The Commandments of the First
Table are absolutely to be kept, and for themselves, the other of the Second
Table are to be kept for the First: Though they are alike as concerning the
kind of Moral Worship, the kind of punishment, and as concerning their
coherence or connection. 9. Every Negative Commandment does bind always, and
at, and unto all times: Every Affirmative Commandment does only bind always,
but not at and unto all times also. 10. Howsoever the least Commandment is not
so small, but the breach thereof deserves Eternal Death; yet the breaches of
some Commandments are greater and more heinous then of others. 11. There is so
near a relation betwixt all the Commandments of the Moral Law, that whosoever
observes all saving only in one point, is guilty of all, James 2.10. Because
one and the same is the Author of them all. 12. To the breach of every
Commandment there is annexed a curse, although it be not expressed.


The use of the Commandments: 1. To lay open our Miseries, Romans 7.7, 9, 13, 14,
18. 2. To whip us to Christ, Gal. 3.24. 3. To be our Guide in all things that
we are to do when we are come to him, Mat. 19.17, 18.


There are certain Libertine Antinomies who contend, That the Law is not to be
taught in the Church of Christ, misinterpreting the Sacred Text, to cloak their
Rebellion against the Law of God, with a pretense of Obedience to the Spirit of
Regeneration: But this Heresy was long since refuted, Mat. 5.17. Romans 3.31.

The Law's voice was Thunder, the Tables Stone;
Break one and all, who keeps not all keeps none:
Most sweetly tuned they to each other are;
In Practice then thou may not make them jar:
Obedience they do for each other call;
A joint Obedience is required in all.
But who can keep the Law? Who Is just an hour?
Frail Man, had thou a Will, where is thy Power?
Though since the Fall this is thy power above,
Yet is the Law fulfilled by Christ and Love.
The First COMMANDMENT.
. 1. I am the Lord thy God, Thou shall have no other gods but me.
THerefore thou shall have Me, that Jehovah, which have manifested my self in
the World by my Creation, Preservation, and Government thereof; that Jehovah,
which have declared my self in my Church by the Participation and Manifestation
of my self to be the true God, that God alone: Therefore Thou shall have none
other gods; that is, beside me the only true God: neither shall thou have them
before me; that is, in my sight, that is, in thy heart or elsewhere. Now not to
have the true God, is either to have no God, or to have more Gods, or another
then the known God, or not to acknowledge God to be such unto us as he is
manifested: Likewise not to trust in God, and to subject and submit our selves
unto God in true humility and patience, not to hope for all good things from
him alone, not to love and fear him, for we are here commanded to have the Lord
for our God, that is, to love him above all, to fear him above all, to put our
whole trust in him, and to make our prayers to him alone: And he only has no
other gods, who is so dead to the world, and does so adhere to God, that he is
neither puffed up with Riches, nor cast down with Poverty; nor swelled with
Honor, nor pined with Ignominy; nor made joyful by Life, nor afraid of Death:
but this suffices him, That he has God, knowing his Savior disdained both
Riches, and Glory, and Pleasure, and Life.

The Preface of this Commandment belongs to the whole Decalogue; and the
Commandment it self is mixed with a Negative Prohibition and an Affirmative
Command. The Duty enjoined, is, To have and to set up in our hearts and
practices the Lord Jehovah, and him only, for our God, which is the main and
principal scope of the whole Law: And he that will abstain from the breach of
this Commandment, must not with the Atheist deny him that gave him Being, nor
with the Ignorant neglect Divine Knowledge; nor with the Profane be
loose-minded toward Gods Worship; nor with the Covetous Epicures, Self-lovers
and Papists, rob God of his Honor. Now Atheism is a Monster in Nature, whereby
the Creature rises against the Creator, to disannul him, to make him without
Being, who gives Being to all; to pull him out of the Throne of Heaven, whose
Footstool is the Earth; to put down his Power, who by his Power alone upholdeth
all things: And this is when men do but in their hearts imagine that it is all
vanity which is spoken of God, or that there is no such God as the Word does
describe unto us: And Ignorance is the next door to Atheism; for where
Ignorance prevails, there can be but a poor deal of Love, little Confidence,
and simple Service done unto the Lord: And Profaneness is a Regardlesness of
God, when a man being about any villainy, remembers not, or cares not that he
is in Gods presence, nor is daunted by any lets in the way; also a
Regardlesness of the very Worship of God, when Prayer, the Word and Sacraments,
is not used at all, or without all reverence; it makes the persons infected
herewith, prefer any small worldly thing, either of Pleasure or Profit, before
heavenly things. Lastly, the Robbing of God of his Honor, is by Inward
Idolatry, or of the heart, when Creatures are there set up, where only is the
room of the Creator: Now he that desires to keep this Commandment, must
endeavor for the Virtues comprehended therein, and they are Knowledge of God,
Trust in God, Humility, Patience, Hope, The Love of God, and The Fear of God.

The Knowledge of God, is, Knowledge.
To judge of God as he has manifested himself in his Word and Works, and to be
moved up by that Knowledge to a Confidence, Love, Fear, and Worship of the true
God, Romans 10.14. Joh. 17.3. This true Knowledge of God is the principal part
and point of his Worship; and he may be known of reasonable Creatures, so far
forth as he will manifest himself to every one: which, if compared with that
whereby God knows himself, is to be accounted unperfect; but, if the degrees
thereof be considered in it self, it is also either perfect or imperfect, yet
not simply, but in comparison, that is, in respect of the Superior and Inferior
degree. The perfect Knowledge of God, is that in Creatures, wherein Angels and
Men in the Celestial life know God by a most clear and bright beholding of the
mind: The imperfect, is that whereby men in this life know God, though not so
much as they could at first before the Fall by the benefit of their Creation.
Now the ordinary means to know God, and which is prescribed unto us by God
himself, is by the study and meditation of heavenly Doctrine: wherefore we must
strive this way to know God, and not look for, from God, any extraordinary and
immediate Illumination, except he of himself offer it, and confirm it also unto
us by certain and evident Testimonies. And this Knowledge must be adorned with
Practice, without which it is not indeed Knowledge: Whence poor Christians are
better taught then great learned men without grace; for no man knows more
then he practices, because what knowledge soever a man has that he practices
not, is but a dead knowledge, an inefficacious knowledge; and indeed, Religion
is the Art of holy men, not of learned men: And as Knowledge thus without
Practice savors of Hypocrisy; so Practice without Knowledge tends to
Superstition, the Mother whereof is Ignorance.

To Trust in God, Faith.
is, To be unbottomed of thy self and of every Creature, and so to lean upon
God, that if he fail thee thou sinkest: And God does often defer deliverance
till the utmost extremity, for the trial of his peoples Faith, and to strip
them of other helps, that they may Trust in him, for till then we trust not in
him as we ought. So that Gods people run another course from other men (though
they have persecution here for their pains) because they trust in the living
God; And in a good Cause God has promised good Success, therein therefore we
are to be guided with as much confidence of safety (while we Rule our selves
therein according to Gods command) as if we had a Prophet immediately sent us
from God. Now the Reason why God is ready to help us, if we Trust in him, is,
Because this our Faith in him is an Acknowledging of, and an Attributing to his
Power; so that our Trusting in God engages him to help us, though commonly he
uses not to appear a Deliverer, till his people are brought to the very brink
of Ruin.

Humility is a Virtue, Humility.
whereby one man thinks better of another then of himself, it makes a man vile
in his own eyes; and this is one fruit of Faith: for where Christ comes to
dwell, he comes with a Light, to make a man see his sins, and what a creature
he is: Therefore the Spirit of true Christians, is a meek Spirit, they are
humble, gentle, and little in their own eyes; they set not up Pride and
Ambition, as other gods, in their hearts, but think basely of themselves, in
regard of their own sins and corruptions, and upon consideration thereof, are
content to give place unto others, and to yield of their own Right for the
maintenance of Peace. This is that true Knowledge of a man's own self, which
indeed is Necessary for man to have, because God will be known by his own
Image, which he engraved in man's Nature, and without it we neither aspire nor
attain to that end, to which we were created.

Patience is the Knowledge and Acknowledgement of Gods Majesty, Patience.
Wisdom, Justice and Goodness, resolving through a confidence in Gods Promises,
and so in hope of Gods assistance and delivering, to obey God in suffering
those adversities which he sends us, and wills us to suffer, neither in
respect of the grief which they bring, to murmr against God, or to do any
thing against his Commandments, but in the highest extremity to retain still
the confidence and hope of Gods assistance, and to ask deliverance of him; and
by this Knowledge and full persuasion of Gods Will, to mitigate and assuage our
grief. Thus Patience is a voluntary and continual suffering for the love of
Virtue and Honesty: Or, it is a Grace of the Spirit, flowing from Grace and
Hope, whereby we suffer things that are evil, that we forsake not those things
which are good, by which we may attain to those that are better. It is the
Keeper of all the other Graces, for when we become impatient of any good
quality, we presently fall a committing the contrary Vice.

Hope is a sure and certain expectation of Everlasting Life, Hope.
freely to be given for Christ's sake, and of a mitigation or asswagement of
present evils, and of a deverance from the same evils of this life, and an
expectation and looking for all Blessings necessary unto Salvation, according
to the Counsel and Will of God: which Hope springs from Faith; for it is an
expectation of such good things to come as God has promised and Faith
believed. In expectation especially consists the very nature of Hope, Romans
8.24. If we hope, we wait: The proper object of Hope, consists in good
things; herein it differs from Fear. These good things are not past nor
present, but to come, neither are nor have been seen; for, Hope which is seen
is no hope, Romans 8.23. They are such good things as God has promised, for true
Hope is termed The Hope of the Gospel, Col. 1.23. And such as Faith believes;
for, Faith is the ground of things hoped for, Heb. 11.1. And, By Faith we wait,
Gal. 5.5. Faith is the Mother, Hope the Daughter; Faith brings forth Hope, and
Hope nourishes Faith: for except a man hopes and waits for that which he
believes, his Faith will soon decay; and according to the quality and quantity
of Faith, is the quality and quantity of Hope. Thus Hope distinguishes the
Faith of Christians from the Faith of Devils and Reprobates, and from Temporary
Faith. A man has never Faith to believe, but he has Hope, which makes him
expect what he believes; yet true Hope may be mingled with Fear: for if there
be nothing but Hope, it is a sign that Hope is not good. This lively Hope makes
us labor for the accomplishment of what we believe, it keeps our heads above
the waves of Adversity, without which, of all men a Christian is most
miserable, 1 Cor. 15.19. it being simply and absolutely necessary to Salvation,
for where no Hope is, there is no Faith: And as it is true, That no man can
hope, except he first believe the Promises; so it is as true, That Faith is
necessarily upheld and nourished by Hope. Faith is Hopes Foundation, Hope
Faiths Nourishment; Faith believes the Promises, Hope waits for the fulfilling
of them; Faith believes, and is persuaded of life Eternal, Hope looks when
it shall be revealed: for this cause Paul says, We are saved by Hope, Romans
8.24.

The Love of God is a holy Disposition of the heart arising from Faith, Love.
whereby we cleave to the Lord, with a purpose of heart to serve him, and to
please him in all things: which Love is so Necessary to Salvation, as he that
has it not, is in a cursed and damnable condition; he is not in Christ if he
do not love, for there is a tie between all these, Faith, Repentance, Love,
therefore they are used promiscuously: And indeed, if we Love not God, we rob
him, for he bought us to be his; that is, to love him, otherwise we rob God of
our selves. Now the way to Love God, is, To pray earnestly, to acknowledge the
power of the Holy Ghost; to go to him, and say, Lord, of my self I am not able
to do it: This acknowledgement of the power of the Holy Ghost, is the way to
prevail; for unless the Holy Ghost kindle this fire of Love in us from Heaven,
we shall no more have it then cold water is able to heat it self: Though the
Preachers speak with the tongues of Angels, yet shall we not be brought to love
the Lord till he show himself to us, till he opens the cloud, and shows us the
Light of his countenance. It was Moses his Prayer, Show me thy Glory; that is,
thy Excellency, which is exceeding glorious: Moses asked not this to no
purpose, to satisfy his fancy, for then the Lord would not have heard him, but
that by the better knowing the Lord, he might love him the more; for a
principal means to the love of God, is the knowledge of God: and indeed,
therefore we love him not, because we know him not: This is the reason the
Angels and the Saints love him most, because they know him most; and why in
heaven when we shall be present with him, shall we love him so abundantly, but
because we shall then know him face to face.

The Fear of God, Fear.
is To acknowledge the infinite Anger of God toward sin, his great Power to
punish sin, his Wisdom and Justice, and that Right and Dominion which he has
over all Creatures: which Fear is a great part of the Worship of God, and one
infallible Sign of the true Religion; for that Religion is true, wherein God is
truly worshipped, and that is but one, and in it only men shall be saved:
Which true Christian Religion, is a Spiritual Band, whereby men in a certain
holy Reconciliation are made one with God, and are kept in his Love and Fear,
that at length they may be made partakers of his heavenly Glory, and of blessed
Life. And though all grant that to be the true Religion which has been
delivered by God himself, yet which may be that Religion delivered from above,
will never be agreed on amongst men, till our Lord Jesus returning to Judgment
decide the Controversy.

Now we must not understand this Fear to be a servile Fear, arising from a
knowledge, and an accusing of sin, and from a feeling of Gods Judgment and
Anger against sin, and is a shunning and hatred of God and Punishment, not of
sin; and is so much the greater, how much the more certain expectation there is
of everlasting Damnation, and how much the greater despair there is of the
Grace and Mercy of God; But the Fear required in this Commandment, is a Filial
Fear, such as Sons bear toward their Parents, who are sorry for the anger and
displeasure of their Father, and yet notwithstanding are always persuaded of
the love and mind of their Father toward them. So that the Fear of God in the
Regenerate in this life, is an acknowledging of sin and the wrath of God, and
an earnest grief for the sins committed, for the offending of God, and for
those calamities which by reason of sin both we and others sustain, with an
earnest desire of avoiding those evils by reason of the knowledge of that Mercy
which is showed unto us through Christ, Mat. 10.28. Thus God alone is the
proper object of Fear, for what fear is due to man, is due to him only in and
for the Lord, whose Image he bears more eminently by virtue of some Authority
or Dignity pertaining to him, which is to be feared: And the extent of this
Filial Fear of God is so large, as without it other holy Duties cannot be well
performed: yea, the whole Worship of God is often comprised under it. Thus Mat.
4.10. Christ expresses the Text, Deuteronomy. 6.13. And thus Mat. 15.9. Christ
expresses the Text, Isa. 29.13.

The Vices contrary to the Virtues in general, contained in this Commandment,
are chiefly these; viz. Atheism, Ignorance, Profaneness, Inward Idolatry,
Rebellion against God, Doubting of his Promises, Desperation, Impatience in
Adversity, Inconstancy in Gods Worship and our own Vocations, Falling away from
the Truth of the Gospel, Rashness, which adventureth upon unnecessary dangers,
under a color of Gods Providence, Pride, Disdain, Ambition, and
Faint-heartedness in good things: All which are forbidden in this Commandment,
yea all particular Vices specially contrary to each Virtue commanded therein:
The chief of both which are here again touched, in the same order they have
been already glanced at: And first of Knowledge.

The Principal Virtue required in this Commandment, is the knowledge of God,
which in particular has four Branches: 1. To know that there is a God; and
this is known either by the book of Nature, The Works of God, or the book of
Grace, Confessing it in our hearts by actions agreeable, as well as by language
in our mouths, else we sin in Atheism. 2. To know the true God, else we sin in
Idolatry. 3. To know this true God is but one, else we sin in Polytheism. 4. To
know of what nature this true only God is, else we shall do naught but sin.


The Knowledge of God is either 1. Simply and absolutely Perfect, whereby God
alone knows himself: Or 2. Not simply and absolutely perfect, whereby Angels
and blessed men know indeed the whole and entire Nature and Majesty of God, as
being most simple; but they know it not wholly, that is, they so far only
understand it, as he reveals it unto them, and their Natures are capable of.


So likewise the Knowledge of God is twofold: 1. General, to know God to be
such an one as he has revealed himself in his Word to be: without this we
cannot be saved, yet this alone does not save. 2. Particular, to know him to be
such an one to me in particular, as he has revealed himself in his Word to be
in general: This requires Faith.


Again, the Knowledge of God is twofold; viz. 1. Literal, which has been in
men either from the Creation, or is wrought in their minds of the Holy Ghost
by the Word, which has not accompanying it an endeavor and desire of framing
and conforming themselves unto the Commandments of God. This is only a
Speculative or Theoretical Knowledge, informing the judgment, but not
reforming the mind; and this a wicked man may have in a greater measure then
some Christians, yet notwithstanding may be damned: for this Knowledge is true
only in regard of the Object, but is false in regard of the Effect. 2.
Spiritual, or true, lively and effectual Knowledge, which is kindled by the
Holy Ghost in our minds according to the Word and by the Word, working in the
will and heart an inclination and desire to know and do what God commands.
This is Saving or Practical Knowledge, when the whole man is transformed into
the obedience required, and labors to practice what he knows of God.


The Imperfect Knowledge of God, which men have in this life, is of two sorts:
1. Christian or Theological; received from the Doctrine of the Prophets and
Apostles. 2. Philosophical; received from the Principles and general Rules
naturally known unto men, and from the beholding of the works of God in the
nature of things.


The true Knowledge of God necessarily required of us, consists in these
points; viz. 1. We must confess and acknowledge him to be the Sovereign and
highest good, Dan. 4.32. 2. We must depend upon him, and put our whole trust in
him alone, not in Men or Angels. 3. We must give him thanks for all his
Blessings, not only in prosperity, but in adversity also, by doing what he
commands, and avoiding what he forbids. 4. We must seek the knowledge of
his Ways and Word, and increase in the knowledge thereof. 5. We must draw near
unto him in time of need, and at all times, as to the Fountain of all goodness,
with all reverence and humility, by hearty and fervent prayer. 6. We must yield
all obedience unto him in his Word, without which our Hearing the Word will but
hasten and further our Condemnation.


Rules directing us what our Knowledge ought to be: 1. Our knowledge must be
according to our Age, 1 Cor. 14.20. 2. It ought to be according to the means
that God has afforded us, Heb. 5.12. Luke 12.48. 3. It must be answerable to
the gifts that God has given us, Mat. 25.14, 15. Luke 12.13. 4. We must all
labor to have so much, as that we may be able to give an account of our Faith,
when we shall be called thereunto.


We must practice what we know of God, for these Reasons: 1. Knowledge without
Practice, procures the greater Judgment of God upon us, Luke 12.47. 2. Without
Practice we must never look to come to Gods Kingdom, Mat. 7.21. 3. By Practice
we do glorify God our heavenly Father, Joh. 15.8. 4. By this Practice we know
that we are Gods good Trees, Mat. 7.17. 5. If we Practice not what we know, we
are more inexcuseable then before we had knowledge, 2 Pet. 2.21.


The way or means to attain unto sound and saving Knowledge; viz. 1. Earnest
Prayer to God for the help of his Spirit to assist us, to illuminate our
understandings, and to teach us how to profit aright by Reading the Scriptures,
Psalm. 119.18. and 66. 2 Chronicles. 1.10. James 1.5. 2. A careful and reverent
Hearing of the Word of God, 1 Cor. 1.21. Romans 10.14. 3. To exercise our selves
constantly in the Reading of the Scripture; To search the Scripture, 2 Timothy
3.15. Psalm. 19.7. 4 Godly Conference one Christian with another, especially
with the Pastor, Mal. 2.7. A sober and reverent Conference about the Scriptures
with others, to minister help and comfort one to another. 5. To lay before us
the grounds and practice of Christian Religion. 6. To labor for true Humility,
1 Pet. 5.5. Psalm. 25.9. 7. To practice what we know; for Practice begets
Experience, and Experience Knowledge.


The Signs of sound knowledge; 1. When we put all in practice that we know, 1 John 2.3, 4. 2. True love of our Brethren, 1 John 4.7, 8. 3. A faithful hearing
of the Word, with care to practice it, 1 John 4.6. 4. A filial Fear of
displeasing God in any one action, Mal. 1.6. 5. A true Humiliation in the sight
and knowledge of our selves.


Motives to stir us up to labor for knowledge 1. The Excellency of it, it is
the first Grace God bestows upon any. 2. The Profit of it, Dan. 11.32. Prove.
3.13. Psalm. 91.14. Joh. 27.3. 3. The Necessity of it, for without it we are
without all saving grace, and in no degree to Salvation, Ephesians. 2.12.


To apply the knowledge of the Nature of God to my self in particular, I must
know, 1. That he is a Spirit; To worship him in Spirit and in Truth. 2. That he
is Eternal; To Crown me if I obey him, to Condemn me if I disobey him. 3. That
he is Omnipotent; To rely and depend upon his Providence. 4. That he is Just;
To leave my wicked ways, and to restrain my self from sin. 5. That he is
merciful; To turn unto him by Repentance. 6. That he is Omnipresent; To carry
my self as in his Presence. 7. That he is Omniscient; To keep my heart upright
before him continually. 8. That he is Infinite; To stand in awe, reverence and
fear of him.


The Vices repugnant unto the knowledge of God; viz. 1. Atheism, which is the
Acknowledgement of no God. 2. Ignorance, or not knowing the true God and his
Will. 3. Errors conceived, or false Imaginations and Opinions of him. 4.
Profaneness, which is a Regardlesness of God and of his special Service. 5.
Magic, Sorcery or Witchcraft, in such as desire the help of it, as well as in
those who use it. 6. Superstition, Soothsaying, Observation of Dreams,
Divinations, Signs and Predictions, or Foretellingof Wizards. 7. All trust or
confidence reposed in the Creature. 8. Idolatry; whether Inward, when another
is worshipped then that one true God, or when the Worship of God is given unto
Creatures, by Praying unto them, Trusting in them, or Setting the heart upon
them, which kind does properly belong unto this First Commandment: or Outward,
when though the true God is worshipped, yet after another manner then God
himself has prescribed. 9. The contempt of God, which is to know those things
of God which are true, but not to be moved thereby to love him.


Were all the Wisdom of the East in one
Comprised: Could thou discourse with Solomon,
From th'Isop to the Cedar; or of ought
In Heaven, Earth, Hell: Could thou foresee a Thought,
And so prevent it; or by strength of Brain
(When it is thought) Argument it back again:
Had thou all Arts and Sciences refined,
Could join East to West, or divide the Wind:
Were thou for Wisdom the Worlds Nource or School,
And knew'st not God, thou were a damned Fool.
. 2. Of Faith or Trust in God.
THe second Duty required in this Commandment, is, To Trust in the only true
God, and in him alone to put all trust and confidence, Psalm. 20.8. This is
Faith, by which whosoever is united unto Christ, the same is Elected, Called,
Justified, Sanctified, and shall be Glorified, Joh. 3.36. and 5.24. By this
Faith is not meant an Historical Faith, as to know and think all those things
to be true which are manifested from above, either by Voice or by Visions, or
by any other manner of Revelation, and are taught in the Books of the Prophets
and Apostles, and thus to be persuaded of them for the asseveration and
Testimony of God himself, firmly assenting to the truth of those things
contained in the Scripture, for the Authority of God that spoke them: which
Faith is good in it self, but made ill, yea sin by them that cannot apply it.
Thus Simon Magus is said to have believed, Acts 13.

By this Faith is not meant a Temporary Faith, as to assent unto the heavenly
Doctrine which is delivered by the Prophets and Apostles, to profess it, and to
rejoice in the knowledge thereof, and to glory therein for a time; yet not for
any feeling of Gods grace toward them, but for other causes whatsoever, and
therefore without any true Conversion, and final perseverance in the Profession
of that Doctrine; for this kind of Faith is led as in a string with the
commodities of this world, and with them does live and dye. By this Faith is
not meant the Faith of working Miracles, which is a special gift of working
Miracles; that is, a certain persuasion springing from an especial Revelation
and Promise of God, whereby a man firmly resolves, That some extraordinary or
miraculous Work, and contrary to Nature, shall come to pass by Gods Power,
which he has foretold, and would have to be done in the Name of God and Jesus
Christ, 1 Cor. 13.2. which Faith so flourishing in the Primitive Church,
cease in those days, for that the Doctrine is now sufficiently confirmed, so
sufficiently indeed, as he that will not now believe without a Miracle, may
stand for a Wonder himself. But by this Faith is meant Justifying Faith,
wrought in the hearts of the Elect by the operation of Gods Spirit, grounded on
Gods Promises, whereby we do undoubtedly believe that God has freely forgiven
us all our sins, applying Christ Jesus in particular to be our Savior and
Redeemer. From this Faith Gods people can never finally and totally fall away;
howsoever it may be sometimes shaken, obscured and eclipsed, so as it may not
so manifestly appear at one time as at another; and this Faith is incident
only to the Elect, Acts 13.48. For it is a principal Grace of God, whereby man
is ingrafted unto Christ, and thereby become one with Christ, and Christ one
with him, Ephesians. 3.17. By this Faith in Christ, we are partakers of the Merit of
the Death and Resurrection of Christ, so as it is Satisfaction for us, and
Forgiveness of all our sins; a special grace or habit infused into the Soul by
the Holy Ghost, whereby we are enabled to believe, not only that the Messiah
is offered unto us, but also to take and receive him as a Lord and Savior.

Thus Justifying Faith comes not, neither proceeds or arises out of the
instinct of Nature, neither out of sense or experience, neither out of
Demonstrations or Reasons borrowed from Philosophy but it comes and depends
of a peculiar and supernatural Revelation or Divine Testimony, it proceeds
from the Holy Ghost, who kindles it in our hearts by the Preaching of the
Gospel, Ephesians. 2.8. and confirms it by the use of the Sacraments, Mat. 28.19,
20. Now we are not said to be made Righteous through Faith only, or that we
please God through the worthiness of mere Faith; but because only the
Satisfaction, Righteousness and Holiness of Christ is our Righteousness before
God, 1 Cor. 1.30. and we cannot take hold of it, or apply it to our selves, any
other way then by Faith, 1 John 5.10. Yet Faith without Righteousness is
Presumption, as Righteousness without Truth is Hypocrisy. And thus Faith is as
it were an Addition of a New Light to Reason, without which Reason is
purblinde; and begins to breed in the heart, when the party begins to be
touched in Conscience for his sins, and hungers withal and thirsts after Christ
and his Righteousness; the first act of the understanding being to assent to
the Truth contained in the Promises, wherein Christ is offered, and then the
act of the Will to consent unto them, that is, to embrace them. But before a
man will be willing to take Christ, the heart must be changed by God, for none
will take Christ upon Christ's conditions, till they be thoroughly humbled, and
have their hearts broken, that know what the wrath of God is, and have their
Consciences awakened to see sin, till they have been stung with a sense of
their sins, till they be heavy, and have felt the weight of Satan's yoke, till
then they will not come under the yoke of Christ, and then they will come in,
and be glad they have Christ, though on Christ's conditions. Thus as the
children of Israel being stung with fiery Serpents, and that unto death, were
healed by looking unto the brazen Serpent erected by Moses; so when we are
stung by the old Serpent, Sin and Death, we must ever remember by Faith to look
upon Christ. Now we are said to Take Christ, when we so take him, as to bring
him into our hearts to dwell there, when we are knit to him and he to us: But
some men cleave to Christ, not because they have any good ground, but because
they want Temptations to a contrary way; therefore it is Gods usual manner when
men seem to Take Christ, and to believe in him, to put them to the trial, to
see what they will do, whether their Faith will work or no: For when to such as
take Christ for love of the good things by him, and not for love of his person,
other commodities are presented, that are present and sensible, and in their
apprehension greater then those by Christ, then they let Christ go again, and
their Faith proves uneffectual; like those that marry not for Love, but for
Wealth; the manner of these men is to seek mercy and not grace: yet may we look
upon our own advantages by Christ, but not on that alone. Thus when a man is
drawn from God, it is either by some offer of some great benefit or some great
evil which he is put in fear of; in both which Faith is that Vnum Necessarium
to keep thee from sinning, for it is Faiths office to guide our lives, so as
that we be not overcome by Adversity, nor drawn aside from God in Prosperity.

Now that Faith that saves, must be effectual Faith, it is the effectualness of
Faith only that God requires; that is, if there be any effectualness in man
that comes not from Faith, God requires it not, but if we labor to grow in
Faith, we shall be enabled to do the duties of New Obedience; but if we have
not the ground, all that we do is but in vain: Therefore when we find any
coldness, weakness or languishing in the Graces we have, increase Faith, and
all other Graces will grow. This effectual Faith is wrought, or our Faith is
made effectual by the Spirit of God, it is not in our own power, of our selves
we are not able to believe; if God himself put not his hand to the work, no man
is able to believe, because naturally man has a hard heart. So for an holy
life, when we have believed and accepted the Righteousness that is offered us
in Christ, when that is done, it is Gods part to frame and fit us for an holy
life: for after that a man is Justified by Faith, Christ Sanctifies him, and
it is he that carries him afterward thorough his whole life in a holy
conversation. And as Christ is thus made unto us Justification and
Sanctification, so is he made unto us Redemption also; for he delivers us from
the least evils as well as from Death Eternal, and Hell it self: yea, there is
no evil that the Saints are freed from, but it is purchased by the Blood of
Christ, which is over and above some general works of Gods Providence that all
men taste of. Now though there be sufficiency in Christ to save all, yet none
have benefit by it, but those that receive it as they ought, that is, as a Lord
as well as a Savior: We must therefore come to God as with a full heart, so
with an empty hand, for Faith does its work best alone; for all that Faith has
to do, is only to Take from Christ that Righteousness which we want our
selves: And without this Faith, God regards not the best Moral Virtues; the
Moral man, what he does, he does it of himself, and through himself, and for
himself; but he that does what he does by Faith, does it of Christ, and through
Christ, and for Christ: for we must receive all from Christ, and do all for
Christ, and all by Faith. Faith works in us a love to God, and presents to
him a perfect Righteousness; and this Faith is the sum of the Preaching of
Christ and his Apostles. Now God requires no more but a Willingness in Earnest
to come and take Christ, he will make thee able afterward to do the rest, for
God never gives his Son to any, but he gives them the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of
his Son, also.

And we must know, That Faith admits degrees, and that every Christian ought to
grow from degree to degree, Romans 1.17. for though the weakest Faith may be a
true, and so a Saving Faith, yet if this small measure of Faith be not edged on
with a longing fervency after fullness of persuasion, and seconded with an
assiduous serious endeavor after more perfection, it is no sound and saving
Faith, but only a counterfeit show or deceiving shadow. The least Assent to,
the least Belief of the Promises, so it be sufficient to overbalance the
Scale of Doubting (which is called the least degree of Faith) brings us to
Christ, and make us willing to Take him, and is Faith, though it come not to
the full degree, though it has some doubting, some fears: And afterward we
shall be more fully and better persuaded, which adds to the degrees. For
Faith, though it be mingled with some doubtings and fears, may be effectual,
though not perfect, for there is a Doubting mingled with the best Faith; so it
be but such a Doubting as does not overcome, it may stand with true and sound
Faith. If a man has so taken Christ, that still he is growing, still his Faith
is prevailing, still overcoming these doubts and fears from day to day, he is
better and better resolved, if it be thus still on the growing hand, it is a
saving and effectual Faith; yea, it is not Faith except it has some Doubting,
except there be some fears, some troubles within, that resist this Faith, and
strive against it; for there is no man that has perfect Faith, especially at
the first, or afterward, so as to set his heart fully at peace. So that it is
said of Doubting, in this case, as we say of Thistles, They are ill Weeds, but
it is a sign the ground is fat and good where they grow: So Doubting, as it is
a thing that resists Faith, is bad, but it is a sign the heart is good where it
is; so that where there is no Questioning, there is all Flesh. And a man may
have a saving Faith, though he want the comfortable Assurance thereof in his
own knowledge, which is the reflect act of Faith: For as some men have a
persuasion of the forgiveness of their sins, yet not savingly believe; so a
true Believer may have but a weak persuasion of the forgiveness of his sins,
but that Faith which is joined with Love, is infallibly true, but disjoined
thence, is false; and the smallest Faith, yea the weakest, may yet be a sound,
true and saving Faith; it is not the difference of degrees and measure that
takes away the nature of it: For Faith, in regard of the extent of it, admits
degrees, not because the Habit is increased, but because the Revelations and
Objects are more; and therefore those poor Christians that are yet ignorant,
may have a true habit, and as true a Grace in the heart: And though a man be
more conversant in the Scripture, knows more then they, has more Revelations,
and in that sense though he has a greater Faith then the other, yet the other
has a like precious Faith with him in regard of that Grace. Nor do Infirmities
break the Covenant betwixt God and those that have once taken Christ, and have
true Faith, though in the least degree. Now in Taking Christ, the stronger the
Will is, by how much stronger Assent the Mind and Understanding gives to those
Truths which concern Justification delivered in the Scripture: And we must
labor to believe hard things, like Abraham; or easy things propounded with
slender Arguments, like Nathaniel: for if we believe in difficult cases, God
will make us with facility to believe them another time: We must labor for the
extent of Faith, for the multitude of Revelations, to be filled full of Faith,
as Barnabas is said to be, and this is by studying the Word much, for therein
will God reveal this.

This Faith is the Mother of all Sanctifying Graces, for by it we are ingrafted
into Christ, and so live the life of Faith, the life of God; the fruits of
Faith are almost infinite, for all the several and distinct branches of Piety
and Charity, if they be rightly performed, are fruits of Faith: And where there
is a true Faith, there is a secret persuasion wrought in the heart, whereby God
assures us that he is ours and we are his; for we may know, and be assured that
Christ dyed for us, and Redeemed us in particular, if we can find in our
selves that we have true Faith in Christ, and true Repentance for all sins: And
we may be assured of our Vocation, if through the Mystery of the Word, seconded
and made powerful by Gods Spirit, we are quite altered and changed from our
former evil lives, and have attained unto Faith and Repentance. And we may be
further assured, That we are Redeemed, and are the children of God, if we find
that we have the Spirit of God dwelling in us, which if we want, we are none of
Gods; which if we have, it will appear by the fruits of the Spirit in us: for
as Exercise begets Health, and we are made fit by Health for Exercise; or as
Acts beget Habits, and Habits are means to exercise those Acts: so Assurance
grounded upon the Promise, enableth, enlarges and increases Sanctification,
and Sanctification increases Assurance; but first see Faith, and then the
other as fruits of it. Now Faith is wrought in us thus; The Spirit comes and
shows Christ to us, and not only the profit we have by him, but the beauty and
excellency of him: it shows us what Grace is, and makes us love it, and then
shows us Mercy: Out of this we come to long after Christ, and to say, I would I
had him. Now to this work he adds a second; Christ comes and tells a man, I
will have thee, he comes and shows himself, discovers himself, and speaks
plainly to him, I am willing to marry thee: Now the longing Soul hearing those
glad tidings, embraces the motion, and the work is done. We may know whether
this Faith be wrought in us, by reflecting upon our own hearts, and considering
what actions have passed through it; for the works of Faith are manifest: And
we must use Faith in comforting our selves, for whatsoever Christ has by
Nature, we have it by Grace, when we have Faith: if he be a Son, we are Sons:
if he be an Heir, we are Heirs, etc. yea, Faith makes a man regardless of all
earthly things.

Those that have Faith, are able to use it of themselves; but many have it that
do not use it: and though God does work in us all the work of Faith as it is
received, yet know, He does not work in us only, but by us, he makes us
Instruments: yea, we shall be called to an account for the Talent of Faith, if
we have it and use it not: and if we use it not, we shall have little enough o^
it, for the using of it is that which strengthens Faith, and makes it
effectual. Now that we are saved by Faith, appears from these places of
Scripture, Joh. 3.16. Romans 1.16. and 3.28. Ephesians. 2.8. Mark 16.16. Rev. 21.8. 2 Thessalonians. 2.11, 12. Gal. 3.7, 9. Luke 7.50. Yet know, That a man is not saved by
Faith simply as it is Faith, for it does not in its own nature merit Salvation,
but it is said to save us in respect of its Object, which is Christ; not as it
is a gift, quality or property, but as it is an Instrument to apprehend and
apply this Object, so that we are saved by Faith as an Instrument, not for
Faith as a Cause: So Faith alone is said to justify us, but that Faith which
is alone, without other Graces, does not justify us; neither were ever any
justified by Faith without Works. For Faith is not only a Persuasion that our
sins are forgiven, but also a thorough Repenting that our sins may be forgiven;
not only a Persuasion that the Promises are true, but a Holiness of living,
that we may have a share in those Promises; not only a Persuasion that the
Scripture is true, but an Obedience to Gods Will revealed therein; not only a
Persuasion that Christ dyed for my sins, but also such an uprightness of
walking, as that I crucify him not again by my Lusts: for Faith does not only
work a good meaning in us, but it does work power in us to do good, and to
mortify our affections; for where Christ dwells indeed, he gives power against
sin, and that by his Spirit; and where the Understanding is fully convinced,
the Will and Affections follow: Faith, and the Desire of satisfying Lusts,
cannot stand together; and he that trusts not God for Earthly things, cannot
trust him for matters of Salvation: for, if we have Faith in the main, we will
have it in particular cases.

We are said to Believe three manner of ways; viz. 1. We believe one God; that
is, we believe that there is a God. 2. We believe God; that is, that God is
true touching his Promises: These two ways Infidels, yea the Devils believe and
tremble. 3. We believe in God; that is, according to those Promises to put our
whole trust and hope in God.


In the Doctrine of the Church mention is made of four sorts of Faith: 1.
Historical, when men believe the Bibles History: This saves not, James 2.19. 2.
Temporary, when men believe only for a time; neither does this save. 3.
Miraculous, proceeding from special Revelation, which is now out of use. 4.
Justifying, this is the true faith, and this saves.


Historical Faith, being an Assent of heart to the Truth of Gods Word, is
twofold: 1. Infused, which is wrought in us by the illightning Spirit of God,
and staying it self upon his Authority, immediately relying thereon. 2.
Acquired, which is produced by the light of Reason, Discourse, and created
Testimony: This is that which may be found in Devils.


Again, Faith is twofold; viz. 1. Legal, when we believe the Promises, or more
specially the Threatenings of the Law, which we are bound to believe. 2.
Evangelical, when we believe the Promise of the Gospel, applying it to our
selves.


For the right understanding of Faith, what it is, these things are chiefly
requisite to be known, and seriously to be considered; viz. 1. The principal
Efficient Cause thereof, which is the Holy Ghost, Ephesians. 2.8. 2. The Instrumental
Cause; that is, the Preaching of the Word, and use of the Sacraments. 3. The
Formal Cause; that is, a certain Knowledge, and a sure and full Considence in
Christ. 4. The Object of it; that is, whole Christ, and his Benefits promised
in the Word. 5. The Subject wherein it remains, of Place where it is, which
is the Understanding, the Mind and Will. 6. The Manner how it Justifies; viz.
As an Instrument. 7. The Actions of it, which are these principally; viz. To
Reconcile or Justify. To Pacify the heart. To Purify or Sanctify.
8. The Final Cause thereof, which is 1. The Glory of God. 2. Our Salvation.



Saving Faith comprehends these three things; viz. 1. Knowledge, or the right
conceiving of the necessary Doctrines of true Religion, especially of those
which concern Christ, our Redeemer. 2. Assent, when a man knowing this
Doctrine, does further approve of the same as wholesome Doctrine, and the Truth
of God, directing us aright unto Salvation. 3. Application, when we conceive in
our hearts a true persuasion of Gods Mercy toward us particularly in the free
pardon of all our sins, and for the Salvation of our Souls.


Or thus, In Justifying Faith these six things are necessarily required; viz.
1. A true understanding of Gods Word, so far as is necessary to Salvation, Romans
10.14. 2. An Inward Assent and Consent unto the Word, Joh. 17.17. Romans 7.16.
Isa. 1.19. 3. A Profession of the Word and true Religion, not for any sinister
respect, Romans 10.9, 10. 4. An Approbation, Joy, Delight, Love and affecting of
this Word. 5. A true and sound Application of Christ to our own particular
selves, Heb. 10.22. 6. A continual Declaration of our Faith by the continual
practice of good works, Jam. 2.26.


The order which God uses in working Faith; viz. 1. He works on the
understanding, enlightening it by his Word, as in all Fundamental necessary
Points of Christian Religion, so in these two especially: 1. In the Misery of a
natural man, which the Law discovers. 2. In the Remedy thereof, which the
Gospel reveals.
2. He works on the Will, and thereon also two especial Works; viz. 1. In
regard of man's Misery, as to be pricked in heart, grieved in soul for sin, and
wounded in conscience. 2. In regard of the Remedy, to desire above all things
in the world one drop of the infinite Mercy of God, and to give all to have
Christ.



How the Holy Ghost works Faith; viz. 1. By enlightening the mind that it may
understand the Word. 2. By moving the Will, that it may assent unto the Word
once understood. 3. By putting an efficacy in the Law; for though the Law be
fit to humble a man, yet is it no worker of Sanctification. 4. By showing the
excellency and riches of Christ. 5. By assuring us that these things are ours.


As in Faith there must be 1. The Understanding to apprehend Christ. 2. The
Will to accept and lay hold on him.


So therein are these things required: 1. To know the Promises of Righteosness
and Life Eternal by Christ. 2. To apply the Promise with the thing promised,
which is Christ, unto our selves.


How to apply Christ truly to our selves: 1. Lay a Foundation of this Action;
that is, in the Word, and in the Ministry of the Word. 2. Practice upon this
Foundation; that is, to give our selves to the exercise of Faith and
Repentance, which stands in Meditation of the Word and Prayer for Pardon; when
this is done, God gives the sense and increase of his Grace.


When we resolve to Take Christ, God gives us power and ability thereto; but
the rejecting of Christ is the greatest sin, and none shall be so much laid to
our charge at the Day of Judgment: Let these Considerations move us to Take
Christ: 1. The Danger in not taking him. 2. The Benefit in taking him. 3. The
Certainty of having him.


The things which must concur in the Will to receive and take Christ; viz. 1.
There must not be Error Personae; this excludes ignorant men, that take not
Christ indeed, but in their own fancy. 2. There must be the right Form of
taking him, as a renouncing of all things else: This must be observed, Christ
must be taken only and alone. 3. There must be a complete Will concurring to
this Action, which excludes all wishers and woulders. 4. There must be a
deliberate Will, which excludes those that only in a good mood would take
Christ. 5. The Will must be true and free, excluding servile Fear, in perilous
Necessities, or at times of Death, etc.


It is the Righteousness of Faith by which alone men can be saved now in the time
of the Gospel; which Position may be opened by the Answers made to these six
Questions; viz. 1. How this Righteousness of God saves? Ans. As Adams
Unrighteousness condemns. 2. How it is offered to us? Ans. By free gift as the
Father gives his Land. 3. To whom it is offered? Ans. To all that will accept
it. 4. Upon what Qualifications? Ans. None as proexistent. 5. How it is made
ours? Ans. By Faith applying it to our selves. 6. What is required of us when
we have it? Ans. 1. To love Christ. 2. To Repent. 3. To part with all for him.
4. To suffer for him. 5. To do for him.



The reasons why the Righteousness of God is ours by Gift; viz. 1. That no man
might boast in himself, but he that rejoices may rejoice in the Lord. 2. That
men may learn to depend upon God for it, who will have no man challenge it as
due, for it is a mere Grace, Romans 4.16. 3. That it might be sure to all the
Seed, even to Gentile as well as to Jew.


There is a double consideration to be had of Faith; viz. 1. As it works; As a
Quality: and so it has nothing to do with Justification. 2. As it Receives; As
an Instrument: So it justifies, and that not by altering the nature of sin;
that is, by making sin to be no sin, but by taking away the efficacy of sin,
that it does not condemn us: Daniels Lions were Lions still, though God at that
time took their fierceness from them; and so was it with Paul's Viper.


Faiths double Act: 1. The Direct Act of Faith, by which we apprehend and take
Christ. 2. The Reflect Act, by which we know and are assured that we have
apprehended and taken Christ.


Faith has also this double Quality: 1. To lay hold of Christ offered. 2. To
empty a man of all things else whatsoever; especially 1. Of all opinion of
Righteousness in himself. 2. Of all opinion of strength and ability to help
himself.



Faith admits Degrees in four respects; viz. 1. In Persuasion, That Christ is
offered, that he is ours, that he is given by God the Father. 2. In regard of
the difficulty and hardness of the things to be believed. 3. In regard of the
Extent of it, when there are more things revealed to us. 4. In regard of the
Proof; and here as the Evidence of Sanctification is more, so is the Assurance.


Opinion is but an Assent to the Truth, with a fear lest the contrary may be
true: So that Faith and Opinion differ in these three things: 1. In the Object,
which is something in its own nature uncertain: but Faith pitcheth upon the
Word of God, which is in its own nature infallible, and cannot deceive. 2. In
the working; Opinion being a matter of Speculation, and no more, Faith a matter
of Practice: but that is not all. 3. In overcoming Doubts; for Opinion goes no
farther, but stays in a Doubt, but Faith proceeds to full Assurance.


To be rooted and grounded in Faith, is, To have the first ground right, and so
to proceed from one to another: As thus, 1. Steadfastly to believe the
Scriptures in general. 2. All the Promises, therein contained, in particular.
3. To apply and appropriate them to our selves justly, and upon good ground.


No man knows what Justifying Faith is, but he that has it: whose true
Properties are these; 1. He being convicted thereof in his Conscience, knows,
that whatsoever things are spoken in the Scriptures, are true and Divine. 2. He
finds himself bound to believe them. 3. He is certain, That through Christ's
Satisfaction he is received of God into favor, and is endowed with the Holy
Ghost, and is by him regenerated and directed. 4. He applies to himself all
those things concluding that they belong unto him. 5. He rejoices in the
present Blessings which he has, but most of all in the certain and perfect
Salvation to come: And this is that peace of Conscience which passes all
Understanding. 6. He has a Will to obey the Doctrine of the Prophets and
Apostles, without any exception, in doing or suffering whatsoever is therein
commanded. 7. He is certain that his Faith, though it be in this life imperfect
and languishing, and often very much eclipsed, yet being builded upon the
Promise of God, which is unchangeable, does never altogether fail or dye.


Faith is said to work four ways; viz. Toward 1. God, by a quiet and peaceable
Conscience, grounded on Gods love, Romans 5.1. 2. Our Neighbor, by mutual
concord, especially in matters of Religion, Acts 1.14. 3. Our selves, by
Patience with joy and thankfulness in Afflictions, Romans 5.3, 4. 4. The Devil
and the World, by victory over their Assaults and Temptations, 2 John 5.4, 5. 1
Pet. 5.8, 9.


The work of Faith toward God: 1. Peace in Conscience, from our Reconciliation
with God, Romans 5.1. 2. Love toward God and Christ, Luke 7.47. 3. Hope of the
Glory of the Sons of God in the world to come, and joy in troubles, Romans 5.3.
4. Boldness to speak unto God, grounded on a sure confidence in him, Ephesians. 3.12.
5. A Confession of the Truth, 2 Cor. 4.13. Romans 10.10. 6. Obedience to God,
Romans 1.5. for which Abraham is chronicled as the Father of the Faithful. 7. A
Perseverance and Constancy in the Truth of Christ, Joh. 6.68. And a commending
of our Souls to God, Acts 7.59.


The work of Faith toward our neighbors: 1. A knitting of the minds of men
one toward another, Acts 1.14. 2. It extends Brotherly love even to our
Enemies, 1 Timothy 1.6.


The work of Faith toward our selves; viz. 1. It makes us entertain with joy
and thankfulness Gods loving Chastisements, Romans 5.3, 4. 2. A Resting upon his
Providence and Promises for Blessings Temporal and Spiritual, Mat. 6.25. 3. It
affects our hearts with comfort, strengthening them against all troubles, Joh.
14.1. 4. It works in us a hatred of sin and of our former ways with shame and
grief, Joh. 12.46.


A thing may be said, not to be done of Faith, three ways; viz. 1. Conscientia
Dubitante, when a thing is done with a doubting or unresolved Conscience, as in
those that are weak in knowledge. 2. Conscientia Errante, thus the Mass-Priest
sins in saying Mass, though in his Conscience he think it the Ordinance of
God. 3. Conscientia Repugnante, though upon Error and false judgment of the
Conscience, it is in the doer a sin: Thus an Anabaptist that holds it unlawful
to Swear, sins if he take an Oath.


In what sense Faith is called Effectual: 1. When it does its proper Office or
Function, namely, To Take Christ. 2. When it is true, real and substantial,
when it is opposed to vain Faith. 3. When it is an operative, lively, stirring,
and a fruitful Faith. 4. When it goes thorough with the work in hand; that is,
when it Sanctifies the heart throughout in respect of parts, and throughout in
regard of time, when it brings a man to the end of his Salvation, when it
carries a man through all impediments, when it leaps over all difficulties; a
growing, pervailing, overcoming Faith.


Wherein the Effectualness of Faith consists; viz. 1. In being well built; that
is, when the preparation is sound and full by Humiliation. 2. When a man
believes the Promises on sure infallible grounds, and sees them distinctly. 3.
When the Will takes Christ out of love to him, not his; not out of fear, nor
out of mistake. 4. When it turns not only the Will, but all the Affections:
when it turns the whole man, when it shoots it self into life and practice.


The Causes of Uneffectual Faith; viz. 1. The Taking of Christ upon
misinformation, without due consideration. 2. The Taking Christ out of fear,
not out of true love to him; as men in sickness. 3. The taking Christ for the
love of the good things by him, not of his person. 4. Want of Humiliation that
should go before it. 5. Because Faith is not grounded aright: when men falsely
take to themselves a persuasion of the Remission of their sins upon an
uncertain and wrong ground.


The Reasons why God accepts no Faith but such as is Effectual: 1. Because
otherwise it is not Faith, for it is dead. 2. Other Faith has no Love, which
condition is required. 3. Other Faith the Devils have, for they believe and
tremble. 4. Else it works no Mortification, for we must deny our selves. 5.
Else Christ should lose the end of his coming into the world. 6. Because good
Works are the way to Salvation.


The usual means that Satan does labor with to weaken, shake and cut down the
Faith of Gods children; viz. 1. By suggesting to the child of God a
consideration of the flourishing state of the wicked, how imperiously and
prosperously they domineer and revel it in the world, whilst himself lies
trampled on by their Insolences, Oppressions, and Profane Censures: But this
the child of God may repulse, by considering and understanding with David, the
end of these men, how suddenly they are destroyed, perish, and come to a
fearful end. 2. He curiously observes all seasons and advantages, therefore if
he finds us cast down with some sad and heavy accident, he presently afresh
represents unto the view of our Consciences, the many and great sins of our
unregeneration in their foulest shape, to cause new unnecessary doubtings,
distrusts and fears, to loosen the hold of our Faith: But this the child of
God must repel, by reflecting on his All-sufficient Savior. 3. When the heart
of a godly man is sweetly refreshing it self with an Assurance of his future
happiness, and eternal enjoyment of endless joys in Heaven, Satan labors to
cast into his mind even some thoughts of impossibility of the performance of
the Promises of Salvation, and of the attainment of that excellent weight of
glory. But this the child of God must resolutely repel by the power of Prayer,
knowing that God who has promised, is Omnipotent, and able to perform;
Faithful and true, and will perform. 4. If Satan by the violence of some
temptation, be able to hale us again into some gross sin, to which we were
principally obnoxious before our Calling, then from thence he draws and
enforces upon us discomfortable and Faith-killing Conclusions, and presently
infers upon such relapses, that we have deceived our own Souls, that our
Holiness is but Hypocrisy, our Faith but Temporary, and our Conversion but
Counterfeit: But this the child of God must overcome by speedy, renewed sound
Repentance.


The two main pillars which support our Faith in the recovery of Grace: 1. One
without us; which is the Author of Grace, even God, in whom the same Cause
which first moved him to bestow the Graces of his Spirit on a man, still
remains to move him to renew his Spirit, and that is even his own free mercy
and goodness. 2. The other within us; that is, the Seed of Grace, which is not
corruptible, but incorruptible, 1 Pet. 1.23. called The seed of God, 1 John
3.9. which is the holy Sanctifying Spirit of God; and compared by Christ to a
Springing well, whence flow Rivers of water of Life, Joh. 7.38, 39. whereby
Supply and Repair of Grace, if it fail by reason of infirmities, may be made,
renewed and recovered through Repentance.


How Faith and Hope differ: 1. Faith embraces the present benefits of God, and
his Will toward us; Hope embraces the effects and fruits which are to come of
this present and perpetual Will of God. 2. Faith is that which makes those
things to be which are hoped for, and which shows those things which are not
seen: but Hope that is seen, is not Hope: for how can a man hope for that which
he sees?


Wherein Faith and Hope agree, viz. 1. In the Author and Worker of them both,
which is Gods Holy Spirit: For as Faith is a fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22. so
we abound in Hope through the power of the Holy Ghost, Romans 15.13. 2. In the
common matter; for both of them are saving and sanctifying Graces: As we are
saved by Faith, Ephesians. 2.8. so also by Hope, Romans 8.24. And as by Faith the heart
is purified, Acts 15.9. so he that has Hope purges himself, 1 John 3.3. 3. In
the Ground of them; both being grounded on the Promises of God. 4. In the
Properties of Assurance and Patience, Heb. 6.11. and 10.22. 5. In Continuance,
which is only till they have brought us to the possession of the Inheritance
promised, 1 Cor. 13.13. in which respect Love, which continues even in Heaven,
is preferred before them both. 6. In many excellent Effects; as, A clear and
quiet Conscience, An utter denial of a man's self, A casting himself wholly on
Gods grace, A patient bearing of Crosses, and perseverance unto the end.


The child of God may not doubt of his Salvation for these Reasons: 1. Because
it favoreth the Opinion of the Papists against the Truth. 2. The doubting of
Salvation wracks the Conscience by a servile and slavish fear. 3. Because it
does quench the motions of the Spirit and all goodness. 4. It takes away our
Patience in Troubles, and willingness to undergo them. 5. He that doubts
hereof, bewrays his ignorance of Gods Word, and his unbelief.


A man may and ought to be certain of his Salvation from these Arguments: 1.
From the Example of Job, Job 19.95. 2. From the words of Paul, 2 Cor. 5.1. Romans
8.14. 3. It was Paul's own persuasion of himself, Romans 8.38. 4. The Spirit is
the Earnest of our Inheritance, Ephesians. 1.14. 5. He that believes shall be saved,
Mark 26.16. Joh. 3.16.


We may be assured that we are the children of God by these five infallible
Signs: 1. By the Testimony of Gods Spirit. 2. By a steadfast Faith in Gods
Promises. 3. By a daily dying unto sin. 4. By a profitable keeping of Gods
Word. 5. By a careful observation of all Gods Commandments.


We may be assured that we have the Spirit of God dwelling in us, if we find
and feel in our selves 1. A more love and desire to good things then to evil,
and a loathing and hatred of all sin, because it is sin. 2. The fruits of the
Spirit, as Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Goodness, Gentleness,
Faithfulness, Meekness, Temperance, Sobriety, Chastity, Holiness, Uprightness,
and such like.


Two ways to increase Assurance; viz. 1. By the Promises, the sure Word, on
which Faith is built. 2. By the fruits of Sanctification in our selves: Now
when we find these languishing, we should go to the first, and the other will
be increased by it.


We offend about this Assurance three ways; viz. 1. By doubting of our
Salvation, as the Papists teach others to do. 2. By Infidelity, not being
thoroughly persuaded of the goodness of God, nor believing his Promises. 3. By
grounding our Hope upon our own unworthiness, sins, infirmities, and so not
upon God.


Six Considerations to help Faith in comforting the soul; viz. 1. God justifies
the ungodly. 2. Christ is made Righteousness to us. 3. The Pardon is general.
4. God takes delight in showing Mercy. 5. His Mercy is Infinite. 6. Christ came
to pardon the greatest sins.


Certain Instances of Faith guiding a man in difficult cases: 1. In confessing
of Christ; as in many of the chief Rulers, Joh. 12.12. 2. In praise with men;
as in Paul. 3. In case of Profit; as it should have been in Saul touching the
fat Cattle; and in Balaam, Judas, Gehazi, Achan, etc. 4. In case of Safety and
Danger; as in Saul and the Philistims, and in Joram, Jer. 42. and 43. 5. In
great Fears; as in Stephen and Paul. 6. In Pleasures; as in Moses when he left
Pharaohs Court. 7. In case of Provision for Posterity. 8. In matters of daily
employment.


The Titles given to true Faith; viz. 1. It is called the Faith of the Elect,
Tit. 1.1. for none but the Elect have it, and all the Elect have it at one time
or another: when once they have it, they never utterly and totally lose it. 2.
It is called Saving Faith, because it brings us to Salvation, Ephesians. 2.8. 3. It
is called Justifying Faith, because it is that means or Instrument which Gods
Spirit works in us, whereby we apply unto our selves Jesus Christ, in and by
whom we are justified, Romans 3.28. 4. It is called Sanctifying Faith, because by
it God purifieth our hearts, Acts 15.9.


How far the sense of Faith may be lost in men: 1. It may be so covered over
and smothered, as it may not be discerned, they may for a time have no
Assurance of it. 2. All the joy and comfort of it (wherewith they were formerly
upheld) may be clean taken away, and they even faint for want of it. 3. No
fruits thereof may appear, they may be as Trees in winter: little conscience of
any duty, dull in hearing Gods Word, cold in Prayer, nothing remaining but a
formal Profession, if that. 4. Their Consciences may prove a very Rack, a
grievous Torture and Torment unto them. 5. They may think it is like to be
recovered with a wet finger, with a light sigh, or a groan: but they may call,
cry, and roar again and again, before they be heard. 6. And when they recover
it, it may be they shall never attain to that measure which once they had; or
if to that measure of the thing it self, yet not of the joy and comfort of it:
They may carry the grief of this their Fall to their graves.


The difference between Faith and Presumption; viz. 1. Faith drives a man out
of himself, and casts himself wholly on Christ: Presumption makes him boast of
himself, and makes him self-conceited. 2. Faith rests on a sure ground, even
Gods Word: Presumption relieth only on a man's surmise and mere conjecture. 3.
Faith is joined with the use of the means: Presumption not only carelessly
neglects, but arrogantly contemns all means. 4. Faith is wrought by
degrees; as first by Knowledge, then by Grief, after by desire: Presumption is
a sudden apprehension of the mind. 5. Faith makes a man work out his Salvation
with a holy jealousy, yea with fear and trembling: Presumption is over-bold.
6. Faith makes a man depart from all iniquity, and keep a clear Conscience:
Presumption is accompanied with much pollution. 7. Faith is most sure in time
of Trial, then the strength of it is most manifested: Presumption makes
greatest flourish when there is least danger. 8. Faith continues unto the end,
and never quite falls away: Presumption is subject to decay totally and
finally.


Motives to labor for, and to grow in Faith: 1. Without it whatsoever we do is
sin, Romans 14.23. 2. We cannot please God in any one action without Faith, Heb.
11.6. 3. We cannot hear Gods Word with profit, except we have Faith, Heb. 11.6.
4. We cannot Pray without this Faith, Jam. 1.6. 5. We cannot Receive the
Benefit of the Lords Supper without it. 6. We cannot be saved without it, Mark
16.16. 7. We must grow in Faith, because we need more strength daily, and daily
meet with greater Assaults. 8. We shall hereby grow in joy, and gain the favor
and love of God the more. 9. We shall the more prevail in Prayer. 10. By
growing in Faith we shall bring the more glory to God.


The means of getting Faith, are twofold: 1. Outward, which are either such as
both work and strengthen Faith, as the Word of God; or only such as strengthen
it, as the Sacraments. 2. Inward (or rather the Cause) which is the Sanctifying
Spirit of God, who softneth, quickneth, opens our hearts, making them to
bring forth the blessed fruit of faith, 2 Cor. 4.13. 1 Cor. 2.4, 5.


The way to obtain and increase Faith; viz. 1. To be vigilant Hearers, and to
continue Hearers of Gods Word, Romans 10.17. 2. To labor for a good Conscience,
and to keep it when we have it, 1 Timothy 1.19. 3. Godly, effectual and fervent
Prayer to God for it, Luke 17.5. 4. The worthy receiving of the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, which though it does not confer Faith ex opere operato, yet
it confirms and strengthens it, 1 Cor. 11.25, 26. 5. That to our uttermost
power we use and well employ that ability whatsoever it be, that we have by
nature or by special gift. 6. That we resist not any motion of Gods Spirit,
like the rebellious Jews, nor put off from us the Promises of the Gospel, as if
they belonged not to us, and think our selves unworthy of eternal life.


The true desire of the heart after Christ, which works Faith, may be known:
1. By the Cause, which is the Gospel, and nothing but it can do it, because by
it alone is Christ revealed and offered. 2. By the Order, which follows upon
grief for sin, and despair of succor in our selves or others. 3. By the
Quality, for it is an hearty and true desire, an inward desire of the Soul, and
also a vehement and earnest desire, greater then the desire of any other thing
can be. 4. By the Fruits, as a conscionable care in using, and fervent Prayer
for blessing the means of Faith. 5. By the Continuance of it, which raises up,
and preserves an appetite after Christ, even after we have tasted him.


The Fruits, Effects and Signs of Effectual Faith: 1. It purifies the heart,
and sanctifies the person, therefore Faith and Repentance are put together; a
purged and sanctified heart, renewed in Soul and Body, Acts 15.9. 2. The Spirit
of Prayer. 3. Peace in the heart, that which passes all understanding, Peace
of Conscience, or Joy resting on God, Romans 5.1. 4. To hold out in cleaving to
Christ; Constancy and perseverance in Christ unto the end, Jude 20.21. 5. The
Concomitants of it, which are Love, Hope, Joy, Humility. 6. The justifying of
us before God. 7. Our whole Conversion which follows Faith, and begins at
the same time with Faith. 8. The fruits of Conversion and Repentance, even good
works. 9. Increase of Spiritual and Corporal gifts. 10. Justification,
Regeneration, and all the benefits purchased by the blood of Christ. 11. It is
an effect of Election, none have it but the Elect, Acts 13.48. Tit. 1.1. 12.
The continual working of it, for true Faith is never idle, Gal. 5.6. 13.
Hearing of the Word with joy, and practicing it, Joh. 10.27. 14. A striving
against Doubt, Distrust, Despair of Gods Mercy, if we have not attained a full
persuasion: And this is acceptable to God, Isa. 42.3.


The principal effects of Faith whereby it may be best proved, may be drawn to
these two Heads: 1. A quiet Conscience, whence proceeds 1. A holy Security of
mind, having peace with God, rests secure for Salvation. 2. A Spiritual Joy
of heart, in regard of the benefit of Faith, 1 Pet. 1.8.
2. A clear Conscience; that is, a faithful endeavor to approve our selves unto
God, by doing what is acceptable, and avoiding what is offensive to his most
excellent Majesty: The ground of this clear Conscience, is Love, for a sense of
Gods Love works love to God; and it is always accompanied with a pure heart,
1 Timothy 1.5. 2 Cor. 1.12.


These two things are especially Requisite as Helps to Faith: 1. A faithful
Remembrance of Gods Promises. 2. A right Application of them.


For the right application of Gods Promises, three things are to be observed;
viz. 1. The matter contained in them: 1. General, concerning supply of all good
things, and deliverance from all evil, Genesis 3.15. and 22.18. Romans 8.28. 1 Cor.
3.22. 2. Particular, fit for our particular estates and needs, and they concern
1. This life, and therein 1. Temporal things, as 1. To Supply things needful. 2.
To Remove things hurtful.
2. Spiritual things, Jer. 31.33, etc. Luke 11.13.
2. The life to come, for which heavenly and glorious things are promised, Luke
23.43. 1 Cor. 15.22. Phil. 3.21. Mat. 25.34.

2. The kind or quality of them; viz. 1. Absolute; which God has simply and
absolutely determined to accomplish even as they are propounded: so all saving
and sanctifying Graces, being absolutely necessary to Salvation, are promised
to all Gods children, 1 Cor. 1.5. and eternal life, Joh. 10.28. 2. Conditional;
which are no farther promised, then God in his wisdom sees to be most for his
own glory and his childrens good; and are no otherwise to be prayed for by us:
Thus conditionally are promised 1. All Temporal Blessings, which Lazarus an
holy man wanted, Luke 16.20. 2. Freedom from all Crosses and troubles: what
Saint has not had his part in some of them? 3. Freedom from all Temptations;
as our Head was tempted, so have his members been from time to time. 4. Less
principal Graces, which are called Restraining Graces: These the Spirit
distributeth severally, 1 Cor. 12.8. Not all to every one; some to one, some to
another. 5. The measure of sanctifying Graces; for though every Saint has
every saving Grace in him, yet have they not all a like measure; some have a
greater, and some a less.

3. The manner of propounding them 1. Expressly declared; and they are either
Generally propounded to all: Or Particularly applied to some particular persons.
2. By consequence employed in the Examples Prayers
of Saints 1. By those Blessings which they have enjoyed. 2. By those which
they have prayed for in Faith, and obtained.




Our laboring to strengthen Faith, is of much use to us, especially these three
ways, 1. In getting Assurance of Pardon after some sin is committed. 2. In
Conflicts with strong Lusts. 3. In want of Spiritual Graces.


The use of Faith in Prosperity; viz. 1. It makes us acknowledge, That it is
the Lord who has so disposed our estate. 2. It makes us rest upon God for the
time to come, that all shall go well with us: for Faith has eyes, whereby it
does after a manner see that to be true which yet it sees not accomplished.


Faith has also a double use in Adversity; viz. 1. It upholdeth us in the
present distress, when else we know not what to do. 2. It makes us patiently
wait for deliverance, Hos. 6.1, 2. for God having promised to give a good
issue, Faith rests upon it, even as it were now and already accomplished.


The Vices repugnant unto Faith, and forbidden in this first Commandment; viz.
1. Unbelief, which assenteth not to such Doctrine as is heard and known
concerning God. 2. Doubtfulness, which neither steadfastly assenteth to it, nor
altogether gainsays it. 3. Distrust, which applies not unto it self the
knowledge which it has of God and his Promises; and does through fear of Gods
forsaking us surcease the doing of that it should do. 4. A Dissembling or
Hypocritical Faith. 5. Temporary Faith, or a Revolting from Faith. 6. A
Tempting of God, stubbornly and proudly provoking him to anger. 7. Carnal
Security, without thinking of God, his Will, or our own miserable estate under
sin.


Faith does the Sun in's Zenith far outshine,
Inflames with Love, and makes us all divine;
Cancels our Debts, makes all our Reck'nings even,
Takes wing at Christ, and flies us up to Heaven;
Lifts us above the World, and does advance
Hope 'yond Hope, and rests us in Assurance:
Which first sucks life from Faith, returns back then
The sap much stronger to the Root again.
He that has Faith has Heaven, only does stay
To take a Death and Cross or two in's way.
. 3. Of Humility.
HUmiliation is the fruit of Faith, and the first effect whereby Faith, which
lies hid in the heart, does appear: And in the very instant, when a sinner
begins truly in heart and conscience to humble himself before God, he is then
entered into the state of Salvation. Now if a man find himself hard-hearted,
and of a dead Spirit, so as he cannot humble himself as he ought or as he
would, such persons, if they humble themselves, must be content with that Grace
which they have received; for if thou be truly and unfainedly grieved for this,
That thou can not be grieved, thy Humiliation will be accepted: And though it
may be thou art more humbled, and have a greater grief for an earthly loss then
for thy committed sins, yet may thou even then be truly humbled and grieved
for thy sins too; because the one is a bodily, natural and sensible loss, and
the other a supernatural, insensible and spiritual: Now sensible things do more
affect and urge the mind then the other. The heart of man cannot be lifted up
in Assurance of Gods favor, to the apprehension of heavenly things, unless it
be first abased by true Humiliation, brought to nothing in it self. To this
must be added Faith; for in the practice of a Christian life, the duties of
Humiliation and Faith cannot be severed: Till the heart be thoroughly by
Humiliation prepared, by being broken with the sight of sins and Gods wrath,
Christ and the Gospel is preached to it in vain; and though some drink in the
Truth of the Gospel with their Education, yet such usually hold not out without
also sound Humiliation. Thus by the Spirit of Elias, is meant a sharp
Ministry, to show men their sins, that they may be thoroughly humbled and
prepared; else they will never take Christ so as to keep close to him, for
without sound Humiliation, sin is not accounted the greatest evil, nor Christ
the greatest good: We cannot love Christ, till upon the consideration of our
sins, we are humbled for them, and are become poor in Spirit, and then the Lord
regards us highly, and will raise us up; but the want of sorrow for sin, is a
greater Argument of the want of love to Christ, then the sin it self.

Now Humiliation is not required as a Qualification, antecedent and precedent
to the pardon of our sins, for no Tears of ours can give Satisfaction; beside,
Judas the Reprobate had it: but it is required as that, without which we will
not come to Christ. Now the taking of Christ, is nothing else but what we call
Faith, and Faith is nothing else, but when these two things concur, That God
the Father will give his Son, and freely offers Righteousness, and we receive
this Righteousness, taking Christ for our Husband, our King and our Lord. And
when we are truly entered into the state of this Humiliation, we shall not fail
of that Humility required in this Commandment; for we shall then acknowledge
all those good things which are in us, and done by us, not to come from any
worthiness or ability of our own, but from the free goodness of God: we shall
then by the acknowledging of Gods Divine Majesty, and our infirmity and
unworthiness, subject and submit our selves unto God, to give the glory of all
good things, which are in us, to him alone: We shall then truly fear God, We
shall then acknowledge and bewail our own defects and vices: we shall not then
covet any higher place or condition: we shall not then trust in our own gifts,
but in the help and assistance of God: we shall then hold our selves contented
with our own Vocation and Calling: we shall not then despise others in
comparison of our selves, neither let or hinder them in the discharging of
their duty, but acknowledge that others also are and may be made profitable
Instruments of Gods glory, and therefore give place and honor to them: we shall
not then attribute to our selves things above our force and power: we shall not
then affect any one excellency above others: neither shall we then murmr
against God, if we fail of our hope, or if we be despised, but in all things
ascribe the praise of Wisdom and Justice unto God. Let no man therefore presume
above that which is written: For who has separated thee? or what have thou
that thou have not received? 1 Cor. 4.6. God resists the proud, but gives
grace to the humble, 1 Pet. 5.5. Whosoever shall humble himself as this little
child, the same is the greatest in the kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 18.4. And this
is that Humility required in this Commandment, and him in whom it is, the Lord
will exalt in due time, 1 Pet. 5.5.

The Vices repagnant to Humility; viz. 1. Pride and Arrogance, which is, to
ascribe our gifts not unto God, but to our own ability, and therefore to stand
in admiration of our selves and gifts; not to acknowledge our wants or bewail
our defects; to be ever aspiring to some higher place or calling; to attribute
to our selves those things which we have not; to overlook our poor Brethren; to
be guilty indeed of all those Vices from which the humble man was even now said
to be free. 2. A feigned Modesty or Humility, which is a double Pride; and it
is, to hunt after the praise and commendation of Humility, by denying of those
things outwardly, which yet a man does in his mind attribute unto himself,
either truly or falsely, and by refusing of that honor which he desires above
the peace of a good Conscience, and covertly laboreth to compass.


Going to take a Survey of my Sins,
I heard a voice which sadly said Who brings
Help to my wounded Soul? And having cried
At least a heart-full of Tears, Faith applied
A precious Sovereign Salve: but said,
It came from far, cost dear, and therefore praid
He would esteem it highly: Then me thought
He somewhat else in dust and ashes sought,
What it should be, I asked Hope who stood by,
And Love replied it was Humility.
. 4. Of Patience.
PAtience is the knowledge and acknowledging of Gods Majesty, Wisdom, Justice,
Power and Goodness, resolving through a confidence in Gods Promises, and so in
hope of Gods assistance and deliverance, to obey God in suffering those evils
and afflictions which he sends on us, and wills us to suffer, and herein
not to murmr against God, or do any thing against his Commandments, but by
this knowledge and full persuasion of Gods good will and pleasure herein, To
comfort our selves in our distress, and to Pray in Faith, and Wait in Hope for
his deliverance. Humility and Patience belong unto this first Commandment, not
only because they are parts of that internal obedience which God requires
immediately to be performed unto him; but also because they follow and
accompany the true Knowledge, Confidence, Love, and Fear of God, as necessary
effects of the same: For in cases of Distress, of Persecution and Affliction,
we must not live by feeling, but by Faith, for Afflictions are Pledges and
Tokens of our Adoption, if we make the right use of them, Heb. 12.7. And when
God defers deliverance, he does it upon great and weighty causes and
considerations best known unto himself; for in his Wisdom he has set down
certain and unchangeable Times for the accomplishment and issue of all things
that are: And indeed there is a necessity of having this godly virtue of
Patience, for we need many afflictions, because the corruptions of the heart
are of diverse sorts, and we need long afflictions, because sin is very
natural, yet there may be good in that evil we suffer, and in the worst dangers
there is somewhat that makes the godly trust in God, that keeps them up from
sinking. A sound Spirit will bear any Affliction, and therein is a Christian
happy, for God loves us tenderly in Affliction: whence the difference between
the Saints and others in the same Afflictions, is, That though the same
Afflictions befall both, yet God has respect to his in it, not to the others,
Jer. 24. The wicked, though prospering, yet stand in slippery places; the
godly, though afflicted, are built on the Rock Christ. To prosper in sin, is
the miserablest condition in the world, for when the wicked are not interrupted
in their course, God has a purpose to destroy them, as Hophni and Phineas:
Prosperity hurts evil men, yea, and as much as Affliction does good to the
godly. Evil men may prosper, and good men be crossed many times, not prospering
in their business, and that in those things which they do according to Gods
Will, as in the success of Paul's Ministry at Macedonia, and the Disciples
jeopardy on the water, though they were there on Christ's command.

Thus the Lord deals promiscuously with good and bad in outward things, that
we may not know where to have him in his ways and actions, which are past
finding out: therefore we must not judge by Gods outward proceeding, till he
has finished the work, nor murmr at his Providence, or prove impatient under
the smart of any Affliction whatsoever: For the Afflictions of the godly are
not punishments, and satisfaction for their sins, but only fatherly
chastisements, and the Cross, whereby they are brought to Humility. To the
wicked they are indeed a punishment, which is either Destruction or Torment,
inflicted by the order of Justice on the person guilty of sin: And this is
proper unto the Reprobate, because it is inflicted on them to this end, That
Gods Justice may be satisfied: for the Law binds all men either to Obedience
or to Punishment. Now the wicked despairing of the Mercy of God, murmr at his
Justice, and are even mad with impatience, when his inflicting Scourge is on
them: but the godly kiss his Rod, and in patience possess their Souls, resting
on the Promises of God. This is that which sets them at liberty in the dungeon,
makes them run the paths of Gods Commandments even when Irons manacle them,
makes them go cheerfully to the Faggot, and embrace the Flame, makes them smile
at the frowns of their Persecutors, and in an holy patience makes them as it
were anticipate Death, by dying to all impatience, that when it comes indeed,
they may be said rather to be changed, then dye. And indeed, this one
Consideration, How that those that persecute the Saints here, would undoubtedly
persecute Christ himself, were he now upon Earth, is sufficient of it self to
support the Spirits of any that now are or may be under Persecution; beside the
consideration that God will as undoubtedly deliver his to his glory and their
advantage, as he permits Persecution to befall them.

We have need of Patience, for these two Reasons: 1. Because there are so many
Mockers and Scoffers at our Profession, Luke 21.17. 2. Because the Object of
our Hope is of things invisible, Romans 8.25.


The Signs or Properties of Patience: 1. A heart resolved to abide whatsoever
is laid upon us, whether it be for sin or for trial. 2. When we suffering, and
suffering much, do yet never cease to love the Lord who strikes us. 3.
Humility, and humbling our selves under his blows and strokes laid upon us. 4.
Cheerfulness and Joy in Suffering: when we are so far from murmuring under it,
that we rejoice in it.


Patience must have her perfect work, James 1.4. which work is said to be
perfect in these three respects; viz. 1. In respect of the Condition; it must
be true, hearty and sound, not feigned and counterfeit, Luke 21.19. 2. In
respect of the Extent; it must reach to all manner of Crosses, heavy and light,
inward and outward, at home and abroad, whether they come from the Devil, or
any of his wicked Instruments, or from God himself, and his own hand, of what
kind, quality, quantity soever they be, 2 Cor. 6.4. 3. In respect of the
Continuance; it must endure unto the end, not only unto the end of that
Affliction which lies upon us, but also to the end of our life: so as we must
both patiently bear the present, and also prepare our selves for future
Crosses, Mat. 10.22.


Necessary it is that Patience have this perfect work in us, and that for these
Reasons; viz. 1. The Crosses whereunto we are subject, are not troubles in show
and appearance only, but such as pierce both Body and Soul: Therefore
counterfeit Patience will stand us in no stead. 2. The Number of Trials
whereunto we may be brought, is uncertain: one calamity upon another, as Waves,
may fall upon us, therefore the extent of our Patience need be very great. 3.
It is Uncertain how long we shall be subject to Trials, because the continuance
of our life is uncertain; therefore there is a Necessity in it that our
Patience continue unto the end: for while we are in this world, the field of
the Lords Battle, the Enemy will assault us.


The good which God aymeth at and effects by those Troubles he inflicteth on
his children, which should incite us to Patience: 1. The Preventing of some
great Mischief and Evil, 2 Cor. 12.7. 2. The Purging out of some festering
poysonsom sin, 2 Chronicles. 33.12. 3. The Upholding and keeping us safe and
steadfast in the right way, Heb. 12.10, 11. 4. The Proof and Trial of such Gifts
and Graces as he has bestowed on us, 1 Pet. 4.12.


The Saints must possess their Souls in Patience from the consideration of
those Ends which God has in afflicting them: As 1. His own Glory, Joh. 9.3. 2
Cor. 12.9. 2. The Edification of others, Ephesians. 3.1. 3. Their own good, 1. By
preventing, 2 Cor. 12.7. or curing some dangerous disease, Psalm. 119.67. 2. To
manifest the Grace of God bestowed on them, Job 1.12. 3. To draw them nearer to
God, Hos. 5.15. 4. To make them long the more for heaven, 2 Cor. 5.2. 5. To
lead them by this Correction, as it were by the hand, to Repentance. 6. To try
and exercise their Faith, Invocation of Gods Name, Patience, etc. 7. To breed
in them a loathing of worldly, and a love of heavenly things. 8. To shake off
their overmuch carefulness for outward things. 9. To suppress and amend the
viciousness ingrafted in their Nature. 10. To save them from being condemned
with the world.



So likewise does God suffer his Church to be under the Cross, and afflicted
for these special Reasons: 1. The more to manifest his Pity, Power, Providence
and Truth in keeping promise. 2. That the Members thereof, by their
Afflictions, may be acquainted with their own wants and infirmities, which they
would not much regard, were they freed from the Cross. 3. That by Affliction
they may be kept from many grievous sins, into which they might otherwise fall.
4. That others seeing the Correction of the Church for sin, may learn thereby
to hate and avoid sin. 5. To wean them the better from the world: Much
prosperity makes us resemble the fool spoken of, Luke 12.19. 6. To make Heaven
the more longed for while we are on earth, and the more acceptable when we come
to possess it; like Victory after a tedious and dangerous Combat. 7. That the
Church may glorify God in a constant and courageous maintenance of the Truth
unto death; for even in persecution is Gods Truth preserved against the Reason
of man's Wisdom.


The Reasons of the worlds Hatred to Gods Church may be these: 1. The Church of
God in the Ministry of the Gospel, seeks the ruin of the Devils Kingdom, who
is the Prince of the World; the Devil therefore rages and inflames the hearts
of his Instruments with malice against Gods Church, that they may quite destroy
it, if it were possible. 2. Gods Church is a peculiar people, severed from the
world in their Profession, Doctrine and Conversation, and therefore the world
hates them, Joh. 15.16. and this the world will do to the end thereof.


The Cross is the Affliction of the godly, but not properly a punishment, and
is of four sorts; viz. 1. The Chastisements, for the remnants of sin in them,
and oftentimes for peculiar sins committed by them, that they may see their
uncleanness, and repent. 2. The Proofs and Trials of their Faith, Hope,
Invocation, Fear of God, and Patience. 3. Martyrdoms, which are Testifications
concerning their Doctrine delivered others. 4. The Cross is their Ransom, even
the obedience of Christ alone.


The causes of the Affliction of the wicked: 1. The Impellent Cause is sin,
because it is an evil merit, and deserves evil. 2. The Principal Efficient
Cause is the Justice of God, inflicting punishment for sin. 3. The Instrumental
Causes are diverse, Angels and Men, both good and bad, and all other Creatures.
4. The Final Cause is, That the Justice of God may be satisfied.


The Causes of the Cross of the godly; viz. 1. The Acknowledging and purging
out of sin, 1 Cor. 11.32. Psa. 119.71. 2. The Hatred of the Devil and wicked
men, Joh. 15.19. 1 Pet. 5.8. 3. The Trial and Exercise of Godliness, Eccl.
34.10. 4. Particular Defects and Failings in the Saints, as in David and
others. 5. The Confirmation of the Truth by their Martyrdom, Joh. 21.18. 6.
Their glorious Delivery; that is, the Manifestation of the immeasurable Wisdom,
Power, Mercy, and Justice of God in their wonderful deliverance, 1 Samuel 2.6. 7.
The making of a Conformity between the Members and Christ their Head, both in
Affliction and Glory, 2 Timothy 2.12. 8. A Testimony and Confirmation of the
Judgment and Life to come, because Gods Justice and Truth requires that in
the end it go well with the good, and ill with the bad; but this comes not to
pass in this life.


In all Chastisements how sharp soever, God is always to be acknowledged just in
laying them upon us: 1. Because his Punishments, though many times very
grievous, yet are always less then our deserts and offenses, Psalm. 103.10. 2.
Because our sins are the procuring Causes of all the Evils we suffer, Mic. 7.9.
3. Because in all his Corrections and Judgments he remembers Mercy, Hab. 3.2.


The Comforts and Consolations which are to be opposed to Afflictions to invite
us to Patience; viz. 1. Remission of Sins, and Reconciliation unto God in
Christ, Romans 5.1. and 8.3. 2. The Necessity of Obeying God, and the love which
we owe him, Job 2.10. Psalm. 3.9. 3. The worthiness of Virtue; that is, of
Obedience toward God, the true Virtue, Mat. 10.37. and 16.25. 4. A good
Conscience; the godly being assured of Remission of sins, purpose to obey God,
being confident of pardon in Christ, resolve to suffer any thing. 5. The Final
Causes thereof, as Gods glory, Psalm. 119.75. Our Salvation, 1 Cor. 11.32. The
Salvation of others, Acts 5. 6. The comparing together of Ends and Events; it
is better to suffer now then hereafter. 7. The Hope of Recompense; for the
Reward is great in Heaven, Mat. 5.12. 8. The Example of Christ, for the Servant
is not above his Master, Joh. 15.20. and of his Saints who have suffered before
us. 9. The Certain presence and assistance of God in all cases and chances of
this life, 1 Cor. 10.13. Psalm. 19.15. 10. The final and full Delivery, whereof
are three degrees, contrary to those of punishment: 1. In this life, when we
have the beginning of eternal life. 2. In our Bodily Death, when the Soul is
carried into Abraham's bosom. 3. After the Resurrection, when we shall be
perfectly blessed both in Body and Soul.



The way to comfort our selves in trouble: 1. It is our duty to acknowledge
Gods Mercy to be great, who might lay a heavier burden on us. 2. We must with
boldness come by Prayer unto the Throne of Grace, that we may put him in mind
of his Mercies. 3. We must thereby be drawn unto Repentance, acknowledge our
sins to have deserved far greater Judgments then yet we suffer, and turn unto
God with all our hearts. 4. We must praise the goodness of God in sparing us,
and not pouring out the full Vials of his wrath upon us. 5. We must remember,
That we think not our selves hardly dealt with, taking heed that we murmr
not, nor complain against God. 6. We must be patient, and not discouraged under
the Cross.


As the hand of Gods particular Providence is in all our Afflictions these
three ways: 1. He decrees and fore-appointeth them. 2. He effects them. 3.
He orders and disposes them.


So his presence with us in Affliction has these three ends or effects; viz.
1. To work our deliverance from the Cross, so far forth as it shall be for our
good. 2. To temper and moderate our Afflictions. 3. To give us strength and
power to bear his Affliction.


The fruit of Affliction; viz. 1. Consideration: they make men to see and
consider their sins. 2. Humiliation: they serve to humble men in their Souls
before God. 3. They serve to work Amendment of life. 4. Abnegation: they cause
men to deny themselves, and rely wholly on the Mercy of God. 5. Invocation:
they make us cry heartily and fervently unto God. 6. Patience: Affliction
brings forth Patience, Patience Experience. 7. Obedience: whereof we have an
Example even of Christ himself, Heb. 5.8.


Prosperity works in us effects contrary to those of Affliction: 1. It makes
us proud and insolent. 2. It stirs us up to serve our own wicked lusts fed
by it. 3. It hardneth us against the affection of Mercy. 4. It makes us cold,
negligent, and distracted in prayer. 5. It provokes us to impatience, wrath,
and self-confidence. 6. It besots us with the love of the world and our selves,
alienating our thoughts from the heavenly life.


For what causes God humbles his servants by Affliction: 1. That all glory and
praise may be given to him alone. 2. That we may put away the vain confidence
which naturally is in us, and cleave to him alone. 3. That we may be the better
fitted for Mercy, the better prepared to receive his gifts. 4. That we may
humble our selves, pray, repent, pity others, renounce the world, and desire
life Eternal.


Why the Lord sometimes defers deliverance from Affliction: 1. To humble us
thoroughly, and to bring us to an utter denial of our selves. 2. That we may
acknowledge from whence our Deliverance comes. 3. To make us distrust the
World, and draw our thoughts to the life to come. 4. To prevent greater evils
and dangers, wherein we might run.


God is said to deliver us two ways: 1. By preservation and keeping us, that we
shall not come into danger. 2. By freeing us from the trouble into which we are
fallen: And this is 1. By taking the misery from us. 2. By takingus from the
misery.



Directions to arm us with Patience, and to keep us from despising Gods
corrections: 1. In all Afflictions look as David did, 2 Samuel 16.10. unto him
that smites, and know that they come not by chance, but by Gods wise-disposing
Providence, and that purposely to breed in us true remorse. 2. Consider that
the Lord can add Cross to Cross, till he pull down our proud stomachs, break
our stiff necks, and bring us to utter confusion; yea, that his Wrath is as his
Greatness, Infinite. 3. Take notice of the Judgments which other men, by
despising the Lords corrections, bring upon themselves. 4. Make use of the
least Cross, and begin speedily to humble thy self, if thy heart begin to be
touched, suffer it not to be presently hardened again, but more and more humble
thy self.


Directions to keep us from fainting under the Cross: 1. We must not cast both
eyes on our selves and our own weakness, and the weight of the Crosses that lie
upon us, but lift up one unto God and unto his goodness, and consider how ready
he is to succor in all time of need. 2. Call to mind his manifold Promises,
both those which respect his gracious Assistance of us in the Trial, and his
mighty deliverance of us out of it. 3. Remember Examples of former times, how
he never oppressed them that patiently endured his corrections.


The benefit the Saints have by their peace with God in case of Affliction: 1.
It keeps many Judgments from us, which fall upon the wicked, yea which
otherwise would fall on us: for the Threatenings of God are made against such as
hate God and are hated of him. 2. It alters the nature of all Troubles which
befall us, the sting is pulled out, the curse is removed, they are not
vindictive for revenge, but rather medicinal for physic. 3. By it we are
assisted and supported in all to the great admiration of others. 4. By reason
thereof we obtain at length full freedom from all Troubles and Crosses,
according to Gods many faithful Promises made to his children, Psalm. 34.19.
Prove. 11.8. 1 Cor. 10.13.


The Promise of Comfort in Affliction is accomplished four ways: 1. When God
tempers and allays the Sorrows and Afflictions of them that mourn, according to
the measure of their strength, 1 Cor. 10.13. 2. When God removes the grief with
the causes thereof; thus he comforted Manasseh, 2 Chronicles. 33.13, 14. 3. When God
gives inward comfort to the heart and conscience by his Word and Spirit, Romans
5.3. 4. When God by death puts an end to all miseries, bringing our Souls to
eternal life. Thus Lazarus was comforted.


Motives to Patience: 1. We must know, That as all Affliction is from God, so
he will be with us, and have care over us under the Cross: for he is present
with his Servants in their Afflictions. 2. This meditation must enter into our
Souls, and never depart from us, that God will turn all our sorrows and
sufferings unto the best, and that every Affliction upon the Servants of God,
has some special goodness in it. 3. We must consider what we have deserved,
and how we may justly be punished, not only in that manner, but in a greater
measure. 4. We are made to suffer here, that we might not suffer elsewhere. 5.
It is the Will of God that we should suffer, to which we must willingly obey,
and humbly submit our selves, Phil. 1.29. For all Afflictions come to pass not
by accident, chance or fortune, but by the special Providence of God, who has
commanded Obedience. 6. We must consider that the party distressed has
partners in the Cross, That God will assist us in the patient bearing of them,
That God promises a blessed issue, That by means of them Prosperity is made
more pleasant and delectable. 7. That the Lord vouchsafes us the Honor to be
Martyrs, Witnesses of his Truth, made like unto Christ himself; yea, that while
we are made partakers of Christ's sufferings, the Spirit of God rests upon us,
wherewith we are marvellously comforted, 1 Pet. 4.14. 8. We must look upward to
our reward, which is great in heaven, Mat. 5.12.


The lets or hindrances of patience, viz. 1. Self-love, the very bane and
poison of all good and holy desires. 2. The desire of Revenge, that indeed
which belongs not to us. 3. Infidelity, when we cast off all confidence in God,
who maintains the lot of all those that trust in and depend upon him. 4. The
want of premeditation and consideration how we may continue and go through all
adversity, without starting back in any kind from our profession.


Means to procure Patience: 1. To pray to God for it, for he is the Author of
it, Romans 15.5. 2. Constantly to profess the Gospel, to hear the Word and
practice it, Rev. 3.10. 3. We must labor for the Spirit of God, which may work
patience in us, for it is a fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22.


The Vices repugnant to Patience; viz. 1. Impatience, which is through the not
knowing and distrust of Gods Wisdom, Providence, Justice and Goodness, not to
be willing to obey God in suffering, but through grief to fret against him, not
expecting or desiring any help or deliverance from him, but by yielding unto
grief, to be thereby solicited unto Despair. 2. Temerity or Rashness, which is
through foolishness, not knowing or not considering the dangers, our own
calling, or the Will of God, through a confidence in our selves to adventure on
dangers without need or necessity. 3. Too light regard of Crosses, Prove. 3.11.
So some despise them as matters not much to be regarded, not looking to God who
smites. This is commonly caused either by stupidity of mind, or stubbornness
of will; such endure many troubles, but receive no good by any: Into this fall
the wicked sort. 4. Too great fear of such Crosses as God lays on men, Heb.
12.5. Thus others faint and sink under the burden of them, as if they were
unsupportable, not to be endured, fixing their eyes too fast upon the Justice
and Wrath of God. Into this Extreme fall the weaker sort, yea many of the dear
Saints and Servants of God, Psalm. 6.6.


Would thou be Fire-proof in the midst of Flame,
Or burn a Martyr, yet not feel the same?
In Chains more free then Kings on Thrones would be,
Fettered and manacled to Liberty,
So great a pleasure done thee by thy pains,
Thou may be bound, as by, so to thy Chains?
Thrive by the Cross, and have Affliction prove
No Scourge of Justice, but the Rod of Love?
If so, put on this Armor of Defense,
This never-Conquer'd Virtue, PATIENCE.
. 5. Of Hope.
HOpe is an infallible and most comfortable expectation of all the Promises
made by God unto the Faithful for Christ's sake, and so of an allaiment of
present afflictions, and of a final deliverance from the same; and lastly, an
earnest looking for all those blessings necessary to salvation, according to
the good will and pleasure of God. This Hope springs from Faith, for he that
is certain of the present will of God toward him, that is assured of his grace
and favor, has also certain and assured promises of the time to come; For God
is unchangeable, yea, and the gifts and calling of God are without repentance.
Now when we believe on true, sound, and undeceiveable grounds that Christ is
ours, that heaven is ours, that our sins are pardoned, and that we are the
Adopted sons of God; then comes in Hope, and that passionately expects that
which is to come; yea, though Persecution, Fire, Sword, Famine, Pestilence,
Bondage, and thousands of other crosses and calamities involve us to eclipse
our Faith, this Hope holds us above the Waves, makes us danger-proof, roots us
unanchorable, and at length brings us safe to our expected haven.

The diverse Acceptance of Hope in Scripture: 1. For the thing hoped for, Tit.
2.13. Ephesians. 1.18. 2. It signifies the person we hope in, Psalm. 46.1. 3. It is
taken for the Object of our hope, which is only good things to come, Col. 1.5.
4. For the certainty of future glory, Romans 5.4, 5. 5. It is taken for a
Theological virtue by which we hope, 1 Cor. 13.13.


Hope is twofold: 1. Counterfeit; as 1. Such as Papists have, grounded upon
their own Merits, not on God. 2. Deceitful, such as ignorant Christians on
their Deathbeds presume to have. 3. Of those who put their hope in men,
wealth, etc. or partly in these, partly in God.
2. True, sound and saving, which is the gift of God wrought in our hearts by
his Spirit, that we being persuaded by Faith of Gods Goodness, Truth, Fidelity
and Power, do wait with patience for the fulfilling of his Promises, especially
that main Promise of Salvation in the life to come.


The grounds of Hope are the full persuasion of 1. The goodness of God, which
is 1. General, to all, to just and unjust, Psalm. 145.9. 1. Special, whereby in
a more special manner he is good to the faithful, which is 1. Unchangeable, Romans
11.29. 2. Invincible; the Devil nor his Instruments cannot hinder it. 3.
Everlasting; because it never fades, but endures for ever.

2. The Truth of God, which is considered 1. In God himself 3 ways: 1. In his
Essence, by which he is truly Existent. 2. In Quality, by which all spoken of
him in Scripture is most true. 3. In Operation, by which all his works are
agreeable to his Nature, most truly good, void of all falsehood, Rev. 15.3.
Psalm. 111.7.
2. In his Word, which is most pure and holy as himself, it is Truth it self,
Joh. 17.17. For it is 1. The Word of God who is Truth it self. 2. It contains
no falsehood, only that which is true. 3. It is a special means to bring us to
the knowledge of the Truth.

3. The fidelity and faithfulness of God, Psalm. 89.34.28. Tit. 1.9. 4. The
Power and Omnipotency of God, being able to perform his Promise, Romans 4.21.


To the right manner of the exercise of Hope, is required 1. Patience toward
God and man, Luke 21.19. Heb. 10.36. 2. Assurance; it is Faith and Hope's
nature to be certain: we must hope assuredly for the Promise. Thus Abraham,
Romans 4.20.21. 3. Earnestness; which is a fervent desire of the Soul, looking
and earnestly expecting the day of Christ, and the accomplishment of the
Promise. 4. Cheerfulness; which is an inward rejoicing in the heart, proceeding
from the persuasion of participation of Celestial glory in the world to come.
5. Continuance and perseverance, even in the midst of the most dangerous and
comfortless Afflictions, Isa. 26.4.


Our Hope must be steadfast, immovable and continual, for these Reasons: 1.
Because the Malice of the Wicked, the Temptations of Satan, the Scoffs in the
World, and the Corruption of our Nature, are continually seeking our
destruction, 1 Pet. 5.8, 9. 2. Because the Lord has given us the Victory over
Sin, Death and Hell, through our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 15.17, 18. 3.
Because the Promise is made to none but those that endure and hold out unto the
end, Mat. 24.13. 4. Because unless our hope be constant, we are none of Gods
children, none of his Spiritual Temple, neither does God dwell in our hearts by
his Spirit, Heb. 3.6.


Hope is the Helmet of Salvation, 1 Thessalonians. 5.8. which is thus applied to Hope
for these Reasons: 1. Because Salvation is the main end of our Hope, that which
above all other things we wait for: when we come to the possession of it, then
has Hope her end and period. 2. Because it is a special means of attaining to
Salvation: we are saved by Hope, Romans 2.24. This is that Cord whereby we hold
fast to all Gods Promises, which will not be let go until we enjoy Salvation.
3. Because it herein differs from the Hope of Worldlings, which reaches no
further then to the things of this life: therefore when they dye, their hope
perishes, Prove. 11.17.


The two special and principal Properties of Hope; viz. 1. Assurance, in regard
whereof Hope makes not ashamed, Romans 5.5. Disappointeth not; therefore it is
worthily termed The Anchor of the Soul both sure and steadfast, Heb. 6.19. 2.
Patience, for if we hope for that we see not, we do with patience wait for the
accomplishment of it, Romans 8.25. 1 Thessalonians. 1.3.


Some men have neither Faith, Hope nor Fear, as 1. Atheists, that have some
vain Hope, but no Fear. 2. Devils and desperate men, that have some Fear, but
no Hope. 3. Presumptuous men, who have but a shadow of Faith.


How Hope is gotten preserved and well used: 1. It is gotten by the same means
that Faith is: for it is the Daughter of Faith. The means which beget Faith, do
immediately hereupon beget Hope. 2. It is preserved 1. By a due consideration
and full persuasion of Gods Promises: As 1. His Free Grace. 2. His Infinite
Power. 3. His Infallible Truth. 4. His Unsearchable Wisdom.
2. By a faithful Remembrance of Gods former dealings, specially with our
selves, whereof we have two notable Examples, one of Jacob, Genesis 32.10. the
other of David, 1 Samuel 17.37.
3. It is well used 1. By casting the Anchor of Hope on a sure ground, Heb.
6.19. which is Gods Promise revealed in his Word. 2. By fast fixing it on that
sure ground; that is, when his Promises are steadfastly believed. 3. By often
setting and fixing it anew, by often renewing the hold; that is, by meditating
again and again in those Promises, which we have known and believed, and often
calling to mind Gods former benefits, and performance of his Promises.



Hope is very necessary in these four respects: 1. In regard of the time which
God has set down for the accomplishment of his Promises, which time is often
both unknown and long dated; though the time be of God certainly determined; so
as it cannot be prevented, Joh. 7.30. nor shall be over-passed, Heb. 2.3. yet
it is not always made known unto us, Mat. 13.32. Acts 1.7. 2. In regard of
those many troubles and perplexities which do fall out betwixt the making and
accomplishing of Gods Promises. Israel may be a sad witness hereof, ere they
enjoyed the promised Canaan. 3. In regard of the Scoffs and Reproaches of the
wicked, as when the accomplishment of the Promises is deferred, 2 Pet. 3.4.
also in time of Affliction, Psalm. 42.10. and in the extremity of Affliction,
Psa. 3.2. 4. In regard of our own weakness: for we are very prone by Nature to
think, That God remembers not his Promises, especially if he delay their
accomplishment, or bring us to any straights, and seem to hide his face.


God draws the Will to Take Christ, and so the Mind to Hope in the Promises,
by these 3 means; viz. 1. By being persuaded what the miserable condition of
man is, that is not yet come to Christ, that is not yet in him, nor partaker of
his Benefits. 2. By the good that we shall get by it. 3. That he shall not lose
his labor if he do attempt it: Now Faith only applies the Promises with
boldness; but we are not affected with Spiritual Privileges, because we look
on them with a general eye, as matters of fancy and speculation, because we see
no such thing, we have no feeling of them. And the Promises of God are always
to be understood with an Exception of the Cross of the godly, and of the
punishments and chastisements of such as depart from God and Sin, or with a
condition of perseverance in Faith and godliness.


When thou see that thou have put thy Seal to the Truth, that thou believe
the Promises, and hopest in them, then consider whether God has put his Seal
to thee. Now we must know that there is a double Seal: 1. Secret; that is, the
Secret Witness that God gives to every man's heart, as a Privy Seal that God
sets on it. 2. A more Open one, in life and conversation, whereby he enables us
to depart from iniquity, 2 Timothy 2.29.


Hope and Faith differ 1. In their Order: Faith is first, for it brings forth
Hope; Faith is the ground of things hoped for, Heb. 11.1. 2. In the kind of
Object: Faith is of things past, Heb. 11.3. and present, Joh. 20.19. Hope,
only of things to come. 3. In their Nature: Faith believes the very Truth of
Gods Promises, and seals that God is true; Hope waits till God manifest and
accomplish his Truth.


In like manner Hope and Presumption differ: Now Presumption may be these four
ways: 1. When men live in their sins without Faith and Repentance, presuming of
the Mercy of God; and because God is merciful, they take occasion to sin more
freely. 2. When men persuade themselves they hope in God, when indeed they do
not; persuading themselves upon no ground, That they live in expectation of the
life to come, being destitute of saving Knowledge, Faith and Repentance. 3.
When men live in sin, thinking afterward to convert themselves when they list.
4. When men presuming too much on their own power and strength, even after
Conversion, think they stand so fast they cannot fall.


The Signs of found Hope: 1. A purging of our selves to resemble God in purity,
1 John 3.3. 2. True filial fear of God, Psalm. 147.11. 3. A weaning our selves
from the most desirable outward things of this life: and that for these
Reasons; viz. 1. They cannot possibly fill the unlimited desire of the Soul. 2.
They cannot secure the Conscience, distressed with the apprehension of the
Wrath of God, or prevent his Judgments. 3. They cannot stretch themselves unto
Eternity.
4. A Rejoicing for the Salvation in the last day, and in this Joy a Delight in
the means, as the Word and Sacraments, Prayer, good and godly men, etc.


Motives to labor for true Hope; viz. 1. The Commandment of God, and the
Admonition to Hope so frequently multiplied in the holy Scripture, Psalm. 42.5.
and 43.5. and 37.34, 7. and 27.14. 2. The Excellency of Hope, for God himself
is called The God of Hope, Romans 15.13. it is also called Blessed Hope, Tit.
2.13. 3. The Profit of this Grace of Hope; as Piety, 1 John 3.3. Comfort in
affliction, Phil. 1.21, 23. Blessedness, Psalm. 146.5. 4. The Necessity of it,
for without it we Christians were of all men the most miserable, 1 Cor. 15.19.


The means to attain unto Hope viz. 1. Diligent and fervent prayer to God, Ephesians.
1.18. 2. We must labor for a full persuasion of the Goodness, Truth, Fidelity,
and Power of God toward us, Romans 15.13. 3. We must labor to have a true
experience of Gods love and favor toward us, 1 Samuel 17.31 unto 51. 4. We must
put upon us the whole Armor of God, Ephesians. 6.11, 12, etc. 5. We must be often
conversant in Reading, Hearing, Conferring and Meditating on the Scripture,
Romans 5.4.


The Vices repugnant to Hope, and forbidden in this Commandment; viz. 1.
Despair, which is to esteem our sins to be greater then the merit of the Son of
God, and to refuse the Mercy of God offered in his Son the Mediator; and
therefore not to look for those Blessings which are promised unto the godly,
but to be tormented with an horrible sense and feeling of Gods wrath, and with
a fear of being hereafter cast away into everlasting pains, and to stand in
horror of God, and to hate him as if he were cruel. 2. A Doubting of the
Blessings to come, which are expressed in the Word, as of everlasting life, and
of final perseverance. This Doubtfulness neither steadfastly assenteth to the
Doctrine of God, nor altogether gainsays it, but being floating and wavering,
has a weak inclination, now to one part, and now to another. 3. Carnal
Security, which is, To live without thinking of God or his Will, or of our own
infirmity and dangers, and without acknowledging or bewailing of our sins, and
without the fear of God, and yet to promise unto our selves an indemnity from
the anger of God, and from punishment without Faith or Repentance.


Suppose the World a Sea, on whose uneven
Tempestuous Waves sails Man that is bound for Heaven;
Whose Understanding at the Rudder stands,
To dictate to the Will what she commands
The Affections, who Vsurper-like do sway,
Command and Rule that Power they should obey;
Whereby the Vessel often miscarries, and
The Fraught of Graces swallowed in the sand.
When Romes Euroclidons from Hell are sent,
Faith's shipwrack'd, 'less Hopes Anchor does prevent.
. 6. Of Love.
THe Love of God is a most upright affection of the Mind, by which God is
loved for himself, and our Neighbor for God: which Love is grounded on Gods
love to us, 1 John 4.19. Indeed Love is nothing else but a disposition of the
Will, whereby it cleaves or makes forward to some good that is agreeable to it
self; yea, all the Affections are nothing else but the diverse motions and
turnings of the Will. Now Love is that act of the Will, whereby it turns it
self to a thing; as Hatred is that whereby it turns it self from a thing: And
the object of Love is somewhat that is good, not that is True, or that is
Beautiful, for this is only the object of the intuitive understanding: So that
to love the Lord, is not only required, That we be persuaded that he is
well-affected to us, That he is willing to receive us, but also that we look on
him as one that is suitable and agreeable to us: And indeed, that is the main,
the other will follow easily. Hence men may have a persuasion of their sins
forgiveness, and yet want true Faith, for that which begets not Love is not
Faith: Now a man may have that persuasion of Christ, yet not love Christ (as a
Prisoner may of the Judge, yet not love the Judge) for love comes from some
suitableness, some agreeableness between the parties: but when a man is
humbled, and looks on Christ, and again is persuaded that Christ looks on him,
and that Christ will take him; when this is done, then a man receives Christ by
Faith, and from this Faith issues this Love.

These two great radical Virtues, Faith and Love, are the two Pillars, as it
were, upon which the Fabric of our Salvation is built: for nothing makes us
the Sons of God, but such Faith as is accompanied with Love and good Works: It
is Gods pleasure to save us in this manner, that it may be of grace. To love any
man because he is a Christian and a child of God, is a sensible and certain
note that he is partaker of the true Love of God in Christ: And it is much
easier to love Holiness in the Saints then in God himself, because he is far
remote from us, and they amongst us are visibly seen; therefore unless we find
our hearts inwardly moved to love them, yea with a natural affection as it
were, we but pretend to love God. Love is a commanding Affection, yea Love and
Hatred are as it were the great Lords and Masters that divide the Affections
between them. Now the Reason why we hate God naturally, is by reason of that
opposition and contrariety which is between God and every Man by Nature: for
all Love comes from similitude and agreeableness; therefore this sinful Nature
of ours must be broken in pieces and subdued, again new-molded and framed,
before it can ever be fit to love God. Hence it is that any natural man that
has the most impure heart, may, to escape Hell and get Heaven, do all the
works the Papists require, and for the same end that they require them, but to
do it out of love to God, that is a thing no Hypocrite can reach to; and
therefore the giving a cup of cold water proceeding from Love, is a better work
then a Martyrdom, the giving ones body to be burned, and all that he has to
feed the poor, if it come not from Love; yea, then all this coming not from
Love, is to God more acceptable, the very will of doing the least good, though
the deed be never done, so the Will arise from this affection of Love: But when
a man loves not, he breaks the whole Law; for as Love is the keeping of the
whole Law, so the want of Love is the breach of the whole Law.

Now true love looks first to Christ's person, next to the Promises and benefits
we have by him: And this love to God does not so restrain us, but we may love
the Creature also; yet so, that if this Love to the Creature does
overbalance, or any away lessen our love to God by the inordinateness of it
to the Creature, then is it an adulterous love: Nor does it restrain our
liberty, for he that gives his heart to God, has as much liberty as he that
follows his lusts; all the difference is, the one is an unjust owner, the
other the Lord has made the steward of his own heart, so that he has it as
before, only now he does use it at Gods appointment, before it was at his own.

What it is to love God: 1. To acknowledge God to be exceeding good, bountiful
and merciful, not only in himself, but also in us and toward us, and that
therefore he does employ his Power, Wisdom, Justice, Mercy and Goodness to our
Salvation, and so through the acknowledging of this his infinite goodness
toward us to love God, as that we more covet and desire our conjoyning and
conformity with him, and the execution of his Will, then all other things
whatsoever. 2. To leave and relinquish all things, rather then to be bereaved
of his communion and fellowship, or to offend him in any thing; and to be ready
to part with all other things which we love, for his sake, and to care for
nothing more then how we may do things acceptable and grateful to him.


There are five kinds of Love; viz. 1. Love of Piety, when we desire the
preservation of any thing. 2. A Love of Concupisence; that is, to love a thing
merely for our use. 3. A Love of Complacency; so the Master loves a towardly
Scholar. 4. A Love of Friendship; that is, a Reciprocation of affection. 5. A
Love of Dependence; that is, to love one on whom all good depends, so we are
said to Love God, yea with the three last kinds of Love.


Love is threefold 1. Natural, wherewith we love our selves, children, wealth,
etc. 2. Sinful, that carries natural love the wrong way to love sinful things.
3. Spiritual, which sets limits to this Natural love, yea elevates it, and
makes it an holy love.


Love to God is twofold: 1. General or Natural, which is in every one by
Nature: Thus the wicked love God, as he is Summum Bonum, and doing good to all
touching outward affairs. This is not true Love. 2. Special, when a man upon
true evidences persuading himself of Gods Love to himself, in particular, does
upon this sensible feeling and perceiving of Gods goodness, return unto God all
his Heart, all his Soul, all his Stength, in Love and Thankfulness.


The right order of Love: 1. God in the first place must be loved, for that is
the cause of love to our Neighbor. 2. We must love in Man only those things
which are to be loved, not those things which are to be abhorred. 3. We must
not love those more or less who are equally to be loved, nor those equally who
are more or less to be loved. 4. We must love the Creator for himself, but the
Creature for Gods sake.


The right order of Love, as touching the degrees thereof: 1. We must love
those that belong to the Church in general, before a private Member thereof. 2.
Those of the household of Faith, before those which are not, for they are Sons
with us, as well by Adoption as Creation. 3. Those to whom we are bound by any
bond of duty, nearer to us then other men. 4. Not strangers so much as
acquaintance, not enemies so much as friends. 5. For equals, we must proportion
our affection to them more or less, as they are more or less profitable to the
Church of God.


The love of God is wrought in us two ways: 1. By breaking our Nature in pieces
as it were; that is, by Humiliation and the Law. 2. By moulding it anew, which
is done by Faith and the Gospel.


A man may also be assured of his love to God 2 ways: 1. By his conformity to
him in Holiness; not in equality and perfection, but in similitude and
conformity. 2. By the weaning of his affection from the things of this world,
so far forth as they are severed from the Fear and Love of God.


The Reasons why he that loves not Christ, shall not be saved: 1. Because there
is a Curse on him and a woe due to him, for to serve God, and not to love him,
is but Hypocrisy, which is to do the outward action, without the inward
sincerity; that is, without Love. 2. Because he breaks the Evangelical Law; now
he that breaks the Law has a curse due to him. 3. Because he is an Adulterer;
now in the Law of God an Adulterer ought to dye, and he that loves not the Lord
is an Adulterer; that is, he is false to the Lord that should be his husband,
and loves somewhat else. 4. Because he slights and rejects the Lords gracious
offer.


The Disposition of all those that love God, is, To have their hearts after
Gods own heart; and this is proper to the Saints: And the way to know whether
our hearts be so or not, is by doing these two things; viz. 1. By hating what
God hates; for our actions are effects of our affections. 2. By loving those
that fear the Lord, and hating those that are enemies to him.


The difference between the love of God and fear of God; viz. 1. The love of
God arises from a Knowledge of Gods goodness: The fear of God arises from a
Knowledge of Gods Justice, and of his Power to punish sins, and of that Right
which he has over all Creatures. 2. Love pursues good, as God, and our
conjunction with him; but Fear flies evil, or the displeasure and wrath of
God, and our separation from him.


The right manner of love to God: 1. It must be with all the heart; that is, the
whole stream of our affections, desires, intentions and endeavors. 2. It must
be with all our might; that is, according to the Talent that God in any kind
has given us. 3. It must be with the whole man, with all the faculties and
powers both of soul and body, Deuteronomy. 6.5. 4. We must love God above all; that
is, incomparably above all; absolutely for himself, and all good things for his
sake, Mat. 10.17. 5. We must be rooted and grounded in love; that is, not by
fits and starts, but to be permanent in love. 6. It must be diligent and
operative, not an idle and negligent love. 7. It must be free, without
constraint; sound, not in hypocrisy; total, without division; continual,
without end.


Why we must love the Lord above all: 1. Because he is most Excellent, and the
most amiable of all. 2. Otherwise we love him not as God. 3. Else we should not
love him constantly. 4. Because he has done for us more then all. 5. Because
he is the uttermost end of all Natures.


The way to be rooted in Love, is, 1. To be rooted and grounded in Faith. 2. To
pitch our love on Christ's person, not to love him for byrespects.


Wherein our love must be diligent: 1. In preparing for Christ's coming. 2. In
adorning and beautifying the Soul for the approach of her Lover. 3. In keeping
his Commandments.


God deals not hardly with us in requiring love, and that for these Reasons:
1. It is that which every one may do. 2. He might have required far harder
things. 3. It is for our own benefit.


The effect of love in the heart: 1. It makes the heart to cleave unto God, and
to be well pleased with him simply for himself. 2. It moves the heart to seek
by all means possible to have true worship with God in Christ.


The signs of our love to God: 1. Obedience both Active and Passive to Gods
Commandments, Joh. 14.15. 2. A careful hearing, conscionable keeping, continual
meditating, and effectual practicing of Gods Word, Joh. 14.23. 3. A true love
toward our Brethren, 1 John 4.20. and 5.1.


The signs of hatred of God; viz. 1. If we desire that he were not, that there
were no God to call us to Account. 2. If we look on him as upon a Judge only,
and not also as a loving Father. 3. When we look on God and his ways as
contrary to our hearts. 4. If we love any thing, as Wealth and Pleasure, more
then God.


The Trials of our love to God in Christ: 1. By the quickness and activeness of
the heart after Christ. 2. By the Affections, as grief when he is absent, joy
when he is present. 3. By hating sin, and loving the Saints. 4. By doing for
his sake, yea matters of greatest difficulty. 5. By the Bounty, as to part with
Credit, Liberty, yea all for Christ. 6. By walking with the Lord; that is, by
observing his dealing to us, and ours to him again. 7. By the Diligence of our
love, by the pains we take for his glory. 8. By our Desire of the present
enjoyment of the thing beloved, without deferring. 9. By the Wages thereof, for
love desires no wages but the thing loved; so that he that loves the Lord
indeed, would serve him for his own sake, were there no Reward here, nor Heaven
hereafter: for Love is its own wages. 10. By its Constraining us to please God:
for if we love the Lord, it will put such necessity upon us to please him, to
obey him in all things, to do what he requires, whatsoever is for his
advantage, that we cannot choose but do it, 2 Cor. 5.


The Trial of the Bounty of our love: 1. When it crosses Advantages to our
selves. 2. When it crosses Self-love, for every man has some particular
Temptation. 3. When it is done cheerfully and willingly, not grudgingly and
niggardly.


Trials of our love to holy men: 1. To love all the Saints; to love all grace,
all holiness in all the Saints. 2. To love none but the Saints with the love of
Complacency; indeed the love of Pity reaches to all Mankind. 3. To love them
as they excel in grace, in holiness, as they are more strict, etc. 4. By
delighting in their Company, and by the fruits of love to them.


The Properties of Love mentioned in the Holy Scripture, whereby we may examine
whether we have true love or no: 1. Love is Bountiful, 1 Cor. 13. God observes
what his service does cost us. 2. Love is contented with nothing but love
again; the sanctified are not content with Mercy without Grace. 3. Love
desires the second coming of Christ, 2 Timothy 4.8. It loves his Appearance here
also in the beauty and purity of his Ordinances. 4. Love delights to be
always speaking of the party loved: Do we make the Lord Jesus our Discourse? 5.
Love will do much, and suffer much, and both willingly for the party beloved.
6. Love is like Fire, in four respects: 1. It is Active, it will set all thy
faculties awork for Gods service. 2. It is Quick, it will not delay from day to
day what God requires of thee. 3. It is Vehement, it will bestow the height of
your intentions about holy things. 4. It is Powerful, it overcomes all
impediments, still aspiring toward Heaven.
7. Love commands all the Affections: especially Anger, when impediments
cross us: This is Zeal. Fear, to tremble at Gods Word, at his Judgments.
8. Love does things freely, and not looks for an exact Recompense; which is
manifest in these two things: 1. It will not limit it self in Duties. 2. It
will not indent with God for Reward.
9. Love to God hates sin; many are angry with sin, but hate it not. 10. Love
loves the Saints of God, for they are his Image, differing only in degrees.


The sincerity of our love to the Lord, may be known these two ways: 1. By our
even carriage toward him, not sometimes for him and sometimes for our lusts.
2. By our constant carriage, by our continuance and holding out in his service;
yet daily infirmities break not the Covenant, so long as our hearts are
sincere, and we take not another husband; that is, love not any lust more then
Christ.


Reasons or Motives persuasive to love the Lord; viz. 1. The Commandment of
God; The Exhortations of the Prophets and Apostles, Deuteronomy. 6.5. Mat. 22.37. Mark
12.30. 2. The Examples of the holy men of God, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs,
etc. as Abraham, Genesis 12. Josh. 23. Peter, Joh. 21. 3. The Excellency of it,
for it knitteth and binds all other Virtues together; yea, he that loves is
in God, and God in him. 4. The Profit of it: for all things work together for
the best, to those that love God, Romans 8.28. 5. The Necessity of it: for
without love, all other Virtues and rare Perfections profit us nothing, 1 Cor.
13. 6. It sets a Price on all we do, be it never so small, be it but a Cup of
cold water given in love. 7. We lose not by this love, which is contrary to all
other loves even in that. 8. The Lord is Worthy of our love: for all Excellency
is in God, and he is wholly delectable. 9. The consideration of the Greatness
of God might command our love; yea, seeing this great and mighty God is a
suitor to us for it. 10. The easy Conditions he requires of us: for he might
have commanded us to offer our children in Sacrifice, and our bodies to be
burned, in being our Sovereign Creator, and we his Creatures. 11. God has
planted this very Affection of Love in us for this very end; and does he then
call for more then his own? 12. We have engaged our selves to love the Lord,
being Baptized in his Name; nay, he has bought us too, and loves us; yea so,
as he gave even himself for us: Does not this deserve Love? O consider this,
all ye Adulterers, that divorce your selves from Heaven, to be enamored with
Hell and your own Damnation.


What lies in the understanding between God and us that hinders Love: for Love
uniteth 1. Temptations to Atheism. 2. Temptations to think that the Scriptures
are not true. 3. Temptations to think amiss of God in any thing. 4. Temptations
to doubt of the favor of God.


The two main Impediments of our love to Christ: 1. Strangeness, for it
dissolveth Love, breeding Ignorance and Fearfulness; but a truly grounded holy
Boldness, is the Parent and Nurse of Love. 2. Uncircumcision of heart, or
worldly-mindedness, Deuteronomy. 30.6. that is, worldly Lusts, worldly Cares, worldly
Desires, when they abound in the heart.


The Means to enable us to Love the Lord; viz. 1. Labor to know him: Beseech
the Lord to show himself to thee, for till then thou will never love him. 2. We
must labor to know our selves: We must consider our sins, what we are, what
hearts we have, what lives we have led. 3. We must labor to get the Assurance
of Gods special Love to us; the two notes whereof are these: 1. The Love of our
Brethren: for then we love God, and then he loves us. 2. Our love of God: for
whom God loves, to them he gives his grace to love him again.
4. Prayer, for it is a lovely Suit; and think you that if we request to love
him, he will deny it us? surely no, Jam. 1.17. 5. A careful and diligent
Hearing of Gods Word, with continual Meditation on the same, whereby we attain
to Faith, which inflames us with Gods love toward us, and thereby stirs up
again our love toward God. 6. We must labor earnestly that the Spirit of God
may dwell in our hearts: Love is a fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22. 7. The
continual Meditation of Gods wonderful works, and of his infinite benefits,
which by the death of his only begotten Son, he bestowed so freely on us.


The love of our Neighbor is said to be like unto our love to God for these
Reasons: 1. Because that Commandment of loving our Neighbor, is opposed unto
the Ceremonies. 2. Because the Obedience of the First Table, is the cause of
the Second. 3. Because the breach of the Second Table, does as well deserve
eternal punishments, as the breach of the First. 4. Because it appertains to
the Moral Worship, which is described in the First and Second Table. 5. Because
of the Coherence of both, for that neither can be observed without the other.
6. Because one is the Author of both. 7. Because both of them contain our whole
Obedience.


The manner how we must love men; viz. 1. It must be as Christ has loved us,
Ephesians. 5.2. not in equality, but resemblance and conformity. 2. We must love our
Neighbor as our selves, Mat. 22.39. 3. We must love them as the same Members of
the same body love one another, Romans 12.4, 5.


Our love must be conformable to Christ's love: The manner whereof was this; viz.
1. Christ's love was Free, without constraint, not for any Merit in us, 1 John
4.19. 2. His love was a right and True love, he loved us not to profit or
benefit himself, but only us. 3. His love was Discreet, he loved our persons,
not our sins, 1 Cor. 13.5, 6. 4. His love was Vehement, he gave himself to the
death for us, 1 John 3.16. 5. His love was Fruitful, showing it self in the
effects thereof, Jam. 2.15, 16. 6. His love was Constant, Joh. 13.1. True love
does never fall away, 1 Cor. 13.8. 7. His love was General, to the Poor as to
the Rich, to his Friends, to his Foes, Mat. 5.44.


That we may know how to love our Neighbor as our selves, we must know that
Self-love is twofold: 1. General, which is Natural Love, whereby every one
seeks his own good and preservation: This kind of love in it self is not
evil, the order thereof being rightly observed. 2. Special, which is 1. Carnal,
whereby a man prefers the benefit of his Body and Flesh, before the good of
his Soul and Spirit, 2 Timothy 3.2. This is a Mother-sin. 2. Spiritual, whereby a
man prefers the good of his Soul before all things in the world.



That we may know how to love our Neighbors as fellow members, we must know,
That 1. One Member of the Humane Body does not envy another, which has not the
same office with it, 1 Cor. 12. 2. One Member does not appropriate his Office
to it self, but communicates it to the good of all. 3. One Member of the Body
being hurt of the other, does not revenge it self upon the other Members. 4.
One Member suffers with another, and rejoices with another, Romans 12.15. 5.
One Member of the Body exposes it self to danger for the defense of another.


The Properties of true love to our Brethren: 1. It must be in Adversity as
well as Prosperity. 2. It must be sincere and sound, not feigned or
hypocritical, Romans 12.9. 3. It must be fervent, increasing inwardly, and
showing it self in the fruits thereof outwardly, 1 Pet. 4.8. 4. It must be
constant, holding out unto the end, Heb. 13.1. 5. It must not be for any
private by-respects. 6. We must love those that are our enemies and hate us,
Mat. 5.46, 47.


The signs of true Christian Brotherly love: 1. If we love God unfeignedly with
our hearts, and labor to keep his Commandments, 1 John 5.2. 2. If we love
without servile and slavish fear, for there is no such fear in love, 1 John
4.18. 3. If we can forgive wrongs, forget to revenge them, and pray for them
that did them, 1 Cor. 13. 4. If it be not only in time of Prosperity, but when
he stands in most need of our love: if it be more manifest to our Brother in
his adversity then in his prosperity, Prove. 17.17. 5. If it be not for outward
respects, but because they are the Sons of God. 6. If it be not outward in show
only, but inward in the heart.


Motives persuasive, or Reasons to enforce our love to our Brethren: 1. Except
we love our Brethren, we do not love God; and if not God, he not us, 1 John
4.20. 2. Except we have this love, we know not God, for God is love, 1 John
4.8. 3. If we love not our Brethren, we abide in death, 1 John 3.14. are none
of Gods children, 1 John 3.10. but the Devils. 4. He that loves not his
Brother is a manslayer, neither shall he be saved, 1 John 3.15. 5. Because God
so commands us to love one another, yea on pain of eternal death, Heb. 2.2.


The Vices repugnant unto the love of God; viz. 1. The casting away of Gods
love, or the contempt and hatred of God, which is through the alienation of our
Nature from God and Gods Justice, and by reason of an inclination thereof to
sin, therefore to fly and shun God, accusing and punishing Sin. 2. Inordinate
love of our selves, and of other creatures, which is to prefer our Lusts, or
Pleasures, or Life, or Glory, or any other thing before God, and his Will, and
Glory, and to be willing rather to neglect and offend him, then to part from
those things which we love. 3. A feigned love of God, an hypocritical,
counterfeit, or self-respecting love, whereby also we may here offend: Now we
cannot here ever offend in the excess, because we never love God so much as we
should.


Hail, O thou lovely Grace, whose rare feature,
When Faith and Hope vanish from the Creature,
Shall ever Luster forth, in Heaven be,
As now of Sweetness, full of Majesty.
By thee the Graces all enameled are,
Amongst whom thou shin'st the Heart Attractive Star:
By thee the Saints are ever so inflamed,
To be but warm they are holily ashamed.
Sweet Flame! perfume my Soul, and in thy fire
Ravished, let me from whence thou came, aspire.
. 7. Of the Fear of God.
THe last Virtue required in this First Commandment, is the Fear of God; which
being formerly touched, and though taken in a strict consideration, was yet
found to be a great part of the Worship of God, and an infallible Sign of the
true Religion: We shall therefore in this place speak a word more of it, only
in reference thereto. Now whereas it is said to be a great part of the Worship
of God, it is understood chiefly and principally of the Inward Worship, which
alone is properly, simply, and of it self the Worship of God; the Outward is
not simply the Worship of God, but only so far forth as it is quickened by the
Inward, and grounded on it. God is a Spirit, his Worship is Spiritual. This is
the Worship of the Mind, the Heart, the Conscience, the Will and Affections:
for Man by all these jointly and severally performs Worship and Service to
his Creator; and this is the Spiritual Worship of the Inward Man, the
Foundation of all true Worship of God: whereas the Outward Worship is only
that, whereby the Inward is testified outwardly by the speech and actions. The
Worship of God, according to his Word, consists in things which God either
gives us, as his Titles and Works; or requires of us, as Hearing his Word,
Prayer, Sacraments, Vows and Swearing, in all which thou shall fear the Lord
thy God, because he is the Lord, Levit. 14.19. To which may be added Outward
Adoration, Confession (not ordinary or Ecclesiastical Confession, but such as
is made before the Adversary) and Fasting; in all which the Fear of God, which
is taken for the whole Worship of God, or for the general Obedience, according
to all Gods Commandments, Prove. 1.7. This Fear, which arises from a knowledge
of Gods Justice, and of his Power to punish sins, from a consideration of of
that Right and Dominion which he has over all Creatures. This Fear, which is
an acknowledging of sin and the wrath of God, keeps the whole Man in a
Religious Respect, a holy Dreadfulness, and in an awful Reverence of the great
and mighty Majesty of Heaven and Earth, commands him to walk as in the Presence
of God, that even his whole Conversation seems one undiscontinued, holy, and
Religious Adoration.

The whole Worship of God may stand in these five particulars; viz. 1. To Fear
and Love him above all. 2. To Believe in all his Promises without doubting. 3.
To Call upon him in all our necessities. 4. To be Thankful unto him for all his
Benefits, which shows it self in these 2 things; viz. 1. An Acknowledgement of
the heart, That our Souls, and whatsoever we have is Gods, and proceeds from
his Blessing alone. 2. In a Consecration of our Bodies, Souls, Lives, Callings
and Labors, to the honor and service of God.
5. To be Obedient to all his Commandments.


The Worship of God consists in things that are 1. Perpetual, which are 1.
Confidence in God, Prove. 3.5. and 22.19. 2 Chronicles. 20.20. Psalm. 37.3, 5. 2. Love
of God, Deuteronomy. 6.5. Joh. 22.5. and 25.11. Mat. 22.37. 3. Reverence of God, Mat.
4.10. Heb. 12.28. Deuteronomy. 6.33. and 10.20.
2. Belonging to this life, as 1. Hope in God, Psalm. 37.7. and 62.5, 6, 7. Isa.
38.18. 1 Pet. 1.21. 2. Fear of God, Deuteronomy. 4.10. and 6.2, 13. and 10.12, 20. and
14.13. Rev. 14.7.



The Heads of Inward Worship are two: 1. Adoration, whereby a man upon a vile
and base estimation of himself, subjects himself, his Soul, to the Glory and
Majesty of God. 2. A cleaving to God, which is by Faith, Love, Hope, and Inward
Invocation.


Adoration is twofold: 1. Religious, in which Religion and godliness is
exercised; wherein are these two: The Intention of the Mind. The outward
prostrating of the Body.
2. Civil, which Fellow Creatures give one to the other; and this pertains
only to the Second Table.


Two principal grounds of Adoration in the heart: 1. Abnegation or denial of
our selves, when we esteem our selves to be mere nothing. 2. Exaltation of Gods
Majesty above all the things in the world.


In Adoration are these four Virtues; viz. 1. Fear, which is a great part of
the Worship of God, and the comprehending Virtue of this Paragraph. 2. Inward
Obedience of the hidden man of the heart, which stands in these two things;
viz. 1. In yielding Obedience and subjection of Conscience to the Commandments,
Threatenings and Promises of God, so as we are willing it should become bound
unto them. 2. When the rest of the Powers of the Soul in their place and time
perform Obedience unto God.
3. Patience, when a man in Affliction submits his will to Gods Will, and
sweetly quieting his heart therein. 4. Thankfulness of heart to God for all his
benefits, acknowledging him to be the Fountain of every good thing.


Two things whereby the Fear of Gods Worship is distinguished from all other
Fears: 1. It is Absolute: for by it God is reverenced absolutely; that is, the
fear we give to men is only for God, but we fear God for himself. 2. It makes
a man first of all to fear the offense of God, and then the punishment: for it
is a fear of both, but of the offense in the first place.


In the Worship of God we must not be led by our own Devices, but by Gods
Direction, and that for these Reasons: 1. God will be acknowledged to be the
only Lawgiver, the King of his Church, and the only Prophet to instruct it
in the Will of God, Jam. 4.12. 2. There is a Promise of Blessing to them that
serve him with a perfect heart; and there is threatening of most heavy Curses
and Judgments to come upon their Souls, that worship him after the
Commandments and Precepts of men, Judge. 2.12, 14, 15. 2 Chronicles. 26.28, 29.


Rules touching the right manner of Gods Worship: 1. Touching things that are to
be done or not to be done, we are not to judge by the false Rule of our own
carnal and corrupt Reason, but according to the sure Word of God by the
Prophets and Apostles. 2. We must not presume to add somewhat of our own to
the Ordinances of God in his Worship, and account it too gross simplicity to
cleave to the bare and naked Word, and thereby make a mixture of his Religion
with our own Invention. 3. We must make it (as indeed it is) our Duty to study
to acquaint our selves with the Scriptures, Reading them with all diligence,
for the Word is a Christian man's true and perfect guide, and in all doubts it
is his Counselor.


More special Rules for our Obedience to the Worship of God, as himself has
prescribed: 1. We must think our selves fools in the matters of God, that we
may be made wise, 1 Cor. 3.18. 2. To account God only wise, yea Wisdom it
self. 3. To add nothing to the Word of the Lord, which were to make our selves
wiser then God himself. 4. We must think nothing small or little in Gods
service; he took order for the least things in the Tabernacle, and left them
not Arbitrary.


Holy things must be handled Reverently and Religiously for these Reasons; viz.
1. Because we have to do with God in matters of Religion. 2. Because such as
come without Reverence and due regard into his presence, do lose the fruit and
benefit of their coming.


The Mischiefs of a Toleration of any false Worship, where the true Worship of
God is Established: 1. It shows a coldness in Gods Cause, and little or no
Zeal in defacing the Monuments of Idolatry, which rob God of his honor, when he
will not have his glory given to any other. 2. It nourishes a Serpent in the
bosom of the Church. 3. It causes uncertainty of Faith and Religion, Doubt in
men, specially the weaker sort, which side to adhere to. 4. It maintains
Confusion in Gods Worship, and fostereth Schisms, Troubles, Seditions and
Rebellions. 5. It breaks the sweet and comfortable knot of the Unity and
Amity of Brethren: it brings danger to the whole State, and is directly
against sincere Profession, Josh. 24.19. and 2.10, 1.


The Vices repugnant unto the Fear of God: 1. Profaneness, Carnal Security,
Not to Fear God. 2. Servile Fear, which is to shun punishment, without Faith,
without a desire of changing and amendment of life, with a despair and shunning
of God, and with a separation from him.


It appears from what has been said, That the Fear of God, being an awful
respect of the Divine Majesty, arises either 1. From Faith in the Mercy and
goodness of God: This is called Filial Fear; The effects whereof are these: 1.
A careful Endeavor to please God. 2. A careful avoiding of such things as
offend the Divine Majesty of God, Prove. 8.13. Job 1.1.
2. From Diffidence, when a man's heart doubts of Gods Mercy, and expects
nothing but Vengeance, and the fearful wrath of God upon him for sin, whereupon
nothing but horror and amazement seizes all the faculties of his Soul. This is
Servile Fear: Both which are grounded Romans 8.15. The first was seen in Abraham,
Genesis 22 12. The second in Adam, Genesis 3.10. And so the devils fear and tremble,
Jam. 2.19.


The signs and Evidences of him that fears the Lord: 1. Where this Fear is,
there is the hatred of evil, as of Pride and Arrogance, Prove. 8.13. A man that
fears the Lord, dare not do unjustly, Genesis 42.18. 2. He is made pliable to
Gods Will, though he were obstinate before, Acts 9.6. Isa. 6.5. 3. He trembles
at Gods Word, Isa. 66.2, 5. Habbak. 3.16. Amos 3.8. 4. He fears not man, Mat.
10.28. Isa. 51.21. Dan. 3. 5. He delights in Gods Commandments, Psalm. 112.1.
Psalm. 128. 6. He shall want no good thing, Psalm. 34.9. and 112.2.


The Means to attain to this holy Fear; viz. 1. To renounce our own Wisdom,
Prove. 3.7. Romans 8.7. and not to be swayed by our own Reason. 2. To beg it of
God, because it is his gift, Jer. 32.39, 40. 3. To meditate upon Gods
Judgments against sinners, 2 Pet. 2. and also upon his Mercies, Psalm. 130.4.
For there is mercy with him, that he may be feared.


Would serve the true God in the Truth? not part
Gods Worship 'twixt Divinity and Art?
Nor smother what the Spirit blows? nor strain
A slavish Complement with Man? whose Brain
Whets his Invention how to cut and fit
God Worship to the measure of his Wit;
Whose Devotion in zeal to Clergy-Pelf,
Gods stead, set up the Dagon of himself:
Would this abhor, and in all things accord
With Truth it self? Then learn to Fear the Lord.
. 8. Of Ignorance.
HAving spoken of the Virtues required in this Commandment, we come now to the
Vices therein forbidden; but because they are many (as may formerly appear in
the first Paragraph of this Chapter) and this Book no Forest but an Arbor, we
shall touch, and but touch only three of the chiefest of them; viz. Ignorance,
Desperation and Pride. Ignorance, or not knowing of the true God and his Will,
is, Not to know those things of God, or to doubt of them, which we ought to
know by the benefit of our Creation, and by his Manifestations. Indeed we must
not, neither can we possibly know God as he is in himself, for so he is
Infinite, and therefore Incomprehensible in regard of us; but we are to
conceive him, so as he does reveal himself to us in his Creatures, principally
in his Word.

Now as Ignorance is in it self a sin and a cause of sin; so is it in it self
the punishment of sin and a cause of the punishment. This Ignorance is called,
Hos. 4.6. The Mother of Destruction, though the blind Papists proclaim her The
Mother of Devotion: From this sin of Ignorance they derive their Devotion, or
their Superstition, or which is worse, their Idolatry: They say Ignorance is
The Mother of Devotion, the Apostle says, of Idolatry, Gal. 4.8. which speaks
Truth, judge. The Papists hoodwink the poor people, and tell them the knowledge
of the Scriptures will cause them to err. Christ says, Ye err not knowing
the Scriptures, Mat. 21.19. which speaks Truth, judge. Upon Ignorance of the
Scriptures, must needs follow Ignorance of Christ, for they are they that
testify of Christ, Joh. 5.39. Now Ignorance being in it self a most odious
Vice, against which Christ will come in flaming fire to render vengeance, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. and a Mother sin of many other notorious ones, it is as strange to
us as true in the Church of Rome, how any man that has but the light of Nature
should be so blind, as to imagine the least light can come out of darkness;
yea, when the Devil the Prince of Darkness is said to be the God of them that
are blinded, 2 Cor. 4.4. Thus are they pitifully beguiled, that think the
Scriptures, being a two-edged Sword, is too sharp and keen for Lay men and
women, and such as have not skill in Tongues and Arts, and therefore the
knowledge thereof very dangerous for them, in case they should pierce and wound
their own Souls and Consciences with this Sword, as children hurt themselves
with Knives; but in a secure and quiet Ignorance they may go to Hell
unmolestedly, without the least check or trouble of Conscience.

Blind Souls! not knowing that the Word of God, as it is sharp in it self, so
has an inward power to give sharpness of wit, and that unto the simple, and to
the child knowledge and discretion, Prove. 1.4. so as by the Word they may
learn how to use the Word.

How dare then any thus counter-command God himself, and question his Wisdom,
who is Wisdom it self, and has expressly commanded the people to use what these
presumptuous Worms and audacious Wretches prohibit them? Whom did Christ
except, when he said to all, Search the Scriptures? Joh. 5.39. Or whom did God,
when he expressly commanded that the Law should be read to all, even men, women,
children and strangers? Deuteronomy 31.11, 12. This not knowing the Word of God, is
the Mother of Ignorance, and that the Mother of all Impiety: If we desire
therefore to know God hereafter as he is, let us endeavor to know him here, as
he has revealed himself to be; for the ignorance of God in this world, will
debar us of the knowledge of him in the next, and for ever exclude us from that
blessed experience the Saints and Angels have of him to all Eternity.

Man's Ignorance touching God, appears in that though the mind of man knows
there is a God, yet naturally man will not acknowledge, 1. The Presence of God:
for if he did, he would not without remorse or sear commit those sins in Gods
sight, which he is afraid and ashamed to do in the sight of men. 2. Gods
particular Providence: for in time of Distress the Promise of Help from men
will more cheer him then his Hope in God, so that he trusts more in the
Creature then in the Creator. 3. Gods Justice: for naturally man thinks, that
though he sin he shall escape punishment, Deuteronomy. 26.16. 4. Though man knows God
must be worshipped, yet naturally the Mind discerns not of Gods right
Worship, Romans 1.21, 23. 1 Cor. 2.14.


Man's Ignorance of himself by Nature: 1. No man naturally knows the blindeness
of his own mind; men think themselves wise, when in the things of God they are
fools, Romans 1.22. 2. Man cannot discern aright of his own sins, nor see the
vileness of them naturally, though his Conscience often accuse him: if he did, he
would not sin as now he does. 3. Man naturally does judge amiss of his own
frailty and mortality, for there is no man so aged, but thinks naturally he may
live longer, and thereby deceives his own poor soul. 4. Natural men cannot
discern aright of the end and scope of their lives; for naturally they wholly
seek their own praise and their own good, in stead of Gods glory and their
Brethrens good. 5. We cannot naturally discern of our own true happiness; for
we measure it by outward things, esteeming the rich and honorable most happy,
and the poor most miserable, when most commonly the contrary is true.


There is a twofold Ignorance: 1. When we are ignorant of those things which we
are bound to know, called Ignorance of an Evil Disposition: And this is evil
properly. 2. When we are ignorant of those things which by the Law of God we
are not bound to know: This is not sin.


The means prescribed by God to expel Ignorance, must be used by us for these
Reasons: 1. That we may obey God therein, who both has decreed ends, and
ordained means to those ends, and not tempt him by contempt thereof. 2. That we
may obtain the Blessing of Knowledge decreed for us according to his Promise,
and that to our Salvation. 3. That we may retain a good Conscience in using the
means, although the expected event do not presently follow.


Again, Ignorance is fourfold; viz. 1. Natural or engendered in men, which is of
those things which we are ignorant of, or cannot understand through the
corruption of our Nature. 2. A simple and mere Ignorance, simply for want of
means, condemned, Joh. 15.22. when the means of knowledge is wanting: 1. Within
a man, there being dullness and want of capacity. 2. Without, there being no
Vision, Prophesying failing, Preaching coldly, or as seldom exercised as
practiced. This is not excusable, Prove. 29.18.
3. A careless Ignorance, which is a neglecting and contemning the means of
Salvation. 4. A wilful Ignorance, because men will not see their sins, nor know
their errors; a purposed and endeavored Ignorance, which is of those things
that our Conscience tells us must be enquired after, neither yet do we
enquire after them with a desire of learning them and obeying God; called
affected Ignorance, when there is no fault in the means wanting, but we are
contented to be ignorant even under the Means, that we may sin the more freely.
This is the highest kind of all Ignorance, and is damnable.


Ignorance is the Mother of many grievous sins, especially of Heart-Atheism,
Profaneness, Inward Idolatry and Apostasy: All which are forbidden in this
Commandment; viz. 1. Of Heartatheism, whereof there are 3 sorts; viz. 1. When
men through a Self-conceitedness, affecting to be wiser then all the world, do
hold this, That there is a God not really but in opinion or show, to keep
simple persons in awe: Of this sort of Atheism David complained of, Psalm. 14.1.
2. To conceive otherwise of God then he has revealed himself in his Word: for
whatsoever is there spoken of God, such an one he is, yea every Attribute of
God is God: So that the heart conceiving a God without any of these, is guilty
of Atheism. 3. When any shall conceive otherwise then he ought of God, in
regard of the persons of the Godhead; viz. denying either the Son or the Holy
Ghost, as Turks and Jews: for he that has not the Son has not the Father, 1 John 2.23. And must needs therefore be an Atheist.
2. Of Profaneness, which shows it self, 1. By living securely in open sins,
being without shame or regard of God or Man, Isa. 3.9. 2. By brutish living
without all practice of Devotion, little or no Praying, Reading or Meditating
upon the Scriptures. 3. By following and professing one Religion so, as that
there is a disposition, if need require, unto the contrary. A profane heart
causes this; for where it is otherwise, there is the constancy of the Apostle,
It is better to obey God then Man.
3. Of Inward Idolatry, or of the heart: And this is 1. By love, joy, and
delight of the heart without measure: Thus the covetous man, the Epicure, and
the Proud man, are Idolaters; so are all such as unreligiously love their own
Wills more then Gods most holy Will. 2. By trust and confidence, whereby the
Creature is so relied upon, as that with it there is total Assurance and no
fear; but if that be wanting, then nothing but fear and mournful despair. 3. By
praying unto it: for it must hereby be supposed to be every where, or to be
able to hear at the least wheresoever it is called upon: But this can only the
Lord do, for it is a property of the Infinite alone, not of Angel or Saint.
4. Of Apostasy, whereof there are five Degrees; viz. 1. A consenting to sin,
being deceived with the Temptations thereof. 2. Hardness of heart upon many
practices of sin. 3. The heart being hardened becomes unbelieving, and calls the
truth of the Gospel into question. 4. By unbelief it becomes evil, having an
unworthy conceit of the Gospel. 5. This evil heart brings a man to Apostasy and
falling from God, which is the extinguishing of the light of the Gospel. To
prevent this sin we must carefully practice the Counsel of the Gospel.



Ignorance of the Will and Word of God is a grievous sin also in it self,
Levit. 4.2. and 5.17. Isa. 1.3. and 5.13. which may further appear by these
Reasons: 1. Because all the corruption that befell us through Adams Fall is sin;
now Ignorance and Blindeness of mind was a principal part of that corruption.
2. Ignorance is contrary to the Image of God wherein we were first created; for
a part of Gods Image in man was Knowledge, Col. 3.10. as well as Holiness and
Righteousness, Ephesians. 4.24. 3. As Knowledge is the Foundation of all Piety and
Obedience: So Ignorance is the Mother of all Error and Profaneness, Mat. 22.29.


The four main Supporters of Ignorance against Knowledge viz. 1. Envy, whereby
men grieve at the knowledge and good parts which are in others. 2. Ambition,
whereby they seek to be eminent above all others. 3. Policy, whereby they seek
a cloak for their own Ignorance. 4. Covetousness, whereby they pretend a
strange kind of secret Virtue in Ignorance, that thereby they may with the
less prejudice to their juggling in Religion, the more securely Monopolize
Idolatry: These men are not of Moses his mind, when he wished that all the
Lords people were prophets, Number. 11.29. neither of Paul's mind, when he wished
that all that heard him were altogether as himself was, Acts 26.29. though
indeed with these men Priest and People are all one, but not in Paul's sense,
unless Darkness be Light.


The Ignorance that is excusable, is only such as is 1. In Idiots, Natural
Fools, through some defects in Nature. 2. In Lunatic persons, violently
bereaved of the use of Reason. 3. In Infants and Children, being not of years
of discretion. 4. In all men, as touching such things as we are not bound to
know.


Time was when Ignorance was not amiss,
When Innocence lay swadled all in Bliss:
But Man soon 'came (proud to unscale his Eyes)
A learned Fool, in naught but Folly wise;
Since which cursed Fate, the Twylight he has left
Serves but to mourn for what he is bereft.
Thus he that dares aspire to dart his sight
In The Sun, looks himself blind with too much light,
Even in those Gospel-days, whose dawning Mind
Has one Eye open that can see it is blind.
. 9. Of Desperation.
THe Diseases of the Body are many, and many grievous, but the Maladies of the
Mind are incomparably more and more grievous; those of the Body make us sick
men, those of the Mind make us miserable men. The Mind can judge of the
Bodies Diseases, but how shall it declare the Diseases of it felf, when it self
is diseased; if the judgment be sick, how shall the sickness be judged? The
instrument of judging is the Mind, the Disease whereof is not proper and
peculiar only to such as are troubled, distressed and disturbed in Conscience,
but Epidemical, yea most reigning in all unregenerate persons, wanting a right
reformed judgment to judge of themselves, and therefore take or rather mistake
Vice for Virtue, Darkness for Light, and Error for Truth. Now of all sores, the
most dangerous is the wound of the Spirit, therefore is that the necessariest
Doctrine which relieveth and rectifieth the Conscience. And as the Word of God
is mighty in operation, piercing the heart, and discerning the thoughts and
intents thereof: So is it alone available and effectual to pacify the Mind,
and to give full satisfaction to the Conscience. In this case of Distress of
Mind, it is meet and convenient there should always be used a private
confession, Jam. 5.16. not of our Faith so much as of our Faults: For the
Physician must know the disease, before he can apply the remedy; and herein the
grief of Mind and scruple that troubles the Conscience must be made known;
for man has but two witnesses of his Thoughts, God and his own Conscience, by
which man knows that thing of himself which God also knows of him, and none
else; for man's Conscience is known to none beside himself but God.

Now the most special and common distress of mind, arises from a Divine
Temptation, which is a Combat with God himself immediately; which is when the
Conscience speaks some fearful things of God, and withal the party distressed
feels some evident Tokens of Gods wrath. Yet indeed Gods Mercy is never sweet
unto the palate of the Soul, until it be seasoned with some taste of his Wrath
and Indignation. This indeed is the true Trial of our Faith, even when above
and against Reason we rely on the Mercy of God in the Apprehension of his
Anger. In which time of Temptation men are unfit Judges of themselves and of
their condition, how it stands between God and their Souls; even the faithful
themselves at such time may cry out, and complain as if they were without both
Faith and feeling of any favor of God, who yet even then is not absent from
them, neither has forgotten them. The hour of Temptation with the Faithful, is
the time of winter, wherein their Faith and Graces seem as it were benumbed;
but when the Rejoicing Beams of the Sun of Righteousness break forth, dissipate
and chase away from the poor bemisted Soul, the thick cloud of false and forged
Suggestions, his Faith appears, the spring of Graces approaches, they show
forth by lively effects, That they still retained life and were not dead, to
the present operation of unspeakable comfort in the late clouded Soul. In such
Distresses let no man think the Weight of his sins can overbalance the Merit
of his Savior. The Celestial Lights may suffer Eclipses; and we must walk by
Faith, not by Feeling. Now the true Application of Life Everlasting promised in
and by the Blood of Christ, is the general Remedy for all Distresses. But note,
That the distressed in mind are not fit for comfort, till they be humbled for
their sins, for till then the Word of God is misapplied, and so abused.

Despair is a sin, whereby a man makes shipwreck of all Hope of the Mercy of
God in Christ, arising from a false consideration of his sins which he has
committed, or the good which he has omitted, with a persuasion that God is
neither able nor willing to forgive him. Thus the Desperate man believes not
that God is either good, true, faithful or powerful; he may indeed have some
conceit that he is so in general, but that he is so to him in particular, and
for his good, this he will not be persuaded of, but with Judas, conceits that
God is not willing to pardon him, or rather that he will not pardon him, Mat.
27. or with Cain, That he is not able to forgive him, Genesis 4.13. Thus Despair
impeacheth the most glorious Attributes of God; his Power, as if he were not
able to make good his Promise; his Truth, as if he were unfaithful; his Mercy,
as if it were dried up with the heat of men's sins; his Omnipresence, as if he
were not ever by us. Thus it stops the current of Gods Mercy, barreth up the
gates of Heaven against men, and opens the mouth of Hell for them; which if
thou will avoid, beware of Infidelity, for that is the Mother of Despair. And
thus Despair arises partly from too deep an apprehension of the power of the
Devil, as if he were Infinite, and he able to do whatsoever his Malice would,
or unlimited, God letting the reins loose, and permitting him to do what
himself pleased; and partly from too light an esteem of that power which is to
be had in God, as if he were not sufficient to keep us safe, and of the Mercy
of God, as if it were not Infinite.

Temptations to draw us to doubt of that help we have in God, and to Despair,
are properly termed The fiery darts of the devil, which he shoots into our
thoughts to poison the Soul with their venomous heads, thereby to draw us into
Perdition. These Temptations, where they light and fasten, pierce deep; showers
of them did the Devil shoot at poor Job: David complains much they were let fly
at him; yea, he flung some even at Christ himself in the wilderness, Mat. 4.3.
in the garden, Mat. 26.37, etc. and on the Cross, 27.46. He that Despairs,
sucks fiery burning poison into his Soul, has the Brimstone of Hell sulphering
in his very bowels, not a drop of the gracious Promises of God to quench it,
because he thinks the Puddle-pool of his sins greater then the Ocean of Gods
Mercy: This fire either stupifies the Spiritual Senses, and dries up the life
of the Soul, or torments him like Cain, Saul and Judas, intolerably, without
all hope of redress. Whosoever therefore by reason of their weakness, or
through the violence of some Temptation, have so let fall their shield of
Faith, as that Satan's fiery darts have touched their Conscience and pierced
their Soul, let them not thereupon utterly despair, and give themselves up to
the power of Satan: but know, That a Renewing of Faith by a speedy recourse to
the Promises of God in Christ, is a liquid Balsam to quench the flame, Virtual
to draw out the fire, and Sovereign to cure the wound. Faith applying the
Virtue of Christ's Sacrifice to a perplexed and troubled Soul, dispelleth the
inward anguish thereof; but he that after some failings and spiritual wounds
puts off all Hope, as if Death and Destruction without all Remedy, must needs
follow thereupon, is like him that will rather dye then take Physic; murders
his Soul, because it was sick, hastens his own Damnation, and by a Blasphemous
prejudice to the unvaluable Merits of Christ, through Infidelity becomes the
wilful Destroyer of that Soul which might have lived for ever, had he had the
grace of Faith to apply the Remedy.

The special distresses of the Mind are five; and arise either 1. Of a Divine
Temptation. 2. From outward Affliction. 3. Of the Temptation of Blasphemy. 4.
From a man's own Sins. 5. From a man's own Body.


Distress in mind is, when a man is disquieted and distempered in Conscience,
and consequently in his Affections, touching his estate before God, which has
two Degrees: 1. The less, which is a single fear, grief, suspense or doubt
touching his Salvation. 2. The greater, which is Despair, when a man in his own
sense and apprehension is without all hope of Salvation.


All distresses of the Mind arises from Temptation either begun or continued;
therefore according to the diverse kinds of Temptations, must the Distresses of
the mind be distinguished, which (as formerly) may be all reduced to these two
Heads; viz. 1. Of Trial, which is twofold: 1. Combat of the Conscience directly
with the wrath of God, called a Divine Temptation. 2. Of the Cross, whereby God
proves and makes trial of the Faith of his children.
2. Of Seducement, which is threefold: 1. Immediately from the Devil, called
the Temptation of Blasphemy. 2. From a man's own sins, both Original and Actual.
3. From Imagination corrupted, irregulated and depraved.



Despair is of three sorts of men; viz. 1. Of Epicures, Profane men and
Atheists, who rejecting all Hope, and refusing to wait for Mercy, their
Conscience convicting them that there is nothing to be expected but damnation,
give themselves over to all manner of wickedness, laboring to extinguish out of
their hearts, That there is a God, a Heaven, or a Hell, Jer. 18.12. 2. Of those
men who are overcome with too much sorrow, arising from the grief of the
punishment, 2 Cor. 2.7. and 7.10. 3. Of those who are troubled in mind for
sins, supposing that their sins are so great and so many, that God cannot nor
will not forgive them. This kind arises from grief for sin, and is twofold;
viz. 1. Temporary, only for a time: This is curable, and may happen to a
child of God. 2. Final and incurable: This kind is only incident to the
Reprobate.



The causes of Despair are twofold; viz. 1. Hidden and secret: So Reprobation
may be said to be the cause of final Despair. 2. Open and more manifest, which
generally are these four, Unbelief, Impenitency, Hardness of Heart, and An
absolute Denial of the known Truth joined with Blasphemy.


The more particular open causes of Despair are these; viz. 1. The greatness
and multitude of sins, Genesis 4.13. 2. The multitude of Temptations, Judge. 3.1.
Genesis 21.1. 3. The often falling into sin: This is incident to the best, Prove.
24.24. 4. Overmuch grief, melancholy, and sadness of heart, Prove. 15.13. 5.
Ignorance in minds not instructed in the Reconciliation by Christ. 6. An
inveterate custom in sinning, whence proceeds hardness of heart. 7. The too
much consideration of our own unworthiness with the least reflection on Christ
and his Merits. 8. That compelled Abnegation and denial of the known Truth
through tyrannical Violence and Compulsion, too hard for the weakness of the
flesh.


Four Caveats in private Confession convenient in case of Distress of mind,
Jam. 5.16. 1. It must not be urged as a thing simply or absolutely necessary to
Salvation. 2. It need not be of all sins, but of such as trouble the
Conscience. 3. It is especially to be made to Ministers, though it may be made
to any man. 4. The person to whom it is made, must be one of trust and fidelity.


Helps and Remedies against Despair; or, that we may the better avoid
Desperation and carnal security, we are always to have in mind, 1. That the
Promises of Grace and Favor to Mankind are universal, Mark 11.38. 2. The
Promises of Mercy, how heinous soever ours sins have been, Isa. 1.18. 3. That
the Mercy of God is above all sin, Romans 20. 4. That the Doctrine of the Gospel
for the free Remission of sins, is to be preached not unto a few, but
universally and generally unto all, Mat. 28.19. 5. That the Seals of the
Covenant are appointed to be given to all men which are members of the Visible
Church, or desirous to be incorporated thereinto, Matthew. 28.19. and 26.26, 27.
6. That as the Disobedience of Adam brought Condemnation on all men: So the
Blood and Obedience of Christ is All-sufficient to wash away all sins, and that
of all men, 1 Cor. 11.24. 7. That God delights not in any sinners Death, but
desires his Conversion, Ezekiel. 33. 8. That if any Believer sin, he has a
sufficient Advocate with the Father, 1 John 2.2. Heb. 9.24. Romans 8.34. 9. Labor
to lay hold upon the Promises by a right-grounded Faith. 10. Take heed of too
much melancholy and worldly sorrow. 11. Consider the grievousness of the sin
of Despair. 12. Remember the Passion of Christ, the Truth and greatness of his
Mercy. 13. Have in mind the Examples of mercy, as to Murder and Adultery in
David, to Apostasy in Peter, to Idolatry in Manasseh, to Theft in the Thief on
the Cross, to Blasphemy in Paul, and much Iniquity and Impurity in Mary, having
many foul Devils in her. 14. The Indignity offered unto God by Despair, seeing
we refuse to trust him upon his most holy Word, and the inevitable destruction
of our own Souls thereby; consider, That so long as we despair not, we are not
shut out from Mercy upon Repentance, but while we despair, there is no hope, we
are lost for ever, and most worthily.


Again, to avoid Despair, it is necessary that we pray to be kept and preserved
1. From presumptuous and notorious sins most chiefly, as Murder, Apostasy,
Adultery, Blasphemy, etc. 2. From wicked Company, which like a violent stream
and torrent does force men to all kind of wickedness. 3. From the Neglect of
Gods Worship, whereby we lose our Spiritual Armature, and are laid naked to our
potent foes. 4. From the love of, and immoderate affection to the things of
this world, which having the heart, if they fail, our heart fails also, and a
wide gap is opened to Despair.


Reader, When ere thou meat one in Despair,
Lock thine Ears, his very breath poisons the Air:
Nothing but Sulphur from his Lungs proceed,
Hot enough to make an Adamant bleed.
Of Gods free Promises discourse the point,
And thou will find his Soul quite out of joint;
His lips foam Blasphemies, and who can tell
But that his Heart goes to the tune of Hell?
In this sad case, his wound is much the worse,
In that he holds the Salve his greatest Curse.
. 10. Of Pride.
THe last Vice in opposition to this Commandment, which we promised to touch,
was Pride; a sin so obviously condemned, even by Heathen Writers, as we shall
here only abstract it is as it were from that Pride which is so generally
condemned; and, taking the word in somewhat a more strict sense, chiefly as it
relates to Inward Spiritual Arrogance, the insensible poison even of a
sanctified heart, we shall only glance at it, and proceed to the Second
Commandment. Pride is a puffing up of the heart and mind, proceeding from the
opinion of some good thing in us more then in other men. Pride, truly so
called, is the most pestilent and incompatible Opposite that Grace has; and
therefore he that is most sanctified, most fights against it: For besides that
impoisoned tincture our Souls are stained with by this sin in our depraved
Nature, the subtle Serpent experimentally knows how to manage it with most
accurate policy, who follows this poison with such eagerness and activity,
sweetning it with such specious Delusions, that after it is expelled by the
Antidote of Faith, he yet endeavors with all the power and policy of Hell, that
some spice thereof may remain behind, even in the Soul humbled for sin, and
devoted unto the service of God. For being exactly experienced in all
advantages for Spiritual Assaults, and tempering the powerful Ingredients of
his Temptations, with the Relics of man's proud Nature, does cunningly
persuade him to advance above that which is meet within himself, in his own
opinion, the worth of his own Graces and Virtues; by reason of the predominancy
and delightsomness whereof the undermining Venom and cankering Pestilency of
this sin corrodes the Soul, and frets out the very heart of Grace undiscernably.

This Lion in a Lambs skin, ths Devil in an Angels shape, this sin of Spiritual
Pride is the harder to be expelled, because so easy to be entertained, and so
difficult to be discerned; such is the insensibleness of those Meanders wherein
she walks invisibly, when she haunts the Saints and children of God; who with
the more circumspection and holy policy are to fortify themselves against it,
because it springs from so fair and unsuspected a Fountain, even from Zeal,
godly Duties, and good Actions; who are with much Humiliation and fervency of
Spirit to pray and strive against it, because it singles out the Chosen of God,
and takes up his seat in the sanctified Soul; who are with wonderful care to
countermine the sly insinuations wherewith it unavoidably winds it self into
their hearts, lest when they seem to disclaim Pride, they prove proud that they
are not proud; who cannot be too secure of their Sentinels on the heart-guards,
because there is no profoundness of Knowledge, no measure of Grace, no eminency
of Zeal can be exempted from hazard of Surprizal, by this last and most cunning
encounter of Satan by Spiritual Pride. Great reason therefore has the child
of God. strongly to fence his heart with a gracious and unfeigned humility
against this sin, lest gazing on the dangerous speculations of his own
worthiness, the eye of his Conscience become blind to his own Deficiencies,
Corruptions and Infirmities; lest his Self-conceitedness, and a vain
over-valuing of his own Gifts and Virtues, call the Truth of them into
question, and extinguish the life of Sincerity; lest an adulterous self-liking
of his own excellency, be justly plagued with a scandalous fall into some gross
sin; lest this Viper nourished in the bosom of his Soul, take unseasonable heat
and warmth from his Zeal, and endanger the whole frame of his New man.

Now the only Sovereign means to preserve the life and vigor of Graces in the
Soul, and to keep thence this pestilent canker-worm of Spiritual Pride, is with
much earnestness and prayer to labor after and settle surely in the heart a
true and undissembled Humility. This kind of Secret or Privy-Pride, is not so
properly a breach of this Commandment, as the outward and more open Pride,
whose concomitant Companions and Branches are, Envy, Anger, Impatience,
Indignation, Self-will and Obstinacy, Presumption, Hypocrisy, Boasting,
Ingratitude, Contempt, Disobedience, Ambition and Curiosity; as also a fained
Modesty or Humility, which is a double Pride, being to hunt after the praise
and commendation of Humility by refusing in show and appearance, and by denying
of those things outwardly, which yet a man secretly covets, and in his mind
attributes unto himself, either truly or falsely: This is Pride under a vail;
which, if Plenty and Prosperity in outward things answer the expectation, does
soon appear in its proper Peacockcolours, to be nothing else but the very
height and pinnacle of all Pride and Arrogance, whose true Properties follow.

The properties of the proud man, viz. 1. To ascribe his gifts not to God, but
to his own worthiness and ability, and to refer his gifts and counsels
principally to his own glory, and therefore to stand in admiration of himself
and his gifts. 2. Not truly to fear God, neither to acknowledge and bewail his
own defects. 3. To be always aspiring to some higher place and calling. 4. To
attribute to himself those things which he has not, to attempt things above
his power, and not belonging to his calling. 5. To contemn and debase others in
respect of himself, to believe none, but to covet to excel, and be eminent
above others. 6. To be angry with God and Men, to fret and fume against God,
when his desires and counsels are hindered, and also to accuse God of Error and
Injustice, if Gods counsels agree not with the judgments and affections of men.


Pride is twofold: 1. Inward, in the soul, which consists Partly in the Mind,
which is a corrupt disposition thereof, whereby a man thinks himself to be
better then indeed he is. This was the proud Pharisees sin, Luke 18.11, 12.
Partly in the Will, which is an inward affection, whereby a man is not
contented with that estate wherein God has placed him, but desires a better.
This befell Adam and Eve, and does most of their Posterity in every Age.
2. Outward, which proceeding from the former, shows it self in the effects in
her proper colors, by apparel, gestures, language, actions, and most vain
fantastic self-conceits.


Inward Pride must be carefully avoided for these Reasons; viz. 1. Because
whatsoever outward good works the child of God can do by Grace, the same may a
wicked man do through Pride and Hypocrisy; as conceive a Prayer, Preach the
Word, and Practice the outward duties of Repentance, of Love, and such like:
for Pride is a sin that will counterfeit Grace, and man cannot discern it
truly, but God only. 2. Many other sins prevail in the wicked, but Pride is
the sin that troubles the children of God, and when other sins dye, then will
Pride revive; yea, it will rise as it were out of Grace it self: for the child
of God may be proud because he is not proud, proud of his Humility; therefore
Paul must be buffeted by the messenger of Satan, lest he should be puffed up
with the abundance of Revelations, 2 Cor. 12.7.


The way to avoid this dangerous sin of Inward Pride; viz. 1. We must be
careful to know the Pride of our own hearts: for every man has it in him more
or less, and the more we see it, the less it is, but the less we see it, the
more it is indeed; for he that is most humbled, is not altogether free from
this Inward Pride. 2. When we see our Pride, we must labor to subdue it, which
may thus be done: 1. By considering the Judgments of God upon this sin; it
poisoned Angelical Perfection, and afterward occasioned our Parents casting out
of Paradise; and remember Herod, who for this sin was eaten up of worms, Acts
12. 2. We must search into our selves, and labor to see our own wants and
corruptions, as our Blindeness of Mind, Unbelief, etc. The want of feeling our
wants occasions Pride. 3. We must meditate upon the Death and Passion of
Christ, and how can a man think that Christ endured that bitter Passion for,
and yet not be humbled with the sight of his sins, which had a part in the
cause thereof.



Reasons taken from the state of the Regenerate Soul, why the child of God
should fence his heart against Spiritual Pride; viz. 1. The consideration of
our deficiencies even in our most religious duties and best performances. 2.
The consideration of our own forwardness to march under Satan's Banners, and our
base unworthy vassallage therein before our Regeneration. 3. The consideration
of the bottomless depth of Gods bounty to us, which has raised unto us
whatsoever gifts we have. 4. The consideration of the danger which may happen
to the whole man, by giving entertainment to Spiritual Pride; for either it may
persuade us to embrace some groundless singularity of unwarrantable Opinions;
or by Gods just Judgment draw upon us a deadness of heart, a dullness of zeal,
an intermission of the operations of Grace, or the like inconveniences.


The three Errors which did deceive the Pharisee, and does many other proud
persons: 1. His Error of Comparison, in comparing himself with another person,
which was to behold his face in a false glass, Luke 18.11. 2. His freedom from
some gross sins forbidden in the Second Table, which he judged others to be
guilty of. 3. His performance of some Duties of Religion, doubtless with as
much Spiritual Pride as he now makes proclamation of it.


Motive-Engines to pull down Pride and Ambition; viz. 1. We must consider the
state of our bodies, what it is: Dust we are, and to it we must return, yea how
speedily we know not. 2. We are altogether set upon sin, and bring forth the
bitter fruits of our Corruption, in regard whereof we are more wretched then
other creatures, so vile a thing, so accursed is sin. 3. We are not able of our
selves to think one good thought; neither are we sufficiently furnished of our
selves to do the least and smallest duty that God requires of us; we have the
spawn and seed of all sin in our Nature. 4. Whatever gifts are bestowed upon,
we must think meanly and humbly of our selves and them; for our best gifts are
stained with many blemishes. 5. Let us set before us the Example of our Lord
and Master Jesus Christ: we must be ready to learn of him the lesson that he
offers to teach us by Word and Example, Mat. 11.29. 6. Pride is the
preparation of us to a fall, and the ready way to destruction, Prove. 16.18.
Fearful Examples whereof are Nebuchadnezzar, Haman and Herod.


A Bubble in a Storm; a falling Star;
A Cobweb-Helmet in the brunt of War;
A Flash of Lightning; or a Spark that slies
By night in the Air, looks like a Star, and dies;
Frothy Foam disgorg'd, spit on the proud Rocks
By Neptune, when he combs his curled Locks;
The Lovers Weathercock; a Peacocks Plume;
A Courtiers Cringe; mere Smoke or Chimney-sume;
A Dream of Treasure; or a Scorpions kiss;
A Tower of Glass: Pride is naught else but this.
The Second Commandment.
. 1. Thou shall make to thee no graven Image, nor the likeness of any thing
that is in Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath, or in the water under the
Earth. Thou shall not, etc.
IN this Commandment God prescribes the Rule of true Divine Worship,
forbidding not only that Creatures or Images be not reputed or worshipped for
God, but also that himself be not worshipped by or at Images: for if Adoration
be given to the true God with a false and erroneous intention, it makes him an
Idol; and to worship him in, at, or before an Image, is Idolatry and
Superstition, and God so worshipped is made an Idol. And in thus forbidding the
grossest, and the Head and Fountain of all false Worships, he forbids all
the other kinds. Here also we are commanded to perform all outward Duties of
Gods Service, according to his Will revealed in his Word, for the substance
thereof. So that the sum of this Commandment is, That we worship not God after
our fancies, but according to his own Revealed Will, Deuteronomy. 29.29. and 13.18.
and 5.33. Joh. 4.24. Lastly, we must take notice, That all manner of Images is
not here forbidden, but only in matters of Religion.

This Commandment has two parts: 1. The former forbids Images to be made,
yet not simply, but so as by them to represent and worship God. 2. The latter
part forbids to worship them with Religious or Divine Honor.


They who make this Commandment to consist of three parts, divide it thus: 1.
The forbidding of the things wherein a man may sin in the outward Worship due
unto God. 2. The forbidding of the things performed in the profession of that
Worship, done by the outward behavior of the body. 3. Threatenings against the
Breakers of the Law, and a Promise to such as keep it.


Two things beside the worshipping of Images forbidden in this Commandment: 1.
The worshipping of Creatures with a Religious Worship. 2. Superstition, which
is a worshipping of God by Rites and Ceremonies devised and commanded by men:
Of this sort are these; viz. 1. To wear a certain kind of Apparel for
Religions sake. 2. To hold Difference of place in worshipping of God. 3. To
observe days and times for that purpose. 4. To make a Difference of meats. 5.
To abstain from Marriage, and such like.



The particulars forbidden in this Commandment; viz. 1. To ordain any other
Word or Sacrament then that which God has appointed, Gal. 1.8, 9. Romans 16.17,
18. 2. To ordain strange Ministeries, or to seek secret things of them or by
them, Lev. 19.31. Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11. 3. All manner of Ceremonies that are not for
comeliness and order, Isa. 1.11, unto 15. and 66.3, 4. 4. All Monuments of
Idolatry, Deuteronomy. 12.3. Exodus 23.24. and 34.13. Judges 22. 5. All means to
Idolatry, as Marriage, and familiar accompanying with Idolaters and Papists,
Deuteronomy. 7.3. Ezra 9.2. and 10.10. Exodus 25.24. 6. To Swear by any false God or
Idol, as Mass, Cross, etc. Exodus 23.13. Josh. 23.7. Psalm. 16.4.


The making of Images to be worshipped is abominable for these Reasons: 1.
Because it is impossible that God who is an Infinite Spiritual Essence, can be
represented by an Image, Isa 40.22, 25. yea, every Image of the Godhead is a
Doctrine of Vanity; and though most curiously polished, yet a very stock and
teacher of lies, Jer. 10.8. 2. Because we have an express Command to the
contrary, Deuteronomy. 4.15. neither can there any toleration be found hereof,
representing God by the Image of a Man; yea, the Lord has not only forbidden
to make Images, but straightly charged that they be pulled down and broken in
pieces, Exodus 23.24. and 34.13. 3. Because the Lord is wonderfully provoked by
Images, as appears Exodus 32. 4. Because Images have often been occasions of
Idolatry, Judges 8.27. 2 Kings 18.4. 5. Because it is a thing scandalous to
such as be without, the Jews and Turks are hereby hardened against the Christian
Religion, when they compare Moses his Law with the practice of Romish
Catholics, and their temporizing adhering Apes.


So that all Images are to be abolished in all Christian Churches for these
Reasons; viz. 1. Because of the Commandment of God: for this abolishing of
Idols is it that Jehu, Hezekiah and Josias are so praised in Scripture. 2. In
respect of our Confession, of our Profession, of the sincere Worship of God,
and of our hatred against Idolatry, which consists not in words only, but also
in actions, and in outward show and signs. 3. For avoiding of offense and
Superstition, lest by retaining of ancient Images, the same danger come to the
Church and ignorant people thereby, which in times past we see to have issued
hence.


In abolishing of Images, two things are to be observed: 1. That the Doctrine
concerning the true Worship of God be preached before the abolishing of Idols.
So did Josias. Let the Word go before, and the Idols will fall to the ground.
2. The Images and their Altars, and the like Instruments, must be taken away
not by private men, but by public Authority: So has God commanded the
Israelites; and so Paul disliking the Athenian and Ephesian Idols, did not
notwithstanding himself pull them down.


Also, it is Idolatry to serve God according to our own fantasies: which is
done these several ways; viz. 1. By a kind of Worship which we our selves have
invented, or other men for us merely out of their own brains. 2. By Resting on
the work done, bodily or outwardly. 3. By serving God without repenting us
truly of our sins. 4. By performing the Service of God and immediate duties of
Religion out of Hypocrisy or for by-ends: For all these are Abuses in Gods
Service, and he is hereby made an Idol.


In this Commandment we are Required to perform all outward Duties of Gods
Service, according to his Will Revealed in his Word: For Direction whereof,
take these general Rules; viz. 1. All things are to be done in order, and not
confusedly, Mat. 3.15. 1 Cor. 14. 2. All things must be done in the greatest
humility and highest reverence toward him whose Service it is, when any preach
or pray, or join with others in these holy duties. 3. All things are to be done
without show of vainglory, not affecting notoriety, by Pharisaick sighing,
groaning, knocking the breast, and the like, more then the heart enforces. 4.
All things are to be done in Faith, to be accompanied with Zeal to God glory,
and Love to our Neighbor. 5. All things are to be done without show of
Idolatry, according to that, Abstain even from all appearance of evil, 1 Thessalonians.
5.22.


The Reason of this Commandment is taken 1. Partly from the punishments to be
inflicted upon such as break it, even unto the third and fourth generations:
This is an Argument of Terror, persuasive to Obedience. 2. Partly from the
benefits to be bestowed on such as keep it, even unto thousands: This is a
Reason of Comfort, invitatory to Obedience hereunto.


The special Vices forbidden in this Commandment; viz. 1. Idolatry, which is a
false and superstitious worshipping of God: This is of two sorts: 1. When a
false God is worshipped; that is, when in place of the true God, or besides
him, that worship is given to some either Imaginary or Existent thing, which is
due to the true God only, and to be given to him alone. 2. When men err in
the kind of worship; that is, when Worship or Honor is imagined to be given
and done unto the true God by some such work as himself has not commanded.
This kind is called Will Worship or Superstition, which is an adding of Humane
Inventions unto the Commandments of God.
2. Hypocrisy, which is a pretending or feigning true Godliness and Worship of
God, without true Faith and Repentance: Of both which a word or two does
challenge the next place in our Discourse.


Enacted in Heavens Statute-Book it stands,
Thou shall not bow the knee nor lift up hands
To Carved Images: And yet, Behold
The Antichristian Prelat is so bold
The blind deluded Sons of Men to tell,
If they will serve Baal, he will rescue them from Hell;
And by the Pardon of's Blasphemous breath,
Reprieve the Damned from Eternal Death.
Hells Masterpiece! second to none at all
Save that whence sprang the Universal Fall.
. 2. Of Idolatry.
WHat Idolatry is, has been already shown: we shall now only speak a word of
the original Antiquity of it, who are guilty of it, of the Ridiculousness of
it, of the Danger of it, and of the way how to avoid it. The Nations of the
Gentiles had multitudes of gods, and every Nation his several Idol-god; as
Chemosh, was the Idol of the Moabites; Baal, of the Caldeans; Ashteroth, of the
Sidonians; Milchom and Moloch, of the Ammonites; Rimmon, of the Syrians; Dagon,
of the Philistims: but these trusting in their Idols, were all still defeated
and destroyed. Whence we learn, That the worshipping of Images, howsoever it be
colored with false Reasons, is the true cause of Gods Judgments; which Truth
is not without a cloud of Witnesses in the holy Scripture: So that the Laity
under Antichrists Jurisdiction, me thinks should give the Modern and more
refined Idolaters of Rome but little thanks for leading them to the Slaughter
by the ears, and buzzing them therein, that Idols are Laymens Books.

The Assyrians were very famous, or rather infamous, for Idols, great boasters
of them, not without cause indeed, for they were most exquisite god-makers, not
much, unlike the Romish Idolaters, who knead the Dough, and of one part they
make Bread, and a god of the other; who cut down the Tree, warm themselves with
part thereof, roast their Meat with another, and with a third part make a
pretty god, and worship it; who hew the Stone out of the Rock bedawb the one
part with tempered dirt, and bow unto the other; who have their Plague-Saint.
and their Childe-bed-Saint, their Tempest-Saint, and their Fair-weather-Saint.
O Blasphemous Idolatry! These and the like are their Dii Tutelares, or their
Patron-Saints, whereof they have one for every Season, called their
Protecting-Gods, as appears by an Historian of their own, Paulus Jovius, Hist.
lib. 24 Now all the difference betwixt this Idolatry and that of the Heathens,
even he that is as blind as themselves may discern; for only the Names of the
Idols are changed, the nature of the Idolatry still remains, to their
indelible infamy here, and fearful condemnation hereafter.

It is not lawful for a Subject to worship his Prince, or for a Son his Father,
with any Religious Worship; much less may we worship Images with any kind of
Religious Worship, or any Worship whatsoever, which at best are as it were but
the Creatures creatures. Not to honor God, is intolerably wicked; to give his
honor to any Mortal Man, is more sinful; but to give it to base and senseless
Idols, is most abominable. The basest Image-maker that lives, is far better
then the Image that lives not: What a gross and senseless thing then is it, that
the living Image of the living God should perform worship or service to the
dead Image of a dead Saint; yea, to the Image of that man, whose Soul for ought
they know is among the damned?

That we may the more abhor Idolatry, observe how base the means are which have
been used to establish this cursed sin of Imageworshipping, Dan. 3. 1. The
violent and peremptory Command of the most haughty King Nebuchadnezzar. 2. The
Acceptance of ungodly Nobles, and flattering of covetous corrupted Officers.
3. The glittering and alluring matter of which Images are made, as gold and
silver. 4. Their outward form and beauty, being most curiously wrought,
artificially carved, and richly apparelled. 5. Most grievous Penalties
threatened to those that refuse to bow themselves thereunto. 6. Enchanting
Music of all sorts. Thus the thing it self is suitably carnal and devilish,
and so are all such as give the glory of the Creator to the Creature.


Idolatry does ever turn to the destruction of the Idolater, and that for these
Reasons; viz. 1. Because God is the Husband of his Church, Hos. 2.19, 20. Jer.
2.2. and cannot suffer his Honor and Worship to be communicated to another:
Idolatry therefore is Spiritual Whoredom, and God is a jealous God of his
glory. As then God is the Husband of the Church, so our Spiritual Worship is a
certain Marriage of our Souls consecrated unto the Lord, and therefore all
false and forged Worship is Spiritual Whoredom and Idolatry toward him. 2.
Because Idols are but the work of men's hands, moth-eaten painted Stocks,
Weather-beaten carved Stones, crack'd-brittle-crasie Glassgods: It follows
therefore, That such as most sacrilegiously rob the most High true God of his
Honor, to give it in any kind to these Stocks and Stones, under any pretense
whatsoever, cannot prosper, but shall be confounded, Hos. 8.8, 9. Jer. 3.23,
24. and 10.15. Isa. 44.9, 10. and 42.17, 18, 19.


No familiarity is to be used with Idolaters; but we are carefully to avoid the
company of them, Hos. 4.15. Deuteronomy. 7.5. Psalm. 16.4. Judge. 2.2. 1 Cor. 8.9. and
10.21. 2 Cor. 6.17. Isa. 52.11. 1. Because whosoever will avoid sin, must also
avoid the means whereby they may be induced and ensnared to fall into it, Psalm.
119.115. 2. Because our Nature is prone and inclinable to Idolatry; and
therefore by their Company, by their Example, by their Practice, by their
Persuasion, and by their Doctrine we may easily be corrupted, as the Lord
himself threatens, Judges 2.3.


Popery may not be tolerated in any State for these Reasons, viz. 1. Because it
maintains inherent Righteousness of their own, and Justification by Works
done by themselves and in themselves, and thereby, as by many other ways,
derideth the imputation of Christ's Righteousness, abandoning, renouncing and
rejecting the Savior of Mankind. 2. Because they corrupt the Worship of God in
substance, by professing and practicing Idolatry; yea, more then Heathenish
Idolatry, by entertaining a mixture of Paganism and Judaism. 3. Because the
Church of Rome is the Church of Antichrist, and therefore not of Christ. 4. A
natural Papist; that is, such an one as acknowledges and believes in the
Council of Trent, and is obedient to the Doctrine of the Jesuits, cannot be a
good Subject, and obey for Conscience sake; and how dangerous it is for any
State to admit them, former Times have already recorded in characters of Blood
scarce yet dry.


That the High Priest of Rome is the true and very Antichrist, may most
evidently thus appear: 1. If we consider the Place where we are to seek, and
where we shall find him: The Seat of Antichrist is Mystical Babylon, and
Mystical Babylon is no other then Rome it self; for the Whore of Babylon is the
Great City, which in the Apostles time had rule and dominion over the Kings of
the earth, Rev. 17.18. and this City is situated upon seven Hills, Rev. 17.9.
so is Rome, as is well known to all Travelers and Historians. 2. If we
consider the Time when the Church was to look for him: The time of Revealing
and Manifestation of Antichrist, was foretold by the Apostle, That he should
come when the Emperors were removed and taken out of the way, and when once the
Empire in the West should be dissolved, then should Antichrist succeed in the
Seat, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7, 8. that is, in the Government of Rome, for the Empire of
the West was the Roman Empire. 3. If we consider the Conditions and Qualities
of Antichrist, which are plainly described, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. he is said to be an
Adversary opposed to Christ, yet not professed but disguised; for under this
Vizard of Hypocrisy, he oppugneth Christ and his Truth, and denies the Lord
Jesus to be that Christ anointed to be the only King, the only Priest, the
only Prophet of the Church: in all which the Bishop of Rome usurps a share,
lifting up himself above all that is called God; that is, all to whom the Name
of God is communicated, or by whom the Name of God is called on, and sits in
the Temple of God as God: Witness his usurped Authority upon the Consciences of
men, upon the Scriptures; his Pardons, and the like.


Private Caveats to avoid Idolatry: 1. We must not delight in Idolatrous
Papists company, to be their inward friends. 2. We must be careful how we
travel for pleasure and delight into Popish and Idolatrous places, lest we
expose our selves to inevitable dangers, by consorting and conversing with such
as are ready to allure us to commit Idolatry, to go into their Idolatrous
Temples to see and hear for fashion and experience sake, and afterward to fall
down before their Images. 3. We may not for Wealth, Friends, or any worldly
wicked Respects link our selves in the nearest Society of Marriage with Popish
Idolaters, taking and nourishing in our bosoms a Serpent which is ever at hand
day and night to tempt and entice us to forsake our Covenant with God, to
renounce his pure Worship, and ^o embrace Idolatry and Superstition. This was
the sin of the Sons of God before the Flood, Genesis 6.1, 2. This was Solomon's
sin, for all his wisdom, 1 Kings 11.4. Neh. 13.26. This was Ahabs sin, 1 Kings
16.31. and Jehorams sin, 2 Kings 8.18. 4. We are not to be present with our
Bodies before the abominable Idol of the Mass, whether it be of a fancy or for
fashion, whether of curiosity, or for fear of punishment; nor to give the least
outward approbation to Idolatry, though we reserve our hearts to God and his
pure Worship: for if this were allowable, then the Holy Martyrs needed not to
have suffered, nor the Three Children of God to have walked in the fiery
Furnace, rather then bow before the Idol.


You that Religion t'any tune can sing,
Make Gods of Wood, of Stone, or any thing;
You that are Gods unto your selves, can strain
Devotion to the Idol of your Brain;
You that pray to your Lust, and Sacrifice
Unto the Glances of Lascivious Eyes;
You that hoord up your God, and put your Trust
In What cannot defend it self from Rust;
And thou Whose Belly is thy God: All ye
Shall be indicted of Idolatry.
. 3. Of Hypocrisy.
THe other Vice repugnant to this Commandment, is Hypocrisy; and whosoever
will keep his Soul uninfected and unpoisoned by this pestilent and venomous
sin, must look to his heart to keep that sincere, as the Root and Fountain of
all his actions; otherwise it may deceive others, and it will deceive himself,
but can never deceive God. Counterfeit Holiness is a double Ungodliness. If it
be a good thing to be good indeed, what Reason has the Hypocrite to but appear
to be what he would not be? And if it be an evil thing to be evil indeed, why
will be be that indeed which he would not so much as seem to be? Wherefore let
him appear as he is, or be as he appears, for what will it profit him to seem
to the world a very Saint, and to his God a Devil: A wicked man of himself as
he is wicked, is too sufficiently wicked; but when he counterfeits godliness,
his dissembling of Piety makes every sin he commits leave a double blot of
guilt on the painted Sepulcher of his Soul. Without Integrity and Uprightness
of heart, our Prayers, hearin; of Sermons, partaking of the Sacraments, or the
performance of any other holy Exercises does nothing avail. If I regard
iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me, Isa. 1.15.

Sincerity is as Salt that seasoneth every work, the life and substance of all
other Graces, without it the best things are no better then sins against God;
but to such as are pure in heart he is good and gracious, Psalm. 79.1. and
125.4, 5. Hence it is that men in this Age hate the Saints, under pretense that
they are the Hypocrites; and this has been the Devils policy against all holy
men in all Ages. David was said to be a subtle man to deceive others; Paul was
reckoned the great Impostor of the world; nay, Christ himself was called a
Deceiver. And indeed no man speaks against Religion or hates Religion under its
own notion, under its own name, but somewhat else, as Hypocrisy; indeed such
as have not Grace themselves, cannot possibly judge of Grace in others.

Now in the state of Formal Hypocrisy, may concur immunity from notorious
sins, all natural and moral Perfections, admirable variety of Learning, Policy,
and all other acquired Ornaments of the Mind, an outward performance of all
duties of Religion, some measure of inward illumination, a resemblance or
shadow of the whole body of true Regeneration, and a persuasion of being in the
state of Grace; even thus far a man may go in the profession of Christian
Religion, and yet for want of true sincerity be a stranger from the power of
Faith, and from the life of godliness: yea, though a man were a moral Saint, an
Angel among the Pharisees, absolute in all other Perfections, yet without the
inward power of Grace to give them the life of sincerity, he is but a spectacle
of commiseration to Angels and Men.

The difference betwixt this Moral civil man and the Hypocrite, is only this,
That the Hypocrite does much of the First Table, little of the Second; but the
Civil man does much of the Second Table, little of the First; neither does what
he does in sincerity; both do what they do in Hypocrisy: yea, though Moral
Honesty and outward Righteousness be in themselves good, and in a kind
necessary, yet by accident are many times a strong bar to keep men from the
power of godliness and unfeigned sincerity; for resting therein and not
stepping forward, they content themselves with a probable error of being in the
state of Crace, and with a plausible passage unto eternal Death: for he which
reaches but to civil Honesty, comes far short of being in Christ, and
consequently of true happiness. Thus the two main Engines whereby the Devil
deludes the world, and ensnares the Souls of Unregenerate men, are Civil
Honesty, and Formal Hypocrisy.

Hypocrisy is either 1. In works commanded of God, but not done after that
manner which God requires. 2. In works not commanded of God, yet done for
ostentations sake, as all superstitious and humane Traditions which appertain
not to the edifying of the Church.


The causes or Reasons that many profess God that serve the Devil: 1. Pride or
Self-love, which so overcomes their hearts, and blinds their eyes, that they
cannot see their wickedness, or judge of themselves and their own Misery as
they should. 2. Because the heart of man is so deceitful, he can speak with his
Tongue what he means not in his heart, beguiling with lying lips and a double
tongue.


Hypocrisy is threefold; 1. Privy Hypocrisy, by which a man makes profession
of more then is in his heart. This kind of Hypocrisy arises from Spiritual
Pride, and sometimes mixeth it self even with the fairest and most sanctified
actions of Gods dearest children, soonest insinuating into the holiest heart.
2. Gross Hypocrisy, by which a man professes that which is not in his heart at
all, and so deceives others, but not his own heart: This most properly is
Hypocrisy. 3. Formal Hypocrisy, by which a man does not only deceive others,
but also his own heart with a false conceit and persuasion that he is in a
happy state.


The Reasons why the gross Hypocrite is more miserable and of less hope then
the open sinner: 1. Because he sins against the light of his Conscience; which
manner of sinning makes him incapable of saving Graces. 2. Because by his
outward profession he so dazles the eyes of men, that he bars himself of those
Reproofs and wholesome Admonitions, whereby the open sinner is many times
reclaimed, humbled and converted. 3. Because all public Reprehensions and
Admonitions from the Ministry he posts over from himself to the open sinner,
as not belonging to himself. 4. Because he is justly obnoxious to an
extraordinary measure of Gods hatred and indignation, and weight of vengeance.


The unhappy issue of the Formal Hypocrite: 1. A cursed Security, wherein he
slumbers to eternal destruction. 2. A wretched Opposition to more sincerity
then he finds in himself. 3. A searedness, deadness, and benummedness of
Conscience. 4. An Impatiency of having his Formality censured by the Ministry
of the Word. 5. A Neglect of a more sound search into the state of his Soul.


Reasons moving the Formal Hypocrite to think well of himself, and his own
state good: 1. A comparing himself with those which are more sinful. 2. A
prejudice which he conceives from the imputation which the world lays upon
the children of God. 3. An outward Success in worldly matter, much plenty in
outward things. 4. A Misconceit of Gods Justice, and a straining and a racking
of his Mercy beyond his Truth and Promise. 5. A Misapprehension of the
Opposition in the passage of Grace. 6. A Misobservation upon the Death and Ends
of other men.


A performance of outward Duties of Religion without the power of Grace upon
the Soul, and an universal Sanctification in all the faculties thereof, cannot
produce any sound comfort in the heart, or acceptance with God; and that for
these Reasons, 1. Because the iniquity, defect or exorbitancy of any
particular, of one circumstance, makes an action evil: but an absolute
integrity of all concurrents is required to make a good work acceptable to God,
comfortable and profitable to a Christian. 2. Because except our Righteousness
exceed that of the Scribes and Pharisees, we shall not enter into the kingdom
of Heaven. 3. Because the principal and holiest Exercises, the most solemn and
sacred actions of Religion, without sincerity and Sanctification of heart, are
but as the cutting off a Dogs neck, and the offering of Swines blood: which
Truth arises out of Isa. 1. Mic. 6. Hag. 2. Psalm. 50. and many other places.


Hypocrisy, though long covered, will be at last uncased, and that for these
Reasons: 1. Because it is like a wound healed outwardly, but festering
inwardly, and therefore at last the corruption cannot but break out. Hypocrites
have no sound hearts, and therefore they must needs at length be made manifest.
2. Because a liar will one time or other miserably forget himself; and every
Hypocrite is a liar, because he speaks one thing with his mouth, and entertains
another in his heart; therefore does the Apostle join them together, They speak
lies in hypocrisy, 1 Timothy 4.2.


Moral Honesty being of near relation to Hypocrisy, observe the difference
betwixt the Righteousness of faith and the Righteousness thereof 1. The
Fountain or Original of the Righteousness of Faith, is the sanctifying Spirit;
but the cause of the Righteousness of Moral Honesty, may be goodness of
Constitution and Ingeniousness. 2. The Righteousness of Civil Honesty in
outward actions, may make a colorable pretense of Piety, but has many secret
relations to byrespects; but that of Faith has in all actions for the main
scope and principal end only the glory of God. 3. That of Faith does labor
religiously and conscionably in that particular Calling wherein Gods Providence
has placed a man, and in all the parts and special Duties of Godliness and
Obedience; but Civil Honesty wanders in the generalities of Religion. 4. That
of Faith does strive with most earnest contention of Spirit for Spiritual
comfort, and a good Conscience before God; but Civil Honesty is fully satisfied
with Credit and Plausibleness among men. 5. Civil Honesty makes no great
conscience of small sins; but the other makes resistance to all known sins. 6.
Civil Honesty does not use to make opposition against the sins of the time; but
the other does stand out for the honor of God unto the death.


The degrees of saving Faith, which are peculiar to the children of God and
distinguish the Regenerate man from the state of the formal Hypocrite: 1. A
feeling and special approbation of the Word of Life and Promises of Salvation,
that with it he holds himself an heir of Heaven, without it a child of endless
Perdition. 2. A most fervent thirsting for the enjoyment of them, enforced with
groans unutterable, and a gasping for it, as the dry and thirsty ground for the
refreshing drops of rain. 3. An effectual Apprehension of them with a fast and
everlasting hold. 4. A particular Application of them closely and particularly
to his own Soul. 5. A full Persuasion of them, being fully and truly persuaded
by Gods good Spirit, out of a consideration of his universal change, that they
are his own for ever. 6. A Delight and Joy thence rising, sound and
unconquerable; he lies down in peace that passes all understanding; he is
filled with joy that no man can take from him; he delights in the Grace
apprehended, as in a treasure far more dear then the glory of infinite Worlds,
yea or Life it self: And from the power and working of this inward grace,
spring out Actions outward, both in his general Calling of Christianity, and
his particular Vocation, which by the Mercies of God are Faithful, Constant,
Uniform, Impartial, Resolute, Universal and Comfortable.


The Degrees of that Temporary Faith which the Formal Hypocrite may have; viz.
1. He may be endewed with understanding and knowledge in the Word of God. 2. He
may be persuaded that it is divinely inspired, and that it is most true. 3. He
may see clearly by the Law of God the grievous intolerableness of his sins, and
the heavy Judgments due unto them. 4. He may be amazed and terrified with
fearful horror and remorse of Conscience for his sins. 5. He may give assent
unto the Covenant of Grace in Christ, as most certain and sure; and may
conceive, That Christ's Merits are of an invaluable price, and a most precious
Restorative to a languishing Soul. 6. He may be persuaded in a generality and
confused manner, that the Lord will make good his Covenant of Grace unto the
Members of his Church. 7. He may be troubled in mind with grudgings and
distractions, with reluctation and scruples before the Commission of sin; Like
Pilate before his Judgment on Christ, and Herod before his beheading of John
Baptist. 8. After a sin committed, beside the outward forms of Humiliation, by
the power of this Temporary Faith, he may be inwardly touched and affected with
some kind and degree of Repentance and Sorrow, which may sometimes prevent
temporal Judgments, as in Achab, and with a slumbering and superficial quiet
secure the Conscience for a time.


The causes whereby Hypocrisy is many times by the world unjustly laid unto
the charge of the children of God: 1. Suspiciousness, an Argument ever of
worthlesness and impotency; for insufficiency is most suspicious: That
suspicion by which a man does cast the worth, actions and affections (...) in
his own mould, and thinks every man obno^^^^^ to all the infirmities he finds
in himself. 2. Disability and blindeness in the natural man of discerning and
acknowledging the operations of grace. For no man can see the actions of grace
in another, without the experience of the power of godliness upon his own Soul.


We may know whether we have sincerity or not, by these signs: 1. If we approve
our selves to God in all things, not to man, 1 Thessalonians. 2.4. and seek to have the
Testimony of a good Conscience. 2. If we are ready to yield simple and absolute
obedience to Gods Word (though our reason be often ready to cross the same)
even to all Gods Commands, Psalm. 119.6. 3. If we Repent of all sin, and not
retain any one, but hate sin unfainedly in our selves and others. 4. If we
truly humble our selves in the sight of God, casting our selves down in his
presence, confessing our own vileness and unworthiness to appear before him,
Mic. 6.8. 5. If we be confident in good Causes, and courageous, especially in
time of peril, Prove. 10.9. 6. If we be constant and persevere unto the end in
well-doing, and be resolved never to give over a continued course of Piety,
till we have finished the course of our Life, the pilgrimage of our Misery.


The infallible Marks whereby to discern the hollowest hearted hypocrite: 1.
His chiefest care is to seek the pomp and glory of the World, to be highly
esteemed of others, and never regarding the glory of God, or what he esteems of
him, 1 Samuel 15.30. 2. Hypocrites are sharp-sighted, and have Eagles eyes, to
observe the behavior, and look into the lives of other men, but are as blind
in regarding, as backward in reforming their own, Luke 18.11. Matthew. 7.3, 4, 5.
We ought to begin with our selves, and end with others. 3. They are more
curious in the observation of the ancient Traditions of men, of the Customs of
their Forefathers, and of Devices of their own, then of the holy Statutes and
Commandments of Almighty God; like the Pharisees, Mat. 15. who charge not
Christ's Disciples with breaking the Laws of God, but with transgressing the
Ordinances of men, which themselves made as Necessary to the Worship of God. 4.
They are precise in Trisles, and loose in Weighty Affairs; they bind and lay
such grievous burdens on other men's shoulders, as themselves will not move
with one of their fingers; they ensnare men's Consciences, and entangle their
own in small things, but let loose the Reins to them in things simply evil.
They made it a great scruple of Conscience to put Judas his Silver-pieces into
the Treasury, because it was the price of blood, but made it none to hire a
Traitor to betray his Master, and to shed that innocent blood. 5. They do all
things to be seen of men, seeking the praise and applause of the world, and
hunting after vainglory, who having received all their Reward already, can
look for no other at the hands of Almighty God, but the portion he has
promised; which is even Motive sufficient of it self to cause us to abhor this
base, unworthy, cursed and abominable sin of Hypocrisy.


A painted Sepulcher, The Just man's Ape,
A puny Devil in an Angels shape:
Lo here the Hypocrite, whose twylight eyes
Seem with much Confidence to reach (...) Skies:
Who seems to shake the Heavens with his breath,
Even whilst his heart does Covenant with Death.
Dissembling wretch! Truth does thy Conscience tell,
God is not mocked: fool not thy self to Hell:
Seem thou what thou will, the Dev'ls in earnest,
Juggle no more, Damnation is no Jest.
The Third Commandment.
Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain.
THis Commandment prohibiteth the vain usage of Gods Name; that is, in
whatsoever false, vain, light or trifling thing, which tends either to the
disgrace, or at leastwise not to the glory of God. Thou shall not take the
Name of God in vain; that is, Thou shall not only not forswear, but neither
shall thou make any dishonorable mention of God; as neither against nor besides
that honor which is due unto him, neither yet lightly, neither yet without just
cause: but, thou shall glorify the Name of God in all that that do, think,
speak and desire, and shall labor that others may be won by thy means to do the
same. For as the abuse of Gods Name is here prohibited, so the lawful and right
use thereof is here commanded; which consists in the true confession and
magnifying of his Name both publicly and privately: The Reason hereof being
taken from the fearful estate of such as any way abuse the Name of God, the
Lord holding them as guilty of dishonor done unto his most Sacred Majesty.

The virtue then of this Commandment consisting in the right and honorable
usage and taking of the Name of God, must be the propagation and spreading
abroad of Gods true Doctrine; The celebration, lauding and magnifying of his
Name; The confession of the Truth which we know concerning God; Zeal for God;
Invocation; Thanksgiving; Right and lawful Swearing, which is comprehended
under Invocation, as a special under the general: For an Oath is a religious
and necessary Confirmation of things doubtful, by invocating God, or calling on
him to be a Witness of Truth and a Revenger of Falsehood, or the calling of God
to Witness for the Confirmation of the unknown Truth of some thing: Or, an Oath
is an invocating of God, whereby is desired, that God, who is the viewer of the
Hearts, would be a Witness unto him that Swears, That he will not lie or
deceive in that matter whereof he Swears, and that God would punish him that
Swears, if he do lie or deceive. An Oath was ordained of God, that it might
be a Bond of Truth between Men, and a Testimony or Record, That God is the
Author or Defender of the Truth. He that takes an unlawful Oath, as by the
Creatures or the like, is bound to keep it, because he Swears indirectly by
God; or that takes it by false gods, is likewise bound for the same reason. So
likewise an Oath whereunto a man is drawn by fraud or subtilty, fear or
compulsion, binds him notwithstanding, if it be of things lawful and
possible. But Oaths that are made of unlawful things, either by an Error or by
Ignorance, or through Infirmity, or against the conscience, may not be kept
without sin, it is sin to keep them, as did Herod in Beheading John Baptist, by
pretense of keeping his Oath. For what things God forbids, those things he
will not have men sworn or unsworn to perform, and he that keeps such an Oath
heaps sin upon sin; therefore is it to be repented of with sound and thoroughly
unfeigned Repentance.

Here note, That Oaths extorted from men against their wills are to be kept,
if they contain nothing in them that is unlawful, although they be unprofitable
and hurtful to us; but unto wicked Oaths no man ought to be forced: neither
should wicked Oather be extorted from us by any torments, but we must choose to
dye rather. But if any wicked or impious Oaths be made through fear or
infirmity against our conscience, those do not bind us to performance, but
must be recalled by sound Repentance, because what is impious to be done, that
is impious to be sworn: neither is one to be heaped on another. But extorted
Oaches that are not impious, which are made of things lawful and possible,
though hurtful and hard, yet are doubtless to be kept, because thou art bound
by Gods Law to choose the lesser evil. And as by swearing falsely the Name of God
is taken in vain, so also by vowing rashly. Now a Vow is a Promise solemnly
made to God of things lawful and possible, or a solemn Promise made unto God of
some things that are ino ur power to perform, for the further strengthening of
our Faith, Deuteronomy. 23.21, etc. Eccles. 5.3, etc. This lawful and holy Vow is a
profitable help to further us in the Worship of God; indeed a Vow is not part
of Gods Worship, no more then Fasting is, yet they are both helps and
furtherances of the true Worship of God; and it is far better never to Vow,
then having vowed, not to perform that which is gone out of our lips: So as we
may reason with such Vow-breakers, as Peter did with Ananias, Acts 5.4. for
they impudently mock the Majesty of God, and thereby, to his great dishonor,
take his Name in vain.

In breach of an holy and religious Vow, there is a double trespass; because to
the observation of a Vow, the man is tied by a double bond, both absolutely by
Duty, and respectively by Covenant and Promise, and thereby violateth both his
Duty and Fidelity unto God. For by a Vow we bind our selves for the doing of
some special thing that is acceptable to God, or for the leaving undone some
thing displeasing to him, because he allows not of our Will Worship, Col.
2.23. therefore we are not left free to Vow what we list, having then no
Assurance that God will accept them, Isa. 10.12. Vain then, wicked, and
ridiculous are the Popish Vows of Pilgrimages, of Abstinence from Flesh, of
Single life, yet perpetual Chastity, of voluntary Poverty, of Friarly Obedience
to superstitious men, and the like; not one whereof does appear to be grounded
in the Word of God.

The Popish Vows, many of them, are as blasphemous as superstitious, for they
Vow not to God only, but to Saints, for which they have no president in
Scripture, no not when Vows stood in the greatest force, and were in largest
extent; yet they teach, That Vows are a substantial part of the Worship of God,
and so by their own confession commit manifest most abominable Idolatry, by
communicating this honor to the Saints, thereby making them to be Gods. In the
right manner of Vowing, observe therefore, That the making of a Vow was always
wont to God, craving his blessing, Psalm. 61.5. Genesis 28.20. And as they must be
made with Prayer, so they must be performed with Thanksgiving, Psalm. 6.5.
otherwise it were better never to have vowed and promised unto God. And Vows
thus lawfully made, are not merely Ceremonial, or pertaining to the times of
the Law, but are a constant and perpetual Ordinance of God, to be observed and
practiced under the Gospel: yet because the Jews were tied to sundry legal
Observations, whereby upon occasion they testified their thankfulness, it may
not be unfitly held that Vows were partly Ceremonial, partly Moral; partly they
were abrogated, and partly they continue and remain in full force to the end of
the world, because the Spiritual Duties shadowed thereby bind all persons.

In this Commandment are three parts; viz. 1. The Rash use of Gods Name is
forbidden. 2. The Sanctifying of it is commanded, contained under the
prohibition. 3. A Threatening against the Breakers of this Commandment.


The Name of God is that whereby he is called and known to us. And it
signifies 1. The Attributes, Titles or Properties of God; that is, those
things which are affirmed of God, Genesis 32.29. Exodus 3.15. and 33.6. 2. God
himself, Psalm. 116.43. and 5.11. 3. The Will or Commandment of God, and that
either revealed and true, or imagined and feigned by men, 1 Samuel 17.45. when
Christ came with Gods Word, and at his command, he said that he came in his
Fathers Name, Joh. 5.43. 4. The Worship of God, Trust, Invocation, Praise,
Profession, Mic. 4.5. Mat. 28.19. Indeed the Name of God is taken in vain,
whenever no profit redoundeth to thee or any other by the using of it, but
contempt and dishonor to God.


In this Commandment is forbidden all Abuse of the Name of God, which may be
these several ways: 1. By Blaspheming, or giving occasion unto others to
Blaspheme. 2. By Swearing falsely, deceitfully, rashly, commonly, or by
Creatures. 3. By Cursing and Banning. 4. By Vowing things impossible or
unlawful, or by neglecting of our lawful Vow. 5. By lightly using the holy Name
of God in his Word. 6. By vain Protestations and Asservations.


Or thus, To take the Name of God in vain, is to speak of God or his Words or
Works contemptuously, lightly and rashly, which may be done sundry ways, but
especially by these five; viz. 1. By Blasphemy, when one does not only speak
contemptuously of God, but does also use reproachful words, and such as savor
of contempt against his Majesty, as they do that renounce God. 2. By abusing
the holy Scripture, which is done specially three ways: 1. When it is profaned
by ridiculous Scoffs. 2. When it is corrupted or wrested otherwise then the
true sense is. 3. When it is abused to Enchantments or Sorceries.
3. By Dissoluteness of life, when one professes to know God, but yet denies
him in his deeds. 4. When the word [God] or the Name of Jesus is used of us
either rashly, or without cause and vainly. 5. When any swears by him vainly;
that is, as often as the circumstances of an Oath are not kept.


The causes of the horrible Abuse of Gods Name by common Swearing; viz. 1.
Custom and common use, whereby many think themselves excused. 2. Evil Examples,
by corrupt communication, when we keep wicked company. 3. Want of Admonition;
for many sin this way, that do not think or know they sin, Swearing so often,
that they know not or take no notice of it when they Swear. 4. Want of
Punishment by the Magistrate, who are oftentimes guilty of other men's Oaths
hereby. 5. A Reprobate sense; for when men are given over to commit wickedness,
impiety becomes habitual to them, and the Name of God is made of no account
amongst them.


The special Abuses of Gods Name more fully explicated; viz. 1. Blasphemy,
which is 1. To speak any thing derogatory to the glorious Attributes of God. 2.
When the Lord is disgraced, as by Pharaoh, Exodus 3. A man is made accessory to
Blasphemy, by giving occasion to others to Blaspheme, which is when a man's
Profession is Christian, yet his Practice wicked.
2. Swearing falsely, which is 1. When a man Swears a thing to be true which he
knows to be false. 2. By Swearing deceitfully; which is, when a man shall
affirm any thing upon his Oath, that he will perform and do it, when his intent
is otherwise; or not to do it, when his meaning is to do it; or when he is
careless and negligent of his Oath.
3. Swearing Rashly; which is, by Swearing without due consideration what an
Oath is, and by whom it is taken; thus we usually sin. Also by Swearing
commonly in our communication and talk one with another, by the Creatures, the
Mass, or any the like vain thing. 4. Cursing or Banning, which is a calling for
Plague, or any the like fearful evil upon those with whom we are offended, Romans
12.14. 5. Vowing things unlawful or impossible, or neglecting of our Vows,
which are 1. General, in the time of our Baptism. 2. Special 1. Upon any
special occasion of danger or benefit. 2. Without any such occasion, only upon
a free resolution, the rather to glorify God.

6. Light using of Gods Name, by saying (O Lord) or (O God) upon every light
occasion, without having the heart lifted up unto him: Or by way of Admiration,
crying out, Good Lord, upon every news or light accident: Also the vain and
wicked using of his Word and Attributes, Titles or Properties, which the better
to avoid, know, that they are such as these, to which thou may easily refer
all the other several degrees and kinds of them; viz. 1. By Praising God for
any thing wickedly gotten, or for any evil thing: Thus did Saul, 1 Samuel 23.21.
2. By Derogating from Gods Power; as 2 King. 7. 3. By Derogating from his
Providence, crying out, What ill luck had I! 4. By Speaking of his Mercy to be
the more hardened in doing evil. 5. By Speaking irreverently of his Works of
Election, Creation, Redemption, etc. 6. By Talking vainly of the Word of God,
to no edification, and to move vain Questions about it. 7. By Mocking at any
thing therein, or jesting out of it. 8. By alleging it to defend any sin or
error, as the Devil did to Christ, Mat. 4. 9. By using it to charm withal, Lev.
20.6. or the holy Names therein, to Conjuration. 10. By teaching falsely in the
Name of the Lord, as the false Prophets did, saying, Thus says the Lord. 11.
By ascribing Power, Greatness, etc. to our selves, as Nebuchadnezzar, Herod,
and the Princes of Tire did, Dan. 4. Acts 12. Jer. 27.
7. Vain Protestations and Asseverations; that is, the needless use of them,
when some earnest occasion does not urge hereunto: Against those as against
Swearing does Christ direct his speech Mat. 5.37.


That our Swearing may be lawful, it is required 1. That we Swear only to such
a Truth as we know to be so; for although it be a Truth to which we Swear, yet
if we know it not so to be, we are perjured, because we Swear contrary to our
Conscience. 2. That we Swear according to the known intent of him unto whom, or
before whom we Swear: for if we Swear in doubtful words, having another meaning
then we know him to have before whom we Swear, we abuse the Ordinance of God.
3. This being a part of Gods Worship, we must do it with great fear and
reverence. 4. We must Swear only things lawful and possible, otherwise we but
mock God, who cannot be mocked. 5. If we Swear for the performance of any
lawful thing by the Assistance of God, we must be careful our Oath be not
frustrated.


The Virtue of this Commandment consists in the right and honorable usage of
Gods Name; the parts whereof were formerly named, but here explained; viz. 1.
The Propagation and spreading abroad of Gods true Doctrine not that only by
the public Ministry of the Word, but that instituting and instructing which
appertains to every one privately in his place, being bound to bring others
to the knowledge and Worship of God, Deuteronomy. 4.9. 2. The Celebration, lauding and
magnifying of God, which is a commemoration and recounting of Gods Works and
Properties, joined with a love and admiration of them. 3. The Confession of the
Truth which we know concerning God, which is the showing of our judgment and
opinion concerning God and his Will certainly known out of his Word, Romans
10.10. 4. The Zeal of God, which is an ardent love of God, and a grief for any
reproach or contempt which is done to God, and an endeavor to put away that
reproach from the Name of God, and to avoid sins our selves, and to banish them
from others. 5. Invocation, which is Prayer, whereby we crave of the true God
none other blessings then God has commanded us to ask of him only, made in
true Conversion by Faith, and in a full persuasion of Gods Promises for the
Mediators sake, Psalm. 105.1. 6. Thanksgiving, which is to acknowledge what and
how great Blessings we have received of God, and to yield unfeigned Obedience
unto him to the utmost of our power, Col. 3.17. 1 Thessalonians. 5.18. 7. Right and
lawful Swearing; the manner whereof has been already touched, and yet remains
to be further opened.


Again, Gods Name is honored, 1. By our deeds of Piety, Praying, Reading,
Hearing, Preaching, etc. also of Charity, 2 Cor. 8.19. And when we confess and
defend it as the Martyrs did. Now that our deeds may be good, these Properties
are required: 1. They must be frequent and often. 2. They must be done in
sincerity and truth; that is, from the very heart, with an aim at this only
end, That God may have glory. 3. In Faith; that is, by persons believing, and
in assurance of being accepted in all our devotion, Heb. 11.6. 4. The Doer must
be separate from sin; that is, not live impenitently in, or make a trade of any
sin.
2. By our speech; as herein we are privileged beyond all other earthly
Creatures: And this is the right use of the tongue; as 1. When our talk is not
corrupt, but tending to the edification of others. 2. When we speak Reverently
of the Name of God, Phil. 2.10. 3. When in all things we make Conscience of
speaking the Truth, Josh. 7.19. 4. When an Oath is rightly taken, or a Vow
rightly made; for this is a special part of Gods Service, Deuteronomy. 6.13. Jer. 4.1.
5. When we speak of the Word of God to edification, Psalm. 37.3. Deuteronomy. 6.7. 6.
When we speak affectionately and thankfully of the Works of God to others,
Psalm. 107.8. yea, of his Judgments upon our selves, Job 1.11.
3. In the Thoughts and Desires of our hearts; which is, when even here we are
enslamed with a love and reverence of his holy Name, and do burn with a desire
of his glory above all things: Without this the outward reverence is nothing at
all in Gods acceptance. 4. When we labor to bring others to the glorifying of
Gods Name, Matthew. 5.16. extending our care to others, by all means possible and
lawful to win them to the praise and glory of God.


Christian Confession of the Truth being also a special virtue of this
Commandment, as whereby Gods Name is highly honored, is twofold: 1. Open; when
a man boldly confesses the Truth or his Faith before the Adversary even to the
death: This is the highest degree of Confession. 2. Implicit; when a man to
keep his Religion is content to forsake his Country, Friends and Goods: This
is a lower degree thereof, yet acceptable to God.


Two special Times in which Confession of our Faith is to be made: 1. When we
are examined touching our Religion by them that are in Authority. 2. When in
the want thereof Gods glory is directly impeached, the Salvation of men
hindered, the Truth obscured, Error enboldned, and our Neighbor offended.


Unto the Confession of the truth and consequently to this Commandment, is
repugnant 1. Denial, which is 1. An universal and general Defection from true
Religion. This Denial is proper only to Reprobates and Hypocrites. 2. Special
and Particular, committed through error, not voluntary, neither purposed,
through fear and humane frailty: This may happen to a child of God, as in
Peter. When a man is forced to deny his Religion, his offense in deed and in
truth is voluntary (though some otherwise think it to be a mixed action) for
compulsion does not reach to the Will, but to the outward man, and serves to
draw forth a consent; and when consent is yielded, he denies his Religion
voluntarily; for voluntas non potest cogi.
2. Dissimulation or Dissembling, and hiding of the Truth, when as Gods glory
and our Neighbors safety requires a Confession thereof. Hereof are they guilty
who out of novelty, curiosity, or for fashions sake, dare be present at
Idolatrous Service: for it is not lawful for any man, being urged, to go to
Idol-Service and hear Mass, though he keep his heart unto God. The Corinths
might not go into the Temple of Idols, though not partaking with Idolaters in
their Worship, 1 Cor. 8. and Chap. 10. 3. The abusing of Christian liberty, or
giving offense in things indifferent, to confirm errors in the minds of the
Adversaries or of the weak, to alienate them from true Religion, Romans 14.15. 4.
All Scandals and Offenses given in Manners, when as they which profess true
Religion lead lewd and wicked lives, and thereby deny what they profess, Romans
2.24. 5. Unlawful Christian slight in time of Persecution: for though in some
cases it may be lawful, yet is Subjection simply to be yielded to the
punishment of Magistrates, for the better witnessing of the Truth, though we do
not always tender obedience to their Commands. Now to a lawful Christian flight
in time of Persecution, by a Minister of Gods Word, or any other man
whatsoever, are required these eight Conditions, that Gods Name may not be
dishonored, nor this Commandment broken; viz. 1. When there is no hope of doing
good by his abode in that place where the Persecution is, but otherwise he may
fly. 2. If the Persecution be personal; that is, directed against his person
particularly, then he may use his liberty. Public Persecution is directed
against the whole Church. 3. If there be in the Pastor a moderation of mind,
for he must neither be overcome with excessive fear, nor through overmuch
confidence. 4. That the Pastor withdraw himself only for a time, not utterly
forsake his Charge, unless his person be chiefly aimed at in the Persecution.
5. If after due trial and examination he find not himself sufficiently armed
with strength to resist the Extremity. 6. If he be expelled or banished by the
Magistrate, though the Cause be unjust. 7. If God offer a lawful way or means
of escape, and does as it were open a door, and give just opportunity to fly.
8. If the Danger be not only suspected, surmised, and seen afar off, but
certain and present.



That we may the better know how to avoid the dishonoring of Gods name by our
unlawful flight, take notice of the principal signs thereof: 1. When God puts
into a man's heart the Spirit of Courage and Fortitude, whereby he is resolved
to abide and stand out against the force of all enemies. 2. When a man is
apprehended and under the custody of the Magistrate. 3. When a man is bound by
his Calling or Ministry, so as in it he may glorify God and do good to his
Church, then he may not fly. 4. When God in his Providence cuts off all lawful
means and ways of escape, he does then as it were bid that man stay and abide.


Gods Name is most commonly abused by Swearing, we will therefore now speak of
Oaths, and in the first place know that they are of two sorts: 1. Of things
past, for the discovery of Truth. 2. Of things to come, for binding a Promise;
which, if made unto God, is called a Vow. This will be touched in the close of
this Commandment.


In an Oath, which is of things past, three circumstances are required, without
which the Oath is sinful and vain: 1. That the thing whereupon we are about to
Swear, be not only true, but also that the Truth thereof be certainly known
unto us. 2. That the thing be of some weight, as well to the glory of God, as
to the love of our Neighbor. 3. That the Truth of that thing by any other means
cannot be brought to light, for otherwise the very Name of God is
contemptuously used.


In an Oath respecting things to come, are these five things to be observed: 1.
That the thing be of some importance, for the reverence we have of God. 2. That
it be just and lawful, that we call not God to witness what is contrary to
himself. 3. That it be in our power, else we swear madly or hypocritically. 4.
That it be of things certain, lest we swear with an evil conscience. 5. That in
time we perform it indeed, though it should be never so much to our loss and
hindrance.


There are four distinct things in every Oath: 1. An Asseveration of the Truth.
2. A Confession of the Omnipotent Presence, Wisdom, Justice, and Truth of God.
3. Invocation on God to give Testimony to the Conscience of the Swearer, that
he speaks but Truth. 4. Imprecation, whereby man binds himself to punishment
if he swears falsely.


That we may be careful (as it is our duty) to use an Oath aright, we must
consider these six particulars therein; viz. 1. What an Oath is: It is a solemn
Appealing to God, whereby we testify that we speak Truth. 2. Who is the Author
of it: That is God himself, by whom alone we are to Swear. 3. The parts of an
Oath whereof it consists; viz. 1. Confirmation of a Truth that cannot else be
known but by our Oath. 2. Invocation of Gods Name, who is witness of the Truth,
and a Judge to be avenged of us if we lie. 3. Confession, that God punishes
Perjury either expressed or implied, openly or secretly; which Confession is
threefold: 1. A man confesses that which he swears is true in his Conscience.
2. That God is a witness not only of his outward action and speech, but also
of his particular Conscience. 3. That God is an Omnipotent Judge of all and of
him that swears; able to justify him if he swear truly, or to condemn him
eternally if otherwise.
4. An Obligation, binding us to the punishment, if we perform not the
Condition. 5. Imprecation, or Prayer to God for these two things: 1. That God
would be a witness with him that swears, to testify that he swears truly,
and according to his Conscience: So did Paul, Romans 9.1. 2. That God would
become a Judge to curse him with eternal death, if he swears falsely, 2 Cor.
1.23.

4. The form or manner that is to be observed in our Swearing; and that is 1. In
Truth, lest we make God a liar; which respects two things: 1. The matter
whereto we swear, for God may not be called to be a witness to a lie. 2. The
mind of him that swears, for his Oath must be according to his mind,
without fraud or deceit, with intent to perform his Promises.
2. In Justice or Righteousness, lest we commit impiety; which also respects
two things: 1. The thing sworn to, which must be just and lawful, and according
to Gods Word. 2. The Conscience of the Swearer, for a man must not swear for a
Trifle, though the thing be true, but either by the Authority of the
Magistrate, or upon some necessary occurrent of his lawful Calling: for light
matters are not a just cause of an Oath.
3. In Judgment, lest he be rash and heady even in so weighty a matter: I say,
in Judgment 1. Of the Oath, to know the nature of an Oath, and to be able to
judge of the matter whereabout he swears; and also to discern rightly of the
persons before whom, of time, place, and other circumstances. 2. Of his own
Person, to see in his Conscience whether he be fit to take an Oath, and thereby
to worship and glorify God: for, the Fear of God, and Swearing by his Name,
are joined together, Deuteronomy. 10.20. So that a profane man that has not the fear
of God in his heart, ought not to Swear.

5. The Ends of an oath, which are 1. In respect of God, his own glory. 2. In
respect of Men, to confirm some truth or decide some controversy; so that the
particular Ends of all lawful oaths may be these four; viz. 1. Allegiance and
Obedience to Princes: so the Elders of Gilead swore to Jephthah, Judge. 10.11.
So Jehoida the Priest made the guard of King Joash to swear, 2 King. 2.11, 4.
2. To confirm a lawful League, and establish a Covenant between men. Thus did
Abraham with Abimelech, and he with Isaac, Genesis 21.23, 24. and 26.28, 29, 31.
Thus did Jacob and Laban, Genesis 31.53. so did David and Jonathan, 1 Samuel 18.3.
and 20.8. and 23.18. 3. For the deciding of Controversies between party and
party, which otherwise cannot be determined. 4. To justify our Religion, and
to bind our selves thereby to the true Worship of God. Thus was it in the days
of Asa, 2 Chronicles. 15.12, 13, 14. and 34.31, 32.

6. The Properties of an Oath; for as every Oath is not unlawful, so every Oath
is not lawful, as when contrary to Gods Word. Now it is the property of a
lawful Oath, to be undertaken of such things as are true, certainly known,
possible, godly, necessary, profitable, weighty, worthy so great a
Confirmation, and no way disagreeing with Gods Word, no way prejudicial to his
Honor, or the Love we owe unto our Neighbor.


Again, before and at the taking of every Oath there must be consideration had
of these particulars; viz. 1. Of the thing in question that is to be confirmed.
2. Of the nature of the Oath that is taken. 3. Of the mind and true meaning of
him that swears. 4. Of the particular circumstances of time, place and
persons before whom we swear; as if before the Magistrate, remember these three
Caveats; viz. 1. That the Oath be administered lawfully, not against Piety or
Charity. 2. That the Oath must be taken in the Magistrates meaning, not in our
own private sense. 3. Not ambiguously, but our words must be agreeable to what
we conceive in heart.
5. Of the just occasions of an oath, which are chiefly these four; viz. 1.
When it may further Gods glory and Worship. 2. When it may tend to the
Preservation of our Neighbors life, goods and good-name, or to the furtherance
of Brotherly love. 3. When it lawfully serves to relieve a man's own private
necessity. 4. When the Magistrate does exact it by order of Justice.
6. Of the event and issue of the Oath. 7. Whether the party we are to deal
with, doubts of the thing we are to speak of, or not. 8. If we doubt, whether
then it may not be passed with Truly and Verily, or by doubling our
Asseveration, as Christ did. 9. Whether there be not any other fit means to try
out the matter, before that we come to an Oath. 10. When the matter is of
importance, and there is no other Trial but by an Oath, we must consider before
whom we swear, as the Judge or Magistrate, Jer. 4.2. And by whom or what, as by
the Lord, Lev. 19.12.


In every lawful oath there is a double Bond: 1. It binds one man to another
for the performing of the thing he swears to do. 2. It binds a man unto God;
for he that swears, invocates God as a witness and a Judge of the Truth of
his Assertion; and he stands bound unto God, till the thing sworn unto be
performed, if it be lawful and possible.


That a Christian may take a right and lawful oath is confirmed by these
Reasons, drawn 1. From the end of an Oath; for an Oath is a confirmation of
Faith and Truth, a deciding of Debates, a Bond of Civil order, and gives and
ascribes the praise and maintenance of the Truth to God. 2. From the nature of
an Oath, which is a Testification of the Truth, and an invocation of God,
whereby we desire of him such things as are agreeable unto his Nature and Will
manifested in his Word, even that he will bear Record of the Truth. 3. From
Gods own Commandment, Deuteronomy. 6.13. and 10.20. Isa. 65.16. 4. From the Examples
and Practice of the Saints, whose Oaths are in Scripture approved; and such
places of Scripture as forbid Oaths, forbid only rash Oaths, and such as
have not the lawful causes and conditions of an Oath.


There are two Times and cases wherein a man may lawfully Swear; viz. 1. When
the Magistrate ministers an Oath unto a man upon a just occasion: for he has
power in this case, and therefore when he justly requires it of a man, then may
he lawfully swear. Let no man therefore vainly imagine from the words of our
Savior, Swear not at all, Matthew. 5.34. that it is not lawful to take an Oath,
being thereto lawfully called by a Magistrate; for Swearing is commanded as a
part of Gods Worship, Deuteronomy. 10.20. And Christ's meaning in that place was not to
forbid all Swearing simply, but all Swearing after the Jewish manner and custom;
that is, in common talk and communication, as is plain in ver. 37. For this is
a Rule to be observed in the Interpretation of Scripture, Things generally
spoken must be particularly understood, according to the circumstances of the
present matter in hand; as when Paul says, He became all things to all men, 1
Cor. 9.22. if this should be taken generally, we might say, That with
Blasphemers he became a Blasphemer, etc. But as that speech of Paul's must be
restrained to things indifferent, so this here of our Saviors is restrained to
the Jewish Custom. 2. When a man's own Calling general or particular,
necessarily requires an Oath: And this is in four cases; viz. 1. When the
taking of an Oath serves to maintain, procure or win unto God any part of his
glory, or to preserve the same from disgrace. In this regard Paul, moved with a
godly zeal, uses an Oath in sundry of his Epistles. 2. When his Oath serves
to maintain or further his own or others Salvation, or preservation in Soul or
Body, 2 Cor. 1.23. Psalm. 119.106. 3. When the Oath serves to confirm and
stablish Peace and Society between party and party, Kingdom and Kingdom. Thus
Abraham and Abimelech, Jacob and Laban, Genesis 21. and 31. 4. When a man by Oath
and not otherwise may free himself from temporal losses; in which regard a man
may lawfully by Oath purge himself from infamy and slander.



An Oath is to be used only in case of necessity, and that for these Reasons:
1. Because God will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain, which
is done one way by using it negligently and unnecessarily. 2. Because the end
of practicing an Oath is to decide Strifes and determine Controversies, which
disturb Peace, and hinder Christian Charity, Heb. 6.16. 3. The Name of God is
most fearful in Praises, glorious in Holiness, great in Might and doing
Wonders; therefore it ought not commonly to run in our mouths without weighty
and necessary cause.


An Oath does not bind in these six cases: 1. When it is against the Word of
God, and tends to the maintenance of sin. 2. If it be made against the
wholesome Laws of the Commonwealth. 3. If it be taken by such persons as want
Reason, as Children, Idiots, Madmen, etc. 4. If it be made by those who are
under tuition of others, and have no power to bind themselves. 5. When it is
made of things impossible, for then it is a vain Oath. 6. If at the first it
were lawful, and afterward it become unlawful and impossible.


We must Swear by God only, and that for these Reasons; viz. 1. Because God
has commanded us to Swear by him only, as alone to be feared and worshipped.
2. God will have Invocation to be used to himself only, and an Oath is an
invocating of God. 3. An Oath gives and ascribes unto him by whom we Swear, the
inspection and viewing of men's hearts, the hearing of them, and infinite Wisdom
and Knowledge; but God only views the heart, Joh. 2.25. 4. By whom we Swear,
unto him we give and ascribe the executing of punishment, and Omnipotency, as
whereby he must maintain the Truth, and punish him that lies; but God alone is
Omnipotent, and the executer of punishment, Mat. 10.28.


Reasons against Swearing by the creatures: 1. An Oath is a part of Gods
Worship, Deuteronomy. 10.20. every part whereof must be referred to God directly; but
in indirect swearing by the Creatures, the Oath is directly referred to the
Creature, and indirectly unto God, namely in the Creature, which is not lawful.
2. A man must Swear by him that is greater then himself, Heb. 6.16. and
therefore God swar by himself, because there was none greater to swear by, ver.
13. 3. Thou shall Swear by my Name, Deuteronomy. 6.13. Then God seems to prescribe
such a form of Swearing, wherein his Name is plainly expressed; but in indirect
Oaths by the Creatures it is otherwise. 4. He that swears by the Temple
swears by God, Mat. 13.16. whence may be gathered, That an indirect Oath is
superfluous, because it is sufficient that a man Swear by God only, and not by
the Creature also.


Unto right and lawful Swearing is opposed 1. The refusing of a lawful Oath,
when one avoideth to take an Oath that tends to Gods glory and to the safety
of his Neighbor. 2. Perjury or Forswearing, when wittingly and willingly a man
deceives in an Oath, either in bearing Witness, or in Promise made to God. 3.
An Idolatrous Oath, which is taken by another besides the true God. 4. An Oath
made to an unlawful thing; as was Herod's to perform whatsoever Herodias
Daughter should ask. 5. A Rash Oath made of lightness, without any necessity,
or for no great cause.


Perjury is threefold, or there are three kinds of Perjury; viz. 1. When a man
Swears that which he knows to be false; when a man confirms by Oath that
which he knows, or thinks to be otherwise. 2. When he Swears that which he
means not to do; this is deceitful Swearing, when a man either about things
past or to come, Swears contrary to the true knowledge or purpose of his
mind, reserving a meaning to himself contrary to the meaning of the
Magistrates demand, according to which every Oath is given and so must be
taken: for if a man might lawfully frame a meaning to himself in Swearing, he
might easily delude all Truth, and so should not an Oath for confirmation be
the end of Strife, but the breeder thereof, through surmise of false meaning in
him that Swears. 3. When Swearing to do a thing which he also means to do,
yet afterward does it not: The breaking of a binding Oath; as when a man upon
his Oath promises to do a thing that is lawful, and does it not, unless God
after the Oath taken, make the thing promised impossible to be done, for then
it is no longer binding.


In Perjury there must be these two things; viz. 1. A man must affirm or avouch
some thing against his own mind, his own meaning, purpose, intention or
persuasion; his speech must not be answerable to that which is in his mind; if
he knows a thing to be false, and swears it is false, this is no Perjury. 2.
In Perjury there must be an Oath: it is not Perjury to affirm a thing that is
false, unless he also swears to the thing he affirms falsely, against his mind;
yet every Oath makes not a direct Perjury, unless it be a binding Oath: for a
man may swear unto a thing that is unlawful, and afterward alter his mind, and
not perform his Oath, without Perjury: Now he sinned in so swearing, and
thereby obliged to Repentance; yet he is not Perjured, because the Oath was not
a binding Oath.


The grievousness of this sin of Perjury, appears by these three sins which are
contained in it; viz. 1. The uttering and maintaining of a lie. 2. The calling
on God to be a witness to a Lie, wherein men do as much as in them lies, set
the Devil himself, the Father of Lies, in the room of God, the God of Truth,
and so grossly rob him of his Honor and Majesty. 3. In Perjury a man prays for a
curse upon himself, wishing God to be a witness of his Speech, and a Judge to
Revenge if he swear falsely; so as herein a man is his own Enemy, and as much as
in him lies, does cast his own both Body and Soul into Hell.


Now as touching Vows, know, That these four Conditions are Required in every
lawful Vow; viz. 1. Concerning the person of him that voweth, that he be a fit
person. 2. Concerning the matter of a Vow, that it be lawful, possible, and
acceptable to God, it may not therefore be sin; not trisles or light matters;
nor things merely necessary, as to dye, which cannot be avoided, nor things
impossible. 3. Concerning the form of a Vow, it must be voluntary and free. Now
that it may be so, these three things are necessary: 1. That it be made in
judgment; that is, in Reason and Deliberation. 2. That it be done with consent
of Will. 3. With Liberty of Conscience.
4. Concerning the End of a Vow, which is not to be a part of Gods Worship, but
only a stay or help to further us in the same. Now there are three special and
particular Ends of a lawful Vow; viz. 1. To show our selves thankful to God for
blessings received. 2. To prevent sin to come, by keeping sobriety and
moderation. 3. To preserve and increase our Faith, Prayer, Repentance and
Obedience.



Again, in a vow consider, 1. What it is is; even a free and solemn Promise to
God, touching such things as please him, tending to the glory of his Name, the
profit of our Brethren, or the Repentance and Salvation of our own Souls. 2.
Who may Vow; and they are only and all such as are free and at liberty. 3. To
whom Vows are to be made; not to Saints or Angels, but to God only, and to him
alone they are to be performed, Psalm. 76.11. 4. What we may Vow to God; not
things unlawful, unpossible and unwarranted by the Word of God; not things
whereof we are uncertain whether they please God or not: but such things as the
Scripture warranteth, being the true Rule of all right ways, the Record of Gods
Revealed Will. 5. That being thus made, it is carefully to be kept and
religiously to be performed, having an eye to that party with whom we have to
deal: For as Vows are to be made with reverence, so are they to be performed
with care and diligence; otherwise we grossly abuse the Majesty of God, and take
his Name in vain. So that Vows are not in themselves unlawful or to be
condemned, so as they be restrained and bounded in the compass of the Law of
God.


Consider farther in Vows these Particulars; viz. 1. If they be made of any
thing flat against the Word of God, they cannot bind or tie us to the
performance thereof: for all the force and power of binding us, is to be
borrowed and derived from the Word of God, otherwise they have no strength or
efficacy to constrain or command. 2. They must not be made of such persons as
want sufficient Reason, Judgment, Discretion and Understanding; as Children,
Fools, or Furious persons. 3. They must be so made as they may stand with
Christian Liberty: for we may not in any sort make that absolutely Necessary
which God has left free unto us, ensnaring the Conscience, and abridging the
Liberty which Christ has purchased: contrary to the Commandment of the
Apostle, Gal. 5.1. 4. That a Vow made of a thing unpossible is no Vow at all,
but an intolerable presumption, and a wilful tempting of God. 5. They must not
be against a man's general or particular Calling; that is, neither against his
calling as he is a Christian, neither against that special calling wherein he
lives. 6. They must not be rash, heady, sudden, idle or unadvised, but made
with Advice, Meditation and Deliberation: for rash Vows are not lawful, though
the things vowed may be done lawfully. 7. They ought all to be of great moment
and importance, not idle and trifling toys, like the Popish Vows, whereof one
voweth a Pilgrimage to the Saints, another to fast or eat no Flesh at such a
Feasts Even: whereof the one is superstitious, and the other devilish, 1 Timothy
4.1, 3. 8. They must not be made for false and wrong ends, as conceit of Merit,
and opinion of deserving the favor of God and Everlasting Life: For the ends
which we respect must be good, as to exercise and stir up the gifts of Faith,
Prayer, Obedience, Repentance, and other graces of the Spirit, and to testify
our Thankfulness to God for Blessings received at his hand: They must not be to
bind God unto us, but us the closer unto him in a more strict course of life.
9. They must come from a free heart, performed willingly and cheerfully unto
God. 10. We must pay our Vows without delay, we must not put off the time, Genesis
33.1. Exodus 5.3. lest the Lord hold us guilty of taking his Name in vain.


The blister'd Tongues of men scarce ought can vent,
Without the Breach of this Commandment:
We cannot sigh, reprove, admire, nor fit
Expressions to the fancy of our Wit
Without the Breach thereof: Courtiers sick
For want of words make it their Rhetoric:
And Poets swear they are undone, unless
They may have license for some Profaneness.
But let all such as Take Gods Name in vain,
Take heed they Take not Hell too for their pain.
The Fourth Commandment.
Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath day: Six days thou shall labor, and do all
that thou have to do, etc.
THe Sum of this Commandment sets out a certain Day wherein God will have
men to sever themselves from their ordinary labors, and to apply themselves
wholly to his Service. As God rested the Seventh day after the Creation: So
Christ having ended the Work of the New Creation, rested on this day from the
Work of Redemption: And as Christ did substitute the last Supper in room of the
Passover; So he substituted the First day of the Week in room of the Jews
Sabbath, to be a day set apart to his own Worship. From Adam to our Savior
Christ, the Sabbath was the Seventh day of the Week; but from Christ and his
Apostles it is the First of the Week; that is, the Lords day, which was
instituted for the Seventh day or Sabbath day, in respect of Christ's
Resurrection. Now Christ in changing the Sabbath day from the Seventh day to
the Eighth, did not change the Moral Law; for that change was no change of the
Substance, but of the Circumstance of Time: for the Substance of that Law, is
the enjoining of a Seventh days Rest unto the Lord; now though a Seventh day
from the Creation be not kept, yet a Seventh day is kept still.

Hence then does the Sectarist vainly hold, That all days are now alike, and
none more a Sabbath then another: For whereas they allege, We are free from
the Law, Romans 7. it is meant of the Ceremonial Law, the heavy yoke whereof
Christ took from our shoulders; and if in any place freedom from the Law be
spoken of, it is either meant of the Ceremonial and Judicial, or of the Rigor
of the Moral Law, enacting perfect Obedience in every point, or else threatening
condemnation. Neither is that true which is alleged, Every day is a Sabbath to
a Christian: for it is Gods express Command, Six days shall thou labor, yet not
excluding our daily Service to God. This continual Sabbath will not be till we
come to Heaven, Isa. 66.23. Neither may it be in the liberty of the Church to
change the Sabbath day again: for as it was not at the first changed without
Christ's Authority, so it can receive no further change without him: And if the
Church had this power, then might it be said to be Lord of the Sabbath; yet
without adjoining any opinion of such necessity of this unalterableness in the
Church, as to think it the least part of any ceremonial Worship, it being now
the Lords day, no Jewish Sabbath. And this is an unchangeable Rule, That one
day in Seven, neither more nor less, is Moral and Perpetual. And although the
Jews that believed, changed the day which was ceremonial, yet altered they not
the Morality of one in Seven: For in the first change they kept two Sabbaths
together; the Jewish, the Seventh day of the week past, in memorial of the Work
of Creation which was past; the Christian, the First day, which was immediately
next the other, and the First of the week to come, in Remembrance of the Work
of Redemption, being our Sabbath at the Resurrection of Christ for the time
following; which is impossible ever to be changed again.

That which is shadowed forth in the Legal Sabbath, is begun in the Spiritual,
and is perfected and consummated in the Heavenly Sabbath. The Breach of this
Sabbath is the main sin of the world: nay, Humane Inventions and Traditions are
ordinarily better observed and more regarded then this Commandment of God: The
people indeed would rather go to Church then to work, but to carnal Delights
and Recreations rather then either; forgetting the Memento wherewith the Lord
more specially commands as well due preparation before, as unsophisticate
performance in the actual celebration of this holiest of days. Such as make no
conscience to take the Lords day from him, are Spiritual Thieves, and meddle
with that which is not their own, never considering the wrong and injury that
they offer unto the Almighty. God rested on the Seventh day; that is, he ceased
to create any New parts of the World, as being now perfect, and such as he
would have it to be: Good Reason therefore had the Lord of this day, on pain of
Eternal death of Body and Soul in Hell, the place of the Damned, strictly to
charge and command that every Soul keep this whole day holy to his glory.

How dares then any creature-Man think his own thoughts, speak his own words,
or do his own works on this glorious day, Isa. 58.13. the Lords own holy day.
He that walks away this day in vain Discourse, idle Pastimes and sinful
Recreations, steps every step he thus profanely steps, one step forward to
Eternal Death: He that gathered but Sticks thereon, was stoned to death,
because he had not kept that Statute which God had enacted as by solemn
Proclamation, That all sorts that profess themselves his Servants, should wait
upon him on the Sabbath. It was Christ's own custom, to preach the Gospel in the
Synagogues on this day; so also the Disciples, Acts 20.17, and 17.1, 2. 1 Cor.
16.11. The Doors of the Temple were shut the six days, but opened from morning
until the evening upon the Seventh day, Ezekiel. 46.1, 2. And this sanctifying of
the Lords day is a Moral Duty, and binds perpetually, otherwise we should have
but Nine Commandments, whereas they are often called the Ten Words, Exodus
34.28. Deuteronomy. 14.13. and 10.4. And Christ came not to destroy, but to fulfill and
keep the Law, Mat. 5.17.

Know then, we may not make this day a day of vain pleasures and carnal
delights, a day of Sports and Recreations, thinking it sufficient if we follow
not the works of our Calling; neither may we on this day go or ride about our
worldly matters, to buy, bargain, sell, and talk with others, robbing God of
his day to spare one of our own; neither is it sufficient to observe only so
much of this day as is enjoined by Laws and Injunctions of men, and profane
the rest of it, thereby dividing the Lords day between God and our selves: And
every sin is so much the greater, by how much less the thing is for which men
sin; I say, the less the thing is for which a man will sin and transgress the
Law of God, the greater always is his sin, because the greater is his contempt
of God: Thus was it with him that gathered Sticks on the Sabbath day, and was
stoned to death for his pains: And thus it is with such as recreate away the
Sabbath by walking the Fields, who offend God more therein, then he that
works thereon in his Calling for his Necessity. Yet here by the way we are to
beware of a Jewish Superstition, which Christ often refutes in the Gospel; that
is, to think it unlawful to perform on the Sabbath day whatsoever works
belonging to the necessity either of his own life or of others: for by the end
of the Commandment it appears, That such works only are forbidden as hinder
the Exercise of the Ministry of Gods Word.

The parts of this Commandment are two; viz. 1. The Commandment, That the
Sabbath be sanctified; that is, that it self, viz. the Seventh day, be allotted
for Gods Service, Genesis 2.3. Exodus 20.11. and 16.26. and 20.10. 2. The Reason of
the Commandment, drawn from Gods Rest on the Seventh day after the Creation,
and his hallowing thereof.


Remember to keep holy the Sabbath day; that is, with great care and Religion;
and that for these Reasons: 1. Because the breach and violating of the Sabbath,
is the breach and violating of the whole Worship of God: for the neglect of the
Ministry soon corrupts the whole Doctrine and Worship of God. 2. Because by
the exacting of this Typical Sabbath, God would signify the greatness and
necessity of the Spiritual Sabbath. 3. Because God will have the external
Sabbath to serve for the beginning and perfecting of the Spiritual Sabbath in
us.


In this Commandment we are commanded to keep holy the Sabbath day: which is
done 1. By preparing our selves by Prayer, and emptying our hearts of sin. 2.
By assembling together to Pray unto God, to Praise him, to hear his holy Word,
and to Receive the blessed Sacraments. 3. By meditating upon Gods Works, and
the Word which we have heard, suffering it so to work in us, as that we may be
furthered in all holiness of life. 4. By collecting and distributing to the
Poor, by visting the sick, and reconciling dissentions among Neighbors.


In this Commandment is forbidden all Profaning of the Sabbath: which is 1. By
doing worldly works which are not of present necessity, by journeying about
worldly Affairs, idle resting, or absenting our selves from the public Duties
of Gods Word and Worship. 2. By forgetfulness of the Sabbath upon the six days,
by which we often bring upon our selves a necessity of profaning the same. 3.
When being Parents or Governors we leave such as are under our charge to their
liberty upon that day.


The Reasons of this Commandment are 1. Partly expressed therein, and are taken
1. From the Lords Example, who rested the Seventh day from all his works of
Creation. 2. From his Blessing inseparably linked unto the hallowing of this
day.
2. Partly enfolded therein, and are these: 1. The Law of the Sabbath is
Ancient, and was of force in Paradise before Man's Fall. 2. Because it is most
Equal, the Lord allowing us six days to labor in. 3. Because the Seventh is the
Lords peculiar day, so that without Sacrilege we cannot any way profane it.



God will have all our children and family to cease from their labors on this
day, for two causes: 1. That these also may be brought up by their Parents and
Masters in the service of God, and may be admitted unto the Ministry of the
Church. 2. Because he will have especially on the Sabbath day, Love and
Bountifulness toward our Neighbors to be showed and seen in the Church.


Strangers also are commanded to intermit their labors, and that (if they were
converted to true Religion) because they were of the household of the Church; if
they were Infidels, it is commanded them not in respect of themselves, but in
respect of the Israelites; and that especially for these two Reasons: 1. Lest
by their ill Example they should give offense unto the Church. 2. Lest their
liberty might be an occasion to the Jews to accomplish by them those labors
which it was not lawful for them to work by themselves; and so the Law of God
should be deluded.


The Cattle also was commanded to Rest, whose Rest had no respect or
consideration of Gods Worship, but was commanded only in respect of men; and
that for these two Reasons especially: 1. That all occasion of laboring might
be cut off, by forbidding the labor or use of their Beasts. 2. That also they
sparing bruit Beasts, might learn how greatly God will have regard to be had of
mercy and favorableness toward men.


It was the Seventh day that God consecrated to Divine Service; for these
Reasons: 1. That by the Example of his own Rest, as a most forcible and
effectual Argument, he might exhort men to the imitation thereof. 2. That this
Rest of the Seventh day might be a Monument of the Creation then finished by
God, and of his perpetual preservation and governing of his Work ever since
that day, unto his own glory, and the Safety of his chosen.


In this consecration God requires these two things most especially; viz. 1.
That on the Sabbath day there be not only a private serving of God as on other
days, but also a public serving of him in the Church. 2. That on that day all
other labors should give place both to the private and public Worship of God,
which on other days every one does exercise according to his Vocation and
Calling. Now here we must know, That there is a threefold difference of
forbidding works and sins; viz. 1. Labors are forbidden but in respect only as
they hinder the Ministry of the Church, or as they give offense to our
Neighbor. 2. Labors are forbidden only to be used on the Sabbath day, sins at
all times. 3. The ceasing from labors is a Type of ceasing from sins, which is
the thing signified by that Type.



The Institution of the Sabbath in Paradise consists of two parts: 1. A
Blessing; God did bless it in regard of himself, because he kept it in his own
person. 2. Sanctification; he hallowed it also in regard of Man, by commanding
it to be sanctified or kept in performance of holy Duties.


Thus two things are required in a Sabbath 1. A Rest, which consists in a
ceasing from labor. 2. A Sanctification of that Rest to an holy use. This is
the Sabbath of the New Testament.


The Sabbath was commanded of God for two causes; viz. 1. Declarative;
considered in two respects: 1. By that bodily Rest the Lord meant to warn the
people of Israel to abstain and rest from their own works being carnal and
defiled, that they might suffer the Holy Ghost to work in them; so that it was
a Type or shadow of our Regeneration. 2. That circumstance served to signify
the Everlasting Rest of the Kingdom of Heaven, which was as it were part of the
former.
2. The other end of bodily Rest, is, That we may wait upon the Ministry of
the Church, meditate upon Gods Works, diligently apply our selves to the love
of our Neighbors, and the instruction of our Families. The former end was taken
away by the coming of Christ; This latter remains, and is perpetual.


There are likewise two things to be considered in the Sabbath; viz. 1. The
things Ceremonial and Temporary: As the Jews might not begin a Journey on the
Sabbath day, Exodus 16.29. nor kindle a fire thereon, Exodus 35.3. nor carry a
burden, Jer. 17.21. 2. The things Moral and Perpetual: As that there should be
a day of Rest, that this day should be sanctified, and that this holy Rest
should be observed in a Seventh day.


The Sabbath signifies a Quietness or Rest, or ceasing from labor, for these
Reasons; viz. 1. Because God rested on that day. 2. Because it is an Image of
the Spiritual Rest to come. 3. Because we also, and our Families, and our
Cattle, are to rest and cease from our works on that day, that God may then
show and exercise his works in us.


Again, there is a threefold consideration to be had of the Sabbath; viz. 1.
Legal, commanded in Exodus 20.8. which is for the exercise of 1. Faith, 1. To
meditate on Gods Works. 2. To beg a blessing on our Endeavors. 3. To Exercise
our selves in Prayer.
2. Charity 1. To the Poor. 2. To our Servants and laboring creatures.

2. Spiritual; that the Old man with all his corruptions may be rooted out, and
the New man may be made perfect. 3. Celestial; wherein both in Soul and Body we
shall rest from the labors and encumbrances of this present life.


Likewise there are three degrees of the Sabbath, not unlike these of the
Sacraments; viz. 1. External and Elementary, in which as touching the outward
celebration, both good and evil men communicate together. 2. Internal and
Spiritual, whereof the Elect only and the Faithful do participate. 3. Of
Perfection and Consummation, which only remains for ever, whereunto we ascend
by the second, and for which the Faithful do earnestly contend.


The Sanctification of the Sabbath is twofold; viz. 1. Public, which is the
solemn performance of Spiritual works, tending to the public Worship of God;
As 1. The Reading, Hearing and Preaching of Gods Word. 2. The Administration of
the Sacraments according to Gods Institution. 3. Public Prayer by the
Minister, the Congregation in mind firmly assenting thereto. 4. Collections
for the Poor, for such as want and may command our Charity.
2. Private, which is done apart from the Congregation still to Gods glory; as
1. That every man in the beginning of the Sabbath, in the Morning, do privately
prepare himself by Prayer to the public service that follows: Also by
examination and humbling of himself before God in respect of his particular
sins, Eccl. 4.27. 2. Reading or hearing the Word of God and godly Books
diligently, Isa. 35.16. 3. That when the Congregation is dissolved, we spend
the rest of the Sabbath in Meditation and conference of the Word before
Preached, of the works and creatures of God, Acts 17.11. 4. That we visit the
afflicted both in mind and body, privately exercising our selves in the works
of Charity and Mercy, Neh. 8.12. 5. That to Gods glory we shut up the Sabbath
with Prayer and Thanksgiving.



Hence appears, That the general parts of sanctifying the Sabbath, are these,
which we are to remember and practice as often as the Sabbath comes, even to
the end of the world: 1. Rightly and truly to teach and instruct the Church
concerning God and his Will. 2. Rightly to administer the Sacraments according
to Gods divine Institution, and so accordingly to use the same. 3. Diligently
to frequent the public Assemblies of the Church, and there attentively to give
ear unto the heavenly Doctrine, plainly opened and delivered, and afterward
diligently to meditate thereon, and to examine it, Acts 17.11. 4. Public
Invocation of God, whereby we join our Confession, Thanksgiving, Prayers, and
desires with the Church. 5. To give Alms; that is, to perform the duties of
Love and Charity, thereby showing our obedience to the Doctrine, Neh. 8.10. 6.
The honor of the Ministry of the Church, or our obedience to the whole
Ministry, in life and manners; and this is the Moral Sabbath.


The Sabbath is perpetual for these Reasons: 1. Because it is placed in the
number of the perpetual Commandments. 2. Because it was written by the finger
of God, Exodus 31.18. Deuteronomy. 9.10. 3. The writing of it in Tables of Stone does
argue that it is perpetual. 4. Because it was before there was any use of the
shadow or ceremony.


Forwhat Reasons the Lords day ought wholly to be spent in religious exercises:
1. For Reasons drawn from the equity and liberality of God in giving us six
days; from the Example of Gods Rest; and from the consideration of the end why
it was appointed to be kept holy. 2. It serves to preserve men from Barbarism
and Atheism, and all irreligious Profaneness. 3. That it may be a Sign between
the Lord and us throughout our generations, that we may know that he is the
Lord that does sanctify us, Exodus 31.13. 4. Our Savior vouchsafed to honor
this day above the rest of the days of the week after his Resurrection, and
that by his special Appearings in it, as well as by his Rising again upon it.


The special Appearings of our Savior after his Resurrection upon this his own
day: which should excite us to sanctify it with prepared hearts, and to
observe it with the more care and circumspection: 1. To Mary Magdalene early in
the morning, Joh. 20.1. and 14. 2. To the other Women as they were going to
communicate to the Apostles the certainty of his Resurrection, which the Angels
had declared unto them before at the Sepulcher, Mat. 28.9. 3. To the two
Disciples going to Emmaus, Luke 24.21. 4. The same day at night he appeared to
his Disciples Joh. 20.19. 5. On this day for the confirmation of Thomas his
Faith, he appeared to his Disciples, Joh. 20.26. And upon this day also did the
Holy Ghost descend.


On the Sabbath we must Rest 1. Chiefly from sin, and thus our whole life
should be a continual Sabbath. 2. From ordinary, not absolutely necessary
labor, Lev. 23.3. 3. From works of special times, as ploughing, sowing,
reaping, etc. Exodus 34.21. Also from buying and selling, Neh. 13.16. 4. From
the works of our special Callings, the six days being appointed for them. 5.
From worldly speeches and thoughts, either by making bargains, or talking of
worldly matters, or contriving the same in our minds.


The Sabbath is now called the Lords day, Wherefore know, That things are said
to be the Lords in three respects; viz. 1. In regard of Duty and service: Thus
all creatures are the Lords, because he is their Creator and Maker, to whom as
to the High and Mighty Lord, all things owe their homage, Psalm. 24. 2. In
regard of that Power and Authority whereby he Rules all things by his
Providence; to which Jurisdiction of his all men, how wicked and perverse
soever, are subject. Thus Cyrus King of Persia is said to perform the Lords
pleasure, though he knew not the Lord, Isa. 44.28. and 45.1. Psalm. 119.91. 3.
In respect of a Propriety and immediate Right that he has in them, being
separate from man's use, and sanctified to his, and to be employed in his
service. Thus is the Seventh day the Lords day: if we rob him of his service in
the least minute of an hour in this day, we are sacrilegious, and meddle with
that which is not our own.


So that we under the New Testament are tied to the observation of a Sabbath,
as well as the Jewswere of old, and by as great Authority: And this appears
1. From the time of the Institution of the Sabbath even in Paradise, before Man
fell, when he had the substance of true Holiness, and needed not any figurative
ceremony for his comfort. 2. From the Morality of this Commandment, being
placed among the rest of the Moral Laws, which are to continue in force for
ever, Mat. 5.20. 3. From the main Reason of this Commandment; for the
Commemoration of Creation and Redemption is more to us, then that of the
Creation only was unto the Jews. 4. From the Caveat given by our Savior
speaking of Jerusalems destruction, Mat. 24.20.


In the Jewish Sabbath observe, 1. The Jews were as dead men if they wrought on
the Sabbath, Exodus 35.2. they might not then kindle a fire throughout their
habitations, Exodus 35.3. 2. It was also a figure of the Everlasting Rest of
Gods children in the Kingdom of Heaven, Isa. 66.23. Heb. 4.9. 3. It was
observed in Remembrance of their deliverance out of Egypt, which happened on that
day, Deuteronomy. 5.15. 4. It was tied precisely to the Seventh day from the Creation,
and celebrated with sundry set Rites and Ceremonies, Numb. 28.9, 10.
Nevertheless there is a Sabbath Moral and Perpetual, a time to be set apart to
the end of the Worship of God to the end of the world.


The Reasons of the change of the Sabbath; viz. 1. To put a Difference between
the Jewish and the Christian Sabbath. 2. To keep a Memorial of the day of our
Redemption; for as the Seventh day kept a Memorial of the Works of Creation, so
does this First day of the week the Memorial of the Work of our Redemption,
which is a work so much greater then the other, by how much it is more to
Redeem us out of Hell, being worse then nothing, then it was at first to create
us out of nothing, Isa. 66.24. 3. To free the Church from the yoke of the
Sacrifices and Ceremonies of the Jews, Acts 15.10. for when this day was
changed, it was more tied to the Jewish Sabbath, which was solemnized with many
ceremonies necessarily belonging unto it.


The Difference between the Christian observing of the Lords day, and the
Jewish observing of the Seventh day: 1. It was not lawful for the Jews to
change the Sabbath, or to omit it, as being a part of ceremonial Worship: The
Christian Church retaining still her liberty, allotteth the First day unto the
Ministry, without adjoining any opinion of Necessity or Worship. 2. The old
Ceremonial Sabbath was a Type of things to be fulfilled in the New Testament by
Christ: But in the New Testament that signification cease, and there is had
regard only of order and comeliness, without which there could be either no
Ministry, or at leastwise no well ordered Ministry in the Church.


The sinal causes or ends for which the Sabbath was instituted; viz. 1. The
public Worship and Service of God in the Church, exercise of Prayers,
Confession and Obedience. 2. The Maintenance and Preservation of the Ministry
of the Church. 3. That it might be in the Old Testament a Type signifying the
Spiritual and Everlasting Sabbath, Ezekiel. 20.12. 4. For a circumstance of the
Seventh day, that it might advertise men of the Creation, Preservation and
Managing of the world. 5. That on that day the works of charity, bountifulness
and liberality should be exercised. 6. For the bodily Rest both of Men and
Beasts, but of Beasts in respect of Men. 7. That men should provoke one another
by their Example to godliness, and to the praising and honoring of God, Psalm.
22.22. 8. That the Church may be seen and heard among men, and be discerned
from the other Blasphemous and Idolatrous multitude of men, that they may join
themselves thereto, who are yet separate from it.


The Sabbath is broken and profaned by such things as are opposed to the
sanctifying thereof; viz. 1. Unto the Delivering and Teaching of the Doctrine,
is opposed the Omitting or Neglect of Teaching, as also a corrupting or maiming
of the Doctrine; or a sitting of it to the Opinions, Affections, Lusts, or
commodities of the Hearers, or to any of them, 2 Cor. 2.17. 2. Unto the right
and due Administration of the Sacraments is opposed an Omitting or Neglect of
Exhortation to the Receiving thereof; as also a corrupt and unlawful
Administration of them. 3. Unto the study of learning the Doctrine, is opposed
1. A contempt and neglect of the Doctrine. 2. Curiosity, which is a desire and
study of knowing those things which God has not Revealed, unnecessary, strange
and vain.
4. Unto the right use of the Sacraments, is contrary the omitting and contempt
thereof, as also a profaning of them, when they are not received as God has
commanded, neither by them for whom they were ordained; likewise all
superstitious using them, as when Salvation and the Grace of God is tied to the
Observation of the Rites and Ceremonies, or when they are used to such ends as
God has not appointed. 5. To public Prayers is opposed the Neglect of them,
and an hypocritical pretense at them, without any attention or inward devotion;
also such Reading and Praying as serves not for any edifying, 1 Cor. 14.16. 6.
To the Bestowing of Alms is repugnant a Neglect of the works of Charity; as
when we do not, according to our power, succor the poor that stand in need of
our help. 7. To the honor of the Ministry of the Church, is opposed the
contempt thereof; as when either the Ministry of the Church is abolished, or
committed to men unworthy or unable, or is denied to be the means and
instrument which God will use for the gathering of his Church: Likewise when
the Members are reproached, when their Doctrine is heard and not obeyed, and
maintenance not allowed.


Time was when this unhappy Nation
Might break by Law by Proclamation
This Great Commandment, and keep this Rest
Prophaner then their dumb or silly Beast;
Silence the Word, lest men be Edified,
And so the Sabbath 'chance be Sanctified;
Sport it with Heathenish May-Games, make a Jest
Of what the Lord had made a serious Rest.
The Lord has one Day more, but that is to come.
Horror! I quake to think upon their Doom.
The Fifth Commandment.
Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that the days may be long in the Land which
the Lord thy God gives thee.
THe Sum of this Commandment, is, That we perform all such Duties as one man
owes unto another by some particular bond. Here are commanded all Virtues
proper and peculiar to all kinds of Superiors, or to Inferiors, or common to
them both; And all Vices contrary to these Virtues are here prohibited, as all
irreverence toward those that be in Place or Authority above us, and all
churlish behavior in such toward those that be of low degree. For the End of
this Commandment, is the preservation of civil order, decreed and appointed by
God in the mutual Duties of Superiors and Inferiors, which are comprehended by
the Name of Father and Mother. And the Reason of this Commandment is taken from
the Promise of long life, if God please not to prevent us with the Blessing of
Eternal life. Now to honor one, is to have an high esteem of him, and to yield
a respect unto him; it must first be placed in the heart, and then outwardly
manifested, and that in relation to Parents Authority, and Necessity: So as
honor compriseth here all those Daties which Children in any respect owe unto
their Parents; it implies in regard of their Authority both an inward reverent
estimation, and also an outward submission; and in regard of their Necessity,
Recompense and Maintenance.

Here both Father and Mother are expressly mentioned, to take away all pretense
from children of neglecting either of them: So that it is not sufficient to
honor the Father only, because he is the Mothers Head; nor the Mother only,
because she is the weaker vessel: the Law condemns him that neglects
either. The Authority of Parents requires Fear from children, their Affection,
Love: Affection in Parents without Authority, would make children too bold and
insolent; Authority without Affection, too much like Slaves: but both
discreetly tempered together, make a very good composition. Love, like Sugar,
sweetneth Fear; and Fear, like Salt, seasoneth Love. Thus the childs duty must
be a Loving Fear, or a Fearing Love. This Fear is an awful Respect of his
Parents, arising from an honorable esteem which he has in his judgment and
opinion of them as they are his Parents: Whence proceeds on the one side a
desire and endeavor in all things (not contrary to Gods Word) to please them,
and on the other side an unwillingness to offend them.

This Fear is an essential Branch of that honor which the Law requires to
their Parents, Exodus 20.12. and is in express words enjoined by the Law, Lev.
19.3. This Fear keeps Love in compass, restraining it from saucy follies; for
as the heart is affected, the carriage will be ordered: Had Cham had this
filial Fear in him, he had never derided his Father, Genesis 9.22. nor been cursed
for his labor; or had Absalom had it in him, he had never broached untruths to
father them on his Father, 2 Samuel 15.3. Mocking and cursing of Parents is
expressly condemned, Prove. 30.11. The Reward whereof is by Gods Law death, Lev.
20.9. yea, a shameful and ignominious death; for, the Ravens of the valley
shall pluck out his eyes, and the young Eagles shall eat it, Genesis 40.19. which
phrase not unproperly describes the execution of a notorious Malefactor that is
hanged; and indeed how dyed undutiful Absalom? Yet we must know, That no
submission is to be given to man, but such as may stand with the Fear of God:
Which seasonable Doctrine indicts all such of folly as fear man more then God.
This was Adams folly, to be swayed by a foolish woman. This was Aarons folly,
to erect an Idol to please the people, Exodus 32.1. This was Saul's folly, to
suffer his people to take of the spoil of the Amalekites against Gods express
Prohibition, 1 Samuel 15.21. This was Joash his folly, to hearken to his Princes
for the setting up of Idols, 2 Chronicles. 24.17. And thus Pilate played the fool,
in delivering against his conscience Christ to be crucified to please the
people, Mark 15.15. As thus Superiors sinned in basely submitting to Inferiors,
so they likewise sin in unwarrantably submitting to Superiors. And if Inferiors
must give honor, and by virtue thereof perform such Duties as appertain
thereto, then must the Superior carry himself worthy of honor, and by virtue
thereof perform answerable Duties. If the child honor his Natural Parents with
filial Reverence, the Parents must answer it with Paternal care and tenderness;
If the People make it their duty to respect their Minister as him that watches
over their Souls, the Minister must make it his to tender their Salvation as of
those that are committed to his charge; If the Subjects make it their duty,
beside Subjection and Obedience, to pay the Superior Magistrates such Tax and
Tribute as is lawfully due to them, they must make it theirs to seek the honor
of God in governing and giving Judgment faithfully among his people; If the
Servant make it his duty to do his Masters work diligently, faithfully, and
with a single eye, the Master must make it his duty to deal justly with his
Servant, and to reward him plentifully, remembering that he also has a Master
in Heaven; If the younger sort make it their duty to give such respect to their
elders, as is due to such as are their Superiors in Age, Wisdom and Authority,
then must it be their duty to govern, and further others by the good example of
their life, by their counsels and admonitions; If the Wife make it her duty to
reverence her Husband as her Head, he must make it his to honor, comfort and
provide for her as the weaker vessel.

Lastly, the duty of Equals, is to live equally among themselves, and to strive
to give honor one unto another; For it is the duty of Christians as to set
forth the praise of God, so to be serviceable one unto another; and public
Callings may not hinder private Duties; nor may we upon pretense of one duty,
though it may seem to be the weightier, shift off another, Mat. 23.23. It is a
general mutual duty appertaining to all Christians, to submit themselves one
unto another, because every one is set in his place by God, not so much for
himself, as for the good of others, 1 Cor. 10.24.

This Commandment consists of two parts: 1. A Precept of giving honor to
Parents. 2. A Promise of long life, upon the performance of that Precept.


In the Precept of this Commandment, we are commanded 1. To honor; that is, to
love, reverence, cherish and obey our natural Parents, the Parents of our
country, and our Fathers in Christ. 2. To carry our selves lowly and
reverently toward our Masters, being ruled by them in the Lord, and toward the
Ancient, and all our Betters. 3. If we be Superiors, to walk worthy the honor
due unto us from our Inferiors, and to use all gentleness toward them.


That we may the better know the duty of this Commandment, take notice of the
diverse Acceptance of the word Father in Scripture; viz. 1. For our Superior
in Government: Thus the King is called a Father. Abimelech signifies The King
my Father. 2. For our Superior in Knowledge and wise Counsel: Thus God made
Joseph a Father unto Pharaoh, Genesis 45.8. 3. For a Superior in private and
Household Government: Thus Naaman is called Father by his Servants, 2 Kings
3.13. 4. For a Superior in the Invention of any Art or Science: Thus Jubal and
Jabal were called Fathers, Genesis 4. 5. For our Superior in things Spiritual
toward God: So the Ministers of the Gospel are called Fathers in Christ: Thus
Paul, 1 Cor. 4.15. 6. For a Superior in Holiness and Power with God: Thus the
King of Israel called Elisha Father, 2 Kings 6.21. 7. For a Superior in
oversight and instruction: Thus Elisha called Elijah, who brought him up in
the knowledge of Prophesying, My Father, my Father, 2 Kings 1.12. 8. For a
Superior in estate and condition: Thus rich men using their riches aright are
Fathers to the Poor. Job 31.18. 9. For a Superior in Age and Years, 1 Timothy 5.1.
10. According to the common Acceptance, there are Parents By Nature. By Law.



Honor to Parents stands chiefly in these things; viz. 1. In outward
Salutation, proceeding from the Inward Reverence which we ought to yield unto
them; In the Signs, as Saul prayed Samuel to honor him before the people, 1 Samuel 15. 2. In Obedience to their Commands, so as they be not contrary to the
Will of God. 3. In Affection, as Eli is said to have honored his Sons, 1 Samuel
2. 4. In the Effects or Fruits, that when they be poor, we do help them
according to our ability. Honor God with thy substance, Prove. 3.9.


Again, Honor signifies and comprehends 1. The Reverence of Inferiors
toward the Superiors; viz. 1. An Acknowledgement of Gods Will, who will have
such an Order to be in the Calling and Degree of Superiors, and does ordain the
same, and adorn and furnish it with gifts necessary. 2. An Approbation of this
Order, and these gifts of God: for if we do not know and acknowledge this Order
to be good, we will not honor it. 3. A Subjection and Submission to this Order,
even for the Will and Pleasure of God. 4. An Outward Declaration of this their
judgment and mind in words and deeds, in ceremonies and gestures, which
differ according to places: And Subjection here comprehends such Obedience as
is not constrained, but voluntary.
2. A Love which we must bear toward them in respect of their Calling: And
this cannot be severed from Reverence; for whom we love not, them we cannot
Reverence. 3. Obedience in all things lawful and possible, which the Superiors
according to their Office and Calling command. 4. Thankfulness toward
Superiors, which requires that every one, according to his calling and
ability, and as occasion serves, aid and further them. 5. Lenity and
equability toward Superiors; which is, to bear with those infirmities of
Parents and Superiors, which may be born with and tolerated without any
reproach to Gods Name, or which are not repugnant unto his Law.


The Fountain of childrens duties, is an inward disposition of the heart,
compounded of Love and Fear: The streams issuing thence extend to Parents 1.
Living; as to their 1. Authority, which Requires 1. Reverence. 2. Obedience.
2. Necessity, which Requires Recompense.
2. Dead; as to their 1. Body, which must with decency be Buried. 2. Credit,
which with honor must be maintained.



Parents rather then other Governors are here named, and commanded to be
honored, for these Reasons; viz. 1. Because the Father-like power and
government was the first among men. 2. Because this is as it were a Rule,
according to which others are to be framed. 3. Because it is most beloved of
men. 4. Because seeing the Bond of Duty toward Parents is the greatest, the
contempt of them is the more heinous and grievous, which therefore also is with
greater severity condemned by God. 5. Because God will have Superiors to bear a
father-like mind and affection toward their Inferiors.


The distinct parts of Outward Reverence due unto Superiors; viz. 1. To Rise up
unto them. Thou shall rise up before the hoary head, Lev. 19.32. 2. To go to
meet them when they are coming toward us: Thus did Abraham, Genesis 18.2. and
Solomon, 1 Kings 2.10. 3. To bow the knee unto them; as in the same place is
noted of Abraham. 4. To stand by them whilst they sit; as the people did about
Moses whilst he sat to judge them, Exodus 18. 5. To give them the chief Seat,
and our selves to take the lowest, as the Lord commands us even at a Feast,
Luke 14.10. 6. To be silent before them whilst they speak: Thus did Elihu, one
of Jobs friends, Job 32.6, 7. 7. To be silent in Courts and Places of
Judgment, until we are bidden to speak: Thus did Paul, Acts 24.10. 8. To give
every one his just Title, as Hannah did to Eli, 1 Samuel 1.14. and Sarah to her
husband, calling him Lord. 9. To uncover the head before Superiors, and to
stand uncovered if the quality of the person so requires. 10. To order all our
speeches and gestures, so as that we pass not the bounds of Reverence.


As this Law is broken by detracting and taking away from the Reverence of
Superiors; so there is a sin in over-Reverencing them: as thus; 1. If Obedience
be Absolute, without respect to Gods Will, Acts 4.19. 2. By ascribing too much
unto them, and extolling them too highly; as the people did Herod, Acts 12. and
the Papists do the Pope. 3. By making them Absolute Paterns to be followed in
all things: Paul speaks of himself, Follow me as I follow Christ Jesus, 1 Cor.
11.1. 4. By preposterous Observance toward them in the Congregation; which is,
when we rise up to great persons, being in the very act of Gods Worship: for if
he be greatest and most worthy, why do we dishonor God by such ill reverence to
man? 5. By the humble prostrating the body unto them as unto God: This gesture,
where it proceeds from religious Humiliation and Worship, comes very near
the brinks of open Idolatry, and cannot but incur that reprehension, Take heed
thou do it not.


Honor in relation to Parents is used for two reasons especially 1. To show
that Parents bear Gods Image, for honor is properly due to God alone; to the
Creature it is due only as it stands in relation to God, and carries his
Image. 2. To show, That it is an honor to Parents to have dutiful children;
even as it is a dishonor to them to have disobedient children.


From the honor here commanded to be given Parents, arise these Observations
for Parents; viz. 1. That they also are as well bound to duty as children, Ephesians.
6.4. their just Government being their duty. 2. Parents must be so watchful
over their carriage, as thereby they make not their children to sin, Ezekiel.
3.18. 3. That it is not sufficient for Parents to prevent such mischiefs as
children may fall into, but they must also seek their good. 4. That Parents
ought to provide all needful things for their children: Nurture and Instruction
is as needful and profitable as Food and Apparel. 5. Parents, as they may not
be too austere, so neither too remiss; the one makes children careless, the
other desperate. 6. As Parents deliver good Precepts and Principles to their
children; so they must be careful, by forcible and frequent Admonitions, to fix
and settle them in their mind, Deuteronomy. 6.7. 7. As Parents by Discipline keep
their children under, so by Information they must direct them in the right way,
Prove. 22.6. 8. Parents must especially teach their children their duty toward
God.


That we may be yet better acquainted with the duties of this Conmandment, let
us again consider, That Superiors are all such as excol others in 1. Gifts 1.
Of Nature; as in Age. Sex. Beauty.
2. Of Exercise; as in gifts either of 1. Body, as 1. Strength. 2. Activity.
2. Mind, as Wit, Learning, etc.

2. Authority; as Governors in 1. Family, as Parents, Husbands, Masters. 2.
Policy, as 1. Church-policy; as Pastors, Doctors, Elders, Deacons.
2. Civil-Policy; as Magistrates 1. Superior, as King, Prince. And 2. Inferior,
as Judges, Justices, etc.





Civil honor is given to men not only for Virtue, but also for divine
Representations of other good things, because one man before another bears
the Image of some thing that is in God; viz. 1. Of his Majesty: So the King is
honored above another. 2. Of his Dominion: So the Husband is honored of his
Wife. 3. Of his Paternity, so the Father is honored by the Son. 4. Of his
Eternity: So honor is given the Aged by the young.


The general duty of all Parents to their children: 1. To instruct them in
Religion according to their capacity. 2. To provide for them touching the
things of this life.


The general duty of all children to their Parents: 1. To requite their Parents
care over them, if they stand in need. 2. To be dutiful and obedient to them in
the Lord.


The Vices contrary to the Duty of Parents; viz. 1. Not to provide and minister
necessary sustenance unto their children, or to bring them up in riot. 2. Not
to defend their children against in juries, or to offend through a foolish over
tender love, for some small or no injuries done unto them. 3. Not to accustom
their children to patience and gentleness, or to bring them up in idleness and
licentiousness of sinning. 4. Not to instruct them according to their ability,
or to corrupt them by their lewd and evil Examples. 5. Not to chastise their
children as necessity requires, or to be too fierce and cruel unto them,
beyond their duty, or the degree of the fault committed.


The general duty of all Superiors to their Inferiors: 1. To command things
good and profitable for all their Inferiors. 2. To recompense them that be
under them according to the things done. 3. To go before them by Example,
Conversation and Experience.


The general duty of all Inferiors to their Superiors: 1. To Respect them
according to their Graces and Gifts. 2. To Profit by their Gifts.


Superiors in Age or in any Authority, transgress against their Duty and
Calling these three ways: 1. Through folly and corrupt counsel. 2. Through
lightness in manners, and by their evil Examples. 3. By neglect of the younger
sort, or other Inferiors whom they see to offend, and might by their counsel
and authority correct and amend.


The Inferiors sin and transgress against that Honor which they owe unto their
Superiors, these several ways: 1. By not accounting of them as being in that
place where God has placed them. 2. By yielding more unto them then may agree
unto men, or by loving them more then God. 3. By denying Obedience to their
just and lawful Commands, or obeying them in show only, or when they command
things unjust and impious. 4. By harming them with injuries, or not ayding them
in what things or by what means we may. 5. By gratifying them flatteringly and
unrighteously. 6. By exagitating, stirring up, or provoking their Infirmities.
7. By flattery commending their Errors and Vices; or not advising them
according to their place, with due Reverence, of enormous and pernicious faults
committed by them.


The Duties of Magistrates may be reduced to these Heads; viz. 1. To see that
God be honored, and that the good things taught and established be done as God
has appointed. 2. To give Judgment faithfully and speedily in matters
belonging to their Judgment. 3. To command the observing and keeping of the
Decalogue. 4. To execute the Decalogue or the Commandments of the Decalogue;
that is, to observe and maintain the obedience thereof, by punishing them that
transgress against Discipline, either in Goods, Name, Body or Life. 5. To Enact
some positive Laws for maintenance of Civil Order, which otherwise would not
stand; serving also for the keeping and obedience of the Decalogue.


The Vices contrary to the Duty of Magistrates viz. 1. Slackness or
slothfulness; viz. 1. Not to Require of the people the Discipline of the whole
Decalogue. 2. Not to Ordain those things which are required to the preservation
and order of Civil Society, 3. Not to defend the Innocent against Injury. 4.
Not to restain or to punish too lightly such as offend against the Discipline
of the Decalogue, or against the positive Laws.
2. Tyranny, which is 1. To Command things which are unjust. 2. To Punish that
which is no sin. 3. To Punish more grievously then the degree of the fault does
deserve.



The Reasons wherefore Superiors ought in performance of their duty to go
before others; viz. 1. By virtue of their Authority they bear Gods Image,
therefore in doing their duty they honor that Image. 2. By reason of their
pluce they ought to go before such as are under them. 3. A saithful performance
of their duty is a special means to keep their Inferiors in compass of theirs.
4. Their Failing in duty is exemplary, it causes others under them to fail in
theirs, and so it is a double sin. 5. Their Reckoning at the great Day of
Account shall be the greater, for of them who have received more, more shall be
required.


The general duty of the Husband to the Wife; viz. 1. To provide for her what
is meet, not only as she is his Wife, but as she may be his Widow. 2. To give
honor to her as to the weaker vessel; that is, to bear with her infirmities and
weakness. 3. To protect and defend her, to be a covering unto her head.


The general duty of the Wife to her Husband; viz. 1. To Recompense his care
over her, in providing things necessary for the household, and to do good for
her Husband all the days of her life. 2. To Reverence her Husband, that he may
be a vail and a covering before her eyes.


The duty of the householder; viz. 1. To provide for his Household the things
that belong unto their Soul, by a familiar Catechizing and Examination, and to
be the mouth of his Family in constant Prayer. 2. To provide for the things
belonging unto this life; that is, to give to every one that is meet, in his
place and Calling; and they of the house are to submit themselves to the order
of the house, so it be good. 3. To command such things as are just and
possible; to prescribe just and lawful labors, not unlawful, not unpossible,
not too burthensom and unnecessary; to give them honestly their wages for their
labors, and to govern them by upright domestical Discipline.


Masters of families may transgress 1. By permitting of idle slothfulness and
licentionsness. 2. By unjust Commands and Exactions. 3. By defrauding their
Servants of their Wages. 4. Through too much rigor and severity.


The duties of married persons: 1. Spousal Faith and Troth for mutual love each
to other only, continually, constantly. 2. Community of goods, and a sympathy
or fellow feeling in evils and calamities. 3. The bringing forth and bringing
up of children. 4. A mutual bearing with infirmities, with a desire to cure
them.


Again, the common mutual duties concerning Man and Wife, are twofold: 1.
Absolutely necessary for the being and abiding of Marriage, whereof there are
two kinds: 1. Matrimonial Amity, 1 Cor. 7.10, 11. 2. Matrimonial Chastity, 1 Thessalonians. 4.4.
2. Needful and requisite for the well-being and well-abiding of marriage,
which may also be reduced to these two Heads: 1. Such as they are mutually to
perform to each other; as 1. A loving Affection of each other. 2. A provident
care of one for another, respecting The Soul of each other. The Body of each
other. Goodname of each other. The goods of each other.

2. Such as both of them are jointly to perform to others: which Duties respect
either 1. Such as are in or of the family. 2. Such as are out of the family.




Directions for preservation of Concord betwixt Man and Wife; viz. 1. All
Offenses must be avoided, as much as possible may be, by both parties. 2. When
an Offense is given by the one party, it must not be taken by the other, but
meekly passed by. 3. If both be incensed together, both must strive which shall
first offer Reconciliation. 4. Children, Servants, or any other must not be
bolstered up by the one against the other. 5. They must avoid making of
Comparisons in any kind whatsoever prejudicial to either. 6. They must take
heed of, and never entertain the least rash and unjust Jealousy. 7. In all
things that may stand with a good Conscience, they must endeavor to please each
other. 8. They must jointly persevere in fervency of Prayer to God, for his
Blessings to be continued on them in the estate wherein they are united by his
Providence.


For the yet better understanding of this Commandment, we must know, That
Subjection is twofold, 1. Of Reverence, whereby one testifies an eminency and
superiority in them whom he reverenceth: This is proper to Inferiors. 2. Of
Service, whereby one in his place is ready to do what good he can to another;
This is common to all Christians.


Again, Subjection is twofold: 1. Necessary, which is the Subjection of Order,
or that degree of Inferiority wherein God has placed all Inferiors, and
whereby he has subjected them to their Superiors, that is, set them in a lower
degree. 2. Voluntary, which is the Subjection of Duty, or that dutiful respect
which Inferiors carry toward those whom God has set over them; whereby they
manifest a willingness to yield to that order which God has established: which
ought to be added to the Necessary Subjection.


Likewise League or Society betwixt Man and Man, People and People, is twofold;
viz. 1. The League of Concord, when men bind themselves in peace one with
another: And this may be had with all men, Believers and Unbelievers, good or
bad; Have peace with all men, Romans 12.18. 2. The League of Amity, when men
bind themselves one to another in special Love, beside their outward Concord:
And this kind of peace ought only to be had with true Believers.


In a word, the Duty 1. Of Magistrates, is to procure the wealth and peace of
their people, like Mordecai. 2. Of Ministers, is to make themselves Servants
unto their people, not seeking their own profit, but the profit of many, that
they may be saved; as Paul, 1 Cor. 9.19. and 10.33. 3. Of Fathers, is to
educate their Children in the Fear of God, taking heed that they give them no
evil Example, nor provoke them to wrath, Prove. 4.3, 4. 4. Of Husbands, is to
dwell with their wives according to knowledge, giving honor to the wife as to
the weaker vessel; like Abraham, Genesis 6.16. 5. Of Masters, is to do that which
is just and equal to their Servants; as the Centurion, Luke 7.2. for they as
well as their Servants are bound to duty 1. By Gods Law, for it expressly
enjoyneth many Duties to Masters. 2. By the Law of Nature, which has tied as
well the one as the other to do as well as receive good. 3. By the Law of
Nations, as appears by diverse particular Laws established for this purpose. 4.
By the Law of Equity, for one good deserves another.
6. Of every one, is to be of like affection one toward another, by serving
one another in love, according to the Apoliles Rule, Romans 12.16. Gal. 5.13. 7.
Of our selves toward our selves, is 1. To honor God in all our ways, 1 Samuel
2.30. 2. To keep our Bodies that they be not made the instruments of sin, 1 Thessalonians. 4.4, 5,



The common Virtues of this Fifth Commandment; viz. 1. That General Justice,
which is Obedience according to all Laws, that appertain unto all, in respect
of every ones Vocation and Calling. 2. The Particular Distributive Justice,
which keeps a proportion in distributing of Offices and Rewards; or which is
a virtue giving every one his own, Romans 13.7. 3. Sedulity or Diligence, or
Fidelity, which is a virtue in a man well knowing and understanding those parts
which belong properly to his own duty and office, examining them, and doing
according to Gods Commandment those things that belong unto him, constantly,
continually, studiously, willingly, faithfully and cheerfully. 4. Gravity,
which is a virtue that observes that which becomes a man's person, and shows
a constancy and squareness in words, deeds and gestures, that thereby we may
maintain our good estimation or authority, that our Calling be not reproached.
5. Modesty, being a virtue which has near affinity, whereby a man knowing his
own imbecility, and considering his place and calling wherein he is placed by
God, keeps a mean and convenience of person in opinion and in speech of
himself, in actions and in behavior, that giving no more to our selves then
becomes us, we may give to others what is theirs. Humility and Modesty differ
only in the end; for as Modesty is toward men, so Humility is toward God,
Gal. 6.3. 6. Love or Tender Affection toward our Kindred or near Allies of
Blood. 7. Thankfulness, which is a virtue consisting of Truth and Justice,
acknowledging from whom, what, and how great benefits we have received,
desiring to return mutual duties, honest and possible. 8. Equity, which is a
virtue mitigating upon good cause the rigor of strict Justice in punishing and
taxing others offenses, patiently bearing with some such errors and defects as
do not enormously harm the public safety, or the private welfare of our
Neighbors, and covering and correcting such vices of others, or endeavoring to
heal and cure them.


God annexeth a Promise of this Commandment, for these Reasons 1. To signify
how greatly he esteems that Obedience, and how grievously he will punish
those who do against this Obedience. 2. To signify how Necessary this
Obedience is, and so much the more to invite us to the observing and keeping
thereof.


This Commandment has a Promise of Outward Temporal Prosperity annexed to the
performance of it, which though to the wicked does by mere consequence through
the Abuse of it turn to evil; yet to the godly it is a Blessing and Fruit of
Gods Love, as appears by these Reasons: 1. It is good, as it was at first made
and ordained of God, Genesis 1.31. 2. It tends to man's good, if it be rightly
used. 3. It was bestowed on man before he had offended, Genesis 2.8. 4. It is a
Promise of God to them that fear him and keep his Commandments, Levit. 26.4,
etc. 5. The Saints have prayed and been thankful for it, Genesis 28.20. 6. The
contrary was first inflicted as a punishment of sin, and is often threatened as
a token of Gods wrath, which accordingly has been often inflicted on
Transgressors, Lev. 26.15. who meritoriously have incurred it.


This Promise of long life includes a Blessing of all earthly things: Now there
is a Right to earthly things two ways; or the Right unto the Earth is twofold:
1. Civil, which stands good before men by their Laws and Customs: Thus men are
called Lords of their Land; and so the Turk at this day is a mighty Lord of a
great part of the whole World. 2. Spiritual, which is warrantable and approved
with God himself: Such Right and Title had Adam to all the World before his
Fall, which he lost by his Sin both from himself and all his Posterity; but yet
in Christ the same is recovered to all the Elect: In regard of this Right, the
Meek are said to inherit the Earth, Mat. 5.5. So that it is most evident the
Turk, and all Unbelievers and ungodly persons, are but Usurpers of those things
which otherwise Civilly they do lawfully possess: For all our Right to the
Earth was lost in Adam, and is only recovered by Christ; so that till we have
our part in him, we cannot justly with a good Conscience possess any part of
the Earth: for he is Prince of the Kings of the Earth, Rev. 1.5. and the High
Lord of all the World.


Though long life be here promised as a Blessing, yet may the Righteous have
their days shortened for their good, as in these and such like respects: 1. That
they may be taken from the evil to come, 1 Kings 14.13. 2. That they might be
made an example to others, 1 Kings 13.24. 3. That by a temporal death, eternal
Condemnation might be avoided, 1 Cor. 11.32. 4. That their chiefest and
greatest Reward might be hastened, Genesis 5.24. Heb. 11.5.


The Promise of long life and Prosperity, is not so appropriated to this kind
of Righteousness, as if it appertained to no other, but in these and such like
particular respects: 1. Because Obedience to Parents is one of the surest
evidences of our conformity to the whole Law, and a good foundation for the
performing of all duties to man. 2. Because Performance of duties to Parents is
a special means under God of prospering and living long, whereas rebellious
children hasten their own sad ends. 3. Because Parents are a special means to
procure the welfare and long life of their children, partly by provident care,
and partly by fervent and frequent Prayer. 4. Because Disobedience draws down
much mischief on the heads of children, and many ways does often shorten their
days, Psalm. 37.37, 38. Eccl. 8.12. Isa. 3.10, 11.


Who say there is to Man no Honor due,
Belie that God that is infinitely True;
And by this specious fond Delusion,
Usher an Unity of Confusion
Both in the Church and State, disjoynting more
The Frame o'th'World then Babel did before.
Child, Reverence thy Parents, thou shall have
By far the longer Journey to thy Grave:
But if the Lord does sooner call thee hence,
Eternity shall be thy Recompense.
The Sixth Commandment.
Thou shall do no Murder.
THe Sum of this Commandment forbids all kind of evil, and commands all
kind of good to our Neighbors person: So that the scope or end of this
Commandment, is the preservation of the life and safety of men's Bodies, and of
the welfare both of our selves and others; herein being forbidden all those
things which tend to the destruction of our life or the life of others. And the
defense of our Neighbor is here commanded; because Negative Commandments
include Affirmatives. Thou shall do no Murder; therefore thou shall help and
aid thy Neighbor: Thou shall do no Murder; that is, according to thine own
pleasure and lust; but when the Magistrate punishes, God punishes. Now the
Virtues of this Commandment are such as either hurt not men, as particular
Justice, Mildeness, Equability, Peaceableness, and the like; or such Virtues as
help and further the Safety of men, either by repelling evils, as Commutative
Justice, true Fortitude, holy Indignation and Zeal; or by doing benefits, as
Humanity, Mercy, Amity, and the like: So that herein we are commanded to
preserve, as much as in us lies, the life and health of our selves and others,
especially of our Neighbor, and most especially the life of his Soul, by good
Counsels, Exhortations and Admonitions. Now here know therefore, That to give
or accept the Challenge to fight the single Combat, is unlawful: That which the
Natural man accounts Valor, God esteems a Vice; and therefore it is no
disgrace to refuse it, but rather true grace in yielding obedience unto God,
for no man must sin against God for the saving of his Credit and Reputation
among men. Duellists if they are slain, are accessory to their own wilful and
untimely Murder; if they kill, presently after the Murder committed, they
have cursed Cains fearful Mark stamped on them.

There was never any man rightly informed either in the Principles of Nature,
or in the gracious way to Heaven, in the sober Passages of Morality, or in the
Justice of State or Policy, or acquainted with the fairness of true Honor, that
ever gave any allowance to the Reputation of Honor, falsely so called, purchased
by private Quarrel in the Field. Now as Murder is one of those sins the Earth
finds most unsupportable, and cries the loudest of any other to Heaven for
Vengeance: So among all the several kinds thereof, Parricide is the
abominablest and most odious; such as of old no particular Law was made
against, as being supposed an act too unnatural for any Child to commit: which
Supposition deceived even Solon, that wise Lawmakers among the Heathen, and
caused him by his own confession to omit the Enacting Punishment against such
Offenders, Cic. pro Ros. Ame. Yet when this inhumane impiety was known to the
world, the Civil Law ordained this most exquisite ingenious punishment, That if
any one should kill his Parent, the Sword or Fire, or any other usual
punishment, should not be his, but being sewed in a Sack together with a Dog, a
Cock, a Viper and an Ape, he should be cast into the next Sea or River, Just.
Cod. cap. 9. Tit. 17. as unworthy to live the life or dye the death of men,
unworthy the Element of Air while he lives, or of Earth being dead.

To this high degree of Murder, borders that ungodly and unnatural act of
Parents in destroying their own Children, whether at any time after Birth, or
in the Womb after Conception: for that which has received a Soul formed in it
by God, if it be unjustly cast away, shall be Revenged; yea, if both or either
of the Parents through any wilful default whatsoever cause the child to
miscarry, they make themselves guilty of that miscarriage; if both miscarry,
they make themselves guilty of the blood of both, at least in the Court of
Conscience before God.

Lastly, because this horrible sin of Murder is most commonly occasioned by
Duelling, we must yet further know, That the Law both of God and Man condemns
this common practice of Brawling. Fighting, Quarrelling, or Challenging one
another into the Field for private and personal wrongs. Whosoever think it a
disgrace to refuse such Challenges, think it also a disgrace to walk in the
ways of God, and to obey the good Edicts of Princes, and wholesome Laws of the
Commonwealth. The greatest disgrace, is, Not to yield Obedience unto God, it is
no credit to sin against him to salve a supposed Honor and Reputation among
men, for no man ought to revenge his own Cause or Quarrel. Likewise the causes
of these Duels are most commonly very wicked, as sometimes Pride and
Vainglory, sometimes Drunkenness and Lust, sometimes Covetousness and
Greediness of Gain, and the cause of all these causes the Devil himself, who
was a Murderer from the beginning. The effects thereof are no better, for they
cause deadly Fewds, breed Hatred never to be appeased, nourish Contention and
Confusion, hinder Prayer, and holy Exercises of Religion, shed man's blood made
in the Image of God, and bring down the Vengeance of God upon our own heads.
Let all such therefore as challenge or accept of Challenges, consider, That he
that kills is guilty of execrable Murder before God, and he that is killed
is guilty of his own death, and no better then one of the Devils Martyrs; for
as God has his Martyrs that dye in his Cause, so the Devil also has his
Martyrs, that dye in his.

These words [ Thou shall do no Murther] do signify, 1. Thou shall not desire
to Murder either thy self or others. 2. Thou shall not intimate or signify
any desire of Murdering either thy self or others, either in words, behavior,
countenance, or otherwise. 3. Thou shall not put this desire in execution.


This Commandment has these two parts; viz. 1. The forbidding of Murder, and
therein all the degrees and steps by which we come unto it. 2. The commanding
of keeping Peace and Friendship with our Neighbors.


The steps or degrees toward Murder, are these three; viz. 1. Hatred
conceived in the heart, Lev. 19.17. 2. Rash sinful Anger, which is a
declaration of that hatred lying hid in the heart. 3. Every hurt purposely
offered to the person of our Neighbor, whereupon ensues sometimes Murder it
self.


That Murder may be committed in the very Affection or Will may be thus
manifested: 1. Because when the Effect is commanded or forbidden, the Cause is
so also. 2. From the scope or end of the Commandment; God will not have us hurt
any, therefore he forbids the means also whereby we may hurt. 3. Whosoever
is angry with his Brother unadvisedly, shall be culpable of Judgment.


In this Commandment we are forbidden 1. All Murdering of our selves or
others, and all approbation hereof in others, either by Command, Counsel,
Consent or Concealment. 2. All Injurious Actions tending to the prejudice of
our Neighbors life, as Quarrelling, Oppression, unskilful Practice of Physic,
and the like. 3. All Railing and Reviling Speeches, Reproach, Slanders, Mocks,
evil Counsel, and such like. 4. All murtherous Desires and Affections of the
Heart, as Anger, Hatred, Malice and Envy; he that hates his Brother, has a
Sword hid in the sheath of his Heart. 5. A wilful Neglect of the Necessity and
Danger of our Neighbor. 6. All Cruelty toward the Creature, which shows a
murtherous mind.


In this Commandment God chiesly requires these things; viz. 1. That we hate no
man, much more that we hurt not by words or deeds, but to be of a peaceable
mind and disposition. 2. That if we be offended, we avenge not our selves, but
suffer the injury patiently, leaving vengeance unto God, Rom 12.19. 3. That we
oresee Mischiefs, and before they come, prevent them. 4. That we should go to
him with whom we are at variance, and be quickly reconciled to him. 5. After
that we have diligently done our duty, if our Adversary do obstinately refuse
Reconciliation, that we forgive, and labor to forget the Injuries done unto us,
that we leave not to love our Adversary, to pray for him, and in all things to
pleasure him, Mat. 5.44.


The Lord does challenge to himself the Office of Revenging, for these three
Reasons; viz. 1. Because being our chief Lord, the offense especially is done
against him, when injury is done unto any. 2. Because he does much better know
the greatness of the injury then does he that is injured, for he pierces into
the hidden and most secret thoughts. 3. Because he alone has the chief power
to avenge injuries, as he shall know to be right and expedient, which we cannot
do.


This Commandment is also broken by unnatural practices on ones self, such as
are 1. The Practice of the Popish penance-mongers, not unlike the Idolatrous
Baalists, who to move their Idol to hear them, cut themselves with knives and
lancers, till the blood gushed out upon them, 1 Kings 18.29. 2. The Practice of
Gluttons, Drunkards, Unchaste persons, Voluptuous, who to satisfy their
corrupt humors, impair their health and shorten their days. 3. The Practice of
such who by Quarrels cause their slesh to be wounded, and their lives to be
taken away. 4. The Practice of such who bring themselves into danger of life
for Lucres sake, and of such as by Felony, Treason, and the like, cast
themselves upon the Sword of the Magistrate. 5. The Practice of them that give
the Reins to Grief, Fear, Wrath, and other the like violent Passions, so as
thereby they weaken their bodies, and shorten their days. 6. The Practice of
Self-Murtherers, who end their days in a most horrible sin, depriving
themselves of the time, place, means and benefit of Repentance.


The hurting as well of our selves as of others is here forbidden, because the
causes why God commands us to have regard of another life, are the same in
us: As 1. The Image of God in man. 2. The likeness of Nature, and our Original
from our first Parents. 3. The greatness of the Price and Ransom wherewith
Christ purchased all the Members of the Church. 4. The conjunction of Christ's
Members.


As a man may be said to kill himself 1. In Whipping himself as the Jesuits. 2.
In Wounding of himself. 3. In Refusing the means of help.


So we are said to preserve our lives 1. In time of Danger, by slying from one
place to another, Matthew. 10.23. 2. In time of Sickness to use all lawful means
of Recovery. 3. In hostile Assaults, by defending our selves with our best
force. 4. In time of Health, by using lawful Recreations at lawful times.


The killing of other men is 1. Indirectly; as Oppression by Usury, Letting out
of Land on such hard terms as the painful Laborer cannot live by it; where
things are so made as men may take harm by them; the keeping of harmful Beasts;
all dangerous Pastimes; and when Children begotten in Fornication or Adultery
are committed to them to keep that have no care of them. 2. Directly; as of set
purpose, when maliciously and advisedly one kills another, or otherwise when
at a sudden variance a man is killed.


The life of other men may be thus preserved; viz. 1. By Alms-deeds, where
Necessity does require it, and Wages, where Right commands it, Deuteronomy. 24.14. 2.
By helping or rescuing a man that is casually or wrongfully in any danger, as
Obadiah hid the Prophets in a Cave, to save them from Ahab and Jezebel in the
time of Persecution, 1 Kings 18. and by helping those that are oppressed with
wrong, Prove. 24.11. 3. By Patience and Meekness preventing Quarrels: The parts
whereof are these: 1. Soft Answers, when any means be used to provoke us, Prove.
15.1. 2. A staid and even temper of Affections, whereby we are not suddenly
moved, or for trisling matters. 3. A Disposition always to interpret such things
as are done against us in the best sense we can. 4. A love of Peace, and
seeking it with all men as much as may be, Romans 12.8. 5. A mind content for
the love of Peace sometimes to depart with a man's own Right.
4. By timely Interring the dead bodies of Christian people, and removing all
other things we know may be prejudicial to the life of our Neighbor.


Cautions and Conditions to be observed in defending our selves against
unlawful violent Assaults: 1. We must not thirst after blood, nor be willing to
take away either life or limb. 2. We ought to the utmost of our power to strive
to free our selves from the Assaults, that there be no blood shed if it be
possible, using all good and lawful means we may in favor of life. 3. We ought
so to behave our selves, that we rather defend then offend, and seek more to
save our own lives, then take away another man's. 4. If we can no way escape the
hands of the Oppressor by flying or calling for the help of the Magistrate, it
is lawful so far to stand in our just defense, as that we should choose to kill
rather then to be killed, for now God seems to put Justice into our own hands.


The kinds of killing are two; viz. 1. Voluntary, when a man kills of set
purpose and intent, to which we must refer those that give command, counsel or
help unto the Murderer; for he that commands is the principal Agent, and the
Murderer is his Instrument. Again, it is voluntary Murder to strike another,
though with purpose only to wound, if death follow thereon: And that also
which is committed by a Drunken man, for his Will is free, though Sense and
Reason be blinded: And this kind or purpose to kill is twofold; viz. 1. With
Deliberation and fore-desire of Revenge, when a man has carried a grudge in
his heart long before. 2. Without Deliberation, when a man without all former
malice is suddenly carried by fury and anger to slay another: This kind is
distinguished from the other by the name of Manslaughter.
2. Casual killing, commonly called Chance Medley, when a man kills another,
having no purpose to hurt him: Now this Commandment is not to be understood of
Casual, but Voluntary killing: And the Presumptions of this Casual killing may
by these; viz. 1. If a man kill another having no illwill or anger toward him,
nor to any other for his sake, neither is moved thereto by Covetousness or any
Affection. 2. If he be doing the lawful duties of his particular Calling. 3. If
he be well occupied, doing some lawful work beside his Calling. 4. If he be
doing a thing which he ordinarily practices, keeping his usual place and time.



Killing is not always Murder: for God gives a man power to kill three ways;
viz. 1. By the written Word: Thus Princes and Governors, and under them
Executioners are allowed to kill Malefactors that deserve death; and thus
Soldiers are warranted to kill in a lawful War. 2. By an extraordinary
Commandment; and so Abraham might lawfully have killed his Son, if the Angel of
the Lord had not staid his hand, Genesis 22. 3. By an extraordinary instinct,
which is answerable to a special Commandment, and so Phineas slew Zimri and
Cozbi without guilt of Murder, Psalm. 106.30, 31.


Murder is either 1. In the Mind only, as Anger, Hatred, Envying, Malice,
etc. 2. By Action, 1. In the Gestures only, by our outward Members. 2. In the
Deed it self: And this may be either By the Tongue in speech. By the hand or
otherwise.




Murder is a most grievous sin for these Reasons; viz. 1. Because it is the
Destruction of a Little World, as Man is rightly called, wherein the wonderful
Wildom, Power, Providence and Mercy of God does as much appear. 2. Because it
is the Defacing of Gods Image which is in every man: This Reason is rendered in
the first Law against Murder, Genesis 9.6. David might not build the Temple,
because he had shed blood. 3. Because it is an Encroaching upon Gods Office, to
whom alone it belongs to call men when it pleases him out of this world: And
God has not made man with such offensive parts as he has done other
Creatures. 4. Because it is the greatest breach of Love and Peace, and so the
greatest sin against man, Joh. 8.44. Therefore the sin of Murder singularly is
said to desile the Land, Numb. 35.37.


To avoid this horrible sin of Murder, let us sly these sins especially: 1.
Pride, the very Fountain of Contention, which Murder follows: for Pride will
endure nothing, and is so wasteful upon it self, that the Poor may starve and
perish without relief. 2. Covetousness: for he that is greedy of gain, will
hunt after the precious life of man, Prove. 1. 3. Riotness, Drunkenness and
Whoredom, whereon much bloodshed has followed, and Self-murder. 4. Hard
heartedness, when we have objects of pity: for we make our selves accessory of
their death who perish, whom our relief might have preserved, Prove. 21.13.


Cruelty is one main Breach of this Commandment: The Properties whereof are
these; viz. 1. In the very look and countenance: Such was Cains toward Abel,
Genesis 4. and Labans against Jacob, Genesis 31.2. 2. In the behavior, when it is
harsh and churlish: Such was Nabals, 1 Samuel 23.3. 3. When any way too much
severity is used, by the Rich toward the Poor, by Officers toward
Malefactors, or by Governors toward such as are under them, expressing a
hateful mind toward them. 4. In the unmerciful usage of the dumb Creatures,
working them without Reason, pinching them in things necessary, beating or
killing them without mercy, or otherwise using them so as they grow diseased
thereby: All these show a cruel mind, Prove. 12.10. 5. In revenging Injuries,
for we must not revenge our own wrongs, but leave that to God, to whom it
properly belongs, Romans 12.19.


Motives to persuade us to lay aside all private Revenge; viz. 1. Let us lay
before us the Example of Christ, the Author and Finisher of our Salvation, 1
Pet. 2.21. 2. Let us set before us the Example of the faithful Servants, that
have lived in all Ages, in the time of the Law, and under the Gospel. 3. It is
Gods proper Right, Office and Royalty, it belongs to him peculiarly to take
vengeance, and therefore is called The Lord God the Avenger, Psalm. 94.1. 4. God
has graciously passed his Promise to us, That himself will take our cases into
his hands, and pay them home that do oppress us, Romans 12.29. It were now a
fruit of infidelity to revenge our selves, and not believe him at his Word. 5.
The consideration of the forgiveness that our selves receive at the hands of
God, Col. 3.13. 6. It is against all good Law, Right, Reason, and common Sense,
that any one man should be both Accuser, Witness, Judge and Executioner; but
every one that takes upon him to right his own cause, and to revenge himself,
does all these.


Murder may be committed as well against the Soul, 1 Cor. 8.11. as the body of
a man, even when he is an occasion of his stumbling and falling into sin: As
thus; 1. Ministers murder, or at least make themselves guilty of murdering
the Souls of the people committed to their charge, when as through their
default any of them perish, Ezekiel. 3. 2. Parents and Masters, and all private
Governors are Murderers, if by their neglect or bad example their Children,
Servants or Pupils perish by Ignorance, Profaneness, or any other sinful
course of life, which they might have amended in them by teaching, charging,
reproving, requiring, and by good example. 3. Every one that makes his
Neighbor drunk, Hab. 2.15. stirs him up to strife, inticeth him to any sin,
or does countenance, favor and defend it, to the heartening of a man on therein
to his destruction, shall answer as a Soul-murtherer.


As the very act of murder is a most odious sin, so also are the degrees
thereof; as Railing, Anger, and the like: For 1. The heart and tongue is hereby
set on fire, of the fire of Hell, Jam. 3. 2. To sin thus, is to be a Murderer
before God: for, He that hates his brother is a Manslayer, 1 John 3.15. 3. It
is the proper Brand of the Wicked; His throat is an open Sepulcher, the poison
of Asps is under his lips, his mouth is full of cursing and bitterness.


Helps to avoid Rash Anger and all such murtherous Affections, may be such as
these; viz. 1. To consider our own weaknesses and sins, Gal. 6.1, 2. Tit. 3.2.
2. To consider wisely the Providence of God in all indignities that are by any
man offered to us, as David did when Shimei cursed him, 2 Samuel 16.10. 3. To
avoid the company of froward and hasty persons by whom thou might be
provoked, Prove. 22.24. even as a man keeps Gunpowder from the fire. 4. To
observe the countenance and behavior or a man in fury. 5. To consider that all
such are fools, Eccl. 7.11. Prove. 12.16. 6. To take into consideration the
heavy Judgment belonging to this Anger, Mat. 5.22.


Three differences betwixt Hatred and Anger: 1. Hatred is more general, or of
generals; a man hates all Drunkards if he hate Drunkenness; it hates every
thing that is under the notion of sin. 2. Hatred is more cruel, it desires the
utter destruction of the thing it hates 3. Hatred is implacable, it comes from
the Judgment, it continues: Hatred is not a Passion, but an Affection; and if
we return to Amity, it was not Hatred, but Anger.


Anger is unlawful in these regards: 1. When we conceive it without counsel and
deliberation, Mat. 5.22. 2. When it is conceived for no cause, or for a
trifling cause, Prove. 10.12. 3. When, though upon just occasion, the measure of
Anger is immoderate, Ephesians. 4.26. 4. When it makes us to forget our duty toward
God or man, by brawling, cursing or banning, Ephesians. 4.31. 5. When we are angry
for private respects concerning our person, and not for the Cause of God.


The Remedies of unjust Anger are twofold; viz. 1. Some consist in Meditation,
and they are of three sorts, concerning 1. God. 2. Our Neighbor. 3. Our selves.
2. Other consist in Practice.


Meditations concerning God, as Remedies of unjust Anger; viz. 1. That God
expressly forbids it, and commands the contrary, Mat. 5.21, 22. 2. That all
Injuries which befall us come by Gods Providence, whereby they tend to good, 2 Samuel 16.10. 3. That God is long-suffering even toward wicked men, Exodus 3.46.
4. That the goodness of God daily forgives us more then we can forgive men. 5.
That all Revenge is Gods Right, and he has not given it unto man, Romans 12.19.
6. That Christ suffered for us the first Death, and the sorrows of the second
Death.


Meditations concerning Man, as Remedies of unjust Anger; viz. 1. The Condition
of him with whom we are angry; namely, that he is a Brother, Genesis 13.8. Again,
that he is created in the Image of God. 2. Concerning that Equity which we look
for at the hands of all men, knowing our selves are infirm, and may offend
others, Mat. 7.12.


Meditations concerning our selves, as Remedies of unjust Anger; viz. 1. He
that conceives Rash Anger, makes himself subject to Gods wrath, if he cherish
the same without relenting. Mat. 6.15. 2. We are commanded to love one another
as Christ has loved us, Ephesians. 5.2. 3. We are ignorant of men's minds in
speaking and doing, of the manner and circumstance of their actions. 4. In Rash
Anger we can do no part of Gods Worship that is pleasing to him, Jam. 1.20, 21.
5. We must consider what are the fruits and consequents of unjust Anger, Ephesians.
4.27. 6. We must consider the causes of unjust Anger, for they are not good.


The Remedies of unjust Anger, which stand in Practice, are especially five: 1.
In the time of Anger, to conclude the same both in word and deed, Prove. 12.16.
2. We must depart from them with whom we are angry, 1 Samuel 20.34. 3. We must
avoid the occasions thereof, as Contentions and contentious persons, Phil. 2.3.
Prove. 22.26. 4. The course of our Anger must be turned against our own selves
for our sins, 2 Cor. 7.11. 5. We must daily pray for the mortification of this
evil Affection.


Motives to abhor Wrath and unjust Anger: 1. The Example of Bruits, who though
never so fierce, are yet gentle to each other of their own kind. 2. Consider
that we came into the world weak, naked and unarmed. 3. The consideration of
Christ's Sufferings for us, whereof if we will share, we must suffer also. 4.
All our Actions are abominable to God, so long as we continue in wrath. 5. The
wrathful man lives in a continual vexation of Conscience. 6. We must not let
the Sun go down upon our wrath.


There is an Anger which is no breach of this Commandment, but is commanded
Ephesians. 4.26. and is an holy Anger: The properties whereof are these; viz. 1. It
is against sin, and not against that which is a private displeasure: Thus was
Moses angry when he broke the two Tables at the sight of the peoples Idolatry.
2. It is only because God is offended: for the same sin may be to the
offending of God and of our selves also, because it is some injury to us. 3. It
is not sudden, but upon deliberation, according to that Precept, Be slow to
wrath, Jam. 1.19. 4. It does not continue long, but is soon over again, where
there is Repentance, Ephesians. 4.26. 5. It arises from Love, and is guided by Love,
the Love of God, and the Love of our Neighbor that has offended: for
whatsoever is without this, is sin.


In just and lawful Anger there are three things; viz. 1. A right Beginning or
Motive. 2. A right Object. 3. A right Manner of being angry.


To the right Beginning of Anger, three things are required; viz. 1. That the
occasion be just and weighty, as manifest offense against God, Exodus 32.19. and
16.20. 2. That it be conceived upon counsel and deliberation, Prove. 20.18. 3.
That it be kindled and stirred up by good and holy affections, as by desire to
maintain Gods Honor, by the love of Justice and Virtue, by the hatred and
detestation of Vice, and all that is evil.


The right Object of just Anger, is twofold: 1. The sin of the person, not the
person himself, but by reason of the sin, Psalm 119.139. 2. The cause and
offense of God properly, not any private offense of man.


Three Cautions to be observed in the right manner of conceiving anger; viz. 1.
That our Anger be mixed and tempered with Charity and Love, Hab. 3.2. 2. Anger
against any offense must be mixed with sorrow for the same offense, Mark 3.5.
3. It must be contained within the bounds of our particular Calling, and Civil
Decency, Genesis 31.36. And must, like poison, be with all speed purged out of the
body and veins, lest it destroy the whole.


Likewise, Envy is a Breach of this Commandment, but it is twofold: 1. Good,
when beholding the perfections of other men, we are angry with our own
imperfections, and seriously labor to be equal, at least to imitate the good
qualities which we see to flourish more in others then in our selves: This is
called Emulation. 2. Bad Envy, when we grieve that the like good qualities are
not in us, or not as well in us as in another, yet labor not for them: And this
produces Detraction, Discord, Disdain, Murmuring, Hatred, and the like.


All Gods people must beware of Envy; and that for these special Reasons; viz.
1. Because it is a fruit of the flesh, Gal. 5.21. 2. Because it procures the
wrath of God, and is never left without punishment, Numb. 12.10. 3. It
transforms us into the Image of Satan, whose Envy sadly appears, Genesis 3.5. 4.
It often presumes to cross and control the Providence of God. 5. It is against
the Rule of Charity, To do unto others as we would be done unto: And this Rule
is the best Remedy against it. 6. It is the Badge and Cognizance of the Devil.
7. It renders us unfit for the performance of holy Duties. 8. It lays us open
to the envy and hatred of other men. 9. Because it impairs the constitution of
our natural strength: for although it ever levels the dart of mischief against
others, yet it still wounds it self, even the very heart.


Remedies to keep us from envying the good of others viz. 1. Let us labor for
Christian Charity, and deck our selves with lowliness of mind, that we may
banish Pride and Self-love, Phil. 2.3. Charity and Humility tempered well
together, makes an excellent Preservative against this fretting Malady. 2. Be
well contented with Gods Administration of Temporal Blessings, Spiritual and
Temporal, that we do not any way charge him with folly, who is Wisdom it self,
or with partiality, who respects no man's person. 3. To cast our eyes upon the
troubles as well as the comforts our Brethren enjoy, that the consideration of
the one may withold us from grudging at the sight of the other. 4. To mark
that the Gifts of others are for our benefit, as the good of one member of the
body serves for the use of another; then we are enemies to our selves, to
repine at that which others have. 5. To pray to God for the obtaining of his
Graces where we see them wanting, and for the increase of them where they are
obtained, and for the continuance of them where they are increased. 6. To love
the Graces of God wheresoever we see them, yea even in our enemies.


Godly men may lawfully go to war without the guilt of Murder or breach of
this Commandment, and that for these Reasons; viz. 1. God commands it, Deuteronomy.
7.2. therefore does allow it as just and lawful, for he does not will things
because they are just, but they are just because he wills them. 2. As God
gave Commandment expressly, so the people going forth to Battle, were to call
upon him for a Blessing, and to sanctify the work by Prayer, and in so doing
have been heard, 1 Chronicles. 5.19. therefore War and true Religion may well stand
together. 3. God himself takes order to have a muster taken of all such as are
able to bear Arms, Numb. 1.2, 3. Therefore the Anabaptists are not infallible.


As the godly may lawfully go to War, so they must be careful to observe such
conditions as make it lawful and allowable; As 1. It must be Proclaimed by the
chief Magistrate and such as have Authority, otherwise it is private Revenge,
not public Justice. 2. Conditions of Peace are to be offered, and such as
yield thereto are to be received to mercy, Deuteronomy. 20.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. 3. Keep
all lawful Promises even to the Enemy, being a sign of an upright heart, Joh.
6.22. 4. The Ends of our Wars must be Holy and Religious, not Tyranny, not
Vainglory, but to maintain the honor and glory of God, to defend the Church
and Commonwealth from violence and invasion, and to Establish Truth, Peace and
Concord in our Borders. 5. We must not suffer lewd and wicked persons
incorrigible and unreformable, to remain in the Host of God, who may endanger
the whole Host, and bring the curse of God upon them, Deuteronomy. 23.9, 10. Joh.
7.11, 12. and 22.20. 6. It behooves us to put our Trust in God alone, to depend
upon him, to pray unto him, and to look for safety and help from him, Jer.
17.5. 7. No man should go to War but with grief of mind and sorrow of heart;
for though the War be lawful, yet when the Enemies are slain in Battle, it is a
defiling of men's hands, and a defacing of Gods Image, Genesis 9.6. 1 Chronicles. 22.8.
8. The Army is to be ordered in such Military Discipline, as that it break not
out to endamage or destroy those whom they ought above all to protect and
defend.


He breaks this Commandment 1. That thinks but a thought in his heart tending
to the hurt of his Neighbors life. 2. That bears malice to another, 1 John
3.15. or is given to hastiness, Mat. 5.22. 3. That uses inward fretting and
grudging, Jam. 3.14. or is froward of nature, hard to please, Romans 1.30. 4.
That is full of rancor or bitterness, Ephesians. 4.31. or derides and scorns others,
Genesis 21.9. Gal. 4.29. 5. That uses bitterwords and railings, Prove. 12.18. or
contending by words or deeds, Gal. 5.20. 6. That is a fighter, Jam. 4.1. and
hurts or maims his Neighbors body, Exodus 21.24. 7. That will not forgive an
offense, Mat. 5.23. or that seeks private Revenge. 8. That does fare well
himself, but gives not Alms to relieve the Poor, Luke 16.19. 9. That uses
cruelty in punishing Malefactors, Deuteronomy. 22.26. 10. That denies the Servants or
Laborers Wages, Jam. 5.4. or that holds back the Pledge, Ezekiel. 18.7. 11. That
sells by diverse weights and measures; or that removes the Landmark, Prove.
22.28. 12. That moves contention and debate, Romans 1.29. or that by his
looseness of life occasions others to sin. 13. That being a Minister, Teaches
erroneously or slackly, Jer. 48.10. or that Teaches not at all, 1 Timothy 3.2. or
that hinders men's Salvation any way, Mat. 23.13. 14. That gives his goods upon
Usury; which is simply to bind a man to return both the Principal and the
Increase only for the Loan, Ezekiel, 18.18.


Thou see how many ways a man may be
Guilty hereof, and how in each degree;
How Thoughts of Hatred may prevail so far
T'ensnare the Heart to be a Murtheree;
How stern and austere Looks, which strangely fly
Like Arrows shot, speak Murder in the Eye;
And how the Tongue, that sharp-edg'd member, may
The harmless Innocent untimely slay;
How that Injustice and Revenge both give
A mortal Wound: Then let thy Brother live,
The Seventh Commandment.
Thou shall not commit Adultery.
IN this Commandment God forbids all Vices repugnant to Chastity, and such
as are of near affinity unto them; likewise their causes, occasions, effects,
antecedents, consequents: And on the contrary he commands all things tending
to the preservation of Chastity. We are here commanded to behave our selves
rightly in the principal outward comfort that belongs to our Neighbor, which is
his Wife: Thus under one kind of Uncleanness, all kinds of it are forbidden;
for being commanded to live in temperance, chastity and soberness, we are to
keep our Bodies holy and pure, as Temples of the Holy Ghost: So that the Sin
here forbidden, is not only the act of Adultery, but whatsoever is any way
against chastity or soberness, either in deed, word or thought, directly or
indirectly as a means of sinning, Mat. 5.28. where to commit Adultery,
signifies as much as to do any thing what way soever, whereby the chastity of
our selves or our Neighbors may be stained. Chastity is the purity of Soul and
Body, as much as belongs to generation; the Mind is chaste when it is free,
or at least freed from fleshly concupiscence; the Body is chaste when it
puts not into execution the concupiscences of the flesh, 1 Thessalonians. 4.3, 4, 5.
1 Cor. 7.34. Marriage is the main help to keep our bodies chaste: Now Marriage
is a lawful and indissoluble conjunction of one man and one woman, justified by
God, that we might know him to detest all impure lust; That also we might
therein chastely serve the Lord, and that especially it might be a means
whereby mankind might be multiplied, and God gather thence afterward unto
himself a Church: Lastly, that it might be a Society and fellowship of Labors,
Cares and Prayers.

The Breach hereof is the foul sin of Adultery, which beside the fearful
exclusion, without Repentance, from the Kingdom of Heaven, occasions jealousy,
the frenzy of the Soul; which is a grief of mind arising from hence, That
another is judged to enjoy that which we desire to have wholly and properly as
our own, and none besides us to possess any part with us: Or, it is an
affection proceeding from fear to have that communicated to another, which we
challenge and covet to retain as peculiar and proper to our selves alone:
Beside this unhappy sin of Adultery, that venomous sin is the poison of
Marriages, whereby the estimation of Parents, the reputation of Children, and
the honor of whole Families stand in hazard to be forfeited; for as God is the
Author of Marriage, so he is the Revenger of the breach thereof. But shame
keeps some from those unclean practices and grosser acts of filthiness, who yet
inwardly boil in speculative Wantonness and Adulteries of the heart. Ask thy
Conscience whether thou art one of them; if so, remember, That no Adulterer
shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, and repent: yea, the Fornicator, and
every unclean person is also thence excluded, all Vices contrary to Chastity,
or of any affinity with them, being here forbidden in forbidding Adultery; for
by one Special, the rest that are of near affinity with that are understood;
and and where the Cause is forbidden, there also is the Effect, and so the
contrary. Now the end and scope of this Commandment, is the Preservation of
Chastity and Wedlock.

In this Commandment are two parts; viz. 1. God forbids Adultery, and
therein not only the too familiar company of man with woman out of marriage,
but also all kind of filthiness by which man may be defiled, all affections of
concupiscence, and whatsoever stirs up unto lust, and nourishes it. 2. He
commands Chastity.


In this Commandment are prohibited, 1. The lust of the heart, or the evil
concupiscence of the flesh, Mat. 5.28. Col. 3.5. 2. Burning in the flesh, which
is an inward fervency of lust, whereby the godly motions of the heart are
hindered, overwhelmed, and as it were with contrary fire burnt up, 1 Cor. 7.9.
3. Strange pleasures about generation prohibited in the Word of God; the which
are many; viz. 1. With Beasts, Lev. 18.23. 2. With the Devil, as Witches do by
their confession: for why may not a Spirit as well have society with a Witch,
as to eat meat? 3. With one and the same Sex, Lev. 18.22. This is a sin which
they commit whom God has given over to a reprobate sense, Romans 1.26, 27. It
was the sin of Sodom, Genesis 19. where it was so common, that to this day it is
termed Sodomy. 4. With such as be within the degrees of Consanguinity or
Affinity, prohibited Lev. 18.6. 5. With unmarried persons: This sin is called
Fornication, Deuteronomy. 22.28, 29. 1 Cor. 10.8. 6. With those whereof one is
married, or at least betrothed: This is Adultery, Deuteronomy. 22.22, 3, 4. 7. With
man and wife: They abuse their liberty, if they know each other so long as the
woman is in her flowers, Ezekiel. 22.10. Lev. 18.19. Ezekiel. 16.8. or using
Marriage Bed intemperately, thereby committing Adultery even with his wife. 8.
Nocturnal Pollutions, which arise of immoderate diet, or unchaste cogitations
going before in the day, Deuteronomy. 23.10. Onans sin, Genesis 38.8. was not much unlike
these. 9. Effeminate wantonness, whereby occasions are sought to stir up lust,
Gal. 5.19.
4. To appoint some light or Sheet-punishment for Adultery, such as that Romish
Synagogue does: For it is nothing else but to open a gap for other lewd persons
to run into the like impiety.


Occasions of lust prohibited in this Commandment, are these; viz. 1. Eyes full
of Adultery, 2 Pet. 2.14. 2. Idleness: This occasioned David's sin with
Bathsheba, 2 Samuel 11.2. 3. Riotous and lascivious Attire, 1 Timothy 2.9. Isa.
3.16, unto 23. 4. Fullness of bread and meat, which provoke lust, Ezekiel. 16.49.
Luke 16.19. Romans 13.13. 5. Corrupt, dishonest, and unseemly talk, 1 Cor. 13.33.
Such are vain Love-Songs, Ballads, Interludes, and Amorous Books. 6. Lascivious
Representations of Love-matters in Plays and Comedies, Ephesians. 5.3, 4. 7. Undecent
and unseemly Pictures, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22. Abstain from all appearance of evil. 8.
Lascivious Dancing of man and woman together, Mark 6.22. 9. Company with
effeminate persons, and unlawful Divorces.


All the sorts of lust repugnant to this Commandment, may be referred to these
several kinds: 1. Those that are contrary to Nature, and of the devil, recited
Romans 1. as confounding both kinds and Sexes, and unnatural abusage of Sexes.
2. Those which proceed from our corrupt Nature: As 1. Incest, that most
abominable crime of unnatural lust. 2. Double Adultery, when both persons are
married persons. 3. Simple Adultery, when the one party is a married person. 4.
Simple Fornication, when they are both unmarried.
3. Corrupt Inclinations, from which though good men are not wholly exempt, yet
do they not so yield unto them, as to take delight in them, but they take all
occasions whereby they may withstand them, and the grace of Resistance is
humbly desired of them.


Adultery consists 1. In consent and mind alone; As to lust after things 1.
Belonging to the body, as excess of Apparel, Meat or Drink, as may stir up to
lust and idleness. 2. In the mind it self.
2. Beyond consent, when action follows.


Adultery is either 1. Contrary to Nature; which is either 1. Confusion of
kinds, as filthiness with Beasts. 2. Confusion 1. Of Sexes, as man with man,
woman with woman. 2. Of Blood, which is Incest.

2. According to Nature; and is either Fornication, when both persons are
single, unmarried or unbetrothed. Adultery, when one of them is married, or at
least betrothed.



Incest is in the degrees 1. Of Consanguinity, which is 1. In a Right Line, as
Son with Mother, and so upwards. 2. In a Collateral Line, as Brother with
Sister. 3. In an Overthwart Line, as Son with Aunt, and so upwards.
2. Of Affinity: There is the same prohibition of this as of Consanguinity; so
it may be called an indirect confusion of Blood, as for a man to marry his
Wifes Sister.


The several kinds of Adultery; viz. 1. Of the Heart, Mat. 5.28. This never
suffers a man to serve the Lord with a pure conscience. 2. Of the Eyes, which
are the windows of the heart, 2 Pet. 2.14. Isa. 3.13. 3. Of the Ears, when we
listen unto unchaste talk, and show no dislike to, nor hatred of it. 4. Of the
Tongue, when we take delight in unchaste speeches and filthy Ribaldry, by which
the hearts of others are corrupted, and our own manifested to be so before,
Ephesians. 4.29. 1 Cor. 15.33. 5. Outward in Fact, and this is called Sin finished:
whereunto all the former are as steps or degrees, and in the end bring it forth
as an end which they have conceived.


The hainousness of this sin of Adultery, may appear by these particulars; viz.
1. We sin against God by withstanding his Will in profaning the holy Ordinance
of Matrimony, by making the members of Christ the members of an Harlot, most
ungraciously defiling those bodies which should be the Temples of the holy
Ghost, converting them into Stews. 2. We sin against our Neighbor, because this
sin is not committed alone, but we draw others to it also. 3. We sin against
the Wife or Husband of the married party by a most ungodly particular wrong. 4.
We sin against the fruit of our own body, whom we brand with a Note of
perpetual infamy, Genesis 21.10. 5. We sin against our own Families, which are
ruined by being defiled. Beggary waits on Lust, Job 31.12. 6. We sin against
the Places, Societies and Kingdom where we live, because we defile the Land,
and cause it to vomit out the Inhabitants, Genesis 34.27. 7. We sin against the
Church of God, by hindering the propagation thereof, and causing it to be evil
spoken of by others. 8. We sin against our selves, because we make our bodies
the instruments of Sin and Satan, infecting them with loathsome diseases here,
and plunging them together with our Souls into Hell hereafter. 9. It is a sin
committed against each person of the Trinity; as 1. Against the Father, whose
Covenant is broken, Prove. 2.17. 2. Against the Son, whose members are made the
members of an Harlot. 3. Against the Holy Ghost, whose Temple is defiled and
polluted, 1 Cor. 6.19.
10. The hainousness of this sin appears by the fruits thereof; viz. 1. The
Alienation of conjugal Affection, which ought to be inviolable. 2. The
Devastation of the goods and estate of the Family. 3. Provocations to unnatural
wishes and practices of clandestine Murder. 4. If not a gauling terrifying
conscience, then a seared one, a hard heart, a reprobate sense. 5. The
procuring of many loathsome diseases to the body. 6. The execution of the
fearful Judgments of God denounced against it, if unrepented.



Adultery, though never so secretly committed, is surely punished of God; and
that for these Reasons; viz. 1. Because the wrath of God is kindled against all
such unclean persons, Ephesians. 5.6. 2. Because it appears to be a most grievous
sin, worse then Theft, Prove. 6.31, 32. 3. Because it defiles the Land, not
only persons and houses, but whole cities and countries, till all are become
abominable, Lev. 19.29. 4. Because of our calling, being Redeemed by God to
serve him in purity and holiness all our days, 1 Thessalonians. 4.3, 4, 5, 7.


The Reasons and Motives to avoid Fornication and lust; viz. 1. Our Bodies are
the Lords, and must be serviceable unto him; the body is not for fornication,
but for the Lord, 1 Cor. 6.13. 2. We thereby make void the glorious work of our
Redemption. The Lord for the body, 1 Cor. 6.13. but Fornication and
Sanctification can never stand together. 3. Those Bodies shall Rise again, not
to glory, but to shame, if we here defile them with beastly lusts, 1 Cor. 6.14.
4. The Members of Christ; that is, the bodies of the faithful may not be made
the members of an Harlot, 1 Cor. 6.15. by profession we seem to be the members
of Christ, but by unchaste lust we pull our hearts from Christ, and knit them
to an Harlot. 5. This sin is against the body, whereas other sins are without
the body, 1 Cor. 6.18. but the Fornicator both uses and abuses his own body,
and leaves a proper blot and stain upon it, making it both the instrument, the
subject and the object of sin. 6. Consider the state and condition of man's
heart, by effectual calling; it is the dwelling place and Temple of the Holy
Ghost, but by unclean lusts we make it a cage of all unclean Spirits: Our body
is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, and destruction is threatened to the defilers
of this Temple, 1 Cor. 3.17. So that a Fornicator is also a Sacrilegious
person. 7. We are wholly Gods, and not our own to do what we list, or to
dispose of our selves, 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. 8. We all desire to see God, and to
know his love in Christ, for our comfort in this life, and Salvation; but
without holiness and purity of heart we can never see God, Heb. 12.14. 9. If we
suffer our hearts now to burn with fleshly lust, we make an entrance in them
for the burning of Hell fire for ever; for these two always go together, Burning
lust and Hell fire, unless Repentance come between.


General Preservatives against this sin; or the way to prevent Adultery; viz.
1. To consider the near Union betwixt God and us; so great is his Love, as that
he has married us to himself, and made us his Spouse: therefore is he most
jealous over us, and in the very instant of impurity or uncleanness, casts us
off as the members of an Harlot. 2. To consider that God is holy and pure, and
the Devil an unclean Spirit, to whom he is joined in fellowship that sins by
uncleanness. 3. To tie and bind our selves by Covenant and Vows from the
occasions which as sparkles of fire do light upon the tinder of our corrupt
Nature, Job 31.1. 4. Set a watch over thy heart, that lustful thoughts proceed
not thence, Prove 6.25. 5. Shut thine eyes, Job 31.1. that they wander not after
the beauty or properness of any ones person, or on lascivious Pictures, or on
any other like allurements. 6. Stop thine ears, that they listen not to any
enticements of others, Prove. 7.21. 7. Lock fast thy Tongue, that it utter no
unchaste and corrupt communication, Ephesians. 5.3, 4. 8. Seal up thy Lips, that they
delight not in wanton kisses, Prove. 7.13. 9. Manacle thy Hands, that they use
no wanton dalliance, Prove. 6.29. 10. Fetter thy Feet, that they carry thee not
near the place where filthiness may be committed, Prove. 7.25. 11. Have a care
of thy company, that thou be not defiled with others wantonness and
uncleanness, Ephesians. 5.7. 12. See to thy Diet, that it be not inordinate and
luxurious, Genesis 19.33. 13. Moderate thy Apparel, that it be not garish and
lascivious, Ezekiel. 23.6, 15, 40. 14. Mis time not thy precious hours, that they
be not vainly and idly spent, 2 Samuel 11.2.


Special Preservatives for single persons against this sin; viz. 1. To beat
down the body and bring it into subjection, to abstain from such meats and
drinks as inflate and provoke to fleshliness, and in case of fleshly motions to
pray heartily against them. 2. To abstain from the company of women, in
private, or alone, or in the dark. 3. If notwithstanding those means thou can
not contain, but art troubled with fleshly motions, then fly to Gods Ordinance
of Marriage, 1 Cor. 7.1. For the word is express, that No Fornicator or unclean
person shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, 1 Cor. 6.


Special Preservatives for married persons against this sin: 1. To dwell
together, the one not separate from the other. 2. So to carry themselves
toward one another as those whose bodies are not in their own power, but
mutually in one another power, and to follow the Apostles Rule, 1 Cor. 7.3. 3.
To contain at times of extraordinary devotion by mutual consent. 4. When women
love to be at home, governing the house, as the virtuous wife is described,
Prove. 30. 5. When the man esteems best of his own wife above all other women,
covering her infirmities by love, and the wife does likewise of her husband;
for such mutual fervent love is a singular preservative from the strange woman,
Prove. 5.18.


For the government of the eyes to avoid Adultery, there be two special Rules;
viz. 1. We must open and shut our eyes in obedience to God, Prove 4.24, 25. 2.
We must look to Gods Glory, make our eyes not the weapons of any sin, but the
instruments of Gods Worship and Service: This we shall do, if we employ them
thus; viz. 1. In beholding Gods creatures in heaven and earth, and in them we
may see Gods Glory, Wisdom, Mercy, Power and Providence, and thence glorify
God. 2. In beholding Gods Judgments very wisely and narrowly, that therein we
may see his Justice and Wrath for sin, and so be humbled and terrified from
sin. 3. In beholding of the Elements of Gods Sacraments, especially the Bread
and Wine in the Lords Supper, which be visible words, wherein we may see our
Savior Christ as it were crucified before our eyes. 4. In using them as
instruments of Invocation, by lifting them up to heaven, to testify the
lifting up of our hearts to God: This use of the eyes Nature teaches us; for
whereas other creatures have but four Muscles in their eyes, whereby their eyes
are turned round about, Man has a fifth Muscle, whereby his eye is turned
upward toward heaven.



The Virtues of this Commandment; viz. 1. Chastity, which is a virtue
preserving the mind and body from uncleanness, agreeing with the Will of God,
and avoiding all lusts forbidden by God, all unlawful companies, and inordinate
copulation, and all the desires, occasions, causes and effects, either in
single life or in wedlock. This is one of the chiefest virtues that makes and
preserves the Image of God. 2. Modesty or shamefacedness, which is a virtue
abhorring all filthiness, joined with a grief, shame and sadness, either for
some former uncleanness, or for fear of falling into any hereafter; and having
a purpose and desire to fly not only uncleanness it self, but also the
occasions, and tokens and signs of uncleanness. This virtue is required unto
chastity, as a furtherance and cause, and also as an effect, consequent and
sign thereof. 3. Temperance, which is a virtue observing the mean agreeable to
Nature. Honesty, Mediocrity and order of persons, places and times, according
to the Law of God and Rule of Nature, in things concerning the body, as in
meat, drink, recreations and apparel. This virtue is required unto chastity, as
a cause without which we cannot be chaste.


There is a twofold Chastity; viz. 1. Of the single life, which is with all
carefulness, and fasting and prayer, to keep their minds and affections and
bodies in holiness. 2. In Marriage, when the pure and holy use of wedlock is
observed, Heb. 13.4.


Rules for the Preservation of Chastity; viz. 1. The mind must be filled with
godly meditations, and the Word of God must dwell plenteously in our hearts,
that there may be no room for these wicked desires to enter. 2. We must often
give our selves to the spiritual exercises of Faith, Repentance and New
Obedience, as public and private Prayer, often meditating, hearing and reading
Gods Word, and the like. 3. We must use Sobriety in Recreations, Company, Meat,
Drink and Apparel, for ungodly lusts are kindled, fed and nourished by too much
pampering of the body. 4. We must always be doing some good thing, either in our
general calling of a Christian, or in our particular calling; for Satan takes
advantage by our idleness. 5. Men and women must not privately converse
together without warrant so to do, either from their general or particular
Calling; for this is the main occasion of Temptations: Remember what the
Apostle says, Evil conversings corrupt good manners, 1 Cor. 15.33. 6. Reject
not Marriage, which was instituted by God for these Reasons; viz. 1. The means
of multiplying Mankind. 2. The gathering of the Church. 3. The Image and
Resemblance between God and the Church. 4. That loose and wandering lusts might
be avoided. 5. That there might be a Society and Fellowship of Labors and
Prayers.



That Marriage may be a lawful conjunction, and this sin thereby avoided, these
things are required: 1. That Matrimony be contracted by consent of both
parties. 2. That there be adjoined also the consent of such others as are
required. 3. That honest Conditions be observed. 4. That there be no Errors
committed in the persons. 5. That it be contracted between such persons as are
not forbidden by the Law of God, as between whom the degrees of Consanguinity
may be no hindrance.


To preserve purity and chastity in Wedlock, these Cautions are profitable;
viz. 1. Contracts must be in the Lord, and with the faithful only, Mal. 2.11.
2. Both parties must separate themselves in the time of the woman's disease, and
at appointed Fasts, Ezekiel. 18.6. 1 Cor. 7.5. 3. Wedlock must be used rather to
suppress then to satisfy the corrupt concupiscence of the flesh, and
especially to enlarge the Church of God. 4. It must be used with Prayer and
Thanksgiving, 1 Timothy 4.3, 4.


He breaks this Commandment 1. That thinks an unchaste thought tending to
Adultery, or any sin of that kind. 2. That looks on a woman to lust after her,
Mat. 5.28. or that uses wantonness, 1 Cor. 6.9. 3. That commits Incest, Lev.
18.22. or Sodomy, 1 Cor. 6.9. or fornication or adultery 4. That uses
Marriage Bed intemperately, or lies with a menstruous woman, Ezekiel. 18.6. 5.
That is given to idleness, wears wanton Attire, 1 Timothy 2.9. or uses
provocations to lust, Gal. 5.9. 6. That uses light talk, and reading of
Love-books, 1 Cor. 15.35. that frequents lascivious places, Ephesians. 5.3. that
delights in wanton Pictures, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. that uses the mixed Dancing of men
and women, Mark 6.22. or keeps company with light and suspected persons, Prove.
7.22. 7. That makes Marriages of young children; or neglects to dispose his
children in marriage in convenient time, 1 Cor. 7.36. or that punishes
Adultery with small punishments. 8. That marries more wives then one at once;
That for the avoiding of Fornication, marries not, 1 Cor. 7.2. or that puts
away his wife for other causes then for Fornication, Mat. 19.9. 9. That loves
his Pleasure more then God, 2 Timothy 3.4. and takes care to fulfill the lusts of
the flesh, Rom 13.14. 10. That maintains and frequents Stews, Deuteronomy. 23.17. That
is given to Drunkenness and surfeiting, Ephesians. 5.18. or to wine, sleep and ease,
Prove. 20.13.


You that do pamper up your flesh, and make
The Creature serve but for your base Lusts sake;
You that do feed your Hearts with thoughts that swell
With boiling Lusts that scorch and burn like Hell;
You that for Objects gaze, and in your Eyes
Offer your Hearts an Harlots Sacrifice;
You that from your sulphurous Throats belch out
Discourse that poisons all the Air about,
You shall not enter Heaven; for you Adore
With Christ's members the Carcass of a Whore.
The Eighth Commandment.
Thou shall not Steal.
TO Steal, is properly to convey away any thing closely from another, Genesis
31.20. Thou shall not Steal] that is, Thou shall not covet nor attempt by guile
to convey thy Neighbors goods unto thee; therefore defend, preserve, increase
them, and give thy Neighbor his own. Under this Name of Theft, are comprehended
all other Vices of the like nature and quality, and all other which prove the
occasions of this sin; among which Idleness is not the least, which is a lazy
dejecture of the whole man from the laudable Exercises of Virtue: whence
proceed Protraction, Remission, Negligence, Improvidence, Indevotion,
Sluggishness, Pusillanimity, Irresolution, Desperation, Misprision, Omission
and Theft: Now the best Remedy against this Body-starving and Soul-famishing
sin of Idleness and Sloth, is Devotion, being a ready Performance of all the
Duties God requires of us.

The Sum of this Commandment requires the Trial of our Love and Faithfulness
which we ought to bear our Neighbor in his goods: wherein we are commanded to
use our own Right, To help the Necessity of others, To be content with that
which we have, To labor with our hands that which is honest, To do to all men
as we would they should do unto us, and by diligent pains-taking to get our own
livings in that estate of life to which it shall please God to call us. And
every Duty is to be seasoned with the Fear of God; for it is not sufficient to
perform general Duties of Christianity, unless also we be conscionable in the
particular Duties of our several Callings.

The private Vocations of a Family and Functions appertaining thereto, are such
as Christians are called unto by God, and in the exercising whereof they may
and must employ some part of their time; for private Callings in a Family are
sufficient Callings, and therefore weak consciences may not think, That if they
have no public Calling, they have no Calling at all. God uses to give his
Blessing to men diligent in their Calling; So blessed he Jacobs faithful
Service to his Uncle Laban, Genesis 31.4. Joseph's faithfulness to Potipher, Genesis
39.2. Moses and David were keeping their Fathers Sheep, when God appeared to
the one, Exodus 3.1, 2. and sent for the other, 1 Samuel 10.11. to appoint the one
a Prince over his People, and to anoint the other King over Israel: So Elisha
was plowing when anointed a Prophet, 1 Kings 19.19. And while the Shepherds
were watching their Sheep, there was the joyful news brought them of the birth
of the Savior of the World. Thus private Callings are blessed by the Lord; and
our diligence therein is a special means to prevent this sin here forbidden.

Now as there is a stealing of things, so there is a stealing of persons, Men's
Daughters, or Wives, or Children: Thus Sechem stole Jacobs daughter Dinah, and
the Philistims Sampsons wife, and Jacobs Sons their Brother Joseph, and sold
him into Egypt. This is more heinous then the stealing of goods, and is
ennumerated amongst other most horrible sins, 1 Timothy 1.10. Exodus 21.16.

Hence then it is most manifest, That the Anabaptists in standing for a
community of all things, take away the very subject of this Commandment, which
is a propriety of worldly goods: for if there be no Meum and Tuum, there can be
no stealing, and so this Law should be superfluous. Touching the community
objected in the Apostles times, Acts 2. it was not general, for in Antioch they
had still several Possessions; and the Apostles Exhortation to the Christians
at Corinth, 1 Cor. 16.1. 2 Cor. 8. intimates, That they had their severals
likewise: And for those that entered into this communion at Jerusalem, it was
voluntary, as may be gathered Acts 5. neither had they all things so common, as
that they reserved not still something proper.

In this Commandment are two parts; viz. 1. The forbidding of Theft, and
therein all evil Trades and Deceits, whereby we hunt after other men's goods. 2.
That we labor to defend and help forward the profits and commodities of our
Neighbor, and so help the necessity of others.


The three grand provocations to the commission of this sin; viz. 1.
Covetousness, which is an inordinate desire, a kind of bad motion, whereby the
Devil inticeth us unlawfully to withhold our own goods, and unjustly to covet
other men's. 2. Prodigality, moving Bankrupts to use unlawful means for other
men's goods. 3. Idleness, the Mother of Poverty, the occasion of Theft, Ephesians.
4.28.


There are two kinds of Theft; viz. 1. Vulgar or common Theft, whereby a man's
goods is secretly and fraudulently taken from him, without his knowledge,
contrary to his will. This sin of Theft may be committed by a Wife against her
Husband, when she privily without his knowledge conveys any thing from him, or
consents to dispossess him of it, especially to purloin it; neither can all
that may be justly and truly said for her Right in the common goods, defend her
from the guilt thereof. Children likewise may be guilty thereof against their
Parents, for Rachel having privily taken away though her Fathers Idols, the
Scripture says that she stole them, Genesis 31.19. And all such as counsel and
encourage children to steal away their Parents goods, are accessory to Theft;
no pretense whatsoever being any sufficient warrant for children to defraud
their Parents, it being better for them to be deprived of their Parents goods,
then to enjoy them by the least deceit; yea, they are worse then other Thieves,
being more dearly accounted of, and more freely trusted; and a very ill Example
to Servants in a Family, and Subjects in a Commonwealth, beside the custom may
in time bring them to commit Theft against other persons also. 2. When any
fraudulently circumventeth his Neighbor in any Contract or Business whatsoever,
whereby he suffers damage.


Again, Theft is fourfold; viz. 1. Common, as when the goods of any private man
is stolen from him. 2. Sacrilege, when things dedicated to the Service of God
are taken away. 3. When the Prince, the Exchequer, or any common Treasure is
robbed, called Peculatus. 4. When Children are stolen from their Parents, or
Servants from their Masters, called Plagiatus.


Theft springs into three Branches; viz. 1. Inward only, as when we suffer our
minds to be ranging after our Neighbors goods. 2. Inward and Outward also, as
when we wish and seek for fit opportunities. 3. Outward only, as when we
execute the act it self.


Theft inward and outward only, is, 1. In Speech, as when we wish to have
another man's goods. 2. In the Eye, Job 24.16. as the Thief goes about in the
day time, and chalketh out the house which he would rob in the night.


The outward Theft is 1. Public; when that which is common to a whole company
is wrongfully translated to the private use of one or more. 2. Private, which
is partly 1. The abuse of our own goods, which is 2 ways; viz. 1. By lavishing it
away, which is either 1. In Apparel, when we bestow more therein then our
Calling, our Ability, or the manner of the country will permit. 2. In
Nouriture, when we eat or drink more on delicate things then are necessary.
2. By withholding it from the necessity of others; when we rob the Poor of our
Charity, which is his due.
2. The taking away from others that which is their own; and this is 1. By
pretense of Justice; as 1. When in bargaining things are not bought and sold to
their value. 2. In letting of Land, when higher price is set thereon then the
careful Tenant can live by; and in the Tenant, when at the term of years he
makes spoil of the Land to the hurt of the Landlord. 3. In Servants that labor
not faithfully for their Wages; and in Masters that reward not their Servants
for their Service.
2. By Violence, which consists in robbing and stealing.




The Remedy of this sin is Trust in God, and contentedness in that condition
wherein God has set us, which we ought to have for these Reasons; viz. 1.
Because God knows what is best for us far better then we our selves do. 2. We
have this comfortable promise from him, That he will never fail us nor forsake
us, whether we have little or much, whether we be in prosperity or adversity.
3. Nature it self is content with a little: Naked it brought us hither, and
will so convey us hence. 4. From the consideration of the contrary fruits,
which spring from ambitious resolved purposes of growing great and rich.


From all such as have taken any thing away wrongfully, Restitution is
especially required, which is twofold; viz. 1. Actual, required of all such as
are able, when we return back willingly what we have taken away unjustly: for
the punishment of Theft is Restitution, even unto bondage, if he be not
otherwise able to repair the damage, and in some cases, death. 2. Mental, which
is only in purpose and desire of the mind, when we are able in any kind to do
no more; which is accepted of them that are poor indeed, and truly repent them
of the fact.


Restitution is required for these Reasons, Exodus 22. Lev. 6.1. viz. 1. Because
it is a fruit or sign of true Repentance and turning unto God, Luke 19.8. 2.
Because without Restitution there can be no Remission, Ezekiel. 18. and 33.15.
forasmuch as otherwise the Repentance is falsely counterfeited and not truly
practiced. 3. The performance of it is a very special means to bring a blessing
on us, Deuteronomy. 24.12, 13. 4. God will accept it as a work of Justice, and as a
fruit of the Spirit. 5. The unjust retaining of other men's goods, hinders many
good things from us, insomuch as God will accept no service or duty at our
hands, until we have rid them of things evilly gotten, Mat. 5.23, 24.


The desperate folly of all such as aim not at Gods glory in procuring to
themselves the things of this world, appears by these particulars; viz. 1.
They prefer their own outward estate before the eternal Salvation of their own
Souls, yea even before God himself. 2. They place their happiness in the goods
of this world, then which nothing's more vain, Prove. 25.5. 3. They make
themselves slaves to that which should be their slave, and drudges for they
know not whom, their enemies for ought they know. 4. With much pains, care,
grief and fear they travel for that which (if Gods honor be forgotten) may soon
be most riotously and prodigally lavished away. 5. They make themselves vassals
to Satan, and seek by him to become wealthy, whereas indeed it is the blessing
of God which makes rich, Prove. 10.22. if such have wealth, they have it in
wrath, and in wrath will it be taken from them. 6. They bring Gods curse into
their house, and with their inheritance leave it to their Posterity.


In most kinds of Policy lurketh this sin of Theft; therefore in the use of
all Policy, observe these four principal Caveats to make it lawful: 1. Nothing
must be said, done or intended against the Truth, specially the Truth of the
Gospel. 2. Nothing must be said, done or intended against the Honor of God in
word, deed or show. 3. Nothing must be wrought or contrived against Justice
that is due to man. 4. All actions of Policy must be such as pertain to our
Calling, and be within the limits and bounds thereof.


And because murmuring at our condition and state of life frequently occasions
this sin of theft, let us be advised, how low soever our condition be, not to
murmr at it, for these Reasons; viz 1. Because contentation is a ready and
approved Medicine for all Miseries and Maladies whatsoever. 2. We have a
gracious Promise from Gods own mouth, that he will not suffer us to lack, nor
leave us destitute of help, but will support our wants, and minister to our
necessities, Psalm. 34.9, 10. 3. The Providence of God rules all things, so
that nothing befalls us but by his Will and Pleasure, therefore ought we to
rely our selves wholly upon him. 4. No man has so mean an estate and
condition, but he may gain some glory to God in it; yea, all that befalls us is
for the best to them that fear him. 5. May not the Lord of all do with his own
what he please? Matthew. 20.15. 6. It is the preserving of Humane Societies and
Commonweals, that some should be Superiors, honored, rich, strong, learned,
noble; others Inferiors, that should honor, be poor, weak, unlearned, ignoble:
without this no Policy could stand. 7. The Lord thus deals to manifest his
Wisdom and Power; he will cast down those whom he purposes to advance, and
many times afflict them with poverty, whom he means to enrich with
everlasting glory, Jam. 2.5. 8. Let us consider that we are here as it were in
a Prison or Pilgrimage, in a place of Bondage or Banishment. 9. It is Gods Will
to prove our patience how we will bear affliction as becomes good Disciples of
Christ. 10. Let us remember how the only Son of God took upon him the form of
a Servant, the Lord of Heaven and Earth became obedient to the death, even that
ignominious death of the Cross; and shall not we suffer an ignominious life by
Poverty, without making it more ignominious by Theft.


Usury is a main breach of this Commandment, as being a Gain exacted by
Covenant, above the Principal, only in lieu and recompense of lending it; and
being thus considered, it is quite contrary to Gods Word: yet is it lawful
sometimes to take above the Principal, but with these conditions; viz. 1. If a
man take heed that he exact nothing, but that which his Debtor can get by good
and lawful means. 2. He may not take more then the gain, nay not all the gain,
nor that part of the gain which drinks up the living of him which uses the
Money. 3. He must sometimes be so far from taking gain, that he must not
require the Principal, if his Debtor be by inevitable and just casualties
impoverished, and it be also plain that he could not make, no not by great
diligence, any commodity of the Money borrowed.


Reasons why a man may sometimes take above the Principal; viz. 1. That which
the Debtor may give, having himself an honest gain besides, and no man any ways
endamaged, that the Creditor may safely receive. 2. It is convenient, that he
which has money lent him, and gains by it, should show all possible
gratitude to him by whose goods he is enriched. 3. It is often for the benefit
of the Creditor, to have the goods in his own hands which he lent, whereby he
is prejudiced by the forbearance; and therefore may justly expect (not exact)
reparation from the Rich, not the Poor.


Lending is twofold; viz. 1. Of Due, which is the Loan of the Rich to the Poor,
when his Necessity compels him to borrow; and for this a man cannot with good
conscience take any increase. 2. Of Courtesy, when one rich friend lends unto
another; this is left to a man's own liberty and discretion, and has not any
particular Promise of Reward; not in this case is all taking of Increase simply
condemned, even for these Reasons in these cases: 1. When the increase is given
only in way of thankfulness, for ingratitude is abhorred of all, and the Law
of Natures requires to do good for good; and all Divines allow this kind of
increase. 2. When a man sustaineth damage by his lending, he may receive
increase by way of Satisfaction for his loss. 3. When a man is contented to
adventure his Principal in the hand of him that borrows it; like as a man may
receive hire for his Horse or other goods, standing to the loss, Exodus 22.14.



Three general Rules set down by Paul, Romans 14. to direct us in all our
actions, that we commit not this or any other sin; viz. 1. He is happy that
condemns not himself in the use of those things which he knows to be
lawful. This concerns those that be strong. 2. No man must do any thing with
a doubtful Conscience, for such a one wounds his own Conscience and offends
God, though perhaps the thing be in it self good which he does, Romans 14.23.
Such a one does many good things that do displease God, which would please him
if they were well and rightly done. This Rule belongs to the weak. 3.
Whatsoever proceeds not from Faith, is a sin committed against God, and
condemns him that does it; forasmuch as without Faith its impossible to
please God, Heb. 11.6. And this Rule engendereth two others; viz. 1. Whatsoever
proceeds from mere Naturals, and whatsoever comes from the force of any free
will in us, is sin in the sight of God. 2. All the Virtues and actions of the
Infidels and Unbelievers, though in the substance of the works, and as they are
the gifts of God, they are not evil but good; yet in the Judgment of God they
are sins.



Corruption of judgment being also another main breach of this Commandment:
See to it, ye Great Ones, and know, That Judgment is corrupted four ways; viz.
1. Through Fear, when we dread to pronounce Truth for fear of offending great
persons: So did Pilate wrest the Law, and sin against his own Conscience for
fear of Herod. 2. Through Covetousness, when we are corrupted by Bribes, and
hired for Money, which blind the eyes of the wise: So did Felix gape after
gain and look for Rewards, Acts 24.26. 3. Through Hatred and Malice; for as
Naboths Vineyard was Ahabs Sickness, so he dealt corruptly with Michaiah,
because he hated him and could not abide him, 1 Kings 22.8, 27. 4. Through
Favor and Affection, when we seek to gratify or pleasure our Kinsmen or
Acquaintance, as Pilate did to please Herod. In this sense it is, that the Lord
will not have even the poor man countenanced in his cause, Exodus 23.3.


The sins forbidden in this Commandment; viz. 1. Inordinate living, whether it
be in no set Calling, or idly, wherein by neglecting their duties, such persons
mis-spend their time, goods and revenues, 2 Thessalonians. 3.11. Genesis 3.19. 1 Timothy 5.8.
2. Unjust dealing in heart, which is called Covetousness, Mat. 15.19. 3. Unjust
dealing in deed, which is either in bargaining or out of bargaining. Unjust
dealing in bargaining has many branches; viz. 1. To sell and bargain for that
which is not saleable. 2. All colored forgery and deceit in bargaining; as
using forged cavillation, Luke 19.8. or when men sell that which is counterfeit
for good; as Copper for Gold, and mingle any ways bad with good, making show
only of the good, Amos 8.4, 5, 6. by mixture of base things of little or no
value, with things of price, in the sale thereof, or by setting a counterfeit
gloss on imperfect Ware, by sophisticating any Wares, or using false lights or
slights. 3. By false Weights and Measures: This is an abomination to the Lord,
Deuteronomy. 25.13, 14, 16. Lev. 19.35, 36. Amos 8.4. 4. By overreaching the Buyer by
dissembling, lying and extolling speeches, when the Ware is unworthy; or when
the Buyer concealeth the goodness of the thing, or the Seller the faults of it,
and blindefoldeth the Truth with counterfeit speeches, Mat. 7.12. Prove. 20.14.
5. By Factions, when as two or three compact together, by offering to buy what
they intend not, to deceive him that intends to buy indeed. 6. When in buying
and selling the people are oppressed; as by raising the just price of things,
by inhancing the price by reason of a set day for payment; by Engrossing or
Monopolizing any Commodity; by becoming Bankrupt to be enriched by the damages
and goods of other men. 7. By not restoring that which was lent, pledged or
found, Ezekiel. 18.7. by delaying any kind of Restitution from one day to
another, Prove. 3.18. Psalm. 37.21. or by practicing Usury, Psalm. 15.5. Exodus
22.25. or by detaining the laborers wages, Jam. 5.4.
4. Unjust dealing out of bargaining, is likewise manifold; viz. 1. To
pronounce false Sentence or Judgment for a Reward, either proffered or
promised, Isa. 1.23. This is the Lawyers and the Judges sin. 2. To feed or
clothe stout and lusty Rogues and Beggars, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10. 3. Gaming for Money
and Gain, which may be worse then Usury. 4. To get Money by unlawful Arts, as
Magic, Astrology, Stage Plays, and the like. 5. To filch or pilfer the least
Pin or Point, though it were for the greatest good, Mark 10.19. 6. To remove
ancient Bounds, Prove. 22.28. Hos. 5.10. 7. To steal other men's Servants or
Children, to commit Sacrilege, Pyracy, Robbery, or the like, 1 Timothy 1.10. Joh.
7.19. 1 Cor. 6.10. 8. To conspire with a Thief, whether by giving advice how he
may compass his Enterprise, or by concealing his Fact, that he be not punished,
Prove. 29.24.



Oppression and wronging without Recompense making, is a main breach of this
Commandment, a far stretching sin, and a Monster of many Heads; viz. 1. In
Kings and Princes, when as Tyrannically they exact upon their poor Subjects:
This made the people Revolt from Jeroboam when he threatened them herewith, 1
Kings 12.11. 2. In the Officers of Kings and Princes, who extort from the
People more then they are by their Lord commanded, even to the private
enriching of themselves: Such should rather follow the Advice Luke 3.13. 3. In
wealthy or great persons, who take away the Lands or Commons of meaner persons,
or enforce them to sell at an under-value for fear of their displeasure. This
was Ahabs sin against Naboth, and so fellonious a Robbery, as that God
Arraigned and condemned him for it, 1 Kings 22. 4. In Rich men, that take
advantage of the poor man's necessity, through which he is constrained to sell
Lands or Goods, not giving to the worth of them: Against this, as a sore
Oppression, God erected a Law, Lev. 25.14. 5. In Ministers of Justice, and
Subordinates under them, which have their hands open to Bribes: Such are termed
by the Lord, Rebellious, and Companions of Thieves, Isa. 1.23. and threatened,
ver. 24. 6. In such as toward dear Seasons hoord up their Corn, and the like;
in Fore-stalling of Markets, Regrators and Ingrossers, hereby inhancing the
Price, to the utter undoing of the Poor: These are Thieves of the Commonwealth
also, and are accursed, Prove. 11.26. 7. In such as take Pledges of the Poor,
which they cannot spare but to their great hindrance and hurt; and such as
restore not the Pledge, who are threatened with death, Ezekiel. 18.7. 8. In such as
let Lands or Money so, as that the hirer by Gods ordinary blessing may not be
saved harmless, doing his best endeavor. This is called a biting or devouring
of our Neighbor, Deuteronomy. 23.19. 9. In such as set upon Trust Corn or Ware, the
Buyer wanting ready Money, which take more then a just price for the same,
without all Reason: This is to help him to a Knife to cut his own Throat, when
he asks Bread. 10. In such as feign themselves Bankrupt to deceive their
Creditors. 11. In such as defer the payment of the Laborers hire, and deny some
part of it: This sin the Lord strictly forbids, Deuteronomy. 24.14. it cries aloud for
Revenge, Jam. 5.4. But on the other side, the Laborer is a Thief to him that
hires him, if he works idly or deceitfully, not with all faithfulness, Ephesians.
6.5. 12. In such as having wronged his Neighbor any way, though unwittingly,
yet coming to the knowledge of the wrong done, refuses to make him Recompense.
13. In such as detain any thing found, lent, pawned, or any way else coming
unto our hands, Exodus 23.24. Lev. 6.3, 4. 14. In such as reject a lawful
Calling to live in idleness, beggary, riot or luxury.


The Virtues required in this Commandment; viz. 1. A certain Calling, wherein
every man according to that gift which God has given him, must bestow himself
honestly, to his own and Neighbors good, 1 Cor. 7.24. Ephesians. 4.28. 1 Pet. 4.10.
2. The true and right use of riches, and all the goods a man has: To which do
belong these two special virtues; viz. 1. Contentation, which is a virtue whereby
a man is well pleased with that estate wherein he is placed, and meekly suffers
all worldly discommodities, resting contented with what he justly enjoys:
Motives whereto are these; viz. 1. It is Gods Command, That we should be content
with things necessary, 1 Timothy 6.8. 2. They that are greedy after abundance,
have many Temptations to bad dealing, and so can hardly keep a good Conscience,
1 Timothy 6.9. 3. In time of Persecution (which often accompanies the Gospel) the
richer a man is, the more danger he is in to forsake the Truth, without Gods
special grace preventing him, so naturally glued is the heart of man to the
world: Thus Demas, to embrace the world, forsook Paul, 2 Timothy 4.10.
2. Thristiness or Frugality, which is a virtue whereby a man carefully keeps
his goods which he has gotten, and imployeth them to such uses as are both
necessary and profitable, Prove. 5.15, 16, 17. and 21.5, 17. and 12.17. Joh.
6.12.
3. To speak the Truth from the heart, and to use a harmless simplicity in all
affairs, Psalm. 15.2. 4. Just dealing, 1 Thessalonians. 4.6. And herein are comprised
all those virtues directly opposite to the vices formerly mentioned in unjust
dealing, whether in Bargaining or out of Bargaining. 5. To become Surety only
for men that are honest, and very well known, and that warily with very much
deliberation, Prove. 11.15. and 17.18. and 22.26. and 6.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 6. All
just Covenants and Promises, though they be to our hindrance, must be
performed: for a Promise does bind, if it be lawful, so far forth as he will
unto whom we make the Promise, Psalm. 15.4. Prove. 25.14. Judge. 1.24, 25. 7. To
get our own, we may, if cannot do otherwise, sue our Neighbor in Law; but the
Law must be used lawfully, we must follow our suits in all holy manner, and with
these Caveats; viz. 1. In all Suits we may not do any thing that may prejudice
the profession of Christian Religion, 1 Cor. 6.1. 2. Law must be the last
Remedy, as a desperate Medicine is the last Remedy the Physician uses; we must
assay all means possible, before we use this, especially to a Brother, 1 Cor.
6.7. therefore we must not use it of pleasure or wantonness, or of custom, but
sparingly as we use Physic, not as Meat and Drink as many do, whose appetites
are never satisfied, or thirst quenched, till they have undone others and
themselves; but it must be used only as the Physician uses poison, in
desperate cases, and only upon necessity, when the case cannot otherwise be
decided. 3. We must not propound to our selves at the end of our Suits to be
Revenged. 4. We must not go to Law for trisles, the matter must be of moment
and importance. 5. Our end must not be to undo one another, or to exercise
Revenge; for the lawful and just ends of all Actions in Law, are these; viz. 1.
Gods glory in the execution of Justice, and manifestation of Truth. 2. The
honest defense of our own Right. 3. The Public Peace. 4. The amendment of
disordered persons, not the defamation or hurt of any man.
6. We must always use moderation of mind in going to Law, which chiefly
stands in these three particulars; viz. 1. In seeking after Peace to the
utmost, Romans 12.18. 2. In love with our Enemies, with whom we are at
controversy in Law. 3. In neither using nor showing extremity in our
proceedings, Mat. 18.28.
7. We must not be given to Strife and Contention, and in an humor seek
occasions to begin and breed quarrels, 1 Cor. 3.3. Phil. 2.2. 8. In all Suits
of Law we must be mindeful of the Law of Charity, and not so much endeavor to
maintain our own Right, as to recall our brother, which erreth, into the right
way.
8. Commutative Justice, which keeps equality in the common Trade of life,
according to just Laws; under which are comprehended all Contracts, as Buying
and Selling, Loan, Commodation, Donation, Exchange, Letting to hire, Pledging
or gaging, Committing on Trust, Partnership, and the like. 9. Fidelity, which
is a virtue that heedeth another man's harms, and endeavoreth to avert them
gladly, and diligently performing all the parts of his Calling in doing his
duty; to this end, that God may be honored, and we enabled to succor our
selves, ours, and others: for, he that undergoeth not those labors that he is
able and ought to undergo, commits Theft. 10. Liberality, which is a virtue
giving to others that want, our own goods, according to the Rule of Right
Reason, not by any due Bond or Obligation, but according to the Law of God and
Nature, with a free heart, according to our own Ability and the Necessity of
others, know where, when, to whom, and how to give, observing a mediocrity and
mean between base Niggardliness and riotous Prodigality. 11. Hospitality, which
is one kind of Liberality, even Bountifulness toward Travelers and
Strangers, especially toward those that are of the household of Faith, or
exiled for the Profession of the Gospel, entertaining them with all duties of
discreet Bountifulness, commendable Hospitality, and Christian Charity.


He breaks this Commandment 1. That thinks but a thought tending to the least
hinderance of his Neighbors welfare. 2. That lives in no Calling, 2 Thessalonians.
3.11. or neglects his Calling, Jer. 48.10. 3. That spends his Wealth in Riot,
and provides not for his Family, 1 Timothy 5.8. 4. That uses powdering,
starching, blowing, dark shops, to make ill wares more saleable. 5. That
conceals the faults of his wares; or that uses false Weights and Measures,
Lev. 9.35. 6. That uses words of deceit, Prove. 20.14. or takes more for his
wares then the just price, Mat. 7.12. 7. That oppresses his Tenants by racking
his Rents, Hab. 2.11. 8. That uses engrossing of wares; or that raises the
price only in consideration of a day of payment. 9. That either gives or takes
Bribes, Isa. 1.13. or writes Letters of Affection in wrong Suits. 10. That
holds back things borrowed, Ezekiel. 18.7. or things found or pawned, Lev. 6.3.
11. That being lusty, lives by begging; or that relieveth such, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10.
12. That for Gain defends bad Causes, and delays Suits in Law. 13. That lay
Burdens on the people without measure, Isa. 1.23. Ezekiel. 22.27. 14. That makes
Merchandise of Gods Word and Sacraments, Mic. 3.11. 2 Cor. 2. ult. 15. That
gets his living by casting of Figures and by Plays, Ephesians. 4.28. 16. That is rash
in Suretiship, Prove. 11.15. or keeps back goods given to any man. 17. That
steals men's Children, to dispose of them in Marriage, 1 Timothy 1.10. or
otherwise. 18. That restores not things evil gotten, Ezekiel. 33.15. 19. That is a
Receiver of things stolen, and gives consent to the fact any way, Romans 1.31. 20.
That waits for a Dearth to sell his things the dearer, Amos 8.5. 21. That takes
by stealth but the least Pin, though it be for the best end.


Rules of Obedience to this Comandment: 1. We must be in a lawful Estate and
Calling, according to the Precept, 1 Cor. 7.20. and we must be diligent
therein, Genesis 3.17. Prove. 22.5. 2. We must be content with our present Estate
whatever it be, which with godliness is great gain, 1 Timothy 6.6. 3. We must be
frugal and thrifty to save that wherewith the Lord has blessed us, not
spending it unnecessarily upon vanity, nor losing it by neglect. 4. We must be
constant to perform all our lawful Promises, Psalm. 15.4. and faithful in all
our dealings.


Live in some Calling; be not Prodigal;
Use no Deceit to set false Wares to sale;
Use no unlawful Weights; give just measure;
Rob not the Nation or the Churches Treasure;
Give God and Caesar both their due; and fly
The Cankerworm of Biting-Vsury;
Oppress not; Bribe not; Lie not; nor Ingross;
Restore things lent, found, pawned; Revenge no loss;
Steal not in heart, word, deed: Do this, and be
From any Breach of this Commandment free.
The Ninth Commandment.
Thou shall not bear False Witness against thy Neighbor.
THou shall not bear] that is, Answer when thou art asked before a Judge, Deuteronomy.
19.17, 18. False Witness] by a figure, signifies every word whereby the credit
and estimation of our Neighbor is either impaired or diminished. By the word
Neighbor, any other man is to be understood, as Luke 10.29. Genesis 11.3. Esth.
1.19. Prove. 18.17. for we are all of one blood, Acts 7.26. The Sum of this
Commandment recommendeth unto us the care of our Neighbors good-name in all
respects; to preserve, as much as in us lies, his and our own good-name,
stopping our ears against false Reports, suppressing them, and always speaking
the Truth: So that the drift of this Commandment, is the maintenance of the
Truth among men, wherein not only the bearing of false witness, but also all
those things which are of near affinity with it, the general whereof is Lying,
are forbidden: So the bearing of true witness is commanded. The name of Truth
is here taken for Trueness or Truthspeaking; that is, for the agreement or
correspondency of our knowledge and speech with the thing whereof our speech
is, for it is then true, when the speech in all agrees with the thing.

This Commandment has two parts; viz. 1. False witness is forbidden, which is
1. In Judgment, which becomes Perjury, Theft, or Murder.
2. Out of Judgment.
2. True witness is commanded.


There are two kinds of false Testimonies in Judgment; viz. 1. Altogether
false. 2. False only in part, which is a Cavil or crafty Accusation, when
something is either taken from the Truth, or put to it, or changed.


False testimonies out of Judgment are principally three: 1. Backbiting or
Slandring, which hurts three at once, The Slanderer, the Hearer, and the
Slandred: Of this kind are Whisperers and Talebearers. 2. Flattery, which is a
smooth fostering of other men's Vices, Isa. 5.20. 3. Lying, which is of diverse
sorts, Psalm. 5.6. There are chiefly these five kinds of Lies; viz. 1. Some
proceed of Covetousness, and are very dangerous, being pernicious to our
Neighbor. 2. Others be of infirmity or fear, Genesis 12.13. 3. Others be of
lightness for pleasures sake, Matthew. 12.36. 4. Other under a color of Love,
called Officious Lies, when one thinks by them to do his Neighbor good. 5.
Dissimulation, when one faineth that which is not; or disguising, when one
hides that which is, to the end the contrary may not appear, or seem to be.



Truth in speech is twofold; viz. 1. Of the thing spoken, when a man's speech is
framed to the thing, as it is indeed, or as near as possible may be. 2. Of the
mind wherein it is conceived, when one swears as he thinks, or is in
Conscience persuaded of the thing.


The breach in speaking untruth is either 1. In lying, which is against a man's
knowledge and judgment, or 2. In speaking untruly, which is upon error and
rashly.


Men sin in lying 1. Publicly, when being called to witness a Truth or matter,
they speak not the known Truth; also when men go to Law for a light cause, or
no cause at all, and so are the cause of Perjury; when the Lawyer pleads an
evil Cause; and when the Judge makes not diligent enquiry into the matter ere
he give Sentence. 2. Privately, By prejudicing the good-name of their Brethren,
in reviling, backbiting, slandering, etc. By flattering, when a man hides the
hatred of his heart with feigned words.



By false Witness we sin against 1. God, whose Commandment is broken. 2. The
Judge, who is deceived. 3. The Hearers, who are brought to have an uncharitable
opinion of our Neighbor without cause. 4. The Commonwealth, which is
disquieted. 5. Our Neighbor who is hurt, by being defamed. 6. Our selves, by
corrupting our own Souls with a pestilent Lie.


The common distinction of Lies; viz. 1. An Officious Lie, which is the telling
of an untruth merely to save a man's life, or his Neighbors, or their goods,
their freedom or peace, without intending any hurt unto another: And this kind
of Lie has found some favorers; but the least evil must not be done that good
may come of it. 2. A Pernicious Lie, which is the telling of an untruth to
deceive and to hurt our Neighbor, for some base gain, or out of malice or the
like: This is an essential property of the Devil. 3. A Jesting or Sporting Lie,
which is the telling of things not true for the recreation of the hearers: This
is also a sinful vanity in all such as use it.


Rules to be observed, that we may do our duty aright toward the maintaining
of the credit and good name of our Neighbor; viz. 1. We must have a good
opinion in Charity of our Neighbor, and a desire of his credit, especially when
he is well reported of. 2. We must speak of what is good in our Neighbor, to
his praise and commendation. 3. We must conceal and hide the infirmities of our
Neighbor, sparing to speak of them to his disgrace. 4. If any thing be done by
our Neighbor that may have a tolerable construction, we must so construe it,
and not in the worst sense. 5. To stop our ears against all slanderous Tales
and Reports against our Neighbors credit; and when he has done ought amiss, to
grieve for it, and endeavor to repair his credit, by seeking to bring him to
Repentance.


In this Commandment is forbidden 1. Unjust and false Accusations, or suborning
False Witnesses, such shall perish, Prove. 6.19, 21. to accuse or witness
against one falsely, 1 Kings 21.13. 2. To accept slight Witness against a man,
and proceed thereon to Sentence of Condemnation; or to belie the Truth, by
giving false Judgment for Bribes or Affection. 3. Envy, Disdain of others,
desire of a man's own glory, 1 Timothy 6.4. 1 Pet. 2.1. 4. Evil Suspicions, 1 Timothy
6.4. 1 Samuel 17.28. Acts 28.4. Here are condemned hard Censures, and sinister
Judgments against our Neighbor, Mat. 7.1, 2. Acts 2.13, 14, 15. 1 Samuel 1.13.
5. A relation of the bare words only, and not the sense and meaning of our
Neighbor, Mat. 26.59, 61. 6. A Lie, whereby every falsehood with purpose to
deceive, is signified, whether in words or in deeds, or concealing the Truth,
or any other way whatsoever, be it for never so great a good to our Neighbor:
Lying is said to be the speaking of any thing contrary to Truth against
knowledge, with an intent or purpose to deceive; because if unwillingly an
untruth be told, it is no Lie; and if a Truth be told, the person telling
thinking it false, it is a Lie in him: for it is not that which a man speaks,
but the manner how he speaks, that makes it a Lie, Psalm. 12.2. Lying is
expressly forbidden, Levit. 19.12. Psalm. 5.6. and 101.7. Ephesians. 4.21. This Sin
makes a man like the Devil himself, Joh. 8.44. 7. To pronounce unjust Sentence
in Judgment; to rest in one Witness; to accuse another wrongfully; to betray a
man's Cause by delusion, 1 Kings 21.12, 13. Deuteronomy. 17.6. 8. Openly to raise
forged tales and reports of our Neighbor, or privily to devise the same, Romans
1.20. Levit. 19.16. 1 Timothy 5.13. to spread abroad flying tales, or to feign and
add any thing unto them, Prove. 26.20, 21. 2 Cor. 12.20. To receive or believe
those tales which we hear of others, Exodus 23.1. 1 Samuel 24.10. Slandering and
backbiting. Thou shall not walk about with tales, says the Lord, Lev. 19.16.
9. To accuse our Neighbor for that which is certain and true, through hatred,
and with an intent to hurt him, 1 Samuel 22.9, 10. Psalm. 52.1, 2, 3, 4. 10. To
open or declare our Neighbors secrets to any man, especially if he did it of
infirmity, Mat. 18.15. Prove. 11.13. 11. All babbling talk and bitter words, Ephesians.
5.3. Joh. 19.34. 12. Flattery, whereby we praise our Neighbor above that we
know in him, Prove. 27.6. Acts 12.22. This is a grievous sin in the Ministers of
the Word, 1 Thessalonians. 25. Jer. 6.13, 14. Romans 16.18. Dissembling against Truth
with fawning insinuations for by-respects, as by extolling him for Liberal who
is vainly Prodigal, or him for Frugal who is miserably Covetous: Such will be
cursed, Prove. 14.24. 13. Foolish and over-confident boasting, Prove. 27.1, 2. To
be possessed with vainglory and self-love, which is the fountain of all
Disgrace-doing unto our Neighbor, 1 Timothy 6.4. 14. To have ears open to false
Rumors: Thou shall not receive a false tale, faith the Lord, Exodus 23.2. 15. To
be long-tongued, more ready to blaze abroad the infirmities of others, then to
amend our own. 16. In the heart to judge ill of our Neighbor without apparent
cause, or for some infirmities to pass Judgment against any man: This is a
most common vice, though thereby we usurp Gods Office, Romans 14.4. and bring the
Judgment of God upon our selves, Mat. 7.1. 17. False Records, Ezra 4.19. 18.
Deriding and mocking the godly, as the children did Elisha. 19. To conceive a
thought of prejudice wrongfully against his Neighbor. 20. To envy the
prosperity of our Neighbor. 21. To seek only our own good Report. 22. To be
suspicious, 1 Cor. 13.5. 23. To take men's sayings and doings always in the worse
sense. 24. To defend an evil Cause, and impugn the contrary. 25. To write or
spread abroad infamous Libels. 26. To raze Deeds, or any Testimonial Evidences.
27. To counterfeit another man's hand, or to forge any thing. 28. To suppress
the Truth, whether by fraud, violence, favor, or by any other means. 29. By
delivering our judgment of any person or thing in words of a double sense. 30.
To refuse to give Testimony, when we can and ought, being lawfully thereto
required by the Magistrate. 31. To deny to give an account of our Faith, when
Error stands in competition with Truth. 32. To lie, though it be for never so
good an end, Zech. 13.3.


The Virtues required in this Commandment; viz. 1. A Rejoicing for the Credit
and good Estimation of our Neighbor, Gal. 5.22. 2. Willingly to acknowledge
that goodness we see in any man whatsoever, and only to speak of the same,
Tit. 3.2. Moreover, we must withal desire, receive and believe Reports of our
Neighbors good, Acts 16.1, 2, 3. Notwithstanding, this must be so performed by
us, that in no wise we approve or allow of the vices and faults of men, 2 Chronicles. 25.2. and 27.2. 3. Fairness of Mind, being a virtue taking well things
well or doubtfully spoken or done, and interpreting them in the better part, as
far as there are any reasonable causes to induce thereto, and does not easily
conceive suspicions, neither sticks upon suspicions, though they be such as
are just and have reasonable causes, nor determines ought by them, unless the
Honor of God be interested therein; yea, to interpret a doubtful evil to the
better part, 1 Cor. 13.5, 7. Genesis 37.31, 32, 33. 4. Not to believe an evil
Report running abroad amongst the Common People, by the whispering of
Talebearers, as it were by Conduit-pipes, Psalm. 15.3. Jer. 40.14, 16. Prove.
25.23. 5. Taciturnity or Silentness, which withholdeth in silence things secret
and unnecessary to be spoken, where, when, and as far as is needful; and
avoiding overmuch babbling and talkativeness; to keep secret the offense of our
Neighbor, except it must of necessity be revealed, Prove. 10.12. Mat 1.19. and
18.16. Contrary hereto is prating and foolish prattling; also Peevishness and
Morosity. 6. To get a good Name and Estimation among men, and to keep the same
when we have gotten it, Phil. 4.8. Now a good Name is gotten thus; viz. 1. If
we seek the Kingdom of God before all things, repenting us of our sins, and
with an earnest desire embrace and follow after Righteousness, Prove. 10.7. Mark
14.9. 2. We must have a care both to judge and speak well of others, Mat. 7.2.
Eccl. 7.13. 3. We must abstain from all kind of wickedness; for one only vice
or sin does obscure and darken a man's good Name, Eccl. 10.1. 4. We must in all
things earnestly seek for the Glory of God only, and not our own, Mat. 6.5, 6.
7. Truth, which is a firm Election in the Will, whereby we constantly embrace
true Sentences and Opinions, speak that which is true, keep Covenants and
Promises, and avoid all deceitful dissembling both in speech and outward
gesture, and all to the Glory of God and the Safety of our Neighbor. Repugnant
to this virtue are all Lies, as well Lies of courtesy, called Officious Lies,
as others; also vanity or levity, and the like. 8. Simplicity, which is open
Truth without wrinkles or circumlocutions, a virtue which does properly and
plainly speak and do such things as are true, right, and honest with a single
heart. To this is repugnant Doubleness in Manners and Conversation. 9.
Constancy, being a virtue not departing from the known Truth, neither altering
purpose without good and necessary causes, but constantly speaking and doing
such things as are True, Just and Necessary: Contrary whereto is Lightness and
Pertinacy. 10. Affability or Readiness of speaking, which is a virtue gladly
and with signification of good will, hearing, answering, speaking where need is
upon a necessary cause.


Rash Censure of men being a high breach of this Commandment, may be committed
these many ways; viz. 1. When things are well done, to carp and cavil at them
without cause that is just. 2. When actions and speeches indifferent are taken
in the worse sense. 3. When upon light occasion and uncertain Reports, we
suspect and surmise evil of our Neighbor. 4. When we see any want in our
Neighbors speech or behavior, to make it worse then it was, or indeed it is. 5.
When we spread abroad and publish the wants of men to defame them, which might
better be concealed, and in Conscience and Charity ought so to be. 6. When we
speak nothing but the Truth of another, yet withal do insinuate thereby some
evil of the party in the hearts of the hearers: This is a pestilent practice,
and too much used. 7. When in hearing the Word Preached, and sins reproved in
the Congregation, some misapply the same, with spite against the Ministers
person or his Ministry.


Reasons against Rash Judgment; viz. 1. The practice of it cannot stand with
Christian Charity; for Charity binds us to walk in Love, and Love suspecteth
not evil, but thinks the best always. 2. When thou see a man err, consider,
thy self art or may be guilty of the like or worse. 3. Consider, That God the
Father has committed all Judgment unto his Son, who now judges by his
Ministers. 4. Consider, That thou art unable to judge aright of other men's
actions, being ignorant of many circumstances thereof, for thou know not
happily with what mind, or to what end the action was done, nor the cause why he
did it, nor the state of his person, nor the manner of his temptation thereto.
5. He that gives rash Judgment of another is worse then a Thief that steals
away a man's goods: for he robs him of his good Name, which Solomon says is to
be chosen above great riches, Prove. 22.1.


Three things Required in judging of others aright; viz. 1. We must have
recourse to the cause of our Judgment: for if the Cause be insufficient, then
our Judgment is Rash and unlawful. 2. We must have Authority and Warrant by
lawful calling to give Judgment, or else some thing which is answerable
thereto, though the Judgment be private: for private men in private Judgment,
though they want this Authority by a lawful calling, yet if they have that
which is answerable thereto, that is, the Affection of Christian Love, then
they may judge. 3. We must always have a good end of our Judgment; that is, the
Reformation and amendment, not the defarning of our Brother.


Since Truth is the chief and principal thing required in this Commandment,
consider in the last place that there is a fourfold Truth; viz. 1. Of
Judgment, when a man's Judgment agrees with Gods Word, which is the
Touchstone of Truth: So as the Principles of that Religion which he professes,
and his opinion concerning the same, are ground thereon, and may be warranted
thereby; This is the ground of all the rest, to which must truth of heart be
added; and where truth of heart is, there will be Truth of speech and action:
for sincerity in the heart will keep the Tongue from lying, and the carriage of
a man from dissimulation and deceit. This Truth of Judgment is directly
opposed to Error. 2. Of Heart, which is the singleness and sincerity thereof,
whereby a man seeks to approve himself to God the Searcher of all hearts, and
to be accepted of him. This is opposed to Hypocrisy, whether open or secret.
3. Of Speech, which is an Agreement of the words of a man's mouth, both with his
mind and also with the matter which he utters, Ephesians. 4.25. This is opposed to
lying, when a man speaks against his Mind and Conscience, and to Falsehood,
when a man speaks contrary to the thing it self. 4. Of Action, which is a
plain, faithful and honest dealing in all things, whether we have to do with
God or Man; when men neither make show of doing that which indeed they do not,
or of doing it otherwise then they do. This was it Christ commended honest
Nathaniel for, Joh. 1.47. and is opposed to Dissimulation and Deceit.


Motives to stir up in us a desire of Truth; viz. 1. The Excellency of it; it
makes us like God himself, for he is the Lord God of Truth, Psalm. 31.5. his
Son is Truth, Joh. 14.6, 17. his Holy Ghost the Spirit of Truth, Jam. 1.18. his
Word the Word of Truth, Psalm. 19.9. and his Promises, Commandments, Judgments,
Ways and Works, all Truth, Psalm. 119. 2. The Necessity thereof; for without it
no Grace can be of any use: therefore the Scripture commends Faith unfeigned,
2 Timothy 1.5. Love without Dissimulation, Romans 12.9. and Wisdom without
Hypocrisy, Jam. 3.17. 3. The Benefit of Truth; for the least measure of Grace
seasoned with it, is acceptable to God, and in that respect very profitable to
us.


There is no greater Ornament or Beauty to Religion, then Soundness and
Evidence of Truth: This is the very Glory and Crown thereof; as for Antiquity,
Universality, Unity, Uniformity, Succession, Consent, Multitude, Pomp,
Revenues, and the like, being separated from Truth, are but vain glosses, or so
many Pearls in a blind eye, to make it so much the more deformed. This is it
made the Martyrs so valiant, David a man after Gods own heart, Nathaniel so
gracious in Christ's eyes, Job so courageous, patient and constant, and Paul so
unconquerable. Truth is a comeliness in every thing.

God is the God of Truth, no Lie can stand
Vnpunish'd by his All-Revenging hand:
Who calls God Witness to what is not true,
Style him we may The Crucifying Jew;
And does what in him lies to make thereby
The God of Truth the Author of a Lie.
We say the Lie deserves the Stab: Are men
So tender of their Credit? much more then
Jealous is God of his, who will not take
The Lie of Creatures for his Honors sake.
The Tenth Commandment.
Thou shall not Covet thy Neighbors House, thou shall not Covet thy Neighbors
Wife, nor his Servant, nor his Maid, nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor any thing
that thy Neighbor has.
TO Covet, is to think inwardly, and also to desire any thing whereby our
Neighbor may be hindered, albeit there ensue no assent of the Will to commit
that evil. And by Coveting here is to be understood, That not only evil
actually committed is sin, but harboring in the heart, although it never comes
into act: So that this Commandment is as it were added for the explaining of
the former, because the more ignorant people seeing no punishments inflicted
for evil affections, would not otherwise have thought them to be sins. And it
might be added to convince every man of Sin, for we all bear in us Lust, the
tinder of Vice. And this coveting what is another, does always argue a mind
either lustful, or not contented, which is against all true Piety. By the
words, House, Wife, Maid, Ox, etc. the Commandment is illustrated, as by an
Argument drawn from the distribution of the Objects of Concupiscence: Whence it
is apparent, That only evil concupiscence is condemned in this place, Gol.
3.5. for there is a good concupiscence or desire; as of Meat and Drink, and
that of the Spirit, Gal. 5.17. So then here are rehearsed the Objects of all
Lusts for the most part, whereby we are stirred up to the transgressing of any
Commandment of the latter Table. In the other Commandments not only wicked
deeds, but also counsels and deliberate consent of the Will is forbidden; but
in this is required somewhat more, namely, that we be not tickled with any
kind of Lust, although our Will consent not, yea also though it be against it:
For here are forbidden all first motions of the Mind unto sin, springing from
Original Sin, though no consent be yielded unto them; and we are here commanded
to keep our very hearts and minds free from evil motions and thoughts against
any of the Commandments of God, and to be well contented with our own. Thus the
motions unto sin forbidden in this Commandment spring from Original Sin, or the
flesh in us; other evil motions we are subject unto, that are suggested by the
Devil, which are not our sins, unless by consenting we make them so. And the
Duty here commanded, is our thorough Sanctification, not only in deed, but
even in heart and thought also, as in 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. the parts whereof are
Mortification, the putting off the Old Man, which is corrupt through
deceiveable lusts, Ephesians. 4.24. and Vivification, the putting on of the New Man,
which after God is created in Righteousness and true Holiness, Joh. 3.5.
otherwise called Regeneration or a New Birth. The Sum of this Commandment
forbids all sins before consent and resolution; all sins without us, as
Adams sin; and all sins within us, as the effect of the former. The Scope and
end of this Commandment, is a Rightness and Inward Obedience of all our
affections toward God and our Neighbor. This Commandment is added to be a
Declaration of the former, and that Universal, because this is spoken of the
whole in general; and is added to be as a Rule or Level, according to which we
must take and measure the inward Obedience of all the other Commandments.
Hereby not only corrupt inclinations are sins, but the thinking of evil is
sin. Unto this Commandment is Original sin or Concupiscence repugnant, which is
an inordinate appetite, and a corrupt inclination and proneness in the Mind,
Will and Heart, contrary to God, and desiring those things that God forbids
in his Law, which ensued upon the Fall of our first Parents. Every Breach of
this Commandment may be termed Covetousness: Now covetous men, the more they
devour, the more they covet, like the Grave or the Barren Womb, Prove. 30.14,
15. like Dropsy men, or Pharaohs lean Kine: Thus Ahab, that had a Kingdom at
command, covets a petty Vineyard, which costs poor Naboth his Life and Living;
but withal, covetous Ahab purchased more then he coveted, the Wrath of God, the
Destruction of his person, the ruin of his House, the loss of his Kingdom, and
the undoing of all his Posterity, 1 Kings 21.16. The covetous man sees nothing
in another without grief to himself; the more he has, the more he thinks he
has not; the fuller his Coffers are, the emptier he judges them; he as much
wants what he has, as what he has not; the seasonableness of Weather and
fruitfulness of Seasons trouble him, because others partake of Gods Providence;
he prays for a Dearth or Famine, that his commodities may sell for more then he
values his Soul at; he hates the Rich, because he has not somewhat they
possess; he hates the Poor, because they crave away his Life: As for Spiritual
matters, he counts Salvation it self not worth one years Extortion. This Sin of
Covetousness may be in the Poor as well as in the Rich, when they use ungodly
shifts and unlawful means to store themselves with Meat or Money, or any other
thing, which is right Covetousness; and when they murmr and grudge at their
condition, not bearing the burden of Poverty patiently, murmuring also at him
that sends it: for whosoever disdaineth his present state, because it is not
higher, richer and better, is covetous: This was the sin caused the Rich man to
forgo the Savior of Mankind, rather then his Temporal Possessions; this makes
it is as difficult a matter for the Rich to enter Heaven, as a Camel the
Needles eye; this made Achan play the Thief; this brought him to so fearful an
end, Josh. 7.25. This brought the leprosy on Gehazi, and Judas to his own
Gallows, Mat. 27.5. This is the occasion of all corruptions in all Professions,
in all Ages, in all degrees of men, indeed the very Root of all evil.

Thou shall not Covet] The cogitation or motion of the heart is of three sorts;
viz. 1. Some glancing or sudden thought suggested to the mind by Satan, which
suddenly vanishes away, and is not received of the mind: The signs to know
and distinguish these diabolical Temptations from the motions of our own Flesh,
may be such as these; viz. 1. They are sudden, and come into the mind without
any object leading thereunto. 2. They are often, yea thousands of times
iterated without intermission, to the infeebling of the faculties of mind and
body, and weakening of the senses. 3. They are motions often horrible to Nature,
as to Murders of others or ones self. 4. They move to things unpleasing,
tedious and irksom. 5. They are violent, and enforce almost to the doing of
that unto which we are moved.
2. The Second is a more permanent Thought or Motion, the which as it were
tickleth and inveigleth the mind with some inward joy. 3. The Third is a
cogitation drawing from the Will and Affection full assent to sin. Now we are
to understand this Commandment of the Second sort of Motions only: for the
First sort, being a sudden thought suggested to the mind by Satan, is no sin
of ours, but the Devils: And the Third kind, which have consent of Will,
belong to the Five former Commandments.


In this Commandment are prohibited these and the like sins; viz. 1.
Concupiscence it self, namely, Original corruption, in as much as it is hurtful
to our Neighbor, Jam. 1.14. 2. Each corrupt and sudden cogitation and passion
of the heart, springing out of the bitter root of concupiscence, Gal. 5.17. To
this place appertains Satan's suggestion, if after the first offer it be
entertained and received in the Closet of the heart. 3. The least cogitation
and motion, the which, though it procure not consent, delights and tickles the
heart: Of this kind are these foolish Wishes, I would such a House were mine,
Such a Living, Such a thing, etc. And hitherto may we refer all unchaste
Dreams, arising from the force of concupiscence.


Here are comcommanded 1. A pure heart toward our Neighbor, 1 Timothy 1.15. 2.
Holy cogitations and motions of the Spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. Ephesians. 4.23. 3. A
conflict against the evil Affections and Lusts of the flesh, Romans 7.22, 23. 2
Cor. 12.7.


That we may be the better preserved from this sin of coveting, 1. Let us
consider our unworthiness of those things we have of our own, be they never so
mean in respect of the superfluity of others. 2. Let us consider the Providence
of God, which appoineth for every one as he sees most fit and convenient. 3.
Let us consider the deceitfulness of our own hearts, which, for ought we know,
would not be fully satisfied, did we enjoy what we covet. 4. Let us shut our
eyes against the beholding of tempting objects; for by the outward senses, the
fire of concupiseence is kindled within us; and withal, let us ardently and
constantly pray for the extinguishing of this fire, and to have a fire of
heavenly desires kindled in us.


The covetous are Idolaters two ways; viz. 1. Because they prefer their Riches
in their affection before God, the gift before the Giver; depending more on
them then on God, trusting in them as in God. 2. Because they account their
life to consist in their Riches, and to rest upon their Wealth, rather then to
stand on the Providence of God, failing of all hope, and comfort and joy, when
their Wealth fails them. This was Satan's bait even to our Savior Christ
himself, to tempt him to Idolatry, when he offered him the Kingdom of the
World, and the glory thereof.


The evils of covetousness; viz. 1. It sets the mind upon a Rack, fretting,
fuming, vexing, tormenting, disordering, disquieting and distempering it self.
2. It bewrays much impiety and infidelity, that their hearts are destitute of
true godliness, whatsoever show they make to the contrary, 1 Timothy 6.6. Ps.
119.36. Jam. 1.27. for the soul which is heavenly in them, is made earthly. 3.
There is no sin which a covetous man will not commit for his gain, therefore the
Apostle calls it the Root of all evil, 1 Timothy 6.10. it is in effect the breach
of the whole Law, it sets up a strange or false god in the heart, therefore
it is called the worshipping of Images, Col. 3.5. and the covetous person an
Idolater, Ephesians. 5.5. he will Swear, Curse and Blaspheme to get an Halfpenny,
Prove. 30.9. he regards the Sabbath not so much as his Pursestrings; nay he
will damn his Soul to fill his Purse, Amos 8.5. This was the cause of lying in
Gehazi, 2 Kings 5.25. of Murder in Ahab, 1 Kings 21.19. of Treachery in Judas,
Mat. 26.15. of Theft in Achan, Josh. 7.21. of Apostasy in Demas, 2 Timothy 4.10.


The thoughts of the heart being chiefly concerned in this Commandment,
consider three ways to discern the thoughts that are conveyed into the mind by
the Devil: 1. They come speedily, as lightning into a house, and in a manner
forced into the mind, as that the party cannot avoid them; and they come into
it again and again, yea a thousand times a day. 2. Because they are directly
against the light of Nature, the sparks whereof are not quite extinct in us by
sin, for every man thinks reverently of God by Nature. 3. At the first
conceiving of them the party is smitten with an extraordinary fear, his flesh
is troubled, and oftentimes sickness and faintings do follow.


Unclean thoughts, which have their residence in the mind of man, are of two
sorts; viz. 1. Inward, and such as have their Original from the flesh, and
arise of the corruption of man's Nature, though stirred up by the Devil: These
at the very first conceiving are our sins, though they have no long abode in
the heart. 2. Outward, and are such as have relation to an outward cause or
beginning: Of which sort are those evil thoughts that are conveyed into the
mind by the Devil, and if we take no pleasure in them, nor yield consent unto
them, they are not to be accounted our sins but the Devils, by whom they were
suggested.


Diverse are the kinds of wicked Thoughts: These three are the most common;
viz. 1. Voluptuous, set upon Vanities, Pleasures, Delights, Sports, and such
like. 2. Ambitious, set upon Pride, aspiring after Honor, who shall be
greatest. 3. Malicious, enviously bent toward others, seeking to do Mischief.


The Conditions required in Wishing Evil against others, that our Thoughts may
not be evil; viz. 1. All Imprecations or evil Wishings, which are made
absolutely without some Prophecy or special Revelation, are Sins. 2. They must
be done without private hatred and desire of Revenge. 3. They must be done in
respect of Gods glory only, and the preservation of the true Church. 4. We
must not imprecate, or wish evil, as it is an evil; as it is the Destruction of
them against whom we wish it.


Two special Rules to guard and keep the heart safe from evil thoughts: 1. That
the Word of God dwell plentifully in us, by daily meditation of the
Commandments, Promises and Threatenings revealed in the same. 2. To establish
our Thoughts by counsel, Prove. 20.18. that is, not once to think or conceive so
much as a thought, but upon advice and direction taken at God and his Word.
This Rule we must practice in the use of our Senses, Speeches and Actions.


Can man be, when the Heart gives not consent,
Guilly the Breach of this Commandment?
It Is so: for since our Parents fell, we all
Are subject to this Sin Original;
^et so, as first we must take pleasure in
This new conceived Embryo of Sin:
^r if we hate the Thought, strive to reject
The Motions that do on our Hearts reflect,
The Sin is Satan's, and not ours; for we
Not tickled with this thought of Sin, are free.
CHAP. VI.
Of Gods Love to Man, of Election, Creation, Redemption, Vocation,
Justification, Sanctification, Adoption, Regeneration, Conversion from Sin to
Good Works, Repentance, and New-Obedience.
I.
THe greatest Evidence of Gods Love that could be given, consists in the
Forgiveness of Sin, which is well known to all that know the end of Christ's
coming (which was to save Sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15.) and the extent of this Love of
God reaches to all Sins (except that against the Holy Ghost) which neither is
unremissable in its own nature as it is sin, but as the party so sinning is
incapable of Repentance, and consequently of Mercy; so that there is no sin
(that excepted) but comes within the compass of Gods Mercy and Pardon upon
Repentance: The Reason is, because the Mercy of God is greater then all sins
whatsoever, and the Sacrifice of Christ is a sufficient Price of Redemption for
all; his blood cleanses from all sin, 1 John 1.7. From this extent of Gods
Love it may be well inferred, That Man's destruction is of himself, either
because he maliciously despights the Spirit of Grace, or wilfully rejects the
offer of Pardon. In the order of Redemption God has made man's sin pardonable,
but man by his impenitency makes it not to be pardoned; for God excludes none
from the participation of his Mercy, his Pardon being offered to all; which yet
must be understood of Gods outward Dispensation and Manifestation of his Mercy
by the Ministry of the Word, wherein no difference is made betwixt persons,
nor exemption of any: So as it calls not into question the Secret Counsel and
Eternal Decree of God. Again, it must be known, That it is to be referred to
the several degrees, sorts and conditions of men, betwixt which God makes no
difference; as Honorable, Mean; Rich, Poor; Learned, Unlearned; Old, Young;
Free, Bond; Male, Female; Magistrate, Subject, etc. Lastly, it is to be applied
to the All sufficiency of Christ's Sacrifice, which is available to take away
the sins of the most notorious sinners that can be, as well as any other
sinners.

Gods love to Man appears both 1. In this life, 1. Before the Fall, in making
us after his own Image. 2. After the Fall, by repairing his Image again in us,
which we had lost.
2. In the World to come, by crowning us with Immortality; for the Goodness of
God endures for ever, Psalm. 103.17.


Gods love to Man opened in the Scripture by these degrees; viz. 1. God has no
pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and
live, Ezekiel. 33.11. 2. That he deferreth, mitigateth, and takes away
punishments, inviting all men to Repentance. 3. That he debaseth himself to
relieve our infirmities, by his Spirit, Word, Sacraments and Miracles. 4. That
he embraces with singular love his Chosen, so that he saves and delivers
them for ever from sin and all Evils, and comfort all in Afflictions, Rev.
7.21. 5. That he chose rather to bring to pass this our Delivery even by the
Incarnation and Death of his only begotten Son, then that all Mankind should
perish, Joh. 3. 6. That he promises and performs all those things of his own
free goodness, Exodus 34.19. 7. That he does those things toward sinners, not
only unworthy of them, but even his Enemies, Romans 5.10.


Two things which highly commend Gods love; viz. 1. The Freeness of his Grace,
which is every way so free, that the Goodness which he shows to his creature,
is altogether of himself, and from himself, Joh. 3.16. Romans 5.10. when there
was none to mediate for us, Genesis 3.15. God offered Grace, and freely gave his
Son to be a Mediator. This is to be opposed against man's unworthiness. 2. The
Riches of his Mercy, which are unutterable, unconceiveable; according to Gods
Greatness so is his Mercy, Infinite, and reaches above the Heavens; so as he
may be said to be Rich in Mercy, Ephesians. 2.4. Abundant in Goodness, Exodus 34.6.
This is to be opposed to the Multitude and the Heinousness of our Sins.


God is Rich in Love and Mercy to Man diverse ways; viz. 1. Because he does
perform more effects of his Love, in regard of himself, then we have need of,
or our misery require; for to the Remission of sins a simple Pardon had been
sufficient, but hereto he adds the gift of his Son by his death to satisfy
for us, by his Spirit to Regenerate and Sanctify us, etc. 2. He does never
cease to communicate his Love unto us, it is never dry. 3. He Loves us for our
own good, having no need of us, he gets naught by it. 4. He Redeems us from all
sins, gives us Faith and Repentance freely, we deserve it not. 5. He Dyed for
us even when we were his very Enemies, the Children of wrath. 6. He Prevents us
with his Grace, when we sought not to him for it. 7. He Bestows Temporal
Favors, and withholds present Afflictions from the Reprobate. 8. He Prosecutes
us with his Love unto the end, and in the end gives us the Salvation of our
Souls, the end of our Faith.


The consideration of Gods Love, must Teach us these Duties; viz. 1. To beware
of all sin, whereby we do offend and displease our God who is so gracious unto
us. 2. To trust God with our Lives, Healths, Bodies, Estates, and all we have
for Food, Raiment, and Protection in the sober use of all lawful means. 3. To
seek for help and succor from God in all distresses and want. 4. To love so
bountiful a God, yea to enforce our hearts to all duties of love to him. 5. To
be thankful to God for all good things we enjoy; for whatever good we have,
comes from him. 6. We must labor continually in heart and life to walk worthy
of the Lord, and to please him in all things, being fruitful in all good works,
Col. 1.10.


The Duties required of such of us to whom Gods Love has been specially
manifested, in raising us who before were weak and contemptible in the world,
to be Instruments of his Glory; viz. 1. We must confess our selves miserable by
Nature, and no good thing in us to raise up our selves above others, being no
way better then others. 2. We must consider, That whatsoever we have, it is
Gods gift, we have received at his hands, it comes down from above; and
therefore let us not glory as if we had not received it, 1 Cor. 4.7. 3. We must
walk worthy of our Calling, even of those Mercies which we have tasted, and
acknowledge our selves to be unworthy of them. 4. We must be humble in our own
eyes, and not boast of any thing in our selves, or in our own merits, nor think
our selves worthy to be regarded of him. 5. If we be thankful for lesser
Mercies, we may be assured of greater and of fatter blessings. 6. We must keep
a Register of his blessings, and so settle them in our hearts, that we forget
them not, but may thereby be provoked to set forth his praise.


II.
ELection is a Decree, in which God, according to the good pleasure of his
Will, has certainly Chosen some men to Life Eternal in Christ, and that for
the praise of the glory of his grace, Ephesians. 1.4, 5. God Decree is that by which
God has necessarily, and yet freely from all Eternity, Isa. 46.10. determined
all things: Howbeit, the Decree of God is the first and Principal Cause of all
things, yet it does not take away the nature and property of second Causes,
Ephesians. 1.12. Mat. 10.29. Romans 9.2. but brings them into a certain order, that is,
directs them unto the determinate end, whereupon the effect of things are
contingent or necessary, as the nature of the second Cause is. When Christ was
offered freely to every man, and one received him, and another rejected him,
then the Mystery of Election and Reprobation was Revealed: The Reason why some
received him, being, Because God gave them a heart, which to the rest he gave
not; but in point of offering of Christ, we must be general, without having
respect to Election. So that Predestination is the Decree of God, in as much as
it concerns man, by which God has ordained all men to a certain and
everlasting estate; that is, some to Salvation in his Son, 1 Thessalonians. 5.9. others
to condemnation, for his own glory and their sins, Romans 9.22. Reprobation is
Gods Decree, in the which, because it so pleased him, he has purposed to
resuse some men by means of Adams Fall and their own Corruptions, for the
manifestation of his Justice, Prove. 16.4. 2 Cor. 13.5.

Again, Election is the eternal, unchangeable, free, and most just Decree of
God, whereby he has decreed to convert some to Christ, to preserve and keep
them in Faith and Repentance, and by him to give them Eternal Life. So
Predestination is an Eternal Decree or Purpose of God, in time causing
effectual Grace in all those whom he has Chosen, and by this effectual Grace
bringing them infallibly unto Glory. Predestination being thus an immanent and
eternal Act of Divine Understanding and Will, cannot be conceived as dependent
upon any foreseen Temporal Acts of man's Free Will; for Election finds or
considers all mere men in one and the self-same condition; and it is the
Grace prepared for them in Predestination, which makes the predestinate become
holy and happy men. They who will have God in his Divine Predestination to
behold all men, and elect those men consequently, whom he considers as
believing and persevering in Faith and Holiness unto the last gasp, are in an
Error: for our Election is not grounded upon any foreseen acts in us of
Obeying, Believing, Persevering, and the like, but these acts are grounded upon
our Election; for whoever is predestined to Salvation, is also predestined
to the Grace of Believing, Obeying, and the like, otherwise it were a
conditional Predestination, but there is none such, for whoever is elected to
Salvation, is predestined also to the means of Salvation. God in his most
gracious Decree of Election, is as absolutely and certainly ordaining men unto
Saving Grace, as unto Everlasting Life and Glory. And this Grace prepared for
the Elect in Gods Eternal Predestination, and bestowed upon them in the
Temporal Dispensations, so causes their Belief, Repentance, Perseverance, as
that it imposes no necessity or violent coaction upon the Wills of men, but
causes their free and voluntary Endeavors.

All that are inwardly and effectually called, are Elected; but many are called
only outwardly, few such are chosen. Now that God has chosen some, and passed
by others, he is not at all cruel; for he owed not his Grace to any, but justly
might have suffered all Mankind to have perished. That some are Elect and some
Reprobate, is known unto us in general, but not in special, whether this or
that man be; but of our own Election every of us not only may, but ought to be
in special certain and assured, whereof he may be by the effect, which is
Conversion, that is, true Faith, and true Repentance. Now if any one shall
think that the Election of some before others, in regard of Gods special Mercy,
came from this, That God foresaw something in them which was not in the others;
let him hear what Moses says to the Jews, The Lord did not set his love upon
you, nor choose you for your multitude, but because the Lord loved you, and
would keep the Oath which he swore to your fathers, Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8. And in Mat.
7.23. Christ says of some, I never knew you; yet speaking of others, he says,
I know my sheep, Joh. 10.14. And again, I know whom I have chosen, Joh. 13.18.
and Paul says, The Lord knows who are his: From which places we may safely
gather, That the Lord puts a difference betwixt man and man, Angel and Angel,
acknowledging some to be his own, and denying the same of others. If God
himself had not avouched this in his Word, no man might have taught it; but
being here plainly propounded, it is with all reverence to be acknowledged and
received: whereof no other Reason can be given, but Gods good pleasure alone,
Mat. 11.25, 26. For, Jacob has he loved, and Esau has he hated; neither did
this difference come from their works, either good or evil, for this difference
God put between them, before either of them had done good or evil; but it is
wholly ascribed to the Will of God, who will have mercy on whom he will have
mercy, and whom he will he hardens, Romans 9. Neither must this seem strange
unto us, for we permit unto men to use their own discretion in their own
Affairs, and can we think it unreasonable in the Creator to use his touching
his Creature?

Thus our whole Salvation is of Gods Free Grace, which in Christ is the
Fountain from whence it flows, yea it is the Beginning, Continuance and
Ending of our Salvation: So that as for any foreseen Faith and Good-works, they
are not causes of our Election, but fruits and effects thereof: for what Faith
or Goodworks could be foreseen in the Sons of Wrath, born dead in Sins. God
chose us not because he knew we would believe hereafter, but to the end we
should believe, that is, that he might bestow upon us Faith, and so save us in
his Son, Ephesians. 1.4. Tit. 1.1. Acts 13.48. and Faith is the gift of God to us,
and the work of God in us, Joh. 6.29, 44. And if Faith foreseen were the cause
of Election, then Infidelity foreseen were the cause of Reprobation, which is
false, because then all Mankind should be reprobated and rejected, forasmuch
as the whole Mass of Mankind sinned, and God could foresee nothing in it as of
it self but Incredulity and Unbelief.

Neither is our Election of Merit, which is a work undue, to which we are not
bound, making the Reward and Recompense that was not due to be due; but all we
can do is due unto God, for our Spiritual life is called a Debt unto him, both
in respect of Creation, Redemption and Glorification; therefore neither is our
Salvation of Merit, but of Gods own Free Grace.

Neither is our Election of any Free Will in us to good, for there is not any
cooperation (as the bold Papists affirm) of man's Free Will with Gods Free Grace
in the first act of our Conversion, but God does all, and we nothing in good
things, save as Instruments: for, God works both the will and the deed; he
preventeth us with his Grace, prepares us by his Word, enclineth us by his
Spirit, and works both the beginning and ending of our Salvation: For
Election, Vocation, Faith, Adoption, Justification, Sanctification, and Eternal
Glorification, are never separated in the Salvation of any man, but like
inseparable Companions go hand in hand.

Now the Elect regenerated and once come unto the Church of the Saints, may
sometimes fall from it, but they can never forsake it wholly, because they
never so fall, as to become the Enemies of God and the Church; nor finally,
because they persist not in this Apostasy, but at length return to Repentance:
Thus was it with David and Peter. Lastly, the Notes of Election are Vocation,
Justification, Sanctification; and all they who are elected unto Salvation, if
they come unto the years of discretion, are called outwardly by Gods Word, and
inwardly by his Spirit. Of this Election Christ Jesus is the Foundation, 1 Thessalonians. 5.9. The Decree thereof is that Book of Life, wherein are written the
Names of the Elect, Rev. 20.12. 2 Timothy 2.19. And the execution of this Decree
is an Action, by which God, even as he purposed with himself, works all those
things effectually, which he decreed for the Salvation of the Elect: For they
whom God elected to this end, that they should inherit Eternal Life, were also
elected to those subordinate means, whereby, as by steps, they might attain
this end, and without which it were impossible to obtain it, Romans 8.29, 30.

Election is twofold: 1. Eternal, whereby God out of the Lump and Mass of
Mankind, has before all Worlds chosen out some to life Eternal. 2. Temporal,
1. To some certain Office, Joh. 6.70. chosen to the Apostleship: All such are
not Redeemed by Christ. 2. Out of the World into the Church, Joh. 15.19. Such
are Redeemed by Christ.



Of Eternal Election: 1. The Efficient Cause is the everlasting Purpose of God,
Romans 9.11. 2. The Material Cause is the Blood of Christ, 1 Timothy 1.18, 19, 20.
3. The Final Cause, or End, why both God the Father has loved, and Christ for
his Elect has suffered, is the Glory of God and Salvation of man, Ephesians. 1.5, 6.
Romans 8.29.


The chief effects of Election, are 1. Justification by Faith in this life, and
Glorification in the life to come. 2. A Conformity to the Image of Christ, in
suffering here, and enjoying glory hereafter.


Indeed the Effect of our Election, is the whole Work of our Salvation, and all
the Degrees of our Redemption; viz. 1. The Creation and Gathering of the
Church. 2. The sending and giving of Christ the Mediator, and his Sacrifice. 3.
The effectual Calling of Men to his Knowledge. 4. Faith, Justification,
Regeneration, and Goodworks. 5. Raising unto Glory, Glorification, and Eternal
Life.


The means whereby to come to the Assurance of our Election, as it is set down
in the 2 Pet. 1. viz. 1. Faith, to put our sole trust and confidence in God
only. 2. Virtue, an upright doing of the Works of the Moral Law. 3. Knowledge,
whereby to carry our selves warily before men. 4. Temperance, in natural
Appetite, in Meat, Drink, Apparel, etc. 5. Patience, a moderation of sorrow in
enduring Affliction. 6. Godliness, whereby we Worship God in the Duties of the
First Table. 7. Brotherly Kindeness, to embrace Gods Church and the Members
thereof. 8. Love, whereby we are well-affected to all men, even to our Enemies.


The three principal grounds of Assurance of Salvation in the First of John: 1.
He that has communion of fellowship with God in Christ, may be undoubtedly
assured of his Salvation, 1 John 5.11. 2. He that is the Adopted Son of God
shall be saved, 1 John 3.2. 3. They that are assured of the love of God to them
in particular, may also be certainly assured of their Salvation, 1 John 4.9.


From the Doctrine of Election follow two weighty Points to be known and
believed; viz. 1. That the Promise of Remission of Sins and Everlasting Life in
the Messiah, is not universal to all, but indefinite to many of all sorts,
kinds and estates: for if the Promise pertains to all, then there can be no
distinction between Man and Man, People and People, in regard of Mercy;
therefore the Opinion of Universal Grace, is erroneous. 3. That though Christ
dyed for all (for so the Scripture says) yet he dyed not effectually for all,
but for all that have Gods Grace to make his Redemption effectual to them by
such effectual Faith as is required to the right Application of Christ's Merits.


Lastly, that we may not with the vulgar run into popular Error touching this
weighty Point, consider these two things: 1. That our Church does not teach,
That God does simply ordain any to Hell fire; but touching Reprobation, the
Doctrine is this, That God has decreed and purposed to glorify his Name in
the due and deserved condemnation of some. 2. That no man from the Doctrine of
Predestination take occasion to live as he list; for in Gods Decree the end and
the means that bring men to that end go always together, and must never be
severed; and therefore such as are ordained to Salvation, are ordained to the
means thereof, Romans 8.30. therefore they sin most grievously, that upon the
immutability of Gods Decree, take occasion to live profanely. Hezekiah, though
he had a promise of Fifteen years addition to his life, yet neglected not the
means of Recovery, to cure his Sore, and to preserve his life.


III.
THe Creation, is that by which God made all things very good, of nothing; that
is, of no matter which was before the Creation, Genesis 1.1. Gods manner of
creating, as also of governing, is such, as that by his Word alone, he without
any Instruments, Means, Assistance or Motion, produced all sorts of things: For
to will any thing with God, is both to be able and to perform it, Heb. 11.3.
Psalm. 148.5. The goodness of the creature is a kind of excellency, by which it
was void of all defect, whether Punishment or Fault. The Creation is of the
World, or Inhabitants in the World. The World is a most beautiful Palace,
framed out of a deformed Substance, and fit to be inhabited. The parts of the
World are the Heavens and the Earth. The Heavens are threefold; The first is
the Air, the second the Sky, the third an Invisible and Incorporeal Essence,
created to be the Seat of all the Blessed, both Men and Angels; this third
Heaven is called Paradise, 2 Cor. 12.4. The Inhabiters of the World are
reasonable creatures, made according to Gods own Image; they are either Angels
or Men, Genesis 1.26. Job 1.6. the Image of God, is the goodness of the Reasonable
Creature, resembling God in holiness, Ephesians. 4.24. The Angels each of them being
created in the beginning, were settled in an upright estate. Man also, after he
was created of God, was set in an excellent estate of Innocence: he was created
perfect both in Body and Soul, and so had continued, had he stood still in
Righteousness: His Soul is an Incorporeal Understanding, and an Immortal
Substance, infused by God into an Instrumental Body, to inform and quicken it
for the operation of certain motions and actions external and internal, by and
without the ministry of the Body, constituting one person, namely, Man: for
whose perfection it was sufficient, if he knew all those things concerning God
and his Works, which God would have him to know; not that he should know all
things, for that had not perfected Man, but transformed him into God. The same
is to be conceived and thought concerning the perfect Wisdom, Righteousness and
Blessedness of Angels.

Touching the Creation of Angels, observe these things; viz. 1. Their Nature:
Angels are Spiritual and Incorporeal Essences, Heb. 2.16. and 1.7. 2. Their
Qualities: They are wise, 2 Samuel 14.17. They are of great might, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7.
2 Samuel 24.17. 2 Kings 19.35. They are swift and of great agility, Isa. 6.6.
Dan. 9.21. and they are wonderfully full of clarity. 3. They are Innumerable,
Genesis 32.1. Dan. 7.10. Mat. 26.53. Heb. 12.22. 4. They are ever in the highest
Heaven, where they always attend upon God, and have society with him, Mat.
18.10. Psalm. 68.17. Mark 12.25. 5. Their Degree: That there are degrees of
Angels it is most plain, Col. 1.16. Romans 8.38. 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. But it is not for
us to search who, or how many be of each Order, neither ought we curiously to
enquire how they are distinguished, whether in Essence, Gifts or Offices, Col.
2.18. 6. Their Office: which is partly to magnify God, and partly to perform
his Commandments, Psalm, 103.20, 21. 7. The establishing of some Angels in that
integrity in which they were created.


Touching Man in the estate of his Innocence, these things are most chiefly to
be regarded; viz. 1. The Place: The garden of Eden, that most pleasant garden,
Genesis 2.15. 2. The Integrity of Man's nature, which was created in Righteousness
and true Holiness. This has two parts: 1. Wisdom, which is a true and perfect
knowledge of God and of his Will, in as much as it is to be performed of man,
yea and of the Counsel of God in all his creatures, Col. 3.10. Genesis 2.19. 2.
Justice, which is a conformity of the Will, Affections and Powers of the Body
to the Will of God.
3. Man's dignity consisting of four parts; viz. 1. His Communion with God, by
which as God rejoiced in his own Image, so also man did fervently love God.
This is apparent by Gods familiar conference with Adam. 2. His Dominion over
all the Creatures of the Earth, Genesis 2.19. Psalm. 8.6. 3. The Decency and
Dignity of the Body, in which, though naked, as nothing was unseemly, so was
there in it imprinted a Princely Majesty, Psalm. 8. Genesis 2.25. 1 Cor. 12.23. 4.
Labor of the body without pain or grief, Genesis 3.17, 19. 4. Subjection to God,
whereby man was bound to perform obedience to the Commandments of God: which
were two; The one was concerning the two Trees; the other, concerning the
Sabbath, Genesis 2.3. 5. His Calling, which is the Service of God, in the
observation of his Commandments, and the dressing of the garden of Eden, Prove.
16.4. Genesis 2.15. 6. His Diet was the Herbs of the Earth, and Fruit of every
Tree, except the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil, Genesis 1.29. and 2.17. 7.
His Free-choyce, both to will and perform the Commandment concerning the two
Trees, and also to neglect and violate the same, whereby we see that our first
Parents were indeed created perfect, but mutable: for so it pleased God to
prepare a way to the execution of his Decree.



There are four kinds of creatures in this world; viz. 1. Bare and naked
Substances without Life, Sense or Reason, as Sun, Moon and Stars; the Sun
serves the Plants, the Plants the Beasts, the Beasts Man, and he God. 2. That
have Substance and Life, but no Sense nor Reason, as Plants, Trees, Herbs. 3.
That have Substance, Life and Sense, but no Reason, as Beasts of the Land, Fish
of the Sea. 4. That have all, as Substance, Life, Sense and Reason, as Man.


Every Creature is good: 1. Partly by Creation, as Sun, Moon, Water, Earth,
Meat, Drink, etc. 2. Partly by Ordination: Thus the Evil Conscience, Hell and
Death, are good, because they are ordained of God for the execution of his
Justice, though in themselves and to us they are evil.


In Creatures there is a twofold goodness; viz. 1. A general and natural
goodness, whereby God accepted and approved all Creatures. 2. A more special
and moral goodness, Revealed in the Moral Law.


Or thus: 1. Uncreated, which is God himself, being absolutely and perfectly
good. 2. Created, whereby the Creature is made good, being the fruit of that
goodness which is essentially in God.


What the Image of God in man is; viz. 1. The Soul it self, together with the
faculties thereof, endewed with Reason and Will. 2. In the Soul, Wisdom and
Knowledge of God, his Will and Works; even such as God requires of us. 3. A
conformity with the Law of God, or Holiness and Righteousness, under which are
comprehended the heart and all affections. 4. Felicity without misery and
corruption; perfect Blessedness, joy, and abundance of all good things, and
glory, wherewith the Nature of man was adorned. 5. The Rule and Dominion of man
over the creatures.


The remnants of the Image of God in man; viz. 1. The Incorporeal Substance of
the Soul, together with the Powers thereof. 2. Many Motions, as of those things
which we know by Sense, as are Natural Principles; some Motions also of God,
his Will and Works. 3. Some prints of Virtues, and an ableness concerning
outward discipline and behavior. 4. The Fruition of many good things. 5. The
Dominion also over the creatures is not wholly lost.


God has preserved those Remnants of his Image in us for these Reasons; viz.
1. That they might be a Testimony of the Bounty of God toward those who were
not worthy of it. 2. That God might use them to the restoring of his Image in
Man. 3. That they might leave the Reprobate without excuse.


The Repairing of the Image of God in us, is the work of all three Persons, and
is in this manner; viz. 1. The Father restores it by his Son. 2. The Son by the
Holy Ghost immediately regenerating us, 2 Cor. 3.18. 3. The Holy Ghost by the
Word; the Gospel is the power of God unto Salvation, Romans 1.16. 4. In this Life
it is only begun in the chosen, augmented to their lives end, and perfected in
the end, as concerning the Soul, but as concerning the whole man at the
Resurrection.


The use of the doctrine of man's creation; viz. 1. We must know, That man was
created without sin, lest God be imagined the Author of sin. 2. Whereas man's
body was fashioned of clay, let us think of our frailty to abhor Pride. 3.
Seeing Gods workmanship in man is so admirable, let us not make it a Sty of
Devils. 4. Seeing God would have Mankind consist of two Sexes, let each have
his due place and honor. 5. Since man was created the Image of God, let his
glory be acknowledged, and let it not be made the Image of Satan. 6. Since Gods
Image in man is impaired by sin, let us bewail the greatness of this
unthankfulness. 7. Seeing the glory restored us by Christ, exceeds our loss by
Adam, let us much the more exceed in thankfulness, profit and increase in
godliness. 8. Seeing the creatures were created for man's use, let us use them
as the Creator has commanded, and not abuse them to the satisfying of our
Lusts. 9. Seeing the Soul is created more excellent then the Body, let our
chiefest care be for the good of our Souls. 10. Seeing the end and blessedness
of man is the participation and communicating of God, his Knowledge and
Worship, let us thither refer all our life and actions to the glory of our
Creator. 11. Seeing part of Mankind are vessels of Wrath, let us magnify the
goodness of God that we are vessels of Mercy. 12. That we may learn and begin
these things in this life, tender and help forward the common Society and
Salvation of others, for which we are born. 13. Since we were created higher
then other creatures, little lower then Angels, let us show forth this
excellency by an answerable holiness.


IV.
REdemption is a Deliverance from our Sins, by the Imputation of the Pains and
Suffering of the due punishment thereof in the person of our Mediator: For
Redemption is ascribed unto the Son, because he is that person which executes
the Fathers will concerning the Redeeming of Mankind, and does immediately
perform the Work of our Redemption; for the Son only was sent into the Flesh,
and has paid the Ransom or Price for our sins, not the Father nor the Spirit.
Now Christ is called the Redeemer of all Mankind, not because all are actually
Redeemed by him, but because no man is Redeemed by any other but Christ only;
the meaning is, he is the only Redeemer of all men who attain this great
benefit of Redeemption and Salvation: Or, he Redeemed all men; that is, in
regard of the Sufficiency of that he did and suffered, for his Passion being
suitable to his Person, his dying was more then equivalent to all the Worlds
perishing everlastingly in Hell: So that wicked men and unbelievers are not
hereby secured, but more justly and deeply damned, as treading under foot the
Son of God, and profaning his Blood: For though Redemption be virtually
Universal, yet the Faithful only have their part in it, being ineffectual to
them as have not the grace of God to receive it. Thus the Sun gives light
generally to all the World, yet are there many particular persons that enjoy it
not. But all that are eternally chosen out of the World into the Church, and
continue using the means of Salvation, are Redeemed; it is otherwise in respect
of all chosen temporally to a certain Office in the Church, as it was with
Judas. Thus Christ in his Passion and Death offers himself to all, but is
given only to the Elect; to all by the Preaching of the Gospel, but he is the
Savior only of the Faithful, Romans 1.16. Now the cause that moved God to send
this Redeemer, was not any foreseen Faith or worthiness of man, nor any merit
or desert by good Works, nor any inherent Righteousness in us, but the
Freegrace and Favor of God, his own Infinite and Incomprehensible love and
goodness.

Redemption is twofold; viz. 1. Corporal, such as that of the Israelites from
Egypt. 2. Spiritual, which is understood of our deliverance by Christ, typified
in the former.


Redemption may be four ways; viz. 1. When the Captive is sent away freely and
voluntarily: Sin and the Devil would never let us go so. 2. When one Captive is
exchanged for another: No creature could be an exchange for man. 3. By a
violent taking away of the Captive by force: Thus only man was not delivered.
4. By paying a Ransom: And this way were we Redeemed by Christ; for the Devil
did hold us Captive by right for Sin, till Christ paid his Blood, Ephesians. 1.7.
Col. 1.14.


Christ is said to Redeem us three ways; viz. 1. Because he alone is both God
and Man, so is neither the Father nor the Holy Ghost, which was necessary to
the Work of our Redemption, Acts 20.28. 2. He alone was appointed of the Father
to work our Redemption, Heb. 3.2. 3. In the Redeemer two things are required;
viz. 1. Power and ability to encounter and overcome the Enemy: This power was
in Christ. 2. The right of Redemption, which is twofold; viz. 1. The Right of
Propriety: This Right Christ has in us as True God, it belonging to the whole
Trinity. 2. The Right of Propinquity: and this Christ has as True Man, and
this he has alone.




Christ takes away our sins three ways; viz. 1. By Imputation, whereby our
sins become his, and his Righteousness made ours, 2 Cor. 5.21. 2. By Expiation
and Propitiation, whereby he removed them out of the sight of God, 1 John 2.23.
3. By Mortification, thereby removing them from us in this life, and in death
by perfect Sanctification.


Or thus; Christ's Blood does save us from all sin: 1. By Expiation, which is
the satisfying of Gods Wrath due to sin, by bearing the heavy burden thereof,
Phil. 1.8. He laid down his life for us, 1 John 3.16. 2. By Sanctification,
which is the virtual diffusing of his Blood in our hearts, and in every corner
thereof, by the working of his Holy Spirit, to the cleansing of them from sin;
so as it has no more dominion over us, Romans 6.3.


This Redemption by Christ is Eternal in two respects: 1. In regard of Eternal
Predestination, which was before the Foundation of the world. 2. In regard that
the virtue of this Redemption does extend it self from the beginning of the
world unto the end thereof, neither is there any other to be looked for.


In this doctrine of Redemption, consider 1. Who are Redeemed; and they only
the Elect of all sorts of people, both before and since the coming of Christ.
2. Who has Redeemed us; that is, Christ alone the onely-Mediator between God
and us, as being the only Head of the Church. 3. That this Redemption is
Spiritual from sin, the cause of Death Eternal, and from Satan the Author of
Sin, and all the ill consequents of sin. 4. Only by the Blood of Christ, the
only purgation from sin. 5. The cause moving Christ thus to Redeem us, which
was the riches of his Grace.


Christ Jesus has made an Atonement between God and us by his Blood, and is
thereby become our Advocate and Redeemer: 1. Because thereby God is well
pleased and his wrath appeased, so that he accounts Christ's Death as a full
Price and sufficient Ransom paid for our sins, Mat. 3.17. Ephesians. 5.2. 2. Christ
took the whole burden of our sins upon his shoulders, presenting himself
before God in our person, and offering us to God in his person: So that he took
upon him our Unrighteousness, and imputed to us his Righteousness, Isa. 53.4,
12. 3. There could otherwise be no Remission of sins: So that it is the Blood
of Christ in the Suffering of the Cross that purges away our sins, Heb. 9.22.
4. Nothing but the Death of Christ could quench the scorching wrath of God, as
a consuming fire kindled against us, and countervail his severe Justice, Heb.
9.5.


In that Christ is said to be the lamb slain from the beginning of the world,
is signified, 1. That he is in respect of the Application of his Merit a
perpetual Sacrifice satisfactory, although the slaying it self is at a certain
time. 2. He was slain typically from all Ages, in Types and Figures, which did
shadow forth his Death to the life. 3. He was slain from the beginning in his
Members, the Saints, as Abel, the Prophets, etc. 4. By the Eternal Decree of
God the Father, he should expiate the sins of the world.


The Doctrine of the Eternity of Christ's Redemption is a threefold Use: 1. Not
to doubt of the Salvation of the Fathers in the Old Testament before Christ
came. 2. Not to Judge, Censure or Condemn our Brethren. 3. Not to despair of
Gods Mercy.


The delivery we have by Christ's Redemption, is fourfold; or Christ has
Redeemed us from a fourfold Bondage; viz. 1. From the Bondage of Blindeness and
Ignorance by the light of his holy Spirit, Ezekiel. 18.2. Tit. 3.3. 2. From the
Bondage of Sin, enduing us with a lively Faith, and regenerating us: From Sin,
which is the perfect, both pardoning of Sin, that it may not for ever be
imputed, and also abolishing of it in us by Regeneration or Newness of life,
which is begun here, but to be perfected in the world to come. 3. From the
Bondage of Death and Corruption by the work of his Redemption, Romans 8.21. 1
Cor. 15.54. From Death, both from Desperation, or the Feeling of Gods Wrath,
which being in the wicked here begun, shall continue everlastingly; and from
Corporal Death, and all Calamities and Miseries, by our Resurrection and
Glorification. 4. From the Bondage of the Law, by taking away the exaction and
strict urging of perfect obedience, Gal. 3.13.


The use that we are to make of our Redemption: 1. To hate, loath and detest
all sin whatsoever. 2. To glorify Christ both in Soul and in Body. 3. To live
wholly unto him, not to our selves. 4. To take heed of defiling our selves
again with sin. 5. To love Christ unfeignedly, willingly, perpetually. 6. To
live and walk as becomes those that are Redeemed.


The use that we are to make of the Freeness of Christ's Redeeming us without
any desert of ours; viz. 1. Not to abuse Gods Mercy by Carnal Presumption. 2.
To accept of it, and Repent more speedily. 3. Never to Despair of this Mercy
finally and totally. 4. To give all possible Praise and Thanks for ever for
this unspeakable Mercy.


V.
VOcation is that General Calling whereby a man is called out of the world to
be a Child of God, a Member of Christ, and Heir of the Kingdom of Heaven. This
Calling belongs to every one within the compass of the Church, not any one
excepted: for this General Calling is the Calling of Christianity, which is
common to all that live in the Church of God. An effectual Calling, or a
Calling to Grace effectually, is, whereby a sinner being severed from the world
is entertained into Gods Family, Ephesians. 2.17, 19. Now though all the Called are
Members of Christ, yet we must know, That of the Members of Christ some are
living, some dying: A living Member of Christ, is every one Elected, which
being ingrafted by Faith and the Spirit into Christ, does feel and show forth
the power of Christ in him: A dying or decaying Member, is every one truly
ingrafted into Christ, who has no feeling of the power and efficacy of the
quickening Spirit in him; he is like to a benumbed Leg without Sense, which
indeed is a part of man's body, and yet receives no nourishment. They who are
effectually called, are only the Elect; for whom God Electeth, them he calls
in the time appointed for the same purpose. This Calling of the Elect being
nothing else but a singling and a severing of them out of this vile world, and
the customs thereof, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13, 14. to be Citizens of the Kingdom of Glory
after this life, Ephesians. 2.19. And this severing or choosing of the Elect out of
the world, is then performed, when God by his holy Spirit endueth them with
true saving Faith, Col. 2.7. Joh. 15.19. This effectual Calling to Christ and
to his Gospel, in which the Elect are only called, is a benefit and effect of
our Predestination; because it is by the Purpose and Grace of God which is
given us in Christ, 2 Timothy 1.9. Romans 8.30. it is not Universal to all, for
Christ is Hidden Manna, Rev. 2.17. therefore effectual Vocation is definite and
particular; and those only whom God had before predestinate, them he called,
Romans 30. So many as were ordained to life everlasting, believed, Acts 13.48.
that is, were called unto the faith. It is not given to all to understand the
mysteries of the kingdom, Mat. 13.11. These things are hid from most of the
wise of the world, and revealed unto Babes, Mat. 11.25. All therefore are not
called effectually.

The Calling of God is threefold; viz. 1. Gods general Calling, whereby he
calls all men to Repentance by the Gospel, and so to life Eternal, Romans 8.30.
and 11.29. 2. His particular Calling, when he calls and assigns men to some
particular estate and duty, in Family, Church, or Commonwealth. 3. God calls
some men to some private personal Duty, which he designeth not to others, but
to be done by them alone. Such a Calling had he assigned him that would needs
be perfect, Go, sell all that thou have, etc. And to Abraham, when he called
him to leave his Country, his Kindred, his Lands and Possessions, etc. Heb.
11.8.


For the better conceiving of the Nature of Effectual Vocation, consider these
6 Points; viz. 1. The Ground and Foundation of it, namely, Gods eternal free
Election of us unto life Everlasting, 2 Timothy 1.9. 2. The means thereof, both
Preparing and Instrumental: 1. The Reading of the Scripture, serving to beget a
general Historical Faith. 2. Afflictions in Body, Goods, Name. Friends or
otherwise, tending to humble a man, and prepare his heart as soft ground. 3.
The denouncing of Gods Judgments, and Threats of the Law. 4. The Preaching of
the glad Tidings of the Gospel, which is the most principal and effectual means
of this special and effectual Vocation, 2 Thessalonians. 2.14.
3. The Persons that are called, those are mentioned Romans 30. namely, those
whom he had before predestined. 4. The Time of this Calling. The particular
time of any man's Calling is not revealed, but laid up in the Secret Counsel of
God, in whose hands Times and Seasons are; some at the Sixth hour, some at the
Ninth, and others at the Eleventh, etc. Defer not therefore, but accept the
Acceptable time. 5. Wherein this effectual Calling does consist, viz. both in
the outward and inward Calling; especially in the inward, when the heart is
pierced, Psalm. 40.6. from stone, changed into a heart of flesh, made tractable
and pliable, Ezekiel 11.19. a heart like that of Lydia's, Acts 16.15. 6. The
Excellency of this Calling, being a great work, as was the Creation of man at
first, Romans 4.18. 2 Cor. 4.6. yea, this effectual Calling goes beyond the work
of our Creation: for here a man is taken out of the first Adam and set into the
second; in the Creation God only called things that were not, as though they
were; but here God calls not only things that are not, but things that would
not, and refuse to be. To raise a man out of the Blood of Christ, is more then
to raise Eve out of Adams side; to raise a dead Soul from the death of Sin, far
more glorious and powerful then to raise a dead body from bodily death; to
raise a man to supernatural life, far greater then to a Natural only.


The means whereby God executes this effectual Calling; viz. 1. The Saving
Hearing of the Word of God; that is, when the Word preached comes savingly to
one dead in his sins, and does not so much as dream of his Salvation, Ezekiel.
16.6. Isa. 55.1. John 1.12. Romans 7.7. 1 John 2.27. Acts 16.14. Psalm. 40.6. 2.
The Mollifying of the Heart, which must be bruised in pieces, that it may be
fit to receive Gods Saving Grace offered unto it, Ezekiel. 11.19. The heart is
mollified by the Spirit of God, and bruised by the knowledge of the Law, of
Sin, and the Punishment due for Sin, by a feeling of the Wrath of God for the
same sins, and by a holy desperation of a man's own power in the obtaining of
eternal life, Acts 2.37. 3. Faith, which is a miraculous and supernatural
Faculty of the heart, apprehending Christ being applied by the operation of the
Holy Ghost, and receiving him to it self, Joh. 1.12.


The main duty of a Christian Calling are most chiefly these: 1. Invocation of
the Name of God in Christ, Acts 9.14. 1 Cor. 1.2. 2. As much as possible we
can, to further the good estate of the true Church of God, Psalm. 122.6. 3. That
every one become a Servant to his Brother in all the duties of Love, 1 Cor.
9.19. Gal. 5.13. 4. To walk worthy that Calling whereto God has called us,
Ephesians. 4.1.


The use we are to make of Gods Calling; viz. 1. Seeing we are called of God
himself in the Ministry of the Word, we must labor to join the inward Calling
with it, which is higher then that, by having first a grief because we cannot
believe; next a ready mind; then an endeavor to believe; and lastly a sorrow
because we believe no more, and fail so much in the Service of God. 2. We must
walk worthy of our Calling, being holy in our conversation, as he that has
called us is holy; and there must be the same end of our lives which is of Gods
Calling, that is, to bring us to Heaven. The end of our being in the world, is
to be called out of the world.


VI.
Justification is that benefit whereby God does pardon and forgive us all our
sins for Christ's sake, and does acquit us and absolve us from the guilt of
them, and does accept us as Righteous before him in Christ: So that
Justification is the Absolving of a sinner, believing in Christ, from sin and
the guilt thereof, and the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ unto him,
and the Acceptance to Life Eternal, freely for the Merits of Christ, with
application of Christ on our part by Faith. The Papists say, That Faith and
Works both are required to Justify; we say, That nothing is required but
Faith, and that Works follow Faith: They say, Faith and Works; we say, Faith
only, but it must be an effectual Faith, that is, a working Faith. This
Proposition (We are justified by Faith) being legally understood with the
Papists, is not true, but Blasphemous; but being taken Evangelically, that is,
with relation to Christ's Merit, it is true: For the correlative of Faith is the
Merit of Christ, which Faith also as a joint relative or correlative
respects, and as an instrument apprehends, being the true Object of Faith.
Good Works and Faith are disjoined in the work of Justification before God, but
they are conjoined in the whole course of our lives and coversation, both
before God and Man. No work in man but Faith is required to his Justification,
but it must be an effectual, that is, a Living working, not a dead Faith; and
in our lives Faith and Works must go hand in hand together. In the Fire is both
heat and light, yet in the warming of the body the heat has force only, and
not the light, which though to many other uses serves necessarily: Even so in a
child of God are required both Faith and Works, but to justify him Faith
only is required, though Works be necessary through his whole life; for they
justify us before men, and give us a Testimony of our Justification before
God, not only in our own hearts, but from the Lord, Jam. 2.21. We may not
therefore content our selves with a Faith in speculation, void of Works, for
such is not true Faith.

There is a twofold Justification; viz. 1. A Justification of the Person; so
was Abraham justified by Faith. 2. A Justification of the Faith of the Person;
so Abraham justified his Faith by his Works; his Works justify him that he was
no Hypocrite; and as touching Sin, his Faith justifies him, and shows that he
was made Righteous.


Again, Justification is twofold; viz. 1. Legal, which is the working of a
conformity with God, or with the Law of God in us, when as we are Regenerated.
2. Evangelical, which is an Application of the Evangelical Justice unto us, but
not a transfusion of the quality into us: or, It is an Imputation of another
Justice which is without us, and an Absolving of us in Judgment.


Christ's Righteousness is made ours by a double Application; viz. 1. The former
is Gods, who in respect of that fulfilling of the Law performed by Christ,
accepts us, and applies the same unto us. 2. We then also apply unto our
selves the fulfilling of the Law performed by Christ, when we are steadfastly
persuaded that God does impute, apply, and give it unto us, and for it imputes
us for Just, absolving us of all guilt.


Christ is in respect of our Justification 1. As the Object or Matter wherein
our Justice is. 2. As the Impellent cause, because he obtains. 3. As the
chief Efficient cause, 1. Because he together with his Father does justify us.
2. Because he gives us Faith whereby we believe and apprehend it.



We are justified by Christ's Merit only for these Reasons; viz. 1. For his
Glory, that his Sacrifice might not be extenuated and made of less value. 2.
For our Comfort, that we may be assured that our Justice does not depend upon
our own Works, but upon the Sacrifice of Christ only, for otherwise we should
lose it many Millions of times.


By Christ's Righteousness we are to understand two things; viz. 1. His
Sufferings, especially in his Death and Passion. 2. His Obedience in fulfilling
the Law, both which go together: for Christ in Suffering obeyed, and Obeying
suffered.


In Justification consider these five things; viz. 1. There must be Faith,
whereby we may receive the benefits of God offered unto us in his Son; so we
are justified, not for Faith as a Merit, but by Faith as an Instrument. 2.
There is an Absolving of the Sinner from sin. 3. Then the Righteousness of
Christ is imputed to him. 4. This Righteousness being imputed, God accepts us
to life. 5. All this is freely for the Merit of Christ, excluding all Humane
Merit or Worthiness in man whatsoever, freely by Grace not by Works, Ephesians. 5.8,
9.


The Signs or Effects of Justification; viz. 1. The true and sincere loving of
God, Luke 7.47. 2. Inward peace of conscience, Romans 5.1. 3. Rejoicing in
Troubles and Afflictions, Romans 5.3. 4. Sanctimony and holiness of life, a
practice of piety and godliness, Romans 6.22.


Two Reasons why the faithful cannot be justified by good Works: 1. Because
Justification, and therefore Sanctification and Salvation, goes before Good
Works; for the Holy Ghost joining us with Christ, makes us fit, by Regeneration
to do them: So that by Faith being made one with Christ, we are justified and
saved by the Imputation of his most perfect Holiness and Righteousness, the
effects or fruits whereof be the Good Works that we do. 2. Because the Faithful
after Regeneration cannot fulfill the Law, Romans 7.14, 18. which is necessarily
required for Salvation by Good Works; yea, we are justified by Faith, without
the Works of the Law, Romans 3.28.


The Reasons why Good Works are required, seeing they justify not: 1. Because
they evidence our Right in Christ. 2. Because God rewards us according to our
works. 3. Because they are Necessary, though not to Justification.


VII.
SAnctisication is an inward change of a man justified, whereby the Image of
God is restored in him; or that whereby a man being justified, is cleansed more
and more from the corruption of Nature, laboring to rise up daily to newness of
life, living in a continual pra^tice of Holiness. To be sanctified,
comprehends both a purging from the corruption of Nature, and an enduing us
with inward Righteousness. This corruption of sin is purged out of us by the
Merits and Power of Christ's death, Romans 6.4. which being by Faith applied, is
as a Corasive to abate, consume and weaken the power of all sin. And we are
endued with inward Righteousness through the virtue of Christ's Resurrection,
Romans 6.5, 6. which being applied by Faith, is as a Restorative to revive a man
that is dead in sin to newness of life.

This Sanctification is wrought in every part both of Body and Soul, 1 Thessalonians.
5.23. it is begun in this life, in which the Faithful receive only the
First Fruits of the Spirit, and it is not finished before the end of this life,
Romans 8.23. 2 Cor. 5.2, 3. And the Graces which do usually show themselves in
the heart of a man sanctified, are the hatred of Sin and love of Righteousness,
Psalm. 119.113. Justification goes with Sanctification, though Justification be
before in Nature, yet they are wrought at the same time: for when God accepts a
man's person, then is he made just, who is also sanctified: And know, That
Sanctification is such a gift of God, as that in changing the man, it does not
change the substance of the Body, or the faculties of the Soul; but the
corruption, disorder and sinfulness of man, it rectifieth, but abolisheth not
affections. Sanctification flows to us, not from our Parents, though
regenerate, but only from Christ, who is made of God unto us Sanctification, 1
Cor. 1.30. Col. 1.19. in whom are hid all the treasures of it, of whose fullness
we receive Grace for Grace, Joh. 1.16. Christ's Holiness, as he is Man, being
the Root of our Sanctification, as Adams Unrighteousness was of our corruption.

Thus Sanctification is nothing else but the repairing of the Image of God in
us, which was lost in Adam; which Image of God was when the understanding was
enlightened with the true knowledge of God and of his Worship, instead whereof
by the Fall came the Ignorance of God and his Service, Wickedness, hating
Virtue, and loving Sin, and weakness to every thing that is good. Now
Sanctification amendeth the corruption planted in our minds, and repaireth the
decay of the Soul, otherwise cast away and undone by Original Sin; for man by
Nature is an enemy to God, full of wickedness, and a servant of Sin. This
Natural corruption of the Mind, Will and Affections, which is amended by
Sanctification, we call the Flesh; the created Qualities of Holiness wrought in
the said Faculties by the Holy Ghost, we call Spirit; and Grace is the
effectual working of the Truth of the Gospel, to the making of us indeed
partakers of the Grace whereby we are justified before God. Now no man can see
the Riches of Christ so as to be affected with them, without the help of the
Spirit; for there is a manner of seeing proper only to the Saints, and that is
the work of the Spirit in them; otherwise we may read the Scriptures a
thousand times over, we may understand them, yet we shall not be affected with
them, till the Holy Ghost show them unto us. This is the secret of God, which
he reveals to those whom he means to save.

Now as the evidence of our Justification is a sound and true Faith; so the
evidence of our Sanctification is a good and clear conscience; which
Sanctification ever presupposes Justification, it being a fruit and evidence
thereof, in which respect we are said to be justified by Works, Jam. 2.24. that
is, declared or manifested to be justified by Works, which are the fruits of
Sanctification, and that the fruits of Justification. And we must likewise
know, That the Gifts of Sanctification that are simply necessary to Salvation,
without which no man of years of discretion can enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, as Faith and Repentance (considered in themselves) may both wholly and
finally be lost: for there is nothing in them or their Nature, in us or our
Nature, to make them or us unchangeable. Angels fell when left unto themselves;
and nothing in its own Nature is unchangeable but God, by whose Grace of
corroboration, unless those Graces of absolute necessity be confirmed in us,
they may perish fully and finally: So that the Reason why the Elect after their
calling do not fall from Grace, is not in the nature of Faith, or the constancy
of Grace it self, but proceeds wholly from the merciful Promise of God made
unto the Faithful.

The parts of Sanctification; viz. 1. Mortification, whereby the power, tyranny
and strength of Original sin is weakened, and also by little and little
abolished. 2. Vivification or Quickening, which is, when Christ dwells and
reigns in our hearts by his Spirit, so as we can say, We henceforth live not,
but Christ in us.


Another division of Sanctification is taken from the Faculties of Man; as the
Sanctification 1. Of the Mind, being that part of man which frames the
Reason; this Paul calls, Ephesians. 4.5. The Spirit of the mind, which must be
renewed; the Sanctification whereof is called, Rev. 3. The Eye Salve, for it is
a Grace clearing the dark Mind and dim Understanding, enlightening it with the
true knowledge of Gods Word. 2. Of the Memory, which is an aptness by Grace to
keep good things, specially the Doctrine of Salvation, when it can retain what
is good and agreeable to Gods Will, whereby David was preserved from sinning,
Psalm. 119.11. 3. Of the Conscience, which is an aptness to testify always
truly that a man's sins are pardoned, and that he preserves in his heart a care
to please God, 2 Cor. 1.12. This Testimony was Paul's rejoicing, and Hezekiahs
comfort on his deathbed; and this is when the conscience checks for the least
sins before actual Repentance. 4. Of the Will, when God gives Grace truly to
will good, as to Believe, Fear, and Obey God; when it can choose that which is
acceptable to God, and resist that which is evil; when a man can say, That
though he sinde not to perform that which is good, yet to will good is present
with him, Romans 1.18. 5. Of the Affections, which chiefly are Zeal of Gods
Glory, The Fear of God, Hatred of Sin, Joy of heart for the approach of the
second coming of Christ, A regard of Gods Commandments, A contentment and
quietness of mind in all conditions of life, Love to God in Christ, and to
Christ in Man, 2 Cor. 5.14. Romans 9.3. An high Estimation of Christ and his
Blood above all things in the world, Phil. 3.8. To love our Neighbor, and to
have a base Estimation of our selves in regard of our sins and corruptions. 6.
Of the Appetite, which is a holy ordering of our desires in Meat, Drink,
Apparel, Riches, etc. And the practice of Sobriety, Chastity and Contentation,
by which the Appetite must be governed. 7. Of the Body, when all the Members of
it are carefully kept and preserved from being the means to execute any sin,
and are made the Instruments of Righteousness. 8. Of the Life, which stands
principally in three things: 1. In an Endeavor to do the Will of God, that
herein we may testify our Thankfulness. 2. In Testifying our love to God in
man. 3. In Denial of our selves, and resigning our selves up wholly to the Lord.



The first Beginnings and Motions of Sanctification are these: 1. To feel our
inward corruptions, and to be displeased with our selves for them. 2. To begin
to hate sin, and to grieve so often as we offend God. 3. To avoid the occasions
of sin, and to endeavor to do our duty, using good means. 4. To desire to sin
no more, and to pray to God for his Grace.


That we may not deceive our selves in this point of Sanctification, consider,
That the Gifts and Graces of Gods Spirit are of two sorts; viz. 1. General and
common Graces, whereby the corruption of man's Nature is only restrained and
limited, for the maintaining of civil Societies, that man with man may live in
some order and quietness. These and such like, evil men may have, for they are
not sanctifying Virtues, but rather shadows thereof, which may be utterly taken
away and quite lost, as if they had never been given, never had been received.
2. More special and particular Graces, whereby the corruption of man's Nature is
mortified, and in some part abolished, and the Graces of Gods Image are renewed
in man, which in the Regenerate are true Christian virtues indeed. These are of
an higher nature, and of greater importance then the former, and are proper
only to the sanctified Servants of God; such are Faith, Repentance,
Regeneration, and other fruits of Election: These shall never be quite lost.


The gifts pertaining to salvation are also of two sorts; viz. 1. Simply
Necessary, without which a man cannot be saved; such are Faith and
Sanctification, which is begun in this life, where though it come not to full
perfection (contrary to the Anabaptists Dream) yet can never be wholly lost. 2.
Others less Necessary, not always going with Faith, but sometimes only, and
sometimes are separated for a time from it; of this sort are a plentiful
feeling of Gods favor, boldness in Prayer, joy in the Holy Ghost, and a full
assurance of Salvation; these being not absolutely necessary, nor always found
in them (though only proper to them) may for a time be wholly lost in the best
and most approved Servants of God.


The outward familiar, general, and easily discernable marks of Difference
betwixt the state of saving Grace and formal Hypocrisy; viz. 1. The power of
Grace does beget in a Regenerate man a watchfulness, care and conscience of
smaller offenses, of secret sins, of sinful thoughts, of appearances of evil,
of all occasions of sin, of profane company, of giving just offense in
indifferent actions, and the like: The unregenerate Hypocrite takes not these
things much to heart. 2. The power of Saving Grace does subdue and sanctify
our affections with a conscionable and holy moderation, so that they become
serviceable to the Glory of God, and for a more resolute carriage of good
causes, and zealous discharge of all Christian duties; but the bridling of
Passions in the Formal Hypocrite is not so much of Conscience, as of artificial
Policy for advantage, and by the guidance of Moral discretion. 3. Every child
of God by the power of Saving Grace does hunger and thirst after all those
means God has appointed, or offers for his furtherance in the way to Heaven,
and does make a holy use of whatsoever is publicly or privately laid upon him
for his amendment, therefore he continually profits and proceeds in
Sanctification by his Word, his Judgments and his Mercies; by the exercise,
observation and sense whereof he grows sensible in heavenly knowledge, Faith,
Humiliation, Repentance, Thankfulness, and all other Spiritual Graces: But the
Hypocrite so far only regards them, as they further his Temporal Happiness, or
as his neglect of them may by consequence threaten danger to his worldly estate.


As the gifts of Gods Spirit are twofold, so the Grace of God in Man is also
twofold; viz. 1. Restraining, which bridleth the corruptions of men's hearts
from breaking forth into outward actions, for the common good, that Societies
may be preserved, and one man may live orderly with another. 2. Renewing, which
does not only restrain the corruption, but also mortifieth sin, and renews the
heart daily more and more; and the least beginnings of Grace, be they never so
weak, are accepted of God, provided they be not fleeting, but constant and
settled.


How God saves men; viz. 1. By giving of the first Grace, which has nine
several actions, or God gives this first Grace by nine operations, but the
first four are indeed no infallible fruits of Grace, for so far a Reprobate may
go: 1. The outward means of Salvation, as the Ministry, Crosses, etc. 2. A
consideration of the Law of God. 3. A consideration of our particular peculiar
sins. 4. A smiting of the heart with legal fear. 5. A stirring up of the mind
after the Promises of Salvation in the Gospel. 6. A kindling in the heart some
sparks of Faith. 7. Faiths victory by invocation over Doubting, Distrust and
Despair. 8. A quieting of the Conscience touching the Souls Salvation. 9. Grace
to endeavor to obey Gods Commandments by New-Obedience.
2. By giving of the second Grace, which is nothing else but the continuance of
the first Grace given; as God does by his Providence in preserving what he
created at the beginning. Among all the Graces of God, which are many, the
principal, the most special and necessary to Salvation, are Knowledge, Faith,
Repentance, Hope and Charity; and when God begins to kindle any seeds or sparks
of Grace in the heart, that is, a will and desire to believe, and grace to
strive against Doubting and Despair, at the same instant he justifies the
sinner, and withal begins the work of Sanctification in him.


Again, there are two ways or Covenants whereby God offers Salvation to men;
viz. 1. Of Works, by which Adam had been saved, had he stood in his Innocence.
2. Of Grace, which is a Board given us against Shipwreck. This Covenant of
Grace is twofold; viz. 1. Absolute and peculiar, as only to the Elect, Jer.
31. Ezekiel. 36. the choycest of all the gifts of Grace being to have Grace to
accept of Christ; for though Christ be offered to all, yet God intends him
only to the Elect, and such as to whom he gives power, grace and ability by
Faith and Repentance to accept him. Though the Papists say, but most falsely,
That his intention is the same to all, to Judas as to Peter, and that all have
sufficient grace to receive him. 2. Conditional, that is, to all men; as, if
you believe you shall be saved.



All they who are sanctified, have the true Testimony of the Spirit, known from
carnal Presumption 1. By the Means, whereby the true Testimony of the Holy
Ghost is wrought ordinarily, as Reading, Hearing, Prayer, Meditation, use of
the Sacraments, etc. 2. By the Effects and Fruits of the Spirit, as Prayer,
Invocation, etc.


The Testimony of the Spirit is wrought two ways; viz. 1. By clearing the
Promises, shining into our hearts by such a light as makes us able To Discern
them. To Believe them. To Assent unto them.
2. By an immediate voice, by which he speaks immediately to our Spirits; so
that a man shall never be so persuaded as to have any sure or sound comfort by
the Ministry of the Word, be it never so powerful, till there be a work of the
Spirit; which having done its work upon us, our understandings are presently
enlightened, our desires ravished, and our conversations reformed; for
sanctified Knowledge, holy Affections, and good Actions, are never disjoined.


The Properties whereby the joy of Spirit differs from carnal joy: 1. The joy
of Spirit is brought forth of sorrow for sin, and for the want of Christ. 2. It
is the fruit of Righteousness, that is, flowing from Christ, believed to be
made unto us by God, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption. 3.
It is founded in the holy use of the Word, Sacraments, Prayer, and in the
practice of Christian Duties. 4. It is so fixed and rooted in the heart that it
cannot be removed. 5. It is eternal, abiding in the mind, not only now, but
for ever.


The Battle of the Flesh and Spirit: 1. The Flesh is puffed up with Ignorance
and love of the World; but the Spirit is endued with the Knowledge, Love, and
Fear of God. 2. The Flesh striveth to follow its own pleasures and wicked
affections; but the Spirit gives it self to this one thing, That it may obey
God, and set forth his Glory. 3. The Flesh is full of distrust and impatience;
but the Spirit humbles it self under the mighty hand of God, rests in his
Mercy, and fashioneth it self unto his Will. 4. The Flesh holds us down in
these earthly things; but the Spirit lifts us up into heaven.


The Spirits defensive weapons to fight with the Devil in the combat of the
Flesh; viz. Ephesians. 6. 1. The Girdle of Verity; that is, Constancy in the Doctrine
and Truth of God. 2. We must stand fast, having our loins girt about with
Verity, which is to be grounded in the settled Truth of Gods Word, without
inconstancy. 3. We must put on the Breastplate of Righteousness, which is a
settled purpose not to displease God in any thing, though never so seeming good
in it self. 4. We must have our feet shod with the Preparation of the Gospel of
peace; which is, a constant resolution to profess the Truth, should it cost us
all the world can yield us. 5. Above all to take the shield of Faith, which is
such a Faith as relieth wholly on God in Christ, with particular application,
which will quench the fiery darts of the wicked. 6. To take the Helmet of
Salvation, which is to stand assured that our Salvation is sealed up unto us;
which assurance will enable us to withstand all the assaults of the Devil.


The Spirits offensive weapons to fight with the Devil in the combat of the
Flesh; viz. 1. We must get the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God,
wherewith our Head and Captain Christ did repel the Devil. 2. We must Pray with
all manner of Prayer and Supplication in the Spirit, and watch thereunto with
all perseverance.


The manner how we must behave our selves in this combat of the Spirit with the
Flesh; viz. 1. Kill sin in the very conception, otherwise it will grow from
motion to liking, from liking to consent, from consent to action, from action
to custom, from custom to hardness of heart, and thence to the height of all
impiety. 2. Be sure to put no confidence in thine own strength. 3. Believe not
the Devil, though he bring Truth in his mouth. 4. Be careful ever to make
resistance to it, either by weakening the ability of sin, by taking away all
occasion to sin, and by making a holy Covenant with every Member and Faculty of
Soul and Body never to admit it, or else by opposing the contrary virtue to
sin. 5. That thou be careful never to compare the pain of Resistance with the
pleasure of Sin, but rather the gripings of Conscience with the pain of
Resistance. 6. Thou must be careful to find out the subtilties, devices and
sleights of the Devil, by which he does assault thee very cunningly. 7. When
once thou have given the Devil the foil, the Flesh will be the less able to
assault thee, and thou the more able to resist it, but then be sure still to
stand well upon thy guard, and keep diligent watch.


The weapons whereby Satan labors to wound our fervency and faithfulness in the
duties of Holiness, and to hinder the entire exercise of the Graces of
Sanctification; viz. 1. Prosperity, and freedom from discomforts and misery,
thereby to beget in our hearts worldliness and security, the two great and
dangerous Consumptions of Spiritual Life; the one makes us insensible of Gods
Mercies and our own Happiness; the other, of Gods Judgments and our own
Misery. 2. By fasteniug upon us unchearfulness and unprofitableness in the
means of the preservation of Grace, by making us cold and negligent, or only
formal or cursory in the daily examination of our Consciences, and in the
exercise of holy duties, whereby there ever follows a languishing and decay of
the Life of Grace. 3. By casting us upon ungodly and profane company, which
has a secret bewitching power to transform others into their own fashions and
conditions, yea to make them sometimes to condemn their former forwardness and
zeal in the service of God. 4. By putting into our heads some inordinate plot
and forecast for preferment and greatness; and then farewell zeal, farewell Gods
children, yea his Service, yea and himself too; for we then think we mis-time
our employment, if we make bold to borrow any from Policy to bestow it on
Religion.


The Signs whereby the Son of God may be discerned from a child of the Devil:
1. Truly to believe in the Name of the Son of God. 2. An hearty desire and
earnest endeavor to be cleansed of his corruptions. 3. The love of a true
Christian, because he is a true Christian.


The true Testimony of our Conscience may be discerned thus; viz. 1. By the
grief of heart for offending God, called Godly Sorrow. 2. By a resolute purpose
of the heart, and endeavor of the whole man to obey God in all things. 3. By
savoring the things of the Spirit; that is, by doing the works of the Spirit
with joy and alacrity of heart.


The working and property of saving Grace, vouchsafed peculiarly to Gods
Children, which does translate them from the corruption of Nature to a state of
supernatural Blessedness, may be thus conceived and understood; viz. 1. It
seats it self in the heart. 2. It is dispersed over all the powers and parts
both of Soul and Body, over all the actions and duties whatsoever that are
required of man. 3. It softneth and changes the heart, and purges the inmost
thoughts. 4. It awakes the Conscience, and makes it tender and sensible of the
least sin. 5. It sanctifies the Affections, and conforms the Will unto the
Will of God. 6. It illightens the Understanding with Saving Knowledge. 7. It
stores the Memory with many good lessons for Comfort, Instruction and
Direction. 8. It seasoneth the speech with Grace. 9. It so rectifies and guides
all a man's Actions, that they proceed from Faith, warrantable out of Gods Word,
accomplished by good means, and wholly directed to Gods Glory. 10. It kindles
in us a desire and zeal for the Salvation of the Souls of others, especially of
all those that any way depend upon us.


The Signs of the Sanctified, or the Signs whereby all men may certainly know
whether they are Sanctified, Regenerated and shall be saved; viz. 1. A
Separation of themselves from wicked and profane men, and a purging themselves
from the sins of the Times, 2 Timothy 2.21. 2. The Integrity of Soul, sincerity
and uprightness in heart in the whole course of Gods Worship, Job 1.8. 3. A
reverent hearing, and careful practicing of Gods Word, and a keeping of his
Covenants, Exodus 19.5. 4. A Soul-ravishing delight in his Word, with often and
fervent Prayer. 5. A Love to Gods Children, and a zeal of his Glory. 6. A
Denial of our selves, and a patient bearing of the Cross with profit and
comfort. 7. Faithfulness in our Callings, with a just and conscionable dealing
in all our actions amongst men.


Reasons that may enforce us to labor for this Sanctification; viz. 1. It is
the Will of God that we should be holy, all impurity being contrary to his
Will, 1 Thessalonians. 4.3. 2. It is the end of our Vocation and Calling, not to live
in filthy lusts and uncleanness, 1 Thessalonians. 4.7. 3. It is the end of our
Election, Ephesians. 1.4. we are not elected to live as we list. 4. Because hereby we
like obedient Children resemble our heavenly Father, who is Holiness it self, 1
Pet. 1.15, 16. 5. Without this Holiness we have no part in the New Birth, Rev.
20.6. 6. Without this Holiness we shall never see the Lord, Heb. 12.14.


VIII.
A Doption arises from our Union with Christ, and is that whereby they which
are justified are accounted of God as his own children; it is annexed to
Justification, and thereby all such as are predestinate to be Adopted, receive
power to be actually accounted the Sons of God by Christ, Ephesians. 1.5. from whose
Obedience, whereby he stood in subjection to the Law, this Adoption springs.
Hence it is that we are freed from under the Law, and have given unto us even
the Adoption of Sons. And this alone is that whereby we stand before the
Tribunal Seat of God, which also we are to oppose to the Judgment of God, to
Hell, Death and Condemnation. In this Grace of Adoption there be two Actions of
God; the one is Acceptance, whereby God accepts men for his children; the
other is Regeneration, whereby men are born of God, when the Image of God is
restored in them in Righteousness and true Holiness. The outward means of
Adoption is Baptism; not Baptism alone, but Baptism joined with Faith: for the
Scripture speaking of Baptism, comprehends both the outward and the inward
Baptism, which is the inward Baptism of the Spirit, Mat. 3.11. and 1 Pet. 3.21.
Now this Adoption gives us Assurance of Salvation; for he that is the Adopted
Son of God shall undoubtedly be saved, Romans 3.2. Moses had an higher esteem of
this Grace of Adoption, when he chose rather to be the Child of God, then the
Heir of an Earthly Prince, Heb. 11.25. So did David, who though a King, yet
regardless of his Royalty, sets it at naught in regard of the Blessing of
Adoption, who otherwise could never have said, That the Lord, not the Kingdom
of Israel, was his Portion, Psalm. 16. And so also must we have an high esteem
thereof, if we hope to have Heaven thereby.

Two Testimonies of our Adoption, whereby we may know that we are Adopted; viz.
1. The Spirit of God dwelling in us, and testifying to our Spirit that we are
the children of God. 2. Our Spirit, that is, our Conscience sanctified and
renewed by the Holy Ghost.


Six Notes of our Adoption out of the six Petitions of the Lords-Prayer; viz.
1. An earnest and hearty desire in all things to further the glory of God. 2. A
care and readiness to resign our selves in subjection to God, to be ruled by
his Word and Spirit in thought, word and deed. 3. A sincere endeavor to do his
Will in all things, making conscience of every evil. 4. Upright walking in a
man's lawful Calling, yet still by Faith relying on Gods Providence. 5. Every
day to humble a man's self before God for his offenses, seeking his favor in
Christ. 6. A continual Combat between the Flesh and the Spirit, for otherwise
Corruption would prevail over the whole man.


The Benefit the Children of God have by Adoption, viz. 1. The Elect child of
God is hereby made a Brother of Christ. 2. He is a King, and the Kingdom of
Heaven is his Inheritance. 3. He is Lord over all the Creatures, except the
Angels. 4. The holy Angels minister unto him for his good, they guard him and
watch about him. 5. All things, yea grievous afflictions and sin it self turn
to his good, though in its own nature it be never so hurtful. 6. Being thus
Adopted, he may look for comfort at Gods hand, answerable to the measure of his
afflictions, as God has promised. 7. God will provide all things necessary for
the Souls and Bodies of his Adopted ones, Mat. 6.26. So that they who drown
themselves in worldly cares, distrusting the Providence of God, live like
fatherless children. 8. In that we are children, we have liberty to come into
the presence of God, and to pray unto him, Ephesians. 3.12. 9. Nothing shall hurt
them that are the children of God, Psalm. 91.13. 10. God will bear with the
infirmities and frailties of them that be his children, if there be in them a
care to please him, with a purpose of not sinning, Mal. 3.17. Let not any man
hence sin, 'cause Grace does abound.


Duties from Adoption; viz. 1. If ye be the children of God, then walk worthy
your Profession and Calling; for if we live according to the lusts of our
flesh, as the men of the world do, whatsoever we profess, we are in truth the
children of the Devil, Joh. 8.44. and 1 John 3. 2. We must use every day to
bring our selves into the presence of God, and we must do all things as in his
sight and presence, presenting our selves unto him as Instruments of his Glory
in doing of his Will. This is the honor the child of God owes unto him, Mal.
1.6. 3. Our care must be, according to the measure of Grace, to resemble Christ
in all good Virtues and holy Conversation; for he is our eldest Brother, and
therefore we should be like unto him, 1 John 3.2, 3. 4. We must have a desire
and love to the Word of God, that we may grow thereby in Knowledge, Grace, etc.
This is the food whereby God feeds his children, 1 Pet. 2.2. 5. When we are
under the Rod of Correction (for God corrects all his children) we must resign
our selves to the will and good pleasure of God. This is childe-like obedience,
and herewith God is well pleased.


IX.
REgeneration is a renewing and repairing of the decayed estates of our Souls;
or an Act of the Holy Ghost in Gods Elect, whereby they are entered into a
constant and faithful exercise of a godly life. No general Preventing Grace in
us which we have in our own power to use or refuse, but the special Grace of
the Spirit only works in us Conversion, the want whereof causes in us our
continuance in sin, for it is God alone who works in us both to will and to
do; yet there is not one Effect ascribed to the Holy Ghost, another to man's
Will, but the same to both; unto the Holy Ghost, the Principal Cause, unto Man's
Will as a Secondary and Instrumental Cause. Like that virtue proceeding from
that Art in the Artificers mind, which guides the Instrument to frame this or
that, the which without it could not be done; which invisible passage or secret
influence we see not otherwise then in the Effect: or like the virtue that
directs the Arrow just to such a Mark, so far and no farther. Such is the
Secret Virtue, Divine Power, and inexpressible Efficacy of Christ, that works
by his Spirit on the hearts of the Regenerate, being made New Creatures, 2 Cor.
5.17. The will and ability to do a work pleasing and acceptable to God, is no
mo^e in the unregenerates power then their Creation.

Now by our Regeneration we are assured of our Justification, not as by the
cause of the Effect, but as by the effect of the Cause; and though Regeneration
be not perfect in this life, yet if it be indeed begun, it suffices for the
confirmation and proving of the Truth of our Faith. And though the Faithful
fail in the measure of those Graces they have, yet is it not such as can justly
impeach the Truth of Grace: It is true though it may be weak, and their
Sanctification is sound though imperfect; the Perfecting is not a work so
powerful as the Beginning of it, for the very New Birth and first act of
Conversion is the most powerful work of Gods Spirit: for then a Sinner is anew
created, of nothing (in regard of Spiritual Being) he is made something; of a
man dead in sin, he is quickened and has Spiritual life put into him. As a
Child born of a Woman has all the parts of Soul and Body; so he that is born
again of God has all the parts of a New-man. All the Faithful have all such
Graces as are absolutely necessary to Salvation, actually wrought in them; no
Saint wants any Grace that may hinder his Salvation, though he should
instantly dye: the perfection of Sanctification is but the highest degree of
that which was begun before; and without Regeneration there is no attaining to
this perfection: Except a man be born again by Water and the Spirit, he cannot
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Joh. 3.5. Hereby a man of a limb of the Devil
is made a member of Christ, and of a child of Satan the child of God.

Now the work of Regeneration in man, is a proper and immediate work of the
Godhead; for to regenerate is to create, and man in that he is regenerated, is
created again: Nothing then can actively regenerate but God, though Sacraments
are said to regenerate as Moral Instruments, because when they are rightly
used, God himself confers Grace by them. We receive not new and Spiritual life
from the Son, but by the means of his Flesh, apprehended by our Faith; yet the
power and efficacy of quickening or reviving is not in the Flesh, as in a proper
subject, but in the Godhead. And we are not in this Regeneration perfectly
sanctified, but only in part, not perfectly till death: whence it is that a
regenerate man, restored by Grace, is not by his Regeneration enabled to fulfill
the Law perfectly; yet of a mere natural man is made a new man, in regard of
Gods Image restored and renewed by Christ, Ephesians. 4.24. This is the restoring of
that new quality of Righteousness and Holiness lost in Adam; which is as it
were a new Soul, for in a regenerate man there is a Body-Soul, and besides the
Spirit, which is the Grace of Sanctification opposed to Flesh and Corruption of
Nature, Romans 8.10. This is as it were the Soul of a Soul renewed, without which
we cannot see the Kingdom of God, Joh. 3.5. And lastly, he that is indeed
regenerate, has this privilege, That the Corruption of Nature is no part of
him, neither does it belong to his person, in respect of Divine Imputation,
Romans 7.17.

In the work of our Regeneration these three Graces be required; viz. 1. The
Preventing Grace; which is, when God of his Mercy sets and imprints in the
Mind a new light, in the Will a new quality or inclination, in the Heart new
affections. 2. The Working Grace; which is, when God gives to the Will the act
of well-willing, namely, the will to Believe, the will to Repent, the will to
Obey God in his Word. 3. The Co-working Grace, when God gives the Deed to the
Will; that is, the exercise and practice of Faith and Repentance: The first of
these gives the power of doing good; the second, the Will; the third, the Deed:
and all three together make up the work of Regeneration.


The Regerate man cannot do the evil he would for these Reasons; viz. 1.
Because he cannot commit sin at what time soever he would, 1 John 3.9. Thus was
it with Joseph, when he was assaulted by Potiphars wife to Adultery; and with
Lot, when his righteous Soul was so vexed with the abominations of the
Sodomites. 2. Because the man regenerate cannot sin in that manner he would,
whereof there be two Reasons; viz. 1. He cannot sin with full consent of Will,
or with all his heart, because the Will so far forth as it is regenerate,
resists and dreweth back: It is a Rule, That sin does not reign in the
Regenerate: for how much Grace is wrought in the Mind, Will and Affections so
much is abated proportionably of the strength of the Flesh. 2. Though he fall
into any sin, yet he does not lie long in it, but speedily recovers himself, by
reason of Grace in his heart.



Two contrary Grounds or Beginnings of actions in man after his Regeneration:
1. Natural Corruption of the Mind, Will and Affections, to that which is
against the Law, called the Flesh. 2. A created Quality of Holiness wrought in
the said faculties by the Holy Ghost, called the Spirit: These two are not
severed, but joined and mingled together in all the faculties of the Soul.


Why the Wills of the Regenerate are inclined not only to good, but to evil
also; viz. 1. In this life the renewing of our Nature is not perfect, neither
as concerning our knowledge of God, or our inclinations to obey him, Romans 7.18.
2. The Regenerate be not always ruled by the Spirit, but sometimes are for a
time as it were left to themselves, as if they were forsaken of God, either for
to try, or to chastise, or to humble them, but yet are called to Repentance
that they perish not, Isa. 63.17. for as the beginning, so the continuance of
our Conversion depends on God.


The work of our Regeneration is distinctly attributed in Scripture to each
person in the Trinity; To the Father, 1 Pet. 1.3. To the Son, Jam. 1.18. To the
Holy Ghost, Joh. 3.5. It is also attributed to the Ministry of the Word; As
thus: 1. The Father, as it were, the Beginner of this work; of his own will
begat he us; for this end he sent his Son into the world. 2. The Son put in
execution the Will of his Father, Joh. 6.13. he took flesh upon him, that we
might be of his flesh, being born anew: Christ is not only the Author, but the
Matter also of our New Birth; the new Spiritual Being which the Saints have,
increases with the increase of God, Col. 2.19. Ephesians. 1.3. This comes to pass
by his Incarnation, Zech. 13.1. Joh. 1.16. 3. The Spirit applies unto us the
virtue and efficacy of Christ's slesh, Joh. 6.63. 4. The Word, and the Ministry
of the Word, are as instruments which the Lord is pleased to use in this
blessed work, Jam. 1.18.


The Difference betwixt Regeneration and Creation; viz. 1. In our Creation
Christ was only a Worker; but he is the very Matter of our Regeneration, we
are of his Flesh, Ephesians. 5.30. 2. The Relation that then was betwixt Christ and
Man, was Creator and Creature; but here the Relation is Head and Body, We are
members of his Body, Ephesians. 5.3. so that the Bond is now much nearer. 3. The
Being which then we had was from Adam; but the Being which now we have is from
Christ, being flesh of his flesh, Ephesians. 5.30. 4. That Being was but Natural,
this is Spiritual; for, that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit, Joh. 3.6.
5. Man might then wholly fall from that estate wherein he was, as indeed he
did, and yet Christ remain as he was: Now it cannot be so, for the Saints fall
not totally and finally. O the Riches of Gods Mercy, who might justly have left
fain Man as he did the evil Angels!


The Difference between one and the same work in the Regenerate and
Unregenerate, being sin in the one not in the other, and that for these
Reasons; viz. 1. Because the Regenerate are reconciled to God, the Unregenerate
are not. 2. The Regenerate work to the Glory of God, the other quite contrary.
3. In both of them the work is imperfect, but the one is covered by Christ's
Righteousness, the other not. 4. The work of the godly is joined with a
beginning of Obedience, but the work of the ungodly with Sin reigning.


Of Regeneration or the New Birth there be four degrees; viz. 1. The birth of a
pure and holy Mind, hating Sin and loving the Law, Romans 7.16. 2. A stirring
and moving in holy Duties, which is a ceasing to do evil and a learning to do
well, doing the Duties of Piety toward God, and of Love toward Man, Psalm.
34.12. 3. An earnest desire of Food, whereby this new life may be maintained, 1
Pet. 2.2. 4. A growing up toward man's estate in Knowledge and Holiness, 2 Pet.
3.18.


The purifying of the Heart in the Regenerate is by a twofold action of the
Holy Ghost: 1. By creating in the Mind a Saving Faith, which unites a man unto
Christ, and as a hand applies Christ's Purity, that is, his Obedience, to the
Heart, Acts 15.9. 2. When a man is in Christ, the Holy Ghost purges and
purifieth the Heart inwardly, by mortifying all the Corruptions in the Mind,
Will and Affections, and by putting into it inward Holiness, whereby the Image
of Christ is renewed, Joh. 15.2.


We may know whether our selves be Regenerated by the signs thereof, or these
fruits of the Spirit: 1. A true touch of Conscience for our sins, both Original
and Actual. 2. A godly sorrow and grief of Heart for offending and displeasing
God by our Transgressions. 3. An earnest desire, or true Spiritual hunger and
thirst after Christ and his Righteousness, testified by our constant and
diligent use of those means, the Word, Prayer and Sacraments, wherein God gives
Grace and assurance of Mercy. 4. An unfeigned turning unto God from all sin by
new Obedience, having a constant purpose of heart not to sin, and a godly
deavor in life to please God in all things.


X.
COnversion is a change or mutation of a corrupt Mind, Life and Will, into a
good, stirred up by the Holy Ghost through the Preaching of the Gospel in the
Chosen; on which ensue Good Works, or a life directed according to all the
Commandments of God. This Conversion of a sinner, is not the change of the
Substance of a man, or of the Faculties of the Soul, but a renewing and
restoring of that Purity and Holiness which was lost by Man's Fall, with the
abolishment of that Natural Corruption that is in all the powers of the Soul.
This is the work of God, and of him alone, who does it not first in one part
then in another; but the work, both for the beginning, continuance and
accomplishment, is in the whole man, and in every part at once, specially in
the Mind, Conscience, Will and Affections: yet this Conversion is not wrought
all at one instant, but in continuance of time, and that by certain measures
and degrees, though in the very first act and degree of Conversion, the sinner
is both justified, adopted and incorporated into the Mystical Body of Christ.
Now we must know, That man wills not his own Conversion of himself by Nature,
either in whole or in part, but by Grace wholly and alone; because of the want
of that Original Righteousness which was in man by Creation, as also now by
reason of his proneness and inclination to that which is evil, and to nothing
that is truly good, Genesis 8.21. Romans 8.7. for all Natural Freewill of man in
things Spiritual, is directly excluded, Phil. 2.13. yet man's Will has a work
in doing that which is good, not by Nature, but by Grace: for when God gives
man power to will good things, then he can will them; and when he gives him a
power to do good, then he can do good, and he does it; for though there be not
in man's Conversion a Natural cooperation of his Will with Gods Spirit, yet is
there a Supernatural cooperation by Grace, enabling man when he is to be
converted, to will his Conversion, 1 Cor. 15.10. Thus we see that man wills
his Conversion in the act thereof, but yet it is God that works that will in
him, it is not of himself, as the blasphemous Idolaters affirm: which here
offering it self to our consideration, may not be thought any great digression
to speak a word or two thereof.

This liberty of the Will, is a Power, Right or Ability proper unto a
reasonable Nature, to will any thing, to choose or refuse any object,
represented unto it by the Understanding, and to move it self by her own proper
motion, without any constraint or violent compulsion from any external cause.
Free Will before the Fall was a fitness or aptitude in man to choose good or
evil; after the Fall, in man unregenerate a proneness only to choose evil; in
the Regenerate a mixed aptitude partly to do good partly evil; in the Glorified
to will good only. Now the state of the principal Question about Free Will, is
this, Whether as man averted himself from God and corrupted himself, so on the
other side he be able of his own strength to return to God and to receive Grace
offered by God, and to amend himself: And further, Whether the Will of man be
the first and principal Cause why some are converted, others persist in their
sins, as well of the converted as not converted, others are more, others less
good or evil, some after one manner, some after another doing good or evil. Now
the erroneous Adversaries to this Question answer it thus, That so much Grace
is both given of God, and left by Nature to all men, that they are able to
return unto God and obey him; Neither that we ought to seek any other cause
before or above man's Will, for which others receive or retain, others refuse or
cast away Divine Succor and Aid in a voiding Sin, and do after this or that
manner order and institute their Counsels and Actions.

Contrary to this Opinion do we learn out of the Sacred Scripture, That
although by Nature so much of God and his Will be known to all, as may suffice
for taking away all excuse from them of sin; and although it be manifest, That
many Works morally good may be done even of the Unregenerate, and the Will does
freely in them make choice either of good or evil, yet no work pleasing to God
can be undertaken or performed by any man, without Regeneration, and the
especial Grace of the Holy Spirit; Neither can more or less good be in any man's
Counsels or Actions, then God of his free and purposed goodness does cause in
them; Neither any other way can the Will of any Creature be inclined, then
whither it shall seem good to the Eternal and good Counsel of God: and yet all
the actions of the created Will are wrought freely, whether they be good or
bad. Now Free Will to outward good actions, without an inward Faith and
Obedience, is not Free Will to good, for outward actions good in themselves,
are made evil by want of inward Faith and Obedience, which is only in the
Regenerate; whose Wills are not taken away, but corrected, as which before
would only that which is evil, will now that which is good, Ephesians. 2.10. which
being inclined, moved and governed by Gods Spirit, will themselves of their own
accord, and are able to work do well and work well; that is, because God
works good things not only in them, but also by them, as joynt-workers with
him, Phil. 1.6. and in them both the will and the deed even of his good
pleasure, Phil. 2.13.

To do any thing with free arbitrament and will, is to do any thing upon a
foredeliberation according to the Will of God, sometimes simply, and sometimes
in some respect only; yea, and against it also sometimes in some respect, but
never simply against it: for the liberty of working is not taken away in any
creature, when God is said so to rule and bend their Wills, that they be not
inclined any other way then whither God will have them inclined, either simply
or in some sort. And there is no such will of free working, as excludes all
action and working of the first Cause, guiding, inviting and bending the
Creatures Wills whither it self lists. The Wills of Angels and Men are so the
causers of their actions, that nevertheless they are carried by the Secret
Counsel of God, and his Power and Efficacy, which is every where present, to
the choosing or refusing of any object; and that immediately by God, or
mediately by Instruments, some good, some bad, as it seems good unto God to
use; so that it is impossible for them to do any thing beside the Eternal
Decree and Counsel of God: therefore God is said to be absolutely, perfectly,
and simply his own, and at his own Will, but man only voluntary and free in
some respects.

The Will is able notwithstanding not only to withstand God moving it, but
also of its own proper motion to assent and obey him, it self exercising and
moving her own actions; and yet this is to be understood of the actions of the
Will, not of the new Qualities or Inclinations which it has to obey God: for
these the Will receives not by her own operation, but by the working of the
Holy Ghost: And the Will of man withstanding the Revealed Will of God, is yet
guided by his Secret Will, and therefore resisting does not resist; for the
Secret Decrees of Gods Will and Providence are ever ratified and performed in
those, even in those who most of all withstand Gods Commandments. Neither yet
are there contrary Wills in God, for nothing is found in his Secret Purposes,
which disagreeth with his Nature revealed in his Word; and God opens unto us
in his Law what he approves and likes, and what agrees with his Nature, and
the order of his Mind: but he does not promise or reveal how much Grace he
will or purposes to give to every one to obey his Commandments. And though God
be chiefly the Mover of wicked Wills, yet is he not the Mover of the Wickedness
of the Wills; for they disagree from the Law, not as they are any way ordained
by the Will of God, but as they are done by Men or Devils, by reason of this
defect, that either they do not know the Will of God when they do them, or are
not moved by the sight or knowledge thereof to do it; that is, they do it not
to that end that they may obey God who will so have it. For this Reason God
cannot be the Author of the wickedness of the Will: Besides, though now since
the Corruption of our Nature by the Fall we have not Free Will to convert our
selves, nor to turn unto God of our selves without the operation of his holy
Spirit, yet our inclinations bent by his Spirit, the Will works freely, though
God works by it as an Instrument, otherwise the Will were idle, which cannot be.

And albeit God was able to have wrought what he would without the Will, yet
because he will work by the Will, the working of the Will is not in vain; nor
can God hence be said to will the actions of sinners, as they are sins; but he
wills them as they are Punishments of sins, and the execution of his just
Judgment. And we must know, That what liberty of Will we have to do good or to
will it, is only but in part, viz. as we are regenerated by his holy Spirit;
but not in whole and full, neither in that degree in which before the Fall we
had it, and shall have in the life to come. And although the Unregenerate are
able to will only those things which are evil; yet they will them without
constraint, even by their own proper and inward motion, and therefore freely:
but the will and ability to do good Works is no more in their power, then the
Creation: for the liberty which is in man now after the Fall, and not yet
regenerated and recovered, is the very bondage of sin: yet God had made man
such a one as was able to perform that Obedience which he requires of him.
Wherefore man by his own fault and folly losing, and of his own accord casting
away this ability, God nevertheless has not therefore lost his Right to
require Obedience from him.

Six things concur to constitute and make the liberty of the will; viz. 1. An
Object, whether it be any end proposed, which still is considered as good, or
the means whereby the end is attained. 2. The Mind knowing and understanding
the Object. 3. The Will alike and equally apt to choose and refuse the Object
represented unto it. 4. The Will doing one of the two upon former deliberation.
5. The Will doing it of her self, or having the cause and beginning of her
motion, internal; this is to do by her own proper motion. 6. Not being
constrained by any external Agent.


This Faculty or Power of the Soul is called Free, in respect of the will, for
these Reasons; viz. 1. The Will does of her own accord follow the judgment of
the Mind and Understanding. 2. Because it is by Nature equally fit to receive
or refuse. 3. Because it moves her self by its own proper motion. 4. In this
Election or Rejection it suffers no impediment or constraint of any external
Agent.


There are four degrees of Free Will in Man, which are distinguished according to
the diverse states and conditions of man's nature; viz. 1. In Man not fain,
before sin, when man had perfect liberty to continue good or to fall; and
though most free, yet not so strong but he might fall, God not assisting him:
which denial of Gods Grace was no cruelty, but a way to greater Mercy; nor any
compulsion to make man fall, for he had Free Will to stand. 2. After the Fall,
in man not Regenerate, in which state it is a proneness in man to choose only
evil; which evil necessity came from man voluntarily, and by his own will. 3.
In Man Regenerated in this life, wherein the Will uses her liberty not only
to do evil, as when the work is not done according to Gods Commandment, but
partly to do evil, partly to do well, as when it does it as God has commanded,
his Spirit working by the will, giving him power to will what he commands and
approves. 4. In Man perfectly Regenerated after his Glorification; in this
state the will shall be only free to choose good, and not to choose evil; and
this liberty is greater then the first before his Fall, because this excludes
all possibility of falling, the other did not.


The disterence between the liberty of Gods will and ours; viz. 1. God knows
all things, of himself, perfectly and perpetually; but the Creatures know
neither of themselves, neither all things, neither the same at all times, but
at such or such a time, and only so much as is revealed unto them. 2. In the
Will; the will of God is governed or moved, or depending of no other Cause but
it self, our wills are depending of him. 3. In the Understanding and the Will:
God determined all things which he will from everlasting, and wills them
unchangeable; we determine what we will in time, and many times change from
that which we first determine.


In the Will are two things common both to Angels and Men with God; viz. 1. To
do things upon deliberation and advice. 2. To will without coaction those
things which they have considered and thought of; that is, their will being by
Nature fit to will the contrary, or diverse from that which it does will, or
also to defer and forbear the action, does incline to the other part of its own
accord.


The use of the doctrine concerning the diversities of liberty of the will in
God and in Man, and of the diverse degrees of the liberty of Man's Will; viz. 1.
That this glory may be given to God, That he alone is the most free Agent,
whose liberty and wisdom depends on no other. 2. That we remember That they
who wittingly and willingly sin, or have cast themselves into a necessity of
sinning, are not at all excused; and so not God, but their own wills declining
of their own accord from Gods Commandments, to be the true and only Cause of
all their sins. 3. That we may know God alone to be of himself and unchangeably
good, and the Fountain of Goodness; but no creature to have more then God works
and keeps in him. 4. That remembering what we are fallen from, we may deplore our
unthankfulness, and magnify Gods Mercy in restoring us. 5. That knowing the
naughtiness of our disposition, if God leave us to our selves, we may be
humbled in his sight, and crave his Assistance. 6. That knowing the liberty
into which the Son of God restores us, we may the more desire his Benefits,
and be thankful unto him for them. 7. That knowing we alone are severed from
them that perish, we be not lifted up with a any conceit of worthiness in our
selves, but magnify the free Bounty of God to us more then others. 8. That
acknowledging the weakness and corruption that still remain in the Regenerate,
we may seek for Justification in Christ alone. 9. That knowing of our selves we
are not able to withstand Temptations, we may ardently and daily desire to be
preserved and guided by God. 10. That understanding we are not preserved
against our wills but with our wills, we may wrestle with Temptations, and
endeavor to make our Calling and Election sure, having received the Grace of
Conversion: whereof we now again proceed in a word or two.


Conversion is twofold; 1. Passive, which is an action of God, whereby he
converteth man being as yet unconverted: In this Man is but a subject to
receive the impression of Grace, and no Agent at all: for in the creating,
setting and imprinting of Righteousness in the heart, and Holiness in the
inward man, Will can do nothing. 2. Active, which is an action whereby man
being once turned of God, turns himself, in all his thoughts, words and
actions. This Conversion is only of Grace; for Grace is the Principal Agent,
and Will but the Instrument of Grace; for being first turned by grace, we can
then move and turn our selves: And thus there is a cooperation of Man's Will
with Gods Grace. He that made thee without thee, will not save thee without
thee.


In the Conversion of a Sinner there be three works viz. 1. The Holy Ghost; who
is the principal Agent enlightening the Mind with true knowledge, softning the
Heart, and changing the Will from evil to good. 2. The Word; which is the
Instrument of the Holy Ghost: for now he works not by Revelation or special
instinct, but ordinarily in and by the Word. 3. Man's Will; which though by
Nature be evil, and dead unto Grace, yet being renewed by the Holy Ghost, in
the very first act of Conversion moves and striveth to be turned. It is not
like wax, only passive, but as fire, so soon as it is fire, does burn; and so
soon as it burns, it is fire: So the Will, though by Nature it move not, yet
being renewed by Grace, it moves; and so soon as it moves, it is renewed.


There is a fivefold Grace bestowed in the true Conversion of a sinner; viz. 1.
Preventing Grace, whereby God inspireth into the Mind of the sinner that is to
be converted, good thoughts, a good purpose, and a desire of supernatural
Grace. 2. Preparing Grace, whereby it is given us to consent unto God offering
Grace, or whereby the Mind and Will are prepared, that they may yield Assent
and Obedience to the Holy Spirit. 3. VVorking Grace, whereby we are delivered
from the Dominion of Sin, and are renewed in Mind, Will and Affections,
having received power to obey God. 4. Co-working Grace, whereby God conferreth
and perfecteth the Grace of Renewing, being received: And without this Grace
following, the first is unprofitable. 5. Persevering Grace, whereby after that
we have received the Grace of Renovation, we do also receive a will to
persevere and continue constantly in that good which we can do, even by this
gift of Perseverance.


The Object of Conversion is 1. Sin or Disobedience, from whence we are
converted. 2. Righteousness or New-Obedience, whereunto we are converted.


The subject or matter of conversion; viz. 1. In the Mind and Understanding a
right judgment concerning God, his Will and Works. 2. In the Will an
earnest and ready desire, purposing to obey God in all his Commandments. 3. A
good and reformed Affection.


Man's Conversion consists of these two parts; viz. 1. In mortifying the Old
Man; that is, to be truly and heartily sorry that thou have offended God by thy
sins, and daily more and more to hate and eschew them. 2. By quickening the New
Man; that is, to live to God through Christ, and an earnest and ready desire to
order thy life according to Gods will, and to do all good works.


The Causes of Conversion; viz. 1. The Principal Efficient Cause of Conversion
is the Holy Ghost. 2. The Instrumental Causes or Means are first the Law, then
the Gospel; the next Instrumental Cause is Faith. 3. The Furthering Causes, are
the Cross and Chastisements; as also Punishments, Benefits, Acts of Providence,
and Examples of others. 4. The Formal Cause is the Conversion it self, and the
Properties thereof. 5. The chief Final Cause is Gods Glory; the next and
subordinate end is our own good, and the Conversion of others. When thou art
converted, confirm thy Brethren.


How the true Conversion of the godly differs from the false Repentance of the
wicked: 1. In their Grief; the wicked are grieved only for the punishment
ensuing, not for that they offend and displease God; the godly are specially
grieved that God is offended. 2. In the Cause; the wicked repent by reason of a
despair and distrust, so that they more and more offend God; but the godly
repent by reason of Faith, and a confidence they have of the Grace of God, and
Reconciliation in the Mediator. 3. In the Effect; for in the wicked
New-Obedience does not follow Repentance, which always accompanies the
Repentance of the godly: so that the Repentance of the wicked is no true, no
sound, no saving Repentance.


The former part of Conversion is called Mortification, and that for these
Reasons; viz. 1. Because as dead men cannot show forth the actions of one that
is living; so our Nature, the Corruption thereof being abolished, does no more
in such sort show forth, or exercise her evil actions: For Mortification is, by
the grace and operation of the Spirit, a decay and perishing of the deeds of
the flesh, which are evil Actions and carnal Affections. 2. Because
Mortification is not wrought without grief and lamenting; and for this cause
Mortification is called a Crucifying, consisting in the subduing by a holy
Discipline our inordinate lusts which rebel against God, and in a patient
bearing of the Cross of Christ.


The latter part of Conversion is called Quickening; viz. 1. Because as a living
man does the actions of one that is living; so Quickening is a kindling of new
Faculties and Qualities in us. 2. In respect of that joy which the converted
have in God, which indeed is such as words are not able to express, nor any
heart conceive, but his who has it.


Quickening comprehends those things which are contrary to Mortification: 1. A
Knowledge of Gods Mercy, and the applying thereof in Christ. 2. A Joyfulness
thence arising, for that God is pleased, and New-Obedience is begun. 3. An
ardent or earnest endeavor or purpose to sin no more, arising from
Thankfulness, and because we rejoice that we have God appeased or pacified
toward us; a desire also of Righteousness, and of retaining Gods love and
favor, being now converted from sin: which next comes to be spoken of.


XI.
SIN in its proper nature is an Anomy, that is, a want of Conformity to the Law
of God. The nature of sin lies not in the action, but in the manner of doing the
action; and sin properly is nothing formally subsisting or existing, for then
God should be the Author of it, but it is an Ataxy or Absence of goodness in
the thing that subsisteth; whereupon it is truly said in Schools, In peccato
nihil positivum, whatsoever a man does whereof he is not certainly persuaded in
judgment and conscience out of Gods Word, that it may be done, is sin.
Original Sin is the Corruption of the whole man, and chiefly of the Soul of
man, and is not only an absence of goodness, but also a real presence of an
evil property and disposition; and this infection of Nature does remain, yea in
them that are Regenerated. For the Principle of Flesh that is in holy men may
sometimes prevail mightily upon them, yea so as to make them do as evil actions
as the worst of men; for this is a true Rule, A man that excels in Grace,
may sometimes excel in ill-doing; but he allows not himself therein, nor is it
properly he that does it, but sin that dwells in him; as the good that evil
men do, it cannot be said that they do it, Gods Spirit may be there to help
them to do much, but the Spirit dwells not there, so a man may do good and
not be good.

On the other side, things though commanded, yet in the unregenerate become
sins; it is sin when a wicked man gives Alms, because it proceeds not from
Faith and Love; yet the Moral actions of the unregenerate are not to be omitted
by us, because in them they are sin, but we must avoid the sin, and perform the
action; avoid not the works of Hypocrites, but the hypocrisy of their works.
Thus is sin the Corruption of a Nature created good of God, but not any
Creature, made of God in man; for it is only an accidental Quality or natural
Property of man corrupted, but no substantial Property, nor of the nature of
man simply as he was first created. Solomon has drawn the picture of Sin to
the life in the Description of an Harlot; the Fawns, Flatters, Pleases,
Delights, but in the end Destroys; it speaks to us in Joabs language to Amasa,
2 Samuel 20.10. and his kisses are as mortal; or in Jaels language to Sisera,
Judge. 4.18. and 5.26, 27. but the Butter in the lordly Dish will not balsum the
wound it gives. All sin is like the painted Harlot, or the beautiful forbidden
Fruit; he that sucks the Honeycomb of sin, sucks the Poison of Asps; it is a
golden Hook baited with all the Glory of the World. All sin is foul, filthy,
unclean, infectious, contagious, and loathsome in the sight of God, Levit.
18.24. Ezekiel. 20.18. Matthew 15.19, 20. Jam. 1.21. Zeph. 3.1. Rev. 21.27. It is
compared to an unclean cloth, Isa. 64.6. to the Blood of pollution, Ezekiel. 16.6.
Levit. 15.19. It polluteth and prophaneth the actions of greatest Devotion in
the Service of God, Hag. 2.13. It defiles the Land and places where sinners
are conversant, Lev. 18.24, 25. And as the Dropsy man, the more he drinks the
dryer he is, and the more he still desires to drink: So a sinner, the more he
sins the apter he is to sin, and the more desirous to keep still in a course of
wickedness. Custom in sinning breeds hardness of heart, Hardness of heart
brings Impenitency, and Impenitency, Condemnation; that men of years living in
the Church are not simply condemned for their particular sins, but their
continuance and residence in them; and though every sin be mortal, yet are not
all equally mortal, but some more, some less; nor do sins committed utterly
take away Grace, but rather sometimes do make it the more to shine and show it
self. Thus can God turn every thing to the best to those that are his, yea so
as we may say we gained by Adams Fall: whence descended unto us that Original
Sin, which the Papists say is not Sin properly so called, but only because
this Original Corruption in all men at their conception is an occasion or cause
of Sin, but as for the Sin it self which was in this corruption of Nature, they
say it was taken away by Christ, Romans 5.18. And herein the Anabaptists agree
with the Papists, for they also hold that Original Sin was taken away by
Christ; yet David, as righteous man as any Anabaptist or Papist, confessed that
he was conceived in sin, and born in iniquity, Psalm. 51.5. For Christ takes
not Sin away but as he saves, viz. from all such as truly believe in him, to
whom it is no more imputed: Nor is God (as some blasphemously imagine) the
Author of Adams Fall; for the unchangeable Decree and Will of God, takes not
away the liberty of man's Will or of Second Causes, but only enclineth and
orders the same, as the first and highest Cause: So that Gods Decree went
before Adams Fall only as an Antecedent, not as a Cause thereof; and though
Adam fell not without Gods general permissive Will, yet without his special
approving Will; and he having full power and liberty to stand, God can no way
be said to be the Author of his Fall, nor consequently of Sin. And now when man
is punished for Sin, other Creatures suffer with him, though had not man fallen
it had been otherwise; but now as Instruments of evil man oftentimes does
horribly abuse them, to the dishonor of the Creator; therefore do the Creatures
groan, as weary of wicked men: and yet to this ungrateful Creature (Man) does
the Goodness and Mercy of God appear infinite like himself, in that the Air
does still yield man breath and not poison him; in that the Water so variously
accommodates him, and not drowns him; that the Fire comforts, and not consumes
him; that the Earth bears and sustains him, and not through drought prove
barren, parch up, and cleave asunder to swallow him; that his Food does nourish
and not choke him; that Death does spare and not strike; yea, that Hell is
conquered for him. O the depth, the depth, the depth of the Goodness of God to
this fallen, restored, yet ungrateful Creature Man! yea, there had not been any
such thing at all as Death, had not man disobeyed, for God made not Death in
the beginning, nor should it have been, except of our selves: for it ensued on
the voluntary Sin of man, God forcibly inflicting it, as a most just
Punishment, and the present Punishments of this life, are but the beginning of
Everlasting, because they are not sufficient here to satisfy Gods Justice; and
though God does not so punish the sins of the godly, yet is not his Justice
impeached thereby, because he punished them in Christ with a punishment
Temporal, yet equivalent to Everlasting; which equability does the Gospel add
unto the rigor and severity of the Law. Now the Judgments of God are not only
Punishments to the Sufferers and Offenders, but also Documents and Instructions
to all others that behold them, know them, and hear them; they are as Sermons
to Repentance, for this very end and purpose he works them, and therefore
they must be Instructions to us, to avoid the occasion of them, which is Sin.

The Sin against the Holy Ghost, is, when any after that he has by the Holy
Ghost been lightened with the knowledge of the Truth of the Gospel, does stand
against that Truth, not for fear, or through infirmity, but on wilful Malice;
for this Sin is a spightful resistance of the Gospel against the knowledge and
light of Conscience, after the Spirit has persuaded the heart of the Truth and
Benefit thereof; and when a man sins out of malice and spite against God
himself and Christ Jesus: which is not every sin of Presumption, or against
Knowledge and Conscience; but such a kind of presumptuous Offense, in which
true Religion is renounced; and that of set purpose and resolved malice against
the very Majesty of God himself, and Christ, Heb. 10.29. This Sin against the
Holy Ghost is said to be unpardonable, not that it exceeds or surmounteth the
greatness of the Merit of Christ, but because he that commits it is punished
with a final Blindeness, and without Repentance there is granted no Remission
of Sins; neither is it unpardonable because it is greater then Gods Mercy, or
as Cain thought, Greater then can be pardoned, Genesis 4.13. but because the heart
of him who commits it is incapable of Mercy: As if a ventless Vessel be cast
into the Sea, it cannot take in one drop of water, not because there is not
water enough in the Sea to fill it, but because it had never a vent to receive
water.

In every Sin these four things are to be considered; viz. 1. The Fault,
whereby God is offended in the Action, which is the Root of all the rest. 2.
The Guilt, whereby the Conscience is bound over unto Punishment. 3. The
Punishment it self, which is eternal Death, the wages of Sin. 4. A certain
Stain or Blot, which it imprints and leaves in the offender.


The Seat of Sin in man is threefold, viz. 1. Reason: whereof Some are of
Knowledge. Others of Ignorance.
2. The Will: whereof Some are from the Will immediately. Others are somewhat
beside the Will. Some are mixed, partly with the Will, partly against it.
3. Affection: whereof Some are of Infirmity. Others of Presumption,



In respect of the Law, Sin is twofold; viz. 1. Of Commission; but if we carry
a constant purpose not to sin, and endeavor to resist all Temptations, our
Concupiscence will not be imputed to us. 2. Of Omission, which obliges us to
Punishment as much as Sin of Commission.


Again, Sins are either 1. Immediately against God, as all the Breaches of the
First Table. 2. Against Man, as those against the Second, 1 Samuel 2.25. Matthew.
28.


Sin may admit of Aggravations seven ways; viz. 1. By the object or person
sinning. 2. By the object or party which is offended. 3. By the thing done in
which the offense is committed. 4. By the place where it is done. 5. By the end
in regard whereof it is done. 6. By the manner how it is committed. 7. By the
time when it is committed.


One and the same Sin admits degrees four ways; viz. 1. By Temptation; when the
Devil cast in the Motion. 2. By Conception; when the Will approves to act the
Motion. 3. By Birth; when the Motion comes into Execution. 4. By Perfection;
when men by Custom have got a habit in sin.


Three degrees of Lust in man; viz. 1. When the Temptation is first received
into the Mind. 2. When the same Temptation prevails, though with some
resistance of the Mind. 3. When the Temptation so far prevails, that the
Heart and Will are overcome, and the Duties of Religion for the time utterly
hindered.


Again, in Sin consider two things: 1. The Corruption of Sin, or the matter of
it, which still remains in us. 2. The Guilt of Sin, which we are freed and
Redeemed from by Christ.


The general nature of Sin is a Defect; which Defect is an Absence 1. Of good
Inclinations in our Mind. 2. Of the Knowledge of God and his Will. 3. Of
Motions to obey the Law of God. 4. Of Inward Actions which are required in the
Law. 5. Of Outward Actions which follow the Inward.


For Inclinations and Actions may in themselves be both good and bad: 1. As
they are things in Nature, made and raised of God, they are good of themselves.
2. As they are in men corrupted, or as they are done by men, they are of
themselves evil and vicious, because they are committed against the Law of God.


The four Crying Sins which are so often passed by in the world, yet cry to
Heaven for Vengeance: 1. The Crying of Blood. 2. The Lust of the Sodomites. 3.
The Noise of the oppressed. 4. The Hire of the Laborers.


There are five Principal Divisions of Sin; viz. The First Original, which is
in all men, not by Imitation but Propagation, Isa. 48.8. Actual, which is every
inward and outward Action repugnant to the Law of God.
The Second Reigning Sin, which is all Sin not repented of, nor resisted by the
Grace of the Spirit. Sin not reigning, which is repented, resisted, and whereof
we obtain Remission.
The Third Against the Conscience, as in those who wittingly and willingly sin.
Not against the Conscience, which we unwillingly commit, yet acknowledge,
bewail, but are not able to avoid.
The Fourth Pardonable, whereof men truly repent and obtain Pardon.
Unpardonable, which is a purposed Denial and oppugning of the known Truth of
God, and his Will and his Works: Now they are excluded from Pardon who are from
Repentance.
The Fifth Of it self Sin, as all things forbidden of God in the Law. Sin by
Accident, which is, when things in themselves indifferent, do by circumstances
become sinful, and are done with offense, or without Faith.



All Sins either in our selves or others, are all the works of Darkness; viz.
1. Because they come from Satan the Prince of Darkness. 2. Because they are
practiced in the Kingdom of Darkness. 3. Because they are practiced by them who
are Darkness, Prove. 4.19. 4. Because they love Darkness. 5. Because they end in
Eternal Darkness.


Four manner of ways is Sin committed in the Heart: 1. By Suggestion, which
comes by the Devil: The Serpent persuaded. 2. By Delight: Eve delighted. 3. By
Consent: Adam consented. 4. By Boldness of defending Sin, by our elation and
stubbornness: when Adam was urged to confess his fault, he defended it by an
audacious Excuse.


The least breach of the Second Table, even all sin whatsoever that is
committed, is committed against God himself; Proved, 1. Because Sin is nothing
else but the Breach of the Law of God, 1 John 5.17. 2. Every Sin is liable to
Judgment against whomsoever it be committed, it is punished of God, he takes
the matter into his own hands, Romans 1.18. 3. No one can forgive any Sin but
God, it follows therefore that all Sin is committed against himself. 4.
Because the Love of our Brethren is made the fulfilling of the whole Law, and
the trial of our selves whether we love God or not, Romans 13.8, 9, 10.


No Sin in its own nature is venial, yet may Sins be said to be not mortal or
venial 3 ways; viz. 1. In regard of the Event or Success; so such are venial
which do obtain Pardon, and when forgiveness follows them though they be in
themselves most grievous, 1 John 5.16. Thus may we say of David's Adultery and
Murder, 2 Samuel 12.13. though the least sin in its own nature is mortal, and
merits Damnation: No sin is venial so long as we follow it, and no sin is
mortal when once we forsake it, Prove. 28.13. All sins are made venial by
Repentance, no sin is venial without it. 2. In regard of the Cause from whence
they proceed: whereupon they sooner obtain pardon, if they are not done of
malice and set purpose, but of ignorance and infirmity. This Paul shows to be
the cause why his sin was venial unto him, and why he obtained mercy and
forgiveness, 1 Timothy 1.13. yet sins of all sorts springing from this Fountain of
Error and Ignorance, in themselves considered, are damnable. 3. In regard of
the nature of the Sins themselves, so no Sin, not the least sinful thought, can
any way be said to be venial, but deserves temporal and eternal Punishment,
whatever the Papists prattle, who most damnably teach, That some Sin in its own
nature may truly and properly be called Venial.


The occasions of Provocation to Sin are many, which may be reduced to these
six Heads; viz. 1. Bad Counsel; hereby came the Fall of the First Adam, and the
Death of the Second, Mat. 27.20. 2. Consent or Approbation of Sin, which is
twofold: 1. Secret, when men see sin committed, and are not grieved thereat, 1
Cor. 5.12. 2. Open, when men countenance sinners and lewd persons, which make
profession of bad practices. This is the horrible Sin of this Age.
3. Provocation unto Sin, when either by word or deed men excite or draw on
others to some evil. This is the common fault of such as delight in drunken
fellowship. 4. Neglect of good Duties unto our Brethren, as of Exhortation,
Admonition, Instruction, Edification by word or example, Reproof or Rebuke. 5.
Evil Example in the practice of any Sin whatsoever: This is like Wildefire. 6.
The private Slandering of Gods Ministers, and the disgracing of their
Ministry, which causes many to contemn the means of their own Salvation.


Communication with Sin may be sundry ways. 1 Timothy 5.22. As thus; viz. 1. By
Counsel; so Caiphas, when he gave counsel to put Christ to death. 2. By
Commandment; so David in the Murder of Vrias. 3. By Consent or Assistance; so
Saul, in keeping the garments of them that stoned Stephen. 4. By Provocation;
this Paul forbids, Ephesians. 6.4. 5. By Negligence or Silence; of this too many
Ministers are guilty. 6. By Flattery; when men sooth up others in Sin. 7. By
Connivance or slight Reproof; so Eli in rebuking his Son. 8. By Participation;
so such as are Receivers of Thieves are guilty of Theft. 9. By Defending
another in his Sin.


Why the Infirmities of the Saints are recorded in Scripture; viz. 1. Not to
disgrace them, but to keep us from a vain opinion of our selves, that we
presume not on our own strength. 2. To make us the more careful to look to our
steps, that we slip not as they did, for fear we cannot rise as they did; it is
easy to fall, but hard to rise. 3. Having fallen as they did, we should by their
Example learn to rise as they did; having like Sins, we should have like
Repentance, that we may have like Forgiveness.


Now the Sin against the Holy Ghost (whereof he is the object, not in regard of
his Essence or Person, but in regard of his Office or Operation) consists of
these Degrees; viz. 1. A rejecting of the Gospel, Heb. 8.29. 2. A spightful
rejecting thereof, under which are comprised Malice and Hatred of Heart,
Blasphemy of the Tongue, and Persecution. 3. A spightful rejecting of the
Gospel against Knowledge, Heb. 10.26. 4. A spightful rejecting thereof after
Knowledge against Conscience. 5. A wilful Gainsaying and Opposition against the
inward Operation and supernatural Revelation of the holy Ghost. 6. A
despighting of the Spirit in such things as he reveals to them, for their own
good.


This unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost is distinguished, and differs
from many other sins which come very near unto it; viz. 1. From many things
against Knowledge, yea and against Conscience also; for they may be without
malice of heart, which this cannot be; the Elect may fall into them, but not
into this. David and Peter sinned against Knowledge, and also against
Conscience, 2 Samuel 11. Matthew. 26.70. 2. From many sins committed on Malice
against Christ and his Gospel, which may be done out of Ignorance, 1 Timothy 1.13.
As Paul did before his Conversion. 3. From Blasphemy and Persecution, which may
be done also in Ignorance, or in Passion, 2 Cor. 16.10. 4. From Denial of
Christ, which may be done out of Fear, like Peter, or other like Temptations.
5. From Apostasy from the Faith and Profession of Religion, which also may be
done, not out of Malice, but through the Violence of some Temptation, like
Solomon, 1 Kings 11.4, 5, 6. And the Levites in Captivity, who though barred
from the Holy Things, yet were admitted to do other Services in the Temple,
Ezekiel. 44.10, etc. whereby it is manifest they fell not into this unpardonable
Sin. 6. From Presumption and Sinning with an high hand, as Manasseh did, 2
Chro. 33.13. 7. From Hardness of Heart, from Impudency and committing Sin with
Greediness; for so did the Gentiles which had not the Gospel Supernaturally
revealed to them. 8. From Infidelity and Impenitency, yea, from final
Infidelity and Impenitency, whereinto all the Reprobate fall, which is not
perfectly committed till Death; but the Sin against the Holy Ghost is sooner,
otherwise in vain had Saint John's Caveat been concerning the not praying for
them, 1 John 5.16.


This Sin against the Holy Ghost is unpardonable, not simply in regard of the
Greatness and Hainousness of it, as if it were greater then the Mercy of God
and Sacrifice of Christ, but rather in regard of that Order which God has set
down, and that fixed Decree and Doom which he has both established and
revealed. And though God is not bound to render man a Reason of his Orders and
Decrees, yet it has pleased him to make known some reasons thereof in his
Word, for the better satisfaction of men's minds, and justification of his own
proceedings, 1. Because it is impossible that they who sin against the Holy
Ghost should be renewed again unto Repentance, Heb. 6.4, 5. 2. Because they
utterly renounce and quite reject the only Means of Pardon, which is Christ
Jesus offered in the Gospel, Heb. 10.29. 3. Because they have wittingly so
wholly cast themselves into Satan's power, and utterly renounced to have to do
with God, having as it were subscribed to be Satan's, and ever to be with him,
and on his side, being certified in their hearts, that they are wholly forsaken
of God, and shall be damned: And thereupon they (like the damned in Hell)
blaspheme God, whom they have renounced, and with spite oppugn the Gospel
through an inward hatred of God the Author, of Christ the Matter, and of the
Holy Ghost the Revealer thereof.


Seeing this Sin against the Holy Ghost is not committed without malice of the
Will, we must know that of this malice of the Will there be two Degrees; viz.
1. Particular, when a man wittingly and willingly sins against some
particular Commandment, as Acts 7.51: The Jews were stiff-necked, and always
resisted the Holy Ghost; that is, the Ministry of the Prophets in some things,
not in all. 2. General Malice, when a man is carried wittingly and willingly to
oppugn all the Law of God, yea Christ himself, true Religion, and Salvation by
Christ, and so reverseth all the Commandments. This is the sin against the Holy
Ghost: And this being a general and universal Apostasy; of this degree the
Apostle says, If we sin willingly, after we have received the Knowledge of the
Truth, there remains no more Sacrifice for Sins, Heb. 10.26.


The chief Points considerable in this Sin against the holy Ghost; viz. 1. The
Name, it is called a Sin against the Holy Ghost, not because it is done against
the Person, or Deity of the Holy Ghost (for so he that sins, sins also
against both the Father and the Son) but it is so called, because it is done
contrary to the immediate Action, namely, The Illumination of the Holy Ghost.
2. The Efficient Cause of it, which is a purposed and obstinate Malice against
God, and against his Christ. 3. The Object, namely, God himself, and the
Mediator Christ Jesus; for the Malice of this Sin is directed against the very
Majesty of God himself, and against Christ, Heb. 10.29. 4. The Subject in which
it is. This Sin is found in none at all, but such as have been enlightened by
the Holy Ghost, and have tasted of the Gift of God, Heb. 6.5, 6. 5. The Elect
cannot commit this Sin; and therefore they who feel in themselves a sure
Testimony of their Election, need never to despair. 6. This Sin cannot be
forgiven not because it is greater then Christ's Merit, but because after the
Commission thereof, it is impossible for a man to repent. 7. It is very hard to
know when this Sin is committed, because the Root thereof lurketh inwardly in
the Heart.


That we may ever abhor the very thought of sin, consider feriously these two
most cursed fruits and effects thereof; viz. 1. It converted happy and blessed
Angels into cursed and damned Spirits, for the Devils by Creation were good
Angels, as Powerful, Wise, Quick, Speedy, Invisible, Immortal, etc. as any
other Angels; equal in every respect, but inferior in no respect to the very
best Angels. Now when they fell, they lost not their natural Substance and
essential Properties thereof, no more then man lost his when he fell: For as
man remained to be not only Flesh and Blood, but also a Living, yea, and a
reasonable Creature after his Fall: So the Devil remained to be a Spirit,
Invisible, Immortal, Quick, Speedy, etc. as before, only the Quality of his
Nature and Properties is altered from Good to Evil. Now the things which
especially make them seem so terrible, are, Their Power, Malice, Subtilty,
Sedulity, and Speed; for where Malice is strengthened by Might, Might whetted on
by Malice, both Malice and Power guided by Craft, Craft and all stirred up by
Diligence, Sedulity, and Speed, the Enemy is prevalent: Be wise therefore,
Watch and Pray, stand fast in the Faith. Yet know, that the Devil is not able
to do whatsoever he will; for this is proper only to God, whose Power is
Infinite, but the Devils Power is a created Power, and therefore limited within
bounds of a Creature; yea, he is not able to do any thing simply above, or
directly against that course which the Lord has ordained unto his Creatures,
which is commonly called, The course of Nature; for God has tied all his
Creatures thereunto, and has reserved only for himself, who is the sole Lord
of Nature, power to alter it as pleases him. But the extraordinary power of
the Devil consists in this, That he can do any thing that is within the
compass of Nature, and may be effected by Natural means, as the violent moving
of the Air, causing of Tempests and Storms, Thunder and Lightning, troubling
the Seas, the causing of Earthquakes, throwing down Buildings, rooting up
Trees, entering into Bodies, both of Men and Beasts, casting them into Fire and
Water, grievously vexing and tormenting them, inflict sore Diseases on them,
possess them, make them Lunatic, Deaf, Dumb, Blind, stir up Wrath, Pride,
Covetousness, Lust, and the like Passions in men: He knows the dispositions of
men, and accordingly lays baits for them; he can darken their Understandings,
and cause much Anguish in their Soul and Conscience; he can inrage Man against
Man, Kingdom against Kingdom, Subjects against Princes, Princes against
Subjects, and so cause whatsoever mischief can be caused, which the whole World
may witness by too woeful Experience. As touching the Nature of Devils, they are
Spiritual Substances, they were created Spirits, and Spirits they still remain
to be, their Fall has not altered their Substance, but the Quality of it, for
else could not that Nature and Substance which transgressed, be punished.
Grossly therefore do they err, who Think and Teach, That they be nothing else,
but bad Qualities and evil Affections, which arise from our Flesh. If because
they are Spiritual things they should be no Substances, but only Qualities,
then neither should the Souls of Men nor good Angels be Substances; for these
are termed Spirits, Eccles. 12.7. Heb. 1.14. Spiritual things may be as truly
and properly Substances, as Bodily things: And as for the Devils, the Actions
which they perform, the Places where they are, the Power wherewith they are
endued, and the Pains and Torments which they suffer, evidently show that they
are plainly and truly Substances. And we may know, that in Hell there are both
degrees of Torments, and degrees of Devils; for there is one Head of wicked
Spirits, called Beelzebub, or The Devil, who has innumerable wicked Angels
ministering unto him, as may be gathered, Matthew. 25.41. where Hell is said to be
prepared for the Devil and his Angels: And it is not unlike, that they are more
in number, then all the men upon the Earth; for where can any man be in this
Life, but some wicked Spirit will be ready to tempt him to sin? And though the
Evil Motions arise from our own Corruption, yet the Devils help is never
wanting to bring them into Action, which confutes the folly of our common
people, who never dread the Devil, but when he appears unto them in some horrid
shape; they think he is never near them, but when they see him; but it is far
otherwise, and there is more Reason to fear his Temptations, then his
Appearance; for this is not so terrible to the Sight, as his Temptations are
hurtful to the Soul: And this fearful Fiend, this cursed Spirit, this damned
Devil had not been at all, had it not been for Sin. 2. It occasioned Adams
Fall, by his disobedience, whereby himself and all his Posterity forfeited that
Happiness wherein they were created, and incurred a most fearful punishment,
which is Threefold; viz. 1. In this Life, as the painful Provision of the
things of this Life, proneness to Diseases, shame of Nakedness, pains in
Childbirth, trembling of Conscience in the Soul, care, trouble, hardness of
Heart and madness, Deuteronomy. 28.28. Subjection to the power of Satan; Damage to the
Temporal estate, Deuteronomy. 28.29. And the loss of that lordly Authority which man
had over all the Creatures. 2. Temporal death, or a change like unto it, Romans
6.23. 3. After this life, eternal destruction from Gods exceeding glorious
Presence.



Presume not to commit that Sin in secret which thou would not before men,
for all secret Sins hidden to men, are known to God, for these Reasons; viz. 1.
Because it is impossible that any thing in Heaven or Earth should hide us or
our works from his knowledge; it is not the darkness of the night, nor the
secrecy of the place, nor the politic contrivance of any act, can conceal us
from his Knowledge and Omnipresency, his Allseeing Eye, Psalm. 139.9, 10, 11. 2.
Because it is the Office of God, and an essential Property attributed unto him
to be the Searcher of hearts, Genesis 6.5. 1 Chronicles. 28.9. Jer. 17.10. Thus he saw
the secret Sacrilege of Achan, the Hypocrsie of Ananias and Sapphira, and the
Treachery of Judas.


In Original Sin consider 1. The Cause, which is Adams Fall, partly by the
subtle Suggestions of the Devil, partly through his own Free Will; and the
propagation of Adams corrupted Nature to his Seed and Posterity. 2. The Subject
thereof, which is the Old Man, with all his Powers, Mind, Will and Heart: 1.
In the Mind, Ignorance of God and his Will. 2. In the Will, Rebellion against
the Law of God.
3. The Effects thereof, and they are 1. Actual Sins 1. Inward, as ungodly
Affections. 2. Outward, as wicked Looks, profane Speech, and ungodly Actions.
2. An Evil Conscience, which brings the Wrath of God, Death, and Eternal
Damnation.



To the Sin of Adams Fall there were three things concurring; viz. 1. Gods
Permitting, not by instilling into him any evil, or taking from him any ability
to good, but by suffering Satan to tempt him. 2. By Leaving man to the liberty
and mutability of his own Will, not hindering his Fall by supply of Grace; and
by Satan's Tempting, who being himself fallen, and envying Gods Glory and Man's
Happiness, subtly addressed himself in the Serpents shape. 3. Man's Yielding,
who being left to the mutability of his own Will, voluntarily inclined to that
evil whereunto he was tempted.


The Sins committed in the first Sin of Adam; viz. 1. Discontent, in not being
contented with that estate wherein he was placed. 2. Pride against God,
Ambition, and an Admiration of himself. 3. Incredulity, Unbelief, and Contempt
of Gods Justice and Mercy. 4. Stubbornness and Disobedience, even when there
was but one Commandment, and man qualified to keep it. 5. Unthankfulness for
Benefits received at his Creation. 6. To his Posterity Unnaturalness, Injustice
and Cruelty. 7. Apostasy, or manifest Defection from God to the Devil, whom he
obeyed and believed.


Man through the Devils instigation was the first Author of Sin, the true Cause
thereof; therefore God is not the Author of Sin, 1. Because he is of his own
Nature Good, the Chief Good, no evil thing then can proceed from him. 2. It is
written, Genesis 1.31. All that God had made was very good. 3. The Law of God
condemns all evil things, and commands all that is good. 4. He were unjust
if he should punish Sin in man, if himself were the Author of it. 5. The
Description of Sin is a destruction of the Image of God in man. 6. The many
places in Scripture to the contrary, Psalm. 5. Jam. 1. Eccl. 15. Romans 3.


The Causes of Gods Permission of the first Sin; viz. 1. To show his Justice
and Power to the Wicked, and his Mercy to the Chosen, Romans 11.32. Gal. 3.22. 2.
That it might stand for an Example of the weakness and infirmity of the
Creatures, even the most excellent of all the rest.


The greatness of Adams sin; viz. 1. He regarded not the Promise of God,
whereby he was willed to hope for Everlasting Life. 2. He despised the
Commandment of God, restraining him from the forbidden Fruit. 3. He brake out
into horrible Pride and Ambition, whereby he would be equal unto God, and seek
an estate higher then that wherein he had set him, though it were most
excellent. 4. He showed an unfaithful Heart to depart away from the living God
his Creator, so that he did not believe, or not regard the Threatening of God,
that he should dye if he sinned. 5. He brake out into foul and fearful Apostasy
from God to the Devil, from his Maker to the Tempter, giving more credit to the
Father of Lies, then to the God of all Truth, of whose Goodness he had such
great Experience.


Other Sins in Adams sin of eating the forbidden Fruit: 1. Disloyalty, in being
content to hear his Maker blasphemously discredited, and in his heart
consenting to the Blasphemy in charging God of Envy, for forbidding him to eat
of the Tree of Knowledge. 2. Intemperance, in that he was carried so far by his
Appetite, as to exceed the Bounds set him. 3. An Inordinate Love to his Wife
swaying him to eat, more then the Love of God to refrain. 4. Curiosity, in that
he would try what Virtue lay hid in the Fruit.


Our former state and condition by Nature is often and seriously to be thought
on; and that in respect 1. Of Christ, the more to magnify his Love, Psalm. 8.1,
4. 1 Timothy 1.12. 2. Of our selves, to humble us, and to keep us from insolent
boasting in those Privileges, whereof through Christ we are made partakers, 1
Cor. 4.7. 3. Of others, to move us the more to commiserate their woeful estate,
who yet remain as we once were, to conceive hope, and use means of their
alteration, Tit. 3.


The heinousness and grievousness of obstinate sinners; viz. 1. Obstinate
proceeding in sin keeps all Mercy from us, as a thick Cloud that suffers
not the comfortable Light of the Sun to shine in our faces, Romans 11.25, 28. 2.
It makes the least sin that a man commits or can commit, to be like to that
Sin against the Holy Ghost, that shall never be forgiven, neither in this world
nor in that to come, Mat. 12.32. for it is not so much Sin simply that
condemns a man (for then all men should be condemned, insomuch as all men
have sinned) as Obstinacy and Wilful continuing in sin. 3. It is a Sin against
the Gospel it self, and the very Doctrine of Salvation: If then we believe in
earnest that we shall come to Judgment; if we take not Heaven and Hell, the
Eternal Joys of the one, and the Everlasting Torments of the other, for mere
Fables; if we think the Blessedness of the holy Angels worth the having, or the
condition of the infernal Spirits worth the avoiding, Let us not continue in
sin.


Rules how to perceive the grievousness of our sins; viz. 1. Compare them with
other men's sins, as with Adams sin; for doubtless we have many sins considered
in the fact, come after his only in time; and yet by that sin Adam brought not
only on himself, but on all his Posterity, Mortality and Destruction, the
first and second Death. 2. Let us consider our sins in the Punishment thereof;
that is, Subjection to all Woe and Misery, yea and to Death it self in this
life, and to Death Eternal after this life, with the Devil and his Angels: This
is the Reward of every sin in it self. 3. Consider these thy sins as they were
laid on the holy Person of our Savior Christ, which he endured; not only
outward bodily Torments on the Cross, but inwardly in Soul apprehended the
whole Wrath of God due unto us for the same, which caused him to sweat Water
and Blood, and to cry, My God, my God, why, etc. 4. Have recourse to the last
Commandment, which forbids the very first Thought and Motions in the Heart to
sin, though we never give Consent of Will thereto, nay though we abhor the Fact
it self.


How God does punish Sin; viz. 1. Most grievously, for the greatenss of sin,
because the Infinite God is offended thereby. 2. Most justly, because every sin
violateth his Law; and therefore even the least sin meriteth Eternal Death,
abjection, and casting away. 3. Most certainly, as in respect 1. Of his
Justice, which punishes whatsoever is not agreeable to it. 2. Of his Truth,
because he had before denounced, That he would punish men if they obeyed not
his Commandment.



The degrees of the Punishment the wicked do and shall suffer for sin; viz. 1.
In this Life, when the Conscience for their misdceds does gnaw, vex and punish
them, then begins their Hellish and Infernal Worm. 2. In Temporal Death,
when they departing out of this life without comfort, go into the place of
Torment and Vexations, Luke 16. 3. At the Day of Judgment, when again to every
of their Bodies reunited to their Souls, the Pains of Hell to both shall be
consummated.


The Effects of Sin; viz. 1. Sins that follow, are the Effects of those sins
which go before. 2. In the immovable and perpetual Order of Gods Judgment, an
Evil Conscience. 3. Temporal and Spiritual Evils, as Temporal Death, and indeed
all the Calamities of this life. 4. Eternal Death, which is the Effect of all
sins as they are sins.


Two Helps to withstand Sin: 1. Labor for Spiritual Wisdom, to be able to
discern the Policy of Satan. 2. Labor for Spiritual Strength to withstand all
his Provocations.


Three degrees of curing the Disease of Sin in us: 1. To know our Sickness, the
dangerous Malady of Sin. 2. To know the Remedy for it, which is Christ. 3. To
apply the Remedy as we ought, by Faith.


Of the contagious Infection of Sin, we are to make this wholesome Use, as an
Antidote against it; viz. 1. We must labor to come to the knowledge of our
sins, and to be touched with a feeling of them, for till then we can never pray
for Mercy as we ought from the great Soul-Physitian. 2. We are put in mind to
confess our sins and uncleanness, that so we may be washed by him that purges
us; for, If we acknowledge our sins, he is merciful and just to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all sin, 1 John 1.9. 3. We must know by what means
God uses to sanctify us, it is by the Blood of his own Son; for, the Blood of
Christ purges us from all sin, 1 John 1.7. Heb. 9.14. 4. We must seek Mercy
while it is offered unto us, when our hearts are terrified for sin, Let us have
recourse to the Fountain of his Blood, which can never be drawn dry, Isaiah
55.6, 7. Psalm. 51.1, 2. 5. We must buy of Christ White Garments to clothe us,
and to cover our deformity, Rev. 3.18. that the filthiness of our nakedness may
not appear. 6. We must forsake our sins, and walk in the statutes of God, Isa.
1.16, 17. Ezekiel. 20.18, 19. if we bring not forth the fruit of obedience, we
wallow in our mire. 7. If God has given us Grace to stand, we must pray him to
give us also Grace to continue and persevere unto the end. 8. We must walk
circumspectly, and forsake the Company of the Wicked, and society with them, 2
Cor. 6.16. Avoid all occasions and inducements to sin, to abstain even from the
appearances of evil.


Again, to be preserved from Sin, use these Remedies; viz. 1. With thy Eyes
ever behold God present, and ever have his fear before thee. 2. With thy Ears
ever hear that terrible voice sounding, Arise, ye Dead, and come to Judgment.
3. With thy Hands be ever exercising that which is good. 4. In thy Heart ever
hide the Word of God, and meditate continually thereon. 5. With thy Tongue and
Lips ever bring some honor to God, and Edification to the hearer, in all that
proceeds from them, knowing God hears even our Thoughts. 6. With thy Feet
stand in the Courts of Gods House, but offer not the Sacrifice of Fools. 7.
With thy whole Man render thy self serviceable to thy Creator, and see thou
keep thy Body holy, as becomes the Temple of the Holy Ghost.


For forsaking of Sin, observe these Rules; viz. 1. It must not be for a short
time, for a fit or a season, but for ever, renouncing all Right, Title,
Interest and Propriety therein. 2. We must alienate our selves for ever not
only from some, but all our sins, the most pleasant, the most dear, the most
profitable sins. 3. It must be a forsaking in deed, and not an exchanging of
one sin for another.


Means sanctified of God to keep us from Sin; viz. 1. The Ministry of the
Word. Thus he sent Jonah to the Ninevites, Jon. 3.4. Nathan to David, 2 Samuel
12.1. And the Prophets to the Israelites continually, 2 Chro. 36.14, 15. Acts
2.37, 38. 2. The Benefits and Blessings of God, many and great, daily and
continual: This should be an Argument prevalent to dissuade us from sin, and
invite us to serve the Living God, Prove. 10.12. 3. He has bestowed upon us his
own Son, the greatest Blessing in Heaven, or Earth; for a greater cannot be
promised of God, or comprehended of Man, Romans 8.31. John 3.16. If the serious
Consideration of this will not move us to repent of sin, nothing in the World
will. 4. The Corrections and Chastisements which are laid upon us, Psalm. 89.31,
32. Job 33.16. Yea upon others, also which should be as so many warning pieces
to call us to Repentance, Isai. 26.9. 5. Private Admonitions and Exhortations,
yea Reproofs and Threatenings of Judgment, when the former will not serve,
Levit. 19.17. Prove. 9.8. 6. The inward Motions and Inspirations of the Holy
Spirit, which he stirs up in our Hearts, 2 Samuel 24.10. Psalm. 16.7. Let us
make much of them, lest he withdraw them, and give us over to our selves.


The Use of the Doctrine of Sin; viz. 1. That seeing sin is so great an Evil,
we praise the Justice of God; who so severely punishes it, and not think to
extenuate it, but endeavor to avoid the least. 2. That acknowledging the
remnant of sin in us, we despair not, but fly to the Mediator. 3. That we may
discern our selves from those in whom sin reigns, and that sin against the
Holy Ghost. 4. That we lay not the cause and fault of our sins on God, when it
is and ever was in our selves. 5. That seeing there are degrees of sins and
punishments, we take heed of adding sin to sin. 6. Let us return perpetual
praise to God, and his Son our Lord Jesus Christ, who from sin and the fearful
punishment thereof, has ransomed all penitent Believers, by his Spirit
converting them from Sin to Good Works, which follow.


XII.
A Good Work, is a Duty commanded of God, performed by a Regenerate person, and
done in Faith, aiming therein at the Glory of God, and the good of Men; I mean
not the Popish meritorious Works, but such as are the Fruits and Effects of a
Living and Effectual Faith; so called, not that they are without imperfection,
even the best of them, but because from the true Believer, God is pleased to
accept of them as good; yet he accepts them not, seem they never so good, no
farther then he finds Faith in them; and yet accepts he the gift, be it never
so small, for the givers sake, if he believe in him. Thus Works of Justice,
Temperance, and the like, cannot be called Godliness or good Works, except they
rise from Faith, because indeed it is not done to God; for further then a man
does a thing out of Faith, he does it not to God: For to do a thing out of
Faith is nothing else, but when out of persuasion of Gods love to me, I do this
thing merely for his sake whom I have chosen, to whom I give my self; one that
I know loves me, and therefore though there were no reward for it, I would
serve him: This is a Work of Faith, insomuch as that Almsdeeds, Martyrdom, or
the like, may not be called Good Works, if they proceed not from Faith. Yet
shall the common actions of our Calling be reckoned Good Works, if they come
from Faith and Love, if they be done as to the Lord, and so he will accept
them; and for this cause the good purposes in many are naught, because they
have not Faith for their ground. Good Works are the Fruit of Sanctification,
they go not before Justification, but they follow after a man is justified: For
first by Grace we are justified, and being justified, we perform Good Works;
for man cannot do any work that is good and godly, being not yet Regenerate,
but when he is prevented by the Grace of Christ, and the Inspiration of his
Spirit, by the Holy Ghost, then he may do good Works; and the best Works before
the Grace of Christ, and the Inspiration of his Spirit, are not pleasing to
God, forasmuch as they spring not of Faith; yea before Justification they have
the Nature of Sin. Now here we must know, that good Works are in a kind
necessary to Salvation, yet not as Causes thereof, either efficient or helping
any way, but only as an evidence whereby we may know that we are in the way to
Salvation: For Faith is necessary, and good Works are the Tokens and Fruits of
Faith, and so are necessary also.

In a Good Work 1. The End thereof must be the glory of God, which chiefly
consists in Fear, Obedience, Thankfulness. 2. The Action it self in its own
Nature, must be just and warrantable. 3. The Circumstances honest and
seasonable, proportioned to the justness of the Work it self. 4. The Means
direct and lawful, and approveable in the sight of God. 5. The Fountain, the
Heart, sincere and sanctified.


In the doing of every good Work acceptable to God, these Rules are to be
observed; viz. 1. The person of the Doer must be acceptable to God by a
justifying Faith. 2. The Word of God must be thy warrant for the doing of the
Work. 3. The Actions end must be Gods glory. 4. The Work must be done in Faith,
because in well-doing a man must testify his Fidelity to God; we must be sure
persuaded out of Gods Word, that the things we do are approved of God; for
whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin. 5. Love is necessary in every good Work we
go about, for Faith works by Love. 6. Service to man is required in our good
Works; for the end of man's Life is in his Calling to serve man, and by that to
serve God, Col. 3.24. 7. Our good Works must be done within the compass of
Callings. 8. Patience is necessary in every good Work, that we faint not in
well-doing.


In every good Work there must beatwofold Faith; viz. 1. Justifying Faith,
whereby the person doing the Work, must be reconciled to God, and stand before
God a true Member of Christ; without which it is impossible to please God, Heb.
11.6. and therefore is chiefly necessary. 2. General Faith, whereby a man
believes that the Work he does is pleasing unto God. Whatsoever is not of
Faith, is sin, Romans 14.23. Whereunto are required both the Word of God
commanding the Work, and prescribing the manner of doing it, and also a promise
of Blessing upon the doing of it.


As things may be said to be good in a double respect: 1. Good in themselves
alone, as Almsdeeds done by a wicked man. 2. Good in themselves and the Doer,
as the Prayers of any true Believers.


So there are two sorts of good Works; viz. 1. Those which God in his Word has
directly commanded, as parts of his Worship; such as are Prayer, Thanksgiving,
receiving the Sacraments, hearing the Word, etc. 2. Actions indifferent,
sanctified by the Word and Prayer, and done to Gods glory, being performed
after the manner, and to the end God has commanded them.


The Ends of a good Work are manifold; viz. 1. The honor and glory of God; the
Work being done in Humility, whereby a man esteems himself to be but a
voluntary and reasonable Instrument of God therein; and also done in simplicity
or singleness of Heart, whereby a man in doing a good Work, intends simply
and directly to honor and please God, without all by-respects to his own
praise, or the pleasing of men. 2. The testification of our Thankfulness to
God, who has redeemed us by Christ. 3. To edify our Brethren thereby, and
that they also may glorify God. 4. To exercise and increase our Faith and
Repentance. 5. To escape the destruction of the wicked, and to obtain the
reward of the Righteous. 6. To be answerable to our Calling, in doing the
duties thereof. 7. To pay the Debt which we owe unto God; for we are his
Debtors, as we are his Creatures, his Servants, his Children, and his Redeemed
by Christ.


God accepts of good works in us diverse ways. 1. In that he pardons the faults
thereof. 2. In that he approves his own good Work in us. 3. In that he does
give unto us the Doers of them, a Crown of Righteousness.
Provided, 1. That before the Work, go Reconciliation of the Person to God in
Christ. 2. That in doing the Work, the right Matter and Manner be observed. 3.
That after the Work is done, we beg pardon for the defects thereof.


There be three Opinions touching the Necessity of good Works; viz. 1. Of the
Papists, who hold them necessary, as causes of our Salvation and Justification.
This is most false, and a preposterous Opinion. 2. Of some Protestants, who
hold them necessary, though not as principal causes, yet as conservant causes
of our Salvation: but the truth is, they are no causes of Salvation, neither
Efficient, Principal, nor Conservant; nor yet Material, Formal, or Final. 3.
That good Works are necessary, not as causes of Salvation, or Justification;
but as inseparable consequents of saving Faith in Christ, whereby we are
justified and saved; or as a way is necessary to the going to a place. And this
Opinion is the truth; for Works any way made causes of Salvation, or
Justification, do nullify Grace.


The Motives which cause wicked men sometimes to do Works fair in show, and
outwardly good, and to abstain from evil Actions; viz. 1. Because some
naturally be not given to the vices which they leave. 2. Others because they be
restrained by a slavish fear of Gods Justice, or else for that they dream to
deserve something at the hands of God. 3. Others for fear of Laws, or lest they
should hinder thereby their prosperity. 4. Because their Lusts do sometimes
strive as the winds, so as that which is the stronger prevails over the rest,
and bridleth them from breaking into action,


No man can do a work properly meritorious (as the bold Papists affirm) and
that for these Reasons; viz. 1. Because the doer of a Work, that may be
meritorious, must do it by himself and not by another; for the praise is his by
whom he does it, and not his own: but man in himself has not power to will
that which is good, much less to do it, least of all to do it meritoriously. 2.
A Work, that it may be meritorious, must not be a Debt or Duty, for then the
doer deserves nothing; but man when he has done his best, has done no more
then what by duty he was bound to do; and having done all, is but an
unprofitable Servant. 3. To make the work meritorious, there must be a
proportion betwixt the Work, and Life Eternal, the reward of the Work; but man
cannot do a work proportionable to Eternal glory, for he takes all of God, and
can give nothing to him; besides, man is a Creature, and therefore whatsoever
he has or can do, is no more then what he owes to God.


Again, the End of good works is threefold especially; viz. 1. In respect of
God, that his Commandment may be obeyed, 1 John 3.22. That his will may be
done, 1 These. 4.3. That we may show our selves to be obedient children to God
our Father, 1 Pet. 1.14. That we may show our selves thankful for our
Redemption by Christ, Tit. 2.14. That we may not grieve the Spirit of God, Ephesians.
4.30. But walk according to the same, Gal. 5.22. That God by our good works may
be glorified, Matthew. 5.16. That we may be good followers of God, Ephesians. 5.1. 2.
In regard of our Neighbor, that he may be helped in worldly things, Luke 6.38.
That he may be won by our example to Godliness, 1 Pet. 3.14. That we may stop
our adversaries mouths. 3. In respect of our selves, that we may show our
selves new Creatures, 2 Cor. 5.17. That we may walk as the children of Light,
Ephesians. 5.8. That we may have some assurance of our Faith, and of our Salvation, 2
Pet. 1.8, 10. That the punishments of sin may be prevented, Psalm. 89.32. And
the promised reward obtained, Gal. 6.9.


Again, more particularly thus we are bound to do good works in respect of God,
for these Reasons. 1. Because of the Commandment of God, who requires them at
our hands. 2. For the glory of God, which is hereby in others also exalted. 3.
Because of that thankfulness which the regenerate owe to God, as well for his
Mercies temporal, as his Blessings spiritual.


We are bound to do good works in respect of our selves, for these Reasons;
viz. 1. That by our good works we may be assured of our Faith, Matthew. 7.17. 2.
That we may be assured, that we have obtained remission of sins through Christ,
and are for Christ's sake justified before God. 3. That we may be assured of our
Election and Salvation, 2 Pet. 1.10. 4. That thereby our Faith may be
exercised, cherished, strengthened and advanced. 5. That thereby we may show
forth an honest Life and Calling, Ephesians. 4.1. 6. That we may escape Temporal
and Eternal punishments, Matthew. 7.19. 7. That we may obtain Corporal and
Spiritual rewards, 1 Timothy, 4.8.


We are bound to do good Works in respect of our Neighbor, for these Reasons;
viz. 1. That we may be profitable unto them by our good Example, and so edify
them. 2. That Offenses may be avoided, Mat. 18.7. 3. That we may win
Unbelievers, and by our words and deeds and example convert them unto Christ,
Luke 22.32.


A more large explication of the Proofs of this Assertion, That Good Works
cannot Merit; viz. 1. Our best works are imperfect, Gal. 5.17. Works indeed
good neither are nor can be performed of us, without our renewing by the Holy
Ghost; neither proceed they from our selves, but are the Gifts and Effects of
God in us, and we his Instruments unto whom he communicates his Blessings; in
us as in the Subject, by us as the Instruments: The purity of which actions are
supposed to be no farther pure, then the purity and light of their Minds may
be supposed to be. Thus on the light of Nature may follow actions morally good;
upon Spiritual light follow actions also Spiritually good, or Good Works; upon
imperfect illightning, imperfect Obedience; on perfect illightning, perfect
Obedience also follows, which though in this life is not, but deferred till
the life to come, 1 Cor. 13. yet are the godly, in whose hearts the life of
Faith is kindled, pure in the sight of God, when he beholds them in Christ;
though their good Works cannot be perfect so long as themselves, who work
jointly with the Spirit, are not perfect: yet shall not their Imperfections,
nor the Imperfections of their works, be imputed to them, but the Perfection of
their Saviors Satisfaction. 2. The Good Works, whatsoever we are able to do,
are all due, Luke 17.10. therefore no man ought to be beguiled to slacken his
strictness in avoiding any sin, or his Conscionableness in performing any
bounden Duty, by a Suggestion of Satan's, that he may be over-just, Eccl. 7.18.
For in true Righteousness a man cannot be over-just; but for a man to make a
Righteousness unto himself, which is not grounded on Gods Word, and therein to
be strict, is to be over-just, and to perform more then is due unto God. To
count such things to be sin, which by Gods Law are not made sin, is to be
over-just, and to be censorious without just ground, is to be over-just: but we
regulating our selves by Gods Word, when we shall have done all those things
which are commanded us, must say, We are unprofitable servants, and have done
but that which is our duty to do, and therefore far from meriting. 3. Our
Works are impure and vicious, however they seem most good, Isa. 64.6. for if
any works proceed good from us, they are not ours, but Gods good works in us,
as the Subject, and by us as the Instruments; neither are they good works which
are imagined by us, as seeming by us to be right and good, or which are
commanded by men, but such only which are done by a true Faith, according to
Gods Law, and are referred only to his Glory; yet, though the Righteousness of
the holiest Saints, considered in it self, and compared with the perfect Rule
of the Law, be exceeding defective; or opposed to the Righteousness of Christ,
be as nothing: yet as it is a work of Gods holy Spirit in us, proceeding from
an heart purified by Faith, all the imperfections thereof being covered with
the perfect Righteousness of Christ, it is acceptable to God, and such a thing
as we may receive much comfort by; but not glory in, or think to merit ought
thereby. 4. If we do any good Works, they are not ours, but are belonging to
God only, who works in us both to will and to do of his own good pleasure,
Phil. 2.13. and therefore good Works in us can merit naught, unless it be a
Curse for those imperfections and defilements which are inseparably in them, by
reason of that staining quality which remains in our depraved Nature. 5. No
Creature whatever he do can merit of God by order of Justice, even because the
Creature can never do sufficient to merit the work and benefit of his Creation
at the hands of his Creator. 6. There can be no proportion betwixt our Works
and the excellency of Gods Gifts. 7. If our Works should merit, Christ should
not be a perfect Savior, nor Heaven purchased for us by his Blood only; which
now to affirm, is, To Crucify him worse then the Jews did.


Good Works cannot justify us, for these Reasons; viz. 1. Because our best
works, yea the works of the Saints are not perfectly good and pure, and that
for these Reasons; viz. 1. We do many things we should not, and omit many
things we should do. 2. We mingle evil with the good we should do, or we do
good, but we do it ill. The thing done may be good, but not the manner of doing
it. 3. The Saints which do good works, do many things which are sins in
themselves, and so deserve to be outed of Gods favor, Deuteronomy. 27.26. 4. Because
there is not that degree of Goodness in these good works that proceed from the
Saints, which ought to be, or as God requires.
2. Though they were perfect, yet are they due and debt, so that we cannot
satisfy by them. 3. They are Temporary, and bear not proportion with Eternal
Blessings. 4. They are Effects of Justification, therefore no Cause thereof. 5.
They are excluded, that we might not have whereof to glory. 6. If they were
part of our Justification, our Consciences should be destitute of stable and
certain Comfort. 7. Christ should have dyed in vain, and have risen in vain,
not to our Justification, if we could have been justified by Works.


That justifying Faith which is required in every good work, has a double use
in the causing thereof: 1. It gives the beginning to a good work, renewing the
Mind, Will and Affections of the worker, whence the work proceeds as pure
water from a cleansed Fountain. 2. It covers the wants that be in good works
(for the best work done by man in this life is imperfect) but hereby both the
person of the worker is accepted, and the imperfection of his work covered in
the sight of God.


All these are excluded from being good works viz. 1. Which are sins in
themselves, and repugnant to Gods Law, and his Will revealed in his most
sacred Word. 2. Which are not repugnant to the Law, neither in themselves
good or evil, but which may yet by an accident be made good or evil. 3. Which
are good in themselves and commanded by God, but yet are made sins by an
accident in that they are unlawfully done, or not as they ought to be.


How the works of the Regenerate and Unregenerate differ; viz. 1. The works of
the Unregenerate proceed not from Faith, as those of the Regenerate do. 2. The
works of the Unregenerate are not joined with an inward Obedience, and
therefore are done dissemblingly, and are mere Hypocrisy; but it is far
otherwise with the Regenerate. 3. As the works of the Unregenerate proceed not
from the right cause, so are they not referred to the chief end, which is Gods
Glory; but in both these the works of the Regenerate are rightly and truly
qualified.


Though the works of the most Regenerate, yea his best works, are good only in
part, not perfectly, because he is not wholly Spirit, and no Flesh, yet God
approves of them: And therefore we must again consider Good Works two ways;
viz. 1. In themselves, as they are compared with the Law, and the rigor
thereof, and so they are sins, because they answer not to that perfection which
the Law requires: for there be two degrees of Sin; viz. 1. Rebellions, which
are Actions flatly against the Law. 2. Defects, when a man does those things
the Law commands, but fails in the manner of doing, and so man's best works
are sins.
2. As they are done by a person Regenerate, and reconciled to God in Christ,
and so God accepts of them, for in Christ the wants of them are covered.


The Benefit of putting and keeping on the Holy and Spiritual Brestplate of
Righteousness, which is Good Works; viz. 1. It keeps us from being mortally
wounded; for so long as we retain a true purpose, and faithful endeavor
answerable thereto, we shall never give our selves over to commit sin and
iniquity. 2. It brings great Assurance of our Effectual Calling and Spiritual
Union with Christ, yea even of our Election and Salvation, Ephesians. 1.4. 1 John
2.29. 3. It procures us a good name in Gods Church while we live, 2 Cor. 8.18.
and a blessed Memory after we are dead, Prove. 10.7. 4. It confirms the Truth
of Religion, and so it may be a means to win such as are without, 1 Pet. 3.1.
to strengthen those that stand, 1 Thessalonians. 1.6, 7. and to stir up all to an holy
emulation, 2 Cor. 9.2. 5. It does highly honor God, and occasion others to
glorify him, Mat. 5.16.


That we may be moved to the doing of Good Works and to live righteously,
observe here the blessed fruit and issue thereof, as it is declared in
Scripture; viz. 1. Generally; that the Lord loves Righteousness, Psalm. 11.7.
that verily there is a Reward for the Righteous, Psalm. 58.11. that Blessings
are on the head of the Righteous, etc. Prove. 10.6. 2. Particularly, for the
Righteous person himself; viz. 1. In this Life; the eyes of the Lord are upon
the Righteous, Psalm. 34.15. God will grant their desire, Prove. 10.24. he
delivers them out of all trouble, Psalm. 34.19. they shall never be forsaken,
Psalm. 37.25. they shall flourish like a Palm Tree, Psalm. 92.12, etc. 2. At
their Death, when they have hope, Prove. 14.32. and are taken from the evil to
come, Isa. 57.1. 3. After Death, their Memorial shall be blessed, Prove. 10.7.
in everlasting remembrance, Psalm. 112.6. 4. At the Resurrection, they shall go
into Life Eternal, Mat. 25.46. They shall shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of
their Father, Matthew. 11.43. 5. For their Posterity: The Generation of the
Righteous shall be blessed, Psalm. 112.2. Their seed shall not beg their bread,
etc. Psa. 37.25.



XIII.
REpentance is a constant turning from all sin unto God, or an inward sorrowing
and continually mourning for sin, joined with Faith and Humiliation, and both
inward and outward amendment. It is an aversion or turning from all a man's
sins, and a reversion or turning again unto God with all our Hearts: Or,
Repentance is an unfeigned sorrow for, and hatred of sin, with an earnest Love
of Righteousness, by the which we are continually stirred up to abhor our
Vices, and are moved to do good Works, not for fear of punishment or hope of
reward, but for that love we bear toward God; that with a joyful heart we are
moved to his Obedience, and with grief go astray from his Commandments. A Godly
sorrow, whereby a man is grieved for his sins, because they are sins, is the
beginning of Repentance, and indeed for substance it is Repentance it self. So
a desire to repent and believe in a touched Heart and Conscience, is Faith and
Repentance it self, though not in Nature, yet in Gods acceptance; for in them
that have Grace, God accepts the will for the deed. Also he that is grieved
truly and unfainedly from his heart for one sin, shall proportionably be
grieved for all the sins that he knows to be in himself; for in the most
Regenerate there remain some unknown sins, of which he cannot have a particular
Repentance, and yet they are not imputed when there is Repentance for known
sins. Thus David repented of his Murder and Adultery, and yet afterward
(erring in judgment by reason of the corruption of the times) lived to his
death in the sin of Poligamy, without any particular Repentance that we hear
of; so the Patriarchs, but God in mercy received a general Repentance for the
same, provided we endeavor to find out particular sins.

Now though Godly sorrow be the beginning of Repentance, yet Repentance it self
does chiefly consist in a change of Life upon this Sorrow, and this stands in
a constant purpose of the Mind, and resolution of the Heart, not to sin, but
in every thing to do the Will of God. In this purpose stands the very nature of
Repentance, nor must it be several from Humiliation and Faith. We cannot so
much as think of our sins aright without grief of heart, neither ought we to be
grieved for this grief, 2 Cor. 7.8. This Sorrow pleases God greatly, and
makes glad the Angels in Heaven, Luke 15.10. And brings the Mourners unto
infinite joy and peace of Conscience. Some there are that repent of their
Repentance, are sorry they have sorrowed for those sins they yet delight in.
This is the height of Impiety, and that which filled the hardness of Pharaohs
heart to the full; nor were the Israelites themselves free therefrom, when
their murmuring appetites lusted after the Fleshpots of Egypt: But he that
indeed repents, mourns that he has not mourned, repents that he has not
repented, humbles himself because he has not been humbled. This is that which
a man must do before he can truly repent of any particular sin whatsoever. And
such think it, nay they know it to be impossible for them to repent enough:
Such are our Offenses against the Eternal and Infinite Majesty of God, as no
man is so humbled for them, as that he can say, He need be humbled no more for
them. So that this is an undeniable Truth, a general Rule without exception,
That whosoever is come to this pass to think he has repented enough, he is not
in the account of Gods Word a true Convert or Penitent: Could our life in
length equal Methuselahs, and our Repentance in an undiscontinued practice
thereof equal our Life; all this compared to the Infinity of the Majesty
offended, would come short to entitle it Longlived. An unintermitted
Watchfulness, fed and supported by a daily constant revolution of faithful
Prayers, is the pith of Repentance, which is likely to prove so much the
sounder, by how much the more free and voluntary the performance thereof is;
for extorted and enforced Repentance, though it often proves sound and good, no
doubt, yet may not be always so; the instrumental cause thereof happening to be
removed, the Work may not go on.

Repent therefore, for except we repent we shall all perish, Luke 13.3. But if
we judge our selves, we shall not be judged of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11.31. Not as
the custom is, a seeming sad Confession of sin out of Formality, not
Conscience, of Passion without remorse, or of fear without change; like Judas,
who confessed he had sinned in betraying innocent blood. This is not to repent,
nor can we be said to be truly penitent, when the Judgments upon us for sin,
grieve us more then the sins themselves. And although whenever an unrighteous
man truly repents, he shall be pardoned, yet he cannot truly repent
whenever he will: Beware therefore of deferring Repentance. He that refuses
to turn when God calls him, provokes God to refuse to turn to him when he
calls upon God, yea to give him over to the hardness of his heart, and to
assign him Belshazzers, or the rich Fools death.

There are two parts of Repentance; viz. 1. The Mortification of the Old man,
that is, Of the Corruption, which by reason of sin sticks in us. 2. The
Resurrection of the New.


So there is a twofold consideration of Repentance: 1. In respect of the
beginning of Repentance, as Contrition: This is before Faith. 2. In respect of
the Act of it; now the Act of Repentance follows Faith.


The exercise of Repentance; viz. 1. A constant turning from all sin unto God,
which has two parts; viz. 1. A purpose of heart and resolution never to sin
more. 2. A holy endeavor of performing the said resolution.
2. A humble Confession 1. Of our sins, not in word only. 2. Of our desert of
punishment due for them.
2. A continual inward grief and sorrow of heart for our sins, not a worldly,
but a godly sorrow, which consists of two parts: 1. To be displeased with our
selves for our sins. 2. To have a bodily moving of the heart, which often
causes crying and tears. The former of these is necessary; the latter is not
simply necessary, though it be commendable in whomsoever it is, if it be in
truth.
4. A true inward Humiliation of the heart, joined with a true inward shame of
all our sins whatsoever. 5. An earnest begging of God, in the Name and
Mediation of Jesus Christ, pardon for all our sins.


Grief of heart causing Repentance, arises 1. From the Word of God, whereby
sin and Gods wrath for the same is discovered, Acts 2.37. 2. From Despair of
all help in our selves, or any other Creature, Acts 16.30. 3. From our
wretchedness and vileness by reason of sin, whereby God is offended and his
wrath provoked, as well as from our cursedness by reason of the punishment and
fearful issue of sin, Luke 15.18.


What the grief is which is in the godly when they repent; viz. 1. A grief both
for sin past and present, which is called Sorrow; and also for sin to come,
which is called Fear. 2. An hatred of sin committed, both of present sin, and
sin to come. 3. An averting from sin committed, to Godliness. 4. A flying from
sin to come. So the grief is in the heart; the flying is in the will; the
averting is in the heart and will, and it is an averting from evil unto good.


The effects of true spiritual grief; viz. 1. Shame for evil, which has been
done, Jer. 31.19. Romans 6.21. 2. A true and through Resolution to enter into a
new course of life. 3. A renewing of grief so often as occasion is offered. True
spiritual grief is never clean dried up, because sin the cause of it is never
quite taken away.


The true properties of sound repentance; viz. 1. We must begin with our hearts
to purge them of all corruptions and filthy lusts, Ezekiel. 18.31. 2. As we must
turn unto God with the heart, so with the whole and all the heart, with all our
soul, Deuteronomy. 30.2. 3. We must shake off all our sins, as well one sin as
another, and turn unto God, Ezekiel. 18.13. 4. Our Repentance must be speedy and
always, so long as we live, Matthew. 24.13. Revel. 2.10.


No man ought to defer his Repentance on this ground, That Christ was merciful
to the Thief at his death, Luke 23.43. For 1. That one example is recorded,
that none should utterly despair. 2. Only that one, that none should presume.
3. It cannot be proved that he put off his Repentance to that day. 4. It is not
safe to make an extraordinary Action (as this was) a pattern: For Christ did
miraculously work on that thief, to give in that moment of his Humiliation an
evidence of his divine Power.


Reasons why we ought to hasten our Repentance; viz. 1. Because we are
uncertain of the means, not knowing whether God will offer the same to morrow,
or no. 2. Because we are most uncertain of our lives. 3. Because the longer we
live, having not repented, we get the greater measure of sin: Sin by custom
becomes stronger, and our selves the weaker thereby to repent thereof. 4.
Otherwise we provoke Gods wrath against us, and cause him to remove the means
from us.


We must witness our Repentance by acknowledging our particular sins and
trespasses, for these Reasons; viz. 1. Because Repentance only made generally
and confusedly, is never true, but a common and hypocritical Repentance of one
resolved and settled to continue in sin, and not yet touched with a true feeling
thereof. Indeed for unknown sins which we in weakness and ignorance commit, the
Lord accepts a general confession and acknowledgement (which no doubt may be
said of the poligamy or marrying of many Wives, and other daily infirmities)
provided we daily renew our Repentance for all known sins, and lead the whole
course of our lives penitentially. 2. Because we must make a particular account
to God at the hour of death, not a general one of gross sins only, but a
particular one of all specials also.


The true signs of sound Repentance; viz. 1. Care to avoid all sin as well as
any one, not for fear but love, not because man, but God commands; a diligent
care, study, and endeavor to amend what is amiss, and to labor to practice the
contrary Virtue. 2. Impatience till we have cleared our selves, and made our
peace with God for committed sins; and a purging of our selves of other men's
sins with a clear Conscience in all things. 3. A holy Indignation or Anger
against our selves, and the sins we before took pleasure in, either in our
selves or others. 4. Fear, because it is sin; fearing to offend God because of
his Mercy; a filial fear to sin, to displease God, or to hazard his favor. 5.
Desire or fervent affection to God, to Spiritual things; a longing after the
Grace of God, a thirsting after Christ's Righteousness and the sincere Milk of
the Word. 6. Zeal for God and his Worship, which makes us not to perform it
perfunctorily; a knowing Zeal after Gods Glory, a holy Contention or Emulation
to exceed in Piety. 7. Revenge, when we are holily revenged of our selves for
our sins by the contrary Virtues; a holy Revenge, judging and condemning of our
selves for our sins in our selves, or others by our occasion.


Motives to true and sound Repentance; viz. 1. The Commandment of God himself
so often urged and repeated, Jer. 13.12. and 8.6. and 18.11. This was John's
Proclamation in the Wilderness, Mat. 3.8. This Doctrine was preached to our
Parents in paradise, was afterward figured out by Circumcision before the Law,
and by Purification after the Law, Isa. 1.16. 2. Such as Repent not, lie under
the bondage of Satan, they are as Captives and Prisoners, bound to obey his
Will, and to do him Service, 2 Timothy 2.26. 3. Such as dye without Repentance,
remain for ever without Remission and Forgiveness, they are lost, and must
needs perish, if they repent not before, 2 Pet. 3.9. Luke 13.3. 4. The
Threatenings denounced and executed upon the Rebellious and Disobedient, are
made Examples and Admonitions unto us. Gods Vengeance justly fallen upon others
should serve to amend us, 1 Cor. 10.6. 5. The Certainty and Suddenness of the
last and general Judgment: What manner of persons ought we therefore to be in
holy Conversation and Godliness? 6. We must be all led to Repentance by the
unspeakable Fruits that follow it; as, Pardon of Sins, Reconciliation with God,
Peace of Conscience, Hearing of our Prayers, and in the end Blessedness in the
Heavens, Ezekiel. 33.11. 7. The Exellency of it, which appears 1. In the
Antiquity of it, being the first Sermon in Paradise. 2. In the Continuance of
it, having always been in the Church, and shall be to the end.
8. The Profit of it, which may appear in these five things; viz. 1. It freeth us
from the Snares and Subtilties of Satan, 2 Timothy 2.25, 26. 2. It preventeth the
Judgment of God in this Temporal life, Jonah 3.4, 10. 3. It procures the
Mercies of God, Temporal, Spiritual and Eternal, Mal. 3.7. Ezekiel. 18. 4. It
freeth us from Death Spiritual and Eternal. 5. It saves our Souls from Death,
and hides a multitude of Sins, Jam. 5.20.
9. The Necessity of it, because without it we may perish for ever, Luke 13.5,
3.


The means to attain unto repentance; viz. 1. A careful, diligent, profitable
and constant Hearing of Gods Word, Acts 2.38, 41. 2. To beg it at the hands of
God by Prayer, for it is the gift of God only, Ezekiel. 36.26.


Duties required of us after we have repented, viz. 1. We must pray to God to
uphold us, that we may not fall again into our former Sins and Transgressions.
2. We must labor to convert others, and be a means for the beating down of Sin
in them, and for the raising of them up to Newness of Life.


XIV.
OBedience, is that whereby a man being endued with Faith and Repentance, does
accordingly to the measure of Grace received, endeavor himself to yield
Obedience to all Gods Commandments, from all the powers and parts both of his
Soul and his Body. And this is called New-Obedience, because it is a Renewing
of that in man whereto he was perfectly enabled by Creation. This Obedience
much consists in observing the Works of Christ; which we must not understand
of doing them according to the rigor of the Law, but of a purpose and endeavor
to keep them: For this is a Privilege belonging to all that are in Christ,
That God accepts their wills and endeavors of Obedience for perfect Obedience
it self, whereupon they who have but little knowledge, if they have care to get
more knowledge, and make conscience to obey that which they know, shall also
have the Reward promised; for true Religion stands not in Knowledge, but in
Obedience; and this is true Obedience, to make Conscience of every sin in our
own persons, to take heed of the infection of sin in others, and to abstain
from the appearance of evil: and all this not for a day or a year, but from
time to time in all; I say, all our thoughts, words and works, through the
whole course of our life, to the end of our days. And this our Obedience must
not only be in doing this or that, but also in suffering the Miseries laid
upon us, to the Death; neither in keeping this or that Commandment, but
impartially keeping them all; yea, and it must be ready and cheerful, without
any deliberation or consultation with flesh and blood.

True Obedience, which proceeds from true faith has these Heads and Branches
viz. 1. It must be a Fruit of the Spirit in Christ. 2. It must be the keeping
of every Commandment of God. 3. The whole man must endeavor to keep the whole
Law in his Mind, Will and Affections, and all the Faculties of Soul and Body.
4. He must deny himself, and take up the Cross, Luke 9.23. 5. He must believe
all things that are written in the Law and Prophets, Acts 24.14. 6. He must
have and keep a good Conscience: for which these means are very requisite; viz.
1. In the course of his life he must practice the duties of the general
Calling, in his particular Calling. 2. In all events that come to pass, in
patience and silence he must submit himself to the good will and pleasure of
God. 3. If at any time he fall, he must humble himself before God, labor to
break off his Sin, and recover himself by Repentance.
7. He must prove what is the good will of God, Romans 12.2. 8. He must restrain
his life from outward offenses, which tend to the dishonor of God and Scandal
of the Church, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22. 1 Pet. 2.11, 12. 9. He must mortify the inward
Corruptions of his own heart. 10. He must labor to conceive new motions
agreeable to the Will of God, and thence bring forth and practice good Duties,
so performing both outward and inward Obedience unto God.


Rules of ordering and directing our Obedience; viz. 1. We must be assured that
we do those things that are warranted in the Word of God, and that they be done
according to his Will, Isa. 29.14. 2. We must perform our Obedience heartily;
not for outward show and fashion, to be seen of men, but as in the sight of him
that looks upon the heart, Prove. 23.26. 3. It must be done with all our power
cheerfully and willingly; which depends upon the former, but distinguished
from it, 2 Cor. 8.12. 4. It must be done freely out of love to him that
commands it, and purely and simply for his sake; not mercinarily for the
Reward, yet in hope thereof. 5. We must perform tht fruits of our Obedience
entirely, not by halfs; sincerely, not parting stakes between God, and the
Devil, and our selves, Jer. 7.9, 10. 6. It must be a constant Obedience, not by
fits, for a day, or a short and set time; there is no promise made but to such
as persevere unto the end, Mat. 10.22. 7. Our Obedience must not be delayed
from time to time, Heb. 3.7, 8. Mat. 25.10.


God requires a full and entire Obedience, and it is our Duty to yield
Obedience to all the Commandments of God, for these Reasons; viz. 1. God in his
own nature is perfect in himself, and perfect in all goodness toward us; we
must therefore answer him in Duty and Obedience. 2. Christ Jesus is a perfect
Savior, a perfect Redeemer, a perfect Mediator; it follows therefore that we
should follow after all Righteousness, and make Conscience of all sin. 3. In
respect of the Commandments themselves, which are so knit together, that the
knot cannot be loosed, but all are dissolved. 4. There is nothing done in this
flesh, but God will bring it into Judgment, Eccl. 12.14. 5. All things
commanded of God from the greatest to the least are most just and equal, and
therefore to be observed diligently, without all parting or partiality.


That our Obedience may be in some good degree toward Perfection, 1. We must
labor to have pure and upright hearts, which gives life to all our actions,
and is very much accepted of God, who looks especially to the heart. 2. We must
be free from any purpose to live in any known sin, and must be inclined to
every thing that is good, lest we be unawares ensnared by the contrary. 3. We
must all take notice of our own wants and imperfections, and earnestly bewail
and mourn for them, striving with all our power against them. 4. We must make
Conscience of the least sin, that we may be afraid of the greatest. 5. We must
still go forward from good to better, evermore growing in Grace. 6. It is our
duty to pray unto God to give us upright hearts, which in themselves are
crooked and corrupt, prone to nothing but what is evil.


This Doctrine of Obedience is useful to Reprove 1. Those that waste themselves
and spend their strength chiefly about the things of this world, and never
labor after Regeneration and the things of the Lord. 2. Such as content
themselves with a small measure of Knowledge and Obedience, of Faith and
Repentance. 3. Those that do halt with God, and yield a maimed Obedience unto
him. 4. Such as think it sufficient to serve God outwardly to be seen of men,
and worship him through Hypocrisy.


Obedience is most lovely in Gods eyes;
Obedience better is then Sacrifice:
It makes us welcome to the Lord, when we
In Faith, in Love, and true Humility
Petitions send, and our Addresses make
In JESUS Name, and all for JESUS sake.
Without this Grace, all other Graces are
But as a Glo-worm-light or falling Star.
Who knows his Masters will, and not obey,
Shall for his knowledge smart another day.
CHAP. VII. Of Fasting and Holy Feasting.
A Religious Fast, is an extraordinary abstinence taken up for a Religious end;
it is an abstinence from all Commodities of this life, so far as comeliness
will allow, and necessity suffer, to make us the more humble and meet for
Prayer, Isa. 1.16, 17. Matthew. 6.16, 17, 18. It is an abstinence from all Meats
and Drinks, 2 Samuel 3.35. Jon. 3.7. The Israelites were commanded to put away
their best Raiment, Exodus 33.5, 6. To abstain from Mirth and Music, from
Pleasures and all Recreations, Joel 2.16. 1 Chro. 7.5. Dan. 6.18. And in stead
of these to give themselves to Weeping, Mourning and Lamentation, Neh. 1.4. For
this case they had their Sackcloth and Ashes, to signify they were no better
themselves. This was to continue one whole day, 2 Samuel 3.35. Judge. 20.26. 1 Samuel 14.24. 2 Samuel 1.12. Sometimes indeed they continued their Fast longer, as
occasion served, and upon extraordinary causes, Hest. 4.16. Acts 9.9. Neh. 1.1,
2. Dan. 10.1, 2. And when the Evening came they did not eat, either in quantity
or quality, to recover with advantage what they had abstained from before, but
fed upon the Bread of Tears, and mingled their Drink with Weeping. So must we
take heed that we make not our Fasts Popish Fasts, or rather Feasts, and think
if we abstain from Flesh, we may feed on other Restoratives; or Fast to take
the more liberty to sin afterward, or at least to suppose that we have thereby
merited at Gods hands what we fasted for. Take heed of this; a rightly grounded
assurance of Gods mercy is highly commendable, but a self-opinionating conceit
of merit for the Works sake done, is uncreaturely presumption; a flat
contradiction to the very end of Fasting, which should be Self-unworthiness,
Self-denial, true Humiliation.

This Fasting must never be without Prayer; for Prayer and Fasting were joined
together, Ezra 9.5. Neh. 1.4. Dan. 9.3. Judge. 20.26. Luke 2.37. and 5.33. 1
Cor. 7.7. True indeed it is that Prayer is available without Fasting, but
Fasting never without Prayer; for Fasting is not the worship of God, but only
a help to it; and the most principal end of a Religious Fast, is Supplication
or extraordinary Prayer, whereunto as subordinate may be added, Examination,
Humiliation, and Mortification. As touching the time of a Religious Fast, it is
now free in regard of Conscience; indeed in the Old Testament they had a set
time of Fasting, as the tenth day of the seventh Month, Levit. 16.29. But in
the New Testament there is no set time which binds the Conscience, only men
must Fast as just occasion is offered; and as for Civil-Politick Fasts, they
are set for orders sake, and not to bind the Conscience.

Fasting was once Ceremonial, when the Lord commanded by Moses, that every Soul
once in the year should humble it self in Fasting before the Lord, in one of
the great Assemblies of his people, Levit. 16.29, etc. and 23.27, etc. And
though the Ceremony of the day be taken away by the coming of Christ, Gal. 4.
yet the thing it self continues and remains in force. The circumstances of
Moral Duties may be changed, but the substance may not be abrogated; for where
the same causes continue, there the thing it self abides: Therefore this holy
Exercise is of as great and necessary use as ever it was, and remains in as
full force and strength as ever it did, Joel 2.12. Luke 5.33, etc. 1 Cor. 7.5.
Acts 13.2, 3. The seasons of Public Fasts being the times of any general
Affliction upon our selves or our Brethren, whether of Sword, Pestilence, or
Famine, or any other just judgment, whether threatened, feared, begun or
executed. For Private Fasts, the same rule holds in private Afflictions,
neither is any time unseasonable when the Religious Soul sequesters it self,
for this Spiritual Physic of private Humiliation.

Holy Feasting is a time of Solemn Thanksgiving for Benefits received, or Evils
removed, wherein the Creatures of God may be more liberally used then at any
other time: For this is a day of Rejoicing, wherein it was once said to the
people of God, Eat the fat, and drink the sweet, Neh. 8.10. Wherein we must be
very careful to preserve the fear of God within our hearts, Exodus 18.12. Jobs
fear was, lest his sons should cast this fear of God out of their hearts in
their Feasting, and so offend God. In every bit we eat, and every drop we
drink, we must remember the caveat our Savior gives, Luke 21.24. Take heed to
your selves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and
drunkenness; yea in this time of Holy Feasting there is also enjoined us a
certain kind of fear of man, Prove. 23.1, 2. When thou sit to eat before a
Ruler, put thy Knife to thy throat; that is, Bridle thine Appetite, have
respect not to pass the limits of Sobriety, Temperance, and Moderation. The
lawfulness of these Feasts may be derived from the Primitive Church, so as the
poor be regarded, superfluity and riot avoided, and the right end intended,
which is the praise and glory of God expressed in Thankfulness for the
abundance of his Blessings. Thus after the Sacrifices and Offerings, Aaron and
the Elders of Israel came to Feast with Jethro before God, Exodus 18.12. So Ezra
the eight. Go your ways, eat the fat, and drink the sweet, and send part to
them for whom none is provided; for this is the day of the Lord. In the
Primitive Church it was a Custom to have a Feast before the Lords Supper, made
by the Communicants; unto which some brought Honey, some Bread, some Wine, some
Milk, and every one according to their ability contributing something
thereunto. These were called Love Feasts, because they were herein to testify
their mutual Love among themselves; as also to the poor, who hereby were
relieved; and to the Ministry it self, which was by these Feasts partly
sustained. But in these Feasts there were many spots, Jude v. 12. who were
eye-sores and disgraces to these holy Feasts, pampering and feeding themselves,
and riotously wasting the Goods of the Church, in stead of taking care for the
poor, and the Ministry, for whose this Contribution was made: It were to be
wished there were no such spots in our Feasts at this day, that neither blemish
them by Surfeiting, Drunkenness, or Wantonness, nor by excluding the poor from
having an interest therein.

Three things required for the right observation of a Religious Fast; viz. 1.
That the Causes be just and weighty, such as these; viz. 1. When we our selves
are fallen into any grievous sin, whereof our Conscience accuses us, and whereby
we procure the wrath of God against us. So did the Israelites, 1 Samuel 7.6. 2.
When some among us fall into any grievous sin, though we our selves be free
from it, because for the sins of others Gods judgments may justly fall upon
us. For this Paul blamed the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 5.2. 3. When the hand of God
in any judgment lies upon us: Thus did the Israelites, Judge. 20.26. 4. When
the hand of God in any fearful judgment lies heavy on others among whom we
live, though we our selves be free. So David, 2 Samuel 12.16. Psalm. 35.13. 5.
When Gods judgments are imminent, and as it were hang over our heads. So did
Jehosaphat, 2 Chro. 20.2, 3. 6. When we stand in need of some needful Blessing
of God, especially such as concerns Salvation. Thus did Cornelius, Acts 10.30.
7. For Gods blessing and good success on the Ministry of the Gospel: So did
the Church for Paul and Barnabas, when they sent them to Preach, Acts 13.3. And
so ought we to do at this day.
2. That the right manner of Fasting be observed, which stands in these
particulars; viz. 1. Abstinence from meat and drink, and all manner of
nourishment of the Body. 2. Abstinence from all manner of sin, whether in
thought, word or deed. 3. Abstinence from sleep, such as thereby the body may
be the more humbled and afflicted with the want of food, 2 Samuel 12.16. 4.
Abstinence from soft and rich apparel, Exodus 33.4, 6. Jon. 3.6. 2 Samuel 12.20.
5. Abstinence from Matrimonial benevolence, 1 Cor. 7.5. Joel 2.16. 6. From the
ordinary Works of our Calling, Levit. 16.29, 31. and 23.28, 32. 7. Abstinence
from all pleasant and delightsom things, which may any way refresh Nature, 2 Samuel 12.20. Dan. 10.3. 8. Abstinence from all manner of Sports, Pastimes and
Recreations, they being all contrary to sound Humiliation. 9. So far forth to
abstain from Sin, Meat, Delights, and all worldly things whatsoever, that as
well the Soul as the Body may be thereby afflicted.
3. That the right ends of a Religious Fast be observed; viz. 1. To subdue the
flesh, that is, to bring the Body, and so the bodily lusts into subjection to
the Will and Word of God, subduing the corruption of Nature: We must not
therefore think it sufficient to abstain from flesh, and Popishly pamper our
Bodies with restorative Conserves, nor eat the day before, or the day after the
day of Fasting sufficient for two days. 2. To stir up our Devotion, and to
confirm the Attention of our Minds in hearing and in praying, it prepares us
unto Prayer, and furthers us therein. 3. To be a spur and provocation to true
Humiliation and Repentance. 4. To admonish us of our guiltiness before the
Lord, and to put us in mind of the Acknowledgement of our Sins, whereby we are
become unworthy of any Blessing, Gift or Mercy. 5. It serves for an outward
Testimony and Profession of our Humiliation and Repentance; to testify the
humility and the contrition of our hearts, that is to say, Our inward Sorrow
for sin, our Repentance, and effectual turning.



The Religious Fast is twofold; viz. 1. Private; performed by one or more in a
Family, that our Prayers may be the more effectual, Neh. 1.4. 2 Samuel 12.16. and
3.35. Psalm. 35.13. and 69.10. Dan. 9.10. Acts 10.30. 2. Public; performed by
the whole Congregation, Joel 2.12. Jonah 3.7. This ought not to be used of a
few; and therefore all sorts of people should come to the same, and none absent
themselves from the Assemblies in such public times of Public Humiliation.


The several sorts of Fasts; viz. 1. Physical; when for Healths sake a man
forbeareth food; a Fast prescribed by the Physician to preserve and restore
Health. 2. Politic; when certain times of abstaining from food are enjoined
for the preservation of plenty, and preventing of penury. 3. The Fast of
Sobriety and Temperance, Romans 13.13. 1 Cor 9.25. 1 These. 5.6. 1 Pet. 5.7. Of
this Fast Bernard says, 1. That the Eyes must fast from curious sights and all
wantonness. 2. The Ears must fast from Fables, evil Reports, and unsavory
Discourse. 3. The Tongue must fast from Slander, Murmuring, and Railing
Speeches. 4. The Hands must fast from evil works. 5. The Soul must fast from
Sin, and doing our own will, Luke 21.34. Ezekiel. 16.49.
4. Enforced, Necessary or Constrained Fast, as in time of Famine, or the poor
man's Fast, or in a Besieged City, or Ship far from Land. 5. Moral; when men eat
and drink sparingly, not so much as their Appetite desires, but only so much
as may preserve Nature, and Maintain Health and Strength. 6. Spiritual; when
men abstain from Vice, which is as food to their corrupt Nature, Isa. 58.6. 7.
Miraculous; when men extraordinarily assisted by the power of God, abstain from
all manner of food longer then the Nature of man is able to endure; which cannot
be brought into imitation. Such was the Fast of Christ, Mat. 4.2. of Moses,
Exodus 34.28. and of Elijah, 1 Kings 19.8. 8. Hypocritical; when men, without
respect to any occasion of Fasting, appoint set times weekly, monthly or
quarterly to Fast. Thus fasted the Pharisees, Luke 18.12. whom Christ taxed of
Hypocrisy, Mat. 6.16. 9. Idolatrous; when men making difference betwixt Meats
for Conscience sake, abstain from one kind, and glut themselves with another,
and yet count this a Fast. 10. Superstitious; when men place Religion and
Holiness in the abstaining from Meat, making the very outward act of fasting to
be a part of Gods Worship, contrary to the Apostle, 1 Timothy 4.8. 11. Religious,
or the true Christian Fast; when men seasonably abstain from refreshing their
Bodies, to make them the more fit for Religious Duties; being an abstinence for
one day, commanded of the Lord, from all Meats and Drinks, and Delights of this
Life, thereby to make solemn profession of our Humiliation, it being the end
thereof to further and better it, Lev. 23.27, etc. Psalm. 35.13. Deuteronomy. 10.12. 1
Kings 21.27, etc. 2 Chronicles. 12.6, 7. Ezra 8.21.


In our Fasts we must seek to approve our selves and our Actions only to God,
for which end we must observe these 3 Rules; viz. 1. With our Fasting we must
join a Conversion of our heart from Sin unto God, Joel 2.12. Now that our heart
may turn to God in Fasting, we must have special regard to our behavior both
before, in, and after our Fast, whether public or private: As, 1. Before the
Fast we must prepare our selves thereto in an holy manner, by a serious
consideration of the Causes and Occasions of our Fast. So did Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20.3. 2. In Fasting we must labor to have more tender Affections, and
deeper Humiliation then ordinary, 1 Samuel 7.6. 3. After the Fast we must labor
for Reformation and Amendment of life, that our behavior both toward God and
Man may be every way better then before.
2. We must be sure we propound unto our selves therein the right ends of a
Religious Fast; for if we fail therein, and propound other ends unto our
selves, we corrupt the whole action unto our selves. 3. With our Fasting we
must join the Duties of the second Table, in the works of Justice, Mercy, and
Love to our Brethren: for without these our Love to God is not sincere, and he
rejects that bodily Humiliation that is severed from them, Isa. 58.3, etc.


Popish Fasting is abominable for these Reasons, which may well prevail with us
to abhor it; viz. 1. In their Religious Fasts they allow one Meal, so it be not
flesh; and beside that, drinking of any kind of Wines or Drinks, taking of
Electuaries, Strong Water, and Conserves, and such like, at any time of the
day; which is a Mock-Fast, and nothing else. 2. They make distinction of Meats
necessary to a Fast, and that not for Civil ends, as Magistrates may do, or for
Temperance sake, as private men may do; but for Conscience sake, which is a
Doctrine of Devils, 1 Timothy 4.3. 3. They bind men in Conscience to many set
days of Fasting, and make the omission thereof a deadly Sin, wherein they take
away our Christian Liberty; for there was no want of care in our Savior Christ
to appoint all good means for the mortifying of the flesh, and yet he
prescribed no set Fasts in the New Testament. 4. They make Fasting meritorious;
teaching, That a man thereby may satisfy Gods Justice, whereby they do
Blasphemously derogate from the All Sufficiency of Christ's Obedience and
Worship. 5. They make no Conscience of Fasting from Sin, though it be the chief
end thereof; nor is their Fasting an afflicting of the Soul, or Humiliation of
the Inward Man, but a Formal hanging down of the head: wherein too many of us
Protestants are of the same Religion.


Touching Holy Feasting, the Liberty thereof is permitted for these Reasons: 1.
To put a Difference betwixt Humiliation and Rejoicing. 2. To Testify our
outward Rejoicing by that outward Sign; thence called A day of Joy and
Gladness, Esth. 9.19.


Rules of Direction for the right use of Feasting; viz. 1. All Excess must be
avoided in Eating and Drinking, Ephesians. 5, 18. 2. They must be sanctified with
holy Conference. It was Christ's own practice, Ephesians. 4.29. Luke 5.29, etc. and
7.36, etc. and 14.17, etc. 3. Blessing before and after Feast must be used.
This also was Christ's usual practice, Matthew. 14.19. and 15.36. and 26.26. 4.
They must mind us of Gods Free Bounty, and of our Unworthiness of the least
and meanest of Gods Creatures. 5. This is a fit season of Testifying mutual
Love one to another, by sending portions and gifts from one to another. This is
a commendable Custom of old, enjoined to Gods people, Esth. 9.22. and practiced
by them, Ezra 8.12. 6. The Poor must then be specially remembered, as is
expressly commanded, Neh. 8.10. Esth. 9.23. 7. In the midst of thy greatest
mirth, think of the Distresses of those that are afflicted. 8. In the end of
this Rejoicing, examine thy carriage of all that day, and crave pardon for what
has been done amiss, Job 15.


To the right use of Meats and Drinks are these three things required: 1.
Before we Eat, Consecration of the Food, by praying for a Blessing on it, 1 Timothy 4.5. 3. In our Eating, Decent, Temperate, and Christian Behavior. 3. After
we have Eaten, Prayer and Thanksgiving to the Lord, Deuteronomy. 8.10.


The Reasons wherefore we ought to consecrate the Meat, before we use it; viz.
1. That in the use of it we may lift up our hearts to God, and thereby put a
difference and distinction between our selves and the bruit Beasts. 2. That we
may be admonished thereby touching the Title we have to the Creature, which
being once lost by our first Parents, is restored to us again by Christ. 3.
That it may be an assured Testimony to our hearts, That we may use the Creature
with Liberty of Conscience when we do use it. 4. That we may be sanctified to
the use of the Creature, as it is sanctified to us, to the end we may use it
with Temperance, and not abuse it. 5. That when we use the Creature, we may
depend on God for a Blessing on it, to make it our Nourishment: for no Creature
can nourish by it self, but by Gods Command, whence proceeds the nutritive
Virtue. 6. That we may not grow to Security, Forgetfulness and Contempt of God,
and so to profaneness in the use of our Meats and Drinks.


Praising of God after Meat, stands in these two Particulars; viz. 1. In an
holy Remembrance, That God has given us our Food, Deuteronomy. 8.11. 2. In lieu of
Thankfulness to God, we must employ the strength of our Bodies in seeking his
Glory, and walking according to his Commands, 1 Cor. 10.31.


That we may eat to the Lord, four things are to be observed; viz. 1. That in
our Eating we must practice Justice, Prove. 20.17. 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. 2. We must
practice Love and Charity in our Eating, Romans 14.21. Neh. 8.10. 3. We must use
Sobriety, a holy Moderation in the use of our Diet, Prove. 23.1, 2. 4. Every man
must eat his Meat in godliness.


Four Rules whereby we may Eat our Meat in godliness; viz. 1. By taking heed of
the Abuse of any Creature appointed for our use, by intemperance. 2. By
receiving the Creatures as from the hand of God himself, Genesis 1.29. Exodus
16.15. 3. We must receive the Creatures from God, as Tokens of our
Reconciliation to him, in, by and through Christ, Ephesians. 5.20. 4. We must learn
to be Content with that Portion which God has assigned us, be it never so mean
or small.


Motives to avoid Excess in Diet: 1. It destroys the Body, and kills even the
very natural strength and life thereof. 2. It brings by consequence of the
former evil, great hurt to the Soul of man. 3. There is a Woe belongs to them
that eat or drink intemperately, Isa. 5.11, 13, 14.


The time of holy Feasting is a time of Rejoicing, a day of Gladness, wherein
we may with more liberty use lawful Recreations: Touching which we must observe
these three Conclusions; viz. 1. Recreations may not be in the use of holy
Things, as in the use of the Word, Sacraments, etc. 2. Recreations may not be
made of the Sins and Offenses of men; but on the contrary, Sorrow and Mourning
for them, Psalm. 119.136. 3. We may not make Recreations of Gods Judgments, or
of the Punishments of Sin.


All lawful Recreation is only in the moderate use of things indifferent,
which are in themselves, neither commanded, nor forbidden; for by Christian
liberty, the use of such things for lawful delight and pleasure is permitted
unto us. Therefore also observe these other special Rules for the right use of
lawful Recreations; viz. 1. We are to make choice of such Recreations as are of
least offense, and of the best report, Phil. 4.8. 2. They must be profitable to
our selves and others; they must also tend some way to the honor of God, 1 Cor.
10.31. 3. The end of them must be to refresh our bodies and minds, and not for
gain. 4. They must be moderate and sparing, both in respect of time about them,
and in respect of our affections on them.


And because Games are used at times of Recreation, observe likewise that all
Games are of three sorts; viz. 1. Such as are ordered by the wit and industry
of man, and they may be used lawfully, if lawfully used. 2. Games of hazard,
wherein hazard only orders the Game not wit; and they by the consent of Godly
Divines are unlawful. 3. Mixed Games, partly of hazard, and partly of wit, which
as they are not to be commended, so are they not simply condemned.


At times of holy Feasting we may also more freely Apparel our Bodies, but
still having respect to these two Rules: 1. Our care for it, and the Ornaments
of the body, must be very moderate, Matthew. 6.18, to 31. 2. It must be fitted to
the Body, in a comely and decent manner, such as becomes Godliness, Tit. 2.3.


Rules for decency and comeliness in Apparel; viz. 1. That it be according to
the Sex, Deuteronomy. 22.35. 2. It must be according to our Office, Calling, or
Function. 3. It must be according only to our Ability, yea sometimes short of
that too. 4. It must be somewhat answerable to our Degree, for distinction of
order in the Societies of men. 5. It must be according to the received Custom
of the Country where we live, Zeph. 1.9. 6. Such as may express the modesty of
our Minds, Frugality, Shamefacedness, etc. 1 Timothy 2.9, 10. 7. It must be
framed to the example of the Gravest, and most Sober of our Order and Place.


The end of Apparrelling our Bodies is threefold: 1. For Necessities sake to
preserve Life and Health. 2. For Modesties sake to cover our Nakedness. 3. For
honor and respect sake which we owe our Bodies, 1 Cor. 12.23, 24.


Special Rules for Direction in the right adorning of the Body; viz. 1. Every
one must be content with their own natural Favor and Complexion that God has
given them. 2. We must place the principal Ornament of our Souls and Bodies in
Virtue and good Works, and not in any outward thing. 3. In the use of Ornaments
we must be very sparing, and keep our selves within the mean. 4. Ornaments must
be used not always alike, but according to occasions; as in this time of Holy
Feasting we may use them more freely then at other times. 5. We must adorn our
Bodies to a right end, viz. That thereby we may honor them, and in them honor
God.


The right and spiritual use of Apparrelling our selves; viz. 1. To consider
our Clothes are but as the Plaster of our shame, and thereby to humble our
selves. 2. When we clothe our selves, to remember to gird up our loins, to
prepare our selves for Christ, whether by Death or by Judgment. 3. By putting
on of our Garments, we must be admonished to put on Christ, Romans 13.14. 4. By
putting off of our Clothes, we are admonished to put off the old Man, the Body
of Corruption.


Sick Soul, have surfetted with Sin? No doubt
Thy safest Physic is to Fast it out;
Or is Gods hand, his just Revenging hand
Threatened, inflicted on thee or the Land?
Or do thou want some Blessing? Go thy way,
Prepare thy self to Mourn, to Fast, and Pray:
But if God stops a Plague, or sheaths his Sword,
Thou may be glad; Rejoice, but in the Lord:
And let thy Holy Feasting never be
Without Thanksgiving, Fear, and Charity.
CHAP. VIII. Of Ecclesiastical Discipline.
ECclesiastical Discipline is that other Key of the Kingdom of Heaven, which is
joined with that of the Preaching of the Gospel; and does open or shut, when
according to the Commandment of Christ, they who in Name are Christians, but in
their Doctrine or Life, show themselves aliens from Christ, Romans 12.7, etc.
After they, having sometime been admonished, will not depart from their Errors
and Wickedness, are made known unto the Church, or to them that are appointed
for that matter, and purpose of the Church; and if neither then they obey the
Admonition, are of the same men by interdiction from the Sacraments shut out
from the Congregation of the Church, and by God himself out of the Kingdom of
Heaven: And again, if they profess, and indeed declare amendment of life, are
received as Members of Christ and his Church, Matthew. 18.17, etc. 1 Cor. 5.2,
etc. 2 These. 3.14, 15.

This Ecclesiastical Discipline is to be ministered by the Pastors of the
Church, whereunto are adjoined certain Elders, for this end as Necessities
shall require, chosen of the Church. For Excommunication is an Action of the
Church, performed in the Name of Christ, whereby a grievous Transgressor, or an
open, ungodly and obstinate Sinner, is banished from the Fellowship of the
Faithful, by the judgment of the Elders, by the consent of the Church, by the
Authority of Christ, and by the Holy Scriptures.

They who are to be Excommunicated, are chiefly such as deny some Article of
the Faith, or show that they will not repent, nor submit themselves to the Will
of God, according to his Commandments, neither make any scruple of persisting
stubbornly in manifest Wickedness. The chief and principal part in
Excommunication, is Denunciation, whereby is denounced, That he that denies
Faith and Repentance, is no Member of the Church, as long as he continues
such. And this Denunciation whereby one is Excommunicated, is not in the Power
of the Minister of the Church, but in the Power of the Church, and is done in
the name of the Church, because this Commandment was given by Christ unto the
Church; and not for the destruction of the Sinner which is to be
Excommunicated, but for his Edification or Salvation, 1 Cor. 5.5.

Some draw the Original of this Church Censure even from Adam, whom the Lord
cast out of Eden, and by an Angel kept him from re-entring, and suffered him
not to touch or taste of that Tree, which was a Sacrament of Life unto him. So
some observe touching Cain, whom the Lord cast out and banished from his face;
and indeed, the Face of God may be called The place of his solemn Worship,
where he more specially appears. In the time of the Law were many Ceremonies to
this purpose; the unclean were kept from coming to the Tabernacle, from entering
into the Temple, from the partaking of the Sacrifices, and from eating the
Passover, Number. 19.13, 20. and 9.13. And Abraham is commanded to cast out the
Bondwoman and her son out of his Family, which was the Church, Genesis 21.10, 11.
So in the New Testament, Matthew. 16.19. and 18.18. The use of the Keys to open
and shut, and the words of binding and loosing come directly to this purpose.
This was executed on Hymeneus and Alexander, 1 Timothy 1.19, 20. From all which it
is very clear, That Excommunication is a sentence of the Church, whereby a
Member thereof convicted of some grievous Crime, and by no means brought to
Repentance, is driven out of the Church, and cut off from the Communion and
Fellowship of the Faithful, that thereby he may be driven to Repentance.

The Church is the City of God, Excommunication is the Sword: That the School
of Christ, this is the Rod: That the Temple of God, this is as it were the Whip
to scourge out such as abuse it and themselves: That the Body of Christ, this
is as a Medicine to cure the sick Members thereof: That the Vine and Sheepfold,
this serves to keep the Foxes and Wolves from it. The Mark whereat
Excommunication aims, and the end whereto it tends, is, That the Sinners
being ashamed, may be brought to Repentance, and that such as live in the
Church might not be corrupted; for the cause of the Institution of
Excommunication, is not so much the punishment of Sin, as the Salvation of a
Sinner, the edifying of the Church, and the glory of God: For the Church,
according to the Doctrine of Christ, smites none with the Spiritual Sword, but
such as are impenitent; and does not this unto death, but unto life; and
therefore receives them that repent.

The Censure of Excommunication must be used as an Ordinance of God, not as an
Invention of Man, not only knowing the nature and use of it, but practicing it
to the glory of God, and to the good of others: Not like the Church of Rome,
that plays fast and loose with the souls of men for gain, nor like their Apes
of Modern Times, little regarding whether the Excommunicate repented or not,
but more advising them to pay their Fees and discharge the Court, then to
repent of their Offenses. The persons that are liable to this Censure of the
Church, are only such as have confessed Christ, and called upon God the Father
together with us, albeit they have denied him in their deeds; and being
exhorted, will not hear; being admonished, will not obey; being reproved, will
not repent. As for them that are without, the Lord will judge them, the Church
has nothing to do with them, 1 Cor. 5.12, 13. For those that were never of the
Church, cannot be cast out of it, being never of the number of the Faithful:
And here also know, That one person may not be Excommunicated for another, but
only the party offending.

Now if any man be truly ingrafted into Christ, endued with Faith in Christ and
Repentance from dead works, being a Member of his Body, in Deed and in Truth,
Excommunication shall hurt him nothing at all in regard of that Spiritual Union
or Communion, forasmuch as the Sentence so given is in that particular void and
frustrate. And though a man justly deserves to be Excommunicated through his
sin, and to be separated from the Communion of Saints, yet Excommunication is
not the first and chief cause thereof, but his own sin and the continuance in
it; seeing it does not sever him from God, but declares him to be severed
through his impenitency; as the Priests under the Law, putting out the Leprous,
did not defile them with the Leprosy, but pronounced them to be defiled; or
like the sentence of the Law, which is but declared only by the Judge upon the
Malefactor: So it is impenitency, obstinacy, and perseverancy in sin, that
separates a sinner from the Church, Excommunication is only the Declarative
sentence thereof.

Ecclesiastical Discipline is the Order in the Church instituted by God,
especially for these two ends; viz. 1. That the Ministry of God may be
preserved, and that all things may be done in the Church decently, and in
order. 2. That the Conversation of every one may be looked into, that such as
have given offenses may be amended, and according to the degrees prescribed by
Christ.


The order which the Church does use in the exercise of her power, may be
comprehended in these three Verses of the eighteenth Chapter of Matthew; viz.
1. If thy Brother trespass, go and tell him his fault between thee and him
alone; if he hear thee, thou have won thy Brother, Matthew. 18.15. 2. If he
hearken not unto thee, let him be again privately admonished by thee, taking
one or two others with thee, Mat. 18.16. 3. If he will not vouchsafe to hear
them, tell it unto the Church; if he refuse to hear the Church also, let him be
unto thee as a Heathen man and a Publican, Matthew. 18.17.


In Excommunication there are three Judgments to be considered; viz. 1. Of
God; when he does hold any obstinate Sinner guilty of his offense, and so
guilty of condemnation. 2. Of the Church; after that God has holden him
guilty; for the Church is only to pronounce, and to declare him so to be; not
absolutely, but with condition of Repentance. 3. Of God again; whereby he
ratifies that in Heaven which the Church has done on earth.


The Power of Ecclesiastical Discipline is very necessary in several respects;
viz. 1. In respect of the Commandment of God, 1 Cor. 5.5. 2. In respect of Gods
glory, which would be much impeached, if without difference the wicked and
blasphemers go in the number of Gods children. 3. Lest the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper be profaned by the wicked, and that be given them in the Supper,
which is denied them in the Word. 4. For the safety of the Church, which shall
be punished if she permit willingly the profanation of Christ's Ordinance. 5.
For avoiding offense in the Church that others be not corrupted, 1 Cor. 5.6. 6.
For the safety of sinners, that they being often admonished may return to
Repentance, and be received again into the Church. 7. For avoiding of offense
among those that are without; and that the Name of God may not be blasphemed,
nor evil spoken of; nor they who are not as yet Members of the Church, kept
from coming into it; nor the Covenant of God despised nor reproached. 8. That
from the sinners themselves punishments may be averted, because the wicked
approaching to the Lords Table, eat their own damnation.


The difference between ChurchDiscipline and State-Government; viz. 1. The
power committed unto the Church depends on Gods Word, the Civil power is
armed with the Sword. 2. In the Church Judgment proceeds according to Gods
Laws, in the Civil State according to Civil Laws. 3. The Church punishes the
obstinate with the Word of God, yet so as it pierces unto their Consciences:
The Civil State punishes the obstinate only with corporal punishments. 4.
Oftentimes the Discipline of the Church has place where there is none for
Civil Judgment; and the Civil Government oftentimes has place where there is
none for Church Discipline. 5. The Judgment of the Church has degrees of
Admonition before it comes to punish; but the Civil Judgment proceeds to
punishment without it. 6. The Church does often reverse and retract her
Judgment and Punishment, if there come Repentance; but it is otherwise with
the Civil Magistrate.


Touching Excommunication, observe these four things from Matthew. 7.6. viz. 1.
The Foundation thereof; it is an Ordinance of God; for all obstinate enemies of
God by Christ's Commandment, must be kept from holy things: A man living in the
Church may be worse in practice then an open enemy; and such an one was
Ishmael, who for mocking Isaac, the Son of the Promise, was cast out of
Abraham's Family; that is, out of the Church of God, Genesis 21.10, 11. For
Abraham's Family at that time was Gods visible Church. 2. The End thereof; which
is, to preserve the holy things of God from pollution, contempt, and
profanation; even the Word, Prayer, and Sacraments, which wilful Enemies would
trample upon, as Swine upon Pearls: And herein we may see the abuse of this
Ordinance, when it is made for Politic and Civil Respects. 3. Who must
execute this Censure of the Church; namely, they to whom the disposing and
keeping of the holy things of God is committed; that is, The lawful Ministers
of the Word and Sacraments, but without the Exercise of this Censure which God
has given unto the Church, they cannot keep those holy things pure which God
has committed unto them. 4. How far this Censure of the Church reaches and
extends against obstinate and wilful Enemies; namely, to the debarring of
them from the use of the Saints Communion in Prayer and Sacraments. Indeed if
the party be excommunicated for some particular Crime, and there be hope of his
Repentance, because he does not maliciously persist by wilful obstinacy in his
sin and contempt of the Church, then although he be excluded from Communion
with them in the Sacraments and Prayer, yet he may be admitted to the hearing
of the Word, because that is a means to humble him for his sin, and to bring
him to Repentance, which is the end of all Ecclesiastical Censures.


The Censures of the Church are of three sorts, all of them having their proper
time, and place, and use, and object, according to the nature of the offense,
and party offending; 1. Admonition or Exhortation to amendment, which also is
joined with reprehension and denunciation of Gods judgments against the party
not repenting, but persisting in his evil way, Genesis 3.11. and 4.6, 7. 2.
Suspension, whereby the offenders for a time are barred from the Lords Supper:
This is not a Separation from all holy things but some only, till clearer
evidence produce either farther punishment or absolution, 2 These. 3.14, 15. 3.
Excommunication, which is a Separation from all holy things, and the
Privileges of the Church, and the Communion of Saints, because to their sin
they add this obstinate contempt of the Admonitions given unto them, Genesis
17.14. Ezra 10.8. Matthew. 18.17.


There is a twofold Communication or Communion from which an excommunicate person
may be said to be excluded; viz. 1. Inward and Spiritual, which every Faithful
one has by Faith and Love; first with God, and then with the Saints of God, 1 John 1.3, 7. From this Fellowship can none be excluded, but by sin, which is it
alone can separate any man from the Grace of God, and from Communion with him.
The Church Excommunication can bar and shut out no man from this Communion. 2.
Outward and Corporal, which stands in a common partaking together in the
Word, in Prayers, and in the receiving of the Sacraments, and in familiarity
and friendship one with another; from all which Excommunication separateth.


The Bands or Duties which no Excommunication does dispense withal; viz. 1.
Natural; if any Excommunicate person be in want or any distress, we must
minister unto him such things as are necessary for his preservation. 2.
Domestical, as the duties of Wives, Children, and Servants, may not be shaken
off under any color or pretense of Excommunication. Provided, that they cease
not to pray for them, to admonish them, to hate their sins, and see they defend
them not in their wicked courses, or join with them in opinion. 3. Civil or
Politic; it is lawful to buy of him or to sell unto him; yet we ought not to
converse and commerce with him as with a Friend.


The Duties which are to be performed to Excommunicate persons; viz. 1. We must
love the Persons of the Excommunicate in the Lord, and thirst after their souls
health, and for their conversion. 2. We must exhort and rebuke them; so that
albeit we love them, we must take heed that we do not flatter them, and so
harden them in their sins. 3. We are bound to pray for those that are bound by
the Church Censures; we are not to pray with them, but it is required of us to
pray for them. 4. We are to assure them that upon their Repentance we are ready
to embrace them, and to receive them as Brethren; forasmuch as there is joy in
Heaven for one sinner that is converted from the error of his ways.


The fearful estate and condition of Excommunicated persons; viz. 1. Their
Names, whilst they persist in their obstinate Impenitency, are cancelled out
of the number of the people of God, Genesis 1.7. 2. The Sentence that is
pronounced on Earth, is ratified in Heaven, Matthew. 18.18, etc. for Christ is
the Author of it, 1 Cor. 5.4. 3. They are barred from the Word and Sacraments,
and from Prayers with the Congregation; the Word prevailed not to do them good,
the Sacraments would do them hurt. 4. They are infamous, for they are to be
called and accounted as the Heathens and Publicans, Matthew. 18.17. 5. Such as
thus contemn the Admonition and Reprehension of the Church, lose the Communion
of Saints, and become the bondslaves of Satan, 1 Cor. 5.3, 4, 5. 6. Being cast
out of the Church they are banished out of all Churches; the Churches of God
have all cast them out whom one has cast out; And if we be not of the Church
of God, we are of the Synagogue of Satan. 7. The sundry Decrees and
Constitutions established by Humane Laws, do much aggravate and set forth the
hideous condition of such as are worthily cast out of the Church.


The ends of Excommunication are these, viz. 1. The good of the person
Excommunicated, that if it be possible he may be won. 2. The Salvation or
preservation of the whole Church, 1 Cor. 5.13. lest others be infected. 3. That
the rest may fear, and be kept within the bounds of their duty, 1 Timothy 5.20. 4.
That those Punishments which hang over the Church for sin, may be kept off and
avoided, Josh. 7.11. Numb. 25.7. 5. The Glory of God; and if this be before
their eyes that are Governors of the Church, it will keep them from declining
either to the right hand or the left, from winking at the sins of great ones,
and censuring the faults and infirmities of those of low degree too sharply;
from winking at great beams in some, and from having Eagles eyes to pry into
the motes of others.


The use of Excommunication ought to be perpetual and universal in the Church,
because the causes of this power of the Church are perpetual and universal: As
1. The Commandment of Christ, Matthew. 18.18. 1 Cor. 5.5. 2. That obstinate
Sinners being made ashamed, may be brought to Repentance. 3. That no others
should be infected by their evil life and corrupt example. 4. Because it is the
ordinary Office of the Church to judge them that are within, 1 Cor. 5.12.


Obstinate Sinners are to be cast out of the Church, which ought not to Tolerate
open Offenders, for these Reasons; viz. 1. Because it is a comely thing for the
Saints of God to purge themselves of them; that as they differ from Heathen
men, so they may differ from Heathen Meetings: for, They are a holy people,
Deuteronomy. 2.14. 2. Because for the neglect of this Duty the Wrath of God falls
upon the Sons of men, Col. 3.6. 3. Because it is a cause of great Mercy, and
wonderful Blessing from God, when such as transgress are resisted and punished,
Joh. 7.13. and 8.1, 2. 4. Because it would be reproachful to God and his Son
Jesus Christ, if they who lead wicked and wretched lives, should be admitted
freely to his Table, as if his people were a company or conspiracy of profane
persons: whereas the Church is the Body of Christ, Col. 1.24. 5. By continual
company of the wicked, the godly are corrupted, 1 Cor. 5.6, 7. it is better
that one Member be cut off, then that the whole Body of the Church should
perish. 6. They are to be cut off, to the end that such as are wicked livers
may begin to be ashamed of themselves and their wickedness, who by winking at
their sin, would grow the more obstinate, but by this chastisement may be
reclaimed and preserved, 1 Cor. 5.5. We must have no company with scandalons
livers, that they may be ashamed, 2 Thessalonians. 3.14.


Excommunication described by its several parts; viz. 1. It is a Sentence of
the Church. Mat. 18.17. 2. It must be executed upon him that is a Member of the
Church, 1 Cor. 5.11, 12. 3. The party Delinquent must be convicted of some
grievous crime, Tit. 3.10. 4. It stretches to him that cannot be otherwise
brought to Repentance. 5. He is driven from the visible and outward Communion
of the Saints. 6. The end or use of it is to make him ashamed that has
offended.


From the first part of the description of Excommunication, we learn, 1. That
such as are themselves out of the Church, and no true parts thereof, have
nothing to do herewith. 2. How great the honor and dignity of the Ministry is,
to bind and loose offenders, to open and shut Heaven, to remit and retain
Sins, so that it belongs not to private persons. 3. That those Churches are
deceived that cast from them this Ordinance of Christ.


From the second part of the description of Excommunication, we learn, 1. What
person is to be Excommunicated; even such an one as was called our Brother, and
registered in the number of the children of the Church, and not such as are
without. 2. To Discern the gross folly and corrupt dealing of the Church of
Rome, which has nothing to do herewith, being not the true, but a false
Church. 3. Such as are without the Church, may not hence be encouraged to
continue in Sin, because they are without Church Censures, but let them hasten
to come within the Church, lest their condemnation be to come.


From the third part of the description of Excommunication, we learn, 1. That a
man is not to be Excommunicated and put out of the Church for every trifle, or
for every Sin, but for Scandals and Offenses against the First or Second Table,
and such as are most notorious. 2. That it is not to be used as the first, but
as the last Remedy; so that there is required Patience and much Lenity, waiting
whether he will by private Admonitions and Exhortations, private Reproofs and
Rebukes, be amended or not. 3. That whilst Sin is secret and unknown, no man
can be Excommunicated, but then only when it is made public and manifest unto
all; and it is then made public, when the Church is acquainted with it.


From the fourth part of the description of Excommunication, we learn, 1. That
such as have offended, and truly repent of their sins, giving evident Testimony
of their unfeigned Conversion, ought to be spared, and not censured; to be
comforted, not terrified; to be retained in the Church, not rejected and cast
out of the Church. 2. That Impenitency is a most grievous Sin, and next to
Infidelity the greatest: for as Faith is the Mother of Repentance, so the
unbelieving heart the cause of Impenitency. 3. To make a difference between Sin
and Sin, between Sinner and Sinner, some fight against their Sins as against
their Enemies, others cherish Sins in themselves, and are resolved to continue
in them.


From the fifth part of the description of Excommunication, we learn, 1. To
avoid the conversation of such as are cast out of the Church, so far as
possibly we can. 2. That to be familiar with such, encourages them to continue
in their dangerous estate. 3. That it is the duty of the Church, to purge it
self of such Offenders, as a Body of corrupt, gross and superfluous Humors.


From the sixth and last part of the description of Excommunication, we learn,
1. Not to condemn the Censure, or open our mouths against this Ordinance of
God, so sovereign, so profitable, so necessary; forasmuch as the Church casts
them out for a season, that it may receive them again for ever. 2. Not to
condemn such persons as are Excommunicated; though we cannot admit of them as
Christian Brethren, yet they are natural Brethren, and may belong to Gods
Eternal Election: The incestuous Corinthian was Excommunicated, yet repented,
and laid hold of the Promises. 3. That whatsoever power is given to the Pastors
of the Church, is given to Edification, and not to Destruction, 2 Cor. 10.8.
This Ordinance is good for all that abuse it not.


The Use we are to make of this Sentence of Excommunication, when it is
denounced against others; viz. 1. We must mourn for them as for the loss of a
Member, though themselves do not; yea, and pray for them most earnestly. 2. We
must beware and look to our selves that we come not into that estate, lest
their condition be ours. 3. We must take heed that we do not harden them in
their sins, but seek by all lawful means to reclaim and recover them, that they
with us may join in lauding and magnifying the Name of the Lord. To whom be
Glory for ever.


This Sentence flows but from the Church alone,
Derived from Christ, Denounced against none
But Members of the Church, when as they be
Duly Convicted of Delinquency.
It Is Power extends not unto such, who may
Be Conquered to Repent some other way:
If not, it may pronounce Exclusion
From the Saints visible Communion,
Until the Church receive clear Evidence
Of godly Sorrow and true Penitence.
FINIS.
AN Alphabetical Table Of all the Choycest FLOWERS Contained in this HOLY
ARBOR. The Number notes the Page, the letters a. b. c. the parts of each Page.
A
ADAM, his state of Innocence, 317 c. 318 a. his Fall, 352 b.c. Adoption, what,
333 a. Doctrine thereof, ibid. to 334 Signs thereof, 333 b, c. Benefits
thereof, 334 a. Duties required thence, ibid. b. Adoration, twofold, 216 b. the
Virtues therein required, ibid. c. Adultery, the several kinds and degrees
thereof, 285, 286 the heinousness of the Sin, ibid. c. 287 a. Remedies against
it, 110 c. 111 a. 288. Affliction, Why God afflicts his people, 198 a. 199 a.
200 c. Comforts opposed to Affliction, ibid. c. The fruit of Affliction, ibid.
b. the Saints advantage thereby, 201 b. Amen, what it signifies, 168 c.
Anabaptists confuted, 45 b. Angels, their Nature, and the manner of their
Creation, 317 b. wherein they are to be imitated by us, 97 b. Anger, holy Anger
and its properties, 281 Sinful Anger, how to be avoided, 279 b. 289 a. how it
differs from hatred, ibid. c. Anointing of Christ, what it signifies, 128 b.
Antichrist, proved to be the Pope, 234 c. 235 a. Apparel, Rules touching it,
375 b, c. the right use thereof, 376 a. Apocryphal Books, not penned by the
Prophets, 6 c. or the Spirit of God, ibid. Ascension, Christ's Ascension into
Heaven, 140 a. 142 c. what most considerable therein, 141 c. why Christ
ascended, 142 a. the Benefits thereof, ibid. b. Assurance, the grounds thereof,
316 b. the necessity and the Signs thereof, 189 c. 190 a. how it may be
increased, ibid.
B
BAptism, what, 41 a. why instituted, 46 c. 47 a, b. how far Necessary, 41 a.
45 c. the Doctrine of Baptism, 41 to 47. Salvation possible without it, 42 c.
what the words in Baptism signify, 42 c. what it is to be Baptized into
Christ's death, 43 b. the right Use of Baptism, 44 c. The Errors touching
Baptism, 45 a. the Papists Error touching it, 46. the difference betwixt
Baptism and Circumcision, ibid. how they agree, 46 b. Bible, the Canonical
Books thereof not perishable, 6 a. Blood of Christ, how it saves from sin, 321
a, b. Body, the Metaphor thereof used in Scripture, what it implies, 151 a.
Bondage, from the which Christ has freed us, is fourfold, 322 a. Bread, daily
Bread, what is meant thereby, 98b. Burial of Christ, the Causes thereof, 37 c.
C
CAlling, twofold, 150 c. Censure, the evil of it, and how many ways it may be
committed, 305 a. Censures of the Church, threefold, 379 c. Ceremonies Judaical
oblige not Christians, 16 a. Chastity, twofold, 289 b. Rules to preserve it,
ibid. c. 290 b. Children, their Duties to Parents, 263, etc. Christ, his
Natures and Properties described, 127 b, c. the degrees of his Humiliation, 127
a. also of his Exaltation, ibid. Why called the Firstborn, ibid. why called
our Head, ibid. 128 a. why called our Lord, 127 Messiah, Christ, or Anointed,
ibid. b. why called the Word, 129 a. the Lamb from the, etc. 322 c. the Head of
the Church, 151 b. how said to be Present with us, 157 b, c. to what ends
Anointed, 128 b. his Royal, Prophetic and Priestly Offices, 128 and 129 his
Theanthropeity and the use thereof, 131 c. Church, what it is to believe in the
Holy Catholic Church, 149 c. why called Catholic, 150 a. The Church twofold,
Visible and Invisible, ibid. b. and 152 c. its Privileges, 151 c. Marks to
know the true Church by, 152 a. her Titles of Honor, ibid. why called Holy,
ibid. b. her Properties, ibid. why God permits it to be persecuted, ibid. c.
153 a. 198 b. why the World hates it, ibid. c. How the Church before Christ's
coming, differs from the Church since his coming, 154 a. how it differs from
Common-weals, ibid. b. her Office and Authority touching the Scripture, ibid.
how the Church may be said to err, ibid. c. what she may not do, ibid. The
Duties of Faith in the Holy Catholic Church, 155 a. Circumcision, why
Abolished, 46 c. why Christ was Circumcised, ibid. b. Communion of Saints,
what, 155 c. 156 c. Doctrine thereof, 155 to 156. How we are said to have
communion with God, 157 c. the Signs of true Communion with God, 158 a. 159 a.
the Duty of the Saints by virtue of this Communion, ibid. c. Conception of
Christ by the Holy Ghost, what, 132 c. what it signifies, 133 c. why he was
conceived, ibid. what it is to believe in Christ conceived, 134 b, c.
Confession, the Properties thereof, 79 b. Christian Confession, twofold, 246 b.
Caveats touching private Confession, 225 c. Consubstantiation, Reasons against
it, 57 b. Conversion, what, 337 Doctrine thereof, ibid. to 343. Conversion
twofold, 341 c. how wrought, 342 a, b. The Object, Subject, Parts and Causes of
Conversion, ibid. b, c. how is differs from false Repentance, 343 a. Covenant,
betwixt God and Man, twofold, 330 a. Covetous, how said to be Idolaters, 309 a.
Covetousness, what, 306 c. the Evils thereof, 309 b. Remedies against it, ibid.
a. 110 b. Creation, described, 124 c. 125 a. 316 why God created the World, 125
the Doctrine of the Creation, ibid. b, c. and 316 to 319 the use of that
Doctrine, 119 b. Creatures, four kinds thereof in the world, 318 b. a twofold
goodness in the Creature, ibid. a. Creed, why vulgarly called Apostolic, 117
c. and why so framed, ibid. Cross, fourfold, 198 c. a Cordial against fainting
under it, 200 a. 201 b. Cruelty, the Properties thereof, 278 b. Curse for Sin,
fourfold, 19 c.
D
DEath of Christ, why so ignominious, 137 c. the Benefits thereby, ibid. a.
Debt, a threefold Debt in Sin, 105 a. Decalogue, how divided, 170 c. the
Doctrine thereof, 169 to 310 Rules how to expound it, 171 c. 172 a, b. Deity,
proved, 119 c. 120 a. Deliverance, how many ways God works it for his people,
113 a. why God sometimes defers it, 200 c. Descention of Christ into Hell,
what, 135 c. the diversity of Opinions touching it, 138 b, c. Despair, what,
222 c, etc. Doctrine thereof, ibid. to 226 threefold, 225 a. Causes thereof,
ibid. b. Remedies against it, 111 b. 225 c. 226 a, b. Discipline; what
Ecclesiastical Discipline is, 376 b. the nature of it, how and by whom to be
administered, ibid. why, and by whom Instituted, 378 a. the Method thereof,
ibid. the Necessities thereof, ibid. c. the Difference betwixt
Church Discipline and State-Government, ibid. Distress of Mind, the kinds
thereof, 224 b, c. Doctrine, how true Doctrine differs from other, 153 c.
Drunkenness, Remedies against it, 111 a. Duties, the kinds thereof, 271 a, b.
E
EArth, a twofold Right to it, 272 c. Eating to the Lord, what and how, 374 b.
Election, what, 313 Doctrine thereof, ibid. to 316 kinds thereof, 315 b.
Effects thereof, ibid. c. the way to obtain Assurance thereof, 316 a. Envy,
twofold, 281 c. why to be avoided, ibid. Remedies against it, ibid. Essence
Divine, what, 2 b, c. 3 b. how the Essence of God differs from the Essence of
the Creature, 4 a. Why the Difference of Essence and Person in the Trinity is
necessary to be known, ibid. b. Examination before Receiving the Lords Supper,
49 c. to 53 b. Examiners, three sorts of Examiners, 53 a. Excommunication,
what, 376 c. its parts, 381 c. the Original thereof, 377 a. how to be used,
ibid. b. of no force against the Child of God, ibid. c. Three Judgments in
Excommunication, 378 b. Observations thereon, 379 b. Duties to be performed by
and to the Excommunicate, 380 a, b. The fearful condition of Excommunicated
persons, ibid. c. the end and use of Excomunication, 381 a, b. with the use to
be made thereof. 382,383. Eyes, Rules for the governing of them to avoid
Adultery, 289 a.
F
FAith, what, 174 b. Doctrine thereof, 379 to 194 What the most Mysterious
point of Faith 1 a. how many ways we may be said to Believe, 183 b. Faith
fourfold, ibid. Historical Faith, what, ibid. c. Justifying Faith, wherein it
consists, 184 a, b. its Properties, 186 c. Gods order in working Faith, 184 c.
how many ways Faith works, 187 a, b. how it admits Degrees, 186 a. 238 c. 239
a. Effectual Faith, what, 187 wherein the effectualness of it consists, 188 a.
the Fruits, Effects and Signs of Effectual Faith, 192 b, c. the Causes of
uneffectual Faith, 188 a. Faithless Works, threefold, 187 c. Trial of Faith, 50
b, c. 51 c. Duties of Faith in Christ Crucified, 138 a. how Faith and Hope
differ, 189 a. wherein they agree, ibid. c. how Faith differs from Presumption,
191 a. how Faith differs from Moral Honesty, 238 b. the Degrees of Temporary
Faith, 239 b. Satan's Engines to destroy Faith, 188 c. Titles in Scripture given
to Faith, 190 c. how far the sense of Faith may be lost, ibid. Motives to grow
in Faith, 191 b. Means to attain it, ibid. c. The use of Faith in Prosperity,
193 c. Faithful, why called Saints, 157 a. Fast, what a Religious Fast is, 369
a. 370 c. 371 a, b. the several kinds thereof, ibid. c. 372 a. Rules touching
the same, 370 c. 371 a, b. 372 c. Popish Fasting abominable, proved, 372 c. 373
a. Father, how understood in the Lords Prayer, 79 b. why Our Father, 78 c. 79
a. Fear of God, what, 176, 215 Doctrine thereof, ibid. to 218. Signs and
Evidences thereof, 217 b. how the Fear of Gods Worship differs from all other
Fears, ibid. a. Feasting, holy Feasting, what, 370 a. Rules touching the same,
373 c. why permitted, 370 a. 373 b. Flesh and Spirit, the War betwixt them, 330
c, the Weapons of that Warfare, and the Nature of it, 331. Fornication, Motives
and Reasons against it, 287 b, c. Forgiveness of Sins, what, 160 b. Doctrine of
it, ibid. to 163 Signs thereof, 161 b. Forgiveness 'twixt Man and Man fourfold,
105 c.
G
GAmes, threefold, 375 a. what Games lawful to be used, ibid. Ghost, Holy
Ghost, third Person in the Trinity, 1 to 5. Gifts, of the Spirit, twofold, 328
b, c. Gluttony, Remedies against it, 111 a. God, his Attributes and Properties,
120 c. 121, 122. Godhead, what, 2 a, c. Gospel, what, 23 c. Doctrine of it,
ibid. to 25. Why called the Gospel of Peace, 24 c. the Effects thereof, 25 a.
Grace, twofold, 329. The operations and properties of Saving Graces, 332 b.
Trials of Sound Grace, 50 a. Grace distinguished from Hypocrisy, 329 a. Grace
Universal, Grace Erroneous, 24 a, b.
H
HAllowing, how many ways taken in Scripture, 84 c. 85 b. Hallowing Gods Name,
what it signifies, 83 b. how many ways Gods Name may be Hallowed, 85 c. Hearing
the Word aright, what, 33 a. Requisites to hear profitably, ibid. c. Rules of
Preparation, ibid. the impediments of Effectual Hearing, 34 a. 35 b.
Preparative Helps before Hearing, 34 b. Rules in time of Hearing, ibid. c.
Duties required after Hearing, 35 c. Heaven, how many ways taken in Scripture,
81 a. Holy Ghost, the Doctrine of Faith therein, 145 to 149. why called the
Spirit of Revelation, 146 a. he is to be prayed unto as God, ibid. his Godhead
proved, ibid. c. why distinct from the Father and the Son, 147 a. his Equality
with the Father, proved, ibid. why called a Spirit, ibid. b. the Titles given
to the Holy Ghost in Scripture, ibid. c. his Operations twofold, 148 a. his
peculiar Offices, ibid. b. how he is given, retained and eclipsed, ibid. c. the
Duties of Faith in the Holy Ghost, 149 a. Honor to Parents, wherein it
consists, 265 b, c. why Civil Honor is due to man, 267 b. how many ways this is
transgressed, 268 b. Hope, what, 175 a. Doctrine thereof, 203 to 207. how many
ways taken in Scripture, ibid. a. Hope, twofold, ibid. b. the Grounds of Hope,
ibid. c. the Exercise of it, 204 a. why it must be steadfast, ibid. c. why
called the Helmet of Salvation, ibid. The special Properties thereof, 204 c.
The way to get, keep and use Hope, ibid. the Necessity of Hope, 205 a. how it
is wrought, ibid. b. how Hope and Faith differ, ibid. c. how Hope and
Presumption differ, 206 a. Signs of Sound Hope, ibid. b. Motives to Hope, ibid.
Means to attain it, ibid. Vices repugnant to it, ibid. c. Householders Duties,
269 c. Humanity of Christ, 133 a. Humility, what, 174 c. the Doctrine thereof,
194, 195. Husbands Duties to the Wife, 269 b. Hypocrisy, what, 236. Kinds
thereof, 237 b. Fruits thereof, ibid. b, c. why not always invisible, 238 b.
why sometimes charged upon the children of God, 239 c. Marks to know an
Hypocrite by, 240 b.
I
IDolatry, what, 233 a. always the destruction of the Idolater, and why, 234 a.
Caveats to avoid it, 235 b. Idolaters, not to be Consorted with, 234 b.
Ignorance, what, 219. Kinds thereof, 221 c. the Mother of what sins, ibid. the
Causes thereof, ibid. c. Image of God in Man, what, 318 c. why God preserves
the Remnants thereof, 319 a. Images made to be Worshipped, most abominable, 231
a. why to be Abolished in all Christian Churches, ibid. b. Incest, wherein it
consists, 286 b. Infants, to be Baptized, 41 b. Infirmities of the Saints, why
recorded in Scripture, 348 c. Intercession to the Father, why proper only to
the Son, 130 b. Joy of the Spirit, how known from Carnal Joy, 330 c. Judgment,
corrupted four ways, 296 a. Reasons against Rash Judgment, 305 b. Caveats in
judging others, ibid. Judgement-Day, what it is, 143 b, c. Last Judgment,
twofold, 144 a. how Christ shall come to Judgment, ibid. Doctrine hereof, 143
to 145 the Day hereof why concealed from us, 145 a. why deferred, ibid. Errors
touching the last Judgment, ibid. Justification, what, 324 b. Doctrine
thereof, ibid. to 326. Kinds thereof, 325. Signs and Effects thereof, 326 a.
K
KIlling, lawful three ways, 277 Kingdom of God, what, 88, 89 a. Threefold,
ibid. c. Kingdom of Satan, what. Knowledge of God, what, 173 c. 177 a, b. the
parts thereof, 176 c. wherein it consists, 177 c. Trials thereof, 50 a. Means
to attain it. 178 a. Signs thereof, ibid. b. Vices repugnant to it, ibid. c.
179 a.
L
LAw, what, 15 b. threefold, 16 c. 17. How the Moral, Ceremonial and Judicial
Law differs each from other, 18. How the Moral Law, the Natural Law, and the
Decalogue, differ, ibid. c. how the Law was given, 170 b. why the Ceremonial
and Judicial Laws are now ceased, and how far, 17 b. the use of them against
Anabaptists, ibid. c. Laws Judicial not necessary for any Commonwealth, 16 a.
Moral Law binding to all, ibid. The use of the Law under the Gospel, 19 c. how
it differs from the Gospel, 16 b. 19 a. how the Law is fulfilled by Christ, 20
b. 130 a. Law written in Man's Heart, 169 c. 170 a. how the performance of the
Law may be said to be possible to the Regenerate, 20 b. The use and ends of the
Law, 20 c. 21 a. how the whole Law is Abrogated, 21 b. Errors touching the Law,
23 a. The Error of the false Church of Rome touching the Law, 22 c. Lending,
twofold, 295 b. Life, threefold, 167 b. how many ways it may be said to be
preserved, ibid. c. Life Everlasting, what, 166 b. the Doctrine thereof, ibid.
to 168. Degrees thereof, 167 b. why called a Rest, 168 a. The Duties of Faith
herein, ibid. b. Love, Gods Love to Man, the Doctrine thereof, 311 to 313.
Degrees thereof, 311 c. kinds thereof, 312 b. the Commendation of Gods Love,
ibid. a. Duties from the Consideration thereof, ibid. c. 313 a. Love, Man's Love
to God, what, 207 the Doctrine thereof, ibid. to 215 the kinds of it, 208 the
parts of it, 52 b. wherein it consists, 175 c. Trials thereof, 52 a. The right
order of Love, 209 a. Assurance thereof, ibid. b. how Love differs from Fear,
ibid. c. the right manner of Love, 210 a. 213 b, c. the Effects and Signs of
Love, ibid. c. 211 a, b. The Properties of true Love, ibid. and 214 a. the
Resemblance betwixt our Love to God and that to our Neighbor, 213 b. Motives to
love the Lord, 212 b. 214 c. the main impediments to Love, ibid. c. without
Love no Salvation, 209 b. Love, Self-love, twofold, 213 c. Lying, twofold, 301
c. the Common Distinction of Lies, 302 a. the kinds and degrees of Lies, ibid.
and 303. Rules against Lying, 302 a. Virtues opposed to it, 304.
M
MAgistrates, their Duty, 268 c. 269 a, b. Marriage-Duties, 269 c. 270 a. Rules
to maintain Concord betwixt Man and Wife, ibid. c. Mass, the vast difference
thereof from the Lords Supper, 57 c. 58 a. Meats, to be Consecrated before the
use thereof, 373 c. 374 a. Mediator, his Office, 130 c. his Necessity of being
true God and true Man, 131 a, b. The benefits of a Mediator, ibid. c. Merit, or
Works Meritorious, a mere Chymera, no such thing in Rerum natura, 359 a.
Ministers, their Duty and Properties, 26 c. 31 a, b. 32 a. Qualifications
requisite for that Calling, 30 a. 31 a. Why to be proved before Admission, 30
c. The Titles given them in Scripture, 30 c. the peoples Duty toward their
Ministers, 32 b. Ministry, why instituted by God, 28 b. the way to promote it,
29 a. why it ought not to be despised, ibid. b. The Reason of the Comparison
betwixt it and Salt, ibid. c. Moses, how said to write of Christ, 130 a. Mother
of Christ, why espoused to a man, 134 a. Murmuring, why unlawful, 294 b, c.
Murder, the kinds and degrees thereof, 273 to 283. the heinousness of the
sin, 278. the way to avoid it ibid. c. Murder against the Soul, how committed,
279 a.
N
NAme of God, what it signifies, 83 b. 243 b. how said to be taken in vain,
241. what that signifies, 243 b. the several ways of taking Gods Name in vain,
244. how it is sanctified, 246. Names in Baptism, to be chosen by Parents, 44
b. Directions for the right choice thereof, ibid. Nativity of Christ, 133 b.
why born of the Virgins substance, ibid. c. Nature, Christ's Divine Nature
proved by Scripture, 134 b. what the word [Nature] Vignifies in the Trinity, 1.
O
Oaths, the nature of an Oath, 246. Oaths extorted how far binding, 241 c.
What is required in a lawful Oath, 246 a. 247 c. 248, 249. What Is to be thought
on before we take an Oath, ibid. c. In every lawful Oath a twofold Bond, 250 a.
Christians may lawfully take an Oath, ibid. Why Oaths may not be used but in
case of Necessity, 251 a. In what cases Oaths do not bind, ibid. Obedience,
what, 367 a. Doctrine thereof, ibid. to 268. The parts thereof, ibid. Rules
whereby to order our Obedience, 367 c. 368 b. the Trials thereof, 51 c.
Angelcal Obedience, 97 c. Perfect Obedience possible to all men before the
Fall, 15 b. now not possible to the REgenerate, ibid. c. Obedience to the
Ministry, 28 c. and the Reasons thereof, 36 a. Obstinacy in sin, the
sinfulness of that sin, 353 c. Opinion, how it differs from Faith, 186b.
P
PArents, their Duty, 267 a. Passion of Christ, 136 b, c. wherein the
Meditation thereon consists, 137 b. Patience, what, 174. Doctrine thereof,
ibid. to 202. Signs and Properties thereof, 197 a. Perfect, when, ibid. b, c.
Encouragements for, and Motives to Patience, 201, 202. impediments thereto,
ibid. Perfection, the several kinds thereof, 20 a. 94 c. Perjury, the several
kinds thereof, 252 b, c. Persons in the Trinity, proved, 4 c. 5 a. what they
therein signify, 1 to 4. why so called, 5 a. wherein they agree, 5 b. their
order of working, 5 c. Policy, Caveats touching it, 194 b. Pontius Pilate, what
he was, 135 a. Popery, why not to be tolerated, 234 b. Power of God, twofold,
123. Prayer, what, 60 b. twofold, 62 b. the parts of Prayer, ibid. c. the
kinds thereof, ibid. c. 63. the qualities of true Prayer, ibid. c. how we
ought to pray, 60 c. how he must be qualified that prays, ibid. and 61 a. the
gesture, time and place of Prayer, 61 a. 62 a. Who alone is to be prayed unto,
ibid. how to conceive aright of God in prayer, 64 c. how the whole Trinity
works in prayer, ibid. the Helps of preparation to prayer, 65 a. Impediments to
be removed before prayer, ibid. b. Duties required in the act of prayer, ibid.
c. why the Creature may not be prayed unto, 66 c. how God answers prayer, 67 b.
why God answers not some prayers, ibid. why God sometimes defers answer to our
prayers, ibid. c. wherein Reverence in prayer consists, 68 a. the necessity of
the Spirit in prayer, ibid. how to pray with the Spirit, ibid. b. Fervency in
prayer, the signs thereof, 71 b. the common Abuses in our prayers, ibid. c.
Duties required after prayer, ibid. who not to be prayed for, 72 b, whom we
ought to pray for, 79 a. Motives to public prayer, ibid. c. the Necessity of
Family Prayer, 73 a. of Secret prayer, ibid. the difference betwixt Praying and
Wishing, ibid. c. the Papists Error touching prayer, 75 a. Prayer, the Lords
Prayer, the use thereof, 75 b, c. what is comprehended therein, 76. Doctrine
thereof, 75 to 117. Preaching, what, 25 c. who may preach, ibid. how Humane
Learning may therein be used without abuse, 26 a. The order to be observed in
Preaching, 26 b. the whole Exercise thereof, wherein it consists, 27 a.
Boldness in preaching how manifested, 27 c. Presence of God with us, 159 b.
Presumption, Remedies against it, 111 c. Pride, what, 226 c. the properties of
a proud man, 228 a. the several kinds of Pride, ibid. b. Remedies against it,
110 c. Spritual Pride to be abhorred, 229. Engines to pull it down, ibid. b.
the way to avoid inward Pride, 228 c. Priests, what they were under the Law, 21
c. how they differed from Prophets, ibid. Priest and Priesthood, twofold under
the Law, 22 a. what things peculiar to the High Priest, ibid. Promises, the
right way to apply them, 193. Prosperity, the effects thereof, 200 b.
Providence of God in preservation of the Scripture, most admirable, 6 b.
Punishment for sin, the degrees thereof, 354 b.
R
REconciliation, what, 130 b. Recreations, Rules touching the same, 374 c. 375
a. Redemption, what, 319 c. fourfold, 320 b. Doctrine thereof, 319 to 322. how
Christ Redeems us, ibid. c. Regeneration, what, 334 c. Doctrine thereof, ibid.
to 337. how wrought, 335 c. 336 b, c. how it differs from Creation, ibid. c.
the degrees thereof, 337 b. Signs thereof, ibid. c. Regulation, Rules thereof
for all Actions, 295 c. Religion, what is the deepest Mystery thereof, 1 a. the
Pillar of Church and State, 25 c. wherein the true Religion differs from all
others, 154 a. Repentance, what, 363 a. Doctrine thereof, ibid. to 367. the
nature, kinds, exercise, properties, effects, trials and signs of sound
Repentance, 364, 365, 51. Repentance not to be deferred, 365 b. Motives to
Repentance, 366 b. and means to attain it, ibid. c. Repetition of Sermon, very
requisite, 28 a. Vain Repetitions, what, 70 c. Resurrection, what, 163.
Doctrine of it, ibid. to 166. proved, 164 b. 165 b. the Duties of such as
believe it, ibid. c. the Types thereof, 165 c. Resurrection of Christ, what,
139 c. how it was wrought, 140 b. why he Rose again, ibid. what chiefly is
therein considerable, ibid. c. why our Resurrection is the Fruit of his, 141 b.
The Duties of Faith in the Resurrection of Christ, ibid. Rest on the Sabbath,
the several kinds thereof, 260 b. Restitution, twofold, 239 c. why required,
ibid. Revenge, Gods Prerogative, 275 c. Motives in man to avoid it, 278 a, b.
Reverence, due to Superiors, the several kinds of it, 266 b. the
overreverencing of Parents, sinful, ibid. Righteousness of Christ, how ours,
325 b. Rome, an Enemy to the Royal, Priestly and Prophetic Office of Christ,
129 c.
S
SAbbath, what it signifies, 258 b. the nature and Doctrine thereof, 254 to
262. Why it is to be kept holy, 256 b. 257 a. 258 a. in what manner, ibid. 260
b. wherefore must Beasts rest that day, 257 b. the degrees of the Sabbath, 258
c. the Sanctification of the Sabbath, twofold, 250 a, b. why it is perpetual,
ibid. c. why now called the Lord's Day, 260 b. what chiefly observable in the
Jewish Sabbath, 261 a. why the Day was changed, ibid. wherefore instituted at
first, ibid. c. how many ways it is broken and profaned, 262. Sacraments,
what, ^7b. their Institution, 38 b. how the signs therein differ from the
things signified, 38 c. how Sacraments differ from the Word, 39. how they
agree, ibid. c. how the Sacraments of the Old and New Testament differ, ibid.
how they agree, 40 a. The ends and right use of Sacraments, ibid. b.
Sacramental Union, wherein it consists, ibid. c. Sacrifices under the Law,
why instituted, 21 b. Salvation, how wrought by God, 329 c. 330 a. not to be
doubted by Gods children, and why, 189 c. Sanctification, what, 326 b. the
Doctrine thereof, ibid. to 333. its parts, 327 b. the kinds thereof, ibid. c.
328 a. and signs, 332 c. Scripture, Holy Scripture, what meant by it, 6 a, b.
why called the Word of God, 7 b. Proved to be the Word of God, 7 c. and 8. The
matter thereof, 8 a. End, ibid. Effects, 8 b. 14 a. Properties, ibid.
Testimonies, 8 c. Majesty, 9 a. Subject, 12 b, c. The Division of Scripture, 9
c. wherein the Old and New Testament agree, ibid. wherein they differ, 10 a.
why all sorts of men are bound to the knowledge of the Scripture, 11a. in what
respects it is difficult, ibid. and the Raeson thereof, ibid. b. Means whereby
to find out the true sense of Scripture, ibid. c. the Graces required for the
right use thereof, 12 a. how to profit by the Scriptures, 13 a. The several
kinds of Neglecters thereof, 13 b. Observations for the right interpreting of
the Scriptures, 13 b. how to decide the doubtful places, ibid. c. the Graces
obtained by the Scriptures, 14 a. the Papists Error touching the Authority
thereof, 9 b. their twofold Scripture, ibid. Seal, twofold, 205 c. Sects of
Jews under the Law, 22 b. Sin, what, 343. why called a Debt, 105 a. the seat of
sin in man, threefold, 345 c. the kinds and degrees of sin, 346, 347. In what
sense sin may be said to be venial, ibid. c. 348 a. the occasions of sin, ibid.
b. the sundry kinds of communication with sin, ibid. the heinousness of Adams
sin, 353 a. God not the Author of sin, 352 c. why God permitted the first sin,
353 a. Two main Disswasives from all sin, 350 c. 351. Rules whereby to see our
sins, 354 a. how God does punish sin, ibid. b. the sad Effects of sin, ibid. c.
An Antidote against sin, 355 a, b. Rules to be observed in forsaking of sin,
ibid. c. Means sanctified by God himself against it, 356 a. Sin, Original Sin,
what, 343. the nature of it, 350, 352. Sin against the Holy Ghost, what, 345 b.
' Degrees thereof, 349 a. how this sin is differenced from all other sins,
ibid. b. why God leaves this sin unpardonable. Sincerity, the signs and trials
thereof, 239 c. Son, the second Person in the Trinity, 1 to 5. Sprinkling in
Baptism, what it signifies, 43 c. Subjection, twofold, 270 b, c. Sufferings,
the Doctrine thereof, 135 to 139. Supper of the Lord, what, 48 a. the Doctrine
thereof, 48 to 58. the signs and things signified, 48 b, c. the Sacramental
Rites of this Supper, 49 b. the Properties of a true Communicant, ibid. a right
disposition in the act of Receiving, 53 b, c. a true discerning of the Lords
Body, what, 54 a. 55 a. what it is to show forth the Lords Death, 54 a. our
Duty after Receiving, 54 b, c. Resemblance betwixt the Passover and the Lords
Supper, 56 c. 57 a. why Christ at the last Passover instituted the Lords
Supper, ibid. why the Bread and Wine is called the Body and Blood of Christ, 58
b. Rules whereby to discern the Lords Body in the Sacrament, ibid. c. how the
Lords Supper differs from Baptism, ibid. it is not necessary to come Fasting to
the Lords Supper, and the Reasons, 59 a. the true and right ends of the Lords
Supper, ib. b. Swearing, the Causes of common and profane Swearing, 243 c.
when and wherein a man may lawfully swear, 250 b, c. Why we ought to swear
only by God, and not by the Creatures, 251 b, c..
T
TEmptation, twofold, 108 b. the kinds thereof, ibid. c. and degrees thereof,
109 a. how God is said to lead a man into Temptation, 108 a. Testimony of the
Spirit, how wrought, 330 b. of our own Consciences, how discerned, 332 a.
Thanksgiving, the subject matter thereof, 68 c. 69. Directions for
Thanksgiving, ibid. c. Theft, the several kinds thereof, 291, 292, 293 a. the
degrees thereof, 296 b, c. 297, 299 c. 300 a. Remedies against it, 293 b.
Thoughts, threefold, 308 b. Unclean Thoughts, twofold, 309 c. how to discern
such Thoughts as the Devil injects into the heart, ibid. an Antidote against
evil Thoughts, 316 b. Toleration of false Worship, exceeding dangerous, 217 c.
Transubstantiation, Reasons against it, 57 b. Trespasses and Sins, why called
Debts, 103 a. 109 b. Trinity, what, 1. the Doctrine thereof, 1 to 5. Trinity
and Triplicity, how they differ, 3 b. Trinity of Persons in Unity of Godhead,
why necessary to be believed and maintained, 4 b. Truth, fourfold, 305 c. Truth
in speech, twofold, 301 b. Types are visible Promises, 17 c.
U
UNion, taken three ways, 157 a. how united to Christ, ibid. b. the Saints
Privileges by their Union with Christ, 158 b, c. 159 a. Motives to Spiritual
Union with Christ, ibid. c. the effects thereof, 160 a. Vocation, what, 322 b.
threefold, 323 a. the Doctrine thereof, 322, 323, 324. Vows, how far they are
to be kept, 242. What is required in every Vow to make it lawful, 252 c. 253 a.
Considerations touching Vows, 253. Usury, conditions and qual fications
touching it, 295 a. Reasons why a man may sometimes take above the Principal,
ibid.
W
WAr, lawful in the godly without the guilt of Murder, 282 b. the
Qualifications to be observed therein, ibid. c. Will, Liberty of Will, what,
338 b. the nature of the Will, ibid. and 339. Liberty of Will how constituted,
340 a. why called Free, ibid. b. Degrees of Free Will, ibid. and 341 b. the
difference betwixt the Liberty of Gods Will and ours, ibid. c. What things in
the Will are common to Angels and Men with God, 341 a. the degrees of the
malice of the Will, 350 a. Will of God, what, 93 c. Doing of Gods Will, what it
signifies, 95 a. Rules how to obey it, ibid. b. Wishing, Conditions required
therein, 310 a. Witness, the heinousness of bearing False Witness, 301 c. Wives
duty to their Husbands, 269 b, c. Word of God, what, 6 a. not always the same
with the letter of the Scripture, b, c. Why to be warily observed in Scripture,
10 c. how falsified by Heretics, ibid. Works of God, twofold, 123 c. Works,
Good Works, what, 356 c. the Doctrine thereof, ibid. to 363. kinds, 358 a. and
ends thereof, ibid. and 359 b. why Good Works required since they do not
justify, 326 b. Rules to be observed in doing Good Works, 357 b. how many ways
God accepts of Good Works in us, ibid. b. the diversity of Opinions touching
the Necessity of Good Works, ibid. c. how the wicked do things seemingly good,
ibid. c. why we are bound to Good Works, 359 c. Good Works cannot merit, 360.
See Merit. Why they cannot justify us, 361 b. how the Works of the Regenerate
and Unregenerate differ, ibid. c. the fruit of Good Works, 362 c. Worship, the
kinds thereof, 171 a. wherein it consists, 216 a. Rules touching it, 217 a.
Required in the Second Commandment, 230. Doctrine of true Worship, ibid. to
240. the kinds of false Worship, 231 c. Rules for right Worship, 232 a.
FINIS.

