The Character of Thomas Merkes, Bishop of Carlisle, out of Bishop Godwin's
Commentaries of the Bishops of England, Part 2. page 149. Together with his
Speech in the last Parliament of King Richard II. Anno 1399. as it is recorded
by Sir John Hayward, in the first Part of the Life and Reign of K. Henry IV.
page 101. Printed at London by John Wolf, Anno 1599.

The CHARACTER.
THomas Merkes, a Monk of Westminster, was made Bishop of Carlisle by the Pope,
at the Request of King Richard II. Anno 1397. against the liking of the
Chapter, and consecrated the same Year; who being entered upon his Charge,
showed himself not unworthy of his Office: For besides that he is commended for
his Learning, and his no small Prudence, he is celebrated, and that not
undeservedly; in the first place for his singular Faith and Constancy toward
his Patron K. Richard; as likewise for his famous Magnanimity, that without any
Fear he boldly professed his Loyalty, not without great and manifest Danger,
when he might honestly have held his peace, and ought to have done so, if he
had regarded only his own safety.

There were some of the Nobles who did not desert the Cause of that unfortunate
Prince, till he was Prisoner to his Rival, Henry Duke of Lancaster. But this
Prelate despising the danger that hung over himself, would not desert the King,
even when he had some while before deserted himself; but durst manfully defend
the King and his Cause, when he had lost his Power and Interest, and when he
certainly might conclude, that no sort of Benefit could redound to the King,
but Ruin might befall himself thereby.

At that very time when the mad multitude, always excessive in their Passions,
not content to have deposed King Richard, and placed Henry of Lancaster (their
Darling) in his Throne, but with their Clamours seemed to extort from the
Parliament, that they might deal yet more severely with the King; and there
were not wanting some in the Parliament it self, who cast out dark and
ambiguous Speeches of putting him to death; this Bishop then was not afraid to
pronounce, That there were none there present, who had right to proceed to
Judgment against the King, (...) as their lawful Prince they had obeyed twenty
two Years.

Some few Heads of this Speech being only related by Bishop Godwin, the whole
is therefore, without any alteration, (Spelling excepted) here printed from Sr.
John Hayward's Book.

When the Inheritance of the Crown was settled on K. Henry, and his Line, it
was moved in Parliament, what should be done with King Richard? In answer to
which the Bishop of Carlisle declared as follows.

The SPEECH.

THis Question (right honorable Lords) concerns a matter of great
consequence and Weight; the (...) whereof will assuredly procure either safe
Quiet, or dangerous (...), both to our particular Consciences, and also to the
common State: Theresore before you resolve upon it, I pray you call to your
considerations these two things: First, Whether King Richard be sufficiently
deposed or no. Secondly, Whether King Henry be with good Justice or Judgment
chosen in his place. For the (...) point, we are first to examine, Whether a
King, being lawfully and fully instituted by any just Title, (...) upon
imputation either of Negligence, or of Tyranny, be deposed by his Subjects.
Secondly, What King Richard has omitted in the one, or (...) in the other, for
which (...) should deserve so heavy Judgment. I will not speak what may be done
in a popular State, or in a consular; in which although one bears the name
and honor of a Prince, yet he has not supreme power of Majesty; but in the
one the People have the highest Empire, in the other the Nobility and chief Men
of Estate; in neither the Prince. Of the first sort was the Commonwealth of the
Lacedaemonians, who after the Form of Government which Lycurgus framed,
oftentimes fined, oftentimes fettered their Kings, and sometimes condemned them
to death. Such were also in Caesar's time the petty Kings of every City in
France, who were many times arraigned upon Life and Death, and (as Ambicrix,
Prince of the Leodienses, confessed) had no greater Power over the People, than
the People had over them. Of the second condition were the Roman Emperors at
the first; of whom some, namely, Nero and Tranquil. in Calig.
Maximinus, were openly (...); others were suddenly surprised by Judgment and
Authority of the Senate: and such are Tacitus in (...).
now the Emperors of Germany, whom the other Princes, by their Aristocratical
Power, do not only restrain, but sometimes also remove from their imperial
State. Such are also the Kings of Denmark and Sweveland, who are many times by
the Nobility (...), either into Prison or Exile. Such likewise are the Dukes of
Venice, and of some other sree States in Italy; and the chiefest cause for
which Lewis Earl os Flanders was lately expelled from his place, was for
drawing to himself cognizance in matters of Life and Death, which high Power
never pertained to his Dignity.

In these and such like Governments, the Prince has not (...) Rights, but is
himself subject to that Power which is greater than his, whether it be in the
Nobility, or in the common People. But if the Sovereign Majesty be in the
Prince, as it was in the three first Empires, and in the Kingdoms of Iudaea and
Israel, and now is in the Kingdoms of England, France, Spain, Scotland,
Moscovia, Turkey, Tartaria, Persia, Ethiopia, and almost all the Kingdoms of
Asia and Africa; although for his (...) he be unprofitable to the Subjects, yea
hurtful, yea intolerable; yet can they lawfully neither harm his Person, nor
hazard his Power, whether by Judgment, or else by Force; for neither one nor
all Magistrates have any authority over the Prince, from whom all Authority is
derived, and whose only Presence does silence and (...) all inferior
Jurisdiction and Power. As for Force, what Subject can attempt, or assist, or
counsel, or conceal Violence against his Prince, and not incurr the high and
(...) Crime of Treason?

It is a common Saying, Thought is free: Free indeed from punishment of secular
Laws, except by Word or Deed it break forth into Action. Yet the secret
Thoughts against the (...) Majesty of a Prince, without attempt, without
endeavor, have been adjudged worthy of death; and some who in auricular
Confession have discovered their treacherous Devices against the Person of
their Prince, have afterward been executed for the same. All Laws do exempt a
Madman from punishment, because their Actions are not governed by their Will
and Purpose: and the Will of Man being set aside, all his doings are
indifferent; neither can the Body offend without a corrupt or erroneous Mind;
yet if a Madman draw his Sword upon his King, it has heen adjudged to deserve
death. And lest any man should surmise that Princes, for the maintenance of
their own Safety and Sovereignty, are the only Authors of these Judgments,
let us a little consider the Patterns and Precepts of holy Scripture.
Nebuchadnezzar, King of Assyria, wasted all Palestine with Fire and Sword,
oppugned Jerusalem a long time, and at last expugned it, slew the King, burnt
the Temple, took away the holy Vessels and Treasure; the rest he permitted to
the Cruelty and Spoil of his unmercifull Soldiers, who defiled all places with
Rape and Slaughter, and ruinated to the ground that flourishing City: After the
glut of this bloody Butchery, the People which remained he led captive into
Chaldaea, and there erected his golden Image, and commanded that they which
refused to worship it, should be cast into a fiery Furnace.

What Cruelty, what Injustice, what Impiety is comparable to this? And yet God
calls Nebuchadnezzar his Servant, and promises Ier 25. 9.
him Hire and Wages for his Service: And the Prophets Jeremiah Ier. 29. 7.
Baruc. 1. 11.
and Baruch did write unto the Jews, to pray for the Life of him, and of
Balthazar his Son, that their Days might be upon Earth as the Days of Heaven:
And Ezechiel, with bitter terms, abhorred the Ezekiel. 12. 18.
Disloyalty of Zedechiah, because he revolted from Nebuchadnezzar, whose
Homager and Tributary he was. What shall we say of Saul? Did he not put all the
Priests to Execution, because one of them did relieve holy and harmless David?
Did he not violently persecute that his most faithful Servant, and dutiful Son
in Law? During which Pursuit, he fell twice into the power of David; who did
not only spare, but also protect the King, and reprove the (...) Soldiers for
their negligent Watch, and was touched in Heart for cutting away the lap of his
Garment; and afterward, caused the Messenger to be slain, who upon Request,
and for Pity, had lent his Hand (as he said) So did Domitian put to death
Epaphroditus, Nero's Libertine, because he helped Nero (although in love) to
kill himself. So did Severus kill all the killers of Pertinax, his
Predecessor: and like wise Vitellius did put to death all the (...) of Galba.
Theophilus, Emperor of Grecia, caused all those to be (...) who had made his
Father Emperor by killing Leo Armenius. And Alexander the Great put to cruel
Execution those that had (...) Darius, his mighty and mortal Enemy.
to help forward the voluntary death of that sacred King. As for the contrary
Examples, as that of Iehu, who slew Iehoram and Ahazia, Kings of Israel and
Judah, they were done by express Oracle and Revelation from God, and are no
more set down for our Imitation, than the robbing of the Egyptians, or any
other particular and privileged Commandment, but in the general Precept, which
all men must ordinarily follow, not only our Actions, but our Speeches also,
and our very Thoughts, are strictly charged with Duty and Obedience unto
Princes, whether they be good or evil. The Law of God ordains, that he which
does presumptuously Deuteronomy. 17. 12.
against the Ruler of the People, shall die; and the Prophet David for Psalm.
105. 15
bids to touch the Lord's Anointed. Thou shall not (says the Lord) rail
upon the Judges, neither speak evil against the Ruler of the People. Exodus 22.
28.
And the Apostles do demand further, that even our Thoughts and Souls be
obedient to the higher Powers: And, lest any should imagine Act. 23. 5.
Romans 13. 1 13.
that they meant of good Princes only, they speak generally of all; and further
to take away all doubt, they make express mention (...). 3 1. 1 (...) 2. 13,
14, 17.
of the Evil, for the Power and Authority of wicked Princes is the Ordinance of
God: And therefore Christ told Pilate, that the Power which he had, was given
him from above: And the Prophet 1 (...) 2. 2.
Romans 13 2
Esaias calls Cyrus, being a profane and heathen Prince, the Job. 19 (...)
(...) Anointed. For God stirs up the Spirit even of wicked Isa. 45 1.
Princes, to do his Will; and (as Iehoshaphat said to his Rulers) they 2 (...).
36 22. and 19 6.
execute not the Judgment of Man, but of the Lord; in regard whereof, David
calls them Gods, because they have their Rule and Authority immediately from
God; which if they abuse, they Psalm. 28.
are not to be adjudged by their Subjects, for no Power within their Dominion
is superior to theirs; but God reserveth them to the sorest Trial: Horribly and
suddenly (says the Wise Man) will the Lord Sap. 6.
appear unto them, and an hard Judgment shall they have.

The Law of God commands, that the Child should be put to death for any
Contumely done unto the Parents: (...) what if (...) Father be a Robber, if a
Murderer, if, for all (...) of Villainies, odious and execrable both to God and
Man? Surely he deserves the highest degree of Punishment, and yet must not the
Son (...) up his Hand against him; for no Offense is so great, as to be
punished by Parricide. But our Country is dearer to us than our (...), Quin. in
declam.
and the Prince is Pater patriae, the Father of our Country; and there fore
more sacred and dear unto us than our Parents by Nature, and Cic. offic. lib. 1
must not be violated, how imperious, how impious soever he be. Does he
command, or demand, our Persons, or our Purses? We (...). 9 37.
must not shun for the one, or shrink for the other; for (as (...) Alphons. a
c^st. in lib. de haeresi in verb.
says) Kings have Dominion over the Bodies, and over the Cattle of their
Subjects, at their pleasure. Does he enjoin those Actions (...) are contrary to
the Laws of God? We must neither wholly obey, Tyrannus.
nor violently resist; but with a constant Courage submit our selves Dominic.
Soto 1. 5. de just. and jur. ^.1. artic. 3.
to all manner of (...), and show our Subjection by enduring, and not
performing. Yea, the Church (...) an Heresy, to hold, that a Prince may be
slain or deposed by his Subjects; for any Disorder or Default, either in Life,
or else in Government, there will be Faults so long as there are Men: And as we
endure with patience a barren Year, if it happen, and unseasonable Weather, and
such other Defects of Nature; so must we tolerate (...) Imperfections of
Rulers, and quietly expect either Reformation, or else a Change.

But alas, good King Richard! What such Cruelty, what such Impi ty has he ever
committed? Examine rightly those Imputations (...) are laid against him,
without any false Circumstance of Aggrava (...), and you shall find nothing
objected, either of any truth, or of great moment. It may be that many Errors
and Oversights have escaped him, yet none so grievous to be termed Tyranny; as
proceeding rather from unexperienced Ignorance, or corrupt Council, than from
any natural and wilful Malice. Oh, how shall the World be pestered with
Tyrants, if Subjects may rebel upon every pretense of Tyranny? How many good
Princes shall daily be suppressed by those, by whom they ought to be supported?
If they levy a Subsidy, or any other Taxation, it shall be claimed Oppression:
If they put any to death for traitorous Attempts against their Persons, it
shall be (...) aimed Cruelty: If they do any thing against the Lust and Liking
of the People, it shall be proclaimed Tyranny.

But (...) it be, that without Authority in us, or Desert in him, King Richard
must be deposed; yet what Right had the Duke of Lancaster to the Crown, or what
reason have we, without his Right, to give it to him? If he make Title as Heir
unto King Richard, then must he yet stay until King Richard's death; for no Man
can succeed as Heir to one that lives. But it is well known to all Men, who
are not either wilfully blind, or grossly ignorant, that there are some now
(...), lineally descended from Lionel Duke of Clarence, whose Off (...) was, by
Judgment of the high Court of Parliament, holthe 8th Year of the Reign of King
Richard, declared next Successor to the Crown, in case King Richard should die
without Issue. (...) the Title from Edmond Crouchback, I will pass it over,
seeing the Authors thereof are become ashamed of so absurd Abuse, both of their
own Knowledge, and our Credulity and therefore all the Claim is now made, by
Right of Conquest, by the Cession and Grant of King Richard, and by the general
Consent of all the People. It is a bad Wool, that can take no Color: But what
Conquest can a (...) pretend against his Sovereign, where the War is
Insurrection, and the Victory high and heignous Treason? As for the Resignation
which King Richard made, being a pent Prisoner for the same cause, it is an Act
exacted by force, and therefore of no force and validity to bind him; and
seeing that, by the Laws of this Land, the King alone cannot alienate the
ancient Jewels and Ornaments (...) to the Crown, surely he cannot give away the
Crown it (...), and therewithal the Kingdom.

Neither have we any Custom, that the People at pleasure should elect their
King; but they are always bound unto him who, by Right of Blood, is right
Successor; much less can they confirm and make good that Title, which is before
by Violence usurped; for nothing can then be freely done, when Liberty is once
restrained by Fear. So did Scilla, by terror of his Legions, obtain the Law
(...) Velleia to be made, whereby he was created Dictator for fourscore Years:
And by like impression of Fear, Caesar caused the Law Servia to be promulged,
by which he was made perpetual Dictator; but both these Laws were afterward
adjudged void. As for the deposing of King Edward II, it is no more to be
urged, than the poisoning of King John, or the murdering of any other good and
lawful Prince; we must live according to Laws, and not to Examples; and yet the
Kingdom was not then taken from the lawful Successor. But if we look back to
Times lately past, we shall find these Titles were more strong in King Stephen,
than they are in the Duke of Lancaster; for King Henry I, being at large (...),
neither restrained in Body, nor (...) in Mind, had appointed him to succeed,
(as it was, upon good Credit, certainly assirmed:) The People assented to this
Designment, and thereupon, without Fear, and without Force, he was appointed
King, (...) obtained full Possession of the Realm. Yet Henry, (Son of the Ear^
of Anjou,) having a nearer Right, by his Mother, to the Crown, (notwithstanding
his Father was a Stranger, and himself (...) beyond the Seas,) raised such
rough Wars upon King Stephen, that there was no end of spoiling the Goods, and
spilling the Blood of the unhappy People, besides the Ruins and Deformities of
many Cities and Holds, until his lawful Inheritance was to him assured. It
terrifieth me to remember how many flourishing Empires and (...) have been, by
means of such Contentions, either torn (...) with detestine Division, or
subdued to Foreign Princes, (...) pretense of Assistance and Aid: And I need
not (...) how (...) this Realm has heretofore been shaken with these (...),
and yet neither the Examples of other Countries, (...) the (...) of our own,
are sufficient to make us to (...)

O Englishmen, worse (...); (...), and (...), (...) after our own Harms: No
(...) have more (...) none less Quiet at home; in other Countries the Sword of
Invasion has been shaken against us, in our own Land the Fire of Insurrection
has been kindled among us; and what are these Innovasions, but Whet-stones to
sharpen the one, and Bellows to blow up the other.

Certainly I fear that the same will happen unto us, which AEsop (...) to have
been fallen unto the Frogs; who being desirous to have a King, a Beam was given
unto them, the first Fall whereof did Put them in some fear; but when they saw
it lie still in the Stream, they insulted thereon with great Contempt, and
desired a King of quicker Courage: Then was sent unto them a Stork, which
stalking among them with stately Steps, continually devoured them. The Mildness
of King Richard has bred in us this Scorn, interpreting it to be Cowardice,
and dullness of Nature; the next Heir is (...) rejected: I will not say, that
with greater Courage, we shall find greater Cruelty; but if either of these
shall hereafter be able to (...) up their Side, and bring the matter to trial
by Arms, I do (...) say, that which Part soever shall carry the Fortune of the
Field, the People both ways must go to wrack.

And thus I have declared my Mind concerning this Question, in more Words than
your Wisdom, yet fewer than the weight of the Cause does require; and do boldly
conclude, that we have neither Power nor Policy, either to depose King Richard,
or to elect Duke Henry in (...) place; that King Richard remains still our
Sovereign Prince, and therefore it is not lawful for us to give Judgment upon
him: That the Duke, whom you call King, has more offended against the King and
the Realm, than the King has done, either against him, or us; for, being
banished the Realm for ten Years, by the King and his Council, (amongst whom,
his own Father was chief,) and sworn not to returnn without special License, he
has not only violated his Oath, but with (...) Arms disturbed the Quiet of the
Land, and dispossessed the King from his Royal Estate, and now demands
Judgment against his Person, without Offense proved, or Defense heard. If this
Injury, and this Perjury does nothing move us, yet let both our private and
common Dangers somewhat withdraw us from these violent Proceedings.

FINIS.

