SYNGOPOS THALASSIOS. A VIEW OF THE ADMIRAL JURISDICTION. WHEREIN The most
material Points concerning that JURISDICTION are fairly and submissively
Discussed. AS ALSO Diverse of the Laws, Customs, Rights, and Privileges of the
HIGH ADMIRALTY of England by Ancient Records, and other Arguments of Law
Asserted. WHEREUNTO Is added by way of Appendix an Extract of the Ancient Laws
of OLERON. By JOHN GODOLPHIN, LL. D.

-- Littusque rogamus
Innocuum. --
Virg. Aen. 7. LONDON, Printed by W. Godbid for Edmund Paxton over against the
Castle Tavern near Doctors Commons, and John Sherley at the Pelican in Little
Britain. 1661.

TO THE Reader.
HE that negotiates about Maritime Affairs, is under Protection without Letters
of safe Conduct, as being within the Sanctuary of Jus Gentium; and the right
Timing of a Modest Address often times proves more successful then a Confident
Argument out of season; There seems some probability, as if this Treatise
obtrudes not upon the world, or thy patience, like a Tract borne out of due
time; nor as if it came like a Physician to his Patients Funeral; or as
Suetonius relates touching the Deputies of Troy, sent to condole with Tiberius
seven or eight months after the death of his sons; If this Treatise be out of
season, others as well as my self are happily deceived; in which case it will
suffice to say with Philip de Comines, That It is very hard for a man to be
wise, that has not been deceived.

For the Method, it is as Regular as the Arguments would afford; though not so
exact as might have been, if the same Metal had been cast into another Mould;
yet not so rude and out of shape, as to suspect from the disproportion of the
Body that the Soul is ill lodged, or like some longbreath'd confused
Discourses, of late much in fashion, whereof it may be truly said as was once
of the Romans two Ambassadors sent to one of their Provinces, whereof one
wounded in the Head, the other lame in his feet, Mittit Populus Romanus
Legationem, quae nec Caput nec Pedes habet; and which for their prolixity and
immethodicality may justly expect the same answer that those of Lacedemon gave
the Samnites, That they had forgotten the Beginning, understood not the Middle,
and disliked the Conclusion.

The Subject Matter of this Treatise is not so much de jure as de jurisdictione
Admiralitatis Angliae, not so much touching the Law of the Admiralty or
Sea-Laws, as now received and practiced in the Navigable parts of the world, as
in reference to the Jurisdiction of that Law within this Kingdom of Great
Britain; So that it will on all hands be eafily agreed, that the argument of
Jurisdictions is Quaestio admodum Subtilis; and no wonder, if you consider,
That that which is de competentia Judicis and Jurisdictionis, is totius juris
velut Obex and repagulum; But (...), and zeal for the Public facilitates the
highest difficulties. To leave the Laws sub incognito, or Jurisdictions sub
incerto, are both of National ill consequence, subjecting the people either to
Transgression through Ignorance, or to unnecessary expenses by multiplicity of
Lawsuits. Lux, Lex, and Veritas, are almost Synonimous; if either of these
suffer, though but a partial Eclipse, how great is the darkness thereof; If a
Jurisdiction, without which the Law is but as a dead Letter, be uncertain, how
great is that uncertainty? but the liquid and clear stating and ascertaining of
Jurisdictions to their proper and respective Boundaries, beyond which one may
not pass to the invading of another, is one of the primary Constitutions of Jus
Gentium.

This short View of the Admiral Jurisdiction was in its Origination designed
only to prevent a Vacuum inter alia negotia, and not to hazard the Censure of a
Superfluum inter aliorum otia. And although a great part of this Fabric, be
laid on a Foundation of Civil Law, yet in regard it is an indispensable duty
which every man owes his Native Country, to keep, as much as may be, sub
incognito, from Strangers and Forraigners abroad, what possibly may not be
absolutely perfect (for there is no perfection under the Sun) quoad modum
procedendi at home, Sumus enim Surdi omnes in Linguis quas non intelligimus;
And in regard this Treatise must recite the very Letter of certain Clauses of
several Acts of Parliament, Transactions of State, and Book-Cases of Common
Law; And in regard the satisfaction of Merchants and Mariners was the main
motive and design of emitting this to the Opinions of men; For these reasons it
could neither properly nor profitably speak the Ideum of that Law, which is no
less adequate to the Admiralty, then current over all the Christian world.

The just Rights and Customs of the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty of England,
are here with submission asserted, and consequently therein many of the
Privileges of Merchants and Mariners; and not only of those who have a
Birthright to England's Laws of the Admiralty, but also of all such, who
negotiating with us, have a Right thereto by the Jus Gentium, and National
Treaties. The Merchant is Bonum Publicum, and such is that Nations Interest
whose Merchants do flourish, that to gratify them with all possible immunities
and due encouragement is now become the common policy of all such Kingdoms and
States, as reap more treasure from their Ports then Pastures. It was most true
what Seneca once said De Benefic. 12.
of them, Mercator urbibus prodest, Medicus aegrotis; without whom a Communalty
or Civil Society of men can scarce plentifully or honorably subsist. It was a
saying with Baldus, that famous Civilian, That the world could not live without
Merchants. Whence it may be rationally inferred, That that Nation is nigh
drowning, whose Merchants are under water; their Function being to import
Necessaries, and to export Superfluities; If therefore such Marine
Controversies as arise between Merchant and Merchant, or between Merchant and
Mariner, should be removed from the Cognizance of the Admiralty (whereof there
is now no fear) ad aliud examen, it might prove no fallible Index, but that our
Trade and Commerce in too sad a measure might also in some short time after be
exported ad aliam Regionem. Here therefore is the Merchant and the Mariner
insisting not for any thing more then what is according to the known Laws of
the Land, and the ancient established Sea-Laws of England, with the Customs
thereof, so far as they contradict not the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, It
will not be denied, but That Jurisdictio originaliter radicata est in Principe,
Angel. in Rub. D. de Jurisdic. om. Judic.
and ab eo descendunt Iudices sicut Rivuli a Font suo. The decision of the
Rights of Jurisdictions resides not in any persons of a private capacity, but
in that Power that creates and constitutes Jurisdictions; that is, the Prince
or chief Magistrate, as the Supreme Source or Fountain of all Humane Laws and
Judicatories.

Reader, it seems something difficult to determine whether the Sophistication
of Truths, or the Fucus of Errors has of late years been the more Epidemical
cheat in Print, it being sufficiently notorious how that adulterous generation
went a whoring after the Press, and what a noisome spawn of illegitimate Brats
were then generated of the froth of the brain, not less numerous then spurious,
that neither their malcontent Parents, nor Religion, Law, Reason, nor Charity
are able to maintain. And although this Treatise be of a more generous
extraction, yet it is very far from complementing it self with the least vain
hopes of exemption from those censures which are common to all men. It is worth
an Asterisk to observe how infeazable it has been in all ages for the most
Innocent to escape this correction; Aristotle that Prince of Peripateciks, was
accused of being too obstruce and obscure, and in many things labors under
Galen's reprehension; the Dialogues of Divine Plato are taxed for being too
confused and immethodical; Virgil by some is counted but a shallow and weak
witted Poet, and by others charged as if he were wholly beholding to Homer for
his works; and Homer himself is derided by Horace, as if he were too drowfie a
poet; Demosthenes could not please Marcus Tullius in all things; Trogus
Pompeius does accuse Titus Livius his Orations of Fiction and Falsities; Seneca
was nicknamed, and called Lime without Sand; Pliny is compared to a turbulent
River that tastes of many things, but digests few. But to come home to the
Worthies of the Civilians Profession; for even the most Orthodox Oracles of the
Civil Law have not escaped such undue reprehensions; As some have affirmed that
Accursius had no depth of Judgment; Others reprove Bartol for the length of
his Distinctions, as if somewhat too Monstrous by having too many Members; On
the other side Albericus is blamed for too much Brevity; Baldus for inconstancy
and instability of Judgment; Alexander for the perplexity of his Method; and
both the Raphaels for their too much subtilty, in some things for their neglect
of and carelessness in the more polite Literature, in other things for their
non-citing and mis-alledging the Doctors; And in a word, those very ancient
and most famous Lawyers, that by the profoundness of their Judgment and
splendor of their Eloquence have so illustrated the dark and obscure places of
the Civil Law, as that they nave left the world just cause of Admiration, no
hopes of Imitation, even these have not escaped the like misreprehensions; For
in the Life of Justinian, Perinus (out of Suidas) has a large Invective
against Tribonian, that Architect of the Pandects; Besides, who more Eloquent
then Ulpian? who more Pithy then Paulus? who more Learned then Callistratus?
who more Acute then Papinianus? who more Distinct, and withal Succinct then
Scaevola? who more Free and Fluid then Caius? who more Profound then Africanus?
who more Delightful and Satisfactory then Pomponius? who more Clear and
Transparent then Celsus? who more Candid and Ingenious then Triphonius? Yet all
these in their Respective and Incomparable Works have met with the said undue
Reprehensions. If this therefore shall chance to meet with some waspish
humors, we must consider the Climate; Nor is it more then wants a President,
or less then needs a charitable Construction; which is the worst Revenge can
possibly be executed by such as choose rather to suffer then offend.

J. C.

THE INTRODUCTION, OR, Preface TO THE Ensuing TREATISE.
THE Systeme of Jurisdictions is, as the Law it self, above the Notions of any
Private Conception; he is something more then of a singular Invention, that
thinks he can arraign the Verdict of all Ages, Nihil dici queat quod non prive
dictum fuit; And he is more then of Terent. in Prolog. Enuchi.
an audacious spirit, that dares invade the Laws Prerogative, Nihil proferri
debet, quod non prius Constitutum fuit. Hence it is, that he that writes of
that Subject without Book, that is, that vents his own Notions, or sails by the
weathercock of his own Brain, not only consiscates the ill-stowed Cargo of his
Intellect, but also renders himself no less arrogant and presumptuous in the
tacit apprehensions of the Prudent, then shallow and ridiculous to the most
rural Capacities. It is therefore nothing dishonorable for Treatises of this
Nature to merit the Application of that Liberty which Chrysippus took, of whom
it is said, That he borrowed so freely from Authors, that if his name were but
expunged or obliterated out of the Title Page, there would nothing remain that
could properly be called his own; It is neither heretical nor disingenious to
accommodate old Truths to new Designs, so it be done aptly and honestly and
sine animo furandi: for there is that Credit by way of debt due to the
Authors, that it is no less then Theft to conceal them, whereas one half of
the debt is paid, if you duly quote them; yea, they become your Debtours, if by
the ingenuity of your Husbandry you raise their Credit according to the
improved value; But he that conceals the Patrons of his Assertions, is ashamed
of his own Craft, robs the Dead, and ch^ats the Living. He that writes
Politics without prefixing his Principles, comes short of his Duty; But he
that writes Law without quoting his Authority, presumes beyond his Line; he
that blushes to be ingenious, is ashamed of his own modesty; Plato borrowed
many things from Pythagoras; Aristotle from Plato, and Theophrastus from
Aristotle; This Treatise has borrowed nothing but what it intends to pay,
here is the acknowledgement of the debt, full satisfaction with interest may be
expected elsewhere, sufficient Caution being given in the subsequent Elenchus
of the Creditours.

As Reason is the soul of the Law, so Jurisdictions may be styled the faculties
of that soul, being reduced to act or exercise as they are accommodated to this
or that object; Consequently therefore to confound Jurisdictions, is to
obliquitate the Rule of all Humane actions, specially if any thing less then
Bonum Publ^cum, under a vizor be the Author of that confusion. Mine and Thine
divide the world betwixt them; in Private transactions they are unhappy
Monosyllables, but in Public affairs they may be of most dangerous
Consequence; Insomuch that Seneca said, The world would be quiet were it not
for those two ambitious Pronouns. Senec. lib. de Morib.
This Meum and Tuum is here understood Collective, for Jurisdictio being of
Public right is not competible with any Private interest exclusive to common
good, L. 1. l. est receptum. ff. de Jurisd. om. Jud. and l. privatorum. Cod. de
Jurisd.
that being beside the design of Jus Gentium, whereby Jurisdictions were
Originally constituted. Natta. Cons. 639. nu. 2. and 99. and Joach. Steph. de
Jurisd. c. 1. nu. 19.
The flux and reflux of Jurisdictions are from and to the Prince as Rivers from
and to the Ocean, wherein Transactions of the greatest weight and burden are
Navigable; And therefore to obstruct the Current of Justice in this or that
Channel, may force open the Sluices of the Law to a Cataclysme of Injustice, and
dissolve the Ligaments of the best jointed Body Politic in the whole world;
And yet if the streams of one Jurisdiction, running too rapid, overflow its
banks to the inundation of another, it is most just and safe, seasonably to
reduce them to their proper Channels. Were it true what Bald. says, Bald. Cons.
333. lib. 1.
Jurisdictiones penes Principes residere quasi Scabellum, the Clashing of
Jurisdictions might be an offense only to the Footstool of Majesty; but if
Jurisdictio ejus ossibus inhaeret, as Tapia and others assert, Car. Tap. in ff.
de Constable. Prin. cap. 4. nu. 14. and Marant. Distinct. nu. 3.
then it may be of an higher nature.

Where diverse persons are concredited with Juridical Trust or Authority, there
the Jurisdiction is either Separate, or Concurrent, or in Common. A Separate
Jurisdiction may appertain to a certain number of persons privative or
exclusive to all others, whereby they are externally qualified to take
Cognizance either of other Persons, L. 6. Cod. de Jurisdict.
or of other Causes, L. ult. Cod. ibid.
or of other Quantities, L. 11. cum seq. de Jurisd.
or of other Places, Alex. tot. tit. de Offic. Juridic.
then what other Judges are Juridically qualified for. A Concurrent
Jurisdiction is that which appertains to many Cumulative, as when the same
Cases are equally subjected to the Cognizance of many Judges: yet so that each
of them, whether one or more, by himself or themselves, may in solidum hear and
determine the Case, and he or they only may take Cognizance thereof to whom
address L. penult. ff. de pet^t. haeredit. and l. 1. Cod. ubi de Crim ^gi.
oport.
by the Complainant is first made, and before whom the Suit is first Commenced,
for in such Cases prevention takes place; and in all Competent Jurisdictions
wherever the Action is first Commenced, there Judgment ought to be given in
the Case. L. 3. ubi coeptum. ff. de Judic.
Thus the Emperial Chamber by an Ordinance there made has Concurrent
Jurisdiction with the Emperor himself, Gail. l. 1. obs. 29. nu. 3. and obs.
42. nu. 3.
save in matters relating to the Fee or Inheritance of the Emperial Crown. A
Jurisdiction in common appertains to many, and that cumulative, as to all of
them, so to all of them together, and complexive; insomuch that one of them may
not proceed without the other, the Law obliging all of them to be present
together in Judgment. L. tune autem. 37. ff. de re judic.
But whatever Jurisdictions there are in a Nation, of how many kinds, degrees,
orders, or subordinations soever, This is a sure Rule and without Exception,
Jurisdictiones non sunt confundendae; L. nemo. Cod. de Jurisd. om. Jud.
The Bonum Publicum is more Rationally stated, and more concerned in the equal
administration of Justice, then to admit the least Confusion in that which is
the only Expedient to prevent Confusion; for Justice (whose office it is not
only to do that which is equal, but also to remove that which is unequal) is
never illustrable through any Mediums that has the least tincture of
Injustice; and although for its material Object, it ever has some one External
action or other, as suppose Equality between Payment and Debt, yet for its
Formal Object it ever has Honesty and Conformity unto, at least an adequate
Consistency with Natural reason, comprised in that external Act.

Of all Jurisdictions, That of the Admiralty or Sea-Affairs has been the least
beholding to the Auxiliaries of the Press in defense of its Ancient Rights and
Privileges against such as would without offense impair the same; The Reason
probably may be either from the paucity of such, as are more specially therein
concerned, in respect of that numerous Host or Retinue, that in fealty to the
other Jurisdictions are most prompt Notaries on all occasions; o^ rather in
that it is of that excellent use in all Maritime Dominions, that the Friends
thereof are well assured, its worth would be better valued, if the want thereof
were more smartly felt. The Ensuing Treatise is to assert the Rights thereof in
part, the design of whose highest Ambition being only rather to excite others
by this hint to supply the defects hereof by a more full and clear illustration
of the Rights and Privileges of so Ancient and Necessary a Jurisdiction, then
to convince any by Arguments less persuasive then that Interest whereon some
men's Prejudice may be founded. Though Merchants and Mariners qua tales be not
such able Lawyers as to know how their Maritime Cases should be determined
according to the exact Rule of Law, yet they are such able Supports to any
Nation or Kingdom, that they are not to be left sub incerto, where or in what
Tribunal to find that Rule under such a quality of Juridical Competency, as not
to run hazards by Land as well as by Sea; yet this under the Notion of a
Maritime Cause, when possibly it is of another Element, may not be strained in
favor of one Jurisdiction in derogation of another; nor under the notion of
Merchants, when posibly they are at best but quasi Mercatores; For not every
one that buys and sells, is thence presently to be denominated a Merchant, but
he only who in the way of Trade and Negotiation deals in Movables for gain or
profit, upon design of disposing thereof in the way of Commerce either by
Importation, Exportation, or otherwise, in the way of Emption, Vendition,
Barter, Permutation or Exchange. L. Unic. Cod. de Nund. and Alceat, in L.
Mercis 66. and l. Mercis 207. de Verb. Signif.
So that he is not properly said to be a Merchant, who once and no more does
buy Commodities that he may sell the same, for it is not one Act that does
denominate a Merchant, Accurs. and alii in l. 1.. Mercis. st. de Trib.
but a certain Assidutiy or frequent Negotiation in the Mystery of
Merchandising, unless he be matriculated or entered as such in the Society or
Corporation of Merchants. He also may be said to be a Merchant, who by common
fame and in the opinion of men is commonly reputed a Merchant. Bart. in Rub.
Cod. de Navic.
They that buy Wares or Merchandises to reduce them by their own Art or
Industry into other forms then formerly they were of, are reputed rather
Artificers then Merchants; C. ejiciens 88. did.
unless by their order they are so transformed by the art and industry of
others upon design of selling the same to gain thereby, in which case they may
be said to be rather Merchants then Craftsmen or Artificers. And such as buy
wares for present money, that without altering the form thereof they may sell
the same at a future day of payment at a far dearer price then they were
bought, are reputed rather Usurers then Merchants. C. in civitate. etc.
consuluit. Extra. de Usu.
But Bankers, Money Changers, and such as deal by way of Exchange are reputed
under the notion of Merchants. Paul. de Castr. in L. in eum. ff. de Instit.
For whereas it is formerly said that a Merchant deals only in Movables,
understand that Money is comprised under that notion. L. moventium, ff. de
Verb. Sign.
So also are Ships.

The Isle of Rhodes anciently was the only Mart of Trade and Commerce in the
whole world; Antiquity describes that Isle and the City thereof as the only
Metropolis of Merchants; who, though they have a Latitude as wide as the Ocean
in point of Trade and Negotiation, yet they may not in time of war transport
Prohibited Goods or Commodities to an Enemy, though designed for the Redemption
of Captives. C. Significavit. Extra. de Judaeis, ubi Abbas.
Yet such is the Reputation of Merchants, that Credit is generally given,
without the least distrust, unto their Count-Books, unless some Legal Exception
may be raised against the same, or other just cause of suspicion. Decii Confil.
40. nu. 3. and Consil. 496 nu. 9.
And whereas each Merchant has his peculiar Mark wherewith his Goods are
usually marked, by way of discrimination from the z] Bald. in Auth. Dos data.
Cod. de Donat. ant. Nupt.
goods of other men, the Law in favor of so laudable a Custom does presume
the goods to be his, whose mark is thereon affixed; Not that such marks,
abstracted from other Concurrent Evidence, do of themselves amount to a full
proof; only they induce such a Presumption, as does (without stronger evidence
or presumption on the other side more energetical) carry the possession for him
whose marks they are; Nor is it therefore less hazardous then unlawful for one
Merchant to make use of another mark, save when in time of war they strain a
point to drive a Colorable Trade, which, with other the like stratagems, the
Law will interpret no other then Solertia or Dolus bonus rather then Trade
shall be totally obstructed, or the Merchants quite discouraged; and where the
goods controverted happen to have the marks of both the parties litigant, in
that case his is the best Condition who has the Possession, till by the other
party better Cards can be showed for the Property;. Commodum. Instit. de
Interdict.
for a Presumption grounded only upon the marks must ever give place to a Proof
of the Title or Property grounded upon an Emption, Permutation, or the like. L.
intra.. vendentibus. ff. de Minor.
Nor may the Plaintiff pendente lite, make use of that mark touching which the
Dispute or Controversy is, till there be a Decision in the Case. Bald. in L.
1. Cod. Ut nemin. Liceat sine Jud. autoritat.


The Interest of the Merchant mainly depending on the Mariners, it concerns him
to know wherein their Duty consists; a right understanding whereof is not with
more facility attainable then by a due perpension of those things which the Law
it self ascribes as faults to Mariners; such in part as these; viz. The Mariner
may not set sail The Skipper or Master is a Mariner, though no common Mariner.
when under an Embargo or other restraint of Princes; nor in Tempestuous
weather; nor after the time limited by Contract; he may not during his Voyage
in reference to Ship or Lading, do ought mis-becoming an honest, able,
skilful, and prudent Mariner; he may not stay in Port or Harbor without cause
when a fair wind invites his departure; he may not deviate in his Course
without just cause, or steer a dangerous or unusual way when he may have a more
secure passage, yet to avoid illegal Impositions, he may somewhat change his
Course and be excusable; L. cum in debito. ff. de Probat.
he may not unlade his Merchants Goods into another Vessel worse then his own;
he may not lade any Goods into a leaky or insufficient Vessel; he may not
over-charge or over-lade his Ship, nor stowe Goods above her birth-mark; he may
not sail without able and sufficient Mariners, both for quality and number; he
may not voluntarily sail by places infested with Pirates, Enemies, or other
places notoriously known to be unsafe: he may not transport persons of an
obscure and unknown Condition, without Letters of safe Conduct, or other
suspected persons, to the rendering Ship or Lading liable or subject to a
seizure or surreption; he may not lade any Prohibited or unlawful goods,
whereby the whole Cargo may be in danger of Confiscation; he may not use any
unlawful Colors, Ensigns, or Flags, whereby his Ship or Lading may incur a
seizure; L. ^. Cod. de Navib. non Excusand.
he may not, being haled at Sea, behave himself otherwise then becomes a
Prudent Master; he may not carry counterfeit Cocquets or other Fictitious and
Colorable Ship-papers to involve the Goods of the Innocent with the Nocent; he
may not with his Vessel engage among the Rocks, being thereto not necessitated
by the violence of wind and weather, nor by night deceived or deluded by false
Lights; he may not refuse payment of the just and ordinary Duties,
Port-charges, Customs, and Imposts, to the hazarding of any part of his
Lading; he may not sail with insufficient Rigging, or Tackle, or with other or
fewer Cables and Anchors then is requisite, respect being had to the Burden of
the Vessel; he may not sail with other Ship-provisions then what is good and
wholesome, and sufficient for the Voyage; he may not neglect the well moaring
of his Vessel in Port; he may not sail without one Cat or more in his Vessel;
he may not suffer the Lading to take wet, to be stolen or embeziled; he may not
permit Debates or Contests among his Mariners, to the prejudice of the
Merchants Goods; he may not let open the hatches of the ship, to endanger the
Lading; he may not prejudice any part of the Lading by any indiscreet or
unskilful stowing of the Goods, respect being had to quantity, nature, and
quality thereof; he may not take up more money upon Bomeree or the Gross
Adventure then his Interest is in ship or Lading; he may not contrary to Order
touch at Ports, not necessitated thereunto by contrary winds or otherwise. Many
other are the faults and miscarriages incident to Mariners; these only by way
of hint to Merchants, who are the greatest sufferers hereby, having herein very
seldom equivalent reparation, the offenders for the most part not sufficiently
solvant.

But here note, that he that will charge a Mariner with a fault in reference to
his Duty, must not think that a general Charge is sufficient in Law, but he
ought to assign and specify the very fault wherewith he is so charged. L.
Praetor ^it, in prin. ff. de Injur.
In like manner he that will infer such or such a sad disaster to have happened
or been occasioned by reason of some fault in the Mariners, must not only prove
the fault it self, but must also prove that that fault did dispose to such a
sad event, or that such a misfortune could not have happened without such a
fault precedent; L. non omne, ff. de Stat. Libe. and l. is, ff. de Act. and
Oblig.
wherein the Mariners though legally qualified as good and competent witnesses
for acts done a shipboard, L. Consensu. Cod. de r^
yet to exculpate and excuse themselves, they are not witnesses without
exception, save in certain Cases wherein the Law allows them a toleration by
way of Juramental purgation; And in case of loss or damage to the Lading or any
part thereof by reason of such disaster occasioned by or in consequence of such
fault of the Mariners, the Merchant has his election in Law, whether he will
sue the Master or the Owners of the Vessel, L. 1.. igitur, ff. de Exerc.
only he can recover but of one of them; And having once determined his
election, he ought to stick to that; In which case if the Master happen to be
Judicially condemned by reason of any default in his Mariners, he may detain
their wages till payment be made, and satisfaction given for such damage as he
suffered by their neglect; for they ought by the Law to refund it out of their
wages. Aret. post Joan. Fab. in. item Exercitor, nu. 3. Instit. de Oblig. quae
ex quasi Delict.


Ships and other Vessels of that kind were Originally invented for use and
profit, not for pleasure and delight; to plow the Seas, not to lie by the
walls; therefore upon any probable design the major part of Part-Owners may,
even against the consent, though not without the privity and knowledge of the
minor part, set a Vessel to Sea, under such Provisions, Limitations, and
Cautions, as by the Law is in that behalf provided; yea, the same thing may be
also effected by the one party only, in case of equality in Partnership. Bart.
and Paul. in l. haec distinctio.. cum fundum, ff. Locat.
But in the choice of a Master, where there are several Part-Owners of the same
Vessel, not always he that is chosen by the major part, but he that is best
qualified for that employment, is according to Law most eligible and to be
preferred. L. non inter, ff. de usu and habi.
If a ship be ripped up or taken abroad into pieces, with design of converting
the Materials thereof to some other use, and it be afterward upon other advice
or change of mind rebuilt with the same Materials, This is now another and not
the same ship, L. inter stipulantem, in. Sacram. ff. de Ver. Oblig. and in l.
quod in. fin. ff. de Leg. and in l. qui res,. aream, ff. de Solut. and in l.
quid tamen, in. in Navis. ff. Quib. mod. Usufr. ami^.
specially if the keel be ripped up or changed, and the whole ship be at once all
taken asunder and rebuilt; It is otherwise if it be ripped up in parts or taken
asunder in parts, and so repaired in parts; In which Case it remains still the
same ship, and not another, albeit it be so often repaired, that in tract of
time there remain not one chip of the Original Fabric. And although a man
repair his ship with plank or other materials belonging to another, yet the
ship shall not be his to whom the materials belong, but remains his who
repaired it. L. Mutius, ff. de rei vendic.
It is otherwise if one takes another man's planks or materials prepared for
the use of shipping, and therewith build a Vessel; for in that case the Owner
of the materials shall be Owner also of the ship, for the property of the whole
Vessel follows the Keel thereof. ff. lib. 6. tit. 1. Leg. 61.
But if one prepare Tables and other Implements, as for the use of a dwelling
house, or the like, with Oak or Deal belonging to another man, and afterward
with those Implements build a ship or other Vessel, in this case the ship is
his who built the same. L. si ex meis, ff. de acq. rer. dom. and l. si
convenerit,. si quis sic, ff. de pign. act.
If a ship be bought, together with all her Tackle, Apparel and Furniture, and
other Instruments thereto belonging, in this case and by these words the ships
boat is not conveyed. L. fin. ff. de fund. instruct. and l. Scapham, ff. de
evict. and l. Marcellus, in. armamenta, ff. de Rei Vendicat.
And therefore if by reason of any offense the ship happen to be forfeited or
confiscate, the said ships boat is not confiscate. Bald. in L. cum proponus.
Cod. de Nautic. soenore. nu. 6.
If one does sell that ship or Vessel, wherewith he has exercised the
detestable acts of Piracy, whether the parties that suffered loss by such
depredations, have any remedy in Law against such ship now bought bona fide, or
against the buyer thereof now bonae fidei possessor, is a question much
controverted; Some are of opinion that he has no remedy in Law, because the
ship is a senseless thing, and not capable of offending. L. 1. ff. si quo ad.
pau. fe. di.
As also, because the buyer thereof (supposing him not conscious of any such
depredations, nor privy to, abettor or partaker thereof) ought not to suffer
being innocent; Jas. in consil. 170. Nomine Magnifici, etc. Vol. 2.
Others are of another opinion, for that it is lawful for every man to seize
the goods of Pirates, Bald. Paul. and Sal. in l. autem navigiae. Cod. de furt.
especially for that there lies a tacit obligation on the goods of all
offenders for satisfaction; Bal. in l. furt. Cod. de furt.
whence some infer that the Merchants who are so despoyled of their goods, have
a Legal recourse for satisfaction on the Pirates goods wheresoever or in whose
hands soever they find them. But the more received opinion is, that whereas it
is held lawful for every man to apprehend the goods of Pirates and be blameless,
it is meant and intended only so long or whilst they are the goods of such
Pirates; L. in delictis.. Si extraneus. ff. de Noxa. and Angel. in l. Sive
manifestus, in. tam diu, ff. de Com. fur.
unless you can also affect the possessors of such goods with a participation
of the same crime. And if any do bona fide, either buy or redeem a ship or
other goods from such Pirates, he may upon restitution thereof to the true
Proprietor recover of him the price of such emption or the redemption-money. L.
mulier. ff. de Captiv.
If a ship or other Vessel by stress of weather or through fear of Enemies or
Pirates, be forced or chased into a Port, no Duties or Customs or other duties
in that case ought to be exacted or paid. L. fin.. si propter necessitatem. ff.
de public. and l. Caesar. ff. de Public.


In fraighting of ships, respect is had either to the ship it self, or else to
a certain part thereof; as also either by the Month, or the Voyage, or by the
Tun; for it is one thing to freight a ship, another thing to take Wearing
Apparel and Victuals for the ships use, pays no freight. ff. Naut. Caupo. stab.
etc. l. 1.. quamcunque rem.
certain Tunnage to freight; So also one thing to be the Cape-Merchant, another
to be an Under-fraighter; and the Law of freight ordinarily is regulated by the
Contract, and varies according to the diversities of Agreement, for Convention
makes Law. If freight be contracted for the Lading of certain Slaves, Cattle,
or the like, and some of them happen to dye before the Vessel arrives to her
Port of discharge, the whole freight is due, that is, as well for the dead as
the living. L. si quis. Cod. de Instit. and Substit.
It is otherwise if the freight were contracted for the Transporting them, in
which case freight is due for no more then are alive at the ships arrival to
her Port of discharge, and no freight due for the dead. Arg. l. Seio. ff. de
annuis legatis. and l. illis libertis. in fin. ff de Condit. and demon. ar^. 7.
If it be not known or liquid, whether the Contract were for the Lading or
Transporting them, the freight is due for the Lading, and consequently as well
for the dead as living. L. qui operas. and l. si aedes.. cum quidam. and. fin.
ff. locati.
If freight be contracted for transportation of a Woman, and she happen during
the voyage to be delivered of a child on Shipboard, no freight is to be paid
for the said Infant. L. Sed and adds. in. Si quis mulierem. ff. Locat.
If such misfortune happen to a Ship in her voyage that she cannot proceed
therein, the freight contracted for does cease in some cases, only for so far
and so much of the said voyage as the said Ship made before such misfortune,
freight shall be paid. Paul. in l. si uno. in. cum quidam. and. ubicunque ff.
locat. and Sign. de Homod. Consil. 195. nu. 6.
If the ship by reason of the fraighters fault, as for Lading Prohibited
Commodities, or the like, be detained or impeded, he shall pay the freight
contracted and agreed; L. penult.. novem. ff. Locat.
The Lading of a Ship in construction of Law is tacitly obliged for the
freight; yea, the payment of freight is preferred before any other Debts to
which the goods so laden are liable, albeit such Debts in time were precedent
to the said Freight. Bald. in L. certi juris. in 4. q. in verb. Quid ergo. Cod.
Locat.
If a set time be fixed and agreed between the Merchant and the Master, wherein
to begin and finish a Voyage, it may not be altered by the Supra-Cargo without
special Commission ad hoc; nor may the Master sail after the time Covenanted,
without refunding the damage out of his own purse, in case any happen at Sea
after the said time. L. Qui Romae.. Callimachus. ff. de verb. Obl.
A Promise being made by a Master of a Ship to to sail Venice from the Port of
London in two months, the promise is performed if he begin to sail the said
Voyage within the two months, though he arrive not at Venice within the said
time. Ang. Alex. and Jason in dict.. Callimachus.
And the sailing from one Port to another, thence to a third, fourth, etc. and
so home to the Port whence she first set sail, o^ some other Port of her last
discharge, is all but one and the same Voyage, L. Relegati. st. de poenis. and
l. ult. ff. de Sep. Viol.
so as it be in Conformity to the Charter Party.

As there is no Art more Necessary, so none more dangerous and uncertain, then
that of Navigation; insomuch that Bias the Philosopher (One of the seven
Grecian Sophies) had a Conceit that Navigators and Mariners, when under Sail,
might not properly be reputed either among the Living or the Dead; and Plutarch
in the Life of Cato, relates it as one of Cato's Three Penitentials at his
death, if ever he conveyed any thing by water when he might have done it by
Land; hence it is that the Law is so favorable in Cases of Wreck, and in
nothing more consults the reparation of any, then such as by that deplorable
Casualty are reduced to misery. Now no man by the Law may be prohibited or
denied the Liberty of Sailing either upon the Seas or any public Rivers. L.
2.. Si quis in mari. ff. Ne quid in loc. publ. and. and quidem. Inst. de rerum.
divi. and l. uni. ff. Ut in flum. pub. navigate licear.
that is, no man may be denied that freedom, or prohibited by any Private
persons, or other who have not Jura Regalia in that Territory, for some Princes
and States have in all ages exercised that Prerogative in this point which no
lesser Powers can pretend unto; Witness the City of Peru, in her Concessions,
and Interdictions or Prohibitions, touching a Liberty or restraint of Sailing
on the Lake of Peru; as also the like by the Venetians as to the Adriatic
Gulf; Angel. Consil. 290. and Veronensis.
Not here omitting to make an honorable mention of that undoubted Sovereignty
which the Kings of Great Britain in all ages have had in the Seas thereof.
Bellissime. Seld. de Mar. Claus.
Another duty of Merchants and Mariners is Contribution, which is not only in
the case of goods cast overboard for the Lightning of the Vessel, but also in
Case of Redemption of ship or Lading, or any part thereof from Enemies or
Pirates, ff. ad Leg. Rhod. de jactu. l. 2.. si Navis a Piratis.
insomuch that if a Master redeem the ship and Lading out of the hands of
Pirates by promising them payment of a certain sum of money, for performance
whereof himself remains as a pledge or Captive in the Custody of the Pirates;
in this case he is to be ransomed or redeemed at the Costs and charges of the
said Ship and Lading, ratably and proportionably as each man's Interest therein
does amount thereunto. Dict.. si Navis a Piratis. and ibid. Juan. de Heuia lib.
3. p. 2. Cur. Philae. Naufragio. 13. nu. 18.
And if there be Cash or money in the Ship; it is not in this case Exempt from
paying its share of the Contribution proportionably to Ship and Lading, because
the Master knowing the said money to be a Shipboard, was probably the more
willing to Redeem the Ship, though at a dearer rate. In a storm, when the Ship
is in danger of perishing, it is not lawful for the Master at his own
discretion, without advice first had with the Merchants or their Factors or
Supracargoes, to cast goods overboard for the Lightning the Vessel, or to Cut
down the Mast, or the like; but in case they consent not, and the Master see
cause for it, he may even against their consents do the same, by the advice of
the major part of his Mariners, who at the end of their Voyage are to make
oath, that they did the same out of Necessity, and only for preservation of
Ship and Lading, and by advice of the Mariners: And the Master in such case is
to take as much care as in him lies, that such goods only be ejected and cast
overboard as are of the heavyest weight, and least value; Leg. Wisbicens. art.
20, 21, 38, 39.
for which Contribution is to be made, wherein the ejected goods are to be
valued as other of the same species are sold for; And Jewels, though of no
burden to the Vessel, yet in such case are liable to pay their share of
Contribution according to their value; And in such Cases the Custom of the
Place is to be observed; for by the Custom of some Places the Oaths of the
Master and a Third part of the Mariners are required, by the Custom of other
Places the Masters Oath with two or three of his Mariners does suffice. But if
only the Ship it self, or any of her Tackle happen by stress of weather to be
damnified, there is no Contribution for the same, though the Lading be all
preserved. ff. ad Leg. Rhod. l. 2.. Si con^c^vatis. The persons of m^n, wearing
appa el, and the Ships provisions are exempt from Contribution.
Contribution is to be made and regulated in this manner; First, the goods
which are lost or were ejected for conservation of the rest, are to be valued
and appraised; then the goods saved are likewise to be estimated, that so the
values of each being known, a proportionable valuation may be contributed by
the goods saved, toward satisfaction for the goods ejected, lost, or thrown
overboard; wherein regard is to be had not to what might be got by the goods
lost, but what the damage is by the loss thereof; which are to be estimated not
so much by what they might possibly be sold for, as by what they cost or were
bought for. Though in truth the more received practice and Custom is, that the
goods Some are of opinion that the goods saved are to be valued as they may be
sold for, but the goods lost as they were bought.
saved and lost are both estimated as the saved goods happen to be sold for,
the freight and other necessary charges being first deducted; and the
Estimation or Computation is to be made by such skilful Merchants and Mariners
as adhere in their judgments and affections to neither party, farther then
becomes indifferent Arbitrators; which may be managed with most equality and
least suspicion or exception, if the appraisment be made upon oath. And if any
in the Ship has Money, Plate, Jewels, or the like, in any Trunk, Chest, Pack,
Fardel, or other thing now to be thrown overboard, he ought to discover it and
show it to the Master of the Ship before the ejection, or otherwise in casting
up the Contribution, these things will come no farther into consideration, then
what the bare Extrinsick value appeared to be. The goods Goods cast overboard
to lighten the ship makes no Der^lict,. ult. Inst. de Rer. Divis. and l. 9..
ult. de acqrer. dom.
preserved are by Law as liable to pay Contribution as Freight, and are
tacitly obliged for the one as for the other, and the Master may retain them
as a pledge in Law as well for the satisfaction of the one as of the other; If
such ejected goods or the Merchandise be afterward recovered out of the Sea,
the Contribution for them ceases, saving for so much as they are thereby
deteriorated. ff. ibid. l. navis.. cum autem.
But if by reason of the Masters over-lading the Vessel, or by his indiscreet
stowing the Goods or the like, such ejection or casting goods overboard
happen, in that case no Contribution to be made by the Merchants; but
Satisfaction by the Ship, the Master, or Owners thereof. Lusi Sernus. 27.. and
Si. 23. Ad Leg. Aquil.
If to avoid the danger of a Storm, the Master cut down the Masts and Sayls,
and they falling into the Sea are lost; this damage is to be made good by Ship
and Lading pro rata; Not so in case the same had happened by the Violence of
the Wind or Storm, or other Casualties. Also no Contribution in case one Ship
strike against another, whereby damage happens; but full satisfaction in case
of a fault or miscarriage in either, or an equal division of the damage in
ca^e it happen by a mere Casualty. Lastly, If a Lighter, or Skiff, or the Ships
Boat into which part of the Cargo is unladen for the the lightning of the Ship,
perish, and the Ship be preserved, in that Case Contribution is to be made;
Otherwise it is, in case the Ship perish, and the Lighter, Skiff, or Ships Boat
be preserved; for no Contribution but where the Ship arrives in safety. L.
Navis. ff. Ad. Leg. Rhod. de jactu.


Within the Cognizance of the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty, and wherein
Merchants and Mariners are principally concerned, are also all causes of
Reprizals, known to us by the Words Reprisaliae, or Letters of Marque, which in
the Law have also other Appellations, as Pignoratio, Clarigatio, and
Androlepsia; For it is supposed that those Reprizals now commonly used, were
first introduced in Imitation of that Androlepsia among the Greeks, with whom
it was a certain Right in case of Murder, to apprehend and seize any three
persons whether Citizens Demosthen. in orat. in Aristogit.
or other of any such place or City, into which the Murderer had fled for
shelter, making it his place of Residence; and such persons to keep in safe
custody, until upon demand the said Murderer were delivered up to Justice; This
was Androlepsia with the Greeks, which (as some suppose) gave an hint to other
Nations for these Reprizals, which are now of practice more common then
commendable. The word Clarigatio is more acceptable to express Reprizals, then
either Androlepsia or Pignoratio; fot Pignoratio is a word too General, and
Androlepsia too Special, as being only by the Authority of such as required the
Revenge of Murder, and upon no other account then that. The word [Reprizals] is
from the French, reprendre and reprise, that is, to Retake, or to take again
one thing for anorher; albeit this may not be by any Private Authority, but
only by the Authority of that Prince whose subject the Injured person is, and
only in case Justice be denied or illegally delayed by that Prince whose
subject the Offender is: For before any concession of Letters of Reprizal or
Marque, there ought to precede the Oath of the party Injured, or other
sufficient proof touching the pretended Injury, the certain lo^s and damage
thereby sustained, the due prosecution for obtaining satisfaction in a Legal
way, the denial or protelation of Justice, the complaint thereof to his own
Prince, Requision of Justice by him made to the supreme Magistrate where
Justice in the ordinary course was denied, persistency still in the denial of
Justice; all which precedent, Letrers of Reprizal (under such Cautions,
Restrictions, and Limitations as are consonant to Law, and as the special Case
may require) may issue by the Jus Gentium; for such Law-Casuists as question
whether Reprizals are Lawful, are in that point rather Divines then Lawyers;
Grotius, who was both, resolves it in the Affirmative; Grot. de jur. Bell. lib.
3. cap. 2. nu. 2.
wherein Nations as well as Persons, the Jus Civil as well as the Jus Gentium
agree the Legality thereof; whether you understand General and Universal
Reprizals, which is quasi Bellum Privatum, or Special and Particular Reprizals,
which is quasi Duellum Publicum.

The precedent Requisites being duly observed, Reprizals may issue by the
Authority of the Prince, in whom alone resides the power as of making War and
Peace, so also of granting Letters of Marque; And this notwithstanding any
Laws to the Contrary that seem to inhibite the same; Ne alius pro alterius
debito and paena teneatur. Auth. and omnino, Ne Uxor Marito C. l. providendum.
de Decurio. li^. 19. c. titu. Ne fill. pro patre. Auth. imo. C. de acti. Cum
Similib.
But with respect to the National Treaties and Coventions, which in this point
may at times vary and alter the Case in Conformity to such National Contracts.
A due Administration of Justice is not the Least sense wherein Princes are
styled Gods; To deny or delay Justice is Injustice; Justice is every man's Right
who has not forfeited what he might claim by the Jus Gentium; therefore the
Prince, within whose Territories Justice is denied or delayed, is Accomptable
to that other Prince whose Subjects suffer thereby; and by the Law Subjects may
be punished for their Prince's Omissions in what the Law of Nations requires.
C. Si Sententiae. c. 16. de Sent. Excom. in 6. Constir.
And that Prince who unlawfully detained the Rights of a Subject under another
Prince, or suffers it within his Territories to be detained, and in the
Ordinary Course of Law denies Restitution, he may at length be compelled to
Restitution, vi and manu militari. L. qui restituere. De rei vindicat.


He that in the way of Reprizals apprehends at Sea another man's Goods, ought
not to keep them in his own private Custody, and to Convert them by his own
authority to his own private use, but ought to bring them to some Public Place
in order to a Judication according to Law; yet they are to remain with the
Captors till by them they are thus brought and submitted to Public Justice; by
the authority whereof Commission may issue for Landing or unlading the said
goods, for Inspection, for Inventorying, and for Sale, either of such part
thereof as upon such Inspection shall appear to be Bona peritura, or of the
whole in case the Court shall see Cause, which is to order payment out of the
Proceed thereof to the party to whose use the Letters of Marque issued for and
toward satisfaction of his debt and damages, after deduction of all dues,
duties, necessary Costs and Charges relating to the Seizure, either Judicially
or Extra-judicially; And the said debt and damages (with all Costs and Charges)
being fully satisfied, the Remainder or Overplus (if any, which seldom happens
in such cases) is to be Restored to their Owners from whom they were taken, and
the said Letters of Marque thenceforward to cease. Such Letters of Marque issue
not without good and Sufficient Caution first given in Court for the due
observance thereof according to Law, the transgression whereof creates a
forfeiture of such Judicial Recognizance or Stipulation; and the Captor for the
better management of a Judicial Proof, in order to a right Decision according
to the merits of the case, is to produce part of the Seized Mariners to be
Sworn and Examined according to Law, as also to Exhibit all the Ship-papers
and Evidences found a Shipboard; and till Judication he may not break bulk of
his own private authority, nor suffer any imbezilement of the Lading, nor Sell,
Barter, or otherwise alter the property thereof, without Special Commission
from the Court for so doing.

In the Law there are certain Persons and Things Exempt from being Liable or
Subject to Reprizals; They whose Persons are Exempt, have also their goods
Free. Reprizals granted against any Kingdom or State, are understood as
against such only who inhabit therein, and not against such who though
originally of that Country against which the Reprizals are, yet inhabit
elsewhere, possibly in the same Kingdom whence the Letters of Marque issued;
for he is not in this point reputed of that Kingdom, State, Province, or City
wherein he does not inhabit, albeit he were born therein; It is not the place
of a man's Nativity but his Domicill, not of his Origination but of his
Habitation, that subjects him to Reprizals; the Law does not consider so much
where he was Borne, as where he Lives; not so much where he came into the
world, as where he improves the world; provided he has there Decenniated or
inhabited Ten years, or less, in case he has born Office there, or paid Scott
and Lot, or removed his Family thither, or his Estate, or the greater part
thereof, or is Naturalized a Denizon of that Country.

Reprizals may not be Exercised on Pilgrims, or such as travel for Religion
sake, nor on Students, Scholars or their Books, or other Necessaries; Nor on
Ambassadors or their Retinue; nor on Women or Children. Likewise Goods found
with a Merchant of another place then that against which Reprizals are granted,
albeit the Factor of such Goods were of that place, are not subject to such
Reprizals; nor ought the presumption of the Place (though strong enough for
Condemnation where proof of an innocent property fails) prevail against fuller
Evidence. Ecclesiastical persons are also by the Canon Law expressly Exempt from
Reprizals; So likewise such persons, as by Storm or Stress of weather are
driven into Port, have an Exemption from the Law of Reprizals according to the
Jus Commune, what the Edict of any particular State in that case may do, is
not here determined; But a ship or Goods belonging to the Subjects of another
Prince, against whom Reprizals are granted, coming into a Port, of that State,
issuing such Letters of Reprizal, not by storm or stresse of Weather, but to
avoid Confiscation for some delict committed at home in their own Country, may
be subject to Reprizals in Port.

This Right of Reprizals (which as some would have it, answers to the Saxon
Withernam) is not only admissable in cases of denial, or protelation of
Justice, as when Judgment may not be had within the time prescribed by Law,
but also when Judgment is given plainly against the Law, and no Remedy to be
had against such wrong Judgment, either in the ordinary course per viam
Provocationis A Appellationis ad J^dicem superiorem, nor in the extraordinary
per viam supplicationis ad principem; understand thus when the matter in
Controversy is tam quod merita quam quod modum procedendi, not Doubtful, for
in Doubtful matters the Presumption is ever for the Judge or Court; But a wrong
Judgment in matters not Doubtful must be redressed one way or other, specially
if such be given to the prejudice of Foraigners, over whom the Authority of a
Judge, though in his own Jurisdiction, is not so exactly the same, as over his
own Subjects; And although it be a Rule in Law, Res judicata pro veritate
habetur, yet it is as true, that Judex male judicans pro injuria tenetur; nor
does a Judgment or a Definitive diminish the merits, though it may alter the
Case; Therefore Paulus the Lawyer held, that a Debtor, that is a Debtor indeed,
though Judicially absolved, yet by nature remains a Debtor still; and therefore
when this happens to be a Foraigners Case, he may (if all other Legal
Expedients fail) for redress have recourse to the Jus Gentium, which holds
conformity with the Law of Nature. Subjects indeed may not by force oppose the
Execution even of an illegal Judgment, nor forcibly prosecute their denied
rights, and that by reason of the Energie of that Power and Authority which is
over them, the Subjects obedience being in the Emphasis of the Magistrates
Authority: But yet Foraigners can fly to the Jus Gentium to Right themselves by
way of Compulsion, which they could not effect by any Legal prosecution, so
long as their Right is reparable by Judgment according to Law, but infeazible
by reason of the denegation or protelation of Justice, contrary to the regular
proceedings of Law. It seems at least Summum jus if not plus justo, that the
Goods of his Innocent Subjects that denied Justice, should be taken and seized
for that ^njustice, whereof they appear no more guilty then the original
Complainants: The truth is, this is not introduced by the Jus Naturae, but yet
being commonly received by Custom and National practice, is now become
qualified for an allowance or tolleration by the Jus Gentium; whether this were
sufficient for Nestor to plunder the Elidenses Hom. Iliad. 2.
for taking away his Fathers horses, or for others on the like peccadilloes in
this Age, to Centuple their Losses on their Innocent Neighbors for their
Princes omissions under color of Letters of Marque, is easier to question then
proper to determine; But whether Christian blood should be engaged in the
quarrel which originully was but of Private Interest, would soon be decided
where no Military man has the Chair. By the Law of Nations all the Subjects of
the Dominion doing wrong, whether Natives or Strangers making their abode
there, are within the reach of Reprizals; whereby it is evident, that Strangers
not permanent there, nor under any of the aforesaid qualifications, are
excepted; for Reprizals being in their nature quasi onus Publicum, are
introduced for the satisfaction of Public Debts, to which Strangers, that are
merely such, are no way obliged; indeed to the Laws of the Land, where their
present being is, they are subject, but yet are not Subjects. And whereas it is
formerly said, that Ambassadors are Exempt from Reprizals, as also their
Retinue and Goods, understand it not of such as are Commissionated to any
Prince or State in enmity or actual hostility against that Prince who issues
such Letters of Marque. Lastly, by the Law of Nations in matters of Reprizals,
whatever is taken, immediately upon the Capture accrues ipso facto to the
Captor in point of Propetty, so far as the Original debt or damage with all
incident costs and charges does amount unto, and the surplus to be restored;
which Equity in this case the Venetians long since used to the ships they took
on this account from the Genuises; But by the Civil Law, Monitions Gregor. lib.
9.
or Citations after a seizure ought to issue, and the parties concerned are not
to carve for themselves, but submit the whole matter to a Judicial Examination,
in order to their Satisfaction, which ought to balance the Damnum Emergens,
but not to exceed by way of Supplement in reference to the Lucrum cessans; for
the Law of Reprizals though otherwise rigid enough, yet Restitutio in integrum
is its ultimate design; and as no man ought to be enriched by another Loss,
so no man ought to gain by his own Loss, when it may not be repaired otherwise
then by Remedies extraordinary, if not unlawful.

Having glanced at some general Heads of the Law of the Admiralty quasi in
transitu by way of Introduction (the least whereof in its due Latitude
requiring more Volumes then are Pages in this) and therein the Custom paid,
with other ordinary Port-charges usual in such cases, It may now be free to
sail from the Law to the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty, being the Port of
Discharge in the Design of this Adventure; The Wind seems Fair, the Seas well
purged of Rovers, and Nereus reinvested with his Trident; The Ensurance
therefore need run but Low, the Danger is not great now that we have Peace with
all Our selves; yea, the Loss is but small though the Ship miscarry, so the
Cargo be preserved, for that is of value, indeed a Jewel, without which the
whole World would soon be Bankerupt; So that if it escape the private Arrest of
some Fained or Fictitious Action, there is no fear of a General Embarg.

Elenchus Authorum; OR, The Names of the Authors Quoted in this TREATISE.
AeSchilus. Accursius. Afflictus. Africanus. Albericus. Alexander. Alonzo de
Chavez. Andreas Masius. Angelus. Annot. in Sac. Bib. Edit. 1651. Aristotle.
Athenaeus. Aurelius. Aul. Gellius. Baldus. Bartolus. Bernar. Gerardus. Boerius.
Boroughs. Brownlow. Bullenger. Caius. Caiciapulus. Cagnolus. Calvinus.
Calistratus. Carbo. Cassanaeus. Castrensis. Casus. Caesar's Comment. Coelus
Rhod. Caepolla. Celsus. Cicero. Comines. Consul del Mar. Corp. Jur. Civil.
Corp. Jur. Can. Codinus. Coke. Corvinus. Cowell. Crook. Curopalates. Curtius.
Cynus. Cothereou. Pet. Coth. Demosthenes. Diodor. Sic. Dion. Afric. Doct. and
Stud. Domin. Niger. Donellus. Durandus. Faber. Fascic. de sup. Adm. in arce
Londinensi. Fazellus. Ferrandus. Fitzherbert. Fleta. Florus. Forster. Fragm.
Hist. Aquit. Fragm. Ascript. Polib. Fulgosius. Galen. Gellius. Gerardus.
Godwyn. Goldsborough. Gothofred. Granat. Decis. Greg. Gemist. Grotius.
Herodotus. Hevedin. Rog. Heved. Hieron. de Chavez. Hobard. Homer. Horace.
Huntindon. Jason. Isernia. Junius. Justinian. Larrea. Leonard. Leon. Marsisc.
Leunclavius. Libanius. Littleton. Livius. Lucius Florus. Lupus de Magistr.
Mainus. Maranta. Marsicius. Malmesburiensis. Math. Paris. Masius. MS. Admtis.
voc. Liber Niger. Monstrelatus. Morisotus. Moursius. Noy. Omphalius. Oleron
Sea-Laws. Ortelius. Oswaldus. Owen. Panormitan. Papinianus. Paris. Math. Paris.
Paris de Puteo. Paulus. Paul. Emil. Peregrinus. Perinus. Petr. Cothereou.
Plato. Pliny. Plutarch. Polybius. Pompeius Trog. Pomponeus. Pruckman. Fred.
Pruck. Ptolimaeus. Purchase. Purpureus. Ramus. Ranulphus Castrensis. Raphael.
Rhodiae Leges. Ridley. Rodorig. Zamerano. Rupertas, alias Robertus le Monachus.
Sabellicus. Salycet. Scardius. Scaevola. Seldom. Seneca. Siffridus. Sigebertus.
Sigonius. Speculator. Spelm. Consul. Spelm. Glossar. Spiegelius. Strabo.
Suetonius. Suidas. Tacitus. Tapia. Terms of Law. Theophanes. Thucidides.
Tibullus. Triphoneus. Tullus. Turpinus. Tuschus. Valor. Max. Valor. Forster.
Victor. Virgill. Vlpian. Vopischus. Zamerano. Zasius. Zonarus.
THE CONTENTS OF THIS TREATISE. viz.
CHAP. I. ADmiral; the Etymon or true Original of the word; with the various
Appellations thereof. CHAP. II. The Original of Navigation, and the Sea-Laws;
with the Antiquity of the Office of high Admiral in the Transmarine or Foreign
parts of the world. CHAP. III. The Antiquity of the Maritime Authority,
together with the Office and Jurisdiction of the Admiralty within this Kingdom
of Great Britain. CHAP. IV. Of Persons Maritime; As also, of such Things as
are properly Cognizable within the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty of England;
And in what method it proceeds to Judgment. CHAP. V. Of Laws and Jurisdictions
in general; with the several kinds and degrees thereof. CHAP. VI. Of
Prohibitions; Their several kinds, Causes and Effects in the Law. CHAP. VII. Of
Fictions; what a Fiction in Law is; how far and in what cases Fictions may be
used according to the Rules of Law. CHAP. VIII. That the Cognizance of all
Causes and Actions arising of Contracts made, and other things done upon the
Sea, is inherent in the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty. CHAP. IX. Of Contracts
and Bargains made, and other things done Beyond the Seas. And whether the
Cognizance thereof does belong to the Admiralty. CHAP. X. Of Judicial
Recognizances and Stipulations for Appearance, and performance of the Acts,
Orders, Judgments, and Decrees of the Court of Admiralty; As also whether the
said high Court of Admiralty of England be a Court of Record. CHAP. XI. Of
Charter-parties made on the Land, and other things done beneath the first
Bridge next to the Sea; vel infra fluxum and refluxum Maris; and how far these
may be said to be Cognizable in the Admiralty. CHAP. XII. Of the Jurisdiction
of the high Admiralty of England, Stat. 13 R. 2. cap. 5. Stat. 15 R. 2. cap. 3.
Stat. 2 H. 4. cap. 11. and Stat. 27 Eliz. cap. 11. CHAP. XIII. Of the Agreement
touching the Admiralty in Anno 1575. As also of the Resolutions Hill. 8. Car.
1. upon the Cases of Admiral Jurisdiction.
A VIEW OF THE ADMIRAL JURISDICTION.
CHAP. I.
Admiral: the Etymon or true Original of the word; with the various
Appellations thereof.
THE Glossographists and others have dug very deep to come at the Root of
this word; Some are of opinion that the word Admiralius is derived from the
Greek (...) Salsus, or from (...) Salsugo, or (...) Salsigo, or from (...)
quasi Salmacidus and Salsus, a Salsugine Elementi cui imperat: Lupus de
Magistr. Paul. Emil. Hist. de Fran. Guaguin. and Morisor. lib. 2. c. 3. de Orb
Maritimo.
from the Saltness of that Element where properly his Authority and
Jurisdiction does reside; Morisot. ib. lib. 2. cap. 7.
vel quod in salso mari suum exercet imperium. But this not seasoned with
sufficient reason, is held but as an unsavory derivation, from the great
improbability that any in imposing of Names should quit the thing it self,
wherein the Denominated is most inherent, and fly only to the more remote
qualities thereof; As if you should say that the Admiral in rebus Maritin^s
were rather Salinarius then Marinarius, as is truly observed by the Learned Sir
Henry Spelman. Spelm. Gloss. verb. Admiral.
So that if you offer this Derivation, though cum grano vel mica Salis, it will
not pass.

Therefore others are of opinion that it is derived from the French [Ameral]
signifying an high Officer or Magistrate in Sea-affairs; But this is as if you
should say, (to keep to the Metaphor of a Liquid Element) That Ice dissolved is
the Mother of Water, rather then Water frozen the Mother of Ice; No doubt but
[Ameral] in French now signifies such an high Officer or Magistrate; but where
was that French word [Ameral] when the Office of Admiral, by other Appellations
almost homophonous to that, was in being, but not in France? That Office by
other Names Appellative not much dissonant to this of Admiral was anciently
known in the world, when no such thing in France; for the Romans themselves
anciently had not these Admirales (for so then called) till Constantine, in
whose time isti Admirales Magistratus creati sunt; Petr. Cothereau. in suo
Schedul. Magistr. Civil. tit. de Praesibus Provin. and Purpur. in l. 1. col.
30. 9. Exemp. Dig. de Offic. ejus cui mandata, etc. Cassanae in Catalog. Glor.
Mund. part. 9. Consid. 16.
that is, among the Romans; for they were known to other parts of the world
long before Constantine the Great, Anno 330. So that it may be truly said that
this high Officer or Magistrate in Sea-affairs is in the French now rendered by
the word [Ameral;] But not that the word Admiral is thence derived.

Therefore others conceive it is derived from the Saxon Aen Mere eal, that is,
over all the Sea. This passes for a current derivation and exposition of the
word Admiral with us; possibly because it sounds both so prettily and pithily;
for we are now as apt as our Neighbors the other side the water to be alamoded
as well with fine words as other vanities. Yet this being a derivation of our
own Generation, it may not be much controverted, specially for that others as
well as those of our own Nation, have acknowledged the word Admiral to be
derived from the Saxons, with whom the word [Hadmiral] does signify Praefectum
maris.

Others there are who will have it derived from neither of these, but from the
Sarazens, [Admirantes] for that in the Infancy of that Empire there were
Quatuor Admirantes, hoc est, Militum Praefecti, qui terra marique pugnarent.
Morisot. Orb. Marit. lib. 2. cap. 3.
But some think that this opinion has no farther truth then in appearance
only; for that the Sarazens had no farther use of that office then in the Holy
Wars. Therefore those Ancients that derive the word much higher then the time
of the Holy Wars, will have it dr^wn rather from the Greek then Arabic; So
that they seem to come nighest of any to the truth, that derive the Pedigree of
this word Admiral both from the Greek and Arabic.

For that Amir in the Arabic signifies Princeps, Praefectus; And (...) in the
Greek Marinus, both which amount to Admiralius, or rather to Amiralius, quasi
Princeps vel Praefectus Anno 1216. in H. 3. Matthew. Paris, viz. In the Wars
between the Christians and the Sarazens in the Land of Promise, That John K. of
Jerusalem with Christ's Militia Castellanum ab equo stravit, and Admiraldum
unum.
Marinus. And this carries the greater probability with it, for that, as the
said Sir Henry Spelman observes, such bilingue Compounds were much in request
at the Court of the Eastern Empire; And it seems Admiraldum capio pro
Centurione sive Capitanio, says the Glossar. on that word, in that place. And
the said Matthew. Par. Anno 1244. in H. 3. viz. Potestas Januae, quem Admiratum
vocant. The Gloss. there, viz. Ille Potestas, Podesta, sive Praetor urbanus,
Nunc dierum Admirallii sive Thalassia^chae munere fungebatur.
yet the more probable, for that in Homer we find the word (...) pro Rectore
maris, or Governor of the Sea; yea, and for Neptune himself. Wherefore Amir,
otherwise Emir, also Amira, Amirae, Amiras, and Amiradis, do signify Regem,
Principem, Eparchum, and Praefectum; also with the Turks and Sarazens, it
sometimes signifies their Great Emperors, and sometimes their Proto-symbol or
President of the Senate. And so the Arabic [Amira] or the Hebrew [Amar] that
is, dixit, edixit: illud praecepit, imperavit; from whence [Mamurem] that is,
praeceptum, edictum; And [Amirom] that is, Dux, Capitaneus, Imperator,
Praefectus. And so (...) or (...) in the Compound; from whence [Alamiro] (with
the Article al) (...), the chief Captain. And from hence the Spanish
[Almirante] or according to their ideom, el Amirante, and thence by turning l
into d the word Admirans by some has been used for Admiral; whence others
also, though very corruptly, yet by reason of their being so Consonant, have
given it other such like names, as Admirabilis and Admirandus; which words, if
compared with the former, will, in the sense of such as have so expressed
themselves, be found to be rather Syncatagorematical in their Signification,
then Homophonous in their Accent or Pronunciation: And therefore the said
Archiologist conceives that the word [Amiratus] (which in Malmsb. is so often
used for Admiral) is not thence derived, but rather from [Amiradis] the
Genitive singular of the foresaid Amiras, by an exchange of d for t, as was
usual; and adds, that the word [Admiraldus] is very Legible in the Antiquities
of Turpin and Rupert or Robert the Monk This Rob. the Monk was one of K. John's
three Emissaries to Miramulalim K. of Morocco, to signify his pleasure to him,
how ready he was to resign his Kingdom.
quasi Al Amiradus, that is, (...), and by an Apocope of the letter d Admiral'
Fragm. Hist. Aquit.
which others will have to be expressed by the word Admirarius. Leon. Marsic.
in casinens. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 44.


This high Officer or chief Magistrate in Marine affairs with us is styled the
Lord high Admiral of England; with the Greeks (...); with the Latins, Amira,
About Anno 1213. when K. John sent Thomas Her^inton, Ralph Nicholson, and
Robert the Monk to the K. of Morocco, we read Misir Nuncios ad Admirallium
Murmelium, Regem Magnum Aphricae, Marrochiae, and Hispaniae, quem Vulgus
Miramumelinum vocat.
Amiras, Amireus, Ammiratus, Admirallus, Admiralis, Admirans, Admirandus,
Admirabilis, Admiravisi, Almiramisi, Admiralius, Amiralius. In the Eastern
Empire, Amerii, Admirantes; also Drungarius, Drungarius Magnus, Drungarius
Classis, Matthew. Par. in Johannem Reg.
Drungarius Navigiorum, Drungarius mari Praefectus. Ita, sed satis Corrupt,
Regem Moroccae indigitarunt Nostrates. Sed Corruptius adhuc Roger. Hovedin.
Almiramisi sive Almiramimoli.
With the Athenians and others, Thalassiarchus, Archithalassus, Magistratus rei
Nauticae Jurisdictionem habens. With the Romans there were Duum Hovedin. pars
poster. in R. 1. page 381.
viri Navales, afterward Praefectus maris, Praefectus Classis, Drungarius
Magn. Fragm. Ascripr. Polybio.
Magnus Dux Classis, Archigubernius. With the Spaniard Almirante, el Amirante,
Adelantado. With the French, L' Ameral, Praefectus maris and Litoris, Custos
Limitis Maritimi, Comes Litoris. Besides these there are several other
Appellations of this one and self-same high Officer, consonant unto the Ideom
of such Nations and Countries respectively, where this great Office has been
constituted.

This word Admirallius, how it should signify Bellicosus or Victoriosus, as
Mat. Paris hints, Matthew. Paris in R. 1. Circa dies istos Rex de Maroch.
potentissimus, quem Mirabilem mundi Vulgus, vel quod melius, Admiralium
Murmulin, id est, Admiralium Bellicosum and Victoriosum nominavit.
seems not easily to be resolved without a far strained Notion; for, without
doubt, of all the presupposed Etymons of that word, that which Junius gives,
seems to be the most Legitimate, that from the Arabic [Amira] Princeps, and
the Greek (...) Marinus; it Et An. 988. Otho. 3. Imp. German. cognomin. Otho
Rufus, iste cognominabatur Mirabilia Mundi.
being generally agreed that this word is a Compound of an Exotic Extraction
from two Sif^rid. Epit. lib. 1. p. 689.
distinct Languages or Tongues; And therefore although Gretserus Glossar. in
Matthew. Paris in verb. Admiral.
be pleased to be displeased with this derivation thereof, yet it is supposed
that others without the least hazard of Naufragating their Art of
Glossographie, may securely cast Anchor and safely acquiesce therein.

CHAP. II.
The Original of Navigation, and the Sea-Laws; with the Antiquity of the Office
of Admiral in the Transmarine or Foraign parts of the World.
THE World was no sooner Created, but Man had Dominion over the Fish of the Sea
Jure Divino, which could not well be Genesis 1. 26.
without Naval Architecture, and some skill in the Art of Navigation; And it is
now no less then nigh 3952 years since Noah, that Totius orbis Thalassiarchus,
or high Admiral of the whole world in that general Cataclysme, with his ship,
or vessel called the Ark of Gopher, laden with a Cargo of Genesis 6. 14. and 7.
24. and 8. 3, 4. The Antiquity of Navigation.
the whole Universe, after a nigh six months Voyage safely arrived at Ararat,
his Port of Discharge in Armenia; which though re-peopled by his Progeny, yet
thence to believe and affirm, Fazel. li. 1. Decad. 2. Rer. Sicul. and Morisot.
Hist. Orb. Marit. l. 1. c. 1.
That by Naval Acquisitions his son Sem proprietated all Asia, his son Japhet
all Europe, and his son Cham all Africa, is more then a mere Historical Faith
has sufficient warrant for, though less then Navigation has Antiquity to
possibilitate.

Whether Jupiter King of Crete, now the Isle of Candie, did purge the Seas of
Pirates, and his son Minos by Sea Fights beat the Athenians into Tributaries, is
also a question more ancient then certain, or easy to be resolved; Sabellic.
Aenead. 1. l. 1. and 4. Plutarch. in Theseo.
yet that Theseus son of Aegeus, King of Athens, vanquished Taurus then high
Admiral to Minos, is asserted by good Authority, Thucid. l. 1. c. 1.
and drowned him in the Sea, hinc Fabula Minotauri. Moris. Ubi supra.
But the Master or Steersman of Theseus his ship, not remembering to advance or
display the White Eagle as the Ensign of Victory at his approach on his Arrival
to Crete, his Father Aegeus betwixt fear and fury cast himself headlong into
the Sea, which gives it the name of the Aegean Sea in the Archipelago to this
day. In those days lived Daedalus, who to avoid the Tyranny of Minos fled, from
Crete into Sicily, but the wings wherewith he is feigned to have fled, the more
modest Mythologists expound to be only the Sails of his ship. Greg. Gemist.
lib. 1. Rer. Graec.
Some are of opinion that former Ages were ignorant of this Art of Navigation,
for that they ingraved Non ultra upon Hercules Pillars: The Nations about
Pontus supposing no Sea in the world like their own, and doubting whether there
were any other Sea then that only; whence Pontus became a word used for the Sea
in general; though Prometheus according to Aeschilus the Attick Poet does
challenge all the glory of this Art of Navigation to himself; whom, among
others who boasted themselves as The Antiquity of the Sea-Laws, or Laws of the
Admiralty.
Authors of this Art, the Rhodians envying, presumed to give Laws, and to
prescribe the Rules of Naval Discipline, in order to the better government of
Maritime affairs, Leg. Rhod. in Leunela. Jus Graec. Romans Tom. 2.
which were now occasionally introduced into the world by this Art of
Navigation; which Laws are found dispersed among the several Titles of the
Civil Law by command from the Emperor Justinian.

This Island of Rhodes in the Mediterranean or Carpathian Sea, was by reason of
the multitude of their shipping and great commerce, Gloss. mag. in l. 1. ff. Ad
Leg. Rhod. and in Decre. did. 2. c. Rhodiae.
no less famous for their Sea-Laws, then for their Monstrous Colossus; The one
was no less the Wonder of Reason in the infancy of Trade, then the other of
Art, though That the greatest of the Seven in all the world; This appears by
that memorable and known passage of the Emperor Antoninus Pius, who in Answer
unto Eudemon's complaint concerning the seizure of his ship-broken goods by the
Customers of the Cyclides in the Archipelago, referres him for Justice to the
Rhodean Laws, professing that although he were Lord of the World, yet the Law
was of the Sea. L. depraedatio. ff. Ad Leg. Rhod. and Le. unclavius. Ubi supra,
in Leg. Rhod.
To which Rhodian Law several other Emperors, as Tiberias, Hadrian, Vespatian,
Trajan, Lucius Septimius, Severus and others do refer all Maritime
Controversies; Leuncla. in prin. LL. Rhod.
yea, for many hundred of years the Mediterranean and most parts of the
Christian Ocean, where any Trassick or Commerce was, subscribed to the Law of
Rhodes in the Decision of all matters of Admiral Cognizance.

But some there are who by no means will admit that the Rhodians should thus
Monopolize the glory of advancing the Common Interest of Mankind, as if the Law
of the Sea was born into the world only by their Obstetricy; and therefore will
have the Origination of the Sea-Laws attributed to the Phaenicians; who as they
are by some accounted the Authors of Arithmetic and Astronomy, so also of
Navigation; whence is that, Prima ratem ventis credre docta Tibullus.
Tyrus. They were the First that took the observation of the North-starre in
supplement of that Navall mystery. These Phaenicians, who came with Cadmus into
Greece, as they Civilized, the Graecians by their Sciences and other
Literature, Herodot. Terpsi.
so they exceedingly debauched them by their Luxury, and insatiable avarice,
which together with their Wares and Merchandise they first imported into
Greece. Diodor. l. 5. c. 15.
These were they that transported Io (whence the Ionean Sea is so called) out
of Greece into Egypt; and were the First that descryed the Two Poles. Morisor.
in Orb. Marit. l. 1. c. 1.
This Phoenicia is the Seacoast of Syria, Strabo l. 16.
The Greeks call this Seacoast Phoenicia, but the Hebrews call it Chanaan, and
the Inhabitants Chananites. Andr. Masius in Jos. 5.
Dionysius also is of opinion that the Phoenicians were the First Mariners,
Merchants, and Astronomers, Dionys. Afric. in verse.
and Tyrus the Maritine Metropolis thereof; whose Trade and Commerce was so
great and remarkable in that Era from Adam, and consequently her Pride and
Luxury, that Less then Two whole Chapters of the Sacred Record will not
suffice Ezekiel. cap. 26. 27.
to describe the vastness of the one, and the Judgments of the other. This City
Tyrus is there styled a Merchant; All whose cap. 27. v. 3.
Ships were made of Fur, their Masts of Cedar, their Oars of Bashan Oak, the
Hatches of Ivory, the Wast clothes, Vanes, Flaggs, and Pendants of Purple and
Scarlet, the common Mariners were the Zidoneans cap. 27. ver. 5, to 9.
and Inhabitants of Arvad, their Calkers were the Ancients of Geball, and their
Steers-men or Pilots where the wise men of Tyrus.

To these may be added the Inhabitants of Caria in Asia Minor, for it is upon
good Records of History that these also were anciently reputed Lords of the
Sea; as also the Inhabitants of Corinth; Likewise the people of Aegina, one of
the Isles of the Cyclades and of Egypt; All these respectively have challenged
to themselves this honorable invention of the Art of Navigation. Herodot. l.
1. and Plin. l. 5. c. 5. and 19. and Athenaeus Deipn. l. 1.
But the First that invented Ships on the Red Sea and sailed thereon, is said
to be King Erythrus, whence the Red Sea took its name of Erythreum Mare.
Morisot. ubi supra. The Egpptians used to coast the shores of the Red Sea upon
Rafts, divided by King Erythrus.


There are others who ascribe this Art of Navigation to the Carthaginians;
Plin. Not. Hist. l. 7.
This seems to have more then fumum probationis in it; for that these Poeni or
Carthaginians originally were Phoeni or Phoenicians, Dom. Nig.
it is most undeniable that their Naval Discoveries attempted by Hanno, Ramus.
by Hamilco, and other Carthaginians are no less famous upon Historical Record,
Diodor. Sicul. l. 5. c. 7. Genesis Chron. and Dom. Nig.
then their Three great though unfortunate Bella Punica Maritima, when Hannibal
himself was Lord high Admiral, which began in the 158 Olympiad, and concluded
with the sad Catastrophe of that famous City of Carthage, then 700 years old,
in the last year of the 158 Olympiad, Morisot. Orb. Marit. l. 1. cap. 16. and
Polyb. Plin. Aurel. Victor. Livie, Sabel. Ennead. Val. Max. Sigon. Lucius
Florus, and alii.
whereby Rome by her Conquests lost the glory of a Competitor for the worlds
Empire.

Now when the Roman Empire (which is so commonly mistaken for the Beast with
ten horns, mentioned in the Prophet Daniel, Dan. 7. 7, 19, 20.
with Teeth of Iron, and Nails of Brass; which in truth is meant of the Syrian
Monarchy under the Seleucidae, so called from Seleucus Vid. Annot. in Dan. per
Theolog. Conv. Edit. an. 1651.
Nicanor) was shattered and dilacerated, whereby a very dark and dismal Eclipse
ensued generally on all Laws, Necessity then, which has no Law, occasioned new
Laws, and bad manners at Sea begat good Laws on Land, yet not so much a
Creation of new Laws that never were before, as a Reviver or Resurrection of
the former out of the Cinders of that fallen Empire, together with such
Additionals as Time, Experience, and Negotiations had administered occasion for,
especially to such parts of the world as by their Neighborhood to the Sea were
most conversant in Naval Expeditions and Maritime affairs. Hence it is, that in
supplement of the forementioned Sea-Laws all the chief Towns of Commerce and
Traffic on the Mediterranean contributed special Sea-Constitutions and
Ordinances of The Readers of the Lecture for the Art of Navigation at Sivil
have published diverse Treatises concerning Marine Causes, viz. Hieronymo de
Chavez. Alonzo de Chavez, and Rodorigo Zamerano.
their own for the better regulation of all Maritime Occurrencies; Such were
the Sea-Laws published by diverse Emperors of Rome, also by the Inhabitants of
Pisa, by the Genuises, by those of Messene in Peliponesus, of Marselleis,
Venice, Constantinople, Arragon, by the Massilites, Barcelonians and others.
Consul. del mare.
As also the Laws, of Oleron, nigh 500 years now Received by most of the
Christian world, specially the Mediterranean, as the Legal Standard of all
Naval Discipline, and for Decision of all Maritime Controversies; For the
Rhodian Laws being grown somewhat Superannuated and obsolete, these Laws of
Oleron succeeded the other, and were published in that Isle, then belonging to
the Duchy of Aquitane, by King Richard the First, at his Return from the Holy
Land in the Fifth year of his Reign, the said Isle at that time being under the
Dominion of the Kings of England.

As to the Original of the Sovereign Command at Sea in the Infancy of Time
(though very uncertain) yet diverse Nations, among which chiefly the Assyrians,
Macedonians, Persians, Egyptians, Romans and Carthaginians have ascribed it to
themselves; But the Greeks confidently assert, that Minos King of Crete had the
first Sovereign Empire over the Sea, and thence would fain have it over our
Faith also, as if Saturn King of Crete, seeing his son Neptune to have invented
the Art of Navigation, gave him the Command of his Navies at Sea, which he
managed with such success, that after-Ages sacrificed to him as to a God of the
Sea; So that Minos being descended of Saturn by his son Jupiter, having
afterward obtained the Superintendency and Guard of the Seas, left it to his
Successors. Notwithstanding which, the Syrians, Egyptians, Cyprians, Rhodians,
but specially the Phoenicians have in all former Ages had the honor of being
reputed the most valiant and expert Artists at Sea in Maritime affairs, and
that from the excellent Conduct and Government of their Navies beyond all other
Nations and Countries whatsoever. But the Corinthians are supposed to be the
first that ever formed or modelled Navies at Sea in a Classical way. Thucid.
Libanius, cells. Rhod. 21. c. 3.


The Athenians had two chief Magistrates for the Maritime affairs; The one was
to provide such a number of ships for this or that design, each Captain having
in charge to see to the Equipping of his own vessel. These Captains they called
Trierarchy. The other had power of setting them to Sea, and of ordering them
home again at his pleasure, whom they called Magistratus rei Nauticae
Iurisdictionem habens, qui Trierarchis jura reddebat, and ordered the several
Squadrons to such or such stations and places of Rendezvous, and discharged
them as he thought fit. This was That Thalassiarchus, or Admiral of the
Athenians, Herod. 6. Thucid. 4. and Demosth. pro Clesiph.
who sometimes had more Admiral's then one at once, as Niceas and Demosthenes;
at other times but one only, as Alcibiades, Pericles, Simon and others.
Likewise under Alexander the Great and his Successors, Kings of Syria and
Egypt, there were diverse Admirals, whereof some were Grecians; others of other
Countries, such were Nearchus, Onesicratu^, Beton, Diognot and others; As also
Patroclus, under Nicanor and Seleucus of the Syrian Monarchy; But most
Memorable is that Commission which was by Ptolomeus Philadelphus given to
Decearchus, as if he had been to take an exact measure of the Circumfercnce of
the whole world by a Line of Navigation.

Among the Phoenicians, the Tyrians and Zidonians were the most eminent in all
Maritime affairs, as was formerly hinted. These not only transported from place
to place varieties of Merchandises till then unknown to other parts of the
world, but also made diverse new Discoveries, and planted Colonies therein, as
at Vtick, Hippone, and Lepte in Africa; at Thebes in Greece and Egypt; and at
Gades and Carthage, that Carthage which is in Spain; But of all Africa, the
other Carthage, once Lord of the Levant, the chiefest for Sea-affairs; whose
Admiral Hanno by order of the Senate discovered the utmost Coasts of Africa,
even to one degree of the Aequinoctial; And their other Admiral Hamilco
discovered all that part of Europe, which till then lay as sub-incognito to the
Carthaginians.

In the Eastern Empire he that was high Admiral was styled Drungarius, as
Drungarius Navigiorum Constantinopoli; Drungarius Classis; Drungarius mari
Praefectus; Drungarius Magnus. Moris. Orb. Mar. l. 2. c. 5. ubi Zonarus,
Codinus, Bulenger. Imp. Romans l. 4. c. 35.
Although some are of opinion that this was a general word with them, or a word
which signified Generals as well by Land as by Sea, Qui Drungis, hoc est,
globis militum imperabant. Vopiscus.
This Magnus Drungarius Classis was a subordinate Officer or Naval Magistrate
under their great Duke, Curopalates in Official. Aulae Constant. vixit an. cir.
1059.
and was also styled Ameralius, which with them was likewise a Common
Appellation for Terrene Princes; Thus the Tyrant of Babylon was called
Amiralius; Huntindon. qui sub Steph. Reg. 1148. floruit and Sigeberti Auctuar.
Thus Huntindon speaks of twelve Amiralios Paganorum, that were slain at the
Siege of Antioch. Thus Matthew. Paris in Will. 2. speaks of 29 Reges and
Amiralios at once appointed for the Wars by Corbaranus. Thus Robert the Monk
Rupertus aliis Robertus Monachus vixit An. 1095. Hist. suae de Bello
Saracenico, l. 4. These are the same twelve Amiralios mentioned by Huntindon.
makes mention of the Son of Cassianus King of Antioch, and twelve Admiraldi of
the King of Babylon slain in battle, whom with an Army he had sent to aid the
said King of Antioch. Thus the Agents or Ambassadors of the the King of
Babylon styled the said King himself Admiraldum. Robertus, ibid. l. 5. in prin.
and Turpinus Archiep. qui floruit an. 803. lib. de Gest. Caroli Mag. cap. 17.
[Si illus sit] says the Learned Sir H. Sp. in his day, and we in ours.
Dominus noster Admiraldus Babyloniae, mandat vobis Francorum Principibus
Salutem. Thus Nabuchodonosor King of Babylon was styled Admiralius. Auth. Fra^.
Hist. Aquitan.
Thus we also find a Chieftain of a Bow-Militia styled Arcubalistariorum
Admiralius. Monstreletus.
So that anciently this word Ameralius or Admiralius did signify as well the
Commander in chief of the Armies by Land as of the Navies by Sea, and sometimes
the office or dignity of Kings and Princes or other Sovereigns of Supreme
Authority; but this you are to limit only to the Turks and Asiaticks.

Again, In the Eastern Empire there were no less then Four Admirals or Amiraei
(there properly so called) at once, for that Mahomet or rather Muhammad
appointed Four Praetors in the Kingdom of the Sarazens which were called
Ameraei. Sigebert. in suis Chron. an. 630. Chro. de Flandr. c. 16. and 46.
And that Muhamed a little before his death constituted Four Ameraeos, qui
debellarent omnes ex genere Arabum Christianos. Theophanes. in Chronico, a
Moursio citatus.
These Four Ameraei were also called Quatuor Admirantes. And of these Four
Admirals with the Sarazens, the one had the Sea-Command of Egypt and Africa;
two others thereof divided the Spanish Coasts betwixt them; and the Fourth had
Palestine and the Coasts of Syria. But many are of opinion that before
Charlemaigne the Sarazens had but one Admiral, viz. Addala: after him Aron; and
after him Mabarmad: which Charlemaigne having war with his Brother Haldala, and
being more then half conquered by him, condescended that the Sarazens should
have two Admirals for one. And Turpin, who was Secretary to the said Emperor
Charlemaigne, acquaints us with an Admiral of Babylon, who came to the succor
and relief of the Sarazens of Spain against the French; as also of another
Admiral, viz. Galaffre, a very potent Favorite with the said Emperor. Turpin.
Hist. de Charlemaigne, cap. 17. and 20.


Under the Roman State, when Pompey banded with Caesar for the Sovereignty,
there were several Admirals, well nigh as many as the Nations were which aided
either party with Shipping, as the Egyptians, Asiaticks, Rhodians, Syrians,
Achaians, and others, over whom M. Bibulus was Lord high Admiral. But when the
Government was reduced to an establishment, the Admiralty was settled also;
which not long after was again divided into two parts, for there was one
Admiralty at Misene and the adjacent Po^^s for the South; another at Ravenne
toward the East; which two for distinctions sake they called the High and Low
Seas; each whereof was under the Command of his proper Admiral, whom they
called Praefectus Classis, as the Captains of their Ships were known by the
style of Navarchi.

It is also evident that in the Roman Empire there was anciently a Company or
Society of Owners and Masters of Ships, as also of Merchant-Adventurers at Sea
in the Isle and City of Rhodes, which above all other places in the world had
once the Prerogative in deciding all Maritime Controversies; Insomuch that the
Emperor Antoninus, who though Imperious enough in styling himself Totius mundi
Dominus, yet in all Nautical Controversies subscribed to the Rhodian Law,
acknowledging that though himself was Lord of the world, yet the other was of
the Sea. L. 9. Depr^catio, Di^. ^d Leg Rhod. de Jact^.
There were also very Ancient Laws made and published by those of Rhodes, who
were most exp^rt at Sea, as well touching Navigation, as Merchant-affairs,
where the use thereof was of no less Consequence unto, then of Antiquity in
that Mediterranean Isle C. Rhodiae, 2. Distinct.
The Assertions upon Historical Record touching the Excellency of their
Sea-Laws, their incomparable skill in Navigation, and the Trophies of their
Naval Victories are almost incredible. Aul. Gell. l. 7. Noct. Attic. cap. 3.
and Fred. Pruckman in sect. Soluta Potestas, cap. 3. nu. 134. usque ad nu. 149.
p. 186.
But this so famous Isle being at length reduced from the glory of a Splendid
to the Eclipse of a Decayed Merchant, by reason of the many irruptions and
incursions made thereon by several Nations, specially by the Turks, a little
before the Reign of Charles the Great, (when about the same time the Turks also
possessed themselves of several other Isles in the Mediterranean) the Gallantry
of the Rhodian Navies soon after vanished; which at length (as some German
Authors would have it) was thence translated to the Oriental Ocean or Baltic
Sea; For that Wisby in Gotland anciently prescribed the Sea-Laws to Merchants
and Mariners; whereunto (as afterward to Lubeck) the Neighboring Cities did
usually appeal in all affairs of Maritime Cognizance.

The word Admiralius from the Eastern Empire was first transported into Italy
and Sicilia, thence into France, and from thence into England. The first high
Admiral in France (as supposed) was one Rutlandus, so called by Aeginardus in
the Life of Comes Maris.
Charles the Great; others called him Rolandus; he was Constituted high Admiral
of France about the time of King Pipin or Charles Martel. Morisot. Orb. Mar. l.
2. c. 7. in prin.
Yet others are of opinion that the office of Ameral, that is, Admiral, was
known to the French first in the days of Lewis the seventh, from whose time
till Philip the fourth there was only one Admiral; After that, there were two
Admirals in France at the same time. Idem l. 2. c. 9. in prin.
And afterward more then two at one and the same time, each dividing his
Jurisdiction according to the Coasts of their several Provinces respectively.
Bernard. Girard. de Stat. and Succes. rer. Galliae l. 4. 2. Calais. Admirallus
seu Comes maris in Gallia, post Conestabilem praefertur.
This high Officer L' Ameral in point of dignity is next to the High Constable
of France. Anciently there were three Admirals in France: one in Aquitane,
another in Brittany, and the other was Generalis in Francia; which three are
now reduced to one, who does exercise his Jurisdiction at the Marble Table in
Palatio Parisiensi. And whereas it is by some supposed that Rutlandus alias
Rolandus (as aforesaid) in King Pipins days was the first Admiral of France,
yet the more probable opinion is, that either Enguarrantus An. cir. 1280.
Dom. de Causy in King Philip the third's time; Or Americus Vicount of Narbone
in King John's time, was the first that ever had the honor of that high An.
cir. 1356.
Office in the Kingdom of France.

CHAP. III.
The Antiquity of the Maritime Authority, together with the Office and
Jurisdiction of the Admiralty within this Kingdom of Great Britain.
IN the precedent Chapter it is said, that the name of Admirallius first came
out of the Eastern Empire into Italy and Sicily, thence into France, and thence
into England; And this (as the Learned Sir Hen: Spelman does suppose) after the
time of the Holy War. For that, as he observes out of Hovenden, when King
Rich. the first prepared his Navy for that design, he appointed no single
person to the Command in chief of that Navy by the name or style of Admiral,
but deputed five several persons Gerard. An^iens. Archiepiscop. Bernard. Baon.
Episc. Robertus de Sabul. Richardus de Canvil. Williel. de Forz de Ulerum
(opinatur) Oleron.
to that Command, by the name or style of Ductores, Justiciarii, and
Constabularii totius Navigii. Spelm. Glos. ex Hovendeno. An. Domini 1264.
The said Learned Author comes something nigher to our times, and says that
this Appellation or style of Admiral seems not to be received with us in An. 8
H. 3. for that the King in his Grant at that time to William de Lucy expresses
himself only by the words of Concessit Maritimam Angliae, without any
mentioning of the word Admiral in that Patent. Nor yet in the forty eighth year
of his Reign, for that he then Constituted Tho: de Moleton, Capitaneum and
Custodem Maris (non Admirallium;) So that he is of opinion, that this high
Officer was not known to us here in England by the name or style of Admirallius
till the beginning of Ed. the first's Reign. And that William de Leiburn was
the first with us that had the dignity of that Office by the style of Admiral,
who at the Assembly at Bruges, Anno 15 Ed. 1. was An. Domini 1286.
styled Admirallus Maris Regis. And that soon after the said Office became
Tripartite, viz. Anno 22 Ed. 1. when the said William An. Domini 1295.
de Leiburne was made Admiral of Portsmouth, and the adjacent parts; John de
Botecurts of Yarmouth, and the Neighboring Coasts thereof; and a certain Irish
Knight of the West and Irish Coasts. After whom succeeded three other Admirals
for the same Divisions in the 19 year of Ed. 2. An. Domini 1325.
viz. John Otervin, Nicholas Kiriel, and John de Felton. And in those days the
Admiral was often styled not Admirallus maris, but Admirallus flotae Navium, id
est, Classis, or the Admiral of the Navy. And this Admiral had his power
divided into two stations; the one was the North station, which began at the
mouth of the River of Thames, and thence extended it self Northward,
comprising Yarmouth and all the Eastern shore. The other was the West station,
which beginning likewise at the mouth of the River of Thames, stretched it self
Westward, comprising Portsmouth, and all the South and West of England. But
the first that was styled Admirallus Angliae was Richard the younger son of
Alan Earl of Arundel and Surrey, in the tenth year of R. 2. Spelm. Glossar.
verb. Admiralius. In temp. W. 1. Odo Admiralius.

Ita Spelm. Gloss. De Admiralio Gall. An. 1142.




Notwithstanding all this which has been said, intimating that William de
Leiburn in the 15 of Ed. 1. was the first in England that had this Office by
the name or style of Admirallus; yet it is evident by Matthew. Paris in H. 1.
(which is about 150 years before that of Ed. 1.) that at that time there was
mention made of one Balac Ameralius here in England, who in Fight took and
surprised Jocelyne Earl of Edessa, Edessa, A Town in Mesopotamia, anciently
called Antioch, one side of Euphrates. Edessa, Macedoniae urbs in Aemathia
Regione.

Ortelii Thesaur. Geogra.


with his Cousin Galeranus. But at what point of Time precisely that Office by
the style or Appellation of Admiral was first known in England, it matters not
much, since the thing it self, which signified that Office now known to us by
the style of Lord High Admiral, and the Jurisdiction thereof has ever been in
this Kingdom time out of mind; This will the more evidently appear if you
consult the Records of History, and compare them with others National, touching
that Ancient Dominion the Kings of England have ever had over the Seas of
England, together with that Maritime Jurisdiction which has ever asserted the
same. That the Kings of Great Britain have an undoubted right to the
Sovereignty of the Seas of Great Britain, none but a few Seldeni Mar. Claus.
seu de Domin. Maris, and Boroughs Sovereign. of the Seas.
Mare Libertines (and that for their own Interest) ever scrupled. Sir Hen:
Spelman gives us an Account of a very Ancient Record Spelm. Consil. p. 414.
Leges Ecclesiasticae Hoeli Dha (id est, Boni) Regis seu Principis totius
Walliae, e Secularibus suis Mss. decerptae, ci^. an. 928.

Malmesb. de Regib. l. 2. c. 8* Marthusius Archiparata (id est, Princeps
Nautarum) ita Spelm. Gloss. Rex Angliae Soli and Sali Orbis Brittanici Dominus.


extracted out of the Laws of Hoelus Dha, Regis seu Principis Walliae, cir. An.
928. which for the proof of the said Dominium quasi uno intuitu, is here
inserted in haec verba, viz.

Variato aliquantulum Nominis Vocabulo, dici hic videtur Huwell Da, qui
superius Hoel Dha, Latin Hoelus and Hoelus, alias Huval, (quem Malmesburiensis
unum fuisse refert e quinque Wallensium Regibus) Quos cum Cunadio Rege
Scotorum, Malcolmo Rege Cambrorum, and Maccusio Achipirata (seu Principe
Nautarum vel Marium Praefecto) ad Civitatem Legionum sibi occurrentes, Rex
Anglorum Eadgarus in Triumphi pompam deducebat. Una enim impositos, remigrare
eos hanc coegit, dum in Prora ipse Sedens, Navis tenuit gubernaculum: ut se hoc
spectaculo, Soli and Sali orbis Brittanici Dominum praedicaret and Monarcham.

In this Ancient and Memorable Record King Edgar, Neptune-like rides in Triumph
over the British Seas, giving the world to understand, that Dominium Maris is
the Motto of his Trident. Consonant whereunto is that which the Law it self
says Bald. Consil. 51. and Tusch. Concl. 87. verb. m^^e.
Mare dicitur esse de districtu illius Civitatis vel Loci, qui confinat cum
mari, in quantum se extendit territorium terrae prope mare. In a word, to this
purpose the Renowned Learned Mr. Seldom, who has left no more to say, but with
Jo: Baptist Larrea in one of his Decisions of Granada, That Authorum sententias
non ex numero, sed ex ratione metiri oportet; and pensitari debent juris
fundamenta, non Authorum Elenchum velut calculatione computari Larreae Decis.
Granat. Disp. 4. nu. 32. and Leg. unic. fect. sed neque. cod. de vet. jur.
enucleando.


The Lord High Admiral is by the Prince concredited with the management of all
Marine Affairs, as well in respect of Jurisdiction as Protection. He is that
high Officer or Magistrate to whom is committed the Government of the Kings
Navy, with power of Decision in all Causes Maritime as well Civil as Criminal;
So that befide the power of Jurisdiction in Criminals, he may judge of
Contracts between party and party touching things done upon or beyond the the
Seas. Terms of Law, verb. Admiral.
Wherein he may cause his Arrests, Monitions, and other Decrees of Court to be
served upon the Land, as also may take the parties body or goods in execution
upon the Land. Ibid.
The Lord Coke in honor of the Admiralty of England, is pleased to publish to
the world, that the Lord Admirals Jurisdiction is very Ancient, and long before
the Reign of Ed. 3. and that there has ever been an Admiral time out of mind,
as appears not only by the Laws of Oleron, but also by many other Ancient
Records in the Reigns of Hen. 3. Ed. 1. and Ed. 2. Coke part. 1. Instit. l. 1.
c. 1. Sect. 3. and lib. 3. cap. 7. Sect. 439.
Thus as the Laws and Constitutions of the Sea are nigh as Ancient as
Navigation it self, so the Jurisdiction thereof has universally been owned and
received by all Nations; yea, and this Kingdom is by way of Eminency Crowned
by Antiquity for the promulgation of the one, and establishment of the other.
For, otherwise without such Maritime Laws, and such an Admiral Jurisdiction,
how could the Ancient Britains, long before Julius Caesar invaded this Isle,
restrain all Strangers (Merchants excepted) from approaching their Confines,
Caes. Com. de Bell. Gall. l. 4. fo. 72.
or regulate such Navies as were the wonder of that Age? Ibid. l. 3. fo. 53.
Or, how could King Edgar in the Titles of his Charters have effectually styled
himself as well Imperator Dominusque rerum omnium Insularum Oceani qui
Brittaniam circumjacent, as Anglorum Basileus, Ex Charta fundationis Eccesiae
Cathed. Wigor. cit. per Sir Tho. Boroughs in his Sovereignty of the British
Seas, p^. 21.
or maintain in Naval Discipline these four hundred Sail of ships appointed by
him to guard and scour the British Seas? Ranulphus Cestrensis.
And did not Etheldred after Edgar for the self-same end and purpose set forth
to Sea from Sandwitch one of the greatest Navies that ever this Kingdom
prepared? Doubtless this was no Lawless Navy, without Maritime Constitutions
for the due regulation thereof according to the Laws of the Sea, Consonant to
that of the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty then in use and received by all the
Maritime Principalities of Europe. In Temp. H. 3. Rich. de Lucy had maritimam
Angliae, and Tho. Moleton was Capit. and Custos M^ris*

Spelm. Glos.




Whereas it is universally acknowledged, That the Admiralty of England is very
Ancient, and long before the Reign of Edward the third, who ever consults
Antiquity shall find it far more Ancient, and long before the Reign of Edward
the first; even time out of mind before the said Edward the first. To this
purpose very remarkable is that ancient Record in the Tower of London,
entitled, De Superioritate Maris Angliae and jure Officii Admirallatus Record
in the Tower of London.
in eodem, and out of the old French rendered into English by Sir John Boroughs
in his compendious Treatise of the Sovereignty of the British Seas, page 25,
etc. edit. Anno 1633. in which it evidently appears that the Admiralty of
England, and the Jurisdiction thereof was far more Ancient then Edward the
first, and that from age to age successively, and time out of mind even before
the days of the said Edward the first, it was so owned and acknowledged by this
and all other Neighbour-Nations, as appears by the said Record, which was
occasioned by a National Agreement of certain differences arising between the
Kings of England and France in the 26 year of the Reign of the said Edward the
first, by reason of certain usurpations attempted by Reyner Grimbald, then
Admiral of the French Navy in the British Seas; in which Agreement the
Commissioners or Agents for the Maritime Coasts of the greatest part of the
Christian world, of Genoa, Spain, Germany, Holland, Zealand, Freezland, Denmark
and Norway, then present, made this memorable Acknowledgment and Declaration,
which is extracted out of the said Record, as to so much thereof as relates to
the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty, viz. That the Procurators of the Admiral of
the Sea of England, and of other places as of the Seacoasts, as of Genoa,
Catalonia, Spain, Almayne, Zealand, Holland, Freezland, Denmark and Norway, do
show that the Kings of England time out of mind have been in peaceable
possession of the Seas of England, in making and establishing Laws and Statutes
and Restraints of Arms and of Ships, etc. and in taking Surety, etc. and in
ordering of all other things necessary for the maintaining of Peace, Right and
Equity, etc. and in doing Justice, Right and Law, according to the said Laws,
Ordinances and Restraints, and in all other things which may appertain to the
Exercise of Sovereign Dominion in the places aforesaid. And A. de B. Admiral of
the Sea deputed by the King of England, and all other Admirals ordained by the
said King of England have been in peaceable possession of the Sovereign guard,
with the Cognizance of Justice, etc. And whereas the Masters of the Ships of
the said Kingdom of England in the absence of the said Admiral have been in
peaceable possession of taking Cognizance and judging all actions done in the
said Sea, etc. the said Procurators in the names of their said Lords, do pray,
etc. that speedy delivery of the Goods and Merchandises taken and detained, be
made to the Admiral of the said King of England, to whom the Cognizance of the
same of right appertains, so that without disturbance of you or any other he
may take Cognizance thereof, and do that which appertains to his Office. In
which Record it is observable, that even in those days, that is, before the
time of Edward the first, the Kingdom of England had not only the Sovereignty
of the British Seas, but also an Admiral empowered with a Jurisdiction
Maritime to take Cognizance and judge all actions done on the Sea; to do
Justice, execute the Laws of the Sea, maintain Peace, Right and Equity,
according to the Laws and Ordinances of the Sea; and in a word, to minister
Justice in all things that to the Office of an Admiral appertain. To this might
be added King John's Ordinance made at Hastings, touching the Sovereignty of
the British Seas in the point of striking Sail or veiling Bonnets by the
vessels of Foreign Nations to the Kings Ships; which Ordinance was made long
before the Reign of Edward the first, and wherein mention is likewise made of
the high Admiral of England; But this that has been said, may abundantly
suffice both to prove and illustrate the Antiquity of the high Admiral of
England, and his Jurisdiction in matters Maritime.

If it be granted, that Frustra sunt Arma foris, nisi est Consilium domi, it
cannot well be denied but that Frustra sunt Arma domi nisi est Dominium Maris,
to which as undeniably may be added, that Frustra est Dominium Maris, nisi est
Jurisdictio domi. If therefore the Ancient Rights of the Jurisdiction of the
Admiralty of England, should at any time happen to be impeded by ought, not so
properly qualified Judicially to conserve the Rights of the Sovereignty of the
British Seas, might not a Decay of Trade, that Cornucope of all National
Provisions, be justly suspected? specially if Neighbour-Nations should thence
pretend to spy any thing like a flaw in Englands Trident, as if her Dominium
Maris were in part dismantled; the Plenty as well as the Safety and Security of
these Kingdoms, much (under God) consisting in the Power of the Royal Navy,
those Pyramids of Majesty, or Floating Garrisons. The Dominium and Jurisdictio
Maris are such Confederates, you cannot prejudice the one, and not the other;
And therefore to scruple that Jurisdiction, those Ancient Rights, whereby our
own are conserved and secured, may not be convenient; So that to doubt whether
the established Jurisdiction of the high Admiralty of England may judge of
Marine Properties, is implicitly and in effect to infer, that the Navy
Royal is equipped only to enamel the Seas and take the Air, or that their
Captures at Sea must evaporate; if Bargains and Sales made super altum mare can
transfer and alienate properties, then doubtless the Admiralty can finally
judge and determine thereof. Nor let any man think the Admiralty of England is
without remedy, in case one man impleads another for an Admiral cause in
another Jurisdiction; Jurisdictionem cujusvis Judicis impediens ab co puniri
potest, and coerceri, licet ejus subditi non sint.

Bart. and Alex. in L. Omnibus. Sect. is videtur. D. Si quis jus dic. non
obtemp. and Larrea. Decis. Gran. Disput. 1. nu. 13.


for if the Admiralty cannot summon and proceed according to the ancient style,
practice and known Rights, Laws and Customs of that Jurisdiction, against such
who in matters of Admiral Cognnizance prosecute the Law elsewhere, then what is
it more then a mere Idaea that has no real existence beyond the pleasure of
the parties litigant; nor is that other mis-opinion, viz. (That the Admiralty
may not enforce its own Decrees and Orders) worth Consideration; for
Jurisdictione concessa, censetur concessum Imperium mistum, h. e. potestas
Exequendi. Quoniam ca concessa, censentur etiam tradita ea sine quibus Exerceri
non potest.

Carbo de Legib. lib. 11. Disp. 10. page 503. Lit. c.


the Executive part is so inherent in a Jurisdiction, quatenus such, that in
effect it is but a lame and imperfect Jurisdiction without a Power Coercive,
which breaths life and vigor into a Jurisdiction by Execution, which otherwise
would be but like a Body without a Soul, or like an expert Commander
Commissioned to fight with his hands manacled behind him; Sententia absque
Executione, est quasi splendidum Justitiae Cadaver. This mis-conceit may Where
the Place is the Foundation, it is more then a bare Circumstance.
not be much inferior to theirs who are dextrous at Translocations by surmises
and suggestions; if the the circumstance of Locality be too light to be
traversable, yet it is of weight enough to be surmised or suggested. It is not
impossible but that the Cognizance It may not be hence imagined but that it is
as legal at Common Law to surmise in a Declaration an act possibly done at Sea
to be indeed done at Land: As at the Admiralty, to allege in a libel an act
possibly done at Land, to be indeed done at Sea, vel infra Jurisdictionem
maritimam.
of the Admiralty, being in part essentiated by the Marine Circumstance of
Place, may be obstructed by a mere missurmise as to the Locality. Suum cuique
tribuere is the ultimate Result or Summa Totalis of all Justice, whose Balance
is then best poized, when it weighs each Individuals, Policy with a Consistency
to common Interest. It may be not less hazardous then chargeable for the Client
to complement Justinian with one Fee, and Littleton with another; If so, it
will be expedient that he provide two Purses, which is but the beginning of
sorrows, for he must also provide a good stock of Patience to await the event
of what will put no issue to the merits of his Cause. And in Concurrencies of
Jurisdictions a Concurrency of Jurisdictional A Concurrency of Jurisdiction
seems to imbly a Divisibility thereof. But Jurisdictio est quid Incorporale,
nec divisionem recipit nec patitur. Dur. Spec. l. 4. de praescript. nu. 22.
qualifications as well Intrinsic as Extrinsick seems to be requisite; for,
admitmitting that by a Dedimus potestatem, or other Writ of like nature,
witnesses might be Legally examined at Venice, Lisboa, or other transmatine
parts; Sub mutuae vicissitudinis obtentu, yet what Judicial improvement can be
made thereof, especially quando ex facto jus oritur, without due intrinsic
qualisications calculated for the Meridian of a Maritime Cause. But to digress,
may be to transgress; To return therefore to the Antiquity of the Office and
Juisdiction Admiral.

The Author of the Book entitled, Rights of the Kingdom, has several
Passages concerning the Office and Jurisdiction of the Admiralty, whereof one
is (page 90.) That Edgar that Great Monarch, was as great a Conqueror by Sea,
as Aethelstane by Land; That it might be easier to show his four Seas, then to
set their exact Bounds. But in (page 132.) he is pleased to say, that the Law
Maritime is Dark enough, with all the Jurisdiction of the Court Admiral; (So is
the Sun to him that will not see) where he farther seems to please himself with
saying, That that Office may be harder then the Name, by calling it a strange
mixture of Greek and Arabic. Yet for the Antiquity of the said Office, he does
the Admiralty that right, as withal in the same place to assert, That the old
Ms. del'Office del' Admiral has diverse Records of H. 1. Rich. 1. and King
John, speaking of Trials by twelve (as at Common Law) But that now the practice
is much otherwise. And that in the Rolls of Ed. 1. the Name of Admiral: But not
in our Printed Laws (that the said Author knows of) till Edward the second.
And then adds, That in Edward the third the Rolls are full of that Office. And
so proceeds, That in Rich. 2. it was brought to a Weldy (that is the Epethite it
pleases him to afford it) Model. Being Uncertain rather then Infinite before,
as the said Author is there pleased to determine; For (says he) the Bounds
were ever straighter much, then some may imagine. Also that they were again
disputed in Henry the fourth, Q. Elizabeth, and King James. And then he is
pleased most facetiously to add, That it lies more open to the Common Law, then
to the Wind. Yet withal he does not there conceal, but that besides the Laws of
Arthur the Britain, and Edgar the Saxon, we have some Records of Custom by
Sea as well as by Land; with Privilege to some, below the King, before the
Norman: whom they make the Founder, yet he was (in the said Authors judgment)
but Patron of the Ports, and Wardens of the Sea. And the same Author, speaking
of the Sea-statutes of Rich. 1. how that they were made, de Communi probarum
virorum Consilio, refers to the very expression of the Charter it self; in
Hovenden, Wendover, or Matthew Paris, who does add, that per Consilium
Magnatum, there were made Justiciarii super totum Navigium Angliae, etc. which
with diverse Records of Henry the third may be added to the Admiral: or Saxon
Aen Mere eal, Over all the Sea. To which much might be added from the Rolls of
Hen. 3. and Ed. 1. But this that has been said, may suffice to satisfy some
and convince others, touching the Antiquity of the Office and Jurisdiction of
the High Admiralty of England.

For the Utility of this Ancient Jurisdiction of the Admiralty in this Kingdom
of Great Britain, if you have retrospect to the Honor thereof in Precedent
Generations, Antiquity can witness with what effectual success (if not to the
nonplus of Neighbour-Nations) the Dominium Maris Brittanici has been from Age
to Age Judicially asserted; If you consider the plenty and splendor of a
flourishing Kingdom, the present Generation cannot yet forget to give ample
testimony thereof in reference to the Trade and Commerce of this Nation; And if
you will not be so irregular as to deny the Consequence that naturally flows
from these Premises, you cannot but infer this Positive Conclusion, That the
succeeding Generations are like to suffer as well an Eclipse of their Honor,
as an Abatement of interest, without the influence of that Jurisdiction;
Insomuch Car. Richlieu.
as the late Cardinal (save one) of France did wisely (according to the last
cited Author) dispose, or rather retain that Office, as the best Jewel of that
Kingdom, which yet must yield to this. But in a word, the Jurisdiction of the
Admiralty of England may not unaptly be compared to that Tree in the Island of
Fierro, being one of the Sept. insulae of the Canaries, which as Purch.
Historians tell us, does with the droppings of his leaves yield water for the
sustenance of the whole Island; It is farther added, that the Moors having
taken that Island from the Christians, attempted to fell down that Tree, but
each blow recoyled on the striker. The former part of this strange Relation
with a small variation passes for a Truth, as known unto and acknowledged by
most of the Ancient Travelers and Geographers; The other part being probably
but a fabulous Addition, To keep hands off, has not (as the other) the Credit
of an Application. To conclude, if this Chapter seems to a Genius more ratified
by acuteness for Apprehension, then endued with Patience for Expectation, more
prolix then may be regularly consistent with a Treatise only by way of Summary
view, let him only consider, that where Eagle-eyes, who are seldom dazeled
with too much light, are to be dealt with, it may be less dis-ingenious to
borrow a Point of Expatiation, then to remain too much in debt to the Truth for
want of room to display her Beams in.

CHAP. IV.
of Persons Maritime; As also, of such Things as are properly Cognizable within
the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty of England; And in what method it proceeds to
Judgment.
THere are but three things that seem specially to illustrate the splendor of
a Jurisdiction, viz. Sceptrum Majestatis, or the Power and Legal Authority of
the Prince, as to the Constitution thereof; Codex Administrationis, or the
Right Administration of Justice; and Gladii potestas, vel Gladius Executionis,
or the Coercive power. Peregrin. de jur. Fisc. lib. 1. tit. 1. nu. 10.
That Jurisdictions thus constituted are inter Regalia Principum, no person not
dis-principled will deny; So as what was long since the Law as to the Emperor
in point of Jurisdiction within the Empire, Imperator quoad Jurisdictionalia
Dominus totius mundi appellatur, L. Deprecatio, Dig. ad Leg. Rhod. de Jact.
is the same and as true in absolute Kings and Princes within their own
Kingdoms, Dominions, Principalities and Territories; And no wonder, in that
Kings and Princes tantum possunt in suo statu, quantum Imperator in Imperio.
Bart. in L. 1. Par. de quare. D. de Postul. and in L. infamem. D. de Public.
Judic.
Some without lisping say, that a King in his Kingdom has a far greater
right and interest, then the Emperor has in the Empire; for that a King is
Loco Domini, and his Kingdom is more assimilated unto and has a greater
resemblance with that which is Dominiu^, properly so called, then with that
which is but simply Regimen. Bald. Consil 271. number. 3
The Emperor is not Proprietarius, but chief Governor of the Empire; Ibid.
Consil. 327. nu. 7.
And that only by Election, not by Succession as the other. Andr. Iser. and
Afflict. in cap. 1. de Vassal. decrept. aetat.
Now as the Seas belong to Princes in respect of Jurisdiction and Protection;
Jason Jac. de Are. and Bald. in l. 2. ff. de Rer. Devis.
So also in them properly resides the Right and Power of Commissionating
Ministers of Justice for the due Exercise and Administration thereof, in
decision of all matters, whether Civil or Criminal within their Cognizance
according to the known Laws of the Sea, not contradicting the Statute or
Municipal Laws of that Kingdom or State, whereof the said Prince is next and
immediately under God Supreme. Glos. in verb. Criminalibus, in tit. de pace.
Constan. Bald. in Auth. Cassa. Cod. de Sacr. Sanct. Eccl. Alex. Con^. 8. col.
1. Cagnol. in L. 2. de Orig. jur. nu. 190


As to Persons Maritime, it might be considered who they are that more
peculiarly are of Marine capacities, and properly may be said to be within the
Jurisdiction of the Admiralty; what their Rights, Privileges and Immunities
are; and what their Office or Duty respectively is; Likewise as to Things
properly Maritime, it might be considered either as they be in respect of the
actions thence arising, Civil, and respecting only Commodum Privatum, between
party and party, whether it be Contractus or quasi Contractus, either by any
Perpetual known Rights, or by some Casual Occurrence; Or Criminal, and
respecting the Fiscus in reference ad utilitatem Publicam; but that the design
of this Treatise is not to expatiate in the Law on any of these, but only (as
most adequate to a Summary view of the Admiral Jurisdiction) to touch quasi in
transitu what referres to each of these under its own proper head, and no
farther then may be of use for the clearer discovery of the subject matter of
the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty of England; without engaging into
Controversal points; choosing rather in a Treatise so compendious to be
wind-bound in our own Ports, then to lanch forth into the wide Ocean of the
Maritime Laws touching this Subject, specially in an English Bottom, having an
eye to the Burden of the Vessel, and for whose account this Cargo was first
shipped, whither bound, and for whom consigned; as also how disadvantageous it
might prove for the Principals to have the returns of their expectation only in
the Arbitrary altercations of cross-opinions, rather then in such stapletruths
of the Law as are not only current in all the Navigable parts of the world, but
of most use and practice in the Admiralty of England. For these reasons the
Reader may expect only a taste of Admiral varieties, and therein no more then
may serve to excite his impatience after the excellency of that which in a set
Treatise for this purpose might in its proper Dialect and due Latitude be
emitted by an abler Artist.

All Maritime affairs are regulated chiefly by the Emperial Laws, the Rhodian
Laws, the Laws of Oleron, or by certain peculiar and Municipal Laws and
Constitutions appropriated to certain Cities, Towns and Countries bordering on
the Sea, within or without the Mediterranean, calculated for their proper
Meridian; or by those Maritime Customs and Prescriptions or Perpetual Rights
which are between Merchants and Mariners, each with other, or each among
themselves. This Maritime Government and Jurisdiction is by the King as
Supreme, as well by Sea as at Land, concredited with the Lord high Admiral of
England, who next and immediately under the Prince has the chief Command at
Sea, and of Sea-affairs at Land. This Lord high Admiral has several Officers
under him, some of a higher, others of a lower form; Some at Land, others at
Sea; some of a Military, others of a Civil Capacity; some Judicial, others
Ministerial. Such as are Chief in the Judicial Capacity are in the Law known by
the style of Magisteriani, Li Consoli del mare.
or Judges of Seafaring debates and all Maritime controversies; whereof one
being the Judex ad quem in all Maritime causes of appeal from inferior Courts
of Admiralty, is with us known by the style of Supremae Curiae Admirallitatis
Angliae Judex; within whose cognizance in right of the Jurisdiction of the
Admiralty by the Sea-Laws, the Laws and Customs of the Admiralty of England,
are comprised all matters properly Maritime or any way pertaining to
Navigation. The Judicial Proceedings wherein are Summary, Velo Levato, and sine
figura Judicii. As by warrant of arrest or other Original Mandate; Execution
and Return thereof; Interposition of Caution given by the arrested for his
Legal Appearance according to the tenor of the said Warrant of Arrest;
Appearance and Introduction of Sureties by way of Stipulation or Judicial
Recognizance in the sum of the Action, de judicio sisti, de judicato and
expensis solvendis, cum ratihabitione Procuratorii; as also the Plaintiffs
caution to pay costs in case he fail in his suit; Contempt in case of
nonappearance, and forfeiture of the said caution in case of such contempt;
offering the Libel in case of Appearance; Litis contestation or joining of
issue; Decree for the Defendants personal Answer upon Oath to the said Libel
exhibited against him; a Decree for a viis and modis in case of a Non Inventus;
a Decree against the sureties to produce the party Principal in judicio;
Production of him accordingly; his answer upon Oath to the Libel; Production of
Witnesses; Compulsory against such Witnesses as will not appear without it;
Commission for examining of Witnesses at home, or sub mutuae vicissitudinis
obtentu beyond Sea; The Oath of Calumny by both parties, if they please;
Exception against the Witnesses; The Supplementary Oath; Exhibition of
Instruments; Publication of Witnesses; Conclusion of the Cause; Sentence
Definitive; Appeal made Ten days by the Law. Fifteen days by the Stat.
within fifteen days of the said Sentence; Assignment ad prosequendum,
Prosecution of the Appeal; Remission of the Cause to the Judge A Quo; Decree
for Execution, and Sentence executed accordingly. Beside the other way of
proceeding by arrest of goods, or of goods in other men's hands, and so to a
Primum Decretum (as to the Possession) upon four Defaults; and thence after one
year) to a Secundum Decretum (as to the Propriety) in case of Nonintervention
(upon laying down the costs of the Prim. Decret.) in the interim. In the
Proceedings there may be also Reconvention, also sequestration of goods lite
pendente; and sentence Interlocutory, as well as Definitive; with many other
particulars which may or may not happen according as the Court sees cause and
the merits of the Case require.

Within the Cognizance of this Jurisdiction are all affairs that peculiarly
concern the Lord high Admiral, or any of his Officers quatenus such; all
matters immediately relating to the Navies of the Kingdom, the Vessels of
Trade, and the Owners thereof, as such; all affairs relating to Mariners,
whether Ship-Officers or common Mariners, their Rights and Privileges
respectively; their office and duty; their wages; their offenses, whether by
wilfulness, casualty, ignorance, negligence, or insufficiency, with their
punishments. Also all affairs of Commanders at Sea, and their underofficers,
with their respective duties, privileges, immunities, offenses, and
punishments. In like manner all matters that cnocern Owners and Proprietors of
ships, as such; and all Masters, Pilots, Steersmen, Boteswains, and other
ship-Officers; all Ship-wrights, Fishermen, Ferry-men, and the like; Also all
causes of Seizures and Captures made at Sea whether jure Belli Publici, or jure
Belli Privati by way of Reprizals, or jure nullo by way of Piracy; Also all
Charter-parties, Cocquets, Bills of Lading, Sea-Commissions, Letters of safe
Conduct, Factories, Invoyces, Skippers Rolls, Inventories, and other
Ship-papers; Also all causes of Freight, Mariners wages, Load-manage,
Port-charges, Pilotage, Anchorage, and the like; Also all causes of Maritime
Contracts indeed, or as it were Contracts, whether upon or beyond the Seas; all
causes of money lent to Sea or upon the Sea, called Foenus Nauticum, Pecunia
trajectitia, usura maritima, Bomarymony, the Gross Adventure, and the like; all
causes of pawning, hypothecating, or pledging of the ship it self, or any part
thereof, or her Lading, or other things at Sea; all causes of Jactus, or
casting goods over board; and Contributions either for Redemption of Ship or
Lading in case of seizure by Enemies or Pirates, or in case of goods damnified,
or disburdening of ships, or other chances, with Average; also all causes of
spoil and depredations at Sea, Robberies and Pyracies; also all causes of Naval
Consort-ships, whether in War or Peace; Ensurance, Mandates, Procurations,
Payments, Acceptilations, Discharges, Loans or Oppignorations, Emptions,
Venditions, Conventions, taking or letting to Freight, Exchanges, Partnership,
Factoridge, Passagemony, and whatever is of Maritime nature, either by way of
Navigation upon the Sea, or of Negotiation at or beyond the Sea in the way of
Marine Trade and Commerce; also the Nautical Right which Maritime persons have
in ships, their Appar^^, Tackle, Furniture, Lading, and all things pertaining
to Navigation; also all causes of Out-readers, or Out-riggers, Furnishers,
Hirers, Fraighters, Owners, Part-owners of ships, as such; also all causes of
Privileged ships, or Vessels in his Majesty's Service or his Letters of safe
Conduct; also all causes of shipwreck at Sea, Flotson, Jetson, Lagon, Waiffs,
Deodands, Treasure-Trove, Fishes-Royal; with the Lord Admirals shares, and the
Finders respectively; also all causes touching Maritime offenses or
misdemeanors, such as cutting the Bovy-Rope or Cable, removal of an Anchor
whereby any Vessel is moared, the breaking the Lord Admiral's Arrests made
either upon person, ship, or goods; Breaking Arrests on ships for the King's
Service, being punishable with Confiscation by the Ordinance made at Grimsby in
the the time of Rich. 1. Mariners absenting themselves from the Kings Service
after their being pressed. Impleading upon a Maritine Contract or in a Maritime
Cause elsewhere then in the Admiralty, contrary to. the Ordinance made at
Hastings by Ed. 1. and contrary to the Laws and Customs of the Admiralty of
England; Forestalling of Corn, Fish, etc. on shipboard, regrating, and
exaction of water-osficers; the appropriating the benefit of Salt-waters to
private use exclusively to others without his Majesty's License; Kiddles,
Wears, Blind stakes, Water-mills, and the like, to the obstruction of
Navigation in great Rivers; False weights or measures on shipboard;
Concealings of goods found about the dead Whales, Sturgeons, Porpoises,
Bailines, Dolphins, and all Fishes strange for bulk, rarity, or quality, are
called Fishes Royal, and belong to the King.
within the Admiral Jurisdiction, or of Flotsons, Jetsons, Lagons, Waiffs,
Deodands, Fishes Royal, or other things wherein the Kings Majesty or his Lord
Admiral have interest; Excessive wages claimed by Ship-wrights, Mariners, etc.
Maintainers, Abettors, Receivers, Concealers or Comforters of Pirates;
Transporting Prohibited goods without License; Draggers of Oysters and Muscles
at unseasonable times, viz. between May Day, and Holy-rood-day; Destroyers of
the brood or young Fry of Fish; such as claim Wreck to to the prejudice of the
King or Lord Admiral; such as unduly claim privileges in a Port; Disturbers of
the Admiral Officers in execution of the Court-Decrees; Water-Bayliffs and
Searchers not doing their duty; Corruption in any of the
Admiral-Court-Officers; Importers of unwholesome Victuals to the peoples
prejudice; Fraighters of strangers Vessels contrary to the Law; Transporters of
ptisoners or other prohibited persons not having Letters of safe Conduct from
the King or his Lord Admiral; Casters of Ballasts into Ports or Harbors, to
the prejudice thereof; Unskilful Pilots, whereby ship or man perish; Unlawful
Nets, or other prohibited Engines for Fish; Disobeying of Embargos, or going to
Sea contrary to the Prince his command, or against the Law; Furnishing the
ships of Enemies, or the Enemy with ships; All prejudice done to the Banks of
Navigable Rivers, or to Docks, Wharsfs, Keys, or any thing whereby Shipping may
be endangered, Navigation obstructed, or Trade by Sea impeded; Also
embezilments of ship-tackle or furniture; all substractions of Mariners wages;
all defraudings of his Majesty's Customs or other Duties at Sea; also all
prejudices done to or by passengers a shipboard; and all damages done by one
ship or Vessel to another; also to go to Sea in tempestuous weather, to sail in
devious places, or among Enemies, Pirates, Rocks, or other dangerous places,
being not necessitated thereto; all clandestine attempts by making privy
Cork-holes in the Vessel, or otherwise, with intent to destroy or endanger the
ship; Also the showing of false Lights by Night either on shore or in Fishing
Vessels, or the like, on purpose to entice Sailers, to the hazard of their
Vessels; all wilful or purposed entertaining of unskilful Masters, Pilots or
Mariners, or sailing without a Pilot, or in Leaky and insufficient Vessels;
also the over-burdening the ship above her birth-mark, and all ill stowage of
goods a shipboard; also all Importation of Contrabanda goods, or Exportation of
goods to prohibited Ports, or the places not designed; together with very many
other things relating either to the state or condition of persons Maritime,
their rights, their duties, or their defaults; all which only to enumerate
would require a Volume of it self; These therefore may suffice for a hint of
persons and things properly Cognizable within the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty
of England; Omitting what might be here likewise added as to the Naval Military
part within the Cognizance of the said Jurisdiction; As that ships in the
British Seas not amaining at the first Summons to any of his Majesty's ships,
may be assaulted and taken as Enemies; That no Prize ought to be carried from
the Fleet without the Admirals leave; That all above hatches, saving the
shipfurniture, ought upon a seizure jure belli to go to the Captors; That the
Vessels of Forraigners met with at Sea, may be visited and examined, if
suspected, specially in times of War, their Cocquets, Pasports,
Charter-parties, Invoyces, Bills of Lading, Ship-Roll, with other Instruments
and ship-papers perused, that so, if there be cause, they may be brought before
the Admiral.

There are many other particulars, referring as well to the Civil as to the
Criminal part of this Jurisdiction, which might be here inserted; but the
design of this Compendious Treatise being (as formerly hinted) rather to touch
then handle things, it may not be expected that the great Continent of the
Admiralty should be comprised in so small a Map. To conclude therefore with
that great Oracle of the Civil Law, Baldus, touching the Marine Jursdiction. In
mari Jurisdictio est, sicut in terra. Bald. ad Leg. 2 D. de Rer. Divi^.
Nam Mare in terra (h. e.) in alveo suo fundatum est, quum Terra sit inferior
Sphaera: and videmus de jure Gentium, in mari esse Regna distincta sicut in
arida terra: Ergo and Jus Civil (id est) Praesciptio illud idem potest (in
mari scilicet quod in terra) operari. So that all such, as out of a subtle
humor would fain insinuate into the world, as if there were no such thing as
Jurisdictio maris, or Dominium maris, with its prescript limits and bounds
(some arguing from the perpetual motion of that liquid element; Others, from a
supposed parity between the Sea and the Air in point of Community) are by this
Learned Oracle left without any hopes or possibility of the least Orthodox
support for their Anti-thalas-monarchical opinion; For in this place he is
positive, That both the Jurisdiction and the Dominion of the Sea, with their
distinct limits and bounds, as well as that of the Land, are duly constituted,
and that not by force and power, but by Law, not only by the Civil, but also by
the Law of Nations; and this not in the Emperors alone, but also in such
Kingdoms and States as by Prescription, Custom, or otherwise may claim the
same.

CHAP. V.
Of Laws and Jurisdictions in general; with the several kinds and degrees
thereof.
IT is recorded in the Historical part of the Law by that famous Lawyer of
Millayne, Jason Maynus, (who flourished about the year of our Lord 1500, and
taught at Padua, where he dyed Anno 1519. Val. Forced. Hist. Jur. Civil. l. 3.
c. 40.
upon this subject of Jurisdictions, that Raphael Fulgosius, that Jaspis
virtutum, utroque jure stupor, as his Epitaph in S. Anthonies Church at Padua
(where he also dyed above one hundred years before the other) styles him, Ibid.
c. 32.
when he was a young Student in the Laws, was wont to say that of other matters
and points of Law he could attain to some understanding by his private study
and chamber-disquisitions, but in this point of Jurisdictions he could
understand nothing at all but what he heard in the Schools Voce Magistra.
Jason. in ff. de Jurisdict. Om. Jud. Rub. nu. 1.
Of such difficulty is the subject matter of this Treatise, and yet with what
confidence do some illiterate persons, (like boys at football) toss and play
with Jurisdictions, even almost to the tripping up the heels of Magistracy it
self. Jurisdictions are things of much tenderness as well as profoundness, and
must be gently touched as well as deeply weighed; if persons in Juridical
Authority be styled Mortal Gods, then Jurisdictions are in some sense things
Sacred, and may not be approached unto but with Civil reverence; Nor is the
acquisition of the profound knowledge of the Law touching Jurisdictions a
pomeridian work for sollicitous students, much less obvious to rural capacities.

A right understanding what Law is, gives the clearest prospect to a discovery
what Jurisdictions are; the Civilians do succinctly and fully define Law, Lex
est Sanctio Sancta, jubens honesta, prohibens contraria. Law is a Decree not to
be violated, commanding things honest, forbidding the contrary. Plato in his
definition of Law, says It is a Reasonable Rule, leading and directing De
Legibu^
men to their due end for a public good, ordaining penalties for them that
transgress, and reward for them that obey. And Cicero defines it to be the
highest and chief L. 1. De Legibus.
reason graffed in nature, commanding those things which are to be done, and
forbidding the contrary. And of all Laws, those of the Empire, next to the Jus
Divinum, seem to challenge the precedence in all Foreign Kingdoms and States;
though in this as not in their proper sphere they display not their beams with
that luster, for want of that encouragement and employment they deserve; It is
every man's duty to have the best and highest thoughts of the Laws of his own
Country, yet to oppose them to the Ancient Emperial Laws, either as to the
Theory thereof, with their numerous host of most Learned Interpreters, or as to
the Practick, in the Pleadings of the highest Courts of the greatest part of
the Christian world, in the many Judgments and Decisions of the several Rotes
of Italy at Rome, at Naples, at Florence, at Genoa, at Bononia, at Mantua, at
Perusium, and the rest; in the Judgments of the Imperial Chamber at Spire,
which is the last result of the German Nation; in the Decisions of Granado and
other places of Spain, and other Kingdoms; as in the Arrests of the several
Courts of Parliament in France, as Paris, Aix, Bordeaux, Grenoble, and the
rest; To oppose any Municipal Laws (save our own) to the Ancient Emperial Laws
in the latitude aforesaid, recitasse est refutasse, the very recital thereof is
confutation enough, saving the honor due to the Laws of our Native Country.

It will not be denied but that the Great Legislator of Heaven and Earth is the
Fountain of all Laws, that is, Law properly so called, had its Origination from
God himself. This is an undoubted Position not only in L. int. Cler. C. de Sum.
Trin.
Christian Religion, but such as the Doctors of the Gentiles and Heathens
themselves will easily admit; for even among them such as assumed the
Legislative Authority, and took upon them to prescribe Laws, would at the
enactment thereof invocate their false Gods, and endeavor to father them on one
or other of their heathenish Deities, as Minos who Cic. Phil. 11. L. 2. ff. de
Legib.
gave Laws to the Cretians, on Jupiter: Numa, who gave Laws to the Romans, on
Aegeria Nympha: Zoroaster, who to the Bractians and Persians, on Horomasis:
Trismegister, who to the Egyptians, on Mercurius: Coel. Rhod. l. 18. c. 19.
Charondas, who to the Thurians, on Saturn: Lycurgus, who to the Lacedaemonians,
on Apollo: Draco and Solon, who to the Athenians, on Minerna: Mahomet, Plat. in
Min.
who to the Arabians, on the Angel Gabriel. Thus all agree in this, that Law
has the image and superscription of some supernatural Powers, and is more
Ancient then Adams Fall, as is evident by necessary though sad consequences;
for without Law there had been no Transgression. In immediate Romans 2. 14, 15
subordination to the Divine and Natural Law written in the tables of the
heart, came the Jus Gentium, or the Law of Nations, when men first began to
have mutual Commerce with each other, for thereby was introduced a kind of
Necessity for all Nations to observe some certain Rules as Law, without which
no Society of men in way of reciprocal negotiations could subsist; which Law
does indeed flow from the Law of Nature; Tusc. 1.
insomuch that Cicero was of opinion, that in all matters and affairs of the
world whatever was the Consent and Concurrent approbation or allowance of all
Nations, that was to be understood the Law of Nature; Next unto which is the
Jus humanum and Civil, being a distinct Law both from the Law of Nature and
also from the Jus Gentium, and seems to be then born into the world, when men
first of many Individuals began to compact themselves into one Society, and
when they first began to incorporate themselves into Bodies Politic, which in
the worlds infancy seems to be when Cain built the City Enoch; for Civil Laws
seem 11. 4. 17.
to have their Origination then when Cities began first to be built,
Magistrates to be constituted, and Ordinations of Government to be committed to
writing; for indeed Civil Law properly so called, is no other ^ ^mnes pop. ^f.
de just. and ^ure.
then that which every City constituted and enacted for it self, and for its
own peculiar government; which Law also has its foundation laid in the Law of
Nature, from whence as from a Fountain are derived diverse lesser channels and
rivulets according to the great variety of Places, Persons, Times and
Transactions; And the Civil Law of the Roman Empire in common acceptance and
mode of speech is now for the Antiquity, Excellency, Universality, and
Authority thereof called The Civil Law by way of Eminency, the Name and
Appellation of the Civil Law being now properly appropriated to the Emperial
Law and Constitutions, as that Law which was the Law Current in all the
Dominions of the Roman Empire, and is at this day in most parts of the whole
Christian world. Beside these Laws peculiar to a due administration of Justice
in matters merely secular, there was also at the worlds Infancy a kind of
Sacerdotal Law or Law of the Priesthood, when men congregated first began to
adore the ^reat God in the way of a Public wor^hip; for in the first
Constitution of Common-weals and Cities, it was necessary to establish certain
Laws peculiar to the Priesthood; for it cannot be imagined, but that when men
Genesis 4.
first began to offer their first fruits and to sacrifice to God, there was
then some Law in being for the worship of the Deity; nor ought it to be doubted
but that in those days there was a true Church of Believers, as also true
Sacrifices, and (as some hold) true Sacraments; and therefore not to be
conceived but that there was also some Ecclesiastical Law then in force, which
afterward became much more clear under Moses Law. And by way of additament to
this, in tract of time was the Canon Law established in every Christian
Commonwealth, which received not (as some suppose) it is Original at that time
when the General and Universal Councils began to be first held, as under
Constantine, but in the days of the Apostles themselves, who gave diverse Rules
and made many Canons touching Divine W^rship, and in order to the salvation of
Souls. And thus Laws being introduced into the world, it could not be but there
must be Jurisdictions also, without which the Law is but a dead Letter. For the
clearer understanding whereof, know

That the word [Jurisdictio] without the Letter [c] etymologizeth it self. In
Arb. Jurisd. lit. a.
For it is not so called from [Juris] and [dictio] as some would have it, but
from [Juris and [ditio]. And so Jurisdictio is quasi juris potestas. Inst. jur.
Civil. in Proem. Par. quorum.
But this pleases not Calvin, who in this matter following Ferrand* Ferrand.
l. 1. Explicat. in lib. 3. Jurisdict.
would derive it from [Juris and dictio] and does charge Accursius with an
error in Judgment for holding it to be derived from [Juris and ditio] though
he confesses that Bartol himself and many others do follow Accursius therein;
whose opinion seems to have the best congruity with reason in the energy of
Law, though Ferrand's Opinion seems to outweigh, if the comprised matter
should be balanced only by the letters of the word; but indeed of the two
Accursius has by far the more numerous Retinue.

So that Jurisdictio taken in the large sense, as the Genus generalissimum or
Plenissima Jurisdictio, is nothing else but Potestas L. potestas. De verb. Sig.
de jure Publico introducta L. 1. Par. hujus, ff. de Just.
cum necessitate juris dicendi L. munerum. Par. judicandi, ff. de Muneribus.
and aequitatis statuendae. L. placui^. Cod. de Judiciis.
The word [Jurisdictio] taken in this large sense, does properly signify that
Office or Function which the lawful Magistrate does hold and exercise by the
ordinary right of his just power and authority. L. 1. ff. de Jurisd. and Jas.
in Rub. and l. 10 nu. 10. ibid.


Of Jurisdictions taken in this large sense, there are three species or kinds
in the Law; There is Imperium Merum, Imperium Mixtum, and Jurisdictio simplex.
And it is called Imperium, because it proceeds from the Authority of the Judge,
and not from any right inherent or residing in the party.

The first of these, viz. Imperium Merum, is that Jurisdiction, which
respecting only the Public utility is exercised Officio Judicis Nobili, and by
way of Accusation. Bart. in Arb. Jurisd. lit. c.
This has the power of the Sword contra homines facinorosos, and all Capital
Offenders. Corvin. de Jurisd. and Fulgos, l. 3. de Jurisd. nu. 1.
And is so called from its purity, simplicity and immixture with either of the
other kinds of Jurisdictions. Bart. ubi supra.
Of this Imperium Merum Bartoll makes Six several degrees Bart. ib.
which Jason contracts into Four, but Zasius into Three.

Of these Six degrees of Imperium Merum, the First is Merum Imperium Maximum; 1.
And this resides only in the Prince, or in the Supreme Authority. L. 1. ff. de
Constable. Princip.
In this Bartol does lodge the Legislative Faculty or power of enacting Laws;
also the calling a General Council, or the summoning a Parliament; also the
power of Confiscation of Delinquents goods. In a word, under this Merum
Imperium Maximum are contained all things competible to Princes or the Supreme
Magistrate. Cacialup. in L. Imperium, ff. de jurisd. om. Jud.
And to these particulars which Bartol mentions under this head, the DD do add
one more, and that is the creating of Tabellions General or Public Notories.
Jun. and alii in C. cum Pub. Tabellio, de fin. just. and Bald. in tit. de
Jurisd. om. Jud.


The Second degree is Merum Imperium Majus. This extends to the taking away 2.
of life, and has the power of the Sword. Bart. ubi supra, lit. c.
Under this head also is that Potestas gladii in homines facinerosos
forementioned; Bart. de Jurisd. nu. 8.
but derivative from the Prince.

The Third degree is Merum Imperium Magnum, under which head is comprehended 3.
Deportation or perpetual banishment. Ibid. nu. 9.
But these two last degrees Jason comprehends under one and the same head, Jas.
in l. 3. ff. de Jurisd. nu. 24. in prin.
For says he, under the power of the Sword in facinerosos homines is
comprehended three kinds of Capital Causes, viz. First, when the Life Natural
is taken away either in whole or in part, as by dismembration, amputation, or
mutilation. Cyn. in l. si quis non dica^. q. 19. C. de Episc. and Cler. and in
L. Transigere, q. 4. c. de Transact.
Secondly, when the Life Civil is taken away, as by loss of Liberty and by
perpetual imprisonment; for such are dead in Law. Thirdly, when a man is
deprived of his Franchise, Freedom or Privileges which he had in any place by
a Natural or Civil Right. Jas. ubi sup.


The Fourth degree is Merum Imperium Parvum, under which head is comprehended 4.
Relegation or temporal exilement; Bart. and Jas. ibid. and l. nulli, C. de
sent.
which is no more then an extermination, whereby a man is commanded out of the
confines of his own Country for a season. And although Deportatio and Relegatio
be often used promiscuously in the Law for one and the same, yet the Law
discriminates them by very different Characters; For in Deportation there is a
perpetual, in Relegation but a temporal banishment. And as they differ in the
Circumstance of Time, so also in the Circumstance of Place; For in Relegation
the party is only circumscribed, and it is part of his punishment that he shall
not go out of the limits of such a certain place. So Shimei the Benjamite that
cursed David in his way to Mahanaim, was after David's death confined by his son
Solomon unto Jerusalem, 1 King. c. 2. v. 8, 36, etc.
and not to pass over the Brook Kidron; who upon occasion of his going
afterward to Gath, exceeded the limits of his circumscription, and for so
doing was put to death by Benaiah at the Kings command. But now in Deportation
the party is not so confined to or circumscribed by any certain place, but is
quite banished and exiled out of all the precincts of his own Country. Again,
in Deportation the party cannot take his goods with him, in Relegation he may;
but this difference holds not always. Likewise under this head is comprised
every Corporal punishment, L. Si quid erit, ff. de Offic. Procons.
provided it be Tortura ad poenam Delicti; For if it be Tortura only ad
investigationem veritatis, then it may be otherwise.

The Fifth degree is Merum Imperium Minus, under which is comprised that
moderate 5.
Coertion by Corporal Castigations which are ad vindictam Maleficii, to
distinguish it from Coertio verbalis per officium Merum, and is competible with
the Office or Function of Magistrates in Authority. Bart. ibid. and l.
magistratib. ff. de Jurisd.
Also Cognizance of such crimes as are of the lesser and inferior kind. Bart.
ibid.
Of this and the last precedent degree or member of Imperium Merum, Jason makes
but one, as forme^ly but one of the Second and Third degrees; So that although
here be Six species, degrees, or members of Imperium Merum, according to
Bartolls account, yet here are but Four according to Jasons computation, and to
him in this matter the DD do generally incline rather then unto Bartoll.

The Sixth and last degree is Merum Imperium Minimum, which comprehends
whatever is imposed by way of pecuniary mulct upon some crime, L. fin. C. de
modo Mulct. and l. 1. ff. si quis jus dicen. o^. obtemp. and l. 2. C. de
Sportul.
provided such pecuniary mulct be in reference to the Public utility, and not
in satisfaction of private injuries.

The Second Species or kind of Jurisdictio taken in this large sense, is
Imperium Mixtum; Imperium Mixtum.
And it is that Jurisdiction which respecting only private utility is exercised
Officio Judicis Nobili. Bart. ibid. nu. 15.
It is so called, as being of a mixed nature, because it consists partly of
Imperium Merum, and partly of Jurisdictio Simplex; And as it consists in
Commodo pecuniario, respecting only private utility, so it does participate of
Jurisdictio Simplex, and is differenced from Imperium Merum.

Of this Imperium Mixtum, Bartol as in the former makes other six degrees,
which Jason contracts to three, and calls them Gradum Maximu^, Medium, and
Minimu^ In l. Imperium, nu. 27. ff. de Jurisd. om. Jud.
The First and Second of Bartols degrees Jason does join in one, as being both
competible only to the Prince or Supreme Magistrate. The Third and Fourth of
Bartols degrees he likewise joins in one, as both requiring plenam causae
cognitionem, and both incompetible with interior Magistrates. So likewise of
the Fifth and Sixth degrees. Now because this last Division of Jasons seems to
take best with the most part of the DD, as being the most succinct yet
comprehensive of all, Jasons method shall here be followed, as formerly was
Bartols.

The first degree then of Imperium Mixtum according to Jasons account is
Imperium Mixtum Maximum, which pertains solely to the Prince, and concerns only
Actus voluntarios; L. 2. C. de his qui veniam aetatis impet.
yet it may be al^o in the ordinary Magistrate, but then it must be by way of
derivation from the Prince. L. 8. ff. de Jurisd.
This Imperium Mixtum Maximum comprehends veniam aetatis impetranti, Bart.
ibid. nu. 17.
That is, that whereas by the Civil Law a man is held a Minor and under age
until he attain unto the age of twenty five years, the Prince might at his
Petition grant veniam aetatis impetranti, that is, if such Minor being a Male
could prove himself to be of the full age of twenty years, or being a Female
could prove her self to be of the full age of eighteen years, then might such
by way of Petition impetrare veniam aetatis a Principe, that is, they might for
the better management of their estate request the Prince's favor for an
exemption from their Minority, and to be held and taken as of full age, that
is, as of the age of twenty five years, to all intents and purposes of Law
whatever; only they could not by virtue of such Privilege alienate their
Praedials or Immoveables without a special Decree for that purpose; And this
Privilege was obtainable only by the Prince's Grant. L. 2. C. de his qui ven.
aetat. impet.
Also under this head is comprehended that which the Civilians call Arrogatio,
which is a kind of Adoption, but something different from it; Caius in l. 2.
tit. de Adop.
For the Prince did interponere Authoritatem Arrogationi, Ibid.
Likewise under this head is comprehended Legitimation, or the power of
legitimating such as are unlawfully begotten; Auth. quibus mod. Not. effic.
legit. Par. illud.
And also Emancipation, which, properly so called, is a Judicial and solemn
transference, alienation, or vendition of freeborn children (For Manumission
relates only to Servants and Bondmen) from and out of the Dominium, power, and
Jurisdiction of their natural Parents into the power and right of another, had
and done by the authority of the competent Judge with the concurrency and
mutual consent of both parent and child. By such Emancipation the Patria
Potestas is dissolved, si filium suum forisfamiliaverit; for it is a kind of
vendition or sale by a tradition or delivery of his child out of his own right
over to another, who thereby becomes as it were Pater Fiduciarius, or a Father
in trust to the child; although anciently such Emancipation was held no less
then Civil death to the child, or then an Ingressus Religionis. Flet. lib. 1.
cap. 7. Par. idem emancipat. and Cowel. Instit. jur. Angl. l. 1. c. 12. Par. 2.
Likewise under this head is comprehended that which the Law calls Supplicatio,
which is a Cognition or Retractation of a Judicial sentence, from which lies no
Appeal, by way of Supplication, pertaining only to the Prince, and in the Roman
Government to the Praetorian Prefect. L. 1. C. de sen. Praef. and Auth. Quae
supplicatio. C. de Praecib. imper. Off. and Bar. ubi sup. nu. 18. and in Arb.
Jurisd. lit. m.
This is that Remedy of a Judicial Sentence which the Canonists call Revisionem
Sententiae, or the Review of a Sentence. C. ex Literis. De Integ. Restitut.
This is used but very rarely and only in extraordinary Cases, but chiefly
against the Sentence of such Judges as from whom by reason of their Eminency
non licet Appellare. L. 1. ff. de Offic. Praef. Praetor.
In such Cases the imploring of the grace and favor of the Prince or Supreme
Authority is properly called Supplicatio.

The Second degree is Imperium Mixtum Medium, under which is comprised a full
and plenary Cognition of a Cause, with Coertion as well Real as Personal; of
such is the putting a man into possession by virtue of a Secundum Decretum;
Likewise Restitutio in integrum; Also the expulsion or outing another of his
Actual Possession; L. ea quae Par. Magistratib. ff. ad Municipalem.
In like manner under this head are comprehended all matters that require a
plenary Cognition, although it has not Real or Personal Coertion; As to give
such a possession of goods as shall convey and carry a right of Property with
it; Also to pronounce for the putting into Possession Ex Secundo Decreto; Also
to interpose ones Authority for the Alienation of things appertaining to
Minors; Also in Transactions of Alimony, and the like. Bart. Fulgos, and alii
ubi supra.


The Third and last degree is Imperium Mixtum Minimum; And this consists in
such things as are expedited Officio Judicis Nobili, but do not require a
plenary Cognition as the former, but are determined by a Summary proceeding,
and have respect only to Private utility. Of this kind is the putting into
Possession by a Primum Decretum; Also any possession which to the Cognizance of
the Cause does not require a Proceeding De Plano, but only Summarily and sine
strepitu judicii. Fulgos, in L. Imperium. ff. de Jurisd. om. jud. nu. 40.
Of this kind also is the granting of Possession to Minors Ex Edicto
Carboniano, so called from Cneus Carbo the Praetor, and Author of that Edict.
For when upon the death of a Parent Intestate any question or Controversy
arose to the Pupil or Minor, either Male or Female by the Masculine line,
concerning the inheritance or goods of such Parent; as also concerning the
state, quality or condition of such Minor, or whether he were the legitimate
Child of such Parent; In all such cases da^ur Carboniana bonorum Possessio,
says the Law; that is, such Minor shall by that Edict be put into possession
of the said goods, he first giving good caution or security not to diminish the
same during his Minority; and in the mean time the dispute in Law or
Controversy touching the right of Title to the said goods, as also touching
the state, quality and condition of such Minor, is by the same Edict to be
deferred and put off until he come of full age. Casus in glos. in l. 1. ff. de
Carbon. Edict.
Likewise under this head falls Manumission, Bart. in L. Imperium. ff. de
jurisd. om. jud. nu. 22.
or the setting at liberty such as were under the servitude and dominium of
others, and refers properly to Servants that were under the domination of
Masters, as Emancipation does to children freeborn, that were under the power
of their natural Parents; of these kinds are Causae Libertinitatis, and Causae
Ingenuitatis. Salyc. and Rubr. l. 2. De Pedan. Judic.


The Third and last species or kind of Jurisdictio taken in this large sense is
Jurisdictio Jurisdictio Simplex.
Simplex; And it is that Jurisdiction which is exercised Officio Judicis
Mercenanario; Respecting only Private utility, Jure Actionis. Bar. ubi sup.
nu. 23. Jas. ubi sup. nu. 31. Fulg. de Jurisd. om. jud. nu. 42.
And being thus exercised Officio Judicis Mercenario, it differs from both the
former, viz. both from Imperium Merum, and from Imperium Mixtum. Of this
Jurisdictio Simplex, which in truth is Jurisdictio proprie stricte and
specialiter sumpta, Bartol as in the former makes no less then Six Degrees; but
Jason again as formerly reduces and contracts them to Three, viz. Gradum
Magnum, Medium, Minimum. Jas. in L. Imperium, ff. de jurisd. om. jud.
Which method now follows, as being the acceptablest with the Modern DD. and
distinctly comprehensive of all, that the Six Degrees which Bartol makes, are
capable of.

Under the First of these, viz. Gradum Jurisdictionis Simplicis Magnum, are
comprehended such as the Law looks on as matters of great prejudice; such are
Causae Liberales, wherein are controverted all disputes concerning Liberty or
Servitude, Freedom or Bondage, Ingenuity (not of wit, but of birth) or
Libertinity. Rub. in ff. de Lib. Cause. and l. 42. 1. ff. Sol. Ma rim. and l.
32. liberali, st. De Receptis, qui arb. receper.
These Causae Liberales, are understood in the Law as certain species opposite
to such things as are either of Merum or Mixtum Imperium. L. placet. C. de
Pedan. Jud.
The Actions that hence do arise are as formerly Actiones Liberales, cogni^able
only before the Superior Judges. Rub. and glos. de Lib. Cause. and Fulg. in l.
Imperium, ff. de Jurisd. nu. 44.
The truth is, such Actions as these that concern the state, quality,
condition, or reputation of perions are in the Law termed Causae Arduae, and
Negotium Arduum. Defin. Jur. nu. 18. ff. de Jurisd. andC. ex ratione. De
Appell. and Jason. sup. nu. 31.
And therefore Inferior Judges (who by interpretation of Law according to the
Civil Laws account are Judices Municipales Fulg. ubi sup.
are no way competent to take cognizance of such Cases. Rub. and glos. min. ff.
deLiber. Cause. and Bart. ubi sup. nu. 24.
Likewise under this head fall all Causes, wherein upon any Action any
Castigations, Coertions, Restraints, or other Corporal punishments in execution
of some Definitive Sentence do happen, Bart. Jas. and Fulg. ubi sup. nu. 43.
according to that smart Proverb in Law, Qui non habet in aere, Luat in
corpore. L. quicunque C. de Ser. Fug. and l. Divus, ff. de Injuriis.
But to make it yet more clear; The Actions specially aimed at and properly
intended hereby in the Law that fall under this head, are such Cases as in
themselves and according to their nature are Criminal, but yet are civilly
proceeded in or prosecuted, Quando ex causd descendenti ex delicto, quis fuit
Condemnatus Civiliter. Desin. Jurisd. nu. 19. ff. de Jurisd.
Or such Actions Quae Civiliter ex Maleficiis intentantur. Fulg. ubi sup. nu.
42.


The Second Degree of Jurisdictio Simplex is Gradus Medius, under which are
comprised all such Peouniary Causes as in value exceed Treoent' Aureos. DD. ib.
This Aureus among the Ancients was in value about our English Noble, or Six
Shillings and eight pence; but in Justinians time it was something more, viz.
about the value of an Angel in our Gold Coin. Calvin. ver. Aureus.
Which is something less then Centum Cestertii, according to the Roman Account,
which some would have the Aureum Antiquum to amount unto, Tacit. l. 17. de
Othone.
if every Cestertius must be in value three half pence farthing according to
our Account. Godw. Romans Hist. li. 3. Sect. 4. cap. 3.


The Third and last Degree of Jurisdiotio Simplex comprehends only such small
and petty sums, as will not defray the charges of a Plenary and Judicial
Order of Proceeding, and therefore they are heard and determined Summarily and
velo Levato. Bart. ubi sup. nu. 26. and Jas. ibid. nu. 32.
Bartol would state, liquidate and ascertain these petty sums to the value of
Centum Aureos: Bart. ibid.
Others to Twenty, others to Ten Ducats. Fulg. ubi sup. nu. 44.
But Jason tells us plainly, that the truth and the more received opinion is,
that in such cases the just and exact values are not determined or ascertained
in the Law, but left ad Arbitrium Judicis, Jas. ib. nu. 32.
according to that Rule in Law in ff. de jur. delib. L. 1. fin. ff. de jur,
elib. d


And thus although here has been distinctly touched each of the Three Species
or kinds of Jurisdiction, taking the word Jurisdictio as the Genus
generalissimum; And although here have been given some instances for the more
clear description of each Member or Degree of each Species thereof; yet all
this would be but imperfect if such things as are or may be both of Merum
Imperium and of Jurisdictio Simplex also, but in diverse respects, should be
omitted. Of this kind therefore is that Tortura, formerly hinted at; which,
when it is imposed or executed Ad poenam, or in Criminal Causes Ad veritatem
eruendam, is of Merum Imperium; Bart. in l. interdum. qui furem, ff. de Furt.
But when in Civil Causes it was wont to be used or imposed, because the
witnesses did vacillare, and were inconstant, staggering or wavering in their
testimony, it was then of Jurisdictio Simplex. Anth. de Test. Si vero ignoti,
col. 7.
In like manner all moderate and light correction or punishment being inflicted
Ad poenam Levis Delicti, is of Merum Imperium; but being imposed for contempt
or contumacy in Civil Actions, it is of Jurisdictio Simplex. Ang. and Jason. in
L. Imperium, ff. de Jurisd.
Also, Excommunication, when pronounced Ex Publica Causa against rebellious and
contumacious persons, is of Merum Imperium; but being pronounced ad instantiam
partis, it is of Jurisdictio Simplex. Panor. in cap. Cum contingat. col. 5. De
Foro Competent.
So likewise Restraint or. Imprisonment, when imposed by the Canon Law ad
delictum puniendum, is of Merum Imperium; when otherwise imposed, it is of
Jurisdictio Simplex. Alb. Bald. Sal. Alex. Jas. in dict. Imperium.
Lastly, Appeals in all Criminal Causes are of Merum Imperium; but in Civil
Causes they are both of Jurisdictio Simplex, and of Merum Imperium also.
Definit. Jurisd. nu. ult. ff. de Jurisd.


There are also in the Law (for these things are only hinted to the memories of
such as know the Law) several other Distinctions of Jurisdiction. Such as
Jurisdictio Voluntaria and Contentiosa. L. 2. ff. De Offic. Procons.
But this is a Distinction in respect of the parties Litigant; the former
Distinctions being in respect of the Judges themselves. There is also
Jurisdictio Ordinaria and Delegata; which though a very common received
Distinction from the Speculator, Spec. de Jurisd. in prin.
yet in truth it is less true then common, and is reproved by Bartol, because
the one differs not from the other according to the Law of Distinctions, both
being in their nature one and the same, though diversified in the exercise
thereof; For the Judge Delegate does but exercise Jurisdictionem Delegantis.
Bart. in L. Imperium. ff. De Jurisd. om. Jud. nu. 26.
There is also Jurisdictio Prorogata; as when the parties litigant do of
themselves consent unto a Jurisdiction in one, who without such consent were no
Judge in the Case; L. Si Convenerit. ff. eod. and l. sed and si. ff. de
Precario.
but this seems more like a compromise or arbitrary decision, then like a
Jurisdiction properly so called.

There are several other Distinctions of Jurisdiction in the Law, here
purposely omitted as being not so pertinent to the design in hand; This
therefore that has been said may suffice for a hint to all such Appendexes on
the Law, as solicit rather for the Lawyer then the Clyent, to learn what a
Jurisdiction in the eye of the Law is, before they attempt the invasion thereof.

To apply the premises, and so to conclude this point with Omphalius, that
famous and Modern German Lawyer, Omphal. l. 1. Civil. Polit. cap. 105. nu. 14.
and L. Lucio. ff. de Aqu. quot. and aestiv. and Ang. in l. 2. ex his. ff. de
verb. Sig.
Jurisdictio est res indivisibilis: si tamen ejus Domini in eodem Territorio
dissentiant in Exercitio Jurisdictionis, pertinebit ad Superiorem Potestatem,
Conoordia parts interponere, vel usum Jurisdictionis Exercendae dividere. This
seems to be the Admiralties Case in terminis. All Jurisdictions are essentially
radicated only in the Prince or Supreme Magistrate. Car. Tap. in ff. de Constable.
Prin. cap. 4. nu. 10. and Marant. Distinct. nu. 3.
The Law ranks them inter Regalia Principum. Auth. Quae sunt Regalia. Coll. 10.
The right and power of the conservation of Jurisdictions does lodge and reside
properly there, from whence they had their being and origination.
Jurisdictiones omnes ab ipso Principe velut Rivuli a font suo manarunt. L. 1.
ff. ubi sup. and l. 1. cum urbem. ff. de Off^c. Praes. Urb. and l. 1. Cod. eod.
tit.
When the Prince or Supreme Authority Ex plenitudine Potestatis does create or
constitute a Jurisdiction, he does not divest himself of the right of
expounding his own Grant, according to that in the Law, Tap. ubi supra nu. 14.
Jurisdictio licet concedatur a Principe, semper tamen inhaeret ejus ossibus.
So that when differences do arise concerning the rights or demands, the
Ampliations or Restrictions, the Latitude or Boundaries of Jurisdictions, the
Prince is the competent Judge to decide and reconcile; In this case therefore
to Caesar is the Appeal.

CHAP. VI.
Of Prohibitions; Their several kinds, Causes and Effects in the Law.
HAving spoken of Jurisdictions in general, it may not now be of less
consequence to enquire, of what superseding faculty a Prohibition in its
original and due intendment of Law may be in point of right and power for the
removal of the Cognizance of Causes from one Jurisdiction to another. And
although in the precedent Chapter there has been a clear and distinct Prospect
of the matter of Jurisdictions out of the Civil Law, being the best and indeed
the only Law that could with such transparency present us with an object of
that depth and difficulty, yet now being to look through other Mediums, so
clear a sight of Prohibitions may not be expected to be presented in the same
Glass; For Prohibitio in the sense now intended, may not be taken for
Interdictum, quo Praetor vetat aliquid fieri; L. 1. interdictum, and l. 2. ff.
de interdict* and Prohibitoria. Instit. cod. tit.
nor be thence dissected into its several kinds and distinctions according to
the Analogy of Civil Law; This would be as little pertinent to the present
purpose in hand, as rationally it could expect of credit or belief out of its
proper Sphere. Suffice it therefore that it be described under such Rules and
Characters as the Law of this Realm does not disown. It shall therefore only be
premised what Boerius, that famous Civilian says of it; Boer. Decis. 114. nu.
2. and ibi Faber. in L. ante fin. Cod. de Off. Praef. Urb. per Tex. in C.
Transmissa. De Foro Compet. and Paris de Put. in Syndicat. Tit. de Excess.
Baron. cap. ult. and Ang. in l. haeredi. De Usu fruct. Legate. ut voluit Saldus
in Prooem. 2. lib. Decret. Colum. 2.
That a Judge in matters cognizable before him, may prohibit such as are within
his Jurisdiction, from impleading any in another Court to his prejudice; And
that an Ecclesiastical Judge may issue his Mandate to a Judge Secular,
prohibiting him from meddling with matters of Ecclesiastical Cognizance. And the
same Boerius in another place Boer. Decis. 9. nu. 15. and Bar. and Alex. in L.
omnibus. is videtur. ff. Si quis jus dic. non obtemp.

Sir Tho. Ridleys View of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Law, in part. 3. cap. 1.
sect. 2.


says, That in such cases of Excess by the power of one Jurisdiction exercised
over another, the King is to decide the Controversy.

A Prohibition in the sense most adequate to the purpose in hand, is a Writ
forbidding to hold Plea in a Matter or Cause supposed to be without the
Jurisdiction and Cognizance of that Court where the Suit depends; Sir Thomas
Ridley calls it a Commandment sent out of some of the Kings higher Courts of
Record, where Prohibitions have been used to be granted in the Kings Name,
sealed with the Seal of that Court, and subscribed with the Test of the chief
Judge or Justice of the Court, from whence the Prohibition does come, at the
suggestion of the Plaintiff, pretending himself to be grieved by some
Ecclesiastical or Marine Judge, in non-admittance of some matter, or doing some
other thing against his right, in his or their Judicial Proceedings, commanding
the said Ecclesiastical or Marine Judge to proceed no farther in that cause,
upon pretense that the same does not belong to the said Ecclesiastical or
Marine Judge. But this description of the Writ of Prohibition, though large
enough, yet not comprehensive enough; For Prohibitions may issue to Courts that
have neither Ecclesiastical nor Marine Cognizance, as appears by the Learned
Fitzh. who among Sixty several Cases Fitzh. N. B. verb. Prohibit.
by him mentioned, wherein a Prohibition does lie, does not instance in any
against the Admiralty; Nor do the Statutes (though express as to Prohibirions
against Courts Ecclesiastical) speak of any in express terms or in the letter
of it as against the Admiralty. Hence probably it is that the Author of the
Terms of the Law Terms of Law, verb. Prohibit.
makes no other description of a Prohibition then this, viz. That it is a Writ
that lies where a man is impleaded in the Spiritual Court of a thing, that
touches not Matrimony, nor Testament, nor merely Tithes; And this Writ shall
be directed as well to the Party as to the Judge or his Official, to prohibit
them that they proceed no farther; But if it appears afterward to the Judges
Temporal, that the matter is to be determined by the Spiritual Court, and not
in the Court Temporal, then the Party shall have a Writ of Consultation,
commanding the Judges of the Court Spiritual to proceed in the first Plea.
Which description of the Writ of Prohibition is consonant to the Statute of 2
Ed. 6. cap. 13. whereby it is provided, That he that sueth for a Prohibition,
shall make a suggestion and prove it by two witnesses; And in case it be not
proved true by two witnesses at the least in the Court where the Prohibition is
granted, within six months next after the said Prohibition; then the Party so
hindered by such Prohibition, shall have a Consultation, and recover double
costs and damages against the party that sued for the Prohibition. And in the
said description of a Prohibition by the Author of the Terms of Law, there is
not any thing expressed as to a Prohibition against the Admiralty, but only
against Judges in matters Spiritual, wherein the Court of Admiralty is not
concerned; By the Proceedings whereof there is not (as in the other once was)
the least pretense for any fear of dis-inheritage of the Crown-Rights, which
will be agreed to be originally the Causa finalis of Prohibitions. Whence it
was long since observed and published by a Learned Civilian of this Nation, D.
Cowel Interp. ver. Prohibitio.
That this Writ of Prohibition in those days may well be spared; For although
It may not be hence inferred, That what seems to cease of use in one respect,
may not remain of use in another; As indeed this is, in Conservation not
Derogation of Jurisdictions; and for prevention of Trials Coram non Judice
Competente, by an expedient of Law, whereby the Gognizance of a Cause may not
be drawn from its proper Jurisdiction ad aliud Examen.
it were some help to the Kings inheritance and Crown, when the two Swords were
in two diverse hands; yet now that both Jurisdictions are settled in the King as
the only Supreme Magistrate, there is little reason thereof. And indeed the
Jurisdiction of the Admiralty of England was ever inherent in the Crown of
England; so that there was never in that sense that parity of reason for
Prohibitions against the one as against the other. That which at first has its
origination from a principle of well-grounded policy, and is of good use in one
age, may afterward be otherwise in another, specially if the Rule Cessante
Ratione cessat Lex should hold in this case as in others. The Fiery Brazen
Serpent when first erected, was of happy use; yet when abused by the people,
Hezekiah brake it in pieces; Number. 21. 8. and 2 Kin. 18. 4.
yea, though of Divine Institution, yet when it became a snare to the people,
that good King did not scruple to call it Nehushtan. Nehushtan, h. e. Brass, or
Brazen, or a piece os Brass.
The Court of Admiralty is one of the Courts Temporal, one of the Courts of our
Sovereign Lord the King, and long since owned as such, as appears by the
Resolutions upon the Cases concerning the Jurisdiction This implies not, but
that Prohibitions are still of necessary use, where Inferior Jurisdictions
meddle with matters which do not concern them, and wherein they are incompetent.
of the Admiralty in Anno 1632.

If the Court of Admiralty be one of His Majesty's Temporal Courts, then the
old Argument of the Conservation of the Crown-Rights, seems not to hold in this
case, and only for that Reason, as to Prohibitions against the Admiralty; as
well for that the said Court is a Court Temporal, as that it is one of His
Majesty's Courts; specially in Cases that are either Locally or Materially
Maritime. It may not therefore be much material to inquire whether Prohibitions
do lie as well against Temporal as Spiritual and Eccsesiastical Courts; For
Fitzh. N. B. fo. 39. Cowel Interp. verb. Prohibit.
admitting a Prohibition according to the Learned Fitzh. [g] to be A Writ for
the forbidding any Court; either Spiritual or Secular, to proceed in any Cause
there depending, upon suggestion that the Cognition thereof belongs not to
the said Court; yet it is presumed that this does not concern such Cases as
primo intuitu appear to be Locally Maritime, or according to the nature thereof
have been time out of mind properly of the Admiral Cognizance; For without
doubt the suggestion mentioned in the said definition does not in construction
of Law pretend to any thing beyond the very truth of what is suggested; or so,
as to transplea a Cause from one Jurisdiction to another, absque minimo fumo
probationis, of the truth and reallity of the suggestion, or that the Cognition
of the Cause belongs not to the Court Prohibited. Thus having seen what a
Prohibition is, which in truth is no more but this, viz. A Charge by Writ to
forbear to hold Plea either in some matter or manner, which (as is supposed or
suggested) a man deals in beyond his Jurisdiction, or otherwise then Law will
warrant; It follows, That

Every Prohibition is either Prohibitio Juris by the Law it self; Or Prohibitio
hominis, where the Ministry of a competent Judge is used; or Prohibitio Facti,
of mere Fact, where it has no fufficient ground or foundation in the Law: The
Second of these, viz. the Ministry of a competent Judge is so essential, as
without which neither of the other can proceed. Prohibitio Juris is a very
Prohibition in it self, and therefore it is a contempt to sue against it.
Prohibitions of Law are such as are set down by any Law or Statute of this
Land, whereby Ecclesiastical Courts are interdicted from dealing in the matters
in such Statutes contained. Such are the Statutes of 2 Ed. 6. cap. 13. whereby
Judges Ecclesiastical are forbidden to hold Plea of any matter, cause, or
thing, being contrary or repugnant to or against the effect, intent, or meaning
of the Statute of Westminster 2. Ridley View of the Civil and Ecclesiastical
Law, part. 3. cap. 1. sect. 2.
cap. 3. the Statutes of Articuli Cleri, Circumspecte agatis, Silva Caedua,
viz. 43 Ed. 3. cap. 3. The Treatise De Regia Prohibitione, Stat. 1 Ed. 3. cap.
10. Such also is the Statute of 9 Ed. 2. cap. 2. There are also other Statutes
declaring in what Cases Prohibitions will not lie; Such are the Statutes of 9
Ed. 2. cap. 1, 4, 5. Also 18 Ed. 3. cap. 5. and 50 Ed. 3. cap. 4. Prohibitions
of Fact, are such as having no sollid foundation (as the other) on the Laws and
Statutes of this Kingdom, may yet pro tempore have some kind of operation like
Prohibitio Juris, because therein also is Prohibitio hominis, or the Ministry
of the Judge or Superior Magistrate. Such Prohibitions of Fact (where they
happen) may administer more matter for Lawyers to work on, then possibly the
merits of the Cause require, and have in former times occasioned several
Complaints by reason of the perplexity of Lawsuits, uncertainties in matters
of Jurisdiction, multiplicity of litigious Controversies, excess of Charges,
delays of Proceedings, retardations of Justice, and the like. Hence it was,
that Sir Tho. Ridley in his View of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Law so long
since on this Subject said, Ibid.
That the Right of the Supreme Magistrate is not to be supposed by Imagination,
but to be made plain by Demonstration. And so both the Statute of 18 Ed. 3.
cap. 5. is, whereby it is Provided, That no Prohibition shall issue, but where
the King has the Cognizance, and of right ought to have; which is very
observable; And also by the forementioned of 2 Ed. 6. which prohibits*
Prohibitions to be granted otherwise then upon sight of the Libel, and other
Circumstances in the said Statute expressed. By which it is intended, the
meaning of the Lawgivers was not that every idle suggestion of every Attorney
should breed a Prohibition; but such only should be granted, as the Judge
according to Law should think worthy thereof, if there were Right to deserve
it. Where the said Sir Thomas Ridley goes on and says, That as emulation
between the two Laws in the beginning brought in these multitude of
Prohibitions, either against Though by Warrant from the Proverb, Losers have
leave to speak; yet in case of Interest, such as cannot hold their own, may
hold their peace.
or beside Law: so the gain they brought to the Temporal Courts maintains
them; which also (they are his words) makes the Judges that they sesse not
Costs and Damages in Cases of Consultation, (although the Statute precisely
requires their assent and assignment therein) because they would not deter
other men from suing out of Prohibitions, and pursuing the same. Though this
was the Observation, and these the very words of Sir Thomas Ridley upon this
Subject in his time, yet we may not thence infer that so it is also now in
our time, specially now that Justice runs again in its proper channel, and her
balance equally poized; It was too true that in late years of unhappy memory
the said words and observation of that Civilian were too sadly verified; which
now no doubt will in some short time (as is already in a good degree) be
completely rectified.

In order to a Prohibition there is to precede such a suggestion as may be
proved, not such a suggestion as is not capable of proof; Improbable
suggestions lay no foundations; Non-Entities are no Basis for Existencies; It
has been a Rule without Exception ever since the Creation, That Ex nihilo
nihil fit. By suggesting the Place, where a Contract is supposed to be made, to
be at Bordeaux in France in Islington in the County of Middlesex, seems to
imply as if the alleging the Place, (viz. to be within the body of some County
within the Realm) were essential for the entituling of that Jurisdiction, where
such suggestion is made, to a Cognizance of the Cause grounded upon that
suggestion, so that the Place seems to be of This hinders not, but that a thing
really done super altum mare, (though not yet so in proof) may be surmized or
suggested to be done at Land, in order only to bring it to issue, whether a
Prohibition lies in the Case. This is but the Law of one Jurisdiction without
any derogation of another.
such Jurisdictional weight, as not capable of being translocated by the
highest strength of Imagination, which may present strange things in
Apparitions, but cannot possibly enervate the energy of Truths and Reallities;
And thence possibly it is, that for prevention of improbable surmizes, as a
suggestion may be quasi Causa sine qua non of a Prohibition, so the said
Statute of 2 Ed. 6. cap. 13. provides that probability by witnesses (which
cannot be without verity) be a due requisite of suggestions. The Lord Coke upon
this Subject of suggesting and surmizing, viz. of places beyond Sea to be as
within the Body of some County within this Realm, does acknowledge, Cok. Inst.
l. 3. c. 7. sect. 440. in sin.
That there is variety of Opinions in the very Books of the Common Law upon
this point. This kind of suggesting and surmizing did in late years of fatal
memory much impede the Judicial Proceedings of the Admiralty, when it was no
rare thing to meet with a suggestion of a Contract to have been made or other
thing done upon the Land in some certain place within the Body of some County,
that really and in truth was made or done upon or beyond the Seas, and farther
possibly then the suggestor ever saw in a Map. The Civilians say, there are
certain Cases wherein Prohibitio vim suam non exercet, whereof one is, Quando
aliquid prohibetur sinel Causa; and the Law of this Realm allows another, and
that is, Quando Consultatio conceditur.

Prohibitions in the Law there are of other kinds, though not so pertinent to
the purpose in hand; Such is the Writ Indicavit, as in matter of Tithes; Fitzh.
N. B. tit. Prohibitio.
This lies also for the Patron, where the Incumbent is impleaded for the
Advowson or right of Patronage in a Spiritual Court; though it lies not till
the Libel be brought to be viewed in Chancery, Et Lis Contestata; Fitzh. Ibid.
And it lies only before Sentence is given in the Ecclesiastical Court, being
afterward void. Lastly, a Prohibition cease and loses his virtue after a
Consultation is granted, as appears by the Statute of 24 Ed. 1. which declares
in what Cases a Consultation is grantable; which again is afterward more full
in the Statute of 2 Ed. 6. cap. 13. whereby it is enacted, That a Consultation
shall be granted for default of proving the suggestion, and double Costs and
Damages (as aforesaid) awarded to the party hindered by such Prohibition,
against him that so pursued the same. And where a Consultation is once truly
granted, the Judge formerly prohibited, shall according to the Statute of 50
Ed. 3. cap. 4. proceed in the Cause, notwithstanding any other Prohibition
thereupon, provided the matter in the Libel be not altered.

CHAP. VII.
Of Fictions; what a Fiction in Law is; how far and in what cases Fictions
may be used according to the Rules of Law.
BY Fiction is here intended no other then such as the Law it self intends, no
other then such as being authorized by Law, and introduced upon a warrant of
Law, has in operation the due effect of Law. As for other Fictions, the Law
understands them but as mere Ciphers, tollerating none but such as are grounded
upon and regulated according to the just Principles of the Law; The Essence of
Law being more Rational, her Designs more Equitable, her Mediums more feasible,
and her style more serious and venerable, then to hazard either under the
Conduct of any Notions inconsistent either with Equity or Possibility; For the
Law does imitate Nature; Such Fictions therefore as cannot endure the Test of
Law, are Fictions indeed, proper only for a Comment upon Lucians Dialogues. To
proceed therefore to the Law.

A Fiction in the eye of the Law, and such whose Practice may be warranted by
Law, is Legis adversus veritatem in re Possibili ex justa causa dispositio.
Schard. ver. Fictio.
So that it is Legis non hominis dispositio; it must be a Fiction framed
according to the Rules of Law, not whatever is imaginable in the conceptions of
Man. This word [Dispositio] is sometimes taken for a quality of the mind, or
imperfect habit, that is, an Inclination or Affection. Cas. Tract. Dialect. 2.
part. cap. 20, and 21.

Vid. Larrea. Decis. Granar. Disp. 8. nu. 58. Semper Fictio, Licet veritati
contraria, tamen veritatem imitatur. Minorem. De Adopr. and l. Si Filius, 14.
D. Si Cer. per. and l. Triennio 18. D. de Stat. Liber. Et solum extenditur ad
id quod per veritatem and rerum Naturam fieri potest. Glos. in l. 3. D. Pro
Socio, and Curr. l. 2. Conject. ad fratrem, cap. 13. and Oswald. l. 14. ad
Donel. cap 19. lit. A.


But in this place it signifies an Act proceeding from good Authority of Law;
for it must be Ex justa Causa; which word [Just] has diverse acceptations or
significations in the Law; As sometimes it is opposed to that which is wicked
or contrary to Justice and Equity; whence it follows, that the Suggestor may
not frame or model a Fiction opposite thereto; Sometimes the word [Just] is in
the Law taken for Full or Perfect; And hereby all defects and imperfections for
want of any Legal Requisites in the Suggestors Notions to the fabricating of a
Fiction, are excluded; Such are the defects or imperfections in respect either
of Equity or Possibility; For as the suggestions are to arise ex justa causa,
so they are to center in re possibili. But to prevent mistakes, let it not be
hence inferred, as if it were here employed, that all Surmizes and Suggestions
at Law in order to remove or transplea a Cause from one Jurisdiction to
another, were such Fictions as fall not within the compass of the said
Definition of a Legal Fiction; If any such inconsequent construction be made of
the Premises, or shall be made of what follows, it is no man's error but the
Readers; For though all Fictions, whether Legal or illegal, may be Surmizes,
Suggestions, or Suppositions, yet all Surmizes or Suggestions are not illegal
Fictions; And many of the Suggestions used in the Practick part of the Law for
the end aforesaid, are both true, equitable, and possible, and consequently
probable, and so of good and necessary use in practice, according to the Law in
the Statute of Prohibitions in that behalf provided. And this not by way of
digression, but ad majorem and necessariam Cautelam, to prevent all
mis-apprehensions.

The foresaid Definition of a Fiction Legal, not finding general entertainment
among the DD, it may be free to incline with the more received opinion to
Bartols definition thereof; whose words are Bart. in l. Si quis pro Emptore. D.
de usucapionib.
these, viz. Fictio, est in re certa, ejus quod est possibile adversus
veritatem, pro veritate a jure facta assumptio. A Fiction is an Assumption of
Law upon an untruth for a truth, against the truth, in some thing possible to
be done, but not done. So that Surmizes and Suggestions in Judicial Practice
that are true, are not (as was aforesaid) Fictions. In this definition it is
said to be in re certa, to difference it from Presumption, which ever fixes
upon something that is dubious, L. Sive possidetis, Cod. de Probat. and Cyn.
ibid. and l. non est verisimile. D. Quod metus causa.
yet carries so much of truth with it, as without better evidence is not
counterpoized; But Fictio fit super Certo, Ibid. in glos. mag. in l. non est
verisim.
Super Falso and Certo fingitur; Super Vero and Incerto praesumitur. Gothof. ad
Rub. D. de Probat.
Likewise, in in this definition it is said to be Ejus quod est possibile,
because Super eo quod est impossible non potest fingi. Bart. ibid. nu. 22.
Of Impossibilities there can be no Fiction according to Law whereon to ground
any Suggestion. Reason it self proves this, for Art (as aforesaid) ever
imitates Nature; And what is impossible according to Nature, is impossible
according to Art; and though Art in some sense may be said to perfect Nature,
yet it may not contradict Nature in any sense. A Fiction in Law ever imitates a
possibility in Nature. L. Adoptio. ff. de Adopt.
Again, it is said to be Adversus veritatem, because if it were really true, it
would cease to be a Fiction, yet withal it is said to be pro veritate, An
Assumption of Law upon an untruth for a truth, because it has the effect of
Law, being thus qualified, as fully as if it were an Assumption upon a Truth.
Lastly, it is said to be a jure facta Assumptio, to exclude all illegal
untruths, which are not of Law, but of Man, and therefore have not the designed
effect in operation of Law.

The premises considered, it is most evident, That on every Fiction according
to Law, attend two such Essential Requisites, that if either of them be
wanting, it ceases to be a Legal Fiction; The one is Equity, the other is
Possibility; These are the Duo Necessaria to every Legal Fiction; And such
Fictions thus qualified, are introduced by the Civil Law, wherein among many
others there are specially two that may be said to be the Capital or more
Principal Fictions in the Law; The one whereof is in Lege Cornelia; The other
in jure Postliminii; A Fiction Legis Corneliae takes place, when a Captive
intra praesidia hostium dies under such Captivity; For if so, then such Captive
by that Law, if he made a Will before such his being taken Captive, shall in
favor of such Will, and for the upholding of the same, be feigned to be dead
in puncto temporis, immediately before such his being taken Captive. Le.
Cornelia. ff. de Testam. and l. Cornel. ff. de Vulg. substi^.
And so by that Legal Fiction of Death his Will is firm and valid, as if he had
really dyed without ever being taken by the Enemy. That De jure Postliminii is,
whereby for the preservation of a man's right of property, the Law does feign
him that is returned out of Captivity to be and to have been as if he had never
been Captive, or at all absent from that place of his freedom and privilege,
whereof he was before such his Capture; L. retro. and l. in bello. 1. and l.
bona. ff. de Capt. and 4. D. Quibus mod. jus. patr. solvit.
whereby he is redintegrated into his pristine state and condition. As it is
thus as to Persons, so also is it as to Things, such only excepted as by Law
are exempted from the privilege of Postliminium.

There are diverse other Fictions in the Law, though of less weight, which have
not any dependence at all on the former, yet not one of them without Equity and
Possibility. Thus he that is in contempt for nonappearance in Court upon due
Summons, is by Law feigned to be present, that so neither the Law might be
rendered Elusory by his absence, nor himself get any advantage by his own
Laches, nor the adverse party receive prejudice by the others contempt. L.
Absent^, ff. de verb. Sign.
So on the other side, he that is present in Court, but does there lurk and
hide himself, vel latitare inter columnas, is by the Law feigned to be absent.
L. ibid. glos. mag.
Also, he that is in utero, and as yet unborn, is by the Law quoad suum
commodum, feigned to be born, lest otherwise he should be left without remedy
as to a child's portion. L. qui in utero, and l. pen. ff. de stat. hom.
Likewise, such as enter into mutual Contracts of Partnership, though
themselves may not therein create Fictions other then the Law allows, yet in
matters of Society and Partnership the Lex Aquiliana does feign a mutual
stipulation or hypothecation in such Consortship, which the Law styles
stipulatio Aquiliana, and in such cases Socius socio tenetur Lege Aquiliana.
ff. Ad Leg. Aquil. and Rub. ibid. and l. Si ex causa. D. Pro Socio.
And in such cases of Partnership for the acquisition of a Dominium and
Property in all the goods in Partnership without any actual delivery, the Law
does tacitly feign such a delivery, albeit it never specially intervened. L.
quia licet ff. Pro Socio.
Likewise the Law feigns the person of one to represent the person of another,
that so Nephews and Nieces may succeed together with their Unkles and Aunts in
their Grandfathers and Grandmothers goods and chattels, for so much thereof as
should have come to their parents respectively, in case they had been alive at
the time of their said Grand-parents decease. L. 1. Si Filius. ff. de suis and
legitimis, and l. 2, 3, 4. Cod. cod.
In like manner he that is dead, may by Law be feigned to be alive to several
constructions and operations of Law, if others his equals in age be then alive,
or in case his being really alive at such time of feigning him to be alive,
does not exceed the natural age of man. Sed si in bello. Inst. de Excusat.
Tutor.
Many more instances of Legal Fictions might here be added, but these may
suffice for proof, that though the Law allows of Fictions, yet never but where
there is justa causa with equity and possibility, disowning all others as
Monstrous Fictions, that are propagated merely of the froth of the brain; for
the Law (as aforesaid) ever resembles and imitates Nature; And therefore if any
man will enter the lists with Lucian, or strain his imagination to forge
rarities beyond his Dialogues, and feign a battle of Elephants to be fought on
a Cobweb in the Air, or fresh water-spring to rise out of the Whales belly, or
a Mine of Gold fifty fathom under ground in the middle Region of the Air, or
the like, he may expect no protection from the Law for such irregular Notions.

A Legal Fiction under the foresaid qualifications, is threefold; either
Inductiva, or Privitiva, or Translativa and Extensiva. A Fiction Inductive, is,
when the Law feigns that to be which indeed is not; A Fiction Privitive, is,
when the Law feigns that not to be which indeed is; And a Fiction Translative
or Extensive, is, when the Law does feign a thing to be done in one manner,
which in truth is done in another. The first of these, or the Inductive
Fiction* is an Assumption of Law in a thing certain and possible, upon a
non-existency for an existency; The second, or the Privitive Fiction, is alike
definable, only the words inverted; And the third, or Translative Fiction, is
only an Assumption of Law more upon the Modus then the thing it self; So
called, because it is mainly conversant in one of these four varieties; As
either when the Law by a Fiction transfers or translates some Act or Thing,
either from one place to another, or from one person to another, or from one
thing to another, or from one time to another; But which soever of these the
Fiction be, it must still keep within the due limits and bounds of equity and
possibility. Whatever the Fiction be, it may be reduced to one of these three
heads, either Inductiva, Privitiva, or Translativa; and neither of these but
must quadrare with Bartols said definition, or the Law rejects it as spurious
and illegitimate.

For the yet clearer apprehension of the premises, it may be no digression to
insert a word by way of caution to the imperfect Notionist, that he would not
hence infer as if the Law did feign impossibilities, because it supposes the
living to be dead, and the dead to be alive; the absent to be present, and the
present to be absent; and the like. For although they would indeed be
impossibilities, if only considered simply in an identity of fact and time, of
person and of place, without their right and due diversifications; yet they are
not impossibilities, being rightly according to the Law of Fictions
distinguished in respect of fact, time, person and place, together with such
transactions, translocations, transtemporations, and transpersonalities, as
according to Rules of Law are requisite to every Fiction that enures to any
effect in Law; For that which may seem Deceptio intellectus, and by
mis-apprehension possibly be taken for an impossibility in the precedent
instances of a Legal Fiction, is in truth nothing but that defect or absence of
verity in the person, act, thing, manner, time or place feigned; Indeed, to
look for Truth in a Fiction, is to expect an impossibility with as much vanity
as some men do for Revelations: if it were possible that there could be the
least verity in the thing supposed, it would immediately cease to be a Fiction.
Legal Fictions may be aptly styled, The just Policies of Law, to attain unto
the end and effect of Law by remedies extraordinary, only where the ordinary
means do fail. This therefore is no warrant to fly to Fictions though Legal,
much less to others, as remedies extraordinary, when the ordinary means by Law
provided may be used.

This point of Fictions having now been put to the touchstone of the Law, and
impartially weighed in the balance thereof, it plainly appears, what kind of
Fictions they are, that are legally qualified to take place in the Judicial
proceedings of the Civil Law in Foreign Nations, as also in this Kingdom;
which (before the late unnatural and intestine Wars) was, and now seems to be
for Religion, Justice and Commerce, Regina Insularum totius Orbis.

CHAP. VIII.
That the Cognizance of all Causes and Actions arising of Contracts made, and
other things done upon the Sea, is inherent in the Jurisdiction of the
Admiralty.
THis Truth in the Law is not denied in the Judgments of men, though it has
not wanted at least a seeming Contradiction Noy Rep. M. 39 40 Eliz. C. B. This
may be but a Surmize in one Jurisdiction for a Supposition in another, as an
expedient whereby to discover unto which Jurisdiction the Case does properly
belong.
in Practice. Witness Susans Case against Turner in Noys Reports; where it is
said, That if a Suit be in the Court of Admiralty for a Contract supposed to be
made Super altum mare, the Defendant upon a Surmize or Suggestion that it was
made upon the Land within the Realm, may have a Prohibition. Such and the like
begat that complaint of the Admiralty, which gave the Lord Coke occasion to
assert in these words following, viz. Coke Inst. part. 4. cap. 22.
That by the Laws of the Realm the Court of Admiralty has no cognizance,
power, or Jurisdiction of any matter of contract, plea, or querele within any
County of the Realm, either upon Land or the Water: but every such contract,
plea, or querele, and all other things rising within any County, either upon
the Land or the Water, ought to be tried and determined by the Laws of the
Land, and not before or by the Lord Admiral or his Lieutenant in any manner: So
as it is not material, whether the place be upon the Water infra fluxum and
refluxum aquae, but whether it be upon any Water within any County. Wherefore
we acknowledge that of contracts, pleas, and quereles made upon the Sea or any
part thereof, which is not within any County (from whence no trial can be had
thereof by twelve men) the Lord Admiral has and ought to have Jurisdiction.
This was the Answer long since given to an Objection made by the Admiralty; But
the Objection was, That whereas the Cognizance of all Contracts and other
thiags done upon the Sea, belongs only to the Juisdiction of the Admiralty,
the same are made tryable at the Common Law, by supposing the same to have been
done in Cheapside, and such like places. So that the sinew of the Objection is,
That things done upon the Sea, being cognizable only in the Admiralty, are made
tryable elsewhere by supposing them to be done in Cheapside, and such like
plaees. The said Answer speaking nothing as to the said manner of supposing,
seems not to enervate the said Objection; The Answer distinctly declares and
sets forth where and in what places the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty has not
Cognizance, viz. not upon Land or Water within any County; But why (according
to the said Objection) things This is meant when the thing is so in truth and
in fact, as well as supposed.
done upon the Sea, and belonging only to the Admiralty, are made tryable at
Common Law, by supposing them to be done in Cheapside, and such like places,
seems yet to be resolved; Statutum simpliciter loquens, debet intelligi de his
quae vera sunt secundum veritatem, non de his quae sunt secundum Fictionem.
Bart. in ^. Si is qui pro Emptore. D. de Usucap.
The scruple touching the surmize employed in the supposition mentioned in the
said Objection, does arise from the fact so supposed, as whether solid enough
to lay foundation for such superstructures as are built thereon. It is
acknowledged, That of Contracts made and other things done upon the Sea, or any
part thereof, which is not within any County, the Lord Admiral has and ought
to have Jurisdiction; but if this Super altum mare should by a mere surmize or
suggestion be translocated in operation of Law, and so thereby become as it
were Infra Corpus Comitatus, the said acknowledgement would seem to be
disacknowledged, and the said Objection would seem to be an Objection still.
Veritatis congressus invictae est major veritas. And he that sues an Admiral
Cause in another Court, ought to withdraw it, and to fine to the King. In lib.
Nig. Adm. fol. 36.


Brownlow Reports, Brownl. Rep. part. 1. Mich. 10 Jac.
That if a Bond bear date Super altum mare, it must be sued only in the Admiral
Court. Whether then an Obligation or other Contract made on board one of the
Frigots of the Navy Royal, or the like, in the Straights, may be tried in
other then the Admiral Court, by alleging or supposing the same to have been
made in the Straights in Islington in the County of Middlesex, seems to be the
question; for the very truth of the fact as to the place of making such
Obligation in the Straights, or Super altu^ mare, seems not to alter the Case,
if the place so suggested is not to be traverfed, it being as easy and as
feasible to suppose and suggest the said Frigot and the Straights, as Bordeaux
in France to be in Islington. But the great Oracle of the Law assures us,
Littl. l. 3. c. 7. sect. 440.
That things done out of the Realm may not be tried within the Realm by the
oath of twelve men.

It is reported in Palmers Case against Pope, Hob. Rep. in Cas. Palmer verse.
Pope.
That Jennings libelled in the Admiralty against one Audley, upon a Contract
laid to be made apud Malaga infra districtum Maris vocat. The Straights of
Gibralter infra Jurisdictionem Maritimam; And because it appeared, That the
Contract was made at the Island of Malaga, Prohibition was granted, for it was
not regarded, that he added infra Jurisdictionem Maritimam, which appeared
contrary. If in another Case it happen to be elsewhere supposed that the
Contract is made at Bordeaux in France in Islington, though by the very light
of nature it appears, as soon as it is put, to be contrary, yet there may be
that reason of Law to hold the place is not traversable as to the Infra Corpus
Comitatus, which the Infra Jurisdictionem Maritimam cannot duly expect, when
that appears to be contrary. It was once said by Justice Wray in Sir Julius
Caesar's Case, Leonard Rep. 30 Eliz. in Sir Jul. Caes. Case, in B. R.
That it was hard that his Jurisdiction should be tried before himself. It has
been observed for these last twenty years, that it is far more easy to preach
good doctrine then to practice it.

The Law in all Jurisdictions is but Reason Regulated; No wonder therefore if
sometimes a Cause as to the Merits of it meet with a right Decision in a wrong
Jurisdiction; but less wonder if it oftener happens otherwise. It is reported
in the Case of Bright against Couper, Brownl. Rep. Par. 1. Case Bright verse.
Couper. Trin. 9 Jac. Rot. 638. in Com. Plac.
That an Action of Covenant being brought upon a Covenant made by a Merchant
with a Master of a Ship, viz. That if he would bring his Freight to such a
Port, then he would pay him such a sum; it was showed that part of the goods
were taken away by Pirates, and that the residue of the goods were brought to
the place appointed, and there unladen; And that the Merchant had not paid, and
so the Covenant broken: And the question was, whether the Merchant should pay
the money agreed for, since all the Merchandises were not brought to the place
appointed: And the Court was of opinion, that he ought not to pay the money,
because the Agreement was not by him performed. Here is no mention made of a
penny-fraight paid for the residue of the goods brought to the place appointed,
albeit there was Vis major, or Casus Fortuitus, without any default in the
Master or Mariners, in the Case; the Court being of opinion that he ought not
to pay the money, because the Agreement was not by him performed; nor had it
been performed in case of stress of weather, part of the goods had Navis
Levandae causa, been thrown overboard; probably this Pyracy, whereby came this
casual incapacity of performing the Agreement, was Super altum mare. And the
same Reporter in Westons Case, Brownl. Rep. Par. 2. Westons Case. Mich. 8 Jac.
1610. in B. R.
A Merchant has a Ship taken by a Spaniard, being enemy, and a month after an
English Merchant with a Ship called the Little Richard, re-takes it from the
Spaniard; And the Owner of the Ship sueth for that in the Admiralty Court. And
Prohibition was granted, because the Ship was gained by battle of an enemy.
Probably this Capture and Re-capture, the occasion of this plea and querele,
was only Super altum mare; and the property of Shipping called into question by
reason of such supermarine accidents, the matter of this plea and querele, is
of every days practice in the Admiralty, and so accustomed time out of mind.
But at another time in a Case something parallel to that quoad merita Causae
super altum mare, A Prohibition would not be granted, Trin. 17 Char. in B. R.
Grand Abridgment of the Law. Verb. Admiral.
A Dunkirker having seized a French man's Vessel Super altum mare, sold the same
with her Lading at We^mouth, whither it had been driven before its brought
infra praesidia Dom. Regis Hispan. whereupon the French man Libelled in the
Court of Admiralty against the Vendee pro interesse suo, who showed that it was
taken not by Letters of Mart, as was pretended, but by Piracy; And prayed a
Prohibition. And it was agreed by the Justices, That if a Ship be taken by
Piracy, or by Letters of Mart, and be not brought infra praesidia, of that
Prince by whose subject it was taken, that it is no lawful Prize, and the
Property is not altered: and such was said to be the Law of the Court of
Admiralty. And therefore the Court would not grant a Prohibition. In the former
Case where Prohibition was granted, the property of the Ship seems not to be
altered, for though she were, as that Case puts it, taken by an Enemy, and a
month intervened between the Capture and re-Capture, and so did pernoctare
with Res quae intra Praesidia perductae nondum sunt, quanquam ab hostibus
occupatae, Dominum non mutarunt ex Gentium jure.
the Captors, yet it does not appear by that Case that she was ever brought
infra praesidia hostium before such re-capture, or that ever Judication passed
thereon; And if there were any alteration of Property of that ship, the
Property must have been altered Super altum mare, which is properly Cognizable
in the Admiralty in respect of the Place as Gror. de ^ur. Bell. l. 3. c. 9.
well as the thing it self in its own nature. Littleton, that Famous Oracle of
the Law, as aforesaid, asserts, Littl. l. 3. c. 7. ^ect. 440.
That a thing done out of the Realm may not be tried within the Realm by the
oath of twelve men. The Lord Coke (as aforesaid) acknowledges, Coke Inst. Par.
4. c. 22.
That the Lord Admiral has and ought to have Jurisdiction of Contracts, pleas
and quereles made upon the Sea, or any part thereof not within any County. And
Sir George Crook says, Cro. Rep. in Resol. upon the Cases of the Admiral
Jurisdiction. Hill. 8 Char.
That if a Suit be commenced in the Court of Admiralty upon things done upon
the Sea, no Prohibition is to be granted. Therefore it follows, that Contracts
made and other things done upon the Sea are inherent in the Jurisdiction of the
Admiralty.

CHAP. IX.
Of Contracts and Bargains made, and other things done Beyond the Seas.
And whether the Cognizance thereof does belong to the Admiralty.
IF the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty in this point should seem to be
pretermitted or waved, by saying that Bargains and Contracts made beyond the
Seas (wherein the Common Law cannot administer Juflice) do belong to the Lord
High Constable and Earl Marshal of England, It might seem tacitly to imply, as
if Charter-parties, Bills of Lading, Cockets, Invoyces, Commissions of Mart,
Marine Consortships, and other Contracts or things made or done beyond Sea
touching Trade and Navigation, were not within the Conusance of the
Jurisdiction of the High Admiralty of England. Whereas it is well known, That
they are only Contracts and Deeds of Arms, and of War, and the like, out of the
Realm, that do properly belong to the Lord High Constable and Earl Marshal of
England, and the like within the Realm; whose Jurisdiction is of a distinct and
diversified nature, both from that of the Common Law and of the Admiralty also.
It is said, Coke Inst. par. 4. c. 22.
That if an Indenture, Bond, or other Specialty, or any Contract be made beyond
Sea, for the doing of any Act or payment of money within the Realm, or
otherwise, wherein the Common Law can administer Justice, and give ordinary
remedy; In these Cases neither the Constable and Marshal, nor the Court of
Admiralty has any Jurisdiction. So that the Admiralty seems hereby to be of
little use as to Contracts though Vltra-marine. But the Lord Hobard in
Bridgmans Case goes farther, and says, Hob. Rep. in Bridgmans Case.
That it has been often Resolved, That if any Obligation were made at Sea, yet
it could not be sued in the Admiralty Court, because it is an Obligation which
takes his course, and binds according te the Common Law. So that it hence
follows, that if it be made beyond Sea, wherein the Common Law can administer
Justice, the Court of Admiralty has not any Jurisdiction; And if it be made at
Sea, it cannot be sued in the Admiralty Court, because it takes its course, and
binds according to the Common Law. Thus betwixt Land and Water, between
Contracts made beyond Sea, and Obligations made at Sea, the Admiralty seems
like a kind of Derelict. But probably it is not hereby meant or intended that
every Contract made beyond Sea shall be tried at the Common Law, but only such
as are there made for doing some Act within the Realm, or otherwise, wherein
the Common Law can administer Justice, and give ordinary remedy; Nor every
thing done at Sea, but only Obligations, which have their course, and bind
according to the Common Law, and also when these things done at Sea, be not (as
Bridgmans Case farther puts it) of the same nature and respect, that is, (as
the said Case explains it) an Obligation made at Sea for security of a debt
growing before at Land, cannot be sued in the Court of Admiralty, because it is
not for a Marine cause. No man, it is presumed, does question but there may be
debts growing at Land for Marine Causes, as in respect of Shipping, Navigation,
and the like; Otherwise a Skipper signing Bills of Lading at Land, might
pretend such Bills of Lading so signed by him did not oblige him to a delivery
of the goods therein expressed according to the consignation thereof. A Marine
Contract may be made, and a Nautical debt contracted as well by Land as by Sea,
for security whereof Obligation may be afterward made at or beyond the Sea,
and be within the Cognizance of the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty; which would
not signify much in this or any Nation, if it could not administer Justice in
any Cases save only such as have their Birth, Life and Death, their foundation,
negotiation, and consummation precisely Super altum mare; specially where a
surmize or suggestion may be material quoad examen, though the Case often times
happens to prove otherwise, quoad merita. Sir George Croke in the foresaid
Resolutions upon the Cases of Admiral Jurisdiction, Croke Rep. Hill. 8 Char.
seems to be of another opinion, where it is said, That if a Suit be commenced
in the Court of Admiralty upon Contracts made or other things done beyond the
Seas, or upon the Seas, no Prohibition to be granted or awarded. There respect
seems to be had more to the Place where the Contract is made, then whether it
be for a Marine cause; There are some things that wherever they be made or done
(whether this side the Sea, upon the Sea, or beyond the Sea) may be properly
Cognizable in the Admiralty; Such are Charter-parties, Bills of Lading, and the
like; There are other things wherein the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty is
limited as to the Locallity upon or beyond the Sea; Personal Actions may
sometimes be or not be of Admiral Cognizance, according as they are here or
there Local, at other times they are regulated quoad subjectam materiam, about
which they are conversant; for as there are some certain Places that sui natura
are subject to the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty, so there are some certain
Things that are likewise sui natura, subject to the same Jurisdiction; And as a
Maritime Place may without respect to the subject matter entitle that
Jurisdiction to a Cognoslibility of a Case; so sometimes the subject matter as
the said Charter-parties, Bills of Lading, and such like, may without such
absolute respect had to the Place, have the same operation; were it otherwise,
it might be something difficult to find a Case simply and absolutely of an
Admiral Cognizance; for Contracts though made even upon or beyond the Seas, are
generally to take effect at Land; And that which is purely Marine in the Cause,
may be Terrene in the Effect; Bills of Lading, that are so properly inherent in
the Admiralty, take effect at Land, though made and firm'd a shipboard for the
most part, upon or beyond the Seas; Likewise Contracts for Freight and Mariners
wages, take effect at Land; yet for the most part are made a shipboard upon or
beyond the Seas. These Obligations (for they are Obligations) though they are
for doing some Act within the Realm, as in Bills of Lading for the safe
delivery a shore (the dangers of the Sea excepted) of such goods to the
Consignatory as are therein mentioned; and in Contracts of Freight and Mariners
wages for the due payment of money on the Land, yet are all within the
Jurisdiction of the Admiralty. When a Contract is really made Super altum mare
vel ultra quatuor maria, specially in matters sui natura maritime, though in
order to something afterward to be done or performed in whole or in part upon
the Land; This seems by the Ancient Customs, style and practice of the
Admiralty to be within the Jurisdiction thereof; yea, properly and exclusively,
unless you hold the doctrine of Universal Concurrency. And herein the Admiralty
may safely appeal to the words of that great Oracle of the Law, whereof mention
has been made in the precedent Chapter, Littlet. l. 3. c. 7. sect. 440.
viz. Que chose fait horse del Royalme n' aient poet estre try diens Le Royalme
per Le serement de 12. A thing done out of the Realm may not be tried within
the Realm by the oath of twelve men. This is the judgment of him whom the Lord
Coke styles not only by the name of a Lawyer, but of the Law it self.

No surmize or suggestion can cause that to be, which in sui natura is not, nor
cause that legally to seem to be, which in rerum natura is not capable of
being. The Question is not whether an Alien born out of the Dominions of the
Realm of England may as a Demandant bring his real Action; nor is it imagined
by any, that because he is an Alien, that therefore his Case may not come to
Trial for want of a suggestion; To feign a Native of France to be born in such
a certain place in England, does not reach the Case in hand; For though it be
impossible for one and the same individual person to be born in both places,
yet it is not impossible but that he who is surmized or suggested to be born in
one place, might in truth be born in another; nor contrary to the Rules of Law
to surmize a translocation of a man's Nativity, which admits a possibility in
any place within the habitable parts of the whole Universe; therefore such a
surmize or suggestion may be regularly consiste^t with the Law of Fictions, and
consequently practicable for the foundation of Process, Action, or Judicial
Proceedings; But it may be otherwise of certain Things, which if you assay by a
surmize to remove from their proper element, you may seem as it were to
annihilate the thing it self. Or endeavoring a representation of such
nonentities by a mere conception of words, you may seem as it were to attempt
incapabilities, which the Law understands not, or no other then the ebolitions
of fancy; for ex nihilo nihil fit. Nor is it controverted whether a Delinquent
for adherency with the Kings Enemies beyond Sea, shall be tried in England; no
question but such adherency without the Kingdom (to accommodate the matter for
Trial somewhere, and to prevent a total failure of Justice) may according to
Law be alleged to have been made in some place within the Kingdom; because a
Fact of that kind is within the Notion of Nature and Reason capable of a being
in either; But it does not thence follow, that the Collision of one Ship
against another by the violence of Wind and Tide, being and capable of
happening where Terra firma is not, may according to Rules of Law be supposed
to have happened in the Ward of Cheap, when possibly or in truth the said
casualty did happen Super altum mare, it may be sixty Leagues Westward of the
Cassiterides, or Isles of Scilly; And this not so much to accommodate the
matter for a Trial at Law somewhere for prevention of a total failure of
Justice, as in the former cases; as to remove a Trial, already in being, from
one Jurisdiction to another, and lite pendente ad aliud examen. There is a
double difference and of wide dimensions between the said instances and the
true state of the Case in hand. First, that way of arguing holds well and
rationally to create a Trial in case of Necessity, where otherwise Justice
might totally fail for want of a competent Tribunal in order thereto; And here
there is no opponent, for the objection is of another nature, as when surmizes
and suggestions are used as a remedy extraordinary, where the ordinary means
fail not, and that not so much to beget a Trial which otherwise could have no
being, as to remove a Trial actually in being. Secondly, there is a vast
difference in Law between Persons and Things, in reference to Legal Fictions,
as to their operation in Judicial Proceedings; For Persons in one place will
without offense to the Law admit of Fictions to suppose them in any place; but
Things and Actions are ever to be accommodated as unto a possibility in Nature,
so to Rationality and Equity in Act; Insomuch that if by any manner of
supposing they happen to be strained beyond either of these, all the
Superstructure may fall for want of sufficient foundation. Though it be very
true what Spiegelius once said, Fingi Lites poterunt, ut transactio fiat citra
Praetoris authoritatem, yet most apt and true also is that of Ulpian, L. cum hi
si cum lis. D. de transact.
Fictio privata and illicita nihil distat a fraudulent a simulatione; The
Reason in Law is, because as all Legal Fictions must ever imitate Nature it
self in re possibili, though it be adversus veritatem: so it must also be Legis
ex justa causa dispositio.

It is said, Coke par. 1. Instit. l. 3. c. 7. sect, 440.
That an Obligation made beyond the Seas, may be sued in what place in England
the Plaintiff please; Insomuch that notwithstanding it bear date at Bordeaux in
France, yet it may be alleged to be made in quodam loco vocat' Bordeaux in
France in Islington in the County of Middlesex, and there it shall be tried;
For, (as it is there farther added) in that case it is not traversable whether
there be such a place in Islington or no. But yet the Renowned Littleton says
plainly, as is before observed, That a thing done out of the Realm may not be
tried within the Realm by the Oath of twelve men. Littl. l. 3. c. 7. sect. 440.
If an Obligation Brownl. Rep. 2. Admiral Court, ibi in haec verba.

Note (says the Report) that it was urged by Haughton, that the intent of the
Statute of 13 R. 2. cap. 5. was not to inhibit the Admiral Court, to hold Plea
of any thing made beyond Sea, but only of things made within the Realm, which
pertains to the Common Law, and is not in prejudice of the King or Common Law,
if he hold plea over the Sea; and that this was the intent of the Statute,
appears by the Preamble.


made beyond the Seas, may be sued here in England, in whatsoever place the
Plaintiff please, admitting the intraversability of the place, it follows, That
a thing done at Bordeaux in France may be tried in Middlesex in England, and
that which was done in the East Indies may be tried in the Ward of Cheap. If it
be admitted that the words of the incomparable Littleton, viz. [Out of the
Realm] And the words of the Lord Coke, viz. [Beyond the Seas] do according to
the intendment here agree in parity of sense, though in other Cases very
distinguishable, then it would seem as if there were some need of a person
dexterous at Gordian knots in this point, that may not Alexander-like cut
instead of untying the same; who withal must remember what the Lord Coke
himself there says in the close of that Bordeaux Case in Islington, viz. That
these Points are necessary to be known in respect of the variety of opinions in
our Books; whereby it is evident, that there is not that universal unanimity of
consent in this point, as to render it indubitable; So that although a surmize
or suggestion should translocate Bordeaux into Islington, yet it is not to be
gainsaid but that the great Oracle of the Law asserts, That Things done
without the Realm cannot be tried within the Realm by the Oath of twelve men.
Where the Locality is merely Circumstantial to the Fact, and not withal
Essential to a Jurisdiction, in that case the intraversability of the Place
need not be so considerable, as when a Right of Cognizance admits dispute by
reason of such Locality, or the claim of another Jurisdiction not inadmissable,
specially of such a Jurisdiction as mainly calculates her Cognizance according
to the Meridian of that Place, where the Thing or ground of Action received its
Origination, and where the very Locality becomes as it were one Essential to
the Jurisdiction it self, and where by such an intraversability of the Place,
though only surmized, it becomes not impossible but that a competent
Jurisdiction may happen to be quoad hoc excluded.

The Jurisdiction of the Admiralty having ever been of the complaining hand
touching the inconveniences through uncertainty of Jurisdiction as to the
Cognizance and Trial of Causes Maritime, may aptly say with the Lord Coke, Coke
par. 4. Instit. c. 74.
Misera est servitus ubi jus est vagu^ aut incognitum. It has been said, Coke
ibid. cap. 22.
That if an Indenture, Bond, or other Specialty, or any Contract be made beyond
the Sea, for the doing of any Act or payment of any money within the Realm, That
in such Cases the Court of Admiralty has not any Jurisdiction; And that
therefore Prohibitions have been granted, as by Law they ought, when the Court
of Admiralty has dealt therewith in derogation of the Common Law. If Instances
of awarding Prohibitions should amount to a general Rule without Exception, the
Admiralty would seem to have made in former times many frivolous complaints; it
is presumed all men will not deny, but that it is possible for a Transmarine
Contract to be a Maritime Contract; if so, then possibly the Admiralty may seem
to deal therewith not in derogation to the Common Law, specially if Things done
without the Realm may not be tried within the Realm by the Oath of twelve men.
That no Maritime Contract shall be tried elsewhere then in the Court of
Admiralty, appears plainly by the Sea-Laws, by the Customs of the Admiralty,
and by the Act made at Hastings by King Edward the First. Cod. Ms. de Adm.
Angl. Vulgo Vocar. Lib. Nig. Adm. in fo. 29.
For Maritime Contracts may be made as well beyond the Seas, as at Sea; And the
performance of something ex post facto within the Realm, in pursuance of a
precedent Contract made beyond Sea, not altering the Maritime quality of the
Original Fact, does not seem to make it cease being Maritime, nor render that
incapable of continuing Maritime, which was of a Maritime Nativity.

Justice Croke in the Resolution upon the Cases of Admiral Jurisdiction,
subscribed 4 Febr. 1632. by all the Reverend Judges of both the Honorable
Benches, Reports, Hill. 8 Char.
That if there be a Suit commenced in the Admiralty for Freight or Mariners
wages, or for breach of Charter-parties, though the Charter-party happen to be
made within the Realm, so as the penalty be not demanded, A Prohibition is not
to be granted. Much less then, if the Charter-party happen to be made without
the Realm. Such Charter-parties, as also Bills of Lading, and the like, are
Contracts frequently made beyond Sea for the delivery of goods to whom they are
consigned within the Realm; if the Admiral Cognizance of such Transmarine
Contracts be in derogation of the Common Law, then it should seem as if Things
done out of the Realm might be tryable within the Realm by the Oath of twelve
men; in variation from the precedent assertion of the Renowned Littleton. The
Concessions of the said Reverend Judges in Anno 1632. seem not so much by way
of enlargement as in affirmance of the Admiral Jurisdiction, for prevention of
future uncertainties in point of Jurisdictions. In the Case of Don Diego
Serviento de Acuna, Ambassador Lieger for the King of Spain, against Jolliff
and Tucker, Hob. Rep. case of Don Diego Serviento de Acuna, against Jolliff and
Tucker.
It was said, That when the Case is laid at Land, no man may by a newfound
form of Suit draw it ad aliud Examen, but he must submit his forms to the Law,
and not e Contra. If this be the Law, which no man questions, as being visibly
founded upon good Reason, it follows, That when the Case is laid at Sea, no man
should by a newfound form of Suit draw it ad aliud examen; For Surmizes and
Suggestions or Suppositions will admit of any forms, and assume what shape you
please, so may not Suits and Actions; This would seem rather to prostitute the
Law to forms, then to submit the forms to the Law.

Remarkable is the Case of Palmer against Pope. Hob. Rep. Mich. 9 Jac. Case
Palmer against Pope.
The Case was this; Pope agreed with Palmer Super altum mare, to transport him
certain Sugars; This Agreement was afterward put in writing in the Port of
Gado on the Coast of Barbary; The Sugars happened to be spoiled at Sea by Salt
water; For which Palmer sues Pope in the Admiralty; For that the Original
Contract and the Breach also were both Super altum mare; yet upon a Suggestion
that the Charter-party was made in the Port of Gado, upon the Continent of
Barbary; it was resolved, that a Prohibition lay, because the Original
Contract, though it were made at Sea, yet was changed when it was put into
writing Sealed, which being at Land changed the Jurisdiction as to that point.
This was the Case, and this the Resolution thereupon. It is here said, that the
Original Contract and the Breach thereof were both Super altum mare. But it is
said withal, That upon a Suggestion of the Charter-parties being made in the
Port of Gado, upon the Continent of Barbary, the Contract originally made at
Sea was changed by being afterward put into writing sealed at Land, whereby
the Jurisdiction was also changed. It does not appear that there was any
variation, as to the substance of the Agreement, in the writing sealed (as
supposed) at Land, from the Contract originally made at Sea; nor any
alteration, as to Circumstance, other then that of Locality where the writing
was sealed, containing that Contract or Agreement which was bonae sidei
Contractus, and therefore good and valid among Merchants without any writing at
all, whether sealed or not. The Charter-party is suggested to be made in the
Port of Gado, upon the Continent of Barbary; in a Port upon a Continent; by a
Continent is meant terra firma; and a Port or Portus, Morisot. lib. 1. cap. 36.
Port-Town] The Lord Coke in par. 4. Instit. cap. 22. in his Answ. there to the
fourth Objection, makes mention thereof by the name of Port-Town, as infra
Corpus Comitatus. The Port of Gado is part of the Sea, the Port-Town of Gado is
upon the Continent of Barbary.
est locus conclusus quo importantur and exportantur merces. L. 59. D. de Verb.
Sig. Thamesim, Prolemaeus Jamissam, Dio Himensam, Vocat.
A Vessel designed for the Port of London is intended for the River of Thames;
A Port is Navigable, a Port-Town is upon the Continent; A Charter-party made in
London, is made upon the Continent of An Testamentum factum in Portu cujusdam
Civitatis Soldani, dicatur factum in Terris-Soldani. Bald. in Rub. D. de Rer.
Divis. in 6. Col. in prin. dicit, quod tempore suo hoc fuit revocatum in
dubium, and Dicatur, Quod Non, Quia Portus est Publicus, and ita Christianorum,
sicut Sarecenorum. Nam hoc est introductum Jure Gentium, vid. Barth. Cepol. de
Servit. Rust. Praed. cap. 28. De Portu. nu. 1. Which could not be assirmed of a
^ort-Town; this plainly shows a wide difference between a Port and a Port-Town,
and proves Portus to be Locus Publicus, uti Pars Oceani. Yet in the Case of Don
Diego Serviento de Acuna, against Jolliff and Tucker in Hob. Rep. It is said,
That no Port is part of the Sea, but of the Continent. So says that Report. But
may we not distinguish between Portum Naturalem and Portum Artificialem. Portum
Naturalem (...), manu and artificio factun (...), Graeci vocant.
England; A Charter-party made in the Port of London, is made upon the River of
Thames; The said Original Contract was upon the Sea; the Breach thereof was
also upon the Sea; the Concurrence of which two makes the cause of the Suit
entire, as in the said Case more at large; And the suggestion it self lays the
Charter-party to be made in the Port, which Nature has adapted for Importation
and Exportation. It was in that Case agreed, that if it had been a writing only
without seal, it had wrought no change of the Contract, Morisot. Histor. Orb.
Marit. lib. 1. cap. 24.
and consequently no change of the Jurisdiction. Put the Case, the like
Contract or Agreement had originally been made at Land, afterward put into
writing sealed at Sea; the Question is, whether the Contract be changed, and
with that change another change in consequence thereof. Seals may be Essential
to Deeds, being but as Embrio's till thereby animated, and as abortive till by
the obstetricy of witnesses well delivered; But Bargains, Contracts, and
Agreements among Merchants and Mariners, proceeding only Secundum aequum and
bonum, and being Contracts bonae fidei, do oblige ultro citroque without any
Seal to the same; And such made at Sea though but parole, are with Merchants
and Mariners as valid, as if in writing sealed at Land; And this is consonant
to that Law which is most conversant in such Affairs. A Seal (as aforesaid) may
be Essential to a Deed, or the like Instrument, so is the place of making a
Contract or Agreement Essential suo genere, to the Admiral in point of
Cognizance; which in effect is not denied in the Report of that Case between
Palmer and Pope, where it is said, That the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty
grows not from the Cause (as of Tithes and Testaments in the Spiritual
Courts) but from the Place; yet this may not be understood exclusively to such
things as are properly Maritime, and consequently within the Cognizance and
Jurisdiction of the Admiralty, such as Reprizals, Derelicts, matters touching
Navigation, Charter-parties, Bills of Lading, Mariners wages, and the like,
whereof you have a Summary enumeration in the Fourth Chapter of this Treatise,
to which the Reader is referred. A Surmize or Suggestion in certain Cases is
doubtless a very Legal Expedient; yet possibly some men will no more agree with
others of their fellow-rationals in suggesting a Contract to be made in the
Port of New Haven upon the Continent of France, then if they surmiz'd it to be
made in the Bay of Biscay, upon the Continent of Spain.

To this purpo^e very memorable is that forementioned Case of Susans against
Turner, Noys Rep. M. 39, 40 El. Case, Susans against Turner.
where it is said, That if a Suit be commenced in the Court of Admiralty for a
Contract supposed to be made Super altum mare, the Defendant upon a Surmize or
Suggestion that it was made upon the Land, within the Realm, may have a
Prohibition. The Fact is re vera super altum mare; notwithstanding which, the
Jurisdiction of the high Admiralty A Surmize at Common Law may be as Legally
qualified to call the Right of Cognizance into question, as an Allegation at
the Civil Law to lay a soundation for a Definitive Sentence, and possibly in a
Case whereof it has no right to determine; For neither a Surmize in the one,
nor an Allegation in the other, are more then suppositions, till reallized by
proof.
of England seems, as that Case puts it, to be in point of Cognizance
subordinated to a bare surmize or suggestion, though in re minus vera. In
matters of an inferior alloy it is no superlative argument to infer, a thing
ought to be so, because it has been so, much less in point of Jurisdiction.
Though it be a common Rule in Law, that ex facto jus oritur, yet this is ever
to be understood non de facto supposito, sed vero.

It is yet too fresh in memory to escape observation, how of late unhappy years
Prohibition have been prayed, even by such as in the self-same Case had before
admitted the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty, by pleading there; yea, when by the
Libel it could not appear that the Contract, whereon the Action was grounded,
was made out of that Jurisdiction; Insomuch as it became most men's policy that
suspected the success of their Cause in one Jurisdiction, to endeavor by the
art of surmizing the removal thereof to another; And this though the Case in it
self never so clear of Admiral Cognizance, and after themseves had submitted to
the Jurisdiction. This had but a slender affinity with what is reported in the
Case between Jennings and Audley, Brownl. Rep. part. 2. in Cas. Jennings
against Audley, Mich. 1611. 9 Jac. in Com. Ban.
where Prohibition was prayed to the Admiral, and the Libel showed to the
Court, which contained the Contract was made in the Straights of Malago, within
the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty, and does not say, upon the deep Sea. And it
was agreed, That in all Cases where the Defendant admits the Jurisdiction af
the Admiral Court, by Pleading there, Prohibition shall not be granted, if it
do not appear by the Libel that the Act was done out of their Jurisdiction. The
like we find in the Case of Baxter against Hopes. Brownl. Rep. part. 2. ibid.
in Cas. Baxter against Hopes.
In which it is said, That if the Defendant admits the Jurisdiction of the
Court, then the Court will not upon a bare surmize grant a Prohibition, after
the admittance of the party himself, if it be not in a thing which appears
within the Libel, that is, that the Act was not made within the Jurisdiction of
the Sea; And to this difference all the Court agreed. So that for the same
party in the same cause to surmize and move for a Prohibition against that
Jurisdiction, to which himself had formerly submitted, and in a Cause which by
the Libel appears not other then Maritime, seems quite beside the Rule and
Practice of Law.

To conclude this point of Foreign Contracts made, and other things done
beyond the Seas, The Merchants Case, Mich. 8 Jac. in the Kings Bench, Brownl.
Rep. par. 2. Mich. 8. Jac. in Ban. Reg.
may not be omitted. It is therein thus reported, viz. Henry Yelverton moved
the Court for a Prohibition to the Admiralty Court: And the Case was, There was
a Bargain made between two Merchants in France, and for nonperformance of this
Bargain, one Libelled against the other in the Admiralty Court. And upon the
Libel it appeared, that the Bargain was made in Marcelleis in France, and so
not upon the deep Sea, and by consequence the Court of Admiralty had nothing to
do with it; And Flemming Chief Justice would not grant a Prohibition; for
though the Court of Admiralty has nothing to do with this matter, yet insomuch
as this Court cannot hold Plea of that (the Contract being made in France) no
Prohibition; but Yelverton and Williams, Justices, to the contrary; for the
Bargain may be supposed to be made at Marcelleis in Kent, or Norfolk, or other
County within England, and so tryable before us; and it was said, that there
were many Presidents to that purpose, and day given to search for them. This
was the Case, wherein it appears the Bargain was made beyond the Seas, and
between Merchants, yet said the Admiralty has nothing to do therewith, because
not upon the deep Sea; nor that Court hold Plea thereof, because made in
France, therefore according to Flemming, Chief Justice, no Prohibition; but
Yelverton and Williams, Justices, to the contrary, the Contract being
supposable to be made at Marcelleis in Kent or Norfolk; Therefore a search for
Presidents of Contracts, though really made beyond Sea, yet supposed to be made
in some Foreign parts beyond Sea in England, as Marcelleis in Kent or Norfolk,
or the like. This could not be so much out of any necessitous ground to
accommodate the matter to a trial somewhere for prevention of a total failure
of Justice, as in order to a removal thereof from the Court of Admiralty, where
it actually depended. It is now nigh thirty years since in the Royal Presence
it was unanimously resolved and subscribed by all the Reverend Judges of both
the Honorable Benches, viz. Febr. 1632. upon the Cases of the
Admiralty-Jurisdiction, Croke Rep. Hill. 8 Char.
That if a Suit be commenced in the Court of Admiralty upon Contracts, or other
things done beyond the Seas, no Prohibition is to be awarded.

CHAP. X.
Of Judicial Recognizances and Stipulations for Appearance, and performance of
the Acts, Orders, Judgments, and Decrees of the Court of Admiralty; As also
whether the said high Court of Admiralty of England be a Court of Record.
ALthough the Court of Admiralty time out of mind has ever used to take such
Recognizances and Stipulations for Judicial Appearances, and due performance of
such Acts, Orders, and Judgments, as are made and given in the said Court; yet
this Ancient Practice of the Admiralty, though so adequate to the genuine
rights of Judicatories and Tribunals of Justice, quatenus, such, has not
escaped a Contradiction founded upon this assertion, That the Court of
Admiralty is no Court of Record.

Such as hold Prohibitions may be granted to the Court of Admiralty upon the
ground or reason aforesaid, seem to model the Argument Syllogistically, and
say, That for the taking of Recognizances against the Laws of this Realm,
Prohibitions have been and ought to be granted: But the Court of Admiralty does
take Recognizances against the Laws of this Realm, Ergo, etc. The Minor
Proposition is said to be proved thus, viz. No Court being not a Court of
Record, can take such Recognizances: But the Court of Admiralty is no Court of
Record; Ergo, etc. That unhappy Minor is said to be a Truth, how fatal soever,
built upon this double foundation: First, because the Court of Admiralty
proceeds by the Civil Law. Secondly, because if an erroneous sentence be given
in that Court, no Writ of Error, but an Appeal does lie, according to the
Statute of 8 Eliz. cap. 5. Reason is, or should be the source or fountain of
all humane Laws, no Waters rise higher then their Springs; The first enquiry
therefore will be, what a Court of Record is, or what Court may properly be
said to be a Court of Record; which being known and considered, if you be not
then satisfied, you may, if you please, farther enquire, whether the being of
Record be such an essential qualification to a Court, as without which it is
incapable of taking such Stipulations (I say, such Stipulations) as the Court
of Admiralty has ever used to take, and de jure ought to take.

The Lord Coke makes this description of a Court of Record, Coke on Littl. par.
1. Instit. lib. 2. c^p 11. sect. 195.
Every Court of Record is the Kings Court, albeit another may have the profit;
wherein if the Judges do err, a Writ of Error does lie. But the County Court,
the Hundred-Court, the Court Baron, and such like, are no Courts of Record; And
therefore upon their Judgments a Writ of Error lies not, but a Writ of false
Judgment, for that they are no Courts of Record, because they cannot hold plea
of Debt or Trespass if the debt or damage do amount to forty shillings, or of
any Trespass Vi and Armis. It is observable that it is here said, that every
Court of Record is Mr. Seld. in suo Mar. Claus. l. 2. cap. 22. styles the Judge
of the Admiralty, Summae cutiae Regiae Admiralitatis Judicem.
the Kings Court; So is the high Court of Admiralty styled the Kings Court, as
appears not only by the Title or preliminary Description, but also by the
second Article or Proposition in the Resolutions upon the Cases of Admiral
Jurisdiction, Hill. 8 Char. 4. Febr. 1632.
subscribed in Anno 1632. by the Reverend Judges in Presence of His Late
Majesty of ever Blessed Memory, and the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council. And whereas in the said description of a Court of Record, it is
said, They are no Courts of Record, because they cannot hold Plea of Debt or
Trespass, if the debt or damage do amount to forty shillings, or of any
Trespass Vi and Armis, it is well known that the Court of Admiralty can hold
Plea of a Debt or Trespass Maritime if the debt or damage do amount to as many
thousands of pounds as there are pence in forty shillings, and not only of
Trespass Vi and Armis, but also of Maihem, yea, of Death it self. Stat. 15 R.
2. cap. 3.
Wherefore, as the former character of a Courts being of Record, may be applied
to the high Court of Admiralty as the Kings Court: So the other character of a
Courts not being of Record, is no way applicable to the said Court of
Admiralty. But in the said description of a Court of Record, it is said, that
every Court of Record is the Kings Court, wherein, if the Judges do err, a
Writ of Error does lie; the question then is, whether it be a question whether
a Writ of Error does lie in the Consistory Court of the University of
Cambridge, which Queen Elizabeth by her Charter dated 26 April, Anno 3 Reg.
made a Court of Record. Cowels Interpreter, verb. Record.
And Writs of Error did also properly lie in any Court where they have power
to hold Plea by the Kings Charter, or by Prescription in any sum, either in
Debt or Trespass above the sum of forty shillings. Fit^h. N. B. Writ of
Error.
In which sense the Court of Admiralty as aforesaid, is sufficiently qualified
as a Court of Record; which though eminent enough for its practice and interest
in the Realm, and so not probable to have escaped a particularization among the
other forementioned Courts, the County Court, Hundred-Court, and Court Baron,
as no Courts of Record, by reason of any oblivion, yet is not there instanced
among those other Courts not of Record. And the County is called a Court of
Record. Westminster. 2. cap. 3. Anno 13 Ed. 1. But it seems by Britton, cap. 27. that
it is only in these causes, whereof the Sheriff holds Plea by special Writ,
and not those that are holden of course or custom. Cowel, ubi supra.
And whereas Brook seems to say, That no Court Ecclesiastical is of Record;
Brook tit. Record.
yet Bishops certifying Bastardy, Bigamy, Excommunication, the vacancy or
plenarty of a Church, a Marriage, a Divorce, a Spiritual intrusion, and the
like, are credited without farther enquiry or controlment. Cowel, ubi supra.
Ubi Brook tit. Bastardy. Fleta li. 6. cap. 39, 40, 41, 42. Lamb. Eirenareha,
lib. 1. cap. 13. and Glanvile, lib. 7. cap. 14, 15. The Register Orig. fol. 5.
b. Bracton lib. 5. Tract. 5. cap. 20. nu. 5. Britton, cap. 92, 94, 106, 107,
and 109. Doct. and Stud. lib. 2. cap. 5. and Cosins Apol. par. 1. cap. 2.
This only by the way, and in transitu. If it be said, the Court of Admiralty
is no Court of Record, because it proceeds by the Civil Law, it may be demanded
by what Law the Consistory-Court of Cambridge proceeds, which Q. Elizabeth (as
aforesaid) made by her Charter a Court of Record; For the King may make a Court
of Record by his Grant; Glanvil, lib. 8. c. 8. Britton, cap. 121. and Cowel,
verb. Record.
which seems to allay that Antipathy that is supposed between a Court of Record
and a Court proceeding by the Civil Law, a Law allowed, received, and owned as
the Law of the Admiralty of England. Yet Sergeant Harris in the Case of Record
against Jobson, argued, That a Recognizance taken in the Court of Admiralty to
stand to the Order of the Court, is void, and that it has been so adjudged.
Noys Rep. Cas. Reord against Cornel. Jobson.
So it is argued; it is not said, Resolved. It is a happiness as well as a
truth, what was once said in Dr. James his Case, Hob. Rep. in Dr. James Case.
That the King is the indifferent Arbitratour in all Jurisdictions, and of all
Controversies touching the same, and that it is a Right of his Crown to
distribute to them, that is, to declare their bounds. It is no novel doctrine
to assert, that Stipulations taken in the high Court of Admiralty for
appearance, or performance of its own Acts, Orders and Decrees, are in modo
procedendi quasi Accessorium quoad Principale; And the Modern Reporter in a
Case depending before the Commissioners of Ensurance between Oils and Marshal,
Mother. Rep. Trin. 1654. in Banc. Reg.
says, That it being moved in the Kings Bench for a Prohibition, and a Rule
there given to show cause why a Prohibition should not be granted to the Court
of Ensurance; it was then declared, That if they had Jurisdiction of the
Principal matter, they had Jurisdiction of matters also incident thereto. And
what are Recognizances taken in the Court of Admiralty, for Appearance, and
performance of its own Acts and Decrees, more then Stipulations Judicio sisti
and judicatum solvi? Insomuch as to deny the right or power of taking such
Stipulations, seems in effect as to imply an inhibition of the whole
Jurisdiction; for without such Stipulations in praeparatorio Litis, the
subsequent Judgment, be it for Plaintiff or Defendant, would prove but vain
and elusory; And a Judgment without due and effectual execution is quasi
sententia inanimata; without such stipulations Justice may be perverted into
Injustice, for default of that which is the complement, or ultimate design of
all Justice, viz. Facultas suum cuique tribuendi.

The Practice of taking such Stipulations for the Legality thereof according to
that Law whereby that Court proceeds, is nothing inferior in point of
Antiquity to the Jurisdiction it self, the style of that Court in that point of
Practice being as Ancient as the Court it self; And whereas the right of taking
such stipulations for Appearance, and performance of the Acts, Orders,
Judgments and Decrees of the Court of Admiralty has not been without
contradiction upon the foresaid ground; That the said Court is no Court of
Record, it does plainly appear by a Record of good Antiquity, and with the
Learned Mr. Seldom of good Authority, That the said Court is a Court of Record.
Cod. Ms. de Adm. viz. Lib. Nig. Adm. fol. 19. and ibid. in Art. 39. Artic.
Inquisit. Adm. Citat. per D. Seld. in Suo Mare Clauso, lib. 2. etc. 24.
And if the Court of Admiralty be discharactered as no Court of Record, by
reason of its proceeding by the Civil Law, it would thence seem to be employed
as if no part of the Civil Law were any part of the Law of England; It is not
concealed from the world by a person of no less honor then knowledge in the
Laws of this Realm, that the Imperial or Roman Law is in some cases the Law of
the Land. Sir Jo. Davies. Jus imponendi Vectigalia, c. 6.
This worthy Author speaking of the Right of Prerogative in absolute Kings and
Princes, as to Impositions upon Merchandises, does upon that occasion in the
forecited place declare himself in haec verba. Forasmuch as the general Law of
Nations, which is and ought to be Law in all Kingdoms, and the Law-Merchant is
also a branch os that Law, and likewise the Imperial and Roman Law have been
ever admitted, had, received by the Kings and people of England, in Causes
concerning Merchants and Merchandises, and so are become the Laws of the Land
in these Cases; why should not this question of Impositions be examined and
decided by the Rules of those Laws so far forth as the same does concern
Merchants and Merchandises, as well as by the Rules of our Customary or Common
Law of England, especially because the Rules of those other Laws are well known
to the other Nations, with whom we have commerce, whereas the Rules of our own
Municipal Laws are only known within our Islands. What this worthy Author here
speaks of the Civil Law in England, as to this point of Impositions by the King
on Merchandises, is applicable in any case of Navigation, Naval Negotiation, or
other affairs properly relating to Merchants or Mariners within the sphere of
the Admiralty of England. And the same Learned Author in another place, Idem.
Jus imp. Vect. c. 4.
When the City of Rome was Gentium Domina and Civitas illa magna quae regnabat
super Reges terrae, The Roman Civil Law being communicated unto all the
Subjects of that Empire, became the Common Law, as it were, of the greatest
part of the inhabited world, etc. And again in the same place, All Marine and
Sea-Causes which do arise for the most part concerning Merchants and
Merchandises crossing the Seas, our Kings have ever used the Roman Civil Law
for the deciding and determining thereof. Thus far goes the said worthy Author
in this point. It is most true, the Civil Law in England is not the Law of the
Land, but the Law of the Sea; Great Britain, and the Dominions thereof
comprizing the adjacent Seas, as well as the Land; The Law by which the high
Admiralty of England proceeds, being in all Causes cognizable in that
Jurisdiction allowed, owned and received by Prince and People, Sovereign and
Subject, seems to be a Law of England, though not the Law of England, not the
Land-Law, but the Sea-Law of England; For as in matters Terrene and in
Land-affairs it is proper to say infra Corpus Comitatus, so in matters Maritime
and Sea-affairs it is no less proper to say Sur le hout mere. The Jurisdiction
of the Admiralty of England is one of the Jurisdictions of England, which ever
implies a Law to proceed by that cannot be but of that Place whereof the
Jurisdiction it self is. It neither may, nor ought to be denied, but that for
the taking Recognizances against the Laws of the Realm, Prohibitions have been
granted; yet possibly it may not thence by a necessary concludency follow that
the high Court of Admiralty (in taking Stipulations for Judicial appearance, or
performance of the Acts and Orders of the Court, vel judicio sisti vel
judicatum solvi, and this according to that Law whereby it is to proceed) is
involved under such a guilt of transgression against the Laws of the Realm, as
eo nomine to incur a Prohibition; which if grantable upon every such
Recognizance or Stipulation for Appearance, and performance of the Acts and
Judgments of the Court (without which it cannot proceed according to Law)
there could then be no Suit or Action depending in the high Admiralty of
England, be it for Place, Nature, or Quality in it self, never so Maritime and
of undoubted Admiral Cognizance, but must be subject and liable to a
Prohibition, and consequently to a removal from its proper Jurisdiction ad
aliud examen, to the great grievance of Merchants and Mariners, and others the
good people of these His Majesty's Dominions, by reason of the multiplicity of
Suits, protelation of Justice, excess of Judicial expenses, together with the
uncertainty of Jurisdictions, and all as the unavoydable consequences of such
Prohibitions.

CHAP. XI.
Of Charter parties made on the Land, and other things done beneath the first
Bridge next to the Sea; vel infra fluxum and refluxum Maris; and how far these
may be said to be Cognizable in the Admiralty.
TOuching this Subject it has been asserted, That if a Charter-party be made
within any City, Port-Town, or County of this Realm, although it be to be
performed upon or beyond the Seas, yet is the same to be tried and determined
in the ordinary course of the Common Law, and not in the Court of Admiralty.
Coke Part. 40 Instit. c. 22. in the Answ. to the fourth Objection.
This is exclusive as to the Admiralty in matters of Charter-parties made upon
the Land; But yet it is agreed and resolved, Hill. 8. Car. upon the Cases of
Admiral Jurisdiction, That though the Charter-party happen to be made within
the Realm, so as the penalty be not demanded; A Prohibition is not to be
granted. Croke Rep. Hill. 8. Car. Resolution upon the Cases of Admiral
Jurisdiction.
Were it otherwise, or that the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty might not take
Cognizance of such Maritime Contracts though made on Land, then by thereunto
adding what was formerly observed out of the same place, Coke ibid. in the
Answ. to the second Objection.
viz. That the Court of Admiralty has not any Jurisdiction of any Contracts
made beyond Sea for doing of any act within this Realm, or otherwise, wherein
the Common Law can administer Justice; It would follow, that if (according to
the one of these Assertions) such Maritime Contracts when made upon the Land,
though to be performed upon or be^ond the Seas, may not be tried or determined
in the Court of Admiralty; and when (according to the other of these
Assertions) made beyond the Sea for doing of any act within this Realm, etc.
the Court of Admiralty has not any Juriidiction thereof; In such ca^e it must
necessarily follow, that the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty (being thereby
excluded the Cognizance of such Maritime Contracts both sides the water) must
keep to Sea in all weathers, yet scarce retain the libert, (if I may so say) of
a confinement Super altum mare, according to the energy of that suggession
reported in the Case aforesaid, of Susans against Turner; Noy Rep. in Cas.
Susans against Turner.
where it is said, That if a Suit be commenced in the Admiralty for a Contract
supposed to be made Super altum mare; Q. Whether in matters of dubiovs
Jurisdiction, merely depending upon future Contingency of proof, a bare Surmize
at Common Law; may not as rationally expect the relief of a Prohibition, as a
naked allegation at Civil Law the count^nance of a Litis Contestation. So that
the Law is good, if it be used lawfully.
the Defendant upon a Surmize or Suggestion, That it was made upon the Land
within the Realm, may have Prohibition. According to which comnutation, with
the premises considered, the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty seems to be hard put
to it both by Sea and Land; Nor need it seem any thing strange that the
Jurisdiction of the Admiralty seems excluded of Cognizance in such cases of
Charter-parties, whether made at Land or beyond Sea, if a bare Surmize or
Suggestion according to the said Report in the Case of Susans against Turner,
may work as to a Prohibition against the Admiralty when a Suit is there
commenced for a Contract not appearing other then made Super altum mare.
According to these premises, if the Charter-party be made at Land, though to be
performed upon or beyond the Seas, it is to be tried in the ordinary course of
the Common Law; And if the Contract be made beyond Sea, for doing any act
within the Realm, etc. the Court of Admiralty has not any Jurisdiction
thereof; And if the Suit be commenced in the Admiralty for a Contract supposed
to be made upon the Sea, then by a Surmize or Suggestion, that it was made upon
the Land, a Prohibition (according to the said Case) may be had. Thus in
matters of Charter-party this side the Sea, the Common Law seems to claim the
Cognizance; in Contracts made beyond Sea, the Admiralty seems not to be allowed
any Jurisdiction; and in Contracts supposed to be made upon the Sea, the
Defendant upon a Surmize may have a Prohibition; But no Fiction can sponge the
Ocean, nor turn the Sea into dry Land, or the Bay of Mexico into Middlesex,
till it be proved as well as surmized, In the said Case of Susans against
Turner, where it is said, If a Suit be in the Admiral Court, for a Contract
supposed to be made Super altum mare, the Defendant upon a Surmize that it was
made upon the Land within the Realm, may have a Prohibition. It is there
farther added in these words, viz. And that it may come in issue if it was upon
the Land or upon the Sea. But by the Justices, their Rule is, that upon such a
Suggestion they shall not grant a Prohibition after Sentence passed. So that,
be the verity of the Fact (as to the Super altum mare) in it self never so
liquid, yet being primarily but supposed (as all things in judicio, though in
themselves never so clear, never so true, yet must be alleged before the Court
can proceed) a Counter-supposition or Crosssurmize Therefore to prevent this
Inconvenience, and obviate such Objections as these; before any Prohibition
does actually issue upon such Surmizes, the Courts of Westminster have ever
used to prefix a day wherein to show cause, if any, why a Prohibition should
not be granted. So that although there be a Surmize, yet there is no Surprise
in the Case.
may work (according to this) as to a Prohibition, to bring it in issue whether
it was upon the Land or upon the Sea; And so it seems as if scarce possible in
any Case to avoid a Prohibition, for the reallest Truths and the undenyablest
verities under the Sun, if in judicio and foro contentioso, can be at first but
supposed truths; for the Court, if it proceed Legally, cannot but proceed
Secundum allegata first, and Probata next.

Charter-parties, Bills of sale of Ships, and the like Maritime Contracts are
commonly made according to the Law of Oleron, and frequently wic^ a clause
express to that purpose inserted therein; the Civil Law, the Laws and Customs
of the Sea, whereby the Admiralty proceeds, takes notice thereof, and can judge
and determine accordingly; how far other Laws, that are accommodated to matters
of another element, though in themselves and in their proper sphere most
excellent, can do the like, is no part of the design of this compendious
Treatise to determine. But that Prohibitions have been granted upon
Charter-parties, is undenyably true. Coke, ubi supra. Mich. 31 H. 6. Rot. 315.
in Banc. Hill. 2. Ph. and M. Rot. 130. Cr. Hill. 17 El. Rot. 410. Cr. The Common
Law in some Cases does take notice of Conjunct: Persona, but not as does the
Civil Law.
Ye^, the lamentable Cases of poor Mariners, for their Wages have not of late
unhappy years escaped Prohibitions, although it be not denied but they may all
join in one Libel in the Court of Admiralty, whereas at the Common Law (if they
must there prosecute)* they may not bring their Actions otherwise then
severally and apart, to their greater expense and charges, respect being not
had to the identity of the Case, or the poverty of the Dem^ndants, to introduce
a joint Action. To this purpose it is reported, Winch Rep. Easter Term
That where judgment was given in the Court of Admiralty against one Jones a
Master of a Ship at the Suit of certain poor Mariners for their wages, a
Prohibition was prayed upon a Suggestion that the Contract was made at London
in England; but the Prohibition was denied, because he had not sued his
Prohibition in due time, viz. before a Judgment given in the Court of
Admiralty. Whereby it seems as if it was not the nature of the Case, though for
Mariners wages, that prevented the Prohibition, but the unseasonable suing for
it, viz. After Judgment given in the Court of Admiralty.

Touching the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty in ontracts made, and other things
done upon the Rivers beneath the first Bridges next the Sea, where it ebbs and
flows, and in the Ports, Creeks, Havens, Peers, Sounds, Harbors, Rhodes,
Bays, Channels, and other places infra fluxum and refluxum maris; It has been
asserted, Coke par. 4. Instit. c. 22. Answ to the first Object.
That by the Laws of this Realm the Court of Admiralty has no Cognizance,
Power, or Jurisdiction of any matter within any County, either upon Land or
Water; So as it is not held material, whether the place be upon the water,
infra fluxum and refluxum maris, but whether it be upon any water within any
County; And it is farther added, Ibid. Answ. to the sixth Object.
That for the death of a man, and of Mayhem, (in these two Cases only) done in
great Ships, being and hovering in the main stream only beneath the Points of
the same Rivers, nigh to the Sea, and no other place of the same Rivers, nor in
other Causes, but in these two only, the Admiral has Cognizance; yet probably
it will not be denied, but that by Exposition and Equity of the Statute of 15
R. 2. cap. 3. (whence, as supposed, that assertion is taken) he may inquire of
and redress all annoyances and obstructions in those Rivers, that are any
impediment to Navigation or passage to or from the Sea: and also try all
personal contracts and injuries done there which concern Navigation upon the
Sea. And no Prohibition is to be granted in such Cases. Croke Rep. Hill. 8 Car.
Resolution upon the Cases of Admiral Jurisdiction. Subscribed 4 Feb. 1632. by
all the Judges of both Benches. Beneath the Bridges] So the Expos. Terms of the
Law, verb. Admiral.
The Reader may at his leisure consult the said Statute, whether it says, [In
the main streams only beneath the Points of the same Rivers nigh to the Sea] or
whether the Statute does not say, [In the m^in stream of great Rivers, only
beneath the Bridge of the same Rivers nigh to the Sea] For the difference may
be material. In the Case of Palmer against Pope it is reported, Hob. Rep. Case.
Palmer versus Pope. Mich. 9 Jac.
That the Statute says, ad prim^s pontes. And in the Case of Leigh and Burley,
Owen Rep. in casu Leigh against Burley. Mich. 7 Jac.
It is said, that the 15 of R. 2. is mis-printed, viz. that the Amiral shall
have Jurisdiction to the Bridges: for the Translator mistook Bridges for
Points, that is to say, the Lands end. So reported in the said Case. The words
of the Statute are, viz. [In the main stream of great Rivers, only beneath the,
etc. of the same Rivers nigh to the Sea, and in no other places of the same
Rivers the Admiral shall have cognizance] It is not denied by the Statute, but
the Admiral has Jurisdiction in Cases of Mayhem and Death in the main stream
of great Rivers; Rivers are not found beneath the Lands end; if Bridges be
mistaken by the Translator for Points, and Points be taken for the Lands end,
then Rivers and the main stream of great Rivers should be beneath the Lands
end, where they empty themselves into the main Ocean. Again, the words of the
Statu^e are, [In the main stream of great Rivers only beneath the, etc.] And
the words in that Ca^e of Leigh against Burley are, [That the Admiral shall
have Jurisdiction to the, etc.] question is, whether there also be a mistake in
the Translation? For the difference is great and very significant between to a
place, and beneath a place. In the said Case of Leigh against Burley, it is
said, That the Statute of 15 R. 2. is mis-printed; yet probably the Press
followed the Copy, and in so doing it may be excused from an error of
mis-impression; In the said Case it is also said, That the Translator mistook
Bridges for Points, that is to say, the Lands end; A right impression of a
mis-translation (if any such be) seems not to render the word Bridges, in stead
of Points or Lands end, as mis-printed, so long as the Press agrees with the
Copy. Pons in the Latin rendered into English seems rather to be a Bridge then
Points, or a Lands end; Pons in the Latin sounds more like Points then Bridge,
and so does Pont in the French, which yet is a Bridge, and not Point or Lands
end; which in the French seems to be more properly rendered by the word La
poincte or un poinct; But a Point of Land at which Rivers or Waters meet, seems
to be most properly rendered by the word Bec in the French, which seems
sufficiently dissonant from the word Points. And those Navigators, that by
experience know the meaning of doubling the Point, probably do ^eldome sail
over Rivers, either great or small, beneath such Points. But this only by way
of observation upon the said mistake, as reported in the said Case of Leigh
against Burley; and not in the least by way of any thing else in reference to
what is not of any private interpretation, but reserved only for ^uch as unto
whom are specially committed the Oracles of the Law.

The Assertion, [That it is not held material, whether the Place be upon the
Water, infra fluxum and refluxum maris, but whether it be upon any water within
any County] was formerly hinted; yet possibly it may be material to know what
waters are held to be within a County, specially if the question put by
Doderidge Sergeant in the same Case of Leigh against Burley be duly considered.
In which Case it is reported, That the Lord Coke said, That the Admiral should
have no Jurisdiction where a man may see from one side to the other: but the
Coroner of the County shall inquire of Felonies committed there; which was held
to be good by all the other Justices; And he gave this difference, that where
the Place was covered over with Salt Water, and out of any County or Town,
there est altum mare: but where it is within any County, there it is not altum
mare: but the trial shall be per Vicenetum, of the Town. Doderidge Sergeant
demanded this question, The Isle of Lunday de Corpore Comitatus of Devonshire,
and lies twenty miles within the Sea; whether is that within the County.
Foster, If the Sea there be not of any County, the Admiral has Jurisdiction,
or else not. In this Case it is said, that the Admiral has no Jurisdiction
where a man may see from one side to the other; which in a transparent Horizon
a man may do from the Lands end to the Cassi^erides, or Isles of Scilly, which
lie seven Leagues at least thence distant in the main Ocean; and almost the
like from some part of England to the other side the water over to France. The
said Isles of Scilly are de Corpore Comitatus Cornubiae, yet doubtless the high
Admiral of England (notwithstanding both sides are mutually visible) has
Jurisdiction on the interflux there, though the said word [within] should be
taken in a sense as large as the Ocean it self. And whereas it is said, that
the Admiralty has not any Jurisdiction of Contracts, Pleas, or Quereles made
or done upon a River, Haven, or Creek, within any County of this Realm,
probably it is not thereby meant or intended to be limited or restrained
otherwise then according to the Statute Law, the Laws and Customs of the
Realm, whereof those of the Sea are a part; the Realm of England consisting of
more elements then one. And if you consult the Topography of several of the
Harbors, Havens, Ports, Rhodes, Bays, Sounds, and Creeks of this Kingdom,
probably the Admiralty might have in more senses then one a more liquid
demonstration, then so to be disjuri^dictioned by any mere supposition, which
had no small operation to the prejudice of the Admiralty in the days of the
late Licentious Times, when fancies were much in fashion; thereby reducing
Jurisdictions to uncertainty, the common fate of all things, in the said days
of Legerde Brain, but especially to the needle^s protelation of Justice, as to
Merchants and Mariners in the Legal prosecution of their Maritime Contracts,
notwithstanding the Resolutions upon Cases of Admiral Cognizance, subscribed by
all the Reverend Judges and Justices of both the Honorable Benches in the
Eighth year of the Reign of our late Sovereign Charles the First, of blessed
Memory; wherein among other things relating to that Jurisdiction, it was then
unanimously resolved, Cro. Rep. Hill. 8 Car. 1632.
That in Cases arising upon the Thames, the Admiralty has Jurisdiction,
specially in the point mentioned in the Statute of 15 R. 2. And by Equity
thereof may inquire of and redress all annoyances and obstructions in those
Rivers that are any impediment to Navigation, or passage to or from the Sea,
and in all Navigable Rivers. And no Prohibition to be granted. But in the Case
of Goodwin against Tompkins, it seems something otherwise; According to the
Report, Noy Rep. in Cas. Goodwin against Tompkins.
the Case was this. A Suit was in the Admiral Court for setting a Ship in a
Wharf to the damage of the Plaintiff: So that none could come to his Wharf,
which is said within the Bill to be within the Ward of Saint Mary Hill: And a
Prohibition was granted: upon a Suggestion, that it was good for the ordering
of Ships. A Consultation was granted, hut afterward upon good advice and
opening the matter, a Supersedeas to the Consultation was granted, and quod
Prohibitio stet; for the wrong and fact is said to be within a County and Ward;
and for that it does not belong to the Admiral: for all Civil Contracts or
Trespasses done upon the River of Thames, or any other River, that is proper to
the Common Law, are tryable in that County, which is next to the Bank, and that
side of the River where the Fact was done; but in Criminal matters upon any
River, that is given to the Admiral by the Statute of 28 H. 8. cap. 15. Thus it
is reported. But the Resolution aforesaid, is, That in cases arising upon the
Thames the Admiralty has Jurisdiction, specially in the point mentioned in the
Statute of 15 R. 2. And no Prohibition to be granted.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Jurisdiction of the high Admiralty of England, Stat. 13 R. 2. cap. 5.
Stat. 15 R. 2. cap. 3. Stat. 2. H. 4. cap. 11. and Stat. 27 Eliz. cap. 11.
THE Exposition, Explanation, and Interpretation of the Statute-Laws being a
right properly inherent in the Supreme Authority that enacted them, and in the
Reverend Judges, the Lex Loquens, or voice of them; there remains no more to
the good people of his Majesty's Dominions then to yield all obedience to them,
and thereby claim their birthright in them. In order whereto it is every man's
prudence, as much as in him lies, to clarify his Intellect; yet with such
sobriety, that as Ignorance may be no Obex to his Obedience on the one hand, so
also that super-curiosity may not quite dazzle his Intellect on the other; It is
not ignorantia juris, but facti, that can excuse any; And though in a sense it
may properly be said of Humane as of Sacred Laws, That they are not of any
private interpretation, whose Oracles alone are entrusted with the exposition
thereof, yet it is every man's duty to know the Rule of his Duty; And he that
will understand that he may obey aright, must have a right understanding of
what he is to obey. Upon the^e Considerations it is most clear, That it well
becomes all such, who may be concerned in the subject matter of this Treatise,
to have right-informed apprehensions (not to make private Interpretations) of
the true intent and meaning of the said Statutes in order to a clearer prospect
of the Admiral Jurisdiction.

It is enacted by the Statute of 13 R. 2. cap. 5. That the Admirals and their
Deputies shall not meddle from henceforth of any thing done within the Realm,
but only of a thing done upon the Sea, as it has been used in the time of the
Noble Prince King Edward Grandfather of King R. 2. Whence it has been
inferred, that the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty is confined only to things
done upon the Sea. The said Statute says, That the Admirals shall not meddle
with any thing done within the Realm, but only with things done upon the Sea,
as it has been used in the time of King Edward, Grandfather of R. 2. that is,
in the time of Edward the Third, to the usage in whose days the said words seem
to have reference, as Limitative with a Referendo. And admitting the word
[duly] if not by the Letter of the Statute, yet by construction of Law, it may
seem almost as equally difficult, exactly to know what was the usage as what
was the due usage or what was in this point duly used in the days of Edward the
Third; only with this difference, that an usage being matter of Fact, there may
be Rei evidentia, in that case to prove it self; whereas to know what was duly
used, may be matter of Law, and capable of diversities of opinion consonant to
various persuasions. And yet until it be known what was in this matter the due
usage in the time of Edward the Third, it seems not indubitably obvious to
every running Intellect to conceive what may be the full scope and true intent
or meaning, That the Admirals shall not meddle, etc. but only with things done
upon the Sea, as it has been used in the time of King Edward, Grandfather of
King Richard the Second. For the clearer apprehension whereof it may not be
impertinent (under submission to better Judgments, and without presuming on
any thing quod est supra nos, as formerly hinted) to inquire a little what was
used or duly used in this point of Admiral Jurisdiction in the days of the said
Edward the Third, Grandfather to King Richard the Second.

To this purpose the Learned Mr. Seldom in his impregnable Treatise of the
Dominion and Sovereignty of the British Seas, Seldom, de Mar. Claus. lib. 2.
cap. 24.
lets us to understand, That it appears by Ancient and Public Records, Ibid.
In Fascic. de Superioriatate Maris, in Arce Land. and Coke, de Antiquit.
Admiral. in Par. 4. Instit. cap. 22.
containing diverse main points touching which the Judges were to be consulted
with for the good of the Kingdom in the time of King Edward the Third; That
Consultation was had for the more convenient guarding of the Sea. For the whole
Bench of Judges were then advised with, To the end (so runs the Record) That
the Form of Proceedings heretofore ordained and b^gun by Edward the First,
Grandfather to our Lord the King, and by his Council, at the prosecution of
his subjects, may be resumed and continued, for the retaining and conserving of
the Ancient Superiority of the Sea of ^ngland, and the Authority of the Office
of Admiralty in the same, as to the Correcting, Expounding, Declaring, and
Conserving the Laws and Statutes long since made by his Predecessors, Kings of
England, for the maintaining Justice among all people of what Nation soever
passing through the Sea of England; And to take Cognizance of all attempts to
the contrary in the same; and to punish offenders, and award satisfaction to
such as suffer wrong and damage; which Laws and Statutes were by the Lord
Richard heretofore King of England, at his return from the Holy Land,
interpreted, declared, and published in the Isle of Oleron, and named in
French, Le Ley Olyroun. That which Mr. Seldom takes special notice of, and
commends to our chiefest Observation, is what we find in these Records touching
the Original of the Naval Laws published at the Isle of Oleron. The said
Statute of 13 R. 2. makes mention of the usage in the time of King Edward,
Grandfather of R. 2. who was Edward the Third; in whose Reign (according to
this Record) not only the Form of Proceedings ordained by King Ed. 1. and his
Council, were to be resumed and continued for the retaining and conserving the
Authority of the Office of Admiralty, as to the Correcting, Expounding,
Declaring and Conserving the Laws and Statutes made long before by the
Predecessors of the said King Edward the First, for the maintaining of Peace
and Justice among the people of what Nation soever, and to take Cognizance of
all attempts to the contrary, to punish offenders, and to award satisfaction to
such as suffered wrong and damage. But also, that those very Laws and Statutes
which were so to be Corrected, Declared, Expounded and Conserved by the
Authority of the Office of the Admiralty, were the Sea-Laws published at Oleron
by King Richard the First. So that the said Laws of Oleron gave the Rule, and
seems to be the usage concerning the Admiralty in the time of Edward the Third,
wereof the said Statute of 13 R. 2. speaks; and by which Laws all Maritime
affairs, whether upon or beyond the Seas, are properly Cognizable in the
Jurisdiction of the Admiralty. And in those Laws of Oleron, so published by
Richard the First, are comprehended the matters of Admiral Cognizance,
whereunto that Form of Proceedings (in these Records mentioned, to be ordained
by Edward the First, and afterward to be resumed, revived, and continued by
Edward the Third) relates. Which very Records are also verbatim transcribed and
published by the Lord Coke, in that part of his Instit. concerning the Court of
Admiralty, which speaks of the Superiority of England over the British Seas,
and of the Antiquity of the Admiralty of England, which he there proves
expressly as high as to the time of Edward the First, and by good inference of
Antiquity and Ancient Records much higher. Coke par. 4. Instit. cap. 22. Rot.
in Archivis in Turri Land. De Superioritate Mar. Angl. and jure Officii
Admiral. and in alio Rot. de Articulis super quib. Consult. Anno 12 Ed. 3.
For it appears by Ancient Records, That not only in the days of King Edward
the First, but also in the days of King John, all Causes of Merchants and
Mariners, and Things happening within the Floud-Mark, were ever tried before
the Lord Admiral. Cowel, Interp. verb. Admiral.


Again; For the clearer understanding of what was the Usage in the time of Ed.
3. concerning the Admiralty, it may be observed, That in the beginning of these
Records in Edward the Third's time it is said, That a Consultation was had, and
the whole Bench of Judges advised with, To the end, that the Form of
Proceedings heretofore ordained by Edward the First and his Council, should be
resumed and continued, not only for the retaining and conserving the ancient
Superiority of the Sea of England, but also the Office of the Admiralty, as to
the Correcting, Expounding, Conserving, and Declaring the Laws and Statutes
long since made by his Predecessors, for the maintaining of Peace and Justice,
etc. If upon a full Consultation in Ed. the Third's time, That Form of
Proceedings which had been formerly ordained by Ed. the First and his Council,
shall be again resumed and continued, it seems then requisite in the next place
to inquire a little farther, what was ordained by the said Edward the First and
his Council, over and above what is already mentioned in the said Record. And
it appears, that in the days of the said Ed. the First, th^r^ was a good
provision and remedy ordained for such Complainants as by Prohibit^ons issuing
out of one Court to surcease the Legal prosecution of their rights in another,
could obtain redress in neither. For by the Statute of the Writ of Consultation
in Anno 24 Ed. 1. It is enacted, That where there is a surceasing of
Proceedings upon Prohibitions, and the Complainants could have no remedy in the
Kings Court, that then the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Chief Justice upon sight
of the Libel, should write to the Judges before whom the Cause was first moved,
that they proceed therein notwithstanding the Kings Prohibition directed to
them before. In a word therefore; The said Statute of 13 R. 2. mentions the
Usage in the time of Ed. 3. Edward the Third resumes and continues the Laws of
Oleron published by Rich. 1. and what was ordained in the time of Ed. 1. And
Edward the First ordained as in the Records aforesaid, and Statute of
Consultation.

The Expositor of the Terms of Law in his description of the Lord Admiral,
Terms of Law, verb. Admiral.
says, That he is an Officer to Judge of Con- Contracts between party and party
concerning things done upon or beyond the Seas. And in another of ancient
Authority it is said in these words, Doct. and Stud. Dialogue vel lib. 2. c. 2.
viz. That if an Obligation bear date out of the Realm, as in Spain, France, or
such other, it is said in the Law, and truth it is, (they are the Authors
words) that they be not pleadable at the Common Law. Also the Learned Mr.
Seldom in the forecited place says, That the Jurisdiction of the Common Law
extends not it self beyond the Seas, and without the Realm of England; For (as
he speaks, Seld. Mar. Claus. lib. 2. cap. 24.
) In the Law of the Land it is reckoned among the Privileges of such as are
absent, That they, who shall be out of the Realm of England at the levying of a
Fine of any Land, and making Proclamation thereupon, are not so bound either by
a yearly prescription, as heretofore, or by a five years prescription, as is
usual of later times, but that their right remains entire to them upon their
return home. So that being beyond Sea, and without the Realm of England at that
time, and nothing of prejudice in that case fastened on them by reason of any
Nonappearance, it seems as without the reach of the Common Law. And Mr. Seldom
in the same place proves, That to be beyond the Seas, or extra quatuor maria,
does in the Common Law Books signify the very same thing with extra Regnum.
And again Mr. Seldom (for it is but due as well to the Truth as his Memory to
repeat his Authority) in the same place asserts, concerning Things relating to
Actions for Matters Maritime, That they were not wont to be entered in express
terms heretofore, Temp. Ed. 1. Fitzh. tit. Avowry 192. and Placit. 37. and 38
Hen. 3. rot. 10. Devon. ^tim Sussex. 47 Hen. 3. rot. 22, and Trin. 24 Ed. 3. in
Brevib. Reg. inter Pilke and Venore, quae in Arcis Londin. Archiv. Ejusmodi
item sunt alia.
in the ordinary Courts of the Common Law, whose Jurisdiction was ever esteemed
of such a nature, that an Action Instituted about a matter arising in any other
place then within the bounds of the Realm, was by the ancient strict Law always
to be rejected by them. After which manner as it has been a Custom now for
many years, that an Action ought to be rejected, unless the matter have its
rise within the Body, as they call it, of the County, that is, within some
Province or County of the Island, usually given in charge to certain Governors
or Officers known to us by the name of Sheriffs; So also is it in the
Sea-Province belonging by the ancient received custom, to the high Admiral or
his Deputies, not only so far as concerns its defense and guard, but also as to
matter of Jurisdiction. Likewise in the same place Mr. Seldom in honor of the
Admiralty says, That in ancient Records, Ms. fo. 12.
concerning the Customs of the Court of Admiralty, It was an usual custom in
the time of King Henry the First, and of other Kings both before and after him,
That if any man accused of a capital crime done by Sea, being publicly called
five times by the voice of the Crier (after so many several days assigned) did
not make his Appearance in the Court of Admiralty, he was banished out of
England, and de mer appurtenant au Roy d'Angleterre, or out of the Sea
belonging to the King of England, for forty years, more or less, according to
the pleasure of the Admiral. This has Mr. Seldom the Lawyer, as well as Mr.
Seldom the Antiquary; there is far less feasibility of contesting with him,
then of gaining honor by subscribing to his authority.

Wherefore, upon an Interestless perpension of what has been only touched, not
so largely handled as might have been in a set Treatise proportionable to this
subject matmatter, the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty may be found not only a
Body of more Solidity then to dissolve only into Water, and not only a
Jurisdiction proceeding by such Laws as have from age to age successively been
owned by the Supreme Authority of this Nation, but also such a Jurisdiction as
though it has its due bounds, yet possibly (according to what has been duly
used in the time of King Edward Grandfather of King Rich. 2.) not so
exceedingly straightlaced as some in the late Licentious times imagined;
specially if in addition to the Premises they consider what has been formerly
said to have been urged by Haughton, Brownl. Rep. Par. 2. Admiral Court-Case.
viz. That the intent of the Statute of 13 R. 2. cap. 5. was not to inhibit the
Admiral Court, to hold Plea of any thing made beyond Sea, but only of things
made within the Realm, which pertains to the Common Law, and is not in
prejudice of the King or Common Law, if he hold Plea over the Sea; And that
this was the intent of the Statute, appears by the Preamble. And in the same
Report it is farther said, That Walmesly and Warburton Justices agree, That if
a thing be done beyond Sea, as if an Obligation bears date beyond Sea, or be so
Local, that it cannot be tried by the Common Law, if the Admiral hold plea of
that, Prohibition shall not be awarded, for it is not to the prejudice of the
King or of the Common Law.

By the Statute of 15 R. 2. cap. 3. It is Enacted and Declared, That the Court
of Admiralty shall have no cognizance of Contracts, Pleas, and Quereles, or
other things done within the Bodies of the Counties, as well by Land as by
Water; Nevertheless of the Death of a man, and of Mayhem done in great Ships
being and hovering in the main stream of great Rivers only beneath the Bridge
of the same Rivers nigh to the Sea, and in no other places of the same Rivers,
the Admiralty shall have cognizance. From hence it has been observed by way of
Inference, how Curious the Makers of this Statute were to exclude the Admiralty
of all manner of Jurisdiction within any water which lies within any County of
this Realm; possibly it has not been so exactly observed by way of Redress,
how unfortunate specially of late years the same has been, in having its
Jurisdiction impeded and obstructed in Waters without any County of this Realm,
by the Prohibitory Consequences of a Surmize or Suggestion, when in rei
veritate, the matter was otherwise then surmized or suggested. This is that
Statute whereof mention is made in the precedent Chapter, touching the mistake
of the word [Bridge] instead of [Points]. It seems something more then strange
in Nature, to find a main stream, or great Rivers (whereof this Statute speaks)
beneath the Points which beak out into the main Sea, as Navigators well know
when they double the Point, the main Sea or great Rivers being commonly emptyed
into the main Ocean above, not beneath such Points, and usually cease to be
streams or Rivers before the Waters thereof reach the said Points. And it were
no prejudice if it were ascertained what Havens and Harbors may be held as
within the Bodies of some County, because possibly Geographers know not with
what Counties to incorporate Milford-Haven, Mounts-Bay, Tor-Bay,
Plymouth-Sound, and the like. The Law in express terms has put the
difference, Res facta in Portu, non facta in Terra. Caepol. de Servit. Rust.
cap. 28. nu. 5. and Bald. in Rub. de R^r. Divis.
The Law knows no preternatural confusion of Elements, Lex semper imitatur
Naturam. Time was (and olim meminisse dolebit) in the late Licentious days,
when the Admiralty of England between Land-imagined, and the
Sea-County-corporated, could scarce keep above water; But now that Justice once
more looks like it self, and suum cuique tribuitur, miraculously arrived
instead of sic volo, sic jubeo, etc. Insomuch that it might then be as truly as
sadly said, Terras Astraea reliquit; yet now that Justice by an overruling
hand of Divine Providence is again turned into its ancient and proper Channel,
and it being well known to the whole world of what luster and value the Jewel
of the Admiralty is (when well set) in the Diadem or Crown of Great Britain,
it may not now be unseasonable to allege what is asserted, (as is aforesaid)
to be of ancient Record, Cowel Interp. verb. Admiral.
viz. That not only in the days of Edward the First, but also in the days of
King John, All Causes of Merchants and Mariners, and things happening within
the Floud-Mark were ever tried before the Lord Admiral. Consonant to what was
resolved in Sir Hen. Constables Case, Coke Rep. in Cas. Sir Hen. Constable.
That the soil betwixt the high and low Water-Mark may be the Subjects; but
when covered with water, the Admirals Jurisdiction reaches to it.

By the Statute of 2 H. 4. cap. 11. It is Enacted, That the Statute of 1. 3 R.
2. cap. 5. shall be firmly holden, and kept, and put in execution. This Statute
therefore seems as a reviver, or in confirmation of that, which (as aforesaid)
mentions according to that which has been duly used in the time of King
Edward, Grandfather of King Richard the Second; which being formerly insisted
on, a retrospect may here suffice.

By the Statute of 27 Eliz. cap. 11. It is 5 Eliz. cap. 5. Cokes Instit. par.
4. cap. 22.
Enacted, That all and every such of the said offenses before mentioned, as
hereafter shall be done upon the main Sea, or Coasts of the Sea, being no part
of the Body of any County of this Realm, and without the Precinct,
Jurisdiction, and Liberty of the Cinque Ports, and out of any Haven or Pier,
shall be tried and determined before the Lord Admial, etc. It has been hence
inferred, That by the Judgment of the whole Parliament, the Jurisdiction of
the Admiralty is wholly confined to the main Sea, or Coasts of the Sea, being
no parcel of the Body of any County of this Realm; And that this Statute is a
particular description of that Jurisdiction as to the limits thereof. This
Statute gives the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty a power of Cognizance in such
Offenses done upon the main Sea, or Coasts thereof; there is the Ampliation:
Being no part of the Body of any County, and without the precinct of the
Cinque Ports, and out of any Haven or Pier; there is the Limitation. Where
either of these is part or parcel of the Body of any County within this Realm,
the Admiralty may not claim Jurisdiction therein. Touching Contracts made
beyond Sea the said Letter of this Statute is silent; In the Resolutions upon
the Cases of Admiral Jurisdiction, Croke Rep. Hill. 8. Car. 1. Resolution upon
Cases Admiral.
the substance of the first Article or Proposition is, That no Prohibition be
awarded against the Court of Admiralty in Suits there Commenced upon Contracts
made beyond the Seas.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Agreement touching the Admiralty in Anno 1575. As also of the
Resolutions Hill. 8. Car. 1. upon the Cases of Admiral Jurisdiction.
THE Non-observance of the said Agreement, being for the more quiet and certain
execution of Admiral Jurisdiction, was one of the Objections of the Admiralty
in Anno 8 Jac. Reg. whereof mention is made by the Lord Coke, in Par. 4.
Instit. cap. 22. And where it is said to be a supposed Agreement, and that it
had not been delivered to the then Judges, but acknowledged to have heard the
same read over in His Majesty's Presence; And to which Answer was then made,
That for so much thereof as differs from those Answers, (viz. to the other
Objections then made) it is against the Laws and Statutes of this Realm: And
therefore the Judges of the Kings Bench never assented thereunto, as is
pretended, neither does the phrase thereof agree with the terms of the Laws of
the Realm. This was the Answer then given to that Objection grounded upon the
said Agreement. Whether the same were no more then supposed, may be referred to
the matter of Fact; wherein, if so, the evidentia rei will easily liquidate the
scruple, and dissipate dubieties. Though the said Agreement be disagreed, yet
the Law like the Axis of the Body Politic, remains fixed notwithstanding the
rotation of opinions; And whether so much thereof, as differed from the Answers
then made to the other Objections, were repugnant to the Laws and Statutes of
the Realm, or the phrase discrepant from the terms thereof, would be more
visible upon an Inspection, were it free to insert that as an Imprinted
Agreement here, which is called but a supposed Agreement there; Therefore to
inquire how far the said Agreement made, or supposed to be made, in one age,
may be obligatory in another, may possibly have an implication of more verity
and reality, then the thing it self with general consent does or may challenge;
yet being in substance Consonant to the subsequent Resolutions upon the Cases
of Admiral Jurisdiction, and being an Objection long since under a former
Impression, with the Answer thereto as aforesaid, it may be now a less
Transgression to omit the Thing it self, saltem in terminis, then Digression to
have given this short hint thereof, quasi in nubibus.

The Resolutions, Hill. 8. Car. 1. upon the Cases of Admiral Jurisdiction,
being the Articles, Propositions, and Agreement made and subscribed in Febr.
1632. by all the Reverend Judges of both the Honorable Benches, for the
accommodating and settling the Differences concerning Prohibitions, are very
Energetical in Affirmance of much of the Rights of the said Jurisdiction. The
Sun need not borrow the Auxiliaries of Art to demonstrate his Light. These
Articles and this Agreement (whatever the former be) are more then supposed,
being real and true. You have it here (as to the Body and Substance thereof)
in no other words then Sir Geo. Croke in his Reports delivers it; with the
requisite Addition of the style or Preface thereto, together with the names of
the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Council then present; As follows,
viz.

At White Hall, 18 Febr. 1632. Present, The Kings Most Excellent Majesty.
Lord Keeper. Lord Archbishop of York. Lord Treasurer. Lord Privy Seal. Earl
Marshal. Lord Chamberlain. E. of Dorset. E. of Carlisle. E. of Holland. E. of
Denbeigh. Lord Chancellor of Scotland. E. of Morton. Lord V. Wimbleton. Lord
V. Wentworth. Lord V. Faulkland. Lord Bishop of London. Lord Cottington. Lord
Newburgh. Mr. Treasurer. Mr. Controller. Mr. Vice-Chamberlain. Mr. Secretary
Coke. Mr. Secretary Windebank.
This day His Majesty being present in Council, the Articles and Propositions
following for the accommodating and settling the Difference concerning
Prohibitions, arising between His Majesty's Courts at Westminster, and His
Court of Admiralty, were fully Debated and Resolved by the Board; And were then
likewise upon reading the same as well before the Judges of his Majesty's said
Courts at Westminster, as before the Judge of His said Court of Admiralty, and
His Attorney General, Agreed unto and subscribed by them all in His Majesty's
Presence, viz.

1. If Suit should be commenced in the Court of Admiralty upon Contracts made,
or other things Personal, done beyond the Seas, or upon the Sea; No Prohibition
to be awarded.

2. If Suit be before the Admiral for Freight, or Mariners wages, or for breach
of Charter-parties, for Voyages to be made beyond the Seas: Though the
Charter-party happen to be made within the Realm; so as the Penalty be not
demanded, a Prohibition is not to be granted. But if the Suit be for the
Penalty; Or if the question be, whether the Charter-party were made or not; Or
whether the Plaintiff did release or otherwise discharge the same within the
Realm; This is to be tried in the Kings Courts at Westminster, and not in His
Court of Admiralty.

3. If Suit be in the Court of Admiralty for Building, Amending, Saving, or
necessary Victualling of a Ship, against the Ship it self, and not against any
party by name, but such as for his Interest makes himself a party; No
Prohibition is to be granted, though this be done within the Realm.

4. Although of some Causes arising upon the Thames beneath the first Bridge,
and diverse other Rivers beneath the first Bridge, the Kings Courts have
Cognizance; Yet the Admiralty has also Jurisdiction there, in the point
specially mentioned in the Statute of 15 R. 2. And also by Exposition and
Equity thereof, he may inquire of and redress all annoyances and obstructions
in these Rivers, that are any impediment to Navigation or Passage to or from
the Sea: And also to try Personal Contracts and Injuries done there which
concern Navigation upon the Sea. And no Prohibition is to be granted in such
Cases.

5. If any be imprisoned, and upon Habeas Corpus brought; If it be certified,
that any of these be the Cause of his Imprisonment, the party shall be remanded.

Subscribed Febr. 1632. By all the Judges of both Benches.

AN EXTRACT, By way of APPENDIX, Of the Ancient LAWS of Oleron. Rendered into
English out of GARSIAS alias FERRAND. Together with Some Marginal Observations
thereon.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1661.

AN EXTRACT (By way of APPENDIX) of the Ancient Sea-Laws of OLERON; Rendered
into English out of Garsias, alias Ferrand.
The Judgments of the Sea, and the Isle of OLERON.
For the Regulation and Government of Merchants, Owners of Ships, Part-Owners,
Masters of Ships, and Common Mariners in all Maritime Affairs.
I.
WHen a Ship or other Vessel, whereof a Master is made, belonging to several
Part-Owners, and departing from her own Port, arrives at Burdeoux, Rouen, or
such like place, and is there Fraighted to sail for Scotland, or some other
Foreign Country; The Master in such case may not sell or dispose Skippers
Sale, without special Procuration, not good.
the said Vessel without License or a special Procuration for that purpose from
the said Owners; But in case he want moneys for the Victualling, or other
necessary provisions of the said Vessel, he may for that end with the advice of
his Mariners, hypothecate, pawn, or pledge part of the Tackle or Furniture
Ship-Tackle pawned for Ship-necessaries, good.
of the said Ship.

II.
If a Ship or other Vessel be in a Port or Haven, waiting for her Freight,
therewith to depart; the Master, before he depart thence, ought first to
Consult with his Company, and say, (Sirs) We have now an opportunity Skipper
not to quit a Port without advice of his Mariners.
to set Sail; Some of them possibly will say, The Weather as yet seems not good
enough, the Wind being but now newly changed, and we ought to see it somewhat
settled; Others of them possibly will say, The Weather is good and fair: In this
Case the said Master is to concur with the Opinion of the major part of his
Company; If he does otherwise, and the Vessel happen to miscarry thereby, he is
obliged to make good the same, according to the value upon a just appraisement.

III.
If any Vessel through misfortune happen to be cast away, in whatsoever place
it be, the mariners are bound to use their best endeavor for the saving as much
of the Ship and Lading as possibly they can; And if Mariners in case of that
like Wreck, to save what may be saved.
they preserve part thereof, the Master is bound to allow them reasonable
Consideration, whereby to get home to their own Country; And in case they save
so much as whereby the Master may do this, then may he lawfully pledge to some
honest persons such part thereof as may serve for that occasion. But if they
have not endeavored to save as aforesaid, then the Master is not bound to
provide for them in any thing; but rather they lose their wages when the Vessel
is lost. And the Master may not sell the Furniture of the Vessel, or her Lading
without a Procuration for that purpose from the Owners and Merchants; But yet
he Skippers Sale, in case of disaster, not good without special procuration.
ought, if it may be, to have the Mariners in a readiness, until he knows the
pleasure of the Owners; And herein he ought to do as becomes a prudent Master;
for if he does otherwise, he is obliged to satisfaction.

IV.
A Vessel Laden, departing from Rochel, or some other place, happens in the
Course of her Voyage to be rendered unfit to proceed therein, yet the Mariners
save as much of the Lading as possibly they can; The Merchants and Master are
at variance, requiring to have their Merchandise or the Lading from the Master;
They ought indeed to Part of freight to be paid for part of a Voyage.
have them, paying Freight for so far as they made the said Voyage, Kenning by
Kenning, and Course by Course, if it so please the Master. But if he will, he
may repair his Vessel, if so be she be in such case as that readily she may be
repaired; but if otherwise, and he cannot hire another Vessel The Skipper, to
hire another Ship to finish his Voyage, in case of disaster to his own.
to finish his said Voyage, then the Master shall have his Freight for so far
of the said Voyage, and for so much of the Lading as is there saved. And the
Freight of the Goods that are saved, ought all of it to be reckoned Liver by
Liver, and the saved Goods to pay the Costs of their salvage, according as they
shall happen to be. And in case it happens that the Master, Merchant, or
Mariners promised the People of the Country, where such misfortune is, a third
or one moity of what by their help should The Reward of Salvage not to be paid
according to promise made in time of distress, but as the Court of Admiralty
shall determine according to Equity.
be saved of the Ship and Lading, out of the dangers they were in; In that case
the Justice of that Country, where such misfortune happens, ought well to
consider what pains they bestowed, and what hazards they did run in the saving
thereof, and to reward them accordingly, notwithstanding what promise in such
distress so made them as aforesaid by such Master, Merchant, or Mariner.

V.
If a Vessel depart from any Country Laden or Empty, and arrive at any Port,
the Mariners ought not to leave the Ship, or to go out of her without the
Masters Leave or Mariners (without the leave of the Skipper) may not go out of
the Ship, when arrived to a Port.
License; For if otherwise, and the Vessel should happen to be lost, or by any
misfortune be damnified, they are obliged to make satisfaction for the same.
But if the Vessel was in such a place, as wherein she was Anchored and Moared
with two or three Cables, they may then lawfully go out of her without the said
Masters License, provided In some cases some of them may.
they leave behind them on Shipboard such a number of the Ships Company, their
Fellow-Mariners, as is sufficient to keep the Decks, and the Merchandise or the
Lading of the Ship, provided also that they return again in due time and season
to their said Ship. For if they make unnecessary delays, or stay from the Ship
longer then is meet, they ought to make satisfaction, if they have wherewithal.

VI.
If some of the Mariners, that hired themselves with the Master, go out of the
Ship without his Leave, and drink themselves drunk, or the like, whereby there
happens Contempt to their Master, besides Debates, Fightings and Quarrellings
among themselves, whereby some happen to be wounded; In this Case the Master is
not obliged Mariners drunk a shore, and wounded, not to be healed at the Ships
charge.
to get them healed, or in any thing to provide for them, but rather to
discharge them of the Vessel, and to turn them out of the Ship, both them and
their Comrades. But if by the Masters Order and Command any of the Ships
Company be in the service of Mariners wounded in the Ships service, are to be
healed at the Ships charge.
the Ship, and therein happen to be wounded or otherwise hurt, in this Case
they ought to be healed and provided for at the Costs and charges of the said
Ship.

VII.
If it so happens that Sickness does seize on any of the Mariners of the Ship,
while he is in the service of the said Ship, the Master How sick Mariners are
to be provided for.
ought to set him on shore, and to let him have Candlelight, and to provide
him a Lodging, as also to spare him one of the Ship-boyes to look to him, or
hire a woman to attend him; Likewise to afford him such Diet as is usual in the
Ship, that is to say, so much as he had a Shipboard in his health, and nothing
more, unless it please the Master to allow him more; And if he will have better
Diet, the Master is not bound to provide it for him, unless it be at his own
Costs and Charges. And if The Ship not to stay for a sick Mariner.
the Vessel be ready for her departure, she ought not to stay for the said sick
party; If he recover, he ought to have his full wages or competent hire,
rebating or deducting Sick Mariners ought to have their full wages, deducting
the charge of his sickness.
only such Charges as the Master has been at for him; And if he dies, his wife
or next of kin ought to have it. Executors of a deceased Mariner, ought to
receive the wages due to him.


VIII.
A Vessel is Laden to sail for Rouen, or some other place; it happens that a
storm overtakes her at Sea, and so violent that she cannot escape without
casting some of her Lading and the Merchandise over board, for lightning the
said Vessel, and preserving the rest of the Lading, as also of the Vessel it
self; In this Case the Master ought to say, Sirs, It is fit or expedient to
cast over board some part of the Lading to save the Vessel; And if there be no
Merchant that answers his pleasure herein, or accords and approves thereof by
his silence; Then the In case of storm, Skipper to use his discretion in
casting goods over board, to lighten the Vessel, and to preserve the same.
Master ought to use his discretion, and to do what in him lies, and to cast
part of the Lading over board; And if this please not the Merchants, but that
they gainsay or contradict it, yet the Master, notwithstanding this, ought not
to forbear casting out so much goods as he shall see may be for the common good
and safety; he and the third part of his Mariners making Oath on the Holy
Evangelist, when they arrive at their right Port of Discharge, that he did it
only for the preservation of the Vessel, and the rest of the Lading that
remains yet in her. And the Wines (or other goods) that were cast over board,
ought to be valued and prized according to the just value of the other goods
that arrive in safety. And when these What the Law is in the case of Averidge.
shall be sold, the price or value thereof ought to be divided Liver by Liver
among the Me^chants; And the Master ought to make the division, and to compute
the damage of the Vessel, or the Freight at his own choice for the recovery
thereof; And the Mariners also ought to have one Tun free, and another divided
by Cast of the Dice, according as it shall happen, if he make it appear he did
the part of an able Seaman. But if he make not this to appear, then he shall
have nothing freely; and the Merchants in this Case may lawfully put the Master
to his Oath.

IX.
If it happen that by reason of much foul weather the Master is like to be
constrained to cut his Masts, he ought first to call the Merchants, if there be
any a board the Ship, and such as have goods and Merchandise in the Vessel; and
to say unto them, Sirs, It is requisite to cut down the Mast, to save the What
the Law is in case of cutting Masts or Cables in a storm.
Ship and Lading, it being in this case no more then becomes my duty; And often
times it comes to pass that they also cut their Moaring Cables, leaving behind
them their Cables and Anchors to save the Ship and her Lading. All these things
are reckoned and computed Liver by Liver, as goods are that were cast over
board; And when the Vessel arrives in safety at her right Port of Discharge,
the Merchants ought to pay their shares or proportions without delay, or sell
the goods and pledge the money thereof proceeding to satisfy the same before
such time as the said goods may be unladen out of the said Ship. And if the
Vessel be such as usually is let out for hire upon Freight, and there happen
Controversies and Debates touching the premises, if the Master observes
Collusion therein, he ought not to depart, but is to have his complete Freight
as if his Tunnage were full.

X.
When a Master arrives in safety at the right Port of his Discharge with his
Vessel, he ought to show his Merchants the Cordage, Ropes, or Slings, wherewith
he intends to hoyse the goods over board; And The ship-ropes or slings to hoyse
out goods withal, to be viewed before used.
if they find that they need mending, he ought to mend the same; For if a Pipe,
Hogshead, or other Vessel, should happen by default of such Cordage, or Slings,
to be spoiled or lost, the Master and Mariners ought to make satisfaction for
the same to the Merchants. So also if the Ropes or Slings break, the Master not
foreshewing them to the Merchants, he is obliged to make good the damage. But
if the Merchants say the Cordage, Ropes, or Slings are good and sufficient, and
it notwithstanding happen that they break, in that case each of them ought to
divide the damage, that is to say, the Merchant to whom such goods belong, and
the said Master with his Mariners.

XI.
A Vessel being Laden with Wines or other Goods, hoyses Sail to transport the
same to Breast, or some other place, but the Master and Mariners trim not their
Sails so as they might or ought to have done, and it happens that ill weather
overtakes them at Sea, and so as that the main yard shakes or strikes out the
head of one of the Pipes, or Hogsheads of Wine; This Vessel being in safety
arrived at her Port of Discharge, the Merchant says to the Master, That by
reason of his main yard his Wine was lost; Goods damnified at Sea, whether by
the Ship-tackle or not, to be purged and cleared by the Oath of the Skipper and
part of his Company.
The Master replying, says, It was not so: In this case if the Master and his
Mariners will make Oath (be it four or six, and such of them as the Merchant
has no exception against) That the Wine perished not by the main yard, nor by
them, or through their default, as the Merchant charges them, they ought then
to be acquitted thereof; But if they refuse to make Oath to the effect
aforesaid, they are then obliged to make satisfaction for the same, for that
they ought to have ordered their Sails aright before they departed from the
Port where they took in their Lading.

XII.
A Master having hired his Mariners, he ought to keep the Peace betwixt them,
and to be as their Judge at Sea; so that if there be any of them that gives
another the Lie, The Law in case of the Lie, or a stroke given by or to the
Skipper or his Mariners.
whilst they have Wine and Bread on the Table, he ought to pay four Denieres;
And if the Master himself give any the Lie, he ought to pay eight Denieres; And
if any of the Mariners give the Master the Lie, he also ought to pay eight
Denieres. And if the Master strike any of his Mariners, he ought to bear with
the first stroke, be it with the fist or open hand; but if the Master does
fiercely assault him with more strokes, the said Mariner may defend himself;
but and if the said common Mariner does first assault the Master, he ought to
pay five Solz, or lose his hand.

XIII.
If a difference happen between the Master of a Ship, and any one of his
Mariners, the Master ought three times to take away from him, or lift up before
the said Mariner the Towel, ere he turn him out of the Ship, The Law in case of
difference between the Skipper and any of his Mariners.
or discharge him thereof; But if the said Mariner offer in the presence of the
rest of the Mariners to make the Master satisfaction, and the Master be so
resolved that he will accept of no satisfaction from him, but notwithstanding
such offer of satisfaction will put him out of the Ship; In such case the said
Mariner may betake himself to follow the said Vessel to her Port of Discharge,
and ought to have as good hire or wages as if he had come in the Ship, or as if
he had made satisfaction for his fault in the sight and presence of the
Ship-Company; And if the Skipper to take an able Mariner in the absence of
another, or to make good the damage, if any thereby.
Master take not another Mariner into the Ship in his stead, as able as the
other, and the Ship or Lading happen thereby to be through any misfortune
damnified, the Master is obliged to make good the same, if he has wherewithal.

XIV.
If a Vessel lying at Anchor be struck or grapled with by another Vessel under
Sail, that is not very well steered, whereby the Vessel at Anchor is
prejudiced, as also Wines, or other Merchandise in each of the said Ships
damnified; In this case the whole damage is to be in common, and to be equally
divided and appraized half by In case of Collision, one ship against another,
the damage to be in common, and equally divided, yet so as they both (if need
be) purge themselves of all wilfulness by Oath.
half; And the Master and Mariners of the Vessel that struck or grapled with
the other, are bound to swear on the holy Evangelist that they did it not
wittingly or wilfully. And the reason why this Judgment was first given, was,
That an old decayed Vessel might not purposely be put in the way of a better,
which will the rather be prevented when they know that the damage must be
divided.

XV.
Suppose two or more Vessels in a Harbor where there is but little water, so
as that the Anchor of one of the Vessels lies dry; The Master of the other
Vessel ought in that case to say unto him whose Anchor lies dry; Master, Take
up your Anchor, for it is too nigh us, and may do us a prejudice; if neither
the said Master nor his Mariners will take up the said Anchor accordingly, What
the Law is in placing of Anchors in Harbors, specially where there is but
little water; as also of Boys to the said Anchors.
then may that other Master and his Mariners (who might be otherwise thereby
damnified) take up the said Anchor, and let it down again at a farther distance
from them; And if the others oppose or withstand the taking up of their Anchor,
and there afterward happen damage thereby, they are bound to give full
satisfaction for the same; In like manner it is, if they neglect the placing of
a Boy to the Anchor, and damage happen thereby, they are obliged to repair the
same; And so also it is in case damage so happen in a Haven at low water, for
they ought to fasten such Boys or Anchor-marks, and such Cables to theit
Anchors, as may plainly appear and be seen at full Sea.

XVI.
A Vessel going to seek a Freight, arrives at her place of Lading in England,
or elsewhere; the Master ought then to say to his Company; Sirs, Will you
Freight by your selves, What the Mariners Immunity or Privilege anciently was
in Freight; which is now grown obsolete.
or be allowed at the Freight of the Ship? They are to answer which of the two
they intend; if they take as the Freight of the Ship shall happen, they shall
have proportionably as the Ship has. And if they will Freight by themselves,
they ought to Freight so as that the Ship be not impeded or hindered thereby.
And if it so happen, that Freight may not be had, the Master is blameless; and
he ought to show them their Ship-fare, which he may weigh out to each of them.
And if they will there lade a Tun of Water in stead of so much Wine, they may;
And in case there should happen at Sea a casting of goods over board, the Case
is the same for a Tun of Water as in a Tun of Wine, or other goods, Liver by
Liver. And if so be that Merchants do Freight the said Vessel for
Transportation of Goods, what freedom and immunity the said Mariner has, the
said Merchant shall also have.

XVII.
The Mariners of Britain ought to have but one meal a day from the Kitchen,
because It seems in those days this was the Law; Now no such thing in use.
they have Beverage or Drinkings out and home; But those of Normandy are to
have two meals a day, because they have only water at the Ships allowance; only
when the Ship arrives at a Wine-Country, there the Master is to procure them
Wine to drink.

XVIII.
When a Vessel does discharge or unload, and the Mariners demand their wages,
whereof some have neither Bed, Chest, nor The Skipper may compel the Mariner to
complete the Ships Voyage.
Cabin aboard, the Master may lawfully retain part of their wages till they
have brought back the Ship to the Port from whence she came, unless they give
good caution to serve out the whole Voyage.

XIX.
If the Master hire the Mariners in that Town whereunto the Vessel belongs,
whereof some at their own finding, others of them at his own costs and
provision; And it happen that the Ship cannot procure Freight in those parts
where she is now arrived, but must sail yet farther to obtain it; In such Case
they that are at their own finding, ought to follow the Master, and such as are
at his own costs, ought to have their wages advanced Kenning by Kenning, and
Course by The Contract for wages must be performed, though the Voyage be not;
so as the fault be not in the Mariners.
Course, for that he hired them to one certain place. And if they go not so far
as to that place for which the Contract was made, yet they ought to have the
whole promised hire, as if they had gone thither; But they ought to bring back
the Vessel to the place from whence they took her.

XX.
When a Vessel arrives at Rouen, or any other place, two of the Mariners at a
time may go a shore and take with them one meal of such Victuals as is in the
Ship, therein cut and provided, as also Bread proportionably What the Law is
touching Mariners going a shore when the ship is in Port.
as much as they eat at once, but no Drink: And they ought very speedily and in
season to return to their Vessel, that thereby the Master may not lose the
earnest or hire of the Ship; for if so, and damage come thereby, they are bound
to make satisfaction; or if any of their Company be hurt for want of their
help, they are to be at such charge of his recovery as one of his
Fellow-Mariners, or the Master, with those of the Table shall judge or
arbitrate.

XXI.
If a Master lets his Ship to Freight to a Merchant, and set him a certain time
within which he shall lade his Vessel, that she may be ready to depart at the
time appointed, and he lade it not within the time, but keep the Master and
Mariners by the space of eight days, or a fortnight, or more, beyond the time
agreed on, whereby the Master loses the opportunity of a fair wind to depart,
by reason of this the Merchants said default; The Merchant to pay Demourage,
when it happens through his own default.
The said Merchant in this case is obliged to make the Master satisfaction for
such delay, the fourth whereof is to go among the Mariners, and the other three
fourth parts to the Master, because he finds them their expenses.

XXII.
When a Merchant Fraights a Vessel at his own charge, and sets her to Sea, and
the said Vessel enter into an Harbor, where she is wind-bound, that she stays
so long till her moneys be all spent, the Master in that What the Law is in
^ase a Skippe^ on his Voyage be reduced to Necessities in a Foreign Port.
ease ought speedily to send home to his own Country for money; but he ought not
to lose his armogan, or desert his Voyage or main design; for if so, he is the^
obliged to make good to the Merchant all such damag^s as shall ensue thereby;
But yet the Master may take part of the Wines or other Merchand-goods, and
dispo^e thereof to compass In some cases the Skipper may sell part of his
Lading.
his return; And when the said Vessel shall be arrived at her right Port of
Discharge, the said Wines that the Master has If part os a Merchants Carge be
sold to supply the Necessities of the Ship, the value and freight thereof is to
be made good to and by the said Merchant.
so disposed of, ought to be valued and appraized at the same rate as the other
Wines shall be commonly sold for, at no more nor less, and accordingly be
accounted for to the Merchant; And the Master ought to have the Freight of such
Wines as he has so taken and disposed of for the use and reason aforesaid.

XXIII.
If a Pilot undertaking the Conduct of a Vessel, to bring her to St. Mallo, or
any other Port, fail of his duty therein, so as the Vessel miscarry by reason
of his ignorance in what he undertook, and the Merchants sustain damage
thereby, he is obliged The head of an unskilful Pilo must go for the loss of a
Vessel occasioned by his unskilfulness, in case he has not wherewith to make
satisfaction.
to make full fatisfaction for the same, if he has wherewithal: And if he be
not able to make satisfaction, he ought to lose his head. And if in that case
the Master or any of the Mariners, or the Merchants, cut off his head, they are
not bound to answer for it; But yet before they do this, they ought to know
whether he has wherewith to make satisfaction.

XXIV.
A Vessel being arrived at her Port of Discharge, and hoysed up there into dry
ground, and so as the Mariners deeming her to be in good safety do take down
her Sails, and so fit the Vessel a loof and aft, the Master now cught to
consider an increase of their wages Kenning by Kenning; And if in winding or
hoysing of Wines, it happens that they leave open any of the Pipes, or other
Vessels, or that they fasten not the What the Law is in case of damage to
goods, by reason of the Ship-ropes or Slings in hoysing of goods over board.
Ropes well at the ends of the Vessel, by reason whereof it slips, and falls,
and so lost, or falling on another, both are damnified, or lost; In these Cases
the Master and Mariners are bound to make them good to the Merchants, and the
Merchants must pay the Freight of the said damnified or lost Wines, because
themselves are to receive for them from the Master and Mariners, according to
the value that the rest of the Wines are sold for; And the Owners of the Ship
ought not to suffer hereby, because the damage happened by default of the
Master and Mariners, in not fastening the said Vessels of Wine.

XXV.
It two Vessels go on a Fishing design in Partnership, as for Mackerel,
Herring, Rays, or the like, and do set their Nets, What the Law is as to
Partnership in the Fishing Craft.
and lay their Lines for that purpose; The one of the Vessels ought to employ
as many Fishing Engines as the other, and so shall go in equal shares as to the
gain, according to the Agreement betwixt them made. After this, if it so
happen, that one of the said Vessels with her Fishing Instruments and Engines
perish, the other escaping, arrive in safety; the surviving friends of In case
of such Partnership, part of the profits upon such a Fishing design, accrue to
the next of kin, to the deceased in that design.
those that perished, may require of the other to have their part of the gain,
as also of their Fish and Fishing Instruments; And they are to have it
accordingly upon the Oaths of those that escape; But in or of the Vessel it
self, they are to have nothing.

XXVI.
If any Ship or other Vessel sailing to and f^o, and Coasting the Seas, as well
in the way of Merchandising, as upon a Fishing design, happen by some
misfortune through the violence of the Weather to strike her self against the
Rocks, whereby she becomes so bruised and broken, that there she perishes, be
it on what Coasts, Country or Dominion soever, and the Master and Mariners,
Merchant or Merchants, or any one of these escape and come safe to Land; In
this Case the Lord of that place or Country, where such misfortune shall
happen, ought not to let, hinder, or oppose such as have so escaped, or such,
to whom the said Ship, or Vessel, and her Lading belong, in Ship broken, men
not to be impeded or h^ndred, but aided and assisted in preservation of Ship
and Lading.
using their utmost endeavor for the preservation of as much thereof as may
possibly be saved. But contrariwise, the Lord of that place or Country, by his
own interest, and by those under his power and Jurisdiction, ought to be aiding
and assisting to the said distressed Merchants and Mariners, in saving their
Ship-broken-goods, and that without the least imbezilment or taking any thereof
from them. Nevertheless there may be a Remuneration or Consideration for
Salvage to such as took pains therein, answerable to their Conditions,
according to right Reason, Salvage to be regulated, not according to promise
made by the distressed, but as the Court of Admiralty shall judge in equity.
and a good Conscience, and as Justice shall appoint, notwithstanding what
promise in that Case was made to the Salvers by such distressed Merchants and
Mariners, as before is declared: And in case any shall do contrary hereunto, or
take any part of the said goods from the said poor, distressed, ruined, undone,
Ship-broken persons, against their Art. 4. Naufragium, quasi Navis Fractio. The
penalty of such Thieves as steal srom persons that are Ship-broken.
wills, and without their consent, they are Excommunicated by the Church, and
ought to receive the punishment of Thieves, without speedy Restitution be made
by them; And there is no Custom or Statute whatever that can protect them
against the said penalties.

XXVII.
If a Ship or other Vessel entering into an Harbor, or elsewhere, happen by
misfortune to be broken and perish, insomuch that the Master, Mariners, and
Merchants, which were on board her, are all drowned; so that the Goods thereof
in part are driven a shore, the rest floating on the Sea, without being sought
after by those to whom they belong, they being ignorant of this sad disaster,
and knowing nothing thereof; In this Case, which is very lamentable, the Lord
of that place or Country ought to send persons to What the Law is in case of
wreck.
save the said Goods, which he ought to secure and to put into safe custody;
and thereof ought also (if it may be) to give notice to the Friends or next of
Kin to the deceased, and to satisfy for the salvage thereof, not out of his
own purse, but of the Goods saved, according to the hazard and pains taken
therein; and the remainder to reserve in safe custody for one year or more; And
if in that time they to whom the said Goods did appertain, do not appear and
claim the same, and the said year or more be fully expired, he may publicly
sell and dispose thereof to such as will give most, and with the moneys
proceeding of the sale thereof, he is to procure prayers to be made for the As
if the gift of Salvation might be purchased with money. Good meanings will never
exculpate blind and superstitious Devotion. This is the Law of Rome by Land at
this day, as well as of Oleron at Sea, nigh 500 years since.
Remission of the sins of the deceased, or to provide Marriages for poor Maids,
and to do therewith such other works of piety and charity as is consonant to
Reason and a good Conscience. But if he assume the said goods either in whole
or in part unto himself, he shall incur the Curse or Malediction of our Mother
the holy Church, with the foresaid pains and penalties, without ever obtaining
Remission, unless he make satisfaction.

XXVIII.
If a Ship or other Vessel happen to be lost by striking on some Rock, or
elsewhere nigh the shore, and the Mainers thinking to escape and save their
lives, attempt to come nigh the shore or brink of the Sea in hope of help, but
in stead thereof it sometimes happens Covetousness which is Idolatry, sometimes
is also Bestiality.
that in many places they meet with people more barbarous, cruel, and inhumane,
then mad Dogs, or ^nraged Wolves, who to gain their moneys, apparel, and other
goods, do sometimes murder and destroy these poor distressed Mariners; In this
Case, the Lord of that Country ought to execute Justice on such Wretches, to
punish them They that lived like beasts, might not dye like men; By the Law of
Oleron.
as well corporally as pecuniarily, and in their goods, and they are to be
plunged into the Sea until they be half dead, then to be drawn forth out of the
Sea, and stoned or knocked down as you would do even to a Dog or a Wolf.

XXIX.
If a Ship or other Vessel arriving at any place, and making in toward a Port
or Harbor, set out her Flag, or give other sign to have a Pilot come a board,
or a Boat to towe her into the Harbor, the Wind or Tide being contrary, and
Contract be made for Piloting the said Vessel into the said Harbor
accordingly; But (by reason of an unreasonable, yea, accursed and damnable
custom in some places, That the third or fourth part of the Ships that perish
and are lost, shall accrue to the Lord of the place where such sad Casualties
happen; as also the like proportion to the Salvers, and only the remainder to
the Master, Merchant, and Mariners) the Persons contracting for the Pilotage of
the said Vessel, to ingratiate themselves with their Landlords, and to gain to
themselves part of the said Ship and her Lading, do like faithless Villains and
treacherous persons sometimes even wittingly, willingly, and out of design to
ruin Ship and Goods, guide and bring her upon the Rocks; And then feigning to
aid, help, and assist the now distressed Mariners, themselves are the first in
dismembring and pulling the Ship to pieces; Then purloyning Behold and wonder
at the Diabolical Practice of some treacherous Pilots.
and carrying away the Lading thereof contrary to all Reason and a good
Conscience; And that they may be the more welcome to their Landlord, do with
all speed post to his house with the sad Narrative of this unhappy disaster;
whereupon the said Landlord with his Retinue appearing at the place takes his
share, the Salvers theirs; and what remains the Merchants and Mariners may
have. But seeing this is contrary to the Law of God, the Edict and Judgment
is, That (notwithstanding any Law or Custom to the contrary) the said Lord of
that The penalty of such thieves as steal goods from poor distressed shipbroken
persons.
place, Salvers, and all others that take away or embezil any of the said
Goods, shall be Accursed, Excommunicated, and punished as Robbers and Thieves,
as fotmerly has been declared.

XXX.
Touching such false and treacherous Pilots, the Judgment is, That they ought
to suffer a most rigorous and unmerciful death; For there ought to be very high
Gibbets erected for them in the very same place, or as nigh as conveniently may
be, where they so guided and brought the said Ship or Vessel to ruin as
aforesaid, and thereon these accur-Pilots are with ignominy and most shamefully
The exemplary punishment of all treacherous Pilots.
to end their days; Which said Gibbets are to be made substantially strong, to
the intent that they may abide and remain to succeeding ages on that place, as
a visible Caution to other Ships that shall afterward sail thereby.

XXXI.
If the said Lord of that place were so feloniously inclined, and so barbarous
withal, as not only to permit such inhumane people, but also to maintain and
abet them in such villainies, that he may participate of the spoil, and have a
share in such Wrecks; In such case the said Lord of that place ought to be
apprehended, all his goods confiscate, and sold to be converted into pious
uses, and An Adequate punishment, and without respect of persons; which will
not counterpoize one grain of honesty in the balance of Justice; So exact was
this Law in punishing such politickly Covetous Miscreants.
for restitution and satisfaction to such as of right it appertains; And
himself to be fastened to a post or stake in the midst of his own Mansion
house, which being fired on the four Corners or quarters thereof, all are to be
burnt together; which done, the walls thereof are to be demolished, the stones
thereof pulled down, turned to rubbish, and then to be converted to a Market
place, for the sale only of Hogs and Swine to all posterity.

XXXII.
If by reason of tempestuous weather it be thought expedient, for the lightning
of any Ship or Vessel at Sea, or riding at Anchor in any Road, to cast part of
the Lading over board, and it be so done accordingly for the preservation of
themselves; know, taht the said goods so ejected and cast over board do become
his that can first possess himself thereof, and carry them away; Nevertheless,
it is here to be farther known and understood, that this holds true only in
such Goods cast over board for lightning the Ship, quatenus such, are not
Derelicts.
case, as when the Master, Merchant, and Mariners have so ejected or cast out
the said goods, as that withal they quit all hope or desire of ever recovering
them again, and so leave them as Derelict, or as things utterly Merces e Nave
jactae, Derelictae non videntur.
lost and forsaken, without ever making any inquiry or pursuit after them; In
which Case only, the first Occupant becomes the lawful Proprietor thereof. Leg.
7. Dig. Pro Derelict.


XXXIII.
If a Ship or other Vessel has cast over board several Goods or Merchandise,
which are in Chests well locked and made fast; or Books so well secured, and so
well conditioned, that they may not be damnified by Salt Water; In such cases
it is to be presumed, that they who did cast such Goods over What symptoms for
a Presumption in certain cases of goods cast over board, that they are not
Derelict.
board, do still retain an intention, hope, and desire of recovering the same;
For which reason such as shall happen to find such things, are obliged to make
Restitution thereof to him who shall make a due inquiry or pursuit after them;
or at least to employ them in charitable uses according to a good Conscience.

XXXIV.
If any man happen to find any thing in the Sea, or Sea-sand, or on the Shore,
(be Res nullius, and Noviter inventa, fit primo Occupantis.
it precious stones, Fishes, or the like, which never belonged to any man in
point of property) it becomes his own; for such things belong to the first
finder, who carries it away.

XXXV.
Touching Great Fishes that are taken or Now called Royal Fishes. Out of the
mouth of a Fish the King of Kings himself will work a Miracle to pay Tribute,
rather then offend by denying it where it is due. Matthew. 17. 27.
found dead on the Seashore, regard must be had to the Custom of that Country
where such Great Fishes are taken or found; For by the Custom the Sovereign
Prince of that Country ought to have his share, his demand or pleasure therein.
And good reason, for the Subject owes Obedience and Tribute to his Sovereign.

XXXVI.
In some Cases also the Lord of the place where some Fishes are found may have
his share, respect being always had to the laudable In such things Custom is
to be observed.
Custom of the Country where such Fishes are found; And he that there finds
them is no farther obliged then to save them by bringing them without the reach
of the Sea, and then forthwith to make it known to the said Lord of the place,
that so such care may be taken therein as appertains to Justice.

XXXVII.
If the Lord of the place please, and it be the Custom of that Country where
the said Fish was found, he may cause the same to be brought to him that found
it, or to the public and open Marketplace, but to no other place; And there
the said Fish ought Consuetudo in tract of time may evaporate into Desuetudo;
as in this Case.
to be Inventaried and Appraised by the said Lord according to the custom. And
the price being set, the other party that made not the price, shall have his
choice or election either to take or leave at that price; And if either of them
whether per fas, or nefas be an occasion of loss or damage to the other, though
but to the value of a Deniere, he is obliged to make him Restitution.

XXXVIII.
If the Costs and Charges of carrying the said Fish to the said Marketplace,
may probably This has reference only to such times and places, as wherein such
Custom did prevail.
amount to a greater sum then the Fish it self may be worth, then the said
Lord is bound to take his share at the place where such Fish was found.

XXXIX.
Also the said Lord ought to submit to the foresaid Costs and Charges, for that
he ought Locupletari nemo debet cum alterius injuria. Leg. 14. tit. 6. Cod.
lib. 5. and Dig. lib. 23. tit. 3. leg. 6. 2. and Dig. lib. 2. tit. 15. leg. 8.
22. and Dig. lib. 12. tit. 6. leg. 14.
not by another damage to enrich himself; otherwise he sins.

XL.
If by some chance or misfortune the said Fish happen to be lost, or otherwise
stolen away from the place where it was first found, and this about the time of
the said Lords going Non tam tenetur, qui non tenet, quam qui detinet.
to see it, or before; in this Case he that first found it is not any way
obliged to make it good.

XLI.
In all other things found by the Seaside, which have formerly been in the
possession of some or other, as Wines, Oils, and other Merchandise, although
they have been cast over board, and left by the Merchants, and so ought to
appertain to him that first finds Consuetudo est Lex non scripta, and Natura
postscripta.
the same; yet herein also the Custom of the Country is to be observed as
formerly in the Case of Fish. But in case there be a presumption that these
were the Goods of Goods found and presumed to have belonged to Shipping, are
dedicated not to profane but pious uses.
some Ship that perished, then neither the said Lord, nor Finder thereof, ought
to take any thing thereof so as to convert it to their own use; but they ought
to do th^rewith as before has been said, that is, to cause therewith that
Prayers be made for the deceased, as also other special good works; Or Art. 26.
If in Heaven, they need no Prayers; if in Hell, Ab inferis nulla Redemptio; if
in Purgatory, it is pity to trouble them, the longer there, the better purged;
This is Rom^s Utopia.
otherwise they shall incur the forementioned Maledictions.

XLII.
If any Ship or other Vessel at Sea happen Res capta sit Captentis, was Law
well meant at Oleron; but very ill expounded by our late Interpreters.
to find a Fish, it is wholly theirs that found it, in case no due pursuit be
made after it; And no Lord of any place ought either to challenge it or demand
any part thereof, although they bring it to his ground.

XLIII.
If any seek for Gold or Silver on the Seashore, Presupposing the Finders
knowledge of of the true Owner thereof.
and finds some; he ought to restore it all, without any diminution thereof.

XLIV.
If any going along the Seashore to fish, or otherwise, happen to find Gold,
or Silver, What the Law is in Case of Treasure Trove.
or the like, he is bound to make restitution thereof, deducting for his own
pains; Otherwise if he be poor, he may retain it to himself, that is, if he
know not to whom to restore it; yet he ought to give notice of such his sinding
the same, to the neighborhood and parts next adjacent to the place where he
found it. Moreover he ought to You may not Note or infer hence, as if in all
Ages the Clergy had a finger in all Elements.
advise with his Prelate, Curate, or Confessor, who ought to weigh and take
into Consideration the indigency and poverty of the Finder, and the quantity of
the Silver, and then to give him such advice as is consonant to a good
Conscience.

XLV.
If a Vessel by stress of weather be constrained to cut her Towes and Cables by
the end, and so to quit and leave behind her both Cables and Anchors, and make
to Sea as please the wind and weather; in this Case the said Cables and Anchors
ought not to be What the Law is in case a Ship by stresse of weather be forced
from her Cables and Anchors.
as lost to the said Vessel, if there were any Boy at them; And such as fish
for them are bound to restore them, if they know to whom: but withal they ought
to be paid for their pains, according as Justice shall determine. But because
sometimes they Well meaning devotion in a Superstitious way, opens a door to
Idolatry; And Politic devotion in an hy-pocritical way Lets in Blasphemy.
know not to whom to restore them, the Lords of the place have their shares,
and the Finders theirs, and they neither cause Pater Noster to be said, nor
Avie Maria, as they ought. And therefore it has been ordained, That every
Master of a Ship cause to be engraven, or set upon the Boys thereof, his own
name, or the name of his Ship, or of the Port or Haven whereof she is; which
will prevent great inconveniences; for it sometimes happens, that he that left
The Names of Skippers or of their Ships to be engraven on their Boys.
his Anchor in the morning, has recovered it again by night; And such as
detain it from him, are no better then Thieves and Pirates.

XLVI.
If any Ship, or other Vessel by any Casualty or misfortune happen to be
wrecked and perish; in that case the pieces of the bulk of the Vessel as well
as the Lading thereof What the Law is in case of Wreck.
ought to be reserved and kept in safety for them to whom it belonged, before
such disaster happened, notwithstanding any Custom to the contrary. And all
takers, partakers, abettors, consenters, or contrivers in the said wreck, if
they be Bishops, Prelates, or Clerks, they ought to be deposed and deprived of
their Benefices respectively; And if they be Laymen, they are to incur the
penalties aforesaid.

XLVII.
Which is to be so understood, when the said Ship or Vessel so wrecked did not
exercise Pirates and other unreasonable men are to be dealt with like other
irrational Animals.
the Thievish mystery of Robbing and Free booting, and when the Mariners
thereof are not Pirates, Sea-Rovers, or Enemies to our holy Catholic Faith.
But in case they be Pirates, Robbers, Sea-Rovers, Turks, or other Enemies to
our said Catholic Faith, Catholic signifies General or Universal; But
Orthodoae has a far better Signification.
every man may then deal with such as with mere Brutes, and despoil them of
their goods without any punishment for so doing.

A SERIES or Catalogue (according to Sir H. Spelman's Computation) of such as
have been Dignified with the Office of Lord High Admiral in this Kingdom,
since King John's time to to the Reign of King Charles the First of Blessed
Memory.
Wherein No mention is made of Marthusius, that Princeps Nautarum, in K. Edgars
time; Nor of those other Tetrarchs of his Navy, who for the guard of the
^rittish Seas had no less then a thousand Sail of Ships under their Command;
Nor of those other Commanders in Chief touching the Sea-Affairs, who have been,
beside the common and usual mode, Constituted by his Successors, Kings of
England; But of such only, as in the Ordinary way have been Dignified with the
said Office and Marine Authority in this Kingdom, viz.

8 H. 3. RIchard de Lucy is said to have Maritimam Angliae. 48 H. 3. Thomas de
Moleton was Constituted Capitaneus and Custos maris and Portuum Maritimorum. 25
Ed. 1. William de Leiburne is styled at the Assembly at Bruges, 8 Martii, 15
Ed. 1. 1286. Admirallus maris Angliae. 22 Ed. 1. John de Botetort, Admiral of
the North, for the Coast of Yarmouth, and that station. William de Leibourn,
Admiral of the South, for Por^^^outh, and that station. A certain Irish Knight,
Admiral of the West, and the parts thereof.

Admirals of the North, viz. Admirals of the West, viz. From the mouth of the
River of Thames Northward. From the mouth of the River of Thames Westward. 34
Ed. 1. Edward Charles. Gervase Allard. 8 Ed. 2. John Botetort. William Cranis.
10 Ed. 2. Nichalds Cryoll. 10 Ed. 2. John Perbrun, alias Perburn. Robert
Leiburn, Knight. 12 Ed. 2. John Athey. 15 Ed. 2. John Perburn. Robert de
Leiburn, Knight, Admiral of the Western Ports of England, Wales, and Ireland.
16 Ed. 2. John Perburn. Robert Battle, alias Batall, one of the Barons of the
Cinque Ports. 18 Ed. 2. John Sturmy. Robert Bendon. 19 Ed. 2. John Otervin.
Nicholas Keriel. Walsingh. calls these the three Admirals of the three Coasts
of England, viz. of Yarmouth, Portsmouth, and the West. And here note, That the
South Coast is comprehended in the West. John de Felton. 19 Ed. 2. John de
Stormy. Nicholas Criell. 20 Ed. 2. John Sturmy. Nicholas Criell. 20 Ed. 2. John
Layborne. 1 Ed. 3. John Perbrun. Wares. de Valoniis. 7 Ed. 3. William de
Clinton. 8 Ed. 3. John de Norwico. Roger de Hegham, alias Higham. 10 Ed. 3.
Thomas Ughtred. 10 Ed. 3. John de Norwico. Walter de Say, Baronet. 10 Ed. 3.
Robert Ufford, and William de Manton. John de Roos. Admiralli Flotae. 11 Ed. 3.
Walter de Manney. Barthol. de Burghershe, Knight. 12 Ed. 3. Thomas de Draiton. This
Thomas elsewhere appears not as Admiral, but only as Vice Admiral to Walter de
Manney: So possibly in some others there may be some Errors also. Peter Dardus,
alias Bard. 13 Ed. 3. Ro^ert Morley, Robert Trussell. Bar. de Hengham. 14 Ed.
3. Richaard, Fill. Alani, Com. Arundeliae. 15 Ed. 3. Robert de Morley. William
Clinton, Com. Huntingd. 16 Ed. 3. William Trussel. Robert Beaupell. 17 Ed. 3.
William Trussell. John de Monte Gomerico. 18 Ed. 3. Robert Uffer. Com. Suffolk.
Reignald de Cobham. 19 Ed. 3. Richard, Fill. Alani, Com. Arundeliae. 20 Ed. 3.
Robert de Ufford, Comes Suff. Richard, Fill. Alani, Com. Arundeliae. 21 Ed. 3.
John de Howard, Knight. John de Monte Gomerico, Knight. 22 Ed. 3. Walter de
Manny, Bar. S. Salvato. Reignald de Cobham, Knight. 24 Ed. 3. Robert de
Causton. John de Bello Campo, Knight of the Noble Order of the Garter. 25 Ed.
3. Robert de Morley. 25 Ed. 3. William de Bohun. Com. Northampt. Henry D. of
Lancaster. 26 Ed. 3. William de Bohun. Com. Northampt. Tho. de Bello Campo,
Senior, Com. Warwicen. 29 Ed. 3. Rob. de Morley, Bar. de Hengham. John de Bello
Campo, Brother to the said Thomas. 30 Ed. 3. Robert de Morley. Guido de Brian,
Knight. 31 Ed. 3. Guide de Brian. 33, 34 Ed. 3. Robert de Morley. Guido de
Brian. 34 Ed. 3. John de Bello Campo aforesaid, was Constituted High Admiral as
well of the North as of the West of England, 18 Julii, 34 Ed. 3. At which time
he was also Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, Constable of the Tower of London,
and of the Castle of Dover; And dyed December. 2. the same year in possession
thereof. 35 Ed. 3. Robert Herle, Knight. Admirallus omnium Flotarum utriusque
partis. 38 Ed. 3. Ralph Spigornell. Admirallus utriusque partis. 43 Ed. 3.
Nicholas Tamworth, Knight. Robert Aston, Knight. 44 Ed. 3. John Nevill, Knight.
Bar. de Raby. Guido Brian. 45 Ed. 3. Ralph de Ferrariis. Robert Aston, Knight.
46, 47, 48 Ed. 3. W. de Nevill. Phillip Courtney. 50 Ed. 3. William de Ufford,
William de Monteacuto. Com. Suff. 50, 51 Ed. 3. Mich. de la Poole, Knight, Dn.
de Wingfield. Brother of Rob. de Hales, Prior of the Hospital of S. Jo. of
Jerusalem. 1 R. 2. Thomas de Bello Campo, Jun. Com. War. Richard, Fill. Alani.
Com. Arundel. 2 R. 2. Thomas Percy, Frat. Com. Northumb. Hugh Calveley, Knight.
3, 4 R. 2. William de Elmham, Knight. Phillip Courtney, Knight. 5 R. 2. William
de Elmham. John Roches, Knight. 6 R. 2. Walter, Fill. Walt. Knight, Dn. de
Woodham. John Roches, alias de Rupibus, Knight. 7 R. 2. Henry Percey, Com.
Northumb. Edward Courtney, Com. Devon. 8 R. 2. Tho. Percey, Frat. Hen. Com.
Northumb. Jo. Radington, Prior of Saint John of Jerusalem. 9 R. 2. Phillip
Darcy, Knight. Thomas Trivet, Knight. 10 R. 2. Richard, Fill. Alani, Com. Arundel,
Admirallus Angliae. 12 R. 2. Jo. de Bello monte, Bar. de Folkingham. Jo.
Holland, Com. Huntington. 12 R. 2. Jo. de Rupibus, Knight. 13 R. 2. Jo. de Bello
monte, praedict. Jo. Holland, Com. praedict. 14 R. 2. Edward Com. Rutland. Jo.
Holland, Com. praedict. 15 R. 2. Edward, Com. Rutland, and Cor^^giae,
afterward D. of Albemarle. Constituted high Admiral as well of North as
Western parts. 21 R. 2. John Beaufort, Marq. Dorset, and Com. Somerset. Fill.
Jo. de Gandavo, D. of Lancaster, Admiral (...) North and West. ^^ R. 2. Thomas
Percey, Com. Winchester, Frat. Hen. Com. Northumb. he was then Constituted
Admiral of both parts. 2 H. 4. Rich. Gray, Bar. de Codenore. Thomas Reniston,
Knight. 5 H. 4. Tho. Beaufort, Frat. praed. Marq. Dors. Tho. Dom. Berkley,
Knight. 7 H. 4. Nicholas Blackburn, Esquire. Richard Cliderhow, Esquire.

Admirals of England, etc.
6 H. 4. Tho. Lancastrius, Reg. H. 4. Fill. Viceroy of Ireland, high Steward of
England; afterward D. of Clarence. Admirallus utriusque partis. 8 H. 4. John
Beauford, praedict. Com. Somerset. Admirallus Angliae. 8 H. 4. Edmund Holland,
Earl of Kent. Admirallus Angliae. 9 H. 4. Thomas Beuford, praed. Adm. Angliae.
4 H. 6. John Lancastrius, D. of Bedford, E. of Richmond and Candale, high
Constable of Engl. Fill. Reg. H. 4. Admirallus Angliae. 14 H. 6. Joh. Holland,
D. of Exon. E. of Huntington. Constituted (together with his son) Admirals of
England, Ireland, and Aquitain, for life. 25 H. 6. Will. de la Poole. Mar. and
E. of Suffolk, made Admiral of England, Ireland, and Aquitain, during the
minority of Hen. D. of Exon; who with his Father had that Office by the Kings
^rant, ad terminum vitae eorum, etc. 28 H. 6. Hen. Holland, D. of Exon. Adm.
Angliae, Hiberniae and Aquitaniae. 1 Ed. 4. Rich. Nevil, Comes Warwic. and
Sarisb. Admiral of England, Ireland and Aquit. 2 Ed. 4. Will. Nevil, E. of
Kent, and Bar. Falconberg. Adm. of Engl. Ireland, and Aquit. Ed. 4. Richard D.
of Gloucester, Brother to the King; Adm. of Engl. Irel. and Aquit. 49 H. 6.
Rich. Nevil, E. of Warwic. and Sarisb. Capt. of the Town and Castle of Calice.
Constable of the Castle of Dover, and Custos 5. Portuum. Adm. ut supra. 11 Ed.
Richard D. of Gloucester, praedict. Constituted Admiral, ut supra. 1 R. 3. John
Howard, D. of Norfolk. Adm. of Engl. Ireland and Aquit. 1 H. 7. Jo. de Veer, E.
of Oxford, high Chamberlain of England, etc. Adm. ut supra. 4 H. 8. Edw.
Howard, Knight, Fill. Tho. E. of Sur. afterward D. of Norf. Adm. ut supra. 5 H.
8. Tho. Howard, eld. brother of the said Edw. E. of Sur. afterward D. of Norf.
Adm. ut supra. 17 H. 8. Henr. Fill. Nothus, Reg. H. 8. D. of Richm. and Summers.
E. of Nottingh. Adm. ut supra. 28 H. 8. Will. Fitz William, E. of Southampt.
Adm. ut supra. 32 H. 8. John Russel, Knight, Dom. Russel. Admiral, ut supra.
34 H. 8. John Dudley, Knight, Vicecom. Insulae, and Bar. de Malpas, etc. Adm.
ut supra. 1 Ed. 6. Tho. de S. Mauro (Vulg. Seimor) Knight, Dom. de S. Mauro de
Sudley, Brother to Edw. D. of Summers. Adm. Angl. Hib. Walliae, Cales.
Bologniae, etc. 3 Ed. 6. John Dudley, E. Warwic. Vicecom. Lisley, etc. Magnus
Admirallus Angl. Hib. Wall. Cales. Bologn. and Marchiarum earundem, Normanniae,
Gasconiae, and Aquitaniae; Also Prefect. Genesis Classis and Marium Regis, etc. 4
Ed. 6. Edw. Clinton, Knight, Bar. Clinton, and Saius. Admiral, ut supra. 1 Mar.
Will. Howard, Knight, Bar. Effingham. Adm. ut supra. 3 Mar. Edw. Clinton,
Knight, Bar. Clinton and Saius. Adm. ut supra. 27 Eliz. Charles Lord Howard,
Knight of the Noble Order of the Garter, Baro de Effingham, E. of Nottingh.
Magn. Adm. Angl. Hiber. ac Dominiorum and Insularum earundem Villae Calesiae
and Marchiarum ejusdem, Normandiae, Gasconiae, and Aquitaniae; Also, Prefect.
Genesis Class. and marium dict. Regnorum. 16 Jac. Georgius, Marchio and Com.
Buckingh. Vicecom. Villers, Baro de Whaddon, Deinde D. Buckingh. Knight of the
Noble Order of the Garter, etc. Constituted Magn. Adm. ut supra.
Non est dubium (uti Spelman) quin perplures Procerum istorum, Equites fuerint
Periscelidis sive Garterii; Sed cum id sibi non prompte innotuerit, aliis
reliquit disquirendum. AN Alphabetical Table of the Principal Things contained
in this Treatise.
ADmiral; it is Etym^n or Original, with the various Appellations thereof. Page
1. to 7 The Antiquity thereof in Foreign Parts. 7. to 21 The Antiquity thereof
in England. 22. to 37 Who the first Admiral in France. 21 Twelve Admirals slain
at once at the Siege of Antioch. 17 Aegina, where situate; Supposed by some to
have first invented the Art of Navigation. 12 Aegean Sea, why so called. 8
Africa, by whom first peopled. 8 Agreement National, between England and
France, acknowledging the Soveraigntie of the Seas to be in the King of Great
Britain. 28, 29 Anchors; h^w to be laid in Harbors where but little water.
175, 176 Alcibiades, Admiral to the Athenians. 15 Antonius Pius, his Memorable
Answer to Eudemon's Complaint touching shipwreck. page 10 Arragon, famous for
Maritime Constitutions. 13 Arrogatio, what it is, and how it differs from
Adoptio. 62 Aruad, the Inhabitants thereof able Marinors. 11 Asia, by whom
Originally peopled. 8 Athenians, their two chief Maritime Magistrates. 15 Made
Tributaries by the Sea Fights of Minos. 8 Averidge, what the Law is therein.
170 Aureus, how much in value among the Ancients. 67
B.
BArcelonians, famous for Sea-Laws. 13 Baxter Case against Hopes. 116 Beast
with Ten Horns, what meant thereby. 12, 13 Bridgmans Case. 99 Brights Case
against Couper. 95 Britains, of old famous for Navigation; and how they
anciently restrained all strangers, Merchants excepted, from approaching the
British Coasts. 27 Boys to the Anchors, to have the name of the ship or
Skipper engraven thereon. 195
C.
CAndie, formerly called the Isle of Crete. page 8 Canon Law, what; the
Original thereof. 55 Carbonianum Edictum; why so called; the true meaning
thereof in the Law. 64 Caria, where situate; the Inhabitants thereof anciently
reputed Lords of the Sea. 11, 12 Carpathean Sea, where situate. 9 Carthage;
when and how demolished. 12 Carthaginians; the Art of Navigation anciently
ascribed to them. ibid. Casting goods over board; to be done at the Skippers
discretion. 169 Case of Baxter against Hopes, in Brownl. Rep. 2. part. 116 Case
of Bridgman, in Hob. Reports. 99 Case of Bright against Couper. 95 Case of
Admiral Court, in Brownl. Reports, part. 2. 107 Case of Don Diego Serviento de
Acuna, against Jolliffe and Tucker, in Hob. Rep. 10, 11 Case of Sir Hen.
Constable, in Coke's Reports. 153 Case of the French man, against the Vendee of
a ship. Trin. 17. Car. in Bro. Reports. 97 Case of Goodwyn against Tompkins, in
Noy's Rep. 139 Case of Dr. James, in Hob. Rep. 123 Case of Jennings against
Audley, in Br. Reports, part. 2. 116 Case of Sir Julius Caesar, in Leonard's
Rep. 95 Case of Leigh against Burley, in Owen's Rep. 135 Case of Mariners
against Jones, in Whinch. Rep. 133 Case of the Merchants, Mich. 8. Jac. in Br.
Rep. part. 2. 117 Case of Oils against Marshal, in the Mod. Rep. 124 Case of
Palmer against Pope, in Hob. Rep. 94, 111, 135 Case of Record against Jobson,
in Noy's Rep. 125 Case of Susans against Turner, in Noy's Rep. 91, 115 Case of
Weston, in Brownl. Rep. 96 Cases of Admiral Jurisdiction resolved. Cro. Rep.
156, to 160 Cestertius, how much in value. 67 Chanaan; so called by the
Hebrews; by the Greeks, Phaenicia. 11 Charondas, Lawgiver to the Thurians. 53
Charter-parties, properly cognizable in the Admiralty. 129, to 140 Civil Law,
properly so called, what; And when first introduced. 54 Colossus, one of the
worlds seven Wonders, where situate. 9 Concurrency of Jurisdictions. 33
Constantinople, famous of old for Sea-Laws. 13 Corynth; anciently reputed Lord
of the Sea, and by some supposed to have invented the Art of Navigation. 12
Cyclades Isles; where situate. ibid. Cymon, another Admiral of the Athenians.
15 Clergy, anciently to be advised with in case of Treasure-Trove. 194
Collision of one ship against another, and damage thereby; the Law in that
case. 174, 175 Custom in Sea-matters, to be observed. 190, 191, 192 Cutting of
Masts and Cables in a storm; what the Law is in that case. 170
D.
DAmage, happening to Goods at Sea; what the Law is in that case. 172 Debate or
Difference between the Skipper, and his Mariners; The Law in that case. 174
Decearchus, his Memorable Sea-Commission. 15, 16 Demourage, when to be paid by
the Merchant. 179 Demosthenes, Another Admiral of the Athenians. 15 Deportatio,
what; and how it differs from Relegatio. 58, 59 Derelicts; in what case Goods
may properly be said to be Derelict. 189 Daedalus; what his wings were made of.
8, 9 Dominion of the Sea, the Right and Antiquity thereof in the Kings of Great
Britain. 24, to 30, and 38, 49 Dominion of the Sea in General; the Original
thereof. 7 Don Diego Serviento de Acuna, his Case against Jolliff and Tucker.
110, 111 Draco, Lawgiver to the Athenians. 53 Drungarius and Drungarius
Magnus, the Admirals style in the Eastern Empire; whence so called. 16
E.
EDgar; his Marine style and title in all his Charters. 27 Egyptians, the
strange way of their Navigation. 12 Emancipation, what; and how it differs from
Manumission. 65 Erythraeum mare, where that is; and why so called. 12
Etheldred, his incomparable Navy for the Guard of the British Seas.. 27
Europe, by whom first peopled. 8 Execution, or the Coercive power the life of
the Law, and a Right of the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty. 32 Extra Regnum, or
Things done out of the Kingdom, where or in what place tryable. 98, to 118
F.
FIshes Royal, to whom they belong. Page 190 Fictions Legal, what they are; the
several kinds thereof; Two capital Instances of such in the Law; And how the
Practice of Fictions may be said to be prejudicial to the Admiralty. 82, to 91
Fierro, where situate; the strange Tree that grows on that Island. 36 Freight,
how to be apportioned when the Voyage is imperfect. 166 France, when first an
Admiral there. 20, 21
G.
GEnuises, famous for their Maritime Laws. 13 Gold, Silver, Precious Stones,
and the like, found in, on, or nigh the Sea, in what cases may be kept by the
Finder, and in what cases not. 190, 192, 194 Goods found, that belonged to
shipping, how they were to be disposed of in Ancient times. 192, 193 Goods cast
over board to lighten the ship, no Derclict. 188, 189 Graecians, by whom they
were first Civilized. 10, 11
H.
HAnnibal, high Admiral of the Carthaginians. 12 Hanno and Hamilco, famous for
their Naval discoveries. ibid. Hercules Pillars; why the Motto of Non ultra
engraven thereon. 9
I.
IEnnings Case against Audley. 116 Imperium, what; the several degrees thereof
in the Law. 57, to 65 Impleaders of Marine Causes in a wrong Jurisdiction
punishable by the Admiralty. 31, 32 Interdictum at the Civil Law, how it
differs from Prohibitio at the Common Law. 71 Joh. Rex; his Ordinance made at
Hastings touching the Sovereignty of the Kings of England in the British Seas.
30 Ionean Sea; where, and why so called. 11 Jurisdiction; the Etymon of the
word, with the several kinds and degrees thereof in Law. 56, to 69 Jurisdiction
of the Admiralty of England, the great Antiquity thereof. 22, to 36 Jus
Gentium, the Original thereof. 53 Jus Humanum and Civil, what; and how
introduced. 54 Just; the diverse acceptations of that word in Law, as in
reference to Fictions. 83
L.
LAding, or ships Lading, in part disposed to supply the ships occasions; the
Law in that cas^. page 179, 180 Law, the true definition thereof. 51 The Law of
Nature; of Nations; The Civil Law; The Law Sacerdotal, and Canon. 52, to 55 Law
of the Sea, or Law Admiral, the great Antiquity thereof. Laws Imperial, their
use and exeellency above other Laws in most Kingdoms. 51, 52 Laws of the
Heathens, fathered on their Heathenish Idols. 53 Leigh's Case against Burley.
135 Lycurgus, Legislator to the Lacedaemonians. 53 Lie; the lie given to or by
either the Skipper or Mariners; the ancient penalty in that case. 173
M.
MAhomet, Lawgiver to the Arabians. 53 Manumission, what; and how it differs
from Emancipation. 65 Marcelleis, famous for Marine Constitutions. 13 Mariner's
Case against Jones. 133 Mariners, their duty in case of disaster to the Vessel.
102 Not to desert the ship till the Voyage be ended. 165 Not to go out of the
ship without the Skippers leave. 167 In what case they may. 178 If hurt or
wounded, in what case not to be healed at the ships charge. 167, 168 Messine,
where situate; the people thereof famous for their Sea-Laws. 13 Minos, he gave
Laws to the Cretians. 53 Minotauri Fabula, why so called. 8 Murderers of
ship-broken men, their strange and cruel punishment. 185
N.
NAmes of ships and Skippers to be engraven on the Buoyes of the Anchors. 195
Navigation, the Antiquity thereof; to whom Originally ascribed. 7, to 12
Nearchus, Admiral to Alex. the Great. 15 Neptune, why feigned to be God of the
Sea. 14 Niceas, Another Admiral to the Athenians. 15 Noah, how long since he
arrived at Ararat. 7 North-Starre, its use in Navigation, by whom first
invented. 10 Numa, Lawgiver to the Romans. 53
O.
OLeron, where situate; most famous for their Sea-Laws and Maritime
Constitutions; when and by whom first published. page 13, 14 Onesicratus,
Admiral to the Assyrians. 15
P.
PAtroclus, Admiral to the Syrians. 15 Palmer's Case against Pope. 94, 111, 135
Partnership in a Fishing design, the Law in that case. 182 Paeni, or
Carthaginians, originally Phoeni or Phoenicians. 12 Phoenicia, where situate;
the People thereof supposed to be the first Mariners, Merchants, and
Astronomers; As also the first Inventors of Arithmetic, and the Art of
Navigation. 10, 11 Pilots; the punishment of an unskilful Pilot in case of
Damage thereby. 180 The punishment of treacherous Pilots. 186, 187 The strange
punishment of their Abettors. 188 Pirates, their punishment. 122, 196 Who
supposed to be the first that purged the Seas of such Vermin. 8 Pisa, the
Inhabitants thereof famous for their Maritime Laws. 13 Poles, who first
descryed the two Poles. 11 Pericles, another Admiral of the Athenians. 15
Pontus, the reason why the Sea is so called. 9 Port and Port-Town, how they
differ. 112, 113 Prohibition, what; the Original thereof; with its several
kinds, causes and effects in Law. 72, to 81 Properties created at Sea, and
Super altum mare, whether cognizable in the Admiralty. 31
R.
REd Sea, who there first Invented ships and sailed thereon; and why called
Erithraeum mare. 12 Relegatio, what; how it differs from Deportatio. 58, 59
Re^^er Crimbald, the French Admiral, his (...) and illegal attempts on the
British Seas, in derogation of the Sovereignty of England. 28, 29 Rhodes,
where situate; their precedence to all other Nations in Marine Constitutions.
9 Rhodian Law generally referred to by the Emperors in decision of Maritime
Controversies. 10, 19, 20 Richard the First, the first that published the
Sea-Laws of Oleron, and when. 14 Ridley's opinion touching. Prohibitions. 78,
79 Roman Admirals. 18, 19
S.
SAles of ship or Lading, or any part of either, made by Skippers or Mariners
without special Procuration, in what cases good, or not good in Law. 164, 165,
179, 180 Salvage, how to be paid and satisfied. 166, 183 Sarazen Admirals. 16,
17 Seleucidae over the Syrian Monarchy, why so called. 13 Ship forced from her
Cables and Anchors, the Law in that case. 194, 195 Not to stay for a sick
Mariner. 168 When broken, the Mariners not to be hindered from saving the goods
182, 183 In King Edgar's time 400 Sail for the Guard of the British Seas. 27
Sick Mariners how to be provided for. 168 And what wages such may challenge.
169 Skipper's duty before he leaves a Port. 164 How to finish his Voyage, in
case of some disaster to his own ship. 166 Slings for hoysing of goods. 171,
172 If damage happen thereby, who must make it good. 181 Solon, Legislator to
the Athenians. 53 Sovereignty of the British Seas publicly acknowledged by
the Agents and Procurators of no less then ten Neighbour-Nations, Kingdoms and
States at once, to be de jure in the Monarch of Great Britain. 28 Striking a
shipboard, whether by the Skipper or Mariners; the Law in that case. 173
Statutes, 13 R. 2. cap. 5. and 15 R. 2. cap. 3. and 2 H. 4. cap. 11. and 27 El.
cap. 11. touching the Jurisdiction of the Admialty. 141, to 154 Super altum
mare, properly within the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty. 91, to 98 Supplicatio,
what it imports in Law. 63 Surmizes, Suppositions, or Suggestions of places
beyond Sea, to be locally as within the body of some County within the Realm;
Variety of Opinions touching the same in the Common Law Books. 80 Susans Case
against Turner. 91, 115, 130 Sydonians, famous and able Mariners. 11, 16
T.
TAckle, ship-tackle, pawned, pledged, or hypothecated for the ships use in
case of necessity, good. 164 Taurus, high Admiral to Minos, King of Crete. 8
Theft committed at Wrecks, the penalty thereof. 183, 187 Tortura, the different
respects and acceptations thereof in construction of Law. 68 Treasure Trove,
the old Law in that case. 193 Trismegister, Legislator of the Egyptians. 53
Tyrus, the Maritime Metropolis of Phoenicia; the costly Materials of her Navy;
her Prosperity and Misery. 11 Tyrians, famous and able Mariners. 11, 16
V.
VEnetians, famous for their Sea-Laws, and Maritime Ordinances. 13
W.
Wages of Mariners to be paid according to Contract. 178 If deceased in the
Voyage, to whom payable. 169 Weston's Case. 96 Wounded Mariners, the Law in
that case. 168 Wreck; the ancient Provisional Laws of Oleron in that case. 184.
194, 195
Z.
ZOroaster, the Bractians and Persians Lawgiver. 53
FINIS.

