THE SCURRILOUS SCRIBLER DISSECTED OR, A Word in WILLIAM LILLY's Ear,
concerning his REPUTATION, which he complains is injured by J.G. that
Ungrateful Scorpionist, as he the said LILLY Scurrilously terms him.
THat Mr. Lilly may be convinced J.G. has not distained his Reputation at all,
let him call to mind what his Repute is, and what Characters he stands under
to the World, by the verdicts of several Learned Men in Print, and to this day
unanswered, and I conceive he will be of another opinion.

1. Mr. Wharton, a Man of Learning and Loyalty, in his Alm. 1648. writes --
Lilly is a Cheat, and a-Cheat he will make him appear to be. -- That he is an
impudent deceitful colloguing Quack -- and an Incendiary between the King and
his People, etc. with much more of the same stamp, in sundry other his Works.
2. Mr. Gataker, a Man of great Learning, etc in his vindication of the
Annotations on Ier. 10.2. terms W. L. A grand Impostor; and in p.71. A palpable
Liar, and fraudulent Coyner of Fictions and Fables. P.73. A base Cheater -- and
that his Merlins are not so much Astrological Predictions, as Satyrs and
Pasquils to play on whom he pleases. 3. The same Mr. Gataker, in Discourse
Apologetical, terms Lilly, a shameless creature; one that knows not how to
Reason, but to Rail only. P.6. A Rayler. P.10. Lilly's words are no slander, he
is so well known to be a most notorious. Liar and one that regards not what he
says. P. 12. A Calumniator and Sycophant. P. 27. A Traducer. P.53. A lying
Varlet, and a Brother of slanderous alumnies. P.54. Lilly is of a murtherous
mind and spirit, in exciting to a general Massacre of the Clergy. Cummultis
aliis, etc. 4. Mr. Johnson, in Anti-Merlinus, writes, -- All know Merlinus
Anglicus (i.e. W.L.) to be a false Prophet, -- and one that has sold himself
to work wickedness. -- That his Predictions are ridiculous Pieces, so full of
Follies and Fooleries, Contradictions and Lies, that an Artist would blush to
own them. -- And that he does in them out-lie, if it be possible, the Devil
himself, the Father of lies: With abundance more of the same kind.
Now I would gladly know of W. L. whether I. G. has Ungrateful Scorpionist,
has said more, or yet so much, against his the said W. L's pretended
Reputation, as is here produced. -- To be plain, J. G. has not meddled with W.
L's Reputation, but his Actions and Expressions; those being everywhere to be
found, without his Reputation (unless he mean an ill one) to keep them company.
But I trifle to no purpose with a professed Calumniator, and will therefore
leave W. L. to seek his Reputation where he pleases.

Only, For Information:
Angry W. L. may understand, That the Question in dispute between him and J. G.
was not, Whether some Men born under Scorpio have been ill, or done ill, or
come to ill ends? But whether any man born under Scorpio was a wicked person
for his being so born? -- And if VV.L. or any for him, Will undertake to prove,
as well as assert it, I.G. is not obstinate, but will be ready and willing to
recant his Defense of Scorpio, as he has liberally more then once promised in
Print to perform. -- But would VV.L. or his Proctor, (the Newgate-Pamphleteer,
as I have been told he is) have I.G. to retract the Truth he has so fully
defended, because they call it an Error? A Turk with as good Reason as this,
may oblige me to renounce my Religion.

What if some Astrologers have called Scorpio a Sign of Falsity, etc and
others that have otherwise abused that glorious Sign, and together therewith
contradicted themselves, as Bonatus, etc as I. G. has remembered the world of,
and distinguished fairly upon such their Dealing? Must such Authorities pass
for current Coin with VV. L. and his Party? -- It may so, if they please. But
I. G. as aware very well of such objections, tells them plainly, in p.11. of
his Defense of Scorpio, that there have been Rebels against Heaven before W.L's
days, and he doubts there will be so, when VV.L. shall be no more. But I.G.
denies that any of those Rebels against Heaven have proved ought of ill against
Scorpio: Nay, VV.L. himself has formerly asserted, That Scorpio is not so bad,
as now he and his Advocates render it: Read J.G. in Defense of Scorpio, p. 62
and p. 141. where W.L's own words to this purpose are quoted. And what if VV.L.
contradict himself, must J. G. be chargable for it? But VV.L's Advocate (that
Mercenary but Nameless Varlet) as ashamed of his Clients Assertion, as well
indeed he may, Would now crave grains of allowance, and prays that VV.L. may be
understood in an Astrological sense only: And why could not VV.L. have prayed
this before? it would never have been denied him.

As for W.L's former Charge of Ingratitude, urged against J.G. and this
Sycophant's, his Advocate's later Charge of the same stamp, Let Truth it self
be witness herein if W.L. and this wicked fellovv both, be not egregious
Calumniators! For when J.G. taxed W.L. for thus terming him, Anno 1660. before
Mr. E. Carrent, then Adjutant General of the City of London, W.L. was then
pleased to deny his words, and protested that J. G. was to him the most
Grateful man in the world. And J.G. has never dealt with W.L. since, except in
defending himself from his unworthy provocations.

As to W.L. his grievance, that J.G. has Printed him a Plagiary, J.G. will
abide by the Charge, and affirms it to be good and true: And for proof thereof,
refers to Mr. Gresham's Manuscript of a Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, now
in the hands of Mr. Ashmole, in which Manuscript, by Mr. Ashmoles favor, J.G.
read sundry Passages, that W.L. has Printed in his Prophetic Merlin; as he
did read formerly, when the said Manuscript was in the hands of Dr. N. Fisk. --
But how would W.L. define a Plagiary, if to Rob a worthy Author, and conceal
his Name, be not to be one? But this is not the only time, (nor Mr. Gresham the
only man with whom) W. L. has played the Plagiary.

For the Story of the Gardiners Daughter, which W.L's lying Advocate makes a
scandalous noise withal, I.G. desires him to speak plainly, and not in Riddles:
for he knows nothing that can countenance any such bold falsehoods. Nor does
he remember that ever he had difference with any more than two women in all
his life; the one was a Lady (so called) that having been Ruinous to many
Families where she had lodged, he justly denied to entertain her into his
House: The other was a Gentlewoman, that he refused to lend ten Pounds unto,
as not knowing how to come by it again. And these things, and naught else that
I.G. knovveth of, begat their prejudice and disesteem toward him. What shall
I say? VV. Lilly and his Advocate, are Lords, Lieutenants over their own Lies
and Scandals, but the Devil is the Captain General and Creator of them.

And whereas W. L. as frequently as foolishly, twits I. G. with his quondam
Profession and Condition, I.G. esteems it no disparagement at all: For the
lower his Education has been, the larger has been his pains to qualify him
into a capacity for the reception of W.L's poisonous Envy. -- Besides, I.G.
has read in Merlini Anglici Errata, that W.L. was a Tailor, [and W.L.
confesses that he was a Footboy to one G.W. an Attorney] and likes him never
the worse for for that; but wishes, so much Friend he is to W.L. that he had
been a Tailor or Footboy still, so he had escaped being Author of that
Treasonable Pamphlet called Monarchy or no Monarchy: which though he have
obtained a Pardon for in this world, I. G. is doubtful that he will never get
one in the world to come, without GOD's infinite Mercy. -- But, confident W.L.
notwithstanding his Astrology [by which he pretends to teach the way of
Prophecy] yet retains so much of his Stitching-Skill, as to make a Tailors Bill
in mood and figure. Howbeit, I would advise him for the future, that he venture
not on such broad-fac'd Impudence, as to forge other men's Names unto any of his
malicious Inventions; but rather set his own unto them, for the better security
of his Ragged and [almost] worn out Reputation.

Finally I. G. does expect, that if any pretend to reply upon him, that they be
not ashamed of their Name: For why should any man be bound to combat the Air,
or play, at Cudgels with the Clouds? And if W. L. be not now satisfied, I
shall advise him to try Reginald Scots Charm against the Scorpion, in Lib. XII.
Cap. XIV. which is this: If any one be bitten of a Scorpion, let him call an
Ass to him, and tell him the Tale in his Ear, and it cures him. -- If W.L.
want the Animal called an Ass, let him whisper the Story into that Varlets
Ear who has pretended to Answer J.G's Obsequium Rationabile, and that will
work the Effect as exactly.

Nature, or the Heavens, never obliges us to any Vice. Seneca. POSTSCRIPT.
I Had almost forgot, that W.L. most idly complains, That J.G. has abused all
the Younger Sort of Astrologers, that he may, by such a Crafty Artifice get
them all of his side, to vote for him against J.G. upon occasion. But wherein
J.G. has abused any Artist at all, Younger or Elder, W. L. is no more able to
prove, than that J.G. has contradicted all Antiquity about the Significations
of Scorpio. -- Both notorious ^^^shoods! and only fit for W. L. to ^ather.


