JOHN GADBURY (Student in ASTROLOGY) HIS Past and Present Opinion OF THE
OTTOMAN OR Turkish Power: Together with what he has wrote concerning the GREAT
and PUISSANT FRENCH-KING; A Prince (if there be truth in the Stars) not born to
be Miserable, (as some boldly write) but to be one of the greatest Bulwarks of
Christendom.

-- -- Veritas odium parit. Printed by Nathaniel Thompson, at the Entrance into
the Old-Spring-Garden near Charing Cross, 1683.

JOHN GADBURY His Past and Present OPINION OF THE Ottoman, or Turkish, Power:
Together with what he has wrote concerning the FRENCH-KING.
BOoks, as Knives, are by the Learned esteemed Adiaphorous; and it is by our
applying of them, that they become either good or bad. Ill Stomachs convert the
wholsomest Food to Poison; and what is designed for Nourishments, through defect
of our Constitutions, proves oftentimes pernicious, and helps to support our
Distempers.

-- Neither was it any design of mine, in what I wrote concerning the Turks, in
my Ephemeris, Anno 1678. to bring them in [Prophetically] to destroy
Christendom at this time, or that the Grand Seigneur should go into Italy, pull
down the Pope, and exalt himself in his room, ruin the Emperor, etc. nor yet
to doom the Puissant French-King to Death, either in this very year, or any
other year: But my Book falling into some peoples hands, who, either out of
prejudice to Me, have thus interpreted me, or not understanding me aright, have
noised me to have been the Praedictor or Prophesier of these amazing and
amusing matters.

It is true indeed, that, considering the notable and spreading Differences
among Christians, and an advance of Atheism, to the great decay of
Christianity; as also, the sober Remarks made thereof by some of the most
Learned in our Nation, I did signify my Fears of a Turkish encroachment upon
Christendom, Anno 1678* in these words following: -- It is in Mundane Affairs
as in a Watch, which when men would put out of order, they either stop the
Balance, or displace the Spring thereof: Religion is the Balance or Spring of
a Nation, the Soul of the Body-politick the whole World over; the true Spiritus
Mundi; the Philosophers Stone in Government; and without it, all Empire would
soon run to ruin. -- How choice and curiously careful ought Nations,
therefore, as well as Persons, to be in the preservation of their Religion! --
Religio neglecta maximam Pestem in Civitatem infert, omnium scelerum senestram
aperit, says a learned Author: Religion neglected, despised, or brought into
contempt, brings the greatest Plagues upon Kingdoms, Countries, Cities and
People, and opens a door to a Wickedness.

The Stars not only in this Year, (as you have been told) but in this Age, do
seem to direct their Beams of Influence more particularly and perpendicularly
upon Religious Persons, Affairs, and Interests, etc. than in sundry Ages past.
I would enlarge upon this Theme a little, if I thought I might not give
offense. And here, I think it not amiss to mind the World of a Chronological
mistake, which I find in the Writings of that Learned man du Plessis,
concerning a Prediction of Albumazar, which he is pleased to urge against
Astrology; It Is this, Albumazar wrote, That the Christian Religion should
continue but 1460 years; and yet (says he) God be thanked, it lifts it self
up, and shines more and more.

I could, and do earnestly wish, That du Plessis, as to this his Prediction
were in the right, and Albumazar mistaken; But Albumazar, from his Skill in
Astrology, understood that the Christian Religion first got ground God
permitting it so to be, according to the course of second causes) under the
Regency of the Sun, whose great years are 1460. ( Cardan says, 1462.) which
said number of years are not to be accounted from the Birth of our blessed
Savior, but from the time that Constantine moved by God) first promoted
Christian Religion by a Law; and that was above 300 years after Christ's Birth.
For the Birth of Christ was but the Conception of Christianity, and Constantine
was the happy Midwise of that Divine and Heavenly Production. So that the
mistake, you see, is not (yet) in Albumazar, (whatever it may) but in du
Plessis, who, I conceive, did not fully apprehend him. And if we shall add 1460
to 312. (the year wherein the Christians were first owned by a Law) the sum
will fall upon the year 1772 which clearly tell us, that we want 94. years of
Albumazar's intended time.

Spineus tells us, among other vain things, that the, 1603. signified the
Destruction of Mahomet, and Glory of Christians; but we Christians have not so
found it, but rather the contrary; for, as it is truly, though sadly, observed
by the Learned Glanvill, -- Providence seems now, by glorious Successes, to
countenance the Alchoran, and the Tyrant Ottoman spreads his Victorious Arms,
and is fleshed in Tryumphs, vide Seasonab. Reflect. p. 126. And the Reverend
Dr. Cave notes in his Epistle to Primitive Christianity, -- That our Religion
is ready to draw its last Breath, being stisled and oppressed with the Vices
and Impieties of a debauched and prosligate Age. And* if we consider the great
progress the Turks have made against Christendom these last 100 years, and
observe therewith the present great Division among Christian Princes and
Prelates, and how the Poles and Hungarians are distressed by that Potent Enemy,
-- we may (perhaps, without Astrology) be able to prefage, -- That if they
proceed for the next 100 years after the same manner, Albumazar may be found to
be truer than we would be willing to have him; and a Turkish Barbarity may come
to be planted in the place of true Christian Civility among us: which God of
his Mercy avert.

And here, I cannot but crave leave to collect a few Lines from the Travels of
the Worthy Dr. Edw. Brown, Son to that University of Learning, the Author of
Religio Medici, viz. in p 111. he writes, -- A great part of upper-Hungary
(through which I traveled) had a different face from that of Austria, and from
what they formerly had been. Some places had been burnt or plundered by the
Turks and Tartars in the late Wars, and diverse pay Contribution to them: so
that many live warily and meanly, to be less noted, even in parts of the
Country better provided; and under the Emperor, a great part of the People
being of the Reformed Religion, are under such hard measure and fears, that
they live in little content: and being of a stout and persevering temper, they
may in time become so desperate, that if the Turk should powerfully break in,
it is probable they would not fight so heartily against him as in times past. --
And in page 82. of the same Book, he writes, I am apt to think or fear, if he
who puts bounds to the Sea, and says, Hitherto shall thou come, and no
further, does not put a stop to their further Incursions, they may probably
obtain and conserve a far larger Empire, and even all Europe to the Western
Ocean. Certain it is, they are not satisfied with their present bounds, and
look beyond Hungaria; and I heard them say, We must in due time come to Beatch,
( sor so they call Vienna) and try our Fortunes again. At this day the Star and
Half Moon are above the Cross upon the Steeple of the Cathedral-Church of St.
Stephen, in the Emperors chief City, Vienna; and it grieved me to see in all
the Confines, a Cross which our Heralds dream not of, which is, a Cross
Lunated; -- Whereby They, the Inhabitants, as they testify their Christianity,
so they acknowledge the Turkish Power. Thus far this ingenious Author.

Nay, that illuminate man Michael Nostredamus has a Prophetical Quadrin
somewhat leaning toward the present Argument; It Is this:

"Par la discord, negligence Gauloise,
"Sera passag a Mahomet ouvert:
"De Sang trempe la Terre and Mer Senoise,
"Le Port Phocen de voiles and Nefs couvert.
Which seems to sound thus in English:

" Through French- men's Discord and Neglect,
" A way is made for Mahomet' s Sect:
"Sienna' s Land and Sea shall bleed;
"Port-Phocen full of Ships decreed.
I know the learned Garenciers is of opinion that this Prophecy was fulfilled
Anno 1559. But I am of belief, that if it intend any thing, it must be of far
greater consequence than any of the actions of that year could be: although I
must allow, that Henry II* of France and Sultan Solomon were then concerned in
each others Affairs. But H. II. had Gemini for his Horoscope, a Sign not
beholding the Palladium of the Mahumetan Faith: A Monarch of France therefore,
of the same Horoscope with That, or in Trigonal Ray unto it, must be the
Fulfiller of this ambiguous Prophecy. The former-quoted Spineus tells us, That
there are yet two other Faiths to succeed viz. of Mercury and the Moon: But so
to write, is not Praediction, but Prophecy; there being no Rules in Astrology
to countenance such Praesages. Howbeit, we have great cause to fear, that if
the Turks should once more advance against Christendom powerfully, (and it is
not the Valiant and Fortunate Sobietski can always live to prevent them) the
grand Ecclesiastical Differences among us will not be so much between Papist
and Protestant, as between Turk and Christian; and the grave Mufti and
Mussulman may (to the sorrow and loss of Christians) vie it with the Venerable
Bishop and Cardinal.

And this possibility of enlarging the Turkish Power in Europe, thus presumed
from Natural and Political Causes, viz. the Influences of the Stars, and the
grand Animosities among Christian Princes and Prelates, etc. together with the
Universal, and (almost) remediless contempt of the Clergy, may reasonably
suggest unto us, that the Ark of God, even Christianity it self, is nearly
ready to depart from our Tabernacles. God willnot always be mocked; and the
true Worship and Adoration of his Name shall not for ever be profaned,
contemned, despised. They are the words of Horace: --

"Dii multa neglecti dederunt
"Hesperiae mala luctuosae.
When men abridge God of his Honor, God will shorten them of their Happiness,
Omnia prospera eveniunt colentibus Deos, adversu supernentibus, says Cicero.
Those People that have a Reverence for Religion and the Worship of God, are
ever prosperous; but the neglecters thereof are always unhappy. It Is Religion
alone, as Plutarch witnesses, that is the Ligature of all Communities, and
Firmament of Laws: It is that which is the band of Families, and Foundation of
Republic.

Let every Christian, therefore, use all just means and ways to preserve his
Religion, and implore Heaven, that the Horned Moon in a Turkish sense, may
never be exalted above the Cross, the Ensign of our Religion and Salvation. --
The alteration or shaking of Religion, is commonly the most desperate Paroxism
that can happen in a sickly Empire, says the learned Bishop of Down. And once
dissolve the Snow of Religion, a great deal of dirty weather will infallibly
follow, as the Divine Leontius Bishop of Antioch wisely observed, when he
strok'd his Reverend Silver Head.

Strive we then, I say, each of us in our proper place and sphere, to advance
the Peace of Christendom, against the menaces of the Stars, and motion of the
Turks; and in so doing, we shall be able to continue in the rightful
possessions of our minds, Honors and Fortunes: and as being born and bred
Christians, we may hope so to die, leaving our Posterity to inherit what our
Progenitors, by Gods Providence, and their great care and industry, had
bequeathed unto us. -- Then shall we not need to be either afraid of the Turks
Power, or yet of the Judgments inculcated to befall a wilful and obstinate
People, as mentioned in the Wisdom of Solomon, chap. 18. 14, 15, 16. -- For
whilst all things were in quiet silence, and that the Night was in the midst of
her swift course, thine Almighty Word leaped down from Heaven out of thy Royal
Throne, as a fierce man of War, into the midst of a Land of Destruction, and
brought thine unfeigned Command, as a sharp Sword; and standing up, filled all
things with Death.

Thus far in my Ephemeris 1678. which is all that I can remember I ever wrote
concerning my fears of the Turks.

And then, concerning the great French Monarch, that I may compurgate my self
from any imprudent Predictions relating to him, as some have idly and falsely
boasted me to have wrote, I shall here relate all again I have particularly
mentioned of Him, -- viz. Having some years since had a scribbling Contest with
an Anti-Scorpiouist, in defense of that my Theme, in my Oblequium Rationabile,
I produced this Illustrious Princes Nativity, as it was printed by Morinus in
his Astrologia Gallica, (that in the Collectio Geniturarum being wrong timed,
as I have since proved to near 8 degrees in the Horoscope) and thence I wrote
as follows, -- Let (my Antagonist) but consider how he has blasted persons of
the highest Honor and Grandeur, and of the most glorious Fame in the World, by
this his wicked and invidious charge exhibited against Scorpio, and all persons
born under it, and then tell me whether he believes he has done well in so
doing: But Kings and Princes are his Tennis-balls, (as well as the Heavens and
Stars) and must be tossed and struck up and down as he is pleased to bandy them
with his black and envious Racket, I mean his infamous Pen.

And in an Encomium on the Caelestial Scorpio, printed in the same Book, I
subjoined these Verses, -- viz.

The Glorious Christian King when he was born,
(The Heavens themselves intending Him no scorn)
Had SCORPIO arising in the East;
And who in War was ever more fully blessed?
Whoe'r had greater Honor by His Word?
Whoe'r did nobler Actions with a Sword?
And this is all that I have said about this glorious Prince's future Destiny,
which I am sure must needs excuse me from having any hand in predicting His
Destruction by a Stab, or otherwise, in this, or any other year. There are some
indeed among us, that are a little too impudent with the Honor and Grandeur of
Princes; and will be so still, unless Astrology have a Licenser that
understands it: Treason and Rebellion being to be spoken in Figures as fully
and as mischievously (to some Peoples understandings at least) as in words at
length.

But if, after all this, it should be expected that I give my opinion
concerning the present matters before us, and that I may beg leave to do it
without offense; -- then I shall presume to say, (notwithstanding all
Enthusiastic Prophets or Prophecies to the contrary) That,

1. The Grand Ottoman Power will, either upon Articles or Conditions, in short
time retreat, or else be forced back. The Illustrious and Victorious Sobietski
is yet alive; and God grant him long to live, to the Honor of Christendom, and
terror of its Enemies. 2. The French Monarch (if Morinus's Scheme of his
Glorious Birth be true) will (according to Starry Edicts) outlive his present
Menaces either by Death or a Stab, (which of late are dropped from foolish and
Enthusiastic Pens) and survive yet (by Gods blessing) many years, advancing in
Power, Honor and Grandeur, to the success and support of Christians.
This I thought fit to publish now, (1.) to excuse my self from any pretense to
Prophecy, or of being Author of any of those clamorous Reports, or yet any way
privy to them, until their obtrusion upon the World. And (2.) to vindicate
Astrology it self from the Infamy that such spurious Praesages must necessarily
bring upon it.

FINIS.

