A SHORT TREATISE, SHOWING The Causes and Remedies of that General Disease
spread abroad throughout this Nation, commonly termed by many the Plague of the
Guts; But it is very probable to be that sort of Flux, called by the name of
Dysenteria, or Red-Flux.

With some other remarkable Remedies for other Diseases worthy to be noted.

Published by N. H. of Dorchester, in the County of Dorset for the good of
those that desire their Health.

Try and Trust.

Try man as the Instrument, but trust God as the Helper.

LONDON, Printed for R. Ibbitson, 1658.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER: OR Any one to whom these Presence shall come; Health
and Peace be multiplied.
Christian Reader,
I Have as a Minister, or servant unto thee, prescribed away if thou will
hearken to me, as from God, for thy good, to be a Physician unto thee both for
soul and body; if thou will give thy heart to receive wholesome counsel and
advice from God, and my self, by using and putting into practice what is here
set down in this following Treatise: The great and wise God knowing the inward
frame and temper of all men's hearts, knows how to suite an outward judgment
upon any particular person, much more upon a whole Nation, according to the
inward distemper of the heart and soul of man. There is (as I am informed) a
general Looseness amongst persons, and that not or a few, but many, with
terrible gripings in the body; may not this fitly intimate, and put us in mind
of that general Looseness not only in Religion, for matter of Worship, but also
a great Looseness, and Liberty in matter of Life and Conversation, by giving way
to the satisfying of the flesh, and this is seen not only amongst profane
ones, from whom we can expect but little better, but has been, and still is
found even amongst those which have made Profession of the Truth, and have been
accounted as Professors of the same, amongst them that are truly godly, whereby
they have fretted and grieved the Spirit of the Lord, and have caused the Name
of God to be evil spoken of.

And this evil is not found only in one corner of the Land, but generally
throughout all the parts thereof; and therefore as the sin is, so is the plague
or punishment, not only in the City of London, and the places adjoining, but
it is spread here and there over the whole Nation. Wherefore (I think) it is
good for us to look about us, and to see the hand that smites, seeing it is not
a mediate, but an immediate judgment from God himself, and therefore
especially to be sought unto.

And because it may be, those that are in Authority, have too much winked at,
and have not put in execution the Law of God, to wit, against Blasphemy, etc.
Therefore God has now taken the power into his own hand, and has taken away
many by death, even those amongst others that were never guilty of any such
horrible Crimes (it may be) for the sins of others. The people of the Lord
were punished for the sin of Acha^, and yet (as far as we know) some of them
whose names were written in the Book of Life.

Wherefore (Christian Reader) I would, if I could advise thee as from the Lord,
that thou consider seriously of these things, and desire true understanding
from God: The Plague is general, and it requires general repentance, not only
by a public humiliation, but every family and person a part by themselves,
with seeking and turning unto God. Those that find themselves guilty, to
bethink themselves especially, and labor to amend, for though the hand of God
is not upon them in particular, or whether it may, or may not be, and so they
may escape, yet it may be for their sakes, that the hand of the Lord is gone
out against others.

And for those that have kept close to God (whom God have preserved) and have
not yet fallen from their first Love, labor still to keep sure footing for
holiness of life, and soundness of doctrine, That the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ may run on, and be glorified amongst them which are truly sanctified,
and to mourn in secret for Gods afflicting hand over his people. A word to the
wise is sufficient, if so be thou art wise for thy self, and I am thine, as
thou art thy self, in the Lord,

N. H.

A short TREATISE SHOWING The Causes and Remedies of that general Disease
spread abroad throughout this Nation, commonly termed by many the Plague of the
Guts, but it is very probable to be that sort of Flux, called by the name of
Dysenteria; or Red-Flux.
WHereas I am credibly informed that the Lord has visited this Nation with a
certain Disease, not only in the City of London, but generally throughout the
whole Nation; I thought it my duty in charity, through the instigation of
certain friends, to publish to the view of those whom it may concern, as
children, and others of riper years, certain remedies, which I have by my own
experience found out, for many years since, which was never before now made
known unto the world, and being made use of (as it has been upon many persons
heretofore, and upon some persons of late) I never failed (to my knowledge) the
first or second day within the space of eight and forty hours, but it has
ceased and stopped without any prejudice to the person, which may seem to follow
by reason of the suddenness of the cure, or any costiveness, which I know will
be objected and feared by many. And although the things prescribed for the
cure of this Disease are mean and common, yet think not meanly of those weak
means, which may through the blessing of God, produce strange and wonderful
effects. And take this for a truth, that although the Disease have held for a
month or two, or for a quarter of a year, or more, those two receipts which are
mentioned, or set down with the mark of a star above the rest, has (and as far
as I know) may through the blessing of God, remedy this Disease, according to
the time before prescribed, or sooner, as I have found by experience, the same
night.

And besides this, I have found for many years since, that those persons which
have accustomed themselves to Physic barely, and nothing else, have (for the
most part of them) dyed, though some have lingered a long time in it, to wit,
two or three months. And during that time they have been in extreme torments by
reason of those contrary humors, and inward gripings of the Guts, which have
brought them to a Consumption of the whole, and so have finished their end in
such extreme torments, as cannot well be expressed.

There are (as I am informed) many Physicians, which term this Disease to be
the Plague of the Guts, the reason, as I suppose is; because most Physicians
have not been acquainted with this Disease in this Nation, though it is common
in Ireland, and as I have heard in Scotland, but in plain (in submission be it
spoken) it is nothing else, or nothing less than the Flux in the bowels, in
that I find it takes them in the same manner as it did those that had the Flux
in Ireland, and are now cured with the same Remedies.

And for the better understanding hereof, I shall here set down,

1 Briefly and in general, what a Flux it.

2 The several kind of Fluxes, together with their causes, that you may
discern thereby the one from the other, and what little probability there is
that it should be the Plague of the Guts.

3 The Remedy for this, or any of the like Disease, so called, though inferior
unto it.

4 The ordering of the body afterward in case of the worst, though I never
found any danger to ensue.

Of the Flux in general.
If it come through much eating or drinking, or through Phlegmatic matter, it
comes not often, nor continues long, he needs no remedy, unless it be
caused of overmuch weakness.

Of the Flux Lyenteria, to wit, Cholle, and Phlegm.
This is an infirmity of the retentive virtue of the stomach, with the
slipperiness of the Guts, whereby the meant being taken very suddenly without
digestion, like as it was received, passes away by stool.

Of the Flux or Laske Diarrhea.
This is a waterish Lask, with griping, but without excoriation of the bowels,
and without heat, whereby the body is consumed; It is caused of all humors of
the body.

Of the Flux, or Laske called Dysenteria, viz. The Red-Flux.
And this is the Flux which by likelihood is this Disease which is spread
abroad in this Nation.

This is an exulceration, or excoriation of the intrals.

And is described in this manner.

It is a pain of the intrals which inflameth, sretteth, and excoriateth the
same, so as with the matter of the scouring, blood is avoided, and it causes
much gnawing, which causes the Pattern to go often to stool.

The causes are sharp humors which passes through the bowels, and there
exulcerateth the same, fr^^, and take away the fatness. Also when the body is
overcharged with Choler, Melancholy, and Phlegm, of which nature seeks to
unburthen her self.

Another kind of Dysenteria, or Bloody Flux.
This comes without scraping of the Guts, and of much more blood than the
former, wherefore it is rather taken for the Flux of the Liver, than
Dysenteria, though wrongfully so called.

For an ordinary Laske, or Flux in Children, or griping.
* Take half a handful of Couch-grass cut, fit to boil, of Carraway-seed, and
Fennel-seed bruised (or Anniseed instead of the Fennel-seed if it cannot be
had) of each half an ounce, nine or ten Plantaine leaves washed and cut, boil
these in a quart of water to a pint, then strain it, after put in of your
Pomgranet ryne poudred, of Cynnamon poudred, of each as much as will lie on a
groat, and a quarter of a pint of milk, or less, and set it over the fire
again, and let it boil for the space of half a quarter of an hour, then take
it off the fire, and let the child drink of it warm morning and evening.

A special Remedy for the cure of the Flux, called Dysenteria, or for any other
Flux.
* Take the inner ryne of an Oak, one great handful, Anniseed and
Carraway-seed bruised alike, one ounce, of Couch-grass cut, fit to boil, one
great handful, of Plantane washed and cut, one little handful, boil these in a
pottle of water to a quart, then strain it, and put it over the fire again, and
put in a quarter of a pint of milk, to sweeten it something, because of the
rankness of the grass; as also Cynnamon poudred, and Sanguis Draconis (or
Dragons blood) of each as much as will lie on six pence, let it boil again half
a quarter of an hour. Drink of this a good draught first and last, warm,
fasting in the morning two hours after, and two or three hours after supper
ere you go to bed. Note this, that you may not be deceived, your Couch-grass,
is not your Knot grass, for that will do more hurt than good, but it is your
Long-grass which runs upon the ground, with sweet knots or knobs.

For a Flax in extremity, with never so great gripings, and the party worn away.
Take of Almonds one pound blancht, and stamped in a Mortar small, twelve yolks
of new laid Eggs roasted hard, bray them together, take a pint of strong
Vinegar, put it into the stuff, and mingle them altogether, and put all into a
fair pot of earth (but remember to stamp it well) then take five or six
spoonfulls at once warm in a cup, and drink four or five times a day if need
be. Proba^^^^ est.

Although this Receipt cannot choose but be good in it self, yet it has not
been tried by me as often as the former Remedy.

In all these Fluxes you may make use of this white, Plaster, if you please,
and partly because it is good for many special uses besides this disease of the
Flux, and partly because children are not so subject to take inward
applications, as outward, therefore I shall ^er^ set down how it is made, with
the Remedies thereof.

Take of the best S^ll^^ oil a quart and four ounces; Red-lead and White-lead
alike, one pound, well beaten into fine dust; Cape-soap, (or Castle-soap)
finely sliced twelve ounces, mingle these well together in an earthen pipkin
well glazed (it must hold a gallon to hold this quantity) ^^ir it with an Iron
ball having a handle to it, when this is well mingled together, the Soap come^^
upward, then set it upon a fire of ^o^ls an hour and hal^, still stirring it,
till the redness he turned into a gray color, then drop a drop of it upon a
trencher; and if it cleave unto the trencher it is enough, then pour it out by
little and little upon a table, and with a little fresh grease anoint your
hands, and the table, make it up ^^roules as fast as you can; keep it for your
use two or three years, the elder the better. But you according to your need
you may take an equal quantity of each, whether less or more (I (...) of this
b^^ by the way.)

It being laid to the stomach; provokes appetite, it takes a way any grief^^,
or about the stomach. It is a pr^^^^^ melody for the Co^lick, it being appiled
to the belly. And being laid to the re^ne^ of the back, it eases the
bloody flux, the running of the Rel^^s, the h^^^ of the Kidneyes, the weakness
of the back. It heals all swellings and bruises: It dries away running
humors without breaking of the skin: It takes away all aches: It breaks
fellons and other impostumes, and heals them; being laid to the head, it is
good for the Evil: It helps the headache, and good for eyes. This in a
Manuscript.

There was once a Gentlewoman, extraordinarily perplexed night and day with
such inward gripings and frettings for the ^pice of almost half a year, as I
was truly informed by her husband, so as that the pain with the continuance of
it was not, nor cannot now be expressed: She had taken Physic from several
Physicians, with all the advice that could be given, or means administered unto
her; yet all was in vain, but still grew worse and worse rather than better: At
the last, I my self being brought by the providence of God into the Town where
she dwelt, and hearing of it, I went unto her, and had some conference with
her, desiring withal to accept of a Drink which I would make for her, I having
had (as I told her) much experience of good it had done, and likewise to
encourage her thereunto, I certified her that there could be no danger in the
taking of it, seeing they were all ordinary things, and that there was nothing
Physical whereby to stir the body, or to make it any way worse than it was, yet
she was loath to venture upon it because she had tried so many Physicians
already, and they had done her no good (which is a great fault found in many,
because they have had a disease long, and have tried many, therefore if any
come that should prescribe any other way, then what was prescribed before, they
think it impossible, as if one person may not exceed another, and may not have
knowledge in that disease which another has not) so this Gentlewoman having
had is so long, thought it impossible to receive any cure, and yielded her
self for dead, being worn away to an Anatomy, or Consumption, yet by much
persuasion, I obtained her leave to make it for her, and she promised me to
take it, and that night she drank the first draught, but it made such a
striving and stirring in her body to get the mastery of the disease, that I
could not persuade her to drink of it any more, yet that ^very draught made a
perfect cure, and she recovered.

Now because the body is over-burthened with Choler, Melancholy, and Phlegm,
therefore I hold it very useful and necessary, that before you take any of the
former Remedies for the Flux, that you take this purge, which is very needful
for the expelling of those humors formerly mentioned, if so be that the party
be not too much worn away; if so, then I could advise you to forbear any such
means, and only make use of that drink for them of riper years noted with a
star, neither is it to be given unto children, for the drink it self will
cure it without any such physic.

A preparative for the purge which I could advise you to take before. Take as
much Senae finely poudered, as will lie on half a crown, with the pap of two or
three roasted apples well buttered, and sweetened with sugar, and so mingled
altogether with the powder of Senae, eat that instead of your supper (and drink
a little warm broth after if you please) a little before you go to bed, it will
lie in your body all the night, and not in the least disturb you of your sleep,
but toward the morning it will begin to work, and it may give you some two or
three stools, according to the temper of your body, it may be more, yet it
will not make you sick at all, but you may wear a Wastecoat that night, or when
you find it begin to work, let a Wastecoat be warmed, or keep it in your
bed all the night, that it may be fit for use; I would not have you to rise out
of your bed about the house until you have taken the purge, or find that
first to move or stir in your body.

About an hour after the preparative have done working, take this purge
following in your bed.

Take of your Diaphenicon, give five drams to a woman, and fix to a man, in a
quarter of a pint of White Wind, stirring it about by the fire with your knife
until it be wholly dissolved, and so take it warm, lying there till it begin
to work (I mean for the space of an hour) then let your clothes be well
warmed, and rise, having before hand a good fire prepared in your Chamber,
cloth your self very hot, the hotter the better, although you are in a
sweating condition all the while the physic is working, and fit by the fire,
or walls up and down in your Chamber till it has done working, and keep out
the air as much as may be.

After every stool you ought to drink ^ draught of broth made of a small neck
of Veal, which must be put over the fire before you take the purge, that it
may be in readiness, putting into your liquor only a good crust of wheaten
bread, and a little salt.

About an hour or more after the purge has done working, take your rest upon
your bed, being covered hot for the space o^ an hour and half, for to refresh
nature that has been something wearied. In the mean time let this broth be
made and provided.

Take a Chicken and boil it in fair water with oat-meal groats (or great
Oat-meal) finely beaten in a mortar, strain them in a cloth with some of the
liquor, then put thereto Violet leaves, Strawberry leaves, the roots of Fennel
and Parsley, the pith of them being taken out with a little whole Mace, Saffron,
and Nutmeg, and one penniworth of Currants, boil half the quantity away, and so
eat and drink thereof.

This purge purges Phlegm, Choler, and Melancholy very easily, and never
offends the stomach, neither makes the party sick, taking it in this manner
after the preparative before mentioned.

There are certain cautions to be observed both for meats and drinks for the
space of two or three days, while you are taking the Physic or the drink.

1 Remember that for that time you drink neither Beer or Ale, strong or small,
neither any Wine, unless it be red Wine with a toast in it, but let your drink
be water and sugar, ordered in this man^er, boil in three pintes of water an
ounce of Cynamon broken in pieces, for the space of half an hour, and then make
it a little sweet with loaf Sugar, and so drink it as you do your ordinary
drink, warm.

2 Abstain during the same time, or longer, from Cabbage or pottage made of it,
and green fruit.

3 Abstain from salt meats, as also from fresh Eeles and Playse.

4 Put in your pottage leaves of Plantane three or four, and eat dry meats for
the most part, as Mutton, your Beef moderately salted, Rabbets, etc.

And remember that at night when you go to bed, the same day in which you have
taken the purge, you may take a draught of that drink which is appointed for
this disease: If you are to make use of Glisters it is good to put the juice of
Plantane into them.

Exitus acta probat.

