Moses and Aaron: CIVIL and ECCLESIASTICAL RITES, Used by the Ancient HEBREWS;
observed, and at large opened, for the clearing of many obscure TEXTS thorowout
the whole SCRIPTURE. Which Texts are now added at the end of the Book.

Wherein likewise is showed what Customs the HEBREWS borrowed from Heathen
people: And that many Heathenish Customs, originally, have been unwarrantable
imitation of the HEBREWS.

The twelfth Edition.

By Thomas Godwyn, B. D.

LONDON, Printed for R. Scot, T. Basset, J. Wright, R. Chiswel, B. Griffin, G.
Connyers, and M. Wotton. 1685.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM Earl of Pembrook, Lord Chamberlain of His
Majesty's Household, L. Warden of the Stanneries, Knight of the most Noble Order
of the Garter, one of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, and
Chancellor of the famous University of Oxford.
All Grace and Happiness.
Right Honorable,
THat many have no better acquaintance with Christ and his Apostles; is,
because they are such strangers with Moses and Aaron: Were Customs antiquated
thoroughly known, many difficulties in Scripture would appear Elegancies; and the
places which now (through obscurity) dishearten the Reader, would then become
sweet invitements to an unwearied assiduity in perusing those sacred Oracles.
If my present labor shall give such light to some obscure passages, that
thereby Gods people shall be drawn on with the greater delight to the
exercising themselves in reading of Holy Writ, it shall not repent me of my
tedious travels in these Rites and Customs, of Generations long since past;
which whosoever undertaketh, shall find the way long and thorny, the path over
grownd and hardly discernable; the Guides few to direct, and those speaking in
strange Languages; and many apt to discourage him, because themselves are
either lazy, and will not, or lame and cannot walk the same way. But now
(through Gods assistance) being come to the end of my Journey, the discoveries
made on the way, such as they are (and such some are, as not observed before)
humbly crave your Lordship's protection.

Your Honor's in all duty,
From Densington, Feb. 21. 1624.
THE ARGUMENT OF EACH BOOK and CHAPTER.
The first Book. Of Persons.
Chap. 1. THe form of their Commonwealth till Christ, and when the Scepter
departed. Fol. 1 2. Publicans, their Office, who the chief. 6 3. Prosylites
who, how made. 8 4. Kings, Why Pilate clad Christ in Purple; Herod in white. 11
5. High Priest, Priests, Levites, Nethinims. 13 6. Prophets who, the Wise man,
Scribe, and Disputer, mentioned, 1 Cor. 1. 20. 23 7. Title of ^^^bi, when, how,
to whom given. 29 8. Nazarites and Rechabites. 30 9. Assideans, difference
between the Righteous and Good man, mentioned, Romans 5. 7. 33 10. Pharisees,
whence their name, when they began, what their Dogmata. 36 11. Sadduces, whence
their name, when they began, what their Dogmata. 46 12. Essenes, whence their
name, when they began, what their Dogmata. 50 13. Gaulonitae, and Herodians,
what they were. 59
The second Book. Of Places.
Chap. 1. THeir Temple, how forty six years a building. 62 Why certain Psalms
are entitled Graduales Songs of degrees. 65 2. Synagogues, Schools, Houses of
Prayer, why their School preferred above their Temple. 69 3. Gates of
Jerusalem. 73 4. Groves and High Places. 75 5. Cities of Refuge. 77
The third Book. Of Days, Times, and Feasts.
Chap. 1. THeir days, hours, weeks, years. 80 2. Their manner of feasting,
salutations, blessing, cup of blessing. 86 3. Their Sabbath; a Sabbath-daies
journey, how much, and whence. 97 4. Their Passover; and feast of unleavened
bread: How a soul cut off from Israel. 103 5. Their Pentecost, what the
second-first Sabbath was, Luke 6. 1. 115 6. Their feast of Tabernacles,
Hosanna, and Hosanna-Rabba. 117 7. Their feast of Trumpets, their New Mons,
Translation of feasts. 121 8. Their feast of Expiation: what meant by the filth
of the world, and the off scouring of all things, 1 Cor. 4. 13. 130 9. Their
Sabbatical year. 134 10. Their Jubilee, their use thereof. 135 11. Their feast
of Purim, and feast of Dedication. 138
The fourth Book. Of their Idolatry.
Chap. 1. THe beginnings of Idolatry. 140 2. Moloch, Adram-Melech, Anam-Melech,
Baal, the Tabernacle of Moloch, etc. 143 3. Baal-Poor, Baal-Tsephon,
Baal-Zebub, Baal-Berith, Bell and the Dragon. 153 4. Dagon. 156 5. The molten
Calf. 157 6. Astorath, Ammonia, Juno, the Queen of Heaven, Diana of the
Ephesians. 160 7. Other Idol-gods mentioned in Scripture. 163 8. Sorts of
divine Relation, Vrim and Thummim. 165 9. Teraphim, what they were. 170 10.
Sorts of Divination forbidden. 171
The fifth Book. Of their Consistories.
Chap. 1. COurts of Judgments, their Ecclesiastical Consistory. 179 2. Sorts of
Excommunication. 181 3. Civil Consistories, what persons necessarily present,
what meant by the Magistrate, Judge, and Officer, Luke 12. 58. 185 4. The
number of their civil Courts, what meant by a Council, Judgment, fire of
Gehenna, Matthew. 5. 189 5. Manner of electing Judges. 193 6. Ceremonies common
in all capital Judgments: whence that phrase came, his blood be on us and our
children. 196 7. Their capital punishments what they were. 198 8. Punishments
not capital. 202 9. Punishments borrowed from other Nations: whether S. Paul
fought with the beasts at Ephesus. 208
The sixth Book. Of Miscellaneous Rites.
Chap. 1. CIrcumcision, whence, the use of Godfathers in Baptism. 213 2.
First Fruits, first-lings, firstborn. 18 3. Sorts of Tithes, manner of paying
them. 224 4. Marriage and divorces, copies of their dowry bill, and bill of
divorce: what meant by power on the Woman's head, 1 Cor. 11. 10. 228 5. Burials,
manner of embalming, manner of their Sepulchers, what meant by baptization of
the dead, 1 Cor. 15. 9. 223 6. Of their Oaths. 245 7. Of their writing, their
Masorites, and their work. 248 8. Isreal's pitching of their tents, or of their
camps. 253 9. Their Measures. 259 10. Their Coyns, first of brazen Coyns,
silver Coyns, and gold Coyns. 264
Moses and Aron.
THE FIRST BOOK Treats of PERSONS.
CHAP. I.
Of the Form of the Hebrews Commonwealth until Christ his coming, and when the
Scepter departed from them.
THE Form and State of Government has been subject to change and variation
amongst all Nations, but especially amongst the Jews, where these changes are
observable.

At first, the Fathers of their several Families, and their Firstborn after
them, exercised all kind of Government, both Ecclesiastical and Civil, being
both Kings and Priests, in their own houses. They had power over their own
Families, to bless, curse, cast out of doors, disinherit, and to punish with
death, as is apparent by these examples: Of Noah toward Cham, Genesis 9. 25. of
Abraham toward Hagar and Ismael, Genesis 21. 10. of Jacob toward Simeon and
Levi, Genesis 49. 3. and of Judah toward Thamar, Genesis 38. 24.

In Moses his days then did this prerogative of primogeniture cease; and as
Aaron and his posterity was invested with the right, and title of Priests; so
Moses, and after him Josua, ruled all the people with a kind of Monarchical
authority. For Moses was among the righteous as King, Deuteronomy. 33. 5.

After Josua succeeded Judges; their Offices were of absolute and independent
authority, like unto Kings, when once they were elected. But there were long
vacancies, and chasms commonly between the cessation of the one, and the
election of the other: yea for the most part, the people never chose a Judge,
but in time of great troubles, and imminent dangers; which being over-past, he
retired to a private life. After that Cideon had delivered the people out of
the hand of the Midianites, he being offered the Kingdom, replied, I will not
reign over you, neither shall my Child reign over you, Judge. 8. 23. That of
Samuel, that he judged Israel all the days of his life, 1 Samuel 7. 15. was
Zepper. lib. 3. leg. Mos. cap. 6.
extraordinary. In this respect their Judges symbolize with the Roman
Dictators. This state of Regiment continued amongst them, by the computation of
S. Aug de Civ. Dei. l. 18. c. 22.
Augustine, three hundred twenty nine years. In these vacancies or distances of
time, between Judge and Judge, the greater and weightier matters were
determined by that great Court of the Seventy, called the Sanedrim; in which
respect the form of Government may be thought Arist^^ratical. Kings succeeded
the Judges, and they continued from Saul unto the Captivity of Babylon, that
is, Zette^. leg. Mosaic. l. 3. ^6
about 520* years.

From the Captivity unto the coming of Christ, (which time is Vide Funcii
Chronol.
thought to have been five hundred thirty six years) the state of the Jews
became very confused. Sometimes they were ruled by Deputies and Vicegerents,
who had not supreme authority in themselves, but as it pleased the Persian
Monarchs to assign them; Maimon, in Iad. l. vit. tract. Sanedrim, cap. 4. sect.
13.
they were termed (...), Rasche gali^th, (...), Heads of the Capitivity. Of
this sort was Zerobabel and his Successors, who are reckoned in the Seder Olam.
minus.
Hebrew Chronicles to be these, Mesullam, Hananiah, Berechiah, and Hosadia. All
which are thought to have reigned under the Persian Monarchy, and to have been
of the Posterity of David: as likewise the other succeeding ten chief
Governors after Alexander the Great. In the last of these ten, the government
departed from the House of David, and was translated to the Macchabees, who
descended from the Tribe of Levi. They were called Macchabaei, from Judas
Macchabaeus, Carrion. Chron. lib. 2. p. 144.
and he had this name (...) Macchabaeus, from the Capital Letters of this
Motto, written in his Ensign or Banner, (...), Quis sicut tu inter Deos, O
Domine? Where the first letters are, M, C, B, A, I, Among the Macchabees,
sovereign authority continued until Herod the Askalonite his reign, at what
time our Savior Christ was born, according to Jacobs prophecy: The Scepter
shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet, until
Shiloh, that is, the Targum Vziel. eadem pae^e verba habet Targum Jerosol.
Messiah come, Genesis 49. 10.

For the right understanding of this Prophecy, We must note two things; 1. The
time when the Scepter was given to Judah; 2. When taken from him. But first we
must observe how these two words, Judah, and the Scepter, are distinguished.

Some take Judah. 1. For the Origin. hom. 17. in Genes. Epiphan. contra
Ebionaeos. and ma^ima Heb ^^^rum pars.
particular Tribe of Judah: ut this seems flat contrary to Scripture; for
many of the Judges were of other Tribes, and all the Macchabees of the Tribe of
Levi, 2. For the Cun^us de rep. Hebr. cap. 5 p. 81.
Two Tribes which cleaved to Rehoboam; because in that division of the People,
these Two Tribes alone were called Jews, and that from Judah, and that never
before this division. 3. For Eusebius. demonst. lib. 8. c. 1. Montacut. in
Analect. p. 72. Casaub. contra Baron. page 16.
all the whole body of Israel, consisting of Twelve Tribes, all which (in the
judgment of these men) were afterward by the singular providence of God, called
Jews from Judah.

Some take Scepter, 1. For Patres plerique omnes.
legal power, and Sovereign authority, residing in one man principally. 2. For
the Casaub^n. advers. Baron. p. 19. It. p. 23. Justinus Mart. in Dial^g. cum
Tryphone. Cunaeus lib. 1. de. rep. Heb. c. 9. p. 82.
form of government, and face of a Commonwealth, governed and ruled by its own
laws, customs, and rites: signifying as well the rule and authority of
inferior Magistrates, yea of Priests also, as of Kings and Princes.

From these different acceptions of these two words, flow four different
interpretations of Jacobs Prophecy.

Some are of Cunaeus lib. 1 de rep. Heb. cap. 11. page 96.
opinion that the Scepter taken in the second acception, began to be given to
Judah, that is, to the Two Tribes cleaving to Rehoboam, at the time of that
division of the People, and that this Scepter was not taken from them until the
destruction of Jerusalem; because that after Herod's time until then, their Laws
remained in force; their Priesthood continued; and their Commonwealth though
it were much defaced, yet not quite overthrown.

Some are of Jeseph. Scalig. ex quo Casuab. adver s. Baron. p. 19. It. p. 39.
opinion, that the Scepter taken in the second acception, began to be given to
Judah, that is, to the Twelve Tribes, from the time of Moses; and that this
Scepter was not taken from them until the Destruction of Jerusalem: Not in
Herod because he was a Jew (in that he was a Proselyte) for a Jew is a name,
say they, of Profession, not of Country or Nation.

Some are of Montacut. in Analect. p. 74.
opinion, that the Scepter taken in the second acception, began to be given to
Judah, that is to the Twelve Tribes, from the time of Moses, and that it was
taken from them in Herod's time: yet so, that in Herod's time, this was but
begun, and inchoate, and at the destruction of Jerusalem it was fulfilled and
consummate.

Some are of Augustine. contra Manich. lib. 12. cap. 40. Eusebius. demonst. lib. 8.
Cor. on Chrom page 143.
opinion, that the Scepter taken in the first acception, began to be given to
Judah, that is, to the Twelve Tribes, from the time of Moses, and that it was
taken from them fully in Herod's time. The former opinions makes the coming of
the Messiah to be a forerunner of the departure of the Scepter: This makes the
departure of the Scepter to be a forerunner or token of the Messiah his
coming, which I take to be the Principal thing aimed at in the Prophecy. This
opinion, as it is more generally received than the others, so upon juster
grounds. Now the Scepter was departed and given to a Proselyte, never so
before: P. Galatin. lib. 4. cap. 6. p. 203. viz. Talmud. Jerosol.
yea now also, the Lawgiver was departed from between Judahs feet, now the
Messiah born.

CHAP. II.
Of the Publicans.
WE having seen the most remarkable changes in the Commonwealth of the
Hebrews; we will note the chief Observation concerning the persons there
inhabiting: and first concerning the Publicans, who were, in the latter times,
an heterogeneous Member of that Commonwealth. After that the Jews became
Tributary to Rome, (which Josep. Locutus de Pompeio l. (...). de bello. Jud. c.
5. page 720.
was effected by Pompey threescore years before the Birth of our Savior)
certain Officers were appointed by the Senate of Rome, unto whom it belonged,
as well among the Jews as in other Provinces, to collect, and gather up such
custome-money, or tribute, as was exacted by the Senate: Those that gathered up
these public payments, were termed Publicani, Publicans; and by reason of
their covetous exactions, they commonly were hated by the People of the
Provinces: Harum societatum frequens mentio facta est apud Ci^eron. in orat.
pro Sex. Ros^. Murana, Cn. Plancio.
Every Province had his several Society, or company of Publicans; Every Society
his distinct Governor: In which respect it is, that Zachaeus is called by the
Evangelist, (...), Princeps Publicanorum, the chief receiver of the tribute, or
chief Publican, Luke 19. 2. Andall the Provincial Governors in these several
Societies, had one chief Sig^n. de Antiq. jure civium. Romans lib. 2. c. 4.
Master residing at Rome, unto whom the other subordinate Governors gave up
their accounts. These Publicans were hated in all Provinces, because of their
exactions; but chiefly in the Commonwealth of the Jews, because though it were
chiefly maintained by the Galilaeans, yet it was generally inclined unto by the
Jews, That tribute ought not to be paid by them: This hatred is confirmed by
that Rabbinical proverb, Is. Casaubon. exercit. 13. 37.
Take not a Wife out of that family wherein there is a Publican, for such are
all Publicans. Yea a faithful Publican was so rare at Rome it self, that one
Sabinus for his honest managing of that Office, in an honorable remembrance
thereof, had certain images erected with this Suet. in Flav. Vesp. cap. 1.
superscription; (...), For the Faithful Publican. And therefore no marvel, if
in the Gospel, Publicans and sinners go hand in hand.

It is now generally received as a truth undoubted, that not only Heathen
people, but sometimes Jews themselves became Publicans. Tertullian was of
another opinion* Tertull de pudic. cap. 9.
and thought that all the Publicans were Heathens; but he has been in that
long since confuted by Jeronym. epist. ad Damasum.
Jerome, and reason it self persuades the contrary. First, Matthew who was a
Publican, was afterward an Apostle, and therefore unlikely to have been an
Heathen. Secondly, Zachaeus his name was a pure Hebrew name having no affinity
with Roman names. Thirdly, the ground or principal argument on which Tertullian
built, was merely Fraudt fuit accutissimo Poeno-Hebra^ae linguae ignoratio,
nusquam enim oceurit in font, spurius ille textus, quo Tertullianus p^tissimum
nititur, non erit vectigal, pendens ex filiis Israel. Deuteronomy 23.
erronous.

CHAP. III.
Israelites, Proselytes.
THe whole Commonwealth of Israel consisted of two sorts of men, Hebrews, and
Proselytes; he that was born an Hebrew, either by Father, or Mothers side, was
an Hebrew; but he that was born so of both, was an Hebrew of the Hebrews; such
a one was Saint Paul, Phil. 3. 5. He that was born a Proselyte either by
Fathers or Mothers side was termed Ben-ger, the son of an he-proselyte; or
Bengera, the son of a she-proselyte; but he that was by Father and Mothers side
a Proselyte, was termed Magni quidam nominis Rabbi apud Judaeos fuit, quem ex
Paganismo ad Judaismum (...) per sigla appellarunt, i. filius proselytae. Pirk.
Aboth. cap. 5.
Bagbag, that is, the son of he and she Proselytes.

The Hebrews were of two sorts; some lived in Palestina, and used the Hebrew
Text, these were called Hebrews or Jews; others were dispersed in diverse places
of Greece, they used the Greek translation, and thence were termed (...), De
Judaeis Graeciensib. vide Scal. animadver Eusebius. 124. 1. and in Can. Isag. 278.
Graecists. S. Luke mentions both. There arose a murmuring, (...), of the
Graecists, toward the Hebrews, Acts 6. 1. Where, note the difference between
(...), and (...), the Graecians, and the Graecists; The Graecians are used by
Saint Paul, to signify all the Heathen people, and stand in opposition with
Hebrews in the general acception; containing both the Graecists, or dispersed
Hebrews, and also those of Palestina: the Graecists were both by birth and
religion, Hebrews, standing in opposition with Hebrews; in the strict
acception, taken for those of Palestina.

The wole body of Israel was divided into twelve Tribes; and public Records
were kept, wherein every ones Genealogy was registered, to manifest unto what
particular Tribe he belonged. These Records Herod burnt, hoping that in after
ages he might be thought originally an Israelite, if those public Monuments
might not be produced against him. E^seb. Eccles. hist. li. 1. cap (...).
Thus much Eusebius plainly delivers of him. I am of opinion, that another
reason might be admitted, namely, That no distinction either of Tribe or
Family, might appear, but, all being confounded, and amongst the rest David's,
(unto whose Family by a peculiar right this Scepter belonged) Herod and his
posterity might be the better secured of the Kingdom.

Proselytes were those Heathen people, who disclaiming Paganism, became
Converts, and joined themselves unto the Church of the Jews. They were termed
Proselytes (...), from their coming and adjoining unto the Jews. Concerning
these Proselytes, we will consider these three things. 1. The several kinds of
Proselytes; 2. The manner of making them; 3. In what account or respect they
lived among the Jews.

First, the kinds of Proselytes were two; (...) Ger Berith, Proselytus
foedoris, A Proselyte of the Covenant. He submitted himself unto the
Circumcision, and to the whole Mosaical Paedagogy. Rabb. Solomon. Deuteronomy. 23. 14.
The Rabbis term such a one (...) Ger tsedeck, Proselitum justitiae, A
Proselyte of rightecusness. Secondly, (...) Ger sahagnar, Proselytus portae, A
Proselyte, or stranger within thy gates, Deuteronomy. 14. 21. Of him also we read in
the fourth Commandment. He was suffered to dwell amongst them; whence he is
also called (...) Toschah, Incola, an Inhabitant. He was not circumcised,
neither did he conform himself to Mosaical rites, and ordinances, only he was
tied to the obedience of those Commandments, which among the Hebrew Doctors go
under the Name of Noah's seven Commandments; Sheingler in P^nt^, lot. p. 1530.
which they reckon thus: 1. Judgments or punishments for Malefactors. 2.
Blessing the Name of God; under this is contained the keeping of the Sabbath.
3. Disclaiming of Idolatry. 4. Uncovering ones nakedness. 5. Shedding of blood.
6. Robbery. 7. Eating of any member of a Beast, taken from it alive. Of this
sort, were Naaman* the Syrian, the Eunuch, Cornelius, and those of whom we
read, That there were dwelling at Jerusalem, Jews (...).
Men that feared God of every Nation under Heaven, Acts 2. 5.

Secondly, to the making of one to be a Proselyte of the Covenant, according to
the difference of Sex, and the difference of times, the Rites of initiation
varied. To the making of Moses Kotser. fol. 20. col. 2.
a Male-Proselyte, at first three things were required. 1. (...)
Circumcision. 2. A kind of purification by Water. 3. The blood of Oblation.
This Oblation was commonly two Turtles or Pigeons. To the making of a Woman
Proselyte, were required only purification by water, and Oblation. Drusius de
trib. Sect. 2. p. 102.
Now because the Jews have neither Altar, nor Sacrifice, they say that for the
Males, Circumcision, and purification by water suffices; and for the Females,
only purification by water. Moses Aegyptius in Assarebiah, Perek. 13. fol. ^37.
vide Serarium trihaeres. l. 2. c. 2.
In David's time they say that many thousands of Proselytes were joined unto the
Church without Circumcision, only by this purification.

Hence we may observe, that a kind of Initiation by water was long in use among
the Jews, though it were not Sacramental until Christ his institution: Yea
therefore itmay seem to have been used by them, because they expected it at the
coming of the Messiah, as appears by their coming unto John, questioning not
so much his Baptism, as his Authority, by what authority he baptized: Why
baptizest thou then, if thou be not that Christ, nor Elias, neither that
Prophet? John 1. 25.

Thirdly, the respect born by the Jews toward Proselytes, was charitable; P.
Fag. Exodus 22. 21.
they used no upbraiding terms toward them, saying Remember thy former deeds.
Notwithstanding it was also provided, Moses Egypt. lib ult. Iad. tract.
Sanhedrim. c. 2.
no Proselyte should be eligible into the Court of their Sanhedrim; yea in
their common commerce, they had an usual proverb, which admonished them of
wariness Casaub. advers. Baron. p. 27.
Vel ad decimam usque generationem a Proselytis cave; Beware of Proselytes to
the tenth generation.

CHAP. IV.
Of their Kings.
WE shall read of three sorts of Kings in the Old Testament: Melchisedeck was
King and Priest; David King and Prophet; others simply Kings. Melchisedeck was
King and Priest, David King and Prophet. The concurrance of Princely
Sovereignty, and Holy Orders, in the same man, intimates that supreme Authority
should always be accompanied with care of Religion: In which respect Joash,
when he was anointed King, received the Testimony, or Book of the Law, 2 Kings
11. 12. Neither did these two meet only in Melchisedeck and David, but the same
man among the Heathens Rex Anius Rex idem hominum Phoebique Sacerdos. Virg.
Aeneid. lib. 3.
was oftentimes King and Priest. And Trismegistus had his name Ter-maximus,
Alex. Neopolit. lib. 2. cap. 6.
because he was Philosophus maximus, Sacerdos maximus, and Rex maximus. All
Kings were not anointed, but only those in whom succession was broken; and
there the first of the family was anointed for his Successors, except in case
of dissension, where there was requireda renewed unction, for the confirmation
of his Authority. For this reason it was, that Solomon was anointed as well as
David, because of the strife between him and Adonijah.

Furthermore, Saul and Jehu were anointed (...) Bepac, with a cruse of oil, to
show the short continuance of their Kingdom, David and Solomon were anointed
(...) Bekeren, with an horn of oil; that is, in a plentiful measure, to show
the long continuance of their Kingdoms.

As Kings were dinstinguisht from the People by many Ensigns of Honor, by
their Crown, their Scepter, their Throne, etc. so likewise were they
distinguished by their Apparel; that was the reason that Ahab entering into
battle, changed his apparel, 1 Kings 22. 30. Though purple and white colors
were not appropriated unto Kings, Valor. Man. lib. 1. cap. (...).
yet these colors were in chief esteem, and principally used by them Alex ab
Alex. lib. 1. cap. 20.
; yea Purple above others was affected by the Emperors and Nobility of Rome;
and white by the Nobility of the Jews: whence the Hebrews term their Noble men,
and such as were of best rank (...) Chorim, Albatos, men clad in white; and on
the contrary, men of meaner rank, (...) Chaschucim, Sord^datos, men clad with a
foul garment. Hence is that of Saint James; If there come a man with a gold
ring, and in good apparel (...), in a white garment, and there come also a poor
man, (...), in a vile or soul raiment, James 2. 2. This may be the reason, why,
when the Jews accused Christ of treason, Pilate his Soldiers clad him in
purple, Matthew. 27. 28. and Herod the Tetrarch of Galilee put on him a white
garment, Luke 23. 11. both therein applying themselves to the customs of their
own Country, and in derision clothing him as a King.

CHAP. V.
The High Priest, Priests, Levites, and Nethinims.
THere were three ranks and degrees of Ministers about the Temple; Priests,
Levites, and Nethinims; they may be paralleld with Ministers, Deacons, and
Subdeacons, in the Primitive Church: Over all these, the High Priest was chief.

In Aaron and his posterity, was continued the succession of the Priests; the
High priesthood was tied to the line of his firstborn; all the rest of his
posterity were Priests, simply so called, or called Priests of the second
Order, 2 Kings 23. 4.

Except Aaron, and those that issued from his loins, (in whom the series of
Priests was continued) all the rest of Levi his posterity were called Levites.

Both in the High Priest, and the second or inseriour Priests, there are two
things considerable. First, their Consecration: Secondly, their Office. In both
these, somewhat they differed, in somewhat they agreed.

In their Consecration they differed. First, Hin^ Sacerdos summus in font
legitur Sacerdos unctus, Levit. 4. 5. Jonathan habet Sacerdos magnus vel
summus. Deserte Abem Esra, Sacerdos magnus ipse est Sacerdos unctus. Lyranus
adhuc clarius; Sacerdos unctus est Sacerdos magnus, quia inferiores Sacerdotes
non ungebantur, etc.
The High priest was anointed: the materials of this Chrism or ointment are
prescribed, Exodus 30. 23. It was poured upon Aarons head, Levit. 8. 12. It ran
down to his beard, and to the border of his garments, Psalm. 133. 2. The Second
Priests were only sprinkled with this oil, mixed with the blood of the
Sacrifice, Levit. 8. 30. In this was typed out the unction of our Savior, who
was anointed with the oil of Gladness above his Fellows, Psalm. 45. 8. He was
anointed* above his Fellows, Extensive, and Intensive. Extensive, for though
Aaron was anointed Priest, Saul anointed King, Elisha anointed Prophet,
Melchisedeck King and Priest Moses Priest and Prophet, David King and Prophet;
yet none save only Christ, King, Priest, and Prophet. Intensive, he was
anointed, we sprinkled, He was full of grace and truth, John 1. 14. And from
this fullness we received grace for grace, ver. 16. And all Christians,
especially Ministers, are unto God the sweet savor of Christ, 2 Cor. 2. 5.

Secondly, they differed in their Garments, which were a necessary adjunct to
their Consecration. The High Priest wore at the time of his ordinary
ministration in the Sanctuary, eight Garments, Exodus 28. First, Breeches of
linen, put next upon his flesh. Secondly, A Coat of fine linen, put over the
breeches. Thirly, A girdle embroidered of sine linen, blew purple, and
scarlet, wherewith the coat was girded. Fourthly, A Robe all of Blew, with
seventy two bells of Gold, and as many Pomegranates of blew purple, and
scarlet, upon the skirts thereof; this was put over the coat and girdle.
Fifthly, An Ephod of gold and of blew purple, scarlet, and fine linen
curiously wrought; on the shoulders thereof were two fair Beryl Stones,
engraven with the names of the Twelve Tribes of Israel. This Ephod was put over
the Robe, and girded thereto with a curious girdle made of the same. Sixthly, A
Breast Plate wrought of gold, blew, purple, scarlet, and fine linen, which
being a span square, was fastened by golden chains and rings, upon the Ephod:
herein wereset twelve several Stones, on which the Names of the Twelve Tribes
were engraven: Moreover, in this Breast Plate were the Vrim and the Thummim
placed. Seventhly, A Miter of fine linen, sixteen cubits long, wrapped about
his head. Eighthly, A plate of purple ple gold, or holy Crown two fingers broad,
whereon was engraven. Holiness to the Lord: This was tied with a blew lace upon
the forefront of the Miter.

These eight Garments the High Priest used in his ordinary ministration, and
they are termed by the Rabbis. (...), Bridge Zahab, Vestimenta aurea, Golden
Vestiments, because of their richness in comparison of other extraordinary
Garments, which he wore only once a year, when he entered into the Holy of
Holies, upon the propitiation day, Lev. 15. 4, 23. These latter are called
(...) Bigde Laban, Vestimenta alba, White Garments; they were in number four.
1. A linen breeches. 2. A Linen Coat. 3. A linen girdle. 4. A linen Miter,
Levit. 16. 4.

In the time of the Second Temple, Cunaeus lib. 2. de rep. Heb. cap. 7. page
22^.
because the Chrism or holy Oil could not be found, therefore, as formerly in
respect of his unction, the High priest was called by the Talmudist, (...)
Mithrabe Mischa, Auctus unctione, the anointed; so when the Oil was lost in
respect of his Garments, he was termed, (...) Mithrabe Begadim, Auctus
Vestibus, The clothed. Those forementioned Garments Moses Kotsensis praec^
fir. 173. f. 212, col. 3.
the High Priest might not wear abroad in the City, unless some urgent occasion
compelled him, as Simeon the just did, when he went forth to meet Alexander the
Great.

In his apparel the threefold Office of our Savior Christ was shadowed: the
Crown signified his Kingly Office; the Vrim and Thummim, and likewise his Bells
and Pomegranats, his Prophetical Office: by Vrim and Thummim, he answered as
from an Oracle; by the Bells was tiped the sound of his Doctrine; by the
Pomegranats, the sweet savor of an Holy Life; the Names of the twelve Tribes
engraven on the Ephod, and the Breast Plate, signified his Priestly Office,
presenting unto God the whole Church, for which he makes intercession. He
knows his own sheep by Name. John 10. 3.

The inferior Priests had only four Garments, which they used in their
ministration. 1. A linen Breeches. 2. A linen Coat. 3. A linen Girdle. 4. A
linen Bonnet, Exodus 28.

Thirdly they differed in their marriage. The High Priest might not marry a
Widow, nor a divorced Woman, nor an Harlot, but a Virgin, Levit. 21. 14. From a
Widow he could not expect the first love: from a divorced Woman he could not
expect the first, or just love: from an Harlot, neither sirst, just, nor only
love: all which Christ (whom the High Priest did herein represent) expects
from his Church. The other Priests might lawfully marry a Widow, Levit. 21. 7.

The High priest, and the Inferior Priests agreed in their consecration in
these particulars. It was required first, that both should be void of bodily
blemish, Levit. 21. 17. Secondly, that both should be presented unto the Lord
at the door of the Tabernacle, Exodus 29. 4. Thirdly, that both should be washed
with water, Exodus 29. 4. Fourthly, that both should be consecrated by offering
up certain Sacrifices, Exodus 29. Fifthly, that both should have of the blood of
the other Ram, put upon the tip of the right Ear, the thumb of the right hand,
and the great toe of the right-foot, Exodus 29. 20.

In the time of their Consecration, certain pieces of the sacrifice were put
into the Priests hand, Exodus 29. 9. The ceremony in the Christian Church, used
by the Bishop unto the Minister in time of Ordination, that the Bishop gives
the Bible into the hands of the Minister, does much resemble this: And both may
signify, that no man takes this honor unto himself, but he that is called of
God, as was Aaron; Heb. 5. 4. Hence Consecration in the Hebrew phrase is
termed, Filling of the hand. And contrary to this did Jeroboams Priests, whosoever would, he Filled his own hand, 1 King. 13. 33. that is, He thrust
himself into the Priesthood.

In the discharge of their offices, the High Priest differed from the other
Priests: First, because he only, and that but once a year, entered into the Holy
of Holies, Exodus 16. 34.

Secondly, the High Priest might not mourn for the death of his nearest kin,
Levit. 21. 10, 11. The phrases used there to express mourning are two. First,
uncovering the Head. Secondly, Renting the Cloths: Of both these somewhat is
spoken in the Chapter of Burials; but concerning the latter it will not be
amiss to note, that the Talmudists determine the matter thus; saying, Vide
Cunaeum de rep. Heb. lib. 2. cap. 3.
That it was lawful for the High Priest to tear the skirt, or neither part of
his Garment, but from the bosom downward it was unlawful: which if it be true,
then it does not necessarily follow, that Caiaphas did contrary to the law in
renting his clothes, Matthew. 26. 65. The inferior Priests might mourn for these
six; Father, Mother, Son, Daughter, Brother, and Sister, that had no husband,
Levit. 21. 2.

In the discharge of their Offices, the High Priest, and other Priests agreed
in these Particulars: First, they both burnt incense and offered sacrifices, 1.
Chron. 6. 49. Secondly, they both sounded the Trumpets; the use whereof was
twofold; sometimes to sound an alarm in the war, sometimes to assemble the
people and their Rulers, Numb. 10. Thirdly, they both slew the sacrifices, 2.
Chron. 29. 22. Fourthly, they both instructed the people, Malac. 2. 7. Fifthly,
they both judged of leprosy, Levit. 13. 2.

For the more orderly performance of these Offices, the High Priest had his
Suffragan, Elias Thisbit.
called (...) Sagan, who in case of the High-priest's pollution, performed his
office. Of this sort was Zephaniah, Jer. 52. 24. And of this sort Annas is
thought to have been, when Caiaphas was High Priest. Causab. adver. Baron. p.
242. It. Joseph. Scaliger. in Prol. ad Euse.
In this sense they interpret Annas and Caiaphas to have been Highpriests the
same year, Luke 3. 2. The High priest and his Sagan, resembled our Bishop and
his Suffragan: The Patriarch of Constantinople* and his Primore termed
Protosyncellus, and amongst the Romans, the Centurion and his Optio: for the
Lieutenants in war, who in case of necessity supplied the Centurions place,
were termed Optiones.

That every one of the inferior Priests might equally serve in his order, King
David distributed the whole company of them into twenty four ranks or courses,
called (...), Turmae, vices; Nadab and Abihu being dead, there remained only
two sons to Aaron, namely, Eleazer and Ithamar; now as the succession of
Priests was preserved in these two families, so did David at his time,
according to the number of people in each family, make his division. Eleazers
family he divided into sixteen ranks, and Ithamars into eight: the division was
by Lot; the first Lot fell to Jehoiarib, the second to Jedaiah, the third to
Hairim, etc. 1 Chronicles. 24. Every rank or course served weekly in the Temple by
turn, and the ranks received their Names from those who at that time were the
heads of the several families, and ever after retained the same names. The
chief of every rank was called, Summus Sacerdos istius Classis: The chief
Priest of that rank. Hence it is, that we read of many High Priests assembled
together, Mark. 14. 1. Furthermore we are to note, that as the weekly course
fell out by lot, so did they by lot determine each particular Priests service;
namely, who should burn incense, who slay the Beasts, who lay them on the
Altar, who dress the Lamps, etc. Zacharias was of the course of Abia, Luke 1.
5. that is, of the eighth course, and his lot was to burn incense, Luke. 1. 9.

The Office of the Levites was, to pitch, to take down, to bear up and down the
Tabernacle, and the Vessels thereof. Levi had three Sons, Gershon, Cohath, and
Merari: and accordingly the whole Company of the Levites were distinguished into
three orders, Gershonites, Cohathites, and Merarites. The Gershonites charge
was to carry the coverings, and hangings of the Tabernacle. The chief things
within the Sanctuary were committed to the Cohathites. The wood-work, and the
rest of the instruments were committed to the charge of the Merarites, Number. 3.
This was the Office of the Levites in Moses his time, and while they were on
their journey in the Wilderness; but afterward when they were settled in the
promised Land, then David changed their office, appointing them, some to have
the charge of the Treasures of the Temple, 1 Chronicles. 26. 20. others to be
Overseers and Judges; others to be Porters, others Singers, 1 Chronicles. 23. 4.
The Singers in time of singing were clad in linnen-Robes or Surplesses, 2 Chronicles. 5. 12. The Singers were divided into twenty four orders or courses, 1 Chronicles. 25. 8. And the Porters into as many, 1 Chronicles. 26. that both might supply
their turns weekly by lot as the Priests did. In Moses time also, their
consecration began at the five and twentieth year of their age: In David's at
the twentieth, 1 Chronicles. 23. 24. Ezra. 3. 8. Here we may note the liberty
granted unto the Church in changing Ceremonies: The Office of the Levites in
David's time, was not the same as in Moses; and again, Moses and David agreed
not in the time of their consecration. Again, in the Christian Church we shall
find in Matthias his election, the use of Lots; not so in Paul's, or any other
of the Apostles: In their meetings, use of an holy-kiss; and at the Lords
Supper, use of their Love Feasts: Both now antiquated thoroughout Christendom.

Moreover, there are certain degrees observable among the Levites: First, their
Initiation, when they were a month old, they were initiated and presented unto
God, Numb. 3. 15. Secondly, their consecration; they were consecrated by
Imposition of hands, when they were five and twenty years old. Numb. 8. 24.
From thence for the five years following, they learned their Offices. Those
that imposed hands on them are said in the Text, Numb. 8. 10. to be the sons of
Israel. Chazkuni interprets that place, the First born of Israel. They were
the Representative Church; and in allusion to this, the Church of Christ is
called the Church of the First born, Heb. 12. 23. At the same time the Levites
were waved by the Priests; that is, as the Greeks read it, (...).
Separated, which word is used for the Ministers of Christ, (...)
Separate me Barnabas and Paul, Act. 13. 2. Thirdly, their Ministration, to
carry up and down the Tabernacle, and this was at the thirtieth year of their
age, until the fiftieth, Numb. 4. 3. Lastly, their vacation, or discharge from
that laborious service of carrying the Tabernacle; notwithstanding even then
they were to serve in their charge, to encamp round about the Tent, to sing,
and to beware that no stranger came into the Temple, Francisc. Jun. Analet.
Expos. Numb. 8.
and likewise to over-see and instruct younger Levites in the manner of
Bishops. Unto these degrees the Apostle seems to have respect: They that have
ministered well, get themselves a good degree, 1. Tim. 3. 13. The like kind of
Dionys. Halycarnass. lib. 2.
degrees are observable among the Vestal Virgins: they remained in their
Nunnery thirty years. Ten years they learned the Mysteries of their Profession;
Ten years they exercised them; and Ten years they taught them others. From this
custom of Imposing hands on the Levites has flown the like custom, used by the
Apostles in conferring Orders, Acts 6. 6. 1 Timothy 5. 22.

Observe the difference of these three phrases, (...), the imposition of hands.
(...), the holding up of hands, in token of elevation or ordination, Act. 14.
23. And (...), A stretching forth of the hands. Both the first gestures were
used in Ordination, or conferring Orders. The first of all, namely, imposition
of hands, was borrowed from the Hebrews. The second; namely, the holding up of
hands, was taken from the Aeschines contra Ctesiphont.
Athenians, who had two sorts of Magistrates, (...) Magistrates chosen by
lots,: and (...) Magistrates chosen by holding up of the hands. The third
gesture of the hands called (...), A stretching forth of the hands, Herodian.
p. 45.
sometime it is termed (...), the beckning with the hand, a gesture used in
craving silence; so Paul stretched forth the hand, and answered for himself,
Acts 26. 1.

There were Moses Kotsen. fol. 211. col. 4.
another sort of holy persons termed (...) Ansche Magnamad, Viri stationarii;
the Law requiring, that, whosoever offered either gift or sacrifice, he should
present it unto the Lord with his own hands, and stand by during the time of
his oblation. Now, because all Israel could not stand by, for the narrowness of
the Place, hence when an offering was made for all the people, certain selected
Persons, chosen for that purpose, supplied the stead of all the People. They
were divided, as the Priests and Levites, into twenty four ranks and orders,
weekly to minister in the Temple, but the choice was not restrained to the
Tribe of Levi, but was indifferently made out of the people. Every rank had one
foreman, chief above the rest, termed (...)
Stationum Princeps, the Fore man of that Station. The Nethinims office was to
be hewers of wood, and drawers of water for the house of God; they were not
Levites, no nor Israelites, but Gibeonites, whom because of their fraudulent
dealing, Joshua made in this manner tributary, Josh. 9. 23. They were afterward
called Nethinims, Ezra 2. 43. from (...) Nathan, which signifies to give,
because they were given to the service of the Temple. Their office was vile and
base, as appears by that proverbial speech; From the hewer of thy wood, unto
the drawer of thy water. Deuteronomy. 29. 11.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Prophets.
THere are diverse names given unto the Expositors of the Law; and although the
Particular year or time when each name began, be not clearly evidenced by
Monuments of Antiquity, yet in general we may conceive three distinct periods
of time; in which the names altered. First, from Adam until Moses; Secondly,
from Moses, till the peoples return from Babylon. Thirdly, from their return,
until the days of Christ, and after. In the first period, as Adam was Prophet
and Priest in his family, so afterward every firstborn supplied these two
offices, together with their princely office in their several families. That
they ruled their families as Kings, and instructed them as Prophets, is clear
to any acquainted with Scripture; the greatest doubt is, what sufficient proof
there is for their Priestood. Adams Priesthood is gathered hence, Bertram
Polit. Jud. c. 1. p. 17.
because that Genesis 4. 3. and 4. Abel and Cain are said to have brought their
sacrifices: to have brought them, namely, unto Adam, who offered them unto God
in their name. The Priest hood of the firstborn is gatherable hence, because
the Leviles were appointed to the service of the Altar, instead of the first
born, and as their (...) or price of redemption, Number. 3. 41. In the second
period, though a private Catechetical exposition of the Law belonged to the
Masters of families, yet the public Ministerial exposition thereof was
appropriated to Priests, and Prophets. In the third period, when Prophecy
ceased, then the office of expounding Scripture was more common, and instead of
Prophets came in a^multitude of other Expositors; In general we may call them
Teachers of Israel, Joh. 3. 10. We may distinguish them into three several
sorts. 1. Wisemen. 2. Scribes. 3. Disputers. The Apostle compriseth them all, 1
Cor. 1. 20. Where is the Wise? Where is the Scribe? Where is the Disputer? Unto
any of these, or whatsoever other Doctor eminently gifted above others, the
title Rabbi was prefixed. First, of their Prophets. Secondly, their Wisemen.
Thirdly, their Scribes. Fourthly, their Disputer. Fifthly, their Rabbis.

To prophecy, or to be a Prophet, has diverse acceptions in Scripture. First,
it is taken for the books and writings of the Prophets. They have Moses and the
Prophets, Luke 16. 29. Secondly, for the whole Word of God: no Prophecy in the
Scripture is of any private motion, 2. Pet. 1. 20. Thirdly, those unto whom God
vouchsafed familiarly to reveal himself, they are called Prophets: Abraham was
a Prophet, Genesis 20. 7. and Miriam a Prophetess, Exodus 15. 20. Fourthly,
ordinary Interpreters of the Word are called Prophets. He that receives a
Prophet in the name of Prophet. Mat. 10. 41. Lastly, it is taken for those, who
were enabled by Divine Revelation, to lay open hidden secrets, transcending all
possibility of humane search. Hence it is that Prophets in old time were called
Seers, 1 Samuel 9. 9. And their Prophecy was termed a vision, Esaias 1. 1. because
God extraordinarily enlightened their minds with the knowledge of these secrets.

There are three observable names applied to Prophecy in Scripture. 1. Verbum
Domini: 2. Visio: 3. Onus. The Word of the Lord: Vision: A Burden. The first
imports the Lord speaking, or revealing his secrets; the second implies the
Prophets attending, or beholding them; the third being applied only to
Judgments, signifies the burthensomness of them on that people against whom
they came forth.

For the propagation of Learning, Colleges and Schools were in diverse places
erected for the Prophets; their Scholars were termed Eodem sens^ Graeci
appellant artis medicae candidatos (...) Eras. Epist. dedicatorta Hilari^
prefix.
Filii prophetarum, children of the Prophets, 2. Kin. 6. 1. unto which phrase
there is allusion, Matt. 11. 19. Wisdom is justified of her children: by reason
of this Relation the Prophet sometimes is called a Father; Elisha cried out, My
Father, my Father, 2. King. 2. 12. The Targum. 2. Reg. 2. 12.
Targum expounds that place Rabbi, Rabbi; as much as to say, my Master, my
Master: And in truth the Rabbis grew very ambitious of the name Father, which
was the reason of our Saviors speech, Matthew. 23. 9. Call ^o man Father upon
earth.

The Kimchi in praefat. ad Hoschan.
Scripture sometimes joyneth to the name of the Prophet, the name of his
Father, as Hosea the son of Beeri, Hos. 1. 1. And such a one the Hebrews
confess to be Both a Prophet, and the son of a Prophet. Sometimes it mentions
the Prophets name, but not the Father; such a one they confess to be a Prophet,
but not the son of a Prophet: Sometimes it mentions with the Prophet, the
name of the City where he prophesied, and then it follows, that he was a
Prophet of that City. When a Prophet is mentioned without the name of the City,
then he is thought to be a Prophet of Jerusalem.

2. Wisemen: This Title though in it self it be general and common to all
Doctors, and Teachers of the Law; yet for many years before our Saviors
Incarnation, Gorionod. lib. 4. cap. 20.
it was either arrogated by the Pharisees, or else by the ignorant multitude
appropriated unto them, from an opinion of their extraordinary wisdom, in
teaching of Traditions,, which they preferred beyond the Law. Hence the
Pharisees were called Drus. de trib. sect. p. 86.
Masters of the Traditions: And hence was that counsel of R. Eleezer to his
Scholars, Buxtorf. Recens. operis Talmud, 19. p. 5.
that they should forbid their children from the study of the Bible, and place
them between the knees of their Wisemen. Hieronym. ad Algasiam, quest. 10.
Likewise hence, when any of their Doctors did read Lectures, their saying was,
(...), Our wisemen do teach tradictions. The like ambition we shall find among
the Grecians, all of them striving to be entitled (...), Wisemen: and hence,
whenever the chief of them had pleased the people in performance of their
Orations, or any other public business, they were honored with a Grand (...),
that is, with a loud acclamation of (...) Well done, or, wisely done; until
Pythagoras, in dislike of such swelling Titles, styled himself Philosophus, a
Lover of wisdom; which kind of modesty was afterward practiced by the Hebrew
Doctors; for they in after times, to avoid the suspicion of arrogance, refused
the name of (...) Chacamim, Wisemen, Elias Thisbit.
and styled themselves, (...) Discipuli sapientium, Learners of wisdom.

3. Scribes: This name was given to two sorts of men; some merely Laics,
others Clergymen. The body of the Laick Scribes, were those, to whom was
committed the instruction of young children in their minority, especially to
teach them to write; we may English them Scriveners. This office was
appropriated to the Tribe of Simeon. In this sense we read not of Scribes in
the Scripture, although the ground of their first institution has been taken
thence, namely, from those words which Jacob used unto Simeon and Levi; I will
divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel, Genesis 49. 7. So that as Levi
had no portion, but lived dispersed among the other Tribes, by the benefit of
the Altar: Solom. Iar. chi. Genesis 49. Vide Ambros. T^^. 4. cap 3. and Targum
Hierosol.
In like manner Simeon had no portion in the judgment of the Hebrews; but
lived scattered among the other tribes, getting their maintenance by teaching
and schooling little children: Whether this office of teaching children was
appropriated to them, I leave to the inquiry of others; certain I am that the
Simeonites had their own inheritance by lot, Josh 19. 1. And the prophecy
concerning their being scattered is thought to have been accomplished in this,
that the inheritance of the Simeonites, was taken out of the portion of the
children of Judah, Josh. 19. 9. Furthermore it is certain, that if not all
Scriveners, yet those public Notaries, who were employed in drawing Deeds, and
writing Contracts (be they of what Tribe they will) they were called by the
name of Scribes. Unto this there is allusion, Psalm. 45. 1. My tongue is as the
pen of a swift Writer, or ready Scribe. Out of the body of these, I conceive,
certain choice men to have been elected for public employments; some to attend
the King, as his Secretaries, termed, (...), the Kings Scribes, 2. Kin. 12. 10.
Such were Sheia. 2. Sam. 20. 25. And Shaphan, 2 Kin. 22. 3. Others to attend
the public Courts and Consistories: they much resembled our Clerks of Assizes,
these were termed, (...) the Scribes of the people, Mat. 2. 4. It. 1. Mac. 5.
42.

The second sort of Scribes belonged to the Clergy; they were Expositors of the
Law, and thence are they called (...) and (...), Scribes of the Law, Esra. 7.
9. Expounders of the Law, Luke 7. 30. and Doctors of the Law, Luke 5. 17. Their
Office was to write, read, and expound the Law of Moses to the people. The name
was a name of Office, not of Sect. Of this sort was Esdras, Esra 7. 6. who
though he were a Levite, yet Drus. de tribus sectis, l. 2. c. 12. ex. Chal.
Paraphrast.
others there were of the Tribe of Judah, and, as it is thought, they might
indifferently be of any Tribe. The name was of the like esteem among the
Hebrews, as the Magi were among the Chaldeans; the Quinde^imviri among the
Romans, for expounding Sybilla's Oracles, Or the Canonists in the Church of
Rome. The word (...) Sopherim, translated Scribes, signifies Numberers, or
Computers, and is applied to the Masorites, because they spent their time in
reckoning, and numbering, not only the verses, but the words also, and letters
of each Book throughout the Bible; which, as it is an argument of their
industry, Augustine. in Psalm. 40.
so likewise of Gods providence, in the preservation of his truth inviolable.
As the Wisemen in their Preaching pressed Traditions; so the Scribes clave to
the written word, whence they were Drusius de trib. sectis l. 2. cap. 13.
termed Text-men, or Masters of the Text. And to this purpose it is worth our
observing, that whereas both the Scribes and the Pharisees sought to fasten
accusations upon our Savior, Matt. 9. The Scribes accused him of blasphemy, v.
3. the Pharisees of eating with Publicans and sinners, v. 11. The Scribes
accusation was a breach of the Law; the Pharisees a breach of Traditions.

3. The Diputer. Vide Thisbit. in (...)
He insisted upon Allegories, and searched out mystical interpretations of the
Text. Hence himself was termed Darschan, and his exposition, or Homily,
Midrasch; and their School, Beth-Hammidrasch: They were counted the profounde
Interpreters, whence that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 84. 7. They go from strength
to strength, Targum Ps. 84. 7.
is interpreted, from their Temple to their Beth-Hammidrasch, from an inferior
to an higher School. Hereby we see the difference between those three sorts of
Predicants mentioned by Saint Paul. The Wise men were teachers of Traditions,
the Scribes teachers of the Text according to the literal interpretation, and
the Disputers teachers of Allegories and Mysteries; which fabulous expositions,
because they bred questions and disputations (...), 1 Timothy 1. 4. Hence is it,
that such an Expositor is termed (...), A Disputer. These three sorts of
Preachers, which S. Paul terms, the Wise man, the Scribe, and the Disputer, 1
Cor. 1. 20. are by the Hebrews named (...) Chacham, (...) Sopher, (...)
Darschan.

CHAP. VII.
Of their Title Rabbi.
ABout the time of our Savior Christ his Nativity, Titles began to be
multiplied; and amongst the rest, these of Rab, Ribbi, Rabbi, and Rabban, were
in especial use: they all are derived from (...) Rabab, signifying,
multiplicatus fuit, and they sound as much as (...), that is, a Master, or
Doctor, eminently gifted with variety of Knowledge. Concerning these titles,
they write thus, Aruch. in voc^ (...)
that Rabbi is a more excellent title than Rab, and Rabban more excellent then
Rabbi; and the simple name without any title, as Haggai, Zachary, Malachy, was
more excellent than Rabban. About this time they used a set from of Discipline
in their Schools. The Scholar was termed (...), Talmid, a Disciple, in respect
of his Learning; (...) Katan, a Junior, in respect of his minority; (...)
Bachur, that is, one chosen, or elected in respect of his election, or
cooptation, into the number of Disciples; After he had proved a good
Proficient, and was thought worthy of some degree, then was be by imposition of
hands made a Graduate, (...) Chaber, a Companion to a Rabbi. This imposition of
hands, they termed (...), vel (...), Semichah, or Semicuth, which Ceremony they
observed in imitation of Moes toward Joshua. The Lord said unto Moses, Take
thou Joshua the son of Nun, in whom is the Spirit, and put thine hand upon him,
Numb. 27. 18. At which time he that imposed hands on him, used (...) Id est,
Scaligero interpret: Ego tibi impon^ manum, and manus tibi imposita esto,
Tithaer. c 5. p. 264. vide etiam Cunaeum de Rep Heb. l. 1. cap. 12.
this form of words, I associate thee, and be thou associated. After this, when
he was worthy to teach others then was he called Rabbi; and whereas in his
minori y, his own name being suppressed, he was called only by his Fathers
name, the son of N. When he was made Graduate by imposition of hands. then was
he called by his own name, N. the son of N. And afterward when he was thought
worthy to teach, then was the Title Rabbi prefixed, after this manner; Rabbi N.
the son of N. For example, Maimonides; at first was termed only Ben Maimon, the
son of Maimon: after his degree, then was he called by his own name, added to
his fathers, Moses Ben Maimon, Moses the son of Maimon: at last being licensed
to teach, then was he called (...) Rambam, which abbreviature consisting of
Capital Letters, signifies, Rabbi Moses Ben Maimon, Rabbi Moses the son of
Maimon. So Rabbi Levi, the son of Gersom, in his minority was called The son of
Gersom, afterward Levi the son of Gersom at last, (...) Ralbag, Rabbi Levi the
son of Gersom. This distinction of Scholars, Companions, and Rabbis, appears
by that speech of an ancient Rabbi, saying, Vide P. Fagium in Scholiis suis ad
cap. 4. Pirke Aboth.
I learned much of my Rabbis, or Masters, more of my companions, most of all
of my Scholars. That every Rabbi had Disciples, and that his own Disciples, and
other well-wishers styled him by the name of Rabbi, in the days of our
Savior, needs no proof. Judas came to Christ, and said, God save thee Rabbi,
Mat. 26. 49 In like manner John's Disciples came and saluted John by the name of
Rabbi, John 3. 26. and Christ's by the name of Rabbi, John 1. 38. But whether
there was such a formal imposition of hands then in use, I much doubt. The
manner of their meetings, when Disputations were had in their Synagogues, or
other Schools, was Philo Jud. Quod omnis probus, p. 679.
thus. The chief Rabbis sat in reserved Chairs; these are those chief seats
in the Synagogues, which the Scribes and Pharisees so affected, Mat. 23. 6.
Their Companions sat upon Benches or lower Forms; their Scholars on the
ground at the feet of their Teachers. Saint Paul was brought up at the feet of
Gamaliel, Act. 22. 3. And Mary sat at Jesus feet, and heard his word, Luke 10.
39. The positure of their body differed according to their degrees. The
Scaliger in Trihaeres. cap. 5: Ecc. c. 1. Bara. coth.
Rabbi is described to be (...) Joscheb, one that sits: the Companion,
(...), Muteth, the word signifies a kind of leaning upon a bed or bench, ones
head lying in the others bosom, in manner of the ancient sitting at table; and
it was a deportment of the body, inferior to that of Pirke Aboth. cap. 4.
sitting: The Scholar was termed (...), Mithabek, one that does lie along in
the dust; and this was a token of the Scholars humility, thus humbling and
subjecting himself even to the feet of his Master: Ambros. 1 Cor. 14.
This same custom, it is thought, Saint Paul labored to bring into the
Christian Church, 1. Cor. 14. Their Scholars were not all of equal capacity,
whence Park Aboth. cap. 5.
they said, some had conditionem spongiae, others clepsydrae, others sacci
faecinacei, and others cribri. Some resembled the Sponge, and sucked in all
that they heard without judgment; others the Hourglass, they took in at one
ear, and let out at the other; others the Winesack, through which Wine is so
drained from the dregs, that only the dregs remain behind: Lastly, others the
Rying sieve, which in winnowing lets out the courser seed, and keeps in the
corn.

CHAP. VIII.
Of their Nazarites and Rechabites.
THere are two sorts of Votaries mentioned in the Old Testament; Rechabites,
Jerem. 35. and Nazarites, Numb. 6. I find scarce any thing warrantable
concerning these two, more than what the Scripture delivers in the
fore-quoted places therefore concerning the matter of their Vows, I refer the
Reader to the aforesaid Texts of Scripture; here only we will note the
distinction of Nazarites. The first are these Votaries, termed so from (...)
Nazar, to separate, because they separated themselves from three things; First,
from Wine, and all things proceeding from the Vine. Secondly, from the Razor,
because they suffered no Razor to come upon their head, but let their hair grow
all the days of their separation. Thirdly, from pollution by the dead: this
separation again was twofold, either for a set number of days, or for a man's
whole life that they termed Naziraeatum dierum, this, Naziraeatum seculi: of
that sort was S. Paul, and those four with him, Acts 21. 24. Of this sort
Sampson, Judges 13. and John Baptist. The just number of days, how long the
former of these two separated themselves, is not expressed in Scripture, but
the Sheingler. in Pentaglot.
Hebrew Doctors determine them to be thirty, because it is said, Number. 6. 5.
Domino sanctus, (...) erit; which word (say they) containing thirty, expresses
the just number of days to be observed in this voluntary separation. The second
sort of Nazarites, were so termed from (...) Natsar, from whence comes
Natsareth, or Nazareth, the name of a certain Village in Galilee, where Christ
was conceived and brought up: Hence our Savior himself was called a Nazarene,
or Nazarite, Matt. 2. 23. and those that embraced his Doctrine, Nazarites, Act.
24. 5. Afterward certain Heretics sprung up, who as the Samaritanes joined
Jewish ceremonies with Heathenish Rites: so Hieronym. Isai. 8. Idem refert
Epiphanius. l. 1. Tom. 2. haer. 29.
they joined together Christ and Moses, the Law and the Gospel; Baptism and
Circumcision: of the beginning of these we shall read, Acts 15. 2. Then came
down certain from Judaea, and taught the brethren, saying, Except ye be
circumcised after the manner of Moses, ye cannot be saved. These Heretics were
called Nazarites, either of malice by the Jews, to bring the greater disgrace
upon Christian Religion; or else because at first they were true, though weak
Nazarites, that is, Christians misled by Peter's Judaizing at Antioch, Gal. 2.
11. And hence it is though Francise. Jan. pa^all. lib. 1. 8.
that the Church at Antioch in detestation of this new bred heresy, fastened
upon them by the name of Nazarites, forsook that name, and called themselves
Christians, Acts 11 26. Symmachus, that famous Interpreter of the Old
Testament, was a strong Defender of this heresy, and August. l. 1^ contra
Faust^ Manichaeum. c. 4.
from him in after times they were named Symmachiani. The Jews had them in as
great hatred as the Samaritanes; whereupon Epiphan l 1. Tom. 2. haeres. 29.
three times every day, at morning, noon tide, and evening, they closed their
Prayers with a solemn execration, Maledic Domine Nazoraeis. Lastly, another
sort of Nazarites there were, so termed from (...) Nazar, signifying to abolish
or cut off; Epipham. l. 1. Tom. 1. haeres. 18.
because they did abolish and cut off the five books of Moses, rejecting them
as not Canonical.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Assideans.
IT is much controversed, whether the Assideans were Pharisees or Essenes, or
what they were. Were I worthy to deliver my opinion, or, as the Hebrews Proverb
is, To thrust in my head amongst the heads of those wise men; I conceive of the
Assideans thus: Before their captivity in Babylon, we shall find the word (...)
Chasidim, (translated Assidaei, Assideans) to signify the same as, (...)
Tsadikim, Just, or goodmen: both were used promiscuously, the one for the
other, and both stood in equal opposition to the (...) Reschagnim, that is,
ungodly or wicked men. At this time the whole body of the Jews were
distinguished into two sorts, Chasidim, and Reschagnim, good, and bad.

After their captivity, the Chasidim began to be distinguished from the
Tsadikim. D. Kanchi. Psalm. 103. 17.
The Tsadikim gave themselves to the study of the Scripture. The Chasidim
studied how to add unto the Scripture. Pirk. Abeth. cap. 5.
Secondly, The Tsadikim would conform to whatsoever the Law required. The
Chasidim would be holy above the Law. Thus to the repairing of the Temple, the
maintenance of sacrifices, the relief of the poor, etc. they would voluntarily
add over and above to that which the Law required of them. Whence it is noted,
that those were Chasidim who would say, What is mine, is thine; and what is
thine, is thy own: those Reschagnim, which would say, What is thine is mine;
and what is mine, is mine own. And it is probable, that that middle sort
mentioned in the same place, who would say, What is mine, is mine; what is
thine, is thine own, were the very Tsadikim.

At this time the body of the Jews were distinguished into three sorts, in
respect of holiness. First Reschagnim, (...), Wicked and ungodly men. Secondly,
Tsadikim, (...), Just and righteous men. Thirdly, Chasidim, who are sometimes
translated (...), Holy men, and that for the most part: Assid ^i de quib^
agitur. 1 Macab. 7. 12. vocantu^ a Joseph^, l^b. cap. 16. (...).
but sometimes also (...), Good men: These of all others were best reputed, and
beloved of the people. The Apostle showing the great love of Christ, dying for
us, amplifieth it by allusion unto this distinction of the people: Christ died
for the ungodly. Scarcely for a righteous man will one die, yet peradventure
for a good man some would even dare to die. Romans 5. 6, 7. The gradation
stands thus: Some paradventure would die, for one of the Chasidim, a good
man: scarcely any, for one of Tsadikim, a just or righteous man; for the
Reschagnim, or ungodly, none would die: Yet Christ dyed for us ungodly, being
sinners, and his enemies.

Now as long as these Works of supererogation remained arbitrary and
indifferent, not required as necessary, though preferred before the simple
obedience to the Law; so long the heat of contention was not great enough to
breed Sects and Heresies: But when once the Precepts and Rules of
supererogation were digested into Canons, and urged with an opinion of
necessity; then from the Chasidim issued the brood of Pharisees; Joseph.
Scalig. Trihaeres. c. 22.
and also from them (as it is probably thought) the Heresy of the Essenes,
both obtruding unwritten Traditions upon the People, as simply necessary, and
as a more perfect rule of sanctity than the Scripture. At this time the
Tsadikim in heat of opposition rejected not only Traditions, but all Scripture,
except only the five Books of Moses; for which reason they were called Karaim.
Joseph Scalig. ibid.
Some are of opinion, they rejected only traditions, and embraced all the books
of Scripture, Which opinion soever we follow; they had their name (...) Karaim,
Textuales, Scriptuarii, i. Text-men, or Scripture-readers, because they adhered
to Scripture alone, withstanding and gainsaying Traditions with all their
might. And if we follow the latter, then all this while the Karaim were far
from Heresy: but in process of time, when from Sadok and Baithus, these Karaim
learned to deny all future rewards for good works, or punishment for evil, or
resurrection from the dead; now the Karaim became complete Sadduces, and
perfect Heretics, taking their denomination from their first Author Sadok. The
time of each Heresies first beginning, shall be more exactly declared in their
several Chapters.

CHAP. X.
Of the Pharisees.
THere are Quart^m etymolig^^m (eujus fundus and author putatur Hieronymus,
Prefat^, in Amos) refellit Scriptura Hebraica; si enim Pharisaeus diceretur a
verbo (...) Dividere, scriberentur Pharisaei. (...) non (...)
three Opinions concerning the Etymology of the name Pharisee. The first are
those which derive it from (...) Parash, Expandere, Explicare; either from the
enlarging and laying open their Phylacteries, or from their open performance of
good works in public view of the People, as being ambitious of man's praises.
Secondly, from (...) Parasch, Exponere, Explanare; because they were of chief
repute; and counted the profoundest Doctors for the exposition of the Law, so
that they were termed Gorionides. c. 22.
Peruschim, quia Poreschim; Pharisees, because they were Expounders of the Law.
Thirdly, others derive the name from the same Verb, but in the conjugation
Piel, where it signifies dividere, separare, to separate. Suidas.
In this acception, by the Greeks they were termed (...), we may English them
Separatists. Their separation is considerable, partly in the particulars unto
which, partly in those from which they separated.

First, They separated themselves to the study of the Law, in which respect
they might be called, (...), Separated unto the Law. In illusion unto this, the
Apostle is Diusius de trib. sectis, l. 2. c. 2.
thought to have styled himself, Romans 1. 11. (...) Separated unto the Gospel:
when he was called from being a Pharisee, to be a Preacher of the Gospel, and
now not separated to the Law, but to the Gospel.

Secondly, They separated themselves, or at least pretended a (e) separation to
an extraordinary sanctity of (...) Suidas.
life above other men. God, I thank thee, that I am not as other men are,
Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers, etc. Luke 18. 11.

The particulars, from which they separated themselves, were these.

First, From commerce which other people, as afterward will appear in their
Traditions; whence they called the common people, by reason of their ignorance,
(...) populum terrae, the people of the earth. In the Gospel of Saint John 7.
49. they are called (...). This people who knows not the Law are cursed.

Secondly, From the R David Sephon. 1. 8.
apparel and habit of other men: for they used peculiar kind of Habits, whereby
they would be distinguished from the vulgar. Hence proceeded that common
speech, Vestes populi terrae conculcatio sunt Pharisaeorum.

Thirdly, From the Thisbites.
customs and manners of the world. This heresy of the Pharisees seems to
have had its first beginning in Antigonus Sochaeus. He being a Pharisee,
succeeded Simon the Just; who was Coetanean with Alexander the Great: he lived
three hundred years before the birth of Christ.

The Pharisees were Chrysostom. Mat. 15.
not tied to any particular Tribe or Family, but indifferently they might be of
any; S. Paul was a Benjamite; Flavius Josep. lib. 13. c. 18.
Hyrcanus was a Levite. Each Sect had its Dogmata, his proper Aphorisms,
Constitutions, or Canons: so the Pharisees had theirs. My purposes is, both
concerning these and the other Sects, to note only those Canons, or Aphorisms,
wherein chiefly they were heretical, and one differing from the other.

First, The Pharisees Joseph. l. 13 c. 9.
ascribed some things to Fate, or Destiny, and some things to man's Free Will.

Secondly, They confessed that there were Angels, and Spirits, Acts 23. 8.

Thirdly, Concerning the resurrection of the dead, they acknowledged it, and
Joseph de bello Judaic. lib. 2. cap. 12.
taught that the souls of evil men deceased, presently departed into
everlasting punishment; but the souls, they say, of good men, passed by a kind
of Pythagorean (...) into other good men's bodies. Hence it is Serar. Trihaeres.
l. 2. c. 3. It. Drus. in praeter.
thought that the different opinions concerning our Savior did arise; Some
saying that he was John Baptist; others, Elias; others, Jeremia, Matthew. 16. 14.
As if Christ his body had been animated by the soul either of John, Elias, or
Jeremias.

Fourthly, They did stiffly maintain the Traditions of their Elders. For the
better understanding what their Traditions were, we must know that the Jews say
the Law was Moses Kotsens. in praef. lib. precept.
twofold, one committed to writing, which they called (...) Thorah schebichtah,
The written Law; the other delivered by tradition, termed by them, (...) Thorah
begnal pe. They say both were delivered by God unto Moses upon Mount Sinai, the
latter as an exposition of the former, which Moses afterward delivered by mouth
to Joshua, Joshua to the Elders, the Elders to the Prophets, the Prophets to
those of the great Synagogue, from whom successively it descended to
after-ages. These Traditions were one of the chief Controversies between the
Pharisees, and the Sadduces. Gorionides, c. 29.
The Pharisees said, Let us maintain the Law which our forefathers have
delivered into our hands, expounded by the mouth of the wise men, who expounded
it by tradition. And lo, the Sadduces said, Let us not believe or hearken to
any tradition or exposition, but to the Law of Moses alone. The Traditions
which they chiefly urged, were these;

1. They would not eat until they washed their hands, Why do thy Disciples
transgress the Tradition of the Elders? for they wash not their hands when they
eat bread, Mat. 15. 2. This washing is said to have been done (...), Mar. 7. 3.
that is, often, as some translate the word, taking (...) in this place, to
signify the same as (...) in Homer, frequenter. Others translate the word
accurate, diligenter, intimating the great care and diligence they used in
washing: with this the (...). Luke 1. 39.
Syriac Text agrees. Joseph. Scalig. Trihaeres.
Others think that there is in that phrase, allusion into that rite or manner
of washing in use among the Jews, termed by them (...) Netilath iadaim, the
lifting up of their hands. The Greek word (...), is thought to express this
rite, because in this kind of washing, They used to join the tops of the
fingers of each hand together with the thumb, so that each hand did after a
sort resemble (...), i. a fist. This Ceremony was thus performed: First, they
washed their hands clean. Secondly, they composed them into the forementioned
form. Thirdly, they lifted them up, so that the water ran down to the very
elbows. Lastly they let down their hands again, so that the water ran from off
their hands upon the earth. Munster in Deuteronomy. 8.
and that there might be store of water running up and down, they poured fresh
Water on them when they lifted up their hands, and poured Water twice upon them
when they hanged them down. Unto this kind of washing Theophylact seems to
have reference, when he says, that the Pharisees did Theophylact. in Marc. 7.
3.
cubitaliter lavare, wash up to their elbows. Lastly, others Beza in majoribus
suis annotationibus. Marc. 7. 3.
interpret (...), to be the fist, or hand closed, and the manner of washing
hereby denoted, to be by rubbing one hand closed in the plain or hollow of the
other. All imply a diligent and accurate care in washing: the ceremomous
washing by lifting up the hands, and hanging them down, best expresses the
superstition, which only was aimed at in the reproof, though all the sorts of
washing, to the Pharisees were superstitious, because they made it not a matter
of outward decency and civility, bur of Religion, to eat with washed or unwasht
hands, urging such a necessity hereof, Drusius praeterit. Mat. 15. in addend.
and Buxtorf. synag. Judai c. 6. p. 93. ex Talmud.
that in case a man may come to some water, but not enough both to wash and to
drink; he should rather choose to wash than to drink, though he dye with thirst.
And it was deemed amongst them as great a sin to eat with unwasht hands, as to
commit fornication. This tradition of washing hands, though it were chiefly
urged by the Pharisees, yet all the Jews maintained it, as appears by the
places quoted.

We may observe three sorts of washing of hands in use among the Jews. 1.
Pharisaical and superstitious, this was reproved. 2. Ordinary, for outward
decency; this was allowed. The third, in token of innocence; this was commanded
by the Elders of the neighboring Cities, in case of Murder, Deuteronomy. 21. 6. It
was practiced by Pilate, Mat. 37. 24. and alluded unto by David, I will wash my
hands in innocence, so will I compass thine Altar, Psalm. 26. 6.

2. When they came from the Market they washed, Mar. 7. 4. The reason thereof,
was, because they there having to do do with diverse sorts of people, unawares
they might be polluted. The word used by Saint Mark, is (...) they baptized
themselves: Implies the washing of their whole body. And it seems that those
Pharisees who wete more zealous than others, did thus wash themselves always
before dinner. The Pharisee marvelled that Christ had not first washed himself
before dinner, Luke 11, 38. Unto this kind of superstition St. Peter is thought
to have inclined, when he said, Lord, not my Feet only, but also my hands, and
my head, John 13. 9. Thus finding his modesty disliked, when he refused to have
his feet washed by his Lord and Master; now he leapeth into the other extreme,
as if he had said, Not my feet only, but my whole body. Hence proceeded that
Sect of the Hemerobaptistae, i. e. Daily baptists, so called Epiph. l. 1. Tom.
1. c. 17.
because they did every day thus wash themselves.

4. They washed their cups, and pots, and brazen vessels, and tables, Mark 7. 4.

3. They held it unlawful to eat with sinners, Mat. 9. 11. yea, they judged it
a kind of pollution to be touched by them. Luke 7. 39. If this man were a
Prophet, he would surely have known who, and what manner of woman this is which
touches him, for she is a sinner. Of such a people the Prophet speaks: They
said, Stand apart, come not near to me, or (as the words may be rendered) (...)
Ne attingas me.
Touch me not, for I am holier than thou, Esaias 65. 5. Scalig. de emend. temp.
lib. 7. Idem refert Epiphan. lib. 1. Tom. 1. cap. 13.
The like practice was in use among the Samaritans, who if they met any
stranger, they cried out, (...), Ne attingas, Touch not.

5. They fasted twice in the week, Luke 18. 12. Theophylact. in Luke 18. 12.
It. Epiph. haeres. 16.
Namely, Mundays and Thursdays. Drusius in Luc 18. 13.
Because Moses (as they say) went up into Mount Sinai on a Thursday, and came
down on a Monday.

6. They made broad their Phylacteries, and enlarged the borders of their
garments, Matthew. 23. 5. Here three things are worthy our consideration. First,
What these Phylacteries were. Secondly, What was written in them. Thirdly,
Whence they were so called. Epiph. lib. 1. Tom. 1. cap. 15.
Epiphanius interprets these Phylacteries to be (...), purple studs, or
flourishes, woven in their garments: as if Epiphanius had conceived the
Pharisees garment to be like that which the Roman Senators were wont to wear,
termed, by reason of those broad-studs and works woven in it, Laticlavium: but
seeing that these Phylacteries were additaments and ornaments, whereof there
were Moses Kotsen. prae^. affir. 22.
two sorts, the one tied to their Fore heads, the other to their Lefthands;
hence it follows, that by these Phylacteries could not be meant whole
garments, or any embosments, or flourishings woven in the cloth. Generally
they are thought to be schedules or scrols of parchment, whereof, as I noted,
there were two sorts; Phylacteries for the Forehead, or Frontlets, reaching
from one Ear to the other, and tied behind with a thong; and Phylacteries for
the hand fastened upon the Left-arm above the Elbow on the inside, that it
might be near the heart. Both these sorts were worn, not by the Pharisees only,
Maimon. in Tephillim. c. 4. sect. 3.
but by the Sadduces also, but with this difference; The Pharisees happily for
greater ostentation, wore their Hand- Phylacteries above their Elbows: the
Sadduces on the palms of their Hands. Scalig. ^rih^res. (...). 258.
Nay, all the Jews wore them, our Savior Christ not excepted. The command was
general, Exodus 13. 9. It shall be for a sign unto thee upon thine hand, and for
a memorial between thine eyes. So that it is not the wearing of them which our
Savior condemned, but the making of them broad, whereby they would appear more
holy than others.

In these Parchments they wrote Chrysostom. and Hier. in Mat. 23.
only the Decalogue, or Ten Commandments, in the opinion of Chrysostom and
Hierom: but generally, and upon better grounds, it is thought they wrote these
four sections of the Law.

1. The first began, Sanctify unto me all the firstborn, etc. Exodus 13. 2. to
the end of the 10, verse. 2. The second began, And it shall be when the Lord
shall bring thee, etc. Exodus 13. 11. to the end of the 16. verse. 3. The third
began, Hear O Israel, etc. Deuteronomy. 6. 4. and continued to the end of ninth verse.
4. The fourth began, And it shall come to pass; if you shall hearken
diligently, etc. Deuteronomy. 11. 13. to the end of the one and twentieth verse.
These four Sections written in scrolls of Parchment, and folded up, they
fastened to their foreheads and their left-arms: those that were for the fore
head, they wrote in four distinct pieces of Parchment, Moses Kotsens. fol. 104.
col. 3.
especially, and if they wrote it in one piece; the length of every Section
ended in one column, and they did put them into one skin, in which there was
the proportion of four houses or receptacles, and not into four skins: every
receptacle was distinct by it self; and those that were for the hand, were
written in one piece of Parchment principally, the four Sections in four
columns; but if they wrote them in four pieces, it was at length, and they put
them in a skin that had but one receptacle. Munster de praecept. affirm.
In time of persecution when they could not openly wear these Phylacteries,
then did they tie about their hands a red thread, to put them in mind of the
blood of the Covenant of the Law.

Touching the name, Moses calls them (...) Totaphoth, which word has almost
as mamy Etymologies, as Interpreters; the most probable in my opinion, is, that
they should be so called per Antiphrasin, from (...) Incedere, to go or move,
because they were immovable: Hence the Septuagint translate them, (...),
Immovable ornaments. The Rabbis call them Tephillim, Prayer-ornaments:
Hieronym. in Mat. 23.
others call them Pittacia, and Pittaciola, from (...), which signifies a
piece or parcel of Cloth. In the Gospel they are called (...), Phylacteries,
from (...), to conserve or keep. First, because by the use of them, the Law was
kept and preserved in memory. Secondly, because the Pharisees superstitiously
conceited, that by them, as by Amulets, Spells, and Charms, hanged about their
necks, themselves might be preserved from dangers. The word (...) signifies a
Spell; and Hierome testifies, that the Pharisees had such a conceit of these
ornaments: In which place he compares the Pharisees with certain superstitious
women of his time, who carried up and down, upon the like ground, parvula
evangelia, and crucis ligna, short sentence out of the Gospel, and the relics
of the Cross. The same Superstition has prevailed with many of latter times,
who for the same purpose hang the beginning of Scalig. Tri. haeres. cap. 7.
Saint John's Gospel about their necks. And in the year of our Lord 692.
certain Sorceres were condemned for the like kind of n Council. quinti. Sexti,
Canon 61.
Magic, by the name of (...), that is, Phylacterians.

Thus much of their Phylacteries: In the same verse is reproved the enlarging
of their borders. Vide D. Kimchi. Radic.
That which we read borders in the Gospel, is called, Number. 25. 38. (...)
Tsitsith, Fringes, and (...) Gadilim, Deuteronomy. 22. 10. which word we likewise
translate in that place, Fringes. They were in the fore-quoted places
commanded, and our Savior Christ himself did wear them, Luk 8. 44. The latter
Hebrew word signifies a large Fringe, which aggravateth the superstition of
the Pharis^es, in making their Fringes larger, when the Law had allowed them
large. This literal exposition I take to be most agreeable with the Text,
though to enlarge in To (...), apud Euripidem in Bacchis, valet, Magnifice
jactare, Efferre. Magnificare apud Varonem and Plinium eadem significatione
usurpatur. Theod (...). Beza in Mat. 23.
Greek and Latin sometimes, signifies to boast, vaunt, or brag of a thing;
and in this sense it may very well fit a Pharisee. The reason of this command
was, to put them in mind of the commandments, Numb. 15. And for the furtherance
of this duty, Hieron. in Mat. 23.
they used sharp thorns in their Fringes, that by the often pricking of the
Thorns, whether they walked or sat still, they might be the more mindful of
the Commandments.

There were Talmud. tract. Suta. cap. 3.
seven sorts of Pharisees. 1. Pharisaeus Sichemita, He turned Pharisee for
gain, as the Sichemites suffered themselves to be circumcised.

2. Pharisaeus truncatus, so called, as if he had no feet, because he would
scarce lift them from the ground when he walked, to cause the greater opinion
of his meditation.

3. Pharisaeus impingens. He would shut his eyes when he walked abroad, to
avoid the sight of Women, in so much that he often dashed his head against the
walls, that the blood gushed out.

4. Pharisaeus, Quid debeo facere, and faciam illud. He was wont to say, What
ought I to do? and I will do it. Of this sort seems the man in the Gospel to
have been, who came unto Christ, saying, Good Master, what shall I do? etc. and
at last replied, All these have I done from my youth upward, Luke 18.

5. Pharisaeus mortarius; So called because he wore a hat in manner of a deep
Mortar, such as they use to bray spice in, in so much that he could not look
upward, nor of either side; only down-ward on the ground, and forward or
forth-right.

6. Pharisaeus ex amore; Such a one as obeyed the Law for the Love of Virtue.

7. Pharisaeus ex timore; Such a one obeyed Law for fear of punishment. He that
conformed for fear had respect chiefly to the negative Commandments; but he
that conformed for love, especially respected the Affirmative.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Sadduces.
TO omit other Etymologies of the name, there are two only, which have show of
probability. Epiphan. lib. 1. cap. 14.
Some derive it from Sedek Justicia; as if they had been Justiciaries, such as
would justify themselves before Gods Tribunal. (...). Theophylact.
There are that derive it, and that upon more warrantable grounds, from Sadoc,
the first Author of the heresy; so that the Sadduces were so called from
Sadoc, as the Arrians from Arrius, the Pelagians from Pelagius, the Donatists
from Donatus, etc.

This Sadoc lived under Antigonus Sochaeus, who succeeded Simon the Just. He
was Antigonus his scholar, and by him brought up in the doctrine of the
Pharisees, but afterward fell from him, and broacht the heresy of the
Sadduces; which heresy, because it had much affinity with that which the
Heretic Dositheus taught, hence are the Sadduces said to Epiph. haeres. 14.
It. Tertul. de praescript. c. 45.
be a branch or skirt of the Dositheans, though in truth Dositheus lived not
till Origin contra Celsum. l. 2.
after Christ; and although these two heresies did agree in many things; yet in
a main point they differed. Epiph. haeres. 13.
Dositheus believed the Resurrection, the Sadduces denied it; and by
consequence the Dositheans believed all other points necessarily flowing from
this.

The occasion of this heresy was this. Aboth. cap. 1.
When Antigonus taught; that we must not serve God as servants serve their
Masters, for hope of reward, his scholars Sadoc and Baithus understood him, as
if he had utterly denied all future rewards or recompense attending a godly
life, and thence framed their heresy, denying the resurrection, the world to
come, Angels, Spirits, etc.

Their Dogmata, Canons, or Constitutions were, 1 They rejected Joseph Antiq.
lib. 13. c. 18.
the Prophets, and all other Scripture save only the five Books of Moses.
Therefore our Savior, when he would confute their error concerning the
resurrection of the dead, he proves it not out of the Prophets, but out of
Exodus 3. 6. I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob,
Mat. 22. 32.

2. They rejected Elias in (...)
all traditions. Whence, as they were called (...) Minaei, i. Heretics, in
respect of the general opposition between them and the Pharisees. First,
because the Pharisees were in repute the only Catholics. Secondly, because in
their Doctrine, the Pharisees were much nearer the truth than the Sadduces: So
in respect of this particular opposition, in the ones rejecting, the others
urging of traditions, the Sadduces were Drusius de trib. sect. c. 8. l. 3. p.
130.
termed (...) Karaim, Biblers, or Scripturists.

3. They said there was no reward for good works, nor punishment for ill, in
the world to come. Hence Saint Paul perceiving that in the Council the one part
were Sadduces, the other Pharisees, he cried out, Of the hope i. of the reward
expected, and of the resurrection of the dead, I am called in question, Act.
23. 6.

4. They denied the resurrection of the body, Act. 23. 8. Mat. 22. 23. Luke 20.
27.

5. They said the souls of men are Joseph. de bello Judaic. lib. 2. c. 12.
annihilated at their death.

6. They denied Angels and spirits, Acts 23. 8.

7. They wholly denied Joseph l. 13. c. 9.
Fate or Destiny, and ascribed all to man's Free Will.

The Samaritanes and the Sadduces are of near affinity: but yet they differ.
First Epiphan Tom. 1. lib. 1. haeres. 14.
The Samaritanes sacrificed at the Temple built upon Mount Gerizim; but the
Sadduces sacrificed at Jerusalem. Secondly, The Samaritanes allowed no commerce
with the Jews. John 4. 9. yeam the mutual hatred between the Samaritanes and
the Jews was so great, that it was not lawful for the Jews to eat or drink with
the Samaritanes. How is it that thou being a Jew, ask drink of me which am a
Woman of Samaria? Joh. 4. 9. Nay, whereas liberty was granted unto all Nations
of the earth to become Proselytes to the Jews, so did the Jews hate the
Samaritanes, that they would not suffer a Samaritan to be a Proselyte. This
appears by that solemn Drusius de crib. sect. lib. 3. cap. 11. ex Ilmedenu.
Excommunication, termed Excommunicatio in secreto nominis tetragrammati: The
form thereof, as it was applied (say they) by Ezra and Nehemiah unto the
Samaritanes, was thus. They assembled the whole Congregation into the Temple of
the Lord, and they brought 300 Priests, and 300 Trumpets, and 300 Books of the
Law, and as many boys, and they sounded their Trumpets, and the Levites singing
cursed the Samaritanes by all the sorts of Excommunication, in the mystery of
the name Jehovah, and in the Decalogue, and with the curse of the superior
house of judgment, and likewise with the curse of the inferior house of
Judgment, that no Israelite should eat the bread of a Samaritane, (whence they
say, he which eats of a Samaritanes bread, is as he who eats swines flesh)
and let no Samaritane be a Proselyte in Israel, and that they should have no
part in the resurrection of the dead. R. (...).
Gersom forbade the breaking upon of the Letters, under the penalty of this
Excommunication. This proves what formerly was said, namely, that between the
Jews and the Samaritanes there was no commerce; but the Sadduces familiarly
conversed with the other Jews, even with the Pharisees themselves; yea, both
sat together in the same Council, Acts 23. 6. Now the Samaritanes and Sadduces
agree. 1. In the rejection of all traditions. 2. In the rejection of all other
Scriptures save only the five Books of Moses. 3. In the denial of the
resurrection and the consequences, as future punishments, and rewards according
to men's works. But the Samatanes held that there were Angels, which the
Sadduces denied. For the proof of these Agreements and Disagreements between
them, read Epiphanius, haeres. 9. and 14.

Touching the Samaritanes, there are three degrees or alteration in their
Religion, observable. First, the strange Nations, transplanted by Salmanesar
into Samaria, when Israel was carried away Captive into Assyria, worshipped
every one the God of their own Countries, 2 King. 17. Secondly, when they saw
they were devoured by Lions, because they feared not the Lord; the King of
Assyria sent one of the Priests which was taken Captive, to instruct them in
the true worship of God: Which manner of Worship though they received, yet they
would not lay aside their former Idolatry, but made a mixture of Religions,
worshipping the living God, and their own dumb Idols. Thirdly Manasses, brother
to Jaddus the High Priest, in Jerusalem, being married to Sanballet, the
Horonite's Daughter, by reason of Nehemiah's charge of putting away their
strange Wives, being driven to that exigent, that he must either put away his
wife, or forgo the hope of the Priesthood; by Sanballets means he obtained
leave from Alexander the Great, to build a Temple Joseph. Antiq. lib. 11. cap.
8.
upon Mount Garizim, one of the highest mountains in Samaria, whither many
other apostated Jews fled, together with Manasses being made their High priest;
and now the sect of Samaritanes (between whom and the Jews there was such
hatred) began, now all those forementioned errors were maintained: And of this
Hill it is, that the Woman of Samaria speaks, John 4. 20. Our Fathers
worshipped in this Mountain, etc.

By comparing the Dogmata of the Pharisees, with these of the Sadduces, we may
perceive a manifest opposition between them; yet both these joined against
Christ, Mark 12.

This heresy, though it were the grossest amongst the Jews, yet was it
embraced and maintained by some of the high Priests themselves: G^ cap. 29.
Joannes Hyreanus was a Sadducee, so were his sons, Aristobulus and Alexander,
Eusebius. hist. l. 2. c. 23. Ex Joseph. Antiq. lib. 20. cap. 8.
and likewise Ananus the younger; so that Moses Chair was not amongst them
exempted from error, no nor heresy.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Essenes.
THe Etymologies of the Names Essaei, or Esseni. i. ^sse^es, are diverse; that
which I prefer is from the Syriack (...) Asa, signifying (...), to heal or cure
Diseases. Joseph de h^ Judai^. lib. 2. c. 12. p. 786.
Hence are the men so often termed, (...)* and the Women amongst them, (...),
that is, Physicians. For though they gave themselves chiefly to the study of
the Bible, yet withal they studied Physic.

Of these Essenes there were two sorts; some Theoricks, giving themselves
wholly to speculation; others Practicks, laborious and painful in the daily
exercise of those handy-crafts, in which they were most skilful. Of the latter,
Philo treats in his book entitled, Quod omnis vir probus: Of the former, in
the book following, entitled, De vita contemplativa.

Their Dogmata, their Ordinances, or Constitutions, did symbolize in many
things with Pythagoras his, where they do agree. Therefore my purpose is, first
to name Pythagoras his; and then to proceed on with the Essenes. They follow
thus.

The Aul. Gell. l. 1.
Pithagoreans professed a Communion of goods So the Essenes, 10. 1. It. Laert.
in Pythag. (...).
they had one common purse or stock, none richer, none poorer than other; out
of this common treasury, every one supplied his own wants without leave, and
administered to the necessities of others: only they might not relieve any of
their kindred without leave from their Overseers. They did not buy or sell
among themselves, but each supplied the others wants, by a kind of Commutative
bartring: yea liberty was granted to take one from another what they wanted,
without exchange. They performed offices of Service mutually one to another;
for mastership and service cannot stand with Communion of goods: and servants
are commonly injurious to the state of their Masters, according to that saying
of R. Gamaliel. (...) Marbe gnabadim. Marbe gezel. Pirke. Aboth. cap. 1.
He that multiplieth servants, multiplyeth thieves. When they traveled,
besides weapons for defense, they took nothing with them; for in whatsoever
City or Village they came, they repaired to the fraternity of the Essenes, and
were there entertained as members of the same. And if we do attentively read
Josephus, we may observe that the Essenes of every City joined themselves into
one common Fraternity or College. Every College had two sorts of Officers:
First, Treasurers, who looked to the common stock, provided their diet,
appointed each his task and other public necessaries. Secondly, Others who
entertained their strangers.

2. The Pythagoreans shunned ^ustin lib 20.
pleasures. Joseph. de Be^o Judaic. lib. 2. c. 12.
So did the Essenes: to this belongs their avoiding of oil, which, if any
touched unawares, they wiped it off presently.

3. Pythagoreans Suidas, It. Aelian. de varia hist. l. 12. cap. 32.
garments were white: Joseph. de bello Judaic. lib 2. cap. 12.
So were the Essenes white also, modest not costly: when once they put on a
suit, they never changed it till it was torn, or worn out.

4. The Pythagoreans forbade La^r. in vita Pythagorae.
Oaths. Philo Judaeus.
So did the Essenes; they, thought him a noted Liar, who could not be believed
without an Oath.

5. The Pythagoreans had their Suidas, It. Laertius.
Elders in singular respect. Joseph. de bello Judaic. lib. 2. cap. 12.
So had the Essenes, The body, or whole company of the Essenes were
distinguished (...), into four ranks, or orders, according to their Seniority;
and if happily any of the superior ranks had touched any of the inferior, he
thought himself polluted, as if he had touched an Heathen.

6. The Pythagoreans drank Suidas.
water. So did the Philo de vita contemplativa.
Essenes only water, wholly abstaining from Wine.

7. The Pythagoreans used Laertius in vita Pythag.
(...) inanimate sacrifices. So did the Joseph. Antiq. lib. 18 ^ap. 2.
Essenes: They sent gifts to the Temple, and did not sacrifice, but preferred
the use of their holy water before sacrifice, for which reason the other Jews
forbad them all access unto the Temple.

8. The Pythagoreans ascribed Suidas.
all things to fate or destiny. So did the Joseph. Antiq. lib. 13. cap. 9.
Essenes. In this Aphorism all three Sects differed each from other. The
Pharisees ascribed some things to Fate, and other things to Man's Free Will. The
Essenes ascribed all to Fate, nothing to Man's free will. The Sadduces wholly
deny Fate, and ascribed all things to the free will of M^n.

9. The Pythagoreans the Quinquenne hoc silentium a Pythagora auditoribus suis
indictum voca. bant (...) a cohibendo sermon.
first five years were not permitted to speak in the School, but were initiated
per quinquennale silentium, Laertius in Pythagor.
and not until then suffered to come into the presence of, or sight of
Pythagoras. To this may be referred the Essenes silence at Table straightly
observed, so that December simul sedentibus, nemo loquitur invitis novem; Drusius
de trib. sect. l. 4.
Drusius renders it, that ten of them sitting together, none of them spoke
without leave obtained of the nine. When any did speak, it was not their custom
to interrupt him with words, but by nods of the head, or beckenings, or holding
their finger, or shaking their heads, and other such like dumb signs and
gestures, to signify their doubtings, disliking, or approving the matter in
hand. And to the time of silence amongst the Pythagoreans, that it must be for
five years, may be referred the initiation of the Essenes; for, amongst them
none were presently admitted into their Society, with full liberty, but they
under-went four years of trial and probation. The first year they received
Dolabellam, Joseph. de bello Judaic. lib. 2 cap. 12.
Perizoma, and vestem albam; a Spadle, with which they dug a convenient
place to ease Nature; a pair of Breeches, which they used in bathing or washing
themselves; a white garment, which especially that Sect affected. At this time
they had their commons allowed them, but without, not in the common dining
hall. The second year they admitted them to the participation of holy waters,
and instructed them in the use of them. Two years after they admitted them in
full manner, making them of their Corporation, after they had received an Oath,
truly to observe all the rules and ordinances of the Essenes. If any brake his
Oath, an hundred of them being assembled together, expelled him, upon which
expulsion commonly followed death within a short time; for none having once
entered this Order, might receive alms or any meat from other; and themselves
would feed such a one only with distasteful herbs, which wasted his body, and
brought it very low, sometimes they would readmit such a one being brought near
unto death; but commonly they suffered him to die in that misery.

10. The Essenes Philo item Joseph.
worshipped toward the Sunrising,

11. The Essenes bound themselves in their Oath, to Joseph. de bello Judaic.
lib. 2. cap. 12.
preserve the names of Angels: The phrase implies a kind of worshipping of
them.

12. They were above all others strict in the observation of the Joseph. ib.
Sabbath day; on it they would dress no meat, kindle no fire, remove no Vessels
out of their place; no, nor ease Nature. (t) Yea, they observed (...), every
seventh week, a solemn c Philo de vita contemplat.
Penticost; seven Penticosts, every year.

13. They abstained from marriage, not that they disliked marriage in it self,
or intended an end or period to procreation; but partly, in wariness of women's
intemperance; partly, because they were persuaded that no woman would continue
faithful to one man. This avoiding of marriage is not to be understood
generally of all the Essenes, for they disagreed among themselves in this
point. Some were of the opinion before noted: Others married for propagation.
Nihilominus autem cum tanta ipsi moderatione convenient, ut per triennium
explorent valitudinem foeminarum, and si constanti purgatione apparuerint
idoneae partui, ita eas in matrimonia asciscunt. Nemo tamen cum praegnante
concumbit, ut ostendant, quod nuptias non voluptatis, sed liberorum causa
inierint. Thus the latter sort preserved their Sect by the procreation of
children: The former sort preserved it by a kind of adoption of other men's
Children, counting them as near kinsmen, and tutoring them in the Rules of
their own Discipline, as Josephus witnesses. Plin. hist. l. 5. cap. 17.
Pliny adds also, that many other of the Je^as, when they began to be struck
in years, voluntarily joined themselves unto them, being moved thereunto,
either because of the variable state and troubles of the world, or upon
consideration of their own former licentious courses, as if they would by this
means exercise a kind of penance upon themselves.

Concerning the beginning of this Sect, from whom, or when it began, it is hard
to determine. Serarius Trihaeres. l. 3* cap. 9.
some make them as ancient as the Rechabites, and the Rechabites to have
differed only in the addition of some rules and ordinances from the Kenites,
mentioned, Judge 1. 16. And thus by consequence the Essenes were as ancient, as
the Israelites departure out of Egypt: for Jethro, Moses father-in-law, as
appears by the Text, was a Kenite: But neither of these seems probable. For
the Kenites are not mentioned in Scripture, as a distinct order or Sect of
people, but as a distinct family, kindred, or Nation, Numb. 24. 21. Secondly,
the Rechabites, they neither did build houses, but dwelt in Tents; neither did
they deal in husbandry, they sowed no seed, nor planted Vineyards, nor had any,
Jer. 35. 7. The Essenes, on the contrary, they dwelt not in tents, but in
houses; Joseph. Antiq. lib. 18. c. 2.
and they employed themselves especially in husbandry. One of the Jos. Scalig.
in Trihaeres. c. 23.
Hebrew Doctors says, that the Essenes were Nazarites: but that cannot be,
because the Law enjoined the Nazarites, when the time of the Consecration was
out, to present themselves at the door of the Tabernacle or Temple, Number. 6. Now
the Essenes had no access to the Temple. When therefore, or from what Author,
this Sect took its beginning is uncertain. The first that I find mentioned by
the name of an Essene, was one Joseph l. 13. cap. 19.
Judas, who lived in the time of Aristobulus the son of Joannes Hyrcanus,
before our Saviors birth about one hundred years: However the Sect was of
greater antiquity; Joseph. l. 13. cap. 9.
for all three, Pharisees, Sadduces, and Essenes, were in Jonathan's time, the
brother of Judas Macchabaeus, who was fifty years before Aristolulus. Certain
it is, that this Sect continued until the days of our Savior, and after; for
Philo and Josephus speak of them as living in their time. What might be the
reason then, that there is no mention of them in the New Testament? I answer;
First, the number of them seems not to have been great in Philo and Josephus
his time, Philo lib. quod omnis probus, page 678.
about four thousand, which being dispersed in many Cities, made the faction
weak: And happily in Jerusalem when our Savior lived, they were either few or
none. Secondly, if we observe histories we shall find them peaceable and quiet,
nor opposing any, and therefore not so liable to reproof as the Pharisees and
Sadduces, who opposed each other, and both joined against Christ. Thirdly, why
might they not as well be passed over in silence in the New Testament
(especially containing themselves quietly without contradiction of others) as
the Rechabites in the Old Testament, of whom there is mention only once, and
that obliquely, although their Order continued about three hundred years before
this testimony was given of them by the Prophet Jeremy; for between Jehu (with
whom Jonadab was Coetan^an) and Zedekiah, Chronologers observe the distance of
so many years. Lastly, though the name of Essenes be not found in Scripture,
Vide Chemnic. exem. Conc. Trident. part quart page 120.
yet we shall find in S. Paul's Epistles many things reproved, which were
taught in the School of the Essenes. Of this nature was that advice given unto
Timothy, 1 Timothy 5. 23. Drink no longer water, but use a little wine. Again, 1 Timothy 4. 3. Forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats is a
Doctrine of Devils: but especially Coloss. 2. in many passages the Apostle
seems directly to point at them, Let no man condemn you in meat and drink, v.
16. Let no man bear rule over you, by humbleness of mind, and worshipping of
Angels, verse. 18. (...), Why are ye subject to Ordinances? ver. 20. The Apostle
uses the ward (...), which was applied by the Essenes to denote their
Ordinances, Aphorisms, or Constitutions. In the verse following he gives an
instance of some particulars, Touch not, taste not, handle not, verse. 21. Now
the Junior company of Essenes might not touch their Seniors: And in their diet,
their taste was limited to bread, salt, water, and hyssop. And these ordinances
they untertook (...), says Philo, for the love of wisdom: but the Apostle
concludes, verse. 23. That these things had only, (...), a show of wisdom. And
whereas Philo terms the Religion of the Essenes, by the name of (...), which
word fignifieth religious worship, the Apostle terms in the same verse,
(...), Volun. tarry religion, or will worship: yea, where he^e rmeth. their
Doctrine (...), a kind of Philosophy received from their Forefathers by
Tradition, Saint Paul bids them beware of Philosophy, verse 8.

We formerly observed two sorts of Essenes; Practicks and Theoricks: both
agreed in their Aphorisms, or Ordinances; but in certain circumstances they
differed.

1. The Practicks dwelt in the Cities; The Theoricks shunned the Cities, and
dwelt in Gardens, and solitary Villages.

2. The Practicks spent the day in manual Crafts, keeping of Sheep, looking to
Bees, tilling of Ground, etc. they were (...), Artificers. The Theoricks spent
the day in meditation and prayers, whence they were by a kind of excellency, by
Philo termed (...), Supplicantes.

3. The Practicks had every day their dinner and supper allowed them; the
Theoricks only their supper.

The Practicks had for their Commons every one his dish of Water Gruel, and
bread; The Theoricks only bread, and salt: if any were of a more delicate
palate than other, to him it was permitted to eat Hyssop; their drink for
both, was common water.

Some are of Opinion, that these Theoricks were Christian Monks; but the
contrary appears, for these reasons:

1. In that whole Book of Philo, concerning the Theoricks, there is no mention
either of Christ, or Christians, of the Evangelists, or Apostles.

2. The Theoricks, in that Book of Philo's, are not any new Sect of late
beginning, as the Christians at that time were, as is clearly evidenced by
Philo his own words. First, In calling the Doctrine of the Essenes (...), A
Philosophy derived unto them by tradition from their forefathers. Secondly, in
saying, Habent priscorum commentarios, qui hujus sect ae autores, etc.

3. The inscription of that Book, is not only (...), but also (...), Now Philo
Phile in Prin. lib. de legate. Caiunt.
elsewhere calls the whole Nation of the Jews, (...), which argues, that
those Theoricks were Jews, not Christians.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Gaulonitae, and the Heredians.
OTher Factions there were among the Jews, which are improperly termed Sects.
Of these there were principally two. First, Gaulonitae. Secondly, Herodiani.
The Gaulonitae had their names from one Judas, who Joseph Antiq. lib. 8. cap. 1.
sometimes was called Judas Gaulonites, Jo. l. 18. cap. 2.
sometimes Judas Galilaeus, of whom Gamaliel speaks, Acts 5. 37. After this
man rose up Judas of Galilee in the days of the tribute. The tribute here
spoken of was that made by Cyrenius, sometimes called Quirinius: the name in
Greek is one and the same, but differently read by Expositors. This Cyrenius
was sent from Rome and Augustus, into Syria, and from thence came into Judaea,
where Coponius was President, and there he raised this Tax; which taxation is
unadvisedly by some confounded with that mentioned, Luke 2. 1. Both were raised
under Augustus, but they differed. First, this was only of Syria and Judaea;
that in Saint Luke was universal, of the whole world. Secondly, this was, when
Archelaus, Herod's son, was banished into Vienna, having reigned nine years;
that, under Herod the Great: Whence there is an observable Emphasis, in that
Saint Luke says, it was the first taxing, having reference unto this second.

Joseph. loco superius citato.
The occasion of this Faction was thus: When Cyrenius levied this Tax, and
seized upon Achelaus, Herod's sons goods, then arose this Judas opposing this
Tribute; and telling the people, that Tribute was a manifest token of
servitude, and that they ought to call none Lord, but only him who was Lord of
Lords, the God of heaven and earth. Whence those that adhered unto him were
called Gaulonitae; they were also called Galileans. ^enius, Act. 5. 27.
Theophylact. Luc. 13. 1.
It was their blood that Pilate mixed with their sacrifices, Luke 13. 1. For
Pilate had not authority over the Nation of the Galileans. Theophylact. in Luc.
13.
The reason of this mixture is thought to be, because the Galileans forbade
sacrifices to be offered for the Roman Empire, or for the safety of the
Emperor: whereupon, Pilate being incensed with anger, slew them whilst they
were Joseph. l. 7. de bedo Iudaic. cap. 28. p. 985.
sacrificing. To this faction belonged those murderers, termed (...),
mentioned, Acts 21. 38.

Concerning the Herodians, those that number them among Heretics, make the
heresy to consist in two things: First, in that they took Herod the Great for
the promised Messiah; because in his Reign; he being a stranger, the Scepter
was departed from Judah, which was the promised time of the Messiah his coming.
Secondly, they honored him with superstitious solemnities annually performed
upon his Birthday. Of Herod his Birthday the Poet speaks, -- Cum
Heredis venere dies, unctaque fenestra,
Dispositae pinguem nebulam vomuere lucernae,
Portantes violas, rubrumque amplexa catinum;
Cauda natat thynni, tumet alta fidelia vino.
Pers. Sat. 1.

Now whether this latter may be referred to Herod the Great, I much doubt;
because I find not any Author among the Ancients to speak of Herod the Great
his Birthday: It was another Herod, Tetrarch of Galilee, otherwise called
Antipas, whose Birthday we read celebrated, Mark 6. 21. The former point, that
the Herodians received Herod as their Messiah, though it has Epiph. haeres. 20
and Theop hyl. Mat. 22. 16. and alii plures
many grave Authors avouching it, yet Hieron. Mat. 22. 17.
others justly question the truth thereof; for if the Herodians were Jews (as
most think) how then could they imagine, that Herod, a stranger* could be the
Messiah seeing that it was so commonly preached by the Prophets, and known unto
the People, that the Messiah must be a Jew born, of the Tribe of Jadah, and of
the house of David?

Others say, Theodor. Beza Mat. 22. 16.
that the Herodians were certain flatterers in Herod his Court, varying and
changing many points of their Religion with Herod their King.

To omit many other conjectures utterly improbable, I incline to Saint Hierom,
whose Opinion is, Hieron. Mat. 22. 17.
that the Herodians were those who stood stiffly for tribute to be paid to
Caesar. It concerned Herod, who at first received his Grown from Caesar, to
further Caesar's tribute, not only in way of thankfulness, but also in way of
policy, to prevent a possible deposing or disceptring; for it was in Caesar's
power to take away the Crown again when it pleased him. Now, in respect that
Herod sought to kill Christ, and the Herodians with the Pharisees took counsel
against him; unto this our Savior might have reference, saying, Mar. 8. 15.
Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, and of the leaven of Herod. Viz. Of
their contagious* Doctrine, and fox-like subtleties.

THE SECOND BOOK TREATS OF PLACES.
CHAP. I.
Their Temple.
When the Israelites came out of Egypt, Moses was commanded to build a
Tabernacle for the place of Gods public worship. Afterward, when they were
settled in the Promised Land, then Solomon was commanded to build a Temple.

These two shadowed the difference between the Jews Synagogue, and the
Christian Church. The Tabernacle was movable, and but for a time: The Temple
fixed, and permanent: the state of the Jews vanishing, to continue in their
generations; the state of Christians durable, to continue unto the worlds end.
More principally it shadoweth forth the state of the Church Militant here on
earth, and triumphant in heaven: Unto both the Prophet David alludeth; Lord,
Who shall sojourn in thy Tabornrcle? Who shall rest in thine holy Mountain?
Psalm. 15. 1.

There were in the same tract of ground three hills, Sion, Moria, and Mount
Calvary. On Sion was the City and Castle of David; on Moria was the Temple, and
on Mount Calvary Christ was crucified. Genebrard in Chron. lib. 1. Anno mundi
3145.
but all these three were generally called by the name of Sion; whence it is,
that though the Temple were built on Moria, yet the Scripture speaks of it
commonly, as if it were upon Mount Sion.

In the Temple there are these three things considerable: First, the Sancta
Sanctorum, the Holy of Holies; answerable to our Quire in the Cathedral
Churches. Secondly; the Sanctum, the Sanctuary: answerable to the Body of the
Church. Thirdly, the Atrium, the Court, answerable to the Churchyard.

In the Holy of Holies there were the Golden Censer, and the Ark of the
Testament, Heb. 9. 4.

In Sunt qui illud (...) apud Apostolum, Heb. 9. 4. referunt ad (...) ut dicunt
in Tabernaculo secundo, quod appellent Sancta Sanctorum, fuisse urnam mannae,
and virgam Aaronis, tabulasque foedoris videl urnam, and virgam ante Arcum;
(ita Moses Kotsensis 210. 1.) tabulam a ^^em in Arca.
the Ark there were three things: First, the pot of Manna; secondly, Aaron's
rod that budded: thirdly, the Tables of the Testament, Heb. 9. 4. Thus they
were in Moses his time; but afterward in the days of Solomon, only the Tables
of the Law were found in the Ark, 1 King 8. 9.

The cover of this Ark was called (...), the Propitiatory, or Mercy-seat,
because it covered and hid the Law, that it appeared not before God to plead
against man. It was a type of Christ, who likewise is termed (...), our
Propitiation, Romans 3. 25, and (...) a Propitiatory, 1 John, 2. 2. At each end
of the Mercy seat stood a golden Cherub, each Cherub stretched forth his wings;
and from between them, as from an Oracle, God gave his answer; Exodus 25. 22.
Hence it is, that the Lord is said to sit between the Cherubims, Ps. 99. 1. The
positure of the Cherubims was such, that their faces were each toward the
other, but both looking down toward the Mercy (...) they fitly shadowed out
the people of the Jews, and Christians, both looking toward each other, but
both expecting salvation in Christ only.

In the Sanctuary, there was the Incense altar in the middle, and the Table,
with the twelve Loaves of Shewbread on it, on the one side, and the
Candlestick on the other. The Incense altar was a type of our prayers, Psalm.
141. 2. And that this Altar must be once every year sprinkled with the blood of
the Sacrifice by the High Priest, Exodus 30. 10. It teaches that our very
prayers, except they be purified by the blood of Christ, they are unavailable
before God. The twelve loaves were a type of the twelve Tribes, and the
Candlestick a type of the Word of God. In them all, we may see the necessity of
both ordinances required, Prayer and Preaching, if we would be presented
acceptable unto the Lord: The Candlestick was a type of Preaching; Incense, of
Prayer.

In Moses his Tabernacle there was but one Table, and one Candlestick: In
Solomon's Temple there were ten Tables, and ten Candlesticks; as likewise in
the Court of the Tabernacle: there was but one brazen Laver, in the Court of
the Temple there were ten, and another great Vessel wherein the Priests washed:
In the Tabernacle there were but two silver Trumpets; in the Temple there were
an hundred and twenty Priests sounding Trumpets.

The Courts of the Temple at the first were but two Atrium Sacerdotum, the
Priests Court; and Atrium populi, the Peoples Court.

In the Priests Court were the brazen Altar for Sacrifices, and the Laver for
the washing, both of the Priests and the Sacrifices. The Laver, and the Altar
situated in the same Court, signified the same as the water and blood issued
out of Christ's side; namely, the necessary concurrence of these two Graces in
all that shall be saved, sanctification, and justification; sanctification
intimated by the Laver and Water: justification by the Altar and Blood.

The Court for the Priests, and the Court for the people Joseph. l. 8. c. 13.
were separated each from other, by a wall of three cubits high.

The Court for the people was sometimes called the outward Court, sometimes the
Temple, sometimes Solomon's Porch, because it was built about with Porches,
into which the people retired in rainy weather: It had Solomon's name; either
to continue his memory, or because the Porches had some resemblance of that
Porch which Solomon built before the Temple, 1. King. 6. 3. Jesus walked in the
Temple, in Solomon' s Porch, John. 10. 28. All the people ran unto the Porch
which was called Solomon' s, Acts 3. 11. That is, this outward Court.

In the midst of the Peoples Court, Solomon made a brazen Scaffold for the
King, 2 Chronicles. 6. 13.

This Court for the People went round about the Temple, and though it was one
entire Court in the days of Solomon, yet afterward it was divided by a low
wall, so that the men stood in the inward part of it, and the Women in the
outward. This division is thought to have been made in Jehosaphat's time, of
whom we read, that he stood in the house of the Lord, before the new Court, 2.
Chron. 20. 5. that is, before the Women's Court.

There was an ascent of fifteen steps or stairs between the women's Court and
the men's, R. David. Kimchi Psalm. 120.
upon these steps the Levites sung those fifteen Psalms immediately following
the one hundredth nineteenth, upon each step on Psalm, whence those Psalms are
entitled, Psalmi Graduales, Songs of degrees.

In the Women's Court stood their Treasury, or Almsbox, as appears by the poor
Widows casting her two Mites into it, Luke 21. 1 In Hebrew it is termed (...)
Korban, the Chest of Oblations; the word signifies barely, an Oblation, or
offering, and accordingly S. Luke 21. 4. says, they all have of their
superfluities cast into the offerings; that is, into the Korban, or Chest of
offerings. In Greek it is termed (...), whence comes the Latin word,
Gazophylacium, a Treasury. That set up by Jehoida, 2 King. 12. 9. seems to
have been different from this, and to have been extraordinary, only for the
repairing of the Temple, for that stood beside the Altar in the Priests Court;
and the Priests, not the parties that brought the gifts, put it into the Chest.
Sometimes the whole Court was termed Gazophylacium, a Treasury. These words
spoke Jesus in the Treasury, John 8. 20. It is worth our noting, that the
Hebrew word (...) Tsedaka, signifying Alms, signifies properly Justice; and
thereby is intimated, that the matter of our Alms should be goods justly
gotten: And to this purpose they called their Alms box (...) Kupha-Sehel
Tsedaka, the Chest of Justice; and upon their Almsbox they wrote Buxtorf. de
abbrev in (...)
this abreviature (...), a gift in secret pacifieth anger, Prove. 21. 14.

In Herod's Temple there were Joseph. l. 2. contra Apion. 1066.
four Porches the meaning is, our Courts, one for the Priests, another for men,
another for women, and a fourth for such as were unclean by legal pollutions,
and strangers. This outmost Court for the unclean and strangerss, was separated
from the woman's court, with a stone wall of three Cubits high, which wall was
adorned with certain pillars of equal distance, bearing this Inscription:
(...). In locum sanctum transire alienigena non debet Joseph. de bell. Jud. lib.
6. c. 6.
Let no stranger enter into the holy place.

The Temple at Jerusalem was thrice built. First, by Solomon: Secondly, by
Zerobable: Thirdly, by Herod. The first was built in seven years, 1 King. 6.
37. The second in forty six years: It was begun in the second year of King
Cyrus, Ezra 3. 8. It was finished in the Joseph. Antiq. lib. 11. c. 4.
ninth year of Darius Hystaspis. The years rise thus.

Cyrus reigned 30 Years. Cambyses 08 It was finished in the year of Darius
Hystaspis 09

One year deducted from Cyrus his Reign, there remains 46.

Herod's Temple was finished in Joseph. Antiq. lib. 15. cap. ult.
eight years. It is greatly questioned among Divines, of which Temple that
speech of the Jews is to be understood, John 2. 20. Forty and six years was
this Temple in building. Many interpret it of the second Temple, saying, that
Herod did only repair that, not built a new: But these disagree among
themselves in the computation; and the Scripture speaks peremptorily, that
the house was finished in the sixth year of the reign of King Darius, Ezra 6.
15. and Josephus speaks of Herod's building a new Temple, plucking down the
old. Vide Hospin. de Orig. Templ. c. 3.
It seems therefore more probable, that the speech is to be understood of
Herod's Temple, which, though it were but eight years in building, yet, at that
time, when this speech was used, it had stood precisely forty six years, Vide
supputationem Funccianam. an. 3747.
for so many years there are precisely between the eighteenth year of Herod's
Reign, (at which time the Temple began to be built) and the year of Christ his
baptism, when it is thought that this was spoken; all which time the Temple
was more and more adorned, beautified, and perfected, in which respect it may
be said to be so long building.

The ancient men are said to weep, when they beheld the second, because the
glory thereof was far short of Solomon's, Ez. 3. 12. It was inferior to
Solomon's Temple: First, in respect of the building, because it was lower and
meaner. H^soinian. ex Talmudistis, de Orig. Temp. c. 3.
Secondly, in respect of the Vessels, being now of brass, which before were of
pure gold. Thirdly, in respect of five things lost and wanting in the second
Temple, all which were in the first. First, there was wanting the D. Kimchi in
Hag. 1. 8. Eadem scribit. Rabbi Solomon ibid.
Ark of God. Secondly, Vrim and Thummim: God gave no answer by these two, as in
former times. Thirdly, Fire, which in the second Temple never descended from
heaven to consume their burnt-offerings, as it did in the first. Fourthly, the
Glory of God appearing between the Cherubims, this they termed (...) Schecina,
the habitation, or dwelling of God, and hereunto the Apostle alludeth, In him
dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily, Coloss. 2. 9. Bodily; that is, not
in Clouds and Ceremonies, as between the Cherubims, but essentially. Lastly,
the Holy Ghost; namely, enabling them for the gift of Prophecy; for between
Malachy and John the Baptist, there stood up no Prophet, but only they were
instructed per filiam vocis, which they termed (...) Bath Kol, an Echo from
heaven; and this was the reason why those Disciples, Act. 19. 2. said, we have
not so much as heard whether there be an Holy Ghost.

Here it may be demanded, How that of the Prophet Haggai is true; The glory of
this last house shall be greater then the first, Hag. 2. 10. I answer, Herod's
Temple which was built in the place of this, was of statelier building than
Solomon's, and it was of greater glory, because of Christ his Preaching in it.

Herod's Temple was afterward so set on fire by Titus his soldiers,
Genebrard* Chro. l. 2. anno Christi 69.
that it could not be quenched by the industry of man: Theodoret. l. 3^ c. 11.
Sozomenus, l. 5. c. 19, 20, 21.
at the same time the Temple at Delphos, being in chief request among the
Heathen people, was utterly overthrown by earthquakes and thunderbolts from
Heaven, and neither of them could ever since be repaired. The concurrence of
which two Miracles evidently shows, that the time was then come, when God
would put an end both to Jewish Ceremonies, and Heathenish Idolatry; that the
Kingdom of his Son might be the better established

CHAP. II.
Their Synagogues, Schools, and Houses of Prayer.
THe word Synagogue is from the Greek, (...), to gather together; and it is
applied to all things where of there may be a collection, as (...).
copialactis, (...); collectio eorum quae sunt ad bellum necessaria. God
stands in Synagoga Deorum, the Assembly of Judges: But Synagogues are
commonly taken for houses dedicated to the worship of God, wherein it was
lawful to pray, preach, and dispute, but not to sacrifice. In Hebrew it was
called, (...) Beth Hacneseth, the House of Assembly. The Temple at Jerusalem
was as the Cathedral Church; the Synagogues, as petty Parish Churches belonging
thereunto.

Concerning the time when Synagogues began, it is hard to determine. It is
probable that they began when the Tribes were settled in the promised Land. The
Temple being then too far distant for those which dwelt in remote places, it is
likely that they repaired unto certain Synagogues instead of the Temple. That
they were in David's time appears; They have burnt all the Synagogues of God
in the land, Psalm. 74. 8. And, Moses of old time had in every City, them that
preached him, being read in the Synagogues every Sabbath day, Act. 15. 21.

In Jerusalem there were Sigonius de rep. Heb. l. 2. ^^p. 8.
four hundred eighty Synagogues, besides the Temple; partly for Jews, partly
for strangers: one for strangers was called the Synagogue of the Libertines,
Act. 6. 9. Whence it had that name, whether from the Roman Libertines, such as
had served for their freedom, being opposite to the Ingenui, those that were
freeborn; (for many of those Libertines became Proselites, and had their Philo
in legate ad Caium.
Synagogues) or whether it were from Vide Tremel. Acts 6. 9.
Lubar, signifying an high place; (for as their Temple, so their Synagogues and
Schools were built on hills and high places) because it is said, Prove. 1. 21.
Wisdom calls in high places: I leave to the judgment of the Reader.

Out of Jerusalem, in others Cities and Provinces, were many Synagogues: there
were Synagogues in Galilee, Mat. 4. 23. Synagogues in Damascus, Acts 9. 2.
Synagogues at Salamis, Acts 13. 5. Synagogues at Antiochia, Acts 13. 14. Yea,
their tradition is, that Maimon. in Tephilla. c. 11. Sect. 1.
Wheresoever ten men of Israel were, there ought to be built a Synagogue.

Their Synagogues had Buxtorf. de abbreviatur, page 73, 181, ^74.
many Inscriptions, over the gate was written that of the Psalm. 118. 20. This
is the gate of the Lord, the righteous shall enter into it. In the walls, these
and the like sentences; Remember thy Creator. And enter into the house of the
Lord thy God in humility. And prayer without attention is like a body without a
soul. And silence is commendable in time of prayer.

As the Courts of the people before the Temple were distinguished by a wall
into two rooms, the one for men, the other for women: So in the Synagogues, the
women were separated from the men, Talmud in tract. Suta. cap. ult vi. Buxtorf.
Synag. c. 9. p. 240.
by a partition of Lattice, or wire-work.

In the Synagogues the Scribes ordinarily taught. but not only they, for Christ
himself taught in them, etc. He that gave liberty to preach there, was termed
(...). The Ruler of the Synagogue. There was also a Minister who gave the book
unto the Preacher and received it again, after the Text had been read. Christ
closed the book, and gave it again to the Minister, Luke 420. This is probably
him, whom they called (...) Sheliach Tsibhur, the Minister or Clerk of the
Synagogue.

Their Schools were different from the Synagogues. Paul having disputed for the
space of three months in the Synagogue, because diverse believed not, but spoke
evil of that way, he departed from them, and separated the Disciples, disputing
daily in the School of one Tyrannus, Act. 19. 8, 9, 10.

Their School sometimes is called (...) Beth, an house, simply, as appears by
that saying; Drusius de tribus sect. l. 2. c. 10.
Octodecim res de quibus contentio fuit inter domum Sammai, and domum Hillel,
ne Elias quidem abolere posset. Those 18 matters controversed between the house
of Sammai, and the house of Hillel, Elias himself could not decide; that is,
between their two Schools. Sometime it is called (...) Beth hammidrasch an
house of subtle and acute exposition. Here points were more exactly and
punctually discussed, than in the Synagogue, or Temple; whence they held it a
profounder place for exposition, than the Temple: To this purpose tend those
sayings; Maimon. Tephill. c. 11. Sect. 14.
They might turn a Synagogue into a School, but not a School into a Synagogue,
for the sanctity of a School is beyond the sanctity of a Synagogue, And that
grows from Virtue to virtue, Psa. 84. 7. Paraphrast. Chal. in hunc locum.
they interpret a kind of promotion, or degree, in removing from their Temple
to their School. In their Temple, their Sermons were, as it were, Ad populum:
In their Schools, Ad Clerum.

As they had Synagogues, so likewise Schools, in every City and Province, and
these were built also upon hills. There is mention of the hill Moreth, Jud. 7.
1. that is, the hill of the Teacher.

The Masters when they taught their Scholars, were said to give: Give unto the
wise, and he will be wiser, Prove. 9. 9.

The Scholars when they learned any thing, were, said to receive it: Hear my
son, and receive my words Prove. 4. 10. Hence is that of the Apostle: This is a
true saying, and by all means worthy to be received, 1 Timothy 1. 15. That is,
learned. The like Phrases of speech are in use among the Da si g^a^e non est.
Hor. l. 2. Satyr. 8. Sed tamen iste Deus qui sit, da Tytere nobis. Virg. Bu^^l.
Accipe nunc Danaum insidias -- Virg. Aeneid. l. 2.
Latins.

Whether their Oratories or places of prayer called Proseuchae were different
places from their Schools, or Synagogues, I have not yet learned. That some of
these were without the City, that proves nothing, for so might Synagogues and
Schools too. Epiphanus treats of these Epiphan. Tom. 2. l. 3. c. 80.
Oratories, but there he speaks not one word to show the lawfulness of civil
businesses to be done in them: could that be proved, a difference would easily
be shown. Some say they were Beza Act. 16. 13.
Synagogues, others Philo. Jud. de vita Mosis, (...). 550.
Schools. Of this house of prayer, mention is made, Acts 16. 13. in which S
Paul sat down and spoke unto the women: which gesture intimates rather
preaching than praying: true, all gesture was in use for prayer; standing,
kneeling, sitting: Abraham stood before the Lord, Genesis 18. 22. that is, he
prayed. The Publican stood afar off and prayed, Luke 18. 13. Whence by way of
Proverb they said R. Juda. in lib. Musar. vide Drus. praet. Matthew. 6. 5.
Sine stationibus non subsisteret mundus^; Were it not for standing the World
could not stand. Stephen kneeled Acts 7. 60. David sat before the Lord, and
said, 2 Samuel 7. 18. Yet sitting, when the speech is to the people, not to the
Lord, implies preaching, not prayer. It is probable, that as at the Gate of
the Temple, so at the Gate of these Oratories, the poorer sort of people
assembled to expect alms: Whence some use the word Qua te quaero Proseucha?
Juven. Sat. 3.
Proseucha, to signify an Hospital.

The Caninius de locis N. Testam: cap. 5. p. 38.
Talmudists taxed the peoples negligence in prayer, saying they used three
sorts of Amen, and all faulty. A faint Amen, when they prayed without fervency.
A hasty Amen, when they said Amen before the prayer was done. A lazy Amen, when
they pronounced it at length, as if they were asleep, dividing the word A-men.
The first they termed (...) Jethoma, pupillum. The second (...) Chetupha,
Surreptitium. The third (...) Ketugna, Sectile, quasi in duas parts sectum per
oscitantiam.

CHAP. III.
Of the Gates of Jerusalem.
THe gates of the whole circuit of the Sheindies pentaglo^.
wall about Jerusalem were nine: The Sheep-gate, Neh. 3. 1. This was near the
Temple, and through it were led the Sheep which were to be sacrificed, being
washed in the Pool Bethsaida near the gate; The Fishgate, Nehem. 3. 3. before
this Judas is thought to have hanged himself. Stukius conviv. l. 2. c. 11.
Some think that these two Gates, and likewise the Horse-gate, Nehem. 3. 28.
were so called, because they were in manner of three several Marketplaces; and
at the one Gate, Sheep; at the other, Fish; and at the third, Horses were sold.
The Old gate was so called, because it was supposed to have remained from the
time of the Jebusites, and not to have been destroyed by the Assyrians; it was
near Calvary, and without this Gate Christ was crucified. Concerning the other
Gates little is spoken.

Touching the Gates of the Temple, there were R. Juda in l. Musar. vid. Drus
praeterit. Joan 9. 22.
two of principal note, both built by Solomon, the one for those that were new
married, the other for mourners and excommunicate persons. The mourners were
distinguished from the excommunicate persons, by having their Lips covered with
a skirt of their garment; none entered that gate with their lip uncovered, but
such as were excommunicate. Now the Israelites, which on the Sabbath days, sat
between those Gates, said unto the new married: He, whose Name dwells in this
house, glad thee with Children. Unto the mourner, He which dwells in this
house, glad and comfort thee. Unto the excommunicate, He, which dwells in
this house, move thy heart to hearken unto the words of thy fellows.

Among the Jews, the gates were places of chiefest strength, so that they being
taken or defended, the whole City was taken, or defended: and they were chief
places of Jurisdiction, for in them Judges were wont to sit, and to decide
controversies. Hence proceeded those phrases: The gates of Hell shall not
prevail against thee, etc. And, Thy seed shall possess the gates of his Enemies.

CHAP. IV.
Of their Groves, and high Places.
THe ancient Heathens did not only not build Temples, Hyspin. de Orig. Templ.
page 1.
but they held it utterly unlawful so to do. The reason of this might be,
because they thought no Temple spacious enough for the Sun, which was their
chief God. Hence came that saying, Alex. ab Alex. lib. 2. cap. 22.
Mundus universus est Templum Solis; The whole world is a Temple for the Sun.
Moreover, they thought it unfit to straiten, and confine the supposed
Infiniteness of their fancied Deities within walls; and therefore when
aftertimes had brought in the use of Temples, yet their God Terminus, and
diverse others of their Gods were worshipped in Temples open roofed, which were
therefore called (...): This I take to be reason why they made choice of Hills
and Mountains, as the convenientest places for their Idolatry. These
consecrated Hills, are those high places which the Scripture so often forbids.
Afterward, as the number of their Gods increased; so the number of their
consecrated hills was multiplied, from which their God and Goddesses took their
names; as Mercurius Cyllenius, Venus Erycina, Jupiter Capitolinus. At length to
beautify these holy hills, the places of their idolatrous worship, they beset
them with trees, and hence came the consecratien of Groves, and Woods, from
which their Idols many times were named. Populus Alcidae gratissima, v^tis
Ia^cho. Formosae myrtus Veneri, sua Laurea Phoebo. Virg. Eclog. 7.
At last some choice and select Trees began to be consecrated. Plin. Not. Hist.
l. 16. c. 44.
Those French Magi, termed Dryadae, worshipped the Oak, in Greek termed (...),
and thence had their names. The Etrurians worshipped an Holm-tree; and Maximus
Tyrius, Sermon. 38. fol. 225. edit. Steph.
amongst the Celtae, a tall Oak was the very Idol or Image of Jupiter.

Among the Israelites, this Idolatry began under the Judges Othniel, and Ehud,
Judge. 3. 7. and at the last it became so common in Israel, that they had
peculiar Priests, whom they termed Prophets of the Grove, 1 King. 18. 19. and
Idols of the Grove; that is, peculiar Idols, unto whom their Groves were
consecrated, 2 King. 21. 7. 2 Chr. 15. 16. As Christians in the consecration of
their Churches, make special choice of some particular Saints, by whose name
they call them, as Saint Peter's Church, S. Paul's, S. Andrews, etc. So they
consecrated their Groves unto peculiar Idols: whence in profane Authors we
read of Diana Nemorensis, Diana Arduenna, Albunea Dea; all receiving their
names from the Groves in which they were worshipped: yea, the Idol it self is
sometimes called by the name of a Grove: Josiah brought out the Grove from the
House of the Lord, 2 King. 23. 6. It is probable, that in this Idol was
pourtraited the form and similitude of a Grove, and thence it was called a
Grove, as those silver similitudes of Diana's Temple made by Demetrius, were
termed Temples of Diana, Acts 19. 24.

CHAP. V.
The Cities of Refuge.
THese places of Refuge, appointed by God, differed from those of Hercules, and
Romulus, and other Heathens; because God allowed safety only to those, who were
guiltless in respect of their intention: but the others were common
Sanctuaries, as well for the guilty as the guiltless. If any man did
fortuitously or by chance kill another man, in such a case liberty was granted
unto the Offender to fly; at first, unto the Altar for refuge, as is implied by
that text of Scripture, If any man come presumptuously unto his Neighbor, to
slay him with guile, thou shall take him from mine Altar, Exodus 21. 14. Yea, we
may conjecture this custom of refuge to have continued in force always, by the
practice of Joab, 1 King. 2. 28. Notwithstanding, lest the Altar might be too
far distant from the place where the fact might be committed, it is probable
that therefore God ordained certain Asyla, or Cities of Refuge, which for the
same reason are thought to have been Rab. Salom-Iarchi. Deuteronomy. 19. 3.
equally distant one from the other in Canaan: The Cities were in number six;
Bezer of the Reubenites Country, Ramoth in Gilead, of the Gadites, and Golan in
Bashan, of the Manassites: these three Moses separated beyond Jordan, Deuteronomy. 4.
41, 43. The other three, appointed by Joshua in the Land of Canaan, were Cadesh
in Galilee in Mount Naphthali; Schechem in Ephraim, and Kiratharba (which is
Hebron) in the Mountain of Judah, Josh. 20. 7. There other Cities of like
nature; God promised the Israelites, upon condition of their obedience, after
their Coasts were enlarged; but it seems that disobedience hindered the
accomplishment thereof, for Scripture mentions not the fulfilling of it.

Concerning the Cities, the Hebrews note from these words, Thou shall prepare
the way, Deuteronomy. 19. 3. That the Senate, or Magistrates in Israel, were bound to
prepare the ways to the Cities of Refuge, and Maimon* in Rotsach. cap. 8. sect.
5.
to make them fit, and broad, and to remove out of them all stumbling blocks
and obstacles: and they suffered not any Hill or Dale to be in the way, nor
water-streams, but they made a Bridge over it, that nothing might hinder him
that fled thither. And the breadth of the way to the Cities of Refuge, was not
less than two and thirty Cubits, and at the partitions of the ways, they set up
in writing, Refuge, Refuge: that the manslayer might know and turn
thitherward. On the fifteenth of the month Adar, or February, every year the
Magistrates sent out messengers to prepare the ways.

Furthermore it was provided, that two or three wise men should be employed, to
persuade the Avenger of blood, if happily he did pursue the manslayer on the
way, that he should offer no violence, until the Cause were heard and examined.
The manner of examination was thus; The Consistory or Bench of Justices, who
lived in that quarter where the murder was committed, Paul. Fag. Number. 35. 6.
placed; the party being brought back from the City of Refuge, in the Court, or
Judgment-Hall, and diligently enquired and examined the cause, who if he were
found guilty of voluntary murder, then was he punished with death, but if
otherwise the Fact were found casual, then did they safely conduct the party
back again to the City of Refuge, where he enjoyed his liberty, not only within
the walls of the City, but within certain Territories and bounds of the City,
being confined to such and such limits, until the death of the High Priest,
that was in those days, at what time it was lawful for the offender to return
and come into his own City, and unto his own house, even unto the City from
whence he fled, Josh. 20. 6. By this means the offender, though he was not
punished with death, yet he lived for the time a kind of exile, for his own
humiliation, and for the abatement of his Wrath, who was the Avenger of Blood.
Masius in Jos. cap. 20.
The Areopagitae had a proceeding against casual man's laughter, not much
unlike, punishing the offender (...), with a years banishment: Why the time of
this exilement was limited to the death of the High Priest at that time, is not
agreed upon by Expositors. But it is most probably thought, that the offender
was therefore confined within that City as within a Prison, during the
High-priest's life, Masius ibid.
because the offense did most directly strike against him, as being amongst
men, (...), ac princeps sanctitatis, The chief God on earth.

THE THIRD BOOK Treats of DAYS and TIMES.
CHAP. I.
Their Days, Hours, Weeks, and Years.
BEfore we treat of their Feasts, it will be needful, by way of Preface, to
understand somewhat concerning the divisions of their Days, Hours, Weeks, etc.

Their Day was twofold; Natural, containing day and night, and consisting of
24 hours, or Artificial, beginning at Sunrising, and ending at Sunset. Of
this is that, Are there not twelve hours in the day? John 11. 9.

The Natural-Day was again twofold: Civil, a working day, which was destined
for Civil businesses and works: This began at Sunrising, and held till the
next Sunrising, Mat. 28. 1, or Sacred, a Festival or Holy Day, destined for
holy exercises: This began at Sunset, and continued till the next Sunset.

Their night was divided into four quarters, or greater hours, termed four
Watches, each Watch containing three lesser hours. The first they called Caput
vigiliarum, the beginning of the watches, Lam. 2. 19. the second was the middle
watch, Judge. 7. 19. not so termed, because there were only three watches, as
Drus. Judic. 7. 19.
Drusius would persuade, but because it dured till midnight. The third watch
began at midnight. and held till three of the clock in the morning. If he come
in the second, or third watch, Luke 12. 38. The last, called the morning watch,
Exodus 14. 24. began at three of the clock, and ended at six in the morning. In
the fourth watch of the night, Jesus went out unto them, Mat. 14. 24. These
Watches also were called by other names, according to that part of the night
which closed each watch. The first was termed (...), the even. The second,
(...), Midnight. The third (...), Cock-crowing. The fourth (...), the Dawning.
Ye know not when the Master of the house will come, at Even, or at Midnight, or
at Cock-crowing, or at the Dawning, Mark 13. 35.

The day was likewise divided into four quarters, as appears by the Parable
of the Laborers hired into the Vineyard, Mat. 20. The first quarter began at
six of the clock in the morning, and held till nine. The second quarter ended
at twelve of the clock. The third quarter at three in the afternoon. The
fourth quarter at six of the night. The first quarter was called the third
hour, verse. 3. The second quarter, the sixth hour, verse. 5. The third quarter,
the ninth hour, verse. 5. The last quarter, the eleventh hour, verse. 6.

Where note, that the three first quarters had their names from that hour of
the day, which closed the quarter (for they began the account of their lesser
hours, from six a clock in the morning, and our 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6. was their 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.) only the last was
called the eleventh hour, by our Savior Christ; whereas among the common
people, it either was called, or should have been called, by proportion with
the rest, the twelfth hour; to intimate unto us, that though God in his mercy
accept labors into his Vineyard eleven hours of the day, yet he seldom
calls any at the twelfth; for that is rather an hour to discharge Servants,
than to admit new.

Some Expositors finding mention of the dawning of the day, in this Parable,
verse. 1. Erat autem primu. ternarius a prima usque ad tertiam, and dicebatur
prima hora, secundus erat a tertia, usque ad sextam, and dicebatur hora tertia;
tertius erat a sexta usque ad nonam, and dicebatur sexta; quartus a nona usque
ad ultim^m quae erat duodecima, and dicebatur nona. Refellit hanc opinionem
Toletus, receptam licet a multis recentionem (ut ipse ait) qu^niam de undecima
^ujus meminit parabola. altum apud h^s silentium. Jure vapulant a te, Tolete,
qui ex^dunt udecimam, constanter tamen asserenda est contra te quadripartita
dici divisi^, in hoc potissimum illorum erro consistit, quod horam* primam
faciunt, non inveniunt; horam undecimam inveniunt, excludunt tamen. nihil a
mente Evangelistarum magis alienum, quam ut (...), verteretur hora prima dies,
qu^, in illorum scriptissonat quartam noctis vigiliam. Vid. Tolet. in Joan.
cap. 19. Annot. 8.
They reckon the 4. quarters of the day after this manner. Hora prima, Hora
tertia, Hora sexta, Hora nona. Where first they err, in taking the dawning of
the day for the first hour of the day; for (...), the dawning, signifies the
last quarter of the night, called the Morning watch. Secondly, they err in
making the last quarter of the day to be the ninth hour, for what then shall
become of the eleventh hour, mentioned in the same Parabe?

By this division of the day into these four quarters or greater hours, the
Enangelists are reconciled touching our Savior's Passion. He was crucified at
the third hour, Mark 15. 25. S. John intimates his examination before Pilate,
to have been Hora quasi sexta, about the sixth hour, John 19. 14. In the first
place, understand by his crucifying, not his hanging on the Cross, which was
not till the sixth hour, Luke 23. 44. nor his expiration, which was not till
the ninth hour, Mar. 15. 34. but his examination under Pilate, at which time
the people cried out, Crucify him, Crucify him; and then the third and sixth
hour will easily be reconciled, for these two hours immediately following one
another, what was done on the third hour, might truly be said to be done about
the sixth.

Lastly, This shows that the hours among the Jews were of two sorts; some
lesser, of which the day contained twelve: others greater, of which the day
contained four, as has been above shown: the lesser are termed hours of the
day, Are there not twelve hours in the day? John 11. 9. The greater, some term
hours of the Temple, or hours of prayer. Peter and John went up into the
Temple, at the ninth hour of prayer, Acts 3. 1. But in truth there are but
three hours of c Drusius in praeterit. Act. 3. 1. Non fuisse ultra tres horas
precationes in die apud Judaeos, clare testatur David Kimchi.
prayer, the third, the sixth, and the ninth. (a) The third instituted by
Abraham, the sixth by Isaac, and the ninth by Jacob. The third hour the Holy
Ghost descended upon the Apostles, Acts 2. 15. About the sixth, Peter went up
to the housetop to pray, Acts 10. 9. At the ninth, Peter and John went into
the Temple Acts 3. 1.

From these greater hours of the day and night, the Canonical hours in use in
the Roman Church, had Vide Bellarm. de bonis oper. in partic. l. 1. c. 10.
their beginning; each Canonical hour contains three lesser hours, so that in
the whole night and day there are eight Canonical hours. At six of the clock in
the evening began the first, and that is termed Hora vespertina, or vespertinum
simply, (officium being understood) their Vespertine. At nine of the clock at
night began the second, and that is termed Comple^^rium, their Completory. At
midnight began the thir^, Nocturnum, their Nocturn. At three of the clock in
the morning, began their Matutinum, their Matines. The Canonical hours for
their day service were named, Hora prima, tertia, sexta, nona. Their first hour
began from six of the clock in the morning, and held till nine: the third from
nine till twelve, the sixth from twelve till three, the ninth from three till
six at night.

The Dial in use among the ancient Jews, differed from that in use among us:
theirs were a kind of stairs; the time of the day was distinguished, not by
lines, but by steps, or degrees; the shade of the Sun every half hour moved
forward to a new degree. In the Dial of Ahaz, the Sun went back (...)
Magnoloth, degrees, or steps, not lines, Isai. 38. 8.

Their weeks were twofold; the one was ordinary, consisting of seven days,
the other extraordinary and Prophetical, consisting of seven years, Dan. 9 24.
The first is termed Hebdomas diaria, a week of days; the second, Hebdomas
annalis, a week of years.

The Hebrews at first measured their months according to the course of the
Sun, whence they are called Menses solares; and then every month consisted of
thirty days. The waters prevailed from the seventeenth day of the second
month, Genesis 7. 11. unto the seventeenth day of the seven month, Genesis 8. 4.
that is, full five months. If we will number the days, they were an hundred
and fifty, Genesis 7. 24. Whereby it appears, that every month contained full
thirty days. After the Israelites departure out of Egypt, then they measured
their months by the course of the Moon, they are termed Menses Lu^res: they
contained either thirty days, and then ^ey were called Menses pleni, full
Months: or twenty nine days, and then they were called Menses cavi, Deficient
Months.

The Sun exceeds the Moon in her course eleven days, Vide Kalendarium
Hebraicum Munsteri. p. 62.
hence every third or second year, one month was inserted. Now because the
twelfth mouth in the Hebrew Calendar was called Adar, hence when a month was
inserted, the last was called Ve^adar, the second Adar.

Before their captivity in Babylon, they counted their months without any
name, according to the number. The First, Second, Third month, etc. After
their return from Babylon, they called them by these names: 1. Nisan; it was
also called (...) Abib, which signifies an ear of corn, in this month Barley
began to be eared. They answered to part of 1 March. April.

2. Iiar, it was also called (...), which signifies beauty: then the Trees
began to be beautified with Buds and Blossoms. 2 April. May.

3. Sinan. 3 May. June.

4. Thamuz. 4 June. July.

5. Ab. 5 July. August.

6. Elul. 6 August. September.

7. Tisri, otherwise called Ethanim. 7 September. October.

8. Marchesuan, it was also called Bull. 8 October. November.

9. Cislcu. 9 November. December.

10. Tebeth. 10 December. January.

11. Shebeth. 11 January. February.

12. Adar. Ve^adar. 12 February. March.



Before their coming out of Egypt, they (...) Joseph Antiq. l. 1. (...). 4.
Mendose ponitur (...) pro (...) qui mensis e^at ^lim secundus apud Heb^aeos,
sicut and Dius apud Macedones.
began their year in the month of Tisri, and thus they continued it always
after, for civil affairs, for their date of buying, selling, their Sabbatical
years, years of Jubilee, etc. After their coming out of Egypt, they began their
year in the month Nisan, and so continued it for the computation of their
greater Feasts.

CHAP. II.
Of their Feasts.
BEfore we descend to their particular Feasts; First we will see their manner
of Feasting in general. Their ordinary meals, as they were not many in a day,
so neither were they costly. They were called Ab (...) Iter facere, significat
viaticum.
Arucoth, which word signifies properly, such fare as Travelers and
Wayfaring men use on their journeys. The word is used, Jer. 40. 5. So the
chief Steward gave him victuals, and a reward, and let him go. Likewise Pro.
15. 17. Better is a dinner of green herbs where love is. The extraordinary and
more liberal kind of entertainment, by way of feasting, was commonly called
(...) Convi^^um, (...). Di^i^ur a potando sive bibendo, ut Graece (...), ab
altera ejus part*
Mischte, from their liberal drinking at such meetings. There was also another
kind of feasting, wherein they made merry together, eating the remainders of
their Sacrifices; this they termed (...), Festum, celebris solemnitas a radice
(...), Festum celebravit.
Chag. From this custom of having a feast at the end of their Sacrifices, the
Christians of the Primitive Church instituted their Love Feasts to Chrysostom 1
Cor. 11. Ho^ autem praecipio.
suc^d the Lords Supper: In both these greater and more solemn Feasts, there
were some Ceremonies used by them, as preparatory to the Feast, others in their
giving thanks, others in their gesture at Table.

The Ceremonies preparatory were principally these three: 1. Salutation. 2.
Washing the feet of the guests. 3. Pouring Oil on them.

Their Salutations were testified either by words, or some humble gesture of
the body. By words, and then these were the usual forms; The Lord be with you:
or The Lord bless you, Ruth. 2. 4. From the last of these, blessing is often
taken in Scripture for saluting. If thou meet any, Tertul. lib. 4. advers.
Marcion.
bless him not, or if any bless thee answer him not again, says Elisha to
Gehazi, 2 King. 4. 29. The sense is, as our English renders it, Salute him not.
Sometimes they said, Peace be unto thee, peace be upon thee, Go in peace, and
such like: When ye come into an house, salute the same; and if the house be
worthy, let your peace come upon it, but if it be not worthy, let your peace
return to you, Matthew. 10. 12. 13. By gesture; their salutations were signified
sometimes by prostrating the whole body; sometimes by kissing the feet, Luke 7.
38. commonly by an Xenophon. de institut. Cyr. lib. 1 page 17. It. lib. 5. page
113.
ordinary kiss. Moses went out to meet his father-in-law, and did obeisance,
and kissed him, Exodus 18. 7. Moreover, Joseph kissed all his Brethren, and wept
upon them, Genesis 45. 15. This Saint Paul calls an holy kiss, 1 Cor. 16. 20. S.
Peter, a kiss of Charity, 1 Pet. 5. 14. Tertul. de orat cap. 14.
Tertullian calls it Oscuculum pacis, A kiss of peace. These were kisses
which a Caio might give, and a Vestal receive: Of this sort, the Jews had Vide
Drusium. ad difficiliora loca. Exodus c. 12.
three kinds; (...), Neshekoth pharukom, Oscula propinquorum.
a kiss of salutation which has been specified by some of those former
instances. (...) Nishekoth parishuth, Oscula separationis.
a kiss of valediction: Wherefore have thou not suffered me to kiss my my sons
and my daughters, Genesis 31. 28. (...) Neshikoth gedola, Oscula magnitudinis.
a kiss of homage; the word signifies a kiss of State or dignity, but was to
testify their homage, and acknowledgment of their Kings Sovereignty. Then
Samuel took a Vial of Oil. and poured it upon Readiness head, and kissed him, 1 Samuel 10. 1. And unto this they refer that in the second Psalm, Kiss the son,
lest he be angry. These Salutations, howsoever they were such as were used
mutually, sometimes in their meetings abroad upon the way, yet were they such,
as were used also in their entertainment, as clearly appears by many of those
fore-quoted examples.

The second Ceremony preparatory was, L^tio pedum ante discubitum, non solum
Judais, sed and gentibus ipsis erat usitata: Locus hic tuas est, hic occumbe,
ferte aquam pedibus, Plantus. Pers.
washing their feet. And the man brought the men unto Joseph's house, and gave
them water, and they did wash their feet, Genesis 43. 24. This office was commonly
performed by servants, and the meanest of the family, as appears by our
Savior Christ, who to leave an example of humility behind him, washed his
Disciples feet, John 13. 5. And Abigail, when David took her to wife said,
Behold, let thine handmaid be a servant to wash the feet of the servants of my
Lord, 1 Samuel 25. 41. For this purpose they had certain Vessels in readiness for
such employments: That which our Savior used, we translate a Basin, John 13.
5. He poured out water in a Basin. The word (...) there used, signifies in
general a Washpot, and is there used for that which in strict propriety of
speech, the Grecians termed (...), (i) a Washpot for our feet: Some may here
make the question, whence this water was poured? I see no inconveniency, if we
say, that there were usually in their Dining-rooms greater vessels, from which
they poured out into lesser, according as they needed; of which sort it is not
improbably St^kins. lib. conviv.
thought that those Water-pots were tioned, John 2. 6. There were set there six
Water-pots of stone, after the manner of the purifying of the Jews. By
purifying there, understand this complemental washing of which we treat: Now if
we consider the washing of their hands, usual and commendable in it self,
though superstitiously abused by Scribes and Pharisees, and the washing of
their feet, before and after meal, (for our Savior washed his Disciples feet
after supper) which second washing, the Hebrews say it was in use only at the
Passover, there must needs be use of great store of water in their greater
Feasts; and therefore no marvel, if many and capacious vessels stood in
readiness. Further, we are to note, that as the office was servile and base, so
the vessel: which observation gives light to that, Psalm. 60. 8. Moab is my
wash-pot; that is, the Moabites shall be basely subject unto me, as the pot in
which I wash my feet.

The third Ceremony preparatory, was pouring out of oil. A woman in the City
brought an Alablaster box of ointment, and stood at his feet behind him
weeping, and began to wash his feet with tears, and did wipe them with the
hairs of her head, and kissed his feet, and anointed them with the ointment,
Luke 7. 37, 38. It was also poured upon the head, whence in the same place,
Christ challenges the Pharisee which entertained him, Mine head with oil thou
did not anoint, verse. 46. Psalm. 23. 5. Thou anointest mine head with oil.

After these ceremonies of preparation had been performed, then they proceeded
to give thanks. The Master of the house sitting down together with his Guests,
took a cup full of wine in his right hand, and therewith began his
consecration, after this manner; (...) Benedictus sis tu, Domine Deus noster,
rex mundi, qui creas fructum vitis.
Blessed be thou, O Lord our God, the King of the world, which createst the
fruit of the Vine. Having said thus, he first lightly tasted of the Wine, and
from him it passed round the Table. This grace of thanksgiving, they call (...)
Bircath haiaiin, the blessing of the cup. With this Christ himself seems to
have begun his supper; He took the cup, and gave thanks, and said, Take this
and divide it among your selves, for I say unto-you, I will not drink of the
fruit of the Vine, until the Kingdom of God shall come, Luke 22. 17, 18. After
the blessing of the cup, the Master of the house took the bread, which they did
Scindere, but not Abscindere, lightly cut for the easier breaking thereof, but
not cut in sunder; and holding this in both his hands, he consecrated it, with
these words; Blessed he thou, O Lord our God, the King of the world, which
bring forth bread out of the earth. This consecration of bread, they termed,
(...) Be^edictionen panis. Drusius in N. T. part. altera p. 78.
Bircath halechem. After the consecration, he brake the bread, (whence the
Master of the house, or he who performed these blessings in his stead, was
termed (...)
Habotseang, i. the breaker:) the bread being broken, he distributed to every
one that sat at the table a morsel, which being done, then they began to feed
upon the other dishes that were provided. This Rite of blessing both the Cup
and the Bread, they observed only in their solemn Festivals; otherwise they
consecrated the Bread alone, and not the Cup. In their Feast time, they
seasoned their meat with good conference, such as might either yield matter of
instruction, or exercise their wits; which practice was also observed in their
Christian Non tam coenam coenant quam discipli^am Ter^ ^^olog. c. 39.
love feasts. Of the first sort, was that Parable proposed by our blessed
Savior at a Feast, Luke 14. 7. Of the second* was Sampson's Riddle, which he
proposed unto his Companions, Judge. 14. 12. At the end of the Feast, they again
gave thanks, which was performed in this manner, either by the Master of the
house himself, or by some guest, if there were any of better note at the table:
He taking a cup of Wine in both his hands, began thus: Let us bless him who
has fed us with his own, and of whose goodness we live: Then all the guests
answered, Blessed be he of whose meat we have eaten, and of whose goodness we
live. This grace they called (...)
Bircath Hamazon, Vide P. Fag. in praec. Hebr.
And this is thought to be the Cup wherewith Christ after Supper commended the
Mystery of his Blood to his Disciples: After this, he which began the
Thanksgiving proceeds, Blessed be he, and blessed be his nane, etc. annexing
a longer prayer, in which he gave thanks: First, for their present food.
Secondly, for their deliverance from the Egyptian servitude. Thirdly, for the
Covenant of Circumcision. Fourthly, for the Law given by the Ministry of Moses.
Then he prayed, that God would have mercy: 1. On his people Israel. 2. On his
own City Jerusalem. 3. On Sion the Tabernacle of his Glory. 4. On the Kingdom
of the House of David his Anointed. 5. That he would send Elias the Prophet.
Lastly, That he would make them worthy of the days of the Messiah, and of the
life of the world to come.

This prayer heing ended, then all the Guests which sat at the Table, with a
soft and low voice, said unto themselves in this manner, Fear the Lord all ye
his holy ones, because there is no penury to those that fear him: The young
Lions do want and suffer hunger, but those that seek the Lord want no good
thing. Afterward, he which began the thanksgiving, blessed the cup in the same
form of words as he used at the first sitting down, saying; Blessed be thou, O
Lord God, the King of the world, which createst the fruit of the Vine: and
therewith he drank a little of the Wine, and so the cup passed round the table.
Thus they began and ended their Feast, with the blessing of a Cup: this cup
they termed (...) Cos hillel, Poculum (...), A Cup of thanksgiving: and both
these cups are mentioned by Saint Luke; and, which is worth our observation,
the words of Consecration whereby it was instituted, as part of the Blessed
Sacrament in the New Testament, were added only to the last cup. This Cup is
the New Testament in my blood, which is shed for you. After all this, they sang
Scalig. de emend. Temp. l. 6. p. 273.
Hymns and Psalms, which also was practiced by our blessed Savior, Mark. 14.
26. So that howsoever he used not any superstitions, either then practiced, or
since added by after Jews, (as the drinking of Moses Kotsensis. fol. 118. col.
1.
four Cups of Wine, Sebastian. Murster. Mat. 26.
or the breaking of the bread with all ten fingers, in allusion to the ten
Commandments, etc.) yet in the beginning, and ending, we see his practice
suitable with theirs. If any desire a larger discourse of these Blessings,
noted out of the Rabbines, let him read It. ^raec. Heb. ^er Fagium editas.
P. Fagius his Comment on Deuteronomy. 8. 10. from whom I have borrowed a great part
of what herein I have delivered. If any shall here object, that I seem to make
the Blessed Sacrament of our Lords Body and Blood, a Jewish ceremony; I answer,
no: For as a kind of ini^iatory purification by water, was used before by the
Jews of old and no Proselyte was admitted into the Church of the Jews without
this purification: yet it was no more a Sacrament to them, than Circumcision*
was to Turks and Saracens. Thus neither was breaking the bread Sacramental to
the Jew, but then it became a Sacrament, when Christ said of it; This is my
body. This cup is the New Testament in my blood, etc. Luke 22. 19. The Jews
could not say, The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of
the Blood of Christ: 1 Corinthians 10. 16.

The last thing considerable in their Feasts. is their gesture. In the days of
our Savior it is Voces quibus usi sunt Evangelistae, sonant accubitum non
sessionem (...), Luc. 22. (...), Mat. 26. (...), Luc. 14. (...), Mat. 14.
apparent that the gesture of the Jews was such as the Romans used. The table
being placed in the midst, round about the Table were certain beds, sometimes
two, sometimes three, sometimes more, according to the number of the guests;
upon these they lay down in manner as follows. Each bed contained three
peasons, sometimes four seldom or never more. If one lay upon the bed, then he
rested the upper part of his body upon his left elbow, the lower part lying at
length upon the bed: But if many lay on the bed, then the uppermost did lie at
the beds head, laying his feet behind the second's back: In like manner the
third or fourth did lie, each resting his head in the others bosom. Thus John
leaned on Jesus his bosom, John. 13. 23. This first is an argument of special
love toward him, whom the Master of the House shall take into his own bosom;
John, he was the beloved Disciple. Secondly, an argument of parity amongst
others, resting in one another bosom. Many shall come from the East and the
West, and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, Mat. 8. 11. And
where shall they sit? In Abraham's bosom, Luke 16. 22. that^s, they shall all
sit at the same table, be partakers of the same glory. Thus Christ, he was in
the bosom of his Father. John 1. 18. that is, in the Apostles phrase, He
thought it no robbery to be equal with his Father. Their tables were perfectly
circular, or round, whence their manner of sitting was termed (z) Messibah, a
(...) Discubitus, cujus radix est (...) circumivit, Ambivit.
sitting round; and their phrase of inviting their guests to sit down, was, sit
round: We will not sit round until he come hither, 1 Samuel 16. 11. Again, Thy
children shall be like Olive-plants round about thy table, Psalm 128. 3. This
custom of lying along upon a bed, when they took their meat, was also in use in
Ezekiel's time; thou satest upon a stately bed, and a table prepared before it,
Ezekiel 23. 41. Philo Jud. p. 388.
And whether this were the custom of the ancient Hebrews, I leave to be
discussed by others. But unto this does also Amos allude; They laid themselves
down upon clothes laid to pledge by every Altar, Amos. 2. 8. that is, the
Vetustissimus ^os erat, super lanatis pellibus discumbere. Qui poter at pelles
addere dives erat. Ovid.
garments taken to pledge they use in stead of beds, when at their Altars they
eat things sacrificed to Idols: Yea, the plucking off their shoes when they
went to table, implies this custom of lying at Table, to have been very
ancient. The plucking off their shoes seems to have been generally received,
when they were in Egypt; for this cause is it that they had a strict charge in
eating the Passover, to have their shoes on their feet, for greater
expedition. The reason why they usually plucked them off; was, for the clean
keeping of their Beds on which they lay. Here, seeing the rule of observing the
Passever requires, that it should be eaten with their shoes on their feet,
which argues rather standing than lying upon a bed: It may be demanded,
Whether Christ transgressed not against the first institution thereof, in the
manner of his sitting at the table? Tremelius answers thus; and, in my mind,
fully: Tremel. in Matt. 26. 20.
We must know, says he, that Exodus 12, it was commanded, after what manner
they, ready to depart out of Egypt, should eat the Passover at that time; for
the necessity of that time so required, namely an hasty eating thereof; but
afterward, in the Law, where it is commanded that this Ceremony of the Paschal
should be renewed every year, those words are not added. Wherefore all the
Hebrew Doctors, both ancient and modern, do teach with one joint consent, that
the Commandment of sprinkling the door-posts with blood, of having on their
shoes, of girding their loins, of taking staves in their hands, and eating the
Lamb in have; did not extend it self to the generations following, but only to
have concerned that very night, wherein they departed out of Egypt: d Talmud.
tract. de Paschate, vid. Tremel. loco superius citato.
Yea, it was an ancient tradition amongst them, that when they did in
aftertimes eat the Passover, they would sit down, or lean upon a bed, as our
Savior and his Disciples did, in token of their deliverance obtained.

The parties that gave entertainment at their Feasts were two; 1. Vid. Casaubon
exercit. p. 278.
The Master of the house. 2. The Master of the Feast; they differed thus: The
Master of the house was termed (...) Baal habeth, (...), Pater familias. The
Master of the Feast was termed (...) Baal mischte, (...), Triclinii praefectus.
The Master of the Feast was the chief servant, attending the Master of the
house in time of the Feast. Others add a Ga^dentius Brixianus. vid. Casaubon.
ibid.
third sort, whom they would have be Praefecti morum, in Greek they were termed
(...). Their Office was thought to have been the inspection of the Guests, that
none should disorder themselves by drinking too much, whence they were called
(...), the eyes of the Feast. Such kind of Officers were in use in Ahasuerash
his Court, Esth. 1. 8. and likewise among the Athenaeus. l. 10.
Athenians; but whether any such belonged unto the Jews is justly doubted.

The ancient Jews, they were both Hospital, ready to entertain, and also
liberal in their entertainments: Their Hospitality is commended throughout the
Scripture, though now it be grown out of use among them, as appears by that
Proverbial speech concerning the entertainment of a friend: (...) Hospes (...)
Onus (...) Profugus. Buxto^. Synag. cap. 32. p. 493.
That the first day he is Oreach, a guest: The second Toreach, a burden: the
third Barach, a runnagate. Their liberality appeared by remembering the poor at
their Feasts, by sending them portions. Send portions unto them for whom
nothing is prepared; Neh. 8. 10. Moris erat veteribus, in conviviis (...)
mittere absentibus amicis. Theophrastu s. c. (...). Idem testatur Plut. in
Agesilaio (...) Eundem m^rem Judaeis in usu fuisse testa^ sacrae literae,
Nehe^n. 8. 10. (...).
This was afterward practiced by Heathens, who in their solemn Feasts did not
only entertain their Guests for the present, but did also allow them certain
junkets to carry away with them. These they termed (...): and likewise, unto
their friends who were absent they sent portions, which they termed (...). This
observation gives light to that Canon in the Laodicean Council, which
forbids the Christians in their love feasts (...), to send portions, the
reason of which prohibition, I conceive to be threefold. first, that Christans
might not symbolize with Heathen people. Secondly, that none presuming that
their portions should be sent them, might absent themselves. Thirdly, that
those present (especially the poorer sort, as it often falls out) might not
be injured, by having the best of their provision sent away in such portions.

Here we may note, for conclusion, that as the time of their supper was toward
the evening, and then they gave greatest entertainment; So the time of their
dinner was about the sixth hour of the day; that is, as we count, about Noon.
Kill meat and make ready, for the men shall eat with me at Noon, Genesis 43. 16.
Peter went up upon the house to pray about the sixth hour; then waxed be an
hungered, and would have eaten, but whiles they made something ready, be fell
into a trance, Acts 10. 9, 10.

Moreover we may here note the difference between those three cups mentioned in
Scripture, (...), 1 Cor. 10. 19. The cup of blessing, and this is applied to
those several cups used in their solemn Feasts, because of those blessings or
thanksgivings annexed. Secondly, (...), Jer. 16. 7. The cup of consolation;
this was so called, because it was sent by special friends in time of mourning,
as intending by this drinking to put away sorrow and grief from the mourner.
Thirdly, (...), Psalm. 116. 13. The cup of salvation: this was used commonly
after their Peace offerings, which were vowed in way of thankfulness for
benefits obtained. Whence the Seventy Elders commonly translate a
Peace Offering, (...), A sacrifice of salvation, or salvation it self.

CHAP. III.
Of their Sabbath.
THe word (...) Sabhath, from whence our English word Sabbath is derived,
signifies Rest, and is applied to all solemn Festivals. They polluted my
Sabbaths, Ezekiel. 20. 21. that is, my Feasts. Sometimes it is applied to the
whole week, Jejuno bis in Sabbato, I fast twice in the week. Sometimes, and
that most frequently, it is used for that 7th day which God had set apart for
his own service. This last was holy, either by a simple holiness which belonged
to it, as was the seventh day; or else by a double holiness occasioned by some
solemn Feast upon the same day, and then it was called, Sabbatum magnum, a
great Sabbath, John 19. 36. For on that Sabbath Day of which S. John speaks,
the Feast of the Passover happened that year.

The week days are termed by the Hebrews (...) Cholim, profane days; by the
Greek (...), working days: but when they speak of them altogether, (...), the
space of time between the two Sabbaths. Scallg. de emend. Temp. l. 6. p. 261.
Item Beza in hunc locum.
This was the time upon which the Gentiles desired to hear Paul, Act. 13. 42.
In respect of the different degrees of holiness on days, the Sabbath Day is not
unfitly compared to a Queen, or rather to those whom they termed Primary-wives;
other Feast-days to Concubines, or half-wives; working-days, to Handmaids.

The Sabbath began at Scalig. de emend. Temp. l. 6. p. 269.
six a clock the night before: this the Grecians called (...), the Hebrews (...)
Biath haschabbath, the entrance of the Sabbath.

The preparation to the Sabbath began at Joseph. Antiq. l. 16. c. 10.
three of the clock in the afternoon; the Hebrews called this (...) Gnereb
haschabbeth, the Sabbath eve. By the ancient Fathers it was cal^ In ritibus
Paganorum coena pura appellabatur; coena illis
coena pura, the phrase is borrowed from Pagans, whose Religion taught them in
their Sacrifices to certain of their Gods and Goddesses, to prepare themselves
by a strict kind of holiness; at which time of their preparation apponi solita,
qui in casto erant, quod Graeci dicunt (...) vel
they did partake of a certain Supper, which as it consisted of choice meats,
such as those Heathens deemed more holy than others: so it was eaten with the
observation of Holy Rites and Ceremonies: Hence (...). Isaac Casau. ^on,
Exercit. 16. p. 662.
they themselves were said at this time of their preparation to be in In casto,
and their preparatory Supper termed, Coena pura. Thus we see the reason why the
Fathers called the Sabbath-eve, Coenam puram. By the Evangelists it was called
(...), A preparation, Mark 15. 42. For distinction sake, we may call that
fore-time of the day (...), A fore-preparation: For the whole day was a kind of
preparation, as will appear by the particulars then forbidden. First, on this
day they might go no more than three Parsa's; now a Parsa contained so much
ground as an ordinary man might go ten of them in a day. Secondly, Judges might
not then sit in Judgment upon life and death, as is shown in the Chapter of
Translation of Feasts. Caesaubo^ Exercit. 16. p. 477. ex Michlot, Kimchi.
Thirdly, all sorts of Artificers were forbidden to work, only three excepted,
Shoomakers, Taylers, and Scribes; the two former for repairing of apparel, the
other for ^itting themselves by study to expound the Law the next day, and
these were permitted but half the preparation time to work.

The best and wealthiest of them, Buxtorf. Synagog. Jud. cap. 10. ex Talmad.
even those that had many servants, did with their own hands further the
preparation; so that sometimes the Masters themselves would chop herbs, sweep
the house, cleave wood, kindle the fire, and such like.

In old Buxtorf. Synagog. Judaic. ibid.
time they proclaimed the Preparation with noise of Trumpets, or Horns; but now
the modern Jews proclaim it by the Sexton, or some under Officer of the Church,
whom they call (...) Scheliach Tsibbur, The Messengers of the Congregation.

Concerning the sanctification of the Sabbath day it self, in corrupter times
some things the Jews added over and above that which God commanded. In other
things they took liberty where God granted none. In the first they were
superstitious, in the second sacrilegious.

They took liberty: There were two thousand Cubits between the Ark and the
Camp; when they marched, Josh. 3. 4. and in probability the same proportion was
observed when they rested: this distance of ground some interpret to be one
mile, some two; some measuring it according to a lesser, others according to a
longer Cubit, which they term a Geometrical Cubit: But all agree in this, that
these two thousand cubits were a Sabbath days journey, though none, as I know,
have observed the reason why it was so called, which I take to be this: On the
Sabbath day they were all to repair to the place of God's public worship,
which was two thousand cubits distant from those who camped nearest: Hence
follow four Propositions. First, That two thousand Cubits any where, by
proportion, might be called a Sabbath days journey. Secondly, That to those
who dwelt in the Camps more remote from the Ark, a Sabbath days journey was
more than two thousand Cubits. Thirdly, That it is now lawful on the Sabbath
day, to join with the Congregation in the place of God's public worship,
though remote. Fourthly, That it was unlawful for the Jews hereupon to take
liberty to walk idly whither they would, if it were not more than two
thousand Cubits, pretending it to be but a Sabbath days journey.

They added unto that which God commanded. 1. God said, Remember to keep holy a
seventh day: in which words, God sanctified one day to be Sabbathum, Hospinian.
de Orig. fest. c. 3.
they added Sabbatulum; so they termed that additament of time which they
annexed to the Sabbath. This addition of time was twofold: some began the
Sabbath sooner than others; this was done by the Jews dwelling at Tiberias,
because they dwelling in a Valley, the Sun appeared not to them so soon as it
did to others. Some again continued the Sabbath longer than others: this was
done by those dwelling at Tsepphore, a City placed upon the top of at Mountain,
so that the Sun shined longer to them, than it did to others. Thus both of
these did Addere de profano ad sacrum; add somewhat of the working day,
immediately going before, or immediately following after, none diminished of
the Sabbath. Buxtorf. Comment. Masoret. cap. 4. ex Musar.
Hence R. Jose wished that his portion might be with those that began the
Sabbath, with those of Tiberias, and ended with those of Tsepphore.

2. God said, To morrow is the rest of the holy Sabbath unto the Lord, bake
that ye will bake, and sees that ye will sees, Exodus 16. 23. This Command was
proper to the time of Jun. and Tremel. in Exodus 16.
Manna: the reason is there alleged, why they should prepare that day for the
morrow, because upon the Sabbath day they should not find it in the field. The
Jews extend this Command to all Ages, and therefore they dressed no meat this
day: this happily was the reason, that the Heathen people thought they Sueton.
August. c. 76. de jejun. Sabbat. Vid. Martial. l. 4. Epig. 4.
fasted on the Sabbath, though I deny not but this error might be occasioned in
part from that phrase, Jejuno his in Sabbato.

3. God said, Ye shall kindle no fire throughout your habitations on the
Sabbath day, Exodus 35. 3. This commandment was only concerning fire for the
furtherance of the work of the Tabernacle, Vatablus in hunc locum. Item Trem.
and Junius.
for therefore is the Sabbath mentioned in that Chapter, to show, that the work
of the Tabernacle ought to give place to the Sabbath. The Jews hence gather,
that it is unlawful to kindle any fire at all on this day.

4. God said, In it thou shall do no manner of work. This the Jews understood
without any manner of exception. Hospinian. de Orig. fest. c. de Sabbato.
Hence they held it unlawful, to roast an apple, to tuck an herb, to clime a
tree, to kill or catch a flea. Hence they thought it unlawful to defend
themselves, being assaulted by their enemies on the Sabbath day: By this means,
twice they became a prey unto the enemy. (p) First, unto Antiochus; whereupon b
Joseph. l. 12. cap. 8.
Mattathias made a Decree, that it should be lawful upon the Sabbath to resist
their enemies; which Decree again they understanding strictly, as if it did
only give leave to resist, (q) when they were actually c Joseph. l. 14. c. 8.
assaulted, and not by any labor that day to prevent the enemies raising of
Rams, settling of Engines, underminings, etc. they became a prey, the second
time, to Pompey. For the right understanding therefore of this Command, we are
to know, that three sorts of servile works were allowed.

1. Works of Charity: God, that allowed them to lead their Ox and Ass to water
on the Sabbath, Luke 13. 5. to make their lives more comfortable, much more
allowed man liberty to dress convenient food for himself and his Family, that
they might the more comfortably perform holy duties. Christ healed on the
Sabbath; therefore, visiting the sick, and the use of the Physician, was both
then and now lawful.

2. Works directly tending to Gods worship: not only killing of sacrifices, and
circumcising of children on that day was allowed; but the Priests might
lawfully blow their Trumpets and Horns on the Sabbath day, for the assembling
of the people, Numb. 10. 2. And the people might warrantably go from their
houses to the place of Gods public worship. By proportion it is now
warrantable for Christians, to ring bells to assemble the people together on
the Lords day; to take journeys, to join with the public Congregation, or to
Preach the Word. Of these we may say, though they are in their own natures
bodily labors yet the Temple which was sanctified did change the nature of
them, and make them holy, Mat. 23. 17. Or as the Jews say concerning the
overthrow of Jericho, which according to their writings fell on the
Sabbath Day: (...) R. D. Kimchi in Josh. 6.
He which commanded the Sabbath to be sanctified, commanded it also to be
profaned.

3. Works of absolute necessity, as the defending ones self against his enemy,
and others of like nature: concerning which the Jews have a saying, (...).
Peril of life drives away the Sabbath: And the Christians with a little change
of a more common Proverb, say, Necessitas non habet ferias; Necessity has no
Holy Days.

CHAP. IV.
Of their Passover, and their Feasts of Unleavened Bread.
SOme of the Fathers have derived the word Tertul. advers. Judaic. c. 10. It.
Ambros. lib. de Myster. Pasch. cap. 1.
Pascha, from a Greek Verb, signifying to suffer, because the sufferings and
Passion of our Savior, are celebrated about that time. Aug. in titul. Psalm. 68.
This Opinion Augustine justly confuteth, for the word is originally an Hebrew
word, signifying to pass by, to leap, or pass over. The Etymology is God's own.
It is the sacrifice of the Lord's Passover, which passed over, etc. Exodus 12.
27.

The word Passover in Scripture has three acceptions. First, it is taken for
that yearly solemnity which was celebrated upon the E Theologis non pauci,
omnia quae ad 14. noctem pertinent 15. attribuunt; quem errorem hauserunt ex
turbidis Rabbinorum lacunis, qui hodie eundem errorem errant, test Scaliger de
emend. Temp. l. 6. p. 270,
fourteenth day of Nisan, otherwise called Abib; you may call it the Passover
of the Lamb, because on that day toward the evening, the Israelites were
commanded according to their families to roast a Lamb, and eat it in their
private houses. Secondly, it signifies that yearly Festivity which was
celebrated on the fifteenth of Nisan: it may be called the Passover of sheep
and Bullocks, Deuteronomy. 16. 2. Otherwise we may call it the Feast of the Passover;
as the fourteenth of Nisan was called simply the Passover. In the fourteenth
day of the first month, is the Passover of the Lord, and in the fifteenth day
of this month is the Feast, Number. 28. 16, 17. Toward this Feast we are to
understand that Josiah gave unto the people such a multitude of Sheep, Lambs,
Kids, and Bullocks, Thirdly, it is taken for the whole solemnity, beginning the
fourteenth of Nisan, and ending the one and twentieth of the same month. Now
the Feast of unleavened bread drew nigh, which is called the Passover; Luke
22. 1. So that in this acception it contained the Feast of unleavened bread
also, notwithstanding, in proper speaking, the Feast of unleavened bread was a
distinct Feast from the Passover.

First, the Passover was to be kept on the fourteenth day of the first month,
at even. This was their second Sacrament, in which although they were enjoined
to eat unleavened bread with the Lamb, yet the Feast of the unleavened bread
began not till the morrow following, being the fifteenth day of the same month,
and lasted seven days, of which only the first and last were holy Convocations,
wherein they might do no servile work, Levit, 23. 5, 6, 7, 8.

Secondly, the Passoever in the age following its first institution, might not
be killed and eaten in any other place, save only where the Lord did choose to
place his Name, which afterward was at Jerusalem: but the feast of unleavenud
bread, the Hebrews thought themselves bound to keep in every place wheresoever
they dwelt, if they could not be at Jerusalem: and (...) Maimon. de fermento
and Azymo. c. 6. sect. 1.
eating of it, they say, depended not upon the eating of the Passover, but it
was a commandment by it self.

The Rites and Ceremonies observed by the Jews in the eating of this Sacrament,
their Paschal Lamb, agreed with those general Ceremonies used in their solemn
Feasts* They blessed the Cup, and blessed the bread, and divided amongst the
guests, and washed the feet of those that sat at the Table, as is shown in the
Chapter of Feasts. The particulars in which it differed from other feasts, are
delivered in those interrogatories, or questions proposed in way of Catechism,
by some Child, at the time of eating their Passover, or rather in the answer
made unto the child by him that blessed the Table. The question was thus: What
means this service? The form of the answer was, Scalig. de emend. Templ. l.
5. p. 270.
How different is this night from all other nights, for all other nights we
wash but once, in this twice: (thus Christ when supper was ended washed his
Disciples feet.) In all other nights we eat either leavened or unleavened
bread, in this only unleavened: In other nights we eat any sort of herbs, in
this night bitter herbs: In all other nights we eat and drink either sitting or
lying; but in this we lie along. Then he proceeded to declare, that the
Passover. was in respect that the Lord passed over the houses of their Fathers
in Egypt. Secondly, he held up the bitter herbs in his hand, and said, these
bitter herbs which we eat, are in respect that the Egyptians made the lives of
our Fathers bitter in Egypt, Thirdly he held up the unleavened bread in his
hand, and said, this unleavened bread which we eat, is in respect that the
dough of our Fathers had not time to be leavened, when the Lord appeared unto
them and redeemed them out of the hand of the Enemy. This kind of Catechizing
they say is commanded, Exodus 12. 26. They called it (...) Haggada i.
Annunciatio, the declaration or showing forth of the Passover. Hence the
Apostle borrows this phrase; As often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink
this cup, ye shall declare, or show forth the Lord's death, 1 Cor. 11. 26.

Concerning this Lamb they are charged thus: Upon the tenth of Abib every one
shall take a Lamb for an house, a male of the first year, without blemish, and
this he kept until the fourteenth day of the same month, Exodus 12. 3. etc. The
Lamb: it was either of Sheep or Goats. For an house, the whole body of the
Israelites was divided into twelve Tribes, the Tribes into Families, the
Families into Houses: if the House were too few for the eating of the Lamb,
then the next Neighbor joined with them in the eating thereof. The whole
Company was termed (...), in the same sense S. Mark uses (...), and (...),
Mark the sixth. All these words signify a society, or company of guests, so
many as can sit at the same Table: the latter word properly signifies, a bed
in a Garden, and thus in the Gospel, the whole multitude sitting on the grass,
seem to be compared unto Garden; and their several Societies or Companies, unto
so many beds in the Garden. The number of Communicants in this Paschal society
Joseph. de bello Jud. l. c. 17.
was never less than ten, nor more than twenty. It follows in the Text, A
male, to note the masculine and peerless virtue of our Savior, whom it did
typically shadow forth. Hebraice (...) Filium anni. Sunt qui distinguunt inter
Filium anni and Filium anni ^ui, Filium anni interpretantur, qui annum u* ^um
agit, nec minor, nec major; Filium vero anni sui, qui est in anno primo, licet
eu^n nondum absolverit. Sed Aben Esra negat absque Cab^la posse sciri quis sit
filius anni sui, ^am fieri potest, inquit, ut sit Vau addit^ium sive
paragogi^um, quale in (...) (...) similibus.
Of the first year; which phrase they interpret thus, that the Lamb, after it
was eight days old and forward, was allowable to be offered for the Passover,
but not before; because it is said. When a bullock, or a sheep, or a goat is
brought forth, then it shall be seven days under the Dam, and from the eighth
day, and thenceforth, it shall be accepted for an offering made by fire unto
the Lord, Levit. 22. 27. And the reason of this Law some of the Hebrews have
thought to be, Vid. Munster ad Levit 22.
because in their Opinion nothing in the world was absolutely perfect, until a
Sabbath had past over it. Moreover if it were an hour elder than a year, it was
unlawful, because it is said, A male of the first year, without blemish, as
well to admonish the Israelites of their own personal integrity, as to signify
the absolute perfection of him who was in truth the Lamb of God. And this he
kept till the fourteenth day of the same month. The Rabbines Hospinian. de
Orig. fest. cap. 5.
affirm four causes of this: First, because otherwise through the multitude of
businesses, at the time of their departure, they might forget the Paschal Lamb.
Secondly, that in this four days space they might have the more certain
knowledge of the Lamb's perfection. Thirdly, that by beholding the Lamb so long
before their eyes, they might have the better occasion, in that space, both to
recount with themselves God's mercy in their deliverance from Egypt, and also
to instruct and Catechize their children in that point: for which respect it
was a received Tradition amongst the Jews, that during the space of these four
days, the Lamb was tied to their bed-posts. Lastly, that in this time of
preparation, they might thoroughly fit and address themselves for the Oblation.

The time when the Paschal Lamb was to be slain, was at the Evening, Exodus 12.
6. Or, as the Original reads, between the two evenings. Here Divines move the
question, what part of the day should be understood by this phrase. Some
distinguish the two evenings thus; That there was Aben. Ezra, Exodus 12.
Vespera Solis, the evening of the Sun; namely, when the body of the Sun
sets: and Vespera luminis, the evening of the light, when the beams and
shining of the Sun is also gone from off the earth; The space or interim
between these two Evenings, is thought to be one hour, and the third part of an
hour; in which space of time, they say, the Paschal Lamb was slain, R. David.
in Radi^. Hoc etiam colligi potest ex Pirk. Aboth. c. 5.
Others admit a greater latitude, and distinguish thus: There is, say they,
Vespera declinationis, the Evening of the Sun declining; and Vespera occasus,
the Evening of the Sun setting; and their meaning is, that their Passover was
offered in this inter-mediate time, between noon and night. This latter answer
seems most agreeable to the truth. First, because by this speech we must
understand a latitude of time, wherein might be offered not only the Passover,
but the daily Evening Sacrifice also, for even that likewise was commanded,
Inter duas Vesperas, between the two evenings, Number. 28. 4. Now this might be
offered in the former part of the afternoon. Talm^d. tract. de paschate. c. 5.
in initio.
The manner of their Sacrisicing, in regard of this time, we find thus
registered, if we count the hours according to our usual computation: the daily
sacrifice of the evening-Lamb was usually slain between two and three, it was
offered between three and four: upon the Passover Eve it was slain between one
and two, it was offered about half an hour before three; but if their Passover
Eve hapened to be the same with their Sabbath Eve, then the daily Evening
Sacrifice was slain between twelve and one, it was offered half an hour before
two; and afterward the Passover. Secondly, this agrees with the Oblation of
the true Paschal Lamb; for, as the time of his crucifying began in the third
hour of the day, with the daily morning sacrifice, Mark 15. 25. so it ended at
the ninth hour, Mark. 15. 34. which was the time of their ordinary evening
sacrifice: but upon their Passover Eve, it was the time when their Paschal
Lamb was slain.

Furthermore, the Lamb was to be eaten with bitter herbs: the reason of this
command is, that thereby they might be moved to thankfulness toward God, for
their deliverance from the Egyptian bondage, in which their lives were made
bitter unto them, Ex. 1. 14.

These bitier herbs they dipped in a certain sauce thick like Mustard, called
(...)
Charoseth, Moses Kotsensis, fol. 118.
which thick sauce (say they) was a memorial of the day wherein they wrought in
Egypt. Scaling. de emend. temp. l. 6. p. 272.
This is thought of some to be that wherein Christ dipped the sop which he gave
to Judas. Of this sauce the Hebrews write thus; Maim. de fermento. c. 8. sect.
7.
they used to dip the unleavened bread in that sauce Charoseth, and to eat;
then they dipped the bitter herbs in the Charoseth, and did eat them. Maimon in
(...) c. 7. sect. 11.
It was made of the Palm Tree branches, or of dry Figs, or of Raisins, which
they stamped and put Vinegar thereto, and seasoned it, and made it like Clay,
and brought it unto the Table in the night of the Passover.

The other seven days following the fourteenth of Nisan, were in strictness of
speech a distinct Feast, as is above-shewed; namely the Feast of unleavened
bread; because in that space of time, Huj^s moris vestigia quaedam sunt reperta
in Roman. Flamine Diali. A. Gell. n^ct. Attic. lib. 10. c. 15.
no leavened bread ought to be found in their houses, Baxtorf. Synag. Judaic.
c. 12. p. 317.
their degrees of preparation to this feast are four. 1. Expurgatio fermenti,
the cleansing of all their household stuff and vessels, unto which leaven might
happily cleave: and this was done two or three days before the Passover. 2.
Inquisitio fermenti, the searching after leaven throughout all the rooms of
their houses, even to the Mouse-holes: this they did with a waxen candle, and
as Buxtorsus notes, upon the night before the Passover: and Scaliger
delivers it in other words to the same * Scalig. de emend. Temp. in prolegom.
purpose, namely, that this search was made, Ineunte quartadecima, usque ad
quartam horam post ortum Solis. At the beginning of the fourteenth day, until
the fourth hour after the rising of the Sun. Now, the beginning of the
fourteenth day was the night going before; for the Jews, in the computation of
their Holy Days, counted their day from even to even. 3. There was
Exterminatio, or Conflagratio fermenti, A burning of the leaven; and this was
done from the fourth of the sixth hour, about dinnertime; at which time
followed the last degree, which Scaliger has omitted, namely, Execratio
fermenti, the cursing of the leaven, in this form: Buxtorf. Synag. c. 12. p. 325
Let all that leaven, or whatsoever leavened things is in my power, whether it
were seen of me, or not seen, whether cleansed by me, or not cleansed, let all
that be scattered, destroyed, and acconnted as the dust of the earth.

In case any did eat unleavened bread those seven days, the penalty was, that
such a soul should be cut off from Israel, Exodus 12. 15. Which penalty has
amongst Expositors a Vid. P. Fag. in Exodus 12.
threefold interpretation. Some understand thereby such a man to be cut off
from his heavenly inheritance: others, that God would cut off such from the
living by an untimely death: others, that he should die without children,
leaving no posterity behind him: To this purpose their Proverb is, Vid. P. Fag.
ib.
A man childless is lifeless.

Of these three, the first is most probable in this place, though the same Text
may admit the second interpretation in other places of Scripture, as is
declared in the Chapter of Circumcision. Notwithstanding here let the judicious
Reader determine, whether these Words do not imply, besides the secret actions
of God touching the soul of such a Delinquent, a direction unto the Church how
to deal with parties thus offending, by censuring them with Excommunication;
which kind of censure elsewhere the Scripture calls, A casting out of the
Synagogue, John 16. 2. A speech much like this, A cutting off from Israel.

Three things may be here demanded. First, who killed the Paschal Lamb?
Secondly, where it was killed? Thirdly, where it was eaten? First, it was
killed by the Priest, 2 Chronicles. 35. 6. Secondly, it was killed after the first
time in the Court of the Temple, the place which God had chosen, Deuteronomy. 16. 6.
Maimon in Korban Pefach. c. 1. Sect. 6.
Thirdly, the owner of the Lamb took it of the Priest, and did eat it in his
own house at Jerusalem Christ with his disciples kept the Passover in an
upper-Chamber at Jerusalem.

It may further be demanded, whether the Passover consisted of two Suppers,
one immediately succeeding the other? Some affirm it, and their reasons are
these: First, say they, the Passover was eaten standing, but Christ used
another gesture. This argument of all other is the weakest, for Christ used the
gesture of lying on his body, as well in the eating of the Passover, as at the
consecration of the Sacrament, and the Jews generally after the first
institution, in all their Passeovers, used rather this posture of their body,
than the other of standing, in token of rest and security, as appears in the
Chapter of the Feasts. Secondly, they say, the Paschal Lamb was wont to be
roasted; but in the last Passover which our Savior celebrated, there was Jus
cui intingebatur panis, Broth into which he dipped the bread. This reason is as
weak as the former, because though there was a command to eat the Paschal Lamb
roasted; yet there was no prohibition to join their ordinary supper with the
eating thereof, and that might admit broth: But, as it is shown above, the
matter into which the sop was dipped, was thought to be the sauce Charoseth.
Thirdly, they urge John 13. 2. That the first supper was done, when Christ
arose and washed his Disciples feet, and after that he gave Judas the sop,
which must argue a second sitting down. This foretelling his Disciples, that
one of them should betray him, is likewise by Saint Luke recited after the
consecration of the Sacrament. This is the strongest argument, and yet not of
sufficient validity, because by a kind of Prolepsis, or anticipation of time,
it is not unusual, in the Scripture, to relate that first, which according to
the truth of the History, should be last. Thus Joh. 11. mention is made of Mary
which anointed the Lord, yet her anointing of him follows in the next
Chapter. And this same history of betraying Christ, Saint Matthew and Saint
Mark recited before the consecration of the Sacrament; whence the Jews have a
Proverb, (...) Salom. Iarchi. in Genesis 6. 3.
Non esse prius aut posterius in scriptura; That first, and last, must not be
strictly urged in Scripture. Together with these answers, confider how
improbable it is, that ten persons (for sometimes they were so few) should eat
a second supper, after they had eaten A Lamb of the first year, which might be
a year old. It is evident also by that of Barabbas, that it was a received
custom on the Passover, to let loose and enlarge one Prisoner or other.
Concerning the reason hereof, the conjecture is threefold. Some think this
custom to have been used in memory of Jonathan the Son of Saul, when the
people rescued the reason hereof was, that the Feast might be celebrated with
the greater joy and gladness. Others more probably think, it was done in
remembrance of their deliverance from the Egyptian bondage.

Again, here is to be observed, that the Jews speaking of their Passover, did
sometimes speak according to their civil computation, wherein they measured
their days from Sunrising to Sunrising: Sometimes according to their sacred
computation, which was from Sunset to Sunset. This serves for the
reconciliation of that, Numb. 12. 18. which seems to make the fourteenth day
of the month, the first day of unleavened bread. Joseph. Antiq. l. 2 c. 5 p. 6^.
And Josephus tells us that they numbered eight days for that Feast. In like
manner the Disciples are said to come unto Christ the first day of unleavened
bread, saying unto him, Where will thou that we prepare for thee to eat the
Passover? Mat. 26. 17. as if the first day of unleavened bread, were before the
Passover. All these are true according to the computation of their civil days,
though according to the computation of their Holy Days, the Feast of unleavened
bread began the fifteenth day, and continued seven days only, and the Passover
was before the feast of unleavened broad.

In the last place, we must know, that there was permited a second Passover to
those who could not be partakers of the first, by reason either of their
uncleanness by a dead body, or of their far distance from the place where it
was to be offered. This was to be observed in the second month, the fourteenth
day thereof, according to all the Ordinances of the first Passover, Numb. 9.
Touching that permission of a second Passover, to those that were in a journey
far off: The Hebrew of this word far off, has extraordinary pricks over it,
for special consideration. Hereby the Lord might intimate, that we Gentiles
which were unclean, even dead in trespasses and sins, and far off, Ephesians. 2.
13. should be made wigh by the blood of Christ, and so partakers of him the
second Passover Of this legal Ordinance the Hebrews say, Maimon. in Korban.
Pesaeh c. 5. sect. 8, 9.
What is this journey far off? fifteen miles without the walls of Jerusalem,
who so is distant from Jerusalem, on the fourteenth day of the first month,
fifteen miles or more, when the Sun rises, ^o, this is a journey far off* if
less than this, it is not a journey far off, for he may come to Jerusalem by
after midday: though he go on foot, easily. The Agreement between the Paschal
Lamb and Christ stands thus.

Christ is our Passover, 1 Cor. 5.
The Paschal Lamb was, Christ was, 1 One of the flock. 1 Perfect man, John 1. 2
Without blemish. 2 Without sin. 3 To be sacrificed and roasted. 3 Suffered and
died. 4 His Bones being not broken. 4 They brake not his legs, John 1933. 5
About the Evening. 5 In the end of the World, Heb. 9. 26. 6 Their door-posts
were to be sprinkled with the blood. 6 The Blood of Christ purg^^h our
consciences. 7 That the punishing Angel might pass over them. 7 That sin and
death might not prevail against us. 8 It was eaten in their several families. 8
He is applied by Faith. 9 The whole Lamb. 9 According to all the Articles of
the Creed. 10. Without Leven. 10. Without Hypocrisy, 1 Cor. 5. 11. With bitter
herbs. 11. With patience under the Cross. 12. In haste, and in the manner of
Travelers. 12. With an earnest and longing expectation of life eternal. 13.
Only by the Circumcised. 13. Only by the faithful, 1 Cor. 11.

CHAP. V.
Of their Penticost.
THis Feast was called (...). the Penticost* which word signifies the fiftieth
day, because it was observed upon the fiftieth day after the second of the
Passover, which was the sixteeenth of Nisan. Here in the first place we must
note, that the fourteenth of Nisan was (...), the Passover, the fifteenth
(...), the feast of the Passover: or (...) the Seniores appellabant hunc diem,
(...) Lev. 23. 11.
first of the Passover: the sixteenth was (...), the second of the Passover,
or the morrow after the Passover, Levit. 23. 11. which is all one, as if it
had, been said, the morrow after the feast of the Passover, for in those
feasts which consisted of many days, the first and the last were termed
Sabbaths. Now these fifty days were in truth the appointed time of their
Harvest, their Harvest being bounded, as it were, with two remarkable days, the
one being the beginning, the other the end thereof: the beginning was (...),
the second of the Passover; the end was (...), the fiftieth day after, called
the Pentecost. Upon the (...), then they offered a Scalig. de omend. temp l. 6.
sheaf of the first fruits of their harvest, Levit. 23. 10. Upon the Pentecost,
then they offered two wave loaves, Levit. 23. 17. the sheaf being an Oblation
offered in the name of the whole Congregation, whereby all the after fruits
throughout the Land were sanctified, (...), Joseph. Antiq. l. 3. c. 10.
it being from thence afterward lawful, and not before, to reap the Corn, the
two loaves being not only an Eucharistical Oblation, but also a token of the
Harvest finished and ended. In the second place we are to know, that they did
count these fifty days by numbering the Weeks from the (...), whence it was
called a Feast of weeks. The manner how they counted the Weeks, was according
to the number of the Sabbaths following the (...). Thus the first Sabbath
following, they called (...),: The second (...): the third, (...), etc. So that
Scalig. lib. 6. de emend. temp. p. 260.
all the Weeks and Sabbaths during the time of the Pentecost; as the first,
second, third and fourth, etc. took their denomination from the (...); which
observation gives light to that of (...). Luke 16. 1. where there is mention
of a Sabbath termed (...), that is, the second first Sabbath, and by it is
meant the Sabbath next after the sixteenth of Nisan, which was the (...).
Seeing that these fifty days did measure out the time of their Harvest, it will
not beamiss to observe the difference betwixt their Harvest and ours, which
chiefly consisted in their anticipation of time; for both the ^anaanites and
the Egyptians beg^n their Harvest about the Plin. l. 18. cap. 18. Illud ipsud
confirmat Leo Aser testis (...) Descript. Afr. lib. 8. c. 4.
first of April, and it was quite finished in May.

CHAP. VI.
The Feast of Tabernacles.
THe (a) Greek word used to express this Festivity, e Jansen. Concord. cap. 73.
Item T^llet. in Joan. 7.
properly signifies the making of Tabernacles: the (...) Chag. hasucceth
Hebrew word, a Feast of Tabernacles. The reason of both is, because all the
time of this (...), non (...).
Feast, which was full seven days, (from the fifteenth of Tisri, until the one
and twentieth thereof) the people remained in Tabernacles and Booths made of
Boughs, in manner of A^bors or Powers; yet so, that the first day of those
seven, and the last, were after a more special manner to be observed as holy
Convocations.

Concerning these Booths, the Jews write thus: Munster Levit. 13.
They ought to be made in the open Air, not within doors, nor under the shelter
of a Tree; they ought not to be covered with clothes, nor to be made too close
with the thickness of the Boughs, but with such holes that the Sun and the
Stars might be seen through them, and the rain likewise descended through them.
In these they ought to dwell those seven days, as in their houses; they ought
to furnish them with household stuff to lie under them, and sleep under them;
only in rainy weather, then they had liberty to eat and sleep in their houses,
until the rain was over-past. Feeble persons also, which could not endure the
smell of the earth, were permitted to stay at home. In Nehemiah's time they
made their Booths, some upon the roof of their houses (for their houses were
made fl^t above) Deuteronomy. 22. 8. Some in their Courts, some in their streets,
Nehem. 8. 15.

Plutarch making mention of this Festivity, says, that Plutarch. Sympos. 4.
Problem. 5.
these Booths were made principally of Ivy boughs: but the Scripture reckons
up four distinct kinds, Levit. 23. 40. which are thought to be, 1. The Cistern
tree. 2. The Palm Tree. 3. The Myrtle-tree. 4. The Willow of the Brook. P. Page
Levit. 23.
The Rabbis teach, that every man br^^ght every morning his burden of the
boughs of these four Trees, otherwise he fasted that day. And this burden thy
termed Elias Thisbit.
Hosanna: in allusion unto this the people cutting down branches from the
Trees, and strewing them in the way when our Savior did ride into Jerusalem,
cried, saying, Hosanna to the Son of David, Mat. 21. 9. Plutarch, scoffing the
Jews, compares this Feast with that drunken Festival in the honor of Bacchus,
in which the Bacchides ran up and down with certain Javelings in their hands,
wrapped about with Ivy, called (...), and in this respect he terms this feast
of the Jews (...) A bearing about of these Thyrsi. That feast which the
Athenians term (...), was not much unlike.

Moreover, on the next day after this feast, they compassed the Altar
Hospinian. de Orig. fest. cap. 7. It. Munst. in Calendar. p. 150.
seven times with Palmboughs in their hands, in the remembrance of the
overthrow of Jericho: for which reason, or else because that Palm-branches were
the chief in the bundle, it was called Dies Palmarum, Palm-Feast.

Concerning the reason of this Feast; some are of opinion, that it was
instituted in memory of that protection which the Lord vouchsafed the
Israelites by the Cloud, when they traveled through the Wilderness, under the
shadow of which they traveled, as under a safe Booth) or Tent. Onkelos in his
Chaldee Paraphrase, seems to incline to this opinion. Where the Hebrew
reads; That your posterity may know, that I have made the Children of Israel
to dwell in booths, Lev. 23. 43. The Chaldee renders it, that your posterity
may know that I have made the Children of Israel to dwell (...)
in the shadow of Clouds. Theophylact. Johan. 7.
Others think it was instituted as a solemn thanksgiving unto God for their
Vintage, which was gathered in at that time of the year; thence it is that they
conceive those Psalms of David, which are entitled (...) pro torcularibus, to
have been composed for this feast. Others speak more probably, who assign the
cause to be in memory of their Forefathers dwelling in Tents and Tabernacles;
the next is clear, Levit. 23. 43.

The Sacrifices which were offered these seven days, are prescribed, Numb. 29.
from the thirteenth verse to the thirty fourth, where we shall read every day
the like Sacrifice, but only with this difference, that upon the first day they
offered thirteen young bullocks, upon the second twelve, upon the third eleven,
and so forward, ever diminishing the number by one. Hospinian. de Orig. hujus
fest
The reason of which diminution, the Jews, deliver to be this: The whole number
of Bullocks to be offered at this solemnity was seventy, according to the
Languages of the Seventy Nations, (for whom, as they teach, these Sacrifices
were performed) signifying thereby, that there should be a diminution of those
Nations, until all things were brought under the government of the Messiah, who
was the expectation and hope of the Gentiles.

The two and twentieth of the month Tisri, was in truth a distinct feast, as
appears, Neh. 8. 18. but yet because this immediately followed the Feast of
Tabernacles, it has been always counted the last day of that Feast. And not
only the Boughs, but the Talmud. tract. de festo Tabernaculorum, cap. (...)
Vid. Tremel. John 7. 37. (...) Buxtorf. in abbreviatur. p. 253.
days of this whole feast of Tabernacles were termed Hosannoth, from the usual
acclamations of the people, whiles they carried the Boughs up and down. And
this eighth day was called Hosanna Rabba, the great Hosanna, or the great day
of the feast, Joh 7. 37. (n) Upon this day they did read the last Section of
the Law; and likewise began the first, lest they might otherwise seem more
joyful in ending their Sections, than willing to begin them. (o) Upon this day
also g Tremel. Joh. 7. 37. ex Talmud.
by the institution of the Prophet Haggaeus and Zachary, and such like
Prophetical men, they did with great solemnity and joy, bring great store of
water from the River Shiloah to the Temple; where it being delivered unto the
Priests, it was poured upon the Altar, together with Wine, and all the people
sung that of the Prophet Esaias 12. 3. With joy shall ye draw water out of the
Wells of Salvation. Our Savior is thought to have alluded unto this, in that
speech which he used on this very day, John 7. 38. He that believes in me, out
of his belly shall flow Rivers of waters of life.

It is worth our noting also, that whereas God commanded the observation of
this Feast on the fifteenth of the seventh month Tisri; Jeroboam, that he might
work in the people a forgetfulness of the true Worship of God, appoints the
Celebration of a p Hospinian. de Orig. hujus fest. p. 24.
Feast in the eighth month, on the fifteenth day thereof, which is thought to
be this very Feast of Tabernacles.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Feast of Trumpets, and their New Moons.
FOr the understanding of the time when this Feast was to be observed, we must
note, the month Tisri was the seventh month, according to their sacred
computation; and therefore it is commanded to be celebrated the first day of
the seventh month, Levit. 23. 24. But according to their civil Computation it
was their first month, so that this Feast may be termed their New-years-day.

The first day of every month had its solemnities. First, when they repaired to
the Prophets for the hearing of the word, as on other Sabbaths. Wherefore will thou go to him to day? It is neither New Moon, nor Sabbath day, 2 Kings 4. 23.
Secondly, it was then unlawful to buy and sell: When will the New Moon be gone,
that we may sell corn? Amos 8. 4. Thirdly They had then special sacrifices over
and above their daily sacrifices.

Notwithstanding, this Feast of Trumpets differed from other New Moons. First,
in respect of their sacrifices; in their ordinary New Moons they offered
(besides the daily sacrifice) two Bullocks, one Ram, seven Lambs, for burnt
offerings; with their meat and drinkofferings, and a Goat for a sin offering,
Number. 28. 11, 15. But at this New Moon, which was the beginning of their year,
they offered all the foresaid sacrifices, and over and besides them, one
Bullock, one Ram, and seven Lambs, for burnt-offerings, and a Goat for a
sin-offering, Numb. 29. 1, 6. Secondly, in other New Moons they blowed no
Trumpets: In this they blowed Sheindler. in voce (...)
from the Sunrising till night. Whence we lea^ what New Moon it is that Daved
speaks of. Psalm. 81. 3. Blow the Trumpet in the New moon, in the time
appointed, at our Feast day.

The reason in general of this blowing, and great noise of Trumpets, I take to
have been, to make their New Years day the more remarkable, because from it all
their Deeds and Contracts bore date, and their Sabbatical years and Jubilees
were counted thence; But why it should be made remarkable by the sound of
Trumpets, or Cor^ets, there are three conjectures.

First, the P. Fag. Levit. 23.
Hebrews think it was done in memory of Isaac his deliverance, and that they
did therefore sound Rams horns, because a Ram was sacrificed instead of him.
Secondly, Basil in Psalm. 80.
Basil is of opinion, that the people were hereby put in mind of that day,
wherein they received the law in Mount Sinai with blowing of Trumpets. Thirdly,
others think it was to put them in remembrance of the Resurrection, which shall
be with the sound of Trumpets; He shall send his Angels with a great sound of a
Trumpet, Mat. 24. 31.

There are Sealig. de emend temp. page 26. It. p. 105.
three things considerable in New Moons. First, (...), the conjunction of the
Moon with the Sun. Secondly, (...), the waxing of the Moon. Thirdly, (...), the
prime of the Moon. In the first it was quite dark: in the second it did open it
self to receive the Sunbeams: In the last it did appear, corniculata, horned.

Because in all these three degrees of the change, there was a kind of mutual
participation both of the Old and New Moon: H^. de Orig. ^est c. 4. p. 15.
E^ti^ in illus (...) ^s ^i c^nt 29. di^.
Hence the Jews observe two days, namely, the last of every Month, and the
first day of the next following. Now because the thirtieth was the last in
their longest months; Hence Horace calls these last days, Tricesima Sabbata:
The first days they termed, Neomenias, new Moons.

For certain reasons the Jews used a kind of change, or translation of days;
which translation, thought it were of use in other months also, yet the
greatest oar was had in translating the beginning of their year, or their
first day in their month Tisri; and he that shall diligently calculate these
changes, shall find, that all other translations depended on this first.

Translation of days was Scalig. de emend. temp. l. 2. p. 85.
threefold. First, Lunary: Secondly, Politic: Thirdly, Mixed.

The reason of Lunary Translation, was, that they might not observe the Feast
of the New Moon, until the old were quite over-past. For the understanding of
this Note, these three rules.

First, The Hebrews counted their Holy Days from night to night, beginning at
six of the Clock, so that from six of the clock the first night, till the next
noon were just eighteen hours.

Secondly, Always before the New Moon, there is a conjunction between the Sun
and the Moon, during this conjunction she is called Luna silens, by reason of
her darkness, and all this time there is a participation of the Old Moon.

Thirdly, When the conjunction was over past, before noon tide, namely, in any
of those first 18 hours, then the New Moon was celebrated the same day. But if
it continued but one minute after twelve of Munster. Calend. Heb. p. 46.
the clock at noon, then the feast was translated to the day following, because
otherwise they should begin their Holy Day in the time of the old Moon. And
this translation they noted with this abbreviation (...), that is, 18. because
of those eighteen hours which occasioned it.

The reason of Politic Translation, was, that two Sabbaths, or feast-days
might not immediately follow each other: Manst. Calend. p. 139.
because, say they, it was unlawful those two days to dress meat, or bury the
dead; and it was likewise inconvenient to keep meat dressed, or the dead
unburied two days. Yet here two exceptions must be remembered, when the meeting
of two Sabbaths could not be avoided.

First, when the Passover, or the fifteenth day of Nisan, fell on Saturday;
for then the Pentecost must needs fall on Sunday.

Secondly, when the Passover fell on Sunday; for then their Passover
immediately followed their weekly Sabbath.

The first Hospinian. de Orig. fest. p. 6.
Author of this Politic Translation was a certain chief man amongst them,
named Eleazer; three hundred and fifty years before Christ His Nativity.

The several species or kinds of Politic translation, were five. The first,
(...) Adu. The second, (...) Badu. The third, (...) Gahvz. The fourth, (...)
Zabad. The fifth, (...) Agu. For the understanding of these abbreviatures, we
must know, that in these made words the letters only stand for numbers, and are
applied to the seven days of the week, thus (...) 1. Sunday (...) 2. Monday.
(...) 3. Tuesday. (...) 4. Wednesday. (...) 5. Thursday. (...) 6. Friday. (...)
7. Saturday: Which was the Jews Sabbath.

Their rules touching Politic translation, stood thus. Adu.
. First, that neither their New-years-day which was the first of the month
Tisri; neither their Feast of Tabernacles, which was the fifteenth day of the
same month, should be celebrated on Adu, that is on Sunday, or Wednesday, or
Friday. Not on Sunday, or Friday, because then the weekly Sabbath must needs,
concur with it, either going immediately before or following after: not on
Wednesday, because then the Feast of expiation, which is the tenth of that
month, would fall on Friday, the day going immediately before their weekly
Sabbath. This instance is only concerning the first of Tisri, which is called
the Feast of Trumpets: but it holds also, by way of consequence, in the
fifteenth day, which is the Feast of Tabernacles, because the fifteenth must
always necessarily be the same day of the week that the first is. Therefore if
the first be not Adu, the fifteenth cannot be Adu.

The Badu.
second rule was, that the Passover should not be observed on Badu; that is on
Monday, Wednesday, or Friday.

The Gahaz.
third rule is, that Pentecost was not observed on Gahaz; that is, on Tuesday,
Thursday, or Saturday.

The Labad.
fourth rule is, that the Feast of Purim, or casting lots, was not observed on
Zabad, that is, on Monday, Wednesday, or Saturday.

The Agu.
fifth rule is, that the Feast of Expiation was not observed on Agu; that is,
on Sunday, Tuesday, or Friday.

Mixed translation is, when both the Lunary and the Politic meet in the
changing of days. And the translation occasioned by this mixture or meeting of
both these two, is twofold. First, Simple. And Secondly, Double.

Simple translation is, when the Feast is translated to the next day following.
For examples sake, If the Moon changed after noontide on Sunday, here the
Feast must be translated, for two reasons: The first is Lunary, because the
point of the change was after eighteen hours; the second, Politic, because the
rule Adu forbids Sunday to be kept: Notwithstanding, in as much as the very
next day, namely Mond^ was observed; I term this translation simple. Of this
sort was that translation which they called Batu tak phat.

(...) Batu tak phat.
Batu tak phat, is a word invented for help of memory; each letter is a
numeral, and may be thus resolved, (...) 2. (...) 15. (...) 589. The meaning
is, that in the year following Annum Embolymaeum (wherein one whole month was
ingrafted) if the point of the change happened upon the second day of the week,
that is, Monday, not before the fifteenth hour, and the 589 moment, the Feast
of the New M^on was translated unto Tuesday. How both the Lunary and Politic
translation work in this change; read Scaliger, de emend. temp. lib. 2. page 87.

Double Translation, is, when the Feast is translated not to the next, but to
some further day: as if the first day of the month Tisri should happen upon
Saturday; here, if the Moon has not overpast her conjunction before the
afternoon, Lunary translation removes this Feast ^ll Sunday, because of (...),
that is, the eighteen hours: Politic, translation removes it till Monday, as
appears by the rule Adu, forbidding Sunday: of this sort is Gatrad.

(...) Gatrad, is a made word, each letter is a numeral and it may be thus
resolved, (...) 3. (...) 9. (...) 204. The meaning thereof is th^s: In their
common year (when a whole month is not inserted) if the point of the change
happen upon the third day of the week, that is, Tuesday, not before the ninth
hour, and the 204 moment of an hour, than the New Moon shall be translated to
Thursday,

Note in the last place, Munst. Calend. page 45.
that 1080 moments make an' hour.

The Feast of Tabernacles was observed in the month Tisri, and therefore that
could not be observed the morrow after the Sabbath, as appears by the rule
Adu. The Passover was observed in the month Nisan, and therefore that might be
observed the morrow after the Sabbath, as appears by the rule Badu. If any
ask the reason why the Passover might be observed the next day after the
Sabbath, seeing the Feast of tabernacles might not? I take it to be thus; All
the after translations depended upon the first translation or the first new
Moon in Tisri; but that could no be so changed, as to prevent all concurrence
of two Feasts, and thus to have their Passover sometimes to follow their
Sabbath, they thought the most convenientest ordering of the year, because
though not all meetings of two Sabbaths, yet most were hereby prevented.

This tract of translation of Feasts, it serves partly to open the customs of
the Jews: partly to give light for the understanding of that great dispute
among Divines, whether our Savior did anticipate the Passover. The Greek
Church Epiph. l. 2. Tom. 1. c. 51. p. 147.
holds, that he kept a Passover by himself with his Disciples, on the
thirteenth day of the month, when unleavened bread was not yet to be used, and
thence they do both use and urge a necessity Vsum fermentati panis in coena
Dominica Ecclesia Romana olim non damnavit. Casanbon. exercit. 16. p. 465.
of leavened bread in the Lords Supper: But this opinion we reject. First,
because it accords not with the truth of Evangelical History. Secondly,
because it plainly makes Christ to be a transgressor, not a fulfiller of the
Law. Munster. in Mat. cap. 26.
Others say, that because that year their Passover fell on Friday, hence the
feast was translated unto Saturday by the rule Baedu. Their inference is, that
Christ kept the fourteenth day of the month, which was Friday, and the Jews
kept Saturday. He kept Gods Command, they the tradition of the Elders. Joseph.
Scalig. de emend. temp. lib. 6. p. 266.
Lastly, others more probaby hold, that both Christ and the Jews did eat the
Passover the same day and hour; namely, on Friday or the fourteenth day of the
month, if we count the beginning of Friday according to the manner of the Jews,
from six a clock at night on Thursday. Friday morning he was judged, and
crucified; and in the afternoon, about three of the clock, when the preparation
of the Sabbath began; he was buried; There laid they Jesus, because of the Jews
preparation, John 19. 24.

For reconciling the Evangelists in this point, we must note these particulars,
which are more at large proved in the Chapter of the Passover. 1. The
fourteenth day of the month, on which the Paschal Lamb was eaten, was called
the first day of unleavened bread; the Feast of unleavened bread drew near,
which is called the Passover, Luke 22. 1.

The fourteenth day was not holy, but the fifteenth was. In the fourteenth day
of the first month is the Passover of the Lord, and in the fifteenth day of
his month is the Feast, Numb. 28. 16, 17. Some of them thought, because Judas
had the bag, that Jesus had said unto him, buy those things that we have need
of against the Feast, John 13. 29.

The Sheep and Bullocks offered upon this day, are called the Passover, Deuteronomy
16. 2. And of this we are to understand S. John, Joh. 18. 28. They themselves
went not into the common Hall, lest they should be defiled, but that they might
eat the Passover. So that this eating of the Passover is not understood of
the Paschal Lamb. But some may question, How they should have been defiled by
entering into the common Hall? The answer is, that upon (...) Moses ben Maimon.
lib. ult. Iad. c. Sanedrin. Sect. 11.
Holy-day-Eves. which they termed days of preparation, they held it unlawful
for their Judges to sit on life and death. Hence it is, that they brought Jesus
to Pilate the Roman Deputy. Secondly, they withdrew themselves out of the
common Hall. Thirdly, for this reason they said, It is not lawful for us to put
any man to death, Joh. 18. 31. Aug. tract. 114. in Joan. Ita hunc locum
exponunt etiam Cyril. lib. 12. in Joan. c. 6. Chrysostom. hom. 12. in Joan. Beda in
c. 18. Joan.
that is upon this, or such like day; for tho their high Court of Sanedrim were
put down at this time, yet all power in cases of Life and death was not taken
from them, as is implied in the words following. It was that the word of Jesus
might be fulfilled, which he spoke signifying what death he should die, ver.
32. Which text intimates, that that unlawfulness was urged by the special
providence of God, that he might be crucified, being judged by Pilate: for if
the Jews had judged, they used no such kind of death toward Malefactors.
Again, Stephen was condemned by them to be stoned, Act. 7. And they complained
before Felix, that when they were about to proceed against Paul according to
their own Law, the chief Captain Lysias with violence took him out of their
hands, Acts 24. Which argues, that all power in causes capital was not taken
from them: But of this see the Chapter Of their capital punishments.

CHAP. VIII.
The Feast of Expiation.
UPon the tenth day of the month Tisri, answering to September with us, the
Feast of Expiation was commanded to be celebrated, Levit. 13. It was called the
Feast of Expiation, because the High priest did then confess unto God both his
own sins, and the sins of the people: And by the performance of certain Rites
and Ceremonies expiate them, and make an atonement unto God for them.

The Ceremonies at this time to be performed, concerned either the People and
the Priest, or the Priest alone. These which concerned the People and the
Priest, consisted in the afflicting of their souls by fasting. Whence this
Feast was also called Joseph de bell Jud page 43.
Dies Jejunii, the Fasting Day, Jer. 36. 6. Which serves for the understanding
of that, Act. 27. 9. Sailing was now dangerous, because the Feast was already
past; that is, the Feast of Expiation was now past, and Winter was at hand.

Those Ceremonies which concerned the Priest alone, were two. First, then the
High priest entered into the Holiest of Holies, which was peculiar unto this
day: Secondly, he being about to sacrifice for himself and his house, he took
unto him a young Bullock for a sin-offering, and a Ram for a burnt-offering,
putting on ^^s Priestly Robes: After he had washed himself in water; he took of
the Congregation two He goats for a sin offering, and a Ram for a
burnt-offering. The two He goats he presented before the Lord at the door of
the Tabernacle, casting lots which of them should be sacrificed, which let
escape alive. This last was termed the (...) Gnazazal: ex (...) Gnaz. capra and
(...) Azal. abiit, R. D Kimchi, in Radic.
escape Goat, because the other being slain, this was sent alive into the
Wilderness. The Greek Interpreters call this Goat (...), Malorum depulsorem, A
defender from evils; which name the Heathens applied to their Tutelar Gods.
They intimated, that when the escape Goat carried away the sins of the people
into the Wilderness, he likewise carried away all those evils which belonged
unto those sins. And for the securing the people in this point, the Lord
commanded the High Priest to confess in the name of all the people, and to
disburden the sins of the whole Congregation upon the head of the escape Goat.
The form of Confession, according to the relation of the Hebrew Doctors, was
this. P. Fag. Levit. 16.
O Lord thy People, the House of Israel, they have sinned, they have done
wickedly, they have transgressed before thee; I beseech thee now, O Lord,
pardon the sins, iniquities, and transgressions, with which the People, the
House of Israel have sinned, done wickedly, and transgressed before thee, as it
is written in the Law of thy servant Moses: that in that day he shall make
Atonement for you, that he might cleanse you, and that you might be clean from
all your iniquities before the Lord.

The modern Jews now (because there can be no proper Sacrifice, the Temple of
Jerusalem being destroyed) the men they take a white Co^k on this day, the
women an Hen: Buxtorf. Synagog. cap. 20.
This Cock they swing three times about the Priests head, saying, Gallus
Gallinaceus hic commutatio erit pro me: that is, This Cock shall be a
propitiation for me. After that they kill the Cock, acknowledging themselves
worthy of Death; and then they cast the intrals upon the top of the house, that
some Raven or Crow might carry both them, and together with them, their sins
into the wilderness. And lest they might seem to be mad without reason, they
assign the cause why they make choice of a Cock, at this time, to be this: This
word (d) Gebher (...)
in the Holy Language signifies a Man, in their Talmud it signifies a Cock.
Now, say they, the Justice of God requires, that as Gebher sinned, so Gebher
should make satisfaction. From this Feast of Expiation it is probable, that the
Grecians used an yearly Expiation of their Cities, which was performed on this
manner: Certain condemned persons were brought forth with Garlands upon their
heads, in manner of Sacrifices, these they would tumble from some steep place
into the Sea, offering them up to Neptune, Suid. in voce (...).
using this form of words, (...), Sis pro nobis peripse na: as if he had said
Be thou a Reconciliation or propitiation for us. The like kind of Expiation was
used among them in time of any Pestilence, or contagious infection; for removal
of such diseases, they then sacrificed certain men unto their Gods, (...) Vetus
Scholiast in Aristophan. Plut. page 48.
such men they termed (...). These two words are used by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4.
13. and they are translated filth and off scouring: we are made as the filth of
the world, and as the off scouring of all things. The words signify properly
the filth or dirt scraped off men's shoes, or from the pavement of the ground:
But in Budaeus annot. reliq. in Pandect. De poenis, p. 334.
Budaeus his opinion, the Apostle had allusion unto those kinds of Expiations
in use amongst the Heathens. As if he had said, we are as despicable and as
odious in the sight of the people, as much loaded with the revilings and
cursings of the multitude, as those condemned persons, who were offered up by
way of public Expiation.

Now, seeing at this Feast principally the High Priest was a Tipe of Christ, it
will not be amiss to note the agreement between the Type and the Truth.

Aaron. Christ. 1. The High Priest went into the Holiest of all, Levit. 16. 3.
1. Christ our High Priest went into the Holy place, namely, the Heavens, Heb.
9. 12. 2. He went once a year, Exodus 30. 10. 2. He entered once, Heb. 9. 12. 3.
He with the blood of Goats and Calves, Heb. 9. 12. 3. He by his own blood, Heb.
9. 12. 4. He alone, Heb. 9. 4. He alone has trodden the Wine Press, Isaiah 63.
3. 5. He clothed with his Priestly Robes, Levit. 16. 4. 5. He, ordained and
sealed to this Office, by his Father from all Eternity. 6. He took two Goats,
Levit. 16. 6. He took two natures: the impassibility of his God head was
shadowed by the Scapegoat: his sufferings in his Manhood, by the Goat that was
sacrificed, Theod. Qu. 12 in Lev. 7. The Goat did bear the Peoples iniquities.
7. Christ was made sin for us, 2 Cor. 5. 22.

CHAP. IX.
The Sabbatical year, or Seventh years rest.
AS every seventh day was a Sabbath day, so every seventh year was a Sabbatical
year, Levit. 25. And as the Sabbath day signified that they themselves were the
Lords, and therefore they abstained from their own work to do the Lords: So the
Sabbatical year was to signify, that both they and their land was the Lords.

The observation of this Feast consisted chiefly in two things. First, in the
not tilling or manuring of their ground, whence it was called (...)
Sabbath Haarets, the Sabbath of the Land, Levit. 25. 6. Secondly, in the
Creditors discharging their Debtors, and releasing their debts, and thence it
was called (...)
Schemita laihova, The Lords release, Deuteronomy. 15. 2.

Seeing they were that year forbid to till their ground, here question might be
made; what they should eat then in the time of this intermission?

Answ. I will command my blessing upon you in the sixth year, and it shall
bring forth frunt for three years Levit. 25. 20, 21. says the Lord.

Seeing every seventh year, Debts, according to Gods Command were to be
remitted some might demand whether this might not much endamage their Estates
if they did lend? or harden their hearts not to lend?

Answ. It could not endammage their Estates, for it is a most infallible
Maxim: No man is a loser by serving God. Whence the Hebrews themselves
interpret this to be rather Mandatum probationis, A command of trial, such as
Abraham's offering up of Isaac was, which God commanded, not intending that he
should be sacrificed, but that Abraham's love might be tried; rather than
Mandatum obedientiae, A command of obedience. To this purpose speaks Aben
Ezra, interpreting these words, Save when there shall be no poor among you,
Deuteronomy. 15. 4. Ahen Ezra. Deuteronomy. 15. 4.
That is, says he, as if the Lord had said, Know that that which I have
commanded thee, that thou should not exact of thy Brother, will be needless.
If all Israel, or the greater part obey the voice of God, then there shall be
no poor amongst you, to whom it shall be needful for thee to lend; yea, all of
you shall be able to lend to many Nations.

The reasons why this Feast was instituted, are thought to be: First, to teach
the people to depend upon Gods providence by faith; for though the owner of the
field might gather, even on that year, for the maintenance of himself and his
Family, Levit. 25. 6. Yet he was neither to sow his field, thereby to make his
harvest the greater; nor to hedge his field, or lock up his Corn-yard, thereby
to enjoy the propriety: but to let all be common, and every man's hand equal in
every place. Secondly, they were hereby put in mind of that happy estate which
Adam enjoyed in his innocence, when the Earth brought forth her increase
without manuring. Lastly, it shaddowed forth that everlasting Sabbath which we
expect in the Heavens. Vid. Hospin. de Orig. hujus, festi.
And some conjecture this to be the ground of Rabbi Elias his opinion, Talmud.
in Sanedrin. c. Helec.
that the world should continue for six thousand years, but the seventh
thousand should be the great Sabbatical year. The six thousand years answered
the six working days of the Week, the seventh answered our Sabbath, according
to that, A thousand years are but as one day with the Lord, 2 Pet. 3. 8. Elias
his words are these; Six thousand years the world shall be, and again it shall
be destroyed: (f) Two thousand shall be (...) Duo millia inanitatis, duo millia
dierum Messiae, Talmud. in Sanedrin. c. Halec.
void, two thousand under the Law, and two thousand under the Messiah. The
substance of this Prophecy, howsoever we reject it as too curious; yet seeing
that a Jew spoke it, it may serve to prove against them: First, that the
Messiah is already come: Secondly, that Moses his Law ceased at his coming.

CHAP. X.
Of their Jubilee.
THis is the last Festival which God commanded the Jews, it was celebrated
every fiftieth year. It is commanded, Lev. 25. 8. Thou shall number seven
Sabbath of years unto thee, etc. The English word Jubilee is derived from the
Hebrew (...) Jobel, signifying a Ram; it signifies a also Rams horn. Seven
Priests shall bear before the Ark seven Trumpets of Rams horns, Josh. 6. 4.
Where the word Jobelim is used, and is expounded by the Chaldee Paraphrast.
Rams-horns. Marbachius is of opinion, that this year was called their Jubilee,
from (c) Jubal, the first inventer of musical h Marbach. in Levit. 25.
instruments, of whom we read, Genesis 4. 21. Jubal was the Father of all such as
handle the Harp and Organ: Other Authors deliver other reasons of the name, but
it is most probable that this year was termed the year of Jubilee from Jobelim,
the Rams-horns then sounded. There were five main uses of this Feast.

First, for the general release of servants. Secondly for the restoring of
Lands and Tenements unto their first Owners, who formerly sold them. Thirdly,
hereby a true distinction of their Tribes was preserved, because Lands returned
unto their Owners in their proper Tribe, and Servants to their own Families.
Hospinian. de Orig. sect. c. 9.
Fourthly, some are of opinion, that as the Grecians did compute their times by
the number of Olympiads, the Romans by their Lustra, the Christians by their
Indictions: So the Jews by their Jubilees. Lastly, it did mystically shadow
forth that spiritual Jubilee, which Christians enjoy under Christ, by whose
blood we have not only a re-entry into the Kingdom of Heaven, which we had
formerly forfeited by our sins, and this was happily signified by the
Israelites entry upon their Lands formerly sold) but also the sound of the
Gospel, which was in this Feast typed out unto us by the noise of Trumpets, is
gone thorow-out the world. And thus the Lord God has blown the Trumpet, as
Zacharies phrase is, Zach. 9. 14. But neither this release of sevants, nor
restoring of Lands, was Moses, Aegyptius in Halacha Schemit. Vei^bel, c. 10.
until the tenth day of the first month Tisri, at which time it was proclaimed
by the sound of Trumpets, or Rams horns; the nine first days of this month the
servants feasted and made merry, and wore Garlands, in token of their liberty
approaching.

CHAP. XI.
The Feast of Purim; and the Feast of Consecration or Dedication.
PVr is a Persian word, and signifies a Lot, whence this Feast of Lots is
called Purim, i. e. (...), A Lottery: It began on the fourteenth of Adar, and
continued till the end of the fifteenth, Esth. 9. 21. It was instituted by
Mordecai, in remembrance of the Jews delivery from Haman, before whom lots were
cast day by day, and month by month, for the destruction of them. In these two
days they read the History of Hester in their Synagogues; and as often as they
hear mention of Haman, Hospin. de fest. fol. 33. ex-Antonio Margarita in lib.
de ceremoniis Judaeorum.
they do with their fists and hammers beat upon the benches and boards, as if
they did knock upon Hamans head.

The Feast of Dedication is tenned in the New Testament, (...) (...). Suidas.
a Feast wherein something is renewed; because those things only are reputed
consecrated, which are separated from their common use, and dedicated to some
new and holy use. We shall read of many things consecrated in the Old
Testament; the Tabernacle, the Temple, Priests, Altars, Vessels and Garments:
But there was no anniversary or yearly solemnity appointed to be observed in
remembrance of their Consecration. The Consecration therefore which we now
speak of, being a yearly Festival, was the Consecration of the Altar appointed
by Judas Maccabaeus to be observed from year to year, for the space of eight
days, from the five and twentieth of the month Cisleu, which answers in part
to our December, 1 Macchab. 4. 59. Of this Saint John speaks; and as he
mentions our Saviors presence there, so he intimates the time to be about
December. It was at Jerusalem the feast of the Dedication, and it was winter,
John 10. 22. etc.

The reason of this Feast was in remembrance of that great mercy which God
showed unto his people, in delivering them from the Tyranny of Antiochus, and
the Idolatry which he had forced upon them, setting up the Idol of Jupiter in
the Temple of God, and abolishing the true worship of God.

These two Feasts are of humane institution, and others might be added unto
them; but little is to be added, or nothing at all, to that which is delivered
concerning them, in the places of Scripture where they are mentioned.

THE FOURTH BOOK OF THEIR IDOLATRY.
CHAP. I.
The beginnings of Idolatry.
THe Infiniteness of Gods Majesty far transcendeth the capacity of Created
Natures; and if we consult not with God's own Oracles, though the sense of a
Deity may be imprinted even in an Atheists heart, yet so far shall he be from
all right understanding of God, that he will adore the Creature instead of the
Creator: And when he has multiplied the number of his Gods, according to the
number of the Stars in heaven, and creeping things on earth; yet still his
heart will be doubtful, whether he has worshipped the true God, nay, whether
the true God be not utterly unknown. For this reason the Mariners in Jonahs
ship cried every man unto his God, Jonah 1. 5. Every man to his own God; and
lest they might all mistake the true God, they awaken Jonah to call upon his
God. This ^ero. in Georgio. lib. 1.
uncertainty attending Idolatry, caused the Heathens to close their Petitions
with that general, Dii deaeque omnes. Gyrald. Syntagm. 17.
The Arabians perceiving the insufficiency of their known Gods, dedicated their
Altars, Ignoto Deo, To the unknown God. At Athens, Saint Paul found an Altar
with the same inscription, Acts 17. 23. Hence other Neighboring Countries were
wont to swear (...). Lucian in Philopatride.
by him that was unknown at Athens. From this doubt and distrust among the
Athenians, what God was, and who he was, sprang another uncertainty amongst
them, as dangerous as the other, dividing and sharing that undividable Unity of
the Godhead, between I know not what Compeers and Equals, so that they had
other Altars mentioning a plurality of Gods: Pausanias in Articis.
the inscription being (...), the Altar of the unknown Gods, yea, the complete
and entire inscription of that Altar which Saint Paul saw, is thought to have
been thus, (...). Theophyl. in Act Apost. 17. 21. It. Hieron. Tit. 1. 12.
To the gods of Asia, Europe, and Africa; to the unknown and strange God. Which
observation implies their Practice to have symbolized with other Heathens in
that forementioned closure; Dii Deaeque omnes, O all ye God and Goddesses,
help. This distrust I think to be the chief reason why they worshipped the
unknown God; though I deny not but the Altars might bear this Title, to conceal
the name of their Tutelar God, unto whose protection they had committed
themselves: Alex. ab Alex. lib. 6. cap. 4. Tyraquel. in illum locum.
because the Heathen People generally conceited, that if the Gods name, to whom
they dedicated a City, were known, then the Enemies might by some magical
incantation or Charm, call him forth, and cause him to forsake the City: For
the better preventing of which manner of evocations, the Tyrians, the
Lacedaemonians, and other Macrob. Saturn. l. 3. c. 9.
Nations fettered and chained their Gods, that they might not depart. Again, it
might be done in imitation of the Jews, who about the time of our Savior his
Incarnation, held it unlawful to pronounce that Essential Name of God, Jehovah,
and instead thereof would read Adonai. The occasion of this concealment of the
name Jehovah, I take to have been originally, to prevent the blaspheming of
that holy Name among the Heathens, who had learned from that name to denominate
their Idols (h) Jove (...) Iaoth, l Vid. Macrob. Satur. l. 1. c. 18. I^.
Ireneum, lib 2. cap. ult. Item. Origin. contra Celsum. l. 6. fol. 76 col. 3.
(...) etc. Hence afterward the forbearing the Name became superstitious, and
so far prevailed, that they corrupted the Text for the defense thereof, Ex. 3.
15. This is my name (...) legnolam, for ever: Vid. P. Galatin. lib. 2. c. 10.
they read (...) legnalem, to be concealed. Though I deny not but that Name was
always in some sense ineffable: namely, as Plin. in Prooem. lib. 5. Hist. Nature.
Pliny faith, the Names of the African people and Towns were ineffable, that
is, such as other Languages could not express without circumlocutions.

As those forementioned Idolatrous names were nothing else but so many
depravations of the name Jehovah: So the Original of many other ensuing kinds
of Idolatry proceeded at first from a misconstruction of Scripture. They have
learned by Tradition, that the Sun, Moon, and Stars, had a kind of Lordship,
and the rule over day and night, times and seasons: Hence the superstitious
ignorance of those people Deified those lights of Heaven, and worshipped them
as Gods. Afterward corruption prevailing, their Apotheosis, or God making
Ceremonies, were extended to sublunary Creatures, partly as Symbola, or
representative signs of those greater and more glorious lights; for this reason
the Chaldeans worship fire: (...), and Vr, of the Chaldeans, mentionned, Genesis
11. which signifies fire or light, is thought to be the very God of the
Chaldeans, though in that place the name Vr be applied to some chief City, from
the name of the Idol. Yea, the God of Nahor, Genesis 31. 53. is thought to be no
other; partly also the inferior Creatures were canonized for Gods, in way of
thankfulness for the benefits received from them, for which reason the Sea, the
Winds, the Air, the Earth, and fruits of the earth, became deified. At last,
well deserving men, nay Crocodiles, Serpents, Rats, Cats, Dogs, Garlic, and
Onions, were reputed Gods.

CHAP. II.
Of Moloch, Adram-Melech, Anam-Melech, Baal, the Tabernacle of Moloch, Chiun,
Remphan, Horses consecrated to the Sun, Thamuz.
OF the Idol Moloch we read in diverse places of Scripture, 1 King. 11. 2 King.
23. 10. Leviticus 18. 21. He is sometimes called Moloch, sometimes Molech,
sometimes Milcom. He was the reputed God, not only of the Ammonites, but of the
Lorin. in Act. 7. ex Oecumen*
Moabites also. He had his name from (...) Malac, signifying to rule or reign.
The Seventy Elders translate him, (...), Prince, or King. Such King-Idols were
Adram-melech, and Anam-Melech, the Gods of Shepharva^m, unto whom that people
burnt their Children in Fire.

I take Moloch and Baal to be one and the same Idol, they were both names of
Supremacy and rule, (...) Baal signifies a Lord or Master. And (...) Molech, a
King or Prince. They had both the same manner of Sacrifice, they burnt their
Sons for burnt-offerings unto Baal likewise, Jer. 19. 5. yea, they built the
high places of Baal, which are in the Valley of Benhinnom to cause their Sons
and their Daughters to pass through the fire unto Moloch, Jer. 32. 35. In which
Text the place of Sacrifice is noted to be one and the same, common to both
Idols, and Moloch put in the end of the Verse, to explain Baal in the beginning
thereof.

Some think them to be different, because the August super Judaic. q. 10. Vide
sis Eusebium de praepar. lib. 1. cap. 7.
Planet Jupiter was Worshipped under the name of Baal; but the Planet Saturn is
probably thought to have been worshipped under the Name of Moloch. If we
diligently observe Histories, we shall find such a confusion of the Planets,
that the Sun, as it was some times called Baal, sometimes Moloch: So it was
sometimes called Plato apud Macrob. Satur. l. 1. c. 23. ubi mendose citatur e
Timaeo Platonis, quod est in Phaedro.
Jupiter, sometimes Assyrios Saturnum (quem and Solemn dicunt) Junonem^;
colaisse constat. Servius in Aeneid. 1.
Saturn; and concerning Baal this is evident: Hence Jupiter was called by the
Phaenicians, Baal-samen, which name is derived from the Hebrew, and sounds as
much as Jupiter Olympicus, the Lord of Heaven. For Baal signifies Lord, and
Shamain, Heaven. And what is this Lord of Heaven in the Theology of the
Heathens, other than the Sun? Who may as well be styled the King of Heaven; as
the Moon the Queen. Yea, Sanchoniatho, as Eusebius in the forequoted place
relates him, takes all these three for one, namely, the Sun, Jupiter, and
Baal-samen.

Concerning Saturn it is apparent that the Sun was worshipped under his Name:
But I find some Expositors to interpret Moloch to be (...), Molech dici vocult
qui (...) Mal^ch, (i) Angelus, Nun^. Proinde interpretantur Molech Mercurium
Deo um nuncium.
Mercury, others R Levi. Dev. 18. 21.
Mars: These are but few, and the grounds weak. It is therefore more generally
and more probably thought that he was Saturn, because as to Moloch, so to
Saturn, the Heathen people did sacrifice their Macrob. Saturn. l. 1. c. 7.
Sons and Daughters. Secondly, Saturns Image differed not much from Moloch's.
Of Saturns thus we read, E^seb. d. praepar. l. 4. c. 7.
It was made of Brass, wonderful for its greatness, whose hands reaching
toward the earth, were so hollow (ready to claspe) that the youths which were
compelled to come unto him, did fall as it were into a mighty ditch full of
fire. You shall read in a manner the same description of Moloch. Jalkut
commenting on Jeremy, writes thus; Jalkut. Jer. 7. f. 97. colum. 1.
Though all other houses of Idolatry were in Jerusalem, yet Moloch was without
Jerusalem, in a place a part. How was he made? He was an Image of Brass; He had
seven Chapels, and he was placed before them, having the face of a Bullock,
and hands spread abroad, like a man that opens his hands to receive somewhat
from some other: and they set it on fire within, for it was hollow: and every
man severally entered, according to his offering. After what manner? Whosoever
offered a Fowl, went into the first Chapel; he that offered a Sheep, into the
second; a Lamb, into the third; a Calf, into the fourth; a Bullock, into the
fifth; an Ox, into the sixth; and whosoever offered his Son, into the seventh.
Thus Moloch and Saturn agree: First, in their sacrifice: Secondly, in the form
of their Images. Now these seven chapels built for Moloch, may well resemble
those Orig. contra Celsum. l. 6. f. 74. col. 4. It. Gyrald. in Deorum Syntag.
7. p. 223.
seven gates with which the Persians honored the Sun; and as the seven gates
did, so might the seven Chapels mystically express the seven Planets, whereof
the Sun was Moloch, i. the King and Prince. When they sacrificed their sons
unto this Idol, they did beat upon Tabrets and Drums, that the cry of the child
might not by heard by the father. Thereupon was the place called (...) Tophet,
from Toph (...) signifying a Drum, as likewise from the cry of the children, it
was called Gehenna, (...) signifying a valley, and (...) roaring or crying.
Some may make the question, whether that the phrase, The fire of Gehenna,
Matthew. 5. 22. had its original from this fire, wherewith the children were
burnt unto Moloch? I answer, that in this phrase there was not respect only
unto this fire, though by the bitter cries and ejulations of poor infants, the
restless torments in Hell might be shadowed, yet the perpetuity and
everlastingness of hellish pains I take to be signified herein, by allusion
unto that D. Kimcbi. Psalm. 27. 13.
other fire, kept continually burning for the consuming of dead carcasses, and
the filth brought out of Jerusalem. For Gehenna was reputed a contemptible
place without the City; in the which they burnt, by means of a fire continually
preserved there, the carcasses, filth, and garbidge of the City. The Capnio de
Cabala. p. 644.
Cabalists treating of Gehenna, in this metaphorical. sense, as it is applied
to the pains of hell do distinguish of it, saying, That there is Gehenna
superior, and inferior: by the first they understand bodily torments inflicted
upon the bodies of sinners in this world: By the second they understand the
pains of the soul in the world to come. P. Galatinus l. 12. c. 6.
They say likewise that there are Septem Gehennae mansiones, Seven degrees or
mansion places of Gehenna. 1. Infernus. 2. Perditio. 3. Profundum. 4.
Taciturnitas. 5. Vmbra mortis. 6. Terra inferior. 7. Terra sitiens. Of these
seven receptacles, he that will mispend his time may read according to the
quotation*

It is much controversed among Expositors, whether the children in this
sacrifice were burnt in the fire, or only initiated and consecrated to Moloch,
passing in the midst of two fires in sign of their consecration? It is
probable, that both were in use. First, the Scripture speaks of both.
Secondly, the Hebrew Doctors show the manner of both. That they were Burnt,
Jalkut expressly teaches, and with him Aben Ezrae Lev. 18. 21.
others accord, saying, That Molech is the name of an Image; and the wise men
of blessed memory interpret Molech to be an universal name, denoting any whom
they have made to rule over them; And it is agreed upon, that this is the
abomination of the Sons of Ammon, and this phrase, To cause to pass through, is
as much as, To burn. Others say, This Idols name was Molech, and Rabbi Solomon,
Lev. 18. 21.
this was his worship: That he (namely, the Father) delivered his. Son unto the
Priests, and they made two great fires; and they made his Son pass on his feet
between both these fires.

Notwithstanding, we must not think that there were no other oblations unto
Molech, besides sacrificing of children: For what use then served those other
six Chapels? No: I take this oblation of children not to have been forced on
them by any superstitious law, or tradition, binding them thereunto; but to
have been reputed a work more meritorious, because it was merely voluntary.
This I note, because otherwise there were an apparent difference between Baal
and Molech. For the Baalites offered unto their fancied Deity a Bullock, in
that contention between them and Eliah, 1 King 18. Bullocks, and Calves, and
Lambs, were their ordinary sacrifices, the sacrificing of their children,
extraordinary. Yet their ordinary sacrifices, were not always altogether void
of man's blood, but sometimes the Priests would lance and cut their own flesh:
which custom, whence it had its original, I find not: only we find the like to
have been practiced by the Heathenish Priests in their sacrifices to Bellona:
Tert. Apol. c. 9.
Tertullian touches it; but Lactan. p. 40.
Lactantius treating of Bellona and her Priests, speaks more clearly, saying,
They Sacrificed not with any other man's blood, but with their own; their
shoulders being lanced, and with both hands brandishing naked swords, they run
and leaped up and down like mad men. Who would not take these Bellonites to be
the very Baalites spoken of, 1 Kings 18. They leapt upon the Altar which was
made -- and cut themselves as their manner was, with Knives and Lances, till
the blood gushed out upon them.

That the Opinion of pleasing God by Sacrificing their Children sprang from
Abraham's offering of Isaac, seems very probable, and is intimated by R.
Solomon, who brings in God speaking concerning Molech after this manner: I
never commanded that they should offer up their Sons for an oblation, and I
never spoke it unto any of my Prophets: Solomon. Jarc. Jer. 7. 31.
and When I spoke to Abraham to sacrifice his son, it entered not into my heart
that he should sacrifice him, but to make known his righteousness. Yea, Eusebius.
praepar. Evang. l. 1. c. 7. p. 17.
Porphyrie treating of Saturn, (who seems to have been this very Molech)
says, that the Phoenicians called him Israel, and that he had by Anobreth one
only Son called Jeud in the Phoenician language, (no doubt from the Hebrew
Jecid, signifying an only begotten, and applied to Isaac, Genesis 22. 2.) which
he offered upon an Altar purposely prepared. Who sees not the History of
Abraham and Sarah under the names of Israel and Anobreth? and the immolation of
Isaac under the name of Jeud? And the Original of this Son-sacrificing Divinity
to have been the unwarrantable imitation of Abraham?

But what! Was the Sun worshipped Idolatrously, no otherwise? Yes, except I am
deceived, we find another manner of Worship described by Amos, Chap. 5. 26. But
ye have born the Tabernacle of your Moloch, and Chiun your Images, the Star of
your God which ye made to your selves. This translation I prefer before others.
First, because the (...)
Hebrew word signifies a Tabernacle. Secondly, it is rendered the Tabernacle of
Moloch, not Siccuth your King, by the Seventy. Thirdly, it is so repeated by
Saint (...).
Stephen, Acts 7. 43. ye took up the Tabernacle of Moloch, and the Star of your
God Remphan, figures which ye made, to worship them.

Three things are to be inquired, for the understanding of this parallel.
First, what the bearing, or taking up of this Tabernacle is. Secondly, what
Idol was pointed out by these names of Chiun and Remphan. Thirdly, what is
meant by the Star of this God.

The taking up of this tabernacle denotes their worship which they exhibited
unto their Idol, by carrying him up and down in Tabernacles and Pageants, after
a Solemn manner of procession; by the Romans this solemnity was termed pompa,
and the Tent or Pageant in which the Idol was carried, Thensa, according to
that, Thensa Deorum vehiculum. This kind of Idolatry may seem to have had its
original among the Heathens from an unwarrantable imitation of Moses's
Tabernacle, which was nothing else but a (...). Joseph. Antiq. l. 3. c. 5.
Portable Temple, to be carried from place to place, as need required. For it
cannot be denied, but that many superstitions were derived unto the Heathen
from the true worship of God, which he himself had prescribed unto his people.
Thus, As God had his Tabernacle, Priests, Altars, and Sacrifices. so the Devil
had his Tabernacles, Priests, Altars and Sacrifices. As God had his Fire ever
burning Lev. 6. 3.
upon the Altar, so had the Devil his Fire preserved burning by those Vestal
Votaries. As God had his Propitiatory or Mercy seat: So had the Devil his
Sacros tripodas, his Oracles, from which he would speak unto them that served
him. This solemn procession was performed by the Romans in the honor of the
Solis honor novi grati spectacula Circi. Antiqui dixere Patres. Corrip. Afric.
l. 1. number. 17. vi. Dempst.
Sun. It was performed by the Israelites in honor of their Moloch, who
formerly was interpreted the Sun. To add unto the pomp and state of this
solemnity, both the Romans and the Israelites caused great Horses and Chariots
to be led up and down. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 3. cap. 12.
Horses were consecrated to the Sun by the Romans, and their Cirque-place was
sometimes called (...), and (...), an Horse-race. And that Chariots were
commonly used in those pompous shows is -- Hic illius arma, Hic currus fuit.
Virgil. Aeneid. 1.
evident. Concerning the people of Judah, does not the like practice plainly
appear? 2 Kings 23. Josiah did put down the Horses given to the Sun, and the
Chariots of the Sun. This kind of Idolatrous worshipping the Sun seems to
have had its beginning from the Persians, who also accounted Horses holy to the
Sun: (c) And the Persian ZCoel. Rh^digin. Antiq. l. 8. c. 2.
King, when he would show himself in great state, caused an exceeding great
Horse to be led up and down, the which was called Equus Solis.

The second inquiry is, what Idol was meant by Chiun and Remphan, otherwise in
ancient Coppies called Repham. Not to trouble the Reader with the various
interpretations of Expositors, much less with the bold adventures of others in
correcting the Text: by Chiun we are to understand Hercules, who in the
Egyptian language was called Chon: By Repham we are to understand the same
Hercules, for (...) Rephaim, in the holy tongue signifies Giants: By Hercules
we may understand the Planet of the Sun: There are Etymologists that derive
Hercules his name from the Hebrew (...), Hier col, illuminavit omnia: the Greek
Heracl^s quid aliud est quam (...) (i.) aeris gloria: quae po^r^ alia est aeris
nisi solis illuminatio? Macrob. Satur. l. 1. c. 20.
Etymology, holds correspondency with the Hebrew, and both signify that
universal light which flows from the Sun, as water from a fountain. Add
hereunto, that Eusebius. de praep. l. 3. c. 4. p. 71.
Porphyry interprets Hercules his twelve labors, so often mentioned by the
Poets, to be nothing else but the twelve signs of the Zodiac, through which the
Sun passes yearly. But some may question, whether the name of Hercules was
ever known to the Jews? It is probable, the name was; for Hercules was the God
of the Tyrians, from whom the Jews learned much Idolatry, as being their near
Neighbors: Yea, it is apparent, that in the time of the Maccabees the Name was
commonly known unto them: for Jason the High Priest sent three hundred drachmes
of Silver to the sacrifice of Hercules, 2 Macc. 4. 19.

Thirdly, it follows that we should enquire, what this star of, Remphan was;
it is probably Oecumenius Act 7. 43.
thought that it was a certain star painted in the forehead of Molech; Neither
was it unusual for the Heathen people to paint their Idols with such Symbolica
Additamenta. Sueton. in J^l^ c. 88. It. Plin. hist. l. 2. c. 25. Horat. l. 1.
Od^ 12.
Julius Caesar his Image had a Star depicted on the Crown of his head.

The Sun was also worshipped by the house of Judah, under the name Tamuz; for
Hieron. comment. 3. in Ezekiel.
Tamuz, says Hierome, was Adonis, and Pier. Hierogl^. l. 9. p. 68.
Adonis is generally interpreted the Sun from the Hebrew Adon, signifying
Dominus. the same as Baal, or Moloch formerly did, namely, the Lord or Prince
of the Planets. The month which we call June, was by the Hebrews called Tamuz;
and the entrance of the Sun into the sign Cancer was, in the Jews Astronomy,
termed Tekupha Tamuz, the revolution of Tamuz, Concerning Adonis, whom
sometimes ancient Authors call Osiris; there are two things remarkable, (...),
the death or loss of Adonis and (...), the finding of him again. As there was
great -- Nunquamque satis quaesitus Osiris. Semper enim perdunt-semper and
inveniunt. Lucan.
lamentation at his loss, especially amongst the Plutarch. in Alcibiade.
women: so was there great joy at his finding. By the death or loss of Adonis,
we are to understand the departure of the Sun; by his finding again, we are to
understand his return. Now he seems to depart twice in the year: First, when
he is in the Tropic of Cancer, in the farthest degree Northward. Secondly,
when he is in the Tropic of Capricorn, in the farthest degree southward:
Answerable unto these two departures, which may be termed (...) disparitions,
or losses of the Sun; there are two returns immediately succeeding, which may
be termed likewise (...) the findings or new appearings of the Sun. Hence we
may note, that though the Egyptians celebrated their Adonia in the month of
November, when the Sun began to be farthest Southward; and the house of Juda
theirs, in the month of June, when the Sun was farthest Northward, yet both
were for the same reasons, and in substance they agreed. And of this the
Prophet Ezekiel is thought to have spoken, Ezekiel. 8. 14. There sat Women
weeping for Tamuz.

These solemnities were chiefly observed, between the Bibliensis and the
Alexandrini Procopius in Isaiam, ad c. 18. It. Cyrilius l. 2. Tom. 2. in 1.
Isaiam.
; the manner was thus: When the Bibliensis solemnized the death or loss of
Adonis, at that time the Alexandrini wrote a letter, this letter was enclosed
in an Ark of B^lrushes therein they signified that Adonis, whom they lamented,
was found again: This Ark being after the performance of certain Rites and
Ceremonies committed to the Sea, forthwith it was carried by the stream to
Byblus; upon the receipt where of the lamentation of the women was turned into
joy. Julius Maternus Firmicus l. de erro re prosan. Religion.
Others say, that this lamentation was performed over an Image in the Night
season, and when they had sufficiently lamented, a Candle was brought into the
room (which Ceremony might mystically signify the return of the Sun) then the
Priest with a soft voice muttered this Form of words; (...) Firmicus ibid.
Trust ye in God, for out of pains salvation is come unto us. (...) R. Dav.
Kimchiin radic. Procop. in Isa. 18.
There are likewise of the Jews that say their Tamuz was an Image whose eyes
they filled with Lead, which Lead being molten by the means of fire under it,
the image it self seemed to weep.

There (l) are that think the Prophet alludeth unto those letters enclosed in
those forementioned Bull-rush Arks, Isa. 18. 2. When he speaks of
Ambassadors sent by the Sea even in Vessels of Reeds upon the waters. But I
rather approve the literal sense, for by reason of the Shelfs and dangerous
Rocks in the River Nilus, it was not unusual for men to sail in Hulks, and
Vessels made of a kind of great Bull-rush, which by the Egyptians was termed
Papyrus, and these kind of Ships, Plin. Hist: l. 6. c. 22.
Papyraceae naves.

CHAP. III.
Of Baal-Peon, Baal-Tsepkon, Baal-Zebub, Baal-Berith, Bell and the Dragon.
WHom the Hebrews called Baal, the Babylonians called Bell; and although the
Planet of the Sun only at first might be worshipped under that name, yet at
lust it became a common Name to many other Idols, according to that, There are
many Gods, many B^alims or Lords, 1 Cor. 8. 5. As the same Idol- Jupiter had
different names, and different Rites of worship, occasioned sometimes from the
different places, as Jupiter Olympius, from the Hill Olympus; Jupiter
Capitolinus, from the Capitol hill; Jupiter Latialis, from that part of Italy
which is called Latium. Sometimes from the different benefits which he was
supposed to bestow on men, as Jupiter Pluvi^s, because he gave Rain; Jupiter
Lucetius, because he gave Light: Jupiter Altitonans, from thundering: So Baal
had his distinctive Titles, and different Rites of Worship, sometimes
occasioned by the place, as Baal Peor, Numb. 25. 3. Sometimes from the the
benefit obtained, as Baal Tsephon, Exodus 14. 1. and Baal Zebub, 2 King. 1. 2.
Sometimes for some other reason, as Baal Berith, Judge 8. 33.

Baal-Peor is thought to be that Hieronym. ad Hos. (...) Idem. prodidit Isidor.
Orig. l. 8.
Priapus, that obscene Idol, so famous in profane Authors. He was called Peor,
from the Hill Peor, mentioned, Numb. 23. 28. as likewise his Temple wherein he
was worshipped, standing upon the same Hill, was called Beth-Peor, Deuteronomy. 3. 29.
He was worshipped by the Moabites and Midianites: The Idol Chemosh, Jer. 48. 7.
is thought to be the (b) same, and I take it (...) Hieron. in Isai. l. 5 c. 15.
to be applied to Baal-Peor; by way of contempt, as if one should say, their
blind god, according to that in the Psalm, They have eyes and see not. For the
first Letter Philo Jud. lib. 2. ^llegor. p. 79.
Caph, signifies quasi; and (...) Musch palpare, to grope or feel about, in
manner of blind men.

Baal-Tsephon is thought by the P Fag. Exodus 14.
Hebrews, to have been an Idol made by the Egyptian Magicians, and placed in
the Wilderness, to observe and stop the Israelites in their departure from
Egypt; whence it was termed (...) Tsephon, from (...) Tsapha, signifying to
watch, and observe in manner of a watchman: We may call him Baal speculator,
as, among the Romans; because Jupiter stayed the Romans when they were flying,
he was called Rosin. lib. 2. antiq. Romans cap. 5.
Jupiter stator.

Baal zebub, sounds as much as the Lord of the Flies, (...). Gregor. Nazianz.
orat. 2. contr. Julian. p. 102.
or a Master fly, which has power and authority over the rest, in which
respect the Prince of the Devils in the Gospel is termed Beel-Zebub, (...)
Zebub signifies a Fly. Plin. l. 10. c. 28.
This Idol was worshipped by the Cyrenians, but principally by the Ekronites,
because whenever they sacrificed unto him, the swarms of flies, which at that
time molested the Country, died. But it is certain, that this was not the alone
reason, for they were wont to repair to him, as to an Oracle, 2 King. 1. 2. We
may call him Jupiter muscarius, or Hercules muscarius: Clemens Alexand. in
procreptic.
for the Inhabitants of the City Elis sacrified to Jupiter under the name
(...), (...). Se puagint. interpr. Jud. 8. 33.
A driver away of flies: and the Romans to Hercules, under the same name. Some
Greek Copies in the Gospel read (...), Beelzebul: which change is interpreted
to be, for to show the greater contempt of the Idol, as if they should say,
Jupiter stercoreus, (...) Zebel signifies stercus, and Beel, or Baal,
signifies Dominus.

Baal berith was the Idol of the Shechemites; of his Temple we read, Judges 9.
4. (...) Berith signifies a Covenant; so that Baal-berith may be translated
Jupiter foederatus, (i.) The God unto whom they bound themselves by Covenant.
Concerning Bell and the Dragon, little is spoken, besides what we read in that
of the Apocrypha, where the History is described.

CHAP. IV.
Of Dagon.
THe R. Dav. 1 Sa. 5.
Hebrew Doctors say, that this Idol Dagon was made from the Navil downward in
form of a Fish, but from the Navil upward in form of a Man. This they Collect
from the 1 Samuel 5. 4. The two palms of his hands were cut off upon the
threshold. And further more they say, the Idol Dagon had his Name from the
Hebrew (...) Dag, signifying in the Holy Language, a fish, according to which
description we may english him the Philistims Neptune, or Triton non absimilem
habuisse figuram fingitur. Frons hyninem prefect, in piscem definit alvus
Pier. Hierogl. sib. 31 p. 218.
Triton. Others derive the name from (...) Degan, signifying Corn: and they
Philo Byblius apud Eusebius. de praepar. lib. 1. c. 7.
say, that he first invented the use of the Plow, and Corn; whence they
translate him Jupiter aratrius. In this respect we may call him the Philistims
Saturn, because Antiquity makes Pier. Hierogl. l. 32. p. 228. Id. l. 56.
Saturn the first Inventer of husbandry, and therefore paints him with an Hook
or Sith in his hand, as being the fittest Hieroglyphick for Husbandry. Both
Opinions have their Authors, and no sufficient proof has been produced to
overthrow either. R. Levi. 1 Samuel 5.
Yea, there are not wanting among the Jews themselves, that say, this Image of
Dagon was made in the form of a man. Notwithstanding Scaliger his conjecture is
not improbable, that those who interpret Dagon, Jupiten ar^r^us, or (...),
might mistake and read (...) Shadai, signifying, Ager, A field, for (...)
Shaddai, being the very Name of God, signifying Omnipotens, Almighty.

CHAP. V.
Of the Molten Calf.
THe History of the molten Calf is at large set down, Exodus 32. where we read,
that by reason of Moses his long absence, the People desired of Aaron, Gods to
be made; whereupon Aaron made for them the molten Calf. The reason why they
worshipped God rather in the similitude of a Calf, then of any other Creature,
is generally by Expositors conceived to be from the corruptions learned among
the Egyptians, who worshipped their Idol Plin. Not. hist. l. 8. c. 46. Herod.
l. 2. Sol^n. c. 35. aut aliorum distinctione. 45.
Apis, otherwise called Alex. Genial. dier. l. 6. cap. 2.
Serapis, in a living Ox, and likewise in an Image made in the form and
similitude of an Ox, with a bushel on his head. This Ox was remarkable for
certain Notes and marks, whereby it was differenced from all others. It was
black bodied, it had a white forehead, a white spot behind, and a knot under
his tongue: For the more ^urious fashioning and polishing of these marks in the
molten Calf, Aaron may seem to have made use of his (...) stylo sculptorio.
graving Tool. Plin. Hist. lib. 8. c. 46. It. Alex. Genial. dier l. 6. c. 2.
The Egyptians repaired unto this Ox for the resolution of matters doubtful,
as to an Oracle, and the manner of consulting with him, was thus. The party
that repaired unto him, tendered a bottle of Hay, or Grass: which if he
received, then it betokened a good and happy event; if otherwise he refused it,
then it did portend some evil to come. Thus they turned their glory into an Ox
that eats grass, Psalm 106. 20. The Hebrew word in the Psalm, translated an
Ox, is, (...)
Shor, which I note, because in my opinion, it gives light to one of the names
by which this Idol was denoted. Sometimes it was called Apis, from the Hebrew
word Vultus facies (...)
Ap, signifying a face: Sometimes Serapis, quasi Shor-apis, which is nothing
else but Bovis caput, an Ox-head; the very name used by the Cyprian. de. bono
patient. p. 318. Videtiam August. p. 73. It. Tertul. adv. Jud. cap. 1.
Fathers, to express this Idolatry. It is commonly known, that this Idolatry
was derived to Israel from the Egyptians; but whence the Egyptians first
learned it, few have taught. They do not conjecture amiss, who interpret the
first Institution hereof to have been in the memory of Joseph, who by his
providence relieved both Egypt and other Neighbor Countries, in the seven
years of famine. Besides the Testimony of no slight Suidas in (...). Ruffinus
lib. 2. hist. Eccles. cap. 23. Pier. Hierogl lib. 3. p. 25.
Authors, there are strong inducements to persuade it. First, both the years of
plenty and famine were foresignified by the apparition of Oxen. Secondly, what
fitter Emblem, (if it had not afterward proved an Idol) to continue the
remembrance of a Joseph, (by whose alone care and industry, Corn and Victual
was provided in an extreme famine) than an Ox, the true and lively
Hieroglyphick of an industrious Husbandman? Thirdly, in this Suidas agrees
with others, that this Ox was pourtrayed with a bushel on his head, though
others do more clearly express the reason of this pourtrayture, namely, because
of the great quantity of Corn measured out by Joseph in that extreme dearth.
Concerning the sin of the Israelites in making this Calf or Ox, the modern Jews
do transfer the fault upon certain Prosylite Egyptians who came forth with
them: and they say, that when Aaron cast their Jewels into the fire, these
Egyptians, contrary to his expectation, by their Art Magic produced a Calf,
to which purpose they urge Aarons own words, Exodus 32. 34. I did cast the Gold
into the fire, and thereof came this Calf; as if his art or will went not with
the making thereof, but of it self it made it self. But this answer of his
shows rather, how vain the Wit of man is in the excuse of sin; and as his
ingraving instrument writes down Aaron's sins; so the confession of others more
ingenuous Jews, proclaims the Israelites, saying, that (...) Moses Gerund. vid.
Munster. Exodus 32.
(i) No punishment befalls thee Israel, in which there is not an ounce of
this Calf. I conclude this with the analogy between the Egyptian Apis, and the
molten Calf, and this consists in three things. First, As there were some
special marks in the Egyptian, Ox; so is it probable that Aaron with his
ingraving Tool made the like. Secondly, As the Egyptians in honor of their Ox
Suid. in voce (...).
celebrated a Solemn Feast, which much singing and mirth. So the Israelites
proclaimed a Feast in honor of their Calf: The people sat down to eat and
drink, and rose up to play. Thirdly, As the Egyptians Ox was at last drowned in
the River, so Moses burnt the molten Calf, and beat it to powder, and cast it
upon the face of the water, Exodus 32. 20. Deuteronomy 92. 21. Jeroboam afterward,
though upon other inducements, committed the same sin; he thought in his heart,
that if the people did go up to Jerusalem, and do sacrifice in the house of the
Lord, they would revolt from him, and return to the King of Judah: Whereupon he
set up two Calves of gold, the one in Bethel, the other in Dan; saying unto the
people, It is too much for you to go up to Jerusalem, 1 King, 12. 28.

CHAP. VI.
Of Astaroth, Ammonia, Juno, the Queen of Heaven, Diana of the Ephesians.
AS the Sun was worshipped under many names, so likewise the Moon. Astaroth was
the Idol chiefly of the Zidonians, 1 King. 11. 5. 2 King. 23. 13. she had her
Temple called the house of Astaroth, in which the Philistines hanged up Readiness
Horum Anathematum oblationem primo didicerunt ab Israelitis, Number. 7. 1 Samuel 21.
Armor after his death, 1 Samuel 31. 10. That the Moon was worshipped under this
name needs not (...). Astarten lunam esse opinor. Lucian. de Dia Syria.
proof; only August. super Judic. quaest. 16.
some say, that Astrate was Juno: And why may we not say, that Juno is often
used to express the Moon? Astarte Urania idem ^nnino valet apud Ph^nicas, quod
Juno Lucina apud Latinos. Deducitur Urania ab Hebraeo (...) Nun in fine adjecto
a^t per se solum, aut cum Jod. quod passim fit a Syris, quasi (...) ^el (...)
in ^oetrinino vero (...) (...) i. Lucidus and Lucida, aut Luci^us and L^. f^
hinc Grae^^ suum (...) ^uati su^t.
Both the Moon and Juno are often called by the name of Urania. And as the Moon
in respect of her light is called Vrauia? so in regard of the lesser lights in
the heaven, she is called Astroarch, that is, the Macrob. S^t. l. 1. c. 15.
Queen of the Planets; or as Horace speaks of the M^on, Siderum Regina, the
Queen of the Stars: Or lastly, as Virgil speaks of Juno; Divum incedo regina,
the Queen of the Gods. It seems very probable, that this is that Queen of
Heaven, of which the Prophet speaks, Jer. 7. 18. Jer. 44. 17. Again unto whom
may we imagine those ancient Heathens to have performed that solemn worship,
which they did on the Calends, or first day of every month? (was it not to the
Moon?) And yet notwithstanding it is ascribed to Juno, (...) dicitur, (...) ab
imperio quod in A^ l 5.
whence she is called Juno Calendaris. Lastly, As Jupiter Macrob Sat. l. 1. c.
21.
Ammon was no other than the Sun, and worshipped him in form of a Ram: so for
ought I see, the Moon might be called Juno C^^l. R^. l. 18. c. 38.
Ammonia, and worshipped in the form of a sheep* Sure I am, that the Hebrews
Doctors describe the Images of D. Kimchi, 1 Samuel 31. (...) It. J^^. 2. 1^.
Astaroth, to have been made in the form of sheep: and the word Astaroth, in
the Original, signifies a flock of sheep, and the Moon might as well be called
Ammonia, as the Sun Ammon, both being so called from their heat, which in the
Holy Tongue is called (...) Cal^r. Sol.
Hammah, and from thence likewise those Images (of which we read, Levit. 26.
30. Isa. 17. 8. Isa. 27. 9.) are called R. Sol^m^n (...) Levi^. 26. 30.
Hammanim, because they were certain Idols placed upon the house top, and so
always exposed to the Sun. Furthermore, as Jupiter -- (...) cor^ger illic.
Jupiter. Luca^. l. 9. verse. 514.
Ammon was painted with horns, so likewise was the Syderum ^gina bicornis audi.
Luna puellas. Horat. car. saecular.
Moon: why they should be thus painted, many reasons might be produced, but
chiefly three; the first peculiar to the Sun, the other common both to Sun and
Moon. First, the Sun was painted with Rams-horns, because with the Astronomers
the sign Aries in the Zodiac is the Pier. hierogh. l. 10.
beginning of the year. Secondly, because as the strength of horned beasts
consists in their horns, so the virtue and influence of the Sun and Moon is
derived into sublunary creatures by their beams. Thirdly, because the light of
the Sun and Moon makes the reflection cornute, or horn-like. When Moses came
down from God, Aaron and the people saw that his face shined, Exodus 34. the
Latin reads is, Facies ejus erat cornuta; and hence it is, that Moses is
painted with horns, which some of the Rabbines have interpreted (...) cornua
magnificientiae R. Solom. porro Hebraicum (...) (unde (...) and cornu
emanarunt) significat in morem cornuum splendorem radiosque emittere.
horns of magnificence, The error grew from the doubtful signification of the
Hebrew word signifying splendour or brightness, and also horns.

Macrob Saturn. l. 1. c. 15.
The Moon was also worshipped under the name of Diana, who although she were
worshipped through out all Asia, yet she was had in principal esteem among the
Ephesians, whence arose that cry, Great is Diana of the Ephesians, Act. 19. 28.
Her greatness among the Ephesians appears partly by her Temple, which in
Plin. l. 36. 14.
one place Pliny says was two hundred and twenty years a building, but Plin.
l. 16. 40.
elsewhere he says 400. years: partly form the great gain procured unto the
Silver-Smiths in making and selling silver Temples of Diana, Act. 19. 24. It is
much disputed what those silver Temples were; some think them to be littles
houses, or shrines (such as were for their smallness portable) in form
representing the Temple of Diana, and within having the Image of Diana
enclosed, and in this sense (...) is sometimes used, to signify closets or
shrines wherein Images were kept: Others think, certain coyns or pieces of
money to be called by the name of Diana's Temple, from the similitude of
Diana's Temple, engraven or stamped upon those coyns: as in England we call
some pieces of gold the George, others the Angel, others the Thistle, from the
impression which they bear. The like custom of naming coyns from their
Sculpture or impression (...) puellos: alios Pelopon^esionum,
was not unusual, among the Simili prorsus ratione Atheniensium nummos quosdam,
hoves: eorundem Atheniensium alios quosdam (...) (i) puellas, alios Corinthiorum
Ancients; neither were such coyns unusual on which the Temple of (...)
testudines; alios Romanorum naves vocabant
Diana was engraven, and these capital letters added, DIAN. EPHE. Theodorus
Beza, in his major Annotations upon the Acts, reports that he has seen two
of these himself.

We read of another kind of Idolatrous Worship toward the Moon, to have been
Macrob. Saturn. l. 3. c. 8. Non* a^similem idololatriam in cultu Veneris
prodidit Juli^s Fi^micus de errore profan. religion. c. 4.
that men sacrificed to her in women's apparel, and women in men's apparel,
because they thought the Moon to be both male and female, whence the Moon is
called by old Authors as well Lunus as Luna: And Venus, whom Philocorus affirms
to be the Moon, is termed Deus Venus, as well as Dea Venus. Maimonid. in more
Nebochim part. 3. cap. 38.
Some have thought that God had respect unto this kind of Idolatry, Deuteronomy. 22.
5. where men are forbidden to wear women's apparel, and e contra; but it is more
generally, and upon better grounds thought, that the promiscuous use of apparel
(whereby the distinction of sex is taken away) is there forbidden.

CHAP. VII.
Of other Gods mentioned in Scripture.
THe Sun and Moon, which are the greater lights in the Heaven, I take to have
been the chiefest Idols worshipped by the Heathen people. Notwithstanding,
their blind devotion deified also the other Planets, and that numberless number
of lesser lights, called in Scripture, Militia Coeli, The Host of Heaven, whose
several natures, properties, and influences, are not distinctly known. In like
manner there is an Host of Idols mentioned in Holy Writ, of whom little or
nothing is spoken to the purpose by Authors, more than their very names. Of
this nature are those Chambers of Imagery, wherein all forms of creeping things
were pourtrayed on the walls, Ezekiel. 8. It may be termed their Pantheon.

In those Colonies which the King of Ashur transplanted into Samaria, every one
worshipped the God of his own Nation. The men of Babel made Succoth Benoth, the
men of Cuth made Nergal, the men of Hamath made Ashima, the Avims made Nibhaz
and Tartak; the Shepharvaims burnt their Children in the fire to Adram melech,
and Anam-melech, the gods of Shepharvaim, 2 Kings 17. 30, 31* R Jar^hi. 2 King
17. R. David non dissentit.
The Hebrew Doctors say, that Succoth Benoth was the picture of an Hen with her
Chicken: Nergal they interpret Gallum Sylvestrem, Asi ma a Goat, Nibhaz a Dog,
Tartak an Ass, Adrammelech a Mule, Anammelech an Horse: that such bruit beasts
should be worshipped as gods, may seem ridicul^^us: but the like to have been
practiced among the Heathens, profane Authors abundantly testify. The Lucian
l. 16 de Sir. Dea.
Cock was worshipped as a god among the Syrians, Herod tus in Euterp.
A Goat by the Mendesii; Cic. de legib. l. 1. vid. Tiraquel. in Alex. ab Alex.
lib. 6. It. Diod^r. Sicul. lib. 1. 8.
A Dog by others: Yea, they have adopted into the number of their gods Alex.
Neopol. l. 6. c. 26.
Oxen, Lions, Eagles, Wolves, Crocodiles, Cats, Rats, etc. Nay, they have
dug their gods out of their gardens Porrum and. cepe, nesas vi^^^re and
fran^ere (...). O ^anctas gentes ^bus haec na^^untur in h^rtis Numina. Juvenal.
satyr. ^5.
Garlic, Leeks, Onions, etc. To these may be added Nisroch, which was the god
of the Assyrians, and, as it seems, had his Temple at Nineve, 2 King. 19.
ult. and Esaias 37. ult. Secondly, (...) Rimmon, the word signifies a
Pomegranate. Concerning this Idol it is much controversed, whether Naaman
sinned not in saying, The Lord be merciful unto thy servant, that when my
Master goes into the house of Rimmon, etc. 2 King. 5. 18. Read the words in
the Praeter tense [when my Master went into the house of Rimmon] the sense
appears to be a pardon craved for sins past, not afterward to be committed.
The same word (...) Bebho, in going, is put to express the time past, in the
titles of the Psalms 52. and Psalm 54. Thirdly, Nebo otherwise called Nabo, and
Idol of the Assyrians, Jer. 48. 1. He had his name from Prophecy, (...) Nabhi,
signifying a Prophet, he seems not much to differ from (...), or (...), so
often mentioned in Homer. Diod. S^^ul. l. 5. c. 72.
Diodorus Siculus makes them both one, and we may render Nebo, the Assyrians,
Ammon, or Jupiter Vaticinus, the god of their Oracles.

CHAP. VIII.
The several manners of Divine Revelation.
AS Idolatry originally sprang from mistaking of Scriptures; so Witchcraft and
Sorcery, (which holds near affinity with Idolatry) seems to have had its
first beginning from an imitation of Gods Oracles. God spoke in diverse manners,
Heb. 1. 1. By Dreams, by Vrim, by Prophets, 1 Samuel 28. 6, 7. when the Lord
would by none of these answer King Saul, then he sought to a Witch. To these
might be added Gods speaking from between the Cherubims, his answering by
Visions, Angels, and Voices: but the chief manner of revealing himself,
observed by the Hebrew Writers, are four, which they term P. Fagius in Exodus 28.
four degrees of Prophecy, or Divine Revelation: somewhat therefore being
spoken of these, I purpose to explain the several sorts of unlawful divinations
mentioned in Scripture.

The first degree was (...) Nebuah, Prophecy. This was when God by certain
visions and apparitions revealed his will.

The second was (...) Ruach Hacodesch, The inspiration of the Holy Ghost,
whereby the party was enabled without Visions or Apparitions, to prophecy:
Some showing the difference between those two D. Kimchi. prafat. in Psalm.
add, that the gift of Prophecy did cast a man into a trance or ecstasy, all
his senses being taken from him; but the inspiration of the Holy Ghost was
without any such ecstasy, or abolition of the senses, as appears in Job,
David, Daniel. Both these degrees, as likewise Urim and Thummim ceased in the
second Temple, whence their ancient Doctors say, Talmud in Sanhedrin. c. 1.
that after the latter Prophets Haggay, Zachary, and Malachy were dead, the
Holy Glost went up or departed from Israel. Howbeit, they had the use of a
voice or echo from Heaven. In which speech we are not to understand that the
Holy Ghost wrought not at all upon the creatures, or that it wrought not then
in the sanctification of men, as in former times, but that this extraordinary
enabling men to prophecy by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost then ceased; and
in this sense the Holy Ghost was said to have departed from Israel. Unto this
common received opinion, that passage might have reference, Acts 19. We have
not so much as heard whether there has been an Holy Ghost or no. That they did
not doubt the distinction of persons, appears clear, if that be true which P.
Fagius in Exodus 28.
some have noted, that the ancient Jews before Christ were so catechized in
that point, that they observed the Mystery of the Trinity in the name (...)
Jehovah, for though the name consisted of four letters in number, whence it was
called (...), Quadriliterum, yet there were but three sorts of letters in the
name: Jod signified the Father, who was the beginning of all things: (...) Van
is a conjunction copulative, and denoted the third person in Trinity, which
proceeds from the Father and the Son, (...) He signifies the Son of God. The
Rabbines have a saying, that God made all things, in litera, (...) He. They may
allude to this, that he made all things by Word: he said, Let there be thus,
and thus, and it was so: but they may also allude to the second person in
Trinity, And furthermore, they note that (...) He, is doubled in this name, to
demonstrate both Natures of our blessed Savior.

The third degree, was Vrim and Thummim. Vrim signifies light, and Thummim
perfection. That they were two ornaments in the Highpriests breast plate, is
generally agreed upon: but what manner of ornaments, or how they gave answer,
is hard to resolve. Joseph Antiq. l. 3. c. 9.
Some think them to be the four rows of stones in the breast plate, the
splendor and brightness of which foreshewed victory, and by the rule of
contraries, we may gather, that the darkness of the stones not shining presaged
evil. R. Solomon quemadmodum refert D. Kimchi in radic.
Others say it was the name Jehovah put in the doubling of the breast plate,
for that was double, Exodus 28. 16. Talmud. in Jonah c. 6. vid. P. Fagium in
Exodus 28.
Others declare the manner of consulting with Vrim and Thummim thus: First,
they say that only the King, or else the Abbeth. din.
Father of the Consistory had power to consult, or to propose the matter unto
the Priest, and the Priest only had power to resolve. Secondly, that the matter
proposed must not be trivial, but of moment and great difficulty. Thirdly, that
this holy writing, termed Vrim and Thummim, consisted of all the Tribes names,
and likewise of the Patriarks, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; so that no letter of
the Alphabet was wanting. The question being proposed, some say that the
letters which gave the answer were (...) (i.) they did arise and eminently
appear above the others. An example they take from the 2 Samuel 2. 1. When David
asked the Lord, Shall I go up into any of the Cities of Judah? the Lord
answered, (...) Gnalah, goup. Here, say they, (...) appeared out of the name of
(...) Schimeen, (...) out of the name of (...) Levi, (...) out of the name of
(...) Jehudah. Others say, that the letters which represented the Oracle were
(...) (i.) that they did after a strange manner join themselves into perfect
syllables and entire words, and made the answer complete. Many other opinions
might be reckoned up, R. David. in Radie.
but he spoke best, who ingenuously confessed that he knew not what Vrim and
Thummim was.

The fourth degree was (...) Bath Kol, filia vocis, the Daughter of a Voice, or
an Echo; by it is meant a voice from heaven declaring the will of God; it took
place in the second Temple, when the three former degrees of Prophecy ceased:
it gave testimony of our Savior; Lo, a voice from heaven, saying, This is my
beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, Mat. 3. 17. It was in truth the
Prologue, Preface, or Type of that true voice of the Father, that Eternal Word
which revealed his Fathers will unto mankind.

These were the extraordinary means by which God revealed himself to his people
of old: ordinarily, he revealed himself by his written word. Notwithanding the
Hebrews say, that the Law, even from the first time of its delivery unto Moses,
was twofold: the one committed to writing, which they call (...) Thera
Schebictab, the written Law: the other delivered by tradition, (...) Thora
begnal pe, it was also termed their Kabbala, from (...) Kibbel, signifying
Accipere, to receive or learn. They say both were delivered by God unto Moses
in Mount Sinai; but this latter was delivered from Moses to Joshua, from Joshua
to the Elders; from the Elders to the Prophets, from the Prophets to those of
the great Synagogue, and so successively to after ages, till at last it was
digested into one Book, containing principally precepts and directions for
those Israelites which inhabited the holy land. It is called Talmud
Hierosolymitanum. It was composed in the year of our Lord 230. This, because it
contains but a few constitutions, is but of little use. About 500 years after
Christ, then was there a more full and exact collection of their constitutions,
for direction of those Jews which dwelt in Babylon, and other foreign places;
this is termed Talmud Babylonicum, and is of greatest use among Authors, it
contains the body of their Civil and Canon Law. This traditional law, they
hold to be as authentic, as their written word, and that Moses received it
from God, when he received the Law; for, say they, were it not for this
exposition, the Decalogue it self, might have been delivered (...) Moses
Kotsen. in praef.
In hora veloci, in less then an hour.

Here we must know that the word Kabbala, when it is applied to the Kabbalists,
to difference them from the Talmudists, is taken in a stricter sense, and
signifies those subtleties or mysteries which are observed from the different
writing of some letters in the Scripture, from the transposing of them, from a
mystical kind of Arithmetic, etc. This was never wholly committed to writing.
Some instances we have Genesis 23. 2. Abraham came (...) to weep for Sara. Here
Baal T^ri^n.
because the letter Caph is less then the rest, they note that Abraham wept but
a little for Sar, because she was old. Again, the letter Aleph i, found six
times in the first verse of Genesis: Hence R. Elias collected that the world
should endure but six thousand years: because Aleph in the Hebrews computation
stands for a thousand. From the transposition of letters they conclude after
this manner; (...) Cherem signifies Anathema or Excommunication, by a
Metathesis or transposition of letters, it is made (...) Rachem signifying
mercy, by another transposition it is made (...) Ramach, which letters in the
Jews computation make 248. which in their Anatomy, they find to be the just
number of members in a man's body: their conclusion hence is, that if an
excommunicated person do truly repent, then his Cherem is turned into Rachem,
his curse turned into a blessing: if he do not repent, then his Cherem enters
into Ramach, the curse enters into all his members, to the utter destroying of
the whole man. Again, (...) Isch, signifies a man, (...) Escha, a woman. Hence
they note, that in the name of the man there is' Jod, which is not in the name
of the woman; in the name of the woman there is (...) He, which is not in the
name of the man: both these make (...) Jah, one of the names of God: these
being taken away, in both names there remains (...) Esch signifying fire, to
show, that as long as man and wife agree, God is with them: but when they
disagree, fire is between them: Thus we see what vain mysteries their
Kabbalists observe.

CHAP. IX.
Their Teraphim.
COncerning the Teraphim, two things are especially to be enquired. First, what
they were? Secondly, for what use? the word (...) Taraph, signifies in general
the complete Image of a man. Michael took an image, (a Teraphim) and laid it in
the bed, 1 Samuel 19. 13. More particularly it signifies an idol or image made
for men's private use in their own houses, so that these images seem to have
been their Penates or Lares, their household gods; wherefore have thou stolen my
gods? my Teraphim, Genesis 31. 30. And this man Micha had an house of gods, and
made an Ephod and Teraphim, Judge. 17. 5. Because of the worship exhibited to
these Idols: Hence from the Hebrew Taraph, or as some read it, Tharaph, comes
the Greek (...). Hesiod. (...).
(...), To worship. The manner how these Images were made, is fondly conceived
thus among the Rabbis; They R. Eliezer (...). Elian Thisbi^.
killed a man that was a firstborn son, and wrung off his head, and seasoned
it with salt, and spices, and wrote upon a plate of gold the name of an unclean
spirit, and put it under the head upon a wall, and lighted Candles before it,
and worshipped it. With such Laban spoke, say they. But, without controversy,
the Teraphim which Michael put in the bed, was a complete stature, or image of
a man. The use of these Images was, to consult with them as with Oracles,
concerning things for the present unknown, or future to come. To this purpose
they were made by Astrologers Aben Ezra, Genesis 31.
under certain constellations, capable of heavenly influences, whereby they
were enabled to speak. The Teraphims have spoken vanity, Zach. 10. 2. And among
other reasons, why Rachel stole away her Father Images, this is thought to be
one, that Laban might not, by consulting with these Images, discover what way
Jacob took in his flight.

CHAP. X.
The several sorts of Divination forbidden.
WE shall find, Deuteronomy. 18. 10, 11. those Diviners, which are by the Law
forbidden, distinguished into seven kinds; not because there were no other, but
they were the most usual. 1. An observer of times. 2. An Inchanter. 3. A Witch.
4. A Charmer. 5. A consulter with familiar spirits. 6. A Wizard. 7. A
Nigromancer. To these we may add an eigth, out of Hos. 4. 12. Consulting with
the staff. And a ninth out of Ezekiel. 21. 21. A consulter with entrals. 1. The
first is (...), an observer of times, Jarchi Lev. 19. 26.
one that distinguishes times and seasons, saying, Such a day is good, or such
a day is naught, such an hour, such a week, such a month is luckie, and such
and such unluckie for such and such businesses: D. Kimchi. (...). ^ad.
whence those that derive the word from (...) Gnajin, signifying an eye, (as if
hereby were meant a Jugler, or Imposter, who deceived the eyes of his
spectators by casting a mist before them) utterly mistake; more pertinently
they speak, who derive it from (...) Gnona, signifying Time. But of all I
approve those who derive it Aben Esra L^^it. 19. 26.
from (...) Gnanan, a Cloud, as if the Original signified properly a Planetary,
or Star-gazer. Hereby he is distinguished from the second sort of unlawful
Diviners, for he also was an Observer of times; the first drawing his
conclusions from the color or motion of the Clouds: the second from his own
superstitious observation of good and evil events, happening upon such and such
days, such and such times: the first seems to have drawn his conclusions, a
priori, from the Clouds or Planets, causing good and bad events, the second, a
posteriori, from the events themselves, happening upon such and such times.
This Planetary, when he observed the clouds seems to have stood with his face
Eastward, his back Westward, his right hand toward the South, and his left
hand toward the North: except it was from this positure of the Star gazers
body in time of observing, I find no reason why the Hebrews should term the
Eastern part of the world (...) Kadim i. The former part of the world: the
Western part (...), i. e. The back part; the South part (...) Jamin, i. e. The
right hand, the North part (...) Shemol, i. e. The left hand. That the reason
of these denominations, is, because Adam was created with his face toward the
East, is as vain, as hard to prove.

2. The second is, (...), Menachesch, rendered an Inchanter; it imports rather
an Augur, or Soothsayer. The Original signifies such an one, who out of his
own experience draws observations to foretell good or evil to come, as
Soothsayers do, by observing such and such events, by such and such flying of
Birds, screechings, or kawings. The Rabbines speak in this wise: D. Kimchi.
inradic.
He is Menachesch, a soothsayer, who will say, because a morsel of bread is
fallen out of his mouth, or his staff out of his hand, or his son called him
back, or a Crow kawed unto him, or a Goat passed by him, or a Serpent was on
his right hand, or a Fox on his left hand, therefore be will say, Do not this
or that to day. This word is used, Genesis 30. 27. I have learned by experience,
says Laban, that the Lord has blessed me for thy sake. Again, Genesis 44. 5. Is
not this the cup in which my Lord drinks, and whereby indeed he divineth?
that is, proves, or naketh trial or experience what manner of men ye are: The
Heathen people were very superstitious in these observations: Some days were
Atri, others Albi; some unluckie, others luckie; on some days they accounted it
unfortunate to begin battle, on some months unfortunate to marry. Mense malum
Maio nubere vulgus ait.
Ovid. Fast.

And as they were superstitions in observing unluckie signs, so likewise in the
means used to avert the evil portended: the means were either words or deeds.
Plura istiuimodi (...) vide apud Theophrastum Character, (...).
Deeds; thus if any unlucky Bird, or such like came in their way, they would
fling stones at it; and of this sort is the scratching of a suspected Witch,
which among the simpler sort of people is thought to be a means to cure
Witchcraft. By words, they thought to elude the evil, signified by such signs,
when they say, (...), In caput tuum recidat hoc omen; This evil light on thy
own head.

The third is (...) Mecascheph, a Witch, properly a Jugler. The Original
signifies such a kind of Sorcerer, who bewitcheth the senses and minds of men,
by changing the sorms of things, making them appear otherwise than indeed they
are. The same word is applied to the Sorcerers in Egypt, who resisted Moses,
Exodus 7. 11. Then Pharaoh also called Mecaschphim, the Sorcerers. Now the
Magicians in Egypt, they also did in like manner with their Enchantments. This
latter part of the Text explaineth what those Sorcerers were. In that they are
called Magicians, it implies their learning, that they were wise men, and
great Philosophers: the word enchantments declares the manner of the delusion,
and it has the signification of such a slight whereby the eyes are deluded, for
(...) Lahatim, there traslated enchantments, imports the glistering flame of
a fire, or sword wherewith the eyes of men are dazzled. The Greek version does
not unfitly term them (...), Vnguentarios, Seplasiarios, Compounders of
Medicines, or if you please (f) complexion-makers, such Artisans who mask men's
and women's faces with (...) Suidas.
paintings and false complexions. Hence it is that the Apostle compares such
false teachers, who under a form and show of godliness, lead captive silly
women, to the Egyptian Sorcerers, Jannes and Jambers who resisted Moses, 2 Timothy
3. 8. These two were of chief note. In the Talmud. tract. Menachoth. c. 9.
Talmud they are called Johanne and Mamre; by Origin contra Celsum. lib. 4.
Nuntenius, a Pythagorean, Jannes and Mambres; by Plin. not. bist. lib. 30.
cap. 1.
Pliny. Jamnes and Jotape.

The fourth in (...) Chober a Charmer. The Hebrew word signifies conjoyning or
consociating; either from the league and fellowship which such persons have
with the devil, or as Bodine thinks, Bodinus Magdaemon. l. 1. c. 6.
because such kind of Witches have frequent meetings, in which they dance and
make merry together, Onkelos translateth such a charmer (...) Raten, a
mutterer, intimating the manner of these Witcheries to be by the muttering, or
soft speaking of some spell or charm. The description of a Charmer is thus
delivered: Maimon. tract* Idolol. c. 11. sect. 10, 11.
He is a charmer who speaks words of a strange language, and without* sense,
and he in his foolishness thinks that these words are profitable: that if one
say so or so unto a Serpent or Scorpion, it cannot hurt a man, and he that
says so or so unto a man, he cannot be hurt, etc. He that whispereth over a
wound, or reads a verse out of the Bible, likewise he that reads over an
Infant, that it may not be frighted, or that la^eth the book of the Law, or the
Phylacteries upon a child that it may sleep, such are not only among
Inchanters, or Charmers, but of those that generally deny the law of God,
because they make the words of the Scripture a medicine for the body, whereas
they are not, but medicine for the soul. As it is written, Prove. 3. 22. They
shall be life unto thy soul. Of this sort was that whereof Bodin. Mag. demon
l. 2. c. 1.
Bodinus speaks, That a child by saying a certain verse out of the Psalms,
hindered a woman that she could not make her butter; by reciting the same verse
backward, he made her butter come presently.

The fifth, (...) Sc^oel Ob, a consulter with Ob, or with familiar spirits. Ob
signifies properly a bottle, and is applied in diverse places of Scripture to
Magicians, because they being possessed with an evil spirit speak with a soft
and hollow voice, as out of a bottle. The Greek calls them (...), Chrysostom.
1 Cor. 12. Tert. adv. Mar^ion. l. 4. c. 25.
Ventriloquos, such whose voice seems to proceed out of their belly. Such a
Diviner was the Damosel, Acts. 16. 16. in August. 2 de doct Christ. c. 23.
S. Augustines judgment, and is probably thought so by most Expositors, who are
of opinion, that the spirit of Python with which this Damosel was possessed, is
the same, which the spirit of Ob was amongst the Hebrews. Hence the Witch of
Endor, whom Saul requested to raise up Samuel, is said in Hebrew to have
consulted with Ob; but among the Latin Expositors, she is commonly translated
Pythonissa, one possessed with the spirit of Python.

The sixth is, (...) Iiddegnoni, a Wizard; in the Greek, he is translated
sometimes (...), a cunningman. In both Languages he had his name from
knowledge, which either the Wizard professed himself to have, or the common
people thought him to have. The Rabbis say, he was called in Hebrew from a
certain beast named by them P. Fag. Levit. 19. Verum Athenaeus bestiam hanc
vocat (...). Vid. Bodin. Mag. demon. l. 1. c. 6. p. 89.
Jadua, in shape resembling a man, because these Wizards, when they did utter
their Prophesies, held a bone of this Beast between their teeth. This happily
might be some Diabolical Sacrament or Ceremony, used for the Confirmation of
the league between Satan and the Wizard. Perer. de Mag. p. 57.
Profane History mentions Divinations of the like kind, as that Magicians
were wont to eat the principal parts and members of such beasts, which they
deemed Prophetical, thinking thereby, that by a kind of (...) the Soul of such
Beasts would be conveyed into their bodies, whereby they might be enabled for
Prophecy.

The seventh is (...) Doresch el hammethim; the Greek answers word for word,
(...), An enquirer of the dead, a Necromancer. Such Diviners consulted with
Satan in the shape of a dead man. A memorable example we find recorded, 1 Samuel
29. There, King Saul, about to war with the Philistines (God denying to answer
him either by dreams, or by Vrim, or by Prophets) upon the fame of the Witch of
Endor, he repaired to her, demanding that Samuel might be raised up from the
dead, to tell him the issue of the war. Now that this was not in truth, Samuel,
is easily evinced, both by testimonies of the learned, and reasons. First, it
is improbable, that God, who had denied to answer him by any ordinary means,
should now deign him an answer so extraordinary. Secondly, no Witch or Devil
can disturb the bodies or Souls of such as die in the Lord, because they rest
from their labors. Rev. 14. 14. Thirdly, if it had been Samuel, he would
doubtless have reproved Saul for consulting with Witches.

The eighth is (...) Scoel maklo, A Consulter with his staff, Hos. 14. 12.
Jerome says, the manner of this divination was thus: That if the doubt were
between two or three Cities, which first should be assaulted; to determine
this, they wrote the names of the Cities upon certain staves, or arrows, which
being shaked in a quiver together, the first that was pulled out determined the
City. Vid. Drus. in Deuteronomy. p. 592.
Others deliver the manner of this Consultation to have been thus: The
consulter measured his staff by spans, or by the length of his finger, saying,
as he measured, I will go, I will not go; I will do such a thing, I will not do
it, and as the last span fell out, so he determined: This was termed by the
Heathens (...) or (...) Divination by rods or arrows.

The ninth was (...) Roe baccabed, a diviner by intr^ls, Ezekiel. 21. 21.
Nebuchandnezar being to make war both with the Jews, and the Ammonites, and
doubting in the way, against whether of these he should make his first onset;
First, he consulted with his arrows and staves, of which has been spoken
immediately before; Secondly, he consulted with the intrals of beasts. This
practice was generally received among the Heathens, and because the Liver was
the principal member observed, it was called (...), Consultation with the
liver. Three things were observed in this kind of divination. First, the color
of the intrals, whether they were all well colored. Secondly, their place,
whether none were displaced. Thirdly, the number, whether none were wanting;
among those that were wanting, the want of the Liver, or the Heart chiefly
presaged ill; that day when Julius Caesar was slain, it is storied, that in two
fat Oxen then sacrificed, the heart was wanting in them both.

THE FIFTH BOOK OF THEIR CONSISTORIES.
CHAP. I.
Their Courts of Judgment, especially their Ecclesiastical Consistory.
THere were in Israel distinct Courts, consisting of distinct persons, the one
principally for Church-businesses, the other for affairs in the Common wealth;
the one an Junius A^alyt. Expos. Deuteronomy. 17.
Ecclesiastical Consistory; the other a Civil Judicatory: of these, and their
several censures, and punishments, it remains now to be spoken.

These different Consistories, or Courts of Justice, we find first
distinguished, Deuteronomy. 17. 12. He which will not hearken unto the Priest, nor unto
the Judge. Where the People of Israel are directed, in what cases, and to what
persons they should make their Appeals from inferior Courts; Namely, to the
Priest, in matters spiritual, or ceremonial; and to the Judge, in matters civil
or criminal. These two Courts are more plainly distinguished, 2. Chron. 19.
where Jehosaphat reforming many abuses in Church and Commonwealth, first
appointed thorow-out all the fenced Cities of Judah, secular Judges to
determine criminal causes, verse 5. And at Jerusalem he appointed a spiritual
Court consisting of Levites, Priests, and the chief Fathers of Israel, verse. 8.
And in Causes spiritual for the Lord, Amariah the High Priest was chief: in
Causes criminal for the King, Zebediah was chief, verse. 11. Likewise the
Prophet Jeremiah is condemned to die by the consistory of Priests, Jer. 26. 8.:
but by the Consistory of Princes, or secular Judges sitting in the gate, he was
absolved and discharged, verse. 16. Yea, although the tyranny of Antiochus, and
the troublesome times ensuing had bred such a confusion in matters of
Government among the Jews, that an evident distinction can hardly be found in
the New Testament: yet some footsteps, and imperfect tokens of both Courts are
there observable, principally Matthew. 21. 22. It. Matthew. 26. 3. The chief
Priests and the Elders of the People are named as two distinct Consistories:
and each Consistory seems to be differenced by its proper name; The secular
consistory termed (...), A Council: the spiritual termed (...), A Synagogue.
They will deliver you up to the Counsels, and they will scourge you in their
Synagogues, Matthew. 10. 17. Hence that great assembly of Prophets and holy men
called together by Esra, for the reformation of the Church, after their return
from Babylon, is called Synagoga magna, A great Synagogue.

The office of the Ecclesiastical Court was to put a difference between things
holy and unholy, and between clean and unclean, Levit. 10. 10. and to determine
Appeals in controversies of difficulty. It was a representative Church. Hence
is that, Dic Ecclesiae, Mat. 18. 16. Tell the Church; because unto them
belonged the power of Excommunication, the several sorts of which censure
follow in the next Chapter.

Only here take notice, that, as in the Civil Consistories, consisting of
seventy Judges, which was the supreme Court, there were two sat as Chief,
namely, one whom they termed Nasi, the Lord chief Justice; and the other whom
they termed Abbeth din, the Father of the Senate: so in the Ecclesiastical
Consistory the High Priest and his Sagan, or second High Priest, sat chief
there, 2 King. 23. 4. Moses Ketses. in Sanhedrim.
That the High Priest, sat in the Sanhedrin necessarily, is an error; for he
was, not elected into that Company, except he were a man of extraordinary
wisdom. Again, note, that sometimes both Consistories assembled together, as
often as the matters to be determined were partly ceremonial, partly civil,
partly belonging to the Church, partly to the Commonwealth: which being not
noted, causes the Courts not to be distinguished by many Expositors. This
meeting and joining of both Consistories often appears in the Gospel. The
chief Priests and the Elders meet together.

CHAP. II.
Of their Excommunication.
THey had three Degrees of Excommunication. The first was called in the. N. T.
a casting cut of the Synagogne, John 9. 22. by the Jews (...) Significat haec
vox Separationem, Elongationem, dedacitur a verbo (...) Separavit. Hinc etiam
Proscriptus, prosiigatus, aut separatus. quispiam dicitur (...)
Niddui i. a separation, or putting away. Buxtorf. ex Rabbinis Epist. Heb. page
55.
It signified a separation from all commerce or society either with any man or
woman, for the distance of four Cubits; also from eating or drinking with any;
from the use of the marriage bed, from shaving, washing, or the like, according
to the pleasure of the Judge, and the quality of the offense: It was of force
thirty days, yet so that they might be shortened upon repentance. He that was
thus excommunicated, had power to be present at Divine Service, to teach
others, and learn of others; he hired servants, and was hired himself, but
always on condition of the aforesaid separation. If he remained impenitent,
according to the pleasure of the Judge, his punishment was increased, either to
the doubling or the trebbling of the time, or to the extending of it to his
lives end; his male-children were not circumcised: if he died without
repentence, then, by the sentence of the Judge, a stone was cast upon his
Coffin or Bier, to show that he was worthy to be stoned. They mourned not for
such a one with solemn lamentation; they followed him not unto the grave; not
buried him with common burial.

The second was called in the N. T. a giving one over to Satan, 1 Cor. 5. 5. By
the Jews (...) cherem. For the better understanding of this word, we must know
that it is not used in this sense in the Old Testament; there we shall find it
applied to persons, or to things; if to persons, then it signifies a devoting
of them to God by their death, Levit. 27. 29. If to things, then it signifies
a devoting of them unto God, by separating them from ordinary use: hence it is
that Achan is punished for stealing the devoted thing, Josh. 7. Budaeus (...)
dici tradit, homines sacros, (i.) quorum capita inferis dicata sunt and devota;
(...) donaria Diis consecrat^.
Persons thus devoted, were termed by the Greeks (...); and devoted things,
(...). Notwithstanding, in the Apostles time, both Cherem and (...), signified
a second degree of Excommunication, differing from the sormer; First, because
it was not done in a private Court, but published in the audience of the whole
Church. Secondly, maledictions, and curses were added out of the Law of Moses.
At the publishing hereof Candles were lighted; and when the curses were ended,
they put out the Candles, in token that the excommunicate person was deprived
of the light of Heaven. This kind of excommunication was exercised against the
incestuous person. And against 1 Cor. 5 5.
Hymaneus, and Tim 20. 25.
Alexander.

The third was called in the New Test. by the Syriack name Maranatha, 1 Cor.
16. that is, the Lord comes. Maran, signifies the Lord, and Atha, comes, and
this they say was instituted by Enoch, Judge, 14. The Jews called it Schammatha,
the Etymology of which word I find to be twofold. Some say it sounds as much
as Maran-Atha, the Lord comes. (...) Domin^s (...) venit
Schem signifying the Lord, and Atha Comes: Elias Thy sbites in radice (...).
others say it sounds There is death, Schem signifying there, and Mitha,
death. Hence we may render it an excommunication to death Bertram de Politia
Judaic. c. 2. p. 21.
And this is thought to be the reason of that phrase, 1 John 5. 16. There is a
sin unto death, i. which deserves excommunication to death. Buxtorf. Epist.
Hebr. p 59. in dorso Epistolae subjici solebat haec abbrevi. ^ura (...) i.
prohibitum est per anathema. Rab. Gersom luminis captivitatis (scil. resignare
has literas.)
R. Gersom forbade the breaking open of letters, under the penalty of all three
sorts of excommunication. And this was termed Excommunicatio in secreto nominis
tetragrammati: see the form hereof in the Chapter of the Sadduces.

In the Greek Church there were Vid. Just. lli notas in codicem canonum,
Eccles. univers. ad ca. non. 25. Bellarde paenit. l. 1. c. 22 and Casaub.
Exercit. p. 552. observant quintum gradum, quem ille (...), Alter (...),
appellat.
four degrees of this censure. 1. (...). Those were censured with this degree,
who were only barred the Lords Table: as for entrance into the Church, hearing
the word, praying with the Congregations, they enjoyed equal liberty with other
Christians, they might stand by and behold others receive the Sacrament, but
themselves did partake thereof, whence they were called Stantes. 2. (...),
concerning this censure, all that I read of it, is thus; that he that is thus
censured has admittance into the Church, Vid. Iustol. loco citato.
but his place must be behind the Pulpit, and he must depart with the
Catechumeni, that is, such Pagans who were gained to the Christian Faith, but
not fully admitted into the Church, because they wanted baptism, and therefore
that they might not pray promiscuously with other Christians, there was a place
behind the Quire of the Church in manner of Cloisters, allotted to them, and
was from them called, Hos^in. de Templis. p. 88.
Catechumenum: This I take to be the place for this second degree of
Excommunication, so that the force of this censure I think to consist in these
three things. First, they were barred the Lords Table. Secondly, they might not
stand by at the Administration of the Lords Supper (which was allowed in the
first degree) and this appears clearly, because the Chatechumeni departed
always at the celebration of the Communion; for to them principally it was said
Ite missaest. Thirdly, though they might (...) fall down on their knees and
pray, and were thence called Succumbentes, yet this they might not do in the
Congregation, but only in that place behind the quire or pulpit, which was
allotted to the Catechumeni, and in this also this second degree differs from
the first. The third sort of censure was (...), the party thus censured was
permitted to come no further than the Church Porch, where it was lawful for him
to hear the Scriptures read, but not to join in prayer, nor to approach the
Lords Table, whence such were termed Audientes. The fourth, and last sort, was
(...), persons under this censure stood quite without the Church, requesting
those that entered in, with tears and weeping to petition the Lord for mercy
toward them, whence they were called Plorantes.

Seeing it is commonly thought, that Cain was censured by the first degree of
Excommunication, called Niddui, and that the last called Schammatha was of
Enochs constitution; both these being of such antiquity, I dare not say that
the three degrees of Excommunication were borrowed from the three sorts of
uncleanness, which excluded people out of the three Camps, though there was an
observable proportion between them. De quibus P. Fagius, in Number. 5. 2.
Niddui may be paralleled with the exclusion out of the Camp of God alone,
which befell those that were defiled by touch of the dead: Cherem may be
compared to the exclusion out of the Camp of God, and the Camp of Levi, which
befell those that were defiled of an issue. Schammatha may be compared with the
exclusion out of all three Camps, the Camp of God, the Camp of Levi, and the
Camp of Israel, this befell those that were defiled of leprosy; and from the
Jews, it is probable that the Greek and Latin Churches borrowed their degrees
of Excommunication.

CHAP. III.
Their Civil Consistories, what persons were necessarily present in them.
IN many things men might be sinful in respect of Gods Law, though not liable
to punishment, in respect of man's; thou shall not avenge, nor be mindful of
wrong, Levit. 19. 18. which the Hebrews explain thus; To avenge, is to deny a
good turn to one who formerly denied him. To be mindful of a wrong, is to do a
good turn to one who formerly would not do so much for him; but at the doing
thereof, to upbraid the other of his unkindness. They illustrate it thus: when
Reuben says to Simeon, Lend me thy Hatchet; he answers, I will not lend him:
Afterward Simeon has need to borrow an Hatchet of Reuben, and says unto him,
lend me thy Hatchet: Reuben says unto him, I will not lend him, thou would
not lend me thine: this is (...) Nekima, Avengement. Now when Reuben says to
Simeon, Lend me thy Hatchet: he answers, I will not lend him: afterward
Simeon borrows an Hatchet of Reubem: Reubem says, lo, I will ^end it thee, I
will not deal with thee as thou dealedst with me, this is (...) Netira,
Mindfulness: both these were sinful, but not liable to man's judgment.

In all civil Courts, five sorts of persons were always present. 1. Judges. 2.
Officers. 3. Pleaders. 4. Notaries. 5. Witnesses. In the supreme Court there
was one that was chief over all the other Judges, they called him in Hebrew,
Nasi, in Greek (...), The Prince. His leave was craved for the trial of
actions. The Witnesses were at least two, Deuteronomy. 19 15. If they were false, they
punished them with a Talio, the same punishment which he intended against his
brother, Deuteronomy. 19. 19. The Notaries were two, Moses Kotsen. in Sanhedrin.
one stood on the right hand to write the sentence of Absolution, and what was
spoken in defense of the party; the other stood on the left hand, to write the
sentence of condemnation, and the objections against the party. Drus. praeter.
Matthew. 25.
Drusius thinks that Christ speaking of the last Judgment had reference to
this, He shall set the sheep on the right hand, and on the left the goats,
Matthew. 25. 23. The Officers were in manner of Sheriffs, they were present to
execute what the Judges determined; whence they carried up and down their Moses
Kotsens. in Sanhedrin.
staves and whips, as the Consuls of Rome had Rods and Axes, carried before
them for the readier execution of justice. In Hebrew they are called (...)
Schoterim, by the Septuagint sometimes (...), in our English translation
commonly Officers, and by Saint Luke (...): for doubtless there is allusion
unto them, Luke 12. 58. When thou go with thine adversary, ((...)) to the
Magistrate, as thou art in the way, give diligence that thou may be delivered
from him, lest he hale thee to the Judge, and the Judge deliver thee to the
Officer, etc. The Pleader was called (...) Baal rib, he stood on the right hand
of the party cited into the Court, whether he pleaded for, or against him. The
Lord shall stand on the right hand of the poor, to save him from those that
judge his soul, Psa. 119. 31. that is, The Lord shall plead his cause. And
Satan stood at the right hand of Joshuah, Zach. 3. 1. thet is to accuse him, or
plead against him. When S. John speaks, If any man sin, we have an Advocate,
2 John 2. 1. he alludeth unto this Baal rib, or Pleader. The Judges, they
examined and determined matters, and after examination, sentence was pronounced
by the Judge in this manner: Tu N. justus, Tu N. reus, Thou Simeon art just:
Thou Reuben art guilty: at the pronunciation of which the guilty person was
dragged to the place of execution. When he shall be judged, let him be
condemned, Ps. 109. 7. the Hebrew is Let him go out wicked.

The manner of sentencing persons, varied in most Countries. The Jews by a
simple pronunciation of sentence, both absolved men, and condemned them. The
Rosin Anti^. Romans l. 9. c. 24.
Romans gave sentence by casting in Tables into a certain box or urne prepared
for the purpose: if they absolved any, they wrote the letter A in the table, it
being the first letter of Absolvo: if they would condemn any, they cast in a
table with C written in it, which is the first letter of Condemno: if the
matter were hard to determine, they would cast in other tables with N L,
signifying Non Liquet. The E^a^. Adag. th praefig.
Graecians in like manner used three letters: th was a token of condemnation,
which occasioned that of Persius. Et potis es nigrum, vitio praefigere Theta.
I was a token of absolution; l, of ampliation. Others signified condemnation,
by giving a black stone; and absolution by giving a white stone. Mos erat
antiquis niveis atrisque lapillis,
Hos damnare reos, illos absolvere culpa.
Ovid. Metamorph. 15.

To this there seems to be allusion, Rev. 2. 17. To him who overcomes I will
give a white stone; that is, I will absolve and acquit him in the day of
judgment.

Note these three phrases, (...), To rise up to judgment; (...), To rise up in
judgment; (...), To depart guilty. The first is applied to the Judge in the
execution of Justice. When God rose up to judge, Psalm 76. 10. that is, to
execute judgment. The second is applied to the party prevailing in judgment.
The men of Nineveth shall rise up in judgment with this generation, Matthew. 12.
41. that is, shall be justified before this generation. The last is applied to
the party condemned, Psalm. 109. 7. Let him depart guilty or wicked: the ungodly
shall not stand in judgment, Psalm. 1. The like phrases were in use among the
Romans: Stare in Senatu, to prevail in the Senate; Causa cadere, to be cast in
ones suit. But these phrases among the Romans I think to have been taken out of
their Fence Schools, where the set positure of the body, by which a man
prepares himself to fight and grapple with his enemy, is termed Status, or
Gradus, as cedere de Statu, to give back; Gradum vel statum servare, to keep's
one standing: and from thence have those elegancies been translated into places
of Judgment.

CHAP. IV.
The number of their Civil Courts.
THeir Civil Courts were two, (...) Sanhedrim gedola, the great Consistory, or
Supreme Senate, (...) Sanhedrim Ketanna, the lesser and inseriour Court. Thus I
find them divided generally by the Rabbis: And although the latter was
subdivided, as will after appear; yet in old time there were only two first
branches: which division our Savior Christ seems to have followed, calling
the lesser Court (...), by the name of Judgment: the greater (...), by the name
of a Counsel. Whosoever is angry with his brother unadvisedly, shall be
oulpable of Judgment. Whosoever says unto his brother Raca, shall be worthy to
be punished by the Council: Whosoever shall say, Fool, shall be worthy to be
punished with the fire of Gehenna, Mat. 5. In which words, as there is a
gradation of sin 1. Anger, passion of the mind. 2. Raca, Raca, non grandis
alicujus est sermo convitii, sed magis e contemptu natum est, and neglect a
dicentis Chrysostom. homil. 16. in Mat.
scornful, or slighting speech, as Tut, Tush, etc. 3. Fool, reproachful and
opprobrious names: so likewise there is a gradation of punishment. 1. Judgment,
a lesser Court. 2. Counsel, the greater Court. 3. The fire of Gehenna: Now
Gehenna was a Valley, terrible for two sorts of fires in it: First, for that
wherein men burnt their children unto Moloch David Kimchi, Ps. 27. 13.
Secondly, for another fire there continually burning, to consume the dead
carcasses, and filth of Jerusalem; partly for the terribleness of the first,
and partly for the contemptibleness of the place by reason of the second fire,
it was a type of hell fire itself. We may resolve that text thus, anger
deserved the punishments of the lesser Court; Raca, the punishments of the
greater: and Fool deserved punishments beyond all Courts, even the sire of
Gehenna.

The greater Court, by way of excellentcy, was called the Sanhedrim, which word
came from the Greek, (...), a place of Judgment: It was also called (...) Beth
din, the house of judgment. It was distinguished from the other Courts: first,
in respect of the number of the Judges, which were Moses Kotsen. fol. 186. col.
2.
seventy one, according to the command of God to Moses at their first
institution, Numb. 11. 16. Gather unto me seventy men of the Elders of Israel,
whom thou know, that they are the Elders of the people, and Governors over
them, and bring them unto the Tabernacle of the Congregation, and let them
stand there with thee. From the latter words of this Text, it is observed, that
there were seventy besides Moses; and therefore after his decease they always
chose one chief Judge in his room, not reckoning him among the seventy; they
called him Nasi, the Prince or chief over the seventy. These seventy are Franc.
Junius Analyt. ex. ^^s. Number. 11.
thought to be chosen six out of every Tribe, save the Tribe of Levi, out of
which only four were chosen. Solon Jarchi.
Others think the manner of their choice was thus; six of every Tribe had their
names written in little scrolls of paper: in seventy of these scrolls was
written (...) Zaken, Senex an Elder, in the two other (...) Chelek, pars, A
part; these scrolls they put in a pitcher or urn, and those that plucked out a
scroll wherein Elder was written, were counted amongst the number of the
Judges: those that plucked out the other scrolls, in which a Part was written,
Numb. 11. 26.
they were rejected, Numb. 11. 26, The senior of these seventy was called (...)
Ab beth din, the Father of the Judgment-Hall. The Moses Kstsen. f. 185. col. 2.
whole Set or Bench of Judges, sat in manner of an half circle, the Nasi
sitting in the midst above the rest, the other sitting round about beneath, in
such manner that the Father of the Judgment-Hall sat next to the Nasi on the
right hand. The lesser Consistory was subdivided into two sorts, one consisted
of twenty three Aldermen, and two such Consistories there were in Jerusalem,
the one at the door of the Court before the Temple, the other at the door of
the Mountain of the Temple: yea, in every City throughout Israel where there
were sixscore householders, such a Consistory was erected: the other sort of
lesser Courts consisted only of a Triumvirate, three Aldermen; and this was
erected in the lesser Cities, which had not the number of sixscore householders,

The Moses Kotsen. ibid.
second difference between the greater Consistory and the lesser, was in
respect of the place. The seventy sat only at Jerusalem, within the Court of
the Temple, in a certain house called (...) Lischath hagazith, the paved
Chamber, because of the curious cut stones wherewith it was paved: by the
Greeks it was called (...), the Pavement. Pilate sat down in the Judgment
Seat, in a place called the Pavement, John 19. 13. The other Consistories sat
all in the gates of the Cities. Now because the gates of the City are the
strength thereof, and in their gates their Judges sat: Hence is that, Mat. 16.
18. The. gates of hell shall not overcome it, that is, neither the strength nor
policy of Satan.

Lastly, they differed in respect of their Power and Authority: the Consistory
of Seventy received D^ut. 17. 8.
appeals from the other inferior Courts, from that there was no appeal: Again,
the Consistory* of three sat not on life and death, but only on petty matters,
as whipping, pecuniary controversies, and such like; the other of twenty three
sat on life and death, but with a restrained power; they had not authority to
judge an whole Tribe, the High priest, false Prophets, and other such weighty
matters: this belonged only to the Seventy in Jerusalem: Cunaeus de rep. Hebr.
p. 1^ 9.
Hence is that, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the Prophets, Luke 13.
34. The means how they tried a false Prophet was thus; they observed the
judgments which he threatened, and the good which he prophesied to a place: if
the judgments took not effect, this did not argue him a false Prophet, because
God was merciful, as in the case of Ezekiah, and the people might repent, as
the Ninivites did: but if he prophesied good, and that came not to pass, they
judged him a false Prophet, The ground of this trial they make the words of
Jeremiah the Prophet, which prophesied of peace, when the word of the Lord
shall come to pass, then shall the Prophet be known that the Lord has truly
sent him, Jer. 28. 9.

The College or company of these Seventy, exercised judgment, not only under
the Kings and Judges, P. Galat. l. 4. cap. 5.
but their authority continued in times of vacances, when there was neither
Judge nor King to rule Israel, and it continued until Joseph. Antiq. l. 14. c.
17.
Herod put them down, and destroyed them, to secure himself of the Kingdom.

Here some may object, that there were no such Courts, or their liberty much
infringed in Samuels time: for he went from year to year in circuit to Bethel,
and Gilgal, and Mizpeh, and judged Israel in all those places, 1 Samuel 7. 16. To
which, I take it, we may say, that as the Emperors of Rome had power to ride
Circuits, and keep Assizes, which was done without any infringement of the
liberties of their Senate: So the Kings and Judges in Israel had the like
power, and yet the authority of their Courts stood firm. This kind of judging
by keeping of Assisses, the Romans termed (...), the other (...).

CHAP. V.
Properties required in Judges, and the manner of their election.
THe Law of God required these properties in Judges: 1. Wisdom. 2.
Understanding. 3. Integrity. 4. Courage, Deuteronomy. 1. 13. Others are reckoned,
Exodus 18. 21. namely, 5. The fear of God. 6. Love of Truth. 7. Hating of
Covetousness: to these may be added the eighth, namely, having no respect of
persons, Deuteronomy. 1. 17. These two last especially, the Heathens required in their
Judges: whence the Plutarch. de Iside.
Thebans painted Justice without hands, and without eyes, to intimate that
Judges should receive no gifts, nor be swayed with sight of persons.

The Moses Kotser. in Sanhedrin.
Jews added many more. 1. That they should be free from all blemish of body. 2.
That they should be skilled in the seventy Languages, to the intent that they
might not need an Interpreter in the hearing of Causes. 3. That they should not
be far stricken in years; which likewise was required by the Romans in their
Judges; as appears by that common adage, Sexagenarius de ponte. 4. That they
should be no Eunuchs, because such commonly were cruel. 5. That they should be
Fathers of children, which they thought was a special motive to mercy. 6. That
they should be skilful in Magic, without the knowledge of which, they were not
able to judge of Magicians.

That there might be a sufficient supply of able men to succeed in the room of
the Judges dying, there sat Moses Kotsen. ibid.
three benches of others beneath, whom they called (...) Discipul. sapientum.
Talmidi Chacamim, Scholars of the wise men: out of these they made their
Election, and two of these always accompanied the condemned persons to the
place of execution.

Their inauguration of Judges was two fold: At first, by imposition of hands
upon the head of the party, after the example of Moses laying hands on Joshua:
this imposition of hands was not held lawful, Petr. Galatin lib. 4 cap. 59.
except it were in ^he presence of five or three Judges at the least.
Afterward, it was by saying a certain verse (...) (...) Maimon in Sanhedrin.
cap. 4.
Lo, thou art associated, and power is given thee to judge of penalties. Hence
is that saying of Galatinus out of the Talmud, Institutio Judicum, aut manu
fiebat, aut nomine tantum.

Observe here, that Samuc, which I render associated, does not always signify
a man licensed to the discharge of some public office by the imposition of
hands, for here it is applied to those who were not admitted by imposition of
hands. Now the reason why these words Semica, and Semicuth, are generally by
all Expositors, Jews and Christians, translated the imposition of hands, is,
because this solemn kind of licensing, termed Semica, or Semicuth, was in old
time used only toward two sorts of men in their admission, toward Rabbis and
toward Judges; which kind of permission, because it was not performed toward
either of them without this ceremony of imposing hands: hence these two words
have been translated the imposition of hands, whereas properly they signify
nothing else, but an association, an approximation, or conjoyning of one into
the same corporation or company, of which he that does associate and give
admission is a member.

CHAP. VI.
Ceremonies common in all capital Judgments.
IN their greater punishments, which deprived of life, some ceremonies were
cemmon to them all.

First, The Judges were to use deliberation in all causes, but specially in
matters capital. There were four causes, says Targum Jonath. Number. 9. 8.
Jonathan in his Targum, that came before Moses (he mentions none in
particular, but what they were, we shall presently learn out of other records.)
Two of these were not weighty; in these he hastened: Two more material,
concerning life and death; in these he delayed. (...) Jonath.
Caeterum tam de his, quam de illis dicebat, Non audivi; Of both the lighter
and weightier causes, Moses says, I have not heard, to wit, from the Lord: to
show, that a deliberation and consultation, as it were with God, ought to be in
all judgments, before sentence be pronounced. These four causes are named in
Targum. Hierosol. Number. 9. (...).
other Records: The two lightest are, 1. The matter of uncleanness, debarring
the people from the Passover, Number. 9. 9. Secondly, the case of Zelophehads
daughters, Number. 36. 10. The two weightier are, 1. The cause of the blasphemer,
Lev. 24. 13. Secondly, The case of him that gathered Sticks on the Sabbath,
Number. 15. 35. In all these judgments there is, The Lord spoke unto Moses. And in
the first, which was counted among the lighter causes (because it was not on
life and death) even there does Moses in a solemn manner bespeak the people to
stand still, Et ego audiam, And I will hear what the Lord will command.
Notwithstanding, wilful delays in Justice makes the Judge unrighteous. In that
unrighteous Judge, from whom the Widow wrested sentence by importunity; we read
not of any other fault in him, but delay, Luke 18. 6.

Secondly, The party accused was placed on some high place, from whence he
might be seen and heard of all the people: Set Naboth, in capite populi, on
high among the people, 1 Kings 21. 9.

Thirdly, The Judges and the Witnesses did (when Deus. praeterit. Math. 27.
sentence was pronounced) put their hands upon the condemned persons head, and
said, Sanguis tuus super caput tuum, Thy blood be upon thine own head: unto
this the people had reference, saying, His blood be on us, and on our children,
Mat. 27. 25.

Fourthly, The place of execution was without the gates, the malefactors were
had thither by two Executioners, M^ses Kotsen. in Sanhedrin It. Talmud. lib.
Maccoth cap. 3. in Mis^na
termed by the Rabbines (...) chazani hacceneseth, Spectators of the
Congregation, which is a periphrasis of those whom S. Mark calls (...), Mark
6. 27. which word, though it be used by the Greeks and (...) Vziel and Targum
Hieresol. Genesis 37. 36.
Chaldee Paraphrasts, yet it is a mere Latin, derived a specutando; because in
the Court the Executioners were only Spectators, to behold and attend what the
Judges would command them.

Fifthy, When the malefactors was led to execution, a Moses Kotsen. in loco
superius citato.
public crier went before, saying, Such a one is going to be punished with such
a death, because he has committed such, or such an offense, at such a time, in
such a place; and these, N. N. are witnesses thereof: If any therefore knows
any thing which may do him good, let him come and make it known. For this
purpose one was appointed to stand at the door of the Consistory, with an
handkerchief or linen cloth in his hand, that if any person should come for
his defense, he at the door swinged about his handkerchief, upon the sight
whereof, another standing in readiness a pretty distance off with an horse,
hastened and called back the condemned person: yea, if the Malefactor had any
further plea for his own purgation, he might come back four or five times,
except he spoke vainly; for the discerning whereof, two of those whom they
termed Scholars of the wise men, were sent with him to observe his speech on
the way.

Sixthly, He was exhorted to confess, that he might have his portion in the
world to come: Thus Joshua exhorted Achan, Josh. 7. 19. My son, give I pray
thee glory unto the Lord God of Israel, and make confession unto him: unto whom
Achan answered, verse. 26. Indeed I have sinned against the Lord God of Israel,
and thus have I done.

Seventhly, In the time of execution, they gave the Malefactor* (...) Corat
lebona becos schel injin. Maimon. in Sanhedrim. cap. 13. It. Moses Kotsen. in
Sanehedrim.
Granum thuris in calice vini, A grain of Frankincense in a cup of Wine: this
they did give to cause a giddiness in the condemned persons head, that thereby
he might be less sensible of the pain. St. Mark calls this cup (...), Wine
mingled with Myrrh, Mark 15. 23. This was done after the manner of the Jews,
but the Soldiers in mockery mingled Vinegar and Gall with it, Mat. 27. 34. As
likewise they gave him a second cup in derision, when they took a sponge, and
filled it with Vinegar, and put it on reed, Matthew. 27. 48. S. Mark in the first
cup mentions the custom of the Jews, which in it self had some show of
compassion; for the ground of this custom was taken from that, Prove. 31. 6.
Give strong drink unto him that is ready to perish. S. Matthew mentions only
their wicked mixture, contrary to the received custom; so that one Evangelist
must expound the other. This first cup was so usually given before execution,
that the word Calix a cup, is sometimes in the Scripture put for death it self.
Father, if it may be; let this cup pass from me.

Lastly, Casaub. exercit. p. 654. ex. Maimonid.
The Tree whereon a man was hanged, and the Stone wherewith he was stoned, and
the Sword wherewith he was beheaded, and the Napkin wherewith he was strangled,
they were all buried, that there might be no evil memorial of such a one, to
say: This is the Tree, this is the Sword, this the Stone, this is the Napkin,
whereon, or wherewith, such an one was executed.

CHAP. VII.
Their capital punishments.
THe Jews of old had only Paraphrast. Chald. Ruth. 1. 17. Mikkotsifol. 188.
col. 3.
four sorts of death in use among them. 1. (...) Sekila, Lapidatio.
Lapidatio, stoning. 2. (...) Sheripha, combustio.
Combustio, burning. (...) Hereg, decollatio.
3. Decollatio, beheading. 4. (...) Chenek, Suffocatio.
Suffocatio, strangling. Of these, stoning was counted the most grievous,
burning worse than beheading, beheading worse than strangling, and strangling
was the easiest of all.

They have a (...) Omnis mors quae absolute in lege usurpatur. strangulatio
est, R. S^lom. Exodus 21. 16.
rule, that wheresoever the Scripture says of an offender, Morte plectetur, he
shall be punished with death, not expressing the kind of death, there it ought
to be interpreted of Strangling. For example, the Law says of the Adulterer,
Lev. 20. 10. Morte plectetur, let him be punished with death: because the kind
of death is not here mentioned, they interpret it strangling. The reason of
this rule is, because strangling was the easiest death of the four; and where
the Law determines not the punishment, there they say, Ampliandi favores, The
favourablest exposition is to be given.

The rule is not generally true; for in former times Adultery was punished with
stoning. I will judge thee after the manner of them that are Harlots, says the
Lord, Ezekiel. 16. 38. And in the fortieth verse the judgment is named, They shall
stone thee with stones: likewise the Scribes and Pharisees said unto Christ,
Moses in the Law commanded us, that such should be stoned, John 8.

Before we treat in particular of these four punishments, it may be questioned,
Whether the Jews had any power to judge of life and death, at that time when
they crucified our blessed Savior? The Jews said to Pilate, It is not lawful
for us to put any man to death, Joh. 18. 31. Latter Jews say that Moses Kotsen.
in Sanhedrin.
all power of capital punishment was taken from them forty years before the
destruction of of the second Temple, and of this opinion are many Divines.

Answer. First, the Jews speech unto Pilate, that it was not lawful for them to
put any man to death, cannot be understood, as if they should have said, we
have no power to put any man to death; for admit, that power in criminals were,
in the general, taken from them, yet in this particular power was permitted
them at that time from Pilate, Take ye him, and judge him according to your
Law, John 18. 31. Neither can it be said, that their Law could not condemn him,
if he had been a trangressor thereof; or that they had not out of their law to
object against him: for they say, They had a law, and by their law he ought to
die, John 19. 7. It was not then want of Power, but the holiness of that time
made them say it was unlawful. For they held it unlawful upon their days of
prepararation to sit on life and death, as has been shown in the Chapter of
translating Feasts. And Friday on which our Savior was condemned, was the
preparation of their Sabbath.

Secondly, in the question, whether power of judging capital crimes were taken
from them by the Romans? We are to distinguish between crimes. Some crimes were
trangressions of the Roman law, as theft, murder, robberies, etc. power of
judging in these was taken from them: other crimes were transgressions only
against the law of Moses, as blasphemy, and the like: in these, power of
judging seems to have remained with them. When Paul was brought by the Jews
before Gallio, Gallio said unto them, if it were a matter of wrong or wicked
lewdness, O ye. Jews, reason would, that I should bear with you: but if it be a
question of words, and names of your law, look ye to it, Acts 18. 14.

In handling these four punishments: First observe the offenders, whom the Jews
make liable to each punishment, and then the manner of the punishment.

The persons to be stoned were Moses Kotsen. fol. 188 col. 4.
eighteen. 1. He that lies with his own mother, 2. Or with his fathers wife,
36. Or with his daughter-in-law, 4. Or with a hetrothed maid, 5. Or with the
male, 6. Or with the beast, 7. The woman that lies down to a beast. 8. The
blasphemer. 9. He that worstippeth an Idol. 10. He that offers of his seed to
Moloch. 11. He that has a familiar spirit. 12. The Wizard. 13. The private
enticer to Idolatry. 14. The public withdrawer to Idolatry. 15. The Witch.
16. The prophaner of the Sabbath. 17. He that curses his Father or his Mother.
18. The Rebellious Son. The manner of stoning was thus: The offender was led to
a place without the Gates, two Cubits high, his hands being bound: From hence
one of the Witnesses tumbled him by a stroke upon the loins; if that killed him
not, the Witnesses lifted up a stone, being the weight of two men, which
chiefly the other Witness cast upon him; if that killed not, all Israel threw
stones upon him. The hands of the Witnesses shall be first upon him to put him
to death, and afterward the hands of all the people, Deuteronomy. 17. 17.

Hence the opinion of Paul. Fagius, Deuteronomy. 17. 7.
R. Akiba is commonly received, that such an Idolater (it holds in all others
condemned to this death) was reserved until one of the common feasts, at which
all the multitude of Israel came to Jerusalem. The party thus executed being
quite dead, was afterward for greater ignominy hanged on a Tree, till toward
the Sunset, at which time he and the Tree were both buried.

Malefactors adjudged to burning were Moses Kotsen. loco superius ^tatio.
ten: 1. The Priests daughter which committed whoredom. 2. He which lies with
his own daughter. 3. Or with his daughters daughter. 4. Or with his sons
daughter. 5. Or with his wives daughter. 6. Or with her sons daughter. 7. Or
with her daughters daughter. 8. Or with his Mother-in-law. 9. Or with the
Mother of his Mother-in-law. 10. Or with the Mother of his Father-in-law.

The manner of burning was twofold. Some they burnt with wood and faggots:
this was termed Rab. Levi. Levit, 10.
by them Combustio corporis, the burning of the body: Others they burnt by
pouring in scalding hot Lead at their mouths, which descending into their
bowels killed them, the bulk of their body remaining whole, and this was termed
therefore Combustio animae, The burning of their Soul. This last was most in
use, and alone described by most of their Writers.

Malefactors condemned to beheading, were Moses Kotsen. in Sa^r.
of two sorts, 1. The Murderer, 2. Those of any City, who were drawn unto
Idolatry. The manner thereof is at this day in use.

Malefactors strangled, were Moses Kotsens. Ibid.
six. 1. He that smites his father or his Mother. 2. He that steals a soul
of Israel. 3. An Elder which contradicts the Consistory, 4. A false Prophet,
and he that prophesies in the name of an Idol. 5. He that lies with another
man's wife. 6. He that abuses the body of the Priests daughter.

The manner of strangling was thus. The Malefactor was put in dung up to the
loins, a towel being cast about his neck; which two Executioners, one on each
side, plucked to and fro until he was dead.

CHAP. VIII.
Punishments not capital.
THe lesser punishments, not capital, in use among the Hebrews, are chiefly
four. 1. Imprisonment. 2. Restitution. 3. Talio. 4 Scourging.

Imprisonment. Under this are comprehended the Prisons, Stocks, Pillory,
Chains, Fetters and the like: all which sorts of punishment, seeing they
differ very little or nothing at all from those which are now in common use
with us, they need no explication.

The keepers of the prison, if they let any committed unto them escape, were
liable to the same punishment which should have been inflicted on the party
escaped. This is gatherable from that, 1 Kin. 20. 39. Keep this man, if by any
means he be missing, then shall thy life be for his life.

Concerning that Libera Custodia, which Drus. praeter. 2 Timothy 1. 18.
Drusius proves to have been in use among the Romans, I much doubt whether any
such Custom were in use among the Hebrews. That some kind of Prisoners at Rome
did go abroad with a lesser kind of Fetters in the day time to their work, and
so return at night to their prison, has elsewhere been observed by me. And
Senec. Epist. 5. Non in lib. de tranquil. c. 10. quem ^dmodum citatur a Drusio.
Eadem catena and custodiam and militem cop^labat: The same chain tied both the
Prisoner and the Keeper. Observe the unusual significations of these two words,
Custodia a Prisoner, and Miles a Keeper. So that Dr^sius delivered Seneca his
meaning, but not his words, when he repeats them thus: Eadem catena tam reum
quam militem tenet. Observe further, that the Prisoner was tied by the right
arm, and the Keeper by the left, because the right arm is the stronger, and
therefore justly remains free rather to the Keeper, than to the Prisoner.
Hence is that, Sen. de tranquil. c. 10.
Tu forte leviorem in sinistra putas catenam; because the Keeper tied himself
unto the same Chain, not in way of punishment, but voluntarily for the safer
keeping of the Prisoner.

Restitution. This was commanded when goods were unjustly gotten, or wrongfully
detained, Exodus 22. It was Tho. Aquin. secunda secundae. q. 62.
threefold.

Restitution is threefold. Secundum idem, in identitie, when the very same
thing is restored which is wrongfully gotten. Secundum aequale, when there is
so much for so much in quantity restored, the goods unjustly gotten being sold
or lost. Secundum possibile, when restitution is made according to that which a
man has, not being able to satisfy the whole.

Restitution in identity, was, and is principally required. Whence it is, that
if the theft, whether Ox or Sheep, were found alive upon a man, he restored but
double, Exodus 22. 4. but if they were killed or sold, then five Oxen were
restored for an Ox, and four sheep for a sheep, Exodus 22. 1. The Jews were so
precise in this kind, that if they had built an house with a Beam or piece of
Timber unjustly gotten, they would pull down the house, and restore the David
Kimchi.
same beam or piece to the owner. From this the Prophet Habakkuk does not much
dissent: The stone shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber
shall answer it Habbak. 2. 11.

Among the Jews, he ought to be sold that was not of sufficient worth to make
restitution, Exodus 22. 3. Aug. Epist. 54.
And Augustine says of Christians, That he which does not make restituion
according to his ability, never repented. And, Non remittetur peccatum, nisi
restituatur ablatum.

Talio. This was a punishment in the same kind, an eye for an eye, and a tooth
for a tooth, hand for an hand, and foot for foot, Deuteronomy. 19. 21.

Talio is twofold. Talio identitatis, or Pythagorica, which was according to
the Letter of the Law, when the offender was punished with the loss of an eye,
for putting out another eye, etc. Talio similitudinis, or Analogica, which was
when the price of an eye, or some proportionable mulct is paid for an eye put
out, or any other member spoiled.

The Oculum pro oculo, id est, pretium oculi. Targum Jonath. Deuteronomy. 19. 21. It.
R. Solomon. ib.
Hebrews understand Talio similitudinis, that the price of a maim should be
paid: not Talio identitatis, not that the offender should be punished with the
like maim; because to punish like for like in identitie, is in some cases
impossible, as if a blind man put out another eye, or one toothless strike out
another tooth.

In case of bodily maims therefore, the Vid. Munster. Exodus 21.
Hebrew Doctors say, that the party offending was bound to a five-fold
satisfaction: First, for the hurt in the loss of the members. Secondly, for the
damage, in loss of his labor. Thirdly, for his pain or grief arising from the
wound. Fourthly, for the charge in curing it. Fifthly, for the blemish or
deformity thereby occasioned. Munster renders those five thus; Damnum, lesio,
dolor, medicina, confusio. The A Cellius lib. 11. cap. 1.
Romans likewise had a Talio in their Law, but they also gave liberty to the
offender to make choice, whether he would by way of commutation pay a
proportionable mulct, or in identity suffer the like maim in his body?

Scourging. This was twofold; either Virgis, with rods; or flagellis, with
scourges. This latter was more grievous then the former, as appears by that
Ironical speech; Cic. pro Rabirio.
Porcia lex virgas ab omnium civium cor pore amovit, hic misericors flagella
retulit. Both were in use among the Romans, but only the latter among the
Hebrews. This beating or scourging was commanded, Deuteronomy. 25. 2, 3: Where the
number of stripes was limited, which the Judge might not exceed. Forty stripes
shall he cause him to have, and not past. The Jews in many things labored to
seem koly above the Law. For example, where the Lord commanded a Sabbath to be
sanctified, they added their Sabbatulum, that is, they began their Sabbath
about an hour sooner, and ended it about an hour later than the Law required:
Where the Lord forbade them to eat or Thisbites in (...)
drink things sacrificed to Idols, (l) they prohibited all drinking with
Heathens, because it is doubtful whether it were offered to Idols or no. The
Lord commanded them in the time of the Passover to put away leaven out of
their Houses, they would not take the Thisbites in (...)
name into their mouths name into their mouths all the time of that Feast. The
Lord commanded them to abstain from eating Swines flesh; they would not so much
as name it, but in their common talk Elias Thisbit. ibid.
would call a Sow (...) Dabar, achar, another thing. In like manner the Lord
commanded chief Malefactors, which deserved beating, to be punished with forty
stripes; they in their greatest corrections would give but thirty nine. Of the
Jews five times received I forty stripes save one, 2 Cor. 11. 24. For this
purpose the scourge consisted of three thongs, so that at each blow he received
three stripes; and in their greatest correction were given thirteen blows, that
is, forty stripes save one. Whether Talmud. lib. maccoth. ca. 3. in Mischna.
these thongs were made the one of a Bulls hide, the other two of an Asses
hide, or Baalturim. vid. Drus. 2 Cor. 10. 24.
all three of a Calves, the matter is not material, both opinions have their
Authors.

The manner of correcting such, was thus. The Malefactor had both his hands
tied unto a post, one cubit and half high, so that his body bowed upon it. The
Judge shall cause him to bow down, Deuteronomy. 25. 2. This post or stake on which the
Malefactor leaned in time of whipping, was termed (...) Gnammud, Columna, a
Pillar. His Clothes were plucked off from him down-ward unto the thighs, and
Talmud. ibid.
this was done either by renting or tearing of them. The Governors rent Paul
and Silas their clothes, and commanded them to be beaten with rods, Acts 16. 22.

That the Beadle should inflict a great number of stripes proportionable unto
the transgression, this correction was performed in the sight of the Judge. The
Judge shall cause him to be beaten before his face, Deuteronomy. 25. 2. Talmud. ibid.
The chief Judge of the three, during the time of the correction, did either
read or excite that, Deuteronomy. 28. 58, 59. If thou will not keep, and do all the
words of this law, etc. Then the Lord will make thy plagues wonderful, etc. The
second Judge he numbered the stripes, and the third he bade the Beadle smite.
The chief Judge concluded all, saying, Yet he being merciful forgave their
iniquity, etc. Psalm. 78. 38.

Sometimes in notorious offenses, to augment the pains, they tied certain
huckle-bones or plummets of lead, or sharp thorns to the end of the thongs, and
such scourges the Eustathius. Item Athenaeus lib. 4.
Greeks termed (...), Flagra Taxillata. T^olasan. synt. jur. univers. l. 13.
In the Scripture they are termed Scorpions. My Father has chastised you with
rods, but I will correct you with Scorpions, 1 Kings 12. 12.

CHAP. X.
Punishments borrowed from other Nations.
THE punishments borrowed from other Nations, are principally six: 1. Crux, The
death on the Cross. 2. Serra dissectio, the cutting one afunder with a saw. 3.
Damnatio ad bestias, The committing one to fight for his life with wild beasts.
4. (...), the wheel. 5. (...), Drowning one in the sea. 6. (...), Beating one
to death with ^ndgels. The first and the third were merely Roman punishments;
the second was likewise used by the Romans, but whether originally taken from
them is doubtful: the fourth and the last were merely Greek punishments; the
fifth was for the substance in use among the Hebrews, Greeks and Romans, but in
manner of drowning them, they differed. It will be needful to speak somewhat of
all these.

1. Crux. This word is sometimes applied to any tree or stake on which a man is
tortured to death, but most properly it is applied to a frame of wood
consisting of two pieces of timber compacted cross-wise, The first is termed
Crux simplex. The last Crux Compacta. This latter is threefold. 1. Decussato.
2. Commissa. 3. Immissa.

Crux decussata. This was made of two equal pieces of timber obliquely crossing
one the other in the middle, after the manner of a Roman X. and thence it is
called decussata. Hieron. in J^. c. 31.
Decussare est per medium secare. Veluti si duae regulae concurrant ad speciem
literae X. quaefigura est cruc is. This kind of Cross is by the common people
termed Crux Andraeana, Saint Andrewscross, because on such an one he is
reported to have been crucified.

Crux commissa. This was, when a piece of timber erected, was joined in the
middle to a traverse, or over-thwart top, somewhat shorter then the piece
erect, in manner of a Roman T. This is called Crux Antoniana, S. Anthony his
Cross, because he is often painted with such a Cross.

Crux immissa. This was when a short traverse somewhat obliquely crossed the
stake erect, not quite in the middle, as Crux decussata, nor quite on the top
as Crux commissa, but near to the top, on this manner. Lipsius de cruce, lib.
1. cap. 10.
This is thought to have been Crux Christi, the Cross on which our Savior
Christ suffered.

The Ceremonies used by the Romans toward those whom they crucified were
these: First, they Joseph. excid. lib. 5. cap. 3^. Philo contra Flaccum. It.
Live. lib. 1.
scourged them, and sometimes tied them to a Pillar in time of scourging.
Artemidorus is clear in this (...), that is, being tied to the Pillar, he
received many stripes. Plut. Baceh.
Plautus is thought to have alluded to the same. -- Abducite hunc
Intro, atque adstringite ad columnam fortiter.


The ancient Fathers Prudentius; Hieron. Beda vid. lip. de cruce, lib. 2. cap 4.
report that our Savior was whipped thus ad columnam: but the Scripture is
silent, both touching the place, and manner of his whipping, only that he was
whipped is testified. He scourged Jesus, and delivered him to be crucified, Mat.
27. 26.

Secondly, They caused them to bear their own Cross, Platarch. de seranum, vind.
Malefici cum ad supplicium educuntur, quisque suam effert crucem. Thus Christ
bore his own Cross, John 19. 17. To this there is allusion, He that takes not
his Cross, and follows after me, he is not worthy of me, Mat. 10. 38.

Thirdly, That the equity of the proceeding might clea^ly appear, the Eusebius.
Eccles. hist. lib. 5. cap. 1. It. Suet. Domit. cap. 10.
cause of the punishment was written in a table, and so carried before the
condemned person; or else it was proclaimed by a public Cry^^. This cause was
termed by the Romans commonly Titulus, by Tertul. Apol. cap. 2 Sueton in Calig.
some i^ is (...) Elogium. Thus Pilate wrote in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, Jesus
of Nazareth the King of the Jews.

Fourthly, They Artemi^. l. 2. c. 58.
plucked off their clothes from such as were to be crucified. Thus, Christ
suffered naked.

Serra dissectio, A sawing one in sunder. They sawed them from the head
downward. The Sueton. in Calig. cap. 27.
Romans used this kind of punishment, so likewise did the Hebrews. Thus
Manasses is thought to have punished the Prophet Isaiah, and the Apostle to have
alluded unto it, They were sawn a sunder, Heb. 11. 37.

Damnatio ad bestias. Those who were condemned to wild Beasts, are properly
termed Bestiarii. Whether S. Paul did, according to the letter, fight with
beasts at Ephesus, 1 Cor. 15. 22. is much controversed. Theophylact. Anselm.
Some understand by Beasts, Demetrius, and others, that opposed him at Ephesus,
Chrisostum. Ambros. and alii.
others more probably understand the words literally. And this kind of
punishment was commonly exercised against Christians in the Primitive Church,
insomuch that the Heathens imputing the cause of all public calamities unto
the Christians, would call out, Tertullian. Ap. l. cap. 40.
Christianos ad Leones! Let the Christians be haled to Lions: yea, the litteral
interpretation of the words: is a stronger argument that Saint Paul believed
the Resurrection (which is the scope of the text) than to understand the words
of a metaphorical fight, against the enemies of his doctrine.

(...), The Wheel: A wise King brings the wheel over the wicked, Prove. 20.
26. I take the words to imply no more but this, that as the wheel turns
round, so by the wisdom of a King the mischief intended by wicked men, is
brought upon their own head. That hereby should be understood, the grinding of
wicked men under a cart wheel, as the husbandman breaks some sort of grain
under the wheel, is the mere conceit of Expositors on this place; for no
Records make mention of any such punishment in use among the Jews. Among the
Greeks there was a punishment went under this name: (...) Aristoph. in Iren. De
eadem poena loquuntur Demosth. 3. in Aphob. and Suidas.
it was called (...), A Wheel, not because a wheel was brought over the wicked,
but because they bound fast the offender to the spokes of a Wheel, and there
scourged him, to enforce a confession.

(...), Drowning one in the Sea. This was in use among many Nations, but the
manner differed. The Senec. lib. 5. controv. 4. Juvenal Satyr. 8. Modestus,
Digest l 48. ad legem Pomp. de patric. vid. Coel. Rhod. l. 11. c. 21.
Romans they sewed up a Parracide into a leather budget, sewing up together
with him into the same budget, a Serpent, a Cock, and an Ape, and so cast them
all into the Sea. The Athenaeus l. 14.
Grecians when they judged any to this kind of punishment, they wrapped him up in
lead. The Hebrews tied a millstone about his neck. Thus, in respect of the
manner Hier. Mat. 18. 6.
those are to be understood, who say, this kind of punishment was peculiar to
the Jews.

(...). It is rendered by the general name of torturing, Heb. 11. 35. 2 Mac. 6.
19. But the word signifies a special kind of torturing, by beating one with
cudgels unto death. It has its denomination from (...), which signifies a
Drum usually: and hence. Magius in lib. de Equuleo, vid. Dyus. praeter. l. 8.
some have paralleled this torture with that among the Romans termed Equuleus;
as if the person thus tortured, were rackt, and stretched out in manner of a
drum head: but it signifies also a drum stick, and Scholiastes Aristophanis.
(...) scribit esse (...) in Pluto. p. 50.
thence comes the punishment to be termed Tympanismus, that is, a Tabring, or
beating one to death with ^udgels, as if it were with drum-sticks. This is
evident by Eleazar; he came willingly, (...), to this kind of torment, 2 Mat.
6. 19. and in the thirtieth verse, where he gave up the Ghost, there is mention
of his strokes, not of his racking or stretching.

Junius reckons Junius Jer. 29. 26.
another kind of punishment, termed by the Hebrews, (...) Tsinok, which he
would have to be a compound word: doubtless his meaning is that it should be
compounded of (...) Tsi, Navis, a ship, or boat, and (...) Janak, Sugere, to
suck: for he says that thereby is meant a certain punishment, termed Navicula
sugentis, which Plutarch. in Artaxerxe.
Plutarch describes in this manner; That the offender should be enclosed
between two boats, as in a prison, or, as his phrase is (quasi in vagina) as in
a sheath; and, to preserve life in him, milk and honey tempered together was
forcibly put into his mouth, whether he would or no. And hence, from this
sucking in of milk and honey, this punishment has been termed Navicula
sugentis. But the (...) Instrumentum constringens manus. D. Kimch. Jer. 29. 26.
Hebrews say, that Tsinock was nothing else but manacles, or cords, wherewith
prisoners hands were tied. I leave in indifferent to the Reader to follow which
interpretation he please.

THE SIXTH BOOK OF MISCELLANEOUS RITES.
CHAP. I.
Of Circumcision.
THeir Sacraments were two. First, the Passover, of which there has been a
set Chapter. Secondly, Circumcision, of which now. Circumcision, was a cutting
off the foreskin, as a sign and seal of Gods Covenant made with the People of
the Jews. It is called a sign by God in its first institution, Genesis 17. and a
seal by the Apostle, Romans 4. 11. Yea, it is called a sign and a seal, by a
Zebar. Genesis 17.
Doctor of the Jews, more ancient than their Talmud:

It was used (though not as a Sacrament) by many other Nations: Alex. Ab. Alex.
lib. 2. cap. 25. Herodot. l. 2. Diodor. Sicul. lib. 2. c. 1. It. l. 4. c. 3.
by the inhabitans of Colchis, the Aethiopians, the Tragloditae, and the
Egyptians.

In a figurative sense, alluding unto this Sacramental Rite, we read of three
other sorts of Circumcision in the Scripture; so that in all there are four
ned, 1. This of the flesh. 2. Another of the heart. 3. A third of the lips. 4.
And a fourth of the ears. We are to consider it in its proper acception, and
here to obseve: First, the time when it was administered. Secondly, the manner
how. Thirdly, the penalty in case it was omitted.

The time was the eighth day; yea, the eighth day was so precisely observed,
that if it fell on the Sabbath, yet they circumcised the Child; whence rose
that saying among them, Circumcisio pellit Sabbatum, Circumcision drives away
the Sabbath; or the Sabbath gives place to Circumcision. And with this
accords that of our Savior, Ye on the Sabbath day circumcise ^an, John 7.
22. The Jews superstitiously conceiting that each creatures perfection depended
upon the sanctification of one Sabbath day at least, say that God did therefore
enjoin the eighth day, that one Sabbath might first pass over each male, before
he should be partaker of this Sacrament. But more probably we may say, that the
reasons why God would not suffer them to anticipate the eighth day, were, first
to show, that God, in the matter of Salvation, neither was, nor is simply tied
to Sacraments; for then there had been no less cruelty in sorbidding
Circumcision until the eighth day, then there was love in permitting it upon
the eighth. Secondly, because in this time of the Mosaical Pedagogie, there was
a kind of legal uncleanness, in which the creatures were thought to be, as
remaining in their blood, for the first seven days after their birth, Levit.
22. 27. It. 12. 2, 3. Notwithstanding, God thought it not convenient to defer
it longer than eight days, for the comfort of the Parents, which they received
by a mature and seasonable initiation of their children.

The manner how Circumcision was administered, I find thus recorded: Some of
those that were present Paul. Fag. Deuteronomy. 10.
held a Vessel full or dust, into which they did cast the foreskin being cut
off. Again, they prepared in the room, a certain Christo. Cast. in Malac. c. 3.
void chair for Elias; which was done, partly in honor of him, for which
respect also, as often as they fell on any difficult place in Scripture, they
would say Macerus in abbreviaturis. (...)
Veniet Elias, and omnia enodabit; We know that Elias will come, and he will
tell us all things: But chiefly it was done, because they thought Elias to be
present there in spirit, whose bodily coming they did, and do daily expect.
These ceremonies are merely Jewish, practiced by the latter Jews, but utterly
unknown in our Savior Christ his time, and, as it appears by the Samaritan
woman her speech, that proverbial saying, applied now unto Elias, was of old
applied to Christ, John 4. 25. Thirdly, he which supplied the place of the
Witness, or as we phrase it, of the Godfather, (...) Elias Thisb. in (...)
held the Child in his arms whiles it was Circumcised: this Godfather they
called Baal Berith, and Sandak; that is, the Master of the Covenant. Uriah the
Priest. and Zachariah the son of Jeberechiah, are Jun. and Trim. Es. 8. 2.
thought to have been Godfathers at the Circumcision of Maher-shalad-hash-baz,
Esaias 8. 2. and from them the custom of having Godfathers in Baptism, to have
taken its original. Fourthly, the parents named the Child, and in Zacharies
times, it seems that in the naming of the Infant, they had respect to some
name of his Ancestors. They said unto her, there is none of thy kindred that is
named with this name, Luke 1. 61. Other Nations had their set days also after
the birth, for the naming of their Children. Plutarch. prob. 102. Macrob. Stat.
l. 1. c. 16.
The Romans gave names to their male-children on the ninth day, to the female
on the eighth. The Coel. Rhodig.
Athenians gave names on the tenth. Arist. hist. ^nim. lib. 7. c. 12. Tertul.
de Idol cap. 16.
Others on the seventh. These 22. cap 12
days Tertullian calls Nominalia. The Graecians besides the tenth day, on
which they named the Child, they observed also the fifth, Scholiast. Aristoth.
in Lusistrat. p. 886. It. Suidas in (...),
on which day the Midwives took the Child, and ran about a fire made for that
purpose, using that Ceremony as a purification of themselves and the Child: on
this day the Neighbors also sent it gifts, or small tokens, Munera natalitia;
Stukius de co^iv. l. 1. c. 16.
from which custom that amongst Christians, of the Godfathers sending gifts to
the baptized Infant, is thought to have flown. But to return again to the Rites
of the Jews. After the Child had been circumcised, the Father said, (...) Moses
Kotsen. in tractat. Circumcis. fol. ^15.
Blessed be our Lord God, who has sanctified us with his precepts, and has
commanded us, that we should cause this Child to enter into the Covenant of
Abraham. After this, the whole Church or company presently replied in this
manner, (...) Moses ^en. ibid.
As thou have made him to enter into the Covenant, so make him also to enter
into the Law, into Matrimony, and into good works.

The penalty for the omission of Circumcision runs in this form; That soul
shall be cut off from his people, Genesis 17. 14. I understand the penalty to be
pronounced against such an omssion, which proceeded either from contempt or
wilful neglect. In this case the question is, what is meant by this phrase, His
soul shall be cut off from the people. Secondly, who ought thus to be punished?
whether the child, or the parents, and such who supply the place of parents?
For the first, besides Gods secret action in punishing such Delinquents;
methinks there is a rule of direction for the Church, how to proceed against
such in her Discipline: If any understand here, by cutting off such a man's soul
from his people, the sentence of excommunication, or casting him out of the
Synagogue, I shall not oppose it, though I rather incline to those, who
understand hereby a bodily death inflicted upon such an offender, in which
sense the phrase is taken, Exodus 31. 14. Whosoever does any work on the
Sabbath, that soul shall be cut off from among his people. And it is very
remarkable, that when Moses his child was uncircumcised, the Lord sought to
kill Moses: which as it intimates the punishment of this fault to be a bodily
death, so it clearly evinceth, that not the child till he comes to years of
discretion, but the parents were liable to the punishment. The opinion of the
Rabbines concerning this latter point, is thus delivered: Moses Kots. tract.
circumcis. fol. 114. col. 4.
If the Father circumcise him not, then the Judges are commanded to circumcise
him, and if it be unknown to the Judges, and they circumcise him not, when he
is waxen great, he is bound to circumcise himself, and every day that passes
over him, after he is waxen great, and he circumciseth not himself, lo he
breaks the Commandment.

Here it may be demanded, how it is possible for a man, after once he has been
marked with the sign of Circumcision, to blot out that character, and become
uncircumcised? for thus some Jews, for fear of Antiochus, made themselves
uncircumcised, 1 Mac. 1. 16. Others for shame, after they were gained to the
knowledge of Christ, and to the entertainment of the Christian says,
uncircumcised themselves, 1 Cor. 7. 18. Ephiphan lib. de men's. and. pond. p.
415. It. Celsus l. 7. c. 25.
The answer is, that this was done by drawing up the foreskin with a Chyrurgion
his instrument; and unto this the Apostle in the fore-quoted place alludeth,
(...) Ne attrahat praeputium. This wicked invention is ascribed unto Esau, as
the first Author and practicer thereof.

CHAP. II.
Of their first fruits, and their Firstlings, or Firstborn.
THe use and end of their first fruits, was that the after-fruits might be
consecrated in them. To this purpose they were enjoined to offer the
first fruits of their trees, which served for food, Levit. 19. 23, 24. In which
this order was observed; the three first years after the tree had been planted,
the fruits were counted uncircumcised and unclean: it was unlawful to eat them,
sell them, or make any benefit of them: on the fourth year, they were accounted
holy, that is, either (...) Sacerdos ea comedebat. Aben. Ezra in hunc lecum.
latter is the common opinion of the Hebrews. After the fourth year, they
returned to the use of the owner: we may call these (...), simply the
first fruits.

Secondly, they were enjoined to pay yearly the first fruits of every years
increase, and these we may call (...), and of them there were many sorts.
First, first fruits in the sheaf, Lev. 23. 10. Secondly, first fruits in two
wave-loaves, Levit. 23. 17. These two bounded their harvest, that in the sheaf
was offered in the beginning of harvest, upon the fifteenth of Nisan, the other
of the loaves at the end, upon their Pentecost: (...) Vzziel. Numb. 15. 20.
and Levit. 23. they are both called (...) Thenuphoth, that is,
shake-offerings. Thirdly, there was a first of the dough, Number. 15. 20. namely,
a (c) four and twentieth part thereef, given unto the Priests: which kind of
offering was observed, even when they were returned out of Babylon, Nehem. 10.
37. Unto this St. Paul has reference, Romans 11. 16. If the first fruits be
holy, the lump is also holy. Fourthly, they were to pay unto the Priests the
first fruits of the threshing-floor, Numb. 15. 20. These two last are called
(...) Therumoth, that is, heave offerings: this the heave offering of the
threshing floor; the other the heave-offerings of the dough, Numb. 15. 20.
Under the name of first fruits, commonly Authors treat of no other but this
last, and wholly omit all the former sorts. Before we proceed to the explaining
of the last, note with me the difference of these two words, Thenuphoth, and
Therumoth: both signify shake-offerings, heave-offerings, or wave-offerings,
but with this difference; P. Fagius in Pentat.
the Therumoth was by a waving of elevation, lifting the oblation upward and
downward, to signify, that God was Lord both of Heaven and Earth. The
Thenuphoth was by a waving of agitation, waving it to and fro, from the right
hand to the left, from the East to the West, from the North to the South: by
which kind of agitation, they acknowledged God to be Lord of the whole world.
Now, that we may know what these first fruits of the threshing floor were, the
Rabbis, and others following them, distinguish them into two sorts: the first
of these, was first fruits of seven things only: 1 Wheat. 2 Barley. 3 Grapes. 4
Figs, 5 Pomegranates. 6 Olives. 7 Dates. For all which the Promised Land is
commended, Deuteronomy. 8. 8. R. Solom. Deuteronomy. 26. 2 It. Moses Kotsens. fol. 201. Col.
4.
These the Talmudists term (...) Biccurim; and when they treat of first fruits,
they treat of them under this name, and understand by the name of Biccurim no
other. These, they say, are the first fruits, which the people are so often in
the Law commanded to bring up unto the Sanctuary, at the Feast of Pentecost,
which was the end and closure of their harvest, as was signified both by this
oblation, and likewise by that of the two wave loaves, Lev. 23. 17.

The second was paid of Corn, Wine, Oil, and the Fleece, Deuteronomy. 18. 4. Numb. 18.
12. yea, of all things else that the earth brought forth for man's food. Thus
their Doctors are to be understood, where they say, Moses Egypt. in Jud. part.
3. tract. de Therumoth, cap. 2.
Quicquid eduliorum ex terra incrementum capit, obnoxium est primitiis,
Therumae, and decimis. This they call, (...) Theruma, an heave offering: the
Greek renders it, (...), A separation, because this was a consecration, or
setting apart of the Lords portion. In allusion unto this, I take S. Paul to
have termed himself (...), separated unto the Gospel, Romans 1. 1. (...), Aaron
shall separate the Levites, so the Greek renders it, but the Original is, Aaron
shall wave the Levites, Numb. 8. 11. Again, (...) Separate me Barnabas and
Saul, Acts 13. 2. Drusius delivers another reason, as has been said in the
Chapter of the Pharisees. But to proceed: the Hebrews called this second
payment, not only Theruma, simply, but sometimes (...).
Theruma gedola, the great heave offering, in comparison of that Tithe which
the Levites paid unto the Priests: for that was termed Theruma magnasher, the
heave offering of the Tithe, Numb. 18. 26. which though it were one of ten, in
respect of that portion which the Levites received; yet it was but one of an
hundred, in respect of the Husbandmans stock, who paid the Levites: and thus
was it a great deal less then the great heave offering, as will presently
appear. This (the Hebrews say) the owners were not bound to bring up to
Jerusalem.

The Law prescribed no set quantity to be paid, either in the Biccurim, or in
the Theruma; but, by tradition, they were taught to pay at least the sixtieth
part in both, even in those seven things, also paid under the name of Biccurim,
or first fruits, as well as in their heave offering termed Theruma, or Theruma
gedola.

Thus the Talmudists do distinguish the Biccurim from the Theruma gedola: but
in my opinion the Biccurim may be contained under Theruma gedola; and in truth,
both of them are nothing else but the heave offering of the floor, formerly
mentioned out of Number. 15. 20. My reasons are these. 1. Scripture gives no such
leave to keep any part of their first fruits at home; if that could be proved,
the distinction were warrantable. 2. Scripture does not limit first fruits unto
those seven kinds, which alone go under the name of Biccurim. 3. Themselves
confound both members; for in their Biccurim, they say, they paid, 1 Wheat. 2.
Barley: In their Theruma, they say, they paid Corn; as if under Corn, Wheat and
Barley were not contained. Some may say, they paid their Biccurim in the Ear,
while the harvest was yet standing, and their Theruma in Wheat and Barley ready
threshed and winnowed. My reasons why it cannot be so, are these: 1. Because
then they should pay twice a sixtieth part in their corn. 2. Because the corn
offered in the sheaf was but a little quantity, and it was offered not at
their. Pentecost when their harvest ended, but at their Passover when their
harvest began, Levit. 23. 10. Whereas their Biccurim, or first fruits, were
always offered at their Pentecost.

But omitting further proofs, I proceed to show the ground, why in this heave
offering of the floor, at least a sixtieth part was prescribed: it is grounded
upon that of the Prophet Ezekiel. This is the oblation that ye shall offer, the
sixth part of an Ephah out of an Homer, Ezekiel 45. 13. that is, the sixtieth part
of the whole, because an Homer contains ten Ephahs. Hence they took that
distinction of these offerings. Solom. Iarchi. Deuteronomy. 18. 4. Item Hieronym. in
Ezekiel. 45 fol. 260.
Some say they gave the fortieth part of their increase: this because it was
the greatest quantity given in this kind of oblations, they termed (...)
Theruma gna^in ragna.
Theruma oculi boni, The oblation of a fair eye: others (though they were not
so liberal as the former, yet they might not be reputed niggardly) gave a
fiftieth part, and this they termed (...) Theruma benonith.
Theruma mediana, The oblation of a middle eye: others, whom they reputed
sordid, gave just a sixtieth part, less then which they could not give, this
they termed (...) Theruma gnajia ragna.
Theruma oculi mali, The oblation of an evil eye: so that the payment of these
was bounded by the tradition of the Elders, between the sixtieth and the
fortieth part: but the Epiphan contr. Pharis. page 11.
Pharisees, that they might be holy above others, made their bounds the
fiftieth and the thirtieth part; so that he was reputed sordid with them that
paid the fiftieth part; and none liberal except he paid the thirtieth. The
manner how these first fruits termed Biccurim were paid, is at large set down,
Deuteronomy. 26. But in time of the Prophets other Ceremonies seem to have been
received, of which the Hebrew Doctors say thus: Maimon. in Buccurim. cap. 4.
sect. 16.
When they carried up their first fruits, all the Cities that were in a County
gathered together to the chief City of the County to the end that they might
not go up alone; for it is said, In the multitude of people is the Kings
honor, Prove. 14. 28. And they came and lodged all night in the streets of the
City, and went not into houses, for fear of pollution: and in the morning the
Governor said, Arise, and let us go up to Sion, the City of the Lord our God.
And before them went a Bull which had his horns covered with Gold, and an Olive
Garland on his head, to signify the first fruits of the seven kinds of fruits.
There was likewise a pipe struck up before them, until they came near to
Jerusalem, and all the way as they went, they sang, I rejoiced in them that
said unto me, we will go into the house of the Lord, etc. Psalm. 122. Unto this,
and other like manner of solemn Assemblies the Prophet has reference, saying,
Ye shall have a song as in a night when an holy solemnity is kept, and gladness
of heart, as when one goes with a pipe to come unto the mountain of the Lord,
Esaias 30. 29.

The firstling, or first born of man and beast, the Lord challenged as his own,
Exodus 13. The ground of this Law was, because God smote all the firstborn in
Egypt from man to beast, but spared the Israelites; for a perpetual memory of
which benefit, he commanded them to sanctify all their firstborn male, unto
him. Now the firstborn men, and of unclean beasts, were redeemed for five
silver shekels of the sanctuary, paid unto the Priests for each of them, Number.
18. 15, 16. Unto this S. Peter alludeth, saying, We are not redeemed with
corruptible things, as silver and gold, 1 Pet. 1. 18. The firstlings of clean
beasts ought to be sacrificed, their blood to be sprinkled on the Altar, their
fat to be burnt for a burnt-offering, and their flesh to return to the Priests.

Observe how God would be honored by the first-lings of men and cattle; by the
first fruits of trees, and of the earth, in the sheaf, in the threshing floor,
in the dough, in the loaves: All which teach us to consecrate the first and
prime of our years unto the Lord.

CHAP. III.
Of Tithes.
WE are here to enquire: First, what things in general were titheable:
Secondly, how many kinds of Tithes there were: Thirdly, the time when each sort
of tithe began to be titheable.

First, their yearly increase was either Cattle, fruits of the trees, or fruits
of the land; of Vid. Sixtin. Amama de decimis.
all these they paid tithes, even to mint, anise, and cumine, These things
they ought not to leave undone, Mat. 23. 23.

Secondly, the sorts of tithes paid out of the fruits, both of the trees and
the land, by the Husbandman, were two, paid in this manner: When the Harvest
had been ended, and all gathered, then the Husbandman laid aside his great
Theruma, otherwise called the first fruits of his threshing floor, of which it
has been spoken in the Chapter of first fruits. This being done, then out of
the remainder he paid a tenth part unto the Levites, and this they termed (...)
Magnasher rischon, the first tithe, Tob. 1. 7. This was always paid in kind,
and as it seems to me, it was not brought up to Jerusalem by the husbandman,
Decime primae necessarii aut a celono ipso aut ejus vicario Hieros^lymas
deportandae erant. Sixtin Amama de decimis.
others think otherwise) but paid unto the Levites in the several Cities of
tillage, Neh. 10. 37. out of this first tithe the Levites paid a tenth portion
unto the Priests; this they termed (...)
Magnasher min hammagnasher, the tithe of the Tithes, Neh. 10. 38. and Decima
sanctitatum, the tithe of holy things, 2. Chron. 31 6. this the Levites brought
up to the house of God, Neh. 10. 38. When the Levites had paid this tenth
portion unto the Priests, then the Levites and their Families might eat the
remainder of the first tithe in any place, even out of Jerusalem, Number. 18. 31.

This first tithe being paid, the Husbandman paid out of that which remained a
second tithe; this the Husbandman might pay in kind if he pleased, or if he
would, he might by way of commutation pay the worth thereof in Money; but when
he paid in Money, he added a fifth part; so that when in kind was ten in the
hundred, that changed into Money, was twelve in the hundred. This the
Husbandman brought up unto Jerusalem, and made a kind of Love-feast therewith,
unto which he invited the Priests and Levites, only every third year he carried
it not to Jerusalem, but spent it at home within his own gates, upon the
Levites, the Fatherless, the Widows, and the Poor, Deuteronomy. 14. 18. Moses Kotsen.
tract. de decima secundo. f. 199.
They reckoned their third year from the Sabbatical year, on which the Land
rested: So that the first and second Tithe was paid by the Husbandman the
first, second, fourth, and fifth years after the Sabbatical year: but upon the
third and sixth years only, the first Tithe was paid to the Levites, and the
the second was spent at home. Hence in respect of the kinds, this is called
(...)
Magnasher scheni, the second tithe, Tobit. 1. 7. in respect it was paid to the
poor every third year: it is called (...)
Magnasher gnani, (...), the poor man's tithe, and (...)
Magnasher sch^hi, the third tithe, Tob. 1. 1. On those years on which it was
carried up to Jerusalem, it ought of necessity to be eaten within the Court of
the Temple, Deuteronomy. 14. 26, and by the third tithe, we are to understand the
poor man's tithe on the third year, which year is termed an year of tithes,
Deuteronomy. 26. 12.

They likewise tithed their Cattle. Of their bullocks, and their sheep, and all
that passed under the rod, the tenth was holy to the Lord, Lev. 27 32. Some
Expositors understand by this phrase of passing under the rod, that all Cattle
are titheable which live under the custody of a keeper, as if there were
allusion to the Shepherds staff, or keepers rod, which they use in keeping
their Cattle. The Hebrews more probably understand hereby, the manner of their
decimation or tithing their Cattle, which was as follows. Solomon Iarchi,
Lev. 27. 32. and Mai^on. de primogen. c. 7. Sect. 1. 5.
He that has Lambs (or Bullocks) thus separateth his tenth, he gathers all
his Lambs, and all his Bullocks into a fold, to which he makes a little door,
that two cannot go forth together; their dams are placed without the door, to
the end, that the Lambs hearing them bleating, might go forth one after another
in order. Then one begins to number with his rod, one, two, three, etc. and
the tenth which comes forth, whether it be male or female, perfect, or
blemished, he marketh it with a red mark, saying, this is for tithe. At this
day the Jews, though they are not in their own Country, neither have any
Levitical Priesthood, yet those who will be reputed religious among them, do
distribute in lieu of tithes, the tenth of their increase unto the poor, being
persuaded that God does bless their estates the more: for their usual Proverb
is, (...)
Thregnasher, bis^hbil sche thegnasher; that is, Pay tithes, that thou may
be rich.

The time of the year from which they reckoned tithes, was different. For
Talmud. tract. de novo anno ad initium Buxtorf. Synag. Jud. c. 12.
beasts they counted the year from Elul to Elul, that is, from August to
August, Moses Kotsen. in prae^p. affirm. 136.
for Gram, Pulse, and Herbs from Tisri to Tisri, that is, from September to
September: for the fruit of Trees, from Schebat, to Schebat, that is, from
January to January.

In this Synopsis following (which Sixtinus Amama has taken out of Scaliger)
the manner of Isreal's tithing is set down.

The Husbandman had growing 6000 Bushels in one year. 100 Bushels was the least
that could be paid by the Husbandman to the Priests for the first fruits of the
threshing floor. 5900 Bushels remained to the Husbandman, out of which he paid
two Tithes. 590 Bushels were the first Tithe to the Levites. 59 Bushels the
Levites paid the Priests, which was called the Tithe of the Tithes. 5310
Bushels remained to the Husbandman, out of which he paid his second tithe. 531
Bushels were the second Tithe. 4779 Bushels remained to the Husbandman as his
own, all being paid. 1121 Bushels are the sum of both Tithes joined together,
which is above a sixth part of the whole, namely nineteen out of an hundred.

We are to know moreover, that through the corruption of the times, in the time
of Hezekiah's reign, Tithes began generally to be neglected, insomuch that then
Overseers were appointed to look to the true payment thereof, 2 Chapter 31. 13.
Notwithstanding partly through the negligence of the Overseers, partly through
the covetousness of the people, about one hundred thirty years before our
Saviors Incarnation, corruption so prevailed, that the people in a manner
neglected all tithes, yea none or very few paid either their first, second, or
poor man's tithe, only they paid the great heave offering. Justly for this
reason (says (h) Moses Kotsensis) in the days of John the (...) Moses Kotsen.
(...) 199. col. 3.
Priest, who succeeded Simeon the just, (I take it he means Johannes
Hyrcanus) their great Court, termed their Sanhedrim, made a Decree, that more
faithful Overseers should be appointed for the Tithes. At this time many things
became questionable, whether they were tithable or no; whence the high Court of
their Sanhedrim decreed, that in the things doubtful (which they termed (...)
Demai) Moses Kotsen. ibid.
though they paid neither first, nor poor man's tithe, yet they paid a second
tithe, and a small heave offering; namely, (...) one part of an hundred: Mint,
Anise and Cummine, seems to have been of these doubtful things; in which,
though their decree of the Sanhedrim required but one in the hundred, yet the
Pharisees would pay a just tenth, Mat. 23. 23. and hence it is that they
boasted, They gave tithes of all that they possessed, Luke 18. 12. In which
they outstripped the other Jews, who in these payments took the liberty granted
them by the Sanhedrim.

CHAP. IV.
Of their Marriages.
IN this Chapter of their Marriages, we are to consider: First, the distinction
of their wives. Secondly, the manner of their betrothings. Thirdly, the rites
and ceremonies of their Marriage. Lastly the form of their Divorce. The
Patriarchs in the Old Testament had many of them, two sorts of Wives: both of
them were reputed lawful, and true wives, and therefore the Children of both
were accounted legitimate. The Hebrews commonly called the one (...) Naschim,
Primary-wives, Married with nuptial Ceremonies and Rites requisite. Some derive
the word from (...) Nascha-Oblitus fuit, quasi Obliviosae dictae, because for
the most part, women's memory is not so strong as men's: but they think not
amiss, who say that women are so called from oblivion, or forgetfulness,
because the Fathers family is forgotten, and in a manner extinct in their
daughters when they are married. Hence proceeds that common saying of the
Hebrews, (...) Ab^n Ezra. Number. 1 2.
Familia matris non vocatur familia: and, for the contrary reason, a male child
is called (...) Zacar, from his memory, because the memory of the Father is
preserved in the Eandem prolis masculae rationem habitam apud Grecos testatur
^der. (...).
Son, according to that speech of Absalom, I have no Son to keep my name in
remembrance, 2 Samuel 18. 18.

The other sort of Wives they call (...) Vx^r sec^ndaria vo^em compositam esse
aiunt ex (...) Dividere and (...) uxor, quasi (...) divisa and di^^dia.
Pillagsehim, secondary wives, or half wives; the English translates them
Concubines, and that not unfitly, for sometimes the Hebrew word it self
denotes an infamous Strumpet, or common Harlet.

The differences between these Concubines, and the chief or primary wives, are
many. 1. A disparity in their authority, or household government: the Wife was
as Mistress, the Concubine as an handmaid or servant. She had only Justori, a
true and lawful right unto the marriage bed, as the chief Wife had; otherwise
she was in all respects inferior. And this appears in the History of Sarah
and Hagar. Secondly, the betrothiing was different: the chief Wife at her
Espousals received from her Husband certain Gifts and Tokens, as Pledges and
Ceremonies of the Contract. Thus Abraham's steward, who is probably thought to
be Eliezer, (of whom we read, Genesis 15. 2.) gave in Isaacs name unto Rebecca,
jewels of silver* and jewels of gold, and raiment, Genesis 24. 55. This custom was
in use also among the Grecians, who calls these gifts (...). D. Kimchi 2 Samuel
5. 13.
Moreover (...). Hom. Iliad. 6. vid. etiam Suid. in (...).
the chief Wife likewise received from her husband a bill of writing, or
matrimonial letters, whereas the Concubines received neither such gifts, nor
such letters. Thirdly, only the children of the chief wife succeeded the father
in his inheritance; the children of the Cencubines received gifts or legacies:
Abraham gave all his goods to Isaac, but unto the sons of the Concubines which
Abraham had, Abraham gave gifts, Genesis 25. 5, 6. And here, by the way, we may
take notice, that the first born by right of primogeniture, received a double
portion of his fathers goods: the father shall give him a double portion of all
that he has, for he is the first of his strength, Deuteronomy. 21. 17. Unto this
custom the Prophet Elisha's speech alludeth, when he prays Elijah, that his
spirit might be double upon him, 2 King. 1. 9. that is, that he might have a
double portion of his spirit, in comparison of the other Prophets, or rather
the sons of the Prophets, amongst whom he obtained the place of an elder
Brother, and therefore prays for the right of primogeniture: so that we are
not to understand him, as if he did ambitiously desire a greater measure of the
spirit than rested upon his Master, but that he desired to excel the other
remaining Prophets, unto whom afterward he became a father. The (...) partem
duorum.
Hebr. phrase is in both places the same. Secondly, in their betrothing we are
to consider, 1. The distance of time between the espousals, and the
confirmation of their marriage, which some have conceited to have been a full
year, at least ten months; and this they observe from Rebecca, her brother and
mothers answer unto Abraham's servant, desiring that the Maid might not depart
presently, but remain after the Espousals at least ten days, Genesis 24. 55. Which
Text they interpret O^keles and R. Solomon.
ten months, understanding thereby that which elsewhere is phrased (...) Duwum
annorum dierum.
a year of days, Gen 41. 1. But if we should yield this interpretation
(although our English at least ten days, is more agreeable unto the Septuag^^t
and the Original) yet it follows not, that this time was craved for the
fulfilling of any prescribed distance between the Espousals and the Marriage,
but rather it implies the tender affection of the mother toward her daughter,
as being loath so suddenly to part with her. Notwithstanding, it is not
unlikely, that there was a competent distance of time between the first
affiancing, and the confirmation of the marriage, though not prescribed, or
limited to any set number of days, weeks, or months. The second thing
considerable in their betrothing, is to enquire the manner of their
contracting, which might be done in Israel three ways. First, (...) Moses
Kotsen. fol. 124.
By piece of money. Secondly, By writing. Thirdly, By copulation, and all these
in the presence of witnesses. By a piece of money, though it were but a
farthing, or the worth thereof, at which time the man used this, or the like
form of words; (...) Maimon in Ischoth, c. 3.. 1.
Lo thou art betrothed unto me: and he gave her the money before witnesses. By
bill, and then he wrote the like form of words; Be thou betrothed unto me,
which he gave her before witnesses; and it was written with her name in it,
else it was no betrothing. By copulation, and then he said likewise, Lo thou
shall be betrothed unto me by copulation, and so he was united unto her before
two witnesses, after which copulation she was his betrothed wife. If he lay
with her by way of fornication, and not by the name of betrothing; or if it
were by themselves, without the fore-acquainting of Witnesses, it was no
betrothing: however he might not lie with her the second time, before the
Marriage was accomplished. And though the betrothing might be any of these
three ways, yet usually it was by a piece of Money; and if they would, they
might do it by writing, but betrothing by copulation was forbidden by the wise
men of Israel, and who so did it was chastised with rods: howbeit the
betrothing stood in force. These solemnities in betrothing were performed by
the man and woman under a Tent or Canopy made for the purpose, called in their
language (...) Elias Thisbit.
Chuppa, a Tabernacle or Tent: to this the Psalmist alludeth, Psalm. 19. 4, 5.
In them has ^e set a Tabernacle for the Sun, which as a Bridegroom coming out
of his Chamber rejoices as a strong man to run a Race.

Thirdly, the Rites and Ceremonies of their Marriage were performed in the
assembly of ten men at least, with blessings and thanksgiving unto God, whence
house it self was called (...)
Beth hillulah, the House of praise, and their marriage song (...)
Hillulim, praises. The Bridegrooms intimate friends which accompanied him and
sung this Epithalamium or marriage song, were termed (...), Children of the
Bride-chamber, Mat. 9. 15. Such I conceive those thirty companions to have been
which Sampson associated to himself, Jud. 14. 11. The form of this praise or
blessing is at large described by Genebrard, and the sum thereof is this: The
chief of these companions takes a cup, and blesses it, saying, Blessed art
thou, O Lord our God, the King of the world, which createst the fruit of the
vine: afterward then he says, blessed be the Lord our God the King of the
world, who has created man after his own Image, according to the image of his
own likeness, and has thereby prepared unto himself an everlasting building,
blessed be thou, O Lord, who have created him. Then follows again, Blessed
art thou, O Lord our God, who have created joy and gladness, the Bridegroom and
the Bride, charity and brotherly love, rejoicing, and pleasure, peace and
society: I beseech thee, O Lord, let there suddenly be heard in the Cities of
Judah, and the streets of Jerusalem, the voice of joy and gladness, the voice
of the Bridegroom and the Bride: the voice of ex^ltation in the Bride-chamber
is sweeter than any feast: and children sweeter then the sweetness of a song:
and this being ended, he drinks to the married couple.

This custom of praising God at such times was not needless or superfluous, for
the fruit of the womb was expected as a special blessing from God, and so
acknowledged by them in that saying, that four keys were in the hand of him who
was the Lord of the whole World, which were committed neither to Angel nor
Seraphim; namely (...) Targum Hier. Genesis 30. 21.
Clavis pluviae, clavis cibationis, clavis sepulchrorum, and clavis
sterilitatis. Concerning the key of Rain, thus speaks the Scripture, The Lord
will open to thee his good treasure, Deuteronomy. 28. Concerning the key of food, thou
openest thy hands Psalm. 145. Concerning the key of the grave, when I shall open
your sepulchers, Ezeck. 37. Concerning the key of barrenness, God remembered
Rachel, and opened her womb, Genesis 30. Whereby is intimated, that these four
things God has reserved in his own hand and custody: namely, Rain, Food, the
raising of our Bodies, and the procreation of children.

The time of the marriage feast appears clearly to have been usually Vid.
Thisbit. in (...)
seven days. Sampson continued his feast seven days, Jud. 14. 10, 11. And of
this seven days feast, August. quest. super Genesis 88.
Divines do understand that speech of Labans unto Jacob, concerning Leah,
fulfill her week, and we will also give thee this, Genesis 29. 27. in which
speech, it is thought that Laban did desire Jacob, not to reject and turn away
Leah, but to confirm the present marriage, by fulfilling the usual days of her
marriage feast. From this Custom, together with the practice of Joseph,
mourning seven days for his father, Genesis 50. 10. arose that usual proverb among
the Jews, Septem ad convivium, Septem ad luctum. The chief governor of the
feast was called (...)
Baal mischte; which name is fitly expressed by being called the (...).
ruler of the feast, Joh. 2. 9. The modern Jews in Italy, when they invite any
to a marriage feast, use this form of words, Such a one, or such a one
entreats you to credit his daughters marriage with your presence at the
feast, etc. Then he that is invited replieth, Mazal tob: (...) Stuk^us de
conviv. l. 2. c. 3.
which some interpret to be the wishing of good luck in general; but I rather
think, that hereby was wished to the married parties, a special blessing in the
procreation of children: whence the wedding ring, given unto the Bride-wife had
Munster. Genesis 30.
this inscription or posie, Mazal tob; and the Hebrews called the Planet
Jupiter, Mazal, whose influence they thought to be of great efficacy or force
for generation: but in truth, Mazal signifies any other Planet or Star in the
Heaven, according to that Hebrew Proverb, Non est tibi ulla herba inferias ^ui
non sit Mazal inf^rmament^, and ferit
There is no herb in the earth, which has not a Mazal or Star in the Firmament
answering it, and striking it, saying, grow. Now tob signifies good; so that
the phrase sounds as much as, be it done in a good hour, or under a good
Planet. ipsam (...) Mazal, and dicit ei, Cresce.


At the time of the marriage also, the man gave his wife a dowry bill, which
the Scrivener wrote, and the Bridegroom paid for, whereby he endowed his
Spouse, if she were a Virgin, with 200 Deniers, (that is fifty shekels) and if
she had been married before, with an hundred Deniers, that is, twenty five
shekels, and this was called the root or principal of the dowry: the dowry
might not be less, but more, so much as he would, though it were to a talent of
gold. There is mention of a contract between Tobias and Sarah, and that was
performed, not by a Scrivener, but by Raguel, the woman's father; where we may
observe, that before the writing of this bill there was a giving of the woman
unto her husband. The form of words there used is, Behold, take her after the
law of Moses, Tobit. 7. 14. A Copy of this Dowry bill is taken by Bertram out
of the Babylon Talmud. The words thereof are thus: Talmud. Bab. vid. Buxtorf.
Grammati^. Chald. p. 389.
Upon the sixth day of the week, the fourth of the month Sivan, in the year
five thousand two hundred fifty four of the Creation of the World, according to
the computation which we use here at Massilia, a City, which is situate near
the Seashore, the Bridegreom Rabbi Moses, the son of Rabbi Jehuda, said unto
the Bridewife Clarona, the daughter of Rabbi David, the son of Rabbi Moses, a
Citizen of Lisbon; Be unto me a wife according to the law of Moses and Israel;
and I according to the word of God, will worship, honor, maintain, and govern
thee according to the manner of the husbands among the Jews, which do worship,
honor, maintain, and govern their wives faithfully. I also do bestow upon thee
the dowry of thy Virginity, 200 Deniers in silver, which belong unto thee by
the law: and moreover, thy food, thy apparel, and sufficient necessaries; as
likewise the knowledge of thee, according to the custom of all the earth. Thus
Clarona the Virgin rested and became a wife to Rabbi Moses, the son of Jehuda,
the Bridegroom.

After the Marriage was finished, then the wife might challenge from her
Husband three things as debt. 1. Food. 2. Apparel. 3. Cohabitation, or the
right of the bed; which they note from Exodus 21. 10. where it is said, if he
take him another wife, her food, her raiment, and her duty of marriage shall he
not diminish. And unto this the Apostle alludeth, calling it, Due benevolence,
1 Cor. 7. 3.

The Wife, when she was first presented unto her Husband, covered her Head with
a Veil, in token of subjection. Rebecca took a Veil, and covered her self,
(Genesis 24. 65) and for this cause (namely in sign of subjection) ought the woman
to have power on her head, 1 Cor. 11. 10. Where by Power the Apostle
understands a veil. Do any ask the question, why he should denote this Veil
by the name of Power, especially seeing it was in token of subjection? The
Apostle being an Hebrew of the Hebrews, might have respect to the Hebrew word
(z) Radid, signifying a Veil, which (...) V^lamen mulie^. a verbo (...)
Subjecit.
comes from the root Radad, to bear Rule and Authority, and so might use the
Greek word, signifying (...)
power in the same sense as the Hebrews did. And, in truth, what was this
subjection to the Husband but a kind of power and protection derived unto the
Wife, in comparison of her former state, being a Virgin? and therefore in case
her Husband was jealous of her, amongst other tokens of sorrow, she was
commanded to stand at her trial with her head uncovered, Numb. 5. 18.
intimating thereby, that if she could not then clear herself, she was from
thence forvvard deprived of all power, which heretofore she enjoyed by the
means of her Husband.

After the marriage was finished, sometimes there (...) Greece (...)
was permitted a Bill of Divorce: this the Hebrews called (...) Give Rad^d.
(...) interpret^r ver^a M^. in So^a. c. 3. sect (...).
Sepher Kerithuth, a Bill of cutting off, because the woman is by this means
cut off from he* Husbands family. M^. de di vo^t c. 1. sect. 1.
Ten things were thought requisite as the Root and foundation of a divorce. 1.
That a man put her not away but of his own will. 2. That he put her away by
writing, not by any other thing. 3. That the matter of the writing be to
divorce her and put her away, out of her possession. 4. That the matter of that
divorcement be between him and her. 5. That it be written by her name. 6. That
there be no action wanting, after the writing hereof, save the delivery of it
unto her. 7. That he give it unto her. 8. That he gave it her before Witnesses.
9. That he give it her by the law of divorces. 10. That it be the husband or
his deputy that delivers it unto her. The form or Copy of this bill of
divorcement was as it follovveth Her f^rma rep^^itar apud M^s^m ^sem. sol.
133. Aliad exemplar ibidem hab^tur. It. in M^se Aegyptio. part 2. fol. 59. unde
desumpta est haec testi^m subs^^ti^ qua^ ap^^sui^.
Upon such a day of the Week, such and such of the M^nth N. such or such an
year of the Creation of the World, according to the computation which we use
here in this City N situate near the River N. that I of the Country of N. the
son of Rabbi N. of the Country N. But now I dwelling in such or such a place,
near such and such a River have desired of my own free will, without any
co-action, and have divorced, dismissed, and cast out thee, thee I say thee my
Wife N. of the Country of N. the daughter of Rabbi N. dwelling in such and such
a Country, and dwelling now in such and such a place, situate near such and
such a River, which have been my Wife heretofore, but now I do divorce thee,
dismiss thee, and cast thee cut, that thou may be free, and have the rule to
thy self, and to depart and to marry with any other man whom thou will; and let
no man be refused by thee for me, from this day forward for ever. Thus he thou
lawful for any man, and this shall be to thee from me a bill of separation, a
bill of divorce, and a letter of dismission, according to the Law of Moses and
Israel: N. the son of N. witness. N. the son of N. witness.

This bill was written by a Solomon. Jarchi. Hos. c. 1. 10.
Scrivener, or public Notary. And Maimon. de divort. cap. 11. sect. 18.
furthermore, a woman being divorced, or otherwise a widow, it was not lawful
for her to marry again, till she had tarried ninety days, besides the day of
her divorce, or of her husbands death, and her last espousals: to the end it
might be known, whether she were with child or no, and that there might be
proof, whether it were the seed of the first husband, or of her second.

It was a common custom among the Romans about the time of our Saviors birth,
even for the women to divorce their husbands, and to marry again at their
pleasure. Of this, Heathen Authors speak: -- Sic fiunt octo mariti,
Quinque per autumnos.
Juvenal. Satyr 6. verse 230. Et nubet decimo jam Thelesina viro.
Martial. lib. 8.

Senec. (...). de Benef. 16.
Non consulum, sed maritorum numero annos suos computant, etc. The Bill tendered
by the woman, was termed Plutarch, in Alcibiade.
(...), letters of forsaking; not letters of cutting off, or putting away. This
same practice was in use also among the Hebrews. Hence is that saying of our
Savior: If a woman shall put away her husband, and be married to another, etc.
Mark 10. 12. Now although, at that time, humane laws forbad not the marriages
renewed with others upon such divorces, yet Gods law condemned both such
divorces, and such marriages, and, before God, persons marrying after such
divorcements were reputed digamites, that is, to have two husbands, or two
wives. For this reason, a Minister above others is commanded to be (...); The
Husband of one wife, 1 Timothy 3. 2. And the woman, she is commanded to be (...),
The wife of one husband, 1 Timothy 5. 9. In which text, second marriages (in case
of the Husbands or Wives death) are no more forbidden, than the Poet forbade
them in the like phrase. Vnico gaudens mulier marito.
Horat. Carmin. 3. 14.

Note in the last place, that among the Jews the Bride-woman also brought a
dowry to her Husband; it was sometimes more, sometimes less; it was called by
the Elias Thiisbit. It. Solom. Jarchi. Genesis 31. 15.
Rabbis (...) Nedunia: Raguel gave with his daughter Sarah half his goods,
servants and cattle, and money, Tob. 10. 10.

CHAP. V.
Of their Burials.
AT the time of a man's death, before his Burial, many Ceremonies were observed.
First, the next of the kin closed the eyes of the deceased body. Joseph shall
put his hands upon thy eyes, Genes. 46. 4. This was likewise practiced both by
the Romans and the Grecians. Ille meos oculos comprimat, Ille tuos.
Ovid. (...),
Homer Iliad. 11.

Secondly, they washed the body being dead. Tabitha died, and when they had
washed her, they laid her up in an upper-chamber, Act. 9. 37. The baptization
or washing at such a time was threesold. The first was (...), Eccles. 34. 26. A
washing from the pollution contracted by the touch of a dead carc^; so that if
happily any ignorantly and unawares became thus unclean, then was he by a kind of
washing to be made clean again. The second was (...), a baptization or washing
of the dead corpse it self. Thus Tabitha was washed: neither is the word (...),
unusually applied to common washings, as Mar. 7. 4. we read of the washing of
cups, pots, vessels, tables, the Greek is (...). The first of these washings
was proper to the Jews: this second in use with Jews, Tertullian. Apolog.
(...). 47. It. Eusebius. hist. lib. 7. c. 17.
Christians, and Cor^ lavant f^ntis and ungunt. V^ lib 6. Aeneid.
Heathens: the third (which was (...)) a baptization for the dead, 1 Cor. 15.
9. proper to some amiss-led Christians. It may be demanded, what manner of
Baptism this was? with submission of my judgment, I understand this place with
S. Ambrose of a Sacramental washing, applied unto some living c Ambr^s. 1 Cor.
16. 29.
man in the name and behalf of his friend, dying without Baptism, out of a
superstitious conceit, that the Sacrament thus conferred to one alive, in the
name of the deceased, might be available for the other dying unbaptized. As if
the Apostle did wound those superstitious Corinthians with their own quills,
and prove the Resurrection of the dead from their own erroneous practice,
telling them in effect, that their superstitious Custom of baptizing the living
for the dead, were vain and bootless, if there were no Resurrection; and
therefore the Apostle uses an emphatical distinction of the persons, in the
next immediate verse, saying, why are we also in jeopardy every hour? He
infers the Resurrection by force of a double argument; the first drawn from
their superstitious baptization for the dead: the second, from the hourly
jeopardy and peril wherein we, that is, himself and other Christians are, so
that as that Father notes, the Apostle does not hereby approve their doing,
but evinceth their hope of the Resurrection from their own practice, though
erroneous. That there was Tertul lib. de (...). carnis.
Vicarium tale Baptisma (as Tertullian calls it) in use among the
Mar^ionites, is evident, yea, and amongst the Epiphan. de Cerinthian. haeres.
28.
Cerinthians also: the manner thereof is thus described, Chrys^st. 1 Cor. 15.
When any Catechumenist died, some living person placed under the bed of the
deceased, they came unto the deceased party, and asked him whether he would be
baptized? then he replying nothing, the party under the bed answered for him,
saying, that he would be baptized* and thus they baptized him for the dead, as
if they acted a play upon the Stage.

The third ceremony used by the Jews toward the dead party, was the embalming
of the corpse, which for the main thereof, it is probable, they learned from the
Egyptians, for we find Joseph to be the first that practiced it, Genesis 50. 2.
The Egyptian manner of embalming was thus: He^dot. Euterp.
they took out the bowels of the dead, they cleansed them and washed them with
the wine of Dates, and after that again with odours: then filled they the
bowels with pure Myrrh beaten, and Cassia. and other Odours (except
Frankincense) and sewed them upon After this they seasoned the corpse hidden in
Nitre seventy days, not longer: after seventy days they washed the corpse, and
wrapped it in fine linen cloth gummed, which gum the Egyptians often used
instead of glue. The Greeks termed it (...). And the use thereof was for the
preservation of the body, that it might not putrify; and therefore when the
Funeral Obsequies were not long delayed, they used another kind of embalming,
namely, an external and outward application of Spices and Odours, without the
unbowelling of the corpse. This the Greeks termed Vs^rpatur tamen (...) in
scripturis, lata significatione, ad denota^d^m utramque ^nditaram. I^ (...)
occu^t. Genesis 5^. 6 pr^, q^od^n Hebres. (...) Et ar^matibus condive^unt.
(...). This was used to ward our Savior Christ, John 19. 40.

Sometimes they did use to burn the corpse, preserving only the bones in some
urn or Pitcher, Amos 6. 10. But commonly they interred the whole body, and
buried it in the earth. The ancient Jews if they received not from their
Ancestors, then would they purchase a burial place themselves, for the burial
of them and their family. The form of that place was thus: It was a vault hewed
out in a rock, (...) Talmud. Seder. Nezikin Bava Bathra. cap. 6.
six cubits long, and four broad, in which eight other cells or lesser holes
(or as some say, thirteen) were made, as so many distinct receptacles, or tombs
for the dead bodies to be laid in: as often as they buried any, they were wont
to roll a great stone to the mouth of the cave. The cave or vault it self they
termed from the act of burial, (...)
Keber, which signifies a place of burial, or from its form, (l) Magnara, a
den or cave. These several cells or receptacles in which the body was laid,
they called (...)
Cucim, graves, tombs: and the stone they named (...)
Golel, a rolling stone. This gives great light to that in the Gospel, Joseph
took the body of Christ, and wrapped it in a clean linen cloth, and put it in
his new tomb, which he had hewn out in a rock, and rolled a great stone to the
door of the Sepulcher, Mat. 27. 59, 60. These caves or vaults the wealthier
sort would paint, garnish, and beautify at the mouth or entrance of them:
hence comes that phrase, Spulchra dealbata, painted tombs. As often as they
had occasion to mention or speak of any friend deceased, they used that in the
Proverbs, The memory of the just is blessed, Prove. 10. 7. Hence the Rabbis, in
their quotations of any worthy Author deceased, usually subjoyn this honorable
commemoration, Benedictae memoriae, N. (...) Memoria ejus sit in benedictione.
Such or such a one of blessed memory.

But their usual Epitaph or Inscription upon their Sepulchers, was, (...)
Sheindler in (...)
Let this soul be bound up in the Garden of Eden, or in the bundle of the
living, Amen, Amen, Amen, Selati.

The latter Jews have been strangely conceited concerning the place of burials,
and are persuaded, that if an Israelite be buried in any strange country, out
of the Promised Land, he shall not be partaker so much as of Resurrection,
except the Lord vouchsafe to make him hollow passages under the earth, through
which his body by a continual volutation and rolling, may be brought into the
land of Canaan. The ground hereof is taken from the charge of Jacob unto his
son Joseph, that he should not bury him in the land of Egypt, but in Canaan.
Solom. Iarchi. Genesis 47. 29.
For which charge they assign three reasons* First, because he foresaw by the
spirit of Prophecy, that the dust of that land should afterward be turned into
lice. Secondly, because those who died out of the holy Land should not rise
again without a painful rolling and tumbling of their bodies through those
hollow passages. Thirdly, that the Egyptians might not idolatrously worship him.

They made a feast at their burials, which is styled The bread of men, Ezekiel.
24. 17. And a cup of consolation, Jer. 16. 7. because it was administered to
comfort those that were sad of heart. It much resembled the Roman Silicernium.

From those two places last quoted, we may observe, that at the burial of their
friends, they used these ceremonies which follow; some to testify, some to
augment their grief. 1. Cutting themselves, that is, wounding or cuting any
part of their body, with any kind of Instrument. Gentes, quasdam corporis
parts acu vulnerabant, vel alias incidebant, atramentumque super ponebant,
quod in cultum demonum suorum fiebat, praecipitur ergone ull^ pacto sicut
gentes ferirent carnes suas; quem ad modum sacerdotes Cybeles and deae Sororum,
ut refert Luci^us P. Fag^t. 14. 1. Vng^ibus ora soror f^dans and pectora pugnis
Vir. lib. 4. Aeneid.
This practice was learned from the Heathens, who were wo^t not* only to
scratch their face, but to punch and p^i^k certain parts of their body with a
needle, and then cover it over with ink, which they used as a special ceremony
in their superstitious worship, and therefore it is forbid, Deuteronomy. 14. 1.
Secondly, making themselves bald, which was done diverse manner of ways; either
by shaving their hair, or plucking it off with their hands, or by impoisoned
plasters to make it fall off. Other Nations were wont to shave off Sectis
fratri im^osa^^e capillos. Ovid. Met. 3.
the hair of their head, and to offer it in the behalf of the dead: they did
sometimes shave their cheeks, sometimes their eyelids: and this also, being an
Heathenish custom, was likewise forbidden in Israel, Deuteronomy. 14. 1. Thirdly,
going bare headed, that they might cast dust or ashes upon their heads,
signifying thereby that they were unworthy the ground on which they went.
Fourthly going barefooted, for their greater humiliation. Fifthly, the covering
of their lips, for that was a special sign of sorrow and shame, The Seers shall
be ashamed, etc. they shall all cover their lips, for they have no answer of
God, Mich 3. 7 If it be demanded, how they covered their lips? It is thought
they did it D. Kimchi (...) Aben Esra P. Fag. Le 14. 45.
by casting the skirt of their cloak, or garment over them. Sixthly, Seissaque
Pol^xena palla. Juvenal. Satyr. 10.
r^nting their clothes. Seventhly, putting sackcloath about their loins, Genesis
37. 34. These were general tokens of grief, used upon all extraordinary
occasions of sorrow. Two other there were, more proper to burials, to augment
their grief. First, minstrels, who with their sad tunes inclined the affections
of the people to mourning. Majoris aetatis funera ad rub^^n proferre solebant:
minoris vero aetatis ad tibias. Servius Aeneid. lib. 5.
Of these there were two sorts: Some playing on pipes, others sounding
trumpets. At the funeral of Noblemen, or old men, they used a trumpet: at the
funeral of the common people, or children, they used a Tibia cui teneros suetum
a ducere manes. Lege Phrygum maesta. Statius. Theb. lib. 6. ver. 121.
pipe. In this respect it is said; That Jesus, when he raised Jairus his
daughter, cast out the minstrels, Mat. 9. 23. Secondly, women hired to sing at
burials for the same purpose, and likewise by outward significations of sorrow,
to move the company, and more strongly to affect them, Call for the mourning
women, etc. and send for skilful women, Jer. 9. 17. These the Romans called
Praeficas, quasi in hoc ipsum praefectas, Chief or skilful mourners.

CHAP. VI.
Of their Oaths.
THe manner of swearing was sometimes by listing up their hands toward heaven;
Abraham said to the King of Sodom* I have lifted up my hand unto the Lord; that
is, I have sworn, that I will not take from a thread, even to a shoo-latchet,
Genesis 14. 22. Unto which custom the Psalmist seems to allude, Psalm. 106. 26.
He lifted up his hand, that is, he swore. Sometimes he that took the Oath did
put his hand under the others thigh, which administered the Oath. We read this
manner of administration to have been used by Abraham, Genesis 24. 2. and Jacob,
Genesis 47. 29. Which ceremony Aben Esra. Genesis 24. 2.
some interpret to be, as a token of subjection Solomon Iarchi, ibid.
others as a mystery of circumcision, the sign whereof they bore about that
place of their body: Others more probably think it to be a mysterious c August.
quaest. super Genesis 62.
signification of Christ the promised seed, who was to come out of Abraham's
loins, or thigh; as the like phrase is used, Genesis 46. 26. the souls that came
out of Jacobs thigh. Sometimes also the manner of deposing, was to stand before
the Altar, 1 Kings 8. 31. Which was also the custom of the Alex. ab Alx. lib.
5. cap. 10.
Athenians, the Livius dec. 3. lib. 1. It. Valor. Max. l. 9. c. 3.
Carthaginians, and the Jures licet and Sam^thracum and nostrorum a^as.
Juvenal. Satyr. 3.
Romans.

The object of a lawful Oath was, and is, only the Lord: whence he that took
the Oath was said to consess unto God, compare Isa. 45. 23. with Romans 14. 11.
And the ancient form of imposing an Oath was this, Give glory to God, Josh. 7.
19. John 9. 24. Now God was glorified by an Oath, because thereby there was a
solemn confession and acknowledgment of Gods omnipresence, that he is present
in every place: of his omniscience, that he knows all secrets: of his truth,
that he is a maintainer of truth, and an avenger of falsehood: of his justice,
that he is willing; and his omnipotency, that he is able to punish those that
by swearing shall dishonor him. And as the object of a lawful oath was only
God: so it is implied, that it was not rashly or unadvisedly to be undertaken,
but by a kind of necessity imposed; for the Hebrew word (...) is a Passive, and
signifies to be sworn, rather than to swear.

In corrupter times they were wont to swear by the Allium, porrum and cepas
inter deos jurejurando habuerunt Egyptii, Plin. lib 19. c. 6. Item. Juvenal.
Sat. 15.
creatures, but the Jews chiefly by Jerusalem, by the Temple, by the gold of
the Temple, by the Altar, and the gift on the Altar. This gift in Hebrew was
termed Corban, and it was one of those (...). Inter quae sacramenta, cum
quibusdam aliis, etiam jusjurandum quod Corban appellatur, enumerat Joseph.
contra Apion, l. 2. p. 147.
oaths which in our Savior Christ's time the Scribes and Pharisees accounted
principally obligatory. If any swore by the Altar, it was nothing: but if any
swore by the oblation of the Altar, he was bound to perform it, Matt. 23. 18.
Yea, although Gods Law enjoined honor, and relief toward parents; yet if they
had bound themselves by this oath Corban, that they would not help or relieve
their Parents, they taught they were discharged. Whence, says their Talmud.
Hierosolymit tract. de votis cap. 10.
Talmud, Every one ought to honor his father and mother, except he has vowed
the contrary. And it is evident that the Jews did often by solemn vows and
(...), Jurejurando se obstringunt, huic vel illi homini nihil se commodi
praestituros. Philo Jud. de specialibus Legib. p. 595.
oaths bind themselves, that they would never do good to such, or such a man.
We must furthermore know, that usually to their oaths there was an execration,
or conditional curse annexed, which sometimes was expressed, as, if I do not do
thus and thus, then the Lord do so to me, and more also, 1 Samuel 14. 44. Also 1
Kin. 20. 10. Sometimes it is understood, as I have sworn, if I take from a
thread to a shoo latchet, Genesis 14. 22. then let the lord do so to me, and more
also; this, or the like is understood, and makes the former part of the oath
to sound negatively; as if Abraham had said, I have sworn, I will not take from
a thread to a shoo latchet. In like manner, Psalm. 95. I have sworn, if they
shall enter into my rest; that is, They shall not enter into my rest, Heb. 3,
18. This helps the exposition of that difficult place, Mat. 15. 5. which we
read, (...). Per Corban. si quicquam tibi prodero: interpretor (...) Si
quicquam quemadmodum (...) Si quisquam Mat. 10. 14. and Mat. 23. 18. Et
execratione subaudita sensus emergat, Per Corban nihil tibi prodero. Caeterum,
si quis urgeat, quod in font sit (...), non per Corban, vel (...) sciendum,
quod similis ellepsis in jurandi formulis non est inusitata, hinc (...) valet
(...) per domicilium hoc. Vide Drusium de tribus sectis. l. 2. cap. 17.
By the gift that is offered by me thou may have profit: but if we conceive
it thus, according to the form of the oath Corban, By Corban if thou receive
any profit by me, and understand the execration implied: Then let God do thus,
and much more to me; the sense will be thus; By Corban thou shall receive no
profit by me. This exposition is as agreeable to the scope of the place, as it
is to their form of swearing, and plainly shows how the Pharisees by their
traditions transgressed the Commandment of God. For God commanded, saying,
Honor thy father and thy Mother. But the Scribes and Pharisees said; Whosoever
should say to father or mother, seeking relief, By Corban thou shall receive no
profit from me, he was discharged.

CHAP. VII.
Of their Writing, their Masorites, and their Work.
WRiting in no Nation came to its perfection on a sudden, but by degrees: The
Opinions of the Ancients concerning the Authors and Inventers of letters are
different. Some say Plin. l 7. c. 55. Diodor. Sicul. l. 6. c. 15.
Cadmus brought the use of letters into Greece: others say, Servius lib. 2.
Aeneid.
Palamedes: Alex. Genial, l. 2. c. 30.
some say Rhadamanthus brought them into Assyria: Memnon into Egypt: Hercules
into Phrygia: and Carmenta into Latium. Likewise some say the Phoenicians had
first the knowledge and use of letters, Phaenices primi (famae si credimus) ausi
Mansuram rudibus vocem signare figuris.
Lucan.

Others say the Diodor. Sicul. l. 4.
Ethiopians: Plin. l. 7. c. 56.
others the Assyrians. But upon better grounds it is thought, that Eusebius.
praepar. Evang. lib. 18.
Moses first taught the use of letters to the Jews, and that the Phoenicians
learned them from the Jews, and the Grecians from the Phoenicians.

In like manner, the matter upon which men wrote, in ruder times was different.
Some wrote on rindes of Trees, whence Liber, signifying originally a rind of
tree, is now used for a book. Diogen. Laert. in vita Cleanthis.
Some wrote on tile-stones with a bone instead of a pen; some on Tables; this
last was chiefly in use among the Jews, the Decalogue was written in two tables
of stone. Again, write these things upon a table, Esaias 30. 8. (...), says the
Septuagint, as if the writing-tables at that time were made of Box-trees. They
used not then pens or quills, but a certain instrument or punch, made of Iron
or Steel, called Stylus, it was sharp at one end, for the more convenient
indenting or carving of the characters; and broad at the other, for the
scraping or blotting out what had been written: whence sprang that Proverbial
speech: Eras. in Adag.
Invertere stylum, to unsay what he has said, or to blot out what he has
written: Scribe stylo hominis: write with the pen of man, Esaias 8. 1. Afterward
before they came to bind up books in manner as now we have them, they wrote in
a roll of Paper or Parchment, which sometimes was ten cubits broad, and twenty
long. Zac. 5. 2. This they called (...) Megilla in Hebrew, from Galal, to roll,
Volumen in Latin, in English a volumn, from volvo, to roll. In the volumn of
the book it is written, Psalm. 40. 7. And Christ closing the Book, gave it to
the Minister, Luke 4. 20. the word is (...), complicans folding, or rolling it
up: and verse. 17. (...), explicans, unfolding, or opening it. Baxtorf.
institut. Epist. p. 4.
These volumns were written not with one entire continued writing, but the
writing was distinguished into many spaces, columns, or platforms, like unto so
many Areae: these platforms, filled with writing, were instead of so many pages
in a book: and thus we are to understand that Jer. 36. 23. When Jehudi had read
three or four leaves, he cut it with a pen knife, etc. These leaves were
nothing else but such spaces and platforms in the roll. After this manner the
Jews reserve the Law, written in such rolls, and with such spaces, in their
Synagogues at this day.

It is much controversed, whether the Jews did from the beginning write with
vowels and accents, or whether they were added by the Masorites; for the
understanding of which, it will be needful, First, to enquire who the Masorites
were: Secondly, what their work was, and then to deliver in a proposition what
may be probably thought in this point.

First, concerning the Masoeites, we are to know that (...) Masar signifies
tradere, to deliver, and Masora a tradition, delivered from hand to hand to
posterity without writing, as the Pythagoreans and Druides were wont to do; but
by the figure Synecdoche, it signifies those critical notes or Scholion,
written in the margin of the Bible, and those that were the Authors of those
critical observations were termed Masoritae, Masorites. Concerning these
Authors, who they were, there are two opinions. Some Aben Esra vid. Buxt.
commen. Masor. c. 3.
think that they were certain learned Jews living in the City Tiberias, they
termed them Sapientes Tiberiadis, the wise men of Tiberias. These wise men are
thought to have added these marginal notes unto the Hebrew Bibles Elias Levita
in praefat. tertia. l. Masoreth. hammasoreth.
some time after the finishing of the Babylon Talmud; which was about the year
of our Lord, 506. This opinion is unlikely for these two reasons. 1. Buxtorf in
comment. Masor. c. 7.
Because we cannot find in Histories, the continuance of any College or School
in Tiberias so long, but rather that degrees in learning ceased here withim
four hundred years after ou^ Savior his birth, 2. Buxtorf in comment Masor. c.
8.
In both Talmuds mention is made of the Masora, and the things contained
therein. Others therefore more o R. Asarias. R. Gedalia. Buxtor. in comment.
Masor. c. 11.
probably say, that the Masorites were the Ecclesiastical Senate or Council
held by Esra, Haggai, Zachary, Malachi, and diverse others assembled for a
reformation of the Church after their return from Babylon; they are called Viri
Synagogae magnae. This Council continued at least forty yrars: for Simeon the
just, who went out in his Priestly robes, to meet and pacisie Alexander the
Great, coming in hostile manner against Jerusalem, Pirke Aboth. c. 1.
was the last of that Council, and that was above three hundred years before
the birth of our Savior. Esra was the President or Chief of this Council; he
was of such repute among the Jews, that they paralleled him with Moses, saying,
Talmud. Sanhedrim. c. 2. fol. 21.
Dignus erat Esra, quod data fuisset lex per manus ejus Israeli, si non
praecessisset eum Moses.

In the second place we are to consider the work, what the men of this great
Synagogue, being the true Masorites, did: their work may be reduced to these
particulars. 1. When this great Council was assembled, they, among whom Ezra
was chief (who was assisted with the inspiration of Gods Spirit) Buxtors. in
comment. Masor. c. 11.
determined what Books were Canonical, what spurious and Apocryphal. Secondly,
Tertull. l. de habit. muliebr. Chrysostom. hom. 8. ad Hebraeos I^enaeus adver*
haeres lib. 3. c. 25. August. de mirab. sacrae. script. l. 2. circa finem.
the authentic and Canonical Books, were purged by them, of all errors crept
into the Text in time of their captivity. Thirdly, they Genebrad. l. 2.
Chronolog.
digested the Old Testament into twenty two books, according to the number of
the Hebrew letters. Fourthly, they distinguished it into great Sections and
Verses; for though the Law was not so confusedly written, without any space or
note of distinction between word and word, that it seemed all one continued
verse, or as the Kabbalists speak, (...) Theba achath, one word, until the time
of the Masorites; yet it was not so distinguished into Sections and Verses, as
now we have it. Fifthly, they added their censures and critical observations,
concerning the irregularity of many words, in respect of the vowels and
accents. Sixthly, they numbered the verses, words, and letters of every Book,
to prevent all possibility of corrupting the Text in future times; for now,
they say, the gift of Prophecy should cease. Lastly, they noted the different
writing, and different reading; for the understanding of which we must know,
that in the Hebrew Text many words are written with more* ^any with fewer
letters, than they are pronounced; Sunt ^ct^ voce^, quae scriptae s^nt in
textu, sed non leguntur, quas add^. ^it M^a, Ruth. 3. 12.
many words written in the Text which are n^ pronunced, etc. In the margin the
difference is expressed: whence the difference in the Text they term (...)
Cethib, Scriptionem, the writing; the difference in the margin they term (...)
Keri, Lectionem, the Reading: because they do read according to that in the
margin. Contra has disputat Elias Levita in praef^t. 3 l. Masoreth. hamma. ^th.
This difference is thought by some to be a correction of the Bible, according
to several copies after their return from Babylon: but, that it is of Divine
Authority, containing many mysteries known to Moses, and the Prophets
successively (though many of them unknown to our Age) and that it was not any
correction, but the difference it self primarily and purposely was intended by
the Prophets, and holy Pen men of the Scripture, evidently appears by the
diversity of readings in those books which were written by Haggay, Zachary,
Malachi, Daniel, and Esra: They being the Authors of their own books, needed no
correction at that time, themselves being present, yet in them this different
reading is used.

In the third place, the Proposition follows; namely, Seeing that the
Masorites passed their censure on many words for their irregularity in their
vowels and accents; therefore, the vowels originally were not from the
Masorites, but of the same antiquity with their words; and in truth, otherwise
they had been a body or carcass without a soul.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Isreal's pitching of their Tents, or of their Camps.
WHiles the Israelites wandered through the Wilderness, their Church was a
Tabernacle; and their habitations, Tents: so that their whole Camp might be
termed a movable City. It was divided into three parts. In the center or middle
of all was the Tabernacle it self, with its Courts, this they termed the Camp
of the Divine Majesty. Next round about, pitched the Priests and Levites, to
whom the charge of the Tabernacle belonged, (and therefore the nearest
adjoining place of habitation might be the convenientest for them) this was
called the Camp of Levi. In the outer parts, round about Levi, the twelve
Tribes pitched their Tents; this they termed the Camp of Israel. The first Camp
resembled a great Cathedral Church, with its Church yard. The second a
Privileged place about the Church, as it were for Colleges for the habitation
of the Clergy. The third, the body of a City, wherein the Townsmen or Laity
dwelt, The form of the whole, is probably thought to be apiece, Vziel.
Number. 2. 3.
some say twelve miles long, and twelve miles broad.

In the Eastern part pitched these three Tribes, Judah, Issachar, and Zabulon.
On the South Side, Reuben, Simeon, and Gad, On the West, Ephraim, Manasses, and
Benjamin. On the North, Dan, Asher, and Napthali: and these made up the outward
Camp, termed the Camp of Israel. Between each Tribe, in every one of those four
quarters, there were distant spaces like Streets, where there was buying and
selling as in a market, and tradesmen in their shops in (...) Joseph l. 3.
Antiq. c. 11. p. 97.
manner of a City leading to and fro. This Camp is Tradunt Hebraei, filios
Israelita castrametatos fuisse in circuitu tabernaculi, ut unum milliare
interfuerit (i.) spatium mill passuum, and hoc erat iter Sabbati. P. Fag. Number.
2. 3.
thought to be round a mile distant from the Tabernacle, that is a Sabbath
days journey; and this is gathered from Josh. 3. 4. where the distance between
the People and the Ark is commanded to be two thousand cubits.

After this, pitched the Camp of Levi: in the Eastern pa^ Moses, Aaron, and the
Priests; in the South the Coha^^ites; i^ the West the Gershonites; in the North
the Merarites.

In the middle was the Camp of the Divine Majesty. Unto this David alludeth;
God is in the midst of her, she shall not be moved, Psalm. 46. 5.

After the same manner the parts of the City Jerusalem were distinguished, when
the Commonwealth was settled. Maimon in Bethhabchirah c. 7. sect. 11.
From the gate of Jerusalem, to the mountain of the Temple, was the Camp of
Israel; from the gate of the mountain of the Temple, to the gate of the Court
(which was otherwise called Nicanors gate) was the Camp of Levi: from the gate
of the Court, and forward, was the Camp of the Divine Majesty.

Furthermore we are to know, that the twelve Tribes had between them four
principal Banners, or Standards; three Tribes to one Standard, for which
reason^, the Church is said to be terrible as an Army with banners, Cant. 6. 4.
The Hebrew word Banner, Numb, 2. 2. the Greek translanteth (...).
Order, and so the Chaldee calls it (...) Quisque juxta ordinatam su. am
ac^em.
Tekes (a word borrowed of the Greek (...)) order: Whence the Apostle takes
his phrase, Every man in his own order, 1 Cor. 15. 23.

Every banner was thought to be of 3 colors, Jonathan V^^l. Number. 2. 3.
according to the colors of the precious, stones in the breast plate, bearing
the names of their Patriarchs. But this proportion will not hold in all, seeing
Levi (who is not here among the other Tribes) was in the breast plate one of
the twelve: and Joseph there graved on the Beril has here two Tribes, Ephraim
and Manasses, unto whom two colors cannot be allowed from the breast plate.

Each Banner had its several motto, or inscription. In the first Standard was
written, from Number. 10. 25. Rise up, Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered,
and let them that hate thee slay before thee. Dicunt in vexillo Reuben fuisse
imaginem hominis: in vexillo Jehudah, imaginem leonis* in vexillo Ephraim,
imaginem b^^ is: in vexillo Da^, imaginem a pailae P. Page Number. 2. A^en Esra,
ibidem. I Angeli ex h^^ versu defini^i possunt; sunt enim spiritus
intelligentes ^t homo, potertes ut Leo, ministratorii ut Bos, and celeres u^
Aquila Tremel. in Ezekiel. 1.
It is moreover taught by the Hebrews, that each Standard had a distinct sign
engraved in it. Reubens Standard had the Image of a Man: Judahs the Image of a
Lion: Ephraims the Image of an Ox: and Dans the Image of an Eagle.

These sime four creatures are used by Ezekiel, Ez. 1. 10. to describe the
nature of Angels. Every Cherubim is said to have four faces: the face of a man,
to show his understanding; of a Lion, to show his power; of an Ox, to show his
ministratory office; of an Eagle, to show his swiftness in the execution of
Gods will. This same description of Angels you may find, Rev. 4. 6.

By the same four, in the opinion of many of the Hieronym. a. l initium sui
commentarii in Mat. It. Gregor. homil. 4. in Ezekiel. a^ Hieronym. dissentit D.
Augustin^^s in Matthae, and Marco, ram in Leone Matthaeum, Marcum, in ^ne put
at ad^m^^atum August. de consens^ Evangelist. l 1. c. (...).
Fathers, are shaddowed forth the four Evangelists. The man shaddowed S.
Matthew, because he begins his Gospel with the Generation of Christ, according
to his humanity: The Lion S. Mark, because he begins his Gospel, from that
voice of the Lion roaring in the Wilderness. Vox clamantis in diserto: The Ox
S. Luke, because he begins with Zacharias the Priest: and the Eagle S. John,
who soaring aloft begins with the Divinity of Christ.

Thus have we seen how they pitched their camps, their marching follows: and
here we are to consider, first, their marching in their journeys through the
Wilderness. Secondly, their marching in their battles.

Concerning their marching in their journeys, they either moved forward, or
abode still, according to the moving or standing of the Cloud, which conducted
them: the manner thereof is described, Numb. 10. and summarily we may view it
thus: when God took up the Cloud, Moses prayed, and the Priests with Trumpets
blew an alarm, then Judath the first Standard rose up, with Issachar and
Zebulon, and they marched foremost: then followed the Gershonites and
Merarites, bearing the boards and coverings of the Tabernacle in wagons; the
Trumpets sounded the second alarm, then Reuben, Simeon, and Gad rose up, and
followed the Tabernacle, and after them went the Kohathites, in the midst of
the twelve Tribes, bearing on their shoulders the Ark, Candlestick, Table,
Altar, and other holy things. At the third alarm rose up the Standard of
Ephraim, Manasses, and Benjamin, and these followed the Sanctuary: unto this
David has reference, when he prays, Psa. 80. 2. Before Ephraim, Benjamin,
and Manasses, stir up thy strength, and come and save us. At the fourth alarm,
arose the Standard of Dan, Asher, and Napthali: and to these was committed the
care of gathering together the lame, feeble, and sick, and to look that nothing
was left behind: whence they are called the gathering Host, Josh, 6. 9. unto
this David alludeth: when my Father and my Mother forsake me, the Lord will
gather me, Psalm. 27. 10.

Concerning their marching in war: First, the Priests sounded the alarm with
Trumpets, Numb. 10. 9. this they termed: (...) Clangor, Vo^iferatio. Hebraei
duplicem clangorem esse statuunt alterumque vocari. (...) alterum (...) ^^orum
ille equabilis est v^x, ^ic citus concis^^que fragor: ille ad conv^candos
caetus, hic ad accendendos militum animos facit.
Therugnah. Secondly, one Priest was selected out of the rest, to stir up the
hearts of the people, and by a kind of hortatory Oration, to encourage them to
the war, Deuteronomy. 20. 2. him they called* V^ctum belli, the anointed of the
battle. Thirdly, they marched on by five and five in battle array, Exo. 13. 18.
so the (...)
Original signifies in that place.

In the last place, we are to consider how they were to deal in besieging a
Town; for the conceiving whereof, note these two propositions.

1. They were to offer peace unto all Foreigners, and Canaanites, Deuteronomy. 20.
10. And this is clearly signified Josh. 11. 19. There was not a City that made
peace with the children of Israel, save the Hivites, the inhabitants of Gibeon,
all other they took in battle. For it was of the Lord to harden their hearts.
Yet here Moab and Ammon are excepted; Israel must not seek their peace, Deuteronomy.
23. 6.

2. They were to make covenant with none of the seven Nations, Deuteronomy. 7. 2.
Exodus 23. 32. and 34. 14. With For reigners they might, Josh. 9. 7.
peradventure you dwell among us, and how shall we make a covenant with you?
Not, how shall we make peace with you?

Some may question, what the difference was between making peace, and making a
covenant? I answer, twofold. 1. The making of peace was a naked stipulation,
or promise, mutually made for the laying aside of all hostile affections
toward each other; whereby life on both sides might be secured. Making a
covenant, was a solemn binding of each other, to performance of this mutual
promise by outward ceremon^es, of Haec est causa cu^ Hebraei Foedus facere,
dicant (...) (i) Divide c, aut dissecare foedus; quemadmodum apud Latin^s,
dicitur percutere foedus, quae l^cutio fluxit ab antiquo foederis faciendi
more: Sacerdos enim feriebat porcum silice, dicens. Sic a Jove feriatur is, qui
sanctum hoc fregerit foedus, ut ego hunc porcum serio Livius, Decad. 1. l. 1.
p. 17.
cutting a beast in twain, and passing between the parts thereof, Jer. 34. 18.
as if they would say; Thus let it be done to him, and thus let his body be cut
in two, who shall break this covenant? Secondly, peace was not concluded by the
Israelites, but only upon these terms, That the people should become tributary
unto them, Deuteronomy. 20. 11. The making of a covenant was upon equal terms, without
any condition either of tribute or service, as is gatherable from the Covenant
made by Joshua with the Gibeonites, where there is no mention of any condition
at all, Josh. 9.

This difference seems to me warrantable, and serves to reconcile many
places, of Scripture, as where God says, Offer peace to all, and make a
covenant with none. Secondly, It shows the fraud of the Gibeonites to be
greater than is commonly conceived, for they sought not peace simply, but a
covenant. Make a league with us, Josh. 9. 6. Thirdly, It salveth that common
Objection made in defense of unadvised Oaths, to prove them obligatory, though
unlawful. The Argument is framed thus; The covenant which Joshua made with the
Gibeonites unadvisedly, was unlawful: but that was observed by him; and the
breach thereof, when Saul slew the Gibeonites, punished by God, 2 Samuel 21. 1.
Therefore, etc. I say it salveth that Objection: because if we diligently
observe Joshua's practice, we shall find unadvised Oaths to be so far, and only
so far binding, as they agree with God's words. God's word required the
Gibeonites should have their lives secured, because they accepted peace; Thus
far therefore the covenant was still of force. God's word required, that the
Canaanites, after the acceptance of peace, should become tributary; here the
covenant was not of force, and therefore Joshuah made them hewers of wood, and
drawers of water, which is a kind of a tribute in the language of the
Scripture; tribute of the body, though not of the purse: in which sense the
Egyptian Taskmasters are in the Original called Tribute-masters, Exodus 1. 11.

CHAP. IX.
Their Measures.
MEasures in use among the Hebrews, and so among all other Nations, are of two
sorts: some Mensurae applicationis, measures of application, as a span, a
cubit, a yard, and the like. Secondly, Mensurae capacitatis, measures of
capacity, as pints, quarts, pecks, bushels, etc. Measures of application,
mentioned in Scripture, are these that follow (in which that there might be no
deceit; the ground of these measures was the breadth of so many, or so many
barley corns middle sized, laid by one another) (...) Ets-bang, Digitus, a
finger, an inch. Arias Mont. Thubal Cain.
It contains the breadth of six barley corns joined together where they are
thickest: though in round-reckoning it goes for an inch, yet in accurate
speaking Quatuor digiti constituunt tres pollices. Franc. Junius in Ezekiel. 40. 5.
four fingers make three inches. Of this there is mention, Jer. 52. 21.

Palmus, This was twofold; Palmus minor, and Palmus major. The lesser
contains the breadth of four fingers, (i) three inches, the Hebrews term it,
(...) Tophach, the Greeks (...): the greater is termed (...) Zereth, by the
Greeks (...); in Latin Spithama, and Dodrans. It contains the measure that is
between the thumb and the little finger stretched out, a span.

(...) Pagnam, pes, a foot. It contains 4. Palmos scil. minores. Pet. Martyr.
1. Reg. c. 6.
twelve inches.

(...) Amma. Cubitus, a Cubit. We shall find in Authors mention of four kinds
of Cubits. 1. Cubitus communis, this was the measure from the elbow to the
fingers end. It contained a foot and half, or half a a yard, it is called the
common Cubit. 2 Cubitus sacer, An holy Cubit, this was a full yard, containing
two of the common Cubits, as appears* by comparing 1 Kin. 7. 15. with 2 Chronicles. 3. 15. In the first place, the pillars are reckoned each of them
eighteen cubits high: in the second place they are reckoned five and thirty
cubits high; which, together with the basis, being one ordinary cubit high
doubleth the number: so that the first Text is to be understood of holy cubits;
the second of common cubits. 3. Cubitus regis, the Kings cubit, this was
Herodot. lib. 2. in des^ript. Babyl.
three fingers longer than the common cubit: Whereas the common cubit is termed
cubitus viri, the cubit of a man, Deuteronomy. 3. 11. Onkelos does improperly term it,
cubitum regis, the Kings cubit. Lastly, there was cubitus Geometricus, A
geometrical cubit, it contained six common cubits, Orig. hom. 2. in Genes. It.
Aug. de Civitat Dei, lib, 15. cap. 27.
and according to these cubits, it is thought that Noah's Ark was built.

Some make the difference between the cubit of the sanctuary, and the common
cubit, to be thus; The common cubit, they say, contained Quinos palmos.
fifteen inches, the holy cubit Sex. palmos.
eighteen inches. But that the holy cubit contained two common cubits, has
been evidently proved, and it is probable, that those who make the difference
to be only three inches, have mistaken the Kings cubit, for the holy cubit.

(...) Chebel, Funiculus, A line or rope. The just length thereof is unknown:
the use thereof was to measure grounds; whence it is sometimes taken for the
inheritance it self. The lines are fallen to me in pleasant places, Psalm. 16.
6. That is, mine inheritance.

(...) Kaneh, Arundo, the Reed. The use of this was to measure buildings; the
length thereof was six cubits and an hand-breadth, Ezekiel. 40. 5. The cubits in
this place are Tremelius in hunc loc. m.
interpreted Kings cubits: it was less liable to deceit than the Rope, because
it could not be shortened or lengthned, by shrinking or stretching: hence the
Canon or rule of the holy Scripture is mystically typed out by this Reed, Ezekiel.
40. and Rezel. 21. 15.

To these may be added other measures, wherewith. they measured their ways and
walks. The least of these was (...) Tsagad, Passus, a Peace.

(...), Stadium, a furlong. It is often mentioned in the New Testament, not at
all in the Old. Isidor.
It contained one hundred twenty five paces, which is the eighth part of our
mile. Some think it to be called so, (...), from standing, because Hercules ran
so much ground before he stood still.

Milliarum, a mile: It contains with us a thousand paces, but much more among
the Hebrews. Their word (...) Barah, translated often Milliarium, properly
signifies a dinner or meal, and being applied unto journeys, walks, or ways,
it signified so much ground as usually is gone, or conveniently may be
traveled in half a day, between meal and meal, or bait and bait. The word is
read, Genesis 35. 16. When there was ((...) Cibrath haarets) about half a days
journey of ground. The Greek in that place has an uncouth word (...);
doubtless it was made from the Hebrew Cibrath, and signifies half a days
journey.

Their measures of capacity, termed Mensurae capacitatis, were of two sorts;
some for dry things, as Corn, Seed, etc. Some for liquid things, as Wine, Oil,
etc. In both, that there might be a just proportion observed, all their
measures were desined by a set number of Hen egg-shells of a middle size.

In my parallelling of them with our measures, where I speak of Bushels,
half-Bushels, Pecks, etc. I am to be understood according to Winchester
measure, as we phrase it: such a bushel contains eight gallons. Where I speak
of gallons, pottles, quarts, etc. I am to be understood according to our Ale
measure, thereby I avoid fractions of number.

(...), Kab. Kabus, a Kab. Arias Mont. Thubal Cain.
This contained twenty four eggs, it held proportion with our Quart. The least
measure mentioned in Scripture, is the fourth part of a Kab, 2 Kings 6. 25. The
famine in Samaria was so great, that a fourth part of a Kab of Doves dung was
sold for five pieces of silver. The Rabbis have a Proverb, that (...) Vid.
Buxtorf. Lexicon. in (...)
ten Kabs of speech descended into the world, and the woman took away nine of
them.

(...) Omer. It contained Alsted. praecog theol. l. 2. p. 588.
one Kab and an half, and a fifth part of a Kab, that is three pints and an
half pint, and a fifth part of an half pint. It was the tenth part of an Ephah,
Exodus 16. 36.

(...) Seah, (...), Satum: The Latin Interpreters commonly render it by
Modius. It contained Vide Buxtorf. Lexic. in (...) ex opere R. Alphes. tractat.
de Pasch. chap. 5. fol. 176.
six Kabs, that is, a Gallon and half. We translate the word in general, a
measure: To morrow this time, a measure (that is, a Satum) of fine flower shall
be sold for a Shekel, 2 Kings 7. 1.

(...) Ephah. It contained Arias Mont. Thubal Cain.
three Sata, that is, half a bushel, and pottle.

(...) Lethec. It contained Epiph. de mensur. and Ponderib.
fifteen Modios (i) Sata; that is, two bushels, six gallons, and a pottle.
Mention of that is made, Hos. 3. 2. It is there rendered in English, half an
Homer.

(...) Homer. It is so called from (...) Chamor, Asinus, an Ass, because this
measure contained so much grain of corn as an Ass could well bear. It contained
ten Ephahs, Ezekiel. 45. 11. that is, forty five gallons, or, five bushels, and
five gallons.

(...) Cor, Corus. The Cor, and the Homer, were of the same quantity, Ezekiel. 45.
14. It was not only of liquid things, Luke 16. 7.

These measures of which we have spoken hitherto, the Hebrews used in measuring
of dry things: Three other measures there were, which they used for liquid or
moist things.

(...) Log. It contained Buxtorf. i^ loco superius citato.
six egg shells. It was of the same quantity as the fourth part of a Kab, half
a pint.

(...) Hin. It contained the quantity of Buxtorf i^.
seventy two egg-shells, so that it was of our measure three quarts.

(...) Bath; (...), Bathus, the Bath. It was of the same capacity with the
Ephah, the tenth part of an Homer, Ezekiel. 45. 14. The Latin Interpreters
commoly render it Cadus. Hieron. Ez^^, 45.
Hierom writing upon Ezekiel, renders it Vadus. Decima pars Cori, inquit, in
speciebus liquidis vocatur Bathus, five Vadus. I sometimes thought there had
been some error in the print, namely, Vadus, put for Cadus: But now I find the
Greeks to use both (...), and (...), for this measure; and from the last of
these Greek words, that ancient Father reads it, Vadus. Sometimes our English
renders it, in general, a measure, Luke 16. 6. It contained fourgallons and an
half.

All these measures were proper to the Hebrews: I find three others mentioned
in the N. T. taken from other Nations.

(...), Sextarius. We English it, in general, a Pot; Mark 7. 4. Alsted.
prae^^g. Theot. p. 561.
It was of the same quantity with the Log, if we understand it of the Roman
Sextarius. It was somewhat more, if we understand it of the Attick Sextarius:
undecim Attici sextarii aequabant Romanos duodecim. In probability we are to
understand the Roman measure, so that it contained six eggs, that is, half a
pint.

(...), Choenix, a measure, Rev. 6. 6. It signifies properly that measure of
corn, which was allowed servants for their maintenance every day. Whence was
occasioned that speech of Pythagoras: Super Chaenice non sedendum. That is, we
must not rest upon the provision which suffices for a day, but we must take
care for the morrow. It contained Budaeus de ass. lib. 5.
four Sextarii, that is, a Quart.

(...), Metretes, Joh. 2. 6. It is translated a Firkin. It was a measure in use
among the Athenians. Budaeus de ass. lib. 5.
It was of the same quantity with Cadus, and Cadus (as before was noted) was
equal to the Hebrew Bath, so that it contained four Gallons and an half.

CHAP. X.
Their Coyns. First of brazen Coyns.
THat they might have just Coyns and Weights, they weighed both them and their
weights by Barley-corns.

(...), Minutum, a Mite, Luke 21. 20. Mar. 12. 42. The latter Hebrews call it
(...) the Syriack (...) (i. Octava, the eighth part of Assarium (...) Moses
Kotsens. f. 124. col. 4.
. It weighed half a barly-corn. It valued of our money, three parts of one (...).

(...), Quadrans, a Farthing. It was a Roman coin, weighing a grain of barley;
it consisted of two mites. The poor Widow threw in two mites, which make a
farthing, Mark 12. 42. By consequence it valued of ours c..

(...), Assarius, vel assarium. It was a Roman coin, weighing four grains. The
Rabbis call it (...) Isor, and say, that it contains Drusius. in praeter.
Luc. 12. 59.
eight mites. Of this we read, Mat. 10. 29. Are not two Sparrows sold for (an
Assarium?) our English reads it, for a farthing? It valueth of ours, in
precise speaking, qa. -- q.

Their silver Coyns.
(...) Gerah. It was the twentieth part of the shekel of the Sanctuary; A
shekel is twenty Gerahs, Exodus 30. 13. It was the least silver coin among the
Hebrews; valued of ours 1. d. ob.

(...) Agorath: We English it in general, a piece of silver, 1 Sa. 2. 36. But
it appears by the Chaldee paraphrase, that it is of the same value with
Gerath; that paraphrase renders both (...) Megna; by the Greek they are both
rendered (...), the value thereof therefore is 1 d. ob.

(...) Keshitah. The word signifies a lamb, and is used for a certain Coin
among the Hebrews, on the one side whereof the Image of a lamb was stamped;
our English reads it, in general, a piece of money. Jacob bought a parcel of a
field for an hundred pieces of money, Genesis 33. 19. In the original it is, for
an hundred lambs. But it is apparent, that Jacob paid money; for S. Stephen
says, he bought it for money, Act. 7. 16. In the judgment of the Rabbines, it
was the same that R. S^l^m. Genesis 33. 19. It R. David. in lib. radic. It. Levi
ben Gers. Genesis 33. 19.
Obolus, Drus. ad diffi^. l^ca, Genesis p. 119.
twenty of them went to shekel; so that the value thereof was 1. d. ob.

(...) Ceseph, (...) Argenteus, a piece of silver: as the Romans numbered their
sums by Sesterces, insomuch that Nummus is oftentimes put absolutely to
signify the same as Sestertius: So the Hebrews counted their sums by shekels,
and the Grecians by Drachmae: Hence Argenteus, a piece if silver, being put
absolutely in the Bible, if mention in that place be of the Hebrew coyns, it
stands for a shekel, and valueth 2 s. 6. d. if it stand for the shekel of the
Sanctuary: if it stand for a common shekel, then it valueth 1 s. 3 d. But if
mention be of the Greek coyns, as Acts 19. 19. then it signifies the Attick
Dram, which valueth of our money 1 d. ob.

(...), Luke 15. 8. (o) It was a quarter of a shekel, and ^wood de number.
thus by consequence it valued of ours 7 d. ob.

(...), Didrachmon, Mat. 17. 24. We English it tribute money: The Syriack
reads (...)
Duo Zuzim; now that Coin which was termed Zuz by the Hebrews, was answerable
to the Roman D^nair; whence it appears, that it valued of ours 1 s. 3 d.

(...), Stater. We English it a piece of money at large, but it contained
precisely two Didrachma's. For the tribute money to be paid for each person,
was Didrachmum, as is evident, Mat. 17. 24, and this Stater was paid for two,
namely, for Christ and Peter, the value of it therefore was, 2 s. 6. d.

(...), Denarius, a penny. This was their tribute money, Mat. 22. 19. There were
Tremel. Mat. 22. 19.
two sorts of pence in use among them: the common penny, which valued of ours 7
d. ob. And the penny of the Sanctuary, which valued 1 s. 3 d. For it was
answerable to their Didrachmum; and of this last we must understand S. Matthew
in this place, for their tribute money was Didrachmum, as before has been noted
out of Mat. 17. 24. This Didrachmum or half shekel, was formerly paid by the
Israelites Aben ^sr. Ne^em. 10. 32.
every year fter they were 20 years old, toward their Temple, Exodus 30. 13.
Caesar by taking away this money from the Temple, and changing it into a
tribute for his own Coffers, did in truth take away from God that which was
God's. Hence in that question proposed unto Christ, Is it lawful to give
tribute unto Caesar, or not? Christ answers, Render unto Caesar the things
that are Caesar' s, and unto God the things that are God's. Joseph. de bell^.
lib. 7. cap. 26.
This very tribute afterward was paid by the Jews toward the Roman Capitol,
by virtue of a Decree made by Vespasian.

(...) Zuz. It was the (...) Elias Thisbit.
fourth part of a shekel of silver: it valued therefore of ours, 7 d. ob.

(...) Shekel, Si^lus, a shekel: it was twofold; Siclus regius, the Kings
shekel, of common use in buying and selling, it valued 1 s. 3 d. And Siclus
Sanctuarii, the shekel of the Sanctuary, it valued 2 s. 6. d.

The shekels of the Sanctuary were of two stamps. The one was always in use
among the Jews: the thirty pieces of silver which Judas received, are thought
to be 30 shekels of the Sanctuary. It had stamped on the one side, the pot of
Manna, or as others think, Aarons Censer or Incense cup: the inscription on
this side was (...) Shekel Israel, The shekel of Israel: on the reverse side
was stamped Aarons Rod budding, with this inscription about the Coin, (...)
Jeruschalaiim hakeduscha. After the coming of our Savior, the Jews which were
converted to the Christian Faith, Alsted praecog. Theol. p. 550.
changed their shekel, and on the first side stamped the Image of Christ, with
(...) at the mouth of the Image and (...) in the pole, which three letters made
his name Jesu. On the reverse side there was no picture, but the whole rundle
was filled with this inscription, (...) (is) Messia rex venit cum pace, and lux
de homine facta est vita. In some Coyns for the latter clause of that
inscription is read, (...) (i.) Deus homo est factus.

The King's shekel, in David and Solomon's time, had stamped on the one side, a
kind of Tower standing between (...) and (...), and underneath was (...). The
whole inscription was, Jerusalem urbs sanctitatis. On the reverse side, the
rundle was filled with this Hebrew, (...) (i) David rex, and filius ejus
Solomon rex.

The shekel again was divided into lesser Coyns, which had their denomination
from the parts thereof. Thus we read of the half shekel, Exodus 30. 13. The
third part of a shekel, Nehem. 10. 32. The quarter of a shekel, 1 Samuel 9. 8.

Their Gold Coyns.
(...) Zahab. The English reads is, a piece of gold, 2 Kin. 5. 5. By it is
meant, that which elsewhere is called Siclus auri, a shekel of gold, 1 Chronicles.
21. 25. Hence the one thousand seven hundred pieces of gold mentioned, Judge. 8.
26. the Greek renders 1700, (...), etc.
shekels, of gold, Breerewood de nummis.
The weight of this Coin was two attick drams. the value 15. s.

(...) Adarcon, of this we read, Esra 8. 27. It was also called (...) Drakmon,
of which we read, Esra. 2. 69. Both these names seem to denote the same coin;
if not, yet both were of the same weight. The Greek interprets them both by
(...), and our English accordingly renders both, a dram, which must be
understood of the drams in use among the Hebrews, weighing two Attick drams.
From the Greek (...), Drakmon seems to have had is name. Breerwood de nummis.
He conjectureth not amiss, who thinks that Adarcon was so called, quasi
Daricon, which was a certain coin of gold in use among the Persians, and from
King Darius (whose Image one side thereof bore) was named Daricon, and (...)
amongst the Chaldaeans is often prefixed before a word, as (...) is among the
Hebrews. The value of this Coin was of ours 15. s.

Their Sums.
Their sums were two (...) Maneh, (...) Mina, a Pound. In gold it weighed one
hundred shekels. This appears by comparing these Texts, 1 Kin. 10. 17. Tres
(...) Manim, three pound of gold went to one shield. Now we read, 2 Chronicles. 9.
16. Three hundred shekels of gold went to one shield. The name shekels is not
expressed in the Original, but necessarily understood, as appears in that
which was spoken of Zahab. For it is a received rule, that in Scripture Aurum
being put with a numeral, signifies so many shekels of gold; and so Argentum
in like manner. The weight thereof then being 100 shekels, it follows, that
the value was 75. l. in silver, their Maneh weighed 60 shekels, Ezekiel, 45. 12.
so that it valued 7. l. 10. s. Note, that Sheindler in (...)
Sheindler was deceived, in saying, that the price or value of the Manch was
changed in Ezekiels time, because it then valued 60 shekels: for the difference
is not between the sacred and profane Maneh, as Sheindler conceives, but
between the Maneh of gold, which was valued at 100 shekels always, and the
Maneh of silver, which weighed 60 shekels, according to the fore-quoted place
in Ezekiel.

The second sum was (...) Cicar, Talentum, A Talent. This, if it were of
silver, it contained in weight 3000 shekels. For, those two verses being
compared together, Exodus 38. 25, 26. shows, that six hundred thousand men
paying every man half a shekel, the whole sum amounts to an hundred talents;
whence it follows, that a talent of silver amongst the Hebrews was 375. l.
But a talent of gold (the proportion of gold to silver being observed) was
twelve times as much, so that it valued of ours 4500. l.

In this tract of their Coyns we are to know three things. First that as the
Romans, in the former ages, used Aes grave, Bullion money, unstampt, which in
the M^ss or Billot they weighed out in their payments, and afterward, Aes
signatum, coined metals: So the Hebrews, though at last they used coined money,
yet at first they weighed their many uncoyned; Abraham weighed to Ephron the
silver. Genesis 23. 16. Hence the shekel had its name from (...) Shak^l,
ponderare, librare, to weigh, or put in the balance. Secondly, as the coined
shekel was twofold, one for the use of the Sanctuary; the other for the use of
the Commonwealth; and that of the Sanctuary was double the price of the other;
so the weight of the shekel is to be distinguished after the same manner; the
shekel of the Sanctuary weighed half an ounce Troy weight; the common shekel*
weighed a quarter of an ounce. For Example, Goli^^; spears head weighed 600.
shekels of the sanctuary, 1. Sam. 17. 7. that is twenty five pound weight:
Absolom's hair weighed two hundred shekels after the Kings weight, 2 Samuel 14.
26. that is, four pound weight and two ounces. Yea, the sums which I have
reckoned only according to the Sanctuary, in common use, according to the
King's weight, they abate half their value.

3. The lesser coyns were in general termed (...), or in the singular number
(...), Joh. 2. 15. The word signifies properly a small quantity or little
piece of metal, such as may be clipped off from coyns. Upon the first of the 2
Moses Kotsens. de Siclis. fol. 122. col. 2.
month Adar, Procla. was made throughout Israel, that the people should provide
their half shekels, which were yearly paid toward the service of the Temple,
according to the commandment of God, Ex. 30. 13. Moses Kotsens. ibid.
One the 25. of Adar, then they brought tables into the Temple (that is, into
the ward Court where the people stood) on these tables lay these (...), or
lesser coyns, to furnish those who wanted half shekels for their offerings, or
that wanted lesser pieces of money in their payment for oxen-sheep, or doves,
which likewise stood there in a readiness in the same court to be sold for
sacrifices: but this supply of lesser coyns, was notwithout an exchange for
other money, or other things in lieu of money, and that upon advantage. Hence
those that sat at these tables, as chief bankers or masters of the exchange,
they were termed (...) in respect of the lesser coyns which they exchanged: in
respect of the exchange it self, they were termed (...), for (...) inquit
Pollu^, est (...) vid. Dr^. Annot. in N. T. part. al. ter.
(...) signifies the same in Greek, as Cambium in Latin, whence those Letters
of exchange, which the Latins call Literas Cambii, the Greeks call (...),
Tickets of exchange: in respect of the Tables at which they sat, they are
termed by the Talmudists (...), Sch ulcanim from (...), Schulcan, Mensa; for
the same reasons they are sometimes termed by the Greeks (...); and by the
Latins Mensarii. These are those changers of money which our Savior drove out
of the Temple.

FINIS.
(...).
The Names of AUTHORS cited in this BOOK.
A
ABen Esra. Aboth. vi. Pirke. Aboth. Aeschines. Alexander Neopol. Alstedius.
Ambrosius. Aquinas. Aristoteles. Arias Montanus, Aristophanes, Aureliae
Allobr^gum. 1607 Artemidoras. Athenaeus. Augustinus, Coloniae Agrippinae. 1616
B
Baal turim, Beda, Bellarminus, Bertramus, Beza, Bodinus, Brerewood,
Buxtorfius, Budaeus.
C
Caninius, Capnio, vi. Reuchlin. Carrion, Casaubonus, Coelius Rhodiginus,
Chazkuni, Chemnitius, Chimchi alias, R. David Kimchi, Chrysostomus, Clem.
Alexandrius, Cicero. Concilium quintum sextum. Cyrillus, Cyprianus, Cuneus,
Ludguni Batavorum. 1617
D
Demosthenes, Venitiis. 1554 Diodorus Siculus. Dionysius Halicarnass. Drusius
de tribus sectis, Franckerae. 1619
E
Elias Thisbites. Epiphanus. Erasmus. Euripides. Eustatius. Eusebius.
F
Funecius. Fagius. Firmicus.
G
Galatinus, Francofurti. 1612 Gellius, Genebrardus, G^rionides, Gregor.
Nazianzen, Gyraldus.
H
Herodianus, Herodotus, Hesiodus, Hieronymus, Basileae, 1516 Homerus, Horatius,
Hospinianus, Tiguri. 1621
I.
Jalcut, Cra^^viae, 1565 Jansenius, Josephus, Aureliae Allobr^g. 1611 Jonathan.
Junius. Justin Martyr. Justin, histor. Juvenalis. Il medenu.
K.
Kimchi vid. Chimchi.
L.
Lactantius. Lacrtius. Levi ben. Gersom. Lipsius. Livius. Lucanus. Lucianus.
Lyranus.
M.
Macrobius. Magius. Maimonides, lib. Jad. Venetiis. 1574 Masius. Maximus
Tyrius. Montacutius. Moses Kotsensis. Venetiis. 1557 Munsterus. Musar.
Modestus.
O.
Oecumenius. Onkelos. Origines. Ovidius.
P.
Philo Judaeus, Coloniae. Allobrog. 1613 Pirke. Aboth. Plautus. Plinius.
Pierius, Basileae. 1575. Plutarchus. Procopius. Prudentius.
R.
Reuchlinus (pro quo citatur Capnio perperam) Francofurti. 1612. Rosinu^.
Ruffinus.
S.
Seder olam minus. Septuaginta interpretes. Serarius. Scaliger. De emend. temp.
Lutetiae. 1583. Trihaeres. Franekerae. 1619.

Sheindler. Sigonius. Scholiastes Aristophanis. Solomon Jarchi. Solinus.
Sozomenus. Statius. Stukius. Suetonius. Suidas, Syrus interpres.
T.
Talmud Bybylonicum, Talmud Hierosolymitanum. Targum Vzielidis, sive
Jonathanis. Targum Onkelos. Targum Hierosolymitanum. Tertullianus. 1609
Theophylactus. Theodoretus. Theophrastus. Tholosanus. Thisbites. Tiraquellus.
Toletus. Tremelius.
V.
Vatablus. Valerius Max. Varro. Virgilius.
X.
Xenophon, Basileae. 1569
Z.
Zepperus. Zohar.
A TABLE OF THE Several TEXTS of SCRIPTURE Explained in the Six Books.
GENESIS.
Chap. Verse. Page 4 3, 4 23 4 21 136 7 24 84 8 4 ibid. 9 25 1 11 31 143 14 22
245, 247 15 2 230 17 213 17 14 216 18 22 73 20 7 24 21 10 1 22 2 148 23 2 169
23 16 269 24 2 245 24 53 230 24 55 231 24 56 236 25 5, 6 230 29 27 234 30 27
273 30 133 31 28 87 31 30 170 31 53 143 35 19 265 35 6 261 37 34 244 38 24 2 41
1 231 43 16 97 43 24 88 44 5 173 45 15 87 46 4 239 46 26 245 47 29 245 49 3 2
49 7 26 49 10 3 50 2 241 50 10 234

EXODUS.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 11 248 1 14 109 3 6 47 3 15 142 7 11 174 12 6 107 12 15 110
12 26 3 106 12 27 103 13 223 13 2, 9, 11. 42, 43 13 18 257 14 1 154 14 24 81 15
20 24 16 23 101 16 34 17 16 36 262 18 7 87 18 21 193 21 10 236 21 14 77 22^ 1,
2 4. 203, 204 23. 32 and 34. 14, 257 25 22 63 28 14, 16 28 16 167 29 4, 9, 20.
16, 17 30 10. 64, 133 30 13. 265, 266 267, 270 30 23 13 31 14 217 32 157 32 20
15^ 32 34, 10. 158, 159 34 161 35 3 101 38 25, 26. 269

LEVITICUS.
Chap. Verse. Page 6 3 146 8 12, 30. 1^, 14 10 10 180 12 2, 3 214 13 33 2 18 15
4, 23 15 16 (...), (...). 15, 133 18 21 143 19 18 18^ 19 2^, 24 218 20 10 199
21 3, 10, 11. 17 21 14, 7, 17. 16 32 27 107, 214 23 118 23 5, 6, 7, 8. 10, 23
10, 11, 17. 115, 116, 118 23 17 218, ^20 23 24 121 23 40 118 23 43 119 24 13
196 25 6, ^0, 2^. ^^4 25 8 136 26 30 161 27 29 218 27 32 226

NUMBERS.
Chap. Verse. Page 2 2 254 3 19 3 15 20 4 41 23 5 3 23 5 18 26 6 31 6 5 32 8 10
20 8 11 220 8 24 20 9 113 9 9 195 10 18, 256 10 2 102 10 9 256 10 25 255 11 16,
26. 19^, 191 12 18 113 15 45 15 20 218, 219 15 35 196 15 38 44 18 12 220 18 12,
13 218 18 15, 16 223 18 26 220 18 31 22^ 23 28 154 24 21 55 25 3 154 27 18 29
28 4 108 28 11, 15. 1^1 28 16, 17, 104. 128 29 119 29 1, 6 122 36 10 195

DEUTERENOMY
Chap. Verse. Page 1 13, 17. 193 3 11 260 3 29 154 4 41, 4^. 77 6 4 43 7 2 257 8
8 219 9 3 7^ 9 21 159 11 13 43 14 21 9 14 1, 2 244 14 18 225 14 16 ibid. 15 2,
4. 134, 135 16 2 104, 128 16 6 111 17 7 201 17 12 179 18 4 220 18 10, 11. 171
19 3 78 19 15, 19 186 19 21 204 20 10 257 20 11 ibid. 21 6 40 21 17 230 22 5
163 22 8 117 22 12 44 23 6 2^7 25 2 207 25 2, 3 206 26 22 26 12 225 28 233 28
58, 59. 207 29 11 2^ 29 15 186 33 5 2

JOSHUA.
Chap. Verse. Page 3 4 100, 154 6 4 136 6 256 7 182 7 19 246 7 19, 20. 197 9 6
2^8 9 7 257 9 2^ 22 11 19 257 19 1, 9 27 20 6 79 20 7 77

JUDGES.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 16 55 3 7 76 7 1 72 7 19 81 8 23 2 8 26 268 8 33 154 9 4
155 13 32 14 1^3 14 10, 11. 233, 283 14 12 90 17 5 170

RUTH.
Chap. Verse. Page 2 4 87

1 SAMUEL.
Chap. Verse. Page 2 36 265 5 4 156 7 15 2 7 16 193 9 8 267 9 9 24 10 1 88 14 44
247 16 11 94 17 7 2^9 19 13 170 25 41 88 28 177 28 6, 7 165 31 10 160

2 SAMUEL.
Chap. Verse. Page 2 1 167 7 18 73 14 26 270 18 18 219 20 25 2^ 21 1 258

1 KINGS.
Chap. Verse. Page 2 28 77 6 3 65 6 37 60 7 15 26^ 8 9 63 8 31 245 10 17 268 11
^4^ 11 5 160 12 12 207 12 28 159 13 33 17 18 147 18 19 76 20 10 247 20 39 203
21 9 196 22 30 12

2 KINGS.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 2 154, 155 2 9 230 2 12 25 4 23 1^1 4 29 87 5 5 267 5 18
164 6 1 25 6 25 ^62 7 1 ibid. 11 12 11 12 10 27 12 9 66 17 30, 31 164 17 33 49
19 37 164 21 7 76 22 3 27 23 4 13, 181 23 6 76 23 10 143 23 11 150 23 13 160

1 CHRONICLES.
Chap. Verse. Page 6 49 18 21 25 268 23 4 19 23 24 20 24 19 25 8 20 26 ib 26 20
19

2 CHRONICLES.
Chap. Verse. Page 3 15 260 5 12 20 6 13 65 9 16 268 15 16 76 19 5, 8, 11. 180
20 5 65 29 22 18 31 6 224 31 13 226 35 6 111

EZRA.
Chap. Verse. Page 2 43 22 2 69 268 3 8 20, 67 3 12 68 6 15 67 7 6 27 7 9 ib. 8
27 268

NEHEMIAH
Chap. Verse. Page 3 1 72 3 3, 28 74 8 10 96 8 15 118 8 18 119 10 32 267 10 37
219 10 37, 38 224

ESTER.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 8 95 9 21 138

PSALMS.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 188 15 1 62 16 6 360 19 1 63 19 4, 5 232 23 5 89 26 6 40 27
10 256 40 7 249 45 1 27 45 8 14 46 5 254 52 164 54 ibi. 60 8 89 74 8 70 76 10
188 78 38 207 80 2 256 81 3 122 84 7 28 72 95 247 99 1 63 106 20 157 106 26 245
109 7 188 116 13 97 118 20 70 109 31 187 122 223 128 3 94 133 2 14 141 2 64 145
233

PROVERBS.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 21 70 3 22 175 4 10 73 9 9 72 10 7 242 14 28 222 15 17 86
20 26 211 21 14 66 31 6 198

CANTICLES.
Chap. Verse. Page 9 4 254

ISAIAH.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 1 24 8 1 249 8 2 215 12 3 120 17 8 161 18 2 153 27 9 161 30
8 248 30 29 223 37 38 164 38 8 84 45 23 246 63 3 133 65 5 41

JEREMIAH.
Chap. Verse. Page 7 18 160 9 17 245 16 7 97, 243 19 5 144 26 8, 16 180 28 9 192
32 35 144 34 18 257 35 31 35 7 56 36 6 130 36 23 249 40 5 86 44 17 160 48 1 164
48 7 157 52 21 259 52 24 18

LAMENT.
Chap. Verse. Page 2 19 81

EZEKIEL.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 10 255 8 163 8 14 152 16 38 199 20 21 97 21 21. 172, 177 22
41 94 24 17 243 37 233 40 5 261 45 11 262 45 12 268 45 13 222 45 14 263

DANIEL.
Chap. Verse. Page 9 24 84

HOSEA.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 1 25 3 2 262 4 12 171, 177

AMOS.
Chap. Verse. Page 2 8 94 5 26 149 6 10 241 8 4 121

JONAH.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 5 110

MICH.
Chap. Verse. Page 3 7 244

HAB.
Chap. Verse. Page 2 11 204

HAGG.
Chap. Verse. Page 2 10 68

ZACHAR.
Chap. Verse. Page 3 1 187 5 2 249 9 14 137 10 2 171

MALACH.
Chap. Verse. Page 2 7 18

TOB.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 7 224 1 7, 8 225 7 14 235 10 10 139

ECCLESIASTIC.
Chap. Verse. Page 34 26 223

1 MACCHAB.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 16 217 4 59 123 5 42 27

2 MACCHAB.
Chap. Verse. Page 4 19 151 6 19 211

MATTHEW.
Chap. Verse. Page 2 4 27 2 23 32 3 17 168 4 23 70 5 189 5 22 146 8 11 93 9 3,
11. 28 9 15 232 9 23 244 10 12, 13 87 10 17 180 10 29 264 10 38 209 10 41 24 11
19 25 12 41 188 14 25 81 15 2 39 15 5 247 16 14 38 16 1^ 192 17 24 265 18 16
181 20 3, 5, 6. 81 21 9 118 21 23 180 22 19 166 22 23 32. 47 23 5 41 23 6 30 23
9 25 23 17 103 23 18 246 23 23. 224, 226 24 31 122 25 23 186 26 3^ 180 26 17
113 26 49 ^0 26 65 17 27 24 40 27 25 19^ 27 26 209 27 2^ 1^ 27 34, 38. 197, 98
27 59, 60. 242 28 1 80

MARK.
Chap. Verse. Page 6 21 6 6 27 196 7 3 39 7 4 40 7 4 240, 26^ 8 15 61 10 12 238
12 50 12 42 264 13 35 81 14 1 1^ 14 26 92 15 23 197 55 25, 34. 82, 109 15 42 99

LUKE.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 5, 9 19 1 61 215 2 1 59 3 2 18 3 37, ^8, 46. 89 4 17, 20.
249 4^ 20 71 5 17 27 7 30 ibid. 7 38 87 7 37, 38, 46, 89 7 39 41 8 44 44 10 39
31 11 38 40 12 2 7 12 38 81 12 58 187 13 1 60 13 15 102 13 34 192 14 7 90 15 8
265 16 1 116 16 6, 7 263 16 21 93 16 29 24 18 45 18 6 196 18 11 37 18 12 41 18
13 73 20 27 47 21 1, 4 66 21 20 264 22 1 104, 1^8 22 17, 18 90 22 19 93 23 11
13 23 44 82

JOHN.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 14, 16 14 1 18 93 1 25 11 1 38 30 2 6 89, 264 2 9 234 2 15
270 2 20 67 3 10 23 3 26 30 4 9 47 4 20 50 4 25 215 7 22 214 7 37 120 7 38
ibid. 7 49 37 8 5 139 8 20 66 9 22 181 9 24 246 10 3 16 10 22 139 10 23 65 11 9
8^, 83 13 2 112 13 5 88 13 9 41 13 23 93 13 29 128 16 2 112 18 28, 31. 128, 129
19 7 200 19 13 191 19 14 82 19 17 209 19 24 128 19 33 114 19 36 98 19 40 241

ACTS.
Chap. Verse. Page 2 5 10 2 15 83 3 1 ibid. 3 11 65 5 37 59 6 1 8 6 6 21 6 9 70
7 16 265 7 43 149 7 60 73 9 2 70 9 37 239 10 9 83 10 9, 1^. 97 11 26 33 13 2
21, 220 13 5, 14. 70 13 42 98 14 23 21 15 2 32 15 21 70 16 13 73 16 16 176 17
23 141 18 14 200 19 166 19 2 68 19 8, 9, 10. 71 19 19 265 19 24 32 19 24, 28
162 21 24 32 21 38 60 22 3 13 23 6 47 49 23 8 47 23 8 37 24 129 24 5 32 26 1 22
27 9 130

ROMANS.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 1 227 1 11 36 3 24 6^ 4 11 213 5 6, 7 34 11 16 219 14 11
246

1 CORINTHIANS.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 20 24, 28 4 13 132 5 114 5 5 182 7 3 236 7 18 217 8 5 153
10 16 93 10 19 97 11 115 11 10 236 11 26 1^6 14 31 15 9 240 15 23 254 15 32 210
16 183 16 20 87

2 CORINTHIANS.
Chap. Verse. Page 2 15 14 5 22 133 (...) 24 206

GALATH.
Chap. Verse. Page 2 11 33

EPHESIANS.
Chap. Verse. Page 2 13 114

PHILLIP.
Chap. Verse. Page 3 5 8

COLOSS.
Chap. Verse. Page 2 8, 16, 18. 64 2 20, 21, 23. ib. 2 9 68

1 TIMOTHY.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 4 28 1 15 72 3 2 238 3 13 21 4 3 57 5 3 238 5 22 21 5 23 57

2 TIMOTH.
Chap. Verse. Page 3 8 174

HEBREWS.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 1 165 3 18 247 5 4 17 9 4 63 9 12 133 9 26 114 11 35 211 11
37 210 12 23 20

JAMES.
Chap. Verse. Page 2 2 12

1 PETER.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 18 223 5 14 87

2 PETER.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 20 24 3 8 136

1 JOHN.
Chap. Verse. Page 2 63 5 16 183

2 JOHN.
Chap. Verse. Page 2 1 187

APOC.
Chap. Verse. Page 2 17 188 4 6 255 6 6 264 14 14 177 21 15 261

FINIS.

