

THE MAN IN THE MOON: OR, A DISCOURSE Of a Voyage thither:

By F.G. B. of H.

To which is added Nuncius Inanimatus, written in Latin by the same Author, and
now Englished by a Person of Worth.

The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed for Joshua Kirton, at the Sign of the Kings Arms in St.
Paul's. Churchyard. 1657

To the Ingenious Reader.
THou have here an essay of Fancy, where Invention is showed with Judgment. Is
was not the Authors intention (I presume) to discourse thee into a belief of
each particular circumstance. It Is fit thou allow him a liberty of conceit;
where thou take to thy self a liberty of judgment. In substance, thou have
here a new discovery of a new World, which perchance may find little better
entertainment in thy opinion, than that of Columbus at first, in the esteem of
all men. Yet his than but poor espyall of America, betrayed unto knowledge so
much as has since encreast into a vaste plantation. And the then unknown, to
be now of as large extent as all other the known World.

That there shoud be Antipodes was once thought as great a Paradox as now that
the Moon should be habitable. But the knowledge of this may seem more properly
reserved for this our discovering age: In which our lilaeusses, can by
advantage of their spectacles gaze the Sun into spots, and descry mountains in
the Moon. But this and more in the ensuing discourse I leave to thy candid
censure, and the faithful relation of the little eyewitness, our great
discoverer.

E. M.
THE MAN IN THE MOON.
IT is well enough and sufficiently known to all the countries of Andaluzia,
that I Domingo Gonsales was born of Noble parentage, and that in the renowned
City of Sivill, to wit in the year 1552. my Fathers name being Therrando
Gonsales (that was near kinsman by the mothers side unto Don Pedro Sanchez that
worthy Count of Almenara,) and as for my Mother, she was the daughter of the
Reverend and famous Lawyer, Otho Perez de Sallaveda, Governor of Barcellona,
and Corrigidor of Biscaia: being the youngest of 17 Children they had, I was
put to school, and intended by them unto the Church. But our Lord purposing to
use my service in matters of far other nature and quality, inspired me with
spending some time in the wars. It was at the time that Don Fernando, the Noble
and thrice renowned Duke D Alva, was sent into the Low Countries, viz. the year
of Grace 1568. I then following the current of my foresaid desire, leaving the
Universitie of Salamanca, (whither my Parents had sent me) without giving
knowledge unto any of my dearest friends, got me through France unto Antwerp,
where in the month of June 1569. I arrived in something poor estate. For
having s^ld my Books and Bedding, with such other stuff as I had, which happily
yielded me some 30. ducats, and borrowed of my Fathers f^^ends some 20. more,
I bought me a little Nagg, with which I traveled more thriftily than young
Gentlemen are wont ordinarily to do: Until at last arriving within a league
of Antwerp, certain of the cursed Ge^ses set upon me, and bereaved me of Horse,
Money, and all: Whereupon I was fain (through want and necessity,) to enter into
the service of Marshall Cossey a French Noble man, whom I se^v^d truly in
honorable place, although mine enemies gave it out to my disgrace that I was
his horse-keepers boy. But for that matter I shall referr my self unto the
report of the Count Mansfield, Mounsieur Tavier, and other men of known worth
and estimation; who have often testified unto many of good credit, yet living,
the very truth in that behalf, which indeed is this, that Mounsieur Cossey, who
about that time had been sent Ambassador unto the Duke D' Alva; Governor of
the Low Countries, he I say understanding the Nobility of my birth, and my late
misfortune; thinking it would be no small honor to him, to have a Spanyard of
that quality about him, furnished me with horse, armor and whatsoever I
wanted, using my service in nothing so much (after once I had learned the
French tongue) as writing his Letters, because my hand indeed was then very
fair. In the time of War, if upon necessity, I now and then dressed mine own
Horse, it ought not to be cast in my teeth, seeing I hold it the part of a
Gentleman, for setting forward the service of his Prince, to submit himself
unto the vilest office. The first expedition I was in, was against the Prince
of Orange, at what time the Marshall my friend aforesaid, met him making a road
into France, and putting him to flight, chased him even unto the walls of
Cambray. It was my good hap at that time to defeat a horseman of the enemy, by
killing his Horse with my pistol, which falling upon his leg, so as he could
not stir, he yielded himself to my mercy; but I knowing mine own weakness of
body, and seeing him a lusty tall fellow, thought it my surest way to dispatch
him, which having done, I rifled him of a chain, money, and other things to the
value of 200. ducats: no sooner was that money in my purse, but I began to
resume the remembrance of my nobility, and giving unto Mounsieur Cossey the
Besa Los Manos, I got my self immediately unto the Dukes court, where were
diverse of my kindred, that (now they saw my purse full of good Crowns) were
ready enough to take knowledge of me; by their means I was received into pay,
and in process of time obtained a good degree of favor with the Duke, who
sometimes would jest a little more broadly at my personage than I could well
brook. For although I must acknowledge my stature to be so little, as no man
there is living, I think less, yet in as much as it was the work of God, and
not mine, he ought not to have made that a means to dishonor a Gentleman
withal. And those things which have happened unto me, may be an example, that
great and wonderful things may be performed by most unlikely bodies, if the
mind be good, and the blessing of our Lord do second and follow the endeavors
of the same. Well, howsoever the Dukes merriments went against my stomach, I
framed my self the best I could to dissemble my discontent, and by such my
patience accommodating my self al^o unto some other his humors, so won his
favor, as at his departure home into Spain, (whither I attended him) the Year
1573. by his favor an^^ some other accidents, (I will say nothing of my own
industry, wherein I was not wanting to my self) I was able to carry home in my
purse the value of 30^0. Crowns. At my return home my Parents, that were
marvellously displeased with my departure, received me with great joy; and the
rather, for that they saw I brought with me means to maintain my self without
their charge, having a portion sufficient of mine own, so that they needed not
to defalke any thing from my brethren or sisters for my setting up. But
fearing I would spend it as lightly as I got it, they did never leave
importuning me till I must needs marry the daughter of a Portugais, a Merchant
of Lisbon, a man of great wealth and dealings, called John Figueres. Therein I
satisfied their desire, and putting ^ot only my marriage money, but also a
good part of mine own Stock into the hands of my Father in Law, or such as he
wished me unto, I lived in good sort, even like a Gentleman, with great content
for diverse years. At last it fell out, that some disagreement happened between
me and one Pedro Delgades a Gentleman of my kin, the causes whereof are
needless to be related, but so far this dissension grew between us, as when no
mediation of friends could appease the some, into the field we went together
alone with our Rapiers, where my chance was to kill him, being a man of great
strength, and tall stature. But what I wan^ed of him in strength, I supplied
with courage, and my nimbleness more than countervailed his stature. This fact
being committed in Carmona, I fled with all the speed I could to Lisbone,
thinking to lurk with some friend of my Father in laws, till the matter might
be compounded and a course taken for a sentence of Acquittall by consent of the
prosecutors. This matter fell out in the Year 1596. even at that time that a
certain great Count of ours came home from the West Indies, in triumphant
manner, boasting and sending out his declarations in print, of a great victory
he had obtained against the English, near the Isle of Pines. Whereas the truth
is, he got of the English nothing at all in that Voyage, but blows and a great
loss.

Would to God that lying and Vanit^e had been all the faults he had; his
convetousness was like to by my utter undoing, although since it has proved a
means of eternizing my name for ever with all Posterity, (I verily hope) and to
the unspeakable good of all mortal men, that in succeeding ages the World
shall have, if at the leastwise it may please God that I do return safe home
a^^^^ into my Country, to give perfect instructions how those admirable
devices, and past all credit of possibility, which I have light upon, may be
imparted unto public use. You shall then see men to fly from place to place
in the air; you shall be able, (without moving or traveling of any creature,)
to send messages in an instant many Miles off, and receive answer again
imediately; you shall be able to declare your mind presently unto your friend,
being in some private and remote place of a populous City, with a number of
such like things: but that which far surpasses all the rest, you shall have
notice of a new World, of many most rare and incredible secrets of Nature, that
all the Philosophers of former ages could never so much as dream off: But I
must be adv^sed, how I be over liberal, in publishing these wonderful
mysteryes, till the Sages of our State have considered how far the use of
these things may stand with the Policy and good government of our Country, as
also with the Fathers of the Church, how the publication of them may not prove
prejudicial to the affairs of the Catholic Faith and Religion, which I am
taught (by those wonders I have seen above any mortal man that has lived in
many ages past) with all my best endeavors to advance, without all respect of
temporal good, and so I hope I shall.

But to go forward with my narration, so it was that the bragging Captain above
named, made show of great coffeehouse for the death of the said Delgades,
who was indeed some kin unto him. Howbeit he would have been entreated, so that
I would have given him no less than 1000. Ducats (for his share) to have put up
his Pipes, and surceased all suit in his Kinsmans behalf; I had by this time
(besides a wife) two sonns whom I liked not to beggar by satisfying the desire
of this covetous br^ggart and the rest, and therefore constrained of necessity
to take another course, I put my self in a good Carick that went for the East
Indies, taking with me the worth of 2000. Ducats to traffic withal, being
yet able to leave so much more for the estate of my wife and children,
whatsoever might become of me, and the goods I carried with me. In the Indies I
prospered exceeding well, bestowing my stock in Jewels, namely, for the most
part in Diamonds, Emeraulds, and great Pearl; of which I had such peniworths,
as my stock being safely returned into Spain, (so I heard it was) must needs
yield ten for one. But my self upon my way homeward soon after we had doubled
the East of Buena Speranza, fell grievously sick for many days, making account
by the same sickness to end my life, as undoubtedly I had done, had we no (even
then as we did) recovered the same blessed Isle of S. Hellen, the only
paradise, I think, that the Earth yields, of the healthfullness of the Air
there, the fruitfullness of the soil, and the abundance of all manner of
things necessary for sustaining the life of man, what should I speak, seeing
there is scant a boy in all Spain, that has not heard of the same? I cannot
but wonder, that our King in his wisdom has not thought fit to plant a
Colony, and to fortify in it, being a place so necessary for refreshing of all
^^^ vellers out of the Indies, so as it ^^^ hardly possible to make a Voyage
thence, without touching there.



It is situate in the Altitude of 16. degrees to the South, and is about 3.
leagues in compass, having no firm land or continent within 300. leagues, nay
not so much as an Island within 100. leagues of the same, so that it may seem
a miracle of Nature, that out of so huge and tempestuous an Ocean, such a
little piece of ground should arise and discover it self Upon ^he South side
there is a very good harbo^ough, and near unto the same diverse edifices built
by the Portingals to entertain passengers, amongst the which there is a pretty
Chapel handsomely beautifyed with a Tower, having a fair Bell in the same.
Near unto this housing there is a pretty Brook of excellent fresh water, diverse
fair walks made b^ hand, and set along upon both sides, with Fruit Trees,
especially Oranges Limmons, Pomgranats, Almonds, and the like, which bear Fruit
all the year long, as do also the Fig Trees, Vines, Pear Trees, (whereof there
are diverse sorts,) Palmitos, Cocos, Olives, Plumms; also I have seen there such
as we call Damaxaelas, but few; as for Apples I dare say there are none at all;
of garden Herbs there is good store, as of Parsley, Cole-worts, Rosemary,
Mellons, Gourds, Lettice, and the like; Corn likewise growing of it self,
incredible plenty, as Wheat, Pease Barley, and almost all kind of Pulse; but
chiefly it abounds with Cattle, and Foul, as Goats, Swine, Sheep, and
Horses, Partridges. wild Hens, Phesants, Pigeons, and wild Foul beyond all
credit: especially there are to be seen about the Months of February, and
March, huge flocks of a certain kind of wild Swans (of which I shall have
cause hereafter to speak more) that like unto our Cuckoes, and Nightingales, at
a certain season of the year, do vanish away, and are no more to be seen.

On this blessed Island did they set me a shore with a Negro to attend me,
where, praised be God, I recovered my health, and continued there for the space
of one whole year, solacing my self (for lack of human society) with Birds,
and brute beasts, as for Diego (so was the Blackmoore called,) he was
constrained to live at the West end of the Island in a Cave. Because being
always together, victuals would not have fallen out so plenty: if the Hunting
or Fowling of the one had succeeded well, the other would find means to invite
him, but if it were scant with both, we were feign both to bestirre our selves;
marry that fell out very seldom, for that no creatures there do any whit more
fear a man, then they do a Goat or a Cow; by reason thereof I found means
easily to make tame diverse sorts both of Birds and Beasts, which I did in short
time, only by muzzeling them, so as till they came either unto me, or else
Diego, they could not feed. At first I took great pleasure in a kind of
Partridges, of which I made great use, as also of a tame Fox I had. For
whenever I had any occasion to confer with Diego, I would take me one of
them, being hungry, and tying a note about his neck, beat him from me,
whereupon strait they would away to the Cave of Diego, and if they found him
not there, still would they beat up and down all the West end of the Island,
till they had hunted him out; yet this kind of conveyance, not being without
some inconvenience, needless here to be recited; after a certain space I
persuaded Diego (who though he were a fellow of good parts, was ever content to
be ruled by me,) to remove his habitation unto a promontory or cape upon the
North-West part of the Island, being, though a league off, yet within sight of
my house and Chapel; and then, so long as the weather was fair, we could at
all times by signalls, declare our minds each to other in an instant, either by
night, or by day; which was a thing I took great pleasure in.

If in the night season I would signify any thing to him, I used to set up a
light in the Tower or place where our bell hung: It is a pretty large room,
having a fair window well glased, and the walls within being plaistered, were
exceeding white; by reason thereof, though the light were but small, it gave a
great show, as also it would have done much further off, if need had been. This
light after I had let stand some half hour, I used to cover: and then if I saw
any signal of light again from my companion at the cape, I knew that he
waited for my notice, which perceiving, by hiding and showing my light,
according to a certain rule and agreement between us, I certified him at
pleasure what I list: The like course I took in the day to advertise him of my
pleasure, sometimes by smoke, sometimes by dust, sometimes by a more refined
and more effectual way.

But this Art contains more mysteries than are to be set down in few words:
Hereafter I will perhaps afford a discourse for it of purpose, assuring my
self that it may prove exceedingly profitable unto mankind, being rightly used
and well employed: for that which a messenger cannot perform in many days,
this may dispatch in a piece of an hour. Well, I notwithstanding after a while
grew weary of it, as being too painful for me, and betook me again to my
winged messengers.

Upon the Seashore, especially about the mouth of our River, I found great
store of a certain kind of wild Swan (before mentioned) feeding almost
altogether upon the prey, and (that which is somewhat strange,) partly of Fish,
partly of Birds, having (which is also no less strange) one foot with Claws,
talons, and pounces, like an Eagle, and the other whole like a Swan or
waterfowl. These birds using to breed there in infinite numbers, I took some
30. or 40. young ones of them, and bred them up by hand, partly for my
recreation, partly also as having in my head some rudiments of that device,
which afterward I put in practice. These being strong and able to continue a
great flight, I taught them first to come at call affar off, not using any
noise but only the show of a white Cloth. And surely in them I found it true
that is delivered by Plutarch, how that Animalia Carnivora, they are dociliora
quam alterius cujusvis generis. It were a wonder to tell what tricks I had
taught them, by that time they were a quarter old; amongst other things I used
them by little and little to fly with burdens, wherein I found them able above
all credit, and brought them to that pass, as that a white sheet being
displayed unto them by Diego upon the side of a hill, they would carry from me
unto him, Bread, Flesh, or any other thing I list to send, and upon the like
call return unto me again.

Having prevailed thus far, I began to cast in my head how I might do to
join a number of them together in bearing of some great burden: which if I
could bring to pass, I might enable a man to fly, and be carried in the air
to some certain place safe and without hurt. In this cogitation having much
labored my wits, and made some trial, I found by experience, that if many
were put to the bearing of one great burden, by reason it was not possible all
of them should rise together just in one instant, the first that raised himself
upon his wings finding himself stayed by a weight heavier than he could move or
stir, would by and by give over, as also would the second, third, and all the
rest. I devised (therefore) at last a means how each of them might rise
carrying but his own proportion of weight only, and it was thus.

I fastened about every one of my Gans' as a little pulley of Cork, and putting
a string through it of meetly length, I fastened the one end thereof unto a
block almost of eight Pound weight, unto the other end of the string I tied a
poyse weighing some two Pound, which being done, and causing the signal to be
erected, they presently rose all (being 4 in number,) and carried away my
block unto the place appointed. This falling out according to my hope and
desire. I made proof afterward, but using the help of two or three birds more,
in a Lamb, whose happiness I much envied, that he should be the first living
creature to take possession of such a device.

At last after diverse trials I was surprised with a great longing, to cause my
self to be carried in the like sort, Diego my Moore was likewise possessed with
the same desire, and but that otherwise I loved him well, and had need of his
help, I should have taken that his ambitious affection in very evil part: for
I hold it far more honor to have been the first flying man, then to be
another Neptune that first adventured to sail upon the Sea. Howbeit not
seeming to take notice of the mark he aimed at, I only told him (which also I
take to be true) that all my Gansa's were not of sufficient strength to carry
him, being a man, though of no great stature, yet twice my weight at least. So
upon a time having provided all things necessary, I placed my self with all my
trinckets, upon the top of a rock at the Rivers mouth, and putting my self at
full Sea upon an Engine (the description whereof ensues) I caused Diego to
advance his Signal: whereupon my Birds presently arose, 25. in number, and
carried me over lustily to the other rock on the other side, being about a
Quarter of a league.



The reason why I chose that time and place, was that I thought somewhat might
perchance fall out in this enterprise contrary to my expectation, in which case
I assured my self the worst that could be, was but to fall into the water,
where being able to swim well, I hoped to receive little or no hurt in my fall.
But when I was once over in safety, O how did my heart even swell with joy and
admiration of mine own invention! How often did I wish my self in the midst of
Spain, that speedily I might fill the world with the fame of my glory and
renown? Every hour wished I with great longing for the Indian Fleet to take me
home with them, but they stayed (by what mischance I do not know) 3 Months
beyond the accustomed time.

At last they came being in number 3 Carickes sore weather-beaten, their people
being for the most part sick and exceeding weak, so as they were constrained to
refresh themselves in our Island one whole month.

The Captain of our Admiral was called Alphonso de Xima, a Valiant man, wise,
and desirous of renown, and worthy better fortune then afterward befell him.
Unto him I opened the device of my Gansa's, well knowing how impossible it were
otherwise to persuade him to take in so many Birds into the Ship, that would be
more troublesome (for the niceness of provision to be made for them,) then so
many men; Yet I adjured him by all manner of Oaths, and persuasions, to afford
me both true dealing, and secrecy. Of the last I doubted not much, as assuring
my self, he would not dare to impart the device to any other, before our King
were acquainted with it. Of the first I feared much more, namely, lest
Ambition, and the desire of drawing unto himself the honor of such an
invention, should cause him to make me away; yet I was forced to run the
hazard, except I would adventure the loss of my Birds, the like whereof for my
purpose were not to be had in all Christendom, nor any that I could be sure,
would ever serve the turn. Well, that doubt in proof fell out to be
causeless: the man I think was honest of himself: but had he dealt
treacherously with me, I had laid a plot for the discovery of him, as he might
easily judge I would, which peradventure somewhat moved him, yet God knows how
he might have used me, before my arrival in Spain, if in the mean course we
had not been intercepted, as you shall hear. Upon Thursday the 21. of June, to
wit in the year, 1599. we set sail toward Spain, I having allowed me a very
convenient Cabin for my Birds, and stowage also for mine Engine, which the
Captain would have had me leave behind me, and it is a mervaile I had not,
but my good fortune therein saved my life, and gave me that which I esteem
more than an hundred lives, if I had them: for thus it fell out, after two
months sail, we encountered with a fleet of the English, some ten leagues from
the Island of Tenerik, one of the Canaries, which is famous through the World,
for a Hill upon the same called el Pico, that is to be discerned and kenned
upon the Sea, no less than 100. leagues off. We had aboard us 5. times the
number of people that they had; we were well provided of munition, and our men
in good health: yet seeing them disposed to fight, and knowing what infinite
riches we carried with us, we thought it a wiser way to fly, if we might, than
by encountering a company of dangerous fellows, to hazard not only our own
lives, (which a man of valor in such a case esteems not) but the estates of
many poor Merchants, who I am afraid were utterly undone by miscarriage of that
business. Our Fleet then consisted of 5. sail, to wit, 3. Carracks, a Bark, and
a Caravel, that coming from the Isle of Saint Thomas, had (in an evil hour for
him) overtaken us some few days before.

The English had 3. Ships very well appointed, and no sooner spied, but they
began to play for us, and changing their course, as we might well perceive,
endeavored straightway to bring us under their lee, which they might well do
(as the wind stood) especially being light nimble vessels, and yare of sail, as
for the most part all the English shipping is, whereas ours was heavy, deep
laden, foul with the Sea: our Captain therefore resolved peradventure wisely
enough (but I am sure neither valiantly, not fortunately) to fly, commanding us
to disperse our selves: the Caravel by reason of too much have fell foul upon
one of the Carracks, and bruised her so, as one of the English that had
undertaken her, easily fetched her up, and entered her: as for the Caravel, she
sank immediately in the sight of us all. The Bark (for ought I could perceive)
no man making after her, escaped unpursued; and another of our Carracks after
some chase, was given over by the English, that making account to find a booty
good enough of us, and having us between them and their third companion, made
upon us with might and main. Wherefore our Captain that was aboard us, gave
direction to run aland upon the Isle, the Port whereof we could not recover,
saying, that he hoped to save some of the goods, and some of our lives, and the
rest he had rather should be lost, than commit all to the mercy of the Enemy.
When I heard of that resolution, seeing the Sea to work high, and knowing all
the Coast to be full of blind Rocks, and Shoals, so as our Ves^ell might not
possibly come near land, before it must needs be rent in a thousand pieces, I
went unto the Captain, showing him the desperateness of the course he intended,
wishing him rather to try the mercy of the enemy, than so to cast away himself,
and so many brave men: but he would not hear me by any means; whereupon
discerning it to be high time to shift for my self, first, I sought out my Box
or little Casket of stones, and having put it into my sleeve, I then betook me
to my Gansa's, put them upon my Engine, and my self upon it, trusting (as
indeed it happily fell out) that when the Ship should split, my Birds, although
they wanted their Signal, of themselves, and for safeguard of their own lives
(which nature has taught every living creature to preserve to their power)
would make toward the Land; which fell out well (I thank God,) according to
mine expectation. The people of our Ship marvelled about what I went, none of
them being acquainted with the use of my Birds, but the Captain, for Diego was
in the Rosaria, the Ship that fled away unpursued, (as before I told you:) some
half a league we were from the Land, when our Carrack struck upon a Rock, and
split immediately: whereupon I let loose unto my Birds the reins, having first
placed my self upon the highest of the Deck: and with the shock they all arose,
carrying me fortunately unto the Land, whereof, whether I were well apaid, you
need not doubt: but a pitiful sight it was unto me, to behold my friends and
acquaintance in that miserable distress, of whom (notwithstanding) many escaped
better than they had any reason to hope for. For the English launching out
their Cockboats, like men of more noble, and generous disposition than we are
pleased to esteem them, taking compassion upon them, used all the diligence
they could to help such as had any means to save themselves from the fury of
the waves, and that even with their own danger: amongst many, they took up our
Captain, who (as Father Pacio could since tell me) having put himself into his
Cock, with 12. others, was induced to yield himself unto one Captain Rymundo,
who carried him together with our Pilot along in their voyage with them, being
bound for the East Indies; but their hard hap was by a breach of the Sea near
the Cape of Buona Esperanca, to be swallowed of the merciless Waves, whose fury
a little before they had so hardly escaped. The rest of them (as I likewise
heard) and they were in all some 26. persons that they took into their ship,
they set them aland soon after at Cape Verde.

As for my self, being now ashore in a Country inhabited for the most part by
Spaniards, I reckoned my self in safety. Howbeit I quickly found the Reckoning,
I so made, mine Host had not been acquainted withal; for it was my chance to
pitch upon that part of the Isle, where the Hill before mentioned begins to
rise. And it is inhabited by a Savage kind of people, that live upon the sides
of that Hill, the top whereof is always covered with Snow, and held for the
monstrous height and steepness not to be accessible either for man or beast.
Howbeit these Savages fearing the Spaniards, between whom and them there is a
kind of continual war) hold themselves as near the top of that hill as they
can, where they have diverse places of good strength, never coming down into the
fruitful Valleys, but to prey upon what they can find there. It was the chance
of a company of them to espy me within some hours space after my Landing: They
thinking they had light upon a booty, made toward me with all the speed they
could, but not so privily as that I could not perceive their purpose before
they came near to me by half a quarter of a league; seeing them come down the
side of a Hill with great speed directly toward me, diverse of them carrying
long Staves, besides other weapons, which, because of their distance from me, I
might not discern. I thought it high time to bestir me, and shift for my self,
and by all means to keep my self out of the fingers of such slaves, who had
they caught me, for the hatred they bear to us Spaniards, had surely hewed me
all to pieces.

The Country in that place was bare, without the coverture of any wood: But the
mountain before spoken of, beginning even there to lift up it self, I espied in
the side of the same a white cliff, which I trusted my Gansa's would take for a
signal, and being put off; would make all that way, whereby I might quickly be
carried so far, as those barbarous Cullions should not be able to overtake me,
before I had recovered the dwelling of some Spaniard, or at leastwise might
have time to hide my self from them, till that in the night, by help of the
stars, I might guide my self toward Las Loeguna, the City of that Island, which
was about one league off, as I think. Wherefore with all the celerity that
might be, I put my self upon mine Engine, and let loose the reins unto my
Gansa's; It was my good fortune that they took all one way, although not just
that way I aimed at. But what then? O Reader, Arrige aures, prepare thy self
unto the hearing of the strangest Chance that ever happened to any mortal man,
and that I know thou will not have the Grace to believe, till thou feast it
seconded with Iteration of Experiments in the like, as many a one, I trust,
thou may in short time; My Gansa's, like so many horses that had gotten the
bit between their teeth, made (I say) not toward the Cliff I aimed at,
although I used my wonted means to direct the Leader of the Flock that way, but
with might and main took up toward the top of El Pico, and did never stay till
they came there, a place where they say never man came before, being in all
estimation at least 15 leagues in height perpendicularly upward, above the
ordinary level of the Land and Sea.



What manner of place I found there, I should gladly relate unto you, but that
I make haste to matters of far greater Importance. There when I was set down, I
saw my poor Gansa's fall to panting and blowing gaping forbreath, as if they
would all presently have died: where fore I thought it not good to trouble them
a while, forbearing to draw them in, (which they never wont to endure without
struggling) and little expecting that which followed.

It was now the season that these Birds were wont to take their flight away, as
our Cuckoes and Swallows do in Spain, toward the Autumn. They (as after I
perceived) mindful of their usual voyage, even as I began to settle my self
for the taking of them in, as it were with one consent, rose up, and having no
other place higher to make toward, to my unspeakable fear and amazement struck
bolt upright, and never did lin towering upward, and still upward, for the
space, as I might guess, of one whole hour; toward the end of which time,
methought I might perceive them to labor less and less; till at length, O
incredible thing! they forbear moving anything at all and yet remained
unmovable as steadfastly, as if they had been upon so many perches, the Lines
s^^cked; neither I, nor the Engine moved at all, but abode still, as having no
manner of weight.

I found then by this Experience that which no Philosopher ever dreamed of, to
wit, that those things which we call heavy, do not sink toward the Center of
the Earth, as their natural place, but as drawn by a secret property of the
Globe of the Earth, or rather some thing within the same, in like sort as the
Lodestone draws Iron, being within the compass of the beams attractive.

For though it be true that there they could abide unmoved without the prop or
sustentation of any corporal thing, other than the air, as easily and quietly
as a fish in the middle of the water, yet forcing themselves never so little,
it is not possible to imagine with what swiftness and celerity they were
carried, and whether it were upward, downward, or sidelong, all was one. Truly
I must confess, the horror and amazement of that place was such, as if I had
not been armed with a true Spanish courage and resolution, I must needs have
dyed there with very fear.

But the next thing that did most trouble me, was the swiftness of Motion, such
as did even almost stop my breath; If I should liken it to an Arrow out of a
Bow, or to a stone cast down from the top of some high tower, it would come far
short, and short.

Another thing there was exceeding, and more than exceeding, troublesome unto
me, and that was the Illusions of Devils and wicked spirits, who, the first day
of my arrival, came about me in great numbers, carrying the shapes and likeness
of men and women, wondering at me like so many Birds about an Owl, and speaking
diverse kinds of Languages which I understood not, till at last I did light
upon them that spoke very good Spanish, some Dutch, and other some Italian, for
all these Languages I understood.

And here I saw only a touch of the Suns absence for a little while once, ever
after having him in my sight. Now to yield you satisfaction in the other, you
shall understand that my Gansa's, although entangled in my line, might easily
find means to seize upon diverse kinds of Fly^s and Birds, as especially
Swallows, and Cuckoes, whereof there were multitudes, as Motes in the Sun;
although, to say the truth, I never saw them to feed any thing at all. As for
my self, in truth I was much beholding unto those same, whether men or Devils I
know not, that amongst diverse speeches, which I will forbear awhile to relate,
told me, that if I would follow their directions, I should not only be brought
safely to my home, but also be assured to have the command of all pleasures of
that place, at all times.

To the which motions not daring to make a flat denial, I prayed a time to
think of it, and withal entreated them (though I felt no hunger at all, which
may seem strange) to help me with some victuals, least in the mean while I
should starve. They did so readily enough, and brought me very good Flesh, and
Fish of diverse sorts well dressed, but that it was exceeding fresh, and without
any manner of relish of salt.

Wine also I tasted there of diverse sorts, as good as any in Spain, and Beer,
no better in all Antwerp. They wished me then, while I had means to make my
provision, telling me, that till the next Thursday they could not help me to
any more, if happily then; at what time also they would find means to carry me
back, and set me safe in Spain, where I would wish to be, so that I would
become one of their fraternity, and enter into such covenants and profession as
they had made to their Master and Captain, whom they would not name. I answered
them gently for the time, telling them, I saw little reason to be very glad of
such an offer, praying them to be mindful of me as occasion served.

So for that time I was rid of them, having first furnished my Pockets with as
much Victual as I could thrust in, amongst the which I fail not to afford
place for a little Botijo of good Canary wine.

Now shall I declare unto you the quality of the place, in which I then was.
The Clouds I perceived to be all under me, between me and the earth. The
stars, by reason it was always day, I saw at all times alike, not shining
bright, as upon the earth we are wont to see them in the night time; but of a
whitish color, like that of the Moon in the day time with us: And such of them
as were to be seen (which were not many) showed far greater than with us, yea
(as I should ghess) no less than ten times so great. As for the Moon being
then within two days of the change, she appeared of a huge and fearful
quantity.

This also is not to be forgotten, that no stars appeared but on that part of
the Hemispheare that was next the Moon, and the nearer to her the bigger in
Quantity they showed. Again I must tell you, that whether I lay quiet and
rested, or else were carried in the Air, I perceived my self still to be
always directly between the Moon and the earth. Whereby it appears, not only
that my Gansa's took none other way than directly toward the Moon, but also,
that when we rested (as at first we did for many hours,) either we were
insensibly carried, (for I perceived no such motion) round about the Globe of
the Earth, or else that (according to the late opinion of Copernicus,) the
Earth is carried about, and turns round perpetually, from West to the East,
leaving unto the Planets only that motion which Astronomers call natural, and
is not upon the Poles of the Equinoctial, commonly termed the Poles of the
World, but upon those of the Zodiake; concerning which question, I will speak
more hereafter, when I shall have leisure to call to my remembrance the
Astronomy that I learned being a young man at Salamanca, but have now almost
forgotten.

The air in that place I found quiet without any motion of wind, and exceeding
temperate, neither hot nor cold, as where neither the Sunbeams had any
subject to reflect upon, neither was yet either the earth or water so near as
to affect the air with their natural quality of coldness. As for that
imagination of the Philosophers, attributing heat together with moistness unto
the air, I never esteemed it otherwise than a fancy. Lastly now it is to be
remembered that after my departure from the earth, I never felt any appetite of
hunger or thirst. Whether the purity of the Air, our proper element not being
infected with any Vapors of the earth and water, might yield nature sufficient
nutriment; or what else might be the cause of it, I cannot tell, but so I found
it, although I perceived my self in perfect health of body, having the use of
all my Limbs and Senses; and Strength both of Body and Mind, rather beyond and
above, than any thing short of the pitch, or wonted vigor. Now let us go on:
and on we shall go more than apace.

Not many hours after the departure of that develish company from me, my
Gansa's began to bestir themselves, still directing their course toward the
globe or body of the Moon, and they made their way with that incredible
swiftness, as I think they gained not so little as fifty Leagues in every hour.
In that passage I noted three things very remarkable, one, that the farther we
went, the lesser the globe of the Earth appeared to us; whereas still on the
contrary side the Moon showed her self more and more monstrously huge.

Again, the Earth (which ever I held in mine eye) did as it were mask it self
with a kind of brightness like another Moon; and even as in the Moon we
discerned certain spots or Clouds, as it were, so did I then in the earth. But
whereas the form of those spots in the Moon continue constantly one and the
same; these by little and little did change every hour. The reason thereof I
conceive to be this, that whereas the Earth, according to her natural motion,
(for that such a motion she has, I am now constrained to join in opinion with
Copernicus,) turns round upon her own Axe every 24. hours from the West unto
the East: I should at the first see in the middle of the body of this new
star a spot like unto a Pear that had a morsel bitten out upon the one side
of him; after certain hours, I should see that spot slide away to the East
side. This no doubt was the maine of Affricke.

Then should I perceive a great shining brightness to occupy that room,
during the like time (which (was undoubtedly none other than the great
Atlantic Ocean). After that succeeded a spot almost of an Ovall form, even
just such as we see America to have in our Mapps. The^ another vast cleerness
representing the West Ocean; and lastly a medly of spots, like the Countries of
East Indies. So that it seemed unto me no other than a huge Mathematical
Globe, leasurely turned before me, wherein successively, all the Countries of
our earthly world within the compass of 24. hours were represented to my
sight. And this was all the means I had now to number the days, and take
reckoning of time.

Philosophers and Mathematicians I would should now confess the wilfulness of
their own blindness. They have made the world believe hitherto, that the Earth
has no motion. And to make that good, they are fain to attribute unto all and
every of the celestial bodies two motions, quite contrary each to other;
whereof one is from the East to the West, to be performed in 2^. hours; (that
they imagine to be forced, per raptum primi Mobilis) the other from the West to
the East in several proportions.

O incredible thing, that those same huge bodies of the fixed stars in the
highest orb, whereof diverse are by themselves confessed to be more than one
hundredth times as big as the whole earth, should as so many nails in a
Cart-Wheele, be whirled about in that short space, whereas it is many thousands
of Years (no less, I trow, they say, than 30 thousand) before that orb do
finish his Course from West to East, which they call the natural motion. Now
whereas to every of these they yield their natural course from West to East;
therein they do well. The Moon performs it in 27. days; the Sun, Venus,
and Mercury in a Years or thereabouts, Mars in three Year, Jupiter in twelve
Years, and Saturn in 30 But to attribute unto these celestial bodies contrary
motions at once, was a very absurd conceit and much more, to imagine that same
Orb, wherein the fixed stars are, (whose natural course takes so many
thousand of years) should every 24. hours be turned about. I will not go so
far as Copernicus, that makes the Sun the Center of the Earth, and
unmovable, neither will I define any thing one way or other. Only this I say,
allow the Earth his motion (which these eyes of mine can testify to be his
due) and these absurdities are quite taken away, every one having his single
and proper Motion only.

But where am I? At the first I promised an History, and I fall into disputes
before I am aware. There is yet one accident more befell me worthy of especial
remembrance: that during the time of my stay, I saw as it were a kind of cloud
of a reddish color growing toward me, which continually growing nearer and
nearer, at last I perceived to be nothing else but a huge swarm of Locusts.

He that reads the discourses of learned men, concerning them, and namely
that of John Leo, in his description of Affrike, how that they are seen in the
Air many days before they fall upon a country, adding unto that which they
deliver, this experience of mine, will easily conclude, that they cannot come
from any other place than the Globe of the Moon. But give me leave now at last
to pass on my journey quietly, without interruption for Eleven or Twelve
days, during all which time, I was carried directly toward the Globe or body
of the Moon with such a violent whirling as cannot be expressed.

For I cannot imagine that a bullet out of the mouth of a Canon could make way
through the vaporous and muddy air near the earth with that celerity, which is
most strange, considering that my Gansa's moved their wings but even now and
then, and sometimes not at all in a Quarter of an hour together; only they
held them stretched out, so passing on, as we see that Eagles, and Kites
sometimes will do for a little space, when (as one speaks, I remember)
cunctabundo volatu pene eodem loco pendula circumtuentur; and during the time
of those pauses I believe they took their napps and times of sleeping; for
other (as I might easily note) they had none.

Now for my self, I was so fast knit unto my Engine, as I durst commit my self
to slumbring enough to serve my turn, which I took with as great ease
(although I am loath to speak it, because it may seem incredible) as if I had
been in the best Bed of down in all Antwerp.

After Eleven days passage in this violent flight, I perceived that we began
to approach near unto another Earth, if I may so call it, being the Globe or
very body of that Star which we call the Moon.

The first difference that I found between it and our earth, was, that it
showed it self in his natural colors: ever after I was free from the
attraction of the Earth, whereas with us, a thing removed from our eye but a
league or two, begins to put on that lurid and deadly color of blue.

Then, I perceived also, that it was covered for the most part with a huge and
mighty Sea, those parts only being dry Land, which show unto us here somewhat
darker than the rest of her body (that I mean) which the Country people call el
hombre della Luna, the Man of the Moon.

As for that part which shines so clearly in our eyes; it is even another
Ocean, yet besprinckled here and there with Islands, which for the littleness,
so far off we cannot discern.

So that same splendour appearing unto us, and giving light unto our night,
appears to be nothing else but the reflection of the Sunbeams returned unto
us out of the water, as out of a glass: How ill this agrees with that which
our Philosophers teach in the Schools I am not ignorant.

But alas how many of their Errors has time and experience refuted in this our
age, with the recital whereof I will not stand to trouble the Reader.

Amongst many other of their vain surmises, the time and order of my narration
puts me in mind of one, which now my experience found most untrue.

Who is there that has not hitherto believed the uppermost Region of the Air
to be extreme hot, as being next forsooth unto the natural place of the
Element of Fire.

O Vanities, fancies, Dreams!

After the time I was once quite free from the attractive Beams of that
tyrannous Loadstone, the earth, I found the Air of one and the self same
temper, without Winds, without Rain, without Mists, without Clouds, neither
hot not cold, but continually after one and the same tenor, most pleasant,
mild, and comfortable, till my arrival in that New World of the Moon.

As for that Region of Fire our Philosophers talk of, I heard no news of it;
mine eyes have sufficiently informed me there can be no such thing.

The Earth by turning about had now showed me all her parts twelve times when I
finished my course: For when by my reckoning it seemed to be (as indeed it was)
Tuesday the Eleventh day of September, (at what time the Moon being two days
old was in the Twentieth degree of Libra,) my Gansa's stayed their course as it
were with one consent, and took their rest, for certain hours; after which
they took their flight, and within less than one hour, set me upon the top of
a very high hill in that other world, where immediately were presented unto mine
eyes many most strange and unwonted fights.

For first, I observed, that although the Globe of the Earth showed much bigger
there than the Moon does unto us, even to the full trebling of her diameter,
yet all manner of things there were of largeness and quantity, 10. 20. I think
I may say 30. times more than ours.

Their trees at least three times so high as ours, and more than five times the
breadth and thickness.

So their herbs, Beasts, and Birds; although to compare them with ours, I know
not well how, because I found not any thing there, any Species either of Beast
or Bird that resembled ours any thing at all, except Swallows, Nightingales,
Cuckoes, Woodcocks, Batts, and some kinds of wild Fowl, as also of such Birds
as my Gansa's, all which, (as now I well perceived,) spend the time of their
absence from us, even there in that world; neither do they vary any thing at
all either in quantity or quality from those of ours here, as being none other
than the very same, and that not only Specie, but numero.

But of these novelties, more hereafter in their due places.

No sooner was I set down upon the ground, But I was surprised with a most
ravenous hunger, and earnest desire of eating. Wherefore stepping unto the next
tree, I fastened thereunto my engine, with my Gansa's, and in great haste fell
to searching of my pockets for the Victuals I had reserved as aforesaid: but to
my great amazement and discomfort, I found in stead of Partridge, and Capon,
which I thought to have put there, a mingle mangle of dry leaves, of Goats
hair, sheep, or Goats-dung, Moss, and such like trash.

As for my Canary Wine, it was turned to a stinking and filthy kind of liquor,
like the Urine of some Beast.

O the illusions of wicked spirits, whose help if I had been feign only to
rely upon, you see how I had been served.

Now while I stood musing and wondering at this strange Metamorphosis, I heard
my Gansa's upon the sudden to make a great fluttering behind me. And looking
back, I espied them to fall greedily upon a certain shrub within the compass
of their lines, whose leaves they fed upon most earnestly; where heretofore, I
had never seen them to eat any manner of green meat whatsoever. Whereupon
stepping to the shrubb, I put a lease of it between my teeth: I cannot express
the pleasure I found in the taste thereof; such it was I am sure, as if I had
not with great discretion moderated my appetite, I had surely surfetted upon
the same.

In the mean time it fell out to be a bait that well contented both my Birds
and me at that time, when we had need of some good refreshing.

Scarcely had I ended this banquett, when upon the sudden I saw my self
environed with a kind of people most strange, both for their feature,
demeanure, and apparel.

Their stature was most diverse, but for the most part, twice the height of
ours; their color and countenance most pleasing, and their habit such, as I
know not how to express.

For neither did I see any kind of Cloth, Silk, or other stuff to resemble
the matter of that whereof their Clothes were made; neither (which is most
strange of all other) can I devise how to describe the color of them, being in
a manner all clothed alike.

It was neither black, nor white, yellow nor redd, green nor blue, nor any
color composed of these.

But if you ask me what it was, then I must tell you, it was a color never
seen in our earthly world, and therefore neither to be described unto us by
any, nor to be conceived of one that never saw it.

For as it were a hard matter to describe unto a man borne blind the difference
between blue and Green, so can I not bethink my self of any means how to
decipher unto you this Lunar color, having no affinity with any other that
ever I beheld with mine eyes.

Only this I can say of it, that it was the most glorious and delightful,
that can possibly be imagined; neither in truth was there any one thing, that
more delighted me, during my abode in that new world, than the beholding of
that most pleasing and resplendent color.

It remains now that I speak of the Demeanure of this people, who presenting
themselves unto me upon the sudden, and that in such extraordinary fashion as I
have declared, being stricken with a great amasement, I crossed my self, and
cried out, Jesus Maria.

No sooner was the word Jesus out of my mouth, but young and old, fell all down
upon their knees, (at which I not a little rejoiced) holding up both their
hands on high, and repeating all certain words which I understood not.

Then presently they all arising, one that was far the tallest of them came
unto me, and embraced me, with great kindness, and giving order (as I partly
perceived) unto some of the rest to stay by my Birds, he took me by the hand,
and leading me down toward the foot of the hill, brought me to his dwelling,
being more than half a league from the place where I first alighted.

It was such a building for beauty and hugeness, as all our world cannot show
any near comparable to it.

Yet such I saw afterward elsewhere, as this might seem but a Cottage in
respect of them.

There was not a door about the house, that was not 30. foot high, and twelve
in breadth.

The rooms were between 40. and 50. foot in height, and so all other
proportions answerable.

Neither could they well be much less, the Master inhabiting them, being full
28. high.

As for his corporature, I suppose verily that if we had him here in this world
to be weighed in the balance, the poyse of his body would show it self more
ponderous than Five and Twenty, peradventure thirty of ours.

After I had rested my self with him the value of one of our days; he ledd me
some Five leagues off, unto the Palace of the Prince of the Country.

The stateliness of the building whereof I will leave unto the second part of
this work, as also many other particulars, which will minister more pleasure to
the Reader, than yet I may afford him, being desirous in this first part to set
down no more than what the process of my story concerning my Journey does
necessarily draw from me.

This Prince whose stature was much higher than the former, is called (as near
as I can by Letters declare it, for their sounds are not perfectly to be
expressed by our characters) Pylonas, which signifies in their Language,
First^^ perhaps it be not rather a denotation of his dignity and authority, as
being the prime Man in all those parts.

In all those parts, I say. For there is one supreme Monarch amongst them, of
stature yet much more huge than he, commanding over all that whole Orb of that
world, having under him 29 other Princes of exceeding great power, and every of
them 24 others, whereof this Pylonas was one.

The first ancestor of this great Monarch came out of the earth (as they
deliver) and by marriage with the inheretrix of that huge Monarchy, obtaining
the government, left it unto his posterity, who ever since have held the same,
even for the space of 40 thousand days or Moons, which amounts unto 3077
Years.

And his name being Irdonozur, his heirs, unto this day, do all assume unto
themselves that name, he, they say, having continued there well near 400 Moons,
and having begotten diverse children, returned (by what means they declare not)
unto the Earth again: I doubt not but they may have their Fables, as well as
we.

And because our Histories afford no mention of any earthly man to have ever
been in that world before my self, and much less to have returned thence
again, I cannot but condemn that tradition for false and fabulous; yet this I
must tell you, that learning seems to be in great estimation among them: And
that they make semblance of detesting all Lying and Falsehood, which is wont
there to be severely punished.

Again, which may yield some countenance unto their historical narrations,
many of them live wonderful long, even beyond all credit, to wit even unto the
age as they professed to me of 30000. Moons, which amounts unto 1000. Years
and upwards, (so that the ages of 3. or 4. men might well reach unto the time
of the first Irdonozur,) and this is noted generally, that the taller people
are of Stature, the more excellent they are for all indowments of mind, and the
longer time they do live.

For whereas (that which before I partly intimated unto you) their stature is
most diverse, great numbers of them little exceeding ou^s; such seldom live
above the age of a 1000. Moons, which is answerable to 80. of our Years, and
they account them most base creaturs, even but a degree before brute beasts,
employing them accordingly in all the basest and most servile Offices, tearming
them by a word that signifies bastard-men, counterfeits, or Changelings; so
those whom they account Genuine, natural, and true Lunars, both in quantity
of body, and length of life, they have for the most part 30. times as much as
we, which proportion agrees well with the quantity of the day in both worlds,
theirs containing almost 30 of ours.

Now when I shall declare unto you the manner of our travel unto the Palace of
Pylonas, you will say you scarce ever heard any thing more strange and
incredible.

Unto every one of us there was delivered at our first setting forth, two Fans
of Feathers, not much unlike to those that our Ladies do carry in Spain, to
make a cool Air unto themselves in the heat of Summer. The use of which Fans
before I declare unto you, I must let you understand that the Globe of the Moon
is not altogether destitute of an attractive Power: but it is so far weaker
than that of the earth, as if a man do but spring upward, with all his force,
(as Dancers do when they show their activity by capering) he shall be able to
mount 50. or 60. foot high, and then he is quite beyond all attraction of the
Moons earth, falling down no more, so as by the help of these Fans, as with
wings, they convey themselves in the Air in a short space (although not with
that swiftness that Birds do) even whither they lift.

In two hours space (as I could guess) by the help of these fans, we were
carried through the Air those five Leagues, being about 60 persons. Being
arrived at the Palace of Pylonas, after our conducto^ had gotten audience,
(which was not presently) and had declared what manner of present he had
brought; I was immediately called in unto him by his attendants: by the
stateliness of his Palace, and the reverence done unto him, I soon discerned
his greatness, and therefore framed my self to win his favor the best I
might. You may remember I told you of a certain little Box or Casket of Jewels,
the remainder of those which being brought out of the East Indies, I sent from
the I Will of St. Hellen into Spain.

These, before I was carried in unto him, I took out of my pocket in a corner,
and making choice of some of every sort, made them ready to be presented as I
should think fit.

I found him sitting in a most magnificent chair of Estate, having his Wife or
Queen upon one hand, and his eldest Son on the other, which were both attended,
the one by a troop of Ladies, and the other of young men, and all along the
side of the room stood a great number of goodly personages, whereof scarce any
one was lower of stature than Pylonas, whose age they say is now 21000. Moons.
At my first entrance, falling down upon my knees, I thought good to use unto
him these words in the Latin tongue, Propitius sit tibi Princeps Illustrissime
Dominus noster Jesus Christus, etc. As the people I first met withal, so they,
hearing the holy name of our Savior, they all, I say, King, Queen, and all the
rest fell down upon their knees, pronouncing a word or two I understood not.
They being risen again, I proceeded thus, and Maria Salvator is Genitrix,
Petrus and Paulus etc. and so reckoning up a number of Saints, to see if there
were any one of them that they honored as their patron, at last reckoning
among others St. Martinus, they all bowed their bodies, and held up hands in
sign of great reverence: the reason whereof I learned to be, that Martin in
their language signifies God: Then taking out my Jewels, prepared for that
purpose, I presented unto the King or Prince (call him how you please) 7.
stones of so many several sorts, a Diamond, a Rubie, an Emerauld, a Sapphire, a
Topaz, a Turquez, and an Opall, which he accepted with great joy and
admiration, as having not often seen any such before.

Then I offered unto the Queen and Prince some other, and was about to have
bestowed a number of more, upon other there present, but Pylonas forbade them
to accept, thinking (as afterward I learned) that they were all I had, and
being willing they should be reserved for Irdonozur his Sovereign.

This done, he embraced me with great kindness, and began to inquire of me
diverse things by signs, which I likewise answered by signs as well as I could.

But not being able to give him content, he delivered me to a guard of a 100.
of his Giants (so I may well call them) commanding straightly,

First, that I should want nothing that might be fit for me;

Secondly, that they should not suffer any of the dwarf Lunars (if I may so
term them) to come near me;

Thirdly, that I should with all diligence be instructed in their Language.

And lastly, that by no means they should impart unto me the knowledge of
certain things, particularly by him specified; marry what those particulars
were, I might never by any means get knowledge.

It may be now you will desire to understand what were the things Pylonas
inquired of me.

Why what but these? whence I came? how I arrived there? and by what means?
what was my name? what my Errand? and such like.

To all which I answered the very truth as near as I could.

Being dismissed, I was afforded all manner of necessaries that my heart could
wish, so as it seemed unto me I was in a very Paradise, the pleasures whereof
notwithstanding could not so overcome me, as that the remembrance of my Wife
and Children, did not trouble me much.

And therefore being willing to foster any small spark of hope of my return,
with great diligence I took order for the attendance of my Birds, (I mean my
Gansa's) whom my self in person tended every day with great carfulness; All
which notwithstanding had fallen out to little purpose, had not other men's care
performed that which no endeavor of mine own could.

For the time now approached, when of necessity all the people of our stature,
(and so my self among the rest) must needs sleep for some 13. or 14. whole
days together.

So it comes to pass there by a secret power, and unresistable decree of
nature, that when the day begins to appear, and the Moon to be enlightened by
the Sunbeams, (which is at the first Quarter of the Moon) all such people as
exceed not very much our stature inhabiting those parts, they fall into a dead
sleep, and are not possibly to be wakened till the Sun be set, and withdrawn
out of their sight, even as Owls, and Batts, with us cannot endure the light,
so we there at the first approach of the day, begin to be amazed with it, and
fall immediately into a slumber, which grows by little and little, into a dead
sleep, till this light depart from thence again, which is not in 14. or 15.
days, to wit, until the last quarter.

Methinkes now I hear some man to demand what manner of light there is in that
world during the absence of the Sun. To resolve you for that point, you shall
understand that there is a light of two sorts.

One of the Sun (which I might not endure to behold,) and another of the Earth:
that of the Earth was now at the highest; for that when the Moon is at the
Change, then is the Earth (unto them in the Moon) like a full Moon with us; and
as the Moon increases with us, so the light of the Earth decreaseth with them:
I then found the light there (though the Sun were absent) equal unto that with
us, in the day time, when the Sun is covered with Clouds, but toward the
quarter it little and little diminishes, yet leaving still a competent light,
which is somewhat strange.

But much stranger is that which was reported unto me there, how that in the
other Hemisphere of the Moon (I mean contrary to that I happened upon,) where
during half the Moon, they see not the Sun, and the Earth never appears unto
them, they have notwithstanding a kind of light (not unlike by their
description to our Moonlight) which it seems the propinquintie of the Stars
and other Planetts (so much nearer unto them than us) affords.

Now you shall understand that of the true Lunars there be three degrees.

Some beyond the pitch of our stature a good deal, as perhaps 10 or 12 foot
high, that can endure the day of the Moon, when the earth shines but little,
but not endure the beams of both; at such time they must be content to be laid
asleep.

Others there are of 20 foot high, or somewhat more, that in ordinary places
endure all light both of earth and Sun. Marry there is a certain Island, the
mysteries whereof none may know, whose stature is not at least 27 foot high (I
mean of the measure of the Sta^dard of Castile) If any other come a Land there
in the Moons day time, they fall asleep immediately: This Island they call Gods
Island, or Insula Martini in their language: they say it has a particular
governor, who is (as they report) of age 65000 Moons, which amounts to 5000
of our years, his name is said to be Hiruch, and he commands after a sort
over Irdonozur himself, especially in that Island out of which he never comes.

There is another, repairing much thither, they said is half his age and
upwards, to wit, about 33. thousand Moons, or 26. hundred of our years, and he
commands in all things (throughout the whole Globe of the Moon) concerning
matters of Religion, and the service of God, as absolutely as our holy Father
the Pope does in any part of Italy. I would feign have seen this man, but I
might not be suffered to come near him: his name is Imozes.

Now give me leave to settle my self to a long nights sleep: My attendants take
charge of my Birds, prepare my lodging, and signify to me by signs, how it
must be with me. It was about the middle of September, where I perceived the
Air to grow more clear than ordinary, and with the increasing of the light, I
began to feel my self first dull, then heavy and willing to sleep, although I
had not lately been hindered from taking mine ease that way.

I delivered my self at last into the custody of this sister of Death, whose
prisoner I was for almost a fortnight after; Awaking then, it is not to be
believed how fresh, how nimble, how vigorous, I found all the faculties both of
my body and mind.

In good time, therefore, I settled my self immediately to the learning of the
language which (a mavelous thing to consider) is one and the same throughout
all the regions of the Moon,) yet so much the less to be wondered at, because I
cannot think all the Earth of Moon to Amount to the fortieth part of our
inhabited Earth; partly because the Globe of the Moon is much less than that
of the Earth, and partly because their Sea or Ocean covers in estimation
Three parts of Four, (if not more) whereas the superficies of our land may be
judged Equivalent and comparable in Measure to that of our Seas.

The Difficulty of that language is not to be conceived, and the reasons
thereof are especially two:

First, because it has no affinity with any other that ever I heard.

Secondly, because it consists not so much of words and Letters, as of tunes
and uncouth sounds, that no letters can express.

For you have few words but they signify diverse and several things, and they
are distinguished only by their tunes that are as it were sung in the
utterance of them, yea many words there are consisting of tunes only, so as if
they list they will utter their minds by tunes without words: for Example, they
have an ordinary salutation amongst them, signifying ( Verbatim) Glory be to
God alone, which they express (as I take it, for I am no perfect Musician) by
this tune without any words at all.

^ Yea the very names of Men they will express in the same sort.

When they were disposed to talk of me before my face, so as I should not
perceive it; this was Gonsales.

^ By occasion hereof, I discern means of framing a Language (and that easy
soon to be learned) as copious as any other in the world, consisting of tunes
only, whereof my friends may know more at leisure if it please them.

This is a great Mystery, and worthier the searching after than at first sight
you would imagine.

Now notwithstanding the difficulty of this language, within two months space
I had attained unto such knowledge of the same, as I understood most questions
to be demanded of me, and what with signs, what with words, made reasonable
shift to utter my mind; which thing being certified unto Pylonas, he sent for
me oftentimes, and would be pleased to give me knowledge of many things that my
Guardians durst not declare unto me.

Yet this I will say of them, that they never abused me with any untruth that I
could perceive; but if I asked a question that they liked not to resolve me in,
they would shake their heads, and with a Spanish shrugge pass over to other
talk.

After 7 months space it happened that the great Irdonozur making his progress
to a place some 200. leagues distant from the Palace of Pylonas, sent for me.

The History of that Journey, and the conference that passed between us, shall
be related at large in my second Book. Only thus much thereof at this time,
that he would not admit me into his presence, but talked with me through a
Window, where I might hear him, and he both hear and see me at pleasure. I
offered him the remainder of my Jewels, which he accepted very thankfully;
telling me, that he would requite them with gifts of another manner of value.

It was not above a Quarter of a Moon that I stayed there, before I was sent
back unto Pylonas again; and so much the sooner, because if we had stayed but
a day or two longer, the Sun would have overtaken us, before we could have
recovered our home.

The gifts he bestowed on me were such as a Man would forsake mountains of Gold
for, and they were all stones, to wit nine in number^ and those of three sorts,
whereof one they call Poleastis, another Machrus, and third Ebelus, of each
sort three. The first are of the bigness of an Hazell nut, very like unto Jet,
which among many other incredible virtues has this property, that being once
heat in the Fire, they ever after retain their heat (though without any
appearance) until they be quenched with some kind of liquor, whereby they
receive no detriment at all, though they be heat and quenched ten thousand
times.

And their heat is so vehement, as they will make red hot any metal that
shall come within a foot of them, and being put in a Chimney, will make a room
as warm, as if a great fire were kindled in the same.

The Machrus (yet far more precious than the other) is of the color of
Topaz, so shining and resplendent, as (though not past the bigness of a Bean
yet,) being placed in the midst of a large Church in the night time, it makes
it all as light, as if a 100. Lamps were hanged up round about it.

Can you wish for properties in a stone of greater use than these. Yes my
Ebelus will af^oord you that which I dare say will make you prefer him before
these, yea and all the Diamonds, Sapphires, Rubies, and Emeralds that our world
can yield, were they laid in a heap before you;

To say nothing of the color, (the Lunar whereof I made mention before, which
notwithstanding is so incredibly beautiful, as a man should travel 1000
Leagues to behold it) the shape is somewhat flat of the breadth of a Pistolett,
and twice the thickness. The one side of this, which is somewhat more Orient of
Color than the other, being clapped to the bare skin of a man, in any part of
his body, it takes away from it al weight or ponderousness; whereas turning
the other side it adds force unto the attractive beam^ of the Earth, either
in this world or that, and makes the body to weigh half so much again as it
did before; do you marvel now why I should so overprize this stone? before you
see me on earth again, you shall understand more of the value of this kind
and unvaluable Jem.

I inquired then amongst them, whether they had not any kind of Jewel o^ other
means to make a man invisible, which me thought had been a thing of great and
extraordinary use.

And I could tell that diverse of our learned men had written many things to
that purpose.

They answered, that if it were a thing feasible, yet they assured the^ selves
that God would not suffer it to be revealed to us creatures, subject to so many
imperfections being a thing so apt to be ab^sed to ill purposes; and that was
all I could get of them.

Now after it was known that Irdonozur, the great Monarch, had done me this
honor, it is strange how much al^ men respected me more than before: my
Guardians, which hitherto were very nice in relating any thing to me,
concerning the government of that world, now became somewhat more open, so as I
could learn (partly of them, and partly of Pylonas,) what I shall deliver unto
you concerning that matter, whereof I will only give you a taste at this time,
referring you unto a more ample discourse in my second part, which at my
return into Spain you shall have at large; but not till then, for causes
heretofore related.

In a thousand years it is not found that there is either Whoremonger amongst
them, whereof these reasons are to be yielded: There is no want of any thing
necessary for the use of man.

Food grows every where without labor, and that of all sorts to be desired.

For raiment, howsing, or any thing else that you may imagine possible for a man
to want, or desire, it is provide by the command of Superiors, though not
without labor, yet so little, as they do nothing but as it were playing, and
with pleasure.

Again their Females are all of an absolute beauty: and I know not how it
comes to pass by a secret disposition of nature there that a man having once
known a Woman, never desires any other. As for murder, it was never heard of
amongst them; neither is it a thing almost possible to be committed: for there
is no wound to be given which may not be cured: they assured me, (and I for my
part do believe it,) that although a man's head be cut off, yet if any time
within the space of Three Moons it be put together, and joined to the Carcass
again, with the appointment of the Juice of a certain herb, there growng,
it will be joined together again, so as the party wounded shall become
perfectly whole in a few hours.

But the chief cause, is, that through an excellent disposition of that stature
of people there, all, young and old, do hate all manner of vice, and do live in
such love, peace, and amity, as it seems to be another Paradise. True it is,
that some are better disposed than other: but that they discern immediately at
the time of their birth.

And because it is an inviolable decree amongst them, never to put any one to
death, perceiving by the stature, and some other notes they have, who are
likely to be of a wicked or imperfect disposition, they send them away (I know
not by what means) into the Earth, and change them for other children, before
they shall have either ability or opportunity to do amiss among them: But
first (they say) they are feign to keep them there for a certain space, till
that the Air of the Earth may alter their color to be like unto ours.

And their ordinary vent for them is a certain high hill in the North of
America, whose people I can easily believe to be wholly descended of them,
partly in regard of their color, partly also in regard of the continual use
of Tob^cco which the Lunars use exceeding much, as living in a place abounding
wonderfully with moisture, as also for the pleasure they take in it, and partly
in some other respects, too long now to be rehearsed. Sometimes they mistake
their aim, and fall upon Christendom, Asia or Affricke, marry that is but
seldom: I remember some years since, that I read certain stories tending to
the confirmation of these things delivered by these Lunars, as especially one
Chapter of Guil. Neubrigensis, de reb. Angl. it is toward the end of his first
book, but the chapter I cannot particularly resign.

Then see Inigo Mondejar in his description of Nueva Granata, the second book;
as also Joseph Desia de Carana, in his history of Mexico: if my memory fail me
not, you will find that in these, which will make my report much the more
credible: But for testimonies I care not.

May I once have the happiness to return home in safety, I will yield such
demonstrations, of all I deliver, as shall quickly make void all doubt of the
truth hereof.

If you will ask me further of the manner of government amongst the Lunars,
and how Justice is executed? Alas what need is there of Exemplary punishment,
where there are no offenses committed: they need there no Lawyers, for there is
never any contention, the seeds thereof, if any begin to sprout, being
presently by the wisdom of the next Superior pulled up by the roots.

And as little need is there of Physicians; they never misdiet themselves,
their Air is always temperate and pure, neither is there any occasion at all
of sickness, as to me it seemed at least, for I could not hear that ever any of
them were sick.

But the time that nature has assigned unto them being spent, without any
pain at all they die, or rather (I should say) cease to live, as a candle to
give light, when that which nourishes it is consumed.

I was once at the departure of one of them, which I wondered much to behold;
for notwithstanding the happy life ^e led, and multitude of friends and
children he should forsake, as soon as certainly he understood and perceived
his end to approach, he prepared a great feast, and c^^^ing about him all those
he especially esteemed of, he bids them be merry and rejoice with him; for that
the time was come he should now leave the counterfeit pleasures of that world,
and be made partaker of all true joys and perfect happiness.

I wondered not so much at his constancy, as the behavior of those his friends:
with us in the like case, all seem to mourn, when often some of them do but
laugh in their sleeves, or as one says, under a visard.

They all on the other side, young and old, both seemingly, and in my
conscience, sincerely ^^id rejoice thereat, so as if any dissembled, it was but
their own grief conceived for their own particular loss.

Their bodies being dead, putrify not, and therefore are not buried, but kept
in certain Rooms ordained for that purpose; so as most of them can show their
Ancestors bodies incorrupt for many generations.

There is never any rain, wind, or change of the Air, never either Summer, or
Winter, but as it were a perpetual Spring, yielding all pleasure, all content,
and that free from any annoyance at all.

O my Wife and Children, what wrong have you done me to bereave me of the
happiness of that place! but it makes no matter, for by this voyage am I
sufficiently assured, that ere long the race of my mortal life being run, I
shall attain a greater happiness elsewhere, and that everlasting.

It was the Ninth day of September that I began to ascend from El Pico; twelve
days I was upon my Voyage, and arrived in that Region of the Moon, that they
call Simiri, September the 21. following.

The 12. day of May being Friday we came unto the Court of the great Irdonozur,
and returned back the Seventeenth unto the Palace of Pylonas, there I
continued till the month of March, in the year 1601. at what time I earnestly
besought Pylonas (as I had often done before) to give me leave to depart,
(though with never so great hazard of my life) back into the earth again.

He much dissuaded me, laying before me the danger of the voyage, the misery of
that place from whence I came, and the abundant happiness of that I now was
in; But the remembrance of my Wife and children overweighed all these reasons,
and to tell you the truth I was so far forth moved with a desire of that
deserved glory, that I might purchase at my return, as me thought: I deserved
not the name of a Spanyard, if I would not hazard 20 lives, rather than loose
but a little possibility of the same. Wherefore I answered him, that my desire
of seeing my children was such, as I knew I could not live any longer, if I were
once out of hope of the same. When then he desired one years stay longer, I
told him it was manifest I must depart now or never: My Birds began to droop,
for want of their wonted migration, three of them were now dead, and if a few
more failed, I was for ever destitute of all possibility of returning.

With much ado at last he condescended unto my request^ having first
acquainted the great Irdonozur with my desire, then perceiving by the often
b^iting of my Birds, a great longing in them to take their flight, I cr^mmed up
mine Engine, and took my leave of Pylonas, who (for all the courtesy he had
done me) required of me but one thing, which was, faithfully to promise him,
that if ever I had means thereunto, I should salute from him Elizabeth, whom he
termed the great Queen of England, calling her the most glorious of all women
living; and indeed he would often question with me of her, and therein
delighted so much, as it seemed he was never satisfied in talkking of her; he
also delivered unto me a token or present for her of no small Value: Though I
account her an enemy of Spain, I may not fail of performing this promise as
soon as I shall be able so to do: upon the 29. day of March being Thursday, 3.
days after my awaking from the last Moons light, I fastened my self to mine
Engine, not forgetting to take with me, besides the Jewels Irdonozur had given
me (with whose use and virtues Pylonas had acquainted me at large) a small
quantity of Victual, wherefore afterward I had great use, as shall be
declared.

An infinite multitude of people, (and amongst the rest Pylonas himself being
present,) after I had given him the last Bezalos manos, I let loose the raines
unto my Birds, who with great greediness taking wing quickly carried me out of
their sight, it fell out with me as in my first passage, I never felt either
hunger or thirst, till I arrived in China upon a high mountain, some 5 Leagues
from the high and mighty City of Pachin.

This Voyage was performed in less than 9 days; I heard no news by the way of
these airie men, which I had seen in my ascending.

Nothing stayed my journey any whit at all: Whether it was the earnest desire
of my Birds, to return to the Earth, where they had missed one season, or that
the attraction of the Earth so much stronger than that of the Moon, furthered
their labor; so it came to pass; although now I had 3 Birds wanting of those
I carried forth with me.

For the first 8 days my Birds flew before, and I with the Engine was as it
were drawn by them.

The Ninth day when I began to approach unto the Clouds, I perceived my self
and mine Engine to sink toward the Earth, and go before them.

I was then horribly afraid, lest my Birds, not being able to bear our weight,
they being so few, should be constrained to precipitate both me and themselves
head long to the Earth: wherefore I thought it no less than needful to make
use of the Ebelus, (one of the stones bestowed upon me by Irdono ^ur,) which I
clapped to my bare flesh within my hose: and it appeared manifestly thereupon
unto me that my Birds made their way with much greater ease than before, as
being lightened of a great burden; neither do I think it possible for them to
have let me down safely unto the Earth without that help.

China is a Country so populous, as I think there is hardly a piece of ground
to be found (in the most barren parts of the same) though but thrice a man's
length, which is not most carefully manured. I being yet in the Air, some of
the Country people had espied me, and came running unto me by troops, they
seized upon me, and would needs^ by and by, carry me unto an Officer. I seeing
no other remedy, yielded my self unto them. But when I assayed to go, I found
my self so light, that I had much ado, one foot being upon the ground, to
set down the other, that was by reason of my Ebelus, so applied, as it took
quite away all weight and ponderousness from my body: Wherefore bethinking my
self what was to be^ done, I fained a desire of performing the necessity of
nature, which by signs being made known unto them (for they understood not a
word of any Language I could speak) they permitted me to go aside among a few
bushes, assuring themselves that for me to escape from them it was impossible;
Being there I remembered the directio^s Pylonas had given me, concerning the use
of my stones, and first I took them all together, with a few Jewels yet
remaining of those I had brought out of India, and knit them up in my
handkerchief, all, except one the least and worst Ebelus.

Him I found means to apply in such sort unto my body, as but the half of his
side touched my skin, whereby it came to pass that my body then had but half
the weight, that being done I drew toward these my Guardians, till seeing them
come somewhat near together they could not cross my way, I showed them a fair
pair of heels.

This I did to the end I might recover an opportunity of finding my Stones, and
Jewels, which I knew they would rob me off, if I prevented them not.

Being thus lightened, I bid them such a base, as had they been all upon the
backs of so many Zebra's, they could never have overtaken me: I directed my
course unto a certain thick wood, into which I entered some quarter of a League,
and then finding a pretty spring, (which I took for my mark) hard by it, I
thrust my Jewels into a little hole made by a Want, or some such like creature.

Then I took out of my pocket my Victuals, (to which in all my Voyage I had
not till then any desire) and refreshed my self therewith, til such time as the
people pursuing me, had overtaken me, into whose hands I quietly delivered my
self.

They led me unto a mean Officer, who (understanding that once I had escaped
from them that first apprehended me,) caused a certain seat to be made of
boords, into which they closed me in such sort, as only my head was at
liberty, and then carried me upon the shoulders of 4 slaves, (like some
notorious malefactor) before a man of great authority, whom in their language
(as after I learned) they called a Mandarine, abiding two days journey off, to
wit one League distant from the great and famous City of Pachin, or Paquin, by
the Chinesse called Suntien.

Their language I could no way understand; only this I could discern, that I
was for something or other accused with a great deal of vehemence.

The substance of this accusation it seems was, that I was a Magician, as
witnessed my strange carriage in the air; that being a stranger, as appeared
by my both language and habit, I contrary to the Laws of China, entered into
the Kingdom without warrant, and that probably with no good intent. The
Mandarine heard them out, with a great deal of composed gravitie; and being a
man of quick apprehension, and withal studious of novelties, he answered
them, that he would take such order with me, as the case required, and that my
bold attempt should not want its deserved punishment. But having dismissed
them, he gave order to his Servants, that I should be kept in some remote parts
of his vast Palace, and be strictly watched, but courteously used: This do I
conjecture, by what at the present I found, and what after followed. For my
accommodation was every way better, than I could expect; I lodged well, fared
well, was attended well, and could not fault any thing, but my restraint. In
this manner did I continue many months, afflicted with nothing so much as with
the thought of my Gansa's; which I knew must be irrecoverably lost, as indeed
they were. But in this time, by my own industry, and the forwardness of those
that accompanied me, I was grown indifferent ready in the ordinary language of
that Province, (for almost every Province in China, has its proper Language)
whereat I discerned they took no small content. I was at length to take the
air, and brought into the spacious garden of that Palace, a place of excellent
pleasure, and delight, as being planted with herbs and Flowers of admirable
both sweetness and beauty, and almost infinite variety of fruits both European
and others, and all those composed with that rare curiosity, that I was
ravished with the co^templation of such delightful objects. But I had not here
long recreated my self, yet the Mandarine entered the Garden, on that side where
I was walking, and being advertised thereof by his servants, and wished to
kneel down to him (as I after found it to be the usual public reverence to
those great Officers) I did so, and humbly craved his favor toward a poor
stranger, that arrived in those parts not by his own destination, but by the
secret disposal of the heavens: He in a different language (which all the
Mandarines, as I have since learned, do use) and that like that of the Lunars
did consist much of tunes, but was by one of his servants interpreted to me.
He, I say, wished me to be of good comfort, for that he intended no harm unto
me, and so passed on. The next day was I commanded to come before him, and so
conducted into a sumptuous dining room exquisitely painted and adorned. The
Mandarine having commanded all to avoid the room, vouchsafed conference with me
in the vulgar language; inquiring first the estate of my Country, the power of
my Prince, the religion and manners of the people; wherein being satisfied by
me, he at last descended to the particulars of my education and studies, and
what brought me into this remote country: Then did I at large declare unto him
the adventure of my life, only omitting here and there, what particulars I
thought good, forbearing especially any mention of the stones given me by
Irdonozur. The strangenes of my story did much amaze him. And finding in all my
discourse nothing any way tending to Magic; (wherein he had hoped by my means
to have gaind some knowledge) he began to admire the excellency of my wit,
applauding me for the happiest man, that this world had ever produced: and
wishing me to repose my self after my long narration, he for that time
dismissed me. After this, the Mandarine took such delight in me, that no day
passed, wherein he sent not for me. At length he advised me to apparel my self
in the habit of the Country (which I willingly did) and gave me not only the
liberty of his house, but took me also abroad with him, when he went to Paquin,
whereby I had the opportunity by degrees to learn the disposition of the
people, and the policy of the Country, which I shall reserve for my second
part. Neither did I by this my attendance on him gain only the knowledge of
these things, but the possibility also of being restored to my native soil, and
to those dear pledges which I value above the world, my Wife and children. For
by often frequenting Paquin, I at length heard of some Fathers of the Society
that were become famous for the extraordinary favor by the King vouchsafed
them, to whom they had presented some European trifles, as Clocks, Watches,
Dials, and the like, which with him passed for exquisite rarities. To them by
the Mandarines leave, I repaired, was welcomed by them, they much wondering to
see a Lay Spaniard there, whither they had with so much difficulty obtained
leave to arrive. There did I relate to Father Pantoja, and those others of the
society these fore-related adventures, by whose directions I put them in
writing, and sent this story of my fortunes to Macao, from thence to be
coveighed for Spain, as a forerunner of my return. And the Mandarine being
very indulgent unto me, I came often unto the Fathers, with whom I consulted
about many secrets with them; also did I lay a foundation for my return, the
blessed hour whereof I do with patience expect; that by enriching my Country
with the knowledge of hidden mysteries, I may once reap the glory of my
fortunate misfortunes.

FINIS.
NUNCIUS INANIMATUS.

By F.G. B. of H.

LONDON, Printed for Joshua Kirton, at the Sign of the Kings Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1657.

NUNCIUS Inanimatus.
NEminem latere potest, qui Philosophiam vel primis (quod aiunt) labris
degustarit, ad intellectum humanum nihil nisi exteriorum sensuum adminiculo
pervenire; ut, qui alium sive absentem, sive Praesentem, suae voluntatis
certiorem facere velit, hunc aditu ingredi omnino habeat necesse.

2. Et apud praesentes quidem alio vix utimur Medio, quam sermonis; qui Auditus
ministerio mentem menti solet apt convenire, and quasi conjungere; nisi for^^
Palias al^quis reperiatur quand^que, qui (ut de Claudiano illo liberto Tacitus)
servis nihil nisi scripto, aut nutu mandare solitus est.

3. Absenti qui volunt aliquid indicare, and Nunciorum fidei non omnia credere,
per oculos ingerunt, quae per aures non possunt, aut non tutum existimant: quem
quidem in finem literas solemus exarare, animi Indices quae jussa plerunque
satis fideliter peragunt nisi ubi, ve^ Nuncio^u^ persidia, aut negligentia vel
Itinerum impedimenta in causa sunt, ut ad destina^u^ locu^ Indicia nostra non
perveniant.

4. His incommodis remedia nonnulla sunt ab Antiquis excogitata, quae praeterea
quod viam expedire videbantur, and Nuncios adhibere, qui facile non possunt
corrumpi, celeritatem etiam pollicebantur, qualem Nullus hominum praestare
posset, nisi qui tanquam Perseus alter, Pegasum nescio quem Alarm (ut literas,
seque perferat,) nactus fuisset.

5. Illorum inventa hujusmodi apud Historicos commemorata non pigebit paucis
recensere, ut postquam Nuncium porro hunc meum descripserim, and quid
polliceatur retulerim, quantum nostra Commenta Antiquorum illa transcendant,
tunc demum lectori innotescat.

6. Cecinna Volaterrarius (ut habet Plinius) comprehensas Hirundines in urbem
secum auferens, Not. Hist. lib. 10. Cap. 24. Pl. lbid.
victoriae nuncias amicis mittebat, illito victoriae color, Tradit and Fabius
Pictor in Annalibus suis, cum obsideretur praesidium Rom: ^ Ligustinis,
Hirundinem a pullis ad se alla^am lino ad pedem eius alligato, ut nodis
significaret, quo die adveniente auxilio Eruptio sieri deberet. Et D. Brutus in
obsidione Mutinensi, Epistolas annexas columbarum pedibus, misit in Castra
consilium. Pl. lib. ^^ Cap. 37.


7. Sed horum omnium inventa multis gradibus superavit illud Mamaluchorum
AEgiptiorum Alexandriam incolentium, de quibus sic scribit Bern: quidem de
Breidenbach Decanus Moguntinus. Quanquam forte fit difficile creditu, (inquit
ille) tamen omnino sic se habet, quod narrabo: Itin. ter. S. moct. 28. 1483
Amiraldus semper apud se quasdam disciplinatas habet columbas, sic edoctas, ut
quocunque perrexerint, in Amiraldi curiam revertantur: Earum duas aut tres
Naucleri, (emissi in occursum Alexandrinum portum petentium) secum recipientes,
educunt per mare usque ad locum in quo advenientes possunt explorare, ubi mox
conscriptam schedulam continentem quae scitu necessaria sunt, ad collum vnius
Columbae suspendunt, eamque sinunt avolare, quae continuo volatu ad mensam
usque Amiraldi schedulam afferens, quales sint venientes indicat: Quod si post
primam emissam columbam, aliud quidpiam Amiraldo fuerit^ significandum, mox
secundam emittunt Columbam, vel etiam tertiam si necesse fuerit: and ita long
antequam Naves portum intrent, Amiraldus de eis est edoctus. Dicitur etiam quod
alias habet Columbas, quas usque in Cayrum emittit ad Soldanum, tempore quo
aliquod repentinum and ardu^^ inciderit negotium, sibi necessario significandum
Porro si Naucleri ab ipso Amiraldo emissi navium conditiones investiga^e
nequiverint, hoc ipsum per Columbas sibi renunciant.

8. Hisce, similibusque rationibus al^ quid significatum quandoque comper^mus
sed avbus semper Baj^lis; cum nos internuncium dare polliceamur, qui non solum
non Ales, aut Alatus, sed ne Animal quidem sit; and tamen Celeritate Animal^um
quodvis, vel pervelocissimu^, multis quod aiunt parasangis ^nteeat.

9. Ad institutum igitur nostrum propius accedit illud illorum, qui noctu
accensis ignibus, interdiu, Pumo, amicis procul dissitis, brevissimo temporis
spatio quod visu fuerit, significarunt. Sic Graecie Chio Confoederatis suis,
qui ad Artemisium castra habebant; and Mardonius Persa ab Athenis in Asiam
u^que: sicuti ab Herodoto traditum est.

10. ^sti enimvero (quantum perspicio) non omnia quae expedire viderentur,
hujusmodi signis enunciabant, sed unum duntaxat aliquod^ de quo, inter ipsos
antea Conventum suerat; utpote, Athenas ^o temporis ^rticulo captas, aut
exsce^sionem factam in terram hostilem, tum, cum in illis locis aut fl^mma, aut
fumus excitatus fuisser.

11. Plus multo mihi videntur praestitisse Tibe^iani illi apud Suetonium; qui
quo tempore P^udentium ille n^qu^ssimus in Caprearum insula helluaretur, actum
p^aecipue quando Sejanum opprimere satagebat, Signa, (ne Nuncii moratentur)
tolli procul, ut qiudque foret factu, mandavit, quae verba videntur innuere ita
rations suas instituisse Tiberium, ut omnia Cogintu necessaria pe^ hujusmodi
signa in Continenti procul elata ipse in Insula degens, intell exerit.

12. Qua in re si non hallucinor, facile subeat admirari, qui evenia^, ut ars
hujusmodi, omnia animi nostri sensa sic sine Nunciis ad absentes procul
annunciandi in hac nostrae Europa interi^rit, aut saltem ab eo tempore nusquam
fuerit usurpata quantum Historiarum classicarum lectione possum reperire.

13. In hac inquam nostra Europa: nam apud Ca^ajanos in summa perfectione
hodi^quev gere, clarissime patet, clarissimi Scriptoris testimonio Aug:
Busbequii de cujus fide dubitare esset nefas, nisi is aliena fide niteretur, se
ipsum audiamus sic loquentem.

14. Postquam multorum Mensuum labor ad angustias ac veluti claustia regni
Catayani perventum est, asperis montibus praerup^^que saxis circumdata; nec
potest intrari n^si perfauces, quae Regis illius praesidiis tenentur: ibi
Mercatores interrogantur quid ferant, undeveniant, and quo sint numero; qua
cognita, regii praesidiarii interdiu fumo, noctu per ignes proximae speculae
tradunt, illa deinceps sequenti, ac sic deinceps, donec aliquothorarum quod
plurium dierum spatio non potest Nuncius, Cathaiam ad regem de mercatorum
adventu transferatur, qui quidem pari celeritate eademque ratione quid sibi
placeat, respondet; admitti omnes, an partim excludi aut differri.

15. Ab hujusmodi speculis, (quas nos Anglice Becons appellamus;) aliquid
enunciari posse, majores nostros non latere patet, a quibus nempe morem
accepimus Hostium adventum earum open declarandi. Verum illa duntaxat ratione,
tot hominum and jumentorum numerum, gentium mercimonia, and alia scitu
necessaria sigillatim refer, opus videtur magis arduum, and difficile, quam
ut solertia gentis Barbarae and philosophiae tam humanae quam divinae penitus
ignaraepraestare posse existimem. Atque de visu, quem non sine causa Cicero
sensuum acerrimum pronunciavit.) Haec hactenus.

16 Ut iam ab oculis ad aures transeamus; legendo huc usque vix comperi aliquam
rationem excogitatam ab antiquis aut a Modernis usurpatam, qua hujusce sensus
beneficio notitia quisque perciperit a loco paulo longinquiori intervallo
dissito, insuper Nuncii inter mentis sermonem.

17. Huc tamen aliquid spectat, quod prodidit nobis Solominis Antiquitatis (a^
nostrae praesertim Britannicae) Camdenus in his verbis: Muri Pictici, (quem aut
Borealem Angliae partem construxit Severus;) accolae tubulum aereumeo artificio
muro insertum inter singula Castella and Turres intercurrisse ferunt, (cujus
fragmenta subinde reperserunt,) ut si quis vocem meam quacunque turri
immisisset, statim sonus in proximam inde ad tertiam and omnes deinceps non
interruptus perserretur ad significandum ubi loci, hostium insultus timeretur,
eujusmodi miraculum de turribus B^zantii. in Severi historia refert Xiphilinus.
Sed cum Murus nunciaceat, (inquit ille,) and Tubulus sit nullus, multi hic
circumquaque praedia in Cor^ nage ut Juridici loquuntur, a Regibus nostris
tenent: videlicet, ut Cornu irruptiones hostium vicinis significent; quod a
veteri Romano^um instituto deductum nonnulli existimant. Hactenus Camdenus, qui
omnia Antiquorum inventa ad hunc scopum tendentia his in verbis complexus est.

18. Haud abs re fuerit fortassis, ut poste^ quam de visu and auditu
disseruimus, nonnihil etiam dicamus de tactu: cujus sensus ministerio procul
absentibus aliquid posse significari sine Nuncio praesertim neque; traditum est
huc usque ab aliquo ut ex^stimo, nec ut fieri possit, credibile videatur. Ego
autem and fieri posse, and factum esse facile contendo, ad Millarii unius aut
forte etiam Alterius distantiam, quanquam experimento ut hoc ipsum haberem
exploratum mihi nondum contigit, and utrum operantium denique futu^um sit, non
promintio.

19. Ad caeteros vero illos sensus quod attinet (visus inquam and auditus:) Hic
dico, and fidenter dico: Primum, nunciari posse ab artis hujusce gnaro ad alium
similiter gnarum procul absentem (modo intra tam partem milliaris) sive
obsessum, sive latentem aut, fortasse detentum in all quo loco, qui nuncianti
plane notus non sit, and etiamsi notus, tamen non accessib lis; omnia
fig^llatim quaecunque voluerit and conducere exist mari^. A^c antur procul
omnes horaimnes; Corpus in Ergastu'um compinge; vincantur manus; Caput
obnubito; caetero qui non sis modestus, verba cuncta auribus percipiet absentis
Amici, illi modo amico libertas non sit imminuto adeo quin ea valeat facere
quae fieri solent quand^que a liberis ho^inious, aut ^altem quae se facere
posse existimet quisque sine periculo.

20. Dico deinde quod cognito loco ubi Am^cus resideat ad quem Notitia perferri
debe^ and si ute^que plena fruatur liberate, rations etiam ^^^^^ fuerint
unitae quae ad Medii dipositionem sunt conducibiles: ad centissimum usque
Milliare (forte etiam vel milessimum) omnia posse nunciari tali Amico, sine
nuncio, hominum, (imone animalum) quoquam intercurrente idque infra brevissimum
temporis spatium, horam puta aut multo fortasse contractius.

21. Miranda inquis, sed non credenda hoccine, vero tam mirandum aut
incredibile videatur? Habes adhuc generalia tantum ^^ specific acum Individuum
de quo minus credas: mandetur Nuncio huic meo Londini (modo raucis) qu^cquid
annuntiari curis Bristoliae, Welliae, au^^i mavis Exoniae degenti, neque enim
longir quitatem viae multum moror si detur facultas sternendi and permiabilem
faciend^: Mandetur (inquam) Londini idque in ipso articulo Meridiei unus
aliquis integer sac^ae B^bl^ae versiculus annunciandus; curabo ut mandata is
exhibeat loco designato, (attend quid dieo) ante meridiem ejusdem diei.

22. Ne temere pronunties: serius aliquot Minutis ad Bristoliensem; quam ad
Londinensem Meridianum Sol pervenit. Hoc tantum est quod mirere, Nuncium
qualemcunque, motum caelestem pernicitate posse antevertere. Iste vero facier,
faciet inquam, si opus fuerit; aut ego omnium qui fari aut s^ribere sciverunt,
vanissimus.

23. De arcibus aut civitatibus obsessia quid loquar? Nuncius noster Inanimatus
Animae nil metuens, innumero^um hostium phalanges pertransibit: non morabitur
cum fossa ad Infernum usque depressa, aut Murus vel Babyloniis illis moenibus
excelsior, quin verba fideliter perferat mittentis, modo (quod femper moneo)
Pauca; sive obsessus is fuerit, sive ad obseslum aliquid velit significare,
idque velocitate incredibile si intra aliquot M^llaria 5. puta vel 7. detur
consistere quanq^am non diffido a vigessimo usque hoc ipsum satis commode
praestari posse.

24. Habes iam tria hujusce Nuncii mei promissa, quae quomodo inter se
differant, perspicuitatis gratia operae-pretium fortasse fuerit demonstrare.

25. In primo, laudo fallendi astutiam, in secundo transeundi celeritatem: in
tertio, cuncta penetrandi potentiam and vim invictam.

26. Quod primo in loco pollicitus sum facillime praestabit sine sumptu, sine
opera cujusquam praeterquam Immittentis: hoc vero habet incommodi, quod illius
usus paulo crebrior suspitione non vacabit.

27. Quod secundo; fit etiam saepenumero absque open aliena, and nonnullis in
locis operam exhibebit temporariam fere sine sumptu; plerunque vero pa^um aut
nihil efficiet sine praeparatione, eaque tali, ut pro singuli^ Milliaribus
quinis plus minus libris nostratibus constare possit, si ad perpetuum usum
destinetur: omnino vero nihil sine nutu atque authoritate Magistratus, cui
quidem perqua^^ facile est, Nuncio huic nostro hanc viam pr^cludere.

28. Ad tertium quod attinet; haud magnum profecto sumptum requirit: oportet
vero ut is qui agit in loco aliquo tuto sit constitut^ eoque non nimium
distance, ubi vim hostilem possit propulsare, donec operationem perfecerit.
Negandum proinde non est Immittentis quam Emittentis deteriorem esse
Conditionem.

29. Videris mihi iam lector p^rcontari, quonam Sensuum percipiente, haec omnia
sic annuncianda amicus intelligat; nam sunt sensus, Intellectus, satellites
(Cicero) interpretes and nuncii, utpote per quos solos ad illum pervenitur.
Respondeo auditu nonnunquam, etiam visu. Rationem quaeris quomodo? Habebis
paucis, and proinde fortassis non tam clare, quin Paradigmata requiras.

30. Si oculis amici absentis aliquid cupis re presentare, absentis inquam and
procul absentis; idque citius, quam corpus aliquodsublunare ad locum tam longo
intervallo disjunctum possit perferri^ (^am and id in me recipio:) oporte^, ut
Ideae, sive formae visibiles augeantur quantitate, multiplicentur numero; and
pro rerum significandarum varietate varientur, vel qualitate, vel quantitate,
vel situ, vel ordine.

31. Auribus nihil perc^pi nisi per sonum Neminem fugit: Erit igitur necesse ut
is^ cui aliquid auditu mediante nuntiatum fuerit, Sonos audiat, ^osque
distinguibiles pro numero Audiendorum: quae cum sint infinita, infinita sit
etiam oportet, sonorum edendorum varietas. Satis tame^ erit ut distinguantur,
vel genere, vel tempore modo etiam and Numere:

32. Haec qui probe intellexer^t (and exemplis omnia luce fient clariora)
quomodo perferantur hujusmodi some ad locum procul distantem, ^unquam
pe^contabitur.

33. Ne vero malis et damnatis artibus haec effici quisquam suspicetur: Deo
opt: Max: test profiteor atque denuncio, illiciti nihil concnere hanc
disciplinam: nihil aut divinis aut humanis legibus repugans Arithme^icae
Geometriae Music aeque aux^^io plaeraque^ coetera si non usitatis^ at legitimis
rationibus p^efici, idque sumptu sane medi^cri, pene dixeram nu^lo; Multa
siquidem p^aesta^i possunt in hoc genere sine a iquo vel Ter^untii unius
dispendio.

34. Ac ista quidem cum sic se habeant sapientibus d^jud^candum reliquo an
quantum^ et quousque laec nostra Inventa Rcip: utilia sint futura, si in primo
deficient, moriantur, et sicut Partus Abortivus, aut lucem non videant, aut
visa no tantilium fruantur, sed protinus intereant.

35. Egoe nimvero cum hujusce Artis usum fore permagnum existimem; tam pacis
quam Bell itempore, ^fficio meo consentaneum duxi, operam meam in ea tradenda
defer. Quod tamen non faciam libenter ita, ut cum passim pluribus innotuerit,
ea suo tempore uti nequeamus.

LECTORI DE AUTHORE.
Pr^stat pol Scilo, Artifex peritus,
Demon, Artifici: Artifex sed hicce
Et Motu prior, atque major Art,
Praestat credit, Demoni vel ips^,
Praestat Damoni and antevertit ips^.
ED. M. Chapter
Aliud ejusdem.
Dic quaeso, si non duce D^mone tant^ quis ergo.
Angelus hic bonus est (...) est bonus ^ic.
NUNCIUS INANIMATUS. OR THE Mysterious Messenger,

Unlocking the secrets of men's Hearts,

By F.G. B. of H.

LONDON, Printed for Joshua Kirton, at the Sign of the Kings Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1657.

NUNCIUS INANIMATUS. OR The Mysterious Messenger etc.
1 IT cannot be imagined, that any one who has but the lest knowledge in
Philosophy, should be ignorant, that, nothing can be perceived by human
understanding without the help of the exterior Senses, so that he that intends
to communicate the secrets of his mind to one either absent or present, it is
altogether necessary that he have an access by this way.

2 And certainly to those that are present, we use no other means than that of
Speech, which by the subserviency of the sense of Hearing, does disclose one
man's mind unto another, and as it were join them both together, unless
peradventure sometimes another Pallas be found, who (as Tacitus relates of that
freeman of Claudius) was wont to comm^nd his servants by no other way than by
writing, or nodding with his head.

3 They who would declare any thing to their friend that is absent, and yet
will not trust to the fidelity of the Messenger, do present that unto their
Eyes, which they cannot, or at least think not safe to do unto the Ears; to
which end and purpose the indicting of Letters, being the interpreters of our
mind, began to be in common use; which for the most part do faithfully perform
that Arrant whereon they are sent, unless when the treachery or negligence of
those that carry them, or the impediments of the journey cause that these
Demonstrations of our mind, come not to the place to which they are destinated.

4 There are many several remedies of these inconveniences invented by the
Ancients, which not only seem to facilitate the way, and to point out fit
Messengers not easily to be corrupted, but also they promise a kind of
swiftness as is beyond the power of man, unless he like another Perseus can
purchase I know not what winged Pegasus for the conveyance of himself and
Letters.

5 It will not repent me of my labor in reckoning up their Inventions of this
sort, as I find them recorded by the penns of Historians, that at the last
when I have given, in some measure, a description of this my Nuncio, and have
related what he promises, then it may be made known to the intelligent Reader
how far our inventions exceed and go beyond those of the Ancients.

6 Cecinna of Volatera, a Noble man of Rome (according to the testimony of
Pliny) bringing with him into the City, Swallows that had been taken, sent them
with tidings of victory unto his friends, painting them with the color which
betokens Victory: And Fabius Pictor also relates in his Annals, that when a
Roman Garrison was besieged by the Ligurians, that there was a Swallow, brought
from her young ones to him, with a piece of thread tied unto one of her legs,
that he should signify by the knots what day he would come with more, aid that
they might make a Sally: And Decimus Brutus, at the siege of Modena, sent
Letters that were tied at the feet of Pigeons into the Tents of the Consulls
Hirtius and Pansa, who came to his releife against Anthony.

7 But that invention of the AEgiptian Mamalucks dwelling at Alexandria does
far exceced all these, of whom Bernard de Bridenbach Dean of Mentz, thus
writes; Although, says he, perchance it may seem incredible, yet nevertheless
what I shall declare, really came to pass: Amiraldus had allwaies with him some
tutored Pigeons, which were so taught, that wheresoever they flew, they would
at length return to the Court of Amiraldus; Now those Pilots that are sent out
to meet with Ships sailing to the Port of Alexandria to be their conduct, carry
two or three Pigeons along with them to Sea, till they come even to the place
where they make full search, where presently they draw up an Inventory
containing those things that are necessary to be known, which they hang at the
neck of one of the Pigeons, and so let it fly away, who by its continual and
restless motion, soon arrives with the Schedule at the Table of Amiraldus, and
shows who they are that are a coming: But if after the sending forth of the
first Pigeon, any thing more is to be made known to Amiraldus, presently they
send forth a second, and so a third, if there be any need: So that Amiraldus
perfectly knows who and what they are, a long time before ever the Ships enter
into the Harbor. It is also affirmed, that he has other Doves, which he sends
to the Sultan at^ Cairo, by which he signifies that some sudden and difficult
business has happened; Moreover if the Pilots sent out from Amiraldus, cannot
find out the conditions of the Ship, they declare this very thing to him by
the Doves.

8 By these and the like means we find sometimes a thing may be made known in
a short space, but it is allwaies done by Birds who are the Carriers, whereas
we promise to exhibit an Inter-Nuncio, who is not a Bird, neither is he winged,
no not so much as a living Creature, and yet notwithstanding by many degrees
goes beyond any creature whatsoever, though never so swift in celerity of
motion.

9 That invention of theirs comes somewhat nigh to our purpose, who by fires
that were kindled in the night, and by smoke in the day, which may be perceived
in a short space of time, did declare their intents to their friends that were
far distant. Thus did the Grecians when they were at Chios, to their
Confederates who pitched their Tents at Artemisium, and Mardonius the Persian,
from Athens even to Asia, as it is asserted by Herodotus.

10 Yet they (as much as I perceive) could not show by these signs every thing
which was expedient, but only that one thing, about which they had agreed
before among themselves, that Athens was taken in that moment of time, or that
there was a marching down into the Enemies Quarters just then, when in those
places they had either kindled a fire or raised a smoke.

11 For my part I think that to be a more ingenuous exploit of the Tybereans,
related by Suetonius, who at the same time when this wicked Monster rioted in
the Island of Caprea, and then chiefly when he endeavored to curb the
haughty spirit of Sejanus, commanded signalls to be erected afar off (lest the
Messengers should slack their speed) to be lifted up higher, that he might
understand beforehand what was done; whose words seem to intimate thus much,
that Tyberius devised this way, that he himself dwelling in the Island, might
understand all things nedful to be known (by these Signs that were then lifted
up) in the Continent or Main land.

12 In which particular, if I am not much mistaken, it is easily to be admired
how it comes to pass, that this kind of art, thus declaring the very secrets of
our mind without the help of any Messenger, to those that are absent a great
way from us, should altogether decay in this our Europe; or at least should
from that time to this never be used, as I find in reading Classick Histories.

13 I say in this our Europe, for it is most certain, that even to this day it
is in great perfection among the Cathayans, as appears by the testimony of
Augerius Busbequius; to doubt of whose fidellity, would be almost Piacular,
unless he leaned on another man's credit; hear himself thus speaking.

14 After the travel of many a month we came at last to the very straights and
skirts of the Kingdom of Cathay, for a good part of the Dominions of the King
of Cathay is Mediterranean, encompassed with sleep and untractable Mountains,
and dangerous Rocks, neither can any one enter into it but by the narrow
passages thereof, which are kept by the Kings Garrison; there the Merchants are
questioned what they bring, from whence they come, and how many there are of
them; which being known, the Watchmen appointed by the King, show it in the day
time by smoke, in the night by fire to the next high hill, that in like manner
to the next, and so one after another; so that in the space of a few hours,
which a Messenger could not do in many days, news is brought to the King of
Cathay of the arivall of those Merchants, who answers with the like swiftness
and in the same manner, whether it stands with his good pleasure that all
should be admitted, or that they should partly be excluded or deferred.

15 Our Ancestors were not ignorant that from high Hills of this kind (which we
in England call Beacons) a thing might be made manifest, from whom also we have
derived this custom, that by their help we give notice of the invasion of a
foreign Enemy; But by by this means only, particularly to relate the exact
number of Men and Beasts, Nation, Merchandise and things needful to be known,
seems to be a more abstruse and difficult work than (as I think) to be
performed by the subtilty of a barbarous Nation altogether ignorant of
Philosophy, as well Humane as Divine. And let this suffice to be spoken about
Sight, which, not without just cause, the Prince of Orators styles the sharpest
of all the Senses.

16 That now we may pass from the eyes the ears, by reading hitherto. I have not
yet found any way either invented by the Ancients, or put in practice by any of
our time, whereby a man that is a far distant may receive notice of any
business by the benefit of this sense, unless by the speech of the Messenger
that goes to each.

17 Yet to this belongs that which Mr. Cambden the Son of all Antiquity
(especially of our British) has exposed to public view in these words; The
Inhabitants of the Picts Wall (which Severus built at the Northern part of
England) do report that there was a brazen Pipe put into the wall, with that
rare artifice that it run through each Tower and Castle, (Pieces, whereof they
now and then find) that if any one did but sound his voice into it, let him be
in what Tower soever, presently the sound went into the next, and so to the
third, so that the sound passed through each of them, without any interruption,
to signify where about they feared the assault of the enemy; Xiphiline in the
life of Severus relates a wonder of the same kind in the Towers of
Constantinople: but whereas says he the Wall is now demolished, and the Pipe
is not to be found, many here on every side hold their Lands of our Kings
successively in Cornage as the Lawyers phrase is, that by the sound of a Horn
they should signify to their neighbors the irruptions of an Enemic, which
some think to be borrowed from the old Roman custom: thus far Cambden who in
these words has comprised all the inventions of the Ancients tending to this
end.

18 Perchance it will not be altogether impertinent, that after we have spoken
somewhat about seeing and hearing, we should say a little about touching, by
the help of which sense that any thing should be signified to them that are
afar off, especially without a Messenger is not yet asserted of any one as I
think, neither does it seem credible, but for my part I dare say that it may be
done, and that with ease, at the distance of a mile or perchance two, although
I have not tried the verity thereof by any experiment, and I list not to say
whether it will be worth our labor for the future.

19 But that which concerns those senses (to wit, of seeing and hearing) I
dare say and do confidently assert, that a man skillful in this art may tell
whatsoever he pleases or thinks, may conduce to his good, to another that is
afar off if a like skillful (if he be within a quarter of a mile) though
besieged, or lying hid, or perchance detained in any place which is not
directly known to him that sends the tidings, and if known, yet not to be
gone to; Let nobody come near him, secure the body in a prison, let the hands
be bound, hoodwink the face, but be not trouble some any other way, and he
shall understand the words of his absent friends, if this liberty be not taken
away from him, that he may be able to do those things which are wont sometimes
to be done by Freemen, or may do them without fear or danger.

20 I say moreover, that if the place be known where a friend resides, to whom
our message should be brought, and if both enjoy a full liberty, the causes
being before agreed upon, which conduce to the disposition of the means, any
thing may be told to such a friend without any Messenger going between each, or
any living creature, though he be a hundred, nay perchance a thousand miles
off, and that in a short space of time, perchance an hour, or it may be
somewhat less.

21 These things some whisperingly say are strange and wonderful, but they are
not so soon to be believed: but does this seem so wonderful and uncredible.
You have yet but this only in the Genus and Species, behold an individual is
presented to thy eyes, which thou will less believe. Tell unto this my Nuncio
at London in as few words as may be, what you desire may be told to me dwelling
at Bristol, Wells, or if you will rather at Exeter, for I do not much regard
the length of the way, so it is but passable; I say tell him at London, and
that just about noone any one whole verse of the sacred Scripture, I will see
that he shall perform our commands in the designed place (mark what I say)
before the high noone of the same day.

22 Do not rashly pronounce this proposal impossible, for the course of the
Sun makes the noone later by some minutes at Bristol than at London: this it is
you may wonder at, that this Messenger should exceed the heavenly motion
thereof in swiftness. This he will do, will do it I say, if there be need, or
else I am the vainest person of all that know how either to speak or write.

23 What speak I of Towers, or Cities that are besieged? our inanimate Nuncio,
not fearing any thing, will pass through whole troops of enemies; A trench
dug almost as low as hell, or a wall though higher than those of Babylon,
shall not hinder his journey, but he will faithfully perform the message (so
it be in as concise terms as may be) of him that sent him, though besieged, or
whether he would have it told to him that is besieged, and that with such an
incredible swiftnes, if he be to be found within 5. or 7. miles, though I doubt
not but it may be done effectually within 20. miles.

24 You have here 3. promises of this my Nuncio, presented to your
consideration, perchance it will be worth our while to show how they differ
among themselv's for perspicuities sake.

25 In the first I set forth the subtlety of deceiving: in the 2 d. the
swiftness of its passage: in the 3 d. its unconquered power and strength in
penetrating all things.

26 That in the first place will easily be performed without any cost or labor
of any one, save him that sends, but it has this inconvenience, that its
frequent use will not be free from suspicion.

27 That in the second place is very often effected, without any help from
others, and in some places almost without any charge, but for the most part it
will do little or nothing without preparation, and that such that for each mile
it will cost five pounds more or less, if it be designed for perpetual use, and
nothing can be done without the countenance and authority of the Magistrate,
who can easily, if he please, hinder our Nuncios journey.

28 As concerning the third, truly it requires no great charge, but it must
be observed, that he that does act, be settled in a place without danger, and
that not too far distant, where he may resist his enemies force, until he has
perfected his work, and here we must not deny, that the condition of him that
sends in, than of him that sends out is the worst.

29 You seem to me, O Reader, to ask by what sense, a friend may perceive those
things that are to be told, for the senses are the guard, Interpreters and
Messengers of the Understanding (so Cicero) by which alone we come to
understand: I answer sometimes by hearing, and sometimes by sight; You ask a
reason how? you shall have it in few terms, and perchance not so clearly, but
that you require examples.

30 If you desire to represent any thing to the eyes of your absent friend, I
say absent, and at a great distance sooner than any sublunary body can come to
the place that is separated by so long an intervall, for I undertake that) we
must see that the Idaeas or visible forms be increased in quantity, multiplied
in number, and be varied according to the variety of the things, to be
signified in quality, quantity, position or order.

31 There is none but knows that nothing can be perceived by the ears without
a sound, it is therefore necessary that he to whom any thing is to be declared
by the mediation of hearing, should hear those sounds, and those must be
distinguished according to the number of the things to be heard, which because
they are infinite, the variety of sounds that are to be echoed forth must be
infinite also: nevertheless it will be sufficient, that they be distinguished
either in the kind, or time, manner and number.

32 He that shall rightly understand (and by examples they are more clear than
the Sun in its meridian splendour) how sounds of this nature are reported to a
place far distant will never question the verity hereof.

33 And here lest any one should timerously suspect these things to be effected
by unlawful and condemned arts, in the presence of that God who is both the
greatest and the best: I protest, and openly denounce, that this discipline
contains in it nothing that is unlawful, or that is contrary to the Laws
either of God or man, and that many things are done by the help of Arithmetic,
Geometry and Music, the rest if not by usual, yet by lawful means, and that
at a very small cost, I had almost said none at all, for certainly many things
may be performed in this kind without the least expense or loss that can be
imagined.

34 And seeing that it is so, I leave it to the judgment of those that are
judicious to consider how much and how far these our inventions may be
profitable to the Commonwealth for the future: if they are defective, let them
dye, and as untimely birth let them not see the light, or if they chance to see
the light, let them not enjoy a little, but forthwith let them vanish into
nothing.

35 Yet I my self think the use of this art to be very great, as well in times
of Peace as War, and I thought it my duty to bestow some pains in the delivery
thereof, which I will not do so willingly, lest that when it shall be made
known to many, we cannot use or practice these things in their due time.

FINIS.
These Books are lately printed, and are sold at the Kings Arms in Paul's
Churchyard.
The Administration of Cardinal Richelieu, containing the History of the most
important Affairs of Christendom, more particularly of England, from A^no.
1624. to 1634.

A Collection out of the best approved Authors, containing near six hundred
several Histories of Visions, Apparitions, Prophecies, Sp^its, Divinations,
and other wonderful Illusions of the Devil, also of dive^s Astrological
Predictions.

The Man in the Moon, or a discourse of a Voyage into the Moon by Domingo
Gonsales. Also Nuncius Inanimatus Englished.

A Restitution of decayed intelligence in Antiquities, concerning the English
Nation, by the Study and Travel of Richard Verstegan.

The History and Character of the Bishops, in the Reigns of Q. Elizabeth and K.
James, written by Sir John Harrington.

The Magistrates Authority in matters of Religion, O^ the right of the State in
the Church, ^ Discourse written by the learned Hugo Grotius.

Of Government and Obedience as they stand directed and determined by Scripture
and Reason, Four Books, by John Hall of Richmond.

Two Play's of Mr. James Sbirley, The ' constant Maid, a Comedy, and St.
Patrick for Ireland.

That Excellent Tragedy of Bussie D^ Ambois written by M^. George Chapman.

The Philosophy commonly called the Morals, written by the learned Philosopher
Plutarch.

The Indian History of Anaxander and Orazia' written in French by Monsicur de
Bois Robert, and translated by W. G. Esquire


