TERRIBLE AND TRVE NEVVES FROM BEVERLEY AND THE CITY OF YORK

Wherein is a true Relation of the beseiging of the Town of Hull, by the Kings
Majesty, with six thousand Horse and foot, on Thursday, July 7. 1642.

ALSO Of Sir John Hothams drowning the Country within four miles of Hull, and
what has happened since, and his Majesty's Resolution concerning it.

WITH The Lord Digbies entertainment at the Court, and diverse remarkable
passages York, from the third of July to the ninth of the same, sent in a
letter from York to a friend in London. July the twelfth. 1642.

London printed for M. T. 1642.

SAD NEWS FROM BEVERLEY AND YORK July the Twelfth, 1642.
SIR
AFter my love presented unto you, I shall acquaint you, withal the sad
disasters, that is like to befall us in these parts, And such as will bring
Ruin to this Kingdom, if such distractions as these continue; which GOD of
his infinite mercy prevent, and bring to a happy Conclusion.

Upon Satterday at night July 3. one Master Murrey of the Bed Chamber, came
Post to the KING, and brought News of a Pinnace, that was sent from the Queen
at Amsterdam, (laden with Money and Ammunition for His Majesty's use) which
was intercepted at the mouth of Humber by one of the Kings Ships called the
May-flower, who brought her down the River of Humber, to a place called Paul,
within 4. miles of Hull, the May-flower casting anckor there, intended to
search her, but she having 2. Pilots of Hull within her, who knew all places
thereabouts, got in at a small Creek near to the Town of Paul, where the
Kings Shipp could not follow her, by reason of the shallow water, and after she
had sailed 4. Miles up the Creek, into Holdernesse, she rune her self a
shore, and there landed 6. Pieces of her Ordinance for her defense, and
Planted them, least Sir Iobn Hotham should surprise her out of Hull. Which His
Majesty had no sooner intelligence of, but on Sunday Morning at 4. a Clock, He
sent 3. Trumpeters into all parts of the City, to Summon 2. Troops of Horse,
one of which was called the Princes Troop, and Commanded, by Sir Thomas
Dallyson, and Captain Byron, Brother to Sir John Byron, late Lieutenant of
the Tower of London; The other was Commanded by Captain Iackson, These Troops
was to meet at the Court Gate, by 8. of the Clock that Morning, who was all
sent toward Hull, where this shipp lay, to protect her from violence.

On Monday Morning, July 4. 300. of the Soldiers that were Billetted in York,
was sent after these Troops of Horse to Beverley, where they are Quartered.

Upon Tuesday July 5. The Lord Digby came to the Court at York, who was
Entertained by His Majesty, but the Lords seem to be discontented therewith:
This day several Troops of Horse and Foot was sent after the rest to
Beverley.

Wednesday July the sixth the King with three Lords in his Coach, took his
journey to Beverley at four a clock in the morning to see the Ammunition which
came from Holland, but he returned again at night, this night news was brought
to the King that Sir John Hotham had seized upon all the sheep and cattle
within four miles of Hull, and carried them into the Town, And he had let in
the sea, and drowned the Country within three miles about the Town, in regard
his Majesty had resolved to beseige him in Hull, This afternoon three
Proclamations was put forth by the King, one for the forbidding all Ammuniton
and provision to be carried into Hull for their releif, the other for a
general pardon to all the Officers and Soldiers in Hull, that would submit,
lay down their Arms, and come to His Majesty, and that they should be
entertained and have a months pay before hand, the third, for not removing any
Magazine within the Kingdom, by any ordinance of Parliament without consent of
his Majesty.

Thursday was a great meeting of light Horse on Heyworth Moore, who was
formerly summoned by His Majesty to meet this day from several places of this
County, and had order from his Majesty to repair toward Hull, the Earl of
Cumberland and Westmerland has commission to raise all the forces they can
both of horse and foot, within the west riding of this shire, and to imprison
those that refuse to obey their Commission.

This day being the 7th. of July the King with a great power both of Horse and
foot, accompanied with diverse Lords and above 300 Gentlemen and Cavaliers took
his Journey again to Beverley; and has beseiged Hull with 6000 Horse and
Foot, who lies about Beverley, and have begun to entrench themselves about the
Town, which trenches are four or five miles off Hull and upon them they have
planted the 6 pieces of Ordnance they took out of the ship that is run ashore,
they are making a passage to drayn the water away out of the Meddowes which Sir
John Hotham had drowned, this last night Sir John Hotham made 40 shot with
great Ordnance against the Batteries which was making by the Kings Forces, but
not a shot could reach them, only one bullet from a Basilisco came very near a
Gentleman who was within 2. miles of the Town, who was in great danger to have
been slain; 4. Pieces of Ordinance more is planted upon a Cliffe near the
Town of Paul to hinder all succor and releife from going by Water to Hull;
Also the Earl of Lindsey has mounted some pieces of Ordinance at Barton on
Humber, below Hull, to stop the passage on that side of the town, It is
generally reported here, that the King intends to starve them by stopping all
passages of relief both by Sea and Land, the King has caused a spring to be
cut of, which runs into the Town, that it is to be feared they will want fresh
water, for the Town affords but little, and not very good, it is also reported
the King will not return back to York, before he has taken Hull, great forces
both of Horse and Foot daily resort toward Hull, Sir John Gotherick a
Yorkshire Knight has given 20 Horse to this design, Sir Ralph Hopton, of
Somersetshire and a Parliament man lately, has given six Horse, The Earl of
Kingstone in Nottingham-shire proffers to lend the King a hundred thousand
pound, at four per centum, most of the Gentry of Yorkshire and Lancashire
assists the King with men and Horse.

Many People within this City, stick not to say they hope now Sir John Hotham
will be Hanged, diverse scandalous speeches are in the mouths of a great many
(both Caveliers and others) against the Parliament, with strange libells against
them and their Proceedings, to conclude, great are the fears and troubles
this Kingdom is likely to fall into, if these distractions continue, Poor
people in diverse places complains of the decay of Trading, which will bring
Ruin upon them, the Lord deliver us from civil Wars, and setle peace and
Unity amongst us,

Your assured Friend P. H.
York July the Ninth. 1642.

