Gadburies Prophetical Sayings: OR, The FOOL Judged out of the KNAVE's Mouth.
Multi multa Sciunt, sed ego nihil.
Merlinus Verax.

a special Protestant.



ALL hail, my Masters! health and peace to you
My Little Master, and my Mistress too;
That Girl, I mean, that sprung from Adam's Loins,
With whom full often I have increast my Crimes,
We then were brisk: for they were pious Times.
All hail, my Ghostly Fathers! now you see
Our wicked Stars, how damned morose they be;
They Are suffering Times: in which I pity you
The pious Nuns, and all our holy Crew.
All hail, my Brethren! you the Starry Quacks,
Dull, blind and Empty, like our Almanacks;
Armed with our Follies, we complete our Fate;
We ruled the Stars: they us in Eighty Eight:
For that I Would hence renounce to live, or be,
Had my two Learned Brethren outdone me.
Shifting and shuffling with his Canting Strains,
His head, poor man's supplied, but not with brains.
All hail, my Neighbors! I to you Appeal;
You know I kept my Church, you knew my Zeal;
Till a New Faith of a more glorious strain
Attacked my Cranium, and possessed my brain,
Which now you see I must renounce again.
All hail to Malachy! Almost forgot,
That used to go instead of the Powder Plot.
All hail, good Catholics! [a sigh for that]
My Cozen Celliers: Father Teague and Not.
All hail, my Friends! but give me leave to Cant,
As God shall save me, I Am a Protestant.
Perhaps you know my Face: well, be it so,
And yet I know not whither you do, or no:
After such Changes I my self have known,
Your Face, I may: but I scarce know my own*
Nay, should my Ghostly Father come, he would swear
I Am not the man I was the other year.
I hugged my rising Fortune in those times
Of being great by a new heap of Crimes*
All Faith's alike to me, so I grow fat,
I am, I am -- but pardon that,
Cannot I be what I please without Control,
My Roman Face shows an accomplished Soul.
They call me Rogue in public, that I Will bear;
The plaguey thing that Nicks: I cannot repair.
And that is [Curse on my Stars which still-prevails]
Those damned Predictions of the Prince of- Wales.
In former times when I such rubs did meet,
Cat-like, I always fell upon my feet:
I kept my stops, and time, and steps; but now
I dance, it is true, but like an ancient Cow:
Or like a Courteous Spaniel, when they cry
Seek out; away he runs, and so did I.
Or like Dispencing Judges: Rave and tear,
Act all that is base: for Fools are void of fear;
But yet when caught, what humble Rogues we are!
Or like a Monkey in an Antic Dress,
Who in a Crab-tree would his Tricks rehearse;
The more he skips, the more he shows his Arse:
even so did I.
J. G's VERSES about the Prince of WALES in his Almanac for the Year 1689.
Travestyed.
In JANUARY.
ALL hail, my Masters! Eighty Eight is gone;
That Year of wonders, which the World so feared;
Yet has produced (for us to Anchor on)
A PRINCE of WALES! the Subject of each Bard.
And that thou now art mine, sweet Babe! forgive,
I Would sing thy praises, and thy Vassal live.
TRAVESTY.
All hail, my Masters! what is here to do;
A Year of Wonders do thou call it John?
'Twas such a year, so fatal to your Crew,
It has not left you ground to anchor on.
Let Chains then be their Lot, who humbly Crave,
And beg to be a Little Bastard's Slave.
In FEBRUARY.
Angels and Stars adorned this Royal BIRTH,
As if the Prince of Peace breathed peace on Earth.
May it to Warlike Britain prove, as he
Did to the World; [its Savior to be!]
Gladding the drooping Souls of Loyal Men;
And Madmen to their wits return again.
TRAVESTY.
Angels and Stars; why, what should they do there?
The man mistook, and meant the Prince of the Air.
Jack's Prince of Peace was by a fury brought;
J^ffries, you know, saw him come reaking hot.
We know his coming pleased the shaven Crew,
And with them [ Jack] it did rejoice us too.
In MARCH.
Who says that EIGHTY EIGHT naught signifies?
Since such a radiant fixed Star did rise
In our Horizon? Can a PRINCE be born
That shall the World with Regal Acts a^^orn
In future times? and yet that fertile Year
Be passive thought, wherein he did appear?
TRAVESTY.
Who says that Eighty Eight naught signifies?
If any do [though Jack himself] he lies.
It gave a Child, a new way got, and born,
Poor Abdicated Creature, all men's scorn.
It gave us Ease from our avowed Foe,
And gave the Papists too a Cursed Blow.
In APRIL.
No, No! Sour Critics! God does dignify
The art of numbers with sweet Harmony.
How many Learned Pens have deigned to write
Of things stupendous in EIGHTY EIGHT?
And so! herein Great WALES, a Prince of bliss,
Born for the Ease of tender Consciences.
TRAVESTY.
No, No, sour Critics; we cannot deny
That Gadbury has learnt to Cant and Lie;
Witness that Year with all these Lies and Tales
About the Glories of his Prince of Wales.
Poor harmless Babe, miscalled a Prince of bliss;
Born for his Mother's Ease, not Consciences.
In MAY
Thrice happy must that SENATE prove that shall
So meet their PRINCE; for to content us all!
Alas! men's minds and thoughts as different be,
As are their faces; like them disagree:
From such a LAW our King will ever shine
In future times, an English CONSTANTINE.
TRAVESTY.
Thrice happy must that Land and Senate be,
That is from Popish Tyranny set free:
Let Priests lead fools; Let us abhor that thrall
That talks of freedom, when they chain 'em all.
'Twas from such Laws [ that King resolved to shine]
As Lewis gives* and not a Constantine.
In JUNE.
By whose Example, Britain's after Kings
May shun the Cause whence dire Rebellion springs.
Nothing so surely keeps a Land in Awe
As Ivory Love; the Christians Golden Law.
But Tyrant force makes people try their brains
A thousand ways to break their Bonds and Chains.
TRAVESTY.
By whose Example must our after Kings,
Shun all those Causes whence Rebellion springs?
Your Prince of Wales I know; while your soft names
Of Golden Laws, are joined to Iron Chains.
'Twas Tyrant-force made People try their Brains*
To Abdicate the Cause, and break their Chains.
In JULY.
But who doubts Ease and Quiet? Since we have
Heavens happy Earnest in a Prince so brave.
Born on that Day Trinity Sunday.
, we justly Celebrate
The holy Feast of the blessed Triumvirate.
As if the Sacred TRINE designed thereby,
To raise Great BRITAINS Ancient PIETY.
TRAVESTY.
None need doubt Ease and Quiet, since we have
Heavens Gift and Blessing, in a Prince so brave:
Born to Restore our Peace; it is he alone,
Shall pull Tyrannick Popish Worship down:
This is the Man [not the Welsh Prince] shall be
The true Restorer of our Liberty.
In AUGUST.
Let Us then contend, who shall best Tribute yield
To this Sweet PRINCE! On whom our Hopes we build
POETS pay Verses! VIRGINS Innocence!
MINERVA Wisdom! MARS brings strong defense.
Each Man brings OFFERINGS proper to his Sphere,
And none forget to breathe a HOLY PRAYER.
TRAVESTY.
Here John tells truth, In this Sweet Prince, [said he]
Our Hopes are laid of all Felicity.
Each pays his Tribute: John alone, you see,
Abounds in his own Talent, Flattery;
This is his Offering, proper to his Sphere,
A precious Tool to breathe a Holy Prayer.
In SEPTEMBER.
And let September, [for the Mothers sake
Of this blessed Babe] a better Name partake.
The seventh Month were dull, but that we see
This matchless Princess in it Born to be.
Bright MODENA, who has enriched our Land;
May thy great Name in this Month ever stand.
TRAVESTY.
And let September never be forgot,
Nor Modena, not yet the Bawdy-Plot;
Nor yet Dada, who as the Story tells,
Lent her his Hand, and with that Aarons Bells.
When Babes by Miracles are got, as said,
Farewell the ancient way of Sheets and Bed:
In OCTOBER.
October! may thou always prove
For God-like JAMES his Birth; a Prince, whose Love
Joined with his Prudence, has for us done more,
Than all the REFORMATION could before.
Oh! Let him Live and Reign to see this SON
Of Years and Parts fit for his Fathers Throne.
TRAVESTY.
October did this Land a King afford,
A Prince, they say, that never broke his Word;
Whose Courage, Wit, and Conduct, has done more,
Than all our Great Reformers could before.
His Reign was short and sweet, but ere 'twas done,
The consecrated Smock produced a Son.
In NOVEMBER.
November brought forth Pious Katherine,
Portugal' s Princess! England's Virtuous Queen,
To whom, tho Heaven Children did deny;
She lived a hopeful Prince of WALES to see.
And let me speak it to her lasting FAME,
Gladly she gave the ROYAL BABE his Name.
TRAVESTY.
November, hanged, that plaguey Powder Plot,
Which Jack so often wilfully forgot;
Nay, last year too; you see how good Men fails!
He thought of nothing then, but Prince of Wales.
To show you too, his spreading Christian Fame:
He tells you, who did give the B. his Name.
In DECEMBER.
Now MUSE forbear! This year draws to an end:
In the next, perhaps thou may thy Measures mend.
Thou gav'st such Hopes long since, of this blessed Birth,
As warmed each LOYAL HEART with Joy and Mirth.
But positive Truth suits not with Human Skill.
When that is Writ, an ANGEL guides the Quill.
TRAVESTY.
Now Muse forbear! the Year draws to an end,
And bid Friend John, his next Years Measures mend.
Who, by his Hocus-pocus Priests and Tricks,
Foretold a Prince of Wales in Eighty six.
A likely Story! for he could not say,
When all his Makers were to run away,
Passive Obedience Stars will not obey.
Read gentle Reader: Read, and think his Crimes;
How base he is, that wrote these fulsome Lines.
J. G's SAYINGS, as he has given them himself in diverse of his Writings;
showing himself a Papist, etc. and also that he was sure Popery would stand in
ENGLAND.
I. MARS bodes likewise great oppositions in Councils, many Serpentine Debates;
and a probability of the loss of sundry Charters and Privileges, perhaps long
since forfeired, though by the merciful forbearance of good Princes, or
Governors, no advantage has hitherto been taken of them.

Moons Eclipse, Alman. 1682.

An Impudent Fellow to pretend to predict the taking away Charters by an
Eclipse of the Moon* No, Jack, it was not the Stars, but the Popish Cabal told
you so.

II. If Monarchs by their Favors Cities make,
And plotting Citizens those Charters break,
They justly lose such Power, when dare deny
Their Sovereign's Laws, and's Pleasure disobey.
It Is proved a Legal Maxim, Just and Strong,
Cities may Err, but Kings can do no Wrong.
In Almanac 1684.

III. However, Let me humbly presume to affirm, That the Stars this Year (and
several Years yet to come, nay, I hope for ever) are at an absolute enmity with
the Enemies both of Church and State, etc. Epist. Almanac 1686 This was a
menace to the Protestants, to let them know that Popery would continue. -- Poor
deluded Fool!

IV. And (might my Muse Prophetic prove) I Would swear some Royal Prince (perhaps
of Wales) draws near. In August, 1686. Ay! was the Bawdy Plot began so soon!

V. True Science teaches us obedience to God and the King: and to acquiesce in
the Decrees and Determinations of our Holy Mother the Church. In Epist. Alman.
1688. A very good Protestant!

VI. Oh! how we ought to magnify the God of Mercies for so immense a Blessing!
so kind has he been to us (Papists) out of his free and gracious Inclination,
and (as it is reasonable to believe) to illustrate the Reign of his Royal
Servant, our Gracious Sovereign; a Prince, as God would have it, (in whose
hands are Times and Seasons) of the Primitive Faith and Piety, by a strange
Providence brought thereto, and by as strange a Courage (which is nothing but
Christian daring) to own it; An Argument to me demonstrative, that this
Religion is not of Man, but of God. --

VII. Better all Religions be Indulged, than the one Ancient Faith Excluded,
Persecuted and Harassed. -- What Persecution the poor Catholics have endured
ever since the time of Henry the VIII. Alman. 1688. In Prog. page 5. What think
you, was Jack a Protestant, or not, in 1688. he says, he is so now. But a Liar
ought to have a good Memory.

VIII. To Rome none need be Slaves! It Is Heresy Ingulphs our Souls, the True
Church sets us free.

In the Reply, in June.

IX. But Prance, unhappy Prance! has so much done, As (not to clear it, yet)
to quit Just Rome.

The Reply, in October.

X. Speaking of Powder Treason, he says; If this were really a Plot of the
Papists hatching (we do not deny but there were some deluded Catholics in it,
and suffered for it) it was the most ridiculous (next to Oates's Plot) that
ever was heard. Reply, page 3. For that reason I judge Jack forgot the Fifth of
November: Here Is an Impudent Advocate for a Villainous Cause and Party!

XI. This greatly Suffering Prince (says he) was Crowned at Westminister, Apr.
23. 1685. and there took an Oath, called the Coronation Oath, what then? was it
not of his own free Choice? he was King of England without it. -- that is not
of irresistible obligation, but Prudence and Humanity that they do so. Reply,
page 8. Ask Jack where that Law is written; and whether it is not a part of
Kings-will's Magna Charta?

XII. And well may we question that man's Loyalty to the King, that shall offer
to plead for a Continuance of the Test against His Majesty's Royal Inclination.
Reply, p. 11.

XIII. Speaking of the Dispencing Judges; What have they done (says he) that
looks like the Actions of Tr^s^lian? with whom have they Conspired? or against
whom? what Countries have they Injured? or what single Persons have they
oppressed? Reply, page 10. Observe but the Fellows Impudence in this thing; and
think whither they were the greater Knaves for acting Villainies, or he for
justifying them in it.

XIV. On the 11th of August, T. Oats is to stand in the Pillory over against
the Temple, and this every year as long as he lives. Alman. 1689. in August.

I believe they were Heretical Stars that cheated Honest Jack at this rate.

XV. He wished to see the Prince of Orange, and the rest of his Great Ones
brought Prisoners to London, to make Speeches at Tower Hill, and Tyburn. In the
Paper written for the Papists. Oh villain! that he should desire the Ruin of
that Gentleman, to whom are all stand obliged for our deliverance from the
destroyers.

XVI. But to demonstrate Iam no Papist; My Adversary, for his more certain
satisfaction, may if he please; very often see me in the Abby-Church of St.
Peter' s Westminster, in the time of Divine Service, if that will convince him.
Cardines Coeli, page 36. Quere? Who has seen him there in the last two or
three years? I suppose he meant well to the Church; but his bashfulness hindered
his coming to it. Sure you will not judge him a Papist for that; will ye? --
Apostate!

ADVERTISEMENTS.
OH Yes! If any Man, Woman, or Child, in City, or Country, above ground, or
under it; or in any Abbey, Monastery, Nunnery, or any other of those Houses,
can give any certain account where J. G. was married to his last Wife, and by
whom; Let them repair to Brick-Court, and they shall be well rewarded.

All Persons that are desirous to be instructed in the Arts of Popery,
Sedition, Rebellion, Reporting False News; and to be furnished with Arguments
against taking the Oaths of Allegiance to their present Majesty's; Let them
repair to the Professor of Sedition, in Brick-court, at his usual Office, and
they need not want their desire.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Baldwin, in the Old-Bayly. 1690.


