GODS GOVERNMENT OF HIS CHURCH, AND THE DEPUTATION THEREOF TO MEN, Both for the
CIVIL and ECCLESIASTICAL Estate: Especially for the Ecclesiastical,
concerning which many doubts and debates are now moved.

PROVE. 8. VER. 15, 16. By me Kings raign^, and Princes decree Justice.

By me Princes, and Nobles, even all the Judges of the earth rule.

Printed in the year 1641.

GODS GOVERNMENT OF HIS CHURCH.
CHAP. I.
SOme Heathen, because they were regardlesse of the maine passages of the
world, and others, because they did too curiously measure them by the line of
humane reason, erred in their opinion, conceiving that God took not care of
this inferior world: But such among them, as were more considerate and better
sighted, made no question but that God had not only an all-seeing eye of
providence to behold and regard, but also an eye intent to the ballancing of
men's actions; and, in effect, said, that God was well pleased, and would in
mercy sooner or later reward them who continued in well doing, and would punish
those in this life or another, who were given up to do evil.

Christians have more undoubted knowledge of these things then others, and well
understand, that God has a special eye on mankind, and has not left men to
themselves, because they are prone to error in judgment, and mis-carriage in
their actions; as having of themselves more sail in their affections, then
ballast in their understanding and will: and therefore that God, as of right
he may, so of his singular goodness he does take care to govern and instruct
the sons of men.

This the Holy Scripture makes evident unto us, when God is styled The Lord,
and Father of all, and all men said to be at his command and disposing, his
dutiful sons, or rebellious children. So when he is called the Master of the
household, and all the world his family; The Builder of his Church, making
choice of fit stones, for the rearing up of the same; The Shepherd of the
flock, and all the world his sheep or goats; The Lord of the vineyard, and all
people his pleasant plants, or fruitless trees.

That we might take more special notice hereof, God is styled The Ancient of
days, The King of kings, The Prince of the Kings of the earth, The Bishop of
our souls, The great Shepherd of the sheep, The Rabbi or great teacher of his
people, The head of the Church, and of all Principality and power.

By these Titles of God, and all other the like in Scripture, we can attain
but in part, and in some small measure to the knowledge of his Majesty,
wisdom and excellency: For this Well is vast and deep, and our pitchers
narrow mouthed, and of small capacity; yet may we observe, that these things
attributed to God, do in most eminent and superlative manner belong unto him.
So that as God is the great Shepherd of the sheep, and King of kings, so he is
likewise the great both Judge and Bishop of our souls, and Ancient of days;
and the Judge of judges, and Bishop of the bishops of our souls, and the
Ancient of all ancients of days.

In the beginning of the world, God often showed himself unto, and in more
familiar manner conversed and spoke with the Patriarchs, and thereby most
clearly manifested his love and care of mankind, his authority and wisdom to
oversee and order, to govern and teach them, and to express the actions which
are correspondent unto the titles above spoken of. This was a wonderful
condiscending of his infinite Majesty to humane weakness, and an
extraordinary favor to some special instruments of his glory for the good of
others his people, and not the usual way, in which he intended to walk; as
appears by the history of after times.

But greater love and mercy did God show, when the son of God took our nature
upon him, conversed among men thirty and odd years; when, I say, Christ
Jesus, borne King of the Jews, and being the heir of David (though refused by
the Jews, and their Rulers) became obedient to death, even to the death of the
cross, and performed all things requisite and fore-appointed by God for man's
salvation and redemption; and having delivered all doctrine and instruction by
his own sermons, and his Apostles preaching and writings, in which were
comprised all necessary matters for the working of faith in us, that in
believing we may have eternal life through Christ's name, he left the world to
make use of the same by the comfort of the Holy Ghost sent down unto them, and
sits on the right hand of his Father in heaven, and as Lord and Christ rules
and moderates all things here below, as having all sovereign power, and
authority in heaven and earth given unto him.

CHAP. II. Gods Deputation of the Government of the Church to men before
Christ's time, and how it was practiced.
IN regard that man (as God himself said) is but dust, and of a frail nature,
and (as the chief Rulers of Israel felt at Gods terrible and dreadful
delivery of the Law) humane imbecility is not able to endure Gods glory and
majesty, nor to hear his immediate voice: and because if God, making much
less appearance of Majesty, should go along with men in their proceedings,
he should (as he told Moses) consume them in the way, if they became (which
they are prone unto) a froward, rebellious, and stiff-necked people. In
regard, I say, that these dangers would befall mankind, as also for many other
reasons, well did the Israelites say to Moses, Talk thou with us, and we will
hear, but let not God talk with us, lest we dye. And for this cause God has
graciously vouchsafed to make over a Deputation to men, and to commit the
Government and teaching of the people to men called and gifted extraordinarily
by himself, or to men so qualified by ordinary means, as he himself has
prescribed, and so called by men, as he has appointed.

This God has done, because these his Deputies being men compassed with like
infirmities, and subject to like passions as others, would moderately
compassionate others, who either through the ignorance of their minds should
fall into error, or through depravation of their wills and affections, should
trespass in their actions.

This Deputation of Governors and Teachers appears most plainly in some
parts of Scripture, where occasion was given to explicate it fully, and to have
it settled exactly; as in Moses time. For then Moses first educated in Pharaohs
court, and afterward flying thence, and becoming for forty years a shepherd
in Midian; that from a low degree he might be capable of exaltation, was called
by God to be the shepherd, captain, and King of Israel, for leading Gods
people out of Egypt. Of this Moses God says, that he should be to Aaron as
Exodus 4.16. and 7.1.
God; and made him Judge of his people: And when Moses could not hear Exodus
18.13
and end all the controversies among so numerous a people, God bids him take
seventy chief Elders of the Tribes, Number. 11.16 Deuteronomy. 1.13, 14, 15.
known to be men of courage, fearing God and hating covetousness, and to make
them Roshim, heads of the people, and Sarim, captains over thousands, hundreds,
fifties, tens. This is further put in practice Number. 2. where each of the twelve
Tribes has Nasi, one chief captain, and the four captains of Judah, Reuben,
Ephraim, and Dan, have not only the command of their own Tribes, but each of
them two other captains, and their Tribes subordinate unto them.

God then also appointed Aaron high Priest, a type of Christ our high Priest:
This Aaron Exodus 22.28 Act. 23.5.
was also Nasi, a Prince of the people, and chief Ruler over the Priests
Eastward by the Tabernacle. The sons of Levi, Number. 3.21, etc.
divided according to their families into the Gersonites, Coathites, and
Merarites, had three Nesiim, captains over them: and Number. 4.28, 32.
over these Ithamar, and Eleazar son of Aaron. This Eleazar was Number. 3.32.
Pakid, (...), and is called Nasi Nesiim, Praelatus Praelatorum, Captain of
captains. Also Roshei Aboth, the heads of the fathers, or chief fathers of
the Levites; are by the seventy Interpreters Jos. 21.1. 1. Chro. 24.31
called Archpatriots and Patriarchs: The same Hebrew words come elsewhere in
speech of the Priests and Levites, and may not unfitly be so translated.

Again, when God took David from as mean employment as Moses before, and
deputed him King of the twelve Tribes, and settled him on the throne, David
took some chief Elders of the Tribes to be his Princes and Counselors, and
appointed captains of thousands, and hundreds, and fifties, and tens; and made
some of his sons when they were grown up, Cohenim, 2. Sam. 8.18.
chief Rulers or Princes.

The High Priest held his place, as in Moses his time. The Priests were by
David divided into 24. Courses; 16. Courses for the sons of Eleazar, and 8. for
the sons of Ithamar, who were fewer in number then the sons of Eleazar. Among
these 1 Chr. 24.5.
there were some Sarim, Princes of the Sanctuary, and Princes of the House of
God. In each of the Courses was one Sar, chief Governor, another 1 Chr. 24.8,
9, 10. and 18.
second to him, the rest were under them: For this term Sar is used, as of the
1 Chr. 27.22.
chief Rulers over the other Tribes, so of the chief Rulers of the Tribe of
Levi; and those were chief in place in these Courses and in the 24. Courses of
the Levites, who, in regard of their many years, and fatherly 1 Chapter 15.22
experience, and ability to direct and instruct the inferior sort, did dispose
of them which were of their Courses, according to their faculties and knowledge
in the Priestly and Leviticall employments: So that some were Poshei Aboth,
Patriarchs, or chief fathers in each Course, others of their kindred
subordinate to them.

Solomon, as a prudent Deputy under God, and a worthy Successor of a blessed
Father, continued these Courses settled by his Father, and performed all things
in order, according to the 2 Chr. 8.14.
Commandment of David the man of God. It Is also the commendation of other good
Kings, as of Asa, Jehosaphas, Ezekiah, Josiah, Zorobabel, that they did that
which was right in the eyes of the Lord, as did David their father, and as
Moses had prescribed.

Jehosuah and Ezra Priests, and Nehemiah a religious noble man, still had an
eye to Ezr. 3.2, 10. and 6.18. and 8.16, 20. Neh. 12.7, 12, 22, 24.
the Law of Moses, and ordinances of David, and gave Roshei Cohenim, the heads
of the Priests their places. Ezra. 7.25.
Ezra also had authority according to the wisdom of God given him, to set up
Judges, being men who knew the Law of God, and could teach others to know it;
and had power to punish refractory persons with death, banishment, confiscation
of goods, imprisonment.

In times, which the sacred Story but briefly touches, or where Kings and
Rulers were not so careful as Gods deputation required, or when tyranny
somewhat interrupted, or violently stopped the observance of Gods Law, the
practice of this deputation is not so express or clear: yet some footsteps
thereof, even in the worst times, are discernable.

In the first times of the world (the Story whereof being of many hundred
years, is very briefly declared) we find Adam Gods Deputy. He ruled not
only over the rest of the creatures here below, but over his sons and
posterity. For if Cain (had he been an obedient son to Adam, and a faithful
servant of God) was to rule Genesis 4.
over Abel, and Abel was to submit to him, because Cain was the elder; it
necessarily follows, that Adam their father was in the same regard to rule
over both of them, and their children; and when he dyed, to leave this
deputation of authority to the Patriarchs, according as they were Elders of
their Families.

Noah by Gods command, and his fatherly authority, took his three sons and
their wives into the Ark with him; To him and them was the government of the
new world committed. So then, he in like manner was Ruler over them and their
children, and did perform sacred offices for them, as a Priest or Sacrificer,
and a Preacher of righteousness.

Sem, Noah's second son, but more eminent for piety then the other two, is
called Melchisedech, and was Gods Deputy, and both King and Priest of the High
God. How Heb. 7 4.
great he was, we are bid to consider. Abraham, who is styled Nasi, a Prince of
God by the Hittites, and as a Prince and Captain marched forth with his
soldiers to rescue Lot his kinsman taken captive, did often sacrifice, and yet
did acknowledge his subordination to Melchisedech, an higher Priest then
himself; for to him he paid the tithe of the spoils got by conquest. The
Patriarchs Isaac and Jacob succeed Abraham in the same deputation.

Job Job 1.1. and 29.7.22.
also was a Prince, and the greatest of the sons of the East, he sat in the
gates and streets as Judge, he often sacrificed, his words were waited for as
the rain, as the later rain, his speeches (as it is spoken of the Prophets
and Priests) dropped into his hearers.

In these times the way of instruction for doctrine, and for resolution in case
of doubt, was to Deuteronomy. 32.7.
enquire of their fathers, who should show them, and of their Elders, (that is,
their Priests) who should tell them; for this duty in special manner belonged
to the Fathers and Elders, as they were Priests. And that some religious Elder
was made Priest in these times, appears, because Abraham upon some thoughts
of his Genesis 15.2.
dying childless, said, that of all the souls which he had got to the Lord,
Eleazar of Damascus Genesis 24.2.
, the eldest servant in his house (and manifestly a religious man) should be
his heir; that is, not only enjoy his substance, but succeed him in the
Priesthood, and continue the knowledge of Godamong the rest of his retinue.

In the times next after Moses and Josuah's death, it pleased God to let the
Israelites know by experience the evil consequences of the want of a chiese
Rulet to be Deputy under God; for thereupon it followed, that Judge. 2.11.12
and 21.25.
every one did that which was good in his own eyes. This gave occasion to the
people to neglect the Priests maintenance, and to the Priests Judge. 17.8.
to become servile, and matters both in civil and Ecclesiastical State Judge.
2.12. and 3.7. and 10.13
to be very corrupt, and Idolatry to prevail; whereupon God punished them with
foreign enemies, famine, and civil war.

When Samuel 1 Samuel 3.19, 20.
was deputed Gods Prophet, Priest and Judge, he took special care of Gods
worship, and the observance of his Laws. Upon Samuels religious performances,
and 1 Samuel 7.3.
the peoples repentance, God himself supplied the place of 1 Samuel 12.12
their King or Ruler, and all the time of Samuel, before Saul's reign, plagued
1 Samuel 7.13, 14.
the Israelites enemies, and gave Israel repossession of the Lands which in
time of the Judges they had lost by negligence of the Rulers, and of the
Priests, at the corruptions of those times do evince.

When God, defending his people as their King, was unthankfully rejected, and
Saul anointed to rule over them, who in many of his carriages proved an evil
Deputy of God, and trespassed so far that God rejected him, Samuel and the
Priests in place after him better observed and continued the Ecclefiasticall
charge.

After David and Salomons time, Jeroboam, made Gods Deputy over ten Tribes, set
up Idolatry, cast out Gods Priests, made lewd Priests fitting his own humor;
and thus set up a wicked pattern, which his successors imitated, till God sent
Israel captive to Assure. Now also Rehoboam, and some wicked Kings of Judah
badly managed the deputation with which God entrusted them: yet the Priests,
driven from their Cities in Israel, were entertained by Rehoboam, and settled
their abode in Judah and Benjamin.

There were also in those times houses of the Prophets, supplied with Students
in Bethel, Gilgal, and Jericho. The 2 Kin. 4.23.
new moons and Sabbaths were by some observed; first fruits paid to 2 Kin. 4.41.
the Prophets by some; some 2 Kin. 10.23.
Priests, servants of the Lord, remained in Israel: yea, in the days of
Athaliah's most wicked usurpation there were some 2 King. 11.
religious Captains of hundreds, and some Priests observant of their courses,
as we see by one course of the Priests going out of their charge, another part
coming in on the Sabbath, and all of them at good Iehojadah's command. By these
religious assistants help Iehojadah slew Athaliah, and seated Ioash, true heir
to the Crown, on the Throne, as Gods Deputy. In his later days, and in the
days of the bad Kings who succeeded him, the deputation was corruptly managed,
and all good order exceedingly depraved; so that God suffered Babel to overcome
Judah, and carry the Jews away captive, as Assure had done Israel.

After Malachies time, when the neighboring nations of Egypt and Syria, and 1
Mac. 1.11.
some false brethren among the Jews themselves caused great mischief to the
people of God, so that no King sat on Davids's throne, to take care of the
Civil and Ecclesiastical government, yet the 1. Mac. 1.23
Sanctuary of God, the golden Altar, the Candlestick, the Table for the show
bread, and the like, remained until Antiochus Epiphanes took them away. The
books of the Law, the customs, and rites, the Sabbaths and feasts were kept,
until this wicked tyrant sought to abolish them. Notwithstanding all pressures
and miseries befalling this people, some 1. Mac. 4.56.
among them endeavored to live according to Gods Laws, paid their 1. Mac. 3, 49.
first fruits and tithes, maintained their 1. Mac. 3.55.
Captains of thousands, hundreds, fifties, tens. And here when Egypts and
Syria's power began by Romes rising to decline, the Maccabees inflamed with a
zeal to their Law and Nation, and encouraged by the peoples applause, were not
content with their own Ecclesiastical charge, and to blow the trumpets for
stirring up their peoples valor, valiantly to defend their liberty; but took
to themselves the places of Princes and Captains, 1. Mac. 5.3, 6.
and in their own persons waged war against their enemies.

In Christ's time the Pharisees sat in Moses chair, and taught some things
well; but loved pre-eminence, and badly managed it. There were then some
religious persons, as Symeon, Anna, Joseph, Mary, Joseph of Arimathea, and
others; These feparated not from the Jewish Church, then much corrupted:
Zachary ministered in the course of his family, and departing to his own
dwelling place, left the ministration to other Priests succeeding in their
course: And until the destruction of Jerusalem and the Temple, and the
slaughter or dispersion of this people, the Rulers of the Jews (in an obstinate
presumption, that the Messiah was not then come, and that yet he should come,
and be seen in that Temple, and receive the kingdom of David) strove to hold
up the Laws and Ordinances of Moses and David, so far as the miseries and
tyranny of those times would permit.

CHAP. III. Gods Deputation of the Government of the Church in and after
Christ's time, and how for the chief passages thereof it was managed.
IN the fullness of time Jesus Christ came, and in his own person did preach,
and instruct the Jewish Nation, who were then very erroneous both for
government and doctrine: He found their Rulers to be unworthy husbandmen of
Gods vineyard, and that the people did persevere in the deviations of their
factious leaders and blind Priests with extremity of obstinacy, and would not
admit him, the Lord of the vineyard, to rule over them. Therefore forty and
odd years before the desolation of the City and Temple (that the Nation might
have time to repent) Christ began to build the Christan Church by his own
gracious sermons, and dying for the sins of the world, rose again, and sent his
Apostles unto all Nations with the glad tidings of the Gospel: and that the
work might prosper by their ministration, he sent down the Holy Ghost a
comforter to his Church and Apostles, to lead them into all truth, and to
furnish laborers with abilities for the building of the universal Church; For
effecting whereof a diversity 1. Cor. 11.4, etc. Romans 12.4, etc
of gifts, administrations, and faculties were requisite. Wherefore these were
bestowed on the Apostles and others by one Lord, one Spirit, one God, who
works all in all, and distributeth to every one severally according to his
will; that every one might profit, and the members of Christ's body by their
several offices (as the different parts of a man's body) be serviceable each to
other, and all be useful for the good of the whole.

Nor did Christ himself only work micacles, but showed in his Apostles and
other instruments a manifest concurrence of his almighty power; as he had done
in Moses and Aaron, when he fent them for building up of the Israelitish
Church: The case is much alike; for now the Roman power and tyranny afflicted
the Christian Church, as of old Pharaoh did the Israelitish. But what ever was
the power opposing Christianity, Christ showed himfelse not only to be the
great Prophet before promised, whom God at that time raised like unto Moses,
but also to be a mighty King, going Rev. 6.2.
forth conquering, and still more and more to conquer: For as when before Saul's
time, Samuel well ordering the Ecclesiastical estate, and all matters by God
committed to his charge, God was the 1. Sam 12.12.
King of Israel and mightily defended them against their enemies: So when in
the primitive times, the Aposties and their successors well managed matters
spiritual in the Church, Christ showed himself to be their King, and
graciously protected them, and made the Gospel to prosper, in despite of all
malicious and tyrannous designs to root it out.

1. No policy, no strength can prevail against the Almighty, how great soever
it seem in the eyes of man. Gods ways are not as worldly men's; and at that
time this was his course: As Moses appointed seventy Elders subordinate unto
him for deciding smaller matters, and easing him in his charge of Judging the
people; so it pleased Christ (as man, and to set a pattern for his Deputies, to
use subordinate officers) to appoint seventy Disciples to go two by two, as
laborers into Gods harvest, into all parts, whither he himself would come.
Christ also sent the twelve Apostles, 1. Cor. 12.28. Ephesians. 4.11.
the witnesses of what he did and spoke, to call both Jews and Gentiles to
Gods truth: Such messengers of old were Moses, Aaron, Elias, Esaias, Jeremie,
Ezechiel and other Prophets, whom God sent early and late to bring the old
Israelites and Jews out of Egypt and Babel, and what Proselites they could
from their superstitious errors and wicked ways.

2. God now also endowed some of his servants with the spirit of Prophecy,
who, as it seemed good to God, did first upon extraordinary occasions, and for
the special use of the Church, foretell things to come: and secondly,
expounded Scriptures, which God for the comfort and instruction of his people
had formerly given: Prophets of both these kinds God of old raised for the
building of the Jewish Church.

3. God appointed some to be Evangelists, writing a compendious story of
Christ's life and death, namely Matthew, Mark, Luke, John; others Evangelists
preaching and divulging the same in their sermons, and opening some passages
thereof in their writings: So in times before, from the beginning of the world,
God, as he saw it necessary or expedient for the use of his Church in diverse
manners, and diverse parts, caused the Gospel of Christ, redemption by his name
to be preached to Adam, Noah and others, and afterward by Moses, David, Esaias,
Zachary and all the Luke 1.70. and 18.35. and 24.25. Act. 3.18.
Prophets since the world began: And therefore often in the new Testament for
the chief passages of Christ's words and actions, and what Act. 3.21.
should befall until his second coming, and for the chief doctrines delivered
by the Apostles, the Law and the Prophets are usually cited.

4. 1. Cor. 12.28. Ephesians. 4.11.
God gave some to be Pastors and Teachers, who were to inform their auditors
minds with knowledge of truth, and to direct their practice: Such of old were
the Priests and Levites, interpreters of the Law, which was read and preached
every Sabbath in their Synagogues. Hence the term Rabbi interpreted a Teacher
or Doctor was never unto Christ's time so frequently (but in some respect
abusively, for the best things may be abused) used among the Jews: Of Christ's
coming at twelve years old, among these Jewish Teachers the Gospel speaks:
John 3.
Christ met with Nicodemus and others of this kind, Rulers and Teachers in
Israel. So they of old, who were chief in the schools of the Prophets, were
(...), Teachers, and did by their scholars (as Paul did by Timothy) teach
them, 2. Tim. 2.2.
that they might teach others, who in time should be able to teach. And
whereas God frequently calls the children of Israel his sheep, they who fed
them with sound doctrine, and led them on in the practice of Godliness, were
of old their Pastors or Shepherds, and from them is the term borrowed in the
new Testament.

5 Christ enabled some to work miracles for the confirm tion of the doctrine of
the Gospel in the first publishing thereof, and for the more speedy withdrawing
of the Gentiles from under the Romish tyranny and superstition; as he had done
of old, for the deliverance of Israel from out of Egypts bondage and Idolatry,
and as he did at other times upon diverse just occasions.

6 God gave to some the gift of healing the bodies of men infirm or diseased,
that the world might be more sensible, and seriously considerate of cures done
upon their ill affected souls: Such cures were of old wrought in taking away
of some of the plagues of Egypt, the Leprosy of Miriam and Naaman, the deadly
disease of Ezekiah, the raising from death the Widow of Sarepta's and the
Sunamites children, the dead soldier, and other the like.

7 God appointed some to be helpers, such as by their company consent in the
truth, and any service of love were taken unto the Apostles and Apostolical
men, when they journyed from nation to nation: In this kind went together Paul
and Barnahas, Act. 11.25, 30. Barnabas and John called Mark, Paul and Silas,
Acts 15.93, 41. Timothy and Erastus, Acts 19.22. and Paul, Barnabas and Titus,
Gal. 2.2. Paul and Tychicus, Ephesians. 6.21. They also were helpers whose names
are joined with Paul's in some of his Epistles, as Timothy, 2. Cor. 1.1. Phil.
1.1. and Sosthenes, 1. Cor. 1.1. Of this number also may they be counted, who
ministered unto the laborers in Gods harvest of their substance, and supplied
them with necessaries.

8 God also gave Governments, styled (...), by a borrowed word, most properly
spoken of governors of Ships. By this term the Spirit seems to allude to
the entertainment which the Church of God sindeth in the world, that is tossed,
as a ship in the troublous and dangerous sea: and partly to the government in a
ship, where care is ever taken to have a Master and masters mate, and So the
seventy were sent two by two: and the Apostles traveling took a helper with
each of them.
double officers in several places, that if the first in place mis-carry, the
mate may be ready to succeed; or if both subsist, the inferior on any occasion
of sickness, wounds, weariness or otherwise, may supply the place of the
superior. The like care was of old taken among the Priests, for Aaron had
Eleazar, and upon Aarons death Eleazar had Phinees; their seconds. In each of
the four and twenty Orders or Courses of Priests and Levites there was one
chief, and each of the chief had a second 1. Chro. 24.8, 9, 10, and 18.
adjoined to him; such it seems was our Ancestors care, who to a Bishop
subordinated a Dean, and to a Rector of a Parish, a Vicar.

9 To some Christ gave ability to speak diverse tongues: By this gift of God
many were converted at Pentecost after Christ's ascension, many afterward: This
gift was fore-prophesied of, as appeaeth, Acts 2. from Joel 2. and 1. Cor. 14.
from Esaias 28.11. Some use there was of diverse tongues before Christ's time; for
then many Proselytes were won out of Nations differing in speech from the
Jews; yet not by any miraculous gift of tongues but by the Hebrew or some
other tongue attained in an ordinary way.

No one person had all these gifts, for Paul says, Are all Apostles? are all
Prophets? are all Teachers? 1. Cor. 12.29.
are all Workers of Miracles, and so forth: Each one had such indowments as God
pleased to give, and occasion incident seemed to require.

Some one had many of these gifts, though no one man all. Saint John was an
Apostle, an Evangelist, a Prophet, a Teacher; Saint Paul was an Apostle, a
Prophet, a Teacher, had ability to speak many tongues: these two might have
some other of the gifts abovenamed; so might other of the Apostles, Deacons,
Presbyters, in like manner, have diverse of the administrations and operations.

Other titles, which are elsewhere in the new Testament given to such
instruments as Christ pleased to employ for the propagation of the Gospel, do
fall within the compass of these, and are co-incident with some of them here
above specified: For Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons, Angels of the Churches,
Ambassadors, Builders of the Church, husband men in Gods field, are of like
nature with these.

Of these titles no one is wholly new, but every one of them upon some occasion
less or more serviceable in the times under the Law, and made use of
heretofore. Hence it may be that Saint Paul says, that he did in the
ministration of the Gospel (...), do the part of a sacrificing Priest, Romans
15.16. that is, in some part of their sacred office, not in sacrificing, but in
preaching, praying, and the like. Only, as John Baptist was greater then any
Prophet before, (for he did say, This Jesus whom here you see is the Lamb of
God, who shall dye for you: He takes away the sins of the world, so that in
him all Nations of the earth shall be blessed) so these other messengers sent
forth and gifted by Christ, were greater then he in this, that they could say,
Christ has dyed, and rose again, and taken away the sins of the world, and
extends his mercy both to Jews and Gentiles.

Thus Jesus Christ the King of kings, and the Priest after the order of
Melchisedech, and according to the times before the Law given to Moses, and
coming of the Tribe of Judah (to which the Priesthood did not belong by the
ordinances of Moses Law) did provide (notwithstanding the Romans tyranny)
Deputies to instruct, and to take order for the instruction of the people:
These Deputies he chose not out of Aarons Tribe, but Jews, without respect unto
any other Tribe in special; and called them not Hieries, Sacrificers, as of
old; but by other titles not unknown to the Jews: and such was the nature of
these titles, that they expressed their mission, oversight, teaching,
administration, and their manifold care to be diligently employed for the good
of the Church. Of these some were fishermen, and unlettered, as Andrew and
Peter, and others, that the Gospels propagation might be known to be of God,
and not to depend on, or subsist by humane wisdom: others had parts more
eminent for learning, as Paul, brought up at Gamaliels feet, and Apollos
commended for his eloquence, and other the like: that when extraordinary gifts
should cease, the help of Arts, and humane learning and education, if
christianly and religiously managed, might be known to be of good use.
However, were Christ's instruments literate, or unlearned, he furnished them
with gifts for discharge of their callings. He prescribed, that the Apostles,
whom the holy Spirit led into all truth, and who under Christ had each of them
(...), a Bishopric, and that Apostolic men approved and appointed by them,
should, as a Titus left by S. Paul in Crete, Tit. 1.
ordain Officers in Gods Church, who should be in many respects religiously
qualified, able to teach, convince, etc. and to ordain things which were
wanting. So in the beginning of the world, men graciously qualified, and
walking with God, as Enoch and Noah, were Gods Prophets and Teachers, and Cains
wicked sons of the elder house passed by: so Japhets the elder brothers sons
were dispersed at Babels building, and Sems, the younger brothers Genesis 9.27.
tents conspicuous for religion: So Abraham, Isaac, Jacob were pious men and
Gods Priests, and Nahor Ismael, and Esau the elder brethren passed by. So now
Christ, as he has no special Tribe of Israel, so neither to any prerogative
of birth, but in the ordinary course requires that men be chosen into sacred
offices, who be well gifted for the discharge of the same. And to this end the
Apostles took to them one or more of the Christian Disciples to accompany them,
and to minister unto them, that these seeing the Apostles practice, and hearing
their doctrine, might in due time be serviceable to Gods Church, as of old the
Prophets of God had done, by educating some sons or scholars under them; and
as out of the persons which accompanied the Apostles in Christ's life time
Matthias (but here Christ's authority by a religious lot was used, because he
immediately called the other Apostles) was chosen.

As the sacred offices were correspondent, and in great part the same with
those in Moses and the Prophets; so the doctrine taught in the new Testament is
the same in substance, and not much differing from that which formerly was
openly, or in types or closer significations delivered by Moses and the
Prophets. Things done to Christ were foretold by Moses and the Prophets, Luke
18.31. and 24.25. Christ restores all things spoken of by the Law and the
Prophets, Act. 3.21. All the Prophets witnessed, that by his Name salvation
should come to the Gentiles, Act. 10.43. The sum of the Law was, The love of
God above all, and the love of our neighbor as our selves, salvation by faith
in Christ, and that which is the effect thereof, holiness of life, 1 Pet. 1.9,
10 and 16. The new Testament treats upon the same Theames.

Besides, As Israel of old was Gods people, a Kingdom of Priests, an holy
Nation, Exodus 19.6. so under the Gospel God has chosen a generation, a royal
Priesthood, an holy nation, nation, a peculiar people, 1 Pet. 2.9. God of old
Psalm. 76.1.
was known in Jewry, and salvation was of the Jews. Now also there are the Jews
indeed, and the Gal. 6.16.
Israel of God, those who know God in Christ; and he Romans 2.28.
is not a Jew who is one outward in the flesh, but he is one who is one within
in the heart, whose praise is not only of men, that his brethren should praise
him, but of God also, by whom to be praised argues a true praise indeed. And
now the old Jerusalem being demolished, Jerusalem Gal. 4.26.
from above is the true mother of us all.

There is also a great correspondence between the enemies of Gods people then,
and of true Christian now. Then was an enmity between the seed of the woman and
the seed of the serpent: Christ in his time found a generation Mat. 23.33.
of vipers or serpents opposing him. Himself, Apoc. 12.
and his Angels, Apostles, and others were fought against by the Dragon and his
Angels, or instruments. A late upstart persecuting Egypt and Babel exercise
cruelty on the Christian Church, as the former Egypt and Babel did on Gods
people. Sundry crosses betided Israel formerly in the wilderness; the Church
under the Gospel is again driven into the Apoc. 12.6.
wilderness, and graciously still maintained by Gods hand as before; another
Gog Apoc. 20.8.
and Magog fight against the Church in these last days, as in former times.
There were false Prophets among Gods people of old, and a 1 Jude 11.
Balaam who loved the wages of unrighteousness; such there are now, who spare
not the flock, wolves Act. 20.29.
in sheeps clothing: There were before a Jannes and Jambres who resisted
Moses, so now there 2 Timothy 3.8.
are some who resist the truth: There was of old a gainsaying of Koreh against
Moses and the Priests in sacred administration above others, as if God had made
a parity; the like gainsaying to that of Koreh is foretold to been in Jude 11.
these last times.

So then, seeing God gives us no new Scripture over and above the old and new
Testament, but of his great mercy has left them unto us for to direct our
judgments and practice; to them both we ought carefully to attend: The old
Testament was made useful, and was sufficient for the Jewish Church; the old
and new together have whatsoever is necessary for these last times. We must
fetch our instruction from both; and therefore the new often relates to the
old, for the old is of great use still in very many things, and the equity
still remains of many observances, types, and ceremonies, which themselves are
not to be used. Christ fulfilled, and put an end to some of them, as the
sacrifices and Paschal lamb, which typed Christ's dying for our sins, and Jonas
type showing his rising again the third day: the observance of beasts clean
and unclean, showing a distinction of Jews and Gentiles, and some other the
like. Yet when Christ had fulfilled these, and put a period to their
observance, some instruction thence is to be raised to our selves; as thus,
Christ was offered up as a sacrifice for us, and dyed on the Gross; we
therefore must not As Paul, Act. 20.24.
refuse to dye for the Gospel, and must Col. 3.5.
sacrifice and mortify our lusts. Christ was the true Pascha, and ended that
type, but in stead of it instituted the Lords Supper: Christ, as Jonas, rose
again the third day, we must rise from the death of sin: the Gentiles were as
beasts unclean, but Christ purifying their hearts by faith, they are become
clean, and fellow heirs, and one body with us; yet even to this day we 2 Cor.
6.14.
must not be unequally yoked by marriage with infidels, nor 2 These. 3.6.
communicate with such as walk inordinately.

Other rites and ceremonies there be in the Law, which do directly concern us,
yet their literal observance is utterly taken away, as namely, the seventh
days Sabbath, answerable to Gods resting from creating the world, was
fulfilled and ended by Christ's body resting that day in the grave; but yet a
new Heb. 4.10.
day of rest comes in place of it, the Lords day, in which Christ rested from
the work of our Redemption. Circumcision is abolished, yet circumcision of
heart and lips are still of use: And as a Jewish child was to be circumcised
the eighth day, so ought a Christians child to be baptized in its infancy,
though Christ has not expressly enjoined this in the new Testament. The
Israelites were to keep the Paschal feast to express their belief in Christ's
deliverance of them to come, and their thankfulness for the same; so, has not
the Christian Church well ordained a solemn Easter feast in memory and
thankfulness for our deliverance from a worse bondage purchased by Christ? The
Jews kept a feast at Pentecost, in memory of Gods giving them the Law at that
time; and has not the Christian Church well appointed us to observe with
thankfulness our Pentecost? at which time Christ sent down the holy Ghost on
the Apostles and others, inabling them to write for us the Gospel, and to
deliver unto us all necessary, saving, and comforting truth: and if the Jews
lawfully kept the feast of dedication, instituted for the memory of Gods mercy
unto them after Antiochus Epiphanes profanation of the Sanctuary, as verily
they did, (for Christ witnessed thereunto Joh. 10.22.
by his observance of that feast) much more may we lawfully in a thankful
remembrance of any great deliverance or favor of God, observe a solemnity
which public authority shall ordain. As the Israelites in the wilderness
gathered Manna, as every one could best find it, and laid it down in common, to
be distributed to every family according to their need, in regard of the
number of their persons; yet in Canaan every one held a propriety in their
possessions and goods: So the Apostles and primitive Christians, in case of
necessity, had all things common which concerned their present maintenance;
yet afterward left every man to hold a propriety in his estate and goods. The
Fire which descended from heaven to burn the sacrifices, was by the care of the
Priests to be kept ever burning and never to go out: so now the Spirit of God,
which came down from heaven upon the Apostles in the similitude of fiery
tongues, is ever to be kept in, and not to be quenched, 1. These. 5.19.

The Priests and Levites, who in time of the Law 1. Cor. 9.13.
attended at the Altar, partaked with the Altar: so now, they which labor in
the Gospel ought to live of the Gospel. The sacrificing Priests and Levites,
teachers of the Israelites, had, as the Priests in the Patriarchs time, the
tithes, Gods portion for their maintenance: and God now gives this rule, that
the 1. Cor. 9.11.
ministry sowing spiritual things, should reap of the carnal things sowed by
the Laity. And in what proportion rather should that be, then in that which was
of old Gods portion, namely a tenth part of the increase of the ground and
cattle? And if we upon good ground of the equity of the Law give God, and
employ in sacred duties every seventh day of our whole time, as before was done
in the Patriarchs time, and under the Law; has not likewise our Church now
well ordained that the Ecclesiastical estate should have the tithe of the
increase of the earth and cattle, as was done in the Patriarchs time, and in
the times under the Law? The equity of both is alike. Besides, the general
Rule of men's bounty or duty in this kind, showing their thankful
acknowledgement to God, was to make the extent thereof according Deuteronomy. 16.17.
Lev. 5.7, 11. and 14.21. Neh. 5.8. Acts 11.29. 1. Cor. 16.2. 2. Cor 8.12.
to their ability, and according to Gods blessing on their labors, as God has
prospered their estate. And what can be more suitable thereunto then to render
unto God a tenth, ever in use until Christ's time, when by Heathen tyranny it
was interrupted? For thus it will come to pass, that each man shall have nine
parts for his own use, and Ecclesiastical persons receive a tenth, and so
partake in a fit proportion with the Laity in years of plenty and scarcity,
and condole in affliction, or rejoice in Gods bounty together with the Laity.

In the first times of the world the Kingly and Priestly offices were conjoined
in one person, and must needs make him of more authority, and require and move
the people in their own hearts to show the more reverentiall observance in
civil and sacred duties: But afterward, when the burden and charge was become
very great, too heavy for one person to undergo, God appointed Mosem custodem
utriusque tabulae, to take the special charge of civil matters, and Aaron of
the Priestly calling. And afterward until Christ's time, the Priests took care
of the sacred performances, and were usually assistant unto the chief Rulers
and Kings: as Eleazer to Josua in dividing Canaan, Zadock to Solomon in
building the Temple, Jehoiadah a preserver and instructor of Joash, Jehosuah in
commission with Zorobabel at the return from Babel. And as the chief Fathers
and Princes of the several Tribes assisted the King in civil matters: so the
Priests and Levites were subordinate to the high Priest in Ecclesiastical
businesses, and he and they subject to the King: so now when the Kingdoms and
occasions of Christian Princes are much increased, they have made use of
Nobles, being men of eminent parts for civil affairs; and of Ecclestasiicall
men, being conspicuous for virtue, religion, prudence and learning in
Ecclesiastical performances. And as the Deuteronomy. 17.9.2. Chro. 19.6, 8.
Priests and Levites were in joint commission with Judges for the judgment and
cause of the Lord, whose the Judgment is: so have such Ecclesiastical men, as
above, been joined in Judgment with prudent Laymen in Courts where Christian
Laws, subordinate to Gods Law, and guided in many things by humane reason and
by custom of the Nations well settled, have bin the Rule determining
controversies.

Furthermore, As the Jews had one solemn place for Gods worship and service,
namely the Temple in Jerusalem, where every day sacrifice was made and holy
rites performed, and prayers and praises offered up to God; and had also many
Synagogues in their Land for prayer and expounding the word: so, have not our
forefathers under the Gospel, being partakers of a better Covenant, and
enjoying better promises then they of old, well showed their thankfulness to
God by building large and goodly Churches for prayer and praising God thrice
every day, and for frequent preaching in the great Cities of this Land, and yet
built in the less towns and villages ordinary and smaller Churches and
Chapels for prayer and preaching at due times? Where God affords more means,
he requires more duty according to men's ability: so in regard that the great
Cities have been more able to build, furnish, and maintain Gods Churches and
service, they may seem religiously in this but to have done their duty.

Yet the equity of this will not extend so far as Rome does stretch it,
arrogating to her self a superintendency over all the world, and desiring that
all Churches on the earth should veil to her, and depend, and be regulated by
her; as all Canaans Synagogues, and Ecclesiastical persons received their
direction from Jerusalem. For first, in the time of the Law there was such a
multiplicity of rites and ceremonies and performances, that had not God made
the King, his Counfell, and the chief Ecclesiastical persons in Jerusalem to
regulate all parts of the Land of Canaan, unity and concord in all points could
never have bin observed: but in the Christian Church, and in the worship and
service of God therein, Christ ordained few and easy Sacraments, a plainer and
more familiar doctrine of faith and practice, so that it is very possible to
keep peace and unity, and for Churches in Lands far remote one from another,
to be of one accord and mind, if they will rest in the simplicity of the
Gospel: much more for all the greater Churches in our Land to agree one with
another in all performances and chief doctrines and necessary truths, because
they have the same plain direction from sacred Scripture, and one King and
Parliament to regulate them. Secondly, whereas God foretold that many Rev.
17.13, 14, 15, etc.
Kings should give power and authority to a tyrannous Beast, and should submit
themselves to the great City, which then reigned, (and ever since desired to
domineer) over the Kings of the earth; and yet should afterward, when the Lamb
of God, Christ, had overcome them, reassume to themselves their own power,
given them by Christ, and should hate that great City, called by the Spirit of
God, The Whore, and make her desolate and naked. This is in great part already
come to pass, and Kings and Queens have become nursing fathers and mothers to
the Church; and rightly hold and maintain that they have supreme power in
their own Kingdoms next and immediately under Christ the head of the Church,
and are as independent of any foreign person whatsoever, as David and Solomon
in their times: and therefore that they neither ought nor may be subordinate to
the Roman Church, which is now manifestly proved to have left her first love,
and to be The Whore, whom the Kings of the earth should ruinate.

But to return to the observances of old. In the Law, from which an equity
being deduced is still of use in the Christian Church, we observe that there
were in those times, This word is often answerable to the Hebrew, for the
courses of the Priests and Levites.
(...), diversities of gifts of God, of administrations, and operations. By
Gods appointment and gracious dispensation the high Priest had the chief
place, other Priests were under him; the Levites, inferior to these, had one
chief in every degree; the rest under them had their different
administrations, some were Singers, others Porters. Some of these were gifted
by God for exposition of Scripture, or Prophecy, or making sacred hymns, and
other holy employment: So in time of the Gospel, There were 1. Cor. 12.4, 5, 6.
diversity of gifts by one and the same Spirit, diversity of administrations by
one and the same Lord, diversity of operations by one and the same God. Of the
Disciples and scholars of Christ, some were called to be Apostles, and
Teachers, and Workers of miracles, etc. some to be Evangelists, some to be
Prophets. These trained up (...), Attendants, Deacons, fellow workmen, fellow
soldiers. These, according as the Apostles pleased, and saw expedient for the
Churches use, grew up from Scholars or Disciples to be helpers or Deacons, and
then afterward to be fellow workmen, and fellow soldiers with the Apostles
themselves; for they of inferior gifts were to endeavor to obtain (...), the
1. Cor. 12.31.
more excellent gifts: This Paul commands. In the Law the chief places of the
Priests and Levites over their brethren came to them by succession of blood, so
that the hoary head found in the way of a faithful and right performance of
the charge entrusted unto him, upon the death of the Sar or Nagid, prince or
chief man in the high priesthood, or any of the 24. Courses, and the other
places, was preferred, and succeeded the deceased. But in time of the Gospel,
the Apostles and Apostolical men by their appointment, having the dispensation
of matters under their Lord Christ committed to them, and observing in several
persons the (...), gracious gifts bestowed by the divine power upon them whom
they instructed, destinated them to administrations and employments
accordingly: which were diversified, as was requisite for the building of Gods
Church: For as in the 1 Co. 12.12.
natural body there be diverse members of more noble or meaner use, and all,
even the meanest, very useful; so it is in the Church or body of Christ. And in
regard that the Church is here militant under Christ the chief captain, he has
his under and subordinate Captains, they inferior captains under them, and
lastly the common soldiers, namely each private Christian, who all in their
places, civil or sacred, war under Christ's banner; for God has not gifted men
with an equality of courage and indowments, and therefore intended not a parity
either in Civil or Ecclesiastical places. There were of old among the sacred
officers Sarim, Negidim, Nesiim, Chieftains, Rulers, Princes of the sanctuary
for the well ordering of the Priests in their several administrations
according to their faculties, who were under them: and does not the equity of
the matter require the same subordination in the Church of God now? yea it
appears that the Church of God was so ordered in the Primitive times; for
Christ ascending into heaven sat there as King of kings to preserve his
people, notwithstanding all Roman tyranny; and appears there as high Priest
for ever. He sent twelve Apostles, Bishops under him, into several parts of
the world; they disposed of such scholars, as Christ in his life time, or
themselves did educate, and instruct, and planted Apostolical men, Presbiters,
Deacons, their fellow workmen, and the rest under other titles, as they found
the occasions of Gods Church to require, and people fitted and ready to receive
them. This was put in practice in the seven Churches of Asia, at Philippi,
Corinth, and elsewere: For see what course was observed in some few Churches,
the like we may conceive of the rest for their general carriage.

The Epistles in the Apocalipse are directed to the Apoc. 2. and 3.
Angel of each Church of the seven in Asia, as denoting one principal man in
each: for so, The Lord of the vineyard, The Lord of the House, The Lord of that
servant, elsewhere speeches in form like these, imply one special Lord, and
not many Lords one equal to another. Besides, in those times there were some
(...), not men which seemed to be eminent and were not, but who were such as
they seemed, men Gal. 2.6, 9.
of chief place above others, dignified both by God and men; pillars in Gods
Church, not pillars in the same rank as all good Christians are, that is,
standing steadfast in Gods truth; but pillars in regard of eminency and
administration above others; such were James, Caiphas, John, And Paul and
Barnabas taken unto them. Again, God who is (...).
Architection, The chief builder of the Church, vouchsafes the title to St.
Paul that he is called an Architecton, 1. Cor. 3.10.
a chief builder: which intimates that the other Apostles were chief builders
also; and if Paul may well be styled an Archbuilder, he may also rightly be
called an Archbishop. Also St. John the Apostle was an Archbuilder, and an
Archbishop under Christ, The Archbuilder and the Archbishop: For if Paul was
so, the same cannot be denied to John, Quia similium similis est ratio: Christ
supreme in authority gives order to John, John sends the Epistles to the Angels
of the Churches, the Angels receive them for their own and the other Teachers
(for there were other Teachers besides the seven Angels) and the peoples
instruction. This also is deducible from the equity of the Law, and the order
settled among the Priests of old; for while Aaron the Type of Christ was alive,
Eleazar his son was styled Nasi Nesiim, Prelate of prelates, or Chieftain of
chieftains; and the chief fathers in the 24. courses are Roshei Aboth,
Archpatriots and Patriarchs. And seeing the new Testament does often borrow not
only doctrine, but terms of speech from the old, and that very usually, may
we not judge, that we have Architecton and Patriarch, Bishop, and the like,
borrowed from the old Testament? and conceive that in the Grecian, Eastern and
African Churches, as well as in the Roman and Western Churches these titles and
a like subordination of governors have taken place; seeing Paul calls
himself Architecton, this warranteth the rest of like nature.

Only a care must be had that they who have these titles 1. must not love
(...). Mat. 23.6.
the title or pre-eminence belonging thereunto, nor earnestly affect to be
great in dignity: but, being called to any high place, become, as Moses, meek
men, and be truly fathers and overseers, performing useful service for the
whole Church, where they are thus dignified: for Christ forbidding men to be
called verse. 8, 9, 10
Rabbi, Father, Doctor, yet in Scripture styles men by the same Rabbi is
Teacher, and usual. Joh. 1.38.

Paul a father to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 4.15.

Barnabas and Silas leaders, Act. 15.22.


terms; and therefore does not absolutely deny them, but their use in the
Pharisaicall humor, which was to love them, and to be proud of them, that
their party might overtop the Sadduces: so faction here, as in many other
kinds, is chief cause of the mischief. 2. They which have these titles must
acknowledge their Deputation from God, and these terms due properly and indeed
to him, and but lent to them; for says Christ, ye have one Rabbi, Father,
Doctor, in heaven: those in earth are but subordinate to him; they must not
require to be heard in their own names, but in Christ's; Thus says the Lord
must be their plea. 3. They must not do as the Kings of the earth, the heathen
Roman Lords, then most in the Jews eye; who 1. neither Pilate said, Know
thou not that I have power, etc.
ruled nor taught according to Gods Law, but by humane reason and Laws of their
own, in many things very corrupt. 2. they minded an earthly Empire They would
have no King but Caesar to rule all.
over the whole world, and domineered therein over the Kings of the earth. 3.
promoted their Who can war with the beast? Apoc. 13, 4.
Sovereignty by the sword and violent means. 4. made all their acquirements
serve to the getting of Who is like unto the beast. ibid.
same and glory to themselves. 5. became gracious See Luke 3.1
Lords to their instruments, and rewarded them with worldly honors and
preferments, and minded not at all the doing of their souls good, and the
obtaining a better life after this; which are the maine aim of Christ's
Deputies for ruling and teaching.

So then, these obliquities being avoided, the titles of a Patriarch, an
Archbuilder, an Archbishop are in themselves lawful, being moderatly managed
for the service and good of Gods people. God deals in like manner with kings;
for though he himself be The King of kings, and the Lord of lords, yet is
Nebuchadnezzar by the Spirit of God styled A King of kings: And if so, then a
Christian King, as Gods Deputy, and having more then one Kingdom subject to
him, may be termed a King of kings, and may substitute under him Viceroyes,
Nobles and Judges, as helpers to bear the burden of government under him, as
well as Archbuilders, and Bishops for sacred matters.

Yet the practice of the Pope of Rome is not at all warranted or countenanced
hereby; but rather hence it may be argued that he sins most highly, 1.
Because, being an ecclesiastical man, he claims the secular and civil power
also, and would have both swords: whereas every soul is bidden to be subject
to the higher power: and if every soul, then both Paul's and Peter's, and much
more the Popes. 2. The Popes sins, that being an ecclesiastical person he
claims superiority over Kings and Princes in all the world; this extent of
Sovereignty is Christ's prerogative only. 3. That he too little esteems Gods
Law, and too highly advances his own Constitutions and Canons, and Doctrines,
many of them needless, or false, or contrary to Gods Laws. But his pride is
abundantly manifest; therefore I say no more.

Whereas his Orators plead in his behalf, that he is as far above the Emperor,
or any King, in dignity, as the Sun before the Moon, Heaven before the Earth,
and spiritual things before temporal; and, in regard that matters concerning
the soul are of more esteem then matters of the body, he is above all Kings and
States in the world: I answer, In these things they grossly flatter him, and
deceive themselves; for God, knowing the condition of humane nature to be
frail, and the necessities incident to our bodies very many, appointed six
days in special for provision for the body, and but one in special for his
service, and the instruction of our souls; and yet the soul is of far greater
dignity and worth then the body. And manifest it is that God set Moses, David,
and Solomon in place above Aaron, Abiathar, and Zadock; for though well and
happy being is more excellent in it self then mere being, yet seeing the care
of being is in order and progress before well being, and in the way necessary
thereunto, (for man must have a being, else he cannot have a well being)
therefore God has given the first and chief place to the King; that, 1. We may
live, and enjoy a quiet and peaceable life, and not one become a prey to
another. 2. Lead this life in all godliness and honesty by the Kings care, who
provides for both these by subordinate civil, and ecclesiastical persons. And
for this cause it was and is, that though the duties of the Sabbath and service
of God are more excellent in themselves then our food and care of our bodies;
yet God will have mercy rather then sacrifice, and dispenses with sacred
duties, for the saving of men's lives, and necessary cure of diseases.

But on the other side, some object, The term Bishop is attributed to a
Presbyter, Tit. 1.5, 7. and elsewhere: So that every Presbyter or Minister may
be truly called a Bishop; and if so, then why should there be an imparity
maintained in this calling? I answer, The word Bishop in its own nature
signifies an Overseer, or Superintendent in any kind, as Pakid in Hebrew. So
God is The great Bishop of all, Job 20.29. 1 Pet. 2.25. Eusebius. in vit Constant.
l. 4.
Constantine terms himself Episcopon in one kind, his ecclesiastical chief
Rulers in another. Heathen Authors style God Episcopon of all good and bad
actions, and give the title also to civil Magistrates. In the like acception
the 70. Interpreters use it, 2 Kin. 11.15. and elsewhere. It is also given to
ecclesiastical Officers, as to Eleazar, who, though he was under Aaron, yet
was Captain of the Captains over the Levites, Numb. 4.16. So it is to the
Priests in office under Jehojadah, 2 King. 11.18. In the new Testament the 11.
Apostles had the same Episcopen, Bishopric from which Judas fell, and into
which Matthias was chosen, Act. 1.20. In the Church of Ephesus, those which be
called Presbyters or Elders, that is, Ministers (as by custom now we call
them) are likewise called Bishops, or Overseers over their flocks. Now, though
the same term be given to all these, yet the matter it self, and the very
different degrees of the persons to whom it is given, admit not a parity in any
wise. The like is evident in other terms, Christ is Sar, Isa. 9.6.
Prince of peace; and Michael the great Sar, Dan. 12.1.
Prince; The Kings of Persia and Grecia are each of them called Sar; This very
word is attributed to the 1 Samuel 12.9.
Captain of an army, To the 2 Chr. 18.25
Ruler of a City, To the chief 1 Chr. 27.22
Rulers of the Tribes, To the 1 Chr. 15.16, 27.
chief of the Levites, To the 1 Chr. 24, 5.
Prince of the Sanctuary. Here then resipsa differenceth the general term, and
prevents misprision and confusion. So likewise the term Rosh, an Head or chief
person, is spoken of 2 Chapter 13.12.
God, Of K. 1 Chapter 20.27.
Jehosaphat, Of 2 Chr. 24.6.
Jehojadah the high Priest, Of other 1 Chr. 9.34.
Priests, Of a Number. 7.11.
chief man of a Tribe, Of a Judge. 11.9.
Judge of Israel, Of the chief 1 Chr. 9.17.
door keeper of the Temple, Of a 1 Chr. 11.6.
chief Captain. The like variety of acception is to be found in the words
Nagid, Prince, and Nasi, Ruler or Prelate. By all which it appears evidently,
that the same term may be used of men much differing in place and degree, and
having an imparity in their callings.

So then, the term Bishop being given to persons of several degrees, must be
differenced according to the condition of their places. God is the Bishop and
great overseer of all the world; Kings are now Overseers of all kind of affairs
in their kingdoms; Civil Magistrates are Bishops in matters secular; Eleazar
and Jehojadah were Bishops over the Priests and Levites; The Apostles had each
of them a Bishopric, and superintendency over the several nations to which
they were sent; The Elders of Ephesus were overseers and Bishops over their
flocks; The Angels overseers of the 7. Churches of Asia, were their Bishops;
and S. John by Christ made a Bishop over them. Thus, cum de rebus constet, vana
est de verbis altercatio, seeing the things themselves are plain, why should
we strive about words?

But further it is objected, Seeing the term is common to many, why does one
only degree of men arrogate it to themselves?

Answ. This scruple might well be passed over; but men prone to take exception
will not let slip any the least atome. The case is clear to any seriously
observant of one tongues borrowing words from another; for words so borrowed
usually by custom vary from their primitive acception: And if custom of
speech once be taken up and become inveterate, neither the plain origination
of words, nor former practice of elder times once abandoned, nor the clear use
of words in Scripture, nor any reason can prevail against it. Our cares will
not endure that a Mayor of a City be called a Bishop of the same: for, though
he be the Overseer of it, the use of our English tongue will reject the
calling of him Bishop. Such a tyrant is Custom, that Caesar may make a
freeman of a City, but cannot enfranchise a word. Loquendum ut vulgus is the
old Rule; and therefore it would be a vain and idle quarrel to reason thus,
Why should Duke be arrogated to one degree of men, Herealt to another, Heathen
to all people not Jews or Christians, Clergy to Churchmen, Laity to the
civil State, Martyr to such only as were put to death as witnesses of Gods
truth, Ecclesia to the Church of God; seeing Dux is any Leader, Herealt
signifies Herum altum, an high Lord, Ethnos Joh. 11.47.
signifies also the people of God, Cleros Deuteronomy. 4.20. and 9.29. 1 Pet. 5.3.
all members of the Church, Laos Joh. 11.51.
the whole people Martyr Mat. 18.16.
one witnessing to the truth, though never violently put to death for the same,
Ecclesia Acts 19.39.
a tumultuous assembly of Silver-smiths, and the like? Custom of the times
restrained the signification of these words; and so of the word Bishop. So that
Bishop in Greek, whence it descends, is any Overseer; but in our English, and
some modern tongues, it is restrained and appropriated to one in place as
Overseer of the Clergy; a work of singular use, if well performed.

Secondly, Nor does the custom of our speech only in the practice of these our
times make for this, but Scripture it self shows the prevalency of custom,
and how use takes up and warrants some words for current, and lies by others.
So he of ancient time was 1 Samuel 9.9.
called Rhoe, a Seer, whom afterward custom nominated Nabi, a Prophet; And
whereas neither does God give, nor Moses and Aaron take to themselves in
express Scripture the title of Sarim, Princes; but Korah and his adherents lay
that to their charge, that they made Number. 16.13
themselves Sarim, Princes and Rulers, so that there the word is first used,
and in Korah's malice attributed to Moses and the Priests: God, who made them
Rulers over the Priests, though he never before (so far as I know) gave them
that title, yet afterward does frequently style the Priests Sarim, Princes, or
chief Rulers in sacred performances, to see them duly observed. We know also,
that the name Apostle was given to the twelve, and afterward to Paul, Matthias,
and others: but yet in the Epistles to the seven Churches of Asia, Angel, a
term equivalent, is used. Afterward, as by the writings of succeeding times is
evident, the chief Ecclesiastical person in any Church was not called
Apostle, or Angel, but Archbishop, Bishop, or Papas Father, or Patriarch chief
Father, and the word Apostle given commonly to the twelve, and to Paul, so
often called Apostle that no custom could take it from him; and the term
Angel appropriated to the ministering Spirits, Gods messengers. Also the term
Presbyter denoted any ancient ecclesiastical man in the Apostles time, as even
the Apostles themselves, 2 John 1. 1 Pet. 5.1. insomuch that the name of
Presbyter is attributed to the twenty four sitting on Thrones, and having
Crowns on their heads, Revel. 4.4. These we may conceive to be Angels of the
Churches, and so called, when speech was of them, with reference to the
Churches to which they had their mission; but in presence of the Lamb they
rise from their Thrones, and cast down their Crowns, and are termed
Presbyters: so a deputed Officer, in presence of his Prince, stands by as a
private man, and lays down the ensigns of his honor. Yet after times
appropriated the title Presbyter, that is, Priest, to them whom we call
Ministers; and since that, custom has so prevailed, that the term Priest is
by our common people and others confined to a Popish Priest, nor will they well
endure to have the word righted according to his ancient acception, and have
Presbyter translated Priest; which might justly be done, if custom would give
leave.

And thirdly, As the Apostles imparted the titles of Apostle, Presbyter,
Deacon, Watchmen, Soldiers, Husbandmen, Laborers, Teachers, Pastors, to
others; so likewise they left the title of Bishop (for each of them had (...),
a Bishopric, as above) to Ecclesiastical men succeeding them. Only after
times appropriated some of these Titles to certain degrees of men, as the
prevalency of custom settled them, and distinction of terms was entertained
to avoid confusion and misprision, when the Church of God was much enlarged.
The Church is now, and ever was a Body consisting of several members; some in
this 1 Cor. 12.
Body are eyes, some hands, some feet, etc. some Luke 22.26.
are greater and chief, some less in the Kingdom of Christ. The less have a
less service or charge, the greater and chief are or should be of greater
service and employment for the good of the whole; and so they are indeed,
though it may seem otherwise. A prudent and considerate man will not judge the
belly in the Roman Apologue to be idler then the other parts; nor the Master
of the Ship, sitting at the Stern, a less actor for the welfare of the
passengers, then they which tug at the oars, or hoyse or strike sail: As the
hand and foot are content with their own offices, so should each member in the
Church: but yet there is a difference in some regard; for one of inferior
place in the Church may desire the improvement of his talent and abilities, may
desire (...), as was said above. As Saint Paul approves this, so the practice
of the primitive times show it then to have been usual; Matthias of a
Disciple was made an Apostle, Philip of a Deacon became an Evangelist.

Furthermore, concerning the performance of these Ecclesiastical offices,
Saint Paul speaking of, and particularly reckoning up (...), the diversities of
Gods gifts, shows a more excellent way to use them; namely, That whatsoever
gift of God in this kind any one has, he should above all make use of
Christian love: without which, tongues, prophecy, knowledge, faith, and all
other gifts and graces are nothing: and with which Christian love, if any ones
heart be truly enflamed, he will apply himself to do good in the Church in
whatsoever kind he can, as Pastor, as Deacon, as a fellow-workman, as a
Presbyter, as an helper, etc. yea, do any useful service in the Church, as
God gives ability, and occasion is offered. So Saint John, being an Apostle,
did as a Prophet write the Revelation, and as an Evangelist also his Gospel, a
divine supplement to the three other Gospels, and then his Epistles. Paul sent
forth to preach, did sometimes baptize, performed the part of a Deacon, and
Evangelist; yea, became all things to all men.

But how may it appear that any one, as a Bishop, had many Presbyters and
Deacons under him? or had a Diocese, or a large circuit of a country to be
overseen by him? Answer, We may observe that the Apostles, in regard of
thepaucity of laborers in the great harvest of God, had large (as I may call
them) Diocesses, and that each of them settled Presbyters in many Cities, as we
conceive by that which we read of some of them. It is also manifest, that there
were many Presbyters at once in Act. 20.
Ephesus, Acts 20. in Jerusalem, Act. 11.30. in Antioch, Act. 13.1. Act. 11.30.
at Caesarea there were at one time Philip the Evangelist, Paul, Act. 13.1.
and the companions of his travels, Agabus and Luke. These would not have
stayed there, but that there was work for more then one of them: Seeing
professors of Christianity much increased, and the Apostles endeavored to hold
them in the true faith, and still to convert more Proselites, it necessarily
follows, that they would not see them want any needful supply of Teachers
and Instructors; but sent their Ministers and helpers to any Church, as any
present occasion required; and that they called them back, as they found
necessary and expedient for any other place. And seeing some Cities were large
and had many Act. 13.5.
Synagogues (which the Apostles made use of, and so probably such as were by
them sent, or left there to preach) it was requisite that they should have more
then one Presbyter for the same, over which (...), the Angel of the Church was
left. When the rest of the twelve Apostles were dead, and Saint John only left
alive, but aged he not able to visit some remote Churches in his own person, by
writing to the seven Churches of Asia, informed every one, who had an ear in
any Church whatsoever, to hear their duties. These Angels might, according to
the example of Titus left by Paul in Creet, ordain Presbyters in every of
their Cities: They might also try those, who said Rev. 3.9. Rev. 2.2.
they were Jews, that is, Christians, and might examine them, who pretended to
be Apostles, and were found liars. Had not these seven Churches more then one
Teacher entertained in them, no stranger would have fained Say he was an
Apostle.
a mission unto any of them: and if the Angel of a Church exercised his power
to examine and reject false pretenders, we see thereby what his authority was;
for he who could do thus by a stranger, might do as much by a Presbyter bred
up in his own Church.

As for Diocesses, the thing is ancient: For the great Cities of old had some
Pagi or villages near adjoined and subordinate to them. Hence we read of Jos.
15.
Gilead, Ekron, etc. and their villages: of Jerusalem Ezekiel. 16.
and her daughters. Of this there is no need to doubt, because it is usual in
all Countries whatsoever, as being a thing for many reasons expedient; and
therefore we may well grant that Ephesus, Smyrna, Philadelphia, etc. had some
villages depending on them, and subject to them, and that therein some free men
of the chief Cities did (...), inhabit. And thus the thing is ancient, how
late soever some affirm the name to be. Men also have used of old (...), to
dwell together for mutual defense and comfort one of another: so that the
thing here also is ancient, and was fitted of old for the name of Christian
Parishes.

Suppose there were such adjacent villages to the great Cities, and that the
retired persons, and shepherds there harkned as soon or sooner to the Gospel
then the richer and greater Citizens, who were cumbred with worldly
employments, and burdened with the weight of honorable places; because also
the shepherds of Bethlehem, and Joseph of Arimathea, and the (...), coasts
near adjoining to the more noble Cities were often more attentive to the
Gospel, then the great men in Jerusalem and other large Cities: suppose all
this, yet how will it appear, that these Angels or chief Overseers of the
Churches, had such large revenues as some Bishops in these our days? Answer.
To this an answer is easily made: No man can expect that a river should have so
great a stream at or near the spring head, as it has after many miles running;
It Is not possible that a Lords, or Knights house in New England should be as
well built, furnished and attended as a Lords or Knights house usually in
Old-England. The Angels and Presbyters of the primitive times found stronger
opposition from the potent Romans and cruel Heathen, and had much more to do
to keep off the violent hands of malicious persecutors, then the New-Englanders
to withstand the unarmed Salvages, and to build and settle themselves in their
neighborhood. If now in the Lands, which have long entertained Christianity,
the goodness of God, and the bounty of Christian Princes, and worthy private
men under them have, as David and Solomon and their Nobles, better provided for
the Ecclesiastical estate, and endowed them with a propriety in a larger
Revenue then the Apostles times enjoyed, we have greater cause to bless God
for all, and to sound forth his praise in sacred hymns, as David caused to be
done: That other Nations seeing the righteous flourish, and abundance of peace,
made use of in due manner for Gods glory, may rejoice and say, Happy are the
people which are in such a state, yea blessed are they, which have the Lord for
their God; who upon a right seeking of his kingdom, adds over and above
temporal benefits, Matthew. 6.33. The Civil and Ecclesiastical state have in
all times endured affliction or prosperity alike and jointly. God
extraordinarily provided for his People and Priests Manna and quails in the
barren wilderness; but in Canaan gave the People corn, wine and oil in
plenty, and the Priests tithes, his own portion, free will offerings, and
consecrate things of great worth, given by David, Solomon, their worthies, and
other devout persons: so God first provided for his Apostles, Presbyters, etc.
extraordinarily by the selling of the believers possessions; but afterward by
free gifts of bountiful persons conferred on them, according to the plenty and
peace of their times, they were furnished with more plentiful means to live
cheerfully, and to undergo their weighty charge with comfort and alacrity;
and, as God gave more and more increase unto them, to build, and endow
Colleges, Schools, and Hospitals. If Abraham, and Job, and other religious
sacrificers were not the slacker, but more frequent in their sacred duties, and
instruction of their people; why should plenty of means and outward estate be
thought to dull and take off the edge of Ecclesiastical persons from their
sacred offices and performances? The same might, and sometimes did befall of
old; so prone is man to sin: but Ecclesiastical persons have (and should make
use of) their religious knowledge to use temporal things aright; if they do
not, good Laws established in a Christian Commonwealth are of force to
prevent or cure that malady. The Gospel by Gods great goodness as it has
brought unto us a better covenant, and better promises; so it has bettered and
enlarged the temporal means of all estates: Is it fit here to make the
Ecclesiastical estate an exception from the general? Let that, I pray you, be
duly considered: God, thanks be unto him for his gracious goodness, has now
made room enough for his people, as for Israel in Canaan: and what needs ships
having sea room at will to clash and fall foul one against another? God is
good unto all, and can open the windows of heaven and pour out a blessing on
all estates. Only let the civil and spiritual estates, as two strong
pillars, mutually conjoyne their forces, and in Christian love support the
whole frame of the building, and so make each other the more steady and strong.

But further, Is it fit that our ecclesiastical persons should be termed
Lords?

Answer, first, It pleased God (as above was showed) to vouchsafe titles of his
own to Civil and Ecclesiastical persons; as these to the ecclesiastical,
Sar Prince, Nasi Prelate, Rosh head, Architecton chief builder, etc. These, as
also the term Adon, (...), Lord, are in the highest and most eminent sense due
to God only, for he is a Lord doing what ever he pleases of his own
authority: yet in an inferior and subordinate sense, Sara called Abraham Lord;
so did the Hittite, Genesis 23. Abraham's servant is called Lord, Genesis 24.18.
So is any master of servants, Exodus 21.5. Col. 4.7. and (which comes home to
this present objection) one of the four and twenty Presbyters. Apoc. 7.14. is
called Lord: And if so, then this term is not denyable to Bishops.

Secondly, as others in chief places subordinate to Princes are high and
honorable Lords, so may the chief Ecclesiastical persons be venerable and
reverend Lords: because in all times, from the worlds beginning until Christ's
days, Ecclesiastical persons were of great esteem: in the primitive times
they were chief governors of the Church under Christ; and for their sacred
employments sake, being men answerable to their calling, ought doubtless to
have a near subordination to Christian Princes; and if the kingdom of God by
their vigilance be first and chiefly sought, all other matters of this world
will be the more prosperous.

Thirdly, Though God in some sense (as above) does deny certain titles to men,
yet he never was against words of due respect and observance to superiors; nor
indeed are such words blame worthy: so that they be not As Judas his Hail
Master.
bare and mere complement, and not cordiat: or As was Herod's applause. Acts
12.19.
hyperbolicall to puff up men with pride. Yea, I know not whether due titles
be not now more studiously and frequently fitted to men's persons: Because, 1.
Some sects set themselves to vilify them. 2. Because it is not amiss thereby
to put some great ones in mind to be Lords, defending the innocent, as well as
to have a title to rule over others in the Lord: to be Lords providing for the
welfare of all under them, as well as to have a power commanding them. God has
been bountiful to Ecclesiastical persons many ways, and they who truly
consider that, will not be strict handed to them.

What has been here spoken in their behalf, was occasioned by some, who upon
faulty arguments (as I conceive) judge amiss of their places and callings:
These have (as Saint Paul in like case said) compelled me to speak what I by
Gods word find to be truth in this point, and submit whatsoever I have herein
written to the religious, grave, and mature judgment of all who be grown men
in Christ, and by reason of use have their senses exercised to discern both
good and evil.

FINIS.

