

Filius Heroum, THE SON OF NOBLES.

Set forth IN A SERMON PREACHED At St Mary's in Cambridge before the
University, on Thursday the 24th of May, 1660. being the day of Solemn
Thanksgiving for the Deliverance and Settlement of our Nation.

By WILL. GODMAN B.D. Fellow of the King's College in Cambridge.

Because the Lord has loved his people, he has made thee King over them.

2 Chronicles. 2.11. -- Nusquam libertas gratior extat
Quam sub Rege pio --
(...).

LONDON, Printed by J. Flesher, for W. Morden Bookseller in Cambridge. An. Dom.
M DC LX.

To the READER.
WHEN I saw the happy fruits that have been of late produced by the Counsels
of this just and glorious Parliament, and in particular by the great Prudence
and Valor of the Noble and renowned Lord General, I looked up to heaven and
gave praise to Almighty God, for that he had mercifully answered the prayers of
all those that were faithful and peaceable in the Land. And being required by
my Superiors here to discharge the duty of rendering public and solemn thanks
to God for this great blessing of our common Deliverance and Settlement, I
willingly obeyed the authority, and cheerfully embraced the occasion of
expressing my joyful sense of God's unspeakable goodness in restoring his
Sacred Majesty with peace and honor. And herein I confess my forward Zeal and
pregnant inclinations out-weighed the consideration of mine own insufficiency.
For as I believe none could have undertaken this charge more cheerfully, so I
am very confident that many could have performed it far more worthily. My only
encouragement to enter upon it, when it was laid before me, was this, that I
considered it to be Opus non Ingenii, sed Officii, a work that required more
honesty than wit, and needed rather the assistance of the heart than the
influence of the brain. However, I shall desire the Reader to accept what is
here presented to him, not for his sake who has taken the pains to compose it,
but in regard of the Auditory wherein 'twas spoken. Let all that is defective
or culpable in it be charged on me alone: But if there be any thing in it that
may attain the happiness of any man's regard or approbation, as proceeding from
a good and peaceable intention, and expressing the devout affection of a loyal
heart; then I desire it may be thought that I am not alone. For I know this
place so well, that I can safely say, that many of us here detest what is past,
love what is present, and hope well for the time to come; and that we have a
great and unfeigned zeal for his Majesty's service. As I knew this long before
I expressed my thoughts on that solemn Occasion; so I have been since
encouraged and invited by several persons of better judgment and reputation
than ever I shall pretend to, to publish what was then delivered. And herein I
have so little regard to my self, that I am more afraid of the Readers censure
than I can have reason to hope for his approbation. And I conceive that the
best that can happen (which is yet beyond any merit of mine) will be but the
fate of him in Horace, -- Laudatur ab his, culpatur ab illis. But however this
shall be entertained in the several judgments and opinions of men, I must
profess my self to have no other ambition, but what is common to all his
Majesty's faithful subjects; which is, to live securely and happily under His
most just and gracious government. And if I had any suit or controversy with
any man, I should say as Mephibosheth did of Ziba, Let him take all, for as
much as my Lord the King is come again in peace into his own house, 2 Samuel
19.30. I am so much in love with a private and obscure life, that if I meet
with any discouragement in publishing my name, yet I can secure my self from
being endammaged or disappointed thereby. For the worst that can befall me will
but make me retire to my own natural inclination. Neither should I have
appeared at this time, but that it was thought requisite I should give some
testimony of the dutiful affection of my self and others; that I should
endeavor to contribute something to the universal joy, and help to blow up
those sparks of Loyalty that have been so long covered and suppressed by
violence. Which as it has been my grief a long time, so it is now my joy to
see Religion and Loyalty kiss each other. And I wish that none may ever
hereafter presume to put those asunder which God has joined together. If I
have given any assistance in the least measure to the tying of this blessed
knot, I shall think my self abundantly happy.

Upon these and other considerations I shall not much trouble my self or the
Reader with an Apology for my self, as being but little solicitous what becomes
of me in this attempt. Only this I beseech him to take notice of, that where I
have expressed any bitterness against the murderers of his late Majesty, as I
was prompted thereto by my own passionate indignation, so I have a warrant for
that invective from the justice of Parliament. For I have reflected only on
those, upon whom they have publicly fixed the mark of their just displeasure
and severity. And I desire that whatever I have said may be so understood as
that it may be coincident with their Decrees and Resolutions. I bless God that
there are so few offenders as 66; and I am glad to see that the short list of
their names admits no possibility of adding a third figure of the same kind,
666
to make up the number of the Beast.

As to the length of the Application in comparison of the whole, I have given
some account in the body of the Discourse; to which I shall only add, that I
see no reason that can oblige me to adhere rigidly to common rules and methods
on an extraordinary occasion. And in general I profess it my private opinion,
that it were better Sermons had more of Application than sometimes they have.

And now to put an end to this preliminary trouble which I have given the
Reader, and that this Introduction may be somewhat conformable to the following
Discourse, I shall close it up with beseeching Almighty God to bless his Sacred
Majesty with a long and happy reign over us; and when he shall have
accomplished the days of his mortality on earth, to crown him with everlasting
joy and glory in that Kingdom which shall have no end. This is my devout,
hearty and fervent prayer; to which I hope all those who shall vouchsafe to
peruse this paper will say Amen.

King's College in Cambridge, June 5. 1660.
In Gulielmi Godmanni Sodalis vere Regii carmen amicum PHILOASILEOS.
EUge vel Augusto Princeps felio^^r ipso,
Trajano melior, succinit Anglus ^va^s!
Quid, Roman, crepas quinqu^nnia cur^^ Ner^nis?
Secula sub CAROLO nos m^liora manent.
Angligenum Stator, Coeli spes, Gloria terrae,
Faustus amor populi, CAROLE, ^^ngus amor,
Celse locum Princeps Superum tibi sede cap^^^^
Serius, humani Deliciae generis.
Magne Pater Patriae, vereor ne maxima famae
Nomine majori buccina dissiliat.
O lasso succurre viro: praeconia mirum
Si canat indigne Regia nudus homo?
Regius Orator solus Godmannus, Apelles
Dignus Alexandro, Caesare dignus, agas.
GULIELMUS NAILOR Caio-Gonvilensis.

To his worthy Friend Mr. WILL. GODMAN Batchelour in Divinity.
SHall I be silent at my glorious KING's
Return, when every Bell his praises sings?
Shall the hard-hearted Musket shout for joy;
And I as dumb-strook, like a trembling Boy
Wax pale and mute? Shall Night her mourning Suit
Put off, and vapor in flame-colour'd Coat;
And I smothered in melancholy Fume
Burn up my heart, and Loyalty intomb?
No, Lazy Muse: I Will goad thee with my pen,
For I Am impatient of delays; nor when
Thou sleep'st can I forbear to pinch, for thou
Do only seem to dream that our KING's now
Returned and safe. Lift up thy leaden eye,
Spout out thy grief, and wash thy Lethargy:
So shall thou cleanse thy self from fault, and see
Like a true Eagle dazzling Majesty.
Then fix thine Eye, and tell me when thou'st done,
If ever Crown did circle such a one.
Does not his Hair like Sampson's guard his head,
And gather up in links and chains? Let dread
Fear then seize those that stand his opposite,
Lest they be fettered in it and feel its weight.
Sometimes his Brows like to Mount Gerizim are,
Sometimes like Ebal. When a Smile sits there,
Blessings and Favors slide down his smooth Cheek,
And run upon the Subjects head and neck:
But when a Frown climbs up and pendant hangs
Out of its dark and hollow womb, the pangs
Of Death, some Thunderbolt may drop and bring.
Thus nature has our Sovereign made A King,
Whose very looks command obedience,
And strike in us a deeper fear and sense
Then the keen Ax and Fasces. But forbear,
Fond Muse, into that sacred Breast to peer
Where Virtue shines that will o're-whelm thy sight.
Read over this book, in its reflected light
Distinctly thou shall see those glorious beams,
As the Sun's Image in the Crystal streams.
THEOPH. CLEAVER, M. A. and Fellow of Kings Coll.

To his Majesty's loyal subject and my dearly-beloved Friend Mr WILLIAM
GODMAN B.D. Fellow of King's Coll.
'TWas Monarchy made thee and me be one,
Loyalty has been our Religion;
Joint haters of the Tyrant and his train,
And faithful subjects to our Sovereign.
Divines are fellow soldiers, though in field
They never take up target, sword, or shield:
For whilst that others fight with swords and spears,
The Churches weapons are her prayers and tears.
These be the arms (dear Friend) which for our Prince
We Have taken up and brandished ever since
False subjects and an Act of Parliament
Forced Him to live abroad in banishment.
Whilst others for our King's Coronation,
And to reform a thing called Reformation
Have spilt their blood, lost estates, lives and health;
(Strange that this should be called a Commonwealth!)
Then thou and I with many a sigh and groan
Prayed and believed Him to his Crown and Throne.
And still we will preach and pray, and print and sing
Disgrace to Rebels, glory to our King.
Dan. Nicols B. D. Fellow of Queens Coll.

In Concionem quam per absentiam non exaudivit.
QUo minus adfuerim, mihi sors id iniqua negavit.
Quae placuisse solent invida fata negant.
Fama sed absentem pertingit: Concio clara est
Quae per tot passus Mill canora fuit.
Fama sed infelix, quia dimidiavit honorem,
Et tantum in lauds primula verba dedit.
Tu tandem satagas, ut quae modo Rostra dederunt
Auribus, haec oculis praela refer queant.
Segnius irritant animos demissa per aures
Quam quae sunt oculis obvia facta piis.
Dodonaea silent, vigeant oracula prompta
E Quercu nuper, Diva Maria, tuo;
Quae si postremis fuerant dictata tyrannis,
In Lucem, at Flammas, singula missa forent.
Gratia sed superis, Ecclesia, Curia, Praesul,
Rege, viro, Domino, praevalet, ambit, ovat.
Jam precibus memorare queas sine crimine Regem:
Antiquas possis tutus inire vias.
Olim crimen erat suprema morte piandum.
Dent his de causis Dii mihi posse Mori.
Regis ad Augurium resonant nunc corda piorum;
Officiosa simul Pulpita tota crepant.
Caetera qui nescit, librum modo consulat istum:
Ingenium spirat paginae quaeque pium.
GUIL. LYNG Caio-Gonvilensis.

Ad virum Integerrimum, mihique inter primos charum, G. GODMAN.
QUI vigor insolitus mentem tibi concitat? Ecqua
Coelitus illabens stimulat praecordia Suada?
Jam teneo; vires recreat Men's conscia recti,
Innocui mores, pietas sine fraud, serenus
Propositique tenax animus. Tu fulmina vibres
Impavidus; ringant sontes Tityique Nepotes,
Quos mordax lacerat Nemesis Furiaeque minaces,
Queis scelus arrisit felix, virtusque misella
Audiit impietas: Haec, haec lethalis arundo.
At niveum sine labe manet tibi pectus; apertum
Saepius inspexi: Quoties ridere profani
Saec'li blanditias vidi? vel dona ferentes
Odisti Danaos; Pietatis larva venenum
Obtegit, exclamas: Procul oh procul este, Britanni,
Quo ruitis miseri? viridi latet Anguis in herba.
Impia magnificis grandescat turba triumphis,
Ditati spoliis jactent sibi Numina blanda
Sacrilegi, madidas ostentent sanguine vestes;
Infelix CAROLUS succumbat, Regia proles
Exulet; En quo fata trahunt retrahuntque sequamur,
Clamitat incautum vulgus, Quis temnere divos
Audeat, aut sceleris damnare innoxia fata?
Venales animae! Generosi Pectoris Heroes
Idem semper erit: talis GODMANNUS habendus,
Quem non pelliciunt Zephyri pontusve serenus,
Nec frangunt scelerum fluctus aut Monstra profundi.
Indomitum Pectus! reboent jam Rostra triumphis;
Victa placet tua causa Diis; Depressa resurgit
Palma; viret jam sacra Jovi Dodonia Quercus.
Turgentes expande sinus, deprome dolorum
Infandas moles queis men's onerata gemiscit.
Quid prosunt lessus furtivi? Flumine pleno
Decurrant lachrymae: nos rupta repagula suadent
Demulcere animos fletu non digna ferentes.
Manibus innocui CAROLI libate, Britanni,
Imbre pio, cineresque sacros inspergite rore,
Et tumulum facite, and tumulo superaddite carmen,
Hic situs est CAROLUS ter Maximus: Anglia, Ierna,
Scotia, quantillo latitant tria regna sepulchro?
Relligio, Candor, Pietas, Ecclesia, Leges
In cineres versae torpent. Heu! plange, Viator.
At quorsum lachrymae? Cur misces laeta querelis?
Martyris e busto Laurus procera virescit,
Vertice vel summis inducens Montibus umbras:
Evulso CAROLO Primo non deficit alter
Aureus Angligenis: tales concedite Ramos,
Oh Superi, nostris semper succrescere Sylvis.
Perge bonis avibus, Patriae Gentisque Togatae
Gloria, grande decus, Magni Ciceronis Alumne.
Quantus in exiguo luces, GODMANNE! Libellus
Audiat hicce DEO summo CAROLO que Secundo
Votivae tabulae: subjungas, Viva Parentis
Effigies; nam te pingis, qui jure voceris
Et Civis Probus and suavi Chrysostomus ore.
Ne metuas; Navem pelago commit pusillam;
Navigat incolumis: CAROLUS tibi, Caesare major,
Omina laeta dabit. Tanto Duce, Numine tanto
Auspice, ridebis fremitus and murmura volgi.
JO. FELTON Col. Gone.-Caii S.

In elegantissimam pientissimamque concionem viri optimi, and mihi, supra quam
dici potest, charissimi, G. GODMAN.
QUO tandem igne calescis insolente?
Quo demum raperis furore? linguam
Quaenam suada tibi and diserta labra
Melle and nectare dulciore reptet?
Quis vires melior Deus ministrat?
Quo nos attonitos trahis rapisque?
O quam dulce canis? quid hoc negoti?
Non inter reliquos magis solebas
Elucere prius, stupende Rhetor,
Quam laetus celebrans diem beatum:
Id quod nemo alius potest, vel ipsum
Te long superas and antecedis.
Sed quorsum tamen ista miror? annon
Dudum novi animum pium and fideles
Sensus? tempora namque iniquiora,
Infaustosque dies, dies pudendos
Questi saepe sumus; miserrimamque
Sortem flevimus, and graves ruinas
Collapsae patriae: quot execrati
Diris consilia impia, atque iniqua
Arma, immania foedera and rebellum
Vesanam rabiem, nefas triumphans
Et felix scelus, and nefanda vilis
CROMWELLI putridissimaeque Caudae
Ausa? and quot lachrymis, dolor quanto,
Quo luctu attonito and stupore fata
Indignissima Martyris beati,
Aerumnasque malas, necemque iniquam
Moesti planximus? and diem nefastum
Irati odimus, atque abominati
Infense quoties sumus, tenebrae
Foedae, perpetuaeque noctis umbrae
Ut Solemn occulerent, ei imprecati?
Votis, ominibus, prece and frequente,
Et desiderio admodum fideli
Te nunquam sumus exulem vocare
Obliti, CAROLE o diu cupite!
Ast olim tamen ista mussitare,
Aut saltem ambigue loqui licebat
Solum. Non etenim palam dolere,
Nec lugere foris, minusque aperte
Quicquid men's pia suggerebat, aut quae
Effari libuit, frequente coraem
Confusaque refer concione
Nobis fas erat: hoc enim negabant
Infames male conscii latrones.
Tandem liberius piae recessus
Mentis pandere, pectorisque fidi
Claustra effringere cum potes, sinusque
Integros aperire, fusiusque,
Quae jamcunque placent, tuo arbitratu
Enarrare, palamque praedicare;
Spe quanta erigimur repent? quid non
De te polliciti sumus? stupendum,
Celsum, and grande aliquid rogamus omnes.
Nec frustra fuimus, speive falsi;
Quin tu vota licet superbiora
Magnis passibus antecelluisti,
Nedum encomia nostra: conticescam.
J. BOULT C.G.C.S.

A SERMON PREACHED at S. Mary's in Cambridge before the University, on Thursday
the 24th of May, 1660. being the day of solemn Thanksgiving for the Deliverance
and Settlement of our Nation.
ECCLES. 10.17. Blessed art thou, O Land, when thy King is the son of Nobles.


THat it may appear there is no prerogative of excellency but what may be
joined with Kingly power, we have heard of some that have been both Kings and
Priests; David was both King and Prophet; and here we have Solomon his son that
was both King and Preacher. Again, that it may be evident what a near connection
there is between Loyalty and Religion, I have chosen this part of his Royal
Sermon to be the subject of mine. For it is easily observable that most of this
Chapter relates to the duty of Subjects and authority of Sovereigns: and it
could not be that Solomon's interest should oblige him to express so much both
here and elsewhere concerning the power and advantages of Princes; for certainly
he, as well as other Penmen of holy Scripture, spoke as he was moved by the
holy Ghost. 2 Pet. 1.21.
Now since those noble and worthy Patriots, whose authority we have reason to
bless as well as to obey, have commanded us to render public and solemn thanks
this day to Almighty God for the settlement and deliverance of our Country; I
thought I could not find a Text more suitable to this joyful occasion: for
all our deliverance and establishment is comprehended in this, and all our joy
and happiness is herein completed, That we have a King, and not only so, but
likewise one who is the son of Nobles. For it is possible that an inferior
person may usurp a Crown; which if he does, it is both his infamy and the
Kingdoms misery. And that verse in the Greek Epigram may very well be applied
to such a one, (...).That the coming down from his usurped height is his rise,
but the climbing up is his fall. This was it which Q. Elizabeth in her great
prudence was careful to prevent; for being importuned on her deathbed by her
Council to declare her Successor, she thus expressed her self: I have said,
My throne is the throne of Kings; I will not that a vile person succeed me. And
when the Secretary asked her what she meant by those words; she answered, I
will that a King be my successor; and who but my nearest kinsman, the King of
Scotland? Now therefore thanks be to God for this unspeakable benefit, that
this Scripture is fulfilled in our ears, and in relation to our selves; that we
can now again securely and solemnly apply this beatitude to our own Nation and
Country, Blessed art thou, O Land, when thy King is the son of Nobles.

In which words there are these three particulars contained; First, a King;
Secondly, his Character, The son of Nobles; and Thirdly, the blessedness that
results from both. This last I shall involve in the Application; intending in
the mean time to speak something in general to the two former. And to begin
with the first, I shall not think it necessary to entertain your thoughts with
any large discourse concerning KINGLY power: I shall only put you in mind, that
the greatest part of mankind has been in all times governed by Monarchs; and
that Monarchy is the best and noblest form of Civil Government, as most
resembling the Empire of the Divine Majesty; the most firm and durable, as
being most at unity within it self; the most serviceable to the ends of
Government, as containing the greatest and most effectual Authority. And I can
but mention the admirable frame and temper of the English Monarchy; which is so
beautified with all the ornaments and splendor of a Kingdom, that it withal
includes all the advantages and conveniences that can be imagined in a free
State: Wherein the Law has exactly joined and united the King's Prerogative,
the Privilege of Parliament, and the Liberty of the people: Where the
Sovereign has enough to maintain his Authority and Majesty, and the Subject
has sufficient for his encouragement, comfort, support and dignity; but not
wherewithal to introduce distraction and confusion. For the people have a
power by their Representatives to consent or dissent in the making of Laws; but
when they are enacted, there is a Power over them that can command their
obedience. These particulars I have only pointed at; as not thinking it very
suitable either to this occasion, or my profession to enlarge upon them. I
shall rather desire you to consider what God himself has declared concerning
REGAL Government, both in the Old Testament and the New; and then you may
discern that there is nothing more clear, than that he approves of the power
and authority of KINGS; and nothing more certain, than that it is his will and
pleasure they should be obeyed. When he brought his people out of Egypt, he
appointed Moses to be their Leader and Governor, who had the power of a KING,
though not the name and title; and yet the Scripture on one place gives him
that also: Moses commanded us a law, even the inheritance of the congregation
of Jacob; and he was King in Jeshurun, Deuteronomy. 33.4, 5. After him succeeded
Joshua in the same Authority: After his time Israel was governed by Judges,
extraordinarily called and appointed by God for the space of about three
hundred years. During which time by reason of the often intervals of
Government, much sin and many mischiefs grew up in that unsettled State. Jud.
17.6.
In the 17 of Judges we read of Idolatry set up by Micah and his mother; 18.1.
In the 18 of Violence and Rapine; In the 19 of Adultery and Murder committed
in one act; 19.1.
In the two last Chapters, of a public and insolent Defense of that wicked
act, and the destruction of almost all the Tribe of Benjamin. And the Holy
Ghost thus expresses the reason of all this, In those days there was no King in
Israel, but every man did that which was right in his own eyes; 22.25.
but that which was neither right in it self, nor in the sight of God. I shall
leave you to judge how much of this may be applied to our Israel, since we have
been destitute of the presence and authority of a KING. After that time,
although God was displeased with the peoples importunity in requiring a KING,
yet it clearly appears he had designed that government for, them. For having
rejected Saul, he gives this testimony of David, I have found David my servant,
Psalm. 89.20.
with my holy oil have I anointed him. And elsewhere promises to establish his
Throne, and to confirm it to his posterity. Again, he had promised by the mouth
of Jacob, Genesis 49. That the Scepter should not depart from Judah. And before
his time, he had said to Abraham, Kings shall come out of thee, Genesis 17.6.
Lastly, Moses had long before Readiness time drawn up the KING'S Charter, as you
may see Deuteronomy. 17.14. and so onward.

Next to this I shall reminde you of some few of the many clear expressions of
Scripture that concern this matter. If you will search out the foundation of
this power, you may find it Prove. 8.15. By me Kings reign, and Princes decree
justice. Would you have the duty it self? Take it in these words, Prove. 24.21.
My son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are
given to change. Do you enquire into the danger of disobedience? It Is thus
represented, Eccles 8.2, 3, 4. I counsel thee to keep the King's commandment,
and that in regard of the oath of God. Be not hasty to go out of his sight:
stand not in an evil thing, for he does whatsoever pleases him. Where the word
of a King is there is power: and who may say unto him, What do thou?

Beside these Doctrinal expressions, the Scripture affords us several examples
of reverence and obedience among God's own people. The first shall be that of
Bathsheba, whose virtue and piety there is little reason to question, since no
crime of hers is recorded, but what is more expressly charged upon David
himself; She bowed with her face to the earth, and did reverence to the King,
and said, Let my Lord King David live for ever, 1 Kings 1.31. In like manner
did Nathan the Prophet (who certainly was no flatterer) when he was come in
before the King, he bowed himself before the King with his face to the ground,
1 Kings 1.23. The like did Araunah, 2 Samuel 24.20. But especially David's
reverence to Saul is remarkable; though God had rejected Saul, and appointed
David to be his successor. When he had him in his power who sought his life,
yet he slew him not, but only cut off the skirt of his Robe: And yet
afterward his heart smote him, because he had cut off Saul 's skirt. And he
said unto his men, The Lord forbid that I should do this thing unto my master
the Lord's anointed, to stretch forth mine hand against him, seeing he is the
anointed of the Lord, 1 Samuel 24.5, 6. After these I shall produce but one
Example more, and that is equivalent to many, being of a great multitude. It Is
in 1 Chronicles. 29.20. And all the congregation bowed down their heads, and
worshipped the Lord and the King. In the New Testament, we know to whom that of
S. Paul referres, Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, etc. The
Romans were then the miserable subjects of the worst of men as well as of
Princes; which is enough to cut off all pretense of resistance for ever. But S.
Peter more expressly describes the persons of those in authority; Submit your
selves to every ordinance of man for the Lord's sake, whether it be to the King
as supreme, or unto Governors as unto those that are sent by him. And again,
Fear God, honor the King. Let this be sufficient to show that Kingly power is
ordained of God, and that it is appointed for the good of those that are
subject to it. And therefore we are obliged, as we regard both our duty and our
happiness, to render obedience to it; and so far to esteem it the blessing of
God, as to magnify it and prefer it before other forms of Government, as most
resembling divine power, and carrying the most lively impress of divine
approbation; as being that which God recommended to his own people, and to
which they willingly submitted when they were in a settled and most flourishing
estate; under which our ancestors have lived happily for many Ages, and by
which our Israel has been always governed ever since it was a Nation. Whence
we may confidently conclude, that what by the appointment of God is sacred and
venerable, has the assurance of his blessing. And thus much of the first.

But this is not all that is required to make a Land blessed, The King whom
Solomon here describes, must be the son of Nobles. It Is in the Hebrew (...) the
son of White ones, or, as some alluding to the word translate it, Filius
Heroum, the son of Heroes. Now that whiteness was the ornament of Kings and
Princes in the East, and that it is used in Scripture as an emblem of candor
and innocence, of honor and dignity, I could easily demonstrate; but that I
hasten to what is more material. We know that the Kingdoms of Israel and Judah
were hereditary, but when God provoked by their sins interrupted the
succession. And it was a part of that sad calamity that befell the Jews in the
Babylonish Captivity, and which the Prophet Jeremy bitterly lamented, That
Servants ruled over them, and there was none that delivered them out of their
hand, Lam. 5.8. As also 'twas a part of that judgment which Esaias had before
denounced against them, That the child should behave himself proudly against
the ancient, and the base against the Honorable, Isa. 3.5. This is a calamity
so much the greater, because it includes reproach and dishonor. It Is an
unnatural subordination that the Honorable should be subject to the base, and
the servant command the Master. It Is an evil which our Royal Preacher takes
special notice of in the former part of this Chapter; Folly is set in great
dignity, Eccl. 10.6, 7.
and the rich sit in low place. I have seen servants upon horses, and Princes
walking as servants upon the Earth. Which is a sad symptom of a disordered
State; more resembling a confused chaos, than the well built frame of a regular
and orderly Government. For the Justice of State being of an higher nature must
not stoop to a conformity with the Vulgar rule, and method of the balance; that
the lighter should be lifted up, and those of more weight should be unworthily
deprest.

I confess there is a difference between the Nobility of Descent, and that of
Virtue; but I am not willing to separate those things which in nature and
reason should be always joined together. And I could wish that no degeneracy
had ever made a divorce between them. But this I Will say, when they are both
united, then results that Nescio quid praclarum, a most exquisite and
accomplished perfection; or, to use Solomon's expression, It Is like apples of
gold in pictures of silver. Prove. 25.11.
For, to say truth, Nobility of race has but little beauty and luster of its
own, but what it borrows from the other; and then it is (...), Pindar.
it puts on the brightness of a Star, and clothes them with honor that possess
it, when it is adorned with the resplendency of virtue. And again, as it
receives from it luster and beauty, so it reflects back upon it constancy and
perpetuity, which begets a kind of veneration. We usually admire a stately
fabric for its order, beauty, and concinnity; but we account it in a manner
venerable if it has lasted many ages, and has strength enough to withstand
the injuries of time. Thus we prefer an ancient and perpetual River, both for
delight and usefulness, before the more swelling and impetuous torrent of a
Land-floud, which cannot long endure, as having no Springhead from whence to
receive supplies. Thus we account a Star that is perpetually and eternally
placed in heaven, more glorious than a blazing Comet, that is only the object
of present wonder, and, as it is vulgarly supposed, a presage of future
Calamities.

Now that Nobility is an excellent qualification of a supreme Governor, beside
what has been said, may appear by these three particulars;

1. Because it adds honor and veneration both to their persons and authority;
and sets them far above the contempt of those that are subject to their
government. For although government subsists by justice, as its chief support
and its main design; yet as to the more effectual improvement of authority, it
depends much on fame and reputation. And it holds as well in Political
obedience as in domestic servitude, Dignitate domini minus turpis est conditio
servi. Men commonly think that those who are noble are born to command; and
they will readily submit to such, when they will rise up in indignation against
the imperiousness of their equals.

2. Nobility is a spur to virtue, a great incitement to worthy and noble
actions. For as we all derive our first inclinations to good or evil from the
imitation of others; so domestic examples being sweetened by all the
endearments of a tender love and care, and a natural propinquity, have the most
quick and lively impressions. Beside that, public expectation adds
encouragement, and enforces the duty with a stronger obligation; and the fear
of a greater blot, and a fouler stain of dishonor deterres them from being
degenerate. For there can be no greater incitement to worthy and noble
performances, than to consider, as Pliny has it, Quibus imaginibus oneretur,
quae and quanta nomina sustineat. That they are bound to make good what their
ancestors have done; and to keep alive those sparks of honor which their
virtue has kindled: That it is as much their duty to claim their virtuous
inclinations by right of inheritance, as it is their happiness to derive honor
and reputation from them. And then the benefit of nature will be turned into
their own due praise: whereas otherwise they cut off the intail from
themselves, and have no right to that which they will not transcribe and
imitate. Again, Nature has placed them on a rising ground, and given them
those advantages whereby they may easily attain to the highest improvements of
virtue and goodness. They have a stock wherewith to begin; and Facile est
inventis addere, it is more easy to perfect what is already begun, than to lay
a foundation of great seize. Hence it is that Aristotle says, Noblemen
are more desirous of honor then others. (...) Because all men are wont to add
to what they already possess. It Is most natural for men to look unto the rock
whence they are hewn, and to the pit whence they are dug. And therefore
they who are of a lower original cannot so easily exalt their thoughts (unless
excited by some extraordinary power) above that station wherein nature has
placed them: As water can ascend no higher than from whence it descends. They
may look upon higher and nobler achievements as objects of wonder, but not as
encouragements of their imitation. They may gaze upon those Stars, but they
have no contrivance whereby to approach their station. Their condition and
capacity is as the son of Sirach describes it, Ecclesiasticus 38.33. They shall
not be sought for in public counsel, nor sit high in the congregation: they
shall not sit in the Judges seat, nor understand the sentence of judgment:
they cannot declare justice and judgment; and they shall not be found where
Parables are spoken.

3. Nobility as it includes hereditary right, puts the government out of
dispute; it is the most probable way and means to prevent all that unhappy
strife, ambition and envy, all the dangerous consequences of contentions and
emulations that are most likely to befall elective Kingdoms. It cuts off those
mischiefs that commonly happen in the intervals of Government. It Is necessary
that such a great and important affair should be transacted by something that
is clear, manifest and beyond dispute. The excess of merit is uncertain, the
effects of violence are dangerous and dreadful, as we have found by woeful
experience: and I hope that now our eyes are open to discover that the consent
of the people may be fallaciously and fraudulently pretended, or perfidiously
and impudently challenged, when 'twas never given. Therefore let the judgment
of nature carry it, which is clear and determinate, and seems to be the
judgment of God himself. Though here in our own case we have the voice of the
people too, declared in a most eminent and evident manner; and this is commonly
said to be the voice of God. For it is he that puts one in subjection, and
exalts another; that fixes an especial mark of respect and veneration upon
Nobility. It Is the prerogative Royal of the King of Heaven to be the fountain
of honor, to give order as well as being to his creatures, and to dispose of,
as seems best unto himself, all the services both of Men and Angels. When he
has herein declared his will and pleasure, what remains for us to do, but to
honor those whom he has honored? It Is our duty not to fight against him, by
setting up those on high whom he has placed in a lower sphere, and depressing
those whom he has exalted. And it is wisdom not to venture the danger of such
an improvident change. For, to what purpose should Jotham's bramble be promoted
over the trees unless that fire should come out of it and devour the Cedars of
Lebanon? Jud. 9.15.
And if the thistle pretends to an equality with the Cedar, what is like to be
the event, but that the wild beast that passes by should tread it down?
Therefore it can never be well, 2 Kings 14.^
but when the Government is on his shoulder whose right it is.

I should have discoursed more at large on these particulars: But I consider
that Application, coming nearer to men's affections, works more effectually and
powerfully on them than a loose and general discourse. And therefore having
much to say, and not willing to be tedious, I will no longer withhold my self
from looking toward that illustrious mercy which this day celebrates, for which
we bless and praise the infinite and eternal Goodness.

I doubt not but ye all know that this Kingdom flourished in peace, plenty and
prosperity for many years before the beginning of these late unhappy troubles.
The source and original whereof I shall not curiously search into; as wishing
rather that it may be buried in the grave of eternal oblivion. But this we may
with truth and charity say, That we have felt the indignation of God, because
we have sinned against him. He prevented us with his loving kindness, he
compassed us with blessings on every side, he heaped his benefits upon us. What
could he have done more for his vineyard, that he did not in it? Isa. 5.4.
But Jesurun waxed fat and kicked; when we had eaten and were full, then we
forgot the Lord that had done so great things for us, and we lightly esteemed
the rock of our salvation. What wonder is it then, that our greater rebellion
against God was justly punished with first an eclipse and diminution, and at
last with the most deplorable loss of a just, pious and merciful SOVEREIGN?
There were some that cried out, We will not have this man to reign over us.
They were too stout and obstinate to submit to a lamb-like innocence and
meekness; and so we were delivered up, not so much to be governed, as destroyed
by foxes, wolves and tigres. There is no doubt but sin has brought upon us all
those evils that we have suffered; all our changes of Government, and all those
destructive consequences that have attended such vain and ambitious
contrivances; all that violence and rapine whereby this Kingdom is almost
exhausted; all that sacrilege whereby our Churches have been ruined and our
Clergy discouraged; all those odious cheats and impostures, by which this poor
afflicted Nation has been most wretchedly deceived.

Time was, when we were the envy, but of late we have been the scorn and
reproach, of all the Nations that are round about us.

It Is easy to conjecture from whence have proceeded all those varieties of
government that have been, I cannot say whether more perniciously or
ridiculously, attempted (for there was as much of the Comedy in the impertinent
contrivance, as of the Tragedy in the sad effects;) all that inconstancy and
uncertainty that has of late exercised these weather-beaten Kingdoms. For the
transgression of a land, says Solomon, many are the Princes thereof. Prove.
28.2.
But there is comfort in the words that follow, But by a man of understanding
and knowledge the state thereof shall be prolonged. Our State has as much need
of a wise and excellent Prince as once that of Rome had, when it had been
sorely shaken with the miseries and distractions of civil Wars. 'Twas then
the only safety of that Empire to be devolved upon Augustus Caesar, Flor. lib.
4.
Qui sapientia sua atque solertia perculsum undique and perturbatum ordinavit
imperii corpus: quod ita haud dubie nunquam coire and consentire potuisset,
nisi unius praesidis nutu, quasi anima and mente, regeretur.

I hope by this time we have learnt the same wisdom, to know from whence we
may expect our safety and happiness. We have tried long enough what it is to be
ruled with a rod of iron in the hands of our insulting and merciless
Fellow Subjects. If the sense of that shame and reproach, that vexation and
misery does not yet awaken us, we must be concluded to be possessed with a more
than Lethargick stupidity.

But we have great reason on the contrary to believe that now all men discern
how safe, how necessary, how honorable it is for them to commit themselves to
the Government of a most excellent and indulgent Prince, whom God and Nature
have designed to be the Father of his Country. I hope that now those happy
times are come which his late Majesty foretold, wherein the Subjects of these
Nations have learnt by their miseries, (...) chapter 27.
That Religion to their God, and Loyalty to their King, cannot be parted
without both their sin and their infelicity. If we have any sense of our
long-continued calamities, we must needs confess that God has blessed our
Land, since he has laid help upon one that is mighty, since he has exalted
the son of NOBLES; for such is our most gracious SOVERATION LORD, who is worth
ten thousand of us. 2 Samuel 18.3.


To make this evident, I shall not think my self obliged to enumerate all his
noble and Royal Progenitors; or to declare how he is related to many of the
greatest and noblest Families of Christendom in Forain parts; or how he is
descended both from the Norman and Saxon Kings for above eight hundred years.
Neither shall I endeavor to make out what Verstegan a late Antiquary says of
K. JAMES, his Majesty's Grandfather of happy memory, that he was of the
bloud-Royal of all those four Nations that were subject to his Scepter. If all
this and much more that might be said were at large discoursed, it might appear
that his Majesty is a Prince as highly and nobly born, as any that reigns in
the Christian world.

But to come nearer to the purpose, I shall confine what I have to say on this
point, to his immediate descent from his Royal Father, our late most gracious
Sovereign Lord K. CHARLES of ever-blessed and most glorious memory. We need not
go farther nor inquire into the Virtues of his more remote Progenitors: it is a
great and high degree of Nobility to descend from him who was the glory of
KINGS, the mirror of PRINCES, and the honor of MARTYRS; but the everlasting
shame of those traitors and parricides that conspired his death. (...). c. 27.
This is he (to use his own unimitable expressions) whom God thought fit to
honor, not only with the Scepter and Government of three flourishing
Kingdoms, but also with the suffering many indignities and an untimely death
for them; while he studied to preserve the rights of the Church, the power of
the Laws, the honor of his Crown, the privilege of Parliaments, the liberty
of his people, and his own conscience, which was dearer to him than a thousand
Kingdoms. His concessions to his last Parliament show that he had a large
heart to do good; and I wish he had never had an occasion to demonstrate his
invincible patience and constancy in suffering evil. But though his name may be
among the unfortunate, yet withal it will ever remain in the Catalogue of most
virtuous, PRINCES. The good he did, and more that he intended, is enough to
clear up the darkest of his afflictions, and to scatter the Cloud of his
undeserved misfortunes. He was so eminently good and just, that I wish all the
Kings and Princes of the world were altogether such as he was, except those
bonds; Acts 26.29.
except the heavy pressure of his unmerited sufferings. Not that I think it is
unworthy of a Prince to be conformable to the Captain of our Salvation, Heb.
2.10.
who was made perfect through sufferings; but because whenever this happens it
must needs redound to the misery of his subjects: As when the Sun is eclipsed,
it is not he, but the earth, that suffers a diminution of light.

It may be you may wonder that I lay before you at this time an object of
grief; and you may think that a discourse that sounds like a Funeral Sermon,
will stain the joy of this day's solemnity. But I desire you to consider, that
it is no small part of our joy, that we can now securely mourn and express our
grief for the untimely death of that incomparable Prince. I doubt not but many
of you have long since mourned in secret; but we never durst before express a
public and solemn lamentation. You know that the Tyranny of our oppressors
has been such, that our sighs were made our crimes; and if we were seen to
weep for our infinitely-injur'd SOVEREIGN, we were in danger to weep for him
over again with tears of blood. 'Twas bad enough that some of them had the
hypocritical art of counterfeiting tears; but to punish tears, especially upon
such a sad occasion, was a more than inhumane cruelty. But thanks be unto God
that we can now lament; that we can securely open the floud-gates of our eyes;
that we can take our fill of that just and Loyal sorrow, from which through
violence and oppression we have been so long restrained.

Expletur lachrymis egeriturque dolor. Ovid.
Methinks there is something of sorrow within us which must be vented before we
can make room for an entire and unmixed joy. At least our joy cannot be
innocent, till we have mourned for him. And then 'twill be somewhat pleasing
(as the Lord Verulam observes in needle-works and embroideries) to have a
lively work on a sad and solemn ground. Neither will our joy be only more
complete, but our Loyalty also more entire, if we begin our duty and allegiance
to his Majesty from our public detestation of that most execrable parricide.
And herein the Honorable House of Commons has set before us a worthy example,
in their excellent Letter to his Majesty. And indeed unless we follow them
herein, we do in vain pretend our selves to be Loyal and faithful subjects.
Therefore, finding in Scripture the example of Job cursing his birthday, my
just indignation prompts me to make use of those significant and vehement
expressions against that day that put a period to the precious life of our late
most gracious KING. Let that day be darkness; let not God regard it from above,
neither let the light shine upon it. Job. 3.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
Let darkness and the shadow of death stain it, let a cloud dwell upon it, let
the blackness of the day terrify it. Let it not be joined unto the days of the
year, neither let it come into the number of the months. Let it be solitary,
and let no joyful voice come therein for ever. Let them curse it that curse the
day, who are ready to raise up their mourning. Let the stars of the twilight
thereof be dark, let it look for light, but have none, neither let it see the
dawning of the day. Because it deprived us of the best of men and most
excellent of Princes: Because it shined upon the counsels of the wicked; but it
quenched the light of Israel, 2 Samuel 21.17.
it extinguished the glory of Great Britain: Because it countenanced the most
horrid, barbarous, execrable murder, excepting only that of the most Holy
Jesus, that ever was committed under the Sun. Then might you have seen sin and
wickedness ride in triumph; when Piety and Loyalty, Law and Liberty were forced
to mourn in secret, and to hide themselves from the fury of the oppressor.
Lam. 5.16.
Then did the Crown fall from our heads: woe unto us that we had sinned. The
breath of our nostrils, the Anointed of the Lord was taken in their pits; of
whom we said, Lam. 4.20.
Under his shadow we shall live. Then was judgment turned into gall, and the
fruit of righteousness into hemlock. Amos 6.12.
Then was judgment turned away backward, and justice stood afar off: ^sa.
59.14.
for truth fell down in the streets, and equity could not enter. Then did the
Sun go down at noonday, Amos 8.9.
and the whole Land was overspread with a black and dismal cloud of horror
and amazement.

If there be any here among you that have not yet bewailed that execrable fact;
I hope that now their hearts are not so hard, nor their heads so dry, but that
they have some few tears to drop upon the Hearse of injured and abused Majesty.
If you tell me 'twas too long ago since 'twas done; I can give you an example
out of Scripture that will silence that objection. It Is in the 2d of Chron.
35.25. And all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah. And Jeremiah lamented
for Josiah; and all the singing men and singing women spoke of Josiah in their
lamentations to this day, and made it an Ordinance in Israel; and behold they
are written in the Lamentations. That good King did indeed come to an untimely
death; but there is this alleviating circumstance in it, that he fell not by
the malice of his subjects, but by the power of his foreign enemies. But how did
our good Josiah fall? I cannot express it but with his own prophetic words,
(...). c. 28.
He dyed a KING, by the hands of his own subjects, a violent and barbarous
death, in the strength of his years, in the midst of his Kingdoms, (nay, in
that very place where he was wont to appear in the greatest splendor of
Majesty and Honor) his friends and loving subjects being helpless spectatours,
his enemies insolent revilers and triumphers over him, living, dying, and dead:
who, that they might be more solemnly cruel, added (as those did who crucified
Christ) the mockery of Justice to the cruelty of Malice. Mark how every word
carries an Emphasis of grief, and every syllable is accented with unexpressible
sorrow.

I believe there are none here who are guilty of that Sacred blood; but give me
leave to speak to them as if they were present.

Do ye deal thus, ye most ungrateful wretches, do ye deal thus with your most
gracious and merciful Sovereign? who had been able to have trodden you down to
the grave, and to have hid you in the dust together, before you could have laid
that load of afflictions upon him. Are these your returns of obedience and
gratitude to him for all his care and protection over you? whom you were bound
by all the Laws both of God and man to preserve to the uttermost of your power.
Is this the way to make him a great and glorious KING? It Is true, you that took
away his precious life have made him such; but no thanks to your malice, but to
his own divine and incomparable virtues. Do ye know, do ye consider, do ye
understand what you have done? Whom have you reproached and reviled? Against
whom have you exalted your voice, and lifted up your hands on high? Against
whom have you exercised your rage and fury? Even against the Lord's Anointed.
How? The Lord's Anointed? There Is thunder and lightning, storm and tempest,
hailstones and coals of fire. There Is the revengeful indignation of the
Almighty and everlasting God, and the unsupportable horrors of death eternal.
For who can stretch forth his hand against the Lord's Anointed and be
guiltless? 1 Samuel 26.9.
And they that resist, Romans 13.2.
but much more they that destroy, shall receive to themselves damnation. Such
and so great was their Sin; (which I beseech God they may consider and repent)
but yet 'twas far less than the glory that attended his sufferings. T'has
been often seen, and it is easy to imagine, how illustrious a KING is when his
power and greatness is entire, when he flourishes in the height of his
authority, when he is courted with pomp and honor. But it is much more rare and
wonderful to see Majesty shining in its full luster, even when it is overspread
with a cloud of misery. Ecce par Deo dignum, says Seneca, vir fortis cum mala
fortuna compositus. But this is nothing to that instance that is now before us.
Here was a great and mighty Prince, that in the lowest ebb of his adversity was
more than conqueror. ^om. 8.37.
Here you might have seen the rage of men and Devils in vain assaulting
undaunted and invincible Constancy. Here was one that in the midst of his
undeserved sufferings by an admirable temper so expressed the meekness of a
Christian, that he forgot not the Majesty of a KING.

In short, he lived a Saint, and he died a Martyr; and his death especially was
conformable to the Captain of our Salvation, the KING of sufferings. And to
make this evident, some have made an exact comparison between them in many
circumstances. But I shall instance only in his Charity, which was in him
eminent and remarkable, and whereby he most resembled our Blessed Savior.
Observe how devoutly, how fervently he prays for his bloody persecutours. Thou,
(...). ^. 28.
O Lord, made thy Son a Savior to many that crucified him, while at once he
suffered violently by them, and yet willingly for them. O let the voice of his
blood be heard for my murderers, louder than the cry of mine against them. O
deal not with them as bloodthirsty men, but overcome their cruelty with thy
compassion and my charity. Though they think my Kingdoms on earth too little to
entertain at once both them and me; yet let the capacious Kingdom of thy
infinite mercy at last receive both me and my enemies.

This is truly a Divine perfection, and a God-like excellency; It Is a near
approach to the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, who took upon him the form of
a servant; who has sanctified all afflictions and calamities by his blessed
example, and his glorious victory; Who was led as a Lamb to the slaughter, Isa.
53.7.
and as a Sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he opened not his mouth; Who
endured the cross, Heb. 12.2.
despising the shame, and is now sat down at the right hand of God. He that
well considers this example, may easily resolve which is the more happy
condition; a persecuted innocence, or an insulting cruelty. But now Divine
providence has made it manifest, that no true and durable greatness can ever
lay its foundation in sin: And we can now certainly and experimentally
conclude, That there is a reward for the righteous, Psalm. 58.11.
and a punishment for the wicked; doubtless there is a God that judges the
earth. And so we leave our ROYAL MARTYR, whose Name shall ever live and
flourish on earth, while his peaceful Soul, long since delivered from a
troublesome world, rests in the blessed mansions of everlasting peace. Let this
be sufficient to show that our KING is the son of NOBLES; since from that great
and glorious Monarch he immediately descends, who is our Joy and our Crown, our
Happiness and our Glory: For whatsoever we loved, reverenced or admired in his
most ROYAL FATHER, does not only remain, as he says, In aternitate temporum,
fama rerum, but also in the real possession of our present SOVEREIGN. This is
he into whose Princely and Heroic Soul all those excellent graces are
transfused, which no doubt but we shall see hereafter improved into more noble
accomplishments.

O what a pitiful dull thing is this rebellious malice? how base and weak is it
in its attempts? how happily is it defeated and disappointed? what have they
done, but to raise us higher by our fall? and to lift themselves up on high,
that they might fall with a greater and more dreadful ruin? What do you think
now, you that used to talk so much of Providence? where was your consideration
of God's eternity? I speak this not to reproach you, but to undeceive you. Did
you think that God would never come and appear again, because he hid his face
from us for a time? 2 Pet. 3.9.
The Lord is not slack, as some men count slackness; for a thousand years in
his sight are but as one day. He has now appeared again sooner than we could
expect, and much sooner than we deserved. The stone which the builders, Psalm.
118.22, 23.
not of Jerusalem, but of Babel, refused, is now become the head of the corner.
This is the Lord's doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes. The other was the
Lord's doing too, in exercising his just judgment upon a sinful Nation: But
this is his work of mercy, the benefit whereof we hope will endure to all
succeeding ages. It Is our comfort that we have remaining an illustrious branch
of that ROYAL STEM, from which we hope to enjoy the fruits of Justice,
Goodness and Clemency.

-- Uno avulso non deficit alter
Aureus, and simili frondescit virga metallo.
God and Nature, his undoubted right, and his Princely virtues, have made him
our King long since, though we have wanted the comfort of his presence. If any
of his enemies should impertinently ask where his Kingdom has been all this
time; It Is easily answered, where theirs never was. He has reigned in the
hearts and affections of his loving and faithful subjects; which is a Kingdom
far more great and glorious than the proudest and most insolent Usurpers can
ever hope to obtain. Our Bodies only, the worser part of us, were under their
power; but our Minds, which are most truly and properly our selves, were at his
dispose. They bound our Hands, but our Hearts were knit and obliged to him.
They possessed the Cabinet, but they could never come at the Jewel. In the
worst of times duty and allegiance were far from suffering a total
defection; and I dare confidently affirm, that there are more than seven times
seven thousand in England that never bowed their knees to Baal. If you could
have then discovered the hearts of many that were faithful in the Land, there
might you have discerned a constant and immovable Allegiance; there might you
have beheld the brightest flames of unextinguish'd love and Loyalty. And now
since the danger of owning him is taken away, and the obstruction is removed,
behold how those hidden flames break out, and make a glorious appearance! Your
eyes have seen, and your ears have heard, with how great a cheerfulness, with
what expressions of unexpressible joy, he is every where acknowledged. I know
no rejoicing that can so well be compared with ours, as that of the Israelites
at the proclaiming and crowning of Solomon, 1 Kings 1. 39, 40. They blew the
trumpet, and all the people said, God save King Solomon. And all the people
came up after him, and the people piped with pipes, and rejoiced with great
joy, so that the earth rent with the sound of them. And yet they had not so
great reason to rejoice as we. Their change was but from a David to a Solomon
immediately, from a righteous KING and a great warrior, to a wise and peaceful
Prince. But we -- I need not tell you the difference.

What shall we say now to those impostours that endeavored to put out our eyes
by their frequent boasting of the consent of the people, by pretending that
their advancement was the Nation's interest? It Is a sign they were far from
true Nobility, that could so impudently practice that base and slavish vice of
lying, to maintain their ill-gotten authority. I confess the late Tyrant in one
or two instances seemed to be somewhat modest; but I attribute that rather to
the overruling hand of Providence than to any goodness of his. He styled
himself Protector of England, Scotland and Ireland. This was a notorious
untruth, for he was the ruiner and destroyer of these flourishing Kingdoms. But
here his impudence failed him, that he durst not adventure to write himself By
the Grace of God. Again, you know time was, when he would and would not be
King, when he refused, and yet hoped that his refusal would have gained him
that honor. But in conclusion, he missed of that which he had sought with so
much ambition. This again I ascribe to Divine Providence; whose admirable
contrivance it was that the Crown, the sacred Emblem of Divine Power and
Majesty, should never touch that villainous and polluted head. I need not tell
you, your own experience may abundantly inform you, how dangerous it is to be
under the dominion of ignoble and unworthy persons. Whereas he that is of Royal
birth, and is a King by the appointment of God and Nature, can maintain his
dignity without those base and ignoble arts, without those ambitious shifts and
contrivances, which are the only support of those that have no right, and as
little merit. Again, he that is a King by birth must needs look upon his people
as his own natural possession; and is thereby engaged to provide more
affectionately for their good and welfare, and to regard them with a more
tender and paternal care. Lastly, He that is such will be more sensible of
honor, and is likely to propound more noble ends in all his designs and
counsels. Therefore, whether we look back upon what we have suffered, or
forward upon what we hope to enjoy; in both respects we have reason to
acknowledge this blessing of the Text, Blessed art thou, O Land, when thy King
is the son of Nobles. And we may well take up those words of the Queen of
Sheba, Blessed he the Lord our God, which delighted in him to set him on the
throne of this our Israel: 1 Kings 10.9.
Because the Lord our God loved Israel for ever, therefore he has made him
King to do justice and judgment.

'T has been our very great unhappiness to know him yet but little by
experience: But all the fame and the report of those that know him, speaks him
to be a rare and most accomplished Prince. And yet I hope that his wisdom and
goodness will hereafter so much exceed our present expectations, that we shall
say, 1 King. 10.6, 7.
as the forementioned Queen did to Solomon, It was a true report which we
heard, but the half was not told us. In the mean time I shall give you two
ample and honorable testimonies of him (when he was nine or ten years younger
than now he is) from two dying Lords; who being persons of honor, and at the
point of death, are two great arguments that they spoke the truth according to
the best of their knowledge.

The one thus expresses it; L. Capel.
Truly I never saw greater hopes of virtue in any young person than in him;
great judgment, great understanding, strong apprehension, much of honor in
his nature, and a very perfect Englishman in his inclinations. E. of Derby.
The other gives him a more ample testimony in these words: Certainly, says
he, as I believe this Nation will never be well contented without a King; so I
believe also that K. CHARLES THE SECOND, our now lawful KING, were he a
stranger to this Crown, were the most fit and most accomplished Prince that
this day lives to take the Government of this people. His admirable piety,
virtue, justice, great valor, and discretion, far above so few years, does
now make him in all places he comes highly beloved, and will hereafter make him
honorable in all Nations. And I wish the people of this Nation so much
happiness (when my eyes are closed) that he may peaceably be received to the
enjoyment of his just right; and then they shall never want their just rights,
which till then they will always want.

We may very well suppose, that since the time that these excellent things were
spoken of him, he has gained much in the improvement of his Princely Virtues.
At present (as far as we can know him at such a distance) we may all judge of
him by his gracious Offers and Proposals to his great Council, and his general
Declaration, wherein he promises to embrace all his Subjects equally within
the arms of his comprehensive Goodness and Clemency. Which without doubt, with
many other Divine instructions, he has received from his most ROYAL FATHER;
beside what his own Princely disposition, variety of observation, the trial of
Affliction, frequent discourse and meditation, and above all the extraordinary
blessing of God, have added to him. Now therefore let us not add to all those
unworthy reproaches and contumelies that have been thrown upon him by his and
our enemies, this of suspicion and mistrust that he will not make good his
gracious promises. We must not look on him as on those whose interest it has
been to deceive and abuse us. Most certainly such unworthy arts are infinitely
below his Noble and Heroic mind. He knows very well whose Vicegerent he is;
that he represents the God of Peace and Truth, whose two grand properties are
according to the doctrine of an ancient Philosopher (...), to do good and to
speak truth. There is no fear that he should fail in the truth of his word, who
comes to imitate God in doing good. For he has no other design upon us, but to
do that for us which we have found by experience that none else can do; to
cure our wounds, to heal our distempers, and to repair our ruins. The hope of
the Syrians when they were vanquished, was, That the Kings of Israel were
merciful Kings. The same may as truly be said of the Kings of England: and to
be sure the last we had was such; for had he not been a merciful King, he had
never felt the fury of unmerciful Subjects. Although his Mercy would never have
brought any affliction on him, but that it met with some ill humors in a
distempered State. But however things have been, let our reflections on times
past excite our most zealous care to repair that Duty and Allegiance that has
been so many years denied to his Sacred Majesty and his Blessed Father. And as
he is willing to remit what is past, so let us meet his Goodness in
endeavoring to make him some recompense for the time to come. Which if we do,
we shall both more facilitate his power of doing us good, and we shall put our
selves into a better capacity of being happy under his Government. I hope that
now we shall understand one another better, since we are delivered from those
whose concernment it was to nourish factions and divisions among us, that their
dominion over us might be more entire and absolute. I hope our cordial union
and consent in obedience to our Sovereign will bring us nearer to one another.
And to this end, I heartily desire that they who always loved and honored him,
may show in themselves the first and greatest examples of Moderation. As for my
own part, since I have this occasion given me, I must freely profess and
declare my self to be one of those, whose Loyalty is the result of a natural
and constant principle, and not of the event of things or necessity of times;
who always abhorred to flatter prosperous wickedness, and would never stoop to
adore usurping tyranny. And yet all the advantage I wish for those of the same
persuasion and inclination is only this, that they go beyond others in humane
civility, in brotherly love, and in Christian charity; That they lay aside all
animosities, all uncharitable opposition against those that have formerly
differed from them, as always remembering that they serve a merciful GOD and a
gracious KING. For otherwise let them not pretend to be his obedient Subjects,
to whose goodness they will not conform. For, as Tertullian well expresses it,
Obsequii ratio in animorum similitudine constituta est. As for those that run
into excess and debauchery, I think I may truly say such practices flow not
from their principles, but from their temper and disposition; and that they
would act the same things under any judgment. To such I shall only say at
present, that I desire them to consider what a Philosopher once said to a
vicious person in the same ship with him, who when in a storm he began to pray,
Hold your peace, said he, for fear lest the Gods take notice you are here, and
cast us all away for your sake.

As for others, I shall hope that a little time may wear away those prejudices,
and the ill consequences of those erroneous opinions, into which some may
possibly have fallen; especially such as give a check to Obedience, and set
Liberty at too high a pitch. I wish that none may ever hereafter mistake Fancy
for Religion, and call Obstinacy by the specious name of Conscience. I heartily
desire that all men would seriously understand and consider, what a necessary
connection there is between keeping the Laws of God and those of our lawful
Superiors; between the first and second Table; between Fear God, and Honor
the King. I would advise men not to be fond either of their sins or errors;
but to be content to sacrifice both to the public good, and to the lasting
tranquillity and welfare of Church and State. And I beseech God to remove all
obstructions that may disturb or hinder our peace and happiness; to reduce the
whole Kingdom to such a perfect unity, to such an happy composure, to such a
blessed harmony, that it may be said of England as it was of Portugal at the
late restitution, That as never Subjects had a more Gracious King, so never
King had more Loyal Subjects.

To this end, the Lord give to our SOVEREIGN a wise and understanding heart.
The Lord make him as an Angel of God to discern good and evil. God bless him
with Wisdom in his Counsels, Justice in his Designs, and Success in his
Undertakings. God grant him the victorious Fortitude of Henry the 5th, the
Piety and innocence of Henry the 6th, the Prudence of Henry the 7th, the
Magnanimity of Henry the 8th, the Felicity of Qu. Elizabeth, and whatever was
eminent and illustrious in K. Charles the First. Let him be like him in his
Virtues, but most unlike him in his Fortunes. Let shame and confusion cover the
faces of those who shall hereafter maliciously persist to blaspheme thee, O
Lord, and to slander the footsteps of thine Anointed: But upon the sacred head
of thine Anointed, and upon his Seed, and upon his Throne, and upon all his
Kingdoms, and upon all his loyal and faithful people, 1 Kin. 2.33.
let there be peace for ever from the Lord. Which he grant through the tender
mercies of the most holy and eternal Jesus, to whom with the Father and the
Holy Ghost, in the unity of one infinite Majesty, be praise, and honor, and
glory everlasting. Amen.

We praise thee, O God, etc.
Books printed for, and sold by, W. Morden Bookseller in Cambridge.
ORigenes contra Celsum; Ejusdem Philocalia, cum Annotat. Gulielmi Spenceri,
4o. Scheyneri Fundamenta Optic. 4o. Officium Concionatorium, 4o. Medi opuscula.
Epicteti Enchiridion, cum Cebetis Tabula. Accesserunt Arriani Comment. item
Porphyrius de Abstinentia, and de Vita Pythagorae, Ejusdem item Sentent. and de
Antro Nympharum, Vita deinde and Scripta Porphyrii a L. Holstenio, 8o. Gassendi
Astronomia; Cui accessere Galilaei Galilaei Nuncius Sidereus and Johannis
Kepleri Dioptrice, 8o. Sebast. Castellio. Dialogi 4 de Praedestinatione.
Sebast. Castellio. Dialogi 4 de Electione. Sebast. Castellio. Dialogi 4 de
Libero Arbitrio. Sebast. Castellio. Dialogi 4 de Fide and Justificatione.
Angelini Gazaei Pia Hilaria. Accessit Tomus alter cum Indice Philologico, 12o.
Mores Antidote against Atheism. Enthusiasmus Triumphatus, or a Discourse of the
Nature, Causes, Kinds and Cures of Enthusiasm. His threefold Cabbal, Literal,
Philosophical, Mystical or Divinely Moral. Immortality of the Soul, 8o.
Billingsly's Idea of Arithmetic, 8o. 2 Sermons of Mr. Clerk, Fellow of
Peter-house. Select Discourses, by John Smith, late Fellow of Queen's College
in Cambridge. As also a Sermon preached by Simon Patrick at the Authors
Funeral: with a brief account of his Life and Death.
FINIS.

