THE PASSING BELL.

Job the 14th verse the first. Man that is borne of a woman, is of few days
and full of trouble.

By James Harwood. B. D.

Printed in the year. 1655.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LADY CAPELL DOWAGER.
THe Honor I ever bare to that bright shining Star of Loyalty, your late
deceased Lord, obliges me to Dedicate these few lines to your singular
goodness; they will occasion serious thoughts in sad times; and point you out
the way to life by Death: I know a great part of your joy on earth is gone to
Heaven: And since Death made a way for your Noble Lord, I trust in the Lord
this shall sweeten to you the thought of the approach of Death. I have made
bold to set a sad object before your eyes, you may mix it with your worldly
enjoyments, as the Israel tes did their bitter herbs, with their pleasant
passover; It may seem at first to kill, but cures, only removing our
Landmarke from a: Coppy-hold at will, to a fee-farme of Eternity: These after
Noise may seem as harsh as Jacobs hands were Rough; but I hope not so to you,
who in life have learnt to dye; A short lesson, yet to some, too long a
learning; God has blessed your Honor with long days, yet some by them have
been overcast with a black cloud of worldly calamity, which many mouths put
all your family and dear friends into mourning weeds: What was this, but the
messen ger of death sent to one, to warn you and all yours, and all others to
make ready to die. Madam, pardon my presumption, I only put you in mind of Death
him, of whom you have too timely an assurance he will spare none; what I here
present to you, is not to terrify you with Death, but put you in mind what
you may gain by dying: And know Right Honorable, that as none was admitted
into the Temple of Honor, but such who fist went through the Temple of Virtue,
so none can come to the life of glory, till they have made their passage by the
death of the body; your high hopes in reversion will sweeten the thoughts of
that messenger of man's mortality, which the more you think of, the better you
will be prepared for your long journey; And this I take to be the thief
cause, why the Emperors of Constable antinople in their Augurations on their
Coronation days, had a Mason, who came and showed them several stones, and
willed them to choose which of those stones should be made fit for their
Grave-stones.

You see at the Espousalls of Imperial Crowns, it was thought fit to Caroll
out this doleful ditty, Memento mori, O Man remember thy end. It shall not be
my last, but everlasting suit, in this, you would mitate the Princes of the
Nations, and whilst by Divine Goodness, you are Inheritrix of large
possessions, at the same time to bebare in mind how here we have no continuing
City: God for his goodness, and Christ for his merits bless you and all
yours, which shall be, Dum spiro, the prayer of

Your devoted servant to command, JAMES HARWOOD

TO HIS BELOVED WIFE, In his long absence from her.
Dear Heart.
HEre we have no continuing City, our days, pass as a take that is told; In
the prime of our Age, The world smiled upon us, in our middle Age, she seemed
to hold out unto us her golden Ball; but in this our old age and worst of
times, all worldly Joy has turned her back upon us: So that after a sad and
serious Meditation, Hist.
I found all Earthly pleasure like Plinies flies, borne at Morn, in their
prime at Noone, and dead at Night. They came to us like Oxen slowly, they have
taken Pegasus his wings and flowne from us: The uncertainty of these unstable
contents has made me cast an eye up to heaven, and seek after an eternity of
Bliss; My best beloved know it, there is no way to a life a Glory, but by the
death of the body; I therefore beg of you, every day to think of your end, that
by the thought of death, you may be prep^red for a life of Glory in the
kingdom of Heaven; In my long absence from you, I thought good to commend
these few sentences to your every days perusal; They will put you in mind of
your long Home, and bespeake you in private to work out your salvation with
fear and trembling. And now considering much of our time is spent, so small a
reverse remains; The Lord grant we may both of us remember our ends, that we
may never do amiss. This is his prayer, who will live and die.

Your Loving and faithful Husband James Harwood.

The passing Bell.
Job the 14th verse the first. Man that is borne of a Woman is of few days and
full of evil.


My Soul is embarked in a crasie Sculler, Here is the passenger, and here is
the vessel.

My Soul is sailing on from a Transitory life of vanity to an eternal lif of
Glory.

In all my Spiritual Sea-sicke passage, behold and hear a Change of Notes.

No more, Soul take thy ease; No more Faciamus tria Tabernacula. No more quid
dabitis and ego tradam vobis.

No, all the noise is, vanity upon vanity, all is vanity.

The Pilot sickness Calls on me to embarke, and now Naboths Uineyard,
Belshazars bouls, Jona's Gourd, these give no content.

Yet this my p resent visitation I bid welcome; knowing it is the back-doore,
whic letts me (...) into the Kingdom of Heaven And therefore go toll the
bell, that all good people may take notice how nigh I am to my e^d.

Let them go toll the bell, whilst I tune my tongue to the passing bell.

My Ditty is Mortality, my Tune Lacrymae, my time short Semiquaver time, which
will admit of no rest.

Give me leave to enchant your ears with a Language will put every one of ^s
in mind of our ends.

I have, and for this cause bethought me of some select sayings worthy of your
Remembrance.

Every sentence shall give you notice of your end, and how here you have no
continuing City.

THE FIRST PART OF THE SOULS DEPARTING DITTY.
Quod faciendum est semel, Deliberandum est diu.
1.I Have a To pass from life to Death.
work to do, I am but once to do it, and I am undone if it be not well done.

2. Let me take more pains to die well then to live long, otherwise my long
life will bring me to an ill end.

3. To return from the dead impossibles; All my life then I will prepare for
death.

4. When death will come, I know not; that it will come, I am sure of it, but
once, O make ready.

5. This life is a summers day before death; Death follows after, Set thy
house in order.

6. Has God given me lenghth of days; It is, that in life, I may prepare for
death.

7. He that dies daily, has done his work before the night of death shuts day
in.

8. I have but once to go hence and be seen no more, that I play not loath to
depart, my last parture, I will bear in my remembrance, and for ever.

9. Before the day of battle what a world of preparation, the war beginns when
death comes; its wisdom before it come, to make ready.

10. They call death Charons boat, I am sure it wastes the soul from a material
to an immateriall world, my advice, eye the barge before thou enter, all one,
with remember thy end.

11. I have but one step to eternity; it is from life to death, I will be
preparing this body of mine, to win the Garland of a blessed immortality.

12. O the serious thoughts while I live; How I must die, these do so make me
run, that I may obtain, a Crown of Immortal glory.

13. In my life I will often meditate on death, when death does come, it will be
more welcome.

14. He that thinks not of his end till ready to die, his unthought of ending
is like an Enthusiasts sermon, poor stuff.

15. This sound of the passing Bell assures me there is some to dya likly to
die; Is it so nigh night, it is high time then to work out my salvation; left
the night of death put in, and none can work.

16. I have a task set will take up all my time, viz. to die well; while I
live then I will learn to die; lest being found unprepared, it be said, thou
fool, this night thy Soul shall be required of thee.

17. There is one, and it will not be long ere he come and call, and knock at
thy door, his name is death, with Martha thou have been troubled about many
things; O this unum That I must die.
necessarium, let it not be forgotten.

18. As thou came by the womb; thou must go by the grave. Learn then in life,
how to be freed from death.

19. Maximilian the Emperor made his Coffin always to be carried along with
him, to this end that his dignity might not make him forget his mortality.

20. How many messengers have brought word that death will quarter here; sad
news, would thou sweeten them far God and keep his commandments.

The second part of the souls departing Ditty.
Statutum est omnibus semel mori.
21. WHat was long since decreed in heaven, God has sent warrants to e^^cute
on earth, semel mori, for us once to die.

22. King Xerxes standing on a Mountain, and having many hundred thousands of
his soldiers standing in the plain, fell a weeping, to think upon it, how in a
few years, and all those gallant valiant meant must die.

23. Adam, he lived 930 years, and he dyed.

Enoch, he lived 965 years, and he dyed.

Metbusalem lived 967 years, and he dyed.

O the longest day has its night, and in the end man must die.

24. The Princes of the Nations pass sentence of death upon others Well, it is
not long, but their turn will come, semel mori, once to die.

25. When the keepers of the house trenible, the grinders cease, the lookers
out of the windows be darkened, then man is taking his journey to his long
home, to die.

26. As is the Law of the Medes and Persians Irrevocable, so is that universal
sentence, i semel mori, for all men once to die.

27. It is reported, how there is a white and black Mouse, which continually
gnawes at the root of a Tree, until the Tree fall down: Man's the Tree, the
day and night the white and black Mouse, in a small time, these hew man down,
and he dies.

28. Baruch, and Gideon, and Sampison, they are all gone, and we are to follow
after, and to die.

29. Better is the house of Mourning, than Mirth, this teaches me to live in
pleasure, and die in pain, that learns me in this life to die to sin; that now
I must die, I may live with God.

30. But where are these Heralds, who blaze that coat of death! The years
Autumn, the Seas Ebbing, the Suns Setting: these assure me, how man never
continues in one stay. Man in honor lasts not long.

31. It is not long, and the Sun sets, the Tide turns, and the Leaf falls, and
man must as assuredly expect a change.

32. Dira at vera, Terrible but true news, it is this, not long, and the
gathering Host of Dan must sweep us clean away.

33. Many of us live where our Parents lived, and live of the same lands which
they lived of: It is not long, and our children shall do as much for us, For we
must go hence and be seen no more.

34. Some ride Post, some Hackney, pace at serius citius, sooner latter all
arrive at the common Inn, the Grave, and die.

35. Some have the Palsy, some the Apoplexy, some a Fever, some an Ague,
some a Consumption, some none of them: yet the sick, the sound, they all meet
in the end, at the same Rendevouz, at the house of Death, and they die.

36. The Scholar thinks to delude death with his fallacies, the Lawyer puts in
his demur, the Prince, his plea is, State Affairs: at equo pulsat pede, Death
knocks at all doors alike; and when he comes, they all go hence, from their
houses to their graves.

37. None leads more a Christian life, then he, who all his life, thinks of
death. O all my days I will wait till my change come.

38. Joseph the Jew, in his best health made in stone-Coffin be cut out in his
Garden, to put him in mind to his Ego abeo, I go hence.

39. The Persians they buried their dead in their houses, to put the whole
household in mind of the same lot, Semel mori, once to die.

40. Simonides, when commanded to give the most wholesome rule to live well,
willed the Lacedemonian Prince ever to bear in mind, se tempore brevi
moriturum: ere long, and he must die.

41. A sort of imprudent people put a fortasse upon all things in the world;
they might have excepted death, it comes not Not by chance but by force.
forte, sed fort ter; and none can rescue from the Jaws of death.

42. God has hid from me the day of my death, that every day I may make ready
to die.

43. There is naught more sure then to die: so then live, as if to day to die.

44. As all the Rivers come from the Sea, and run in again into the Sea, so we
all come from the earth, and to the earth we must return again.

45. The Mower cuts all down, as much will death do for all us, leave none
standing.

46. The Adder lays one ear to the ground, the other, the Adder covers
with her Tail, and all that Charm the Charmer never so wisely, she may not
hear: As deaf is death, it stops its ear, and will not hear, h^c magnos
paervosque terit, the storm of death roots up Shrubs and Cedars

47. They say a Wolf, if he sees a man, first secludes the man from the use
of his tongue; how true is that, I know not, this is true. I am sure of it,
death leaves us speechless, lifelesse: Whilst therefore thou have life,
prepare for death.

48. I have heard of Abraham at Confession, confessing himself to be dust and
ashes; and David, how his days are but a hand breadth: The shortness of this,
the Britleness of that, tells me in my ear, I have no long time to stay here.

49. Solon, to pull down man's proud heart, made this inscription on the Post
of the gates of Delphos, Nosce te'psum, quasi tunc cogitabls; know thy self,
and then thou will quickly know thou must dye.

50. I have read of a sort of people that use dead men's bones for money, and
the more they have, they are counted the more Rich: herein consists my richest
treasure, to bear that about me will make me all my life remember my end.

51. Great Sultan Saladan, Lord of many Nations and Languages, commanded upon
his deathbed, that one should carry upon a Spears point through all his Camp
the flag of death, and to proclaim, for all his wealth, Saladan has naught
left but this winding-sheete, an ensured ensign of Deaths triumphing over all
the sons of Adam.

52. I uncloath my self every night, I put off all but what may put me in mind
of my winding sheet, and thus day after day utters speech, and night after
night shows knowledge, how Ego Exeo, I go hence.

53. Anaxagoras having word brought him, his only son was dead: his answer
was, scio me genuisse mortalem. I know he was borne to dye.

54. The Epicure in his life takes his fill of pleasures, yet fears one day
death will deprive him of all his pleasure, let us unlearne his first lesson,
let us take out his latter lesson, and remember that death one day will deprive
us of all our earthly joys.

55. The Meditations of Death are the politics of Saints, and therefore says
the wiseman, Remember thy end and thou shall never do amiss.

56. Philip of Macedon gave a boy a pension every morning to say to him,
Philippe memento te hominem esse, Philip remember thou art a man, and therefore
must die.

57. Since man is subject to dye so soon as he begins to live, it shall make
me now that I know I live, to bear in mind, I must die.

58. The body at best is but a living Coffin to the Soul, when the Soul
departs from the body, the grave shall be the dead Coffin, to that late living
Body.

59. We read of Philostrates, how he lived seven years in his Tomb, that he
might be acquainted with it against the time he came to be put into it: Oh an
Apprenticeship of years is time little enough to make us perfect in the
mystery of mortality.

60. Causinus in his Hieroglyphics makes mention of an Indian Fountain out of
which Gold is drawn in Earthen pitchers, yet none can get the Gold but he that
breaks the earthen pitcher. Est vita fictile: the life of man is the earthen
pitcher. The Gold contained, the earnest of all Heavenly happiness, which none
can in full attain till this corruptible put on incorruptibility, and this
mortal Immortality: after the night of death comes that day of joy: Let me
welcome that cloudy evening promises so fair a sunshine, let us make fit to
die that we may be counted worthy to live: he that lives well, cannot die
ill: he that dies well, his death is a pass from a miserable life on earth,
to live a life of glory in the Kingdom Heaven. Which God for his mercies send
all of us.

Divine Meditations, arising from the contemplation of these sad and serious
sentences.
1. Med. Is it not high time to make fit to die; considering the Passing Bell
does Tole: Well, I will go take my Dough upon my shoulders, and march from this
carnal Egypt, to that spiritual Canaan. Let the foolish Virgins slip their
time to lay in Oil; yet, lest the gates of heaven be barred up, I will up, and
on, and buy without money, or mony-worth. My want is great, my time is almost
run: If I make not Market to day, I am not sure to do it to morrow. O the
uncertainty of life shall be the Alarum-Bell to give me NOW notice, to work out
my salvation with fear and trembling.

2 Med. I am now sole Caesar, I have, and what not? at my disposal, Jobs Goods,
Naboths Vineyard, John Baptist^s head in a Charger: I am of potent power, who
dare control me. O consider, ere long, it is not long, and whereas mighty
territories could not stint thy ambition, Death will come and make a seizure of
thy SELF, and bereave thee of all thou have, all but an evil CONSCIENCE.
Think upon it, Death has hitherto hewed all down, and art thou able to
withstand Him. Go and give him a peaceable meeting, who, with all thy force,
there is no resisting. The Firmament will endure but one Sun, but the THOUGHTS
of God and the Grave may take up their lodging in the same Inn. O, I am never
so nigh my God, as when I think of my end. FRIEND, let death be in thy
thoughts, and God will be in thy heart.

3 Med. Consider well what is said, Cor sapientum est in Domo luctus, the Heart
of the wise is in the house of Mourning. Death brought Tears to the house and
Tears assure us that Wisdom is got within doors. There is no fear of God,
where no wisdom, no wisdom, where no serious thoughts of our end. I will think
of my end, that I may be numbered among the wise: wise to Godward, while I
have an awful fear of his death-blow. Come, let me embrace that thought of
DEATH, which fits me for the day of life, even a life everlasting.

4 Med. Meditate what new men we ought to be, who are here to day, gone to
morrow, whom, it is not long, and death will arrest, and then we must answer for
all done in the flesh, what a sudden trial will it be, if we get not pardon
before the cause be called on? What a fearful reckoning, if before the day of
Death, the Lord of life strike not off all our reckoning. Lord I am deep in
debt to thee, I owe thee more, than my goods, lands, and life can redeem: my
debt surmounts, my time to discharge its nigh at hand. O let the certain and
swift summons by death, cause me forthwith to think upon a way to compound with
my grand Creditor: I disclaim MERIT, I hold fast by MERCY. For thy ancient
mercie's sake, for our blessed MESSIA's sake, in the hour of death, and in the
day of judgment, accept the blood of thy Son, and save my Soul.

5 Med. Meditate, since man must die, Lord, what danger in dying unprepared;
this is Maxima miseria, a misery of miseries: and St. Augustine gives the
reason, quoniam qualis in isto die moritur, talis in illo die judi cabitur: For
that look how a man goes to that Prison the Grave, so he goes to the
Judgment-Hall to be tried, and now consider of it well, if thou be not able to
give a Gospell-answer to the Judge of Heaven and Earth; come to answer; but
know not what to say, had it not been better thou had never been born,
than to be born to die, and be damned, not considering thy own end? A wiseman
has his answer beforehand prepared to pacify wrath to come; whereas the fool
forgets what is to come, and dies in his folly.

6 Med. Let me all my life bear in mind, how I have to do with an enemy that
has no mercy, he bears all down before him, Peasants and Princes. O the
thought of this quite astonishes, let me make ready to die, since I am sure to
lay down my life; let me lay up for a life to come, since Death will come, and
deprive me of This life. Before death throw me into the bowels of the earth,
let me lift up my heart to the God of Heaven. O God, who can praise thee in the
PIT: While I have life, then I will praise the Lord of Life; and yet while at
the best of works, and best in health. Here is the grim visage of pale colored
Death looks me in the face. O thou common Butcherer of human Nature; after thy
great stroke be struck, I am not dead but asleep. Blessed be thou my God, who
have made my grave my bed, in which, after I have taken some silent rest, the
noise of the Arch Angel with his Trumpet, shall awake and raise me, from a
death for sin, to a life of glory. Death is the way we must all walk to life:
And as it is not the least in my thoughts that death will quarter here, so it
is the uppermost in my Note book, and stands upon Record, That after death I
shall live with God, and for ever.

FINIS.

