Edwards Mayor.

Cur. special. tent. die Lune, in Festo Sancti Michaelis Archangeli, 1679.
Annoque Regis Caroli Secundi Angliae, etc. XXXjo.

THis Court does desire Dr. Hascard to Print his SERMON Preached this Morning
at St. Lawrence Church, before the Election of the LORD MAYOR.

WAGSTAFFE.

A SERMON Preached before the Right Honorable Sir JAMES EDWARDS Lord Mayor, In
St. Lawrence Church, On the FEAST of St. Michael, 1679. AT THE ELECTION OF Sir
ROBERT CLAYTON TO BE Lord MAYOR for the ensuing Year.

By GREG. HASCARD D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty, and Rector of S.
Clements Danes.

LONDON: Printed for William Crook at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar.
1680.

JUDE v. 8. -- Despise dominions, and speak evil of dignities.


THE care and tenderness of this Apostle over his new-baptized Christians, was
the cause of this Epistle: well foreseeing how these young Disciples (like
Adam in his first Plantation, or Hercules in his Cradle by Serpents) would be
assaulted by men of subtle interest and sly designs, who would pervert
Christianity from its first simple and plain intention of reforming the Minds
of Men, and prescribing them methods how they should arrive at Immortality; and
cause it to degenerate only into some wanton purposes of licentiousness and
passion, the little ends of earth and interest, and tread upon their Saviors
Body for a Temporal advancement. For no sooner was Christianity planted in the
Pagan world, (the busy spirit below, and his Factors the Carpocratians here,
striving to blast Religion in its spring) but so strange a change appears in
all its Doctrines, and the Lives of those Professors too, that you might seek
Christianity in such a Christian World, and yet scarce find it: for as the
Apostle describes it here, their Faith was changed into fancy and polluting
dreams; their unity and peace, into Schism and Separation; their Humility and
Mortification, into Pride and Luxury; their resignation and sedateness of mind
in all conditions, into murmurings and complainings; and all Religion so hugely
changed, as though it had washed an Ethiopian; or the Pagan World, with all its
Vices and Idols too, had only wheeled about again to be adored in a new
Christian dress. The apostle like a good Sentinel standing upon his guard, and
discovering the approaches of the Enemy, sounds an Alarm to his true Disciples,
v. 3. and bids them contend earnestly for the Faith that was once delivered
unto the Saints. And that they might know their Enemies the better, he paints
them out in their own colors: that they were men for their wickedness so
lively prophesied of long before; they are said to be, v. 4. (...) pasted up:
that they were ungodly men, who turned the grace of God into lasciviousness,
and denied the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ: (...) M. 8.
And notwithstanding the dismal Examples of Sodom and Gomorrha, of Corah and
his Company, Cain and Balaam, mentioned v. 10, 11. they were resolute and
incorrigible in their sins, and added this more to their former crimes, they
scorned the power and authority which might correct them, and despised
Dominions, and spoke evil of Dignities.

Despising and speaking evil of Dominions and Dignities, is nothing else, but
by words and actions to disturb, resist, and defame our Governors. By
Dominions and Dignities,(...) (not Orders of spirits above, of which these
Heretics told fine stories) the Abstract for the Concrete, is meant, all sorts
of Rulers and Governors, equivalent to St. Paul's (...) Romans 13; 1.
the higher Powers.

Political Government and Authority being so clearly founded by Divine
Commands, and seconded by the absolute necessity of Humane Nature, with the
consent of all Mankind; it seems a Miracle, that among the loud Vices of this
degenerate Age, Disobedience to Kings and Magistrates, contempt of Authority,
and Trustees of power, should be a crying one: As though Men courted Anarchy
and Confusion, and were in love with ruin and disorder. Some who will not pay
Obedience to any Command that is not clearly drawn from Holy Writ, it is strange
their own principle, though false and stingy, will yet countenance them in
despising Government, which is as clear in Sacred Volume, as the Sun in his
noonday glory. The Man of earth, that measures all things by profit and
design, and nothing is just and Divine, but what is useful and convenient, it is
a wonder he should mistake his rule so far, as to cast dirt upon Dominion and
its several Orders, which is the original of all his quiet, and the only
security of his Temporal Interest. However this comes to pass, yet we sadly
find, that the Ghosts of these Carpocratians are come out of their Graves, and
haunt the world again; and civil Government, though confirmed by Christ, yet
like him is crucified between these two; Enthusiasts, and Men of Designs and
Policies; the one cries it princheth upon Conscience, it entrencheth upon
Christian Liberty; that Magistracy becomes not a Christian man; it degrades the
privilege of grace to found Dominions, and justles with the Almighty Conclave
and Consistory, to whom all Government ought to submit. The Son of Matchiavel;
that prostitutes every thing to his politic devices, the windings of his
brain, and private happiness, declaims aloud against the grandeur of Princes;
that acts of Magistracy are only Force and Tyranny, the abridgment of civil
Immunities, and natural Liberties; that their Titles are high and
Antichristian; that they confound equality of nature, and self-preservation;
that Tribes and Families, with a whole Nation, groan to support the Pomp and
Retinue of Regal Power, and are only slaves to burden and greatness. Hence
instead of Honor and Fame, Reward and Duty, that we ought justly to pay to our
Governors for their care and faithful discharge, the only assurance of what
we call our own; we put lewd senses upon their Actions, black censures upon
their Persons, Pasquils upon their Place and Authority, making them all like so
many Mock-Kings, with a reed for a Scepter, and Laurels about their brow, a
fantastic guard against the thunder of Tongues, with an Hail King, first to
abuse, and then to crucify.

Firtst, let us consider from whence this contempt does spring. To omit many
others, we shall only mention these four.

(1.) From a Principle of Vice. Whatever the Names of these men were, against
whom the Apostle levels this Epistle, to be sure they were ungodly men, that
abused Religion to all manner of Lust and Passion; for so the Apostle expressly
tells us, v. 4. and the Learned say, that this Epistle was wrote against the
Carpocratians, a lewd Sect in the early days of Christianity, (as Irenaeus and
Epiphanius, and others set them out) who, that they might be the more secure in
their grosser Lusts, affirmed that nothing was good or evil in it self, but in
opinion; and looked upon all sort of Vice, as their natural Freedom and lawful
Liberty; Non mirum id fecisse Carpocratianos, qui leges avitas omnes pro nihilo
ducerent. Grot. in Judam, v. 8.
and scorned all Authority; and if the Magistrate endeavored to correct them,
his Power must be grim'd for Tyranny, and his Authority called Usurpation. It Is
no wonder the brute acts like himself, sometimes biting the Chain, and
sometimes barking at the Whip that is held for his correction. To the vicious,
the Magistrate appears an Executioner and Romans 13.3.
a Minister of wrath; but his Vice drew him in those black colors: But to the
good, he is a Guardian-Angel. He that will sacrifice all to Self-love and
Passion, and would have all Enclosures pulled up, ruat Coelum, etc. that he
might walk up and down like a Beast of Lust and Prey with his lawless Passion,
it is no wonder that he grows angry with his Governor, that bounds him, and
says to his froth and madness, as Providence to the Waves, ( v. 13.
so these are called) Hitherto shall you go; and no further. Fond and dissolute
men propose to themselves days of Paradise, could they but tumble down their
Governors, and break their bonds in sunder; yet after a surfeit in Vice, and
weary with Ruin and Disorder, they would either step into the Chair
themselves, or beg of some more prudent to take the reins; concluding that the
rods of Tyrants are milder far than the blind state of Nature and Confusion.
The Extravagant know very well, that Governors are designed for Champions of
Religion and Virtue, the common Patrons of all good Men, the terror of the
bad, and the scourge of Vice; and his Love can be but a slavish Fear at best,
that they might not hurt him. As Vice does grow, so much is Government
contemned; while Vice discouraged is Virtues Triumph, and the support of
Government. Such ill conceptions have men of Vice, to conclude, there is no
Liberty, because there is a Law; and they are in Bondage, because they cannot
be Licentious: Whereas good Laws are the security of our just Freedoms and
truest Interest; and he that Governs, and Commands us only to be happy and
truly Men, we ought not to look upon as the Jailer of our Liberties, the great
Retrencher of our Freedoms, to bespatter and despise; but our Friend and
Benefactor, to admire and love.

(2.) From a silly Opinion that all Dominion is founded in Grace, there was a
sort of Christians who bestowed upon themselves alone the fine names of Elect
and Gracious; and upon this title challenged Empire; and all Governors not so
qualified, they cried down for Tyrants and Usurpers: And because by Grace they
expected Heaven, they thought themselves the only fit persons to govern Earth.
Point Blank against the Invisible Kingdom and Spiritual Design of Christ: For
if upon the score of Saintship a Right to rule the world is derived, our
Savior's Kingdom (notwithstanding his declaration before Pontius Pilate) is
of this world, by a new Title which he brought down with him. And if you be
once a sound believer, and a sincere convert to the Christian Faith, you have a
better Title to a Scepter, than Succession, or Election, or any Temporal right
can give; and to be Orthodox, is a nearer step to a Throne, than Birth, and all
the Voices of a Nation: A way to Government unknown to the world before, and is
only a new privilege of Christ's Subjects, to be Christians that they might
be Kings; and the liberty of his Religion should free Servants and Sons, and
other Relatives, from Duty and Obedience. These are the men indeed that have
turned the world and Christian Religion upside down: which Christ gave to
Mankind to reform their manners, and to save them; to confirm good orders and
rules, and leave the world to the freedom of civil rights and conveyances as he
found them; which are plain and visible, and fall under a sensible cognizance;
but whose Grace is genuine and true, may not be known till this world with all
its principalities and powers shall be no more. As though Christianity came to
procure rewards for Hypocrites, who by their gay pretenses, and gilded zeal,
can impose upon the less-discerning world; and his seeming Piety, joined with
ill nature, and impudence to call all above him Reprobates, must be made the
most specious right unto an Empire: and because what is only fancy and
fondness, passion and effeminacy, whimsey and Enthusiasin, is called by the
name of Grace; all these will set up their Standards for the Empire too, and
lay all the blood and confusion following from these several Titles at the door
of Grace. And because the world has torn in pieces and confounded
Christianity, and called their own Faction and profit Fundamentals in Christ's
Kingdom, and split it into numerous parties and divisions, and each confines
Christ and all his privileges to themselves, and they are the only gracious
persons, and will be saved; they have confounded Temporal Government; all these
different persuasions pretending to rule, because their Christ and Grace are
true, and all besides are false. Poor Wicliff was condemned by a Popish
Council, Council. Tom. 12. p. 46. Artic. 15. Nullus est Dominus civilis, nullus
est Paraelatus, nullus est Episcopus, dum est in peccato mortali.
that of Constants, and one of his criminal persuasions was this, that Dominion
was founded in grace. But the Pope his Judge has baptized himself into the
Heresy of his Malefactor, and upon account of Christian Religion and Grace
committed to him to manage, ought to be the only Universal Monarch. And
whereas the design of Christianity was to take men off from earth, and make
this world only a step to another State; this is the way to make men earthly
and sensual, and to be Religious only because ambitious and proud, to sway the
world by this new Title, which (they say) Christ gave, to be as bountiful to
Christians, as ever Mahomet to his Disciples. Religion, that fixes the Crowns
of Kings faster upon their Heads, by these designing men must be wrested to
disturb the peace of Kingdoms, and to settle licentiousness, or freedom from
Temporal Laws, by a pretended Spiritual one, That only Saints have a right to
rule and possess the Earth. This makes Christianity but a quaint device, to
divert men's eyes and affections from earth, that they might have the fairer
opportunity to secure it. These men in effect say, their Savior was too modest
in refusing to be Crowned a King; 2 Kings 5.20.
and like Gehazi, when his Master had refused the Present, run after and cry,
he denied his own rights, and if he will not, yet they, purely upon account of
secret characters of Spirit and Grace, ought to be heads of Dominion, and rule
the World. This stops the conquest of Religion, when the Pagan King must change
his Religion, and may loose his Diadem whenever Baptized, because of others
that may be elder and better Saints the he: for who knows where such freaks
will end? Had this been a genuine Doctrine of Christianity in the first times,
it had certainly been confined to a narrower compass than now it is in: but as
Kings and Governors became its nursing Fathers, did, and justly might out of
gratitude expect more reverence and duty, and not contempt upon their dignities
and persons.

3. Contempt of Government springs from that lewd opinion, That Dominion is
nothing else but strength and might. That Philosophy that resolves all beings
and actions into matter and motion, lays the foundation too of all Obedience
not Conscience and Divine Commands, but the strongest arm and longest Sword;
only Subjects, because they are overpowered. What does vilify our Governors
more than this principle? whom we beautified before with the Titles of Sacred
and Divine, but now are made only a common lump of strength and power; and are
really weaker, because their Subjects too, like them, are only Arms, but no
Heart or Conscience, no internal principle to oblige unto Obedience. For if no
inward persuasion and dread of an Higher Power, but only fear and interest,
weakness and convenience, are the bottom and reason of our Obedience; when
these shall change, and the man has swelled his Coffers, procured firm
Alliances, and mustered up his Armies and Confederates, and other instruments
of Rebellion; he may then, by the Title of Power, lay claim to Dominion, and
call himself a Prince. Thus the Lion and the Eagle are two Kings, the one of
Beasts, and the other of Birds, because of the longest paw, and the sharpest
pounces. For duty for want of power, is only Rebellion demurred, and waits
only its proper season to bring forth, and set up for himself: for self-love is
the stingy principle of all his actions: what signifies Religious Oaths, and
solemn Vows to engage us unto Obedience, which is only an acknowledgment of
weakness, if only external power must be their keeper? This makes a Christian
Government the rule of Brutes and Infidels, where only rage and fury, Tyranny
and Oppression, and Solomon's Lions, the Supporters of his Throne, sit in it.
And it is contempt upon the Governor, that his Subjects are so, not out of
Conscience and Religion, as becomes Men and Christians; but out of a sordid
principle of fear and weakness, as becomes Brutes or Vassals.

4. This contempt upon Government, arises from an Atheistical principle. When
once the debauched world has put out the fires below, and torn in pieces the
Account-Books of the last Bar, and dis-thron'd a God above, they will look upon
his Deputies as Fantastic Creatures, because entitled with the same name,
and are called Gods. Psalm 82.6.
It Is no wonder, when men look upon the Resurrection like the sowing of Cadmus
his Teeth, a Poetical Fable, and laugh at or despair of a future state of
happiness, that they manage this life to the best advantage; and to serve their
pleasure or interest, break all the ties of Honor and Duty, which they look
upon as terms of Art or Trade, or Dreams and Fancies of Religious heads; which
will confound all order and security of Mankind, and the world shall have
nothing more of the scales of Justice in it, than that the one goes up, and the
other down, oppressed by greater Power and flyer Interest. The Atheist destroys
that which fitly qualifies Subjects to be truly so: are they expected to be
stout and daring? What will sooner make them so, than to persuade them they
shall survive their body, and wear a Crown? For he only fears to dye, who
knows not how to live, nor what betides him afterward; and Vice or Infidelity
makes in a Coward. Is a faithful secrecy, frugality, thriftiness, sobriety, and
temperance, care and diligence, looked upon as the perfection of a people? These
are the commands and genuine issues of a Religious life. And Patience and
Humility, Obedience and Honor to Superiors, are great and indispensable
Duties in Religion. So that while the man of Wit and Atheism bespatters
Religion, he casts dirt upon Authority. 'Twas the wisdom and goodness of our
Christian Lawgiver, to twist our Temporal convenience, with our eternal
happiness; that when Princes should embrace the Christian Religion, and become
its nursing Fathers, the belief of Immortality should beger more obedient Sons
and Loyal Subjects. Could we suppose the Prince to lay aside his Sword and
other methods of Government, and only like a Philosopher, treat his Subjects
by arguments; the firm belief of Immortality alone, would be sufficient to
command obedience; it being against the common sense of Humane Nature, to be
persuaded of the greatest good, Immortality, yet not to have an influence upon
his mind to guard his actions; and therefore dares not despise Dominion, lest
he forfeits that which he most desires: for Religion has been so careful to
support the Secular arm, as to lay double ties, like St. Paul's bonds, to oblige
the Subject unto Obedience; allowing all earthly power; but to make it
invincible, has added the dread of an omnipotent arm. He therefore that
buffoons with Religion, is rude with Majesty, and is profane, and a Rebel too,
at the same time; and wounds the Authority of Princes, laughing at the mighty
argument of Conscience and Immortality, as much as ever Clement or Ravilliac
did their persons. Vows of Obedience, and Oaths of Fidelity, would be only the
labor of Lips and Lungs, and like common air, for convenience taken in, and
for the same sent out gain; having no other fear upon him, but lest his Perjury
and Treason should become public and unsuccessful. This is the mighty interest
by Christianity; Princes grow stronger, and Subjects safer; that Obedience
shall not be sowr'd into Slavery, nor Liberty swell into Rebellion; the loss of
Immortality, which the Atheist laughs at, and in that at Government, being at
the stake for Prince and people too.

Let us in the next place consider what are the obligations to Duty and Honor
toward our Governors: we shall briefly urge only two.

1. Let us consider what esteem God is pleased to bestow upon them; which are
not purely 1 Pet. 2.13.
(...), Humane Creatures, made only for, and by a mutable convenience, but
indispensable, by reason of men's necessities and imperfections, and created by
God. For though variety of Governments are left to men when free to choose, and
are various according to the Interests and Countries in which they dwell; yet
being once well established, the possessors of them are Gods Vicegerents, they
represent his Person and Authority, and by him Kings Reign; and in this sense,
Prove. 8.15, 16.
all other Governments, as well as that of the Jews, are Theocratical, and have
God for their Supreme, and must only answer unto him. They are arrayed with
such Titles as will command more reverence than all their Purples and Ensigns
of Honor, being called the Deputies of God, Ps. 82.6.2. Chron. 6.42. Deuteronomy.
1.17.1 Sam. 15.23.
and adopted into his Family; entitled by the same name, and called Gods:
their Inauguration is solemn and grave, all circumstances are high and
venerable; and are styled God's Anointed: their judgment and decisions are
God's: Rebellion is branded by the name of Witchcraft, an Apostasy from God or
his Authority; and an eternal doom for its reward, Romans 13.2.
shall receive to themselves damnation. When we despise Dominion therefore, we
spit at Heaven, and appear in Hostility and fight against God; and as much as
in us lies, like unconverted Saul, we persecute him, and the blow touches his
Throne; and for as much as we do it to one of his Governors, as well as
Saints, we do it unto him: yet to keep them humble, they must dye like men; and
to guard their actions, they must be responsible at an higher Bar; and by
reason of their Maladministration, have the Crimes of Cities and Countries
laid unto their charge; and the punishment is as great to the bad, as rewards
to the good. And St. Peter, to strike an awe upon men's minds toward their
Governors, tells them, 'twas the aggravation of these Carpocratians, and their
followers Crime, (...), etc. 2 Pet. 2.10.
That they were bold and contumacious men, and did not tremble when they
blasphemed Dignities: And this Apostle, to set them an excellent President of
Honor and Respect to Governors, tells them, that when the mighty Archangel
Michael, (whose Feast the Church this day celebrates) when contending with the
Devil, and disputing about the body of Moses, (...) v. 9.
would not give him any contumelious words, because he had some power given
him, or permitted by God, and was the Prince of the air, or god of this World.

2. Let us consider what benefit we receive by them: if ease and quiet,
property and security, be the mighty blessings of the world, we owe this to the
Magistrates care and resolution in the execution of Laws, without which, they
would be but imaginary guards and formality. For such are the degenerate minds
of men, that the natural love of God and Virtue, and the Laws of Christianity
(though very apt and fit in themselves) have not that force as gently to
persuade men unto Duty and Obedience; but Swords of Justice and Temporal
punishment must keep the world in awe: and what a strange monster this world
would be, if either no Laws, no Pale of Government was set; or else for want of
guards and keepers, every man might pluck up or leap over at pleasure! it would
be but a second Chaos, or greater Robbery, like the state of the wild Arabs, or
the Banditi; and every one would prey upon his fellow-being. So that the
Magistrate gives life to the dead letter of the Law, and in that gives the
shadow and fruit to our Vines, Titles to our Possessions, security to our
Lives, and is the Castle against our fears and jealousies. Which calls for,
instead of Contempt and Scorn, the highest Esteem and Veneration.

First, from these things considered, let us here lay a particular Charge
against the Church of Rome, who does most eminently despise Dominion, and speak
evil of Dignities; who challenges a right not only to Excommunicate, Depose,
and Kill the Persons of Princes, and Absolve their Subjects from their Duty and
Allegiance, but allows her Champions to rail at, and vilify the Persons and
Powers of Princes, in a most ignominious way, because they will not pay an
absolute Obedience, and submit their Authority to hers: the constitution of
that Church being to put down all Authority and Power, to Rival Kings, to
advance her Priesthood, and make her Bishop a Mighty Prince; who (they say)
like his Lord, is invested with all Power both in Heaven and in Earth, and is
constituted to root up, and to plant; to put on, and kick off the Crowns of
Princes; to dispose of their Royalties and Dominions; to tread upon their
Necks, and lash their Backs; to proclaim their Wars, and conclude their Peace;
to contract or dissolve their Marriages; to press the Prince and the People to
Holy Wars, or his private Quarrels; to play the Herald, and give mighty Titles,
and adjust Precedencies; to Levy Texas, and exempt his Clergy; to interdict a
Land, and legitimate Rebellion, and spurious Children; to dispatch or bind
their Kings in chains, and their Nobles in fetters of Iron; in plain, to show a
great deal of Pride and earthliness, disguised by Spiritual Names and Titles,
to advance the Kingdom of Christ, which he hathh made as Temporal as any. For
though his Master Jesus was humble and mortified, and refused and Earthly
Kingdom offered to him by the Devil and the Jews; yet this frugal servant of
his tells him, he understood not his own Merit and Title, and he ought to look
after his Masters Rights, and not only from the donation of Constantine, and
the bounty of Princes, and such low Titles; but from a power derived to him
from that Universal Monarch, King Jesus, must govern Christendom. Christendom.
Christ told indeed Pontius Pilate, the Procurator of Judea, that his Kingdom
was not of this world; but he had a prudent reservation in the case, so as not
to tell them, because they could not bear it then, and make good use of it; his
Religion was but in its Nonage or Minority, but his Successor should come and
lead them into this mighty Truth, display his Banner, and tell the World and
its petty Princes, that now the Kingdom of God and his Christ was come with
power. In those early days of Christ and his Apostles, Loyalty and Obedience
were mightly Duties to Temporal Princes; but then Christian were few and weak,
(to this purpose their two Cardinals Bellarmine and Allen have spoke:) but the
case is altered, they are now more numerous and strong; and the time is come,
when the fifth Monarchy, surpassing the Grecian and others, must be set up at
Rome. Blessed Jesus! when thou told'st the Judge and the Jews this truth, thou
did it with the greatest sincerity, in the plainest terms, John 18. 36.
that thy Kingdom was not of this World, and would not clash with Secular
Princes; and this was thy open will and pleasure: but thy Infallible Vicar
tells us of a secret will, and private Instructions given to thy Apostles, thy
Privy Council, and thy Successor, that when all things were ripe, and the World
better Disciplined and Tutored, they should set forth their Title, and write
over the Bishop of Rome's Head, This is the mighty King of the Christians; and
make the sturdy Monarchs submit their Necks unto him, by kissing his feet,
holding his stirrup, waiting at his Gates, and other slavish acknowledgments.
For when he pretends to all the forementioned power, what is it but to be the
only Absolute Monarch on Earth, though he wears the Robes of another World?
For the humble and Spiritual Names of Bishop and Pastor, Servant of Servants,
Silver and Gold have I none, the Seal of the Fisherman in Lead, and the like,
turn all into Scene and Laughter, when they are contradicted by the swelling
Titles that their flattering Canonists and others bestow upon him; as, Vide
Fowlis History, p. 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38.
The Lord our God; that he is far above all Principalities and Powers, that
every knee must bow to him both in Heaven and in Earth; that he is Moses by
Authority, Peter by Power, and Christ by Unction: that he is Daystar of
Justice, Arbitrator of all things, Savior of Christians, and Image of
Divinity: that he can dispense with Laws, and against the Apostle: that he is
Spouse of the Universal Church, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: that a priest
excels a King, as much as a man does a Brute: that a Priest is as much better
than a King, as God is better than a Priest: and they are commanded to bow at
the name of the Virgin Mary and the Pope, as well as at the Name of Jesus.
These and many more are the great swelling words which these Carpocratians
vented, v. 16. far beyond what ever the Asiatick Princes in their greatest
Luxury and Pride did ever affect. Is not this plainly to tell the world, that
Conscience is interest, the Altar is the Exchequer, the Church and Court are
the same, and Christianity new policy contrived by Christ, and communicated to
St. Peter and his Successor? Their Casuists, with their nice Distinctions, can
debauch the minds of men into Treason and Murder, Lying and Hypocrisy, and the
lewdest Vices; yet can pass uncersur'd, and sometimes rewarded: yet question
but his power and jurisdiction, which he calls Articles of Faith, the severest
penalty in the Inquistion may be your doom. And therefore very bountifully and
wisely he has sometimes yielded some Articles of his Faith, as the half
Communion and the like, upon condition they would admit of his Power and
Authority; as though the sole design of Christ's coming into this world, was to
lay down new methods of Government; to be a Publican himself (as well as eat
with them) and gather Peter's pence, only to be rich and great. Though some of
Romes Champions are more modest, and assume this power only indirectly, in
ordine ad spiritualia, to serve Religion; yet others more barefaced, challenge
a direct power over Princes, their Territories, places of Trust, and all their
Regalities: yet the other is very comprehensive, and can at pleasure throw off
the Mask, and face to face tell the Sovereign, that all his power in sending
Ambassadors, in striking Leagues, in making his Ministers, and other Actions of
State, must now be devolved on him, for the well-being of Christianity: and the
Prince has little benefit by it, that he is killed by St. Peter's Keys knocked
about his cars, and not his Sword. And such Canons and Constitutions, whatever
the gilded name and Constitutions, whatever the gilded name and pretense is,
are as much of this world, as the Edicts and Acts of Princes. And whereas the
Disciples of Christ were first called Christians at Antioch, they were first
called Matchiavilians at Rome, the Seat of this new Christian Empire.

2. Let this re-mind the Magistrate of a faithful discharge, and our selves of
Duty and Honor toward him; and what more powerful Arguments to do this, than
to bid him consider, who it is he represents; what. blessings he procures to
Mankind, and how he serves himself with infinite rewards, and a public
Character of a good Servant, worthy of his Masters joy? This is the best way to
silence scurrilous tongues, to be as good in Life, as high in Dignity: for an
eminent virtue and clear uprightness lays violence upon men's judgments, and
will push forward a just Character of a faithful Ruler. But if this fail, yet
however, like the Roman Senators when the Barbarians should enter Rome, they
put on their Senatorian Robes, and Curulibus sellis sese posuerunt, ut cum
venisset hostis in sua dignitate morerentur; and placed themselves in their
Chairs, that if this sight would not procure respect, yet like men of honor
and justice, at least they might dye in their Dignities. This is the design of
all the powers and abilities that nature has enricht men withal, to serve
their fellow-beings, and make an universal spirit for the good of all mankind.
He that reaches at dignity, the better only to drive on some petty pleasure,
or suck in vulgar air; acts like Domitian, makes it an Empire to hunt and kill
a fly. He that courts Power only for an opportunity to return some injuries,
and serve his spleon, does blasphemously praise the Deity, whose Deputy he is,
that he has given him an occasion like a monster of nature only to poison and
kill. He that begs the place only for the splendor of it, like young Phaeton
-- Currus miratur habenas, admiring the gilded reins of Government, yet putting
the world on fire; of serves only his private interest, and like a dark
Lanthorn, only shines to himself; abuses his mighty Office, heightens his own
account, to be called a god, and do less than man. But to the good Governors
our esteem ought to be as high as their places are; not weighing their worth by
rigorous proportions, but charitable allowances for the circumstances they are
in: it is but a common grace we owe to the errors of all Mankind; but a more
peculiar debt of Charity we owe to our Superiors, whose ways of conversation
and place, expose them to keener temptations, and more fierce assaults, which
may make them yield sometimes. But instead of prudent concealment, and casting
in the grains of charity and favorable Comments upon the Lives and Actions of
our Governors, we swell indifferent actions into errors, every slip and
infirmity we grime for a mortal sin, and single sins we change into habits; and
these must needs pull down the person and his dignity too. As though that Head
had only right to wear a Crown, whose Life was as clear as the Jewels of it;
or as though he might not be an ill man, and yet a good Governor; or that
Principalities, like Estates of Idiots for want of Wit, could be begged for
want of Grace. We scan the words and actions of our Superiors; we anatomize
their thoughts and designs; and the spots of their Lives, like those of the
Moon, by the glasses of our censorious fancies, we swell into Mountains, to
serve our reputation, our party, or our spleen; representing Beelzebub, that
Prince of flies, that feasts on sores, and is pleased with the errors and
infirmities of men. Such men are uncertain too, dealing with their Rulers as
the rabble with Sejanus, or the Barbarians with St. Paul, with their curses and
their flatteries, making no middle between a Murderer and a god: far unlike
that first Christian Emperor, who would dis-robe himself, to cover the errors
of a Spiritual Father.

And now what can I recommend more seasonably, that unity among your selves, to
serve the ends of your Choice and Government, and Religion too? Division among
the ancient Germans gave an easy Victory to the Roman Army: Dum singuli
pugnant, vincuntur omnes. Our Enemies greatest Policy is, to divide us: let not
us execute our Enemies Councels, and be fighting among our selves, about the
Bells and Pomegranats of the Temple, when others are undermining the very
Foundation; or about the fringes of our Garments, when the Enemies Dagger is at
our breasts. Common dangers ought to unite us, -- jam Caesar mitte canes: When
the Stags are fighting among themselves, it may be kindness in Caesar to throw
off his dogs upon them. Providence many times makes a Foreign Enemy to appear,
to reconcile discords at home: and now the Roman Eagle is upon the wing, the
separated chickens ought to run back to the wing of their Mother Church. 'Twas
said: of the two brave Athenians, Themistocles and Aristides, that though they
had great misunderstanding at home, yet when they went upon any Foreign
Expedition, or Warlike design for their Country, inimicitiam it finibus
patriae deposuerunt, they left their private quarrels behind them. This would
be the way to secure King and Country, Church and State, Religion and Property;
that sitting safely with our Lives and Liberties under our own Vines, we might
merrily sing our praises to the Lamb, and him that sits upon the Throne;
ascribing all Power, Might, Majesty, and Dominion, both now and for evermore.
Amen.

FINIS.

