A SERMON PREACHED Upon the Fifth of November, 1678. AT St. CLEMENTS Danes.

By GREGORY HASCARD, D. D. Rector of the said Church and one of his Majesty's
Chaplains in ordinary.

IMPRIMATUR

Jan. 22.1678. Guil. Jane.



LONDON, Printed by S. and B. G. for William Crook at the Sign of the Green
Dragon without Temple Bar, 1679.

To the Right Honorable JOHN Earl of Exeter, my Noble Lord and Patron.
MY LORD,
I Am very sensible how much unworthy this following Discourse is of your
Lordships judgment, which nature made quick and solid; and Books and studies
have advanced: yet however, being earnestly importuned, by some Friends of
considerable Rank and Quality, to expose it to common view, and thinking this
might be a fit opportunity publicly to acknowledge that mighty favor, which
your Lordship was pleased so generously to give, I have ventured to inscribe it
to your Lordships name, choosing rather to undergo many censures upon it than
miss one occasion to evidence to the world how much I stand obliged to your
Lordships goodness, for what I there enjoy, where this was preached, I own to
your Lordships Tule and undoubted Patronage, and my obligation swells the
higher, being involved in that common debt, which the whole Nation owes to your
Lordships Family, one of which was so happy an instrument in discovering this
bloody Plot, and twould be hard for your Great and Noble Family to bear the
brand, that some bot headed Romanists have set, calling this Plot only Cecils
contrivance, and for those that reaped the benefit not to acknowledge the
loyalty and good service of a Cecil done to Church and State, and therefore
upon these and many more accounts with all gratitude and honor I shall ever
indeavonr to express my self,

Your Lordships most Humble and most obliged Servant. GREGORY HASCARD.

A SERMON PREACHED Upon the Fifth of November.
Psalm. 124. Ver. 7. The Snare is broken and we are escaped.
WHether this Psalm is only Prophetical, and respects the future Calamities of
the Jewish Church, and her Deliverances by Divine Providence, as the Babylonish
Captivity, and the Persecution of Antiochus: Or whether it is only Gratulatory
and expressive, of the Delivery and escape from the intended Bondage and Misery
threatened by the Philistin and Idumean Armies, and other neighboring Nations;
which often made their invasions into the Jewish Kingdom: Or whether the Royal
Psalmist sings in his public or private Captivity, for Mercies conferred upon
his single self, or else his People, or Government. Or whether it be a mixed
Song, Divine Writ frequently carrying a double force and sense; looking back
upon things or favors past and gone, and forwards, as Types and Presidents, to
prefigurate things to come. I find the Learned divided among themselves, and
it is not very material to determine, who has the exactest truth on his side:
It serving the Interest of the Christian Church, that it is a lively
description of a rageing Enemy under the shape and figure of a ravenous and
devouring Beast. Ver. 3. His number, force, and violence is pointed out under
the Emblem of a torrent, deluge, or inundation. Ver. 4. The danger, subtlety
contrived and laid, undiscovered as yet; and slyly carried on, set down, Ver.
7. in the former part. But the unsuccessefulness and defeat of all these
approaching dangers and calamities, by the vigilant and tender eye of
Providence, in the later part, The Snare is broken, and we are escaped.

Two things are considerable in these words.

1. The imminent danger and misery the Church was in, by the plots and
machinations of Wicked men, 2. Her miraculous and providential deliverance.
What was then the condition of the Jewish, as tho it was a type or prediction,
is now the State of a Christian Church; the Danger and the Enemy, the
Providence and Deliverance very much alike in Features and Complexion: The
truth and certainty of this bloody Treason is so well known and confirmed, that
none besides a Romish Zealot, that has pawned all his Faith upon the pretended
infallible Chair, or which is as good, the doting Legends of their Saints, can
have the brow and confidence to call it in question. This traitorous Design
being evidenced from the judgment of Great and Impartial Men, who from an
obscure Light, a dark Letter to my Lord Mounteagle, made it as clear as the
Noon Sun, to the satisfaction of King, Lords, and Commons, which caused the
consequent Acts of Parliament to call it an Hellish Conspiracy, not only of the
Jesuits, but Seminary Priests, from the Confession of the Principal Actors, the
Evidences product, at their Arraignment, the acknowledgement of Romanists
themselves; one whereof, the judicious and sincere Historian Thuanus, has
wrote the History of it, that we may safely say, it is more fairly proved, than
many Articles of faith in the Church of Rome, it is the art and cunning of that
Church to keep their bloody Principles of assassinating Kings, and murdering
their heretical Subjects, secret and close, till some fair opportunity calls
them out for public use, and condemns the design and attempt, if not
prosperous; and disavows it to the ignorant Vulgar, and the unsanctified ears
of Heretics, tho she applauds it in conclaves and Cloisters. But when Leo 10.
to Cardinal Bembo his secretary.
one of their infallible Bishops called the Gospel, that Fable of Christ, And
Luther and Beza by them must be affirmed to have died Roman Catholics; and
that Dr. Prideaux's Praelection devisibilitate Ecclesia.
Junius was cloven footed like an Ox, Providence having set mark of Schism upon
him: And Sir Edw. Sands Spec. Europ.
that all English men, by the excommunication that they are under, had
contracted Atrorem Diabolicum, an hellish Balckness, and have contrived such
fine Stories for the sake of their Vulgar, and more ignorant Proselytes; who
must know no more than their wise Guides will give them leave: We may allow
them to call this Conspiracy a Puritan Plot, the Statecraft of Cecil, or what
they please. It Is not our business now to prove there is such a place as Rome,
or the truth of this barbarous attempt, we shall only consider it in such
circumstances, as may advance the Providence and Goodness of God, and tune our
praises and gratitude for it: the end of this days celebration.

1. The cruelty of the designed Fact. Had the British Church been Heretical or
Schismatical, had she swer'd from the Christian Faith into the Mohammedan, or
renounced her baptismal Vows, and degenerated into the Pagan superstition or
idolatry; is this the way to cement the breach and difference? are these proper
methods to confute Errors? is this the only wholesome counsel and reason to
renew our repentance, and make us Christians once again? is to murder and
kill, to convert? is to be baptized in blood, to destroy our bodies, to bring
our souls to Christ? Such ways for Conversion were utterly unknown, and never
thought of by Saint Peter, and the first Planters of the Christian Faith, and
are highly unsuitable to, and unworthy of Christ and his Religion, which became
victorious, and spread over the World, not by frauds or cruelty, but by
miracles and argument, by patience, susferings, and the innocence of its
Teachers and Disciples: And therefore its Author, Jesus, tho solicited by his
Disciples, to call down, like Elias, fire from heaven (according to his mighty
power) to destroy his fiercest Adversaries, the greatest obstacle to the
propagation of his Religion, rebukes and corrects them, and tells them, They
knew not of what Spirit they were of, and that this temper was Ignorance and
Fury, and not true Zeal and Faith; and therefore he would never in his greatest
straits and miseries, call down the Angels from above to his guard and
assistance, or like his Type Moses, turn the Rivers into streams of blood, but
still continued delivering his Fathers Will, in safe and gentle methods, with
prayers for, and compassion upon his Persecuters, resigning up his Soul into
the hands of him that judges right: For the sake of Christianity and the peace
of Christendom, all good men wish, that his pretended Successor at Rome was
heir to, and possessed this gentle and easy temper, as well as aimed at his
power and jurisdiction. But alas! to the scandal of Christianity, if we search
into the Records of Time, and turn over the History of all Ages, and read the
barbarous usages of the Pagan World, we can either equal or over act them in
the butcheries and Massacres of the Romish Church, that pretended mild and holy
Mother: so numerous are the files of Martyrs, that have died under their bloody
hands, that we can reckon them by as large numbers as St. John does his
Catalogue of sealed Saints, Rev. 7.5.
of the Tribe of Judah twelve housand. For so the Historians tell us, that in
the French Massacre in the space of three Months, an hundred thousand were
slain, by the instigation of the tender Vicar of Christ, Dr. More in his Divine
Dialogues out of Vigerius and Peyonius.
and the most Christian King of France. Murdered of the Albigenses and
Waldenses ten hundred thousand. Killed in the Duke of Alva's persecution thirty
six thousand: and in the holy Inquisition in the space of thirty years, an
hundred and fifty thousand, and what should I tell you of the times of Pope
Julius, and our own Marian days; of the Spanish cruelty to the poor Americans,
or the bloody persecution in Ireland, wherein an hundred thousand Protestants
were murdered by Papish hands. What Kingdom or People have not felt their
slaughtering principles, either by open violence, or secret poisoning, or
stabing? and this days brave attempt surpasses all the great exploits of all
their bloody Predecessors: and every where so many have been, and are their
cruelties, that that good Author, Mr. Mede, observes, that Papal persecutions
do equalize or exceed the ten famous persecutions of the Pagan Emperors:
Here Is the litteral Successer of Saint Peter, and out writes the Copy, arise
Peter kill and eat; and when they have spoke the Prologue by the murder of a
worthy Person in order to as deep a Tragedy as this, our indignation must
assign the Roman Bishops another Predecessor, his great Sire Romulus, Fraterno
primi maduerunt sanguine muri.
who laid the Walls of Rome in his Brothers blood; as tho Rome Pagans cruelties
were all entailed, and ran in the blood of Rome Christian, and are now become
so natural to her, being established by her Canons and Constitutions, that we
must sooner expect an instrument out of a Cutlers Shop, than arguments out of a
Jesuits College for our conversion, giving us no other effect of her power of
Miracles, but that she would this day have turned our Rivers into blood; not
remembering the wise mercy of that God, they say they adore, who when he
revenged the sins of Sodom in showers of fire and brimstome, was careful least
the Righteous should be swept away in the deluge: But here Prince and People,
good and bad. History of the Powder Plot. page 9.
Some Romanists and the Reformed, must all promiscuously fall by one common
blow, to be Pattern and President hereafter of learned Cruelty, that they dared
to act what others seared to think.

2. The Policy by which this Conspiracy was carried on, 'Twas called a snare in
the Psalmists time, and so it may be justly now: Naked Truth and Integrity are
powerful and successful by their native arguments and internal virtue; his
villiany and baseness, which call for stratagems and deceits, and live and
thrive by political frauds. When Rome her self was to be baptized into
Christianity, only the reason and Miracles of her great Apostles, their
plainness and integrity, their constancy and resolution under persecution made
the way, and caused the mighty Change and Conversion; but when she her self is
to reclaim only the errors of a dissenting Sister, Conclaves and Cabals, the
State-craft of all their Fraternities and Orders, the subtlety of all their
Emissaries must combine together to carry on this black design: How strangely
is Primitive Christianity among them that pretend to be its greatest Champions
and Admirers, degenerated from its first simplicity and open innocence into
fraud and violence, inquisitions and disguises; cunning and artifice is their
faith and piety, and the Court and Ceremony their Church, and their Bishop
instead of universal Pastor merits better the title of Stateholder; their
Discipline and Cannons, their Articles of faith and Rules of manners, are
coined and framed to serve their power and Interest; and Mysteries of
Christianity are changed and become only secrets of the Papal Empire; the
design of their counsels and determinations are not to better and amend the
lives of men, but to sway and govern Christendom. Good old Laws are relaxt,
and new ones, called fundamental, cast, to raise a portion for a Niece, or to
enrich a Cardinal Patron, and their Exchecquer brought into the Temple, and
called the holy of holies; that, what their Predecessors got by fraud, they
might still keep by the same method; the dreams and visions, the ecstasies and
raptures, the miracles, and revelations, and other pious frauds, used and
countenanced by the Church of Rome (who calls her self the only spouse of
Christ) to drive on their secular interest, makes the Atheistical world
conclude, that Jesus himself was only a great imposter, and joined with his
Privy Council, the twelve Apostles, only designed to set up a new government,
or only to lay us down some rules to trade by, and the chief factory should be
at Rome, a good School to teach men only policy and cuning; and for an instance
of their policy, which they call the Spirit of God, take the time for the
election of Romes High Priest, when they pretend the Spirit of God, is as
familiarly presiding, and as fully operating, as upon the day of Pentecost, or
baptism of the blessed Jesus, yet so wide are their differences, so clamorous
their factions, their buying of voices, their seting up stales, their tearing
of scrutinies, their long disagreement (as from the death of Clement the
fourth, two years and more) and other sly methods, that you may say of them,
as an old Cardinal did, you must uncover the roof of the house (so little room
is left among them) for the holy Ghost to come upon them. And their famous
Tridentine Council, was a better demonstration of their cunning than their
faith, and integerity, wherein they fancy the Spirit of God guided their pens,
influenced their heads, and moved their hearts, he being totus in toto, and
inqualibet part, and sent every day ( Hist. of the Counc. of Trent. page 497.
as some then merrily said) from Rome in a cloak-bag thither; yet beside the
lewdness of their definitions and decrees, so many were their wily methods, and
their laborious arts, that the Recorder of Florence, or Caesar Borgia, seemed
rather to keep the Chair than the Spirit of God, and little of good Saint Peter
among them, beside his Nets to draw some less discerning men into the fashion
of their Religion, and therefore more eminent was Divine Providence, that
discovered all these sly and subtle Serpents, that took them in their crasty
wilyness, defeated their Counsels, and made them perish by their own designs.

3. The Loss that would have followed had this design taken effect: Which is
twofold.

1. Of the Lives and Blood of so many. 2. Of Religion.
1. Of the Lives and Blood of so many. To secure the peace and quiet of this
Nation, and to fix Religion safe from its underminers, the Great Assembly
meets, a learned and wise King (the Prince also, by them in the beginning of
their Plot, concluded to be present) Nobility and Commons with their large
Train and Attendants, the Flower and strength of the Nation, the Church and
State engrost, and enhous'd together, with their good design, stately
buildings, and a Race of Kings sleeping in their Tombs, must by these
Conspirators, be made an whole burnt Sacrifice, and offered up to Rome
ambition, and by one blow surpass, what ever Plague or Pamine, War or common
Mortality, in many years could bring to pass; and these would not have fallen
alone, but Laws and Liberties, Charters and Privileges would have died
together, and have been buried in one common ruin: and all our peaceand
freedom would have ended in Gibbets and Inquisitions, Torments and heavy
Burdens, and betrayed into a Papal Bondage: And this Land, that was never
completely overcome by all the Legions and Armies of their Pagan Emperors in
the space of so many years, in a moments time, might have been conquered by
Romes High Priest. History of the Powder Plot out of Thuanus, page 5.
For so Catesby (as my Historian tells me) thought it not enough, that this, or
that, or any single Person, should be aimed at, but that all together, and at
the same time should be comprehended in this Conspiracy. For so he reasoned
with himself, The King himself might many ways be taken away, but this would
be nothing as long as the Prince and the Duke of York were alive: Again, if
they were removed, yet this would advantage nothing, so long as there remained
a Parliament, so vigilant, so circumspect to whatever might happen: Or if the
Parliament, or the Chief Members of it, could be destroyed, there would remain
still the Peers of the Realm, so many prudent Persons, so many powerful Earls,
addicted to that Party, whom they would hardly resist, and who by their
Authority, Wealth, and Dependants would be able, if occasion should be, to
restore things to their former state; therefore not by delays but at one blow,
all were to be swallowed up, and so laudable an achievement was to be brought
to effect altogether and at once. Thus did the Roman Eagle stoop to her prey,
and the whole Land was got within her pounces, but, thanks be to God, who has
not given us as a prey to their teeth.

2. The Loss of Religion.

1. What might have been, had this Treason been successful. Had this Train of
Powder and Designs been prosperous, what a dismal choice had been proposed, to
change you Religion, or to embrace a Stake, to violate your Faith and
Consciscience for the Romish Creed, or else Lives and Liberties, Fortunes and
all the Endowments of Life must be sacrificed; to Recant your Vows and sacred
Oaths, or else to expect a perpetual Prison or a Flame, to suffer or comply, to
have a Wrack either in Body or in Mind. Such hard proposals should have been
the conditions of your Peace, and a severe contract it would have been to
change the Religion of our Church, which we have Arguments and Reasons
sufficient to confirm us, is pure, Primitive and Apostolical, into a Faith,
that is but a Modern Contrivance and Innovation, begun by interest, made up of
Fopperies and Falsehood, and carried on by Fraud and Violence. Such a Religion
you must have had, which makes absurdities, Blasphemies and Contradictions
Articles of Faith, teaching you how by virtue of Transubstantiation, you may
admire the glorified Body of your Savior above, yet mangle it, adore, and
devour it, at the same time here below, you should have been taught to make
your Prayers and Addresses unto God in an unknown Tongue, whereby the dead,
that sleep in the Tombs and Monuments of the Church, might have as good
Devotion as the living in it, or if they understood any part of their Devotion,
the work barely done, the nimbleness of their Lips and Fingers must satisfy
for Zeal and intention of mind: you should have been taught, that, though you
die with a load of sins, not thoroughly repented of and satisfied for, yet your
kind Mother of Rome has provided an intermediate place between Hell and you, a
second venture from whence, by a Deputy Friend, a good Purse, and a kind
Priest, you may be discharged, and be Crowned a Saint in that Church. You must
be content only to Communicate in one kind, and be glad of the bread alone,
for the dainty reason of the Lay man's beards, and the nice distinction of
concomitance, yet point blank against your Saviors institution. you must have
been in that Church (notwithstanding the Thunder and Lightning upon Mount
Sinai, to show their indispensible nature, when the Ten Commandments were
delivered) will afford you Nine only; or at least, use Art to conceal the
Second, because it Glares too much upon their Adoration of Images, and
Invocation of Saints; and the Curious Distinctions of their Schools and
Casuists have eluded the force of all the rest. Such Priests, such Temples,
such Devotions you must have had, so gay, so foppish, so full of Antic
Postures, Scenes and Ceremonies, that you will find little difference between
Old Rome's Theaters, and New Rome's Churches. Such a Religion is the Romish,
which Magnifies Christ in Hymns and Songs, Gestures, and other lighter
Services; yet Rivals him in his particular Power and Prerogative, in Adoring
and Invoking Saints, some of which, while on Earth, were Vicious, and now we
know not where they dwell; and others justly suspected, if ever they were in
Being. The jolly Sinner in that Church needs not despair of his Salvation for
want of Sincere Repentance, while Artificial Sighs and Customary Confessions,
Pilgrimages and gentle Whippings, Pardons and Indulgences so easily obtained by
privileged Altars, Agnus Dei's, hallowed Swords, Roses, Hats, Churchyards, and
other pretty Knacks and Devices; while a little Dole to the Poor, and more to
the Priests, for a lusty Absolution upon Attrition, and other faint
Compositions with God, and Bribes for Divine Justice will serve the turn. Such
a Church you should have been in, who, notwithstanding her Pretenses to
Infallibility, can give her Members no sufficient Assurance to judge by,
whether they shall be saved or no; not only from their known way of Arguing,
called Circle, proving the Scriptures from their Church, and their Church again
from the Scriptures, but from the Doctrine of Intention Dianae Compend. p. 36.
, (which is an Article of Faith at Rome) that if the Priest do not really
Intend to do, what he outwardly pretends to do, all his Performance is
Ineffectual; and this perverse Intention of the Priest is not to be supplied by
God himself, Ibid.
says one of their Casuists, and that the Priest may be so perverse as not to
Intend. Escobar Tract. 7. Examine. 6. Number. 41. p. 867.
Another of their Doctors does suppose, and states the Case where it may be
allowed; so that though you be Baptized, Communicated, and Absolved, (things
absolutely necessary to Salvation by their Confession,) yet you cannot
certainly judge whether you shall be saved, except you have the privilege of
God, and know the Heart and Intentions of your Priest. Such a Religion you must
have professed, whose chiefest Doctors and Guides of Conscience teach men to
break all the Ties and Ligaments of Humane Society and Conversation, telling
their Disciples that Faith is not to be kept with Heretics; directing them how
to Lie Artificially, to Equivocate and Forswear, to Cheat in Bargaining, to
baffle Contracts, to exempt their Priests, though Guilty of Treason, from the
Secular Judge; and before an Ecclesiastical one it is very difficult to Convict
them, their For a Cardinal 72. for a Bishop 64. See Diana Compend. p. 85.
Witnesses must be so many. These Guides teach Subjects to Rebel and Murder,
Children to be Disobedient, Servants Unfaithful; by which, and many other
lewder Doctrines, Skinned over by nice Distinctions, by which they instruct
their Proselytes only more Learnedly to sin; they would make the World only a
greater Robery, and reduce it to its Ancient For these and much more of the
same nature, see the Casuistical Writers of the Church of Rome, as Sanchez,
Azorius, Lessius, etc.
Chaos. In short, such a Religion the Bishops of Rome would have fore'd you
into, whose Faith is False and Erroneous; the Rules of Manners laid down by
many of her Penitentiaries and great Doctors persuading and countenancing Vice
and Debauchery; her Devotions Childish and gay, and propagated by Fraud and
Cruelty. Taking therefore this short view of the Romish Way, and being fully
persuaded that we are Baptized into this Church of England, whose Faith is
Primitive, Pure, and Apostolical, her Rules for Manners only leading to Virtue
and Goodness, her Discipline wholesome and proper, and her Devotions decent and
Manly; let us stick fast unto her, Prove. 24.21.
and take Solomon's Advice, My Son, Fear thou the Lord and the King, but meddle
not with them that are given to change.

2. What Religion has lost, though the Design was Unsuccessful, yet the
Attempt makes the Crime Scandalous and Horrid, and Detestable by all Mankind.
Christianity by the intended Blow lies a Bleeding: Tell it not in Gath, publish
it not in Askelon. When the Uncircumcised, the Pagan Emperors and Mohammedan
Princes shall hear of such Barbarous Attempts upon the Persons of Princes, such
Bloody Villainies and Massacres upon their Subjects, and That by her that Arrays
her self with the fine Names of the only Catholic, Apostolical, Infallible,
most Holy, and only Christian Church; and Perjuries and Murders, Rebellion and
Disloyalty are defended by the Nice Doctrines of their Schools, will they not
conclude in Disdain: Here Is the Principles of a Christian, these Spring from
their Bibles, these are the Doctrines and Precepts of their Commander and
Master, Jesus? Are these the tame Lambs and Doves of Christianity? Are these
they that fear Damnation for Rebellion? Are these the gentle Martyrs for
Honesty and Peace, for Conscience and Obedience? Are these the meek Servants of
the Bishop of Rome, that calls himself the Servant of Servants? Christians!
Away with them to the Lions and Fires again. Let us invade their Territories,
set up our Alcoran for their Bibles, and our Mahomet for their Christ, against
whom we dare not Rebel, lest we forfeit that Luxurious Paradise. The Bloody
Doctrines and Rebellious Practices of the Infallible Chair has stained more
the Beauty of Religion, and stopped its progress and Victories over the
Superstitions and Idolatries of the Gentile World, and lost more Proselytes,
than ever their busy Emissaries, their Christaviers and other zealous Planters
have Converted and obtained. Will not an Indian Prince be afraid of embracing
the Christian Religion, lest he lose his own Dominions, Life, and his Paternal
Religion too, at the same time, which he now holds by a surer Tenure? Is it not
a clear Argument and demonstration to the Chinesian Emperor to renounce his
Idolatry, and be Baptized Christian, when he shall read how Henry the Fourth
and Frederick the First (as one observes) fought threescore Battles more than
Julius Caesar, stirred up by the Peaceable Popes of Rome? Is it not a fair
persuasion for all Princes to become Christians, when they shall hear of the
Deprivations and Excommunications, and that unlimited Power of the Romish
Priest, in disposing Crowns and Sceptres, upon the pretense of Profuseness or
Breach of Faith, for Perjury or Magic, for Sacrilege or Heresy, for Schism,
or Violence to a Cardinal, and for many other Causes laid down by their
flattering Casuists, or for almost any thing, when his Holiness is out of
Humor? and they give us a President of Childerick, who was deprived from being
King of France, because he was a little easy natured, not given to Action, nor
so wise as his Neighbors, whereby he was unfit for Rule; Fowlis Hist, p. 113.
though Benedict the Ninth at Twelve years of Age was made Vicar of Christ, and
his little Holiness was as Infallible as the best of them, and fitter for the
Rattles of their Devotions than any. When they shall read of that Jolly Pope
Sixtus Quintus Excommunicating Elizabeth of England, and publishing a Croisada
against her, and Henry the Third of France; of Gregory the Fourteenth,
Excommunicating and Damning Henry the 4th, renewed by Clement the Eighth; and
the turbulent carriage of Paul the Fifth, in the Reign of King James; and
thence (as a good Author notes) as it is natural consequence, this Black
Conspiracy came; for seldom was the Thunder of Excommunication discharged, but
a Shower of Blood followed. When Adrian the Fourth shall chide Frederick
Barbarossa the Emperor, for holdin the Stirrup wrong, and tread upon his Neck,
adding Profaneness to his Insolency, in applying the Prophecy belonging to
Christ, Psalm. 9
Thou shall go upon the Lion and Adder, the youg Lion and the Dragon shall thou
tread under thy feet: Fowlis Hist. 252.
When they shall read how Callistus the Second had William the Great Duke of
Apulia as his Foot Boy, how Celestime the Third put on, and kicked off again in
Disdain the Emperor Henry the Sixth his Crown: When the Pagan Princes shall
read of King John resigning his Crown upon his knees to Pandulphus the Pope's
Legate, and of the Canonizing of Thomas a Becket, that Insolent, Saucy, and
Rebellious Saint; and invoking of his Blood as meritorious: and the whipping
his Prince and Master Henry the Second by the Monks of Canterbury; and that
Champian and Garnet for Rebellion and Treason should justly forfeit their Lives
here in England, and yet be reputed Martyrs, and have Glories about their Heads
at Rome: that these can be the Methods to make Kings the Nursing Fathers, and
Queens the Nursing Mothers of the Church? Will it not make them believe that
Christianity spread, and became Victorious, not by Patience, Goodness, and
Martyrdom, but by Falsehood and Invasions, Murders and Powerful Armies? No
Sect of Christians have made True Religion more give ground, than those of the
Romish Communion, who engross Christianity, and all the World are Heretics and
Pagans but themselves. Their Adoration of Images are a Scandal and Offense unto
the Jew, whose Law is so rigorous and strait against them; and their Doctrine
of Transubstantiation is made up of so many Contradictions and Blasphemies,
that it made the Arabian Philosopher Averroes say, Terrarum Orbem peragrando
nullam Religionem Christiana deteriorem inveni, quae ipsum Deum quem tollit
devorat; in all my travels I have found no sort of Religion worse than the
Christians, which Devoures that God it pretends to adore; and their many other
soft and delicious Doctrines, have caused the Christian World to degenerate
into Atheistical and Vicious Lives; and to conclude Christianity is nothing
else but a Politic Maxim, to reduce Fools and Madmen and credulous Subjects
into awe. Thus was this Church and State struck at, but Christianity felt the
Blow; and while St. Peter's Sucessor draws his Sword, pretending to defend his
Savior, and propagate his Religion, his Master receives the Wound, and he
Crucifies the Lord of Life again, and puts Religion to an open shame.

Lastly, the opportunity God took for this Deliverance. Just when the Snare,
and these Conspirators were ready; just when these proud Waves, our Enemies, in
a violent Torrent were all coming, and this horrid Monster was begotten, grown,
and thriven in the teeming Womb, and ready to be brought forch; Divine
Providence interposeth, strangleth it in its Birch, to the rain of its Parent.
the Deity permits the Designs of Satan and his black Confederates to blossom
and to grow, and through all the Intrigues and mysterious turnings of State and
Policy, to arrive at their full maturity; then the Invincible Hand is stretched
out, and crops them, to display his Omnipotent Arm more, to make his Presence
and his Wisdom more sought for and reverenced, and to be stronger Arguments
for a grateful Mind. When the Trains and Methods of Tyrants and malicious Men
are so well contrived and laid, that their Passions begin to swell, and their
hopes are brisk and smiling, and nothing but Victories and Praise, Triumphs and
Success do-rove with-within their Fancy, an unexpected Providence stops them in
their full Cariere, blasts their hopeful Spring, and all ends in a Dream. The
Tyrant waxes pale, and mourns, curses his Confederates, perhaps that Machiavel
below, that he and they are not Stronger than Omnipotence, and more Politic
than the All-wise. When wicked Designs are in the Egg, they may be crushed and
prevented by the slow and dull Methods of Humane Wisdom, an easy hand; but
when they hatch into a Serpent or Basilisk, breathing out nothing but Death,
and Poison, and Despair, and Paleness sits on every Brow, this Danger calls for
an Infallible Eye, and Omnipotent Arm for its Deliverer: Extremity, and the
utmost minute of Cure, are the Seasons for Divine Mercy: When Hezekiab's wound
is become Incurable, when St. Peter and his Church begin to sink; when
Sennacherib's Regiments encompass and shut up Ferusalem, when Counsels and
Armies fail, and the Secular Arm does shrink, and nothing but a Wonder can
prevent Despair; a Provident Eye looks down from above, Defeats the Enemy, and
Crowns the Day with Victory and Success. Thus did Englands Church and State
both lie like Isaak upon the pyle, the Flame and Conspirators are ready for the
Bloody Sacrifice; but an Angel thrusts his hand through the Cloud, a Bird of
the Air tells the matter, and a Ram is caught by his Horns in the Thicket; the
Conspirators are their own Ruin, and now the cause of our Joy and Triumph,
which leads to the last, part, We are delivered: which commands us these two
Duties.

First, A Faithful Remembrance of this Mercy of God.

Secondly a future Dependence upon Providence.

First, A Faithful Remembrance of this Mercy of God. This is all the return we
can make for Divine Favors, passionately to resent and commemorate them. But
alas! Good deeds, though the Condition is so cheap, do dye like Men, and are
buried in the Grave of Oblivion, and have seldom a Resurrection in the mind of
the Receivers, thinking it meanness to make an acknowledgment that they are
obliged to God himself. He therefore well foresaw how soon his Miracles and
Wonders in Egypt would be forgotten, or attributed to Foreign Deities; He
therefore commanded Aaron's Rod Numb. 17.10.
and Exodus 16.33. Josh. 4.7.
the Pot of Manna to be laid up, and Stones to be erected at the passing of
Jordan, to be constant and standing Monitors to the descending Generations, of
the Power and Bounty of God to their Forefathers; and our Savior had regard to
the treacherous Memories of Mankind, when he commanded the frequent
Commemorations of his Death and Passion, lest that grand Attchievement should
slip out of the minds of men; so difficult it is for Sinners and Ungrateful men
to record a Favor. The Pagans Adorned their Temples with their (...), the
Spoils of their Battles and Victories, in Honor and Memory of the Assistant
Deity: and the Sailers having escaped a shipwreck, hung up their Vestes Votivas
unto Neptune, to record the favor of the Sea-god. We tell the long stories of
our Sorrows to the Neighborhood, we proclaim our griefs like Jeremy, All you
that pass by, is there any sorrow like to my sorrow? or any grief like to my
grief? We pen down the black days, write the Effects of a devouring Flame, or
Pestilence, Judgments upon Marble or Cedar with the Pen of a Diamond, we tell
them to our Children, O passi graviora! and entail them upon Posterity; but for
Mercies and Favors, we cry not with the Psalmist, Come and see what God has
done for my Soul; we hush them in Silence, we Degrade and Vilify them, to
Advance, our own Wisdom and Power, and say of them as Nebuchadnezzar of his
Babylon, Is not this great Babylon that I have built for my Honor and Renown?
Injuries and Affronts we write down in indelible characters, the Persons, and
Time, and all the aggravating Circumstances are ever fresh and green. -- manet
alta mente repostum Judicium Paridis -- and never laid aside but upon a
Sacramental day, and taken up the next. Though our Memories for Benefirs at
first may be fresh and brisk, yet the sudden Flame of Joy at length changes
its ruddy Complexion, grows pale, and ends in Ashes, and is blown away. And
this day began to lose its Solemnity, had it not been revived by the New
Traitorous Designs and Contrivances of the same sort of bloody men. Hist, of
the Powder Plot. p. 7.
And if these bold Conspirators, having found the Cellar for their Design,
directly under the Royal Throne, did seem to persuade themselves from that
Accident, that God by a secret Conduct did favor the Attempt, we may now
justly turn Providence upon them, and in this strange Deliverance acknowledge
the hand of God; in a true Remembrance therefore of this great Deliverance, the
Knife being taken from our Throat, the Flame quenched the Snare broken, and the
Tempest calmed, and the Church and State, and every private Person riding at an
Anchor in a quiet Haven, let us acknowledge our mighty Benefactour with our
Psalmist, and say, Our help is in the Name of the Lord who has made Heaven and
Earth.

Secondly, A Dependence upon future Providence. 1 Samuel 7.12.
Hitherto (said the good man) has the Lord helped us; he is god for ever, and
changes not, and his hand is stretched out still. The Familiars of Rome, which
haunt the Courts and Palaces of Princes, like the Devil in the Gospel,
sometimes attempted to cast us into the Water, by the Spanish Armado; sometimes
into the Fire, by this Conspiracy; and sometimes by Civil Wars and Rebellion
(riding another sort of Men) they rent and tore us till we foamed again. See
the Book called the grand Design of Papists in the Reign of Charles the First.
But Providence that commands the Waves and Flames, kept us secure, disposses'd
the Fiend, and we are in our Wits again, and under our own Vines of Peace and
Safety. And though the ejected Spirit thinks to return again, and make our last
Condition worse than our first; yet we doubt not (if our Prayers and just Zeal
be not wanting) that Providence will put a stop to him, and say to him as he
does to these proud Waters, the swelling Billows of the Ocean, So far shall ye
go, and no farther; for think not that your Savior is enthroned above only to
hear the Hallelujahs of Saints, and enjoy his Triumphs, and listens not to the
cries and groans of his Distressed Members here. He watches still, discovers
their Dangers, feels their Wounds, and sends them Aids and Supplies, Power and
Counsel to make them Successul, that the gates of Hell and all its Auxiliaries
might not prevail against them. Let the Times look Black and Stormy, let
Predictions be never so sad and gloomy, and we hear the sound of may Waters,
and the Fiend and all his Confederates sit in full Consult for the ruin of
Religion, and nothing else is heard but the noise of Ravens and Eagles for the
dying Corpse, yet we can stand secure, an omnipotent Arm does wield our Sword,
and our Council is All-wise, it is he that neither Heaven above, nor Hell below,
nor Earth and the Sea between, can skreen off his Divine and All-seeing Eye.
The closest Dungeon and most secure Cell, neither Shade nor Night, as black as
a Traitors Soul, can conceal their Policy from him that Orders and permits,
Disposes and Prohibits for the Interest and Benefit of Religion, which tells
us, That all things shall conspire for their good who truly worship him; and
that he that in former days did deliver us out of the paw of the Lion and the
Bear, will deliver us from this Uncircumcised Philistin; and that we might not
dispond and suspect his Promises, he does further assure Matthew. 24.35
us, that Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but my Word shall not pass away:
and therefore let us not sink and despair, and cry out, Master, we perish; but
see the Train of Powder, and view the Snare, all lying Innocent and Unactive,
the whole Design of our Enemies Defeated; and with a grateful Mind sing the
triumphal Song to God, Rev. 7.12.
with the Angels who stood above his. Throne and worshipped, saying Amen,
Blessing, and Glory, and Thanksgiving, Honor, and Powes, and Might, be unto
our God, for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

