In memoria Coll: HARVV. Equitis Aurati.
CArmina quid canerem? Tristes imitantia Musas,
Carmina sunt meritis inferiora suis.
Vixit, quem dederat cursum Deus, ille peregit,
Gentis honos obiit, gloria, fama, decus.
Multa fides, pietasque viri, sic multa recursat
Nobilitas animi; plurima nota loquor.
THough Holland honored be to keep the dust
Of such a Soldier, valiant, wise, and just:
The Basis of the Universe not great,
Nor Vaste enough, his merits on to seat:
Mars, Hermes, Phoebus, and chaste Theseus Son,
In Coll'nell Harwood did meet all in one.
But should I wirte his praise? it would be thought
A Nephew will commend the Work, tho naught,
I rather leave it to each Readers mind,
To judge thereof, as he the Work shall find:
And if they say, that he has not done well,
Bid him that blames him; Show his Parallel.
M. Draper.

THE ADVICE OF THAT WORTHY COMMANDER, Sir ED: HARVVOOD, Collonell.

Written by King CHARLES his Command, upon occasion of the French Kings
preparation: and presented in his life time, by his own hand, to his MAJESTY:
Hitherto being a private Manuscript.

Also a relation of his Life and Death. Whereunto is also annexed diverse
remarkable Instructions, written by the late, and ever-famous, Earl of Essex.
All tending to the Securing and Fortifying of this Kingdom, both by Sea and
Land, and now seasonably published for the benefit of these Times.

PROVE. 25. 11. A word spoken in season is like Apples of gold in pictures of
silver.

London, Printed for R. Harford. 1642.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, the Lords and COMMONS assembled in the High Court of
Parliament.
RIGHT Honorable Lords, and worthy Gentlemen, We are all imbarqued in the
ship, the Commonwealth; and as in a ship there are diverse Agents, whereof some
of the chiefest, at the stern to govern; others of an inferior rank clime
the Mast, hoysesailes, and do inferior works in it, all of them according to
their several rank, as they do the duties of their several places; so have
interest in the Common good, and either do, or ought to mind the public
welfare of it: And as in building of the Tabernacle, some of the chief sort
brought gold, silver and precious stones, others of inferior sort, goats hair
and Badgers skins, every man according to his ability, did contribute unto the
same. I, though but of the inferior rank in this ship, even the meanest of all
others, yet imbarqued therein, see not but I ought to endeavor, though but in
inferior works the good of it, who though I have not gold, silver, or
precio^s stones, nor any thing besides my poor prayers to advance the glorious
Tabernacle, yet would with Ahimaaz, run also, as one willing and desirous to
do good, if I had any ability in my self, or opportunity: But having nothing
of my own, finding this little Manuscript among the papers of my dear
deceased brother, and considering the troublesomenesse of the times the fears
of the better sort, and hopes of the worse: I have adventured to make it
public, which though written some time since, and upon another occasion, yet
there may something be gathered out of it (if I mistake not my self) which may
be of good use for these present times of our fears, and sad apprehensions,
wherein if there be any thing which in your grave wisdoms, you may think fit to
put in execution, it shall much (...) me, that I brought it to the light, or at
least, if it may but occasion your wisdoms to take into your serious
consideration, the subject matter of it, which is the securing of the Kingdom
against all dangers, that may come to it, and in your wisdoms to think upon
better directions, that may remove the fears and apprehensions of most men in
these ^^^multuous times, by reason of the Insurrection of our neighboring
Kingdom, and the just fears we have of these pestilent enemies of our Church
and Commonwealth, The Papists in this Kingdom, and their Adherents, the
Prelates: Now as concerning my brothers manuscript, as it was penned in time of
a great Sea preparation made by the French King some ten years past, so (as I
had it from his own mouth) it gained the approbation and good liking of his
Majesty, who commanded him to write his judgment and opinion of these
preparations, and by what means (if they were intended against us) we might
secure our selves, both for the pesent, and in future; which though for some
reasons was not thought sit to be put in execution, yet I have been encouraged
by some of good judgment, now to publish it in these times, wherein we have
some more apprehension of danger then formerly (partly by the actual rising of
these many ill affected to Religion in Ireland, and also those proud-threatning
speeches lately given forth by the Papists here at home, which if not by some
such course, as is here propounded, be prevented, may breed more danger then
most are sensible of.

Eliahs cloud rose but like a hand, which after orespread the whole heaven,
what this may do, if suffered to enlarge itself; how farrereach, we cannot
directly say; but even to our own Horison we may well presume, if not
repelled, or dispersed by a strong and swift gale The mischief they carry with
them cannot be contained in the neighbor Kingdom, if they thus grow in their
progress. What combination there may be with forrainstates I leave to deeper
judgments, but for my own part, I shall ever subscribe unto the opinion of
that noble Lord, concerning an old Enemy the Spaniard* that if he ever find an
opportunity, and advantage against us, he will not baulke it: I cannot easily
be drawn to a belief, that that great Fleet they sent two years since upon
our Coast, when we and our true hearted brethren, the Scots, were ready to
enter into a bloody battle, was to guard only his Soldiers, or treasure; but
that there was a design in it upon this Kingdom, though by Gods mercy
prevented. Never came such a Fleet upon our Coast, save in 88. when they
intended a real invasion. But if it be objected; was he not in league with us?
But alas, what security can we have thereby, in being in league with him, or
any of that Religion: when first they hold that it is no fault to break faith
with Heretics. Secondly, If it be? The Popes dispensation will take it away.
Thirdly, if the Pope find it for his advantage he will so charge them to
break with us, that so conscience and obedience shall cure their malice and
perfideousnesse: I am bold to add to what my brother wrote, what once, long
since I read in a little Treatise, which may something conduce to this, of that
brave Lord, the late Earl of Essex; expressed in an Apology in the late Queens
time of happy memory, which may something strengthen my brothers opinion for
making Sea preparations; which with my Brothers, I humbly offer to your
considerations, there being none under Heaven to whom we can address our
selves* for power and fitness to correct the malignant aspect of these
influences, besides your honors: And now most noble, and grave Senators, the
true and ever renouned Patriots of your Country, if my Zeal for my countries
freedom and prosperity, have borne me beyond my bounds, impute it to my error
of judgment, and let your candor close with the good intentions of him, who is
more in wishes, and hearty desires, then in parts and abilities, for the
felicity of his Country. And he shall ever remain,

Your Honors most humble and obsequious servant. GEO. HARVVOOD.

THE LIFE AND DEATH of Collonell Harwood.
Gentle Reader,
THis little Manuscript penned by my honored friend, Sir Edward, Harwood
Colonel of an English Regiment in the Low Countries, was intended for the
press, and ready thereunto, when by Gods gracious providence I coming over
(having had much experience of his worth;) and in some respect, obliged unto
him, was not a little glad to meet with an opportunity to show my love and
respects to him. I therefore desired leave of his brother, of whom I have now
obtained it, though with some difficulty, to offer to the World some Testimony
of it, wherein I will forbear to say what I may, neither is there need for me
in that kind to say any thing at all, in respect of those that knew him, and
have been conversant with him; they have been eye witnesses to more then I
write, but for their sakes, who did not know him: I desire a little to acquaint
them with his worth. To the end, that they, who have alove to that Honorable
profession, may have a worthy example to incite them to imitation.

It being my portion to travel with him one whole night not loing before his
decease; He was (beyond his custom) kept awake all that time by his own
Spirit, which constrained him to open his bosom to me, and to give me an
Epitome of his time, and Gods dealing with him, of which, and my own
observations concerning him, you may please to take this brief extract.

His Birth was Gentile, and from a root fit to engraft his future education
and excellency; furnished he was with such learning as his age was capable of,
and grew up in an especial respect unto the faithful Dispensors of the
Gospel, and accordingly reapt the fruits of it in Gods season. His spirit
(though sad enough) yet accompanied with much natural metal and courage, and
looked above other callings, to that which narrow minded and effeminate men
close not with.

He soon attended the School of war of those times, where quick and
curious designs issued into daily action and execution. There my Lord Veere,
who could well distinguish of men, cast his eye upon him, by whose favor,
exhaled by his own worth, he was not long ascending the usual step whereon
the wars places reward for its followers; as he grew skillful in his trade,
so was he amiable to others: They live who know how dear he was to that
justly lamented, Prince Henry, who took such delight in him, that his closset
thoughts were open to my Noble friend, from whom that Noble Prince got no small
advantage in his military way; He was also ever precious to King James, of
blessed memory; so also no less in the esteem of our now gracious Sovereign,
witnessing their Royal affection toward him in several expressions of their
favors. The illustrious Princess, the Queen of Bohemia, who hearing of his
death, cried out in a great passion! Oh that uggly Town of Mastricht that has
bereeved me of so faithful a Servant. Also to that mirror of his time, the
last Lord Harrington, to whom he was so endeared, that he offered to hazard
estate, liberty, and life, for his good, as by diverse of his Letters still
extant, appears. To the late Duke of Buckingham, who after the defeat at the
I Will of Ree, remembering what service he did at Cadiz voyage, in bringing of the
retreat, cried out! Oh Ned Harwood, Ned Harwood, that I had had thee here. To
the last Lord Steward, To the old Earl of Southampton, To the late Earl of
Bedford, To this now Earl of Essex, And to the now Earl of Leycester, who was
sometime his Colonel; To the Earl of Warwick, To the Lord Carleton, and to
most of the chief Nobility of this Kingdom. Whose Letters found among his
papers mention such real affection, as is scarcely credible, from men of their
quality. Neither was he a little dear to that highly honored Lord, the Lord
Craven (who beside the late real expression of love to his Brother, and for
his many, great, noble, and pious works, deserves to have his name written
upon pillars of brass) who when he heard of his death (as was related to his
brother,) cast himself on his bed, cried out, he had lost his Father, such
was his love and opinion of him.

Moreover, when his death was noised in the Army, there was such a general
lamentation for his loss, that his Excellency was feign to send special
command to still it, least the enemy should take courage, as thinking it were
for some of greater quality; And his Excellency himself in my own hearing, I
being appointed to go before his Excellency after the Hearse, heard him say,
to Count Earnest, He had lost his right hand, in the loss of Monsieur Harwood.
To be brief his name amongst Soldiers was, In omniore, tanquam mel suavis
est, and tanquam instrumenta musica in convivio lauto. He lived, desired; and
died, lamented.

He soon ascended (in the States service) to the highest step that Englishmen
usually tread, and that was a Collonell; in which condition, I had my knowledge
of him: And these things my eye observed, that Religion, fidelity, and prowess
so met in him, that there seemed a constant strife among them, which should
most appear, and often showed themselves together, by which he brook the
back of that Proverb: Nulla fides pietasque viris qui castra sequuntur.

The first of these, showed it self in attendance upon the word, intimate
acquaintance with, and respect unto the faithfullest dispensours of it; The
exercise of his family therein; His purse standing open to the advancement of
every work of that nature in England and Holland; He gave a large sum
annually to the redeeming impropriations, the ruin whereof was none of his
least griefs, together with the many souls that suffer by it; His conceit
was, that nothing less then Atheism and hellish malice could blast it; He
kept a diary of his inward man, wherein he wrote his own slips, infirmities,
and Gods several ways of providence toward him, which stood him in no small
stead; He was very often in humiliations, and loved those days in his life
time, and to his death, being slain in a public day of fasting; In all his
actions, he gave testimony, that he thought as much of dying, as of living.
For the second, he was famous and precious to both the Princes of Orange, in
that respect.

In the quelling the Arminian faction, he alone was trusted with a message to
King James, and upon his return Barnevell, went to his last home. In the
leaguer of the Busse, he had the charge of the Vello^, when Picolominy was in
the bowels of the Country with 10000. men. His Excellency intrusting him with
the sole trust, mannaging and ordering of that service, without limiting his
commission, left it, though a matter of maine concernment to his wisdom and
fidelity. In which service, he watched 30. whole nights on Hor^eback, and
never in that time came in bed, and in conclusion by his providence and
vigilance discharged that great trust, and fully secured the Country.

At Cadiz voyage Which was a matter of trust and great difficulty, he had
imposed on him the Charge of bringing up the Rear, where the Enemy setting
upon many scattered Troops, he brought them off with safety, by an honorable
Retreat. For want of which at the Isle of Ree, how many brave Engglish lost
their lives, and our Nation, much of their honor.

Lastly, his Valor was unstained, as all the Services he was in, can bear
large testimony thereof. To be short, He was first hurt by a Granado in the
foot, at Mastrick (a sufficient warrant to have exempted him from the Service
for that day) yet would he not leave the prosecution of the design, though
often dissuaded and advised, of the great danger he adventured, by the worthy
Gentleman, Captain Skippon, now Sergeant Major General, for the City of
London, but going often into the Trenches, to view the Enemies Works, in a
Scarlet Coat, gave the Enemy so fair a mark, that he received from the wall,
a sudden shot, out of a small Brass Piece, which struck him through the
heart, and was from thence, by Command of the Prince of Orange, carried to the
Hague, where he was interred, with as much honor, as ever was any that dyed in
those parts, of his quallitie. In fine, Thus much I must say of him, He was
true to his Principles, (a rare virtue in this Age) He was neither above, nor
beneath his Calling, but very aeduquate and true unto it; So sad, serious, and
skillful in his way, that you may do well to believe what he writes. He was a
good man, a good Soldier, a good Christian, and is now wearing his Crown. Much
more I might have said, but I must not make the Porch greater then the
Building, and therefore I conclude,

Sic O praecabor, usque vivere,
Me posse, dein sic mori,
Mori me posse, dein sic Vivere.
So I desire of God, to live and dye,
And so to dye, to live eternally.
Epitaph.
IF Rimes might raise him Columns, I believe,
Nor hearts, nor heads, nor pens would wanting be
But sure such Varnish can small luster give
To blaze his worth, his Friends may spare that Fee.
For less desert, we may such pains yet keep,
Let Us now remember Harwood, and then weep.
HVGH PEETERS.

COLLONELL HARVVOODS advice to King CHARLES. OR, A Discourse on the rumor of
the French Kings Preparation at Sea.
THe particulars of his preparations not being certainly known, there is no
certain judgment to be made of them; I will therefore only take the case, as I
suppose it will be granted. That the French King endeavors to make himself
strong at sea, and that by two means, one encouraging his subjects to trade at
sea, giving his Merchants great privileges, and immunities, another of his
own proper cost, buying, and building many great and good ships, and ordaining
a yearly brave proportion out of his revenue, for the increasing, and
maintaining his Navy, as some say 300. thousand l. sterling, others but 300.
thousand crowns, one or other, are considerable, and may prove of danger to
this state: For this disposition of his argues, that he intends either to
enter into a new war, with his Majesty, or at least, to put himself into such
a condition, as when he shall think fit, he may do so, without his
disadvantage. That this his Arming at sea, must be intended, in emulation of
His Majesty's Lordship of the narrow Seas, to equal, ore-top him at sea is
probable. For against whom else? Not against the Hollanders, they are his
obsequious friends, desirous of his friendship, fearful of his displeasure;
not against the King of Spain, for he can more easily invade him by land, when
he will, as Spain can him: Besides, the French King shows no disposition to
enter into open war with him, for having taken on him the protection of
Mantua, and not well dealt with by him in the last treaty for Italy, making a
peace in show, and yet after taking his advantage, renewing the war in the
Emperors name, yet does he not enter into open war with him, but will only be
an assistant, else had it not been more facile for him to have invaded
Flaunders, or Artois, and so by diversion aided the Duke of Mantua, then by
sending an Army into Italy in the winter; therefore this preparation of the
French King, for the sea, has his chief aim, in present, or future at His
Majesty. I suppose, not to invade England, or it may be none of His Majesty's
Islands, though that is more then we can be assured of: some of his ships of
war were this winter on His Majesty's coast, went from Harbor to Harbor,
doubtless to discover them, and not for any good to His Majesty: besides, who
cantell, since the Islands of Garnesey, and Iersey, are the only remainders of
the large Dominions, His Majesty's Predecessors formerly have possessed in
France, if he have not an itching to join them to France again, or if not
them, nor Wight; yet to share the dominion of the narrow Seas with His
Majesty, and that is to take it from him, if he can; to which hitherto he
has not pretended, as not being able to match His Majesty at Sea, but if he
continue these His preparations, and that His Majesty out of hand prepare not
also against it, he will in short time undoubtedly effect it. It will be said
(it may be) he has no good ports or havens? that is an error; it is true, he
has not so many good harbors, as His Majesty has, yet some he has, not
inferior to any of His Majesty's, it may be also said that his Subjects are
not so proper for the Sea, nor so affected to Trade, as his Majesty's are: it
is true, but if he continue to encourage his Merchants, turn Merchant
himself, will not his Princes, great Lords, and Gentlemen, follow his example?
For Saylors, if he give great pay, and pay well, he will not want them of other
Nations; nay, if his Majesty's own Subjects have not the like great and good
payment, it is to be feared, he may draw many of his, to his service, at first,
until there be open wars twixt the Kingdoms: for do not, at this present,
many hundreds, I might say, thousands of his Majesty's Subjects, serve other
States at Sea; as the Hollanders, nay, the Turks, without either leave, or
knowledge of his Majesty.

Now, if the French King should come to be as powerful, or more, then his
Majesty at Sea, he will be a more dangerous and fearful neighbor to England
then Spain, whom hitherto this Kingdom have of latter years only had cause
to fear, for that against Spain, the Low Countries will ever be a good
Bulwarck; who if the King of Spain at any time, make any great preparations at
Sea, will be ever jealous, it is intended against them, and so ever arm
against him, and be always ready to join with, and to assist his Majesty
against Spain, which may be doubted, they will not so readily do against
France, with whom they are in league, and not jealous off. Besides the King of
Spain has not so populous a Country, as he can easily prepare, either a
great Fleet, or Land Army, and much less both, without long time, and so his
Majesty may have the more warning thereof; Then Spain is further from
England, and so the journey is the longer, and from thence cannot come many
Horse, which are the forces most to be feared in England. Whereas France being
so near us, and so full of Soldiers, both Horse and Foot, if it once come to
be able to equal England at Sea, by sudden and quick preparations, stealing
opportunities, he may oretop England at Sea, and then transport such an Army of
Horse and Foot, as we might justly be afraid of: For old Soldiers both Horse
and Foot, France abounds in, and the French have a virtue proper to them, that
not a Gentleman thinks himself any thing, until he have seen the Wars,
learned at least, good and perfect use of his Arms, and naturally they are all
good Horsemen; their Land affords Horses fit for service, and every man almost
knows to use Pistol and Carabin: whereas in England, unless those, which have
been Soldiers, few or none can use their Arms, and of those which have bin
Soldiers, it may be not all, can well use their Arms; especially the Musket,
which is of most offense, which our Nation are not naturally so prompt to learn
the use of, as the French are; and for Horse, this Kingdom is so deficient, as
it is a question, whether or not, the whole Kingdom could make 2000. good
Horse, that might equal 2000. French.

To redesse these deficiences, In all humility, I here present my poor and
slender advice, under correction, and with submission to better judgments.

First, and principally I would advise that his Majesty would arm at Sea, for
that is the surest defense, for we can never be hurt by a foreign enemy, by
land, till we be first beaten at Sea; and therein I cannot give better advise,
then to do what the French King does, as to repair and increase his own
Royal Navy, which is the greatest and best assured strength of England, and
to that end, to set apart some certain large proportion of his revenue, that
His Seamen may have good pay, and well paid; and if there be good and strict
courses taken, that there be no abuses in the Musters, victualling, consumption
of Ammunition (which without good payment cannot well be executed) His Majesty
will be a Gainer thereby, in matter of profit, besides, the reputation and
advantage of his service; and it is my opinion, that no Prince nor State, but
had better give 40 in the hundred, for moneys to pay his Militia well, then not
to pay well: Then to encourage his Merchants, and other subjects to trade, and
in making new plantations. For his landforces, that His Majesty would take
order, that the numbers of trained men were increased, or rather that the whole
Kingdom from 18. or 20. to 35. or 40. as many men as were able of bodies were
armed, one third with pikes, and armours, another with muskets, and the third
with calivers; that there were powder, bullets, and match through the whole
Kingdom, magazines thereof in suncry places of the Kingdom in such a
quantity, as if it were invaded in one, or diverse parts, there be no want of
Ammunition in any place: for it would be then too late to fetch it elsewhere,
and much worse, then to make it, or send over Seas for it. That there were care
taken, that these men then armed might be well exercised; and to that end, that
there be in every hundredth, or wapentake, some old soldier, Sergeant, or other
inferior Officer, had out of the Low Countries well chosen, that might teach
men the use of their Arms, and that there were certain days set and
appointed, for the showing their Arms, and exercising them: and if the
Statutes which were formerly for sporting in the Long Bow, were revived, or
converted, (with deliberation) for the musket and Caliver, to practice by
shooting at marks on ordinary Holy Days, and such like times, and at some
time some small prize for them, that shoot nearest; under correction, I think
it were much for the strength of the Kingdom: Then that there were good choice
made of the Mustermasters, none to be but such as had borne office in some
actual war of reputation; for better there were none, and their allowances
divi^ed unto sundry inferior men, then for one to draw a great pay, that
either knows not to do, or does not any thing for it: and because there is,
or may be such as have borne office in the wars, and yet discontinue so long,
as they have forgotten their trade, or that the fashion of the wars and
exercising be changed, since he was last a soldier, that every
Mustermaster, shall not only at his first entrance, be approved by such as
are able to judge him, to be fit for that charge, but to the end he may
continue so, he be enjoined once, in 4 or 5. years, to go personally for
the Summer time into some actual war abroad, if any be, to retain and
renew his knowledge, That the Captains of the Trained bands, be enjoined
themselves to pass the Seas, to learn the duties of their places, or at
least, to keep of his own charge, one that can discharge his place, and if
neither to quite their commands to such, as will do the one or other.

By this means, his Majesty may have an Army of foot on a sudden in any part
of England to answer all occasions, without drawing his forces much far out
of their proper Countries; for an Enemy may make show of landing in one place,
and having drawn the greatest strength of the Kingdom thither (winds serving
for it) suddenly transport himself to another, before that Army can by land
come there.

Now for horse, wherein this Kingdom is more defective, then I think is any
other, it were a work worthy of his Majesty, seriously to take it into
consideration, how to amed it, and though on a sudden, it is not to be hoped
to bring the work to any great perfection, yet a good foundation once well
laid, in process of time, it may be effected, and for the present be much
helped: it is so great a work, and my experience being not so much that way as
in foot, I will not take upon me to deliver any certain grounds for it, but
will only point at some ways, whereby I conceive it may be reformed: The
defects consists chiefly in want of fit horses, and fit men to be horsemen,
which I take to be the greater want of the two, and can but wonder, that so
great a kingdom should be so defective in so brave and noble a strength,
wherein our nearest neighbors so abound; in ancient times we were not so, it
may be one reason is, that now our Nation is more addicted to running and
hunting horses, then in those elder times.

For remedy, under correction, First, that there where care taken, that there
were a stronger breed of horses through the Kingdom; then that his Majesty
would begin at his Court, and there convert his bands of Pensioners into a
brave troop of Curassers, there horses at least so ready, as to give and
change a pistol on, sometimes to exercise them, by shooting at a mark on
horseback with their pistols, and always to keep this band so. To admit none
to those places, but such as before, were known to be horsemen, and could use
pistol on horseback: Then that the Lords, and others of his Majesty's great
Officers, and Council, did follow this example, and every one to keep some
great horses, to have arms, and pistols, and some such Servants as were fit to
be horsemen, and to induce other Lords, and Gentlemen of great estates, to do
to like, and encourage them thereto; to reserve all personal honors (except
experienced soldiers that had born good command) for such Noblemen, and
Gentlemen as did in this conform themselves to do his Majesty and Country
service, whereby those, which never intended to make the wars their trade,
might be brought so far as to be enabled to do something for the defense of
their King and Country: if the Noblemen and Gentlemen would take this to
heart, as they have done, running of races for bells (which I could wish, were
converted to shooting at a mark with pistols on horseback for the same bell;)
they would be sufficient for Curassiers. Now for other kinds of horse, I would
that the Trained bands were increased, and all reformed to Harquebusiers, but
whether their Pieces to be with Firelocks or Snaphaunces, is questionable,
the Fire-lock is more certain for giving fire, the other more facile for use.
For the present my opinion is, at first, it were best to take up the
Snaphaunce, until Pistols be more frequent, which being more difficult to use,
are fittest as before for Gentlemen to begin first to bring into use: When they
have once brought them to be ordinary, it will be more facile to bring them
into use amongst the inferior sort; and for the present, this Kingdom has
not (except in London, and it may be some few Towns besides) Artificers, that
can make or amend firelocks: Then I would have a Muster-master a part, for the
horse, as well as for the foot, well choosen, some old Horseman out of the
Low Countries; For that it is scarce possible to find men that are fit and able
for both horse and foot: The Kingdom thus armed and exercised an Enemy cannot
land in any part of it, but, (without unturnishing the other parts,) there will
be a competent Army presently found to make resistance.

It may be said, these Advises will be found not practiquable, or very
difficultly; so are all great works at first; but I conceive, if his Majesty
would take it to heart, and give encouragements of honor and preferrements, to
such as conform themselves to his pleasure herein, and make this the way of
advancement, it would not be difficult, but if without this way honor and
advancement may be had; well may many think, why should they take such pains,
or be at such charge, for that which may more easily be had: And here I cannot
but blame our Nation in the general, (for I believe, the most gloriousest of
our neighbors, will grant, it as Valiant a Nation, as is on the Earth,) that
they should not be more addicted to Arms, but give themselves for the most,
to expensefull pleasures, altogether unserviceable for King and Country:
whereas there is not a French Gentleman, that so soon as he begins to write
man, but learnes to ride, to use his arms on foot and horseback, and whether
younger or elder brother, puts himself into some actual war for some time,
to learn the trade of a soldier, though he never intend to make it his
profession. I would further advise, that all the principal Harbors and good
landing places were so fortified, as far as is possible, that no Enemies
Fleet should anchour in them, or much less land in them, without remarkable
disadvantage. The command of which places I would have given to none, but
experienced soldiers, and such, as are sound in Religion, and had borne
commands in the wars for many years; and they to reside in them: not unto
Noblemen, or Gentlemen of great estates, which seldom, or never, come at them;
and much less to meaner men that are no soldiers: for maintenance whereof the
charge once arrested, to repartite them on some revenue near adjoining, and
being well paid, to have strict oversight had, that there be always such, and
so many able Gunners and Soldiers present in them, as his Majesty pays, on
all occasions to be used; if less will serve, then why should his Majesty be
charged to pay more.

To conclude, if his Majesty would reserve the places properly belonging to the
wars, (whereof he has the fewest of any great Prince of Christendom;) as,
the Governments of his Islands, the keeping of the Forts, and Castles, and
places of command in Zeeland, only for soldiers, and worthy soldiers, and
men sound in Religion. It would be a great encouragement to his Subjects to
follow the wars, to enable themselves to do him service, though to their
cost and charge, when they have to hope, that though they serve a strange
Prince, or State to their no advantage, yet thereby inabling themselves to do
their own King service, they may in time be provided for in their own
Country; whereas if charges of commands, advancements of honor may be had
better cheap, by staying at home and following their pleasures, there will but
few ever take the pains and labor, or be at the charges to enable themselves
by following the wars abroad, all men being led, either by honor, or profit,
or both.

THE LATE EARL OF ESSEX His Instructions for Englands SAFETY.
AFter I had resolved to publish this Manuscript of my Brothers, I remembered I
had read something, long since, in a little Treatise, written by that brave and
worthy Commander, the late Earl of Essex, concerning Sea Preparations (though
then written in a time when we had an open Enemy, and now no such occasion,
yet we know not how soon we may,) Which though but short, yet my Brothers
judgment concurring with it, which was, that the safest and surest defense for
this Kingdom, was our Navy, and that we could never be hurt by Land, by a
Foreign enemy, unless we were first beaten at Sea. I thought it not amiss,
to annex it to this of my Brothers, and by that occasion, reading the whole
Discourse from which I had it. I found in it besides, what concerns this
point, which was Directions for the securing of this Kingdom, some such worthy
expressions, which as they did much affect me in the reading, so I conceive,
they might be of some use also for these times; as some for imitation, others,
for other purposes. I thought it not amiss to revive, and bring them again to
light; some things were spoken by that brave Lord of himself, some others are
related by him of those Ancient and renowned Romans, where we may see a
bravenesse of spirit, even in those that were but Heathen. Now if there were
such brave spirits in them that had nothing but the light of nature to direct
them: What should be then in Christians that have a Sun to their Candle, Shall
they come short of them, in love and affection to their Country? Will it not
one day rise up in judgment against us, as our Savior says of Tirus and
Sidon, that have such principles, and such encouragements of rewards above
them. They had but honor and reputation, I may say, a vain and windy motive:
We have the Command of God, and a heavenly reward promised, even a Kingdom,
and that everlasting; and shall we come so short of them, as not to venture
anything for God, his Gospel, and our Religion* Did a Roman say, he cared not
to leave to bury him, so the Commonwealth might flourish? What shall a
Christian do for his Country? shall he not lay aside all private respects of
his own, and only seek Gods honor, in his care of the Common good.

Now most noble Lords, and Gentlemen, God having called you unto it. Let your
Country see, and all the World know, that there is more power in Religion,
then in Heathenish Principles; Join all your forces together to promote his
Gospel, and your Countries good.

O that the reviving of these few sparks that I have by this occasion brought
to light, might add fervor to your brave English Spirits; What though there
be some so degenerate, as to raise their fortunes and keep their honors,
cares not what becomes of the Commonwealth, and Gospel of Christ; Yet we have
found there are many, yea many, that still retain that ancient virtue in them,
and do even at this time practice it; to such I will say, go one Noble Lords
and Gentlemen, do worthily in Bethelem, and you shall be famous in Ephrata,
set aside all private respects, and as you have begun with unwearied pains and
patience (which in all due thankfulness we do humbly acknowledge) Go on
still to continue your care of us, and our Countries good, and for all others
contrarily minded, the Lord either convert them, or suddenly confound them.

In this ensuing relation, I shall only use that Honorable Lords own words.
I leave their application to all true-hearted Englishmen. The heads are these,

First, His advice for Sea Preparations, which are not (as I conceive)
un-usefull for this present time.

Secondly, his Protestation of his affection to his Country, worthy the
imitation of men of his quality.

Thirdly, his extraordinary affection to Soldiers and men of War, the
favoring and cherishing of whom, will be no small security to this Kingdom.

Fourthly, his Judgment concerning Pluralities of Religion, tolerated in a
State, A thing worthy of due consideration.

Fifthly, the sweet harmony betwixt a loving Prince, and loyal subjects, a
desirable and imitable thing. Lastly, a sweet reprehension of the superfluous
expense of these times, which if some course were taken therein to limit them:
I see not, but it would make much to the general good of this Commonwealth.

First, for his advise for Sea-preparations, it was this, that if Her Majesty
would be pleased, but to raise up a sum of a hundred, and fifty thousand
pounds a year; and put it into the hands of an honest and sufficient
Treasurer, for the wars, and to be issued by a Council well chosen, would
fully and sufficiently maintain the war with Spain; yea, such a force
should be maintained thereby, as Her Majesty having a convenient number of her
own ships, and repairing and furnishing them, as yearly she does, the enemy
should bring no Fleet into the Seas for England, or Ireland, or Low Countries,
but should be beaten, nor seek to gather one into Spain, but the parts of it
should be defeated, before the whole could be assembled, yea, those services
should be done upon the enemy, that the poorest Prince or State in
Christendom, should have little cause to fear his malice.

2. For his Protestation of his affection to his Country, it was, that the
reputation of a most faithful subject, and zealous Patriot, with the hazard of
his life, and decay of his estate he had sought to purchase, and when he was
offered by the King of Spain, what Tittle, sum of money, or pension he would
desire, so as he might be won to take their part, he did profess, that if
God had not put him back, and arrested him by contrary winds and tempests that
summer, he would have taught that proud King, what effects his proffer had
wrought in him, and the longer the will of God, and his Sovereign did
restrain him, with the greater interest to hope to pay him in the end, that
had sought him out as a fit man to betray his Queen and Country.

Thirdly, for his respect to Soldiers, and men of war, he professed he did
entirely love them. First, for his own sake; for he found sweetness in their
conversations, strong assistance in their imploiments with him, and happiness
in their friend-ship: that he loved them for their virtues sake, and for their
greatness of mind (for little minds, though never so full of virtue, can be
but little virtuous) and for their great understanding, for to understand
little things, or things not of use, is little better then to understand
nothing at all; That he loved them for their affections; for selfe-loving men,
love ease, pleasure, and profit, but they that love pains, danger, and pain,
show that they love public profit, more then themselves: That he loved them
for his countries sake, for they are Englands best Armor of defense, and
weapons of offense, if we have peace, they have purchased it; if we should have
war, they must manage it; Yea, while we are doubtful, and in treaties, we
must value our selves by what may be done, and the enemy will value us by that
which has been done by our chief men of action. Before action, providence
made him cherrish them for the service they can do, and after action,
expeperience, and thankfulness made him love them for the service they had
done.

Fourthly, concerning Plurality of Religion, professed in one Estate, that it was
against the policy of all States; because where there is no unity, or order in
the State, it is the manifest ruin of that State; for as the mingling of
poison with wholesome liquor in one vessel, does not correct that which is
Lethal, but corrupts that which is wholesome: so the poisoned doctrine of those
Hispanioliz'd Jesuits once brought in that state, will not endure any
profession (save their own.)

Fifthly, for the sweet harmony, betwixt a loving Prince, and loyal subjects:
Thus does he say, we, thanks be to God, have a Queen, who has never been
wastfull in her private expense; yet will she sell her plate, and jewels in
the Tower, ere her people shall be undefended: We are a people that will turn
our silken coats into iron Iacks, and our silver plate into coats of plate,
rather then our Sovereign shall be unserved.

Sixthly, and lastly, his pleasing reprehension of the superfluous expenses of
those times, it is by way of objection that was made in those times; that they
could neither have a good peace, or jnst war; and of two evils, it were
better to have a patched peace, then an unsupportable war. To which he
answers, that those that did so think were injurious; First to our men of
war (that fight for them, and defend them) in thinking their arms (which
have ever done honor to our nation, and stricken terror into the hearts of
our enemies) less able to defend our country, then their treaties, which have
never been free from scorn and disadvantage. Injurious they are to the
Country that bred them, which being one of the bravest, strongest, and
happiest States in Christendom, is judged by these men, to be as weak as their
own weak hearts. Injurious they are to her Majesty, who being so great, so
glorious, and so victorious a Queen, shall be judged unable to maintain
war, when she cannot have peace, but at the pleasure of her enemy. Yea,
injurious, and most unthankful they are to God himself (who has hitherto
fought for them) in that (for an unsafe peace, with an idolatrous, and
irrelegious nation) they would leave an honorable, and just war. But when
some objections might be made, that Her Majesty's Treasure was drawn deep
into, and if there were any weakness in our means, to make war, it was in
our Treasure: To this he answers, that though Her Majesty's treasure be drawn
deep into, and the poor Hus-bandman by the late hard years past, has now
left scarce any means to live; yet if our sumptuous buildings, our surfeiting
diet, our Prodigality in Garments, our infinite Place, and costly Furniture of
our houses, be well considered, England cannot be thought poor: can we exceed
all nations in Christendom in wastfull vanities, and can we not arm our
selves against one nation (whom we have ever beaten) for our necessary
defense? Was Rome so brave a State, that the very Ladies to supply the common
Treasure, and to maintain the wars, spoiled themselves of their Jewels, and
rich ornaments, and is England so base a State, as that the people therein,
will not bestow some part of their superfluous expenses, to keep themselves
from conquest, and slavery? Did the godly Kings and religious people, which we
read of in the old Testament, to maintain war, against the enemies of God,
sell the ornaments of the Temple, and the things consecrated to holy uses? and
shall not we that have as holy a war spare those things we have dedicated to
our own idle, and sensual pleasures? Could our own nation in those gallant
former ages, when our country was far poorer, then now it is, levy armies,
maintain wars, atchieve great conquests in France, and make our powerful
Armies known, as far as the Holy Land? And is this such a degenerate age, as
we shall not be able to defend England; no, no, there is yet left some seed of
that ancient virtue. I remember with what spirit and alacrity, the Gentlemen of
England have put themselves voluntarily into our late actions; there will ever
be found some valorous, which (so the State may stand) and flourish care not
though they leave not, wherewith to bury themselves: though others bury their
money, not caring in what case they leave the state.

The Conclusion.
THus far are his own words, and here I intended to have finished this
discourse, but my thoughts pressed me to a new task, and what shall I say most
Noble Lords, and worthy Gentlemen, I will say to you even as Abraham did to
God; Seeing, says he: I have begun to speak unto my Lord, that am but dust
and ashes, Let not my Lord be angry, I will speak but this once. Seeing, I
have taken upon me to publish something, that I hope, may tend to the good of
our bodies; give me leave now to add something, (which I hope) may be no
less for the good of souls, and that is this, most Humbly to crave, that you
will be pleased to take to your most wise and grave considerations, that noble
and pious work happily begun and successefully proceeded in, of the Feoffees
for redeeming in impropriations, of which body before it was suppressed, I was
(though unworthy) a member, and therefore can say the more, of which I dare be
bold to say, it was one of the most glorious works that ever was undertaken
in this Kingdom of late years, and did more conduce to the spreading abroad
of the glorious Gospel of JESUS CHRIST, then any I ever understood of, or
heard of. Of which I may truly say, as Solomon of the virtuous Huswife, to
those that did contribute to it Many Daughters have done virtuously, but thou
surmounts them all. I deny not, but it is good to give to Hospitals, to
repairing of Churches, setting up of Free-Schooles, building of Almes-houses
and the like; But I have ever thought such as concern souls, to be as far
above them, as the soul is above the body.

This Pious Work it was well approved by his Majesty, as we were informed, at
our first taking of ^t; And I am sure of all the best Subjects, only the
Diotrephes, that Saint John speaks of, ( That love Pre-eminence, and thrust
their Brethren out of the Church) the Prelates of our time, that never did
further, but ever hinder any good Work that tended to the advancement of the
Gospel of Christ, if it did not Comply with their ambitions. But of them I
will say no more, (you have said so much, and so well.) But for this Pious work
I dare be bound to say, if it had continued, and not been suppressed, by their
means, That by this time most of the Impropriations of this Kingdom had been
brought in, and laid unto the Church again. A work fit for such an Age as
this, that has enjoyed the Gospel so long, to have propagated it to the dark
corners of this Kingdom, and this to be effected and done, not by a forced and
strained exaction, but by a free and willing contribution of such as understand
the nature of it, and saw the present good fruits and effect of it, which add
much to the glory of it. The Contributions at first were very encouraging, and
some underwrit yearly good sums, others to every impropriation we brought
certain sums; but toward the time of our unhappy dissolution the
contribution grew much greater; for, not a week before we were suppressed, a
Lady, yet living, sent us word, she would give a thousand pounds presently to
the furtherance of the Work, and many wills have since been altered that we
heard off, that gave brave proportions to it. I never heard of, nor can yet see
any such way to spread the Gospel to the remote and blind corners of this
Kingdom, neither can we, for ought I know, ever hope to see Popery quelled,
till a godly painful Ministry be established, and that will never be, till
competent means be provided: both these had been effected, and the effects in
time, would have manifested what I have said, and the benefit thereof would not
only have extended to the Church, but also to the Commonwealth; for where a
good Ministry is placed in a Town, there idleness will be abolished, the
poor and impotent children, and vagrant set on work, and His Majesty have
gained true and loyal Subjects, such as he may repose himself in their loves
and fidelities. Its the glory of our Religion, it was never stained with those
hellish Plots, Massacres, and Treacheries against their Sovereign; and if ever
Popery be put down to purpose, it must be by the means of establishment of a
powerful Ministry; then shall we see Satan fall down like Lightning, It must
be the breath of the Lord that must abolish the man of Sin. I deny not but
good Laws do well, but what through favor, conniving, and want of execution,
we daily see they have not such good effect, as were to be wished: that I am
confident, it must be the powerful conscionable Preaching Ministry of the
Gospel, that must especially effect it, and to procure that, nothing will more
conduce, then a full, free, and plentiful provision for the Dispencers of it,
and not for such as do least to have most. The Lord in mercy direct you,
bless and prosper your proceedings, and in his good time, give us to enjoy the
happy fruits and effects of your great, long, and unwearied Pains.

FINIS.

