Sir Arthur Haslerigg his Speech in Parliament, the fifth of January last.

Whereby he clears himself of the Articles of high Treason, exhibited
against himself, the Lord Kimbolton, Mr. I. Pym, Mr. Hampden, Mr. Stroud, and
M. Hollis, by his Majesty on tuesday 4. of Ianu. 1641.

Whereunto is added Master PIM his SPEECH In PARLIAMENT, Concerning the Vote of
the House of Commons, for his Discharge upon the Accusation of High Treason,
exhibited against himself, and others.

London, Printed for F. C. and T. B. 1641.

Sir Arthur Haslerigg his Speech in PARLIMENT.
Mr. Speaker.
THis misfortune of mine seems to me at the first exceeding strange, not
only in respect of the Crimes laid to my charge, but most of all having
thereby incurred not only the disfavour but irefull displeasure of his Sacred
Majesty. For the first, knowing the innocence and integrity of my heart, that
it is free from any such crime either in thought, word or deed against either
my gracious Sovereign, or my native Country, I shall the more easily bear the
burden of the charge, but to groan under the burden of a most Pious and wise
Prince his displeasure, wounds me sore.

Mr. Speaker, I humbly desire so much favor of this Honorable House of which
I have had the happiness to be a Member, to speak something of my Innocence
in all these Crimes I am charged withal.

This Honorable House* (Mr. Speaker) can I hope witness for me, the manner of
my carriage and disposition in any debate or arguments wherein I have been
one, I hope nothing has proceeded from me; that can come any ways within the
compass of Treason.

In all disputes and conclusions of any matter by Vote of the House, my Vote
has commonly agreed with the Major part then I hope my Vote in Parliament
being free cannot be Treason.

Mr. Speaker, The Articles that are exhibited against me and the other
Gentlemen, are of most dangerous and pernicious consequence, if we should be
found guilty of them, which God defend, I would to God these persons that
incensed his Majesty against us, (which is easily conceived who they are) were
as free from thoughts, words, may actions within the limits of Treason) as I
hope we shall prove our selves by Gods blessing.

MASTER Speaker, It is alleged, we have endeavored to subvert the
fundamental Laws of this Land, abridge the Kings power, and deny his Royal
Prerogatives. Give me leave I beseech you, to speak concerning this Article.
There is (as I conceive) not two Forms or Government in this Kingdom: there
it not two sorts of Fundamental Laws: there is but one form of Government;
One sort of Fundamental Laws, that is, the Common Laws of this Land, and
acts, Statutes, and Ordinances of Parliament, these two Mr. Speaker, depend and
hang one upon another, so that they cannot be separated; and he that subverts
the one, breaks and infringes the other. Now under favor Mr. Speaker, to
speak freely in Parliament (freely called and assembled by his Majesty's most
Royal Authority) to Vote freely in the same, upon the conclusion of any Bill to
be made a Law by the whole consent of Parliament assented to by his Majesty: to
agree in Voting with the whole Parliament against Delinquents, and Malefactors
in the State, to bring them to condign punishment for the same: to give my
Vote in the House, or removing evil Counselors from his sacred Majesty, to
place loyal and faithful ones in their place: To assent with the whole State
assembled together in Counsel for the settling of peace and tranquillity in the
same: To ordain and enact such wholesome Laws and Ordinances whereby his
Majesty's good Subjects may be governed in righteousness and good obedience:
To Vote with the House for redressing the many grievances of the Commonwealth,
If these be to subvert the Fundamental Laws of the Land, then Mr. Speaker am
I guilty of this Article in giving my Vote against the Earl of Strafford; in
Voting those acts already made and passed by his Majesty; in Voting against the
Bishops; in protesting to maintain the Fundamental Laws of the Land, the
true Protestant Religion, according to the true Doctrine of the Church of
England: I say then Mr. Speaker, in this am I guilty of high Treason: but if
this be not to subvert the Laws of the Land; then (as I conceive) am I clear
from being guilty of this Article. Which I humbly leave to the consideration
of this Honorable House.

Under favor (Master Speaker) I come now to the other Articles of the Charge:
I will only recite the substance of them; for they all harp on one thing: To
endeavor to bring in an Arbitrary and tyrannical Form of Government: To
invite Tumults, and unlawful resorts of multitudes of people to the
Parliament, to be a color for our Designs: to raise Forces and Armies in this
Land to assist me in my practices: To invite foreign Princes to bring an Army
into the Land: To endeavor by Declarations, Proclamations, and otherwise to
alienate the hearts of his Majesty's loyal Subjects from their lawful
Sovereign thereby to avert their due obedience from him, and having an evil
opinion of his sacred Majesty, to side with us, and take our parts to effect
our Designs.

Give me leave I beseech you to speak concerning these crimes: And first Mr.
Speaker to endeavor to bring in an Arbitrary power and tyrannical Form of
Government in the Subject, is to deny Parliamentary proceedings: To oppose the
Laws enacted by Parliaments: To incense his Majesty against Parliaments; to
protect and Petition against the proceedings thereof, is to bring in an
Arbitrary form of Government. But to agree with the Parliament being a Member
thereof by Vote to make and enact Laws; I conceive this cannot be termed
Arbitrary; neither I persuade my self can the effects thereof be tyrannical.

Secondly, concerning the late Tumults about the House, I am innocent thereof;
neither came they by my invitation or encouragement: I always thought their
resorts in that sort were illegal and riotous: I have Voted with this House
for their suppressing; have assented to all Orders for their appeasing; agreed
with the Parliament in all things concerning their petitions and Requests: Then
I hope this Honorable House will not conceive me guilty of this Crime: if it
be one, and granted; yet I conceive far without the limits of Treason for these
Reasons.

1. They came not with Arms to force any thing to be done in Parliament; but
humbly by Petition showed their grievances, and desired redress thereof which
is one Privilege (and one of the greatest) to make their griefs known to a
Parliament, and by them to be relieved.

2. They offered no assault; but (being assaulted) preserved themselves and
departed.

3. The matter of their clamor was not against the King nor any of his
Counsel: It was not against the Lords, nor House of Commons: It was only
against Delinquents, against such as had been the greatest oppressors of them.

Thirdly, I come in a word to the other Articles of the charge which I intend
to speak of (under favor) altogether: I pray you who raised any army actually
in this Land but the trained Bands, which was done by the Parliament for the
security of their own persons in the Kings absence; and in obedience to his
commands, at his return home they were discharged, and afterward again
raised by his Majesty's own Royal Authority. And for inviting or procuring any
foreign Princes to aid me with an Army, I am altogether innocent therein; I
know of no aid required but from Scotland, which is done by the Parliament, my
Vote as a Member thereof only agreeing with them in the same: And that aid is
procured for his Majesty's assistance in subduing the Rebellion in Ireland, and
(as I conceive) for no other purpose. And for the last Article wherewith I am
charged, I hope to be cleared by this whole House for what Declamations or
Proclamations have been published but by Authority of the Parliament, joined
with his Majesty's most Royal Power and assent thereunto. It is manifest to
all people that nothing is published by the Parliament; or any of the Members
thereof, but tends to the winning of the hearts of his Majesty's Subjects to
dutiful obedience and entire love and tender affection toward their gracious
Sovereign. And I dare confidently say, that there is none of his Majesty's
Subjects that are true Protestants, and well affected to Religion; but upon the
least command of his Majesty's, will spend their dearest blood in defense of
his Sacred Person, his Queen and Princely Issue, of the Laws and
Constitutions of this Kingdom, of Parliaments and the Rights and Privileges
thereof; of Religion and the Doctrine of the Church of England. And therefore I
conceive I am far from intending any Treason against his Majesty or Kingdom.
And thus craving pardon for my presumption, and humbly thanking this Honorable
House for their patience, beseeching them to have a good opinion of me and my
Actions, that I may receive such Trial as to their wisdoms shall seem meet,
with my hearty Prayers for the happy continuance of this Parliament; to effect
and finish such great matters both in Church and State, as may advance Gods
glory, settle all things in a right frame for the good Government of this
Kingdom, and the everlasting peace and tranquillity of his Majesty and all his
Kingdoms.

Master Pymme his Speech in Parliament on Wednesday the 5. of January, 1641.
Concerning the Vote of the House of Commons, for his Discharge upon the
Accusation of High Treason, exhibited against himself, and others, etc.
Master Speaker,
THese Articles of High Treason exhibited by his Majesty against me and the
other Gentlemen in the accusation charged with the same Crime, are of great
consequence, and much danger to the State: The Articles in themselves, if
proved are according to the Laws of this Land High Treason.

First, to endeavor to subvert the Fundamental Laws of the Land, is by this
present Parliament in the Earl of Stafords Case adjudged High Treason.

Secondly, to endavour to introduce into this Kingdom an Arbytrarie and
tyrannical form of Government, is likewise Voted High Treason.

Thirdly, to raise an Army to compel the Parliament to make and enact Laws
without their free Votes, and willing proceedings in the same is High Treason.

Fourthly, to invite a foreign force to invade this Land, to favor our
designs agitated against the King and State, is High Treason.

Fifthly, to animate and encourage riotous Assemblies and tumults about the
Parliament to compel the King to assent to the Votes of the House is Treason.

Sixthly, to cast aspersions upon his Majesty and his Government, to alienate
the affections of His people, and to make his Majesty odious unto them is
Treason.

Seventhly, to endeavor to draw his Majesty's Army into disobedience, and to
side with us in our designs, if against the King, is Treason.

I desire, Master Speaker, the favor of this House to declare my self,
concerning this Charge, shall only parrallell and similize my actions since
the sitting of this Parliament with these Articles.

First, Master Speaker, if to Vote with the Parliament, as a Member of the
House, wherein all our Votes ought to be free: it being one of the greatest
privledges thereof to have our debates, disputes, and arguments in the same
unquestinable, be to endeavor to subvert the Fundamental Laws, then am I
guilty of the first Article.

Secondly, If to agree and consent with the whole State of the Kingdom by Vote
to ordain and make Laws for the good government of his Majesty's Subjects in
peace and dutiful obedience to their lawful Sovereign be to introduce an
Arbitrary and tyrannical form of government in the state, then am I guilty of
this Article.

Thirdly, If to consent by Vote with the Parliament, to raise a Guard, or
Traine-Band to secure and defend the persons or the Members thereof, being
environed and beset with many dangers in the absence of the King, and by Vote
with the House, in willing obedience to the Royal command of his sacred
Majesty, at his return, be actually to levy Arms against the King: then am I
guilty of this Article.

Fourthly, If to join with the Parliament, by free Vote to crave brotherly
assistance from Scotland, Kingdoms both under obedience to one Sovereign,
both his loyal and dutiful Subjects, to suppress the Rebellion in Ireland
which lies gasping every day in danger to be lost from his Majesty's
subjection, be to invite and encourage a foreign power to invade this
Kingdom: then am I guilty of High Treason.

Fifthly, If to agree with the greatest and wisest Council of State, to
suppress unlawful tumults and riotous assemblies, to agree with the House by
Vote to all Orders, Edicts, and Declarations for their repelling, be to raise
and countenance them in their unlawful actions, then am I guilty of this
Article.

Sixthly, If by free Vote to join with the Parliament in publishing of a
Remonstrance in setting forth Declarations against Delinquents, in the State
against Incendiaries between his Majesty's Kingdom, against ill Counselors
which labor to avert his Majesty's affection from Parliaments against those
ill affected Bishops that have innovated our Religion, oppressing painful,
learned and godly Ministers with vexatious, suites and molestations in their
unjust Courts, by cruel sentences of Pillory, and cutting off their ears,
greatisines, Banishment, and perpetual Imprisonment, If this Mr. Speaker be to
cast aspersions on his Majesty and his government, and to alienate the hearts
of his Loyal Subjects good Protestants, and well affected in Religion, from
their due obedience to his Royal Majesty, then am I guilty of this Article.

Seventhly, If to consent by Vote with the Parliament to put forth
Proclamations, to send Declarations to his Majesty's Army, to annimate and
encourage the same to his Loyal obedience, to give so many Subsidies, raised
so many great sums of money willingly for their keeping on foot to serve his
Majesty upon his Royal command on any occasion, to apprehend and attach as
Delinquents, such persons in the same as are disaffected both to his sacred
Person, his Crown and Dignity, to the wise and great Counsel of Parliament to
the true and Orthodox Doctrine of the Church of England, and the true Religion
grounded on the Doctrine of Christ himself, and established, and confirmed by
many Acts of Parliament in the Reign of Hon. 8. E. 6. Queen Elizab. and King
James of blessed memory, if this Mr. Speaker be to draw his Majesty's Army into
disobedience, and to side with us in our Designs, then I am guilty of this
Article.

Now, Master Speaker, Having given you a touch concerning these Articles,
comparing them with my Actions, ever since I have had the Honor to sit in this
House as a Member thereof: I humbly crave your consideration, and favorable
judgment of them, not doubting, they being weighed in the even scales of your
Wisdoms, I shall be found innocent and clear from these Crimes laid to my
charge.

Master Speaker. I humbly crave your further patience to speak somewhat
concerning the exhibiting of this Charge which is to propose to your
Considerations these propositions, viz.

First, whether to exhibit Articles of High Treason by his Majesty's own hands
in this House agrees with the rights and privileges thereof.

Secondly, Whether for a guard armed to come into the Parliament to accuse any
of the Members thereof, be not a breach of the privilege of Parliament.

Thirdly, Whether any of the Members of Parliament being so accused may be
committed upon such accusation, without the whole consent thereof.

Fourthly, Whether a Parliament has not privilege to bail any Member so
accused.

Fifthly and lastly, Whether if any of the Members of a Parliament so charged,
and by the House discharged without release from his Majesty may still sit in
the House as members of the same. And thus Master Speaker, I humbly crave
pardon for my presumption in so far troubling this Honorable House, desiring
their favorable consideration of all my Actions, and that I may have such a
trial as to this wise Counsel shall think meet, cheerfully submitting my
self and actions to the righteous judgments of the same.

FINIS.

