A SATYR AGAINST SEPERATISTS, OR, THE CONVICTION OF Chamber-Preachers, and
other Chismatickes contrary to the Discipline of this our Protestant Profession.

By A. C. GENEROSUS.

LONDON, Printed for A. C. 1642.

A SATYR Against Seperatists.
I Have been where so many Roundheads dwell,
that there are only more of them in Hell.
Where silenced Ministers enough were met
To make a Synod; And may make one yet.
Their blessed liberty they have found at last
And talked for all those years of silence past.
Like some halfe-pin'd, and hunger starved man,
Who when he next gets victells, surfets than.
Each Country of the World sen^ us back some
Like several winds which from all quarters come,
To make a storm. As't haps its Sunday too,
And the chief Rabbis preach. To Church i will go
Where (that we men more patiently may hear
Nonsense) to Heaven at first he speaks it, there
He hummes, then whispers strait, and next does roar,
Now draws his long words, and now leaps them over,
So various tones, that I admired, and said
Sure all the Congregation in him praid,
'Twas the most teadious Soul the dullest he
That ever came to Doctrines twenty three,
And nineteen uses. How he draws his Humme
And quarters Haw, talks Poppy and Opium!
No fever a man's eyes could open keep,
All Argus body he would have preached a sleep
In half an hour. The Wauld O Lawd he cries
Lukewarmenesse: And this melts the Women's eyes.
They sob aloud, and strait aloud I snore
Till a kind Psalm tells me the dangers over.
Fles'd here with this escape, bouldly toth'hall
I venture, where I meet the brethren all.
First there to the grave Clergy I am led,
By whatsoever style distinguished,
Whether most reverend batchelors they be
Of Art, or reverend Sophes of no degree.
Next stand the walleyed Sisters in a row
Nay their scaldheaded children they come too.
And mingled amongst these stood a gaping there
Those few laymen that not 'oth Clergy were,
Now they discourse, some stories here relate
Of bloody Popish plots against the State:
Which by the spirit, and providence, no doubt,
The man that made has found most strangely out.
Some blame the King, others more modest say
He Is a good Man himself, but led away:
The women rip old wounds, and with their tears
Recount the loss of the three worthies Ears.
Away you fools 'twas for the good o'th men
They nere were perfect Roundheads until then.
But against Bishops they all rail, But I
Said bouldly I Would defend the Hierarchy,
Toth' Hierarchy they meant no harm at all,
But root, and branch, 'bout Bishops to it we fall,
I like a fool with reason, and those men
With wrested Scripture, a fly Deacon then
Thrust in his Ears, so speaks The Apostle too:
How speaks he friend? not in the nose like you.
Strait a Shee-zealot raging to me came
And said, o'th what do you call it part I am,
Bishops are limbs of Antichrist she cries.
Repent quoth I good woman, and be wise,
The Devil will have you else, that I can tell
Beleiv't, and poach those eges o'your eyes in hell.
An hidious storm was ready to begin,
When by most blessed fate the meat came in,
But then so long, so long a grace is sed,
That a good Christian when he goes to bed
Would be contented with a shorter Prayer.
Oh how the Saints enjoyed the creatures there!
Three Pasties in the minute of an hour,
Large, and well wrought, they root and branch devour,
As glibly as they would swallowed down Church land,
In vai^e the lesser Pies hope to withstand.
On Geese, and Capons with what zeal they feed?
And wondering cry* A goodly bird indeed!
Their spirits thus warn^d all the jests from them came
Upon the names of Land, Duck, Wren and Lamb,
Cannons and Bishops Seas, And one most wise
I like this innocent mirth at dinner cries,
Which now by one is done; and grace by two.
The Bells ring, and again to Church we go,
And now the Christian Bajaset begins;
The suffering Pulpit groans for Isreal's sins.
Sins which in number many though they be
And crying ones, are yet less loud then he:
His stretchd-out voice sedition spreds a far,
Nor does he only teach but act a war:
A sweats against the state* Church learning, sense,
Resolving to gain hell with Violence.
Down, down as low as earth must all things go
There was some hope the Pulpit would down too.
Work on, work on good zeal, but still I say
Law forbids thrashing on the Sabbath Day.
An hour lasts the two handed Prayer, and yet
Not a kind syllable can heaven get
Till to the Parliament he comes at last;
Just at that blessed word his furie's past:
And here he thanks God in a loving tone
But Laurd; and then he mounts, All is not done:
No would it were think I, for much I fear
That all will not be done this two hours here:
For now he comes to it, As you shall find it writ
Repeats his text, and takes his leave of it,
And strait to's Sermon in such furious wise
He'as made it what it is called, an exercise.
The Pulpit's his hot bath: the brethren's cheer
Rost-beife Mince-py, and Capon reeke out here.
Oh how he whips about six years ago
When superstitious decency did grow
So much in fashion? Now he whets his fist
Against the name of Altar, and of Priest,
The very name in his outrageous heat
Poor innocent Vox ad placitum he beat,
Next he cuffs out set Prayer, even the Lords,
And binds the spirit he says as 'twere with cords,
Yea with whipcords; Next must authority go,
Authoritie's a kind of binder too.
First then he intends to breath himself upon
Church Government: have at the King anon.
The thing's don straight, in poor six minutes space
Titus, and Timothy have lost their place;
Nay with The Apostles too it eene went hard,
All their authority two thumps more had mard,
Paul and St. Peter might expect their doom
Knew but this frantic fool they would bin at Rome
Now to the State he comes, talks an alarm,
And ath' malignant party flings his arm,
Defies the King, and thinks his Pulpit full
As safe a place for it, as the Knight at Hull.
What though no Magazeen laid in here be
Scarce all the Guns can make more noice then he.
Plots, plots he cries there is jelousies, and fears,
The politic Saints shake their misterious ears,
Till time (long time which does consume and wast
All things) t'an end his Sermon brought at last.
What would you have good soul, a reformation?
Oh by all means; but how? o'th newest fashion;
A pretty slight religion, cheap, and free,
I know not how, but you may furnished be
At Ipswich, Amsterdames a Kingdom near
Though to say truth you paid for that too dear,
No matter what it costs we will reform though
The Prentizes themselves will have it so.
They Will root out popery here whats' ever come.
It is decreed nor shall thy fate O Rome
Resist their Vow. They Will do it to a hair, for they
Who if upon Shrove-tuesday or May Day
Beat an old Baud, or fright poor whores they could,
Thought themselves greater then their founder Lud,
Have now vast thoughts, and scorn to set upon
Any whore less then her of Babylon.
Thei'r mounted high, contemn the humble play
Of trap, or footeball on an holyday
In Finesbury Fields. No it is their brave intent
Wisely t'advise the King, and Parliament,
The work in hand they will disaprove or back
And cry in the reformation, What do you lack?
Can they whole Shopbooks write, and yet not know
If Bishops have a right devine or no?
Or can they sweep their door, and shops so well,
And for to cleans a State as yet not tell?
No, study and experience makes them wise,
Why should they else watch late, or early rise:
Their wit so flows, that when they think to take
But Sermon notes, they often new Sermons make,
In Cheapside Cross they Baal and Dagon see,
Yet know it is gilt all ore as well as we.
Besides since men did that gay Idol rear
God has not blessed the herbwives trading there.
Go on brave Heroes, and perform the rest,
Increase your fame each day ayard at least,
'Till your high names are grown as glorious full
As the four London Prentises at R^dbull:
So may your goodly ears still prickant grow,
And no bold hare increase to mar the show,
So may your Morefields pastimes never fail,
And all the rooms about keep mighty Ale,
Ale your own spirits to raise, and cakes to appease
The hungry coinesse of your mistresses,
So may rare Pajents grace the Lord-Maiors show
And none find out that those are Idols too.
So may you come to sleep in Fur at last,
And some Smectimnian when your days are past
Your funeral Sermon of six hours rehearse,
And Haywood sing your praise in lofty verse.
But stay who have we next? mark and give room
The women with a long petition come,
Man's understanding is not half so great,
Th'Aple of knowledge 'twas they first did eat.
First then pluralities must be laid away
Men may learn thence to keep two wives they say,
Next schollership and learning must go down
Oh fie! your sex so cruel to the gown?
You don't the kindness of some Scholars know,
The Cambridge women will not have it so,
Learning's the Lamp o'th Land that shines so bright
You Are not s'immodest to put out the light
This is a Conventicle trick. What Is next
Oh with the Churches solemn form thei'r vexed,
The sign o'th Cross the forehead must not bear
'Twas only they were borne to plant signs there.
No Font to wash native concupiscence in
You like that itch still of orignall sin.
No solemn rights of Burial must be shown,
Pox take you, hang your selves, and then you will none.
No organ Idol with pure ears agree,
Nor Anthemes, why? nay ask nor them nor me,
There Is new Church Music found instead of those,
The women's sighs tuned to the teachers nose.
No Surplesses, no? why? why none do you crave?
Thei'r rags of Rome. I think what you would have,
You Would preach I troe, Why do so, there is no doubt
A fitter preaching age you will nere find out:
You Have got the spirit, you have fiery tongues it is true,
And by your talk they should be double too.
OH times, oh manners! when the Church is made
A prey, nay worse a scorn to every trade.
When every Tyler in his popular rage
(The Ages greatest Curse) enformes the Age,
When reason is for Popery suppressed
And learning counted Jesuitisme at least,
When without books Divines must studious be,
And without meat keep hospitality,
When men against ancient Father's reverend says
The many headed beast Smectimnius raise
That Hidra which would grow still, and increase,
But that at first he met an Hercules,
When the base rout the Kingdoms dirt, and sink,
To cleanse the Church and purge the Fountains think,
Such as whilst they might living waters take
Drink Belgian ditches, and the Lemnian lake,
VVhen'th Liturgy, which now so long has stood
Sealed by five reverend Bishops sacred blood
Does pass for nonsense, and but potage thought,
Pottage from Heaven like that to Daniel brought,
Their broaths, have such weed mix't, and made so hot,
The Prophets sons cry out, death's in the pot.
Oh Times, oh manners! But methinks I stay
Too long with them; Take thus much for this day:
Hereafter more, far since we now begin
You Will find wee've Muses too as well as Prinn.
FINIS.

