I do allow the Printing of this Book:

Jan. 24. 1677. Francis North.

A TREATISE Concerning Statutes, OR Acts of Parliament: And the Exposition
thereof.

WRITTEN By Sir Christopher Hatton, Late Lord Chancellor of ENGLAND.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Tonson, at his Shop under Gray's Inn Gate, next
Gray's Inn Lane. Anno 1677.

Academiae Cantabrigiensis Liber


A TABLE of this TREATISE.
CHAP. I. What a Statute or Act of Parliament is, whom it binds, and when it
begins to take force.
1. WHat an Act of Parliament is, p. 2. 2. The Royal Assent is Forma informans
and interna Statuti, p. 3. 3. The Royal Assent binds not the King or Queen,
except they be named, but stands for a Law to bind the Subjects, ib. 4. Some
Statutes proceed in respect of the benefit from the Prince only; some from the
Subjects only, and some contain benefit reciprocal; but the Law conveyeth it
ever from the person that has best right to grant, ib. 5. Statutes penned in
the name of the King only, are not his only Act, p. 6. 6. A Doubt of the
Statute of Rutland, p. 7. 7. Statutes Commence, or have Relation to the first
day of that Session wherein they are made, and all of them are counted simul
tempore, p. 8. 8. If the Cause Efficient of any offense be pardoned by
Parliament, the effect is pardoned, p. 10.
CHAP. II. A Division of Statutes.
1. STatutes are General pertaining to all Subjects, or particular; The benefit
of the General, all Judges are to yield though the party crave it not. But
Particular Statutes are not to be taken notice of without Pleading, p. 11. 2.
Of Statutes, some are General in Particularity, some Particular in Generality,
p. 12. 3. All Statutes that concern the King or Queen in their Body Politic,
are General; for they concern all Subjects, because every Subject is a mystical
Member of the Kings Body Politic, ib. 4. Some Statutes are general in Words,
and particular in Intent; some are particular in Words, and general in Intent,
p. 13. 5. In dubio haec legis praesumitur esse sententia quam verba ostendunt,
p. 18. 6. Ubi manifest pugnant legis voluntas, and verba, neutrum sequendum
est, verba quia non congruunt menti, men's quia non congruit verbis: So it was
in the Earl of Leicesters Case, and so it has been in diverse Statutes,
continued by unapt words, and so discontinued, p. 19.
CHAP. III. Another Division of Statutes.
1. OF Statutes, some be Beneficial, and some Penal; And because the most are
Penal to some, though Beneficial to the more part, they take their Denomination
of the prevalent quality, p. 22. 2. Of Statutes, some are Constitutive of new
Laws, and some Declaratory of old; some go to the Abridgment, and some to the
Enlargement of the Law. ib. 3. The Laws of England and Reasonable, are not
always Coincident nor Convertible, neither is it otherwise in the Law Civil, p.
25. 4. That our Law wants much of Perfection; for neither the Courts of Law,
nor of Conscience, can end all Causes, but some of necessity are left to the
conscience of the party. p. 26.
CHAP. IV. A Division of the Interpretation of Statutes.
1. OF Statutes, some must be interpreted after their Words, and some by
Equities, p. 28. 2. If all the Parliament were voluntarily assembled again, and
not by Writ, Eorum non esset interpretari statutum dubium, 29.
CHAP. V. Of Interpretations of Statutes according to Equities, so far forth as
Epicaia goes.
1. STatutes ampliative of the common Law, supplying a defect therein, and
reforming matters needful in the Commonwealth, to be reformed, may be expounded
by Equities, p. 31. 2. Statutes may sometimes be expounded by Equities, to
reach to things of Vicine Nature, especially if the one come in lieu of the
other, p. 34. 3. Some Statutes are expounded by Equities, because Law and
Reason repugn to the open sense of the words, p. 41. 4. Law and Reason have
been so effectual against the words of Statutes, that even in the Princes
Prerogative the words of Statutes have been controlled, p. 44. 5. An Act of
Parliament confirms all the Customs in a Town; those that are against Law and
Reason are not confirmed, p. 53. 6. If by an Act of Parliament an Act or Deed
is to be done with the Counsel, or in the presence of a party or parties; That
party is no Judge in the Cause, as in the Court of Star Chamber none are Judges
but the Lord Chancellor, and Treasurer, or Keeper, or two of them, p. 56. 7. A
Statute must bring forth some new fruit, and to such end it must be expounded
by Equity, p. 57. 8. If a Statute by the open sense punish one, and intends
another; it must be expounded by Equity, p. 61.
CHAP. VI. That some Statutes Penal may be expounded by Equity.
1. STatutes Penal may be so expounded, if the Exposition tend to favor, p.
63. 2. Statutes Penal, that remedy a great mischief, are taken by Equities, p.
66. 3. Likewise if they continue recompense, p. 70. 4. Statutes Penal, that
inflict most grievous Punishments, are never expounded by Equities, except the
word may bear an equity it self, p. 72. 5. Fineux thought, that the Statutes of
Attaints might not be expounded by Equities, because there was some former
remedy, p. 74.
CHAP. VII. Of Statutes that must be taken strictly.
1. STatutes which are grievously Penal, and those that derogate from the
Common Law, and those that save not in their general disposition persons
favorable in all Laws, must be strictly taken, p. 76. 2. Every private Statute
must be strictly taken if it be Penal, p. 80. 3. All Statutes appointing a
thing to be done in a Form, must be strictly taken touching the observance of
the Form, p. 81. 4. Statutes in the Affirmative, imply a Negative, when there
is no former Law nor Statute to the contrary, p. 83. 5. Some Statute in the
Affirmative defeateth, p. 84.
CHAP. I. What a Statute, or an Act of Parliament is; Whom that binds, and
when it begins to take force.
THis word Statute is more general than an Act of Parliament here in England,
for that contains Burghlees, and even very Ordinances in Court Leet, or
Court Baron. Moreover this word Statuimus, perpetuitatem designat; whereas Acts
of Parliament do expire many of them by time. But to omit the force of words,
and to come to the matter intended:

An Act of Parliament is a 1.
Law agreed upon by the King or Queen of England, having Regal Authority, the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons lawfully assembled; which takes
strength and life by the assent Royal; so that I account the rest of the
consents to be parcel of the substance, and the Royal assent to be Forma
interna and 2.
informans, quae dat rei esse; yet this agreement binds not the King or
Queen, except they be named, if it be onerous; for it must be taken as 3.
agreed unto, for a law to bind her Subjects, her self standing in Pristine
liberty. And though 4.
Acts of Parliament be consisting of so many consents, yet sometimes in respect
of the benefit, some of them seem to proceed from subjects only to the Prince,
as those of Dismes and Subsidies, and some other of like nature. Sometimes they
seem to proceed from the Prince only, as Pardons and Privileges, Confirmations
of Customs, and such like; And some have reciprocal benefit, as the Statute of
36 E 3. c. 11. ordains, that where the Commons of the Realm had granted to
the King a great Subsidy, the King in consideration thereof granted, that after
three years, nothing should be taken or demanded of the said Commons, but only
the ancient custom of half a mark of every sack of Wool. But to whom soever
the fruit redoundeth, there is no such absurdity that one person is both Agent
and Patient; for the Law conveigheth the thing whether it concern many or one,
from them or him that best right has to give the matter passage to such as the
Court is agreed should receive benefit thereof. And because every man's consent
in England is employed in the persons there assembled, it is a hard matter to
say, that wrong or error is there committed. Quia concurrit consensus 5.
omnium quorum interest. Yet I cannot say but an Act of Parliament may err,
whereof I mean to speak in more convenient place.

Now whereas diverse Statutes be penned in the name of the King, we are not to
think that the King was sole Enactor; for the Statute De donis conditionalibus,
says; Dominus Rex perpendens necessarium, and utile fore in casibus predictis
apponere remedium, statuit, quod voluntas donatoris, etc. Yet never was Statute
with greater consent at the making, nor better acceptance until this day, put
in practice by the subjects, for it is the ground and fountain out of which
flow all intailes; Only I call to remembrance, that when Baron Frevile, and
Baron Luke in the Exchequer held opinion, that that Court had no jurisdiction
in Common Pleas, and among other Luke cited the Statute of Rutland to that
purpose; Sir Edward Saunders, Chief 6.
Baron, whose opinion I account great in Law, said, that the Statute of Rutland
was no Statute, but the Kings pleasure. And therefore I forbear to conclude
generally that all Statutes which are so named are written by the consent of
the King and Subjects; yet I know none of that kind, except the Statute of
Rutland be such a one.

The time when the Lords 7.
Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons assembled have agreed upon any Law,
and the Royal assent is given to the same, is not the beginning of that Law,
for it has Relation and is accounted to commence from the first day of that
Session of Parliament, and all the Acts that are concluded upon at one Session,
are accounted Simul tempore; so that if it be not limited at what day the
Statute shall begin to take force, some might be offenders of the Law before it
were known. And saving that, that it is meet to credit such men of Learning, as
was Justice Hales, and diverse other Justices, I should never think, that any
Law positive, or constitution, should bind, but that which is rightly ordained,
and also duly published; I say, Rite lata 8.
Lex, and debito publicata. And because I am in matter of Relation, I add this,
That whenever a general Pardon is by Parliament, if the cause efficient of
any offense be pardoned, the effect is pardoned. As for example; A man was
stricken before the beginning of a Parliament, in the time whereunto the Pardon
had relation, and the party stricken died after in a time exempt from the
benefit of the Pardon; this death nevertheless was pardoned, because the stroke
which was the cause efficient was pardoned.

CHAP. II. A Division of Statutes.
OF Statutes, some be General, and some Particular: Those that extend to 1.
all Subjects are General, and the benefit of them the Judges in every Court
are of office bound to yield to every Subject, when his case before them
needs that it should so be, whether they be pleaded or not; and whether the
Parties crave it, or not. But those that are Particular, all men that will have
any benefit of them, must plead, or else the Judges are not to take notice of
them.

Of Particular Statutes, some 2.
are general in a particularity, or particular in a generality; as those that
concern all Sheriffs, all Escheators, or any other sort of men, and not all
men; some concern one or a few persons particularly.

All those Statutes that concern the King or Queen in 3.
their body Politic, are general, for they concern all Subjects. Wherefore the
Statute whereby the Lady Latimer being Queen, as lawfully espoused to King
Henry the Eighth, had a distinct capacity to take, give and grant of the King,
or to the King, or of, and to any other person or persons; concerns all the
Subjects, and is general, because every Subject is a mystical Member of the
King's body politic.

A harder matter than is yet 4.
spoken of remains, because some Statutes are general in Words, and
particular in Intent; some are particular in words, and general in intent: Of
which sort I know no great number, and to set down a rule for them it is very
hard, other than to say, when the intent is proved, that must be followed; Ut
verba serviant intentioni and non intentio verbis: which is allowable in all
laws; for the words are the Image of the law, and the meaning is, the substance
or body of the matter; but whenever there is departure from the words to the
intent, that must be well proved that there is such meaning. The Statute of
Circumspecte agatis, names but the Bishop of Norwich and his Clergy, and it is
extended and understood to belong to all Bishops in this land, and is a notable
boundary to distinguish the Spiritual from the Temporal Jurisdiction. In the
seventh year of King Edward the Sixth, a Statute was made, that if any
Treasurer, Receiver, or other Minister accomptant, their Deputy or Deputies,
receive of any person any sum of Money, or other profit of or for the payment
of any Fees, Annuities, Pensions, etc. more or otherwise than he lawfully might
by former Statute, that then the said Treasurer, etc. should pay for every
penny otherwise taken, vi s. viii d. and though the words be of any Treasurer,
etc. yet it is not understood to belong to any other but the Kings Officers,
and not any other man's. I busy not my self at this time much to draw such as
these are under a rule, and in the cases rehearsed, there is pregnant reason
why the one should be taken generally, and the other particularly; for the
first has been so taken ever since the making thereof, and besides the benefit
thereof agrees as conveniently to every other Bishop and his Clergy, as to the
Bishop of Norwich; and the second is taken particularly for all the general
words; both because the preamble which is the key to open many Statutes, as
Justice Dier says, favors and gives light to that exposition; and other
men may be spoken with themselves if their Officers abuse men, though the King
cannot at men's pleasures be come unto; and it is chiefly ordained for Religious
Persons that had Pensions of the King, who were delayed and defrauded by the
King's Officers; and as in these cases, so will there appear special reason of
other Statutes in this kind, or else they must be taken according to their
words; for as Civilians say, In dubio haec legis praesumitur esse sententia
quam verba ostendunt. 5.
But if the words and mind of the Law be clean contrary, that Law or Statute is
void. Vbi manifest pugnant legis voluntas and verba, neutrum sequendum 2.
est. Verba quia non congruunt menti, men's quia non congruit verbis. As for
example; A Nobleman of this Realm lately deceased, was attainted, 3.
de facto, of High Treason, in Queen Mary's time, and in an Act of Parliament
it was 4.
intended to confirm the judgment; and those words were void, because the
Attaindor was void by mis-recital; and by consequence, for want of
Jurisrisdiction in the Commissioners; and because it was void, it could not be
confirmed; for that which is weak may be made stronger, but that which has no
subsistence cannot be corroborated: Et confirmare est illud quod est firmum
facere, Likewise diverse Statutes that should have been continued in Parliaments
have been misrecited, and by that occasion, discontinued and dissolved. Out of
the Premises arises the solution of one great doubt, which is; Whether the
Parliament may err, or not; for it is lately declared wherein it has erred.
And though there be no Court higher to convince or pronounce upon the error,
yet when the matter is plain, every Judge may esteem of it as it is, and being
void, is not bound to allow it for good and forcible.

CHAP. III. Another division of Acts of Parliament.
WHere there are not Essential Differences Divisive, men that would use
plainness in Treatises of Learning, are allowed to divide more than once, and
so do I at this time: Wherefore I say again, of Statutes, some be Penal, 1.
some are Beneficial or Gracious; And again, some Statutes are constitutive of
new Laws, 2.
some declaratory of old; some go to the abridgment of the Common Law, some to
the enlargement. I will not stand upon defining the Members of these divisions,
nor show examples; for they bear their Names and Natures in their forehead, so
far forth as does in this precurse and preparation to the rest of this work;
Only I will say with Sir Edward Saunders, late chief Baron, of worthy memory,
that all Statutes, in a manner, are Penal 6.
to some; but if they be beneficial to very many, and punish a few, they are to
be counted gracious, taking that denomination of the prevalent quality. And
whereas I have said, that some Statutes are constitutive of new Laws, and go to
the enlargement of the Common Law, I cannot tell how it might be taken of some,
who hold the Law to be so perfect, and so large, as Reason is in every thing,
and beyond Reason a man cannot go, for Reasonable is the Difference
constitutive, and convertible with man. But our Laws are not grown to that
perfection, nor the grounds of Law are not all so perfect, but that the
contraries of some are as reasonable as our Laws. As for example, The law or
custom of the eldest Sons inheriting the whole Land; how does the consent of
the Laws of other Countries go against that? and the number of such laws are
many. Wherefore seeing Reason must be bridled and restrained in the course of
the Law, the law of England and 3.
reasonable be not convertible, nor always coincident together. I know that
Reason may be called the Mother of the Law, and Maxims the Foundations, in
respect of the more part of the Laws; and Maxims may not be denied, but they
may be compared, and must be reconciled in every case where they seem to
differ; but all this negotiation brings us a less matter than that which
Tully de legibus speaks of, Lex est summa ratio, etc. Neither is this defect
peculiar to our law, for the Civil Law says, Non omnium quae a majoribus
constituta sunt, ratio reddipotest, And we are so far from Perfection 4.
in our Law, that both our Courts of Law, yea, and our Courts of Conscience, as
the Author of the Book called, The Doctor and the Student, says, must leave of
necessity some things that need reformation to the Conscience of the party
himself; and then may Acts of Parliament be made right well, that are
constitutive of new Laws, and corrective of old.

CHAP. IV. A Division of Interpretation of Statutes.
NOw that Statutes are divided, let us likewise 1.
divide their Interpretation, which is of two sorts: One is, according to the
precise words of every Statute; the other according to equity: For when the
words express not the intent of the Makers, the Statute must be further
extended than the bare words; but ever it must be thought, that the meaning of
the Makers was such, when there is any proceeding other than the words bear,
for it were an absurd thing to make an exposition go further than either the
words, or the intention of the Statutaries reached unto, especially seeing a
great part of them, are by election, namely all of the Lower House, and then by
the law Civil, the Assembly 2.
of Parliament being ended, Functi sunt officio, and their Authority is
returned to the Electors so clearly, that if they were altogether assembled
again for interpretation by a voluntary meeting, Eorum non esset interpretari.
For the Sages of the Law whose wits are exercised in such matters, have the
interpretation in their hands, and their Authority no man takes in hand to
control: wherefore their Power is very great, and high, and we seek these
Interpretations as Oracles from their mouths.

CHAP. V. Of Interpretation of Statutes according to Equity.
ALl Statutes may be expounded by Equity so 1.
far forth as Epicaia goes, that is, an exception of the Law of God; and Law
of Reason from the general words of the Law of Man; for such cases are taken
for understood, and what is understood is not out of the Law. By the Law of
Reason, I mean, as the Author of the Book called, The Doctor and Student, does
the Law Eternal, or the Will of God, known to every man by the light of natural
Reason; and by the Law of God, I mean the Old and New Testaments, not favoring
their Opinions, that by circuity of Argument would batter or beat down any good
Law of man by color of contrariety thereof to the Word of God, when the truth
in plainness of dealing is otherwise to be discerned. The Statute of E. 3.
ordains that no man upon pain of Imprisonment should give Alms to a valiant
Beggar: yet if one meet with such an one in so cold weather, and so light
apparel, that if he have no clothes given him, he shall die before he shall
come to any Town: If a man give him Apparel, he offends not the Law; for
there is an inward dispensation by the bond of Christian Charity and Compassion.

By the Statute De frangentibus prisonam, It is Felony if a Prisoner break
Prison; yet if the Prisonhouse be on fire, and the Prisoners break it, they
are excused by the Law of Reason. And this is as evidently true, as it is
manifest that the Law punishing Bloodshed is not against the Barber or Surgeon
that lets Blood in exercise of his Faculty, for the health of man; and that
the Statute Demalefactoribus in parcis, Means not to punish any but unlawful
Hunters, and not such as have leave to shoot at a Deer, and shooting hit a Pale
or Tree.

Furthermore, to exceed the limits of Epicaia, some Statutes 2.
are ampliative of the Common Law, reforming matters needful in the
Commonwealth, and supplying a defect in the Common Law. As the Statute that
gives Action against the Warden of the Fleet, for suffering to go at large any
Prisoner, there being by judgment, at the suit of any Party, by Bail, Mainprise
or Baston, without agreeing with the Parties, and to recover the value of the
debt at the Keepers hands: This is extended to all Sheriffs, and Gaolers, or
Keepers of Prisons; Yet some think this Reformation to be drawn from the
Statute of Westminster the 2d. giving Auditors power to imprison Accomptants
found in Arrearage; but from whethersoever Statute the Reformation proceeds,
common utility and necessity requiring that those that are justly condemned,
should be safely kept to satisfy the Law, and that the negligence or lewdness
of Gaolers, or other Officers, should not make the grave judgments of the Sages
of the Law clusory, and the hope of Suitors frustrate, upholdeth this
dilatation. But in all Expositions by Equity, there must be parity or minority
of Reason, and good judgment of evident utility public, and necessity for
supplying defects in the Law; and it would be utility or necessity proved
otherwise than by circuit of argument, or far borrowed circumstance, that is to
say, plain and evident.

The Statute De donis conditionalibus, has but three kinds of intails
specified; and yet there are diverse other founded upon the equity thereof,
though the Statute have not every man's good word; but as the Doctor and Student
rehearses, is calumniated of diverse as brought in of self-love and
singularity, by those Lords and Gentlemen that were then in the
Parliament House, for advancement of their Blood, and perpetuation of their
Honors and Names, yet are all those extensions received lovingly and
generally: And seeing it not without some man's refragation so well born out and
allowed, I cannot think the contrary, but that when more plain and evident
utility public, and necessity for supplying defects in the Law, shall be ready
to warrant expositions, by equity they will be allowed: For if all Estates
tailed, were Fee-simple Conditional, as they were before that Statute, men
would think the Law as good and perfect as now it is, and as godly, leaving
liberty, for the time, to the Possessor, to bestow his Land in Fee, as God
should move his heart, which many times would be better than upon his own Blood
degenerated from ancient Virtue. Nevertheless, these enlargements of this
Statute, De donis conditionalibus, are quietly retained, and lovingly embraced,
because they have the surer, that is to say, the abler sort to maintain them;
for commonly every man possessed of any good thing, be it Land, or whatsoever
else is dear to man, thinks that Law to have good savor and relish, that
conveyeth and conducteth the same to his Posterity.

The Statute of circumspecte agatis, names only the Bishop of Norwich, and his
Clergy, and yet appertains to all the Bishops in England; and is so taken of
all men without exception, which I suppose to be for the causes above recited;
that is, because it makes to public good; that is, to concord between the
Governors Spiritual and Temporal, and to the quiet of the Subjects generally,
containing a distinction in very main points of the Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical
from the Temporal.

Moreover some Statutes are 3.
expounded by Equities, to reach to things of Vicine nature and condition; and
sometimes, because the one comes in lieu of the other, and the things lie
under the same necessity of Reformation that the cases expressed are under; and
therefore the Statute that says, that the Executor that first comes by
distress, shall be taken, is extended to Administrators. The Statute of Westminster.
2. cap. 3. says, Admittantur heredes vel illi ad quos spectat reversio, and by
equity of the same he in the remainder is received. The Statute of 13 R. 2.
gives receipt for faint pleading, and is extended to faint defending. The
Statute of Acton Burnell says, If Praysers prize Goods too high, they should
take them by the price, this is construed to reach to extenders of Land. The
Statute of Westminster. 2. that gives, Cui in vita, is extended to Cui ante
divortium. The Statute of E. 3. That Executors shall have Action of Trespass,
De bonis asportatis in vita testatoris, is extended to Administrators. The
Statute of Glouc. cap. 7. is, that where Tenant in Dower alieneth, he in
reversion shall have Writ, In casu proviso, and by the equity thereof, tenant
by the courtesy, tenant for term of life, alien in reversion have Writs of
Entry, In casu consimili. The Statute of Glouc. cap. 1. is, that the Disseisee
shall recover damage against every one that is found tenant after the
Disseisin, and by the equity thereof Writ of Intrusion is founded.

Sometimes Statutes are expounded by Equities, because, 4.
Law and Reason, repugn to the open sense of the words, and therefore they are
reformed to consonance of Law and Reason. The Statute of 25 E. 3. That by
exception of non tenure of parcel, no Writ shall abate, reaches not to things
entire, as a Manor, for non tenure of any parcel of a Manor, abateth the whole
Writ, because a man by former Law may not demand any entire thing without
foreprise of such parcel as is not in the Tenants possession, and therefore the
Statute is understood of things several, as of Acres, Perches, and such like.
The Statute of Westminster. 2. of Cessavit, says, Fiant brevia de ingressu heredi
petentis super heredem tenentis, and super eos quibus alienata fuerint
hujusmodi tenementa. And yet if the Demandant die, the Heir shall not have the
Cessavit, whereby they should be recovered, because the Arrearages come not to
the Heir in right. The Statute of Glouc. ordains, That if Tenant by the
courtesy alien, and against the Heir garranty be pleaded, if he have Assets,
to him in Fee-simple, descended from the same Ancestor, he shall be barred; but
if he have not Assets to him already descended, but that after they shall
descend; then the Tenant shall have recovery by Writ of Judgment, that shall
issue out of the Roll of the Justices, before whom the Plea was pleaded; and by
the equity of the same Statute, if with Assets, garranty of the Tenant in tail
be pleaded, where he has not Assets, but after Assets is to descend, there the
Tenant shall have Scire facias, to have the Assets, and not the Land tailed;
because that the Issue might after recover that from him, and so the Statute
gives to the Tenant the thing aliened, and to the Issue the Assets; and by the
equity the Issue shall have the thing aliened, and the Tenant shall have the
Assets: and this is because that former law would not suffer the Land entailed
effectually to recompense the party disherited, and so the Statute should have
served to little purpose, or none, if it had not been thus expounded. 32 H. 8.
A Statute was made against buying of Titles of Land, which Justice Mountague in
the Commentaries expounds thus: Except such Person and Persons have been in
possession thereof [making a full point there] or of reversion, or remainder
thereof [making another point there] or have taken the Rents or Profits
thereof, by the space of one year; so that these words by the space of one year
shall be referred only to the last clause of receiving Rents, and so he in the
reversion or in the remainder, or he that has been in possession, though it
were but an hour, has power to alien; for he says, that understanding the
Statute, according to the letter, the Baron being possessed by the space of a
year, in the right of his Feme Tenant in tail, might make a Lease, or alien,
and he that should enter for mortmain, or by escheat, or recover by any title,
might be restrained for a year. All which is inconvenient, and to avoid such
inconvenience, the Statute is expounded by such pointing and reference. The
Statute of Articuli super chartas, against Champerty, hinders not the Father
from infeoffing his Son and Heir. And the Statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 11. which
says, that in Appeals it shall be inquired who be Abettors, extends not to
the Heir that abetteth his Mother. Anno 5 E. 6. A Statute was made, that if any
Treasurer, Receiver, or other Minister Accomptant, or Deputy or Deputies to
them, receive of any person any sum of Money, or other Profits, of or for the
payment of any Fees, Annuities, Pensions, or Warrants, more or otherwise than
he might by former Statutes in such cases, provided that then the Treasurer,
etc. so offending, should pay for every penny, or penny worth so taken by way
of forfeit, vis. viii d. to be recovered in any of the Kings Courts, etc.
though these words extend to all men's Officers, yet they are restrained to the
Kings Officers only, even for the evidence of Reason; for other men may be
spoken with themselves, especially to remedy injustice offered by their
Officers; and there is no Statute that limiteth the Fees of other men's Officers
besides the Kings, and by the Preface of the Act it may appear to be a remedy
for those that the Kings Officers defrauded of their Pensions, granted out of
Religious houses; and Justice Dyer says, that the Preface is the Key to open
the intent of the Makers of Acts of Parliament; and Civilians say, that
Cessante statuti prooemio cessat ipsum 5.
statutum; for Reason has been so forcible against the words of Statutes, that
even in the Princes Prerogative, the words of Statutes have been controlled, as
the Statute of Prerogativa Regis, says, Dominus Rex habebit custodiam omnium
terrarum, eorum qui de ipso tenent in capite per servitium militare, de quibus
ipsi tenentes seisui fuerunt in dominico suo ut de feodo, die quo obierunt de
quocunque tenuerunt. Yet if the Kings Tenants have Lands in Knights Service,
holden of the King; and other Lands descending from the Mother, holden of
another Lord, and die without Issue; the Lands descending from the Mother shall
not be in the Kings hands, for they go to the next heir of the Mothers side,
and the heir of the Father shall not have them; wherefore the King, who is but
to have the custody of the heir of the Father, shall have but those Lands that
to him descended, and not those that went to another heir. The Statute of
Westminster. 2. touching View, which provideth that View shall not be granted in the
second Writ, if the Party abate the first, Per exceptionem dilatoriam, is
restrained; where it is abated by such an exception dilatory as the Court or
another Tanquam amicus Curiae might abate it by. An Act of Parliament
confirms all the Customs of a Town; there are some against Law and Reason,
those are not confirmed. 3 H. 7. cap. 1. It is ordained, That the Chancellor
and Treasurer of England, for the time being, and Keeper of the Privy Seal, or
two of them, calling to them a Bishop, and a Temporal Lord of the King's most
honorable Privy Council, and the two Chief Justices of the King's Bench and
the Court of Common Pleas; or in their absence, two other Justices have
Authority to examine Riots, etc. And it is holden, that none are Judges in this
Court, but the Chancellor, and Treasurer, and Keeper, or two of them; and the
other are but Assistants, and not Judges; yet it is held an error if they call
not such persons as is limited by the Act; for Law and Reason say, Licet
presentia aut consilium alicujus requiratur, in aliquo actu, requirens non
tenetur illud sequi.

Finally, Every Statute does 7.
either bring forth some new thing, or is declaratory of former Law, and
therefore every Statute must be expounded to have some good operation, not as a
thing needless or void. The Statute of 32 H. 8. c. 13. providing that Leases
for years made by Abbathies, etc. shall be good for 21 years, only from the
time of the making, if so many years be by the demise, lease, or grant
specified; or else for so many years as be expressed, so that the old Rent be
reserved, and so that the said Lease or Leases exceed not 21 years: This first
(so that) is expounded to be conditional, and the second (so that) is but
declaratory; for if the old Rent be not reserved, all is void, through breach
of the condition: but the second, so that the said Lease or Leases exceed not
21 years, does only limit the meaning, and declare that such Leases shall be
good for so long, and no longer; and if there be mention of more years, the
residue that exceed 21 are void, but not the whole term; and if it should be
otherwise expounded, the latter words would overthrow all the intent of the
former, for all those Leases for the most part exceeded 21 years. The Statute
of Glouc. cap. 3. says, In like manner be not the Heirs of the Feme, after the
death of the Father and Mother, barred of Action to demand the Heritage of his
Mother, whereof no Fine was levied: These words [no Fine] are taken for no
lawful Fine; that is to say, levied both by Father and Mother, for else it had
been without any operation; for a Fine levied by Father only, was void before,
and therefore that the Statute might bring forth some good fruit, it is
expounded as before is said. Likewise if a Statute in common sense of the
letter, corrrect one person, whereas it is intended to chastise another, it
must be reduced to the true meaning of the Makers. As the Statute, 8.
Depannis, against Fore-stallers, made 25 E. 3. says, That the Goods and
Cattels by Fore-stallers bought, shall be forfeited to the King: If the Buyer
therefore agree with the Seller here the penalty might lie upon the Seller, who
peradventure never sold to a Fore-staller before, and the Fore-staller might go
free if the Goods might be taken away as forfeited, so soon as the Buyer and
Seller were agreed: And therefore to satisfy the extent of the Law, which is
to punish the Fore-staller, agreement executed is taken, which is agreement and
payment; and not agreement executory, which is before payment.

CHAP. VI. That some Statutes Penal may be expounded by Equities.
STatutes Penal, may be, and 1.
commonly have been taken by Equity so far forth as the exposition applies to
favor and benignity, or to the propagation of a good Law, supplying a former
defect in the execution of Justice; for the Exposition is not Penal, but
serves to the impenalling of rigorous Law in some points, according to the
Rule, Odia restringi convenit. In the restraint of rigor, there is greater
favor than in some Statutes favorable, or giving men privilege or
pre-eminence; for these do but increase a man's good Estate, those other save
the Head, preserve Liberty, deliver from Pains Corporal and Pecuniary, and
sometimes also from the note of Ignominy; but I cannot say of the contrary
part, that Laws favorable and indulgent may be straightened, Quia favores
convenit ampliari. And I refuse to follow Cicero, saying, Melius est innocentem
damnari quam nocentem causam non dicere, For it is against all Christian Laws,
humane Infirmity, and Corruption, and man's often falls considered. Moreover
Pains and Penalties inflicted for Transgression, are chiefly for Example sake;
Ut paena unius sit metus multorum; the harm and damage done being many times
irreparable; in which case, it were great folly to propose for terror any to
punishment, whom the Beholders should pity for that cause to be afflicted.

And therefore to show what Statutes Penal may be extended 2.
by Equity, I suppose most of those Statutes Penal which are devised to supply
a defect in the Common Law, or to remedy a great mischief in the Commonweal,
are extended by Equity unto cases under Majority, or parity of Reason with the
Statute established, as may appear by the Statute of R. 2, against the Warden
of the Fleet, for suffering any Prisoner there being by Judgment, at the suit
of any Party, to go out of Prison, without agreeing with the party, which is
worthily extended to all Sheriffs and Gaolers, or Keepers of Prisons; for
though this Act be Penal, yet there is so great expediency in the enlarging
thereof, that all men allow it.

The Statute of Acton Burnell likewise before mentioned, against Praysers of
Goods, that prized them too high, is applied to extenders of Lands, with diverse
other of that kind, which I omit, because it is needless to make doubt of that
point.

Secondly, I suppose that those Statutes Penal, or Restrictive of the Liberty
that the Law otherwise gives to man, as are in the most wise men's judgments
either equally, or more beneficial than they are penal, may be extended by
Equities, as the Statute of West. 2. cap. 1. says, Non habeant illi quibus
tenementum sic fuit datum sub condition, potestatem alienandi; abridgeth the
Donees in tail from doing their pleasure with their Lands, but it recompenseth
them in the eye of the wise, by the reservation and safe keeping thereof to the
behoof of their Posterities; and because here is equal good to the evil or
damage that they seem to sustain, this Statute is the rather extended by
Equities, though there be diverse good reasons beside for the same; for where
there is but mention of the Donees, it is extended to all their Heirs
infinitely. But some may say, and that truly, though this Statute be
restrictive of a man's free disposition of his Lands, yet it is not properly
called Penal, and therefore I go to another point.

And thirdly, It is to be noted, that if a Statute Penal 3.
give but recompense, though the recompense be somewhat liberal, it may be
extended by Equities; and this agrees with the Civil Law, that allows a
Statute Penal to be extended, that is, Bonum animae licet damnosum rebus, as
the Statute of Waste says, if any make waste of that he holds Ex dimissione,
is extended to Land, holden Ex legatione. The Statute of 7 H. 8. cap. 1. which
says, that the Defendant shall recover damages; if the Plaintiff be barred in
second deliverance, is expounded to give the Defendant damage if the Plaintiff
be nonsuit. The Statute of 4 H. 7. cap. 17. says, If Cestuy que use of Lands,
holden by Knights service die, and no Will by him declared, that the Lord shall
have the Ward; for it is counted as no Will to hinder that purpose, because
such uses were invented to defraud their Lords of their Wards, and Wardships
come in respect of Knights-Service, to be done by persons thereto unable for
imbecility and tender years, and are a kind of recompense.

And to be short, there are few Statutes Penal, which may 4.
not be expounded by Equities, that are Beneficial to the Commonwealth, or
more part of good men, and Penal but to a few, not worthy to be favored in
such cases, if it so please the Judges of the Land to agree. Yet always I
except those that inflict most grievous Punishments, for those are never
extended by severity further than their words in some sense may bear. Indeed
sometimes containing them within the words, though in an unusual sense, they
are largely taken: as the Statute that makes it Treason for the Servant that
kills his Master, touches him as grievously that kills his Mistress,
making that word to serve both Sexes. But the words in some sense stand always
where the Penalties be very grievous, and therefore the Statute of Attaints,
and the Statute of 32 H. 8. of buying Titles, are not expounded by Equities.
But 5.
Fyneux, Chief Justice in King Henry the Seventh's time says, That touching
Attaints, there was yet further reason why they should not be taken for
Equities, because former Laws or former Statutes, left them not altogether
unpunished; whose Opinion I think to stand good at this day.

CHAP. VII. Of Statutes that must be taken strictly.
NOw to speak of Statutes that are taken strictly, it may be briefly done; for
all must be taken within the compass of their own words, which have not some
warrant by Law, or by good reason to be taken by Equities. And yet to handle
this matter somewhat more specially, I agree that those Statutes which are
grievously 1.
Penal, and those that derogate from the Common Law, and those that save not in
their general disposition persons commonly in all Laws favored, as Infants,
Femes Covert, Men beyond the Seas, Men in service of their Prince, such as are
imprisoned, such as are of Non sane memory, must be strictly taken; except
there be especial Warrant to take them by Equities. Likewise those Statutes
that go to the abridgment of Fines, because they are devised for general
repose, and secure contentment, which amplifieth every good gift that God
gives to man. As the Statute of Westminster. 2. concerning intailed Lands, says, Si
finis super hom. tenementa levetur sit ipso jure nullus. Here nullus is
restrained to the right of the intail, and finis is aliquis to other intents,
for it is discontinuance of the possession. The Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 33.
ordains, That no dying seized of a Disseisor, shall toll the entry of him
that right has, except the Disseisor had peaceable possession by the space of
five years; yet if an Infant Abator die seized within five years, he in the
reversion, or the remainder, cannot enter. The Statute of Glouc. cap. 3. says,
In like manner be not the Heirs of the Feme, after the death of the Father and
Mother barred of Action, to demand the Heritage of his Mother, whereof no Fine
was levied. These words, whereof no Fine was levied, are not suffered to go at
large, to corroborate a Fine levied by the Father only, but is restrained to a
Fine levied by Father and Mother. The Statute of 32 H. 8. against those that
buy Titles, shall not be expounded by Equity, neither the Statutes that give
Attaints. The Statute De malefactoribus in parcis, is not extended Ad
malefactores in forestis. The Statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 40. ordains, That
where the Baron alieneth the Land of the Feme, Non differatur secta mulieris
post obitum viri sui per minorem aetatem haeredis qui warrantizari debet. This
haeredis might extend to the Heir of any Alienee, but it is restrained to the
Heir of the Baron only; and if the Heir of any other Alienee be under age, the
Suit shall not stay. Every private Statute must be taken strictly, especially 2.
if it be penal. Therefore if a Statute be, that all Estates of Land to a
certain man made, shall be void to him and to his Heirs, and an Estate is made
to him and to his Feme, and the Feme survive; his and her son shall inherit as
Heir unto her: for Statutes private, and particular Customs are in like degree;
and as Civilians say, Statutum and consuetudo pari passu ambulant: And
therefore if there be a custom in some place, that an Infant may make
Feoffement at 15 years of age, as I take it some such custom is in England;
this shall not be extended to a release to be made by an Infant in that place
by force of that custom. All Statutes appointing a thing to 3.
be done in a form must be strictly taken touching the observance of the Form
and circumstance specified, and therefore the Statute that gives power to
Auditors to commit to the next Gaol Accomptants found before them in Arrerages,
saying, Per testimonium Auditorum mittantur proximae Gaolae, is strictly taken
both in the number, so that one Auditor cannot commit; and in the Gaol, so that
he must be sent unto the next Gaol, though it be in another County. The Statute
of 21 E. 3. provideth, that error in the Exchequer shall be corrected and
amended before the Chancellor and Treasurer, and therefore the persons named,
and no other, may correct and amend it in any other Court. For Statutes 4.
in the affirmative, imply a negative, when they be constitutive of new Law,
and there is no Law nor Statute beforehand to the contrary thereof: but where
there is a former Statute or Law contrariant, it is not taken away by implying
a negative in an affirmative, as 27 H. 8. Wales was united to England, and 34
and 35 H. 8. Authority was given to the Justices in Wales affirmatively, giving
them Jurisdiction to try all Penal Statutes. This takes not away the Authority
that Judges had before in other of her Majesty's Courts; And though some say,
that a Statute in the affirmative defeateth nothing, yet am I not of their
mind, for the cause and reason aforesaid. And further, because I know the 5.
Statute of 21 H. 8. gave the King the possessions of diverse Colleges in such
state as they then were; and though the possessions of some of them came not to
the Kings hands three or four years after, nevertheless all the Leases granted
between the time of the Statute and the Kings entry, are void by this Statute.
So that this affirmative defeateth with great reason; for when the Statute had
settled in the King, the right, title and interest of those Lands that
appertained to those Colleges, it was great reason that the Leases of other
men out of whom the right was passed away and divested, should be void and of
no force.

Books Printed for Richard Tonson.
MArches Actions for Slanders and Arbitraments: the first being a Collection
under certain Heads, what Words are actionable in the Law, and what not; Where
an Action De Scandalis Magnatum will lie, and of the nature of a Libel: The
other showing what Arbitraments are good in Law, and what not, with all sorts
of Presidents for the same, and variety of Pleadings. And also certain Queries,
with the Books cited, Pro and Con; very useful for Students in the Law. By J.
M. of Gray's Inn Barist. Price bound, 3 s.

Reports, or New Cases, taken in the 15, 16, 17, and 18 years of King Charles
the First. By Jo. March of Gray's Inn Barist. Price bound 3 s. 6 d.

Transactions in Chancery, both by Practice and Presidents, with the Fees
thereunto belonging, and also special Orders in ordinary Cases. By William
Tothil, late one of the Six Clerks. Price bound 1 s. 6 d.

The Courtiers Calling: Showing the ways of making a Fortune, and the Art of
living at Court, according to the Maxims of Polity and Morality, in two parts:
The first concerning Noble Men, the second concerning Gentlemen; by a person of
Honor. Price bound 1 s. 6 d.

Lately Published,

The Art of making Love, or Rules for the Conduct of Ladies and Gallants in
their Amors. Price bound 1 s.

Don Carlos, Prince of Spain, a Tragedy, as it is acted at the Dukes Theater;
written by Thomas Otway. Price 1 s.

Titus and Berenice, A Tragedy, as it is acted at the Dukes Theater, with a
Farce, called the Cheats of Scapin. Price 1 s.

The Portugal History, or a Relation of the Troubles that happened in the Court
of Portugal, in the years 1667, and 1668; In which is to be seen that great
Transaction of the Renunciation of the Crown, by Alphonso the Sixth; The
Dissolution of his Marriage with the Princess Maria Frances Isabella of Savoy;
The Marriage of the same Princess to his Brother the Prince Don Pedro now
Regent of the Realm of Portugal, and the Reasons alleged at Rome for the
dispensation thereof. By S. P. Esquire. Price bound 2 s. 6 d.

All sold by Richard Tonson, at his Shop under Gray's Inn Gate, next Gray's Inn
Lane.

FINIS.

