SIR Arthur Haselrigg HIS SPEECH IN PARLIAMENT, CONCERNING The Bill Passed
against Plurality of Livings, That no Clergy man shall have above one Living,
except he be servant to the KING.

February 21. An. Dom. 1641.



LONDON, Printed by John Hammond. 1641.

SIR Arthur Haselrig, HIS Speech in Parliament: CONCERNING The Bill passed
against Plurallity of Livings; That no Clergy man shall have above one Living,
except he be Servant to the King.
February the 21 An. Dom. 1641. Mr. SPEAKER,
THIS Bill, which has been laid aside till now, by reason of the great
affairs of State which has required more speed in the settling thereof, delay
and protraction of time therein, might have proved very dangerous and
prejudicial to the whole State: for we have had too much experience of what
has followed the practices and plots of the adversaries and enemies of the
same; by which means we have not been permitted any time to take into
consideration the abuses in the worship of God in our Religion, and the
manifold grievances of the Subject, by the oppressions and injuries of persons
as well spiritual as temporal in places of authority in Church and Stare; but
now many impediments, by the blessing of God, and the wisdom of the King and
his high Court of Parliament, are removed and avoided, that did much hinder our
proceedings therein, by which we have now again some time to recolect what
business we had in hand before these distractions and distempers of the State
were raised, and to proceed in the same.

Mr. SPEAKER, the word of word of God, without mixture or composure of their
own or other men's inventions, they held, I say, this as vile and base, but
could permit to themselves time sufficient to study to obtain the mystery of
the change of the times, to be time-servers; Every day changing if occasion
served for their advantage. If they could attain to understand the fashions of
the Court, to bow and complement, to be Parasites and Flatterers, observing
the dispositions and inclinations of great personages and great men in places
of authority, in the Church and State, but especially could learn to dance
after the Bishops Music, then had they learning enough, and were accounted
able Divines, fit to be Masters of two, three, or four Benefices. But as far
unfit to execute his office as a Teacher over those committed to his charge, as
almost Plow-men to be Bishops: This increased vice, impaired virtue; by these
was it no hard matter for the superiors to introduce into Church superstitious
Ceremonies; these easy to be drawn to preach liberty and vices, rather then
teach piety and godliness; no hard matter at least to bring them to that pass
they may be at any time ready to choose what religion to be of, according as the
times alter.

Mr. SPEAKER,

And thus much (Mr. Speaker) concerning this Bill, which I humbly leave to the
further consideration of this Honorable House, And humbly desire the same may
be presented to his Majesty for his royal assent, and passing thereof.

FINIS.

