THE MINISTERS Office, THE INFANTS Inheritance.

By JAMES HARWOOD, B. D.

Bulling. advers. Anabapt. Cum id quod majus est Infantes habeant, rem scilicet
signatam, gratiam Dei, and remissionem peccatorum; Quis illis id quod minus
est, Signum, Aquam, videlicet, denegabit.

LONDON, Printed by R. W. for the Author. 1659.

To the Right Honorable, THOMAS, Earl of SOUTHAMPTON, Baron of Titchfield.
Right Honorable,
THat (...) of favor which I have received from you, binds me in a strong
obligation to return a thankful acknowledgement. Some in these sad times have
voted Charity an Heretic; a Sect whose Faith is in the full, their Charity in
the wayne: it is their belief they are for Heaven, their works say, they are
for Hell; these call themselves young Saints, but are old Devils; they profess
much, practice nothing; full of science, but make no conscience of their ways:
these have a Bush at the door, no Wine within. A generation of Vipers who cry
up Christ, and Crucify his Members.

My Lord, here you have in full view these Arch Heretics, enemies to young and
old; all the young Infants in the Land, and all the old Ministers of the
Gospel. We at this time in comparision, ane as few as Gideons Lappers; yet with
those few sounding Trumpets, the Lord, I trust, will throw down the Walls of
Jerico to the ground. Our Church much resembles the sweet waters of Hypanis,
through which a Well of incredible bitterness runs; that as Heroditus and
Solinus do affirm, none of those sweet waters admit of any of the bitter waters
to lodge within their source. Here we live together as in the Ark, clean and
unclean, incorrigible Heretics and devout Conformists; yet no heretical
brinish waters do we suffer to intermix with the waters that issue out under
the threshold of the Temple.

Phideas his Picture was so made, that it all appeared in every part of
Minerva's Im ge; but the Picture of Heresy, God of his mercy has kept from
appearing in the face, or dwelling in the tongue of us so much despised
Divines. There is yet a Sibboleth, Shiboleth, by which your Honor may discover
who is the Gileadite, who the Ephraimite; who are the Sons of God, who are of
their Father the Devil.

My Lord, it is no small comfort to us, The Seers of Israel, to behold such
tall Cedars as your Honor, standing upright in this our Lebanon; who for all
the storms of Schisms and Heresies hold fast to the Faith of Christ Crucified,
to the Doctrine of his Apostles, to the practice of the Primitive Church. It Is
well known how you approve of the Ministerial Office as the highest calling, as
also Infants Baptism; and yet in these latter days, perilous men are start
up, who debar young Children from the Font, and shut the Church doors upon us
called to officiate; their malice reaches from the Font to the Pulpit, from the
Pulpit to our Persons. Their Germane Massacre makes us fear a second Parisian
Mattens, or else the Cicilian Evening-Song; where they predominate they are
most bloody, none talk more, and less reason; they are ever questioning, but
never satisfied. And thus I have taken to task unreasonable men, whom, though
we inform, they will never reform. The Sunbeams makes clay the harder, and the
Beams of Gospel Admonitions makes these more obdurate; a just judgment for
their Capital crime: their sin was against the Head, and God gives them over to
be headstrong Heretics.

And now my Noble Lord, since I have to do with such sons of Belial, and so
ill-opiniated, I crave the shrowding my Manuel under the benign shrine of your
protection; your gracious compliance shall oblige me to pray for your health
here, and happiness in heaven, which is the Christian engagement, My Lord, of

Your Honors most humble

THE Ministers Office, The Infants Inheritance.
Matthew 28.19. Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the
Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.


THe occasion of these words lies thus: Our Christ who was attached,
arraigned, condemned, crucified, and now is risen from the dead, appears to
Mary Magdalen, and the other Mary, verse 9.

Christ gives the woman a gracious salute, An all hail; and the woman again do
him worship.

O! A word of Christ first to us is able to make us fall down at his feet and
worship him.

O! Christ comes to us via gratiae, or we can give him meeting via Ecclesiae.

But it seems the two good old women fall a trembling; but says our Savior,
Be not afraid.

He would have them fear him, but not be afraid of him; fear him as the Child
the Father, not be afraid of him like Malefactors of the Judge. Nay, they have
just cause to rejoice, and again I say to rejoice; for they have foud him whom
they had lost, they have found him whom their soul loves, even the Lord Jesus,
God blessed for ever. Amen.

These are his servants, and he sets these to work, verse 10. The two Mary's
must go tell the eleven, nay more says Christ, Go and tell my Brethren.

Brethren? But such Brothers as Joseph's, who had sold him, so did some of them;
at best left him, so did most of them, the prime of them forswearing him, so
did Peter.

And yet he calls them Brethren, Go tell Brethren, and bid them go into
Galilee, and there they shall see me; me, lately left in the grave, now the
Lord of Life; me, and my side which the Jews wounded; me, and my head which
Jews crowned with thorns; me, to whom all power is given in heaven and in earth.

But as the women, so the eleven, they are now come, they come whither Christ
did command, into Galilee, unto the Mountain.

Yea, as the women, so the eleven, they worship him; but the women begin this
divine worship, the Apostles are only their seconds. They at the Grave, Christ
newly come out of the grave; these Apostles not, till the two women instructed
them.

And thus as our first Mother Eve by sin threw down the first Adam; so now,
these two women throw themselves down at the feet of the second Adam; as if not
only willing to bewail Eves evil and fall, but also, as a woman first wronged
mankind, so these the same Sex, first desire to do service to man's Messiah.

These first after the Resurrection met with Jesus, and Jesus sends them to
tell his Disciples his Apostles.

They are met, verse 11. now the Apostles see him; they worship him, even that
Jesus who was delivered up to death for us all, Rom 8.

Yea, this is he has overcome him who has brought to the ground all our
Ancestors; Death, Death: as sath the Apostle, He has swallowed up death in
victory, and therefore that sacred Christtide carrol is made in his praise, 1
Cor. 15.55. O death, where is thy sting? O hell, where is thy victory?

Ride on O Lord with thine Honor full of Majesty and Power; thou who guidest
the Heavens, and governest the Earth; thou art now met with thy servants the
Apostles; and it is now that thou have issued our a Warrant for them to
execute: The contents of Christ his Warrant is my Text, and my Text is this.

Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

In which words take notice of two parts; the Apostles Mission and Commission.

The Mission, Go ye therefore.

The Commission, And teach all Nations.

In the Mission we have two in full view: Here is 1. Persona mittens inclusive.
2. Personae missae expressive.


The Person sending is Christ Jesus, implied, though not expressed.

The Persons sent are ye. In this ye

The Ite are considerable. The Ergo are considerable. The Ite involves the
Journey. The Ergo the cause of the Journey. The Ite, Go. The Ergo, Therefore;
Go ye therefore.
Therefore, wherefore: Look ad Christum. Lood ad Patentiam.


And first at Christ, He bids go; who dyed for us, nay, rather who is risen
again, sits at the right hand of God, and makes intercession for us. Has he
done so much for us? go ye therefore.

Again, he has all power; a bar against dilatory delay, he can make us go; go
ye therefore.

But I must only do with these waters which run under the thresh-hold of the
Temple, as the Egyptian Dod does as he goes by the Banks of Nylus, lap and run
on.

The second part of my Text is the Apostles Letters Paents for 1. Preaching.
and 2. Baptizing.


Let us read their Commission at large, it is this, Go teach all Nations,
baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

See here 1. What they are allowed to do. 2. How they must do it.


What they are allowed to do, it is this, to Teach, Baptize.


To teach, not then to be taught by them who Christ has sent them to teach; we
have such forward fellows in our Congregations, who will not stick to teach as
blind Byard, had they either learning or commission to do it, I would be
silent, but the want of both avows it is high presumption.

The Commission to instruct and teach in public, you see, is only granted by
Christ under his own hand to the Apostles, and their undoubted successors, the
Ministers of the Gos;pel, who have leave, and by commission, and from Christ to
Teach. Baptized.


1. You see the Act licensed, is to teach. 2. For extent, it is all Nations.
The other part of our Office, and we hold it from Christ, and by Chatter form
him, it is to baptize; For Quiddity, it is to baptize, Universality, all
Nations. Why not Children then?

This and other Argumetns we shall use to confute the Herefie of the
Anabaptists, and all that rabble sent from Hell.

Next follows the Modus, or how this sacred Sacrament must be administered, In
nomine Patri^, Filii, and Spiritus sancti.

The Jews and Turks they circumcize, Christians and none else they baptize.

The Jews believe not that the Messiah is come; and so deny the second Person.

The Turks deny both the second preson and the third, the holy Ghost.

Only Christians believe a Trine Unity, one God, and three Persons; and we
baptize into this Faith, Baptizing in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost.

Nor run we without our Warrant, this to teach, a Trinity; and thus to baptize,
In the Name of the three Persons; since it is Christ himself who says, Ite and
praedicate, Go and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

I would not like a careless Porter keep you without doors, till you have lost
your stomachs.

Each several part of my Text is a several Service; I will say to you as
Abakkuk to the Prophet, Take the meat your God has provided for you.

And the first whole serive this day to be served up is missio Apostolorum, the
mission of the eleven, intimated while said, Go ye therefore.

The Persona mittens, or he that sends, is our Jesus; so he says, Go. This is
the first dish of the first service; but of this and diverse others we must
only take a taste, and keep our stomachs for a Christening Dinner, I mean the
Doctrine of Baptism, which is the last course, and the most fitting these
Times and Seasons.

Briefly then to give you a taste and no more: and first of the Sender, it is
Christ, he bids go.

And whosoever is desirous to go about this great work, our Master Christ, our
Lord Christ must send; therefore Luke 10.3. himself says, Ego mitto, I send
you; but how, as Lambs among Wolves; yet ego mitto Go ye therefore.

You might be disheartened you poor Ministers of my Gospel to go among ravenous
Wolves; but ego mitto, I send you, I bid go, Go ye therefore.

Fear not to go and preach my Gospel among men as fierce as Wolves, of whom it
is reported, that after they have slain the innocent Lambs, lick their lips
when they reek with their hearts blood; be the time such, even to these
Bloodhounds we must preach, not weighing the danger, but the Sender, casting
our eyes up to his Greatness. Goodness.

And first his Greatness, who is sole Independent, that is, under no authority,
and a Name only fit for the Lord of Heaven and Earth; and it is high ambition,
yea, high Teason to attribute it to any mortal man.

He sends, who is a King of absolute independent Power, who purposes and
disposes all things as he pleases, as one says, Tyrants are the Kings of
slaves, Princes are the Kings of men, Christ is the King of kings, here
dispatching us his Legates on his Embassage to the world.

This does divulge his Greatness, and his Commission begets in us a courage to
tell Judah of her sin, and Israel of her transgressions.

I cannot but likewise take notice of the Senders Goodness, to send to us men,
a sort of miserable, treacherous wretches, qui pulvis, and cines, and Del
hosts; he sends to us who are dust and ashes, and Gods grand foes.

Here is Love surpassing man's expression; God grant that our Love may be
reciprocal, and to this let all the people say, Amen.

Our Lord and Savior he sends to us miserable sinners, he sends to man, man
else meant not to make to him.

Christ is the way, the truth, the life, and if the way had not found out us,
we should never have found out the way: herein appears Gods goodness, that
early and late Messengers are sent unto you, to beg to you to be reconciled to
God in Christ Jesus. Such a message, and from such a Statist, and non sauciare
sanos, se^ sanare saucios; not to slay the sound but to make well the wounded:
this shows Gods infinite goodness to us wretched creatures, and obliges all the
people to the Lord of life for ever.

But in haste I will pass along from the Person sending to the Persons sent;
and therein first of the Ite, then the Ergo.

The Persons sent by Christ are ye; the cause why they must assent to be sent
lies hid in this therefore.

Well, the Sender being Christ, the Messengers being sent and these Apostolic
Ministers; first they receive Order, and then they go, but not before, for not
authorized.

Mark and mind it.

Without Christ bid go, he is an Intruder into Christ his Harvest, hat
undertakes his labor to Preach, Baptize.

None must dare to go, but such is have a calling for it; while Christ was on
earth it was a sufficient warrant, ego mitto, Matthew. 10.16. or Ite, go ye, as
here.

As out of his clothes, so out of his mouth passed virtue to fit and furnish
those he called to go.

But what were they to go and do? Read my Text, To teach and baptize, Mat. 18.
to bind, to loose, John 20. to remit and retain sins; yet more says S. Paul,
2 Cor. 5.18. God has given unto us the Ministry of Reconciliation, which
stands in the dispensation of the Word and Sacraments. But as none have these
high privileges till called by Christ to this high Office the Ministry, so it
plainly appears this was not a personal Legacy only given to the then
Apostles, but Church Legacy legated to the Successors of those Disciples of
Christ Jesus; for I must tell you, there were not only Apostles, but some
Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors, some Teachers, which were to join in
the work of the Ministry for the gathering of the Saints, Ephesians. 4.11, 12.

And as Christ ordained his twelve, they the seventy; so we being ordained by
their Successors, our Bishops, our Ordination is acknowledged valid, while
with holy Prayers, holy Imposition of hands is laid upon us as was upon Timothy
by Paul, 2 Timothy 1.6.

Again, since all Nations were to be taught and baptized, and the
commissionated could not by themselves do what commanded, many ages succeeding,
after their departure out of this life; and since all Saints to be born in all
Centuries were to be gathered by the work of the Ministry; hence necessarily
it follows, some debitated were to make Imposition of Hands upon some adjudged
by the Church sufficient for so high a calling. And as some few among many
thousands in the Apostles days were only thought sufficient to be culled out
by Ordination to this high calling, so since the Apostles deceased, their
supervivers, or succcessors in office, have trod in their steps, choosing some
to be admitted-into the Holy Office, not daring promiscuously to lay hands upon
all, as do those Heretics the Anabaptists.

And to make it more manifest how it is a Catholic and Fundamental Doctrine,
Imposition of Hands, and that not upon all, but only such approved by Power
Episcopal, the Christian Church (...) a most horrid sin suffered? No, never,
but in a distracted Commonwealth, or a Kingdom God meant to ruin: Portenta
dira, these are sad presages. O ye presumptuous spirits, who despise all
Government and Order of God in his Church; remember to your everlasting horror
Nadab, and Abihu, and Uzza, and their fearful ends for the like sins.

You who will ire and praedicare, know you have gone, but the Lord sent you
not; you have preached, but the Lord spoke not by you.

If you will yet take upon you the Ite, know my Lord has given me command to
divorce from your ite, praedicate, and to join together to your eternal terror,
Ite maledicti.

If you have not so much learning as to know my meaning, how dare you lay hands
on these high Mysteries, the Word and Sacraments.

After the ite in comes the ergo, therefore; as much, as if Christ had said
since I have all Power in Heaven and Earth, you who be but earth, must obey me
the God of Heaven: you cannot have a greater to command then I, nor I find
weaker to withstand then you: Ite igitur, Go ye therefore.

There is no resistance, Ion as may be shipped for Tarshish, but he who bid go to
Nineve will find him out, unship him, and make a Whale ferry him to the place
he had his first commission for; ite igitur, go ye therefore.

Note it, the power God has over us, must overawe us, and prick us forward to
go about the work of the Lord: Ite igitur, Go ye therefore.

Again, Christ has power to inspire us with his spirit: Moses is a man of a
stammering tongue, the Apostles ignorant what to answer; remember what is said
to the commissionated, in the same hour it shall be given unto you, for God
commonly furnishes them with gifts who are lawfully ordained: Here is magna
potentia, Gods great power made manifest in weak contemptible Instruments.
Since it is thus, Ite igitur, go ye therefore.

Again, our God, our Christ has power to defend us: Thus Elias when an Army
sent to attach him, and an Host of Angels sent to relieve him; thus Daniel in
the Den, the three in the Furnace, and the Preacher Noe in the Ark, when the
whole world, except eight persons, where drowned.

Who so have Gods Commission to go and teach and baptize, I mean to be
Ministers of the Gospel, let them not fear the arm of man, God can preserve;
Ite igitur, go ye therefore.

And the rather, for that our Lord and blessed Savior has power to reward;
call to mind what is said, and by that Minister of the Gentiles, Henceforth is
laid up for me a Crown of immortal glory.

What though we have been in perils by land, in perils by water, in perils
amongst false Brethren, yet our reward is laid up in heaven; a prize so good,
and a place so secure, so that none can deprive us of it.

Here for preaching the true Doctrine of Christ Jesus, and severing the tares
from the wheat, Heresies from Gospel Truths, perchance we may suffer
Imprisonment, confiscation of our Livings, it may come ad sanguinem, to loss of
life. But that come ye children of my Father, receive the Kingdom; tha^ venite
commands this ite: fince but this world to be lost, heaven to be had, and
ensured at our end; ite igitur, go ye therefore.

And now to give you the Collect of all, since we Teachers shall have our
reward in the world to come; since here, if God think meet, he can defend us
from the violence of unruly men; since he can fit us for this high calling, the
work of the Ministry; and since to resist is to resist the power of God, Ite
igitur and praedicate, Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing them in
the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

The act licensed is to teach. The extent extends to all Nations; go teach all
Nations.

What and how must be thought of, teach them verbum Christum, verbum Christi.

Teach the word Christ, for so he is styled, John 1.1. It was Paul's religious
ambition to know nothing but Christ and him crucfied; says he, I count all as
dung to the excellent knowledge of Christ Jesus.

This is that unum necessarium, one thing only needful to know Christ Jesus,
John 17.3. his birth, death, resurrection, ascension, and his for ever making
intercession for us.

This must be subjectum and basis praedicationis, the subject of our sermons
Christ Jesus; and the reason is given by St. John the Evangelist, who said,
Haec est vita aeterna, this is life eternal, to know God, and whom he has
sent, Christ Jesus. O what a plentiful Harvest is here! I wish we had had more
time to inn this divine grain.

But as we must reach you to know verbum Christum, the word Christ, so verbum
Christi, the word of Christ; two places I will press upon you, one threatening
judgment without repentance, Matthew. 3.10. where it is said, And now also the
ax is laid to the root of the tree, and every tree which brings not forth
good fruit shall be hewn down, and cast into the fire. The other place
promising salvation to all that confess and believe, Romans 10.9. the words be
these; who so confesses with his mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in
his heart, that God has raised him from the dead, shall be saved.

I cannot give you a less Manuel of the Law and Gospel, the one place steering
you off the rock Presumption; the other preserving you from being crushed upon
the rock Despair; while the one threatening punishment, the other promising
salvation: and now betwixt these two, the Lord grant we may sail in safely to
that haven the kingdom of heaven.

And so I pass along from the quid to the quomodo, how we must teach the people
of God the good Word of God.

Quoad se. Quoad nos.
Quoad se pure. integre.


Pure purely, not teaching for Doctrine the Traditions of men; God will not be
pleased that we preach what we please; the gold must all of it be fined and
refined, which we hammer upon that anvil the Pulpit: we have no license to
disburse any other Peter's pence unto Gods people, save such as have been
delivered to our hands out of the Treasury of the Scriptures.

And therefore our sacred Bellows have in them no wind to blow and bouy up a
people into rebellion against their Sovereign; we know better how to interpret
that Text, Curse ye Meroz, then some have done; who for (I had almost said
their unpardonable sin) conscience enjoined a public penance.

Again, you may long be hearers of Orthodox Divines before they give the least
encouragement for a Civil State to rob Christ's Church.

Nor yet hear till that they approve of those numberless Locusts the
Enthusiasts, who being taught by a white devil, pretend Gods Spirit to destroy
Christ's Gospel.

No, we honor the gospel of Christ Jesus, praise God for those that bring
purple and fine blue to adorn the Sanctuary; and preach, ever since we have
heard of the mutinous angels, obedience to the Sovereign Power, under whom we
have lived for many years a godly and peaceable life.

And thus having winnowed out the chaff, we feed you with the kernel of the
Scripture; the Babes with Spoon-meat, milk; the strong men with Manna, meat for
Angels: neither must we be spiritual niggards, but integre, wholly impart, and
make known unto you the Gospel of Christ Jesus; we must endeavor to imitate
the Apostle, who says, I have hid, no, nothing from you.

What shall we think then of such Ministers, that have hid the truth in
unrighteousness; who many years have concealed, while not read, the Ten
Commandments in our Churches: surely these are those new kind of Ministers,
that would have their hearers forget their duty to God, and charity toward
their neighbors.

What shall we think of those Teachers sprung up of late like Mushrums, who
have hid, while hindered their Parishioners for many years from receiving the
Holy Communion? Had the good people detained their Tithes, when these Mungril
Ministers first refrained giving Communion, I will warrant you, ere they would
have wanted the Pig and Goose, they would have given you the Bread and the Wine.

What shall we say now to those Preachers, who deptive poor Infants of their
jus divinum, I mean Baptism; but of this I shall make a large discourse, to
the Anabaptists shame, and our Mother the Churches renown.

These are the Preachers who have detained from Infants their due, and also
stolen from us Christ's Legacy; while instead of peace they have cried up war; in
the room of Subjection, voted up Rebellion; in the stead of Religion, brought
in Atheism; nay, their false Doctrine so commonly ventilated has made as
fearful a rent in our Church and State, as was at the death of the King of
Salem in the Temple of Jerusalem. As our sins have brought upon us this misery,
so none can help us but the King of glory.

Now Lord for thy ancient mercies sake, for thy Son his merits sake, be good
unto Zion, and build up the breaches in the walls of our Jerusalem.

And thus having prayed for our selves, let us look quoad nos, at our selves,
and take into consideration how we the Ministers of Christ Jesus ought to
preach the Gospel: this must be done with a quick speed, deliberate discretion,
with a constant continuance, to join all together.

Haste without discretion, is like wings without eyes; discretion without
haste, is like eyes without wings; both without constancy, is like feet and
eyes without an heart.

First, we must hasten to our business, and teach; says St. Paul, I conferred
not with flesh and blood, when it pleased God to send me to preach his Son
among the Heathen, Gal. 1.16. And to show what speed all the Apostles were to
make, they are commanded to salute none by the way. Remember what Solomon
says, As vinegar is to the teeth; and smoke to the eyes, so is a sluggard to
them that send him, Prove. 10.26. Remember Peter and John were at the Temple at
the third hour of the day.

Secondly, Discretion is mightily required in teaching, to make our spiritual
receipts; we stand in need to be inspired with Gods Spirit; and all this to
know how much oleum, and how much acetum we must pour in.

3. We are to hold on teaching, for it is said, Cursed is he that puts his hand
to the plough, and pulls it back. A Ministers work is never at an end; for as
we make, the Devil mars, we must therefore to our work again; as we sow the
wheat, the envious man sowes tares; when therefore tilth time is past,
preaching the Law, seed-time past, preaching the Gospel, The weeding time comes
in, and never ends till our end, till you, Gods, harvest, be inn'd into that
common barn the grave.

Here is work for us then all our lives; you find us work, a long life-lasting
work; it is an hard case to work so long for no wages, for small wages; nay
more, for all our pains to be scourged out of the Temple, plundered of all our
goods, as Job was by the Devil; imprisoned, and fed with the bread of
affliction, as was Micaiah; well, he was an Ahab who used Gods Prophet thus;
and one sold himself to do wickedness in the sight of the Lord: yet for all
this despite, this is our comfort, Our reward is with the Lord.

But now I pass from the act to the extent; from the act, Teach, to the extent,
all Nations. It is an Apostolical charge to go and teach all Nations. Hence it
is Saint Paul says, The care of all the Churches are upon me. If so much had
been said by Saint Peter, it had been a good plea for an universal Bishopship.

But why will Christ have us to go and teach all Nations? that what is said
might be verified; the sound of his word is gone through all the World, all
Nations in the World.

Again, thus goes the command, Go and teach all Nations; and why, to leave all
inexcusable: all Nations must be taught as to convince all, so to call home
some; all Nation, as Jews so Gentiles: that I note is, the partition wall is
broken down, Ephesians. 2.15. And peace is preached to you, who are afar off, as
well as to them who were nigh at band; yea, Christ by the Preaching of his word
is become a light to us Gentiles as well as the glory of his people Israel. We
are not now strangers to the Covenant of Gods promise, but of the household of
God, built upon the foundation of the Prophets. Christ being the head
cornerstone, Ephesians. 2.20.

Again, by all Nations, may be meant all of all Nations, without exception.

That I note is, we are to teach all of all sorts, Kings, and tell them, of
whom they hold their Crowns, immediately of the Lord, Prove. 8. 15. is my
witness, where said, By me Kings do reign. We must tell subjects, that they
ought to be subject to the King, and that for the Lords sake, 1 Pet. 2.13.
Preachers, that it is their office, Pascereoves, to feed that flock over which
God has made them overseers, John 21.17. Soldiers, that they must be content
with their wages, and do violence to no man, Luke 3.14. Traitors, that whosoever
resists the higher power, resists the power of God, Romans 13.2. Church
robbers, that they are God robbers, Mal. 3.8. Headstrong Heretics, that in the
latter time perilous times shall come, 2 Timothy 3. pray you read the whole
chapter. Our commission extends to all, to instruct and reprove all, all in all
Nations.

I could tell you how it comes to pass, that a sort of our brotherhood do not,
dare not do their office to instruct, reprove all of all sorts; some do not,
they are afraid to reprove them, who have preferred them to other honest men's
Livings, but how justly, let God be judge.

Another fort dare not, they are afraid to tell Inda of her sin, lest some of
the Bulls of Bashan or cursed Kine of Samaria push them with their horns; and
thus they had rather hazard their poor souls, then endanger their fat
Benefices. I wish these Trencher-chaplains and time observers would remember
what is said, If my people perish for want of knowledge, their blood will I
require at thy hand.

I speak it from the bottom of my heart, that this muzzling the mouth of the
Ministers with fear, or else gagging them with the gift of a fat Benefice has
made an Atheistical Nation, and a purblinde people; yea, some of them are grown
so very blind in all Divine duties, yea, I say as blind as Carders in
Christtide, who having sit up night after night, and being long overwaked, when
they look at their cards, they know not a King from a Knave.

But I fear too long I have insisted upon this part of my Text; through all the
other parts of this verse, I will make as much haste as the Israelites made in
their passage through the Red Sea.

The other part of our Office is to Baptize, In the Name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

1. See what we have commission to do, to baptize. 2. See how we must baptize,
In nomine Patris, Filli, and Spiritus sancti.
And this is one of the great works we Ministers of Christ Jesus are enjoined,
to administer the sacred Sacrament of Baptism.

It is not much to our purpose, yet may serve to lead us orderly on to our
business to begin at the beginning of the Institution of Sacraments, and to
give you a summary of them briefly.

Briefly then, there were Sacraments before the fall. after the fall.


Before the fall two.

Sacramentum immortalitatis. Sacramentum probationis.
The Sacrament of Immortality, the tree of life; the Sacrament of trial, the
tree of the knowledge of good and evil.

After the fall. Some were Sacraments enjoined under the Old Testament. New
Testament.


Those in the Old Testament were extraordinary, and ordinary.

Extraordinary, such as Diluvium, Transitus per mare, Mana e Calo, Aqua e petra.

Ordinary were, Universal and Special Sacraments.

Universal, one and no more, the Rainbow.

Special, in the Old Testament were two, by name Circumcision. The Paschal Lamb.


Lastly, there were Sacraments ordained under the New Testament, and they were
2.

Baptism. The Lords Supper.
These are the last were instituted, and it is of the last, but the last, I am
now to treat, by name Baptism.

All the foregoing Sacraments I have as lightly touched, as the woman in the
Gospel, Christ, who touched but the hem of his garment; and it is all, that I
may hasten to that sacred Sacrament of Baptism.

Look upon the words of our Savior, Go ye therefore and teach all Nations,
baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost. It needs no collecting, only your observing how it is a part of the
office of the Ministers of Christ Jesus to baptize, to administer the Sacrament
of Baptism; of which Sacrament while I speak, Lord grant I may do it
sacrament, with an holy heart.

I mean, God willing, to treat of this Sacrament, Conjunctim. Disjunctim.


Conjunctim, as being one of the two; Disjunctim, as singled out by it self.

We Protestants acknowledge our Christ left us only two Sacraments, whereof
this is one, Baptism; and that, the other, called, The Supper of the Lord.

And yet the Papists will have seven Sacraments, videlicet, Baptism. 2.
Confirmation. 3. The Eucharist. 4. Penance. 5. Extreme Unction. 6. Orders. 7.
Matrimony; and the Council of Trent curses all Christians that say there are
more or fewer.

Accursed then must be their own Cardinal Bassarion, for he confesses but two
Sacraments. Accursed then must be Isidore, for he will have but three. Accursed
then must be their Alexander de Hales, for he four. Accursed must be the Author
bearing the name of Cyprian, for he holds five only. And lastly, accursed must
be Cajetan and Durandus, for these maintain there are more then two, and less
then seven, while they teach there are are only six.

And yet the Papists maddle upon the number seven, especially Bellarmine; for
says he, The seven Virtues, the seven capital Sins, the seven Planets, the
seven Defects, the seven golden Candlesticks, the seven Seals, the seven
Trumpets, the seven Angels, blaze there are seven Sacraments. I wonder they
forgot the woman in Rev. 17.3. with her seven Heads.

But if this plea were satisfactory, I could likewise countenace the number of
two, with two Tables, two Testaments, two Trumpets, two Swords, two Witnesses;
but this is childishness.

That these are two Sacraments it is confessed by our adversaries; that these
two are all, is justified by us of the Reformed Churches, and proved by Gods
word, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3, 4.

And we have the unity of the Fathers, St. Jerome, St. Ambrose, St. Angustine,
all averring two only and necessary to salvation. The fountain out of which
they did flow was Christ's side, when he swet water and blood. These two Gospel
Sacraments he left us instead of the two Sacraments under the Law; the one we
once recieve, the other often; Baptism presently after our birth, the Lords
Supper when we come to maturity, or full growth: and as the child is once
born, but must often eat, so we are baptized but once, oftentimes feed upon the
body and blood of our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus.

Having spoken upon these two Sacraments conjunction, now give me leave to
speak upon this Sacrament of Baptism disjunction, single by it self.

And since it belongs to my Office to baptize, I think it very fit to let you
know what is Baptism. Secondly, what is covenanted at it. Thirdly, why the
Church requires Sureties. Fourthly, why commonly administered at the Church
door. Fifthly, whether absolutely needful. Sixthly, what good got by it.
Lastly, whether lawful to baptize Children.

And of every of these a word, and but a word, till we come to the last so much
controverted. And first of the first, I take Baptism to be primum novi foeder
is Sacramentum, in quo elect is in Dei familiam receptis externae aquae
aspersione, peccatorum remissio, and regeneratio per sanguinem Christi and
Spiritum sanctum obsignatur. Baptism is the Seal set to the New Covenant,
whereby we being received into Gods Household by the washing of water, have
sealed unto us by Christ and his Holy Spirit, Remission of our sins, and
Regeneration.

The Word of God is Gods hand writing, which he passes to ensure us we shall be
saved, and this Sacrament is his Seal; what would you have more then hand and
seal? O this Sacrament seals our pardon, and ensures us heaven; yea, it is the
general Tenet of the Catholic Church, That no Christians child baptized,
dying before it come ad usum rationis, was ever damned, but of this suo
proprioloco, in its properplace.

The next thing to be considered is, what covenanted when the child is
baptized; and know it, this is the good, the adulti, which those of ripe years
get by staying out the Administration of this Blessed Sacrament. O! it puts you
in mind what covenanted when you were Christened.

I will give you it in my Common Prayer Books Language, and the rather, Because
I dearly love it, neither care I who know it.

At you Baptism you covenant to forsake the Devil and all his Works, the vain
Pomp and Glory of the World, with all covetous desires of the same, the carnal
desires of the flesh, so that you will not follow, nor be led by them; in one
word, you promise to forsake the world, Flesh, and Devil, to leave being at the
command of those three, and be obedient unto the other three, Father, Son, Holy
Ghost, but why will not the Anabaptists suffer their new born children by their
Sureties to make this holy League with God? Is it because, that as their
fathers have made a league with Hell, Death, and the Devil, freely giving
themselves over to a reprobate sense, to work all manner of wickedness with
greediness, so their children being kept from Christendom, as being free from
the Tripertire Bond in Baptism, might more swiftly run to the devil after them;
the contempt of this Head of Christ's Ordinance, and the practice of the Church
Catholic imbitters my charity toward them, while they show so little love to
their young ones.

Know this for certainty how that Gods Ordinance is a Teacher which stints us
from running into gross sin, which as Infants, while Infants, are incapable to
commit, so after their mature age, as often receiving lifts up their hearts from
earth to heaven, so this bond past in Baptism, and their calling to mind
their solemn Covenant past at Font, draws them from the love of the world, to
love our Lord God who made the world, and our Lord Jesus who died for our sins,
and rose for our righteousness.

The third thing to be enquired after is, why the Church, but we are grown in
this age wiser then the Church, why the Church appoints Sureties at the Font,
and three at the least.

1. For that the Infant is to pass promise by the three Sureties to forsake
three, the World, Flesh, and Devil. 2. To make the baptized coming to years of
discretion, have more care to hold promise with God. 3. That if Parents were
neglecting, among so many, some might have a care of the Bond past to God in
Baptism. 4. To rub up our memories, and put us in mind, how man is more likely
to break Bond with God, then man with man; and therefore in common Contracts
there are no more then the Principal and two Sureties, but at the Christening,
the Principal, the Baptized, and three Sureties; and to countenance this
commendable custom, the Council of Mentz in the ninth Century ordained
Godfathers to be, and to attend, and see that their spiritual children be
brought up in the true Faith. 4. And now in the fourth place, These Sureties of
the Baptized Infant commonly stand over against the Church Door, and there this
Sacrament of Baptism usually is administered. O! our Mother the Church, there
set the Font, that you may know how Baptism is the Door lets us into Gods
Church, by it we enter in into our Masters House, the Church Militant. 5. But
not in the fifth place, it is enquired whether Baptism be of absolute
necessity. To this I answer, No, for we have this Sacrament instead of
Circumcision, enjoined by the Lord, not to be administered till the eighth day;
and I am confident, that as all the children which died before the eighth day
were not damned, no more those who dye unbaptized; but I will end with Saint
Bernard, who says, Non privatio, sed contemptus damnat; it is not the want,
but contempt that damns, and the default being in the Parents, let them fear
the punishment; and since the neglect is dangerous, let us be sure, that there
be no defect in us, but let us bring our young to be washed in this Jordan. 6.
And so I come to the sixth thing considerable, viz. What good is got by
Baptism, ne parum quidem, yet we will begin at the leaft: Novum Nomen, a new
name, now christened, you have two names, the one is nomen naturae, the other
nomen gratiae, commonly called, Surname, Christen name. But objected, what am I
bettered? Much if thou have wit or grace; thy two names put thee in mind of
thy two natures; and with Rebesca that there are two struggling within the womb
of thy heart, Nature and Grace, Old Man, New Man; the Flesh, the Spirit; yea,
thy Surname puts thee in mind of thy sinful Generation, thy Christen Name of
thy Spiritual Regenration by the Grace of our Lord Jesus; thus whilst the one
makes me fear, the other puts me in hope; whilst the one tells me, I am of a
sinful seed, and to suffer, and the other comforts me, assuring me I am a
Member of Christ Jesus.
2. The second good got, is recorded, Gal. 3.27. I can assure you it is a very
comfortable place, and a spur to prick every Christian on to baptize their young
ones; the words are these, Ye who are baptized have put on Christ, you are hapt
with him as with a garment; he is the Robe of Righteousness all over-spreading
the late Biptized, you are armed with his as with a coat of mail, able to bear
off all the fiery assualts of the devil. Says the Spouse in the Canticles, I
have put off, how can I put on again. Being baptized we put on Christ with a
resolve never to put him off any more; and it is this Church Cognizance,
whereby we are known to be of the Household of God.

The third good got is, Admittance into Heaven, and hence says our Savior,
Except you be born again of Water and the Spirit, you cannot enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. The Baptism of Water assures the Visible Church, that you
are made Members of Christ's Congregation here; the Baptism of the Spirit when
you are of ripe years, asserts you shall be Members of the invisible Church
hereafter; our outward Baptism ingrafts you into the Church Militant, an
Ordinance of Grace conducting to the Baptism of the Spirit, being an assurance
you shall be admitted into the fellowship of the Church Triumphant; if wilfully
you slight this, it is not probable how God will bestow upon you the other; the
laying hold on this Ordinance within humane reach, puts me in hopes to attain
that other only conferred by the Divine Power; when I scornfully neglect what
proffered by Gods Church, what hopes have I to attain that without which I
cannot come to Gods Kingdom; since you cannot enter into Gods Kingdom, except
you be born of Water and the Spirit, let us use the water, lest we deprive our
selves of the hopes we have to acquire Gods Spirit. The words recorded by the
Evangelist are spoke to all of all Sexes, Ages, and since the major part are
Younglings, there being more children then men, let not us disinherit so many
Infants to humor a few Heretics; hinder not your children from Baptism for
not having the perfect use of reason, since we are unsure whether theelder,
believe, but only by professiion; it were to be wished at one instant we might
be baptized flumine, flamine, with water and the Spirit; but the aged may
receive the first; want the latter. Let us then who have prayed for the Infant,
that he may receive the latter, not debar him from the former. The Catholic
Church way is a safe way to walk in, and who so obstinately, scorns Baptism,
has small hopes that the Spirit will land at the haven, his heart; nay it is to
be feared that he shall never enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. As none in Rome
could enter into the Temple of Honor, but first went through the Temple of
Virtue; so none can be admitted into the Kingdom of glory, but such who first
have had admitttance into the Kingdom of grace. And this Sacrament is the
ordinary key, which opens your children the door, that they may enter in by,
and may rest assured, this Water Baptism takes away the mulct, though not the
guilt, the blame, though not the stain; and that the Infant baptized who dies
before it have usum rationis, to sin with a free will, shall certainly depart
in peace to a place of immortal bliss, whither God of his mercies send all of
us.

And so I come to the sixth and last thing to be discust upon, Whether it be
lawful to baptize Infants; in discoursing upon this controversy, I shall first
set down the Adversaries Arguments against Baptism and by the help of my God,
the answer to every of them, then give you my Reasons, why Infants ought to be
baptized; lastly, show you the punishments have been enacted to be inflicted
upon Anabaptists. And because this age is desirous to read much in few lines,
therefore I will rather offer the courteous Reader matter then words; and as
much as I can, match solidity and brevity both together; and with the one win
the ear of the more judicious, and by the other prove my self not much to
prejudice such as have high employments.

The Anabaptists the more hopefully to lay their foundation against Infants
Baptism, have first cunningly gone about to prove rebaptizing lawful, which
Block I purpose to remove out of our way, that so we may the better answer all
they object against baptizing Infants.

To countenance their cause they labor to prove out of the Acts, That those
whom John baptized that had not heard of the Holy Ghost, Paul again baptized.

To this hear what St. Augustine says, Discipulos Joannis iterum baptizatos
fuisse, non iterato Baptismate; for as Philip Melancton says, Ioannis
Baptismum, The Baptism of John was signum mortificationis; Christi Baptismum,
signum vivificationis; for to Christ's was added condonatio peccatorum, and
oportuit iterum baptizari, qui Ioannis Baptismo loti erant, quo certi essent,
se jam consecutos esse remissionem peccatorum: To Christ's Baptism was added
remission of sin, and it was most might and right; for those who were washed
with John's Baptism, to receive also Christ's Baptism, that so they might be
ensured of remission of sin, by being baptized into the Faith.. of our Lord
Jesus. The Anabaptist let him produce any so baptized by John, and we shall not
refuse them Christ's Baptism, till such a one be produced, this Argument must be
shouldered out.

We have not now to do either with the Novatians, who were admitted into the
Church without any new Baptism, or yet with the Heretics sprung from the
corrupt lungs of Samosatenus, who were excluded from being members of the
Church Catholic till anew baptized, because they denied Fundamentalls; but
with Anabaptists, who will allow no Infant to be baptized; and yet this Heresy
the very Heretics called the Donatists, and Pelagians, cried down. It is at
least a thousand years since this execrable Tenet sprang up, and the new
Fomenters of it in Germany were Nicholas Stock, John of Leiden, and
Knipperdolin, but now it is ferried over into England, and by such bloody
Saints, who will either force us to lose our estates, if not lives, or else put
in peril our Infants souls; hard chap-men who would force upon us so hard a
bargain. I need not recount unto you the several forts of Anabaptists, fourteen
in all, Alstedius has saved me this labor; nor will I blur my paper with
their abominable Opinions, lest my making them too publicly known, might move
the spiders to suck in poison whence the laborious Bees might gather honey; yet
since our Land is infested with these Locusts, who contumeliously against the
Tenet of the Church Catholic maintain it is unlawful to baptize children, for
this cause, give me leave to show you the weapons they fight against us with,
and then disarm them: what are these weapons but so many Arguments which they
use wherewith to abuse us.

Cassander, page 740. has quoted their champion reason; this they say, Non
sunt capaces Baptismi, quod doceri and profiteri nequeant, Children are not
capable of Baptism, that are not capable to learn and believe.

To this we answer, that the ground of their Argument is taken out of Matthew
28.19, 20. where it is said, Go and teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the
Name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost; teaching them to observe
all things which I have commanded you.

Upon this foundation they rear up this building, that teaching must go before
baptizing; my answer, The words in the Original are not (...) teach, but (...),
that is to say, make Disciples, which infants in their swaddling belts may
attain to, by being by Baptism admitted into Christ's School, while their
Sureties give in their names, and by this Sacrament record them amongst Christ's
Disciples. And again it is plain from the Text, that baptizing ushers in
teaching, as appears verse 20. Teaching them to observe all things: to which
they have several conducts, their Christian Parents instructing, and the
Bishops Confirmation, with prayers for them, and their growth in the mystery of
the faith of our Lord Jesus.

2. We might answer, that all the world but a few were Jews and Gentiles,
ignorant generally of Christ and Christianity, and denying the Savior of our
souls; now if we were to go to such, as are now the Indians, teaching must
precede baptizing, but you know what is said, The Covenant is made to you, and
to your seed.

3. The Anabaptists might as well say, that since it is said, Mark 1.25. Repent
and believe, that repentance goes before faith, which is as known an untruth,
as that preaching to Infants must necessarily precede baptizing of them. And
thus since the setting repentance before faith binds me not to believe how
faith is not before repentance. Secondly, since these words, Mat. 28. were
spoke concerning people unconverted, and therefore first to be taught. Thirdly,
since all enjoined, is first make disciples, then baptize, and after teach.
This considered makes the Anabaptists Argument weak and invalid.

The Anabaptists 2. Objection.
Signum frustrae datur non intelligenti, say they, it is a vain and footlish
custom to give the Sacrament to ignorant Infants, that know nothing of the
virtue of it, nor what it means.

Give me leave to tell these Anabaptists what answer a late Reverend Doctor of
our Church gave to this; says he, These gyant-like fight with God, for if this
Argument were in force, it would be available to overthrow the circumcising of
Children, instituted in the Old Law by God himself, as Infants Baptism in the
New. For they then knew no more what Circumcision meant, then these now what
Baptism.

Secondly, These bold Heretics by this Argument do seem to condemn our Lord
and Savior, as if in vain he laid his Hands upon children and blessed them,
seeing they knew not what he meant.

Thirdly, Physic is given to the Patient sometimes when senseless, and does
him good; so though children perceive not what they receive, yet may get good
by receiving this Seal of Grace. And thus since health may be restored by
administered physic, when the Patient is senseless: since Christ blessed those
whose young years did impede their present cognition of a Blessing: Lastly,
since God ordained circumcision for children of eight days old, and not in
vain; this considered, makes invalid this second Argument, unless these
Anabaptists will condemn all Physicians who give physic to Patients in a
trance; or will inveigh against the Lord who ordered circumcision on the eight
day; or else conclude our Savivors blessing young children was in vain.

Their third Objection.
Christ was not baptized till thirty years of age, ergo, Infants ought not to
be baptized.

To this I answer, Baptism was not in esse at Christ's Birth, but no sooner
instituted, but he was baptized; though not, as one says, in his infancy, yet
in the infancy of Baptism; and because he lived in the time of the Law, he was
circumcised the eighth day; and so soon as the New Law was proclaimed, baptized
according to the Gospel.

Again, the example of Christ binds not without a precept; for then we should,
as Christ did, only receive the Lords Supper at the closure of our life, and
all our life time, till then, abstain from the Blessed Communion.

And now all considered, the Anabaptists Argument is invalid. And since our
Savior binds us not for all his example from Communion till our dying.
Secondly, since he received this Sacrament so soon as it was instituted.
Thirdly, since it was impossible for him to receive a Sacrament before
ordained: These seriously considered, blunt the edge of the Anabaptists
argument. And though they would seem to give us a great downright Blow, yet
have drawn from us no Blood.

Fourth Objection.
Their fourth Objection in this: You have no express place in Scripture that
injoyns Ministers to Baptize Children; and man ought not to have a Mouth to
speak for that, which God allows not a Pen to write for.

Answ. This Gordian knot long since has been unloosed. I mean diverse Doctors
of our Church have resolved this doubt; it is almost impossible for me to add
one mite into their Treasury: yet to recollect in short, what has been said at
large, is neither dishonorable to the Writer, not will be unsatisfactory to
the Reader.

I answer then, though we find it not set down totidem verbis, in so many
words, Go and Baptize Infants, yet Mark 10. ver. 14. tells, how unto little
children belong the Kingdom of Heaven; which must be understood of Infants,
because, as follows; Chirst took them up in his arms and blessed them.

And it is a sound Argument, a majori ad minus, that if heaven belong to them,
then the means to be assoiled of their sin, which otherwise would obstruct
their going to heaven, into which no unclean thing can enter: and the means at
their Age in viacognita, can be no other but Baptism. And of this judgment
were the Primitive Fathers, and are our now Modern Writers, as also all the now
Papists and Conformist Protestants, and the Presbyterians, all concuring in the
necessity of Baptizing children; building the Structure of their Salvation in
part, upon this Foundation.

2. We take John 3. ver. 5. to be a good Scripture ground for Baptizing of
Infants; where is said, Verily, verily, except a man be born of water and the
Spirit, be cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Not without the one, into
the kingdom of Grace; not without both, into the kingdom of Glory. I speak so
far as is revealed to us, we dare give no farther a warrant, then God a
precept, and must tie our selves to the revealed means, though not our God at
all times to such terms, as he has revealed himself to us. But this place of
Scripture, the Anabaptists tell us, is to be understood of men of years, not of
Children who are of less age then the tenth of one year. As a reverend Doctor
writes, they might as well put in an Exception against women, no more named
then Children. This, they dare not; that, they ought not: for our Savior in
that place speaks of man Specifice, I mean of mankind, of every person sprung
from Adam, which since the youngest is defiled as well as the eldest, as
appears by Psalm. 51.5. therefore Infants, while Infants, ought to have the
Medicine Baptism administered to them as well as if elder people; especially
considering it is the only Church cure to free such who are conceived in sin
and born in iniquity, from the guilt of Original sin: of which Ordinance I take
new born Babes to be capable, though not Active, yet Passive; for in all the
work they are passive; being prayed for, and belessed, and washed, and none can
doubt but capable of this Seal of grace at those young years, as well as the
children under the old Law were capable of Circumcision at eight days old.

And this is that Murus Aheneus, that Brazen Wall which all the Anabaptists are
never able to leap over, not yet lay flat; but under this Analogy our Children
will find a perpetual shelter for baptism in the greatest storm of
Anabaptists.

3. Acts 16. 33. wintnesses how the Jailer was baptized (...), and all that
were his, his children then were not to be excluded; or if they had been to
have been debarred, doubtless our Apostle would have entered his Caveat against
Infants Baptism, and as he said, 1 Cor. 1. 14. I thank God I baptized none of
you save Crispus and Gaius, as also the household of Stephanus; so ^ere he would
have told us, how all of the Jaylors household he had baptized but the young
ones, but his non-exception is a sure confirmation, that old and young were
there, and then baptized.

4. I answer how the Anbaptists can bring no express place of Scripture,
commanding us to give the Sacrament of the Lords Supper to women, or for
changing the Sabbath from the seventh to the first day of the week; nor find
they the Creed word by word in Gods word: nor yet, the words Trinity and Unity,
and Unity in Trinity; and yet they acknowledge a Trinity in Unity, believe the
Creed, observe the Lords day, and give the Communion to Women, why then not
Baptism to Children, for which we have fair evidence, how it belongs unto them.

And now the premises considered, how that many things are approved of for
Divine Truths, not expressed at large in so many lines of the Text. Secondly,
since whole families were baptized, our Apostle telling us whom he did not
baptize, but entering no Caveat against Infants Baptism. Thirdly, Since
Scripture tells us, this is the way for man or mankind to enter into the
kingdom of Heaven, by being born of Water and the Spirit: this water charter
being granted by the God of heaven to all men of what age of sex upon earth.
Fourthly, since our Savior assures us heaven belongs to our young children,
and that at their years there is no way to free them from their birth-sin, and
ensure them heaven but by Baptism; with these few smooth stones taken out of
the bag of the shepherd of our souls, we have knocked in the forehead the
Anabaptists great grand Goliath argument, and made it of as little force as
Samson when his locks were shaven.

And now to pass from our adversaries most material Objections to our
Arguments, which are as so many Champions to defend the baptizing Infants, and
my first is this.

This salve was never forbid us to apply to our Infants sores, who are all over
wounded with original sin by Adam; let the Anabaptists point out where God
forbids it and we will leave it: methinks it had been time enough to cry out of
us for baptizing children, when they had showed us Christ's prohibition; but
where there is in Scripture so universal a silence, I know no cause why they
should make so open an outcry; we much desire they would cease to quarrel with
us on earth, till the God of heaven declare for them. They tell us how we have
no express place in Scripture to justify what we do; we tell them, how they
have not the least appearance in any text in Gods word which contradicts what
we do: it were wisdom in them, to let us without disturbance baptize our
Infants, till they find a Law to condemn us, or a Gospel to forbid us.

The second Argument.

Our second Argument to justify baptizing Infants is this; Our Doctrine is
Catholic, and was practiced both in the Primitive Church, as also till this
day in all National Churches Christian. You know what is said, 2 These. 2.15.
Hold fast the Traditions which I have delivered unto you, whether by word or
our Epistle. Now this Church Doctrine of baptizing Children being an
Apostolical Tradition, we hold it warranted by Gods word, and a Doctrine not to
be oppugned; especially considering God has promised to be with his Church
unto the end of the world. And though the Churches of Asia have their golden
Candlesticks removed, and are fallen from the Faith, yet the Universal Church
never erres: and of this judgment are all our Learned Divines, nor dare our
Adversaries make the least Mutiny against it, if the question seriously and
soberly be propounded to them. And now the Task I have undertaken, is to prove
Infants Baptism a Church Tenet all the time of the Primitive Church; for since
it is undeniable, for practiced by the Greek and Latin Churches, witness the
Churches in all Graecia where there are Christians; as also in Syria, in India,
in Muscovia, in Ethiopia. And as for the Churches in this part of the world;
what I have delivered will appear to be truth, by the confession of the
English, Scottish, and Irish Churches: by the practice of the Romish Church, to
which I may adjoyne as supernumerated up to my hand, the Augustine Confession,
the Bohemian, the Belgic, the Helvetian, the Saxon, with many more, all
asserting Infants Baptism; for of such (as says our Savior) are the Kingdom
of Heaven. The covenant is made to them, doubtless then the Seal of that
covenant, which is Baptism, must belong unto them. Of which opinion was
Tertullean, who lived within less then an hundred years after St. John's death.

But now, Deo juvante, by Gods assistance, I mean to make my word good, and to
prove by the practice of the Primitive Fathers, how baptizing Infants in the
four first Centuries after Christ's time and his Apostles, was maintained lawful.

Iraeneus in his second Book and 39. against Heretics, says, Omnes venit
Christus per semetipsum salvare, omnes inquam, qui per eum renascuntur in Deum,
et pueros, et juvenes, et seniores, et parvulos, et infantes. Christ came to
save all that were born of God, even Infants born a new by Baptism. This holy
Writer lived sixty years after the Apostles.

St. Origin, hear him faithfully translated; Ecclesia ab Apostolis Traditionem
accepit, and jam parvulis Baptismum dare; porro air, propterea baptizantur,
quia per Baptismi Sacramentum nativitatis sordes deponuntur. The Church (says
he) received this Tradition from the Apostles, even this, to baptize Infants;
moreover, as he asserts, for this cause, they are admitted to this Sacrament;
that thereby, the foul spots in their Nativity may be washed away. This Father
flourished in the eighty seventh year from the death of St. John who outlived
all the Twelve.

St. Cyprian in his third Book and eighth Epistle, thus writes, A Baptismo
prohibere Infans non debet, qui recens natus nil peccavit; nisi quod secundum
Adam, carnaliter natus. None ought to deny an Infant Baptism, for, says the
Holy Father, he being new born, has no sin, save the guilt of Adams to answer
for. This Father lived in the 158. year after the death of the Apostles.

St. Gregory Nazianzen next steps in to defend Infants Baptism, and to give
you it in our Latin tongue, more suitable to the capacity of many readers, he
asks the question, "Number Infantes Baptizemus? It is answered, Maxim quidem, si
periculum quoddam imminet; melius est enim nondum rationis compotes
sanctificari, quam non signatos, and initiatos vita excedere. It is the
judgment of this Father, that we may justify to baptize Infants if in the
danger of death; yea, he fully determines the controversy, and positively sets
down, how it is better, though they want the use of reason, so to make them
holy, than to suffer them to die without this Seal of Grace; and mark, how by
being made holy, or sanctified, is meant being baptized, as here easily you may
perceive, but Doctor Hamond has perspicuously made it appear, in his answer to
Mr. Tombs. This St. Gregory lived two hundred and seventy years after the last
of the twelve.

St. Jerome, let us now hear what he can say, Infantes baptizantur, ut eis
peccata in Baptismate dimittantur. Infants are baptized, that so they may be
assoiled of their sin by Baptism, he means their birth-sin; and therefore
without all doubt, a most needful work we impose upon all Parents, to hasten
the Christening or Baptizing of their Children. This Holy Father lived in the
year two hundred and eighty after the Apostles.

St. Chrisostom is as good a witness for us as any of these, we may find his
testimony recorded in his Homily de Baptizatis. Hac de causa, ait, and jam
Infantulos Baptizamus, ut non sint coinquinati peccato, ut iis addatur
sanctitas, justitia, adoptio, haereditas, fraternitas Christi, ut ejus membra
sint omnes. We baptize young children, says Saint Chrysostom, that they may
not be polluted with sin, that there may be added to them holiness,
righteousness, adoption, a right of heirship, and to be the brothers of Christ;
yea, to be made his members: yea, and by this means they are made as the Holy
Father tells us, the Temples of the Holy Ghost. And thus you see of how high
concernment it is to baptize Infants, by virtue of which Sacred Ordinance, they
are not only assoiled of their sin by Adam, but have conferred upon them Gods
grace; with which the Anabaptists, it seems are loath at young years to be
acquainted: and if they continue in those damnable tenants, prejudicial to all
government in Church and State; as hitherto they have done; then I dare say,
that as they refused to be made visible members by Baptism in the Church
Militant, its to be feared God will never bestow on them true repentance
whereby they might be ensured to be members of the Church Triumphant.

But to draw to an head, you see how large a talent of Gods grace in the
judgment of this holy Father does Baptism put Infants into a possession of; of
all which Sacred Riches, the Anabaptists like strong thieves labor to rob
them: but those who stick not to imbrew their arms up to the elbows in the
blood of the Lords anointed, will make no conscience to wrong one of these
little ones, though their very Angels, as the Evangelist tells us, stand before
the face of their heavenly Father. This Father lived in the 300. Year after the
departure of the blessed Apostles.

St. Augustine in his fourth Book and 13. Chapt. against the Donatists, speaks
thus: Quod tenet universitas Ecclesiae, cum parvuli Infantes baptizantur, qui
certe nondum possunt cord credere ad justitiam, and ore confiteri ad salutem,
etc. Et tamen nullus Christianorum dixerit eos inaniter baptizari. That which
we have received, meaning as an Apostolical Tradition, the whole Church of God
approves of: that is, That our young Infants ought to be baptized, who neither
can be known by outward appearance to believe and confess. Yet in his time, he
professes none denied them Baptism, or said, in vain it was administered to
them. Yet more in Sermon. 14. he avoucheth: Quod consuetudo Matris Ecclesiae in
baptizandis parvulis non spernenda est. How the custom of baptizing Infants is
not to be contemned. "Habet enim ista parvula aetas "magnum testimonii pondus.
He tells us, that little age, in which the Church suffered sad Persecution, we
ought to honor her Testimony, as she that did maintain this Church Doctrine
in the time of a Fiery Trial. This Doctor of our Church lived in the 330. Year.

And now I must tell you, that since baptizing Infants is at this Day the
practice of all National Churches Christian: nay more, since Tertullian,
Iraeneus, St. Cyprian, Gregory Nazianzen, St. Jerome, St. Chrysostom, and St.
Augustine, all living in the time of the Primitive Church, assert it to be a
Tradition Apostolical; this makes me admire how so much impudence should
possess the Sons of Disobedience, as to send a Defiance to the Church
Catholic, for granting Infants that Sacramental Privileoge, of which they
have been in possission ever since the Apostles time. But I slight the contest
with such Adversaries, who when they cannot maintain their Quarrel with men at
arms, the Doctors of our Church, take up the cudgels against Infants, whose
right to Baptism is of so long a standing, that I find it practiced before any
Council did decree it; and yet to support the Pillars of this Divine Truth, the
Council of Carthage, and the Milevitine Council, even both of them accurse for
Heretics all such as detain Infants from Baptism.

The third Argument.

And now I come to the third Argument, which though I have made some use of it
amongst my answers to some objections; yet it is no spiritual cowardice to draw
out the same sword, so I wound the adversary more deeply. Notum est omnibus, it
is notoriously known, how we have Baptism instead of Circumcision; but very
young children at eight days old under the Law were circumcised; therefore
children under the Gospel may be baptized: such an Argument, that as before I
hinted at, either must the Anabaptist quarrel with God, for circumcising those
young children, or lose beshrew himself for blaming us who baptize these.

The fourth Argument.

God calls on them to come unto him, it is an unmannerly part of those
Ministers, who will not by that door Baptism, let these young ones into their
masters house, the Church, whom himself calls upon; would you see who these
are, turn to the Christning Gospel, Mark 10.14. Suffer, says he, little
children to come unto me, and forbid them not. It seems even in our Saviors
days, there were some a little too saucy and burstling against this Doctrine
of baptizing Infants.

The fifth Argument.

Young children are comprehended within the covenant of Grace, witness Genesis
17.7. where said, Ero Deus tuus and Seminis tut. Nay famous is that place, Acts
2.39. There, says St. Peter, the promise is to you and your seed, and to your
children. If God be thus open-handed unto us, and to our young ones, as to pass
his promise to them, that he will be their God, ashamed then may they be who
will not let our young ones have the cogniscence how they are his people.

The sixth Argument.

Children may be inspired with the Holy Ghost, even in utero, in the womb, and
it is a Scripture Argument, since these have received the Holy Ghost as well as
we, what hinders, meaning they must not be hindered Baptism; and that a child
may be thus inspired, witness that first of Luke, where said of John the
Baptist, how he leaped for joy in his mothers womb; and that joy, is a fruit of
the spirit, Gal. 5.22. puts it out of all doubt. But replied, that was
miraculous, and so it was; yet since children may have Faith, I see not in my
judgment, but how they may receive Baptism: and let me tell you, that as
children are counted guilty of sin, and reputed sinners, who never commit any
one actual sin, so all our children may by counted (...) believers, who yet
have no faith of their own, but of their parents. And hereupon says St.
Augustine, Absit ut ego di^am non credentes Infantes. God forbid bid that I
should say, how Infants are no Believers, Credit in altero qui peccavit in
altero. He believes by a Proxy, who sinned by a Deputy, and is reputed for a
true believer; and this reputative faith, as a reverend Doctor of our Church
well observes, is accepted of by the Church on the Infants behalf; and the
rather because it is evidenced by the Baptism of Simon Magus, and all other
Hypocrites, how it is the profession of faith, not the possession of it, which
is required as the qualification which authorizes the Church to admit the
baptized to this Sacrament; and since they cannot speak and make this
profession, because they have not as yet the use of their tongue; for this
cause it has been the practice of the Catholic Church to admit of their
seconds to profess in their name, which well they may, since as you know I have
proved, the promise is made to you and-to your seed, and to many that are afar
off. To conclude, it is an unchristian part, for a word speaking to make our
little ones want their Charter for Heaven.

The seventh Argument.

Heaven belongs to young children, Matthew. 19.14. Are they reckoned among owners
of heaven, and shall we keep them out of Gods Church on earth? shall Christ
tell us unto them belongs the kingdom of Heaven; he is an Heretic then that
will not by this Sacrament grant them admittance into the kingdom of grace:
what? are our young children for heaven, and dare any hinder them for coming
into the way which leads unto the kingdom. This Sacrament receiving, sets you
into the very first way for heaven, till then we are out of the Church way; the
straight way to a life everlasting, whither God for his mercies send all of us.

The eighth Argument.

My last Argument to convince the Anabaptists is taken out of Acts the 16. read
the 15. and 33. verses. There is mention made of two whole families that were
baptized, the one Lydea's, the other the Jaylors; from the example of the
blessed Apostles we have liberty to baptize all in the family, men, women, and
children.

And now to give you the colle^ of all; since the Apostles baptized whole
families old and young, 2. Since heaven belongs to young children. 3. Since it
is not the possession only, but profession of Faith makes the baptized capable
of Baptism. 4. Since children are comprehended within the Covenant of Grace.
5. Since Christ calls on them to come unto him, and says (forbid them not.) 6.
Since we have Baptism left instead of Circumcision, and that at eight days
old, that Seal of Grace was in print upon the Infants flesh. 7. Since we have
the practice of all National Churches Christian, to justify our practice, both
Greek and Latin, old and modern; yea, all the Fathers which lived in the
Primitive Church declaring for us. Lastly, Since there is no place in
Scripture, that in the least stands in opposition against baptizing young
children; but many divine Texts leading us to this business. All these reasons
seriously weighed in the balance of an impartial Reader, I hope this will give
good satisfaction, and encourage us to Anathematize that damnable Doctrine of
the Anabaptists, as also to look upon them as Heretics, and murderers of the
Souls of Infants.

And now that you may for ever bear in your remembrance, how odious were these
Heretics to all Christian Nations; for this cause I shall present to the view
of the Judicious Reader, those heavy Punishments (by godly Princes) inflicted
upon those who were obstinate Anabaptists.

1. To begin at Home: They have been judged to be burned to death, and have
suffered by Fire in this famous City of LONDON. And let me tell you, that if
these Firelocks of the Devil had not now of late by this present Power been
suppressed, they were a blowing that Coal, which would have kindled that Fire
which might have consumed Suburbs and City to hot ashes.

2. Justinian speaking of these pernicious people, tells us, how in his Days
they were all condemned to Death. For in truth, if you would take the pains to
read all their damnable Tenets, you would solemnly swear, that it was not fit
for them to live amongst Honest men.

3. At Vienna, that Bulwork of Christendom, the Sentence denounced upon these
Anabaptists was this; That they should be sowed in Sacks and cast into a River,
and be drowned in the Water, for denying Infants the benefit of that water
consecrated in the Font for Baptizing of them.

4. Some States decreed that these Anabaptists should be beheaded. Too noble a
Death for such Headstrong Heretics.

5. There was a Law enacted for all pernicious Anabaptists to be stabbed to the
Heart with Daggers. Thus they were to have inflicted upon them a plurality of
Wounds, who plotted the Death of a world of Infants.

6. I read how a Law was in force, to cause all the Anabaptists to be pinched
to death with hot Pincers. And to say no more but truth, they deserve store of
hot Fire, who deny Infants the Benefit of cold Water.

7. I read in the History of Germany, how it was decreed, that the Anabaptists
should have their Bodies hung up in Iron Cages in the high Steeple in Minster.
They had wronged the Church, and therefore the Steeple was too good to be their
gallows. They had sinned against. God in Heaven and his Church on Earth; and
for this cause, it was a just Sentence to hang them betwixt Heaven and Earth;
as being unworthy to enter the one, or tread upon the other.

Having made known to the courteous Reader what severe Punishments have been
inflicted upon these Heretics, as Disturbers of the Catholic Church; and as
much as in them lies, the destroyers of all our Infants: Now give me leave to
put you in mind, how for form we baptize. In the Name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the holy Ghost; if we use any other form, we offend, our
Tongues must be tied to these words: where God dictates, it is high
presumption, treason, to alter any thing.

I shall not spend any time to give a reason of this form of baptizing, let sic
volo sic jubeo satisfy; our Christ commands, our Christ prescribes, and I will
leave all Directories to follow his directions, which is this; Go ye therefore
and make Disciples; for so the word in the Greek signifies, baptizing them in
the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Christ's word is our warrant to baptize. For us. Not for every one then; for us
to baptize, not the ancient only, but Infants also. A parvulo recens nato
usque ad senem, nullus est prohibendus aa Baptismo, Aug. we have leave to
baptize old and young, says St. Augustine, go ye therefore and baptize them; as
if our Savior had said, time will come, you will be all for the word, little
for the Sacraments, all for preaching Sermons, have small care to administer my
Seals of Grace. I foresee your zealous frenzy, thinking you have done me good
service, when but half your duty; I charge you therefore go teach; and go
baptize: you see we must not give our selves so much to teach, that we neglect
the administration of the Blessed Sacraments; nor those whom God has joined
together let no man put asunder. And now good Christian Readers, what just
cause have I here, to fall foul upon many of our English Ministry, who can be
content not to administer the Blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper to their
Parishioners for seven years together; nay more, keep young children from
Baptism; these are mungril Ministers, half Clergy men, as ill as Papists,
worse then Papists, their Priests keep from the communicants only the Cup, the
Wine at Communion; these have deprived the people for many years together, both
of the Bread, and the Wine; neither will they let their Children wash in this
Jordan Baptism, that God might account them clean. O England, lament and
bemoan the fearful calamity has fallen upon thee, how can thou, but fear,
and justly, that God will remove thy golden Candlestick, I mean deprive thee of
his word, since in many Parishes thou have cashiered the use of his Blessed
Sacraments. Now the Lord grant we may know what belongs to the day of our
visitation; yea Lord, for thy infinite mercies, let the son and the Moon, thy
word and Sacraments shine in our English Church all our days. Grant this dear
Father for the merits of our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus.

FINIS.
Errata
In the Episte, for makes read make twice. page 8. read women twice. p. 13. l.
8. r. this. p. 24. l. 13. r. us. p. 34. l. 13. r. tell. p. 41. 1. 9. r.
Nations. p. 54. l. 5. r. teather. p. 67. l. 22. r. (...)

These Books following are made by the same Author.
The Lords Prayer Unclasped.

A Plea for the Common Prayer Book.

The Passing Bell rung out.

A pair of Spectacles for the Anabaptists.

pair of spectacles

Do ye not yet See?


