Have You any Work for a COOPER? OR, A COMPARISON Betwixt a Cooper's, and a
Joyner's Trade,
Wherein their Qualities are both displayed:
But still the Cooper, as you Here may sind,
The Joyner does Excel in every Kind.

The Tune, The Friar and the Nun, etc.
THE Cooper, and the Joyner, are Two famous Trades:
They both are cunning Workmen; they both are crafty Lads:
They both can varnish off their Work; both will you Trepan:
Yet say what you will, the Cooper is the -- Man.
They both have their Trade well, to give the Devil his Due;
Nay, some stick not to say, He was their Master too:
But though the Joyner do appear the more Active Blade;
Yet say what you will, the Cooper is the -- Lad.
They both work in Timber, but not in the same Wood:
The Cooper works in Ash, that Hilts makes firm and good
For the Axe, that on the Head all Lordly Traitors knocks:
Yet say what you will, the Cooper is the -- Fox.
The Joyner he (of late) work't for Life 'bout a Tree,
Like the Old Tripple-Oak, which near Hide-Park you see;
Where many Traitorous Pendulums have had a shrewd Disaster:
Yet say what you will, the Cooper is their -- Master.
The Cooper he hoops Hogsheads, and a Hole in the Side leaves open;
The Joyner he Joins all Things, except a Neck that is broken:
Though both were wrapped up in the Smock of their City-Mother;
Yet say what you will, the Cooper's -- The Elder-Brother.
The Cooper on his Friends, late casts a Squinting-Eye:
The Joyner too of late, does shrewdly look a-wry.
And though they do, in this one Point, both of them agree:
Yet say what you will, the Cooper's -- Ipse He.
Both are True Protestants, and of the Newest Stamp,
(Such as Jack Presbyter does with an Atheist Vamp:)
Both the Glory of the Church; both in the old Way bred;
Yet say what you will, the Cooper is its -- Head.
The Cooper he can make a Speech to be admired:
The Joyner too can prate, as if he were inspired;
It seems his Clapper is well hung, (I wish them well hung both;)
Yet say what you will, the Cooper is the -- Youth.
They both went to Oxford, to Study, I suppose;
But not both of One College, yet both of Brazen-Nose:
But One of them staid behind, his Degrees to take there:
And say what you will, the Cooper is a -- Quaker.
The University discovered soon their Parts:
But it had never yet There, Masters of such Arts:
Each of them for the Good Old Cause, doubtless is a Right Boy:
Yet say what you will, the Cooper is the -- White-Boy.
The (...) (...) about Town, is now the Cooper's Cry;
The King Dissolves, then cries the Joyner by and by;
And the People do Resolve, is the Rabble's Vogue:
Yet say what you will, the Cooper is the -- Rogue.
Creat Scholars stood amazed, to hear the Cooper plead;
And wondered too to hear, what the Learned Joyner said:
He of all the Bawling Curs, is the Chief Controuler:
But say what you will, the Cooper is -- Old Jouler.
The Cooper is, you know; Chief Workman to a Brewer;
The Joyner work't for both, but make not Work so sure;
As apppear'd not long ago, much to the Cooper's Grief:
Yet say what you will, the Cooper's a -- Sly Thief.
The Cooper by his Calling, does often work with Fools;
The Joyner does the same too, and uses the same Tools:
And though he be accounted, by all a Subtle Slave;
Yet say what you will, the Cooper is the -- Knave.
The Cooper is an Elder-man of Fame and Renown;
The Joyner is likewise a Freeman of the Town:
And though he wears no Gown, he did lately wear a Chain;
Yet say what you will, the Cooper merits -- Twain.
Both (like their Fellow-Tradesmen) can Cant and Cringe, to Cheat
Their Customers with Wares, False and Adulterate;
And sell too their own Fathers, for a Penny in the Shilling:
Yet say what you will, the Cooper is the -- Villain.
They both can Yea and Nay, both can Profess, to get
Unwary silly Wood-Cocks into their Treacherous Net:
Both can snear like Saints, with Carriage wondrous Civil;
Yet say what you will, the Cooper is a -- Devil.
The Cooper he is free to work in the Tower all Day;
But not with the Popish Lords, at Pins or Bowls to Play;
Or any such Profane Game, whereof the Pope's Contriver:
Yet say what you will, the Cooper's the -- Top-driver.
The Joyner has a Freedom herein beyond the Cooper;
For he in the open Field, with Ketch may play a Rubber:
And though he were so mad, his Neck to venture at one Stake there;
Yet say what you will, the Cooper's the -- Match-Maker.
The Cooper he has been a Parliament-Cavalier;
The Joyner had been for the Next Election fair,
Had he not late miscarried by the Member's Division;
Yet say what you will, Cooper's the -- Politician.
All you can for the Joyner say, (say your Best, or Worst)
Is, That he had the Honor to be Exalted first.
Well, I Will to oblige you, grant that Part of your Text:
Yet say what you will, the Cooper will be -- Next.
Now, pray take Notice all of you, what-e're you are,
That before the Noble Cooper, the Joyner do prefer;
You must confess, That if with him in any sort compared,
Even say what you will, the Cooper is a -- Lord.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for R. H. in the YEAR 1681.


