TRUTH May be blamed, but not shamed. A SERMON Upon Matthew. 16. v. 13, 14, 15,
16.

Wherein Truth and Error are brought upon the Stage acting their parts, By
WILLIAM HARVEY, Minister of the Word.

O foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you that you should not obey the
Truth, etc.

Gal. 3.1. Am I therefore become your enemy because I tell you the truth.

Chap. 4.16. Quid de quoquo viro, and cui dicas saepe caveto. LONDON, Printed
for the Author, 1657.

Collegium S. Set Individuce Trinitatis in Academia Cantabrigiensi


Matthew. 16 Chap. verse. 13, 14, 15, 16. When Jesues came into the coasts of
Cesarea Philippi, he asked his disciples, saying, Whom do men say that I the
Son of man am? And they said, So me say that thou art John the Baptist, some
Elias, and others Jeremias, or one of the prophets. He says unto them, but
whom say ye that I am? and Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art Christ the
Son of the Living God.


IN these words we have two questions with their answers: The questions are one
and the same, but the answers are distinct and different, accoring to the
different Spirits of the Common people and of the Apostles, Both respond as
they thought, and as their genious prompt them. The Apostles give in the
judgment of the vulgar, which is various and diverse; and they in the person of
Peter (wrapped as it were in the Clouds) and their tongues touched with a Coal
from the altar; give in theirs, viz. Thou art Christ the Son of the living God.
But first let us come to the plebeans and hear what opinions the vulgar had of
our Savior. We have them in the thirteenth and fourteenth verses, Some say
that thou art John the Baptist, Some Elias, and others Jeremias, or one of the
Prophets. To omit all other Circumstances of time and place, where and when;
The external impulsive cause or occasion of the giving in of the peoples
judgment, was our Lords interrogation; whom do men say that I the son of man
am? Or as S. Mark has it, whom do men say that I am? Chap. 8. verse. 27. Or as
S. Luke; whom say the people that I am. Chap. 9. verse. 18. By Son of man,
Christ meant himself; which word is usual in Scripture, and is expressed by the
Prophet Daniel, chap. 7. v. 13. I saw in the night visions, and behold one like
the Son of man came with the Clouds of heaven, and came to the ancient of
days, and they brought him near before him. And all this, to intimate, and
point unto us that he was born man of the blessed Virgin Mary, in all things
like unto us, (Sin only excepted) as the Apostle has it Heb. 2. chap. verse.
14, The end of his interrogation, or question, was not sinister, as affecting
popular applause, or vain glory; neither was it, because he was ignorant of the
peoples thoughts of him; For he needed not that any should testify of man, for
he knew what was in man. John 2. chap. verse. 25. But hearing the various
conceits of the inconstant people, he might the more fully and rightly inform
them in the same. The answer of the Apostles is fourfold, a many headed Hidra,
which they give in the name of the Common people; Some say that thou. are John
the Baptist, some Elias, and others Jeremias or one of the prophets. Now, John
was a notable Doctor, a man for holiness of life, innocence, and sharpness in
his reproofs above all in his time. This John, Herod (not long before) causes
to be put to death. Our Lord treading in his steps, and exceeding him in
innoceney, austerity in reproving of Sin, and vehemence in his reprehensions;
the Common people conceited, and persuaded themselves, that he was very John
the Baptist, risen again from the dead; so Luke chap. 9. verse. 7. Because it
was said of some that John was risen from the dead. With which fond opinion
Herod himself was big, Matthew 14.2. This is John the Baptist, he is risen from
the dead, therefore mighty works do show forth themselves in him. Others took
him for Elias, that noble and heroic prophet, in the time of king, Ahab and
Jezabel, who slew the prophets of Baal, smote the waters of Jordan, and possed
over as on dry ground, and as too good for earth, is carried in a fiery Charet
to heaven, 2 Kings 2.11. Thus we read Mark 6.15. Others said, that it is Elias,
etc. The ground of this mistake is the words in Malachi, 4. chap. 5. verse.
Behold I will send you Elijah the prophet before the coming of the great and
dreadful day of the Lord. The Jews hereupon falsely imagined our Savior to be
that Tishbite come from heaven, and so that prophecy of the prophet
accomplished. Thirdly others again, think him to be Jeremias, a prophet who was
not only ordained from his mothers womb to preach and prophesy to the people;
hut the whole course of this life was a free reprehending the sins and
enormities of the times. He prophesied the destruction of the Temple and the
captivity of the Jews in Babylon. A sad Omen to as sad a consequence, which
they found too true by sad experience. Christ therefore with the like zeal
reprehending the priests, and foreshewing the destruction of the Temple, and
Jerusalem it self, that most populous and flourishing City; hence they blindly
surmise him to be Jeremias. Lastly, others, without positive affirming him to
be this or that particular, shoot their bol^, and blindly say that he is one of
the prophets. So we read Luke 7.16. And there came a fear on all, and they
glorified God, saying, that a great prophet is risen among us, and that God
has visited his people. And Luke 9.8. And, of some that Elias had appeared,
and of others that one of the old prophets was risen again. And John 6.14. This
is of a truth that prophet that should come into the world. And thus you have
the several and promiscuous judgments of the people, concerning our blessed
Lord. All give in their verdict, but rove at random, and miss the white. Yet
the Commons, although they erred, and (and to use Chrysostoms words) multo
humilior quam opporteba^eorum de Christo erat opinio, a nequitia tamen libera
erat; their opinion concerning Christ was far beneath him: notwithstanding it
was without tincture of wickedness. On the contrary, the opinion of the
Pharisees savored of much malice; For they said, he was a Samaritan, and had a
devil, and did eject devils through Beelz bub the prince of the devils Luke the
11th 15. John 8.48. And so I come to the Observations in the Text.

First then, it were not amiss after the example of our Savior, when he said,
whom do men say that I the Son of man am? for us (upon occasion) to question,
and enquire what others speak of us; to understand the several vo'es of the
people, and to hear their resolves; that so we may take off all occasions of
scandals in time, and opportunely stop Calumnies wide and foul mouth.
Especially this concerns the Ministers of Gods word, having more Curs barking
at them then any other, Fama proxima vitae, a man's fame is next to his life.
And the Wife man says, A good name is rather to be chosen then great riches.
Prove. 22.1. Yet see how flies seek to mar these precious ointments, and rob a
man of that which is of more value then all the gold of India. Si actum de
nomine, actum de homine.
For, if a man's name be done, he is in a manner undone. S. Augustine said well;
Nobis necessaria ese vitanostra, alils sama nostra.
Our life is necessary for our selves, our fame for others. Wherefore tender is
as the Apple of thine eye; For as it is said of Titus, that he was delicium
humani generis, the delight and darling of mankind; De bon. viduit.
so is a good name of man, his darling, his delight. Haec sunt ornamenta mea
said Camelia to a Matron of Campania, pointing to her Sons: These are my
jewels, my ornaments. Such a jewel is ones good name to him. My advise then is
this, take away the cause of scandal, base life and sinful courses, and the
effect will cease of it self. Da operam ut recte agas, atque sio perfrueris
hona fama.
A good life cannot want a good name. Wherefore as Epictetus has it, Endeavor
to do well, and so shall thou enjoy a good name. It is sin that causes shame;
Rake a dunghill, and it will stink. What comes from a fog, but unsavory smells?
Isaiah 57.20, 21.
The wicked are like the troubled Sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast
up mire and dirt, There is no peace says my God to the wicked. No peace within
their Consciences, none without, in the thoughts and acceptions of the world.
Take the moral of this. Progne, king Pandions daughter, and wife to king
Thereus; desired her husband to fetch her sister Philomela to her. To be short
the fair maid is ravished by Thereus, and her tongue cut out. Coming to her
sister, with her needle, (though she could not speak) opens all Thereus his
villainy. Progne in revenge of this foul act, murders her only son, and presents
him as a dish of meat to her husband. This being done; the king rises in a
rage, whilst Progne makes her escape: and the Fable says, Thereus was turned
into a Lapwing, Progne into a Swallow with a spot of red on her breast, to
express her cruelty, and Philomola into a Nightingal, as one always bewailing
her misfortune. The ravishing king had these verses of him, Rex fueram, fie
crista probat, sed sordida vita
Immundam e tanto culmine secit avem.
This Tuft does show that once I was a King,
By base life now brought low, a filthy thing.


Look on murdering Cain, idolatrous Ahab, painted Jezabel, rebellious Absalom,
and treacherous Judas, and their names stink in the nostrila of men. Their
memory carries such an Odium with it, as all detest, and cast it forth as dung
in the streets. Drunken Tiberius Nero has the deserved Epithete of ^iberius
Mero; And another Emperor this, Non homo sed porcus Sardinapalus erat:
Sardinapalus was no man but a Swine. Caligula that Monster of Nature, who kept
a Common Stewa for both Sexes to fill his coffers, a Wretch so avaritious, that
he would spread himself over his treasure; was stabbed by his own Servants with
this watchword, Hoc age, mind this only. His name is so detestable, that all
spit at it, but once mentioned. And can our beastly Drunkards and Epicures, who
make their belly their Gods, can our goatish Adulterers defile their bodies,
which are Gods temples, making them members of an Harlot; and can our covetous
muck-worms, that eat the people of God as men eat bread, think to escape? No an
odium will be upon their names to perpetuity, and an Ocean of waters shall
never wash away their stains. Wherefore as David said to Ahimelech, of the
sword of Goliath; There is none like that, give it me. 1 Samuel 21 29. So there is
nothing comparable to a godly and vertnous life to preserve a good name. It is
like the Cherubims and flaming sword, which turns every way, to keep the way
of this tree of life. Genesis 3.24. This is that Rizpah, that suffers neither
the birds of the air to rest on them by day, nor the beast of the field by
night to prey upon them. 2 Samuel 21.10. But what if innocence it self and fair
virtue cannot stop the madness of the people? Suppose that some sons of
Belial, for all this, will be blotting thy fair copy, and seek to impair thy
integrity? Care not for it; Ne hili aestima, weigh it not the black of a Bean:
and say with S. Paul, But with me it is a very small thing that I should be
judged of you, or of man's judgment. 1 Cor. 4.3. I would conclude the point,
but that I must say something of our credulous men, whose ears are open to
every tale, those common shores that receive all waters and kennels to run
through them. Epicarmus was wont to say; Memento diffidere, be not too
credulous. For it is most true; If there were no tale-hearer, there would be no
tale-hearer. And verily as the Devil sits on the tongue of the one, so be
sits on the car of the other. And I cannot tell which of the two is worse.
These, as thief and receiver are relatives, and like Addition in Arithmetic,
cast up the particulars, and both make but one gross Sum. I may say of these
Youths, as one sometime of the Popes Legate, Sic bacchinantur in Provinciis,
etc. They so revel it in the Provinces, and make such havoc where they come;
as if the Devil were let loose of God to scourge hi^ Church. We use to say, and
it is very true; Plus gula, quam gladio. More men are slain by the throat,
meaning by surfets and drunkenness, then by the sword. Even so more are
murdered in their good names, by those that speak through their throat by way
of defamation of good men, then such as fall by the sword. It is the part of a
Christian to construe all in the beter sense, and to have a candid construction
of reports; For to believe all spoken to thee in the detraction of thy brother,
may bring an innocent man into a praemunire, and cause thee to infringe the Laws
both of nature and religion. How did David though one after Gods own heart, by
too much harkening to the false suggestion of flattering Ziba, wrong a good man,
even Mephibosheth; and the only son of his dear friend, 2 Samuel 16.4. This took
away Naboths vineyard, and his life, 1 Kings 21.13. Tertullus the Orator
thought this the best way to crack the credit of S. Paul, and like water to
spill it on the ground, not to be gathered up, Acts 24.5, 6, etc. Joseph the
chaft, by his wanton Mistresses falls accusation, was cast into prison, Genesis
39.20. Susanna, that honest and good soul, had almost lost her life too, by
this murdering piece; had not Gods mercy opportunely intervened to the saving
of his handmaid. What should I say more? Our blessed Lord himself had this
Cannon shot at him; the piece goes off, but being foul, breaks and flies
about their ears who first gave fire to it, Luke 23.2. Mark 15.3. Matthew. 27.12.
There are three things amiable in the sight of God and men: Concordia fratrum,
amicitia propinquorum, and vir and uxor inter se convenientes; Concord of
brethren, friendship of neighbors, and a man and his wife agreeing together.
And now what puts these instruments out of tune but the foul hand of
Calumny? Who causes a separation of these three lovely pairs but falf tales
and suggestions? Nothing breaks the peace more then this. Oh, what
confusions, what sad troubles have followed them! Such turbulent spirits have
been raised in one hour, as could scarce be laid in many years after. These
bellows have kindled such a fire as no waters have been able to quench it. So
horrid and deplorable has been the sad consequence of the ready reception of a
slander; as I may say of him, and the author of it, as ( Jacob of Simeon and
Levi) they are brethren, instrumental of cruelty are in their habitations, Genesis
49.5. Simile.
In a storm the ship is tossed to and fro, reeleth like a drunken man; one
while it mounts as high as heaven, and then falls as low as hell; the
lightnings flash on their faces, the proud waves beat upon them, and fearful
darkness like a black mantle, begirt the trembling mariners; now they are at
their wi^s end, and Acts 27.20.
all hope that they shall be saved is taken away; Thus is it, when the fire of
contention is blown up by the breath of such, who go from house to house to
carry tales; and it kindles the more into flame, when it meets with combustable
matter, a facil disposition, an ear open to receive it. When this Euroclydon
once rises; (unless the Lord) whom the winds and sea obey, in mercy
intervene, the tempest will rise so high, as nothing but miserable, ship wrack
can be expected. Hear I pray all of you whom it may concern, what direction
Titus has from the Apostle, Titus 3.2. To speak evil of no man, to be no
brawlers, but gentle, showing all meekness unto all men. This thing was so
hateful to David, that he thus speaks of it, Psalm. 101.5. Whosoever privily
slaundereth his neighbor, him will I cut off, Mark but this dilewma; I suppose
it will nonplus the best Sophister. Matthew. 7.12.
Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do you
even so to them: Luke 6.31.
for this is the law and the prophets. Now would thou have any slander and
backbite thee? No. Thou art then an unreasonable man; Non compos mentis, to do
that unto another, which thou abhorrest to have done unto thy self. I should
bite my tongue first, before I would perpetrate a sin so unworthy, so beneath a
Christian, I may say a man. For if thy tongue be employed in this particular,
and runs on this errand; James 3.6.
It is a sire, a world of iniquity: so is the tongue amongst our members, that
it defiles the whole body, and sets on fire the course of nature, and it is
set on fire of hell. Blush then (for shame) if thou be guilty this way, and
say with Pharaohs Butler, Gen: 41.9.
I do remember my faults this day. And with holy Job, from a sorrowful and
penitent heart, sweetly warble forth (as he in another sense) Wherefore I abhor
my self, and repent in dust and ashes, Job. 42.6. If this will not serve, let
them know they are murderers, and children of the devil, John 8.44. Ye are of
your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do; he was a
murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth because there is no
truth in him. When he speaks a lie, he speaks of his own: for he is a liar
and the father of it. And if they be murderers; then their sin cries to heaven
for vengeance. Among the four capital, or (if you please) Cardinal vices that
cry, this is set in the front, Clamitani ad coelum vex sangumis, vox Sodom^rum,
Vox oppressorum, merces detenta laborum.
Vix sanguinis, the voice of blood. Genesis 4.10. the voice o thy brothers blood
cries unto me from the ground. And not only so; but they are excluded the
heavenly Jerusalem, no unclean thing can enter there, Revel. 22.15.
For without are dogs, and Sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers; and
idolators, and (in the ^ere) whosoever love h^ and makes a lie. And so leaving
them to stand or fall to their own Masters, I come to the people; and now hear
what they think of due Savior.

Some say that thou art John the Baptist; some Elias, and others Jeremias,
Second observation.
or one of the prophets. Hence I observe, That the vulgar, concerning Christ,
and other matters of faith, are often various and unsatisfied: they hold and
believe that which is not sound and orthodox. Like the blind man in the
Gospel, they discern not aright; as he saw men like trees. How many have we who
know not what God, what Christ or what faith is. In this particular they are as
mute as fishes, and as the horse and mule that have no understanding. Either
they are ignorant of what true religion is, or they stand in doubt of it, and
make a question, whether there be any such thing or no. Witness, our many
sects and opinionists that swarm every where; namely, our blasphemous Quaker,
away with such a fellow from the earth. Our Simpleton Seeker (of a needle in a
bottle of hay) Our ignorant Leveller, that would beget a parity among men,
which is impossible, Mark. 14
For the poor ye have always with you; Our dipping Anabaptist, verberibus magis
quam verbis, authority must cudgel it out of him, for disputes boot not. What
should I speak of Judaism, Turcism, Heathenism, Atheism, etc. In such diversity
of opinions what shall we determine? Shall we bear them? shall we commend them?
or shall we detest them? Laudare mon possumus, detestari d^bemus, far
cogimur. Dierec. Annal.
Praise them we cannot, we ought to abhor them, we are forced to suffer them.
Here is all our Comfort, the harvest will one day day come, when the wheat
shall be put into the granary of Heaven, and the tares cast into the fire.

In the interim, though we live by them, let us not live with them. By any
means, avoid conversing, though we cannot commercing with them altogether; 1
Cor. 5.10
for then must ye needs go out of the world. But above all, make not your
selves one with them by marriage, lest ye propagate a mungrel and monstrous
generation. This was the sin of the old world; when Genesis 6.2.
the Sons of God saw the daughters of men that they were fair, they took them
wives of all that they chose. Modo forma placuisset, Beauty alone pleased them,
as Tremel. upon the Text. So the join bodies and hearts together, and ten to
one but Religion hazards a final divorce. Hear what a father of the Church
says, Neque in confusione Paganorum, neque in purgamentis haereticorum, neque
in languore schismaticorum, neque in coecitate Judaeorum quaerenda est religio,
etc.
Religion is to be sought, neither in the confusion of Pagans, neither in the
filth of Heretics, nor in the languour of Schismatics, nor in the blindness
of the Jews; but with those alone who are called Orthodox Christians, Aug. lib.
de verit. Rel. Cap. 5.
and Catholic, that is to say, such as are retainers of integrity, and those
which follow warrantable ways. But let me (beloved) hit the nail on the head.
If ever thou or I desire to find sure footing, we must do this one thing; even
prostrate our selves at the feet of Christ, and take what drops from his mouth;
for God is true, and all men are liars. I say, let us meekly attend his sacred
Word, it is the only rule we must walk by. This is Lucerna qua fur
deprehenditur, as a Father says, The light by which the thief is descried. I
mean the great thief of all, Satan; and the little ones, the wicked of the
would, seduced of both sexes; who deceive and are deceived, like those enemies
of the truth, of whom S. Paul speaks, that creep into houses, and lead captive
silly women, laden with sins, led away with diverse lusts, ever learning, and
never able to come to the knowledge of the truth, 2 Timothy 3 6 7. Now, as Jannes
and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist the truth: men of corrupt
minds, reprobate concerning the faith, verse 8. This light concerns us much
then in the descrying of these thieves. The Word is to a Christian, as the Card
and Compass is to a Mariner, it makes him sail safely through the sea of this
world; whereas without it, millions are cast away. Wherefore as our Savior
admonishes; Search the Scriptures, for in them you think to have everlasting
life. Yet beware, so search them, that you mistake them not; for otherwise I
may say again, as Christ to them of old, Ye do err not knowing the Scriptures.
They were big words which Julius Caesar spoke, and me thinks, somewhat
hyperbolical, more cry then wool, though, I confess, he was a fortunate and
valiant man; Veni vidi, vici.
I came, sad he, to the enemy, and looked upon them, and conquered them. But is
is a greater task (my brethren) upon the first sight to conquor the sense of
the Scriptures; where in some places the waters are so deep, that an Elephant
may not only swim, but drown. Whosoever have the saving knowledge of the Word,
it is by divine dispensation, Manns in nube.
the good hand of Providence is upon him. A man may read and hear much, and all
to little purpose, if the Star of Gods Spirit appear not, and so direct him to
Christ. Then opened he their understanding, that they might understand the
Scriptures, Luke 23.45. Had not the Lord opened the heart of Lydia to give
attention, Paul's oratory had done her little good, Act, 16.14. When Philip said
to the Eunuch; Understandest thou what thou read? How can I, said he, except
some man should guide me? Acts 8.30, 31. The men alone behind the cloth make
the pupets move. And Almighty God only can and must illuminate our
understandings, and anoint our eyes with eye salve, that we may see, Revelat.
3.18.

And here, in the next place, I pray observe, how difficult a thing it is to
leave a custom once taken up. Pravus usus vix aboletur. Isid. lib. 1. Soliloq.
A wicked habit is hardly left off. Wash a black Moor, and the sign is Labor
in vain. Custom in any thing is a second nature, and it clings so elose to a
man, as if it were born with him, and he sucked it from his mothers breast. It
is like the heart within him, although it is not the first thing that lives,
yet it is the last that dies. ultimum moriens.
See it verefied in the Jews in my Text. Some think Christ to be John the
Baptist, some Elias, Jeremias, or one of the prophets. And all out of an old
custom and mistake, that they could not give a right definition of him. It was
not the first time that Joseph swore by the life of Pharaoh when he had it so
ready in his mouth. The Ephraimites could not pronounce Shibboleth, but say
Sibboleth, Judge. 12.6 Quo semel imbut a recens servabit odorom Testa diu^ Horat.
A vessel will savor of that liquour, it last received, and it will taste of
it a long time after. As for example; A common drunkard seldom turns sober
man, and a desperate swearer will ever have an oath in his mouth. Mark an
unclean person, his words will be obscene and scurrilous; not a syllable comes
from him that administreth grace to the hearers. A covetous muckworm always
savours of earth; and with Esau, his smell is the smell of a field, as Isaac
said to Jacob, taking him for Esau, Genesis 27.27 Take him at his Orisons, or
private devotions (which you shall seldom do) and though he make long prayers,
yet with the Scribes and Pharisees, it is to devour widows houses. The world is
ever his center, and this Dor, fly he never so long, ends his flight on a
dunghill. Take him in the Church, and if his eyes be intent upon the Preacher,
his thoughts are retrograde, and with the Devil are going to and fro in the
earth, and walking up and down in it, Job. 1.7. See this confirmd in our bloody
Nimrods, those mighty hunters before the Lord; who with Caligula are Lutum
sanguine maceratum, a lump of clay soaked in blood; they are accustomed to
murder, as the killing of a man is no more to them then the killing of a flea,
although it be a sin so heinous, that it cries to heaven for vengeance, Genesis
4.10. It is recorded of a Roman Emperor, who when he was alone, spent his time
in pricking of flies with his penknife, insomuch, when one asked who was with
the Emperor, answer was wittily returned, Nemusca quidem: Sueton.
Not so much truly as a fly. Caligula, whom I mentioned before, like an
incarnate Devil, brake out into these words; Vtinam populus Romanus unum
cervicem haberet.
I could wish the people of Rome had but one neck, that he might cut them of at
once. And the reason is, Custom in sinning takes away the sense and feeling of
sin. Philosophers say, Elementum aquae suo loco non ponderat; The element of
water in its proper place is not heavy. As for example, Let a man dive to the
bottom of a river, and he comes up with ease; yet let the same man take but a
bucket and fill it with water, and he will find the carrlage ponderous and
troublesome. Thus is it in once accustomed to sin: whilst he is in that element
(as I may so speak) though whole seas of impiety cover him, he is insensible of
the burden; but if one, by divine assistance, he comes out through a sense of
his deplorable condition; he will then say with David, Mine iniquities are gone
over my head as an heavy burden, they are to heavy for me. Psalm 38.4. What
should we do then in this case? what remedy for this sore? Only, Caveat emptor;
beware how thou make thy bargain with Sin. The foreman in the shop is Satan,
and he cannot away with returns of his bad ware. What is that to us, see thou
to that, said the chief priests and elders to Judas after he had betrayed his
Master, and was troubled in conscience, Matthew. 27.4. Thou will one day say to
the Devil and thy sins, as Job sometime to his Friends, Miserable comforters
are you all. Sin is like a storm at sea, first there are leves undae, small
waves, after that majora volumina, greater volumes of water; and at last
fluctus ad coelum, surges mounting up to heaven. The first committing of sin is
not so dangerous as a frequent and common perpetration. A man may wash himself
nigh the shore, yea, he may go so far as he can well wade, without danger; but
if he once step beyond his depth, it must be a hand of providence if he be
saved. And we should the rather be wary, in regard of the proneness of our
nature to sin: All the imaginations of our hearts are only evil continually,
Genesis 6. And without grace, it is as natural for us to sin, as for ponderous
things to tend downwards. Can we then be too careful to fall into that, whereto
we have so facil, and genuine a disposition, so innate and inbred faculty. The
dogs of Egypt drink of the river Nilus as they run for fear of a Crocadile;
and shall we lie down and drink our fill of sin, when that Crocadile Satan is
ready to devour us: and especially when it is a work of power to reclaim us?
God forbid. To conclude the point; Concerning the opinions in my Text, and the
fond conceits which the people through custom and use had of Christ; let us
wash our hands of them, and cordially pray, From all Sedition and privy
conspiracy, from all false doctrine and heresy, from hardness of heart, and
contempt of thy Word and Commandment, Good Lord deliver us. In the interim, let
us be constant to our principles, and like oaks, withstand all winds of
contrary tenants, which are disconsonant to the analogy of faith. And let us
always remember that of S. Paul, For there must be also heresies among you,
that they which are approved may be made manifest among you, 1 Cor. 11.19. And
Ephesians. 4.14. That we henceforth be no more children tossed to and fro, and
carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the slight of men, and cunning
craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive. And so I come to the
confession of the Apostles in the name and person of Peter. verse. 15, 16.

He says unto them, The Apostles confession.
, but whom say ye that I am; And Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art Christ
the Son of the living God. This confession or responsion we have, first, from
the principle efficient cause, which was S. Peter. And it is amplified from the
adjunct his proper name, Simon, and by his surname Peter; which signifies a
rock, as Mark 3.16 And Simon he surnamed Peter. So Luke 6.14. Simon whom he
also named Peter. And Cephas in the Hebrew, (or as the Learned say) rather in
the Sy^iack tongue is all one with Peter in the Greek, and signifies a rock or
stone. Now in that Peter is the mouth of the rest of the Apostles, and their
spoaksman, it was not because he thought himself the chief of his brethren; no,
he never dreamed any such thing, Quia ardore Christi praecipou servens, and ad
faciendum, and ad respondendum paratissimus erat. Cyrill. lib. 12. in Johan.
neither was he taken with that ^ectick fever, but as Cyril has it, Because
being more fervent in the love of Christ, he was most ready to make and give an
answer.

Again, in that he alone made answer, in the name of the rest of the Apostles.
For, Fides catholica una est ubicunque and apud quoscunque fie. Ideo conveniens
fuit confessionem ejus per unum fieri, liee^ illu esset fides multorum. Tostar
super locum, Quest. 56.
wheresoever and with whomsoever it is found. It was therefore sit the
Confession of Christ to be made by one, although it were the belief of many. To
confirm the same, we have the like Confession, John 6.69. Where though Saint
Peter speaks only, yet he delivers it in the plural number. And we believe
and are sure, that thou art that Christ the Son of the living God. Secondly
here is the form of the confession; Thou art are Christ the Son of the living
God. Which confession though it be in few words, the matter is high and
sublime; for in it is contained that great mystery of God made man; and the
person and office of our Savior. First, Christ is God coequal and coessential
with the Father and the Holy Ghost. To this end he is called, The only begotten
of the Father, John 1.14. Thus is he begotten of the essence of his Father from
all eternity, Psalm. 2.7. Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. And
the Text, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God. He is said to be the
Living God Secundum supereminentiam, qua superemines omnibus habe^tibus vitam,
quemad modum solus habet immortalitatem. Orig.
according to his Supereminency, wherein he is above all living, as one that
has only immortality, and is the fountain of life. So S. John Chap. 14.6. I am
the way, the truth, and the life. And he is called the living God also, Ad
comparationem little deorum qui putantur dii, sed mortui sunt; Saturnum dico,
Jovem, Venerem, and coetera idolorum portenta. Hier.
in comparison of those gods, who are thought to be gods, but are all dead, I
say Saturn, Jupiter and Venus, and the other forms of idols. S. Paul Heb. 1.3.
has it -- Who being the brightness of his glory, and the express image of
his person. But to put all out of doubt, the Apostle has this dilemma, Colos
1.16. For by him were all things created that are in Heaven, and that are in
earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or
principalities, or powers, all things wers created by him and for him. Saint
John says 1 John 5.20. This is the true God and eternal life. And Romans 9.5.
Who is over all God blessed for ever, Amen.

Secondly, As our Savior is true God, so likewise he is true man, of the
substance of his Mother, born in the world. This is manifest by his own words,
verse. 13. Whom do men say that I the Son of man am? To this purpose he has the
plain Epithete of Man given him, Luke 23.47. Now when the Centurion saw what
was done, he glorified God, saying; Certainly this was a righteous man. And the
Apostle, 1. Tim. 2.5. For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and
men, the man Christ Jesus. Wherefore he is called the son of Mary, Matthew. 1.16.
The seed of the woman. Genesis 3.15. The seed of Abraham, Heb. 2.16. Born of a
woman, Gal. 4.4. Yet notwithstanding, though he be God and man, he is not two,
but one Christ. According to Athanasius his Creed. One, not by Conversion of
the Godhead into flesh, but by taking the manhood into God; one altogether, not
by confusion of Substance, but by unity of Person; For as the reasonable soul
and flesh is one man; so God and man is one Christ. To this purpose the Apostle
says, there is one Lord Jesus Christ, 1. Cor. 8.6. And one Mediator between
God and men, 1. Tim. 2.5. Thus we see he is but one Christ. In the next place
we have his office expressed in the word, Christ. Thou art Christ, etc. which
word signifies anointed. For whereas Kings, Priests, and Prophets, were
usually anointed in the Old Testament upon their inauguration, Exodus 29.7.1
Sam. 16.13. Hence they are called the Lords anointed, Esaias 48.1. So likewise
was Christ anointed, not with any external oil, but with the Holy Ghost, into a
Kingly, Prophetic, and Priestly office, Psalm. 45.8. John 3.34. Acts 10.38.
First, he was anointed a Prophet to make known the will of his heavenly Father
concerning our redemption; John 1.10. No man has seen God at any time, the
only begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him.
And in the next place, that he might appoint us the Ministry of the-Word, and
the use of the Sacraments; that by these, as (by instruments) he might work
effectually in his Church, as Mark 16 15.16. Go ye into all the world, and
preach the Gospel to every creature; He that believes and is baptized, shall
be saved; but he that believes not shall be damned. Secondly, he was anointed
a Priest, that he might offer himself on the Cross for us, and by the sacrifice
of his own body, redeem us from our most sad and deplorable condition in the
loins of our first parents; and that he might ever intercede for us to his
Father. For by one offering he has perfected for even them that are
sanctified, Heb. 10.14. and chap. 9.24. For Christ is not ascended into the
holy places made with hands, which are the figures of the true, but into heaven
it self, now to appear in the presence of God for us: And Romans 8.34. Who is he
that condemns? it is Christ that died; yea rather that is risen again, who is
even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us. Thirdly, he
was anointed a King that he might rule and govern us by the Scepter of his
power; that is, that he might preserve and defend us both from our corporal and
spiritual enemies; to wit, the Devil, Sin, Death, Hell, and this wicked World.
Wherefore the Prophet thus speaks, Rejoice greatly O daughter of Zion, shout
O daughter of Jerusalem; behold thy King comes unto thee, he is just, and
having salvation, etc. Zach. 9.9. And the Evangelist; Then shall the king say
unto them on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the world, Matthew. 25.34

From this Confession of Peter we may learn what is the duty of every Christian
man; even this, freely to give an account of his faith. According to that of
the Apostle, But sanctiste the Lord God in your hearts, and be ready always to
give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you
with meekness and fear, I Pet. 3.15. And to take off all excuse in this
particular, our Savior himself says, Whosoever therefore shall confess me
before men, him will I confess also before my Father which is in heaven,
Matthew. 10.32. Holy David makes it a fruit of faith, Psalm 116.10. I believed
therefore have spoken. Veritas and credenda, and laquenda.
The truth (says Prosper) is to be believed, and spoken. Confession is of a
high consequence, and concerns Christains more then they think of. This I
believe wrings many a professor by the nose, and touches (as we say) their
c^ppy hold. How many have we that dare not confess the truth openly for fear
of men. These are cowardly Christians, who when they should fight, betake them
to their heels. Some will make a fair flourish for a time; they will take up
the Cudgels with much seeming Confidence: but when any comes to play with
them, they presently lay them down. Such a one was S. Peter, Hear his high
words; Though all should be offended because of thee, yet will I never be
offended. And further, Though I should die with thee, yet will I not deny thee,
Matthew. 26.33.35. but look upon him a while after, and then, quantum mutatus ab
illo, one would not take him to be the same man: How are the chariot wheels of
his resolution taken off, so that he drives heavily. Mark him I pray; I know
not what thou say; and again, with and oath in his mouth; I do not know the
man. And to make him superlative, he falls more basely; begins to curse and to
swear, saying; I know not the man, verse. 70.72.74. Who would have taken Spira
otherwise then a Chrisitian once; but miserable man, when he was urged to
subscribe, or else lose all, and incur the Popes displeasure straightwayes
makes shipwreck of faith and a good conscience; and after this, by God his
divine justice, dies in horrible despair. Is not this an Epidemical disease?
What Thrasonian brags will our mungrel professors make in times of peace and
prosperity? Who better Christians now then they? whilst this calm lasts, it is
a hard matter to find out the true Mother: a base hypocritical Pharisee can
scarce be discerned from a Nathaneel, a true Israelite indeed, in whom there is
no guile: but let one storm arise; let the Sabeans take away their oxen, and
their asses, or the Chaldeans fall upon their camels; or let a prison be
threatened them; the least gust of adversity blow upon them, and as Satan
falsely said of Job, it may truly be said of them, they will curse God to his
face. Most sad experience we have had of this in all ages, and the Apostasy of
our times is a sufficient test and proof of it. Confess we then the truth,
maugre the menaces and threats of wicked men. Let this never be forgotten of
us. But whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my
Father which is in heaven, Matthew. 10.33. And worthy is that of the Apostle to
be writ in the tables of our hearts, Romans 10.9, 10. That if thou shall confess
with my mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine heart, that God has
raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved. For with the heart man believes
unto righteousness, and with the mouth Confession is made unto Salvation.
Secondly, this more especially concerns the Ministers of God his word: they of
all other must freely deliver the truth. Nihil in sacerdote tam periculosum
apud Deuw, tam iurpe apud homine^, quam quod sentiat vericatem non libere,
pronuneiare. Ambr.
Nothing in a Minister is so dangerous with a God, and base with men, then not
to speak that freely which he thinks to be truth.

I was spoken like a prophet: As the Lord lives, what the Lord says unto me,
that will I speak, 1 Kings 22.14. And no less noble was it said by Nehemiah;
Should such a man as I^ flee, chap. 6.11; These are the pillars of the Church,
if they fall, down comes the whole fabric. It is a shame to see a man of God
turn tail, for him to deny the truth is monstrous, who will trust that
shepherd, or (rather that thief) who seeing the wolf coming, leaves the
sheep and flies, John 16.12. He that sits as the stern must not leave it
for every storm, lest he hazardeth the whole vessel, and so commit the
Mariners to the mercy of the seas. Look to this ye Ambassadors of the most
high God, and betray not through your cowardice those souls committed to your
charge. What more worthy of commemoration, then that of he Apostles, who when
they were put into the common prison for preaching in the name of Christ;
presently they entered into the Temple early in the morning, and taught, saying;
We ought to obey God rather than men; and boldly told them to their faces; The
God of our fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye slew and hanged on a tree; him has
God exalted with his right hand to be a prince and a Savior, for to give
repentance to Israel and forgiveness of sins, Acts 5. 18.21.29.30.31. Who can
but admire at the Constancy and brave spirit of Martin Luther, who when he was
by some of his friends dissuaded from going to Worms, made this answer, If
every tyle of each house was a devil, yet would I go thither. O noble soul, thy
name will be had in remembrance to thy immortal praise. Let my counsel be
accepted of you, my dear brethren of the Clergy; Yea let the wise man's
counsel be accepted of you; Prove. 19.10.
Buy the truth, and sell it not. Let no panick fear possess you when you
should proclaim the glad tidings of the gospel, and preach salvation through
the merit of Christ. He is the Son of the living God (says my Text) who will
own you his Champions, and reward you with a crown of immortality, if ye be
constant. What i^ the world hate you for it; Take this Cordial, Be of good
comfort, I have overcome the world said your great Master once. And if God be
for us, who can be against us? Romans 8.31. Take this for all, even from him who
is Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, he that lives and was dead, and
has the keys of hell and of death. Fear none of those things which thou shall
suffer; behold the devil shall cast some of you into prison that ye may be
tried, and ye shall have tribulation ten days; be thou faithful unto death,
and I will give thee a crown of life, Rev. 2.10. At for those Milk-sops, those
fearful watchmen, ambodexters, and trencher Chaplains, who for sinister ends
speak what God never put into their mouths, against the plain text of
Scripture, denying the Lord that bought them, and so making shipwreck of faith
and a good conscience, to the hazarding of many thousand souls; Good God give
them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth: If not, the wish of the
Apostle, to all you that fear God, shall be mine; I would they were even cut
off that trouble you. Amen. Gal. 5.12.

FINIS.

