The Mariners Card and Compass. OR THE BEST WAY TO ATTAIN HEAVEN Amidst a
Sinful and Crooked GENERATION.

By WILLIAM HARVEY, Minister of the Word.

AUGUST. Vae etiam laudabili vita hominum, si remota misericordia discutias eam.

-- Haec via ducit in urbem.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1659.

To the right Honorable ANN Countess Dowager of SCARSDEL, And To the rest of
that Noble Family, Grace, Mercy, and Peace, etc.
Madam,
THe world (for the most part) is like the Cypress-Tree, long and fruitless;
and like Tullies strange Soil, for all the sweet showers that fall upon, it
it is still dry as dust. The cause of it is either ignorance or negligence, want
of Knowledge in the will of God, or Non-Improvement. I have endeavored to
remove these Obstructions, and to take the rubs out of the way. There are but
two extremes, Presumption and Desperation, which like Scylla and Charybdis,
make shipwreck of all the vesseds they met with. Where these waters break out,
they beat down all before them. They are alike dangerous (faith Chrysostom.) For
Presumption falls him that stands, and Desperation after a fall admits no
rising. This small Tract (Madam) by Gods assistance will inform the one, and
reform the other. It will be an eye to the ignorant, and a spur to the
negligent; for it treats only of Christ, and as the Star the Wise men, will
conduct them to him. But I am loath to take too large a survey in so small a
piece of ground. They that write must not forget that Rule of the Orator, ut
titulum legant, to read the Title of their Books, least like the gates of
Mindus, it proves bigger then the City it self. I was ambitions to dedicate it
to your Honor, that it might kiss your hand, which has been so often open to
men of my calling and condition, and in particular to my self, the meanest of
them who serve at the Altar. Now the God of Heaven be your continual guard and
guide; his Blessings in a plurality light upon your Honor, and your whole
Family, as the dew on Gideons Fleece. This shall always be the unfeigned
Prayers of.

Your Honors most humble, and grateful Servant, William Harvey.

JOHN 14. 6. I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life.


THese words are an answer to the precedent verse, and they are Allegorical,
rately adorned, partly metaphorically, and partly Meronymically, and they are
brought in, to inform Thomas, and the rest of the Disciples more fully in the
way of Salvation. We know not (says Thomas) whither thou go, and how can we
know the way? Our Savior presently resolv's him in the words of my Text. I am
the way, the truth and the Life. Aurea Sententia, A golden Sentence. The wife
men of the East opened their treasures, and presented unto him gifts, even
Gold, Frankincence, and Myrrh; but he presents unto us gifts more precious, in
that they fit the Soul in her divine progress to Heaven, and as the Angels,
Lazarus, carry it into Abraham's bosom.) But I will come to the several
branches of the Text. And they are three, Via, veritis, and vita. The way the
truth, and the Life.

First, Christ is the way docendo, by way of teaching, because he alone
instructs in the way to happiness. The Law is our Schoolmaster to bring us to
Christ, Gal. 3.24. and Christ is our Schoolmaster who brings us to Heaven. he
is that pillar of a cloud and fire leading us the way to the Heavenly Canaan,
Exodus 13.21. St. John says, No man has seen God at any time, the only
begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Father he has declared him. John.
1.18. He is the true Mercuries finger, that directs the poor wandering traveller
the right way to his heavenly Mansion. None but he can fit us for that blessed
Academy above, were we shall all) be Fellow-Communers with the Saints and
blessed Angels.

Secondly, he is the way promerendo, by way of Meriting. Conerning this notable
is that of St. Paul, Romans 5.16, 17, 18, 19. For if by one man's offense, death
reigned, by one much more they which receive abundance of grace, and the gift
of righteousness shall reign in Life by one Jesus Christ, etc. read the Text.
He alone is that Sampson, who has broken the Cords of our Sins from us, by
which we were so fast bound, and with that woman in the Gospel, even bowed
together. That strong man Satan, by him is overcome, and his armor wherein he
trusted, taken from him, and his spoils divided. Luke. 11.22. The Apostle to
the Colossians says, In whom we have redemption through his blood, even the
forgiveness of our Sins, Col. 1.14. and v. 20. (Having made peace through the
blood of his Cross) by him to reconcile all things to himself. To omit a cloud
of witnesses; St. Peter positively thus, Neither is their Salvation in any
other; for there is none other name under Heaven given among men whereby we
must be saved. Acts. 4.12. And thus he is the way promerendo, by way of merit.

Thirdly He is the way applicando, by way of application; And that in Several
respects. First by his word; so the Psalmist, Thou will show me the path of
Life. Ps. 16.11. And in another Psalm I will instruct thee, and teach thee in
the way which you shall go. I will guide thee with mine eye. Ps. 32 8. Secondly
by his Sacraments, by which God has not only saved us according to his mercy,
by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the holy Ghost, which he shed
on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Savior, that being justified by his
grace, we should be made heirs according to the hope of eternal Life. Titus
3.5, 6, 7. But also he does Confirm unto us as by undoubted Seals and
assurances, the way of Salvation, righteousness, and eternal Life. So the
Apostle speaking of Abraham. And he recieved the s^gne of Circumcision, a Seal
of the righteousness of faith, which he had being yet uncircumcised; that he
might be the Father of all them that believe though they be not circumcised,
that righteousness might be imputed to them also. To. 4.11. Thirdly By holy and
fervent prayers, According to that of St. Paul Ephesians. 2.18. For through him we
both have an access by one Spirit unto the Father, etc. chap. 3.12. In whom we
have boldness and access with confidence by the faith of him. And to the Romans
he says, For ye have nor received the Spirit of Bondage again to fear: but ye
have received the Spirit of ad^ption, whereby we cry Abba Father. Romans 8.15. To
this purpose we are commanded in our Pater Noster, to supplicate Almighty God
in that sweet Epithete and name of Father. Our Father, etc. ut vere credamus
eum nostrum verum parrem, nosque ejus veros filios esse: ut eo confidentius
plena fiducia adcum accedamus, eumque invoeemus; quemadmodum videmus liberos
certa fiducia aliquid aparentibus suis potere Luth, in Explicat. Catechet.
that (as Mart. Luther expounds it) We might believe him to be our true Father,
and we his very Sons, and that we should come unto him more confidently, in a
full assurance, and might call upon him, even as we see Children with
Confidence beg any thing of their Parents. For which cause he is said to be our
advocate, 1. Ep. John 2.1. And if any man sin, we have an advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous, etc. And by St. Paul, our Mediator, 1. Tim.
25. For there is one God and one Mediator between God and men, the man Christ
Jesus.

Fourthly and lastly, per exemplum, by example in showing us the way how to
live in mutual love and amity one with another. For this we have a fair copy to
write by, John 13.15. For I have given you an example, that ye should do as I
have done to you, and what is that, even a low descention, a rare bird on the
earth nigro simillima Cigno, like unto a black Swan; hear it, If I then your
Lord and Master have washed your feet, what said I, washed your feet? O rare
humility! ye also ought (and all the reason in the world) to wash one another
feet. v. 14. Secondly, In showing us how we should undergo and suffer
afflictions and persecutions in this life. Herein likewise he has beaten our
way before us. 1. Pet. 2.21. For even hereunto were ye called; because Christ
also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we should follow his steps.
And now I come to application.

If Christ be the only way to happiness, as is clear by the premises; then by
consequence, all who affect and follow any other way beside, without, and
against Christ cannot be saved. Let the Turk dream of an Elysium and fancy
what carnal pleasures he please in another world; he will find one day he
built but Castles in the Air, and instead of sports and pastimes, feel the
torments of a damned Conscience, then will he curse his Mahumet, the day
wherein he was born, and the womb that bare him. Quantum mutatus ab illo? How
is the man now changed, when he sees all his hopes frustrate, and for a World
of happiness falls into a deep confused Tophet, where the breath of the Lord,
like a river of Brimstone does kindle it. Isaiah. 30.33. No man comes unto the
Father but by me, (says the Way in my text) and if he gains heaven without
Faith on Christ, farewell thou Queen of Sciences sacred Divinity, the Holy
Scriptures then are but mere Riddles. But O God! thy word is truth, and all men
besides are liars; We know and believe. He that believes on ^he Son has
everlasting life, and he that believes not the Son, shall not see life but the
wrath of God abides on him, John 3.36 And Verissimum est, this is most true,
Whosoever denies the Son, the same has not the Father; but he that
acknowledges the Son, has the Father also. 1 John 2.23. And again, He that
honoreth not the Son honors not the Father that has sent him. John 5.23.
Where are our Jews now, and Antitrinitarians, those brethren in evil as (
Jacob, said of Simeon and Levi) If the great Turk cannot be saved, what will be
come of them? 3. Mutato nomine, change but only the name, and there is not a
pair of sheares between them. Poor Jew, (were thou as rich as he of Malta) thou
can never obtain true happiness 'till thou believe in that God whom thy
Fathers crucified. All thy privileges and prerogatives which thou so much
gloriest in, without faith in him, will prove so many plummets of lead to sink
thy floating soul to Hell. Thou say, thou have Abraham to thy Father, and
think that shall carry it, a mere flourish. What arms can thou show of his
to prove thy pedigree. Hear what our Lord said to thy Countrymen of old; Your
Father Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it, and was glad, John 8.56.
The touring Eagle ownes no bird for hers that cannot out-look the Sun. Where is
thy faith to make thy words good? The Philosopher stared upon a Star, when he
fell into a pit.

In the next place I must say something to our Roman Catholics, who like
watermen look one way and row another; these set too great a price on their
works, and where natural beauty fails, there they seek to repair by Art. What
with their Saints, and what with their works, Christ the only and true way is
forgotten. We confess, the Mother of our Lord was a holy Virgin, a rich and
pure Cabinet, wherein was enclosed that most precious Jewel (God-Man,) the true
Catholicon, by whose blood all the diseases and maladies of our Souls
occasioned by sin, were perfectly cured; and she now a glorious Saint in
Heaven; yet to make her a Savior is high Sacrilege. O my soul, come not thou
into their secret, unto their Assembly mine honor be not thou united. Hear,
and blush to hear it, Marie is the Mediatrix of our Salvation, Maria est
Mediatrix nostrae salvationis, etc. Bernardinus in Mariali.
of our Conjunction, Justification, Reconciliation, Intercession,
Communication. Mark what result that Den of Thieves, the Council of Trent give
of the Saints in general, Sanctos suppliciter invocare, and ad eorum oratione
opem, auxiliumque confugere, bonum and utile est. Humbly to invocate the
Saints, and to fly to their prayers for help and safeguard is good and
profitable. But again, see how they make their works sit cheek by jowl with the
merits of Christ. This is all one, to compare a stinking candle burnt to a
snuff with the most transcendent light, and glorious rays of the Sun. Behold
what a train they have in this particular, and with what rabble this Idol is
ushered up. Certainly these fellows must have a good purse to maintain so great
a retinue. Some by observing the prescription and rule of (as they call them)
S. Dominick, Frances, Benedick; and others the Saints, S. Bridget and S. Clare,
etc. others by their tedious peregrinations to this or that Saint, others by
their Vigils, Masses, and Rosariorum preculis, by their Rosary of short
prayers; others by their abstinency, and fasting, and ciborum delectibus, their
choice dishes; others by a spontaneous whipping themselves; others by their
Alms-deeds (pity so good a pail of milk should be spilt) aliisque commentitiis
pietatis operibus, and by other counterfeit works of godliness; they truly
(though vainly) think to obtain Salvation, and more then ordinary reward in
Heaven.

But haec non est via, neque est haec civitas, this is not the way, neither is
this the city, as Elisha said to the Syrians, 2 Kings 6.19. This is not the way
to Heaven, neither will it ever bring any to that great city, the holy
Jerusalem descending out of Heaven from God, Revel. 21.10. I speak not this to
discourage a holy walking with God in a man's general or particular Calling, or
that I null good works as superfluous and unnecessary. No, God forbid. Without
holiness no man shall see the Lord. Not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall
be saved; but he that does the will of my Father which is in Heaven, Matthew.
7.24. For as we are not saved propter opera, for our works, we are saved, and
shall be one day judged accordingly, secundum opera, according to our works.
See Matthew. 25. v. 34. to the end. But I would not have men big with their
works, high conceited of them, stand in competition with God, fondly to imagine
their works meritorious; in so doing they derogate from the free Grace of God,
and the death and passion of Christ, who says in my Text, I am the way, etc.
Alio nobis non opus est ostiario, mediatore, vel ministro, says Chrysostom. We
need no other doorkeeper, or Mediator, or Minister. 16. Hom. in Matthew. Our
Justiciaries then and conceited Pharisees, like Players over act themselves.
These indeed have good things in them, but (as we use to say) fools have them
in keeping. Should we call them Papists they would spit at it, and yet verily
in a sense they are all one in this particular: just like the two Elders in
Susanna they seem to take leave one of another, and presently meet at one door.
He that says, I am the way says likewise, I am the door of the Sheep. John
10.7. And as no man comes unto the Father but by him so by him also we have
access by faith into the grace wherein we stand and rejoice in hope of the
glory of God. Rom 5.22. What impudence can out face that of the Apostle. For by
grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift
of God, not of Works, least any man should boast. Ephesians. 2.8, 9. And the same
Apostle elsewhere says, speaking of free election; And if by grace then is it
no more of works, otherwise grace is no more grace, but if it be of works; then
it is no more grace, otherwise work is no more work. Romans 11.6. Let the Church
of Rome then tells what tale they please; I hope (beloved) it is no article in
our Creed. To pray to Saints, and ascribe merit to our works is the next way to
make us devils. I am sure they never had these puddles from the pure fountain
of Gods holy word. Pride is one of the seven deadly sins, but of two,
spiritual pride is the more dangerous and must expect a fall. That man who is
big with the timpany of his own worth will hardly acknowledge Christ to be the
way. This is so stiff an Oak that it will break rather then bend; and with
Naball it is such a son of Belial that a man cannot speak to it. 1 Samuel 25.17.
But to conclude the first particular, Let this serve for admonition to all that
truly fear God, without procrastination to address themselves to Christ, who
is, and none but he, the true and living way to bliss: to know him and his
Father is eternal life. John 17.3. Wherefore as the Apostle sometime said in
another sense, so let us all say; whether shall we go, thou have the words of
Eternal life.

And so I come to the second branch in my Text. As Christ is the way, in like
manner he is the truth. I am the truth.

First he is the truth Complendo, by way of accomplishment, for in him as by a
lively voice and promise, whatsoever was spoken and typified concerning the
Messiah by the mouth of all the holy prophets, since the world began, are
fulfilled. Acts. 3.21. see. v. 24. and. Acts. 10.43. In like manner, the whole
Hierarchy of the Leviticall priesthood is accomplished in him the Antetipe:
which the Epistle to the Hebrews throughout plainly shows. Thus the Apostle
speaking of the Law, says, that it was but a shadow of things to come, Hebr.
10.1.

Secondly he is the truth Promittendo, by way of promise. So Joh. 17.17.
Sanctify them through thy truth, thy word is truth. And David thus speaks Ps.
119.43. And take not the word of truth utterly out of my mouth. And Ps. 33.4.
For the word of the Lord is right. Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but my
words shall not pass away. Luke. 21.33. St. Peter having spoken of the frailty
and vanity of man and flesh; positively concludes, that the word of the Lord
endures for ever. 1 Pet. 1.25.

Thirdly he is the truth Operando, by operation; because by the holy Ghost
through the word of truth, he shall guide us into all truth. Jo. 16.13. And
Chapt. 8.31.32. If ye continue in my word then are ye my disciples indeed, and
ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free; And v. 36. I the
Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed.

This may first serve to inform us, that Christ is the true Messiah, that
undoubted Seed of the woman who should break, the Serpents head Genesis 3.8. That
seed of Abraham in whom all the nations of the earth were to be blessed. Genesis
12.3. He, who was to save his people from their Sins. Matthew. 1.21. he in whom
all the promises of God are yea and amen. 2. Cor. 1.20. Let us then who are
Christians acknowledge him alone to be our Savior; although the Jews wickedly
blaspheme, Parati sunt adlegendam, caeci vero ad intelligendum, duri ad
credendum. Aug. Sermon. 35. de Temp.
and fondly phancie themselves of a Messiah to come. Of whom the Father truly
speaks; they are ready to read, but blind to understand, and hard to believe.

Secondly, if Christ is the truth, it follows, whatsoever is propounded to
us, against, without, or besides Christ to embrace and follow; is a mere lie.
St. Paul calls it the Spirit of error. 1. Tim. 4.1. Our Savior himself says
There shall arise false Christ's and false prophets. Math. 24.24. That is to
say: false Doctors and Teachers, as Tertuil. expounds the Text. Qui
pseudoprotae sunt, nisi falsi praedicatores? Qui Pseudo-apastoli, nisi adulteri
Evangelizatores? Qui Antechristi, nisi Christi rebels? de prescript. haeret
cap 4. Who are false prophets, but false preachers? Who are false Apostles, but
adulterate Gospellers? Who are Antechrists, but rebels of Christ? These come in
sheeps clothing, Matthew. 7.15. Having a show of Godliness. 2 Timothy 3.5. a show
of wisdom. Coloss. 2.23. Who by good words and fair speeches deceive the
hearts of the Simple. Romans 16.18. Yea they shall show great signs and wonders,
that (if it were possible) they shall deceive the very elect, Matthew. 24.24. And
indeed whom have they not deceived? If ever that saying was true, it is now;
Where God has his church there the devil has his chapel. We have almost as
many Conventicles as Churches, and a multitude resort unto them. Let but one
sheep run astray and the whole flock will soon follow. Et affabilissermo and
blandum haereticorum eloquium sunt sagena et laquens quibus pisces capiunt and
volucres. In cap. 9. Eccl.
St. Hierom thus discribs the heretics. Their affable speeches, fair tongue
are a gin and snare wherewith they catch the poor birds and fishes. But of
these the people of God are admonished to take heed, Beware of false prophets,
says our Savior himself, Matthew. 7.15. And in another place, Take heed and
beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and of the Sadduces, chapt. 16.6. and
that 24.25. and 26. verse. read the words. And the disciple follows his Master.
Beloved, believe not every Spirit; but try the Spirits whether they are of God:
and he gives the reason; because many false prophets are gone out into the
world. 1 Epistle of John. 4. chapt. v. 1. Thus should every Christian do, if
they would not be seduced. Should a Goldsmith hand over head take all moneys
without trying; I believe he would receive much adulterated coin. To prevent
which, he brings all to the touchstone. If Solomon had not been wise, he could
never known the true Mother, for the harlots were both a^ their pro and con,
Heresis Aocta est mentiri non tantum lingua, sed and vita; si fidem imerroges
whil bristtanius si conversactonem nihil irreprehensibilius. Bernd.
and in one tale. 1. Kin. 3.23. etc. Wherefore, the best way to find out the
false play of these juglers, is to bring them to the touchstone of Gods word
For all is not gold that glisters. The property of Heresy is to lie, not in
tongue only, but in Life. If thou questions his faith, not better Christian;
if his Conversation, none more irreprehensible; says Benard. And Ireneus of
false prophets, goes on thus; They speak to us the same things, Similia
nobiscum loquuntur, dissimilta vero sentiunt lib. 1. epist. 59.
but think the contrary. And truly had we not recourse to the sacred springs of
holy Writ; the whole world would go after them. You know who said it, My sheep
hear my voice, and again; The sheep follow him, for they know his voice; And a
stranger will they not follow but will flee from him. For they know not the
voice of strangers, John. 10.4.5. It was a voice from heaven which said, hear
him Matthew. 5.16. And he that came from Heaven, the Son of man who is in
Heaven, said of those hypocrites, Mittite eos, Let them alone they be blind
leaders of the blind, etc. Matthew. 15.^4.

In the next place; If Christ be the truth; then by consequent, his word is
truth; and we ought to subscribe to it without dispute. Ipse dixit was
sufficient a Scholar of Pythagoras; If their Master once said it, it carried as
much weight with it, as delivered from an Oracle. Me thinks the word of God
should be of more credit with us. If that once speaks, we should presently lay
our hands upon our mounths, and by silence express our consent. I am with you
unto the end of the world, that is, by his Spirit, Grace, word, etc. Except a
man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of
God. John 3.5. There are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the
Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one, 1 John 5.7. and verse the
20. St. John speaking of our Savior says, This is the true God and Eternal
life. And according to St. Paul, God blessed for ever. Romans 9.5. These and
whatsover we find recorded in the word, we must believe, without Cavelling;
seem they never so contrary to natural reason. This condemns the foul Heresy
of the Photinians, who deny the Divinity and Godhead of Christ; upon this
account only, because their blind reasons cannot comprehend it; as if our
faith were pinned upon reasons sleeve. I have read of one who was in his dumps
and deep contemplation, to define fully what God was; and this he would do
forsooth by Philosophy and reason. In this his brown study, by the seaside, he
sees a Child go often to the sea, and bringing from thence water in a shell,
and then to put it in a little hole which was hard by. The Philosopher asked
the Child, why he did so; The Child replied, because I will bring all the Sea,
and put it into this hole. That is impossible, said the other again; So it is
as impossible (says the Child again) for thee by reason to define what God is.
Worthy is that of Cassianus; Do thou ask me a reason of the Word. I do not
tell thee; God has said it, his word is all the reason. The person of him
alone that speaks it is sufficient for my belief. What need I enquire how that
is true that God has spoken, when I must not doubt, because it is true,
because God has spoken it. If this course were taken, it would not only
prevent blasphemy and mistakes of Scripture, but be a great obstruction to sin
and wickedness. Did our Anapabtist but steer this way, they would not cavil so
much at the Baptism of Infants. What though their baptism be not positive or
demonstrative; yet it is deductive, deduced from Scripture, as plain as a man's
nose on his face. Will they play the thieves, and rob a poor Child of the
Sacrament, upon this fond cavil, What good does it do them? And they have no
faith, which is more then they can prove for they have Sacamentall faith, and
the Seed of faith. And further they urge that Children are not capable of
teaching, and so ought not to be baptized; As if that text had relation to the
adulted Men and Women of ripe years; and not to Children. They make themselves
simple Logitians, for they understand not a distinction. If they ask what good
it does them; Aqua corpus absoluitur Spiritu animae delicta mundantur.
Saint Ambrose will tell them; The body is cleansed by the Element, Water; the
spots and sins of the Soul by the Spirit: I will end this with that of Crysost.
(meaning Tertullians works) Da mihi Magistrum, da mihi Magistrum, Give me my
Master, give me my Master. So say I, and so let us all say of the word of God;
da nobis Magistrum, etc. Give us our Master, give us our Master. Thus Christ is
the truth.

Thirdly, as he is the way, and the truth so he is the life; and that in three
respects, Creando and Conservando; Regenerando and Sanctificando, Resuscitando
and Glorificando. By Creating and Conserving us, By Regenerating and
Sanctifying us, By Raising again and Glorifying us.

First he is said to be the Life, not so much in relation to his essence; in
which respect he is life eternal, 1 John. 5.20. but in relation to us, in that
he has creared us, and kept us ever since by the hand of providence. So David,
Psalm. 100.3. Know ye that the Lord he is God, it is he that has made us and
not we our selves, we are his people, and the sheep of his pasture. And the
Apostle, In him we live, move, and have our being. Acts 17.28.

Secondly, he is life, and that especially by Regenerating and by Conserving
us; because, by the Sacraments and words, he works, and (as I may so speak)
begets in us a Spiritual life. According to that of S. John, Jesus answered,
verily, verily I say unto thee, except a man be born of water and of the
Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, and so forward, John 35. And
in the 6. chap. and 33. v. etc. For the Bread of God is he which comes down
from Heaven, etc. And John 10.10. I am come that they might have life, and that
they might have it more abundantly. St. Paul has this expression to the
Galathians, I am Crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live, yet not I, but
Christ lives in me; and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the
faith of the Son of God; who loved me, and gave himself for me. Gal. 2.20. And
in his Epistle to the Romans he says, How shall we that are dead to sin, live
any longer therein? Know ye not that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus
Christ, were baptized into his death. Romans 6.2. and v. 4. Therefore we are
buried with him by baptism into death, that like as Christ was raised up from
the dead by the Glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of
life. Read Romans 8.12, 13.

Thirdly and Lastly, Christ is the life, Resuscitando and Glorificando, by
raising us again, and by glorifying us. This is the will of him that sent me,
that every one which sees the Son, and believes on him may have everlasting
life; and I will raise him up at the last day. John 6.40. And again, I am the
Resurrection and the Life, he that believes in me, though he were dead, yet
shall he live? And whosoever lives and believes in me shall never dye. John.
11.25.26. St. Paul says, whom he justified, them he also glorified. Romans 8.30.
And which is more; Who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned
like unto his glorious body, etc. Philipians. 3.21.

The fruit which we may gather from hence is this; If Christ be the life, we
should seek it in and through him only, without whom we shall never obtain it.
And we should not so much mind this present life, which we have in common with
beasts, reprobates; and as Eurip. says Non vita, sed calamitas est, It is not
a life in comparison, but a calamity, and differs nothing from death; if we
believe the Philosopher: a life that is as brittle as Glass, frail and
Momentany. Vt hora sic vita. It is a life, which passes away as an hour upon
the Dial, insensibly. But mind we that spiritual life of regeneration and
sanctification, which is the life properly; and by which we live to God through
Jesus Christ our Lord. A life wherein sin does not reign in our mortal body,
that we should obey it in the lusts thereof, neither yield we our members as
instruments of unrighteousness to sin. Romans 6.12, 13. When the Emperor Nero
had finished his house, which he called Domum Aureum, the golden house, he
said, now I begin to live like a man. But this is most true; we never begin to
live like Christian men, till we live the life of Regeneration and
Sanctification. And now if Christ be our life. death will be to us advantage.
As St. Paul has it. When Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall ye
also appear with him in glory. Coloss. 3.4. And that true and eternal life
which we here possess by faith and hope; We shall at length have the full
fruition of it in Heaven. That of the Apostle is worthy of all acceptance; For
whether we live, we live unto the Lord, and whether we die, we die unto the Lord;
whether we live therefore of die we are the Lords. Romans 14.8. Who is he then
that will not from his heart breath forth and say. O my Lord Jesus Christ, thou
art truly the way, because no man comes unto the Father nisi per te, but by
thee; thou art the truth, because no man knows the Father nisi per te, but by
the Thou art the life, because no man lives, nisi per te, but by thee, Be thou
to me the way by which I may come to thee and the Father; Be thou to me the
truth by which I may know thee and the Father; be thou to me the life by which
I may here live in thee by faith in believing, and there in heaven by fruition.
Let this ever sound fresh in our ears. Ambularevis? ego sum via; fallinonvis?
ego sum veritas: Morino^ vis? Ego sum vita Hoc dicit salvator tuus, non est quo
eas nisi ad me, non est quo cas nisi per me. Aug. Tract. 22 Johannum.
Will thou walk? I am the way, Will thou not be deceived: I am the truth;
Would thou not dye? I am the life. This thy Savior says, thou have not
where to go, unless unto me, nor how to go but by me. Secondly, if Christ be
the life, then it follows there is a resurection of the body at the last day.
From this flower may the Be suck honey, the Spider poison.

Now in the first place, may the people of God, with the Eunuch depart home
rejoicing, with much harmony in their Souls. Cura thymo pleno, their thighs are
now laden with sweetness. O the rare contentment of a child of God in the
privation and want of all external comforts! With Jacob he may well and truly
say, few and evil have the days of my life been: As for this world he does
but breath in it, that is all. Yet prithy erect thy self, banish thy sad
thoughts; no violence is perpetual; a storm lasts not always: The poor Ship
that is long tossed too and fro with a tempest gains the wished Port at last.
The Ark that was hurried on the flood, has a Dove with an Olive branch in her
mouth to imitate the falling of the waters. Haec non durabunt aetatem, as that
learned Bishop Jewel said of the Marian persecution. These things will not
last an age. Cheer up sweat heart; Gods rod is but a love kiss, and our
afflictions are but tokens of his indulgency. Look back to former Ages, and the
Church is often in a cloud her throws like a woman in Travel, have been thick
and painful; Sicut unda sequitur undam, and have followed as one wave upon the
neck of another. Yet mark the result of all; her end is peace at the last; Wait
then with patience, and thou shall see the salvation of God; who ever trusted
in him and was confounded? Behold a most ample compensation: For thy light
afflictions, thou shall have an exceeding, an eternal weight of glory in
another World, Forget not the Text; I am the life, etc. A day therefore will
come when thy sorrows will have an end, and breath out their last. Hear, and
glut thine ear with this music. Ye are they which have continued with me in my
temptations, and I appoint unto you a kingdom, as my Father has appointed
unto me; that ye my eat and drink at my table in my Kingdom, and sit on thrones
judging the twelve tribes of Israel. Luke 22.28. etc. When this Sun once Sets
and the great World on fire; they every man shall receive according to his
works, and a full satisfaction made of all injuries and wrongs, which the poor
Saints have groaned under in this Life by wicked and ungodly men.

In the next place this may serve for horror and amazement to all such, who
with David's fool have said in their hearts there is no God. The Sadduces and
Epicures of our days who by their lives deny the resurrection of the body. Some
have likened a Courtier without preferment, to a Blackamoor, qui in ortu solis
positus, habet colorem noctis, who though living upon the Sun rising, has
notwithstanding the Color of the night. So an Atheist amongst us may fitly be
compared to this Ethiopian; He lives where the Sun rises, even where the
Gospel casts forth its glorious beams; and yet he acts the works of darkness
and of the night. It is observed by Josephus, that the Sadduces were most
approved and favored by great men; And it is very probable; because they that
wallow in wealth, for the most part are so glued to this world, that they could
wished there were no other; and truly in their account there is not. Nemo tam
carxaliter vivit, quam qui negat resurrectionem.
That of Tertull. is undeniable No man lives so loosely and Carnally, as he
that denies the resurrection of the body. And one may give a shrewd guess,
that they who live in all kinds of pleasures and voluptuousness, and luxuriant
in vermium operibus, and Pride it in silks without all fear of God, reverence
to his house, love to his ordinances, and Charity to the poor: are Epecuri de
grege porci; the hogs of Epicurus, and acknowledge no life but the present. You
shall allways have them Sing this Song. Ede, bibe, Lude, etc. Eat, drink, and
be merry, after death there is no pleasure; I believe it; and will one day find
by woeful experience, if they repent not before they go hence, and be no more
seen. It were happy for worldly men if there were no resurrection, they should
come then to no accounts. And on the contrary, the Saints were most unhappy;
For if in this Life only we have hope in Christ we are of all men most
miserble, says the Apostle. 1 Cor. 15.19. But Christ is the Life,
Resuscitando, etc. by raising thee again, (as I said before) God is just, and
he will one day reward every man according to his works; and this must be in
another world. Thou must not think to live here a Devil, and a Saint
hereafter; have the full fruition of happiness in this world, be clad in purple
and fine linen, and fare deliciously quotidie, every day; and at length be
carried by Angels into Abraham's bosom; Somnias vigilans, Thou dreamest waking,
once to think it. You know what was said to the rich glutton being in hell
torments, Mememto fili; Son remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy
good things, and likewise Lazarus his Evil things; but now he is comforted, and
thou art tormented. Luke 16.25. Mark how Empatheticall the pronoune (Thy) is
there. This life is called his life; not in regard he lived in it, for so it is
every man's; but because he so lived in it, as if there had been no other Life
besides. Seculum non agnoscit nisi presens; A Carnal man acknowledges no
World but the present; or at least, will acknowledge no other, till he drops
into it unawares. Hence it is, that he has neither thought of death or of the
resurrection. Not unlike unto the Emperor Vespatian, who seeing at one time two
ominous presages of his end, to wit a blazing Comet and a gaping Sepulcher;
puts them both from himself, and said; the Sepulcher gaped for the Empress
Julia, and the Star did portend only the death of the Persian King, who then
wore long hair. Cuspind. Lust. The Psalmist, says, Thou will not leave my Soul
in grave, nor suffer thy holy one to see corruption, speaking of of Christ Ps.
16.10. My Soul in grave, there is the immortality of the Soul, nor suffer thy
holy one to see Corpuption, there is the Resurection of the body. That of Jonas,
who lay three days buried in the belly of a Whale, is Sacramentum magnum, not
only a true History, but a pregnant mystery of the Resurrection. Cor terrae fit
venture ceti. The heart of the earth to us will be as the belly of the Whale was
to Jonas; It shall not ever retain us. Death is the convoy or passing boat
either to a better or sadder port. In the time of nature, God took away away
Enoch, in the time of the law Elias, in the time of Grace our Savior, himself:
by all these examples, it is clear; that we shall rise again. The Scripture
makes mention of four keys, which God has reserved to himself. The first is
Clavis pluviae, the key of rain. as Deuteronomy. 28.12. The Lord will open to thee his
good treasure. The second is Clavis Cibationis, the key of Victuals. Ps.
145.16. Thou openest thy hand, and fillest every thing with thy plenteousness.
The third is Clavis Sterilitatis, the key of Sterility or barrenness. Genesis
30.22. Where it is said God remembered Rachel, and opened her womb. The last is
Clavis Sepulchrorum, the key of the grave. Ezekiel. 37.12. When I shall open your
Sepulchers. But to omit Gods omnipotency, which is the basis and fundametall
arch, on which is founded our Christian Religion; I will reduce all to two
heads, his mercy, and his justice; Which two are the Master attributes which
set all the rest on work It is thus said by God, I am the God of Abraham, the
God of Isaac and the God of Jacob; Now God is not God of the Dead but of the
Living. Matthew. 22.32. He is not a God of those that are not, who are without
existance, but of those that have a being, so that he will raise their bodies
at the last day. Otherwise, he shall dimidium tantunimodo hominum restituere;
he were God to one part of Abraham, etc. But his mercy is over all his works.
Ps. 145.9 and extends both to Soul and Body; and in the mercy of the most high
they shall not miscarry. Ps. 21.7. Secondly, as his Mercy, so his Justice
requires a general Resurection, when both the godly and the wicked shall come
forth: their graves the one, rapi in occursum, to meet the Lord in the Clouds,
and the other verti retrorsum, to be turned down to Hell, with all those that
forget God. There must be a Judgment of Retribution in another World which
cannot be without the Resurrection of the body. The ungodly are sometimes
plagued in this life, to assure us there if a God; yet but sometimes to assure
us there is a day of judgment; wherein the accounts of all men and women must
be audited and cast up, In that day will God make up his jewels. Mal. 3.17.
And put a difference between an Israelite and an Egyptian. Then will the Wheat
be put into the granary of Heaven, and the tares burnt in the fire. Surgite
mortui, Arise ye dead, was St. Hieroms Earwig, and oftimes beat an alarm on
his very heart strings. Methinks that of the Apostle should make us tremble; We
shall stand before the judgment seat of Christ. O sinner! Let the day of death
and the day of doom be the two Pole-stars to fix always thine eyes upon. I
could wish (says one) that men every where would discourse of hell, nam
ghehennam meminesse, in ghehennam non permitter incidere. For the Remembrance
of hell would by (Divine assistance) keep us from falling into it. I hope by
this time (if thou be not an Atheist) thou art convinced of this truth, that
as Christ is the way and the truth so also he is the life; by whose omnipotent
power we shall all one day rise from our graves, to answer for what we have
done in this life whether good or bad. I will now conclude. The day of the Lord
will come as a thief in the night, in the which the Heavens shall pass away
with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat, the Earth
also, and the works that are therein shall be burnt up. Seeing then that all
these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be in all
holy Conversation and Godliness. 2 Pet. 3.10, 11.

Gloria Deo in excelsis. Amen.

FINIS.

