THE SECTARIES DOWNFALL: OR, A Treatise of the Calling of Ministers. WHEREIN
The Orthodox Clergy are approved to be the only true and lawful Pastors of
the Church of GOD. That all others besides them, (pretend what they please) for
their usurping the Ministry, without any lawful Call, are but thieves and
Robbers, and Seducers of the People.

And he spoke unto the Congregation, saying;

Depart I pray you from the Tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing of
theirs, least ye be consumed in all their Sins, Numb. 16.26. These be they who
Separate themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit, Jude, verse. 5. Quid magis
est contra fidem, quam Cred^re nolle quicquid non possis ratione attingere?
Bern. Nusquam est, qui ubique est. Seneca. Certa amittimus, dum nova petimus.
Plaut. By WILLIAM HARVEY, Minister of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

LONDON, Printed by T. F. 1655.

TO The Right Honorable, THOMAS RICHARDSON Esquire, Viscount Cramond: And to
his Vertous and Religious Lady.
Right Hon:
SENECA writes of one Harpastes, a woman as foolish as blind, who would
commonly put the fault in the House she dwelt in. Ait domum tenebrosam esse.
She says the house is dark, as if she could see well enough. Even so our
Sectaries, and false Prophets, although in very deed, they be blind, men of
Corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the Faith, (as the Apostle has it of the
Enemies of the truth) 2. Tim. 3.8. Yet they usually complain of the Times, and
say, that the Ministers of God (though Orthodox and godly Learned men formerly)
and now, lived, and do live in darkness and ignorance; and so cry them down
as wicked and Antichristlan, to the great dishonor of Almighty God, the
distraction of his People, and no small advantage to the Enemies of GOD to
blaspheme. Whereupon, being (though unworthy) called to be a Minister of the
Gospel; J thought it my Duty (according to my poor Talent) to endeavor to stop
the mouths of these railing Rabshakeh's and to admonish the People (as they
tender the good of their Souls) not to follow these Strangers, neither know
Ioh. 10.5.
their voice, but fly from them? I have not published this ensuing Treatise,
in hatred to any man's person, or purposely to show their nakedness, but to
warn them and the world of their dangerous Errors and tenants which they
hold, and (unheard of Ptesumption) without any lawful Call, or warrant from
God to take upon them the Sacred function of a Minister, and to feed God's
people with Poison in stead of Bread, and so (without the mercy of God) giving
2 Timothy 2.25.
them Repentance to the acknowledging of the Truth: incur damnation to their
Souls.

I am bold to present this poor and unpolished work unto your Honor, as to a
Religious Obadiah, who have ever fed the Lords Prophets with bread and water,
and as to a Noble Maecenas, favoring Learning and Learned men. I humbly desire
your Honors favorable acceptance and Patronage, that through Your hands it
may find the better entertainment in the world. Thus craving pardon for my
presumption; wishing to your Hon.rs and your whole Family, all happiness, both
external, internal, and Eternal; I rest in the Lord,

Your Honors, Most humble Servant to be Commanded. WILLIAM HARVEY.

TO THE READER.
GEntle and Christian Reader;
J have in brief only touched these Four heads, having scarce time to lick
them to a form. If J been somewhat free in Speech and incurred thy censure, I
cannot help it, the cause required it. Nettles must be crushed hard, and
Heretics handled roughly. In reproving of Sin, a Minister of all other men,
must not be mealy-mouthed or remiss. Nihil in Sacerdote tam periculosum apud
Deum, tam turpe apud homines, quam quid sentiat veritatem, non libere
pronunciare; (says Ambrose) Nothing in a Priest is so dangerous with God, or
so base with men, as not to declare that freely which he thinks to be Truth.
And thus have J cast in my poor Mite; I may (God willing) if occasion serve,
put in more; In the mean time I desire thy acceptance, and beseech Almighty GOD
to keep thee from the Apostasy of the Times ^ Remembering that to the Angel of
the Church of Philadelphia: -- Behold I come quickly; hold that fast which thou
have, that no man take away thy Crown, Revel. 3.11.

Thine in the Lord Jesus Christ, W. HARVEY.

THE SECTARIES DOWNFALL.
(hoc agere) attend only upon his Calling, without meddling with Secular
affairs.
FIrst then, when J speak of Ministers Calling, you must understand, that it is
from GOD; whether it be immediate or mediate. For Divinity ever teaches us, --
Nullae^prorsus vera est Vocatio, nise ab ipso Deo facta. There is no true
Calling except it be from God himself. Thus we read in Math. 9. verse. 38.
That it is God alone that sends forth laborers into his Harvest. Pray
therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he will send forth Laborers into his
harvest. And the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 12.28. And God has set some in the
Church; first Apostles, secondarily, Prophets; thirdly, Teachers, etc.

Now this Calling is twofold. An immediate Calling, and a mediate Calling. The
immediate Calling, otherwise special and extraordinary, is that which is from
God himself, absque hominum Ministeri^, without the Ministry or service of men.

And this God has done either by himself without a Messenger, as when he
called Moses, John the Baptist, and the Apostles; or secondly by certain
Messengers, as when God called Aaron by Moses, Exodus 4.14. and Elisha by Eliah,
1 Kings 19.19.

This Calling is ever accompanied with certain extraordinary testimonies and
gifts of the Holy Ghost, which are as it were Seals of divine Doctrine, and
heavenly inspiration. And withal, it is accompainied with more then ordinary
Sanctity of life and conversation. But this extraordinary Calling must not now
be expected in a Constituted Church, being of use only in former times, when
either the Corruption of the Ministry, or degeneration of the Ministrers
required it.

What warrant then have our blind Enthusiasts, our Bedlam Quakers, Adamites,
Seekers, and the rest of the rabble, to sow their tares of damnable Doctrine
among the pure Wheat of GOD's sacred Word, under the pretense of Divine
inspiration, and immediate Calling of Almighty God?

I have read of a certain Munk, qui gloriari non erubuit Sozomenus Lib. 3 cap.
14.
, who was not ashamed to brag, that the lawfulness of his Order, he had given
him from the authority of an Angel. The Saracens descended from Hagar, that
was the bondwoman, call themselves Sarazens, as if they came from Sarah the
freewoman. And these mungrell Christians would make men believe they descend
from heaven, when indeed they ascend from Hell, and their works which they say
are by Divine inspiration, are by a Diabolical delusion. These men are like
Conjurers, who will have the names of God about their Circle, when they are
raising the Devil.

But if they be extraordinarily called as they say, let them show us their
extraordinary Holinesss, Learning, and gifts of Gods Spirit. Ah poor men! if
they come to this touchstone once, their false Coin will soon appear. The
bastard Eagle cannot behold this bright Sun. Pray what learning is this, to
Call all the Ministers of the Gospel, deceivers of the People, to cry down
Tithes, and call their lawful maintenance Antichristian; What learning, to
deny the Godhead of our Savior CHRIST JESUS; to say, that there is no Hell,
but that in a man's Conscience; that all things come by Nature; that baptizing
of Infants, is unlawful; to deny Obedience to lawful authority, and a world of
such stuff. And for Holiness, I blush that they are not ashamed to
appropriate it to themselves, when no Swine wallowes more in the mire, then
they in Sin; but I Will stir the Dunghill no further least it raise a stink.

THe Mediate, or common and Ordinary calling, is that Calling of God by
ordinary means, or by the Ministry of the Church by fit men appointed
thereunto. Although this Calling is by the Ministry of men, yet nevertheless
it is Divine as well as the other, and has God likewise for its author.

For God, not only appoints in his Church, Apostles (immediately called) but
also Teachers, that are mediatly Called, by the Ministry of men, as you shall
find 1. Cor. 12.28. and Ephesians. 4.11. And the Holy Ghost is said to have made
and appointed Bishops and Elders in Ephesus, who yet were not extraordinarily
called by CHRIST but were Ordinary ordained by the Apostles, Acts 20.28.
Whereupon they are called the Ambassadors of Christ; as you have it, 2 Cor.
5.20. And for this cause our savior himself says; he that hears you,
hears me, and he that despises you, despises me, etc. Luke 10,16. Hence
that Protomartyr Stephen, tells the Jews, Ye do always resist the Holy
Ghost, as your Fathers did, so do ye, Acts 7.51. And St. Paul to the
Thessalonians says, He therefore that despises, despises not Man, but GOD,
etc. 1. These. 4.8.

But the Question is, who ought (all this while) to ordain and make Ministers.
The Politics say, this is in the power of the Secular Magistrate. The
Anabaptists, they ascribe it to the Plebeans, the mixed multitude, and the
Catholics give it all to Bishops. Now, what is this. One says, the Child is
his, the other his, and the third, his. Can one Child belong to three Women;
no. Who then is the Mother of the Child? They all make claim unto it; Well, I
am but a fool to Solomon, yet I will give it to none, but share it amongst
them. The whole Church has right to this Ordination, and the several Orders
of Episcopacy, Magistracy, and People must have their due proportion.

In Confirmation hereof, that thou may be confident of it; the practice of
the Church in the Apostles time shows; This manifest in the choice and
Election of Matthias, Acts 1.15.23. And in the Election of the seven Deacons,
the point is clear, Acts 6.23 etc. Where, in the sixth verse, we read; And
the saying pleased the whole Multitude, and so forth. Their approbation was
thought necessary in so weighty a matter And in the 15. of the Acts, 2.22. it
is said; Then pleased it the Apostles, and Elders, with the whole Church, to
send Chosen men of their own company to Antioch, with Paul and Barnabas,
namely Judas surnamed Barsabas, and Silas, chief men among the Brethren. Here
Bellarmine cavils, and says, that this Consent of the Church, -- Non ex quadam
necessitate, sed ex Petri concessione; It was not of any necessity, but of
Peter's Concession only.

This is as good Divinity as another of his own side, who by these words of
CHRIST, (Let these go their way) would needs defend the lawless estate of
Clergy men, But says In Eras. Annot. 18. John.
Erasmus, this did he do Ridicule, fondly or foolishly.

If the Cardinal had but read that of the Acts cap. 6. ver. 3. aforementioned, he
would have found there, That it was not Peter's grant alone, but of all the
rest of the Apostles; The text is plain. Wherefore Brethren, look ye out
among you Seven men of honest report, full of the Holy Ghost, and Wisdom,
whom we may appoint over this business. And this way of Ordination, the
Primative Church, having it (as it were) by tradition from the Apostles own
hands, always Religiously observed it.

As appears by this: Ordinationes Sacerdotales non nisi sub Populi
assistentis conscientia fieri oportet, ut plebe praesente, vel detegrantur
malorum crimina, vel bonorum merita Praedicentur; and sit Ordinatio justa and
Legittima quae omnium Suffragio and judicio fuerit examinata In Decret 15. Did
Sancta R^na. T^ste Erasmo, Praefat. in Cyprian. lib 1. Epist 4.
. The Ordinations of Priests ought not to be made, unless the By People is not
meant the Ignorant and factious, but the godly and judicious.
People have knowledge of it, that so being present, the faults of wicked men
may be detected, or the deserts of good men made known; and that is a just and
lawful Ordination, which shall be by the Suffrage and judgment of all. Not
including any Sectaries, for they by no means must be admitted, or have any
voice here.

As for the Magistrate, we all know, (if the People) much more he has a voice
in this our Ordination. In the Election of Ambrose, though the People did
choose him it was ratified and confirmed by the Emperor Socrat lib 4. C. 25
Tripar lib. 7. cap. 8.
Valentinian And when Athanasius had nominated one Peter to succeed him, that
Voice (as Theodoret does witness) was confirmed, not only by the Priest and
People, but by the approbation of the Magistrate.

To make an end, one James Pamelius in his Annotations to Cyprian, confesses;
that not only in Africa, but also in France, Spain, Rome, and every where,
this was the custom. And says further, that it so continued all the times of
the Emperors Charles the Great, and Ludovick the Godly.

And thus J hope I have given you satisfaction in this Particular. Where the
Bishop ordaines, the People approve, and Magistrate confirms, there is a
lawful Ordination. Those therefore whom God has joined together, let no man
put a sunder; Take them together, and they are a perfect harmony, but once
separate them, and they foully jarre, and are out of tune.

The Catholics therefore do greatly err, and are much out of the way, in
giving this Power and jurisdiction solely to the Bishops. Those be the words of
the Council of Trent.

Sacerdotum Council. Trident de Sacrament Ordin. cap. 4.
and caterorum ordinum, nec Populi, nec cujusvis Secularis potestatis and
Magistratus Concensum, sive vocationem, sive aucthoritatem ita requiri, ut sine
ea irrita sit Ordinatio. Of the Priests and of the other Orders, the Consent or
calling, or Authority, neither of the People, nor any Secular power and
Magistrate is to be sought after; that without it, the Ordination is unlawful.

But on the Contrary, such as are chosen and ordained by the People and
Magistrate, they say, they are not Ministers of the Church, but Thieves and
Robbers. And Bellarmine to maintain the assertion of his Error, brings that
example of Aaron, who by Moses alone, without the consent of the People, was
chosen to be the high Priest; and likewise that of our Savior, who chose his
Apostles without the suffrage or consent of the People.

But what of all this? These examples make nothing for him; because they belong
to the immediate Calling; and our question is concerning the Mediate or
ordinary Calling. For (as J said before) this immediate Calling must not now be
expected, being extraordinay, and long since out of date.

Neither must the Anabaptists, and Politics, think to carry it; they have as
little right (of themselves) as the other; For that which belongs to all,
concerns all; ought not to be done by the Command and authority of One, but
jointly with the consent and approbation of All. Away then with the rude
Multitude, they by no means must meddle with the Helm, sit at the Stern, least
by their unskilfulness, and wilfulness they run their Vessel a shore, and so
miserably make shipwreck of all. They are like the troubled Sea, whose waters
cast up mire and dirt. From such violent inundations, and dangerous breaking
in; Good Lord deliver us.

And you, who are said to be Gods, and Sons of the most high; yet seeing you
must dye like men, and fall like one of the Princes; take heed (J pray) that
you do not appropriate that to your selves which is not proper; For there is a
vast difference between a Political Kingdom, and an Ecclesiastical
Government. You remember what the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords said: My
Kingdom is not of this World, John 18. verse. 36. And this calling belongs not
to power of the Magistrate, but to the jurisdiction of the Kingdom of CHRIST.
Let them not therefore send what Laborers they please into God his harvest,
without approbation of the People, and Ordination of the Bishop: Where this
Order is not observed, but preposterously cast off and neglected; The
Ministerij auctoritas prostituitur Conscientiae vulnerantur, Ecclesiae sal^
turbatur, and Sensim ac sensim tandem destruitur. Dieter. Annal. Evangel. in
dic Sanctae Andreae.
authority of the Ministry is prostituted, men's Consciences are wounded, the
safety of the Church is trouubled; and by little and little is at length
destroyed. And so I come to my second head; which was the Condition and
qualification of the Ministry.

FIrst then, the man of God must be no Ignorant person; or Novice, but endued
(if not with eminent) yet at least with Competent knowledge. Romes mother of
Devotion (Ignorance) must have no room here. The Apostle St. Paul writing of a
Bishop (among other things) he would him Didacticon; one apt to teach, 1 Timothy
3.2. And after he had spoken of the Scripture, how it was given by inspiration
2 Timothy 3.16,17.
of GOD, and was profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for
instruction in Righteousness, he thus closes; That the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works. And the same Apostle in his
Epistle to Titus, 1 Chap. verse. 9. Speaking likewise of a Bishop or Minister,
has these words; Holding fast the faithful Word, as he has been taught, that
he may be able by sound Doctrine, both to exhort, and to Convince the
gainsayers.

In the second place (and it is nothing inferior to the first) as they must be
able and sufficient; So they must be of an Honest, Civil, and godly
deportment; They must teach not by Precept only but by Example. -- Sicut
Minister ecclesiae doceri debet propter suae administrationis officium, ita
Sancte vivere debet propter exemplum. ( Prosper de Vita contempl. Cap. 5.) As a
Minister of the Church (says he) ought to teach for the Office of his
administration; so likewise, he ought to live Holy for examples sake. The
Apostle (in the foresaid first Epistle to Tim. 3.2.) would have such to be
Bishops, who are (...); that is to say, Brambles, or Irreprehensible. See to
this purpose, first Chapter to Titus, 2.6. and so forward; where we have at
large, how Ministers ought to be Qualified.

As a man consists of Soul and Body, So also a Minister consists of
Learning and Living; these two must meet in a man of God, if he would be
complete; But God he knows, we have many (for all the cry of Reformation and
New lights) that have neither Learning nor Life. And where happily, or rather
unhappily one has Learning, he wants life; A rare thing to see them meet in
one center, and like the Jemini in the Zodiac to embrace each other. Should
the light of the Sun be once turned to darkness, what would become of all
Sublunaries? For without its light and heat, nothing could long subsist. The
Ministers of Gods word are the Light of the world; so our Savior, Ye are the
Light of the world. And this light consists in Learning and Holiness of life
and conversation. Now where this Light is wanting, the people of God are in a
sad condition. They are called Watchmen, and Shepherds; If they sleep, the
Tower is in danger to be surprised by the Enemy, and the Sheep either
scattered or devoured. Seneca writing of a Governor of a Ship, says, -- Non *
est loquendum, sed gubernandum. He must not talk, but guide and rule his
Vessel: In like manner, the man of God must not talk, but endeavor to bring
the ship of men's Souls, to the Haven of heaven. And good reason he has to be
careful, in regard of the many Rocks and sands in his way, and violent storms
he often meets with. Let me freely speak to thee, thou who art Called to
Preach the Gospel, and to be a Minister of CHRIST. What is it thou have
undertaken? A Calling of that burden and weight, as would require an Atlas, or
Sampson to bear it; Thou have the care of Souls committed to thee, and if any
perish through thy negligence, their blood shall be required at thy hand. What
ear can hear this and not tingle? Whose heart does not either bleed or
tremble, to think on it. Hear what St. Paul says to Timothy; * Preach the
Word, be instant in Season, out of season Reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long
suffering and Doctrine.

How will thou one day be wrapped with Confusion as with a cloak, when thou
appearest before the judgment Seat of CHRIST, to give an account of thy
Stewardship? How will thy heart then dash and beat, as the waves of the Sea;
what Lightning, Thunder, Death, and hell will thou feel in thy Conscience? To
the Hills and Rocks will thou cry, fall on me, and hide me from the presence of
him that ^itteth on the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb. What a hell
will it be to thee to think that by thy Example and Idleness, many have
perished everlastingly, and that thereby thy Sins are not only aggravated, but
thy torments increased and multiplied. Well, the Omnipotent GOD, with whom
nothing is impossible, give thee more grace, that thou may have more care of
thy Self, and thy flock committed to thy charge, Amen.

Now I come to prove that none but such who are lawfully called, ought to teach
in the Church, which was my third particular. Hear what the Lord says of the
Prophets, who without a Call presumed to speak to the people. I have not sent
these Prophets (says GOD) yet they ran; I have not spoken to them, yet they
Prophesied, Ier. 23.21. As much as if the Holy Ghost had said in plain words;
No man without a lawful Calling ought to Prophecy. The Apostle herein is
positive and obvious, Rom, 10.15. Where he interrogates thus: And how shall
they Preach, except they be sent? As if he had said; They cannot Preach (that
is lawfully) except they be sent.

And it is very true; For the Ecclesiastical Ministry has relation to divine
Calling and Mission, whose ultimum and end, is the Preaching of the Gospel; For
they are sent only to Preach. But when men have no Divine, or lawful calling,
how J pray you can their Preaching be lawful? And further, to corroborate my
assertion, we are prohibited to hearken to such as want this Divine and
lawful calling. Therefore hearken not unto the words of the Prophets that
speak unto you; saying, Ye shall not serve the King of Babylon; for they
Prophecy a lie unto you, For I have not sent them, etc. Jer. 27.14,15. and
Chap. 29.8,9. For thus says the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel; Let not your
Prophets and your Deviners, that be in the midst of you, deceive you, neither
hearken to their Dreams which they cause to be dreamed; For they Prophecy
falsely unto you in my Name: J have not sent them, says the Lord.

What need many words! The Church is a house, and this Epithet St. Paul gives
the Church, 1 Timothy 3.15. But if I tarry long, that thou may know how thou
ought to behave thy self in the house of GOD, which is the Church of the
living God, etc. And Heb. 3.6. But CHRIST as Son over his own house, whose
House are we, etc. And our Savior, when he drove out those which bought and
sold in the Temple said to them; It is written, My House shall be called the
house of Prayer, etc.

Hence J argue, That no man ought or can challenge to himself the rule end
governance of this House, but he whom the Lord of the house (who is God) shall
appoint. Take an argument from the Lesser to the greater, and this folly will
soon appear.

Should one take upon him to Command and rule in another man's house, without
leave from the Master of it, I believe he would scarce brook such insolency
and unmannerly deportment. And as for him, all would admire, and wonder at the
man's impudency. Much less sufferable it is, for one so to demean him self in
the Church, which is the house of GOD.

I must encounter now with no less then Two, and two to one is ods; yet, by
the grace of God, I hope, I shall come off fair enough.

And first, J shall ask our Thieves and Robbers, Ioh. 10.1. why they entered not
by the door into the Sheepfold, but climbed up some other way? Why by force
they intrude themselves into the Ministry? O good God, how is thy house of
Prayer become a den of Thieves! What Blasphemies, Heresies and Doctrine of
Devils, are every where belched forth by those that run, without thy sending!
How is thy Sanctuary laid wast! Thy servants, the faithful Ministers of the
Gospel, (if not killed or stoned) yet at least, banished and Imprisoned, or by
base and rude hands, beaten and buffeted! Truth now gets hatred, and Flattery
friends. -- O Tempora, O Mores! O the Times, and manners of Men! O
Praesumtionem, O Consuetudinem! (as Golden mouthed Chrysostom, said in his
days) O what Presumption, what Custom is this! never known or heard of, but
in these later times of Reformation. Now every beardless Boy, and broken
Shopkeeper, will step into a Pulpit, and there (Parrat-like) prate what they
know not themselves, and indeed, how should they do otherwise, when they
speak that which God never put in their mouths.

These are the Foxes, who spoil the Vines, but plant them not, Cantic. 2.15. J
would to God they were taken. These are they which hatch Cockatrice eggs, and
weave the Spiders web: he that eats of their Eggs, dies, etc. Isa. 59.5.
Auditores interimentes, nou re^cientes (as one says,) Killing their hearers,
and not refreshing them. These are they, who usurp the Priesthood with Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram; Let them beware, that the Earth open not her mouth and
swallow them up etc. and they go down quick into the Pit, etc. Numb. 16.30.
etc.

Who almost would believe it, that our Nation, which is blessed and happy in
the enjoyment of so many brave and Learned men, should have a company of
Sectaries to trouble it! Who would think, that we who (not long since) were
envied for our Church Discipline; being so Complete in every particular, that
no Christian Church in the world might Parallel it; So that a noble Frenchman
brake forth in these words, -- Clerus Anglus stupor mundi. The English Clergy
is the wonder of the World; should now be either destroyed, or disturbed by a
sort of Heretics and Schismatiques? In comes your Anabaptist, Quaker, Seeker,
Adamite, and I know not what rabble; Qui sic bacchanantur in Provinciis, etc.
(as one writes of the Popes Legates) That so revell it in the Provinces, and
make such havoc where they come, as if the Devil was let loose to Scourge and
trouble Gods Church.

Have these men a Calling for it, J am confident of it (setting their seduced
Proselites aside) they have neither God nor man for them. If you will have my
judgment, They are like Frogs and Toades, Sponte nascentia, who come up of
themselves, bred only by Corruption. I will end with that of Pope Boniface the
8.th, who like these fellows, came to the Popedom, as they presume to come
into our Churches without divine Calling, by sinister ways and by Corruption.
Intravit ut Vulpes regnavit ut Leo, moriuus ut Canis; He came in as a Fox, he
reigned as a Lion, and he dyed like a Dog.

In the next place, I have some thing to say to the People, who follow and
run after these blind Guides. We have a Proverb, The receiver is as bad as
the thief; and indeed, were it not for their several Congregations, these new
Lights would soon be put out; take away the fuel, and the fire will go out
of it self. Let there be no wind stirring, and the Mariner will sail but
slowly. A Traitor* who is a shame and bane to his Country, what is he without
his fellows. And therefore the People are in as much fault as their Prophets;
for should not they so flock unto them, their Cake would quickly be dough. We
have an express prohibition to the contrary, Jer. 27.14,15. Therefore hearken
not unto the words of the Prophets that speak unto you, saying; Ye shall not
serve the King of Babylon; for they Prophecy a lie unto you; For J have not
s^nt them, etc. This is a true mark of the sheep of CHRIST, that they will not
follow a Stranger, but will fly from him Ioh. 10.5. And a stranger will they
not follow, but will fly from him; for they know not the voice of Strangers.
And in the 14. verse. I am the good Shepherd, and know my sheep, and am known
of mine.

When Chrysostom was banished, one Arsacius without any lawful or ordinary
Calling, succeeds him: But in the Church of Constantinople, no Christian or
faithful man, thought him worthy their audience, or a word from their mouths,
as Theodoret, Sozomen, and Nicephorus write. Theod. lib. 5. cap. 34. Sozom.
lib. 8. cap. 23. Niceph. lib. 3. cap. 22. It is recorded of the Samosatenians,
that neither Rich nor poor, Man nor Woman, young nor old, would come to the
Ecclesiastical Convent of an Arrian Bishop Theod. lib. 4. hist. Eccl. Cap. 14.
So hateful to them were the Sect of the Arrians. When one Jovianus, who
sometime was in the parts of the Arrians, offered to Consecrate Antiochus; he
refused it, saying; Absit ut manus tu^ me consecret. Be it far from me that
thy hand should Consecrate me, Theod. lib. 4. cap. 11.

Yet see the inconstancy and levity of many thousands of people, who are tossed
too and fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine, which the Apostle
straightly forbid us, Ephesians. 4.14. And Heb. 13.9. Be not carried (says he)
about with diverse and strange Doctrines, etc. St. John in his second Epist.
verse 10.11. says; If there come any unto you and bring not this Doctrine,
receive him not into your bouse, neither bid him God speed; For he that
bids him God speed, is partaker of his evil deeds. Yet J say, there is no
Sect, be it never so simple and damnable, but has its Disciples and followers.

What a train after them, have your Anabaptist; I may say of them as Balak
said of the Children of Israel; Behold they cover the face of the Earth. What
River almost, whose streams have not been defiled and polluted by their
unclean Dippings.

Your Quaker so pitiful a fellow, and so composed of Nonsense, heresy, and
blasphemy; he I say, (though a man would admire it) has his followers too.
Would any one imagine, that an Adamite should gain Disciples; yet they have so
much prevailed, (though their Doctrine be the doctrine of Devils) that their
Women (setting all Shame and Modesty aside) have walked naked in the open
Streets, to the view of all men.

The Angels, and Archangels (says learned Luther) must not be followed, though
no false Doctrine fall from them; if they want the testimony of a lawful
Calling. And he adds this Reason, Quia ubi non est vocatio and mandatum, ibi
non est Ministerium. Where there is no Calling and commandment, there is no
Ministry, Tom. 5. fol. 157.6. in explic. Psalm. Much less should the People
follow deceivers and false Prophets, who without all lawful calling sow
nothing but Seeds of heretical and damnable Doctrine, whose judgment now of
long time lingreth not, and their damnation slumbreth not, 2 Pet. 2.3. Alas
poor people; What do you (think you) in following them. You encourage them in
their most sinful ways, who otherwise (did not you countenance them) would not
dare to do as they do, and happily they might repent; should you desert and
forsake them. Again, in following of them you cause the way of truth to be
evil spoken of, 2 Pet. 2.2. And many (says the Apostle) shall follow their
pernicious ways by reason of whom, the way of Truth shall be evil spoken of.

And is not this most true! By sad experience we see it every where. Who
suffers so much as the Truth! Hell now is broke loose upon her, and never was
Hare so torn and worried by Dogs; as the Truth is by Sectaries and Heretics.
Now every foul mouth is opened against her; and she is the scorn and derision
of all.

The Drunkards make songs of her, and the abjects mowes, and cease not. Well,
It is impossible but the offenses will come, but woe unto him through whom they
come Luke 17.1. And woe to them, by reason of whom the way of truth shall be
evil spoken of.

And here again the Seduced people; they make but Merchandise of you and bring
you into fools Paradise. And through Covetousness shall they with feigned
words make Merchandise of you, as you have it in the 3. verse, of the foresaid
2 Epist. of St. Peter, and the 2 chap. They are but for their own ends, think
of them how you please, and make Merchandise of you. They will tell you that
Tithes, and the Ministers lawful maintenance is unlawful, Antichristian, and a
burden to the People, but it is to make Merchandise of you. J believe your
Gratuities to them do far exceed the tenths given to a godly Minister. And do
you but once hold your hand; the fiery zeal of your false Prophets will soon
freeze and be a cold. For they are greedy Dogs which can never have enough; and
they are Shepherds that cannot understand; they all look to their own way,
every one for his gain from his quarter, Isaiah 56.11. Curia Romana non captat
ovem sine lana; is as true as old. The Court of Rome cares not for the Sheep
that has no fleece. And for all their seeming Holiness, and hypocritical
zeal, you will find Sirs, they make Merchandise of you.

Will not all this diswade you from following these false Lights! Think then of
your Souls which are in danger to be cast away. Quid anima pulchrius! What
more fair and comely then the Soul? What more precious then the Soul? Nay,
what so precious? It must needs be rare, when the whole World is nothing to it:
What is a man profited, if he gain the whole world, and loose his own Soul?
Yet this so precious, so fair, and so rare a thing, thou puts to hazard, every
moment.

Bethink thee prithy, when thou art going to the assemblies of these men, and
weigh with thy self, what thou do. Thou runnest to the very Cannons mouth,
and art in as much danger as a Ship in a storm without Anchor or Cable, ready
every minute to be cast away; for I may say of them, as Solomon of a whore:
Their house is the way to hell, going down to the chambers of Death, Prove.
7.27. O Lord, J pray thee, so to open the eyes of thy People, and so to
inlighten their understandings, that they may know thy voice alone in the mouth
of thy faithful Ministers; and that among all the changes and chances of this
mortal life, they and we, may ever be defended by thy most gracious and ready
help, through Christ our Lord, Amen.

And now I come to my fourth and last Particular, viz. That every Minister
being lawfully Called, must attend upon his calling, without meddling with
Secular affairs. No man that warreth (says St. Paul) entangleth himself with
the affairs of this life, etc. 2 Timothy 2.4. Which words (says Super locum.
Theophilact) are spoken to all Bishops.

When there arose a murmuring of the Grecians against the Hebrews, because
their Widows were neglected in the daily Ministration; Then the twelve (says
the text) called the multitude of the Disciples unto them, and said; It is not
reason that we should leave the word of GOD, and serve Tables, Acts 6.1,2.
Pluribus intentus minor est ad singula Sensus. A man's mind busied about many
things, is less intent to any one thing alone. I hope you will believe him
that said it; a man cannot serve two Master, for either he will love the one
and hate the other, or else he will cleave to the one, and despise the other;
we cannot serve GOD and Mammon. Even so, a man cannot serve two Callings well;
for if one be followed, the other will be neglected.

If a Divine has his thoughts too much upon the world, he must of necessity be
more remiss in the Service of God; one cannot Plough and Cart at once. The
mischief of this was so well known to our Forefathers, that Clerks were
forbidden to meddle with Civil affairs, as unbeseeming Divines, and such as
serve at the Altar, Can Apost. 6. and 82. and Council. Chalcedonens. can. 7.
act. 15. Non Convenit unum duplicem habere Professionem, (says St. Ambros.) It
is not for one man to have two Professions. The Prophet Isaiah will tell you
what the Office of a Minister is, Chap. 52. verse. 6, 7. J have set Watchmen
upon thy walls, O Jerusalem, which shall never hold their peace day nor night:
Ye that make mention of the Lord, keep not silence and give him no rest, etc.
When the Apostles were sent forth, our Savior says; And as ye go, Preach,
saying; The Kingdom of heaven is at hand, Math. 10.7. and Math. 28.19,20. Go
ye therefore, and teach all Nations etc. Teaching them to observe, etc. And to
make an end, St. Paul says Woe be unto me, if J Preach not the Gospel.

What can our Laics then say for themselves? What starting holes have they
now? By what Divinity, or by what Logic, can they prove it lawful, to Cobble
all the week, and Preach upon the Sabbath day. To throw a Shuttle, and cry,
What do you lack Sir, the six days, and then presume in God his house to tell
a Tale, or their own Dreams to the people? Proh pudor, Quis cui? (as they
said) of a simple unlearned man that succeeded St. Chrysostom. Alas? what a
sorry fellow is this? In whose room is he placed? So may we justly exclaim
against this froth and filth, who leap our of their Shops into a Pulpit. Alas!
what sorry fellows are these? In whose room do they stand? And as for that
Common objection to maintain their actions; St. Paul was a Tent-maker, and some
of the Apostles Fishermen etc. it is so poor, and void of Sense, as its not
worth the answering. In the mean time, if they be still hardened, seeing their
ways are perverse before the Lord, (as the Angel said to Balaam) Number. 22.32.
God give the People grace to avoid them as, Mariners do rocks and ^ands. And
as for them; He that is filthy, let him be filthy still, Apoc. 22.11.

And now my Brethren, and fellow laborers in the Lord's harvest; Let it be
far from you to do the work of the Lord negligently. Hear this and tremble:
J charge thee therefore before GOD, and the Lord JESUS CHRIST, who shall judge
the quick and the dead at his appearing and Kingdom, etc. Preach the word,
being instant in season, out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long
suffering and Doctrine, 2 Timothy 4.12. Never were there more ravening Wolves that
come in Sheep clothing, in the memory of man; Let us have a care Sirs then of
the flock. The thief (we know) comes not but for to steal, and to kill, and
to destroy, John 10.10. Let us then stand up and defend the poor Sheep of
CHRIST. If by our default, any shall dye in his iniquity, his blood will God
require at our hand, Ezekiel. 3.18.

How does it behoove thee then (thou man of God) to look to thy charge, and to
take heed to thy Self, and to all the flock, over the which the Holy Ghost
has made thee Over-seer, to feed the Church of God, which he has purchased
with his own blood; (as St. Paul charge the Elders of Ephesus, Acts 20.58.
But, I blush to speaste it. There be many Ministers that mind the world more,
then the weal of their Flock. Here, one is a Physician, another, a Lawyer, a
third, a Merchant. One minds more the Ploughing of his field, then the
ploughing up the fallow ground of men's hearts; and delights more to sow his
Land, then to cast the seed of God's saying word into the hearts of his
Congregation. You shall have them oftener at a Fair or Market, to buy and sell,
then at their Studies for the good of men's Souls.

Hence it is, that they are so cold and faint in their Exhortations and
Reproves to the people: When they should be bold and lift up their voyees like
Trumpe^s; show the people of God their transgressions and the house of Jacob
their Sins, Isiah, 58.1. Then Exodus 14.25.
the Chariot wheels of their zeal and devotion are taken off, so that they
drive heavily. Not long since, if a Minister was abused undeservedly, he had
the Law to right him (though that hedge be broken down.) But says Bishop
Babing. in P^.
Babington; If he follow the Cow fair, and Sow fair, and so happen to get a
broken pate, as the Law (says he) in this kind will not help him, so I (for my
part) and I too, will not greatly pity him.

And so I will conclude with that of St. Hierome, Hierom. ad Nepot.
Neg^tiatorem Clericum ex inope divitem ex ignobili gloriosum, quasi quandam
pestem fuge. A worldly Minister grown rich from poverty, glorious from
baseness, avoid and shun as a kind of Plague.

But again (in case of Necessity) a Minister may step aside, when they way is
so soul that he cannot travel; And n marvel, a man cannot go on his
journey, when he is turned out of the Road, and his Horse taken from him. Those
who have lost their Livings and exposed to the wide world, as (God knows) we
have too many of them, blame them not, if they endeavor in a warrantable way
to maintain themselves. their Wives, and Children. They must have a care of
their Relations. This of the Apostle, lies as nigh their doors as at any
other man's, 1 Timothy 5.8. But if any provide not for his own, and specially for
those of his own house, he has denied the Faith, and is worse then an
Infidel.

In this Case, a man of God, may use lawful means to relieve his Family, and
labor with his own hands to serve his Necessities; as that Reverend The
Minister of Seven Oak in Kent; if he be living.
Divine was forced to Hedge and Ditch, etc. for to feed his poor Family. Who
so lists, may have the whole Parish to attest the truth of it.

Hear I pray and repent you unworthy People of the glad tidings of the
Gospel, what the Apostle writes of the Galathians, That if it had been
possible, they would have plucked out their own eyes, and have given them unto
him, Galath. 4.15. Would they pluck out their Eyes? And will you pluck out
their hearts? Is this beseeming Godliness? Or is this according to your
Profession? Shall the Ambassadors of the high GOD find no better entertainment.

In all ages, the Priests and Prophets (thou Idolatrous) were ever had by the
People in high esteem. As for Example; The Prophets of Baal, and rhey of the
Groves, did eat at Jezebels table, 1 Kings 18.19. In the time of the Seven
years Famine, when the rest of the Egyptians sold their Lands, the Priests
were excepted, and had a certain allowance from Pharaoh. The Muzzelman (the
Priest so called) is had in such reverence amongst the Turks, that when he
travelleth, every one that passes by, must vail his bonnet to him, and bow
himself, and if not, he is presently beaten down with clubs. The Papists
have the like esteem of their Priests as is manifest by their devout
deportment in the Idolatrous Mass, in their auricular Confession; in their
Penance, and in the large Salary they allow them, etc.

Shall these Calfes Priests be thus respected by their blind auditory, and
shall the people be so indulgent to them, as nothing is thought too good, too
dear and will you sl^ght the faithful Ministers of CHRIST, who do, -- Vos
quaerere, non vestra, Seek you, not yours; And with the Apostle are willingly
to spend, and to be spent for you? Shall they travel as it were in birth
again? Till CHRIST be formed in you, and have they this thank for their
labor? Will you muzzell the mouth of the Ox that treads out the Corn? Will
you not afford them the milch of the flock, who feeds the Flock? Do ye not
know that they which minister about holy things live of things or the Temple?
And they which wait at the Altar, are partakers with the Altar? 1 Cor. 9.13.
Pray read the 14. verse. Even so has the Lord ordained, that they which
Preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel.

How can J now keep silence, or hold my tongue, when the sacred Ministers of
God are held in such Contempt? That of Burton, before his Melancholy, is most
true, Dat Galenus ^pes, dat Justinianus honores,
Sed genus and species cogitur ira pedes.
The rich Physician, honored Lawyer rides,
Whilst the poor Scholar foots it by their sides.


Many may say with the Apostle. 1 Corinthians. 4.11,12. Even unto this present
hour, we both hunger and thirst, and are naked, and are buffetted, and have
no certain dwelling place: And labor, working with our own hands: Being
reviled, we bless: Being persecuted, we suffer it.

Where is the life of Religion, where is the power of Godliness, when such
gentil, and diabolical acts are perpetrared amongst us? Can ye be said to
honor God, love his Word, and his holy Sacraments, when ye suffer the
Ministers of GOD, of his Word, and of his Sacraments, to want, and beg their
bread, when it is in your power to supply them? Fie; I am ashamed to hear it,
and blush that Christians (so called) should act the part of Infidels. Either
express in Life what ye profess, or profess nor at all. The white Devil,
(I mean a hypocrite) is Pessimum hominum genus, the worst sort of men (as
Musculus writes of an Anabaptist, and must one day expect his reward. And that
is only titular, a bare Name, the vain applause of the People, who with the
Ape, kills with indulgencie.

And you that possess their Livings, not giving authority rest, till removed,
and so force them to ways beneath them; You must come to an account too: A
whole Sea of water will not wash away your stain; It must be true penitent
Tears in the blood of CHRIST must do it, or nothing. In the interim, all the
Oratory in the world shall never free you from the deserved Epithet, Of dry
Murderers.

You know who spoke these words; J have Coveted no man's Silver, or Gold, or
apparel, Acts 20.33. Per hoc Lupe cognoscuntur qui talia Concupiscunt: Says
the ordinary Gloss, -- By this the Wolves are known who covet after such
things.

What shall I say of you then, who have not only coveted, but possessed, (not
these alone) but their Houses, Livings, Books, Arreares, etc. The close of the
Commandment is, -- Nor any thing that is thy Neighbors, Exodus 20.17. How can
you then excuse your selves, when you have Coveted all things. If you Sirs be
Sheep, J know not who are Wolves. Let your voice be what it will I am sure
your hands are the hands of Esau.

No wonder then to see some Ministers labors with their hands, and to beg
their Bread, when it is a forced put, and Causa Necessitatis for mere
Necessity; I shall say no more, but end with that of holy Stephen when he was
stoned to Death; Lord lay not this Sin unto their charge, Acts, 7.60.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by T. Forcet, for the Author 1655.


