Gladius Justitiae: A SERMON Preached at the ASSIZES held at LINCOLN, March 9.
1667/8 WILLIAM WELBY, Esquire Being Sheriff of the County.

By G. H. M. A.

Magnificentius est dicere, quemadmodum gesserimus consulatum quam quemadmodum
ceperimus.

Tully. LONDON, Printed by William Godbid, for Nathaniel Brook at the Angel in
Gresham College, 1668.

To His Most Honored Friend William Welby ESQUIRE.
SIR,
FOR this small Piece to crave your countenance, or the making Apologies on its
behalf (which calls indeed for the Posse Comitatus, the whole extent of your
Office, to defend its weakness against the attempt of Tongues, which are
expected fiercely to charge it with conceit and confidence,) is unfaithfully to
betray you into the same censure and imputation. Give me only leave to summon
You an impartial Witness, not suborned by affection, to attest this Truth; That
it was not an itch of Juvenile years, desirous to be scracht by Popularity; or
only an earnest importunity of Friends, the customary pretense of Scriblers:
but direct Commands and friendly threats of the Grand Inquest, (whose Persons
and Judgments save in this, may justly challenge a large esteem and value,)
forced and extorted a Promise of committing this to public View. So that I
disown to be styled the Parent of this hasty birth, let it call Twelve its
Father, and be laid at their Door. I can now triumph in an innocent revenge,
when I can justly indite and call every one of them a felo de se, for offering
violence to his own Judgment, and committing a Rape and Deflowring that
modesty which I account the inviolable duty of my low conceptions, and well
becomes the clearest intellectuals and best accomplishments, which like the
greatest beauty should wear a Vail; for exposed to Sun and Air to public
appearances to be read by all; they soil their Features and Complexion, and
gain the name of confident. To escape so black a brand, let me rather confute
my Doctrine, persuade You to be a partial Judge, let Your Affections bribe Your
Reason; or let Me beg me favor of Your Place and Charge, reprieve Me being
found Guilty and Condemnd, and account this pure Obedience to their Commands,
and a faint return to Your high Civilities and Engagements laid upon

Sir, Your most humble and obliged Servant, GREGORY HASKARD.
March 9th. 1667.
Romans 13.4. -- (...) -- -- For be bears not the Sword in vain.
SOme Proselytes betimes had sucked in this rotten Principle, Gal. 3.13
that Christian Religion did discharge all its Professors from obedience unto
Secular Powers, 2 Pet. 2.19.
because it did entitle them to Diadems above, 1 Pet. 2.16.
and styled them Coheirs with the King of Glory, and endowed them with other
fair Prerogatives and Royalties Divine, they stretched these beyond the bounds
of a Spiritual design, to reach at a Temporal Interest; which was to enlarge
their Secular liberties to throw open all enclosures, to level Dignities and
Honors, to pluck up the pale of Humane Laws, and tumble down all Supremes, and
Saint and Subject no more than King and Rebel could agree. The Apostle to
dislodge and prevent this pestilential opinion, so great a rub to the spreading
of Christianity in the Pagan World, as though Kings must then throw off their
Purples, when their People put on Christ's white Robe; 1 Samuel 26.
or cease to be God's anointed with his holy Oil, when their Subjects
foreheads are once sprinkled with Baptismal water, to purge so foul a stain as
this from so pure and innocent a Religion, and to set the Laurels of Kings
faster upon their brows, to their External power he adjoyns a Divine
Commission, their Authority is a bright as their Diadems, their Jewels belong
to the new Jerusalem, and sent by the King above to be Enameled in them; 1
King. 10.20.
their Thrones more than Solomon's are supported with the Lion of the Tribe of
Judah, not only to entreat, but command obedience from the most refined
Christians. So that this new proselyte mistook his Liberty, and his Religion
too, in thinking he ceas't to be a Subject, a Man reduced into order when he
became a Christian; or to pay Tribute here below to Princes, and Devotion to
the King above, could not stand together. He therefore gives him this wholesome
caution, that if he fall under the lash and strokes of Civil Government and
Justice, he must not murmr at, and revile, bespatter and blaspheme the arm of
him that strikes; but kiss the rod, and pray for the hand of him that holds it,
Dan. 3.9.
O King live for ever, be patient and submissive to His Authority which came
from the broad Seal above, and enstampt with an Image Divine, the Author of His
Dignity and Power, as well as of your Religion; For He is the Minister of God,
and bears not the Sword in vain.

In which words are included these Two parts. (1.) A Character Royal, a Power
dirived from God, and delegated unto Judges, or the Authority of Magistrates
(whereof the Sword is an Ensign) by Letters Patents from the Court above, and
sent down to lower Judicatures.

Secondly, The design and end by a negative, Non temere, the Secular arm must
not wield it furiously and rashly, or use it indiscriminately like the arrows
of Death and Famines, making no difference; but must point it at the bad and
nocent, and protect the good and innocent.

First, The Original and Family of the Magistrates power. God to tell the World
it was not Pride and Ambition, Tyranny, and private Interest that first erected
Polities, and founded the different sort of Government, has signed their
Commission from above, sent them down instruments of Authority, to back and
countenance their just procedures and execution of Laws, that the Rebel World
might not degrade and vilify their Persons, styling them poor Mortals, Sons of
Earth, cast in the same mould with all Mankind; He has advanced them to be his
Deputies and Vicars, and now they sound infinite and immense in their Authority
all Divine descending from above, and the Rebellion rebounds from Earth, and
touches the Throne of Heaven. It Is more than Poetry what Phoebus told his rash
Son, begging the rule of his Father's Chariot, Ovid. Metamor.
Non est mortale quod optas; their shoulders had need be more than mortal, who
can canvass for rule of an Immortal concern. Hence refusal of Supremes, and
disobedience to their Edicts and Commands, 1 Samuel 8.7.
like persecution of Saints and Favorites of Heaven, reflects upon the person
of God himself. Exodus 16.8.
For they have not rejected thee but they have rejected Me; all Government in
this sense as well as the Jewish might be called a Theocracy. The commands and
precepts of Kings have a deeper power than only upon the Externals of Men, they
reach farther, Saunder. de obli. Consci.
and tie his Conscience too by this general and derivative power from God, who
only has merum and directum imperium in conscientias, an independent unlimited
rule. The criminal and disobedient upon this score mistake themselves, because
their bodies have suffered the penalty and mulcts of Laws, to call their Souls
innocent and set them clear, their Consciences still stand arraigned at an
higher Bar; only Faith and repentance must discharge that guilt. Hence things
of a middle and indifferent nature, the Amphibions in Morals by the commands of
Princes, become the matter of necessary obedience; and things intrinsecally and
materially good, seconded with the injunctions of Magistrates, lay double
chains, and tie the Conscience faster; and disobedience and Rebellion against
the smallest Law, 1 Samuel 13.23.
is grim'd with the name of Witchcraft, and Apostasy from God, or his Deputy
which sounds the same. To silence factious and turbulent Spirits, and still the
complaints and brawls of unreasonable Men, before the Judge inflict his
punishments, or distribute rewards, let him read his Commission, every
Magistrate ('it is no invading of Royalty to say) is by the Grace of God, his
Power is given him from above.

Secondly, Its design and end. All Ensigns and badges of Honor were contrived
to represent and re-mind their duty, Seiden. Tit. Honor.
like Coats of Arms the office and virtue of the bearer; among which the Sword
signifies an impartial Justice and execution of Laws. For Edicts and Commands
sound but Rhetoric and Oratory, or Formalities of State, painted Weapons, or
dead Men's breath, and cast contempt, light and low thoughts upon the Enacting
power, if their penaltyes and mulcts annexed, retch not the bold transgressour
and disobedient; or by wit and interest, connivance or relation, can be evaded
or compounded at a cheap and inconsiderable rate. Laws of old were therefore
written in Stone and Brass, that their executioners might not be of a soft and
loose affection, Lubin. in Juvenal and Persius.
and with Cinnabaris or Rubric, ut immorigeris sanguineum quid minitarent,
threatening the blood of him that durst commit a Rape upon them, and painted out
a Spirit bold and unconcerned what the result and conclusion might be of an
Office faithfully discharged. The definition of a Law by the Pagan Orator takes
in its Family and design too, Cicero.
Lex est nil aliud nisi recta and a numine Deorum tractata ratio, imperans
honesta, prohibens contraria. Right reason handed down from God to his Officers
here below to smile upon virtuous and ingenuous, to check and restrain sordid
and exorbitant actions. He that prodigally bestows his pardons and reprieves to
Criminals and Malefactors to gain the title of mild and merciful, purchases at
the same time the name of timorous and careless, tame and remiss; his pity
becomes a cruelty, while severity to reform, is Mercy only in a sanguin dress.
It Is the method of Divine Providence to display the lightning of his Love and
Charity, the groans of his Spirit, promises, and rewards, and other endearments
and invitations unto repentance, before he discharge the Thunder of his
Justice, despair and affrightments, to rend and tear the cauteriz'd Conscience,
and impenitent Soul. Since the World is grown so confident and presumptuous and
lulled asleep not to be wak't, or drawn by Love or Mercy the bands of a Man
unto obedience, He has armed his Justice with Swords and Arrows, to drive and
terrify into a sober life; and has left a model for the Magistrates rule,
where equity of the Law, dictates of Reason and Conscience, with the cries of
Religion will not reclaim, frowns and angry brows and hands armed with the
Sword of Justice, must force, at least discourage habitual offenders; For he
carries not, etc.

The Text thus divided, will return into its self, and frame this Proposition.
That the solemn design of all sorts of Magistracy is to protect the good and
innocent, and inflict just and due punishments upon all offenders. As none of
the designs and commands of Heaven, as the not eating of an Apple, thoughts and
glances, without a blasphemy, can be thought indifferent and low, much less his
inauguration of Kings and Magistrates, his Deputies and Vicegerents, by which
he rules this lower World. Dispensation of Law and Justice was contrived, not
like the badges and glittering marks of Honor to distinguish degrees and
subordinate files of Men, to make the vulgar World only to gaze and pay
reverence to their purples: but to fulfill that solemn design and end which
Heaven its self with all its Rhetoric, HOly policies, Divine and Moral
arguments, would joyfully persuade; which is the curbing of all Irregularity,
to civilize the barbarous World, to disgarrison Vice and Injustice, Fraud and
Oppression, to make the World purely Christian; Isai. 11.16.
when the Lion and the Lamb, the Vulture and the Dove, the weaker and the
stronger Christian, should live, love, and lie down together. So that that
which is the Ruler's Charge, is the care of Heaven, and the Ministry of Angels,
they being styled (...), and are dispatched into this lower World upon the
messages of the upper one, Heb. 1.14.
to infuse Holy thoughts, and Divine tempers, which carry on the Ruler's Office
to advance Virtue and Religion, and reclaim the degenerate world. His thoughts
are therefore too course and vulgar which styles them purely Humane, Verse. 1.
when Heaven has clothed them in Divinity; and gives too favorable a
punishment to disobedience, which charges it only with a Temporal mulct, Verse
2.
when my Apostle passes an eternal doom upon it. When therefore you are
instal'd God's Viceroys, the Champions of Religion, the Patrons of Virtue, the
expectation and hopes of all good Men, Aristotle.
the Terror of the bad, the (...) the walking Law; think not so low and humbly,
the Administration of Justice to be a thing only Gentile and Titular, of a
Secular Interest and convenience, and looks below; entertain more serious and
noble conceptions, and look upon your Dignity of an higher design, an Immortal
concern, the state beyond the Grave, into which all the smaller and the large
lines of this life and its actions, must all at last resolve and center
themselves. To fix this burden and care faster upon your shoulders, consider
and weigh these ensuing obligations.

First, The necessity of Humane Nature. Since Man lapst into this degenerate
condition, and Sin became his Master, his Nature now is no more led by Love and
Ingenuity, but by the severities of Justice lasht into a sober and coversive
life. For the passions and rage of the general part of Mankind will no more be
boiled over, and cooled by rational arguments and out of principles of Virtue,
than the loud and surly storm can be allayed and seren'd by strains of
Rhetoric or gentile deportment. So that Humane Nature being so fester'd and
gangrened, grown so rough and sturdy, it calls for cuttings and lancings, more
than lenitives and remulcients, Laws and penalties from the sharpest Sword of
Justice. So that paint but the World as once it lay in its primitive Chaos and
confusion, Figida cum calidis, etc. Draw the dismal consequences of Civil
Wars, Inroads of Enemies and depopulations, secret Murders, and open
Invasions, with all the numerous spawn of mischiefs, you will then discern what
a deformed monster this World would turn, if instead of wholesome Laws, and an
exact distribution of Justice, with a free, a cheerful obedience, the harmony
of the moral World, only the harsh notes of tyrany and oppression, frauds and
violence, should grate upon your ears; the tears of Widows, and the cries of
Orphans; the deaths of Innocents, and blood of all good Men; no sitting under
our Vines to crop their fruit, though watered with the sweat of our own brows,
or calling for Landmarks of propriety, when life it self would not be our own,
but Tenant at Will to another passion and revenges; the strongest arm would be
the greatest right; the weakest Christian the greatest criminal; subtilty would
be Justice; and want of power with the groans of the poor, the only crying
vice. Reason and Religion, candor and ingenuity, with all the lovely
principles of humane nature, would lie a bleeding, and a fiat justitia modo
ruat Coelum might rather have this sense, Heaven would totter if Justice were
not done. For these and many more, like the opening of Pandora's box would
swarm together, if once the streams of Justice be obstructed, penalties
remissly inflicted upon disobedience, and the Pale of Civil Govenment plucked up
by the brawny hands of violence. So that'a faithful dispenser of Justice is a
benefactor to all Mankind, repairing its ruins, the only Atlas of the moral.
World, which otherwise would rush into Confusion. The Sword of Justice
therefore like the Angel's flaming one, must still guard Paradise, Religion,
and Equity, least it become a Wilderness of Sin. The eyes and hopes therefore
of all innocen: Souls, the cries of all good Men, and of our common Parent too
for your Protection against these black and dismal ills, which are so closely
linkt and twisted with the corrupt and ruinous nature of Mankind, make your
Justice of an indispensable convenience and absolute necessity.

Secondly, Consider who you represent. Your Authority and Power like Janus,
carry a double face; they look upward toward God, who has chosen you his
Deputies and Exarchs in ruling the Provinces of this lower world: and just
Sentences and Dooms he appropriates, and calls them his own, The Judgment is
Gods. And it looks below to the People your fellow Beings, whose Trustees and
Representatives you are, to distribute the equal shares of Justice. The one in
your Commission sets you above the level of Mankind; Deu. 1.17.
for what the ambitious Pagans would have enameled in their Crowns, as Domitian
called himself, Dominus Deus noster, and Rome Christian, still courts the title
of Rome Pagan, as though entailed upon her, Seldom. Tit Honor. Revel. 17.14.
Sesostris wrote himself (...), Corrival with the King of Heavens title, King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords, with what the Peruvian Kings of late, or the
Persian and Mohammedan Emperors now do swell, is enjoyed in a sober and modest
sense by the Administrators of Justice, when God Christens them with his own
name, I say ye are Gods. Divisum imperium cum Jove Caesar babet, Psalm. 8:.5.
Their Commission being higher than their Crowns, of an immortal race. The
other styles you Guardians, and Feoffees in trust, of the Peoples Proprieties
and Possessions. A Judge no longer remains asingle and individual Person, but
sounds a Multitude, a Legion, a Leviathan of Men, a Monopoly of Rights and
Privileges, the Beast with many Heads; Revel. 13.
Beast in Prophetic Schemes and Types signifying Government, or Polities. So
that the remiss. Migistrate that falls in love with Beauty and Varnish of his
Office like the giddy Phaeton, currus miratur habenas, Ovid.
and neglects a strict and wise discharge, does not only bespot his own
Purples, but shakes the Throne of Heaven too, from whence his Commission came.
If the Judge that is invested with the Peoples Rights, misimploy or wrest their
Trust from its first intention of preserving them from the greedy jaws of
Rapine and Violence, and abuse them to crooked designs and private Interests,
he acts in part what Caligula wished, that all the World had but one neck, and
he its Executioner; He murders the People with their own Right committed to
him. Private persons like smaller Stars may be obseur'd, and no damage to the
lower World; but Public like Sun or Moon when once Eclipst, Heaven and Earth
seem to mourn in blackness, with a train of aggravating circumstances. Hence
then to make your Office answer its Pedigre and Original which is Divine, Gods.
Commissioners, and the Peoples Trust, impartially and deveoid of Fear, inflict
due punishments upon Offenders, and use not the Sword in vain.

Thirdly, Let the Magistrate consider the grand account at an higher Bar. God
to over-aw the actions of Mankind, and strike a Reverence into mortals breasts,
has placed himself a spectator and Judge at lower Bars, good and bad Angels
more then Mahomets upon the two shoulders of every Disciple, to record your
Sentences, and the Mind and Conscience of all good Men, the grand Inquest at
the last Tribunal, where all Causes must be tried ore and pleaded once again,
the Court of Equity the last appeal; where all unjust damages, too rigid
penalties, passionate Dooms and Sentences, and decisions of design, will wheel
about, and return upon the Judges score. The cries of the weak and destitute,
whose poverty here below was their only crime, and the blood of Martyred
Innocents reeks up to Heaven, and returns in a shower of Vengeance or the
Thunder of Conscience upon the drowzy Magistrate, Acts 18.27.
who like Gallio was a spectator of Riots and Injustice, yet cared for none of
those. The Judge therefore, that only admires the splendour of his Office, and
courts the Pomp, and Retinue of his Charge, the noise of his Duty, without
regard to the Lines of Justice, Laws of Equity, and proportions of Reason, dies
like Cleopatra, in beds of Roses, the sweetness and pleasure of his Office to
delight his Senses, yet forgets the Asp upon her breast the sting of Conscience
there. Every Man has numerous swarms of his own Sins, and may read large
Catalogues of his private Crimes, enough to put his Soul in a sweat and agony;
but Men of public capacities, to have the Sins of Cities and Villages, Nobles
and Plebeians, all where he reformed not nor distributed right, charged upon
their account, stands in need of the back of Angels, the brawny Consciences of
Fiends, the Lethargy and stipidity of the desperate to bear so great a load.
Sins and Crimes of People and Magistrates are correlatives as well as they, and
have been mutually charged upon another; and as there is in the body Natural,
so in the Politic too a Circulation of blood, and return of ill humors to
infest the head; the transgression of a People being scor'd upon the Supreme,
whose timidity and slackness in Reformation, has given birth and countenance
to many a Vice. He being called the Pater Patriae, has entailed his vices with
their subsequent Penalties and Judgments, as well as his Crown and Dignities
upon the People, or his Heir apparent. Divine anger and revenge, as well as
Sins and Diseases of impenitent Mortals run in the blood. Ezekiel. 13.28.
If the Magistrate therefore will be tender of Sin below, if he dread the
Crimes of others more than their Ghosts to haunt them in this lower World, if
he fear to be degraded, and become a Malefactor at an higher Bar, if he expect
the charge of his Five Cities to multiply into a larger power, let him draw the
Sword of Justice resolutely, and sheath it in the bowels of Sin.

Fourthly, Let him consider the great discouragement he gives to Virtue. The
Magistrate whose Office calls him the Scourge of Vice, the terror and
affrightment of all exorbitant actions, the Champion of Religion, and Patron of
all good Men; if he begin to dye Scarlet Sins of a faint complexion, and style
them Peccadillo's; if fearsul to strike, because the offense came from
greatness, or grandeur; or acquits a Criminal without his just and deserved
penalty, he turns the Protector of Vice, the oblique Persecutor of all virtuous
and brave actions, the Caterpillar of the Rose of Sharon, the only bane of
Religion. For while Men live in this vale of tears, and begirt with this mass
of flesh; and humor and passion are become half, if not the larger, part of
the Man, they sooner become Proselytes to Virtue from Rewards and Punishments,
then from Internal Principles, or a rational love: the Vail and Shrine
recommends Diana, while her beauty is invisible. So that in not inflicting due
Punishments upon Offenders, Virtue feels the smart which they deserve, and is
robbed of one of her methods to gain Professors, while Vice's Torment becomes
Virtue's Triumph, and commands our Love and Admiration. And therefore Cyrus
said well, Xenophon
(...). When good Men who do not always see by the light of Grace and Reason,
but through the Spectacles of Senfe and Fancy, see Vice discountenanced and
frowned upon, their appetites are whetted, and carry a keener edge, to
prosecute Virtue and Religion still, and advance its practice. Though he that
takes his Religion only upon the score of privileges and immunities, rewards
and praises that attend it, and no more, is but a Sales-man in Religion, and a
Mercenary in Devotion; or he that lives a virtuous life for fear of whipps and
lashes, the strokes of Justice and severity, that ought to be the companion of
his Vice, may be called God's slave, and not his servant; his vassal, not his
Son, the title of the pious.

Yet these may be good motives and arguments at 'first, but not the Principle
and Basis to bottom our Religion on. So that a remiss and timorous Magistrate
in deducting the due penalties from Vice, stifles Religion in the Cradle,
hinders that which might have been the first step to a regenerate life; many
have been scared and terrified into a Divine conversation, by the strange
dooms, and unexpected dismal providence, more than the dreams of Hell, that
have seized upon unrepenting Sinners. Virtue therefore throws her self at your
feet, Religion is your Supplicant, and all good Men cry for just and impartial
punishments upon, Sin and Vice. Twill augment the Seminaries of Virtue; 'Twill
weed out Vice, and lop off all luxuriant actions; 'Twill gloss upon your
Honor, and make your Sword shine the brighter.

Fifthly, Consider what ill example it will prove unto the World of returning
acts of injustice upon them that are unjust in their discharge. For the World
that loves revenge and retaliation of wrongs, will catch at all opportunities
of reflecting back the same, Amos 6.12
or greater injuries upon him which has been unjust before. When therefore
Rule degenerates into Tyranny, Righteousness into Hemlock, and Bribery, (or by
a softer name presenting) corrupts the streams of Justice, when right is
measured by proportion to their own Interest, and others behavior and carriage
toward them, The Crowns of Kings begin to totter, their Scepters shake like
Egyptian Reeds, and all sorts of Magistracy depend at will and uncertainty,
the Subject lying in wait to throw off the yoke of oppression, and disthrone
their Government; Anarchy with freedom, then Government with Injustice being
more grateful to the Multitude, the rabble which naturally sounds confusion.
For though Christianity, the Spirit of Christ did never (like his Antitype
Moses, Luke 9.54
) turn the Rivers into streams of blood, or call down Fire or Legions of the
Spirits above, to defeat his enemies; but commands us patience and a generous
temper with submission to unjust exactors: yet there is a passionate rage and
fury in the breasts of the unregenerate World, which being the larger number,
will soon pluck down a continual and habitual Injustice. But if experience of
all Kingdoms, and sayings of all politic heads, will not evince this truth,
16.10.
yet believe the wise King in his Proverbs. The Throne is established by
righteousness, and the dignity of all inferior Magistrates coucht under that
more general and splendid title. An uneven Justice like nourishment to the
body; distributed in unequal shares, makes some limbs Gigantick, and others
Dwarfish, and the whole body politic monstrous and prodigious, and becomes the
sooner ruined, being over weak to bear so great a load, like Goliah's shoulders
upon an Infants legs. This unequal dealing of Justice, and executions of Laws,
has called in question the institution of Magistracy, questioning its Family,
tearing its Commission from above, styling it only (...) a creature of Man's
formation, 1 Peter 2.13.
a mutable convenience and temporary interest, and a suitable obedience is paid
to its commands; not out of Conscience and Religion, but fear and usefulness:
Ephesians.6.6
and as these do change, so will their eye-service too into Rebellion. It Is
shame we should give still life to that aged Proverb which is the death and
bane of wholesome Laws, which makes them cobweb-Lawn, to catch and trapan the
little animal, but larger ones are above their force; as though weakness was
the only guilt, and strength was innocence. This has made the World believe,
that Laws and Equity, Justice and Right, are nothing else but strength and
Force, Might and Power; and think the same of them, that looser gallants of
Virtue and Religion, only the fancy of some brainsick Student, the contrivance
of a Conclave or Council Board, to reduce Fools and Madmen, and credulous
Subjects into aw. As though a tame Seal with an imaginary face of Eagles, or
Lions Rampant, the scar-crowns of Babes upon a piece of harmless wax affixt to
Parchment, the Coat only of some innocent Sheep, should drive away and terrify
their rank and rapacious appetites. Hobs.
This made the Leviathan say that the stare of Nature was a state of War, who
feasts and preys upon the smaller fry; Right and Possessions were only
resignations enforced by Might and Power; and the Man best armed, a Cap a pe
justitiary, like the Scales of a Leviathan, Daniel 7.
was clothed with the greatest Justice. Hence Beasts are well assigned the
Types and Hieroglyphics of Rule and Civil Polities; where the fiercest look,
the longest paw, and sharpest tooth shall call them Princes: the Lion is called
King of Beasts from these. If therefore you would put a hook into the nostril
of this Leviathan, if you would underprop the Thrones of King, and fix their
Crowns faster on their Heads, if you expect as it is due, Reverence and Honor
to be paid unto your Purples, if you would persuade the World it is Reason and
Religion, Conscience and Divinity commands, not Strength and force, a Fascis or
Securis, Swords and Rods, that Enact Laws, distribute evenly and impartially
Justice and Equity unto all.

This Proposition being so enforced, may be applied to two sorts, which carry
the great concern in Judicatures.

First, To those who are only to prepare Causes, Complaints and Defenses, 1 Samuel 31.4.
top ripen and mature for the Laws definitive Sentence; like Readiness
Armor-bearer, to deliver the Sword into the Judges hand for Execution. Because
Judgment and Justice must be given secundum allegata and probata, according as
things are well alleged, and fairly proved, they are as much to be reminded of
their duty, as he that passes the final Sentence. There is a numerous swarm of
Officers in Courts of Justice, which like Caterpillars, Flies and Gnats, and
other insects, only buzz and sting, raise reports and vex Men's names and quiet;
and like those of Egypt strive to over-cloud and darken Judgment. The World
has commenced in so high a degree of Sin, that some of its Sons can
out-swagger their own Conscience, Hector Religion, swear and depose any thing;
the old Greek Proverb fits their mouths, (...), Lend me Sir an Oath to day in
my action, I Will make restitution and swear for you to morrow. Some that love to
dress up a bad cause in the embroydery of Rhetoric, the Pictures and Shadows
of Oratory to pass for truth and reality; Some dilight to involve the truth
with seeming difficulties, and artificial perlexities; Some strive by Demurrs
and Procrastinations, like Fabius Maximus, Enniu^
not so much by truth and valor, as by delay, to win the Field; they seem to
lay Siege to Equity, and would starve out and impoverish an innocent Cause, by
having the fatter or deeper purse. By such occasions and pretensions they
endeavor to put out the eye of Justice, making it as blind in Reason, as it
ought to be in Affections; dint the Sword of Justice, cast a mist before the
Judges eye, that he might mistake a right definitive Sentence. And thus success
in Law shall not depend upon Right and Equity, but Chance and Fortune, Cross
and Pile for a Victory. Nothing has opened the jaws of the black-mouthed
World, to bespatter more the ingenuous study of the Law, than this, when the
Candidates and Professors of it, wresting and perverting (...) and end of
deciding Controversies, composing defferences, untying intricacies, and
distributing Right to all, bestow its force to buoy up a party and factions; to
befriend a relation, and oppose truth; to swell a Fee, and lessen Conscience,
and by art and skill in subtleties and cobweb-Lawns; to cast a blind; to
disguise an unjust Cause, to make it a prosperous and successful one; Who look
at this as the grand design, the Cause was ingeniously and wittily pleaded, and
as well rewarded; while Innocence and Right, that wanted a smooth Tongue, and
an open Hand, shut up by poverty, lost the day. And thus fetch up Law, and
seeming Reason, dressed up with de advantages of Rhetoric, and a confident
carriage, to destroy that Virtue whose Guardian and Patron it was first
designed. It Is sad, yet common, that he should be accounted a guilty person or
criminal, because he is only stoutly accused, and Rhetorically charged with
Vice; The World knows the Proverb too well, fortier acousa and aliquid
adhaerebit; strike home, and be sure a Scarr will remain, if the Wound be not
Mortal. For it is one of the dismal ills, and largest piece of Injustice in this
life, that if Innocence, and an unspotted name be once called in question, and
arraigned by passions and malice, though clearly quitted and well discharged,
ye jealousies and surmizes still keep their lodgings in cankerd and ill-natured
breasts, to which it holds up its hands, and is condemned to suffer the private
punishment of reproach and scandal. It Is sad, that when malice and jealousy,
peevishness and faction shall commence a suit, that wise Laws should be
prostituted by promoting and informing, bribery and a witty tongue, to carry on
so inhumane and barbarous design. It was thereofore well provided by the
Ancients, as the Roman and other Laws to witness, that the Accuser should first
depose before the Praetor before he put in his Libel, that he was free from all
malicious and calumnious intent. Hence the Magistrate had ever a Latitude
indulged to him, and a Power left him to go beside the letter of the Law, pressed
by a cross-grained and litigious nature, and follow the equity and intention of
it. They propounded therefore rewards for useful and necessary Informations,
and set Fines and Mulcts upon trivial, froward, and superficial ones. Hence the
Plaintiff and Defendant did mutually make a pledge or depositum, a certain sum,
if the cause was not well proved, and as fairly defended, and the punishment
designed for the accused party to return upon the Informer or Plaintiff, if
once it did appear Malice or Envy had drawn up the Charge. These, and many
more, with the Consent and Reason of all good Men, showed their just severity
and indignation against Sycophants and bribed Orators, raising debates, de
Lanacirc; Caprina, about Air and Moonshine out of passion and malice, catching
at niceties and letters, to degrade the gravity of the Law, and cast contempt
upon so well and designed functions. These, like other Malefactors and
Criminals, deserve as just, if not a larger punishment; the one robbing but the
Lives and Fortunes of single Men, but these commit a Rape, and murder the Law,
the defense of all Societies, and Mankind too.

Secondly, To the Magistrate or Judge, from whom all Determinations and final
Sentences, the result and conclusion of all former Oaths and Attestations must
come. Whose Authority being signed with the broad Seal of Heaven, his
Commission from the Throne of God, and a Sword put into his Hands, he must not
let it sleep in the Scabbard, or make false flourishes, or only be an ornament
by his side; but must draw it with a resolute Hand, an impartial and
unconcerned Spirit, for execution upon Sin and Vice. We live in the latter
times, 2 Timothy 3.1
in a confident and presumptuous age, when Vice has gotten a steeded brow,
when Wickedness is become Gentile and Fashionable, Licentiousness counted
Modish Education, the scurrilous and Blasphemous Droll cried up the ingenuous
and witty Man, and well disguised Fraud and Faction esteemed the Politic head;
and these must be dealt withal as Caesar did with the Roman Senate, Florus.
if his request with their free choice would not create him Consul, his Sword
should give the casting voice for his Election. If Principles of Virtue, Reason
and Religion, will not reclaim the debauched and sturdy World, Laws and
Penalties from the Secular arm must drive and beat the World into Obedience.
The Magistrate then acting like that God he represents, who first displays the
lightening of his Love and Charity, to melt the soft and pliable Soul, and then
discharges the Thunder of his Justice to rend and tear impenitent Sinners. And
thus reforming the unregenerate World, and advancing Righteousness and
Religion, your Secular Sword turns into that of the Spirit, Psalm. 106.30.
and like Phinehas you execute Judgment, or Pray at the same time. Your
Commission being given and made your Duty, all sorts and Files of injured Men
may not only petition and beg, but command your Justice and a free access for
all. The poor that walks in rags, and dwells in smoking Cottages, may
confidently come unconcerned upon the Equity of his Cause. Greatness and Riches
here are false Topics to prove the goodness of a Cause, Revenues and
Possessions are too scant to measure the innocence of the Man, no more than by
the shadow of the Body you can take the height of a Soul or Mind. The Souls of
rich and poor are Jewels of an equal luster, the one is only better set, and
enameled in more flourishing estate, the other rough and unpolisht; yet they
must be valued not so much for their accidental glosses, as their natural
beauty. Noble and Plebeian Souls have the Divine Image equally enstampt upon
them; the one only is set in a more gilded frame, a more splendid condition:
yet we respect the Picture for its strokes and proper features common to both
from God the Carver of Souls; and Caesar's Image commands regard, whether in
Gold or Brass, or courser mettle. The helpless Widow and destitute Orphan may
smile at such a Tribunal, where their potent adversary, with his swelling
pride, and large retinue, must be looked upon with a disinterested and
impartial eye; the Judge is deputed the Orphan's Father, and the Widdow's
Husband to redress their wrongs. The ignorant and homespun Man that dreads the
Sophisms of Law and great appearances, may call for the Magistrate to be
Spectacles for his blear'd eye, Crutches for his decrepit and dejected
faculties, who must be knowing to make him just. Oculus in Sceptro, the
Egyptian Hieroglyphick, bespoke the duty of a Ruler, the eye of knowledge upon
his Scepter, least the brightness of the Crown upbraided and insulted over the
dullness of the head that wore it. An ignorant Magistrate represent the blind
Man steering at the Helm by the Polar Star he yet never saw; the Pilot then
must needs turn Pirate, and sink the Ship of Government. The Magistrate would
do well like the Philosopher, to put out the eye of Sense and Affection, to see
the clearer by the light of Reason. The stranger or alien Turk or Fagan need
not be jealous of Friends and Favorites, and different persuasions; at Altars
and Tribunals relations cease, Religion and Conscience must know no Father or
Mother. If once Tribunals were so adorned, We should recover the times that are
past, and restore the Judges as of old, when Reason and Religion, Justice and
Equity, Conscience, and an eye to God kept the Chair, and Virtues were the only
steps by which they did ascend, and sat in the Gates, Deuteronomy. 22.15.
and gave free invitation for all; and all good Men, and just Societies might
triumph in the same strain with old Rome at the choice of Numa, (...). Plutarch
. When Kings and Judges are virtuous and knowing too, their People receive a
King and a Kingdom both. What then remains, but to draw and use this Sword with
a steady and impartial hand, regardless of others frowns or smiles, or any
small events that may attend your Charge, unbyassed to Sects and Parties, 1
Kings 22.31.
Qualities and Conditions, fight against none but Sin and Wickendness, Lewdness
and confident Vice; this will call you truly Man, and God's Deputy; This will
style you Saint, and advance your Temporal Chair into a Spiritual one, 1 Cor.
6.7.
to Judge in the other World at the period of this; This will make you Heir
apparent to the Character of a Faithful Steward, and the Rewards of Immortality
with the Blessed Jesus, to whom be Honor and Glory, both now and for ever,
Amen.

FINIS.

