King David's Sanctuary, OR A SERMON Preached before His MAJESTY the fourth of
Febr: 1643. at Christ-Church in OXFORD:

By RICHARD HARWOOD Master of Arts.

Psalm. 108.10, 11, 12. Who will bring me into the strong city? who will lead me
into Euom?

Wilt not thou, O God, who have cast us off? and wilt not thou, O God, go forth
with our hosts?

Give us help from troubles for vain is the help of man.

OXFORD, Printed for H. Hall and W. Webb. 1644.

TO THE HIGH AND MOST ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE CHARLES, PRINCE OF WALES, DUKE OF
CORNWALL, and Earl of CHESTER.
SIR,
BEsides the Honor your Highness has done the Truth, by casting so early an
eye upon Her, though in the plainest dress: You have given a Happy Omen to
this Nation, that the True Religion, which is now trampled under foot by
Heresy, and Schism, has yet Messem in Herba, and is Revirescent in your
tender years. As Theodosius the Emperor, after the Apostolical Faith had
been long buried by the Arians, Soc. Eccl. hist. l. 5 (...) 6.
erected a Church in Constantinople, and christened it(...) the Resurrection:
So by your timely Patronage of the Truth, You have raised our Hopes into a
Confidence, that we shall yet see a Resurrection: when the Kings Crown shall
rise the Brighter out of these Flames; and the Dry bones of Learning and
Religion, live, and stand, in Your sight. For by commanding this Sermon to the
press, ( Though I must say to Your Highness, as Tully to Brutus, Quamvis
Placebam, nihil feci, quod placeret: It being like Martial's Fly, of no Worth
in it self, but only for the Amber and Grace You have cast about it:) You
have already insome part, They have made lies their refuge, and under falsehood
hid themselves. Isai. 28.15.
not only vindicated the Kings Honor, and Your own Spotless Innocence from
the Blasphemies of those, who have made Lies a refuge: (For he that pleases to
read, may here behold the liberty and boldness, we are still allowed against
the Romanists, Even in the presence of our King, His Posterity, and the whole
Counsel,) But also confirmed the Faith of this Kingdom, that according to the
Unparalleled Example of Your Royal Father, you will be a Constant Defender of
the Protestant Faith, you have received from a Religious Education, To the
glory of God, the future Tranquillity of these Kingdoms, and your own
Immortal Honor, which is the prayer of

Your HIGHNESS Truly devoted, but most humble Servant, RICHARD HARWOOD.

King DAVID'S Sanctuary.
PSALM. 73.25. Whom have I in Heaven, but thee, O Lord? and there is none upon
earth, that I desire besides thee.


AMong the books of Canonical Scripture, there is but one styled the book of
the Preacher: not as if our doctrine should all be confined to Ecclesiastes,
Proloq. in Ecclesiast.
but as Gregory Nyssen,(...) etc. because it is a choice Tract of
Ecclesiastical policy, and no Text more fit for the Preachers study, or the
Peoples practice, then the vanity of the creature, and the immortality of the
creator. For since the soul of man is restless, and unquiet out of its
center, and the whole world is but a wide circumference. since like the needle
in the compass, she has a natural trembling to the fruition of happiness,
and this temporal, as Basil truly, Basil. in Psalm. 61.
(...) steals along by it, as an impetuous stream rowles by the banks, (and
who can aim steedily at a moving mark?) The Prophet here is a true
Ecelesiastes, if he draw you a right line to the immovable center, and direct
the quaking soul to its true pole, God himself. For having coasted the whole
world in his thoughts for a resting place, with Noah's Dove, he returns again
into the Arc with this Olive branch in his mouth, Non est Mortale, quod opto.
He finds no sanctuary, but in heaven, no safe repose, but in the Almighty:
Whom have I in Heaven, but thee, O Lord? and there is none upon Earth, that I
desire besides thee.

In this verse King David seems to be placed, as Augustus once fancyed
himself, inter suspiria and lachrimas, between sighs, and tears: yet he
looks cheerfully up to Heaven, fetching comfort thence in the full assurance
of the divine favor. And because it is musical, I shall once more crave leave
to follow the allegory, please you to observe

The Disposition of the parts And Opposition of the notes, in both.

First, The Disposition of the parts, and those are Acutum, and grave, High,
and Low.

High, in a passionate expostulation. Whom have I in Heaven, but thee, O Lord?

Low, in a deliberate resolution. There is none upon Earth, that I desire
besides thee.

I. In the expostulation you have 3 notes.

1. Quem in coelis. Whom in Heaven, whilst others lay up their treasures on
earth, in heaven my exchecquer, in heaven my treasury. 2. Quem praeter te? Whom
have I there, but thee, O Lord? God alone is a Christians portion: he is truly
possessed of nothing, but the Deity. 3. Quis mihi, according to the hebrew,
(...)
who is for me? who pleades my cause in heaven? not any Saint, or Angel, but
thou O Lord, thou art my redeemer, thou my advocate: which makes the question
past all question, I have none in heaven, but thee, O Lord.
II. The resolution. There is none that I desire on Earth besides thee. Et
tecum non. (...)
The negation is Personal, no man for his favor, Real, no creature for its
excellency, that I desire with thee: the treasures of the earth are but gilded
poverty: the favor of a Prince, but a gracious snare without thee: give me thy
blessed self, and what can this earth add to my happiness? that I may in the
next live for ever with thee, Lord, let me never live in the present world
without thee; For, non est in terris, there is nothing on earth, that I desire,
but thee.

Secondly. The Opposition or distinction of the notes in both parts. For as
Synesius in his panegyricall oration, (...) in their discord is a most sweet
harmony. The opposition appears 1. In the order of the places. In King David's
thoughts, Heaven takes praecedency of the earth; Whom have I in Heaven? that is
his first care: then, desire on earth, follows after. It Is honor enough, for
this vile earth to wait upon Heaven. 2. In the sense of the Verbes, Habeo, and
Desideravi; Habeo in Coelis, Have in heaven, Desideravi in terris; only desire
on earth. Here we tire our selves with a restles coveteousnesse, wandering
through the whole creation, but finding no satisfaction: yet what we crave on
earth, we are sure to have in heaven: there our desires shall be satisfied with
fruition, and though some vessels may contain more then other, yet every one
shall be full, no vacuity, no want in any. 3. In the diversity of the
praepositions. The hebrew (...) and Calvin's Praeter. Nothing with, nothing
besides thee, that I desire: this is the true Ela, the highest streine in the
Song.
Canticordium, a song for no other instrument, but the heart: that is the
Psaltery King David sings to: and as Basil observes of the material, Basil
in Psalm. 1.
(...) that they use to play upon it above, not below, as in the Harp and
Violl: so in this spiritual Psaltery, the Heart, we shall strike the upper
strings, the understanding, will, and affections, (...) that so our souls may
ascend, and in every note of the song, seem to rise a degree nearer heaven.
That Is the first, which presents it self to your attention, Quem in caelis,
Whom have I in heaven; whilst others lay up their treasures on earth, In heaven
my exchequer, in heaven my treasury.

Christianity is but a kind of religious Astronomy, 1. Quem in Cales.
the contemplation and study of heaven. No Geometry, or measuring the earth in
a Christians Mathematics, unless it be, that his soul may the more easily
take footing into heaven. When the Rabbis take Shamajim, the word for heaven
in pieces, they find it composed of esch and maijm, fire and water, not a jot
of earth in it: The very creation of the Heavens instructing our thoughts
should be advanced above the earth: Menass. Ben Isr. 9.30. in genesis
that has the lowest place in nature, made, but to be trampled on.

Some Principles there be, that lay a foundation to every Science: Let your
conversation be in heaven, is the chiefest in Christianity. Philip. 3. v.20.
As the Stars move in their several orbs, and the planets in their cycles,
and epicycles observe a kind of orderly wandering: so a Christians sphaere is
above, in Heaven, there he performs all his regular motions:(...), the
original word is, let your civil commerce be in heaven. For are we not all
Merchant adventurers for happiness? Does not every man desire to deal in that
rich commodity? and where shall we find it, but in the new Jerusalem? The
Artist has made it a very long voyage, I. h. de sae. Bos. de Sphaera.
who curiously calculating the distance from earth to heaven, finds it to be
five hundred years journey, but the Christian has a nearer way to it: he can
step to heaven in a pious glaunce; finish this five hundred years journey in a
meditation of but an hour long: venture alms and prayers, and have a return
in a day: nay whilst we are but furnishing the Ship for Heaven, our faith, and
affections but on the Shore, not yet launch't into the deep, God many times
prevents our desires and sends us in a rich prize of blessings. No such gain,
as by trading to heaven.

But not to move the note off its rule; when we say our Pater noster, (though
it be almost out of use now adays, our extemporary mouths prizing more their
whining nonsense, yet when we say it) we tune this note to our selves: Our
father which art in heaven, and why not as well, which art on earth? but that
he would confine our thoughts to that place, where all happiness is confined.
Earth? Why, it is the mother of corruption; fit for nothing, but to make graves
of: if you dote upon it, yea quite change our Liturgy, and commit your souls
to the ground, earth to earth, ashes to ashes, dust to dust, but with no sure
and certain hope of a resurrection to eternal life. In the 6 Chapter of
Isaiah, the Cherubims cover their feet with a pair of wings, Ne terram
contingerent, Calvin. in 6. cap. Isai.
lest they should once touch the earth, and contract any pollution from it. Quo
admonentur, says Calvin, to give us notice, that we shall never have any
commerce with Angels, till we forsake our acquaintance with the world. It Is S.
Ambrose upon those words of Matthew, Matt. 7.16.
do men gather grapes of thorns? that the soul, and the grape do so
correspond in their nature, that as the bunches next the earth corrupt, whilst
those above ripen: so (...) as Nazianzens phrase is, the soul that creepes
upon the ground does rot, and putrify, when that which springs upwards is
immortal. Indeed our primitive soil is the earth: the soul was first planted
in a body of clay, as a diamond some times may be set in lead: yet as Pliny
said of Roses, that they loose not their virtue by transplantation, Lib. 2.
not. hist. ^^^^.
but increase it. Oderatiores, they are more odoriferous, and pleasant, so did
we transplant our souls into heaven, they would be more sweet and fragrant,
whilst now they stink, and smell of the earth.

But let me not here play the Jesuit with you, persuading you to abjure
worldly happiness, that our own tribe might ingrosse it, (though some deal
worse with us, whowould reform the Church into a religious beggar, condemning
us all to a laborious penury, only to bring her revenues to their own
coffers) we equally detest a voluntary mendicant, and a golden Idolater.
Wilful poverty is a Stoicall dullness, and the adoration of mammon a most
stupid Idolatry. Mundu^ munde, use we may, but not adore the creature, command
the world, as a servant, not serve it as a Commander. We may look upon this
fair picture as the work of God, not worship it for a God; like the foolish
Egyptians that were so enamoured with the picture of Bucephalus, that they
esteemed it a Deity.

Yet how many Shrines and Altars are erected in men's hearts to this great
Idol, the world? Most men scarce acknowledge any other God, but this golden
Calfe, to which they perform their servile devotions. Herodot, lib. 5.
Terpsie. (...).
As Herodotus said of Onefilus his head, that it was empty of brain, filled
only with honey combs, so our hearts are void of the thoughts of Heaven,
replenished only with the vanities of the world. Should I mispend time, to
represent unto you the actions of men, I should find them so opposite to
heaven, Plutarch.
as if they had consulted with Brutus his Oracle, which required him Osculari
terram, even to kiss and embrace the earth.

But Heaven is a fairer object for our meditations. Did we but cast up an eye
to our future hopes, how meanly should we esteem our present fortunes. All our
happiness here stands on a rolling stone, but if we fix it in Heaven it is
everlasting, and permanent. Plutarch.
Empedocles being asked C^r viveret, why he desired to live in this miserable
world? replied, ut coelum aspicerem, only to contemplate Heaven.

When I behold but the Pavement of Heaven stuck with Stars, as so many
sparkeling Diamonds, how despicableis the statelyest palace of the greatest
Monarch: and if the very pavement be so glorious, what shall we think of those
better parts yet unseene? Bernard.
Magnum and mirabile sub tanta majestace. When I consider the eternal joys of
that place, how heartlesse, and dying are the best of earthly pleasures! It Is a
very Turkish heaven, that is composed of nothing, but your temporal delights:
Aug.
a Christians is above, made of pure, everlasting bliss. But Saint Hierom's
Ghost strikes me dumb in this point, who departing in Bethlehem, hasted to
Hippo, where Augustine was Bishop, and then studying the joys of heaven, and
interrupted his meditations with this question, Quid quaeris brevi immittere
vasculo totum mare? Why do thou endeavor to contract the Ocean in a
thimble? or to draw eternity within the narrow limits of time? The fading
honor of this world! It Is but a popular breath, the butt of envy, or what is
worse, too often the stage of treason, and revenge: in heaven, it is in triumph,
above the reach of malice, or oblivion. The Dying life we live here! it is a
lamp that must out, a shadow that will vanish, a grass that shall wither: in
heaven, it is lengthened into eternity, beyond the threats of mortality or
corruption. The sinful company we enjoy in this life! It Is a mixture of virtue
and vice, gold, and dross, wheat and tares, in heaven, the society of Saints
and Angels: yea the beatificall vision of God himself. O King of glory, it is
the revelation of thy royal presence, that makes heaven to be it self! as we
use to say, Ubi imperator, ibi Roma: Where the King is, there is London: his
presence creates a metropolis of any place: which leads your attentions from
Quem in coelis? to Quem praeter te? The second note in the song. Whom have I in
heaven, but thee O Lord? thou my portion, thou my riches.

Divitiae parents sunt absurditatis, says a Father, 2 Quem prater te.
worldly happiness is the parent of absurdity: for what more incongruous, then
to forsake the glory of the creator, for the vanity of the creature? This were
(...) in Synesius opinion, In epist. ad Pylens. Plin. l. 12. not. hist.
to exchange gold for brass, or with those people in Pliny, tributum pro
umbra, to pay tribute for a shadow. Alas, we creatures need not one another, so
long long as we are possessed of thee, O Lord. Ambros.
Cui portio Deus est, totius possessor est naturae; He is Lord of the whole
universe, that is but possessed of God himself. And how unsatiable art thou, O
man, whom God cannot satisfye? What does thy religious avarice determine thy
desires to? name it what thou will: think what thou can; nay, think once a
miracle, what thou can not think; yet this shall thou find in the
all-sufficient God. Arist. in Morral.
(...), says Aristotle by the light of nature, the Deity is in all things, and
all things in it. 'Twas Saint Cyprians wonder, Deum solis nobis, that God
esteems us enough for him, nobis non sufficere Deum; and yet we think not God
a sufficient boon for us. Quid avarius co, cui Deus non sufficit, cui insunt
omnia? What so coveteous as he, that is not satisfied with God, who is a
monopoly of all things? It Is the ambition of every man's coverteousnesse, to
reach after the greatest, and most lasting fortune he can; but can your desires
compass a larger inheritance then Immensity? can your Lawyer draw you a firmer
conveyance, or give you a surer tenure then Immutability? can you take a lease
for a longer term of years then Aeternity? Let Saint Augustine speak,
Quantum libet sis avarus, sufficit tibi Deus, be as coveteous as thou can,
yet God is enough for thee. He is an immense, immutable, aeternall inheritance.
Avaritia terram quaerit, add and coelum, Avarice carries thy desires upon the
earth, but to make thy fortune complete, add heaven to thy desire. Nay,
would thou have this world, and the next too? Plus, est qui fecit coelum, et
terram; He that made heaven and earth is more then both. Who so rich as he,
whose maker is his Wealth? Who so fortunate, as he that enjoyes him, who
enjoyes all things? Aug. manuale c. 34.
Qui hoc bono fruitur, quid illi erit, im o quid non erit? he that possesses
this good, what will it be, nay, what will it not be unto him?

I have here discovered a Mine: opened a Treasure to you: (and certainly in
these times of public necessity, it cannot be an unwelcome message: Ambros.
Ser. 8. in Psalm. 118.
) In te Deo est ampla possessio. In God alone is the most ample possession: as
the greatest abundance without him is extreme poverty, so the most extreme
poverty with him is the greatest abundance. Omnis mihi copia, quae Deus meus
non est, egestas est, says Bernard: all my wealth, which is not my God, is
down right penury, Dominus pars haereditatis, the Lord is the part of my
inheritance. David esteems not that an inheritance, whereof God is not a part.
Ps. 16. v.5. Menath, (...)
the Principal part, Heaven it self being but a poor fortune without him.
The Romans were wont to say, 'twas good looking in a Map, ubi nihil alienum
videmus, if all they beheld in it were their own: I have here drawn you to a
Map, wherein, were there as many Worlds as Epicurus dreamed of, All Is yours, if
you make but God your own. O let us advance our thoughts from the creature to
the creator, the mine is in heaven, 1 Samuel 1.1.
the treasure above: every Christian should be an Elcanah, that is, by
interpretation, a possessour of God: else he is no Christian, but an Atheist.

My coveteous heart! why do thou vex thy self with restless thoughts for
this world? let them look after earth, that have no right to heaven. God is a
Christians patrimony, and what penury of gold, when thou have the mine? What
want of water at the spring head? can he complain the lack of any thing, that
is possessed of the Lord of all things? a bottomless coveteousnesse, which the
Author of all things cannot content!.

My ambitious spirit! why do thou breath after greatness and honor? If God
be not in thy preferments, thou art advanced, but upon a pinnacle, which gives
an advantage to thy more ruinous downfall. All true honor is derived from
heaven, there are Joh. 14.2.
many mansions; places of honor. A 1. Pet. 5.4.
Crown of glory, the ornament of Revela. 7.11.
Saints and Angels, attendants of honor. Mat. 24.35. Romans 2. Been speremus de
eo, in quo aliquid Des cernimus. Calvin
A Kingdom, the support of honor. A Luciferian ambition, that is not
satisfied with the glory, honor and immortality above, But once more: My
despairing anxious soul, why art thou cast down, why disquieted within me?
Let not thy hope sink, so long as thou see the least ray of the Deity.
Though thou beholdest our King dishonored, our religion martyred, our fortunes
ruined, and whatsoever is dear unto us in this world threatened with
destruction: Nunquid tibi Deum? says Angustine, yet they cannot rob us of our
God, keep we our interest in him, and we have yet a Treasure inexhaustible, an
Army invincible, a Castle impregnable: a Treasure, an Army, a Castle, All in
our God. what would you have? if Peace again, he is Deus pacis. If more power,
he is Dominus exercituum. Psalm. 144. v.10.
If Victory, It is he that gives victory to Kings, and delivers David his
servant from the peril of the sword, Peace, Power, Victory, All from our God.
Ask no more, who will show us any good? Psalm. 4.6.
but Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us. For he alone can
be all these to us, who now begs all these for us: our partrimony, on earth,
our patron in heaven; which brings me from Quem praeter te? to Quis mihi? who
pleads for me? not any Saint or Angel; but thou O Lord: thou art my redeemer;
thou my advocate.

Whom but thee. 3. Quis mihi.
why? Is the new Jerusalem become desolate? what use of many mansions, if no
inhabitants there? Or if inhabited, why but thee, O Lord? Can God be solitary
among so many regiments of Cherubims and Seraphims? or has David never a
friend in that Army of Martyrs, to usher his prayers to the Allmighties care?
were the Court of heaven like a Kings on earth, Exam. decret. council.
Tridentini part. 3. loc. de Invoc. Sanct. 13.
many might conclude, as the man in Chemnitius hearing a Bishop on this
subject, Tunc simpliciter actum and conclamatum nobiscum: or at least despair
of a gracious answer, that have no friend at Court. But the Almighties care is
not confined to a privy chamber: he that would speak with God needs not bribe
any Saint or Angel to be his Sollicitour, a creature so base, and servile on
earth, that the heavens scorn the use of him: the finitude of the Kings
presence requires an officer of state, to state our requests to His Majesty,
but the ubiquity of God needs not the flattery of a creatures mediation. His
ear is omnipresent, as his essence. Itur ad reges per tribunos, a tribune, or
Lord must open the door for a petition to the King: Ambros. in Romans 6.1.
ad Deum suffragatore non opus est, sed mente devota, To speak with God, we
need no other Key, but a devout heart: this unlocks the heavens, and presents
the suite to the Kings own hands.

Indeed mediation supposes a quarrel. (for it is scarce sense to say, I will
reconcile friends:) had God and man never fallen our, there had been no use of
a Mediator, but now we all bend our knees to an offended justice, and might
despair of mercy for ever, unless as Themistocles once to the King of
Molossy, we present our requests under the protection of the Kings only son:
Plut. Mor.
(...), the most prevalent kind of supplication. If Manoah offer sacrifice,
Exodus 25. v.16. Genesis 27. v.27: Judge. 13.20.
this Angel must open heaven for it. If Moses ascend to God, he must be
covered with this cloud. If Jacob would obtain the blessing, He must enter in
the garments of this elder brother. Ephesians. 3. v.12:
(...), by him alone our persons have admission into the royal presence of the
Allmighty.

But, Quis praeter te? is no antheme for the Popes quire, who allows as many
mediators, as he has Canonized Saints. Though he fill his Calendar from
Tyburne, Masters of requests he will have for all necessities. Saint Geogre for
the field, and (to open the roll no farther) Saint Gregory for the Schools.
Yea as great a turn of State, or if you will. reformation you have in heaven,
as we now fear on earth: Christ is put out of his office, and Saint Francis
stepped into the mediatour-ship; the Church of Rome being therein as bold with
the King of heaven, Anselm l'de excellentia Virg. Bonavint, in Spec. c. 8.
Mendoz. in 1. lib. Reg. c. 4. n. 11. An. 12. Sect. 1.
as some are with our King on earth: not only to counterfeit the Great Seal
in the Sacraments, but to deny him the choice of his own officers. Nay, they
have given away half the Kingdom, that of Mercy to the Virgin Mary (so free
are they of the divine prerogative:) allowing God himself but the dreadful
tribunal of Justice, of purpose to draw all suitors to her Court.

Ambr. in 1. cap. ad Romans Aug. l. 8. de civil Dei prolixe.
A Platonicke superstition, that has too many gray hairs upon it, to survive
to this age of the Gospel! for either the Jesuit does Platonize, or Plato did
Jesuitize, when he first sent abroad his Deos intermedios. A sacrilegious
religion, to rob the very Deity, they worship, of his honor! An impious piety,
ot degrade our high Priest of that honorable title, he has purchased with his
blood! How do they defloure the memory of the blessed Virgin, whilst they
force her loyal Spirit into the Throne of God, there to dispense those Acts of
grace, which are in the sole power of the King of Kings? 'twere too ridiculous
to hear Francisco del campo at his thanksgiving, that he swam over a river
with his arms, a Sculler that never before tried the waters, yet made very
nimble, and kept to the true stroke by the help of our Lady: When (though
necessity has wrought greater miracles,) a spaniell shall do more without
imploring the Virgins ay de. A Pure Virgin she is still, for any violence the
Church of England ever offered her, which has always given her Due honor,
but not Adoration. 1. Tim. 2. 5^
Habemus legem, We have a Salicke law in Scripture, that will not allow of any
Queen Regent in heaven. Christ called her Woman who was his mother, that we
might not esteem her a Goddess, who was but a Woman She may desire our
salvation, but cannot bestow it. Wish us well in heaven, yet not know, much
less relieve our wants on earth. Ignorance of our misery is some part of the
Saints happiness, As Saint Hierome reads the Epitaph on Nepotians tomb,
Foelix Nepotianus, qui nec videt, nec audit haec omnia, happy Nepotian, who
neither sees, nor hears the sinful affairs of this world.

But their own Schoolmen have fancied the Deity, Abulensir. Durandus. Cajetan.
All transparent: and as the bright Opall presents to the eye the various
colors of all precious stones; so the Saints have a clear sight of all
affairs in the world, if they cast but a look on the divine essence. Indeed
the whole world is resplendent in the Deity, yet by no means do we make it a
looking-glass for the Saints curiosity. For either their vision is unlimited,
and penetrating unto all things, or else restrained to Gods pleasure, as he
shall open or shut the veil to them.

If unlimited, then the knowledge of a Saint must be as infinite as the divine:
not a mystery of State, not a record written in that great diary of the world,
the Mind of God, from the beginning, but must be published to the creatures
view. All there must be of Gods Cabinet counsel, and nothing kept secret in
that Kingdom: Things past, present, and future: the very thoughts of our
hearts, the knowledge whereof has ever yet been Gods peculiar: Yea that Arcanum
Dei, the day of indgement, which our Savior protests, no man knows, not the
Angels in heaven, no, not the Son of man, Every Saint would behold in this
Crystal.

If their knowledge be confined to his will, as he shall please to draw the
curteine aside, more or less to them, since the Scripture assures me not,
that God has, or will discover my necessities, how absurdly must I fall upon
my knees, to beseech God to reveal that to my Saint, which I first prayed my
Saint to reveal to God? This were to mediate for my Mediator, as Saint
Augustine once scoffed at Apllo, Lib^^ decir. Dei.
Interpres Deorum eget interpret, the interpreter of the Gods must speak by
an interpreter himself.

May we not then be so unwise, as to go from the living fountain, to the
broken cisternes for the water of life; from the bright sun to the languid
beams for the light of knowledge; from our powerful King to the impotent
Subjects for the Crown of glory? We acknowledge no Mediator, but our
Redeemer. He is not worthy the name of an Intercessour, that has not his
garments dyed in blood.

Christ alone is the Center, where God and man must, if ever, mere friends;
and why should we range about the circumference? Chemnit exam. council. T^id. de
invoc. Sanctor.
Sarcerius relates how that George Duke of Saxony, lying upon his deathbed,
and the Monks striving who should commend the most propitious Saint to his
devotion, one of his Nobles told him, In publicis negotiis, In matters of
State, your highness always used this Proverb, Rect a sine ambagibus
progredi, Viam esse maxim compendiariam: to proceed without deviations was the
most compendious method; And in a business of so high concernement as your
eternal felicity, will you fetch a compass to it, and not rather go directly
to Christ, in whose power are the keys of life, and death? can you think,
that he, who breathed out his soul on the cross for us, will spare any breath
to plead our cause in heaven? that he who poured out his precious heart blood
for our redemption, will not also pour out hearty prayers for salvation? Never
doubt of your cause, so long as you have such an Advocate, a Jesus in heaven.
With what boldness may we address our selves to the throne of grace, when he
that is sued unto, is easy to be entreated, Pater, non Judex, a Father, not a
Judge? he that petitions for us, is gracious to prevail, Filius, non
peregrinus, an only Son, not a Stranger? Et quando pater a filio, Deus
avertetur a Christo, and how can a father deny his son, Prosper.
God his Christ, when he shall supplicate with strong cries and tears? Heb. 5,
7. When all the Saints in heaven shall sit with cheerful, and dry eyes, and
he alone show the frailty of a man to move compassion for us: Nay, when he
shall come before him, Heb. 12. v.24.
with that Rhetorical blood of sprinkling, that speaks better things then the
blood of Abell: when the wounds he received on earth shall beco^e orators for
us in heaven, Quot vulnera, tot ora, each wound being a mouth to beg mercy for
us. Saint Ambrose can hold no longer, but cries out O Domine Jesu, Amb l. de
interpell. 4. c. 12.
tu portio mea, etc. O Lord Jesus, thou art my portion, a bounding to me in
all things, whom because I have in heaven, I desire nothing else on earth.
which brings me from the Expostulation to the pious Resolution, the second
part of the song, There is none upon earth that I desire besides thee.

Lo chaphasti, (...)
None that I desire, love, trust, or delight in. All in tha word, and because
Unisons all, I shall tune them together.

The procession of the creatures from the Creator is like a ray shot from the
body of the Sun, 3. The Resolution.
which is weakened, and spent by extension, and has no way to recover it
strength or vigor, but by reflection on the point, that first sent it forth,
even God himself. In Plato our desires are styled, Vela animi, the sails of
the mind, because in this life, the soul is tossed in an unconstant motion;
she has no security, till she hoist sail for heaven, no haven of peace, but
in the Deity. It Is a Rabbinicall observation, that all the letters in Gods name
Ichovah are quiescent, preaching unto us, that Quies animae, Drus. q. heb.
the souls rest is in God alone. For in God there is such a confluence of
goodness, such a quintessence of perfection, that the soul of man cannot
desire, with what it may not be satisfied, from the bounty of his fullness. As
Origin said of the Israelites Manna that it answered every man's taste, even the
most curious courtlike palate: so there are such infinite delicacies in the
deity, that there cannot rise an appetite in the longing soul, that may not
be satiated with his plenty. Philosophy ranks our desires into those of the
Understanding, after truth: of the Will, after virtue: and of the Affections,
after felicity. Now, to all these God is a full satisfaction: to the
intellectual, with his infinite wisdom: to the voluntary, with his
transcendent goodness: to the affective, with his eternal glory and if the
senses can desire, Origin says, he is singul Can^. ^^.30.
singulis, a most pleasing object to every sense. Beauty for the eye, music
for the ear, Joh. 6.48.53.
bread for life for the taste, Cant 1. v.2.
a perfume to delight the smell, and Joh. 20.24. Hom 1. in cant.
flesh for the incredulous touch: but why do we look on these objects at the
wrong end of the glass? what we call beauty is indeed deity, music felicity,
life eternity, sweetness perfection, perfection essence, essence! what shall
I say? Honors, riches, peace? I am too short yet, All things. how should this
inflame our love to God, who like another Proteus (as I may say) converts
himself into all forms and natures to please the covetous heart of man.

He that seeks contentment in any created good, lays a foundation in the
moving air: for when the figure of the great Empires were represented to
Zachary in a vision, Zechar. 6. V.5.
the Angel told him, isti sunt quatuor venti, those are but the 4 winds, Wind
all, and it is strange, me thinks, men should repose themselves on the wings of
the wind. Sure, had God intended we should have rested our desires on this
world, he would have provided a better foundation for it, but Mundum fundavit
super nibil, says Job, (...) Super non quid, cap. 26. v. 7.
he has founded the world upon nothing, A very tottering foundation, ut
universus mundus fundaretur super seipsum, that the whole world might settle,
and repose it self on God alone. Riches themselves, the worlds great Diana,
are styled, but the goods of Fortune; the hypocrisy of their nature being
signified by the false deity that protects them, or if you will accept of the
ordinary gloss, it is by mere fortune, a great chance that riches are good
for any thing. Were there any substance in them, sure the greatest fortune
would not be attended with least content: but, (the vanity of their nature!)
To the largest possessions, as to an imperfect tract, we must always write
Desiderantur nonulla. Charles the fifth had for his Motto, Ulterius: we must
borrow the word of him for when we have searched over all the treasures, and
delights of the world for contentment, we must conclude with an Vlterius,
something further is to be sought for yet: there is no non ultra to our
desires, Aug. med.
but the all sufficient God.

Wherefore in this point let Saint Augustine be your Orator, Quaere unum honum
in quo sunt omnia bona, and sufficit. Seek but that one good, in which is all
good, and it is enough. Why should we trouble our selves to collect the rays,
when we may enjoy the Sun? to catch a drop of water, when the Ocean's ours? to
seek for the dust, and fragments, when we may have the whole Diamond? never
let St Salvians complaint be reversed upon us, L. 5. de guber. Des.
omnia amamus, omnia colimus, solus Deus in comparatione omnium vilis habetur.
We love all things, we honor all things, only God in comparison of all is
esteemed vile by us: If beauty be the loadstone of love in a creature, shall not
he draw our love after him, De amore Dei c. 3.
whose very Being is the perfection of all beauty? 'Twas St Bernards
resolution, and it is worthy the breast of every Christian, Animam meam odio
haberem, si alibi, quam in Domino, etc. I should abhor my own soul, 2. Genesis
the distinction of the notes.
did I find it delight in any thing but the God of Heaven. And so I pass to
the second general, the distinction of the notes in both parts, and therein,
First, the order of the places, Heaven takes place of the Earth: 2. The order
of the places. Heaven before the earth.
Quem in coelis, before desideravi in terris.

It is with you in your conversation, as with us in our studies, An erroneous
method frustrates the best endeavors. Many had arrived to greatness, if their
first care had been goodness: but if they are crossed in what they would,
it is because they would not what they ought. In Christianity we have no such
figure as a (...) to place the first last. Primum Quaerite, First seek the
Kingdom of Heaven, and all things else will seek you. Such is the Allmighties
liberality, that if we desire but the best, he will cast us in, All things.
(...)
The morning word Boker is derived of Bicker a Verb of Inquisition, because
heaven should be our morning study, the sun should not rise so early in the
firmament, as our thoughts toward Heaven. King David dedicated one Psalm to
the morning, (...)
Al ajeleth hassachar, upon the morning star is the inscription of the twenty
second, the day no sooner saluted the world, but he took his leave of it: his
devotion therein resembling the sun, that creepes every morning from under
the earth, never ceasing his course, till he has got up to the vertical point
of heaven; O God my God early willst seek thee, Psalm. 63. v I. It is never too
rath to seek after happiness. Ber. ser. 68. in Cant.
Aceeler a quantum potes, etiam ipsas anticipa vigilias, invenies, non
praevenies. Let thy waking devotion anticipate the very watches, find you may,
not prevent the vigilant God: we cannot seek him so early, as he expects us.

You have here Vivendi methodus, the method of living well. The first step, you
tread, must be for Heaven: the first line you draw, for Eternal life. We
invert the very order of nature, if we prefix the earth in our thoughts. for
the Almighties first work was to set up this Great Vault, Heaven, over our
heads, e're he created this Little ball, the Earth, for us to tread on: thereby
instructing our piety, if we would build like Christians, to lay our foundation
in heaven. Had we no other Catechism, but this one sheet of stars above us,
we might learn where to place our first thoughts: by their luster, and
sparkling, me thinks, they seem to invile us to that Kingdom, which they now
adorn.

I need not acquaint this Assembly, how unblest the very Heathens esteemed
their public enterprises, till they had consulted with their oracle. The
Romans, as Tully observes, Cie, in l. de Aruspice.
counted it unlawful to propose any matter to the Senate, prinsquam de coelo,
till their wizards had drawn their observations from the sky. The safest
policy indeed to take advise of heaven: 'Twas the ancient emblem of a
statesman, manus ad gladium, oculus ad astra, A posture of defense, these
times should put you all in, your hands on your swords, your eyes toward
heaven. If you begin your consultations on your knees, you fetch a blessing and
commission at once from the Almighties own hand. Sure that work cannot
miscarry, that begins in religion.

Indeed the ambition and malice of some men have made religion put on many
faces at this day, like those new invented pictures, that at a different
station represent diverse forms: in one place, Libertinisme, and Atheism, in
another Anabaptisme, and Brownisme, scarce daring at all to show her Protestant
face: yet all these pretend to be religion, when by their bloody effects, the
murders, treasons, and rebellions, they do produce, a Pagan would never
believe, that -- Religio tantum potuit suadere malorum.

How happily has this Kingdom, Acts. 24.14.
even in that way which is now called haeresie worshipped the God of our
fathers: but now we may say of our Religion, as Saint Basil of the Air in a
time of dearth, Basil. hom. in Fam. and siccitalem.
that it was (...) grown the more impure, because it affects so much purity:
the more wicked, because it would seem so religious.

But so pernicious an Abuse of religion should encourage every Noble spirit to
a more zealous patronage of it. Heaven, you see, lays clay me to your first
thoughts, and at this time 'twere the highest sacrilege to bestow them on your
private interests. What we intend is first, not what we pretend: but if we make
it a pious gloss for our worldly designs, we seek not heaven, but our
selves. God has placed it in nature beyond all things, that we might place
nothing beyond it in our affections. Make it we the prologue of our actions,
and God will make it the Epilogue of our lives: the end of this life is, life
without end; here we have it only in expectation, but in heaven the full
fruition. Which presents unto you the next particular, the Different sense of
the Verbes, Habeo, and Desideravi. Have in heaven: only Desire on earth.

This life is a Christians minority. 2. The sense of theverbes.
He is truly possessed of nothing himself, but is a ward to the Almighty: he
never enters upon his Inheritance till he comes to heaven, there he has
livery, and seisin given him from the hand of God himself. Come ye blessed of
my father, Mat. 25. v.34. Alex. in Strom.
receive the Kingdom, etc. Clemens Alexandrinus calls him (...) one that lives
in the confines of heaven, whilst he is in this world: he wants but the
courteous hand of Death to put him into possession. Here, the law flatters us
with firm conveihances, and perpesuities; but there is no freehold of any
thing here below, our surest tenure is in Heaven. We contend for the Property
of the Subject, when nothing on earth can be the Subject of true Property. For
the Lawyer is mistaken, that says the Clergy man only is borne to no
inheritance, when the noblest birth brings forth but a great heir of nothing:
For how can I truly call him possessour of that, which in it self has not the
truth of a possession? or if it has, the longest here, is but the short lease
of a man's life: when death comes, he cuts off the entayle of the fairest hopes:
your Crowns and Sovereigns you must lay down at the pits brinke: your
Lordships, and manours must be contracted within the narrow compass of a
Grave; that's all the Land, you can carry with you. As we read of Abraham. All
the Heritage he purchased for his posterity, was but the Cave of Machpelah, a
burying place.

Never let the Dream of any lasting possession here enter into your breasts.
If you would be freeholders indeed, you must lay up your treasure in heaven;
there, an Inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, that fades not away is reserved
for us. 1. Pet. 1.v. 4.
An inheritance so large, that four pradicaments can scarce hold it. For
Substance Incorruptible, for Quality Undefiled, Immarciscible for Duration, and
Celestial for Site: yet (...), It Is All reserved for us, in surer hands then
Orphans estates here on earth, which are too often a prey to another avarice,
this is safe in Gods own keeping, till we shall lay down our non age, and
lives together. And what do we mean to spend our precious souls on these
perishing treasures? A Kingdom prepared for Us, and we not yet prepared for
the Kingdom? do you not hear the world call upon you, upbraiding, (as it
were) your mistaken confidence in it. For what are all these Wars and
Tumults, but the worlds outcry to us? what are those Defects and Imperfections
in the creature, but their Broken Language, whereby they do beseech us to
depart from them, and seek after our Aeternall patrimony in the Creator. For
we love not God at all, if he has not All our love. Neither Cum, nor Praeter
must devide it: that is the particular, the Diversity of the Praepositions,
Nothing with, nothing besides thee, that I desire.

The original admits of no variety, 3. The Diversity of the praepositions.
(...) is but once in the verse: but the accent Revia, as Chimki observes,
distinguishing both parts makes it tuneable in both. Yet behold the modesty of
Scripture, which rather understands the same word, then suffers a Tautology:
much unlike some audacious devotion, that has many petitions in it, but not
diverse:

Not to stay though at the grammar of the text.

To love the creature for the creature is Epicurisme.

To love the Creator for the creature is Mercenary.

To love the Creator with the creature is spitituall adultery: but to love the
Creator for the creator is true charity. Uno oculorum, said Christ of his
Church, Thou have wounded my heart with One of thine eyes. True love has but a
single eye, Cant. 4.9.
or if more, the Naturalist says, there is such a motion of consent between
them, that one will not suffer the other to be disloyal, but are both fixed
upon one object. Cypr.
A lascivious glaunce upon the creature had made the Spouse Adulter a Christo.
In the Schools, Aquinas. Daven. in ^. col.
Principale obiectum, God is the principal object of humane charity: the
creatures deserve not our love, but in ordine ad illum, as we espy some dark
lineaments of the Diety in them. Indeed we may use the creatures, as so many
rounds in Jacobs ladder, whereby we climb up to God himself, and therefore
Richardus Victorinus, Integer amator Dei, L. De gradibus charit.
quocunque, se vertit: a perfect lover of God cannot turn about his eye, but
he sees every creature ready to catechize his love: in the meanest created
object he calls to mind, that increated charity: so far we love the
creatures, that we may love the Creator the more. Fruimur Deo, utimur aliis: we
do but make use of them to enjoy God. Qui diligunt Deum propter aliud,
Simoniace diligunt, says Gerson wittily, he that loves God for any thing but
himself commits Simony in his love. Gerson. centilogio. dec. 4.
It Is not the Clergy man's sin only, (though our Country Patrons force us too
often to ask the price of our own patrimony.) but there is a Lay Simony too,
when you love God no longer, then you can get by him, like those people that
worshipped Nilus only so long as his rich inundations filled their barnes with
corn.

'Twas Saint Austines argument to such men, (and may it prevail with us.) Ser.
46. de tempore.
Si dulcis est mundus, dulcior est Christus, If there be such sweetness in the
creature, which is but a drop, as to allure thy desires, shall not the
transcendent delight in the Creator, who is the fountain, command thy
affection?

Could I present the King in the Text with all the delights and treasures in
the world: nay could I fetch you back that Beloved peace, that is fled from
us, Nibil dulcescit, nisi hoc uno condiatur. We should find no sweetness in
it, unless it were seasoned with the Deity: Had we kept our God with our
former peace, we had not been to seek it now.

Were every soldier in our armies multiplied into a thousand: Chrysostom. in Psalm.
7. v. 3:
every Garrison environed with a wall of brass, and Castle of Diamond: Nay
(...), were the whole world on the march for us against the enemy, it were an
inconsiderable force, unless God himself lead up the Van^

And why should we neglect him any longer, without whom are conquered, even
when we are conquerours?" Whilst we think of recruiting our Armies, let us
not forget to reruite our affiance in God. The Eclipses we have suffered, are
but the Interpositions of our own carnal confidence: The losses we have
undergone, are but the corrections of our mistrust. Take it from the mouth of a
King, (though in a more desperate condition, then We, God be blessed, have ever
yet seen: yet) Jehosaphat in as great a straight as ever Prince was, stood up
and said, O Judah, and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem, believe in the Lord your
God, so shall ye be established: believe his Prophets, 2. Chron. 20. v. 20.
so shall ye yet prosper.

O our God, though we know not what to do, yet our eyes look up unto thee.
Let not this Kingdom we beseech thee, be made an Aceldama: We have been thy
Eden, O make us not now a desolate wilderness: but be favorable to Sion,
build up the walls of Jerusalem. For whom have we in Heaven but thee, O Lord?
and there is none upon earth that we desire but thee:

To whom be ascribed of Us Men on earth, and Angels above, All glory, honor,
power and thanksgiving world without end. Amen.

FINIS.

