THE PLEA FOR The Common Prayer Book. In two Parts.

By James Harwood, B. D.

Let all things be done in decency and in order.

1. Cor. 14 40. Jerusalem is like a City at unity within it self.

Psalm. 120.3. LONDON, Printed for the Author. 1654.

To the Right Honorable, the Countess of Pembroke and Montgomery, etc.
RIght honorable and truly virtuous Lady, elect in the Lord, your favorable
accepting with the hand of Charity; my Lords Prayer unclasped, oblieges me in
more special, to dedicate this short Treatise, called A Plea for the Common
Prayer Book, unto your singular goodness. I have found our Churches Prayers
set light, and by those who ought to have been as shining lights in the midst
of this our more then Egyptian darkness. This is it has made me set pen to
paper, in some poor measure to vindicate as our Lords Prayer before, so now
the Prayers of our Church. I am sure to meet with Hericano's and the grand
gusts of malecontented spirits: I humbly therefore crave leave this my decurt
Treatise may shroude it self under the Lee of your acceptance; and if the Lord
in his mercy allay these winds of boyst^rous calumniators of our Churches
Service, within my short time I have here to stay, I shall put to Sea once more
again, and purpose in my next Bottom, to Land that Staple Commodity, A
Treatise upon the lawful Calling of our Ministry, according to the Canons and
Constitutions of our Mother, Church of England. A Subject, I assure you, most
fit to be laid open and maintained, lest in a very short time, we lose the
name Christian. Madam, I am loath to promise much, and perform nothing:
therefore this short I realise I devote to your service, and subscribe my
self, as bound,

Your most Humble servant, JAMES HARVVOOD.

The Author of the work begins his Treatise with a Divine Prayer, put up to
the Author and finisher of our Faith, Christ Jesus, God blessed for ever, Amen.
THE PRAYER.
MOst Divine power, I am unworthy to tread upon the Earth thy footstool, more
unworthy to speak unto thee, my God and my King, yet humbly upon the bended
knees of my body, and from the bottom of my heart, I beg thy Heavenly
protection, from the violence of unruly men: look O Lord upon the woeful
warfare of thy Church, and no longer suffer her children to wound her to the
heart blood by division: say O Lord it is sufficient and divert the judgment:
bring us to an unity in Discipline as in Doctrine, that as we all acknowledge
one God, one Faith, one Baptism for the remission of our sins in Christ Jesus,
so we all of us with one heart, and one mind, and one spirit, may put up our
joint prayers to thee in thy Church; Lord open the eyes of the dissenters that
they may see what damage accrues the Doctrine of thee the Lord Jesus, for want
of uniformity in Church service, our sins have pulled upon us this division:
grant us true sorrow for our sin, and then we shall be in hopes of an union. O
give us the spirit of unity in the bond of peace, while we join together like
Sampsons foxes; all the choice fruit is burnt up: O that we might once more
hand in hand, like Peter and John, go up unto the Temple and pray. Let not the
redundancy of the spirit, make the people set light thy set form of prayer,
and the prayers of the Church, but since both thy precept and practice
justifies a set form of Prayer; Pray thee dear Savior, send down thy
Spirit, to point the people of England out the way to our common Prayers: if
ought were in them tended to the dishonor of thy name, we would not expect a
blessing, since all is consenta^eous to thy Holy Word, Lord say the word and
the People shall be obedient; when we are weakest thou art strongest: and now
that there is no Law to compel the People to come in, send abroad those thy
servants, the sacred suggestions of thy Spirit, and thy house it shall be
filled. Lord thou know what harsh censures I shall under go for the
discharge of this my conscience; I fly to thee for succor, and beg that of thy
merciful goodness, thou would preserve from all perils and dangers of body
and Soul.

Thy dejected, Servant, James Harwood.

A Plea for the Common Prayer Book. Six Arguments to prove a set form of
prayer lawful. Seven Mementoes to the dissenting Ministry. Three Inferences
from every Memento. The four sold Aim of the Presbyterian Minister. Six
unexpected Issues. A Parrallell betwixt the Papist and Presbyterian Minister.
The Intravit. The Exivit. The Vale. The Supplicat for restorement of the Common
Prayer Book.
A Plea, for a reprieve, after judgment post upon the Common Prayer Book, or
a short and charitable construction upon the forbidding the Common Prayer
Book, to be read in the Churches of Christ, which will bring much of it into
use, and nemo debet contradicere.

And as for the remainder, you know what is said, our Law condemns none,
until he be heard.

In all humility we who are conformists but peaceable, beg leave to be heard
in a case so much concerning the glory of God, the peace of our own
consciences, and uniformity in Divine service, and if ought be found guilty in
our Churches Rubric, senting either of Heresy or superstition; we are in all
sobriety willing to be better learnt, and shall submit.

We dare not lay aside, and as we hope by the stricktnesse of the last
command, it was never intended we should, though enjoined to be used and read
by the Common Prayer Book, these holy Rellicks of Christianity.

THe Ten Commandments, for they were written by Gods own hand, Exodus, 20.

2. The Lords Prayer, for that was made by Christ Jesus, and by him given us in
command to say, Luke 11. Chapt. Verse. 2.

3. The Sacrament of the Lords Supper, for that was instituted by our Savior,
whose self says, do this in remembrance of me.

4. The Sacrament of Baptism, for the command is, go and teach all Nations,
Baptizing them In the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Mat. 28.19. Verse.

3. David's Psalms, the most rigid count them innocent, since separated from
the Organs,

6. First and second lesson is likewise Scripture, and that I hope is not yet
our of date.

7. The Holy Hymns are likewise warranted by the word of God.

8. The Epistle and Gospel are also Scripture and fitted for the times and
seasons, the better to make us bear them in remembrance.

9. The preparative verses, we find verses of the Chapters.

And thus the preparative verses which begin the service, The Collect.
the Lords Prayer, David's Psalms, first and second Lesson, the Holy Hymns,
the Epistle and Gospel, the ten Commandments, the blessed Sacraments, they
all being part of the Holy bible, we in charity co^ceiv, though they were
enjoined by the Common Prayer Book, you have not forbid to be used, and
therefore without receiving the brand of obstinate, we nothing doubt of free
leave for us, who are Orthodox Divines, to use them in our Churches. We have
somewhat more to offer, and do desire aught understanding, and a favorable
into pretation of our candid meaning.

1. That we may have liberty to say the Gloria Patri, for this fragment of the
Tongue of Canaan we learnt of the Angels Luke 2. who are set to be our
samplers Luke 11. Again this Article of our Faith was opposed by the Arians
and Macedonians, the one denying the Godhead of Christ, the other the Godhead
of the Holy Ghost, and to show how we who hold the Catholic Apostolic Faith
detest these Heresies, for this cause were brought into our Churches service;
these words, Glory be to the Father and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

2. We desire to make confession of our Faith called the Apostles Creed, since
it is the confession of the Church Catholic, and not an Article in it but
Scripture proose, as also the Nicene and Athanasius his Creed.

3. To make confession of our sins in the public place of Gods worship since
Gods word does injoyne us to confess one unto another Jam. 5.16. yet more,
their confessing and Praying, are coupled together, to note, as the Church is
the house of Prayer, so a fit place for confession of sin to be made in.

4. For us the Ministers of the Lord Jesus, to declare to the people being
penitent, Remission of Sin, especially considering to win home we moderate
our claim, Joh. the 20 23.

5. To use the Collects after the Epistle and the Gospel, since they give the
most over went before, and all that is intended is, that what was lately read
in your hearing, you by praying, may be ensured of the blessing,

6. And as for that Letany where with so many thousands have been in love a
long time, being a prayer fitted for all occasions and al necessities at al
times, we humbly crave leave we may use it in our Churches, till either that
sect confute it, who will have no King to rule over them upon earth but Christ,
or that fraternity of the new so called Ministrey, who will bring all the civil
power under the verge of their new sprung up discipline, and upon contempt of
it disthrone them; neither is this the total of our desire, but more, we
humbly crave a sober conference with our supposed scholastic opponents, not
doubting but we shall justify the work of our reverend reformers and if we
he found imbecill, or unable, peaceably we shall decline and submit to what
commanded.

And whereas I am confident the great fault they have found against our Common
Prayer Book is de modo for that non for that materia. for that the Churches
Prayers are a set form of Prayer, The Lords Prayer unclasped Page. 324.
I have already answered that great grand Goliath objection, and received no
hurt by the weavers Beam.

And now that the people of God may more perfectly be informed, and for ever
convinced, how a set form of Prayer is lawful to use in the Churches of
Christ Jesus. let them know.

1. The Orthodox Divines of our mother Church of England are able in every
Century from the time of the primitive Church, Six vallid reasons to prove the
lawful use of a set form of Prayer.
to make it appear, how it has been the universal practice of the Church
Catholic, to use a set form of Prayer: O stand and inquire for the good old
way.

2. Arg. If any will say our Church Prayers blunt the edge of Devotion, for that
set forms, why then do they approve of David's Psalms to be read, so full of
set forms of Prayer?

O be guided by a man after Gods own heart.

3. Arg. We have Christ his Precept to warrant a set form of Prayer, Luke 11 2
O let Christ his word be your warrant.

4. Arg. We have Christ his practice to justify our Practice who prayed three
times in the Garden of Geethlemene, using the self same words. Matthew. 26.36.
to the 45 verse. O remember what him self says, Learn of me.

5. Arg. A set form has been in use as under the Gospel, so under the Law.
King Hizekias is my witness. 2. Chro. 29 the later part of the 35. verse.

And thus my dear Brethren, if either the practice of the King of Juda, The
Collect
the practice of Christ Jesus, King of Kings, the precept of Christ, David his
set forms, or the Church Catholic, be worthy of imitation, we have made no
innovation upon the people of our God, but in truth and sober^es desire you to
embrace our Churches Prayers especially considering a set form (...) warranted
by the Lord of Heaven and Earth Numb 6 from the 22 verse to the end of the ^6.
where said, and by the Lord unto Moses Speak unto Aaron and his sons saying on
this wise ye shall bless the children of Israel. saying unto them the Lord
bless thee, and keep thee, the Lord make his face shine upon thee, and be
gracious unto thee, the Lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee
Peace. Note.
And thus Aaron the Priest for his time, and his sons for after times, were to
say these Common Prayers, and enjoined to do it by the Lord: What Heaven and
Earth thinks fit to go for current, let dust and ashes not dare to disalow; I
never met with any could justly tax the subject matter of our service Book;
and now we having such a Cloud of witnesses to testify the lawfulness of a
set form, its high time for the brethren of the separation to come home, yet
if they will not communicate with us, O thou who sits in Heaven so dispose of
the hearts of men upon earth, that we may have free liberty to use our
Churches set form of Prayers, and we shall pray.

The Second Part of the Plea for the Common Prayer Book.
Containing seven Mementoes for the dissenting Brethren, who before these late
wars were lawfully ordained Ministers, according to the Constitutions of the
Church of England, but since not by compulsion, but voluntarily, have deserted
the Common Prayer Book, with three Inferences, drawn from every Memento
proposed unto them, by James Hear wood.

Nevertheless I have something against thee, because thou have left thy first
love.

Revel. 2.4.
His Epistle to the dissenting Brethren.
IT is not malice but conscience has extracted from me, these Mementoes.
Memento was spoke too late to Dives, these in good time to you my Brethren: you
know; better are the reproves of a friend, then the kisses of an enemy: the
one may cure, in the other there is danger. If the Ulcer be overgrown, the
incision must be deep: if my Lance be too sharp, it is, for that your sore is
festred: I shall be glad of your recovery, and pray, as for the health of your
bodies, so your souls, and subscribe my self, as bound

God and the Churches Servant.

1. Memento. There oath was taken when made D^acons, Minister, and instituted.
Remember vour tripartite oath, like a three fold cord, not easy to be
broken, which did bind you to use the Common Prayers in your Churches.

1. Inference. No Potentate can securely confide in their civil odedience, who
do make no matter of such religious ties and obligations. 2. Inference. I
cannot see, how there can be any heavenly efficacy in their preaching, who
have made so little reckning of their swearing. 3. Inference. Those preachers
do over highly prize their preferments, who to save their benefices, make
Shipwreck of their consciences.
2. Memento. Remember you could never yet convince us, how our Common Prayers
were either Idolatrous, or superstitious.

1. Inference. The law was upon suspicion to hang, and after in open Court
hear the witnesses.
You are guilty of more severity, than the ancient Arch Dukes of Austria, who
first condemned, and after the death of the felon went to trial; It is more
favor than our Common Prayer Book has yet found from you. 2. Inference.
These children of the Church resemble young Vipers, for they kill their mother
that they may live themselves: The young Viper gnawes a way through her dammes
bowels
It is an infamous life is preserved by the death of the dambe. 3. Inference.
You must needs be given over to strong delusions, to cry down Common Prayers,
and show us no cause.
It is high time therefore to set pen to Paper, and to say something though you
can say but little.

3. Memento. Remember the reverend compilers of the Churches service Book,
whose very ashes from age to age, will have a civil respect from all good
Christians.

1. Inference. You are higher conceited of your selves than the Chinoes, who
say they themselves have two eyes, we of Europe one, and all the world beside
blind. It seems you would be the only seeing men and none else 2.
Inference. You prize your own judgments above all our ancient reformers,
whilst all that, which they have compiled, you have wholly disalo wed, by this
it seems all our Church Prayers were impertinent, or else your sentence past
very rigid. 3. Inference. You have as much as in you lie, dishonored, the
reverend fathers of the reformation, whilst with Cham you endeavored to
uncover their nakenesse; whereas if there had been a blemish, you ought with
Shem and Japhet, to have gone backward, and with sorrow and reluctance covered
the sports in their fices.
4. Memento. Remember, it is not long, since the Common Prayer Book was a
cognisce^ce to distinguish a conformist Protestant, from a Recusant, till you
forced our Church Service out of the Church doors.

1. Inference. You have robbed us of that piece of the holy tongue, the
Sibboleth, by which we did distinguish the Ephramite from the Gileadire. 2.
Inference. The Wolf may now come in, into Christ's Sheepfold in the Lambs Skin,
and the innocent Lamb be in danger of its life, by conversing with the Wolf.
3. Inference. You put us in fear I dolatry will creep in, into the Church,
since you have banished that Service Book, which scared the fomentors of
Haerisies, so that they durst not communicate with us.
5. Memento. Remember, not any thing is contained in our Common Prayer Book;
but either Scripture, or what consonant to the Scripture.

1. Inference. Your quarrel then must needs be against God and his word, and
the upshot without repentance, will be the issues of death. 2. Inference. You
are more menpleasers then pleasers of God, otherwise you would never forbid his
word to be read; and that which is as consonant to it as the Doctrine you draw
from your Text, 3. Inference. Here he reprooves them for casheering that part
of Liturgy which tatidem verbis is the word of God.
You set an higher estimate, of that, which as you say, is dictated to you by
the Spirit, than of that sacred word which holy men spoke as they were inspired
by the Holy Ghost.
6. Memento. Remember, and again I say remember, how they who are against
unity of Discipline in the Churches service, have ever been, and ever will
be, against the government of this Nation, in the person of one.

1. Inference. You are common disturbers of the Church and State, and have no
acquatutance with that sacred Motto beatisunt pacifici Lysimachus Nicanor has
drawn out your perfect picture. 2. Inference. As you have laid aside the
government of one Prince, That Author writes the P^rrallel betw^xt the Jesuits
and these dissenting Ministers.
so the personal power, now in power has no good cause to confide in you, you
are semel and semper iidem. 3. Inference. You are enemies to Moses and Aaron,
the Scepter and the Miter, and there is no safe sanctuary, where your over
pouring synod is predominant.
7. Memento. Remember by disowning the Churches service, you opened a gap for
Enthusiasts who pretend the spirit to make Null the Gospel.

1. Inference. You have pulled down part of the hedge of the Vineyard, so that
the little Foxes have destroyed diverse choice Vines. 2. Inference. You have
made way for the daughters of Giants, to mix with the sons of the Church. From
a prodigious match, expect a prodigious birth. 3. Inference. Your intent could
not be good, the event has made us very suspicious, yea we do truly judge of
your self ended aim, God so crossea you in the issue.
Your forefold Aim.
1. Aim. To quarrel with the Church for her revenewes, your want of a
temporal estate made you plot vi and army for spiritual promotion.

2. Aim. To pull down a Bishop in a Diocese, and set up a Pope in every
Parish. A great Pope in a little Rome.

3. Aim. No longer to hold Stirrup, but sit in the Saddle. Yea, when you know
not how to obey you purposed to command.

4. Aim. To set the Church on fire to warm your own frozen fingers, videte
fratres no plus quam satis calefaciatis.

The Sextuplade unexpected Issue.
1. Unexpected Issue. God has confounded the wisdom of these worldly wise
Ministers, their golden stream is turned into another Channel, and they that
aimed to have all the command, have little more than they had before.

2. Unexpected Issue. Their expectance of fat Cathedral parsonages, is
Metamorphosed into lean augmentations, A just reward for their unjust
Apostasy.

3. Unexpected Issue. The hearts of the most of their old adhaerents, are quite
alienated: for now their worldly mindedness is discovered.

4. Unexpected Issue. They cannot possibly but be distrusted by the State, for
these have been untrue to their churches interest.

5. Unexpected Issue. They cannot expect to be countenanced by the sword man;
for they are opposite to his principles, liberty of conscience.

6. Unexpected Issue. They have just cause to fear, how they have lost the
love of God the Father. for they have slighted their Mother the Church.

A Parralell betwixt the Papist and Presbyterian, showing how they join hand in
hand to destroy the Common Prayer Book.
The Protestant Divines complied it.

The Papist Priests burnt it.

The Presbyterian tears it al in piece.

The Protestant Bishops suffered Martyrdom for it.

The Papist Priests branded it abettors for Heretics.

The Presbyterians call us Papists who use it in our Churches.

The Papists did not disent it till forbid by the Pope.

The Presbyterians used it, till laid aside by their prevaling party.

The Protestants crave liberty of consicence to use it, thought disanuld by the
Pope and their party.

The Papist enemies to reformation first slighted it.

The Presbyterians pretenders to reformation, after cuted it,

The Ancient Protestants of the Church of England still own it.

And thus good reader, Mark. 1. How that book which the Papists burnt -- The
Presbyterians as ill-intreated. 2. For maintaining that book, for which the
Papists Martyred our good Bishops -- the Presbyterians have don what they can,
to starv us; 3. How as the Papists have obeyed the popes Mandat, and left
coming to Common Prayers so these Presbyterian Ministers, sworn to maintain
them, upon their prevailing parties intimation, left them 4. It is worthy to be
considered, how the Papist a known enemy to the Church. of England, has not
been more an enemy nemy to Common Prayers, than the Presbyterian, who many
years at ripe years was a pretended friend to our Church government till a
Seotch Covenant like a fas all comet hung over his spiritual preferment.


And thus you see who are enemies to Common Prayers, a Papist, a Presbyterian:
it was quickly discerned what would betide Christ, so soon as Pontius Pilate
and Herod were agreed.

The intravit The exivit The service Book.
It came in with the fall of Papicie.

It went out with the fall of Monarchy.

It came in with the rise of Protestant Bishops.

It went out when Presbyter John came in.

It received Christendom from a Prince.

It received Martyrdom by the people.

It came into the Church with a general Union.

It was forced out of the Church by a general division.

It was peace of conscience ushered it in.

It was a scismaticall conscience frighted it out.

The service Books.
The Vale.

And (...).

Farewell Uniformity in Discipline

Farewell unity in Doctrine,

Farewell royal Scepter

Farewell Priestly Miter, Riches of the Church.


Farewell golden Trumpet. Lawful called Ministry.


Farewell linen Ephod.

Farewell Brotherly love

Farewell Noes Dove.

The Supplicat.
FAther of Spirits, Humbly I beg, thou would not permit these dissenting
Brethren of the Ministry to be predominant, Byas their ambition whilst by thy
providence, thou impedest their purposes. O thou who sit at the helm of
Government, steer about the hearts of thy Churches adversaries, Lord save
their souls, but confound their divices, and keep us Orthodox Divines in the
Channel of our Churches, set form of service, harmless in it self, decent
to be used, and not in ought, discongruous to thy sacred Word: the innocence of
our intents makes us have faith to believe, that thou will neither suffer them
to be exalted too high, nor deject us too low, which is prayed for, by thy

most unworthy dejected servant, JAMES HARVVOOD.

FINIS.

