MILITARY AND SPIRITUAL MOTIONS, FOR Foot Companies.

With an Abridgement of the Exercise of a single Company, as they now ought to
be taught, and no otherwise.

Composed in IRELAND, and now published for the good of his fellow Soldiers in
ENGLAND, By Captain Lazarus Haward, of Ailsford in Kent.

soldier

London, Printed by Tho. Harper, and are to be sold in Little Britain. 1645.

To the Honorable Sir Anthony Weldon Knight, and the rest of the Honble Deputy
Lievtenants and Comittees of the County of Kent.
Honorable Gentlemen,
THE noble favors I daily receive from you, since my arrival out of Ireland,
into this County, has imboldned me to offer this poor tribute of mine
experience, not to teach your uncontrollable knowledges, but humbly desire it
may kiss your hands, as a sacrifice offered from your servant, or as a
weakness that stands in need of your protections. In your Honors I know is
power to judge of my labor, and in you also is power to exercise mercy; I hope
I have written nothing that is erring from sense or truth: having not labored
mine own, but the profit of my poor bleeding, dying Countrymen, whom these
miserable times have called out to this miserable unnatural War: desiring not
only his temporal victory, (but above al) his spiritual. There may be many
puny Scholars that from these brief Rules, may gather more abler judgments:
Your noble favors and allowance can only make it acceptable to those which
need it, especially in this Country, which I wish to be served by it: then let
those graces fly from your noble natures, that as now I live, I may die your
Honors poor

Servant and Soldier L. H.

To the Courteous Reader.
I Have not presumed to add any thing to the uncontrollable knowledges of such
as have formerly taken much pains in writing at large upon this Subject of
drilling, drayning, or exercising of Foot Companies, nor any new thing to catch
covetous spirits, but only what may ever be embraced of solid and substantial
judgments: Innovations and divisions have stirred up such dismal
distractions, that it has brought us near to a fearful desolation: and that
which by the blessing of God should be the principal means of our restoring,
being the Honorable art of War, is with the times, much of it become full of
divisions and divisionall practices, only serving to delight curious
spectators, otherwise dangerous to the poor soldier, if ever he be brought
upon service, the actors little regarding the old brief rules from whence
their new devised divisionall whimzies are fetched. But since peace it lost, and
the devouring sword strives to be conqueror of all, and fearing that thou that
art my fellow soldier who standst in need not only of military discipline, but
also in more need of spiritual, so that not having put on S. Paul's spiritual
armor, nor been exercised in any spiritual motions, thou be in danger to
lose both soul and body together: Let me entreat thee to peruse these few
brief rules, concerning the defense of thy soul and body both: the brevity of
the rules which thou art to use for defense of thy body will afford thee
sufficient time: peruse and double over those good motions, admonitions,
sentences and sayings, as their letters have linkt them to their order, which
being well observed, will bring thee to be a soldier of that great Captain,
Christ Jesus, under whose obedience is obtained ever lasting victory, and a
crown of glory. Thus uniformity in discipline spiritual and temporal, will
make us like the Israelites, go up as one man with one heart, and in one form;
and so take away the evil from before our brethren, and so once more enjoy a
happy peace in Church and State, this being the briefest way to give an end to
our miserable troubles: having comprehended the full and whole Exercise of a
Foot Company in the last sheet of this Book, I commend thee to it and the
rest, which being construed according to my honest meaning, I have got my
desire, and shall ever rest at thy service

Lazarus Haward.

Military Motions for Exercising of Foot Companies.
S Ilence is the daughter of shamefastness, both which as they are excuses for
mediocrity, so they are prejudices to excellencies.

I t is a shame a godly man's zeal should not be as courageous to defend the
truth as a wicked man's malice is violent to oppose it.

L et heaven thunder, earth and hell roar, speak for the truth, for it is truth
that preserves our lives, and makes us blessed for ever.

E vill thoughts can seldom bring forth good words, never good deeds: for as
corn is, so will the flower be.

N othing more lewd then error; the more false the matter, the greater noise to
hold it up.

C ursed is that speech, that is either against the God of truth, or against
Gods truth, or against the friend of both, God and truth.

E very man that is Christ's Soldier, will fight for him.

S erve the time I wicked counsel: we are made to serve God.

T hat mind can never be steady, that stands upon another feet, until it
will rather lead then follow.

A Commonwealth is a tent picht up to shelter men from wrong, that they may
live happily together: Laws are the cords of it, break the cords, and the
tent falls.

N othing that the Law allows, but the malcontent censures; what it forbids,
that he strives to justify: but that's a treacherous hand that steals away from
Statesmen their reputation.

D ivinity is a mistress for the highest masters of men: and the Scripture is
the best counselor for the greatest Statesman in the World.

R ulers to be unrighteous, are like blazing Stars with long tails, drawing
trains of mischief after them; and is ominous to a whole Kingdom: but piety
in a Prince, blesses all his Subjects.

I f Magistrates will uphold Gods Kingdom, he will uphold theirs: if they will
have God to be mindful of them in his mercy, they must be mindful of him in
their business.

G od permits false teachers for man's ingratitude: because Ahab will not
believe Micha, a lying spirit shall deceive his Prophets.

H ee that comes in Gods name, and is sent; yet delivers a false message, when
he is come is a falsifier of Gods Word.

T o entangle the soul with multitude of traditions, ceremonies, and
unconcerning rites is to be condemned; for it takes away liberty of conscience.

I t would cool the heart of the Devil if the Church had escaped the
ingenious solicitations of our superstitious teachers, who not only trouble the
waters of our peace, but poison her very springs of life.

N o sooner was God worshipped and served, but hatred and spite fell to the
portion and lot of Religion.

Y f false teachers had not store of followers, heretical positions would fall
to the ground, and themselves slinke away with reproach and shame.

O ur wickedness in these days and dangerous times, proceeds not from weak,
but from wilful ignorance.

V iolent opposing the truth (which we have rejected) with tongue and hand,
justifying and defending mischievous opinions against the Gospel of Christ, is
a denial of Christ in judgment.

R eligion in an unstable man lies always in wait for the inclination of his
Prince, as a Spaniell hunts according to the face of his Master.

F easting sinners do little know how near jollitie is to perdition,
judgment is often at the threshold, when drunkenness is at the table.

I n vain do they fly whom God pursues, for there is no mountain so high
but God can reach it, no depth so low but his eye sees it, and power reaches it.

L ying and false teachers are amongst us by Gods permission, that the true
only might more painfully and patiently exercise their knowledge.

E very one that desires to be true to himself, and free from all errors, let
him be sure to be true to Christ.

S uperstition first loves, and then believes; but true Religion first believes
and then loves.

S inn at first was the cause of ignorance, now ignorance is the cause of
sin; as long as we think we see we continue blind, when we perceive our
blindness then we begin to see.

T he first punishment of sin is blindness of mind, and that blindness is
the cause of future sin.

A lewd man is a pernicious creature, that the damnes his own soul is the
part of his mischief, for he commonly draws vengeance upon a thousand, either
by desert of his sin, or by the infection of it.

N ever was any man so desperately wicked, but he had some followers, Lucifer
fell not alone from heaven.

D estruction should teach us to think of our sins; do we marvel at this
distracted age? every man look to his own sins, and cease marvelling.

R ankmirth, with full bellies, with gaming and wine, has laid us all open to
the Devil.

I t is just that they who have made themselves partners in sinning, should not
be separated in suffering.

G od is not just without mercy; nor merciful without justice, slow to anger,
yet he will not acquit the wicked.

H ee that will not take Gods word for good, shall feel his sword for evil;
so near is unbeleef to Atheism, as the word of God is to the nobleness of his
Majesty.

T he Almighty hates to be disturbed, and accounts infidelity so much a greater
sin then another.

I t is ridiculous for a man to profess he is going to heaven, when his whole
life is forwarding him to hell.

N o man can charge God with over hastiness; for if he should be angry as
often as we sin, and strike as often as he is angry, what man could escape?

Y f the summons of vengeance should awake us to repentance, we shall no sooner
change our minds, but God will change his sentence.

O pennesse of sin has saved justice a labor of inquisition; there needs no
hue and cry after the thief that presents himself.

V engeance is always Gods own weapon, so appropriated to his hand that no
creature can meddle with it.

R oot out all corruption out of thy heart, or else it will root thee out of
the land: for concupiscence is to a man, as Peter to the Maid that made him
deny his Master.

R ighteous art thou, O Lord, and just in thy judgments: no man can confess
this, but such as live uprightly and truly as he has commanded.

A ll complain, yet every man adds to the heap of sin, redress stands not in
words, but each man amend one, and we may all live.

N ever did God so irrevocably threaten judgment for sin, but the penitent
confession of the sinner cancels and avoids the sentence.

K nowing the sweetness and excellency of Christ we cannot but love him; and
if we love him, it must needs be grievous to us to lose him.

S inners may so weary the invincible patience of God, that he may say of them
as he did to Ephraim: Ephraim is joined to Idols, let him alone.

T he Devil is let loose for a season to try the patience of Gods Church; yet
let falsity vomit her poison for a while, we shall find saving health in
Christ.

O ur enemies, O Lord, are near us to hurt us; but thou art near to help us:
thou art Judge of the whole World, therefore deliver thy people.

T he sword never prevailed, but sin set an edge upon it; God indeed is judge
of all, but sin is the cause of all.

H asten from the company of the wicked, that there may be no stay in your
passage to heaven for fear judgment overtake you.

E ven as our tears must slacken Gods bow, so our prayers must get out his
arrows when they stick fast in our sides.

R ipenesse of sin makes ready Gods wrath; so that neither greatness nor
strength can protect us.

I t is a grievous judgment upon a Nation, when teachers sent for man's
salvation, shall become means of their confusion.

G od is angry against all sin, but his wrath is most hot against universal
sin, thousands, or a whole Army falls then in one day.

H umble confession, and devout penance cannot always avert temporal
judgments: David spent three days in sad contrition, yet in that short time
Gods Angel destroyed 70000.

T he desolating actions of Gods justice is not to destroy and deprive of
being, but to further the growth of his Church, as men root weeds out of a
garden that the herbs may grow the better.

H oly men out of their acquaintance with their Master, foresee punishment, but
fools run on and are punished.

A sinful Commonwealth cannot live unless it bleed in the common vein,
neither is there a better sacrifice to God then the blood of malefactors.

N o target, no corslet, nor armor of proof, nor banks, nor fortifications,
can withstand the hand of the Almighty.

D readfull blasphemy, desperate sacrilege, apostacy, covetousnes,
drunkenness, luxury, profaneness, and excessive pride, has provoked Gods
wrath: therefore mourn for them that will not mourn for themselves.

A ll Gods blessings, all his judgments, all his creatures, are as so many
Sermons and Trumpets to bring man to repentance.

S hall a land mourn for the inhabitants, and not the inhabitants for the
sins of that land? God forbid!

Y f we do not perish every mothers son and daughter by the sword, as the old
world did by the deluge, it is not because we are less wicked, but because God
is more merciful.

O England! the Gospel of Christ is fittest to lead our times, and as that is
either distressed or prosperous, so let us frame our mirth or mourning.

U ngodly policies may bring a Kingdom to desolation; because they are
contrary to repentance.

W ee have suffered the mischief of a long peace, and our estates are not the
better, but through security much worse; and for our sins God has sent his
bloody arrow amongst us.

E very man is a limb of the Community, and must be affected with the estate
of the whole body, whether healthful or languishing.

R epentance neglected is the despising of Gods goodness, and will cause war
to fill our streets and fields with blood.

E ven Gods long-suffering is an affoordment of time to repent, and is a
favor; not man's, but Gods, not a common grace, but a special fruit of his
goodness.

T here is great need of mourning where sin is great; for heavy judgments will
not be turned away without deep sorrows.

O ur sins deserve destruction, our repentance is no satisfaction; it is only
Gods mercy in Christ that gives absolution.

T he greater the corruption, the vaster the destruction; but if we be found in
the faith there is no end of blessedness.

H ee that looks outward upon some eminent and notorious sinner, concluding he
is in the plague of our Nation, is a vain man, look inward, there is an Achan
in thine own bosom.

E very sin is mighty, therefore our repentance must be more hearty; or else
expect not the removing of calamity.

L ittle pleasure does the Father of all mercies take in the death of a sinner:
ere David could see the Angel, he had restrained him.

E very man censures, none amends, nay all grow worse; therefore vain man
apprehend, condemn and execute thine own sin.

F east, drink, carouse and play, when so many hearts are bleeding, is the
sign of a desperate soul that can rejoice and be merry when God shows
himself angry.

T he content has corrupted the continent; men's sins have infected the whole
world, as the plague in persons infect the ^ery walls of a house.

H ee that wounds the truth by his sins which God has sent to save his
soul, no wonder if he perish by her forsaking kim, that has lost himself by
forsaking her.

A s no importunity can delay Gods judgments, no secrecy avoid it, no policy
corrupt it: so nothing but sanctification can give us comfort in it.

N oah preached much, the World was warned; so patient is God, that if sin were
not desperate, it should not smart.

D educt our own evils from the evils of these days; and then God, the
land, and our own consciences shall find the less.

A s Gods mercy has her day in giving time of repentance; so justice shall
have her day of retribution.

S atan would have all perish, the infinite goodness of God would have all
blessed; their names will fit in our language, good and God, evil and Devil.

Y f a whole Nation apostate to lewdness, and there be none to stop the
course, how should it stand an hour?

O h England, prepare to meet thy God, for although he be offended with the
whole Land, yet there be some that he will own.

U niversall judgments call for universal repentance; our Land mournes, yet
some feel not the sharp wound of that hungry sword.

W hen man turns himself out of Gods service, all the creatures serving him,
are as it were turned out of his service.

E very man pray heartily that the Lord destroy us not: let our sins be less,
and our prayers more, that we may sinde mercy.

R un not on in sin till thou meet with unexpected mercy, for thou may as
well spur thy beast till he speak, because Balaam did so.

E xcept we love our own lusts and vanities more then the welfare of a whole
Land, let us confess and redress our sins.

T he wrath of a King is a fright, we fear an ague, wonder at a comet, and
tremble at thunder; but fear not the Commander of all these.

O ur fathers were more devout then we, for they did but what they heard,
though it were but the devices of men; we hear and do not, though it be the
Word of God.

T hat heart is hard frozen, that nothing but hell fire can thaw; beware of
such a heart.

H ee that laughs at the memorial of his sins, shall weep tears of blood for
those sins.

E liphants will be ruled and led about by little dwarfs, but man is an
indomable creature, a^^ forsees not the judgments of God.

R eligion made a sta^king horse for policy, is odious, and of all men the
religious dissembler shall be sure of plagues.

I n vain do men speak well of us when no man knows good by us.

G od is just, he has many ways to punish us; we have none to escape him.

H ee loves not the Lord that will not suffer for him; be patient therefore
unto his coming.

T he gloss of profession will off in a storm, and unless we be dyed in
grain we never hold grace.

H ee will hardly brook wounds that cannot endure wounds for the cause of our
Savior.

A true Christian may live without doing wrong, but not without receiving wrong.

N o walking to heaven upon roses, God put his children into the way of
discipline by the fire of correction to eat out the rust of our corruption.

D eceits are most abominable when we shroud them under the name of Religion;
nor is there any such Devil as he that looks like an Angel.

A true Christian is like Jacobs ladder, while his body the lower part stands
on the ground, the top his higher part is in heaven.

B ee not devout in a storm, and stormy in a calm, like Mariners on land, who
imitate the rage of the Seas, and roar here as fast as they do there.

O ur fair shows are a just argument of our unsoundnesse: no natural face
has so fair a white and clear a red, as that which is painted.

V aine glory swells men with rank opinions of their own worth, mighty are
their words, as if they shook mountains, and spoke thunderclaps.

T he tongue that yields not defense when Gods glory is in question, is tied by
the Devil, and not loosed by God.

A wise man will not be scoffed out of his money; nor a just man out of his faith.

S ome men may be stored with some acts of patience, but what are they amongst
so many troubles? yet if patience be with us we are all safe.

Y f we had before we went about our warlike affairs penitently cleansed our
hearts, we might have expected better success.

O ne lust fights against another, both against the soul; they made one soul
against another, and many souls fight against God.

U nnaturall coldness in some, and preternatuall heat in others, has set us
together by the ears about trifles, while the common enemy breaks in.

W oolfe and woolfe can agree, lamb and lamb fall not out, but who can
reconcile the woolfe to the lamb, but Christ Jesus?

E very day it is the Devils policy to assault the best, the multitude he
knows will follow after; for the unstable vulg^^ are soon carried away with the
religion of authority.

R ooms Schoolmen have invented a doctrine of fables cunningly devised, and the
Friars had crotchets enough, but the Jesuit put down all.

E very bad King hurts much by his unjust commands, but more by their examples:
for the Common wealth like a fish rots first at the head.

T he precepts of Kings are sometimes evil, therefore we must only obey them
in God, but when God commands we may not examine, but execute.

O nly a form of godliness will never remove Gods judgments from a Nation.

T o wear the Devils livery, to be the pentioner of hell at the command of
that malignant spirit, is a most damnable name and shame.

H ee that is to day a Papist, tomorrow a Protestant, next day no man can tell
what, nor himself; such a man denies Christ.

E very man will try to write with two pens, hunt two ways, fight with two
swords, or travel two ways together, is a troublesome folly: truth has but
one way, no second, not another.

L et truth once flourish, and heresy find no footing, then shall justice
reign, oppression shall be oppressed; the hand of bribery shall be broken, the
arm of injustice cut off, and the mouth of iniquity stopped.

E very man shall sit under his own vine, we shall fear no breaking in of
enemies to invade us, nor hear any news or noyses to affright us.

F or joy we shall sing aloud, our Princes shall be wiser, and our Judges
better instructed, and instead of serving themselves and the time, will learn
to serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice in him.

T he Lord is a living Lord, and a giving God, unchangeable his goodness, most
bountiful in his benificence.

H ee that is the common enemy, seeks to devour all: therefore every man cease
quarelling one with another, and fight with him.

A ll men are merry, but who mournes, for God is angry with us, and would
destroy us, did not Jesus stand in the breach for us.

N ever depend on the favor of God, until our hearts be purged of pride and
self-love; be every thing denied that has no relation to Christ.

D oath all the world acknowledge some God, do some Narions acknowledge too
many gods, for shame let us acknowledge one God.

A sall times have their incident troubles, so there is one maine day of
trouble, yet considering Gods promise he will never fail his.

B ecause we know not the time of our deaths, let us learn with St. Paul to dye
daily.

O ne halse hour spent fixedly every day, will by Gods grace bring alteration
heart and life.

V igilancie, carfulness, and love, are the three marks and helps of
diligence.

T hat man's life is well bestowed in death, when to patience is add godliness.

A s finer tempers are more sensible of the changes of the weather, so the
faithful and familiar with God can discry his judgments.

S uch is the Worlds desperateness and policy to vex whom God has blessed;
but still he takes them into his tuition, and will devout their enemies.

Y f man say to God in the midst of his distresses, Is this thy justice? he
will answer, Oh man, Is this thy faith?

O ur sins by sea and land are so great, that it is the only infinite mercy of
God that in every place we perish not.

U nthankfull men are the worse for all Gods favors, and the worse they grow
toward the end, the worse it shall be for them in the end.

W ee commonly kill our beasts when they are fattest, but judgment surpriseth
sinners when they are leanest, which is the remotest distance from goodness.

E very sin is mighty, therefore our repentance must be more hearty, which mixed
with faith and hope, will bring us to heaven.

R epent in life, that thou may find comfort in death; for the great Judge
cannot err, he knows our going out and coming in.

E xtraordinary terror was at the Law-giving, but was a burning Image of what
shall be at the Law enquiring.

R oome thinks the Gospels rising, must needs be her falling, and therefore
cannot endure like a sister to communicate with us, but like a Tyrant to
excommunicate.

A unwise King destroys his people: but through the wisdom of them which are
in authority, Cities are inhabited.

N othing so sovereigne but by being abused by sin, may not of a blessing
become a curse.

K nowledge separated from obedience does but inslames a man's reckoning, and
helps to a greater measure of condemnation.

S aint John's short Sermon in his old age was, Little children love one another.

T hree things let us always commit to God, our injuries, our losses, and our
griefs, for he is only able to cure our griefs, to restore our losses, and
rederesse our injuries.

O ur afflictions shall never end us, but God will rather put an end to them,
our mouths shall be filled with laughter, our tongues with singing.

T he end of our conversion is to amend our conversation; and that word which
sounds peace and joy, and remission of sin, leaves this lesson behind it, Sin
no more.

H ee that is never so poor, if a true believer, Peter and Paul, and Jesus
Christ himself are his brethren.

E xhortations to particular duties of holiness, is always needful, even to
those that are most holy, for the seeds of virtue are much hindered by natural
corruption.

R ingt holiness is true nobility, for without goodness there can be no true
glory.

I it is the honor of Gods Saints to be attended by Angels while they live, and
to be exalted by Augels when they dye.

G od both can and will deliver his chosen, he can at all times seasonable for
his own glory.

H ee that will not be found out of God in his mercy while he he lives, shall
be sure to be found out by him in his judgment when he is dead.

T hough all enemies be conquered and vanquished, yet the Christian soldier
shall be crowned.

H ee that neglects to please, cannot complain to be neglected.

A ll that live godly in christ shall suffer persecution: thus Paul Christ's
Aturney pleads our affliction.

N ever think the virtuous and vicious go all noe way, or that good and bad
speed all alike, for it a beast could argue, he would abhor such a tenant.

D espised and distressed souls that humbly acknowledge God on earth shall be
acknowledged and glorified by him in heaven, when Atheists shall be thrown
down into endless calamity.

D estruction bates nothing of total ruin, Gods justice will leave nothing,
for the wicked shall be preyed upon by insatiate judgment till nothing, be
left.

O ur ignorance is our curse: but that which knows not Christ is the most
miserablest.

V ice is always an enemy to true knowledge: but how shall a man like that
food of which he never tasted?

B lessed is the man that seeks by all means to grow in grace, for he shall be
sure to win a Crown of glory.

L et good and we meet in all our actions: for to be wicked is not much worse
then to be undisereet, for knowledge without virtue, makes a man's mitimus to
hell.

E very evil man has lusts of his own which he is as resolute to maintain, as
a father to keep his own children.

A man's conscience is like a pulley that keeps reason in the right wheel. and
cashiers mutinous affections, or executes Marshall law upon them.

S uch as turn grace into wantonness, deny Christ, for he that calls himself
Christian, and teaches that in Christ is granted liberty of finning, denies his
Redeemer.

Y f thou buy honor thou call it thine; indeed thy friend thou calst him
thine, purchasest a house thou calst it thine: but Christ has bought thee with
his blood, yet thou deniest to be his.

O ur inward sincerity is not without external profession: but external
profession may be without inward sincerity.

V ertue is ever full of proselt enemies: darkness is not more contrary to
light, nor sickness to health, nor death to life then vice to goodness.

W hat means the worldling in our birth, we had but swaddling clouts and
cradle: in our death we shall have but a winding sheet and a coffin.

E very man is a soole that forgets his own name, that are the sons of Adam,
the son of dust.

R iches are but for this world; yet God is both Lord of this world, and of
that to come; and where the glory of this ends, the glory of that begins.

E very man's death is the punishment of his first birth: if faithful, the
glory of the second, not a dying but a departing life, with some sorrow laid
off, but with much joy said up.

R achel weeping for her children because they were not, and shall not we? can
we see the Churches tears, and not do our utmost endeavors to comfort her?

A prayer made in confidence that God will hear us, because he has heard us,
may obtain mercy: then approach boldly to the Throne of Grace.

N o shame, sorrow or misery, should ever put any Christian to any desperate
attempt: for there is more valor to endure a miserable life, then to embrace a
wretched death.

K eep thy shield of faith, and thou shall victoriously march with the Saints
on earth, and triumphantly sing with Angels in heaven.

S uch is the sincerity of Christian Religion, that it not only imposes upon
us pure innocence, but also profitable honesty.

T he fear of God, and the love of God are inseparable; he does neither that
does both: he omits neither that does one.

O fall the medicines administered to us by our spiritual Physician, love is
the sweetest, bitter pills will down when they are made up in love.

T he rules of our faith and life are manifest; if we would study enough, study
them and practice.

H ow poor soever thy cottage be, set thy prayers as a guard without, and thy
faith as a lock within: the sevenfold walls of Babylon cannot be so strong.

E very man has his own faith, yet all men have but one faith, by which they
must be saved.

L et thy thoughts examine thy thoughts, for thy conscience must not only
extend to deeds and words, but even to secret thoughts.

E ndeavour to be thrifty husbands of time and means to be spiritually rich;
for if man neglect, the occasion will neglect him.

F ear God as Noah: Noah believes he shall be saved: why he above the rest?
because he believed with fear.

T he inseparable effect of justification is obedience; then we follow Christ,
when we follow his.

H ee that preserves the truth from the malediction of men, preserves himself
from the malediction of God; and he that vindicates the truth from present
blasphemy, tha truth shall preserve him from everlasting misery.

A threefold lot belongs to all faithful men, the lot of suffering, the lot of
happiness, and the lot of salvation.

N o man will hardly brook wounds that cannot endure words for the cause of
his Savior.

David had a great company of Soldiers at his back, yet he slew Goliath alone:
thus Faith alone conquers the Devil.

D estruction is always incident to opulent Cities and delightful places:
Sodom abounded with all delights and pleasures.

O ur sins greedily hear that the mercies of God endures for ever, but they
shall all sensibly hear that the wrath of God endures for ever.

U nthankfulnes is the sole witch and sorcerer, whose drousie enchantments have
made man forget God himself.

B ee not such sins, rather the image of hell then of heave; neither measure
the joys of heaven by our own corrupt and sensual pleasure on earth.

L et us appeal from men's lips to their lives: he that obeyes not Christ,
knows not Christ, it is fruitfulness in good that setles him in our hearts.

E vill hearts have corrupt hands; for if the hand grope for a bribe, as Felix
did of Paul, there must be an unjust heart.

A wicked man thinks he may be out of danger of the Law, if either he have
agreat man to his friend, or have not a great man to his enemy.

S inn with a voice, is sin in action; sin with a cry, is a sin in
presumption.

Y fone act of filthiness do so distress us, that we would give all the
World for a pardon; what torture will the same sin bring being committed again?

O ur days are evil, whether we respect their troubles, or that which
troubles them our sins; and not likely in either of them both to amend.

U ntill knowledge and goodness go together we may be doubtful, for
knowledge will fall from us, when we fall from goodness.

W oe to those that call evil good: woe indeed for refusing the right way, for
approving the wrong: woe, for they have erred: woe, because they will not be
converted.

E rrors are infinite, and but one truth; God charge us to refuse all ways
but one: but the Devil bids us refuse that one.

R eason, will, memory, imagination, affection and sense, by one act of
rebellion, put all their noble family into a shattered disorder.

E very corruption is so pleasing to the wicked that they think it health it
self, for every heart overruns with sin, is all sin.

F orget all sin in respect of continuance: but remember them in respect of
repentance.

I n the last days we live, on the last days we do not meditate; so the last
days falls upon us whilst our first and last, and all our sins are found in
us.

L et us be so kind to our selves as to think doomes day is not past, there
is a day, an evening and a morning; we shall find no peace, unless we
provide for it in the day.

E ndeavour to run so much the faster, as we run for the better prise.

S o far as holy joy is entered into us, so far are we entered into the
everlasting Kingdom of Christ.

T o begin in the spirit and end in the flesh, is in Paul's sense folly: but to
begin with grace and end with wickedness is malicious impiety.

O ur troubles are felt without, but our peace of conscience is always felt
within.

T he right way to heaven is by the signified will of God revealed in his Word,
and whatsoever repugneth that is the wrong.

H appy repentance is sorry for ill beginnings; but to dislike good beginnings
is an unhappy repentance.

E very wise man will work by knowledge, but a fool will spread abroad his
folly.

R ememoer that God is faithful, and will suffer no man to be tem pted above
what he is able to bear.

I n Gedions Army all faint hearted Soldiers were commanded to stay at home,
no cowards get into the Kingdom of heaven.

G od will not be worse to them that follow him, then he is to them that
forsake him: yet alas, how does the world ingrosse men's consciences?

H ee that looks up to the promised Land, and sees but one glympse of those
heaveny treasures, will look scornfully upon the world.

T he way to keep amans heart in heart is by hearty prayer, meditations,
hearing and receiving.

H ee that obtained the precious jewel of Faith, let him be more thankful,
because it is denied to thousands.

A man's faith, his credit, and his eyes admit of no jest, if his faith be
sound, though injury wound his eyes, ignominy his fame; yet faith shall make
all whole.

N othing but the infallible promise of God can be the ground of our faith: but
the cause of our fear is our own sinful weaknesses.

D evotion honors God, charity do good to men, holiness is the image of
heaven, therefore beauteous thankfulness: but faith is good for every purpose,
the foundation of all graces.

D oubling and questioning of that truth we have so long embraced, is the first
step of falling away from our own steadfastness.

O ur obedience to God must not be only inward and habitual, but outward in
the actions of faith, and of the fear of God; like fruitful trees bringing
forth fruit in due season.

U nfruitfulnesse has ever been held a curse; for when God gives salvation, he
is said to take away barrenness.

B ee not like Plaices black and white for they are such, as have the faith of
Christ in their mouths, and the world in their hearts.

L et no extremity of sorrow or suffering enervate thy faith; grudge not to dye
with Christ or for Christ.

E very man is charged with every good work, all holy duties are required of
all men; if we know Christ we will imitate him forthwith.

A Soldier without courage, a horse without metal, a creature without
vivacitie, such is a Christian without fervencie.

S inn upon earth in its own soil grows without planting or any pains
bestowed on it, but much more when it is manured with applause and practice.

Y f the sword of vengeance that devoured the heathen having bin shaken amongst
us, amend us, we shall escape Gods fury, and become blessed examples of his
mercy.

O ur expectation may be challenged with too much violence, if we be not
qualified and directed by patience.

U nload thy conscience by repentance, and the everlasting doors of heaven
shall give thee entrance.

W hither the good we hope for be deferred, or the evil we fear be
inflicted, still patience is a cordial, which if God preserve to us, will
certainly preserve us to him.

E nter into the joy of your Lord says the King himself, thus all excuses of
our not entering into the Kingdom of heaven is taken away.

R emember what Christ faith to thee, and thou shall be the better able to
remember what he has done for thee.

E ntrance into heaven consists of two things, our union with Christ, and
communion with the Holy Ghost.

F ull of good works, full of fruits, full of blessings, full of God, brings to
lie down full of peace, and rise again full of glory.

I t is a barren mindefulnesse that does not declare it self in holy
fruitfulness.

L et others be ambitious of great and glorious parentage, only pray we Lord
make us thy sons and daughters in Christ Jesus.

E xpectation of heaven belongs only to Gods own afflicted; and to them that
suffer much misery in this world, is promised a new.

S ome virtues cannot be exercised, but in troubles: we must be poor and want
before we can exercise the virtue of thankfulness.

T here could be no destruction to destroy us, if there were no corruption in
us; neither could man or devil destroy us, if we did not destroy our selves.

O Israel thou destroyest thy self; if there be-any help it is in me: Gods
hand of justice strikes, but man by his wickedness draws out the sword.

T he tolling of a bell for a friend wakens a man at midnight: yet for all the
lamentable dying groans of the Church of God, with the innumerable gaspes of
dying Christians we are all asleep.

H ee that will not be so sullen as to be holy, for fear of displeasing a
company of sinners, shall never be so happy as to enjoy the society of God and
his holy Angels.

E mbrace not the world, for it will steal away thy faith: faith obtained, and
faith retained, shall without fail advance thy soul to glory.

L et no man dye in sin, for thou can not be so quick to dispatch thy sin,
as God is to dispatch thy soul.

E very sinful man can no more escape his trial, then a pregnant woman can
escape or avoid her travel.

F ew men have the luck to steal themselves into heaven in spite of hell;
many have the fate to cosen themselves into hell, in spite of heaven.

T he world is not a minute to eternity, man's life is but a minute to the
world, occasion is but a minute to our life; yet we scarce apprehend a minute
of that occasion.

H ee that made the world in six days, and could have done it in six hours,
spared it above a thousand years before the flood.

A s we are sure our life shall not reach to a thousand years, so we are not
sure is shall not last out a day.

N oman shall ever be condemned for being ignorant of that which he is not
bound to know.

D ear bought and far fetched things are for rich purses and rich pallats; but
there is a poor herb in the garden called Time, more precious then all.

D evotion of the heart, profession of the mouth, and conversation of life, are
the objects of a Christian.

O f the flesh comes three sorts of things: some good, as the knowledge of
Arts: some indifferent, as honor and riches: some evil, as the works of sin.

V ertue grows fastest upon us when vices decay in us; it is always busy, but
then most eager when we are most holiest.

B lessed is the man that is holy, nothing can make that man poor, he graceth
all conditions, honors and places.

L et others boast of generation, but a godly man of regeneration; this is the
best ornament of blood, the nobliest part of the secuchion, and fairest flower
in the Gentleman's gatland.

E ternall life and salvation is not allotted to every one, but for the Saints;
he that will have a lot in Canaan, let him be sure to be a true Israclite.

A desire of blessedness cannot be expected where there is not a well grounded
hope to be blessed.

S alvation in repentance is Gods end, let not him lose his hope, and we shall
not lose ours.

Y f a man will be noble, let him be humble, for the humble shall be exalted.

O ur honors are the fruits of birth, of wisdom, of valor, of riches, of
place and authority, or of royal favor: but it is never of the fruit of
grace, nor the blessing of God without humility.

U nlesse we honor Christ otherwise then the world does, we have no more grace
then the worldling has.

W ee have not the sign of a star in our foreheads, but the sign of the
cross: still humility is the way to glory, this way went all the Saints; this
way went even the God of Saints.

E arthly inheritances are oftentimes divided with much inequality, and the
privilege of primogeniture stretches far, but in the new heaven it is not so.

R iches gotten and forgotten must be accounted for before God the divine
Justice: Gehezaes talent of gold could not buy off his sores, nor hide his
shame.

E ven the poorest amongst us may give praises unto God; and the more he spares
us in our bloods and estates, the more we are obliged to him in thankfulness.

H olinesse is not tied to literature, Doctor and Saint are not convertible,
for then he that knows his Masters will could not choose but do it.

A man may be sooner acquainted with the nine Muses, then with the three
Graces, Learning, Discretion, and Honesty.

L et others be full of the politics: it is good for us to be well habited in
the morrals: one thing is necessary, integrity of heart.

F lattery and treachery are but two names of one vice (...) dry suits of
mischief.

E very man that defends not Gods Church, glorifies him not, for he means small
honor to the head, that does not his best to save the body.

F aithfull service is most accepted where it is least expected: some would do
much for Christ's glory, and cannot; thousands of us can do much for his glory,
and will not.

I t is better for a man to want some truth then want peace: for a man that
never studied controversies, may without controversy be saved.

L et every soul humbly cast himself down at the foet of Christ, and be
beholding to him only for his salvation, for our best works are but blankes.

E very wise man will be easily requested to do himself good when God sues to
us to save us, we are sullen to hinder our own preferment.

S alvation comes from God: yet he will be found a God of judgment, they that
have denied it their mortal flesh, shall acknowledge it in immortal fire.

T here be two things torment a man: sin, and a bad conscience: grace
delivers from sin, and peace quiets the conscience.

O ld men, covetous young men, voluptuous Nobles, ambitious common persons,
ceremonious, or whosoever is led away with any kind of wantonness, is brought
within the Devils lure.

T here is fearful combustion all over the world, wars at home, wars abroad;
if therefore we love peace, every man pray for peace.

H ee that desires to be found in peace, let peace be found in him; peace or
nothing, peace and every thing.

E very whispering and murmuring is like a vapor rising out of the earth,
multiplying into storms of sedition: sedition grows into mutinies, and
mutinies into confusion.

R emember David, that holy King would admit no States-min as far as he could
discern, but such as were after his own heart.

I ts a true protraitor of the Churches condition, that as Israel has been
temporally wasted; so the Church of God is now spiritually assaulted.

G od would have us read our sins in our judgments, that we may both repent
of our sins, and give glory to his justice.

H ee that cannot keep himself from death while he lives, will more impossioly
restore and revive himself to life again, being dead.

T hy Prince has honor, thy father reverence, thy master service, thy wife
love; all these are due to God in a more transcendent manner.

H ee that sincerely loves God, and detests sin, desires dissolution for no
other end but to be freed from temptation.

A s no wise man leaves his he house for some flies, but rather drives them
out: so no good forsakes his holiness for temptations.

N either the gifts of grace, nor the seals of grace can free us from
assaults: we may have force to repel bad suggestions, we have not to prevent
them.

D eclare thy grievance by prayer, it shall bring down heavenly graces: God
knows thy wants, ask, he has promised to hear.

D eath to the godly is good in the cessation of pains, better in the
renovation of all things, best in the immutability of all happiness.

O ur talk is of vanity, and vanity is with us: but if Christ could be kept in
our mouths, we should always have him in our hearts.

U nbeleefe is the bane of constancy and perseverance: of constancy in the
purpose of our minds: of perseverance in the tenor of our lives.

B arrennesse is a privation of fruit, shame privation of innocence, and death
a privation of life; for these privations men sell themselves.

L ike horses, whether put into perfumed Coaches, or noisome carts, they will
draw: so our affections will be doing set them on what work you will.

E arth will to earth, an earthly desire to an earthly center: so man lives
till earth be turned into earth; so he dies till earth be turned out of earth,
their earthly souls into hellish torments; such a life is base and brutish.

Y f there be ignominy in thraldom, there must be glory in freedom: Stand
fast therefore in the liberty wherein Christ has set you.

O nce turning from God, we continue naught: naught till we return by
repentance.

U nholy Machiavels admired for policy, commonly falls under Jehoakims curse,
to be buried with the burial of an Ass: they live fools, but dye Asses.

R ighteous men shall live for ever, for their reward is with the Lord; he
has a care of them.

F aith and repentance were two short lessons; yet Israel was forty years
before they could learn them.

R emember your sins to repent of them; forget to practice them, that God may
forget them in judgment, and remember us in mercy.

O ld sins must be looked back into, because the vanity of youth, proves the
vexation of age.

N one can be too young to amend that is old enough to dye, for man is apt to
sin before he be able.

T o give over sin when we can no longer commit it, is no repentance.

A good Christian will be good and devout, like good Daniel, though alone.

S ome trust in horses, some in their swords, some in their lands, some in
their wits, some their friends, and some in their moneys; but let every good
Christian trust in the Lord.

Y f we must converse with evil men, let it be in no evil matters.

O nce God spoke it, another time performed it, a third time redouled it;
therefore none can plead ignorance that they want instruction.

U ngodly men may taste of the waters of life by chance, as a dog laps at
Nilus, but his voyage is bound for mischief.

W hile the Devil can busy men with ceremony and circumstance, he hopes well,
and will let them alone about faith and manners.

E xternall prosperity is no good mark of our election: the fairest beasts are
kept for slaughter.

R emember always the house of mourning is not for mirth; Christ turned the
Musicians out of doors.

E very judgment we see should make us wiser in the fear of God: every mercy
we feel wiser in the love of God.

H ee that thinks to assuage the anguish of one sin by doing another,
preseribes to himself a remedy far worse then the disease.

A fair carriage keeps temptation out at staves end; but lightness of
presence lets it into the graple, and gives encouragement to lewd desires.

L ove is commended like water, it neither makes a man in debt nor in drink;
so love is neither hard to get, nor costly to keep.

F alling from Christ can be incident to none but Christians: for they that
were never up, can never be said to fall.

F or known diseases there be known medicines: but hypocrisy prevents all
ways of remedy.

I t is better with Philosophers to have honesty without Religion, then with
wicked Christians to have Religion without honesty.

L et men turn from wickedness to piety, and God will turn judgment to
mercy: Solomon and Idolater, Zacheus an extortioner, Noah drunk; yet all these
went to heaven.

E xpectation is sometimes of fear: so the timer ous traveller looks for the
thief, and so the conscious malefactor looks for the coming of the Judge.

Saul is tempted, sins, and sleeps his last: David is tempted, sins,
and sleeps not his last.

T he less space a man has allowed for his business, the more he should ply
it, the fewer days, the fruitfuller lessons.

O h that my people would have heard, these are royal and sweet speeches: but
to the wicked God changes his speech into sharpness.

T he more a man fears God, the less he fears any thing else: for all the fear
of Satan arises from the want of the due fear of God.

H ee that loves God only for temporal blessings, and fail him when those
blessing fail: is like mutinous soldiers, no longer pay, no longer fight.

E ndeavour to keep thy shield of faith, and thou shall victoriously march with
the Saints on earth, and triumphantly with Angels in heaven.

L et Princes boast of their delicacies, Christ lives in me: this be the food
of our souls.

E ndeavour that your faith be increased, and grow still from faith to faith.

F aith is a fundamental grace, and should overcome the World; yet it will
prove a coward without servencie.

T here is no poverty of estate, or consumption of body, to a lean starved
soul, which neither knows nor cares to know Christ.

H ee that loves God for himself, and goodness because it is goodness, can
God.

A s God will crown the faithful above their deserts with glory: so he will
load the wicked according to their deserts with eternal torments.

N ot to have no spots here; but to have no spots imputed to us hereafter, is
the happiness of Christian.

D arknesse of nature must have its due course by creation: yet no darkness
shall afflict thy body while there is saving light in thy soul.

D esire more grace, seek more, never think you have enough: be still poor
that you may be rich, rich that you may be full, full that you may be glorious.

O h that men could see how much better it is to be poor then evil; and that
there is no comparison between want and sin!

U se the world, but enjoy the Lord: be thankful for outward blessings, but
rest thy heart on Jesus Christ.

B etter are the troubles and differences of righteousness, then the peace of
wickedness.

L et nothing pierce your hearts deep, either in grief or fear, but sin and
unbeleefe.

E nvy not the gifts of God in any, neither think hardly of their infirmities,
nor fret at the prosperity of the wicked.

Y f we be departed from Babylon, let not a rag or relike of superstition abide
with us: for it is proore comfort to escape in Sodom, and perish in the
Playnes.

O ur conversation to God must be with a whole heart, without exception,
without hypocrisy, without delay, without apostacy, and without despair.

U nstable men are in a wretched estate, their Religion is yet to choose: they
know they shall dye, but know not what faith to dye in.

R ight holiness, is true nobility; for without goodness, there can be no
true glory.

F aith working by love, performs all duties to God and man: but false faith
is like sandy earth which never brings forth fruit.

R eligion and true Piety is the readiest way to the highest advancement:
therefore above all treasure, set your hearts thereon.

O ne spark of true Religion is far beyond a whole flame of secular wisdom.

N eeds must that virtue be fruitful that is stirring: and needs must that be
stirring that is living: and needs must that be living that is quickened by
Jesus Christ.

T he neglect of resolution to enter the way of righteousness, is the forlorn
state of a sinner: for what hopes can be had of him that has not so much as a
purpose to be holy?

A good man lives after death: but the name of the wicked is rotten before
their carcaste is cold.

S inn like a viper may hang upon Paul's hand and not poison it; it may bring a
potentiall guilt, not an actual.

Y f man's heart be divided, if sinks to confusion; but keep it whole to the way
of truth, and it shall be saved.

O ur eyes be good, we know our hands be good: God grant our hearts be good,
that we may defend Christ's cause.

U ntill a man seele his own want, and that feeling breed sorrow, that sorrow
desire, that desire prayer, that prayer increase of faith; that prayer of his
shall never bring down Gods mercy.

W retched are they that flatter themselves: but blessed are they that can
prove themselves to be out of the rank of the ungodly.

E xamine thy self whether thou have suffered an heavenly holy violence, or
whether grace has wrought upon thee: if not: thou live the life of nature.

R emember to walk in a measure of holiness answerable to Gods mercy; for if
we turn his grace into wantonness, he will turn his mercy into judgment.

E very argument is shut up with an ergo, and is the known note of a
conclusion, thus may the syllogism be framed: but whosoever would escape
destruction, must adhere to the truth.

T he greatest show of sanctity that error puts on, the more fuller of
suspicion: therefore beware of the intended mischief.

O ppinionate wisdom is in a manner the sole cause of all folly; for it
transports a man with an imagination of his own knowledge, that he runs into
error with confidence.

T hey that will walk to Christ, shall have Christ walk with them; for he is
the truth, the way, and the life.

H ee that believes will keep the Commandments: for as the Law sends us to
Christ to be saved; so Christ sends us back again to the Law to learn
obedience.

E very Scribe instructed unto the Kingdom of heaaen, brings out of his
treasure things new and old; the new before the old, because the Gospel was
promised, before the Law was Printed.

R econciliation, and the peace that was made between God and man, did not
stretch so far as to conclude a peace between God and sin.

I am a sinner, therefore God has from everlasting rejected me, is a desperate
conclusion: I believe in Christ, and endeavor to live like a Christian,
therefore am chosen, is a sound inference: so far God gives leave to look into
the book of life.

G ods informer is conscience, a spy in the soul mixing herself with all our
thoughts and actions.

H ee that hopes for a new heaven above, and does not become a new creature
below, that man's expectation is in vain.

T he highest act of a Christian is to comfort himself in Christ: he never
fell from us; we are basely unthankful if ever we fall from him.

H ee that knows God, and lives in evil, is no better then a devil in the
shape of a man, or a man in the shape of a devil.

A s no place can content the fire but the upmost rising toward its own
region: so let no knowledge satisfy us but the knowledge of Christ.

N atural men perceive not the things of Gods Spirit: in other knowledge the
righteous have part with sinners; but in this sinners have no part with the
righteous: let me be weak in policy, so I be wise of salvation.

D ivine knowledge mounts aloft, and find^s no rest but in the region of
immortality.

C elsitude of honor is a mere dwarf to faith; that can but command mortals,
faith is attended by Angels.

O ur faith has need of a good foundation, for it is an heavy and weighty
building, all other virtues lie upon faith.

U nbeleeving sinners tremble: but let such fear to dye as have no hope to
dye; if we have made our peace with God, we shall escape from death.

N o man can take Christ from thee, unless thou take thy self first from
Christ.

T he Gospel is no weak thing, but comes in power; for Christ has a further
latitude, he came once unto men, but he comes still into man.

E xcept a man be borne he can never see light on earth; and except he be twice
borne he can never see light in heaven.

R edemption by Christ has stated us into a blessedness never to be
forgotten: for no soul that Christ has truly bought can ever perish.

M ans sins have made heavens entrance narrow; but Christ's sufferings have
made it wide.

A little faith with knowledge, is true and saving; but great presumption with
ignorance is damnable.

R eligion knows no outward calling or condition: for all those that are in
Christ, are holy believing brethren.

C ertainly if men believed in Christ, they would not, nay could not speak, not
look upon his works without great reverence.

H ee that trusts his salvation on a strange faith erres in darkness, and
holds not the way which the light of the Gospel directs him.

T he Gospel speaks of Christ buying: Ye are bought with a price: to fell that
which is bought, is to cross his proceeding.

O f all purchases, buy Jesus: for be thou never so poor, Christ will sell
himself for thy soul.

T he life of man is precious in the sight of God: but the life of his whole
Church is far more precious.

H ee that cares not for any mirth but that which must grieve the Holy Ghost,
must needs procure that peace which is at wars with Christ.

E very man thinks he loves himself better then his enemy; but while he loves
sin, he loves his enemy better then himself.

L et the servants that are under the yoke count their own master worthy of
all honor, that the name of God and his doctine be not blasphemed.

E very action that gives way to Gods dishonor, and heartens others to
superstition, is a denial of Christ in some degree of fact.

F alse Prophets intrude amongst the people, but principally amongst the people
of God.

T he Devil is a false Prophet, he calls evil good, and promises bad,
attempts good events; either he conceales the end from the way, or the way from
the end.

H earken not to the world for it is a false Prophet, it tells you your gold
shall make you rich, when it rather makes you cursed.

A n Infidel persuades himself there shall be no reckoning day, and an
Epicure dreams of no future life: false: for the Lord will take them away in a
whirlewind.

N atures colors will last; if not, artificial shall say pride to the
beautiful: false: Art shall make a fool of Nature, Time make a fool of Art,
and Death make a fool of all.

D runkards prophecy to morrow shall be as to day, and much more abundant:
false: awake and howl, Oye drunkards, for the wine is cut off from your mouths.

C arnall minds hope and say, I will be sure to repent: false: thousands are
in hell that promised themselves this evasion, neither has any man a patent of
repentance.

O ur ambitious men flatter themselves, saying, we will arise out of the dust,
and sit with Princes: false: for they shall fall from the throne to the dust.

V anity and worldly pleasure says, I am a Queen, and shall see no
mournfulnesse: false: for the day of lamentation is come.

N aturall men are moles to spiritual objects: but wise and regenerate eyes
can pierce the heavens, and espy God in all his earthly occurrences.

T he flesh is a false Prophet, every affected sin is a false Prophet to the
soul; for falsehood if it cannot deceive another, it will deceive if self.

E very man says he is in Gods favor, so were the children of Israel till
they were tempted by false Prophets and sinned.

R ighteousnesse is the life of all lives, without which our bodies shall rot
in the dust, and our memories stink above ground, yea our selves perish in the
lowest pit.

M any will be in the Church way, the road of profession; not for any love they
bear to devotion, but that the sent of their turpitudes may not be discovered.

A ll ungodliness robs God of his honor, and is either the true worship of a
false god, or the false worship of the true God, or the true worship of the
true God with a false heart.

R hetoricke is the art of speaking well; Logic the art of disputing well;
Magistracy the art of governing well: but Christianity is the art of living
well.

C an the Naturalist with all his eloquence dissuade the covetous worldling
from his greediness: no, one ounce of gold weighs down all his reasons.

H eavenly things are far from carnal sense, and he that will believe no more
then he sees, shall for ever be blind.

F ew and evil are our days, few in number, evil in nature, not one of them
good, few and evil below; many and evil above: misery is our familiar,
happiness but a stranger.

I t is a great comfort in distress to hope for a deliverer: to believe is
better, but to be sure of it is best of all.

L et us be sure to repent one day before our death; but hereof we cannot be
sure unless we repent every day.

E very man repent while be lives, that he may rejoice when he dies.

Simeon desired not to dye sooner, he desired not to live longer: Now letthy
servant go away in peace.

T here is a double martyrdom, a bloody one when Christ is magnified in the
roses of his Church by death: a bloodlesse one when he is magnified in the
lillies of his Church by a holy life.

O f vanities we soon grow weary, and loath them; but the joys of
righteousness will be as everlasting in our desires, as they are in their own
sweetness.

T o turn from sin is Gods special grace by giving repentance: but to fall
from steadfastness, is through defect of perseverance.

H ave you righteousness, seal and deliver it as your act and deed; never say
you praise God with your words, when you despise him by your works.

E very man decline unrighteousness which dissolves peace, and then God shall
fulfill in our hearts St. Peter's wish, Grace and peace.

R espect God in all things, doing nothing but as in his presence, looking unto
him as the directer and discerner of all our actions and thoughts.

I t is Gods delight in extremity to be a deliverer when Armies besiege his
servants, then he musters up his servants.

G ods displeasure for sin is able to turn a Nation upside down; that like
Senacherib, they become the spoil of their own bowels.

H ee that marvells in this rebellious age how or why we thus fall by the
sword, let him look to his sins, and cease marvelling.

T here are destructions that creep upon men by degrees: but sudden destruction
often seizes upon the wicked.

O ur God will not favor us because we have studied hard, and known much, but
rather the more punish us, because we have known good, and done evil.

R eligion and Piety is made havocke of, and all to atchieve glory, that which
the Apostles rent their clothes to put from them; let us rend our very skins to
pluck to us, Act. 14.14.

L et every servant of God think his crosses are meant for his blessings;
punishments to them are signs of his favors.

E ven for those who have fought a good fight, a Crown is laid up, be
diligent then in this point, and be saved.

F aith is a Queen, repentance her usher, and good works the Court that shall
follow her: so let her come to the King of mercy, the presence chamber of
Christ Jesus.

T he ground of hope in the midst of delay is when the deferring of our
desires discourageth not our faith.

O ur affections if they be not shod with patience, will be so pricked with
crosses, that we shall be weary of our journey to heaven.

R egard not so much what portion thou have in the punishment of sin, as what
interest thou have in the Covenant.

T he execution of Gods justice does magnify his mereies, when he punishes
some, that he may spare many.

O nly a form of godliness will never remove Gods judgment from a Nation.

T o bear meekly with thy persecuters is commendable patience; to be
commendable at Gods dishonor, is commendable baseness.

H ee is a fool that loves sin better then his soul: then never seek to
please sin that seeks to confound us.

E very man commonly fears Gods temporal blows more then his eternal: yet of
both they neglect the antidote and prevention.

C onsidence in God does only support us: we cannot put too much trust in him,
not too little in our selves.

E very affliction prepares us for salvation: a mere paradox to the children of
this world, who run in the cirele of sin and pleasure.

N ever did pride go more blustering through the streets then now; and the
language of her pace is, Who made me?

T he dust of this world makes many a man blind; they did like moles in the
earth, and there lose the light of heaven.

E very man seeks for something to rest his mind upon; but to make this world
the center, that and our hopes must fail together, for the fire will dispatch
them both.

R iches shuts abundance out of heaven, but the grace of God lets in many.

C hrist rejoices in a Christian, whenever a Christian rejoices in him: the
repentant son was not more glad of the father, then the father was glad he
found the son.

L et every man labor to preferve what he has gotten: for the loss of faith
is a dangerous ship wrack; save your faith and save your souls.

O ne and the same end is to the sinner without repentance; and to the
righteous without perseverance.

S alvation is with more difficulty wrought up then perdition; yet grace, time
and diligence, will work it up in season.

E very work has his own season: only Gods work requires every season,
especially the work of praising his name.

T he law was perfect truth, but we were weak, it could not save us, because
we could not keep it: but on the Evangelicall truth we may repose our souls.

O ne way to honor is by flattery, another to pleasure is by making the flesh
mistress, and a way to be rich by usury: yet but one way to make a man
blessed, and that is the way of truth.

Y f our obedience do not testify our faith: that Law was not more deadly
then the Gospel to inhance our condemnation.

O ur Soldiers are valiant till they come to fight, all Philosophers are
excellent till they come to dispute; and all good Christians till we come to
master our own lusts.

V anity in some men, curiosity in other men; and unconstancie in all men,
makes many faiths.

R eligion that binds the conscience where God has not bound it, brings
snares and fetters, and takes away due liberty.

C ommonly too much heat annoyes, but too much heat destroys: but Religion of
all tempers in our days, complains not of heat.

L ot could be holy among the wicked, a Saint amongst sinners; yet we are evil
amongst the good, and sinners amongst Saints.

O ur growing or fading in grace brings us to heaven or hell, Paul turns an
Apostle, Judas an apostate.

S trong bodies without strong grace, are strongest to sin: thus the strongest
is weakest; strong to commit sin, weak to resist sin.

E vill can never be the child of goodness, nor can sin so basely descended,
lay claim to omnipotency.

O vercome evil with good, and be far from snatching Gods weapon out of his
hand, but rather master unkindnesse with kindness.

R ather labor to avoid sin by knowledge, then venture to sin upon the
conceit of repentance.

D elay is dangerous when we are once resolved: if ever good, why not now?

E very man is charged with every good work, all holy duties are required of
all men: if we know Christ, we will imitate him.

R emember that as addition a adds to grace, so multiplication increases the
effect of those graces.

R epentant eyes are true Cisternes of holy water, and the sighs of sorrowful
spirits on earth, makes the Spirits joyful in heaven.

A s God regards not so much the quantity, as the quality; not how much, but
how true faith is: so he never rejected them that had any at all.

N either the greatness of crime, not the thortnesse of time can bar true
conversation from for givenesse.

K nowledge, virtue, temperance, patience, godliness, brotherly kindness, and
charity, with one end tied to heaven, fasten the other end to the conscience,
and it shall draw thee up to heaven.

S aving knowledge takes away barrenness, andmakes fruitfulness in the works
of obedience.

T here be two things torment a man, sin and a bad conscience, grace delivers
from sin, and peace quiets the conscience.

O ne that has a will bent to do harm, and a wit able to prosecute it is
like a Canon shot that makes a Lane where it goes.

T here is fearful combustion all over the world, wars at home, wars abroad;
if therefore we love peace, let every man pray for peace.

H ee that desires to be found in peace, let peace be found in him, peace or
nothing, peace and every thing.

E arthly peace the earth can give, though sometimes she will not: but the
peace of Christ the world cannot take away.

F or profit peace is like the dew of heaven that makes all fat and fruitful;
wheresoever peace sets her foot, there drops fatness.

R egeneration makes a man like the Garden of Eden, wherein stands the Tree of
life: Jesus Christ when he dyed, one Paradise entered into another,

O ur condemantion is great, if we know the light, and yet choose darkness.

N o more but eight saved of the old world: see what sin can do, bring many
millions to eight persons.

T here can be no safety without faith, there is no faith without a promise,
and no promise is made to disobedience.

C hrist was made a sinner by the reputation of our sins; and we made just by
the imputation of his justice.

L ife brings appetite, appetite brings desire of meat, and meat affords
nourishment, if the soul hungers not after Christ, it lives not.

O ur sins deceived us of our birthright, let it not deceive us of our
blessing: it stole us from our happiness of nature, let it not steal us from
our happiness of grace.

S inn shows the Devil horrible, God a severe judge, let the Gospel remove
that: God is my father, the Devil his and thy slave.

E very wound of Christ is a passage, his side was opened, his heart was
pierced: through both these breaches we have entrance into heaven.

T his is a faithful saying, and worthy all acceptance that Christ can forgive
more, then we can offend: but that he will forgive all, is a fearful question.

O ur salvation is sure in Christ; upon sin, will follow doubt; upon doubt,
terror; upon terror, remorse, upon remorse, deprecation: upon that pardon, and
after that peace.

Y f holiness be not in the heart, it is not where it should be: Ismael was an
unbeleever in the house of faith.

O pen thy heart as well as thine ear: if the seed of Gods Word be not sown
there, it will never abound with fruit to everlasting life.

V ertue is not temporal, but is still ambitious of improving it self, and so
is admitted into the number of Gods Jewels.

R ecollect your selves, and become fruitful trees, that when God transplants
you from this misery, he may set you in his own glorious garden.

O ur best works are but blanks, then let us go out of our selves, and be
beholding to the righteousness of Christ only for our salvation.

R aise thy affections above a common pitch, and let thy soul bear herself as
the Spouse of the great King of heaven.

D iligence respects so great an object as salvation, and such an object
requires great diligence.

E lection in heaven, calls for vocation on earth; vocation calls for corn,
wine, and oil, which are the fruits of a godly life.

R iches brings contention, godliness brings contentation: gain has often
hurt the getters, but piety is profitable to all men.

O ne Jesus Christ in the Gospel never satiated any man that read him:
therefore let the Word of God dwell in you plentiously.

R ecover you affecttions so dear to you, that were the prisoners and drudges
to lust, and let them now do service to God.

C harity gives part of thy wealth to the poor, but faith gives thy self, yea
thy whole self to God.

L et this sinful flesh do what it can, it shall not hinder thy entrance into
heaven, for which thank God through Jesus Christ.

O ur good is only accepted through the righteousness of Christ, our very
persons are accepted in the beloved: if our persons, then our good actions.

S ecurity and expectation are opposites: the servant that looks for his
Masters coming is afraid to fall asleep.

E very man that is kind to his brother, comes with best speed to his Maker.

O f such a zeal as prefers Gods service before all other things, comes true
godliness.

R ighteousnesse of reparation is the reforming of errors, and confirming of
manners, salving past defects by a bettered life.

D ivorce must be suffered, one husband must be lost, happy is he that finds
another in heaven, Christ Jesus.

E ndeavour to be saved, is no easy task, but requires labor; refuse no
work for such a reward as heaven is.

R ead the Scriptures constantly, and meditate upon them: for it was holy
David's practice day and night.

T o be strong to sin is no credit for man, for strength to sin, is to be
strong to go to hell.

O Christian acknowledge thy dignity, and being made the consort of a divine
Nature, return not by thy degenerate conversation unto thy ancient vildnesse.

T o small purpose do we keep the Law in memory, and break it in life; in
vain do we remember Christ in our words, and forget him in our deeds.

H ee that carties a Bible in his hand, and has not a leston of it in his
heart, is like an Ass that carries a dainty burden on his back, and feeds
upon thistles.

E ither they had no beginning or no end, whose end is worse then their
beginning: for death that ends other miseries, begins his that falls away from
God.

R emembrance of one days sin, brings to mind how great a mass many days
have made up; too great a bottom for one hours sorrow to ravell out.

I n youth I was too young, now I am too old, between both these time I had
other business: so to shufflle off repentance, is very dangerous.

G ods patience invites our repentance, his sparing us so long, is, that our
amendment might proeure him to spare us for ever.

H ee that has any motion of repentance in his soul, or but a touch of
sorrow, a spark of hope, a grain of says, be comforted; the God of mercy
will not have him perish.

T his is our day, the next is the Lords; if we do not in this day provide for
that, that day shall condemn us for the loss of this.

H ee that has a secret pride, root out that, or a secret infidelity cast out
that: strive not to know where or when we shall be judged; but how we shall
answer the Judge.

A s no day without sin, so let no day pass without sorrow, such showers kill
the weeds of lust, and spring the herbs of grace.

N ot a Lot in Canaan without a Joshua our Captain: no room in heaven without
a Jesus our King.

D oe not protract thy conversion: for if thou repel or neglect one good
motion, thou art not sure of a second.

W ithout some sauce of sorrow, all worldly delights are but like delicate meat
to a man that has lost his taste: give God leave to scrourge us, so long as he
does save us.

H ee that is lowest in the World, if his conversation be in Heaven, is the
highest, let his feet stand upon the earth, his head is in heaven.

E very one puts off conversion, and at twenty send Religion before them to
thirty, from thence forty; and yet not pleased to entertain it at threescore:
at last comes death, and allows not an hour.

E very man repent while he lives, that he may rejoice when he dies.

L et every man be sure to repent one day before his death: but hereof thou
can not be sure unless thou repent every day.

E arth must do something to bring it self to heaven: Gods bountifuluesse is
beyond our thankfulness, then look to thine own duty.

T o speak of virtue is nothing, the labor of it, is to show the power of it
in virtuous actions.

O ur conversation is the Index of our estate, if that be bad, the credit of
our profession is lost, and we are broke in our Religion.

T hat heart that conceives grace will bring it forth; for he that gives
strength, denies not strength to bring it forth.

H ee that is truly called, has a sincere devout affection to Christ, and
above all things loves the place where his honor dwells.

E vill men may show the good they have not: but good men cannot hide the good
they have.

L et thy life grow white thy hairs, lest thou be full of days, and fuller of
sin.

E very man's conscience testifies that there is a rule, which if he follow he
does well, and is at peace; if not, he finds trouble, with fear of punishment.

F aith is the foundation of a Christian, but that once lost, all is desperate,

T he good man sleeps more secure in his tent, then a sinner in his barracadoed
fortifications.

H appy is the man that cares not to call any thing his own, save Jesus Christ.

A righteous soul is always like the body of a square figure; lay it how you
list, it will still be constant, and like it self.

N o neighborhood is able to make the Serpent and the Woman, the cursed seed
of the one, and the blessed seed of the other agree.

D eath is contrary to life, and commonly they that live like Laban, dye like
Nabal, which is but the same word inverted.

W hen man turns himself out of Gods service, all the creatures serving him
are turned out of his service.

H ee that plays on purpose to lose, is not like to win: therefore be resolved
against transgression, as you would be resolved of your salvation.

E ither never choose me, or never lose me, this is virtues charge: to begin in
the spirit and end in the flesh, in Paul's sense is folly.

E very man must fall, and as the tree falls so it must lie; and commonly it
falls to that side which is most laden with fruit, the fruit of obedience to
the right hand, and of wicked nesse to the left.

L et us eat to live, not live to eat; for when we have devoured the most
delicate creatures, the worms shall devour us.

E very man that lives dishonestly will dye shamefully: Saul so bloudied
against David, that the Priests became unmercifull to him.

T he less space a man has allowed him for his business, the more let him
ply it: the fewer days the fruitfuller lessons.

O sinner thy life is short, the world is not long, but hell is eternal, of
whose torment there is no cessation, and from which there is no redemption.

T i am past is irrecoverable, the future to us is contingent, and our very now
is slippery and transcient: this is all the term we have, we must enjoy this
or none.

H oly David ran the way of Gods Commandments: it is but folly to ask why he
made such haste, when we know he would feign be at home.

E very day will I bless and praise thy name, says David: the day will have
an evening, if his praise should last no longer, night would bring in silence,
but for ever and ever.

R i would fair and foftly, is the weary travelers rule when he comes near his
journeyes end: but if we lag so in the way of godliness, we shall never come
to the end of our expected journey.

I s there fullness of joy in Heaven? yes: but thy laughing and singing in a
Tavern is no pattern of it.

G reat honor and glory is in heaven: but our base covetous desires of the
riches of this world, are no paternes of it.

H eavenly music and harmony is above: but our wanton sonnets and drunken
carches, are no paternes of it.

T here is peace and rest above: but man's idle security and slippery neglects
are no paternes of it.

H eavenly beauties with clarity are above: but man's peecing the defects of
nature with art, dressing up of dust in rich atires, are no paterns of it.

A great light shines above: but the works of darkness that is in man, is no
reflection of it.

N othing but pure innocence is above: but man's rapines, rage, and
bloudinesse, are no resemblances of it.

D oubtlesse there is perfect obedience above: but man's rebellions, are no
modules of it.

O there language then the praises of Christ is not heard in heaven: man's oaths,
curses, and blasphemies, are not like those sounds.

R epent and for sake your sins while it is called to day, remember the
covenat we made in baptism forbids it.

L ooke to the innumerable savours where with God has blessed us, graced and
honored us, and we shall find them sufficient to oblige us to obedience.

E ither the name of Savior in our salvation, or the name of Judge in our
confusion, some way this honorable name will strike upon us.

F ear God more, and we shall fear all other things less; turn all thy
fear into the fear of God, for he will honor them that honor him.

T ill we have put our sins to the worst, we shall never get the better of our
enemies: for God will not be wanting to us, if we be not wanting to him, and
our selves.

W hen rebellions abound, punishments are full of variety: God destroyed Corah
by fire, the Canaanites by the sword, the whole earth by water.

H ee little loves Christ, that will not love him without company, and his
zeal is cold to heaven, whom the example of numbers can turn away.

E very true child is obedient, and will follow his fathers directions: then
if we follow not God, we are bastards.

E very promise of God is a cordial able to fetch back a swooning soul:
there is no condemnation to them which are in Christ, is a sweet cordial.

L et every Christian soul on the holy feet of faith and obedience travel
toward Jerusalem, then Christ will say thou shall have my company.

E arth is more honorable and brave in the spectators then in the spectacle:
but the glory of new Jerusalem, the splendour of righteousness, is far more
honorable.

A s a traveller passes from Town to Town, till he come to his Inn: so the
Christian from Grace to Grace till he come to Heaven.

B lessed is that man that is holy, nothing can make that man poor, for he
graceth all conditions, honors and places.

O ne grace opens the door for another; for God is never weary of blessing
where he has once begun.

V ivification and living unto grace, comes only by mortification and dying
unto sin: for by the death of the body, comes the life of glory.

T here is nothing for which Christ will reward us, but that whereby his glory
is the greater for us: such as in great tribulations confess him.

R eprobates and wicked men, if their bodies were like their souls, they would
grovell like beasts.

A s God shows mercy to some in their salvation: so it is fit he should show
justice upon others in their damnation.

N othing can defend against the arrows of God, neither are the strongest
Cities shot-proofe: for things ordained for refuge, are by his justice made
destructive.

K nowledge neglected brings great judgments: for he that cloaks error with
ignorance, binds two sins together, and receives double vengeance.

S innes of ignorance stand in need of mercy: but what cloak is long enough to
cover sins against knowledge?

O f servants they are in worst case that are sold, but worse that do service
in prison, worst of all bound in fetters: such is the condition of the ungodly.

P estilence should not be more avoided then the conversation of the
misreligious or openly profane.

E xpiation was offered for the world, and offered to the world: but those that
are blessed by it, are separated from the world.

N othing so sure as there shall be a judgment: such as is the conscience,
such shall be the sentence.

B oasting of sin when it is done doubles the lewdness, wicked men glory in
that which shall everlastingly cast them from glory.

A Canon does not so much hurt from a wall as a mine under the wall, nor a
thousand enemies that threaten, so much as a few that take an oath to say
nothing.

C hristianity is become the footstool of policy, and has made bargains
with the World for universal Monarchy, Religion being but the labell to that
Indenture.

K nowledge is not wholly exercised with good, nor wholly taken up with evil;
but it knows both good and evil: thus man thought to have become like God, and
became indeed like the Devil.

W ee know Christ to be the best Counselor: therefore undertake nothing
without consulting at his Oracle.

A whole garment is more hand some then a broken one: but a broken heart is
more pleasing to God then a whole heart.

R epentace is the necessary way to salvation: it is the will of God that none
should perish; yet withal it is his will that all shall perish, except they
repent.

D estruction would not fall upon the wicked, unless they first by their
wickedness bring it upon themselves: O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self.

T he imitaters of evil deserve punishment, the abetters more: but there is no
hell deep enough for the leaders of wickedness.

O ur own feet carry us to sin; we love the journey, our affections seduce
us, and so have been our undoing.

Y f there will come no period to the rebellion of the wicked till they sink
down to hell: yet for shame know no date of thy obedience till thou come up to
heaven.

O f all victories love is the greatest; to overcome evil with good, is to be
like God, whose Image we bear in our creation; and to whose Image we are
restored in our redemption.

U pright justice is without equivocation, it seeks not to obey God for man's
sake, but man for Gods sake; it obeyes men, but never against God.

R ighteousnesse and all happiness is in the will of God to his creature, for
holiness is the daughter of repenance.

O ur persons are justified by our faith, our faith is justified by our
charity, our charity by the actions of a holy life.

R emember that there is nothing that makes a man so unlike to God as a hard
heart without pity, without patience.

D iligence and patience, with painfulnesse, are good: but it is the
sincerenesse of the heart that commends the rest.

E very Christian soldiers scutchion must be patience, and his motto, I serve:
Angels are glad of this title.

R emember the end is near, thy end nearer, whether the end of this shall not
be the end of all thy days, thou have no assurance: to day then hear his
voice; repent one day before thy last day.

O ld age were better gather grace for themselves, then goods for their
posterity; for it is their last time of gathering.

R eward belongs to laborers, not loyterers; the Crown is laid up not for
cowards, but for Conquerers.

O into what unfortunate times are we fallen, when all our wrongs must be
answered in blood!

P ray and repent; repent and pray: join with them abstinence, add to them
three, patience, faith, obedience, and amendment of life; and the Lord our God
will deliver us.

E very man kiss that hand that strikes us, love God that crosses us, and
trust in that power that kills us: this is the honorable proof of a Christian.

N o man is the worse for his repentant grief; if the evil do come; its labor
well spent, if not its a labor well lost.

O ur good God takes it in a foul scorn to speak, and not be heard; to be
heard, and not minded.

R eligion promises no worldly pleasures; but contrary, they shall whip and
scourge you they shall bind and lead you whither you would not.

D oe as the most do, and fewest will find fault with you: but God charge
us not to follow a multitude in evil.

E very man's hand is not an able instrument of mischief: but whosoever the
instrument be the consenter is as deep both in the sin and the penalty.

R ighteous men shall never be swept away for company: yet the unrighteous are
often spared for company.

F ew words to the wicked in the latter day, but full of bitterness: depart,
word of separation: ye cursed, words of malediction: into everlasting fire,
words of desolation: prepared for the Devil and his angel, words of
exemplification.

I n many things familiarity breeds contempt: but in these things strangeness
and ignorance has made men profanely insolent.

E very man has his knowledge from nature; but the Christian his from grace:
one is from earth, the other from heaven.

L et no man cast with himself how old he may be before he return from his
sins, lest he reckon without his host.

S inn is like Stibium, it will tarry with no body, up it must, either here by
an humble confession, or hereafter by a wretched confusion.

T here can be no full satisfaction or consolation in the mind of any
knowledge but of Ghrist.

O utward crosses and calamities may take from us our goods of this world, but
it can never take Christ Jesus from us.

T he contempt of the truth makes it not worse, but thy self, and the
advancing of it makes it not better, but thy self.

H ee that is always for the time, nothing for the truth, is like a top that
goes always round, never forwards, unless it be whipped.

E very worldling is left handed, he will be doing, though he have no thanks
for his pains.

R eligion derived from Christ preserves unity with Christians: he that will
not keep the peace of God, shall not be kept by the peace of God.

I t is easy for the greatness of authority to bear out the smalnesse of
piety, and commonly the sins of the mighty are mighty sins: therefore their
destruction is answerable to their presnmption.

G ods children have three suits of apparel, black, white, and red; here we
are black with mourning, red with parse cution; and shall be white only
glorified.

H ee that mournes for the cause of his punishment shall mourn but a while; but
he that mournes for the punishment and not for cause, shall mourn for ever.

T he good man looks into himself, not into another; and therefore thinks best
of another, not of himself.

O bedience it selve would lose a reward by coming short, but for
perseverance: for no virtue can expect eternal blessedness, but that which
holds out to the end.

R emember, O man, how short thy time in and be not weary of thy pains: for
what cause can be long in that which is so short of it self?

L ooke where the glory of this world ends, the glory of heaven begins: but
riches are here to day, and gone to morrow.

E very service in the end brings wages: but the wages of sin is without end.

F lattering up others in their sins, is the very next way to make them our
own.

T he Word of God sets down the wages of sin, and ties punishment to it as an
inseparable effect to the cause.

H ee that chose us when we were not called, and called us when we were naught,
and has justified us being sinners, will glorify us being Saints.

A man may partake of one nature of Christ, and be cursed: but if of his
divine, then most blessed.

N ature created, and nature corrupted, is the difference between Gods
workmanship and ours.

D eath is fearful wages when it is paid in the proper coin, without the
allay of Christ's death to qualify it.

O ne that will plead Christ's cause without a fee; or he that will say with
Job, Though he kill me, yet I will trust in him, shows the heart of a Saint.

R esolve with Hester, If I perish, I perish: for nothing can be lost that we
piously trust God withal.

F aith goes along with Christ from his cradle to his cross, it sees him doing
good, and suffering ill.

R ecrant soldiers first forsake their courage, and the last thing that
forsakes them is their heels.

O ur backwardness requires continual provocation; to be good is a thing
hardly gotten, quickly forgotten.

M ans habitation pleases him, his gold bewitcheth him, a woman's beauty
tempts him, and yet all is but earth.

T ruth is never to be numbered by the pole; for it is not numbers, but weight
that should carry it.

H e that mouths a Pater noster while his heart is in his coffer, as if he
would at once serve God and mammon, in vain thinks himself godly.

E arth will to earth, an earthly desire to an earthly center: so man lives
till earth be turned into earth: so he dies till earth be turned out of earth,
their earthly soul into hellish torments: such a life is base and brutish.

C omplaine not though other men blanch thee, so long as thou have fellowship
with Jesus Christ.

E very man be contented with his own measure of good things vouchsafed him,
for God will not be prescribed.

N one but the King of Kings, has right to the style Imperial, I will, or I
will not, without limitation; because his will and power are matches only.

T o obey well is as great as to govern well, and more men's duties; they that
think otherwise, know not the Christians part, which is to suffer.

E nter not into a restless course of life for honor, for a Princes breath
blows is up, and the Peoples breath blows it away.

R eady for honor, ready for disgrace, for poverty, for riches, for joy or
sorrow, for life or death, for all: such a Christian will hold out to the
latter end.

O ur grace is Gods glory, the more we are amended, the more he is commended:
thus the truth appears greater in us, though it cannot be made greater by us.

P erseverance is the queen of all virtues; and the master of all temptations,
commands to sight against none but those that persevere in goodness.

E vill men may show the good they have not; but good men cannot hide the good
they have.

N othing but grace can satisfy the soul of man, give him grace, and then be
goes away springing like Joseph, and singing like David.

T here cannot be a greater argument of a foul soul then the deriding of
religious actions.

O there sins have but three enemies to deal withal: but a backslider has a
fourth, a hard heart.

Y f we receive not the blessed Gospel with faith and fear, Sodom and
Gomerah never sinned as we sin, nor were never so plagued as we shall be.

O pinion of the mind are like diseases of the body, all alike infinite.

V iolent passions makes men bandy controversies, who fight with their Pens,
like Soldiers with their Pikes, wounding the peace of the Church.

R eligion is more practical then theoriticall; rather an occupation then a
mere profession, dwelling like an Artizan, wit at singers end.

O ne man is an Atheist, and believes no God, another is an I dolater, and
worships many: one will be of a new Religion, another of none: no matter to the
Devil, they are both traveling toward his kingdom.

Room never means us so sudden a storm as when she makes fair weather, and
bears us in hand all is peace.

D ogs are fawning, but sicophantising Jesuits are worse; for their tongues do
more harm then their teeth.

E very man that will not adhere to the God of truth, shall be turned over to
the faither of lies.

R esist the Devil and he will fly from thee; give to God obedience, to thy
Prince allegiance, to superiors reverence, to the weak assistance, to the
Devil and sin resistance.

O ur day is broken, why day we sleep in sin: when the Sun is up good
husbands think of rising: the slumber of the body and the soul is not much
unlike.

R epent therefore in life, that thou may find comfort in death; that thou
may be acquitted at the day of judgment of Jesus Christ.

O ur entrance into this world is full of weakness, our proceeding full of
wickedness, our departure full of wretchedness.

P ray that you may leave the earth when you know the way perfectly to heaven:
desire to live till you are inspired by grace, desire to dye when you are
assured of glory.

E very man with Paul learn to dye daily; for no man knows when he shall dye:
therefore be evermore armed with expectation.

N ever expect peace without Christ: whosoever dies in peace, dies in Christ
the Prince of peace.

O ur breath is in our bodies; the life of our souls is in heaven, our bodies
move upon earth, let our heart dwell in heaven.

R ighteousnesse must dwell in those that look to dwell in heaven, where
righteousness dwells: for Christ is the Lord of righteousness.

D eath takes the clock of our life asunder: but then the omnipotent Maker
takes it into his own hand, and sets it together again at the Resurrection.

E nquire not what heaven is too curiously, lest thou have a snib, as Manoah
had for asking the Angels name, it is secret and wonderful.

R emember Gods mercies and blessings to us in all times of this pilgrimage,
and he will hear us when we pray, with the penitent thief, Lordremember us in
thy Kingdom.

Silence.
STand right in your Files.

Stand right in your Ranks.

To the right hand.

As you were.

To the left hand.

As you were.

To the right hand about.

As you were.

To the left hand about.

As you were.

Ranks to the right hand double.

As you were.

Ranks to the left hand double.

As you were.

Files to the right hand double.

As you were.

Files to the left hand double.

As you were.

Half Files to the right hand double your Front.

As you were.

Half Files to the left hand double your Front.

You may do the same by bringers up, or leave it our.

To the right hand Countermarch.

To the left hand Countermarch.

Files to the right or left, or to the Center: Close to your order, or close
order.

Ranks close forward to your order, or close order.

To the right hand wheel.

To the left hand wheel.

To the right or left hand wheel about.

Ranks open backward to your order, open order, or double distance.

Files to the right or left, or from the Center, open to your order, or open
order.

In distances observe, if you open from the right to the left, that the left
hand man next to the right hand man, is to take his distance from the said
right hand man first, and so every man on the left hand successively one alter
another: be in any of the distances of close order, order, open order, or
double distance: If in Ranks, the first standing, the second opens backwards to
either of the distances above said and not forwards: in closing of Ranks it is
to be done forwards, and not backwards, all moving together, saving the first
Ranks.

In facings you are to be sure to keep your left foot on the ground^s: in
doublings if you come up to the right, turn off to the left, and so always to
the contrary hand.

In wheelings, if you close to the left, then wheel to the right, or if you
close to the right, wheel to the left, or you may wheel upon the Center.

According to my intended purpose, I shall add to the exercise of the Pike and
Musket in the briefest manner, being only what shall belong to present service:
and first for the Pike: in all standing postures of the Pike, keep your left
foot fast fixed upon the ground: in all marching postures move with the left
foot advancing forward.

1 Advance your Pikes. 2 Order your Pikes. 3 Shoulder your Pikes. 4 Port your
Pikes. 5 Advance your Pikes. 6 Shoulder your Pikes. 7 Traile your Pikes. 8
Cheek your Pikes. 9 Charge your Pikes. 10 Shoulder your Pikes. 11 Charge to
the Front, Rear, right or left. 12 Shoulder your Pikes. 13 Advance your Pikes.
14 Or order your Pikes. 15 Charge to the horse and draw your sword any of the
four ways.
For the Musket standing or marching: First, your Musket not being charged
without a Rest, supposing always your left hand to be your Rest.

1 Slip your Muskes. 2 Poyse your Muskes. 3 Bring her to your Rest. 4 Open your
Pan. 5 Clear your Pan. 6 Prime your Pan. 7 Shut your Pan. 8 Cast off. 9 Blow,
cast about, and 10 Charge. 11 Draw out your scourer 12 Shorten your scourer 13
Put in your bullet. 14 Ram your scourer 15 Draw out your scourer 16 Shorten
your scourer 17 Put up your scourer 18 Recover. 19 Poyse. 20 Shoulder. 21
Slope. 22 Slip. 23 Poyse. 24 Bring to your Rest. 25 Draw forth your Match. 26
Blow. 27 Cock. 28 Try. 29 Guard your Pan. 30 Blow. 31 Open. 32 Present. 33 Give
fire. 34 Return your match. 35 Clear your pan, and so charge again as is
taught.
All these in service are reduced into these three words: Make ready. With
these two added, either Shoulder your Muskets. Present. Or Give fire. Order
your Muskets.

T he postures of arming and disarming, according to my intention of brevity is
needless to be here inserted, they having been sufficiently written of by your
Trained Band teachers: I shall but only present you further with what firings
are necessary for our present service out of a single Company or Regiment:
wishing heartily all noble Captains, and their officers, would conform
themselves to these brief rules, using no other words of Command then what are
here used.

Y our single Company being drawn up Regiment wise at three foot distance,
being your order, and your Pikes all shouldered the manner of firing to the
Front, is first, let the two first Ranks, making ready, advance 8 or 10 paces
from the Body, the rest of the Ranks marching to the front of Pikes; which two
Ranks having presented and fired one after another, let them march off to the
right and left hand, the next two ranks doing the same with the rest
successively as long as you please, when you draw near to your Enemy, or by way
of supposition, charge over your Pikes three ranks deep, and the rest ported
following the charge.

T o fire from the rear; first command your Body to advance their Pikes, then
face them about to the right or left, and then shoulder your Pikes again:
moving your Body, command the two last Ranks to make ready, being ready,
command the last Rank, to the Rear present, who is to turn to the right hand,
and give fire, and so turning up to the right and left, advances into Front,
placing themselves before their Leaders: the rest of the Ranks doing the same
successively one after another.

T o fire from your right and left stanks, command the right and left hand file
to make ready, which done, marching your Body, command them to present to the
right and left, and so give fire, which being done, let the files stand and
charge their Muskets again, by which time the two next files will have performed
the like, who are also in like manner to stand facing toward their Commander,
and the first file is immediately to march up to the second: the next files
having done the like are to stand, the first and second file advancing up to
them; and so of all the rest successively making up your Body again with all
speed that may be.

T here is sometimes another firing used standing, whereby an Enemy may receive
suddenly a very hot charge when you are retreating; command your Body to face
about to the right or left, and then let them all make ready, which done
standing, let the first Rank fire and fall off into the Rear, and so the rest
of them in like manner successively one after another, your Pikes retreating
back as your body loses ground.

Y ou are to use your endeavor to bring your soldiers to know the several
notes of a Drum, and what he is to perform upon the hearing of them, your
Pikemen being to be shouldered upon the beat of a march, and advanced upon the
beat of a troop: This thing perfected, will be sufficient for our present
service: to which God give (...)

FINIS.

