TO ALL PEOPLE That profess the Eternal TRUTH OF THE living GOD, THIS IS A true
and real demonstration of the cause why I have denied, and do deny the
Authority of George Fox; which is the original ground of the difference betwixt
us, whatsoever may be pretended or deceitfully alleged against me; which I do
in simplicity desire Friends to peruse impartially, and weigh in the balance
of Equity, that they may clearly discern, and sensibly feel the depth of the
ground of the matter in difference betwixt us, that so none may be blinded
through false pretenses or vain reports, but that every particular in Israel
may see and perfectly know the Truth, before they judge of this matter.

This is only to go amongst Friends in all Countries, Nations and Islands where
George Fox 's Papers of Enmity against the innocent has passed.

Printed in the Year 1663.

Dear Friends in truth,
BEfore I proceed to signify the several causes which I believe and know to be
the chiefest substantial matter of the ground of George Fox's disowning of me,
and warning Friends of me, I shall in the living truth open my heart, and
unsold my breast innocently and nakedly unto you, concerning this particular:
That the truth of God manifest amongst Friends, I never did, neither do I
disown, God is my witness, but in the fear of the pure God I declare it. I
confess and own that there is no other truth or way of salvation but what has
been, and is manifest amongst Friends that abide in their measures of living
knowledge given of God; neither did I ever or forsake Friends Assemblies,
though such things may be falsely charged against me; but this I do testify
unto you in the name and truth of God, that G. F. and some of his servants have
endeavored to shut me our from amongst you, both by their reviling words and
writings, supposing thereby to take away the strength of the testimony of truth
God in his mercy has manifested in me, as also to keep him from owning public
judgment for these crimes and capital offenses hereafter mentioned and charged
against him, which subtle evasions in the Light of truth and righteousness is
seen and disowned, and as he has caused others to confess and acknowledge
their offenses, and to own public judgment for them, according to his own Law
and Rule he ought to do the same, and this is no other but really according to
the Law of Equity, to try a man by his own Law, or measure him by his own Rule;
so that to call him to an account for his offenses, as he has called others,
is just and righteous before God and just men, it is but the same measure he
has measured to others, (at may be proved which is measured to him again; and
many, or the most part of these things which are now charged against him, has
been charged upon him two years ago, and several of his own bosom-friends
nominated to have the hearing of them, as John Bolton, Gerard Roberts, Gilbert
Laytie, and several others whom I desired might have the examination and trial
of these things, and judge of them according as they found them, in, and by the
law of truth and righteousness, which he has hitherto neglected and refused,
which is a signal testimony that he acknowledges himself guilty of them; for
he that is clear from guilt, need not fear the judgment of truth; butthe
guilty starts aside, and he hides himself from judgment; but I know that
judgment will find him out, be cannot, nor shall not escape it. And now my
dear friends, I shall clearly and innocently signify unto you why I do publish
these things; Not in enmity, God is my Witness, I have no prejudice in my heart
against the man, but because the Lord has laid it upon me, and I dare not
disobey the Lord herein. I could have been willing to have born it all, and
have buried all these things in the Land of everlasting Oblivion, if the God of
my life had not laid it upon me; for I take no pleasure in laying open of any
man's nakedness or weakness, or discovering any man's offenses, crimes or
transgressions, nor in the publication of such things; but I see that God is
just in all his ways and works, and will render to man a just recompense of
reward according to his works so that as G F, has been very active in
searching after the knowledge of the failings and offenses of others, and in
publishing of them, and in using severity toward the offenders, now it is the
will and pleasure of the just God to have his offenses made manifest and
published; and herein this Scripture comes to be fulfilled, There is nothing
hid, that shall not be revealed; what is done in secret, shall be revealedon
the house top, etc. So that dear Friends, stand single in the naked truth, and
in the impartial judgment, and you will see that the manifesting and the
publication of these things concerning this man, is just at the hand of the
righteous God, and mine, who has no other end in it, but to answer the mind of
the Lord, who will make manifest the hidden things of darkness, and bring to
light that which has been veiled in obscurity, that nothing may stand before
him but purity and naked simplicity in his chosen people: And whereas George
Fox has called himself the Son of God, and also said, I am the Seed, which he
might as well have said, I am Christ; (for we know that the Seed is Christ) I
do desire Friends to judge impartially of his fruits, whether or no the Son or
Seed of God ever brought forth such things as these that follows? And whether
or no such have not been, and are yet deceived, who have esteemed, and do
esteem him infallible?

And though he has been in his day and time serviceable in the work of the
Lord, yet that will not save him from judgment in the day of his
transgression. So long as he stood innocent and faithful, God honored him with
the glory of his presence, and prospered his work in his hand, and he was seen
by many in the Light of righteousness, to be a glorious instrument, and had
high esteem of me and many others in Israel, and he was exceeding honorable at
that time, and so long as he did abide in the perfect zeal of God's glory, and
continue and keep in the innocence of the Lambs life, in the true discerning
and judgment, he had (as he was worthy) double honor; but since he has sought
to exalt himself and throw down others to set up himfelf in the highest place
in the seat of God, to rule as Lord over God's Heritage, his glory has faded,
and he suffered to be ensnared, and to fall into diverse temptations, as
hereafter will at large appear, that man's weakness may appear, and his glory be
stained, that God alone may have the glory of his own work, who is jealous of
his honor, and will not give his glory to another.

And this is seen in the Light of Divine glory, that many eminent instruments
in the work of Reformation, have brought shame and confusion upon themselves in
seeking to exalt themselves over the people which have had a high esteem of
them, and looked upon them above their places, which has kindled the wrath of
God against them, who once employed them in his service: Therefore O Israel,
give thou the honor and the glory unto thy God alone, and to his Government
only do thou submit, lest thou be charged with the guilt of this sin in
over-valuing or too high estimation of some such instruments as God has
employed in his service, through affection (and the undervaluing of others
through dis-affection) that thou give not the glory, honor and praise to the
creature, that properly and wholly belongs to the Creator, who is over all,
God blessed for ever; the desire of my soul is, that this sin may not be found
in thee, nor laid to thy charge: The Lord has said in the zeal of his own
glory, That all the idols of the earth shall be abolished, and that the
haughilness of man shall be laid low; so that all men, though never so high in
esteem, that seek after their own private interest (and not the good of others)
and through subtilty and policy seek to usurp Authority over the Consciences of
God's people, and to enthrone themselves in his Judgment Seat, to give forth
Legal Prescriptions, and to enjoin the performance of any external form of
practice, such the God of Heaven will abase and throw down, and make them as
contemptible in the eyes of the most innocent in Israel, as ever they have been
honorable. Therefore, O Israel, beware of these things, lest the Lord of glory
break forth in his fury, and turn his hand against thee, and scatter thee
amongst the Heathen, as he did Israel of old, who through disobedience and
ambition provoked him to wrath. This warning is in pure love, and in tender
compassion to your immortal souls, and according to the command of God, and the
true motion of his eternal Spirit. And now I shall proceed to lay to the line of
true Judgment, the several crimes and offenses of G. F. and do call to him to
answer to his charge through judgment and public confession, or otherwise
according to righteous judgment and justice to come to a hearing and due
examination before some sound Friends in a public Meeting which may be named
and ordered for that purpose, where he may have liberty to clear himself if he
can, of, or from any of the things charged against him.

1. Thou G.F. sent Papers with thy hand at them, throughout the several
Churches in the several Counties, for friends to nominate and appoint such as
they esteemed sit for the place of Magistracy, and to send their names to
London to be presented to the then present Power to be commissionated by them,
which was in direct opposition to the doctrine of William Dewsbury who said
publicly in many Assemblies, That he had a command from God to declare and
publish among friends (as many are Witnesses) that there should not be a man in
Israel to rule one over another, but that the rule and authoriry of man should
be overturned, and Christ alone rule in the hearts and spirits of his people.
Now I desire that Truth in all may judge whether that this would not have been
great confusion in Israel, if the Lord had not crossed the purpose of G.F. and
frustrated his end and intentions in this particular, as also have brought
great sufferings upon friends, being fond in the place of Magistracy: As also
this may truly signify, that he had an end to himself, and a secret purpose in
his heart as to exalt himself in the Government of the Nation; for if he had
perfected his purpose in getting Friends up in the seat of Justice, it might
truly be supposed that he would have set himself over them, and that they
should have acted nothing but through or by him and his order; and this is
clear, that it William Dewsbury had a command from God to cry down the Rule and
Government of man, George Fox had none to set it up.

2. A Letter went forth in his Name with his hand at it, or the Letters of his
Name, for all that had been Officers and Soldier in the Army, that were put
forth upon the account of truth, should send up their names to London to be
presentod to the then present Power, that they might be returned into their
respective places; which the Light of truth in many judged and condemned; and
there were many amongst them and is at this day, that could not, nor cannot
bear a carnal sword for conscience sake; therefore consider whither this man
would have led people, if his purpose had not failed: and if he had
accomplished this thing, and friends had been sound in actual Arms at this
Powers coming, it might have caused the ruin and destruction of many innocent
people; but blessed be the God of peace and love, who stopped the issue of that
design: But this also clearly evidenceth, that there was a secret intention of
the usurpation of external Government.

3. He sent a paper to judge John Hall upon a lying report, as was proved, and
positively charged that upon him which he was clear from; upon which public
false accusation and judgment, according to George Fox's own Law, he ought to
make confession, and to own public judgment upon it, being a public Fact:
And this the truth requires of him, to satisfy his own Law in this particular;
for he ought to do himself to others, as he has done by them.

4. He judged an innocent woman sane Stoakes, as a carnal Whore, sent Letters
with false Accusations amongst friends, to reproach and render her
contemptible, to stop the testimony of truth God had manifested in her; as also
he would not suffer her to be assisted in her journey to Rome, where she was
commanded of God to go, which showed his envy end uncharitableness, and also
the want of discerning, who could not see her service for the Lord there, which
she faithfully performed, notwithstanding his envy against her: And for this
notorious public crime in defaming her, and not assisting or permitting her to
be assisted out of the public stock provided and ordered for that purpose, he
ought also according to his own Law to acknowledge the same upon his knees, and
own judgment publicly in all places where he has defamed her, which his own
Law requires of him, and the truth cannot own his Authority, until he has
satisfied and fulfilled his own Law in this particular.

5. The said G.F. sent George Baily into France, who dyed in prison, who
confessed to me he had no command from God to go in his service, neither did he
know any particular place to go to in France; whose blood is, and will be
required at his hand.

6. The said G.F. contrary to the principles of truth prosessed by us, he
vindicated and justified the practice of Water Baptism in Humphrey Wooldridge,
who in water baptized a woman one of his disciples he sent forth to minister;
which was a public fact, and required public acknowledgement and judgment
according to his own Rule and Law.

7. The same G.F. when he is in London, takes upon him the place of God, and
orders those he accounts Ministers in his will, and sends them to the several
Meetings in and about London, saying to them particularly, (to my knowledge)
Thou must go to such a place; and to another, Thou must go to such a place, or
such a place is ordered for thee; and thither they must go, whether they have
any command or motion from God to go or no; and in his absence leaves one of
his most eminent servants to order the rest esteemed Ministers in his place on
the first days, who also orders them by word of mouth, or gives them a piece of
paper; which thing the soul of the righteous God lothes, and the seed of his
life bears testimony against, for the which he must come to judgment.

8. He sent forth Milborough Smith into the Ministry, and bid go and be a
Mother in Israel, when she was with a Bastard-Child, and was shortly after
delivered of it; which shows his insufficiency and want of discerning to
officiate such a place, as also his fallibility and usurpation, which is
likewise for public judgment.

9. The said G. F. in envy writ a paper in pretense of an Answer to a Book of
innocent John Perrots, called Unity and Amity, which he sent amongst friends in
the time of his persecution, which was judged by the eternal Power and Life of
God in several of his suffering servants: which was also a public fact for
public judgment amongst friends. And here he has turned his hand against the
chosen and anointed of God, which will in the end prove to his own hurt.

10. George Fox in his Book tituled, The Honor amongst the Jews, calls the Hat
an earthly thing, and a thing below the Worship of God, and the dignity of a
man, and speaks much against the putting off the Hat; but now he goes to set it
up as part of God's Worship, and says. He has unity with none but such as put
off their Hats in prayer: So makes it clearly manifest, that he is changeable
and fallible, and that his unity stands in an earthly thing, and in that he
confesses is below the worship of God; and here he would set up a form, and
tie the Lords free people to the performance of an external practice, contrary
to the liberty of the free Spirit of Life, which ought in all things to order
and exercise Gods chosen Remnant, who are only and alone to be ordered in the
performance of all duties and practices, according to its leading and immediate
motion, which is also to be denied and judged out, at the entrance or inlet of
idolatry into the Church, which all impositions and penal injunctions lead unto.

11. He also reviled and reproached me, and judged and condemned me in several
papers which he has spread up and down the Countries amongst Friends, for the
very same thing which he acknowledged (in Gerard Roberts Chamber) two years or
more ago, that the power had remitted; which shows his envy and confusion: But
this his end in so doing (as the clear-sighted in Israel may discern) he
thought thereby to raise prejudice in Friends against me, that they might not
receive me nor my testimony, that so I might be quite disabled, and the
strength of truths testimony God has manifested in me, might be taken away,
that so I might have no power to call him to an account for these things God
has laid upon me to charge against him: But blessed be the Name of the pure
God for ever, who has given, and does give me strength and courage in his
truth to clear my Conscience in obeying his will in this thing, which in the end
will come heavy upon him.

12. His cowardliness in shrinking in the time of persecution, his shifting
from place to place both in this City and Country, to shun a prison, or to
avoid suffering, is for judgment, many in Israel took notice of it; where
there was danger, he sent others, and would not go himself: He sent Thomas
Richardson to Ely, but refused to go himself when Friends desired him; and the
man was put in prison, and would have given it under his hand, if friends,
would have suffered him, that he knew not whether the Light of salvation was in
every man or no. And such dark ignorant men he sends forth to burden the Seed
in Friends; yet they will cry up his Name, and receive Orders from him, and be
his servants or slaves, which the Light of pure wisdom disowns and judges, and
he must come to the bar of Justice, and receive the sentence of condemnation
for such things; for the truth will not, nor such as live in it, justify him
in these or the like practices.

13. He sent papers of enmity, and set his servantr on work in Barbados and
Virginia, to judge and reproach innocent John Perrot, Jane Stoakes and
Elizabeth Harris, who were moved to go in the service of the Lord, which is
contrary to truth, love and mercy; which practice is also for perpetual
judgment.

14. The said George Fox did cause John Fretwell, Christopher Gilburn, and
James Naylor, with several others, to go down upon their knees before him
publicly amongst Friends (which is gross idolatry) and there and then upon
their knees to make their confession, and own judgment upon what he charged
against them, before he would own them, or receive them into unity amongst
Friends; which practice the Seed of God lothes and abominates, and it is but
according to his own Rule and Law that he upon his knees should confess to, and
own public judgment upon what is charged against him; for if a man make a
Law, he ought to observe and keep it.

15. His writing and speaking against Pulpits and high places upheld by others,
and allowing such like things in our own Meeting-places, which he has been
told of, is for judgment; and his several forms concerning Marriage: First, He
sent on this Orders to the several Churches, to publish Marriages three times
publicly in meetings, and now he sends forth another to contradict that, to
lay it before Men-friends Meetings, as also before Women friends Meetings, and
they must have their approbation before they take one another; and this shows
his chargeable spirit, and his fallibility; and all these his prescribed Laws
and imposed forms are out of the truth, and with it judged; yet the Marriage in
the Lord is owned to be lawful and honorable, and publication also according to
the immediate motion of the Spirit of Love and Life, that joins in one, and
makes of two one flesh.

16. The said G. F. has allowed [after notice] of John Moon's going abroad in
the Ministry, and has sent him abroad as a Minister since he has prophesied
lies publicly amongst friends, saying and affirming, that there should not be
a wicked Magistrate in England within two years time, which is near expired:
And further said, That if that which he then spoke did not come to pass, the
Lord never spoke by him: Which I lay to the line of righteous judgment in all
friends, to judge of this matter, whether or no the lying spirit ought to
minister in Israel, yea or nay. Surely, surely the just God will plead with some
for these and the like things suffered and countenance in Israel.

17. His being shut up in a room in Newgate-Market with Margaret Fell, several
hours, and none suffered to come into them, though several endeavored it, has
not the savor of honestly in it; but I shall leave that to the Lord to judge
of, who will reward them according to their works. And it is also reported
amongst friends, that the said George Fox and Margaret Fell did so carry
themselves each to other, and walk so unseemly and undiscreetly at the House of
Elizabeth Trott when they lay there, that she questioned their honesty, and was
weary of their company; and what this does signify, let truth innocence judge.

Lastly, The said George Fox contrary to the doctrine and practice of Christ
and the Saints, has gone himself amongst friends in and about this City, to
revile, reproach and backbite the innocent, and also has warned, and sent his
servants to warn friends for entertaining such as he dis-affects and envies, so
would not leave them a place to rest in, but would even force them with
violence from the truth, if the Lord by his mighty power did not preserve them:
As likewise in other places he has gone about in the same manner, which
practice is for eternal judgment and condemnation: It was not, nor is not the
work of the true Spirit in the Saints, to hate and envy their Enemies, nor to
pursue them from place to place with false railing accusations, much less the
people of God, who in a large measure have suffered in innocence for his Name
and Truth, as G.F. has done, and now does, which is a true sign, or signal
testimony that he is not in the true Spirit, the Spirit of Love, but in the
contrary, which is not to bear rule, nor predominate in Israel: It is, and was
the Doctrine of Christ and the Saints to love their enemies to gain souls to
God with meekness and love, and also their practice to restore or regain such
as were ensnared through temptation, in all tenderness and bowels of
compassion, and likewise to seek after the lost sheep of the House of Israel,
to fetch them back into the sold of rest: They did not as G. F. does, drive by
force away such as he looks upon as gone astray, which clearly proves that he
is out of the power of the healing, restoring Spirit, in the devouring nature,
which forces me (with many others) to deny his Authority, and to bear a living
testimony for God against his works, practices, usurpation and Lordly Domion,
who seeks in the strength of his subtilty to set up himself in the seat of
Christ, to rule over the Consciences of God's chosen Remnant, which is no other
but the Sun of the Morning, which has not kept his first habitation, which the
God of Israel will dethrone and cast down.

And this I testify in the Name of the Lord, in a clear discerning, and
perfect understanding, that G.F. has turned his hand against, and struck at
the most glorious appearance of the life of God these several years, in the
dearest of God's people; and it is not only the Hat, and the other things
reported amongst friends, which causes G.F. to turn against J. P. but because
of that beautiful life God has manifest in him, which to the simple and
innocent-hearted in Israel, did appear more amiable and glorious then his
Ministration; and because that the virtue and sweetness of the clear life of
God manifest in J. P. drew the Virgins in Israel after it, therefore G. F. has
sought, and does seek with violence to destroy that which is most excellent and
glorious, that he may have the honor and glory to himself, which many in Israel
in the Light of truth have seen, and do see; and since the spirit of Saul
entered G: F. behold how he has lost his strength, and how his glory has
faded; He that has an eye to see, let him see, and an ear to hear, let him
hear, and also he that can receive it, let him, this is true and faithful
testimony. And mark furthermore, he does not only pursue and seek to destroy
the life of God in J.P. and to hinder the testimony thereof from going forth in
Israel, but also in all such as own, love and affect his innocent life; which
manifests clearly to the impartial understanding in Israel, That he seeks to
destroy the Son and Heir, to make the inheritance his own: so seeks to exalt
himself, and after his own glory, and not to exalt the Lord and his alone
glory: But the Lord of Life and glory is arising in his mighty power, in the
zeal of his own honor and glory, and will stain the glory of all flesh, and
throw down, and utterly overturn the rule and government of man in Israel, and
will set up his own government and heavenly authority over all, in the hearts
and consciences of his chosen people, and they to his Scepter alone shall bow,
and shall not be enslaved through the usurpation of ambitious man.

By one of the despised Remnant, who sets up no man, but seeks only the
exaltation of God's alone glory, and honors all men in the Lord, and owns all
men in their places, known by this Name, JOHN HARWOOD,
London the 8th. of the 6th. Mon. 1663.
THE END.

