The Lying Prophet Discovered and Reproved;

In an Answer to several particulars in a book called The Quakers Downfall, said
to be written by Lawrence Claxton, who blasphemously styles himself the alone
true and faithful Messenger of Christ Jesus; but his spirit being tried by the
fruits it has brought forth, he is found to be a messenger of Satan, and an
enemy to Christ and his people, who has confessed he has naught of God in him.

With several of his damnable doctrines (seldom the like ever read or heard of)
which he has published in his Book, returned back for him to prove by plain
Scripture or to confess his error and blasphemy.

Also Twelve Particulars which he and his companion Lodowick Muggleton uttered
at Richard Whitpans house in Eastcheap, in a discourse with me and some others
he calls Quakers.

Given forth for the the clearing the Truth and the Witnesses of it from his
lying aspersions, and the manifesting deceit and deceivers, that simple hearted
ignorant people through their policy may not be deceived nor deluded, By a
Friend to Truth, John Harwood.

The False Prophet is made manifest by his fruits, according to the Doctrine of
Christ, Mat. 7. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Bull and Mouth near
Aldersgate,, 1659.

To the honest understanding Reader, who reads without Prejudice, or Malice,
Reader,
A Book coming to my hands, tituled the Quakers downfall, said to be written by
Laurence Claxton, (having his name at it) who blasphemously styles himself,
the alone, true and faithful messenger of Christ Jesus, the Lord of Glory; and
bath the last Revelation and Commission that ever shall be, as he says, but
his doctrine and Spirit, being truly weighed and tried in the just and equal
balance, by the Eternal Spirit of Light and Life; (manifest in the Royal
seed of God, called Quakers) he is found to be lying Prophet, a Messenger of
Satan, an enemy to truth 2 and the witnesses of it, at his fruits will make it
plainly appear; who goes about through his subtilty to pervert Truth and
Innocence, and has is a high manner blasphemed against God and his people: so
that in pure love to the Eternal Truth, for the clearing of it from lying
Aspersions cast upon it, and the faithful witnesses of it, by this
unreasonable man; I am moved to write something in Answer to several
particulars in his book; that his deceitful lying spirit in some measure may
be made manifest, that the simple hearted, ignorant people, may not be deluded
through his subtilty, or by them who are of the same mind, which he calls the
last Commissioners the third Writers of the Scriptures, in page marked for the
twelfth in his book; And in the fifteenth page he blasphemously says, they are
the last Commissioners that ever shall appear in this unbelieving world: (that
is to say, John Reeve, and Lodowick Muggleton; so would limit the holy One, the
unlimited God: (which he knows not as his fruits of darkness makes appear)
who gives gifts and Commission unto many of his dear servants and children, (in
this the day of his glorious and bright appearance, in and amongst the sons
and daughters of men) who are his true and faithful Messengers, who have
manifested the truth of their message (the Lords gift) through many trials and
cruel sufferings, whom he sends forth into many Nations and Islands, freely to
preach glad tidings, the Gospel of peace, the power of God unto salvation;
which is a mystery hid from that spirit and power of darkness in L. C. and
the other he calls the last Commissioners, who said he had naught of God in
him, and also he denies the light of Christ within people; (Gods pure witness)
which the Apostles bore testimony unto, and John the Baptist; as all the
faithful messengers of God does, (which in scorn he calls Quakers) which true
Light, (with which Christ enlighteneth every man) is the only way of Life,
Peace and everlasting salvation, which he and all such high Ranting spirits are
shut out of, and into the true knowledge of it cannot enter, with all their
Serpents policy; which L. C. would cover with the naiue of divine knowledge:
but with the eternal light, (which he despises) he is discerned, his Covers are
too narrow to hide him from the pure eye, which the eternal God by his power
has opened in his innocent babes and children, he calls in derision quaking
Ranters; but by them he is seen and comprehended, and by the Life of God, who
is a Spirit of Glory, Light, Life, Power and Infinite wisdom, is judged to be
an instrument of Satan, an enemy of God, (the Spirit of all flesh) and an
unreasonable man, according to his own confession, who says there is no pure
reason in man nor in God, which is high blasphemy; For pure wisdom and pure
reason is one in nature and substance, and neither God, the infinite being of
Wisdom, Glory, and Life is without it; nor man in the Image of God, unto whom,
the Light Christ is made Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption;
but the understanding Reader may easily perceive, by what spirit this man is
acted, who would have all men to be like him, whithout pure reason, and also
the Living God, the Eternal Spirit of Glory, (which he denies to be a Spirit)
he would have to be without Reason (and so have him unreasonable) who is the
Eternal Fountain of Wisdom, Knowledge, and pure Reason; for from his pure
presence, all the pure streams of divine Wisdom, Knowledge, and Reason has
ever flowed, and does ever flow; which clearly evidenceth, that this man is
possessed with, and acted by the same lying spirit and power of darkness which
has acted all the false Prophets, and deceivers, in all ages as in this age,
(so not to be believed, but denied) whose minds has been and are blinded, and
hearts hardened against the truth of God, acting to the utmost of their
strength against it; but with it, L. C. and his Companions, and all the
deceivers in all Nations, under what Name or Title soever are comprehended,
condemned, and shut out of the knowledge of the mystery of Life, out of the
light and knowledge of God, out of his kingdom, in the pit of gross
darkness, and there are to remain until the Judgment of the great day, and
then shall receive the reward of their doings; Oh how he rages against us in
his book, and scoffs and reviles us because we will not deny the Light Christ
Jesus in us, as he does, who says he is in no creature, but only in heaven
above the Stars as a man or person; what cursed doctrine and blasphemy is this
which this wicked man has published, who would limit and confine the Lord of
Glory, the unlimited God unto a certain place, (and exclude him from his
people) which the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain, who fills Heaven and Earth
with his Glory; yet this unreasonable man pretends to own Scripture, though he
publish such things as these, which are quite contrary to it; for the Saints in
Light that gave forth the Scriptures, denied not (as he does) but witnessed as
we do, Chrict Jesus in them the hope of glory, as in the first Chapter of the
Colossians, verse 27, as also in the second of the Corinthians, 13.5. Christ in
you, except you be Reprobates, and likewise in Galathians 2.20. says Paul, I
live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, etc. and many other Scriptures might
be brought to prove the true Light Christ to be in his people, which this
wicked deceiver denies; but the wise in heart may see by this, that the life of
the Scripture judges his doctrine to be contrary to the doctrine of the
Apostles; and his faith to be contrary to the faith of Gods elect, so out of
the doctrine and faith of Gods Elect, in the state of Reprobacy, not to be
owned nor credited, but to be denied and sharply reproved by all that fear the
Lord. Now I know none of Gods people, that love him, and fear him, will believe
the Lies, slanders, and false aspersions which this unreasonable man in his
book has cast upon us he calls Quakers, but will discern it to be written from
an envious wicked heart and spirit, (because his will has been crossed by us)
and will judge his lying malicious spirit, and not entertain any hard thoughts
against us, through his Lies and false Accusations; but the ignorant, and such
as have an enmity against the truth, and the witnesses of it, who are given up
to believe lies may be ready to believe his blasphemous Lying Aspersions, which
he has cast upon God and his people, but however, we are clear in the sight of
the Lord and his people; and the truth is over him, and all the world, and
whosoever stand up to oppose it, or in any manner appears against it, must bow
before it, and come under it, and the witnesses of it: for all Nations must bow
before the power of Truth manifest in Gods Elect; The Royal seed called
Quakers,

I. H.

The Lying Prophet Discovered and Reproved.
Lawrence Claxton If I had not the spirit of Inspiration, or Revelation in my
own Soul, not any part or portion of the Scripture would belong unto me, page 1.

Ans. It is the Spirit of God with which the Saints were Inspired, which unto
them revealed the Mysteries and secrets of God, who as they were moved spoke,
and writ forth the Scriptures, which thou do not rightly understand, who
wants the same Spirit and Life, for thy lying and boasting manifests thy
spirit to be none of the true Spirit with which the Saints were and are
Inspired; so ignorant of the Mystery and Life of them; but that part or portion
of Scripture belongs unto thee, which is against blasphemers, liars, boasters
and ungodly deceivers, and to be applied to thy present condition, but the
blessings and promises which appertains to the Elect Seed thou have nothing
to do with; And what have thou to do to speak of the Spirit of Inspiration or
Revelation in thy Soul, who said, thou have naught of God in thee?

L. C. Also boasts of the Spirit, To be more fully manifested in him then it
was in the Saints that gave forth the Scriptures, page 1.

Answ. The lying spirit which was cast out of the Saints, by the power of the
Spirit of truth, in a large manner is manifest in thee, as thy fruits makes it
appear; and thou may be ashamed to boast thus of thy spirit, who said in the
hearing of several honest people, Thou had naught of God in thee; it is the
lying imagination of thy corrupt fleshly wisdom, which thou calls the
Inspiration of the Spirit, by which thou art deceived and deluded, and seeks to
deceive and delude others, but the Elect are out of thy reach, and fathomes
thee.

L. C. Says, Moses, the Prophets and Apostles never rightly understood,
neither was required of them to know Christ in their Commission any other but
God the Father, P. 4.

Answ. That is false, Moses knew a Prophet should arise like unto him, which
the people should hear, which was Christ the Son of God; and the Prophet knew a
Virgin should conceive and bear a Son, and call his Name Emanuel; and said,
Unto us a Son is given, etc. and the Apostles knew the Father, Word and Spirit
to be one, and there was them that were witnesses of his birth, Acts 3.15
sufferings and Resurrection, which thou knows nothing of but by tradition, the
Apostles were eyewitnesses of him who was born of the Virgin, and knew him in
the flesh a single person, and after his death and Resurrection were to know
him no more, 2 Cor. 5. Let him that reads understand, for here have thou
manifested thy lies and confusion, thou have lied of Moses, the Prophets and
Apostles, and of the Scriptures their writings, as the Scripture will make
plainly appear, read Deuteronomy. 18.18. Isa. 9.6. Isa. 7.14.

L. C. Affirms, That the wisdom of Solomon was but natural, P. 5. and in the
6. p. says, Solomon's writings were no Scripture, nor the writings of Job, p. 7.

Answ. The wisdom God gave unto Solomon was pure and spiritual, it is contrary
to the disposition and nature of God to give gifts unto his people, 1 Kings
3.12.
contrary to himself; that is natural in thee, which wrongs the Lord and calls
Solomon's wisdom (Gods gift) natural, 1 Kings 3.28.
it is manifest thou sees not with the eye of Faith as thou conceives, but art
deceived by the prince of darkness the old serpent, who goes about through thy
policy to turn the truth into a lie, but the serpent with all his subtilty
cannot prove the writings of Solomon to be no Scripture, nor persuade such as
fear the Lord to any such thing; none but such as are given up to believe lies
will credit thee, for his writings are truth, and the other Scripture is no
more; And as for the writings of Righteous Job (whom thou confessest Righteous)
who saw the Lord of Glory; Job 42.5.
they are also to be believed (and not scrupled) to be truth given forth from
the Spirit of truth; and to be as true as the writings of the Prophets and
Apostles; and thou art Judged out of the truth, in the lie, by the Righteous
Spirit which was manifest in Job; who Judges with thy lying spirit all the
translaters and composers of the Scriptures, who put Job and Solomon's writings
amongst the Prophets and Apostles.

L. C. Likewise affirms, That the Scriptures were written for our learning to
know God, etc. p. 11.

Answ. The Jews and Pharisees which Christ reproved had the Scriptures, the
writings of Moses and the Prophets, yet knew not Christ, nor God the Father;
and thou and many other have the Scriptures, and yet wants the knowledge of
God, none knows God the Father but such as the light Christ reveals him unto;
here thou contradicts the Doctrine of Christ, and seeking (with the unbelieving
Jews) for the knowledge of God, the Life, in the Scriptures, read Luke 10.22.
John 8.19. here thou have shown thou knows not the right use of the
Scriptures, which are serviceable in their places.

L.C. Boasts and says, We write not of other men's labors, but as our Faith
within us reveals unto us, p. 13.

Answ. All that reads his book may see him to be an impudent liar, for he has
written of the works of the Prophets and Apostles, which are none of his; this
is the false faith, which reveals such horrible lies, and none of the Faith of
Gods Elect thou boasts of to be in thee; for the true Faith is of God, his own
pure gift, but thou have said there is naught of God in thee, and the fruits of
the true faith does not appear in thee, but the contrary.

L.C. He faith, The Sun at his presence (viz. Christ Jesus in the form of man)
will be put forth as the snuff of a candle, etc. page 15.

Answ. The Sun, Moon and Stars receives their glory and clearness from Christ
the Word, the Eternal Son of God, John 1.1.
who was before man had a form, and the Sun is not put out at the presence of
him that made it, whose presence fills Heaven and earth; this is one of thy own
foolish imaginations, which thou calls the Revelation of Faith, for when the
Sun shines in the fullness of the strength and glory, the most of the presence
and power of God is seen in it.

L.C. Likewise says, The nature of our Revelation, leads us forth to no manner
nor form of worship, p. 8.

Answ. Then thy revelation is contrary to the Revelation of Christ and the
Saints, and here thou have shut thy self out of their Doctrine and Practice;
Christ preached and prayed, Luke 11. Matthew. 6.1 These. 5.11
and taught to pray and to worship God who is a Spirit, in the Spirit and in
the Truth; and the Saints that lived in the power of Christ, met together, and
in love edified one another, Preached, prayed and prophesied as they were moved
in the power of the Holy Spirit; so had a form of godliness or worship, though
in the power of God, as the chosen of the Lord, who bears his glorious image
have now, who are acted in the power of the same Eternal Spirit, who judges
thy revelations to be foolish and vain imaginations, and out of both form and
power of godliness.

L.C. Says, That one of them (viz. the Quakers) declared, that his God was an
infinite spirit, all light, life, power, that filled Heaven and earth with his
glory, etc. and he likewise says, The Spirit is nothing without a body; and a
little before says, Neither was this any God at all, p. 20.

Answ. I do bear Testimony in the strength of the Eternal Spirit of Life, 2
Cor. 3.17 John 4.24.
unto the God that I then declared of, which is as I then affirmed, a Spirit of
Light, Life, Glory, Power and infinite Wisdom, who is not to be confined or
limited to time or place, and his glorious presence does fill Heaven and earth
(though thou would limit him, and have him in Heaven above the stars and in no
Creature) but according to the Scripture, Heaven is his Throne, and the earth
is his footstool, Isa. 66.
the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain him, who was from all Eternity, 1 Kings
8.27.
and is to all eternity before any thing was formed, by his own Power and
Wisdom gave to man and every Creature his form, the nature of man and Angels, 2 Chronicles. 6.18.
gave them not their form, as thou falsely and blasphemously affirms, against
thee and thy imagined god I do bear witness, in the Spirit and Power if Christ,
and all thy lying imaginations, who denies God to be a Spirit and to dwell in
his people, 2 Cor. 6.19.
contrary to the holy Scriptures, and denies the Words of Christ, who says in
John 4. God is a Spirit, and a spirit has neither flesh nor bones, Luke 24.39.
and the flesh profits nothing, it is the Spirit that gives life, and the
Spirit is the true God, which thou says is no God, whose dreadful Judgments
thou must one day know to thy pain and torment, for thy blasphemy against him
and his Tabernacle which is with men, Reu. 21.3.
who dwell and walks in his people, though thou would exclude him from thee and
all other; who said, there was naught of God in thee nor in any man, which
words preceeded from thee, as several can and will witness that heard thee,
which makes it appear thou denies the Scripture, which says, I in them and
they in me, and I will dwell in them and walk with them, says the Lord; 2 Cor.
6.16.
yet thou brings scriptures in a pretense to prove thy Imaginations, but all
thy covers are too narrow to hide thee, they sleights, errors, lies and
blassphemies are seen, and thy wicked unclean spirit which vents all these
abominations is eternally Judged, and condemned by the Spirit and Power of the
eternal unchangeable God; and for all thy craft and subtilty thou shall be
bruised and crushed, the rod is over thee, it is not saying as thou said unto
me, Thou art damned to all Eternity (or words to the same effect) that will
save thee from the wrath of the Almighty ( Jehovah our God) which without
mixture will be poured forth upon thy head, and all like-minded with thee shall
partake of the same; and this was one of thy subtle Evations, when any hard
question was asked thee, which thou could not or durst not for shame answer,
thou art damned already I will not answer thee, and so put things by which came
near thee, though several times thou was taken in horrible lies, and spoke
diverse times unto us after thou had denied it, which manifested the true. God
thou puts far from thee that should have guided thee, to have spoken the truth,
unto which thou appears a strong enemy; Therefore L.C. thou may expect the just
judgments which is pronounced against thee, to come speedily upon thee, and
the unreasonableness is in thy self and in thy Companion, and the rage and
wickedness; though thou would falsely charge us with such like stuff as you
trade with, but by us it is denied and returned into your own bosoms, into its
proper center; And as for thy saying, a Spirit is nothing without a body,
herein also thou manifests thy ignorance, concerning the devine eternal
unchangeable substance, the Spirit which gives every thing its being, body or
form, and the body without the Spirit is dead, Jam. 2.26.
according to Scripture, though thou would have the form, the body, to be the
substance of the Spirit; what a mist of thick darkness is over thee, that thou
vents such cursed doctrine; where do thou read in the Scripture that the
Spirit is nothing without a body, or who ever durst be so impudent as to broach
such a blaspemous doctrine? I never read that the Papists for all their
blindness ever held forth such a doctrine, here the Idolaters may Judge thee,
and thy cursed opinion; yet the Spirit has a body, but according to thy own
confession thou art none of the Members of it; but such as are baptized with it
knows his body, nature, virtue and life, who was before man was formed; Learn
what that means, the bodies of the Saints are the Temple of the living God, 2
Cor. 6.16
and prove thy God (which thou says is a man above the stars, no where else in
no Creature, nor in this world) by plain Scripture, or confess thy gross
ignorance and darkness, for I utterly deny thy meanings and corrupt
imaginations; and if thy God be so far from thee, thou have a great way to go
for Counsel; but Moses said, the Word was nigh in the hearts of Isreal's
Children; and likewise Paul to the Romans; and the Word was God says John; so
that thy doctrine and the Saints that gave forth the Scripture accord not,
which clearly evidenceth a contrary spirit in thee, if thou had not confessed
there were naught of God in thee; so that thy commission, the voice of words,
which thou pretendest is also judged and denied, being seen by the light of
devine glory in us, to be deceit and hypocrisy, and the delusion of Satan
which thou professest, who have uttered such abominable filthy blasphemies,
and railing speeches against the Lord and his only people, which will hasten
thy downfall and destruction, but our foundation stands sure, not to be shaken
or moved, mark that, and the sentence of eternal Condemnation, which thou says
five of us came under, we stand clear from, and under it thou thy self and thy
Companion art, and the great darkness you are in (who deny and oppose the light
of Jesus Christ within us) in the reprobate state, who know not the light
Christ Jesus within you, whom we confess in us (as the Saints did) the hope of
our eternal glory, and witness him against you, the world, and all men upon the
earth who stand up against him, who is our life, rock, refuge, and the horn of
our Salvation, and the Condemnation of all that deny and oppose his light
within.

L. C. Thou says in the 20 and 21 page, Both Angel and man has forms suitable
to their natures, and that it was their natures that gave them their form; and
after thou say toward the latter end of the 21 p. God created man in his
own Image; and likewise says, God has the same form that man has, and yet
one is spiritual and the other natural, etc.

Answ. Mark, The heap of confusion he has compacted by his confused sensual
wisdom, which he calls the Seed of Faith; if God created man, Genesis 2.7. John 1.
then his nature gave him not his form, but God; and if by the word speaking,
came forth both Angel and man, as thou says, then their nature gave them not
their form, but God that spoke the word; and if God has the same form as man
has, the not another as thou falsely affirment; Is there no difference betwixt
a spiritual and a natural form? Herein thou have contradicted thy self, that
all who have a true understanding may see thy darkness and confusion.

L. C. Thou also says, When thou believe him only an infinite Eternal
spirit, then thy faith is wavering like unto the God, for a spirit without a
body cannot be known, etc. p. 22.

Answ. The Faith God has given me, by which I see and know him to be an
Eternal Spirit, a devine substance is not wavering, but sound and steadfast;
neither is God the infinite Eternal spirit wavering as thou falsely affirms,
but stands and remains in his own being, nature and life for ever; and the
Saints knew God to be a Spirit, as also Jesus Christ has declared and
confessed him, John 4.
and unto their Testimony I do bear witness against thy lies and confusion; and
God who causes light to shine forth of darkness, has shined in our hearts, to
give us the knowledge of his glory in the face of Jesus Christ; 2 Cor. 4.6
so that we know God to be a Spirit of infinite power by his light in us, as
the Saints did that gave forth the Scriptures, which knowledge thou and all the
world wants who contemns and opposes his light within; And is not this the
blaspemy against the holy Spirit, to deny God to be a Spirit, have not thou
here brought thy self under Eternal Condemnation, is not this the unpardonable
sin? But we do not deny that God was in Christ, and that in his body the
fullness of the Godhead dwells, Joh. 16.23
Christ is the same for ever; now in his Saints, and God in him, the Father and
Son we do not deny, but confess to be one, and he that has the Son has (the
life) the Father also, but thou have excluded him from thee, who says, there
is naught of God in thee, and Christ has but one Body, one Church, one Temple,
and yet there are many Members; but thy corrupt sensual wisdom cannot see into
this divine Mystery, though the Scripture in plain words declare it; So that
for ever thou may stop thy mouth, for boasting of thy knowledge in the
Scriptures.

L. C. Who says, Because we witness Christ manifest in us, that he is but in
one of us, unless we can make it appear, that Christ has so many bodies as
there is Quakers, etc. p. 25.

Answ. We do say and testify in the fear of the Lord, with a true and perfect
understanding, (notwithstanding thy reviling) that the true light Christ the
spiritual body, or Divine substance, is manifest in us; and also do bear
witness of his descending, and ascending for above all heavens, and it was the
same which ascended, Colos. 1. 2 Cor. 13.5 Ephesians. 4.10. 1 Cor. 15.50.
that descended, according to the Scripture; and do thou prove the descending
of a body of flesh, blood and bones; flesh and blood enters not into the
Kingdom of heaven, learn what this means, John 1 14.
the word was made flesh, and the flesh suffered without the gate at Jerusalem,
but the life God died not, which was in the body of flesh, but entered into
glory, into the same glory it was in before the world was made, Ephesians. 4.10
whose glory and presence fills all things, and is amnifest in us, his
beauty, his presence and power is seen known, and rightly understood; and his
spiritual body, his pure Divine presence is but one, yet in thousands it is
manifest, glory to his eternal name (Jehovah) for ever; but this is beyond the
reach of thy devilish sensual wisdom, this secret is hid from the Magicians of
Egypt, the worlds wise men, who want the pure wisdom and reason; And this I
affirm, 1 Cor. 1.21.
he has no true ground for his faith, so out of the true faith; but what have
thou to do to boast of thy faith or speak of it, who denies the true light
Christ to be in thee; and says there in naught of God in thee, is not the true
light Christ the Author of faith? so he that has not Christ the power of God,
Heb. 12.2.
the ground of faith, which faith stands in, his belief or faith stands in the
wrong ground, in the wisdom of men's words, and this is the false faith, the
faith of the whorish woman the false Church, the worlds faith, and the faith
which L.C in acted in, which all along in his book he boasts of, who denies the
true light Christ within, the ground and Author of our faith.

L. C. In the 17. p. It is said; Look into thy own body, there thou shall see
the Kingdom of heaven, etc. and in page 25. he says Christ is in heaven and in
no creature.

Answ. The Kingdom of heaven being in man, if Christ be in heaven he must needs
be in man, would thou exclude Christ from his Kingdom, or can it be properly or
truly said to be a Kingdom without a King? but here thou have manifested thy
ignorance of the Reign, Government, Kingdom and power of Christ which is in the
Saints, and that another King (the Prince of darkness) has the Government in
thee.

L. C. He also goes about, through his subtilty, to strengthen the hands of the
wicked persecutors, the enemies of God and his people in New England and other.
Nations, saying that the suffering of the Quakers in New England or in any
other Nation is not for righteousness, etc. p. 44.

Answ. Here thou joins with Cains generation, the persecutors of the innocent,
and manifests the lineage and stock thou art of; where or when did any of the
seed of faith persecute any for conscience sake, were not the righteous seed
sufferers in all ages? blush and he ashamed of thy wickedness; what unrighteous
action can lay to the charge of of any one of these thou calls Quakers in New
England, that so cruelly suffered by that bloody generation; their innocent
sufferings and the patient suffering of those called Quakers in other Nations,
shall stand a witness against all Gods enemies there and else where, to the
honor of the righteous God, and to their eternal shame and confufion, and Gods
judgments is nigh to come upon that bloody generation in New England and else
where, who have drunk the blood of the innocent; and all that join with them
against the Elect seed called Quakers, shall partake of the wrath and
indignation of the Lord God, which upon them will speedily be poured forth
except they repent, and they and thou, shall know one day the ye have wronged
the righteous seed, to your sorrow and torment, who for the innocent truth, and
for righteousness have suffered long and cruel imprisonments, stockings,
stonings and cruel scourgings, the spoiling of their goods, and the loss of
some of their members which Cains generations must answer for, every drop of
innocent blood they must give an account for; the Lord of hosts will avenge the
blood of his people, who will render to every one a just recompense of reward
according to their works, woe, woe to the merciless, for they shall have no mercy.

L. C. Rages against us and says, You Quakers are not Commissionate so
counterfeits, yea guilty of spiritual Treason; and would have us deny the Lord
Jesus within us, etc. page 45.

Ans. Our Authority and Commission stands in the power to Christ Jesus manifest
in within us, unto whom we do bear witness in the power of his own spirit and
life, 2 Pet. 1.21.
as therein we are moved (as the Saints in all ages did) and his voice we know
and hear, John 10.
(which thou art a stranger unto) and his Counsels and commands, through the
virtue of his power we are and have been subject unto, through the which many
times, by Cains generation, we have suffered much; Col. 1.
but it is thy self and thy generation which are guilty of high spiritual
treason, that denies Christ within, and would have us to do so too; but we deny
thy cursed Counsel and Doctrine and know one day that thou shall answer for all
these things at the Bar of Divine Justice, and thy Commission, the voice of
words thou speaks of, is seen with the eternal light, and judged to be
delusion, and thou proved thy self to be the counterfeit.

L. C He affirms in p. 26. that God or Christ is not in this world, neither
in Prophet nor righteous; And also that the seed or nature of God is in all
true believers.

Answ. Here thou would devide God from his seed or nature, which is
inseparable, and would exclude God from the world, believers and righteous;
what confusion is this, who begets the Seed or nature of God in man, and how is
it generated or begotten, or how comes the seed or nature into man, if God be
not in man, by his own power to generate it; and what makes a man righteous if
the righteousness of God be not in him? here thou have written thou knows not
what, uttered words without understanding.

L. C. Also faith, The seed of the woman is faith, and the seed of the
Serpentine Angel is Reason, etc. and this Serpents seed Reason put to death
Jesus and his Apostles, and that reason has power to put to death the seed of
faith.

Answ. The seed of the woman is Christ, and the seed of the Serpent is sin and
iniquity, they were unreasonable men that murdered the just and innocent, such
as thou art, but the seed of faith shall never die; Joh. 6.47. Joh. 3.15.
he that believes in me shall never die, never perish, never be confounded, but
shall live for ever, have everlasting life, it is the Serpents seed, the
ungodly, the unrighteous, the blasphemers and liars, that dies and eternally
perishes, and the seed of faith is not out of the pure reason, but in it;
Reason, does not destroy but preserves; the persecutor, the devourer is out of
reason, unreasonable.

Several particulars which L.C. in his Book has asserted, desired to be
proved, by plain Scripture, or otherwise they will stand upon record, as lying
forged imaginations and no true Revelations. 1. That Faith shall die in the
heel, and reason in the head. 2. That the Angel did descend into the womb of
Eve. 3. That a spirit cannot live without a body, p. 28. 4. That we and our God
are cursed to all eternity, page 28. 5. That Christ or God is above the Stars
with a body of flesh and bones. 6. That God that Christ said was a spirit, the
meaning of his Revelation was, that his invisible soul was that God or spirit
abiding only in his person. p. 29. 7. That Reason is the seed of the Serpent.
8. That by faith, reason shall be kept in Eternal death. 9. That God gave
faith, Reason, and sense but once. 10. And that faith reason and sense have in
all generated, in its kind form and nature as in p. 40. 11. That the Devils
Kingdom, and reasons Kingdom are one. 12. That God does damn as well as save,
and that not for any evil thing done, as he has asserted in p. 58. 13. That we
acknowledge no other God but what is within us. 14. And that we conceive this
God was an infinite nothing, and so made all things of nothing. 15. That the
light in us is darkness. 16. That an infinite spirit without a body is nothing.
17. That we say God has no form. 18. That all the time Paul was clothed with a
corrupt persecuting spirit he was a vessel of honor in the account of God. 19.
That God is all Faith and no Reason; and that Reason is of the nature of the
Devil, p. 31. 20. That it was the wisdom of the flesh that made a chief
Magistrate, as in p. 36.


This and much more of the like nature has proceeded from the imagination of
thy sensual wisdom, which thou calls the Revelation of thy generated faith, and
many railing and reviling expressions against us which thou calls Quakers, which I
shall pass by, as not being worth mentioning, but for all these things thou
must give an account, and terrible and dreadful will the day day of account be
unto thee, who has uttered so many horrible blasphemies, lies and false
accusations against the God of life, (who is a spirit) and against his people,
and also goes about in thy sensual wisdom, to make a difference amongst
believers, as if God answered some and not others.

L. C. page 41. thou says that thou can not find that ever God did hear or
give an answer to any private believer?

Answ. Which is false; for God hears and answers all believers, it is the liar
and unbeliever that God neither hears nor answers; The whole household of faith,
who are the family of heaven, of one heart, one soul and one spirit, in and
through faith have all access to him and acceptance with him, all heard and
answered by the Lord God who is near unto them (even in their hearts) to hear
their requests and to answer their demands, and also to relieve their
necessities, and there is no difference in true believers, the devisions and
differences are amongst the unbelievers and the wicked: it were in vain for
such as thou calls private believers to pray or believe, if God shall neither
hear nor answer them, in this all the whole household of faith will deny thee
and witness against thee, who have all been heard and answered of God; in this
also have thou discovered thy folly.

L. C. Likewise says in the 42. p. I shall reveal unto you the difference of a
Commissionate faith from a generated faith, and how the one is ceased, the
other not, etc.

Answ. Where do thou read of a commissionate or a generated Faith in the holy
Scriptures? here thou art not guided by the Scripture, nor the Spirit that gave
it forth; Faith is but one, Eyb. 4.5
the gift of God, not to be divided, the Mystery held in a pure Conseience, by
which all Gods children had and have victory over the world, John 5.4.
its nature and life, and in it reigned over the prince and power of darkness,
as all who be in the Faith will witness, one Faith, one Lord, one Baptism, and
that it is not ceased, nor never cease, but remains and endures in the
Church of God, the Assembly of the firstborn, his Elect in which they have all
access to and acceptance with God; but this Faith and charity thou art out of,
which is manifested inthe Saints, by which they live and please-God.

L.C. He says, The nature of Reason is to cheat, injure and persecute his
neighbor, etc. p. 47.

Answ. That is false, It is the nature of Reason to do the thing which is
reasonable, it is contrary to Reason to cheat, lie and persecute, such are out
of pure Reason that do such things, unreasonable men like thy self.

L.C. Likewise says, For as the Law was made for the lawless, viz. The Seed of
Reason, etc. p. 49.

Answ. This is also false, The law is not made for the Seed of Reason, which is
added because of transgression, and made for the lawless, the Law is grounded
upon pure Reason, and the lawless and transgressors are out of the Reason in
the unreasonableness; So the Law has power over them to condemn them; pure
Reason is Law, and what is contrary is no Law, and in this also have thou
opened thy folly.

L.C. Also says, Blasphemy is matter of Conscience (as you call it) so in
Christ's Kingdom, etc. p. 50, 51.

Answ. This is another of thy horrible lies; Blaspemy, error, deceit, lies and
iniquity is in the Devils kingdom, in which thou art, and not in the peaceable
Kingdom of Christ into which no unclean thing can enter, blaspemers are shut
out of it, and has no part in it.

L.C. Does likewise say, The blind Quakers are laboring through the fire of
their own Righteousness, intending to find rest but cannot, etc. p. 53.

Answ. The fire which they have labored in, is a mystery to thee, if ever thou
come to know it, and feel the heat of it, it will be a dreadful time unto thee,
and our own righteousness and unrighteousness, in the Lords fiery furnace is
consumed (and consuming) and the righteousness of the Lord is our covering,
which can stand in the everlasting burnings, and in it many of us can witness
true peace, rest and sweet comfort, which is satisfactory to our Souls,
notwithstanding thy lies and false accusations, which cannot touch us to hurt
us, glory to our God for ever; but they will one day come heavy upon thee and
be thy burden.

L.C. Blasphemously says, This I know God could die, etc. p. 58.

Answ. This is horrible blasphemy, to say that the everliving God could die,
who is eternal life, Genesis 21.33
remains the same in substance, nature, life and being to all eternity, who was
before death was, before any thing had a form, Deuteronomy. 33.27.
gives every thing its form, life to every thing that lives, and is the Spirit
and life of all flesh, never slumbers nor sleeps, immortal, eternal,
unchangeable; if he dies, he changes, and lives not ever; Thou sottish man, how
does thy sensual wisdom blind and deceive thee, can the unchangeable God dye,
who can change all things in a moment, Mal. 3.6.
in the twinkling of an eye, which is changeable? But in this as well as before
he has largely manifested his ignorance concerning the immortal unchangeable
God, Jam. 1.17.
in whom there is no variableness nor shadow of turning; but the death and
suffering of Christ in the flesh we believe, own and bear witness unto,
according to the Scripture of Truth?

And likewise at Richard Whitpans house in East-Cheap in London, in a discourse
with some of us, this ensuing confusion proceeded from the mouth of this lying
prophet (and his companion) who styles himself the alone true and faithful
messenger of Christ; but the understanding Reader may easily discern whose
messenger he is, by his Message, unto which I shall refer thee, which is as
follows; taken from their own mouths, as it was uttered by them at the same
time.

1. L.C. Said he would prove God to be a man, flesh and bones as we are. 2.
Lodowick, Mugleton his companion, that he had more knowledge in the Scriptures,
then they that gave them forth. 3. L.C. Said he had nothing of God in him. 4.
L.C. Said he would prove nothing, and before said, he would prove what their
God was. 5. L.C. Said, The Devil was the Author of this light in the world,
(and Christ says I am the light of the world, etc) 6. He said he would never
eat nor drink with George Fox Ju. for he was damned to all Eternity, but
shortly after said he would drink with him to morrow. 7. He also said he was
the judge of the Scriptures, and all must believe the meanings he gives unto
them, yet would show no reason for it. 8. L.C. Likewise said he had damned the
Lord Mayor seven or eight years ago and 1000 more within this eight years, and
that he had justified forty or fifty. 9. He pronounced damnation to George Fox
Ju. and to John Harwood, and said several times he would speak no more to them,
yet after did, and said also he would answer no question, but after did. 10. He
said his God was in heaven above the Stars and no where else a man or person.
11. He said the words in the Scripture, in the 4. chap. of John does not prove
God to be a Spirit, where Christ said God is a spirit, yet be pretended to own
the Scriptures. 12. One of them said that a spirit has flesh blood and bones
contrary to Christ's words.
WE whose names are here subscribed were present in the Chamber when these last
twelve Particular passages were spoken by Lawrance Claxton and Lodowick
Mugleton, and much more of the like nature, not worth the mentioning, and this
is published for no other end but the manifesting of deceit and deceivers, and
the clearing of the innocent truth and the witnesses of it, Richard Whitpain.
Alice Whitpain. William Sympson. George Fox Jun. John Harwood.


THE END

