KILLING IS MURDER, AND NO MURDER: OR An Exercitation concerning a Scurrilous
PAMPHLET, OF ONE WILLIAM ALLEN, A Jesuitical Impostor; Entitled KILLING no
MURDER: Wherein his Highness honor is vindicated and Allens Impostors
discovered.

And wherein the true Grounds of Government are Stated, and his fallacious
Principles detected and rejected.

As also his Calumnious Scoffs are perstringed and cramb'd down his own Throat.

An siquis atro dente me petiverit,

In ultus flebo ut puer.

Horac. Epod. 6. Scurror ego ipse mihi, populo tu. Hor. l. 1. Ep. 19. By MICH.
HAWKE, of the Middle Temple Gentl.

London, Printed for the Author; and are to be Sold by the Company of
Stationers. 1657.

ANd first of his Title, Killing no Murder: Wherein by his Jesuitical fallacy
he shows himself to be of that Faction; for Killing is Murder, and no Murder:
And it is no Murder in the Supreme, or Subordinate Magistrate, for any Capital
Crime to condemn one to death, and Execute him: But it is Murder in any private
Person upon precogitated malice to kill any private Man. And that, if any
private Person compass the death of the Supreme Magistrate, Coll. comm. f. 1.
133. b.
and declare it by any overt Fact, though he be a Mad Man (as I suppose therein
William Allen is) the very intent is high Treason, and Superlative Murder by
the Law of God and Nations, though it be not effected; which he in facto will
be enforced to acknowledge, if once apprehended; notwithstanding the Jesuitical
Institutions of his Ghostly Father Mariana.

Which also the taking upon him the spurious name of William Allen seems to
signify; wherein no man of that name and his condition is to be found within
the Latitude of our territories; a fashion followed by the Jesuitres, Contra
Monarchi. com.
as by Eudaemon Johannes, and Junius Brutus, whom Beza supposes to be Parsons
the Jesuit; and not without reason, says Barclai, in that they blush to own
that opinion, which they in conscience know to be erroneous: Which is allowable
to the Jesuitical Doctors, to teach others that which they really know to be
erroneous, See the Preface to the Provincialls. Watsons Quodlibet. f. 238.
as Layman the Jesuit affirms, quamvis ipse Doctor ejusmodi sententiam
speculative falfam esse sibi persuadeat. Neither does his bearing of Arms free
him from that suspicion; for Parson the Jesuit is checked by Master Watson, for
Acting in Campo Martio, with Bellonas Banners; and if Fame speaks truth, he is
not the only Jesuit has under the shape of a Soldier lurked, and done
mischief in our Army.

Put them in mind to be subject to principalities and powers ready to obey
Magistrates, and to every good work. Tit. 3.1. Neither murmr, as some of them
have also murmured, and were destroyed of the Destroyer. 1 Corin. 10.8. Curse
not the King, no not in thy thoughts; for a Bird of the Air shall carry the
voice, and that which has Wings shall tell the matter. Eccles. 10.20. Falsa
maledicta in privatum quidem non licet jacere, in Regem vero veris abstinendum.
Grot. de bell. l. 1. c. 4. Remove from me reproach and contempt; for I have kept
thy Commandments. Psalm. 119.221. Non est ulla res tanti, aut commodum ullum
expetendum, ut viri boni and splendorem and nomen omittas. Cicer. 3. Offic. To
the Most Puissant and Prudent PRINCE, OLIVER CROMWELL, By the Grace of God LORD
PROTECTOR Of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, And the
Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging.
Most Renowned PRINCE,
PArdon me, if I presume to present these Papers to Your Princely View, as
Justine did his Annals, to the Emperor Antoninus; Non tam cognoscendi, quam
emendandi causa; not so much to instruct you as to be Instructed of You, who
are best able to Judge of the Historical Passages related in them; in which You
have been a Continual and Honorable Actor: Which, if it shall please Your
Highness, to peruse and examine by the quadrant and square of Your exact
Judgment, and peircing Intellect, You shall highly Honor him, whose ambitious
and ultimate scope is to vindicate Your Highness Honor; which has always, and
ever shall be divulged and defended by the Pen, and Hand of Your,

Unworthy Servant, and observant Subject, MICH. HAWKE.

To the Upright and Vnbiass'd READER.
IT is not unknown to some great Personages, that the Author had completed
this Exercitation before the Answer to Killing no Murder saw the light; and had
been made public sooner, but that he doubted to divulge it without the
surveigh of some of the Higher Powers: their being therein specified many
particular passages concerning the State. Neither is it a Novelty, or an
inutility for diverse Books of the same subject to pass the Press, as St.
Lib. 1. de Trinit. c. 3.
Augustine upon the same occasion averreth. Utile est (says he,) plures
libros, a pluribus fieri diverso stilo etiam de quaestionibus iisdem, ut ad
plurimos res perveniat ad alios sic, ad alios autem sic: It is profitable to
have many Books composed of many in a diverse style, even of the same questions,
that the knowledge of the thing may be conveyed to many, to some after this
manner, to others after another. Which also may be very requisite, and
conducent to the suffocating of this serpentine pamphlet; for a single eye may
clearly discern by the therein inserted secret and several relations, that it
cannot proceed from one brain, but that it is Hydra multorum Capitum composed
by many virulent Heads, and therefore had need of more Heads then one to
encounter it: Besides many material passages are untouched by the other, which
in this are punctually handled, and not by skippes, but literally, and orderly
decided: And also have retorted in his teeth the filth of his scurrilous and
bitter taunts, and thrown them in his own face, which for the most part work
more powerfully on cavalier and nimble wits then a Logical Argument; for as
Horatius one of the Secretaries of Augustus, Ridiculum acri Fortius, Horat. l.
2. Sp. 1
and melius magnam plerumque secat rem.

Which are generally by him pretermitted. My intention is not to disparrage the
Author; for in many things he has done very well; Sed plus vident oculi, quam
oculus: Two eyes see more then one.

The Preface.
IT has been deemed prudence in Princes, to slight calumnies; for which
Tacitus gives these Reasons, Quia spreta exolescunt, si irascare, agnita
videautur; because, they being slighted vanish and come to naught; but if you
be angry at them you seem to acknowledge them; and in another place by
condemning them, Nil nisi dedecus sibi, atque illis gloriam peperere, View of
the Civil Law, etc. fo. 31.
They have purchased nothing but disgrace to themselves, and glory to the
Authors: which are to be understood of defamations, proceeding from the
lubricity of the tongue, or weakness of the brain as Sir Thomas Ridley
distinguishes, according to the saying of the Emperor, Siquis Imperatori
maledixerit si id ex levitate processerit, contemnendum est; si ex insania,
miseratione dignissimum. If any shall speak evil of the Emperor, if it proceed
from lightness, it is to be contemned, if from madness, it is worthy of
commiseration, but if they be Vulnifici sales and cruenta verba, Wounding and
bloody words, full of rancour and malice; Curt. l. 6.
which as Alexander in Curtius, perveniunt ad gladios, Produce quarrels and
seditions: Such Calumniators according to the constitution of Theodosius, ought
to be secured, by Custody, and according to other Princes, by Death, Tac. l. 6.
as Tiberius the sagest of the Emperors, who otherwise, was merciful to
Male-dicants, caused Panconianus for composing Verses in disgrace of him to be
condemned Laesae Majestatis, Of High Treason, and to be strangled in Prison;
which moved Henry the Seventh, whom Sir Francis Bacon adorneth with the Elegy
of awise Prince, Bacon His H. 7
to hang and execute five persons, for contriving and spreading of swarms and
volleyes of Libels against his Majesty. Clapm. l. 6. nuper.
And so severe and strict was the great Turk in punishing this crime, who in
moral policy by dilating his Empire seems second to none, that he commanded
fifty Scholastiques whom they called Totti, to be put to death, because they
made certain signs and signification of a sinister conceit they had of him,
which might be conceived to be a very cruel censure; but that the Wiseman
intimates the same Eccles. 10.20. Curse not the King no not in thy thoughts;
and that the disparagement of Princes are the fomentaries, Idem. H. 7.
and as Sir Francis Bacon the Females of Sedition.

And though the words of a malicious Detractor as the Wiseman, Plut. Apotheg.
are sharper then Swords, or as Heracides, then whetted Swords, and penetrate
into the Bowels of the Belly, yet the diffamations of a Libeller, are more
pernicious especially Printed Libels, because more permanent; Littera Scripta
manet, and perpetually read and carried from one malevolent hand to another,
and will not exelescere as Tacitus says, but gliscere, not decay but increase;
for most men are transported with a philauty or self-respect, and have envious
and itching ears, to hear ill reports of others, and are easily induced to
believe them. So as the more dangerous they are, the greater care should be
taken, to cancel, and vacuate them, which may be according to the practice of
other Princes, either Cremando, by apprehending them in Ovo when they sweat
under the Press; And to fire them as Tiberius did those of Liberius, who wrote
the Elegy of Brutus and Cassius: or else refutando, by Reasons, which work most
on a man, to refute them: as the most learned Doctor Andrew handled and
tortured Tortus, who by his Pen, as this Libeller attempted to seduce the
Princes Subjects from their allegiance; These are the thoughts which have
instigated the Author, to convel, and confute, this pestilent and perilous
Libel, which punctually levelleth at the ruin, and fate of his Highness; and
also by collection of other Princes, for under the pretense and color of
Tyranny, he concludes it lawful for any obscure or sordid person to kill or
murder his Sovereign Prince, pronouncing it to be a glorious and magnanimous
Act so to do. And for so much that this Pasquil is covertly dispersed among
discontented and seditious persons, which they embrace as their Apostles Creed,
and communicate and extol it to others, as an indubitable, and sacred Truth,
whereby many well disposed people may be debauched, corrupted, and withdrawn
from their due obedience to their Prince. The Author, thought it his duty to
the Prince, and Public, to prevent such imminent and future mischiefs, by
making it manifest, that every page of this Pasquiller is full fraught with
venomous errors, Oseand. Cent.
and seditions falsities. And that their Apostle is Os Diaboli as Irenaeus
styled Marcion, the Mouth of the Devil; and that this Creed is the Devils
Creed, forged in the Infernal Shop of King Killing Jesuits his selected
Apostles.

Wherein if the Author shall seem Superficially Prolix

Utque oblita modi millesima pagina surgat. Yet hops he well that the Serious
Observator will mark, Juv. Sav. 7.
and consider the various, curt and close couched Historical Passages, with his
Suspense and involved Questions, which could not be clearly conceived, and
fully refelled in conciser and fewer Lines.

ANd first in general to tax him for his Calumnies, Invidia calumniae matter.
Lip. de ^ont.
the brood of envy and malice, wherein he follows the steps of Satan, who for
calumniating and accusing his Brethren is surnamed Diabolus, which in the
Original signifies a Calumniator; and practices the precept of Medius, whom
Plutarche styles Dux Calumniatorum, Plutarche de diff. and ad
the Captain of Calumniators, which is Audacter calumniis mordere, inquiens, si
is qui morsus est, vulneri medeatur, cicatricem tamen relinqui; boldly to bite
with Calumnies, saying, that if he that is so bitten be cured, yet a scarre
will remain; for as Machiavel, Machiavel. l. 1. cap. 8.
though Calumnies be grounded on slight suspicions, yet they being once
divulged and entertained will hardly be removed. And this is generally this
Impostors breviary, or practice of piety in all the passages of this Pasquil,
to interlace, and interweave here and there diverse contumelious opprobries
against his Highness, which though they be universally fictitious, yet hops
he that some scarre or filth will adheare to his skin; but he is vaniely
deceived, for the Magnanimity and integrity of his Highness will with scorn and
contempt cast off the dirt, and filth of his contumelies, as a Lion does dirty
water passing through a miry slough, without any blemish remaining, saying,
Ille didicit maledicere, ego maledicta contemnere; he has learned to revile,
and I to contemn revilings.

And then in particular to pursue him close, Terent.
and to pay him in his own coin: Vt quod ab ipso allatum est, id sibi illatum
putet; that what scoffs are cast from him, he may find retorted on him.

In the front he places his supplication to his Highness, which is as full of
jeeres as words, wherein he endeavors with Archilochus by his snarling
scoffs, to jeere his Highness out of his life, as he did Lycambes according to
the Verse, Tincta Lycambaeo sanguine tela gerunt:

And would fain persuade his Highness to his happy expiration, whereby he might
show himself a true Father and Deliverer of his Country, and free it from a
bondage little inferior to that from which Moses delivered his -- (A Simile,
which by his often repetition seems much to please his fancy, though no more
like then this Impostor is to a true Israelite) and that then he will be a true
Reformer of Religion, and till then we can call nothing our own; and that by
his death we hope for our Inheritance, with some other Ironys tending to that
purpose, which becomes the Kings Jester better then a States man, as he would
seem to be: but his Highness may truly and justly say with Titus the best of
the Roman Emperors, who by such Detractors was reproached in the like kind;
Seeing I have done nothing worthy of reproach, Mendacia non curo; I weigh not
lies: and that by all peaceable and prudent people and their Representative; he
is acknowledged to be a true Father of his Country, and a Deliverer of his
people, from the Egyptian bondage of Popery and Tyranny, and that by his
Paternal and Princely care; our Inheritances are settled and protected against
foreign invasions; and domestique seditions, unless theirs who through
intestine insurrections, or public Rebellions have justly forfeited the same,
such as this Impostor and his Confederates are, or have been.

And that contrary to this Impostors contumelions suggestion, justice is not
defined by the will and pleasure of the strongest; but other Laws take place as
well as those of the Sword, which all the subordinate Justiciaries to his
Highness will aver; that it has been his principal and peremptory charge to
them to administer Justice to all impartially, without any respect of persons,
according to the Laws of the Land; and that his Highness upon particular
complaints of diverse of his people, pretending that they have not received
Justice, by the hands of his Justiciaries has called them before him, and
according to Law, equity, and good conscience heard and determined the same.
And as St. Paul did, so does his Highness exercise himself to have always a
good conscience, void of all offense, toward God and man; where is then the
terror of conscience this Impostor would fasten on his Highness? is it not
fixed in his own heart? 1 Timothy 4.2.
is not he one of them the Apostle mentions, who speaking lies with
Hypocrisy, having his conscience seared with an hot Iron, gives heed to
seducing Spirits, and the Doctrine of Devils? For who can deny but it is the
Doctrine of the Devil, who was an Homicide from the beginning, to give the
Reins of Authority to dissolute persons, to wound and slaughter the supreme
Magistrate, to whom they ought not only to be subject for wrath but for
conscience sake?

And therefore it behooveth William Allen to consider in his own conscience, in
what a sad and desperate condition he stands through his Diabolical murderous
intention, whereby he cannot only escape the certain doom of Gods vengeance,
but also incur the Capital censure of his Vicegerent; which to avoid, I will
not advise him as he did his Highness, though it may be supposed, that to
escape a shameful death like Brutus and Cassius, he will perish on his own
Sword, or rather with Judas frighted with the terror of conscience will be his
own Hangman, or else with his renowned Sindercombe swallow a Spanish Fig to
shun the Triple Tree; but why should he be supposed to be so Valiant, whose
valor, like Thersires, consists only in braving, railing, and encouraging
others to fight, and assault one he dares not himself encounter; and what man
of common sense will give ear and credit to his exhortations, by which he would
incite others to Act that horrid Homicide he himself fears to attempt?
Howsoever this Impostor may assure himself, that his Highness has his heart
and conscience so armed, and fortified with Religious fortitude, and Pious
constancy, that no Scuril or popular conceits can deter him from laying fast
hold on his Scepter.

Virtus repulsae nescia sordidae,
Intaminatis fulget honoribus,
Nec sumit aut ponit secures
-- Arbitrio popularis aurae.
Next follows his Dedication, which is as full of shifts, as his supplication
was of scoffs, Astutam vapido servans sub pectore vulpem: Shrowding two faces
under one subtle hood.

Wherein he straineth all the nerves of his conceit to corrupt and debauch the
Army, and either to withdraw it from his Highness, or to divide it to its and
his Highness destruction, which is apparent in the Title; it being directed to
all those Officers and Soldiers of the Army that remember their engagements,
and dare be honest (hoping at the least to gain the honest party to his
Devotion.) But I wonder much that he should have such confidence in the honest
party, having so little honesty himself; for what honest man would attempt to
divide but unite, and especially the Army, whereby it might be decayed or
ruined, which under God was the principal means of procuring our Liberty, and
of preserving the same? but what cares William Allen if with Phaeton he fires
the world, so he may have his will; to wit the ruin of his Highness, which is
the fatal close of his Dedicatory Epistle? This the Levellers aimed at in the
year 1649. and the fifth Monarchy men in the year 1654. See the Declaration of
the Parliament of England, dated 27. September 1649. And the Case of the
Commonwealth etc. Dated 1654. See the true Case of the Commonwealth etc. Dated
1654.
by the division and alteration of the Army, to suppress the Generals; but his
Highness and the Army are in one Body so naturally and affectionately
incorporated, that no Command or divice can dissipate and separate them, no
more then the device of Pompy, and the Command of the Senate could Caesar and
his Army at Rubicon.

But to weigh his wily Arguments, by which he cunningly goes about to seduce
the Army from his Highness; the one, and the Prime one, is, that the Officers
and Soldiers of the Army, which were raised to defend the Privileges of
Parliament, his Highness has made to dissolve Parliaments. This is a fallacy
from the cause, a non causa ut causa; for the raising of the Army was not to
defend the Privileges of Parliament, but to bring Delinquents to condign
punishment, the maintenance of the Laws, and Liberties of the Land, and of due
successions of Parliament, which did not intend to quarrel with the Kingly
Government, but to regulate the disorders, and excesses in the Government. And
the Army never took up Arms against any particular form of Government, nor
ever fought against the King as a King, nor for the Parliament merely as a
Parliament, as appears by all the Papers and Declarations have been published
in the beginning of these Wars; and therefore was the long Parliament justly
dissolved by the Army, because it exceeded the due time of successions of
Parliaments, which should have been but triennial, and not perpetual as they
would have had it; besides many other enormities did concur to its
dissolution, which in the true State of the Commonwealth Stated, Dated 1654.
Fo. 11.12. are amply declared, so as when that was dissolved, there was not so
much heard as the barking of such a Dog as the Impostor is, or any general or
visible repining at that; and the Soldiers therein were not made the
Instruments of slavery, and establishers of Tyranny as he says, but the
Restorers of our Liberty, and Instruments of Justice. Noother Parliament I know
of, but that it did continue out the fixed period of time, according to the
first Institution.

And as concerning their engagements; the Parliament being justly dissolved,
the engagements concerning the Privileges of the same, are also justly
dissolved; for all promissory Oaths as engagements are but Political ties,
grounded upon Political considerations for Politic ends, and bind no longer
then the particular Politei and State stands; for as the Civilians
distinguish in such Oaths, Tholosa Syntag. 49. c. 4.
apposita clausula censeatur, promissionem valere rebus sic ut tunc erant
extantibus and in eodem statu permanentibus; an annexed clause or condition is
to be supposed, that promise to be of force, things standing as they then were,
and remaining in the same State; so as if that State be changed and ended, such
engagements as reflect on it are determined; which distinction this Impostor
might have learned of his Master Suares, Suares resp. ad apologiam projure
fidelit. 409.
Quod sublata materia Juramenti, consequenter obligationem auferri necesse est;
that the matter of the Oath being taken away, by consequence the Obligation of
necessity must be taken away; as if a King, says he, be deposed, he cease to
be a King; and in that respect no obedience is due unto him, and forthwith the
Oath does not bind; a fortiori, if the Government be determined, and the
matter of the Oath dissolved, the Obligation of the Oath is ipso facto
exstinct; for as Master Askham, possession is the great condition for our
obedience and allegiance; how unjustly therefore does this Impostor call these
distinctions prevarications to piece up contrary Oaths, which are grounded on
approved Authority, and his own Masters opinion. The other reason on which he
groundeth his seditious desgne, is, that the Officers and Soldiers of the Army
are employed to force Elections, that is, as may be conceived to seculde such
as are turbulent and factious from being Elected, and admitted members of
Parliament, wherein we are to distinguish between a quiet and settled State, and
a Commonwealth which is distracted with factions. In the first a free Election
of Knights, Burgesses, and Citizens in Parliament, is requisite, and ought to
be, as Plato says, Libere and incorrupte; in the second a free Election is
altogether inconvenient and dangerous; for otherwise that great Council may be
distracted, and overruled by turbulent Spirits, and nothing by it resolved for
the public good: A pregnant Example, of which we lately had in the
proceedings of the late Precedent Parliament, See his High. 22. Jan. 1654.
which as his Highness says, wholly spent their time, and did nothing. And in
such cases of extremity where there is no course of prevention otherwise
provided by Parliament, Expedit principi omnium dissentionum causas in repub.
dirimere; it appertains to the Prince to prevent all causes of dissension in
the Commonwealth, for he is the supreme Conservator pacis; and by the advice
of his Council may bar, and frustrate the Election of those of whose malignancy
and disaffection to the State; he has received certain and infallible
intelligence, and that by way of preventing future discord and distraction; and
accordingly in the turbulent times of Henry the third, when the Kingdom was
divided into two mighty Parties, That wise King called the best affected only
to Parliament, as Master Cambden in his Britannia relates; Ad summum honorem
pertinet, says he, F. 122.
Ex quo Henricus tertius ex tanta multitudine quae seditiosa, and turbulenta
fuit, optimos quosque ad Parlementaria comitia evocaverit. It was an highly
honored Act in Henry the third, that out of so great a multitude, which was
seditious and turbalent, he had called every one of the best affected to the
Parliament, by whose prudence and moderation the torn Estate of that Kingdom
was cemented and settled in an uniformity of peace and tranquillity. In like
manner did his Highness this Parliament out of a multitude of malignant and
discontented persons, by the advice of his Council, according to the Instrument
of Government, call and admit those only who were best affected, and well
disposed, into the Parliament House; by whose wisdom and advice with little
disturbance and contradiction the three main Pillars of the State, which were
then tottering, were firmly fixed and established by Act of Parliament; to wit,
the supreme Magistracy was confirmed in his Highness, the succession settled,
and the Liberties of the people were Ratified, and secured by his Highness,
according to the advice and Request of the Members of Parliament; and were not
as he impudently says, Pimps of Tyranny, only employed to draw the people to
prostitute their Liberty.

How unworthily and injuriously therefore does this Impostor brand that
pacifique and prudent Parliament in diverse passages of his Pasquil with the
strange name of a Junto (with whose sound he is as much pleased as children are
with the strange noise of a Rattle) because it was purged and cleansed of such
malignant and factious spirits, and not virtuous, as this Impostor says, who
would have fomented discord and dissentions among them: By which means the
distracted State of these Nations is happily united to the content of his
Highness, and satisfaction of the People: And that with the approbation and
applause of the Religious, Zealous, Faithful, and Courageous Officers and
Soldiers of the Army, as he styles them, notwithstanding his conjuring
imprecations, who for their fidelity upon occasions, are deservedly advanced
and exalted by their magnificent and victorious Prince and General; and not
ruined by him whom they raised, F. 15.
according to this Impostors Machiavilian rule, which, he says, Princes
observe, when they are in power, never to make use of those that helped them to
it; unless they be such as this Impostor is, Seducing Mutineers, who are justly
purged, and cast out of the Army like dung, and like cudgeled hounds lie
lurking in their kennel, bawling, barking, and catching at flies, and are not
like to rise, or be exalted, unless it be as Haman was, and as he divineth, be
hanged up like bottles.

Qui male dixerit pejus audiet. His Preface now ensues, wherein, like the Fox,
though he seems to change his hair and outside, yet still retains his nature
and manners, according to the Proverb, Vulpem pilum mutare, non mores; and
pretends, that it was not instigations of private revenge and malice (though
it may be conceived, manet alta mente repostum, that his public disgrace does
still stick in his stomach) but indignation did make him break that silence
prudence would persuade him to use. But indignation and anger, says the Royal
Preacher, Eccles. 7.9.
rests in the bosom of fools: And, Ira furor brevis est, Anger is a mad
Penman, which makes him use such frantic and wild expressions. But what is he
angry at? but that he shall employ his time and pains to little purpose (which
he truly divines) or to think that any reasons of his, or convictions of
theirs, shall draw men from any thing wherein they shall see profit, or
security; or to any thing wherein they shall see loss, and fear of danger
(which also is true) for, by the dictate of reason, every one is taught and
convicted to pursue his own profit, and to shun danger; neither will any one of
sound sense hearken to his unprofitable and unreasonable delusions.

And, that we court our bondage, and place it among the requests we put up to
him (which is illi cordolium, and strikes to his heart to see the sincere
affection of the Parliament, and their respective observance) And, that he
expects not only danger from ill men, but disallowance from many which are
good, that have a zeal, but not according to knowledge (neither of which he
has, which therefore he must expect.) All his hopes is, in honest and wise
men, which, he says, are but few, or indeed none at all; for what honest or
wise man will give ear to his projects, which as he confesses, appear so
bloody, and so cruel, unless such discontented and forlorn persons as himself,
whose life is a death to them, and for whom Timon Misanthropos has prepared a
new Gibbet in his Garden, expecting daily their desired hansel.

But his soul Pen bespatters not only his Highness, but his accomplices, as he
terms them, and especially Mr. Speaker by name, for giving Mr. Sindercombes
traitorous design the epithites of bloody, wicked, and proceeding from the
prince of darkness, fearing that the people judging of things according to
their outward appearances, without penetrating at all into their causes and
natures, when they shall read the Pamphlet of Mr. Speaker, they will certainly
think he gives those plotters the right Titles; and not without good reason;
for though the vulgar do not ordinarily dive into the causes of things, are not
wise enough to apprehend them, yet most of them are so wise, as to hearken unto
the advice and reports of those whom they know to be wise, and able to judge of
them (whom Aristotle in that respect adjudgeth to be wise men) And therefore
without doubt, they will sooner believe what is declared by Mr. Speaker, who is
a man of Authority, and who has always been reputed vir bonus, and sapiens, a
wise, and honest man, then that what is feigned and foysted in the Pamphlet of
this Impostor, an obscure, scurril and lying Pasquiller, which for it in diverse
places of the City of London was burnt by the people, for want of an Hangman,
which is notoriously manifest, in that he seems to doubt of Sindercombes
traitorous design, and suspitiously to ascribe it to his Highness invention,
whereas the contrary is made clear by the confession of his confederates, and
upon sufficient evidence, at a public Trial, so adjudged. Which is not unlike
to his lying protestation, to wit, that his principal intent in this paper is
not to declaim against my Lord Protector, or his Accomplices; and that were it
not more to justify others then to accuse them, he should think their own
actions should justify them sufficiently; which, as Cicero, is magnum and
impudens mendacium, a great and impudent lie: For in his Supplication he
persuades his Highness to his happy expiration, and that his death shall
something balance the evils of his life. And in his Dedication he inciteth the
Officers of the Army against him, that they can never redeem their honor
until they see their revenge upon his faithless head. And herein in his
Preface he justifies it lawful for Sindercomb to have killed him, as a
Tyrant, and by consequence for any other private man. If then to persuade his
Highness to his expiration, or to incite the Army to take away his life, or to
allow it lawful for any private person to kill him, and that as it is probably
said, tribus bolis, he would have him forthwith devoured one way or other, be
not principally to declaim against his Highness, then fools cannot speak
nonsense.

But what will William Allen gain by his lying, but that when he speaks
truth, no man will believe him, but say to him as it is said in the Comedy, Si
dixeris mendacium solens tuo more feceris? Plaut. Amph.


But to pass by his other senseless and superfluous passages, and to discuss and
examine his three serious questions, which contain in them the contagion and
venom of this pestilent Pamphlet.

The first is, Whether my Lord Protector be a Tyrant or no? which he says is
no question, and would disputare ex non concessis; but he shall neither find it
granted of us, nor proved by him.

The second is, If he be, whether it it is lawful to do justice upon him
without solemnity, that is, to kill him?

The third is, If it be lawful, whether it is likely to prove profitable, or
noxious to the Commonwealth?

The first question: Bartolus makes Tyrants of two sorts, In titulo, or
Exercitio; the one is called a Tyrant, because he has no Right to govern; and
the other, because he governs not rightly, or as he Phraseth it,
Tyrannically; and at last infers that the Protector may with great Justice
put in this claim to both Titles, but how unjustly, the conclusion will
manifest.

And then says, that we shall sufficiently demonstrate who they are that have
not right to govern, if we show who they are that have: Arist. Polit. l. 1. c.
1.
And first he premiseth truly that the supreme Power was first placed in
Fathers of Families, as Aristotle tells us from Homer, that every one gives
Laws to his Wife and Children; so Adam was the King and Lord of his Family; and
a Son a subject, and a Servant was then one and the same thing; and this power
was exercised everywhere where Families were dispersed, and some small time in
some places after Commonwealths were constituted; but whereas William Allen
assumeth, that after, of many Houses and Families a Society was made, the
supreme Power was designed and settled in one man, by the consent and Election
of the people, where the immediate appointment of God himself did not
interpose; William Allen must give me leave to leave him; for after the fall of
our first Parents the natural State of men, before they were settled in a
Society, as Master Hobbs truly says, was a mere War; and as Cicero says,
Rules concerning Government. F. 14.
tantum haberent quantum manu ac viribus per caedem and vulnera eripere, and
retinere potuissent: had so much as by force and might through wounds and
slaughters they could obtain and retain; and as his Master Mariana in those
times, Vbique latrocinia, direptiones, caedesque grassabantur; everywhere
Robbery, Rapine, and Slaughter did rage, De Regis Institut. Fo. 16. Genesis 6.
Lib. 1.
which abhors not much from the Sacred Scriptures, as is plain by the
Tragedy of Abel and the Murtherous mind of Lamech: And what may be meant by
the Giants who were mighty men, and in the old time men of renown, but such as
Thucydides writes of, who by force and rapine did snatch and catch what they
could from others, holding it an honor, and no disgrace, so it was Valiantly
done; all which continually happened before the setlement of a Society by a
Supreme Governor; how then was it possible for such a discordant multitude of
people solemnly to concur, or unanimously to consent in the Election and
approbation of a Supreme Magistrate, which indeed at that time was bellua
multorum Capitum? and though God for the special care he had of the People of
Israel, did sometime after a special manner choose their King, whom the people
afterward did accept and approve, yet cannot this Impostor find any Place or
Text in the Scripture, where any Power or Commission is given to the people to
govern themselves, or choose themselves a Governor, or to alter the manners of
Government at their pleasure; though this Impostor would obtorta gula wrest
the Text of Deuteronomy. 17.14, 15. to that purpose; If thou say I will set a King
over me, like as all the Nations are about me; Thou shall make a King over
thee, such as the Lord thy God shall choose; so as notwithstanding their saying,
the choice and nomination of their King was to proceed from God; and therefore
according to that prediction, when the people did ask a King; 1 Samuel 6.5.
and that Samuel would make them a King to Judge them like other Nations, he
showed them Saul, saying, See you him whom the Lord has chosen, 1 Samuel 6.5.
which the people acknowledged, showting and saying, God save the King.

And in that he says, it is plain in that place that God gives the people the
choice of their King, for there he instructs them whom they shall choose, one
of the midst of their Brethren: This is otherwise; for he there says not they
shall choose a King from among their Brethren; but they shall make a King over
them; 1 Samuel 10.1.
from among thy Brethren, whom the Lord God shall choose; that is to say, shall
approve and confirm Gods choice: So Saul was chosen by God, and anointed by
Samuel, but was made, that is, confirmed King by all the people in Gilgal; so
David was chosen by God, and anointed by the same Prophet, but was afterward
confirmed by the people of Juda and the Elders of Israel. 1 Samuel 16.2.14.


And if the peoples consent were alone sufficient, then was Gods choice in
vain; but I hope this Impostor will not be so vain in this as in other things
he is, to make Gods Election and choice vain, to please the people; for Deus
and natura nil faciunt frustra, God and nature do nothing in vain: Much more he
says he could say if it were a less Manifest truth, to wit for the Election
of the people; but how can it be a Manifest truth is so absonant from reason?
for it is averse from reason, that men who are free by nature, should by free
Elections expose themselves to imperious subjection, without fear or force;
Oration ad Caesarem.
for by nature every one asperrime Rectorem patitur, un willingly and
stubbornly endures a Ruler; especially to have the Power of life and death
over him, as every Ruler has; whereupon Patricius infers this conclusion,
Nulla gens sine aliquo metu, De rep. F. 6.
vel vi supremo Magistratui se subjecit; and therefore as Bodin says,
Aristotle is deceived in supposing that Kings where chosen by the suffrages of
the people; fallit enim Aristoteles, says he, Bodin. de repub. l. 2. c. 2.
qui aureum illud genus hominum Fabalis Poetarum quam ipsa re illustrius, Reges
Heroas suffragio creasse prodidit; Aristotle deceives in that he shows that
the people who lived in the Golden Age, did create their Heroique Kings by
suffrages, which is more Illustrious by Poetical Figments then by real truths;
for it is perspicuous that the first Kingdom and Royalty was constituted by
Nimrod, whom the Sacred Letters call a mighty Hunter, because by force he
gained his Kingdom; for before his age, Liberty was equal to all; and he was
the first that compelled Free men to subjection, and therefore is called
Nimrodus, In. Genesis 10.
that is Dominus metuendus, a terrible Lord, and as Tostatus, was the first
King and Monarch, because we read of none in Holy Scriptures Reigned before him.

But against this I surmise this Impostor will object who goes about to make
all Princes Tyrants in Titulo, whose Power is not founded on popular Election
or consent; that Nimrod was a Tyrant, because he was a mighty Hunter,
Populosque vi and armis Sceptro subjecit, and subjected the people by force,
and Arms to his Scepter; but on the contrary he is said to be a mighty Hunter
before the Lord, because as Chrysostom says, Cajus in Arist. Fo. 3. c. 10.
Cornelius de lapide Melchior Canus, Aben Ezra in 10. Genesis Barcl. contrae
Monarch F. 281. Acq. sum. pa. 1. q. 63. Ar. 4. Syntag. Ic. l. 18. c. 18. c. 12.
robur acceperat a Domino; he had received his strength from the Lord, by which
he subdued the people that lived in that age; and that he nutu and beneplacito
Dei, by the impulse and good pleasure of God had forced the barbarous and rude
people unto a Civil life, and stoutly ruled them by the Power of the Sword, as
many Commentators on that place observe; so as if this Impostor will make
Nimrod a Tyrant, he must make the will and power of God Tyranny, by which he
obtained his Royalty; for as Aquinas, effectus semper convertitur in suum
principium; the effect is always converted into his principle: It is clear
therefore, that if we respect the foundation of Government, it is not Election
or consent of the people, as this Impostor would have it, but force and Arms
which first raised and established it; which is also confirmed by Judicions
Tholosanus, primus vi constituit imperium; alii partim successione, alii
Electione facti sunt reges: The first by force constituted a Kingdom; others
were partly by succession, and partly by Election made Kings. Election then
has no privilege in a Commonwealth, which was first constituted by force;
neither in a settled Commonwealth has it any power where succession reigns,
which is almost universal; and where it has any vigor, it is but little and in
part; for many Princes are and have been chosen by some part of the people, but
by the whole or major part none at all; but most have been by the nobility,
Gentlemen, and Princes of the blood, as in Poland, Denmark, Swethland, and
Germany, and not by any collective or representative body of a Nation, whence
this Impostor may learn, if he scorn not instruction, that all just Power of
Government is not founded upon those two bases of Gods immediate appointment,
or the peoples consent, as he would have it; but datur tertium, to wit War
and Victory, which he might have learned of the ancient Father Tertullian,
Imperia armis quaeri, Apoll. Resp. ad Apollo. Jur. F. 124.
Victoriis propagari; that Empires are purthased by Arms, and pronagated by
Victories; or else of his new Master Suares, Solent i^terdum provinciae seu
populi liberi involuntarie subjici regibus per bellum; Provinces and free
people are unwillingly sometimes made subject by War; but this happens to be
done justly or injustly; when therefore War has a just Title, the people is
justly deprived of the power they had, and the Victor that prevails against
them, has true Right and Dominion over them: For jus est in Armis; there is
Right in Arms, and it is the most potent Right, which the Roman Civilian
Cicero was at the last forced to confess, Ep. ad Atticum.
Nullum Jus plus potest quam arma; ut enim quisque potentissimus est, it a
justissime dicere, and facere omnia videtur; no Law has more power then Arms;
for as every one is more potent, so does he seem to say and do all things most
justly. By this it is perspicuous that there are three bases of all just power
of Government, the immediate appointment of God, War and Victory, and the
Election and consent of the people. And therefore this Impostor shall give me
leave to infer his conclusion, that whosoever does arrogate to himself that
power, or any part of it, and cannot produce any of these three Titles, is not
a Ruler but a Tyrant. And now let this Impostor dare to ask his Highness, Quis
te constituit Principem and Judicem super nos? who made the Prince and Judge
over us? and he shall be fully answered, to wit, that he was made a Prince and
Judge over us by the immediate appointment of God, by the Right of War, and
by the consent of the people, which two Titles dimane also from the Divine
providence, as shall be in the sequel showed; but first of the immediate
appointment of God.

The power of all Kings, Princes, and Rulers, immediately proceeds from God,
though not by his special revelation, which was only incident to some of the
Kings of Israel, Romans 13.1.
yet by particular designation, which is common to all, and is a matter of
Faith, if we will believe St. Paul, who says, There is no power but of God;
which he uses as a reason to persuade due obedience to the Prince; and that
God is the immediate Dispensator of that power he proves by the Authority God
has given to a Prince to revenge and execute wrath upon him that does evil,
Ib. 2.4.
by depriving him of life, if it be requisite as he says, that he bears not
the Sword in vain, which is only in the gift and power of God, who is Dominus
vitae and necis, the Lord of life and death; for no man has power to take away
his own life without the guilt of being a Murderer; and therefore are Princes
called by the Prince of Poets (...), Gods Son, and Scholars; and by a more
Divine Poet, Homer.
Gods, Dixi quod dii estis; I have said you are Gods, because they immediately
have their power from God.

Solomon the Wisest of Kings acknowledged this, By me Kings Reign, and Princes
degree Justice: Prove. 14.21.
And Daniel who was wiser then all the Astrologers and Magitians, taught
Nebuchadnezzar this lesson, Thou O King art King of Kings; for the Lord of
Heaven has given thee a Kingdom, power, strength, Dan. 2.21. Apology fetched
out of Allen.
and glory; and that he changes the times and seasons; he removes Kings, and
sets up Kings, which none will deny, but he that says in his heart there is
no God, but nature; to which purpose speaks some of the Papists and Jesuits,
and especially Bellarmine; Bellarm. de conc. l. 2. c. 19.
In regnis hominum potestas Regis est a populo, etc. In the Kingdom of men the
power of the King is from the people; which power is immediately in the
multitude as in the Subject; and Suares second to none in subrility, says that
God is said to give this power to the Prince, because he has immediately given
it to the people, who transferres it to the Prince; and this says he, is modus
maxim connaturalis, and optimus qui intra latitudinem naturalis rationis
cogitaripotest; the most connatural, and best means, Resp. ad Apollo. Jur.
fidel. F. 127.
which can be thought or found within the Latitude and extent of natural reason.

Which to confirm, he produces Scripture, that whereas St. Paul says, there
is no power but of God; he does not say that every Prince is constituted of
God; for his saying is not of any Prince, but of the power; and so as he said
before, the power being immediately in the people from God, is immediately by
them conveyed to the Prince; yet will he not allow the power to be immediately
in the people; Ex peculiari institutione and donatione divina; from the
peculiar institution and Divine gift; sed per naturalem consequutionem ex vi
primae creationis; but by natural consequence from the force of his first
creation; in which they seem to ascribe more to natural reason and production,
then to Divine patesaction. But St. Paul is his own Interpreter; for after his
general Doctrine of obedience to the power, he expounds it in the singular,
and applies it to the Prince in particular, as he is the Minister of God to
thee; and then again, that he bears not the Sword for naught; and least they
should forget it he reiterateth it, for he is a Minister of God, etc. But it is
objected that though St. Peter makes the King Supreme, yet he tells us the
King is an humane Ordinance, or creature of the people; for the words are,
Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man, for the Lords sake: but it is
answered, 1 Pet. 2.11.
Kings may be called an humane Ordinance, for being made of one of the people,
and not by the people; and are humane in regard of their material cause, though
not of their efficient; and if Peter had meant that Kings had been made by the
people, he must also have meant that the Governors had been made by the people;
for he says, they are sent by him, not by them, for the punishment of evil
Doers, so as the Governors are sent by the King, not by the people.

This needs no application, were it not for this Impostors exprobations; for
who but such a blind Bayard will question who made his Highness a Prince and
Judge over us, and cannot see what wondrous works the immediate hand of God
has wrought by him, who as Moses delivered this captive Nation from the
bondage and Tyranny they groaned under; and though not sent by particular
nomination as Moses was; yet questionless by the immediate designation of the
Almighty above ordinary providence; for if we observe his various and marvelous
progressions in his military employments, who from a common Commander within a
few Summers for his stupendous Victories was made Commander in chief; and from
that dignity above his own ambition, or humane calculation, Resque fide major,
was advanced to the Supreme power of these three Nations; how can we but
acknowledge that it is the Lords doing; and that it is mavelous in our eyes,
who raises the poor out of the dust, and lifts up the needy out of the
dunghill, Psa. 113.7.
that he may fit with Princes, even the Princes of the people?

The second way by which the just power of Government is gained, is bello and
Victoria; Chyl. rud. Fo. 16.
by War and Victory; for as Master Hobbs says, it is a Corollarie in the
natural state of man, that a sure and unresistable power conferres the Right of
Dominion and ruling over those who cannot resist, of which before sufficient
has been said.

A Title also to which his Highness may justly lay claim, for after the
Victorious and invincible Army under the Command of Sir Thomas Fairfax and his
Highness, had laid the Royal part in the dust, and trampled it under foot, the
Enemy which was vanquished in the Field, had recourse to subtle practices to
corrupt the Parliament, and City of London, upon the specious pretenses that
there was no Enemy in the Field; and therefore no more need of any Army to
continue the heavy and unnecessary charge upon the people: by such Arguments as
this the faction prevailed to vote the disbanding of the Army, and vast Sums
of the Commonwealths Treasure were wasted in raising Forces, and entertaining
of Reformadoes to beat the Army, and thereby to make way for the readmitting of
the then King, to the reexercising that power which had produced such bloody
and fatal effects, and that without any just satisfaction given for the same to
the people, or reasonable provision for those had Faithfully engaged, in the
maintenance of them; See the Declaration of the Parliament of England, dated
24. of September. 1649.
insomuch that the Army presaging what dangerous and bloody consequences might
ensue to the reinslaving of the people, and to make void and irrite all their
former and glorious Victories; and that the Commanders and Officers of the Army
might become a prey to the Royal party; and the Enemy whom they had with great
difficulty, and much effusion of blood subdued; and that their own honor and
safety was now in dispute; they of necessity were justly instigated by the
principles of nature, and self defense, to oppose their bloody, inhumane and
ungrateful designs, in attempting to supplant, and cut off those had been the
Patriots and Champions of their Lives, Liberties and Fortunes, and by the power
of the Sword, to force them to Victorious conditions; which having obtained by
the Right of War, the Supreme power divolved on them, because they were in
an Hostile manner unjustly invaded and enforced to defend themselves from
imminent destruction. And that this was a just War, Cic. pro. Milone.
let Cicero and Aristotle be Judges; Illud est non solum justum sed etiam
necessarium, says Cicero, bellum cum vi vis illata defenditur; that is not
only just, but a necessary War, when enforcing force is defended by force:
And Aristotle to the same effect; injuriam Passos oportet pro seipsis Arma
capere; Arist. ad Alex.
it is not only just, but it behooveth those who suffer injury, to take up
Arms for themselves, or to defend their Kinsmen, Benefactors, or Associates
affected with injuries, as the Commanders and Officers of the Army did; neither
is the objection of any force that in Civil War, where the people is divided
into two parts, that part which conquereth the other, cannot challenge conquest
over it by Right of War, because it is one Nation, and a Nation cannot
conquer it self; to which Grotius gives this satisfactory Answer, Grotius 16.
l. 2. c. 18.
that in such a divided State Gens una pro tempo re, quasi duae Gentes
habentur; One Nation during the time of those civil divisions, is accounted and
esteemed as two; And therefore one part may claim Title of Conquest over the
other: as one Nation may do over another. So Henry the Fourth, with one party
of this Nation, Heywards Hen. 4.
conquered Richard the Second and his party: after which conquest he was made
King of England, and did not claim that by the Title of Inheritance; for as
Mortimer said, he was Haeres Malus: but first by conquest, and then by consent
of the people; which commonly follows the conquest, as Praemium Factorum, a
Reward of his Valor, which all men naturally applaud and honor. And so Henry
the Seventh, with one of the party of this Nation conquered Richard the Third
and his party; neither did he lay claim to the Kingdom by proximity of blood,
for there were others nearer then himself; but the first Title he had was in
Bosworth field, when after the conquest of Richard the Third, Bacon, and Bakers
Hen. 7.
he was by public acclamations saluted King of England. And such Conquerors
for right of War may as Alexander says in Curtius, Leges Victis dare, Give
Laws and Conditions to the subdued party; and as Ariovistus said to Coesar,
Imperare iis quemadmodum vellent, Caesar de Bello Gallico.
To rule over them as they please. And so did the Commanders and Officers of
the Army: (of whom his Highness was the Headpiece,) by right of War rule and
order the conquered party as they pleased; and caused the City to deliver up
all their Forts together with the Tower of London, and all the Magazines and
Arms therein. To disband all their Forces, and turn all the Reformados out of
the Line, to withdraw all their Guards from the Houses; and to receive such
Guards within the Line, as the Army should appoint to guard the Houses; to
demolish their Works; and to suffer the whole Army to march in Triumph through
the City, as Conquerors; and by the same Right did they purge the Parliament of
its infected and corrupted Members, which power from that time they constantly
retained, and upon occasions continually exercised; and were as Curators to the
Parliament and Common wealth, to remedy the distempers, and rectify the
disorders which the ambition of some, and lucre of others introduced; And in
fine, for important Reasons above specified, dissolved that long Parliament;
and that poor men under their arbitrary power were driven like flocks of Sheep,
by forty in a morning, Hen. 4. See his Highness Speech, 12 Dec. 1653.
to the Confiscating of their Goods and Estates; without any man to give a
reason, that any of them had forfeited Forty Shillings; and that no door was
open to their grievances.

By whose power afterward a new Assembly and Parliament was constituted; and
because it seemed not to be for the good of the Commonwealth, the Mayor part of
them thought it requisite to resign, and deliver up the said power unto the
Lord General Cromwell, which they received from him. So as thereby all Power of
Government divolved on the Lord General Cromwell as Head of the Army; and by
right of War descended to him as General: The Supreme Power being then vacant
to whom all the acts and honor of the Army is to be ascribed: Because as
Iphicrates, the General is the head, without which the body cannot act; and as
Curtius, militarem sine duce turbam esse corpus sine spiritu, A Military
Company without a General is as a body without a spirit, and cannot be rancked
and retained in its right postures without it; for as the Comoedian, Vhi summus
Imperator non adest ad exercitum, Plaut. Amph.

Citius quod non facto est usus fit, quam quod
Facto est opus.


And to speak truth without dawbing, he was the Life, spirit and head of the
Army; And in all his Battails led them on encountering the Enemy in the front.

Hostibus haud tergo, sed forti pectore notus. And as Fortunate as valiant, who
by the amplitude of his Victories overcame the envy of his Enemies, for which
as Romulus by the right of War, upon the request and approbation of the Army,
he took upon him the supreme dignity.

Ipsius certe Ducis hocque refer videtur, Juvenal.

Vt qui fortis erit, fit felicissimus idem.
This certes reflecteth on a Generals aim,
That he who valerous is, thrice happy reign.
And as Aristotle says (...), Arist. lib. 3. Polit. cap. 22.
it is just that such a Valourous Prince be Lord of all, and King alone.

And this right and title also flows from the Ocean of the Divine power; for
the Lord is a man of War, and he in War overcomes ever; it was he that girded
his loins with strength, and made his way perfect; he taught his hands to war,
and his fingers to fight; his gentleness has made him great, he has given him
the necks of his Enemies that he might destroy him that hates him; he has
delivered him from the strivings of the Enemy, and made him the head of his
brethren. And as his Motto and Word in battle was The LORD of Hosts: So has
his Highness perpetually and piously ascribed and consecrated all his victories
to the LORD of hosts.

The third basis upon which the just power of Government is founded, is the
election or consent of the people; and to this title also may his Highness
justly lay claim, who to bar up the way against those manifold inconveniences,
which have been felt under many other fleeting forms of Government, and to
reduce us as near as may be to our ancient way of Government, by supreme
Magistrates and Parliaments, did at the request and entreaty of diverse persons
of honor and quality, and of many of the chief Officers of the Army for the
good of the Commonwealth, under the name and title of the Lord Protector, take
upon him the supreme Government, and was by the consent and in the presence of
the Commissioners of the great Seal, the Judges, the Lord Mayor and Aldermen
for the City of London, the Soldiers, diverse Gentlemen Citizens, and many
other people and persons of quality, confirmed in the same, with whom being
accompanied to Westminster Hall, he did promise in the presence of God, to the
best of his understanding, to govern these Nations according to their Laws,
Statutes, and Customs; seeking their peace, and causing Justice and Law to be
equally administered; whereupon the Commissioners and Judges received their
commissions from him, by virtue of which they have ever since acted; and as all
the Justices of Peace did also act by his Commissions, so did all the Sheriffs
according to his Commands and Precepts; and all which came in by process,
issued out by the Sheriffs, consented to it, and all the Justice in this Nation
has been administered by this authority; besides, his Highness had the
approbation of the Army in England, Scotland and Ireland by Remonstrances, and
under signature; the Soldiers at that time being a very considerable part of
the three Nations; besides he had the Congratulation of the great City of
London by way of invitements which was very great, high and public; and by a
numerous body of those who are known by the names of several Corporations and
Societies in that City; as also the greatest County in England, the County of
York, with many other Cities and Buroughs, and many other Counties assembled
in the public and general Assizes, gave him thanks for the undertaking of
that Burden.

These and many more were the presentary and explicit Testimonies of the
peoples general approbations, and congratulations, manifested to his Highness
upon his gracious acceptance of this Government. And which of late has been
more amply and indiciously remonstrated, and declared in Parliament by the
Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, and confirmed, ratified, and established by
an Act, that upon publication of the premises, all and every person and
persons of what quality soever are strictly charged, and commanded to take
notice of the same, and to conform and submit themselves to the Government
established; which Proclamation, being published at the magnificent and
glorious inauguration of his Highness in Westminster Hall, with great solemnity
in the presence of the Lord Ambassador extraordinary of France, and the States
General of the United Provinces, and diverse other noble and honorable
personages, the people made great several acclamations with loud shouts: God
save the Lord Protector; and the like congratulations and acclamations, with
the expressions of their ^^^tions, wishing to his Highness long life, were made
by the people (...) City of London, and so did all the Cities of England,
Scotland and Ireland, upon the s^lemn Publication of the said Proclamation.
With what brazen brow can the Impostor now deny but any that his Highness may
also lay claim to this Title? if this be not a visible, public, and general
approbation, and consent of the people, then was never published any in Poland,
Scotland, Denmark, or any other Dominion or Territory of the Universe; and if
there be any refractory, or repugnant to the same, they are such as this
Impostor and his Accomplices, malignant men of Belial.

And this also is the Lords doings, who prepared the hearts of the people, and
touched them to appear and follow their Prince and Protector, as he did the
Band of men that went with Saul, after the Lord had chosen him: so as his
Highness Council, or Parliament as he vainly vaunts, nor any one else shall not
be much troubled to answer his Interrogations and Questions, which appear so
frivolous and nugatory.

But here this Impostors malice cease not; for though he confidently
concludes his Highness to be a Tyrant in titulo, as he falsely supposes; yet
will he have him also a Tyrant in exercitio, and as complete a Tyrant as ever
had been since the first Societies of men; for so he brazeth it but as he
fails in the first, so does he falter in the latter; and does but labor and
blot paper in vain, though he daubs it on with artificial cunning to make the
delusion the stronger; for thus he cunningly argues: Is it not Tyranny to
change the Government without the peoples consent, to dissolve their
representative by force; and to disannul their Acts, to give the names of the
peoples Repraesentative to confederates of his own; to establish iniquity by
Law; to take away men's Lives out of all course of Law, by certain Murderers of
his own, whom he names an High Court of Justice, to decimate men's Estates; and
by his own power to impose upon the people what taxes he pleases; and to
maintain all this by force of Arms? Which criminations, as they are by him
expressed, are malicious and contumelious; for he did not dissolve their
Representatives by force, or disannul their Acts, but upon necessary grounds,
and urgent occasions; neither did he give the name of the peoples
Representative to confederates of his own, to establish iniquity by a Law; but
he purged the Parliament of its unfound and putrified members, and settled in it
sincere and sound persons who might act nothing but what was agreeable to Law,
and equity, as is in the premises expressly proved; neither did he take away
Men's Lives by certain Murderers of his own, but did make Commissioners, and
erect an High Court of Justice, to take away the Lives of such Rebellious and
murdering persons as this Impostor and his Accomplices are, who would have
taken away the life of their Prince and Protector, which he justly might do;
neither did he decimate Men's Estates, and impose upon the people what taxes he
pleased by his own power: but he by the power was given him by the Army, with
the consent of many honorable people as well as others, at his installation at
Westminster Hall, and in other places, by whom he was created Lord Protector;
did by advice of his Council for the maintenance of the Army and Navy, and
defraying of other neces^^^^ charges which concerned the honor and safety of
the Commonw^^^^^ ^ecimate men's Estates; and impose upon the people necessary
taxes. All which as he truly says, he maintained by force of Arms out of all
course of Law, as by right of War and his second Title he might, as has been
fully debated, Ploy. f. 19. Tholosan. Syn. l. c. 18. and 28.
and decided. Besides, though upon acceptance of this Government, with the
consent and approbation of the people, his Highness has promised to govern
these Nations, according to the Laws, Statutes and Customs; yet is it a Rule
in the Divine, Civil, Canon, and the Common Laws, that necessity has no Law,
and that Necessitas facit licitum quod alioquin fuerit illicitum; and that
necessity makes that lawful, which otherwise should not be lawful; and Princes
strained with imminent and urgent necessity for the dignity and safety of the
Commonwealth, no established Law providing for a present remedy, may justly do
those Acts which otherwise by the course of Law were unlawful, as to decimate
Men's Estates, and by his power with the advice of his Council to impose such
Taxes as are convenient and necessary.

And as the learned Legist. Davis Rep. fol. 12.
Sir John Davis says, The King by his Prerogative Royal to support the
necessary charges of the Crown, may decree Imposts and Impositions payable upon
Marchandizes; and so have Princes heretofore by their Prerogatives to encounter
sudden dangers and mischiefs, which would not endure so much delay as the
assembling of the great Council of the Commonwealth, used their Edicts and
Proclamations, which Mr. Pym a grave and prudent Senator of this State styles
the most eminent power of a Prince, and the most glorious beams of Majesty, Mr.
Pym his Speech in Parl. 1642. fo. 31.
in commanding Obedience and Subjection, which he calls Leges Temporum; and
only disallowes them for the abuses in being exercised for the maintaining and
enjoying of sundry monopolies, and other graunts, exceeding burdensome and
prejudicial to the people. And therefore, how can this Impostor answer his
Highness Question in this point, Whether the people should prefer the having of
their wills, though it be their destruction, rather then to comply with things
of necessity? which as he truly Divines, he should wrong his Native Country to
suppose: unless he will suppose the necessity to be feigned, and imaginary, See
his Highness Speech 22 Jan. 1654. See his Highness Speech the 12 of Sept. 1654.
which his Highness acknowledges to be the greatest cousenage, that men can
put upon the Providence of God, and which his Princely and Paternal care
abhors. Besides, his Highness acted nothing in this Kind, but by the advice
of his Council, who are the Trustees of the Commonwealth in all Intervals of
Parliament, and has an absolute negative upon the Supreme Power in the said
Intervals, as the Parliament has in the sitting; so as it is not his own, but
a mixed Act by the advice of his Council, who in all probability would not
advise him to any thing but what is necessary and expedient; and if they
should, the offense would lie at their door. And thus are the preterit
Ordinances of his Highness fully cleared from the unjust aspersion of this
Impostor in giving him the title of the Violation of Laws, and Exercise of
Tyranny and Robberies. See the humble Pet. and advice of the Parl. etc. the 17
of Sept. 1646.
And for the future to prevent all ensing mistakes and suspicions of the
necessity of imposing Taxes on the people, upon provision made for the support
of the Government and Safety of these Nations; It is declared and enacted, that
no charge be laid, nor no person be compelled to contribute to any gift or
loan, benevolence, tax, tallage, aid, or other like charge, without common
consent by Act of Parliament.

But to proceed in the canvasing of this Impostors Calumniations; and whereas
he says, That notwithstanding his Highness has done all these things, yet for
his preservation the people must pray, as if it were impiety in the people to
pray for him. Our Savior Christ was of another mind, Mat. 5.45.
whose Council is, to pray for them who despitefully use or persecute you; And
so was his selected Apostles, who exhorts that first of all prayers,
supplications, intercessions and giving of thanks be made for all men, for the
King, and those that be in Authority. And who had rule over them at that time,
but Nero? a reputed Tyrant; 1 Timothy 2.1. Swarez responsad Apolog. p^^ Jur. fidel.
and for persecuting Christians supposed to be Antichrist; wherein by the
fruits we may perceive of what spirit this Impostor is; for he has not the
fruits of the Spirit of our Savior Christ, the Prince of Peace; to wit Love,
Joy, Peace, etc. but he has the fruits of the spirit of his father the Devil,
to wit, envy, cursing, lying, and all manner of reviling; So if his father, the
Prince of darkness should be deposed, by right of inheritance, the succession
may properly descend to him as the Devil Incarnate; who is the worser, and most
dangerous Devil.

And now in every respect are the reasons of this Impostor, by which he
fortifieth his first Question, utterly quashed, notwithstanding his
vainglorious triumphing before Victory, that it is a Question no longer.

But before he comes to the Second Question, seeing things are more easily
perceived by the Description of Exterior Accidents and Qualities; he thought
it not amiss to see whether his Highness has the outward marks and characters
by which a Tyrant is known, as well as he has their nature and essential
properties, which, as he says do so naturally correspond to his Highness that
it cannot be doubted, whether his Highness be the Original or the Copy, or
whether he has in drawing the Tyrant represented him, or in representing him
expressed a Tyrant. But here also will his fair and glorious pretenses prove
but shadows and sick men's dreams; for as it has been exactly proved, that the
nature, and essential properties of a Tyrant are not to be found in his
Highness, no more cannot the exterior accidents and qualities be inherent in
him; for if the nature and essential properties be not in him, the external
accidents and qualities also cannot; for as Aristotle, Arist. Categ. c. 2
Accidens non potest esse sine eo in quo est; and therefore cannot the
Characters be aptly and properly applied to his Highness, though they be not of
his own stamping, as he says: but such as be found in Plato, Aristotle,
Tacitus, and his Highness own Evangelist Machiavel; who indeed is his only
Evangelist: for he seems better versed in him then in the Gospel; having
cited more Texts and Passages out of him, then out of that, whereas his
Highness in his Writings never mentions him, nor ever had him in his mouth;
as this Impostor every where has who supposes his Paradoxes authentic,
whereas neither his Highness, nor any Pious Prince will adhere to his
authority, and therefore in vain cited by him.

Howsoever, if we examine his Characters, Marks, and Scutchion of a Tyrant,
which he would fasten on his Highness sleeve, we shall find them sleeveless,
and altogether impertinent.

The first Charrcter is, That all Tyrants have been first Captains and Generals
of the people, for which he quoteth Aristotle; but his words are, all Tyrants
have been made (...), of Leaders of the people, and so have all Kings and
Princes; for without a party of the people, how can an Army be raised? and
without Armies how can there be Leaders? So Arbactes, Arist. Pol. l. 5. c. 10.
and Cyrus Leaders of the People were made Kings, the one of Assyria, and the
other of Medea data liberate, for giving and gainings the Peoples Liberty.

And so was his Highness also made Protector of these Nations, See the humble
advice of Parl. 1656.
for delivering us from Bondage and Tyranny, and restoring us to Peace and
Tranquillity, as is declared by our Representative in the last Act. But to
construe it according to his own mind and meaning, which is incongruously pacht
out of Aristotle and Tacitus, That his Highness being made a Leader for the
people, under pretenses of vindicating and defending their Liberties did
subvert the present Government, which being done, he invaded that Liberty
himself. And so indeed his Highness was made a Leader for the people, and did
vindicate and defend their Liberties; and vanquished their Tyrannical Enemy:
but when some of the Corrupters of the people (contrary to the Law of Nature
and Reason) in an hostile manner would have compelled their Leaders by force of
Arms to have subjected themselves to the power of the Tyrant, whom they before
had conquered, then according the Law of Nature were they enforced to repel
such ungrateful and destructive inuries and aperto Mart, to force them to
submission and subjection, whence by the Law of War their Command, Rule and
Government was transferred on them which they afterward always exercised over
them, as has been before argued and determined; yet did not their Leaders
leave them, but persevered to maintain and defend their Liberties against the
said Tyrants abetters, and never ceased till they had wholly and perfectly
routed and subdued them, for which not only by the Law of War, but by the
Consent of People, and Act of Parliament, the Supreme Power was placed and
settled on his Highness, by whom we enjoy our Liberty more fully then before we
did in our new modelled Democracy; for as Aristotle's Tyranny is a confused and
mixed of Timocracy and Democracy, of the principalities of a few, and the power
of the people, Arist. Pol. l. 5. c. 10.
and has the vices of them both; for the vicious end of the one, as his
accurate Expositor Camerarius observes, is to be an Enemy to the noble and
rich men, and them either to destroy or exile, of which we have had sensible
experience, and the vicious end of the other is through diffidence to afflict
the people, to banish some, and dissipate others into several places, which
also has been formerly practiced among us: but by Monarchs and the Government
of one these Vices are rejected, and remedied. For as Aristotle says, by it
the nobles and rich are defended from the injury of the multitude, and the
people are protected from the oppressions of the Nobles and Rich: So as there
is no greater Liberty then in Monarchy, by which the Tyrannical vices are
expunged and expelled; and the Nobless are according to their virtues worthily
preferred and defended, and the People according to their deserts advanced. And
this is his Highness cases far different from that of Panoetius, Pysistratus
and Dionysius, whom Aristotle produces as examples of Tyranny. And now I am of
the Impostors mind, this needs no further application.

The second Character is, That Tyrants accomplish their ends much more by fraud
then force; neither virtue nor force are so necessary to that purpose, as Vna
astutia fortunata, A lucky craft which without force has been found
sufficient, but never force without that: wherein he mistaketh his Apostle
Machiavel, as if in that place he should denote a crafty Tyrant; whereas he
intimates a prudent Prince, as if his Prince were all one with a Tyrant. For
though all his Precepts collectively taken are not authentic, or allowable,
yet some parts of his policy are necessary and useful, for the gaining and
preserving a Princes State; as Guards, Garrisons, Fortresses, Vigilance of
Counselors, diligence of Spies, and Intelligencers; De Arcanis Imperii, f. 207.
for which reason acute Clapmare in dispraising commends him pro politico
magni acuminis sed minus sanae and piae mentis, for a Politian of great wit,
though not of a sound and pious mind; and if we read him with a Chemical
Judgment, and refine him by Religious Policy, we shall find many conditions in
him worthy our observation and practice, whereof this is one, that Virtue and
Fortune avail not so much in obtaining a principality as a lucky craft; for as
the Civilians distinguish, there is dolus bonus, a good craft; if it be as
Plautus says, sine omni malitia, without any malice; and is called solertia, a
cunning craft; which is not disallowable, but laudable, especially in a General
or Prince, as it was in Hanibal; in which the nature of the Lion and Fox did
concur; Just. l. 1.
and in Darius Hidaspes, who by the cunning craft to make his Horse neigh,
gained the Kingdom of Persia; and in Servius Tullus, the Son of a Captive, who
being substituted in the place of a King, by Tanaquil his Queen, For l. 1. c. 6.
Regnum dolo partum sic egit industria ut Jure adeptus videatur, did so Rule
the Kingdom gotten by craft, that he seemed to have gained it by Right, and
obtained that by craft they could not have gotten by force; for as Tacitus,
Tacit. Ann. 2. Match discourse. l. 2.
plura consilio quam vi geruntur; and as Machiavel, fraud without force has
been sufficient, but never force without that; and though he says that it is
praiseworthy in a Prince to deal plainly, truly, and really; yet is there
Serpentine prudence to be used in his Dovelike plainness, and ought to be
participate of the fraud of the Fox as well as the force of the Lion; and as
this Impostor Phraseth it, to have the Tail of the Fox as well as the Skin of
the Lion; Match. Princ. 18.
thereby as he says, aggregare I cerveli de gli huomini con astutia, to wind
himself into the brains of men with craft, and by plausible pretenses to feel
the pulse of their affections, or to discover their sinister intentions, that
in the end he may Master those had so little wit as not to rely on his Faith
and integrity; of whom I believe this Impostor to be one by his little wit in
that point; neither is such dissimulation unlawful, as a Pious Politician
averreth, but Lawful and commendable, yea, and sometimes necessary; Artyl.
Religious Policy. c. 31.
especially in Princes, who ought to cover their intentions with more care and
circumspection then other men, so as it may well and truly be said, qui nescit
dissimulare, nescit regnare; he that knows not how to dissemble, that is to
say, discreetly to Cloak and cover his Intentions, when occasion requires,
knows not how to Reign; so Pious Aeneas concealed and dissembled his
departure from Dido, for which she Taxed him in the same Terms, Virg. Aeni. 4.
Dissimulare etiam sperasti perfide tantum
Posse nefas, tacitusque mea discedere terra:


But wherefore does this Impostor flower his Highness for his fluency in
tears? Elisha wept fot the evils would sall on the Israelites; and our Savior
bitterly, to foresee the destruction of Jerusalem; and why should not his
Highness weep to see the evils did afflicts his Country? who by his prayers
and tears did prevail more with God, and work more in the hearts of the
people of great prudence and piety, though this Impostor shamefully defiles
his own nest, (in stiling them a people of great Faith, and little wit) more
then his courage and the rest of his moral virtues with the help of his
Commilitons, which he scoffingly calls his Janisaries; leaving the eloquence in
execratious and contumelious opprobries to himself, who will never leave them
till the halter has him.

The third Character is that they abuse all excellent persons, and rid out of
the way all those have noble minds; and terrae Filios extollunt, advance Sons
of the Earth, which he thus applies, that his Highness purged both Parliament
and Army, till he left few or none there that had either honor or conscience,
either wit, interest or courage to oppose his designs, which before has been
effectually answered, to which he refers the Reader; neither were there any
excellent persons abused, or rid out of the way; but such as this Impostor is,
who were disturbers of the quiet and peace of the Commonwealth, as they justly
deserved; neither were there any advanced but for their Valor and Virtue,
which is Vera nobilitas; for we are all terrae Filii; and it is not birth, but
worth puts the difference between us.

The fourth Character is, they dare not suffer assemblies, not so much as
Horseraces; but to use Aristotle's words, they strictly forbid Feasts and
Companies, and take away Schools of Learning; all which his Highness approves,
and has honored the Schools of Learning as their Head and Chancelour; but
Horse (...) were prohibited three years ago, when mischievous plots were for
(...) acting in the State, and that but for a time to prevent new troubles
might be raised in such a great concourse of people by ill disposed persons.

The fifth Character is, that in all places they have their spies and dilators,
Apol. Pol. l. 5. c. 11.
which though he borrows of Aristotle, yet may we without reprehension decede
from our Master in this, because experience, which was his Master, and that
practice of Princes teaches us, that Spies and Intelligences are necessary
Members of a State; and as Bodin, Bodin. de repub. l. 6. c. 11.
Necessariae sunt quidem magnis principibus largitiones ad hostium consilia,
copias and opes evertendas, nec potest ullum magnum Imperium speculatoribus
carere; Stipends are necessary to a great Princes, neither can any great Empire
want Intelligencers to frustrate and overthrow the Counsels, Forces, and
Estates of the Enemies: But how impertinently and impudently does he apply
this? besides many innumerable spies, says he, they have their Fleetwoods,
Braghals, and St. John's to seem discontented, and not to side with them, that
under that design they may yet trust, and make discoveries. The poison of Aspes
is under his lips, and his venomous tongue spares none comes within his reach.

Quaelibet in quemvis opprobria figere saevus. Horac.
But how should this Impostor know these things, unless he has more Spies
then his Highness, which surely he has, such as frequent Tavernes, Alehouses,
and Barbers Shops, who stamp news by the Print of their own phansies, and will
seem to know those things which never were done, or never will be, of whom the
Comaedian wittily, Qui res alienas curant opere maximo, Plaut. truo.

Qui omnia simulant scire, nec quicquid sciunt,
Quae neque futura, neque sunt facta sciunt.
Who into others Acts do dive with curious eyes,
And all things do pretend to see, yet nothing Spies,
And seem to know what never was, or will be done.


But why should these honorable persons weigh his Fables, which are above
Poetical fiction, and which none will believe but Fools and Mad men, his only
Parasites and Patrons? his Highness also, says he, has his Emissaries to send
with forged Letters; if any one doubt this, let him send to Major General
Brown, who will satisfy him; and what says Master Brown? he cannot justify any
Letters to be forged; only he suspecteth that one who brought him Letters from
Charles Steward, received not condign punnishment: But though his Highness is
clear of this calumny; yet has that been Judged arcanum imperii, a secret of
Government in Princes and Generals, Plutarch. vita Eumenis. A Gell. l. 15. c.
22.
to forge Letters, thereby to fish out the affections of those they doubted to
be disaffected, or for other Politic ends, as Eumenes and Sertorius did, which
in such cases is not unlawful, according to the practice of the Emperor
Frederick the first, and Lewis the eleventh King of France, whose proverb was,
qui nescit dissimulare, nescit imperare; and which lesson the said Lewis would
only have his Son to learn, as before has been intimated.

The sixth Article is, They stir not without their Guarde, nor his Highness
without his Life-Guarde, as if it were Tyranny in a King or Prince to have a
Guarde; which is not only useful, but necessary to defend himself from the
ambitious and seditious; without which no Majesty is safe, or secure; for as
Pontanus, amor incedit inermis, Armatus dormit; love walks unarmed, Arist. l.
3. Pol. c. 11.
but the Armed man may sleep: and truly Aristotle being a witness, the use of
such Guardes is necessary as well in a quiet and peaceable Commonwealth as in a
turbulent and seditious; for how, says he, can a King exercise his power,
unless he has about him Force and Armed men, to resist those oppose it? But
he says, his Highness has a Life-guarde, and so had Romulus three hundred
Horsemen, tam pace quam bello; as well in peace as War for his Royal body.
And for the same cause Antoninus had German Horsemen; Live.
but this Impostor would fain have him to discard his Life-guarde, that his
Bravos may the sooner slay him.

The seventh Character is, They impoverish the people that they may want the
power, if they had the will to attempt any thing against him. His Highness way,
says he, is by Taxes, Excise and Decimations.

But let us remember what the Impostor said to his Reader, that he should not
want Proofs, if he wants not memory, whereas herein his own memory fails him;
for he might have called to memory that the like Taxes. Excise, and Decimations
were imposed by the Parliament; for which in all his passages he pleads
whilst that possessed the sole Government; and ubi est eadem ratio, ibi est
eadem lex; and where there is the same reason, there is the same Law; and if
such Taxes were Lawful then, and did not impoverish the people, how can they
for that reason be unlawful now? But if his Highness should have imposed such
intolerable Taxes on the people, Arist. Pol. l. 3. c. 11.
as Dionysius did on the Syracusans, having by them within five years space
exhausted the wealth of Syracuse, for which Aristotle in the same place, from
which he extracteth this Character, branded him with Tyranny; or if he should
have laid such Imposts on them, as the Duke of Alva did on the Netherlanders;
who, as Bodin says, exacted the tenth part of their Vendible goods; by which
device within a short time he almost swallowed up all the Merchants Estates
(they using to tell the same ten times over) then might he have had just cause
to charge his Highness with the impoverishment of the people; but since he has
always imposed moderate and necessary Taxes, according to the public
occurrences and occasions, and now only such as are ratified and established
by the last Parliament, this Impostor may put up his Pipes, and set down by
weeping Cross.

The eighth Character is, that they make War to divert and buisy the people;
and besides to have a pretense to raise money, and to make new Levies if they
mistrust their own Forces, or think them not sufficient: But the words of
Aristotle are, they make War least the people should be idle, Arist. Pol. 5.
c. 11.
and that they may have need of a General; and varyeth nor a little from his
alleged Authority, to intrude his own Inventions; but herein also must we
shake hands with our Master, being taught by experience, that as Bodin, nihil
est utilius quam externis bellis implicari; Bodin. de repub. l. 4. c. 1.
there is nothing more profitable then to make War with Forrainers.

And first to invert Aristotle's reason, that idleness in people may be taken
away; for idleness is the Mother of all vices, and begets vicious persons in
a Commonwealth, which unless they be expunged, the body will be vitiated and
corrupted. Therefore it is necessary to make War; whereby such nefarious and
facinerous persons may be exonerated, Tholosan. Synt. l. 41. and 22.
and those which remain imbettered; and more glorious for them Valiantly to
hazard their Lives for the honor of their Country abroad, then ignominously
to endanger themselves by loose living at home. An other reason is drawn from
Annibal, that ancient circumspect and courageous Captain, that War is to be
made with Forrainers, to prevent intestine seditions, which was his State
Aphorism; Nulla magna civitas diu consistere potest; Livii.
si foris hostem non habet domi invenit: No great City can long continue; if it
have not an Enemy abroad, it will find one at home, as prevalid bodies are
secure from external hurts, yet are they burdned and laden with their own
strength, which was the principal cause that Scipio Africanus the younger would
not destroy Carthage, Bodin. de rep. l. 4. c. 10.
least if there were no War against the Enemy, it would begin at home; and
therefore to avoid some War at home, or some eminent and supposed War
abroad, a Prince may well support a just quarrel in any such Country by way of
prevention; so as it is no Tyranny, but preventing Policy, to make War with
an ambitious Enemy; Non cuivis homini contingit; and this Impostor is incapable
of this imperial mystery.

But mark his malicious inference, The War with Spain serves his Highness to
this purpose, and upon no other Justice was it begun at first, or is still
continued; what Pander can be more impudent, as it may be he is to the Whore of
Babylon, who savors much of her Conclave, to deny the justness of the
undertaking that War, which is so plainly and evidently demonstrated in the
Declaration of his Highness, in the year 1655. that the prudent and Protestant
Princes of Christendom embrace and believe it; and so do all others who are not
simply ignorant, or wilfully blinded: but let us hear the Advice of Master
Pymm, that provident Member of this State to the late King Charles in
Parliament, and the reasons by which he would have moved him to the same War:
The Spanish Colonies, says he, in the Indies were weak, distracted, and
discontented; and that there were sixty thousand Persons of this Nation in
those parts, whose bodies were seasoned to that Climate, which at a very small
charge might be set down in some advantageous part of those pleasant Rich and
Fruitful Countries, and easily make him Master of all that Treasury, Master
Pymms Speech 1642.
which not only foments the War, but is the support of Popery in all parts
of Christendom: what will this Impostor now say? He cannot say it was his
Highness Plot, but Mastes Pymms, against whom, if he open his Jaws, they will
instantly be Metamorphosed into the Jawe bones of an Ass, by Vote of
Parliament; and whereas he makes this War his Highness pretense to raise
moneys to replenish his vacant cohorts: What did Queen Elizabeth the Semiramis
and Sheba of this Nation? She was the Spaniards Potent Antagonist, and never
encountered him but she Conquered him; for which she received this boon and
benevolence for her Victorious attempts against him; as Master Pymm affirms,
that the greatest part of that charge was made upon the Subjects Purses, Vid.
Pym. ibid.
and not upon the Queens; though the honor and profit of the same did most
accrue to her; this certainly will close this Impostors lips from bawling
against the Taxes, and that Sacred and hopeful War.

The ninth Character is, They will seem to favor and provide for good men: But
herein this Impostor mistakes Aristotle; for he does not propound this as a
Character of a Tyrant, but of a King, to wit, to favor and prefer good men;
and shows that by this means a Tyrant may lengthen his power, if he square
his Rule by the pattern and similitude of the Royal power. Arist. Pol. 5. c.
11.
And makes as absurd an Application: That is, says he, If the Ministers will
be Orthodox and flatter; if they will wrest and torture the Scriptures, to
prove the Government Lawful, he then likewise will be content to understand
Scripture in their favor, and furnish them with Tithes: For his Highness
before the acceptance of this Princely dignity, when the fifth Monarchy men in
Parliament would have deprived the Clergy of their benefices and Tithes, his
Highness preserved and confirmed them, according to the Laws of the Land;
neither need the Ministers wrest and torture the Scriptures to prove his
Government; for they are generally plain in that point, as before has been
demonstrated.

The tenth Character is, That things which are odious and distastful, they make
others Executioners of, and when the people are discontented, they appease them
with Sacrificing those Ministers they employ, and do grateful things
themselves; and simply infers that he will leave it to his Highness Major
Generals to ruminate a little on that point; for Princes make others
Surrogates, and Executioners of their Judicial Acts; because as Jethro said to
Moses, they are too heavy for them, and not able to perform them themselves
alone; not that they be distastful, Exodus 18.
but expedient it so should be; yet whatsoever they do, or Act, is in the
Princes name, and by their Authority; and in this respect is his own Acts: So
did his Highness by the advice of his Council employ the Major Generals upon
urgent and necessary occasions, to prevent seditions, preserve Peace in the
Commonwealth, which are particularly expressed in his Highness Declaration,
Dated October 1655. which in that regard was his Highness own Act; and though
it did prove distastful to the people, yet was it not therefore unjust and
inconvenient; for Moses a most just Prince did enjoin, and prohibit almost all
things contrary to the mind, and will of the people; neither were the Major
Generals that Action Sacrificed to the censure of the Parliament, nor thereby
incurred any penalty, though the Parliament was not pleased for some weighty
reasons, to confirm their Authority in the same mode they desired, yet stand
they in the same favor with his Highness, and without any disparagement in the
Parliament; and whereas the deaf Adder says, he never heard of any good his
Highness has done himself, it seems he never frequenteth our Churches; who
upon Thanksgiving days from the Pulpit might have heard Commemorations of his
mavelous Victories; and every day might have heard from the Parliament the
thankfulness they have acknowledged to God, for preserving his Highness in
many Battles, and to make him an Instrument for restoring and preserving our
peace; and if he had not lost all his Senses, See the Humble Advice, etc.
holden at Parliament. 1656.
he could not but see, hear, taste, smell, and feel, the many gracious
blessings which God has conferred on us since his Highness acceptance of the
Empire: For what greater blessings can accrue to a Commonwealth then peace and
plenty? which through Gods blessings we enjoy quietly and abundantly: that we
may say with the Poet, -- Non est quod copia Major
A Jove donari possit. Hor. l. 2. Ser. 2.

Or as it is said of Augustus, Strabo. l. 17.
Nunquam pacis facultas tantaque omnium bonorum copia affluxit, quantum
suppeditavit, etc. Never so much Liberty of peace and plenty of all good things
did abound, as he has sufficiently Ministered since he took upon him the Reins
of the Empire, insomuh as it we compare the store and cheapnesse of our present
Commodities, with the Scarceness and dearnesse of the preterit times, we shall
conceive them to overpoise ours to the value of our Taxes. And as he has lost
all his Senses, if he had lost his Tongue too, he had been rid of his worst
member.

The tenth Character is, In all things they pretend to be wonderful careful of
the public, to give general accounts of the moneys they receive, which they
pretend to be levied for the maintenance of the State, and the prosecuting of
the War.

But in this also he misconstrues Aristotle, who does not deliver this as a
Symptom of a Tyrant; but insinuates that by practicing those Precepts are
proper to a Prince, his power may endure the longer; and for that he says, his
Highness made an excellent Commentary on the same in his Speech to this
Parliament, which if he did, his Highness therein did perform the part of a
debonaire Prince, to give an account to the representative of the people of his
charges, and disbursements for the Commonwealth.

The twelfth Character is, Arist. l. 5. c 11.
All things set aside for Religions uses they set to sale, that whilst these
things last, they may expect the less of the people; the Cavalier says, he
would interpret this of the Deanes and Chapters Lands, as if he were not a
Cavalier; and if he be not, he is worse: for many Cavalliers have submitted to
Gods providence, and this civil Government: but this is nihil ad rhombum; for
his Highness since his power has maintained the Estate of the Church, and
advanced Learning; though it may be not in that Superstitious kind, this
Impostor would have him.

The thirtenth Character is, They pretend inspirations from God, and responses
from Oracles to Authorize what they do; but how does he apply this? His
Highness, says he, has ever been an Enthusiast, as if it were Enthusiasme for
him to believe and avouch his power to be of God, and of Christ himself; upon
whose Shoulders the Government is laid, and not to attribute the contrivance
and Production of this mighty Work to himself, or any other person; and not to
judge of Gods Revolutions as the products of men's Inventions; and if this be
Enthusiasm, then all our precedent Kings and Princes have been Enthusiast's;
who by their Title Dei gratia profess to have received and held their Scepter
of none but God; and that their power dimaned immediately from him as the first
cause, and mediately by second causes from him also, as before has been
asserted: or that if were Enthusiasm to pray and believe, and to receive
returns from God, or to be spoken unto by the Spirit of God, who though he
speaks with the written word sometimes, yet according to that of Job, God
speaks once, yea twice; for though God does not speak to men in these days
by Revelations, or by the voice of a Prophet, yet speaks he by the secret
operation of the Spirit, though it does not visibly appear to us; as it is said
in the same place of Job, Job 33.14.
God speaks once yea twice, yet man perceives it not; and that by prayer we
may obtain the returns, and comfort of the Spirit, is clear by the simile of
our Savior. If ye then, says he, being evil, know how to give good gifts to
your Children, how much more shall your Heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to
them that ask him? whosoever therefore does exclude the Spirit, Luke 11.13.
without whose concurrence or teaching all ordinances are ineffectual, is like
to the Disciples of John, who had not so much as heard whether there was an
Holy Spirit; by which as the Apostle says, Acts 19.2. 1 Corinthians. 12.13.
we are all baptized into one Spirit, and made to drink into the same Spirit,
and have one and the same Spirit, with the Apostles, though in a different
measure.

But Lingua quo vadit? his tongue runs at random, and idely blurteth a
nonsensical simile. And as says he, Hugh Capet in taking the Crown, pretended
to be admonished to it in a dream by the Instigation of St. Vallery, and St.
Richard; so I believe his Highness will do the same at the Instigation of St.
Henry, and St. Richard his two sons; A mere bull, and a nominal conceit
without sense or reason; for what correspondence has my Lord Richard with St.
Richard, or my Lord Henry with St. Vallery? they being no such superstitions
Saints and dreaming Spirits. But what if his Highness at the Instigation of my
Lord Henry, and my Lord Richard, should have taken the Crown, which this
Impostor did but dream of? he had taken no more then he has merited; and he
were worse then an Infidel, if he should not provide for his own, and
especially for these of his own household. And my Lord Henry, and my Lord
Richard may be St. Paul's Saints, that is, Holy men, if they follow his Doctrine
by Faith in Christ, and works of Salvation.

The fourteenth Character is, Arist. Pol. 5. c. 11.
they love God and Religion; and in this does he also rack Aristotle's words
from the sense; for his meaning is that, if a Tyrant will prolong his power, he
most imitate a good pious Prince, which he preposterously calls Artem
Tyrannorum potissimam, the best Art of Tyrants; for piety and justice are the
two pillars of a principality; otherwise by this Character, David a man after
Gods own heart might be a Tyrant, and Numa Pompilius also, who was the Founder
of Religion among the Romans, and for his piety advanced to that Royalty, as
his Highness likewise partly was to this supreme Magistracy: for protecting and
cleansing true Religion of its superstitions.

And indeed, as he says, His Arms were Pious Arms; and conquered most by those
of the Church, Prayers and Tears; for his Prayers and Tears prevailed more with
God, then his Arms and Force with Men; and that as he also says, Godliness
has bin great gain to him, for which the Lord has honored him with a
Temporal principality, as in all probability he will with his Heavenly Kingdom.
Thus are this Impostors profane Scoffs against his Highness, piously inverted
to his honor, who not only as he likewise says Romanlike, but Brittainlike,
being a Prince and Priest (for by our Law also Rex est persona mixta cum
Sacerdote) has and does as a Prince protect our Temporal Estates; And as a
Priest preserve the Tythes-offrings, and duties of the Church, and not cost us
all as he maliciously slandereth him.

No other marks of a Tyrant can be found in Aristotle, Plato, and his familiar
Machiavel, says He, which are suitable to his Highness but those two, as he
conceives: The first to use Aristotle's own words (which he commonly changes
and wresteth to his own conce it,) is that he would not have him impulst with
anger, to fight and strike; for as Heraclitus, it is a difficult matter to
resist anger which may cost ones life; Arist. Pol. l. 5. c. 16.
which is also a precept for a Prince, by the practice of which a Tyrant may
the longer subsist; For as St. Ambrose says, Dum justo amplius irascimur, and
volumus aliena corrigere peccata graviora committimus, when we are angry above
measure, and would restrain and repress offenses, Ambros. de Sancto Josepho.
we commit greater. And therefore Theodosius, after the furious slaughter of
the Thessalonians, ordained that Sentences of Princes should be deferred for
thirty days from execution: yet Aristotle says in another place, Arist. 9. c.
8.
Anger is a virtue in a Valiant man, and spurs him on to dangerous attempts,
Vires injicit ira, and by consequence in a General and Prince; And therefore as
Solomon says, We ought not to provoke a King to anger, because the anger of a
King is like the roaring of a Lion. Prove. 20.2.


And therefore as this Impostor says, seeing his Highness is naturally
choleric, and will call men Rogues, and go to Cuffs, let him beware he falls
not into his Highness clutches, least he handle him like a Rogue; and serve gim
as Agamemnon did Thersites a bawling Captain of the Grecians, who for his
impudent railing slew him with a cuff of his fist.

And the last is, that a Tyrant should not be really good, nor absolutely bad,
but half one, and half toother; but herein also he falfieth Aristotle, Arist.
15. c 11.
whose words are, that he so fashion himself (...), that he either have a good
mind to virtue, or else that he be half good, and not altogether vicious; and
does not say that he would have him really good, but that he would have him
like a Prince, be as good as possibly may be. And whereas he says that this
half good is too great a proportion for his Highness and more then his temper
will bear; It is only his saying, as if his Ipse dixit like the Pope his Holy
Fathers Sentence were definitive, and to be rested in; See the humble advice of
Parl. 1656.
though the contrary be humbly acknowledged by the Parliament, which is of more
authority then his finxit or the Popes dixit.

In conclusion he supposes, That if his Highness be not a Tyrant, then there
is no description of a Tyrant. And because he has put an if to it, he has
invited me to show him that some have affirmed, 1 Kings 1.11. 1. Justin. l. 1.
Esaias 45.1.
there are no Tyrants in Titulo, and others no Tyrants in Exercitio, and diverse
no Tyrants at all; according to his Hypothesis. And for that there are no
Tyrants in Titulo, some allege the example of Jeroboam, who invaded the right
of Rehoboan; yet was he by Holy Writ neither reputed an Usurper or Tyrant: but
on the contrary, that the ten Tribes were given him by God. And so say they,
Cyrus invaded the Kingdom of Harpagus, to which he had no Title though the
Son of his Daughter; and did beat him out of his Kingdom, yet is he by the
Prophet Esaias called the Lords anointed.

Others to prove there are no Tyrants in Exercitio, produce the example of
Nebuchadnezzar, whose cruelty and Tyranny in Sacred Writ is generally
expressed, but in especial for erecting his golden Image, and commanding that
they who resused to worship it, should be cast into a fiery Furnace, Jer.
15.9.24.17. Baruch 1.
by which he would have enforced and compelled the consciences of men to his
profane superstitions, which is the most execrable Tyranny, and Carnificina
Animorum, a Torture and Torment of men's Souls, yet God calls him his Servant,
and the Prophet Jeremy and Baruch did write to the Jews to pray for the life of
him, and Baltazar his Son; And further say that God stirs up the spirits of
wicked Princes to do his will, and that if they abuse their authority, they are
to be judged by God only, who is only their Superior: yet say they, God
reserveth them to the sorest Trial; Horribly and suddenly will the Lord appear
unto them, and an hard Judgment shall they have. In Genesis 10.


And those who maintain there are no Tyrants at all, argue from the name of a
Tyrant, which as Musculus says, signifies nothing but as a Monarch, a Prince,
and a King, though of late it has been taken in the worser sense; Act, 19. and
19.
which though it be frequent in every man's mouth, and our old English
Translation uses sometimes the word Tyrant, yet the Authors of the New
Translation have not once used the words, because they find no Hebrew word in
the Scripture to signify a Tyrant. Neither do Aristotle, Bodin, or Sir Walter
Rawleigh agree in the distinction or description of Tyranny; and therefore
question whether any man can describe what a Tyrant is; and then who can tell
who was ever a Tyrant according to that description?

Pardon me for this digression; for my intention is not to assert any of these
opinions, but only to give this Impostor a glance, and a touch for his if; who
will be of any opinions which may serve his turn. But now, this Impostor shall
give me leave to roll up the conclusion, which things seeing they are so, It is
certo certius and not liable to exception, that according to his distinction
and description of a Tyrant, His Highness without question is no Tyrant, in
Titulo nor in Exertio, neither in Title nor in Practice; and that he is a
Lawful and Legitimate Prince, ordained by God, warranted by the Sword, and
approved by the People; And triplex nodus non facile est solvendus, A triple
wreath is not easily loosened. And this is the prime and peremptory question
upon which the other two depend, which being defunct, the other two dye with
it. For to refricate your memories, The first Question was whether his Highness
was a Tyrant or no? upon which it is resolved upon the Votes of the Scripture,
Reason and Parliament, that he is no Tyrant. The second Question is, If he be a
Tyrant, whether it be lawful for any private person to kill him? Thirdly, If it
be lawful, whether it is likely to prove profitable or noxious to the
Commonwealth? So as it is as clear as the Day Star, that the first question,
which is the Foundation of the other, being resolved against him, the other two
which are built upon it, will of themselves fall to the ground; for Sublato
Fundamento corruit Opus, The Foundationing failing the Work falls.

And now me thinks I hear my Genius calling on me, Heus tu, Cic. Epist. ad At.
manum de tabula, Hark, Sir, Stay your Hand, and spare your Pen, least it may
seem overlong and troublesome. And so I would, were it not to be feared that
some of the Impostors swearing Auditors will be made by his Enchantements
Jurare in verba Magistri, to swear what he says, or through simplicity, or
prejudice will not, or cannot conceive, or weigh the premises in the golden
Scales of true Judgment, and distinguish real Demonstrations from glistring
probalities: Whereby they may be seduced to imagine his Highness to be one of
his Tyrants, and his Ears to be Horns, and his Justice Tyranny: And
consequently, to be lawful for every person, to do Justice upon him without
solemnity, as he says, that is to kill him, according to his seditious
inference. For what reverence and obedience will be given to a Prince (without
which what is his power?) when the people are persuaded, that under pretenses
and color of Tyranny every private Subject may vindicate his own quarrel, and
be a Judge and Executioner of his Right and Actions? Which preposterous
inconveniences to prevent, I thought it necessary to continue this discourse,
and further to proceed in the refutation of his strange absurdites; and
according to my design of brevity, will succinctly consider his material
passages, omitting his superfluous Tautologies.

First Therefore he proposes, that Supreme Magistrates who degenerate into
Tyrants, are not be censured by private persons; and that none of sober sense
do make them Judges of their actions: But he finds none have been such great
enemies to Common Justice, or to the Liberty of mankind to give any kind of
indemnity to an Usurper, who can pretend no title, but that of being the
stronger; nor to have the peoples obedience upon any other Obligation then that
of necessity, or fear. Wherein, by the way, I cannot supersede Sir Edward Coke's
Rule of State: Cooks Com. p. 392.
Sunt quos ducit amo^; plures sunt tamen quos corrigit timor, Some are drawn to
be obedience by the cords of love, but more are forced to it by the scourge of
fear; which the Magistrate could not do, unless he were the stronger, and had
the power of the Sword. But how unfitly do these expressions correspond with
his Highness Title, which has been before discussed and resolved?

Sambucam citius caloni aptaverit alto. Perseus Sat. 4.
A Fidle you shall sooner sit to a Soldiers side. But to examine his Reasons,
why a Tyrants case is particular; and why, in that every man has that
vengeance given him, which in other cases is reserved to God and the
Magistrate; which he says, cannot be obscure, if we rightly consider what a
Tyrant is, what his crimes are, and in what state he stands with the
Commonwealth, and with every member of it.

And first, he assumeth that Laws are the Nerves or Sinews of a Society, or
Commonwealth, without which they must necessarily dissolve, and fall asunder.
Those therefore that submit not to the Laws, but make their Will and Lust a
Law, and secure themselves against the ordinary course of Justice as Tyrants
do, are not to be reputed in the Society of mankind, nor to have benefit from
Humane Society, nor protection from Law; wherein he seems, as he pretended,
to argue from the definition of a Tyrant, which is, as he supposes, that he
that submits himself to no Law, but secureth himself against the ordinary
course of Justice, is a Tyrant; which is an imperfect definition: For in the
beginning of Societies, there were no written Laws; but Princes being advanced
to the hight of Majesty for their Valor and Wisdom, Just. l. 1. and l. 2.
Arbitria Principum pro Legibus erant, The Decrees of Princes stood for Laws,
as Justine says of the Assyrians, and of the Athenians; Libido Regum pro
Legibus erant, the Will and Lust of Princes were for Law. If then all Princes
were Tyrants, which submit themselves to no Law, but made their Will a Law, all
the Grecian Princes before the Laws of Draco, Arist. Polit. l. 3. c. 12.
Solon, and Lycurgus; and all the Roman Kings before the Laws of Tullius
Hostilius, were Tyrants; and so also was Moses, whose licet was a Law before
the Law was given him by God on the Mount: His definition therefore is
defective, because not adaequate to the thing defined, and generally the
Nonsubmission to written Laws, which he speaks of, does not make a Tyrant; For
a good Prince without Laws may Rule the People as well as with Laws. And
Aristotle makes it dubitable, and disputable, whether it is better to be Ruled
by a good Law, Arist ibidem.
or a good Man? And whereas he makes Aristotle to say that Tyranny is against
the Law of Nature: he does not mean, contrary to the Law of Humane Society, by
which Humane Nature is preserved, as the Impostor construeth it; for Humane
Nature has, and may be preserved without the Law of Humane Society, and that
by the Law of Nature: According to which as Sir John Davis, In the Preface to
his Reports.
If we all lived of Nature, we should need few Laws, and fewer Lawyers, which
Princes, as Gods Subjects, are bound to observe, as well as their Subjects them;
and which as Bodin, is, Regina utrisque Imperans, Bod. Poc.
A Queen commanding them both: And a Lesbian Rule flexible every way, according
to the various contingencies and vicissitude of things: Which therefore by some
is preferted before written Laws, because the inconstancy of the people, and
change of things do often require new Laws, which the Lawgivers cannot
foresee, or provide for, which Defects are supplied by the Law of Nature in a
good Prince. Therefore such Princes as do not guide themselves, and rule their
Subjects according to the Law of Nature, as Aristotle says, are Tyrants,
Arist. Eth. l. 8. c. 10.
because they rule contrary to the Law of Nature; And as in another place, Rex
si vitiosus sit, Tyrannus efficitur, A King, if he be vicious, becomes a
Tyrant; for vices are contrary to the Law of Nature, and right Reason: Such
vicious Princes were Sardanapalus, and Astyages: And therefore for their vices
by Arbactes and Cyrus expulsed their Kingdoms. But grant his Major, that those
Rulers who subject themselves to no Humane Law but their will, and his lust is
a Law, by which he governs himself and others, are no Magistrates, but
Tyrants: How does this reflect on his Highness, who has submitted himself to
the Laws of this Nation, and has a principal care to put them in Execution?
Justissimus Vnus.

Qui fuit ex Anglis, Et servantissimus aequi, Virgil. Aene. 2
As before has been shown: Besides in cases of present importunity, or
imminent necessity, he exercises not an absolute power, but is guided by his
Council, who have as absolute a negative voice in the Intervals of Parliament,
as the Parliament had whilst it was sitting. Then he falls fowl on the crimes
and effects of Tyranny: A Commonwealth, says he, falling into a Tyranny
absolutely, loses that name. For Servorum nulla est Civitas, says Aristotle,
and Grotius, Sed magna familia, Arist. Pol. c. 8. Grotius de Jubel. l. 3. c. 8.
s. 2.
Where all are Slaves, it is not a City: for as he says, there is one
Government for the utility of the Ruler, and another for the commodity of the
Ruled; this has place among the free people, the other between Lords and
Servants, and where the people is bridled by such a Government, is not a City,
but a great Family; And he inferres there is no longer King and People,
Parliament and People, but these names are changed (at least their natures into
Masters and Servants, Lords and Slaves. But certainly this Impostor has
learned the Art of Forgetfulness, not to forget injuries, as Themistocles and
Caesar did, but benefits and good turns as Brutus, whom though Caesar saved at
the Pharsalian battle, See his Highness Speech. 12 of September. 1654.
yet was he the chiefest Conspirator against him; Even so does he brand his
Highness, with the enslaving others, who freed him from slavery; and aims more
at the utility of the Commonwealth then his own, and will not remember the
gentle and gracious protestation his Highness publicly and solemnly made in
Parliament, that he did not assume to himself dominion over them, but resolved
to be a Fellow Servants with them: And so indeed he is; for in his Protection he
serves us, and we in our obedience serve him: unless he will make obedience
slavery, which is Regis and Legis essentia, the being and essence of a Prince
and Law. And of the two, his service and burden is the greater; and as Tiberius
said, Onerosior servitus, The heavier service. But observe his sottish
inference: And in truth, says he, we are all members of Whitehal, and when our
Master pleases, he may send for us thither, and there bore through our ears at
the Dore-posts; For for whom did his Higness send for thither, but for such
refractory and turbulent spirits as his is, and there by godly and moral
instructions did labor to bore them through their consciences and reclaim
them, or otherwise, by custody, to secure them to prevent future combustions in
the Commonwealth? And let this Impostor take heed that his Highness find not
his hole wherein he lurketh, and send for him to Westminster Hall, and there
cause him to be mounted on the top of a pillory, and his ears and tongue too to
be bored through, and his forehead stigmatized for his impudent and eminent
scandals. Next he shows the condition wherein a Tyrant stands with the
Commonwealth: to wit, that a Tyrant is no part of the City, nor member of the
Commonwealth, and therefore in all reason to be reckoned in the number of those
savage beasts that fall not within any other hard, that have no other defense
then their own strength, making a prey of all that is weaker, and by the same
reason being a prey to all, are stronger then himself: But if we grant that a
Tyrant is no part or Member of a Commonwealth (which I can neither find in
Aristotle or Grotius, whom he quoteth in his margent,) yet is he not for that
reason a Tyrant; for injury should be offered to a Prince, says Aristotle, L.
1. Pol. c. 9.
who excels others in virtue and valor, to esteem him apart of the City and
Commonwealth, seeing there is Impar in eis virtus, Unequal virtue in them; for
such a man ought to be esteemed a God among men; And so also is there in
Tyrants, who as he also says, for their Virtue and Valor were at the first
made Tribunes, or Leaders of the people: Regis Just. 1. cap. 5.
And though they be Eccentricque and above the other Sphaere and Orb, yet do
they like Primum Mobile, Roll about, and sway all the Inferior Orbs with
their Motion and rule. And therefore the comparison of Tyrants with wild
beasts, which he borrowed of his Master Mariana is incongruous and absurd,
because there is not the same Reason of both, and parium eadem est ratio; for
among wild beasts there is no rule, or government, Lib. 1. Hist.
but promiscuous confusion and dilaniation, whereas in Tyranny there is a Form
of Rule and Government, though not so just and equal as it ought to be: Kek.
Pol. fol. 21
And for that Reason, says Tacitus, Praestat esse sub malo Principe, quam sub
nullo, It is to be better under an evil Prince then none, and a Tyranny is
better then an Anarchy; for where there is no Government at all, men like brute
beasts indeed by wounds and slaughters, snatch and catch what they can to
themselves. And for the same infirm Reason, page 9.
he in the ensuing page assevereth, that no Society and no Faith is to be kept
wit Tyrants, nor no Religion of Oath to be observed, because as Seneca says,
that whatsoever was of Mutual Obligation between us, his destroying the Laws
of Humane Society has dissolved; but I wonder much that he who seems so well
versed in Grotius, Grotius lib. 3. cap. 2. L. 5. Tuscan.
should not observe that he utterly rejects that opinion of Seneca, and also
of Cicero's, which in that Place he also cites, Nulla nobis Societas cum
Tyrannis, sed summa potius distractio, That no Society is to be had by us, but
rather extreme distraction. For says he, Tyrants have had Society with the
people, and by compacts and agreements with them, established their power, by
granting them Liberty: And which is more to be admired, the Impostor seems to
countenance the Error of Michael Ephesus, which as Grotius says, proceeded
from that Fountain, That Adultery is not committed with a Tyrants Wife, and
graceth it it with a jeer, if she have no other guard for her chastity, but age
and deformity: But he will find, that if his Wife have not the guard for her
chastity of age and deformity, a Tyrant may with less offense, and danger
commit Adultery with his Wife, if he have any.

In the next place he produces another argument of the same nature; that a
Tyrant making himself above all Law, and defending his injustice by a strength
which no power of Magistrates is able to oppose, becomes above all other
punishments, above all other Justice, then that he receives from the stroke of
some generous hand. And by the Law of Nature, where no Justice is to be had,
every one may be his own Magistrate, and do justice for himself: which he
learned of his Master Suarez, who gives the same reason for the lawfulness of
every private man's authority in such a case. Quia, Suarez Resp. ad Apologiam
pro Jur. fidel. Fol. 415.
says he, per Naturalem Legem Deus dedit unicuique potestatem defendendi se.
Because God by the Law of Nature, has given power to every man to defend
himself, where no remedy is to be had against him from their Superior.

But herein is this Impostor catched in his own ginne, by falling from his
first principle, which was that it is Lawful for every private person to kill
Usurpers or Tyrants in Titulo; but not supreme. Magistrates who degenerate into
Tyrants, and be Tyrants in exercitio; whereas by this reason every private
person may as well kill the one as the other; for a Tyrant in exercitio is also
above Law, and defends his injustice by a strength which no power of
inferior Magistrates is able to oppose; and by his successive Title becomes
more potent and irresistible in his Acts of Injustice; for no Injustice can be
had against him also for his Compulsory, Contributions, Loanes, Benevolences,
Assessements, Taxes, or other the like Impositions; and may as well be styled
magna Latrocinia, great Robberies as well as the other. In which Argument this
Impostor seems to have lost his sober senses; for he says, None of sober
sense makes private persons Judges of the Actions of those that degenerate into
Tyrants, which by this Argument he does.

And further in this case the Impost or says, that every one may be his own
Judge, and do Justice for himself; for the question is not whether a private
man may take upon him to be his own Judge, whether a Magistrate does him wrong
or not; for that is denied of Grotius and Bodin. Grotius l. 1. c. 3.
Ne occasio sit majoris tumultus faciendi; least it should be an occasion of
greater tumults: And therefore Cicero compares such resisters of Magistrates to
the Titans, Qui ut illi Caelestibus, adversantur Magistratibus; Cic. lib. 3. de
Legibus.
who oppose Magistrates as they did the gods. But the question is, Whether
every private person may take upon him to be his Judge, in punishing an usurper
that has no just Title to Magistracy, which this Impostor resolves in the
affirmative. In which he decedeth from the Institutions of his Masters, Mariana
and Suarez: Suarez resp. ad Apolog. pro Jur. fid.
The one averring, that if the Tyranny be doubtful and not Manifest, no man
ought to offer him force; and how this doubt shall be resolved the other
shows, Neque enim inprivato cujusquam arbitrio ponimus, etc. We place it not
in the Judgment of every private person nor mamy, De Regis Inst. l. 1. c. 5.
unless the public voice of the people be assenting, and learned and grave
men be called to Council, least, says he, any one should conspire against the
life of the Prince, as if he were a Tyrant: And so also says Grotius, maxim
autem in re controversa judicium sibi privatum sumere non debet: In this case
above all other, a private man ought not to take to himself Judgment.

And yet this Impostor would Father that opinion on Grotius, Grotius lib. 1. c.
4.
which his grave Fathers Mariana and Suarez rejected, and make him like the
Satyr in Aesop, iisdem buccis calorem and frigus efflare; breath contraries,
to supply his purpose; for Grotius does not say, where no Justice is to be had,
every one may be his own Magistrate, and do Justice for himself; for before he
said the contrary, Molin. de Instit. Fo. 1. disp. 100. Grotius de sol. l. 1. c.
3.
and so does Molina whom Grotius cited in that place, to wit, that no private
man ought to take vengeance for an injury offered him, eo quid unusquisque
possit facile occoecari sua in causa, because every one may be easily bl^nded
in his own case: And therefore it is written, Vengeance is mine; that is,
God's, and his Magistrates; whom (though we suppose them to do us injustice) we
ought not to resist. And in that Grotius says, ubi cesset judicium, where
Justice cease, the Law of nature sometimes now has place. He does not speak
of injustice done by Magistrates in their place of Justice to private persons,
but of injuries and wrongs that happen between private persons, which
appears by his subsequent distinctions; for Justice says he, does cease
momentane, for the present moment, where Justice cannot be executed without
certain danger and damage: In which sense that of this Impostor is to be
taken, that the Law of God permits every man to kill a thief, if he take him
breaking open his House in the night, because he cannot bring him to Justice
without certain peril or loss: Or else says Grotius, Justice does cease
continue, continually; which is either by Right, as in Wildernesses and
Islands, where there is no City and Government; or by Fact if the Subjects will
not hearken to the Judge, as Pirates, Robbers, Mosse-troopers, or such
notorious Malefactors, who are no part of a City, but contemn Government; and
therefore as Grotius says, Grotius l. 3. c. 19. Molin. ibidem.
may be punished by every man, if we respect the Law of nature; or else says
he, When the Judge does refuse to do Justice; as if says Molin, in one Kingdom
one City assaulteth another, and does grievous injury to it; and the King
(being requested) neglects, or dares not to vindicate the offered injuries.
In this case that City may not only desend it self, but also make War with
the other, and put the Malefactors to the Sword: But cautiously adds, Non
tamen auderem facultatem hanc multum extendere; yet I dare not much extend this
power no further then between City and City; and not to give private persons
the power of Magistracy; and that where no Justice is to be had, to do Justice
for themselves; no, not between themselves, unless in the causes above
mentioned; and therefore a fortiori not against a Magistrate, as this Impostor
conceives; which opinion both Molin and Grotius utterly reject.

And in that he says, That it is contrary to the Law of nature, that when the
Law can have no place, men shall be forbidden to repel force by force: but to
be left without all defense and remedy against injury: God left not the Slave
without a Remedy against the cruel Master, and permitted every man to kill a
Thief breaking upon his House in the night, because it may be supposed he could
not otherwise bring him to Justice; and shall a Free People have no redress
against an Imperious Master, nor an oppressing Tyrant? Wherein this Impostor
has forgot the old Wise Lesson, -- Fuit haec sapientia^ quondam
Publica privatis secernere, sacra profanis.


To distinguish between public and private things, Sacred and Profane; for
private persons, upon any pretense of Injustice, may not be their own Judges,
and make resistance against the public Magistrate, or the Supreme power, for
they are public and Sacred persons, Sanctified by the Ordinance of God: Yea,
though they be unjust and wicked, yet is there power and Authority the
Ordinance of God; and therefore Christ told Pilate, that the power he had was
given him from above; John 9.11.
and as Jehosaphat said to his Rulers, They execute not the Judgment of man,
but of the Lord.

The same answer may be returned to that he says, What can be more absurd in
nature, and contrary to all common sense to call him Thief, and kill him that
comes alone, or with a few to rob me, or to call him Protector, and obey him
who robs me with Regiments and Troops, as if to rove with two or three Ships
were to be a Pirate, but with fifty an Admiral; as if the number of Adherents
only, not the the cause, did make the difference between a Robber and a
Protector: But it is not the number of Adherents puts the difference between
them, but the cause; for the Protector as the public and Supreme Magistrate,
by the Advice of his Council, or Parliament, for the good of the public may
impose Assessements and Taxes on the people whom as Gods Vicegerent, we are
all obliged to obey: but the others in contempt of public Authority, as
private persons Rob, Pillage, and Plunder their Brothers and Neighbors:
Otherwise the Pirates answer to Alexander had been pertinent, who being
demanded of him by what Right they did infest the Sea, and spoil Passengers;
said, by the same Right that he with many did Rob the whole World. Whereas
the Legal and public Authority of the one did make the difference of Right and
Robbery between them. And as concerning the consent of the people to Taxes,
either made expressly by themselves, or virtually in Parliament, satisfaction
therein has before abundantly been given. And if this Impostor will have other
Remedy and satisfaction, let him hearken to Grotius, who will further Instruct
him, and tell him that Magistrates Judge private men; Princes Magistrates, and
God Princes, Grotius l. 1. c. 3.
of whom he has a peculiar care, who will vindicate their offenses, if he
Judge i^ needful, or bear with them in poenam and explorationem populi; for the
punishment or Trial of the people; or else as others say, they may be
questioned of the Superior Magistrates, by the Supreme Law of the peoples
safety. And every private man's defense; as he would have it is altogether in
this cause restrained by the Law of God and man, since Magistrates and public
Courts of Justice have been constituted.

These are his reasons; in which he says, He should be much less confident,
unless they were seconded by the Examples that are left us by the greatest and
most Virtuous, and the opinions of the greatest and Wisest Men, by whom, says
he, if I am deceived, I shall however have the excuse to have been drawn into
that error by them: So that notwithstanding his former Thrasonical vaunts; he
begins now to doubt that he is deceived, and drawn into an error: Et habemus
poene confitentem reum; and not without cause; for Examples and Authorities, as
the Logicians say, are the weakest Weapons brandished in our humane Academy who
give it for a Rule, Boeth. Hial.
Locus ab Authoritate est infirmissimus: An Argument from Authority is the
weakest: And especially his which are either wrested, or for the most part
misconstrued. But to examine them in order; in the front he places Grotius as
his chiefest Champion, whom he mistaketh and dismembreth as he did before. For
Grotius, says he, says, That an Usurper that only by force possesses
himself of Government, and by force only keeps it, is yet in the State of
War with every man; and therefore every thing is Lawful against him, is
Lawful against an open Enemy, whom every private man has Right to kill.

Whereas Grotius says, If by an unjust War any one by force suatcheth unto
himself the Empire, and no agreement and consent follows, nor long
Possession, but by force retains it, the Law of War seems to remain; and
that what is Lawful against an Enemy, is Lawful against him, who by Right may
be killed of every private man; and omitteth the Limitatious (to wit) an unjust
War, consent of the people, and possession, as not conducent to his design,
because they jointly concur to the establishment of his Highness just Title;
for as has before been declared, his Highness may lay clame to this Government
by the just Title of War, and also by the consent of the people; the only
question may be, is concerning the possession, which as I conceive, is rightly
determined by Learned Master Ashkam. Fol. 99.
That place, says he, is Judged to be in full possession, when it is so held,
that another power as great as that that holds it, cannot approach it without
great danger; or that there is no probable hope to recover it, which is
sufficient says he, to challenge our obedience; and which as Grotius says,
Every private man ought to follow, as our Savior Christ did; who though he was
the King of Kings, yet because he had undertaken the condition of a private
person, did willingly pay Tribute to Caesar, because the moneys bore his image
and Superscription, that is, because he was in possession of the Empire.

All his other Authorities were deduced from the Laws and practices of those
Citisens, who lived and Ruled in mere Commonwealths, to whom the Government of
one was always odious: Arist. Plut. l. 1. c. 3.
And as Aristotle (...), most people are evil Judges in their own affairs; and
as this Impostor, who like the Devil sometimes speaks truth; it is contrary to
the Laws of God and nature, Fo. 8.
that men who are partial to themselves should be their own Judges: And
therefore Xenophon, Solon, Plato, and Cicero are not competent Judges in this
case, because it concerned the continuance of their own State and dignity. And
though in their Commonwealth they erected statues in their Temples to
Tyrannicides, and Deified those private persons who murdered Tyrants; yet in
Monarchical Governments, none such escaped Capital censure, whose Examples
because they are divulged in most Histories, I willingly supersede, and will
only name two, which seem more rare and memorable: As that of David, who
caused the Messenger to be slain, that upon Request and for pity had lent his
hand to help forward the voluntary death of Saul; and another of Domitian, who
did put to death Epaphroditus, Neros Libertine, because he helped Nero in love
to kill him; which may seem to be summum Jus, and in equity considerable, as
void of a malicious Intention, which is the form of Murder, and partly
excuses or mitigateth ordinary homicides but that the parricide of Supreme
Magistrates is of higher consequence, and abominable by the Law of God and Law
of man, that whosoever shall brew his hands in their blood, though by consent
and void of malice, shall in Publicum Exemplum without hope of mercy receive
the highest punishment.

From his authorities, he descends to the examples of such lawless
Murderers, which as his Master Mariana, are not numerous Ex tanto numero
Tyrannorum says he, qui anti quis temporibus extiterunt, De Just. Reg. l. 1.
c. 6.
paucos quosdam numerare licet ferro suorum periisse, Out of the great company
of Tyrants have been in ancient times, few can be numbered who perished by the
sword of their own people.

And as in Spain, he says but two, so may we say of England, so faithful and
loyal commonly have the people been to their Supreme Magistrate. And this
Impostor instanceth but in one, which in his judgment seems instar omnium,
though indeed little ad Rhombum: to wit the slaughter of Coesar, which his
Pater Patriae Cicero extols as an act most generous, and worthy of aeternal
memory. But Tacitus, more truly, cum occisus fuit Caesar, aliis turpissimum,
aliis pulcherrimum facinus videretur: when Caesar was slain, it seemed to some
a most fowl, to others a most glorious act.

Scinditur incertum Stadia in contrari vulgus. Li. 1. Ann.
For if we consider that according to the judgment of the sager sort, it will
appear a barbarous murder and obnoxious to the state of Rome as then it stood,
and that by the judgment of Tacitus himself; Quia, says he, Nullum aliud
discordantis Patriae remedium fuit. Because there was no other remedy to cure
and unite that discordant Nation, then by the Government of one. And for that
reason as Plutarch relates, Plut. Vit. Caesar.
was Caesar created Perpetuus Dictator, by the Senate and People, hoping
thereby says he, Ab intestinis Discordiis respirare, To breath and rest from
their Inetstine Discords, so as in the regard of the necessity and utility
(which as they were the cause of our consociation, so are they of our
preservation) Cesar's acceptance of the Empire was a necessary and a commodious
Act: which Cicero himself, who foully trampled on Caesar's ashes, Li. de Not. Deo.
did upon mature deliberation acknowledge. Quod is esset status Reipublicae,
quod eam unius Consilio and cura gubernari necesse est, That such was the State
of the Commonwealth, that that of necessity must be governed by the Council and
ear of one; And Necessitas est Lex temporis, Necessity is the Law of the
times, which we are forced to obey, and against which as one says, Ne dii
quidem pugnare possint. App. Alexand. de Bello Civilis
And therefore the Senate and People of Rome after the Conquest of Pompey as
Appian says, did not only create Caesar perpetual Dictator, but with the
Dictatorship gave him the perpetual Consulship, to the Consulship the Title of
Emperor, and the surname of Pater Patriae, whereof Cicero was one. Neither
could the Senate plead any excuse for Caesar's murder, whom they themselves
acknowledged Supreme: But condemned it as an horrid parricide. Only the
prevaricator Cicero who (as this Impostor says) if he was not conscious of
that design, yet he affected the honor to be thought so, as appears by his
Philippick and invective Orations, for which he justly paid the mult of his
head which forged them, and his hands which pressed them, and were both fastened
to the Rostrum wherein he made them: which may be the Impostors penalty in the
end for his prevaricative and invective pamphlet, and that jure, who is as
faithless and calumnious as the other: Insomuch as if Caesar was an Invador, as
this Impostor conceives: yet was he rightly fixed and se^led in the Majesty of
the Empire by the Decree of the Senate, and consent of the people; who were so
enraged at his death that they unanimously flocked to the houses of the
Parricides to punish and tear them in pieces. Plut. Vit. Caesaris.


But I will conclude this Question with the determination of Tholosanus;
Exempla Tyrannicidarum, Syntag. l. 6. c. 20.
says he, non hic sunt sequenda. The Examples of Tyrannicides are not here to
be followed, which happened in a free Commonwealth which had no King, nor did
not subject themselves to him, or that those things which were done rashly be
measured by the success: which this Impostor seems to acknowledge in that, he
says, That now he will conclude with authorities are much more authentic, and
Examples we may much more safely imitate, as if it were not very safe to
imitate the former. And now Ventum est ad triarios, He is driven to his last
refuge: The ranks of his many battails are broken, and his humane arguments
routed and forced to his last reserve, and to bring up his triaries and divine
authorities into the field, on which he chiefly relies; but they like a staff
of reed will fail him, and though primo impetu, at the first dispute they seem
more then men, yet at the second they will prove Minus Faeminarum, Weaker then
Women, and soon overcome: But to encounter them in the same order they are
ranked. Deuteronomy. 17. Chapter 12. Ver.
The first is drawn from the Law of God, which decrees certain death to that
man that does not hearken, as he says, or submit himself to the Judge, or the
Decision of Justice, and thence infers, that neither that, nor any other Law
is in force, if there were no way to put it in execution, and against a Tyrant
process, and citation have no place, neither have any formal remedies against
him, and therefore includes that every man may kill him. Joan. Sarisb. de nug.
Cur. l. 8. c. 20.
But he rowls the same stone he did before, and the same answer will satisfy
both. That a Tyrant is the Minister of God, whom any private man ought not to
resist, but is to be left to the Judgment of the Lord, who will either take
vengeance on him, or permit him for our punishment or trial to remain.

Regum timendorum in proprios greges, Horat.

Reges in ipsos Imperium est Jovis.
The next is taken from the example of Moses; every English man, says he, has
more cause, and as much call as Moses had to slay the Egyptian. But as he has
no cause, as has been manifested, so has he no such call; for Moses from the
inspiration of God, obtained his authority, who moved him to this slaughter,
that he might begin to show himself an avenger of his people, and to kill the
public Enemy, which is the interpretation of the best Commentators according
to the harmony of the Scriptures. For Stephen says, that Moses seeing one of
his Brethren suffering wrong, Acts 7 Chapt. 24, 25. Ver.
defended him and smote the Egyptian who oppressed him, supposing his Brethren
would have understood that God by his hand would have delivered them, but they
understood not; Though Moses did know that he was ordained a Captain from God
to vindicate the Hebrews, and that he should prepare himself by this slaughter
to that charge; And though he did fly out of Egypt; yet as the Apostle says,
by Faith Moses forsook Egypt, Heb. 11.27.
and feared not the feirceness of the King, for he endured as he that saw him
which is invisible, that is, he did it not for fear, but believed in his time
to deliver Israel. What imprudence or impudence is it therefore in this
Impostor to aver that Moses had no other call we read of, but the necessity his
Brother stood in of his help, when the contrary is cleared by the Scriptures,
that he had his call in this action, immediately from God, who by the smiting
of the Egyptian was prepared and animated to the deliverance of Israel.

The example of Ehud follows which both his Masters Mariana and Suarez
principally urge, Suarez in Apol. pro Jur. fidel. Mor. de Rege Inst. l. 1. c.
6. Grotius, l. 1. c, 4.
that he as a private person killed Eglon the King of the Moabites, to free the
Israelites from his Tyranny. But as Grotius says, Sacred authority does
plainly justify that he was raised by God, and by his special command to
avenge the Tyranny of the Israelites: And that God also by what Ministers he
pleased, did execute his Judgments against other Kings, as he did by Jebu
against Joram: neither does it appear, says he, that the King of the Moabites
had no right to rule by compact, which seems probable by the whole eighteen
years time he ruled them, that some consent might pass between them.

And w^ereas he says, That a Tyrant is not a Devil to be cast out by prayer
and Fasting but by a Dagger of a cubit long; yet was it the only and pious
means the people of God used to free themselves from the Tyranny and Slavery
of Nebuchadnezzar and other Princes, which at the last they obtained without
the help of a Dagger; but he had rather run to the Devil for a Dagger to
execute his revenge, then fly to God by prayer for his deliverance. Judge. 10.
This same answer also may be given to his Example of Sampfon: for it is
perspicuous by his miraculous acts that he was raised by God, to begin to
deliver Israel out of the hands of the Philistines, and that whatsoever he
acted was by the Spirit of God. Besides as Peter Martyr says, In eundem locum.
he was a public Magistrate constituted of God, and that as a Magistrate he
did punish and plague the Philistines; and therefore styled their Enemy. And so
is it said, ver. 20. That he judged Israel in the days of the Philistines
twenty years. For as the same Author, Nemini privato licet ad hunc modum
injurias prosequi, It is not lawful for a private man in this manner to
prosecute injuries; and not as a private man to do unto them as they did unto
him, as this Impostor says, and conceives. And in that the Text says, that
the men of Judah should say, Know thou not that the Philistines are Rulers
over us: It is answered by the Gloss on that place, that it was their gross
ignorance that they judged Gods great benefits to be a plague unto them, which
they understood not, though he did, and therefore suffered he them to bind him,
because he knew that God would deliver him. And therefore this Impostor for his
ignorant collection in this place, meriteth to have his brains brayed in a
Mortar with Sampson's Jawbone of an Ass, that he may be cured of his
soolishness. And if his Friends and Relations daily receive capital punishment
as he says, it is because they adhere to the foolish dictates of such a
frenetick Impostor, by which they are blinded and bewitched to foment such
mortal and pestilent conspiracy against their Prince and the State, And
therefore justly suffer: The same Response may also be returned to his Example
of Samnel: That nothing was acted by him on Agag, but by the special command of
God. Which, 1 Samuel 15.3.
because it was neglected of Saul, Samuel according to the Voice of God, hewed
him in pieces before the Lord in Gilgal. Neither was this Agag a Tyrant, as
this Impostor says, or an Usurper, or had any rule or command over the People
of Israel, and therefore extra oleas fertur, he is carried beyond the limits of
the question, and idly argues not ad idem. He concludes with the Example of
Jehojada the high Priest, who says he, Six years hid the right Heir of the
Crown in the House of the Lord, and without doubt was all that while contriving
the destruction of that Tyrant Athaliah, Lib. 1. c. 45. Godw. Ant. l. 1. c. 45.
Martyr. Con. In 2 Kings. 11. In 2 Cron. 23.
who aspired to the Crown by the destruction of those had right to it, but
though he pretended no immediate command from God as Jehu did, or immediate by
Vrim and Thummim, which signified his Prophetical Office, and by which he
answered as from an Oracle; yet as Peter Martyr says, he enterprised that Act
Fiducia praeclara auxilii Divini, By the clear and manifest considence of the
Divine assistance, or as Wolfinus Tigurinus, Impulsu Spiritus Sancti, By the
Impulse and Inspiration of the Divine Spirit; And therefore does this Impostor
improperly ascribe this action to the sole contrivement and invention of man;
and that Jebojada h^^ no pretense to authorize this action, but the equity and
Justice of the Act it self, which was Gods Act in him, and wrought by the
Impulse of his Spirit; who though as Lavater also says, 2 Chronicles. 23.
Whatsoever he did was done by the Incitement of the Holy Spirit, yet does he
use the ordinary means of prudence, and diligence, and military forces: Because
humane helps, when they be offered ought not to be despised, no more then they
were by Moses and Jehu in the like case. And whereas he says, that any man
might have done what Jehojada did as lawfully, that could have done it is as
effectually as he: Jehojada did not do it, as Jehojada or a private person, but
as the Princes Tutor and Guardian, which appertained to him, as the next of
kin, having married the Princes Aunt, who in that respect, represented the
person of the Prince; and by virtue of that Relation was not only obliged to
hide and defend his person, but to have a care of his right to the Crown, and
restore him to the Kingdom of Juda, which he lawfully did, and only might do,
and not any other private person. And therefore for that Royal Act was he
honored as a King, and buried a among the Kings. Besides, as Peter Martyr
says, Non erat homo privatus, sed Reipublicae sumn^us Pontifex, he was not a
private man, 2 Chronicles. 23. In Eundem Locum.
but the High Priest of the Commonwealth, to whom it appertained to judge in
all Civil as well as Ecclesiastical causes; and by that authority as a Judge
according to the decree and promise of God, that the Scepter should not depart
from Judah till Shiloh come; and that his House and Kingdom should be
established for ever; and according to the Law in Deuteronomy, that the
Kingdom should not reside in Strangers; he did lawfully and justly do
execution on Athaliah, whereby the seizin and possession of that Kingdom was
made, and delivered to the right Heir of the House of Judah; and did not do it
as a private person with his Dagger, but as a public Magistrate with the
assistance of the Nobles, and the approbation of the People; and therefore as
the Text says, All the People of the Land rejoiced, and the City was quiet
after they had slain Athaliah with the Sword.

But mark this Impostors preposterous allusion; They slew, says he, Athaliah
at the horse-gate, and by the Kings house, the very Whitehall wherein she had
caused the blood royal to be spilt, and which she had so long unjustly
possessed, and there, by providence did she receive her punishment, alluding to
the late Kings execution before Whitehall. A comparison as absurd as odious,
and no more like then Cicero and his Son: for the one was acted by the
authority of a public Act of Parliament, the Representative of the People; and
the other by the malicious and revengeful hand of a Cruel Woman, with the
detestation of all the people.

Wherein this Impostor discovers his reserved intention, in that before he
did pretend to stand solely for the Parliament, but here he covertly wheeleth
about to the King, and which in the next page he plainly pro^esseth, Vtinam,
says he, Te potius Carole, retinuissemus quam hunc habuissemus, We wish we had
rather retained thee O Charles, then had this man. Who presaging that he shall
not by advising the Parliament draw the Army to his mischievous design,
endeavors by coquesing the King to invire the Royallists to effect it, and
cares not how it be done so it be done, resolving with that desperate
malecontent.

Flectere si nequeo superos Achavontamovebo. Virgil.
If the Heavens will not help him, the Devil shall. But what will the Devil
help him to but shame and confusion? and will serve him as he does the Witches,
leave him when he comes to the gallows; which will be the end and portion also
of his accomplices, that unless as he says, in the contrary sense they repent,
they shall also perish as their precedent Assassinates have, and justly suffer
in the same place where they shall act such an high offense, and therefore
admonish them with the Poet by others dangers to be wisely cantious; Vos ego
nunc moneo, faelix quicunque dolor Tibull.

Alterius, disces posse carere tuo.


Yet will he not conclude this Story of Athaliah without observing that
Jehojada commanded, that whosoever followed her should be put to death, and
generally applies it to all are confederates with his Highness, but more
especially to his Chaplines, and Tryers, who, as he says, will admit none to
the ministry that preach liberty with the Gospel, though indeed they admit all
that will preach not only civil Peace and Liberty, but also Christian Liberty,
and Liberty of Conscience; and only bar those who will preach uncivil
sedition, and tyranny of conscience: And yet does he compare them with Baal's
priests, because as he says, they do sacrifice to our Idol of a Magistrate,
and preach for Tyrants, when as they preach nothing but sound Doctrine,
according to the Scriptures in defense of the Supreme Power: and yet would have
them hanged before their Pulpits as Matten Baal's priest fell before the Altar;
but it he is a Jesuit, as he shows himself to be, he is one of Baal's Priests.

Et saepe in Magistrum sceler a redierunt sua. And what he designs to others
may fall on himself, who with his popish Priests and Jesuits, for preaching
continually like Baal's Priests, Idolatry, and practicing it in their Masses,
and principally for sowing the Cockle of Sedition among his Highness Liege
People, as Baal's Priests did, will certainly, as then heretofore have been, we
hanged, drawn, and uarteted at Tyburn, if once discovered, which they also may
be pleased to take notice of, and to use his own phrase, that unless they also
repent, they shall all likewise perish.

Sed tandem amoto quaeramus seria ludo. And now he begins seriously to consider
what he above has said, and has found out two Objections which he has made
stronger then he is able to answer. The first is, That those Examples out of
the Scriptures, are of men that were inspired of God; and that therefore they
had that call, or authority for their actions, which we cannot pretend to: And
so that it would be unsafe to us to draw their actions into Examples, unless we
had likewise their justifications to allege; to which he answers, That if
God commands these things, it is a sign they were lawful and commendable; But
if he had answered, that these were lawful and commendable in them whom the
Lord had commanded to do them, Non Apollonis magis verum, quam hec ve^p^nsum.
Apollo's answer had not been more true. But to say, they are commendable and
generally lawful, and to be drawn into Example as a General precept by every
one, is more uncertain then a Paradox, and absonant from the harmony of the
Scriptures; and are no more set down for our imitation then Jehu's slaughter of
Joram, which was done by the express Oracle and Revelation of God: For
otherwise every private person may by that Example slay his true Prince, such
as Joram, and Ahaziah were, if they degenerate into Tyrants, which this
Impostor himself says, none of sober seen will aver. Thus is the Be drowned
in his own honey, and entangled in his own words, and his own mouth has
condemned him, yea, his own lips testify against him.

What shall I say of the Israelites robbing of the Egyptians, or Sampson's self
murder, or Jonas casting himself into the Sea, or any other Prophetical
precedents, or privileged commandments, of which fort there are many recorded
in Holy Writ: but that they were otherwise heinous offenses by the Law of God,
and out of the general, precept, and therefore unlawful for us ordinarily to
follow, unless that, as he says, we had their justifications to alleges.

The other Objection is, That there being no opposition made to the Government
of his Highness, the people following their callings and traffic at home,
making use of the Laws, and appealing to his Highness Court of Justice, that
all this argues the peoples tacit consent to the Government. But this
Objection is not rightly stated, and something he has not fully expressed; as
to style that a tacit which is more then a tacit, and implicit consent; for
it is more then a tacit and implicit consent: for the Judges and Justice; of
Peace to take their Commissions from his Highness, and the Sheriffs to act by
his Process, and the people to come in upon the Process issued out by the
Sheriffs, and appealing to his Court of Justice; For there are two main Pillars
of Government, Imperare and Obedire, to Rule, and to Obey, which are Relatives
and cannot be severed; And there can be no Rule without Obedience, nor no
Obedience without Rule. Sint quibus Imperat. And when subordinate Magistrates
are created for the Meum and Tuum of the whole Land, to which the people
actually submit an active obedience, it is more then a tacit and implicit
consent.

And in the stating of the Objection something he has omitted; for he should
have premised that in that his Highness at the request of diverse persons of
honor and quality, and many of the chief Officers of the Army, did take upon
him the Supreme Government, which afterward was seconded by the general consent
of the people, and by them created the Supreme Magistrate of these Nations, as
before has been acknowledged, and demonstrated; The people therein have openly
and explicity declared their actual and real consent to the Government of his
Highness, which would have made the Objection stronger, and altogether
unanswerable.

But now to examine his Answer, which is that if commerce and pleading were
enough to argue the Peoples consent, and give Tyrants the name of Governments,
there was never yet any Tyranny of any long standing in this world, which in
his sense may be true, speaking of a Tyrant in Titulo, who so soon as he has
gained the peoples consent without any prescription of time, is no longer a
Tyrant, even by the judgment of Learned Grotius, as he not unworthily styles
him; whereof commerce, pleadings, and obedience to him and his Magistrates is
one clear argument which the general concurrence of the peoples consent makes
invincible And therefore impertinently does he produce the Examples of Nero and
Caligula, who were not Tyrants in Titulo, but Exercitio; who if they had been
Tyrants in Titulo, the consent of the Senate and People had cleared them of
that odions name.

And as to the Example of Eglon, whom the Israelites, as he says, served
eighteen years, no question but he by his so long continuance of time, and the
consent of the people might have challenged the Right of Government, as well as
by conquest; neither can time corroborate a principality where the ancient of
days will change it? And to the Example of Athaliah who reigned six years, it
may be answered, that though traffic, pleadings, and all public Acts of
Justice were exercised by and under her for the same time, yet wanted she the
complete consent of the people, all the people generally disaffecting and
disliking her Government, which was apparent by their public rejoicing at her
death.

Besides Jehoiada by the impulse of God, as a public Magistrate and Tutor of
the Prince, to whom by the decree of God, the Kingdom of Judah did remain,
which was irrepealerable, might lawfully Act what he did against Athaliah, Got.
de Jur. l. 1. c. 4.
though her Reign had been of longer continuance, as Grotius seems to
intimate.

To the third question, Whether the removing of a Tyrant is like to prove of
advantage to the Commonwealth, or not; he can scarce persuade himself to say
any thing, because he thinks that needless, and all one to enquire whether it
is better the man dye, or the impostume be launched, or the Gangreen Limb be
cut off: yet be there some, says he, whose cowardice and avarice furnish them
with some Arguments to the contrary, and would feign make the world believe,
that to be base and degenerate, is to be cautious and prudent; and what indeed
is a servile fear, they basely call a Christian patience; and that with
continuance in slavery they have lost their courage, and with their courage
their Fortu^^.

And thus would he persuade his Auditors to precipitate themselves into mortal
dangers, upon the rumination of his precepts, as Cleombrotus vainly did on
Plato's, without any prudential circumspection or caution.

But he might have Learned a more wary Lesson of his Master Mariana, who though
he Fathers his impious principles, De regnis Inst. J. 1. c. 6.
yet advises he every man to be cautious how he enterpriseth such a dangerous
attempt. Artente says he, cogit andum est; we ought seriously to consider what
moderation and reason is to be observed in expelling a Tyrannical Prince; least
one evil be heaped on another, and one impiety avenged by another; and the
safest and expeditest way is, if a public assembly may be called to deliberate
by common consent, what is to be determined: And especially the Prince is to be
admonished, to be recalled to health; who if he obey and satisfy the
Commonwealth, I think it fitting to desist, and not use bitter and sharp
Remedies. But his Master Mariana's provident Instructions are too dilatory for
this Monsters heady Resolution, who will rather hearken to the Counsel of his
prime Apostle Machiavel, That men deceive themselves, says he, to mollify
arrogance with humility; a Tyrant is never modest but when he is weak, it is in
the Winter of his fortune when the Serpent bites not; we must not therefore
expect cure from our patience, and suffer our selves to be cousened with hopes
of amendment; though our Saviors Counsel is, that if our Brother trespass
against us, Matt. 18.15.
we should first tell him of his fault privately; and if he hear us not, to
tell him of it before witnesses; and if he refuse them, to tell it to the
Church: but if he refuse the Church also, let him be as an Heathen and
Publicane. These are the degrees of charity every Christian is to observe in
admonishing his Brother, before he exercises the severity and extremity of
Justice; because as our Savior says, by that means we may win our Brother;
and he is little less then an Infidel and Publicane that resuseth so to do.
Nay, God himself never strikes but he denounces his admonitions that they
might repent; as he did by Eliah to Ahab, by Jado to Jeroboam, by Jeremiah to
Zedekiah, and by Daniel to Nebuchadnezzar: and in civil affairs admonition
ought to precede Process; Non autem de necessitate, sed de urbanitate, and
honestate, Tholos. Synt. l. 32. c. 3.
not for necessity sake, but for civility, and honesty; so as this Impostor
seems in this sudden fit to be void of all Piety, Civility, and Honesty; and
like a Brainsick Mountebanck will cut off the Limb, before it appears to be
a Gangrene or immedicable, and lance the Impostume, which with Sovereign Salves
may be cured, and Judge that a Gangrene and Impostume which is none. Yet this
Impostor says, Nemo unquam impertum flagitiis quaesitum bonis artibus
exercuit; never did any man Manage the Government with Justice that got it by
wicked means: The longer a Tyrant lives, the more the Tyrannical humor
increases in himself. Tac. l. 1. Hist.
But this is part of Pisos speech against Oath, who was a competitor with him
for the Empire; and therefore the less authentical: And if Flagitiis is
understood by force and might, as this Impostor in this pamphlet seems to take
it, then this position is not generally true; for Julius Caesar who gained the
Empire by force, and is styled by Victor Invasor, was as he says, tam pacis
bellique artibus clarus, Vict. vita Caes.
and imprimis clementia long clarissimus, most famous in Peace and War; and
especially in clemency most famous: Ib. vita Aug.
And though Augustus was Dominandi supra modum avidissimus, and by might
obtained the Empire; yet for his candid Demeanor and civil Justice was he so
beloved, and honored after his decease by the people, that they wished ut non
nasceretur, aut non moreretur, that he had not been born, or had not died:
besides Grotius says, Grot. l. 3. c. 14.
Tyranni interdum libertatem reddiderunt; Tyrants sometimes have restored
Liberty; and Tacitus himself in the same sense, Vitia erunt donec homines,
Hist. l. 4.
sed nec haec continua, sed interventu meliorum pensantur; there will be Vices
as long as there be men; but these are not continual, but are recompensed by
the intervening and supply of better things.

But what, says he, would succeed, if a Tyrant should be removed? I will tell
him, that cura pejor sit morbo; the cure may be more dangerous then the
disease. And as his Master Mariana says, one evil may be heaped on another;
and one Impiety avenged by another: and all Historians will show him the
lamentable events of such preposierous and precipitated mutations, which many
times beget effusion of blood, ruins, and sacking of Cities, and sometimes the
destruction of Cities and Kingdoms. But I will rather instance in some ancient
Examples then Novel, which as yet adhere in the minds and mouths of men: It is
not unknown to those who are versed in Annals, that of all the Grecians none
were more renowned then the Spartans, either for the glory of Military, or
severity of Civil discipline: but they when they could not endure the Dominion
of Agis because it seemed to be a Tyranny; conspired against him, and openly
slew him: But what were the Fruits of this unhappy Slaughter, Cic. Tull. Offic.
Tully does show us; Ex eo tempore, from that time, says he, the strength of
the Lacedaemonians did fall into diverse Storms and Tempests of adversities; and
did suffer all the calamities of a miserable state. And what succeeded the
Barbarous slaughter of Caesar, but most dangerous and mortal Divisions among
the chief, who being inflamed with the hope of obtaining the Empire did by
their Dissentions tear the Bowels of the Commonwealth in pieces? Insomuch that
the people complained, as Tacitus relates, prope eversum orbem, Histor.
etiam cum de principatu certaretur; That by the Dissentions of men, concerning
the principality, the whole world was turned upside down: Which Caesar himself
presaged, who being informed of some Nocturnal conjurations, and meetings of
some Malevolent persons, did check and reprehend them saying and Prophesying
of himself, Non tam sua quam Reipublicae interesse ut salvus fieret, That it
reflected not so much upon his own good, as the welfare of the Commonwealth,
that he should be safe; and that for himself he had got abundance of glory: but
the Commonwealth, if any such thing should happen, would not be quiet and
peaceable, but in a worse condition then before.

And therefore is the safety of a Tyrant more to be desired then his Slaughter,
In Plut. in Bruto.
because commonly civil Wars thereupon ensue: for as Favorinus, A civil War
is worse then an unlawful Dominion; which Cicero, who could best judge of the
best State of a Commonwealth, in his Epistle to Pomponius Atticus, in the time
of the civil Wars writing of them, acknowledged, Ego autem usque co enercatus
sum, ut malim (...) quam cum optima spe dimicare; But I, says he, am so out of
heart and cast down that I had rather live under a Tyrant, then fight with the
best of hopes. And therefore after the civil Wars were ended, and the Empire
placed on Augustus, Lib. 1. Ann.
the people wisely, as Tacitus writes, novis rebus aucti tuta, and praesentia
quam vetera and periculosa mallent: being augmented and advanced by their new
Government, did desire rather those present times which were safe, then those
preterite which were dangerous. This needs no application to the condition of
our State: Res ipsa loquitur.

Besides it is observed, Golden Grove. l. 3. c. 1.
that according to the French Proverb, Un mal train un auter, one evil draws
on another; and commonly that one Tyrants head being cut off, three more may
arise in their room; so the people of Rome by the avoiding the Scilla of one
Tyrant, to wit Silla fell headlong into the Charybdis of many Tyrants, which
more perplexed them. To which purpose Valerius Maximus reports a pretty Story
of a certain old Woman, L^ 6. c. 3.
who, when the Syracusians did servently desire the end and expiration of
Dionysius the Tyrant, did pour forth her Prayers for his health; and being
demanded of the Tyrant (wondering at her undeserved reverence to him) for what
good turn she did so: answered, that she being a Maid, and living under a
grievous Tyrant, desired to be rid of him, who being slain, a more cr^el Tyrant
possessed the Castle, and that she also wished a period to his Dominion, which
also was effected, and that then a more outrageous Tyrant succeeded him: And
therefore says she, fearing that you being taken away, a worse might possess
your place, she did devote her Prayers, for his safety: A grave though a
Foeminine answer, which deserves to be placed among the famous Apothegmes; for
it is generally observed, which also is verified in the succession of the first
Roman Emperor, that the latter commonly is worse then the former.

Tiberius, as Dion. says, was cruel, and a dissembler; and was sublated by
poison, whom Caligula succeeded, an incestuous, Prodigal, and Luxurious Tyrant,
and incestuous with his Sisters, whom Cheraea murdered. Claudius succeeded him,
who was a Slave to Messalina and his Servants, and was poisoned with a
Mushroome; whom Galba succeeded, who was inexplebilis pecuniae, a Slave to his
Coffers; which is a most abominable vice in a Prince, who above all others
ought to be magnificent; for which vileness he was slain by his Soldiers.
Nero succeeded him, who was a detestable Monster, defiled his Mother, and after
murdered her; he was condemned by the Senate; and for sear of shame executed
the office of Hangman upon himself. Not long after Vitellius took upon him the
Empire, who was nothing else but drunkenesse and gluttony, and of all the rest
died most shamefully and miserably; Aetas parentum pej^r avis, and seldom
comes a better. Only Vespasian, says Tacitus, in melius mutatus erat, was
changed into the better. I could Load you with Examples of this nature, but my
Intention is not to be tedious and burdensome: But let us perpend what this
Impostor says to it: It is phrensy, says he, and ridiculous policy, to suffer
a certain misery for a contingent one, and let the disease kill us because
there is danger by the cure, and ne moriare mori, and not to defire a change,
when we are certain we cannot be worse: Cujus contrarium verum est; and in this
case the contrary is true; for we suffer not a certain misery; and if we
change, we may be worse; for we now possess plenty and peace, which are optima
rerum, the best of things; and upon the change may probably fall into civil
dissentions, and have a worse Government, which is pessima rerum, the worst of
things: and therefore as Cicero in the same case affirms, omnis pax bello
civili utilior videtur: Any peace seems more commodious then a civil War.
And whosoever should attempt such an infernal Act, is sure to undergo a
certain, not a contingent misery, and no less then capital censure, and loss
of Life; unless with this Impostors brave Syndercombe he prevents it with a ne
moriare mori; for discovery, vengeance lies at there door; and the Lord does
never, or rarely permit such Impostors to escape Divine Justice: Vita Augusti.
Augustus, as Suetonius Historiseth it, non ultimae quidem sortis hominum
conspiratione and periculo caruit, wanted not the dangerous conspiracies of the
meaner sort of men; yet were they discovered or suppressed, priusquam
invalescerent, before they were of any validity, and incurred the fatal stroke
of the Sword of Justice: And to come nearer the state of thequestion,
Leonagillus, Golden Grove. l. 9. c. 1. Ann. Them. 568.
an ancient King of the Goths in Spain, both a Tyrant and a Arrian, pursued
the true Christians, and exiled his own Son, because he was of the true
Religion; where upon this young Prince being moved at the persecution of the
Christians, did twice raise Arms against his Lord and Father: At the first he
was taken captive and banished, and at the second he was put to death on Easter
day. So Nebuchadnezzar being a Tyrant and Persecutor of the Jews, who were then
Gods people, yet because Zedekiah rebelled against him, who was then his
Sovereign, was he put to flight, and he and his Sons taken Prisoners, who were
slain before his eyes, and himself bound in chains, cast into Prison, and both
his eyes put out, where he remained till the day of death. Two notable Examples
of the effects of Gods Judgments against two Princes for rebelling against
their Sovereign. More precedents to this purpose are recorded in the Volumes of
preterit Stories, quam muscarum cum caletur maxim, then flies in the heat of
Summer: but I Study Brevity, especially in so a clear case; how soever it is
resolved in this Impostors Junto, that his Highness is to be killed; but he
only questions the manner how; some, says he, are of a strange opinion, that
it were a generous and noble Act to kill his Highness in the Field, but that
pleases not his Spirit, knowing well that he is impar congressus Achilli, and
that he is stronger in the Field then in the Court; and does not like the
hazard, blood and confusion that thereupon might ensue: but he would have him
catched in a Ginne, Page 9.
and slain by a Stratagem; for, says he, The most Lawful way to destroy him,
is the readyest; no matter whether by force or fraud.

And by consequent, Regis Inst. l. 1. c. 7.
says Mariana, no matter, if by poison, especially, says he, the saculty of
Acting by fraud being granted. And for this reason, because says this
Impostor, it may be so effected with less hazard, blood, and confusion, which
makes no difference between open force, and private fraud; for though hebe not
removed by a precedent bloody War, yet a subsequent War may happen as
dangerous and as bloody as it, as it did upon Caesar, and Richard the seconds
Slaughter; which was the cause of the greatest consusion and effusion of blood
between the Houses of York and Lancaster, that ever embroyled this Nation,
wherein four score of the Blood Royal perished. As also of the loss of France,
which as Philip Cominaeus, Secretary to Lewis the eleventh King of France,
averreth, we might have retained, had not those divisions intervened and
impeded us; such are the fatal effects of the murder of Supreme Magistrates,
though supposed Tyrants.

And though it is more generous and more noble to kill the Enemy in the Field,
Aristorle.
then by fraud; and that a magnanimous man loves to speak freely and truly;
and a generous mind knows not by stealth to conquer his Enemy; as Alexander,
though he were Advised by Parmenio, to conquer his mighty Enemy Darius by
circumvention, refused so to do, holding it more glorious, Aperto Mart, by
dint of Sword to gain the Victory, because thereby the mind of the Enemy is
perpetually conquered, and forced to confess the Victory, as Claudian,
Confessos animo quoque subjugat hosts. And which generally also was the
practice of the Romans, unto the end of the second Punique War; yet is fraud
by the stoutest and sagest Captains ranked in equal posture with strength and
might, as Ulysses, -- Dolus an virtus, Virg. Aen. 2.
quis in host requirat. And as by Fabius Maximus, Et in virtuti placuit dolus.
Silius Ital.
And according to the vulgar Verse: Nil refert armis contingat palma, dolove.

And as Austin, Quest. 10. super Jos.
it appertains not to the Justice of War, whether it be Acted by sorce or
fraud.

And to give the Devil his due, such prudent fraud and craft is to be
preserred in Martial enterprises, De re Militar.
before force and might of hand, because as Vegetius, aperto Mart commune est
periculum: In open fight the danger is common and equal; but Ex occulto, by a
close and sudden fight, the Enemy may be either vanquished or put to flight
with little loss and less danger; which was the cause of the Ceremony of the
Lacedaemonians (who of all the Grecians were the best warriors) that they (when
they overcame the Enemy by Stratageme) did sacrifice an Ox to Mars; but when
by open strength, a Cock; preferring the utility of the first before the
magnanimity of the latter: Chrysostom l. 1. de sacerdotio.
And therefore Chrysostom chiefly commended those Emperors, who by fraud
obtained Victories. But what does all this avail to this Impostors drift? for
though such Stratagemes are approved between Prince and Prince, Captain and
Captain; yet are not such violent frauds allowable between private persons in
a peaceable Commonwealth, much less to Subjects against their Magistrates, who
are to obey Magistrates, as the Apostle Paul says, and to be subject to
Principalities and Powers; for that were coelum cum terra miscere, to confound
Heaven with Earth, and make a Chaos or confusion in the Commonwealth, and
therefore by all Princes condemned as Capital.

And though Empoisoning is less turbulent, because more occult; yet is it more
execrable and detestable, and exploded by the Law of Nations, even in military
affairs. Which Tiberius (subtle enough to do mischief) refused to Act on his
terrible Enemy Arminius, of which Grotius gives the reasons; because the perils
of War (which were frequent) should be too much extended. Grotius de Bello l.
3. c. 4.
And that Princes (whose lives before others are defended by Arms) are less
safe then others from poison: Yet Mariana (this Impostors Tutor) who approves
the killing of Princes by poison, whom he calls Tyrants, if they do not please
the Pope; De Regis Inst. l. 1. c. 7.
yet always with this modification, That it is better to poison a Tyrant in
his chair, or in his habit, in imitation of the Moors, then to poison his
drink, for fear the Tyrant may be guilty of killing himself, and that it may
prejudice his Salvation.

Certainly a great Example of charity says Pierre du Mouline Ironically,
Bourbier de la foy. Fo. 730.
that those Fathers should have a cure of the Soul, when they cause the Body to
be flain; and yet extols the Murder of Jacobim the Monk, for killing with a
poisoned Knife Henry the third King of France, saying, caeso Rege, De Regis
Inst. l. 1. c. 6. Pet. Mol. b.d. f. 129.
ingens sibi nomen fecit, That he got himself a great and excellent name by
killing him; for which the Pope gave thank to God in a full Consistory, without
any charitable respect to the Soul of Henry the third: Such charitable Fathers
has this Impostor.

And though the Goths, and the Parthians, and the Moors, did infect their
Weapons with poison, and double the causes of death; yet has it always been
abhorred of most Christians, and especially of the ancient Britains, as
Johannes Sarisburiensis (the Disciple of Thomas Becket) writes, Quod Britannia
veneno abhorruit, and in principes non novit, De Nugis Cur. l. 1. c. 9.
sed pro suis principibus invictos gladios exercere: That Brittany abhorred
from poison, and did not know to exercise their invincible Swords against their
Princes, but for their Princes. And such poisoning Plots were not heard of in
our Nation, Bakers Hist Q. Eliz. Reign. F^. 553.
until some Spaniards thinking to make Queen Elizabeth away by poison, and not
daring to trust any English man in such a business, did treat to that purpose
with Rodericke Lopus a Jew, and Physician to the Queen, with Ferrara Loysy and
other Portugals, who came into England at that time in Relation to Don Antonio,
but were discovered by the Interception of their Letters, and were all
condemned and executed at Tyburn.

But now he begins to rave, and like Ajax is angry without fear or wit; --
Calido sub pectore bilis

Intumnit, Perseus sat. 5.
quam non extinxerat Vrna cicutae.



He presageth, and truly that his senceless projects will not prevail with
ingenious Auditors; and that he does -- Ventis perfundere verba, Vent his mind
to the wind; and therefore gives over his seducing exhortations, and vomits out
the Venone of his rancour and bitterness against every one. What have we of
the Nobility (says he) but the name? The Luxury and the Vices of them. Poor
Wretches, those that now carry the Title, are so far from any of their Virtues
that should grace them, and indeed give them the Titles, that they have not so
much as their generous Vices, Indignation, and Ambition.

And wherefore all this, but that the Nobles are so virtuous and pious, as to
submit to the good pleasure of the Almighty, and not madly (as he does) to kick
against the Prick.

What have the Ministers, says he, or what indeed desire they of their
calling, but their Titles? how do they rack the Scriptures for flatteries, and
impudently apply them to his Highness? And why this also? but that they derive
his Highness Authority from the power of the Scriptures, and Minister the
sincere Milk of the word, and in plain evidence of the Spirit and power, and
not by the enticing Speech of man's wisdom, as he does the contrary.

What is the City, says he, but a great tame Beast that eats, and carries,
and cares not who rides it? And this too, because they prudently and cautiously
affect peace and tranquillity, and will not be rid by such a mischievous
Baboon, nor driven through his instigations to rush into the Battle, like the
Horse and Mule that have no understanding. And what, says he, will not the
Army fight for? what will they not fight against? what are they but Janisaries
and Slaves themselves, and making all others so? But it is an old saying, that
one Fool may propound more questions then twenty wise men are able to answer;
but he has here propounded many questions any Fool may answer.

What will not the Army fight for? says he: Who knows not but they will not
fight for such seditious, and turbulent Traitors as he? and who knows not what
they will not fight against? not against their courageous and Victorious
General; and their magnificent, and courteous Lord and Protector; and who knows
not that they are not Janisaries, but their Generals Commilitons and fellow
Soldiers; not Slaves, but Commanders, and have freed us from Slavery; and as
it is said in, the peoples late Representative, restored us to peace and
tranquillity?

At the last says he, What are the people in general, but Knaves, Fools, and
Cowards, principled for ease, vice, and Slavery? But who knows not that their
honosty and fidelity exceeds that of other Nations, and that in that respect
Anglorum fides, among Christians may pass for a Proverb; as anciently Artica
fides did among the Grecians? And he has forgotten what his holy Father Pope
Gregory called them, Angli, quasi Angeli, for their feature, and honesty; and
fools they are not, because they will not swallow this Impostors principles of
knavery, which none but fools and gudgeons will? And who dares call them so,
whose renowned valor is ecchoed and resounded within the circumference of
France, Spain, and Germany, and are not principled in ease, vice, and slavery
as he says, but employed in noble and virtuous actions, for the glory of their
Country?

And as for Slaves, that Tenure has been long since exiled England, Et nunquam
Libertas gratior extat, We never enjoyed more gracious Liberty; And those
Epithites do more properly appertain to himself. For does not he play the knave
and fool too with the Nobles, Ministers, Citizens, Parliament, People, and with
the Council? yea, the Protector himself almost in every passage of this
pamphlet?

And who will not judge him a Fool, whose peevish conceits end in his own
destruction, which questionless will fall on his petulant noddle? Et Sapiens
incipit a fine, And a Wise man begins from the end. And a Coward certainly he
is, and dares not appear in the open field, though a professed Soldier, -- Et
larga est illi copia fandi
Tunc eum bella manus poscunt. Virgil. Aeneid.



And is bragging and prating when he should be fighting.

Syndercombe is the only Patriot, he deems worthy of his Elogies, who he
says, has showed as great amind, as any Old Rome could boast of; and had he
lived there, his name had been registered with Brutus and Cassius, and had had
his statue as well as they; and so he might; for Brutus and Cassius had no
statues erected to them in Rome; And if they had not fled from Rome, the people
had served them as they did Caesar, so much they abhorred his barbarous murder;
But on the contrary, besides statues, the people erected a Column of the
purest stone, almost of twenty foot long to Caesar, and placed it in the
Marketplace, in which was engraven Pater Patriae. And also erected a Temple to
him in common with the Goddess of Clemency, and conferred many Divine honors
on him. But all the honor that Brutus and Cassius gained, was their miserable
self-murder, and rather for the same merited a stake knocked in their graves,
then statue in the temple, with his desperate Syndercomb, who instead of taking
away his stake from his grave (which this Impostor would have) deserves to
have his head fastened to the top of a long pole, and set on the top of Newgate,
according to the English custom, as an ensign of his traitorous intention, and
spectacle of infamy, which is the only statue or monument this Impostor must
expect for him. Yet do I not much wonder why he is so profuse and excessive in
his commendations, when I observe that he chiefly praises him, for that
neither bribes nor terrors could make him betray his Friends, whereof he may be
supposed to be one, and that Mulus Mulum scabit, One Knave claws another.

And at the last I cannot but observe that this Impostor in three passages of
this pamphlet, has been tampering with the Army to persuade them-against
against his Highness, and has excogitated an irrefragable reason, as he
supposes, whereby to effect it; It Is a Rule says he, that Tyrants observe
when they are in power, never to make use of them that help them to it. And
indeed, says he, it is their interest and security not to do it: for those
that have been the Authors of their greatness, being conscious of their many
merits, they are bold with the Tyrant, and less industri^us to please him;
They think all they can do for them is their due, and still they expect more;
and when they fail in their expectations, as it is impossible to satisfy them,
their disappointments make them discontented, and their discontents dangerous.

His Rule is experimentally false; for Princes whom he styles Tyrants, when
they are in power make use of those, and prefer them that helped them to it,
until they grow insolent in their demands, and offensive in their discontents.

But true it is, that it is a most difficult thing to please and satisfy those
that advanced him, Victor Vita. Nervae.
and secure them from discontent, which made Nerva to complain, after he had
taken upon him the Empire, that he was not only subject to many vexations, and
perils, but to the censure not only of his Enemies, but of his Friends: Qui
cum merere omnia praesumum, si quicquam non extorserint, atrociores sunt ipsis
quoque hostibus, Who when they presume to merit all things, if they cannot
extort what they desire, are more bitter and dangerous then their Enemies
themselves

And therefore is every Prince and Emperor between Scylla and Charibdis, two
dangerous Rocks, to wit, their enemies and their Friends. And though by their
Friends assistance they keep their Enemies in aw; yet many times their deserts
make them to forget themselves, and in a most dangerous manner to oppose their
Princes, if they correspond not with their peremprory vores, which has Moved
Princes sometimes to lessen their power, and other times severely to punish
them According to the degree of the contempt; of which a rare Example we have
in the uncivil deportment of Sir William St^anley toward Henry the Seventh,
who at the Battle of Bosworth, Bak. Hen. 7.
came in to rescue him, when he was in danger to be slain by Richard the Third,
and afterward did set the Crown on his head, which was found among the spoils;
for which Noble Act he promoted him to be one of the Privy Council, and Lord
Chamberlain of his Household, and gave him the Ample Spoils of the Victory, and
otherwise abundantly rewarded him, insomuch as at his death were found in his
Castle in ready money Forty thousand Marks besides Plate and Jewels: Yet
because Henry the Seveth refused to grant him one inconvenient boon (to wit) to
be Earl of Chester (which was an Appennage to the Principality of Wales, Bacon.
Hen. 7.
and an honor appropriate only to the Kings Son) he fell into a mischievous
discontent, and began to incline to Perkins, and as some say, to aid him with
money; but certainly to prefer the Title of York before that of Lancaster, which
appeared by his own confession, in saying that if he certainly knew that
Perkins was the son of Edward the fourth, Bak. Hen. 7.
he would never fight, nor bear arms against him, for which words he was
arraigned, condemned, and beheaded; and all his former merits buried in the
grave of this conditional treason: and in this sense, is that true that the
Impostor says, that a Prince will never trust those he has provoked, and
fears, and will be sure to keep him down, least he should pluck him down.

And in such cases a Prince is not at liberty to show mercy as a private man
may; for a Prince, as Sir Edward Coke, is Caput and salus Reipublicae, Coke l.
5. f. 124.
the head and safety of the Commonwealth. And as from the head health is
conveyed to every part of the body, so from the Prince safety is conveyed to
every part of the Commonwealth, and every private person has interest in the
safety of the Prince, because his safety is their safety; and therefore a
Prince ought not freely and absolutely to show mercy to such traitorous
malefactors, because the Commonwealth is intercessed in it.

Et pereat unus ne pereant omnes. It is better that one perish, then all
suffer; And a Prince (to use that Impostors allusion) may use such friends (who
abuse their trust, and conspire against him, and are not only useless, but
obnoxious to the Common wealth,) as Dionysius did, hang them up like Bottles,
and not incur the title of a Tyrant, but be adjudged a wise Prince, as Henry
the seventh was.

But now this Impostor is acting the last Scene of his interlude, and as in a
Tragedy, in the beginning or Protafis, he was very pleasant, so now in the
Catastrophe he is very rigid, and threatens nothing but death. -- Intentant
omnia mortem. And verily all his passages would better become a Scenical Stage,
then a Princely Court, wherein he lays his bloody Scene, and like an
imposthumed stomach vomits nothing but blood. Though brave Syndercombes great
spirit says he, be suppressed, yet there are a great roll behind even of
those, which are in his own muster-rowls, that are ambitious of the names of
Deliverers of their Country, and do know what the action is that will purchase
it. Which they all know to the contrary, See the Humble Advise fol. 2.
that his Highness eminently, and the Officers and Soldiers of the Army
subordinately, have (under God) been the Deliverers of their Country, and
Restorers of our Peace and Tranquillity, whose saithfulness to the
Commonwealth, the late Parliament gratefully and publicly acknowledged, and
that they shall put a just value thereupon, to their general satisfaction. In
vain therefore does this Impostor go about to fright his Highness with a
supposition of their infidelity, whose constancy as a rock is irremoveable, and
with one voice aver.

Nec feret illa dies ut commutemur in aevo. Auso.
And further with a bugbear he thinks to fright his Highness as others do
Children: His Bed, his Table says he, is not secure: and he stands in need of
other Guardes to defend him against his own. But those are but Figmenta and
terriculamenta puerorum, Feigned and childish scarre-crowes, and are above
credulity.

Nec pueri credunt, nisi qui nondum aere lavantur. Ju.
For he who has the wisdom to win the affections of a potent Army, cannot
want the prudence to gain the love of his own Family, which as Cleobolus, is
the best Economy to govern by love, not fear, Macrob Sat. l. 1. c. 11.
as his Highness does, who as a greater Pater familia's as Macrobius advises,
uses his Followers as Familiars, and not as Servants, but as Fellow Servants.

And also his Highness Court is by his Virtuous and Religious Example formed
and fashioned into such a pious and civil frame, Beisius de Not. Ep. ad Max.
as the Emperor Maximilian was, that no Christian family can be better
instituted, and instructed; and therefore his Followers cannot be inscious,
what an abominable, and odious crime it is to betray their Lord and Master not
only in respect of them to whom by mutual relation they are obliged to be
faithful, but in the apprehension of others, and even of those who have
instigated them to commit such a detestable fact, and received benefit by it,
and yet punishing them for it?

As we read of Publius Servilius, Patric. de Princip. Tit. 20.
who being with C. Marius and L. Sylla Condemned as Enemies of the people of
Rome, hid himself in a private Village, but was betrayed by his Servant, and so
slain, whom for his prodition they first rewarded, and then as a Proditor
precipitated from the Tarpeian stone.

And so Sylla the Daughter of Nysus, who inflamed with the love of Minois,
Patric. de Princip. Tit. 20.
upon his promise to her of marriage, betrayed her Fathers Palace to him; but
in stead of standing to his promise, he married her to the Ocean, and
precipitated her to the bottom of the Sea.

And so it is also related of Claudius, that before he had gotten the Empire,
he was assured it by Cassius, Cheraea, and Lapys, who slew Caligula, yet after
he had possessed it, Dion. l. 60.
he caused them to be punished with death. Because though Caligula for his
cruelty deserved to be cut off, yet ought it not to have been done by Cheraea
his Tribune to whom the safety of the Prince was committed: for how can a
Prince expect that he will be faithful to him, was perfidious to another?

And if Philip of Macedon, Niceph. l. 14. c. 16.
who above all other Princes approved Proditors, will give them a reward, yet
did he permit his Soldiers to taunt them, and call a Spade a Spade.

To which purpose Nicephorus reported of Constantius, that when he had
conquered Zadochius who rebelled against him, and put him to flight, and forced
him to repair to his familiar Friend Eudicius for refuge, who had received many
benefits from him, yet in the night ungratefully cut off his head, and in all
haste carried it to Constantius, who gave him thanks for it, but would not
permit him to remain with him, neither did he think the company of a perfidious
Friend to be good matter or example to himself, or army: Insomuch as if
Proditors sometimes escape capital punishment, yet can they never avoid capital
hatred.

By such Patterns and Examples as these, which his Highness Gentlemen and
Servants have learned in their Academy (for what is his Court but a little
University? so studious are they of any erudition) are they settled and
confirmed in their fidelity and allegiance, that his Highness does not stand in
need of another Guard to guard them, as this Impostor pretends: for they are
his privy and Cabinet-guard, and nearer to him then his Lifeguard, who in all
privy and secret passages are prompt at hand, girded with their Swords to guard
and defend his person with hazard of their Lives. Pol. Virgil. l. 1. c. 17.
As the courageous Servant of Maurice Duke of Saxony, did, who of late years
seeing his Master suddenly assaulted by certain Turks that lay in ambush, and
cast from his Horse, covered him with his own Body, and valiantly repelled the
Enemy, until certain Horsemen came in, and saved the Prince, but died himself
a little while after, being hurt, and wounded in every part of his Body.

Or as the undaunted and adventurous Esquire of the Duke of Guyse, Jean de
Seres Charry f. 446.
who seriously surveying a Trenche, a certain Soldier levelled a Harquebusse
at him, which his Squire espying as it was firing, suddenly casting himself
between them, and with the loss of his own Life, guarded his Masters.

Or else as that affectionate Servant of Vrbinus, Macrob. Sat. l. 1. c. 11.
who being commanded to be slain, hid himself in a secret place, but being
betrayed, one of his Servants changed his apparel with him, and put his Ring on
his finger, whom the Soldiers rushing into his Bedchamber, supposing him to
be his Master suddenly slew him, by which means his Master escaped.

I could furnish you with many more Examples of such Noble Servants, who have
sacrificed their Lives for their Masters safety; but I hasten to an end;
Pulchrum est pro Domino mori, It is a most glorious act to die for a Master;
for which many Servants have been graced with Noble Elogies, and registered in
the Monuments of Eternal Memory.

At the last this Hobgoblin would fright his Highness with the formidable
judgments of God out of the Scriptures; which he abuses as the Devil did,
when he tempted our Savior, and have more analogy and proportion to this
Impostor then to his Highness.

For those places of Scripture which he thundreth out of Job, against him, are
judgments generally denounced by the Spirit of God against the wicked for
their evil and wicked imaginations, and machinations; and therefore I do truly,
and properly apply them to himself. Job. 20.24.
Death and Destruction pursues him wheresoever he goes; they follow him
everywhere. Darkness is hid in his secret places. A fire not blown shall
consume him: he shall flee from the Iron Weapon, and a Bow of Steel shall
strike him through: The Heavens shall reveal his iniquity, and the Earth shall
rise up against him. Ver. 27.
That the eyes of the wicked shall fail, and they shall not escape, their hope
shall be at the giving up the ghost. And so I fear it will be with him, Job
10.21.
for before the giving up the ghost he will never repent, or be good.

But to his Highness the antecedent Verses may justly be ascribed: Thou shall
be secure, because there is hope, thou shall dig about thee, and thou shall
take thy rest in safety. Also thou shall lie down, and none shall make thee
afraid; yea many shall make suite unto thee.

-- Rex eris, ajunt, Horat. Ep.

Si recte facias; hic murus abeneus esto
Nil conscire sibi, nulla pallescere culpa.
Thus would this Monopoly of mischief have frighted his Highness with
pernicious and deadly Threats; who though Pyrrhus and Hanibal were ad portas,
yet would he not fear them, no not the principalities and powers that dwell in
high places; nor all the crafts and subtilities of the Devil, or this Impostor
himself, who is one of his most precious Imps; for the Lord is with him: But on
the contrary, his Highness has struck him into such a fright, Horat l. 1. Ep.
10.
-- Vt motu ad Lunam trapidabit arundinis umbram. That he is asraid that every
shadow is a Messenger: And that he shall not escape the hand of Justice. And
though the Monster lurk in Cacus cave; yet not withstanding his preposterous
steps will be discovered; his foot shall slide in due time, the day of his
destruction is at hand, and the things that shall come upon him make have; for
the Lord has forsaken him, because he has forsaken the Lord, and followed
that which is evil, and not that which is good: And this also may be said of
his confederates and accomplices, that, because they partake of his villainies,
they shall participate of his infamy.

And thus have William Allens parturient mountains produced a pitiful and
ridiculous Mouse; who with it for shame were best to conceal, and hide their
heads in some obscure chincke or corner, and never appear again, either in the
light or night, for fear the Dog or the Cat catch them, which night and day
watch, and observe their peepings.

A word to his Postscript.
JUdicious Reader, expect two or three Sheets more of Paper, in refutation of
this Impostors Jesuitical Opinion, if in the mean time he escape the Halter of
the Hangman, which he himself not without just cause doubts; and which I
presage will be the Castrophe and conclusion of his Tragical design; for though
the fugitive Sculk in some foreign seminary; yet the false Spirit may move him
to come over into his Native Country, to do more mischief, and to receive
Sentence according to his deserts.

Vivat PROTECTOR.

FINIS.

