DIVINE MEDITATIONS Upon Some of the Virtuous, and Vicious WOMEN, in the
SCRIPTURES: Wherein, as in a Glass, every one may see their own Faces; whether
Fair, or Foul; Deformed, or Comely.

A Work worthy their Spare-Hours; which, by the Grace of God, may work an holy
Emulation in many, either to Equal, or Outvie their SEX in VIRTUE.

By WILLIAM HARVEY, Minister of the WORD of GOD.

A Virtuous Woman is a Crown to her Husband: but she, that makes ashamed, is
as rotteness in his Bones.

Prove. xii. 4. Who can find a Virtuous Woman? For her price is far above
Rubies.

Prove. xxxi. 10. Contraria juxta se posita magis elucescunt.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1661.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE COUNTESS of South-Hampton, And the COUNTESS of
North-Hampton, WILLIAM HARVEY wishes all Happiness in this life, and that,
which is to come.
RIGHT Honorable, and Virtuous Ladies, when I pitched upon this Subject, I had
You in my Thoughts: my Ambition was to beg your Patronage. As Your Fortunes, so
are Your Virtues parallel; and, like the Gemini in the Zodiac, embrace each
other. Your Titles of Honor are remote, and distinct, opposite to other: but,
as the needle in the Compass, You ever tend to one star; and, with the King's
Daughter, are both glorious within. I shall present to Your view a
Tragi-Comedy: the Actours be all Women, though their parts differ. Here You
have Virtue, and Vice displayed; both brought upon the Stage in lively Colors.
To attract Your attention, the Several Scenes are Sacred; for each Theme is
drawn from Holy Writ: an no Water, but that, which flows from the pure
Fountains of the Scriptures. Your Honors must not expect any Plot, or
Aenigmatical passages, to puzzle rather, then please the Spectatours; neither
look for sublime, and high expressions; for, the Subject being feminine, the
matter must not speak big. Here Your Ladyships shall see plain dealing, and
every woman's praise, or dispraise, as she deserves. If any one's mouth open,
they bark not at me; but God; for I have spoken nothing, but that, which the
Holy Ghost thought fit to Record. The ultimate end is God's Glory, the next an
holy imitation, and detestation either of Vice, or Virtue. As Contraries put
together do illustrate each other: So Sanctity, and Impiete, oppositely
placed, will by far, seem more lovely, or loathsome. Should we, at once, behold
a glorious Sun at one hand brightly shining, in a serence, and clear day, with
no Cloud interposing; and, on the other hand, the Moon totally eclipsed with
thick, and black Clouds, o'respreading the whole face of the Heavens, from
whence proceeded fearful Thunderings, and Lightnings, with impetuous Storms,
and Tempest, threatening another deluge of Waters to drown this great World
again: how dreadful would the one, and how amiable, and delightful would the
other seem? Grace of it self is lovely; but, compared with sin, will look more
lovely. So a gracious Woman, compared with one tht is graceless, how
transcendent? I humbly desire Your Honors acception, and pardon, and rest

Your Honors humble servant WILLIAM HARVEY, The meanest of them, that serve at
the Altar.

TO THE HONORABLE, AND VIRTUOUS LADY, the LADY HILLIARD, of W. Horsly in
Surrey. Grace, Mercey, and Peace.
MADAM,
SHould I have left You out, I had been guilty of much Ingratitude; which is a
thing so foul, as that alone objected, is sufficient to make one odious to God,
and man. Your Ladyship has often supplied my Necessities, and never did I
return from You empty. As Philip the Eunuch, You have many a time made me go
away rejoicing; for the Oil of Your Goodness never stayed so long, as there was
a Vessel more to receive it. I know Your Ladyship affects not Popularity:
neither would have a Trumpet blown before You; being confident, that Your Right
hand was ever ignorant of the Actions of Your Left. That God, which sees in
Secret, reward You openly. This is only to express my Thankfullness for all
Your noble Favors; and to let the World know how much I am obliged to You.
Again, who should protect Virtue, but the Virtuous? A glorious Frontispiece
speaks somewhat within, and often begets a Desire of Inspection: So Virtue (We
say) from a handsome, and comely Person, is more Acceptable; So Books owned,
and protected by Noble Wights, have the better Entertainment from those Hands
they happen to fall into. But I will detain the Reader no longer: A Small City
must have Gates proportionable, lest it run out. Thus, in all Observance, I
Rest,

Your Ladyships humble Servant WILLIAM HARVEY.

DIVINE MEDITATIONS.
First Meditation upon Eve.
THIS was the Mother of us all, the Common Womb of the World. Here man had his
first rise, and descent. And, as Rivers come from the Sea; So all have their
Breath from her. But, O my heart! As Jepthah brake out with Sorrow, and
Reluctance, when his Daughter came out to meet him; So must we needs Say
Judges, xi. 35.
Aliss, our Mother! thou have brought us very low, and thou art one of them,
that troublest us. Hinc illae lacrbymae! This is the cause of my Woe, and makes
my tears trickle down, like a Shower of Rain. Thou wast the cause of our life:
true, we must acknowledge it; But withal, through thy Fall, the whole World
fell with thee. O the Sad Catastrophe! Into what a Sea of miseries did thou
plunge thy Progeny! Now nothing, but wringing of hands. In Matt. ii. 18.
Rama was there a voice heard, lamentation, and weeping, and great mourning;
Rachel weeping for her Children, and would not be Comforted, because they were
not. Upon this thy lapse it had been better for us, we had never been born,
never seen the Sun, that glorious Lamp of Heaven. An Ugly Yoad, or fell Dragon
is in a happier condition. All Sensitive, and Vegetative Creatures far
transcend the Rational. The eating of one Apple shook the Universe; and made
the Stars fall from heaven. By thee we lost Paradise, not a Terrestrial only,
but a Cel^stial. -- But this is not all: the one half of our miseries is not
told us. Our wretchedness, and infelicitie 1 King x. 7.
exceed the fame, that ye have heard. -- How my Soul trembles! My Thoughts
trouble me, the joints of my Loins are loosed, and my Knees for fear smite one
against another. Belshazzar's sad Catastrophe is ours.

Through thee, we lost not heaven Poena Damni.
alone, enough to cause a Nabal's heart to dye within him, and become like a
Stone; but likewise gained that of Poena Sensus.
Sense. Isaiah! xxx. 33.
A Tophet, a Yelling, and Confused Pit made deep, and large; the Pile whereof
is Fire, and much Wood; and the Breath of the Lord, like a Stream of Brimston,
does Kindle it. The prayer of Saint Augustine shall be ever mine. Here (O Lord)
bu^ me to ashes, cut my body to pieces, that thou may save me for the
future. O, let my Soul live with Thee, and no matter, though I suffer in this
world a thousand exquisite deaths.

Job. xxxviii. 2.
But who is this, that darkens Counsel without Knowledge? Chap. xl. 5.
Once have I spoken, but I will not answer; yea twice but, I will proceed no
further. How is wretched man Quantum multatus ab illo!
altered! What a glorious change upon the Sudden! The heavens Smile upon us,
all is Serene, and clear. No dire Eclipse, or dark Cloud, to obscure our Sun.
Man, reassume thy Courage; Wipe of the Tears from thy Cheeks; behold, a
harmeless Dove comes to thee with an Olive branch in her mouth, and the Waters
are abated. O golden Sentence! Genesis iii. 15.
The Seed of the Woman shall break the Serpent's head. No Honey, or Honeycomb
so Sweet. I am even Ravished with the Contemplation, and as it were rapt into
the third Heaven. Now Satan do thy worst, thy Venom is spit. Psalm. cxlvi. 1, 2.
Praise, ye the Lord: Praise the Lord, O my Soul! While I live, will I praise
the Lord! I will Sing praises unto my God, while I have any being. -- Eve, thou
have now given us Heaped measure, pressed down, and running over. A full
Compensation have thou made us. Thy, and our God, has caused thee to be
Instrumental in our Restoration. By Faith in that promised Messiah to come,
art thou Saved; and we by Faith in him, as Come already, dead, buried, risen,
and ascended into heaven. -- In thy State of Innocence thou had free will,
but subject to temptation. Yet thy Fault was freely perpetrated, and not
committed by Coaction. Thou had power from above to Stand; thank thy Self for
thy fall. Thy destruction is of thy self, O Israel! Sweet Father, whom thou
love now, thou love ever. We may fall into Sin, and fall again; but not
finally, nor totally. Thy Promises in Christ Jesus are without Repentance: like
the Law of the Medes, and Persians, they alter not. Heaven and Earth shall pass
away, but Thy word shall not fail.

O Lord, Support us with thy Grace, and Sweet Influences of thy blessed Spirit;
that we fall into no Sin. If thou forstake us, we perish. Let him, that
thinks he stands, take heed, lest he fall. Father, Cloth us with Humility,
as with a Garment, and make us Sensible of the heavy Weight of our Sins. As
weary, and heavy-laden, let us make to him, who took our Transgressions upon
him, that knew no Sin, that we may have Rest, even the forgiveness of all our
Sins, lest they sink us into irrecoverable Perdition. O Jesu, sis mihi Jesus.
Amen.

2. Meditation upon Sarah.
THis may be the World's Mistress, or the Females Tutouress, to learn her Sex
Obedience. She knew well, that Man was not made for the Woman; but the
contrary: and therefore tends the end of her Creation. She scorns to stand in
Competition with her Husband; but nulls a paritie, and calls him Lord.

A Scanctified Woman is a rare Creature; having more Luster in her, then any
twinkling Star. How calm the Sea is, when there is no wind stirring! Her house
is as Silent, as the night. There is no Pro and Con; for no sooner said, but
done. Happy that Man in the fruition of such a Wife. He is Prove. xxxi, 23.
known in the Gates, when he sits among the Elders of the Lord. No Harmony
like to Still-Musick. The Man eats, drinks, and sleeps in quiet. No
disturbance, where there is such a Consort; for his days are prolonged; he dies
in peace, and is gathered to his Fathers in a good old age. Here Is an help meet
for him; because in two distinct Bodies there is but one Soul. O, what
Contentment is there, where there is such an accord! In such a well-tuned
Instrument there can be no flaw; but every Touch enchanteth the ear, and
attracts attention.

To you then, whose Lot is fallen into so fair a ground; Be not you Imperial,
and unnatural. Prove not unkind to a Spouse so lovely, who has made you all,
as so many Pompeys, and Caesar's. Return love for love, and grieve not,
causeless, so harmless a Creature. Suffer not a Tear to sully so Sweet a Face;
but tender her contentment, as the Apple of your Eye. Who, in his right Wits,
would injure such a Bedfellow? Compare Light and Darkness, Heaven and Hell,
with a perverse woman to Such a Wife: and what a vast disproportion! If ever
there was a Paradise on Earth, it is here. Except the Fear of God, and the Joys
of Heaven alone, to such a woman there is no compare. Let no Churlish Nabal
ever kiss her Lips; much less crop the flower of her Youth. A Wight, so rarely
accomplished, let no rude hand attempt once to touch.

3. Meditation upon Rebekah.
MOdest, and faithful Rebekah, thou come next to hand, a Daughter well
becoming such a Mother. Thou shamest not thy kind; for thou enjoyest her
virtues. Thou, Chaste Penelope! How many may blush to read thee! The unplucked
Rose, and Lilly, not more pure. No Snow in Salmon whiter. Thou wast as
innocent, as a newborn Babe; true, as the Turtle-done to her Mate; and, though
married, ever a Virgin. Like Joseph, thou were of Canonproof, and no assault
could once Seal thy Walls. As a well-disciplined Army, none could break thy
Ranks; but always thou put the Enemy to a rout. -- O thou one of a
thousand! unparalleled, incomparable woman! What Bays sufficient to Crown thy
Temples? Thy memory is Sweet, and Lovely: and thy chost fellows praise thee.
How an I transported with thee? My Genius promp me: and yet, alas! my Pen
falls short of her encomiums. --

Look into this Prospective, you weaker vessels, behold a lively pattern for
your imitation. Cast your eyes upon this Sampler, and write after this fair
Copy. Your Bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost, defile them not then. No
unclean thing can enter heaven. Shake off your Paramours, if you love your
Souls, and be faithful to your married beds. Wrong not your Husbands, your own
flesh, your precious Souls. It will be bitterness in the later end, believe me.
God is pure, and hates all uncleanness. Cast not away that better part, which
is capable of Immortality. Your pleasures are but momentary, which, so soon, as
enjoyed, vanish.

4. Meditations upon Abigail.
WIse Abigail, thou art now my Subject, pity, a Fool should have been thy
Husband; for Nabal was his name, and folly was with him. He was a Churl too,
that, had thou not been wise, one house had been too little for both. A
Crooked piece of Timber sometime is in a fair Building, and a perverse man my
have a complete woman; else the whole Fabric would fall. -- This is none of
the meanest blessings, had a man but eyes to see it. Setting the Grace of God
aside, and the ornaments of the Soul, a virtuous woman has no Peer. -- See how
this fair Water quenches the violence of Fire. David is resolved to cut off
root, and branch, all that appertained to Nabal. Like Jehu he marches
Furiously, intent upon Revenge, for the unmanly affront of that Fool. She
presently goes forth to encounter him, a weak woman with a man of war. Hear her
Rhetoric. 1 Samuel xxv. 24, and so along, etc.
Upon me, my LORD, upon me let this Iniquity be, and let thine Handmaid, I pray
thee, speak in thine audience, and hear the words of thine Handmaid, etc. Not a
word, but has its weight, and Emphasis, Good God, how immense is thy wisdom,
when a poor woman is so rare! Needs must thou, our Creator, be wise, when a
Silly Creature is so accomplished. This Wisdom was that wisdom, which was
from above, pure, peaceable, gentle, easie-to-be-intreated, etc. James iii. 17.
Like the holy cyl, with which the vessels of the Sanctuary were anointed, it
had the best Ingredients. Here was no Machiavellian Policy, or Cromwellian.
Stand off, ye Sons of Belial, you brats of a perverse woman. Her Tongue was
touched with a coal form the Altar: theirs set on fire of h^ll, earthly,
Sensual, Devilish. The S^n now makes for the Cloak. She attempts it, and
effects it. As a sudden dam reared up, she turns the Torrent another way. A
blessed Success! See, how low are the waters now? Jordan is driven back: and
that face, which was once Terrible, now Smiles. Not one drop of blood spilt.
The big Mountain is delivered of a mouse. What Instrument so mean, but succeeds
through divine assistance. Abigail, thou plaiedst thy part well, and wentest of
the Stage with a Plaudit. Thou were not unrewarded neither, for thy Share was
much; the Corydon dies, and in his room stepps up a Prophet, and a King.

5. Meditations upon Naomi, and Ruth.
HEre are a pair of Virtues; they go hand in hand, and one God serves them
both. Ruth, happy for thee, thou met test with such a Mother; and Naomi, no
less happy were thou, in having such a Daughter. Call thy Self no more Mara;
for thy Daughter-in-law, which loved thee, was beloved of God. How wonderful
are thy ways, O Lord, How unspeakeable thy Goodness! God is no respecter of
persons; but whom he will save shall be saved, whosoever says Nay. No reason
can be shown Stat pro ratione voluntas.
for it, but this, It is his will, his pleasure. Thus the Apostle concludes. So
them, it is not of him, that wills, nor of him, that runs; but of God,
that shows mercy. Romans ix. 16.

How Attractive is Heaven! How does Grace add wings, where there were leaden
heels before! How greedily does she now Swallow that, which once her Stomach
loathed. For a Moabite to become an Israelite; an Idolater, a true worshipper
of God; a Devil, a Saint; and that upon the sudden, is a strange
Metamorphosis. All the Blocks in her way she removes. Neither her Country,
people, her Sister-in-law, who returned back, nor her Gods can stay her
progress. The place she went to, she knew not, all were Strangers to her;
besides this, she was in a wanting Condition: yet none of these can stop her.
Ruth. i. 16.
For whither thou go, I will go; and where thou lodgest, I will lodge; thy
people shall be my people, and thy God, my God. No relation can obstruct those,
whom God means to call. Now they arrive at Bethlehem, yet poor, and indigent.
-- Faith gives us no Charter to exempt us from poverty. This Lot often falls
upon God's dearest children. Affliction commonly is their Coviator, their
fellow-traveller, and companion. Yet, in this low Ebb, they were not dejected;
nor forsaken of God. The Young woman gleans in the field of Boaz, and God gives
her favor in his Sight, under whose Wings of providence she came to Shroud.
Never any, that trusted in him, was confounded. Will God shake them off, that
cling unto him? Can a natural Mother see her Child cry after her, and her
Bowels not yearn upon it? Much less, will God turn his back upon those, who
make such haste after him. But see how the goodness of the Lord dogs her, and
follows her step by step. Ruth iii.
My daughter, shall I not seek rest for thee, that it may be well with thee?
Here Is no love lost (as we use to say) a full Compensation is made, and an
ample retribution. Mark this, you unnatural women, and dye your Cheeks into a
blush. Hang down your heads, for shame, you degenerate Mothers, you Masculine
Creatures, and Stony Niobes. The ostrich lays her Eggs, and then leaves them to
the mercy of the Traveller; So, many procreate Children, and leave them at Six,
and Sevens, to Sink, or Swim, all is one to them. Is this Religion? Is this all
the fruits of their Profession? The savage Bears are more natural; for they
lick their young into a form, and are indulgent to them. One would not think so
sweet a Creature was so Cruel. But it is no News, Latet anguis sub Herba.
for a Snake often to ly under the Smooth Grass; and for Sodom's Golden Apples
to vanish into Smoke.

To proceed, Ruth obeys her Mother, comes softly to Boaz, uncovers his feet,
and lays her down by him. The man awakes, and is afraid Ruth iii. 9.
I am Ruth thine handmaid (says she) Spread therefore the Skirt over thine
Handmaid; for thou art a near Kinsman. She ventures hard, and puts to Sea;
but, God giving her a favorable wind, makes a good voyage, returns to Naomi
Richly-laden, with a promise from Boaz, to perform the part of a kinsman to
her. -- Take the Result of all. The Marriage is Solemnized with Acclamations of
Joy; a general Consent, and Content, and she, who, of late, gleaned a few ears
after the Reapers, is now Mistress of the whole field. -- Religion, and Modesty
is a fair Portion; and weighs more with Wise men, then either Wealth, or
Beauty. Genesis xiv. 21.
Give me the Persons, and take the goods to thy Self, said the King of Sodom to
Abraham So, for My part, give me the Woman, and let who will, take the Portion,
and proportion to himself. Though, I confess, when all concur in one, these
Simples make an excellent Compound. Yet, put Virtue into one Scale, and the
rest in the other; it weighes them all down to nothing. -- Naomi, thy Daughter
now is better to thee, then Seven Sons; for she is thy Support in thine
old age. As choice Spirits of Life, she strengthens thy feeble knees. Goodwas
it for thee to be afflicted; for thou must now confess, with that Sweet Singer
of Israel, thy Rod, and thy Staff comfort me. To Conclude, their Lives were
Tragic mical, a Medly, a Composition of Sour and Sweet. Yet, though their day
was somewhat dark and gloomy, the going-down of their Sun was clear.

Meditations upon the Shunammite.
CHarity, I seldom meet with thee, and therefore we must not part so.
Greatness, and Goodn^ss to meet in one, is a glorious fight. To do good to all
is our Duty; but especially to the household of Faith. The Object adds Luster
to it, and Crowns it. This Woman has scarce her fellow: which puts me in mind
of that Maxim in Philosophy, Null simile est idem.
No like is the same. Let us come to particulars. -- And it fell on a day, that
Elisha passed to Shunem, where was a Great Woman, and she comp^lled him to eat
bread. I must stop at this middle point. Compelled him, said I? Is there such
an one living? It Is a rare Bird upon Earth then, somewhat like a black Swan.
It Is well now adays, if Importunity gets any thing. Were the Prophet living
now, he would hardly find the like entertainment. He might implore the Charity
of some Females, who are called Christans too, (but Ironice) until his heart
aked, and with them 1 King. xviii. 26, 27.
Cry aloud from Morning till Noon, and from Noon till Night, and yet have no
voice, nor any to answer, nor any, that regarded. The Prophets fare worse, then
any, in our late Times of Reformation, or rather Deformation, they, with the
weakest, ever went to the Wall, unless some confiding Boys, with their Shel^
upon them, who should have gone to Jericho till their Beards had grown; Or Such
old Peny-Fathers, those excellent Tex^uaries, and Boanerges, who could baul
loudest Curse ye Meroz. These indeed were fed at Jezebel's Talbe. No Muzzel-man
among the Turks in higher esteem. The poor Elishas, as if they had the Curse of
Elie's Posterity, were fain to crouch for a piece of Silver, and a Morsel of
Bread. So sad was their Condition, and so deplorable. -- But my Shunammite,
thou Sanctified Woman, and Glory of thy Sex; thou had a better Spirit, to the
Shame of future Ages, and to kindle an holy zeal of Emulation in nobler Souls.

Yet this is but positive all the while; She ascends a degree higher. And so it
was, as often as he passed by, he turned in thither to eat bread. -- She was not
weary of welldoing; but, like the Sun, rejoyed to Run her course. She was none
of those, that give a bit, and a knock: and she Scorned to return that Common,
and penurious Objection, You were here once before. Grace is Communicative,
and, like the Widon's Oil, never stops so long, as there is a vessel more to
receive it. Perseverance in Goodness makes a Christian complete. You did run
well, who did hinder you; Gal. v. 7. Many for a Spirt run Swiftly, their
Setting cut is Violent, but that is not perpetual, like Jades, they are soon
tired, the Chariot-wheels of their Devotion are taken off, that, at last, they
drive heavily, One jeeringly said to Hannibal; Hannibal, Vincere scis,
Hannibal, uti Victoria nescis.
to get the Victory thou know full well,
But after how to use't, thou can not tell.


To begin in the Spirit, and to end in the Flesh, is to no purpose; we lose
both our Oil, and Toil. Not to go forward is to go backward. The Exit proves
all our actions, and Crowns the Play -- To make her Superlative, and I have
done.

Let us make a little Chamber, I pray thee, on the Wall, and let us set for him
there a Bed, and a Table, and a Stool, and a Candle-stick: and it shall be,
when he comes to us, that he shall turn in thither. I should scarce have given
Credit to it, had it not been Recorded in Sacred Writ. And I awake yet, or in a
dream? I can but admire yet at this Arabian Bird, when I compare her with the
Scornful Dames of this Age. A Dancing Master, or a Fiddler, has free Ingress,
Egress, and Regress, when the poor man of God must stand without, and blow his
fingers; for he has no pottage to cool. Out come the servants, this Gill, and
that Flurt, Cerberus the Porter, whose Fathers they would sometime have scorned
to set with the dogs of their stock, (as holy Job once said in his agony, Job.
xxx. I.) and they look on them as sour as a Carb. The Prophets have not a word
to say being first seen by the Basilisks, and stand dumb as Planet-struck.
Democritus Juniour saw how it was with the Ministers in his time, when he brake
out in these words: Dat Galenus Burton in his Preface before his Melancholy.
opes, dat Justinianus honores;
Sed Genus and Species Cogiturire pedes.
The rich Physician, honored Lawyer Rides,
Whilst the poor Scholar foots it by their Sides.


But for the Scum of the World, the Riff-raff, every base Mechanic and
Trencher-waiter, to affront, and scorn the Ambassadors of the most High, is a
Sin transcendent, a Shame to Religion, and an hissing to the whole earth. --
Pardon me, you more Noble Wights, and forgive me this wrong. Some of you have
taken in the poor wandering Levite, and, with Obadiah, have fed the Lord's
Prophets with Bread and Water. Samaritan like, you have poured oil into the
deep wounds of many, that have been half-dead in misery, ready to breath out
their last. You have given drink unto them, that were ready to perish, and wine
unto those, that were of heavy hearts, that they might drink, and forget their
poverty; and remember their misery no more. Prove. xxxi. 6, 7. This you did, to
your Perpetual praise, and let his Right Hand forget his Cunning, that proves
ingrate. Here was some Intermission of Sorrow, a time of breathing, had not
that wild goard marred the pottage, that they could eat no more of it. Let them
ever be an hissing, a byword, and a Proverb to all after-ages, that were the
first breakers of this peace, who Resolved upon the Question, That no suffering
Minister, in the cause of God, and his King, should have House, or Home, or
where to lay his head. -- You Pretenders of Reformation, you wicked Hamans, and
Sons of Ammeda^ha, you Cannibals, and blood-sucking Horse-leaches: the pit,
which ye have dug for others, you may chance fall into your selves. Look to
in, for as sure, as the Lord lives, the same measure will be measured to you
again, if you repent not. There is a God, that sits in heaven, shall laugh you
to Scorn, and have you in derision. But this by way of digression. To our
subject. God, who will not let a Cup of Cold water pass unrewarded, returns a
blessing equivalent. For her charity, he fructifies her womb, and gives her a
Son. Never was Bread yet cast upon the waters, but in due time it was found
again. He, that gives to the poor, lends unto the Lord, and he will repay
it. The Sea supplies all Rivers, and yet is full; the Sun affords Light, and
Heat to all Sublunaries without Substraction; One Candle lights many, and no
diminution: So Charity, (though thought prodigal) is a full Sea, a transparent
Sur, and a Candle notextinguish'd.

Meditaion on Bath-sheba.
FAir Venus had a Mole, the Sun sometime is Eclipsed, the Moon in her Wane, and
thou, Bath-sheba (though otherwise virtuous) had thy failings. I would
willingly go backward, and cover thy nakedness, should I not be thought
partial. Yet I will not blaze thee to thy shame, but, as a Mercurie's finger,
set thee up, to direct all Travailers the right way. Thou did wash thy self;
so thou might, who should hinder thee? But herein thou erredst; it was too
public, thou were visible, the King saw thee, and thy Beauty charmed him. My
Construction of thee shall be Candid. I believe thou did it not to that
intent, to blow that fire, which was apt enough to kindle of it self, neither
did thou imagine thy Sovereign a spectatour. But thou might have been more
private, and this mischief has not happened. -- Of all the Senses, the Eye is
most affective, and what Poison penetrates the Heart, is let in at that Window.
No object more attractive, then Beauty; for, be the Metal never so hard, this
Lodestone will draw it. Nothing has been able to divert the Current of this
stream. What Remora can put a stop to such a Vessel in its Carrier? Samson
could slay a thousand Men with the Jaw Bone of an Ass, and yet one Delilah
makes an Ass of him, puts out both his Eyes, so that he grinds at the Mill and
becomes ridiculons to the uncircumcised Philistines. When that Wretch Balaam
could no way curse the people of God, he puts this Stumbling Block before them,
and they presently fall. This She-Divel puts them more to a rout, then an host
of armed men. Solomon was Wise, yet in his old Age becomes a Child again, his
wife draws his heart from the living Lord, and he falls down to an Idol. One
wanton Helen, in ten years Wars, caused a slaughter of more, then a Million of
Men. What should I say more? The Triumphs, and Victories, obtained by this
thing called Woman, no Tongue is able to express. This Wish of Valerius Maximus
to his Friend shall be mine. -- The Omnipotent God deliver thee from an
Omnipotent Woman. -- But let us not do Bathsheba too much wrong neither. She did
not prostitute her self, as a Mercenary Strumpet. No; she was strongly Courted,
and Imporiuned, and that by a King. Which Circumstances lessen her Fault, and
extenuate her sin. -- She was no Shutile-Cock, or Tennis-ball, to be tossed,
and banded by every Gamester; but like a Royal fort won by storm. Who can wash
their hands in innocence? They, that are without sin, let them throw the first
stone. Good God! what are we without thy supporting hand, without assisting
Grace? If thou forsakest us, we fall. Vae ettam laudibili vitae hominum; Si,
remota misericordia, discutias ea^. Aug.
Miserable were that Conversation, though never so pure, if thou should
examine it without a Compassionate Ey. Much Dross would be found in the finest
Gold, when it comes to the fire. What is a blinking Candle to the Sun? How
deformed, and foul would an Ethiopian seem, compared with an exquisite beauty?
The very Angels are not pure in his Sight. Strike we then our Topsails, and
let us vailour Bonnets, Down with your Tails, you Birds of Juno, and proud
Peacocks; cast your Crowns before his Throne, fall down before him, and worship
him, that sits on it, who lives forever, and ever. -- Let me give this Caveat
only to either Sex; and I have done. -- And first, to you, the weaker. Cloth
your selves with Modesty, as with a Garment; Shun all occasions of Sin, admit
not any Lascivious embrace; frown upon all Complements, that tend to dishonor;
and, Basilisk like, strike them dumb with looks. Who dare speak obscenely to a
Chaste Ear, or lay Rude hands on a resolved Spirit? A Castle, which stands out a
Storm, or two, wearies the Enemy, and makes him raise his Siege. However,
consent not to the motion; but still reply in Negatives. But, if through Divine
permission, they prove too strong for you, it is a Rape, no Conquest. -- A word
unto you of the more worthy Gender. God has given you the Prerogative, you
have the Birthright, lose it not for a Mess of Pottage. Let not one base Lust
deface the Image of your Creator. To be foiled by your inferior is
dishonorable: and for the Foot to rule the Head, is another Antipodes, and no
less, the Monstrous. Let not her, who was given to thee for an Help, be the
occasion of thy fall; lest thou be like one of those Simple ones, a man void of
understanding, that goes as an Ox to to the Slaughter, or as a Fool to the
Correction of the Stocks; Prove. vii. 7, 22. Yet in this thou art only Passive,
and that is enough too; for her house is the way to Hell, going down to the
Chambers of death; verse 27. But to importune, aggravates thy fault. And now,
thou man after God's own heart, thou were more in the Transgression, then
Bath-sheba, deeper in the mire, then she. Thou were her Sovereign, and
should have been rather to her a Shelter from the Storm, an Haven of repose,
and a refuge in time of need. What Is a Trembling Partridge in the gripes of a
towering Falcon? Sweet God! how soon may we lapse, when thy choicest Saints have
fallen? If any be guilty this way, with Amnon, hate the Sin seven times more,
then e're you loved it, turn that Tamar out, and bar the door after her.

Meditations upon the Virgin Mary.
EVE, thou were not so bitter to us, but here is one as Sweet. Thou did eat of
a sour Apple, and thy childrens Teeth were set on edge. Through thee we all
were at a loss, in a winding maze, and labyrinth of Sorrow, not knowing which
way to get out. Thou did drive us both from a Terrestrial and Celestial
Paradise. But Mary, like to Ahimaaz, has outrun thee, and brought us good
tidings, even of great joy to all people. She was delivered of a son, whose
name is Jesus, who shall save his people from their sins. O the height, and
depth, the length, and breadth of God his goodness toward mankind! Those, that
sat in darkness, and in the Shadow of death, have seen a mavelous Light. Now
the slaves are taken from the Galleys, and all the Prisoners set free. We are
now out of Egypt, that House of Bondage, and journeying through a vast
Wilderness, to the Heavenly Canaan, which flows with Milk, and Honey. Blessed
art thou, fair Maiden, among Women; for, no sooner was the Voice sounded in our
Eart, but our Hearts; leaped in the womb of our Bodies for joy. Our year of
Jubilee is come: and not the Jews only, but the Gentiles have light, and
gladness, and joy, and honor; yea joy, and gladness, a Feast and a good day.
Hester. viii. 16, 17. But not to Hyperbolize too much, lest I rob God of his
honor, I will acquiess. Thou were greatly beloved, and now a Glorious Saint in
heaven; for God has regarded the lowliness of his Hand-maiden, and, behold!
from hence forth all Generations shall call thee Blessed. For he, that is
Mighty, has done to thee great things, and Holy is his Name. Yet we will not
free thee from Original Sin (as some dream) make an exception, when the Rule is
general without any. Had thou not born Christ in thy heart by faith, as well
as in thy Womb, and brought him forth in a Sanctified life, as thou did into
the world, thou had but shook the Tree, beat the Bush, or started a Hare,
produced a Savior to thy Fellows, and been a Castaway thy self. But thou
shakest off those Vermin at once, put to Nonplus thy base Parasites, and
Clawbacks, as if they were Planet-struck. My Soul does magnify the Lord, and
my Spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior. What Spirit then was he of, that
belched this Blasphemy. Hear it, and let both Ears ringle -- Mary is the
Mediatrix of our Salvation, of our Conjunction, Justification, Reconciliation,
Intercession, and Communication. How does this agree with her own Magnificate?
But why should I foul my hands with such dirt, and rubbish? -- Learn humility
from the Mother of our Lord; even from her, who was highly favored, and be not
conceited of your own worthey, she-Saints. God sees no sin in you, as you would
make us believe, and therefore are above Ordinances. The Preaching of the Word,
and Administration of the Sacraments according to Divine institution, concerns
you not; for you are Babes of Grace, and by your second Baptism, contrary to
Scripture, and the Practice of the Primitive Church, your sins are washed off.
This is the Tale you tell us; though, with the Sow, that was washed, you are
turned again to your Wallowing in the Mire; 2 Pet. ii. 22. Never had the Devil
such an Harvest since the world was, as in these late Times of Reformation: and
who would think it? Any with half aney might well see, what sad effects that
thing, called Liberty of Conscience, would produce.

Meditations upon Miriam.
I Have met now with a Prophetess, and a Virgin both; one, that was Sister to a
Prince, and Priest. But this did not so much Enn^ble her, as her Virtues; for
her chiefest Ornaments were the Graces of her Soul, and the more precious
Jewels were enclosed in that Cabinet. How bravely did thou lead thy women in
their dance before the Lord? With what grace did thou foot it? Every step
sounded forth the praises of the most High. Thy Song was gracious, and, like
thy Spirit, it returns to him, that gave it. The subject of it was praises, and
their Object the Lord. Like the Smoke of Incense, they ascend upwards; and, as
a most sweet Perfume, disperse a redolent smell throughout the Camp. Surely,
this was no other, then the house of God, and this was the Gate of Heaven. Hear
the burden of her song, and let it ravish your hearts, and draw them to divine
contemplation. Notone syllable, but Emphatical. Exodus xv. 21.
Sing unto the Lord, for he has triumphed gloriously: the horse, and his Rider
has he thrown into the Sea. -- Most Angelical! when the matter of our
exaltation intends only the glory of God, when the stream of our affections
run that way. Incomparable is that Harmony, when every string speaks an
Hallelujah: and that voice Seraphical, which warbles forth such Musical Airs to
the piercing of the Clouds. O my Soul how divine are thy raptures, into what
ecstasy of joy art thou swallowed! May thou, with Noah's Dove, find no rest
for the sole of thy foot, till thou return to this Ark. Let that Mariner suffer
Shipwreck, which will not make to this Port; and those Rivers before ever dried
up whose reflux tends not to that Sea, where they have their flux, and
overflowings. -- Lift up thy self then, thou Worldling, and let not thy
thoughts, with Staan, compass the Earth to, and fro, and walk up and down in
it. Thou Dor, end not thy flight ever upon a dunghill. Prove not thy self
unnatural.

Os homini sublime dedit, celumquoe tueri Jussit. Ovid.
To man an erect Front, and Face, is given;
That he might Soar aloft, and look toward heaven.
Seek those things, which are above, where Christ sits on the right hand of
God; says the Apostle: he, that was wrapped into the third heaven; Coloss. 3.1.
-- The Birds of the Air, the mute Fishes of the Sea, and brute Beasts will
instruct thee. They all move in their proper Sphere. Philosophy will tell thee,
that ponderous things tend downward, and light the contrary. Throw but a Stone
in the Air, and how it will have to its proper Center? Take a Fish out of the
water, and it will gasp for Breath. Shall all Creatures both Sensitive,
Vegetative, the insectile too, the poor silly Fly, praise the Lord in their
kind and is the Prince of all, Man alone, defective? Shall he so basely
degenerate? The Poet will clear the Point.

Populus me sibilat, Horat.

Plaudo ipse domi, et nummos contemplar in area. --
The people hiss at me, they laugh, and at me wink,
At home I praise my self, and count my Chink.
With the blind Mole, the wretch is ever under ground, and casting up always
Earth above him. As a Pioner he, and as another Nero, he rips the womb of his
mother. Like green and liquid fuel, he quenches that fire, which should kindle
his thoughts into an holy Flame, and make them Sparkle, and mount upward to
heaven. -- Though he lives, moves, and has his being from God only: yet he
will not pay one Pepper corn of Thankfullness, in acknowledgment of his Lord,
of whom he holds all, that he injoys, and being but Tenant-at-will, may every
minute be ejected, turned out his bense of Clay, and cast into that Infernal
Prison, from whence he must never expect Redemption, till he has paid the
uttermost mite. --

Meditations upon Hannah.
Here Is a steril Woman, but not Barren: for she is big with Grace, and bare in
her Soul those lovely Twins of Faith, and Supplication. She was not impatient
with Rachel; Give me Childen, or else I dye: but humbly addresses her self to
him, who has the Key of the womb, and who alone withheld the fruit of it. She,
in the bitterness of her Soul, prays to the Lord: yet her Lips move only, to
prevent all sinister acceptions. She was not longwinded hypocritical Pharisee.
No Enthusiast, or gifted sister, those pretenders of Sanctity, who have a name
that they live, but are Revel iii. I.
dead. Neither was it out of too much fondness, or indulgency, to dandle a
puppet on her knee, which is the fault of many mothers, neglecting, the mean
while, the main business, it is breeding and Religious education: but vows, and
performs it too, to give him unto the Lord all the days of his life. I cannot
but admire her Piety, and deservedly say of her, as they sometime of Judith;
There is not such a Woman in the Earth. She has now a Son, and she brings him
to Eli, and the Child ministers unto the Lord before the Priest. Our Women, for
the major part, run into extremes, either they are too cruel, or too mild. The
mean in which virtue consists, that arrow flies beyond them. Some are rather
Step-dames, then natural Mothers. Others again, with the Ape, kill their young
with embracing. This, of the two, is more Common with the feminine gender.
Their beloved Adonijahs they will not displease at any hand, or once say, Why
have you done so; 1 Kings. i. 6. They give them the Rains, and care not, though
they run to the Devil. Hawking, Hunting, and so forth, are the Arms they bear,
that you may know from what house they come. Needs must that Garden be
overgrown with weeds, when it is no better looked too. Nature without Art, or
Science, is blind. We are not born religious, but are made so through grace,
and virtuous education. This makes us alone differ from Brutes, and gives the
distinction. Take a Colt unbroken, and who can back him? So, without
discipline, and goot nurturing of youth, they become unserviceable in Church,
and State, and have no more Savor in them, then there is in the white of an
egg. Yet this is the height of many women's ambition, if they can but leave
their Brats a fair revenue, to be honored in the World, it is all they look
for; let their Souls Sink, or Swim, be Saved, or Damned. O Salvage Mothers!
What answer will you one day give at God's Tribunal-Seat for your neglect? Your
Children shall dye in their iniquity: but their blood will be required a your
hand. They, whom you so dearly loved, or rather hated; will be bound to Curse
you, and with horror break -- Let the day perish, wherein we were born, and
the night, wherein it was said, that a Man-child is conceived! Why dyed we not
from the Womb? why did we not give up the Ghost, when we came out of the Belly?
Why did the knees prevent us, or why the breasts, that we should suck? Job.
iii. 3, 11, 22. See, see to it in time, and be not the mean of their eternal
death, to whom you once gave a temporal life. -- But, to proceed, Being young,
she devotes him to the Lord's service. Samuel ministers before the Lord, being
a Child girded with a linen Ephod. Sam. ii. 18. -- She thought no Master so
worthy of him, as God, nor any Service comparable to Divine. A Star seems
small, and contemptible in the eyes of many, though it be great, and honorable
in the Thoughts, and Acceptions of the Almighty. The Ministry is of so mean
Esteem with some, that, with Jeroboam, they think the lowest of the people are
good enough to serve that Turn. The younger Brother must be the Parson; when the
H^ir looks a squint at it, as a thing far beneath him, a descension too base,
and derogative to his Birth. Tender eyes water at the Sun; and none, but
Aesop's Dunghill. Cock, will prefer a Barly-Corn before a Jewel. But, Be in
known unto all Men by these presents, whosoever thou art, and how high soever
thou look; Thou honor not the Calling, but the Calling thee. What
greater Honor, then to be Fishers of m^n? To be instrumental in the saving of
one Soul, and rescuing it out of the Power of Satan, that Apollyon, and
D^stroyer, is more glorious, then to Conquer the whole World. I will end with
that of King Charles the First of Blessed Memory. -- EIKON ASILIK, upon the
denying his Majesty the Attendance of His Chaplains.
Indeed, I think, both Offices, Regal, and Sacerdotal, might well become the
same Person, as anciently they were under one Name, and the united Rights of
Primogeniture. Nor could I follow better Presidents, if I were able; then those
two eminent Kings, David, and Solomon; Not more famous for their Crowns, and
Scepters, then one was for devout Psalms, and Prayers; the other for his divine
Parables: Whence the one assumed the Name of a Prophet, and the other of a
Preacher. Titles indeed of greater Honor, if rightly placed; then any of those
the Roman Emperors affected, from the Nations they subdued: it being
infinitely more glorious to convert Souls to God's Church by the World; then to
conquer men to a Subjection by the Sword.

Meditations upon Phinehas.
Here Is matter both of Joy, and Sorrow. Tidings came to this gravid Woman, and
near Her Time; that the Ark of God was taken; and that her Husband, and
Father-in-Law were dead. -- Heavy, disconsolate News, sufficient to dissolve
into Tears an heart of Flint, to break a Triangle of Stone. And, indeed, I can
scarce refrain my Self in the penning so Sad a Story. Her Soul, no question,
was vexed within her, and, with Rebekah, in the Womb of it She had much
Struggling. Yet at last the Oil swims at the Top, the deepest Wound, which went
nighest her heart, was the loss of the Ark. The G^ory is departed from Israel,
for the Ark of God is taken; 1 Samuel iv. 22. And, this being said, She falls
asleep One would have thought the Birth of her Son might somewhat have assuaged
her Grief, and, as a comfortable Cordial, in part have cured, or, at least,
eased the Distempers of her Spirit. But nothing will do it, like a Vessel
surcharged, she sink^; and, being full of anguish, wanting Vent, bursteth. --
Nothing should go so nigh a Christian, touch them more to the quick, then the
decay of Religion; when they see God's Service, and his Ordinances, in an
Eclipse; or, as this Good Woman, the Ark even violently taken from them, by
rude, and uncircumcised Hands. I remember that Passage of Camelia, the Mother
of the Gracchi; when a Matron of Campania came to visit her, and desired to
have a Sight of her Jewels; She, waving it, held her in discourse, until her
Sons came home: and then, pointing to them, said, Haec sunt Ornamenta mea;
These are my Jewels, my Ornaments. Even so the pure Preaching of the Word, and
the lawful Use of the Sacraments; which are the Marks of a true Church, are, at
least should be, the Ornaments of Christians, and the only distinct Characters
between the true, and false Church. The loss of these should most perplex us,
as things of highest Concernment; being Means appointed of God to the eternal
Welfare, and Salvation of our Souls. This should be the proper Subject of our
Sorrow. To see Religion decay, Charity wax cold, the house of Prayer made a Den
of Thieves, as we have of late. To see Profession a Cloak to palliate men's
Avarice; the Orthodox, able, and faithful Pastors, removed into Corners,
plundered, and sequestered, and many not, as yet, restored; and to see a Company
of ignorant Balaamites, more fit, with the Gibeonites, to divide Wood, rather
then the Word, to pert up, and to poison the people with Errors, Heresies, and
Doctrines of Devils, to the danger of many thousand Souls. This, I say, should
strike a sudden Damp within us, put us into a Cold Sweat, and make us weep into
a Torrent; for the Glory is departed from Israel, the Ark of God is taken. If
this will not cause their Tears; I pray God they be not one day cast into utter
Darkness, where there is weeping, wailing, and gnashing of Teeth for ever.

Amen.
Meditations upon Joseph's Mistress.
THE fair and pleasant weather is at a Period, and the cold and deep Winter
approaches. The ways now are dirty, no walking abroad; only let us look out,
and see how foul the road is, in comparison of what it was. Here is one of
Nilus Breed, a Woman-Crocodile, one, whose Tears, and actions were not only
feigned, but mischievous. See how impudently, and shamelesly she courts him.
And she said, Ly with me; Genesis xxxix. 7. By this Imperative voice, like another
Herricano, she thought to blow up the chaste youth with a Gust, and frame him to
her Will. The first Onset having a repulse, she thought to weary him through
importunity, wherefore she solicits him day by day to condescend; Verse 10. but
the powder will not take, and therefore she goes another way to work, and try,
if opportunity will do it. But, alone together, and none of the men within, she
caught him by his garment, saying, Ly with me; Verse 12. Yet, for all this
Fire, the Tinder will not burn, Joseph is impregnable, and, being armor of
Proof, no bullet can pierce him. Now hear, and wonder, when all her strings
break, she cries Whore first, and basely pretends a Rope offered her. The
Hebrew Servant, which thou have brought unto us, came in unto me to mock me;
Verse 17. O the wickedness of an imperious, whorish woman! Who would think so
fair a face had so foul an heart! A Box so externally pol shed should be
replenished with such venom? But no marvel, for a graceless woman to outvy a
Serpent. -- The Whore now is Carted, let every bed und filed throw dirt upon
her; for she is hateful to God, a bane to Youth, injurious to her husband, and
a shame to her Sex. -- And you, Young ones, in your spring, and Fl^wer, look
upon Joseph, the world's mirror, the Chaste, the Virtuous. Can you view this
piece, and not be in love with it? Can you read this, and give your strength to
wowen? Yield not to a Common Prostitute. When this Siren sings, stop your ears,
you run else on a Rock, or Quicksand. Let your part upon the Stage of this
would be Chastity; that you may go off with a Plaudite. Keep your virginity
untouched, so shall you be fit Temples for the Holy Ghost. Christ was laid in
a new Tomb; if you would have his Company, let your Conversation be pure, and
chaste.

Meditations upon Delilah.
HEre is another of the same Form, an excellent proficient in the Black-Art;
one, that Coun'd her Lesson perfectly. She was prettily seen in Rhetoric, for
she could speak well: and a Logician too, being expert in Fallacies. She
prostitutes, and gives Sampson her Body: but not her heart; though she gained
his to his destruction. Sampson was a Nazarite from his Youth, a Type of
Christ, an Enemy, to the Philistines, and a destroyer of their Country by
divine appointment. The Lords plough with his heifer, and promise to give her,
each of them, eleven hundred pieces of silver, to get out of him where his
great strength lay. See how cunningly she carries it: the Gipsey has Honey in
her mouth, but Gall in her heart. Tell me, I pray thee, where thy great
Strength lies; and so, by her importunity, urging him from time to time, that
his Soul was vexed unto death, he tells her all his heart; and he, that with
the Jaw Bone of an Ass slew a thousand men, she makes an Ass of him, puts out
his Eyes, and now he grinds in the Mill, and is become a Fool to the
Vacircumcised. O the mazie, and false heart of an ungracious Woman! No Toad
more replete with poison, then such an unsanctified Creature. A Vicious woman
cancels the bonds of Religion, and Nature. A pure Maremaid Monster, half woman,
half fish; or rather an incarnate Devil: to betray a confiding Lover into the
hands of implacable enemies: That of the Poet with me is Canonical; Believe not
such a woman, though she should breath her last. What act so horrid, that a
Mercenarie Strumpet will not do? All former Familiarity, amorous dalliance,
and mutual embracings, are all buried in Oblivion. Who would trust a Whore;
for, grease her in the fist, and, if she can, she will damn thee. All the Plagues
of Egypt are blessings to this Cannibal. If thou fear God, tenderest the
Peace of thy conscience, and mind'st the Salvation of thy precious Soul; fly
the sight of this Basilisk. -- For Riddles, she is a Lamia; for enchantments, a
Circe; for Cruelty, a Devil. She is so ugly, that no Pen can draw her to the
Life. She is a Sea of Mischiefs, which no Line can sound, and a Remora, that
puts a stop to Virtue in all Vessels, that sail by her. Sampson, of a thousand
Tun Burden, was stayed by it, and so hailed a shore by the Uncircumcised, and
then rifled. What should I say of this Witch? Mount Aetna spits not forth more
Fire, and her Smoke ascends from the bottomless Pit. The wish of Velerius
Maximus to his friend shall be mine to every individual; Det Deus omnipotens,
ut omnipotenti faemina semper libereris: The Omnipotent God deliver thee from
an Omnipotent woman.

Meditations upon Jezebel.
FRom Evil to worse. Here have I met with a precious Saint. One, whose Religion
was a Cloak to cover her Villainy, a Sheep in show, a Fox indeed, a Wolf in
Cruelty. These three may be compared to the three Furies; Alecto, Megaera, and
Tisyphone: but, of all the Degrees, this is Superlative, and falls short of
none, but the Devil, which may seem a Paradox too. It were hard to compose a
Play of her, the Scene being in Hell, and the Stage so Tragical, enough to
fright the Spectatours. But see an Act, or two, and then discede the House with
an Hiss. Ahab, being denied Naboth's Vineyard, more sick in Mind, then Body,
throws himself on the Bed, where, like the troubled Sea, the Waters cast up
mire, and dirt. There Is no Peace, says my God, to the wicked. In this
Distraction comes up the Monntebank, who, to recover him, applies Poison,
making the Cure worse then the Disease. A dear Purchase! when a man exchangeth
his Soul for a Vineyard. But see the Devilishness of this Woman. She writes
Letters in Ahab 's name, and seals them with his Seal, and sends them to the
Elders, and Nobles. Mark the Contents. Proclaim a Fast, and set Naboth on high
among the People, and set two Sons of Belial before him, to bear witness
against him, saying, Thou did blaspheme God, and the King; and then carry him
out, and stone him, that he may dye. 1 Kings. xxi. 9, 10. O incomparable
villainy! impiety in the abstract! A Woman? a Devil rather. Must Religion be a
Bawd to Murder? It must: but it aggravates the Sin, and contracts more guilt
to the Soul. Feigned Sanctity is a double iniquity, and they sin twice, who
do it under a pretense of Holiness. -- This has ever been the Common-road to
all horrid, and black deeds. When we had no King in Israel, and every man did
as seemed best in his own eyes; Religion brought up the rear, and the Scattered
Troops of Hypocrisy rallied, and fought under that Banner. Should the Devil
appear dreadful, he would scare the Witch her self. -- Our pretended
Triennial, and long-winded Parliament (who made this Kingdom another Ach^ldamae
a Field of Blood, and place of dead men's Sculls.) put this vizard on.
Reformation, the glorious name of Reformation was all the Cry. When we were
made worse, then Gally slaves among the Turks, or God's people in Egypt, who
made Brick without Straw, and through intolerable burdens, and impositions,
even weary of our lives: yet the Liberty of the Subject, and Reformation was
pretended. But God, pitying our miseries, looked through the pillar of Fire,
and of the Cloud, on the Host of these Egyptians, and troubled them, he took
off their Chariot-wheels, that they drove heavily, and the Rump (though not
drowned) was Sacrificed in the Fire.

There is not a Sectary, but has Religion for his pretense. Religion hat been
the Commonsewer, through which all Kenels have run; and, like the Physicians
Catholicon, applied to all foul disseases. But a seeming Saint is a real Devil.
Now to our Theme again. She was the first painted woman we read of, not, like
the Picts, to terrify, but to attract. Furious Jehu came to Jezreel. Jezebel
paints her face, and tires her head, and looks out at a window; 2 King. ix. 30.
By this she thought to captivate him, before whom two Kings could not stand.
Her first Complement was, -- Had Zimri peace, who slew his Master? As if she
had been no Homicide, though she murdered Naboth. O the Deadness of a
cauterised Soul! Coul'd she speak this, and yet guilty of innocent Blood?
Truly, Custom in Sin takes from us all since, and feeling of it. No judgment so
fearful, as a benumbed Conscience, when one perpetrates a sin, and never
minds it. The Sea, that is now calm, when a storm comes, will prove turbulent,
and cause it to rage, and foam. Waters, which are stopped, when the Banks give
way, break in with more violence. At one time, or other, thou will say to thy
Conscience, as Ahab to Elijah, Have thou found me out, O mine enemy, have thou
found me? Tuta esse scelera, secura non possunt. Thy sins may, to thy thinking,
be safe; but cannot be secure. Thy Conscience will bark, and bite, and without
Repentance, that worm live to perpetuity. Lake Prometheus his Vulture, it will
continually gnaw thy heart, and add to the measure of thy endless torments. She
paints her Face, and paints her Sin, which nothing can wash off but Tears of
contrition in the blood of Christ. -- But has she no Sisters living? Yes, and
such, who are called Christians too, which make their sins out of measure
sinful. We have many Jezebels, who, when natural Beauty falls short, they
would repair by art. Angli quasi Angeli, said a Pope once of some of our Boys,
who were brought before him; but, should be have seen some of our Women, he
would have changed his Tale; and instead of Angels, have given them the
deserved Epithete of incarnate Devils. Many so dawb, and slaver their faces,
that they look more like Puppets, then women; and pictures rather, then living
Creatures. As for Hypocrisy, and seeming Holiness, that show of Godliness,
denying the power, not such an harvest since Adam, as in our pretended times of
Reformation. Well, mark the result, Jezebel was devoured by Dogs. Repent, you
degenerate women, that you become not a prey to the Devil.

Meditations upon Athaliah.
THE Way, as yet I see, is very foul. I thought the last would admit no
Comparison; but I have now met with her Match. They may very well go for
Sisters: for they are as like, as two Twins, bloody Nimrods both, and mighty
Hunters before the Lord. I may say of this as is Recorded of Caligula, Lutum
Sanguine maceratum. Suet.
a Lump of clay soaked in Blood. Her Complexion was altogether sanguine: and no
water could quench her Thirst, but choice Spirits of Life; for She destroys all
the 2 Kin. xi. 1.
Seed Royal. Ambition is the Cutthroat of nearest Relations: and, where it
reigns, there is no room for Virtue. Like Hell, and the Grave, it is never
satisfied. If a Crown be the Gain, all the H^unds are let loose. How many have
broke their Necks in the pursuit of it? Nay; how many have damned their Soul,
to Climb up this Culmen? It is so sweet a Bait, that many Gudgeons have nibbled
so long at it; that they have been caught to their Destruction. Caesar, and
Pompey were great Gamesters at it: One could brook no Superior, the other
scorned a Competitiour; but their Exit was miserable, and their Sun went down
in Blood. Great Alexander, who grieved he had not more Worlds to Conquer, was
nipped in the Eud, and confined within a Winding Sheet, and a Coffin. Bajazet,
the Turk, whom once all Asia could not hold, was at last cooped up in a Cage;
where he might complain to his Mahomet, and dolefully Tune forth his
Misfortunes. Crook'd-Back Richard, the Usurper, (who, to gain a Crown, murdered
his Nephews in the Tower, and drowned his own Natural Brother, the Duke of
Clarence, in a But of Malmsey) after three Years, and odd Months Reign, had
his full Compensation, and Retribution: For he was slain in Bosworth field,
and, being besmeared with dirt, and blood, was tied behind a Pursivant, to the
Scoff, and Wonder of both Armies. But, what need I search the Records, or look
back to Antiquity? It Is fresh in our Memories; Oliver Cromwell, whose Name not
long since was terrible, as Captain Drake's was to the Spaniards. What Seas of
Blood did he wade through? What Numbers of Fatherless Children, and Widows, did
he make, whose Cries, and Complaints would have forced a Sympathy from an
hard-hearted Jew, to condole with them? Into what Miseries were the Royal
Party, those noble Souls, who fought for God, and their King, plunged? Loyalty,
and Piety would then have made any miserable. King Saul 1 Samuel xv. 9.
saved alive the best of the Sheep, and of the Oxen, and of the Fatlings, and
of the Lambs; but every thing, that was vile, and refuse, he utterly destroyed.
But here, on the contrary, the best of men, and the fattest, harmless as Sheep,
and innocent as Lambs, the nobly-born, true-hearted Gentry, and the Orthodox
Clergy, were hailed to the Slaughter; and the vile, refuse, and rascal People,
the rebellious, and schismatical were reserved. Ambition, only Ambition, was
the Devil, that let loose that accursed Blood-Hound. But, mark his sad
Catastrophe. -- His Vale to the world was unhappy: for He Intravit ut Vulpes,
regnavit ut Lupus, mortuus est ut Canis. Dictum de Bonifacio Octavo Papa.
came in like a Fox, He reigned as a Wolf, and dyed like a Dog. And, behold
this miscreant Woman, Hell's fourth Fury, after awhile, being put forth the
Ranges, is slain; 2 King. xi. 16. Sic transit gloria Mundi. Thus the seeming
Glory of the world vinisheth. And the Bladder, blow up with Wind, with one
Spurn is gone.

Meditations upon Sapphira, Acts v.
WE say, The nigher the church, the farther from God; and, indeed, many times
it proves so, take it either by way of Profession, or Station, and the Proverb
will often be made good. A Possession is sold, but a part only is brought, and
laid at the Apostles Feet. It Is impious, and irreligious to part Man, and
Wife; for those, whom God has joined together, let no man put asunder. But, it
had been happy for Sapphira, she had been less indulgent, and distinct in this
particular. Well; she was privy to the Sale, and to the Sin. Grace is
Communicative; and so is Vice. A drowning Man plucks the next, that is to him,
in with him; and one, struck with the Plague, loves Company. When Sin
conceives, the Sign is in Gemini, and brings forth Twins. Sacril^ge walks not
alone; but must have a lie to wait upon it. Yea; for so much, said this Poor
Soul: and presently falls down at the Apostles feet, and yields up the Ghost;
Verse 10. ubi pecata, ibi procella. Aug.
A Storm is ever at the heels of Impiety: and, where Sin is Mistress, Sighs
attend as Hand-maidens. As Solomon, in the Singnlar Number, addresses his
Speech to his Young man, I will deliver in the Plural. Eccles. xi. 9.
Rejoice, O ye Sinners, and let your hearts cheer you, and walk in the ways of
your hearts, and in the Sight of your eyes; but know ye, that for all these
things God will bring you into Judgment.

This Sin of Sacrilege, with us, as Fornication with the Papists, is counted
venial; though, otherwise in God's eye, damnable. If not so; what mean the
bleating of the Sheep, and the lowing of the Oxen, which I hear? (as Samuel
said to Soul, in another sense 1 Samuel XV. 14.
) Why are Livings every where so small, and, with Pharaoh's Kine, so lean, and
il^-favoured, that the Man of God is fain to graw upon a Crust? Is not this to
make Brick without straw? And yet, which is beastly, and unreasonable, they
will exact the tale of their Bricks, expect from their Minister that, which he
is not able to perform. How can the Ox tread out the Corn, when his mouth is
muzzled? And how can he preach, who has not bread many times to satisfy the
hungry bellies of himself, and Family? O Cruelty to be abhorred! Aves paseunt,
ferae par^unt, homines saeviunt: the Birds feed us, for Elijah was fed by
Rvens; Salvage Beasts spare us, so the fierce Lions Daniel in the Den; but
(shall I speak it?) Men only are cruel, and devour. This is that, which brings
both Ministers, and Ministry in Contempt, to the scorn of the World, the shame
of Religion, the dishonor of God, and, without repentance, the damnation of
their Souls. For the affront, offered to them, is offered to God himself: and
it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. We know who
said it. Luke x. 16.
He, that despises you, despises me; and he, that despises me, despises
him, that sent me. This simple Woman came to a sudden end for keeping Back part
of that, which was her own, or perhaps for concealing it only; what judgment
then must they expect, who keep back, and detain from their Pastors that,
which is their own? Genesis xlix. 6.
O my Soul, come not thou into their secret; unto their Assembly, mine Honor,
be not thou united. The pitiful Pharisee, who was an Hypocrite, a verbal
only, and external Professor, shall one day rise in judgment against this
generation, and condemn it; for he paid his Tithes even unto Mint, Anice-seed,
and Cummin, when some Christians, so called Nomine, non re, in name only,
would not willingly spare the paring of their Nails. Well; let them cosen, and
cheat: Aurum habent Tolosanum, they, or their posterity, will be met with;
and, when the hand of the Almighty lights heavy upon them, they will then cry
out, as the Philistines did, when the Ark was brought into the Camp; Vae nobis!
Vae nobis! Woe be unto us! Woe be unto us! Hear, and tremble; for the mouth of
the Lord has spoken it. Mal. iii. 8, 9, 10.
Will a man rob God? Yet ye have robbed me. But ye say, Wherein have we robbed
thee. In Tithes, and Offerings. Ye are cursed with a Curse; for ye have robbed
me, even this whole Nation, etc. -- Her next sin was Lying. Yea, (said she) for
so much. Had she left this out, and spoken Truth: her fault had been the less,
but now it is aggravated. To perpetrate a Sin, is bad enough; but to maintain
it, is a great deal worse. O Sapphira! would thy Lying had perished with thee;
but, thou art dead, thy Sin survives, and, like a Gangrene, has dilated it
self far and wide, as if from thee hereditary. This is thought small; for it is
Epidemical: yet, it bids defiance to God, and spits in the Face of the
Almighty. I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life; said once thy Savior. What
therefore can be more contrary, and opposite to him; then Falsehood? Every like
delights. and rejoices in its like; says Philosophy. Now, thy God is Truth,
yea Truth it self; by Consequent then Falsehood, and Lying must needs be odible
to him. What Emolument comes by Lying? All, that I know, is only this, Shame,
and not to be credited, when they speak the Truth. Let them weep; and presently
we say, Crocodili Lacrymae, Behold the Tears of a Crocodile! and, let their
Speech seem never so fair, and seconded by deep Oaths, and Imprecations; Yet,
it is but taken as ridiculous, and as a Syren's Song, that tends only to the
Ruin of the poor Mariner. The female Sex commonly is the fairer, and of a more
tender Constitution; therefore more attractive: Yet nothing does more imbellish
them, then Virtue, an innocent and harmless Conversation. Their Tongues, and
Hearts should be ever Coviaetours, and fellow-Travellers, and nothing should
put a Divorce between them. The Calves of our Lips is a Sacrifice pleasing to
God; but it must be without Blemish. He cannot away with Halting, neither
accept that, which wants an Eye. Me thinks, that Proverb should not be amongst
Christians; Plain dealing is a jewel, and he, that uses it, dies a Beggar.
How! a Beggar? this is no fair play, and those scales were not right, to weigh
down so precious a Commodity. We have another equivalent, Obsequium amicos,
Veritas odium parit.
Flattery gets friends, Truth hatred: but more is the pity. Tell it not in
Gath, publish it not in the Streets of Askelon; lest the Daughters of the
Philistines rejoice, lest the Daughters of the Uncircumcised triumph. Admire
the depth of this sin. It Is a precipice so steep, that it will strike terror
in any but to look down; and, being once known, by the grace of God, deterr all
Passengers from coming that way. You are of your Father the Devil, and the
works of your Father you will do, etc. He was a murderer from the beginning, and
abode not in the truth; because there is no truth in him. When he speaks a
lv, he speaks of his own; for he is a liar, and the father of it. John viii.
44. See who brings up the rear of the Blackguard. Revel. xxi. 8.
But the Fearful, and Unbelieving, and the Abominable, and Murderers, and
Whoremongers, and Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all Liars, shall have their
part in the Lake, which burns with Fire, and Brimstone; which is the second
death.

FINIS.

