A FREE WILL Offering.

Genesis 4. part of verse 4. And the Lord had respect unto Abel and his Offering.

BY JAMES HARWOOD. D.D.

DVBLIN: Printed by J.C. Anno Domini, 1662.

To his GRACE JAMES Duke, Marquis, and Earl of Ormond: Earl of Ossery and
Brecknock, Viscount Thurles, Lord Baron of Arclo and Lanthony, Lord of the
Regalities and Liberties of the County of Tiperary, Chancellor of the
University of Dublin, Lord Lieutenant General, and General Governor of His
Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland, one of the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable
privy Council, of His Majesty's Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland,
Lord Steward of His Majesty's Household, Gentleman of His Majesty's Bedchamber,
and Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter.
May it please your Grace,
YOur great Employments might implead my boldness, while I have presumed with
unpolished lines, to withdraw you from your high affairs. The Church and State,
under God, depend upon you; you have given such assured Testimonies of your
care to tutor up these Twins, so that Clergy and Laity, bid you welcome; as
wished for by all true Protestants, and prayed for by all the suffering Sons of
Levi. We look upon you, as the Physician sent to cure our Kingdoms maladies; as
the Master Pilot, able to steer to a safe Harbor, this crazy Vessel, the
Commonweal: The Star in the East conducted the Wisemen to the Cratch of Christ;
and that most resplendent Constellation, Charles his Wain, is your Conductor to
this Kingdom. We honor our King, for he honors God; we honor you, who honors
the King: The King has given you a Commission, and our Church gives you her
blessing; yea, Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord.

Most Mighty Prince, I have neither Myrrh, nor Aloes, nor Cassia to present to
your Illustrious Highness; yet a little oil in a barrel; not much, for not
Master of much; not less, lest my present had been less then the Widows Mite.
Christ feasted thousands, with a few Loaves and Fishes: No marvel He could make
that little more.

My little I can make neither more nor less; not less, lest too little should
be brought to the Table; not more, lest your State affairs should surfeit of
long lines.

Here is a Viaticum and Modicum, an Offering, and a small one, presented by him
who joys in your presence; who was engaged to honor you, before he saw you:
Your favors at a distance oblige, and your love to the CHVRCH commands for
you, and all yours, the prayers,

Of your most humble, devoted Servant, James Harwood.

THE CONTENTS.
A Christians Looking-Glass, 1 Mercy beyond Measure, 13 Gods Magistrates, the
Peoples Deliverers, 21 A home charge for all Subjects, 30 Sions sad Complaint,
37 The Angels Antheme, 43 A Lesson for Soldiers, 51 Gods love, man's life, 60
Gods Presence, Patients Protector, 67 Where Unity, Amity, 76
ERRATA.
PAge 10. l. 6. after he is a sinner, add, and whilst, p. 58. l. 3. r.
Mutineer, p. 37. line 10, for Alphaltes, read Asphaltes, p. 41. l. 6. for Do,
r. dare, p. 46. l. 11. add, it, after the word shall, p. 47. l. 19. for men,
r. man, p. 56. l. 3. for did, r. dyed, l. 18. for tripertite maudat, r.
tripartite mandat, p. 59. l. 9. for care, r. can, p. 70. l. 6. for madles, r.
madles.

A FREE WILL Offering.
A CHRISTIAN LOOKING-GLASS.
I Said I will look unto my ways, Psalm. 39.1.] A Good resolution, if brought to
Birthdom; but O, it is time to resolve of Good, when Evil has harrased the
soul: And yet what are all my resolves beneficial to me, if I resolve not to do
as I determine: I confess, Say well is good, but Do well is better; but as the
fruit is first in the bud, so the blossom of a good intent first blooms a
Cord, then in os, then in opus. I am in hopes to proceed on happily; when a
Radice from the root, there is a visible show tending to perfection.

I said I will] A word would almost warrant an happy issue: Resolute intents to
do good, are stout Agitators to assist first endeavors: Yet if this, I will,
proceed from humane confidence, the weakest temptations lay flat our
presumptuous undertakings. Let me beg the assistance of God, and by his
adjuvant grace, my Will will scale the Walls of Jericho.

I said I will] This is the language of a Saint, a Sinner, a Devil: Says the
unclean Spirit, Then I will return; the Devil he wills a mischief to man; a
Sinner to himself; a Saint, the sin-slaughter in his soul. The Devil is
peremptory to repossess, the sinner wilful to do evil, the Saint has a will to
do good: What a fair show makes this man of God? so he is; and yet a man after
Gods own heart may have a fearful stop betwixt his intent and act. Again, had
not David failed to perform, he had never been thus resolute to have willed:
when sin overtakes Gods child, if the child of God, he takes up new
resolutions to amend, and as the Ram gives the biggest push runs the furthest
back, so the backsliding of a sinner, may, if grace, serve to amend his pace to
Paradise. Surely here has been a sinful party sent out to divert our Kingly
prophet in his spiritual progress; Else why is it resolved upon the case, I
will look unto my ways? If he had not with Lots Wife, lately looked back to
carnal Sodom, here had been less need at this present to look unto his ways.
But O, when the old Man stands in the way, the good Man had need carry both his
eyes in his head! Though it be natural for the works of darkness to blindefold
our best of intellectuals, yet by a spiritual virtue in the herb of Grace, my
sin is made my eye salve; and fro once, with the Snake, I have rubbed my
speckled Conscience betwixt those two peeble stones, the two Tables, the ten
Commandments; then those scales, Ignorance of my offenses pill off: And instead
of walking, Will. Then I resolve I will look unto my ways; but no sooner do I
look, but lo, Bears and Bug-bears, sad afflictions, and disguised trespasses: I
looked, and knew not this last, my peccata splendida: till I looked, and looked
again ad Dei Judicia, I offered up for my Quitrent to the Lord of Heaven,
counterfeit Coin for current Silver; till the Touchstone, Affliction,
discovered Hypocrisy to be the metal within, whilst External Profession the
thin covering without. O let me be, what I seem to be, otherwise there is a God
will set me out in my own colors: I know it, and for certain, that though I
may cozen man, yet I cannot deceive my God; and therefore lest I be found a
dissembler with man, or with ire to encense my Maker, once more, I will look
unto my ways, and look at them with a double eye, Corporis, mentis: At all
without, in the confines of my Conversation; and at all within, in the
territories of my Conscience: With my bodily eye, I can spy much amiss; with my
eye spiritual much more: While I see without, I may be blind within; and spy a
world of wonders in this great World, and yet not see that World of wickedness
in this little World.

O Lord, open the eye of my understanding, lest while I look and see the way to
thy Church, I miss of thy Kingdom; yet lest I miss, I will look ad Sinistram,
at my Corrosives. ad Dextram, at my Cordials


At my Corrosives, my crosses in this life, seeming hindrances in my spiritual
Pilgrimage; but sanctified, pricking spurs, pressing me unto the prize of my
high calling. O God, my God, twenty years current have those lasted, and had
not thou put strength into my anckle bones, long since, with Gad and Reuben, I
had sat me down on this side Jordan. And now I turn ad Dextram, to the right
hand of thy gracious favors, high cordials, in the upshor of long distempers.
O heaviness has endured a long Winter night, but joy is come in the morning, a
Plerophoria, a full sea of Peace and plenzy.

O my God, as Adversity did nor quire deject me, so let not Prosperity puff me
up: Now that I am in part restored to my Means, let not my Means make me forget
my Maker: Believe it, he who sets his heart on Earth, shall never inherit
Heaven: Now I am out of the briars, Lord, let not the pleasant Pageants
withdraw my eyes: God sent afflictions to wean me from the World; these
contentments are proffered to try, whether I love God more then the World: I
may look at them, and not lose my way; if I love them, and inordinately, I am
at a loss, and for ever: And therefore once more I will look about me, lest
suppressed by Adversity, or surprised by Prosperity.

Now this is done, I will up, and on, and having little time, and far to go,
and many bypath in my passage, I will look unto my ways. There is but one
way, and yet it is here said, I will look unto my ways: Christ is the way, via
recta, via tuta; all other ways are viae deviae, by-ways; and yet this way
Christ is cut into two paths, is viam Divinitatis, Humanitat is: The first
step into the Heavenly way, is per Christi Incarnationem; the second is, per
Christi Divinitatem: The hand that leads into these two, which run into one,
is, Amor Dei, the love of God; For God so loved the world, that be sent his
Son, the second Person; and therefore God; born of a Virgin, and therefore made
man. Now this is made my way to Heaven, efficienter a Deo, instrument aliter
per sidem; and this way is by Christ's Godhead, Manhood, whilst the Godbead
dwells in him bodily. And now the two Natures being joined together in one
Person, and that by an Hypostatical union; this considered, that one way may
admit of a plural, without prejudice to the single singular way: I mean, to
him, who is the Way, the Truth, and the Life. But as all that go to Heaven,
must look unto this way, Christ, cut into two paths; so I must look unto my
ways; ways for Plurality, mine for Propriety.

How different are these two ways! the way Christ, and my ways; that is the
way of Life, this the way of Death; Have I not need now to look about me? Miss
of that fist, and I am out of the way to Heaven; walk in this other, and I
march a full career to Hell; and yet I am never in hopes to come into the way
Christ, till I take a survey of my own ways, my thoughts, words, and works.

This is a large task, and this a lazy generation: Much is to be done, and all
to be left undone, portends a fearful doom: O Jacob, why layest thou thy head
upon a stone? O Jonah, why sleep thou in the howl of the ship? O ye
Disciples, can ye not watch one hour! O! the sluggish blankets of carnal
security, have lulled Gods dearest sons asleep, when the Philistines have been
ready to fall upon them: The Disciples let Christ be taken from them; O let not
your selves be taken from Christ. He that sleeps in sin is senseless, and
whilst he is a sinner; he looks not to his ways; he casts not an eye to
Christ, nor Christ to him; but mark what is said, I will look to my ways; Is it
not high time, when surround in the rotten bogs of Whoredom and Bloodshed.

It has been the hard hap of the Elect to tread awry, and ere, aware to step
into the Red Sea of blood, by the misleading of the old Man in the Woman's
habit. Here are ways to be looked at, not walked in: See them, and shun them,
they are dangerous by-waies, leading to Hell, leading from Heaven: Their names
are these, The Unclean Spirits Round, Relapse into sin, That beaten Tract
Covetousness, which is Idolatry; That way which went of late too night the
Royal Palace, Rebellion and Regicide; Hold of Hell-gars, Despair; the shadowed
Grove Hypocrisy; The barren Mount, Presumption; The new Reformers Road,
Sacrilege: These have been common highwaies, leading to Hell, Death, and the
Devil; and now the late walkers in them, though disguized with the vizard of
seeming Saintship are discovered: But there are other more covert ways I must
look to, if ever I look to go to Heaven: And in special, that way or walk in
which my corrupt heart meets with, first Motions to sin, Assent to sin, A will
to sin, A seduced judgment to approve of sin in the secret of my soul: Look to
these ways, and root out all thou meetest; and fear not thou the wide road of
thy conversation. Smother sin in that way, the entrance into the womb of thy
heart, and the work is done; neither need thou fear, but that is the way to
life everlasting.

But the Prophets Possessive, my, my ways, makes him owner of these highwaies;
says the Lord, My ways are not your ways: This Mine and Thine, makes or mars.

Man's ways have in them naught of God; Gods ways have in them naught of man.
While I look unto my ways, I see a super plus of sins, While at Gods, the way
to be disburthened of my sin.

To conclude, I will look unto my ways, through that looking glass the Law, so
I shall see I am a sinner: I will look, O Lord, unto thy ways, which thy
sacred Testament points me out, to ensure me of a Saintship.

And now O Lord, lead me in thy way, that so I may possess my soul in peace:
Lord, give me grace to look unto my ways, that so I may escape that death,
death eternal.

MERCY beyond MEASURE.
Psalm. 58. part of verse. 1. Lord, thou art become gracious unto thy Land.


THe people of God are returned from bondage, and they sing a Psalm of
Thanksgiving: all Israel have been Captives, and this their deliverance is of
the Lords doings.

What the arm of man conoot, the finger of God can bring to pass: In the low
ebb of Misery, he can buoy up to a full sea of felicity.

The Israelites are carried into Babylon, and the Babylonians are planted in
the Land of Israel; Gods own people at a loss, and the Devils darlings bear all
the sway: Sad news for the Saints, to see such in their possessions, and they
transplanted into a foreign Land, and imprisoned: But we must not judge them
the best, who prevail the most. As sinners in the next world shall not escape
Gods venngeance, so Saints in this life often times are sad sufferers, yea, and
such sufferers, as cannot sing a song of Sion, while by the banks of Bybylon.

O! Mesery without Remedy, is able to leave heart-less the best of Saints; yet
when my reason fails to foresee deliverance, let my faith in God tow me to the
firm land of his gracious promises. Though I should see no hopes in my frail
judgment of a settlement, yet will I hope for peace; for that thou the God of
peace art become gracious unto thy land, to it and us: To us who wanted grace
to serve thee; gracious to us who were enemies to our selves: The God of peace
has made our peace; he will have peace with us, who had open war with him: His
mercy is over all his works, and our sinful works cannot over-master his
mercy: Of his own free grace he is reconciled with us; our sins set us at odds,
Gods love to man made the composition; what love owe we to him, who so loved
the world? who loved man, that loved not himself? who showed love to us, to
learn us to love one another?

When Heaven proclaims peace, a shame it is for us earthy worms to live at
odds; let the grace of God lead on to have peace will all men; and the more
mercy the Lord shows to us, the less debate let be found among us our selves.

But wherein, O Lord, art thou become gracious unto us? If any want eyes, and
sees it not, let him that has ears hear it.

Was there ever such an universal devastation, Three Nations off the Hinges,
Givil and Ecclesiastical Government disjoynted, The Heads of the Kirk and
Kingdom made shorter by the head, Pharaohs lean Kine, devoured all the fat,
Peter's Patrimony was but a breakfast, The Kingly Revenue unable to pay the
public faith, The Riches of the Land exhausted, The Soldier unpaid, and our
lives and livelihood left to the indiscretion of an Arbitrary power.

When we were fallen into this irrepairable Consumption, the Lord set us on
foot again, composed our differences without bloodshed; made peace, when no
hopes of peace, replanted thousands under their own vines: Now we may live at
home without fear, enjoy our own, without sequestration; have the society of
our Wives and young ones, in despite of Pike and Pistol.

O God, my God, this is thy great work; this we attempted, but could not bring
to pass: This thou have done, and none else could do it. To our endess comfort
we may now report, how Thou, O Lord, art become gracious to thy Land: Thou have
restored the Kingdom to the King, and the King to his Kingdoms; the Nobles to
their Honors, and the Commons to their Birthright; the Law is restored, and
the Gospel preserved, and there is peace from Dan to Beersheba. And now is not
he ungrate, who will not warble out this note, O Lord, thou art become gracious
to thy Land?

If it had not been thine, thou would not redeemed it; if thou had not been
the Lord of Hosts, no other L. General could have done it: But what is thine,
who can keep from thee? To think who thou art, is able to blunt the edge of all
opposers: Blessed be God, for that our Land is thine, and thou have owned it;
and that thou who art Lord of Heaven, we hold our land here below on thee.

But by the Land, is meant all in the Land. The Brutes have found Gods favor,
they did groan under the pressure of a Civil War: The War is ended, and they at
quiet; now they may take their pastime in the pastures, skipping over the
Mountains, and leaping over the Valleys.

Their Masters by a Metonymie, may be here meant; and by Land, be understood
the inhabitants of the land; blessed not only in their new Restorement, but
late punishment. We had little grace, till we had a large lash; we had sinned
much, and have suffered long: And as the Walnut-tree brings forth most fruit,
when most cudgel'd; so that Sons of God are most penitent, when most afflicted:
And thus our God is doing us good, when we think harm; he was never more
gracious to his three Confessors, then when they were in the furnace: He casts
us into the fire of affliction, to make us run for current coin in his Kingdom:
He brings us to Heaven by Hell-gates, and first hacks and hues the bole of our
bodies, to make men serviceable timber to build up a living Altar.

His Cedars are fel'd, and now made fit; his metal melted, and the gold
resined: The fuel is consumed, but the Bullion forth coming; our Tormentors
taken away, and we sufferers saved: O our good God, he whips his child, and
burns his rod; purges us, and expunges our foes.

Blessed be our God, who in mercy has corrected us, while in fury he has
consumed them; them who had pulled down Majesty, Magistracy, Ministry.

They made our Kingdom an Akeldama, a field of blood; our Church, a Den of
thieves; our Judicatures, the High Places of high injustice.

But thou, O Lord, have delivered us out of the Lions paw, from bloodthirsty,
and blood-guilty men, who tyrannized over King and Kingdom, Church and
Churchmen: And for this cause we cannot but singing say, and saying sing, How,
O Lord, thou have been gracious to thy Land.

GODS MAGISTRATES THE Peoples Deliverers.
Psalm. 77.20. Thou did lead thy people like sheep, by the hand of Moses and
Aaron.


THese words are spoke by David, when sore afflicted; what misfortune had
befallen him, I find not upon record; that shrewdly encumbered, is without
dispute: But what! a King, and surrounded with sorrow, and beset with care! O!
Majesty is not exempt from misery, no more then the fairest day, from a dark
cloud, and dashing shower.

But say the storm be raised, and David in it, How comes it to be becalmed?
When I think what God did for the three, it puts me in hopes how he will
relieve one; I cannot but confide, How my God will free his servant from the
conspiracy of wicked men, while I call to mind, How thou my God did lead thy
people, like sheep, out of Egypt, by the hand of Moses and Aaron.

Never people more made slaves, forced to work much, and want their wages;
their task of brick is enreased, and their stubble take from them; they are
ordered to spend all their days in Pharaohs Brick-kilns, and yet while they do
Pharaohs work, Pharaoh murders all their males.

Our Kingly Prophet in the midst of his pressures, calls to mind this slavish
oppression; he grieved before, takes up now; had almost despaired of support,
but that he calls to mind, how in despite of Pharaoh and his Host, from the
House of Bondage, it was thou, O Lord, who did lead thy people like sheep, by
the hand of Moses and Aaron.

Gods Deliverance, when past all hopes in Humane reason, is a strong Rampire to
keep off Despair. Let us bear then with patience all our crosses, since the Arm
of the Lord is not shortened.

He saves by unities, as well as universalities; and one Moses, and one Aaron,
is enough for him to lead his people out of Egypt.

But Magistracy and Ministry are under a cloud, and yet the people like sheep,
are led by those the Lord has set over them. You see adversity of old could
not make disloyal Subjects, but prosperity of late has buoyed up too many into
Rebellion: This is too apparent, parent, while all the people, like sheep, were
led by the hand of Moses and Aaron: But in our times, Moses and Aaron have been
led like sheep to the slaughter, by the hand of the common people.

I shall not so much inveigh against our bloody Regicides, as commend these
loyal subjects; though in a foreign Land, and they all captivated, yet the
words import their obedience to their Superiors; they are at the command of
Moses their head Magistrate, and Aaron their prime Diocesan.

Where Loyalty and Conformity is the Coat, Deliverance by the Prince and Priest
is the Cresh; we shall stick in the mine, till these bring us out of the dirt:
Know it, That obedience to the Law of the Land, and the Discipline of the
Church, assure deliverance: We may suffer long, and see small help, yet let us
live in Loyalty to the King, and obedience to our Aaron, and God will bless us:
There has been no want on Gods part; we want hearts seriously to consider,
what great things our great God has brought to pass for the good of us, by the
hand of our Moses, and our Aaron; by the meekness of the one, and wisdom of
them both, they have settled the Laity in their Lands, and the Clergy in their
Livings: So that now to the praise of God, and comfort of us, and all ours, we
can say, Though not out of the Land of Egypt, yet out of the house of Bondage,
thou, O Lord, have led thy people like sheep, by the hand of Moses and Aaron.

It is thou, O Lord, and nil desper andum Caesare duce: Thou did lead, that is
our joy, the work is done; and we delivered. But who are these the Lord
delivered? A people for plurality, thine for propriety.

It is Gods good will to be guide to the people: whilst led, they are sure not
to be misled: For thy people, thine by Creation; thine by Redemption:
Redemption spiritual from the Power of the old man; Redemption Corporal from
the sons of Belial.

But thou, O Lord, have led the people like sheep; Israel of old, Ireland of
late, like sheep: Thou have led us, not to the slaughter, but from the
slaughterhouse, the High-Court of high-in-justice, and many slain; and yet we
thy people were like sheep, scarce opening our mouths before the Shearers,
content to part with our fleece, to save our flesh.

What is more innocent the sheep? And what had we done against them that did
rise up against us?

Thus, O Lord, thou have called back the Captivity of a people, as harmless as
sheep; for neither against our King nor Kingdom were we Offenders.

But it is here said, O Lord, how thou ledst thy people by the hand, to point
out the way, not by the sword to cut out a way.

But this is done by hand of Moses and Aaron, and blessed be those Counselors
to our King, who when it was War, have made Peace: The worst of Enemies, if
they have the least of Grace, will shake hands with this Moses, and this Aaron.
The twain are said to have one hand, to note an unanimity: O happy is the Land,
when these go hand in hand, the Prince and the Prelate: Then is the best of
times, when Aaron bows to Moses his Scepter, and Moses by Law upholds Aarons
Mitre.

Though these be the Instruments, God's the Author of our Deliverance: Our help
then stood in the Lord our God, for thou did lead us out, and brought us in;
for our sin thou did punish us, and of thy mercy thou forgavest us, we may
blame our selves for our captivity. It is to thee, O Lord, we give thanks for
our liberty.

But thou, who dwell in Heaven, made use of some choice servants upon earth
to redeem us, as the Israelites; yet give thanks, but to thy name be the praise.

Here must we, after a thankful acknowledgement made to thee our God, not
neglect to honor those, whom under thee, O God, thou have honored to be our
Church and State Restorers.

Blessed shall they be in the Kingdom of Heaven, who under God, and the King,
have been instrumental to set at freedom this Kingdom.

It is fawning flattery, but Christian civility, to bless them both, who have
the chief Government in this our Church and Kingdom, whose hands and hearts
these many years have been lifted up to God by prayer for us, when others had
made a prey of us; whose grave counsels, added to the wisdom of our young
Solomon, have brought to naught the Worldly wisdom of all Traiterous
Achitophels. Let us acquiesce under the pious Government of their Graces, since
no new custom, but the old fashion, thus to be governed, and thus to govern;
for of old, O Lord, thou did lead thy people like sheep, by the hand of Moses
and Aaron.

A home CHARGE for all Subjects.
Prove. 24.21. Fear God and the King.


THe Object of fear, is God in Heaven, The King on Earth; God in the first
place, the King in the second: I must so reverence God, that I slight not his
Vicegerent; and so observe my King, that I forget not to be the servant of the
living God.

Love advises, To fear God; Allegiance binds to stand in aw of the King: The
one, for that, The Father of Spirits; the other, for that Pater Patriae, the
Father of the Country.

But let us look at these two conjunct, severed: Conjunct, as if no fear of God
in them, that injure the King; as if the Civil Governor be contemned, our
Celestial Commander is lightly set by.

Fear God] And show thy self religious: Thy fear to offend the King, witnesses
thou art righteous.

The first Commandment involves our fearing God, the fifth, our fearing the
King: In the first Table, its the first thing which God takes care of, To fear
him; In the second Table, the first precept implicit, To honor the King: While
you do no homage to the person of your Prince, fear to offend him is far to
seek: But since God commands all, and the King immediate Vicegerent unto God:
This considered, all are engaged to Fear God and the King.

This Precept is like the waters of Trial, Numb. 5. The water tried whether
that a pure Spouse; this, who is a good Christian.

He is an unsufferable subject, that pretends the fear of God, and fears not
the King: He is a Demi-Chtistian, who vaunts how he honors the King, while the
fear of God is not before his eyes.

But let us look into this Ark, and we shall find Manna laid up in it, good
advice for after ages.

That enjoined is, Fear God: Who should I fear, if not God? But what is he? and
what must I go do? God is a Spirit uncreate, eternal, a part post, so are we:
a part ante, so none but he; for God is never to have an ending, nor ever had
a beginning: And this Eternity, a part ante, is it that no humane reason can
fathom: Lord, where Reason fails, give me faith to believe; and that it is an
eternal God, Creator of Heaven and Earth, that I must fear.

And have I not just cause to fear him, whom so often I have offended? But this
Scripture hints not at fear of punishment; but such a fear as love leads on to
the keeping Gods Commandments: He has the true fear of God in him, that fears
to break the Commandments. He that says he fears God, and casts his word
behind him, does not so much deceive the World, as the Devil deceives him:
When I square my life by Gods Law, then I keep this command; a profane person
then, has no fear of God in him; and if to be guided by Gods Word, picture out
this party, such then who pervert the Word of God to their own damnation, how
dwells the fear of God in them?

I have cast my eye up, let me now look down, and look at a debt I owe, as to
God, so to the King: Religion obliges me to fear God; the Law the King: The Law
Moral, as my common Parent; the Law Municipal, as my Lord and Sovereign; truth
is, he is a loose fellow will not be bound up to the Law.

The King is set over by God; for is it not said, By me Kings do reign? Prove.
8. and since of his setting up, none but a Devil will pull them down.

Obedience and reverence is due to the Prince, and the want of each, assert the
breach of this charge.

Let no man separate assunder, those whom God has joined together: Yet let me
set a vast distance betwixt fear and fear; my Spiritual fear, I reserve for
God; a Civil for my Sovereign: There is an awful reverence due to the one, as
my Creator; I owe reverence to the other, for that set far above every
sublunary Creature.

Love is the fulfilling of Gods Law, and a filial fear leads on to the
completion of the Kings commands.

As he that fears not the King, the fear of God is not in him; so he fears not
the King, who fears not to break his Laws: Know it, and for an assured truth,
That when the King in his vertual Capacity is contemned, his personal Capacity
stands in need of a guard.

And therefore either fear to break the Kings Law, or else it is to be feared,
thou will attempt to wrong the Kings Person: Experience is a witness to this
Thesis, and proclaims, How haters of the Law, have turned murderers of their
Sovereign Lord the King: These deserve pity, for they hate reproof, while had
rather dye in their sin, then be told of their sin.

Let us resolve, To fear God and the King; let us show our fear to him, by our
fear to stray from his wholesome Laws: Laws able to keep you in possession of
your own, in peace one with another; Thus you shall preserve the bond of peace,
in the unity of the Spirit; live as Christian Brethren, and dye true loyal
Subjects.

To conclude, where there is no fear of God, there is a want of the grace of
God: But that you all may possess Grace and Peace; Grace which assures, you
have Peace with God; Peace which witnesses you are in high grace with the King:
Fear God for love; and love the King, for the fear of God.

And that thy fear, may not interfear, thy charge is, Fear God and the King.

SIONS SAD COMPLAINT.
Isa. 36. part of verse 13. O Lord our God, other Lords besides thee have ruled
us.


THis is a mixed Song, sung in the tune Lachrymae; sung in the Cliff Gaudete:
The people of God call d to mind their Babylonian Bondage, and tears stand in
their eyes: They are brought back from Babylon, and now with their sad
thoughts, are intermixed mirth and merriness.

The parallel of these Jews, is the River Alphaltes, in whose channel run salt
and fresh waters.

How can it but grieve, to think of their long and late Captivity? How does it
solace, to enjoy their lost liberty? that so long sufferers, exhausts tears;
that sufferers are become conquerers: For this cause rejoice, and again, I say,
Rejoice.

That other Lords have bore rule, this flats our joy; That they have, but do
not, revives our drooping spirits.

Let us look behind, before; at what past, at what present; at our late
banishment, miraculous restorement: These duplicated thoughts, extract mixed
passions, joy and sorrow, hope and fear. We grieve, when we remember what past;
joy for that our griefs are past: Those other Lords put us in fear, O Lord our
God; thou puts us in good hopes.

And thus fear and hope, sorrow and joy are here housed: Of this I rest
assured, while this I hear read, O Lord our God, other Lords besides thee have
ruled us.

These Israelites are not grieved, that God has punished; but complains of
that body of sin, which provoked the Lord to punish: They quarrel not at the
stone, they look at the thrower; and takes all well, as it comes from God, yet
think meaner of themselves, for that, O Lord our God, other Lords besides thee
have ruled them.

Them and us; they led the round, we hold out the dance: Their Thraldom was
long since, ours scarce got from our doors: The Jews were Captives in a
foreign Land, we made slaves at home; a mighty King conquered them, the
off-scum of our Kingdom tyrannized over us; Worshippers of Idols inslaved the
Israelites, Pretenders to God and Godliness plauged our Church and Nation.

When Religion must cloak faction, that is the height of Rebellion; and the
Church then sadly suffers, when her new Gospellers abhor Idols, yet commit
Sacrilege.

What can add more to misery, then to have the Law of God and the King trod
undersfoot: When the Kings Laws suffer an Eclipse, the Kings Crown is under a
cloud; when the Preachers of the Gospel are turned out of their pulpits, they
are not far off who mean to rob them of their benifices.

We have experienced the merciless mercy of these Egyptian Taskmasters, who
caused us to make our stint of brick, and seek our stubble; live like men, and
miraculously get our maintenance. O if we could have overruled our selves,
others should not have ruled us; our sins led us into bondage, it is of the
Lords doings to redeem us.

Had thou not been the Lord, thou could not have freed us; Had thou not
been our God, thou would not have done this for us.

We have experienced thy power, as the Lord, and none do come in competition;
we have found thy favor as our God, and it is thy superlative mercy is solely
to be magnified.

Let us weep, for that we have sinned against so good a God; let us joy in the
Lord, for that relieved by the arm of the Lord our God.

Of late we were in Babylon, now in Sion; servants to slaves, now servants only
to God and the King: praised be God, it is thou whom we do serve, though of
late, O Lord our God, other Lords besides thee have ruled us.

He that takes upon him to rule without God, is sure to be punished by the
Devil: Let me tell you, an Usurper on Earth, is a Freeholder in Hell; and
though he make us suffers for the present he in all likelihood is to be
tormented to Eternity.

But what a madness is this, to strive to rule a multitude, when thou can not
rule one; to seek for sovereignty over men, when thy usurped power makes thee a
slave to the Devil.

It is the most unseemly sight, for Peasants to personate Princes; and for
Princes to stand at the Bar, when Peasants sit on the bench. We have seen the
time, and God be blessed, over-lived the time; and though long inslaved, at
length relieved.

Yet to humble us, and give God thanks, we do confess, to our late grief, and
now joy, how, O Lord our God, other Lords besides thee have ruled us.

THE ANGELS ANTHEME.
Luke 2.14. Glory be to God in the highest, peace upon earth, goodwil to man.


THe occasion of this Antheme, is Christ's Birthdome; the Messenger, is an
Angel; his Message, to the Sheepherds; the news, glad tidings to all people;
the Choristers, a multitude of heavenly Soldiers; their Angelical Carrol,
Glory be to God in the highest, peace upon earth, goodwil toward man.

Christ is born, and Christ's Brithdom and the Angels Antheme, divulge the great
love of the great God to mean man.

For God sent his Son, from Heaven to Earth; he came from Heaven, he came to
Earth; he became man, to make us all men; was born of a Virgin, O blessed
Birthdom, whose birth gives life to many millions.

O Divine condescension! Our Christ came to live with men, that we men might
live with God: He assmes our nature, to make peace betwixt the Creator and the
Creature; nay more, he took upon him life natural, that so he might free us all
from death eternal: He lived to dye, that we might not dye, but live.

His Birth is the forerunner of all our benefits; and therefore in honor of
that Day, Christ's Birthday, Angels sing a Gloria Patri, they sing the Antheme
in three parts;

In Alto. In Alto, glory be to God in the highest. In Basso. In Basso, Peace
upon earth. In Medio. In Medio, Goodwil toward men.
The Singers are the Angels; the Ditty, Glory, Peace, Goodwil; the Tune, in
Alto, Basso, Medio; behold, Glory ascends on high, Peace possesses the earth,
Goodwil pursues each soul: And thus Heaven, Earth, and Man, bear all parts in
this Song; God in Heaven, Man on Earth, and the Earth from whence Man came;
each do here bear their part, apparent, while glory is given to God, Peace to
the Earth, goodwil to Man.

What soul is not ravished with this sacred Ditty, sung by Angels, sung on
Christ's Brithday, sung for joy, That our Redemption drew nigh.

A Song to be sung in Triple time, which as Musicians know, allows of two
Minnims down, and one only up: And is not here one up, Glory be to God on
high; And two down, Peace be upon earth, And two down, Good Will toward man.

These are Heavens Waits, and being come to the doors of us Mortals, they
double their strokes; and having honored God, God takes it for no dishonor, in
a redoubled note, for them to express their love to us: Thus shall be done to
them whom the King means to honor.

Well, let Angels be our Samplers: and let us learn by them to us, to give back
again to God, praise and glory; praise, for our Creation; glory, for our
Redemption: Let God have the glory for making our peace with him, yea, glory to
God in the highest, for affording us peace one with another, peace within
ourselves; and for that hope we have of that Peace which passes all
understanding.

And as thus we give glory to God for this peace proclaimed; so glory be to God
for his goodwil to man; we may possess our souls in peace, for we have the good
will of God; we had enslaved our selves to sin and Satan: It is Gods good will
to free us from Hell, and the Devil.

The Prince of darkness is rooted, and our peace is purchased; not only peace
for us, who are earth; but the goodwil of God to all mankind on earth.

But though the Greek Fathers interpret these words, of Gods goodwil to man;
yet the Latin Fathers thus translate this Antheme, Peace be upon earth to men
of goodwil.

As if men could never be at peace with God the Father, whilst he bears ill
will to his neighbor: He is quite out of tune, who is not in charity; neither
will God afford him peace, that affords not his neighbor love: As love is the
fulfilling of the Law, so the large and the long, and the brief, and the
semi-brief in this sacred Sonnet.

An ill will d man is a wicked man, and while he lives at odds with men, can
never have hopes of peace with God.

But the twofold Exposition of the Greeks and Latins; the one expounding this
Antheme of Gods goodwill to us; the other of ours, to God and all mankind:
This proclaims, How Heaven and Earth are agreed.

God loves us, and we love him, and we all one another: He us, before we were;
we him in time: He loved us, before we loved him; we love him after his love to
us has mollified our stony hearts.

But how comes this good agreement? none were more at odds then God and man. O!
the reconcilement is made by the Birth of Christ! a Birth predicted by the
Sibbels, foretold by the Prophets, and confessed by all Christians.

Christ Harbinger came before, our Savior came quickly afeter: When nigh at
hand, the cry went, Advenit, advenit, advenit, advenit; He comes, he comes, he
comes; he comes to us in utero Virginis, in the womb of a Virgin: O rate
generation! Adam was neigher of man nor woman; Eve from a man, but no woman:
Our Savior is born of a woman, begot of no man; he is born man, and Mary made
the Mother of God: For the Word was made flesh, Joh. 1.14. and all this, that
we who are more flesh then Spirit, might by the Spirit of Christ, become less
carnal, and more spiritual.

And now since Christ is come to save us, us his enemies, such enemies as made
a combination with the World, Flesh, and Devil, against the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost; nay more, since this Son of God, sic exananivit semetipsum, has so
humbled himselt, as to be born of a Virgin, that we might be born again, and
live; and with God, and in Heaven, and for ever; doubtless it is high time, and
opportune time, at this set time; for no less then Angels, to turn Coristers,
and to say and sing this sacred Song, Glory be to God on high, Peace upon
Earth, Goodwil toward man.

A LESSON FOR Soldiers.
Luke 3.14. The Soldiers likewise demanded of him, saying, And what shall we
do? and he said unto them, Do violence to man, accuse no man falsely, and be
content with your wages.


THese words are occasioned upon a Sermon newly Preached: The Preacher is John
the Baptist: His Hearers are of diverse dispositions; the effect, they are all
astonished: The Baptist threatens death, the people enquire, how to save life:
No sooner says John, The ax is laid to the root of the tree; but as soon the
people fear to be made fuel for the fire.

Lo, after a Law-Sermon, follows a Gospel-Demand: We will never seek after
Christ, till Moses has found us out; It is Moses must lanch the sore, before
Christ will cure the wound; let me welcome then a Boanerges, as much as a
Barnabas; and by this demand rest ensured, How Law-preaching, makes me sensible
of my sins.

Though the love of God, and merits of Christ save; yet the justice of God, and
judgment preached, fits me for a Savior.

It is true, how Christ by his blood has purchased for us a Kingdom; it is as
true, how the Law is Schoolmaster, and leads us unto Christ: Till I meet with
this guide, I shall neither have eye to see with, nor tongue to enquire for a
Savior: After the Law be home applied, and powerfully preached, presently the
whole man seeks every where for a Deliverer: Such a Sermon was Peter's, Acts 2.
and then in verse. 37. they cry, What shall we do? Such a Sermon is this of our
Baptists, and in three companies the cry goes, And what shall we do?

O! when the Law preached, makes me sensible of my sore, then I seek for a
plaster! He that preaches to the people, God is nothing else but all love,
shall be sure in the end to meet with his justice: Sugar plumbs are more
destructive to the stomach then sharp sauce; and a discreet Cook will send up
to the table salt, to relish the fresh dishes.

Such a Caterer is this of our Saviors, he sends up meat and mustard; and
while threatens the torments of Hellfire, tells the people how to escape the
fire of Hell; generally in a Sermon, particularly in a Catechism.

And that I note is, the people Demand, and the Baptist Answers: Lo the
willinguess of the one, and the readiness of the other; the Soldiers are
alarmed out of sin, and now they are in march for Sion; they are awaked out of
the bed of carnal security, and they cry for the dug of Divine Doctrine.

That is a gracious forenoon Sermon, produces such an afternoon Catechism; it
assures how the Catechuminists loath not Manna, but long for the sincere milk
of the Word.

But that again I call to mind is, how the Soldiers propound, and the
Preacher resolves: Thus like new hatch birds, they gape, till the old one
disgorge into them.

They cry, says the Text, and is it not high time for them to cry, who have
made so many, so long to cry?

Well, when God in a Sermon speaks home to the Conscience, it will make thee
ask, ere thou be asked, an say, Master, what shall we do?

This was the cry of the people, of the Publicans; and now that they have begun
to cry, the Soldiers cannot hold their tongues; Good example does much prevail
with rude and robust natures: As the fierce beast by long waking, is made tame;
so our savage dispositions are made pliable by a long and loud peal of Gods
judgments, sounding in our ears.

But I much marvel not, that these Soldiers are thus terrified, and demand,
What must we do? They had hewed down so many with their swords, that now afraid
to be cut in pieces with the ax, Gods judgments.

When a guilty Conscence has a weeping eye, and a crying tongue for salvation,
though his sword has been di^d with the blood of innocents, yet there is
hopes, how his soul may be rinsed clean from sin, with the blood of our lord
Jesus.

And thus I proceed from the Demand, to the Determination, from the quid
faciemus, what shall we do? to the quid faciendum; Do violence to no man,
accuse no man falsely, and be content with your wages.

Here are short Lessons, but long a taking out; little said, much employed. In
three lines, Soldiers are taught their whole duty to man: We will give them
three years to take out their Lesson, and to do what here they are willed to
do: But this Tripertite Maudat, seems to infer the Soldiers propenseness to
the breach of this advice; as also, That he is a right bred Soldier, who
squares his life by this Law: Model me out such a company, and in a fight they
will not fear to dye.

When my life is led according to Gods golden Rule, then death is as welcome to
me as life.

I will in special take notice, what is the will of God in this time of my
earthly Pilgrimage, lest my farewell be far worse then my first beginning.

But come, when we carry righteously toward man, it is probable we will be
religous toward God.

And it is at this end of Divine Direction, that our Baptist starts his
discourse, Viz. Do violence to no man. Viz. Accuse no man falsely. Viz. Be
content with your wages.


By this it seems, Gods Word gives no warrant to him who has the longest
sword, to take the greatest plunder; nor yet for him who has the longest
weapon, to have too long a tongue; nor yet for him who has marched all day, to
turn Mntineer next morning.

A right bred Soldier will rest content with that pay which is allotted for
him; will not forge a lie to hurt his neighbor; nor yet when the drawn sword is
in his hand, will harm the innocent.

Here are three Lessons for Soldiers; and the first, manacles their hands; the
second, their tongues; the third, staves them off other men's goods, while gives
them no more but what they work for; and to speak no more but truth, he is a
gallant Soldier, whose hand is tied to good behavior, and Does violence to no
man; who can keep his tongue within his teeth, and Accuse no man falsely; who
quiets himself with his means, and is Content with his wages.

Your being Content with your wages, asserts, how you are no Mutineers, and
gains you the love of your Leaders.

Your Accusing no man falsely, assures how you have the fear of God, and keep
his ninth Commandment.

Your withdrawing your selves from Doing violence to any man, shows an heroic
spirit; and such an one, whose religious will, overrules your Warlike care.

Such an Army of Soldiers, make an Host of Saints; and if they thus lead a
life of Grace, the Lord of Hosts will lead them to a life of glory: Their
reward is in Heaven, and they are sure of it; the Lord never fails them that
fear him, but so soon as the Soldiers scabbard falls to the ground, the blade
is laid up with the Lord: Though thou be at a loss for a time, thy soul will be
safe in Abraham's bosom.

It is better then, to live well, then fight: well; especially for Soldiers,
whose lives are so very often in danger.

Let this threefold Admonition forearm them, and warn us to lead a good life,
if ever we mean to enjoy a life everlasting.

Gods Love, MAN'S LIFE.
John 3.16. God so loved the World, that be, etc.


LOrd inspire me with thy Spirit, that my tongue may show forth thy praise,
whilst my heart rejoices in God my Savior: And since it is not in the heart
of man, to sathom the depth of thy love, O give me leave to admire thy love to
him, who deserves the utmost of thy vengeance: Had not thou been a God whose
mercy is not to be measured, man had never tasted of so much mercy in the midst
of his Misery.

But thus to love us, when we had forsaken our first-love, This is of the Lords
doings, and it is mavelous in our eyes.

Let me lay the guilt of Humane Nature wide open to the World, then the God of
Nature will be magnified, and the Attribute of his Mercy mightily admired. Was
not man made little inferior to the Angels, The prime piece of Gods
Workmanship; in the likeness of God did God make man: And could a Creature
expect an higher favor from his Creator? Was he not seated in Paradise, an
Heaven upon Earth? Had he not given unto him, Dominion over all the whole
Creation? And might not his Lordship have Lorded it over all the Creatures.

He who had all to obey him on Earth, was tied only to obey that one God in
Heaven; and yet he aspires to be as God: A sin so transcendent, to turn a
Traitor to his Liege-Lord, as no mouth dare justify him, no Angel plead for
him; for in committing this one sin, he stood guilty of Ingratitude to his
Liege-Lord; of Covetousness, for aspired to have the Regiment of Angels; of
Rebellion, for rebelled against God and his King.

As Divines conceive, in committing this one sin, Adam coagulated all sins, not
making his Person only, but Humane Nature accessory: And thus he dishonored
God, destroyed himself, and corrupted all mankind.

And yet rebus sic stantibus, instead of punishing, God pities; instead of
confounding, God comforts.

Death was threarned, if Adam sinned; life is promised, after he had sinned;
not for any foreseen good in man, but because God would be so good to man.

Lust inthrald us, Love set us at liberty; it was the love of God; and
therefore of the best sort: He so loved, as no parallel can equal: He loved the
World, a large extent; and gave his Son, not a servant, his only Son; its much
to have but one, and part with that one: But why parts God and his Son? That
some of the sons of men might come to God, even as many as believe. All then
are not at a loss, as many shall be saved as lelieve; Salvation then is not of
works, but faith: And this Faith mist be in him, not in the Jewish Talmud,
Turkish Alcaron, nor Popes Pardons, but a Belief in Christ Jesus; a belief,
That as Adam made us guilty of death, so that by the death of Christ, me shall
be freed from the second death, and have life; here a life of grace, bereafter
a life of glory; here the Inchoation; after the Consummation; now we live to
dye; through Christ we dye to live, and have a life everlasting.

What could Adam and all we have expected less? what could he and we have more
desired? we were doomed to dye, reprived to live; by the Judge of Heaven,
sentenced to an Eternity of torments; by the same Judge, our sentence is
repealed, to a fair possibility of salvation: And thus for us to sin against
God, and God thus to put it up, and not only not to punish with death, but to
provide for us life, life everlasting: This may put Humane Wit to a stand.

Was ever Love like this! says the Scripture, Can a Woman forget her own
Child? The Quaere implies a possibility, but a rarity: Such forgetfulness may
be in us mortals, there in none at all in our Maker: Being arch enemies to him,
he befriends us, and parts with his own Son, to make us his Sons and Daughters;
yea heirs, heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ Jesus: And thus he gives
gold for dross, and all to make us who are dross, to pass for current coin in
his Kingdom.

Says David to Jonathan, Thy love to me was wonderful, passing the love of
women: But behold and wonder, here is love surpassing man's expression, The love
of God to man! so to love him, as to redeem him, to send his Son to dye, to
save man from death, and to require no more, but to believe; to believe, His
own Son has paid the ransom with his own life, to purchase us a life
Everlasting.

O let my life answer my belief! We do not believe in Christ, if we lead not
the life of grace: Though faith only justifies, alone faith never justifies:
If I do good works, to testify my Sanctification before men, then my belief in
Christ, will ensure my Justification before God: As my faith must justify me,
so my works must justify my faith: No man believes in Christ, that lives in
sin. I say not, who is sometimes gulled, but every day misled, and willingly;
the effect of faith is an holy life: As light attends on the Sun, so good works
on Faith; he that lives well, cannot believe ill: Thy life ensures me of thy
belief; thy belief, of the love of God, yea, and that thou art one of those of
whom it is said, God so loved the World, that he, etc.

GODS PRESENCE, Patiences Protector.
Phil. 4. part of verse 5. The Lord is at hand.


THese words were writ to the Philippians, occasioned, for that surrounded with
sorrow, and overcast with care: They profess Christ, and for it, scorned by the
Jews; scoft at by the Gentiles.

Now lest despair crush them, or impatience provoke them, this Memento is given
them, The Lord is at hand.

One able to support; for A Lord: No mean one, for (...) The Lord; nor is he
far off, for says S. Paul, At hand; on thy right hand, to comfort; not on thy
left hand, to scourge.

Our God is in Heaven, and our God is here; Residentially above, Potentially
below: There is his Palace, and here he perambulates; and as thou can not
fly from thy shade, no more from God: The Sun is above, and vertually with us;
and God is in Heaven, yet always with men on earth.

He is within sight, Nam Deus videt, God sees within cry, for says he, Call on
me in trouble, and I will hear thee: He houses in thy house, Know ye not your
bodies are the houses of the Holy Ghost.

A Cordial, and may comfort Gods child; a Corrosive, and cuts to the quick the
sons of Belial.

God sees thy afflictions, and can ease thee: He knows the impetuous
wantonness of the wicked; and will punish him.

But why should I lay on load, when God bids, Hold off Hands?

This Scripture is not alleged, to terrify evil livers, but to support such
as are surround with sorrow.

Thou live well, and farest ill, servest God, and art misused by men. It is
pity, that for well-doing, thou should be ill entreated.

This is the course of the World, to set light by them; who set an high
estimate on Gods service.

The Devil and the sons of Belial both join, to disjoynt a Saint; the wicked
with revilings, the Devil with temptations.

The nigher I come to God, the closer siege the Devil lays to my soul: A daily
sinner he seldom assaults.

No, he that is running fast on to Hell, needs not be called on to mend his
pace; but he that is going out of Sodom, shall find many a stop ere he get to
Zoar.

The approach of Gods Spirit close up to my heart, mudles the unclean spirit,
who vows a return, not only to the house, which is empty, swept, and garnished
empty of all Piety, swept with the stump worn broom Formality, and garnished
with the gilt of Hypocrisy; but he rages to turn into the Temple of God, The
heart of the Elect: There he hopes for rich plunder, Abraham's Jewels, Jonathans
Purple, and Judiths Bravery, to surprise a Saints spiritual graces.

This is that King of Assyria, that gives charge to his two and thirty
Captains, to sight with none but the King of Israel, the soul of a Saint.

O! the fall of such a star, he knows, would darken Heaven: The Apostasy of one
Disciple pleases him more, then the debauchedness of many Miscreants.

And now it is, that the siege is laid against the precious sold of a
sanctified Saint; his out-work is battered with persecution, his in-work with
temptation.

The Alarm is taken, and it holds on, all the Summer of our youth, and Winter
of our old age; it lasts from the cradle, to the crutch; from our birth, till
our Death.

To have such an enemy as the Devil, and so long a siege as all our lives, and
such fierce Assailants, as seek the ruin of body and soul, and for ever: Were
not this able to crush in pieces Patience. But O Jobs Wife, be thou gone! I
never knew her prove a good wise, who gave her husband evil counsel. I hate
here advice, to Curse God; I like Jobs resolve, Yea, though the Lord kill me,
yet will I trust in him.

Job knew that the Devil was busy about him, yet that God was not far from him.

This is it will make us take our dough upon our shoulders, and march though a
Wilderness of stinging Serpents.

We have a cloud behind, to shade us from our enemies; a pillar of fire
before, to guide on to the promised land of our possession: The Lord is he, who
never leaves us, nor forsakes us.

The presence of God, is the prime preserver of Patience in afflictions: Let me
stand it out, my Sovereign Lord is within sight: Let me not faint, since such a
second is present: The Lord is present; What could I do if he were not here?
What can I not, now he is at hand? Not only sight, but overcome, Become more
then Conqueror; yea, conquer the Devil, that meant to make of me a conquest;
yea Conquer my self, whom the DEVIL could not Conquer.

I am never a freeman, until a Bondsman; the more I inslave my flesh, in which
dwells no good thing; ne parum, ne minimum quidem, no not the least good; the
more my mind, my spirit and heart are at liberty now to bring this to pass,
hic labor, hoc opus.

Our hands are weak, and cannot do this work, weakened by Adams sin, by our own
actual sins: How can a weak man stand out against a subtle Serpent? How can we
hold out the fight sixty years, that cannot work sixty hours?

Can frail man undergo a life-lasting Temptation? Is not the thought of this
able to turn his Patience into Passion, to be ever set on, day and night
waking, sleeping, without ceasing or intermitting.

It is now that the power of God begins to manifest it self: I am here, and
here is God; I can do nothing without him, he will do nothing without me: He
works in me, I work by the help of him; I faint, he refreshes, The light of his
countenance puts life into me.

But O! the mists of homebred Ignorance, and hellish Temptations, interpose
betwixt me and my God! and now with Mary, I am ready to cry out, They have
taken away my Lord; and in depriving me of the presence of God, they rob me of
my perseverance and patience in afflictions. This is my fear, yet while I fear
the worst, I may chance fare the best.

I will sooner approve of a filial fear, then a foward presumption: Faith may
be overcast, never finally eclipsed; or if eclipsed, it is but for a time: A
short time, and the Sun appears, even he who made the Sun, and the Moon, and
the Stars, God blessed for ever, amen. Let us by looking up to God, as Israel
to the Brazen Serpent, cure our Soul-sick patience: God he is the Register, and
Records all our sufferings: He carries the scales, and weighs out our just
allowance; no more can be laid upon us, then he likes: no more will he let be
laid upon us then we can bear: He is night us, and none can wrong us: He is
with us, the General with his Soldiers, the Sovereign with his Subjects, the
Physician of Souls, with his Soul-sick Patients: Let us then have patience,
yea, Let your patient mind be known, for God is at hand.

WHERE UNITY Amity.
I Pet. 3. part of verse 3. Finally, be ye all of one mind, love as brethren.


ST. Peter shows a scattered Church, the best way how to avoid trouble. These
new Converts in Pontus, Galatia, Capadocia, Asia and Bythenia, have been of
several judgments; but diversity of Opinions, breeds discord in Professors:
And therefore to avoid Insurrection against the State, and Schism in the
Church, the advice is, Be ye all of one mind.

The Gospel makes ex sua Natura, union, never division; neither is it probable,
that he will make a good Christian, that dissevers from the Congregation.

This Divine Exhortation gives no license for Liberty of Conscience, lest
Liberty of Conscience become Licentious Libertinism.

What the Church decrees, that Edict must be obeyed; for be sure, A Schismatic
in Discipline, when opportunity serves, will be a Rebel against his Sovereign:
A contemner of Church Government, has always been found a close spurner
against Kingly Power.

And therefore to preserve obedience to the Prince care must be taken, That
submission be made to the Churches Canons: Which sacred work speedier to
effect, the charge is, Be ye all of one mind.

This Injunction is given by St. Peter, and the greater the Apostle, of more
weight are his words: It is directed to Gospel-Professors, to show, commonly
where grace, there will be peace: It is not to one, but all; Be ye all.

The Mysteries and Mandats of Christ Jesus, must be dispensed non ad unum, sed
unitatem: But what is this that is given in charge, Be of one mind.

A needful Mandat; for those men's hands can never be bound to good behavior,
whose judgments do differ: Know it, That new broached Schisms and Heresies in
the Church, are Cankerworms to the Crown; and where the Power of the Keys in
spiritualibus is not coercive, the impudence of Apostates is intolerable: When
so many men, so many minds; as many minds, so many mischiefs: The ignorance
of some, and impudence of others, makes bold Controllers; But a rod, says
Solomon, is made for the back of the fool; and a whip (Church-censure) made of
small cords, must scourge the incorrigible out of the Temple.

But come, we will not put them out of the Church, who pulled us out of our
Pulpits; what is past is forgiven, so that finally ye all be of one mind.

We say, Better late thrive, then never; and, He runs far, that never turns: We
have hopes of you, while you have life: What was amiss, let it be amended; And
finally, be ye all of one mind.

I dare not, but set the Church-doors wide open to all, who come home to the
Church, there is yet time, before the Door be shut. The Thief was welcome to
Christ at the last hour; So Peter has given almost as large a time for the
dissenting Brethren to return: Besides, there is a Royal Dispensation from our
King, for what past; so that now you will accept of his grace, and obey St.
Peter, And finally, be all of one mind, and love as brethren.

Lo, it is unity of the Spirit, must make Amity among men; for as there is no
union, where there is no love; so no love, where no union.

He that pretends friendship to me at my table, and will not walk with me to
the Lords Table, such a friend is more to be feared then trusted; for he that
makes no conscience constantly to be a Separatist from the Holy Communion, has
little love to his own soul; And is it not high time then for me to set my
Corpse du guard?

Union then in Gods service, is the best Certificate, It is Peace: But look at
the tree, and look at the fruit, like tree, like fruit: Here is unity, and here
is love.

Give me leave, though Knocks began the Quarrel, yet to end in Love; long was
it wished, and much now to be hoped: A love one to another, assures we love our
Lord and Maker; but he that loves not his Brother, neither dwells the love of
God in him.

Whatsoever went before, let love lead up the rear: And since no way but one to
be certain, how God loves us, and we one another, the advice is, Finally, be ye
all of one mind.

Finally,] As if God of his goodness would give a Dispensation for what past,
so that now at last ye all would be of one mind, and love as Brethren.

Beloved, here is one newly lighted, who shall bring love to our lodging; it is
Humility: Want Humility, and farwell Love to God, and Charity to men.

Every Key cannot open this Lock, Love; every Captain, cannot conquer this
Castle; every Levite, must not look into this Ark; and yet Humility is the Key,
Captain, and the Levite, that can unclock the Door, and win the Castle, and
search into that Ark, where lies this heavenly Treasure, (Love) kept in earthen
vessels.

But as I have found out him, can bring Love to our houses; so here is another
will seat him in our hearts. The last born is the strongest man; the last word
the most forcible inducement, to move this our whole Isle to live in love.

We be Brethren, all of us by Creation, many of us by Nation, most of us by
Profession; nay more, God is our Father, and the Church our Mother. What, Full
Brethren! it is a shame then to fall out, and live at odds, Genes. 45.24. O let
us love for Brethren.

It was Abraham's Argument to Lot, Let there be no difference betwixt thy
Herdsmen and mine, for we be Brethren.

We are of the same Mould, live in the same Land, profess the same Faith; And
shall we differ? That Tripartite tie of Nature, Nation, and Religion, are
serious Motives to bury all discontents, and renew a peace, and love as
Brethren.

Nay, he is guilty of death in foro poli, that lives not in love in foro soli;
for love is the fulfilling of the Law.

Again, my hearty charity to my neighbor, clears me of my debt to God; for God
will forgive all, so we will forgive one another.

I am resolved to send a defiance to Discord, and to live in peace with all
Mankind: Thus I shall be ensured of the love of God and Man; of Grace here,
and Glory in Heaven: Which Glory, that we may all inherit, let us hence forward
be all of one mind, and love as brethren.

FINIS.
Imprimatur,

GVLIELMVS LIGHTBVRNE, Capellanus Reverendissimi Patris JACOBI DUBLIN. Archiep.
etc.

THESE BOOKS ARE Put out by this AUTHOR.
THe Lords Prayer unclaspt.

The Plea for the Common Prayer Book.

The Passing Bell rung out.

The Ministers Office, the Infants Inheritance, or a pair of Spectacles for the
Anabaptists.


