THE Family-Physician, AND THE House-Apothecary.

CONTAINING I. Medicines against all such Diseases people usually advise with
Apothecaries to be cured of. II. Instructions, whereby to prepare at your own
Houses all kinds of necessary Medicines that are prepared by Apothecaries, or
prescribed by Physicians. III. The exact Prices of all Drugs, Herbs, Seeds,
simple and compound Medicines, as they are sold at the Druggists, or may be
sold by the Apothecaries. IV. That it is plainly made to appear, that in
preparing Medicines thus at your own Houses, that it is not only a far safer
way, but you shall also save Nineteen Shillings in Twenty, comparing it with
the extravagant Rates of many Apothecaries.


By GIDEON HARVEY, M. D. Physician in Ordinary to his Majesty.

The Second Edition, Revised by the Author.

Printed for M. R. and are to be sold by the Booksellers of London. 1678.

Imprimatur.

May 6. 1676. G. Jane.

THE INTRODUCTION, Containing the use of this TREATISE.
AS Diseases and Death are marks of the Divine Justice in the punishment of
Sin, So the Art of Physic must be acknowledged a derivative from the
transcendent Mercy of the Great God, whereby the crazie and sickly
constitutions of humane Bodies are supported, their pains appeased, and Health
restored. These, as well as his other Attributes, render the Almighty most
glorious.

The Observation deduced from what precedes, informs us, That those that usurp
and exercise the Art of Physic abusively and unworthily, do extremely Eclipse
Gods glory, by so diminishing of his Mercy; and of this so weighty a Sin, it is
to be feared many Empiricks and Little Apothecaries inhabiting the skirts of
the City, and Country Villages, do contract a guilt, not only by administering
Physic ignorantly, and without those qualifications that are absolutely
necessary in a Physician, but by over-rating the prices of their Medicines, to
that degree, that mean Families by a fit of sickness or two must unavoidably be
ruined in Estate, and too often in their Health. I must tell you, I have often seen
Bills of Apothecaries risen to twenty, and sometimes thirty pounds in the time
of a Fortnight; what is more, I have known an Apothecaries Bill so extravagant,
that the Sum at the bottom of his Account amounted to Fifty Pounds in the space
of Thirty Days, when the Ingredients of the whole Course could not be computed
to stand him in Forty Shillings: But, that which sounds worse than all this,
is, that not long since an Apothecary of our Suburbs, to Nine Patients, brought
in Bills for less than three quarters of a years Physic, amounting to Fifteen
Hundred Pounds. Though at the same time I must intimate to you, that this is
not the practice of our London-Apothecaries, who not only for discharging their
Consciences in the faithful Preparation of their Medicines, but also for
vending them at reasonable Rates; may vie with any others of that Trade in all
Europe; and therefore you are not to suppose me here embarked in a design of
discouraging you to make use of these later, who are so necessary in the Art of
Physic, but only of discharging my Duty to such, as are exposed to be
defrauded by some Little Apothecaries of the Country and skirts of the City,
not only through their ill preparation of Medicines, but also through their
unjust and avaricious Prices: So that I do pretend hereby, First, to instruct
you, how to prepare the most usual and ordinary Medicines at your own Houses;
which cannot but be a great satisfaction to you, in regard you are certain they
are well prepared, and that the Ingredients are Sound and Fresh; Likewise that
you can have your Medicines ready, without attending the Apothecaries leisure
for him to bring them, or without giving your self the trouble to send three or
four times to his Shop for them. Secondly, you may be assured, that in so
doing, you shall save Nine Pounds in Ten, or sometimes Forty Eight Pounds in
Fifty. Thirdly, by this means you avoid being defrauded of your Lives and
Estates too, by Mountebanks and their Medicines, which being so indifferently
and rashly used by many credulous Persons, at all times and seasons, without
that particular regard had to their Constitution, Age, Sex, Climate, and Cause
of Disease, must necessarily, if not kill, at least destroy the Temperament of
their Bowels and noble Parts.

Before I proceed any further, I am obliged to demonstrate, and make it appear,
in what manner, and wherein this Treatise does discharge what is here promised.

First then, I have picked out such Medicines of the London-Dispensatory as are
most usual, which being reduced to a small number, may without any great defray
of charges, be kept ready at your Houses. I have only made choice of three or
four fragrant Waters, that are to serve for Cordial Juleps, which in respect of
Temperament, may be mixed and qualified for use in hot or cold Distempers. What
concerns the vast number of other simple distilled Waters, I do wittingly
reject them, as being so little imbued with the virtue of the Simples whence
they are distilled, that Decoctions, or sometimes Infusions, or Expressions of
Juices made of the same Simples, or Spirits distilled from them, are
experienced to be a million stronger; which as your Disease may require, are to
be prescribed, and taught you by your Family-Physician. Likewise compound
Waters, Syrups, Electuaries, Pills, Trochisces or Lozenges, Emplasters,
Unguents, and Oils, you have only so many recommended to you, as may serve for
most uses; the others of the Dispensatory are omitted, either because they
agree in Virtue with those that are inserted, or are not so congruously
compounded, or are rarely used, or are dangerous, or useless; or if occasion
does require, may be prescribed by your Physician.

Secondly, I have taught you here the best manner of distilling Simple and
Compound Waters, of preparing Syrups, Pills, Electuaries, etc. what Ingredients
are to be put in first, which afterward, how some particular Medicines are to
be reduced into Powders, and how at last the whole Composition is to be
artificially mixed.

Thirdly, I have calculated what each Medicine will stand you in, set down
exactly the prices of Herbs and other Simples that are to be bought of the
Herb-women, the prices current of Drugs and Physical Seeds that are to be
bought of the Druggists, and of Spices and dry Fruits that are vended by the
Grocers; all which being Alphabetically placed in the latter part of this
Treatise, you may at any time have recourse unto; whereby you likewise avoid
being imposed upon by the said Herb-women and Druggists: and by the same means
you may easily compute, what every Composition in the Dispensatory may amount
unto, giving some small allowance for garbles and waste, that may happen by the
powdering and sifting the Ingredients, or by evaporating over the Fire, or
sticking to the Pan, Pipkin, or other Utensil you make use of in preparing some
Compositions.

Fourthly, If want of convenience, or any other occasion should persuade you
from the preparing of the hereafter-mentioned Simples and Compositions at your
own house, you have the prices of both declared, at which you may buy them from
the Apotheearies ready prepared, to keep a proportion by you, to be mixed and
made use of according as your Physician shall judge fit.

Fifthly, If you desire to avoid that trouble also, and do prefer sending your
Physicians Bill to an Apothecary, you may hence easily compute, what the
Medicine is to be valued at, and what the Apothecary deserves for his pains,
for mixing and bringing it to your House.

Lastly, Since every small disorder of Body puts many into the humor of
sending for an Apothecary, who to mimick the Physician, shall ask you, when you
was at Stool, or whether you are not oppressed or stuffed at your Stomach;
feels your Pulse, and then shall tell you, that you are weak: and if he finds
you hot, he forces you to believe you have got a Surfeit: or if he perceives
your hand to be cold, he persuades you that you have taken cold. This is the
substance of his Theory, on which he practices so boldly. But if you are
curious to be thoroughly acquainted with the whole Body of Physic, by which the
Country- Apothecary practices, you may soon gratify your self in that, by
purchasing a Treatise called, The Accomplished Physician, the Honest Apothecary,
and the Skilful Surgeon, sold at the Angel in Duck-lane; which having perused
from page 4 to 14, and from page 64 to 73, will abundantly satisfy you for
your disbursement. If then you are found to be costive, he sends you a Clyster
at 2 s. 6 d. price; which on the same occasion you may advise your self, and be
instructed by this Treatise, how to make one for three half pence, or two
pence. If he apprehends your stomach to be oppressed, he orders his man to boil
a little Carduus in Water, strain it, and put to it three or four spoonfuls of
rank Oil of sweet Almonds, to cause you to vomit, and carry off a little phlegm;
for which an half Crown is an usual rate. Now, instead of this, you may at a
much cheaper price make your self a Pint or two of Carduus-Posset, and drink it
off lukewarm, to cause the same effect. For your weakness, he will advise you
a Cordial made out of two or three musty simple Waters, Confectio Alkermes, and
a little Syrup of Gilly-flowers, for which he expects to be paid three
Shillings and six Pence; and by the way compute, what two or three Cordials a
day may amount unto, in three or four weeks time. What he reckons at three
shillings six pence, you are taught below, how to prepare a Cordial Julep for
much less. In case of a Surfeit, three or four pints of cooling Juleps shall be
sent you every day, at two shillings six pence, or three shillings the Pint;
which you shall be informed how to prepare at two pence or three pence the
quart. If he infers from the pain of your Head and Limbs, Cough, Stuffing in
your Head, etc. that you have taken Cold, some Sweating Bolus or Potion
(whereof Mithridate, or Treacle shall be the chief Ingredient) besides Syrups,
he conceives to be good Remedies, that may conduce to your health and his
profit; wherein also the Directions of this Tract will render you a
considerable saver.

This is the furthest point the Practicing Apothecary can safely steer, or
which you are capable to apprehend; wherefore you are not to expect from me
instructions for using the great Remedies, viz. Bleeding and Purging; the good
management of which and other Remedies, does entirely depend upon the Methodus
Medendi, (or Method of Curing) which two words do summarily express the whole
Art of Physic, and its greatest Secret: for, to arrive to the said Method of
Curing, or applying of Remedies in manner, order, and time, it is requisite a
man should understand the Nature of Diseases, their Causes, and the Parts
diseased, unto which the said Remedies are to be applied; all which cannot be
understood, unless you have acquired a competent knowledge of the natural
Constitution of the Parts of the Body of Man, their Structure, Position,
Relation, and Connection to each other, and their several Offices and Uses. This
Knowledge or Science is chiefly gained by frequent Anatomy, or Dissection of
dead Bodies, and most certainly is the Basis and Groundwork of the Art of
Physic; and the complete finishing of that, is the Methodus Medendi: For all
Factive and Mechanic Arts consist in these three particulars. 1. In the
knowledge of their Subject, which in our Art is the body of Man in its natural
and preternatural constitution. 2. In the Instruments or Means whereby to
operate, which in the said Art are such, whereby to preserve the Body in its
natural constitution or health, and whereby to correct and remove its
preternatural or diseased Constitution, which are Diet and Remedies. 3. In the
Method or Directory of Rules, how to use the said Instruments, which in Physic
is called Methodus Medendi, or the Method of applying the said Means. The First
and Third Particular I have already spoken to. The Second is the Means, wherein
it is as necessary for a Physician to be not only knowing, but also
experienced, as in either of the other: For what success can be expected from
the Method of applying Remedies, unless those Remedies are such, as obtain a
Specific and peculiar property of correcting or removing the Cause of each
Disease? A Physician is as little capable to cure great Diseases with ordinary
Medicines (which notwithstanding some of the ignorant for want of due Education
pretend to do) as a Graver is able to cut curious Figures in Steel, with the
ordinary Tools of a Carver or Stone-cutter; or a Barber to take off the hair of
your Beard with a Chopping-knife.

As for those ordinary Medicines, they are set down in several Dispensatories,
among which, that of the Physicians of London, considering the time it was
composed, by far exceeds all the others. These ordinary Medicines, it is
confessed, being methodically applied, may by long continuation remove some
slight Distempers, and some great Diseases also, if timely used; but if
confirmed and inveterated, are too often found absolutely fruitless. For what
proper Remedy do those Dispensatories contain to cure a Pulmonick ulcerous
Consumption, an inveterate Scurvey, Dropsy, Stone, Gout, Fever, King's Evil,
Leprosy, etc. To this a Vulgar Hackney-Physician shall possibly answer, That
there is no Disease, be it never so great or dangerous, but he will undertake
(which is well put in) to cure by Method, and that with ordinary Medicines. For
Example, a Consumption occasioned by an Ulcer in the Lungs, he pretends to cure
by prescribing, 1. Medicines that shall discharge or cleanse the Ulcer, by
expelling the matter by Expectoration, that is, by coughing and spitting; and
this is performed by Ground Ivy, Speedwel, Hyssop, and many other Vulneraries
made into a Syrup, Lohoch, or Decoction. 2. By consolidating Medicines, that
shall close up and skin it with a Callus; such are Comfrey, Knotgrass,
Ladies-Mantle, and such like, as you may read in Chap. 20. of my Treatise of
Consumptions. 3. By moistening and restoring the solid and other parts that are
consumed and dried up by the absorbing heat of an Hectic Fever. This Effect is
expected from Asses Milk, which they say, does cleanse, cool, moisten, and
nourish the consumed parts. 4. By Fontanels or Issues, shaving off the Hair of
the Head, and applying Attractive Plasters on it; likewise by cramming the
Patient with Conserve and Sugar of Roses; all which shall serve to intercept
the defluxion of corroding Humors, falling down from the Brain to the Lungs.
Now when all these means have been used a very considerable time, look upon the
Weekly Bills of Mortality, and you shall soon know the pretended effects of
those ordinary Medicines.

In the first place I must agree, that some of those Indications are well
enough proposed, and the Indicata in respect of the Materia Medica there set
down, do sometimes (though seldom) accomplish a happy Cure. But in the second
place, I must also tell you, that there is another sort of a Materia Medica,
being artificially prepared, and not according to the Rules of the slovenish
Cookery of Country-Apothecaries, that does very often, and always, if timely and
methodically applied, answer the expectation of the Physician, and the hopes of
the Sick, not only in Pulmonick Consumptions, but also in those other Diseases
before recited.

Touching those great Medicines, it is very fortunate they are not yet arrived
to the knowledge of the little Apothecaries, or the prescribing Surgeons, who
using them without Method, though sometimes they might do good, yet for want of
capacity in the Applicative, would certainly at most times do great mischiefs
with them; and therefore every Physician ought to reserve them secret, by
preparing them himself, and when necessary to be used, to send them to the
Apothecary to be exhibited, or to give them to his Patients, with what
Directions are requisite.

In conclusion, though the practice by the said great Medicines is by me here
proposed as necessary, yet I am not to be understood by that, to exclude the
use of Apothecaries, or the Medicines of the Dispensatory, that are to be
prepared by them: for most schetical and moveable, or slight commencing
Diseases, those ordinary Medicines are experienced so capable to remove, that
to make use of great Medicines in those cases, would seem, as if you laid hold
of a Club to knock down a Louse.

The second necessary use of the said ordinary Medicines is, either to serve
the great Medicines for Vehicles, or to be substituted in their stead (when
some circumstances may countermand their use) so long, until occasion or
opportunity shall require the aid of the said great Medicines, and the
forementioned circumstances be abated.

Now, Reader, if I find this Essay does receive that acceptance from you,
which its real Use, and consequently the certain Advantage that you will
acquire thence, does merit, you may expect a further pursuit of this so
profitable design, that tends to no other end, than the Preservation of your
Health and Purse.

Farewell.
Hatton-Garden, March 10. 1675.
Pre-Instructions touching Weights and Measures.
WEIGHTS.
A Physical Pound (which is Troy-weight) contains only twelve Ounces.

The Druggist and Grocers Pound (being Aver-de-poiz-weight) contains sixteen
Ounces.

An Ounce contains eight Drams.

A Dram contains three Scruples.

A Scruple contains twenty Grains.

MEASURES.
A Pint measure in most watery Liquors, weighs twelve Ounces.

Two Quarts make a Pottle, two Pottles make a Gallon.

A Fascicle signifies an Armful.

One Handful is as much as a moderate hand can take up.

A Pugil is as much as you can take up with your Thumb and two next Fingers.

Observe, That Roots, Barks, Woods, small Fruits, Berries, Seeds, Gums and
Rosins are set down by weight; Herbs by handfuls and fascicles; Flowers, and
the tops of some Herbs by pugils.

THE Family-Physician, AND THE House-Apothecary.
CHAP. I.
Of the most useful Simple distilled Waters, and the manner how to distill them.
AMong the vast number of distilled simple Waters, none are more useful, than
those four mentioned below, which may serve to answer that intention, which the
best of simple Waters are used for, viz. for Cordial Juleps, and Cordial
Potions. What concerns alterative Waters, they contain so weak a virtue (as I
said before in the Introduction) that Decoctions, Infusions, and Juices made, or
Spirits drawn from the same alterative Simples, are infinitely more effectual;
and therefore when occasion does require the use of them, may be prescribed,
and easily taught you how to prepare them, by your Family-Physician.

The Four Simple Waters are, 1. Baume Water. 2. Black-Cherry Water. 3. Carduus
Benedictus Water. 4. Red Poppey Water, that is, Water distilled of red Poppey
flowers.

The Herbs, namely Baume, and Carduus Benedictus, are to be bought in
Newgate-Market, Stocks-Market, Gutter-lane, or Covent Garden, of the Physical
Herb-women, by the Basket, the Red Poppey Flowers by the Peck, Violet Flowers,
and some others are sold by the pint or quart measure. Scurvey-grass is sold by
the Basket, also by the Bushel or Peck. For most Herbs, if you buy them by the
handful, you must pay a Groat a dozen; or if you have occasion for less than a
dozen, a halfpenny the handful is the usual rate. The value of twelve Pence in
Herbs or Flowers will yield three Pints of Water, or more; in some Herbs it may
yield two Quarts or five Pints: or if you have not the convenience of
distilling them, you may buy them from the Apothecaries, at a Shilling the
Pint; or if you are only mindful to buy them, when your occasions require, you
need pay but a Penny for the Ounce, being the common price of almost all
distilled Waters. The common price of most English Roots among the Herb-women
is a Groat for a Pound.

The manner of distilling the said Simple Waters.
Put as many of those Herbs (being separated from the greater Stalks) or
Flowers (pulled from their Husks) as will only fill two Thirds, or at most
three Fourth parts of the body of a Pewter Alembick, or a Copper Alembick with
a Bucket head, without adding any Water to the Herbs, (which too many
Apothecaries do) and having closed the head to the body, by pasting slips of
Paper, of the breadth of an Inch, or a little more, round about the juncture,
with Starch or Yest; kindle your fire gradually, and continue it to a heat so
gentle, that your hand may endure it on any part of the Head; and so you will
distill your Waters without smelling of being burned, provided you have put
ashes to the thickness of an Inch and half between the plate and the body or
bottom of your Pewter Alembick.

If you make use of a Copper Alembick, you must fill the bucket with cold
Water, and as soon as you find the Water to be hot in the said bucket head, you
must tap it off, and fill it up again with cold Water.

The reason why you are not to fill the body of the Alembick with Herbs, is,
because should you fill it up, the bottom of the cake of the Herbs will be
dried and burnt, before the top is half dry or distilled off.

CHAP. II.
Containing the manner how to distill compound Waters.
The Description of London-Treacle Water.
TAke of the juice of green Walnut-peel a pint, of the juice of Rue three
quarters of a pint, of the juices of Marigold-leaves, Baume, and of Carduus
Benedictus, of each half a pint, Butterbur-roots four ounces and a half,
Burdock-roots a quarter of a pound, Master-wort and Angelica-roots, of each two
ounces, Water-Germander-leaves one handful, Venice Treacle and Mithridate of
each two ounces, Canary-Wine three pints, sharp French Vinegar a pint and an
half, juice of Limons half a pint.

The manner of preparing the Ingredients.
The Walnut-peel, Rue, Marigold-leaves, Baume and Carduus Benedictus must be
each severally bruised into a sappy mass in a stone Mortar, or a Lignum vitae
Mortar, and pressed through a fine Canvas cloth in a small Press. The fine
Canvas cloth for strainers you buy at the Linen Drapers at ten pence the
yard. The small Presses you may buy at the Turners at Hosier-lane end, next to
Smithfield, from three shillings to six or seven, according to their bigness;
or possibly you may buy one at second hand big enough for your use, at the same
Shops, for eighteen pence or less.

The reason why you are to bruise the Walnut-peel, Rue, and the other Herbs
severally, is, because you are to have an exact measure of each of their
Juices; For should you bruise Marigold-leaves, Baume, and Carduus, of each the
same quantity together, yet you would not have the same measure of Juices from
them, in regard one Herb yields far more Juice than another; though at the same
time I know several Apothecaries, to save trouble, do bruise the foresaid Herbs
together, which notwithstanding must be imputed an error in the exactness of
preparing Treacle-Water.

Observe, that Apothecaries commonly take the green Walnuts whole, that is,
Nuts and Peel about them, before they are quite ripe, and bruise them in a
stone-Mortar together, in order to the expressing of the Juice out of them.
Moreover note, that about fifty Walnuts will go near to yield a Pint of Juice.

2. The Butter-bur, Burdock, Masterwort, and Angelica-roots must be fresh taken
out of the ground, and may be bruised together into a mash; the
Water-Germander-leaves must be dried, stripped from their stalks, and beaten in a
Mortar into a course powder; or they may be used green, and beaten in a Mortar
to a mash, or shred small with a knife.

3. Put all these together with the Treacle and Mithridate into a glass Body,
and pour on them the several juices, and the Canary Wine, mixing them well by
shaking them gently together, and fasten a blind head to the said glass Body,
by applying round the juncture (or the place where they are joined) a Hogs
Bladder cut into long slips, the breadth of two fingers, and dipped in Whites of
Eggs, beaten thin into a Water: or put all those Ingredients into a Glass
Retort Receiver, the mouth whereof stop with a piece of Cork fitted to it, and
fasten a piece of Bladder over that. About the said Receiver tie two or three
pieces of Brick, to make it sink into a Kettle of Water, hanging over a gentle
Fire, wherein let it stand some twelve, or four and twenty hours at longest.
Then empty the Receiver into a glass Body, which being covered with its glass
Head or Alembick, and closed about the Juncture with slips of Paper and Starch,
or a Hogs Bladder dipped into Whites of Eggs, put into a Sand-pan, hanging in a
portable Furnace, there being the breadth of two fingers of Sand under the
Glass, fill the Pan with Sand, kindle the Fire gradually under it, and so let
it distill off, until the Ingredients are almost dry.

The prices at the Glass-Shop.
Of a quart green glass Body 12 d. Of a pottle green Body 18 d. Of a gallon
green Body 22 d. Of a quart white glass Body 18 d. Of a pottle white Body 2 s.
Of a gallon white Body 3 s. Of a green glass quart Head, that is fitting a
quart body, blind, or with a Spout 18 d. Of a green Pottle Head 22 d. Of a
green Gallon Head 2 s. 6 d. Of a green quart Retort Receiver 6 d. Of a green
pottle Retort Receiver 8 d. Of a green gallon Retort Receiver 12 d. Of an
earthen portable Furnace, according to its bigness, and fitted with a Sand-pan,
from 2 s. 6 d. to 5, 6, or 7 s.
Note, That those Bodies that are called quart Bodies, always are to contain
two quarts, if they were filled to the top. Likewise a Pottle Body is to hold a
Gallon, and a Gallon Body two Gallons. Likewise a quart Receiver is to hold a
Pottle; and the others proportionably the double.

2. Observe, That the Apothecaries commonly (without other digestion than
letting it stand three or four days in their Shops in a great glass) distill
this and other compound Waters in a small Copper Still with a Bucket Head; but
then those Waters shall not be so full of virtue, nor so pure, as the Waters
distilled in a Glass.

The price of the whole Composition.
Compute the Walnuts the half hundred at 6 d. The Herbs whereout the juices are
to be pressed at 12 d. or 14 d. The Roots and Germand. at 3 d. d. The Treacle
and Mithridate at 2 s. Canary Wine at 3 s. French Vinegar at 3 d. Juice of
Limons at 4 d. d. Charcoal Fire used in distilling 4 d. The whole is 7 s. 10 d.
So that for seven Shillings and ten Pence you may expect near four Quarts of
excellent Treacle-Water, which is about ten pence three farthings the pint, and
scarce three farthings the ounce, computing according to the content of their
retail measure, sixteen ounces to the Pint, which according to Physical
measure, ought to contain twelve Ounces.

The Apothecaries prices of Treacle Water by the pint, is three shillings six
pence; some will not sell it for less than four shillings: by the ounce, four
pence; others will sell for three pence. Some few Apothecaries in stead of
Canary put in a decayed Malaga or Brandy: and for juice of Limons put in Lime
juice, and make use of their worst sort of Treacle and Mithridate; wherefore
they sell Treacle-Water somewhat cheaper than the ordinary price.

The Description of Aqua Epidemica, or the London Plague-Water.
TAke of the roots of Tormentil, Angelica, Peony M. Liquorish, Elicampane, of
each half an Ounce; of the Leaves of Sage, the greater Celandine, Rue, the tops
of Rosemary, Wormwood, Sundew, Mugwort, Burnet, Dragons, Scabious, Agrimony,
Baume, Carduus Benedictus, Betony, the lesser Centaury, of the leaves and
flowers of Marigolds, of each a handful; steep them four days in four quarts of
the best White Wind, and distill them in ashes in a glass Alembick.

The manner of Preparation.
Note, Instead of putting Sand into the Sand pan of your portable Furnace, you
must put in ashes, or rather Saw-dust, for to set the glass Alembick in to
distill.

You must bruise the Roots in a Stone, or Lignum Vitae Mortar; shred the
leaves, and bruise them also in a Mortar, and put them into such a glass stopped
close, and fixed in warm Water, as was expressed in the Preparation of the
foregoing Water.

The Prices.
The Roots at a half penny the half ounce come to 2 d. d. The Leaves at a half
penny the handful 8 d. The Wine at 4 s. Charcoal to burn in the furnace 4 d.
The whole distillation will stand you in just 5 s. 2 d. d.
The Pint of this Plague Water costs you seven pence; in regard the whole
Distillation will yield somewhat more than eight Pints, the Ounce will come to
less than three farthings, computing Physically twelve ounces only to the Pint.

The Apothecaries Prices of Plague-Water.
By the Pint three Shillings six Pence, and some sell it at four Shillings.

By the Ounce three Pence, and some four Pence.

The Description of Aqua Mirabilis.
TAke of Cloves, Galangal, Cubebs, Mace, Cardamoms, Nutmegs, Ginger, of each a
dram; juice of Celandine half a pint; Spirits of Wine one pint; Whitewine three
pints. Steep them four and twenty hours, and then distill them in ashes in a
glass Alembick.

The manner of Preparing.
The manner of steeping and distilling of this Water, is the same with the
foregoing. Most Apothecaries and Distillers draw this Water off in a Copper
Still with a Bucket Head, or with one that goes with a Worm.

The Spices before mentioned must be beaten to a course powder only; for if you
endeavor to bring them into a fine powder, their principal virtue is apt to
fly away in powdering.

By Spirits of Wine is here meant the best Nants Brandy.

Observe, You are to distill this Water only half off, and leave the other half
in the Still; because the first half will contain all the Spirits and virtue of
the Ingredients; whereas the other remaining half is found to be flat, and sit
for no other use, than to wash your hands; though it is to be feared, that such
as are greedy of gain, distill it almost quite off.

The Prices.
The Spices all at 6 d. or 7 d. The juice of Celandine at 3 d. or 4 d. The best
Nants Brandy the pint at 5 d. or 6 d. Whitewine at 18 d. Charcoal 2 d. or 3 d.
The whole Distillation, which is two pints and a quarter, comes to 2 s. 10 d.
or, 3 s. 2 d.
The Pint comes to seventeen or eighteen pence.

The Ounce comes to five farthings, or a little less.

The Apothecaries Prices.
By the pint three shillings six pence, and some four shillings.

By the ounce three pence, and some four pence.

The Description of Cinnamon Water according to the Dispensatory.
TAke a quarter of a Pound of Cinnamon, steep it four and twenty hours in three
Quarts of Brandy, then distill it in ashes in a glass Alembick, which renders a
purer Water by much than a copper Still.

The manner of Preparation.
Observe, You are to bruise the Cinnamon gross, and into every Pint of the
distilled Water you must dissolve two Ounces of the best white Sugar.

Here is a great deal of hot burning Brandy to a little Cinnamon, wherefore you
will do better in preparing it thus.

Take three quarters of a pound of Cinnamon bruised, steep it eight and forty
hours in a quart of Rose Water, and a pint of Whitewine; then distill it, as
long as it drops milkie, in a glass Alembick in Balneo; that is, in Water
poured into your Sand-pan, instead of Sand or Ashes; but if your Pan be not
large enough to contain a sufficient quantity of Water, you may make use of
Saw-dust instead of the Water, and keep a very moderate fire in the Furnace.

What this Water will stand you in, you may easily compute your self.

The Description of Aqua Raphani composita, or the common compound Water
against the Scurvey.
TAke of Garden and Sea-Scurvey-grass leaves, of each three pound, press the
juice out of them; and thereunto mix of the juices of Watercresses and
Brooklime, three quarters of a pint; the best White Wind two quarts; Limons cut
into small slices, six in number; Briony roots newly taken out of the ground
two pound; Hors-radishes one pound; Winters bark a quarter of a pound; Nutmegs
two ounces: steep them three days, and distill them in Ashes in a glass
Alembick, or copper Still with a Bucket Head.

The manner of Preparation.
The Briony and Horseradish Roots must be bruised together in a stone Mortar,
the Winters bark and the Nutmegs are to be beaten to a gross powder in a brass
Mortar. The juices are to be pressed out of the said Herbs, in the same manner
as was told you in the preparation of Treacle-water.

Put the Ing^^dients into a glass Receiver, and pour the Juices on them; stop
the Glass very close with a Cork and a Bladder, and place it in a cool Cellar
for two or three days.

Observe, 1. If you should let those Ingredients stand in steep in hot Ashes,
Sand, or warm Water, that would certainly diminish the virtue of those light
flying Salts and Spirits.

2. The juice of Limons mortifying the said light flying Salts and Spirits, may
be more conveniently left out than added.

3. When this Water has been kept a month or two, though never so close stopped,
you may be certain it has lost very much of its virtue.

4. This Water being distilled, as exactly as may be, yet is not half so
effectual as some Spirits, which are published in my last Treatise of the
Scurvie.

The Prices.
Upon the valuation of the Herbs, Roots, and Bark, according to the Rates I
have already informed you before, you shall find, that this Water may be
prepared at six or eight pence the pint, and at a half penny the ounce.

The Apothecaries commonly sell this Water at three shillings six pence the
Pint, and three pence the Ounce.

The Description of Aqua Brioniae composita, or the London Water against Fits
of the Mother.
TAke of the Juice of Briony-roots one pint, of the leaves of Rue and Mugwort,
of each half a pound; Savin dried, a little less than a handful; Fetherfew,
Nip, Pennyroyal, Basil, of each half a handful; of the outside of fresh
Orange-peel one ounce; Myrrh half an ounce; Castor a quarter of an ounce;
Canary-wine three pints: steep them four days in a Glass well stopped, and then
distill them off in a glass Alembick in Balneo, or warm water.

The manner of Preparation.
The dried Herbs, which are the Savin and Pennyroyal, may be beaten together
to a gross powder.

The other Herbs, which must be green and fresh, are to be shred small, or
beaten to mash in a wooden or stone Mortar.

The Myrrh must be poudered by it self, and the Castor cut into small thin
slices: mix all these together, and pour on them the Wine and Briony-juice.

This Water, when it is distilled as it ought to be, is not good enough to wash
your hands, and consequently of little virtue to be taken inwardly; for not a
quarter of the strength of the Ingredients does come over the Helm; Wherefore
let me advise you rather to prepare this Water against Fits, thus:

Instead of the Juice of Briony, Take dried Briony-roots, beaten to a gross
powder, two ounces; the rest of the Herbs being all dried, and the other
Ingredients poudered gross, and in the same quantity as they are set down
before. Instead of three pints of Canary, take a quart of the best Nants
Brandy. Put them into a Glass, and let them steep six days in warm Ashes, then
strain the liquor off, and keep it in a glass Bottle cork'd up for your use.

An half ounce of this Liquor does contain more virtue, than half a pint of the
other distilled Water.

What this Liquor or Water will stand you in, is not difficult to compute, by
what is informed you before; therefore I shall spare the pains of summing it up
here.

The Apothecaries prices are three shillings six pence, or four shillings the
pint; and three pence or four pence the ounce.

The Description of Aqua Limacum Magistralis, or the London Snail-water,
against Consumptions.
THis compound Water is so ridiculous, that I am ashamed to see it in any
Dispensatory; for the chief thing aimed at is, through the cool, clammy, and
glutinous substance of the liquor of Snails, 1. To cool the heat of the Hectic
Fever. 2. To repair the parts consumed. 3. To facilitate Expectoration, that
is, to make the matter come up easy by Cough, through its lenifying quality,
whereby it sweeteneth the humors, by allaying those gnawing Salts that prey on
the Lungs. Now in distilling of the Snails, there is no part of their unctuous
or glutinous Liquor passes the Alembick, but a mere Elementary Water. The same
may be said also of the Hogs Blood. For this and other reasons I do commend to
you this following Liquor of Snails.

Take of Garden-snails, especially those off a Vine, with their shells, a
pound; first wash them well with water and a little salt, then wash them once
or twice more with fair water, to wash off the salt; bruise them with their
shells in a stone Mortar to a mash; add to them Ground-Ivie, Speedwell,
Lungwort, Scabious, Burnet, Coltsfoot, and Nettle-tops, of each a handful;
English Liquoris, half an ounce; Dates stoned, twelve in number; of the four
greater cold Seeds, and Marshmallow seeds, of each one dram and half; Saffron a
scruple. Put them into a new glazed Pipkin, and pour on them a quart of
Spring Water; fasten the Cover close to the Pipkin, by pasting it round with
Dough. Let it stand twelve hours upon hot Cinders, or rather in a Kettle of hot
water over the fire; then strain and press out the Liquor, dissolving into it,
while it is warm, a quarter of a pound of clarified Honey; put it into a Glass,
and keep it in the Cellar.

Note, That the Herbs must be shred, the Seeds bruised, and the Liquoris cut
small.

What concerns the other compound Waters described in the Dispensatory, they
either agreeing in virtue with some of these forementioned, or being not very
aptly composed, or other Medicines being at hand, that instead of them may
immediately, according to the Prescription of your Family-Physician, be
prepared with far greater profit and benefit to the Patient; for those reasons
I have omitted setting down any more of the said Dispensatory-Waters.

CHAP. III.
Of Syrups.
The Description of Syrupus Altheae, or Syrup of Marshmallows.
TAke Marshmallow-roots, two ounces; Grass-roots, Asparagus-roots, Liquoris
raspt, and Raisins stoned, of each half an ounce; red Cicers, one ounce; the
tops of Marshmallows, Mallows, Pellitory, Burnet, Plantane, Wall-rue, and
Maidenhair, of each one handful; the four greater cold Seeds, and the four
lesser cold Seeds, of each three drams. Boil them in three quarts of fair water
unto two quarts; strain the Liquor into your Syrup-pan, and dissolve into it
three pounds and half of good Bahi Sugar, which will go as far as four pounds
of Barbados, and preserve the Syrup much better.

The manner of Preparing.
The Marshmallow-roots, by scraping with a knife, must be freed from those
strings that hang about them; likewise their hard cordy substance must be taken
away from them; then wash them well, and bruise them in the Mortar. Also wash
the Grass-roots and Asparagus-roots, and bruise them; scrape off the black
outside from the Liquoris, and bruise it into strings, or rasp it; wash the
Herbs clean, for cleanliness in preparing of Medicines is wholesome, and no less
commendable than it is in Cookery.

First then put into your Pipkin (being placed on a clear fire, and containing
three quarts of water) the Marshmallow, Asparagus, and Grass-roots, because
they require longest boiling; a while after put in the Cicers, and not long
after that put in the Herbs, being shred; the next you must put in, are the
Seeds, Liquoris, and Raisins: being sufficiently boiled, strain and press the
Liquor out, and then clarify it. The manner how to clarify Decoctions and
Apozemes, you shall be informed of at the end of this Chapter.

Having dissolved your Sugar to the Decoction, boil it gently, until it comes
to the due thickness of a Syrup.

Note, The four greater cold Seeds are these: 1. Pompion. 2. Cucumber. 3.
Gourge. 4. Melon-seeds.

The four lesser cold Seeds are, 1. Succory. 2. Endive. 3. Lettice. 4.
Purslain-seeds.

The Prices.
The Ingredients come to 9 d. The Sugar 21 d. Fire 3 d. or 4 d. The whole
amounts to 2 s. 10 d.
For which you have five pints, eight ounces, allowing the fourth part waste,
which evaporates in the boiling it up to a Syrup: so that it will stand you in
about three farthings the ounce.

The Apothecaries prices.
By the pint, two shillings.

By the ounce, three pence.

The Description of Syrupus Garyophyllorum, or Syrup of Gilliflowers.
TAke fragrant Gilli flowers, cut off from their white strings, one pound; pour
on them a quart of Spring Water, and let them stand all night. Then strain the
Liquor, and being gently warmed, dissolve therein four pound of the whitest
Sugar, without boiling it.

The manner of preparing.
1. Buy the most fragrant Gilliflowers, that are newly gathered, at ten or
twelve pence the peck.

2. Put them into a large pewter Flagon, or a new earthen glased Pipkin, and
pour the Water, being warmed, upon them; then stop your Flagon, or earthen
Vessel very close, and place it all night in the Cellar.

3. Strain off your tinctured liquor, without much pressing the Strainer, in
regard you are not to clarify it, as other Liquors are for Syrups; for that
would occasion a great loss of those fragrant Cordial Spirits.

4. Place your Syrup-pan over a very gentle Charcoal-fire burning clear without
the least smoke, and let your liquor be only lukewarm; then put in the Sugar,
being powdered and sifted gradually, stirring it about very gently with a long
Steel Spatula, or slice (which you may buy big enough for your turn for ten
pence at the Rasormakers.) As soon as you find the Sugar all dissolved, take
it off immediately, without letting it boil or be hot.

The Description of Syrupus Papaveris erratici, or Syrup of Red Poppies.
TAke Red Poppy-flowers newly gathered, two pound; steep them one day and night
in two quarts of warm water; strain and press out the liquor, which you must
not clarify, but add to it three pound and half of good Bahi-sugar, and boil
it gently to a Syrup.

The better way to make this Syrup is thus: Take two pints of the Juice of Red
Poppy-flowers, clarify it after the same manner as shall be taught you at the
latter end of this Chapter; put to it a pound and three quarters of Bahi-sugar,
and boil it gently to a Syrup.

The Price.
It will come to three farthings the ounce.

The Apothecaries price.
By the ounce three pence;

Which is the common price of most Syrups, excepting Laxative Syrups, and Syrup
of the juice of Pomgranates, which are sold at six pence the ounce.

By the Instructions set down here in this Chapter, you may easily attempt the
making any Syrup, and therefore I shall add no more.

In the preparation of the Syrup of Marshmallows, the manner of clarifying
Decoctions was referred to the latter end of this Chapter, which is thus:
Having strained your Decoction (being only warm, not hot) through a canvas or
woollen Strainer, pour about a pint thereof into a Bafon, wherein you have put
before two whites of Eggs, beaten with a Rod of small twigs, and their shells
crushed with your hands: mix them well together by stirring them with a spoon,
or rather beating them into a froth with the foresaid Rod of twigs; then put in
another pint of the Decoction, and mix it as before. This done, set it over the
fire, and let it boil a little until you see a scum a top; then take it off,
and let it cool a little, and then strain it, and let it run through without
squeezing or pressing it.

Note, That two Whites of Eggs, with their Shells, are sufficient for
clarifying a quart or three pints of Decoction.

The manner of clarifying Apozems is only thus: Having clarified the Decoction
as before is set down, you heat it again, and when it begins to boil, mix
the Syrup with it, and let it continue on the fire until it casts up a scum,
then strain it twice or thrice, being half grown cold.

The manner of clarifying Honey or Sugar will be inserted in another Chapter
below.

CHAP. IV.
The manner of making Conserves.
Conserve of Roses.
TAke a pound of red Rose-flowers, gathered in a dry season, before they are
quite spread; and their yellow bottoms clipped from them with a pair of Sissers,
bruise them well in a stone Mortar into an even smooth Mass like a Pulp; add
to it two pound of white Sugar, mixing it by degrees with the Roses, by
grinding them together with a wooden Pestle until all the Sugar be thoroughly
incorporated with the Roses. Then put the Conserve into a stone pot, covering
it only with a paper, and let it stand a fortnight or three weeks in the Sun,
stirring it about once or twice a week with a steel Slice or Spatula.

The manner of making Conserve of common Wormwood.
TAke of the tops only of common Wormwood, freed from its stalks, half a pound;
beat them in a stone or marble Mortar to an exact pulp, mixing with it a pound
and half of the best white Sugar, in the same manner as was directed in making
Conserve of red Roses.

Most Conserves are made the same way, adding a double quantity of Sugar to the
pulp of what Flowers or Herbs you intend to conserve, excepting only some
sower and bitter Herbs and Flowers, which require somewhat more Sugar.

The price of Conserves at the Apothecaries is two pence the ounce, and two
shillings eight pence the pound; excepting some few, as Conserve of
Rosemary-flowers (which is six pence the ounce) and suchlike.

If you prepare the Conserves your self, you will save above two Thirds in the
price, and probably may prove much better; for usually Apothecaries put up
their Conserves crude or raw, without digesting them by the heat of the Sun;
for which defect they neither keep so long, nor are they so safe to be used.

CHAP. V.
The manner of making Lozenges.
Trochisci albi pectorales, or the common white Lozenges.
TAke of the best white Sugar, half a pound; white Sugarcandy, and Penide
Sugar, of each two ounces; Florence Orris-root, half an ounce; Liquoris, six
drams; of the finest Flour, or Starch-flour, six drams; with the mucilage of
Gumdragant extracted in Rose Water, make them up into small Lozenges.

The manner of preparing.
1. The white Sugar, the Sugarcandy, and Penide Sugar, must be pounded and
sifted.

2. Penide Sugar is prepared thus: Dissolve the best Bahi Sugar in water over a
gentle fire; then clarify it with Whites of Eggs, in manner as has been told
you; next strain it through a cloth, and let it stand again over a gentle
fire, and boil away, until it comes to such a body that it will stick to your
Teeth; then being almost cooled, pour it on a Marble Stone, being a little
anointed over with Oil of sweet Almonds, keeping it together in a body as near
as you can with your fingers, being dusted over with a little Starch-flour.
When it is grown almost quite cold, and ropie, take it up with a steel fork, to
make it hang in ropes, which with your hand, being dusted with fine flour, you
may twine into what shape you please. This being so prepared, is called Penide
Sugar.

3. The Orris-roots must be powdered and sifted; likewise the Liquoris powdered
in this manner. Take dried Liquoris, scrape off the brown with a knife, round
about; then cut it into small bits with a knife that is made of the same Metal
which Shoemakers knives are made of. These put into a brass Mortar, and beat
into powder.

Observe, It being very troublesome to beat Liquoris into powder, you may buy
it ready poudered at the Druggists at a very small rate, which you may read in
the Catalogue of Prices belonging to this Treatise.

4. The Starch-flour must be gently rubbed into a powder in a Mortar; and then
mix all of them together in the same Mortar, by stirring the Pestil round
about; then pour to it as much mucilage of Gum-dragant as will suffice to bring
the Powders into a Paste, and beat it well together. The Paste being rolled
into long round Bodies, or little Columns, of the bigness of your little
finger, cut them into small round pieces, like Parsenips are cut, when they are
to be eaten buttered.

5. The mucilage of Gum-dragant is made only by steeping a little of the said
Gum in Rose Water so long, until it become thickish; which it will do in twelve
or eighteen hours.

What this Composition will amount unto, you may easily compute by perusing the
Catalogue of Prices.

The Apothecaries sell these white Lozenges at three pence the ounce.

The manner of preparing Trochisci bechici nigri, or the common black Lozenges.
TAke juice of Liquoris, and of the best white Sugar, of each one ounce and
quarter; Gum-dragant and sweet Almonds blanched, of each six drams, or three
quarters of an ounce; make them up into Lozenges with the mucilage of
Quince-seeds.

The Instructions given you for the preparing the foregoing Lozenges, will
sufficiently guide you in the Preparation of these; only I must add the manner
of poudering the Gum-dragant.

Your Gum-dragant being well dried, put into a brass Mortar, whose bottom has
been heated somewhat hotter than your hand can endure, by setting it upon the
fire, or putting hot burning coals into it; and after it is well heated, put
out the coals, and wipe it clean with a linen cloth: Moreover, you must also
heat the end of the Iron Pestle very well. Then covering the Mortar with a
cover that has a hole through it for the Pestle to pass, beat the Gum to
powder, and sift it; what is unsifted put into the Mortar again, which if it be
not hot enough, you must heat again in manner as has been told you. Lastly
observe, that you must put in a fourth part more into the Mortar, than is set
down in the Prescription; because at least a fourth part will waste in the
powdering.

CHAP. VI.
The manner of preparing compound Powders.
The Description of Pulvis e Chelis Cancrorum, or Gascons Powder.
TAke prepared Pearl, Crabs Eyes, red Coral, white Amber, Hartshorn, Oriental
Bezoar-Stone, of each a quarter of an ounce; of the black tops of Crabs claws,
one ounce and half; beat them all into powder, and mix them. The mixed Powdery
ou may make into Balls, by incorporating it with Gelly of Hartshorn, or thin
mucilage of Gum-arabick extracted with Carduus-water.

The manner of preparing.
The Preparation of Pearl, Crabs eyes, red Coral, Bezoar, and Crabs claws, is
only thus: You must first reduce them into a fine powder, and sift them.
Afterward grind them into a most subtle and smooth powder or dust upon a
Marble, or Porphyr stone, with a Muller, dropping now and then a few drops of
Rose Water into the powder, to keep it from dispersing or flying up. The
Hartshorn must be grated, and afterward beaten in a brass Mortar into a fine
powder, and sifted. The white Amber, that is, the lightest yellow, must be
beaten and ground with a Pestle into a subtle powder, and sifted by it self.
Afterward mix all the powders well in the Mortar, by stirring and moving them
together with the Pestle.

The Prices.
The Oriental Pearl 2 s. Crabs Eyes 1 d. Red Coral 3 d. White Amber 3 d.
Hartshorn d. Oriental Bezoar 10 s. Crabs Claws 6 d. The whole Composition 13
s. 1 d. 1 q.
For which expense you may expect two ounces and five drams, allowing two drams
or something more for waste.

The ounce will stand you in something less than five shillings.

The dram at seven pence halfpeny.

You may take notice, that this Powder may be prepared at a far lower rate, for
the poorer sort; and for what I know, may prove more effectual: thus, Instead
of Oriental Pearl, take Occidental; and probably the finest sort of Mother of
Pearl does exceed either; that is, if prepared as it ought to be. In lieu of
Oriental Bezoar, take Occidental; which being much cheaper, does not so much
encourage fraudulent people to counterfeit them: and therefore in my opinion,
certain Occidental Bezoar may justly be preferred before the uncertain
Oriental. But what if the Bezoar be wholly left out, and double the proportion
of Pearl that is put in, where is the damage? So that the dram of Gascons Powder
will come under three halfpence.

The Apothecaries Prices.
The ounce at forty shillings.

The dram at five shillings.

The grain at one penny.

The Description of Species Diacarthami, or Powder of Diacarthamum.
TAke the marrow of Carthamum-seeds, and of the best Turbith, of each half an
ounce; the purest Scammony, Hermodactyls, and Liquoris, of each two drams;
Ginger, Cinnamon, Gum-dragant, of each one dram; beat them all to a powder, and
mix them.

Observe, Though this Powder is not in the London-Dispensatory, yet is of great
use, and therefore I have inserted it here.

The manner of Preparing.
1. With a knife gently scrape off the hard dust that is dried about the
Hermodactyls, then grate them upon a fine Grater into a powder.

2. The Turbith, Ginger, and Liquoris, powder together, adding two or three
sweet Almonds, which being powdered with the others, will hinder them from
wasting, or flying up into dust. Being powdered, sift them.

3. The Gum-dragant is to be powdered as was expressed in the Preparation of
the common black Lozenges.

4. The Scammony must be powdered by it self, anointing the inside bottom of
the Mortar, and the end of the Pestle, with a little Oil of sweet Almonds, to
hinder the Scammony from clotting, or sticking to the bottom of the Mortar, and
the end of the Pestle. The Scammony being powdered, needs not be sifted.

5. All the Ingredients being powdered in manner before said, you must mix
together in a Mortar, and then put them up into a Species Glass, tying it over
with a Hogs Bladder and Leather.

The Prices.
Carthamum-seeds 1 d. Turbith 3 d. Scammony 2 d. ^d. Hermodactyls 1 q. Liquoris
1 q. Ginger q. Cinnamon 1 d. Gum-dragant 3 q. The whole Composition will stand
you in less than 9 d.
For which you shall have, allowing waste and garbles, fourteen drams, or
sometimes more, according to the purity of the Ingredients.

The dram will come to no more than two farthings and a half.

If the Apothecaries did prepare this Powder, they might afford it by the ounce
at eighteen pence.

By the dram at two pence.

The Description of the Species, or Powder of Hiera Picra.
TAke Cinnamon, Lignum Aloes, Asarabacca-roots, Spikenard, Mastich, Saffron, of
each three drams; Aloes six ounces and a quarter: beat them into powder.

The manner of Preparing.
1. The Cinnamon, Asarabaccaroots, Spikenard, and Saffron, may be powdered
together, and sifted.

2. The Mastich must be powdered by it self, wetting the bottom of the Mortar,
and end of the Pestle with a little Rose Water, or any other distilled water.

3. To powder the Aloes, you must anoint the bottom of the Mortar, and end of
the Pestle, with a little Oil of sweet Almonds, to hinder it from sticking.

4. At last mix all the Powders together in a Mortar.

The Prices.
The Cinnamon 3 d. Lign. Aloes 6 d. 3 q. Asarabacca 3 q. Spikenard Indian 9 q.
Mastich the finest 1 d. 2q. English Saffron 1 s. 2 d. The purest Succotrine
Aloes, at 3 s. 1 d. d. The whole amounts to-5 s. 4 d. 3 q.
For which you have (allowing waste) a little more than seven ounces.

The Apothecaries Prices.
By the ounce two shillings.

By the dram three pence, or as much as they can get.

CHAP. VII.
Of Electuaries.
The Description of Diascordium.
TAke Cinnamon, Cassia Lignea, of each a quarter of an ounce; Scordium, or
Water Germander, half an ounce; Dictamnum Creticum, or Dictander of Candia,
Gentian, Tormentil, Bistort, Galbanum, Gumarabick, of each two drams; of the
best Opium, two scruples and five grains; Storax, two drams and fifteen grains;
Sorrel-seeds, two scruples, and five grains; Bole-armene, six drams; Terra
Lemniae, two drams; clarified Honey, one pound and a quarter; Sugar of Roses,
or rather Conserve of red Roses, half a pound; Canary-wine, a quarter of a
pint. Make them up into a soft Electuary.

Notwithstanding I have with good reason left out the Ginger and Pepper, yet
the Composition seems to me very confused; but be it as it is, I will show you
how to prepare it.

The manner of Preparing.
The Cinnamon, Cassia Lignea, Dictamnum Creticum, Tormentil, Bistort, and
Sorrel-seeds, may be powdered and sifted together. The Germander-leaves dried,
and stripped from their stalks, must be powdered, and sifted by it self. The
Bole-armene, and Terra Lemnia, must be powdered, and rubbed, or grownd with a
Pestle into a very smooth powder, wetting the bottom of the Mortar and end of
the Pestle with a little Rose Water, or other distilled water. The Gum-arabick
must be powdered in the same manner as Gum-dragant is powdered in the
preparation of the black Lozenges, or else you may dissolve it into a Mucilage
in the Canary-wine, that is to be added to the Composition. The Storax must be
powdered by it self, rubbing the bottom of the Mortar, and end of the Pestle,
with a slit Almond. The Opium cut into thin slices, and thoroughly dry in the
Sun, or over the Fire, so that it may crumble between your fingers; then powder
and sift it. The Sugar of Roses must also be powdered and sifted. Mix all these
powders well in a Mortar, in that manner as has been said before. Then add
the clarified Honey to it by degrees, incorporating it thoroughly with the
powder, by stirring the Pestle about. In the same manner put in gradually your
Canary-wine, of which put in so much as will bring it into a body of a soft
Electuary.

The Prices.
The Ingredients of the whole Composition, weighing almost two pounds, will
stand you in three shillings and six pence, which is near two and twenty pence
the pound.

The Apothecaries Prices.
By the ounce four pence or six pence, or as much as they can get.

By the pound five shillings and four pence, or six shillings.

The Description of Electuarium Lenitivum, or Lenitive Electuary.
TAke Polypody of the Oak, new Currants picked from their stalks, Sena, of each
two ounces; common Mercury-leaves, one handful and half; Iujubes and Sebestens,
of each twenty in number; Maidenhair, Violets, and Perl-Barley, of each half a
handful; Damask-Prunes stoned, Tamarinds, of each six drams; Liquoris half an
ounce; boil them in two quarts of water, until a third part be boiled away;
strain the Liquor, and therein dissolve of the pulp of Cassia, Tamarinds, new
Prunes, and Sugar of Violets, of each six ounces; of the best Sugar, two pound.
At last add to them, of Sena powdered, one ounce and half; and to every pound
of Electuary, two drams of Anniseeds powdered; and so afterward bring them
into the body of an Electuary.

The manner of Preparing.
1. The Polypody-roots being washed clean, must be bruised in a Mortar, or
cleft with a Knife into four parts, and afterward cut into small pieces like
as Sarsaparil is cut: These with the Perlbarley must be put in somewhat longer
than a quarter of an hour before the other Ingredients; next put in the
Mercury-leaves, and Maidenhair, being washed clean from sand or dirt, and shred;
a little after put in the Jujubes stoned, Sebestens, Currants, Prunes, Tamarinds
and Liquoris bruised in the Mortar; at last put in the Sena; and so let them
boil in six quarts of water, until one quart be boiled away. Then strain the
Liquor, while it is warm, into a glased earthen Pan, or copper tinned
Preserving-pan; dissolve in it the white Sugar, and the Sugar of Violets; or
instead thereof put in the same quantity of white Sugar, and boil it gently to
the thickness of a Syrup. This done, put the pulps of Cassia, and the other
pulps, into a brass Mortar, and add to them about the third part of your
powder of Sena and Anniseeds, and pour on them about the third part of the
forementioned Syrup, while it is yet warm, and mix them very well together with
a steel Slice (or Spatula) or a Pestle; then add another third part of the
powders of Sena and Anniseeds, mixing them well together; and so at last put in
the remaining third part of Powders and Syrup; which being also well mixed
toghether, makes up your Lenitive Electuary. This put up into a stone
Electuary-pot.

2. I must show you how to extract the pulp of Cassia. Take a pound and half of
the best Cassia in Canes, crush them into pieces, that you may take out all the
inside, together with the Grains, which put into a hair Sieve, and hold it over
the steem of warm water, wherein a few Anniseeds have been boiled, or over the
Decoction (being warm) which was prepared for the Lenitive Electuary, so that
the steem thereof passing through the Sieve, may moisten and dissolve the
marrow of the Cassia. While this is doing, you must with the back of a spoon
stir and press the said marrow through the Sieve, and gently with the hollow of
your spoon take it off on the other side; and so continue to do, until all the
marrow is passed through. Moreover, if your Cassia be very dry, you may moisten
it a little with the warm Decoction, that it may pass the easier. On the other
hand, if the pulp of the Cassia be too moist or liquid when it is passed, you
must put it on a Tin Plate, or a flat earthen glased Pan, and set it over a
Chafing Dish to dry the superfluous moisture from it, until it come to the
thickness of an Electuary. About a quarter of a pound of good Cassia, or
somewhat more, in Canes, is usually found to yield an ounce of pulp.

3. You are to know the manner of extracting the pulp of Tamarinds. Put a
sufficient proportion of Tamarinds into a Mortar, and pour to it as much warm
water as will but just soften it, and a little dissolve it; for otherwise they
being sticking and glewie, the pulp will not pass through the Sieve. Then with
the Pestle gently move and stir the Tamarinds about, that the warm water may
incorporate with them. This so done, put the Mass into a Sieve, and press the
pulp through in the same manner as has been taught you in the extracting of
the pulp of Cassia.

4. The manner of extracting the pulp of Prunes. Boil the Prunes in water,
until they are pretty soft, then put them into a Sieve, and press through the
pulp.

5. The manner of preparing Sugar of Violets. Take two ounces of the juice of
Violets, and as much Violet-water, therein dissolve one pound of white Sugar.
Boil them in a Preserving-pan over a Chafing Dish of Charcoal, until they come
to a just thickness; which you shall know by these several trials: 1. By
dropping a drop off the point of a Knife, or steel Slice on a Plate, and let it
grow cold: if it prove hard enough, so that you may take it off the Plate
without sticking, it is boiled enough. 2. By taking some of it on the point of
a knife, and let it drop into the Pan again; which if it be enough, it will
drop a top of the surface, and continue raised on it like a knob. 3. By letting
a little cool on the point of a knife, and then see whether it be hard enough.

Lastly observe, while the Violet-juice, Water, and Sugar are boiling, you must
often stir it with a steel Slice, or long-handled spoon or knife, to prevent it
from burning at the bottom.

The manner of preparing Sugar of Roses.
Because of the Affinity of this Preparation with the foregoing, and that a
little father information will serve, I thought fit to set down the manner of
preparing Sugar of Roses.

Dissolve a pound of the best white Sugar, being powdered and sifted, into four
ounces of red Rose Water, or into two ounces of red Rose Water, and as much of
the juice of red Roses; boil it to a just body, mixing it with one ounce of red
Rose-leaves, dried in the Sun and powdered, a little before it be ready to be
taken off from the fire.

How to make the foresaid Sugar of Roses or Violets into Lozenges.
When your Sugar of Roses or Violets is taken off from the Fire, and has stood
a little for to cool, put it on a clean smooth Marblestone, whereon you must
have dusted a little fine Flour, by tying it up in a fine rag; and then beating
the said rag all over the stone (this being done, to prevent the sticking of
the Lozenges to the Stone) afterward take a small Rolling-pin, such as is used
for Paste, and dust it likewise over with fine Flour: with this Rolling-pin
smooth the top of the Sugar, being almost grown cold; then with a Knife cut it
into Lozenges of such shape and bigness you fancy best.

The Prices of Electuary Lenitive.
The Ingredients of the Decoct. 18 d. The white Sugar, and Sugar of Violets for
the Syrup. 18 d. The Pulps 3 s. 2 d. The Sena and Anniseeds 8 d. The whole 6 s.
10 d.
For which you shall have five pounds, and somewhat more, of Electuary
Lenitive; so that it will not stand you in above sixteen pence farthing the
pound; and the ounce will come but to one penny.

The Apothecaries prices.
The pound four shillings.

The ounce four pence.

CHAP. IX.
Of Pills.
The Description of Pilulae Rudii, or Extractum Catholicon.
TAke of the pulp of Colocynth, six drams; Agarick, black Hellebore-root,
Scammony, Turbith, of each half an ounce; Aloes Succotrine, one ounce; of the
powder of Diarrhodon Abbatis, half an ounce. All these (excepting the powder or
Species of Diarrhodon Abbatis) must be beaten into a gross powder, and put into
a digesting-Glass, viz. a glass Body, and blind Head, or into a bolt Head with
a wide neck, pouring upon them as much Brandy as will cover them, and eight
fingers breadth higher; so let them stand in the Sun to steep for eight days.
Afterward in the same manner infuse the powder of Diarrhodon Abbatis in Brandy
for four days: then strain and press the Liquor or Tincture hard from both the
Infusions, and mix them, pouring them into a glass Body, covered with a glass
Head; and distill off as much of the moisture, until the remainder in the
bottom of the glass Body come to the thickness of Honey, whereof make a mass of
Pills, and put it up into a stone Pill-pot.

Exceptions against this Prescription.
1. Whoever caused this description to be inserted into the Dispensatory,
discovered himself very much unexperienced in Chemical Pharmacy, by directing
the Aloes and Scammony to be infused with the other Ingredients; for the Aloes
and Scammony immediately saturating or clogging the body of the Brandy, hinder
its Spirits in attracting the virtue out of the other purgative Ingredients,
there being not a third part of their virtue extracted.

2. The Powder of Diarrhodon Abbatis is not only troublesome, but chargeable to
be prepared; and when it is prepared, signifies no more to the correcting of
those strong Purgatives, than water to the washing a Blackmore white.

Wherefore instead of this Fobcorrective, rather add to those Purgatives one
dram of Cinnamon, Clove-bark two scruples; both reduced to a gross powder, and
put in with the other Ingredients. The volatile Salts and Spirits of those
Spices being united with the Spirits of the Brandy, do not only render them
more potent to extract the virtue of the other Simples, but also qualify them
through their subtle particles, to maturate and digest the gross impure
Sulphurs of those violent Purgatives, whereby they become more mild, and less
offensive to Nature, and heightened in their virtues.

The true manner of preparing the foresaid Pilulae Rudii.
1. BReak the Colocynth-Apples, and take out the white soft Marrow, flinging
away the grains, or kernels. Then put the said Marrow into your brass Mortar,
dropping into it a few drops of Oil of sweet Almonds, or of sweet Salade-oyl,
and beat it to powder.

2. The Agarick will not be beaten into powder, but must be grated on a Tin
Grater.

3. The black Hellebore and Turbith may be beaten together into a powder.

4. Put all these Ingredients, together with the Spices beaten to a gross
powder, into a digesting-Glass; and then pour the Brandy upon them, having
dissolved into it one dram and a half of Salt of Tartar.

When the Liquor is sufficiently tinctured, strain it, and press it hard out
into a low glass Body, to which you are then to add the best Scammony and
Succotrine Aloes (which needs no other purification) each by it self grossly
powdered, and sifted from the stalks, and other heterogeneous bodies that are
usually incorporated with them. After this, distill off the moisture, until it
comes to the thickness of Honey.

Twenty grains of this Preparation is more safe, and yet not less effectual
than forty grains of the other.

The Prices.
The Colocynth 5 d. or 6 d. Agarick 3 d. Black Hellebore d. Scammony 5 d.
Turbith 3 d. Aloes Suc. 6 d. Spec. Diarrhodon Abbatis 6 d. Bourdeaux Brandy 15
d. Charcoal 4 d. The whole 3 s. 11 d. d.
For which you shall have about two ounces of Pil. Rudii.

The ounce comes to one shilling eleven pence three farthings.

The dram comes to three pence.

The Apothecaries prices.
The ounce at four shillings.

The dram at six pence.

The Description of the Mass of Pills of Hiera with Agarick.
TAke of the powder of Hiera Picra (the preparation whereof has been showed
you before) and Agarick, of each half an ounce; the best Aloes, one ounce;
Honey of Roses, as much as will suffice to bring the foresaid powders into a
Mass.

The manner of Preparation.
1. The Agarick must be grated on a fine Grater.

2. The Aloes being powdered, must be mixed with the Honey of Roses, and
afterward dissolved together over the fire.

3. The foresaid Powders being put into the Mortar, and mixed together, pour on
them a third part of the Honey of Roses, with the Aloes dissolved in it; and
mix it well with the Powders, by stirring the Pestle round: then add to it the
other third part, mixing it well together; and so do with the remaining third
part. Afterward, when the Honey is incorporated, and the mixture appears in
clots, beat it well together with the Pestle until it comes to a Mass.

4. You must know how to prepare Honey of Roses. By the way take notice, there
are three sorts of Honey of Roses set down in the Dispensatory, viz. Common
Honey of Roses, Honey of Roses clarified, and Honey of Roses laxative. It is
the second sort of Honey of Roses is made use of in the incorporating the
foresaid Mass of Pills, which is prepared thus.

Take two pound and half of clarified Honey; the Juice of red Roses newly
gathered, a quarter of a pint; new red Rose-leaves, one pound; boil them
together, until the Juice of Roses be boiled away; then strain it.

5. You must likewise be informed how to clarify Honey.

Take what quantity you please of Honey, put it into a new glased Pipkin, or a
brass tinned Preserving-pan, pouring on every pound a pint of water; let them
boil up twice or thrice, to the end they may be thoroughly mixed together, and
strain this Syrup once or twice through a close Canvas or Flannel Strainer.
Then to every quart of Syrup add the white of an Egg with the shell crush't to
pieces, beating the said white of Egg with a Rod made of twigs, or a Spoon,
into a froath, mixing with it a small part of the Syrup, while it is beating.
Afterward pour in the rest of the Syrup, which you must let boil so long,
until so much of the moisture is boiled away that it comes to the thickness of
Honey; then take it off the fire, and skim off the froath: but if the Honey be
very foul, it is necessary you should skim it while it is boiling.

The Prices.
What the powder of Hiera Piera will stand you in, is set down before; the
prices of Agarick and Aloes, you may easily find among the Rates of Drugs
inserted below, so that I need not take the trouble of computing this
Composition.

To offer you the description, or manner of preparation of any of the other
Masses of Pills that are contained in the Dispensatory, I judge absolutely
superfluous, in regard that a Physician by prescribing the mixture of these two
Masses (here described) in such proportions as he shall apprehend necessary, or
by mixing one or both with some purgative Powders set down in one of the
preceding Chapters, or by mixing of either or both with some preparation of his
own, according to the indication of the Disease or Cause thereof; I say, he may
easily answer all those intentions, for which that excessive number of Masses
of Pills, described in the Dispensatory, can be supposed capable to be used.

CHAP. X.
Of Oils.
The manner of drawing Oil of sweet Almonds.
TAke half a pound or a pound of sweet Almonds, beat them in a stone or marble
Mortar to a paste, pouring a spoonful or two of warm water among them while you
are beating; put the Paste up close into a piece of Canvas, which press out
gradually, so that it may only drop into a porringer or basin which you have
put under it.

One pound of good Almonds will yield about two ounces and a half of pure Oil;
which being drawn, you are to unscrue the Press, and take out the cake of
Almonds, and roll it up again into a round lump; and being put up close into
the same piece of fine Canvas, you may press again, and draw about one ounce
and half or two ounces more of thick Oil, which ought only to serve for
external uses. Oil of bitter Almonds is drawn in the same manner. By the way. I
must tell you that few Apothecaries draw Oil of sweet Almonds themselves, in
regard it is somewhat troublesome to draw, and soon turns rank; wherefore most
Apothecaries about London buy it ready drawn at several places, but chiefly at
the Sun in Cheapside, and at the Swan in Bucklersbury; where they may have it
new, and at a cheaper rate than they can draw it themselves, namely, at two
pence the ounce.

The description and manner of preparing of the Oil of Mucilages.
TAke Marshmallow-roots fresh, and Lin-seeds, of each a quarter of a pound;
bruise them in a Mortar singly, and steep them in a pint of water all night;
then boil them a little, and press the Mucilaginous liquor hard out: to a pint
of this Mucilage add a quart of common Oil, and boil it until all the waterish
moisture be dried away; but in the boiling you must be careful to stir it often,
or else it is apt to burn at the bottom.

CHAP. XI.
Of Unguents or Ointments.
The Description of Vnguentum Aegyptiacum.
TAke Verdigriese grown'd very fine, one ounce and a quarter; Honey, three
ounces and a half; of the sharpest Vinegar, one ounce and three quarters: boil
them on a gentle fire unto the thickness of an Ointment of a purple-colour.

The manner of Preparation.
The Verdigriese must be powdered and grown'd very fine in a brass Mortar, and
then passed through a fine linen Cloth; observing while you are powdering and
sifting, to hold your head back from the Mortar, and keep your mouth and nose
stopped with your Handkerchief, to prevent those venomous steems from getting
up into your brain. After you have done using the Mortar, be sure to make it
very clean before you use it again.

2. Put the Honey and Vinegar together into a brass pan, or broad brass pipkin
placed on the fire; and as soon as it boileth, put in the powdered Verdigriese,
and mix it with the Honey by stirring it gently with a Spatula. Boil it, and
keep stirring now and then, until the Vinegar is boiled away, and that it come
to the thickness of an Ointment; which you may easily know by letting a drop or
two grow cold on the backside of a Plate or Marble Stone.

The Prices.
The Verdigriefe 2 d. d. The Honey 1 d. 3 q. The Vinegar 1 d. d. The whole 4 d.
3 q.
For which you shall have four ounces of Unguent. Egypt. the ounce comes to
almost five farthings.

The Apothecaries Prices.
The pound four shillings.

The ounce three pence.

In imitation of this Unguent, Felix Wurtz prepared his brown Ointment, that is
so much famed among most foreign Surgeons, thus:

1. Take Ground-Ivie, Speedwell, and Figwort, of each one handful; being
bruised in a Mortar, put them into a glass Retort-Receiver, and pour on them as
much sharp Vinegar as will cover them, and two inches over; let them stand in
digestion in the Sun in the Summer, or in warm water in the Winter, for seven
days; then strain and press the Vinegar hard from them.

2. Take of the best green Copperas two pound, put it into a thick blackish
earthen Melting-pipkin, of no greater bigness than will just contain the
Vitriol. This place between Bricks laid so as to make a square Tower, about two
inches larger than the Pipkin, and two inches higher. Fill this kind of open
Furnace with Charcoal up to the top, and kindle it gradually, which in less
than half an hour will make the Pipkin red-hot; continue this heat until the
Copperas be calcined, or burned into a deep red. Then take out the Pipkin, and
being grown cold, break it, and take out the red Copperas, or Colchothar, which
beat to powder, and put into a new Pipkin; pour on it one quart of River or
Spring Water, and one pint of Vinegar; boil them until half be consumed away;
then after it is settled pour off the tinctured Liquor into a flat earthen pan:
This done, pour another quart of Spring Water upon the same red Vitriol; boil
it away half, and after it is settled, pour off the tinctured Liquor to the
other Liquor in the earthen pan; this repeat with fresh water, until the red
Copperas will color the water no longer. Place the earthen pan between two
Bricks set edge-wise, and kindle a very moderate fire under it, and let the
water evaporate, or dry away, until the red Vitriol that was dissolved in the
said water, be left dry in the bottom of the pan. This red dried Vitriol put
into a new Pipkin, and calcine or burn it over again, as you did at first; that
put in into another Pipkin, and pour fresh water on it, and boil it as you did
before, to extract the tincture, or dissolve the purest of the red Vitriol;
then pour it off into your earthen pan, and pour more fresh water on the red
Vitriol or Copperas in the Pipkin, and boil it to extract more of the tincture:
thus continue until all is extracted, throwing away the remaining dregs on the
bottom; the tinctured Liquors evaporate again to a dryness, and then calcine or
burn the red Copperas remaining on the bottom a third time, and extract and
evaporate it over again, in the same manner as before; which done, then the
Copperas is prepared.

3. Take Verdigriese one ounce and half, powder it and put it into a glass;
pour on it half a pint of sharp distilled Vinegar; let it stand in the Sun four
or five days, or 24 hours in warm water; then pour off the Vinegar, being
tinctured green, and evaporate it in an earthen pan, until it be dry.

The proportion of these prepared Ingredients for to make the foresaid Brown
Ointment, is as follows:

Take of the abovementioned prepared Copperas powdered, two ounces; of the
prepared Verdigriese, one ounce and a quarter; clarified Honey, six ounces; of
the Vinegar that was pressed from the Herbs, three ounces; of the Phlegm of
Vitriol, two ounces: boil them to the thickness of an Ointment, in the same
manner as was told you in the preparation of the Unguentum Aegyptiacum.

This Brown Ointment, as it is here described, the preparation is very tedious
and troublesome; which you may make shorter, thus: Calcine the Vitriol six
hours, then powder it, and extract the tincture with three quarts of water, and
one pint of sharp Vinegar; evaporate it, and then it is sufficiently prepared.

The Verdigriese must be prepared as it is set down before.

The Herbs need not be extracted with Vinegar; only press out their juices, and
mix them with the Tincture of Verdigriese.

The Honey need not be clarified, only take off the scum, as it is boiling with
the juices; then put in the other Ingredients, according as you have been
informed before.

But far beyond this, I have formerly prescribed an Ointment, that in malignant
or sordid Ulcers, Joynt-waters, Fistula's, and other desperate cases, does the
greatest Effects imaginable; which I here impart to you.

Take of the Vitriol of Venus, of the Vitriol of Mars, of each half an ounce;
Sugar of Lead, two drams; Honey boiled up to a consistency, three ounces and
half; Mithridate half an ounce; mix them together in the Mortar, without
putting them over the fire. If your Ointment happen to be too thick, either by
over-boiling the Honey, or by dryness of the weather drying the Ointment after
it is made, you may soften it with a little Honey of Roses, or rather Juice of
Celandine.

The Description of Vnguentum Althaeae, or Ointment of Marshmallows.
TAke of the Oil of Mucilages, (which is described in the foregoing Chapter)
one pound; Wax half a pound; Rosin one ounce and half; Terebinthin six drams;
make them up into an Ointment.

The manner of Preparing.
First melt the Wax and Rosin together, afterward put in the Terebinthin and
Oil, and let them boil gently to the thickness of an Ointment, stirring it often
with your Spatula, until it be ready to be taken off the fire.

The Prices.
It will stand you in something less than three farthings an ounce.

The Apothecaries sell it the ounce at two pence.

The Description of Vnguentum Basilicon I wittingly omit, in regard, that Tar
and Firre-Terrebinthin being mixed together in equal proportions, does digest
and ripen far beyond it.

The Description of Unguentum Populeon, or Poppy-Oyntment.
TAke of the fresh Buds of black Poplar, half a pound; Violet-leaves, and Venus
Navil, of each three ounces; new unsalted Hogs grease, three pound. Bruise and
mix them, and let them steep together in the Hogs grease in the month of May;
add to them of the tops of young Bramble-bush, of the leaves of black Poppey,
Mandrake, Henbane, Nightshade, Lettice, of the greater and lesser Housleek,
and of the greater Burdock of each three ounces. Bruise them again, and mix
them all together, letting them stand and ferment ten days; then pour on them a
pint Rose Water, and boil them until all the superfluous moisture be consumed.
Strain and press them hard through a Canvas-strainer.

The manner of Preparing.
The Poplar-buds, Violet-leaves, and Venus navil, must be bruised together in a
stone Mortar in the month of May. The Hogs grease must be freed from its little
skins, and washed in this manner: Cut it into small pieces, and melt it with a
little water over a Charcoal-fire, in a clean flat earthen pan; stirring it often
with a Spatula. Being melted, strain it through a clean piece of Linen, and
pour on it some lukewarm water; put it over a very gentle fire, stirring it often
with a Spatula for an hour; then letting the grease settle, pour off the water,
and pour on again some fresh warm water, and stir it often for half an hour; then
let it settle, and shift the water again: washing of the said grease thus twice
or thrice, is sufficient for this Ointment; but for the Ointment of Roses,
Vnguentum Album, and Vnguentum Pomatum, where whiteness is required, to make
the Ointment look neat, and very white, you must wash it in the manner
aforesaid eight or nine times.

The Hogs grease being washed, put it into the Mortar, and mix the aforesaid
Herbs with it, by stirring the Pestil often about; then put them into a clean
Pipkin, and let them stand about a month, or so long, until the other Herbs can
be got, which then must be also bruised in the Mortar, and mixed with the
grease, and Poplar-buds: this done, set them in the Sun for eight or nine days,
stirring them now and then about with a Spatula. At last put them into your
Pan, pour the Rose Water upon them, and let them boil until the superfluous
moisture be boiled away; then strain and press them hard out, and put them into
an Oyntment-pot.

The Apothecaries sell this Ointment for two pence an ounce.

The Description of Unguentum Album.
TAke Oil of Roses, nine ounces; White Lead, three ounces; Wax, two ounces;
Camphor, two drams: make them up into an Ointment.

The manner of preparing this White Ointment.
Cut your Wax into lumps, and melt it together with the Oil of Roses in a
glas'd earthen Pan, or a tinned Pan; but not in one of brass, because that will
spoil the whiteness of the Ointment. Being melted, and mixed together with a
Spatula, take it off; when it is grown half cold, put in the White Lead (being
washed and very finely powdered) gradually mixing it as it is put in, by stirring
it about with a wooden Spatula. Being grown almost quite cold, mix in like
manner the Camphor, being powdered and grownd into a smooth even powder,
dropping a few drops of Oil of sweet Almonds into the Mortar, to anoint the
bottom and end of the Pestle.

Note, Oil of Roses is prepared, by steeping four ounces of red Roses, before
they are quite opened, in a pint of Oil of Olives, that was pressed out before
the Olives were ripe, and setting it in the Sun six or eight days. Then strain
and press the Oil from the Roses, and put fresh red Roses to the Oil, and steep
it again in the Sun; the same do again the third time.

This Ointment will not stand you in two farthings the ounce.

Apothecaries sell it at two pence the ounce, and some at three pence.

CHAP. XII.
Of Emplasters.
The Description of Emplastrum Diachylon cum Gummi.
TAke of the Oil of Mucilages, two pound; Lithargyr of gold, one pound; pouring
to them about a pint of water: boil them until they come to the thickness of a
Plaster; then add to them yellow Wax, a quarter of a pound; Gum-ammoniac,
Galbanum, Opopanax, Sagapenum, all dissolved in Vinegar, of each two ounces;
Therebinthin, a quarter of a pound: make them up into an Emplaster.

The manner of preparing this Plaster.
The Lithargyr must be powdered very fine and sifted; then put it to the Oil and
Water, and boil them, stirring them continually until they come to the
thickness of a Plaster; then put to them the Wax cut into lumps, which being
melted, put in also the Gums, which you must first have dissolved over the fire
in as much Vinegar as will swim a-top two fingers breadth; this strain through
a Canvas, and evaporate it until it come to the thickness of Honey. These being
well mixed with the Oil and Wax, add to them the Therebinthin; which being also
well mixed, take them off, and keep constantly stirring gently with your
Spatula, until it is almost grown cold; then make it up into great Rowls
between your hands, being anointed with a little Oil of Roses, or other sweet
Oil.

Observe, That the Gums will not mix so well, unless the Oil of Mucilages be a
little cooled.

The Description of Emplastrum Sticticum Paracelsi.
TAke Oil of Olives, six ounces; yellow Wax, one ounce and half; Lithargyr
powdered, four ounces and a half; Gum-ammoniac, Bdellium, of each half an
ounce; Galbanum, Opopanax, Oil of Bays, Lapis Calaminaris, of both the sorts of
Aristolochia, Myrrh, Frankincense, of each a quarter of an ounce;
Therebinthin, one ounce. The Oil, Wax, and Lithargyr, must be boiled together,
until it does not stick to your fingers. Afterward, the mass being a little
cooled, put the Gums to it, being dissolved in Vinegar, which by boiling let
evaporate from it, being strained, and pressed hard through the Strainer; at
last put in the Powders, Therebinthin, and Oil of Bays; so make it up to an
Emplaster.

I need not add any thing for the instructing you in making of the Plaster,
since the directions set down in the manner of preparing the Diachylon cum
Gummi will sufficiently guide you.

The Description of Emplastrum Diapalma, or Diachalciteos.
TAke unsalted Hogs grease cleansed from its skins, one pound; Oil of Olives
pressed out before the Olives are ripe, Lithargyr of Gold powdered fine and
sifted, of each one pound and half; white Vitriol burned and powdered, two
ounces: the Lithargyr, Grease, and Oil must be boiled together on a gentle
fire, pouring to them a little Plantane-water, and stirring them continually
with a Spatula, until they come to the body of a Plaster, wherewith being
almost cold, you are to mix the Vitriol, and so make it up into a Mass.

Besides the instructions given you before, you are only to observe, when this
or any other Emplaster is boiling, to drop now and then off of the Spatula
(wherewith you stir the melted Mass of Emplaster) a drop thereof upon the
backside of a Plate, and let it cool; and thereby you may judge whether your
Plaster be boiled enough.

This Plaster is sold by the Apothecaries at two pence the ounce.

Observe, That in defect of the foregoing Paracelsus Plaster, melting of two
thirds of Diachylon, with one third of Diapalma, will very well serve for the
same intent and purpose, if not better.

The Description of the Emplastrum Opodeldoch of Felix Wurtz, so much cried up
among Surgeons Beyond Sea.
TAke of the best Wax, two pound; Venice Therebinthin, one pound; Genoa Oil of
Olives, three ounces: melt them together, pouring thereunto of the Juices of
Celandine, Oak-leaves, Starwort, and Speedwel, of each one ounce and half; boil
these until all the moisture be consumed; then put to them Gum-ammoniac,
Galbanum, Opopanax, dissolved in Vinegar, strained, and evaporated (in the same
manner as was directed in preparing the Diachylon) of each six drams;
Colophony, one ounce and half; Amber, half an ounce; Mastich, Myrrh,
Frankincense, Sarcocolla, of each three drams; prepared Magnet, one ounce and
half; Crocus Martis, two ounces; Crocus Veneris, one ounce; prepared Tuthia,
Lapis Calaminaris, of each ten drams; of the red sweet Earth of Vitriol, as
much as will make the Plaster red.

The manner of Preparing.
Observe, That the Crocus Martis, and Veneris, Tuthia, Lapis Calaminaris, and
Earth of Vitriol, must be put in last, when the Plaster is almost grown cold.

2. The Magnet is prepared thus: Being powdered, make it red-hot in a Crucible,
and pour to it of well-dulcified Oil of Mars the same quantity, let them
continue over the fire until they be dry.

3. The Oil of Mars is prepared thus.
Take of Allom, one pound; of common Salt, four ounces; distill an Aqua fortis
from them in a reverberatory Furnace: with this water imbibe the Filings of
Steel several times a day, and a rust will stick, which must be washed off
clean: let the water evaporate from it to an oyliness, which must be dulcified
by evaporating common water from it once or twice.

The manner of preparing Lapis Calaminaris.
Powder it very small, and heat it red-hot in a Crucible, and quench it by
pouring Vinegar a-top it; this repeat thrice.

The Tuthia is prepared in the same manner; excepting that instead of Vinegar,
it must be quenched with Fenil or Celandine-water.

The Preparation of Crocus Veneris.
Take Copper beaten into very thin Plates, put them into a Crucible in Lays
(which is termed among Chemists, Stratum supra stratum) one over the other,
strewing some common Salt between every Lay; then cause them to be nealed
together; which done, cast the Plates and Salt into cold water, and wash them
clean from their blackness; then put them again in Lays with Salt as before,
neal them, and then cast them into cold water. This nealing and washing repeat
three or four times, or oftener: The water wherein the Plates were washed being
settled, decant or pour off from the setlings on the bottom, which must be
sweetened, by often pouring warm water on them, and letting them settle, and then
pouring it off again; repeat the washing so often, until the aforesaid settlings
taste free of the Salt.

Crocus Martis prepare thus.
Put Filings of Steel into a Crucible, which set in a reveberatory-Furnace for
four and twenty hours; then cast the red-hot Steel into a large earthen Pan
that is full of water; stir it well together, and pour it off into another
earthen Pan; then evaporate the water, and on the bottom you will find the
Crocus Martis.

The Preparation of the Earth of Vitriol.
Calcine Vitriol in an earthen Pot to a red color; powder it, and pour water
on it, which let stand four and twenty hours to settle, then pour off the
water: This repeat so often, until it is sweetened, and all the sharpness is
taken off.

These Emplasters are sufficient for all intentions; however, those that desire
to make use of some other common Emplasters, they may buy them from the
Druggists, that keep Journey-men- Apothecaries for the same purpose, at as
cheap a rate as they can prepare them themselves, which is far cheaper than you
buy them from the Apothecaries; who often by keeping them too long in their
Shops, or not preparing them exactly, sell Emplasters far worse, and of much
less virtue, than those that are sold by the Druggists, who commonly take great
care that their Medicaments shall be well and exactly prepared.

THe Rates of Emplasters at the Druggists you may see at the end of the ensuing
Table of Rates and Prices of Druggs.

The Rates and Prices current of Drugs, and other Commodities belonging to
Physic, as they are commonly sold at by the Druggists in London.
Radices, or Roots.
A Corus, the pound 2 Shillings. Angelica, the pound 6 d. Aristolochia rotunda,
the pound 1 s. Aristolochia longa, the pound 1 s. Asarum, the pound 2 s. 8 d.
Behen Album, the pound 2 s. 8 d. Behen Rubrum, the pound 2 s. 8 d. Bistort, the
pound 9 d. Carlina, the pound 8 d. China, according to its goodness, the pound
from 4 s. to 6 s. China lapid. or Flinty China, the pound 2 s. 8 d.
Contrayerva, the pound 12 s. Costus dulcis, the pound 2 s. 8 d. Costus amarus,
the pound 2 s. 8 d. Curcuma, Turmerick, the pound 8 d. Cyperus longus, the
pound 1 s. Cyperus rotundus, the pound 1 s. 4 d. Dictamnum album, the pound 1
s. 6 d. Doronicum Romanum, the pound 5 s. 4 d. Elicampane, the pound 1 s.
Eringo, the pound 1 s. 4 d. Galanga, Galingal, the pound 4 s. Gentian, the
pound 8 d. Glycyrrhiza Angl. or English Liquoris, the pound 1 s. Glycyrrhiza
Hisp. or Spanish Liquoris, the pound 6 d. Hellebore white, the pound 1 s.
Hellebore black, the pound 1 s. Hermodactyls, the pound 1 s. Ialap, the pound 3
s. 4 d. Iris Flor. Orris of Florence, the pound 8 d. Mechoacan, the pound 5 s.
4 d. Meum, the pound 5 s. Rad. phu maj. the pound 4 s. Polypodium of the Oak,
the pound 8 d. Pyrethrum, the pound 1 s. Rhapontic, the pound 2 s. 8 d. Rhubarb
the best, the pound 14 s. Rubia tinctorum, the pound 1 s. 6 d. Sarsaparil.
according to its goodness, the pound from 4 s. to 5 s. Scorzonera, the pound 2
s. 8 d. Serpentaria Virginiana, the pound 8 s. Squils, the pound 6 d. Spikenard
Celt. the pound 2 s. 8 d. Spikenard Indian, the pound 8 s. Thapsia, the pound 6
s. Tormentil, the pound 10 d. Turbith, the pound 6 s. Zedoary, the pound 2 s.
Cortices, or Barks.
CAssia lignea, the pound 1 s. 8 d. Cortex Elatheriae, the ounce 5 d.
Clove-bark, the pound 2 s. Caper-bark, the pound 1 s. 4 d. Guaiacum-bark, the
pound 6 d. Jesuits bark, the ounce 4 s. Pomgranat-bark, the pound 1 s. 4 d.
Tamarise-bark, the pound 1 s. 4 d. Winters-bark, the pound 2 s.
Ligna, or Woods.
LIgnum Aloes, the ounce 9 d. Lignum Aspalathi, the ounce 1 s. Lignum
Colubrinum, the pound 5 s. Lignum Guaiaci, or Lignum Vitae, the pound 2 d.
Lignum Iuniperi, the pound 1 s. Lignum Mastichinum, the pound 2 s. Lignum
Nephriticum, the pound 8 s. Lignum Rhodii, the pound 6 d. Santalum album, white
Sanders, the pound 3 s. 4 d. Santalum citrinum, yellow Sanders, the pound 2. s.
8 d. Santalum rubrum, red Sanders, the pound 8 d. Sassafras cut, the pound 6 d.
Folia, or Leaves.
ADianthum album, the pound 1 s. 8 d. Adianthum nigrum, the pound 1 s. 4 d
Dictamnum Creticum, leaves, the pound 5 s. 4 d. Cuscuta, the pound 1 s.
Ceterach, the pound 1 s. 6 d. Epithymum, the pound 2 s. 8 d. Chamaepitys, the
pound 1 s. 8 d. Malabathr. leaves, the pound 8 s. Soldanella, the pound 1 s. 6
d. Scordium Creticum, the pound 1 s 4. d. Scordium common, the pound 1 s. Senna
Alexandr. the best, the pound 4 s. Senna of Aleppo, the pound 3 s.
Flores, or Flowers.
BAlaustia, the pound 5 s. 4 d. Chamomel-flow. the pound 1 s. 2 d. Crocus Angl.
English-Saffron, according to its goodness, the pound at present is from 50 s.
to 54 s. Crocus Hisp. Spanish-Saffron, the pound 24 s. Crocus Orient.
India-Saffron, the ounce 3 s. 6 d. Melilot-flowers, the pound 1 s. Flor.
Origani, the pound 2 s. 8 d. Flor. Polii montani, the pound 2 s. 8 d. Red
Rose-flow. dried, the pound 4 s. Flor. Staechados, the pound 2 s. 8 d. Flor.
Schoenanthi, the pound 8 s.
Fructus, or Fruits.
ALkekengi, the pound 5 s. 4 d. Bay Berries, the pound 4 d. Carpobalsamum, the
pound 2 s. 4 d. Cassia Fistularis, the pound 1 s. 4. d. Coculus Indus, the
pound 2 s. 8 d. Cicers red, the pound 1 s. 4 d. Colocynthis, the pound 3 s. 4
d. Cubebs, the pound 2 s. 4 d. Galls, the pound 8 d. Hederae Baccae, the pound
4 s. Iuniper-berries, the pound, 4 d. Iujubes, the pound 2 s. Lupins, the pound
8 d. Myrtle-berries, the pound 1 s. 8 d. Myrobalans citrin, the pound 1 s. 8 d.
Myrobalans emblic. the poun. 1 s. 8 d. Myrobalans chebul. the pou. 1 s. 8 d.
Myrobalans belliric. the poun. 1 s. 8 d. Myrobalans indic. the poun. 1 s. 8 d.
Nuces Cupressi, Cypress Nuts, the pound 1 s. 4 d. Nuces vomicae, the pound 1 s.
4 d. Nuclei pinei, Pine-kernels, the pound 2 s. Pepper white, the pound 1 s. 8
d. Pepper long, the pound 9 d. Pepper of Iamaica, the pound 2 s. 4 d.
Sebestens, the pound 3 s. Tamarinds, the pound 8 d.
Semina, or Seeds.
ALthaeae, the pound 1 s. Anethi, the pound 8 d. Angelica-seeds, the pound 1 s.
Agnus castus-seeds, the pound 2 s. 8 d. Ammeos-seeds, the pound 1 s. 4 d.
Amomi-seeds, the pound 2 s. 8 d. Anniseeds, the pound 6 d. Apii, the pound 1 s.
Broom-seeds, 1 s. Burdock, the pound 1 s. Bombacis, the pound 2 s. 8 d.
Cardamom, the pound 4 s. Carduus Benedictus-seeds, the pound 1 s. 4 d.
Carui-seeds, the pound 4 d. Cataputiae, the pound 5 s. Citron, the pound 8 s.
Carthamum-seeds, the pound 1 s. Cichorei, the pound 1 s. Coriander-seeds, the
pound 4 d. Cucumber, the pound 1 s. Citrul, the pound 1 s. Cumin-seeds, the
pound 4 d. Dancus Creticus, the pound 5 s. 4 d. Common Daucus, the pound 8 d.
Sweet Fennel, the pound 10 d. Common Fennel-seeds, the pou. 4 d.
Fenugrec-seeds, the pound 4 d. Gourge, the pound 1 s. Henbane, the pound 1 s. 4
d. Linseeds, the pound 3 d. Lettice, the pound 1 s. Levisticum, the pound 1 s.
Lithospermum, the pound 1 s. S. Malvae, the pound 1 s. S. Melonum, the pound 1
s. S. Napi, the pound 2 s. 8 d. Nettle-seeds common, the pound 1 s. 4 d.
Nettle-seeds Roman, the pound 5 s. Nigella-seeds, the pound 2 s. 8 d. Orobi,
the pound 2 s. Poppey white seeds, the pound 1 s. 2 d. Poppey black seeds, the
pound 1 s. 4 d. Parsley of Macedonia seeds, the pound 8 s. Peponum, the pound 1
s. 8 d. Paradise Grains, the pound 6 d. Purslane, the pound 1 s. 4 d.
Piony-seeds, the pound 1 s. 4 d. Parsley common, the pound 1 s. Psyllium-seeds,
the pound 8 d. Plantane, the pound 1 s. Quince-seeds, the pound 4 s.
Rocket-seeds, the pound 1 s. 4 d. Rue, the pound 2 s. 8 d. Seseli of Candia
seeds, the pound 2 s. Seseli common seeds, the pound 1 s. Sumach, the pound 1
s. 4 d. Staphis agria seeds, the pound 1 s. Sorrel, the pound 1 s. 4 d.
Saxifrage, the pound 1 s. 4 d. Thlaspi-seeds, the pound 1 s. 4 d. Wormseed, the
pound 5 s. 4 d.
Simples grown out of Plants.
AGarick the best, the pou. 6 s. 8 d. The outward parings of Agarick, the pound
2 s. Kermes Grains, the pound 5 s. Fungi Sambuci, the pound 2 s. Viscum
quercinum, the pound 1 s, Sponge, the pound, 5 s. 4 d.
Of liquid Juices there is only
KErmes Juice, the pound 6 s.
Concreted Juices, Gums, and Rosins.
ACacia vera, the pound 10 s. Aloes Succotrina according to its goodness, the
pound from 4 s. to 6 s. Aloes Caballina, the pound 2 s. 8 d. Amber white, the
pound 3 s. 4 d. Amber yellow, the pound 1 s. 4 d. Asa foetida, the pound 2 s. 4
d. Asphaltum, the pound 5 s. 4 d. Balsam of Peru, the pound 16 s. Balsam of
Tolu, the ounce 2 s. 8 d. Bitumen, the pound 5 s. 2 d. Bdellium, the pound 4 s.
Benjamin course, the pound 2 s. Benjamin fine, the pound 4 s. Cambogia, the
pound 5 s. 4 d. Camphor, the pound 8 s. Caranna, the pound 12 s. Colophony, the
pound 4 d. Elaterium, the ounce 1 l. 16 s. Frankincense, the pound 4 d.
Galbanum, the pound 2 s. 8 d. Gum. Ammoniac. the pound 1 s. 4 d. Gum. Animae,
the pound 6 s. Gum. Arabic, the pound 1 s. Gum. Coopal, the pound 5 s. Gum.
Dragant, the pound 2 s. Gum. Elemi, the pound 2 s. 8 d. Gum. Hederae, the pound
8 s. Gum. Iuniperi, the pound 1 s. Gum. Lac. the pound 1 s. 4 d. Hypocistis,
the pound 5 s. 4 d. Labdanum, the pound 2 s. 8 d. Liquidambar, the pound 8 s.
Liquoris juice, the pound 1 s. 4 d. Manna, according to its goodness, the
pound, from 2 s. to 5 s. 4 d. Mastich, according to its fineness, the pound,
from 2 s. 8 d. to 5 s. 4 d. Mouth Glue, the pound 5 s. Myrrh, the pound 3 s. 4
d. Olibanum, the pound 2 s. Opium, the pound 12 s. Opobalsamum, the ounce from
15 to 20 s. Opopanax, the pound 5 s. Pitch of Burgundy, the pound 4 d. Rosin,
common, the pound 3 d. Stone-Pitch, the pound 2 d. Sagapenum, the pound 6 s.
Sanguis Draconis in the lump, the pound 4 s. Sanguis Draconis in tears, the
pound 8 s. Sarcocolla, the pound 2 s. 8 d. Scammony, the pound 12 s. Storax
Calamit. the pound 8 s. Storax liquid. the pound 3 s. 4 d. Tacamahaca in the
lump, the pound 5 s. 4 d. Tacamahaca in the shell, the ounce 1 s. Tartar
Rhenish, the pound 8 d. Tartar French, the pound 4 d. Therebinthin common of
Firr, the pound 4 d. Therebinthin of Venice, the pound 1 s. 4 d. Therebinthin
of Cypress, the pound 6 s. 8 d. Therebinthin of Chio, the same.
Animals, their parts, and their Excrements.
BEzoar Oriental, the ounce from 30 s. to 40 s. Bezoar Occidental, the ounce 16
s. A Boars Tooth is worth 1 s. Castor of Russia, the ounce 3 s. 4 d. Castor of
New England; the ounc. 1 s. Cantharides, Spanish Flies, the pound 4 s. Crabs
Eyes, the pound 5 s. 4 d. Crabs Claws, cheli cancrorum, the pound 1 s. 6 d.
Cranium humanum, A dead man's skull, if sound, is worth 8, 9, or sometimes 10,
or 11 s. Civet, the dram 5 s. 6 d. Fox lungs, the pound 2 s. Hearts Horn whole,
the pound 8 d. Hearts Horn shavings, the pound 1 s. 6 d. Hearts Horn burnt, the
pound 1 s. Ivory raspt, the pound 4 d. Ivory burnt, Spodium, the pound 1 s.
Ichthyocolla, Ising-glass, the pound 5 s. 4 d. Musk, the dram 5 s. Mummy, the
pound 5 s. 4 d. Os e cord Cervi, the Bone of a Stags Heart, the ounce 1 s. 6
d. Sericum crudum, the pound 6 s. Scuttle-bone, Os sepiae, the pound 1 s.
Seahorse Tooth, the ounce 4 d. Seahorse Pizzle, the ounce 4 d. Skink, a piece
1 s. 4 d. Sevum cervi, the pound 1 s. 4 d. Sperma caeti, the ounce 3 s. Stags
Pizzle, Priapus Cervi, the ounce 6 d. Vngula Alcis, Elks Claw, a piece 2 s.
White Wax, the pound 2 s. Wax yellow, the pound 1 s. 4.
Minerals, Metals, and Stones.
AERugo, Verdigriese, the pound 2 s. Allom Roch, the pound 6 d. Allom
feathered, the pound 5 s. Antimony, the pound 6 d. Argentum vivum, Quicksilver,
the pound 4 s. Armene Bole, the pound 1 s. Borax, the pound 4 s. Cerussa, white
Lead, the pound 4 d. Chalybis limatura, the filings of Steel the pound 6 d.
Chalyb. acicul. limatura, the pound 1 s. Cinnabar natural, the ounce 3 s.
Cinnabaris artificialis, Vermilion, the pound 5 s. 4 d. Crystal, the pound 5 s.
Lapis Aetites Ind. Indian Eagle-Stone, according to their bigness and goodness,
a piece from 10 s. to 40 s. Lapis Aetites Germ. German Eagle-Stone, a piece,
from 5 s. to 20 s. Lapis Calaminaris, the pound 6 d. Lapis Corneolus in
fragments, the ounce 1 s. Lapis Gagates, the ounce 1 s. 6 d. Lapis Hyacinthus,
in fragments, the ounce 1 s. Lapis Haematites, Blood stone, the pound 2 s. 8 d.
Lapis Sapphir, in fragments, the ounce 1 s. Lapis Iudaicus, the ounce 1 s. 6 d.
Lapis Sarda, in fragments, the ounce 1. s. Lapis Smaragdus, in fragments, the
ounce 1 s. Lapis Lyncis, the ounce 1 s. 6 d. Lapis Hybernicus, Irish-Slate, the
pound 6 d. Lapis Magnet. the ounce 4 d. Lapis Lazuli, Azure Stone, the ounce 2
s. Lapis Nephriticus, the ounce 5 s. Lapis Topazius, the ounce. 1 s. 6 d.
Lithargyr of Gold, the pound 6 d. Lithargyr of Silver, the pound 4 d. Mercury
sublimate, the pound 5 s. 8 d. or 6 s. Mercury-precipitate, the pound 8 s.
Minium, Red Lead, the pound 3 d. Osteocolla, the pound 5 s. Pompholyx, the pou.
1 s. 6 d. Sal armoniacum, the pound 1 s. Sal gemmae, the pound 1 s. Sal nitrum,
Salt Peter refined, in the lump, or crystallized, the pound 10 d. Sulphur
vivum, the pound 1 s. Flos Sulphuris, the pound 8 d. Talck of Venice, the pound
5 s. 4 d. Talck common, the pound 4 d. Terra Lemnia, the pound 1 s. 4 d.
Tuthia, the pound 2 s. 8 d. Vitriol white, the pound. 10 d. Vitriol Roman, the
pound 4 s. Vitriol common, or Copperas, the pound 1 d.
Sea-Simples.
AMbergriese, the dram 18 s. Coral white, the pound 2 s. Coral red, the pound 4
s. Corallina, Sea-moss, the pound 1 s. Seed-Pearls Oriental, the ounce from 4
s. to 8 s. Seed Pearls occidental, the ounce from 3 s. to 6 s. Mother of Pearl,
the ounce, 6 d.
The Prices among the Druggists of some particulars ready prepared by their
Journy-men, or elsewhere, which you may buy far cheaper of the said Druggists,
than you can prepare them your self.
Simples.
ELicampane powder, the po. 16 d. Liquoris powder the finest, the pound 2 s.
Liquoris powder common, the pound 8 d. Orange-flower-Water, or Aqua Naphthae,
the pint 1 s. 4 d. Orange-flower-Butter, or Unguent. flor. aurant. the pound 5
s. 4 d. Plumbum ustum, or Lead burnt, the pound 1 s. Red Saunders powder, or
Lig. Santal. rubr. pulv. the pound 8 d. Trochisci de Viperis Venet. the ounce 2
s. Trochisci de Viperis Novae Angliae the ounce 18 d. Turmerick powder, or
Curcum. pulv. the pound 8 d.
Compounds.
DIascordium, the pound 3 s. 4 d. Mithridate, the pound 6 s. London-Treacle,
the pound 2 s. Treacle-Water, the pint 2 s. 8 d.
The Prices of some Oils and Emplaestors sold by the Druggists.
OLeum Lateritium, the pound 1 s. 6 d. Oleum de Ben, the ounce 1 s. Oleum
Capiviae, the ounce 2 s. Oleum Nervinum, the pound 1 s. Oleum Palmae, the pound
1 s. Petroleum, the pound 3 s. Vnguentum Pomatum, the pound 1 s. 8 d.
Emplastrum Diachylon simple, the pound 9 d. Emplastrum de Minio, the pound 9 d.
Emplastrum Diapalma, the pound 9 d. Emplastrum Meliloti, the pound 9 d.
Emplastrum Sticticum Paracelsi, the pound 2 s. 8 d.
The Prices Current of Ingredients that are to be bought of the Grocers.
ALmonds sweet, Jordan, the pound 1 s. 4 d. Almonds sweet of Valentia, the
pound 10 d. Almonds bitter, the pound 10 d. Cinnamon, the pound 8 s. Cloves,
the pound 7 s. Dates, the pound 8 d. French Barley, the pound 4. d. Ginger, the
pound 6 d. Mace, the pound 13 s. 4 d. Nutmegs, the pound 6 s. Pearl Barley, the
pound 6 d. Pistaches, the pound 1 s. 6 d. Sugarcandy white, the pound 1 s. 8 d.
Sugarcandy brown, the pound 10 d.
The Prices of Chemical Preparations at the Chemists, or at the Druggists, who
sell the same Chemical Preparations at the same Rates; which they can very well
do, in regard they buy great quantities of them from the Chemists, at much
cheaper Rates than they will sell lesser proportions to particular persons.
ANtimonium Diaphoreticum, the ounce 1 s. 6 d. Bezoardicum Minerale, the ounce
5 s. Cerussa Antimonii, the ounce 2 s. 6 d. Chalybs praeparat. the pound 2 s.
Crocus Metallorum, the pound 5 s. 4 d Crocus Martis, the pound 2 s. 8 d.
Mercurius Dulcis subl. the ounce 10 d. Mercurius Vitae, the ounce 3 s.
Mercurius Praecipitat. albus dulcis, the ounce 3 s. Magisterium perlarum, the
ounce 5 s. Magisterium Corallorum, the ounce 2 s. Regulus Antimonii, the pound
2 s. 6 d. Tartarum Vitriolatum, the ounce 1 s. 4 d. Turbith Mineral, the ounce,
1 s. 6 d. Vitrum Antimonii, the pound 2 s.
The Prices of Chemical Oils and Spirits.
AQua fortis single, the pound 2 s. 8 d. Aquae fortis double, the pound 5 s. 4
d. Balsam of Sulphur, the pound 8 s. Elixir proprietatis, the ounce 18 d. Lac
Sulphuris, the ounce 3 s. Oleum Absinthii, the ounce 1 s. 6 d. Oleum Anisi, the
ounce 1 s. Oleum Carui, the ounce 2 s. Oleum Citri, the ounce 2 s. 8 d. Oleum
Cinnamoni, the oun. 1 l. 12 s. Oleum Cumini, the ounce 1 s. Oleum Cerae, the
ounce 2 s. 6 d. Oleum Garyophyllorum, the ounce 5 s. Oleum Iessemi, the ounce 5
s. Oleum Iuniperi, the ounce 2 s. Oleum Nucis moschatae, the ounce 2 s. Oleum
Origani, the ounce 2 s. 8 d. Oleum Rhodii, the ounce 5 s. Oleum de Sassafras,
the ounce 3 s. Oleum Sulphuris per campanam, the ounce, 10 d. Oleum Succini,
the ounce 1 s. Oleum Tartari per deliq. the ounce 1. s. Oleum Vitrioli, the
pound 5 s. 4 d. Spiritus cornu cervi, the ounc. 1 s. 8 d. Spiritus Salis, the
pound 8 s. Spiritus Salis armoniaci, the ounce 1 s. Spiritus Cochleariae, the
ounce 9 d.
The Prices of Chemical Salts.
SAl Absinthii, the ounce 1 s. Sal Arthemisiae, the ounce 2 s. Sal Cardui
Benedicti, the ounce 2 s. Sal Chalybis, the ounce 1 s. Sal Cochleariae, the
ounce 1 s. Sal Fraxini, the ounce 10 d. Sal Genistae, the ounce 10 d. Sal
Prunellae, the pound s. 8 d. Sal Succini, the ounce 5 s. Sal Tartari, the ounce
8 d. Sal Vitrioli, the ounce 8 d. Saccharum Saturni, the ounce 1 s. 6 d.
THE Family-Physician.
CHAP. I.
Of Vomitives.
The Description of a gentle Vomitive.
TAke lukewarm water a pint, add to it six or eight spoonfuls of sweet
Salade-Oyl; drink it off warm: or if your Stomach be full and inclined to
vomit, drink off a Pint or two of warm Carduus-Posset.

Another gentle Vomitive.
Take three or four Radishes, bruise them, and boil them in a pint of small
Ale, until one half be boiled away; press the Liquor hard through a Strainer,
and add to it one ounce of fresh Butter, or 2 or 3 spoonfuls of sweet Oil.

Another Vomitive.
Dissolve two scruples, or a dram of Saltpeter, in a pint of fat broth.

Another somewhat stronger.
Take of the yellow Bark of Frangula three drams, or the same quantity of
Broom-flowers; boil it or them a quarter of an hour in half a pint of small
Ale; strain it, and drink it off warm.

Another.
Take a dram and half of Orach-seeds powdered, and drink it off in a quarter of
a Pint of warm Posset-Ale, or fat broth.

Or,
Take a dram of dried Pompion-Root powdered; or a dram of Nettle-seeds
powdered; or a dram of the inner Bark of Walnut-tree powdered; or 3 drams of
Radish-seeds powdered; or three drams of Garden-cress-seeds powdered; likewise
a dram of fine grated Agarick, taken in a draught of fat broth, will with some
operate very well by Vomit.

Also threescore drops of the juice of green Tobacco-leaves taken in Posset,
does Vomit very smartly.

The best Vomitive among Vegetables is this following.
Take five or six leaves of green Asaraback leaves, bruise them in a Stone
Mortar, and whilst you are bruising them, pour to them by spoonfuls, a quarter
of a pint of Whitewine, or Ale; having mixed them well together, press out the
Liquor hard, through a Canvas Strainer.

Likewise, in stead of the leaves, you may take a dram of Asaraback roots dried
and powdered, in a draught of Posset, or warm Ale.

CHAP. II.
Of Potions.
THe Description of a Cordial Potion, such as Apothecaries commonly prepare you
in all cases, when you make use of them, imagining, though it does you but
little good, it will do you no great harm, except it be to your purse.

Take of Baum water, Black-cherry water, Carduus Water, of each one ounce and
half; Treacle water, one ounce; Syrup of Gilliflowers, one ounce; mix them in a
glass Viol. As often as you prepare this your self, you will save three shillings
by it.

In many cases, if you must needs have that which is called a Cordial, a
quarter of a pint of good fresh small Beer, and an ounce of Syrup of
Gilliflowers dissolved in it, and so taking two or three spoonfuls every two
hours, may do as well as the best Cordial, to please your conceit; for you must
know, that very often Cordials are prescribed only for to gratify your Fancy,
and the Apothecaries Avarice; the right Cordial being that, which removes the
Cause of your distemper, and upon that be assured your Heart and other Bowels
will soon recover strength, and revive.

The Description of a Perle Cordial.
Take of the distilled waters of Citron, Wood Sorrel, Dragons and Carduus, of
each one ounce; Aqua Mirabilis, six drams; Pearl prepared (that is only ground
on a Marble, with a few drops of Rose water into an impalpable powder) one
dram; Syrup of Gilliflowers, one ounce: so shake them together in a four ounce
Glass, and take it by spoonfuls, as directed before.

The Description of an Universal purgative Potion.
Take half an ounce of the best Senna, one dram of sweet Fennil seeds bruised,
steep them all night in somewhat more than a quarter of a pint of clear Posset
Ale; next morning strain and press it, dissolving into the liquor one ounce of
good Manna, then strain it once over again.

Another universal purgative Potion.
Take half an ounce of Polypody roots of the Oak, a handful of Agrimony, six
Damask Prunes, one ounce of Currents, half an ounce of Senna, one dram of green
Anni-seeds; boil them gently for a quarter of an hour in half a pint of water;
press the liquor through a strainer, and sweeten it with brown Sugar.

Another universal Purge.
Take two drams of Senna, one dram of Rhubarb, two scruples of Agarick, half a
dram of sweet Fennil seeds, a scruple of Cinnamon; steep them all night in
somewhat more than a quarter of a pint of the Decoction of Currents; Press the
liquor next morning through a strainer, and dissolve therein one ounce of Syrup
of Roses Laxative.

CHAP. III.
Of Emulsions, and Almond Milk.
The manner how to prepare an Emulsion to cool the Kidneys, and to take off the
heat and sharpness of Urine.
TAke of sweet Almonds blanched one ounce, of the four greater Cold Seeds, of
each half an ounce; then first bruise the seeds well in a stone Mortar with a
wooden Pestle; this done, put the Almonds to them, and bruise them together,
pouring to them as they are bruising by three or four spoonfuls at a time, a
pint of Barley water; then press the liquor through a strainer, and sweeten it
with white Sugar.

The manner of preparing Almond Milk.
Take four ounces of sweet Almonds blanched, bruise them in a stone Mortar, and
while you are bruising them, pour to them by degrees a pint of Barley water,
press the liquor hard through a canvas strainer, and sweeten it with as much
white Sugar as will make it grateful.

CHAP. IV.
Of Clysters.
The Description of a laxative Clyster.
TAke of white Lilly roots one ounce, of Marshmallows, Pellitory, and Mercury
leav^s, of each 2 handful; of Chamomil flowers two pugils, or one handful;
common Fennil seeds half an ounce; boil them in a pint and half of water to a
pint; strain the liquor, and therein dissolve one ounce of Electuary Lenitive,
three ounces of common Oil, two ounces of brown Sugar, and a little Salt,
strain it once again, and use it warm.

Observe. Strain the Decoction (being warm) of the foresaid Roots and Herbs into
a basin, and with the backside of a spoon dissolve the Electuary and Honey by
stirring of them together; then strain it once again from the little lumps,
that may not be thoroughly dissolved, which otherwise would stop the
Clyster-pipe, and hinder it from passing; if it be grown too cold, you must
warm it again, before you administer it.

Another laxative Clyster.
Add to the ingredients of the foresaid Decoction half an ounce of Senna; boil
it, then strain the liquor, and dissolve in it four or five spoonfuls of brown
Sugar, with four spoonfuls of Oil, and a little Salt. Administer it warm.

An Emollient Clyster.
Take a pint of fat Broth, dissolve in it four or five spoonfuls of brown
Sugar; and administer it warm.

A Clyster against the Cholick.
Take Marshmallow roots one ounce; Mallows, Rue, Origan, Calamint, of each a
handful, dried Virginia Tobacco leaves, half an ounce; Bay berries, six drams;
Linseeds, half an ounce; boil them in a little more than a pint of water:
strain it, and thereunto add eight or nine spoonfuls of common Oil.

An Anodyne Clyster against Gripes.
Boil a pint of Milk once up, and mix with it the yolk of one Egg, and four
spoonfuls of brown Sugar.

An adstringent Clyster against a Looseness, and Dysenteries.
Take half an ounce of Tormentil roots; of the leaves of Plantane and Shepherds
purse, of each one handful; red Rose leaves, two pugils; Cypress Nuts, two
drams; boil them in Smiths water unto a pint, and mix with it the yolks of two
Eggs well beaten.

A Clyster against pains of the Stone.
Take of the leaves of Pellitory, Mallows, and Mercury, of each one handful;
Fenugreek seeds, and Bay berries, of each half an ounce; Chamomil flowers, two
pugils: boil them in water unto a pint: dissolve therein one ounce of Venice
Therebinthin, which must be done thus; warm two ounces of common Oil, therewith
mix the foresaid Therebinthin with a Spoon or Spatula, which then will easily
mix with the foresaid Decoction.

CHAP. V.
Of Suppositories.
TAke a Beet root, or a Cabbage root, cut it according to the length and shape
of your forefinger, that is, Taper; only a little pointed at one end; dust it
about with a little Salt powdered fine, and put it up your fundament.

Another.
Take a piece of Castle Soap, shape it as was directed before, and make use of
it. Or, take an end of a Tallow Candle, and dust it a little with Salt powdered.

Another.
Take Honey, and boil it up to a thickness and hardness, mix with it twenty
grains of Aloes powdered, or (if required more stimulating) twenty grains of
Scammony powdered, or twenty grains of Colocynth powdered.

CHAP. VI.
Of Iuleps.
A cooling Iulep in Fevers.
TAke a quart of Barley water, squeese in it the juice of one large Lemon, or
of two small ones, then sweeten it with as much white Sugar, as will make it
palatable.

Another.
Take of the distilled waters of Succory, Sorrel, and Violets, of each four
ounces; dissolve in them three ounces of Syrup of Limons, or Syrup of Sorrel.

CHAP. VI.
Of Decoctions.
A Pectoral Decoction against Coughs, and Phthisicks.
TAke of Elicampane, Eringo, and Liquoris roots, of each half an ounce;
Currents one ounce; Figs, twenty in Number; Dates, ten in number; Maidenhair,
one handful; sweet Fennil seeds, half an ounce: boil them in Spring water unto
a pint and half; strain the liquor, and dissolve therein one ounce and half of
clarified Honey.

A Decoction against the Dropsy.
Take of the chips of Guaiacum wood, two ounces; Sassafras wood cut small, one
ounce; of the roots of Swallow-wort, Florentine Orris, of each one ounce;
Agrimony, Pennyroyal, Horehound, of each one handful; Roman Wormwood, half a
handful; Juniper berries, and Parsley seeds, of each one ounce; Clove bark,
three drams: boil them in Whitewine and water, of each the same measure, unto a
quart: strain the liquor, and therein dissolve three ounces of clarified Honey.

A Decoction against the Stone.
Take of Restharrow roots, one ounce, Horseradish roots, half an ounce;
Saxifrage leaves, and Venus Basin, of each one handful; Alkekengi berries, or
Winter Cherries, fifty in number; Milium Solis, six drams; sweet Fennil,
Burdock and Saxifrage seeds; of each half an ounce; Juniper berries, six drams;
Rhenish Tartar, a quarter of an ounce; boil them in half Whitewine, and half
Water unto one pint and half: strain the liquor, and keep it in a glass. Take a
quarter of a pint Mornings and Afternoons.

A Decoction against a Dysentery and other Loosnesses.
Take Tormentil, and Snakeweed roots, of each half an ounce; red Saunders, six
drams; Comfrey leaves, half a handful; Myrtle berries, six drams; red Rose
leaves, one handful: boil them in Smiths forge-water unto a quart.

CHAP. VII.
Of Gargarisms.
A Gargarism to purge the Brain of Phlegm.
TAke of Elicampane roots, one ounce; of the tops of Hyssop, and Sage, of each
one handful; Pyrethrum root, or Pellitory of Spain, two drams; long Pepper,
Cubebs, of each one dram, boil them in half Whitewine, and half Water, unto a
pint. Strain the liquor, and therein dissolve two ounces of Syrup of Vinegar.

A Gargarism against the swelling and inflammation of the Throat.
Take of Plantane water four ounces; Rose water, and Self-heal water, of each
two ounces; dissolve in them Syrup of Mulberries two ounces; Sal Prunellae half
a dram.

A Gargarism against foul Scorbutic Gums.
Take Tormentil and Aristolochia rotunda roots half an ounce, Pilewort, Sage,
and Garden Scurvey-grass, of each one handful: boil them in water to a pint;
therein dissolve two scruples of flowers of Sal Ammoniac.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Collyria's, or Eye Medicines.
An Eye-water to clear the sight.
TAke Celandine, Eyebright, Vervain, and Rue, of each three handfuls; sweet
Fennil, and Cummin seeds, of each six drams; Mace and Cloves, of each three
drams; steep them in French Wine and Spring water, of each one pint; afterward
distill the water off in a glass Body with a glass Head in Sand.

An Eye Water against Heat, Redness, and sharp Rhumes of the Eyes.
Take Rose water and Eyebright water of each two ounces* of trochisci albi
Rhasis one dram (...) red Tuthia twenty grams, mix them together in a glass.

The Green Eyewater to remove Specks and Pearls from the Eye.
Take a quarter of an ounce of Verdigriese powdered very fine; Aloes powdered
one dram; boil them in Rose water and Whitewine of each five ounces; then while
it is yet warm, filtrate it through brown Paper.

CHAP. IX.
Of Cataplasms, or Poultesses.
A Dissolving Poultess or Cataplasm.
TAke green Orris roots, and white Lilly roots, of each one ounce;
Marshmallows, Pellitory, Pennyroyal, Origan, Calamint, Rue, of each a handful;
Chamomil, Melilot, and Elder flowers, of each a pugil or half a handful; green
Anniseeds, common Fennil, and Cumminseeds, of each half an ounce; boil them to
a mash in Water, and Whitewine: then bruise them into an even smooth mass, in a
wooden or stone Mortar, adding to them Lupin and Bean flowers, of each one
ounce and half; Oil of Camomil, and of Orris, of each one ounce and half; mix
them well in the Mortar, and heat them again; then apply half of this Poultess
(more or less according to the extent of the part affected) being hot, and
spread between two Linen Clothes.

Another.
Take a quarter of a pound of Leven, mix it with as much common oil as will
bring it into a Poultess, and apply it warm.

A maturating Cataplasm or ripening Poultess.
Take Marshmallow and white Lilly roots, of each one ounce; Pellitory,
Marshmallow, and Mallow leaves, of each two handfuls; Fenugreek and Linseeds,
of each one ounce: boil them to a Mash in water, and put to them Wheat flower
three ounces, Oil of Lilies three ounces. Apply it as was directed before.

An Anodyne Cataplasm, or Poultess to ease pain.
Take of the Crumbs of White Bread one pound, boil it into a thick Pap in Milk,
then add to it two Yolks of Eggs, three ounces of thick common Oil, and a
little Saffron, and apply it warm, renewing it as often as it cools.

CHAP. X.
Of Ointments.
An Ointment against a Scald or Burn.
TAke Rue leaves one handful, Housleek one handful and half, Hen-dung two
ounces, unsalted fresh Butter a quarter of a pound, fry them together, and then
press them through a Canvas cloth. Herewith (a little being melted in a Spoon)
anoint the scalded or burned part once in three or four hours, applying thereon
two or three fresh Plantane leaves.

An Ointment against the Itch.
Take Hog's Grease four ounces, Therebinthin and Wax of each one ounce, Flower
of Brimstone, or rather unmelted Brimstone pounded and sifted, one ounce;
Tobacco stalks powdered and sifted half an ounce, White Lead two drams, common
Oil as much as will suffice to bring it into an Ointment.

CHAP. XI.
Of Vesicatories or Blistering Plasters.
A Vesicatory Emplaster.
TAke half an ounce of Leven, Cantharides or Spanish Flies powdered, one dram;
sharp Wine vinegar as much as will suffice to mix them into a Paste; which
spread upon Linen or Leather, and applied will in few hours raise a large
Blister.

Another.
Take of Rosin three drams and half, Wax one dram and half, Cantharides
powdered three drams, Mustard Seed two scruples, common oil as much as
suffices. This will serve for three or four Blistering Plasters.

FINIS.

