Richard Head


The Globe's thy Study; for thy boundless mind
In a less limit cannot by confind.
Gazing, I here admire: thy very looks
Show thou art read as well in men, as books.
He that shall scan thy face, may judge by it,
Thou have an Headpeece that is throngd with wit.
THE English Rogue DESCRIBED, In the LIFE OF MERITON LATROON, A Witty
Extravagant.

Being a Complete Discovery OF THE Most Eminent CHEATS OF BOTH SEXES.

Man's life's a Play, the world a Stage, whereon Learn thou to play, or else be
played upon.

Si mihi praet^ritos referat nune Jupiter annos,
Qualis eram, etc. --
Licensed, January 5. 1666.

London, Printed for Francis Kirkman, and are to be sold by him and Thomas
Dring the younger, at the White Lion next Chancery lane in Fleet street. 1668.

The Epistle to the Reader.
Gentlemen,
IT has been too much the humor of late, for men rather to adventure on the
Foreign crazy stilts of other men's inventions, then securely walk on the
groundwork of their own homespun fancies. What I here present ye with, is an
original in your own Mothertongue; and yet I may not improperly call it a
Translation, drawn from the Black Copy of men's wicked actions; such who spared
the Devil the pains of courting them, by listing themselves Volunteers to serve
under his Hellish Banners; with some whereof I have heretofore been unhappily
acquainted, and am not ashamed to confess, that I have been somewhat soiled by
their vicious practices, but now I hope cleansed in a great measure from those
impurities. Every man has his peculiar guilt, proper to his constitution and
age: and most have had (or will have) their exorbitant exiliencies, erroneous
excursions, which are least dangerous when atrenoed by Youthfulness.

This good use I hope the Reader will make with me of those follies, that are
so generally and too frequently committed every where, by declining the
commission of them (if not for the love of virtue, yet to avoid the dismal
effects of the most dangerous consequences that continually accompany them.)
And how shall any be able to do this, unless they make an introspection into
Vice? which they may do with little danger; for it is possible to enjoy the
Theorick, without making use of the Practick.

To save my Countrymen the vast expense and charge of such experimental
Observations, I have here given an account of my readings, not in Books, but
Men; which should have been buried in silence, (fearing lest its Title might
reflect on my Name and Reputation) had not a public good interceded for its
publication, far beyond any private interest or respect.

When I undertook this Subject, I was destitute of all those Tools (Books, I
mean) which diverse pretended Artists make use of to form some Ill-contrived
design. By which ye may understand, that as necessity forced me, so a generous
resolution commanded me to scorn a Lituanian humor or Custom, to admit of
Adjutores tori, helpers in a Marriage Bed, there to engender little better then
a spurious issue. It is a legitimate offspring, I Will assure ye, begot by one
singly and soly, and a person that dares in spite of cankered Malice subscribe
himself

A well-willer to his Countries welfare, Richard Head.

On the approvedly-ingenious, and his loving Friend, Mr. Richard Head, the
Author of this book.
WHat Gusman, Buscon, Francion, Rablais writ,
I once applauded for most excellent wit:
But reading Thee, and thy rich Fancies store,
I now condemn, what I admired before.
Honceforth Translations pack away, be gone;
No Rogue so well writ, as our English one.
M. Y.

To his respected Friend, the Author.
COuld I but reach Bays from Apollo's Tree,
I Would make a Wreath to Crown thy Work and Thee;
Which yet is needless, now I think upon it;
Thy own great Pen deservedly has don't.
Of all who write of Thee, this is my Vogue,
None ere writ better of, and is less Rogue.
W. W.
On his deserving friend the Author.
FLetcher the King of Poets of his age,
In all his writings throughout every page
Made it his chiefest business to describe
The various humors of the canting-Tribe:
His Beggars-bush, and other of his Plays
Did gain to him (deservedly) the Bays.
Nature and Art in him were both conjoined;
None could ere say that his Wit was purloyn'd:
Neither is thine: he did all fancies fill,
From Kings and Queens, unto the Maid of the Mill;
And so can thou, for thou have here displayed
The Vices of each Sex, and every Trade.
Wherefore what he in his time wore, do thou
Put on, a Wreath of Bays to adorn thy brow.
F. K.
In stead of the Errata.
THis Rogue has had his Faults; the Printers too:

All Men whilst here, do err; and so may You.

Books lately printed for, and sold by Francis Kirkman.
THe English Rogue described in the Life of Meriton Latroon, a Witty
Extravagant: Being a complete discovery of the most eminent Cheats of both
Sexes.

Poor Robins Jeasts: Or, the complete Jeste^ first and second Part; being a
Collection of several Jests not heretofore published, now newly composed and
written by Poor Robin, Knight of the Burnt Island, and well-willer to the
Mathematics; together with the true and lively Effigies of the Author.

The Spightful Sister: a new Comedy, written by Abraham Bailey of Lincoln's Inn
Gent.

Money is an Ass, a Comedy, written by Tho. Jordan Gent.

There is now in the Press, and will be published in few days,

The English Rogue continued in the Life of Meriton Latroon, and other
Extravagants, being a complete discovery of the most Eminent Cheats of most
Trades and Professions: the second Part.

THE ENGLISH ROGUE Described in the Life of a Witty Extravagant.
CHAP. I.
What his Parents were. The place of his own Nativity. His miraculous Escape
from the hands of Irish Rebels. His brother being at that very time murdered by
the merciless hands of those bloody Butchers.

AFter a long and strict Inquisition after my Fathers Pedigree, I could not
find any of his Ancestors bearing a Coat: surely length of time had worn it
out. But if the Gentle Craft will any ways ennoble his Family, I believe I
could deduce several of his Name, Professors of that lasting Art, even from
Crispin. My Fathers Father had by his continual ^abour in Husbandry, arrived to
the height of a Farmer, then the Head of his Kindred: standing upon one of his
own Mole-Hills, Ambition so sweled him, that he swore by his Plow-share, that
his ^ldest Son (my Father) should be a Scholliard and should learn so long,
till he could read any printed or written hand; nay, and if occasion should
serve, write a Bill or Bond.

It was never known that any of the Family could distinguish one letter from
another, neither could they speak above the reach of their Horses
understandings. Talk to them in any other Dialect but ^at of a Bag-pudding of a
Peck, or a piece of Beef, (in which their teeth might step whet-shod) and a man
were as good to have discoursed with them in Arabic. But let me not abuse
them; for some understood something else; that is to say, The Art of Whistling,
Driving their Team, and to shoe themselves as well as their Horses; how to
lean methodically upon a Staff, and through the holes of their Hat, tell what
it is a Clock by the Sun.

The symmetrical proportion, sweetness of features, and acuteness of my Fathers
wit, were such (though extracted out of this lump of red and white marle) that
he was beloved of all. As the loveliness of his person gained always an
interest in Female hearts; so the quickness of apprehension and invention, and
the acquired quaintness of his expressions; procured him the friendship of such
as conversed with him. A Gentleman at length taking notice of more than
ordinary natural parts in him, at his proper charge sent him to School contrary
to the desire of his Father, who was able enough to maintain him at School; and
to say the truth, this Gentleman offered not my Father his Patronage upon any
charitable account, but that he might hereafter glory in the being the chief
instrument of bringing up such a fair promising Wit; which he questioned not
with good cultivation would bring forth such lovely fruit as would answer cost,
and fully satisfy his expectation. Being admitted into the Grammar School, by
the strength of his memory, to his Masters great amazement, in a very short
time he had Lillies Rules by heart, out-stripping many that for years had been
entered before him: his Master perceiving what a stupendous proficiency he had
made, was very glad that this fair opportunity offered it self, that he might
be idle, and in order thereunto would frequently appoint my Father to be his
Usher or Deputy, when he intended to turn Bacchanalian, to drink, hunt, or
whore, to which vices he was overmuch addicted. My Father having now conquered
in a manner the difficulties of that Schools learning, began now to lay aside
his Book, and follow the steps of his vicious learned Master, the examples of a
Superior proving oftentimes guides to inferior actions,

Regis ad exemplum -- Besides his springing Age (wherein the blood is hot and
fervent) spurred him on, and the natural disposition of his mind, gave him
wings to fly^ whither his unbounded, licentious, self-pleasing will would
direct. His Youth introduced him into, all sorts of vanity, and his
Constitution of body, was the Mother of all his unlawful pleasures. His
Temperament gave Sense pre-eminence above Reason. Thus you see (which
experience can more fully demonstrate) how the heat of Youth gives ^wel to the
Fire of Voluptuous Enjoyments; but without a supply of what may purchase those
delights, invention must be Tenter-hooked, which ever proves dangerous, most
commonly fatal. My Grandfather too indulgent to his son, supplied him
continually with money; which he did the more freely, since he was exempted
from such charges which necessity required for my Fathers maintenance, he
having now more than a bare competency, he not only consents to the commission
of evil, but tempts others to pe^petrate the like. And now following his own
natural proncness to irregular liberty, ^iurnally suggests matter of
innovation, not only to his own, but others reasons. (...) non citius (...)
quam in Deum delinquens, non citius surgens (...) insurgens. No sooner
relinquishing his bed, but delinquishing his Creator, No sooner rising, than
rising against his God. In short, I know not whether he prevailed more on
others, or others on him, for he was facile; the best Nature is most quickly
depraved, as the purest flesh corrupts soonest, and most noisome when corrupted.
Yet notwithstanding these blooming debaucheries, he neglected not his Study so
much, but that he capacitated himself for the University, and by app^obation
was sent thither by his Patron. He applied himself close to his Book for a
while, till he had adapted himself a companion for the most absolute critic
could be selected out of any of the Colle^ges: in the assured confidence of his
own parts, he ventured among them, and left such remarks of his cutting wit in
all companies he came into, that the Gallants and most notable. Wits of Oxford,
covered so much his company, that he had not time to apply himself to his
Study; but giving way to their solicitations, being prompted thereunto (...)
his own powerful inclinations, ^lung'd himself over head and ears in all manner
of (...). For his ^ewd carriage, (...) wicked practices, and (...) behavior, he
was at last (...) the Colle^ge.

Now was he forced to return to his Father, who with much joy received him, but
would not tell him the true cause of his coming down: But to palliate his
vi^lanies, informed his Father that he had learned as much as he could be
instructed in; and now and then would sprinkle his Discourse with a Greek or
Latin Sentence, when talking with the poorignorant old Man; who took wonderful
delight in the mere sound thereof. When my Father spoke at any time, they were
all as silent as midnight; and then would my Grandfather with much admiration
becken to the standers by, to give their greatest attention, to what the
Speaker as little understood at his Auditors, not caring what nonsense he
uttered, if wrapped up in untelligble hard words, purposely to abuse those
brutish Plough-jobbers. In ostentation he was carried to the Parson of the
Parish to discourse with him; who by good fortune understood no other Tongue
but what his Mother taught him; My Father perceiving that, made Shoulderamutton
and Rat^thumpton serve for very good Greck; which the Parson confirmed: telling
my Grandfather further, that his Son was an excellent Scholar; protesting that
he was so deeply learned, that he spoke things he understood not; this I have
heard him say, made him as good sport, as ever he received in the most
ingenious Society.

He had not been long in the Country, before a Gentle woman taking notice of
his external and internal Qualifications, fell deeply in love with him; and
preferring her own pleasure before the displeasure of her wealthy Relations,
she incontinently was married to him. I shall wave how it was brought about in
every particular, but only instance what is therein remarkable. Doubtless the
gestures he used in his preaching (when she was present) might something avail
in the conquest of her affections; beginning with a dearly beloved passionately
extended, looking full in her face all the while, and being in the time of the
Kingdoms alteration and confusion, a temporizing Minister, he had learned all
those tricks by which those of his Sect and Coat used to bewitch a female ear.
But that which chiefly effected his desires, was the assurance of an old
Matron, that lived near my Mother, who for profit serupled not to officiate a
Bawd; this good old Gentlewoman contrived ways to bring them together,
unsuspected by any, by which means they obtained the opportunity to perform
Hymen's Rites, Sans Ceremonies of the Church. My mother finding impregnation,
acquainted my Father therewith, who (glad to hear how fast he had tied her to
him) urged her to the speedy Consummation of a Legal Marriage; which she more
longed for than he did himself, but knew not how to bring it to pass, by reason
of those many Obstacles which they saw obvious, and thwarting their intentions.
As first, the vast disproportion between their Estates; Next, the Antipathy her
Parents bore to his Function. Joining these to many other Obstructions, which
Fancy and Knowledge presented to them, they concluded to sreal a Wedding, and
accordingly did put it in execution. Much troubled her Parents were at first,
to hear how their daughter had fhip-wrackt her Fortune (as they judged it) in
the imfortunate loosing her Maidenhead, but time, with the intercession of
Friends, procured a Reconciliation between them, and all parties well pleased.
The old people took great delight in their fortune, hopeful thoughts and
expectations of their Son-in-law, but he more in the reception of a large Sum
of Money they paid him, and my mother most of all (as she thought) in the
continual conversation and enjoyment of my Farther, which she equally ranked
with what might be esteemed the best of things.

His eminent Parts natural, (and what he attained unto by his Country studies,
being ashamed to have lost so much time) introduced him as a Chaplain to a
Nobleman, with whom he traveled into Ireland. He took shipping at Myneard, and
from thence, sailed to Knock-f^rgus, where he lived both creditably and
comfortably. Experience had then so reformed his Life to so strict a religious
course, that his Observers gained more by his Example, than his Hearers by
Precepts. Thus by his piety in the purity of its practice, he soon regained his
lost credit.

By this time my Mother grew near her time, having conceived me in England, but
not conceiving she should thus drop me in an Irish Bog. There is no fear that
England and Ireland will after my decease, contend about my Nativity, as
several Countries did about H^mer; either striving to have the honor of first
giving him breath. Neither shall I much thank my Native Country, for bestowing
on me such principles as I and most of my Contrymen drew from that very Air;
the place I think made me appear a Bastard in disposition to my Father. It is
strange the Clymate should have more prevalency over the Nature of the Na^ive,
than the disposition of the Parent. For though Father and Mother could neither
flatter, deceive, revenge, equivocate, etc. yet the Son (as the consequence
has since made it appear) can (according to the common custom of his
Contrymen) dissemble and sooth up his Adversary with expressions extracted
from Celestial Manna, taking his advantage thereby to ruin him: For to speak
the truth, I could never yet love any but for some byrespect, neither could I
ever be persuaded into a pacification with that man who had any way injured me,
never resting satisfied till I had accomplished a plenary revenge, which I
commonly effected under the pretense of great love and kindness. Cheat all I
dealt withal, though the matter were ever so inconsiderable. Lie so naturally,
that a Miracle may be as soon wrought, as a Truth proceed from my mouth. And
then for Equivocation, or Mental Reservations, they were ever in me innate
Properties. It was always my resolution, rather to die by the hand of a common
Executioner, than want my revenge, though ever so slightly grounded. But I
shall desist here to characterize my self further, reserving that for another
place.

Four years after my Birth, the Rebellion began so unexpectedly, that we were
forced to flee in the night; the light of our flaming Houses, Ricks of Hay, and
Stacks of Corn, guided us out of the Town, and our Fears soon conveyed us to
the Mountains. The Rebels, wandering to and fro, intending either to meet with
their friends, (who flockt from all parts to get into a Body) or else any
English, which they designed as sacrifices to their implacable malice, or
inbred antipathy to that Nation, met with my Mother, attended by two
Scullogues, her menial servants, the one carrying me, the other my brother. The
Fates had decreed my brothers untimely death, and therefore unavoidable, the
faithful infidel being butchered with him. The surviving servant who carried
me, declared that he was a Roman Catholic, and imploring their mercy with his
howling Chram a Crees, for St. Patrick a gra, procured my Mothers, his own, and
my safety.

Thus was I preserved, but I hope not reserved as a subject for Divine
Vengeance to work on. Had I then died, no other guilt could have rendered me
culpable from Gods Tribunal, but what was derivative before Adam. But since,
the concatenation of sins various links has encompassed the whole series of my
life. Now to the intent I may deter others from perpetrating the like, and
receive to my self Absolution (according as it is promised) upon unseigned
Repentance, and ingenious Confession of my nefarious Facts, I shall give the
Readers a Summary Relation of my Life; from my Nonage to the Meridian of my
days, hoping that my Extravagancies and youthful Exiliences, have in that
state of life, their declination and period.

CHAP. II.
A short Account of the general Insurrections of the Irish, Anno 1641.

But though the mercy of these inhumane Villaius extended to the saving of our
Lives, yet they had so little consideration and commiseration, as to expose our
bodies (by stripping us) stark naked to the extremity of a cold Winter Night,
not so much as sparing my tender age. Thus without Shoes or Stockings, or the
least Rag to cover our nakedness, with the help of our Guide, we traveled all
night through Woods as obscure as that black darkness that then environed our
Horizon. By break of day we were at Belfast; about entering the skirts of the
Town, this honest and grateful servant, (which is much in an Irish man) being
then assured of our safety, took his leave of us, and returned to the Rebels.

Here were we received with much pity of all, and entertained, and clothed,
and fed, by some charitable minded Persons; to gratify their souls for what
they had done for my mothers body, and those that belonged to her, my Father
frequently preached, which gave general satisfaction, and continued thus in
instructing his hearers, till the Sark or Surplice, was adjudged by a Scottish
Faction, to be the absolute Smock of the Whore of Babylon. Then was he
constrained to fly again to Linsegarvy, taking his charge with him.

Before I proceed, give me leave to digress a little, in giving you a brief
account of the Irish Rebellion, Not two years before it broke out, all those
ancient Animosities, Grudges, and Hatred, which the Irish had ever been
observed to bare unto the English, seemed to be deposited and buried in a firm
Conglutination of their Affections, and National Obligations, which passed
between them. For these Two had lived together forty Years in peace, with such
great security and comfort, that it had in a manner consolidated them into one
body, knit and compacted together with all those Ligatures of Friendship,
Alliance, and Consanguinity, as might make up a constant and everlasting Union
betwixt them there. Their Inter-marriages were near upon as frequent as their
Gossippings and Fosterings, (relations of much dearness among the Irish)
together with all Tenancies, Neighborhoods and Services interchangeably passed
among them. Nay, they had made as it were a mutual Transmigration into each
others manners, many English being strongly degenerated into Irish Affections
and Customs, and many of the better sort of Irish studying as well the
Language of the English, as delighting to be Apparrel'd like them. Nay, so
great an advantage did they find by the English Commerce and Cohabitation, in
the profits and high improvements of their Lands, as Sir Phelim O Noal, that
rebellious Ringleader, with diverse others eminent in that bloody Insurrection,
had not long before turned off their Lands, their Irish Tenants, admitting
English in their rooms; who were able to give them far greater Rents, and more
certainly pay the same. So as all those circumstances duly weighed and
considered with the great increase of Trade, and many other evident Symptoms of
a flourishing Commonwealth; It was believed even by the wisest and most
experienced in the Affairs of Ireland, that the Peace and Tranquillity of that
Kingdom was fully settled, and most likely in all humane probability to
continue, especially under the Government of such a King as Charles the First,
whom After-ages may admire, but never match. Such was the serenity and security
of this Kingdom, as that there appeared not any where any Martial preparations,
for relics of any kind of disorders, no not so much as the least noise of
War whisperingly carried to any ear in all this Land.

Now whilst in this great calm, the British continued in the deepest
security, whilst all mon sar pleasantly enjoying the fruits of their own
labors, sitting under their own (Vines, without the least thoughts of
apprehensions of Tumulcs, Troubles, or Massacres, there brake out on October
the Twenty third, in the Year of ^our Lord, sixteen Hundred forty and one,
almost desperate, direful, (...) Rebellion, an Universal Desection (...),
wherein not (...) the mere Native (...), (...) almost all those English that
professed the (...) were totally involved (...) solved by me to give you a (...)
the most remarkable Transactions and (...) my life, it will be also necessary
to acquaint you with the beginning and first mo^ Neither shall I omit to trace
the Progress of (...) Rebellion, since therein, I shall relate sum^ (...) and
what others underwent, (...) of the Irish, and their abomi^ committed, as well
without number, as without mercy, upon the English Inhabitants of both Sexes,
and all Ages.

It was carried with such secrecy, that none understood the Conspiracy, till
the very evening that immediately preceded the night of its general execution.
I must confess there was some such thing more than suspected by one Sir William
Cole, who presently sent away Letters to the Lord Chief Justices, but
miscarried by the way. Omen O Conally (though mere Irish, was notwithstanding a
Protestant) was the first discoverer of this general Insurrection, giving in
the Names of some of the chief Conspirators. Hereupon the Lords convened and
sat in Council, whose care and prudence at that time was such, that some of
the Ringleaders were instantly seized, and upon examination, confessed that on
that very day of their surprizal, all the Ports and Places of strength in
Ireland, would be taken; that there was a considerable number of Gentlemen and
others, twenty out of each County, were come up expressly to surprise the Castle
of Dublin. Adding further, that where was to be done in the Country (where
Mercury the swist Messenger) could neither by the wit of man, or by Letter, be
prevented. Hereupon a strict search was made for all strangers lately come to
(...) and all Horses were seized on, whose owners could not give a good account
of them. And notwithstanding, there was a Proclamation dispersed through all
Ireland, giving notice of a horrid Plot designed by Irish Papists, against
English Protestants, intending thereby a discouragement to such of the
Conspirators, as yet had not openly declared themselves. Yet did they assemble
in great number, principally in the North, in the Province of Ulster, taking
many Towns, as the Newry, Drummoore, etc. burning, spoiling, and committing
horrible murders every where. These things wrought such a general
consternation and astonishment in the minds of the English, that they thought
themselves no where secure, flying from one danger into another.

In a very short time, the mere Irish Northern Papists by closly persuing on
their first Plot, had gotten into their possession most of the Towns, Forts,
Castles, and Gentlemen's Houses, within the Counties of Tyron, Denegal,
Fermanah, Armab, Canan, etc. The chief that appeared in the Execution of this
Plot, within the Province of Ulster, were Sir Phelim O Neal, Tourlough his
Brother, Roure Mac Cuire, Phillip O Rely, Sir Conne Mac Gennis, Mac Brian, and
Mac Mahan, these combining with their Accomplices dividing their Forces, and
according to a general Assignation, surprised the Forts of Dongannon, and
Mon^joy, Carlemont, with other places of considerable strength. Now began a
deep Tragedy: The English having either few other than Irish Landlords,
Tenants, Servants, Neighbors, or familiar Friends, as soon as this fire brake
out, and the whole Country in a general Conflagration, made their recourse
presently to some of these, lying upon them for protection and preservation,
and with g eat confidence trusted their lives and all their concerns in their
powers. But many of these in short time after, either betrayed them to others,
or destroyed them with their own hands. The Popish Priests had so charged and
laid such bloody impressions on them, as it was held according to their
Doctrine they had received, a deadly sin to give an English Protestant any
relief.

All bonds of Faith and Friendship now fractur'd, Irish Landlords now preyed on
their English Tenants; Irish Tenants and Servants, made a Sacrifice of their
English Landlords and Masters, one Neighbor murdering another; nay, 'twas
looked on as an act meritorious in him that could either subvert or (...) an
English man; The very Children (...) the cruelty of their Parents, of which I
shall (...) a mark with ^e to my Grave, given me (...) by one of my Irish
Playfellows. (...) high time to fly, although we knew not (...); every place
we arrived at we thought least (...), wherefore our motion was continual; and
that which heightened our misery, was our frequent stripping thrice a day and in
such a dismal stormy (...) season, as the memory of man had never observed to
(...) so long together. The terror of the Irish and Scorch incomparably
prevailed beyond the rage of the Sea, so that we were resolved to use all
possible means to get on Shipboard. At B^fast we accomplished our desires,
com^ing our selves to the more merciful Waves. This Relation being so short,
cannot but be very imperfect, yet if I dare credit my mother, it is not stained
with falsehood. Many horrid things (I consess) I purposely omitted, as desiring
to wave any thing of aggravation, or which might occasion the least Animofity
between two, though of several Languages, yet I hope both ^ited in the
demonstration of their consrant Loyalry to their Sovereign Charles the Second.

CHAP. III.
After his arrival in Devonshire, he briefly recounts what Waggeries he
committed, being but a Child.

BEing about 5. years of age, Report rendered me a very beautiful Child,
neither did it (as most commonly) prove a Liar. Being enricht with all the good
properties of a good face, had not pride in that my render age, deprived me of
those graces and choice ornaments which complete both form and feature. Thus it
happened, My Father kept commonly many Turkeys; one amongst the rest could not
endure the fight of a Red Coat, which I usually wore: But that which most of
all exasperated my budding passion, was, his assaulting my bread and butter,
and in stead thereof, sometimes my hands; which caused my bloomy Revenge to use
this Stratagem: I enticed him with a piece of Custard (which I temptingly
showed him, not without some suspicion of danger which fear suggested, might
attend my treachery, and so led him to the Orchard-gate, which was made to shut
with a pulley; he reaching in his head after me, I immediately clapped fast the
Gate, and so surprised my mortal Foe: Then did I use that llttle strength I
had, to beat his brains out with my Cat-stick; which being done, deplum'd his
tail, sticking those feathers in my Bonnet, as the insulting Trophies of my
first and latest Conquest. Such then was my pride, as I nothing but gazed up at
them; which so tried the weakness of my eyes, and so strained the Optic
Nerves, that they ran a tilt at one another, as if they contended to share with
me in my victory. This accident was no small trouble to my Mother, that so
doated on me, that I have often heard her say, She forgot to eat (when I sat at
Table) for admiring the sweetness of my Complexion. After she had much grieved
her self to little purpose, she consulted with patience, and applied her self
to skilful Occulists, to repair the loss this face-blemishing had done so sweet
a countenance, though for the present it eclipsed my Mothers glory and pride,
yet Time and Art reduced my eyes to their proper station; so that within six
Years their oblique aspects were hardly discernable. When I was about ten Years
old, I have heard some say, that this cast of my eyes was so far from being a
detriment, that it became my ornament. Experience confirmed me in this belief;
for they proved as powerful, as the persuasive arguments of my deluding tongue;
both which conjoined, were sufficient (I speak it not vain gloriously) to
prevail even over the Goddess of Chastity, especially when they were backed on
with ardent desires, and an undaunted resolution But to my purpose: Being
driven out of Ireland, there being at that time no place of safety in that
Kingdom, my Mother taking me with her, (being compelled to leave my Father
behind, barbarously murdered by the Rebels for being a Protestant Preacher) she
adventured to Sea, not caring whither she went. Foulness of weather drove us
upon the Coast of France, where we were forced to land, to repair what damage
the Ship had sustained in stress of weather. From hence we set sail, and landed
in the West of England, at a place called Barnstable in the County of Devon.
Here we were joyfully received, and well entertained by some of my Mothers
kindred at first; but lying upon them, they at length grew weary; so that we
were forced to go from thence to Plymouth, so called from the River Plime, unto
which the Town adjoyneth; at that time it was strongly fortified by new raised
Works, a Line being cast about it, besides places of strength anciently built;
as the Castle, the Fort of an hundred pieces of Ordnance, that commands
Cat-water, and overlooks the Sound, Mount Batten, and the Islands in the Sound,
well furnished with Men and great Guns impregnable; had they been never built
or demolished, raced as soon as raised on their Basis, it had been much better
then to have proved the Fomenters of Rebellion in the late Wars for a whole
year, daily thundering Treason against their lawful Sovereign. We being here
altogether unacquainted both with the people and their profestion, my Mother
having an active brain, casts about with her self how she should provide for
her charge, but sound no way more expedient, than the pretention of Religion.
Zeal now and Piety were the only things sheseem'd to prosecute, taking the
literal sense of the Text; Without doubt Godliness is great gain: But she erred
much in the profession and seasonable practice thereof; Hers being according to
the mind of the true Church, the Church of England, whereas the Plymotheans
were at that time Heterodox thereunto, and led away as the rest of their
Brethren called Roundheads, by the spirit of delusion. Finding how much she was
mistaken, the changed quickly her No^e and Coat; a rigid Presbyterian at first,
but that proving not so profitable, instantly transformed her self into a
strickt Independent. This took well, which made her stick close to the
Brethren, which raised their spirits to make frequent contribution in private
to supply her wants. Here we had borrowed so much of the Sisterhood* who vildly
suspected my Mother to be too dearly beloved by the Brotherhood, that it was
high time to rub off to another place, left staying longer, the holy Mask of
Dissimulation should fall off; and she being detected, be shamefully excluded
their Congregation, and so delivered up to be buffeted by Satan. Before I leave
the Town, give me leave to take a short view thereof. Eorn^erly it was a poor
small fishing Village, but now so large and thronged with Inhabitants (many
where of very wealthy Merchants) that as it may be compared with, so may it put
in its claim for the name of a City. Havens, as there are many so commodious,
which without striking sail, admit into the bosom there of the tallest Ships
that be, harboring them very safely, and is excellently well fortified against
hostility. It is situate alike for profit and pleasure; in brief, it wants
little that the heart of man would enjoy, from the various productions of the
whole Universe. Now farewell Plymoth, no matter whither we went, for wherever
we came; we found still some or other that gave us entertainment for those good
parts they found in my Mother, she being very well read both in Divinity and
History, and having an ^loquent tongue, she commonly applied her self to the
Minister of the Town; who wondering to see so much learning and perfection in a
Woman, either took us into his own house for a while, or gathered some
contributions to supply our present necessities; with which we traveled to the
next Town: And in this manner we strouled or wandered up and down, being little
better than mendicant Itinerants. Staying so little time in a place, and my
Mother being more careful to get a subsistence, than to season my tender years
with the knowledge of Letters, I was ten years old before I could read.
Traveling through many Towns unfit for our purpose, we at last took up our
seat for a while at Birdport in Dorse^shire, here being ashamed to go to School
in this ignorance, I applied my self to my Mother, who taught me to apprehend
the Alphabet in less hours than there are letters; so that in a short time, I
could read distinctly, and immediately introduced into the Grammar School;
where I had not been long, before I became a Book-worm, securing as many as lay
in my way, if convenient privacie served. And to the intent that my Thests
might pass undiscovered, before I would vend what Books I had stolen, I usually
metamorphized them: If new, I would gash their skin; and if the leaves were
read, I would make them look pale for the wounds they received: If much used,
tear out all the remarks, and paint their old faces, and having so done, make
sale of them. This course I followed a long time undiscovered, which cost many
a Boy a Whipping at home by their Parents, as well as Master. I had various
uses for my money I made thereof (you must think) but principally to bribe some
of the upper Form to make my Exercises; which were so well liked of by my
Master, that I still came off with applause; and in short time so advanced,
that I was next to the highest Form, when I understood not the lowest Author we
read. I was forced to employ my Wits in the management of my hands, to keep
rouch with my Pensioners, left they failing me for want of encouragement, my
Master should discover how much my Dunceship was abused. Frequent were my
Truantings, which were always attended with some notorious Fact besides small
Faults, as robbing of Orchards, pulling the first and seconds of forty or fifty
Geese at a time, milking the Cows or Goats into my Hat, and so drink the milk:
And then for Poultry, there was seldom a day escaped wherein I had not more or
less, usually I took them thus: At night I haunted the Hen-roosts, taking them
off so quietly from what they stood on, that their keckling noise seldom
alarmed the rest; if I could not conveniently carry them off, I made their Eggs
compound for their Heads. If I met with any Geese at any time, them out came my
short stick with a string fastened to a bullet, and tied to the end thereof,
with this would I fetch in my Game by the neck; the weight of the bullet
twirling the string so many times about the neck, that they could not di^ingage
themselves from inevitable destruction. I used to fish for Ducks, baiting my
Hook with a gut or some such trash; and laying it on a piece of Cork, that
swiming it might be the sooner perceived, I could carch in a short time as many
as I pleased: Nay, I have not only thus deceived these ^ame Fowl; but the same
way with a longer time, I have caught Gulls and other Sea-Birds. What I had
gotten by these cunning (and so much to be feared tricks) I carried to a house
that encouraged me in my Roguery, participating of the cheer, and so feasting
me for my pains. If I had stolen any thing, I had my recourse to them, who would
give me two pence for what was worth a shilling, and render me good content. I
knew my punishment for my rambling, and valued it not; therefore little hope of
reformation from thence. Nay, for very small faults I wished to be whipped,
knowing the Rod would then be laid on gently; which carried with it a tickling
pleasure. As for my Thefts and Rogueries abroad, I was careful they should not
be discovered. If any Boy had injured me whose strength exceeded mine, so that
I durst not cope with him, I would exercise my revenge upon him privately,
concealing the resentment of the injury he did me; For to grin and not bire,
does but persuade an Adversary to knock out those teeth that may prove sometime
or other injurious. One common trick I had, was to stick a Pin on the board
whereon he was to sit: in this manner did I serve several; in which fact I was
at last taken; The punishment my Master inflicted on me, was: To sit by his
Desk alone, and compose a Copy of Verses; there was great likelihood I should
perform my task, when I knew not how many feet an Hexameter required; and yet I
then read Virgil. However some thing I must attempt, and thinking Saphicks, and
Iambicks too difficult, I ventured upon Heroicks, supposing them the easier
composition. But Lord into what an excess of laughter did my Master fall into,
when he perused my hobling strains; Surely said he, these Verses are running a
race altogether, the first did not start fairly, or else is a very nimble
Gentleman, for he has outrun all his fellows four feet? the second comes two
soot short of him, yet too forward for a true pace; here is another lame in a
foot, and (...) most scurvily; here is another whose quanti^ is short, and has
gotten upon stilts to seem long, and one (in contradiction to him) which is
long, because he will be short has cut his own Legs off: With these and the
like speeches did he please himself in his own wit, (which I understood but
little) and after he had tired himself and me too, with prodigal talk: He then
spoke to me in a harder dialect, making me understand how ignorant I was, and
how much precious time (irrecoverably) I had lost, which so much seized on my
spirits, that I was much grieved and troubled, so that he made Vermilion tears
run down my cheeks, etc. After he had bestowed so much correction as he thought
might work in me penitence for my egregious truanting he degraded me, and made
me begin anew. The shame whereof, and reproach I daily received from my
School-fellows, I could not bear; wherefore I prevailed on my Mothers
Indulgence, to let me regain what I had lost at home, which she consented to.
But perceiving my Lecherous inclinations, by my night-practises with her Maid,
resolved to send me to a Boarding School: For our Family being but small, I lay
with the Maid: being so young, my Mother did not in the least suspect me; but
my too forward Lechery would not let me lie quiet, putting her frequently to
the squeak. In sine, I was sent away a great distance to a very severe and
rigid Master. I no sooner commenced Scholar to this Tyrant Pedagogue, but I was
kept close to my Book; and lest my Wit should be any ways dulled, my stomach
was always kept sharp; which quickened my invention, to supply what was
deficient. There is no complaint so insufferable as the grumbling of empty and
dissatisfied Guts. My greatest care was to infinuate my self into the favor of
the Servant-Maids, knowing they loved to play at Small Game rather than stick
out. I performed my business so well, that my stomach was always satiated,
when the rest of the Boarders were dissatisfied; often going to bed in a manner
supperless. Here I was deprived of my old pilfering way, because I had no
convenience for the disposal of what was stole, it being but a very small
Village. However to keep my hand in use, I daily practiced on Fruit, sometimes
with a Spar sharpened at one end, I pricked the Apples out of the Baskets: at
other times I took with me a Comrade, and then thus would we do. I would go to
a Fruiterer and bargain with him for a penny worth or more of Apples, receiving
them into my Hat, pretending to draw my money out, I did clap my Hat between my
Legs, my Partner perceiving that (as we had before plotted it would be) behind,
snatched it through my Legs and ran away with it, I thereupon did use to roar
out as if I had been undone, and pretending to run after him to regain my Hat,
we got out of sight and then shared the booty. One time coming along the
Market, I saw a small basket of Cherries, I demanded of the woman that sold
them, what she would have for as many as I could take up in my hand; she
looking upon it and seeing it was but a very small one, proportionable to my
Stature, two pence said she; with that, I laid her down her price, and took up
basket and all the Cherries therein contained, and in a sober pace carried them
away. The woman amazed that she should be thus surprised by such a Younker,
followed me; and making a great noise, gathered a conflux of people about us,
and among the rest a Gentleman of quality, who was very earnest to know what
the matter was: Holding my purchase fast in my hands (for nothing could
persuade me to let go that booty I had so fairly obtained) I desired the
Gentleman that he would be judge of my cause, whereupon I related to him in
what manner I bargained with the woman, and that I had done nothing unjustly,
but what was according to our contract. The Gentleman wondering at the pregnancy
of wit in so tender an age, laughed hear^ily, and condemned the Cherries for my
proper use, but withal paid the woman for them. I was naturally so prone to
please my senses, so that I cared not what course I took that I might obtain my
desires. I applied my self more to my Wit and invention, than I should have
done, had I had any thing allowed me from a Friend for a moderate expense. But
my Mother thought otherwise. knowing by infallible symptoms, the
extravagantness of my inclinations, and therefore debard me as much she could
the very fight of money. A River confined within some made Bank, deterring its
natural course, will (when that is overthrown which impeded its progress) flow
with the greater impetuosity: Youth may for a while be circumscribed as to its
desires; but if his inclination prompt him to the enjoyment of sensual
delights, sooner or later he will raste their relish; and better early than
late. Before the Noon of his days approach, Experience may reform his Life and
Conversation; though from the Dawning Morning thereof, till the Meridian, his
Actions have been nothing else but the Extract of all manner of Debauchery. But
('it is commonly observed): That Man which in the Declination of Age tracks the
bypath of Vice and Licentiousness, seldom defists till Deaths cuts off his
passage; never leaving off doting on such false and immaginary pleasures, till
the Grim Pale-^ac't Messenger takes him napping. Thus much by way of digression.

Our Master was very ancient, however resolved that his Age should not hinder
his Teaching: for if he found himself indisposed, he would send for us all into
his Bed Chamber, instructing us there: A man of so strange a temper, that he
delighted to invert the course of Nature; lying in bed by day, and walking in
the night, the rain seldom deterring him. On a time above the rest, a
Gentleman had sent his Son five pieces of Gold to give his Master for Diet,
etc. Our Master receiving them, called for a small Cabinet that stood in the
room, which I (more officious than the rest) brought him. Having put in the
Gold, he commanded me to carry it from whence I had it: which I did; well
considering the weight thereof, being, though small, very heavy. The Devil
presently became my Tutor, suggesting to my thoughts various ways for the
gaining this money. At last I resolved to take the impression of the Key in
wax; which with much difficulty I obtained, and carried it to a Smith four
miles distant. The old Fellow (immediately upon my proposal) suspected me;
(doubtless he was acquainted with such kind of devices) and questioning me what
I intended thereby, I was forced to betake my self to my Legs for safety, not
knowing what answer to make him. The Smith seeing me run, thinking to benefit
himself by apprehending me pursued after, with a red hot iron in his hand which
his haste had made him forget to lay aside; one standing by me (just as the
Smith had almost overtaken me) seeing him come running with a hot iron in his
hand, and fearing left his blind passion might prompt him to mischief me,
struck up his heels, who in the fall gave himself a burnt mark in the hand,
which no doubt he had long ago dese^'d; my unknown friend would not suffer him
to rise, till I was out of sight. My first stratagem not suiting with my
purpose, I tried a Picklock of mine own invention: but that would not effect my
design neither; so that I concluded to take Cabinet and all, and in order
thereunto watched my opportunity when he should walk abroad according to his
custom at night. It was not long ere I enjoyed my wishes. My masters custom was
to walk abroad at nights, and sleep in the day time; inverting the course of
Nature: soreknowing his intention, I got into the Chamber, and conceald my self
under the Bed. So finding my way clear, I conveyed my self and purchase out of
the House; and traveled all night. In the morning I found my self near a small
Town, about sixteen miles distant from the place whence I came. Thinking my
self now secure, I thought it very requisite here to repose my wearied Limbs,
and solace my self with the sight of what I had gotten: but it was not long
after that I was so laced for it, that comparatively to my punishment, Bridewel
whipping is but a pastime. The first Bush I came at, I went in and called for
Sack, having never tasted any, and hearing much talk thereof; at which the
people of the House much admired, that so small an Urchin as I should call for
such costly Liquor. They viewed me very intuitively, but more especially the
Cabinet, which caused them to suspect me. The Master of the house was
acquainted herewith, who as the Devil would have it was a Puritan, and a
Conestable too too officious and severe. Without craving pardon for his bold
intrusion, he desired me I would admit him into my Boy-ships society. I confess
his gray hairs and sour countenance made me at first sight, very much fear
what the event of his visit would prove: However with a seeming undauntedness,
I drank to him (but what a difference of taste there was in that and the first
glass I drank Solus: at length he began to ask me diverse questions, Whence I
came? Whither I was going? What was contained within that Cascanet? and the
like. Before I could give the resolution of what they demanded, the Hue and Cry
overtook me: presently I was laid hold on. And my treasure taken from me: that
which vexed me as much as my Surprizal was, I had no further time to try what
kind of taste the Sack had. Various were the talk of the people, every one
spending his Verdict on me. This is a prime young Rogne indeed to begin thus
soon, said one; could be have seen, when in his Mothers belly, surely be would
have stolen something thence. Another said, Forward fruit was soon rotten; and
since I began to steal whilst a child, I should be hanged before I should
write Man. Ready to die with fear, I was sent back to the place whence I came,
and from thence to the place of Execution, had not the tenderness of my age,
and fewness of years, procured pity from my injured master. Confined I was
within his house, locked up close Prisonner in a Chamber, till that he could
acquaint my Mother with what had past. In this time I was not debarred of my
sustenance, though my Commons were Epitomized, neither was I altogether
deprived of society, for I was daily visited by my Master, attended with a Cat
of Ninetails (as he called it) being so many small cords, with which he fley'd
my buttocks; and when he found me stubborn, or not penitent enough as he
thought, after he had skinned my podex, he would wash it with vinegar, or water
and salt. Within a week my Mother arrived, who hearing of my Rogueries, was so
impatient, that she would needs take me to task her self; but when she had
untrust me, and saw me in so woeful a plight, my shirt being as stiff as Buckram
with blood, and my tender Breech plowed and harrowed, fell down as if she had
been about to expire recovering, my Master endeavored to pacify her, by
telling her, that great offenses, required great punishments; and the way to
bend and Oak, is to do it whilst its young; I had once when young (said he) a
Spaniel which would find out the Hens nest, and breaking the Eggs suck them, so
that we could never have any Chickens, at last discovering who was the
malefactor; I bethougt my self of this punishment which should hinder him from
ever doing ^he like. I got an Egg roasted so hard till the shell was ready to
burn, then did I first show the Egg to the Dog, and then clapped it hot into his
mouth holding his jaws close, this so tormented him by burning, that ever after
he could not endure the sight thereof; but if shown run away ciying as if he
had been beaten. Thus for this notorious fact your Son must be so sharply
chastized, that when he thinks of stealing, he shall remember those torments he
once endured for it, and so frighten him from executing any such crime. Many
more arguments he alleged to that purpose, which had satisfied her well in
his severity, had not natural affection interposed. Whatto do with me, she knew
not; wherefore she consulted with my Master, who told her, He durst not keep me
longer, the Country people bringing in daily complaints against me. And to
aggravate my Mother the more, he briefly summed up my faults in this manner;
having had justly various accusers, who drew up my indictment, Thus.

Imprimis, That one of his Maids having crossed me (to be revenged of her,
knowing she was a drowsy wench, when asleep, not easily wak't) as she slept by
the fire, I took my opportunity, and melted some glue, and gently touched the
closure of both her eyelids with a pencil which well I knew would lock up her
sight. Against the time I intended to wake her, I placed all about her Chairs
and Stools. The Plot being ripe, I pretended her Mistress called. The wench
starting up and running rubbing of her eyes turned ropsie turvy over the
chairs, getting up she engaged her self with the stools, and so entangled her
self therein, that endeavoring to free her self, her coats acted the part of
Traitors, in discovering the hidden secrets and Arcanas belonging to her sex:
and that with much satisfaction I had seen the execution of my revenge. That
this wench could not be persuaded by any means, but that as a judgment she was
stricken blind for some sin she had committed privately, which then her
Conscience did whisper in her ear, and undoubtedly had turned Lunatic had she
not been speedily restored to her sight by taking off the glue, which was done
with much difficulty. That he going about to correct me for this unlucky and
mischievous fact, was by me shown a very shitten trick, which put him into a
stinking condition; for having made my self laxative, on purpose squirted into
his face upon the first lash given. That being upon boys backs, ready to be
whipped, I had often bit holes in their ears. That another time firreverencing in
a paper, and running to the window with it, which looked out into the yard ^oy
aged Mistress looking up to see who opened the Casement, I had liked to have
thrown it into her mouth; however for a time deprived her of that little sight
she had left. That another time I had watched some lusty young Girls, that used
in Summer-nights about twelve a clock, to wash themselves in a small brook near
adjacent, and that I had concealed my self behind a Bush, and when they were
stripped, took away their clothes, making them dance home after me stark naked,
to the view of their sweet-hearts, whom I had planted in a place appointed for
that purpose, having given them before notice of my design. A great many more
such tricks he recounted, which he knew, but not the tenth of what he knew not.
As for example, on Christmass-day, we had a pot of Plumb-broth, I asked the maid
to give me a taste, to see how I liked them, I that I should, she said, (this
was the maid I had so served before with glue) and with that, takes up a ladle
full, and bid me sup, she holding the ladle in her own hand, I imprudently
opening my mouth somewhat larger then I should, she poured down the scalding
Pottage through my throat: at present I could not tell the Jade (that laughed
till she held her sides) how I liked them; but I verity believed I had
swallowed the Gunpowder-Plot, expecting every moment to be blown up. I took as
little notice of this passage, as possibly I could, resolving to, retalliate
her kindness when she least thought ont. I observed the maid to carry this
plumb pottage-por into the yard, and taking notice that the weight of the Jack
was in the same yard wound up a great height under a small Pent-house, the Jack
being down I suddenly removed the weight, and fastened the Pot to the line; so
going into the Kitching, wound it up to the top, and then stopped it, for the
meat was taken up. The house was all in an uproar instantly about the Por,
every one admiring what should become ofit: The maid averred, that she saw it
even now, and none could remove it but the Devil. Others asserted (which were
infected with Puritanism) that it was a Judgment shown for the superstitious
observation of that Festival day; but the next day, roasting Meat, this seeming
Miracle vanished by the descending of the Pot fastened to the Jack-line.
Another time my Master had reserved in his Garden some choice Aprecocks, not
above an half-score; which he purposed for some friends that intended to visit
him shortly: The daily sight of this delicate fruit, being forbidden, tempted
me more strongly to attempt their Rape; but I made choice of an impropitious
hour to accomplish my design in; for my Master looked out ofhis window and saw
me gather them, though he knew not absolutely whether it, was I or no.
Whereupon; he instantly summond us together; being met, I quickly understood
his intention: therefore I conveyed the Aprecocks into the next boys Pocket; I
had no sooner done it, but we were commanded to be searched; I was very forward
to be the first, though I was most suspected, but none was found about me, so
that I was acquitted. But to see with what amazement the poor boy gazed, when
they were discovered about him, how strangly he looked, distorting his face
into several forms, produced laughter even from my incensed Master, but real
pity from me; for he was severely whipped for that Crime I my self committed.
I could recite many more such like childish Rogueries, did I not fear I should
be tedious in their relation, and burden the Reader with juvenile follies;
therefore I shall return where I left off. Whilst my Mother was in a serious
consultation with her Reason, how she should dispose of me. I had not patience
to wait the result, but gave her the slip, resolving to run the risk of
Fortune, and try whither mine own endeavors would supply my necessiries.

CHAP. IV.
How he ran from his Mother, and what courses he steered in one whole years
Ramble.

IT was in July when I undertook this my Knight-errantry; the fairness of the
Season much favored my Enterprise: thinking I should always enjoy such
weather, and never be pincht with necessity, I went on very courageously. The
first dinner I made was on Blackberries and Nuts, esteemed by me very delicious
fare at first, which delighted me so much the more, having not my liberty
controlled. When night approached it seemed very uncouth and strange, finding,
instead of a Feather-bed, no other thing to lie on but a Haycock, and no other
coverlid but the Canopy of Heaven. But considering with my self that I had no
task to con over night, nor fear of over sleeping my self next morning, and so
be fetched to School by a Guard of my fellow Scholars with a Lanthorn and
Candle, though the Sun appeared at that time in his full luster; I laid my self
down and slept profoundly, not without some affrighting dreams: The last was of
the Cat of Nine Tails, which my Master laid so home me thought that the smart
thereof made me cry out, and so I awaked; as then the early Lark, the winged
Herald of the morning, had not with her pretty warbling Notes, summoned the
bright watchmen of the Night to prepare for a retreat; neither had Aurora
opened the Vermillion Oriental Gate, to make room for Sols radiant Beams, to
dissipate that gloomy darkness that had muffled up our Hemisphere in obscurity.
In the morning I went on in my progress as the day before; then began a shower
of tears to fall from my eyes, considering how I had left my disconsolate, and
almost heart-broken Mother, lamenting my loss, and fearing what fatal courses I
might take: it was no less trouble to me to think that I was traveling I knew
not whither, moneyless, having nothing but Hazel, and Brambles to address my
self for the appeasing of Hungers approaching gripes. Now me thought I began to
loath my aforenamed Manna, Blackberries, Nuts, Crabs, Bullies, etc. and longed
to taste of the Fleshpots again, but the Devil a bit could I get but what the
hedges afforded me. All day I thus wandered about, nor daring to come near any
Town, having had such bad success in the last when I first rambled, and now
night came on, which put me in mind of procuring a lodging somewhat warmer than
the other. A Barn presently offered its self to my sight, which I accosted, and
without delay or fear, entered into the enchanted Castle, where I found
accommodations for the most faithful and valiant Knight that ere strode Saddle
for Ladies sake. Here might I take my choice of variety of fresh ^raw, but my
weariness would not permit to complement my good fortune one joy etc I so
tumbled over head and ears; I had not Iain there above an hour before I heard a
noise, and peeping out of the straw, being in a great fear, I saw a many
strange creatures come into the Barn, for the day was not yet shut in. My
thoughts presently reminded me that I had heard talk of Hobgoblings, Fairies
and the like, and judged these no other; and that which confirmed me in this
be^ief, was their Garb and talking to one another in a language I understood
not (but since, I understand it to be Canting.) I lay still as long as my fear
would permit me, but they surrounding me, I was not able to contain my self
longer, but cried out aloud, Great God, have mercy on me, and let not these
Devils devour me; and with that, started out from among them: They amazed as
much as I, ran for it too leaving their children behind them, every one
esteeming him the happiest man which was the foremost. I looking behind me,
seeing them following me, imagined these Devils ran upon all four, and having
started their game were resolved to hunt a sinful Leveret to death: Concluding
them long-winded Hell Hounds, I judgd praying a safer way than flying, and so
fell instantly on my knees: the Gypsies quickly overtook me, and finding me in
that posture, soon understood whence their fear proceeded. They then spoke to
me in a Langage I understood, bidding me not be afraid; but I had heard the
Devil was a Liar from the beginning, therefore I would not believe them. They
would have raised me from my devotion, telling me it was enough, and that made
me suspect them the more; thinking they designed to get me out of a praying
posture, that they might have the more power of me. Nothing prevailing with me,
they vowed and protested they would nor injure me in the least, and if I would
go along with them, I should fare as delitiously as they did, this was a potent
argument to persuasion, and so I agreed to go along with them back again. All
their cry was now for Rum-booze (i. e.) Good Liquor. Their Captain not enduring
to hear so sad a complaint, and not endeavor the supplying the want complained
of, immediately commanded out four able Maunders, (Beggars) ordring them to
stroule (wander) to the next Town, every one going apart. Some Contrymen
gave them drink fearing they might fire the houses in the night, out of
revenge, others (out of the more ignorant sort, thought they could command
infernal spirits, and so harm them that way, or else bewitch their Cattle, and
therefore would not deny them: in so much that in a short time these four
returned laden with bub and food. It was presently placed in the middle of us,
who sat circularly; then out came the Wooden dishes, every one provided but my
self, but I was soon supplied by a young Rum-Mort that sat next me intended
for my sporting mate. A health went round to the Prince of Maunders, another to
the Great Duke of Clapperdogeons, a third to the Marquess of Doxy Dells, and
Rum-Morts, a fourth, to the Earl of Clymes; neither did we forget, Haly Abbas,
Albumazar, Arcandam, with the rest of the Waggoners, that strive who shall be
principal in driving Charles his Waine. Most part of the night we spent in
boozing, pecking rumly or wapping, that is drinking, eating or whoreing
according to those terms they use among themselves Jealousy was a thing they
never would admit of in their Society, and to make appear how little they were
tainted therewith, the males and females lay promiscuously together, it being
free for any of the Fraternity to make choice of what Doxie he liked best,
changing when he pleased. They plied me so often with their Rum-booz (as they
called it) and pleased me so well in giving me a young Girl to dally with, who
(though in Rags, and with a skin artificially discolloured tawny) yet I was not
so ignorant, as not to understand good flesh, and what properties went to the
completing a votaress for Venus service. I was so tickled in my fancy with
this pretty little wanton Companion, that for her sake, I was very well content
to list my self one of that Ragged Regiment. And that which added to the
inducing me to this resolution was my want of money, and what I suffered in
those two foregoing hard days fare among the Nut Trees. I first acquainted my
Doxie with my intent, who glad to hear thereof, gave it vent and broacht it to
the rest who unanimously with joy embraced me; and to congratulate my
inagravation tipped to each other a Gage of Booz, and so went round. The fumes of
drink had now ascended into their brain, wherefore they coutcht a Hogs-head,
and went to sleep.

CHAP. V.
Wherein he Relates what manner of People they were into whose Society he
entered himself, division of their Tribe, Manners, Customs, and Language.

AS soon as I had resolved to travel the Country with them, they fitted me for
their company by stripping me, and selling my proper garments, and clothing me
in rags, which they pinned about me, giving a stitch here and there, according
as necessity required. We used not when we entered our Libkin or Lodging to
pull off our cloths; which had I been forced to do, I could never have put them
on again, nor any, but such who were accustomed to produce Order out of a Babble
of rags. Being now ale mode de Tatterdemallion, to complete me for their
purpose, with green Wallnuts they so discolored my face, that every one that
saw me, would have sworn I was the true Son of an Egyptian. Before we march on,
let me give you an account of our Leaders, and the rancks we were disposed in.
Our chief Commander was called by the name of Ruffeler, the next to him
Upright-man, the rest in order thus:

Hookers, (alias) Anglers. Priggers of Prancers. Pallyards. Fraters. Prigges.
Swadlars. Curtals. Irish-toyle. Swigmen. Jarkemen. Patri-Coes. Kitchin-Coes.
Abram men Whip-Jacks. Counterfeit-Cranks. Dommerars. Glymmerers. Bawdy-Baskets.
Autem-Morts. Doxies. Dells. Kitchin-Morts.


We Mustered above threescore old and young, and because we were too great a
company to March together, we were divided into three Squadrons. The first
Squadron that led the Van, was ordered by our Commander, to stick up small
boughs all the way they went, that we might know what course theysteer'd. For
like wild Fowl we fly one after another, and though we are seattered like the
quarters of a Traitor, yet like water when cut with a Sword, we easily came
together again. As the Switzer has his Wench and his Cock with him when he
goes to Wars: or like a Scotch Army, where every Soldier almost has the Geud
Wife and the Bearns following him: So we had every one his Doxie or Wench, who
carried at her back a Lullaby-cheat, and it may be another in her Arms. When
they are weary of carrying them, they take their turns to put them in a pair of
Panniers, like green Geese going to Market, or like Fish in Dossers coming
from Rye. Where note, that each division has a small Horse or two, or else
Asses to ease them of their burdens. Some of us were clad Antickly with Bells
and other toys, merely to allure the country people unto us, which most
commonly produced their desired effects. In some places they would flock unto
us, in great quantities, and then was our time to make our Markets. We
pretended an acquaintance with the Stars (as having an Alliance to the Egyptian
Magi, the founders of Astrologick Art) and that the Ministers of Fate were our
Familiers, and so possessing these poor ignorant people with a belief, that we
could tell their Fortunes by inspection into either hands or faces; whilst we
were seriously looking thereon, one of our diving Comrades picked their pockets,
or with a short sharp knife, and a horn on the thumb, nipt their bungs. By
asking the silly Milk maids questions, we gathered from their own mouths the
properest resolutions, then would they admire, and in their admiration tremble
to hear the Truth proceed from the mouth of such as were strangers to their
actions, by which means, among some we gained a great respect, accompanied with
fear. Did not Astrologers make use of such Stratagems, they could never acquire
so much repute among the judicious, as well as vulgar capacities. And because
it falls in so par to my present purpose, I shall beg so much patience from the
Reader, as to give him a brief account of some fallacies some Star-gasing
Impostors use to work their own ends, and delude credulous People. One whereof
I knew, who raised his credit (and since a considerable estate) upon the Basis
of good intelligence. He kept a servant, who constantly attended below for the
reception of such who came for satisfaction in the astrological Resolution of
questions. This man's Office was to tell the Querent, That his Master was busy
above, about some grand concern, but if the Person would be pleased in wait a
little while, till that business was dispatched be questioned not but that his
Master would render him a satisfactory account of what he demanded; adding
father, (to infuse into him faith, to credit what he said) that though report
had spoken largly, (and yet nothing but what this Artist has merited) yet all
came far short of his real desert, having done such stupendous things, that
must needs (without injustice) be commemoriz'd to Eternity, and admired by
future ages. In the mean time, this servant endeavored to pump out of the
Proponent what he came about, which having understood, he gave information to
his Master, by so many times ringing a Bell. This Item being given, the Querent
is called up, and before ever he can frame his mouth to propound his question,
this profound Artist prevents him, saying, I know what you come about Sir,
(therefore save your, self the labor to tell me that which I know already) you
have lost a Watch, a Horse; or you would know how you shall prosper in such a
business, whither Marriage, or an Employment; or any such like common question.
This makes the Artist be wondered at; and then erecting a Scheme, positively
and surlily tells him what he must expect. And that he may give answers more
exactly concerning stolen goods, he was in constant see with Thies-takers, who
from time to time, made him a report of what persons were robbed, what the
things were, and many times gave him a description of the Fellon. By these
practices, men believed every word he delivered to be an Oracle; so that his
Chamber was daily so thronged with the report of people, that in a short time
his ambition pricked him on to purchases, with the money he had gained thus
falliciously. One Story, very remarkable, I shall add, and then crave your
pardon for this my disgression. One day a young Gentleman (but of a mean
estate) came to him, who was more credulous then wise, and more inquisitive
then prudent; and having nor that wealth which his prodigality required,
desired instructions what course he was to steer to arrive at the Port of his
wishes and hopes: viewing him narrowly, he perceived him to be a man of a sweet
complexion, and a body well proportioned; and therefore judged him a fir
subject for Female fancies to work upon. Sir, (said he) I shall give you my
best advice, but I shall crave your patience for a little while; for a matter
of this weigt, must not precipitately be undertaken; wherefore if you please to
see me to morrow, what lies in me shall be at your service. Being just gone, it
happened that a Stale Maid, who had more moneys than beauty, and less
discretion than leachery, came to be resolved of him, When she should be
married: (for it seems by the sequel she could tarry no longer:) viewing her
well, (though she knew not him) he knew her to be wealthy, and nearly related
to persons of quality. Madam, (said he) I shall endeavor your satisfaction;
and so withdrew into his Closet. Having staid a while, bringing out his Figure,
and with much gravity looking thereon, he thus unridled the mysterious meaning
of the Celestial bodies. Madam, You never was much troubled with the
importunate suits of amorous Vi^tants, (this he gathered from the deformity of
her phosiognomy) they all knowing your indifferency to change your condition,
but upon considerable grounds; by which means you have almost frustrated what
the Stars have designed for you. I hope it is but almost, (said she) not
altogether: for it troubled her very much to hear she should leave the world
without tasting the sweets of a married life. No, (he replied) for if to morrow
by four of the clock in the Afternoon, you go into More-fields, and take a turn
or two in the Userers-Walk) you shall there meet with a person rich and
handsome, that at first sight shall fall extremely in love with you: slight him
not, neither deny him his conjugal proposal if you do, it will be too late to
hope for an husband. You shall distinguish him from others by these signs: His
Complexion is fair, his Eye sharp and piercing, his Hair flaxen, of a middle
Stature. Her joy had like to have transported her beyond the bounds of modesty,
which she could not conceal, but made it appear in a pecuniary expression of
her gratitude for such welcome tidings; and so promising him to follow his
counsel, she took her leave. The next morning the young Gallant came, who had
his lesson given him: but before he went, he made him give him a Bond of 200 l.
to be paid upon the day of his marriage with that Gentlewoman; which he gladly
consented to, and paid that very sum within ten days after, for according to
the directions was given him, he met with that Gentlewoman described to him, as
he had been before to her, who at the first ^ight of each other, were incapable
of containing themselves, but mutually embraced (after three or four words
past) as if he had been her (quon^am) Dearly Beloved, returned from some long
Voyage, and went not to their respective lodgings till their marriage was
consummated. But to return where I left off.

Thus we rambled up and down the Country; and where the people demeaned
themselves not civil to us by voluntary contributions, their Geese, Hens, Pigs,
or any such mandible thing we met with, made us satisfaction for their
hide-bound injuries. Our revenge most commonly was very bloody, and so
merciless, that what ever fell into our hands, never escaped alive, and in our
murders so cruel, that nothing would satisfy us but the very hearts-blood of
what we killed. The usual sacrifices of our implacable revenge, were innocent
Lambs, Sheep, Calves, etc. all which we handled more severely than Prisoners
are by Sergeants when they are not paid their unjust Demands; Fees, I should
have said, but that by experience I have found, they walk not according to the
Rules of ancient Constitutions, but are guided by the dictates of their
insatiate wills, which is their Law, which poor Prisoners must indulge, (though
they rack their slender credits, or pawn their clothes) or else they must
expect less kindness from them, then a condemned person about to be tied up by
the Hangman, who will stay till he is ready to be turned off. A Goose coming
among us, we have a trick to make him so wise, as never to be Goose again: But
let the wisest use what tricks they can, they never shall make some Sergeants
honest men. We seize the prey, and leave the Tragical part to our Morts or
Women to act: the Stage on which they perform their parts, is either some large
Heatb, or F^rz-bush-Gommon, far from any House. This being done, and night
approaching, we repair to our Dormitories, or Houses of Rest, which are most
usually Out-Barns of Farmers and Husbandmen, which we make choice of insome
poor straggling Village, who dare not deny us, for fear ere the morning they
find their Tatcht houses too hot to hold them. These Barns serve us instead of
Cook Rooms, Supping Parlours, and Bed-Chambers: having Supt, (most commonly in
a plentiful manner) we cannot Couch at Ho^shead, that is to say, sleep, without
good store of Rum-booze, that is, drink; and haying sufficiently warmed our
brains with humming Liquor, which our Lower (Silver) shall procure; if our
deceitful Mounding (Begging) cannot, we then sing a Catch or two in our own
Language, of which we had good store; which for their bawdry I omit: however,
give me leave to instance one Canting Song, and I shall wave the rest, being
loath to tire you too much with one thing.

BIng out bien Morts, and toure, and toure,
Bing out bien Morts, and toure;
For all your Duds are bing'd a wast
The bien Cove has the loure.
I met a Dell, I viewed her well,
She was benship to my watch;
So she and I did stall, and cloy,
Whatever we could catch.
This Doxie Dell can cut bien whids,
And wap fell for a win;
And prig and cloy so benshiply,
All the Deusea-vile within.
The boil was up, we had good luck,
In frost for and in Snow:
When they did seek, then did we creep,
And plant in Ruff-mans low.
To Strawling Ken the Mort bings then,
To fetch loure for her cheats;
Dude and Ruffe-peck, Rombold by Harman-beck,
And won by Maunders feats.
Ye Maunders all, stow what you s^all,
To Rome Coves what so Quire,
And wapping Dell, that niggles well,
And takes loure for her hire.
And Jybe well jerkt, teckrome confect.
For back by glymmar to Ma^nd;
To mill each ken, let Cove bing then,
Through Ruff-mans, jague, or Laund,
Till Cramprings quire tip Cove his hire*
And Quier Ken dothem carch,
A Canniken, mill quire Cuffen,
So Quier to ben Coves watch.
Bien Darkmans then, Bouse Mort and Ken,
The bien Coves bings awast,
On Chates to trine by Rome-Coves dine,
For bis long lib at last.
Bing'd out bien Moris and toure, and toure,
Bing out of the Rome vile bine,
And toure the Cove that cloyd your duds,
Upon the Chates to trine.
Having even wearied our selves with drinking and singing, we tumbled
promiscuously together, Male and Female in Straw, not confining our selves to
one constant Consort, we made use of the first that came to hand; by which
means Incests and Adulteries become our pastimes. By this means I grew weary of
their practices, and therefore resolved to desert them as soon as the first
opportunity should offer it self, which was in a short time; wherefore at the
present I shall say no more of them, only give me leave to give some small
account of their Language. The first Inventor of Canting, as I am informed, was
Hanged about fourscore years since: such Gibberish was never heard of before;
since which time, there has not been wanting such, who have taken pains in the
pollishing, refining, and augmenting that Language of the Devils Imps. It is a
confused invention of words; for its Dialect I cannot find to be grounded on
any certain Rules; and no wonder, since the Founders and Practicers thereof,
are the chief Fathers and Nourishers of Disorder. Yet even out of that
Irregularity a man may observe some kind of form, and some words do retain
something of Scholarship, as Togeman a Gown, from Toga; Pannam, from Panis,
Bread; Cosan, Caseus, Cheese. The monosyllable Cheat; we use as a Relative, as
Nab, a Head; Nab-cheat, a Hat, etc. Cove or Cuffin is in general terms a Man;
but by adding bieu, which signifies good, or well, or Quire, which is wicked or
Knavish; you make the word Cove signify an Honest man, or a Justice of Peace.
Pardon the expression, for they call a Justice Quier-Cussin; that is to say, as
beforementioned, a wicked, knavish, or foolishman. To conclude, I shall here
insert this little Canting Vocabulary Alphabetically.

AUtem Mors A Married Woman Abram Naked Abram Cove A Tatter demallion Autem A
Church Bughar A Cur Bouse Drink Bousing Ken An Alehouse Board A Shilling Boung
A Purse Bien Good or well Benshiply Very well Benar Better Bing To go Bing a
waste To go away Bube The Pox Bufe A Dog Bleating cheat A Sheep Belly cheat An
Apron Betty An Instrument to break a door Bite the Reter or Roger Steal the
Portmantle or Cloak-bagg- Budge One that steals Cloaks Bulk and File The Pick
pocket and his mate Cokir a Liar Cove Cuffin
A Man Cuffin-Quire A Justice of Peace Cramprings Bolt or Shackles Chats The
Gallows Canke Dumb Crackmans Hedges Call Togeman Joseph
A Cloak Couch To lie or sleep Couch a Hogshead To go to sleep Commission Mish
A Shirt Cackling cheat A Chicken Cassan Cheese Crash To kill Crashing cheats
Teeth Cloy To steal Cut To speak Cut bien whids To speak well Cut quire whids
To speak evilly Confeck Counterseit Cannakin The Plague Cly the Jerk To be
whipped Clapper dogeo^ A Beggar born Culle A Sap-headed Fellow Dimber Pretty
Damber Rascal Drawers Stockings Duds Goods Densea-vile The Country Dommerar A
Madman Darkmans Night or evenin Doxie Dell
A Wench Dock Wap
To Deuswins Two pence Dup To enter Earnest A part As tip me my Earnest Give me
my part or share Frummagem Choakt Filch A Staff Ferme A Hole Fambles Hands
Fambles cheats Rings or Gloves Fib To beat Flag A Groat Fogus Tobacco or Smoke
Fencing Cu^y One that receives stolen goods Glymmer Fire Glaziers Eyos Grannam
Corn Gentry-More A Gallant Wench Began A Lip Gage A Pot or Pipe Grunting cheat A
Sucking Pig Giger A Door Gybe Any Writing or Pass Glazyer One that goes in at
the windows Gilt A Pick-lock Harmanbeck A Constable Harmans The Stocks Heave a
Booth To rob an House Half board Six pence Hearts ease A twenty shillings piece
Jocky A Flayl, or man's Privities Jague A Ditch Ja^ke A Seal Ken An House
Kinchin Little Knapper of Knappers A Sheep-stealer Kinchin Cove A little man
Kate A Pick-lock Loure Money Lightmans Morning or Day Lib To tumble Libben an
house to lie in Lage Water Libedge a Bed Lullabic-(...) a Child Lap Pottage
Lurries All manner of Clothes Maunder To Beg Maunders Beggars Margery Prater an
Hen Mill To steal Make an halfpenny Mynt Gold Muff^ing cheat a Napkin Mumpers
Gentile Beggars Milken One that Breaks houses Mynns The Face Nab an Head
Nal-(...) an Hat Nap To take Palliard One whose Father is a Beggar born Paplar
Milk-Pottage Prats Thighs Prigg To Ride Peckidge Meat Plannam Bread Plant To
lay or hide Prigging Riding Prancer an Horse Prating-cheat a Tongue Peake any
Lace Pike on the Leen Run as fast as you can Perry Fearful Peter a Portmantua
Prigger of Prancers an Horse-stealer Pad The Highway-man Plant your whids Have
a care what you say Quarron a Body Quacking cheat a Duck Quier Wicked or
Roguish Quier-Ken a Prison Quier-Mort a Pocky Jade Quier-Cove a Rogue Romboyle
a Ward or watch Rome Gallant Rome-vile London Rome-Mort a Gallant Girl Ruffin
The Devil Roger a Cloak-bagg Ridge-cully a Goldsmith Ruffter an overgrown
Rogue Ruff pock Bacon Red-fhanke a Mallard Rom-pad The Highway Rome-padders
High-way-men Rome-Culle a Rich Coxcomb Swagg a Shop Snudge One that lies under
the bed to rob the house Shop-lift One that steals out of shops Stampers The
shoes Stock-drawers Stockings Stamps Legs Scour To wear Skew a Dish Slate a
Sheet Strommel Straw or Hair Skepper a Barn Stew your whids Be wary
Stalling-Ken a Brokers House, or an House to receive stolen goods. Smelling
cheat A Garden Solomon The Mass Tour To look out Tout his muns Look in his face
Track up the Dancers Go up the Stayres The Cul Snylches The Man eyes you Tip
the Cole to Adam Tyler Give what money you pocket-pickt to the next party,
presently Tip the Mish Give the Shirt Tib of the Buttery a Goose Tip To give The
Mort tipped me a wink The Whore gave me a wink Trine Tyburn Trining Hanging
Tick-Rome A License Tres wins Three pence Win A Penny Wicher Cully A
Silver-smith Yarum Milk




Thus much for a taste: I think it not worth my pains to insert all those
Canting words which are used; it is enough that I have here divulged what words
are most in use. Having now deserted this Tawny Crew, I resolved to betake my
self to a new Trade; which you shall understand in this following Discourse.

CHAP. VI.
How he went a Begging. What Rules he observed therein. What Villainies he
committed whilst he professed that mysterious Art.

NEcessity is a thing better known by the effects, than its character; and of
all things the most insufferable: to prevent which, it puts a man on to venture
upon all manner of dishonest and dangerous actions, suggesting strange
imaginations, and desperate resolutions, soliciting things infamous, and
attempting things impossible; the product of which is only disorder,
confusion, shame, and in the end ruin. But when Necessity shall conjoyn with
an evil disposition, a depraved nature, what horrid and nefarious facts will it
not instigate that man to perpetrate? And though he sees monthly examples of
persons condemned and executed for the like crimes he daily practices, will
not forbear nor desist from such irregular and life-destroying courses, till
they have brought him to the like miserable Catastrophe. Necessity had now
deeply fallen in love with me; and the young Virgin Shamefacedness (once my
Mistress) had forsaken me; for as soon as I had pulled but one thread out of
her garment, all the rest unravelled; and she not brooking her nakedness,
changed her master, and so totally left me. Having now obtained more than a
convenient boldness I traveled, and begged with very good success. But me
thought my life was somewhat uncomsortable without a Companion, (all Creatures
coveting society, but more especially Man:) at length according to my desires I
met with one, whose long practice in this Art, besides the Observations of his
Predecessors, deriving his pedigree in a direct line from Prince Prigg) indu'd
him with so much skill as to furnish me with the knowledge of any thing that
belonged to the liberal Art of Begging. We straight betook our selves to the
Boozing-Ken; and having bubb'd rumly, we concluded an everlasting friendship.
Than did he recount to me the most material things observable i^ our
Profession. First, he tuned my voice to that pitch which might most of all
raise compassion; next what form of prayer I was to use upon such an accasion,
what upon such, varying according to the humor of those persons that I begged
of, gathered from their habit or gesture; then he told me when we came to
London, he would acquaint me what places were most fit for our purpose, and
what times. That I ought not to be too importunate to some, always wishing
well, and loudly praying for the health and safety of Estate and Limbs of such
as denied me Alms; but more especially pronounce a God bless you Master, and
let Heaven reward what you have here done on earth, if any thing is bestowed
upon me. If any should pity my nakedness, and cloth me in garments without
holes in them, I should wear them no longer than in the Doners fight, reserving
my rags to re-invest my self, and sell the other, as unfit and scandalous to
our Occupation. That we should never beg far front one another, and at nights
faithfully share the gains. Moreover, he informed me the way to make all sorts
of seeming sores and lameness. That within the tattered rags, there be places
provided for private conveyance. Some of maturer age, if they have no children,
rent them of such as have: but we had no occasion for this fallacy. That if I
saw a door open, I should go in boldly; if I met any in the way, I should then
in a very submissive manner implore their help in the relieving my want, never
desiring any thing but what was of small value, one halfpenny, farthing, or
some broken crust, (if at a door) pretending the not eating of a bit in two
days. If the passage was clear, whip away what was nearest to hand. That the
time of rising in the morning be very early, showing my self in the street: for
then will those that pass by, judge I have no other lodging but what a stall
affords, that way procuring relief from pitiful-minded persons, and so continue
beging till the evening; when it begins to be duskish, if any then walks
singly, accost him in a begging form; coming up so close, as that you may knock
him down with a Truncheon, still carried about for that purpose; which is done
securely, and many times with a good booty.

Being full fraught with these, and many more precepts he delivered, we set
forth on our progress. We had not gone far, before we were surprised by the
Constable, as two sturdy Vagrants, and as handsail to my new Trade, we were
both soundly whipped out of Town. To avoid this danger for the time to come, we
mist all the towns of any considerable note in our way, and only frequented
Villages; nay at last we were forced not only to avoid them but the Highways
too: for Travelers observing our garb, countenances, and weapons, which was a
Battoon, suspecting us, would before they came near us, set spurs to their
horses and ride as if the Devil drove them. Many petty rogueries we performed
by the way, not worthy the commemoration, and therefore I shall pass them over;
only this I shall insert.

Traveling the Field-way, we stumbled on a Tinker and his Trull lying by an
Hedge-side, I knew not what to think at first they lay so still, with rouch
pulling and stirring then they awakened; I asked them what they lay there for?
They answered me, That they were lately bitten by a Serpent near adjacent, a
potent creature, mighty in strength, and of a vast proportion, who had lately
stung several as well as they. It seemd very strange to us, especially having
heard not the least report hereof. To be short, I desired them to show us the
place of his residence, which they readily consented ^o. Instead of this
Venomous Animal, they only brought us to its representation in a sign, where a
Cup of double-brew'd Beer was sold, notable huming geer. The people liked the
Tinker and his Female Comerade well enough, but would not admit of us, till we
she showed them money: For our Vestments looked like the Gleanings of a
Rag-merchants Yard. We drank stiffly till we laid the woman asleep again: still
the Tinker bore up stiffly, she had not slept long, but up she started, pulled
up her coats, and in our presence pissed in the middle of the room and so sat
her self down, yet awaked not: which action could not but produce much laughter
from me and my Comrade. At last the Tinker fell asleep too, having added so
much to his former burden that he was no longer able to stand under it. Now had
my wits enough to work on: but finding my self very drowsy, for the strength
of the drink had almost over-powred me, I was forced to advise with my friend
what course I were best take to make me a little more sober: he was so well
known in such matters, (being an old experienced Pitcher-man) that he quickly
counseled me what to do, he himself being not in the least disturbed. This was
his advice which he did put in practice, he got a Pail full of water, and so
taking me up by the heels, he clapped my head thereinto; holding me in that
manner so long, that the Pail had like to have proved the Terry-beat that
should wast me over the Stygian Lake; this so qualified the heat my head had
contracted by my excessive drinking of that strong stupifying liquor, that I
found it had wrought its desired effects.

After this, we ransackt their pockets, but found little in the man's; but
searching the woman in a private place between her Pocket and Placket, we there
discovered something considerable. Having so done, we thought it high time to
be gone, but first we resolved to make some sport for their moneys, which was
thus: I tied to each of their Girdles behid a Flaggon-pot, and to each a Label
affixt, or a paper of Verses, and so immediately tript off. The Host seeing us
go out of doors with more than ordinary speed, ran into the room where the
Tinker and his Lady were: he suddenly awaked them, telling them we were gone.
Hearing this, they hastily started up, and reeling ran to overtake us: the
Master of the house seeing his Pots dangling at their breech, ran after the
Tinker, crying, Stop'em, stop'cm, Stop the thievish Tinker, stop the Whore with
my Pot. We were wiser than so to stay to hear how the Tinker and his Trull came
off, or to hear the laughter that we undoubtedly raised by this waggish
contrivance, but directed our course for London directly, where we arrived soon
enough, nay too soon for some. This Outcry soon alarmed the ears of his
Neighbors, who with the Host seizing on them, and carrying them back, gave us
an opportunity for our escape. The Lines that were about the Tinkers Pot, were
these to my best remembrance.

Serpents but sting, or only bite so deep
To numb the sense, so lay men fast asleep.
Wit acts far greater things. I Will say no more:
You Have paid for sleeping, Sir next clear the score.
Those that were fastened to the Woman's Pot, were these:
'T was not the Serpent, but strong Beer that stung:
The vent being stopped, the Drink wrought through the Bung.
I had like to had forgot to give you an account of a merry passage that happened
upon the road we traveled on; beating the hoof we overtook a Cart, but in the
name of Rabbi Abraham, what think you was in it? In troth even a Squadron of
the Tatterdemallion Regiment; Some pretendedly blind, others their legs tied
up in a string. A third sort having a dead Palsy over all one side. A fourth so
lame as is he never had been strung with sinews. We fell into discourse, asking
them whither they were bound thus carted? They answered us: every one for his
own Country, we have been already jib'd (said one) that is jerkt at the
Whipping-post, and now enjoy the benefit of a Pass. The Surly Rogue the Carter
observing our familiar talk made a stand, speaking to us after this manner. Why
how now Gentlemen, how dropped you out of the Carts Arse? what, you go on foot
and your Brethren rid? It shall not be; ease your legs, come I Will lend you an
hand. I was about to reply when a fellow came along who knew this Carter, and
asked him what he would do, or whither he was going with them Criples. In Troth
said he, to tell you the truth, I am going to Killum (a Town it seems on the
borders of Oxfordshire.) Hearing this, I knew not what to think on it but
consulted with the aspect of the carred crew. Their faces discovered nothing
but sense of danger, so that now I perceived their thoughts were soly employed
about their escape, which they did soon put in execution. For sorth with the
strings were cut that tied up their legs, who silently slid out of the cart one
after another for fear of discovery, the blind could see their way down too,
the Paralitick could run as swift as a Stag; The fellow drove on still, not
misling his Company presently, at last looking about he saw one running this
way, another that way a third contrary to either, a fourth was hiding himself
in a bush, thus they were all dispersed: Do You here, do you here, cried the Carter,
restore the legs and eyes you borrowed, and then run to the Devil if you can.
I heard one of them distinctly answer him, I le see you hanged first, you
murdering Rogue e're I will come near you; don't you remember that you said even
now that you were going to Killum. Could you but imagine the various postures
their causless fear put them in you would be a great Sharer with me in
laughter, I could not retain my self from; this story put me in, mind of the
like mistake whose effects proved more fatal in the time of the intestine wars
in Ireland: A Trooper met with a Sculogue or Country-fellow, and demanding of
him whence he came, he answered from Killwanium: whither art a going? ^o kill
more said he: these are two Towns) with that the Soldier swear he should not
kill more, and so pistol'd him.

CHAP. VII.
Coming to London, he enters himself into the society of Beggars, distinguished
by these Titles, Ben-feakers, Dommerars, Clapperdogeons, etc. With a short
description of their Manners and Customs; as also a relation of a piece of
Theft he committed.

COming up to London, we strait way betook our selves to Newington-Butts; but
by the way, my Friend could not forbear calling on his Friends in Kent-street,
there they gave me a Nickname; and my Comrade immediately fell to work, to put
himself into an equipage fit for the employment we had undertaken. He needed
not to alter his habit; but his chief aim was to make counterfeit Sores o^
Clymes, according to the term of Art that is given them. With the assistance of
some of the Fraternity, he had in an hours time, such a Leg, that I could
hardly look upon it without even dropping down; and thus they made it: They
took un^aked Lime and Soap, mingled with the rust of old Iron; these being well
tempered together, they did spread it thick on two pieces of leather, which they
applied to his Leg, binding it thereunto very hard, which in a short time did
fret off the skin, the flesh appearing all raw; then did they take blood and
rubbed it all over his Leg; which being fully dried, made the Leg appear all
black, the Sore they did only let peep out of the holes of five or six
matterish clouts. He soon got us a Doxie too, with a couple of children, (the
fitter for our purpose) the one to carry in her arms, and the other to lead.
Providing himself and me a good lusty Filch or Stick, with a hole at the end
there of, to put in a hook if occasion should serve, to filch any thing off
Hedges, etc. A way we went into Moor-fields: he would have made me a Clyme too,
or an Artificial sore; but my stomach would no ways accept of his kindness.
Coming into the Fields, he planted me in a convenient place, the Doxie with her
Lullaby-cheats in another, and himself in a third, not far distant from one
another, that one might catch the others Maunding at the rebound. I observed my
Friend and Rogue diligently, what he did, for my own information. One would
have sworn he had been absolute lame, for (about to lie down) he slid to the
earth by his Staff; being on the ground, the first thing I took notice of; was
the pitious distorting of his face into various forms, to stir up compassion in
such as passed by him; to which he added, a most doleful noise to this effect;
For Gods sake, some tender bearted Christian, cast through your merciful eyes
one pitiful look upon a sore, lame, and miserable wretch: Bestow one penny or
halfpenny upon him that is ready to perish, etc. I knew not how to tune my
voice, for harkening to him; which he observing (when all the people were
passed by) he held up his stick at me, a strong argument of his great
displeasure, which lest I might further incur, I was forced to tone it out to
some purpose. Night approaching, we left off begging, resolving to recreate our
selves with what we had got: in the way home, I saw a very fine piece of
Beeslying on a Butchers-stall, the woman that kept the shop, was telling a
Gossips tale to her neighbor so intentively, as I thought I might seize on my
prey, and she never the wiser; with that I boldly snatched it up; which an
opposite neighbor perceiving, ran after me, and soon took me. I was brought
back before the woman, who was so wise (forsooth) that she would not receive
stolen goods, though they were her own; and so enraged she was, that nothing
would serve her turn, but I must go before a Justice; and to add to my
punishment, she made me carry the stolen Beef openly. Coming before his
Worship, my accusation was read, aggravated by many feigned circumstances. The
pittisul and sad casts of my eyes, were all the Rhetoric I used in my own
vindication; which the merciful Justice perceiving, they were so prevalent, as
to gain some favor from him; whereupon he asked the woman what she valued her
Beefat? Why, (said she) I would not have abated a penny of five shillings. Take
heed what you say, good woman, (said he) for should you swear this, it is
enough to hang him. O Lord, Sir, (said she) I would not hang him for a world;
than said his Worship, You must prize it under thirteen pence halfpenny;
whereupon the Butchers Wife was content to value it at eight pence. The price
being set, the Beef was convoyed into the Justices Kitchen, I sent to Prison,
and the woman put to her Oath; having sworn, my Mittimus was made, and
therewith sent to Prison. The woman now thought she should have her Beef
surely, and without any danger in the reception, and therefore demanded it; but
the Justice told her he would buy it of her, and so asked her what she would
have for it: Sir, (said she) five shillings; I cannot afford it one farthing
under. How, how! (said he) did you not swear but even now, it was worth but
eight pence, and do you now talk of five shillings? A mear Cheat, Extortioner,
etc. Make her Mittimus, (speaking to his Clerk) which so terrified the Woman,
that she cried out most pitteously; good your Worship, do not send me to
Prison, and do with me what you please. The Justice at this, looked steadfastly
upon her (who was not so old but that he could discern a handsome woman when he
saw her) and indeed generally your Butchers hare jolly handsome Wives;
otherwise they may be ashamed to serve seven years in handling and choosing
good flesh for others, and at last know not how to make choice of a fine young
plump juicie bit for themselves. I say, the Justice looking upon her, smiled,
yet seemed to reprove her sharply, and at last pretended he had something to
tell her he would not have every one hear, carried her into a withdrawing Room,
where they staid not long but out she came and declared openly that she would
never desire more justice done her, than that good and just Justice (as she
called him) had shown her. And as I understood afterward, he did her so much
right, that she sent him in an half dozen of Bottles of Canary, and supt with
him on her own flesh; I in the mean time wished them both choked in the eating
thereof; for never did Roman Catholic endure greater and severer penance for
eating flesh on Good Friday; than I for coveting this; I have loved a Capon the
better for it ever since. For I was no sooner gotten out into the street, but I
had a hundred people about me, crying which is the young Rogue? this, this is
he, said the Butcher, pretending to lay his hand upon my shoulder, but gave me
a terrible nip by the ear, which made me roar out so loud and so suddenly
unexpected, that my Gentleman Usher that was leading me by the arm to the White
Lion, starting, let go his hold. There was no dallying with so fair an
opportunity, fear and love of sweet liberty so winged my feet, that running
instantly hereupon, I was gotten presently a great way before them. The
Harmanbeck, Huntsman or Constable seeing this, unable to run himself by reason
of that great load of flesh he constantly carried about him, set a pack of
young yelping Course to track the scent, but they were soon all at a loss, and
so I escapt their clutches.

CHAP. VIII.
Whilst a Beggar what cunning tricks he invented to steal undiscovered, and how
at last served, being caught ipso facto.

THe next day I went into Lincolns-Inn-fields, where I saw a company of Rogues,
Cheats, Pick-pockets, etc. playingat Pidgeon-holes (a game much practiced
there, and in More-fields, by such mischievious and lazy Rascals) growing very
hungry, I singled out two or three of the fittest for my purpose in assisting
or contriving Roguery; a little rising grass-plat was our councel-table, where
we consulted what stratagems would best take and were least known. Come
gentlemen (said I) for the Liberal Science or ancient Profession they studied
was enough to gentelize them) what money have ye? sine Cerere and Baccho
friget ingenium, we must have good liquor that shall warm our bloods, enliven
and unthaw our congealed spirits, and make our inventions and fancies as nimble
as lightning. Faith said one, I have but three pence; yet that you may see how
well quallified I am for your company, I Will have money for you presently. He
was not gone much above an half hour, but merrily he came to us; sitting down
he desired me to put my hand down his neck between his wascoat and shirt, which
accordingly I did, but admired to groap out there rashers of Bacon, which I
produced to the Company. Very importunate I was with him to know what it meant,
and how they came there: Give me attention (said he) and I will unravel this
riddle thus. Walking along the streets leisurely, strictly eying any thing on
which I might seize securely and advantageously: at length I saw a good
pitiful old woman (for so she seemed to me by her countenance) selling Bacon,
who I observed did put what money she took into a pocket made in her Apron.
Upon this sight, Fancy me thought suggested to me that her money was already as
surely mine as if I had already confined it close Prisoner in-my leathern
dungeon. And thus I wrought my design. Good woman said I, speaking in a whining
tone,) how do you sell your Bacon a pound? Seven pence (said she,) whereupon I
began a lamentable oration, telling her that I would willingly have half a
pound but that I had but three pence: that my Master was a very cruel man, half
starving his servants; come give me your money sirrah, she said, for once you
shall have it so; weighing it, I desired her to cut it into slices and thrust
it down my back; She asked my reason for it. I told her that my Master usually
searched me, and should he find any such thing in my pockets, he would half
murder me. Alas poor boy (quoth the good old woman) lean down thy head toward
me, surely I will do thee that small kindness: whilst she was larding my back,
I got my hands underneath her Apron, and with this short knife nipt off the
bottom of her pocket, and thus have I done my part to procure ye both food and
money. As I looked on this as base ingratitude, so I could not but tacitly
within my self, both condemn and abhor such society, remembering the words of
Juvenal.

Ingratos ante omnia pone sodales. Of all persons we should shun most the
ungrateful. Neither could I forbear (though I was joyful of the purchase) to
read him a public lecture on his ingratitude; what (said I) shall we find
gratitude in Beasts (as in the Lion that was healed by Andronicus in the wood,
which afterward saved his life in the Theater) and yet shall we be unthankful!
I have read a story of an Asp that was kept and nourished by an husbandman at
his own table, feeding him there daily; at last she brought forth two young
ones, one whereof poisoned the Husbandmans son, the old one (as my Author tells
me) in the fight of the Father killed the offender, and as if ashamed of his
ingratitude, departed the house with the other and was not seen after. I would
have proceeded, but that they told me if I did, they would have no men of
morrals in their company, and so away we went to Beggars-Hall, hard by where we
called lustily. Fearing we should spend all the money, I des^ed the company
that some small portion might be left in^ny hands as a stock to trade on, which
they consented to.

Having feasted ourselves well, before we departed the next days meeting was
appointed, when and where. Against the time I had made a quantity of Serpents,
Crackers, etc. and brought them with me. When first I showed horn, they all
fell out a laughing to think I could improve our stock by such devices. Have
but the patience to hear me (said I) and then condemn me if you see cause; Ever
since I parted from you I have been racking my invention to find out some way
whereby I might render my self both deserving of, and acceptable to your
company, and I think this my first discovery will do it; I would have you Jack,
Tom and Will, take an equal quantity of crackers and serpents, and anon at
night let us go into the Market, where each of you shall observe each of us;
where ever we make a stand be sure you throw a Serpent, etc. at that very
place; and then will we take the opportunity of the peoples confusion and
fright, and so march off with what we can lay hands on. This plot was very well
liked of by all. The eyening approaching (it being near November) we went to
put what I had contrived in execution. The first that was thrown was where I
stood, which sell into the Basket on which a Market woman sat, the woman
starting up to extinguish it, suddenly it bounced in her face, the sinoak
whereof and powder, for a little time so blinded her, that she could not see me
walk off with a shoulder of Mutton, my comrades had the like success with a Pig
and a Goose. Having done enough as we thought for that time, we went to a place
of our acquaintance where we had the Mutton, Pig, and Goose roasted, Giving the
Landlord the Pig for dressing, bread, and drink. We were so successful for the
first, that we made several trials afterward not ineffectual. But in fine, I
found the Proverb verified, The pitcher goes not se often to the well, but that
it comes home cracked at last. One time I went, and having ordered them to do as
they had done before, a Serpent came flying on the woman's stall where I stood,
and fell into her lap, which being brusht off, sell underneath her coats, and
there burst, in the mean while I had gotten a loyn of Veal and was trooping off
with it; the woman missing it suspected me by my great haste, followed me and
laying hands on me found her meat under my coat. O have I caught you Mr Their.
Mistake not good woman (said I) it is no such matter. For as I stood by your
stall, the wildfire which some unhappy Knaves threw, so scared me, that having
your meat in my hand at that time cheapning it, I was so frighted that I ran
away with your Veal to shun the danger, forgetting to lay it down, wherefore
pray take it again. Taking her meat, here is a pure excuse indeed (said she)
but this shall not serve your turn, and with that, gave me two or three such
blows on my chops, that I verily thought she had made me swallow half my teeth.
Another that had heard our discourse, takes me to task after this. Come sirrah,
you love the flesh well, but it is fit you should pay for it. And it is but just
if you will have my flesh, I should have some of yours. Up straight he snatched
his Knife, and holding me by the ear I verily thought he would have marked me as
he used to do his calves. My crying and praying so far prevailed, that he only
kicked me to his next Neighbor, and so from one to another, so that though it
cannot be said I ran the Gantlet, yet between the Pannyers on both sides I was
kicked the Gantler from the Standard in Cheapside to the Conduit at the lower
end thereof: this unhappy adventure made me betake my self to my old course of
begging, resolving as yet not to deal in that trade I had little experience in.

CHAP. IX.
A Merchant seeing him begging, took a fancy to him, conducts him to his House,
and entertains him as his Servant.

ONe day as I was begging, more servently than formerly, having gotten not one
penny that day, so that I found a civil war between my Guts and Stomach, yet
knew not how to salve up the difference; neither would they hearken to any
thing but a Bill of Fare. In the midst of this combustion, a Tradesman of no
mean quality, passing by, took a strong fancy to me, being extraordinarily
pleased with the form of my face and body. He asked me, Whence I came? what my
Parents were? and what I intended? I answered him with well contrived
forgeries, that seemed to give him good satisfaction: liking well both my
speech and understanding, he bid me follow him, which accordingly I did; having
conducted me to his house, he presented me to his Wife, my intended Mistress,
telling her his resolutions of receiving me into his service; at which she
blessed her self, saying, Prithee, Sweetheart, from what Dunghill did thou pick
up this Snakerag, this Squire of the body? This thing dressed up in sippits? This
Scarecrow, what shall I call him? (for I am sure I had but few clothes on, but
what were rather fit to dung ground, than to be sent to the Paper-mill.) Said
my Master, Rest your self satisfied, since it is my pleasure, this shall be so:
neither can I give you any reason for my fancy. Whereupon he commanded me to be
stripped, and well washed, in the mean time clothes were provided for me, a suit
of one of his Apprentices. A great Vessel like Cornelius his Tub, was filled
with water to bath me, but so cunningly set by the Maids, (though privately)
that they might see me all over naked. It was my good fortune to observe my
Mistress standing in a private place on purpose to see me dismantled; and after
I was washed, she commended the whiteness of my skin and well proportioned
limbs; and by the consequent, approved all within her self, for I was then a
stubbed Lad. Being new clothed, and raised to this unexpected fortune, how
strangely did this vain blast puff up my empty pate! However, I was resolved to
carry my self discreetly, lest I should overthrow the state I was then in, not
yet well settled. Wherefore I behaved my self very respectfully toward my
Master, and served him as punctually as I could, endeavoring that my service
should require his kindness in as great measure as my abilities could perform.

My endeavor was not only to please my Master, but my Mistress too, even in
the meanest services; so officious to her, that I was ready to perform the
office of a Chambermaid. The maidservants I obliged also, by doing their
duty, as making the fires, washing the Kitching, nimbly and willingly doing any
thing they would have me; which so ingratiated my self among them, that I
always had their good estimation among themselves, and good word to my Master
and Mistress when occasion served. Very careful I was, not to report what I
heard, lest I by that means I involved my self in the affairs of others,
without advantage to my self. For by meddling in others matters, I should breed
animosity among them, and reap just hatred to my self when discovered to be the
too too busy intelligencer. This I looked on as an undeniable maxim. That
nothing more recommends a man, than a silent tongue, (unless necessity required
the contrary) a fair complacential carriage; and a faithful heart. My master in
a humor would sometimes find fault with me, but then it was my chiefest care
not to reply, knowing, that what should be all eadged as my just vindication,
would but aggravate his spirits being passionare, always punctually performing
what was commanded me. To try my fidelity, he would lay a six pence on the
Counter, or in the Window, as if it had been left there forgotten. I was wiser
than to be caught so, and therefore would instantly carry him the money. One
time sending me out to buy something, instead of a shilling he gave me among
other money a piece of Gold; I took no notice of it than, but being gone a
little way, I came running back out of breath to restore him the piece; this
and the like made my master stand amazed at my seeming honesty. A strange
alteration you will say; but all this was only to get a good esteem, whereby I
might gain fast footing. What though I underwent a great deal of pains, and had
my patience tried to the height? Yet I gained much in the end, had God given
me grace rightly to use it, and the baseness of my nature not persuaded me to
abuse it. So much credit I had gotten with my master, by my civil behavior,
that he raised me gradatim, step by step. Being ignorant of Arithmetic, he
caused a master to come to his house to instruct me, which I soon apprehended,
and by that means capacitated to keep his Accounts, which was the thing I aimed
at, intending thereby the prosecution of mine own ends, notwithstanding my
pretended fidelity, and his real kindness to me undeserved: which puts me in
mind of the conclusion of an Epitaph I have read on a Tomb, which the master
erected for the perpetual commemoration of his servants cordial respect and
honesty.

View often this Tombstone, since we seldom find,
A servants faithful, and his Master kind.
Now to the intent I might complete my conquest of his heart, I pretended my
selfan Independent, not omitting any opportunity of going to their Meetings;
and upon all occasions would rail against Steeple Houses (as we called them)
and tear the Bishops holland sleeves to pieces, calling them the impure rags of
the Babylonish Whores Smock, etc. I would pray mornings and evenings so loud,
so late, and so early, that my neighbors could hardly sleep for me, much less
those of our own Family: Notwithstanding all this piety not a day past wherein
I cheated not my master. Thus did I delude his eyes with pretended sanctity,
yet concluded with the Poet,

Damihifallere, dajustum Sanctunque videri,
Noctem peccatis and fraudibus objice nubem.
Let me seem just; to cheat the better shrowed,
Let my dec^its be hidden in a Cloud.
How much did I silly fool deceive my self, thinking my self secure, because no
mortal eye saw me. Be not thus cheated as I was, for assure your self there is
no darkness so thick and obscure, which the All-over-seeing and Eternal
piercing eye cannot penetrate --

Cermit Deus omnia vindex. A passage remarkable in Erasmus I read to this
purpose concerning a young Gentleman, whom a wanton Lady tempted, who used this
Expression as his last and best Refuge. Art not thou ashamed to do that in the
sight of thy Maker, and the Holy Angels, which thou art ashamed to do in the
sight of men. We are afraid of disgrace with men, not caring for the Grace of
God.

CHAP. X.
How he came acquainted with lewd and vicious Apprentices. What Trade they
drove together. What places and times of meeting.

I was as officious at home, as reserved from all company, never stirring forth
unless called by my Masters business, till my next Neighbors man intruded
himself into my acquaintance. Who so far insinuated himself into my
affections, that I was in a manner wholly ruled by him. He and I met on a time
abroad, and would not be denied but he must needs fasten a glass of Wine,
conducting me to a Tavern where the Drawer (as he said) was his friend. After
several Congratulations past, order was given for a pint of Canary: being gone
to draw it, this young man began to tell me what an honest fellow this Ralph
the Drawer was; which words he had no sooner uttered, but I heard him cry at
the Bar, A Pint of white Wine in the Rose, score; and immediately in he brings
it, and in formality a glass but we made no use of it for he was fearful his
Master would discover the cheat, and therefore desired us to be speedy in the
dispatch, and so we made but too draughts thereof. Away he goes again, and
brings in another, not after the same manner, but crying it Right, bringing
withal a Quart-Bottle in his Codpiece: Now, Gentleman, (said he) using your
discretion, you may sit and talk freely, without either fear or suspicion,
using your glass, and when your pint is empty, fill him again you shall not
want for liquor Lads. This something amazed me at first, till my Neighbor
Thomas told me that this was frequent, and that he and two or three friends at
any time could be drunk for six pence a piece. Come, come you are but a Novice,
said he; but if you will be ruled by me, I Will show you the way to soften the
cord of bondage, to make the long time of a seven-years Apprenticeship seem
short, by living as merry, nay, more jovially than our masters. They may be
distracted with cares how to procure necessaries, pay Rent, and satisfy
Creditors, whilst we have none of these pressures and disturbances on our
spirits. What though we have an harsh word ar a smart blow, it may be a broken
pate? We will make his Till spring a leak for it, or his Goods goto Pot, and
break him at last too. It may be his Provision is neither dainty nor plentiful,
nay, restrained from cur liberty too: it is only by day then, we will be
Masters of our own at night, not wanting any thing that may conduce to mirth,
or the delectation of our insatiate senses.

I asked him how could this be done? He answered, If I would swear to be secret
and faithful, and become a Brother of the society, he would not only tell me
how all this (a sore recited) might be performed, but would likewise introduce
me into the place where these jolly Blades used to congregate. I soon
consented, rejoicing exceedingly at this blessed opportunity, (as I thought it)
wherein I might sail in the Ocean of delight, bound for no other Port but that
of Pleasure or Profit, never considering the inevitable Quicksands which such
meet withal steering that course, having no other Compass to sail by than their
own Fancy. Very eager I was to have him inform my judgment with what at present
I understood not, but doubted not in a little time to be as forward as the
foremost in any moral wickedness. First, he informed me, that I must insinuate
my self into the Maids favor, so that, when occasion should require, she may
let you have the Key of the Street-door, or else sit up for your return, making
her sensible that she does not so break her sleep for nothing. That I must
never fail coming home to gratify her kindness. If she be modest and
continent, only kiss her, and that my behavior should not be either rude or
lascivious, that all my expressions should savior of Platonique, or chaste
love, often repeating this to her; O that I was out of my time, if it were for
nothing else but to repay thee thy love! So great an acknowledgment I have of
thy civilities, that I hope a time will come wherein I shall make full
satisfaction for all, etc. If she be bucksome, or wantonly given, she will
never be content with hopes, promises and protestations, vows and such like
windy stuff; wherefore you must kiss, hug, and embrace her, telling how dearly
you love her; and then fall to somewhat else: She may put you off at first with
a Pish, a Fie, or Pray be civil; yet be so far from denying, that if you
proceed not on vigourously, she will prompt you her self, to try what mettle
you are made of; if dull, she will make you the subject of her private, nay and
public laughter and scorn. But be very cautious of procreation, which you may
prevent several ways. Now to tell you what manner of persons we are that are
confederates; there are few among us but what are of several Trades selected,
as Linnen-Drapers, Mercers, Woollen-Drapers, Silk-men, Hosiers, Haberdashers,
Grocers, Goldsmiths, Jewellers, Ribband-sellers, Exchange-men, to which add a
Drawer and an Oylman, the one to furnish us with good Liquor, and the other to
prepare our pallates for it. A great many Trades there are which signify
nothing in our Commonwealth as Pe^trers, Braziers, Plummers, etc. we are only
for such as will profit the body, please the Palate, and fill the Pocket.
Every one brings his several Commodities at the place of meeting, then do we
exchange or barter one with another for what each respective person wants;
either to supply his own occasion, or his Mistress: for it is to be supposed
such a thing must be had; when procured, must be maintained, though to the
destruction of our Masters Estates, and ruin of our bodily health. Further he
added, that our Masters might not detect us in the purloining his goods you
must not (said he) take too much of one Sort of Commodity.

All this I liked wonderfully well, and promised to meet that day seven-night
at the place appointed; and so we parted. Coming home, I immediately put these
prescriptions into practice; first; taking notice of what Goods we had greatest
quantity; and whatsoever Commodity my Master forgot he had, I always secured it
as mine own: nay, sometimes I would try him; There was such a person enquiring
for such a thing to day when you were abroad, but I could not find it: it may
be he would say, We had it not; suiting my design according to desire. Having
taken a through view of the Shop and Warehouse., I saw so many ways of
advantage, if assisted by a cleanly conveyance, that I could snip as well as
the most forward of them all.

The next thing I had to do, was to endear my self to the chief maid, who was
one of those that lay covertly to see me wash my self in the Tub; and as she
confessed since, took an affection to me from that hour. It required no long time
to court her into a compliance; her Complexion or Temperament, forcing her
acceptance of any thing amorously inclined; The color of her hair inclined to
Red, which color (though I know not for what reason) I love above any: This
may be partly the reason, because as that Complexion has always the
concomitant of a very white skin, so it has two inseparable Companions,
Plumpness and Bucksomness: Her skin as the usual attendant of Red or Flaxenish
hair, as I said) was as white as whiteness it self: Her Cheeks naturally
painted with Vermilion; plump were her Cheeks and Lips with a mole thereon, and
a dimple in her Chin, as the infalible marks of one that is willing to dedicate
her self to the service of Venus.

Having a fit opportunity, after some amorous discourse, I desired her she
should grant me leave that night to talk with her in private, having business
of importance to impart to her: She condescended to my proposition. As soon as
our Master and Mistress were gone to take their rest, her impatience to hear
what I would say, made her soon send the rest to bed. The house being thus
cleared, and all things silent as the Air, when Winds into their hollow grors
repair, I acquainted her with the greatness of my affection, which I delivered
with all the Rhetoric I could invent, still rouching that string which
produced Loves harmonious concord: So fervent I was in my expressions, and so
ardent and hot in my desires, that I soon melted the conjealed iceness of her
Chastity: But first there were mutual Articles reciprocally drawn and agreed
unto, viz.

That if she proved with child, I should marry her.
That I should devote my self to her service, and nones else.
That we should both endeavor to make use of all opportunities for the
enjoyment of each other.

That to prevent discovery, we should often fall out before people, that
without suspicion in private we might agree the better; throwing oftentimes
bones at my head when sitting at Dinner, because suspision should not deprive
her of the Grizzle. So great was our seeming ^eud sometimes, that our master
was called in to part us.

After this I gave her plenary instructions as to my affairs, which she
faithfully and punctually promised to observe. Then did I put my hand to the
instrument, and sealed the Articles with two witnesses.

The night was come wherein I was too meet according to promise. I acquainted
my Amoretta with my intention of going out at twelve a clock; and that my
Master might not in the least suspect me, I went to bed, but arose again at the
hour promised. The first time I would not carry any Commodities with me,
resolving to see first what they did. Being come to the house, I was introduced
by my Neighbor Thomas into a private back-room, among the associated Brethren.
I was much amazed to see such variety of Wares lie upon a long Table, as Silks,
Stuffs, Cloth, L^nnen and Woollen, Stockings, Ribbands, Muffs, Hoods, Starffs,
and the like. Some of them came to me, and welcomed me as a Brother, drinking
to me in a Beer-bowl of Sack and Sugar.

Most of the Company being met, they truckt with each other according to their
convenience, furnishing themselves with what they either stood in need of
themselves or their friends. Several things were offered me; I told them I had
brought nothing to retalliate: They told me my Credit was good, which is the
Soul of Commerce; telling me they should have occasion to make use of me in the
like nature another time. I took with me only such things as might be proper
to bestow at home, on whom I had lately engaged my affections; which I
presented her with, accompanied with many expressions and protestations of a
never-dying affection. She accepted of my kindness with much gratitude, but
though she could not fully remunerate me without a readmission into her
private, and then particular favors, I could easily discern her inclinations
by griping of my hand, kissing as if she would devour me, the palpetation of
her heart, and her inflamed eyes. I ran parallel with her in the same desires,
so that with much facility we two clapped up a bargain. After which; I would have
betaken my self to my rest in my own bed, but that was displeasing to her, I
perceived nothing would content her, but that we should be bed-fellows. I soon
assented to it, though to the hazard of both our credits and fortunes. I
desired her to go up first, telling her I would follow instantly after. By that
time I thought she was in bed; up march^ I the stairs, which creackr as if they
had conspired a discovery; Coming up to the highest stair, I raised my foot
(being fearful of making any noise) thinking there had been another, it
descended with such precipitation, that I made the house echo. The Chamber
wherein my Master and Mistress lay, (the maid lying in a Trundle-bed underneath
them) was right against the Stair-head. My master had taken a dose more than
ordinary of Sack, so that this noise awaked him not: my mistress at the first
hearing thereof, imagined Thieves had broken into the house; she endeavored to
wake her Husband, by stirring him, but could not, therefore thought it the best
way to lie still, expecting the event. In the mean time (...) lay per due,
stirring not till I imagined my Mistress asleep again, The maid, concluding I
durst not adventure further by reason of this unfortunate accident, fell
immediately into a profound sleep. Finding (after a considerable time) all
things still and quiet, I entered the Chamber, dark as Hell, and in a low voice,
groaping the contrary way, I cried, Where art? Here, here, said my Mistress, in
a whispering tone: minding from whence the sound came as near I could, I
directed my footsteps to that place: The same words being repeated, conveyed
me exactly to that side of the bed whereon my Mistress lay. Taking her about
the neck, I kissed her a thousand times: not perceiving my mistake, I made all
the haste I could (and all too little) to undress my self; which was done in an
instant: Opening the Cloths to come to bed, Hold, said my Mistress, I have a
Bedfellow already; what I have suffered you to do, was only as a trial to
understand and what you intended. Get you gone to your own bed for this night,
and I shall talk with you farther to morrow, I durst not reply, not daring to
stay longer, but betook my self to my own Chamber, possessed with fear and shame,
I nothing but tossed and tumbled all that night, taking not the least rest.

In the morning early I was up, showing my self more than ordinarily diligent.
But Lord, what a confusion I was in, when I saw my Mistress come into the Shop?
I made an hundred pretenses to stoop behind the Counter, and rectify
disordered Wares: So busy I was with my back toward her that she could not
have so much as a sight of me. At length she comes up close to me, and turning
me about, said, Indeed, you take too much pains, you are too laborious; fair
and softly; there is a great while to night yet: d^t a little, I must have a
word with you. Hearing this, I presumed to look in her face, and was overjoyed;
for from thence I received a most alluring smile, in stead of a killing frown.
This re-armed me with confidence, compelling from me these expressions:

Most respectful Mistress, I do with shame confess my self (...) a great
error: but if you will consider that the (...) thereof was irresistible; I
hope you will in some measure mi^gate my crime. My very youthfulness speaks my
Apology. You cannot be ignorant of the fervent heat of young blood, which
sometimes ^ls beyond its bound. Besides the temperature of my body, (being of a
Sang^ine complexion) did add much fuel to that fire.

She admired to hear me speak in such a Dialect; but ^aying aside her wonder,
she bid me tell her the whole truth, and what Contract we had concluded.
^quivocated in my relation, intending to excuse the mal^ forwardness, and that
I only designed to ^prize her ^wares. This ^ry of mine did (...) in the least
prevent my Mistresses prying wit, (...) quick understanding; from searching out
the (...), ^ing every meander, finding it our at last, though involved in a
labyrinth of obscurities. She told me plainly she knew all, though I
endeavored to conceal it, and desired me, in stead of commands, to withdraw my
affectionate thoughts from her, since her resolution was to divorce our
persons. Adding moreover, that if I was so amorously inclined, as not content
without a Female Object to exercise my passion on, I should elect such a one,
whose merit grounded on Beauty, Birth, Wealth, and Power, should command my
love, and finally eternize my terrestrial happiness; and so vanished from me,
leaving my cogitations to their operations.

Forty five years had not totally destroyed her beauty, but there was still
remaining the ruins of a good face: Her Birth, though from a high extraction,
had little influence over me, had not her Wealth (which she had at her own
disposal) whispered in my ear more than a common felicity. Her last words left
a deep impression on my imagination, which were not so enigmatically delivered,
but that I could easily interpret them advantagiously enough to my purpose. I
resolved within my self to acquiesee, leaving this affair to time to bring it
to perfection.

CHAP. XI.
What divices he found out to Cheat his Master; and what ways he had to spend
it lavishly, at unseasonable hours, on Wine, Wenches, etc.

THe time being come again, for the meeting my snipping Brethren, I went
prepared with what I could conveniently carry with me. Seeing me come well
fraught, my merchants presently clapr me aboard, resolving not to let my
commodities lie long on my hands, our truck was soon agreed on to our mutual
contents. Then like true Sons of Bacchus, we trouled the full boles about,
wishing him that pledged not his fellow, in a dark rainy night on a ryred Jade
bare ridged in a dirty lane, with a pocky Whore behind him, and his own bones
rotten, nine Miles from an house, not knowing one step of his way, nor having
one penny in his pocket. This, or the like dreadful execration, made us tumble
off whole Boles like so many thimbles full. Half a dozen of these a piece, were
a preludium to our Supper, which usually was composed of the choicest viands.
Neither could we eat, without our female Consorts, whom Wine and Music waired
on. After Supper, we fell again to our old Bacchanalian sport, drinking,
dancing, or privately treating our Mistresses at a venereal Banquet. When we
had drank our selves to ebricty, and satiated our lustful appetires, we betook
our selves to our respective habitations, our Masters not dreaming of our
night-Revellings. Our own expenses were neither valuable nor comparable to what
our Mad-Dames put us to, which were so great (though they made me rack my
invention to supply their pretended necessities) that all my various endeavors
could not answer their expectations. I had taken my Gentlewoman a chamber, for
which I paid three shillings a week, and upon the bare promise of a Whore,
that she should prove constant to me, I allowed her a weekly pension besides, I
never came to receive a private favor, but I must return her for it, some
special and particular courtesy; as a Scarf, an Hood, a Ring, a Whisk, or
rich Lace for her Smock. If I failed at any time of paying, I should be
severely checked, nay, sometimes threatened, at the least denied my accustomed
Familiarity; then she would pretend that she had refused many eminent Matches
merely for my sake, that now she saw her self merely deluded, and therefore
would endure it no longer; and would tell my Master all the proceedings. If I
had performed the main, and not presented her when I came with some other
gratuity, as a work of Supererrogation, she would deride my Courtship, telling
me, I was an empty fellow, that I bestowed my favors on others, and that made
me so sparing to her. And that she scorned to be a copartner in my heart. When
she thought she had sufficiently nettled me, (fearing to streign my passion too
high) then a little compry clapping me on the cheeks, calling me, Smock-face
Rogue; come hither Sirrah, I know what you would have, I Will save your longing.
Such sweetened words soon overpowered my soureness and: notwithstanding my
intended hardness, I could not forbear melting in her arms. Nowsince
opportunity offers it self so appositly, give me leave to lay open this
subtle Female, on whom a strong ascendency of Mercury and Venus, had bestowed
so liberal a Talent for Whoring, and Cheating, that few escaped her
circumvention that came into her company. The Relation I shall give of this
miracle of Female subtilty, will be much advantageous to all sorts of persons.
By this those that are viciously inclined may be advised into a Reformation,
before they have occasion for Repentance: And they who desying all
Admonishment, and are resolved to be wicked in spite, may out of an
apprehension of the ensuing danger and punishment, be deterred into caution,
etc.

A Short survey of a cunning WHORE.
WHen first I made my self acquainted with her, I thought my happiness not
inferior to the Grand Seignors, for although he had in his Seraglio the
enjoyment of an hundred or more of the most select beauties of the Universe,
yet did I fancy all those external glories contracted into one, and possessed
my matchless Mistress. As she was fair, so well featured, sprightly and young,
four dangerous advantages, when they are accompanied with Wit, Dissimulation,
Crast and Impudence, with a covetous desire of enjoying of wlaat others
possessed. She could not be ignorant of her trade, since her mother was a prosest
Bawd from the time she brought her into the world. Taking notice of her
extraordinary handsomness even from the Cradle, she resolved to dedicate her to
the service of Venus, not doubting but the bent of her nature would render her
very capable of that employ. Being about thirteen years of age, her beauty was
so much taken notice of, that her Lovers swarmed about her. The old Bawd her
mother was so overjoyed to see so large and goodly a Troop of Cupids Lanciers,
her daughters lifeguard, and doubted not now but that she should obtain the
plenary fruition of her hopes, and therefore entertained them all, yet watching
them so narrowly, that none should taste her fruit unless they bought the tree
at a dear rate. She so well observed her daughters natural polity, that she was
well assured her insinuations would in a little time command both the hearts
and purses of those who courted her. Her design proved as fortunate as she
could wish, in as much as among the many that languished for her, there was one
so wealthy, as that he never knew the want of a thousand pound, whose heart was
inflamed by her eyes.

She had now assumed the title of Madam, which one should think belonged to
none but who are nobly extracted, however, why should she baulk it, since it is
an honor costs little or nothing, and as soon conferred as spoken. This
Gentleman was so ensnared by the withcrafts of a lovely face, that though he
knew the profession and practice of the Mother, and the daughters want of
honor, honesty and wealth, yet he resolved upon a marriage within few days
without the tediousness of Treaties. When there was a firm contract concluded
between them before witnesses, the charitable Bawd his intended mother in law,
came to him, and told him if his stomach was raw and could not stay so long
till the meat was served up with the usual ceremonies, he should have a bit for
a stay, and taste before hand: the proposition was not unwelcome to him,
wherefore he instantly took earnest of the happiness he vainly believed would
bear him company durante vita. Not long after they bad their nuptials
celebrated, and that he might not disparage himself in the worlds eye, as to
his inconsiderable choice; he bought his wife at his proper charge, new
clothes, splendid enough you may guess, with the appendixes of gallantry,
rings, jewels, etc. and so brought her home to his house in much state. She had
not long lived with him, but she followed the dictates of a luxurious
disposition, and a libertine, hating to have her liberty circumscribed or
bounded especially by one so remote to her nature and unsuitable in years,
wherefore under pretense of visiting this friend, and that cousen, she so
blinded her old husband by this plausible excuse, as that shemade her frequent
sallies abroad pimp for her desires. Her husband observing her often gaddings
and profuse expenses, could do no less than suspect more than he was willing to
understand, and therefore not only abridged the liberty she took, but divested
her of those ornaments he had bestowed upon her, which so animated her to
revenge, that she resolved not to let slip the first opportunity. She soon got
acquainted with one suitable to her purpose, a person as much engaged in
debauchery, as his credit was in the world, yet so pleasant he appeared in her
eyes, as that a little courting made her wholly at his devotion. Hence we may
observe the dangerous consequences of disproportion of age in matching. Surely
there can be no agreement between fire and water, between freezing winter and
Scorching Summer. Besides, when a woman comes once to have mean thoughts of her
husband (upon any account what ever.) She is then in the way to affect any body
else. She now not only slighted, but hated him, which made her lanch out into
all the excesses that exasperared, and vicious womankind can imagine or
contrive, from whence she may either derive satisfaction or advantage, neither
could she want assistance or council, as long as the old experienced Bawd her
mother lived.

This good old Dotard finding himself so abused, that the whole world must
needs call his reason in question; if he suffered any longer his loose wise to
Career thus in Luxury and Wantonness, resolved within himself to call her to a
severe account, intending withal to reduce her by kindness, as well as
sharpness, and so equally to temper his frowns with smiles, that she should not
tell which of those two ingredients were most powerful in the effecting the
cure of his lust-sick wanton.

Returning one evening from her revels abroad, the old Cuckold took her to
task; sharply reproving her for her Gaddings, her Tavern meetings, with
debauched and licentious persons; her lavish expense in paying the Reckonings
where ever she came, but especially her supplying the necessities oflusty
younger Brothers, which resupplyed hers. The old man had so spent his spirits
and breath, in schooling his Lecherous Truant, that he was forced to conclude
his wormwood Lecture in an excessive cough; the inseparable Companion of him
and Age. My bucksome Madam searing he was streining for more of that unpleasing
stuff, which had so lately offended her ears, left him half strangled with a
Tyfick.

In this Interval, a female Neighbor of his came in, a Gentlewoman of that
worth, that Virtue and Gentility contended in her for priority: How is it I
pray Sir (said she) I am much troubled to see you in this condition? You lie,
you lie, you Whore (said he) his ears being so furd by Time, that he could not
distinguish this Gentlewomans voice from his Wises; neither could he see, his
violent coughing forced down such a torrent of moisture into his eyes; that his
sight was totally drowned: Continuing his railing; See me in this condition? I
believe you would be glad to see me out ofit, you Strumpet, Lump of Lechery,
Cheat, she Devil, what shall I call thee? there is no name too bad: And then
cought again so violently, that it was in vain to speak to him; but when this
violent fit abated, she resolved to say something, though her amazment to hear
what she neither deserved, nor expected, would hardly give her permission. At
last she spoke to him, and reasoned with him, why he should thus stain her
honor which was hitherto spotless, undefiled; that her actions had ever been
so far from rendering her, what he unworthily represented, that they made her
famous, and looked on as a good example for her Neighbors to follow and
immitate. I, I; infamous you mean (said he) and let me alone to make you such
an example, that you shall have followers enough to see you Carted, you Bitch
whore. Why, who am I said the Gentlewoman, that you thus abuse me? Am I, (said
he) you are Touchwood, Tinder, Saltpeter, Gunpowder, Wildfire, nay, worse then
all this, my Wife.

By this the Gentlewoman verily concluded him to be mad, and fearing lest his
srenzie might be converted into fury, was thinking to slip from him just as his
cough left him, and his eyes again restored to him, with the insight of his
mistake; which made him much condemn his fallacious age, that had put this
trick on him.

Apologies (as many as this old man's sterile invention could frame) were not
wanting to excuse this obsurdity and error: Neither was his Wife without the
height of mirth behind the Hangings, to hear how much her doting fool was
mistaken; who had not patience any longer to discourse his Visitant, but
obruptly left her in quest of his abused Wife as he now supposed, imagining
from this grand mistake, that what ever before he had either seen or heard of
his wife, was nothing but the genuine product of his own idle and jealous
brain. After he had made a strict enquiry through the whole house for his wife,
he at length found her out cloistered in a Garret, into which she had conveyed
her self, coming softly behind the Hangings, wherein she had hid her self; and
the better to color her intended Villainy, hearing her Husband ascend the
Stairs, she put her self into a praying posture.

The old man seeing her on her knees, had like to have broke his neck for
haste, not minding so much the disturbance he should give her (pretended)
devotion, as the satisfaction he enjoyed to see his mistake confirmed. Being
out of breath, his discourse was abrupt and broken, neither did he know which
was most expedient, either first to question her, or crave her pardon: at
length he threw himself at her feet (for indeed he could hardly stand upon his
feeble Legs,) and hanging down his Head (I knew not whether he cried) a salt
Rhume gushed through the port-holes of his Head, which looked like scalding
Tears; so and so they might be, for by their burning heat, any might conclude
the loss of the hair of his Eyelids, and that thereby the shriveled skin of his
Countenance was parcht. It was a long time ere he could speak, and no wonder,
since this was the second time of his Infancy; but at length with much ado,
with a look as pitiful as his Rhetoric, he asked forgiveness. She seemed
strangely surprised, and not only wondered at, but taxc him for the
Irrationality of his Petition. The pretense of her ignorance in what had past,
made him the more eager to discover his ridiculous folly. In short, he gave her
to understand, that since he was mistaken in a thing so palpable, he might very
well question whether all former reports, and his own evil opinion of her,
might not be posited on the same basis of falsehood. That for the time to come,
he would never admit of jealousy within his breast, and to give a full
confirmation to what he protested; he instantly delivered her his Keys,
committing to her trust what he had of greatest value. This cunning Queen would
not accept this kind proffer, but with much pressing, and then sealing his
pardon with a kiss, an everlasting affection was seemingly agreed upon. For two
or three months after she behaved her self so well, that had her Husband had
Argus his hundred eyes, he could not perceive any thing that might blemish her
Reputation, or trouble his head.

Her Cue being come to enter and act her part on the Stage of deceit, she
appeared and managed her business to the purpose. For having given her Mother a
Catalogue of those rich things she had in her possession; she never left her
daughter till they had conveyed all away which might be carried in the day time
without any notice taken; and at an appointed night getting the Servants to
bed, and delivering the Key of the street-door to the old Bawd her Mother, she
played the part of a woman in general, by lulling her Husband in bed by
dissimulation and flattery, into a fond opinion of her cordiality to him,
whilst her agent then were leaving him as naked of goods, as he was at that
time of Apparel. In the morning she arose by times, before the old man was
stirring, and went instantly to her mother who had provided her lodgings. Then
did she change her name to hinder detection, and that she might add to her
security; she never went abroad but with her Vizard Mask, and in as many
varieties of Suits as there are months in the year, which though but thirteen,
yet did she make them ring as many changes as BOW BELLS.

Not long after she had played this exploit, it was my unhappiness to be
acquainted with her, by coming accidentally to our Shop, where buying some
wares, it was so ordered that I must bring them to her Chamber. According to
the time appointed I waited on her, but found my self extremely mistaken in my
Chapwoman. For instead of paying me for my commodity, she would have truckt
with me Ware for Ware; which I would no ways assent to; finding me no fit
person for her purpose, she dismissed me by discharging the debt. This passage
did so run in my mind, that I could not be at quiet till I had purposed a time
to visit her, and indeed I was forceably prickti on thereunto by those
matchless features, I saw in her incomparable face. My Master riding out of
Town I found a very fit opportunity to make my address to her, which I thought
would be the more welcome by bringing a present with me.

Her memory was so good that she knew me again, and shrewdly guessed at my
Errant, and indeed I was not long in the discovery thereof: There were but two
words to a bargain and so struck up the business: So much delight I took in her
at that time, and she in me, that we interchangably promised each others
constancy of affection.

Mine and my females extravagancies, made me invent as many ways to cheat, as
we had ways to spend what was this way gotten. If I had heard any friend say,
they must buy a Gown, I had my mercer ready for that purpose; If a Suit and
Cloak, my Draper, and the like: sometimes telling my friend, That I was
acquainted with one, that would sell me a far cheaper pennyworth than any one
else, other times, that such an one owed me some moneys, and that this way I
could both pleasure my friend, and hedge in mine own debt. Though I drove a
great trade this way, receiving still ready cash, yet this would not do alone.
As an assistance I gilded the money-box every day, receiving my part first,
before my Master should take his, which usually he did every night, putting it
into his Till. I could not sleep for thinking how I might be intimately
acquainted with the inwards of this same Till. Several projects I made trial
of, but none suited my purpose so well, as a Barbers pair of Curling irons. I
got a File from a Smith, and to work I went with my Curling irons, filing them
to slip in easily, and to turn round. The first Essay I made thereof, had like
to have put me into an Ecstasy for joy. I laid them upon their edge, opened
them wide, I pincht the money below; holding fast, I turned them on their side,
and so drew up the money to the mouth of the Scotch: now because there was many
times so much, that it would not come throw, with a knife I would slide away
piece after piece, till I had ^itted the money to the narrowness of the
passage. I seldom brought up at a time less than three shillings, a good
draught, not ceasing till I had gotten twenty or thirty shillings at a time, or
more, according to the quantity of the stock. Finding my Engine act according
to my desires, I could not be content without congratulating my success. My
Master was seldom at home, wherefore I asked my Mistress to go out for an hour,
promising her not stay beyond my limited time: She consented, and I overjoyed,
picked up a Rambler or two, and away we went to honest Ralph. Being glad to see
us, planted us in a convenient room fit for his purpose. There was never a Pint
he scored at the Bar, but he had a Quart-Bottle in his Breeches for it. They
all wondered to see me so srollick, but I thought it wisdom to conceal the depth
of my practice from them.

After we had drank very smartly, I came home, transgressing but a little
beyond my time. My Mistress was very well pleased, telling me, I should have
Icave another time, since I was so punctual. Those Bottles of Sack we drank,
ran perpetually in my ^inde; for it was the very flower of Wine. In the
commemoration of my Friends courtefie, and the goodness of that Liquor, I gave
my contemplative fancy leave to characterise a Bottle of Canary, thus.

THE CHARACTER OF A Bottle of Canary.
HE is Gentleman I assure you well extracted, which once lived like a
Salamander in the midst of the flames, and had he not been burnt, he had never
proved sound. He seems a Prodigy: For that which we live by, decays him, hating
Air, as Ba^chus hates small Beer. He will lie still if you smother him, and is
never so well, as when his breath is stopr. Bury him, and you make him quicker.
As for his habit, it is ever plain, yet neat: Though Nobly born, he scorns not
to wear a Green Coat, with a badge on it; and you cannot injure him worse than
to pick a hole in his Coat. Though he wears for the most part one sort of Garb,
yet he is never out of fashion, acceptable to the best of company, not
regarding his outward dress, but valuing his inward worth: However, his Suit is
made of admirable Stuff, for his outside never grows barer, and his Linings are
the fresher for wearing. So choice he is in his Clothing, that he rather
^huferb to have his brains knocked out, than to have a ^ent in his Garment. He
wears a^ la mode Hat, as light (and almost as little) as a Shittle-cock, which
he puts off to none; but like the Quaker when brought before a Magistrate, has
it taken off for him.

As for this Pedigree, I know not how to derive it; for he has had in him the
best and purest of the French blood, but will now acknowledge his Place only
from the Spaniard, whom he imitates, being stately and standing always upright;
treads for the most part on Carpets, and never stirs abroad but when he is
carried, yet full of activity. If he runs fast and long, the more wind he
gets. If he chance to fall, which is seldom, for many looks to him, he whl be
extremely moved, yet (contrary to all men) the fuller his belly is, the less
hurt he receives; his credit is large, never paying for what he wears, running
on the score perpetually; his conditions are a riddle; there is in him pure
virtue, and notorious vice; the quintessence of love, and the venom of hatred.
He is the beginning and the end of a thousand quarrels in a year, yet a very
Coward; for he suffers any to take him by the ear, and never broke any ones
pate, but when company was by. He is very facetious in society, and will spend
himself freely to the last drop, if a Ladies soft and warm hand will raise him
He is a brisk Spark, and therefore Courtiers adore him; he is smooth in his
expression, and therefore Ladies delight in him; he is filled with nimble
fancies, therefore the Wits frequent him, exhausting his radical moisture, to
distill it into Poetical Raptures; for conce^s never run faster from the Limbick
of their brains, than when this Gentleman adds fuel to the Furnace. He whets
wit, yet dulls it; creates new Fancies, and stupifies. Gives the Orator a
fluent tongue, and makes him speechless. Gives a Poet seet till he cannot go.
And as he helps Ministers to preach, so he likewise silenceth more than the
Spanish inquisition. He has a great many tricks in him: He will make a
Faulkner fly high w ithin doors: Makes a Huntsman catch a Fox by the fireside.
What ever he holds, is made good; and unless you mind him well, much good
matter that falls from him, may be lost: for he is often fluent beyond measure.
All Tongues court him; and those that look narrowly unto him, shall find him no
dry Fellow. The truth is, he is too profound for shallow brains to meddle with
him: He will pour out quaint expressions and hard words so thick, that the best
Scholars are glad at last to give him something to stop his mouth: Yet hold him
up fairly, and you may get all he has out of him. He is excessively beloved
and relishes all Company, being pleasant, and full of admirable humors. He is
inwardly acquainted with the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, and incorporateth with
their Wives daily. His Kisses are so sweet, that they lick their lips after
him; and though his breath be strong, yet it is not offensive. He is a true
Good Fellow, drinking till he has no eyes to see with: Good Liquor is his Life
and Soul, and he is never musty but for want of it. He will drink till he be
filled up to the very throat, and gape whilst others put it in. He will bear as
much Sack as any man in England of his bulk; yet he will be soon drunk in
Company. But if you will give him leave to vomit, he will take his Liquor and
drink fresh, till all the Company be forced to leave him. Drinking is his
hourly exercise, seldom lying out of a Tavern. He is the main Upholder of
Club-meetings, without fear of being broke. He picks men's pockets, yet is never
made more reckoning of than by such persons. As for his Estate, I can only say
this, That all he has he carries about him; yet generally he is reputed rich:
What he has, he holds upon courtesy; but what he gives others, is held in
Capite. What he possesses, is commonly upon Sale; yet more for plenty, than
for want; and if you can purchase him, you purchase all.

I could never endure Idleness, I was ever in action; either writing, or
contriving or putting in execution my contrivances; I thought it better male
agere quam nibil agere, my brains or hands were continually working and very
soldom but effectually, My pen was generally so happy in discoveries, that my
wit was much applauded by the most censorious, much respected I was, and my
company much importuned by the Tanker-barers of Helicon by which means I so
swelled with pride that I thought my self little inferior to Apollo, I called
Mercury Pimp, the nine Sisters Whores, whom I had frequently layn with and
might when I pleased, the best title I could bestow on Pegasus was Hackny-Jade.
In the height of this my opinionativeness, my Cooler (our Masters maid came to
me where I was alone) and after many heart fecht sighs, told me she found her
self with child; which news had like to have deprived me of my understanding:
but knowing that Vexation never remedies but rather adds to trouble, I was
resolved to bear it patiently and study some means to preserve her and my
Credit. I framed a Letter as from her Father, desiring her to come down into
the Country speedily, if she intended to see him alive; and according as we had
laid the Plot, she shows it her Mistress, desiring her leave to show her duty
to her dying Father. Our Mistress most willingly consented thereunto, as
knowing that there was more than ordinary love between us; the maid had staid
as long as possibly she might without discovery, Lacing her self very straight,
and keeping down her belly with three Busks: but now she made haste to rub off:
I had provided a Midwife that should be her Bawd too: but this could not be
done without extraordinary cost. After her Delivery, I found the keeping of her
and the Child very expensive: then did I begin to consider what a vast charge,
and how many various troubles this momentary lecherous pleasure draws upon a
man: how furiously he is upon the onset, and how quickly satisfied, loathing
that Object he a little before longed for. Well I bethought my self how to be
rid both of Cow and Calf. I told her I would get together what moneys I could,
and so marry her, upon this condition she would be willing to travel with me
whither I went, which I knew was her only desire: I informed her of my
intention to go for Virginia; and the reasons that induced me thereunto.

First, her disgrace would not be known there: Next, my Master could have no
power over me; insisting further on the pleasantness of that Continent, and the
plenty of every thing, etc.

She assented to all I propounded, relying her self solely on me to dispose of
her as I pleased. To palliate my design, I went with her to Gravesend,
pretending as if I was then going with her beyond Sea, for no other end but to
clear my self from her there, knowing that after she had past examination, or
search of the Block-House, she would meet with no more, Being aboard, I
suddenly seemed to have forgot something ashore; having well laid my Plot upon
the Basis of a good Sum of money, I had distributed among the Seamen with a
considerable present to the master, and telling my Landabris I would return to
her instantly, I got into the Boat; and immediately after the Ship wayed
Anchor, and quickly was under Sail. I confess notwithstanding the Devil had at
that time the total possession of me; yet I was much troubled at what I had
done so hardheartedly and cruelly. A flood of tears had so overwhelmed my
sight, that I could not discern the Ship in which she was: so sensible I was of
the wickedness of this Fact, that Dido like, I could have thrown my self into
the Sea after her, had not a good Woman, whose Husband was in the same Ship,
prevented me. Observing my tears, It Is probable, Young Man, (said she) you have
lately taken your leave of some dearly beloved Friend; and I guess, by your
earnest looking after yond Ship under sail, the person was in her. I told her
it was truth. My Husband is in the same Vessel, (said she) and therefore I have
as much cause to grieve as you. Come, be of good comfort, Man, Friends must
part; and it is better to part here than at the Gallows. Go along with me, and
we will wash down sorrow; and with a Glass of neat Canary, antidote our hearts
against any thing that may distrub them.

With that I looked intentively in her face, and found it correspondent with a
jolly temper. An Eye black and piercing; and Eye brow black also, and each as
big as a man's thumb comparatively: a sign that never fayls to denote that
Woman capable of giving a man the greatest delectation. She was every way
completely handsome, and suitable to the desires of the most curious Critic in
Love-affairs, I thought it a shame to deny so kind a prosfer, and a crime in
Youth unpardonable not to embrace that opportunity, that shall lead him by the
hand into Venus her Bedchamber. With that I addressed my self to her, (and
afterward undrest together) declaring that the force of her Rhetoric,
assisted by her external, beautiful, and altogether lovely form, had forced me
to forget my one dearly beloved she-friend, and become her Proselyte, her
absolutely devoted convert, and would prostrate my will to be guided by hers
and her command. With that we concluded to solace our selves at the next
Tavern, I applied my self to my old way of insinuation: which soon melted her,
so that I saw I might when I pleased stamp loves impression on her returning to
Gravesend we soon lodged our selves conveniently for our intended purpose,
having so done, I so ordered the matter that there was not any thing wanting
that might please our senses. Yet fearing left her love should cool again,
there was no Art forgotten that might serve to entertain it. Delays in love
affairs are dangerous: Women love not to be too long Tantalized; there is a
certain critical time to know their inclination; which if you punctually
observe, you shall assuredly reap the fruits of your desires; if not, you may
perpetually wait, but never enjoy the like opportunity. Wherefore the Iron
glowing hot, I thought good to strike, to enliven my spirits, she sent for a
noise of Music, ordering them to play in the next Room. And in the end we
began to think of some repose, agreeing before to lie in two Chambers
contiguous to each other; which were accordingly provided. As soon as I thought
all the Household were in bed, I repaired to my mistress, who eagerly expected
my coming; approaching the bedside, she clasped me in her arms: As soon as day
broke; I arose, bespeaking a fat Capon swaddled with Sassages, and a Quart of
Buttered Sack. I got all ready by the time ofher rising, she was
extraordinarily well pleased in my double diligence of serving her, having
applauded my industry and care of her, we fell to it, interlining every bit
with a Glass of Canary. She told me she would never part whilst she had a penny
left, having about her some Thirty Pieces of Gold. Well (said I) my Dear, since
it is thy resolution, a match; but let me be Steward: Which she agreed unto,
delivering into my hands what Gold she had. For two or three hours I showed my
self very officious in my place; but considering that when this money was
spent, we should not know what to do, I thought it was better for one to want
than two; besides, I had lately surfeited on a Medler, and therefore my stomach
nauseated the very thoughts thereof. I had feed the Drawer to bring me word
just as the Gravesend Barge was going off; which accordingly he did by a
private sign concluded betwixt us. I then pretended an excuse to go down under
the notion of providing something novel, which should be conducible to our
mirth and jollity. I had just so much time below to write her these lines in
stead of a solemn leave taking, leaving them with the Drawer to present her,
and so went aboard the Barge for London.

Madam I Am gone; no wonder, for you know,
Lovers encounters, are but touch and go.
Arriving at Billings-gate, I went straight to a Tavern, where I had an
interest with the Drawer, resolving there to consult seriously with my self
what course to follow, being as yet unresolved what to do. After I had raised
my dulled spirits with a glass or two, I concluded to hazard my Masters good
opinion, nay, and my Mistresses affection too; which though at that present it
only smoaked, I might easily divine, that in process of time, it would burst
forth into a flame. Being before consined to my Masters time, I began to
consider what an excellent thing Liberty was, equally estimable with Health;
which two, though they are the greatest and most precious gifts (next our
Redemption) the Creator of the world has bestowed on mankind; yet we poor
mortals, value them not till we are sensible of their want, by being deprived
of them. This is an infallible maxim, That the deprivation of a thing shall be
so much the more evil, as the possession thereof is good. Now if Liberty be
such an excellent and delectable thing when enjoyed, how miserable are those
that want it?

Having moneys in my Pocket, I concluded to experiment the enjoyment thereof,
and to participate of such delights the nature of young men is most inclinable
to. Now man being a sociable Creature, I thought I should reap but little
satisfaction to my self in the expense of my moneys, without an Associate:
Wherefore I sent to an Apprentice of my intimate acquaintance contemporary with
me, and who had often prompted me to ramble with him. This Lad was his Masters
Casheer, which I knew would much assist my design. I made him acquainted with
my intention of trying the world: Though it had been formerly his own motion,
yet he seemed at the first something startled; but all his doubts I resolved;
adding moreover. That to have our wills inslaved to other men's, was a thing
insupportable, since that we were as well as they, created free Denizens of
this world. That since our great Grandfather was Emperor of the whole world,
we could not style our selves less than Princes, and therefore debased our
Birth by a voluntary submission to Service and Slavery. I had no great occasion
to make use of many Arguments to this purpose; for his own inclination was
sufficient to persuade him. The result of our discourse was a firm resolution
to become two Knights-errant. I advise him forthwith to go home and bring with
him what Cash he had in his possession; which he readily performed, and indeed
more then I could expect, being 200 l. the Fates having so decreed to favor
this our first bold exploit, as trial of what we durst attempt.

CHAP. XII.
How he frequented Bawdy-houses; what exploits he committed in them; the
Character of a Bawd, a Whore, a Pimp, and a Irapan; their manner of living;
with a Detection of their wicked lives and Conversations.

BEing full Fraught with money, we undertook our Progress, promising to our
selves all delight imaginable, but not considering what the effect would be. We
frequented all places of pleasure, but among the chief, we ranked
Brothel-houses, which were our Repositories. We seldom were seen in the Streets
by day, fox fear of discovery; confining our selves close Prisoners to some
Bubbing-hou^e; at night (like such as closely delighted in deeds of darkness)
we would sometimes flutter abroad. Our pastime was to hire Coaches to any
pretended place, and when we came near it, to make our escape. One time leaping
out of the Boot, my Cloak chanced to rangle in the spokes of the Wheel, the
Coachman not perceiving we were got out, drove on; by the wheels continually
turning, my Garment was so engaged, that I verily believed my sins had now
conserred upon me the just punishment of being executed on the wheel, which I
could hardly have avoided, had I not speedily unbuttdned my Cloak: I was loath
to bid the Coachman stop, thinking I should have it at last; I ran I,
acquy-like a long way, but all my endeavors to shift it, proved ineffectual;
so that at length I was forced to cry out, Hold Coachman. The Coachman coming
out of his Box, soon perceived the fallacy, and straightways demanded his money
for his hire, before he would untangle my Cloak, which I was compelled to give
him. Delivering me my Cloak, he told me, I had paid him, but he had not paid me
for my attendance on him: And said moreover, That my Cloak would not look like
a Livery, unless it were laced; and with that, with his whip, lashed me well
favouredly. Another sort of Pastime we used, was to kick the old Watchmens
Lanthorns about the street; and it may be sometimes confer a blow or two on
their sleepy nodles, and then fly for it. We practiced this foolery so often,
till at length we were met with, and rightly served. It was thus: In
Paternoster-row, we found a fellow at nodie upon a stall, with his Lanthorn and
Candle by him, having first seized on that, and thrown it into the Kennel, we
prosecuted our abuse by falling upon him, and beating him. Having so done, we
betook our selves to flight; but here we mistook our mark, thinking him to be
an old decriped Watchman, and one that had little ^se of his eyes, without
those in his Pocket; whereas to our cost, we found him as nimble and as light
footed as a stag, who overtaking us, surprised us; and as he was carrying us
before the Constable; we met with the grand Round, who, without much
examination, committed us as Rats to the Counter. The chiefest thing that
troubled us, was the apprehension of our Masters knowing where we were. But we
resolved to drowned that care; we had not been there long, before other Rats,
Male and Female, were brought in to bear us company. Some of the men were all
bloody, and their Mobs Scarfs and Hoods all rent, and none of them sober:
Damming and Sinking were the constant flourishes of their discourse; calling
for drink was the Argument they held, and roaring in distracted notes was their
Harmony. Though I my self was comparatively wicked, yet I blessed my God I had
not arrived to that height these superlative Villains had attained to. Being in
their company, I thought my self in the Suburbs, or on the confines of Hell.
Sin, if it be dressed up in specious pretenses, may be entertained as a
companion; but when it appears in its own shape, it cannot but strike horror
into the Soul of any, though desparate, if not stupefied. Wherefore me thought
I was so far from associating my self with them, that I protest, the lendness
of their actions were so represented to me with such desormity, that I knew not
which I loathed most, them or the Prison. I cannot make appear to the world
what they were, nor my resentments, unless I should stuff a page or two with
all manner of horrid Oaths, Execrations, Blasphemies and such like
soul-infecting and destroying Plague-sores; wherefore I shall only take leave
to anatomize the Place that detained us from our freedom. Then look upon a
Prison as in it self, and it may be fitly termed a temporal Hell. For as the
other is a receptacle for damned Souls, the Gates thereof standing wide open;
so that this refuses the reception of none, though never so wicked a
miscreant. Though my durance in this place was but short, yet I could not but
take some observations, employing from thence the faculties of my Soul, to draw
up the definition of a Prison, Hell is a very proper denomination for it, since
it is a place composed of nothing but disorder and confusion; Land of darkness,
inhabited by calamity, horror, misery, and confusion; a bottomless Pit of
fraud, violence and stench. A Prison is the Banishment of Courtesy, the Center
of Infamy and Disparagement, the Destruction of good Wits, the Treasure of
Despair, the Fining-Pot of Friendship, a Den of Deceivers, a Forest of
Ravenous Beasts. Here you may see one Weeping, another singing; one Sleeping,
another Swearing; every one variously employed; one Eating in a corner, and
another Pissing-just by him; another Lowsing himself between both; it may be
heretofore a military man, and therefore loath to forget his Art, but rather
exercising it in the killing of his bodily Enemies, bearing the blood on his
nail, as the Trophies of his Victory.

It is to speak most properly a living Tomb or grave to bury men alive in,
wherein a man for half a years experience may learn more Law, then he can in
three Terms for an hundred pound.

It is a little Wood of woe, a Map of misery, a place that will learn a young
man more villainy, if he be apt to take it in six months, than at twenty Gaming
Ordinaries, Bowling-Allies or Bawdyhouses, and an old man more policy, than if
he had been Pupil to Matchiavell.

This Place has more diseases predominant in it than the Pesthouse in a
Plague time; and stinks worse than my Lord Mayors Dog-house.

It is a little Commonwealth, although little wealth common there; it is a
desert, where desert lies hood-winkt.

The Place is as intricate as Rosamonds Labyrinth, and is so full of Meanders
and Crooked turnings, that it is impossible to find the way out, except he be
directed by a Silver Clue, and can never overcome the Minoraure without a
Golden-ball to work his own safety. Thus much in short; the next day paying our
Fees, and receiving some checks, with good admonitions from the Justice, we
were discharged. This misfortune made us not a jot more cautious, but as soon as
we were at liberty, we went upon the sent to Mother C^-formerly famous for the
Citizens wives that frequented her house; and still rides Admiral of all the
rest of her function about the Town. I hope the next time I go to visie her,
she will not get me clapped for the pains I take in praising her. The truth of it
is, of all the Bawd^ I know, she merits most, having an house fit for the
accommodation of the best: As for her walking Utensils, they are composed of
refined metal, always neatly kept; which, because they are not used upon all
slight occasions, they appear the more delectable to the eye. As Soon as we had
entered the door, I could hear a ruffling of Silks in sundry places: I conceive
it was their policy, by seeming modesty, to set a greater edge on our
appetites. We were conducted into a large handsome Room, bottles of Wine were
brought up, both Spanish and French, with Salt meats to relish the Palate,
though we gave no order for them: But, it seems, it was the custom of the
house, a chargeable one, but without a piece spending, you shall know little of
their practices. At length, up came the old Matron, she seats her self by me,
and began to be impudently acquainted, chucking me under the chin, calling me
her Son Smock-face. Having well warmed our selves with Wine, and the good
Gentlewoman perceiving that our bloods began to heat. Well, said she, I guess
at the intent of your coming hither, neither shall you go away unsatisfied.
Nature will have its course, and if in Youth it be stopped, it will but,
Torrent-like, flow with the greater impetuosity. Come, I see by your
countenances, that ye were born sons of mirth and pleasure, show then what
stock ye came of: If you want Subjects to exercise your parts on, we'll have
more Wine; and when ye are inflamed, ye shall have the benefit of a Cooler.
With that she leaves us; but another of the same Sex, though three degrees
different in age, supplied her place. At first view I seemed very well pleased;
handsome she was, and very proportionable, but withal so impudent, that I was
antidoted against lechery. Ista femina qua limits vericundiae semel
excesserit, opportet illam essegraviter impudentem. If once a woman pass the
bounds of Shamefacedness, she will seldom stop till she has arrived to the
height of Impudence. I must needs deal ingeniously at the beginning, The
Needle of my Microcosm was touched by Loves Loadstone. But upon further
acquaintance, if I might have had an hundred pounds, I could not have meddled
with her.

Though she had baited her desires with a million of prostitute countenances
and enticements, yet I looked upon her rather a Companion for an Hospital, and
stood more in need of a Chy^rgions acquaintance than mine. My Friend had
nibbled at the bait; but when I heard them capitulating about the price, I
thought she wanted a Fee for the Doctor. Well, had she not over-traded, she had
not broke so soon, for her trade is opposite to all others: for she did set up
without credir, and her too much custom undid her; and so let her go, without
either shame or hope of repentance.

We desired to see another: It Is variety that Man chiefly takes delight in: One
constant sort of Food, without participating of any other, though Manna, will
cause the stomach to long for the Fleshpots: Neither can the crime be greater
in the enjoyment of diverse persons, than one alone, provided Matrimony make not
the Act Legitimate: I do not approve of these consequent lines tending to this
purpose, yet give me leave to insert them, that you may understand how
viciously minded some are in this frothy age.

Born under some ill Planet, or accursed,
Is he that loves one single Whore:
Who with one draught can always quench his thirst,
Tied to one Mistress, and no more.
This nauseating thing being removed, up came one of Venus her chief Darlings,
excellent Flesh! and she her self the Cook that dressed it, spending most of her
day time about it, that she might with the better appetite be tasted at night.
Finding no exceptions in this, I was impatient till I had consummated my
desires, withdrawing into another room. To heighten my thoughts, she declared
to me her Birth and Education; that as the one was well extracted, the other
had occasioned much cost and expense. That for her parts she associated with
none but persons of quality, who by long patience, intreatments, which first
procured a familiarity, and in fine freedom in the exercise of love affairs;
and so would have (seemingly) put me off upon this score, that it was not usual
for her to admit of any to her embraces, but such whose long acquaintance had
gained her affection. I offered her a Crown, which she refused with
indignation, telling me, That she was not yet reduced to so low a condition, as
to become so poor a Mercenary Prostitute. At last, with much persuasion, I
fastened on her an half Piece, and so striving with her (she only seeming
averse) I accomplished my ends. And presently in came a fellow, whose very face
would have enlightened the room, though in the darkest night: for indeed it
appeared to me a Blazing Star, and his Nose (for miraculously he had preserved
it) was the brushy Tail. Laying his hand on his Sword, he looked fiercer than a
Spanish Don insulting over an Indian Slave. The bulk of his Body began to heave
like an Earthquake, whilst his mouth, Etna-like, belcht out all manner of
sulphurous Oaths, which roared so loud, as if his belly had contained a barrel
of Gunpowder, and the Linstock of his Nose had fired it. His courteous
Salutation to me, was, How dare thou, Son of a Whore, presume in this nature
to dishonor me, in the abusing of my wife, without the expectation of an
immediate annihilation or dissipation into Atoms? But I have something here
shall tame thy insolence, and now I am resolved toset thy Blood abroach. With
that he seemed to make a Pass at me: Now I, imagining that he really intended
to do what he pretended, for the safeguard of my life, took up a Jovnt-stool,
and received his point in the seat, and following it home, tumbled him down the
stairs, and not being able to recover my self, fell with him. My Comerade came
running down at the noise to assist me, but he seeing me rather make use of my
heels than hands, followed my example, and so built a Sconce, leaving the old
Bawd to condole her great loss, for her Reckoning was very considerable.

Now because I have often met with these Hectors or Trapanning Villains, I
think it will not be unsuitable to this present Discourse, to insert their
Character.

THE CHARACTER OF AN HECTOR OR TRAPPAN.
A Bawdy House is his Cloister, where he constantly says his Mattins. He is an
Whores Protector, pretending himself more valiant than any of the ancient
Heroes, thereby thinking to take off the suspicion of a Coward from himself:
For the opinion of Valor is a good protection to those that dare not use it.
His frequent drawing his Sword upon any slight occasion, makes the ignorant
suppose him Valiant, whereas he durst not do it, but when he is confident no
danger will ensue thereon. He never strikes any, but such he is sure will not
return his blows. In company he is wonderful exceptious and choleric, thinking
in the fray some booty may be obtained: but his wrath never swells higher than
when men are loath to give him any occation; but the only way to pacify him,
is to beat him soundly. The hotter you grow, the milder he is, proresting he
always honored you. The more you abuse him, the more he seems to love you: if
he chance to be quarrelsome, you may threaten him into a quiet temper. Every
man is his Master that dares beat him, and every one dares that knows him; and
he that dares do this, is the only man can do much with him. Yet if he knows a
Coward, he will purposely fall out with him, to get Courresies from him, and so
be bribed into a reconcilement. Yet I cannot say but than he may fight, (if
with great advantage) being so accustomed to the sight of drawn Swords, which
probably may infuse something of a conceit into him; which he so magnifies by
his own good opinion, that he would have people believe that the Molehill of
his Prowess no less than a Mountain. This little he has, he is no Niggard in
displaying, resembling some Apothecaries Shops, full of Pots, though little
contained in them. His Estate lies in Contrivances, and though other Landlords
have but four Quarter-days, he has three hundred sixty and odd to receive the
fruits of his Stratagems. He is well skilled in Cards and Dice, which help him
to cheat young Gulls newly come to Town; and the reason he usually gives for
it, is, A Woodcock must be pl^kt ere he be dressed. If that will not do, he
carries him to one of his Mistresses, and so both join to plume this Fowl: if
there be not ready money to answer expectation, a Bond of considerable value
shall for we turn, attested by two shall swear any thing for half a Crown. No
man puts his brain to more use then he; for his life is a daily invention, and
each meal a mear stratagem. He has an excellent memory for his acquaintance;
if there ever past but an How do you? between him and another it shall serve
seven years hence for an embrace, and that for money. Out of his abundance of
joy to see you, offers a pottle of Wine; and in requital of his kindness, can
do no less than make you pay for it whilst you are drawing money, he sumbles
in his pockets (as Schoolboys with their points, being about to be whipped) till
the Rockoning be paid, and says It must not be so, yet is easily persuaded to
it; and then cries Gentlemen, you force me to incivillity. When his whores
cannot supply him, he borrows of any that will lend him ought of this man a
shilling, and of another as much; which some lend him, not out of hope to be
repayed, but that he will never trouble them again. If he finds a good look
from any, he will haunt him so long, till he force a good nature to the
necessity of a quarrel. He loves his Friend as one does his Cloak, that has
but one, and knows not how to get another; he will be sure to wear him
thread-bear ere he for sake him. Men shun him at last as infection; nay, his
old Companions, his Clothes that have hung upon him so long, at length fall off
too. His prayer in a morning is, That his Chears may take effect that day; if
not, that he may be drunk before night. He sleeps with a Tobacco pipe in his
mouth, and he dreams of nothing but Villainy. If any mischief escapes him, it
was not his fault, for he lay as fair for it as he could. He dares not enter
into a serious thought left he hang himself, but if such melancholy seize him,
the Drink is his refuge, and Drunkenness cures him. Lastly he commonly dies
like a Malefactor on the Gallows, or like Hercules with fire in his bones.
When hanged, if begged for an Anatomy, it would serve to convert
Tobacco-smokers from delighting in the excess thereof; for they will find the
funnel of his body, I mean his throat, furred and choakt up.

Being freed from danger, we rejoiced exceedingly that we thus so narrowly
escaped, resolving to house our selves in the next Bubbling-place we came to,
that we night talk freely of this rencounter. A place (pointed out to us by the
Devils Finger) soon presented it self to our Eyes, which we with more than good
speed entered, and coming into the Kitchen, I was not a little amazed at the
sight of a thing sitting in a Chair by the fireside, with a Pipe of Tobacco in
its mouth, and a Quarter of Strong Water by its side. This Tun of Flesh
resembled an Elephant for the bigness of her Waste, had there been the least
appearance of Tooth: A Nose she had (which with all wonder be it spoken that
she had any) so long, as that it was a fit resemblance of the Elephants
Proboscis or Trunk. But as I said before, her Teeth were fallen out; and as
loving Neighbors to reconcile them, her Chin and Nose resolved to meet about
it. She bids us Welcome as well as she could speak. Go, I think she could not;
but opening her mouth, Lord, what strong imaginations my fancy suggested to me!
Me thought I saw Hell gaping to favor me; and within that bottomless Concave,
could discern infinite numbers of Souls whose damnation she was accessory to;
and coming somewhat too near her, I imagined her breath was bitumenous and
smelt of Brimstone. She might fitly be compared to an old Coal that has been
well burnt, that with the least spark will rekindle and fire any thing near it.
But her fittest likeness is the Devil, her Envy running parallel with his. All
that the Devil endeavors is to bring Mankind into the same state with himself,
and a Bawds crime is to make all fair women like her: now because their youth
perhaps will not admit of it so soon, she hurries them on to it by degrees, by
drinking, smoking, painting, and the daily excess in venery. I looked about her
house very inquisitively, but I could not judge her Movables (setting aside
her quick Cattle) to be worth an Inventory. Her bedding I doubt me too is
infectious, few coming near it but they are presently taken with a fit of the
falling sickness. This old Beldame, being loath to put her throat to the trouble
of calling her white Devils about her, had got a Whistle, on which she used
several Notes, which Musical language her Girls understood very well. We called
for drink; the old Baw replied she would send for some, though she had it not
in the house: this was to be sure of our Moneys. Herein I observee their
temperance, not suffering us to have too much measure, Wenches we had
plentifully, one more especially I took notice of, to have the Swarthiest skin
I have seen English born on whom an ordinary fellow was very sweet. When I saw
my opportunity, I asked him, (craving his excuse) What Trade he was? Pat as I
would have it, he answered me. That he was a ^er. I concluded so, Sir, (said I)
by your dressing of that Calves skin there. This Dullheaded fool apprehended me
not, but began to be angry, telling me, His Trade was a good Trade and I need
not undervalue it: I told him, I did not, since there was some analogy between
my Trade and his Why what trade are you? (said he,) (I may ask you a question
as well as you me.) I replied, That I was Cuckoldmaker. How can that be like my
Profession? quoth he. In this, said I, You dress the Skins, and I trim the
Horns. The Bawd at this fell into such an extreme fit of laughter, that down
fell her Pipe, and up came the Strong Water that she had swallowed; that was
not all, but having not her retentive faculty, she let fly: surely she was
overcharged, which made her recoyl, and so blew out her breech-pin. She was
forced to leave us, and about an hour after returned: how sweet I cannot tell
you. We fell into discourse again: I asked her, How long she had lived in this
house? Two years (said she) a longer time than any house I have lived in this
twenty years: with that I concluded she was in fee with the Justices Clerk. My
stomach being waterish, I would needs have some Eggs and Bacon: but Lord, what
an Agony the hearing thereof put the Bawd in! desiring me to desist, for she
should die at the sight of them. I asked her the reason: O, said she, it puts me
in mind of one Shrove-tuesday especially, on which the Apprentices pulled down
my house; and sick, sick as I was, pulled me away violently from a Caudle I had
prepared to comfort me: But they gave me one with a Pox to them, and the Devils
Dam take the rotten Eggs in it, with which I thought they would have pelted out
my brains, after they had dragged me sufficiently, and worried me (as a Mastiff
would a Cat) till they were weary of the sport, fearing I should catch cold,
they out of pity covered me warm in a Bogg-house. But the worst was, after this
kind usage, I was to go through a long street before I could come to an
acquaintanee of mine wherein I could safely secure my self from the outrage of
these Hellhounds. All along as I went, a thousand Dogs barks at me, the street
was filled with people looking and laughing at my sad disaster, but none daring
to come near me. They say I left so strong a scent behind me, that several of
the Inhabitants lift their dwellings upon it, and that the strong savor
remained in that place above six days. I seemed to pity her much, promising to
visit her often; and so we left her.

CHAP. XIII.
What a Trick he served his Comrade; how himself was Trapan'd; his own Clothes
taken from him; the Band out of pretended pity, invested him with an old
peticoat and wastcoat; his admittance into a Boarding-School; his getting many
of the Gentlewomen with Child; his discovery, and his flight.

FRom one bawdy house to another, was our daily Travel, still finding out some
variety that might please us. About the twylight, coming along by the well
built house, I saw a Gentlewoman richly Attired standing at the door, who, as I
passed by, very civily saluted me, and so withdrew her self; I followed her in,
as very well understanding how to interpret such actions. She brought us into a
spacious inner-room, and then with much civility and good carrage, invited us
to sit down. She called to her servant to bring some bottles of Wine, resolving
to make us pay dearly for her extraordinary Favors. By our habits she took us
for no less than persons of Quality; for we had gallantly accoutred our selves;
and I thought that Fortune now had designed me her chiefest Favorite, in
throwing this unexpected blessing upon me. She caused her Lute to be brought
her, to which she sung so harmonical, that the Music of the Spheres are no
more to be compared to it, than a Scotch Bagpipe to an Organ. This so
intoxicated my Comerade, with the Wine together (not but that they had a great
operation on my self) that he fell fast asleep, (alias dread drunk.) Glad I was
to my very heart of this accident, fearing he might be a Rival in my intention:
and to the intent I might remove all Remora's or Impediments that might hinder
my sole enjoyment of this Lady, I consulted with my self what to do with him; I
was not long about it, but straight found out this cunning Plot, which was to
send him home to his Master. Love to a Woman is so forceable, that what will it
not do? To sum up all, make a man betray his Friend. I made my Apology to the
Gentlewoman for his incivility, and requested the favor to have her servant
procure me a Porter; whilst she was gone to execute my desires, I searched his
Pockets, and took away all his Gold; for we had converted all our money into
that Metal, which we always made our vade mecum. To ingratiate my self with
this Gentlewoman, I acquainted her with my design, which she heartily laughed
at. I farther desired of her, that I might have a Card and a piece of Paper. On
the Card I wrote a Superscription, and pinned it on his back, directing the
thing to his Master, living in such a place; with the Paper, I wrote a Letter
to him to this effect.

Sir,
Lately I found your Goose upon the way,
I took him up, as one that went astray.
To recompense my pains, I pulled his feathers,
Such precious down will warm me in all weathers.
His flesh I love not; it belongs to you:
The gibblets though I keep, and so adieu.

I gave the Porter instructions, that he should but just put him within the
doors and leave the Letter, and so with all speed to come away to prevent
examination; he brought me word he had performed my order: what descants were
made hereon, I shall leave the Reader to imagine. By this time I had gained my
mistress with a shower of Gold, which had so far prevailed on her, that she
protested she was wholly and solely at my devotion. I would have had her to
have gone immediately to bed; but she told me, There would be time enough
before morning to sport in, and that we should be both tired, if we went to bed
so soon. Wherefore to divert our selves, we drunk and sung together in parts, I
my self having indifferent good judgment. Having spun out the time so long till
it was time to go to bed, she then conducted me to the Chamber where she
intended we should lie. Though she made what haste she could to undress her
self, yet me thought she was purposely tedious. I commended before her Vocal
and Instrumental Music, but then I esteemed no other Music sweeter than what
the tag made against her Bodice when she was unlacing her self. About two a
clock in the morning, three fellows rushed into our Room, at which I awaked,
but made as little noise as a Perdue. My mistress leaping out of the Bed, they
seized on her, gagged and bound her; and then opening the two leaves of the
Window that was the entrance into the Belcony, they came in all haste to the
Bed, and in a trice, had rolled up the Bed so close, that they had like to have
stiffled me in the middle on it, though they dragged me in the Bed from off the
Bedsteed, rudely letting me fall on the ground, yet I felt no harm, every part
of me was so well guarded, that in that condition, I might have bid defiance to
a Canon Bullet. But when I heard them talk of flinging the Bed over the Belcony
to their Companions, I thought I should have died instantly for fear, knowing I
must of necessity go with it. Whereupon I cried out as loud as could, and
struggling, I got a little place open and then I roared like Phalaris his Bull.
They seeming to be surprised with my unexpected noise, fled, fastening a Rope to
the Belcony, and so slid down into the street. Perceiving they were all gone, I
groped about the Room (for it was very dark) speaking very lowly, Where are you
Madam? repeating it often; but much wondered I could not hear her answer me. As
I was feeling round the Room, stretching forth my hands, I chanced to run one
of my hands against her, and one of my fingers into her mouth; I thought my
finger had strayed at first mistaken the place, but searching farther, I found
teeth, I knew then where about I was, and discovered withal, a stick in her
mouth, keeping it wide open, as Butchers do their Sheep with a Gambrel, But
having removed this obstacle of her speech, she begged me to untie her hands,
which having done, she her self untied her feet; and with that she would have
clasped me in her arms, but I hung an arse, being sensible of the stinking
condition that the fear had put me in. She was very inquisitive after my
welfare, asking me again and again, Whether I had received any harm from the
Rogues, I told her no: Nay, then I care not for my own sufferings, or what loss
I have sustained by them, said she, and so speedily went for a candle. As I was
thinking to Apogiloze for my nastiness, up she came with a light, viewing me,
and perceiving what a condition I was in, she kept at a distance; Sir, said
she, my fancy (...) gests to me, that you now resemble Nebuchadnezzar when
Metamorphozed into a beast, and lying in his own dung; when you shall have
reassumed you humanity, I shall presume to approach nearer to you. I made my
Sirreverence to her, wishing they had gagged her breech too so wide, that her
guts might have a passage through her posteriors. For I plainly perceived,
notwithstanding all her specious pretenses, she was the foundress of this Plot.
Well, she caused water to be brought up, with which I cleansed my self, and
because my shirt had too strong a sent of Stercus humanum, she lent me a Smock,
which presaged ere long I should ware Coats too. Having shifted my self, I
looked for my Clothes, but there was a Non est inventus out against them, all
my search could afford me not the least comfort: my Mistress seemed much
disturbed at my loss, but when I told her I had lost such a considerable
quantity of Gold, her sorrow seemed to be redoubled, and I am sure her inward
joy was increased. She comforted me with a great many friendly loving
expressions, desiring me to be patient, and indeed necessity forced me to it. I
asked her advice what I should do in this naked condition, There is no remedy,
(she replied) you must be content to cloth your self in Woman's apparel, as for
man's I have none to furnish you withal. I consented to it, and presently she
dressed me up in one of her Gowns, with all the appurtenances thereunto
belonging. The slenderness of my body, whiteness of skin, beauty, and
smoothness of face (having no hairs thereon) added a suitableness to my gath. I
must ingeniously confess, when I consulted with a Looking-glass, I thought the
transmutation of Sexes had been verified in me; but when I walked, I found
something pendulous, which easily persuaded me to the contrary belief of my
self. I thought it folly to tax her for my misfortune, knowing how little it
would advantage me. The time was come I was to take my leave of her, going to
salute her, I committed a foul mistake, endeavoring to pull off my hood in
stead of my hat, and making a Leg (as the vulgar term is) in stead of a Curchy;
but the advising me to rectify that mistake for the time to come, we bid each
other adieu. In this disguize I traversed, the streets, it being almost
impossible for any to discover me, my voice being so effeminate, that I was
confident that would never betray me. As I walked, I consulted with Reason, what
was most expedient. My invention (as at all times) was now ready to assist me;
and thus it was. Finding a Bill on a door, I knocked, desiring to see what
Lodgings they had; I was very civily entreated to come in, and was shown
several Rooms with much respect, for my female habit was very gallant, and so
it had need, for it cost me dearer than so much ^loath of Gold. I pitched at
last upon a Chamber extraordinary well furnished, I never scrupled the pace,
(because they should look on me as a person of Quality) but agreed to my
Landlords own terms. I told him I was lately come out of the Country, and that
my Trunks were not yet arrived, with a great many more fictions to prevent
suspicion. At first I intended to take for no longer time, than I could
contrive a way to dispose of my self, and procure man's Apparel; but perceiving
how agreeable my Feature, Stature and Gesture were to my Female Weeds, I
resolved to try some projects in them. There was a young Gentleman that lay in
the house, and took special notice of me as soon as I entered it, and as he
told me next day, was overjoyed that I had determined to be a Lodger there.
This young Bravo (which had more money than wit) had prepared a Banquet for me,
and requested the favor of me, that it and himself might be received into my
chamber, I alleged I could not do it in point of honor, and therefore
desired to be excused; but he pressed me so far (getting also his Landlady to
intercede for him, that at last (though with much seeming unwillingness) I
condescended thereunto. Very merry they were, but I thought it prudence to be
reserved. My Amorist so gazed on me, that I thought he would have devoured me
with his eyes, kissing me sometimes, which had liked to have made me disgorge
my stomach in his face. For in my opinion, is it very unnatural, nay loathsome,
for one man to kiss another, though of late too too customary I know it is; yet
I look on such as use it, inclining to Sodomy, and have had the unhappiness to
be acquainted with several, who using that unnatural action, found it only the
Procludium to a more beastly intention. In three days time we grew so
intimately acquainted, that at last he became impudent. One time as I past by
him, he caught at me, endeavoring to intrude his hand where he had no
interest, but he did it so rudely, that I verily thought he had spoiled me; I
believe he imagined that he had caught me by the busk, which some Ladies wear
very long to hide their rising bellies. I showed my self much displeased at him
for so doing, expressing my resentment in imbittered words for so great a
Crime. Next morning, he courted me to a Reconciliation with a Gold Watch, by
that he should have been well skilled in gaining female affections; for there
is nothing prevails on them more than presents; and nothing gains sooner over
them a total conquest, than the hopes of enjoying a fair promising Fortune.
With much importunity I accepted his Peace Offering, conditionally, that he
should never attempt the like offense. Nothing troubled me more, theen how to
dress my self when my clothes were off. I durst not lay two things together,
for fear I should mistake, there were so many baubles, I wished for a Pen and
Ink, to write on them what places they properly belonged to. Viewing them on
the Table together, they represented to my thoughts Babel, or a greater
confusion, and nothing but a miracle could produce Order out of them. I had so
improved my self by hourlypractice, when none was with me, and observation of
others, that I had now the knack on it. I new modelled my steps, my former being
too large by three quarters; I could advantagiously cast my eye, set my face in
a platform, and dissect my words; my feet were my only Traitors, and therefore
I always kept them close Prisoners, for their greatness (like the Devils
cloven-foot) proclaimed me the contrary Sex I imitated. Well, I thought it high
time to be gone, not without plucking my Widgeon. Having a fit opportunity,
there being none present but himself and I, I pretended disappointment of money,
and that my Rents were not yet due, and therefore desired him to lend me 10 l.
for eight days; at the termination of which time, I should not fail to return
it him with gratitude. He was much joy'd, that I would favor him so far, as to
accept his service; and with that flew like Lightning, fearing he would have
fractured his Leg-bone for haste to bring me the money, which I received from
him thankfully. I caused a Coach to be called, pretending I had business into
the City. My Cully would have waited on me, which I utterly refused, telling
him without privacy my affairs would prove ineffectual; whereupon he desisted.

Coming into Burchin-Lane, I went to a Salesman, and bought (pretendedly for my
Maid) an ordinary yet handsome Peticoat and Westcoat, furnishing my self with
all the Appurtenances requisite for a Servant maid.

In stead of returning to my Lodging, I caused the Coachman to drive me to one
of the principal Nurseries of Venus Whetstones Park. For I looked upon it as a
matter of small import, to take my leave either of my young Gallant at home, or
my Landlord, since I had not left the least Mortgage behind me for sleeping.

Mother Cunny (to tell the truth) was the Nickname of that Corpulent Matron,
that with much demonstrations of joy, received me into her house; neither could
she forbear expressing her great satisfaction, in that her civil and honest
deportment was so generlly taken notice of, as that it should be an inducement
to strangers, to shelter themselves under her Tutelage, preferring her as a
Guardian or Tutress, before so many thoroughly tried, and long experienced
ancient Gentlewomen, both in City and Suburbs. She highly applauded both the
Features and Complexion of my Face, not forgeting the right color of my Hair,
which was flaxen; the Stature of my Person infinitely pleased her, which was
somewhat of the tallest: In short, nothing disliked her, but that she said I
looked as if I had a greater mind to beat, than buss; and to fight than delight
my Amoretes with smiling insinuations.

I had not been long in her house, before a roaring Damme entered the house, (a
constant visitant) who meeting with my Guardian, was informed that there was a
rich treasure discovered in her house and that none should attempt to spring
the Mine, til he had made entrance by the first stroke. In short he was brought
into the Chamber where I was, who at first behaved himself indifferently civil,
and treated me nobly: But o Heavens! how great was my confusion and
destraction, when strength of Arguments and force of hands, would not repel the
fury of his lust, and that nothing would serve his turn, but lying with me. I
defended my self manfully a long time, but seeing it was impossible to hold out
any longer, and that I must be discovered, the next assault he made, forced me
to cry out, this so alarumed my Gentleman (concluding this out cry proceeded
not from modest and chastity, but out of some trapanning design) that he drew
his sword, and made toward the Staircase, and running down with more (...)
than good speed, overturned my kind Gover^ (that was puffing up the stairs to
my relief) and so both tumbled down together; fear had so dispossessed this
huffling fellow of his senses, that he mistook my old Matron for the Brava, he
thought did usually attend me, and so without once looking behind him, made his
escape into the street, leaving the piece of Antiquity not so much defaced by
time, as by this dismal accident so near extinguishing, that she was half
undone in the vast expense of her strong waters, to bring her tongue to one
single motion.

Coming to her self, you may imagine how I was treated by her; but to be brief,
I told her I could not brook such a course of life, wherein all enjoyments were
attended by ruin and destruction, although habited and clothed in the seeming
ornaments of real pleasure; adding moreover, that I would speedily leave her
house, investing my self with a meaner garb, bestowing those I wore on her in
part of satisfaction for what she suffered through my means. This proposition
so well pleased her, that I had free liberty to do as I thought most convenient
herein.

Exchanging my fine Madamship for plain Joanship, my equipage being suitable
for service, I resolved to apply my self to a Boarding School, and the rather
having observed it to be more thronged with Beauties, than any other. My
address proved as succesful as I could desire, for instantly upon my motion, I
was received in as a Menial of the house. But when I came to use the Tools of
the Kitchen, I handled them so scurvely, it made those teething Giglets my
fellow servants, even split with laughter. To add to my misfortune, those
Varlets one time when we had some meat to roaft, on purpose got out of the way
for a while, to see how I could behave my self, and then I did spit the meat so
monstrously strange, that coming into the Kitchen, they could not tell at first
fight what those joints were called at fire. My actions had proclaimed my
ignorance in all Domestic Affairs, so that my Mistress could not but take
notice of me; the result was, that I was altogether unfit for her service, and
that she could do no less than discharge me.

Fearing that my design was now frustrated, and my fair hopes of delight
annihilated, could not contain my tears from bedewing my face. My blubberd eyes
wrought so powerfully with my Mistress, that I judged it now the fittest time
in broken Accents to molli^e her anger, and still reserve my place in her
service. Whereupon I told her a great many formal and plausible lies, well
methodized; that I had all my life time lived in an obscure Village, amongst
rude and ill-bred people, and therefore knew nothing, that it was my desire to
learn, not so much valuing wages as experience, and it was for that intent, I
had tendered my service. The good old Gentlewoman being much pleased with my
freedom, presently ordered the maids that without their grinning and gigleting,
they should show me any thing I understood not.

By diligent observing, I gained shortly an indifferent knowledge: Though I lay
with one of my fellow servants every night, yet I judged it no prudence to
discover to her my Sex (though much against the hair) ill I had by external
kindnesses indeared her to me. I went through my business pretty handily,
giving a general satisfaction, gaining daily an interest upon the loves of the
young Gentlewomen.

O the fine inexpressible petulances that daily, nay, hourly past between me
and some or other of them; and so crafty I was grown that I perfectly did
counterfeit a modest maiden. Sometimes we would retire three or four of us into
a private corner, yet not so obscure but that we intended to be seen by some
man or other we had before discovered; and then as if affrighted by an
unexpected surprise. Squeck out, and the with strange haste endeavor to hide
our pretended shamefacedness. Thusconcurring and suiting my self to their
humors, I had all the freedom I could desire.

And now thought it high time to handle the matter for which I came about; for
indeed flesh and blood could hold out no longer. One night I perceived my
Bedfellow could not in the leaft close her eyes, continually fighing and
tumbling too and fro, sometimes laying hex leg over me, and at other times
hugging me within her arms, as if I had been in a press. At first I thought
this Commotion or perturbation proceeded from Sympathy, as questionless in part
it did; for I found experimentally by my self that my heart did beat as if it
would have forced its passage through my breast.

I thought I could do no less then ask the cause why she was thus restles, At
first, sighs were her only answers, till at last (I pressing her much) Poor
thing she melted into tears. As soon as her eyes had given over deluging, and
that her heart would give her leave to speak; Jone (said she, (for so I called
my self if thou will keep my secrets, I will tell thee my whole heart. Having
promised to do that, whereupon she began thus to related her story. Our
Coachman for several years has shown me more then common respect, and indeed
though I have concealed that affection I ever bore him, yet I could not but now
and then give him slight occasions of hope: as the months wherein we lived
together added to our age, so did it add true life and vigor to our loves
which increased so much and fast, that I could hide mine no longer. But herein
consists my misery that our affections aim at different ends; I fain would
marry him; he is only for present enjoyment, and finding me obstinate and not
in the least yiedling to his amorous solicitations, begins to slight me, and
toys with such before my face, that I know will surrender their Maiden-forts
upon the first Summons. Now Dear Joan, let me tell thee, I can hold out no
longer but am resolved to give him all the opportunity of privacy I can invent,
upon the least motion offered, I will entertain it. I dissuaded her from this
rash resolution with as much reason as I could utter; inculcating the danger of
being gotten with child, with all its aggravations: that having obtained his
ends, his love would be converted into loathing, and he having rejected her as
his object, none that knew her would choose her as an object that may make an
honest wife; for who would marry a whore but to entail the Pox on his progeny.
What ever I alleged, she valued not. Seeing she was full bent, I thought this
the critical hour to discover my self to her. Come, come (said I) I with
quickly put you out of conceit with John, and cure this love that so much
troubles you; and so I did, after which I enjoined her silence; which I thought
she would have done, for her own interest sake; which she did for a while. I
came at length to be very much beloved in general. It was the custom almost
every night for the young Gentlewomen to run skittishly up and down into one
another Chambers; and I was so pestered with them, that they would not let me
sleep. But I had an excellent Guardian in bed with me, that would not let any
of them come in to us, resolving to monopolize me to her self. It was good
sport to observe how this Maid always followed me as my shadow, and whatever I
was doing, she would have a hand in it with me. What an endless work we made in
making the beds! Our Mistress saw her work very much neglected, laying all the
blame upon my bedfellow; and indeed not without cause: for her mind was so
employed about thinking on night, that she did little all day; which my
Mistress perceiving, turned her away; which was no small joy to me, if for no
other consideration than her extreme fondness, which I knew would betray us
both in the end.

After the departure of my Bedfellow, the young Ladies pitying my loneness in
the night, redrest that solitude by their welcome presence. The first that came
had like to have spoiled all by her squeaking, but some of her Associates
running to know what was the matter, she readily told them she thought there
was a Mouse in the bed: thus satisfied, they departed, and I enjoined her as I
did the other, silence: but alas! all Injunctions on Women to keep a secret,
are but as so many persuasions to divulge it. Notwithstanding I had so enjoined
her secrecy, yet she made it known to some that she entertained a peculiar
respect for, intending they should participate with her in what she enjoyed.
This discovery did put me to an extreme hard task, I should never have
undergone it, had not variety of such sweet smelling Rose buds encouraged me.

Thus frequently each night did I repeat,
My uncontrouled passions, and for heat,
And active liveliness, I thought that none
Could stand with me in competition.
It Was then forgetful wretch, that I a kiss
Did often prefer before a greater bliss.
What did I care my carnal joys did swell
So slighted Heaven, and never feared Hell,
But let me henoeforth learn to slight those toys
And set my heart upon Celestial joys.
In the very height of these my jollities, I could not forbear thinking
sometimes on my eternal condition, but custom and opportunity had so
absolutely inslaved me, that good thoughts which were but seldom, wrought
little good effects upon me. But if my souls welfare would not deter me from
these soul and wicked acts, yet love to my present mortal condition, compelled
me for a while to desist, and by flying those embraces I lately so hotly
pursued, shun those complicated mischiefs which were appropinquant, the
undeniable effects of my immoderate and distractive wantonness. My approaching
danger was too too visible, for I observed that some of the Gentlewomen began
to find strange alterations in their body, with frequent qual^ coming over
their stomachs, which made me sick to be gone, and in this manner I did plot my
escape. My Mistress having a Son much about my stature, and one time finding a
fit opportunity, I got a suit of clothes of his, with other perquisits which I
put on, reassuming my proper shape and habit, and so with flying colors
marched off, insulting over the conquest of so many maiden-heads, leaving the
quondam possessors thereof to deplore their ensuing misery, and condemn their
own rash folly.

CHAP. XIV.
What a Trick he served a young man of his Acquaintance, whom he met withal
accidentally; how he was pinched with hunger, and what ways he invented to
kill it.

I Made all the speed I could to London, knowing the largeness of that Vast
City, would afford convenience for my concealment. But then my clothes much
troubled me, knowing nothing would betray me sooner than they. Whilst I was
studying all imaginable ways for my preservation, such an opportunity
presented it self that therein it was plainly seen the Fates had decreed of old
to favor my enterprises. As I said, walking the streets and ruminating what
was best to be done, I met with a young man of my acquaintance, who seeing me,
ran and caught me in his Arms, and with very much joy we congratulated each
other, and so as it is usual when Friends meet, we must drink together. Over
our cups; I began to inquire after his condition; He shook his head, and so
related to me a sad story, which in effect was to this purpose in his own words.

Dearest Friend, since last I saw you, never was young man so unfortunate as my
self, the cause thereof I can impute to nothing more than self conceit, and
over much credulity which by the sequel you will plainly understand. For
perceiving that my Mistress showing me more then a common respect, I concluded
that she had entertained some private favor for me within her breast, so that
I began to be puffed up with conceit; neglecting my duty, and now desposing the
Chambermaid, who was before the only Saint I made nightly my oraizons to;
withal, I carried my self so imperiously, that my Master was not very well
assured whether he durst command or no. My Mistress would sometimes heartily
laugh, to see how ridiculous I carried my self, which I looked upon as a
singular favor, mistaking her smiles for tokens of her love. When they were no
other than the apparent Symptoms of her derision. Observing how affable and
pleasing she was, I never considered the generality of it, so that my self
flattering-noddle supposed this carriage particular to me, and thereupon
interpreted this her complacencie strong affection, and by reason she was
frequently merry and jocose; I eoncluded her salacious or Lecherous. Thus by
the false lights of misconstruction and easy belief, I was led into Loves
Laborynth; My Masters affairs was less regarded than my Mistress supposed
affection. In fine, I judged it absoleutly necessary to make her acquainted
with my Amorous Passion, and no expedient better than by Letter. My Mistress
(as it is customary with Citizens Wives, to light the candle of their husbands
estates at both ends) had her Country House, to which I was sent by my Master,
with some bottles of Wine, preparatory for a Feast intended for the
accommodation of some special Friend: arriving, I found my Mistress had sent
her maid to London about some business, at which I blessed propitious stars, to
direct me thither in such a foriunate and most desired hour.

After I had delivered my Message, I began to talk very familiar with my
Mistress, she with a smiling countenance, asked ne, What I meant? not in the
least checking my presumption, which made me more arrogant and bold; telling
her, I was her eternally devoted Servant; she answered me. I was bound to be
her Servant for a time, and that I must, when commanded obey her pleasure: to
which last word, I added in my thoughts the Epithet Venereal, supposing she
meant not to have left it out; with that I replied, Mistress, I should not deem
my self worthy to be your Servant, if my resolution had not engaged me to be so
perpetually; as for my affection, it shall daily anticipate your desires; you
shall not need to lay your commands on me, since my thoughts shall be solely
employed in contriving ways how we may enjoy eath other, to the mutual
satisfaction of us both. At which words, she fell into an excess of laughter,
(which I judged the effects of joy) and then asked me, Whither I was Mad? I
answered, No; unless too much love had made me so; Dearest Mistress, read but
this Paper, and I hope that will better inform you.

Here he stopped, pulling out of his pocket a copy thereof, which was to my best
remembrance to this purpose.

Dearest Mistress,
FRequently revolving in my thoughts, the condition I now am in, Despair stands
ready to seize me; but the consideration and knowledge of your commiserating
Nature, draws me out of its ruinating Jaws. When I reflect again on the
disparity of our Fortunes, and that it is your Indentured Vassal that thus
prostrates his affection at your feet, I fear one blast of your just
Indignation will suddenly shiprack all my hopes. I confess my error is
overmuch confidence, for which I may expect ruin, which commonly attends rash
Attempts; especially daring to sail in the narrow Seas, without any other Pilot
than blind Love, and if I should arrive at my desired Port, I cannot deliver my
Goods without stealing Custom. But waving all difficulties of this nature,
consider that Love must needs be quintessential, that is not drawn from any
other interest than reciprocal enjoyment; and it must needs be exceeding strong
and eminent too, that will force its way through the greatest hazards. Signify
my Pardon by one gracious smile, for what I have so boldly (yet forceably)
discovered, and I shall esteem my condition little inferior to what is
Celestial; which is no happiness to me without the auspitious beams of your
favor shine on me. And so subscribe my self according as your sentence shall
be, either the

Most happy, or most miserable.


The Verses that were annexed to the Letter, he told me, he got a Rimer to
compose for him which afterward he found stolen out of several Authors; a line
out of one, and a half out of another, and so with the course thread of his
brain botch'd together; which were these:

Cupid did wound my heart; I hid the grief
Long time, but durst not seek for your relief;
I found the smart increased on that score,
For wounds, if not well searched, but rankle more,
O cure me quickly then, or else I die;
Deny not, since there is none but you and I.
I withdrew as soon as I had delivered my Paper, giving her leave to read in
private, what my Love had dictated. About a quarter of an hour after she called
me to her, assuring me in a day or two, I should receive an answer to the
purpose; and so absconding her displeasure, she sent me with all expedition
home again. After the expiration of three days, she came home to her
City-house: at night she pretended some indisposition of body, and desired to
lie by her self; which hearing, I thought my joy would prove a Traitor to my
supposed happiness; she takes an occasion to tell me, About twelve at night I
might come to her Bedchamber, the door whereof she would leave open for me on
purpose. In the mean time, she showed my Master the Letter, acquainting him
with the whole business. According to the time appointed, I entered the Chamber
in my shirt; approaching the Bed, I began to pour out my Amorous Expressions;
and as I had one leg upon the Bedside, ready to enter the Bed, where I thought
my Mistress had attended my pleasure, I thought the devil had waited on my
Posteriors, correcting mesor not making more haste. The first lash was seconded
with three or four more in an instant, which made me caper up and down so
nimbly about the room, that for my life I could not find the door, at last I
did, speed was now the only Guardian I had lest, and so without pausing long
upon it, I made but one step of the first pair of Stairs from top to the
bottom, which had liked to have lamed me; before I could recover my self my
Master was with me again, which put fresh expedition into me, and so starting
up; I leapt down half the next pair, and tumbled down the rest. By this time he
had lost the cord of his Whip, and fearing lest he might spoil me with the
stick, defisted, bidding me go to bed, lest I should catch cold after so great
a heat, and so with two or three parting blows I got into my chamber, where I
fell into a deep consulration with my self, the result of it was this; I took
my curtains and sheets, and tied them together; and then fastened one end
thereof to the Window; after this I went our of the Window, and so slid, by
that time I was within an half story of the ground, the knot of one of the
Curtains slipped, so that falling from that height, I thought that every bone in
my body had been absolutely broken. Knowing it was no ways safe to lie there
and cry God help me, I raised my self as well as I could, but I had not walked
far, before I found my self in no condition of going, wherefore I resolved to
lie under the next Stall. As the Devil would have it, I found a Cobblers Stall
newly broke open that very night, never questioning the place, I crept in, and
notwithstanding my bruise by the fall, and whipping besides, I fell fast
asleep, so soundly, that I awaked not, till I was forced to it with an horse
pox. For the Cobbler coming to work early in the morning (according to his
custom) sound his door broken open, with that, he made an hideous noise,
crying out, He was undone; for the day before he had laid out three shillings
four pence, which was all his stock in Leather; all which was stolen, with many
old shoes, nay his very working implements; doubtless it was done by one of
his own Fraternity, that had informed himself of his late great purchase. The
Cobbler entering his Stall, found me in one corner fast asleep. He took no other
course to awake me, than dragging me by the heels out of my Den, into the
Street, crying out, That he had got one of the Rogues, and without any more
ado, sell upon me busseting me with his fist, and treading me underneath his
feet, making himself both my Judge and Executioner: Thus you see one mischief
attends the others heels. I begged him in a pitiful manner to let me alone,
and I would confess to him all I knew, desiring him to go with me to the next
Alehouse, which accordingly we did. I vowed to him I was no ways accessory to
his wrong, informing him as much as I thought convenient of my sufferings,
showing him what a wosul plight I was in; relating, it was my Masters cruelty
that was the cause of all this, and no other fault of mine, then staying the
last night out a little too long. The Cobbler seemed to commiferate my misery,
asking me forgiveness for what he had done, and so we parted. Since by the
kindness of a good natured Widow (where I he) I have recovered my hurts and
strength, and now am overjoyed we should so happily meet.

After this we drank very smartly, but, I forgot not all this while my design
on him. After that I had pitied him, and lamented his sad misfortune, I thought
it high time to put my Plot in execution, in order thereunto I demanded what
difference he would take between my Hat and his, his Cloak and mine, there
being small matter of advantage in the exchange, we agreed to go to handicap.
In fine, There was not any thing about us of waring clothes but we
interchanged, scarce had I un-cased my self, and put on my Friends clothes, but
in came one that had dogged me, attended by the Constable, with a Warrant to
seize me, who they knew by no other token but my Boarding-Mistresses Sons
garments, I had stolen for my escape. They forthwith laid hold on my Companion,
(finding them on him) telling him, He should severely suffer for the wrong he
did his Mistress, in the abuse of her house. Full of horror and amazement, he
beseeched them not to carry him before his Mistress, knowing how much he had
offended her, she would have no mercy on him; this confirmed their belief, that
they had found out the Offender. The more he entreated, the more deaf and
inexorable were they; and whilst they were busied about their mistaken
Criminal-Prisoner, I took an occasion to give them the slip, knowing that a
little further discourse would rectify their Error; what they did with him I
know not, neither durst I be so inquisitive to understand: wherefore, leaving
him to the mercy of such, as would show but little to him, I shall proceed
forwards in my own story. My stock was now very small; how to increase it, I
knew not. My invention was daily on the Rack, to find out expedient ways to
supply my necessary expense. But my money being all spent, my belly began to
grumble out insufferable complaints against me, seeming to charge me with want
of ingenuity and industry, since I enjoyed my liberty; for want that man
cannot, which wants not them. Alas, what should I do? I used what means I
could, having no better experience. There was not a Billiard-Table, Boards-End,
and Nine-Pin-yard, that I did not daily visit, frequenting such as had the
greatest resort: in a short time I learned the art of Spunging so perfectly,
that I had the Title of Spung-Master General conferred upon me. In those places
I learned to take Tobacco which was the chiefest part of my food; living in a
manner by Smoke, as the Camelion by Air. I fed so lightly, that I durst not
stir abroad in a high wind; neither durst I fight lest one single stroke should
have harzarded my dissolution, continual drinking, had so washed me, that my
body was transparent, you might have seen within me (without dissection) the
motion of the heart; you could have observed but little as to my liver, it long
since had lost its use in the conveyance of the blood, for my stomach had
nothing therein contained to supply it, like an Inns-a Court Kitchen out of
Term-time. In short, I appeared like a walking Skeleton, I had several
suggestions within me to proffer my self again to my Master; but the shame to
be seen in that condition, deterred me; wherefore, I resolved to weather it out
a little longer, and try whether Fortune would once more be favorable to me.
My clothes were indifferent good which could not but procure me credit, if I
would make experiment. By means whereof I had gotten an handsome lodging
chamber. It was a public house of entertainment, so that have I thought I
should have meat, drink and lodging for chalk, and chalk for nothing. I called
freely for what was in the house, which was readily brought me; but when the
servants beheld with what cele-^ity, ( Hocus like) and cleanly conveyance, I
had disposed of what was before me, they verily believed in one week, I would
cause a dearth in the house if I said, wherefore, one of the servants
acquainted her Mistress with what she had observed, alleging farther
invectively against me, That I looked like one of those lean Beasts which have
nothing given them to feed on, but virtuous and honest Women; that she believed
I was the Genius of some hunger-starved wretch, or a shadow without a
substance, (which was very true as to my pocket.) Which I thought it was time
to go to bed; I called for a candle not mattering whither I called for a
Reckoning. But my Landlady did; for said she, Sir, It is our custom to reckon
with our Lodgers every night what they have that day, and once a week to
discharge their lodging. In truth I did intend to have discharged my self of it
before the week had been out. I knew not what at present to answer her, but I
was seldom to seek in such cases. I desired her to be content for that night,
on the morrow I would have my Trunks brought to her house; making it my
Quarters for some time; and that she should find me a boon companion, drinking
freely: I believe so, she said, you will be here for some time or may be you
will make this your Refuge or Sanctuary for one night; and then you say you
will drink freely too, give me leave to tell you, you meant at free cost. Sir,
give me my reckoning now, or you shall have no lodging here this night. Do you
suspect me Landlady, said I? Respect you, said she, (mistaking the word) for
what grounds unless I knew you better? and yet I doubt I shall know you too
well. That Is a good one indeed, respect a skinfull of Bones; a bag of Chessmen;
a bundle of small Faggot-sticks. Why, thou Haberdasher of small wares, do
thou think I will respect thee other ways than for thy moneys; unless I should
be so mad as to fall in love with Famine, Come give me my reckoning first, and
I shall talk with you in another Dialect; if not, I shall set my Currs at thee
(the Tapster and Hostler) that shall worry thy gibb'd Catship. Hearing her say
so, and thinking the passage had been clear, I betook my self to flight, but
running throw the Entry, Iran my belly directly against the Tapsters leg, that
lay over the bench on which he slept. Iran so siercely, that I shoved his head
so violently against the board raised at the end of the bench, that I made his
neck double; the knock likewise had like to have turned that little brains he
had within his head. As for my own part, I thought that his foot had run quite
into my belly, and that pulling it out he had left his shoe behind. Before I
could rise, I had three or four about me which I thought would have limbed me
as boys falling out, do their cocks on Shrove-Tuesday. At that time I would
have spared them one limb, provided that would have contented them. But there
was no mercy to be had at their hands, especially the shrill note of their
Mistresses perpetually moving Tongue, sounding a charge in their ears. Being
tired with me, they would be revenged of my clothes. They would have stripped me
(I think stark naked) for my Reckoning, but that one said, Let his cloak
suffice; at which, another pulled so furiously at it, that miraculously,
without renting that thin transparent garment, he got it all but the cape. In
this condition I was brought before my new Landlady; I asked her what was to
pay? Sirrah (said she) more then thou have in thy pooket; (2 s. 4 d.) As well
as I could speak, I demanded how it came to be so much. Why, (said she) there
is for Beef 1 s. for Bread 4 d. six pipes of Tobacco, and three pots of Ale,
all this thou had in less then half an hour. I would not contradict her,
though I knew it was near an hour, I desired her to keep my Cloak for the
reckoning, but durst not threaten her for her abuse. Being about Hay-making
time, I walked out in to the Fields, resolving to spend that night in
contemplation. I had now time to consider the damage I sustained in this
skirmish: they had carried away all my Ribbands with their fingers, otherwise
my clothes received the least harm. My Nose resembled a black pudding before it
is boiled, and my Eyes were fled into my head for fear of such melancholy meat.
My cheeks were so puffed up with swelling pride, that they were resolved to close
up the portals of my Optics, that they might not be eye witnesses of the
height of their ambition. My ears were so maulled with their fleshy Hammers,
that I heard a peal within my head for joy, I suppose that my eyes had taken up
their residence with my brains. At last I felt something about my shoulders; at
first I thought it had been the weight of the blows, but feeling, found it a
part of my friend that still hung about my neck, and would not leave me; which
put me in mind of that faithful Cloak that would never leave its Master,
although his Master had attempted all ways imaginable to leave it. I must needs
say, I loved my Cloak so well, as that it grieved me much to be compelled to
part with it. It had been a servant to servants, ever since the setting up of
the first billiard-table, whence it derived its Pedigree. Being deprived of its
employment, and dispossessed of its ancient habitation, its heart strings were
ready to break, and being not able to take a nap for grief, turned changling.
The young man I had it of, told me, that from the fifteenth successively, it
was descended to him; but they were unworthy to him, that having had his best
days, would turn him off in his extreme old age. I have him so fresh in my
memory, that I cannot but condole his loss.

Cloak, if I may so call thee, though thou art
Thus ravished from me, don't abruptly part.
Thou did not take distaste, a^ ^o art gone,
Cause once I called thee a mere hauger on.
'Twas but in jest; for had I now my will,
I Would have thee for to hang about me still.
Now I may tax thee justly, for I see
That new thou art nothing else but levitie;
Nay when I had thee scarcely did I know,
Sometimes whether I had thee on or no.
Thou were so thin, and light, that some have thought
Thee made of that same web Arachne wrought,
And say thou art useless now, unless men put
Thee like a Cohweb to a finger cut.
I love thee still for better and for worse;
He that divorced us let him have my ourse.
Sure'twas a red Nosed fellow, for I know,
He coming near, it was but touch and go.
But let him keep thee, for thou wilt useless be
To him; thick clothes suits best with knavery.
Day appearing I got me a stick out of a hedge, and so walked in Querpo into
the City. I walked up and down, but met with none of my acquaintance on whom I
might fasten on as a bur. Noon approaching, my belly began to Chime, I thought
all the meat in East-cheap, would not lay that spirit hunger had raised within
me. Coming by a bakers shop, I pretended to be ignorant of the City, and as I
was asking him the way to such a place, not caring what. I happily secured a
penny loaf; which I carried off undiscovered; I thought it not good to cumber
my pocket with it, wherefore at two bits I gave it my belly to carry. Surely at
that time I had an Ostriches stomach; every thing I put into my mouth, passed
through me like Quicksilver. Going a little farther, I came to an Ordinary,
where I saw two sitting in a lower Room expecting their meat, I sat me down in
the next little box to them. Immediately there was brought to them powdered Beef
and Turnips; the young man that served them, came to me, demanding what I would
have, I bid him let me alone and not speak too loud, for those two which were
next me, were my very good friends, and I would startle them by and by with my
unexpected appearance, at which he left me. Finding my opportunity, I slipped my
hands through a whole, in the form of an heart, which was in the partition that
divided us, and laying hold on the Turnips, I spoke aloud, you hoggs are ye at
the Roots, I will make one one among you instantly, and so brought out my
handful; having devoured them in a trice, I presentted my self to their view,
and sat down with them: Gentlemen, said I, excuse my frollick I am in a merry
humor to day. They concluded what I said, to be a truth, and bad me welcome.
Nay, said I, my meat will come instantly as a supply; and so it had need, for
we made a clear board immediately. Seeing this, they called the boy, taxing him
for sloth, that he did not bring my meat. Sir, said he, the Gentleman did not
order me to bring any; at which they frownd, and began to charge me with
incivillity. What are ye angry, said I? To which they replied, Affirmatively:
if so, I answered, (laying my hand upon a full pot of Ale) I value your anger
no more than the drinking this Pot, which I swallowed at two gulps, and so bid
them f^rewel leaving them to call for another Ordinary.

CHAP. XV.
How he had like to have been transported, being taken up by a Kid-napper,
vulgarly called a Spirit.

HAving satisfied my stomach, I walked along with much more courage than
before, which had been to little purpose, had I not had a stick in my hand: For
there was hardly a dog in the street (which I went through) that gave me not
his grinning Salutation, and would when my back was turned (knowing else I
would never have suffered their humility) have kissed my very heels, had not my
stick prevented their Snearing Dogships mouths. I have wondered often why Dogs
will bark so incessantly at the sight of a Tinker, Pedlar, Tom-a-Bedlam, nay,
any suspicious fellow, till I found it my self by experience, that by natural
instinct, they know and hate the scent of a Rogue. My course of life appeared
so idle (by my lazy stalking and gaping this way and that, sometimes standing
still and seriously viewing what deserved not a minutes observance) that the
Beadle took hold on me, telling me it was great pity that such a lusty young
man should want employment, and therefore would help me to some: but
understanding from him that it must be in Bridewell, my legs failed me,
showing thereby how unwilling they were to be accessory to the punishment which
would be insticted on my back: at length by pitiful looks and many entreaties,
I got clear of him, but fell immediately foul with an evil spirit, or a Seducer
of Persons to the Indies. Well may he be called a Spirit, since his nature is
like the Devils, to seduce any he meets withal, whom he can persuade with
allurements, and deluding falfities to his purpose.

After he had asked me many impertinent questions, he invited me to drink with
him; I ingeniously told him I had not a penny, otherwise his motion would be
acceptable to me. At which he cast up his eyes to heaven, and laying his hands
on his breast, alas poor young man, said he, what pity it is such a lusty
fellow as thou art should want money; which argues thou art both destitute of
friends, and an employment also. Well, I Will say no more for the present, but
before we part I Will study some way or other for thy advantage, which I shall do
meetly out of commiseration to the miserableness of thy condition, as also out
of respect to thy Father, whom I am confident I have heretofore known, by the
resemblance thou bear him in thy Countenance. I could but smile to my self
to hear how this Rascal dissembled; not discovering my thoughts, I willingly
went with him to drink, resolving to see what the event would be; after he had
paused a while, well, said he, I have found it.

There is a Merchant an intimate friend of mine that wants a Store
housekeeper; Now if you can cast accounts ever so indifferently, you shall
find oncertainment form him, and 40 l. per annum for encouragement. I told him
that I joyfully accepted his kind proffer, and that I should refer my self to
be disposed of, as he should think fit. With that he embraced me, saying,
within two days I should go aboard the Ship where the Merchant was, who would
go along with me to Virginia (where he pretended the Merchants Plantation lay)
in the mean time, you shall go along with me to my house where you shall be,
and shall recieve from me what your necessities require. I had heard before,
how several had been served in this kind, so that being forewarned, I was fore
armed, premonitus, premu^ He carried me away presently to Wapping, and housed
me. To the intent he might oblige me to be his, he behaved himself
extraordinary friendly, and that he might let me see that he made no
distinction bdtween me, and his other friends, he brought me into a room where
half a score were all taking tobacco the place was so narrow wherein they were,
that they had no more space left, than what was for the standing of a small
table. Methought their mouths together resembled a stack of Chimneys, which in
a manner totally obscured by the smoke that came from them; for there was
little discernable but smoke, and the glowing coals of their pipes. Certainly
the smell of this room would have outdone Assae Foetida, or burned Feathers in
the Cure of Ladies troubled with the Fits of the Mother. As to the sight, the
place resembled Hall, so did it likewise as to itsscent, compounded of the
perfume of stinking Tobacco and Tarpawlin. So that I concluded the resemblance
most proper.

In Hell damned souls, fire, smoke, and stink appear.
Then this is Hell, for those four things were here.
I was seated between two, lest I should give them the slip.

After I had been there a while, the Cloud of their smoke was somewhat
dissipated, so that I could discorn two more in my own condemnation: but alas
poor sheep, they never considered where they were going, it was enough for them
to be freed from a seven years Apprenticeship, under the Tyranny of a rigid
Master (as they judged it, coming but lately from sucking the breasts of a too
indulgent mother) and not weighing (as I know not how they should) the slavery
they must undergo for five years, amongst Brutes in foreign parts, little
inferior to that which they suffer who are Gally-slaves. There was little
discourse amongst them, but the pleasantness of the soil of that Continent we
were designed for, (out of a design to make us swallow their gilded Pills of
Ruin) and the temperature of the air, the plenty of Fowl and Fish of all
sorts, the little labor that is performed or expected having so little trouble
in it, that it rather may be accounted a pastime than any thing of punishment;
and then to sweeten us on farther, and they insisted on the pliant loving
natures of the women there; all which thy used as baits to catch us silly
Gudgeons. As for my own part I said but little but what tended to the
approbation of what they said.

For all my aim (as I related before) was to understand the drift of this
Rogue, and then endeavor to get what I could from him. By this time supper was
talked of by our Masters; so choice they were in their diet, that they could not
agree what to have. At last one stands up and proclaiming silence, said, that a
Dish of Bruiss was the most Princely dish of any. And to tell you truly, by his
looks, I thought he had been begot just as his Mother had put a Sop into her
mouth, of that Stomach murdring stuff, the grease running about her chops,
which pleasing her fancy, struck so deep an impression in the imagination upon
her conception, that the face of that thing she brought forth, looked much like
a Toast soaking in a Cooks Dripping-pan.

That he might persuade the rest, this way to indugle his appetite, he added
farther, that it was a Dish would not be expensive, and soon ready. My Landlady
to back him on, said, she had some skimmings of the pot, which she had been
collecting these three months, some whereof the questioned not but to procure,
and let her alone to order it so, that we should say we never had a better Dish
aboard in our lives.

Another contradicting him, preferred a bowl of Pease pottage before the
chiefest meat whatever, that he could never look into the pot and see them boil
round, but that his heart leapt within him, and kept time with their motion. My
master (that was their Senior) scorned to be controlled in his fancy; and
therefore positively determined to have some Poor John, swearing that the Great
Mogul did eat nothing else thrice a week, and that Atabalipa (that Indian King
whom Cortex conquered) caused a sacrifice every day to be made of them to his
Idol, commanding them to be laid on an Altar made of some coals of fire, then
the fat of some beast rubbed thereon, (because they had no Butter) and so
presented to the Idol, afterward to the King which he did eat with
inexpressible satisfaction. Order was given that this delicate fare should be
provided. Though they did beat it most unmercifully, yet it would not yield,
resolving rather to be broken in pieces, then to become unlike it is Masters, or
show any thing of a tendure nature. There was one al otted me for my
proportion, which I used as they had done, laying it on the coals a little
while, and so committing it to my teeths disposal. I never found till now that
my teeth could be thus shamefully bastled. They made several assaults upon it
to little purpose. My teeth at length s^aring a total conquest, desperately and
inragedly seized on the thinnest and weakest part and holding it as fast as a
Vice, at last in the conflict overpowred one small steak, but not being able to
stay the swift backward motion of my head, the hinder part thereof (the feat of
Memory) flew so violently against the wall, that I not only instantly forgot
what I was doing where I was, but the pain then I sustained by the knock:
Strong-water they poured down my Throat to revive me, but there was nothing did
sooner fetch me then a small fleak of the poor John, which sticking in my
Throat had well nigh choked me, which caused a strugling' and summoned the
spirits together to oppose what might be destructive to Nature.

Now did I really imagine my self at Sea, where, for want of provision, I was
forced to feed on Cordage, or the Ship sides. Had this poor creature been
ground small, I might have made as hard a shift to have swallowed it, as those
Seamen did the Saw-dust of deal boards coming from Norway, and destitute of
other food. That night I slept but little, neither could I, had I swallowed
Opium for that purpose, for the innumerable quantity of Buggs (as some call
them) that had invaded my body; being weary (as I suppose) of inhabiting any
longer the dry mansion of that old rotten Bed-stead on which I lay. In the
morning I found the ruins of a Looking glass in the window, which I took up to
discover what knots or nodes those were I felt orespreading my face. The sigh:
whereof struck into me a Pannick fear, verily believing I had been infected
with the spotted leaver.

I began to curse the bed and sheets, imagining the Contagion proceeded from
them; to be satisfied herein, I drew aside at the beds feet, the Curtain (that
is to say part of Tilt a) pinned there to keep the wind off, which otherwise
would have fanned us to death, coming in so furiously through the Port cullise
of the window: (for glass there was little) At first sight I questioned whether
I was not lately risen from the Dead, since there was visibly before my Eyes,
the black Cloth that covered my Hearse. Had not we gone to bed without a Candle
over night, I should sooner have chosen a bulk than this bed to lie on. It
might have been a good Quaere, whether those sheets had ever been washed since
their weaving and continually since employed by Whores and Bawds, successively
to sweat out their Contagious humors, and matter proceeding from their
ulcerated Bodies.

My pretended friend perceiving my amazement, bid me be of good courage, for
those marks in my face, were only occasioned by a stinking sort of Vermin, who
seldom meddle with such as are accustomed to them, only giving their welcome
to such as were New-comers. I took these sufferings as patiently as I could;
but thinking it was an ill coming for me to either of them; and it should not
be long before I would take my farewell. We had scarce breakfasted, before a
Messenger came into the room, and with much seeming respect pretended to
deliver a Message to my friend. I ghessed it was to inform him how the Tide
served, and so it proved. My friend told me we must be gone instantly, for the
Merchant attended my coming Wherefore we presently went down to the stairs to
take Boat, by the way he told me, that he would go with me in the same Ship,
and take as much care of me as he would of his own Son, whom I understood
afterward he had too sure, ^bove a year since stolen away, and sold him as a
slave. One while thought to have ran for it, another time I thought to have
cried out, a Spirit, a Spirit, but that the thought of the Watermen, being his
Accomplices deterred me. I was at my wits end, not knowing what to do. Coming
into the Boat, being now destitute of all relief, I asked him according to his
former pretense, whether he resolved to go to se^ with me? yes, replied he. I
question, Sir, (said I) whether you ever told a truth in your life, but I am
resolved you shall now, and with that I flung my self with him overboard.
Those which were in the Boat, immediately endeavored at our rising to pull us
up into the Boat: But I clapping my hands unfortunately on the side of the Boat
on which they within leaned I overturned it upon me. The first thought this
accident produced in me, was that a Whale had swallowed me, and that I was in
the dark concave of his belly: or that Death had arrested me; and claped me up
a close prisoner for my sins, in Hell's deep and black Dungeon. But by the
industry and expedition of many Watermen, eye witness of this passage, (which
had like to haved proved Tragieal) the Boat was recovered, and I the first
person taken up and set on shore.

Multorum manibus grande levatur onns.
Many hands make light work. I near staid to see what was become of my good
Friend, (a Pox take him but with what speed I could, attended with a great
number of little hooping Onlets (I mean the young try of Scullars) I secured my
self from this Anthropopola, or Man seller: A charitable Woman seeing me in
this pickle, (for it was Salt water, which my Sous'd guts, may testify if they
please, in their grumbling manner of speaking) told me that she would entertain
me till to morrow. This was the greatest Cordial could be applied to this
gross, without many Complements, I thanked her for her great love, Now because
she saw what condition I was in, she immediately put me to bed

CHAP, XXVI.
How under the pretense of begging, he stole Cloak. and with that went to a
Gaiming Ord^nary; what a bold Adventure he made there and the success thereof.

PArting from this good Woman, I began to think that the Art of stealing might
be reckoned amongst the liberal Sciences; for though it may be called an
Handicraft, yet it cannot be looked on as Mechanic. This is the Art, the right
Practice whereof is the true Philosopher's stone, the Elix^ of life; with which
many turn Poison into Medicine, coarse cloth into cloth of Gold, hunger into
fullness and satiety, convert rags into Satins; and all this done by a quick
wit, and slight of hand.

The Antiquity and Dignity of this Profession, I shall relate elsewhere, and
shall proceed on in my Adventures.

The Evening or Twilight being come, I chanced to look in at a door, and
perceiving none at hand I went in boldly, resolving if I met any to beg an
Alms of them, having before premeditated what I had to say, viz, that I was a
poor distressed young Gentleman, my Father, Mother, nay, all my Relations I
knew, being dead, and that not knowing what to do, was forced (under the Covert
of the night) to beseech the assistance of charitable minded persons. But in my
way found none that should occasion my using this form.

I found in the Parlor a good Camlet cloak, which I made bold to put on, and so
very gravely walked out of the house; but coming to the door, you must think
there was Wildfire in my breech, that hastened me out of the street. Being
gotten a Bow shot off, I thought my self indifferent secure, so that I slackned
my pace, but could not (if my Life lay on it) forbear looking this way, that
way sometimes over one shoulder, sometimes over the other, thinking of what
dangerous consequence this might prove; I resolved to walk more confidently,
and not let my eyes discover any thing of fear, by reason of guilt. This loose
garment had so of a sudden Metamorphosed those thoughts I had of my self but a
little before, my eye being continually on my Cloak, I could not conceit my
self less then the best of the young Templers, that walk the Streets to show
themselves: coming into Bell-yard, I observed several Gallants go into an
House, and others to come out, which put me to the curiosity of enquiring,
what, or whose House it was: Who told me it was a Gaming Ordinary; nay, then
(thought I) it is as free for me to enter as others and so went in, I looked on
a while, but my fingers itched to be at it. Why, thought I, have I not
adventured a Gaol, a Whipping, or an Hanging, and shall I now fear a kicking, a
pumping, or a Bog-house. These considerations made me resolutely take up the
Box, and I threw a Main, which was 7, a great deal of money was presently set
me, I knew it was but to little purpose to baulk them, so that confidently I
threw at all, which I nicked with eleven, and so continued holding seven hands
together. Perceiving I had got a considerable quantity of money, and fearing I
might loose that which I had so boldly adventured for, I thanked my propitious
Stars and the Gentlemen, who had rather lose their money than suspect any that
has the Garb of one well Extracted, and so bad them good night. A privilege
too many Sharking ubiquetarians use without interruption, being most commonly
in fee with the Waiters and Boxskeepers, who will be sure to speak in the
behalf of such confident Cheats, if they lose, pretending great knowledge of
them, that they are men of repute, civil and responcible, which frequently so
prevails upon a Mouth, that he has not a word to say more, Questionless
Ordinaries were first impartially founded, interdicting all play but which was
upon the Square; but since, by the connivance of the Box-keepers, when the
Table grows thin, and few at it, let the stranger beware, for the Box-keeper
shall walk off, pretending some speedy dispatch of a business concerning the
House of Office etc. whilst your Antagonist shall put the change upon you, or
make use of his own Jack in-a-box, and then had you 500 1. (would you let like
a Gam^ster) he will have it to a penny in a short while: with whom the Waiter
goes snips. If at any time such they know want an High flyer etc. they know
how, and when to supply him.

Full fraught with this good fortune, and so laden I was ready to sink, I
resolved to moor my Vessel in the next Harbor. The Landlord whence I came, was
very loath to entertain me, his lodger having served him a scurvy trick the
night before conveighing out of the Window the Furniture of a room that cost
him 40 1. besides a great silver Tanker, which the Gentleman would have filled
with stale beer and Sugar, to stand by his bed side all night pretending it was
his custom. But I desiring him to lay up a parcel of money for me till the
next morning, quite put out the eye of his Jealousy. I showed my self that
night very exceeding noble, concealing my success at play, that he might
conclude the greatness of my expense, proceeded from the nobleness of my
nature, having a good estate to back it. I was conducted to bed with many
Ceremonies, and abundance of respect; Sleep I could not, for thinking how to
dispose of my self,

I had experimented the various exigences and extremities an unsettled condition
is accompanied withal, and knowing how securely I could purloin from my
Master, if I would moderate my theft; I concluded to supplicate my Master, by a
Letter for my reception into his service not forgetting my Mistresses quondam
kindnesses. If my Master should refuse to re entertain me, I had by me what
might supply my necessities; till I had re-considered how to improve my stock,
or bestow my self. Not to delay time the next day I wrote him this Letter.

SIR,
HAving seriously considered the greatness of my folly in running from so good
a Master, (whom I may more rightly entitle Father) with tears I beg mercy from
Heaven, and forgiveness from you. Mitigate my offense by revolving in your mind
the fewness of my years, which makes me (as it does most others) prone to
rambling fancies, look then favorably on my long absence from you, as a mere
exiliency; a youthful elapse, which maturity of age may rectify. If you can
forgive my follies, I will study to forget them, and daily endeavor the
propagation of my fedility in the remainder of my time. By the Bearer hereof
you may signify your pleasure.

Sir, I am Your cordially penitent Servant, etc.


With much joy my Master read this Letter, and hastened the Bearer away to
bring me to him. Having converted my silver into Gold, sowing it in my Collar
and Wastband, and putting my self into a Garb convenient for his sight, I went
to him.

CHAP. XXVII.
His Master shows him more kindness than formerly; the ill requital he made
him, by cuckolding him, an accident that fell out thereupon, which produced two
remarkable stories, deduced from the strength of Imagination.

MY Master upon my reception, told me he had freely forgiven me, and if that I
would henceforward endeavor the prosecution of a more regular course of life,
he would forget too my past follies, I promised him more then the strickest
Zelot ever yet did, and beged him pardon aforehand, if he found a defect in
performance.

As my expressions gave my Master much content so my return (I perceived by my
Mistresses eyes) gave her the greatest satisfaction. My Master began to dote on
me again, seeing I daily trebled my deligence, and so active I was in every
thing, that concerned his affairs, that it was hard for any to anticipate me in
my intention.

This gained so much upon his facile good Nature, that I had liberty to wear my
Hat, and sit at Table with him, neither would be command me any thing servile.
I had (as formerly) the same solicitations from my Brother Snippers, but
fearing least one time or another I might be snapt by the timorous nature of
some, who, if once taxt, will confess, not only as to themselves, but likewise
detect the whole knot of a Brotherhood; I resolved to have no more to do with
them, but would snip securely by my self, knowing, that in any secret design,
if many are concerned, their business cannot be long kept private. Wherein by
the way, I cannot but commend the craft and policy though I absolutely disclaim
the actions of modern Padders, whose providence instructed them to rob singly,
by which means their booty came to them entire without distribution, or if
apprehended (as it was very rare) they knew how to make a better plea for
themselves in a Court of Judicature. I now kept close to my business, not
barbouring the least temptation to any extravagancy, and had sequestered my self
from what might render me publicly notorious, and only studied by what means I
might raise my Fortune intending to build my future estate upon the ruin of
other men; having nothing of mine own but my late purchase at play, my only way
was (as I thought by some's success therein) to make the world believe I was
really reformed, and so create to my self a credit, whereas I was only a Divil
converted to an Angel of light, or a VVoolf in Sheeps clothes. Now did I begin
to cant religiously, and not omit one Sabbath wherein I did not take Sermon
Notes, judging this religious cloak to be the best expedient to screw my self
farther into my Mistresses favor, who doted on Morning Ex^rcises, and monthly
Fasts, If my Master had forgot to the duty of the day, I would with much
respect put him in mind of the neglect, desiring that I might repeat what had
been delivered. As they looked upon my conversion more miraculous then that of
S. Paul, so they gave me the greatest encouragement, least like Weak women, I
might prove a back-slider. There were few private meetings my Mistress heard
of, but, by the leave of my Master, I must conduct her to them, which were as
many portents of our private meetings afterward, where Venus should appoint.

I am sorry that I am so uncharitable as to say that the zeal of her Spirit was
not so hot as that of her flesh, every day I had some remark of her love, w^ I
received with much submissive respects, pretending I understood not her meaing,
which added but fuel to the blazing flame of love within her. (...) could not
be ignoront, that since she began to court me, she would prosecute it to the
end. Her courtship me-thought was very preposterous, she might have first
received the charge from me, and by that means she would have found me
prepared, whereas otherwise she might have been deceived in her expectation.

My Mistress gave me so many opportunities, and signified her desires by so
many tokens and dumb expressions, that I began to condemn my fears, which
rendered me unworthy of her favors The besieger deserves not the honor of
possessing that City, whose Gates are freely opened to him, yet dares not
enter. Whilst I was thus ruminating, my Mistress came to the Counting house
were I was writing, and leaning upon my shoulder, asked me what I was doing, I
told her nothing; but writing. Nothing, I believe said she, nor never will do
any thing, but draw up blanks, and so abruptly left me. She knew the quickness
of my apprehension, and so left the interpretation hereof to my own
construction.

Not long after, (thinking her words had left a deep inpression, (as they did)
and withal concluding I would give her the sense of them, when I had an
opportunity; She informs my Master that she had a great desire to visit a
Gentlewoman, she had not seen a long time, and requested that her man Thomas
(for that was my name) might wait on her, to which he assented. Though I l^d
her, yet I wondered were she led me, through one street into another till we
arrived at the waterside. She bid me call for a pair of Oars, which I
accordingly did. The Watermen were very inquisitive according to their
custom, to know whither we intended. Well, well, said she, put off, and then
it will be time enough for you to understand. Said she, row us up to Fox hall.
I for my part was somewhat amazed, yet I partly guessed at what the drove at. I
kept at a distance, showing her the respect of a servant, which she taking
notice of, laughed, saying, come Cuz, why do not sit nearer? to which I
replied as familiarly (for by this time I had much improved the stock of my
confidence) I were best to sit a little nearer you, since I shall be the best
expedient to balance the Boat even, or trim it, for you are but light on your
sides. This expression I doubt netled her, for presently thereupon she shot a
peircing dart from her eye (which I fancied to have penetrated my very soul)
how now Cuz, said she, I thought you had a better opinion of me, I understand
the Riddle, Your expression may be very dark to some, however I have too much
light in it. I would have made an Apology for my self, but that she hindered me
by whispering me in the ear, to this effect that if she was light there was no
other cause but my self, and that if I abused her love any longer, she would
sit the heavier on my skirts. Landing, we went straight to spring-Garden, by
the way she told me, I must lay aside all formallity, and for the better
carrying on the design we went upon, she would have me as before assume the
title of Cuz. We were conducted into an obscure bower, I suppose one of Loves
Chapels of ease, where, without a Clew, it would be hard for any to find us.
There was not any thing wanting that might delight the Appetite, which with
much freedom we enjoyed together.

Now, said my Mistress, I shall take off the veil of my modesty, and discover
to thee the very naked secrets of my heart. The first time that ever I saw
thee, I had more then a common respect to thee, and there was not a time since,
wherein I had the sight of thee, but that it added new fuel to the flame of my
affection: I used all possible means to smother or blast it in the bud, but
could not: I summoned my reason to confute my passion, and notwithstanding, I
alleged that there was a disproportion in our age, and unsuitableness as to
our condition; and lastly how great a stain it would be to my religious
profession; yet Love got the Victory over these, and would have been too strong
for ten times as many; the rest she supplied with kisses, which were infinite.

Having gained a little breath, and she again having lent me the use and
disposal of my own mouth I returned to this her am^r us Oration something
suitable to it by way of retalliation; Protesting with invocations, that since
she had so completed my happiness by her love, I would perish before I would
be guilty of the least abuse therein.

That had it not been for the sense of my unworthiness, and fear of hazarding
her love, and so gained her displeasure, no other difficulty should have
deterred me from declaring, and discovering what she had prevented me in,
adding, that where the quintessence of all loves contracted into one body it
could not equallize mine. Come, said she, let us leave of talking in such idle
phrases, let future constancy make apparent the reallity of our affections, and
let us not loose any time wherein we may mutually enjoy each other. It is but a
folly for me now to mince the matter, or by my coldness endeavor to recongeal
that water where the ice, is too too visibly broken and thawed. Yet let not
your prudence be questioned, or reason forfeited, in making any unhandsome
advantage of this my freedom. But above all, blast not my reputation by the
unsavory breath of any ostentations, boasting of a Gentlewomans favors, nor
let not my love cause any slighting or disrespect in you to your Master,
neither let it so puff you up with pride, as to contem your fellow servants.
In company, show much more reverence to me than formerly. In private, when none
sees us but our selves, be as samiliar and free as actions can demonstrate. Be
constant to me alone for true love will not admit of plurality. Be secret and
silent, and follow not the common practice of vainglorious Fools, that in
requital of those favors they have received in private of some credulous
Female, will make their braggs of them in public. As if it were not enough for
them to rob them of their Chastities, but must likewise murder their
Reputations. Have a special care you slight me not, (as some squeamish or
curious Stomachs use feeding too long on one sort of Food, though never so
delicious) for a Woman's love despised, will turn into extreme hatred, and will
be ever restless till malice and revenge have consulted with Invention, how to
be more then even with the slighting Injurer. She propounded more Articles,
which I have forgot now, but I remember I sealed them without a witness. We
made an end of our business for that time, with much expedition, to the intent
the tediousness of our staying might not be suspected by the ignorant Cuckold
at home: I have reason now for so calling him.

Coming home, I applied my self to the business of the Shop as before,
enjoining my eyes a severe penance, not so much as to look toward that Object
they so dearly loved. According to my usual time I went to Bed, but sleep I
could not, for thinking on what I had done. About one a clock I was much
startled, to bear something come into my chamber; but before I could give my
eyes the liberty for a discovery, my Mistress had gotten within the sheets, and
not daring to speak, because my Master lay in the next room, most commonly by
himself, and her chamber was the next to that, (and in a Trundle-bed underneath
my Mistress's bed lay the Maid.) Near upon daybreak my sweet Bedfellow left
me, at an unhappy time, for then was my Master awake, which might have ruined
us both, which had so fallen out, had he been resolute or courageous; but on the
contrary, exceeding timorous, but more especially, childishly afraid of the
supposed walking of spirits: For hearing the boards crack twice or thrice, with
the weight of her body; besides, by the help of Starlight, perceiving something
to move all in white, he shrunk underneath the clothes, not daring to put out
his head; now did his imagination work as strongly almost as his Breech,
suggesting strange and ridiculous things to his fancy. But I shall give him
leave to tell his own story. A little after it was day, being almost stifled
for want of fresh Air, and choked with the stink that was in the Bed, he
boldly and valiantly put his head out of the coverlid, and after he had thrice
exorcis'd the Devil, or the supposed evil Spirit, with avoid Satan, repeating
as often that Scriptural Sentence, Resist the Divil and he will fly from thee:
He called out as loud as he might for me to come to him. I leapt out of Bed,
and ran to him, asking him what was the matter: O Thomas, said he, light a
Candle quickly; I running in haste to light the Candle, fell (by mistaking the
first step) down the stairs, which made a terrible noise: my Master hearing me,
cried out, (saying, O God, what will become of me?) thinking the Devil indeed
had mistook me for himself, and that he was horsing me on his back to carry me
away; with that he fell to prayer so servently loud, that upstarts the
Mistress, and the Maids, running to know what was the matter: fear had so
possessed him, that he could not be persuaded, but that they were some of the
Devilish crew.

At first they thought him to be fallen mad; but finding out the cause of this
distraction, with much ado my Mistress made him sensible of his mistake. Being
fully assured, that they were not (yet) damned Spirits, he relates what he had
seen, in this manner: My Mistress afterward told me, that had it not been for
laughing, which so busied her, that her sense of smelling for that time had
left her, she could never have endured to hear him out, for that notorious
stink, which came from the Bed, when he stirred ever so little.

I wondered, said he, that contrary to my usual custom, I awaked about four a
clock, whereas I used to sleep soundly, thou know till eight. I hearkened, at
first I perceived only the boards to crack, but presently after I heard chains
rattle, and the stools flung about the room, the bed, and I in it, danced up
and down, as if a Scotch Bag-pipe had been played upon by a Northern Witcb, and
the Devil the while had Danced with me, and the Bed a Morris, (supplying the
Bellows with wind.) Sometimes they pulled me out of Bed, and laid me on the
cold floor, and then tossed me in again like a Dog in a Blanket.

Hearing no noise, I attempted to peep out; but scarcely had mine eyes
recovered the top of the Bed-cloths, when I saw standing by me, a composition
of mere bones, with a shroud thrown over his shoulders, like an Irish Brachin,
or a Scotch Pladd, with a light Taper in one hand (I knew not what use he could
make of it, for there were only holes in his head instead of eyes) and an
Hourglass in the other: he grinn'd at me with his teeth, (for he had no lips)
and shaking his chains left me, which fight so terrified me, that I had like to
have shot out (like a Pudding in a Bag) all that was within me. My Mistress had
like to have broken out into extreme laughter, had not the consideration of
danger (that might have ensued thereon) hindered her.

After this, it was a long time before he would be persuaded to lie in that
Chamber again, which made me curse his strong conceit, for by this means he
would lie with his wife, which interrupted our sweet venereal pastime. As for
my part, I believed he would never have returned to his own chamber again, for
he trembled when he past through it in the day time; and if alone, he would so
thunder down the stairs (fear giving wings to his feet) as if (Vulcan-like) he
had been sent by Jupiter headlong in a message.

Another accident (happening not long after) cured him in part of his ridiculous
belief, grounded on nothing else but fancy: In the Sellar, on a certain beam
that went cross, there were great quantity of Tenter-hooks placed there, some
to hang meat on, others of a smaller sort for other uses. Our Cat being
somewhat ravenous, was following the scent, and had gotten upon the Beam; her
foremost feet slipping, she was strangely caught by the tail, and not able to
recover her self: Being terribly pained by the hook, she made a most hideous
noise, which made our Dog fall a howling. This stranged in first approached my
Masters ears, who awaking my Mistress, asked her now whether she would believe
her own ears. At first she confessed to me, she knew not what to think, her
conscience being yet tender (which having no long time accustomed her self to
sin, was not hardened and seared up) put her in mind of what she had lately
committed, so that she had like to have concluded that it was Satan was sent to
buffet her: But she having a martial spirit, and not easily daunted, she
hearkened further, and then judged that Thieves had broken into the house.

My Master all this while was breathing his last at both ends, whilst my
Mistress leaped out of Bed, and came to my Chamber door, bidding me in all
haste to rise, for there were Thieves in the house. I confess I had no great
mind to be killed, and therefore I was in no great haste to rise, sometimes
buttoning my Doublet, and anon unbuttoning it again: perceiving that I delaid,
she came again, taxing me with Cowardice, and meanness of Spirit, which put new
life into me, making me resolve to adventure my life, rather then hazard the
loss of her good opinion.

Finding my Mistress in her smock, I thought it a shame for me to have any
clothes on: and so naked as I was, we marched on. Coming to the Stairhead, my
fancy troubled me a little too, for the noise had so amazed me, that I would
fain have my Mistress to go first: she could not forbear laughing, to observe
how complemental and ceremonious at that time I was. Having scattered my fear
by resolution, How do I abuse my self, said I, and with that boldly went on.

By this time a light was produced, and then those Bugbear thoughts which
darkness possesses the fancy withal, began to vanish. There was not a hole big
enough to contain a man, but what I prob'd. Descending the Cellar-stairs, I
there plainly saw the Original cause of our fear and distraction, hanging by
the tail. I called my Mistress to the sight, and now the Maids too would be
Spectators, understanding the danger to be overpast.

Well, the general vote was, that the Cat should be carried up stairs to our
Master, and show him the wound in his Tail, for evidence to prove his guilt in
being seduced by fancy.

He hearing some come up, thought we were all destroyed, and that they were
coming up to dispatch him too: Wherefore he cried out, Save my Life, and take
all I have. His wife (not to increase his perplexity) bid him quiet himself,
there was no harm, nor any like to be done; and withal so convinced him of his
folly, both past and present, that he had not a word to say in his own defense;
he enjoining us all silence, we were dimiss'd.

The next night, to show how much he was altered from his former temper and
belief, he did lie in his Chamber aforesaid, supposedly haunted, and that same
night with much joy, my Mistress and I renewed our pleasures.

CHAP. XVIII.
How his Mistress supplied him with money, even to superfluity; what ways he
had to spend it. He is tempted to destruction by Correctors (alias) Clippers
and Coyners (alias) Matter-men.

I Found my Estate to increase abundantly, for I was half sharer my self with
my Master; my Mistress she put in for one too, which I had likewise; so that
the good man received but the fourth. I had been (since my return) very sparing
in my expense, having laid up my money securely: But now finding out another
rich Mine, I thought I should be too rich, unless I contrived ways to draw out
as well as put in.

In the first place, I thought good to buy a brace of good Geldings, for by
that means I could meet whom I pleased, though a dozen or sixteen miles
distance, and so by the quickness of return come home undiscovered: If occasion
should serve, they might very well serve for the High Pad. These I bought, and
where they stood, I had four or five several suits, either to Ride withal,
(using variety that I might pass in^ognito) or to wear when I did intend to
appear splendidly to peculiar friends; and then the Prodigal himself did not
spend his money more profusely than my self.

I judge it unnecessary to relate how, and in what manner I disburst great
sums, since there are few that are addicted to pleasure, and have money, but
know how to lay it ou^ to the satisfaction of their desires, that is, to please
all their senses. My Mistress seldom saw a piece of Gold in her Husbands hands,
or some large and great piece of Silver, but she would be begging it of him,
for no other intent but to give it me; which she took delight in, withal,
knowing that frequent presents very much engage the affection.

My Master seldom denied her, (for, like a Cuckold he doted on his Wife) but if
he did, she would take pet, and would not eat, have the forehead bound down
with a cross-cloath, look pitifully, and the like. If he asked her what she
ailed, or what she was troubled at, she would say, at nothing more then your
unkindness, and then weep bitterly: for, like a right Hyp crite, she had tears
at command. The Dotard would melt too, sometimes the great Calf crying and
sobbing, like a Child that has lost his Bread and Butter: Then to make his
atonement, he must procure her two or three pieces; if he has them not in the
house, otherwise it shall cost him as much more wealth on the Doctor, of whom
she would often pretend to take Physic, but it should be only rich Cordials,
strengthing ^ellies, with such like Provocations to Venery.

For my own part, I was not idle in the mean time, laying up like the careful
Be for Winter. We returned great sums of money every day, which an
acquaintance of mine knew very well; and he being daily in the company of a
fellow, who was both Coyner and Clipper, it seems a decayed Goldsmith, undone
by the study of Chemistry, but now lived by some particular part thereof, as
the transmutation of Metal, or so forth.

This man he informs that he know a young Casheer, that he thought he could
work to their purpose, who was very well qualified for it. An appointed time
for meeting was agreed upon between them, which was made known to me; I thought
of no other design but to be merry. Being met, we drank stiffly, but ever and
anon the stranger would beseech me to favor him with my future acquaintance,
that he should think himself very happy, if I would admit him into a
familiarity. I could do no less then promise so much, and so laying aside
ceremonies, we entered into a very familiar discourse. But for that night there
was nothing propounded, neither was it thought convenient: several times we
met, (not without great expense) so that now we were grown intimately
acquainted. Our discourse happened on a time to be about Chemistry, I was forced
to be mute, as not understanding any thing thereof; yet I could not but admire,
to hear any new friend rela^e what admirable Rarities he could perform in that
mysterious Art, and thereupon showed me a piece of Gold, demanding my opinion,
what I thought of it? I told him I could judge no less, but that it was what it
seemed to be; he smilingly replied, No wonder that this should deceive you,
since it will do the like to the most critical Goldsmith about the Town: No
doubt, said he, you have heard of the Philosopher's Stone, and what vast
Estates some have misspent in the search thereof, how ineffectual the labor
of such has been, the miserableness of their condition makes apparent. Others
and not a few have pretended they have obtained the mastery thereof, for no
other intent then to delude some wealthy credulous person, making some
ridiculous experiments to confirm his belief, and at last extract him to the
very lees of his Estate. I shall not deludingly pretend to any thing, but what
I will perform, which your own eyes shall attest. Hereupon, he showed me
various pieces, both Gold and Silver, which are the effects (said he) of my own
labor and pains, employed in an Art I have found out by the curious search and
industry of my brain, with which I can convert Copper into that Metal which
current money is composed of, either of which, according to the Tincture I
shall give it. And to be plainer with you, out of that great love I have born
ever since I first saw you, and that my actions shall make it apparent, see
here this piece, according to the term of Art given, it is called a black Dog,
with Queen Elizabeth's Head thereon, which is only Pewter double washed. This
here is a George plateroon, being all copper within, and only a thin Plate
about it. Another called Compositum, which is a mixed Metal, and will both touch
and cut, but will not endure the fiery test. He gave me the sight likewise of
pieces of eight, half pieces, and quarter pieces. Then again (said he) our own
Coin we usually call English Cloth, the other Spanish; the prices whereof are
several, according to their goodness and fineness: The best you may have for 15
sh. the yard, i. e. five shillings in the pound profit; the worser for eight,
ten or more.

Now to the intent that I may complete your happiness here, if enjoyment of
Wealth will do it, I would advise you to take some of every sort, and so mingle
it with the rest of your good cash, proportionably to the sum. Let me add one
thing more, if any large money comes to your hand, lay it aside for me, which
after I have corrected a little (for broad brimd Hats are not now in fashion) I
will return it, allowing you 18 pence per pound interest.

I gave him all this while great attention, without the least interruption; but
he here making a stop, I thought he expected my replication; which was to this
effect, That I thankt him cordially for his respects, which I believed were
real, having used that freedom with me, that I did not in the least question
the greatness of profit that would redound by the acceptance of his proffer;
but it being a matter of the greatest consequence and highest concern, I
desired I might have some time for consideration This answer made him look
blank, fearing least I made a demur only to betray him, so that I saw by his
countenance, he wished he had been more sparing in his expressions. I must needs
consess, I trembled all the time I was in his company, wherefore I made all the
have I could to be gone, giving him to understand, that, after serious
consultation with my self, I would send him an answer by my friend, and so I
took my leave of him. The whole night following I spent in weighing his
Proposals in the balance of profit and preservation: I quickly sound that
Life's preservation outweigh'd all other interest, and that honor, riches, and
pleasure, would avail little to that man that was riding Post to the Gallows.
Besides, how could I expect to escape better then others, who were frequently
made wretched spectacles of rash imprudence and folly, who, having forfeired
the Kings high and just displeasure, did usually betray their own selves to the
Severity of the Law in that case; which has as little Commiseration on such as
on the worst of Offenders? Though I had committed several things that might
come within the verge of an Indictment, yet I always shunned such actions as
bore the inscription in their front, Memento mori. To be as good as my promise,
I sent my Chimist these consequent Lines.

SIR,
You seemingly do proffer fair, but know,
Hanging attends such kindnesses you show.
The hope of profit tempts me; loss of life
O'repowrs perswasious, and so ends the strife.
Had I two Lives, my deeds should make it known,
How little I would care to hazard one;
But having solely one, I will not try
Its loss; as yet I have no mind to die.
Should we proceed then, and be taken in it;
Death and damnation seize us in a minute.
Cease then, and let your fancy's suit with mine.
We Will plot no Treason, but to get good Wine:
That being bad, let each man's face declare
The Indian Mines are not so rich as ours are.
If we want Coyu, the best way, I suppose,
Is to transmute the Metal of my Nose.

I never received any answer to what I wrote, neither did I ever see my new
friend after, which was according to my own desire, but I heard of his sad
destiny, whereof I should have participated, had I listed my self in that
Mettle-simulating Regiment. Some found out operating in the obscurest thickets
of woods; others were detected clipping in dark Concaves on Black Heath, and
their Ringleader discovered in his own house, in a deep Vault befitting his
purpose; who, though he had timely notice to remove his tools, yet, by his
Seizers they were found hid in a Chimny-mantletree, hollowed to that intent,
with a shutter at the end. After the dismal catastrophe of these Hazardous
fools, I had like to have been put to a great trouble, though not in the least
guilty of the accusation: and thus it was; an indigent Hanger-on, having taken
notice of my being once or twice in the company of the chief of those lately
executed, came to me one Evening, and requested some private discourse: I
consented: being together (laying aside several Formalities that ushered in his
discourse) he told me, that I was taken notice of as a notorious disperser of
Counterfeit money, and that there was a warrant out to apprehend me, and, that
out of pure love to a man so young and fairly promising as my self, be thought
himself bound in duty to preserve if he could, by giving timely notice to shun
that, which, if neglected might prove destructive. I immediately saw the Rogue
peep through the Vizard of di^malation, and therefore instead of giving thanks
I gave him a blow over both the eyes, to the intent he should not see how I
would beat him, which was in such a manner, that he could not see himself for
three days afterward. This fellow I understood to be a Dunner for the Prisoners
of their confederates abroad; and if they would not continually let down their
milk, impeach them, and were often condemned.

CHAP. XIX.
He breaks his Master (by the help of his Mistress) and so sets up for
himself with that money he had unlawfully gotten in his Apprentiship, and
credit besides: what a trick he served his Master at last: his Master and
Mistress soon after died.

BUt to proceed, now I had served my time, and was accordingly made free; but
solicited by my Master to stay some longer time as a Journeyman, which I
consented to, knowing it could not be long: for we had so purloined from him,
that it was impossible for him to subsist any longer. His Creditors visited him
daily, so that now his whole time was taken up in studying fair promising words
to satisfy them for the present, and tell them when they should come again. My
Master perceiving the danger he was in, would neither stir abroad, no, not so
much as come into the Shop. He now standing upon the brow of a very high Hill,
and being forced to descend, I resolved to save him the labor, and so threw
him down headlong.

By this time I had conveyed away a sufficient quantity of his Goods, intending
them for my own use; and stowed them in a Warehouse which I had lately taken
privately for my purpose. My Master one night told me his intended design, that
he was resolved to pack up all his Goods, and to gather in what moneys he
could, and so take his wife with him for Ireland. I thought I should have died
at first when I heard him talk of carrying his wife with him, and could not
forbear dropping some tears; which he perceiving, his trickled down his Cheeks
to bear mine company. Well now, said he, I see thou love me too, as well as
thou have hitherto proved faithful. But the dearest friends must part (and with
that he wept again like a child) however my comfort is, I hope we shall see
each other in Heaven. I thought with my self, I had rather see him in the
Counter. And from that minute I contrived how I might effect it: For at that
time I should never have been able to have brookt a separation between my
Mistress and self, especially at so great distance. She and I often consulted
what to do; Sometimes we were in the mind to take what money the old fool had,
and so run away together, with many stratagems which we propounded; but were
rejected as no ways expedient nor convenient. At last I resolved on this, that
she should acquaint her self of the exact time and way he intended to go, and
so inform me thereof. I received information in a short time after, that before
break of day, at such a time he would take Horse at I sl^gton, and so for
Westchester. I immediately sent away word to one of his chiefest Creditors,
making known to him the sum and substance of every thing, and, that if ever he
expected to receive what was due to him, he must at such a time have Officers
ready to way-lay him, in order to his arrest, which was punctually done
according to what instructions I sent him in a letter, without a name
subscribed thereunto. He had not been long in custody, before I was sent for,
to advise with him what was best to be done in this his great extremity and
perplexity. I could do no less then seemingly condole his misfortunes, and
withal seemed to be very active as to his assistance, running up and down to
his Creditors to bring them to a compliance; but he had been better to have
sent some person else as solicitor in his business, for by my means I made his
wound incurable. Seeing there was no remedy but patiently to endure his
inevitable imprisonment, he got an Horse (as some men term it) alias a Duce
facies, and so removed himself to Ludgate, where he had not been long e're he
died for grief.

In the mean time my Mistress had secured what he had, which I enjoyed. I had
now an House and Shop of mine own, very well furnished; but withal I was grown
so deboist and profusively lavish, that I seldom was at home but at night, and
then in bed with my Mistress, who was very importunate with me to marry her: I
confess I loved her entirely as my Mistress, or Whore, but I hated her as my
Wife; knowing very well that if she would be an whore to me, and have an
Husband, she would he so to another when I was in the formers place. She now
found her self with Child; whereupon (taking upon her my duty) she daily
prest^e to save her Credit. But I delayed, putting her off continually with
specious pretenses, which her love and facileness easily swallowed. The time of
her delivery approaching, I went down into the Country with her; and because it
was at hand, I stayed to see the event: Within a short while she fell in labor
(now because we were known for no other then Man and Wife,) when her throws
came upon her, she would not let me stir out of the room. Her pain growing
intolerable, she called me hastily to her, and getting my hand within hers;
Farewell, said she, I die for thee; thy last unkindness in not performing thy
promise, and not returning love answerable to mine, has untimely yielded my
days: with that she groaned, and then using her former expressions, cried out,
Love my memory however, since I die for thee. She uttered not one word
afterward, being as good as her word: The good women looked strangely on me,
every one passing their verdict, and all concluding her none of my Wife. The
first Christians under the great Persecution suffered not in 500 years so many
several ways, as I did in five hours by the peoples Tongues. I must needs say,
I took it very much to heart that Report, which made Richard the Second alive
so often after he was dead, should kill me as often whilst alive; desiring them
at last to wave their Censures (which they expressed publicly) I entreated them
with all the Rhetoric I could produce to endeavor the reviring of my Wife,
which if past recovery, to use means to preserve the Child. In a short time
they told me that was dead likewise. At first I showed much grief, which was
unfeigned, being not so much afflicted for the loss of her, as affected with
those words she uttered when she breathed her last. I was too conscious of my
own guilt, and therefore they made the deeper impression in my very Soul.

But all these perturbations of mind I dissipated with a glass or two of
Canary, which was the common antidote I used against care, sorrow, and
vexation, etc. I now provided things necessary for her Funeral, which were not
vulgar; which I might the better do, having made my self her Executor before,
taking all she had into my custody. In memorial of her and her fidelity, I
wrote this Epitaph on her Tombstone.

Women they say will lie, but now I see
It Is false, to th'last she spoke the truth to me.
Farewell said she, I thought my grief to have hid,
I die for love of thee, -- and so she did.
Here with her lies her Child, that strove in vain
To untomb it self, to be entombed again.
But rest my babe, thy cares with life are gone,
Thou Wilt rise again, though now a setting Sun.
Though wonders cease, thy Mothers death does prove
They may revive, for she did die for love.
CHAP. XX.
His credit becomes suspected by his exorbitant manner of living in Drinking,
Whoring, Gaming, etc. He thinks to sawder up that crack by Marriage; he is
deceived both in Person and Portion.

REturning to my own Habitation, I found that my so long absence had raised a
jealousy in my Neighbors breasts, that I was run away; which rested not
there, but spread like a Canker, so that this flying report came to some of my
Creditors cars, which made them both impatient and importunate with me for
their moneys; I wondered whence proceeded their unexpected haste. Some that
would not be put off with promises, I was forced to pay; from others I obtained
a little longer forbearance, which gave me but liberty to prosecute my former
courses. If I was at the Tavern, I was either drunk, engaged in a quarrel, and
so involved in blood; or else at play, if not at a Bawdy house, which places I
could not refrain from frequenting, though I kept one of my own at home. For I
would not entertain a Maid, but what was more then ordinarily handsome, whom I
commonly vitiated either by presents, or promises if I got them with child.
When I was weary of one, I paid her off with some additions to her wages, and
entertained another, who would in a short time be wrought upon as well as her
predecessors, being ambitious to lie with her Master, and vainly hoping that to
be the first step to her preferment, thinking of nothing but presently
marrying, and so be Mistress. In three years that I lived as a Mr. I had nine
illegitimates, which I knew, four whereof were be gotten of my Maids, which put
me to a vast expense. Two of the Mothers would have forced me to have married
them, or allowed them competent maintenance (for they were subtle cunning
baggages) had I not by a wile got them aboard a Vessel bound for Virginia, and
never heard of them since. Besides two or three terrible Claps, which cost me a
considerable sum in their cure. This distemper, as it caused a consumption in
my Pocket, so it impaired my wonted strength, and almost spoiled my natural
Talent.

I now began to be sensible of my folly, and so resolved to take up in time,
and redeem by degrees my lost credit by a temperate sober life; but that I
found I had wasted my self extremely, by which means I became less capable of
reacting what I had before done, and my mind in a manner satiated, I question
whether I should have had now such penitent thoughts. For a while I kept my
Shop diligently and constantly; I would not drink with any but at home; my
sudden alteration made people admire, and the suddenness of my reformation was
the common discourse of all my Neighbors: The Parson of our Parish hearing of
my strange alteration, came to me, which I admired at; for before, he that had
the least care or respect of his Reputation, would avoid all occasions of being
seen in my company, lest they might be suspected extravagant and deboist.

Pares cum paribus facilime congregantur.
Birds of a Feather will flock together.
The shortness of his hair declared him a member of the Circumcision, but his
triple cap, or three caps on his head, showed, though he hated the very name of
Rome or Babylon, yet he loved formerly a whore in private, though common. His
Cloak was faced down with zeal before, and his Band appeared but as a broad
hem, to show that a hem, with two or three formal spits, or a feigned Cough,
was the usual supply of his discourse, when he had thrasht himself in his Cloak
out of breath in the Pulpit. His looks resembled the bleer-ey'd Printing at
Geneva (and his face like that sort of ragged paper on which they work off
their impressions. After he had set his face into a Platform, he delivered
himself. I shall not relate exactly his own canting words, or what he borrowed
from Scripture, being sensible, non est tutum ludere cum sacris: but give you
the substance, which was first a reproof for my extravagancies: secondly, some
general instructions, (picked out of a commonplace Book) for my future
practice: and lastly, some encouragements drawn from various motives to proceed
(without looking back) toward a good life: on which three points he ran
divisions strangely, till Dinnertime, and then his stomach petitioned him to
shut his mouth, lest it should be deprived of its appetite by receiving in too
much air.

In this seeming strictness of life I lived two or three months, and now some
began to have charitable thoughts of my Soul; and that I might regain my
runnings out by future diligence and industry.

I had several Matches offered me, which I saw, but liked them not; for I had
always been a general lover, and could not now come to particulars. At last it
was my misfortune to see one, whom I was wished to; and which at first sight
robbed me at once, both of my self and good company.

Formerly I was pleasing and affable, desirous and desired of good society, but
never lived till now in Anchorite on earth. Neither did I ever till now tie up
mine eyes to one particular face, giving them free liberty to wander. But now
at last I fell from my primitive liberty, losing it totally, by dotage on a
Creature, and that a Woman too: a just judgment on me for my manifold sins, to
throw this thing in my way for me to stumble at.

CHAP. XXI.
How he was married, and what kind of thing his Wife.

I Made strict enquiry after the condition of my intended Wifes Parents, and
found by report they were very wealthy. In a short time we had conference
together about the Portion, and my Estate, and therein we were all satisfied.
My Courtship was very Noble, yet not prodigal, for fear of giving offense; and
in a little while we were married. By her looks I thought her so modest, that
an unchaste thought durst not enter into her head, since all immodest
expressions she banished from her cars.

The first night I thought to have had the first taste, but my experience told
me the Tarriers had been there before. This struck me into an amazement, that
there should appear such Virginwhiteness, and the extract of innocence in her
face, yet be guilty of a crime so notorious. Much perplexed I was, but durst not
vent my self, what was more then bare suspicion. In one half years time what I
intended to conceal could be hid no longer, being brought to bed three months
before her time; and yet the Bawd her Midwife would make me believe this was
usual; and that Children brought forth at six months might live.

Now began our domestic Civil Wars, which was carried on with such fury
between us, that there was hardly an Utensil in the Kitchen that could rest in
quiet for flying about our ears continually. My Wife acted the Silent Woman to
the life, whilst in a single state; for before we were married all her answers
were very short, comprehended within the two Monosyllables of I, and N; and
those two must be forcibly extracted from her. But now her tongue wagg'd in a
perpetual motion, and her voice so shrill and loud, that it would be heard
distinctly, though a piece of Ordnance were discharged near her at the same
time, or standing at the Bell-room-door whilst the Bells were ringing.
Frequent were her complaints to her Father and Mother, which alienated their
affection from me, so that their only study was how to be rid of me. Her
forgeries (to excuse her own Devilry) had so instigated them, that they sought
my ruin by all ways imaginable. Besides, they laid an Imbargo on the rest of
my Wives portion unpaid; advising her withal to secure what she could, for her
own self preservavation. She followed their instructions so exactly, that in a
short time I found my self in a very declining condition, yet knew not the
cause till it was too late, conveying away both my goods and money, some
whereof went to supply the necessities of her Stallion.

I was all along jealous of this, though I could not conclude her altogether so
culpable. But my doubts and fears which of all are the sharpest passions, could
not turn this distemper into a disease (although they looked through false
Optics, making things appear like evening shadows, disproportionable to the
truth, and strangely longer then the true substance) till knowledge hereof
(confirmed me by the witnesses of my eyes) had banished bare suspicion.

Which was thus, One night I caused my self to be brought home by a Porter as
dead drunk; my Wife received me in that condition (I perceived by peeping out
of my eyelids) with much satisfaction, and was immediately carried up to bed;
with much difficulty they undrest me, pretending my self a sleep all this
while, and so they left me. It seems by the story that my Wife presently sent
away the Maid (which was her Pimp) to her friend to come at such an hour. About
nine of the clock the Maid was posted to bed; and about ten I heard one small
knock at the door: he needed not to knock there any longer, for there was one
below that was ready to receive him. When I judged they were incircled in each
others arms, (which I understood by harkening at the bottom of the stairs, and
thereby knew where about they were) I ran in upon them with my Sword (which I
had prepared ready) and thinking to have run them through the body, intending
to make a passage for their Souls escape, I past my Sword through the fleshy
part of both their thighs. At which they made a most hideous outcry, so that
the Maid came running down, and a Watchman that stood just at my door
hearingthe noise, knocked at the door, to know what was the matter; the Maid
apprehending the danger, let him in, who by the help of his Candle, never saw
so strange a sight; for I had so pined them together, that they could not stir.
As well as they could speak, they both begged their pardon for their lives
only, which I granted, as looking on my revenge somewhat satisfied.

My Gentleman I dismissed, but as for his Mistress I was forced to send for a
Chyrurgeon, whose wound needed no probing, but tenting, for it was through and
through. There was no concealing of what was done; wherefore in the morning
early I acquainted her Parents with what had happened last night. Insisting
further, that since she had instead of putting off handsomely the Chain of
Matrimony, rudely broke it, it should be her own damage; neither would I be at
the cost of a visitation to repair the breach. To which I added, that had I
denied her things requisite or necessary, or not performed duly my duty, she
might have had some pretense for her slighting me, and look upon me only as a
false Crow set up in a Garden, to keep others from the fruit it cannot taste it
self. But since it was otherwise, and that she had nothing to object against
me, but only sometimes curbing her inordinate desires; I wished them to save me
the labor of having the Law to tear her from me, but that they would remove
her elsewhere.

They replied but little, hastening to their daughter; and fearing worse
mischief might ensue, they instantly conveyed her into the Country. She had not
remained there long, before she was cured, and not enduring to be confined to
solitariness, repaired again to the City, where now she lives, as such do that
keeps Civet-Cats; but I hear she is very reserved to all but such she knows she
may entrust her self with.

There never yet was Woman made,
Nor shall, but to be cursed;
And oh! that I (fond I) should first
Of any Lover
This Truth at my own charge to other Fools discover.
Ye that have promised to your selves
Propriety in Love;
Know women's hearts like straws do move,
And what we call
Their Sympathy, is but love to jet in general.
All Mankind are alike to them;
And though we Iron find
That never with the Loadstone joined,
It Is not the Irons fault,
It is because the Loadstone y t was never brought.
If where a gentle Be has fallen
And labored to his power,
A new succeeds not to that flower,
But passes by,
It Is to be thought the Gallant elsewhere loads his thigh.
For still the flowers ready stand;
One buzzes round about,
One lights, one tastes, gets in, gets out.
All always use them,
Till all their sweets are gone, and all again refuse them.
However, I must confess my own faults, as well as condemn others; which was, I
was too inquisitive after that which the more I knew, would the more disturb
me. Of all things the less we know, the better. Curiosity in this renders a man
as ridiculous a Coxcomb, as that Cuckold Sir John Suckling mentions, who made
diligent enquiry, whether he was made so in a bed, or on a Coach, and whether
his duty-officiating Cavalier pulled off his Spurs first or not, etc.

Well, it was my hard fate to Marry thus like one doomed to prison, who
expecting to lie in a private room, is confined to the Hole. Had I married the
best, I believe I should have found my self in the Stocks. It Is strange that I
of all men should be deceived by this thing that was like a box bearing drugs
not suitable to the inscription. Had not my passion hung in my eyes, when I
looked into her disposition and carriage, I might have easily understood that
her behavior in the presence of me was only like action on a public Stage, and
that the evil of her natural inclinations were hid from me under the vail of
silence and seeming modesty. And indeed my palate was bed-ridden, and so
scarce sensible of sauce, much less of meat. But since I have had such ill luck
in marriage, which some vainly and falsely account a merry-age, I shall in the
ensuing Discourse give you some instruction or advice as Landmarks. For having
split upon this Rock, I may the better be a Pylot to another that would sail
this way.

CHAP. XXII.
Some Observations concerning Love and Women; selected out of the choicest
Commentators on their nature, together with his own experimental reflections.

LOve it is confessed is a Natural distemper, a kind of small Pox; most have
either had it, or is to expect it, and the sooner the better. Surely I was
never well cured on it, or else I had not thus fallen into a Relaps. Want of
knowledge misguided me at first, and so I fell into a Quagmire; but I knew not
what possessed me to ride afterward into another on purpose. Love-seeds when it
grows up to Matrimony is good for nothing, like some Fruittrees which must be
transpanted before they will bring forth any thing. And when Love in this
nature does seed, the increase thereof is dissatisfaction, sorrow and vexation
multiplied. This aforementioned is not truly love but lust; for I cannot
believe that that noble passion can be the ruin of its subject; neither would
I have it disparaged by so unworthy an object as a woman. If there be Love, it
should be to Heaven, a male-friend, relations, or our Countries preservation,
and not to a Female-piece of imperfection. And yet nothing will serve the turn,
but monopolizing it by Marriage, because we would make it surely our own, and
nevertheless our own till then. For if she be young, she is like an Hawk upon
her wing; and if she be handsome, she is the more subject to go out at check.
Faulkners that can but seldom spring right game, should still have something to
take them down. The lure to which all stoop in this World, is either garnisht
with profit or pleasure, and when you cannot throw her the one, you must be
content to show out the other. Consider again that woman (besides the trouble)
is a Rentcharge which though the curiosity of man has often enclosed, yet he
cannot for his life stop so well one gap, but it will lie open for any
stragler, by which means it seldom improves or becomes fruitful. And why should
a woman be denied the liberty of breaking a pane in her own window, or not
admitted the freedom of regress to her own salliport, letting in whom she
esteems as friends? If you will not give them the permission, you must be
forced to wink when they take it, or do worse: cross them, and they will
endeavor the not leaving a cross in your Pocket. Take it which way you will,
Marriage is the dearest way of curing love. Faring with such, as it does with
those for the most part that at great charges walls in grounds and plant, who
cheaper might have eaten Mellons elsewhere, then Cucumbers in their own Garden.
Besides, it is a gross piece of ignorance to be bound up to love for an age,
when the cause of love may perish for a month, and then the effect will follow.
If it be natures plant in the face, that does induce you; those beautiful
flowers of red and white, a disease will quickly wither; if not, ravishing time
will deflowre the choicest beauty.

But the ill consequents of Marriage are more to be considered, which are
commonly drawn from the evil inclinations of that Sex Eve by stumbling at the
Serpents solicitations cast her Husband out of Paradise; nor are her Daughters
surer of foot, being foundred by the heat of lust and pride. It were something
if Marriage could answer the expectation of all she boasts the cure of; for
instead of quenching the hot coals of concupiscence, it aggravates the simple
sin of Fornication, making it sprout into Adultery. What might be said more as
to this subject, I shall refer the Reader to the Writings of that ingenious
Gentleman Mr. Francis Osborne. If any more (like boys stripped and stand
shivering about the brink) are ready to leap into Loves Whirl-pit, and so end
anger the loss of themselves, let them first look upon Love to be an idle
fancy, and Wedlock of a dangerous consequence. If I could persuade you from
loving, one would think the other then would be disregarded, but some to their
costs can speak the contrary. In the first place, marry none but whom you love:
for he that marries where he does not love, will love where he did not marry.
If you are prone to love one particular person, some are of opinion that travel
is an excellent remedy: For absence does in a kind remove the cause, removing
the object. Others think that frequent visits (where as the rarity of them
indears the affection) may by a surprizal discover some defects, which though
they cure not absolutely, yet they qualify the vehement heat of an amorous
Feavor; and as near as can be, let it be unseasonably, either when she is in
sickness or disorder, by that a man may know she is but mortal, and but a
woman; the last would be enough to a wise man for an Antidote. Enter into
discourse with her of things she daily hears not, and it will confirm the cure.
Neither will it be amiss to contrive your self into the company of variety,
especially such beauties which are generally cried up; and if you can, taste
them all, (but now I think on it, it is no matter, one is sufficient for a
surfeit) for this Malady is better remedied this way, then by abstinence: good
jovial company will much conduce to the cure.

But, I like not the prescription of Marriage, since it is the last and most
dangerous receipt; like a kind of live Pigeons applied to the soals of the
feet, which remedy to say truth, is worse then the disease: Were it possible
for a Woman to be constant to one, something might be said, but I never yet
tried any which did not very much show their displeasures when offered some
kindness, but never found any to refuse them, if opportunity and privacy of
place admitted their reception; which has made me often in my own thoughts
question my mothers honesty and fidelity to my Father.

What I now utter, is not derived from prejudice to that Sex, grounded on my
own Wifes disloyalty; but experience tells me this, which most past sixteen
very well understand, that there are few Women, let them pretend what they
please, but will yield to the temptations of the flesh, and so much the sooner,
by how much she professes some new light, which is Ignis fatuus that leads
them into the Quagmires of all sorts of erroneous Tenants. With this dark
Lanthorn-Light they dazzle the eyes of such as would pry into their actions,
whiles behind in the dark they sensually satisfy themselves undiscovered.

Experience dictates what I here express; for I have had converse with several
of these Religious pretenders, that in the very act would very much inveigh
against Adultery with their tongues, whilst their Bloods willingly consented to
the commission of that sin, and then immediately after seem extremely pensive.

They will make it their daily discourse, speaking against such whose natural
inclinations have prompted them to unlawful satisfaction of their lusts, and
yet they themselves are at the same time studying how they may secretly and
securely accomplish the same thing.

To conclude, Woman in general is the very extract of inconstancy, and
therefore it is but a vain thing for any to think she can absolutely love one
man. Such who are found constant to their Husbands preferring their welfare
before the indulging of their own by-respects, ought to be looked on no less
then Miracles of their Sex, by such who are acquainted generally with Female
dispositions and actions.

CHAP. XXIII.
He cheats his Creditors by knavish breaking, and runs away for Ireland. He is
Shipwrackt on the Isle of Man.

WHilst my Credit was good, I thought good to make use of it, lest that
failing, I should want an opportunity to march off with flying Colors. To
raise my repure amongst my Neighbors (whom I knew would spread abroad what
they had seen) I caused a Porter (whom I could entrust) to carry out prlvately
an hundred pound, and a little while after to come with a trusty friend of mine
with that, and five or six hundred pound bags more on his back, openly carrying
them. Upon my receipt hereof, I presently tumbled the Money out of the bag
(which had really money in it) on the Counter, purposely making a great noise:
having told it over (my friend standing by the while) I put it up; and
pretending to lay that aside and take another, I took up the same again, so
doing till I had told it over five or six times; then writing in public view a
Receipt, with much civility and respect I dismissed my Gentleman. And thus did I
thrice in a months time; so that by this means without suspicion I conveyed
away a great quantity of my Goods, which people thought I had sold, and
therefore thought me to have a great trade. Report hereby rendered me a man of
vast dealing, so that now I had goods daily offered me, some whereof I
received, promising to them payment at three months, others at six; whereas I
intended they should stay till her had her twelve Apostles for her Jury. What
Wares or Moneys I could take up, I did, not mattering at what rate. To some of
the more wary sort I confessed a Judgment for their security. I needed not to
have spoken in the Singular number, for I deluded four with my Judgments. What
commodities I had, I converted into money by a bill of Sale, and so went away,
leaving my Creditors to sue out a Statute of Bankrupt if they so pleased; which
I val^ed not, if once out of their reach. To my chiefest Creditor I sent these
lines, to the intent he should not tax me with incivility for going away, and
not sending him word.

Credit does strengthen such whose Trades are weak;
But too much Credit, Sir, did make me break.
Credit to sinking Tradesmen is a prop;
But had you kept your Wares, I Would kept my Shop.
Pray do not blame me, Sir, because I show
A way to pay those many debts you owe:
Which you may do, if you will advised be,
Which is in short, prepare to follow me.
Believe me, faithful Sir, in what I say,
I went before, but to show you the way:
But if you will not, don't lament your loss,
For in your Money I do bear the cross.
Grief will distract you, and destroy your wit;
Good Sir, preserve it, for you have paid for it.
I rid post for Holy-head night and day, so that I arrived there in a very
short time: going to dismount, I tumbled off, neither could I rise again;
continual and unaccustomed riding had almost dislocated every bone in my body,
notwithstanding it was swathed for that purpose. The next day I made a shift to
walk abroad to view the Rarities of the Town, but found nothing rare but
handsome Women, Civility, and good Drink. In two days time we set Sail: we had
not ran above three Leagues before the Sky darkened; the Wind blew hard at a
South-East, and the Waves rose mountain-high: In an hours time we were forced
to cut our Masts by the board, and lightning the Ship as much as we could, let
her drive. Every man fell to his Prayers, expecting every moment when they
should be swallowed up by the Sea. As for my part, I now thought divine
vengeance had overtaken me, and would reckon with me for all my Rogueries; I
looked on my self as Jonas, and was much troubled that others should suffer for
my iniquities. About three a Clock in the mornning we heard a hideous noise
occasioned by the beating of the Sea against the Rocks, which was ecchoed by
the loud and lamentable cries of the Seamen, who now knew there was no hope for
us. Now could I pray heartily, that had never prayed in my life before; but my
Devotion was soon spoiled, for the Ship struck in between two Rocks. I looked
out, and methought the dashing of the waves looked perfectly like flashes of
Fire. Here she stuck a little while, which gave five of us opportunity to leap
out upon a Rock: we were no sooner there, before a wave fetched her off, but
brought her on again, and split her all to pieces. We five in the mean time
riding astride on a Rock behind one another, like so many Criminals on a
Woodden-horse. Sometimes a wave would strike clear over us, which endangered
our washing off. Sometimes we thought to let go our hold, as looking upon our
preservation to be impossible; and withal imagining that the tide was coming
in. At last the hindmost could hold no longer, but crying, Lord have mercy on
my Soul, committed himself to the merciless Sea. Immediately came a tumbling
Sea and washed off the next; now did I expect that every wave would prove my
Executioner. But it was not decreed (I suppose) that I should be drowned. Day
broke, so that we could discern we were not a Coits cast from the Shore, and
that the Sea was ebbing. We waited not above an hour before we crawled to
Shore, for go we could not, our joints were so benumbed by the cold. We got up
the Beach, and could discern a little way distant a small Cottage; thither we
repaired with much difficulty, and were kindly entertained, pittyed, and
informed where we were. We stayed about a week in this Isle of Man, without one
farthing expense. For the Inhabitants are generally very civil and courteous,
and especially to Strangers. From thence we imbarkt for Dublin.

CHAP. XXIV.
His Arrival into Ireland: he changes his Name: what trick he served his first
Landlady; all his Money being spent, and those Goods and Coin likewise
Shipwrackt which he expected to follow him.

WE landed at a place called Ringsend about a mile from Dublin. I was asked
whether I would have a Coach. Where are there any, said I? (for I looked about
me, and could see nothing like a Coach) the fellow looked upon me to be a very
ignorant person, because I understood not what he meant, and angerly spal^e
thus: By my Gossips hand, thou can not see very much well, arra look here is
one by thine own side. It was a great while before I could tell what language
he spoke, he did so tone his words; neither could I understand him, till one
standing by interpreted him. As for his Ringsend-Coach, as he called it, it was
Wheel-barrow fashion, only it had two Wheels not much bigger then a large
Cheshire Cheese: the Horse that drew this Princely-pygmy-Chariot, I at first
mistook for an overgrown Masty; but viewing him narrowly, found him the
extract (by his shape) of a Scotch-Hobby; well, up I mounted, but could not
invent a name for the manner of my riding, for I was neither coacht nor carted,
but I fancyed my self (and that justly) as I was riding, to be some notorious
Malefactor drawn on a Sledge to the place of execution, which afterward
experimentally I found Dublin to be: many of its Inhabitants call this City
Divlin, quasi Devils Inn, and very properly it is by them so termed; for there
is hardly a City in the world that entertains such variety of Devils Imps as
that does. If any knavishly break, murder, rob, or are desirous of Polygamy,
they straightway repair thither, making that place, or the Kingdom in general,
their Azylum, or Sanctuary. My first care was to plant my self conveniently;
the next day I sent for a Barber to shave all my hair off, ordering him to
bring me a Periwigg of an absolute contrary color to my own hair, to the
intent, that if I should meet with any of my former acquaintance, they might
not know me, whereby I should prevent their sending notice to any where I was.
The truth of it is, in this disguize I hardly knew my self. The greatest
difficulty I found, was to make my self familiar with my fictitious name. At
first when my Landlady called me by that name, I either star'd her in the face,
or looked behind me, (not answering thereunto) thinking she had spoke to some
man else: but had I not pretended to be thick of hearing, and so that way
apologizing for my silence, my design might have been marred. I daily met with
several I knew, but would not take the least cognizance of them.

In this manner I spent a month, but all this while no tidings of my Goods and
Money; that which I had brought with me was all consumed. My Landlady (as it is
customary there, having as little trust or faith as they have Religion) called
upon me for what I owed her. For a little while I stopped her mouth, by telling
her I had a considerable quantity of Goods and Money too coming, which I
expected by every fair wind. A little while after I heard the Ship in which
they were was cast away. Now did I absolutely conclude Gods just judgment
attended my fraud and knavery. My loss I did not in the least discover to any,
knowing I should reap at first only some pity, and afterward be undervalued
and and disrespected. My Hostess again, was very importunate with me to have
her Reckoning: I endeavored to put her off, saying, I expected daily Bills of
Exchange; but she would not believe me; for I perceived that she had been often
cheated with such delusions.

Now did I not know what to do: I thought good to try another way; she being a
Widow, I fancyed I could work upon her Female frailty: I used all means
possible to get her alone; which I did but seldom, and then did I make use of
all my Rhetoric to persuade her into a belief, how dearly I loved her; she
replied little, but would laugh at me till she held her sides again. I verily
believe she understood my drift, which I might argue from her expressions.
Sometimes she would say, Come, come, away with these love-fooleries, and pay me
what you owe. Then would I tell her all I enjoyed, and my self too, were
properly hers, and that she might take them when she pleased into her
possession. No, no, she would say, my youthful days are past, and it is time
for me to look Heavenwards; wherefore let fall your suit, etc.

Since words would no ways prevail, I resolved to try something else, knowing
how difficult it is for a Woman when in bed to refuse a Venereal proffer. To
that purpose one night I came softly into her Chamber, and groping with my hand
for her face, I caught a man by the Beard: at which he awaked, and thinking the
Devil was come to trim him, or rob him of his Wash-balls, would have cried out
aloud, but that fear had so locked up his voice, that his highest note was
little louder then whispering; I could but just hear him say, In the name of --
what art? I am, said I, (and then she waked too) no Ghost, but a living witness
of your leachery, to that intent I came hither to be fully satisfied of what I
have a long time suspected. As for you Madam, your youthful days are past, but
your lust will endure for ever. If this be your way to Heaven, why were you so
uncharitable as not to let me go along with you? As for your part, Sir, I
believe that you are traveling that way too; for if I mistake not, you lately
came out of Purgatory.

To be short, they both entreated me to be silent, and retire to my own
lodging, and that in the morning they would treat with me to my full
satisfaction. This was what I aimed at, though brought about otherwise then
intended. Early they both came to me: the pious Gentlewoman being very tender
of her credit, would forgive me my Debt, if I would not blemish her reputation
by my report; her Gallant gave me ten pieces to bind the bargain: having gotten
a discharge under her hand, I sealed our contract with an Oath and faithful
promise never to divulge their shame. The Gentleman (though his estate much
exceeded hers) out of spite, I think, or vexation, to be so caught,
incontinently married her, though all former solicitations (which I understood
were many) proved ineffectual.

CHAP. XXV.
He is driven to extreme necessity; he describes what it is to be indigent, by
what he suffered in that condition.

THis ten pound I received from my old leacherous Dotard, made its Exit almost
as soon as its entrance into my Pocket: by that sum I thought to have purchased
Mountains in Ireland (and indeed there is too great plenty of them there,) by
gaming; but experience told me afterward that my design was hazardous, and so
it proved, for I met with a person that bubbled me at Hazard, not leaving me a
penny, and engaged besides for my proportion of the Reckoning. My Gamester
dealt too hardly with me, yet it was but just, for I intended to show him as
little favor, if compelled to lie at my mercy, which I verily thought would
be, having various Utensils about me to that purpose, but I was overmatcht.

Ithought my self secure, for I could top,
By which I Have forced some ^its to leave their shop.
I palm'd, and put the change upon them too;
I only studied how I might undo.
But now I Am met with, it is but just I see,
That he which others cheats, should cheated be.
I returned to my Lodging, (which was none of the best) with what anxiety and
perturbation of mind I shall give any looser leave to imagine, whilst the
remembrance thereof enforces me to speak; and I hope the Reader will give me
that liberty, since the Proverb intaileth on the looser that privilege. I
acquainted my Landlord with my misfortune, who seemed very much to condole me
for the present, but it was afterward the occasion of his not crediting me.
From hence I will advise all to speak as little as they can of ills that betide
them; but we cannot discourse too much of the good that happens to us.
Perceiving my Landlord grew cold, my spirit was too high to be any longer
beholding to him but for my Lodging; wherefore I feldom came home till night.
Neither would I make known my condition to any that knew me. Sometimes I should
meet with some in the street, who would ask me to drink with them: my usual
answer was, I came from it but even now: insisting farther, that such a
Gentleman, with two or three more besides my self had drank so much, and that I
admired at my self, for being so sober; whereas to deal ingeniously, I had not
drank one drop that day. Another seeing me, would ask me whether I would dine
with him at the Ordinary? then would I pretend that my Lord -- Gentleman
over-perswaded me to dine with him, and that we had such variety, that I
doubted my stomach had received some detriment thereby; and therefore begged an
excuse; whereas a dry crust taken out of my Leather Cupboard was all the
varieties the Gentleman Usher of my stomach, my throat I mean, had taken
cognizance of that day. So hard it was too, that I would look this way, and
that way, not daring to commit it to the engine of my Chops, unless there was
none near me within a furlong; for had there been any near me, they would have
sworn I was eating Walnuts shells and all. Now did I learn to drink Water,
which necessity made me to commend as the most sovereign liquor, and most
suitable to the body of man; otherwise Adam in Paradise would not have been
without a cup of Ale.

Every morning I offered up my Devotions either to St. Patrick, or St. James,
each of which have two excellent Wells dedicated to the honor of their
Saintships. Thither did I repair constantly twice or thrice a day: after I had
offered up the fumes of smoke (most commonly of none of the best Tobacco) I
kneeled, not using the common way of drinking out of the chained iron dish, but
with greater a doration sucked it as it came through the conveyance. After a
walk to Kilmanum (about a mile from Dublin) or some other place to prepare my
stomach, I returned to Christ-Church, frequently dining there with Sir Richard
Strang-bow: Reflecting on his Cheer, and the Liquor of those two Saints, I
cannot but tell you my thoughts of both.

Sir Richard Strang-bow keeps an house where Wine
And Bread some sup on, but few seldom dine.
Ask yet an hungry Rambler, and he will say,
(Though not one bit came near his mouth that day)
He plentifully dined with him, so let him still
Till he has found his empty belly fill,
Where I never could, which made me hate in fine
Sir Richard Strang-bows Feasts, St. Patricks Wine.
I fasted so long, I had now almost forgot how to eat: for if casually I came
where meat was, I often made a proffer to convey something to my mouth, but my
lips understood not my meaning; for having been so long unaccustomed to their
duty, knew not how to perform their gaping office. It was impossible at this
time for the greatest fright to have made me foul my breeches, because I seldom
used any thing that might cause excrements. And therefore I wondered to hear any
enquire for an house of Office, since I had now left off going to stool. Once
in five days I thought I stood in need of evacuating; but I was mistaken, for
by discharging a blast of wind (whose fury seattered small stones underneath
me) I found it only a fit of the Cholick. I shall deal plainly, should I have
found a propensity, I would have been very unwilling to let any thing go out,
since so little past into my belly. Some Movables I had left, which I was
forced to dispose of, to keep the passage of my guts open, which would
frequently grumble against my stomach for detaining too long what was received,
challenging a propriety therein. I thought it good policy not to buy any
Belly-timber of a quick concoction, because it should stay the longer within
me. To this purpose I looked on old Cheese to be food convenient; knowing that
though it will digest any thing else, yet it cannot digest it self; and as it
closes up the mouth of the stomach, so by its respective quality it looks up
fat^ the Postern of the Micro-cosm. Flesh again (if I got any) I would swallow
by wholesale, fearing left by chewing it, my stomach would too suddenly give
it a passport to my Hypo-gastrium; by which means it would be immediately ready
again, nay restless in the craving more. I seldom slept for the gnawing of my
stomach, and the anguish of my guts, and for want of those fumes which
proceeding from Meat ascended into the head, and so the causers of sleep. If I
chanced to nod at any time, I dreamed of nothing but eating, my fancy feeding
that while as voraciously as an hunger-starved hound on a shoulder of Mutton. I
was driven to that pass, I could not justly tell whether I was alive or not.
Sometimes I was of the opinion that I dyed in our Shipwreck on the Isle of
Man, and that I was now a Soul in Purgatory.

Immediately after my arrival in this place, the Itch and Bunniah, or Flux,
(the two grand Epidemical distempers of Ireland) gave me their welcome into
their Country, attended by a great number of six-footed Gent. clad in a gray
livery, with one single list down the back; who all promised to stick to me and
be my bosoms friends, neither would they forsake me as long as life lasted.
But they like the rest of the best and fairest promising friends left me, when
fortune committed me prisoner to the merciless cruel hands of that accursed
Jailer, Poverty. I was grown so lean, that the Mungril Scotch and Irish
Gentleman the Itch, finding not flesh enough to feed on, gave me the French
Complement, Adieu pouvre Gentilhome. The Flux staid with me as long as any
thing was left in my belly, but finding no substance from my Guts, took his
leave also, unkindly carrying away all that was within me. Their retinue
perceiving they were like to feed on hard meat, there being little left but
bones, whose teeth were incapable of fastening thereon, resolved to follow
after; some making more then ordinary haste, broke their necks off the Cape of
my Cloak, missing their footing, the threads thereof being spun out by time as
fine as those of Arachnes working.

To conclude, I was a mere walking Skeleton, my skin only served as a mantle
for my bones. But for wind, my belly would have contradicted an approved
Philosophical Axiom, proving a Vacuum.

One time passing by the Castle-gate, a Soldier fired his Musket, and I
protest methought my belly sounded like a Drum at the report. Should I relate
every particular wherein the malevolenoie of Fortune afflicted me, I should
much tire the Reader, as well as perplex my self with remembrance; wherefore I
shall desist, and give you leave to imagine the deplorableuess of his
condition, who has neither Moneys, Friends, nor Credit, and in a place where
he is neither acquainted with the people, nor their Language.

CHAP. XXVI.
He falling accidentally into a strange house, endeavors to build a Sconce,
but is frustrated of his intent. The old Hostess pities him at first, and
relieves him, and continually after feeds him for her own peculiar Diet;
further insisting on the mifery he then endured.

I Was by this time grown so feeble by fasting, or by the manner of my feeding,
which was either Cheese or hard Eggs, (there being great plenty) that I could
hardly go; and so light I was by continual smoking, that I questioned often
whether I was not a mere fume my self; fearing still when I walked abroad, to be
extracted by the Sun for an exhalation. Fortune so favored me one day, that I
found a Groat, which put me into an ecstasy of joy. I know not what Magical
power there was in that vast sum of four pence, for in an instant, not knowing
by what means, I found my self in a Victualling-house, so speedy was my
conveyance, as if I had been riding some Demon through the air. I called for
some meat, but my voice sounded so hollow, as if I had spoken in a vault. Some
said, it was the Echo of some person speaking in the next house: others of the
wiser sort believed me to be some Spectrum, or Apparition; and that the Devil
had assumed a body speaking in that mortuum cadaver. The truth of it is, 'twas
something hard to determine, whether I spoke or no, but that they might
perceive my lips to open. There was a Physician in the house at that time, who
looking on me narrowly, openly proclaimed that I was the workmanship of some
Mortal, who having first gotten the Skeleton, or bones of a Man, had
artificially skinned them over, and that German Clockwork caused my motion. I
would have laughed heartily at their ridiculous apprehensions, but that I had
forgot how. I had some Gall left in me still, which made me start up in as
great a rage as my feeble body was able to declare, intending to demonstrate to
them how grossly they were mistaken; but perceiving me to approach, they all
fled but Mr. Doctor, whom shame retained, otherwise by a fit of an Ague (which
just then possessed him) I knew he would willingly have been gone too. Speak
(said he tremblingly) what art? I was somewhat puzzled at his question, for I
knew not well what I was: I am a living man, said I. Why then thou would have
flesh, said he. After several discourses to this purpose, I at length made him
partly believe that I was no such thing he imagined. And yet he would be asking
me still a many impertinent questions, as whether I could fee; and his reason
was, because he could discern no eyes. Whether I was born without eyes, or lost
them since accidentally, etc. I was forced to tell him at last that it was the
Country disease that had reduced me to this condition. Hearing me say so, he
pitied me much, and told me he would fetch instantly something that should do
me much good. I thankt him, and away went Mr. Doctor.

The good Woman over-hearing our discourse drew near then confidently, and
demanded what I would have? I told her, any thing which was eatable, as far as
a groat would go. She brought me some hot Meat, and setting it before me, went
for some drink, but before she could return I had swallowed it all: she fetched
me more, which went the same way with as much celerity. But like Quicksilver
it wrought quite through me, not staying a quarter of an hour.

The manner whereof was thus: About to pay my Reckoning, my Groat got into a
piece of paper; I fumbled a great while in my pocket, but found it not, which
put me even to my wits ends. At last drawing out some papers, and shaking them
my Groat dropped; perceiving its fall might be dangerous, there being many holes
in the Floor, I caught after it; notwithstanding it fell upon the very brink of
an hole; what with have to recover it, and the fright the danger put me into, I
discharged my self of every bit I had eaten. There was no body could say, I had
fouled my Breeches, or that I stunk; which I made appear to my Landlady by
showing her what I had evacuated, but little differing from what I had eaten a
quarter of an hour before. The good old woman persuaded me strongly to eat it
again; for said she, it cannot be much the worse for just passing through you,
and I will fry it if you please. I thought I should now have dyed with laughter
at her strange proposition; but the woman star'd upon me, not knowing whether I
grin'd or laughed. Well, well, said she at last, if you will not eat such good
victuals, some body else shall. I offered her my Groat, which she refused,
telling me there was as much more to pay; I told her that was all the moneys I
had about me, and that I would pay her the rest the next day.

But she for her part thought it was unjust,
To listen to the arguments of trust.
And therefore told me plainly she would have her Reckoning. I bid her stay a
while: then as soon as she had turned her back I attempted to march off, but my
strength failing me, I wanted swiftness, and so was brought back. I made her
acquainted with my condition how miserable it was; I needed not many arguments
to persuade any into that belief, for my person was the true Emblem of misery.
She gave a serious attention to what I expressed, and at last melted into tears,
commiserating my misfortunes; she caused instantly a bed to be warmed, where
being laid, she ordered a Cawdle to be made, and in fine showed a world of
kindness to me, not imagining what she aimed at. She would not let me stir out
of my Bed but whilst it was making, for above a week; at the conclusion of
which I began to recover a little color in my cheeks, and grew indifferent
strong; she gave me moneys in my Pocket, and told me I must walk into the
fields with her. I blessed my self, and that Angel that directed my feet to the
finding that lost groat which was the occasion of my restitution to a condition
of living again. By this time I imagined what my old Gentlewoman expected:
wherefore, in the first place I acknowledged how much I was obliged to her
matchless civilities, and that it was impossible for me to return her
answerable satisfaction. Rolling her pretty Piggs-eyes to and fro in her head,
I require (said she) nothing but your Love. If it must needs be so (thought I)
there is no way better then to let fancy form her beautiful, and so by the
force of imagination I shall enjoy as much pleasure as if lying with Venus,
though in Conjunction with this Succubus. We used not many ceremonies, (like
puling-whining Lovers, that are always saying Grace, but never fall to) but
taking the convenience of a Ditch underneath a bushy-topt hedge we conferred
notes. Had any seen us in this posture, they would have concluded old Winter
metamorphosed into an old Woman lying in a Dike, and that Flora was converted
into a young man, and both in an unnatural Conjunction. Or that youthful
Phoebus had contracted his rays to court a lump of Ice, but with shame was
forced to desist, finding his powerful endeavors ineffectual in the production
of a thaw. Whenever I wanted a small sum, a kiss or two, or the saying I loved
her, extracted so much as supplied my present occasions; if I wanted a sum
considerable, why then a quarter of an hours discourse in private effected my
desires. Most that knew me wondered what politic stratagems I used that I so
suddenly wound my self out of that Labyrinth of all sorts of miseries, and that
I appeared both in feature and garb so excentrick to my former condition. I had
as many pretenses to blind the world as there were various suspicions of
pragmatick persons. In short, I was now very well apparelled, well furnished
with moneys, I kept my Horse, nay my Whor^ too; this I made use of for what she
was, the other for what she had. So seemingly happy was the present state of my
life, that I deemed it impossibly unalterable by any decree of fate.

CHAP. XXVII.
He makes a Ramble into the Country, takes some Observations as be travelleth;
and is soundly beaten for attempting to board a small Irish Pinnace.

I Began now to be somewhat weary of the City, and therefore resolved to
refresh my self with the Country Air. I acquainted my Patroness therewith; who
with much regret condescended, conditionally two days should be the utmost time
of my absence.

That morning I set forth, there was such solemn leave taken between us, as if
my voyage had been intended for the Indies. About to amount, she retrived my
intentions, clasping me in her arms; I should rather have chosen the embraces
of a she-Bear, as thinking her breath far sweeter; and truly I have often
wondered at my recovery in so impure and unwholsom air. Being on Horseback she
so bathed her Cheeks with tears (wanting no moisture, derived from an
everlasting spring of humors distilling from her head) that you would have
sworn she was the representation of the Pigwoman in Ben's Bartholomew fair. Had
not her watery Floodgates drowned her eyes, I think she would have stood
looking after me that way I rid till my return. Well, there is no fool like the
old doting fool: And were I again to love for interest, I would choose such a
person. Your young skittish things that only mind their pleasures, think they
have done a man a courtesy that merits reward, if they admit him into their
private samiliarity, because they find fond man so passionate and impatient in
the prosecution of his desires: And then again, having variety of Courtiers,
they are too sensible, that if one w^ll not meddle with the bait, a second will
nibble at it so long till he is caught with the hook. Whereas a woman stricken
in years, and having lost her beautiful allurements is disregarded, and looked
on as no fit subject for love to treat on; not but the may have as youthful
desires as any; and if that way inclined, none so prone as she. For knowing she
has nothing but her wealth to attract withal, she will freely part with it for
her self-satisfaction; and that she may not loose her Stallion, constantly
encourage him even to the exhausting of what she has. Moreover, finding the
man to answer her expectations, she studies all ways imaginable how to please
him in every thing, that he may please her in that one thing.

But to my purpose: coming to Balle-mor^-Eustace, a little beyond the Town,
(which is in the County of Wicklow) there is a small River in the Summertime
not above knee-deep; I perceived a young woman about to cross it; drawing to
the water, she stood not on the niceties of modesty, but pulled up her Clothes
to the wast. The sight hereof stopped me, and as near as I could opposite to her.
She minded me not, but came straight over to me, and at about three yards
distance let down her Coats. I observed so many excellencies that my blood
began to boil, and myflesh was all of a flame. For her hair which naturally
curled, and was plaited, was of a bright flaxen, each hair in the Sun glittered
like a thread of Gold.

Here take notice by the way, that the Maids for the most part, Winter and
Summer, go without any coverings on their head, which they wash all over every
night; the meaner sort as soon as married wear Kerchers. She had an Angelical
countenance, only somewhat brownish by the Suns frequent kissing of it; I know
not whether I may adjudge that a deformity. The skin of her body might vye with
Snow for whiteness, etc. I dismounted, and addressed my self to her in English;
she answered me in her own language, she understood me not: Then did I make use
of that little Irish I had learned, which were some fragments of lecherous
expressions, to which she replied, but I understood her not. To be brief, I so
far prevailed that I got her into a small Wood, in which the thick and
spreading tops of the trees seemed to lay their heads together in conspiracy to
keep not only the Suns entry, but also the curious search of any mortals eye.
She permitted me to kiss, dally, lay my hands on her thigh, etc. which were the
only Preludiums of what should follow. But herein I mistook, for their
dispositions are much different from the English. We use to say, that where we
gain over any woman the liberty to use the hand, we cannot fail of doing what
we most desire: whereas quite contrary they will without the least opposition
permit the first, but with the greatest difficulty admit of the last. For
as soon as she saw me ready to engage, she cried out incessantly, Whillallalloo;
and presently I could hear this ululation ecchoed. I had just recovered my
Horse, when two or three fellows came running to me, the one with a Flail, the
rest with long Poles. The first salutation I received was from the Flail, which
failed but little of doing my business: the next my Horses Crupper received;
the poor beast being civilly bred, could do no less then return them a Congee
with his leg, which made one of them fall on his knees to his Master, as if he
had been Monarch of that Soil. These two Rogues stood stiffly to me, insomuch
that I knew not what course to take. The Villains were so nimble, that one of
them was continually before me hindering my slight, whilst the other drub'd me
forward. I bethought my self of a Pistol I had in my Pocket charged without a
bullet; I drew it, presented, and pretended I would fire if they desisted not;
for these stupid fellows apprehended not the danger: perceiving how stupidly
senseless they were, I fired it full in the sace of him that fronted me, who
verily believed he had been shot, and so out of conceit (for they are naturally
very timorous) fell down as dead; the other seeing that, ran away as swift as
lightning, whereby I had leave to ride on, which I did (you may think) with no
ordinary speed. Lovers may talk of their sufferings by their Mistress frowns,
or obdurateness, but let any one judge of mine by the blows I received; sighing
is nothing to fighting, and a few tears are not to come in competition with dry
basting. Pox on them they made me out of conceit with love for six weeks after.
I never thought of enjoying a woman since; but the remembrance of those three
Bog-trotters converted the hot fit of my amorous Fever into a cold one.

A little way from Baltinglass I took up my quarters for that night. The Inn I
lay in was one story high, about the height of an extraordinary Pigsty, and
there was one Chinney in it too, more then there is to be found in one of an
100 such Hovils. The good man well-com'd me after his fashion, but I think an
Anthropophagus or Indian Man-eater would have done it as civily. I bid him set
up my Horse by signs, (for that was the language we converst in) but alas
there was no other Stable but what was at the end of our Kitchen; our
Dining Room, Bedchamber, Pigsty, Pantry and Buttery, being all one, without
distinction or separation. Some few Wattles (as they call them) were placed
above, that was our Hay-loft. The only door of our Inn was a large hurdle,
much like a sheep-pen. The Bann^ttee or good wife of the house, could speak a
little broken English. I asked her what I should have for Supper? Thou shall
have a Supper said she for St. Patrick a gra. I staid an half hour expecting
when she would lay down something to the fire, but instead thereof she brings
me in a Wooden Platter a great many Leeks, in the bottom whereof was a good
quantity of Bay Salt, and withal a loaf as black as if the Meal had been wetted
with Ink. See tou tere, Chreest himself nor St. Patrick did ever eat better
ting. I could not forbear smiling, which put her into a great passion: For if a
man eats not what they set before him, they think themselves highly affronted.
Because I would please them (not knowing but that I might find as bad sauce
here) I pretended to eat, conveying it into my Boots. After supper I asked them
for a clean Pipe; the woman brought me one about an inch long, telling me it
was very clean, for her Husband had not smoakt in it above ten times. I judged
it to be the ruins of the first Pipe that was made, which was conveyed from
one of that famility to another, conditionally they should constantly smoke in
it without burning it. They offered me some snuff too; which is one of the
greatest kindnesses they can either show or be shown. I called for some drink,
(to try whether that corresponded with the rest) and so it did, for there was
no swallowing it without chewing. Finding but little satisfaction I desired to
go to Bed. That I should instantly, they said, but I wondered where they
intended to lay me. In a little while in came a lusty wench with a bundle of
rushes on her head, my bed it seemed by the sequel, which she spreading on the
ground, covered them with a Caddow or Rugg. Here I must lie or no where,
patience was my only comfort; wherefore stripping my self to my drawers and
Stockins, I laid my self down. About two hours after came in two Cows, three or
four Piggs, some Ducks and Geese, (which they brought not in before, out of
civility to me.) All their family being within doors; the good Man, his Wife,
and two Daughters, stripping themselves stark naked, lay down altogether by my
side, which seemed somewhat strange to me. I could hardly forbear the two young
ones, but that my late misfortune was so fresh in my memory.

I could not sleep all that night, wherefore very early I discharged my
Reckoning, and so set forward for Dublin with all the expedition I could, not
liking the Country-entertainment. I would not ride the same way back as I came,
to avoid my bone-breakers; but it had been as well; for coming to a River that
I must foard, I asked a fellow which was the safest place: he pretended no
knowledge of what I said, wherefore making signs to him, he answered me again
with his hand, directing me to such a place; at the first step my Horse and I
plunged over head and ears; and had not my Horse been strong, we had both
perished. With much difficulty we got up the bank on the other side, and
looking behind me, the villain was e'ne almost out of fight. Such causeless
revenge they frequently exercise toward the English, naturally hating us with
a perfect antipathy. I returned at length to my old Hostess, resolving when
next I undertook such a journey, I would steer by the compass of other men's
experience.

CHAP. XXVIII.
The manner of his stealing an Hogshead of French Wine from the Custom-house.

TRacing the street, I chanced to cast my eye on a fellow, the flowness of
whose pace informed me of the idleness of his condition. His garb was so
preposterously unsuitable, that a man could not possibly look on him without
excessive laughter. To the intent you may participate with me in the same
sport, I shall open his Wardrobe. In general there was not any thing he did
wear that had not some times another property, and of which one might derive
another Pedigree. The Hat he had on was divested of all Royal Dignity, having
lost its Crown, and yet his crime would not be allowed of as Capital. But what
it wanted in one place was supplied in another, the brims whereof being so
large, they might have conveniently served as a Pent-house for another besides
himself. But this ingenious Squire politickly had pined up the brims on one
side, that he might have some light to discern his way; his Hat thus pined up
on the one side looked much like a trap-door pulled up. His Band was so torn and
dirty, as if he had but just come from some fray; and lest passion should prove
obnoxious, time had done him that courtesy to purge away his choler. In what
condition his Doublet was behind, I could plainly discover through the holes of
his Cloak, which generally was so transparent, that the rents and patches of
several colors of his clothes were as visible as if you had looked through
Lawn. The forepart of his Doublet and his Breeches I am confident were the
offspring of the Furniture of a Billiard-Table. His Cloak proceeded from a
Boat-tilt, whose Grandfather was an Horse-cloth; and I could not look on his
Breeches, but it put me in mind of the Scotch Flaggs that hung up^ Westminster.
His skirts were so liquor'd and greased, that in case of extremity they might
have served for belly-pieces, not using any thing but their own fatness to fry
them in By his countenance be seemed like a man of courage and ingenuity, and
so I could not choose but endeavor his relief. Wherefore I accosted him,
pretending I had seen him somewhere, but could not for the present call to mind
the place. His necessity made him assent to whatever I said; and defiring his
company to an Alehouse, he readily granted my request. By what unhappy
accident he became thus miserable, I know not, but the man was well furnished
both with natural and acquired parts. Having had various discourses of several
matters, and that we began to be familiarly acquainted, I asked him why he rapt
himself up so close in his Cloak? O Sir, said he, (to be plain) I have a maimed
Doublet, and I have heard some say, there is nothing more prejudicial to a
wound than the intromission of Air; which that Network garment of yours (said
I) will never be able to keep out. He replied, It Is true, Sir, I find it so,
but I wish it were a Net, for then I might employ my self by fishing.

I was so well pleased in my new acquaintance, that (bidding him stay there
till my return, which should be speedy) I went and procured him all things
necessary for to cover his nakedness; the last thing he put on was his Shoes;
finding them to have Soals, they added new life to him.

Having thus cast (Colt-like) his ragged Coat, I was not ashamed to walk with
him in the streets; coming to the Custom-house we saw several Pipes and
Hogsheads of Wine. Viewing all the places belonging thereunto, said I, Methinks
it is no difficult matter to steal one of these Hosheads, had I but assistance.
You shall not want mine, Sir, (said he) even to the hazard of my life, which I
shall never look on as a sufficient requital for this singular favor you have
now conferred on me. Having walked there a while, we went down to a place called
Lazy hill, where I found out two or three pure Rogues more, one whereof had a
Boat. I informed them of my design; they willingly promised their helping hand,
and the time appointed for the effecting our intentions, was that night about
twelve. Accordingly we all met, and having procured an empty Hogshead, we
filled it with water, and away we went in the Boat. The tide ebbing had left
dry ground underneath the Key, where I planted three of our company,
instructing them that as soon as they found the Coast clear above, they should
with slings (which they had for that purpose) leave the Hogshead of water, and
exchange it for one of wine; which done, they should march off immediately. I
and my new Comerade marched up the Customhouse stairs, where we encountered with
two old Watchmen. They asked us what our business was, we told them we had no
other design but to drink with them, having been a little frolicksome the other
side the water. The old Watchmen were very joyful at this news, and so giving
one of them money to fetch some drink, the other carried me to the Lodge. The
drink being come, they minded that so much, they had forgotten their duty; and
I played them so close with whole ones, that they were incapable of holding one
more: in the mean time my Comrogues were gone, pretending our boat was a drift:
we took our leaves; Being five of us concerned, we scorned to sell our Wine,
but contracting with some to find Sugar, with others Westphalia hams, or such
like relishing meats, and with others to be at the expense of Music, but every
one to be at his own charge for Wenches; we never gave over ranting and roaring
till we had dreined the Hogshead dry.

CHAP. XXIX.
His Landlady dies, and so is left again to live by his wits; his Comerade is
hanged, with some hints of his desperate, irreligious, and atheistical tenants.

IN the height of our jollity, word was brought me that my Landlady was
dangerously sick, and that she desired to speak with me instantly; thinking it
was only a sit of lecherous and salacious itch, I made no great haste, but at
length I went: As Soon as I entered within her doors, I received the sad tidings
of her death. I ran up stairs (not believing this report, because I would not
have it so) but found it too true: viewing her as she lay, I perceived her hand
fast clincht: I took it into mine, and wrenching it open, there dropped ten
pieces of Gold, which I conceive she intended to have bestowed on me whilst
living, as her last Legacy. I conveyed them privately into my Pocket, and
presently made enquiry how she had disposed of her Estate; but I received
little or no satisfaction herein, only to my great vexation, I heard she often
to the very last called much upon me.

I stayed not above two or three days in the house, but I was forced to leave
it.

I met with my obliged friend, to whom I communicated my late misfortune: he
like an experienced Stoic counseled me to bear my loss patiently, since that
is below a man to repine at any sublunary casualty, much more to sink under the
burden of any vexations cross, or remediless loss. We discoursed what expedient
we were best to take, and to increase our small stocks by some witty exploit.
We propounded many things which we approved not of. We thought of turning
Highway-men; but I dissuaded him from that, by informing him that money was
very scarce, and that men of 500 l. per annum usually traveled 30 or 40 miles
with a single Cob, or piece of eight, not so much for fear of robbing as for
want of Coin; and that is the reason that all sorts of provision are very
cheap, because there is so great a scarcity of that should purchase them. Why
then said he, there is money enough in the Exchequer. But said I, it is so
difficult to come at, that I will not hazard my life in the attempt. Hearing me
speak in this manner, he looked upon me in derision: saying, That fear was a
passion unworthy to be lodged in the Soul of man, and that there is nothing
here which a man either should or need to fear, Secundum Religionem Stoici: And
that man deserved not the fruition of the least happiness here, that would not,
rather then go without it, venture his neck.

We had so hot a contest about this, that we parted in anger, and never saw him
afterward till I heard of his condemnation, which was occasioned by the
prosecution of what he propounded to me. Two or three more besides himself
combined to rob the Exchequer, but were apprehended in the enterprise,
committed, arraigned at the Bar, convicted and condemned. Hearing hereof, I
gave him a visit in Prison; expressing much sorrow for what he was to suffer:
but he only laughed at me for my pains. I des^'d him to be more serious, since
three days would put a period to his life; and then he must give an account of
what he had done on earth, and that though we might sooth up our selves in all
manner of debauchery here, yet without cordial repentance we must suffer for it
hereafter, Prithee, said he, do not trouble thy head with such idle fancies,
and so break out into Atheistical mocks and expostulations, not fit to be
mentioned; and would have proceeded, but I desired him to desist.

Now his profane and irreligious discourse did so bore my glowing ears, that
notwithstanding the wickedness of my own nature, I could not endure to hear him
blaspheme; wherefore instead of endeavoring to rectify his erroneous
judgment, (for to speak the truth, my knowledge at that time was but slender in
the doctrine of Christianity) I say I durst not discourse longer, but left him
to his own Conscience for conviction, which I judged would be powerful with him
at the place of Execution.

The day being come, I resolved to see the final end of my friend. And there
did I enjoy the fruits of my hopes and wishes. For as soon as the Halter was
about his neck he roared so loud with his voice, that it could not but awake
the most lethargick conscience that ever the Devil lulled asleep. There I might
see and know by the urinal of his eyes, and the water standing therein, what
convulsion fits his soul suffered, his own mouth confessing how greivously his
diseased soul was stretched upon the rack of despair: then it was that the
voluminous Registers of his conscience, which did formerly lie claps'd in some
unsearcht corner of his memory, were laid open before him, and the Devil, who
hitherto gave him the lessening end of the prospect to survey his licentious
courses and damned opinion, now turned the magnifying end to his eye, which
made him cry out at last for mercy and so was turned off.

CHAP. XXX.
He passes for a'Batchellor, Courts several under the pretense of Marrying
them, by which he persuades some out of their Maiden-heads; others out of their
Money, with which he goes for England; At Chester he cheats his Lanllord, where
having all things requisite to complete an High way-man, follows that trade,
he is met with by some of that gang, who intending to rob him he discovers his
intentions, and they admit of him into their society.

BEing left now to shift for my self, having lost the main prop that sustained
me in all conditions, husbanding well the advantage of this contrary wi^d, I
presen^y set the engine of my brain to work, and thus it was; I addressed my self
to Courtship. Beauty was not the mark I aimed, the purchase thereof producing
little profit, since it self is most commonly the sole reward; neither can a
man attain to it but by great expense outvying all therein, least any
interpose. Either wealthy and aged widows, or thrifty Maids, who had laid up
what they had gotten in Service as a bait to procure an Husband, such did I
daily hunt out and visit by turns. I was not sparing of amorous expressions,
showing therein the height of zeal, by which means I deluded several. Some I
was forced to give earnest to for their Goods before they would trust me with
what they had. This course I followed till I was generally taken notice of for
a grand deceiver. Having now gotten a round sum of money by me, I borrowed
where ever I could, so crossing S. Georges Channel, in twenty four hours I
landed at Chester. I took up my quarters in a very graceful Inn, and gave out
immediately that I had an hundred head of Cattle ooming. The Master of the
house taking notice of my extraordinary Garb, and believing the report which I
had caused to be spread abroad, lodged me with much respect in one of the best
Chambers of his house.

The Wind favored my design as much as I could desire, for it blew
East-North-East, by which no Shipping could come out of Ireland. One day I came
to my Landlord, and telling him that by reason of the non arrival of my Cattle,
I was disappointed of Moneys, and therefore I desired him to lend me ten pounds
and he should satisfy himself in the first choice of the best of my beasts
when they came, and swore to him I would perform my promise to him upon the
word of a Gentleman. So that without any scruple he lent me the money. Being
Market day I bought an excellent Gelding with Fur^iture thereunto belonging,
with Sword and Pistols, and in this Equipage mounted, I taking my leave of my
credulous Landlord, without speaking a word to him. I had not r^d far before
three well mounted rid by me, (I found them afterward to be the Vanguard)
having as many more in the Rear. At the bottom of an Hill they before faced
about, and bidding me stand, those in the Rear reinforced the Van. One of them
clapping a Pistol at my breast, commanded me forthwith to deliver, Sweraing
three or four full mouthed Oaths. I saw it was now to little purpose to resist
although I was so well armed, and therefore endeavou^ed a conquest some other
way, viz. by smooth expressions. Gentlemen (said I) ye are all mistaken;
neither do I greatly wonder thereat, since I verily belie^e ye are fresh men,
men of a days standing in the study of this noble Science otherwise you might
have distinguished me from an honest man; for I think in thi^ Garb and posture,
I look as suspitiously as any of ye; only I think I take a better course when
ye to avoid apprehension, and ^eap to my self greater satisfaction. For ye rob
in companies, and if any one be taken his just fears frequently betray himself,
but of^ner the rest to destruction: whereas I robbing singly. I rob securely.
Now Sirs ^eely examine my Pockets, where finding store of Coin, they demanded
how I came by it? I invented a lie to their general satisfaction; which was, I
had met with a Booty a little before I met with them, which was the occasion of
my being so well furnished, but that which confirmed them most was my being so
well provided with Pistols in my Holsters, Pockets and Boots. Instead of doing
what they intended, they were then of another opinion, and all of them carest
me in a very high manner; resolving to be merry at the next Inn, and there to
admit me as a Brother,

Having set up their Horses, they went into a Room before, whilst I stayed
sometime after for the benefit of easing nature; coming in among them I thought
my self mistaken in my company, and made a proffer to go out again; but they
laughing heartily called me back. I knew not one person, for they had pull^d
off their false Beards, Vizards, Hoods, Patches, Wens, Mufflers and Perriwigs,
together with those other disguises that obscured the natural proportion of
their faces, so that they appeared as other men. Come said the chief (as I
guest him to be by the sway he bore over the rest) you are a freshman, and
therefore want some of our instructions, which in due time you shall receive
from us. In the first place it is fit that you take an Oath which every young
Theif must observe that is admitted into the Brotherhood, or at his
investation into the honor of one of the Knights of the Road: which was to
this effect, First, they read a charge of sec^ecy, that what ever misf^ortune
happened to cloud their freedom by rendering them as an object to Justice and
the Law, they should concea^ their Accomplices to the death, or against any other
jeopardy whatsoever, burying in oblivion not only his Confederates, but also
his manner of entrance into this way.

And further, they proceeded to swear me, that if the Judges should press me to
a discovery of particulars, that then I must cunningly create some men in my
fancy, devising not only Names, but to each man a particular feature,
describing their stature, complexion and age, as also their dwelling place.
Still provided that the place of their abode be far enough off. And then before
enquiry be made, the danger of the trial may be over or past: and then again
this pretended discovery may purchase favor from the Bench.

Further, if I should be examined, why, and how I fell into these courses, I
must then tell them that I was born a Gentleman, and well educated, but being a
younger brother, I had not where withal allowed me for a subsistence, and
rather then I would live beneath my birth, or disparage the stock from whence I
came (here fetching a deep sigh and looking very sadly) necessity constraining
me to supply my wants, I fell into these wicked courses, which will make them
think you are some misled young man whom temptations had drawn aside, and so
cause them to take pity of your condition; and if their mercy extend to the
remission of your guilt, it shall not only rest you from the punishment of the
Law, but from the persecution of your past evils.

By this means we may have liberty to fall to our old courses; nor must
conscience trouble us but dispense with every impiety, and glory in the
greatest iniquities, counting him most honorable who is grown the oldest, and
most exquisite, experienced Practitioner of all manner of vice. Much more was
committed to my memory for future observation, which for brevity sake I shall
omit.

CHAP. XXXI.
Some Instructions given me by our Grand master Thief.

AFter I was sworn, and full bowls of Sack had trou^d round, our grand Master
Thief, composing his Countenance, and looking very gravely, Come my new and
young Knight of the Road, be ruled by me whose long experience makes me able to
command, and my love to you willing to instruct you. Ever lurk or lie in some
by-place most advantageous and least suspicious which yields the eye the
prospect of the Road so strictly view the Booties, that other men's missortunes
may enrich your condition, and the honest man's loss be your gain; and be sure
you draw every advantage that may promote your cause to the longest extent. For
your Masks and Chin cloth, thus must you place them and fit them at a moment to
disguise your faces, thereby to blind the intellects of such as by constraint
pay tribute to your wants who then can know and with confiderate heed directly
swear you are the man, when these artificial vizards are withdrawn, and so the
visible tokens vanish that might inform men's knowledge, what you are, and that
your words may have a different sound alter your voice, that so as your habit,
face, and hair obscure your discovery; your speech (reputed undisguiseable)
will add to your concealment and security.

Be sure you ingeniously contrive a Watchword to your selves that may occasion
no suspicion; as we are like to have a fair day or a foul, according as the
weather is like to prove, which being named let every man fall to his work,
those that are strongest at the grasp, and have hearts accordingly, let them
seize first, always duly observing this, to catch the bridle by the left hand,
and with the right draw your Sword. If he or they resist, the one prevents his
flight, the other cuts, and so cools his courage. The weaker sorts charge is to
bid stand, and confronting the Horses head, present a Pistol fit for to
discharge. If they deny delivering patiently what they have, but contend, you
must wave all nicetie, but cut them soundly; if that will not qualify their
foolish presumption, be sure you fire not without doing Execution, and then
with what speed fly, after you have with expedition taken the pillage of the
field.

If you are pursued by an Hue and Cry, obscure your self in some place or
other, and let it pass by you, and then to be sure it will never overtake you,
If a prize comes by, or in your sight, if up the Hill meet him, if down follow
close at the heels, and having more in company then your self, let each man
single out his choice which he likes to deal with, the coast being clear fall
up all to your close order and side, be sure that you jointly seize your prize.
But here observe let not any baseness of spirit unman you. For (speaking to me)
nature has bestowed on you the full proportion of limbs, and seem a man of
courage, suitable to the largeness of thy manly size, but be not surpised with
fear or cowardice if the affailed boldly assaults thee.

Full fraught with the Documents which I received from my old experienced
Master, I resolved upon some atcheivement: between two and three in the
afternoon I my self with four more set out; we planted our selves in a
convenient place, only I was sent out for a discoverer, not rightly
understanding my trade I wandered too far, but in my digression I met with a
single person whom I bid stand, which he would have done, and as willingly have
surrendered his purse, but that he was mounted on a stone-horse, I on a Mare.
As Soon as I had given the word his stone-horse wheeled off and came in the rear
of me, I thinking he intended to crupper me, endeavored all ways imaginable
to prevent him, for there was something it seems under my Mares tail more
powerful, which at that time I dreamt not of, I led him round and round several
times circularly, the poor harmless Gentleman fearing he should provoke me too
much by delays, the unruliness of his Horse hindering my seizing the Booty,
cried out worthy Sir, take what I have and spare my life, at that very instant
his Horse reared his two fore feet upon me and my Mare, in so much that I
thought he said, I Will take both Life and Money too presently; fear had then
rendered me so incapable of performing the office or a Thief. With that I put
spurs to my Mare, and flew through the air for the procuration of my safety.
Notwithstanding I made what speed I could, the other was close at my heels,
striving and kicking with both my legs, one of my Pistols went off in my
Pocket, the apprehension of the present danger had bereft me of the true use of
my sense, for I imagined that my back friend had discharged at me, which made
me roar out for quarter. He on the contrary concluded I fought Tartar like
flying and that I had fired it at him, which made him with much eagerness echo
out with repetition this expression, As you are a man, show your self merciful.
Sometimes he would say for heavens sake hold, good Sir stop, which made me ride
more furiously, thinking he called to the Country, hold him, stop him; at last
do what I could, his Stone-horse leapt up upon us, at that instant (by what
means I know not) we all came headlong to the ground. I expected how that my
imaginary adversary would be upon me, and cut my throat before I could recover
my legs, wherefore I started up and found my mortal foe up before me and upon
the run. I could have hanged my self to think I should be reckoned among the
number of men, and yet want that spirit and courage which compleats a man; but
loosing no time I pursued him, and easily made my self possessor of what he
had; Sirrah said I, if e're I meet thee again, and find thee so obstinate, or
durst resist, as now thou have done I will tie thee to a Tree in some obscure
place, where none can hear thy doleful cries, and there for six days thou shall
have no other food but what I shall bring thee, Once a day during that term I
will visit thee, and each days Meat shall be either a piece of thine own Sword
broken into small bits, or those Bullets (which thou intendest for the
destruction of honest men) dissolved and mingled with Gunpowder, which shall be
conveyed to thy mouth through the muzzle of thine own Pistol. It pleased me
exceedingly to see how pitifully and submissively he looked, for verily I durst
not have uttered half so much if he had shown an austre countenance.

As I was framing a lie to delude my Comerades (when I should meet them) into a
belief how valiant I was, and dextrous in prosecution of that design I had
newly undertaken, I looked about me and saw them all at my elbow. I now believed
(which I easily perceived by their flearing looks) that they were all
eyewitnesses of my dangerous encounter. Oh brother, said one, how is it, are
you well? I asked him the reason of his impertinent question? Because, said he,
we took notice of the great danger you were in even now, narrowly escaped of
being shot by a Pocket Inkhorn. Without doubt, brother, you are very heard
hearted to fly (riding full speed) at the very naming of, Good Sir be merciful,
The poor harmless soul making frequent repetition thereof, but you stopping
your ears from all entreaties, his Stone horse seemed to be his advocate, and
to that intent ran after your Mare, endeavoring to court her into an
intercession for his Master,

I should never have stopped their mouths had I not showed them what I had
gotten, which was not inconsiderable.

It was twy-light as we met with another Prize, which was of a different temper
from the former. For though he and his fellow traveller were (comparatively to
any of us) but Pigmies, yet of so undaunted resolution and unresistable
courage, that neither threats of death, or torture (I am confident) could dull
the edges of their courageous spirits, which might be in part understood by
their deportment to us, for had we not slasht, carbonadoed, and forceably bound
them, rather then they would have yielded willingly, they would have stoopt to
death. Our power having subdued them, we withdrew them into a secret place,
leaving them not any thing valuable. Then did I learn to search with so strickt
care, that sooner might the Grand Turk turn Roman Catholic then conceal a
penny from me; here was I taught to be deaf when the poor Traveller cries he is
undone; and to be more flinty then Adamant, not to be moved with sighs or
tears. Having engaged them by Oath not to follow us by Hue and Cry, or by means
of a general rising of the Towns adjacent; these two fellows robbed, rifled and
amazed, we left wrapped up in woes, and hasted away to secure our selves.

I shall conclude this Chapter with a Relation how I was quit with my Comrades
upon the account of fear or timorousness. Neither could they justly tax me with
it, since they are things c^tail'd upon the profession. For every Crow that
flies extracts a fear, and every thing that does but stir, or make the bushes
rush, seemb'd to our fearful fancy a Constable to apprehend us for our Theft. I
cannot forget how strong a confusion arose amongst us by a triffle, the means
were so small, and the occasion so ridiculous, that when after I thought
thereon (though by my self) I could not forbear laughing excessively, and
condemn the t^merity of such minds so meanly spirited. 'Twas thus in short, An
Owl who to gain thelter from the troubles of a Sunshine day, when all the air
tribe (wandering) flock to him, screen'd himself in the obscure retired
residence of an hollow tree; no sooner had he cloistered up himself, but
between discontent and something of a pleasing satisfaction he first uttered
his amazing screeks, being in a slumber, and dreaming of the assaults were made
at him by his feathered enemies, of all sorts, and then again awaking, whoopt
for joy that he was delivered from them; thus did he whoop and hollow
incessantly, which infused such a terror into our distrustful minds, that
Whips Swiches, and Spurs were all too few to expedite our have. For we
absolutely thought those Hollows were the outcries of the Country following us
for what we had committed. We at length took Sanctuary in an Inn, where we had
some interest and confidence in our security.

Understanding that our days work had been prosperous, our Host calls lustily
for Sack, which the drawer doubles in the Bar, the Hostler must be one of our
company too, and hail fellow with us, who knowing what courses we take, presume
we dare not cavil, lest they betray our practices. Sic nos non nobis. So we rob
for them, and not for our selves; for by that time we have prosusely frolickt
(a bill whereof shall be brought in of twice as much as we called for) and have
bestowed our largesses to the Servants, and offered up our (expected)
sacrifices to our Landlady, or her Daughter for some private favor received,
we find our selves to have the least share, and so betake our selves to our
trade ^ill apprehension take from us that liberty, and the Law sentenceth us to
pay our lives as a just debt we owe to Justice.

CHAP. XXXII.
Scouring the Road, he lights on a Farmers house which he intended to rob, but
desists from that resolution, falling in Love with his Daughter, who was
exceeding beautiful; gets her with Child, under the pretense of Marriage, but
afterward refusing it, She and her Parents tax him with the undoing of the
young Woman; whereupon he leaves them, giving them no other satisfaction then
what they could gather out of a Copy of Verses he sent them.

RIding along the Road I met with a young Girl with a Milk-Pail on her head,
but I was amazed to see such perfection in one mortal face; I rid up to her
very near, purposely to entertain some discourse with her, introductory to a
future acquaintance, considering the ground you may imagine the questions I
propounded to this pretty Rural Innocent were fr^volous enough; as, which was
the readiest way to such a place, etc. which with much respect and modest
confidence she resolved; she opening a gate to milk her Cows, I followed, and
tying my horse to an hedge I begged her an excuse for being so rude and beseecht
her charitable opinion of my present actions, assuring her I would not offer
the least injury nor prejudice to her chastity. Being over-perswaded with my
protestations and vows to that purpose, she admitted me to sit down and
discourse with her whilst she performed the office of a Milk-maid. I could
hardly contain my self within bounds when I viewed her pretty little hand
stroking the Duggs. which indeed had so heightened my amorous passion, that I
soon forgot my Oaths and Promises, but after some dalliance, what by entreaties
and love persuasions, and what by corporeal strength I obtained my desires. We
then grew somewhat more familiar, but the burden of the Song was, I had undone
her; let him that reads judge the truth thereof. We concluded at length that
she should go home to her Fathers house, and that near night I would come
thither likewise, according to the time appointed, as if I had never seen her
before, and that I casually rid that way for information in the steering of my
course regularly in the prosecution of my journey.

She subtly goes in and acquaints her Father and Mother that there was a
Gentleman (witl (...)) whom by his countenance, garb and jesture, showed
himself no less; that fearing to travel farther, being night, knowing not the
way, desired to rest himself there till morning. With much respects from her
Parents to her own great satisfaction (which I discerned in her eyes) I was
kindly entertained, and nobly treated. That night we intended to be better
acquainted by the renovation of our late enjoyments; but our unlucky Stars
were impropitious to our amorous designs Next morning I seemed to be very ill,
that I might have some pretense for my staying, which I acquainted the Daughter
withal, the old people were very loving and courteous, so that as soon as they
heard thereof, With much pity they visited me, and with as much care they
provided what was necessary for me. I offered them money, showing good store of
Gold that they might have the better esteem of me. Thus I lay for at least a
fortnight; several Doctors had been with me, but none knew my distemper. All
this while I nightly had the society of my fresh Country Mistress, who deviated
from the common customs of her Sex, did not coyishly refuse that which was the
center of her hopes wishes and desires. Fearing least I might be suspected I
left off counterfeiting and showed them some recovery of my strength, When at
any time the good old people would come into my Chamber to sit with me, the
main subject of my discourse would be the resentments of their favors, and
that if I lived I would gratefully repay them. Being restored to my former
heathful condition, I one day told them I could never recompense their love and
care of me but by marrying their Daughter, whom I told them I loved most
affectionately. Her Parents made many excuses, As that she was but a poor
Country Girl and the like, but glad I perceived they were to hear such an
overprized motion. Enquiries I made in a Neighboring Town what this farmer
was, whom I understood by all to be very wealthy, and that time was not more
careful to furnish him with silver Hairs, then he industrious to maintain them
by the procuration of a plen^iful Estate: My wanton was his only Darling, for
whom he furrowed the surface of the Earth, and for whom he chose rather to sell
then to eat his better sort of Provision, that he might add to her Portion. It
was now, he thought he had well bestowed his labor, since he had met with such
a blessed opportunity wherein he should add Gentility to his Daughters riches.
O the slaughter of Piggs, Geese Capons, which as to some Idol were Sacrifices
diurnally, offered to procure my favor! And as he was liberal in his Food, so
was not I sparing in the sending for Wine, six Dozen of Bottles at a time: So
that the Old man was brough to this pass, that he cared not whether he spent
his Estate on me or gave it; and that young Girl, so well pleased with her
imaginary Paradise here, that I am confident she would never have been induced
to have exchanged this for any other on equal terms. Inexpressable was our
satisfaction on all hands, but nothing gave them greater content then to see us
together, by which we had as many opportunities as we listed. My main aim was
still to know of my young Mistress what store of Coin her Father had, and where
it lay, but to my great grief and vexation she told me he had not five pound
within doors, having lately bought a purchase. I now thought it was to little
purpose to stay longer, since I could not glean from her Fathers harvest,
though I had reapt the crop of her Mothers labor, and so resolved to be going,
but not without one nights solemn leave taking of her; The night being come,
she purposely stayed up till all the rest were gone to bed. But we being too
imprudently hasty in the Kitchen, stumbled against two Barrels piled one on the
other, and fell; and we both were so entangled, that we could not digsinage our
selves so soon, but that her Father came out crying, In the name of Goodness
what is the matter? And groping about caught me by the naked breech. Seeing
there was no remedy, I desired him to be silent; and not spread his Daughters
disgrace, if so, I would make her shortly a recompense. The old man was very
much perplexed, and could not forbear telling his Wife of what had past. They
both cried out that their Daughter was undone; The Daughter was in the same
tone, unless I would spedily marry her.

I stayed afterward about some three days to color the matter, and at last
marched off incognito, sending her twenty pieces of Gold, and a Copy of Verses,
which as too plain and pertinent to the sweet Treatments had past between us we
shall at present here omit.

CHAP. XXXIII.
From this Farmers house he rides he cared not whither. On the Road he is
strangely surprised by a Woman robber in Man's apparel; He discovers it by
unbuttoning her Breeches to search for private Pockets within. They two
conclude a perpetual Friend-ship.

A Bruptly taking my leave of the Farmer and his loving Daughter, I rid a long
time but met with none worthy of my taking Cognizance; being wearied I struck
into an Inn, and by that time I had thoroughly refresht my self, the evening,
began to approach. Whereupon I mounted and so put on; Passing by a small
Coppice in a bottom between two Hills, a Gentleman (as I then supposed) well
armed, and handsomely accoutred, started out upon me, and bid me deliver
instantly. Hearing him say so, I told him if he would have but the patience I
would; and with that drew out a Pocket Pistol and fired it at him, without
doing any execution. If you are for a little sport (said the Gentleman) I shall
show you some instantly; whereupon drawing a Pistol he shot me into the leg;
having so done, with his Sword (which hung ready at his wrist) neatly at a blow
he cut the reins of my bridle, so that I was not able to guide my Horse. But he
being good at command and used to the charge, with the winding of my body, I
gave him to understand what he was to do. Come Sir, said my adversary, have you
enough yet? In faith Sir, said I, I Will exchange but one Pistol more, and if
that prove insuccessful I shall submit to your mercy; Whereupon I shot but
missed my mark; however I killed his Horse, which instantly fell, my Gentleman
was so nimble that before I could think what to do, he had sheathed his sword
in my Horses belly, which made me come tumbling down too with a Horsepox, Once
more said my Antagonist, we are upon equal terms, and since the obscurity of
the place gives us freedom, let us try our courages, one must fall. And
thereupon with his Sword (which was for cut and thrust) he made a full pass at
my body, but putting it by I closed in with him and upon the Hug threw him
with much facility, I wondered much at it, which I need not have done since his
nature (as afterward I understood) was so prone to it. Having him down, now,
Sir, said I, I shall teach you to be careful on whom you set, you have as
imprudently undertaken this enterprise as a Pickeroon did once, who seeing a
Man of War high built, and but few men aboard her discoverable, her Port-holes
being likewise fast, clapped her aboard imediately, thinking she had been a
Merchantman, but they found th contrary, the deck being instantly filled with
men that were below, and running out her Guns there could be no wisdom in
resistance. Wherefore now Sir yield, or I shall compel you; with much
reluctance he did. With cords I had ready for that purpose, I tied both his
hands and feet, and so fell to riffling him. Unbuttonning his Doublet to find
whether there was no Gold quilted therein, I wondered to see a pair of Breasts
so unexspectedly greater and whiter then any man's; but being intent about my
business that amazement vanished from my thoughts. Then did I come to his
breeches (which I laid open) my curious search omitted not any place wherein I
might suspect the concleament of moneys, at last proffering to remove his shirt
from between his legs, he suddenly cried out (and strove to lay his hand there,
but could not) I beseech you Sir be civil, said he: I imagining that some
notable Treasure lay there obscured, I puled up his shirt (alias Smock) and
found my self not much mistaken.

The sight so surpriezed me as if I had been converted into a Statue by the
head of a Gorgon, but after a little pause, I hastily unbound her, and taking
her in my Arms, Pardon me most courageous Amazon, (said I) for thus rudely
dealing with you it was nothing but ignorance that caused this error; for
could my dim-sighted soul have diffinguisht what you were; the greatness of
love and respect I bear your Sex would have deterred me from contending with
you. But I esteem this my ignorance, my greatest happiness, since knowledge in
this case would have deprived me of the benefit of knowing there could be so
much Prowe^ in a Woman. For your sake I shall ever retain (since you have
restored it) a good esteem of the worst of Females. She begged me not to be too
tedious in my expressions, nor pump for eloquent phrases alleging this was no
proper place to make Orations in. But if you will enlarge your self, let us go
to a place not far distant from this, better known but to few besides my self,
I liked her advice very well, and returning what I had taken from her, I
followed it, by following her through diverse obscure passages till we came to a
Wood, wherein a place the Sun had not seen since the first deluge, stood an
House. At our approach the Servants were all in a hurry who should first obey
Mrs. Viragos commands, for they all knew her being no way estranged to her
disguise, but wondered to see St. George, and his trusty Esquire on foot,
neither durst they show themselves inquisitive presently: with much respect we
were conducted into a very stately room, where embracing each other, we knit an
indissolvable tie of frindship.

CHAP. XXXIV.
After Supper they enter in Discourse, wherein she giveto him a short account
of her Life, and the cause of her undertaking such an extravagant and dangerous
course; relating how notably she revenged her self on her Husband for his
unworthy and base carriage toward her

HAving refresht our selves with what the House afforded, and Bottles and Pipes
had supplied the place of Dishes; we dialogu'd as famillarly, as if our
acquaintance had bore equal date with our nativities. And now it was she laid
her self open to me, not concealing any thing, having before made my self
acquainted with her greatest Secret. Frankly she called for Bottles of Wine,
which we smartly drank together, out of Beer-glasses, had not Supper been
speedily provided, which required a cessation for some time, I should not have
been in a condition to discern the Dish, nor him that brought it to the Table.
Having taken some rep^st I began to be refresht, she not in the least disturbed
all this while.

I pressed her to tell me what she was, and what manner of life she led. Sir,
said she, I cannot deny your request, wherefore to satisfy you, know that I
was the Daughter of a Sword Cut^er. In my younger days my Mother would have
taught me to handle a Needle: but my Martial spirit gainsaid all persuasions
to that purpose. I could never endure to be among the Utensils of the Kitchen,
but spent most of my time in my Fathers shop, taking wonderful delight in
handling those Warlike Instruments, to take a Sword in my hand well mounted and
brandish it, was reckoned by me among the chief of my recreations. Being about
a douzen years of age I studied all ways imaginable how I might make my self
acquainted with a Fencing-Master,. Time brought my desires to their complement,
for such a one as I wished for, casually came into our Shop to have his blade
furnished, and Fortune so ordered it there was none to answer him but my self
Having given him that satisfaction he desired, though not expecting it from me:
Amongst other talk I demanded of him whither he was not a Professor of the
Noble Science? (for I guest so much by his Postures, Looks, and expressions.)
He told me he was a well willer thereunto; being glad of this oppertunity,
desiring him to conceal my intentions, I requested him the favor as to give me
some instructions how I should manage a Sword: at first he seemed amazed at my
proposal, but perceiving I was in earnest, he granted my petition, allotting me
such a time to come to him as was most convenient. I became so expert at
Back-sword and Single-Rapier in a short time, that I needed not his assistance
any longer: My Parents not in the least mistrusting any such thing.

I shall wave what Exploits I did by the help of a disguise, and only tell you
that when I arrived to fifteen years of age an Innkeeper Married me, and
carried me into the Country. For two years we lived very peaceably and
comfortably together, but at length the insolent and imperious temper of my
Husband made me begin to show my Natural humor Once a week we seldom mist of a
Combat between us, which freequently proved so sharp, that it was well if my
Husband came off with a single broken pate, by which means the gaping wounds of
our discontents and differences being not presently salved up they became in a
manner incurable.

I never was much inclined to love him, because he was of a mean, dastardly
spirit, and ever hated that a Dunghill-Cock should tread a Hen of the Game.
Being stinted likewise of Money, my life grew altogether comfortless, and I
looked on my condition as insupportable, Wherefore as the only remedy or
expedient to mitigate my vexatious troubles, I contrived a way how I might
sometimes take a Purse; I judged this resolution safe enough, (if I were not
taken in the very fact) for who could suspect me to be a Robber, wearing abroad
upon such designs man's Apparel, but at home only that which was suitable and
agreeable to my own Sex. Besides, none could have better encouragement and
convenience then my self; for, keeping an Inn who is more proper to have in
custody what charge my Guests brought into my house then my self; or if
committed to my Husbands tutelage, I could not fail to inform my self of the
richness of the Booty. Moreover, the Hostess is the Person whose company is
most desired, before whom they are no ways scrupulous to relate which way they
are going, and frequently what the affair was that led them that way.

Courage I knew I wanted not, (be you my impartial Judge, Sir) what then could
hinder me from being succesful in such an enterprise. Being thus resolved (I
soon procured necessary Habilliments) for these my contrivances, and never
miscarried in any of them till now. Instead of going to Market, or riding five
or six miles about such a business, (the usual pretenses with which I blinded
my Husband) I would when out of sight ride a contrary road to this House
(wherein we now are) and here Metamorphose my self, and being fitted at all
points Pad uncontroulably, coming off always most Victoriously. Not long
since my Husband had about one hundred pounds due to him some twenty Miles from
his habitation, and designed such a day for its reception, Glad I was to hear
of this, resolving now to be revenged of him for all those injuries and
churlish outrages be had committed against me, I knew very well which way he
went, and knew the time of his coming home; wherefore I waylaid him at his
return. And happliy as I would have it, he did not make me wait above three
hours for him. I let him pass me, knowing that by the swiftness of my Horse I
could easily overtake him, and so I did, riding with him a mile or two before I
could do my intended business. At last (looking about me) I saw the coast clear
on every side; Wherefore riding up close to him, and laying hold of his Bridle,
I clapped a Pistol to his breast, commanding him to deliver, or he was a dead
man. My imperious Don seeing death before his face, had like to have saved me
the labor by dying voluntarily without compulsion, and so amazed at his
sudden surprizal, that he looked like an Apparition, or one lately risen from
the dead. Sirrah (said I) be quick: but a dead Palsy had so served every part
of him, that his eyes were incapable of directing his hands to his Pocket. But
I soon recalled his lost spirits by two or three smart blown with the flat of
my Sword, which so awakened him out of that deep Lethargy he was in, that with
much submissiveness he delivered me his moneys. After I had dismounted him and
cut the Reins of his Bridle and Girts, I basted him soundly, till that I had
made jelly of his bones, and that his flesh looked like Egyptian Mummy. Mow you
Rogue (said I) I am even with you, have a care the next time how you strike a
woman (your wife ^ mean) for none but such as dare not fight a man will lift up
his hand against a weaker vessel. Now you see what it is to provoke them, for
if irritated too much they are restless till they have accomplished their
satisfactory revenge, I have a good mind to end thy wicked courses with thy
life, but that I am loath to be hanged for nothing, such a worthless man.
Farewell, this money shall serve me to purchase Wine to drink healths to the
confusion of such Rascally and mean spirited things; and so I left him.

She was a bout to have proceeded in such agreeable relations of her
rencounters, when word was brought her up two Gentlemen below desired to speak
with her, craving my excuse she went down and in a little time returned with
them: She made an Apology to me for so doing, ading that if she had committed a
crime herein, my future knowledge of those persons would extenuate it. By their
effeminate countenances I could not miss of judging rightly what they were,
viz. Females. After several discourses we grew so familiar, that the longest
continued friendship could not boast of more freedom.

Having talked and drank our selves weary, we concluded to lie all in one
chamber, there being two beds, what our Nocturnal passages were, I Will give the
Reader leave to imagine.

CHAP. XXXV.
Here he relates (modestly) what satisfaction he received from his new Female
acquaintance, and what occasioned the two last income Amazons to attempt the
hazardous enterprises of the High Pad, with their Character and course of Life.

THough Melancholy Night had drawn her sable curtains about our Hemisphere,
yet the coverled of our Optics was not yet laid down to admit our active
senses to their usual rest and repose, obscured darkness had every where
proclaimed silence about us on penalty of distracted incomposedness; yet we
feared not the breach of those binding Laws, by breaking our minds to each
other interchangeably. My conquered foe (now my new friend) first began to
relate to her old associates the rise of our late rencounter and the success,
which she expressed with so much life and ingenuity, that they knew not which to
value most, her wit, or my courage; but when she came to relate the manner of
the discovery of her sex, so petulant and facetious was her discourse, that it
occasioned a great deal of laughter and mirth among us. Having thoroughly
discourst varieties, for further diversion one of these late Incommers
undertook to give us a summary of her Comerades (or Sisters) being therewith
intermixed; now I must give her leave to tell her own Tale.

Sir, (for to you I apply my discourse particularly, being wholly ignorant of
what these two inseparable Companions of mine well understand) I shall not
trouble your ear with any thing then what is absolutely necessary: laying aside
therefore superfluous Preambles, let me tell you I was the eldest Daughter of a
Vintner in London, a man looked on so wealthy, that he was called upon for
Alderman, having no more children then a Son, my Self, and this my dear Sister,
my Metamorphosed follower. My Brother I think was begat out of degenerate Wine,
and that made him so degenerate from Virtue and a good Spirit; a hot firery
fellow, always on the fret, till his Cask or Carcass was pierced; and so I
leave him as I found him, an empty, Hogsheard.

This obstacle being removed (the Remora to our ^air promising Fortune) none
were more extold and courted for Wealth and Beauty (rarely seen together) then
my Sister and self; men of all sizes, both of Wit, Estate and Stature, daily
frequented my Fathers House, pretending they came for the goodness of Wine
there vended, till they had got an interest in our acquaintance, and then they
unmask their meaning. Several overtures were made to our Parents, who like good
domestic Politicians, seemed to like, too encourage them to continue coming
for their expense sake; frequently they bespake Dinners, vying who should
exceed in prodigallity, thinking thereby to gain esteem, while the old Fox did
but laugh at them in private for their pains My Mother had her trade at her
fingers ends; for when she would oblidge any of them to any treaty, it was but
calling him Son, or Sirrah you are a wag, my Benjamin must have the largest
Portion, etc. By this means she chained them to the house, and to engage them
the more, permitted us to bear them company; but fearing least we might glut
our Idolators by too long staying (for we sooner surfeit on delicates then
courser fare) our Mother would call us, pretending present business, and would
then supply the place her self; then would they charge afresh, till they had
blinded one another. I must needs say, my Mothers company was deservingly
desirable: for though she had past her ages AEquinox, yet her beauty appeared
but a very little declining. In her youthful days she was the wonder of her
Sex, and was so generally talked of among Beauty-hunters, that our Tavern was
never empty, and happy was he that could procure the drinking of a glass with
her at the Bar, but transported, if they could obtain the favor to have her
company in a room: which for profit she sometimes permitted, and something else
which my Father wincked at gladly, because he could not find the like expedient
to enrich himself. She was comely, tall, and of a beauteous blushing brown; her
hair proper to her complexion, neatly put into curls and folds by Nature: Her
face was made up of excellent parts; as a quick eye and full; her circled brows
graceful and big; her nose not over Roman, with a full mouth; the largeness of
the lips commendable because plump and red; her dimpled chin (which Nature had
drawn, with a wanton touch of her Pensil) did singularly set out her looks most
comely. Her neck was round, rising full and fat: her Body well fed, not fat;
an Italian Don's delight. When any Gentlemen came in, methinks I now see how
she leared out of her enticing Italianated eyes, able to confound a Saint. In
short, her hair was enough to enchant you into those mazes, but that her looks
were so near which hooked yours into her eyeballs, full, black and rolling; and
when she had you, she held you there. Neither was she a niggard of those gifts
were so liberally bestowed on her, but communicated a taste thereof to diverse
for as she was naturally prone to whorishness, so she gave her inclinations the
reins, and at last became so impudent, that she did frequently that in our
sights, which though we understood not being too young, yet forceably drew a
blush into our tender cheeks. Being in her prime, she gave her self so much
liberty, that she was a shame to her sex; there was not any vice that was
attended either by pleasure or profit, but she would be sharer therein, And now
being gulled with shadows and impostures, she drew up the Portcullis of her
heart, and laid the gates thereof wide open to her own ruin. Who would
imagine, that a pleasing countenance could harbor villainy, or that a smile
could set upon the face of mischief. But herein she showed her self a Curtezan
of the right stamp, that for her own advantage can entertain man's appetite with
wanton dalliance, but will never make assurance of settled love. When men think
themselves most interessed in her, than was it frequently that they were
farthest from her. I am somewhat the longer in my Mothers Character, that I
might the fuller demonstrate what was the original that I so exactly coppied in
the actions of my own life. Did Parents consider how prevalent their wicked
examples are with their Issue, they would be less curious to cleanse their
houses of dirt and dust against the coming of their friends, and more careful
not to see them hung with vices in the presence of their Children. You see I
know the difference between good and evil, because I talk so well though I act
so ill. But to proceed; How is it possible the Daughter should be chaste, that
can reckon up the adulteries of her Mother, though she be nere so well in
breath without a dozen stops or intermissions at the least? Such as are
conscious to these faults in others, cannot but be capable of them in
themselves The hearing of them told, begets a willingness to try them: the
seeing of them done, a wilfulness to do them. She presumed I belive upon our
indiscretions as Children persuading her self we had not wit enough to discern
it. But alas? she erred in her Ciphers, and was much mistaken in her accounts:
for we coming to years, did not stick to do that in her sight which she before
would not forbear in ours. And with what face could she rereprove us.

The crooked wretch must not upbraid the lame,
Nor must the Moor the tawny Indian blame.
Her house did daily swarm with such as pretended more then common kindness to
me. Several my Parents approved of as wealthy, and propounded them to me whom I
only disliked for want of comeliness. One I confess I could have fancied highly
for his wit, had not his formation, been so extravagant and preposterous. O the
innumerable quantity of Poetic brats which Pallas like sprang out of his head,
and so pestred my Chamber that I could hardly sleep for the trampling of their
feet: some whereof appeared so fair unto me from a Father so foul, that I have
carried them in my bosom to converse with them among the solitary shades. I
protest civility could scarce keep me from laughing outright every time I saw
him, his whole composure appeared to me so ridiculous. For first his head
seemed to sink down into his breast, his eyes staring affrighted at the danger,
whilst his mouth continually gaped, as if it intended to cry out for help: his
back and breast bunched out as if a wallet stuffed at both ends had hung over
his shoulder behind and before. Though extravagant enough, you could not say he
showed much waste. Had you seen him on a rainy day, by the length of his legs
(yet of dwarfish stature) you would have thought him mounted on stilts, and
wading through the dirt with a boy at his back. Now let me skip over his
person, and only tell you how I served him, and then I have done with him. That
day I saw him not, I had his representation sent me, which was good diversion,
but his presence was insufferable: to the intent therefore that I might be rid
of him I sent him these lines,

SIR,
You are the son of Esop, for I find
Legitimation by your shape and mind;
Deformed ye are alike thence it is thought fit,
That such defects should be supplied by wit.
Your aspects monstrous foul, yet don't complain,
Your issues fair the product of your brain:
But stay, I must recall my self, for know
My praises are like to your self, too low:
Troth when I veiw you well my fancy must
Imagine you much like a Capon trust.
Or like Sir Hudibras, nicknamed All-feather,
Or like one tied both neck and heels together:
Nor do not think Pygmean Sir that I,
Will fall in love with mere deformity;
Then court some Succubus, a fiend will be
A fitter match: so think no more on me.

These lines so nettled him, that having belcht out some execrations against me
and our sex, I never hard more of him. To be short there was none could get any
interest in me, but our Head-drawer, a neat flaxen-hair'd dapper fellow; so
passionately we loved one the other, that we could not forbear holding some
private correspondence at nights. My Father at length suspecting us turned away
his man, whose absence I could not brook, and therefore resolved to follow
after, which I did, taking with me what ready money my Father had in his
custody; and finding out my dear Comerade, this was the resullt of our
consultation, that I should cloth my self like a man, and so travel together.
It will be too tedious to relate how and whither we went; but let it suffice to
tell you, that after we had ran through France and Italy, and wearied our
selves in foreign parts, we concluded to return for England. We landed at Dover
having made an end of our voyage and money together, saving so much as would
purchase Horse and Arms, for padding was the way we agreed on to recruit our
decayed stock. Many were the robberies we committed, taking such a course that
the Devil could hardly detect us: for sometimes when we had robbed, and fearing
least we should be taken by the Hue and Cry, it was but turning my horse loose,
and then would I put on woman's apparel (which I always carried in my Portmantle
in such expeditions) and getting up behind my dear friend, I past unexspected
as his wife; this stratagem frequently proved a safeguard to us both By this
means we several times robbed houses under the pretense of my friends taking
lodgings for himself and Wise; to tell you in what manner and how often we
played our pranks under a double disguise, would take up more time then is
convenient. Wherefore I shall now wind up my story: My Comerade in an unhappy
enterprise received a shot in his shoulder, which proved Mortal, for not long
after he died. Being then destitute of my dear companion, I had several
thoughts of returning home, but that I liked my trade so well, I could not be
induced to leave it. However I went to my Fathers house frequently with roaring
Blades, but new me not though sometimes they would stare upon me, as if their
eyes would have started out of their heads for joy to see their o'd
acquaintance. At last I took a convenient opportunity under the veil of
courtship to discover my self to my Sister (nere present) who understanding my
course of life, and knowing well her own constitution, for my sake resolved to
hazard all, and run one risgue with me. Having instructed her how she should
rob her Father, as I had done before her, we met at a place appointed, and so
took our journey hitherward. Now if our conversation may be any ways pleasing,
and our service advantageous, we are both your devoted servants: she uttered
these words with such a grace, that I could not forbear embracing her. After we
had plighted faiths, and mutually carressed each other, we betook our selves to
rest, which you may imagine was little enough.

CHAP. XXXVI.
How he with his new female padding Comrade contrived notable subtle and safe
ways to rob together, with a rela^ion of some remarkable stories which were
thee effects of those consultations.

Angry I was when I perceived the appearance of day, which I knew would
unavoidably rob me of my present delight and pleasure. But it was only my fear
of being deprived of so much bliss made me so grossly to mistake; for I
quickly found my happiness enlarged by the approaching light, my sense of
seeing being now made Copartner with that of feeling. Love had now his eyes
restored him who before only groped for the naked truth in the dark. Now did we
begin afresh to renew our late sweet nocturnal pastime, and could our bodies
have any ways answered our boundless desires, our bed would have been the sole
concern we should have minded, till that time which must put a period to this
transitory life.

But to avoid the censure of sluggishness, we all resolved to rise and
unanimously strive and contend who should make the best proof the greatest
ingenuity in contriving what may give the largest satistaction both to mind and
body. As a praeludium to our intended purpose and a restorative to our decayed
strengths; we first resolved upon buttered Sack, with other things of like
comforting natures: and now finding our selves by this first essay so much
beyond expectation revived and fitted for mirth and pleasure, we straight gave
order for a Dinner to be speedily prepared, whose composition should be of the
choicest viands. And that the time might not seem tedious in the interim, it
was put to the vote what pastime we should make choice of for divertisement.
Some were for bodily exercise, but I was clearly against that, having so lately
tired my self with it: besides my lameness, which was occasioned by the shot I
received in my leg from my Valient and Rencountress. It was at length agreed
on by all that we should entertain our selves with Music and Discourse. A
match said the eldest Sister) and to the intent you may see my freedom and
forwardness to propogate your proposition, I shall give my assistance first to
heighten your spirits by vocal and instrumental Music: having thus broken the
Ice, I question not but you will prove ready followers, and swim with me in the
same streams of delight. Whereupon she took up a Lute, and having praised that
instrument above all other for its sweet ravishing harmony, I will now try
(said she) how my voice will agree with it, and thus sang:

What need we to care,
W 'have enough and to spare,
What we gain we will drink out and spend on it;
But when all is gone
We will get more anon,
Then make it all fly, there is an end ou't.
We will rob, we will steal,
For our own Common weal.
Let the Miser be damned with his treasure;
Our designs we will shape
For the juice of the grape,
Thus spin out our lives in our pleasure,
We think it more fit
To live by our wit,
And hazard our lives on adventure,
We are Sons of the blade
Never bred to a trade,
We scorned to be bound by Indeuture.
Not for flattery, but due merit we could give her no Iess then applause: Which
though that word may favor of something of a complement, yet I will assure you
there was no such thing past between us; we knew how to improve our time to a
far greater advantage, leaving such empty vain expressions to such, who have
little else to do then to play with a Ladies Fan, or to consume their times in
combing their Perriwigs, not only in the Streets and Play houses, but even
(irreverently) in the holy places of Divine Worship.

The pertinency of this Song. to the practice of our lives, did as much please
us all, as the sweet harmony of that voice did ravish our deli^hted ears. And
least our satisfaction should any ways cool or abate, more Musical fuel was
laid on, to warm our benumbed spirits, if any such unlikely thing should happen.

Whereupon her Sister (not making use of any instrument to assist her voice,
being sensible it was good and natural) frankly, and with a becoming freedom,
sang to this purpose,

It Is liberty which we adore,
It is our wealth and only store,
Having her we all are free,
Who so merry then as we:
It Is she that makes us now to sing,
And only She can pleasure bring.
Chorus.
Since we then such freedom have
Wee' purchase pleasure, or a grave;
It Is better so then live a slave.
As I am free, so will be still,
For no man shall abridg my will:
I Will pass my life in choicest pleasure,
On various objects spend my treasure:
That woman sure no joy can find
Who to one man is only joined.
Chorus,
Since we then such freedom have,
We Will purchase pleasure or a grave:
It Is better so then live a slave.
What pleasure is in full cramed baggs,
No more ^hen is in Beggars rags,
Unless made use of, what is Cash?
A fine new Nothing, glittering trash:
Being well employed, it is a thing
Which does delight and honor bring,
Chorus
Since we then such freedom have
We Will purchase money, or a grave:
It Is better so then live a slave.
About to have proceeded in this manner round, we were interrupted by Dinner
coming up, which came as seasonable as our stomachs could require. Waving all
Ceremonies, we instantly fell to it without the tediousness of long winded
graces; neither were we long at it, our hands and appetites being alike nimble
and quick to give the body its required satisfaction.

After Dinner we had various discourses about the vanity and imbecility of the
female sex: winding up our Argument, one said, She would not be a mere Woman
for the whole universe, and wondered that man, so noble and rational a Soul
should so unman himself in his voluntary inslaving himself to a Woman's will: I
wonder how they dare boast of Conquests, when they must acknowledge they are
daily overcome by a weak and feeble Creature, Woman a thing which for want of
heat sunk into that Sex, With such like prattle we entertained our selves for
an hour or two; and now it was put to the vote what course we should steer, and
what design we should next put in execution. Diffirent were our opinions for a
while, but at last we concluded unanimously about the evening to set out and
rob jointly: the manner which we laid down was thus; The youngest sister should
ride behind the eldest Sister on a Pillion in her own proper apparel and my
Virago behind me in the like female garb; and this we judged to be the safest
project we could propound; for who could be so senseless to imagine us Robbers,
riding in that manner double horsed, and attended with the greatest symptoms
of innocence.

Hereupon we presently fell to work, that is to say, endeavored to get such
necessaries as were most convenient for our enterprise, as Pillions, Safeguards
and short Swords for my females: Pocket-pistols they had already, having gotten
what woman's attire we wanted, and all things ready, we mounted with Boots,
which we dirted on purpose, to the intent those which saw us might not suspect
but that we had rid many miles that day. It was about six of the Clock in the
evening when we did set forth; we had not rid above two hours but there
overtook us four Horsemen, and demanded whither we were traveling? I answered
them to such a place. Now did our two subtle Queans which rid behind us play
their parts to the life, pretending a great fear of being robbed, and carried
their business so crastily, that they gave the Gentlemen to understand their
pretended fear and jealousy: and the better to cloak our design, pray thee my
Dear (said I) in a voice not over-loud, but just so that they might hear me, do
not be afraid, I am confident they are no other then what they appear, that is,
honest civil persons.

Hereupon, one of the Gentlemen over-hearing, rode up close to me and comforted
my supposed Wife behind, protesting they were no such persons as she imagined;
that they were Gentlemen of good Estates all, and so far they were from
offending any, that they would with the hazard of their lives defend the
injured on the road: we seemed hereat to be much satisfied, returning them many
thanks, and desiring their comya^y, which they kindly granted, saying, Come
follow, wee'llead the way gently on, and stand between you and danger. I was
glad to hear them say they would ride before, for now I judged our business to
be facile and easily done. I now whispered behind me, telling her as soon as
ever she saw me give a blow, she should immediately leap off the horse, and
make use of what weapons she had: Her sister had the like instructions given
her.

My Brother, as I called him, riding up close with me; received directions from
me, that when we came to the bottom of the Hill, he should at the same time
with me directly discharge his Truncheon on the head of his foregoer withal
the force he could sum up together.

When they least suspected us in the rear, we executed what we designed with
such exact time, and so successfully, that a divided minute did not difference
their fall Our Women were as swift as lightning upon them, depriving them of
all the advantages of rising, whilst we set spurs to our Horses, and overtook
the other two before, who insensible of what was done, were strangly surprised
and amazed, to see our Swords and Pistols ready to dispatch our Hellish
commands. Fear on a sudden had so chained up their tongues, as that they could
not utter a word, till we forced them to it by threatening their unavoidable
deaths if they did not instantly deliver. Being willing to ransom their lives
by their moneys, gave us what they had, as not to stand in composition with a
matter of eternal concern. Having reaped our desires, we dismounted them, and
cutting their Girts and Bridles, we took their pieces with the Saddles, and
threw them into an obscure place. The Horses were whipped over into a field. Our
Prisoners we led into a little wood, where we bound them, as the rest of our
gang did, who were more expeditious then we in their works. Having finished our
business to our hearts content and security, we mounted, and so rid back again
to our old quarters. Our Landlord wondered at our speedy dispatch, but had like
to have exspired for joy when he saw our booty was so considerable; for you are
to understand he had a quarter share with us. Here did we carouse and feast for
a long time, not so much as thinking on any prize: and the truth on it is, my
leg grew so bad by my shot, that I could not ride but in great pain. Wherefore
I resolved to lie still till its cure should be effected by my loving and
skilful Landlady. My wound being healed I resolved to follow old custom rob
alone, not so much that my profit would be greater, but I began to be tired
with my three former dainties; nay more, they were so insatiate in those
pleasures they enjoyed, that my strength could not cope with such excesses.
Wherefore pretending business of privacy a little way off, I gave them the
slip, knowing how difficult it would be to part from them knowingly.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Being now upon the Pad alone, ^e baits at an Inn, with which he was
acquainted, and there by the Hostler is informed of a Booty which he pursued,
but was soundly barged for his pains, losing both his Horse, and what small
matter he had left.

VEry loath I was to part with these Amazons, notwithstanding I saw there was
an unavoidable and absolute necessity for it. For no man could ever better be
pleased with society, then I was in theirs, enjoying such persons whose courage
and fidelity might vie with the most approved male friend, and reaping at the
same time the choycest favors Venus can confer on her chiefest Favorites.

One remarkable passage concerning this Female Robber, I had like to have
forgot; which was this; She would frequently Pad or rob on foot in Woman's
apparel, but so disguised, that she could not easily be known: Getting a
Cushion, or some such thing, (by putting it under her Clothes to make her seem
big with Child) she would usually walk abroad, it may be three or four miles at
length, near some beaten Road Thus had she the benefit of viewing all rid by.
If she saw any single person by whose equipage she might imagine him to have
his Pockets well furnished, before he came near her, she used to feign her self
both exceeding sick and weary, groaning in a most pitiful manner. What man's
heart could be so obdurate as to pass her by neglected. and without taking any
notice of her? Who would not proffer a big bellied Woman (tired and indisposed)
the courtesy of riding behind him for a little way to refresh her? As she told
me, she met with very few that did not take her up behind them seeing her in
that deplorable condition. Having rid a pretty way, seeing the Coast clear, and
coming to a convenient place for to execute her design, she would pretend the
Gentleman's hat that rid before her offended her eyes; most in point of civility
would put it off, though they immediately put it on again: then would she with
a Cord with a nooze, which she had ready for the purpose, clap it over his
head, and so whipping off the Horse pull the Man after her; oftentimes half
strangling him, serving him as the Mn^es do the Bassas with their black box and
Silk string therein, when they are designed for death by the Grand Seniors
appointment and command. Taking the advantage of their being half suffocated,
she could easily first bind their legs making them so secure that they were so
far from resisting, that they were totally at her devotion.

But to return where I left off: before I took my leave of her, perceiving the
temper of this brave noble Spirit, and that it was Poetically inclined out of
my true resentment of her due merit, I gave her these lines, which she
thankfully received, though modestly denied to concern her in the least.

Stand back ye Muses, Mars, come guide my Pen,
To rank this Female Hero amongst thy Men.
So, so, it is well. Now let us to the matter,
It Is such a subject that I cannot flatter.
The Pantalooners strut, and Muffetoons;
Taking great pains for to appear Buffoons.
They do seem men, and like ^m wear their Swords:
But dare not draw; such may be killed with words:
These love a Lady, and affect perfumes:
Who lighter are, (then what they wear) their Plumes.
Thou scornst such shadows, or Chimaera's, which
Are good for nothing, but a Woman's itch.
Thou love that man alone, that dares in spite
Of fate, scorn Death himself in fight.
Thy actions speak thee man, who dares deny it?
Believe this truth, or if you dare, then try it;
'Twill be a favor to her, for they will find,
That never man enjoyed so brave a mind.
Bidding this my Minerve and her associates adieu, I rid on in the next road,
without meeting any I thought requisite to fasten on. At length I came to an
^nn, where I was very well acquai^ted, and intended there to have refresht my
self; but the Hostler prevented it, not suffering me to alight, telling me
hastily, that there was a Gentleman not an hour since bai^d there, who had in
his Portmantue a considerable purchase; that he was a poor spirited follow,
whom he knew, and that he ever had an absolute antipathy to a naked Sword, and
that he was gone such a road, etc. I stayed not so long as to drink, but with all possible expedition made after him; ascending a small Hill, I discovered
him, who rid an ordinary pace, wherefore I slacked mine to cool my Horse;
however I soon overtook him, and rode by him, not without viewing him well;
riding down the Hill I did alight, purposely that he might overtake me, which
he did; being past I mounted, and at the very bottom I bid him stand and
deliver instantly, or he was a dead man. Sis, sis, sir, (said he lisping very
much) I-I-I-I am going home. I bid him not make these proposed delays, left he
smarted, and therefore wished him to dispatch and give me his money, for I was
informed (I told him) that he had a sum behind him. T-t-t-'it is true (he
replied) b-b-but it is my Fathers m-m-money. Hang your Father and his
stuttering Coxcomb too, (said I) I must have what you have. W-wh-why then you
shall, (said he) and with that drew out a pocket-pistol and fired it at me;
which made my horse start, and very much surprising me, expecting not the least
resistance from such a seemingly ignorant and cowardly fellow; by that means he
had time and liberty to draw his sword (which was almost as broad as a
Chopping-knife) and came upon me so furiously, that I am sure I had not time to
defend my self: he so laid about him, that I soon lay at his mercy. I was
forced to beg very hard for my life, which I obtained with very much ado: then
he fell to my pockets, not leaving any suspected place for money unsearcht: by
which I guest him to have belonged to our profession, and was not mistaken, as
you shall understand by and by. He went to my horse, and viewing him, he seemed
to like him very well. Wherefore coming to me (for he had cut me off my horse)
ha-ha-hark you (said he) you are but a raw Thief, a me-me-meer Child, and it is
but fit that you should be sent to a ma-ma-Master to be ta-ta-taught knowledge,
and be whipped for your foo-foo-lishness. You said you must have my Fa-fa-Fathers
money, but I tell you I must have your hau-hau-Horse, and so farewell. He was
so kind as to leave me his, which was a pitiful Jade, however necessity
compelled me to mount him, and anger spurred me on to be revenged of the
Hostler, but I better considered with my self, that probably that horse was
known there, and so I should be detected; wherefore I rid a contrary way, and
took up my lodging in a place I never had been in before. As soon as I
alighted, abundance of people flockt about me, seeing me all bloody, to know
the cause thereof. Whereupon I related in a very doleful manner how this sad
accident befell me. That traveling to such a place with about 150 pieces of
Gold, I was set upon by five or six lusty Rogues, who robbed me, and because I
made what resistance I could, to save what I had, it being my whole Estate,
they had thus barbarously mangled me, hacking and hewing me till I grew weary,
and at last with much difficulty escapt with my life. There was a general
sorrow for me, pitying me so much that the Inhabitants strove one with another,
who should show me most kindness. A Chyrurgeon was presently sent for, who (as
he was a Barber too) Barbarian like, dressed my wounds; some were employed in
procuring me Cordials, and getting me things necessary; others were sent out to
make inquisition after the Thieves.

This Gentleman that served me this trick, was (as I understood afterward) an
High-way-man himself, who being well born and bred, but his Father being either
at that time unable or unwilling to supply him with what moneys his lavish
expenses required; Nature having bestowed on him a stout resolute heart, and
strength answering his courage, betook himself to the Pad. In which profession
he behaved himself so gallantly, that he was styled the Father or Governor of
his Tribe. But his attempts proved not always successful, so that there was
hardly a County in England, wherein he had not been in Prison; being frequently
arraigned for his life, but having eminent and potent friends, he still came
off; this did his Father and Kindred so frequent, that they grew weary, and he
narrowly escaping with his life one time, and finding that his kindred mattered
not much if he were hanged, he submitted himself to his Father, making a solemn
protestation that he would never follow the like courses again: whereupon his
Father settled an Annual Estate upon him, on which he now lives very orderly.
Thus much briefly of my overcomer.

I had not laid above a night in this place for the cure of my wounds, before I
was questioned about my Horse by some persons that knew him well, and taken on
suspicion for murdering the Gentleman the right owner; which seemed more then
probable by various circumstances. First, this Gentleman was not to be found,
which well might be his late success, having conveyed him on the wings of speed
to an obscure place, there to revel and congratulate his good Fortune by the
speedy spending his late purchase. Next, my many and dangerous wounds
sufficiently declared the great hazard of the two combatants lives: but that
which chiefly committed me, was the Gentleman's horse, which I like an impudent
insipid Coxcomb must ride on, which reason must needs say was the ready way to
ride Post to the Gallows. Notwithstanding the miserable condition of my
Carbonadoed body, I was enclosed between a pair of walls, and had undoubtedly
been hanged for being robbed, had not the Gentleman appeared again amongst his
friends; then did my accusers slip their necks out of the collar, and none
prosecuting me, I was discharged. Staying a little while in the Town for
refreshment, an old acquaintance there found me out, of whom I cannot but give
you a character, since the passages of his life has been so remarkable and
notorious, and from the short relation of which I question not but the Reader
will reap much benefit and satisfaction. For indeed examples have so great an
influence and power upon the actions of man's life, as that we find men are more
wrought upon by president then precept. To this intent preceding Generations
have made it their grand care and labor, not only to communicate to their
Posterity the lives of good and honest men, that thereby man might fall in love
with the smooth and beautiful face of virtue, but have also taken the same
pains to recount the actions of criminal and wicked persons, that by the
dreadful aspects of Vioe, they may be detered from embracing her.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
He bear renews his acquaintance with a cunning fellow, that formerly studied
the Law, and since made it his sole business to practice the abuse thereof.

ABout four days after I was discharged, there came into the same Inn where I
lay a Gentleman, who hearing some of the house discoursing of the Robbery that
was lately committed, he desired to be particularly informed, which they did,
adding that the robbed Gentleman lay wounded in the house; he inquired of them
my name, which they told him, as I had told them, having a name for every month
in the year. Very desirous he was, if it might be no disturbance to me, to give
me a visit, unto which I condescended, a servant to that intent desiring to
know my pleasure. As Soon as he entered the Room, I verily thought I knew him,
though I could not for the present call to mind where I had seen him. I was so
muffled about the Chops, that it was impossible for him to have any knowledge
of me. He sat down by me, and asked me various questions, to which I gave him
convenient satisfaction. At last I recalled my memory, and asked him if his name
was not so -- he answered me affirmatively. Dear friend (said I) I am glad to
see you: come, be not amazed; my right name is so -- with that he embraced me,
and was overjoyed that he so casually found me out. Laying aside all formal
niceties, I unbosomed my self to him, not mincing the truth in the least; for
we know our selves Birds of a Feather, Rogues together. He condol'd my wounded
condition, and comforted me, by telling me that he would not leave me till I
was well, and that he would procure me such a Plaster for the wounds I had
received, that should prove very effectual. He stayed with me above a
fortnight, enjoying what pleasures the Country was capable to afford us. Being
by our selves (for so we designed the major part of every day;) we discoursed
interchangeably of nothing but our adventures, etc. how we might lay new plots
for our advantage: I gave him the epitome of what I had done, since I left him,
who took more pleasure in the relation of my Rogueries, then the Quaker did in
Courting the Mare near Rochester. But when he began to relate his Villainies, I
was struck dumb with admiration; and what cannot a man do if endued with the
strength of his natural parts, sharpness of wit, quickness of apprehension,
depth and solidness of judgment, with a tenacious memory? Now because he ever
had a smooth and insinuating tongue, with the command thereof, I shall give him
leave to tell his own tale.

CHAP. XXXIX.
The Life of a Law-abusing Cheat.

Dear Friend,
FOr what am I beholding, it is to Nature alone; for as I am ashamed of my
birth, so I cannot condemn my Father for not bestowing Education on me, since
his condition was so low, yet his spirit so high, that he would not beg himself
though ready to starve, however would permit me, which was the sole support of
his and my life. I was ten years old before I could meet with any preferment:
one day Fortune favoring, she offered to my view a Commodity, which with
confidence and dexterity I might carry off undiscovered. My hands presently
successfully effected what my mind suggested; it was but of small value, the
utmost I could get for it was a Link, with which that night I more then trebled
what it cost. This course I followed by night, and ran in errands by day, so
that I had furnished my self both with Clothes and Money. In process of time I
was admitted as a Servant into a Scriveners House; my Master taking a liking to
me, put me to a Writingschool, where being capacitated for his business, he
puts me into the Shop, and instructs me in his employment. I had not been there
long before I made my self very eminent, by studying the Law, the Rudiments
whereof I understood so well, as I knew how to ingross an Indenture. This made
my Master esteem of me, and that estimation made me proud; and being not yet
bound his Apprentice, I thought I knew betterthings then to be his servant any
longer, and so left him. Then was I with an Attorney a while, afterward with a
Counselor, till thinking I had Law enough, I took an House, resolving to see
what I could do with it my self. I solicited several men's businesses, giving a
general content, insomuch that my credit and reputation increased daily. Now
did I marry for Wealth, having not the least affection; for her face looked much
like a gammon of Bacon with the skin off. Sometimes I lived with her, too long
for any delight I took in her; and being resolved to be ^id of her, this
stratagem I used. I showed her more kindness then formerly, pretending I would
do nothing but what I would consult with her about; which so wrought upon her
love, that she would have been content to have sacrificed her Soul for my
Interest; and made her withal so opinionative, that she judged every silly and
unsavory expression she uttered was no less then an Oracle. Having brought my
business thus far to perfection, I came home one evening very melancholy: very
inquisitive she was to know the cause. My Dear, (said I) I will not conceal any
thing from thee; such a Gentleman has injured me, and I cannot rest till I be
revenged. Thou know my Nature, if wronged I am implacable, it is a fault I
cannot help. Come, come, said my wife, let us go to bed, and there we will
consult. Being there she ask^ me how we should bring our revenge about? I
seemed to study a while, -- I have it now (said I) thou art wi h Child; he is
one tender of his reputation; tax him for being the Father of it, and that will
do the work to my, full content: very loath she was, because of the talk of the
people; but I satisfied this poor silly harmless soul, by telling her that as
long as I knew her chaste, it was no matter what others said of her: whereupon
she condescended, and had the Person before a Justice, where she swore
positively that she was got with Child by that Gentleman. I presently took
advantage of her Confession, turned her off, leaving them both to the disposal
of the Spiritual Court. This was my first prank.

One of my Clients another time, having bought a good handsome Tenement, had so
much confidence as to put me in Possession; my Client having purchased an
Estate in the Country, was forced to be there to look after the management of
his Rural affairs, for some certain time: I took this opportunity to forge a
Lease to my self, at an easy Rent, from him that constituted me his Trustee. I
soon found a Chapman for it, and sold this Lease, receiving a good round Fine,
which had been a pennyworth indeed, had the title been good; unto this man I
delivered possession, who dwelt in it till the return of the right owner, who
coming to his said house, wondered to find every thing so contrary to his
expectation, and demanding of the Tenant by what power he inhabited in that
dwelling, the poor man showed him his forged Lease, declaring that he had paid
his fine to such a man, nominating me, who at that time was not to be found.
The Landlord could do no less then eject him his house, but finding him so
grossly abused, required nothing for the time he was in it, but left him to the
Law to require satisfaction of me. The abused being very much troubled he
should be thus deceived, made so strickt inquiry after me, and so unwearied in
his search, that at last he found me out, who said, nothing should serve his
turn, but he would for this cheat have the rigor of the Law executed upon me;
knowing of what a dangerous consequence it was, I got my adversary arrested in
an action of a thousand pounds, who wanting Bayl was committed to Newgate,
where grief released me by his death from ensuing prejudice. I afterward
forged a deed of Sale of an House hard by the former, which would have made
more for my advantage, had not this man discovered my design, which made me the
more inveterate against him and his. For this was always my temper, though
nothing could provoke me to express my anger in company (as having a perfect
command over my passions in that nature) yet if any durst prosecute his own or
friends right in opposition to me, I seldom left him, till I had either
absolutely undone him, or so impoverisht him, that he should be in no condition
to hurt me or help himself, making him at last confess that he had been better
to have sat down with his first loss. And this I effected the easier, having a
conscience that serupled nothing, and instruments that would swear any thing.
These contrivances of mine made me generally reputed a subtle and knowing man,
which brought me in multiplicity of business, with considerable in-comes.
Neither did I alone solicit for such as were concerned in the Law, but I had
my concernment with Lifters, who did put so great a confidence in me, that what
they got was left solely to my disposal, either by sale or pawn, for which I
had my brokage, and something else beside. Now was I grown so famous (my Garb
adding much to my fame, which was very splendid) that if any intricate
controversy, reference, or Lawsuit arose among my Neighbors, they knew no
person fitter to make their appeal to then my self for arbitration. If any
again wanted either money, goods, nay a cooler of concupiscence, I was adjudged
the best Procurer. By these means I tumbled in money; and to let the world know
it, I wore a several Suit every day, having besides Habits suitable to any
design. Now did those that knew me not, even adore me; those that were
acquainted with me, out of fear were forced to show me more then ordinary
respects. I confess had I now walked in a medium, this had been the time (as
they say there is a time allotted to every man) to have made my self for ever.
But Knaverie was so implanted in my Nature; that I could not forbear cheating
the dearest friend I had, if he entrusted me, circumvent every man that had
more honesty then my self; and though I was sure to damn soul and body, yet I
must attempt the destruction of my adversary; and to speak the truth, I did not
stick to betray my friend, if any advantage would accrue to me thereby. For one
trick I served an ancient Widow, I now and then find some internal gripings, I
cannot tell whether they proceed from conscience, because I never knew what
conscience was; and this it is. A Gentlewoman of my acquaintance, whose sole
dependence was upon Lodgers, and having taken up a great many Goods to a
considerable value to furnish her House, befitting the reception of any person
of quality, for which she was indebted, and having too often put off her
Creditor, came to me, desiring the favor of me to procure her fifty pound,
telling me, that such a Knight, and such a Squire would stand bound with her;
that will not do (said I) for the Gentry have so many tricks to keep Citizens
out of their money. That they will have better security. Perceiving her present
necessities were very urgent, I knew I could do any thing with her; wherefore I
persuaded her to confess a Judgment: she agreed to it. I told her such a day
it should be done, but I would speak with the Party first: according to the day
prefix^ I came, bringing with me a Warrant of Attorney, with a friend or two to
attest it; she confided so much in me, as to seal before she received the
moneys. That being done; now come along with me (said I) to such a place, where
the Money lies ready. As we were going, there was a stop in a Lane by Carts and
Coaches, and by the help thereof I dodg'd her, she seeing me no more till it
was too late: for I came with an Execution a while after, and carried away
every pennyworth of Goods she had; yet so civil I was, that I would not let her
see it done, knowing it could not but be a great trouble to her, to that intent
about half an hour before I sent for her in my name, far enough distant from
her own Habitation. In this nature with some variations as to the manner, I
served several. Knowing I had a plentiful invention, which seldom failed me, I
scorned to be so idle as to make use of one trick only, to bring about my ends;
and as I had several, I never made use of one trick twice, for fear of being
smoakt. I seldom went abroad, but I had some of my Accomplices at my heels,
rarely going together, unless necessity required it. I went into a Coffee-house
one day, and sat me down at a common Table, (as the Room is to all Comers) a
little after came in one of my Imps, and sits himself down too. I had then a
very curious Ring upon my finger, which a Gentleman opposite to me perceiving,
pray Sir (said he) do me the favor as lend me a fight of that Ring on your
finger; I presently delivered him; having viewed it and commended it, my Rogue
must needs desire a sight of it too from this Gentleman, who thinking no harm,
gave it into his hands; after he had looked on it a while, he fairly marched off
with it: I saw him, but would not in the least take notice thereof, knowing
where to find him. The Gentleman imagined nothing to the contrary, but that the
right Owner had received it again. A little while after, I demanded very
courteously my Ring, excusing his detention thereof upon the account of
forgetfulness. The Gentleman starting, replied, Sir, I thought you had had it
long since. I told him I had it not; and as I delivered it unto him, I should
require it from no other person. He pisht at it, and in the conclusion bad me
take my course; and so I did, having first taken witness of the standers by, I
sued him, and recovered the value of my Ring twice over; producing two in Court
that swore point blank, that the one of them sold it me for so much --. One
thing I confess I frequently made use of, which was this; If any person died,
and none durst administer, but leave the Deceased's Goods to the Creditors,
then would I be sure to make my self a principal Creditor by a forged Bond, and
thereupon sue out letters of administration, and sweeping all away, I wiped the
nose of other Creditors.

CHAP. XL.
What a notable revengeful trick he served the Turn-key of Ludgate.

I Went on a time to see a Prisoner in Ludgate, but thinking to come out again
as easily as I went in, I found my self just as the Picture I have often seen
upon the Exchange, wherein is represented a man plunging himself with much ease
into the great end of the Horn, but with the greatest difficulty can hardly
squeeze his Head through the other end. Hell Gates stand ever open to let all
souls in, but none are suffered to go out. Here I waited two hours for the
return of the Turn key, fretting my self even to death for being detained from
my urgent occasions. At length he came: I told him what an injury he did me:
instead of excusing himself, he returned me very scurvy language, which
provoked my passion so much, that though I said little, yet my invention was
presently at work to be revenged. Not long after I got a poor fellow to be
arrested for an inconsiderable debt, advising him to turn himself instantly
over to Ludgate. In a short time the poorness of this man's condition was
generally known, and he himself pretending he was almost starved, got liberty
to put in what slender security he could procure for his true imprisonment, and
so had leave to go abroad In the mean time I had got a Bond of the Prisoner of
fourscore pound for the payment of forty, and so went privately and entered an
action of Debt. I told the Prisoner the next time he went out he should run
away, which he did, neither was there any security to be found; then did I
bring my action against the Keeper, with my Knights of the Post, and so
recovered the money.

CHAP. XLI.
What a freak he played upon a Jeweller.

I Was intimately acquainted with a Jeweller in Foster-lane, whom I often
helped to the sale of Rings and Jewels, so that my credit was very good with
him. Being one time above in his workroom, I chanced to spy a very rich Jewel,
whereupon I told him I could help him to the sale thereof; my Lady such a one
having lately spoke to me about such a thing. He glady delivered it to me at
such a price to show it her. But I only carried it to another to have one
exactly made like it with counterfeit stones. Before I went, I asked him if the
Lady dislikt it, whether I might leave it with his wife or servant? I, I, (said
he) to either will be sufficient. I was forced to watch one whole day to see
when he went out; and being gone, presently went to the Shop, and enquired of
his Wife for her Husband; she answered me, he was but just gone. Well, Madam
(said I) you can do my business as well as he, it is only to deliver these
stones into your custody; and so went off undiscovered. Not long after I met
him in the street, carrying displeasure in his looks; Sir (said he) I thought a
friend would not have served me so; but I denied it stiffly. Whereupon he was
very angry, and told me he would sue me, I valued not his threats, and so left
him; I had not gone many paces, before I met with a friend, that complained to
me he had lost a very valuable Locket of his Wives, it being stolen from her.
Glad I was that this should fall out so pat to my purpose; I asked him to give
me a description of it, which he did punctually. Now, said I, what will you
give me, if I tell you where it is? Any thing in reason. Then go to such a Shop
in Foster-Lane (the same Shop where I cheated the man of his Ring) and there
ask peremptorily for it; I was there at such a time and saw it; and he would
have had me help him to a Customer for it; I Will stay at the Star-Tavern for
you. Away he went and demanded his Locket: The Jeweller denied he had any such
thing, (as well he might.) Upon this he returned to me, and (by this I had
another with me) and told me what he said. Whereupon I advised him to have a
Warrant for him to fetch him before a Justice of Peace, and that I and my
friend (which saw as much as I) would swear it. The Goldsmith was instantly
sei^'d on by a Constable, and as soon as he saw who they were that would swear
against him, desired the Gentleman to drink a gl^ of wine, and then tendered
him satisfaction: But I had ordered the business that it would not be taken
unless he would give us all three general releases. He knowing the danger that
might ensue to life and estate if we persisted, consented to the proposal.

CHAP. XLII.
He puts a notable Cheat upon a Gentleman concerning his House.

WAlking one time in the Fields with an Attendant or two, who would be
constantly bare before me, if in company with any persons of quality, but
otherwise, bail fellow well met; I was got as far as Hackney, ere I thought
where I was; for my thoughts were busied about designs, and my wit was shaping
them into a form; casting my eye on the one side of me, I saw the prettiest
built and well situated House that ever my eyes beheld. I presently had a
covetous desire to be Master thereof: I was then, as Fortune would have it, in
a very gentile Garb; I walked but a little way further, and I soon found out a
Plot to accomplish my desires. And thus it was: I returned and knocked at the
Gate, and demanded of the Servant whether his Master was within? I understood
he was, and thereupon desired to speak with him. The Gentleman came out to me
himself, desiring me to walk in. After I had made a general Apology, I told him
my business, which was only to request the favor of him, that I might have the
privilege to bring a Workman to supervise his House, and to take the
Dimensions thereof, because I was so well pleased with the Building, that I
egerly desired to have another built exactly after that pattern. The Gentleman
could do no less then to grant me so small a civility. Coming home, I went to a
Carpenter, telling him I was about buying an House in Hackney, and that I would
have him accompany me to give me (in private) the estimate. Accordingly we
went, and found the Gentleman at home, who entertained me kindly as a stranger.
In the mean time the Carpenter took an exact account of the Butts and Bounds of
the House on Paper; which was as much as I desired for that time.

Paying the Carpenter well, I dismissed him, and by that Paper had a Lease drawn
with a very great fine (mentioned to have been paid) at a small Rent; Witnesses
thereunto I could not want. Shortly after I demanded Possession. The Gentleman
thinking me out of my wits, only laughed at me: I commenced my suit against him,
and brought my own Creatures to swear the sealing and delivering of the Lease,
the Carpenters evidence, with many other probable Circumstances to strengthen
my cause; whereupon I had a Verdict: The Gentleman understanding what I was,
thought it safer to compound with me, and loose something, rather then loose
all.

CHAP. XLIII
How he cheated a Scrivener under the pretense of bringing him good Security
for an Hundred pound which he would borrow.

ATtiring my self in one of the richest Garbs I had, I went to a Scrivener in
Bow-lane, and acquainted him I had an occasion for an Hundred pound. He
demanded the Names of my Security. I told him where they lived, two persons of
eminent worth (whom I knew were gone into the Country) and desired him to make
enquiry, but in it to be private and modest. The Scrivener according to my
desires went and found them by report to be what they were, real, able, and
sufficient men: two or three days after I called upon him to know whether I
might have the money upon the Security propounded. He told me I might, bringing
the persons; and appointed me a day. According to the time I came with two of
my Compliees attired like wealthy grave Citizens, who personated such persons
so to the life, that the Scrivener could not entertain the least suspicion. The
money being ready, I told it over, and putting it up in a bag, I and my
insignificant Bondsmen sealed, leaving the Scrivener to another enquiry after
us, whom, if he did not meet, I was confident he could never find out by reason
of our feigned Names.

It chanced that my forged and fictitious name shook hands with that of a
Gentleman in Surry, who was a great purchaser, which I came to know by being
accidentally in his company the next night after I had cheated this credulous
Scribe, understanding likewise from him the exact place of his abode; and, as
the Devil would have it, his Christian name was the same, as well as his
Surname, with that of mine I had borrowed. Whereupon I went to the Scrivener
again, and told him that now I had a fair opportunity to benefit my self very
much by a purchase, provided he would assist me with 200 pound more. But Sir,
said I, take notice (in a careless and generous frankness) that it is out of a
particular respect to you, that you might profit by me that I come, again,
neither will I now give you any other Security then my own Bond, though I did
otherwise before. But if you will desire to be satisfied as to my Estate, pray
let your servant go to such a place in Surry, there is a piece of Gold to bear
his charges, and I will satisfy you farther for the loss of your Servants
time. He being greedy of gain, very officiously promised me to do what I
required, and would speedily give me an answer. Imagining what time his Servant
would return, I repaired to him again, and understood from him by the sequel
that he received as much satisfaction as in reason any man could require.
Hereupon I had on my own Bond the money paid me. I cannot but laugh to think
how strangely the Surry Gentleman was surprised when the money becoming due was
demanded of him, and how like the figure of man in Hangings the Scrivener looked
when he found himself cheated.

CHAP. XLIV.
How he was revenged on a Broker for arresting him for some Goods he had past
his word for upon his friends account.

NOtwithstanding I daily thus almost cheated one or other, procuring thereby
considerable sums of money, yet, by my Drinking, Whoreing, and defending my
self from such as I had wronged, I seldom kept any money by me. One day as I
walked the streets securely, as I thought, a fellow fastened his Flesh-Hooks on
my Shoulder. Looking about to see what this sudden clap meant, I saw a fellow
behind me, whose face looked ten times worse then those Philistines that are
pictured on Chimny-pieces, seizing upon Samson; his mouth was as largely
vaulted as that within Aldersgate; his Visage was almost eaten through with
Pockholes, every hole so big, that they would have served for Children to play
at Cherry-pit. His Nose resembled an Hand-saw; take both Head and face
together, and it appeared like the Saracens on Snow-hill; questionless some
In^ubus begot him on a Witch. Having a little recovered my self from my
amazement, I asked him what his business was with me? He spoke but little,
^eaving his errand to his Mace (which he showed me) to relate. Away they
carried me to Woodstreet at the King's Head, from whence I sent for Bail, which
speedily came to me: having put in Bail to one Action, I found another entered:
having done the like to that I found another, half a dozen more bearing it
company; wherefore thanking my friends for the trouble I had put them to, I
desired them to leave me, resolving to go to Ludgate. The two Sergeants that
arrested me conducted me thither, having my name entered in the Paper-house, as
Horses in Smithfield are in the Tole-booth: Cerberus turned the Key, and set
the door as wide open as Westminster Hall Gate in the Term-time to Country
clients, to receive me from my Hell-guides, which puts me in mind of that old
Verse,

Noctes atque dies patet atri janua ditis. I no sooner was entered into this
enchanted Isle, where some lie wind-bound sometimes seven years together, but a
fellow (whom at first sight I took to be a Gardner, because he had a kind of
Reddish beard, and turned up withal) came to me, and understanding I was a
Prisoner seemed mighty courteous, profering me his Chamber, for my Garnish
sake. I accepted his kindness, and went with him to view this
Cobweb-hung-Chamber, for so it proved; I demanded of him who should be my
Bedfellow? that Gentleman there Sir, said he, that sits by the fire side: I
could not forbear smiling, for he was a fat squobby fellow, though his brain
seemed to be lean. I believe he was his own Barber, and was forced to make use
of a Knife instead of a Razor; for his beard it was cut round like a
rubbing-brush. Certainly, had all the skin of his body been like that of his
face, it would have served excellent well when he was dead to make clokebags
of. Not content with this lodging, I sought out another; liking it somewhat
better then the former, I pitched on it. As Soon as they understood my
resolution, they worried me presently like angry Mastaffs, barking for their
Garnish; I told them they should have it to morrow, at which they grumbled like
the greatest strings of a Base-Viol. Before I went to Bed I must pay for a pair
of sheets, that never came nigh Holland by three hundred miles, and out of much
civility my Bedfellow brought me a candle not so long as his nose to light me
to Bed.

The next morning I made it my business to get out as soon as I could; some I
paid, others I nonsuited, and so got clear. Being out I resolved not to rest
till I had revenged my self on this Broker that had thus troubled me. I needed
not means, for the Devil seldom failed to help my inventions. I pretended to go
into the Country, and in order to it packed up a Trunk of what I had most
valuable and portable, and getting a Porter, sent it to an Inn where a
Norwich-Carryer used to lie, but I knew him to be gone the day before. Going
along with the Porter, I enquired for such a Carryer, but they told me he was
gone, and would not return till the next week. I asked them where I might lay my
Trunk safe: they showed me a Room; where bidding the Porter sit down, I called
for some Ale, telling the Porter, moreover, that I would have him be a witness
of what there was in the Trunk, lest I should be dishonestly dealt by;
whereupon I unlockt it, desiring him to take notice, which he did, and to be
more sure took an inventory in Writing. Having paused a little, now I think
upon it (said I) Porter, it will not be so safe to leave this here in a
public house as in a friends, wherefore prithee go buy a Cord, and thou shall
carry it elsewhere. Whilst he was gone, I took out the chiefest things and put
in rubbish, or what I could get, and so locked it again. The Potter returning,
we corded the Trunk, and carried it to this Broker, who took it kindly from me,
that I would entrust him after our controversy, and received it. The next week
I told him I would call for it, in order to the sending it into the Country.
The time being come, I took the same Porter with me, and demanding the Trunk,
it was forthwith delivered me. Come, Porter, said I, you must uncord it again,
for I have present use for something therein contained; which being done, I
seemingly amazed, cried out I was robbed, taxing the Broker for so doing,
villifying him for his knavery. He protested that he never looked on it to his
knowledge since the receipt thereof. Well Sir (said I) this shall not serve
your turn, this honest Porter knows how differently it is fraught from what he
saw it at first. In a great seeming heat I left him, but before he slept I sent
a couple of Sergeants to him, who arrested him; coming to trial, by the
assistance of two (resolved Jurors) and this Porter, I overthrew him, and
recovered above forty pound, besides cost of Suit.

CHAP. XLV.
How he coaeened a rich Usurer, and a young Tradesman.

BEing resolved to go and look out some of my Consorts to rejoice together for
my good success in my advantageous revenge, I met with an old comrade that had
lately heaved a Booth, Anglise broken open a Shop, who told me he had a
quantity of good commodities, and desired me to put them off for him, knowing
that I dealt in Brokeage in goods indirectly come by: I promised him I would.
The next day he delivered what he had into my hands, I instantly carried them
to an old Usurer that would grasp at any thing, telling him I only desired to
Mort-gage them for such a time, requesting to lend me fifty pounds thereon. He
looking upon them to be thrice the value of that sum, lent me freely the
quantity of money propounded, and in my sight took the Goods and laid them in a
place next his Bedchamber. The same day I met with this friend, who demanded
of me whether I had done his business? No, not yet (said I) it will be to
morrow first: However let us drink a glass of wine, which he readily consented
to. Having drank pretty smartly, he could not contain himself (so powerful are
the operations of Wine, as it frequently makes a man divulge that which
carries in it inevitable ruin) I say he told me whose Shop it was he robbed,
and at what time. I seemed to take little notice then, though I intended to
make good use of it. Parting with him, I went straight way to the person robbed,
and told him that accidentally I was informed of his late loss, and that my
intent of coming was out of a principle of honesty, to assist him in the
recovery of what was stolen from him. But before I acquainted him with any
thing I required of him a Bond of 10 ^. if I helped him to his Goods; which he
granted me. I advised him to get the Lord chief Justices warrant, which he did,
and taking some friends with him, I directed them where they should go, and in
what place they should find them. He would have had me gone with him, but that
I excused my self, alleging it would be inconvenient. Taking a Constable with
them, they went and found what they sought for according to my direction, which
they seized, leaving the old man to condole his loss, which had been no great
matter had not his life lain in his Purse.

Having thus carried on my mischievous contrivances with continued impunity;
the next I fell on was a young Merchant, to whom I went gentily habited, with a
footboy waiting at my heels. I looked out several Commodities, and laid them
aside, assuring him that I would e're long lay out a considerable parcel of
money with him. We discoursed upon the price, and in the conclusion closed. The
next day I appointed the Goods to be sent home to my House, and in the interim
desired him to go along with me, and accept of what poor accommodation my
habitation would afford him, under the pretense of being better acquainted, but
my design was to raise in him a good opinion of me, for I had one room
(especially) very richly hung with costly Furniture. My motion was entertained,
and away we went, where I treated him nobly; the next day the Commodities were
sent in with his Servant, who expected his money, but I pretended that my
Cashier was abroad, and so desired him to call the next morning; he did, but
then I was not to be spoken with. Thus he did so often till the young man was
weary. At last the Master himself came, who met me just as I was going out; who
had not the patience to ask for his money, but presently railed most bitterly,
calling me cheat, knave, etc. and that he would not put himself to the trouble
of posting me up, but would have a Warrant for me instantly.

Being gone, I was as nimble as himself, having a couple of my Emissaries ready
for him against his return. It was not long before he came strutting with a
Constable. Perceiving him coming, I sent my two friends out with their Warrant,
and putting it into the Constables hand, charged him in the Kings name to
execute it upon such a one, meaning the Merchant; who dared not deny it, but
carried him before a Justice, before whom my two Rogues swore flat felony, and
so was committed. Sending for friends, they advised him to make an end thereof.
Whereupon I was much solicited; and upon consideration I consented to cause my
friends to forbear prosecution.

As yet I have not fully unbowell'd the huge bulk of my villainy, that has
proved so burdensome to the world, and destructive to so many Families;
wherefore give me leave a little farther to anatomize my own vicious nature,
and I shall so lay open the ulcers and sores of my impostumed machinations,
apparent to the sight of every one, that the most Ospray and Owl-eyed spectator
shall confess there never was a more necessary and commodious discovery
revealed.

Brother, said I, for so I must call you now, your flagitious deeds claiming
that title, and must be compelled I see to give you superiority, the upperhand,
for I am confident the line of other men's inventions never sounded the Sea of a
more deep and dreadful mischief. When I consider how powerful and imperious
vice is of late grown; and what horrid facts are committed every where by
licentious and wicked men that swarm in all places: I admire that the Fabric
of the Earth is not continually palsyed by Earthquakes, since there is a
Creator above that oversees such actions. That the Earth her self (though an
indulgent Mother) does not receive into her Womb her offspring, and therein
for shame hide them: that the air is not choked with Froggs, and that black
pitchy mists do not perpetually masque the face of Heaven, and leave the World
in obscurity; and that the Sun does not hide his face from seeing such enormous
crimes blacker then is the Eclipse of his countenance: and lastly, that the Sea
is not turned to blood to put us in mind of the cruel and remorseless usages of
one another; our kindness being commonly attended with discourtesies of a
Vermilion hue. Thus Brother you see I am sensible of my miscarriages, but want
the power to regulate my life. I would have proceeded, but that I found this
discourse grated in his ears; wherefore I desired him to prosecute his story,
which he did in this manner.

CHAP. XLVI.
He discovers the subtlety of some Citizens he had to do withal by Broking for
them, relating his own craft and cunning, and what the consequent was, the
ruin of young Gentlemen.

LIke an Hawk as I told you, I flew at all Game, not confining my self to any
one thing particularly; where I could abuse the Law, I did; and if I had an
opportunity to Trepan, I seldom failed, etc. Some part of (...) ^me I spent in
the enquiry of what young (...) were arrived, into whose society I was sure by
one means or other to insinuate my self. These Country Wood-cocks I knew how to
catch with a City Spring; whom I very well understood, had rather be out of
the world then out of the fashion, who would be brave for the present time,
though their Gallantry cost them all their future Fortunes. I commonly laid my
plot thus: Sir, you undervalue your self by the meanness of your Habit, it
being so unsuitable to your quality: if you want money, you cannot want credit,
having a fair promising estate in reversion; if you are willing, I will find
you out a believing Mercer. Returning me many thanks, it may be he would be in
such have as to send me presently. He could not be so eager to have his gaudy
desires satisfied, as I forward to accomplish them. I knew where to go readily
to one, with whom I went snips; in so saying, I would not have any think I
throw dirt upon that noble profession. If I discover the fraud of any
particular person, as long as I name him not, I do him no wrong; but if I
detect by what deceitful and sinister means he works upon the infirmity of
the youth of a greenwitted Gallant, it may serve for an use of instruction. In
the most famous Universities there are some Dunces resident, that by disgracing
themselves, disgrace also their fellow Students. In the most virtuous Courts
there will be some Parasits. So in the most goodly and glorious City under
Heavens Canopy, there are some Asps lurking, that sting the reputation of their
Brethren by their poisonous and corrupt dealings. There are knaves in all
Trades but Book-selling.

But to my purpose: a young Gentleman coming out of Norfolk to see the City,
and finding so many (beneath him in estate) gallant it so much above him, he
grew very melancholy: happening to be in his company, and indifferently well
acquainted with him, I asked him the cause of his sadness? after I had pressed him
very much, he ingeniously confessed the true original of his pensiveness. Pish,
said I, is that all? let me alone to effect what you desire; neither shall you
wait longer then the morrow. Leaving my Gentleman, away I went to a person fit
for my purpose, and gave him an account of my business: glad he was, thankt me
for my pains, promising me a reward, and would needs have me to a Tavern to
consult this affair. Having concluded every thing, I repaired the next day to
my Gentleman, who over-joyed to see me, was impatient to know whether his
wishes were consummated. Come along with me, said I, and we will try what we
can do. I have been very importunate with the Mercer, but as yet I cannot
mollify him, it may be your presence may do much. Finding him in the Shop. I
called him aside; and told him this was the Gentleman. My young Gentleman that
would be gallant presently, fell aboard him (and with much fervency and
protestations) he wooe^ the Mercer to credit him for 30 l. worth of
commodities. I called him aside, saying, What will 30 l. worth do? take up 100
l. worth, and what you use not, I will dispose by sale, to furnish your Pockets
with money. He thankt me kindly for my advice, and returned to the Mercer, who
asked him, if he should credit him with so much, what securiry would he
propound? This struck my young Gentleman as dumb as a Codshead. The Mercer
perceiving he had nothing to say, played the Rope-maker, being extreme backward
to trust him; Bonds he refused, Judgments he would not hear of, Statutes he
scorned: For, said he, Gentlemen of late have found out so many tricks to
cousen their Creditors (I by the same means having had several collops cut from
the body of my estate) that I will not credit any more: whereas he spoke this
only to grind the blunt appetite of my Commodity-taker into a sharper edge, and
make him more greedy of his own ruin; imitating in this a cunning and
deceitful, though petulant and wanton Curtezan, who is nice when a sick-brain'd
young Gallant importunes her to admit of his amorous kindness, only to make him
more fierce upon his own confusion: holding him off like a Fencer, a month or
two, that he may come up the roundlier to her purpose. But to the matter. My
Gentleman being in a manner denied, seconded him thus; Sir, you know not what
you do in refusing to credit this Gentleman; he is his Fathers heir, a man of a
vast estate, and very aged: This his son is about a very great match, a rich
heiress, and though he has not money for the present, yet let him have an
hundred pounds worth of Commodities, you need not doubt your payment, and it
will do him at this present a 1000 pounds worth of good. The Mercer began to
hearken to this and protested to my Green-goose, that he would be glad to do
any a pleasure, so as not to injure himself; that if he could but possess him
with a belief that he should have his money in six months, he would freely let
him have an hundred pounds worth of what he pleased: the young Gentleman
protested, and I warranted it; and the Mercer (though seemingly loath)
condescended, upon this proviso still, that he should procure some man else to
be bound with him as good as himself; For, said he, we are all mortal, and
having not a lease of our lives, we may die before to morrow; where is then my
100 l.? Sig^ior Unthrift is once more put to his nonplus, but at length fell
to entreat me, who would not by any means, and so we parted. He would not let
me rest for two or three days together, so that at last, provided he would give
me ten pound, I would: agreed, we went again to the Mercer, and entering into
Bonds, we had the commodities. Having made my young Gentleman an absolute
Gallant, I went to sell what was left, of which I made 40 l. but I made my
Gallant to be contented with 30 l. alleging, that when goods come once to be
sold, they will not yield the moiety of what they cost, though new: and out of
that 30 l. I had my 10 l. for suretyship. Thus I persuaded him to be very well
satisfied. He revels about, whilst I was contriving to leave him as bare of
means as Brains. Now does my Mercer dream of nothing but his pay-day, which he
hoped would be broken. The time being expired, and my young Novice not minding
it, the Mercer invited him to a dinner in Fish-street: dinner being almost
ended, for a third course came up a couple of Sergeants stewed with Mace, who
arrested him at the suit of the Founder of the Feast; not procuring Bail, he
was carried to the Counter, where he lay some time: his friends hearing
thereof, endeavored to get him out, by an Audita querela; my Mercer hearing
thereof advised with me what was best to be done. Agree, said I, with some
Officer in the Exchequer, and so turn the debt over to the King, pretending you
owe him so much money; for the Chancery will not, or cannot allow any thing in
such a case against his Majesty. He so doing, his business was done for the
present. Thus have I read, when the Jews have bought a red-hair'd Boy, at first
they will cloth him in silks, ravishing him with all the delights that can be
thought on, never have Music from his ears, or banquets from his taste; and
thus use him, till they see he is plump, fat, and fit for their purpose: but
when the poor Boy least thinks of his imminent ruin, he is taken by a brace of
slaves, and tied up by the he^ls, so beaten by degrees to death with cudgels,
purging the rankest poison out of his mouth, and making Mummy of his flesh. I
shall leave it to the Reader to make application. In short, I persuaded the
Mercer to take a Bond of 500 l. of his Prisoner, to be paid after his fathers
decease. This Widgeon being in the nets, sealed to any thing for his liberty.
He was not the first so served, by thousands. And that is the reason there are
so many crested Citizens: for Gentlemen being beggered by their extortion, they
have no other means then to fall in with their Wives, purchasing from them a
supply. This is it that makes the Roads every where so full of High-way-men,
who will borrow of men when they have little mind to lend, but not without
giving them Bonds. This makes Tyburn, the Metropolitan, and other petty
Gallowses, have so many hangers on; and this is the cause so many such Citizens
sons are plagued after their Fathers deaths, as their Fathers, when living,
have plagued others. These are the Boars that plow up whole Acres, nay, Fields
of Gentlemen's Lands with their Snouts; these are the Swine that eat up whole
Orchards, and these are they whose siery consciences drink up whole Fish Ponds
at a draught; and lastly, they are the Hurrycanes that root up the trees of
whole woods together. From such, Libera nos Domine.

To conclude, take this as an infallible Maxim, that the worst of Creditors
are either very rich men, or very poor men: The rich man can stay for his money,
and therefore will have all or none; the poor man to be sure will have no pity,
neither do I see how he should, for it may be the debt is all he is worth.

CHAP. XLVII.
How he insinuated himself into the acquaintance of all he thought he could
prey upon, and what tricks he used to build his interest upon their ruin.

HOw can that Tyrant flourish in his Commonwealth, when the foundation of his
Reign was built on the Sepalchre of the right and lawful Heir he murdered? And
how can that man prosper, whose rise he reared from other men's ruins? Such was
I, who having oftentimes been gulled by Knaves, turned Knave my self, and did
as greedily hunt after such I could make a prey of, (to repair the damages I
had sustained by others) as the devil does after Usurers souls, being on their
deathbeds, resolving to live like a Bandite on the spoil. Like an old Soldier
having been beaten to the world, (or indeed more properly, beaten by the world)
I began to summon up all my senses and my idle brains to a strict account, how
to get that up again, my riot and folly had spent; and thinking I had no way to
recover my self, but by what ruined me, I did cast about me, and fished after
this manner. I prepared my lines, providing baits, and made ready my hooks,
which had such constant and firm barbs, that after I had struck a Gudgeon in
the gills, I was sure to hold him, though I suffered him to play a little in
the stream. The Floods I daily frequented, were either the Temple, Ordinaries,
Play Houses, Cock-pits, Brothels, or Taverns, leaving no place unsearch'd,
wherein there might be any thing worthy a Bait. If such I found, like a shadow
I was never from his heels, but followed him close, especially if he was a
young Country-Gentleman, whom his father had sent up to see fashions in the
City: and rather then he should go out as raw as he came in, I failed not to
season him in one of the Cities Powdering-Tubs. First, I made it my business to
know what his Father allowed him; then would I study his natural disposition
and inclination, and accordingly suit my self to him, so that by my behavior
toward him, he should look upon me to be his Masculine Sweetheart, his
bosom-friend, and that like Hippocrates twins, we must needs live and die
together. Having now by much sweat and industry adapted and fitted him to my
humor and purpose, and wrought him to such a soft and waxen temperature, that
I could make what impression I pleased on him, I brought him acquainted with
some of my accomplices, who all veiled bonnet to him, invited him from Tavern
to Tavern, not letting him expend a penny; or if he wanted money, I would
supply him with four or five pound. This Innocent (not having yet scented the
Citie-air) all this while thinks himself in Elysium, fancying he enjoys more
de^ghts then the Turks Paradise affords, and withal imagines h^mself not a
little graced, to be entertained amongst such seeming Gallants. For my Rogues
(give me the liberty to call them so) looked on it as the greatest piece of
police to wear good clothes, though their ^ockets were wo^e furnished then a
Chandlers box, that seldom has any greater money in it, then Two piece, Three
pence, Groats, etc. Sometimes my C^llie did meet with such (that knew me) who
would advise him to have a care and not to keep me company, for I was a
dangerous person, and in the end would ruin him. Whereas it was to little
purpose: for when Youth is in its full vigor, and height of desire, neither
wholesome counsel, nor Iamentable examples, will give them warning of their
future destruction. Still I continued my seeming respects and kindnesses to
him, which I only intended as the Praeludium or Prologue to that Play which
was to come after: for my Country Cock-brain being honeyed with these sweet
delights, thought that whatever he could return, was not able to give an
answerable satisfaction. Watching a fit opportunity (when he is well warmed
with wine) then would I persuade him, (which was no difficult matter) to be
bound with (...) for so much, etc. which I promised I would repay at the day,
without putting him to any inconvenience: but he knew not, that what I borrowed
for an hou^, I borrowed for an age. When I could squeeze no more juice out of
him, then I left him to the mercy of his Creditors, to be dealt w^thal as the
Topinjay in the Fable, who being summoned to appear with the rest of the winged
Tribe, before their King the Eagle, borrowed of all the finer sort of Birds
feathers to adorn him, and make him appear splended before his Sovereign. After
he wat dismissed, he proudly fluttered up and down the woods with his borrowed
gallantry, which made the little Titmoase, Wren, and Hedge-Sparrow adore him.
They to whom he was obliged for his gallantry, hearing thereof, demanded again
their own, and so deplum'd him, whereby he seemed ten times worse then those
small birds that lately did admire him. Such Popinjays are they, who borrow of
every Citizen, to make themselves show glorious in the worlds eye; but when
their Creditors shall come and claim their own, and get it, they will seem more
foul then lately they did fair. So various and villainous were the pranks I
committed every day, that I was forced now, like an Owl, to appear only by
night in the City. If I d^d at any time transgress that custom, I did then as
the dogs of Egypt, when they come to drink of the river Nil^, lap here and
there, and dare not stay long in one place, for fear the Crocodiles that lie
lurking within the Banks, should pull them into the current: so did I, skulking
here and there, then to one Tavern; and not daring to stay longer there,
shifted to another. But to proceed.

CHAP. XLVIII.
How he could make Ink that would disappear from the Paper, accordingly as he
pleased, by the strength or weakness of the composition. His imitating exactly
both Hand and Seal. A remarkable Story thereupon.

REading one time a book that an Italian writ, I found therein a description
of several sorts of Ink, and how to make them; but more especially, an Ink that
should last a week, a month, or two, according to the composition. I made an
experiment, and found it hit indifferently well: perceiving how beneficial this
would be to me, I resolved not to rest till I had found out the true Receipt;
which I did at last, by much study and industry. Having obtained it, I so
highly valued it, that methought I would not have parted with it for the
Philosophers Stone. Not to be tedious, I did abuse there with many persons with
Bonds, Leases, Deeds, Acquittances, etc. there appearing in such a time nothing
but the bare Seal, the paper remaining as white as if never writ on. By the
help of Graving, I could counterfeit Seals exactly, insomuch that I have often
cheated the Grand Cheater, Oliver, the late hypocritical and bloody Tyrant; and
by an exact imitation of an handwriting, his Council was too too sensible of
what Cheats I put upon them. That I was no bungler at it, I shall give you this
instance. Accidentally coming acquainted with a Gentlewoman, very beautiful and
well featured, her sparkling eyes set me all in a flame, so that I resolved to
attempt the enjoyment of her. Oftentimes I visited her, and by the modesty of
my carriage toward her, she perceived not my burning lust. One time having a
fit opportunity, she being alone, I communicated my thoughts to her: waving
what amorous discourse past on my side, I would have fallen roundly to the
matter; but she understanding my intent, cried out; whereupon) desisted, seeing
it was to little purpose if I proceeded. Sitting down by her, she expressed an
absolute hatred to me for my incivility, and vowed she would neither see nor
endure me more. The vehemence of her utterance and countenance fully declared
she was in earnest; so that I saw 'twas time to be gone. Looking about
(unperceived by her) I took up half a sheet of paper of her writing, and clap^
it into my pocket; and so took my leave. Coming home, I found my love converted
into hatred, and therefore vowed my revenge: and thus it was. I understood from
her, whereabout her husband lived, and what his Christian name was, with
something of her concerns; that her husbands mother could not endure her,
(because her son married her without a portion, though a wise, discreet,
virtuous, and handsome woman) and whereabout she lived, with name, etc. I
counterfeited a Letter, as from this virtuous Gentlewoman, to a Gallant of
hers, taxing him with want of love, and that if he proved not more constant,
she had no more to say to him, etc. The contents you shall have in the Letter
it self, as follows.

Most beloved by me of men!
I cannot blame you so much as my self: it is customary for man to proffer, but
then it should be a woman's duty to refuse: but alas! how could I withstand the
powerful persuasions of your cloquent tongue, especially when they carried with
them so much seeming reality of affection and constancy? I find you now like
other vow-breaking men, who having obtained the fruition of their desires,
their appetite nauseates that which before it so eagerly craved. Call to mind
those many endeared and melting expressions you did voluntarily utter, when I
was encircled in thine arms; and if that will not reduce you to your former
station, and good esteem of me, now so much slighted by you, consider that I
have preferred you in love before my Husband, not caring how much I wronged him
to pleasure you. If nothing will prevail, know then, this shall be my
resosolution, that since you have alienated my affection from my Husband, and
you thus unworthily desert me, I will procure a Subject elsewhere shall outdo
you in every thing, as much or more as you have outdone my Husband. I am
young, plump, handsome, and buck some; what then should hinder me from enjoying
such a person, my heart will not rest satisfied till I have found? which having
done, he shall lead me in thy view, and then it is probable you will desire,
but never shall reassume your place again within my breast. Farewell.


This Letter was sent to her Mother-in-law in the Country, who was glad she had
matter to impeach her daughter to her son. As Soon as he saw the Letter, he very
well knew the hand, he thought, and would have sworn it to be his wifes: but
reading the contents, the poor man was ready to sink down for grief.
Perturbation of mind would not let him rest in his Countrydwelling, but rid up
Post to London, where he soon found out his wife. The unexpected fight of him
at first surprised her, not hearing of his coming, and knowing that his
occasions were very urgent in the Country; however, like a truly-loving wife,
she was overjoyed to see him, and would have kissed him, but that he rudely
thrust her off; which action struck her to the heart, and overwhelmed her in
amazement. Prithee Sweetheart (said she) what is the matter? There, read it,
said he, throwing her the Letter. She read it, and swounded: he let her lie,
not caring whether she lived or died; and haddy'd indeed, had not her Maid come
up accidentally. Being recovered, he asked her whether it was her hand. She
could not deny it: which made the man rage, ready to run out of his wits,
whilst she was silent with astonishment, taking such inward grief, that she
betook her self to her bed. Nothing could comfort her, neither would she take
any thing to sustain life. Hearing how powerfully my forgeries had wrought, to
the hazard of somes lives; in the same hand I sent him a Letter, wherein I gave
him an account of the design, proclaiming to the world the Gentlewomans
honesty, unspotted and unstained. The Gentlewoman recovered in a little time
after; but this trick had too much seized upon my Gentleman; for like a fool he
fell distracted in a sneering posture, as pleased to think his wife was honest
notwithstanding. I have been somewhat long in this relation, because it was a
passage very remarkable. Now I shall tell you how I cheated a young Citizen and
an Upholster.

CHAP. XLIX.
How he cheated a young Citizen newly set up, and an Upholster.

A Young Citizen about to set up, and wanting some money, was directed to me,
to procure so much as his present occasion required. I treated him very
civilly, promising him very fairly; and in order thereunto, appointed him a
day; which being come, contrary to my expectation or desire, he brought a crew
with him, to see the receipt of the money. Judging this time inconvenient for
my designs, I told him I expected the money this very day; but if he pleased
to seal the Bond, and have it witnessed, he might keep it himself; and bringing
the Bond with him the next day, he should not fail to have his money. The next
day he came to the place appointed, where I was ready to wait him. As good
fortune would have it, he came alone. I discoursed with him a while: at last I
desired him to let me see the Bond; which he delivered into my hand, being
signed and sealed before. I took this as a good and lawful livery, and put it
up into my pocket. He asked me what I meant. I told him he should know when the
Bond became due. Why Sir, said he, you will not serve me so? Do thou think I
am such a fool (said I) to lend thee so much money upon a piece of Paper, which
next shower of rain will wash away with thy self into the common shore? Shall I
trust thee, when thou can not trust thy self? At this the young man began to
be clamorous; but one of my accomplices soon filled the clapper of his mouth,
by a sound knock on the pate, which laid him asleep: and in the mean time we
marched off. Just as the money came due upon the Bond, my flock-pated (it was
gone to tell his friends in the country the danger of Counters and prisons in
the City. Wanting another time some money to supply my present occasions, I
could not think of any stratagem for the present to assist me in this
necessity, but to sell my featherbed, with furniture thereunto belonging.
Packing them up, I got a friend to go along with the Porter, and sell them to
an Upholster. Which my friend did, bringing me half their worth; but withal,
that which was more then the whole worth, the name of the person. A week
afterward, wanting my bed, I resolved to have it again. Whereupon I went to
him that bought it, asking him before a couple I carried along with me, whether
at such a time there were not such commodities sold him. He acknowledged there
was. I desired to see them: and he as readily granted that. Sir, said I, these
are my goods: I was lately robbed, and now I know you are the receiver: I must
have you before a Justice, to know how you came by them. The naming of a
Justice so terrified this simple silly fellow, that he bid me take them if I
would swear they were mine, and put him to no further trouble. First I wore
they were my goods, (and therein I was not perjured) but I told him I could not
receive stolen goods safely, though they were my own. In short, I got my bed
and furniture thereunto again, with money to boot.

CHAP. L.
He is at last met withal, and laid up in Prison by one of his Creditors. The
abuses and tricks Sergeants use to arrest men. Lastly, he escaped, by putting
atrick upon his Keeper.

HAving gone thus far without any remarkable check or control, at least any
such as might bear a proportion with the villainies and injuries I had done; I
absolutely thought that nothing was dishonest or difficult that had in it
either pleasure or profit. Meeting with no molestation or hinderance, I took my
freedom to do even what I listed. One time thinking my self most secure, I then
found my self in the greatest danger, being arrested in an Action of 5000 l.
Several times there were attempts made to take me, but I was still too cunning
for them: yet at last they overreacht me; it will not beamiss to relate in what
manner. They had information, that every week I had Letters come to me out of
Essex, and that the Porter which brought them had still free admittance to me:
wherefore the Sergeant provided himself a Frock, and a Rope about his middle,
which would better have become his neck, and with Letters in his hand directed
to me, trudged to my lodging. Knocking at my door, and being demanded his
business, he told them he had Letters for the master of the house, nominating
me. Looking out, and seeing no one but a seeming Porter, I ordered that he
should be let in. As Soon as he was entered, he bid my Worship good morrow, and
in stead of delivering me his Letters, showed me his Mace; which I wished might
be the only spice and meat too he should eat for a twelvemonth. Seeing how I
was betrayed, I went quickly along with him to the Compter; and afterward,
finding I could make no composition with my Creditors, turned my self over to
the King's Bench. Various are their tricks and inventions to ensuare whom they
intend to arrest. Sometimes I have known a Creditor seem to comply with his
Debtor, telling him that paying some inconsiderable matter, his Bonds should be
renewed with longer time: then appoint him a place of meeting, where he says
he will bring a Counselor and Scrivener; a Counselor to advise them in
management of their business, and a Scrivener to write what they determine. He
acquainted a Sergeant and a Yeoman with his Plot, who were as hot upon it, as
an Italian on a Wench of 15. The Sergeant going with a Barristers Gown on his
back, and the Yeoman with his beard cut as close as a stubble field, with a Pen
in his ear, and some Parchment in his hand, effected their design without
suspicion. A Merchant I knew, that intended to break and go beyond Sea, was
betrayed by his servant, who informed his Creditors that at such a time his Mr.
would be gone: that on the morrow he would send for Coopers to hoop some
dry-fats to pack his goods; and that if ever they hoped to have their money,
they must make that their time. Some Sergeants were presently acquainted
herewith, who attired like Coopers in red Caps, canvase Brecches, with Ads in
their hands, and Hoops about their shoulders, went to the Merchant and vve^e
entertained; whilst he was giving them direction; but in stead of hooping the
dry-fats, they hoopt him in their arms, and arrested him. Before they parted
with him, they made him part with so much money as would satisfy his
Creditors and them; and made him fee them besides, not then to enter any more
Actions against him. They will change themselves into as many shapes as
Proteus, to bring about their design: sometimes like a grand wealthy Citizen,
othertimes like a Country-fellow newly come to town, with boots and spurs all
dirty. Now as I have related their manner of arresting, so let me briefly
inform you of their using (or rather abusing) prisoners. First they enquire of
the person whether this be the first time he was arrested: if so, then they
know the better how to deal with him. Perhaps they will carry him to the
Tavern, pretending to do him kindness, where they will advise him to send for
some friend; and one of them will be the Porter himself; but in stead of
fetching the friend, he only enquires out his Creditors, and persuades them to
use this opportunity to recover their debt: mean while, the other that is left
behind does milk him. The messenger returning, sorrowfully tells him his friend
is not at home. Getting as much as they can by spunging, and sucking the very
heart-bloud of his pocket, the Compter must be his refuge at last. Sometimes,
seeing a man in fear of arresting, they will without warrant of the Creditor
give him a cast of their Office, often arresting him before they enter their
Action; and have ways to prevent a man's injuring them by search in the Offices.
Other times for a fee they will send to the party to keep out of the way,
having received a fee to that end before. Oftentimes, having arrested, if the
Creditor stand not by, they will let the party go for a brace of Angels, or so;
telling his adversary that he cannot set eye on him. And though their fee for
an Arrest is to be but I^ yet will they hardly be wrought upon to do their
Office under a Crown: and though the Statute say that the arrested shall pay
but one Groat, I will not excuse him for an Angel. If a man oppose them, or
struggle for an escape, they will both gripe and pinch him, and afterward clap
an Action of Assault and Battery on him at their own suit. I could say more of
them, but that for fear I must be favorable, being now, as I tell you, a
prisoner in the King's Bench, which may be called, The Bankrupts
Banque^ting-house, where he feasts himself on dishes borrowed from other men's
tables; or, The Predigals Purgatory, and A Pesthouse for decaying Citizens.
Being weary of this place, wherein are as many maladies and mischiefs as flew
out of Pandora's box opened by Epimetheus; I invented this stratagem: One day I
pretended much business abroad, and so got leave to go out with my Keeper,
resolving not to return with him. Having been from Tavern to Alehouse, and so
to Tavern again, pretending the dispatch of much business I at length told my
Keeper, that I would visit a very dea friend of mine, but that I thought it
requisite to be trimmed first. He consenting, we went to a Barbers. I sat down
in the Chair first; and being dispatched, I desired the Keeper to sit down too,
and I would pay for sprucifying his Phisnomy. Whilst he was trimming I talked of
one thing or other, to hold him in discourse. At last said the Barber, Shut
your eyes, or else my ball will offend them. Shutting his eyes, I took an
occasion to slip out, planting my self in an house hard by; the Barber not
imagining I was a prisoner. The Keeper not hearing me talk, valued not the
smart, but opened his eyes; and seeing me not in the shop, rose up, and that so
hastily, that he overthrew Cutbeard, and the basin on him, running out into the
street with the Barbers cloth about him, and Don Barberoso's Turbant on his
head. The people seeing him thus with the froth about his face, concluded him
mad, and as he ran gave him the way. The Barber with his Razor ran after the
Keeper, crying, Stop him, stop him, that I may be revenged on the Rogue. The
other nere minding the Outery, ran staring up and down as if his wits had
lately stole away from him, and he in pursuit of them. Some durst not stop him,
others would not, thinking the Barber by his posture intended to have his
Testicles for abusing his wife. To conclude, the Barber at last seized him, and
having recovered his clothes and made him pay 6 d. for shaving, the Keeper was
d^mist with a kick or two in the arse; the Barber not suffering him to speak a
word in his own defense. Thus freeing my self, I resolved to take the
Country-air, where I happily met with you. Many other things worthy remembrance
did he relate, which now I have forgot. Some while we staid together; but at
last his business called him one way, and my Padding Trade invited me another.

The English Padder or Hiway Robber Portrayed.




CHAP. LI.
He is laid up in Oxford- Goal by his Host; he is cheated at Chester; and after
some time is ransomed thence by some of his Comrades, Knights of the Road, they
paying his Debts.

OUr Crew having been abroad, we had got a valuable Purchase; which after we
had divided, I told them, that I would but visit a friend at Oxford, and repair
to them again within two or three days. My old Acquaintance being overjoyed to
see me, after so long absence, treated me very gallantly, introducing me into
the society of the Wits; who would frequently drink too, till they had lost
them. The Company pleased me so well, that I thought it a solecisin in
civility, to be sober, when they made any appointment for m^h; and they being
true Bacchanalians, in the uppermost Classis of Aristippus's School, scorned to
be oucvy'd by a junior Sophister; and therefore, do what I could, they would be
drunk before me: they never commended about any argument that tended to eb^ery,
but swallowed them all. I thought they would never have done speaking of Sack;
every one endeavoring who should express most in its praise. One said, That
Diogenes was but a dry fellow; and the only reason he could give for it, was,
That it is shrewdly suspected by the Commentators on his Tub, that that
wooden-house of his was given him by a Beer-brewer, who being, an enemy to all
good wit: and learning, ciates, unfortunately my Chester-Landlord (who having
some business to do in Oxford, was newly come thither to dispatch it) espied
me, and without accosting me (like a subtle Sophister) watched me whither I
went: being housed, he presently fetched two Officers, and coming out into the
street napt me. I sent to those friends that had been so merry with me ever
since my coming to that City; but they understanding the business, came not
near me; one pretending in disposition of body; another, that he was not
within; a third, that he was about urgent occasions, which having finished, he
would wait upon me; but in fine, none came to my relief, showing themselves
right pot-companions, whose courtesies it may be, shall extend to the payment
of a Reckoning, when their friend wants it to discharge it himself; but
disappear and vanish, when their assistance is implored to draw him out of
Prison. Seeing no remedy, I patiently suffered my self to be confined. My
adversary visiting me, I treated with him about my releasment, offering him
what I had, which was near upon half; but his resolution was to have all, or
there I must lie. Though I could not much condemn him, yet I could not but
complain against the inconstancy of Fortune; and ruminating within my mind the
miseries that attend all sorts of prisons, I judged that of Debt to be the most
deplorable: and though I wanted liberty, which commonly does depress the mind,
yet by the virtue of Canary (which I could not be without) my fancy scorned to
be fettered, but would in spite of fate, use her freedom. It Is some kind of
pleasure and comfort, for a man sometimes in adversity, to descant on his own
miserable condition; which because I found experimentally true, I applied my
self to my usual custom, the use of my pen, differencing these Metropolitan
Prisons thus:

To Bedlam men are sent bereft of wit;
When it is restored, then they are freed from it:
Confined to Newgate long, men cannot complain,
For once a month they are cleared from it and pain;
In a short time their Bolts wear off, and then
They may be sure never to come there again;
Discharged thence their fettered souls shall be,
Only an hour confined, and then set free.
Bridewel, n^ wise man yet did e're dispraise thee,
For thou do feed the poor, correct the lazy;
The expiration of a little time,
Forgives offenders, and forgets their Crime.
Hereafter from this Prison, Heaven defend me,
Rather to Bedlam, Newgate, Bridewel, send me;
For there Wit, Work, or Law does set men free,
Nothing but Money here gets liberty.
Having lain here above a week, I sent away a Letter to my Brethren, informing
them of my misfortune, and acquainting them with the sum I was imprisoned for;
which was sent me by them, and brought by one of our trusty Knights: paying my
Debt and Fees, I returned again to them.

CHAP. LII.
He returns to his Brethren the Knights of the Road, whom he finds with two or
three Gentlemen, strangers; he cheats one of them of a very fair and rich Watch.

MY Companions took little notice of me at my return, which made me think there
was some design in hand; but according to their usual course, fell to drink
high: observing two or three faces, I tipped a wink to one of my Brethren; being
in another room; I asked him, who they were; he replied, Gentlemen that were
traveling into the North; to which he added, We have been pumping them (ever
since we did thrust our selves into their company) to know what store of Cash
they had about them; but we find little more then will defray their necessary
expenses on the Road; only, said he, there is one of them has a very rich
Watch: I bid him return to his place, and I would warrant him to have it before
he stirred. I came in again to the company, not taking the least cognizance of
any, but showed much tespect and civility to them all, as a stranger; I
purposely asked what it was a clock: one of the Gentlemen, and of my friends
both, pulled forth their Watches, striving who should first give me
satisfaction to my question; after this, they viewed interchangeably the
workmanship of one and the other, both praising the seeming goodness of each
others Watch. At last my friend makes a propofition: Come, Sir, if you please
we will make an exchange upon sentence and repentance. The stranger desired to
understand his meaning: Why, Sir, said he, we will commit them both into the
hands of any one indifferent person, and what difference he shall judge there
is between them, shall be given in money by him whose Watch is least worth. It
was concluded upon; but they could not agree into whose hands to put them. At
last it was mutually agreed upon between them, that I being a stranger to them
both, should be the decider: I seemingly refused it, but they would not hear me
allege any arguments to the contrary; whereupon I went out, and immediately
causing my horse to be brought forth, without the least delay I mounted, and
away I rid. My Comerades knew where to meet me at the next stage. The next
morning they found me out, telling me how they all stormed to be so cheated, to
avoid suspicion: and now did they all embrace me, promising to themselves great
hopes in me from this adventure.

CHAP. LIII.
He puts a notable Trick upon a Physician.

NEar adjacent to our general randezvons, I was informed of the habitation of a
weaithy Physician, who had showed himself fortunately expert in diverse Cures,
where it seemed that humane art had not sufficient power to give a remedy. The
fame of his great skill, and of many admirable cures, which to the shame of
other Physicians, he had performed, made him so generally beloved and sought
after, that in a short time he purchased by his sanatory industry, above 500 l.
per annum, and seldom had less by him then a thousand pound. Thus much I
casually understood from one accidentally, speaking of this his rich Neighbor:
but that which pleased me most was, that (as he said) he seidom carried less
then an 100 pieces of gold about him constantly, proceeding from a fancy
derived from an extreme love he bore that Metal. I could not sleep for
contriving a way how I might disembogue this U^iral of what it contained:
sometimes I waylaid him in his return; but he was so well esteemed of, that he
seldom returned home without two or three Gentlemen to accompany him. At
another time I thought to have pretended some distemper, and so have applied my
self to him for Cure; and imagining that he would privately discourse with me
about my Malady, that then I would present a Pistol to his breast, swearing,
that should be his immediate and unavoidable Executioner, if he did not without
the least noise or resistance, deliver such a quantity of Gold; but this way I
could not approve of, it being accompanied with so much hazard. At last I
thought of this stratagem, which safely produced its effect: One day after
dinner I rid to his house (seemingly) in extreme haste, which he might perceive
not only by my own affrighted looks, but by my horse, which was all of a soam;
I asked his servant, with much quickness, whether Mr. Doctor was within; yes,
Sir, (said he) if you please to walkin, I shall call him to you. I waited some
time (for most of that profession must take some state upon them) and then Mr.
Doctor came. Sir, (said I) the report of your great experience in your happy
Practice has brought me hither, humbly imploring your assistance, and that
instantly, if you have any respect to the preservarion of life; the trouble I
shall put you to, shall be gratefully recompensed to the utmost of my ability.
The Doctor inquired of me, whom it was, and what manner of distemper the person
labored under; I readily told him, it was my Wife, who for some continuance of
^e, has been extremely ^oubled with the flux of her Belly; the more that is
applied to it by us, the more it increases; wherefore, our help failing, I
beseech you lend us yours, and favor me so far as to ride with me to her. The
seeming sincerity of my words prevailed upon him, asthey would have done upon
the most distrustful. This Doctor (who as I was informed, was accustomed to be
induced more by gain, then fair words) gave me this desirable answer: Sir, far
be it from me that I should resuse to do my endeavor to any person whatever,
much less to a Gentleman of your rank and quality, in that little skill which I
have in the knowledge and practice of Physic; if I can effect any thing for
the good of the good Gentlewoman your Wife, I will attend you thither with a
very good will, which at any time my charge requires. Without attending any
further discourse, his horse was made ready, and so we rid a way together. As
we rid through a small Wood, leading him the way, I turned my horse about, and
clapped a Pistol to his breast, showing him withal an empty bag; See here, Sir,
(said I) my Wife, which has a long time been troubled with a flux or vomiting,
which you please, the last I think more proper; for she no sooner receives any
thing for her (and my) sustenance, but she immediately brings it up again at
her mouth. Now Sir, if you do not find out some means to mitigate this
distemper (the cure I shall never expect, as knowing it impossible) this Pistol
shall send you to AEsculapius, to consult with him what is most sit to be
administered: come, Sir, let me advise you, and save your self the trouble of so
long a journey; your gold (an hundred pieces (as I am told) are the constant
attending Esquires of your body) I say, that is the best and only Recipe for a
remedy. The Doctor perceiving there was no help, in much amazement and fear
delivered me what gold he had about him, which was near upon the sum expressed:
there was a rich Diamond-Ring on his finger, which I desired him likewise to
give me, which should serve for a perpetual memorandum of his kindness to me. I
commanded him, as he tendered his life, to ride back again, without so much as
once looking behind him; and that if he offered to raise the Country, if I was
sure to die that instant, I would be the death of him first. The Doctor
followed my dictations so exactly, that I never heard more of him.

CHAP. LIVE.
He falls in love with a wealthy Widow, who is poetically inclined; he courts
her, and in a short time injoys her, and after that ingratefully leaves her,
carrying away what ready money she had.

HAving gained so much money by my own industry and sole procurement, I
resolved neither to acquaint my Brethren therewith, nor associate my self any
longer with them, being so encouraged by this success, that I concluded I might
a^chieve gallant things by my self: being belated one night, and some miles
from any town, I knocked at an house that stood in my road, imagining it at
first a public house for entertainment; one of the servants coming to the
door, I found it no such thing: he demanded my business: Prithee sweetheart
(said I) acquaint your Master, that there is a Gentleman requests the civility
of a nights lodging: she goes in and informs her Mistress what I said; who came
to me with much respect, telling me, She questioned not but I was a Gentleman,
and therefore should be welcome to the mean accommodation she was capable of
showing. I rendered her many thanks, and so alighted; strict order was given to
the Groom, that he very carefully looked after my horse: this being done, I was
conducted into a very fair room; there did I make my apology in the best
Rhetoric I had, for I perceived she was endued with ingenuity, by the
quaintness of her expressions; Ex pede Herculem: Many things I forged, as that
the ways being dangerous, I was fearful to adventure any farther, having a
great charge upon me. Such was her urbanity, that laying aside all niceties,
she bore me company till it was time to go to bed, entertaining me all this
while with what the house afforded, which was beyond my expectation. Every
glass of wine, or bit almost, that I committed to my mouth, she ushered thither
with some Apothegm or other: the whole series, indeed, of her discourse, was
composed of nothing but reason or wit, which made me admire her; which she
easily understood, I perceived, by her smiles, when she observed me gaping, as
it were, when she spoke, as if I would have eaten up her Words. As her soul was
beautiful, sparkling with celestial ornaments, so was the caskanet that
contained it very fair, and enricht with Natures chiefest gifts: She was very
clear skinned, well bodied, a sharp piercing eye, a proportionable face, an
exceeding small and white hand; and then she lispt a little, which became her
so well, that methought it added a grace to the rest of her internal and
external qualifications. Being about ten a clock, she advised me to repose my
self, supposing I was weary. I condescended, though with much regret to leave
her so soon; but good manners would not permit me to do otherwise: She
conducted me to my Chamber, where bidding me good night, she betook her self to
her own Chamber. That night I could hardly sleep, not so much for pure love, as
the heat of lust: next morning, very early, I heard her stirring, which made me
wonder; but she told me afterward, that she got up so soon, fearing I should
have gone away, and she not take her leave of me. About eight in the morning,
the Maid brought me up a Sack-posset; and a little after, her Mistress came,
courteously saluting me, and enquiring how I slept: I returned an answer, in as
handsome terms I could utter: her eyes plainly discovered to mine, that she had
more then a common respect for me. Having left me a while, I arose, and made my
self ready for my journey: after several discourses which she had engaged me
in, purposely to delay time, with much gratitude I took my leave, she attending
me to the court: my horse being b^ought out, halted downright (she had caused
him to be pricked in the foot, to the intent I might stay longer.) Not knowing
what to say or do, Well, Sir, said she, since the unhappy accident has fallen
out so unexpectedly, make use of my house, and what is in it, till your horse
be recovered of his lameness. This was a proposition that my soul longed for;
wherefore I could not but show much satisfaction in the acceptance of this
proffer. We walked in again, and prosecuted for diversion sake our former
discourse, interlining it with some love-touches at a distance, which she would
frequently descant on pleasantly. We in this short time became intimately
acquainted; which need not be much wondered at, considering the greatness of
sympathy between us; so that now the conquest of her appeared not any ways
difficult. Having talked our selves weary, Come, said she in a very familiar
manner, I will show you the product of some idle hours; and with that brought
me several Epitap^s, Elegies, Anagrams, Anacrosticks, Epigrams, etc. of her own
composition, too many here to relate; but for their wit, deserved to have each
line characterized in gold: some I would here insert, were not the radiant
luster of her conceits so great and glorious, that they would absolutely
extinguish the dim-sightedness of my fancy. Having viewed them, I could not but
applaud them, as their due merit; and I was glad I had this happy occasion to
vent my own thoughts, which I taci^ly infinuated in these lines, reflecting on
her from what I had read.

Sisters thrice three I Have read of, and no more,
Till your quick wit completed half a Score:
Since you are one, let me persuade you then,
Be kind to me, for they are kind to men.
Dearest, be like them, they are soft and hlithe
Let who will love the nine, give me the tithe.
These lines so powerfully wrought upon her, that she could not forbear to tell
me, that she was much obliged to me for what I had writ. You cannot Madam, said
I, cancel your obligation, till you have made some recompense: with that, said
she smilingly, What will content you? The continuance of your favor Madam, is
the utmost ambition of my desires. You have it Sir; neither can I deny any
deserving man a thing so inconsiderable: By your favor Madam, love I mean. I
never was so uncharitable, said she, to be out of love with any. I was glad to
hear her reply so merrily: for a fort which so capitulateth, is half
surrendered. Since I had broke the ice, I was resolved to prosecute my design;
wherefore in plain English I told her, that I loved her from the first
interview, so ardently, that my constancy should prove the reality of my
affection: she desired me to leave that to the test of time; that should she
believe me suddenly before she had made trial, she should not only loose the
good estimation she had gained by the prudent and discreet management of her
affairs, every one accusing her for too much credulity, but thereby it may be
involve her self in a Labyrinth of all manner of troubles. Trial, said I, you
shall have: and knowing the manner of courting a widow, a trial I gave her,
knowing that Parleys operate little on a widow, and there is nothing sooner
gains a conquest then a resolute assault. This action made her so firmly mine,
that I durst not speak of leaving; which when I did at any time, her Soul was
ready to leave its ancient habitation to attend on me. Some two months we spent
in all manner of selfpleasing delights, till at last I begun to be tired with
her too frequent invitations; the more I endeavored to satisfy her, the
further I was from it. Not only by her, but by others, this experiment I found,
that the oftener I treated them, the more eagerly and earnestly they desired it.
Being now incapacitated to hold out in this manner longer, I thought it high
time to be gone, but not without sufficient recompense for my service. She
daily solicited me to marry her, which I promised her from time to time,
waiting an opportunity when I might become master of her treasure. One day in a
frolic, and the more to encourage me to make a speedy consummation of our
loves by marriage, she showed me all her writings which concerned her estate
(by which I found her to be so wealthy a fortune, that I oftentimes cursed my
unhappy stars, that they had thus debarred me from the complement of so great a
bliss.) After this, she shows me a trunk wherein was contained her cash: then
taking me about the neck with such fervency of affection, that I thought she
would have strangled me, and with the repetition of kisses, she smiling, ask
me, whether these things satisfied me or not. I told her they did, but they
were not to stand in competition with her most affected self: with that she
gave me the keys of that trunk wherein her money was; and in retaliation, I
vowed to marry her in four days. In the mean time I studied how I might be
gone, but could not contrive a way, she not enduring me to be out of her sight.
In fine, I feigned some indisposition of body, and that I would ride two or
three miles for the benefit of the fresh air, and return: with much
unwillingness she consented. Just as I was about to take horse (having
furnished my self with as much money as I could well carry without discovery)
she wept bitterly (as having I think a prophetic Spirit.) I asked her the
cause of her discontent: all bathed in tears, she answered me with a deep sigh,
I shall never see you more: Hard-hearted man! can you thus leave a woman that
loves you thus dearly, nay, that dotes on you? I made many protestations to the
contrary; which were not believed. Seeing that I could not prevail on her
belief, I bad her farewell, setting spurs to my horse, and was out of sight in
an instant. I could not but condemn my self extremely for this inhumane action:
but considering that there is no slavery greater then that of the smock, I
soothed my self up in mine own unworthiness; passing by a little Alehouse, I
called in, and over a pot of Ale I composed these ensuing lines, which I sent
to her by a messenger I procured in the house, directed thus:

Deliver these to the fair hands of Mrs. Pulcheria Tickleman, at her
dwelling house, near Redding.

The Contents were these, or to this purpose.

Madam,
A Poetess you are, and Prophet too,
Thus to divine I Am gone from you
Eternally. It Is true: Do You think that I can eat,
Though never so choice, always one sort of meat?
No faith; I Would rather wear a Porters frock,
Then to be shrouded in one woman's smock.
You say you are with child; Pish, don't complain;
It Is but the product of your fruitful brain:
You Are only big with fancy, which may prove
A witty Brat, like Pallas sprung from Jove.
And have you then conceived? How can I choose
But write Encomiums on my fertile Muse?
Mind not the Father, nor his Brat, for it
Will like the Father live (no doubt) by wit:
Let Pegasus be Godfather, the crew
Of the nine Muses, Gossips; so adieu.

I desired no answer, therefore stayed not till the return of the messenger,
but rid that night to Maidenhead.

CHAP. LV.
He comes up to London, sends to a particular friend, whom he could confide in,
to come to him, and requests him to compound with his Creditors, which he did
in a short time; and in a short time after, he attempts the robbing of an
house, but is taken and clapped up in Newgate: The miseries of an imprisoned
estate, with the manner of his escape out of that Prison.

THe next day I rode toward London, and about twylight took up my quarters in
the Suburbs: the day following, I sent for a friend whom I could put confidence
in, who came immediately upon the reception of my Letter. I communicated to him
my intentions, who was very glad to hear of my resolution; yet I would not
acquaint him how strong I was, nor by what means procured: 'twas enough that I
gave him commission how far forth he should proceed, and no farther, which was
half a Crown per pound. He went (after I had given him a list of them all) to
every one particularly, and treated with them so cunningly, and they despairing
of ever recovering a farthing, condescended to his proposals; whereupon he gets
them all to subscribe, and then brings the Paper to me, which I exceedingly
well liked of. According to the day appointed, he carried them the Money, which
every one received ^oportionably, each man respectively giving me his general
release from the beginning of the world: they to whom I had confessed Judgments,
filled according to Law their discharges. But when my Creditors a little while
afterward, saw me walk the streets in so splendid garb, some of them were ready
to die with anguish; but that which troubled them most, was my supercilious
looks when I met any of them, and my slighting salutations. What I did in this
respect was only to have the freedom of walking the streets, without the
molestation of chargable arrests. I kept such deboistcompany, that the remaing
part of my money grew low, and in a very short time after was all spent. All my
drunken Companions failed me, and I having nothing left me but my clothes,
necessity made me to condescend to the enquiry after the kind-natured
Gentlewoman my Wife: her nearest relations could not give me any account of
her, giving her over for lost. I wandered up and down, employing all the powers
of my wit and invention, in the search of what might conduce to supply my
present necessities. While I was thus hammering out some new design on the
Anvil of experience, I bethought my self where probably I might find my Wife:
First, I went to Ratcliff highway, and made enquiry of Dammaris, etc. the
Metrapolitan Bawd of those parts, for a Gentlewoman of such a complexion,
stature, and age, ('it was but a folly to mention her name, for those that follow
that trade change their names as often as they do their places of abode) but
that cart-load of flesh could give me no information, neither was it possible
for me to have staid to hear it, she so stunk of Strong Water, stronger then
that Cask that never contained any thing else: I went down all along to the
Cross, in my way I saw many Whores standing at their doors, giving me
invitation; but being poor, they could not afford the charge of Fucus, so that
their faces looked much like a piece of rumpled Parchment, and by their
continual traffic with Seamens Breeches, I could not come near them, they
smelt so strongly of Tarpawlin and stinking Cod; yet still no tidings of her I
sought for. From hence I went to Fleet-yard, but there they were so dawbed or
plaistred with paint, and botcht with patches, that had I seen her there, it
was impossible for me to have known her. Away I went to Luteners-lane, Sodom,
and Dog and Bitch-yard; but the Pox, it seemed, had not yet fitted her for
those places. From hence I went to Whetstons-Park, where I saw my Mad-dame
standing at the door: her frequent trading, and those many shots she had
received between wind and water in the service, had so altered her countenance,
and disproportioned her body, that I knew not whether this Frigate was English
or Flemish built: but at last, hailing whence she was, I boarded her, and made
her lawful prize: mistake me not, I rummag'd not in her Hold, fearing she was a
Fire-ship. The sight and knowledge of me, made her shed some Babylonish tears,
which I took little notice of, knowing them to be either customary to that Sex,
or the effects of a moist brain. In we went together, where we had, according
to the custom of the house, Pint-black-pots of small Ale for two pence, and
quarterns of Strong-water half filled for six pence, with Biskets; which as
soon as brought, every one broken, though not a bit afterward eaten. We must
be smoking too, though the Pipe must be thrown down carelessly, and often broken
as soon as put to the lips: one of the Plyers being gone down to draw some more
drink, she begged me to conceal my self for the present, and comply also with
the cheating customs of the house, and she would willingly pay all. I had
hardly smoakt two whiffs more, but that a fellow came where we were, swearing
dam-me, why do you stay with this fellow, and leave me thus, you unconstant
Queen? have I spent my estate on you, and must you now grow weary of me? and
with that drew his knife, making a proffer to cut her nose off. I was so amazed
at what I heard, and so irritated by passion, that I knew not which of them to
be revenged on first. Sir, said I, I have been longer acquainted with her then
you, and may justly claim a better title and more privilege; but as you have
affronted me, so I shall require satisfaction instantly, nor referring our
difference to be decided by the field, an Umpire that Cowards frequently make
choice of: so drawing my knife also, and seizing on his nose, which I intended
to have divore'd from his face, I was prevented, for it dropped off into my hand.
This accident so astonished me, and withal being much affrighted at the fight of
his Deaths-head, I durst not meddle with him any further, lest handling any
Member, it would have dropped off in the same manner: he made a blow at me, but
instead of striking me, I expected when his fist would have flown from his body
into my face: he kicked at me, but that leg being up, the other was incapable of
supporting his body, and so he fell down. The old Bawd hearing this
disturbance, ran to us as fast as the vast bulk of her body would give her
leave, whose pace was not much swifter then a snail in his full carreer, who
having fasted too long, by the constant repercussion of the Sunbeams on him in
a misting morning, forrageth a garden for pillage. From the place whence she
started, to that where we scuffled, was about six yards distance; and from the
time of her setting forward, to the time she came to us (not to belie the
woman) was about half an hour, and then too, out of breath, for the haste she
made. Sirrah, sirrah, said she, come you hither to breed quarrels, and abuse
civil Gentlemen, and it may be build a sconce too? get you out of my house, you
Rascal, or I Will scald you out. By this time the Pimp came to their assistance,
and so they all conjoined to shove this poor fellow out of doors: and
notwithstanding he had for two or three years frequented the house, yet they
neither pitied nor relieved him as a maimed soldier, the marks whereof were a
sufficient testimony, besides the loss of a Member or two. Having discharged my
reckoning, my Wife appointed me a place where I should meet her. Having now
convenience and privacy of discourse, we waved every thing that tended not to
my present design, which was the contrivance of some way to live. At last we
resolved to take an house and live together; I thought it was as good to be
Pimp to my own Wife, by which means the major part of the gain would be mine,
as Pimp to another for 12 pence a day and spunging. What we had determined, we
soon put in execution: what money she had was laid out in utensils belonging to
our Trade, as for bedding, linen, chairs and stools, etc. The Tally-man or
Broker, who sells his goods to be paid by 12 d. a pound per week, the truth of
it is, we found of him, but more especially his servants excellent customers;
for they would for a private favor, cut off a score, sometimes two or three
from the Tally. Our stock being but small, my Wife was forced to be both Bawd
and Whore; but our trade increasing, she goes frequently to the Carriers, where
at last she had picked up a couple of very well-featured Country-girls, and
brings them home, entertaining them as servants; but showing as much kindness
in them, as if they had been our nearest kindred, purposely to induce them to
stay: The Whore, my Wife, intended to have sold their Maiden-heads at a dear
rate; but in truth, I ever loved such things too well to put them to sale,
having them in my possession. To be sure thereof, I gathered my Rose-buds the
first night, lest the infectious and contagious breath of some one
Suburbicarian should blast them: in four days time afterward, I fitted them
for their occupations, leaving the instructive part thereof to my Wife to
season them withal. I never saw two young Jades understand their trade sooner
in my life; for in a Months time they could Cant indifferently, Wheedle most
cunningly, Lie confoundedly, Swear desperately, pick a Pocket dexteriously,
Dissemble undiscernably, drink and smoke everlastingly, Whore insatiately, and
brazen out all their actions impudently. Now did I begin to renew my
acquaintance with the Tribe of Rogues, with whom I grew so intimate, that I was
seldom out of their company, either at home or abroad. To relate all the tricks
and rogueries we committed in one half year, were an half years work: therefore
to be short, we were grown so notorious, and so generally taken notice of, that
at last my Wife, and her two Maids of dishonor, were apprehended by the
Marshals men, and carried to Bridewel; I my self narrowly escaping by flight:
The next day I boldly went to visit them; methought their beating of hemp
became them excellent well; and in troth I Will say this for them, there has not
been seen in that place a more serviceable strong-dockt Crew for many years.
Looking very earnestly upon that Hemp my Wife was beating, a deep fit of
Melancholy seized me, proceeding only from my imagination; for I fancied that
very Hemp would make that very Rope which should put a period to my life. The
time of my visiting them, fell out on the day of their correction;
understanding so much, I resolved to stay and see them well lasht, I hoped: My
Wife being manacled, and the whip ready to encircle her Waste; Hold, said I,
and then directing my self to the Masters of Bridewel; May it please your
Worships, this woman now under correction, is the most impudent brazen-faced
Whore in the whole Town; I have known her a long time, ever since, and some
small time before she undid her Husband, a very honest man indeed, and had the
good report of all his Neighbors; but this confident Slut could not then be
content without her Stallion, whom she maintained by what she purloin'd from
her Husband, and so utterly ruined him: since she has been the destruction of
several, some in their estates, others in their bodily health, and now so far
from being penitent, that she glories in nothing more, then in the relation of
how many she has undone here and hereafter: wherefore I beseech your Worships,
for my friend's sake, that good honest man, and for the good of her own soul,
add one half-dozen stripes to the number intended, and let them be laid home. I
had no sooner ended my speech, but I vanished immediately. Just as I was out of
the gate, I met with two of my roguing friends, whom the Devil had sent, I
think, to way-lay me: they were going, it seems, to see some of their Doxies,
that had that day been committed. Being overjoyed to meet me so accidentally,
they would needs have me go to the Tavern with them: over a glass of wine we
consulted about diverse matters, no goodness to be sure; the result whereof was,
that I should go to such an house, and try if by any means I could get into it
unperceived, and abscond my self in order to my opening the door for them about
twelve a clock. According to the time nominated I went, and with much facility
conveyed my self into a lower room, wherein there was a bed, under which I
crept, being confident I might lie there securely, till all the household were
retired to take their rest. After I had lain about some two hours on the
ground, there came into this room a servant; I peept out, and by the light of
his candle, saw that which I thought would have distracted me with fear; it was
the laying the cloth, by which I understood, the Master of the house intended
to sup there: suddenly after, meat was brought in and served to the Table; then
came five or six persons, who passing diverse complements (all which needless
ceremonies at that time, I wished with their inventers were stark naked upon the
top of the Snowy Alps) every one took seats. Had not there been at that time
some small prattling children running up and down, and making a noise, the
affright their appearance had put me in, would have betrayed me; for my knees
knocked so hard one against the other, that they made a noise like a Mill-clack,
or the striking of two marrow-bones together: for my life I could not prevent
the Palsy from seizing every limb of me. My cruel fates had so ordered it,
that there was a small Dog in the room, and a Cat, both dearly beloved by their
Mistress; who would be continually flinging down something other, which they
continually quarrelled about, as jealous and envious upon the distribution of
their Mistress favors: at length she threw down a small bit; the Cat being
somewhat a more nimble servitor, and diligent waiter than the Dog, took it, and
ran with it underneath the Bed; the Dog ran after the Cat snarling,
endeavoring to affright her, that she might forsake the purchase: The Dog
approaching near, and too much intrenching upon her right, she puts him in
mind of his duty, by one scratch with her Claw, and chastises him for his
rashness with two or three more: this so angered him, that he made a furious
assault upon Puss, who defended herself as well as she could; but at length
they closed and grappling each other, they made a most hideous noise. The spot
in which they fought this combat, was underneath the Bed upon my buttocks: The
servant that attended being over hasty to quell the noise, by parting the fray,
snatched up the fire-shovel, and throws it underneath the Bed; had it hit my
nose with the edge, as it did my breech with the handle, I should have had it
pared off even with my face. The Cat instantly provides for her safety by
flight, but the Dog still remained behind grumbling, and now and then barking
with such eagerness, that he became very offensive to the whole company.
Wherefore the servant was commanded to drag him forth, which he he did, beating
him, and throwing him out of doors: in the mean time I was left in such a
condition, as if I had been breathing my last. As soon as the door was opened,
the Dog came in underneath the Bed with more fury than before: this second
alarm did my business (or as they vulgarly say, made me do my business) for
running fiercely on me, he had bit me by the nose, but that I snatched away my
head from him: but not observing the Bed-post behind, I thought I had dashed my
brains out against it; fear also having berest me of my retentive faculty, I
did let fly at one and the same time, which made so strange a noise together,
that they all rose from the table to see what was the matter: their noses
quickly informed them of some part, for the room was presently strongly
scented; looking underneath the bed, they could see poor Jain Perus, giving up
the Ghost (as dying persons usually evacute their ordure before their
departure) they pulling me forth, and quickly revived me, they roughly handled
me, and then beat me, till I was ene dead again. Being taken in the present
offense, I could expect no other but to be subject to the rigor of their
vengeance; I could make no plea sufficient to stay their fury, or satisfy
their revenge: having fetched a Constable, I was carried before a Justice of
Peace, who with little examination caused my Mittimus to be drawn, and so I was
sent to Newgate. I was no sooner within, and under lock and key, but fetters
confined my legs from straggling, and bracelets were ciapt upon my arms. The
Rogues came all flocking about me for their Garnish, which I gave them: some of
the gentiler sort added more to it, so that we had a bundance of drink. But
never did I hear so confused a din of Dam-me and Sink me: others singing so
loud (alias roating) that I thought my self in Hell, and that these were damned
souls that roared through extremity of torments. I thought none had been so
wicked as my self, till I came among these Hellhounds. Not a word came from any
of their mouths, but what was seconded with an Oath, cursing their bad Stars,
and Blaspheming. The Misery of this or any other prison is sufficiently
represented, if by nothing else then want of liberty, that rich inheritance of
living souls: as it is the greatest of enjoyments, next that imperial Gem of
health, so the want thereof next to sickness must needs be of all other the
most bitter. Since then to be consined to the confines of the Goal, is to be in
part unmanned, entombed alive, what and how great is that wretchedness that is
occasioned not only by a want of liberty, but by a continual dread of shamesul
death! The terror of this place full of torture is so exasperated by the
imagination of a noble mind, that Hell it self cannot contain more exquisite
woes and pains, a continuance whereof were sufficient to punish all offenses,
if the Law dispensed with that debt due to Justice, the life of the offender.
Your companions are none but licentious wretches, souls which daily surround
you with their loath some persons overspread with scabs and lice. Here sighing
is our air, our comfort coldness, our food despair, our music rattling of
chains, our recreation the destruction of vermin; lastly, our expectation death
and damnation. The keeper with the gri^ aspect of his stern countenance makes
us tremble, with fear of a new martyrdom, whilst the insulting raskal on the
tiptoes of his pride need not skrew his ill-favored face to a frown, for he
knows not how to look otherwise; which so dejects the spirits of we poor
imprisoned slaves, that the contrition of our looks seems to implore his
smiles, whose flinty heart having renounced remorse, casts a desiance in our
sad and pitiousfaces. I might insist much further, but that I am hastening to
get out of the miserable and soul-excruciating prison. One day after I had
exonerated nature, I chanced to view the seat, and found that it was no
difficult matter to go down the vault by the help of a Rope. A trusty friend
coming to see me, I told him what I had observed, and what I wanted: some three
days before the Sessions, he brought me Rope enough to have hanged us all.
Having a respect unto two more, which I honored for their admirable good
parts, I informed them of what I intended; which presently we put in execution.
First I went down, but I could have wished my self up again; for I was up to
the neck, and knew not but I might be deeper, but to my great comfort I found
to the contrary: the rest descended after me, with the like good success.
Having gotten us to an house, in which we could put confidence, we quickly
sreed our selves from our Iron tackle.

CHAP. LVI.
He and his two Comrades (which he had delivered) disguise themselves, and
having been old experienced Gamesters, they taught him all the tricks on Cards,
by which they usually cheated their Cullies or Mouths, and also how to nap,
palm, or top a Dye; With all things thereunto belonging.

WE had places enough to send to for change of apparel, as rich as we pleased,
or as beggarly again on the contrary, according as our design required. Having
layen in Lavender about a fortnight in this house, not only to sweeten us, but
that the rumor of our escape, and search for us might be over, we got our
selves change of habits: Then did we all consult with our Lookingglasses for
the change of our faces, not suffering our own judgments to pass, without the
approbation of the rest. In the first place I got me a coalblack Perriwig (my
own hair being flaxen) and a small false beard suitable, with whiskers in the
Spanish fashion: It was no great trouble to black my eyebrows every morning;
then clapping a patch on my left eye, stealing out of the room, while my
Companions were busied about the same thing, not minding me, and coming in
again presently, my appearance did put them all into a very strange confusion.
I changed my voice, and asked them what they were doing; and speaking to them
in a tone they were not acquainted with, their chops moved incessantly, but the
Devil a word I could understand; they had got a palsy in their jaws by their
sudden surprizal: To have observed the several Mankey-saces, and
Baboonpostures, could not but extract laughter from the severest Cynick. Why
don't you answer me, and that quickly, ye sneaking dumb Rascals? Looking most
piteously one upon the other, expecting who should speak first, at last said
one, We mean no harm, we are only preparing some things for a Mask, which
shortly will be presented to the Citizens, and we are persons therein
concerned. I could not hold longer, but burst forth into an excessive laughter,
by which they understood their mistake, not without shame enough to think that
the apprehension of danger so slightly grounded, should so terrify them, being
struck dumb, and almost dead with a pannick fear. To be brief, we very well
liked the manner of our Metamorphosis; and having borrowed some money as the
necessary tools of our intended Trade, we adventured abroad. The first Mouth we
picked up was in the Long-walk by Christ-Church, upon the account of a wager:
there came toward us a young man, who by his garb seemed to be a Merchants man
(he afterward proved so, and his Casheer) I stepped to him, and said, Sir, if it
may not be too troublesome to you, I beseech you resolve me one question: This
Gentleman has laid an Angel with me, and referred the decision thereof to the
next that came this way, whether this next adjacent Hospital be S. Thomas's, or
S. Bartholomew's. Said the young man, I can assure you it is S. Bartholomews.
Why then friend (said I) you have lost. Sir, will you be pleased (if it may not
be any great hindrance to your present affairs) accompany us to the next
Tavern, and participate of the losings? for I scorn to pocket it. He
condescended, and so we went together: we discovered not any thing till the
sixth pint, and then my friend, as by chance found a pair of Cards in a corner
of the window, which he himself had laid there before. Here is a pair of Cards
(said he) come, to pass away the time, let us play for a pint or so; so I
really took up my friend, Putt was the game; I won of him two or three pints,
and ever and anon I would drink to the stranger, so that now he began to be
warmed, and seemed to take delight in our play, looking over my hand, and
sometimes prompting me to see him when he did put to me. At last my friend
played the High Game, as the term of Art renders it; that is, he gave me two
Trays and an Ace, and reserved for himself two Trays and a Duce. My Antagonist
puts to me: I pretended I knew not what to do, showed my game to the stranger
that looked over my shoulder: he jogs me on the Elbow; I still delayed: come
Sir (said my opponent) what will you do? I will hold you five pound on these
very Cards in my hand. I received the second jog: will you go my halfs Sir,
said I? He answered me, that he would. But alas, we lost: it could be no
otherwise. This so animated the stranger, that he persuaded me to play again,
and that he would go the moiety of every stake. Sometimes 'twas so ordered that
I won, but in fine, I lost forty pound, my Cully being half. He would now give
over, being much perplexed that he should thus lose his Masters money: but that
he might forget the condition he was in, we drank round some half a dozen
healths: So that now I thought it high time to provoke him again to let down
his milk by some new trick or stratagem.

Now did we sall to the Preaching of the Parson, a trick on the Cards, which
has deceived the most curious eye, and the wariest of men; with which we
gained from our young Merchant, the major part of his money.

Lastly, to the intent we might without any further delays give him an
acquittance for the rest of his money, we drew out some other implements, viz.
Dice fixed for our purpose, as Highfullums, which seldom run any other chance
then four, five, and six; Low-fullums, which run one, two, and three, etc.

By these means we sent him home penniless and heartless, whilst we drank
healths to the confusion of sorrow.

CHAP. LVII.
From hence he goes, by the direction of his Comrades, to a new-fashion
Bawdy House; he describes it, and relates his own success.

UPon the division we found each man's share to amount to 40 l. apiece. Being
overjoyed at our first good success, we resolved to return thanks for our good
fortunes in some private Meeting House, where we might have a Sister to assist
in the carrying on the work of the day. The Devil in all Societies never wants
his Factor, or one to solicit his business: For, I had no sooner intimated my
desires, but presently one of my Rope-brokers gave me information of a place
fit for that purpose, and that the like was not any where to be found. Being
pricked on with the desire of novelty, and to understand the curiosities
therein, I went according to my directions solely; for company in such designs
commonly frustrates expectations. They advised me when I came to the door, to
pretend I came to enquire out lodgings: At the first, I verily thought my self
abused by these Rogues, or mistaken in the house, when I saw a Porter standing
at the door with his tiptstaff: To undeceive my self, I confidently, yet
civilly asked him, whether there were any Lodgings to be let there? Yes Sir,
(said he) which you may view if you will give your self the trouble of walking
in. I had no sooner entered the door, but I was met by a grave Matron, who
readily understood (as I conceived) my approach by her sentinels above in the
windows. Madam (said I) I am informed, that here are lodgings to be let. There
is so, Sir, (said she) and with that conducted me into her Parlor (which was
gallantly furnished) there to take a stricter view of me, as to my person, but
more especially my garb, by which she might partly judge how well lined my
pockets were. After the resolution of some trivial questions, for discourse
sake, she was so well satisfied in me, that she showed me the way up one pair
of stairs, into a very large and fair Dining Room hung with rich Tapistry, and
adorned round with excellent Pictures, the Effigies of diverse Ladies (as I took
them to be) renowned and celebrated in all ages, for the fairest and most
beautiful of that Sex. A servant brought us up, immediately after our entry
into that room, a bottle of Sack, without any order given, as I could perceive;
out of which the old Gentlewoman drank to me, expressing my welcome. For want
of other discourse (as I thought) because we were both silent a while, for I
was contemplating her face, in which I could then see still the goodly ruins
of a beautiful and handsome countenance; Sir, said she, as you are a Gentleman,
you may have some knowledge in that noble Art of Limning, since for its
excellency it is in these our days (and has been in most ages) much studied by
the Gentry of this Nation; wherefore, your judgment, Sir, which of all these
Pictures is the best drawn, or according to the rules of Physiognomy, has the
best features? Madam, said I, I shall freely give you my judgment; which is,
This, in my opinion, (pointing at one) for she has a full large front, her
archt eyebrows are thick and black, without any straggling hairs; her eyes are
of the same color, and by their intuitive faculty seem to penetrate that which
they look on; passing her cheeks, which carry in them an excellent air, and her
nose, which is neither too long nor too short, view her lips, whose plumpness
and redness resemble a double Cherry; and then for the dimples in her cheeks
and chin, I could make them the subject of an whole days discourse: what might
be said more of this representation I shall wave, wishing my self no greater
happiness, then to discourse the rest with the real substance, which is not
impossible, Sir, if you can have but the faith to believe your own eyes; and so
instantly thereupon withdrew her self, leaving me amazed at what I had already
seen, my heart the mean time beating an alarm to my passions, to be all in
readiness at the approach of this Celestial Creature. Hearing a rushing of
Silks, I drew my eyes off the Picture, and looking toward the door, there I
saw enter an Angel; for I could not believe there could be so much perfection
in any one mortal: with profound reverence I stood at a distance, admiring, or
rather adoring her person, till she smilingly and familiarly desired me to sit
down. Being come to my self, I could talk to her; and in half an hour,
confidence had repossest her ancient seat in me. It will not only take up too
much time, but also offend the ears of the modest Reader, here to insert what
discourses we had; therefore I wave them, and come to the conclusion. Sir, said
she, I question not but that you are acquainted with the customs of the House.
I protested to her, I was altogether ignorant. Why, you know that you may call
for what Wine you please, not exceeding four Bottles; and if you please to eat,
you shall have some choice bit suitable to the season, etc. if you stay not all
night, your expense shall be but forty shillings, and you shall have to boot,
the enjoyment of a Mistress besides: but if you stay all night, then thus must
you do (and with that drew forth ten pieces of Gold) whether you fancy me or
any else, that matters not, you must deposit before you go to bed ten pound,
laying it underneath your own head, and for every kiss, etc. take a piece back
again, and if you draw in this manner all your own stake, you may next day be
dismissed with a great deal of applause, without expending a penny, but what you
shall be pleased to distribute voluntarily among the servants. I was stark mad
to be at it, and so impatient, that I presently told out ten pieces. Telling my
money the next morning, I found I had eight pound of my ten, but I deserved to
have my money trebled: however, for the present, I thought forty shillings was
never better spent, nor husbanded with so much recreation and delight. By her I
understood what manner of cattle they were that frequented that house, though
prostitutes and free-booters, yet such as scorned a piece of Country-dirt: some
whereof, were persons of no mean quality, which came thither to satisfy (what
was impossible to do) their insatiate lusts, and therefore enacted that Law or
Custom of depositing ten pieces, merely to incite such who were confident of
themselves to make trial of their skill for the lucre of gain; and to the
intent that it might not be discovered, either by their Husbands, or such
relations or friends that had received causes of jealousy, they had their
peeping-holes, where they might plainly and fully see such who came upon the
like accounts. If the Gentleman was unknown to that Gentlewoman whose Picture
he elected to bear him company that night, she with much freedom would appear,
and tender her self as the subject of his pleasure; otherwise abscond her self.
If so, and the Gentleman press hard for a sight of her the Picture represented,
why then Madam Bawd finds some excuse or other, as that Picture she bought
casually at second-hand as she past through Longlane, or that it was the gift
of some friend of hers: with many other fictions, merely to make him desist
from the pursuance of his desires. Being very much pleased in the satisfaction
of my fancy, I took my leave, not without some acknowledgement thereof, in
these consequent lines.

What is a Bawdy House? I fain would know:
It is a thing appears so by the show.
Is that a Brothel, or an house of State,
Where Tip-staff Porters do attend the gate?
This was a stately house, and yet was such;
In stately houses Ladies take a touch.
It must be so, they have little else to do,
Then study how to answer those that woo.
Such pampered flesh must yield, and few gain-says
Their own lusts motions, but with formal nays;
Rather then want that satisfaction, most
Stick not to purchase it, though at the cost
Of health and wealth; delighting thus in sense,
They never think too much the recompense.
Why should they then fond souls rail at an Whore,
Since they themselves are on that very score?
And damn all Brothels too to Hell; but stay
What house is not a Brothel-house, I pray?
Many I Have seen, with this none can compare;
A new Exchange, where Ladies sell their Ware
To none; they scorn thereon to set a price,
But leave it solely to the Chapinans choice:
Here by a female Council 'twas judged fit,
He that reaps pleasure here, must pay for it;
Not with his purse, so much as brawny back,
Solely affecting such who holds them tack:
And to provoke men on, no want of Wine;
Nay, all delights do here in one combine
To raise men's fancy, that he may do over
That thing he did but even then before.
Her rosy dimpled cheeks, vermilion lips,
Did blush to see her ivory thighs and hips:
Her round soft belly swelled with pride, for lo!
Like a small Hill 'twas overspread with snow:
Let but a warm hand touch it, and it will
Its moisture into pearly drops distill.
We kissed and parted, I sighed, she did sob;
She for her lusty Lad, I for my Mob.
CHAP. LVIII.
He finds out his two Comerades (the Gamesters) and after some consultation
had, they resolved to reassume their quondam trade of Padding; are taken and
committed to Newgate.

FRom this house of pleasure, (where I must ingeniously confess I never
received more for so little expense) I went in search of my two Gamesters, whom
casually I met: The next Tavern was our Council Chamger, where Wine was the
dictator. We there unanimously concluded, it was a thing beneath us to pick up
here and there Crowns or Angels, but resolved on Have at all, knowing that a
five hours adventure might make us possessors of 500 l. With this resolution we
went and bought us horses, with all things requisite for our intended
expedition: being all ready and well prepared, we took our leaves of London for
a while; we had not rid above fifteen miles, but we baited: the Hostler knowing
me, and what designs I had formerly been upon, and imagining I was steering the
same course, whispered me in the ear, that he had a desire to speak with me
instantly: taking my opportunity, under the pretense of looking to my horse, he
informed me, that there were three within drinking, that on the next morning
would travel such a Road, and that they had a great charge with them. I thankt
him, bidding him come to my chamber at night, where I would discourse farther
with him. Then he gave me a summary account of all; and after a smart
drinking-bout, with promises to him of reward if we prospered, we betook our
selves to our rest: in the morning very early we called for our horses, and rid
in that very Road through which those three Travelers were to pass, where we
planted our selves very conveniently: about three hours after, we could discern
them at a distance; by that time we had made our selves ready, they were at
hand: just at the bottom of a small hill we bid them stand; they asked us to
what intent: We told them, that we were younger Brothers, and wanted money, and
therefore must borrow some of them. With that, they all in an instant drew
their swords; being not unprovided with Pocket-pistols, we fired at them, and
they again at us: we were all at level-coyl; and very equally marched; the
second shot killed my horse, and a fourth bereaved my Consort of life; the
third Rogue ran away: being in a labyrinth of perplexity, I thought it the best
way to sell my life at as dear a rate as I could (knowing very well, that if I
were taken I should be hanged.) I fought with my sword as long as I could stand
upon my legs, wounding both them and their horses; but at last one unhappily
ran me through the swordhand, and thereupon I was disarmed. I was carried by
them before the next Justice of Peace, whom they enquired out, and by a
Mittimus was committed. I could not now expect any thing but death: but the
next news I heard was, that I must be removed to Newgate, there being other
things to be alleged to my charge. I was mounted again, in order to my
removal, but very ill horsed, being bound thereunto and pinnion'd. My greatest
grief (when I came into London-streets) was to hear the various discants of the
good women on me; some saying, What a pity it is such an handsome young man
should come to the gallows so soon? Others judged I had deserved it, otherwise
I should not have rid to Town in that posture pinnion'd, and so attended with a
guard. As soon as the Keeper saw me, leaping for joy, O Sir, are you come
again? we will take care that you shall not be any more annoyed with smells
proceeding from the Vault; and so without more ado, laid as much iron on me, as
there is in some Smiths shops, and confined me close Prisoner to the Dungeon.

Which made me curse those acts the Fates have done,
To cause a setting ere a rising Sun:
But since my doom is now decreed by Fate,
I must indur't, repentance is too late.
CHAP. LIX.
He much condemns the follies of his past actions, and in token of his
unseigned repentance, gives some general instructions to his Countrymen, first
how to know Padders on the Road, by infallible signs; with other remarques
worthy the observation of any Traveller, laid down in some consequent Chapters.

BEing in this terrestrial Hell, (where darkness, horror and despair surrounded
me) my conscience started out of her dead sleep, and presently demanded of me a
severe account of what I had done. My guilt was such, I had not a word to speak
for my self, but wished my production (as my actions were) in humane. What did
not then the apprehension of an approaching and unavoidable death, suggest to
my thoughts! to have only dyed (though with the most exquisice, terrifying, and
soul-excruciating tortures) was not a thing the spirit of man should shrink at;
but the consideration of an eternal punishment hereafter, justly inflicted on
such who have offended an infinite God, absolutely distracted me: So that
methoughts, I already heard the howls and hollow groans of damned Souls, which
add to the weight of their everlasting misery. Having somewhat appeased my
enraged conscience, by a faithful promise and constant resolution to lead a new
life, if I should escape the danger of the Law, I determined with my self, to
show the first Fruits of my reformation, by publishing something to the world,
that might serve as a guide for Travelers, how they might pass in safety on
their way. To that purpose I acquainted my Keeper with my good intentions; but
that being no particular profit to him, he valued not the public, and
therefore rejected my good motion, till I greased his fist, and then I had the
accommodation of a Candle, Pen, Ink and Paper, etc. The uncertainty of their
attire, various diseases, non-constancy of residence, and changeable names,
makes me incapable to do what I would: Therefore I will do what I can
(according to my small experience, occasioned by my no long continuance among
them.) Riding on the Road (if you have company) it may be two or three shall
overtake you, and seem to be much afraid of you: they will pretend to be even
now set upon by half a dozen stout fellows, but that they did beat the Rogues,
forcing them to fly for safety: and this fiction they use to seal with
basket-hiltoaths: thus by your answers they will find whether you dare fight;
if not, they will wait an opportunity to act their roguery on you; which having
done, as a reward for what unwillingly you have left them, they will pretend to
give you a word shall protect you better than your sword, from any injury shall
be done you upon the like account: but this is nothing else than a mere cheat,
and no securing charm; for we valued not words, when our wants were in pursuit
of Moneys. Not but that we used some formal words among our selves, when ready
to seize a prize; and observing other company, either before or behind, to
defist a while, by which we knew what we had to do, and the ignorant Travelers
suspected no wrong.

CHAP. LX.
What is to be taken heed unto, before the Traveller begins his Journey.

MOst respected Countrymen, and more especially you, who frequently pass the
Road, the most part of my notorious wicked life having been consumed in all
manner of cheats and debauchery, and that in part of late maintained by
robbing: seeing now the wretchedness of that course of life, and being sensible
of the injury I have done my Country, I looked upon my self as bound to
satisfy the debt I owe to you, to the uttermost of my power, which reaches to
an act not more satisfactory, than good advice how to avoid those dangers which
too many of late days have fallen into, fince Dammee Plumes of Feathers came in
fashion. First then, if you carry a charge about you, make it not known to any,
and conceal the time of your departure in your own breast; for it is a custom
no less common than indiscreet and foolish, among some sort of persons, to
blaze abroad among their reputed friends, the time of their intended journey,
and vaingloriously make them acquainted with what considerable sums they should
carry with them; by which means the Son has oftentimes betrayed the Father,
and one friend another, by informing or comploteing with some of the Padding
society; the discoverer sharing (for giving notice of the prize) one quarter or
more of the gain he betrays, when but for this foolish humor they had not been
way-lay'd. Again, have a special care, both of the Hostler, Chamberlain and
Host himself: the two first the Thief is sure to bribe, and the last, in
expectation of a share with them (as it is so ordered) or in hopes that the
major part of what they get shall be prosusely spent in his house, gives them
items where the booty lies. Especially be sure on the road to associate with
none but such as you find inclined rather to leave your company then keep it;
for they are very suspicious persons, and oftentimes prove dangerous, that
press into your society, and are very inquisitive to know whither you intend,
spinning out the time with many impertinent questions. But if you would know
whether the strangers intentions be honestly inclined, take occasion to make
some stay; observe you in the mean time their motion: for if they make an halt,
or alight, so that you may overtake them, follow at a distance; but if their
pace be so slow that you needs must overtake them, look about you, and provide
for your safety, for there is no surer symptom of an Highway-man than such
purposed delays. The other usual marks of such Maths be these; they commonly
throw a great Leaguer-cloak over their shouldiers, covering their face, or else
they have visibly disguised their faces in some manner or other. Now of late
they find very useful a Vizard in every respect (but for the largeness) like
the a-la-mode Vizard-masks so much worn by Gentlewomen, who endeavor to
conceal the shame of their wanton actions by absconding their faces. If you
meet with any who have none of these things, as soon as they come somewhat near
you, fix your eye full in their face: if they turn their heads from you, keep
your distance, and ride from them with what expedition you can; but being
surprised by any you know, be very careful that you discover it not to them;
for these Desperado's never think themselves secure, till they have prevented
your giving intelligence, by cutting asunder the thread of your life. Observe
whether their beards and hair of their head agree in a color, and are not
counterfeit: and be sure to beware of him that rides in a Mountier-cap, and of
such as whisper often; or of any one single person that intrudes into your
company; for that is one way they have to ensnare the Traveller: he will tell
you a great many merry and facetious stories, merely to ingratitate himself
with you; which having obtained, he shows himself more than ordinary civil, and
so fearful of any thing that may prejudice his new acquaintance, that he no
sooner espies two riding toward them, but he apparently trembles, and will
presently question his new friends, what charge they have about them: if
little, the best way were to yield to these approaching persons, if Thieves,
rather than hazard a life; but if it be any thing considerable, he will
presently vow to be true to them, and rather than they should come to any
danger or loss, he will fight with them as long as he has breath. These so
causlesly suspected, were perhaps downright honest fellows: but before they
have traveled five miles further, it is ten to one but they overtake two or
three more, one it may be riding aside with twists of Hay instead of Boots, it
may be with a Fork, Bill, or Goad in his hand, like a Country-Boor. It may be
your newly-entertained treacherous Friend will tell you that he will make good
sport with this Country-Bumpkin, and so to that purpose ask him some foolish
impertinent question, which the other shall answer as ridiculously; so spinning
out the time till a convenient place and a fit opportunity serve; then shall
this pretended friend seize one of you himself, and my Hedge-creeper turn
Hector, and lay hold on another: and now will it be in vain for you to strive,
for nothing but money will ransom you out of their hands.

CHAP. LXI.
Instructions in what manner, at what time, and what Road is most safe to ride.

THere are so many ways to rob the innocent, that it behooves every man to be
very circumspect, how, when, and where he rides. If you have a quantity of
money about you, choose rather to ride by night then day; for by this means you
are freed from any Horseman or Cutter whatever. But this course cannot seal
your protection from base sheep-stealing penny-Rogues, the baseness and lowness
of whose spirits will stoop for a Noble, though they hang for their pains;
therefore take heed of their long poles, and that they do not suddenly start
out and lay hold on your bridle. As for the nobler sort of Rogues, this they
believe as an undeniable Maxim, that none will ride by night that are worth
the robbing. Besides, they are obliged to take their Inn betimes, lest through
mistrust they should be apprehended: Moreover, they hardly dare adventure in
the dark, because they cannot discern what dangerous defenses the assailed
have, as Pistols, or other private weapons in readiness, nor see their own
advantages: and withal, it will be no difficult matter to convey in the
obscurity of the night, what they have undiscovered, into some ditch. Choose to
travel in byroads, for it is a general rule with High-way-men, to keep their
station on the greatest Roads, that of the number that pass by, they may select
such as they think will prove the richest booties. Here now as a Corollary,
take notice of a foolish custom: Some when they ride by any place that commonly
speaks danger, they will bustle up together side by side, which is the usual
overthrow of such. Wherefore take my counsel here, when ere you ride, in fear
especially, ride sar asunder, at least a stones throw by so doing none durst
set upon you, fearing lest this straggling order give some leave to escape
undoubtedly, and so raise the Country in their pursuit.

CHAP. LXII.
How a man is to behave himself if beset or surprised.

WHen the Rogue bids you stand, look not about as if amazed, or hoping for a
rescue; for this does but encourage them to the height of resolution and
expedition: but looking sternly, as if fear were a stranger to you, making your
brow the throne of rage and fury, draw, and undauntedly tell them, that though
you have but little, yet you would willingly sacrifice your life rather then
lose a penny; and add ten more to it (if you had them) then have your
reputation stained with cowardice. This is the readiest and most certain way to
save both your money and credit; for they fighting with a guilty conscience
within and without, against a Country, Law, and Justice, if nobly a man resists
(this I know experimentally) the stoutest, and most undaunted, and highest
spirit of them all will stoop to discouragement. Some I have known, that durst
outbrave the roaring Cannon to the mouth, yet their courages have found an
alteration, when on this account they have met with a bold and nobly resolved
Antagonist: but if by your own negligence, and the malevolency of fortune, the
pleasure of your journey is eclipsed and clouded by a sudden surprisal, and
that you see no hopes but that you must yield, be not so unwise to strive when
it is too late, but give them the best words you can, and rack your wits to
please their ear, most devoutly wishing you had more moneys to supply their
present occasions; and so banishing all dejectedness from your looks, deliver
some, and so perhaps they will let you pass without furcher search. If they
make a second offer, yield freely to it: then it may be they will sift you
soundly; never in that time lay your hand near your money, and seeming
fearless, it will be a means to make their suspicion of a greater sum to
vanish. This I have known my self, that when I have taken so much as pleased
me well, by means fear I have had grounds to think they had more, and so made
me research; laying my hand but near the place where they had concealed the
rest, suddenly would they cry out, that they were undone, when as yet I had
found nothing; but by this their foolish and undiscreet carriage I have found
the remainder, which otherwise might have been secure and safe from me.

CHAP. LXIII.
Directions, if robbed, how to follow the Thieves; which way to set Hue and Cry
after them; how to coast, and where to find them.

IF you are robbed, there is no help but to endeavor to surprise the Thieves
by a strict pursuit: Therefore let no Remora or delay deter you from obtaining
your wish, and so seize them that so lately seized you. In the first place,
scowre the next Road, not straight before, but either on the right or
left hand; for they know Hue and Cries never cross the passages, but go
straight along. If in so doing you miss them, then conclude they are sheltred
in some Inn which you have past, and therefore you must set some careful Spies,
with a sufficient assistance near at hand, and be confident you will see them
come that way, without the least apprehension of fear, or fear of apprehension.
But this observe, that if they light of any considerable sum, then do they ride
that night to their general Rendezvous in London, which is too sure a shelter
for them: but observably take notice, for here is as eminent an example of
their subtilty, as any ever the Devil enriched their knowledge with; For, if
you are robbed in the eastern quarter, pursue them not in the direct Road to
London with Hue and Cry, for by some other way they are fled; but haste to the
City, and in Westminster, Holborn, the Strand and Covent Garden search
speedily, for there they are. If Northward they light on you, then to
Southwark, the Bankside, or Lambeth they are gone; and when you find any one,
seize all with him, for they are all Companions that are together.

CHAP. LXIV.
Cordial advice, and infallible instructions for the Innkeeper, how to know
Thieves from his honest Guests.

MEthinks the many tragical examples of Innkeepers, who have harbored and
countenanced Thieves, were suflicient (I should think) to deter those that
survive from doing the like; wherefore my advice to them in general is, that
their chiefest care be, not to wink at any such lifedestroying actions for hope
of gain, lest that sweet be imbittered by future trouble and disgrace. That you
may know them, observe these Rules: First, they are extraordinary curious about
their horses; they will have them as strangely dressed, as strangely fed, with
Mashes, Bread, Flesh, and mingled provender, and that in an unusual quantity.
If any wonder at the extraordinary feeding of their horses, they will endeavor
to palliate their design therein, by telling that their tricks and good
abilities deserve it: nay, sometimes they will boast, that their worthy
services will soon repay the cost; using the like dark words to that effect,
which are palpable grounds for suspicion. It is their custom likewise, to ask,
Whose horse is that? or, What is the owner thereof standing by? of what
function or quality? whither he intends to travel? how far, and when? Observe
again, that their Cloak-bags are for the most part empty, carrying them only
but to make a show. Next, the Chamberlain conducting them to their Chamber, he
is presently dismissed; but let him hearken, and if they are Highway men, it is
ten to one but they fall to share what they have purchased that day; and he
shall see every one taking his dividend, as well as hear the money, if he but
narrowly pry into the Chamber. This they never defer, lest he which has the
purse should cheat the rest. But above all, for their discovery, make this
trial; Cause one to knock hastily at the gate, giving him instructions in the
mean time that attends on them, to observe their carriage then, and he shall
see them start and stare in each others face with ghastly looks, being struck
with fear and amazement: speak so that they may hear you, seemingly to some or
other in the house, asking what Officers those are? what is their business? or
whom do they look for? or the like. If they seem much srighted, bid them fear
not, for none shall search where they are, to offer them any injury; and that
they are as safe with him, as in a well-fortified Castle. By this means you may
pry into their private thoughts and actions so far, as that you may gather, not
only substantial grounds for more then bare conjectures, but it may be they
will confess something too, desiring your concealment and succor, and they
shall think themselves for ever engaged: after this you may use your own
discretion. Then again, you may perceive by their loitering and disiegard of
time, what they expect; for they only bait but to oberve what purchase they can
see pass by; which when they have espied, they will pretend immediate business
calls them to be gone, and so mount in great haste. Again, when they come to in
Inn to lodge, they commonly come in divided, or in several Companies,
frustrating the Hue and Cry by their number: besides, if one part be surprised,
the other may escape; and when the residue comes in, they seem as strangers one
to the other, enquiring of mine Host what their Companions are, what
Countrie-men, whether he knows them? and if they find he has either jealousy
or suspicion of any of them, they will seign some business that necessitates
their speedy departure: but if you take them for honest men, as they met by
seeming chance in your Kitchen; so after some formal civil salurations, and
drinking together, they soon become acquainted, and before they part, show much
familiarity. Thus, as I was faither endeavoring to lay open their devices and
deceits, to repair what wrong my Country had sustained by me, word was brought
me, that I must immediately appear at the Bar, and there answer what should be
objected against me; and it was but just that I should be now exposed to the
Law of Justice, since I had so often rejected and slighted the Law of Mercy.

CHAP. LXV.
He received sentence of Condemnation; he thereupon seriously contemplates
Death, and considers Eternity.

APpearing at the Sessions, and seeing so many of my Adversaries ready to give
in their evidence against me, I concluded my self a lost man; my very
countenance betrayed both my thoughts of guilt and despair. In short, I
received sentence of Death to be hanged at Tyburn by the neck till I was dead.
I thought these sad tidings would have presently deprived me of my life, and so
have saved the Hangman a labor. All the way I went back to Newgate, I fancied
nothing but Gibbets stood in my way, and that I saw no other trades but
Cord-winders. Being entered the prison, I was forth with put into the Dungeon,
laden with shackles: I had not been many hours there, before a charitable
Physician of the soul, I mean a Minister, came to visit me, who advised me, to
repent, since it was high time; and endeavoring to disburden my conscience, by
extracting from me a general ingenious confession of what enormous crimes I had
committed. Finding this person to have no other design, but merely for my souls
sake, I dissected the actions of my whole life, not omitting any thing that
might be accounted sinful, He was amazed to hear such notorious Roguery in one
Man, and so young; wherefore, before he applied any cordial, he administered his
corrosives, and so thoroughly searched every corner of my heart, that there was
nothing hid from him. In the first place, he made me sensible of the wickedness
of my life, and that every, nay, the least evil action, deserved the loss of
eternal and inexpressible happiness, and instead thereof, torments everlasting
and intolerable. It will take up too much time, to give an account of every
thing this pious man alleged for my information, contrition, and consolation:
so effectually and powerfully he delivered his divine Message, that the
obdurateness of my heart was able to hold out no longer, but melting into
tears, was willing to have its flintiness broken by the hammer of Sacred Writ.
Finding me in so good a temper, he left me to God and my self, for the
perfecting of that work he had so hopefully and successfully begun. I began to
consider what I was, only a statue of dust kneaded with tears, and moved by the
hid engines of restless passions; a clod of earth, which the shortest Fever can
burn to ashes, and the least shower of rheums wash away to nothing; and yet I
made as great a noise in the world, as if both the Globes (those glorious
Twins) had been unwombed from that formless Chaos, by the Midwifry of my wit:
all my actions were attended with so much success, and so answerable to my
desires, as if I had been one of heavens privy-Counsellors; which swelled me up
with so much arrogance, that I spoke thunder, looked lightning, and breathed
destruction; and by the eloquence of my own vanity, I persuaded my self, that
the machinatious of my brain were able to unhinge the Poles: but it is
otherwise decreed, that the Ministers of Justice should put a period to my
boundless pride, to make me know I am but a man, and that mortal too. And
having but a short time to live, I thought it very requisite to think of that
which must shortly be the means to convey me either to bliss or woe; by so
doing, I seized on death before it seized on me. It was the fittest subject I
could busy my soul about; for what more heavenly, than the thought of
immortality? and what so necessary, as the thought of death? Seneca faith, When
he was a young man, be studied to live well; when aged, how to dye well: but I
never practiced Artem been vivendi, and therefore am so ignorant in Art been
moriendi; which makes me so fearful, that I know not how to be careful of not
being found unprepared. Methinks I already hear that doleful saying, Its
imparats in paratum. My sole companions were now despair and fear, for the King
of fear is death; and indeed there is nothing absolutely fearful, but what
tends to death; and I am confident, the fear of death is worse than the pains
of death: for, fear of death kills us often, whereas death it self can do it
but once. Life would not be troubled with too much care, nor death with too
much fear, because fears betray, and cares disorder those succors which reason
would afford to both: and though some say, he is more sorrowful than is
necessary, that is sorrowful before there is necessity; yet that soul cannot be
in a good condition, so long as it fears to think of dying; but did I not
sorrow now, and jutly fear that messenger that must bring me before the
Tribunal of Heaven, I should have too little time to wash away so many black
spots, especially having nothing but objects of terror and amazement before my
eyes; but I never needed have feared what I should suffer when dead, if I had
not deserved it whilst I lived. Life is not alike to all men: To such a wicked
wretch as I am, the best had been, that I never had been, and the next best
were to live long; in this condition, it was ill for me that I was born, worse
for me that I must die: for without unfeigned repentance, this dying life will
bring me to a living death; whereas a good man is otherwise minded, he counts
his end the best of his being, for that brings him to the fruition of his hope:
could death end misery, it should be the greatest happiness I would wish: but
my conscience will not let me lie, for fear the end of my present miseries will
be but the beginning of worse; yea, such as death it self cannot terminate. Now
came into my mind the consideration of Eternity; and with it, I remembered how
it was represented by the Ancients, which very much helped my present
Contemplation; which was thus: A vast Den full of horror, round about which a
Serpent winds it self, and in the winding bites it self by the tail. At the
righthand of this Den, stands a young man of a most beautiful and pleasant
countenance, holding in his right hand a Bow and two Arrows, and in his left an
Harp. In the entrance sits an old man opposite, and having his eyes very intent
on his Table Book, writes according to the dictations of the young man standing
by. At the left hand of this Den, sits a grave Matron gray headed, and having
her eyes always busied. At the mouth hereof, are four stairs ascending by
degrees; the first is of iron, the second of brass, the third of silver, and
the last of gold: On these are little children sporting up and down, playing,
fearless, and inapprehensive of falling. The sight of this Emblem of Eternity
inculcated into my thoughts this interpretation: The Den, which was bottomless,
signified to me the incomprehensibility of Eternity; the circumferating
Serpent, Time; the young man, Nature: on Earth and Hell are her arrows fastened;
but in Heaven there is the Harp, fullness of joy, and pleasures in expressible:
The old man I looked upon to be Fate; the grave Matron, Providence; the Stairs,
distinct Times and Ages; the Children running up and down the Stairs without
fear of danger, do signify foolish Man and Woman, who regardless of their
salvation, sport and play with it so long, till they slipped into Eternity. So
have I been careless of that which should have been my greatest care, though I
knew (but would not know) that the least and lightest touch of death were
sufficient, in a moment, to translate me from Time to Etermity. Were we all to
live a thousand years (whereas the Executioner is to put a period to my life in
one day longer) we should before we had ran half our course, in our very
nonage, apply our selves to repentance and newness of life. Now, now is the
time, every hour, every moment: now one part of an hour (as I am informed, to
my great comfort) may obtain pardon here, which all Eternity cannot hereafter.
Therefore, let this now be my time (this one day I have left me) to cancel my
debts and trespasses against Heaven, which I can never do in Hellfire, in all
the years and times to come hereafter. Let such who have lived (as I) in all
manner of wickedness, consider what Eternity is, which may make them return
like the penitent Prodigal. What then is Eternity? It is a Circle running back
into it self, whose center is every where, and circumference no where, that is
to say, infinite: It is an Orb that has neither beginning nor ending: Or it is
a Wheel,

Volvitur and volvetur in omne volubilis aevum. A Wheel that turns, a Wheel
that turned ever:

A Wheel that turns, and will leave turning never.

Eternity is like a year, continually wheeling about, which returns again to
the same point from whence it began, and still wheels about again. It is an
ever-running Fountain, whither the waters after many turnings flow back again,
that they may always flow. It is a bottomless pit, whose revolutions are
endless. It may be compared to a snake bowed back unto it self orbicularly,
holding its tail in its mouth; which in its end does again begin, and never
cease to begin. What is Eternity? It is a duration always present; it is one
perpetual day, which is not divided into that which is past, and that which is
to come: Or, it is an age of ages, never expiring, and never changing: Or, more
properly, it is a beginning continuing, never ending, always beginning, in
which the blessed always begin a blessed life, in which the damned always die,
and after all death and struggling therewith, always begin again to die. As
Hell Torments are eternal, so will the conscience be perpetually tormented with
deep and horrid despair for the life past: Their worm shall not die. The Poets
of old alluded to this place notably, in that Fiction or Fable of Tytius, whom
Virgil feigneth, that a flying Vulture every day gnaws and tears his Liver,
which is every night again repaired and made up, that every day the Vulture may
have more matter to prey upon. What is this Vulture, but the worm I speak of?
and what is his Liver, but the conscience always gnawn and tormented? Not only
this (as he that preached my Funeral-Sermon told me) but all the torments of the
damned shall never have end, because there can be no place for satisfaction:
For although these inexpressible torments shall continue many millions of
years; yet shall there not one hour, no, not one minute of respite be granted:
Let us then be no longer forgetful of our selves, and so degenerate into
beasts, but seriously to consider our end, and what shall come after. All men
are in the way of Eternity, but I am now almost at my journeys end: I sit on
the Stairs of Eternity, expecting when one small thrust shall plunge me into
the bottomless pit, where one hours punishment shall be more grievous, (as
Thomas a Kempis says) then 100 years here in the bitterest of torments: There
they are tortured for infinite millions of ages, and are so far from finding an
end, as never to be able to hope for any end. The consideration of these things
brought me to that pass, as I was content to suffer any thing in this life, so
that I might not suffer in the life to come. Though a King, I should willingly
and patiently have endured what Andronicus did, Emperor of the East; who (as
History relates) being overcome and taken prisoner by Isaac Angelo, had
immediately two great chains of iron put about his neck; and being laden with
fetters, was brought before Isaac, who delivered him over to the rage of the
multitude, to be abused at their pleasure. This rabble being incenst and
stimulated on by revenge, some buffeted him, some bastinado'd him, others
pulled him by the beard, twitching the hair from his head, dashing out his
teeth, dragging him in public through the streets: the insolence of women was
such, as to fall upon him, leaving the marks of their nails in his Imperial
face. After all this, they cut off his right hand: thus maimed and bruised, he
was thrown into the Dungeon of Thieves and Robbers, without either attendance,
or the least thing necessary to sustain life: Some few days being past, they
put out one of his eyes: thus mangled, they put him upon an old rotten short
coat, shaved his head, set him upon a seabbed Camel, with his face toward the
Tail, put on his head a crown of Garlic, made him hold in his hand the Camels
Tail instead of a Septer, and so they carried him through the Marketplace very
leisurely, with great pomp and triumph. Here did the most impudent crew, and
base among the people, like Tigers, after an inhumane manner fall upon him, not
considering in the least, that not three days before he was no less then an
Emperor, crowned with a Royal Diadem, whose frowns were inevitable death, was
honored, yea, adored of all men. Their rage and madness fitted every one with
instruments to execute their revenge: Some struck him on the head with sticks,
others filled his nostrils with dirt, others squeezed spunges upon his face
soaked in humane and beastial excrements: some threw stones, others dirt at
him. An impudent woman as he past, came running out with scalding water in her
hand, and poured it on his head. All these indignities which they exercised
upon this poor Emperor, did not satisfy their insatiate revenge, but bringing
him to the Theater, took him down from the Camel, and hung him up by the heels:
yet did he behave himself like a man, by bearing patiently what was inflicted
upon him, being never heard to cry out against the cruelty of his fate. All
that he was heard to say, was this, which he often repeated, Domine miserere,
Domine miserere. Thus hanging up, one would have thought their malice should
have ceased; but they spared him not as long as he lived; for pulling his Coat
from his body, they tore him with their nails. One more cruel than the rest,
ran his Sword through his bowels as he was hanging: Two others, to try whose
Sword was sharpest, cut him and gasht him in several places; and so ended his
life miserably, but was not suffered to be buried. Oh, that my condition were
as Andronicus, to suffer all that man can lay upon me, that I might not perish
for ever: I would be content to be miserable for so short a time, that I may
not be miserable to all Eternity. Questioness he could never have suffered such
things so constantly and courageously, but that he had Eternity in his
thoughts; and were our minds employed about the same subject, any adversity or
affliction we should more easily bear. Ftom the time of my condemnation till
Monday morning I slept not, neither did I eat or drink: then did I hear my
passing bell (having heard the day before my Funeral-Sermon) every stroke
methought carried my soul one degree higher, being confident I had made my
peace above. Whilst I was in the depth of Meditation, and my soul breathing out
this short ejaculation.

Is there no hope now of Relief,
In this Extremity?
Mercy e're now has sov'd a Thief,
And may do as much for me.
Behold, a friend came to me (that never visited me during my imprisonment) but
now in the time of need brought me a Reprieve: when I looked thereon at first, I
could not believe my own eyes; I thought I dreamt, or that grief had so
distracted me, as that limagined things that are nor. My friend at length
cleared up my doubts; but I shall tell you this for a truth, I knew not whether
I were best accept of this self-preserving courtesy: For, methought I had so
well settled my eternal concerns, as that I had nothing else to do but die.

About a fortnight after, I was sent aboard, in order to my transportation; my
sentence of Death being converted into a seven years banishment.

CHAP. LXVI.
Being on Board, he descants on his ensuing misery; yet draws comfort to
himself from the sufferings of others. He relates how he was freed from his
intended banishment by a double Shipwreck; the manner thereof he amply
declares.

THe Ship that was to transport me lay at Wollidge: about the latter end of
August 1650. I was conveyed aboard a lusty Ship, a Virginia-Merchantman, and
was instantly claptunder hatches; but I knew they would quickly call me alost,
if there was any fighting work; as such a thing might easily be, since the Sea
was no where free from such as would make a prize of what Vessels were too weak
to contend with them. Having pen, ink, and paper about me, I busied my thoughts
and pen in contriving consolation for my disquieted and disconsolate mind, thus:

Why should not I with patience suffer? some
Have kissed what brought them to their Martyrdom.
Many a Saint has suffered on a Cross;
And our good King endured three Kingdoms loss.
Shall I (fool) then at any cross take grief?
Tyburri's the way to heaven for many a Thief.
But must I now to Sea? well, it is no matter;
Fortune now frowns, though heretofore did flatter.
Let not my soul despond, since it is my hap,
I Will scorn that Whore, and trust to Thetis lap:
Though she may foam with anger, and the wind
May aggravate her passion, I mayfind
Her calm again, and set me on that shore,
Where I may Moar, and put to Sea no more.
Neptune may shake his Trident, and each wave,
Or tumbling billow may become my grave.
A thundering Canon may pronounce my death,
Or a small shot bereave me o^ my breath:
All which may throng together in full crowds,
To make m'a winding sheet of tattered shrowds.
The winds shall sing my requiem, and my knell
Shall be a peal of Ordnance, that shall tell
My angry fates I Am dead and the Sea must
Intomb without the form of dust to dust.
But I hope better things and do believe,
My good events will make the furies grieve.
About the beginning of September following, we set sail for the Downs. As soon
as we had weighed Anchor, a thick melancholy cloud encompassed my thoughts;
and so much sadness seized my spirits, as if I had been not so much taking my
leave of my dearly beloved Country, as leaving the world. Though my soul could
not foresee the least danger, nor be troubled at the apprehension of what
slavery I was to undergo in my exilment; yet certainly I found this strange
anguish and propassion to be ominous, proceeding from something divine, which is
able to unriddle the Apocrypha of nature, and made my soul sensible of some
approaching mischief. Having been about five days ar Sea, one morning, just as
the Sun began to gild our Hemisphere with his Golden rays, the Boatswain made
us al turn out, and commanded al hands upon deck: coming alost, I could not see
a man in whose face there was not written the pale characters of fear and
amazement; which were the infallible marks of some sudden and ensuing danger.
Upon my first coming on board, I could discern a great many rednos'd fellows (a
drunkards truest indicium) but the apprehension of present danger had now
extinguished all those flaming torches of their faces, without the help of
water: The faces indeed of the stourest amongst us, were so altered by this
affrightment, that we knew not almost one another; losing our natural
complexions, through the extremity of passion. One was at his prayers, that
never till then knew what a prayer was; another shedding of briny tears, to
make room for more salt waters: for my own part, I found my self not much
moved, having lately made my self acquainted with death. By this time I
understood what had past; that is, our Ship had sprung a leak, and was ready to
sink. Seeing every man in that posture, and that there required means, as well
as prayers for our preservation; Come (said I, Gentlemen) let us not thus cry
out, and never lend our assisting hand; let us to the pump, and let every one
be employed in this grand concern. Whereupon we all unanimously fell to work:
but as it is usual in such extremes, we were all busy about doing of nothing;
what we began we left imperfect, and fell to another, and so perfected nothing
to our safety. Some were sent down into the Hold, who quickly returned to us
with the symptoms of death in their countenances; for they all with hesitations
and quivering of tongue, with words abruptly or half spoken, signified to us,
that our Ships wound was incurable, that the leak could not be stopped, but that
we must inevitably perish within some minutes. These words I received as from a
Deaths-head, which I never heard speak before; and truly his very looks would
have sufficiently declared what message he was about to deliver, viz. ruin and
immediate destruction. Our inexpressible fears bereaved us of the power of
counselling one another; neither did we know what was best to be done. Our
Master commanded our Longboat to cast out, and withal, ordered some eight
Guns to be fired, which methought resembled so many toles of my passing bell,
when I was designed to pass by Sr. Sepulchers Church in a Cart, guarded by
fellows whose visages were the true resemblance of the Saracenshead on
Snow-hill, for terror, horror, and merciless proceeding; as to all which, these
Canibals will outvie that inhumane and bloody Nation. Every man endeavored to
shift for himself, and I among the rest (being loath to be drowned alone) leapt
short of the boat, and fell into the Sea in Charontis Cymba; but necessity then
forcing me to use treble diligence to recover my self, with much difficulty I
got into the boat: I was no sooner there, but another leapt down upon me, and
had like to have beaten the rest of my breath out of my body: which I took
kindly enough; for I would have been content to have born them all on my back,
^ay, boat and all, so that I might have escaped with life. We were constrained
to leave many of our friends behind us, and committed our selves to the Sea,
driving us we knew not whither. Now were all our hopes dashed, as well as our
selves, by the waves; for were almost in despair of humane help: for we were
left in the wide Ocean, which did not at that time wear a smooth brow, but
contending with the wind, swelled into prodigious mountains, which every moment
threatened our overwhelming. How could we expect safety in an open Shaloup, when
so stately a Castle of wood, which we but now lost, could not defend it self,
nor preserve us from the insolency of the imperious waves? We were many leagues
from any shore, having neither Compass to guide us, nor provision to sustain
us, being as well starved with cold as hunger. Several bags of Money we had
with us; but what good could that do us, where there is no exchange? We could
neither eat nor drink it; neither would it keep us warm, nor purchase our
deliverance. Therefore we may justly esteem of money in its own nature, as an
impotent creature, a very cripple, inutile pondus, an useless burden. I could
not now imagine any thing could preserve us, less then a miracle: and as we
were all sinful creatures, especially my self, we could not expect that nature
should go out of her ordinary way to save us. The waves indeed carried us up to
Heaven,

Jam jam tacturos sidera summa putes. Neptune sure at this time was very
gamesome, for he played at Tennis with us poor mortals, making a wave his
Racket to bandie us up and down like Balls: Sometimes we seemed so proud and
lofty, being raised so high, as if we had been about to scale Heaven; which the
incensed Deity perceiving seemed again to throw us down headlong to Hell, for
too much ambition and presumption: yet I could not see, but that the extremity
of our condition pleaded for us, crying aloud for pity and compassion. I now
was silent, committing my self into the hands of providence; yet verily
believing, that the inversion of the old Proverb appertained to me, that being
not born to be hanged, I should be drowned. Commonly we are not so much moved
with a clamorous and importunate beggar, who hunts after our Alms with open
mouth, and makes Hue and Cry after our Charity (as if we had robbed him who begs
of us) as with the silence of impotent and diseased Lazaro's: their sores speak
loudest to our affections: Quot vulnera, tot ora; each wound is a gaping mouth
strenuously imploring mercy; the sight whereof, cannot but melt the most
obdurate spectator into a charitable compassion. This was our case, our misery
was louder than our prayers, and our deplorable condition, certainly was more
prevalent then our imperfect devotions. In this moment of death, when we were
without the least expectation of any deliverance the wind chopped about, and
drove back one Ship that had overrun us: this was unquestionably Digitus Dei.
This Ship made toward us, and we what in us lay, toward it: The wind blew
hard, and the insulting Sea, that will not admit of pity, rose high upon us: so
that we were forced to lave the water out of the boat with our hats. It was my
chance to sit on the weather side; fain would I have exchanged my place, but
such complements are useless in a storm; so that I was constrained to endure
patiently the indignation of my raging enemy. But now began an other despair;
for with all our endeavors we could not reach the Ship, nor she us, although
she hung on the Lee to retard her course. Thus our pregnant hopes brought forth
nothing but wind and water (for the Ship rode on furiously before the wind, and
we came after in pursuit of her, as slowly as if an hedghog had been running
with a Race-horse;) so that we which before flattered our selves with an
assurance of safety, were as much confounded with a certainty of perishing. In
my opinion it is better to have no hopes at all, than be disappointed in them:
doubtless it did redouble the punishment of Tantalus, to touch what he could
not taste. That Mariner, who seeing a fatal necessity for it, is contented to
die in a tempest, would be exceedingly troubled to perish in a Haven, In Portu
perire. In this very condition were we, having a Ship near us, but could not
board her for stress of weather; so that ruin attended us, though all the
while we looked safety in the face. Now did it grow dark, whereby we could not
see which way to row: though this was an evil in its own nature, yet
accidentally it became our benefit: for not seeing our danger, we understood it
not; but redoubling our strength, we brake through the waves, and by the
assistance of a light, which was in the Ship, we directed our course truly; and
now did we find we were very near her. As soon as we touched her on the
Lee-side, the Seamen, with the rest in the boat, being more dexterous in the
art of climbing than my self, never regarding their exiled Prisoner, (whom they
ought to have taken charge of) got all up into the Ship in a moment, leaving me
alone in the boat. By good hap they threw me out a Rope, which once had like to
have de prived me of my life, but was now the preserver: which I held fast, to
keep the boat from staving off. Our boat was half full of water, and the waves
dashed it so violently against the Ship-side, that every such stroke struck me
down, so that I had like to have been drowned (and did much fear it) in that
epitome of the Sea. It would have vexed a man in my condition, to escape by
swimming over a large River, and coming ashore, to be drowned in a wash-bowl.
At last with much difficulty I got aboard too. The Master, Merchants, etc.
having saved their lives (even miraculously) one would have thought they should
not have been so pensive as they were for the loss of their goods. Those which
lost much, took it very heavily; those which lost less, their affliction was
greater, having lost all: I was the most glad, joy riding in triumph in my
cheerful countenance, having lost nothing, neither could I anything, but my
life. Having escapt so miraculously, it was unchristian-like to murmur at any
loss; and as ridiculous, as if a man being restored to life, should complain
that his winding sheet had sustained some damage by lying in the grave. The
Ship wherein we were, was bound for the Canaries, the wind blowing very fair
for that coast. The second night after our deliverance, about ten a clock,
having set our Watch, we laid our selves down to rest, with the thoughts of
much safety and security, but it was otherwise decreed; for about one a clock
we were forced to use all hands aloft, a most terrible storm beginning to
arise, and the wind blew so furiously, that before morning we lost out
Bow-sprit and Mizon: we durst not bear the least sail, but let the Ship drive
whither the wind and waves pleased; and before the next night, we could not
endure our remaining Masts standing, but were necessitated to cut them by the
board. Thus we were tumbled up and down for four days, and as many nights,
contending with the waves in a Pitcht-battel, not knowing where we were, till
our Ship struck so violently against a Rock, that the horrid noise thereof
would have even made a dead man startle; to which, add the hideous cries of the
Seamen, bearing a part with the whistling winds and roaring Sea; all which
together, seemed to me to be the truest Representation of the Day of Judgment.
The Ship stuck fast so long between two Rocks, as that we had time enough, all
of us, to leap out; the only means left us for our safety. We all got upon a
Rock, and the Morning Star having drawn the Curtain of the night, we found that
we were a very little distance from the shore; getting thereon, and ranging to
and fro, we at last espied a small house, the sight whereof made us direct our
footsteps thither, steering our course solely by the compass of our eyes:
being come to the house, the Master thereof stood at the door; we addressed our
selves to him in English, but his replications were in Spanish, which we
understood not: wherefore I spoke to him in Latin, in which language he
answered me, Tam compte, tam prompte, both quaintly and readily. In that tongue
I made a shift to tell him the sad Illiades of our misfortunes. This noble
Spaniard understood it better by our looks, than my relations; which made such
a deep impression in his soul, that his gravity could not forbear the shedding
of some few tears, so that one would have thought he suffered Shipwreck as well
as we. He desired us to come into his house, and refresh our selves: what
little meat he had, stewed in a horse-load of herbs, with some pottage only
seasoned by a piece of Bacon, that had served for that purpose at least a dozen
times, he ordered to be set before us; being no ways sparing of his wine,
better than any I ever yet could taste in Taverns; this good man being not
acquainted with dashings, dulcifyings, etc. Seeing us eat so heartily, he
caused another dish to be provided, which was composed of such variety of
creatures, that I thought he had served us in as a Mess, the first Chapter of
Genesis: This Olla-podridra was so (...), that the distinction of each creature
was sauc'd (...) our knowledge. Having satisfied our hungry (...)machs, he
dismissed all excepting my self, desiring me to accept of what kindness he could
do me, for he confessed he took much pleasure in my society and discourse. I was
very well contented to entertain his proffer: in some few days he told me he
was to go to Sea, being Captain of a Vessel that lay in Perimbane, a small
ea-faring Town near the place of our Shipwreck; and asking me whether I would
go with him to the Indies (whither he was bound,) I readily consented, and in
some few days after we did sail from thence, to perfect our intended Voyage.

CHAP. LXVII.
From Perimbana, a small maritine Town on the Spanish coast, he sets sail with
Captain Ferdinando ^lasquez bound to the East Indies; but by the way (...) with
three Turkish Galleys, and by them is taken, miserably abused, and imprisoned.

AN hour before day we left the Port, and failed along the coast before the
wind; about noon we discerned three vessels, whereupon we gave them chase: in
less than two hours we got up to them, and then we could easily perceive that
they were Turkish Galleys; whereof we were no sooner assured, but we betook our
selves to flight, making to Land with all speed possible, to avoid the danger
that inevitably threatened us. The Turks understanding our design, presently
hoisted up all their sails, and having the wind favorable, bore up to us so
close, and getting within a small Faulcon-shot of us, they discharged their
Ordnance on us, wherewith they killed eight of our men, and wounded as many
more; and so battered our Ship beside, that we were forced to throw a great
quantity of our lading overboard. The Turks in the mean while lost no time,
but grappled us; we on the other side, who were able to fight, knowing that on
our valor and undaunted courage depended our lives, or loss of liberty, with
perpetual slavery, resolved to fight it out. With this determination we boarded
their Admiral, doing very eminent exccution; but being over-powred with
numbers, we were so overprest and wearied, that we desisted from making any
further resistance: For, of 35 men we had at first, we only had remaining ten,
whereof two died the next day, whom the Turks caused to be cut in pieces or
quarters, which they hung at the end of their Main-yard for a sign of Victory.
Being taken, we were carried by them to a Town called Mocaa, and received by
the Governor and Inhabitants, who expected and waited the coming of these
Pirates. In the company was likewise one of the chiefest Sacerdotal dignity;
and because he had been a little before in Pilgrimage at the Temple of their
Propher Mabomet in Meca, he was honored and esteemed by all the people as a
very holy man. This Mohammedan Impostor rid in a triumphant Chariot up and down
the Town, covered all over with silk Tapistry, and with a deal of ceremonious
fopperies, bestowed on the people his benediction as he passed along, exhorting
them to return hearty thanks to their great Prophet for this Victory obtained
over us. The Inhabitants hearing that we were Christians taken Captives, flockt
about us; and being exceedingly transported with choler, fell to beating of us
in that cruel manner, that I thought it a vain thing to hope to escape alive
our of their hands; and all this, because we owned the names of Christians.
When I was in England, I justly was senteneed to die for my villainy, and now
here only for the bare profession of Christianity, I must not be suffered to
live. This wicked Caecis (as they called him) instigated them on to those
outrages they committed; who made them believe, that the worse they dealt with
us, the more favor and mercy they should receive from Mahomet hereafter. We
were chained all together, and in that manner were we led in triumph; and as we
past along, we had our heads washed with women's Rose Water, thrown down upon us
from Balconies, with other filth, in derision and contempt of the name of
Christian; wherein every one strived to be most forward, being instigated
thereunto by their Priest. My sufferings then, put me in mind of my former
wishes, to be as unfortunate Andronicus, miserably afflicted here, that I might
escape eternal torments hereafter: I received in part the effect of my quondam
wishes, no ways acceptable to my present desires. Having tired themselves in
tormenting us till the evening, bound as we were, they clapped us into the
Dungeon, where we remained 21 days exposed to all kind of misery, having no
other provision allowed us, than a little Oat-meal or Rice and water, which was
distributed to us every morning, what should serve us for that whole day: for
variety sake, we had sometimes a small quantity of Pease soaked in water.

CHAP. LXVIII.
He is brought forth into the Marketplace, and there put to sale; he is bought
by a Jew (a miserable avaricious man) and by a stratagem he delivers himself
from that Master, is sold to a Grecian, in heart a Christian: the Ship being
taken, and his Master drowned, he escaping to shore by swimming, is at his own
liberty.

IN the morning the Jailer repairing to us, found two of our miserable
companions dead, by reason of their wounds, which were many, and not looked
into. This made him haste to the Guazil or Judge, to acquaint him of what had
happened; who upon information given, came to the prison in person, attended with
Officers and other people: where having caused their irons to be struk off, he
ordered their bodies to be dragged through the Town, and so cast in the Sea. We
that remained were chained altogether, and so led out of prison unto the common
place of sale, to be sold to him that should give most. By reason of my
strength (which those that looked on me might argue, from the streightness and
firmness of my limbs, being elevated by the Pole above a common or middle
stature) I was first bought by one, whom at the first sight, I could not well
tell whether he was Man or Devil; for his complexion was of the same color as
the Devil is usually rendered: to say all in short, he was a Jew. He carried me
home to his house, where I no sooner arrived, but he marked me for his own: My
employment was constantly to turn a hand-mill; if I rested at any time, though
ever so little, the punishment he inflicted on me was, three or four blows on
either the belly or souls of my feet; which were doubled or trebled according
as he judged of my offense: my diet was such as only served to keep me alive.
In general he used me so cruelly, that becoming desperate, I once thought it
better resolutely to cut the thread of my life, than spin it our longer in so
much wretchedness and misery. Revenge too induced me to the undertaking of this
attempt, as knowing him to be the most covetous wretch living, and therefore
would even hang himself when he should lose what he paid for me: but
reconsidering my self, I made choice of a better expedient, which was to
pretend (what I intended not) to kill my self, I made choice of such a time,
when I was sure some one or other was set to watch me; who perceiving that I
was about to destroy my self, rusht in and prevented me, and went forthwith to
inform my Master of what he had seen; advising him withal to sell me out of
hand, otherwise he would infallibly be a loser by me. My Master taking notice
of my countenance and behavior, resolved to put his friends counsel in
practice, and so sold me to another, who fortunately proved a Greek, that in
show was a Mohammedan, but cordially a Christian, Once more was I delivered from
miseries that are hardly to be endured, and was imbarqued with my new Master in
a Ship bound for the East Indies. In the course that we held, we sailed with so
prosperous a gale, that in a very short time we arrived in view of the Fort of
Diu; but seeing several vessels lying before that Fort, firing against it in an
hostile manner we shaped our course to Goa, where we arrived in safety. From
hence we sailed unto the River Lugor: just as we were entering its Mouth, we saw
a great Junk coming upon us, which perceiving us to be few in number, and our
Vessel but small, fell close with our Prow on the Larboard-side, and then those
that were in her, threw in to us great Cramp-irons fastened unto two long
chains, wherewith they grappled us fast unto them; which they had no sooner
done, but incontinently some seventy or eighty Mahometans started outfrom under
the Hatches, that till then had lain lurking there; and pouring out their
small-shot upon us, clapped us aboard in an instant. Those that knew what it was
to be a slave to the merciless Turks, leapt into the Sea, whereof I was one: we
were not far from land, so that it was not long before I got safe to shore; it
was my Masters misfortune (and truly I think my unhappiness, for he behaved
himself to me as to one of his familiar friends) being wounded, and ignorant in
swimming, to be entombed in the deep. There were some five or six more that
escapt the danger of their enemies and the Sea, that wading up to the Waste in
mud, landed in safety; with these I hid my self in the next adjacent Wood.
There was hardly one of us but received some hurt; and being now divested of
all hope of help, we could not forbear to unman our selves by weeping,
complaining against our hard destiny, that should in so short a time bring us
into so sad a disaster. In this desolation we spent the remaining tragical part
of the day; but considering with our selves, that the place was moorish, and
full of venomous creatures, we betook our selves to the Owze, standing therein
up to the middle. The next morning, by break of day, we went along by the
Riverside, until we came to a little Channel, which we durst not pass (not
knowing its depth) for fear of Lizards, plenty whereof we had sight of therein:
we wandered so long to avoid this and the Bogs covered with rushes, which
environed us about, till that we were forced to rest our selves, being so weary
and so hungry, that we could not go one step farther. In the morning awaking,
four of our company lay dead, so that there was only one remaining to bear me
company: I now thought my condition worse than if I had hung at Tyburn,
surrounded with a full Jury of fellow sufferers: my companion and I, with
tears, sang the obsequies of our dead friends, expecting hourly our own
dissolution: Their bodies we covered with a little earth, as well as we could;
for we were then so feeble, that we could hardly stir, nay, nor speak. In this
place we rested our selves, intending to bear our friends company to their
eternal rest. Some four hours after this our resolution, about Sunset, we
espied a Barque rowing up the River: coming near us we hailed her, and
prostrating our selves on the ground, beseeched those that were in her to
receive us on board. Amazed to see us in that posture on our bended knees, and
hands lifted up to Heaven, they stopped: our cries for succor reached their
ears, which obtained commiseration from their hearts; so taking us in, they
carried us with them to Lugor, where about Noon next day we landed. The people
are fearful black like the Devil, whom they superstitiously worship, in the
form of a bloody Dragon: They have many Idols amongst them which they hold in
great esteem, as a Ram-goat, a Bat, an Owl, a Snake, or Dog, to whom they
ceremoniously bow or kneel, grovelling upon the earth, and throwing dust on
their faces; they offer Rice, Roots, Herbs, and the like, which is devoured by
the Witches; these devilish creatures being both feared and esteemed by the
Savages. The female sex, against the appearing of the New Mood, assemble upon a
Mountain, where turning up their bare bums, they contemptuously defy the Queen
of Heaven, who has this despite shown her, because they suppose her the
causer of their monthly-courses. They are much given to novelties, amongst
which dogs are of very great value with them: Insomuch, that whilst I was
there, I saw six slaves exchanged for one Europaean Cur. They abound with the
choicest of natures blessings, as health, strength, and wealth, but are very
inhumane and uncivil; for they delight much to feed on man's flesh, eating it
with more satisfaction than any other food. Upon my first arrival, I did not
rightly understand their meaning by feeling my flesh, but when I was informed,
that like Butchers, they felt my flank to know how fat I was, they never touched
me afterward with their fingers, but I fancied my self either boiled or
roasted, and that their hands, my bearers, were conveying me to the open
Sepulchers of their months, to be entombed in the gutrumbling Monument of their
bellies: whereas other Anthropophagi content their appetites with the flesh of
their enemies, these cover most their friends, whom they imbowel with much
greediness, saying, they can no way better express a true affection, than to
incorporate their dearest friends and relations into themselves, as in love
before, now in body, uniting two in one (in my opinion) a bloody sophistry. It
is a very truth, of which I was an eyewitness, they have Shambles of men and
women's flesh, joynted and cut into several pieces fit for dressing. It is usual
for some, either weary of life, or so sick, they have no hopes of recovery, to
proffer themselves to these inhumane Butchers, who returning them thanks,
dissect or cut them out into small parcels, and so are sodden and eaten. It is
a custom among them, when they would add to their beauties (deformity) to slash
their faces in several places. They adore those two glorious Planets, the Sun
and Moon, believing they livein Matrimony. They are much addicted to rapine and
theevery, and they choose to commit any villainy rather by day than night,
because they suppose thereby the Moon and Stars will never give testimony
against them. Their heads are long, and their hair curled, seeming rather wool
than hair: Their ears are very long, being extended by ponderous bawbles they
hang there, stretching the holes to a great capacity. Both men and women
hideously slash their flesh in sundry forms; their brows, noses, cheeks, arms,
breasts, back, belly, thighs and legs, are pinkt, and cut in more admirable
(than amiable) manner. They contemn apparel, and indeed, the heat of the
Climate will not permit them to wear any; very few have nothing on to cover
their secrets. Most have but one stone, the other is forced away in their
infancy, that Venus may not too much allure them from Martial exploits:
wherefore the women take great delight in strangers. One of them so strongly
besieged my modesty, that more for fear than love, I yielded to her
incontinency: I was displeased at nothing but the fight of her; for her flesh,
no Velvet could be softer. There are in this place great quantity of Lions,
which in dark weather use great subtility to catch and eat some Savages: They
again in the daytime dig pits, and covering them with boughs, do train the
courageous Lions thither, where they receive destruction, eating them to day,
who perhaps were Sepulchers to their friends or parents the day before. I have
seen these well-bred people descend in a morning from the Mountains, adorned*
with the raw guts of Lions or other wild beasts, serving for an hour or two
for chains or neck-laces, and afterward for their breakfast; of which good
cheer, if I would not participate, I might fast for them: so that my squeamish
stomach was forced to give entertainment to that unwelcome guest, to keep
starving out of doors. The Ship that brought us hither, was now ready to set
sail, being bound for Goa, the Master whereof was a Portugal, who understood
Latin and French very well, of which I was not ignorant: I addressed my self to
him in the French tongue, desiring him to accept of mine and my Comerades
service; which he condescended to with much willingness. At Goa we stayed not
long, but from thence passing toward Surrat, a vehement and unexpected storm
overtook us, for three days raging incessantly, so that those which were
acquainted with those parts, very much feared an Hero-cane, a tempest commonly
of thirty days continuance, and of such sury, that Ships, Trees, and Houses
perish unavoidably in it: once in nine years, it seems, it fails not to visit
them. It chanced, that my Comerade being heedless and unexperienced in
Sea-affairs, was washed off by a wave into the Sea, and so was buried in the
large and deep grave of the vast Ocean; a sure treasury for the resurrection.
The foulness of the weather fore'd a Junk-man of War, full of desperate
Malabars, a bloody and warlike people, in view of us; but the Seas were too
losty for them to board us. After three watches, the Sea changed color, and
was calmer; and by the swimming of many snakes about our Vessel, the Seamen
knew we were not far from shore, landing shortly after safely at Surrat.

CHAP. LXIX.
From hence be sct sail to Swalley-Road, and so from thence coasted till be
arrived at Delyn a Town that belongs to the Malabars: be gives an account of
what be there saw and observed.

SOme two hours after we set fail, we were becalmed, having not the least
breeze of wind, the weather withal being exceeding hot and sultry: at length
we arrived in Swalley-Road, where was riding an English Vessel; there we east
anchor, the English men came aboard of us, whom our Captain welcomed with the
best of his entertainment. I could not forbear embracing my dear Countrymen,
showing them so many demonstrations of joy, that by their looks, they seemed to
question whether I was in my right wits. Their Masters-mate calling me aside,
asked me, how I came to be engaged in this Vessel? how long since I came from
England? with many other questions too redious here to relate. To all which I
gave him such satisfactory answers, that he seemed very well pleased. I gave
him a summary relation of what I had suffered, since my departure from my own
Country; the report whereof, seemed to extract much pity from him. In fine, I
told him, I had a great desire to see England again, and to that end desired
him to make use of what interest he could, to remove me into their Ship: he
promised he would; and accordingly giving a Present to our Captain, he so far
prevailed upon him to let me go, and persuaded the chief of whom he was
concerned withal, to entertain me, which they did with much willingness. I was
so like a Seaman in this short time, that none could distinguish me from one
that received his first rocking in a Ship. I carried about me as deep an hoguo
of Tarpawlin as the best of them, and there was no term of art belonging to any
part of the Ship or tackling, but what I understood. I could drink water that
stunk (as if stercus humanum had been steept two or three days in it) as well
as any of them, and eat beef and pork (that stirred as if it had received a
second life, and was crawling out of the platter to seek out the rest of his
Members) I say, I could devour it with as much greediness (scorning that my
appetite should be ever again taxed with any of those Epithetes, either nice or
squea mish) as if it had been but nine hours, instead of nine Months, in salt.
And to make me the more complete, I had forgot to wash either hands or face, or
what the use of a comb or shirt was, neither did I know how to undress my self;
or if wet to the skin, to make use of any other means than my natural heat to
dry my self: I never looked on a hat or band, but as Prodigies. But to return to
my purpose, where I left off. In three days time we set sail for Swalley-Road,
steering our course from them all along the coast of India, Decan, and Malabar.
I knew not whither they intended, neither did I care now, as thinking my self
safe, being amongst my friends: on the 20 of April, seven days from our
weighing auchor in Swalley-Road, we came to an anchor at Delyn, a Town of the
Malabars: We durst not land, the people being so treacherous and bloody; yet we
suffered them to come aboard us in their small Canoo^, selling us for any
trisles, Coco-nuts, Jacks, Green-pepper, Indian-pease, Hens, Eggs, and the
like. They brought us likewise Oranges of so pleasant a taste, the rind vying
with the juice, which shall become most grateful to the palate: We had likewise
from them Plantanes, a fruit supposed by some, to be that which Eve was tempted
withal; if a man gathers them green, yet will they ripen afterward, colored
with a dainty yellow: the rind or skin will peel off with much facility; they
melt in the mouth, giving a most delicious taste and relish. These Malabars are
coal-black, well limbed, their hair long and curled; about their heads they
only tie a small piece of linen, but about their bodies nothing but a little
cloth which covers their secrets. Not withstanding their cruelty and
inhumanity, we manned out our longboat, and 15, whercof I was one, went ashore,
carrying some Muskets and Swords with us, suspecting the worst: Landing, they
fled from us, but not without sending good store of po^soned arrows and darts
amongst us. It is no wonder that these people are so black, for they live under
the scorching fire of the torrid Zone. We returned to our Ship, finding it no
way safe to stay here longer; next morning hoising sail, we came to Canavar,
where we met with people more civil, whereupon we landed; and receiving things
from the inhabitants of considerable value, for toys and trifles we gave them
in lieu, we resolved to stay here a while. The better sort of these people are
called Nairo's, whose heads are covered with a low tulipant, and their middles
with a party-colored Plad, resembling a Scotch Plad: The poorer sort have
nothing but a small vail over their privities, wholly naked elsewhere; which
vail or flap the women in courtesy will turn aside, and show a man their
Pudenda, by way of gratitude for any courtesy received, as if they would
render satisfaction with that, which could never receive plenary satisfaction
it self. They have a strange custom in their Marriages, observed among them by
the highest to the lowest: who so marries, is not to have the first nights
embraces with his Bride, but is very well contented to bestow her Maidenhead
on the Bramini, or Priest, who do not always enjoy it, being glutted with such
frequent offerings, and therefore will many times sell them to strangers. Such
a proffer I had once made me, and with shame I must confess, I did accept it,
forgetting those sacred vows I made in Newgate, to live a more pious, strict
and sober life. The Bride that night, was placed in one of their Fanes, as its
customary, the Priest or Bramin coming to her; but instead thereof, according
to agreement between this Priestly Paynim and my self, I went: I wondered to
find her so low of stature, but I did not much matter it then, minding
something else; which having performed, I departed. The next morning I had a
great desire to see her, but was amazed to see her so young, believing it
impossible (though I knew the contrary) a child (for I may so call her, being
but seven years of age) could be capable of man's reception at that tender age.
Afterward, I was informed, it was usual for them to marry so soon; first,
being extremely salacious and leacherous, and as fit, nay, as prone to enjoy
man at that age, as Europaeans at fourteen. Next, they extremely honor
Wedlock, insomuch, that if any of their children die whilst very young, they
will hire some Maiden to be married to him, and so lie with him the night after
his decease. So soon as we arrived (which is a custom they use to all
strangers, of what Country soever) we had presented us choice of many Virgins;
our Boat-swain choosing one he fancied for a small price, she guided him to a
lodging, where if he would have stayed so long, she would have performed his
domestic affairs, as well at board as bed, discharging her duty very
punctually: but he that undertakes any such thing, must be very wary that he be
not venereally familiar with any other woman, lest that she with whom he has
contracted himself for such a time, does recompense his inconstancy with mortal
poison. At his departure, her wages must be paid to her Parents, who returns
then with much joy, and they receive her with as much credit and oftentation.
The chiefest among them hold it a very great courtesy, if any one will save
them the labor, pain and trouble, by accepting the Hymeneal rites of hi^
Bride. I should have told the Reader, that the Bramins are so much respected
and esteemed by the commonalty, that if any of them gets their wives or
daughters with child, they believe that offspring to be much holier than their
own, being extracted from Pagan piety. Their Funerals they celebrate after this
manner: Bringing the dead corpse near to their Fanes or Churches, they consume
it to ashes, by fire made of sweet smelling wood, unto which they add costly
perfumes in Aromatic gums and spices: If the wife only (for here they will not
hear of Polygamy) cast not her self into the flames voluntarily, they look upon
her to be some common prostitute, having not any thing commendable in her
natural disposition; but if she freely commits her self to the flames, with her
husbands carcass, she from that noble act (for so it is esteemed of among these
infidels) derives to her memory, reputation and glory amongst her surviving
friends and kindred. They are deluded on to this resolution by their Bramins,
who persuade them by so doing, they shall enjoy variety of perpetual pleasures,
in a place that is never disturbed by alteration of weather, wherein night is
banished, there being a continual spring; neither is there wanting any thing
that shall ravish each individual sense. This was at first a stratagem invented
by some long-headed Politician, to divert them from murdering their husbands
(which they were frequently guilty of, by reason of their extreme leachery and
insatiate venery) so by that means they were reduced to that good order, as
that they tendered the preservation of their husbands healths and lives equally
with their own. For my part, I could wish the like custom enjoined on all
married English females (for the love I bear to my own Country) which I am
confident would prevent the destruction of thousands of well-meaning
Christians, which receive a full stop in the full career of their lives, either
by corrupting their bodies by venomous medicaments administered by some preteded
Doctors hand (it may be her Stallion) unto which he is easily persuaded, by the
good opinion he has of his wifes great care and affection for him: or else his
body is poisoned by sucking or drawing in the contagious fumes which proceed
from her contaminated body, occasioned by using pluralities for her venereal
satisfaction, and so dies of the new Consumption. Or Lastly, by pettish and
pe^ulant behavior, she wearieth him of his life, and at last is willing to
die, that he may be freed, not only from the clamorous noise of her tongue, but
that the derision of his neighbors, and scandal that she has brought upon
him, may not reach his ears. That all such might be mindful of their duty, I
would have (were it at my disposing) these two lines fixed as a Motto to their
doors.

A Couchant Cuckold, and a rampant Wife,
A Cop'latives disjunctive all their life.
CHAP. LXX.
From Delyn he sailed to Zeyloon; with what he there observed.

THe Isle of Zeyloon is very famous, and not far distant from the Point of
India, called Cape Comrein; it abounds with all sorts of odoriferous and
Aromatical Spices; the people are Pagans, not owning a Deity: some though have
heard of Christ, and others of Mahomet, but such are rarely to be found. They
go naked, not compelled thereunto by want or poverty, but mere heat of the Sun.
They are greaet Idolaters, worshipping things in monstrous shapes. On the top
of a high Mountain, they have set conspicuously the Idaea of an horrible
Caco-Daemon, unto which Pilgrims from remote parts do resort; and upon this
account, a King of Zeyloon coming, once derided this Idol: another time,
intending to make a second repetition of his former derifion, the King was even
frighted out of his wits; for not only he, but his attendants all saw how this
Demon threatened him for so doing, by shaking a flaming Cymeter, and rolling
his fiery eyes, from his mouth gaping, issued out fiery flames; whereat this
King returns with as much penitence as amazemenr, resolving by his due respect
and worship for the time to come, to make an atonement for his former errors.
For my part, had I not believed there was a Devil, the sight of this horrid
monstrous representation would have induced me into the belief that this was
one really. They have in another place a Chapel, in which they adore the Devil
(whom they call Deumo) the height whereof is about three yards, and uncovered:
the wooden entrance is engraven with hellish shapes; within, their beloved
Devil or Deumo, is enthronized on a brazen Mount: From his head issue four
great horns, his eyes of an indifferent proportionable bigness, having somewhat
a larger circumserence than two sawcers; his nose flat; a mouth like a
porteullice, beautified with fours tusks, like Elephants teeth; his hands like
claws, and his feet not unlike a Monkeys: beside him stand lesser Deumo's
attending on this grand Pagod, some whereof are represented or pictured
devouring souls. Every morning the Priest washes them, nor departing till he
has craved their malediction; and when he takes his leave, he is very careful
of offending the Devil by showing his posteriors, and therefore goes from him
retragrade, steadfastly fixing his eyes on the Idol. It Is strange that a
rational soul should be so much infatuated, as to adore such a monstrous and
ridiculous thing. The people in way of mutual love and amity, use to exchange
their wives; a thing, though much hated by the jealous Spaniard, yet would be
very acceptable to other Europaeans, or else to be rid of them altogether, who
are the daily murderers of their content and quiet. Polygamy, or plurality of
Wives, is here permitted; and as the men are granted the liberty to have more
than one wise, so are the women allowed more than one husband. However, the
woman has the disposal lest her of her children, giving them to him she has
the greatest affection for; which he receives, not questioning his interest or
right (by generation) unto the infant.

Elsewhere the Fates decreed a Cuckol'ds lot,
To keep that child another man begot;
And by his joy therein he plainly shows,
He thanks the man that paid those debts he owes:
But these She-Blacks in justice thought it fit,
That he which got the child, likewise keep it:
Therefore both love and custom made it so,
On the true Father they the child bestow:
By which good Law unto each man it is known,
That he does keep no other child but's own.
Were this observed in England, I durst swear,
Some what-d'ye-lacks would Heirs to Lords appear;
And half of what some own, must be conferred
On such who have a Fathers name deserved.
These Blacks do tax our women, for they paint
The Devil white, and make him seem a Saint;
To let them know, they are far greater evils;
For fairest females often are foulest Devils.
We stayed not long here, but having dispatched what we came for, we sailed
along the coast of Choromandel, and landed at Meliapor. The people are much
after the same complexion of those of Delyn, only a little more duskie, and go
in a manner naked too. Here are like wise great store of Bramins, who are very
busy and industrious to instruct these poor ignorant souls in the perfect way
to damnation; sor which they have the honor and estimation of all conferred
upon them. We manned out our longboat and went ashore; upon our landing, it was
our hap to be eyewitnesses of one of their Funerals, which was performed after
this manner. The husband was carried before the combustible Pile; his most
dearly loving wise closely following after him, attended by her Parents and
children; music (such as they have, which I cannot compare to that of the
Spheres) playing before, behind, and on each side of her. She was dressed both
neatly and sumptuously, to the height of the rudeness of their art; her head,
neck, and arms (not omiting her nose, legs, and toes) each bedeckt and charged
with Bracelets of silver, with jewels every where about her distributed: She
carried flowers in her hands, which she disposed of to those she met. The
Priest going backwards before her, showed her a magical glass, which
represented to her sight whatever might be pleasing to her sensual appetite.
The Bramin all along inculcating to her thoughts, the senseravishing and
affable joys she shall possess after her decease; at which this poor deluded
soul smiled, and seemed to be much transported. We followed them till they came
to the fire, which was made of sweet odoriferous wood. As soon as her dead
husband was committed to the flames, she voluntarily leapt in after him,
incorporating her self with the fire, and his ashes: we wondered that the
standers-by would permit her thus to destroy her self, imagining this rash
action proceeded from the ardency of her affection; but perceiving her friends
to throw in after her, jewels and many precious things, with much exultation
and expressions of joy, we concluded this to be the effects of custom. Such as
resuse to burn in this manner, are immediately shaven, and are hourly in danger
to be murdered by their own issue or kindred, looking upon them as strumpets:
and indeed many of them are so audaciously impudent, that upon the least
distaste, or not having their luxurious expectations answered, nothing more
intended or endeavored than the lives of their husbands. They are in these
parts so extremely idolatrous, and so over-swayed by the Devil, that they adore
a great Idol made of Copper gilded, whose statue is carried up and down,
mounred on a glorious Chariot, with eight very large wheels overlayed with
gold; the afcent or steps to the chariot are very large and capacious, on
which sit the Priests, attended by little young girls, who for devotion sake,
proftirute themselves freely to the heat of any libidinous spectator; for so
doing, they are entitled the Pagodes children: A very strange zeal in their
bewitched or besotted Parents, to destinate the offspring of their bodies,
from their nonage, to such an abominable liberty; for by letting them know the
use of Man so soon, it cannot but be very prejudicial to their bodies, but also
invest them with the thoughts of perpetual whoring: For, that woman that shall
admit of more than one to her private embraces, will admit of any upon the like
account. Nay, such is their blind zealand superstition, that as the Chariot
passoth, some will voluntarily throw themselves under the wheels, who are
crushed in pieces by the weight of the Idol and its attendants, suffering death
without the benefit of a happy (but to them unhappy) Martyrdom.

CHAP. LXXI.
From Zeyloon, he arrived at Syam; and what there he saw and observed.

SYam is a Kingdom contiguous to Pegu, a part of the East Indies: And, as the
people are included within the burning Zone, therefore far from being fair; yet
are tall of stature, very strong and valiant, and generally so strait, that few
are found among them crooked. Formerly they were much given to Sodomy: to
prevent which, 'twas wisely ordered, (though strangely) that the males as soon
as born, should have a bell ofgold (and in it a dried Adders tongue) put
through the prepuce and flesh. When then desire of copulation stimulates any of
them, he presents himself to some expert Midwives; who advise him to drink
Opium, or some such somniferous potion; which having done in their presence, he
falls asleep; during which interval, they remove the ball, and apply to the
orifice from whence it was taken, an unguent, which affords a speedy cure: then
is he free to make use of such as his fancy leads him to. The young Girls are
served in a worse manner; and it it as great a rarity, to find a pure Virgin
here at ten years old, as to find a Maid at sixteen, in most places of Franc,
or its neighboring Countries. And that these young Fry may be capable of that
employment they are destinated unto, they have potions given them to drink. The
women here (still the more to allure the men from that detestable and unnatural
act of Sedomy) go naked; (as little a novelty in these parts, as for Irish and
Scotch to wash their clothes with their feet, their coats, smock and all tuckt
up about their middles, though twenty men stand by as (deriding spectators) I
say, they go naked to their middles, where the better sort are covered with a
fine transparent Taffata or dainty Lawn, which by a cunning device is so made
to open, that as they pass along, the least air discovers all, to all men's
immodest views. Their Priests, which they call Tallapoi, are seeming very
zealously superstitious: they fomewhat incline to Mahometanism; for they
pretend they will not drink wine, being forbidden it by their Law, yet are
abominable hypocrites: for, though they wear a sheep-skin with the wool
thereon, not suffering any hair to be on their bodies, and in show lead a
chaste life, yet I found the contrary; as you shall understand by what past
between one of them and my self. I being on shore with our Ships crew, I
chanced to walk abroad, carrying with me a bottle of Spanish-wine: As I entered
into a Wood, intending not to adventure too far, there came to me one of these
Tallapoi or Priests, in the habit aforesaid, with a horn about his neck,
resembling a Sowgelder's but much less; with which, I was told, they, with the
sound thereof, used to convene the people to hear them preach. This holy
Infidel espying me, blessed himself, (as I guest by his gesture) and approaching
near me, I imagined that he prayed for me, by the elevation of his and eyes
hands: as a requital, I proffered him some of my wine; and having tasted
thereof, liked it so well, that by signs, I understood he desired his hornfull
of me: to tell you the truth, I liked it so well my self, that I had no desire
to part with one drop more of it; but his importunities so far prevailed, that
I granted his request; which having obtained, he made no more ado but drank it
off, making but one gulp thereof; a thing contrary to the strictness of his
profession. After this, he seemed to bless me, and so departed. It was but a
little while, before he again presented himself to my view; and beckoning to
me, I followed him: coming close up to him, he pointed with his finger to a
place, where covertly I espied three Maidens (as I supposed) to whom he by
signs persuaded me to go. Sitting down amongst them, they entertained me with
as much civility as they were endued withal, and courted me after their
amorous fashion. One of these was the handsomest that I have seen in those
parts; though not to be compared, for form of face, with the homeliest
Kitchin-stuff-wench in London. I dallied with her so long, till that lust
conquered my fancy; attempting something, and being in a fair way to it, this
Satyr-Goat-Devil, (I cannot invent a name bad enough to call him by) presently
falls down upon us; and taking me thus unawares, lying on my belly, I was not
able to help my self, that he had like to have performed his business; and
questionless had effected it, but that the two Maidens standing by (no ways
ashamed at this most shameful sight) assisted me, pulling him off. I presently
started up, and seized him; and tripping up his heels, I laid him on his back:
having so done, I bound him; then taking out my knife, I could not find in my
heart to spare him one inch; and that he might not have any witnesses left of
what was done, I took away his testicles too. The three young Girls fled,
fearing my rage and revenge might have extended to them: And fearing my self,
that they would give information of what I had done, I fled too to my
Ships-Comerades; and giving them account of what had happened, we all judged it
the safest way to go aboard; and so we did, with all expedition possible.

CHAP. LXXII.
From hence he sails to Do-Cerne, so called by the Portugals; who Adam- like,
give (or, as I may say, take too much liberty) in imposing names on all new
places, and things. By the Hollanders, it is called Mauritius. Its general
Description.

DO-Cerne or Mauritius, is an Isle situate within the torrid Zone, close by the
Tropic of Capricorn; but it is very uncertain unto what part of the world it
belongs, participating both of America, and bending toward the Asiatick Seas,
from India to Java. This Isle abounds with what the use of man shall require.
The landing looking out at Sea, is Mountainous: the circuit of this Island is
about an hundred miles; it procreates an healthy and nourishing air; the great
quantity of ever-flourishing and fragrant trees, does no less lenisie the
burning heat, when the Sun enters into Capricorn, as helped by the sweet
mollifying breath of the North-west wind, when Sol again adheres to Cancer.
Now as the temperature of that body is best composed, that participates
indifferently of all the Elements, which either super-abounding or wanting,
begets defect; What then is the temperature of this place, which is blessed with,
and abounds in all, and aborrive in none? Water is here very plentiful,
drilling it self from the high rocks and trickling down into the valleys,
spreads it self into various Meanders, till those sweet and pleasant waters
disembogue themselves into the lap of the salt Ocean. There is so great a
quantity of wood, that we could hardly procure passage. But of those many
various Trees, we found none so beneficial to us, as the Palmeto: this Tree is
long, straight, and very soft, having neither leaves, boughs, nor branches,
save at the top, whereon there is a soft pith, wherein consists the sole
vegetative of that Tree; which cut out, the Palmeto in a very short time
expires. Its taste is much like a kernel of an Hazel-nut; boiled, it is like
Cabbage. But the chiefest commodity that this Tree produces, is the wine which
issues from it, pleasant, and as nourishing as Muskadine or Alligant. Thus we
procured some thereof; coming where two or three grew together, with an augure
we bored some small holes in eoch, which immediately the liquor filled; then
with a small cane or quill we sucked the wine out of one Tree; then we went to
another, and from that to the third: by that time we had drained the last, the
holes in the two former were full again. This course we followed so smartly,
that in less than an hour, three of us were so drunk (whereof I was none of the
soberest) that had not these Trees been near the shore, for ought I know, by
the morning we might have feasted the wild beasts. Diverse other Trees there
be, strong both in shape and nature; one whereof (merely out of curiosity) I
must needs taste, which for half an hour so bit or stung my tongue, as if I had
had my mouth full of Vitriol, or spirit of Salt. It is a comely tree to look
on, but brings forth not any thing that is good: this Tree is in a manner naked
too, and the body thereof as soft and penetrable, as new Cheese: the form of
the Tree, its uselesness, with that hidden sting it carries in it, together
with its softness; the lust of which, invites me to cut these lines therein;
which my knife as easily performed, as to write a man's name with a stick on the
sand. The lines were these:

Thou Art like a Woman, but thou want her breath;
Who Is fair, but fruitless, and will sting to death
If tasted: would I could blast thee with my curse,
Since woman thou art like, for nothing's worse.
There is another Tree, which bears a cod full of sharp prickles, wherein
lies hid a round fruit, in form of a Doves-egg; crack it, and therein contained
you shall find a kernel, pleasant in taste, but poisonous in its operation. My
sweet tooth lon'gd for a taste, and being very toothsome I did eat several; but
it was not long ere my guts were all in an uproar, and were resolved in this
mutiny, could they have found way, to charge my mouth with high treason,
against the rest of my Members; but they were at last content only to discharge
their fury through the Postern of their Microcosm; which they did so furiously,
that I was much afraid, my guts having spent all their shot, they would have
marched out after. I had (in plain English) in less than six hours sixty stools,
besides purging upwards; and had not we had a very skilful Dr. Chryrurgeon of
our Ship, I had unavoidably perished. Nature in this Island showed her
prodigality of water and wood, corresponding also in every thing else a
fruitful Mother labors to be excellent in. Here she seems to boast, not only
in the variety of feathered creatures, but in the rareness of that variety,
which should I run over but briefly, the subject is so large, that by some I
cannot but be thought too tedious. However, I shall lightly touch thereon.
Here, and here only is generated the Dodo; for rareness of shape contending
with the Arabian Phoenix; her body is round and very fat, the least whereof,
commonly weighs above twenty pound: They please the sight more than the
appetite, for their flesh is of no nourishment, and very offensive to the
stomach. By her visage (darting forth melancholy) she seems to be sensible of
that injury Nature has done her, in framing so great a body, and yet useless,
but to please the eye; committing its guidance to complemental wings (for so
I Am forced to call them) since they are so small and impotent, that they only
serve to prove her an offspring of the winged Tribe. Here are Bats also, as
large as Gashawks. There is likewise great plenty of Fish: among the rest of
most especial note, is the Cow-fish; the head thereof not unlike an Elephants,
her eyes are small, her body at full growth about three yards long, and one
broad, her fins exceeding little, her flesh (being an amphibious creature,
living as well at Land, sometimes, as in the Sea) does taste much like Veal.
Some say that this Fish does affect, and takes much delight in the sight of a
man's visage. About this Island are flying fish, Dolphins, and Sharks. One of
our men imprudently swimming one day, the weather being very hot, in our sight
a Shark came and bit off his leg, and part of his thigh, and he thereupon sunk;
we made out to save him, but before we came, he was drowned. Here are Tortoises
so great, that they will creep with two men's burdens on their backs; but their
pace is so slow, that they would make but ill Porters, going not above ten
yards in two hours, when they make their greatest speed. The birds here are so
unaccustomed to frights, that I have shot five or six times amongst a flock,
letting the dead still lie, and not one of the surviving did so much as offer
to fly. The Goats here have more of the Politician in them; for they seldom
seed or rest themselves, but they set out their sentinels.

CHAP. LXXIII.
Hence he sailed for Bantham; by the way he recounts the danger he had like to
have sustained, by ascending a burning Mountain.

WEighing Anchor, we steered our course for Bantam; but being much straightened by
the way, for want of fresh water, we were compelled to make up to the first
Land we descried. Though the darkness of the night blinded our eyes from such
discoveries, yet flames of fire not far distant from us, gave us perfect
intelligence that land was not far off. That night we cast Anchor, fearing we
might run foul of some Rock or shelf: In the morning we saw a large track of
Land before us, not knowing what place it should be. Our Captain commanded the
Longboat to be manned out, to procure water, if any good were there: amongst
the rest, I went for one; for I was very greedy to observe novelties. Coming on
shore, and seeing this Hill now and than belch out flames, by my persuasions I
made my fellows forget for a time their duty or errand they came about, to make
some inquisition into this miracle of Nature. Whereupon we all resolved
unanimously to ascend the Hill, and with much difficulty we came so nigh the
top, that we heard a most hideous noise proceeding from the Concave thereof: so
terrible it was, that we now began to condemn our rash attempt, and stood at a
convenient distance, judging it the only medium of our safety. Whilst we were
thus in a delirium, not knowing what was the best to be done; the Mountain was
instantly possessed with an Ague-fit, and afterward vomiting up smoke and stones
into the Air (which afterward fell down in a shower upon our heads) we thought
we could not escape without a miracle: and whilst we were all striving which
way, with greatest expedition, we might eschew the danger, there rose in the
midst of us such an heap of earth, ashes, and fire, with such kind of
combustible matter, as that we all seemed as so many moveable burning Beacons,
and without any thoughts of helping each other, every one endeavored to secure
himself. And although I was the last in the company, yet in this expedition it
was much available to me; for my companions making more haste than good speed,
tumbling down the Hill before me, fell several of them together; which blocks
lying in my way, obstructed my passage, and so saved the breaking of my neck,
which otherwise would have been inevitable. In this prodigious conflict, most
of us lost the hair of our heads, nor without receiving several batteries upon
the Outworks of our bodies. At first sight we were much afraid; but the
consequence made it appear, we were not more afraid than hurt. We made a shift
to crawl down the rest of the way; and having fixed our unadvised feet on the
bottom of the Mountain, we resolved we would never again pay so dearly for our
curiosity, but sorthwith went in search of some Spring, that might serve as
well to quench our clothes, as our thirst. What we sought for we quickly found;
and so filling our empty Cask, we made what haste we could aboard. The Captain
and the rest stood amazed to see us look so ghastly, and were very impatient to
know what was the matter with us; we told them succinctly what had happened,
and what great dangers we underwent: instead of pitying us, they only laughed at
us for being such adventurous fools. Having thus furnished our selves with what
we wanted, we set fail again for Bantum; where we safely arrived in a short
time.

CHAP. LXXIV.
Going ashore to Bantam, and observing the Merchants what they did, taking up
Goods upon credit (as it is usual in those parts) till the ship is ready to set
sail, he by a stratagem turns Merchant too, and cheats a Bannyan, or China-
Merchant.

AS soon as we came into the Harbor before Bantam, we presently manned out our
Longboat and went ashore, to acquaint the President what we were, and by what
authority we came thither to Traffic, being empowered by the
East-India-Company. We were received with much demonstrations of joy, and nobly
feasted for three days together. Here note, that the house wherein the
President dwells, is the receptacle for the whole Factory, each man according
to his quality having a dwelling within this house suitable to his dignity; the
Factors all in general taking their daily repast with the President. In a weeks
time I learned by observation the custom of the Country, and manner or way of
Trading, our Merchant taking up Goods daily, and sending them aboard without
giving present satisfaction; it being sufficient that he belonged to such a
Ship, and therefore must pay before he go, otherwise the King will arrest the
Ship, compelling him to make restitution or payment. One time I met with a
Bannyan, whom I observed to have a box full of precious stones: I could not
sleep for thinking how I should make my self a Partner with him. At last I
hammered out this invention: I clothed my self in Indian-silk, according to
the custom of the Country; and having so done, I discolored my face, and clapped
a black patch upon one of my eyes. In this equipage I addressed my self to this
Bannyan, who presently laid open his treasure to my view. I was not long in
choosing what I esteemed as most valuable; and demanding of him the price, we
agreed he should have either so many pieces of English gold within two days,
or else take his choice of what commodities I had aboard. We made a shift to
understand each others broken expressions; and he without the least suspicion
of my treachery, delivered his stones into my hands. Taking off my disguise, I
went instantly aboard, and hid what I had cheated the Bannyan of (as I might
easily do for the smallness of its bulk) in the Hold of our Ship, resolving not
to go ashore yet a while. The day of payment being come, and the Bannyan no
where finding me on Land, came aboard of our Ship, where by sign he made known
to our Captain his errand; that a Merchant belonging to his Ship had bought
commodities of him, and promised to pay him on that day. Our Captain replied,
that he verily believed he was mistaken (as knowing what commodities the
Merchants belonging properly to the Ship had bought) and therefore told him he
must make inquiry elsewhere for satisfaction. The Bannyan still persisted,
alleging he was not mistaken, and that he was confident if he might have a
^ight of all the men, he could out of them select the concerned person. So warv
I was of being discovered, that I acquainted not one soul with my project: for
had I committed this secret to any, (though ever so dear a friend) it had been
mine no longer; neither could I have promised to my self safety. Hereupon the
Captin ordered us to be all called alost: which was spedlly performed. He went
all round the company, viewing every man particularly, and very heedfully. At
last he came to me, and there made a stand, (which had like to have made my
heart start out of my breast:) he looked upon me on this side, and on the other
side; and to say truly, on every side: and having thoroughly eyed me, he ran to
our Captain, saying, That should be the man (pointing to me) but that he is a
white man, and has two sees (id est) two eyes. Whereupon I was strictly
examined: but for all this sifting, I would not let drop any thing of a
confession, that should convict me of guilt; but with lifting up hands and eyes
to Heaven, I utterly denied that ere I saw this man, or ever had any dealing
with him. I had now forgot what promises and vows I made to Heaven, (when in
Newgate, and sentenced to be hanged at Tyburn) what a serious, pious, and
honest life I would lead, if I escaped that eminent danger the concerns of this
life and that to come were then in. Herein I see the old Proverb verified:

Quo semel est imbuta recens servabit odoren.
Testu diu, etc. --
That Cask will favor of that liquor still,
With which at first the Cask a man did fill.
Or according to that thread bare expression so commonly used: Naturam expellas
fura, licet usque recurret.

Though man should stop his nature from its course, It will overflow again with
greater force.

In short, the Bannyan, since he could not say positively I was the man, was
dismissed, not without a solemn vow he would be revenged of us all in general;
and I cleared of the Indictment.

CHAP. LXXV.
The next going ashore of the Seamen, this Bannyan (for the injury was done
him) caused a Running a Muck, that is, he instigated a great many people to
kill all they met of that ship. The loss of several men thereupon: but he is
out of danger, having cunningly kept himself aboard that time. He afterward
had like to have been killed by a Crease the Bannyan had hired for that
purpose. His enemies being destroyed, be marries an Indian Punce-woman.

THe next day, a great many of our men went ashore; and going into China-row,
(a street so called in Bantam) to drink Punce and Tea, a great crew of Indians
and Chinese (headed by this Bannyam) fell upon them, killing whom they could,
not directing their revenge upon any particular person, which they call a
Muck:) so hot and sharp was this Conflict, that many were killed on both sides,
but more wounded. This accident alarmed the whole town, but most especially the
English there resident: but at last, with much ado, this grand uproar was
calmed. It was my good fortune, that I was not then among them, otherwise I
might have been made (...) sacrifice among the rest of my fellows. But I was
fore-warned, having been pre-inform'd that such broyls are usual upon such
occasions; wherefore I kept my self out of harms way for that time.

But not long after, thinking their malice was blown over, I went ashore; and
walking with others of our Boars-crew in the same (...), (where most of our men
were used to resort, because of the liquor that was there to be had, and a
Whore to boot) a fellow came to me, with this Bannyan I cheated, and both of
them with Greases, (a kind of Dagger of about a foot and half long) would have
stabbed me, had not my friends prevented them, by striking up their heels, and
afterward with their own Creases stabbed them to the heart. After this, we
could walk very quietly without any disturbance, going any where without any
danger.

Being very hot there, our usual pastime was to go up a little small River
(joining to the Town) four or five miles to wash our selves: the trees so
covered it over like an Arbor, that the beams of the Sun could not penetrate
it; by which means it was fine and cool, which very much refresht our parched
bodies. I never came ashore, but I drank very immoderately of Punce, Rack, Tea,
etc. which was brought up in great China-Jug holding at least two Quarts: with
every such Jug there was brought in a Dish of Sweetmeats, not of one sort, but
variety, and excellent good; for which we paid a shilling English: and if you
called for another Jug, you paid no more, (...) a Dish ushered it in.

One house especially I much frequented, for the Indian woman's sake that kept
it: for though she was black, or rather tawny, yet she was well-featur'd and
well-form'd, having long black hair (when she untied the tresses) hanging down
to her legs. She from the first showed me as much kindness as could be expected
from that lump of Bar barism and I could discern her inclinations, (in the
same manner as a man may from beasts, when they are prone to Generation) but
yet it went against my stomach to yield to her motions. However, she continued
her love to me, not letting me pay for any thing I called for: and when there
was no necessity of being aboard, she would in a manner make me lie in her
house, (which, as their houses commonly are, had but one story:) the beds they
use are a kind of Quilr, hard; for were they soft, the hotness of the Climate
would cause them to be very destructive to man's body, even melting his very
reins. Gold and Jewels she had great quantity, with an house richly furnished
after the Indian fashion. For this consideration, I persuaded my self to marry
her; and with several arguments alleged, I gained so much conquest over my
self, that I could kiss her witout disgorging my self: and by accustoming my
self to her company, methought I began to take some delight in it. By degrees,
interest so overpowered me, that I resolved to marry her. Thus many (nay most)
for Money, stick not to give themselves to the Devil. Having one night (lying
there) seriously considered of my resolution, and liking it indifferent well, I
fell asleep; but wondered when I awaked, to see a thing lie by me all black, as
if she had had a Mourning-smock on. It seems she could hold out no longer: I
pretended to flee from her; but she held me fast in her arms, using what
rhetoric she could to persuade me to the contrary. I asked her what she meant?
She told me in a little broken English she had got, that she would Money me;
marry me, she meant: I, Money me, said I, that I like well; but without it, let
the Devil have married her for me. I asked her several questions, to which she
gave me satisfaction; and enjoined her several things, which she greedily
condescended to: whereupon I gave her the first fruits of her desires. But ere
I go farther, take something of my Ryming fancy with you.

CHAP. LXXVI.
He descants on his Marrying, and lying with an Indian-Black: Gives (...)
Advice to others; and concludes for this time.

AT the first light, her head s^em'd in a Case,
Or that a Vi^rd-mask had hid her face,
Or that she was some Fiend from hell had stole,
Having for Lust been burnt there is a role.
I could not tell what this foul thing should be:
A Succubus it did appear to me;
A d^mn'd black soul, that was by beaven sent,
To make (...) of my blacker crimes repent.
I started from her, being much ama^'d:
The more I was afraid, the more (...).
Then she arose, and caught me in her arm;
Such soft flesh sure intended me no harm.
'(...) time to roar, since that I could not tell,
But that I was encircled (now) by Hell.
(...), stay, (said she) I am no (...) ^end,
(...) flesh and blood, and am ^hy loving friend:
(...) my (...) do not pleas^ thy (...),
Then close shine eyes, (...) love: This love is blind.
I understood her (...), and (...) did swear
That I would (...) this my (...) fear;
And so (...) my self unto the Rug
On which we lay, and after many a Tug,
I^lighted faith with this kind Infidel.
(...) what we did, my modest tongue ^on't tell.
I would at any time (might I but ch^se)
The fairest White for thi^ same Bl^ck refuse.
But mischief on it, let me shoot e're so right,
It cannot be said that I did hit the White.
Interest so blinded my reason, that I went instantly to my Captain, and gave
him information of my proceedings, desiring his consent in the marrying this
Indian, alleging how advantageous it would be to me. He granted my request,
upon my earnest importunity; land being dismissed from his service, we were
married according to the Ceremonies of the Church by an English Priest, she
rencuncing her Paganism. What money was got by my wifes Trade, I laid out in
such Commodities the Country afforded, as Callico's, Pepper, Indico,
Green-Ginger, etc. and sold them immediately to the Ships lying in the Harbor,
doubling what I laid out: so that in short time I found my stock to increase
beyond expectation: such satisfaction my Black received from me, that she
thought she could not do enough to please me. I was an absolute Monarch in my
family; she and her servants willingly condescended to be my vassals: yet
though I thus enjoyed the prerogative of an husband, yet I did not Lord it too
much; which won so much upon my wifes affection, and those that were concerned
with her, that as soon as I desired any thing it was immediately performed, with
much alacrity and expedition.

I fancied my life to be now as happy as the world could make it, having plenty
of every thing, and not controlled by the foolish self-will of an obstinate
woman. I confess it was at first a great regret to my spirit, to lie by a woman
so contrary to my own complexion: but Custom made her become in process of time
as lovely in my eye, as if she had been the compleatest European beauty. I now
again considered how he must live, that intends to live well; and upon that
consideration, concluded upon this resolution, Not to neglect my duty to
Heaven, my Self, or Neighbors: for he that fails in any of these, falls short
in making his life commendable. For our Selves, we need Order; for our
Neighbor, Charity; and for the Deity, Reverence and Humility. These three
duties are so concatenated, that he which lives orderly, cannot but be
acceptable to his Maker and the World. Nothing jars the Worlds harmony more,
than men that break their ranks; and nothing renders Man more contemned and
hated, than he whose actions only tend to irregularity. One turbulent spirit
will even dissentiate the calmest Kingdom: so did my past unruly and disorderly
life ruin my self, as well as many families. I have seen an Orthodox Minister
in his Pulpit with his congregation about him; and since revolving in my mind
the comeliness of that well-ordered sight, I have thought within my self how mad
he would appear, that should wildly dance out of his room. Such is man when he
spurns at the Law he lives under; and such was I, that could not be contained
within due limits, living like the Drone on others labors: taking no pains, but
only making a humming noise in the world, till Justice seized me for a
wandering, idle, and hurtful vagabond, (an ignavum pecus) and so had like to
thrust me out of the world, the Hive of industrious Bees.

Ill company at first misled me, and it is to be feared by my example others
have been misled. For he that gives himself leave to transgress, he must needs
put others out of the way. Experience gives us to understand, that he which
first disorders himself, troubles all the company. Would every man keep his own
life, what a concord in Music would every family be! It shall be my own
endeavor to do this, and my cordial advice to others to do the like.

Doubtless he that performs his duty to Heaven, shall find such a peace
within, that shall fit him for whatsoever falls. He shall not fear himself,
because he knows his course is order: he shall not fear the World, because he
knows he has done nothing that has angered it: he shall not be afraid of
Heaven; for he knows he shall there find the favor of a servant, nay more,
a Son, and be protected against the malice of Hell.

I know I shall be looked on no otherwise than an Hypocrite; neither will the
world believe my reformation real, since I have lived so notoriously and
loosly. Let a man do well an hundred times, it may be he shall for a short time
be remembered and applauded; whereas if he does evilly but once, he shall be
ever condemned, and never forgot. However, let me live well, and I care not
though the world should flout my innocence, and call me dissembler: it is no
matter if I suffer the worst of censorious reproaches, so that I get to Heaven
at last: to the attaining of which, the best counsel I can give my self and
others is, Been vive, ordinabiliter tibi, sociahiliter Proximo, and humiliter
Deo: Live well, orderly to thy self, sociably to thy Neighbor, and humbly to
thy Maker.

Take this as wholesome advice, though from an ill liver, which has been in
part discovered in the foregoing Discourse; wherein I have endeavored, by
drawing up a List of my own evil actions, to frighten others from the
commission of the like. For as there is no company so savagely bad, but a wise
man may from it learn something to make himself better: so there is no Book so
poorly furnished, out of which a man may not gather something for his benefit.
Herein I have not minded so much words, as the matter; aiming at nothing more
than how Imight completely limn Vice in her proper ugly shape: having done
that, I have done what I intended, The reformation of others by my wicked
example. For Vice is of such a Toady complexion, so ill shaped and deformed,
that she cannot choose but teach the soul to hate; so loathsome when she is seen
in her own nasty dress, that we cannot look upon her but with detestation and
horror. Vice was cunning and curiously painted when I fell into her scabbed
embraces; neither could I have ever known her soulnes, and rottenness, had I
not tried whether her (seeming) fairness and soundness were real. Believe me,
she is no ways that she appears to be; therefore be not deluded by her: but let
my Life be to the Reader, as a friend fallen into a pit, that gives warning to
another to avoid the danger. So admirable has Providence disposed of the ways
of man, that even the sight of Vice in others, is like a Warning-arrow shot for
us to take heed. Vice usually in her greatest bravery, publishes her self
foolishly, thinking thereby to procure a Train; and then it is, that the secret
working of Conscience makes her turn her weapons against her self, and strongly
plead for her implacable adversary Virtue. We are frequently wrought to good by
contraries; and soul acts keep Virtue from the charms of Vice. An ancient Poet
writ well to this purpose, thus:

(...) Insuiv^t Pater optimus hoc me,
^r fugerem exemplis vitiorum quae^ not ando.
(...) me horta^ etur parce, frugalitur, at^
^verem uti contentus e^, quod mi ipse paraesset:
(...) vides Albi (...) male vivat fillus? ut^
Bartus inops? Magnum documentum ne patriam (...)
Per^ere (...). A turpi (...) amore
Quum deterreret, Sectani dissimilis sis.
-- Sic me
Formabat puerum dictis. --
-- Thus my best father taught
Me to flee Vice, by nothing those were naught.
When he would charge me, Thrive, and sparing be,
Content with what he had prepared for me;
See not how ill young Albus lives? how low
Poor Barrus? Sure, a weighty Item how
One spent his means. And when he meant to strike
A hate to Whores, To Sectan be not like.
-- Thus me a child
He with his precepts fashioned. --
There is no better way to correct faults in our selves, than by observing how
uncomely they appear in others. After a ^it of drunkenness, my conscience would
usually accuse me, and many times, after convictment, would pass so severe a
sentence of condemnation on me, that my own hands have oftentimes been like to
prove my Executioners. Considering within my self what should be the cause of
this trouble and self loathing, I found it proceeded from ^ther reason than the
observation of others in the like beastly condition, and how noisome it has
rendered them to all. The first thing that made me abhor a Choleric passion,
and a saucy pride in my self, (of which I was too guilty) was the seeing how
ridiculous and contemptible they rendered those that are infested with them.
Besides, those that are thoroughly experienced in navigation, do as well know the
coasts as the Ocean; as well the sands, the shallows, and the rocks, as the
secured depths in the most dangerless channel: so I think those that would
arrive to as much perfection as they are capable of enjoying here, must as well
know bad, that they may abtrude or shun it; as the good, that they may embrace
it. And this knowledge we can neither have so cheap, nor so certain, as by
seeing it in others: for under a Crown you may buy the whole experience of a
man's Life, (as of mine) which cost some thousands; though me no more hundreds
than what I borrowed of the world, having of mine own nothing originally. If we
could pass the world without meeting Vice, then the knowledge of Virtue only
were sufficient: but it is impossible to live, and not encounter her. Vice is
as a god in this world: for as she rules almost incontrollably, so she assumes
to her self ubiquity, we cannot go any where, but that shepresents her self to
the eye, etc. If any be unwittingly cast thereon, let him observe for his own
more safe direction. He is happy, that makes another man's vices steps for him
to climb to his eternal rest by. The wise Physicians make poison medicinable;
and even the Mud of the world, by the industrious (yet ungrateful) Hollander,
is turned to an useful fuel.

If (Reader) (...) ^hou lightst here on any thing (...) is bad, by considering
the forded stains, either (...) those faults thou hast^ or s^un those thou
might^st have. That Mariner which has Sea-room, ^an (...) any wind almost
serve to s^t him forwards in his wished (...): so may a wise (...) any ad^ to
set (...) forward to the haven of Virtue. Man, (...) ^eated, h^d, two great
sui^ens (...) ^ife and (...); the one Ver^, and the other Vice^ (...) cam^ in
this manner and thus attended, Tru^ (...) ^ked, (...); after h^ followed
Labor, Cold, Hung^), Thirst, Care and Vigilance; these poorly arrayed, (...)
looking upon it unseemly to (...) than their Mist^iss, who as plainly and
meanly clad, yet cleanly: yet her countenance showed such a self-perfection,
that she might very well emblem whatsoever Omnipotency could make most rare.
Modest she was, and so lovely, that whatsoever looked on her face steadfastly,
could not but insoul himself in her. After her followed Content, enricht with
Jewels, and overspread with Perfumes, carrying with her all the treasure and
massy riches of the world. Then came Joy, withal essential pleasures: next,
Honor, with all the ancient Orders of Nobility, Scepters, Thrones, and Crowns
Imperial-Lastly, Glory, whose brightness was such, (which she shook from her
Sunny tresses) that it dazzled the eyes of her beholders, so that they could
never truly describe her. In the rear came Eternity casting a ring about them,
which like a strong Enchantment made them ever the same. Vice strove not to be
behindhand with Virtue; wherefore she sets out too, and in this form:
Herpre-cursor or forerunner was Lying, a painted houswife, of a smooth,
insinuating, and deluding tongue, gaudily clad all in changeable; but under her
vestments she was full of scabs and loathsome ulcers. Her words seemed
exceeding pleasant, promising to all she met whatsoever could be wished for, in
the behalf of her Mistress Vice. On this hypocritical Queen Wit waited: next
him, a Conceited fellow, and one that over-swayed the Fancy of man with his
pretty tricks and gambals. Sloth and Luxury followed these, so full, that they
were then ready to be choked with their own fat. After these, followed some
Impostors, to personate Content, Joy and Honor, in all their wealth and Royal
dignities. Close after these, Vice came her self, sumtuously apparel'd, but yet
a nasty surfeited slut; her breath being so infectious that he which kissed her
was sure to perish. After her followed suddenly Guilt, Horror, Shame, Loss,
Wanr, Sorrow, Torment; and these were charmed with Eternity's Ring, as the
former. And thus they wooed fond Man, who taken with the subtle cozenages of
Vice, yielded to lie with her; whereby he had his Nature so empoysoned, that
his seed was all viciated and contaminated; and his corruption even to this day
is still conveyed to his undone posterity. It is man's folly, only to look on
the forerunners of Virtue, which are very poor, as Cold, Hunger, Thirst, etc.
but not to consider her glorious attendants that follow after, as Content, Joy,
Honor, and Glory. We fancy Vice for her outside, not imagining what she is when
stripped of all her Gauderies.

If you then intend to enjoy for your portion a Kingdom hereafter, adhere not
to the allurements of Vice; for she will soon persuade you to be an unthrift,
to sell your Inheritance whilst it is but in Reversion. But hearken to
Virtue's counsel; she will teach you how to husband all things well, so as to
become a purchaser of no less than Joys eternal.

Fortunes favors often do fade,
To those that in her arms do sleep:
Sbelter your selves in Virtue's shade;
She crowns those that do her reap.
For though darkened, you may say,
When Friends fail, and Fortune frown,
Though Virtue is the roughest way,
Yet proves at night a bed of Down.
THus have I given you a Summary Account of the Life of our Witty Extravagant,
from his Nonage to the Meridian of his days. I left him in the East Indies,
and shall e're long discover what further progress he made there in his Cheats,
not omitting the description of those places, wherein he perpetrated his
Rogueries. In his return to his own Country, by foulness of weather, he landed
in S pain: and finding the first place suitable to his designs, he overran
that Country. From thence into Italy, acquainting himself with the most
eminent Cities thereof; then into France, in which no place of note was unknown
to him. Of all which places, we shall endeavor to give you an exact
Chrorography. We shall likewise inform you what company he kept; Rogues of all
sorts and sizes, of diverse Countries, and how far he out-did them all.

Lastly, his arrival at Graves-end, from whence he came to London in the rise
of the late dismal (and never to be forgotten) Contagion; acting in that time
of horrid Mortality, what will scarcely be comprehended within future belief,
or expressible by Pen. I shall also trace him to that great and dismal
Conflagration, the burning of the City of London, in which by just Vengeance he
lost what he had unlawfully gotten, with his most nefarious and wicked life.

FINIS.

