Heads of Agreement Assented to by the United Ministers In and about LONDON:
Formerly called PRESBYTERIAN AND CONGREGATIONAL.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

LONDON: Printed by R. R. for Tho. Cockerill, at the Three Legs, and John
Dunton at the Raven, in the Poultrey. MDCXCI.

THE PREFACE to the READER.
Endeavors for an Agreement among Christians, will be grievous to none who
desire the flourishing State of Christianity it self. The Success of these
Attempts among us, must be ascribed to a Presence of God so signal, as not to
be concealed; and seems a hopeful Pledge of further Blessings.

The favor of our Rulers in the present Established Liberty, we most
thankfully acknowledge; and to Them we are studious to approve our selves in the
whole of this Affair. Therefore we Declare against intermedling with the
National Church-Form: Imposing these Terms of Agreement on others, is
disclaimed: All pretense to Coercive Power, is as unsuitable to our Principles,
as to our Circumstances: Excommunication it self, in our respective Churches,
being no other than a declaring such scandalous Members as are irreclaimable,
to be incapable of Communion with us in things peculiar to Visible Believers:
And in all, we expressly determine our purpose, to the maintaining of Harmony
and Love among our selves, and preventing the inconveniences which humane
weakness may expose to in our use of this Liberty.

The general concurrence of Ministers and People in this City, and the great
disposition thereto in other places, persuade us, this happy Work is undertaken
in a season designed for such Divine influence, as will overcome all
impediments to Peace, and convince of that Agreement which has been always
among us in a good degree, tho neither to our selves nor others so evident, as
hereby it is now acknowledged.

Need there any Arguments to recommend this Union? Is not this what we all have
prayed for, and Providence by the directest indications has been long calling
and disposing us to? can either Zeal for God, or prudent regards to our selves
remissly suggest it, seeing the Blessings thereof are so important, and when
it is become in so many respects even absolutely necessary; especially as it may
conduce to the preservation of the Protestant Religion, and the Kingdoms Weal;
a subserviency whereto, shall always govern our United Abilities, with the same
disposition to a concurence with all others who are duly concerned for those
National Blessings.

As these considerations render this Agreement desirable, so they equally urge
a watchful care against all attemps of Satan to dissolve it, or frustrate the
good effects thereof so manifestly destructive to his Kingdom. Therefore it is
incumbent on us, to forbear condemning and disputing those different sentiments
and practices we have expressly allowed for: To reduce all distinguishing Names,
to that of United Brethren: To admit no uncharitable jealousies, or censorious
speeches; much less any debates whether Party seems most favored by this
Agreement. Such carnal regards are of small moment with us, who herein have
used words less acurate, that neither side might in their various conceptions
about lesser matters be contradicted, when in all substantials we are fully of
one mind; and from this time hope more perfectly to rejoice in the Honor,
Gifts, and Success of each other, as our common good.

That we as United, may contribute our utmost to the great concernments of our
Redeemer, it is mutually resolved, we will assist each other with our Labors,
and meet and consult, without the least shadow of separate or distinct Parties:
Whence we joyfully expect great Improvements in Light and Love, through the
more abundant supplies of the Spirit; being well assured we herein serve that
Prince of Peace, of the increase of whose Government and Peace, there shall be
no end.

This Agreement is already assented to by above Fourscore Ministers, and the
Preface approved of.

HEADS of AGREEMENT Assented to by the United Ministers, etc. The following
Heads of AGREEMENT have been Resolved upon, by the UNITED Ministers in and
about London, formerly called Presbyterian and Congregational; not as a Measure
for any National Constitution, but for the Preservation of Order in our
Congregations, that cannot come up to the Common Rule by Law Established.
I. Of CHURCHES and CHURCH MEMBERS.
1.WE Acknowledge our Lord Jesus Christ to have One Catholic Church, or
Kingdom, comprehending all that are united to Him, whether in Heaven or Earth.
And do conceive the whole multitude of visible Believers, and their Infant Seed
(commonly called the Catholic Visible Church) to belong to Christ's Spiritual
Kingdom in this world: But for the notion of a Catholic Visible Church here,
as it signifies its having been collected into any formed Society, under a
Visible human Head on Earth, whether one Person singly, or many collectively,
We, with the rest of Protestants, unanimously disclaim it.

2. We agree, That particular Societies of Visible Saints, who under Christ
their Head, are statedly joined together for ordinary Communion with one
another, in all the Ordinances of Christ, are particular Churches, and are to
be owned by each other, as Instituted Churches of Christ, tho differing in
apprehensions and practice in some lesser things.

3. That none shall be admitted as Members, in order to Communion in all the
special Ordinances of the Gospel, but such persons as are knowing and sound in
the fundamental Doctrines of the Christian Religion, without Scandal in their
Lives; and to a Judgment regulated by the Word of God, are persons of visible
Godliness and Honesty; credibly professing cordial subjection to Jesus Christ.

4. A competent Number of such visible Saints (as before described) do become
the capable Subjects of stated Communion in all the special Ordinances of
Christ, upon their mutual declared consent and agreement to walk together
therein according to Gospel Rule. In which declaration, different degrees of
Expliciteness, shall no way hinder such Churches from owning each other, as
Instituted Churches.

5. Tho Parochial Bounds be not of Divine Right, yet for common Edification,
the Members of a particular Church ought (as much as conveniently may be) to
live near one another.

6. That each particular Church has Right to choose their own Officers; and
being furnished with such as are duly qualified and ordained according to the
Gospel Rule, has Authority from Christ for exercising Government, and of
enjoying all the Ordinances of Worship within it self.

7. In the Administration of Church Power, it belongs to the Pastors and other
Elders of every particular Church (if such there be) to Rule and Govern: and to
the Brotherhood to Consent, according to the Rule of the Gospel.

8. That all Professors as before described, are bound in duty, as they have
opportunity, to join themselves as fixed Members of some particular Church;
their thus joining, being part of their professed subjection to the Gospel of
Christ, and an instituted means of their Establishment and Edification; whereby
they are under the Pastoral Care, and in case of scandalous or offensive
walking, may be Authoritatively Admonished or Censured for their recovery, and
for vindication of the Truth, and the Church professing it.

9. That a visible Professor thus joined to a particular Church, ought to
continue steadfastly with the said Church; and not forsake the Ministry and
Ordinances there dispensed, without an orderly seeking a recommendation unto
another Church. Which ought to be given, when the case of the person apparently
requires it.

II. Of the MINISTRY.
1. WE agree, That the Ministerial Office is instituted by Jesus Christ, for
the Gathering, Guiding, Edifying, and Governing of his Church; and to continue
to the end of the world.

2. They who are called to this Office, ought to be endued with competent
Learning, and Ministerial Gifts, as also with the Grace of God, found in
Judgment, not Novices in the Faith and Knowledge of the Gospel; without scandal,
of holy Conversation, and such as devote themselves to the Work and Service
thereof.

3. That ordinarily none shall be Ordained to the work of this Ministry, but
such as are called and chosen thereunto by a particular Church.

4. That in so great and weighty a matter, as the calling and choosing a Pastor,
we judge it ordinarily requisite, That every such Church consult and advise with
the Pastors of Neighboring Congregations.

5: That after such Advice, the Person consulted about, being chosen by the
Brotherhood of that particular Church over which he is to be set, and he
accepting, be duly ordained, and set apart to his Office over them; wherein it is
ordinarily requisite, That the Pastors of Neighboring Congregations concur
with the Preaching-Elder, or Elders, if such there be.

6. That whereas such Ordination is only intended for such as never before had
been ordained to the Ministerial Office; If any judge, that in the case also of
the removal of one formerly Ordained, to a new Station or Pastoral Charge,
there ought to be a like Solemn recommending him and his Labors to the Grace
and Blessing of God; no different Sentiments or Practice herein, shall be any
occasion of Contention or Breach of Communion among us.

7. It is expedient, that they who enter on the work of Preaching the Gospel,
be not only qualified for Communion of Saints; but also that, except in cases
extraordinary, they give proof of their Gifts and fitness for the said work,
unto the Pastors of Churches of known abilites to discern and judge of their
qualifications; That they may be sent forth with Solemn Approbation and Prayer;
which we judge needful, that no doubt may remain concerning their being Called
to the work; and for preventing (as much as in us lies) Ignorant and rash
Intruders.

III. Of CENSURES.
1. AS it cannot be avoided, but that in the Purest Churches on Earth, there
will sometimes Offenses and Scandals arise by reason of Hypocrisy and
prevailing corruption; so Christ has made it the Duty of every Church, to
reform it self by Spiritual Remedies, appointed by him to be applied in all
such cases; viz. Admonition, and Excommunication.

2. Admonition, being the rebuking of an Offending Member in order to
conviction, is in case of private offenses to be performed according to the
Rule in Mat. 18. v. 15, 16, 17. and in case of Public offenses, openly before
the Church, as the Honor of the Gospel, and nature of the Scandal shall
require: And if either of the Admonitions take place for the recovery of the
fallen Person, all further proceedings in a way of censure, are thereon to
cease, and satisfaction to be declared accordingly.

3. When all due means are used, according to the Order of the Gospel, for the
restoring an offending and scandalous Brother; and he notwithstanding remains
Impenitent, the Censure of Excommunication is to be proceeded unto; Wherein the
Pastor and other Elders (if there be such) are to lead, and go before the
Church; and the Brotherhood to give their consent, in a way of obedience unto
Christ, and unto the Elders, as over them in the Lord.

4. It may sometimes come to pass, that a Churchmember, not otherwise
Scandalous, may sinfully withdraw, and divide himself from the Communion of the
Church to which he belongs: In which case, when all due means for the
reducing him, prove ineffectual, he having hereby cut himself off from that
Churches Communion; the Church may justly esteem and declare it self discharged
of any further inspection over him.

IV. Of COMMUNION of CHURCHES.
1. WE Agree, that Particular Churches ought not to walk so distinct and
separate from each other, as not to have care and tenderness toward one
another. But their Pastors ought to have frequent meetings together, that by
mutual Advice, Support, Encouragement, and Brotherly intercourse, they may
strengthen the hearts and hands of each other in the ways of the Lord.

2. That none of our particular Churches shall be subordinate to one another;
each being endued with equality of Power from Jesus Christ. And that none of
the said particular Churches, their Officer, or Officers, shall exercise any
Power, or have any Superiority over any other Church, or their Officers.

3. That known Members of particular Churches, constituted as aforesaid, may
have occasional Communion with one another in the Ordinances of the Gospel,
viz. the Word, Prayer, Sacraments, Singing Psalms, dispensed according to the
mind of Christ: Unless that Church with which they desire Communion, has any
just exception against them.

4. That we ought not to admit any one to be a Member of our respective
Congregations, that has joined himself to another, without endeavors of
mutual Satisfaction of the Congregations concerned.

5. That one Church ought not to blame the Proceedings of another, until it
has heard what that Church charged, its Elders, or Messengers, can say in
vindication of themselves from any charge of irregular or injurious Proceedings.

6. That we are most willing and ready to give an account of our Church
Proceedings to each other, when desired; for preventing or removing any
offenses that may arise among us. Likewise we shall be ready to give the right
hand of fellowship, and walk together according to the Gospel Rules of
Communion of Churches.

V. Of DEACONS and RULING ELDERS.
WE agree, The Office of a Deacon is of Divine Appointment, and that it belongs
to their Office to receive, lay out, and distribute the Churches Stock to its
proper uses, by the direction of the Pastor, and the Brethren if need be. And
whereas diverse are of opinion, That there is also the Office of Ruling Elders,
who labor not in word and doctrine; and others think otherwise; We agree, That
this difference make no breach among us.

VI. Of Occasional MEETINGS of Ministers, etc.
1. WE agree, That in order to concord, and in any other weighty and difficult
cases, it is needful, and according to the mind of Christ, that the Ministers
of several Churches be consulted and advised with about such matters.

2. That such Meetings may consist of smaller or greater Numbers, as the matter
shall require.

3. That particular Churches, their respective Elders, and Members, ought to
have a reverential regard to their judgment so given, and not dissent
therefrom, without apparent grounds from the word of God.

VII. Of our Demeanor toward the CIVIL MAGISTRATE.
1. WE do reckon our selves obliged continually to pray for God's Protection,
Guidance, and Blessing upon the Rulers set over us.

2. That we ought to yield unto them not only subjection in the Lord, but
support, according to our station and abilities.

3. That if at any time it shall be their pleasure to call together any Number
of us, or require any account of our Affairs, and the state of our
Congregations, we shall most readily express all dutiful regard to them herein.

VIII. Of a CONFESSION of FAITH.
AS to what appertains to soundness of Judgment in matters of Faith, we esteem
it sufficient, That a Church acknowledge the Scriptures to be the word of God,
the perfect and only Rule of Faith and Practice; and own either the Doctrinal
part of those commonly called the Articles of the Church of England, or the
Confession, or Catechisms, Shorter or Larger, compiled by the Assembly at
Westminster, or the Confession agreed on at the Savoy, to be agreeable to the
said Rule.

IX. Of our Duty and Deportment toward them that are not in Communion with us.
1. WE judge it our duty to bear a Christian Respect to all Christians,
according to their several Ranks and Stations, that are not of our Persuasion
or Communion.

2. As for such as may be ignorant of the Principles of the Christian Religion,
or of vicious conversation, we shall in our respective Places, as they give us
opportunity, endeavor to explain to them the Doctrine of Life and Salvation,
and to our uttermost persuade them to be reconciled to God.

3. That such who appear to have the Essential Requisites to Church Communion,
we shall willingly receive them in the Lord, not troubling them with Disputes
about lesser matters.

As we Assent to the forementioned HEADS of AGREEMENT; So we Unanimously
Resolve, as the Lord shall enable us, to Practice according to them.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Reasonableness of Reformation, and the Necessity of Conversion; the true
Methods of making all men happy in this world, and in the world to come;
seasonably discoursed, and earnestly pressed upon this licentious Age. By J. F.
a sincere Lover of his Native Country, and the Souls of Men. Printed for Tho.
Cockerill, at the Three Legs in the Poultrey.

In Twelves, Price Bound, One Shilling.


