THE Right of Succession ASSERTED, Against the False Reasonings AND Seditious
Insinuations OF R. DOLMAN alias Parsons, And others.

By the Learned Sir JOHN HAYWARD Knight. Doctor of Laws.

Dedicated to the King; AND Now reprinted for the Satisfaction OF THE ZEALOUS
PROMOTERS OF The Bill of Exclusion.

LONDON: Printed for Mat. Gillyflower, Will. Hensman, and Tho. Fox; Booksellers
in Westminster Hall. 1683.

TO THE KING'S Most Excellent Majesty.
Most dread Sovereign,
TO offer Excuse for that which I needed not to have done, were secretly to
confess, that having the Judgment to discern a fault, I wanted the Will not to
commit it. Again, to seek out some colors to make it more plausible, were to
bring in question the sufficiency thereof. Therefore without further
insinuation either for Pardon or for Acceptance, I here present unto your
Majesty this Defense, both of the present Authority of Princes, and of
Succession according to Proximity of Blood; wherein is maintained, that the
People have no lawful Power to remove the one, or repel the other: In which two
Points I have heretofore also declared my opinion, by publishing the tragical
Events which ensued the deposition of King Richard, and Usurpation of King
Henry the Fourth. Both these labors were undertaken with particular respect to
your Majesty's just Title of Succession in this Realm: and I make no doubt, but
all true-hearted Englishmen will always be both ready and forward to defend the
same with expense of the dearest drops of their blood. The Lord vouchsafe to
second your honorable Entrance to the Possession of this Crown, with a long
and prosperous continuance over us.

Your Majesty's most humble and faithful Subject, JO. HAYWARD.
Qui tibi Nestoreum concessit pectus and ora,
Nestoreos etiam concedat Jupiter annos.


TO R. Dolman.
YOu will think it strange, Master Dolman, that having lain these many years in
quiet harbor from the tempest of men's Tongues, you should now feel a Storm to
break upon you; peradventure you were persuaded (as every one suffers himself
to be beguiled with desire) that this silence did grow, either upon acceptance
of your opinion, or from insufficiency to oppose against it: I assure you
neither; but partly from contempt, and partly from fear. The contempt proceeded
from the manner of your writing, wherein you regard not (...) but (...) not how
either truly or penitently, but how largely you do write: endeavoring nothing
else, but either to abuse weak judgments, or to feed the humors of such
discontented persons, as want or disgrace has kept lower than they had set
their swelling thoughts. The fear was occasioned by the nimble Ear which lately
was born to the touch of this String: For which cause our English Fugitives did
stand in some advantage, in that they had free scope to publish whatsoever was
agreeable to their pleasure; knowing right well, that their Books could not be
suppressed, and might not be answered.

It may be you will question, wherefore I have not answered your Second Part:
It is ready for you, but I have not now thought fit to divulge the same; partly
because it has been dealt in by some o^h^rs; but principally because I know
not how convenient it may seem to discuss such particulars, as with general
both liking and applause are now determined. I forb^ar to express your true
name; I have reserved th^^ to my Answer to some cast Pamphlet which I e^^ect
you will cast forth against me: And I make ^^ttle doubt but to drive you in the
end to such desperate extremity, as (with Achitophel) to sacrifice your self to
your own shame, because your mischievous Counsel has not been embraced.

AN ANSWER TO THE FIRST CHAPter; whereof the Title is this.
That Succession to Government by nearness of blood is not by law of Nature or
divine, but only by humane and positive Laws of every particular commonwealth:
and consequently, that it may upon just cause^, be altered by the same.
HERE you begin, that other conditions are requisite for coming to Government
by succession, besides propinquity or priority of blood; which conditions must
be limited by some higher authority than that of the King, and yet are they
prescribed by no Law of Nature or Divine. For otherwise, one that wants his
wits or senses, or is a Turk in Religion, might succeed in Government; which
you affirm to be against all Reason, Law, Religion, Wisdom, conscience, and
against the first end of Institution of common wealths. And that Byllay, who
maintains the contrary, does it in favor and flattery of some particular
Prince.

What conditions are requisite in succession besides priority of blood, and by
what authority they are to be limited, I will then examine when you shall
propound: but for your reason of this assertion, you must have other men them
Billay out of credit, for reason, law, conscience, and wisdom, before you carry
it for clear good. As for entire contrariety in Religion, or difference in some
particular points thereof, whether it be a sufficient cause of exclusion, or
no, I will refer my self to that place, where you do strain your strength about
it. In disabilities to govern, In. c. 1. tit. de success. feud.
Baldus does distinguish, whether it be natural, or accidental, affirming, that
in the first case it suffices to exclude, because he that is incapable of
government from his birth, had never any right of succession settled in him: in
the other it does not suffice; because he that is once inveited in right of
succession, cannot be deprived thereof without his fault.

In quaest. a^ rex Franciae recognosca^ superiorem. In l. nemo. D. de leg L. In
l. cum praeror. non autem. D. de Jud^.
Many do follow this distinction; Io. Igneus does limit it, to such dignities as
are not absolute. But Jason, Angelus, and diverse others do indistinctly hold,
that the eldest Son of a King or other Governor, although he be born either
furious, or a fool, or otherwise defective, cannot therefore be excluded from
his succession.

These affirm, that any end of institution of Commonwealths is, if not fully,
yet better satisfied, by appointing a protector of the state (as upon diverse
occasions it has been usual) then by acknowledging another Prince; as well for
other respects, as for that by continuance of succession in one descent, a fair
and ordinary occasion is removed, both of mutiny and invasion. For enemies will
not readily attempt, and subjects do most willingly obey that prince, whose
ancestors have worn out those humors both of hatred and contempt which do
commonly accompany new raised estates. I will not confirm this last opinion, by
the example of Neptune the son of Saturn; who, although he was lame on both his
legs, yet had the Government of the sea allotted to him: but I will confirm it
by the practice of Athens and Lacedaemon, the two eyes of Graecia, Apud
Aristor. rhetor. 3. ca. 10 Lib 5. In ce^psychore.
as Leptines and Iustine do aptly term them. Herodo^us reports that when
Alexandrides King of Sparta left 2. sons, Cleomenes the eldest, distracted in
wits, and Dorieus the youngest, both of ability and inclination to all actions
of honor, the Lacedaemonians acknowledged Cleomenes for their King. Agesilaus
also the famous King of Lacedaemon was lame, as Plutarch and Probus Aemilius do
report. Paul. Orosius says, In eju^ vita. Lib. 3. ca. 2*
that the Lacedaemonians did choose to have their King halt rather than their
Kingdom. Heredotus also writes that after the death of Codrus King of Athens,
Ubl. 5.
Medon his eldest son, and Neleus the next, did contend for the Kingdom,
because Neleus would not give place to Medon, who was by reason of his lame
legs, if not unable, yet unapt to govern. The matter being almost brought to
the sentence of the sword, it was mediated between them, that the controversy
should be decided by the Oracle of Apollo. Apollo was consulted; by whose
Judgment Medon was declared King. Josephus 1 has left recorded, Antiqu. 14. ca.
that Aristobulus and Hircanus after a long and cruel contention for the
Kingdom of Jury, made Pompey the Judge of that right which by arms they were
unable to decide. Hircanus alleged that he was Eldest brother; Aristobulus
excepted, that Hircanus was insufficient to govern a Realm. Hereupon Pompey
gave sentence, that Aristobulus should give over the Kingdom which he did
usurp, and Hircanus be restored to his Estate. The like Judgment does Livy
write, Lib. 1.2. belli Punici.
that Annibal gave for the Kingdom of that Country, which is now called Savoy,
Allobroges.
restoring Brancus unto his right, from which he had been by his younger
brother expelled. And although Pyrrus did appoint that Son to succeed, whose
sword had the best edge, yet was the eldest acknowledged, who bare the least
reputation for valor. Lisander moved the Lacedaemonians to decree, that the
most sufficient, and not always the next in blood, of the line of Hercules
should be admitted to the Kingdom, yet Plutarch says, that he found no man to
second his advise. In Lisandr.


I will add an example of later times. Ladislaus, a man more famous for the
sanctity of his life, then for his Kingdom of Hungary, left by his brother
Grisa two Nephews; Colomannus the elder, who was dwarfy, lame, crook-backt,
crab-faced, blunt, and blear-eyed, a stammerer, and (which is more) a Priest:
and Almus the younger, a man free from just exception. Yet these respects set
aside, a dispensation was obtained from the Pope, and Colomannus
notwithstanding his deformities and defects, was accepted by the people for
King. Girard writes, Michael Riccius. Lib 1 d^ l' estate de France
that the custom of the French was to honor their Kings whatsoever they were,
whether foolish or wise, able or weak: esteeming the Name of King to be sacred,
by whomsoever it should be born. And therefore they supported in Estate, not
only Charles the simple, but Charles the 6. also, who reigned many years in open
distemperature and disturbance of mind.

So you see, that the practice of many Nations have been contrary to your
conceit: and that the interpreters of the civil and Canon Law (good arbitrators
of natural equity) either bare against you, or stand for you only when
disability is natural: adding further, that if the excluded successor has a
Son, before or after succession does fall, free from any such defect, the right
of the Kingdom descends unto him. This affirms Baldus, Socinus, Cardinal
Alexander, Cons. 389 lib. 1 Cons. 47 lib 3. In c. 1. tit. an mutus vel
imperfectus. in c. vit. Epis. vel ab. Lib. 3. D. de interdic. and rel. l. 2. C.
de liberi. and cor. lib. l. divi fratres D jur. pat^. l. quae ritur D. de bo.
lib. panor. cons. 85. lib. 1. Io. Anno. in c. significasti de fo. comp. In l.
vii. in si. de senate.
and before them, Andreas Iserna. Because the Inability of Parents does not
prejudice the Children, especially in regard of their natural Rights: neither
is it any impediment wherefore they should not enjoy either privilege or
dignity from the person of their Grandfather. Magis est (says Vlpian) vt avi
potius dignitas prosit, quam obsit casus patris. It is fitter that the Son
should receive profit by the dignity of his Granfather, then prejudice by his
Fathers chance.

And this (we may think) is a reasonable respect, wherefore other interpreters
have not allowed their principal opinion, in repelling him who is disabled by
birth. For if another be once possessed of his place, it will be hard for any
of his Children to attain their right. Whereupon disunion, factions, Wars may
easily arise. It is inconvenient (I grant) to be governed by a King, who is
defective in body or in mind: But it is a greater inconvenience, by making a
breach in this high Point of State, to open an Entrance for all disorders,
wherein ambition and insolency may range at large. For as mischief is of that
Nature that it cannot stand, but by supportance of another Evil, and so
multiplyeth in it self, till it come to the highest, and then does ruin with
the proper weight: So minds once exceeding the bounds of obedience, cease not
to strengthen one boldness by another, until they have involved the whole State
in confusion. We find that Gabriel the youngest brother of the House of Saluse
kept his Eldest brother in close Pri^on, usurped his Estate, and gave forth for
satisfaction to the People, that he was mad. I could report many like Examples:
But I shall have occasion to speak more hereof in the further passage betwixt
us.

After this you conclude three points.
1 That inclination to live in company is of nature. 2 That Government and
Jurisdiction of Magistrates is also of nature. 3 That no one particular Form of
Government is natural; for then it should be the same in all Countries, seeing
God and Nature is one to all.
But before I join with you, either in contradiction or consent, it shall not
be amiss to declare briefly, what we understand by the law of nature, and by
what means it may (...) known.

God ^n the creation of man, imprinted certain rules within hi^ soul, to direct
him in all the actions of his life: Which rules, because we took them when we
took our Being are commonly called the primary Law of Nature: Of which sort the
canons account these precepts following. To worship God: To obey Parents and
Governors, c. lus natural did. 3.
and thereby to conserve common society: lawful conjunction of man and woman:
succession of children: education of children: acquisition of things which
pertain to no man: equal liberty of all: to communicate commodities: to repel
force: to hurt no man: and generally, to do to another as he would be done
unto: which is the sum and substance of the second table of the decalogue. And
this Law Thomas Aquine affirms to be much depraved by the fall of man; 1.2 q.
94 d.2
and afterward more by error, evil custom, pertinacy, and other corrupters of
the mind: and yet does it yield us so large light, that Saint Paul did esteem
it sufficient to condemn Romans cap. 2. and 3
the Gentiles, who had no other Law written.

Out of these precepts are formed certain customs, generally observed in all
parts of the World: which, because they were not from the beginning, but
brought in afterward, some as a consequence or collection, others as a practice
or execution of the first natural precepts are called the secondary Law of
nature, and by many also the Law of Nations. Quod naturalis ratio inter omnes
homines constituit, id apud omnes peraeque custoditur vocaturque ju^ gentium l.
ix. D. de just. and jur. Just. de rer. di^^. singulorum. In re consensio omnium
gentium, lex naturae putanda est. 1 Thuscul. In l. 1. C. de t^stam.
Gaius, 'saith: that which natural reason does constitute among all men, is
observed by all alike, and termed the Law of Nations: and the same is called by
Iustinian^; the Law of Nature. Cicero likewise says: the consent of all
Nations is to be esteemed the Law of Nature.

But this is to be taken, not as though all Nations have at any time observed
one usage alike: it is not necessary says Baldus, that the word all should
carry so large a sense: neither has it ever been brought into knowledge what
customs all Nations have held in use. And it is most certain, that there is not
one point or precept of the Law of Nature, but, by reason, partly of the
weakness, partly of the corruption, which the fall of Adam did fasten in his
posterity, some people have at all times, either neglected or else depraved:
some being so dull as they could not perceive, others so malicious as they
would deny, that which nature did lay before them Yea, such is either the
weakness or wilfulness of our judgment, that they who are not only admitted but
admired for wise men, do many times disagree in determining what is most
agreeable to nature: much less may we either expect or imagine, that all
Nations, so different, so distant, never so much as now, and yet not now fully
discovered, should jump in one Judgment for uniform observation of any custom:
neither is that no natural Right, Socrat.
as Zenophon notes, which many daily do transgress.

And therefore Donellus did unjustly reject the description which Gaius gave of
the Law of Nations, In com. ju. 6.
by taking the word all in the amplest sense. Ad ephesians. 4. Tit.
S. Ambrose and S. Hierom did in this sort declare it; that we are to take that
for a Decree of Nations, which successively and at times has been observed by
all. But as for any one time, as it is to be judged the decree or custom of a
whole City, which has passed by consent of the most part, although all have
not allowed, and some perhaps have opposed against it; C 3. de decret. ab ord.
fac. l. 32. de legi.
so is it to be esteemed the Law of Nations, the common Law of the whole World,
which most Nations in the World are found to embrace.

And because Government was not from the beginning, but induced as a
consequence of the primary Precept of Nature; to maintain human Society:
therefore whenever we speak of natural Government, we are intended to mean
the secondary Law of Nature, which is the received custom, successively of all,
and always of most Nations in the World.

Out of this we may gather, that three rules do chiefly lead us to the
Knowledge of this Law. The first is that which Cicero in the like gives: Ad Q.
fratrem. provocandum ad sensus Interiori nesc^o qua conscientia i^^aec
se^timus. de util. cred. Omne malum aut timore aut pudore natura perfudit. in
apol. Licet possint negare, non possunt tamen non erube^cere: 3. de offic. 14.
L. 3. si auro. D. deusurp. l. 8. D. quib. mo. pi. fol. l. 15. de cond. l. 14.
D. de nup. 7. var. 16. topic. prin.
to appeal unto sense: because there is no man but by the light of nature, has
some sense of that which nature does allow. S. Augustine says, I know not by
what conscience we feel these things: and likewise Tertullian: Nature has
tainted all Evil either with fear or shame. Whereto agrees that which S.
Ambrose says: although they deny it, they cannot but show some tokens of
shame. Hereupon the authors of the civil Law do reject that for unjust, which
is not demanded without show of shame. For, as Cassiodorus writes; God has
given all men such a sense of justice, that they who know not the Laws, cannot
but acknowledge the reason of truth.

But because this light of nature, in many men is exceeding dim; the next rule
is to observe what has been allowed by those who are of greatest both wisdom
and integrity, in whom Nature does show her self most clear. For as Aristotle
says; that is probable which proved men do approve. Among these, the first
place pertains unto them, who by inspiration of God, have compiled the Books
of holy Scripture: to whom as attendants we may adjoyn the ancient Counsels and
Fathers of the Church. The next place is to be given to the Authors of the
civil Law; whose Judgment has been these many hundred Years, admired by many,
approved by all, and is at this day accepted for Law, almost in all states of
the Christian commonwealth. To these also we may adjoyn, as attendants, their
interpreters of most approved note. The third place is due to Philosophers,
Historigraphers, Orators and the like; who have not unprofitably endeavored to
free nature of two clouds, wherewith she is often overcast: gross ignorance,
and subtle Error.

But because natural reason, as Alciate affirms, does sometimes vary, 5.
consil. 38.
according to the capacity of particular men; even as the Sun, being in it self
always the same, gives neither heat nor light to all alike: the third rule
follows, Ipsius vocem naturae* de nature. deor.

15. prob. 3.


to observe the common Use of all Nations, which Cicero calls; the voice of
Nature: because as Aristotle has written, it is not done by chance which every
where is done. Plato says, 8. de legib.
this shall be the proof hereof, that no man does otherwise speak: and likewise
Baldus, 4 consil. 496.
I dare not disallow that which the World allows. And in this common Law or
Custom of the World, three circumstances are to be considered: antiquity,
continuance, and generality.

Now when your first position is so clearly true, that you do but guild Gold in
laboring to prove it: for man is not only sociable by nature, but (as
Aristotle affirms) more sociable than any other living creature. 1. polit.
These notorious points, the more we prove, the more we obscure.

Your second is also true, for as Tully says, sine imperio nec domus ulla, nec
civitas, nec gens, nec hominem universum genus stare, nec rerum natura omnis
nec ipse denique mundus potest. 3. de legib.
without Empire, neither House, nor City, nor Nation, nor Mankind can stand,
nor the Nature of all things, nor in a word, the World it self. Whereto agrees
that of Aristotle: Government is both necessary and also profitable. But
whereas you bring in proof hereof, that there was never People found, either in
ancient Time, or of late Discovery, which had not some Magistrate to govern
them, neither is it necessary, (...).

1. polit. ca. 3.


and yet false. It is not necessary to have so large a consent of Nations, as I
have declared before: and it is false that in all Times and Nations there have
been Magistrates. After the deluge, Magistrates were not known until Kings did
arise, as hereafter it shall appear. The Jews were often without either
Magistrates or Government: Whereupon in certain places of the Book of Judges it
is thus written: ca. 17. ver. 6. and ca. vit. in si.
In those days there was no King in Israel, but what seemed right to every man
that did he.

Sometimes Democratical Government does draw to a pure Anarchie; and so does
the interregnum of elective principalities. Leo Afer reports, that in Guzala,
a country of Africa, the people have neither King nor form of Government; but
upon days of mart, they elect a Captain to secure their traffic. The same
Author delivers, that the inhabitants of the Mountain Magnan, upon the
frontiers of Fez, have no form of common wealth, but do stay travelers
(unpartial judges) to decide their controversies. Leo himself was arrested to
be their judge, and when he had spent many days in determining their debates,
he was in the end presented with hens, ducks, geese and other of their country
commodities, which served only to discharge his host. And if this your reason
should be of force then were not sociability natural, because many men have
made choice to live alone.

But how then, will you say, is nature immutable? It is in abstracto, but it is
not in subjecto. Or thus: In it self it is not changed: in us, by reason of our
imperfections, it is. Or else more plainly; it is not changed, but it is
transgressed. But nature, you say, is alike to all. Not so, good sir, because
all are not apt alike to receive her: even as the sun beams do not reflect
alike upon a clean and clear glass, and upon a glass that is either filthy or
course: And in many, not only men, but nations, evil custom has driven nature
out of place, and sets up it self in stead of nature. L. si quis post.
humo^. D. de lib. et post^.


Your third conclusion, that no particular form of Government is natural, does
not find so easy acceptance. Your only proof is, that if it were otherwise,
there should be one form of Government in all Nations; because God and nature
is one to all. But this reason I have encountered before: and yet you take pains
to puff it up with many wast words; how the Romans changed Government, how in
Italy there is, a Pope, a King and many Dukes; how Millaine, Burgundy,
Loraine, Bavier, Gascoine, and Britain the less were changed from Kingdoms to
Dukedoms, how Germany was once under one King, and is now divided among Dukes,
Earls, and other supreme Princes; How Castile, Aragone, Portugal, Barcelona
and other countries in Spain, were first Earldoms, then Dukedoms, then several
Kingdoms, and now are united into one; how Boeme and Polonia were once
Dukedoms, and now are Kingdoms; how France was first one Kingdom, then divided
into four, and lastly reduced into one. How England was first a Monarchy, under
the Britains, then a Province under the Romans, after that divided into seven
Kingdoms, and lastly reduced into one; how the People of Israel were first
under Patriarcks, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, then under Captains, then under
Judges, then under high Priests, then under Kings, and then under Captains and
high Priests again.

I will not follow you in every by way whereinto your errors do lead (for who
would have adventured to affirm, that the Children of Israel were under Abraham
and Isaac; and that the Britains at the first were under one King, whereas
Caesar reports that he found four Kings in that Country which is now called
Kent) but I will only insist upon the principal point, in regard whereof, all
this bundel of words is like a blown bladder, full of wind, but of no weight.

For first you do but trifle upon terms, in putting a difference between
Kings, Dukes, and Earls, which hold their state with Sovereign power. We speak
not of the names, but of the Government of Princes. Supreme Rulers may differ
in name; they may change name also, either by long use, or upon occasion: and
yet in Government neither differ nor change.

Secondly, it is a more vain jest to put a difference (in this regard) between
a great territory and a small. If a Kingdom be enlarged or straightened in
limits, the Government is not thereby changed; if many Kingdoms be united into
one; if one be divided into many; the nature of Government is no more altered,
then is the tenure of land, either when partition is made, or when many parts
accrewe into one. The knot of doubt is, whether it be not natural, that one
state, be it great or small, should rather be commanded by one person,
howsoever entitled, then by many.

And if we descend into true discourse, we shall find, that the very sinews of
Government do consist, in commanding and in obeying. But obedience cannot be
performed, where the commandments are, either repugnant or uncertain; neither
can these inconveniences be any ways avoided, but by union of the Authority
which does command.

This union is of two sorts; first, when one commands; secondly, when many do
knit in one power and will. The first union is natural; the second is by means
of amity, which is the only band of this collective body, and the more they are
who join in Government, the less natural is their union, and the more subject
to dissipation, Arduum sem per eodem loci potentiam and concordiam esse.iiii.
annal.
For as Taci^us says: equality and amity are scarce compatible

Natural reason teaches us, that all multitude begins from one, and the
ancient Philosophers have held, that from unity all things do proceed, and are
again resolved into the same. In principio lib. de vitis sententiisque
Philosophorum. Lib. de dogmatis Philosophorum. In successionibus Philosophorum.
Lib. 8. de vitis and sententils Philosophorum. Lib 1. contra lovinian. C.
nuptiae. 32. di. 1. Lib. 6. de lanit. tuend. In Timaeo. In Philebo. In
Epinomide.
Of which opinion Laertius reports that Museus of Athens was Author, who
lived long before Homer: but afterward it was renewed by Pythagoras, as
Plutarch, Alexander, and Laertius do write: who added thereunto, that Unity is
the original of good, and duality of evil: And of this opinion Saint Hierome
was al^o, whose sentence is repeated in the canonical decrees, but under the
title and name of Saint Ambrose. Hereupon Homer does oftentimes call good
(...), and applies the term (...), to affliction and trouble. Hereupon Galen
also writes, that the best in every kind is one. Plato produces all things
from one; measures all things by one; and reduces all things into one.

The whole world is nothing but a great state; a state is no other then a great
family; and a family no other then a great body. As one GOD rules the World,
one master the family, as all the members of one body receive both sense and
motion from one head, which is the seat and tower both of the understanding and
of the will: so it seems no less natural, that one state should be governed
by one commander.

The first of these arguments was used by Soliman, Lord of the Turks. Anno.
1552.
Who having strangled Sultane Mustapha his son, because at his return out of
Persia, he was received by the soldiers with great demonstrations of joy; he
caused the dead body to be cast forth before the army, and appointed one to
cry; There is but one God in Heaven, and one Sultane upon Earth. The second was
used by Agesilaus, to one that moved the Spartans for a popular government; go
first (said he) and stablish a popular Government within your own doors. Unum
imperil corpus unius animo regendum videtur. 1. annal.
To the third Tacitus did allude, when he said: The body of one Empire seems
best to be governed by the soul of one man.

In the Heavens there is but one Sun; which Serinus also applies unto
Government, (...),
in affirming, that if we set up two Suns, we are like to set all in combustion.

Many sociable creatures have for one company, one principal either Governor
or guide; which all Authors take for a natural Demonstration of the Government
of one.

And if you require herein the testimony of men, you shall not find almost any
that writes upon this subject, but he does, (...). In cap. 2.
if not allege, yet allow that of Homer: (...): one Lord, one King. Plutarch
declares both his own Judgment concerning this point, and also the consent of
others, in affirming that all men did acknowledge, that the Government of a
King is the most excellent benefit that God has given unto Men.

Callimachus says, that Kings proceed from God: Homer affirms, that they are
cherished by God. Your self do show out of Aristotle, Seneca, Plutarch, S.
Hierome, S. Chrysostom and S. Peter, that Monarchy is the most exeellent and
perfect Government, most resembling the Government of God, and most agreeable
unto Nature. But what do you mean to acknowledge all this, and yet to deny that
Monarchy is natural? do you take it to be above Nature? or how else is it most
excellent and perfect? how is it most agreeable to Nature, and yet not natural?
can any Action be most agreeable to Justice, and yet not just? I know not by
what stratagem, or cunning crank of the Schools, you can be made agreeable to
your self.

But now if we consider the general custom of all people, we shall find that
all the ancient Nations in whom the Laws of Nature were least corrupt, had no
other Government: as the Assyrians, Medes, Persans, Parthians, Indians,
Scythians, Sirians, Phaenicians, Arabians, Egyptians, Africans, Numidians,
Mauritanians, Britans, Celtes, Gauls, Latins, Hetruscanes, Sicilians,
Athenians, Lacaedemonians, Corinthians, Achaeans, Sicyonians, certum est omnes
antiquas gentes regibus paruisse. 3. de leg^b. In Catilin. Principio rerum,
gentium nationumque imperium p^nes reges erat, lib. 1.
Candians, and in one word, all. Tullie says: it is certain, that all ancient
Nations were under Kings: with which opinion Salust consents; and Iustine
also, where he says; the Empire of Nations at the first was in the Hands of
Kings. And when the People of Israel desired a King, they alleged that all
other Nations were governed by Kings. The Athenians were the first (as Pliny
affirms) who set up the Government of many, whose example certain other Towns
of Greece did follow, rather blinded by ambition, 1. reg. 8.5.
then led by Judgment. Among these, if the highest Authority were in the least
part of the Citizens, it was called Aristocracy; if in the most or in all, it
was termed Democracy; In ca. 2.
wherein you confess that neither they did nor could any long time continue;
but after many Tumults, Seditions, Mutinies, Outrages, Injusticies, banding of
factions, and inundations of blood, they were in the end either dissolved or
vanquished, and reduced again under Government of one.

The state of Rome began under Kings; it attained the highest pitch both of
Glory and Greatness under Emperors: in the middle time, wherein it never
in^oyed x. years together free from sedition, Polybius says that it was mixed;
the Consuls representing a Monarchy, the Senate, an Aristrocacy, and the common
People a Democracy: which opinion was likewise embraced by Dionysius
Halicarnasseus, Cicero, Cantarine and others. But many do hold that the State
of Rome at that time was popular: which seems to be confirmed by the famous
Lawyer and Counselor Vlpian, where he says: that the People did grant all
their Power and Authority to the Prince. Whatsoever it was in show, Utpote cum
lege regia quae de imperio ejus lata est, populus ei and in cum omne suum
imperium and potestatem confera l. 1. D. de constable. princ. Sub umbra ejus urbem
terrarum dominam latere, ejus nutus pro decretis patrum pro jussis populi esse.
lib. 30. Nemo erat quo magis innixa res romana, quam in Papi^io cursore
extaret. lib. 9. In pelopid. In pericle,
in very deed it was always governed by some one principal Man. Livie writes
of Scipio, that under his shadow the City was protected, and that his looks
were in stead of Laws: and likewise of Papirius cursor; that he sustained the
Roman affairs. So said Thucidides, that Athens was in appearance popular, but
Aristides was the true Monarch thereof: and Plutarch also affirms, that
Pelopidas and Epaminondas were no less then Lords of the popular State of
Thebes: but after the death of these Men, both the States of Athens and Thebes
floated in Tumults, as the same Author observes, like a ship in a Tempest
without a Pilot. So did Peter Sodarine ^onfalonier of Florence give forth, that
the title of popularity was used as a mask, to shadow the Tyranny of Laurence
Medices: but florence did never so flourish both in honor, wealth, and quiet,
as under that Tyranny. Also in actions of weight, in great dangers and
necessities the Romans had recourse to one absolute and supreme Commander,
which Livie calls the highest refuge; Trepidi pattes ap summum aux^lium
decurrunt Dictatorem dici placuit lib. 6. Dictatoris edictum pro numine semper
observatum. lib. 6. Tantus erat dictatoris terror apud ho^tes, ut ^o creato
statlin a manibus discesserint, lib. eo. Ut recte prudentes quidam de vita
Augusti post mortem ejus inter se conserentes, dixerunt, non aliud discordantis
patriae remedium fuisse, quam si ab uno regeretur. ann. 1, In epist. 1. ad Q.
Fratrem.
whose Authority as the Romans did most reverently respect, so was it many
times fearful to their Enemies. Of the first, Livie says; the D^ctators edict
was always observed as an Oracle: of the second, so soon as a Dictator was
created, such a Terror came upon the Enemies, that they departed presently from
the walls. Likewise in cases of extremity the Lacedaemonians had their high
Governor whom they called Harmostes; the Thessalonians had their Archos; and
the Mytileans also their great Aezymnetes. Lastly, Tacitus reports that
certain wise men discoursing of the like of Augustus after his death, affirmed
rightly, that there was no other mean to appease the discords of the state, but
by reducing it under the Government of one.

Let us now take a view of our present age. In all Asia, from whence Tully
says, civility did first spread into other parts of the World, no Government
is in use but by a Monarch, as appears by the Tartarians, Turks, Persians,
Indians, Chinans and Catajans: no other Government is found to be founded in
all the Countries of Afric: in America also and all the west parts of the
World, no other is yet discovered: Europe only, upon either declining or change
of the Empire, a few Towns in Germany and Italy did revive again the Government
of many: some are already returned to a Monarchy, and the residue in their time
will do the like, even as all others have done which have been before them.

What then shall we say of this so ancient, so continual, so general consent of
all Nations? what can we say, but conclude with Tertullian these testimonies,
the more true, In apolog.
the more simple; the more simple, the more common; the more common, the more
natural, the more natural, the more divine.

But because ambition is a most fiery affection, and carries men blindfold
into headlong hopes, whereby many do aspire to bear rule, neither they good,
nor with any good either means or end; the Custom or Law of Nations has by two
Reigns endeavored to keep in this raging desire: by succession and by election.
And yet again, because election is most often, if not always, entangled with
many inconveniences; as first, for that the outragies during the vacancy, are
many and great; every one that is either grieved or in want, assuming free
power both for revenge and spoil. Secondly, for that the bouldest wins the
garland more often than the best; because the favor of the People does always
taste more of affection than of judgment. Thirdly, for that they who do not
leave their state to their posterity, will dissipate the demain and work out of
it either profit or friends; for so we see that the empire of Germany is plucked
bare of her fairest feathers. Fourthly, for that occasions of war are hereby
ministered; and that, either when one takes his repulse for indignity, upon
which ground Francis the first, King of France, could never be driven out of
practice against Charles the 5. emperor; or else when by means of factions many
are elected, as it happen^d in Almaine when Jews of Bavi^r, and Albert of
Austria were elected Emperors, whereupon eight years war between them did
ensue; and as it often happened in the Empire of Rome, when one Emperor was
chosen by the Senate, and another by the Soldiers, and sometimes by every
legion one; whereby such siers were kindled, as could not be quenched without
much blood. For these wars are most cruelly executed; because the quarrel
leaves no middle state inter summum and praecipitium; between the highest
honor and the deadliest downfall.

For these and diverse other respects, it has been observed, at most times in
all nations, and at all times in most, that the royalty has passed by
succession, acco^ding to propinquity of blood. We read that ^tolomy, who after
the death of Alexander the great seized upon Egypt, and part also of Arabia
and of Africa, lest that state to his youngest son; but Trogus said, and out of
him Iustine, Lib. 16.
that it was against the Law of Nations, and that upon this occasion one of
them did work the death of the other. And therefore when afterward Ptolomy
surnamed Physcon, at the importunity of his Wife Cleopatra, would have
preferred his youngest son to the succession of his Kingdom, Lib. 39.
Iustine says, that the People opposed themselves against it; Lib. 1^*
but Pausanias more probably affirms, that they reversed his order after his
death.

The same course was held in Italy by the Hetruscanes, Latins, and those
Albanes from whom the Romans took their original. Livy writes that Procas King
of the Albanes appointed Numitor to succeed in his estate, Lib. 1.
but Amulius his younger brother did usurp it by force: Lib. 1.
hereupon Dionysius Halicarnasseus says; that Amulius held the Kingdom against
right, because it appertained to his Elder brother.

Among the Graecians, during the space of six hundred Years, wherein they were
governed by Kings, we find but Timondas and Pittacus who were elected, the one
of Corinth, the other of Negropont; the residue held their states by order of
succession, as Thucidides affirms, encountering therein the opinion of
Aristotle. Belli macedonici. lib. 10.
Livy writes, that Perseus King of Macedon said, that by the order of Nature,
the Law of Nations, and the ancient custom of Macedony, the eldest son was to
succ^ed in the Kingdom. Diodorus Siculus, and Iustine do report, Lib. 16. Lib.
7.
that by this custom Alexander succeeded his father Amyntas, before his younger
brother Philip.

Herodotus declares that the same order was observed among the Trojans;
affirming, that after the death of Priamus, In Euterpe.
the Kingdom was not to devolve unto Alexander, because Hector was before him
in years. The same also does appear by that which Virgil writes.

Aeneid. 1.
Praeterea Sceptrum Ilione, quod gesserat olim,
Maxima natarum Priami.
The Scepter which Ilione, when she the state did stay,
The first daughter of Priamus, with royal hand did sway.
Out of which place Servius Maurus does collect, that women also did use to
govern. But more plainly this custom of the Trojans does appear, Lib ad octav.
August.
by that which Messala Corvinus writes, that Trojus had two sons, Ilus and
Assaracus; and that Ilus by privilege of his age succeeeded in the Kingdom.

The Persians also, who for a long time held the reins of all the nations near
unto them, had the same order of succession, as Zenophon witnesses; In
Cyropaed.
which is also confirmed by two famous histories; one between Artaxerxes and
Cyrus, In Artaxerxe
whereof Plutarch makes mention, the other between Artabazanes and Xerxes,
reported by Herodotus and Justin; In polyhimnia. Lib. 2.
wherein Artabazanes alleged, that it was a custom among all men, that the
eldest son should first succeed. Agathocles, and out of him Athenaeus do write,
that the Persians had a golden water (for so they term it) whereof it was
capital for any man to drink, but only the king and his eldest son. Whither
this water were drawn out of the River Euleus, which invironeth the Tower
Susis, and the Temple of Diana, whereof Pliny writes, Lib. 6. ca. 28.
that only the kings of Persia did drink; or whether of Choaspis, whose waters
Herodotus does report to have bin boiled, and carried after the king in silver
vessels; or whether both these were one River, I will neither determine nor
discourse.

In Siria, Lib. 7.
which is called Assiria (as Herodotus, writes) and also Phoenicia, Palestina,
and Mesopotamia, as appears by Pliny, Eusebius and diverse other, Lib. 5 ca.
12. De praepara^. evang. lib. 10. Lib. 34. Lib. 46.
the same custom is proved by that which Iustine, and L. Florus do write, that
Demetrius, having bin delivered by his brother Antiochus, King of Siria, for an
hostage to the Romans, and hearing of the death of Antiochus, declared to the
Senate in open assembly, that as by the law of nations he had given place to
his elder Brother, so by the same law, the right of succession was then cast
upon him. The Parthians, who being thrice attempted by the Romans, in the time
of their chiefest both discipline and strength, were able to bear themselves
victorious, did always acknowledge for their king, the next of the blood of
their first King Arsaces. Justin. lib. 24. and 41.
Among the Germans also, who were of force to defeat five consulare armies of
the Romans, Tacitus affirms that the eldest Son did entirely succeed, De
morib. Ger.
only the Horses did fall to the most valiant. And that this was likewise the
custom of the Jews, it is evident by the whole History of their Kings,
especially where it is said, 2. Chron. ca. 21
that Ioram succeeded Iosaphat; and the reason added, because he was the eldest.

I should but burn day (as the saying is) in running further upon particulars.
In polyhimnia.
Herodotus does advow it to be a general custom among all men, that the first
in birth is next in succession. Certain ages after him S. Hierome said, In
epist. ad onagrium, and in genesis 49.
that a Kingdom is due unto the eldest. In late ages our selves may see, that
the Tartars, Turks, Persians, and all the Asiaticks have no other form of
constituting their Kings. No other is followed in all the Countries of Africa.
In the west Indies no other is yet discovered; Insomuch as when Frances
Pizarre, in the Conquest of Peru, had slain Atibalippa the King thereof, the
people brake into show, some of joy, all of contentment; because he had made
his way to the Kingdom, by murdering of his Elder brother. In Europe it is not
long sin^e all the Monarchies were successive. When the Empire of Almain was
made elective, it became in short time so either troublesome or base, that
diverse Princes refused to accept it: of late it has been settled in one Family,
but has as yet little increased eitheir in dignity or in power. The people of
Denmark, Sweden, Hungary, and Boeme, Cons. 275. vol. 2. L. Ex hoc jure D. de
ju^^. and jure semper fuit* and semper erit etc. In c. Licet. de voto. Cons.
94. and 274. In pro^em. D*. Discipull. Cons. 287. In c. prudentiam de offic. de
leg. In l. maximum. C. de lib. praeter. and cons. 179. li. 1. Cons. 25. lib. 5.
Cons. 2. Con. 67. Deci. 476. and con. 60. In c. tit. de hi^ qui feud. da, poss.
and in c. Qualite. tit. Si de seu, tu cont. inter do.
do challenge to themselves a right of election, but they accept their King by
propinquity of blood. So they did in Polonia, until the line of Iagello was
worn out, and then they elected for King, Henry Duke of Aniou in France: since
which time, they have always in the change of their Kings, exposed their state
to open danger of ruin.

Upon this both general and continual custom Boldus says, that Kingdoms are
successive by the Law of Nations; affirming further, that always it has been,
and always it shall be, that the first born succeeds in a Kingdom: wherein he
is either followed or accompanied with a fair Cry of all the choice
interpreters of both Laws; as namely the Glossographer, Johan. Andreas,
Hostiensis, Collect. Pet. Anchoranus, Antonius, Imola, Card. Florentinus, Abb.
Panormitanus, Oldradus, Albericus, Angelus, Felinus, Paul. Castrensis,
Alexander, Barbatius, Franc. Curtius, Guido Pape, Card. Alexander, Philip.
Francus, Jason, Philippus Decius, Carol. Ruinus, Anto. Corsetta, Ripa,
Calderine, Alciate, and many other of somewhat more ordinary name, Who all with
full voice do agree, that in Kingdoms and other dignities, In sub de test. lib.
6. and in c. grandi. de sup. G, prael. In l. 1. D. de constable. prin. and in l.
Nemo. de leg. 1. Con. 225. and 289. Cons. 25. lib. 1. Tract de pot. and excel.
reg. a. q. 9. In l. quart. ad l. Falc. Cons. 9. tit. de feud. In l. Obvenire D.
de verb. fig. C. jus natural. did. 1. Zach. 12.10. 2. Reg. 13.21. In Exodus
cap. 11. In sermon. de septem plagis. In Genesis hom. 51. Ubi ^. De histo. animal.
lib. 6. cap. 18. Lib. 11. cap. 40 De motu animal. lib. 3. and lib. 15. cap. 13.
Histor. chilla. 4 cap. 126. In Arato.
which cannot be either valued or divided but they are dismembered, the eldest
Son does entirely succeed. And this many of them do call the Law of all
Nations, derived from the order of nature, and from the institution of God; and
confirmed by the Canon, civil and other positive Laws.

For the Succession of Children, is one of the primary precepts of nature:
whereby his mortality is in some sort repaired, and his continuance perpetuated
by his posterity. But among all the Children, nature seems to prefer the
first born, by imprinting in the mind of parents the greatest love and
inclination toward them, as diverse of the authors before alleged do affirm;
and as it may appear by that of the prophet Zachary, and they shall lament
over him as men use to lament in the death of their first born, and likewise by
that which is said of David, that he would not grieve his Son Ammon, for that
he loved him, because he was his first born. Hereupon Lyra, and before him
Saint Augustine and Saint Chrysostom do affirm that the last plague of the
Egyptians, which was the death of their first born, was the most sharp and
heavy unto them. For nothing (says Saint Augustine) is more dear than the first
born. Aristotle, Pliny, Aelian, and Tzetzes do write, that the same affection
is also found in certain beasts.

And to this purpose is that which Herodotus reports, that when the
Lacedaemonians had received an oracle, that they should take for Kings the two
sons of Aristodemus and Aegina, but give most honor unto the eldest, and they
were ignorant which was eldest, because the Mother and the Nurse refused to
declare it; they observed which of the children the mother did wash and feed
first, (...) in dialogo (...). Lib. 2. de Cain and Abel. cap. 2. Exodus 4.
and thereby found out that Eristhenes was the eldest. Lucian cites the love
of the first born, as grown into a proverb. Gregory Nazianzene says, that all
men have a sense thereof. Saint Ambrose writes, that in this respect God
called the People of Israel his first born, for that they were, not most
ancient, but best beloved. Lastly S. Chrysostom affirms that the first born
were to be esteemed more honorable than the rest. Homil. 5. adversus Judaeo^


And this natural precedence both in honor and in favor, Genesis 4.7.
seems to be expressly ratified by God; first where he said unto Cain, of his
brother Abel, His desires shall be subject unto thee, and thou shall have
dominion over him: according to which institution, Genesis 27.29.
when Jacob had bought his brothers right of birth, Isaac blessed him in these
words, Be Lord over thy Brethren, and let the sons of thy mother bow before
thee: Secondly, Deuteronomy. 21.17*
where he forbids the Father to disinherit the first Son of his double
portion; because by right of birth it is his due: Thirdly, where he makes
choice of the first born to be sanctified to himself. Exodus 1^.2 and. 22.29.
and 34.19. Levit. 27.26. Number. 3.13. and 8.16. and 18.15. Nehem. 10 36. Ezech.
44 30. Luke 2.23. Matthew. 19.30. and 20.16. Marc. 10.31. Luke 13 10. 1. Cor. 1.
circa si. Lib. 7.
And whereas God has often preferred the youngest, as Abel, Isaac, Jacob,
Judah, Phares, Ephraim, Moses, David, Solomon, and others; it was no other than
that which Christ said, that many that were last should be first: and that
which Saint Paul has delivered, that God has chosen the weak, and base, and
contemptible things of this world, least any flesh should glory in his sight.
So has Herodotus written, how Artabanus the Persian, in a complaining manner
did confess, that God delighted to depress those things that were high.

But if the first born dye before succession fall; or if being possessed of the
Kingdom, he dye without issue; his right of birth devolveth unto the next in
blood; In prooem. D.. Discipuli. Et in L. donationes C. de don. inter vir. and
ux.
and if he dies in like manner, then unto the third, and so likewise to the
rest in order. This is affirmed by Albericus, and may be confirmed by that
which Baldus says, that succession has reference to the time of death, In L.
2. C. de jur. Emphyt. Per. l. Ex facto* Pen. D. ad Treb Cons. 275. lib. 2 In l.
Proximus. D. de verb. sig. L. Ex duobus^ D. de vulg. and pup. In l. Si quis
prioris.. talem. D. de secund.
and respects the priority which is then extant. And again, He is not said
the first born in Law, who dies before the fee opens, but he who at that
time is eldest in life. And this opinion is embraced by Alciate; because as
Celsus says; Primus is dicitur ante quem nemo sit, He is first who has none
before him. Iaco. Aretinus, Cinus, Albericus and Baldus do form this case:
There is a custom, that the first born of the first marriage should succeed in
a baronny; a certain baron had three Wives; by the first he had no Children, by
the other too many, the first son of the second marriage shall succeed: Because
(as the glossographer there says) the second marriage in regard of the third
is accounted first. Ibid.
Baldus does extend it further; that if he has a son by the first marriage;
and he refuse the barony, the first son by the second marriage shall succeed in
his right; and so he says it was determined in the Kingdom of Apulia, when
Jews the Kings eldest son was professed a friar. And this decision is allowed
by Alexander, In addit. Bar. l. 1.. Qui habebat. de D. bo. poss. cont. tab. and
in disput. incip. Sigismund. Cons. 92. In tract. de pot. and excel. reg. q. 10.
and q. 74. In c. quaeritur.. i^em opponitur 22. q. 2. Unigenitus. C. nam and
ego De ver. sig.
Oldradus, and Antonius Corsetta: and is proved by plain text of the Canon Law,
both where the second born is called first born, when the first born has given
place; and also where he is called the only son, whose brother is dead. But
because it is a notorious custom that the nearest in blood does succ^ed, although
perhaps removed in degree, I will labor no more to load it with proof: for who
will proclaim that the sun does shine?

But if we should now grant unto you (which is a greater courtesy, than with
modesty you can require) that no particular form of Government is natural: what
will you conclude thereof? what inference can you hereupon enforce? That th^re
is no doubt but the People have power to choose and to change the fashion of
Government, and to limit the same with what conditions they please. What Sir?
can you find no third? But that either one form of Government is natural, or
that the People must always retain such liberty of power? Have they no power to
relinquish their power? Is there no possibility that they may loose it? Whether
are you so ignorant to think as you speak, or so deceitful to speak otherwise
then you think. There is no Authority which the People has in matters of
state, but it may be either bound or straightened by three means.

The first is by cession or grant; for so the Romans by the Law of royalty
yielded all their Authority in Government to the Prince. Lex regia. L. 1. de
constable. princ. De rep. lib. 1.
Of this Law Vlpian makes mention; and Bodin reports that it is yet extant
in Rome graven in stone. So the People of Cyrene; of Pergame and of Bithynia,
did submit themselves to the Empire of the Romans. So the Tartarians commit
absolute power both over their lives and their livings to every one of their
Emperors: and so have our People many times committed to their King the
Authority of the Parliament either generally, or else for some particular case.
For it is held as a rule, that any man may relinquish the Authority which he
has to his own benefit and favor. Neither is he again at pleasure to be
admitted to that, L. Si fini^a and ^b. Bar. and Bald. D. de dam infect. L. Si
quis insiurandum. c. de reb. cred. Inst. de jur. Person.
which once he did think ^it to renounce. And as a private man may altogether
abandon his free estate, and subject himself to servile condition, so may a
multitude pass away both their Authority and their liberty by public consent.

The second is by prescription and custom, which is of strength in all parts of
the world, least matters should always float in uncertainty, L. 1. de usucap.
and controversies remain immortal. And that this Authority of the People may
be excluded by prescription, it is evident by this one reason, which may be as
one in a third place of Arithmetic, in standing for a hundred. Every thing may
be prescribed, wherein prescription is not prohibited: L. vit. C. de praesc.
long. temp. L. sicut. c. de praesc. 30. ann. L. Si de interpretatione. D. de
Ll. L. Omnes popull. De just. and jur. l. Sed and ca. D. de leg^b. C. 1. de
Feud. C. l. de all. Feud
But there is no Law which prohibiteth prescription in this case; and therefore
it follows that it is permitted. And generally, custom does not only
interpret Law, but corrects it, and supplyeth where there is no Law; in so
much as the common Law of England, as well in public as private controversies,
is no other (a few maxims excepted) but the common custom of the Realm. Baldus
says, that custom does lead succession in principalities, which Martinus
advises to ^ix in memory, because of the often change of Princes: and the
particular custom of every Nation is at this day, the most usual and assured
Law between the Prince and the People. And this do the Emperors Honor us and
Arcadius, L. Testamenta* omnia. C. de test.
in these words command punctually to be observed: Mos namque retinendus est
fidelissimae vetustatis: the custom of faithful Antiquity must be retained:
Which place is to this sense balanced by Pau. Caestrensis, Franc. Aretinus,
and Phil. Corneus; who terms it a moral text. The like whereto is found also
in the Canon law, C. Ridiculum 12. di. In c. Quanto de transl. prael. In c.
Domino. 50. di. In L. Si vero D* de sol. Mat.
and noted by the Glossographer, Archidiaconus, Romanus, and Cepola. Neither
were the Fathers of the Nicene Council of other Opinion, who thus decreed: Let
ancient customs stand in strength: Whereto also agrees that old Verse of
Ennius, In tract. de imper. (...),
Moribus antiquis res stat Romana virisque Customs and men of oldest sort,
The Roman State do best support:


De civit. Dei* lib. 2. cap. 21. Lib. 3. de repub* (...). Vive moribus
praesentibus, loquere verbis praesentibus. Lib. de clar. rhetor. Lib. 15 c. 1.
and lib. 1. cap 10 Quae praeter consuetudinem and morem majorum fiunt, neque
placent. neque recta videntur. 4. de civit. 5. Cons. 132. Grandia latrocinia.
Lib. 10. 1. de benefi^: Orbis terrarum praedo. L. Post liminium D. de cap.
Which is cited by Saint Austin; and esteemed by Cicero both for brevity and
truth, as an Oracle. To the same sense Periander of Corinth said, that old Laws
and new Meats were fittest for use: which saying Phavorinus in Gellius did in
this manner a little vary: Live after the passed manner, speak after the
present. Hereto also pertains that edict of the censors mentioned by
Sueton^us, and Aul. Gellius: Those things which are beside the custom and
fashion of our Elders, are neither pleasing, nor to be adjudged right. Of this
point I shall have occasion more particularly hereafter to write.

The third means whereby the People may loose their Authority, is by way of
conquest. For howsoever Saint Augustine, and after him Alciate, do disallow
ambition of enlarging Empire; and term Wars upon this cause great Theeveries:
Whereupon Lucane, and his Uncle Seneca, called Alexander the Great, a great
robber of the World, yet there is no doubt but the sentence of victory,
especially if the War was undertaken upon good cause, (as the Conqueror being
made his own Arbitrator, will hardly acknowledge the contrary) is a just title
of acquisition; reducing the vanquished, their privileges, liberties and whole
Estate, under the discretion of him that is victorious. Caesar says; He gives
all that denies right: Arma tenent^ omnia dat qui in ita negat. Reg. peccatum
p. 2.. 9. In rub. C. de la. li. Ut qui vicisssent, iis quos vicissent, que
madmodum velint imperarent. Strom. 1. Archid.
Which sentence is approved by Covaruvias; affirming, that the victor makes
all which his sword touches to be his own. So says Baldus, that he does his
pleasure upon the vanquished: and again Caesar in the speech of Ariovistus; it
is the Law of Arms, that the victorious should command those whom they have
subdued, even as they please. Clemens Alexandrinus says, that the goods of
Enemies are taken away by right of war. Isocrates has written, that the
Lacedaemonians did by title of victory in this sort maintain their right. We
hold this Land given by the Posterity of Hercules, confirmed by the Oracle of
Delphos, the inhabitants thereof being overcome by War. Which was not much
unlike that which Iephte captain of Israel expostulated with the Ammonites;
Judic. 11.23. and 24.
Are not those things thine which Chamos thy God has possessed? but whatsoever
the Lord our God has conquered, pertains unto us. Yea, God does expressly
give to the People of Israel, the Cities which they should subdue; Deuteronomy. 20.
some into full possession, others into servitude and subjection: By which
title Jacob also had given to Joseph his part^ge among his brethren, even the
La^d which he had taken from the Amorites with his sword and with his bow. Ge^
48 22. 1. Civ.
It was usual to the Romans, and as Appian says, just, to retain principal or
direct Dominion, in all things which they brought under the sway of their
sword. Brissonius has collected certain examples of the form of yielding unto
the Romans, ^. de form.
whereby all profane and sacred, all human and divine matters were submitted
unto them.

Seeing therefore that the people may so many ways loose both their power and
their right in affairs of state, is not your ignorance adventurous so generally
to affirm, that if no one form of Government be natural, there is no doubt but
the people have power both to alter and limit the same, as they please? Can no
Law, no custom, no Conquest restrain them? Your pen does range, and your
judgment rage beyond all compass and course of reason. You should have said,
that there is no doubt, but if by all or any of these means, the right both of
succession and governm^^t be settled in one family, according to pr^^^^quity and
priority of blood, the people may neither take away nor vary the same: and if
they do, they commit injustice, they violate the law of nations, whereby they
expose themselves, not only to the infamy and hate of all men, but to the
revenge of those who will attempt upon them. For it is not only lawful but
honorable, for any people, either to right or reveng the breach of this Law;
against them which contemn it, as monsters; against them who know it not, as
beasts. Saint Augustine says; If a City upon earth should decree some great
mischiefs to be done, Vide civit.
by the decree of mankind it is to be destroyed. And as in the state of one
country any man may accuse upon a public crime, so in the state of the world,
Just. de pub. iud.
any people may prosecute a common offense: for as there is a civil band among
all the People of one Nation; so is there a natural Knot among all men in the
World.

You close your conclusion with this conceit, that the word natural Prince, or
natural Successor, is to be understood of one, who is born within the same
Realm, and that it is ridiculous to take it, as though any Prince had natural
Interest to succeed. But what construction will you then make of that which
Herodian delivers, Herod. lib. 1.
in the speech of Commodus the Son of Marcus? Now has fortune given me unto
you for Prince in his stead, not drawn into the state, such as they were, who
were before me; nor as one that glories in the purchase of the Empire: for I
only am born unto you and brought up in the Court, never swathed in private
Clothes, but so soon as I was born the imperial purpure did receive me, and the
Sun beheld me at once, both a Man and a Prince. Jure principem colite, non
datum, sed natum. Lib. 1. de l' estate de France
Consider these things, and honor your Prince by right, who is not given, but
born unto you. Girard goes further in writing of Charles the Simple, that he
was King before he was born. Say therefore again, that it is ridiculous to take
the word natural Prince, for one that has right of succession inherent in him
by birth; and I will say that this mirth will better beseem a natural indeed,
then any man that is wise. But let us now consider the further passage of your
discourse, both how you are able to fortify this foundation, and what building
it is able to bare.

TO THE SECOND CHAPTER, which is entitled,
Of the particular Form of Monarchies and Kingdoms, and the different Laws
whereby they are to be obtained, holden and governed in diverse Countries,
according as each Commonwealth has chosen and established.
IN this chapter you spend much speech in praising a monarchy, and preferring
it before the Government of many; which you do to no other end, but to
insinuate your self either into credit, or advantage to draw it down; even as
Ioab presented Amasa with a kind Kiss, to win thereby opportunity to stab him.
For in the end you fetch about, that because a Prince is subject, as other men,
2 Samuel 20. Fol. 21.
not only to errors in Judgment, but also to passionate affections, in his
will; it was necessary, that as the common wealth has given that great power
unto him so it should assign him helps for managing the same. And that a
Prince reciveth his authority from the people, you prove a little before, for
that Saint Peter terms Kings Humane creatures; which you interpret to be,
Page 17. 1. Pet. 2.
a thing created by man; because by man's free choice, both this form of
government is erected, and the same also laid upon some particular person.

I know not in what sort to deal with you, concerning this interpretation.
Shall I labor to impugn it by arguments? Why, there is no man that wants
not either judgment or sincerity, but upon both the natural and usual sense of
the words, he will presently acknowledge it to be false. Shall I go about either
to laugh, or to rail you from your error, as Cicero in the like case persuaded
to do? But this would be agreeable neither to the stayedness of our years, nor
the gravity of our professions. I am now advised what to do; I will appeal, as
Machetes did before Philip of Macedon, from your self asleep, to your self
awake; from your self distempered by affection, Plutarch. in probl.
to your self returned to sobriety of sense. Do you think then in true earnest,
that a human creature is a thing created by man, or rather that every man is a
humane creature? Is a brutish creature to be raken for a thing created by a
beast? Spiritual, Angelical, or any other adjunct unto creature, what reference
has it to the Author of Creation? And if it were so, then should all creatures
be called divine, because they were created by God, to whom only it is proper
to create; and in this very point, Romans 13.
Saint Paul says, that all authority is the ordinance and institution of God.
Neither needs it to trouble us that Saint Peter should so generally injoine
us to be obedient to all men, no more than it troubled the Apostles, when
Christ commanded them to preach to all creatures Marc. 16.
; according to which commission, St. Paul did testify Col. 1.23.
, that the Gospel had been preached to every creature under Heaven: but St.
Peter does specify his general speech, and restrain his meaning to Kings and
Governors; in which sense St. Ambrose Ad Auxentium.
cites this place, as it follows: Be subject to your Lords, whether it be to
the King, as to the most excellent, etc.

This interpretation not only not relieving you, but discovering very plainly
either the weakness or corruption of your judgment, it rests upon your bare
word, that Kings have received their first Authority from the people; which
although I could deny, with as great both countenance and facility as you
affirm, yet will I further charge upon you with strength of proof.

Presently after the inundation of the world, we find no mention of politic
Government, but only of oeconomical, according as men were sorted in families;
for so Moses has written Genesis 10.5.
, that of the progeny of Iapheth, the Isles of the Gentiles were divided after
their families. The first who established Government over many families, was
Nimrod the Son of Cush, accounted by St. Chrysostom Hom. in Genesis
the first King: which Authority he did not obtain by favor and election of
any people, but by plain purchase of his power. Hereupon Moses calls him a
mighty Hunter Genesis 10.9.
, which is a form of speech among the Hebrews, whereby they signify a spoiler
or oppresser. And this does also appear by the etymology of his name; for
Nimrod signifies a Rebel, a Transgressour, and as some interpret it, a
terrible Lord: And names were not imposed in ancient times by chance or at
adventure, as Plato In Cratylo.
, one of Natures chief Secretaries, and among the Latin Writers Aul. Gellius
Noct. Attic. 9. cap. 4.
do affirm.

Many hold opinion, that this Nimrod was the same, whom the Grecians call
Ninus: which seems to be confirmed by that which Moses says Genesis 10
, that he did build the City of Ninive. Of this Ninus, Iustine writes Ninus
primus dicitur bello parta retinu^sse, cum priores contenti victoria, imperio
abstinuessent. Just. 1.
; that he was the first who held that which he did subdue; others, satisfied
with Victory, aspired not to bear Rule. Nimrod founded the Empire of the
Assyrians, which continued by Succession in his posterity, until it was
violently drawn from Sardanapalus to the Medes. From them also Cyrus by
subversion of Astyages did transport it to the Persians; and from them again
the Grecians did wrest it by Conquest. After the death of Alexander, his
Captains, without any consent of the people, made partition of the Empire among
them; whose successors were afterward subdued by the Armies and Arms of Rome.
And this Empire, being the greatest that ever the Earth did bear, was in the
end also violently distracted, by diverse several either Conquests or Revolts.
Leo Afer writes, that it is not a hundred years, since the people of Gaoga in
Africa had neither King nor Lord, until one observed the greatness and Majesty
of the King of Tombute, did enterprise to attain Sovereignty above them, which
by violence he effected, and left the same to his posterity. And because I will
not be tedious in running through particulars, give you an instance of any one
people, which has not diverse times received both Prince and Government by
absolute constraint, Et Phillida solus habito; and I will yield to all that you
affirm. But failing herein, you shall be enforced to confess, that in many,
yea, in most, if not in all Countries, the people have received liberty, either
from the grant or permission of the victorious Prince, and not the Prince
authority from the vanquished people.

What helps now do you imagine, that the people have assigned to their Prince?

The first, you affirm to be the direction of Laws. But it is evident, that in
the first heroical Ages, (...) people were not governed by any positive Law,
but their Kings did both Judge and Command, by their word, by their will, by
their absolute power; and, as Pomponius says L. 2. de Orig. jur
, Omnia manu a regibus gubernabantur: Kings governed all things, without either
restraint or direction, but only of the Law of Nature.

The first Law was promulged by Moses; but this was so long before the Laws of
other Nations, that Josephus writes Contra Appianum
, It was more ancient than their Gods: Affirming also, that the word Law is not
found in Homer, or in Orpheus, or in any Writer of like antiquity^ Of this Law
of Nature Homer makes mention in these words: (...). And they who keep the
Laws which God has prescribed.

And again, (...)
(...).
Uncivil and unjust is he, and wanting private state,
Who holds not all civil War in horror and in hate.


And of the Justice of Kings he writes in this manner: (...),
(...)
(...).
on. In which verses Chrysostom affirms lib. 2. de regno.
by the judgment of Alexander, that Homer has delineated the perfect Image of
a King: but that he makes mention of any positive Laws, I do rather doubt,
than assuredly deny. For Kings in ancient times did give judgment in person,
not out of any formality in Law, but only according to natural equity. Virgil
says Aeneid. 7.
: Hoc Priami gestamen erat cum jura vocatis
Moredaret populis.
This was the Robe which Priamus
did always use to wear,
When he the People to him called,
their causes for to hear.
Which he does also affirm of Aeneas Aeneid. 3.
, Dido Aeneid. 1.
and of Alcestes Aeneid. 5.
. This like does Herodotus report Lib. 1.
of Midas King of Phrygia, who consecrated his Tribunal to Apollo: and the like
also does Plutarch In Apopht.
of diverse Kings of Macedonia: Philarchus affirms in Athenaeus, that the
Kings of Persia had Palm Trees and Vines of Gold, under which they did sit to
hear Causes.

But because it grew both troublesome and tedious, for all the People to
receive their Right from one man At cum jus aquabile ab uno viro homines non
consequerentur, inventae sunt leges, Offic. 2.
; Laws were invented, as Cicero says, and Officers also appointed to execute
the same.

Another Original of Laws was thus occasioned: When any People were subdued by
Arms, Laws were laid like Logs upon their necks, to keep them in more sure
subjection; which, both because it is not doubtful, and to avoid prolixity, I
will manifest only by our own example.

When the Romans had reduced the best part of this Island into the form of a
Province, as they permitted liberty of Law to no other Country under their
obedience, so here also they planted the practice of their Laws: and for this
purpose they sent over many Professors, and among others Papinian, the most
famous both for Knowledge and Integrity, of all the Authors of the Civil Law.
Again, when the Saxons had forced this Realm, and parted it into seven
Kingdoms, they erected so many sets of Law; of which only two were of
continuance, the Mercian Law, and the West Saxon Law. After these, the Danes
became victorious; and by these new Lords new Laws were also imposed, which
bare the name of Dane-law. Out of these three Laws, partly moderated, partly
supplied, King Edward the Confessor composed that body of Law, which afterward
was called St. Edward's Laws. Lastly, the Normans brought the Land under their
power, by whom St. Edward's Laws were abrogated, and not only new Laws, but
new Language brought into use; insomuch as all Pleas were formed in French, and
in the same Tongue Children were taught the principles of Grammar. These causes
we find of the beginning of Laws; but that they were assigned by the people for
assistance and direction to their Kings, you bring neither Argument nor
Authority for proof; it is a part of the dross of your own device.

The second help, which you affirm that Commonwealths have assigned to their
Kings, is by Parliaments and Privy-Councils. But Parliaments in all places have
been erected by Kings; as the Parliament of Paris and of M^ntpellier in France,
by Philip the Fair; the Parliament in England by Henry the First; who in the
sixteenth year of his Reign Anno 1116.
called a Council of all the States of his Realm at Salisbury, which our
Historiographers do take for the first Parliament in England; affirming that
the Kings, before that time, did never call the common People to Council. After
this the Privy Council, at the instance of the Archbishop of Canterbury, was
also established; and since that time, the Counselors of State have always
been placed by election of the Prince. And that it was so likewise in ancient
times, it appears by that which Homer writes: (...).
First he established a Council of honorable old men.
And likewise by Virgil: -- gaudet regno Trojanus Acestes,
Indicitque forum, and patribus dat jura vocatis.
Acestes of the Trojan Blood, in Kingdom does delight;
He sets a Court, and Council calls, and gives each man his Right.


I will pass over your coarse, foggy, drowsy Conceit, that there are few or
none simple Monarchies in the world, (for it would tire a Dog to toil after
your impertinent errors) and will now rip up your Packet of Examples, whereby
you endeavor to show, that the Power of Kings has been bridled by their
Subjects. But what do you infer hereby? what can you enforce? will you rake
over all Histories for examples of Rebellion, and then argue, a facto ad jus;
that every thing is lawful which you find to have been done? Justinian says,
Non exemplis, sed legibus judicandum l. 13. C. (...) Scin^. ^ loc. om. i^d.
: We must judge Facts by Law, and not Law by Facts, or by Examples; which
Alciate 5. Cons. ^3. and 6.50.
and Deeiane 3.100.
do term a Golden Law, because there is no Action either so impious or absurd,
which may not be paralleled by Examples. Will you prove it lawful to use carnal
familiarity with the Sister, with the Mother-in-law, with the natural Mother?
You have the example of Cambyses for the first, Caracalla for the second,
Dionysius and Nero for the third. The Jews, upon whom God had settled his
Choice, did at times (beside many other Enormities) erect Malestews 3. Reg. 14,
and 15.
. Of the two Nations, whose Examples you use, the Romans and the Lacedaemonians,
the first did the like under diverse Emp^rours, as Lampridius writes; and in
more ancient times allowed also Parricide of Children Gell. l. 5 c. 19.
: the other would sort themselves by fifteen and twenty Families together, and
hold both Wives and Goods in common. I omit the unnatural customs of diverse
other Nations, and will now declare, how in straining a few Examples to
countenance your Conceit, you are constrained to bear your self no less cunning
in concealing truths, than bold in avouching things which are not only
uncertain, but plainly false.

It is true which you write, that the Kings of Sparta, by the institution of
Ly^urgus, were ob^dient to the Officers called Ephori; but these were Titular
Kings, having no other power but a single voice among the Senators: and because
all Affairs were carried by consent of the People, the Estate was then esteemed
popular. Afterward Theopompus, by pretense of an Oracle, drew this Authority
from the People, to a Senate of thirty; whereby the Government did change into
an Aristocracy; and yet the naked name of Kings was retained. By this
shuffling-off Rule, the Lacedaemonians were continually tossed with Tempests of
Sedition, ceasing not to wade in their own Blood (as before you have
acknowledged) until in the end they were brought into subjection; first, by the
Macedonians; afterward, by the Achaeans; and lastly, by the Roman^* I will not
say now, what reason have we? but what a shame is it for us to open our ears to
these Utopical State-writers? who being mellowed in Idleness, and having
neither Knowledge nor Interest in matters of Government, make new Models upon
disproportioned joints, borrowed from Nations most different in Rule.

You affirm by the testimony of Livy, that for offense taken against Romulus,
because he reigned at Pleasure, and not by Law, the Senators did cut him in
pieces; in which short Assertion many base untruths are included, beneath the
degree of any vile word. Livy writes, that he sorted the People into order,
and governed them by Laws Jura dedis.
, and that he was also both advised and valiant in the Field; even such a one
as Homer describes: (...).
Both a good King, and courageous Commander.


Concerning his end, Livy writes, that in taking muster of his Army, a thick
Tempest did arise, after which he was never seen; wherein he is seconded by
Solinus, Eutropius, and the rest: only Livy adds, that there was a rumor,
but very obscure, without any certain either Author or ground; I will add
also, without probability, that he was torn in pieces: for how probable is it,
that such a Fact, in the open view of his Army, could be very obscure? How
probable is it also, that the People would first tear him in pieces for his
Injustice, and then worship him for a God? Further, with what either confidence
or conceit do you allege this Report of Livy, for his opinion? I find your
fetch; you apprehend every thing which may, if not confirm, yet countenance
that Doctrine which lately you have drawn out of Cerberus Den, That it is
lawful to contrive the death of Kings.

That the People were grieved against Servius Tullius for reigning without
Election, it is a mere Fantasy, a Dream, a Device. Livy says Tanto consensu
quanto haud quisquam alius ante Rex est declaratus.
, that he was declared King with such a Consent as no man had been before him.

That Tarquinius neglected the Laws of Government prescribed to him by the
Commonwealth, it is an ugly untruth. Livy says, that he brake the ancient
manner of Kings before him: But for Laws, Pomponius affirms In l. 2. D. de
orig. jur.
, that at that time the Romans had no Laws but from their Kings, and that
Sextus Papirius reduced them into one Volume, which was called the Civil Law of
Papirius Jus civil Papirianum.
; and that when the People expelled their Kings, they abrogated their Laws
also, and remained twenty years without any Law.

Lastly, you add, that the Romans did expel their Kings, and erect Consuls in
their stead; but you suppress that which followed, which I hold for a common
consequence of the like disorder: First, that for this cause they were
presently almost overwhelmed with Wars: Secondly, that in this state they never
enjoyed long time free from Sedition: Lastly, that as Tacitus says Nullum esse
discordantis patriae remedium, quam ut ab uno regeretur. Annal. 1.
, there was no means to appease these Tumults, but by returning to a Monarchy
again. All this I write, rather to manifest the manner of your dealing, than
that I hold it much regardable what Romans did.

Your Examples of our present Age I will wrap up in these few words: All
Nations, very few excepted, do consent in this form of Government; first, to be
under one Prince; secondly, to accept him by succession, according to
propinquity of Blood: In other circumstances, either for inaugurating their
Prince, or for the manner of managing and executing his Government, not two
Nations in the world in all points do agree. And yet is not this diversity
raised by any Laws which the People do prescribe unto their Prince, as you do
most grossly, yea peevishly, yea maliciously affirm; but by the particular Laws
and Customs of every Nation, in which the consent of the Prince, either secret
or express, sometimes only is sufficient, always principally does concur.

Upon this diversity of Customs you conclude, that it suffices not to allege
bare propinquity of Blood. What, not where that Custom is established, as I
have declared it to be in most Nations of the World? Does difference of Customs
make all Custom void? Does diversity of Custom in some circumstances take away
the principal Custom of Succession by Blood? This cleaves together no surer
than Sand; you lose both labor and credit in obtruding unto us these weak and
loose Arguments, without either force of Reason, or form of Art.

Your instance of the Law Salick in France, does offer occasion to enter into a
large Field, wherein I could plainly prove, that there was never any such Law
made to bind the descent of the Crown of France; and that it has been the
custom in most parts of the world, not to exclude Women from succession in
State: insomuch as Beda In Act. cap. 8.
and before him Eusebius Lib 2. cap. 1.
and Pliny Lib. 6. c. 29, and 30.
do write, that certain People were governed only by Princes of that Sex. But
because this is a matter both of long discourse, and not proper to our purpose,
I will contain my self within this Observation, That the Exclusion of King
Edward the Third from the Crown of France, upon this pretense* was the cause of
the effusion of their bravest Blood, and of the spoil, waste, and conquest of
all that Realm. I acknowledge that the English have lost the possession of that
Conquest; and that was by means of domestical Wars, for excluding the nearest
in Blood from the Crown: into which unquiet Quarrel you do now endeavor again
to embark us. Yet no man can assure that the miseries of France for this cause
are at an end. Rams recoil to strike harder; we are gone rather back than away:
I will not presage, but any man may conjecture, that our minds and our means
will not always want the favor of time.

After all this, you proceed a degree further, that it is lawful, upon just
considerations, not only to put back the next Inheritor of the Crown, but also
to remove him who is in full possession thereof. And that is plain (you say)
not only by the grounds before by you alleged, but also by example of the
Romans and Grecians; and because God has commonly concurred in such judicial
actions of the State, not only in prospering them, but in giving them also
some notable Successor. And yet you protest you are far from their opinion,
who upon every mislike are ready to band against their Prince; and that you
esteem the tenure of a Crown, if once it be settled, the most irregular, whereto
every man is bound to settle his Conscience, without examination of Title or
Interest; but only by the supreme Law of Gods disposition, who can dispense in
what he lists: and that notwithstanding you are as far from the abject
flattery of Billaie and others; who affirm, that Princes are subject to no Law
or limitation at all, and that they succeeded by nature and birth only, and
not by admission of the people; and that there is no authority under God to
chasten them. These you call absurd Paradoxes; and herewith you settle your
self to show in the next Chapter, what good success has ensued the disposition
of Princes.

Concerning your protestation, we may say unto you as Isaac said to his son
Jacob Genesis 27.22.
, The voice is Jacobs voice, but the hands are the hands of Esau: You speak
fair, and therewith also well; but the main drift of your discourse, is nothing
else but a tempestuous Doctrine of Rebellion and Disorder; you being therein
like the Boatman, who looks one way and pulls another; or rather like the
Image of Ianus, which looked two contrary ways at once. It is a Rule in Law;
That a Protestation contrary to a man's Act, will not serve to relieve him
Protestatio actui contraria non relevat.
only this shall serve to convince you, either of false or of forgetful
dealing, when we come to that place where in flat words you maintain the
contrary.

Concerning the quarrel which you lay against Billaie; as I have not seen what
he has written, so will I not interpose between him and you. I never heard of
Christian Prince who challenged Infinite Authority without limitation of any
Law, either Natural or Divine. But where you term it an absurd paradox, that
the people should not have power to chasten their Prince, and upon just
considerations to remove him; I am content to join with you upon the issue.

And first I note the manner of your dealing, in that you have omitted to
express what these just considerations may be. For seeing there has been no
King, who is not noted of some defects; and again, no Tyrant, who has not many
commendable parts (as Plutarch writes In Dionys.
that Dionysius excelled most Princes in diverse points of Justice and Virtue)
it is a matter of dangerous consequence, to leave these considerations
undetermined and at large. But who sees not, that you do it out of policy,
that you may upon every particular occasion, declare such causes to be
sufficient as you please?

How then do you prove, that upon any cause, the people have power to
dispossess their Prince? This is plain (you say) not only by the grounds
before by you alleged, but also by example of the Romans and Graecians. The
grounds by you alleged, are two: One in your first Chapter, that because no
one form of Government is natural, the people have power both to choose, and to
change, and to limit it as they please. The other ground is in this Chapter;
that because there are diverse Laws and Customs in matters of principality, it
suffices not to allege bare proinquity of blood.

Why? but had you no Text of Scripture? no Father of the Church to allege? no
Law? no Reason? no better Example? no surer Ground? It is more than this which
you bring against your self, in citing out of St. Peter 2. c. 10.
; The Lord knows to reserve the unjust unto the day of Judgment; and
especially them that despise Government, and speak evil of those that are in
Dignity. And out of St. Jude verse. 8.
* Likewise these dreamers despise Government, and speak evil of them that are
in Authority. Besides also, you have alleged out of St. Paul Romans 13.
: Let every soul be subject unto the higher power* for there is no power but of
God: Whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the ordinance of God;
and they that resist shall receive to themselves judgment. And likewise out of
St. Peter c. 2. v. 13.
: Submit your selves to every humane creature, whether it be to the King, or
unto Goververnours; for so is the will of God. To which places we may likewise
add that, which St. Paul did write unto Titus Tit. 3.1.
: Put them in remembrance that they be obedient to the principalities and
powers. And writing to Timothy 1 Timothy 2.1.
, he exhorts us also to pray for them* that we may lead under them a
peaceable life.

But perhaps you will say, that the Apostles did not mean this of wicked
Princes. Trifler, the Apostles spoke generally of all: St* Peter 1 Pet. 2.18.
makes express mention of evil Lords. And what Princes have ever been more
either irreligious or tyrannical, than Caligula, Tiberius, Nero, the infamy of
their Ages, under whose Empire the Apostles did both live and write?

Bellarmine the great master of Controversies, perceiving this to be
unanswerably true, did in another sort rather cut than unty the knot:
affirming, In tract. de exemp. Clericorum.
that at that time it was necessary to admonish the Christians to perform
obedience to their Kings, lest the preaching of the Gospel might otherwise be
hindered: which is as if in direct terms he should have said, Sir Kings, whilst
our heads were under your girdle, we were content to curry favor, by preaching
obedience unto the people: But now we have got the wind of you, we must plainly
tell you, that you hold your Crowns at their courtesy and favor; and have no
power in effect, but as Lieutenant-Generals. I know you will make a sour face
at this; it will go very much against your stomachs; but there is no remedy,
you must take it down; they are your good Lords; they may dispossess you.

Profane Bellarmine! is Christian Religion a mere policy? does it apply it
self only to the present? does it turn always with the time? May the principal
professors thereof say, as an infidel Moor did, when he violated the Faith
which he had given unto Christians? We have no bone in our tongues that we
cannot turn them which way we please. We see plainly that you say so: and it as
is plain, that it was far from the true meaning of the Apostles. St. Jude ver.
16.
writes sharply against those, who had men's persons in admiration because of
advantage. St. Paul also says Gal. 1.10.
: Go I about to please men? If I should please men, I were not then the servant
of Christ.

I will give you an example of another time. Nebuchadnezzer King of Assyria,
wasted all Palestina; took Jerusalem, slew the King, burnt the Temple, took
away the holy Vessels and Treasure: the residue he permitted to the cruelty and
syoyl of his unmerciful Soldiers; who defiled all places with rape, ruin, and
blood. After the glut of this butchery, the people which remained, he led
captive into Chaldaea, and there commanded, that whosoever refused to worship
his golden Image, should be cast into a fiery furnace.

What cruelty, what impiety is comparable to this? and yet the Prophets
Jeremiah c. 29.7.
and Baruch c. 1.11.
did write to those captive Jews, to pray for the prosperity and life of him,
and of Baltazar his Son, that their days might be upon Earth as the days of
Heaven: and Ezekiel c. 17.
both blames and threatens Zedechia, for his disloyalty in revolting from
Nebuchadnezzar, whose homager and tributary he was. What answer will you make
to this example? I am wisely busied to cast forth this question; what answer
can you make, which your own knowledge will not convince?

Many other places there are in holy Scripture, whereby not only our actions
are tied to obedience: He that does presumptuously against the Ruler of the
people shall die Deuteronomy. 17.12.
: but also our words, Thou shall not speak evil against the Ruler of the people
Exodus 22.28. Act. 23.5.
; yea, our secret thoughts: Detract not from the King, no not in thy thought;
for the fowls of the air shall carry thy voice Eccles. 10.20.
. The reason hereof is not obscure: Because Princes are the immediate Ministers
of God Romans 13.
; and therefore he called Nebuchadnezzar, his servant Jer. 25.9.
; and promised him also hire and wages for the service which he did Ezech.
29.18.
. And the Prophet Esaias c. 25.
calls Cyrus, a profane and heathen King, the Lords Anointed. For, as
Solomon says, Prove. 21.1.
The Hearts of Kings are in the hands of the Lord: and he stirs up the
spirit, even of wicked Princes, to do his will 2 Chro. 26.22.
: and (as Iehoshaphat said to his Rulers 2 Chro. 19.8.
they execute not the will of man, but of the Lord.

In regard hereof David calls them Gods Psalm. 82.
: whereof Plato also had some sense, when he said (...). In polit.
, A King is instead of God. And if they do abuse their Power, they are not to
be judged by their Subjects, as being both inferior and naked of Authority,
because all Jurisdiction within their Realm is derived from them, which their
presence only does silence and suspend: but God reserveth them to the sorest
trial: Horribly and suddenly (says the wise man Sap. 6*
will the Lord appear unto them, and a hard judgment shall they have.

You Jesuits do yield a blindfold obedience to your Superiors, not once
examining either what he is, or what he does Command: and although the Pope
should swerve from Justice, yet by the Canons ^xtravag. Unam sanctam. de major.
and obed.
, men are bound to perform obedience unto him, and God only may judge his
doings: and may a King, the Lords Lieutenant, the Lords Anointed, in the view
of his Subjects, nay, by the hands of his Subjects, be cast out of State? May
he, as was Actaeon, be chased and worried by his own hounds? Will you make him
of worse condition, than the Lord of a Manor? than a Parish Priest? than a
poor Schoolmaster, who cannot be removed by those that are under their
authority and charge?

The Law of God commands that the child should die, for any contumely done
unto the Parents. But what if the Father be a Robber? if a Murderer? if for
all excess of villainies odious and execrable both to God and Man? Surely he
deserves the highest degree of punishment; and yet must not the Son lift up
his hand against him: For, as Quintilian says In decl^m.
, No offense is so great, as to be punished by parricide. But our Country is
dearer to us than our selves Cic. oftic. lib 1.
: and the Prince is the Father of our Country Pater patriae.
; whose Authority, as Baldus notes In l. senium. C. qui test. fa. poss.
, (...) greater than of Parents: and therefore he must not be violated, how
impious, how imperious soever he be.

If he commands those things that are lawful, we must manifest our obedience
by ready performing. If he enjoin us those actions that are evil, we must show
our subjection by patient enduring. It is God only who seateth Kings in their
State; it is he only who may remove them. The Lord will set a wise King over
the people which he loves, as himself does testify 2 Chro. 1.
. And again, For the sins of the land the Kings are changed Prove. 28.2. 2.
Chron. 28.6.
. A^ therefore we endure with patience unseasonable weather, unfruitful years,
and other like punishments of God; so must we tolerate the imperfections of
Princes, and quietly expect either reformation, or else a change.

This was the Doctrine of the ancient Christians, even against their most
mortal persecutors. Tertullian says Apolog. 3^.
, For what war are we not both serviceable and ready, although unequal in
number, who do so willingly endure to be slain? neither want we strength of
number: but God forbid, that Religion should be maintained with humane fire.
From him also St. Cyprian, a most studious reader of Tertullian, as St. Hierom
De sacr. ec. Tert.
notes, in like manner writes Ad Demet.
: Although our people be exceeding copious, yet it does not revenge it self
against violence it suffers. St. Augustine says Pactum societatis humanae
generale regibus obedire. Confess. lib. 2.
It is a general paction of humane society to obey Kings. Which sentence is
assumed into the body of the Canon Law Did. 8. c. Quae contra.
. In a word, the current of the ancient Fathers is in this point concurrent;
insomuch as among them all there is not one found, not any one: one is a small
number; and yet I say confidently again, there is not any one, who has let
fall so loose a speech, as may be strained to a contrary sense. How then are
you of late become, both so active and resolute to cut in sunder the reins of
Obedience, the very sinews of Government and Order? Whence had Bened^tto
Palmio, a Jesuit, his Warrant, to incite William Parry to undertake the
parricide of our Queen? whence did Annibal Codretto, another Jesuit, assure
him, that the true Church made no question, but that the fact was lawful?
Whence did Guignard a Jesuit term the Butchery of Henry late King of France, an
heroical act, and a gift of the Holy Ghost? Whence did he write of the King,
who now there reigns, If without Arms he cannot be deposed, let men take Arms
against him; if by War it cannot be accomplished, let him be murdered? Whence
did Ambrose Verade, Rector of the College of the Jesuits in Paris, animate
Barriers (as he confessed) to sheath his Knife in the Kings breast; assuring
him by the living God, that he could not execute any act more meritorious?
Whence did the Commenter upon the Epitome of Confessions, otherwise the seventh
book of Decretals, commend all the Jesuits in these terms Tyran^os
aggrediuntur, lolium ab agro dominico evellunt.
: They set upon Tyrants, they pull the Cockle out of the Lords field?

It is a Rule in Nature, that one contrary is manifested by the other. Let us
compare then your boisterous Doctrine with that of the Apostles and ancient
Fathers of the Church, and we shall find that the one is like the rough Spirit
which hurled the herd of Swine headlong into the Sea Mat. 3.
; the other like the still and soft Spirit which talked with Elias 1 Reg. 19.
.

Neither was the Devil ever able, until in late declining times, to possess the
hearts of Christians with these cursed Opinions, which do evermore beget a
world of Murders, Rapes, Ruins, and Desolations. For tell me, what if the
Prince, whom you persuade the People they have power to depose, be able to make
and maintain his Party, as King John and King Henry the Third did against their
Barons? What if other Princes, whom it does concern, as well in honor, to see
the Law of Nations observed, as also in policy, to break those proceedings
which may form Presidents against themselves, do adjoyn to the side? What if
whilst the Prince and the People are (as was the Frog and the Mouse) in the
heat of their Encounter, some other Potentate play the Kite with them both, as
the Turk did with the Hungarians? Is it not then a fine piece of policy which
you do plot? or is it not a gross error to raise these dangers, and to leave
the defense to possibilities doubtful?

Go to, Sirs, go to, there is no Christian Country which has not by your
devices been wrapped in Wars. You have set the Empire on float with Blood; your
Fires in France are not yet extinguished; in Polonia and all those large
Countries, extending from the North to the East, you have caused of late more
Battles to be fought, than had been in five hundred years before. Your
practices have heretofore prevailed against us: of late years you have busied
your selves in no one thing more, than how to set other Christian Princes on
our necks; stirring up such store of Enemies against us, as, like the
Grasshoppers of Egypt Exodus 10.
might fill our houses, and cover our whole land, and make more doubt of room
than of resistance. Our own people also you have provoked to unnatural
attempts: you have exposed our Country as a Prey to them that will either
invade or betray it; supposing belike that you play Christ's part well, when
you may say as Christ did, Mat. 10.34.
Think not that I came to send peace: I came not to send peace, but a sword.
But when by the power and providence of God, all these attempts have rather
shown what good hearts you bear toward us, than done us any great harm; when
in all these practices you have missed the mark, now you do take another aim:
Now having no hope by extremity of Arms, you endeavor to execute your malice,
by giving dangerous advice: Now you go about to entangle us with Titles, which
is the greatest misery that can fall upon a State.

You pretend fair shows of Liberty and of Power, Sed timeo Danaos and dona
ferentes: We cannot but suspect the Courtesies of our Enemies: The Power which
you give us, will pull us down; the Liberty whereof you speak, will fetter us
in Bondage. When Themistocles came to the Persian Court, Artabanus Captain of
the Guard, knowing that he would use no Ceremony to their King, kept him out of
presence, and said unto him, You Grecians esteem us barbarous for honoring our
Kings, but we Persians esteem it the greatest honor to us that can be. The
like Answer will we frame unto you; You Jesuits account it a bondage to be
obedient unto Kings, but we Christians account it the greatest means for our
continuance both free and safe.

An Answer to the third Chapter, which is entitled,
Of the great Reverence and respect due to Kings, and yet how diverse of them
have been lawfully chastised by their Commonwealths for their misgovernment;
and of the good and prosperous success that God commonly has given to the
same, and much more to the putting back of an unworthy Pretender.
THat Princes may be chastised by their Subjects, your proofs are two: One is
drawn from certain Examples; the other from the good success and Successors
which usually have followed. Surely it cannot be but that you stand in a strong
conceit either of the authority of your Word, or simplicity of our Judgment;
otherwise you could not be persuaded by these slender Threads to draw any man
to your Opinion. Of the force of Examples I have spoken before; there is no
Villainy so vile which wants example: and yet most of the Examples which you
do bring, are either false, or else impertinent*

For there have been diverse States, wherein one has born the name and title of
King, without power of Majesty. As the Romans in the time of their Consular
Estate had always a Priest, whom they entitled King, whose office consisted in
certain Ceremonies and Sacrifices, which in former times could not be performed
but by their Kings. Likewise the Lacedaemonians, after Lycurgus had formed their
Government, retained two Kings, who had no greater stroke in matters of State,
than a single Voice as other Senators. Such were in Caesar's time many petty
Kings of Gaul, who (as Ambiorix King of Liege confessed) were subject to their
Nobility, and questionable by them. Such are now the Emperors of Almain,
because the Puissance and Majesty of the Empire pertains to the States, who
are sworn to the Empire it self, and not to the person of the Emperor. Such
are also the Dukes of Venice, the Sovereignty of which State is settled in the
Gentlemen. In these and suchlike Governments, the Prince is not Soverain, but
subject to that part of the Commonwealth which retains the Royalty and
Majesty of State, whether it be the Nobility or Common People: and therefore
your Examples drawn from them, is nothing to our purpose.

Concerning success, it cannot be strange unto you, that by the secret, yet
just Judgment of God, diverse evil actions are carried with appearance of good
success. The Prophet David said, Psalm. 73.
that his treadings had almost slip't, by seeing the wicked to flourish in
prosperity: The Prophet Jeremiah Ca. 12.1.
seemed also to stagger upon this point; and it has always been a dangerous
stone in the way of the Godly, whereat many have stumbled, and some fallen.

Besides, it ordinarily happens that good Princes succeed Tyrants; partly
because they are so indeed, as being instructed to a better manage of
Government, both by the miserable life of their Predecessors, and by the ugly
infamy which remains after their death: partly because by means of the
Comparison they both seem and are reported to be far better than they are.
Hereupon Lampridius says of Alexander Severus, In Alexand.
I may also say, that Alexander was a good Prince by fear, for that
Heliogabalus his Predecessor was both an evil Prince, and also massacred and
slain. Seeing therefore the reason is so manifest, wherefore good Princes
should succeed Tyrants, is it not rashness? is it not impudence? is it not
impiety for us to wade with unclean feet into God's secret Counsels, unknown to
the Angels, and to justify upon this event the Parricide of any Prince? For my
part, I know not whether you show your self more presumptuous in entering into
this observation, or in pursuing it more idle and impure.

I will pass over your protestation of Respect and Obedience due unto Princes:
Protest what you please, we will take you for no other than a vile kind of
vermin, which, if it be permitted to creep into the bowels of any State, will
gnaw the Heart Strings thereof in sunder. This you manifest by the coarse
comparison which presently you annex, that as a natural Body has authority to
cure the Head if it be out of tune, and reason to cut it off oftentimes, if it
were able to take another; so a body Politic has power to cure or cut off the
Head, if it be unsound. But what either Will or Power has any part of the Body
in it self? What either Sense for the one, or Motion for the other, which
proceeds not altogether from the Head? Where is the Reason seated which you
attribute to the Body, both in judging and curing the infirmities of the Head?
Certain it is, that in your cutting-cure you deal like a foolish Physician, who
finding a Body half taken and benumbed with a Palsy, cutteth off that part to
cure the other, and so make sure to destroy both. You suppose, belike, that to
enter into greater perils, is the only remedy of present Dangers. I omit to
press many points of this Comparison against you, because Comparisons do serve
rather to illustrate than enforce: and I know not what assertion you might not
easily make good, if such senceless prating might go for proof.

I come now to your particular Examples, whereof the first is of King Saul;
whom you affirm to be deprived and put to death for his disobedience. Saul
deprived and put to death? I never heard that any of his Subjects did ever lift
up one thought against him. Dreamer, you will say, he was slain by the
Philistines: Good, but who deprived him? It was God (you say) who did deprive
him. You must pardon us, if upon the sudden we do not conceive the mystery of
your meaning: Your words of deprivation and putting to death, do rather import
a judicial proceeding against him, than that God delivered him to be vanquished
by his Enemies in the Field. But what is this to dispossessing by Subjects?
Yes, you say, because whatsoever God has put in ure in his Commonwealth, may
be practiced by others. Why, but then also good Princes may be deposed by their
Subjects, because God delivered Josiah to be slain by the Egyptians.

You Firebrands of Strife, you Trumpets of Sedition, you Red Horses whose
sitters have taken peace from the Earth Apoc. 6.4.
, how impudently do you abuse the Scriptures? how do you defile them with your
filthy Fingers? It is most certain, that David knew, both because Samuel told
him, and because he had the Spirit of Prophecy, that God had rejected Saul,
and designed him to be King in his place: yet his Doctrine was always, not to
touch the Lords Anointed, Ps. 105. 1. reg. 24.
whereto his Actions were also answerable: For when Saul did most violently
persecute him, he defended himself no otherwise than by Flight. During this
pursuit, Saul fell twice into his power; once he did not only spare, but
protect him, and rebuke the Pretorian Soldiers for their negligent watch: The
other time his Heart did smite him, for that he had cut away the lap of his
garment. Lastly, he caused the Messenger to be slain, who upon request, and for
pity, had furthered (as he said) the death of that sacred King. We have a
Precept of Obedience, which is the mould wherein we ought to fashion our
actions. God only is superior to Princes, who uses many instruments in the
execution of his justice, but his authority he has committed unto none.

Your second Example is of King Amon, who was slain (as you write) by his own
people, because he walked not in the ways of the Lord. This is somewhat indeed,
if it be true; let us turn to the Text: 4 reg. 21.
Amon was twenty two years old when be began to reign, etc. and he did evil in
the sight of the Lord, etc. and his servants conspired against him, and slew
him in his house; and the people smote all those who conspired against King
Amon, and made Josiah his son King in his stead. But this is very different
from that which you report. Amon was slain by his Servants, and not by the
people; who were so far from working, that they severely revenged his death.
And although Amon was evil, yet the Scripture lays not his evil for the
motive whereupon his Servants slew him. The Devil himself in alleging the
Scripture, used more honesty and sincerity (if I may so term it) than you: For
he cited the very words, wresting them only to a crooked sense; but you change
the words of the Scripture: you counterfeit God's coin; you corrupt the Records
which he has left us. I will now shake off all respect of civility toward
you, and tell you in flat and open terms, that as one part of your Assertion is
true, that good Kings succeeded Saul and Amon; so the other part, that either
they were, or in right could have been deprived and put to death by their
Subjects, it is a sacrilegious, a loggerheaded lie.

Of your Example of Romulus I have spoken before. I have declared also how the
Romans, presently after the expelling of their Kings, and for that cause, were
almost overwhelmed with the weight of War, being beaten home to the very Gates
of their City. And had not Chocles by a miracle of Manhood sustained the shock
of the Enemies, whilst a Bridge was broken behind him, the Town had been entered,
and their State ruined. And whereas you attribute the enlargement of the
Empire, which happened many Ages after, to this expelling of their Kings, you
might as well have said, that the rebellion against King John was the cause of
the Victories which we have since had in France. I have before declared, that
the state of the Romans under their Consuls, was popular rather in show, than
in deed: This show began also to end, when by the Law Valeria, L. Sylla was
established Dictator for four and twenty years. After this, the Empire did
mightily increase, until the reign of Trajane; at which time all Authors agree
that it was most large; and yet far short of your wandering Survey, not half
Fifteen thousand miles in compass.

In your Example of Caesar, I never saw more untruths crowded together in fewer
words: you say he broke all Laws both Humane and Divine: that is one; his
greatest Enemies did give of him a most honorable testimony. You say he took
all Government into his hands alone: that is two; the people by the Law Servia
elected him perpetual Dictator. You make his death to be an act of the State:
that is three; for they who slew him, were both declared and pursued by Decree
of the State for public Enemies; of whom, not any one, either died a natural
death, or lived three years after: it was further decreed, that the Court where
he was slain should be stopped up, that the Ides of March should be called
parricidium, and that the Senate should never be assembled upon that day. You
say that Augustus was preferred in his place: that is four; and all within the
compass of six Lines. Augustus was never chosen Dictator; Suetonius writes In
Augusto. genu nixus dictaturam deprecatus est.
that he entreated the people upon his knee, not to charge him with that
Office. But Augustus, Antonius, and Lepidus did first knit in Arms by the name
of Triumviri, to revenge the death of Julius Caesar; whereupon a long cruel and
doubtful War was set up, which continued the space of twenty years: first,
between these three and the Murderers of Caesar; then between Lepidus and the
other two: lastly between Augustus and Antonius: and this was the sweet success
of the murder of Caesar.

Augustus, after his Victory was made perpetual Tribune, as Suetonius has
written. Dio says, In Aug. (...). lib. 53.
that he was freed from the power of the Laws, as Pompey also had been before
him. Tacitus adds, In proam.
that the people having their hearts broken with broils, permitted him to rise
into rule, and to draw by degrees the whole Authority of the State into his
hands. Lex regia.
And so it seems that the Royal Law was not yet established, by which the
people gave over their power in Government: Whereupon some make good the
Sentence which the Senate gave against Nero, because the Sovereignty was not
then by any express Act settled in the Emperor.

But where you bring the Succession of Vespasian as a good success of this
Sentence against Nero, it is a wild and witless untruth. Galba succeeded next
after Nero, who was slain in a sedition raised by Otho. Otho again was overcome
in field by Vitellius; whereupon he slew himself. Lastly, Vitellius was
overthrown and slain by the Captains of Vespasian, who was the fourth Emperor
after Nero. These Intestine Wars, these open Battles fought to the full, this
slaughter of Emperors, which you term Interludes, were the immediate success
after the death of Nero. You Fiends of Hell, whose Voices are Lightning and
Thunder, whose breathing is nothing but Sword, Fire, Rages, and Rebellions: the
encountering of Armies, the butchery of millions of men, the Massacre of
Princes, you account Interludes: These are your pleasures; these your
recreations. I hope all Christian-Commonwealths will bear an eye over your
inclination, and keep out both your persons and persuasions, from turning their
State into an open Stage for the acting of these Interludes.

You continue your base boldness in affiring, that the Senate procured the
death of Domitian; that they requested the Soldiers to kill Heliogabalus; that
they invited Constantine to come and do justice upon Maxentius: this broken
kind of disguising is familiar unto you, to make such violences as have often
prevailed against excellent Princes, to seem to be the act of the whole State.
And whereas you bring the succession of Alexander Severus for a good success of
the murder of Heliogabalus, being the rarest Prince (you say) that ever the
Romans had, you might have alleged any Author in proof thereof better than
Herodian, who writes of him in this manner. lib. 6
Alexander did bea^ the name and Ensigns of the Empire; but the administration
of Affairs and government of the State did rest upon women. And further he
writes, that by his slackness and cowardice, the Roman Army was defeated by
the Persians: and finally, that for his want of courage he was slain by his own
Soldiers. By this we may see that you go blindfold, being so far from caring,
that many times you scarce know what you write.

Your markable Example (as you term it) of the change of the Empire, from the
West to the East; from Constantine the sixth, to Charles King of France, does
mark out nothing more unto us than your soundred judgment. The question is not
what one foreign Prince may do against another, but what Subjects may do
against their Sovereign? This is the point of controversy; here you must
close, and not traverse about in discourses impertinent.

The change of the Kingdom of France from Childeric to Pepin, your own Author
Girard lib. 1. de l'state de France.
affirms to be both an ambitious and fraudulent usurpation, wherein Pepin
used the reverence of Religion as a Mantle to cover his Impiety and Rebellion.
The matters which he objected against Childerick were two: First, his
insufficiency, the ordinary pretense of most Rebellions; but Girard says
Ibidem.
that the ancient custom of the French was, to love and honor their Kings,
whether sufficient or unable, worthy or weak; and that the name of King was
esteemed sacred by whomsoever it was born. Secondly, he objected, that his
Subjects were conditionally sworn unto him: and this also Girard writes to be
a forced and cautelous interpretation, violently streining the words of their
Oath to his advantage; and indeed, if the Oath of the people had been
conditional, what needed they to procure a Dispensation for the same? This was
the first act (says he) whereby the Popes took occasion to set in their foot
of Authority for transporting of Kingdoms from one Race to another: which
growing to strength, has filled all Christian Countries with confusion and
tumult.

Likewise, the change of that Kingdom from the Line of Pepin to the Line of
Capet, was a mere violence and intrusion, and so it was acknowledged by Ends
Earl of Paris, the first of that Family who did usurp Girard fo. 52.
: and for that cause he was constrained after two years reign to quit the
Crown, and to give place unto Charles the lawful Heir. And when Robert, brother
unto Ends, did enter into arm^ to recover that which his Brother once held he
was beaten down and slain by the faithful Subjects of King Charles. Hugh, the
son of Robert nourished this ambition; but Hugh Capet his son, with better both
opportunity and success, but no better right, did accomplish the Enterprise.
For Girard Fo. 58. de l'state.
calls him an Usurper, and Charles Duke of L^^rain the true Heir to the
Crown. Betwee^ these two (as in all usurpations it is usual) War was raised;
but by the unsearchable Judgment of God the Duke of Orleans was cast to the
ground. And there is little doubt but, if he had prevailed, Orleans had bee^ at
this day a Member of the Crown of France.

The like answer may be given to your Example of Suintilla: and this beside,
that the Kingdom of the Goths in Spain was not the^ settled in succession, and
chiefly during the Reign of Victeric, Gundemir, Sisebuth, Suintilla, Sicenand,
Cinthilla, and Tulca.

The History of Alphonso, another of your Examples, stands thus. Alphonso had
a son called Ferdinand, who died during the life of his father, and left two
young sons behind him. After the death of Ferdinand, his younger Brother Sancho
practiced with D. Lope Diaz de Haro Lord of Biscay, to procure him to be
advanced to the succession of the Kingdom, before his Nephews. D. Lope
undertook the devise; and drawing some other of the Nobility to the party, they
so wrought with the King, that in an Assembly of the States at Segovia, Sancho
was declared Successor, and the Children of Ferdinand appointed to be kept in
Prison. But Sancho, either impatient to linger in expectation, or suspicious
that his Father grew inclinable toward his Nephews, made a League with Mahomed
Mir King of Granado, a Moor; by whose aid, and by the Nobility of his Faction,
he caused himself to be declared King. Hereupon Alphonso was enforced to crave
assistance of Jacob Aben Joseph King of Morocco, who before had been an Enemy
to Alphonso: but upon detestation of his unnatural Rebellion, he sent Forces to
him, protesting notwithstanding, that so soon as the War should be ended, he
would become his Enemy again. So Alphonso by help, partly of the Morocco Moors,
and partly of his Subjects which remained loyal, maintained against his son
both his Title and State during his life; but not without extremity of
bloodshed, and opportunity for the Moors, being assistant to both parties, to
make themselves more strong within the Countries of Spain. For this cause
Alphonso disinherited his son by his Testament, and cast a cruel curse upon him
and his Posterity: and afterward it was ordained in an Assembly of the States
holden at Tero, that the Children of the elder Brother deceased, should be
preferred before their Uncle.

How then will you verify your two points by this History? First, that
Alphonso was deprived by a public Act of Parliament: Secondly, that it turned
to the great Commodity of the State. It is not a million of Masses that are
sufficient to satisfy for all your deceitful and malicious untruths. I marvel
how the Rebellion of Absolon against King David his Father escaped you: Oh, it
wanted success; and you could not easily disguise the Report.

You write, that the Commonwealth of Spain resolving to depose Don Pedro the
cruel, sent for his Brother Henry out of France, and required him to bring a
strength of Frenchmen with him: But hereby you make it plain, that the
Commonwealth was not fully agreed. The truth is, that this was a dangerous
division of the State between two Concurrents; some holding for Henry, and some
for Pedro* Henry obtained foreign Assistance by the French; Pedro by the
English. In the mean time, whilst Peter was thrown out of State by the Forces
of France, and after that Henry by the Arms of England; and again Peter
dejected both from dignity and life; the poor Country became a Spectacle for
one of your Enterludes.

Your Example of Don Sancho Capello King of Portugal, contains many
intolerable untruths: for neither was he deprived of his dignity, neither did
the Pope and Council of Lions give either authority or consent that he should
be deprived; neither was he driven out of his Realm into Castilla; neither died
he in banishment; neither was Alphonso his Brother King during his li^e. These
five untruths you huddle into one heap. The Council of Lions wholly opposed
against the deposing of Don Sancho, notwithstanding many disabilities were
objected against him: in regard whereof they gave direction, that Alphonso his
Brother should be Regent of the Realm; as in that case it is both usual and
fit. But Sancho taking this to dislike, did seek Aid of the King of Castile,
and in that pursuit ended his life without Issue: whereby the right of
Succession devolved to Alphonso.

To your Examples of Greek Emperors c. 5. p. 84.
I will answer by your words, which are, That for the most part they came not
orderly to the Crown, but many times the means thereof were tribulent and
seditious.

The deposing of Henry King of Polonia, I acknowledge to be both true and just;
I have nothing to except against it* When the Crown of France did descend unto
him, he forsook Polonia, and refused to return again to that swaggering
Government; whereupon they did depose him. Give us the like case, and you shall
be allowed the like proceeding; but you esteem your Examples by tale, and not
by touch: being not much unlike a certain mad Fellow in Athens, who imagined
every Ship which was brought into the Haven to be his: For whatsoever you find
of a King deposed, you lay claim unto it, as both lawfully done, and pertaining
to your purpose; whereas one of these does always fail.

Concerning your two Examples, one of Sweden, and the other of Denmark, I shall
have occasion to speak hereafter. The Nobility of those Countries pretend that
their Kings are not Sovereign, but that the power in highest matters of State
pertains unto them. If it be thus, the Examples are not appliable to the
Question; if it be otherwise, then the Princes had wrong.

We are now come to our domestical Examples; the first whereof is that of King
John, who was deposed by the Pope, you say at the suit of his own people. All
this people was the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of London, and the
Bishop of Ely; at whose complaint, the Pope did write to Philip King of France,
that he should expel King John out of his Realm. If not Conscience, if not
ordinary Honesty, pure Shame should have drawn you to another form of writing.
He was also deprived (you say) afterward by his Barons. H^avy Beast, call you
this a Deprivation? The Commons were never called to consent; the Clergy were
so opposite to those that stood in Arms against King John, that they procured
Excommunication against them; first, ^^^^c^ally; then by name* lastly, Jews
the French Kings son was also included: Of the N^b^lity, which is only the
third State of the Realm, I make no doubt but some reserved themselves to be
guided by success; others, and namely the Earls of Warren, Arundel, Chester,
Pembrooke, Ferrers, Salisbury, and diverse Barons did openly adhere unto King
John: You may as well call any other Rebellion a Deprivation, as affirm that
the rest either did or might deprive him. And whereas you bring in King Henry
the Third as a most worthy Successor after this Deprivation, I will derogate
nothing from his worthiness; but there was never King in England, who without
concurrent in the Title of the Crown, did draw more blood out of the sides of
his Subjects.

Your second Example is of King Edward the Second, whom many of our Histories
report to be of a good and courteous nature, and not unlearned; imputing his
defects rather to Fortune, than either to counsel or carriage of his Affairs.
His Deposition was a violent fury, led by a Wife both cruel and unchaste; and
can with no better countenance of right be justified, than may his lamentable
both indignities and death which thereupon did ensue. And although the
Nobility, by submitting themselves to the government of his Son, did break
those occasions of Wars which do usually rise upon such Disorders, yet did not
the hand of God forget to pursue revenge: For albeit King Edward his Son
enjoyed both a long and prosperous Reign, yet his next Successor King Richard
the second, was in the like violent manner imprisoned, deprived, and put to
death. I will prosecute the successive revenge which hereof also ensued, being
a strange matter, and worthy to be rung into the ears of all Ages. King Henry
the Fourth, by whom King Richard was deposed, did exercise the chiefest Acts of
his Reign in executing those who conspired with him against King Richard. His
Son had his Virtue well seconded by Felicity; during whose Reign, by means of
the Wars in France, the humor against him was otherwise employed and spent:
but his next Successor King Henry the Sixth, was in the very like manner
deprived, and together with his young Son Edward, imprisoned and put to death
by King Edward the Fourth. This Edward died not without suspicion of poison;
and after his death his two Sons were in like manner disinherited, imprisoned,
and murdered by their cruel Uncle the Duke of Gloucester; who being both a
Tyrant and Usurper, was justly encountered and slain by King Henry the Seventh
in the field. So infallible is the Law of Justice in revenging Cruelties and
Wrongs, not always observing the presence of times wherein they are done, but
often calling them into reckoning, when the Offenders retain least memory of
them.

Likewise the deposition of King Richard the Second was a tempestuous Rage,
neither led nor restrained by any Rules of Reason or of State; not suddenly
raised and at once, but by very cunning and artificial degrees. But examine his
actions without distempred judgment, and you will not condemn him to be
exceeding either insufficient or evil: weigh the Imputations that were objected
against him, and you shall find nothing either of any truth or of great moment.

Hollingshead writes In Richard 2.
, that he was most unthankfully used by his Subjects; for although, through the
frailty of his youth, he demeaned himself more dissolutely than was agreeable
to the Royalty of his estate, yet in no Kings days the Commons were in greater
wealth, the Nobility more honored, and the Clergy less wronged: who
notwithstanding in the evil-guided strength of their Will took head against
him, to their own headlong-destruction afterward: partly during the Reign of
King Henry, his next Successor, whose greatest Achievements were against his
own people; but more especially in succeeding times, when upon occasion of this
disorder more English blood was spent than was in all the foreign Wars which
had been since the Conquest. Three causes are commonly insinuated by you, for
which a King may be deposed; Tyranny, Insufficiency, and Impiety: But what
Prince could hold his State, what People their Quiet assured, if this your
Doctrine should take place? How many good Princes does Envy brand with one of
these marks? What action of State can be so ordered, that either blind
Ignorance or set Malice will not easily strain to one of these heads? Every
execution of Justice, every demand of Tribute or Supply, shall be claimed
Tyranny: every unfortunate Event shall be exclaimed Insufficiency: every kind
of Religion shall by them of another Sect be proclaimed Impiety. So dangerous
it is to permit this high power to a heedless and headless Multitude, who
measure things not by Reason and Justice, but either by Opinion, which commonly
is partial, or else by Report, which usually is full of uncertainties and
errors: the most part doing because others do; all easy to become slavish to
any man's ambitious attempt. So dangerous it is to open our ears to every
foolish Phaeton, who undertaking to guide the Chariot of the Sun, will soon
cast the whole Earth into combustion.

You proceed, that King Henry the Sixth was also deposed for defects in
Government. Let us yield a little to you, that you may be deceived; a little
that you may be carried by your affections: How can you excuse these open
untruths, wherein it cannot be but the Devil has a finger? You cannot be
ignorant that the only cause which drew the Family of York into Arms against
King Henry, was the Title which they had unto the Crown: by virtue whereof it
was first enacted, That Rich. Duke of York should succeed King Henry, after his
death: but for that he made unseasonable attempts, he was declared by
Parliament incapable of succession, and afterward slain at the Battle of
Wakefield.

Then Edward his Son, prosecuting the enterprise, and having vanquished King
Henry at the Battle of St. Albans, obtained possession of the State, caused
King Henry to be deposed, and himself to be proclaimed and Crowned King.
Afterward he was chased out of the Realm, and by Act of Parliament both
deprived and disabled from the Crown. Lastly, he returned again, and deprived
King Henry both from Government and from Life. It is true, that some defects
were objected against King Henry; but this was to estrange the hearts of the
people from him. The main cause of the War did proceed from the right of the
one party, and possession of the other: The contrariety of the Acts of
Parliament was caused, by the alternative Victories of them both.

Your last example is of King Richard the Third, of whom you write: First, that
although he sinned in murdering his Nephews, yet after their death he was
lawful King. Secondly, that he was deposed by the Commonwealth, who called out
of France Henry Earl of Richmond, to put him down. Philosophers say, that
dreams do commonly arise, by a reflection of the fancy upon some subject,
whereof we have meditated the day before. It may be that your drowsy conceit
was here cast into a dream, of that whereon it had dozed in all this Chapter:
Or at the best, that you are like unto those, who have so often told a lie,
that they persuade themselves it is ture. King Edward the fourth left other
children besides those that were murdered; the Duke of Clarence also, who was
elder Brother to King Richard, left Issue in life, all which had precedence of
right before him. And as for the second point, tell me, I pray you, by what
Parliament was King Richard deposed? where did the States assemble? when did
they send for the Earl of Richmond to put him down? by what Decree? by what
Messengers? There is no answer to be made, but one; and that is, to confess
ingenuously, that you say untrue; and that it is your usual manner of
deceiving, to impute the act of a few unto all; and to make every event of
Arms, to be a judicial proceeding of the Commonwealth. For it is manifest, that
the Earl of Richmond had his first strength from the King of France; and that
after his descent into England, more by half, both of the Nobility and common
people did stand for King Richard, than stir against him. You adjoyn for a
special consideration, that most excellent Princes succeeded these whom you
affirm to be deposed. I will not extenuate the excellency of any Prince; but I
hold it more worthy to be considered, that these disorders spent England a sea
of blood.

In the end you conclude, that all these deprivations of Princes were lawful.
Nay; by your favor, if you sweat out your brains, you shall never evince, that
a fact is lawful because it is done. Yes (you say) for otherwise two great
inconveniences would follow: One, that the acts of those that were put in their
place, should be void and unjust. The other, that none who now pretend to these
Crowns, could have any Title, for that they descended from them, who succeeded
those that were deprived.

You deserve now to be basted with words well steeped in Vinegar and Salt; but
I will be more charitable unto you, and leave bad speeches to black mouths. For
the first, the possession of the Crown purges all defects, and makes good the
acts of him that is in Authority, although he wants both capacity and right.
And this does Vlpian expressly determine In l. Barbarius. D. de offic. praesid.
upon respect (as he says) to the common good. For the other point, the
Successors of an Usurper, by course and compass of time, may prescribe a right;
if they who have received wrong, discontinue both pursuit and claim.
Panormitane^ says In c. cura pastoralis de jure patron.
, Successor in Dignitate potest praescribere, non abstante vitio sui
Praedecessoris. A Successor in Dignity may prescribe, notwithstanding the fault
of his Predecessor; Otherwise, causes of War should be immortal, and Titles
perpetually remain uncertain.

Now then for summary collection of all that you have said: your Protestations
are good; your Proofs light and loose; your Conclusions both dangerous and
false. The first does savor of God, the second of Man, the third of the Devil.

An Answer to the fourth Chapter, which bears title,
Wherein consists principally the lawfulness of proceeding against Princes,
which in the former Chapter is mentioned. What interest Princes have in their
Subjects goods or lives. How Oaths do bind or may be broken, of Subjects
toward their Princes; and finally, the difference between a good King and a
Tyrant.
HEre you close with Bellaie upon two points: First, whether a King is subject
to any Law. Secondly, whether all Temporalities are in propriety the King's:
But because these questions do little pertain to our principal Controversy, I
will not make any stay upon them; it suffices that we may say with Seneca De
benefic. lib. 7. c. 5.
: Omnia Rex imperio possidel, singuli domino. The King has Empire, every man
his particular propriety in all things.

After this, you proceed further to make ood, that the Princes beforementioned
were lawfully deposed; and that by all Law, both Divine and Humane, Natural,
National, and Positive. Your cause is so bad, that you have need to set a bold
countenance upon it. But what Divine Laws do you allege? You have largely
before declared (you say) that God does approve the form of Government which
every Commonwealth does choose, as also the Conditions and Statutes which it
does appoint unto her Prince. I must now take you for a natural liar, when you
will not forbear to belie your self: you never proved any such matter; and the
contrary is evident, that sometimes entire Governments, often, Customs and
Statutes of State, and very commonly accidental actions are so unnatural and
unjust, that (otherwise than for a punishment and curse) we cannot say that God
does approve them. We have often heard that the Church cannot err in matters
of Faith; but that in matter of Government a Commonwealth cannot err, it was
never (I assure my self) published before.

But let us suppose (supposal is free) that God allows that form of
Government which every Commonwealth does choose: Does it therefore follow, that
by all Divine Laws Princes may be deposed by their Subjects? These broken
pieces will never be squared to form strong argument. But wherefore do not you
produce the Divine Canons of Scripture? Surely, they abhor to speak one word in
your behalf: yea, they do give express sentence against you, as I have showed
before.

Well, let this pass among your least escapes; in making God either the Author
or Aider of Rebellion, you allege no other Humane Law, but that Princes are
subject to Law and Order. I will not deny but there is a duty for Princes to
perform: But how prove you that their Subjects have power to depose them if
they fail? In this manner: As the Commonwealth gave them their Authority for
the common good, so it may also take the same away, if they abuse it. But I
have manifested before Cap. 2.
, both that the people may so grant away their Authority that they cannot
resume it; and also that few Princes in the world hold their State by grant of
the people. I will never hereafter esteem a man's valor by his voice: Your
brave boast of all Laws, Divine, Humane, Natural, National and Positive, is
dissolved into smoke: You busy your self as the Poets write of Morpheus, in
presenting shadows to men asleep.

But the chiefest reason (you say) the very ground and foundation of all. Soft;
What reason? what ground? if you have already made proof by all Laws, Humane
and Divine, Natural, National and Positive, what better reason; what surer
ground will you bring? Tush; these interruptions? The chiefest reason (you say)
the very ground and foundation of all is, that the Commonwealth is superior to
the Prince; and that the Authority which the Prince has, is not absolute, but
by the way of mandate and commission from the Commonwealth.

This is that which I expected all this time: you have hitherto approached by
stealing steps, you are now come close to the wall; do but mount into credit,
and the fort is your own. You affirmed at the first, that Princs might be
deposed for disability; then, for misgovernment; now, upon pleasure and at
will. For they who have given authority by commission, do always retain more
than they grant C. dudum de praeb. lib. 6.
; and are not excluded either from Commanding or Judging, by way of prevention,
concurrence, or evocation; even in those cases which they have given in charge
l. judicium solvitur. D. de judic.
: The reason is declared by Vlpian, l. solet. de jurisd.
Because he to whom Jurisdiction is committed represents his person who gave
commission, and not his own. Hereupon Alexander In l. ult. de jurisd.
, Panormitane In c. pastoralis de off. ord.
, Innocentius, and Felinus In c. cum ecclesiarum. eo.
, do affirm, that they may cast their Commissioners out of power when they
please, because, as Paulus says In d. l. judicium.
a man can judge no longer, when he forbids who gave authority.

Further, all States take denomination from that part wherein the supreme power
is settled; as if it be in one Prince, it is called a Monarchy; if in many of
highest rank, then it is an Aristocracy; if in the people, then a Democracy.
Whereupon it follows; if the people are superior to the Prince, if the
Prince has no power but by commission from them, that then all Estates are
popular: for we are not so much to respect who does execute this high Power of
State, as from whom immediately it is derived. Hereto let us add that which you
have said in another place Cap* 2.
; that in popular Governmens there is nothing but sedition, trouble, tumults,
outrages, and injustices upon every light occasion; and then we shall perceive,
first, that you want the art of a wise deceiver, not to be entangled in your
tale. Secondly, that this is mere poison, which the Devil has dropped out of
your Pen, to infect Christian Countries with disobedience and disorder. In a
word, to the contrary of this your impudent untruth, our Laws do acknowledge
supreme authority in the Prince within the Realm and Dominions of England, 1
El. 1.
neither can Subjects bear themselves either superior or equal to their
Sovereign; or attempt violence either against his person or estate, but as well
the Civil Law L. 1. d. ad. l. Jul. majest.
, as the particular Laws and Customs of all Countries, do adjudge it high and
heinous Treason. I will speak now without passion: What reason have we, to
accept your idle talk for a kind of authority, against the Judgment and Laws of
most Nations in the world?

You proceed, that the power of a Prince is given to him by the Commonwealth,
with such conditions and exceptions, as if the same be not kept, the people
stand free. That the Prince receives his power under plain conditions, you go
about to prove afterward: now you hold on, that in all mutual contracts, if one
side recede from promise, the other remains not obliged: And this you prove
by two Rules of the Law. The first is Frustra fidem sibi quis postulat servari
ab eo, cui fidem a se praestitam servare recusat.
, He does in vain require promise to be kept of another man, to whom he
refuses to perform that which he promised. The other is Non obstringitur quis
ad implendum quod juravit si ab (...) part (...) impletur, cujus respe^tu
praebuit juramentum.
A man is not bound to perform his Oath, if on the other part, that be not
performed, in respect whereof he did swear.

Poor fellow, had you been as conversant in the light of Law, and clear course
of Justice, as you are in the smoke and dust of some corner of a College, you
would never have concluded so generally so confidently upon any of the Rules of
Law, which are subject for the most part unto many exceptions. Alexander In l.
cum proponas c. de pact.
and Felinus In c. pervenit 2. de jurejur.
do assign five fallencies unto these Rules: Socinus In tract. fallen reg. 199.
gives the contrary Rule: To him that breaks his faith or oath, faith ought
to be kept; and then restrains it with seven limitations. But all affirm,
that in those offices which are mutual between any persons, by the Law of
Nature or of God; as between the Father and the Child, the Husband and the
Wife, the Master and Servant, the Prince and the Subject; although the same be
further assured by Promise or by Oath, the breach of duty in the one, is no
discharge unto the other.

And therefore if the Father performs not his duty toward his Children, they
are not thereby acquitted both of the obedience and care, which God and Nature
exacteth of them; howsoever Solon in his Laws discharged Children from
nourishing their Parents, if they did not train them in some Trade, whereby
they might acquire their living. Much less are Subjects exempted from
Obedience, if the Prince either err or be defective in Government; because the
like respect is not due unto Parents as unto Princes (as I have somewhat
touched before) insomuch as a Son that bears authority, has right both to
command and compel the Father I. ille a quo and l. s^q.
.

This was declared among the Romans, by that which Plutarch In apopht.
, Livie Lib. 24.
, Valerius Lib. 2. c. 1.
, and Gellius Lib. 2. c. 2.
, do report of Q. Fabius: to whom, being Consul, when Fabius Maximus his
Father, who had been Consul the year before, did approach sitting upon his
Horse, the Son commanded him by a Sergeant to alight: the Father not only
obeyed, but highly commended both the Courage and Judgment of his Son, in
maintaining the Majesty which he did bear, and in preferring a public both
Duty and Authority before private. Upon those examples Paulus the Lawyer did
write L. postliminium.
, that public discipline was in higher estimation among the Roman Parents,
filius D. de capit. and postlim.
than the love of Children.

After an impertinent discourse, that upon diverse considerations an Oath ought
not to be performed; you annex another cause wherefore Subjects may withdraw
their Allegiance; and that is, when it should turn to the notable damage of the
Commonwealth: And both these you affirm to be touched, in the deprivation of
Childerick King of France. But I regard not what was touched in the deprivation
of Childeric; I have answered to that in the Chapter next before; I require
either Arguments or Authority of more tough temper. Well then, let us turn back
the leaf, and there we shall find a Rule of the Law (because by Rules only you
will only beat down Rule) c. In malis de reg. jur. in 6.
In evil promises it is not expedient to keep faith: Which is also confirmed by
a sentence of Isid^rus 22. q. 4.4. c. 5.
: In evil promises, break your word; in a dishonest oath change your purpose.

Well fare your wits, good soul; Do you account the promise of obedience evil?
not so (I suppose you will say) but it turns to be evil when it turns to
the notable detriment of the Commonwealth. It is one of your peculiar gifts,
the further you go, the more impious you declare your self. For if you take the
word evil in no higher sense than for detriment and damage, it would follow
upon your rule, that a man were no further tied to his promise, than the
performance thereof were advantageable unto him. You would enforce also, that
if the Father does dissipate his patrimonial Estate, and run a course to ruin
his Family, the Children and the Wife may thereupon disavow their duties.

But if we take a true touch of this point, we shall find that the vices of any
Prince are not sufficient of themselves to overthrow a State, except thereupon
Rebellions be raised, which will draw all things into confusion. For there is
no Prince, which either has lived, or can almost be imagined to live, in so
little sense of humanity, but generally he both favors and maintains some
order of Justice; only against particular persons, some of them have violently
been carried by the tempest of their passion, whereby notwithstanding the
inordinate desires of one man, cannot possibly reach to the ruin of all.

So says Suetonius, In Domit.
that under Domitian the provinces were well governed, only certain private men
at Rome, felt the evil of his cruelty and other vices. But when the people do
break into tumult, then all course of Justice is stopped; then is either
assistance made, or resistance weakened for forain Invasion; then is every one
raised into hope who cannot fly but with other men's Feathers; then, as when a
fierce Horse has cast his Rider, the Reins are loosed to those insolences,
which a dissolute people, nothing restrained either by honesty or ^^ar do
usually commit. For as it is the nature of men, when they come ou^ of one
extremity wherein they have been holden by force, to run with a swift course
into another, without staying in the midst; so the people breaking out of
Tyranny, if they be not hold back, will run headlong into unbridled liberty;
and the harder they were kept under before, the more insolently will they then
insult.

I observe that Saint Paul* alleges two reasons wherefore we should be
obedient even to wicked and cruel Princes: one is for conscience sake, Because
they are the ministers of God To. 13.
* and in their Royalty do bear his Image: Another, for the safety and
tranquillity of our selves; that we may lead under them a quiet and peaceable
life 1 Timothy 2 2.
. Whereupon the Prophet Jeremiah ^. c. 2^.7.
also exhorted the Jews to seek the peace of the City whither they should be
transported, because in the p^ace thereof their quiet should consist: For by
obedience, a few particulars remain in danger; by Rebellion, all; by Obedience,
we can be under the Tyranny but of one; by Rebellion we are exposed to the
Rapine and Cruelty of many; by the one nothing, by the other all things are
permitted. Upon this ground Saint Augustine said; Generale quippe pactum est
humanae societatis, regibus obedire. confess. lib. 2.
It is a general covenant of humane Society to obey Kings: And likewise St.
Ambrose Magnum est and speciale documentum, etc. ad Auxentium
It is a great and special point of doctrine whereby Christians are taught to
be subject unto higher powers.

Three ways a cruel Prince may work violence against his Subjects; upon their
Goods; upon their Persons; and upon their Consciences, by commanding them to
commit that which is evil. Of the first, St. Ambrose says: Ad Auxentium.
If the Emperor demands tribute, we do not deny him: If he desires Fields,
let him take them if he please: I do not give them to the Emperor; but
therewith also I do not deny them. Of the second, Tertullian writes Apol.
as I have alleged him before: For what War are we unserviceable or unfit,
although unequal in number, who do so willingly suffer death? Yea, he was so
far from judging it lawful to resist, that he thought it scarce allowable to
fly. In the third case, not your rule of Law, but the rule of the Apostles
takes place: It is better to obey GOD than man Act. 4:
: whereby the Subject is not bound to yield obedience.

But how? he is not bound to obey by doing, but by suffering he is: He is not
bound to obey in doing that only which is evil; but he is not thereby freed
from doing any other thing which is lawfully commanded. St. Augustine says, In
Psalm.
Julian was an Infidel Emperor, an Apostata, an Idolater; Christian Soldiers
did serve this Infidel Emperor; when he would have them worship Idols, and
offer Frankincense unto them, they preferred God before him: but when he said,
Bring forth the Army, march against such a Nation, they did presently obey. All
this seems to be confirmed by God himself, who after he had forewarned the
people of Israel by the mouth of Samuel, 1 Samuel 8.
what heavy, what open injustice they should endure under some of their Kings,
he concludes in these words: And ye shall cry out in that day because of your
King, and the Lord will not hear you. As if he had said: you shall grudge at
this burden, you shall groan under it; but you shall not have power, either to
shrink from it, or to shake it off.

Surely, if you had been advisied, you would privily have blown your
Blasphemies into the ears of those Idiots, who adore you for the great
Penitentiaries of the Sea of Rome, and esteem your idle imaginations as the
Articles of their Faith: and not so publicly have poured forth your self into
these Paradoxes, both impious and absurd; not so boisterously have stepped,
like Hercules Furens, upon the open stage of the world, to denounce deprivation
against all Princes. You would not thus confidently have opposed your
hotheaded assertion against all the ancient Fathers of the Church. You would
not thus ignorantly have troubled the Waters of true humane Wisdom, by
corrupting the sense of the Civil Laws: you would not thus profanely have
abused the Scriptures in maintaining Rebellion, as Conjurers do in invocating
the Devil. For first, you are thereby discovered to be neither religious,
modest, nor wise: Secondly, you have run your self into the compass of a Canon,
in the Council of Chalcedon. C. conjurationum xj q j.
Wherein it is thus decreed against you: If Clerks shall be found to be
contrivers of Conspiracies, or raisers of Factions, let them be degraded.

After this you declare who is a Tyrant; and that is a King, (you say) if once
he does decline from his duty: which is a large description, and fit to set all
Christian Countries on float with Blood. Comines says, that he is to be
esteemed a good King, whose virtues are not overballanced by vice.

I omit your thick error in putting no difference between a Magistrate and a
King, with many other of like quality; and do come now to a principal point of
your strength: That Christian Princes at this day are admitted upon conditions,
and likewise with protestations, that if they do not perform the same, their
Subjects are free from all allegiance. This you will prove by the particular
Oaths of all Princes, if the overrunning of your tongue may have the full
course without encounter.

An Answer to the fifth Chapter, which is entitled,
Of the Coronation of Princes, and manner of admitting to their Authority; and
the Oaths which they do make in the same unto the Commonwealth for their good
Government.
FIrst I will preface, that no Prince is sovereign, who acknowledges himself
either subject or accountable to any but to God; even as Marcus Aurelius said,
That Magistrates were Judges of private men, and the Prince of Magistrates, and
God of the Prince. In regard of this immediate subjection, Princes are most
especially obliged to the Laws of God and of Nature: for In l. 2. D. de servi^.
8^ aqua.
Baldus, ^ons. 2.^.
Alexander, De legi
Speculator, In (...) c. ^. con^^^jus.
all Interpreters, c. sunt (...) 25. (...)
the Law it self, do affirm, that Princes are more strictly bound to these
Laws, than any of their Subjects. Whereof ^
Dionysius the Tyrant had some sense, when he said unto his Mother, Nunc.
That he was able to dispense with the Laws of Syracusa, but against the Laws
of Nature he had no power. If therefore a Prince does profess that he will bear
himself r^gardful of the accomplishment of these Laws, he does not condition or
restrain himself, but (...) honorable promise of endeavor (...) discharge his
Duty, being tied thereby to no scanter scope than he was before. The reason
hereof is, L. 3. D. de leg. 1. Dec. in reg. 77. n. 10.
Quia expressio ejus quod tacit inest, nihil operatur: The expressing of that
which is secretly understood, works nothing.

Again, when the Promise is not annexed to the Authority, but voluntarily and
freely made by the Prince, his Estate is not thereby made conditional. For the
Interpreters of the Civil Law do consent in this Rule In l. jurisgentium
, Pacta conventa quae contractibus non insunt, Quinimo
non formant actionem: Covenants which are not inherent in Contracts, do not
form an Action. And therefore although by all Laws, both of Conscience and
State, a Prince is bound to perform his Promise; because (as the Master of
Sentences says) God himself will stand obliged to his word: yet is not the
authority, but the person of the Prince hereby affected; the person is both
tied and touched in honor, the authority cease not, if performances do fail.

Of this sort was that which you report of Trajan, who in delivering the Sword
to his Governors, would say, If I reign justly, then use it for me; if
otherwise, then use it against me: But where you add, that these are the very
same words in effect which Princes do use at their Coronations, (pardon me, for
it is fit I should be moved) you will find it to be a very base lie. Of this
nature was that also which the same Trajan did (to encourage his Subjects to do
the like) in taking an Oath to observe the Laws: which Pliny the younger did
account so strange, as the like before had not been seen. But afterward
Theodoric did follow that fact; whereupon Cassiodorus says, Ecce, Trajani
nostri clarum seculis reparamus exemplum; jurat vobis per quem juratis: We
repair the famous example of Trajan; he swears to you by whom you swear. So
when King Henry the Fifth was accepted for Successor to the Crown of France, he
made promise to maintain the Parliament in the liberties thereof. And likewise
diverse Princes do give their faith to maintain the privileges of the Church,
and not to change the Laws of the Realm: which Oath is interpreted by In l.
claris l. de fideis.
Baldus, In c. pro illorum de prebend.
Panormitane, and Cons. 220. lib. 6. and cons. 122 and 125. l. 4.
Alexander, to extend no further than when the Laws shall be both profitable
and just; because Justice and the common benefit of Subjects, is the principal
point both of the Oath and Duty of a Prince, whereto all other clauses must be
referred. And now to your Examples.

First, because in all the rank of the Hebrew Kings you cannot find either
Condition or Oath; not in the ancient Empires and Kingdoms of the world; not
usually in the flourishing time of the Roman State, both under Heathen and
Christian Emperors; because these times are too pure for your purpose, you
fumble forth a dull Conjecture: That for so much as the first Kings were elected
by the People, it is like that they did it upon conditions and assurances for
themselves. That the first Kings received not their Authority from the people,
I have manifested before In c. 1.
: and yet your inference hereupon is no other, than if you should sue in some
Court for a Legacy, alleging nothing for your intent, but that it is like the
Testator should leave you something; in which case it is like (I suppose) that
your Plea would be answered with a silent scorn.

After a few loose Speeches, which no man would stoop to gather together, you
bring in the example of Anastasius the first Emperor of Constantinople; of
whom the Patriarch Euphemius required before his Coronation, a Confession of
the Faith in writing, wherein he should promise to innovate nothing. And
further, he promised to take away certain Oppressions, and to give Offices
without money. Let us take things as they are, and not speak upon idle
imagination, but agreeable to sense. What either Condition or Restraint do you
find in these words? Condition they do not form, because in case of failance
they do not make the Authority void: neither do they make Restraint, because
they contain no point whereunto the Law of God did not restrain him. All this
he was bound to perform without an Oath; and if he were a thousand times sworn,
he was no more but bound to perform it: even as if a Father should give his
word to cloth and feed his Child; or the Husband to love his Wife; or any man
to discharge that duty which God and Nature does require. It is true, that
Anastasius was both a wicked man, and justly punished by God for the breach of
his Faith; but his Subjects did never challenge to be free therefore from their
Allegiance.

The same Answer may be given to the Promise, which Michael the first gave to
Nicephorus the Patriarch, That he would not violate the Ordinances of the
Church, nor embrue his hands with innocent blood; especially if you take the
word Ordinances for matters necessary to be believed: but if you take it in a
larger sense, then have I also declared in the beginning of this Chapter, how
far the Promise does extend.

Your next Example is of the Empire of Almain; from whence all that you object
does fall within this circle. After the death of Charles the Great, the Empire
was held by Right of Succession, until his Line was determined in Conrade the
First: After whose death it became Elective: first, in Henry Duke of Saxony;
then in Otho his son; and afterward in the rest: from whom notwithstanding no
other promise was wrested, but the discharge of that duty, which they were
informed, or rather threatened, that God would severely exact at their hands.
But (as in all Elective States it usually happens) at every new change and
choice, the Emperor was deplumed of some of his Feathers, until in the end he
was made naked of Authority, the Princes having drawn all power to themselves.

So by degrees the Empire was changed from a Monarchy to a pure Aristocracy;
the Emperor bearing the Title thereof, but the Majesty and Puissance remaining
in the States. During which weakness of the Emperor, some points were added to
his Oath, which seemed to derogate from the sovereignty of his estate. But what
is this to those Princes who have retained their dignity, without any
diminution either of Authority or of Honor?

The like may be said of Polonia, which not many hundred years since was
erected into a Kingdom; and although the States did challenge therein a right
of Election, yet did it always pass according to propinquity of blood, and was
esteemed a sovereign Monarchy; until after the death of Casimire the Great,
when Lodovicus his Nephew King of Hungary, rather greedy than desirous to be
King also of Polonia, did much abase the Majesty thereof. Yet falling afterward
into the Line of Iagello, who married one of the daughters of Lodowiek, it
recovered the ancient both dignity and strength. But when that Line also failed
in Sigismond Augustus, the last Male of that Family, the States elected Henry
Duke of Anjou for their King, with this clause irritant; That if he did violate
any point of his Oath, the people should owe him no Allegiance. But whereas you
report this as the usual Oath of the Kings of Polonia, you deserve to hear the
plainest term of untruth.

In the Kingdom of Spain you distinguish two times: one, before the Conquest
thereof by the Moors; the other, after it was recovered again by the
Christians. I acknowledge a difference in these two times; for that in the one,
the Right of the Kingdom was Elective; in the other, it has always remained
Successive: insomuch as In spec. ^it 14.
Peter Belluga, a diligent Writer of the Rights of Arragon, does affirm,
Veniamus, n. 10.
that the people have no power in elect^on of the King, except in case the Line
should fail.

Concerning the matter in controversy, you affirm, that the Kings did swear
the same points in effect, which before have been mentioned. This we must take
upon your forfeited Faith, for you allege no form of Oath, only you write,
that the fourth National Council of An. 623. cap. 74.
Toledo, with all humility convenient did require, that the present King and
all other that should follow, would be meek and moderate toward their
Subjects, and govern them with Justice, and not give sentence in Causes capital
without assistance: declaring further, that if any of them should exercise
cruel and proud Authority, that they were condemned by Christ with the sentence
of Excommunication, and separated to everlasting Judgment.

But what pang has possessed your dreaming brains, to term this by a marginal
Note, Conditions of reigning in Spain? being no other than a reverent and grave
admonition of the duty of a King, with a fearful declaration of the Judgment of
God against wicked Princes. And that which was afterward decreed in the sixth
Council of Toledo, That the King should swear, not to suffer any man to break
the Catholic Faith, because it is a principal point of his duty, his Estate
was not thereby made conditional.

The rest of this passage you fill up with froath of the antiquated Law of Don
Pelayo, prescribing a form of inaugurating the Kings of Spain; whereof there is
not one point either now in use, or pertaining to the purpose. So miserable is
your case, that you can write nothing therein, but that which is either
impertinent or untrue.

For France, your first Example is taken from the Coronation of Philip the
First: wherein you note, that King Henry his Father requested the people to
swear Obedience to his son; inferring thereby, that a Coronation requires a
new Consent, which includes a certain Election of the Subjects. But this is so
light, that the least breath is sufficient to disperse it. Philip was crowned
King during the life of his Father: which action, as it was not ordinary, so
was it of such both difficulty and weight, that it could not be effected
without assembly and consent of the States. The Oath which he made, is in this
form extant in the Library of Rheimes: I do promise before God and his Saints,
that I will conserve to every one committed unto me, Canonical Privilege, and
due Law and Justice, and will defend them, by the help of God, so much as shall
lie in my power, as a King by right ought to do within his Realm, to every
Bishop, and to the Church committed to him: and further, to the People
committed to my charge, I will grant by my authority the dispensation of Laws
according to right. Add to this a more ancient form of the Oath of those
Kings, which it seems you have not seen: I swear in the Name of God Almighty,
and promise to govern well and duly the Subjects committed to my charge, and to
do with all my Power, Judgment, Justice, and Mercy. Add also the Oath which
you allege of Philip the Second, surnamed Augustus: To maintain all Canonical
Privileges, Law and Justice due to every man, to the uttermost of his power;
to defend his Subjects as a good King is bound to do; to procure that they be
kept in the union of the Church* to defend them from all Excess, Rapine,
Extortion, and Iniquity, to take order that Justice be kept with equity and
mercy; and to endeavor to expel Heretics. What does all this rise unto, but a
Princely promise to discharge honorably and truly those points of duty which
the Laws of God did lay upon them? What other Conditions or Restraints are
imposed? What other Contract is hereby made? Where are the Protestations which
in the end of the last Chapter you promised to show, that if the Prince do fail
in his Promise, the Subjects are free from their Allegiance? What Clause do you
find sounding to that sense? But you little regard any thing that you say; you
easily remember to forget your word. Well then, we must put these your vain
Speeches into the reckoning of Money accounted, but not received: and seeing
you cannot show us that the Kings of France and of Spain are tied to any
Condition, whereto the Law of God does not bind them, I will not vary from the
judgment of Ordradus Con. 69.
in affirming them to be absolute Kings.

I have pressed this point the rather in this place, because you write, that
most Neighbour-Nations have taken the form of anointing and crowning their
Kings, from the ancient custom of France; although the substance be deduced
from the first Kings of the Hebrews, as appears by the anointing of King
Saul: whereof David (you say) made great account, notwithstanding that Saul had
been rejected by God, and that himself had lawfully born Arms against him.

Out, Atheist; you would be dawbed with Dung, and have the most vile filth of
your Stews cast in your face. Did David bear Arms against his anointed King?
did he ever lift up his eyelids against him? did he ever so much as defend
himself otherwise than by flight? It is certain that Shemei did not half so
cruelly either curse or revile this holy man, who did so much both by speech
and action detest this fact, that he would rather have endured ten thousand
deaths, than to have defiled his Soul with so damnable a thought. What then
shall we say unto you, who to set up Sedition and Tumult, abuse all divine and
humane Writings, in whatsoever you believe will advance your purpose? who spend
some speech of respect unto Kings for allurement only, to draw us more deep
into your deceit? Shall we give any further ear to your Doctrine, both
blasphemous and bloody? We will hear you to the end; and I deceive my self, but
your own tale shall, in any moderate judgment, condemn the authority of your
opinions for ever.

Let us come then to your last Example, (which is neither the last nor the
least whereat you level;) and that is of England, which of all other Kingdoms
(you say) has most particularly taken this Ceremony of Sacring and Anointing
from France. Well, let the Ceremony be taken from whence you please; if the
Oath be no other than you do specify, To observe peace, honor, and Reverence
unto Almighty God, to his Church, and to the Ministers of the same; to
administer Law and Justice equal^y to all; to abrogate evil Laws and Customs,
and maintain good; (which was the Oath of King Richard the First; the like
whereto was that of King John, altered only in the first branch, To love and
defend the Catholic Church.) If the Oath be no other, I say, I do not see what
other Answer you need to expect, but that it is only a free Royal Promise, to
discharge that duty which God does impose. And this is plainly declared by the
Speech which you allege of Thomas Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury, to King
Henry the Fourth: Remember (says he) the Oath which voluntarily you made:
Voluntarily he said, and not necessarily; it was voluntaly in Oath, but
necessary in Duty. That which you report also, that* Thomas Becket did write
unto King Henry the Second, imports nothing else but an acknowledgment of
Duty: Remember (said he) the Confession which you made.

I cannot omit your description of the manner of the Coronation in England.
First (you say) the King is sworn; then the Archbishop declares to the people
what he has sworn, and demands if they be content to submit themselves unto
him under those conditions: whereunto they consenting, he puts on the Royal
Ornaments; and then adds the words of commission: Stand and hold thy place,
and keep thy Oath. And thus you have hammered out a formal Election, supposing
that you draw together the pieces of falsehood so close, that no man can
perceive the s^am. The truth is, that King Henry the Fourth being not the
nearest in Blood to the inheritance of the Crown, did countenance his violence
with the election of the people; not at his Coronation, but in a Parliament
that was holden before. And therefore you do impudently abuse us; first, in
joining them together as one Act; secondly, by falsifying diverse points in
both; lastly, by insinuating that the same order was observed by other Kings.

The points which you falsify, are these: The interrogation of the Archbishop
to the people; the absurd straining of these words, Stand, hold thy place, to
be a Commission; the alleging also out of Stow, 1. That the Archbishop did
read unto the people what the King was bound unto by Oath. 2. That the Earl of
Northumberland did show a Ring unto the people, that they might thereby see the
Band whereby the King was bound unto them. 3. That the King did pray that he
might observe his promise. In which composition of Conceits you show how active
you are in counterfeiting any thing that may make to your purpose; persuading
your self, that it is no fraud unto God, to deceive the World in a lie for
advantage.

King Edward the Fourth also (because his Right was litigious, and another was
in possession of the Crown) strengthened, or rather countenanced his Title with
the approbation of the People. But where you write, that at the Coronation of
King Edward the Sixth, Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth, the consent and
acceptance of the people was demanded: First, we have no cause to credit any
thing that you say; then, although it be true, yet not being done in
Parliament, it adds no right unto the Prince; but is only a formality, a
circumstance only of Ceremony and Order.

Hereupon you conclude, that a King has his authority by agreement and
contract between him and the people: insinuating thereby, that he loses the
same, if he either violate or neglect his word. The contrary opinion, that
only succession of Blood makes a King, and that the consent of the people is
nothing necessary, you affirm to be absurd, base, and impious, an unlearned,
fond, and wicked assertion; in flattery of Princes, to the manifest ruin of
Commonwealths, and perverting of all Law, Order, and Reason.

I did always foresee that your impostumed stomach would belch forth some
loathsome matter. But whosoever shall compare this confident conclusion with
the proofs that you have made, he will rather judge you mad than unwise. This
bold blast, upon grounds that are both foolish and false, bewrays rather want
than weakness of wits. I am ashamed I should offer any further speech in so
evident a truth: but since I have undertaken to combat an Heresy, since the
matter is of so great consequence and import, I purpose once again to give you
a Gorge.

Learn then, heavy-headed Cloisterer, unable to manage these mysteries of
State; learn of me, I say, for I owe this duty to all Christians: the Prophets,
the Apostles, Christ himself has taught us to be obedient to Princes, though
both Tyrants and Infidels. This ought to stand with us for a thousand reasons
to submit our selves to such Kings as it pleases God to send unto us; without
either judging or examining their qualities. Their hearts are in Gods hand;
they do his service, sometimes in preserving, sometimes in punishing us: they
execute his judgment both ways, in the same measure which he does prescribe. If
they abuse any part of their power, we do not excuse, we do not extenuate it;
we do not exempt them from their punishment: let them look unto it, let them
assuredly expect that God will dart his vengeance against them with a most
stiff and dreadful arm. In the mean season, we must not oppose our selves
otherwise than by humble suits and prayers; acknowledging that those evils are
always just for us to suffer, which are many times unjust for them to do. If we
do otherwise, if we break into tumult and disorder, we resemble those Giants of
whom the Poets write, who making offer to scale the Skies, and to pull Jupiter
out of his Throne, were overwhelmed in a moment with the Mountains which they
had heaped together. Believe it, Cloisterer, or ask any man who is both honest
and wise, and he will tell you: It is a Rule in Reason, a Trial in Experience,
an Authority confirmed by the best, That* Rebellion produces more horrible
effects, than either the tyranny or insufficiency of any Prince.

An Answer to the sixth Chapter, whereof the title is,
What is due to only Succession by Birth; and what interest or right an Heir
apparent has to the Crown, before he is crowned or admitted by the
Commonwealth: and how justly he may be put back, if he has not the parts
requisite.
YOu begin (after your manner) with a carreer against Billay; but because both
I have not seen what he has written, and dare not credit what you report, I
will not set in foot between you.

In breaking from this, you prefer Succession of Princes before free Election,
as well for other respects, as for the pre-eminence of Ancestry in birth, which
is so much privileged in the Scripture: and yet not made so inviolable, (you
say) but upon just causes it might be inverted, as it appears by the examples
of Jacob, Judah, and Solomon. And this liberty you hold to be the principal
remedy for such inconveniences as do ensue of the course of Succession; as if
the next in birth be unable or pernicious to govern: in which cases, if he be
not capable of directions and counsels, you affirm that the remedy is to remove
him. And so you make Succession and Election, the one to be a preservative to
the other; supposing, that the difficulties of both are taken away, First, if
ordinarily Succession takes place; then, if upon occasion, we give allowance
to Election.

For the Prerogative of Birth, as also for the special choice which God has
often made of the youngest, I will remit my self to that which I have written
before Cap. 1.
. At once; in those particular actions which God has either done, or by
express Oracle commanded, contrary to the general Laws which he has given us;
as in the Robbery of the Egyptians, the extirpation of the Amalekites, the
insurrection of Iehu, and such like; we are bound to the Law, and not to the
Example. God has given us a natural Law to prefer the firstborn; he has
often made choice of the youngest, because he commonly works greatest
effects, by means not only weak, but extraordinary; as it appears by the
birth of Isaak. But that these special Elections of God are not proposed for
imitation to us, hereby it is evident; because they have been for the most part
without defect in the one, or demerit in the other. And especially in this
example of Jacob and Esau, St. Paul says To. 9.13
that it was not grounded upon their works, but upon the will and pleasure of
God; for before they had done good or evil, before they were born, God said:
Genesis 25.23.
The eldest shall serve the youngest. Which if we might imitate, the privilege
of birth were given in vain.

For your device in joining Election to Succession, whereby one of them should
remedy the difficulties of the other, it is a mere Utopical conceit: What else
shall I term it? an imposture of State, a Dream, an Illusion, fit only to
surprise the judgment of the weak and ignorant multitude. These toys are
always hatched by the discoursive sort of men rather than the active; being
matters more in imagination than in use: and herein two respects do principally
oppose against you.

The first is, for that in most Nations of the world, the people have lost all
power of Election; and Succession is firmly settled in one descent, as before I
have declared Cap. 1.
.

The second is, for that more fiery factions are hereby kindled, than where
Succession or Election are mere without mixture. For where one claims the
Crown by Succession, and another possesses it by Title of Election; there, not
a disunion only of the people, not a division in arms, but a cruel
throat-cutting, a most immortal and mercyless butchery does usually ensue. It
is somewhat inconvenient (I grant) to be governed by a Prince either impotent
or evil; but it is a greater inconvenience, by making a breach into this high
point of State, to open a way to all manner of ambitions, perjuries, cruelties
and spoil: whereto the nature of the common people would give a great
furtherance, who being weak in Wisdom, violent in Will; soon weary of quiet,
always desirous of change, and most especially in matters of State, are easily
made serviceable to any man's aspiring desires. This I have manifested before
Cap. 3.
, by the examples of King Edward and King Richard, both surnamed the Second:
who were not insupportable either in nature or in rule; and yet the people,
more upon wantonness than for any want, did take an unbridled course against
them. And thus is your high Policy nothing else but a deep deceit; thus whilst
you strive with the wings of your wit to mount above the Clouds of other men's
conceit* you sink into a sea of absurdities and errors.

After this, you determine two questions: The first is, What respect is to be
attributed to propinquity of blood only. Whereto you answer, that it is the
principal circumstance which leads us to the next Succession of the Crown, if
other circumstances and conditions do ^oncur, which were appointed at the same
time, when the Law of Succession was established. Assuredly, you can never show
either when, or by whom, this Law of Succession was first instituted, except
perhaps by some Nimrod, when he had brought the neck of a people under his
sword: at which time, what conditions he would set down to be required from his
Successor, any ordinary judgment may conjecture at ease. Well, since you set
us to seek for proof of this, to that which you have written before, I will
also send you back to the same place Cap. 1.
for your answer.

The second question is, What interest a Prince has to his Kingdom, before he
be Crowned? This you resolve by certain comparisons; and first you write, that
it is the same which the German Emperor has before his Coronation. But that
is so large, that some Emperors have never been Crowned; others have deferred
it for many years; among which Metrop. l. 3. cap. 20.
Crantzius writes, that Otho the First received the Crown of the Empire, in
the eight and twentieth year of his Reign. And yet is not this comparison full
to the question propounded; because in elective States there is not held one
perpetual continuance of Royalty, as is in those that are successive. And In
Prooem. decret.
Panormitane says, That an argument a similibus is not good, if any difference
can be assigned. Much more unfitly do you affirm, that it is no greater than a
Mayor of London has in his Office, before he has taken his Oath: For it is
odiously absurd, to compare the Authority of an absolute Prince by succession,
to the Authority of an Officer, both elective and also subject.

But it is the example of marriage (you say) whereby this matter is made more
plain: for as in this contract there is an espousal, by promise of a future
act, and a perfect marriage by yielding a present consent; the first is, when
both parties do mutually promise that they will. The second, that they do take
one the other for Husband and Wife: So an Heir apparent, by propinquity of
blood is espoused only to the Commonwealth, and married afterward at his
Coronation, by Oaths of either party, and by putting on the Ring, and other
Wedding-garments. But how were Kings married in former ages? how are they now
married in those Countries, where they have neither Ring, nor Wedding Garment,
nor also any Oath? What? is every Office and Degree which is taken with
Ceremony, to be esteemed likewise a Marriage? Or if you will have Coronation
only to be a Marriage, what else can it resemble, but the public celebration
of Matrimony between man and woman? which adds nothing to the substance of
contract, but only manifests it to the world.

These pitiful proofs naked of authority, empty of sense, deserve rather to be
excused than answered: I will help therefore in some sort to excuse them. They
are the best that your both starved cause and conceit can possibly afford: and
you have also some fellows in your folly. Heliogabalus did solemnly join the
statues of the Sun and of the Moon in marriage together. Nero was married to a
man, and took also a man to his Wife. The Venetians do yearly upon
Ascention-day, by a Ring and other ceremonies, contract marriage with the Sea.

But now in earnest; men do die whenever it pleases God to call them: but it
is a Maxim in the Common Law of England: Rex nunquam moritur; The King is
always actually in life. In France also the same custom has been observed; and
for more assurance, it was expressly enacted under About the year 1375.
Charles the fifth, That after the death of any King, his eldest Son should
incontinently succeed. For which cause the Parliament-Court of Paris does
accompany the funeral-obsequies of those that have been their Kings, not in
mourning attire, but in Scarlet; the true ensign of the never-dying Majesty of
the Crown.

In regard of this certain and incontinent succession, the In c. ult. 24. q. 1.
Glossographer upon the Decrees, notes, That the Son of a King, may be called
King during the life of his Father, as wanting nothing but administration:
wherein he is followed with great applause by In l. quaesitum. D. de leg. 1.
Baldus, In c. tanta qui fill. sunt legit.
Paenormitane, Cons. 192. l. 2.
Jason, Cons. 19. l. 1.
Carol. Ruinus, In c. 1. tit. quis dicat. dux.
Andreas Iserna, Martinus, Card. Alexander, In l. particum. c. de rei vind.
Albericus, In rep. rub. de ca. po and prop.
Fed. Barbatius, Cons. 262. and in tract. de po. and excel. reg. q. 25.
Philip Decius, and Ant. Corsetta, In tract. de privil. fis^. par. 1. ca. 109.
Fra. Luca, In tract. (...).
Matthe, Afflict. And the same also does Servius note out of Aeneid. 9.
Virgil, where he says of Ascanius: Regemque requirunt, his Father Aeneas
being yet alive.

But so soon as the King departs out of life, the Royalty is presently
transferred to the next Successor, according to the Laws and Customs of our
Realm. All Writs go forth in his Name; all course of Justice is exercised, all
Offices are held by his Authority; all States, all Persons, are bound to bear
to him Allegiance: not under supposal of approbation when he shall be Crowned,
according to your dull and drousie conjecture, but as being the true Sovereign
King of the Realm.

He that knows not this, may (in regard of the affairs of our State) join
himself to St. Anthony, in glorying in his ignorance, and professing that he
knows nothing. Queen Mary Reigned three months before she was Crowned, in
which space the Duke of Northumberland and others were condemned and executed
for Treason: for Treason, I say, which they had committed, before she was
proclaimed Queen.

King Edward the first was in Palestina, when his Father died; in which his
absence, the Nobility and Prelates of the Realm assembled at London, and did
acknowledge him for their King. In his return homeward he did homage to the
French King, for the lands which he held of him in France. He also repressed
certain Rebels of Gascoine; amongst whom, Gasco of Bierne appealed to the Court
of the King of France: where King Edward. had Judgment, that Gasco had
committed Treason Walsing. in E. 1*
; and thereupon he was delivered to the pleasure of King Edward. And this
happened before his Coronation, which was a year and nine months after he began
to reign.

King Henry the sixth was crowned in the eighth year of his Reign; and in the
mean space, not only his Subjects did both profess and bear Allegiance, but the
King of Scots also did swear Homage unto him.

What need I give any more either instance or argument, in that which is the
clear Law, the uncontrouled custom of the Realm? Against which notwithstanding
your weather-beaten forehead does not blush to oppose a blind Opinion, that
Heirs apparent are not true Kings, although their Titles be just, and their
predecessors dead. This you labor to prove by a few dry conjectures, but
especially and above all others (you say) because the Realm is asked three
times at every Coronation, whether they will have such a man to be their King
or no. First, we have good reason to require better proof of this question than
your bare word. Secondly, although we admit it to be true, yet seeing the
answer is not made by the Estates of the Realm assembled in Parliament, but by
a confused concourse (necessary Officers excepted) of all sorts both of Age and
Sex, it is for Ceremony only, and not of force, either to give or to increase
any right.

Another of your Arguments is, for that the Prince does first swear to Govern
well and justly, before the Subjects take their Oath of Allegiance; which
argues, that before they* were not bound. And further you affirm, that it
happened only to King Henry the fifth, among his predecessors, to have fealty
done unto him, before he was crowned, and had taken his Oath. I confess indeed,
that Polydore and Stow have written so; but you might easily have found that
they write not true; the one of them being a mere stranger in our State; the
other a man more to be commended for endeavor than for art. King John being in
Normandy when his Brother died, sent into England Hubert Archbishop of
Canterbury, William Marshal Earl of Strigvile, and Geoffry Fitzpeter Lord Chief
Justice, who assembled the States of the Realm at Northampton, and took of them
an Oath of obedience to the new King. Also King Anno reg. 23.
Henry the Third caused the Citizens of London, the Guardians of the
Cinque Ports, and diverse others, to swear fealty to Prince Edward his son; who
being in Palestina when his Father died, the Nobility and Prelates of the Realm
assembled in the new Temple at London, and did acknowledge him for their King.
And in like manner, King Edward the Third took an Oath of all the Nobility of
the Realm, of faith after his death to Richard Prince of Wales; and so did King
Henry the first, for his Daughter Mawde, and her young son Henry.

After the death of King Henry the Fifth, that Subjects did often swear
allegiance before the Coronation and Oath of the King, you had neither
Countenance nor Conscience to deny: but it was neither of these two which did
restrain you; it proceeded only from the force of truth, which will manifest
it self whatsoever art we use to disguise it. For otherwise, what Countenance,
what Conscience had you to affirm, that it is expressly noted by our English
Historiographers, That no Allegiance is due unto Kings before they be crowned?
Who are these Historiographers? Where do they so write? You that search every
dusty corner of your Brains for a few ragged reasons to uphold your Heresy,
should not either have mentioned, or omitted such pregnant proofs: For in that
you affirm and do not express them, you condemn your self by your own silence.

If you mean that which you allege out of Polydore and Stowe: That an Oath of
fealty was never made before Coronation, until the time of King Henry the
Fifth; it is neither true, nor to any such sense. If you mean that of Polydore
in terming Henry the Fifth Prince and not King, before he was crowned; in
writing also, that the States did consult in Parliament, De no^o rege creando
more majorum.
Of creating a new King after the custom of their Ancestors: It is a sleepie
jest, to strain every word in such an Author to propriety of speech. You might
better have cited, what certain Cities in France, not long since, alleged for
themselves: That because they had not reputed Henry the Fourth for their King,
because they had not professed Allegiance unto him, they were not to be
adjudged Rebels: Whereupon notwithstanding the chiefest Lawyers of our age did
resolve, that forasmuch as they were original Subjects, even Subjects by birth;
they were Rebels in bearing Arms against their King, although they had never
professed allegiance. And this is so evidently the Law of the Realm, that it
is presumption in us both: in you, to assay by your shallow Sophistry to
obscure or impugn; in me, to endeavor by authorities and arguments to manifest
or defend the same.

But the admission of the people (you say) has often prevailed against right
of Succession. So have Pirates against Merchants; so have Murderers and
Thieves against true meaning Travelers. And this disloyalty of the people has
moved diverse Kings to cause their Sons to be crowned during their own lives;
because the unsettled state of succeeding Kings does give opportunity to boldest
attempts; and not as you dream, because admission is of more importance than
succession.

I will examine your Examples in the Chapters following. In the mean time,
where you write, that King Henry and King Edward, both called the Fourth, had
no better way to appease their minds at the time of their death, but by
founding their Title upon consent of the people; the Authors Sir Tho. Moor, and
Stow.
which you cite do plainly charge you with unexcusable untruth. King Edward
never made question of his right: King Henry did, as some other Authors report
Holingshed
; but applied no such deceitful comfort: this false skin would not then serve
to cover his wound.

An Answer to the Seventh Chapter, which bears title,
How the next in Succession by propinquity of Blood, have oftentimes been put
back by the Commonwealth, and others further off admitted in their places, even
in those Kingdoms where Succession prevails; with many Examples of the
Kingdom of Israel and Spain.
HEre you present your self very pensive to your audience, as though you had so
over-strained your wits with store of Examples of the next in Succession not
admitted to the State, that you had cracked the credit of them for ever. But
you are worthy of blame, either for endangering or troubling your self in
matters of so small advantage. I have showed before, that Examples suffice not
to make any proof; and yet herein does consist the greatest show of your
strength. It is dangerous for men to be governed by Examples though good,
except they can assure themselves of the same concurrence of reasons, not only
in general, but in particularities; of the same direction also and carriage in
Counsel; and lastly, of the same favorable fortune: but in actions which are
evil, the imitation is commonly worse than the example. Your puffie discourse
then is a heap of words without any weight; you make mountains, not for
Mole-hills, but of Moats; long harvest of a small deal, not of Corn, but of
Cockle: and (as one said at the shearing of Hogs) great cry for a little, and
that not very fine Wool.

Yea, but of necessity something you must say: yea, but this something is no
more than nothing. You suppose, that either your opinion will be accepted, more
for authority of your Person, than weight of your Proofs; or else that any
words will slide easily into the minds of those who are lulled in the humor of
the same inclination; because partiality will not suffer men to discern truth,
being easily beguiled in things they desire. Besides, whatsoever countenance
you carry, that all your Examples are free from exception, yet if you had cast
out those which are impertinent, or unjust, or else untrue, you could not have
been overcharged with the rest.

Your first example, that none of the Children of Saul did succeed him in the
Crown, is altogether impertinent: because by particular and express appointment
of God 2 Reg. 15, and 16. 2 Reg. 2 and 5
, the Kingdom was broken from his posterity. We acknowledge that God is the
only superior Judge of Supreme Kings, having absolute both Right and Power,
to dispose and transpose their Estates as he please. Neither must we examine
his actions by any course of Law, because his Will is above all Law. He has
enjoined the people to be obedient to their Kings, he has not made them equal
in authority to himself. And whereas out of this example you deduce, that the
fault of the father may prejudicate the sons right, although he had no part in
the fault; to speak moderately of you, your judgment is either deceitful or
weak. God in his high Justice, does punish indeed the sins of Parents upon
their Posterity Exodus 20.^.
: but for the ordinary course of Humane Justice, he has given a Law, that the
Son shall not bear the iniquity of the Father ^^ec. ^^.20. Jer. 31.29. Deuteronomy.
24.16. 2 Chronicles. 25.2.
: The equity whereof is regularly followed, both by the Civil L. siquis suo..
Legis C. de in off. test. l. generali. D. de ^it. nup. l. siliam. D. de
senator. l. adoptivum. D. de in jus voc.
and Canon Did. 56. per tot.
Law; and by the Interpreters of them both ^gl and D^. ib. and in c. vel n^^
est de temp ord.
.

Your second example is of King Solomon, who succeeded in the State of David
his Father, notwithstanding he was his youngest Son. But this example in many
respects falls not within the compass of your case. First, because he was not
appointed Successor by the people, and we speak what the people may do to
direct Succession. Secondly, for that the Kingdom was not then stablished in
Succession. Lastly, for that the action was led by two Prophets, David and
Nathan, according to the express choice and direction of God 1 Chro. 22.8, 9.
: whereby it is no rule for ordinary right.

Here many points do challenge you of indiscretion ^^ the least. You write that
David made a promise to Bathsheba in his youth, That Solomon should succeed in
his estate: but if you had considered at what years Solomon began to Reign, you
should have found that David could not make any such promise, but he must be a
youth about threescore years of age. You write also, that David adored his Son
Solomon from his bed: but the words wherewith David worshipped were these 3.
Reg. 2.48.
: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who has made* one to sit on my Throne
this day, even in my sight: whereby it is evident, that David adored God and
not his Son. This I note rather for observation of the looseness of your
Judgment, than for any thing it makes to the purpose. You are so accustomed to
untruths, that you fall into them, without either advantage or end.

The like answer may be given to your example of Rehoboam; because God declared
his sentence therein by two Prophets, Ahijah 3. Reg. 11.31.
and Shemaiah 3. Reg. 12.24.
. But for that the ten Tribes revolted from Rehoboam upon coffeehouse at his
rough answer, and with dispite against David and his House, and not in
obedience to Gods Decree, we cannot excuse them from offense, for which it
turned to their destruction. For hereupon, first they were separated both from
the place and manner of the true Worship of God; then, there arose unappeasable
War, between them and the Tribe of Judah; then, insolences following
disorders, they were never long time free from Conspiracies, Divisions, and
Tumults: by which means being drained both of Wealth and Inhabitants, and
reduced to a naked weakness, they were lastly carried captive into diverse far
Countries, and strangers were sent to inhabit their Cities.

I must here also observe a few of your interpretations, wherein your boldness
is not limited with any bounds. It is to be noted (you say) that before
Rehoboam went to Shechem to be admitted by the people, he was not accounted
true King. I desire therefore that you would satisfy us in these places
following. Before Rehoboam went to Shechem, the Scripture says, that Solomon
died, and was buried, and Rehoboam his Son reigned in his stead 3. Reg. 11.43.
. Again, after the defection of the ten Tribes it is said, that in the Cities
of Judah Rehoboam did Reign still 3. Reg. 12.17.
; implying thereby, that in the other Cities he reigned before. Again, they are
said to have rebelled against the house of David 3. Reg. 12.19.
. And lastly, Rehoboam raised all the strength of Judah and Benjamin, to bring
the Kingdom again unto him 3. Reg. 12.21.
.

Further you write, that ten Tribes refused to admit Rehoboam; but the
Scripture says, that they rebelled 3. Reg. 12.19.
. What? did God only allow hereof after it was done? did he only permit the
people to do it? The Scripture testifies, that it was his Decree, that it was
his Deed, and that he declared his Will by Ahijah the Prophet 3. Reg. 11.31.
, during the life of Solomon, and for his sins. But these special Warrants do
not constitute a Law; they serve only to make good the particular actions for
which they are directed, and not to justify another the like. Lastly, St. Paul
says, that all things happened to the Jews in figure; upon which place diverse
Expositors have noted, that the State of the Jews was a figure of the Church of
Christ: but that it was an example and pattern of all other States that should
ensue, it shall be ranged among your cast conceits.

I refer me now to the judgment of any man, who takes not pleasure to beguile
himself, whether you do not by art and trumpery manifestly abuse us; partly by
incapacity, and partly by deceit, either corrupting or confounding whatsoever
you take in hand. Your humor both discontented and unquiet, has armed your
mind with bloody desires; which have edged you on to put fuel to those flames,
which you should endeavor to quench, though it were with your blood.

I will not stand upon the particular Examples of Spain, as well for that the
matter is both tedious and to little purpose; as also for that we have small
conformity with the Customs of that Nation. Only thus much in general: We
acknowledge that in ancient times the Kingdom of Spain was Elective, and
therefore your Examples drawn from thence are nothing pertinent. The Examples
of latter times are both few and unjust, carried only by Faction and by Force;
as Garabay Page 414.
testifies of your Example of Aurelio; and as by the Example of D. Sancho el
Bravo I have declared before Cap. 3.
. But you account Faction to be the Commonwealth, and Violence Justice, when it
may make to the furtherance of your affairs.

The History of D. Berenguela I will briefly report, rather for the respect
which guided the Castilians, than that I allow it for Right which they did.
Henry had two Sisters: Donna Blanch the eldest, married to Jews the eighth
King of France; and Berenguela the youngest, married to Alphonso King of Leon.
Henry dying without Issue, the Castilians feared if they should submit
themselves unto Blanch, that their State being less than the State of France,
would be made a Member thereof, and governed as a Province, and not as a
Kingdom. And therefore they did rather choose to profess Allegiance to the Lady
Berenguela; by which means the Kingdom of Leon was afterward annexed unto
Castile, to the great increase both of dignity and assurance to them both. I
have followed herein your own Authors, not being ignorant that others of better
name do write, that Berenguela was the eldest Sister, as I shall have occasion
hereafter to declare: but for the present, let it be as you please; and let us
weigh our own wisdoms, not only in straining, but in forging Titles, to incur
those mischiefs which the Castilians rejected a lawful Title to avoid.

And this was also one of the Motives of the Revolt of Portugal, which is your
last Example; although it had also (as Garabay Lib. 34. Page 833.
writes) a concurrence of Right. For Ferdinand King of Portugal, by his
Procurators the Bishop of Ebora and others, did both contract and solemnize
espousals with Elianor, Daughter of Peter King of Aragon. But being entered into
War with Henry King of Castile, and finding himself at some disadvantage, he
forsook the King of Aragons Daughter, and contracted himself to Elianor,
Daughter to the King of Castile, upon very beneficial Conditions for his State.
Afterward, falling into fancy with one of his Subjects, named Elianor Tells de
Meneses, Wife to a Nobleman called Lorenzo Vasques de Aounna, he took her as
his Wife, and enforced her Husband to avoid the Realm; and had by her one only
Daughter named Beatrix, who was joined in marriage to John King of Castile.
After the death of the King of Portugal her Father, the King of Castile in the
right of his Wife, laid claim to that Realm, and was accordingly acknowledged
by the chief of the Nobility and Prelates; and in particular, by D. John Master
of Avis, her Fathers base Brother, who was then the most forward man in her
favor. But afterward falling into quarrel, and having slain the Count de
Oren, he stirred the people against the Queen, and compelled her to quit the
City. And after diverse Outrages and Murders committed upon the Bishop of
Lisbon, an Abbess, and many others, he was first made Governor of Portugal;
and then proceeding further, in an Assembly of his Party gathered at Coimbra,
he was made King. Garabay writes Pa. 845.
that the chiefest objection against Beatrix was, because her Mother was not
King Ferdinand's lawful Wife. And I believe you also, that they had a reflex
not to lose the dignity of their Kingdom (as now they have done) and be made
subject to the cruel both Avarice and Ambition of a more potent State.

An Answer to the eighth Chapter, which is entitled,
Of diverse other examples out of the States of France and England, for proof,
that the next in Blood are sometimes put back from Succession, and how God has
approved the same with good Success.
YOur Examples of France (to which Nation we are more near both in situation
and Laws) I will run over with a swift course. Of the Change which twice has
happened in the whole Race of the Kings of France, I have spoken before: Cap. 3.
You seem also either to threaten or presage the third Change, from the King
who now reigns, and other Princes of the House of Bourbon. It was your
desire, you applied your endeavor, with all the power and persuasions you
could make. You knit diverse of the Nobility in a treacherous League against
him; you incensed the People; you drew in Foreign Forces to their assistance:
by which means, the Realm fell daily into change of distress, the men of Arms
making all things lawful to their Lust. The Good did fear, the Evil expect; no
place was free, either from the rage or suspicion of Tumult; few to be trusted,
none assured, all things in commixtion; the Wisest too weak, the Strongest too
simple, to avoid the Storm which brake upon them: the People Joining to their
miserable Condition many Complaints, That they had been abused by you, in whose
Directions they found nothing but Obstinacy and Rashness, two dangerous
Humors to lead a great Enterprise. At the last, when lamentable Experience had
made that known unto them, which they had no Capacity by reason to foresee,
they expelled as well your Company as Counsel out of the Realm; and so the
Firebrands which you had kindled, were broken upon your own Heads; having
opportunity by your just banishment to take into Consideration both the
Weakness and Wrong of your Advice.

The partition of the Realm of France between Charles the Great and Charloman
his younger Brother, and also the uniting thereof again in Charles, after the
death of Charloman, depended upon the disposition of Pepin their Father, and
not upon the Election of the People. Girard says, that Lib. 1 de l' estate.
fol, 45.
Pepin having disposed all things in his new Realm which he thought necessary
for the surety thereof, he disposed his Estate; leaving the Realm of Noion to
his Son Charles; and to Charloman his other Son, that of Soisons, and that by
the death of Carloman, both his Place and his Power did accrue unto Charles. In
this manner, the first of a family, who has attained a Kingdom, has
ordinarily directed the Succession thereof.

The Contention between Lewis le Debonaire and his sons, according to your
own Author Girard, De l'estate.
proceeded and succeeded after this manner. Certain Lords of France taking
coffeehouse at the immoderate favors, which the king showed toward Berard
his great Chamberlain, conspired against him; and for their greater both
countenance and strength, drew his own sons to be of their faction. But
Lewis brake this broile, more by foresight than by force; and doing execution
upon the principal offenders, pardoned his Sons. Yet they, interpreting this
lenity to slackness of courage, rebelled again, gathered a greater strength,
and drew Pope Gregory the fourth to be accomplice of their unnatural impiety:
whereby it appears (says Girard) that they are either foolish or
mischievous, who will affirm, that every thing is good which the Popes have
done. Afterward they took their Father, under color of good faith, and sent
him prisoner to Tortone, and then at Compeigne assembled a Parliament, composed
of their own confederates, wherein they made him a Monk, and brought his estate
into division and share. It is easy to conjecture (says the same Girard) what
miserable conditions the Realm then endured; all Laws were subverted, all
things exposed to the rage of the Sword, the whole Realm in combustion, and the
people extremely discontented at this barbarous impiety. In the end Jews, by
the aid of his faithful servants was taken out of prison, and restored to his
Kingdom; and his Sons acknowledging their fault, were received by him both to
pardon and favor. His son Pepin being dead, he divided his Realm among his
other three Sons, Charles, Jews, and Lothaire; but Jews rebelled again, and
was again received to mercy: lastly, he stirred a great part of Germany to
revolt, with grief whereof the good old man his Father died. After his death,
Jews and Lothaire, upon disdain at the great portion which their Father had
assigned to their brother Charles, raised war against him. The Battle was
given, wherein Charles ramained victorious, reducing them both under such
conditions, as he thought convenient to impose. Lo^ here one of your plain and
evident examples, which is so free from all exception. But minds corruptly
inclined, hold nothing unlawful, nothing unreasonable, which agrees with their
passion.

Loys le Begue, succeeded after Charles, not as you affirm, by authority of the
states, but (as in France at that time it was not unusual) by appointment of
his Father. And whereas you write, that Loys at his first entrance had like to
have bin deprived by the states, but that calling a Parliament, he made them
many fair promises to have their good will; it is a very idle untruth, as
appears by the Author whom you avouch. At his death, he left his wife great
with child, who afterward was called Charles the simple. But before he had
accomplished the age of 12 years, there stepped up in his place, first Loys and
Carloman his bastard brothers; then Charles surnamed le Gros; and after him Odo
Earl of Paris. Then Charles the right heir attained the Crown; and then again
were raised against him, first Robert, Earl of Angiers; and afterward Ralph
king of Burgundy. But where you attribute these mutations to the authority of
the states, Girard says, that they where by faction and usurpation of such,
who from the weakness of their Prince, did make advantage to their own
ambition; affirming plainly, that between the death of Loys le Begue, and
Charles the simple, not one of them who held the crown of the Realm was lawful
king Di l'esta^e lib. 1. p. 55
, noting further, that the first two races of Kings, were full of cruel
parricides and murders; and that in those times the Realm was often traveled
with tempests of sedition.

Of the usurpation of Hugh Capet I have spoken before: Girard writes, l. 8. f.
60, b
that although he sought many shadows of right, yet his best title was by
force, which is the common right of first usurpers. And whereas you write, that
Henry the first was preferred to the crown of France before Robert his helder
brother: First, it was not by appointment of the states, but of their father;
Secondly, Girard makes the matter doubtful, affirming, that some said he was
the younger brother; Lastly, Fol, 63
it set up a dangerous and doubtful war between them.

Further, where you write, that William being a bastard, succeeded Robert his
Father in the Duchy of Normandy, notwithstanding the said Robert left two
brothers in life, it was at that time a custom in France, that bastards did
succeed, even as lawful children. Thierry bastard of Clovis, had for his
partage the kingdom of Austrasie, now called Lorraine. Sigisbert bastard of
King Dagobert the first, parted with Clovis the twelfth, his lawful brother.
Loys and Carloman bastards of King Loys le Begue, reigned after their Father.
But in the third race of the kings of France, a law was made, that bastards
should not succed in the Crown; and yet other bastards of great houses were
still advowed, the French being then of the same opinion with Peleus in
Euripides. In Andromache.


(...)
(...).
Oftentimes many Bastards excel those that are lawfully Born: which is
verified by Hercules, Alexander the Great, Romulus, Timotheus, Themistocles,
Homer, Demosthenes, Brutus, Bion, Bartolus, Gratian, Peter Lombard, Peter
Comestor, Io. Andreas, and diverse other of most Flourishing name.

Your examples of Jews the 6. and Jews the 11. are not worth a word in
answer. In the beginning of their reign, you affirm that they had like to have
been dis-inherited by the State, for the offenses of their Father. You bear a
mind charged with thoughts Vain, Busy, and Bold, without any restraint either
of Honesty or of Discretion. For how else could you here also affirm, that King
Henry the third of England, was condemned by his Barons to be disinherited, for
the fault of his Father? It is usual with you in all your reports, either
plainly to break beyond the bounds of all truth, or grossly, (for I cannot now
say artificially) to disguise it, with many false and deceiveable terms. But to
conclude for the state of France, which is also to exclude whatsoever you have
said; under the Reign of Charles the fifth, 1375.
for the better establishment, of this right, and for cutting off those
calamities which accompany usurpation, there was a Law made, that after the
death of any King, the eldest Son should incontinently succeed.

We are now come to our English examples, of which you might have omitted those
of the Saxon Kings; as well for that there could be no settled form of
Government in those Tumultuous times, as also for that our Histories of that
Age are very imperfect, not leading us in the Circumstances, either of the
manner or occasion of particular actions: they declare in Gross what things
were done, without further opening, either how or wherefore. But both these do
make for your advantage: for who sees not, that your examples are chiefly bred
in Tempestuous times; and the obscurity of Histories will serve for a shadow
to darken your deceit.

Well, let us take both the Times and Histories as they are. How will you
maintain that Egbert was not next Successor to Briticus by propinquitie of
Blood? Briticus left no Children, and Egbert was descended of the Blood Royal,
as Polydore affirms; Lib. 4. circa sin.
William Malmesbury De gest. Ang. lib. 1. ca. 2.
says, that he was ^he only Man alive of the Royal Blood, being descended of
Inegild, the Brother of King Ina. How then is it true which you say, that
Briticus was the last of the royal Descent; and if it had been so indeed, the
right of Election should then have been in the State. And thus you Stumble at
every step, you entangle your self without Truth or End. You snatch at the
words of Polydore, where he says; He is created King by consent of all: which
do imply no other sense, but that which a little after he says; That he was
saluted King by all. So we find also, that the like Improper speech was used
at the Coronation of Philip the Second, King of France, whereby the Archbishop
of Reimes did Challenge power in the right of his See, to make Election of the
King.

That Adelstane was illegitimate, you follow Polydore, a Man of no great either
Industry or Judgment. William Malmesbury Lib. 2* c. 5.
accounted Egwina the Mother of Adelstane, to be the first Wife of King Edward
his Father: he terms her also a noble Woman, contrary to that which Polydore
fableth. Henry Huntington, Roger Hoveden and others, write no otherwise of him,
but as of one that was lawfully Born. And in that you english these words of
Polydore, Rex dicitur; Rex a populo salutatur; He was made King by the People:
In that you affirm also, that for the opinion of his valor he was preferred
before his Brethren which were lawfully born, whom you acknowledge to be Men of
most Excellent both Expectation and proof; you do plainly show, that use has
made you too open in straining of truth.

Eldred did first take upon him but as Protector, because of the minority of
the sons of Edmund his elder brother; and afterward entered into full
possession of the Crown. But that his Nephews were put back by the Realm, it
is your own idle invention; it was no more the act of the realm, than was the
usurpation of King Richard the third.

That Edwin was deposed from his estate, it is inexcusably untrue. Polydore
Lib. 6.
writes, that the Northumbrians and Mercians not fully settled in subjection,
made a revolt. Malmesburie Lib. 2* c. ^.
says, that he was maimed of a great part of his kingdom, by the stroke of
which injury he ended his life. And whereas you write in commendation of Kind
Edgar his next successor, that he kept a Navy of 6600 ships for defense of
the Realm, you discover your defective judgment in embracing such reports for
true.

In that you say, that many good men of the Realm were of opinion, not to admit
the succession of Etheldred after the death of his brother, I dare confidently
affirm, that you do not only tell, but make an untruth; having no author either
to excuse or countenance the same. In that you write also, that between the
death of Edmund Ironside, and the reign of William Conqueror, it did plainly
appear what interest the Commonwealth has to alter titles of succession; it
does plainly appear, that both you reason and your conscience is become slavish
to your violent desire. For what either liberty or power had the Commonwealth
under the barbarous rage and oppression of the Danes? when Canutus had spread
the wings of his fortune over the whole Realm, none having either heart or
power to oppose against him, what choice was then left unto the people? what
room for right? what man not banished from sobriety of sense would ever have
said, that he was admitted king by the whole Parliament and consent of the
Realm? It is true, that after he had both violently and unjustly obtained full
possession of the Realm, slain the brother of Edmund Ironside, and conveyed
his Children into Sueden, he assembled the Nobility, and caused himself to be
crowned king: but neither the form nor name of a Parliament was then known in
England; and if coronation were sufficient to make a title, no king should be
accounted to usurp.

Of Harold the first, the natural Son of Canutus, our Histories do very
differently repor^. Saxo Grammaticus writes, that he was never king, but that
he died before his Father. Henry of Huntington reports that he was appointed
but as Regent for his brother Hardicanutus. Others write, that apprehending the
opportunity of his Brothers absence, he invaded Northumberland and Mercia, by
force of the Danes who were in England, whereupon the Realm was divided, one
partholding for Harold, and another for Hardicanutus, who was in Denmark. But
because he delayed to come into England, they all fell, rather not to deny then
to acknowledge Harold for their king. Take now which of these reports you
please, for all do serve to your purpose alike.

Hardicanutus after the death of Harold, came out of Denmark into England: and
the people having their courages broken with bondage, were easy to entertain
the strongest pretender. But after his death, diverse of the Nobility,
especially Godwin Earl of Kent, rising into hope to shake off their shoulders
the importable yoke of the Danes, advanced Edward the Son of Etheldred to the
Crown, as being the next of the Race of the Saxon Kings, though not in blood,
yet at hand; for Edward the Outlaw his elder Brother, was then in Hungary: and
fear being the only knot that had fastened the people to the Danish Kings, that
once united, they all scattered from them, like so many birds whose Cage had
been broken. Edward being dead, Harold the Son of Godwine usurped the Kingdom:
for as Malmesbury says; Extorta a principibus fide arripuit diadema.
By extorted faith from the nobility he fastened upon the Crown a forceable
gripe: Henry Huntington also, and out of him Polydore do write, that upon
confidence of his power he invaded the Crown Viribu^ and gener^ fretus regni
Diadema invasit.
which usurpation gave both encouragement and success to the Enterprise of the
Normans. This short passage of History you do defile with so many untruths,
that it seems you have as natural a gift to falsify, as to eat, drink, or
sleep.

But where you write that William the Conqueror formed any title by consent of
the Realm, you grow into the degree of ridiculous. We find that he pretended
the Institution of King Edward, which had neither probability nor force; and
that he was nearer to him in blood, than Harold the Usurper: but that he ever
pretended the Election of the People, it is your own clouted conceit. For when
he had routed the English Army in the field, when he had sacked their Towns,
harrassed their Villages, slain much people, and bent his Sword against the
breasts of the rest, what free Election could they then make? Your self
acknowledge also in another place, In part. 2. ca. 2. pa 12.
that he came to the Crown by dint of Sword; and at his death his own
conscience constrained him to confess, that he took it without right Lib. vit.
(...).
. And in that the Pope and the French King favored his enterprise, it is not
material, this is not the first injustice which they have assisted. Neither was
it the Popes hallowed Banner (as you affirm) but the Bow and the Arrow, the
only weapon of advantage long time after to this Nation, whereby he did obtain
the Victory. One help he had also within the Realm, for that King Edward had
advanced diverse Normans, to high place both of Dignity and Charge; who gave
unto him much secret both encouragement and assistance in his Attempt.

And thus in all these turbulent times, you are so far from finding five or
six, that you are short of any one, who was made King by free Authority of the
People.

King William Rufus made no other Title to the Crown, but the Testament of his
Father: For often use has confirmed it for Law, that a Victor may freely
dispose of the Succession of that State, which he has obtained by the purchase
of his Sword. Cin. and B^^tol. in l. im^perialis. (...) nupt*
The Conqueror disinherited his Eldest Son, Robert, for that joining with
Philip King of France, he invaded, wasted and spoiled Normandy, and joined in
open battle against his Father, wherein the Father was unhorsed and wounded,
and brought to a desperate distress of his Life. Hereupon he cast forth a cruel
Curse against his Son, which he could never be entreated to revoke: in so much
that upon his deathbed he said of him Lib. Vit. Will. conq*
, that it was a miserable Country which should be subject to his Dominion, for
that he was a proud and foolish Knave, and to be long scourged with cruel
Fortune. And whereas you write that at the time of his Fathers death he was
absent in the war of Jerusalem, it is a very negligent untruth.

But it is an idle untruth that you write, that Henry the first had no other
Title to the Crown, but the Election of the People. He never was Elected by the
People; he never pretended any such Title. Nubrigensis, Lib. 1. cap. ^.
and after him Polydore In Henr. 1. fol. 181.
do report, that he laid his Title, because he was born after his Father was
King. Malmesbury In Henr. 1. lib. 5.
says; Henry, the youngest Sons of William the Great, being an Infant,
according to the desires and wishes of all men was excellently brought up Quod
solus omnium filiorum Willielmi natus est regie, and ei regnum videretur
competere.
because he alone, of all the Sons of William, was Princely born, and the
Kingdom seemed to appertain unto him. He was born in England in the third year
after his Father entered into it. And this was the like Controversy to that
which Herodotus In polyhimn.
reports, to have happened between the Sons of Darius, the Son of Hystaspis,
King of Persia, when he prepared an expedition against the Grecians and
Egyptians: because by the Laws of Persia, the King might not enter into
enterprise of Arms, before he had declared his Successor. Darius had three
Children before he was King, by his first Wife, the Daughter of Gobris; and
after he attained the Kingdom, he had other four by Anrosa, the Daughter of
Cyrus. Artabazanes was eldest of the first sort, Xerxes of the second.
Artabazanes alleged, that he was eldest of all the Kings children; and that it
was the Custom amongst all men, that the eldest should enjoy the Principality.
Xerxes alleged, that he was begotten of Atossa, the daughter of that King, by
whose puissance the Persians had gained, not only Liberty, but also Power.
Before Darius had given sentence, Demaratus the son of Aristo, cast out of his
Kingdom of Sparta, came unto Xerxes, and advised him to allege further, that
he was the eldest son of Darius after he was king: and that it was the Custom
of Sparta, that if any man had Children in private estate, and afterward
another son when he was King, this last son should be his Successor: upon which
ground Darius pronounced in the bealf of Xerxes. The same History is reported
by Iustine Lib. 2.
, and touched also by Plutarch Lib. de fraterna benevolentia.
, although they differ, both from Herodotus, and one from the other in some
points of circumstances. Hereto also agrees that which Josephus writes Antiq.
li. 16. cap. 3.
, in reprehending King Herod, for excluding Alexander and Aristobulus his Sons,
and appointing Antipater, born to him in private estate, to succeed in his
Kingdom.

Many great Lawyers have subscribed their opinions to this kind of title; and
namely Pet. Cynus, Baldus, Albericus, Raph. Fulgosius In l. imperialis. sect,
illud. C. de nupt.
, Rebuffus In l. si senatus C. de dignit. li. 12.
; and Anto. Corsetta* In tract. de pot. and excel. reg sect. 16.
delivers it for a common opinion. But with this exception, if the kingdom be
acquired by any other title then by succession, according to proximity in
blood: for in this case, because the dignity is inherent in the stock, the
eldest Son shall succeed, although he were born before his father was King Pet.
Iac. in arb. success. reg. Franc. Io. Rai. in cap. praeterea. tit. de prohi
feud ali and intract: nobil. (...). 10. Iac. a S. Georg. intract. feud. D.
Benedic. in rep. c. Rainutius. ^ ^00 de testam.
. And therefore Plutarch writes In Artaxerxe.
that after the kingdom of Persia was settled in succession, when Darius the
King had four Sons, Artaxerxes the Eldest, Cyrus the next, and two other;
Parysatis his wife having a desire that Cyrus should succeed in the kingdom,
pressed in his behalf the same reason wherewith Xerxes had prevailed before:
affirming, that she had brought forth Artaxerxes to Darius, when he was a
private man; but Cyrus, when he was a king. Yet Plutarch writes, that the
reason which she used was nothing probable; and that the eldest was designed to
be King.

Howsoever the right stood between Robert Duke of Normandy, and his younger
brothers, the fact did not stand either with the quiet or safety of the Realm.
For, during the reign of William Rufus, it was often infested upon this
quarrel, both with foreign arms and civil seditions; which possessed all places
with disorder, and many also with fire, rapine and blood, the principal effects
of a licentious war.

These mischiefs not only continued but increased in the reign of King Henry,
until Robert the eldest brother was taken prisoner in the field, which put a
period to all his attempts. So dangerous it is upon any pretense to put by the
next in Succession to the Crown.

This Henry the first left but one Daughter, and by her a young Son named
Henry, to whom he appointed the Succession of the Realm: and took an Oath of
all the Bishops, and likewise of the Nobility, to remain faithful unto them
after his decease. Yet you write, that because Stephen, Son of Adela, Sister to
King Henry, was thought by the States more fit to govern, he was by them
admitted to the Crown In which assertion, you cannot be deceived, you do not
err; but your passion does pull you from your own Knowledge and Judgment.
Polydore Lib. 12. in prin.
writes, that he possessed the Kingdom contrary to his Oath, for which cause
the minds of all men were exceedingly moved: some did abhor and detest the
impiety; others, and those very few, unmindfull of Perjury, did more boldly
then honestly allow it, and followed his part. Further he says, Ibidem.
that he was crowned at Westminster, in an assembly of those Noble Men who were
his Friends. Nubrigensis affirms, that Sacramenti praevaricator regnum
invasit.
violating his Oath he invaded the Kingdom.

William Malmesbury, who lived in King Stephen's time, says In hist. novel l.
1. fol. 101 ^.
; that he was the first of all Laymen, next the King of Scots, who had made
Oath to the Empress Maud; and that he was Crowned, Tribus episcopis
presentibus, nullis abba^ibus, paucissimis optimatibus.
three Bishops being present (of whom one was his Brother) no Abbot, and a very
few of the Nobility. Henry Huntington, who lived also in the same time, says
Lib. 8. p. 221. Vigore and impudentia fretus.
; that by force and impudence, tempting God, he invaded the Crown. Afterward he
reports Pa. 221.
, that being desirous to have his Son Eustace Crowned King with him, the
Bishops withstood it, upon Commandment from the Pope, because he took upon him
the Kingdom against his Oath Quia regnum contra jussurandum praeripuisse
videbatur.
. Roger Hoveden writes Pa. 275. quasi tempestas invasit.
, that he invaded the Crown in manner of a tempest.

This is the report of those Writers who came nearest, both to the time and
truth of this action: whom other Authors do likewise follow. Polydore In princ.
l. 12.
, and after him Hollingshead In Steph.
, do write, that he took upon him the Crown, partly upon confidence in the
power of Theobald his Brother, Earl of Blois; and partly by the aid of Henry
his other Brother, Bishop of Winchester. Walsingham adaddeth Hypodig. pa. 38.
, that Hugh Bigot, who had been King Henry's Steward, took an Oath before the
Archbishop of Canterbury, that King Henry at his death appointed Stephen to be
his Successor. Whereupon the Archbishop and a few others were over-lightly
led, like men blinded with security, and of little foresight: never considering
of dangers, until the means of remedy were past.

You write, that they thought they might have done this with a good conscience,
for the good of the Realm. But what good conscience could they have, in
defiling their faith? Such consciences you endeavor to frame in all men, to
break an oath with as great facility, as a Squirrell can crack a Nut. What good
also did ensue unto the Realm? The Nobility were set into factions; the common
people into division and disorder: and as in Wars, where discipline is at
large, there insolences are infinite; so in this confusion of the State, there
was no action which tended not to the ruin thereof; the Lives and Goods of Men
remaining in continual pillage. Polydore says: l. 12. (...)
Matrons were violated, Virgins ravished, Churches spoiled, Towns and Villages
rased, much Cattle destroyed, innumerable Men slain. Into this miserable face
of extremities the Realm did fall; and into the same again you strive to reduce
it.

But you say, that for the ending of these Mischiefs, the States in a
Parliament at Wallingford made an Agreement, that Stephen should be King during
his life, and that Henry and his Offspring should succeed after his death. A
man would think you had a mint of Fables; there is no History which you handle,
but you defile it with apish untruths. All our Histories agree, that King
Stephen, unable to range things into better form, did adopt Henry to be his
Successor. The second Huntington says, ^
that this agreement was mediated, by the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the
Bishop of Winchester, who repented him of the furtherance he gave to the
advancement of King Stephen, when he saw what Miseries did thereupon ensue. The
like does Hoveden report Fol. 281. ^.
: and Holingshead p. 62.
sets down the form of the Charter of agreement between them; whereby it is
evident, that it was a transaction between them two, and no compulsory act or
authority of the State. I deny not but some Authors affirm, that the King
assembled the Nobility, but neither were they the States of the Realm, neither
were they assembled to any other end, but to swear Fealty unto Henry, saving
the King's Honor so long as he should live.

After the death of King Richard the first, you affirm that the Succession was
again broken; for that John, Brother to King Richard, was admitted by the
States, and Arthur Duke of Britain, Son to Geoffry, Elder brother unto John,
was against the ordinary course of Succession excluded. Well, Sir, I arrest
your word; remember this I pray you, for I will put you in mind thereof in
another place. That which here you affirm to be against the ordinary course of
Succession, you bring in another place for proof, that the Uncle has right
before the Nephew. You do wildy waver in variety of Opinion, speaking flat
contrary, according as the Ague of your passion is either in fit or
intermission.

The History of King John stands thus. King Richard the first dying without
issue, left behind him a Brother named John, and a Nepew called Arthur, Son of
Geoffry, who was Elder Brother unto John. This Arthur was appointed by King
Richard to succeed in his Estate, as Polydore writes ^ib. ^5^ in prin.
. Nubrigensis says, that he should have been established by consent of the
Nobility, if the Britains had not been so foolishly either suspicious or fond,
that when King Richard sent for him, they refused to commit him into his Uncles
hands.

But after the death of King Richard, his Brother John seized upon his Treasure
in Normandy, came over into England, and in an Assembly only of the Nobility,
was crowned King. Of these, many he won, with such liberal Protestations and
Promises, as men careless of their word are wont to bestow; others were abused
by the persuasions of Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury, and a few others (says
Polydore Lib. 15. p. 262.
) not well advised.

Nic. Trivet says In prologo.
, that John pretended for his Title, not the election of the People, but
propinquity of Blood Iure propinquitatis.
, and the testament of King Richard. The same also is affirmed by Walsingham
Hypodig. p. 59.
. And this is the Question between the Uncle and the Nephew, of which I shall
have occasion to speak hereafter. But Polydore says Lib. 15. p. ^ 63.
, That diverse Noblemen did account this to be a fraudulent Injustice, and
thereupon did ominate those Evils which afterward did ensue. And when the
Archbishop was charged, That under color of Reason, partly subborned, and
partly weak, he had been the occasion of all those Mischiefs, Polydore pa. 269.
says, That he was both grieved and ashamed at nothing more; Rog. Wenden
affirms, That he excused himself, that he did it upon Oracles, and by the
gift of Prophecy.

King John having locked himself into the Saddle of state, made one wrong which
he had done, to be the cause of a greater wrong; by murdering his Nephew,
Arthur, Duke of Britan, whose inheritance he did unjustly usurp. For this fact
the French King deprived him of all the Lands which he held in Fee of the Crown
of France, and prosecuted the Sentence to effect. After this, as men are easily
imboldened against an Usurper, when once he declineth either in Reputation or
in State, diverse of the Nobility, especially they of the North, confederated
against him: but being neither able to endure his war, nor willing to repose
trust in his peace, they contracted with Jews the French Kings son, to take
upon him to be their King. And so it often happens in civil contentions, that
they who are weakest, do run with a natural rashness to call in a third.

Jews being arrived upon the coast of Kent, the Nobility of that faction
Walsing. hypodigm^. pa, 56,
, came and swear allegiance unto him. The Londoners also, many upon an ordinary
desire to have new Kings, others for fear, and some for company, joined to the
revolt. Hereof a lamentable presence of all miseries did arise, whereby as well
the Liberty as the Dignity of the Realm, were brought to a near and narrow
jump. The poor people, naked both of help and hope, stood at the courtesy and
pleasure of the men of arms; the liberty of war making all things lawful to
the fury of the strongest. The Nobility, feeling much, and fearing more the
insolency of the French Nation, who (as Vicount Melin a Nobleman of France
confessed at his death) had sworn the extirpation of all the Noble Blood in the
Realm, began to devise how they might return into the allegiance of King John:
in so much as a little before his death, Letters were brought unto him from
certain of his Barons, to the number of forty, who desire to be received again
into his peace. But after his death, which happily did happen within five
months after the arrival of the French, both their hatred and their fear
being at an end, they were all as ready to cast out Jews, as they had been
rash to call him in.

This History you corrupt with very many odious untruths, which are more harsh
to a well-tuned ear, then the crashing of teeth, or the grating of copper. As
namely, in affirming, that Arthur was excluded, and John crowned King by the
States of the Realm; that God did more defend this act of the Commonwealth,
then the just Title of Arthur; that by the same States King John was rejected,
Prince Henry his son deprived, and Jews of France chosen to be King; that the
same States recalled their sentence against Prince Henry, disannulling their
Oath and Allegiance made unto Jews. A shameless tongue, governed by a
deceitful mind, can easily call Faction, the Commonwealth; Rebellion, a just
and judicial Proceeding; open and often Perjury, an orderly revoking of a
Sentence; Gods secret Judgment in permitting Injustice to prevail, a plain
defense and allowance thereof.

Of the division of the Houses of Lancaster and York, it is but little that you
write, whereto I have fully answered before: you do wisely to give a light
touch to this Example, it is so hot that it will scald your throat. King Henry
the fourth, more carried by cursed ambition, then either by necessity or right,
laid an unjust gripe upon the Realm, which afterward he did beautify with the
counterfeit Titles of Conquest and Election. So violent are the desires of
Princes to embrace streined Titles, by which they may disturb the States of
other; not remembering, that Right may be trodden down, but not trodden out;
having her secret both means to support, and seasons to revive her. For
although the lawful Successor did warily strike sail to the Tempest, because
neither the time running, nor the Opportunity present (which are the Guiders of
Actions) did consent as then to enter into enterprise; yet so soon as one hair
of occasion was offered, his progeny did set up a most doubtful war, wherein
thirteen Battles were executed by Englishmen only, and above fourscore
Princes of the Royal Blood slain.

Lo now the smiling success of these usurpations; lo what a dear purchase of
repentance they did cause! Were it not that passion does blind men, not only in
desire but in hope, they might suffice to make us advised, to keep rather the
known and beaten way with safety, then upon every giddy and brainless warrant
to engulph our selves in those Passages wherein so many have peristed before
us. It belongs to wise men to avoid mischiefs; and it is the reward of fools
to lament them.

Go too then; conclude if you please, that the people are not bound to admit
him to the Crown, who is the next Successor by propinquity of blood; but rather
to weigh, whether it is like that he will perform his charge, or no. Conclude
this (I say) to be your Opinion; and that it seems to you to be conform to
all Reason, Law, Religion, Piety, Wisdom, and Policy, and to the Custom of all
Commonwealths in the World: and I will assuredly conclude against you, that
you prate without either warrant or weight.

An Answer to the Ninth Chapter, which bears this Title:
What are the Principal Points which a Commonwealth ought to respect, in
Admitting or Excluding any Prince; wherein is handled largely also, of the
Diversity of Religions, and other such Causes.
IN this Passage you handle what Cause is sufficient either to keep in, or to
cast out of State the next in Blood. In which Question you determine, That God
does allow for a just and sufficient Cause, the Will and Judgment of the
People. Your Reason is, For that they are Judge of the Thing it self, and
therefore they are the Judge also of the Cause. Your Antecedent you prove,
first, For that it is in their own Affair: secondly, For that it is in a Matter
that has its whole Beginning, Continuance, and Substance from them alone. Your
Consequence you prove by a whole lump of Law, in alleging the entire Body of
the Civil and Canon Law, assisted also with great Reason.

Diogenes said of a certain Tumbler, That he never saw Man take more pains to
break his Neck. In like sort we may say of you, It is hard to find a Man that
has more busied his Wits to overthrow the Opinion of his Wisdom. For, the
first Proof of your Antecedent is not only of no force for you, but strong
against you; because no Man is a competent Judge in his own Cause; no Man can
be both Party and Judge: Whereto I will add, That no Inferior has
Jurisdiction over the Superior, much less the Subject against the Sovereign.

Your second Proof, That all the Power of a King has dependency upon the
People, I have sufficiently encountered before Cap. 1.
. And if your Consequence were true, That whosoever is Judge of a thing, is
Judge also without controllment of the Cause; if this were as agreeable to all
Laws as you seem to believe, then were all Judgments arbitrary; then could no
Appeal be interposed, for giving Sentence without just Cause; then were it
false which Panormitan writes In c. per tuas. Qui fill. sunt legit.
, that a false Cause expressed in a Sentence makes it void.

What shall I say? What do you think? Do you think that these fat Drops of a
greasy Brain can bring the Tenure of a Crown to the Will of the People? What
are you, who endeavor thus boldly to abuse both our Judgment and Conscience?
Are you Religious? Are you of Civil either Nature or Education, who under the
name of Civilian do open the way to all manner of Deceits, Perjuries, Tumults,
and Treasons? What are you? For you show your self more profane than Infidels;
more barbarous than Canibals, Tartarians, Moors, and Mammelucks; who though
they please themselves in nothing more than Hatred and Contempt, yet do they
both love and honor their Kings. I see what you are, the very true Follower of
the Anabaptists in Germany, who openly professed, That they must ruinate the
State of Kings. And who can assure us (for your corrupt Dealings make all
Suspicions credible) that you do not also follow them both in Desire and Hope,
to embrace the Monarchy of the whole World? The difference between you is this:
They pretended Revelation for then Warrant; you work by deceitful show of
Reason by falsely either alleging, or wresting, or corrupting both Humane and
Divine Authority.

In what miserable condition should Princes live, if their State depended upon
the Pleasure of the People, in whom Company takes away Shame, and every Man
may lay the Fault on his Fellow? How could they command? Who would obey? What
could they safely either do or omit? Who knows a People, that knows not, that
sudden Opinion makes them hope; which if it be not presently answered, they
fall into Hate, choosing and refusing, erecting and overthrowing, as every Wind
of Passion does puff? What steddiness in their Will or Desire, which having so
many Circles of Imagination, can never be enclosed in one Point?

And whereas you write, That God always approves the Will and Judgment of the
People, as being properly the Judge of the whole Business; and that every
particular Man must simply submit himself thereunto, without further
inquisition, although at diverse times they determine Contraries, (as they did
between the Houses of Lancaster and York) because we must presume they were led
by different Respects. You seem not obscurely to erect thereby another
privileged Power upon Earth, which cannot err, which does not deceive.

But it may be some honest-minded Man will say, That howsoever you write, your
meaning was otherwise: You write also afterward, That in two Cases every
Private Man is bound to resist the Judgment of the whole People, to the
uttermost extent of his Ability. Well then, let us take you for a Man whose
Sayings disagree, both from your Meaning, and between themselves* let us
consider what are your two Exceptions.

The first is, when the Matter is carried not by way of orderly Judgment, but
by particular Faction of Private Men, who will make offer to determine the
Cause, without Authority of the Realm committed unto them. But this Exception
is so large, that it devoureth the whole Rule: for in Actions of this quality,
the Original is always by Faction; the Accomplishment by Force, or at least by
Fear, howsoever they are sometimes countenanced with Authority of the State. So
Sylla, having brought his Legions within the Walls of Rome, obtained the Law
Valeria to be published, whereby he was created Dictator for twenty four Years;
by means of which Force, Cicero affirms Lib. de L^gibus.
that it was no Law. Likewise Lawrence Medices, having an Army within Florence,
caused, or rather constrained the Citizens to elect him Duke. When Henry the
Fourth was chosen King, he held Forty thousand Men in Arms. And this is most
evident by your own Example, of four contrary Acts of Parliament, which at
diverse times were made, during the Contention between the Families of Lancaster
and York, not upon different Reasons, as with little reason you affirm, but
upon different Success of either Side.

In Matters of this moment, the orderly Course of Proceeding is only by
Parliament. The Parliament must be summoned by the King's Writ, and no Act
thereof has Life but by express Consent of the King. If this Form had always
been observed, neither our Kings should have been deposed, nor the next
Successors excluded, nor the Title of the Crown entangled, to the inestimable
both weakening and waste of all the Realm.

Your second Exception is, When such a Man is preferred to the Crown, by whom
God is manifestly offended, and the Realm prejudiced or endangered: In which
Case (you say) every Man, with a free and uncontrolled Conscience, may resist
what he can.

It was even here I looked for you. Your broyling Spirits do nothing else but
fling Firebrands, and heap on Wood, to set Kingdoms in Combustion. What
Rebellion, what Revolt has ever been made, but under some of these Pretenses?
What Princes Actions, either by malicious or ignorant Interpretation, may not
easily be drawn to one of these Heads? You are a Nursery of War in the
Commonwealth, a Seminary of Schism and Division in the Church: In sum, All your
Actions, all your Thoughts are barbarous and bloody.

You write much of Right and Justice; but you measure the Right and Justice of
a Cause, by the Advantage of your own Affairs. You speak as having a tender
sense of the Glory of God; but you stretch out your Throat with high Words of
Contradiction against him. You make show of Care to preserve the State; but you
are like the Ivy, which seems outwardly both to embrace and adorn the Wall,
whereinto inwardly it does both eat and undermine. For, what Means, either more
ready or forcible, to overthrow a State, than Faction and intestine Quarrels?
And what other Milk do you yield? What are your Opinions, what your
Exhortations, but either to set or to hold up Sedition and Bloodshed? St. Paul
teaches us not to resist higher Powers Romans 13.
, although both cruel and profane; you teach us to resist them what we can.
The Apostle is followed of all the Ancient Fathers of the Church; you are
followed of those only who follow the Anabaptists. For my part, I had rather
err with the Apostle in this Opposition, than hold Truth with you. But I will
speak more moderately in a Subject of such a nature: I will not say then, That
I had rather err; but, That I shall less fear to err, in not resisting, with
the Apostle, than in resisting, with you. New Counsels are always more
plausible than safe.

After you have played the Suffenus with your self, in setting the Garland upon
your own Head, and making your imaginary Audience to applaud your Opinion, as
worshipfully wise, you proceed to declare what ought chiefly to be regarded, in
furthering or hindering any Prince toward the Crown. Three Points (you say)
are to be required in every Prince; Religion, Chivalry, and Justice: And
putting aside the two last, as both handled by others, and of least importance,
you assume only to treat of Religion; wherein either Error or Want does bring
inestimable Damage to any State.

You draw a long Discourse, That the highest End of every Commonwealth is the
Service and Worship of God; and consequently, That the Care of Religion is the
principal Charge which pertains to a King. And therefore you conclude, That
whatsoever Prince does not assist his Subjects to attain this End, omitteth the
chief part of his Charge, and commits High Treason against his Lord, and is
not fit to hold that Dignity, though he perform the other two Parts never so
well: And that no Cause can so justly clear the Conscience, whether of the
People, or of particular Men, in resisting the Entrance of any Prince, as if
they judge him faulty in Religion.

This is neither nothing, nor all which you say. In Elective States, the People
ought not to admit any Man for King, who is either cold or corrupt in Religion;
but if they have invested such a one with Sovereign Authority, they have no
Power at pleasure to remove him. In Successive Kingdoms, wherein the People
have no Right of Election, it is not lawful for Private Men, upon this cause,
to offer to impeach eith^r the Entrance or Continuance of that King, which the
Laws of the State do present unto them; not only because it is forbidden of
God, (for that is the least part of your regard) but because disorderly
Disturbance of a settled Form in Government, traineth after it more both
Impieties and Dangers, than has ever ensued the Imperfections of a King.

I will come more close to the Point in controversy, and dispel those foggy
Reasons which stand between your Eye and the Truth. There are two Principal
Parts of the Law of God; the one Moral, or Natural, which contains three
Points, Sobriety in our selves, Justice toward others, and generally also
Reverence and Piety toward God: The other is Supernatural, which contains
the true Faith of the Mysteries of our Salvation, and the special kind of
Worship that God does require. The first God has delivered by the Ministry of
Nature to all Men; the second he does partly reveal, and partly inspire to whom
he pleases: and therefore although most Nations have in some sort observed the
one, yet have they not only erred, but failed in the other.

During the time of the Law, this peculiar Worship of God was appropriate only
to the People of Israel, in a corner Kingdom of the World: The flourishing
Empires of the Assyrians, Medes, Persians, Egyptians, Graecians, Syrians, and
Romans, either knew it not, or held it in contempt. The Israelit^s were almost
always in subjection under these both Heathen and Tyrannical Governments, and
yet God by his Prophets enjoined them Obedience, affirming, That the Hearts of
Kings were in his Hands, and that they were the Officers of his Justice, the
Executioners of his Decrees.

In the time of Grace, the true Mysteries both of Worship and Belief were
imparted also to other Nations; but the ordinary Means to propagate the same,
was neither by Policy, nor by Power. When St. Peter offered provident Counsel
(as he thought) unto Christ, advising him to have care of himself, and not to
go to Jerusalem, where the Jews sought to put him to death, Christ did sharply
reprove him for it Mat. ^^.25.
: When he did draw his Sword, and therewith also drew Blood in defense of
Christ, he heard this Sentence, M^t. 2^.52.
They that take the sword shall perish with the sword. Christ armed his
Apostles only with Fiery Tongues Act. 2.3*
, by force whereof they maintained the Field, against all the Stratagems and
Strength in the World: And when Princes did not only reject but Persecute
their Doctrine; they taught their Subjects obedience unto them Romans 13. 1. Pet.
^.
, they did both encounter and overcome them, not by resisting, but by
persisting and enduring.

This course seems strange to the discourse of Reason, to plant Religion
under the Obedience of Kings, not only careless thereof, but cruel against it:
but when we consider that the Jews did commonly forsake God in prosperity, and
seek him in distress; that the Church of Christ was more pure, more zealous,
more entire, I might also say more populous, when she traveled with the Storm
in her Face, then when the wind was either prosperous or calm Contra (...),
that as S. Agustine saith^s, Want or weakness of faith is usually Chastised
with the Scourges of tribulations; We may learn thereby no further to examine,
but to admire and embrace the unsearchable wisdom and will of God.

Seeing therefore that this is appointed the odinary means, both to establish
and increase Religion, may we adventure to exchange it with humane devices? Is
it the Servants duty either to contradict or dispute the Masters commandment?
is there any more ready way to prove an Heretic, then in being a curious
questionist with God? is he bound to yield to any man a reason of his will? It
is more then presumption, it is plain Rebellion to oppose our reason against
his order, against his decree.

It stands also upon common Rules: That which is contrary to the nature of a
thing does not help to strengthen, but destroy it: It is foolish to add
external stay, to that which is sufficient to support it self. It is senceless
to attempt that by force, which no force is able to effect: That which has a
proper Rule, must not be directed by any other. And this was both the
Profession and practice of the ancient Fathers of the Church, as I have
declared before Ca. 2.
; whereto I will here add that which S. Ambrose says Epist 54*
: Let every man bear it patiently, if it be not extorted from the Emperor,
which he would be loath the Emperor should extort from him. And lest they might
be interpreted not to mean obedience, as well to succession as to present
Power, they allege that which the Captive Jews of Babylon did write, to the
tributary Jews which were at Jerusalem Hierom. 29. Baruch. 1
; to pray for the life not only of Nebuchodonosor, the King of Babylon, but
also of Baltasar his Son, the next Successor to his Estate.

But in latter times, Innocentius has taught, and is also seconded by
Castrensis in rep. l. ^ de just.
, that love is a just cause to move arms for matters of Religion; Under which
pretense, diverse men have pursued their own private purposes and ends.
Guicciardine writes lib. ^2.
, that Firdinand who was called the catholic, did cover all his covetous and
ambitious desires, with the honest and holy vail of religion* the like does
Iovius report lib. 30^
of Charles V. Emperor. Paulus Emilius Paul. Aem. 6.7.8.
writes thus of all: every man professes his war to be holy; every man
terms his enemies impious, sanctity and piety is every man's mouth, but in
advise; and in action nothing less. The contention is for worldly right, take
away that, and you shall find no cause of war. Now they pretend piety to every
mischief: the name of holy warfare, (most miserable) is applied unto arms.

Hereupon such cruel calamities have ensued in most parts of Europe, and
especially in Germany and France, with so little furtherance to that cause, for
whose supportance force was offered, that all the chief Writers of our Age are
now reduced to the former opinion; affirming with Arnobius Adv. g^. 3 4.
, that Religion is of power sufficient for it self: with Tertulian also Apollo
, Lactantius (...) 2^.^1.
, Cassiodorus ^. Var. ^^. et. lib. 10. ep. ^^.
, Josephus ^. Vt. su
, S. Barnard ^ant. ser.
, and others, that it must be persuaded and not enforced. They of your Society,
as they took their original from a Soldier, so they are the only Atheologians
whose heads entertain no other Object but the Tumult of Realms; whose Doctrine
is nothing but confusion and bloodshed; whose Persuasions were never followed,
but they have made way for all miseries and mischiefs to range in, to come
forward, to thrive, to prevail. You have always bin like a winter Sun, strong
enough to raise Vapors, but unable to dispel them. For most cowardly
Companions may set up strife; but it is maintained with the hazard, and ended
with the ruin, always of the worthiest, and sometimes of all.

The sum is this. So long as we express pure piety, both in our Doctrine and in
our doings, all will go well: but when we make a mixture of divine and humane
both Wisdom and Power; when we preach policy; when we make a common trade of
Treason; when we put no difference between Conscience and Conceit; we must
needs overthrow either Religion or our selves.

Now I will answer the Reasons of your Assertion. First you say, That if
Princes do not assist their Subjects in the honor and service of God in this
life, God should draw no other fruit or commodity from humane Societies, then
of an Assembly of brutish Creatures. But this Reason is not only weak, as it
may appear by that which has been said, but also brutish, and (which is worse)
profane. For what fruit, what commodity does God draw from Societies of men?
is not his Glory perfect in it self? can we add any thing to the excellency
thereof? has he any need of our broken worship? God is an absolute Being, both
comprehending, and exceeding all Perfections: an Infinite Being, therefore his
sufficiencies neither can be increased, nor depend upon any, but only of
himself. He was from Eternity without any world, and a thousand worlds more
cannot at all increase his felicity and glory: he did create the world, not to
participate any thing thereof, but to communicate from himself unto it.
Hereupon Job says 22.3.
, What profit is it to God if thou be just? What advantage is it to him if thy
ways be clean? Surely we must be better informed of the soundness of your
judgment, before we dare depend upon the authority of your word.

You put us in mind that you compared an Heir apparent to a Spouse, betroathed
only and not married to the common wealth. I remember it well; but I did not
take you for such a widower of wit, that you could think it worthy to be
repeated. And ye^ that which hereupon you deduce out of S. Paul makes
altogether against you. S. Paul says 1* Cor. 7.
, that if a brother has an infidel to wife, if she consent to abide with him,
he may not put her away: and likewise if a woman has an infidel husband: but
if the infidel does depart, then the Christian is free. Now if you will needs
make a marriage between a King and his Subjects, you might hereupon conclude,
that if an infidel King will hold his state, the people may not dispossess him.

And whereas you affirm, That all they who differ in any point of Religion, and
stand wilfully in the same, are Infidels the one to the other, you show both a
violence and weakness of mind. For obstinate Error in certain Articles of
Faith, and not in the whole state and substance thereof, does make an Heretic,
but not an Infidel. And although the Canon Law does in some case dissolve
marriage between a Christian and an Infidel c. juda. 28. q. 1. c. quanto d^
diver.
; yet does it not permit the like between a true Christian and an Heretic d.
^. ^uanto c. gaudemus de divert.
. And Panormitane In c. ex part. ^. d^ conver. conjug.
in his doub^ing manner denies, that the Church has power to authorize
diviorce in case of herisie. So that allowing your comparison for good, yet in
case of infidelity, S. Paul; in case of Heresy, the Cannon Law is altogether
against you.

You add, that albeit the Religion which a man professes be never so true, yet
whosoever has a contrary persuasion thereof, he shall sin damnably in the
sight of God, to prefer that man to a charge, where he may draw others to his
Opinion. But I will omit this strain, and yet rather as impertinent than true.
For there are few Nations in the world, wherein the people have right to prefer
any man to be King: and that which you allege out of S. Paul Romans 14* 1. Cor.
^.
for your proof is very different from the case which you do form. The Apostle
speaks when an action is of it self indifferent, but a weak Conscience
judges it evil, being also evil by circumstance, in offending others: you
speak where an action is good in it self, but an erroneous conscience judges
it evil. I allow, that a good action contrary to conscience is unprofitable;
but that it is always a damnable sin I dare not affirm. I dare not affirm that
the Roman army did damnably sin, in deferring the Empire to Iovinian; who
excusing himself, (as Zonaras writes) because being a Christian he could not
command a Pagan army, they did notwithstanding confirm him Emperor, by which
means they did afterward embrace the Christian faith. The like does Orosius,
report, that Valentinian, being discharged by Julian from being Tribune,
because he was a Christian, by consent of the Soldiers was created Augustus. I
rather take it to be a damnable sin, which Zonaras ^
writes of the Bulgarians, in taking arms against their King, because he was
converted to Christian Religion, albeit they did according to their Conscience.
It were wasting time to dive into the depth of this question; because it
appertains to Elective States, and not unto us. But where you write without
either authority or proof, that to assist, or not to resist the advancement or
government of any King, whom we judge faulty in Religion, is a most damnable
sin, of what side soever the truth be; you breath out most filthy and unsavory
smoke; you lift up your voice into high blasts of blasphemy against the most
High.

God has taught by the Apostle S. Paul Rom 1^*
, that whosoever resist the higher Powers (which at that time were Infidels)
receive unto themselves damnation; you teach, that whosoever does not in the
like case resist, does damnably offend. Were not the spirit of division,
otherwise called the Devil, seated in your soul, you would not thus openly
oppose the setlings of your rotten brain, against the express and direct
sentence of God. What? is it a damnable sin to do every man right? is it
damnable to give Caesar that which is his due Math. 2^* 17. Mar. 12.17. Luc.
20.25:
? to give tribute, honor, fear, to whom they appertain Romans 13.7^
? The Apostle says, that Christians by resisting the power of Infidel Rulers,
do acquire unto themselves damnation Romans 13.2.
* and shall we yield credit unto you, that Turks, Moors, Infidels, should
damnably sin, either in admitting or enduring the authority of a Christian
Prince? How cheap do you value the judgments of men? at how low rate do you
prize both your conscience and credit? I could rise into riot of words upon
you, were it not that I respect what is seemly, rather for me to speak, then
for you to hear.

Certainly if we had received no such commandment from God, the regard of the
quiet of humane societies is sufficient to overwhelm your Heritical Assertion:
for seeing there are many different professions of Religion, not only in the
World, but almost in every Nation of the World: seeing also, Cas Philo says De
legate.
) every man, either by use or instruction, judges his own Religion best: what
surety could any Prince, what safety could any people enjoy, if your fiery
opinion should take place? what assurance can there be of Life or of State,
where the Sword bears sway upon such occasions, and that guided by hands both
Tumultuous and fierce. And seeing among many Religions there can be but one
Truth, if all Men should be obstinately bent against the Government of any, who
in their Judgment is Faulty in Religion; what likelihood can we either conceive
or conjecture, but that many Errors would soon prevail against the only Truth.
And therefore it is far more moderate and safe, to use the ordinary means both
of maintaining and propagating the truth, and to commit the success thereof
unto God; and (as Josephus advises) not to offer either con^umelie or violence
against any Religion, lest we provoke thereby the Professors thereof to do the
like against ours.

Your last Reason is drawn from Policy and consideration of State; because a
King will neither trust nor favor, much less advance him, that is not of the
same Religion with himself: but to the contrary, he shall be Subject to all
molestations, injuries and other aversions, which are incident to those who are
not current with the present course of affairs.

Oh Sir; this is the Helene for which you contend; you concur in opinion with
those Athenians of whom Alexander demanded divine honors; not so obstinately
to defend Heaven, as to lose the benefit of the Earth. This is the mark whereat
you aim, this is the Compass whereby you sail; as diverse flowers do open and
close, according to the Motion of the Sun; so according to the variation
hereof, you extend or restrain your plyant Conscience as you please.

But the Appostle teaches us to be obedient to higher Powers, for Conscience
sake Romans ^3.5
, and not for any private respect.

Besides, all Princes are not of that disposition whereof you speak. Suidas
writes of one, who changeing Religion to please his King, was therefore
adjudged to lose his head; one being appointed to cry at the time of his
Execution; He that keeps not Faith with God, what sound Conscience can he
bear toward Men? The Protestants in France are not altogether cast either out
of Favor or out of Charge: and many Roman Catholics in England, do enjoy
their full part, of all the plenty and pleasures that the Realm can afford.

Lastly, what have you to do with Reasons of State? This is the Eagles Feather
which consumes your devotion. Your Office is to meditate, to pray, to instruct
men in pure Devotion, to settle their Souls in Piety and in Peace. But do you
contain your selves within these limits? nothing less. You take upon you the
Policy of State* you rend and deface the reputation of Kings; you make your
selves both judges and moderators of all their actions, allowing them to fly no
further then you give them wings. You dispose not only their Affairs, but their
Crowns at your pleasure; you hunt them not to Covert but to Death. You contrive
ways to compass your designs; you train up your Followers in the high mystery
of Treason; you cast into every Realm the Apple of Strife: your Doctrine is to
no other use but as Drumms, Fifes, and Trumpets, to Incense Fury.

To these ends you wrest Scriptures, you corrupt Histories, you counterfeit
Reasons, you corrupt all Truth (pardon my plainness I pray you, I have not
attended to your dexterity in disguising matters with smooth terms) you are
obstinate to hazard rather all dangers, then to be cut off from one point of
your purpose. You acknowledge no Religion but your Will, no Law, but your
Power: all Lies, Treacheries, and Frauds do change their Nature, and become
both lawful and laudable actions, when they bear for the advantage of your
affairs.

But this is directed to devotion, (you will say) and as you term it, ordine
ad deum, for a holy and Religious end. Away then with your devotion, and so we
shall be rid of your dangerous deceit. Away I say with your devotion; or else
we will conclude of you as Livie did of Anniball: Nihil* very, nihil sancti,
nullus deum metus nullum jusjurandum, nulla religio.

(...).
FINIS.

