Hic et Ubique; OR, THE HUMORS OF DUBLIN. A COMEDY.

Acted privately, with general Applause.

Written by Richard Head, Gent.

Facilius est Carpere quam Imitare.
LONDON, Printed by R. D. for the Author. 1663.

The Prologue.
Enter Momus. Momus HA, ha, we are like to have a goodly Play y faith when our
Author swore just now he knew not whether Pegasus were Horse or Cow, if a be no
Poet, I wonder the Devil how he came to be so poor; for I Have heard some say,
Poverty and Poetry are inseparable companions, but now I think on it, his fancy
creeps in prose, and sometimes cuts a caper or two in verse, according as a was
inspired by Bacchus -- but that he could not purchase always, And that is the
reason that there is here such lack.
Of wit, since there was want of sparkling Sack.


What can you then expect but the dreggs of Ale? the best title you can give
him is but a red lettice scribler, whose rimes and the spiggot keep time
together.

Enter Musoph.
Musophilus. Courteous spectators --


Momus. Save your self the lobour, I have spoke the Prologue already.


Musoph. Who sent thee?


Momus. My friends, Envy and Prejudice.


Musoph. Thy commission's false, get hence, thy breath infects the air, and
wu'd be contagious here, but that the serenity of each face I view becom's it
's antidote. Avaunt.

( Exit Mome) The Prologue.
Our Author wrote this Play, but cannot tell
Whether or no his genius has done well.
Mark well then what he will say, and doubtless you
Will swear though it be not quaint, yet most is true.
Here Is no Vtopian stories, nor such things,
As some men fain, that fly upon the wings
Of fancy only, and include the station
Of their own projects in imagination.
Experience dictates what we have to say,
She being guide, I marvel who can stray.
Hear't out with patience, for we will all contend
To please you all, and not a Mome offend.

Drammatis Personae.
ALderman Thrive-well Vintner in Dublin. Colonel Kil-tory. Quondam Citizens of
London.
Hope-well. Bank-rupt. Contriver. Tru^.
Fantastic. Hic-et-nbique. Peregrine. Scrivener. Patrick. Kil-tory's man.
Recipe. Drawer.
Women.
Cassandra, Thrive-wels daughter. Jane her maid. Contrivers Wife. Hope-wells
Wife. Sue-Pouch a Land-Lady.
The Scene Dublin.

Act 1. Scene 1.
Enter Peregrine, Mr. Hopewell, Contriver, Trust-all, Bankrupt, Fantastic,
Hic and ubique. Peregr. MAdam, welcome ashore.


Hopewel. Thanks, noble Sir.


Peregrine. The like to you all, Gentlemen. What, melancholy, Mr. Trustall?
Come, come, though you are altogether a stranger in this Country, yet let not
your unacquaintance therewith too much discompose your spirits, or disturb your
rest: you are removed but two degrees from your native habitation, and there is
but little difference between the Climates. The generality of Dublin's
Inhabitants may justly boast of as great a measure of civility as the greatest
pretenders thereunto elsewhere; only their losses and crosses has so refined
their wits, that they are become the best oeconomick Politicians.


Trust. Sir, it is not so much the remembrance of my native soil, as the loss
of a fair promising fortune; together with the leaving behind me my dear Wife
and Children, that thus discompose me, leaving my dissipated thoughts in a
continued extafie.


Peregr. The consideration hereof would dissuade the most censorious from
blaming your dejection. However, be of good comfort, though the world has fallen
out with you, I wu'd not have you therefore be revenged on your self, or take
pet, and be miserable in spite.


Trust. Sir, I am sensible that I merit blame, but not the least pity; since
my sufferings are the sole effect of my overmuch (foolish) credulity,
occasioned by my greediness of trade: grasping at every motion of credit, I
thought to oblige and engage all.


Peregr. Never to come near you after.


Trust. Woeful experience informed me so, for now do I find their names in my
debt books, merely as so many memorandums of my folly, never to be canceled.


Hic. Hang all sad thoughts, ecstasies, and distracting remembrances (say I)
let us drink a glass of Sack and drown 'em all therein. Since we know none that
will give us our welcome to Ireland, lets e'ne do it our selves.


Phant. Well said, faith Boy, let us away then to the next Tavern. Here Is money
lads, and bills of Exchange too, which we will exchange for Sack: We cannot want,
for when we have spent all our English moneys, here is Spanish and French, more
than these Ram-crested Citizens know what to do withal. It shall go hard but
our wits shall put in for a half share among 'em.


Mrs. Hope. Now Sir, I have time to thank you, for your civility aboard; truly
I knew not what to have done without you; you stood to me in my weakness, we
women are troublesome sickly things at Sea. Enter Thrivewel.


Thrive. Save you Gentlemen. Came ye out of England?


Phant. The Sun has not run six minutes, thirteen seconds since we landed.


Thrive. I pray Sir, what Country man are you?


Phant. I Have been so long a Traveller, I don't justly know.


Thrive. And it may be not very well understand what you say.


Phant. What do you make of me?


Thrive. By your language, you seem a rabbinical Christian; by your gesture, an
Aegyptian-French Magician.

But I pray Gentlemen, what news at London?


Phant. My gaul has overflown its banks, and so irritated my animosity against
your dissimilar abjurgating similitudes, that I am loath to give your plush
Jacket any other than brushing satisfaction.


Thrive. If you do, pray Sir let it be in English.


Phant. Novelties (you would say) according to Courtly expression, or novel as
the French has it, but news according to the Vulgar. Some there is though not
much, let me see this is Wednesday, or as the great Mogol calls it --


Thrive. If this be your way of telling news, I shall sooner hear thereof from
my friends at London.


Phant. Well, I Will condescend then to the imbecility of your veterane capacity.
A Saturday night last, I supped with Dick-Shallow in the Strand, (for he and I
are so intimately acquainted, that we are never asunder.) A Monday night I came
to Holly-head, where I found these Gent.


Thrive. The expedition of your journey seems to me very strange Sir.


Phant. You would not think so, had you but seen me fly through the air. I tell
you my horse is so extreme swift in his motion, that winged Pegasus is but a
dull Ass to him.


Thrive. I would I cu'd see this wonderful swift Animal.

Have you brought him over with you Sir?


Phant. Do You think that my brain-pan instead of guts, is plenified with
obfuscosities? though I venture him at land, I Would not hazard such a treasure at
Sea.


Peregr. This is a long parenthesis. You were about to tell the Gentleman some
news.


Phant. 'Slife it is right; why, then to be short, London's London now.


Peregr. That Is without doubt; but have you no stranger news to relate?


Phant. Have but patience, and I shall gradually inform your curiosity. First
then, Houses and Shops are so dear in London, that some Shopkeepers are forced
to sell their wares in the Country.


Hic. I believe so, and their wearing clothes too.


Phant. The Mercers and Booksellers are deeply in law about the Fee-simple of
Ludgate, O it is disputable which shall carry it. As for Newgate that is to be
let.


Hic. And so it may stand, for I know not who would willingly take it, but thy
grounds for this conceit?


Phant. Why, the doors were fast locked up.


Hic. I wonder how thou got'st out then, unless thou have a body as
penetrating as a spirit.


Phant. And I saw a bill upon 'em.


Hic. That may be, a Doctors pocky bill, or a pocky Doctors bill; why, art thou
so ignorant, to be guilty of so gross a mistake?


Phant. Thou art as blind as a Polebeg Oister, not to see a well digested
conceit of mine therein. But to proceed: younger Brothers never rackt their
wits and inventions so much as now, to supply their necessary expense. The
Ladies are grown so insatiate, as that they are not content without seven or
eight baudy Pentioners, whereby they can hardly purchase provocatives enough to
render 'em capable of the office of a Stallion. False Dice will not avail neither,
for the Devil has taught even the Phanatick to be a Gamester. The Sea and the
Pox has swept away one half of the Cock-neighs, and the other half expect to
end their days by hanging like plummets to a line, and are in hopes when wound
up, to go to Heaven by Clockwork.


Contr. What an ass was I, that I could not think of this; well, since it is
not my invention, I Will go and acquaint all the Grave-makers in the Town, that
there is one has brought in an innovation, which may prove destructive to their
profession; for which I hope they will immediately digg him a grave, shall at
least reach to the Anti-podes. (aside.)


Phant. Breaking's now a la mode, and that makes this son of a Costermonger in
the fashion: (to Contriver) add to him Bankrupt and Trustall, and they will make a
leash of Knights of the burning Pestle, that are come into the Western parts
for strange adventures. This here is coutriving to drein St. George's Channel,
being so dangerous to seamen in Winter time, and when it is done, he is to have
a Patent for the sole transportation of Boggs and Laughs of Irish growth into
foreign parts.


Thrive. But Sir, you have lost the main subject of your discourse viz. the famous
and now most glorious City, London.


Phant. No such matter; there are Cities in Terra incognita that I have seen
nay and been drunk in, (there I lie, for now I remember my self, they drink
nothing there but Coffee and Chocolate.)


Thrive. But what of them?


Phant. I say that they for Architecture do as much excel London, as my horse
that I told you of, is to be preferred before a gelding of fifty pound price.


Thrive. You are a Traveller I perceive then.


Phant. I am so, it is novelty I solely take delight in, which makes me no where
a constant resident.


Bank: I believe so, for he will stay in no place longer than he can be trusted.


Phant. Speak once more, and down goes thy brazen head. No Sir, my aim therein
was to learn diversity of languages, that thereby I might at will pick-lock the
treasury of knowledge therein contained: and out of the manners of each nation,
extract somewhat excellent for my peculiar observation and imitation: what
progress I have made herein, let my carriage and language express it.


Peregr. Travel I confess in joys so many worthy privileges, that the hazard
and labor that accompanies it, should not in the least deterr us from it: for
we are not so to indulge the body, as to starve the understanding. This is the
ready was to improve an imature judgment. But instead hereof, some after a vast
expense, return at length only metamorphosed from English Asses, to French Apes.


Phant. Enough, enough Sir, let us go to the Tavern. The knowledge that this
Gentleman has of the City, will inform us where is the best wine. Come old Sir
John, you will favor us with your company.


Thrive. What Tavern do you pitch on? the London Tavern?


Bank. No, no, we have had too much to do with London Taverns already.


Thrive. Why then, the Feathers. (Exeunt.)


Act 1. Scene 2.
Enter Colonel Kil-tory and Cassandra. KIlto. Once more (my fair Cassandra)
the blessed sates have breathed upon my hopes, and blown those sparks into a
blazing flame, which lay concealed in the dark embers of your
life-extinguishing absence, now I find the sunshine of your presence, thawing
the congealed icinesse of my heart, and makes it spread like the Marigold,
tending it is course to your motion. Fairest (and most worthy of that epithet
of all your sex) be not cruel to me, because nature has been kind to you: let
not your beautif^l prerogative tyraunize, but rather let it is sweet influence
be communicative. What say you Lady, can you love?


Cass. As yet I know not how to answer you, men are prone to promise that in
the height of their amorous sancies, which they never intend to perform: and we
poor silly eredulous maidens are too too often caught with such alluring bates of
fair promising pretenses, I know not why you should desire me not to be cruel,
when it is the proper nature of your whole sex to be guilty thereof: otherwise,
you would not thus continually beleaguer us, and if you cannot obtain a fair
surrender, you will attempt the storming of our maiden Castles.


Kilto. Madam, let me be exempted out of that number, since my only battery
shall be loving Artillery, persuasive arguments. There shall be no Soldiers
listed under my command, whose strength or policy you may fear in the least, as
dissimulation, flattery, equivocation, false oaths, mutual enemies to us both.
My desires are honest, my intentions real, and my requests legal, what then
should hinder the crowning of our loves?


Cass. Soft Sir, let not your confident hopes over run your reason and
discretion, you are in my opinion too hot upon the onset, and such commonly come
off with the loss of one member or other. Be advised therefore, and let time
which tries allthings, try also the reality of your affection, to whose test
let me leave you for a while. (Exit.)


Kilto. Delays to me are but slat denials: a long grace suits not with a sharp
stomach: It Is their subtilty thus to hold us in suspense, the more to inflame
our desires. Methinks I could now as willingly hate every part of her sex, as
formerly I loved she whole for her sake, but that I am partly assured my
Mother's a woman.


Patr. Moistere, here is one beating de door, would make speak for die shelf.


Kilto. Yet I cannot but love her, her sweet Idea is too deeply rooted in my
heart, so easily to be pulled out; never did any cies behold a fairer object,
she is now the sole and continual subject of my cogitations.


Patr. O yea, between me and God achree, my Moistare will make mad for my
shelf. Upjack and supjack; ^hoo fuato de Deole ale thee.


Kilto. No I must smother the ripe sallies of my inflamed defires, and study
what it is to be mart again, and how much these admired pieces of imperfection
fall short of his merit. Whilst I was scouring the Mountains and skipping the
Boggs, not sparing the very spawn of rebellion, I had none of these qualms. I
cu'd have then driven a score or two of these white cloven Devils, without pity
or regard. But since Mrs. Peace came acquainted with us, she has persuaded us
to change our Headpiece for a soft Pillow, the ground (covered with the
spangled Canopy of Heaven) for a down-bed, and that is naught too without a
wench. Great Mers assist me, and conjure this Devil love out of me.


Patr. By my Gossops hand, and my Faders shaddle, Kilphatrick will be mush fear
by and preshently, to see my Moistare make conjuration. Arra Moistare by St.
Sunday, 'cis ill kind for die Faders shild, to be making speech wit die shelf,
and no body, Be me fet and be, I do hate de De-vil, as I do Olivers soujer, and
if he come presently, my shelf will run away. Arrahall.


Kilto. Patrick.


Patr. Sha, sha, tatuggemi Moistare.


Kilto. What Is the matter?


Patr. Dear is one wu'd fain be speaking for dee. ( Exeunt.)


Act 1. Scene 3.
Enter Thrivewell, Peregrine, Bankrupt, Contriver and Trustall. THrive. And is
it possible Sir, that you are old Peregrine's son, the East India Merchant? for
your Fathers sake (whose memory I honor) command me wherein I may be
serviceable to you; let me request you to be no stranger to my house.


Peregr. Thanks is the least I can render you Sir, for this great favor.


Thrive. If my heart speak not in my tongue, let my name be blasted with
perpetual ignominy.


Peregr. What ever others speak malevolently of fortune, I must proclaim her
constant in her propitious smiles on me. Though I have traveled from Pole to
Pole, I ever found some civil, even among the barbarous.


Thrive. Mr. Bankrupt, sure I should know you Sir, I Have been acquainted with
the name, and not unlikely your self.


Bank. Sir, my name is so common every where, that it is no great wonder if
you are mistaken in the knowledge of me.


Trive. But I shall easily convince you that I am not mistaken by
particularizing where you lived. Were not you a Colourman in Corn-bill, London?


Trust. Heaven grant a does not betray us. (Aside.)


Bank. I confess I was ever a man of a good color, and cu'd color well what
I did. But I know not your meaning Sir. Now had I rather been in St. Georges
Channel in a great storm, than to have met with this man. (Aside.)


Cont. Would I were employed by the King for the finding out Obrazeele to rid
me of my present fears. (Aside.)


Thrive. Sir fear not that my knowledge of you, shall prove detrimental, but
rather tend to your future security.


Trust. I Am glad it is come to that, I was just at my wits end. (aside.)


Cont. And so was I too, I liked him not at first sight, 'a was so forward to
be acquainted with us. (Aside.)


Bank. Being then confident of your fidelity, I shall commit to your charge a
secret.


Thrive. Which you may be confident I shall keep safe.


Bank. Trade failing, and my creditors too hasty to receive, what my debtors
were too slow in paying me, I was necessitated to fly from perpetual
imprisonment. All that the suddenness of my departure wu'd permit me to take,
I Have brought hither; upon which slender basis, I intend to raise the structure
of a future livelihood, This Gent. Mr. Trustall, is a fellow-sufferer with me
in the same condition.


Contr. Nay Gentlemen, since ye have made Mr. Thrivewell your Confessor, 'a
shall be mine too; I Will promise you Sir, I stayed in London so long for my own
pleasure, that my Creditors had like to have made me stay a little longer for
theirs.


Peregr. Faith Gentlemen, I suspected no less, though common civility wu'd not
permit me to vent my thoughts. I rejoice at your escape, it is enough that you
have your liberty; for it is such an instrument that if you make good use on it,
'twil procure you a being any where; What think you of me? I was never brought
up to any Trade, yet live handsomely; I confess I was born to land, and enjoyed
it so long, till I was weary on it, and then was never at rest, till out of that
dirty lump, I had extracted a pure and portable Elixir. In short, to free my
self from that trouble and vexation that are the inseparable companions of
Lands and Tenements, I sold 'em. (Caveat Emptor) The moneys I have long since
spent, yet want not; the Earth's large, and has enough, (and to spare) to
supply the wants of all her industrious children. He that has wit, (I think
needs no plow; the apprehension of which persuades me, not to be confined to
any place. My great Grandfather Adam, (Emperor of the whole world) left me
something every where, and I find it truly paid me where e're I come.


Thrive. I must needs crave your pardon for my abrupt leaving you, I have
business of concernment (which I had almost forgot) that requires me, and I
hope we shall henceforth be no strangers to each other, ( Exit.)


Contr. My Masters, we have trifled away too much time already, 'twere very
requisite we redeem what is lost, by making treble use of the present.
Preferring employments will neither proffer nor prostitute themselves, unless
we court them with labor and expense; as for my part (according to the
proverb) omnem lapidem movebo, not leave a stone unturned, 'till my defires by
my endeavors are arrived at the Cape of good hope.


Trust. Mr. Contriver, though you are as much a stranger to this Country as we,
yet I look upon you to be better skilld in projecting: your advice therefore,
what course were we best to take?


Peregr. As I Am a Gentleman, if you will take my opinion with you, I Am clearly
for the second course, but believe me 'twere best for you to take some speedy
course, lest e're long, a red Herring make up all the courses in your dinner;
if you will consult where is the best Sack, how to procuve a handsome Girl, and a
good noise of Music, (they are best together) I Will be of your counsel, otherwise
I shall leave you to your worldly thoughts.


Contr. Sir, you may be much deceived in your conceited happiness, though
fortune hitherto has looked smilingly upon you, don't therefore vainly imagine,
that she doats on you as her Minion. Woeful experience has forced her chiefest
favorites to confess, that she is nunquam stabilis, and by taking no more than
she gave, leaves 'em in a condition far more miserable than e're she found 'em.


Peregr. I value neither the strumpets love nor hatred, I Am proof against the
worst she can inflict on me; what e're it be, equo animo feram. Adversity shall
not depress me so low, as to make me forget what I was, nor prosperity exalt me
so high, as to slight my friend.


Contr. First Sirs, let us provide us convenient lodgings, that done we may talk
of our business at leisure.


Trust. Let Us about it then; but what is become of Fantastic, Hic and ubique,
and Mrs. Hopewel? tha've given us the slip.


Bank. They desired to be excused, being gone to procure Mrs. Hopewel a lodging.


Contr. And I warrant you they intend to take up their quarters with her; 'twas
cunningly plotted. ( Exeunt.)


Act 1. Scene 4.
Enter Mrs. Hopewel sola. Mris. Hope. In a strange Country! all strangers too!
no acquaintance! no kindred! four hundred miles from home, and a woman too!
what condition is more uncomfortable than mine? Alas! me thinks I cu'd take
pleasure in my tears, and with sharp blustering sighs, blow sweetness upon my
sorrows: But stay, I Will not grow desperate, but recollect my thoughts, and play
bad cards at the best advantage; I will implore aid from Heaven, and study how
I may become a favorite to each Deity; pluck up my failing spirits, and
preserve my disconsolate and despairing self with comfortable hopes and
expectations. Nature took pains in forming me beautiful, and age has not so
much impaired it, but that there is enough still to attract both love and pity
from any breast that is amorous. Why may not I then follow the presidents of
thousands of our sex, that in the ebb of their prosperities, have angled with
their wits (baited with their beauties) in the swift streams of affection,
whence they have drawn up large and rich fishes, without breaking the
honorable line of their reputation. That I am a Wife it is too certain, but
here are none that know it; therefore will I conceal it, and act the part of a
Widow, yet never wrong my Husband. Time cannot but furnish me with
acquaintance, and when I find my self courted by a person considerable, I Will
meet his flames with pretended affections, so far as shall strengthen his
perseverance, yet still maintain the principle of my own integrity. Enter
Fantastic and Hic and ubique.


Phant. What my fellow Traveller? How is it now? what think you of Ireland?


Hope. In truth Sir, I know not, but I hope well still.


Hic. Gramercy wench, keep in that mind, and the more to encourage thee, thou
shall never want the benefit of man or money, whilst I am furnished with either.


Hopew. I thank you, good Sir, I wish I may deserve your kindness.


Phant. Want! by this hand she shall not want; Lady, bebelieve me here is money
enough, and when this is spent, never fear but we will have more; all which, and
my self, are at your service, command either, or both together. I have the
spirit of a Gentleman, and I must drink Sack.


Hope. By no means Sir, you have been too lavish already, and this Gentleman
likewise; I shall beg your pardon, it is time to repair to my lodging.


Hic. Faith then, Madam, we will wait upon you thither.


Phant. I wud not lose that honor, nor become guilty of so grand an absurdity,
as to neglect it, for the best Jewel in Queen Dido's Cabinet; no Madam, it is
early yet, and before we mew up our selves in our lodgings, we will take a walk,
and recreate our selves with the various objects of the City; and as you view
it, take notice of what you like best; I Will procure it -- here is heavy Gold,
and a light heart boys -- ha -- honest Hic, what say thou to it?


Hic. I say, spend it all quickly, and then you will have a light pocket too.


Phant. Thou put'st me in the mind of a common saying here, that those that
come hither are not in a probability of thriving, til they have spent what
English money they brought with them, if this be true, I Will make all the have I
can.


Hic. Nay, rather than you should be too much put to it, I Will help you, that you
may the sooner sit down in the predicament of bettering your condition.


Hopew. You invent this discourse, I conceive, only to make your selves merry.


Phant. Faith we are the sons of mirth and pleasure; delight and handsome Ladies
(such as yourself) are the only Loadstones of our desires. We adore no Deities
but Bacchus and Venus. Let the Usurer fall down and worship his bags, groaning
under the weight of 'em: Let the Soldier fight for honor till his forward
limbs be drencht in blood, by the sword of his conquering Enemy; Let the
Scholar quarrel in Logical Arguments, picked out of Ramus, till he break
Priscians head. Let us drink Sack, which will make us conceit our selves to
have that which they so strenuously content for; to the obtaining of which
let us lose no time. ( Exeunt)


Act 1. Scene 5.
Enter Thrivewell and Bankrupt. THrivew. Mr. Bankrupt, you are much mistaken in
your opinion of Dublin; by that time you have been here as long as I, you may
experimentally know the contrary.


Bank. You have good cause to think the best on it, however Sir, as having
gotten a good estate in it.


Thrive. I may thank a good careful Wife for it; though I say it, she is handsome
too, and yet I dare say, honest withal. A merry Grig, to give Guests content.
When I came over first, I knew not what to have done without her; for, by
waiting a great while for a very beneficial employment, which I was promised by
this great man and 'tother, all my money was gone, then cu'd I not stoop to be
a Drawer, that was so lately a Master, at length my wife had taken a house
unknown to me, and I know not how it came to pass, got so much credit as to
furnish it befitting lodgers. In a short time all our rooms were filled with
Gallants; and to accomodate them better, we kept a cup of very good Beer, as
also a bottle of Wine. Then cu'd I ride abroad, and stay a month together, yet
still the trade went on at home; and such a one it was, that it quickly raised
me moneys to purchase this Tavern I now live in, well furnished with wine; but
fortune's not alike favorable to all, according to that old saying.


Non cuivis homini contingit adire corinthum.

Bank. Few women make manifest by their lives, the intents of their creation,
that is to be an help to man, and that is it makes me the more admire your wise.
I Have heard of many that have undone their Husbands, but few that prefers the
welfare of 'em, before the indulging of their own luxurious (and often
lustful) appetites. I cu'd wish my own condition did not prompt me to say what
I do.

I have a Wife ('twere well, if I never had any) who lives, I fear to be a
continual thorn in my side. What I gathered she scattered; yet durst not
reprehend her for it, till 'twas palpably known, she admitted others to her
embraces besides my self. Perceiving and foreseeing my downfall, she hastens
it by the taking what cash she cu'd, and left me to be devoured by my merciless
creditors; had not sudden flight (as I told you) prevented it.


Thrive. I pity your condition, and do wish I knew any way that might now be a
support unto you, for I assure you this is a place wherein it is no easy matter
to borrow money, nay, or be trusted long for meat and drink; Provision indeed
is cheap, because money is scarce; yet good liquor is dear, 'cause there are so
many that will pawn their cloaks, but thei'le have it; and much good may do
'em; for my part I shall never fear a scarecity thereof, since there is almost as
many Alehouses, as good fellows; to be short, those that live here, are all
old Soldiers, and such you know, fight cunningly. It Is a great oversight me
thinks in the English Gentry, in sending their Children into foreign parts, to
learn wit and manners, whereas it were far more expedient to send 'em hither;
for here they may so learn to live, as to live any where: And after seven years
abode in this country, they need never fear being troubled with the failing
Sickness.


Bank. Sir, I doubt your discourse savours more of wit, than truth. But how
wu'd you advise me to secure my self from my debts in London? As for
protection, by reason of the many abuses occasioned by 'em, they are called in, I
hear.


Thrive. However fear not: There Is a great Gulf man betwixt you, and your
creditors.


Bank. I but these letters of Atorney, I fear 'em more, than the lark does the
hobby.


Thrive. You trouble your self to no purpose.


Bank. But is it not usual for such letters to be sent over, the witnesses being
sworn in Chancery.


Thrive. Such a thing may be, but then there is a remedy; if e're it comes to
that, repair to me, and I Will show you the hole, that I my selfcrept through
upon the like account.


Bank. You have much eased me of my fears. But still I Am in a labrynth of
cares, how I shall live, since the current of my money is but small, and will
soon be wasted, without some rivolets of supply. Well, I must pinch this
carcass, as much as e're I pampered it. O London, London! The very naming thee
does disturb me, and the fixing of my thoughts thereon, almost destracts me.


Thrive. Indeed Mr. Bankrupt you are too blame to complain, thus in vain; what
cannot be cured, must be endured. Be of good comfort. Dum spiro spero, you see
as old as I am; I have not forgot all my latin.


Bank. O Sir, your long absence from that famous City, has made you forget
i'ts stately building, pleasant walks, with a hundred delighting places for
pastime; wherein all pleasure is Epitomized and contracted. How often have I
there plunged over head and ears in all sorts of delight, feasting my senses
with those things, that are most suitable to each! But I Will never think on
those days, since I never expect to enjoy the like.


Thrive. Bravely resolved, and to begin, I think you were best to dispose of
those fine Clothes, that saw some of those fine days, lest they should put you
in mind on 'em again; thei'le you two or three good Bandle suites, with lasting
Woolen stockings, which will be much more convenient for this Country weeping
weather, you must expect to find here little, other than rany or windy, and the
reason is according to some Rabbyes opinions, because the windy God Aeolus, and
phlegmatic Luna are in contention, whither the one shall make it his Court, or
the other her pispot. The natives yield submission to the God, for which the
goddess punished 'em with an hereditary disease, called the fundamental
thorow-goe-nimble. I Am sure I have been troubled with it four or five days --
your pardon -- your pardon Sir ( Exit as untrussing)


Bank. If his Wife were to look for him now, she might quickly find him out by
the scent ( Exit)


Act 1. Scene 6.
Enter Cassandra sola. CAss. Whither shall I fly for refuge? what Sanctuary can
protect me from this pursuing shadow, which like some ill Genius still follows
me, I fear, to the utter ruin of my rest? My antipathy against him is so
strong, that rather than admit of his love, I cu'd be content to court some
hedge-born slave, whose rags and rudeness render him a fit companion for swine
and dunghils. And yet I know not why, love seldom gives a reason for what a
does. Methinks his embraces are like the circling of Snakes, his voice like the
howling of a Wolf, and his smiles like the grinning of a Monkey. (Enter
Kiltory.)


Kilt. Well overtaken Lady. ( she offers to go) Nay, be not so hard hearted as
to leave me thus, who loves you dearly.


Cass. Pray forbear Sir, the bias of my thoughts run otherways; therefore give
me leave to enjoy the benefit of my freedom, which should I loose (but as yet it
lies in my power to preserve) I should account my self most miserable.


Kilt. You shall not loose, but enlarge it; for you shall enjoy a man, the
bounty of whose affections shall daily multiply your happiness. I Will be your
Guardian, and defend you from every storm of aproaching injury.


Cass. My fears --


Kilt. What?


Cass. Nothing, if you and love never come near me.


Kilt. Wu'd you be so uncharitable as to live in hate?


Cass. No, by my Virgin-whiteness, I Have charity for all men; but was never yet
fond enough to give away my self.


Kilt. It Is common to your sex.


Cass. And may be proper for me hereafter, but as yet I could never see that
man I cu'd love so well.


Kilt. Is there no hopes for me then?


Cass. Truly Sir, I think none.


Kiltor. Why then did you give me hopes, when you told me you wu'd leave me to
the test of time?


Cass. That was but to stop your importunity.


Kilt. How long will you leave me to that re^?


Cass. For ever.


Kilt. Say you so? -- This is not the way ( aside) -- come Lady, I will --


Cass. Do what Sir?


Kilt. Make you my Bride.


Cass. But I say, you shall never.


Kilt. And to begin I must --


Cass. Must what?


Kilt. Kiss you, Lady.


Cass. Pray forbear Sir.


Kilt. Introath I must.


Cass. Truly you must not, ( kisses her) fie Sir, I was never acquainted with
such rudeness and rumbling before -- If you will not be civil, I Will cry out, and
make your credit suspected. Pray Sir believe me, I swear I cannot love you.


Kilt. I do -- and know I am not such a fool, to be passionate in love with a
Statue: I value not your disdain; and do not think your immaginary beauty is
able to make me pule, whine, and exclaim against Heaven. Alas, you have no
Virtue, but what man's fond conceit and feigned praises invests you withal; I
confess you have all subtilty enough, by which you maintain and keep up your good
estimation among men: The height of your wisdom consists in I, and No, and you
must be accounted solid and prudent, though you cannot speak three words of
sense, provided you have obtained the gift of Silence; and you must be continent
by all means too, because you have the Art of concealing your deeds of darkness;
so temperate, as if your bodies required not eating; forbearing in the presence
of men, whetting your stomachs upon their appetites, to feed Cormorant-like in
private. Wine is inflaming, and flies up into the face; and therefore you are
only for sips, till you come among your Gos-sips, and then you can drink pottle
after pottle, with a small Cawdle or two, that contain gallons a piece; and
being elevated, you talk of things that do'nt concern ye: Having overgorg'd
your selves, you pretend you are not well, and so go to bed. Lastly, so
cleanly, that you wu'd persuade us you evacuate no excrements.


Cass. I can endure no longer: farewell Sir, this discourse wu'd have better
suited with a Bear-garden, exclaiming against some Apple-woman for not selling
twelve a penny.


Kilt. Oh! have I touched your Copyhold? now am I sufficiently revenged; I must
study to forget her: yet notwithstanding I have so much inveighed against her
sex, my heart spoke otherwise; questionless Woman is a most divine Creature,
and therefore worthily deserves to be beloved: but I Will rest a while,


Until Experience tells me I have found
One free to love, and is with beauty crowned.
Enter Patrick crying. Patr. Fuillilaloo!


Kiltor. How now Sirrah?


Patrick. The donny fellow make buse for my Moister.


Kilt. What Fellow?


Patrick. He was no Sougare nor Musketteer, but a greyshy guddy hang of a
Peek-man.


Kilt. And what of him?


Patr. Fuy by St. Patrick agra, he put de suckation upon my weef. I will tell
dee tale if thou will Gluntamee. I came in wid my pishfork upon my back, thou
know, and I see a greyshy guddy hang upon my weef, and I did creep in like a
michear, to the wattles upon de loft abow thou know, and there I did see
putting the great suck upon my weef, as if thy own shelf was there Moister; and
because I wu'd make haste, I fell down upon 'em, and leek to have more than
half break my neck; then wid my pishfork I clap him upon de Narsum, and I did
make sharge for him in the Kings name, thou know, to stay dear til I fetch
the Cunt -- stable; but before I came, this chverech craveRauge make run away
for himshelf: and looky there Moister.


Kilt. Why what wudst have me do?


Patr. Fea^een take my weef to thine own shelf, for Patrick will not lie with
his weef Shuane again.


Kilt. Why wudst a have me lie with her?


Patr. Yea feat if thou will.


Kilt. Oh Sir, it is so great a favor, I shall never be able to make your
brogues a requital. However take this ( kicks him) in part of satisfaction;
nay, this ( kicks him again) too, that I may come out of your debt the sooner.


Finis Actus Primi.
Act 2. Scene 1.
Enter Fantastic, Hie and uhique, and Sue Pouch. S. Pouch. REally you are the
prittiest, sweetest natured Gent. and the merriest Guest, that ever I
entertained in my life, and I am sure I have been an housekeeper this
seventeen years, come Candlemas.


Phant. Faith Landlady, it is my custom to be merry where ere I come. I must be
like my self, noble and generous. I can as well be hanged as degenerate from a
Gentleman.


Hic. Hang all base pinching Misers, greedy Earthworms, that place all their
delight in melancholy possessing, not merrily spending, and emptying their
full crammed bags.


Let 'em rot with their cares,
And worldly affairs,
And worm-eat their souls with their treasures
Those only live brave,
That spend what they have,
And spin out their lives in their pleasures.
2.
Therefore we will shape
Our Designs for the Grape,
Where Fancy is feathered with freedom;
Our souls do disdain
The world with its gain,
Give Riches to slaves that shall need'em.
Phant. Gramarcy Hic: the lines are indifferent, and wud sound better, were not
that throat of thine so much like the base of a Lancashire Horn-pipe, whilst
thy Treble runs Divisions like a Ram in a halter.


S. Pouch. Ha, ha, ha, that was a witty one; you are an arch Wag, I Will warrant
you.


Phant. If you mean an arch Wag-tail, you have hit the nail oth'head.


Hic. But Landlady, they say you are well read.


Phant. And so the report goes of thee, but it is in two-leav'd books.


S. Pouch. I know not how well I Am read, but I have read much.


Hic. What Authors?


S. Pouch. In my youthful days, the most part of the Garland of good will,
the Seven wise Masters, etc. and there was not a godly Ballad that escaped my
hands.


Hic. What since?


S. Pouch. That good man Mr. Patience his works, and what else the Brethren
published.


Hic. The Fathers of your Church you mean.


S. Pouch. Well Gent. as simply as look, my first Husband was a Schoolmaster
of great learning, and so given to his Scholarship, that a wud not ask me for a
mess of broth but in Latin, and for modesty sake (when a had a mind to it)
wud woo me to lie with him in Greek, or Hebrew. So that I was forced to learn
my Accidence to understand him.


Hic. And did a not teach ye?


S. P. Yes, the first thing a told me was, that a Noun Substantive is the name
of a thing -- that may be seen, felt, and understood --


Phant. Admirable!


S. P. And that a Noun Adjective could not stand -- by it self, but required
another thing -- to be joined with it. And then a taught me to decline Lypides,
and Hic, haec, hoc, Genesis whorum, harum, whorum.


Hic. And why not lapis?


S. P. Because I will have it to want the singular number. But to proceed, I
soon understood Propriae quae maribus. As for Quae Genus, I judged there was
but little use to be made thereof.


Hic. Why so?


S. P. Why what can a woman do with insufficient Heteroclites?


Hic. Deficient you mean.


S. P. It Is all one, Therefore I skipt over to As in praesenti, which I soon got
at my fingers ends.


Phant. Did you learn your figures?


S. P. Yes, I warrant ye: figures enough to make ye be in my debt as long as ye
live.


Phant. I mean Syncope, Apocope, etc.


S. P. I know not what you mean by stink-a-pisse, or a pocky piece. I mean
round O's for shillings, and half O's for testers.


Hic. Have you no better Arithmetic?


S. P. I have learnt Multiplication, and the Rule of Three, I hope that is
enough for a Woman. To conclude, my Husband taught me so exactly prick-song,
that in a short time I taught a many to play on the Band whore, using (after a
compendious manuer) but three Notes, Large, Long, and Quaver.


Phant. I cud not have thought you so well qualified. But Landlady, a word in
your ear -- Can you help us to a pretty Wench. I Am in the bravest humor -- O I
cud --


S. P. What cud you do?


Hic. You may know his meaning by his gaping.


S. P. What Is that?


Phant. Why a --


S. P. If you talk thus, I Will not venture my self in your company any longer.


Phant. Come, what Sinner do a know from fifteen to forty?


S. P. It Is pity such handsome Gent. as you are should long stand in need of that
which you complain for the want of. I must confess I should think it a sin to
deny either of you, upon that account, (you know my meaning) were not a sin to
do it. As our Teacher Mr. Giggum has often hinted when a has ta'n the pains to
hold forth at a private meeting.


Hic. How now Landlady, what canting's this? pray let us have no more of
hinting, and holding forth; they are not only word obsolete, but they favor
likewise too much of rebellion and treachery.


S. P. I hope Sir, you are not angry.


Hic. No, not I, but gigging (as you say) you may use; it is a good ancient
word, and still in fashion.


Phant. And holding forth in some sense, is good too.


S. P. Well, Gent. what ere you think of me now, I knew the time when brave
Sparks would have been glad of my company, and would not have sat down to
dinner without me. Who then but Madam Pouch? ruffl'd every day in my silks, and
wore Laces that cost many a fair pound, I Am sure; been Coach'd to this Tavern
and to that, and in a frolic would have drank my Wine freely, God forgive me
for it now. All my Neighbors did admire me. There was not any fashion stirring
but I wud have it, what ere it cost: and truly in every thing I was so neat --


Hic. So it seems Landlady by your present dress.


Phant. Well, I think it is now near the critical hour, when Mortals whet their
knives on thresholds. What Is for dinner? the edge of my stomack's as sharp as a
Turkish-Scymiter.


S. P. Truly Sir, I have nothing but a Calfs-head and Bacon and a sows'd Hogs
Countenance; what think you of that Sirs?


Phant. Well enough, but that the continual sight thereof nauseates my stomach.
Hic with his Calves head is always our first course, and not a dish afterward
brought to the Table, but what is ushered in with a Sows Phisnomy. Prepare
ready what you have, and we will be with you instantly,


S. P. I shall, and though our meat be homely, yet it is cleanly; pray do'nt stay
too long. Exit.


Hic. Oh! it is a pretty beast; the smile she left behind her, with the court'
fie she dropped, has given me my dinner.


Phant. How she curvetted at every word she spoke!


Hic. And her breech kills Musket shot.


Phant. Her eyes wud inform an ingenuous Artist to proportion the minutes of
his Clock; for they are in continual motion, and keep time direct and
retrograde.


Hic. What a hand she has! the true proportion of a shoulder of Mutton. As for
her middle parts, (if they correspond with the rest) I shall look upon that man
that dust adventure to lie with her, as desperate as Sir Francis Drake in
shooting the Gulf. Let Us in to Dinner. ( Exeunt.)


Act 2. Scene 2.
Enter Contriver, solus. Contr. DUll Drones -- a little pains might drein a
bog, methinks -- as easily as the Fens, and here is a great many. I Will about it
presently, left the amphibius Dutch prevent me. But how shall this be done?
Thus -- ( Enter Fantastic and Hic) the Bogs lie near the Mountains, which
will afford me earth enough to dam'em up: but first I Will lay a foundation of
hurdles, such as Dublin is built on, to support that Mass of Earth. So it
shall be; it is as clear as a Mathematical Demonstration. The benefit that will
redound hereby, will be triple. First a vast quantity of unprofitable Acres
made arable, next a discovery (it may be) of gold and silver Mines, which the
barrenness of the Mountains demonstrate: and lastly metamorphosing a
mountainous into a Champian Country. Here Is the worst on it, I shall loose my
name by it. The The King will confer on me little less than the Title of Duke
of Mountain, Earl of Monah, or Lord Drein-bog.


Phant. Surely Gog Magog never talked thus.


Hic. A good reason why, he never had that this fellow has.


Phant. What Is that prithee?


Hic. A Maggot in's head as big as a Congre Eel.


Phant. I do not think but a as swallowed Euclids Elements.


Hic. How do ye Mr. Contriver? are ye well?


Contr. Yes, pray how do you?


Phant. Never better; the Duke of Vtopia lives not merrier than us; we eat,
drink, and sleep, without the least care; for our hearts are so continually
oil'd by good liquor, that they are antidoted against sorrow.


Contr. For how long?


Phant. The question's gross, pray let the thought thereof trouble you as
little as it does us: We Will never want it while we have any thing, and when we
have it not, we will try our credits and rack 'em.


Contr. And that is the way to crack 'em.


Hic. Not so, as long as we have bold faces to back 'em.


Contr. To rhyme to that, I wish you never may lack 'em.


Phant. What, bold faces?


Contr. No, I mean your Credits; Fantastic, be ruled by me, and I Will make thee
a man.


Phant. Why what do make on me now, an Ass?


Contr. No, I Am serious; the foundation of your well-being cannot be laid firm
upon such sandy bottoms, as the tenure of your discourse discovers.


Phant. You talk like your self, full of projects, and never a won worth a blew
bead: but what wudst a have me to do?


Contr. This very day did I find in an old Map, O Braseel with its height; that
there is such a place, is without doubt, and as report goes, very rich, and
inhabited by very ignorant people: this I Would have thee do; let me have thy
moneys to carry on the design, and never fear, but this working pate will soon
make a discovery.


Phant. Prithee good Solomon simple set thy heart at rest, I have better things
to employ my money about.


Contr. Well, think what you please of me, had I but money enough now, I Have a
hundred projects to increase it by.


Phant. What an Ass art thou to trouble that contriving sconce of thine with
vain Chimeraes: had I so much money as thou speak of, I would tell thee how
I would dispose of it: first, my house should be built by such rare Architects;
every one an Archimedes, (or a Sebastian Shyrley at least), that the sight
thereof should strike the spectators into an amazement, or Gorgon like convert em
into Statues: my Gardens and Walks therein should be composed of nothing but
pleasure, in whose shady Meanders Venus should have a thousand Chapels of ease.
But chiefly my Cellars should be throug'd with all sorts of rich Wine, and should
be free for all good fellows. My Larders replenisht with Neats tongues,
Westphalia hams, Potargo, Cavere, Olioes, and such like; all for to relish our
liquor: and then Jesters, Musicians, and exquisite beaucies should be our menial
servants.


Hic. You wud permit me to be your Poet to compose Songs for your Music, and
provoke your dul'd desires by amorous Sonnets.


Phant. Prithee do'nt interupt me: to be short, whatever nature produces to be
extremely delightful, that wud I possess my self of, neither wud I enjoy this
alone excepting my Concubines.


Hic. It Was well you made that exception; for that stable that admits of all
sorts of horses to litter in, now and then meets with a running Nag.


Contr. Pray on Sir, about your Vtopia.


Phant. I wud keep open house for all roaring Blades, and one part of my
pastime should be to make them drunk: the Gentry should ride home in Coaches, and
the servants follow after in wheelbarrows.


Cont. Mad, stark mad. When you have obtained your wishes, will you not reserve
a place for me?


Phant. By all means, why thou shudst be my contriving Cocks-comb, or my Fool,
but that I fear thou have not wit enough.


Cont. I am bound to thank you Sir, but this discourse suits not with my
business: you may please your self for a while in your own fond conceits, and
soon after see the folly of 'em.


Hic. See how the Maggot bites ( aside.)


Cont. Well, I see our purposes run in two several channels, therefore it will
be needless to entertain any further discourse.


Phant. Fare you well with your plots, let us mind our pleasures. ( Exeunt)


Act 2. Scene 3.
Enter Thrivewel, Bankrupt, Peregrine, Trustall. THrive. Gent. to say you are
welcome is no more than the custom of our calling allows every man; yet I Will
not complement, what my house affords, freely call for. First seat your self,
next what wine d'y^ drink?

Boy (within, by and by Sir) enters.


Pereg. I think a glass of Canary.


Thrive. There Is your mistake Sir, you will find but little of that here, but for
Sherry and Malago, London affords no better.


Pereg. What you please then.


Thrive. Boy, draw a quart of Sack out of the sixteenth Butt in the middle
range.


Trust. I Am glad to hear you are so well stored.


Thrive. And so am I too: since I came to this City I could not command so many
full bottles, as now I can Butts.


Trust. The case is well altered with you.


Bank. Why then should we dispare.


Thrive. It Is so, and now I live happy in the enjoyment of my Wife and an only
Daughter.


Peregr. How old Sir I pray.


Thrive. About eighteen, and though I say it, her wit, beauty and breeding
contend for pre-eminence: you shall see her. Boy call hither Cassandra. (Enter
Cassandra.)


Pereg. This is a favor beyond expectation.


Thrive. So that is well.


Cass. Your pleasure Sir?


Pereg. Madam excuse my rudeness. ( Salutes her.)


Thrive. My pleasure is, that you go to your Mother -- and do you hear -- (
whispers, and then goes.)


Pereg. Nay Madam, let me present my service to you in a glass of wine, (
drinks) I cu'd wish the enjoyment of your company a little while, were the
motion approved of by your fair self, I question not your Fathers allowance.


Cass. Sir your pardon, my Fathers commands obliges me otherwise. ( Exit.)


Pereg. Ald. Thrivewel, I wonder at you.


Thrive. Why?


Pereg. That you are not infinitely proud.


Thrive. For what?


Pereg. Being the Father of such an incomparable piece of beauty.


Thrive. You flatter me.


Pereg. I never was accustomed to it. O Love I never felt thy all-searching
power til this minute. ( Aside.)


Thrive. Come, to all our friends in England. ( Drinks)


(Enter Contriver projecting with himself.) Whose that? Mr. Contriver, you are
come very oportunely.

Contr. So it seems.


Thrive. Well, what news abroad?


Contr. I know not, but I think e're long, the Inhabitants of this world, will
all turn either fools, knaves, or madmen.


Thrive. Why, what is the matter now?


Contr. Why, I have been to have a bill accepted, and the man persuades me, I
forged it my self; if it be not so, he is a knave to refuse it; if it be so,
then was I a very fool to do it so as he should discover it.


Trive. Here Is the knave, and the fool, or the fool and the knave, but where is
the madman?


Contr. Fantastic, and Hic and ubique. I came now from dissuading 'em from
their distructive courses, yet still they hold, that they were born to no other
end, than to enjoy pleasure, and they say there is but one deadly sin, and that is
good husbandry; they talk of nothing, but Wine, Wenches, and Music, how to
make men drunk, and to send 'em home in wheelbarrows, and such like trumpery.
And so I left 'em to come and speak with you about some business.


Pereg. Alderman, for this courtesy I shall be better acquainted with your
house.


Bank. And remain we your debtors. ( Exeunt.)


Contr. It Is thus, I understand that there is just now arrived two Ships laden
with french wine; if you make have you may have the first sight of 'em.


Trive. I thank you good Sir, I Will go instantly. ( Exit.)


Contr. This plot of mine has taken rarely well; this will occasion his
absence for some considerable time, which will give me a fair opportunity to
court his Daughter Cassandra. ( Exit.)


Act 2. Scene 4.
Enter Fantastic, Hic and ubique and Mrs. Hopewel. PHant. S'life you are too
coy for a man of my temper, these long graces have too much of a phanatick
relish. Come, you may guess at my meaning, few words among friends are best.


Mrs. Hope. I hope Sir, you will not ravish me.


Hic. By Heavens Lady, as long as I Am hear, he shall not injure you, for I have
more than ordinary respects for you.


Phant. Who you? why thou pitiful poor inconsiderable thing, made up of the
parings of Priscians nails, mingled with the excrements of Mars; do thou
undertake to be her Champion, and do not deserve to be her Footboy? I durst
swear the very sight of a drawn sword, shall make thee run seven miles, without
once looking behind thee.


Hic. I regard not thy choleric expressions, but be confident thy over
self-conceitedness, ( Narcissus like) will hasten thy ruin. In any thing that
may be termed good in thee, thy eyes like drunkards see all double, and thy
opinionative fancy, like a multiplying glass, makes a molehil seem a mountain:
thus admiring thy self, thou vainly do imagine, that every one that does but
look on thee, does the like. Yet know I Have as much interest here as thou.


Mrs. Hope. Pray Gentlemen let not me be the subject of your quarrel; I equally
respect you both, til my judgment shall be balanced by him that loves me most.


Phant. Why then she is mine by Priapus -- Lady by all --


Hic. Who gave you leave to speak first, she freely confesses I have an equal
share with you in her affections.


Mrs. Hope. One as much as the other, and that is none at all ( aside.)


Phant. But Sir, as I Am your superior many degrees, desist from interrupting
me, or I shall quickly send you to that place where you must be content to wait
churlish Charons leature for your passage.


Mrs. Hope. If I can but keep my countenance now I shall have fine sport
between 'em. ( Aside.)


Phant. Madam, I make no question but my services have acquainted you with the
height of my love, and therefore what I now can say will be but a tautology.
You Are not ignorant that I am not only a Gentleman, but a Traveller too, and to
show you what quaint observations I have gathered abroad, I Will first represent
to your view the common salutations of each Country. Thus the neat French mode,
thus the proud and stately Spanish, -- (nay hold still) or thus after the
devouring Italian manner, I shall omit the slavering Dutch fashion, as too
clownish for my imitation.


Mrs. Hope. Sir your Prologue's too long.


Hic. Wud a were come to his Epilogue once. ( Aside.)


Phant. To please you Madam then I Will be shorter.


Hic. That Is not the way to please her. ( Aside.)


Phant. Can you love?


Mrs. Hope. As I Am a woman, I Have a mixture of all passions in me.


Phant. Then consequently that of love, but commonly women's affections are
grounded upon self-interest: if they match with those whose estates cannot
satisfy their ambition, it is to be supposed then, that there is something
extraordinary, that supplies that defect.


Mrs. Hope. You speak mistically, I know not what you mean.


Phant. My meaning is not far from you, which time and your permission may make
you acquainted withal. Madam, my face is not so contemptible, as tempting,
experience confirms my belief. I never yet in all the Countries I came
acquainted with, took the pains to court any, all contending who should first
prostitute her self to my pleasure. I lived in Vtopia three months, where no
English man before durst venture; the Dukes only daughter taking notice of my
super-excellent qualifications, as likewise the exact simetrical proportion of
my body, fell so deeply in love with me, that I was necessitated to satisfy
her desires, to save her life. And to save mine (the Duke being informed of
what was done) there being no shipping in the harbor, I was fain to put to sea
in a Wash-boal, and the only sail I had, was the fore part of my shirt.


Hic. A yard I grant him. But what did a do for want of a mast. ( aside)


Phant. And by a strange providence I Landed at Graves-end. The Court was
suddenly informed of my arrival, and immediately was profer'd I know not what a
year to keep 'em company only. I knew what they drove at, for they intended to
make me the pattern to wear their clothes by.


Hic. But not how to keep 'em. ( aside)


Phant. I cud have served in stead of a jury of french Tailors, for the
inventing of a new fashion, as likewise they knew I cud teach 'em to speak
well, and redeem their Tongues from being pensioners to absurd silence.


Mrs. Hope. I now plainly see you are a Travelles.


Hic. How handsomely the gives him the lie; but the fool (I believe) has not
so much wit to apprehend it. ( aside)


Phant. What you express is nothing but truth. Nay more I durst challenge the
whole world to parallel my strange observations.


Hic. More strange then true: but I Am glad a has traveled so far from his
subject. ( aside)


Phant. I Will tell you one of 'em, I met with a fellow about a league from
Pernassus, falling into discourse (for a spoke perfectly the Rabbinical, and I
answered him in mank's) we at length concluded to descend the foresaid hill,
and drink our mornings draught at Hellicon, having carrows'd so long that we
began to be mellow, a spoke to me in five several Languages at one instant.


Mrs. Hope. I have heard of those that have spoken their words by clusters, but
certainly the tother's impossible.


Phant. The Method that he observed therein will salve up all contradiction:
for with his tongue a wud vowel out the lofty Italian, in the mean time the
proud Spanish came glittering through the rolling of his sparkling eyes; his
cheeks (being swelled with Wind) blew out the blustering Dutch, a snuffled the
French through his nose; and the grumbling of his dissatisfied belly (at the
same time) spoke articulately the Hungarian. I cud tell you of a thousand more,
which are now too tedious to relate, yet hereafter the relation of 'em will
serve for pretty divertisements between us by the fire side in a winter night.
Therefore to conclude, if my Travel, Wit, Birth, Breeding, and a handsome
Personage, will not invite you to embrace my motion, I know not what will:
Consider of these things seriously, and I shall never fear that an Hic and
Vbique can rob me of your affections.


Mrs. Hope. Sir, your discourse has been so prolix, that it will require a very
considerable time to find out what you drive at. However, give me leave to hear
you both.


Hic. That Is my Cue -- Lady, give me leave to salute you after my fashion.


Mrs. Hope. I Have been troubled with too many of 'em already. yet for once, how
is it?


Hic. After the Hic and ubique manner thus -- ( kisses mouth, eyes, etc.)


Phant. But that is not as you said, every where.


Hic. I know that, I Have done as much as was civil, pray do you the rest.


Mrs. Hope. Such scurrilous discourse renders you ridiculous, and reflects
likewise upon me.


Hic. Madam, I shall then wave such deviations, and render my self in such
terms that may be suitable to the greatness of my affections: Prose is too low
a style to express my self in, therefore thus: Free and unstained with base
intent,
My love to you I tender;
A heart not gloss'd with complement,
As free I do surrender.
It Is Love commands, then how can I
So great a God as this deny?
Your Beauty, and those better parts,
your virtues (which surprise.
Where e're they shine on mortal hearts)
Extinguished have mine Eyes.
And it is but just that I should be,
Led by that power, that blinded me.
I will not vow, protest, nor swear,
nor cog, as others do:
But only say, my fairest dear,
I live in bliss, by loving you.
And sooner may the Cyprian Dame,
Live chaste, then I put out my flame.
Rivers their courses back shall turn;
the roveling Orb stand still;
And sulphurous Aetna cease to burn,
before I change my will.
Then give me hope before I faint;
No Idol ever had truer Saint.



Mrs. Hope. This is something to the purpose, if they be your own.


Hic. Madam I Am no plageary, I never yet wanted words to Express my mind, and
therefore need not borrow.


Phant. But you can steal: how cudst thou have the face to repeat these verses
(I being present) thou know I told thee, I made 'em five years since, for my
first Mistress.


Hic. Let not thy Impudent lying provoke me too far.


Phant. I never took the lie yet without satisfaction, therefore don't repeat
it, lest I make thee a companion for subterian spirits.


Hic. Thou had best, if tha'st a mind to be hanged.


Phant. What for killing an Elfe, or an Ass?


Hic. No, I mean thou durst as well be hanged, as draw.


Phant. I Will try that. ( draws)


Hic. Nay have at ye then. ( draws)


Phant. Murder, Murder.


Mrs. Hope, Help, Help. (Enter Kiltory and Patrick.)


Kilt. What, Draw upon a woman (cowardly villians) ( draws) what your intent,
tell me quickly, or this all-piercing stell shall set your bloods abroach.


Hic. Sir, We came not to injure the Gentlewoman.


Mrs. Hope. Sir, They are both my servants, and it is Jelousy that occasions 'em
to quarrel.


Kilt. Madam, I should think such poor spirited fellows deserve not the honor
of that title.


Mrs. Hope. I thing so too, Sir, I was forced to entertain 'em, because I knew
not how to be rid of 'em.


Kilt. Madam, I Will quickly do you that courtesy, and by so doing, I may
pleasure my self; her beauty has already captivated me; ( aside) Villians,
Expect not the honor to fall by my hands. Patrick go cut their throats.


Patr. For fuat joy, to put the Kill upon my shelf.


Kilt. Go sirrah, or I Will cut yours (turns to Mrs. Hopewel)


Patr. O yea, for Christis shake, make help for my shelf moyster, or else poor
Kilpatrick will be made Kill upon.


Kilt. To provoke cowards too much, is the way to make 'em desperate. ( Beats
'em of) sirrah, did not you tell me you cud fight, upon that account I
entertained you.


Patr. Yes feat, at cuff, or skean.


Kilt. None serves me but those that durst blow in a charged pistol, and value
a sword no more than a cudgel.


Patr. See for this, by got a chree he wu'd put some lead in my belly but there
was no sharge powder upon the pishtol, he did make intention to cut off my
head, feat.


Kilt. Be gone, I shall talk with you some other time, Madam should I say I love
you, from this interview, you wu'd condemn me as rash, but blame me not, if
your beauty commands me, to be yours eternally. May I request the great favor
as to know your lodging.


Mrs. Hope. It deserves not your knowledge: Your pardon Sir. ( Exit.)


Kilt. Follow her sirrah, and see where she houses, and bring me word, at the
three Tunns.

If she disdainful proves, then I Will give ore;
It Is but the second, I will court no more.
Finis, Actus secundi.

Act 3. Scene 1.
Enter Contriver and Cassandra. Contr. MAdam, I hope the fervency of my love
will (in some measure) excuse the boldness of my intrusion; since the time that
I first saw you I have been extremely impatient, and the force of my
imagination was so strong, as to make me conceit every minute of Delay to be a
complete day, till I had found out an opportunity to make you acquainted with
the reality of my affections.


Cassand. And pray Sir, what do you propose to your self, now you have found it?


Contr. I shall in part ease my self of a great load of love that lies on my
heart.


Cassand. Pray Sir, if that be all, disburthen your self quickly, charity
commands me to give you my attention, if that will do you good.


Contr. Very much, if you will let my penetrating expressions sink into the
hollow recesses of your heart.


Cass. I cannot promise you that; for I know not what you mean, every word you
speak to me is an Hieroglyphick, or some foreign language, which will require
an Interpreter.


Contr. Then Madam I Will be my own, and unriddle that Emblem which seemingly
puzzles you so much to understand; I love you, and that in so great a measure,
that were the quintescence of all love contracted together, it could not exceed
mine.


Cassand. I Am sorry that you have shot your Arrows at the wrong mark, your
hopes have mistaken their lodging, and you have cast Anchor in a bootless
harbor.


Contr. Pray don't say so, I have a stronger faith than to be moved with such
customary denials, which your politic sex still defends themselves withal,
when the forlorn hope of their affection receives it is first encounter. Lady,
you are flesh and blood, and cannot be out-lawed from the Court of Love; and
though your beauty, birth, and education may advance the verge of your thoughts
to a far higher fortune than my self: Yet I question not but the strength and
constancy of my Love may balance it.


Cass. Sir your eagerness puts me in mind of a common saying that what is
violent, is not permanent; every days experience informs us that hot love grows
soon cold; yet what I speak is but by hearsay; for as the tenderness of my
years may persuade any that I am unacquainted with Love-affairs, the same
argument may make you know, that I understand not your amorous discourse.


Cont. The many examples of younger matches, are enough to sway down the subtle
evasions of your sophistical arguments.


Cass. There Is no contradicting you, for they say men have the art of persuading
women contrary to their own beliefs; though for my own part (I think) I am
proof against it, as designing my affections to be guided by my Parents will
and pleasure.


Contr. Were I but assured of your consent, I am confident of your Fathers
assent, and then there can be no remora or impediment to our conjunction.


Cass. Excuse me Sir, the world is now grown very deceitful, therefore it is
requisite I advise with my self, consult you as you please with my Father.


Contr. The result of which (I hope) will tend to your lasting contentment (
exit.)


Cass. I never yet cud give a reason for Antipathy; as soon as I saw him,
methought of all men living I loved him least. (Enter Jane) How now, what is the
matter with you?


Jane. The matter Mrs. I believe I have matter enough in my hand for you, O the
sweetest Gentleman (I think in my conscience) that ever lay by a woman's side.


Cass. What, ar't mad, Wench?


Jane. Yes, and so w'ud you too, had you seen what I did.


Cass. What was that?


Jane. I tell you the finest Gentleman -- I warrant 'a has --


Cass. It Is no matter what a has, but what of him?


Jane. He gave me a Letter, and enjoined me to deliver it to your own hands.


Cass. A Letter for mel sure thou art mistaken.


Jane. Will you believe your own eyes? ( delivers it)


Cass. These for that matchless piece of beauty, Mrs. Cassandra Thrivewel. It Is
a fair title, I Will see if the contents correspond. ( reads.)


Madam,
How well did nature in her plots contrive,
A way to keep her own prerogative.
By the sweet Edicts of her subtle Law,
Pride quakes, and savage creatures stand in awe.
Them Man commands, and makes their fury fall;
But Woman (Natures wonder) conquers all.
I that have felt the tempers of each Zone,
And know most climates, better than my own;
Cu'd never love, till your commanding Eyes
Shot schorching flames, and did my soul surprise.
I am your Captive, therefore must my fate,
Take life, or death, or from your love, or hate.
Your most affectionate servant PEREGRINE.


Cass. Peregrine, who is that?


Jane. Don't you remember the Gentleman that you were commending yesterday?


Cass. Thou talkest at random.


Jane. It Is the very same.


Cass. Why should a love me? and yet why do I ask that question, since I know not
well why I love him?


Jane. For what else, but for a beautiful face? and let me tell you Mrs. you
have one that is tempting enough; for so say most Gentlemen that come to our
house; Oh! I have heard 'em wishing -- you know what I mean.


Cass. You are too bold huzy, pray learn to be silent, and that at least will
make you seem wiser.


Jane. Indeed Mrs. you wud not only seem so, but be really wiser, if you wud
resolve to make better use of your time: had some as many sweet-hearts as you,
they would make more have to understand, what a pretty pleasant life they (that are
married) do enjoy.


Cass. Peace, thou talkest idely. I find an alteration in me already; ( reads)
sure this paper contains magic, otherwise it could not persuade me to love so
suddenly: O my freedom I now begin to fear the loss ou't.


But let it go, to him I Will not refrain:
This single loss returns with double gain.
( Exeunt.) Act 3. Scene 2.
Enter Fantastic and Hic and ubique. HIc. Were ever men thus bafled? how glad
the strumpet was to be rid on's?


Phant. Hang her, she is like the rest of her sex, that value men by the
quantity of their moneys, and not their worth.


Hic. Wud I had again what I Have spent on her, twud be now very seasonable to
supply my empty pockets.


Phant. O Sir! are you come to that? never wish for it, if you intend to thrive:
don't you remember your old maxim?


Hic. Prithee leave off your jeering, and lend me a crown.


Phant. Why then your money's all gone it seems.


Hic. Yes I may thank you for it.


Phant. Nere thank me for the matter, but thank your self; however there is a
crown, but make no practice of borrowing of me, this is the last time.


Hic. Now y' faith, if thou will, weel go to the Tavern again, and I Will spend
it, I Am half drunk already, and so art thou.


Phant. No not I.


Hic. Then thou art mad.


Phant. Why?


Hic. Thou Would never have lent me a crown else; I conceit my self now as rich
as Craesus. Here boy, fetch me a quart of sack, a short life and a sweet,
there is nothing like it.


A Pox o'those dull men, whose bosoms are filled
With the doubts of their fortunes, and cares:
May be starve in a Prison, that fears to yield
In seasons of plenty, his belly a share.
Let 'em still live in scorn,
With their money and their corn;
Till the terror of sin makes 'em free,
They are not companions for thee, nor for me.
(Enter boy with Sack.) So well done, sill a brimmer.

Here Is a health to all those that will never be poor,
That conquer the frowns of their fates with their wine;
That will quaff, and carouse, and never give over,
Till their faces by drinking like Comets do shine.
In these we will delight,
( Enter Pouch.) With these we'll unite,
And our happiness still shall endure,
As long as our company Sack can procure.
Su. Pouch. It Is very well Gentlemen, that you are so merry, but I Would have you
remember, you did not discharge the large reckoning last night. I don't like
this shuffling, you can run oth' score in my house, and find ready money abroad
for the Tavern. Gentlemen, I can stay no longer, my Brewer must be paid, and my
Baker has been here to day for money.


Phant. As for your Brewer he may be an honest fellow; but hang your Baker, I
have nothing to do with him: but pray what is it I Am engaged to you?


Su. Pouth. Since you paid me last, it is just twenty five shillings four pence.
'Twill be long enough before you Mr. Hic, will ask how much you owe, and if you
did, I think it is much at one, for you never intend to pay, as far as I can
see. I never saw a penny of your money yet, and that which is worse, I know not
when I shall: had I known you would have roared and ranted so much, you should have
sought your lodging some where else. Besides, I doubt you have both been too
familiar with my maid Dorothy; I examined her upon her crying out last night,
and she confessed that you were both uncivil, and did -- I Am ashamed to tell
what: wud I had been in her place, I de have taught you to have meddled with a
woman again after that manner.


Hic. And for ever after made us hate the cry of kitchen stuff for thy sake.
Prithee good butter-barrel, don't think to melt thy self by our fire: thou Tun
of Heydleberg, thy bunghole's so big that I am afraid to come near it, lest
falling therein, I hazard a drowning. Had Garagantua lived, thou might have
taught him, without much endangering of him, to have kneaded dough in thy
trough.


Phant. Could a man have but seen 'em in conjunction, the resemblance had been
to nothing more proper than the Ox at St. James's fair, roasted whole with a
Pudding in his belly.


Hic. Come Landlady I have more charitable thoughts than to think thee a --
because thy age wants temptation; But I Am sure not hot inclination; but as for
cheating and extortion (two excellent moral virtues) they have qualified thee for
a shee-saint of thy profession.


Su. Pouch. But that I am patient, and not given to the language of
Billingsgate, I would say, that thou art a son of the Whore of Babylon, to
abuse an honest woman of my sort; thou spawn of Iniquity; vile, vain, Vilainous
Raskal: It Is no wonder thou should thus scoff at me, thy self being so
handsome, come up here, thou maggot faced fellow; thy hose wu'd serve for a
hand-saw; Get thee a lookinglass, and there thou shall see the Image of
Nebuchadnezzar newly come from grass, away, foh, thou stink'st of superstition,
there is something in thy face that bears the resemblance of a profane large
wrought Christmas candle.


Hic. This will not do, I must cog her into a better humor. ( Aside) Honest
Landlady, I was but in jest all this while, only to try your temper: to be
serious, what you find fault withal, shall speedily be amended, as for what I
owe you, my bills of exchange, (which I expect by every post) are enough to
satisfy you ten times over, and so here is to ye ( she Drinks) nay in faith
Drink't off.


Phant. Come lets be merry.


Hic. Boy call in the music I sent for: my Land-Lady and I must have a Dance.


Su. Pouch. I cannot Dance, I Am old, but when I was young I could have footed
it to the horn-pipe, with the best of 'em.


Hic. Nay then I durst swear you have not forgot it.


( They Dance.) Phant. Well done in faith, you have been a notable lass in your
days I warrant you;


Su. Pou. I am not so old yet, but that I can have a young man ( or two for
need) as handsome as either of you, no disparagement.


Hic. Certainly he was born blind then.


( Aside.) Su. Pou. But it is best to keep my self as I am, and then I need not
be in continual jealousy of my maids, nor stay so long for my husbands coming
home from the Tavern, that my meat is either rotten roasted, or cold; sit up
till twelve a clock at night; If he comes home, then to be sure he is drunk,
and falls a railing at me: if not, ten to one he has taken up his quarters
with one wench or other. No, no, there is never a young man of them all shall so
delude me.


Hic. I wonder who wu'd, unless it be one that is troubled with a continual
foul stomach, and so to save charges wu'd make use of her face to give him a
vomit.


Su. Pou. Well Gentlemen, my business calls me away, pray don't force me to
rise in my smock age'n, to let you in, when you are out late. ( Exit.)


Phant, Hic, Your Landlady will not always thus be put off with fine words.


Hic. I know that, I see there is but one way; my cloaks must lie by it I faith:
and now I think on it, Alderman Thrivewel is a fit person for my purpose. 'Twere
better they were Imprisoned than I.


Phant. It Is true, in faith.


Hic. Well, when all is gone I Will not despair; for it is an article of my faith,
I shall never want; how e're it is with you now, I believe I shall see you in the
same condition e're it be long.


Phant. If thou shu'dst see me as poor as thy self, yet there will be a great
deal of difference between thee and me.


Hic. Prithee why?


Phant. Because I have more wit and a better carriage than thou have to carry
it off.


Hic. O The impudence of folly! those commonly which conceit themselves the
wisest, are often found the veryest fools. Do thou talk of wit, when thy
ignorance has no similitude, and thy carriage no comparison. Thy fine clothes
like a cork boys thee above water, and thy small remaining stock of money, like
ballast, keeps steady the giddly vessel of thy brain, which otherwise wu'd
with every blast of misfortunes, be quite turned topsey turvey; neither have
thou schollarship to sollace thee in thy adversity.


Phant. And what does thy learning avail thee, when thy Landlady calls for
money? see then whether you can persuade the sergeant, with your hard words, to
let you go; I durst say your quaint fancyes will hardly bayl you out of prison;
neither will your learned Poems pay your fees. Hic, I Will give you good advice;
never pawn your cloaks, as you intend, till you have tried what you can take up
upon your schollarship; thy cloak will serve to keep thee warm, and feed thee
too for a while, when all the profound Authors thou have read, cannot advise
thee how to procure one meals meat; he that has money, commands every thing,
with which I can obtain the opinion of being a wit too. Have NOT I known a rich
young heir, been cried up for a witty person, when the Iliads of his discourse,
wu'd not afford a nutshell of sense?


Hic. Content your self with your money, whilst you have it, in the mean time
I shall learn to understand, that there is something that satisfies without it.


( Exeunt.) Act 3. Scene 3.
Enter Bankrupt and Trustal. Trustal. PRithee, have a er'e a perpetual Almanac?


Bank. What to do?


Trust. I would be placed there, instead of a saint, an everlasting fool.


Bank. Wherefore?


Trust. Why that Vbiquitarian, and his antic comrade Fantastic, have lately
borrowed moneys of me: the one shun's me, as the Hare does the Gray-bound; the
the other flatly denies a ever received a penny of me, and because he receivd it
in private he bids me produce my witnesses; and a third, when I asked him civily
for my moneys, he very uncivily threatened to bang me.


Bankrupt. His bastinadoes wu'd have proved beneficial, had they broken the
bones of too much trusting, and so well reduo'd again by a Jewish incredulous
bone-setter.


Trust. Now I see second thoughts are best, by which I Judge thee one of
Solomon's fools too, for had thou been wise, thou would have purchased thy
name for breaking, for some vast sum, and then 'twere no matter if the
fee-simple of a statute of Bankrupt were intayl'd upon thee and thine heirs for
ever.


Bank. But what way do you resolve on for a lively hood?


Trust. I know not, employments being so difficult in their obtaining.


Bank. It Is true, though whole ships of fools daily arriving vainly Imagine the
contrary.


Trust. Had I known so much before, the Indies should sooner have been my refuge.


Bank. What think thou of being a Rat-catcher?


Trust. Prithee why?


Bank. Why, thy face does look like a Weezle, which you know is a great enemy
to that soro of Vermin; so that thy appearance in a House, hanted by 'em, will
so terrify 'em, that thou may save the charge oll Compositions for their
destruction.


Trust. No, 'twere better to turn Merchant.


Bank. But that will require a considerable sum.


Trust. There Is your mistake, for a box of sneezing, a decayed Tobacco-role, a
dozen of clean Pipes, and a bottle of Strongwater, will make me one of
indifferent good reputation.


Bank. O Excellent! Well, I Will be for the study of Physic: My Father being an
Apothecary, 'twill facilitate my knowledge of Simples, and their Compositions.
I shall want little but terms of Art, to puzle the Ignorant.


Trust. Get acquainted with Barber-Surgeons then, and Apothecaries, they help
you to enough of such Empty shells, that contein nothing: And be sure let the
excellency of your skill, chiefly consist in the cure of the French Disease;
I Will warrant you Patients enough.


Bank. How so?


Trust. Don't you hear of the Armad^ of Fireships abroad?


Bank. No.


Trust. That Is strange, there is not a Frigot hardly, that either lies moored up
at Lazy-hill, Kilmainam, or ^he rest of the Docks that properly belong to that
Fleet, but they are all soul in the Gunroom: There Is not one that sails from
London, (let her be ever so well Rigged) but her Pump is choked up, and she
opens in the Keel.


Bank. I Have heard indeed; that your over-worne decayed, and unwholsom London
Doxies, having no longer ^, nor credit there, repair hither, making it their
(...)ris, and passing for young fresh sinners, are soon bought up as sauce for
Wood, cocks.


Trust. Which your French Cooks don't always compose of the wholsomest
Materials: But it is no matter, if you may live reasonably well, upon the
unreasonable, and all living of others.


Bank. Then I am resolved upon it. Now must I put on a grave. Countenance, with
a Habit suitable; Ransack all Dictionaries for hard words, It Is no matter how
little Intelligible, if amazing: Get some empty Glasses and Gally-pots, with
Inscriptions on 'em; And a Catalogue of Diseases, fairly printed, all which at
least I Will pretend to cure; which done, I Will cause my Bills of an outlandish
new come learned Doctor to be affixt to all corners of Streets, and not a
pissing place shall escape 'em.

Thus by this Plot, I Will change my low condition: A broken Tradesman, makes a
sound Physician.


Finis Actus Tertii. ACT. IV. SCEN. 1.
Enter Thrivewell and Contriver. Thrive. I thank you for your timely
advertisement; I hope the bargain will not prove improfitable.


Cont. May all than you take in hand prosper; but Sir, I have another business
to acquaint you withal.


Thrive. What Is that Sir?


Cont. The love I bear your Daughter, makes me humbly beseech you to accept me
for a Son.


Thrive. It Is ^er of weight, and will require much serious consideration. Have
you made her acquainted with your affections?


Cont. With your pardon Sir, I shall confess I discovered my never-dying love
to her, but her answer thereto she referred to your Disposal. Neither is it my
desire to captivate any Maidens heart, till I am authorized by her Parents.


Thrive. You speak prudently. And truly Mr. Contriver, let me tell you, I ever
had a good conceit of you, and it is my opinion that you will thrive. The
consideration of which persuades me to give you my consent, and you shall have
my authority to command her. Boy -- call it Cassandra.


Enter Cassandra. Girl what think of a blusband?

Cassand. Sir If I may freely deliver my opinion, not as others do.


Thrive. How Is that?


Cassand. They may fancy to themselves pleasure in the enjoyment of that, the
very thought of which is troublesome to me.


Thrive. Come, come, you know not what a Husband is, till you have tried.


Cassand. I wish I never may.


Thrive. Away with this dissimulation: Your Mother told me as much, when I
wooed her first, and yet, was never at rest, till I was assured to her. Here Is
a Gentleman I respect, in whose affections (if you will be obedient) I intend to
make you happy.


Cassand. The state I now enjoy (provided it suited with your will) is already
more happy than alteration can make it. Good, Father pardon me. And Sir, for
your affections, I thank you, yet deserye 'em not in the least; but I must beg
your excuse too, since in me I find no appetite to relish love.


Cont. It Is a seeming piece of Injustice, not to retalliate love, for love,
Madam.


Thrive. You are a foolish Girl, and know not what is good. Into what
inconveniences would you run your selves, were ye your own Carvers: It Is well
therefore that you have careful Parents to provide what is best for you; I
wonder what recompense can you make us for all our care, but by being dutiful
and obedient; the neglect whereof renders you notoriously guilty.


Cassan. Sir, Let me be disowned for your Daughter, rather then be branded with
that superlative crime of Disobedience.


Thrive. Why, well said, now you say something, Mr. Contriver, let not any thing
disincourage you, for, her denial only proceeded from her modesty: Let us
leave her therefore to consider on your Proposals, and my Resolutions: They
cannot but take deeply with her: But I must talk with you in private, about some
thing that must be done before the Nuptials are celebrated.


Exit Thrivewell. Cont. I Will follow you instantly. Madam, the utmost that I now
can say, is but the same in effect of what I told you heretofore. In your
presence I can speak in no other Dialect but that of love. I had just now come
into my head -- I must think on it another time -- I hope your Fathers good
counsil, with the consideration of my tender affections, will (in a little
time) work such effects, that may satisfy the eagerness of my desires, the
full content of your self, to the complete satisfaction of your Parents.


Exit Contriver. Cassand. Unhappy I that am thus in the very spring of my love,
thwarted by unwelcome contradictions. I stand betwixt two extremes, the Duty I
owe my Father on the one side, commanding me to love one, whom in all the World
I love least; On the other side, my own inclinations forces me to affect him,
whose love I prefer before my own welfare! What shall I do? methinks Age should
consider of others that are youthful, by themselves that were so? (...) in the
same condition. They had a time to love, and wu'd have thought it hard measure,
should the freedom of their funcies have been contradicted. I know not what to
think of old Folks experience, which they continually inculcate into our
memories, to perswadeous not to love, without some palpable Advantage: ^ unto
me are but dead precepts --


Enter Peregrine. Peregrine. It Is she: Be resolute and be happy. Madam, my
Messenger of love I question not, but you have received, and should infinitely
rejoice to hear you have made him welcome. The impalsive springs of my
affections brought me hither, to second and confirm the contents of what I have
writ. If I have offended, I desire to be tried by no other Jury then that of
your charitable thoughts, and being Assaigned at Loves Bar, I now expect from
your Tongue, (the Foreman) the verdict either of life, or death.


Cassand. Sir, the evidence as yet has not found the Indictment, therefore I
might suspend my Judgment in pronouncing you Guiltless, but that I cannot but
freely acquit you.


Peregr. Then Lady, to your Ladyships will I pay my fees, (kisses) assure your
sell, I Have wilt nothing, neither will I speak anything, but what I am ready to
seal with the purest of my blood. O that my thoughts were visible. My heart's
too little to contain the greatness of my affections.


Cassand. I doubt your Words and Lines are all but trials of a Maidens
weakness. Where are too too many of your Sex, that are too too prone to glory
in their erecting Frophies over our too too much credulity. We Maids have
tender hearts, and are apt to take notice of worth, especially when we find it
in conjunction with constancy.


Pereg. Cu'd you love that man heartily then, that wu'd love you constantly.


Cassand. I think I cu'd, provided he were well stockt with virtue.


Pereg. That Is not positive.


Cassand. I both can and will then.


Pereg. Why then, By all the Powers above I am he.


Cassand. Have you caught me thus? but it is no matter, since I cu'd no longer
hold: Then by all the Powers above and below, I am yours. But Sir, my Father
has commanded me to love one Contriver, but assure your self, he shall never
injure your interest in me, it is possible he may hinder it a while.


Pereg. He to our constant loves shall add no doubt;

His own unworthiness will work him out. Exeunt.


Act. 4. Scen. 2.
Enter Thrivewell and Contriver. Thrive. HEnceforth I shall bestow on you the
title of my Son.


Cont. And from this moment I shall esteem my self most happy by being so in
all dutiful respect. Exit Thrivewell. Umh -- how happy are all my projects,
gramercy good brains. I am now clearly of the belief, my Mothers imagination
was strongly fixed on Oliver or Mazerin, when she conceived me, or that she
longed to eat five or six leaves of Machiavel's politic Discourses. When I was
but a Boy I could have cheated all the Boys in a whole School of their bread
and butter, and have eaten it all afterward: As for Calves and such like
humane Creatures, them I couzened at my pleasure, by sucking their Dams. Now
since I write my self Man, go thy way, when e're thou dyest, there is none will
survive to bring thy ingenious plots to perfection. Exit.


Enter Hic and Vbique with three Cloaks on his back, and Alderman Thrivewell.
Hic. Mr. Alderman, you're the man I looked for.


Thrive. What Is your business, Mr. Hic and Vbique.


Hic. In troth my business now is not so much Vbique, as for the present Hic,
and that is to borrow a little money of you.


Thrive. Indeed you must excuse me.


Hic. I mean upon a Pawn.


Thrive. A Pawn, now you say something, and what is it?


Hic. My Cloaks?


Thrive. Did not I always persuade you against your extravagant courses, and
now you see what they have brought you to.


Hic. I pray Sir do me that courtesy, it is to stop my Landlady's mouth, who
daily threatens me with imprisonment, and I know not how to avoid it, but by
your lending me so much money.


Thrive. I should think Sir that you are able to stop your Landladyes mouth
without money; However follow me, and I Will satisfy your Request.


Exeunt. Act. 4. Scen. 3.
Enter Kiltory, Mrs. Hopewell and Pathrick. Kilt. MAdam, you are so incredulous
of the reality of my affections, that I know not which way to persuade you,
that I love, if the free surrender of my Estate will do it, it shall be done
without any reservation, that thereby you may know that I value not my self or
what I have proportionably to the enjoyment of your Dearest self.


Mrs. Hope. The freeness of your Proffer, makes me really believe, that your
love is incapable of Admitting the least Equivocation. However I shall not give
my self up solely to your embraces, till by the conveyance of your Land over to
me, I shall be more fully assured, that you love me not for what I have, but
for what I am. I propound not this to cheat you, but that as it may be the
touchstone of your Love.


Kilt. If that be all, were the whole Universe at my command, I Would freely
tender it to you to be disposed by your Will; and what Loss wu'd it be to part
with the world to one, in whom ten worlds of Excellencies and pleasures are
contained: the possession of you (me thinks) is enough to recompense the loss
of All, that the greatest Potentates do Enjoy. Every minute of Delay seems to
me an Age till I have fulfilled your request. Pathrick fetch me a Scrivener
presently.


Path. Scriboner, arra fuat de Devel; Scribner -- my shelf make no meyning for
Dat at all.


Kilt. A Fellow that writes Bills and Bonds.


Path. Bills and Ponds! feir De vaiter is.


Kilt. Why a Clark then, thou Blockhead.


Path. Arra fuat de Tevil wilt dou do vid de Cleark?


Kilt. That, Goodman Raskal. Kicks him.


Path. If I make tell so for him before, he will not come for me afterward.


Kilt. Why thou Bog-trotting, Beetle-head, tell him, I have business for him
then.


Path. Arrah fuat de Devil must my shelf go make fecth for de Clark, to put
sheat upon my moyster, and Pathrick himself.


Exit. Pathrick. Mrs. Hope. Now Sir I see you love me, and I shall ever
endeavor that my Affections run parallel with yours.


Enter Pathrick and Scrivener. Kilt. So, are you come, a word with you Sir,
here is a Copy of my Estate presently draw a conveyance to Mrs. Anne Hopewell
and her Heirs.


Mrs. Hope. Pray Sir see that there be no fraud nor fallacy in it.


Kilt. Now I hope you are mine.


Mrs. Hope. Stay Sir, you're too hasty, have Patience till the Scrivener has
engrossed your Dictates.


Kilt. Then you will be mine.


Mrs. Hope. As freely as I can dispose of my self.


Kilt. In the mean time let us take the Air, this place is too little to
contain the greatness of my Joy.


Exeunt. Enter Hic and Vbique without a Cloak. Hic. Why should I now cry out
against the iniquity of the Gods, that they should thus leave the disposal of
human affairs to the Guidance of partial Fortune, I cu^d weep (but that 'twu'd
render me effeminate) when I think that I am wholly extracted, and that by the
Chemistry of my Folly, brought to the very Mercury.


Three Cloaks and all engaged, O cruel Fate
That wu'd not leave me one, to Palliate
My weather-beaten Body, and enclose
My naked sides from my deriding Foes.
My Angry Hostess, (heedless of the weather,
Grown far with foggy Ale, and bound together
With the warm thongs of Fortune) has forgot
What cold and hunger is, and she will not
Shake hands with Pity, holds it is injust
To listen to the Arguments of Trust:
Pay and you're welcome, when you have spent all,
Farewell good Fellowship, Comfort's but small.
Well, what is now to be done, I must consider, whether Hanging or Drowning be
best, or what Death with the greatest ease, and quickest Expedition, will
convey me safe to Charon's Ferryboat: in the mean time, as for the thinness of
my habit, that must be excused with the heat of my Constitution; as for Eating
'twill render the Body too corpulent, therefore Fasting will be requisite: as
for Drinking, Nature has provided enough every where of that, which will
prevent hot Distempers; and for Sleeping I question not but I shall have time
enough for that.

Enter Fantastic. Phant. What ha we got here? The emblem of Poverty, this is
it to be a Poet; surely he is ill-belov'd of the Muses, that none of the Nine
wu'd give him a Petticoat to make him a Cloak of, now is the time for me to
make sport with him; who do you belong to, Prince Prigg? have not you no part in the
Beggars Bush to act? you you look as if you were conning something of that
Nature.


Hic. Truly Sir, I was studying the Art of Begging, because some say it is very
beneficial to them that can manage it aright.


Phan. But thou want thy implements, as a Wooden Leg, False Belly, a Forced
Eye, with the Art of making Old Sores, and such like undiscernible Cheats, that
may procure Pity: as for thy Clothes they will serve indifferently, a Month or
two will reduce them into the Tatter-demallion fashion.


Hic. To which add four more to make up a half year, and his may be in the
same Condition ( Aside.)


Phan. What Countryman art?


Hic. Sir, my Country is Hic and Vbique.


Phant. Let me see -- where does that Country lie? now I know; Just three
Degrees, five minutes from the Equinoctial. And what is thy Name?


Hic. Hic and Vbique.


Phan. Is that thy Christen-name?


Hic. I know not whether I was ever christened, if I was not, I had much wrong
done me by the Parish, for I am told, my Mother left me in a Church Porch for
that purpose.


Phant. where do lie?


Hic. Hic and Vbique -- Pauper ubique jacet.


Phant. Then you are no constant Lodger?


Hic. No, not I.


Phant. So I thought, thou look as if thou have not came a nap since thy
creation. And where do dine to day.


Hic. Non hic, sed ubique.


Phant. That Is no where, and that is it makes thee look so like one of Pharaoh's
lean kine, I can hear hither thy belly grumbling out complaints against thy
mouth. How do intend to live?


Hic. I know not how Hic, I think I should do better alibi, the neighboring
Country to ubique.


Phant. Well Sir, I knew you all this while, and do pity your miserable
condition. I see thou have no luck at contriving thriving Maxims.


Hic. However, I Will not despair, when Fortune's at the lowest ebb, 'twill flow
again; my English money being now spent, I hope the worst is past.


(...) Phan. Prithee what is the meaning of that thundering conjuring Sentence?


Hic. In English it is thus: He is no Soldier dyed in grain,
That cannot endure a shower of rain.



Phant. But what make a' here without a Cloak?


Hic. A good reason why, they are all at pawn.


Phant. And what is become of the money?


Hic. One half I spent, and 'tother I gave my Landlady; and yet she is
unsatisfied.


Phant. For old acquaintance I Will lend thee a Cloak, but no money, for to tell
thee the truth, mine is all gone too, though I set a good face on it; My
Landlady, no longer ago then this morning, fired a whole broad side at me; for
my part, what to do, I know not, unless Wit without Money can assist me.


Exeunt. Act. 4. Scen. 4.
Enter Su Pouch, (Sola.) Su Pouch. LOdgers, quoth he, with a Pox, hang all such
poor Scabs, my sheet's shall never entertain again such Vermin: But that which
vexes me most of all, they bring in their Wenches under the borrowed names of
Sister, and Cousin, dancing all night like Faries, their night-rounds, and
imitating the Nightingale, singing with a prick at their breast; and they so
slobber them, nay before my own face -- I know not what they have; I Am sure I
have been purposely familiar enough with 'em, (had they but eyes to see it) and
have given 'em opportunities -- that any man that had guts in his brains, wu'd
have laid hold on. A couple of Ninyhammers, that might have had my heart out of
my belly (as one may say) had they but done -- but what was reasonable, I mean;
but they have taken the wrong Sow by the ear -- Here comes one of them; Enter
Hic. Now will I try how this Fellow's necessity will work upon him.


Hic. My sweet loving Landlady, how is it?


S. Pouch. Never the better for you.


Hic. I hope you shall not be the worse.


S. Pouch. Yes, I shall, if I stay till your Bills of Exchange come over, that
you so much talk of; can you pay me the residue of my money?


Hic. Not at present.


S. Pouch. Then will I deal with you no longer, since I find your comings in
but short. As I am an honest Woman I cannot be so satisfied.


Hic. What wu'd you have me do?


S. Pouch. Since you cannot pay me, give me good security.


Hic. I am unacquainted here, and I have but one thing left me estimable, which
I value so much, that I Am very loath to engage it, unless great necessity
force me to'r.


S. Pouch. And what is this fine thing I marvel, that you are so loath to pawn,
some counterfeit Jewel, pretended to be given by some fond Gentlewoman or other.


Hic. No I assure you, this is no counterfeit: but hap-hazard, will you venture
to accept of it in lieu of that small Debt I owe?


S. Pouch. What is it? I Will not buy a Pig in a Poak.


Hic. It Is my self.


S. Pouch. Ha, ha, ha, I guest so much all this while; Is It not enough that
thou have had my Meat, Drink, and Lodging for nothing, but thou would have me
too? No Mr. Hic, I Am meat for your betters.


Hic. Landlady, I Am not in jest; if you will, so? if not, so? you may say
hereafter that you had an opportunity which can never be recalled.


S. Pouch. Ar't in earnest then?


Hic. Yes by my faith am I.


S. Pouch. Why this is it I aimed at: Youth joined with Age is like a
Warming-pan to a bed in Winter. aside. But speak seriously though, do you love
me?


Hic. I heartily.


S. Pouch. And will you be constant?


Hic. While life endures.


S. Pouch. And when you are married, will you never Wench more, lie abroad at
nights, come home drunk, and then throw the stools about, call me old Jade, and
cry who the Devil brought us together, and it may be, beat me too?


Hic. Don't entertain such hard thoughts of me.


S. Pouch. Will Not you upon every slight occasion forsake my bed, and then you
must be bribed before you will lie in it again.


Hic. I shall not.


S. Pouch. Thou'st half persuaded me then. And will you keep me company at
home, and be a good Husband?


Hic. I shall.


S. Pouch. Why then in the first place I forgive thee what thou owe me.


Hic. And in the next place lets seal the bargain. Kisses her.


S. Pouch. Here Is money, go, and redeem what you have at pawn. She offers to
go. And do you hear, pray remember you have sealed the bargain; don't you go now
and spend the money's. What a fine thing it is to have money, I might have slaid
long enough for a Husband, but for that. ( aside.) (Enter Fantastic.) [Exit
Hic. Your too late friend, your Cake's dough y' faith.


Phant. What do you mean?


S. Pouch. I mean to be married.


Phant. Married, ha, ha, ha, to whom?


S. Pouch. Why to your Comerade: You might have been the man, had you not been
an Ass.


Phant. Me! I scorn thee.


S. Pouch. Scorn me, scorn to be in my debt: Now will I stay no longer; I Will
have my money's.


Phant. Indeed you must stay till I have it.


S. Pouch. Stay me no stayings, I must and will have it: And so farewell. Exit.


Phant. Base worthless man, whose fettered heart can cling, Only for wealth,
unto so foul a thing. Exit.


Finis Actus Quarti.

ACT. 5. SCEN. I.
Enter Bankrupt like a Doctor, and Recipe his man. Bank. HAs no body yet
inquired for the Physician to day?


Recipe. Yes, one that looked a squint, that came to have his eyes set right:
And an old Woman troubled with the Palsy; but they had neither A farthing of
money, and so I sent 'em away, it is ominous to trust handsel.


Bank. It Is strange no body else comes; were you careful in putting up the
Bills?


Recipe. There Is never an Inne-door, nor Pissing-place, but is checkered with
'em.


His Banner. There is lately come to Town an Italian Doctor, who (besides his
exquisite knowledge in the occult Art of Physiognomy and Chyromancy) perfectly
understands the Divine mysteryes of Astrology; and thereupon can give judgment
according to the good, or evil aspects of the Planets: As for Example, Whether
a Maid shall marry her intended Sweetheart, and can discover who are Maids and
who are not, etc. and who can calculate Nativities so truly, that he will tell
the most remarkable passages of any one's life, either past, present, or to
come; he likewise cures these diseases under written,

The Sciatica Vande poca.
Palfie.
Impotency in Men and Women.
The restoration of lost Beauty in a Lady's complexion.
Draw Teeth; and take out Corns by the root, and yet put the Patient to no pain.
-- Cum mill Aliis.
But most especially that almost (here) Epidemical disease, the Ghonoraea, or
Morbus Gallicus.
To be spoken with at the hours of Nine and Three.

Enter Fantastic and reads the Banner. Phant. As I take it, you are the
Doctor that cures these Diseases.


Bank I am Sir.


Phant. First then, I shall request your Secrecy.


Bank. It belongs to our Profession. But what is your Distemper?


Phant. I Have got a Clapp.


Bank. Of what continuance is it?


Phant. It Is eight days since I first discerned the Pain.


Bank. Then in eight days more you will discern the Cure? Recipe, bring me hither
two Papers, the one marked with P. the other with C. ( He brings it.) Sir, take
of each of these as much as will lie on a Groat, in half a Pint of the
decoction Guajacum, and Sassaphras, for three mornings together, and 'twill
divert the vehement pain in the Scrotum; that done, take of these restringent
Pills, three or four, Morning and Evening.


Phant. I thank you Sir, What will content you?


Bank. I shall leave it to you Sir.


Phant. Then know, I purchased my Disease at so dear a rate, that I have scarce
money enough left to pay for the Cure. However there is something as Earnest.
Exit.


Bank. I knew him in another Condition; but commonly the Effects of Prodigality
concludes in misery: those that sail in Ships of Pleasure, near minding the
Sea-marks of Discretion, are often sucked in, and swallowed up by the Quicksands
of Delight, or are violently dashed against the Rocks of Luxury. See who is that
Knocks at the door. ( Knocks within.)


Recip. It Is a Maid that would speak with you Sir.


Banck. Let her in. (Enter Jane.)


Jane. Forsooth, Are you the Outlandish Doctor pray forsooth?


Bank. Yes forsooth.


Jane. Then my Mistress has sent me to ask you a Question forsooth.


Bank. What is it?


Jane. Whether you can tell Fortunes or no?


Bank. I can resolve all difficult Questions. But what is yours?


Jane. My Mistress would fain know how long it will be before she will be
married: She has two Suitors, and she would likewise understand which of 'um
should be her Husband.


Bank. Have Patience Sweetheart till I have consulted with my Authors, and I Will
inform you straight. Recipe, reach me hither Haly, Ptolomey, and Argol. How
filthily now should I have been puzzled, but that I understand how the Case
stands between 'em, (Aside.) (Reads.) The Person whom your Mistress most
affects is tall, and inclining to Black.


Jane. It Is very true, that is Mr. Peregrine.


Bank. He is a Traveller, and a well-bred Gentleman, and I find contrary to her
Fathers commands, she has promised her self to him, the other she hates. Bid
her cheer up, for though her Father intends to cross her in her Election, yet a
strange providence shall prohibit him, and she at length matched to her Parents,
and her own content.


Jane. I tremble to hear him: for he that knows all this, surely knows that all
is not right with me. ( Aside.)


Bank. Let me see, by my Figure, I find Venus Lady of the Ascendant, and
Significatrix of your Mistress, strong and in an Angle; which argues, She Is at
her own disposal, only vitiated by the quartile Aspect of Jupiter, our of the
fourth House, numating the Father: but he being detrimented by being in his
Decanate (and Occidental also) his design is frustrated; and besides he is
within two degrees of his Retrogradation.


Jane. Redograbation quoth'a; wu'd I had never come at him, I fear 'a will
raise the Devil by and by; for certainly he is Conjuring. ( Aside.)


Bank. The Man she loves not, is of a Middle stature, Brown hair, a Quick eye,
and has a Roman nose, and is signified by Saturn, our of the eight house, in
twenty four degrees, thirty nine minutes of Leo, and very near a Trine with
Venus; but is prevented by the hasty interposition of the Moon's body, she
being Anguler, Lady of the Tenth, in her own House, and in Sextil with Sol, out
of the Twelfth: which intimates, that your Mistress shall in the very nick of
time be delivered by a Woman from him she cannot loye.


Jane. This will be welcome News to my Mistress.


Bank. Her Husband that must be, is here signified by Mercury, in twenty one
degrees, sixteen minutes of Aries, swift in motion, having many Essential
dignities, and is applied to by the body of Venus; which Conjunction being in a
fixed sign, and not impeded by the ill Aspect or Application of an Unfortunate
Planet, (but the inconsiderable quartile of Jupiter) it must needs be that they
will be joined speedily.


Jane. And will they live happily forsooth?


Bank. Let me see my Figure again: after this Conjunction, Venus hastens to a
Trine with Jupiter, who is Lord of the Midheaven; here I find a speedy
reconciliation between her and her Father: besides Pars fortunae is in
Semisextile to the cusp of the Ascendant, out of the second, and strengthened
by being in the terms and exaltation of Jupiter. Every Significator is so full,
that in spite of fate, they will live happily. I cannot Err since my Figure is
so radical.


Jane. Pray you forsooth let me trouble you a little farther: there is a Friend
of mine, not very well, and she desires that you wu'd cast her Water. (Gives
him an Vrinal.) Oh how my Heart pants to hear what he will say, it is my own
Water; for I would willingly know the certainty of that which I have suspected
on Just grounds this six weeks. ( Aside)


Bank. It Is Raggy -- besides there are many more apparent Symptoms. Maid, tell
thy Friend, she is with Child, and I find by a strong Planetary Conjunction,
that she shall be delivered of Twinns.


Jane. Then am I twice undone. But Sir, this will be unwelcome News to her, for
she passes for a Maid, therefore if you cu'd help her in this Necessity, I Am
confident she wu'd well reward you.


Bank. Wud'it thou 'a me be a Murderer?


Jane. O no Sir, but she got her Mischance so lately, that it cannot yet be a
living thing.


Bank. Thou talk according to thy Wisdom: here take this Powder, and let her
drink off a penny weight every Morning, for nine days, and it will do her
business.


Jane. I thank you good Mr. Doctor, I Will bring you your fee presently. ( Exit.)


Bank. I think I Have fitted her for a Queen, that which I gave her will prevent
all her murdering Endeavors. It Is a pretty good beginning, Heaven continue.
Exit.


Act. 5. Scen. 2.
Enter Mr. Hopewell, and Mrs. Hopewell. Mr. Hope. As for what is past, I freely
forgive thee, Thou Art now as chaste in my thoughts, as unspotted Virginity it
self.


Mrs. Hope. I hope my frequent tears have washed me white again, and thy
forgiveness has restored me to the good Opinion of my self for the time to
come; Ye Powers above, deprive me immediately of that Soul ye gave me, so soon
as I shall wrong that duty I owe thee.


Mr. Hope. And let me not live, when I shall cease to love thee.


Mrs. Hope. My Dearest though I cu'd for ever content my self to discourse in
this Dialect with thee, yet now an emergent business, which you shall Know
more fully hereafter, will hinder us, and require your silence and attention a
while. Stand by, Here 'a comes. Enter Kiltory, Scrivener with the Writings, and
Pathrick.


Kilt. See here the performance of your Injunctions: but who is that Gentleman?


Mrs Hope. A Kinsmans of mine, whose advice I took in this weighty affair.
Alderman Thrivewell promised to be here too; and see he is come in the nick.
Enter Thrivewell.


Thrive. Save ye All: come Widow, are the Writings drawn?


Kilt. Here they are: and take notice that in these I make a free surrender of
my whole Estate to the use of Mrs. Anne Hopewell.


Thrive. Goods and Chattels?


Kilt. All, all.


Path. Ub, ub, ub, boo! arrow moyster, wilt tow give away all dine own tings,
and leave noting upon me poor Kilpathrick: suate shall my wise Juane do for de
Cow dat make de buutermilk, and de bony clabber for die child and my shelf, and
de mulaghane, and de garraane baane, and de garrane dough, thou did make
promise for me.


Kilt. Sirrah leave thy howling.


Path. My shelf no howl, me make speak for you: By St. Pathrick and St. Shone
Batty, my shelf will make no servant for de.


Thrive. Come, come, Sign, sign: Kiltory delivers the writings to Mrs. Hopewell
So, so.


Kilt. Now Madam, I Have done my part, there is nothing wanting but the
performance of yours.


Mrs. Hope. Which I shall quickly do; according to my promise, I freely bestow
on you, all the right and title I have in my self.


Kilt. That Is a gift greater then the riches of the Indie^s.


Mrs. Hope. No such matter Sir, it is none at all.


Kilt. How Is that?


Mrs. Hope. Can you give away another man's interest?


Kilt. No.


Mrs. Hope. Then cannot I give away my self: that man, she Kinsman as I told
you, has been my Master this seven years, and shall be all, till I am masterd
by death.


Kilt. Am I now in the Meridian of my wisdom, thus cheated by Female subtilty.


Thrive. Ha, ha, I like thy wit Wench. Well, I have such an other at home, a
notable Girl at a pinch.


Mrs. Hope. I give you much joy of your purchase Sir, fare you well. Exit Mrs.
Hopewel.


Thrive. Col. is this Debenture-land, or are you only an Adventurer: if so,
you may come in among the forty nine men. Exeunt Thrivewel and Mr. Hopewel.


Path. Shoole a crogh, manam a dioule, thou greisie micheer, by my soulwation
joy a chree, y told dee, de English vid put de sheat pon efry podyes.


Kilt. Woman was the first that ever took the Devils counsil, and first
communicated it to man, to the ruin of both their terrestrial happiness; and
still I see he makes use still of that Sex, as his principle Instruments to
perpetrate the most notorious evils. Impudence is a hereditary vice in 'em,
other wise how cu'd she have looked me in the face, whilst she made me swallow
her gilded Pills of dissimulation; and so intended to kill, when she did most
pleasingly smile; they are Basilisks that destroy with their looks; Harpies
that allure with their face, to murder with their talons; 'twas well she had
not cheated me out of my soul too. Exit.


Path. May starsing come to her sheeks, strepoh granach, and may her fader's
shild make dye in de prishon. Exit.


Act. 5. Scen. 3.
Enter Cassandra and Jane. Cassand. WEll Jane, what news have you brought me
from the Conjurer?


Jane. Mistress, believe me if there be a Devil in Hell, he is one.


Cassand. Prithee why?


Jane. Why? he knows what every one does, and I think he knows their thoughts:
He described Mr. Peregrine, and Mr. Contriver, as perfectly as if he had seen
'em a hundred times; and he says forsooth, that you shall speedily have Mr.
Peregrine; and that Mr. Contriver's design of marrying you, shall be prevented
by a woman: And then he fell a conjuring up of all the Devils in Hell I think;
he was so well acquainted with 'em, that he called 'em by their names; as
Jupiter, Saturn, and Mars, and I know not what beside.


Cassand. This news has revived me.


Jane. O but Mistress --


Cassand. What Is the matter?


Jane. O I Am undone, I Am undone.


Cassand. Why, prithee why?


Jane. Im'e ashamed to tell you forsooth.


Cassand. However I suspect what it is. I ever told you what your ramping on
men's backs wu'd come to.


Jane. Alas that did me no harm: But will you keep my secrets forsooth?


Cassand. I will, what is it?


Jane. About six weeks since, Robin the drawer and I, after all the rest were
gone to bed, sat up late by the fire side; Robin indeed has born me affections
any time this twelve month's day; after a great deal of talk, he told me he
wu'd marry me, and upon that he kissed me, I think, a thousand times, then I
promised I wu'd have none but him: then again he fell a kissing, and hugging,
and tumbling me, and -- I Am sure I was never well since; therefore to know
what ailed me, I carried my water to the Doctor, and he told me, she that made
it was with child.


Cassand. Is it so Huswife, that you have made my Fathers house a Bawdy House?


Jane. Nay, good Mistress, did you not promise me not to be angry?


Cassand. Is it possible that Robin's so gamesome, and you fond sool so
heedlesse of your credit, well, you shall both walk for it, and then try whether
wantonness will maintain you.


Jane. Good Mistress forgive.


Cassand. Well Huzzy, the love I ever bore you makes me pity your folly. I Will
get a friend-shall sawder up the crack of your honesty; follow me. Exeunt.


Act. 5. Scen. 4.
Enter Fantastic, solus. Phant. WHy should I rail at Fortune, calling her
Whore, unconstant Queen, and the like; when my own soolish self, is the sole
Author of my present misery. Had I not been infatuated, I might easily have
prognosticated my future condition, by the courses I then took. I cannot stay
at home, the distemper of my body makes me every where restless. Neither
durst I stir abroad, for fear of Arrests. Oh insupportable condition! from bad
premises, I cu'd now draw a worse conclusion: Farewell fond Femal pleasures, and
welcome that Pilot that will stear me to the land of forgetfulness, where my
weatherbeaten Vessel may be safely moored up, from the tempestuous, and
swelling billows of all misfortunes; Oh -- I Am right enough served. Here comes
one that will plague me worse then the Pox it self. Enter Hic.


Hic. How now Fantastic, what is the matter, thou can not steer aright;
surely thou'st lost thy Rutter: You must be firing so often, that I thought
you would blow out your Brich-pin. Surely thy touchhole is very foul, for thou
recoylest wickedly; let me see thee walk, -- Bad, bad -- I fear thou art past
mending by a a Sereing, so that the utmost of thy expectation is e're long to
be all at slitters. Well, I am sorry that so good an Hackney should so quickly
be beaten of his speed, and dry foundered. You see how drinking and whoring
makes you draw your legs after you; come, thou must be stewed, else thou wilt
never be wholesome meat for the worms.


Phan. Prithee Hic forbear; my folly is so lively delineated by my fancy, that
I am tortured thereby, worse than by the Disease, I now groan under. Yet this
benefit Experience has bestowed upon me, to know, How merely imaginary was that
Recreation I ever aimed at, and what miserable effects ensue the enjoyment
thereof.


Hic. I cannot much condemn thee in thy just complaints; for they have made
thee look like a -- I know not what -- A male Factor that has been hung up two
or three years in Gibbets; -- Why, thou art ham-shrunk, and broken-winded too.
Don't thy bones ach pockily? stand farther off, thy breath is none of the
sweetest. I perceive it is come to a snuffing in the head, a pox on that dampish
air thou breathe in last.


Phan. A dampish air indeed; but if thou will curse it, let be some other way,
for it has that already.


Hic. Let me advise you to be very careful, that you blow your face tenderly,
thy nose will never endure it else. If I am not mistaken it is already not so
fast, as it should be; don't you observe it shake in the Hilts.


Phan. Never give over; now I see thou art cruel, thou terrifiest me worse then a
salivation, or a clensing loation. He flings away from him.


Hic. Not so fast; move easily, you are but tender: going so fast may endanger
the leaving of a League behind; thus much to be even with thee; and now for one
that shall new vamp thee again. Excunt.


Act. 5. Scen. 5.
Enter Kiltory, and Mr. Hopewell. Mr. Hope. SIr, My Conscience, and that
principle of honesty, that I have ever preserved inviolated, will not permit me
to be accessory to so soul an injury: Though you may have just cause to
complain against the subtilty and fraudulent dissimulation of a woman, (my
wife) yet you shall not have the least seeming ground against me. It Is true,
what once was yours, is now lawfully (though not justly) my wives, and shall
be yours again upon consideration.


Col. Kilt. What Is that worthy Sir?


Mr. Hope. Your Estate being two hundred pound per Annum, if you will lend me a
years anuity (but conditionally that you shall never require it' again) till I
shall freely confess, that the improvement thereof has made me fully able.


Col. Kilt. Sir, your extraordinary civility and honesty deserves far more.


Mr. Hope. It Is only that sum, and the assurance of your friendship, that I
desire.


Col. Kilt. This very act of yours, commands me to satisfy you in both. Excunt.


Act. 5. Scen. 6.
Enter Thrivewell, Contriver, and Cassandra. Thrive. COme, come, never blush
Daughter, it is time enough for that anon, when no body can see you.


Contr. Fairest Mistress, 'twill not now be many hours before you will both change
your name, and condition too.


Cassand. Dearest Father, are you then so cruel to wed me against my mind;
certainly you cannot but have heard of the ill effects of forced Marriage.


Thrive. Hold your prating, it is now no time to talk of this.


Pereg. Mr. Alderman, I am come to inform you of that, which will be dangerous
to conceal longer.


Thrive. Mr. Peregrine, I am glad to see you; but what is it Sir, that we may
speedily prevent it.


Pereg. It Is only the preserving your Daughter from being perjured; by doing
which, you will likewise invest me with the possession of my own.


Thrive. What do you mean?


Pereg. Mrs. Cassandra, your Daughter, who is as firmly mine, as vows,
protestations, and invocation of Heaven (voluntarily proceeding out of her
mouth) can make her.


Cont. How, how?


Pereg. It Is very true Sir, and I Am confident she is too virtuous to be guilty
(willingly) of the breach of such solemn Promises.


Cont. Sir, you do but flatter your self, I cannot suspect her to be so facile,
as to bestow her self so lightly on one, that is here to day, and gone to morrow.


Pereg. Pray be you silent, you troublesome contriving Coxcomb, unworthiness in
the abstract --


Thrive. Mr. Peregrine, I should have been glad to have known your Intentions
sooner; therefore I shall desire you to be silent too, for the Pretenses are
past taking effect.


Cass. Dear Father you will break my Heart if you say so, for I must confess, I
promised no less than that worthy Gentleman has expressed, as for my fault (if
it may be accounted any) I humbly ask your pardon. (Mrs. Contriver knocks at
door,) and Enters.


Thrive. Who Is there? Come in.


Mrs. Cont. By your leave Gentlemen -- Oh, are you here Sir! I heard of your
Projects in England, which made me make the more have over, to prevent you from
doing that, which wu'd undo me, that am your Wife, and her, that you intend to
marry; and likewise save your self from the Gallows.


Thrive. The Woman raves.


Mrs. Cont. No Sir, I Am in my right wits, though the baseness and unworthiness
of my Husband's carriage (that hangs down his Head like a Sheep-biter) were
enough to distract any one.


Thrive. Is 'a your Husband then?


Mrs. Cont. Yes (to my sorrow) this five years.


Cass. Oh Goodness! now are the Predictions of that rare Astrologer come about:
Oh thou Villain; that cu'dst thus attempt to undo A harmless Maid.


Mrs. Cont. Pray Lady, were you She that was designed for his Bride?


Cass So it seems, though against my will.


Mrs. Cont. Oh thou monster-treacherous Villain! but that thy Conscience is
seared, it cu'd not but hinder thee from committing so foul a Crime, upon so
fair a Person. Is It not enough that thou have trampled me under thy feet thus
long, but must thou seek another subject to execute Injuries upon. Why don't
you speak, and be hanged? now you are dumb, (with a pox to ye;) but if you were
alone with me, you would find Tongue enough, and Hands too.


Thrive. Get out of my Doors dissembling Monster -- O wicked Raskal --


Mr. Cont. How just is Heaven! I see there is no shelter from Divine vengeance,
no resuge from the All-seeing eye. Now I am betrayed to my own deservings. Good
Sir Pardon me, and Lady forget me for ever: Dearest Wife, remember not the many
Injuries I have done thee, but forgive me. Now will I practice Repentance, and
make it my daily study, how I may for the future live inoffensively.


Mrs. Cont. I like this Recantation well, because 'a never used it before. (
Aside) Well, I Will forgive, and let me request all here to do the like.


Omnes. We do.


Cass. Loving Father, this Obstacle being removed, I know none remaining, but
that you may be pleased, to let me perform my Promise to my dear Friend
Peregrine.


Pereg. By permitting which, you will render me most happy.


Thrive. Marriages are made in Heaven, and questionless it was there decreed
your Union; therefore my blessing on you both.


Pereg. Sir, in that Word you have completed my Happiness; and now Lady we
are ariv'd at that Port, from whence I hope we shall never weigh Anchor more,
nor never part, till summoned by Death's pale-fac't Messenger.


Enter Hic and Vbique, Su Pouch, Mr. and Mrs Hopewell, and Fantastic. Thrive.
How now Mr. Hic, what is the matter now?


Hic. Matter enough, Matter -- a -- money.


Thrive. Prithee, with whom?


Hic. With my honest Landlady here.


Thrive. Nay then we will make but one Dinner for two Weddings.


Hic. This is as heart can wish. Fantastic, yet for all thou laugh'st and
jear'st at me in my necessity, I wu'd have so much pity now of thee in thine,
as to make thee my Tapster, if thou can go in Stilts, for thy Legs will never
carry thee up stairs and down. But Gallants, Come first to Church let us go, and
then let us dine,
And spend our day in music, mirth, and wine:
We Will dance like skipping Fawns, and gladly sing
Soft Epithalmes, whilst Bells in Changes ring.



Pereg. That being ended, we will consume the night In those sweet Pastimes, that
our Loves delight.


FINIS.

