The RED SEA:

OR THE DESCRIPTION Of a most Horrid, Bloody, and never yet paralel'd SEA FIGHT
BETWEEN THE ENGLISH and DUTCH.

With an Elegy on that truly Valiant and Renowned Commander, Sir Christopher
Minnes, Who died in the Bed of Honor, in defense of his King and Country.

By R.H.

LONDON, Printed by Peter Lillicrap, and are to be sold at the Princes Arms in
Chancery Lane, 1666.

To my truly worthy and ingenious Friend Mr. Richard Vvedale.
SIR,
THat naught can judge of Wit but Wit, it is true,
Wherefore these Lines I Dedicate to Tou.
My Subject's Valor, which therein is shown;
Valor and Wit are Properties You own.
Wherefore I hope, You will accept these Rimes,
Since Wit and Valor are Your only Crimes.
Your most Affectionate Friend and Servant R. H.

The RED SEA: Or a Description of a most Horrid and Bloody Sea Fight between
the English and Dutch.
SOL well nigh swelter'd in his fiery team,
Hastened to cool himself ^'th' Western stream,
When there appeared two large prodigious Woods,
Which strove to meet, floating upon the Floods.
The Sun did hereupon more swiftly fly,
Frighted to see this Sea-bred-Prodigie.
At whose approach, the curled Billows roar,
And as it comes, fearfully roll before.
The silent Fish presaging future blood,
Against their kind ran frighted in the mud:
And had they Wings would from the Sea have broken,
And but for churlish Nature would have spoken
To manifest their fear; yet what they might,
In sholes they fled to shun the dreadful sight.
The Oceans King feeling such weight on's back,
With leaning on his Trident made it crack.
Had it not been immovable, they say
The Earth this time would fain have fled away;
Which with the Shore so trembled, you would have said,
Fear, not enclosed Winds this Earthquake made.
These stately Ships were thronged with Noble Spirits,
Whose only aim was by their lofty merits
To outlive Fate, and for their Countries good,
Think it their glory to pour forth their blood.
These gallant Souls were all devote to give
Their own lives, that their Contrymen may live.
Here then observe, which you may frequent try;
The worthi'st man most willing is to die.
Our Admiral breaths forth a stout All-arme;
The adverse Fleet Echoed rebounding Arm.
Thus at the Generals voice, the vulgar sort
To their assigned stations resort;
With quick confused have, the tumult's led;
And speed, by too much speed, is hindered.
One might have thought the Battle was begun,
To see how Neptune first was thorough run.
Now as with proud advance they nearer came,
Those beasts which gave the Sail-rul'd-Vessels name,
With an aspect more grim, then is their life,
Made all their speed to make, then end the strife.
So fiercely they came on, as if from thence
They meant to move their painted residence.
Now bravely did the General exhort
His men to courage (though his speech was short)
To this, or like effect --
Courage Brave souls, and that is all I pray;
Strength cannot want, where courage leads the way.
But what need I th'undaunted hearts excite
Of them, whose eyes me thinks already Fight?
Look as you do, and you shall never need
Weapons, or hands, to make your Foes to bleed.
Your looks shall strike them dead, your Warlike sight
Shall put your fearful Enemies to flight.
What ere you aim at, here before you lie,
Honor, Revenge, Spoil, Riches, Victory:
Which if they move not; see your Native Land,
Your Nurse, your Mother, see, how she does stand
A far to mark which of you best shall render
His duty, striving who shall best defend her.
If you don't fight, your Foes will not mercy have;
If you will not fight, the Sea will prove your Grave;
Or else by Justice domb'd to die: then on,
And let not this cold Element, whereon
You are to fight, quench those courageous Flames
Which burn in every manly breast, that aims
At Immortality; Fight and the Oceans bound,
Nay farthest Thule, with your fame shall sound.
The Sun himself when he at night shall press
This way, will go and tell the Antipodes
What acts he saw. Nor yet of aid despair,
The Wind, and Sea (if need shall ask) will spare
The chiefest help (which they possess) to you:
All Fish prove Sword Fish, fighting for our due.
No longer will the time with us dispense,
What my speech wants, my Sword shall recompense.
Now did the amazing signs of Battle sound,
Making the Lands remote, and Rocks rebound.
The shrill voic'd Trumpet, and courageous Drum
In rattling Language bid the Foes to come.
Deaths horrid Vizard now begins t'appear
In their pale faces; terror, ghastly fear
In their amazed hearts does panting rise;
And future blood bathes in their fiery eyes.
Apelles present here, or one so skilled,
Might have drawn Pictures hence, that would have killed.
The thundering Ord'nance now began to rent
The frighted Air; the Flames before it sent,
Seem lightning, and as deadly Bullets fly,
Prodigious Hail seem to power down the Sky.
Nilus never roared so much, when with a shock
Headlong does tumble from the towering Rock:
Making the people on the neighboring Shelves,
That hearing him they cannot hear themselves.
Thus the Fights noise made many a man to fall
In roaring Death a silent Funeral.
Alas! those Elements which use to uphold
Our crasie Lives with their due heat and cold,
Making complete our Bodies constitution,
Strive now to cause its utter dissolution:
Who viewing this, would not have thought't a wonder,
That without Rain, Wind, Lightning, Hail, or Thunder,
Or hidden Shelves, or Rocks, Sea ambusht back,
Or any Tempest, Ships should suffer wrack?
That one might here have termed it, choose you whether,
A stormy Calm, or Calm Tempestuous Weather:
But now each Fleet, each Ship, with hopeful pride
Clash altogether furious, side to side;
Their tired senses labored in such wise,
That they grew dull with too much Exercise:
Their troubled eyes viewing such ghastly sights,
Wished that sad darkness cancelled all their lights.
The horrid noise the Battle made was such,
Hearing, heard nothing 'cause it heard so much.
Such a confusion racks their senses here,
They Would reason now to wish they senseless were.
Now Death in purple stands upon the hatches,
With pale and grisely looks; see how he snatches
Hundreds of men at once, and stops their Breath,
Till that grim Death grew weary now of Death.
See on the Sea how thousand Bodies float
From their Great Ships, hasting to Charons Boat:
Which crabbed Skuller now might think it meet
His old torn Bout should be new changed a Fleet.
The tumults noise pierced the blevv arched Sky,
The crystal Air filled with a deadly cry,
Only in this was blessed, as Blows abounded,
It could be ever Cut, yet never Wounded.
The silent Earth, glad that she was debarred
From this sad sight, yet inwardly was heard
(The dreadful Guns rebounding often) to moan,
And Echo, made her yield a hollow groan:
But this thing chiefly made her most to rave,
That to her due the Sea should prove a Grave.
Never did strong breathed Eolus disturb
The Sea so much, when he can hardly curb
His madding Pages, when they raging, muster
To quarrel with the Waves, or whistling bluster,
Among the well-set Trees, and branched Boughs,
Singing through chinks of some decayed house.
Nor stern Orion, with his stormy Light
Apalling Seamen, does so much affright
Their soon moov'd Sea, as did this Battles noise,
Which Neptune answered with his bellowing Voice.
Who as the Fleets made nearer to the strand,
With tumbling haste, ran frighted up the Sand;
That had not bounds restrained his Element,
His watery Veil had clothed the Continent.
The tender Nymphs, who with their silver Feet
Use on the Plains o'th crisped Sea to mere;
Where tripping prettily they are wont to dance
Themselves into a heavenly slumbring trance
Of sweet repose, at these inhumane shocks,
With hair all torn creep into the hollow Rocks;
Where shrouded they to meditate began,
No Rock so flinty as the Heart of Man.
Ships now began to burn, that one might see
Neptunes, and Vulcans consanguinity.
The quaking Ships with Thundering Guns are rent,
Whose wounded Sides, the goared Streams do vent
Of Dead and Wounded Men, who lay therein
As if they had their Beires, or Coffins been.
They that would have a Mare Liberum
Instead thereof gain Mare Mortuum.
Their Tacklings, Sails, and Cables now do burn,
And Fire casts Anchors, never to return.
Thus did the inhumane Battles fury rage,
Nor could the Sea the increasing Flames assuage.
Fire now and Water did not each contend,
But seemed their Powers so mutually to lend;
That you might see there many men became
Burnt in the Sea, and Drowned in the Flame.
This one good hap to Karkases did fall,
They Would fire to burn them at their Funeral.
The mangled Ships nor fearing to be drentht,
Gladly take Breeches, thereby to be quenched.
Thus much in general, I cannot choose
But on particulars employ my Muse;
As the wise Pilot watchfully does mind
To husband all the advantages of Wind;
Comes an unruly Shot, and him does force
To certain Death, change his uncertain course.
The Master ranging up and down the Deck,
And Wounded mortally, to him does beck
His Mate, who hasting to his aid in vain,
Is there together with the Master slain;
And having finished thus his lost life's date,
Does truly prove himself the Masters Mate.
The Trumpeter with smart reviving sound,
Quickening their dying Hearts, falls to the ground,
Thinking to sound one life-infusing bout,
His own Dead March he made it Echo out:
And having lent his Trumpet so much breath
In's life, it turned him some again in's Death.
The Drummer with his nimble Hand repeating
His doubled Blows, without compassion beating
His harmless Drum, which seemed with groaning cry
To murmur at his Masters cruelty.
Immediately two Bullets rudely come,
Tearing both Skin of Drummer, and of Drum.
Drummer of Life, of Sound the Drum's bereft,
So Drum and Drummer both are speechless left.
Here comes a Captain with undaunted Face,
Encouraging the Soldiers to the Chase;
And being about to say, be brave, be bold,
An untought ill-bred Bullet bids him hold:
This Leader faithful to his utmost breath,
Can only now lead's men the way to Death.
Some under hatches closed in despair,
Mount up their Foes with Powder in the Air;
Giving to them a strange unvvonted Death,
Who having Air too much, yet vvanted breath:
It seems yet that they no Damage meant 'um,
Who the next way up into Heaven sent'um.
These Men who chanced in the Ship to fall,
The cruel Sea was made their Burial;
And to the Waves without remorse were thrown,
Slain by their Foes, and Drowned by their own.
Some fearing Fire, into the Sea do fly,
And so for fear of Death, fear not to dye:
See two which stoutly grapple, striving whether
Should overcome, both fall in the Sea together;
Embracing both, till they have lost their breath,
And seem though Foes in Life, yet Friends in Death.
Two Brothers slain, as they together stood,
One then might svvear, they were allied in Blood.
See a poor man, with both Arms cut asunder,
Distracted leap't into the Water under,
Meaning to swim, but see the woeful Wretch,
With how much toil he labors to stretch
His raw Vein'd Stumps; and catch to save his life
Some kind remain o'th Ship, but all his strife
Does make him sooner to be out of breath,
And wanting Arms, he yet imbraceth Death.
One gets this by having lost his eyes,
In that he cannot see his miseries;
Another Legs are gone, that who him sees,
Might think he did beg mercy on his knees.
What refuge now is left? when if they shun
The approaching Svvord, into the fire they run;
Shunning the Fire they into Water fall,
So no way wants a certain Funeral.
Thus after strange unheard of sort they ly,
And Death, by many Deaths, makes many dye,
The mangled Ships no longer can vvithstand
Th'intruding Sea, and Mars his fiery brand.
Some Fled, some Sunk, the rest amazed stood,
Finding instead of Sea, a Sea of Blood.
On that Truly Worthy, and approvedly Valiant Commander, Sir CHRISTOPHER MINNS,
Knight, lately Deceased.
Compel your Tears (like to his Foes) to fall,
Helping to waft him to his Funeral;
Remember what he did, let that excite
In all men Courage, to gain Fame by Fight:
Such was his Valor, not o'th Furious Strain,
The Hand that struck did first consult the Brain.
Often encompassed round, he Victor stood,
Painting the Decks with his pure (conquering) Blood.
He, though alone, no succor need to crave,
Eager to Obtain a Victory, or Grave;
Regarding less his own then Countries good,
Maintaining it to the last drop of Blood.
I cannot Write more for grief, my blubbered Eye
Nill's the enlarging of his Elegy:
Nevertheless I (thinking on his Name)
Shall his due Praise perpetually proclaim.
Licensed,

June 12. 1666.

