POEMS UPON Several Occasions.

By Benj. Hawkshaw, Student in St. John's College in Cambridge; sometime
Student in Trinity College in Dublin.

-- Stulta est elementia, cum tot ubique
Vatibus occurras, perituroe parcere chartae.
Juven. Sat. 1.

LONDON, Printed by J. Heptinstall, for Henry Dickenson, Bookseller in
Cambridge, 1693.

To the Learned and Ingenious Doctor Willoughby Physician in Dublin.
SIR,
GIve me leave to present you with a few Lines, as a Testimony of my Respects
for those singular Favors and Encouragements which I have formerly received
from your Hands: I need not tell you they are the Essays but of a very young
Pen, a few By-thoughts in my Vacancies from other Studies, a Vein of
Youthfulness and Immaturity runs through the whole Piece, which nothing but the
Protection of so great a Patron can secure from the Reflections and Censure of
the World. I was the more ambitious they should be laid at your Feet, being
very well assured of your Goodness and Candor in pardoning the rash Attempts
of Youth, and the Defects that attend all first Endeavors; besides, 'twere the
highest Piece of Ingratitude not to pay the First Fruits to that Sun, under
whose kind Influence they ripened, and came to that little growth you now see
them in. I dare not, Sir, presume to attempt a Strain of Panegyric, lest when
I have done my utmost Endeavors, the World should condemn me for speaking too
little on so Eminent a Subject, whose worth, that I may not too much embase by
this Dedication, I desire rather from thence to borrow Luster to my youthful
Performances, which at least their Devotion may recommend to your candid
Acceptance on the behalf of

Your Obliged and Humble Servant, B. H.

On the hopeful Author of these Ingenious Poems.
WHen sent from Heaven a more than common Guest
Takes up his dwelling in a mortal Breast;
And when a Soul of large Dimensions comes
TO inform the human flesh -- compacted Rooms,
The gladsome Fabric full of Beauty shows,
No common Splendor from the Windows flows:
A sacred Brightness does the Seat attend,
And th'Inmate prosperous Omens do befriend.
Quick Worth, Praecocious Virtue, Early Grace,
And ripe Perfection does the Soul embrace.
Inspired Wit fills the capacious Mind,
And forward Sense, to lofty Flights inclined,
Prevents the tedious Discipline of Schools,
The Loyt'ring Art of Paedagogick Rules.
Thus Fated to high Facts Amphitryon's Son,
As soon as born, a wondrous Conquest won;
The Warlike Babe did two fierce Dragons tame;
Too small an hansel for his mighty Fame.
Go on young Hawkshaw, to the World be kind:
And with the Early Products of thy Mind,
Enrich and entertain us at one Time,
Expressing Native Wit without a Crime.
Nor dote on Fame: It Is seldom justly given,
And is too small a Prize for Souls of Heaven.
Look up! -- A due Reward will come from thence,
For him, who decks his Wit with Innocence.
Joshua Barnes.
Emanuel Collegde, Cambridge.
To the Ingenious Mr. Hawkshaw on the Publication of his Poems.
Pindarick.
I.
MEthinks this looks like an untoward Age,
Too gross, or too censorious to engage;
For faith some Poems unregarded lie,
That with their Authors merit Immortality:
Others worse done, yet are approved by all,
Because the Subjects more agreeable.
But, Damon, you have wisely taken care,
Of Sense, and Mode, to mix an Equal share;
And with assurance may address:
Already certain of success:
Your Book must needs delight, but cannot cloy,
Having that great Preservative, Variety.
II.
When Cowley died we fondly did conceive,
The Loss so vastly Great, 'twas past retrieve;
The Lover then condemned his Lute,
To be for ever, ever Mute:
For why the mighty Charmer gone,
The only Power could influence his Song:
He Would lost the pretty Arts that please,
A Virgins tender'st part,
Those soft becoming words that seize,
The most unwilling heart:
Despair and Silence cramped his Breast,
And damned him to a dull uneasy Rest.
III.
But Damon does his Character renew,
In him his Flights, his soft Address we view;
Lovers no more repine at Fate,
Nor call their Mistress false, ingrate;
Learn by his Verse to raise desire,
But that as chaste, as Vestal fire:
For in the whole true Modesty appears,
Not one lewd Notion to betray his years;
Nor does his Mistress all the rest excel,
What ever he pleases to express
In whatsoever dress,
The Beauty's Parallel.
IV.
If Eighteen can produce
So Generous, so Divine a Muse,
Think what advantages he has,
Who starts where others end their race:
If Youth his worth cannot conceal,
What Wonders will his riper Years reveal?
Advance, dear Damon, as thou have begun,
Eternal Music dwell upon thy Tongue;
Let no rude cares thy Breast alarm,
Such as may Sorrow move,
But keep it always gently warm
With Poetry and Love.
And when malicious Fate
Denies thy Life a longer Date,
The Change will not be great:
For why? their whole performances above,
Are nothing else but Harmony and Love.
St. John's College. George Smit^

To my Ingenious Friend Mr. Hawk* shaw, on the Advance of the Poetry.
WHen yet the World was young and Nature ne^
Ever many Days had sprung from early Dew;
When Beauty dawned, and did first Mankind war^
And Love it self was But an Infant Charm:
We boast our Art, co-eval with the Stars,
The Birds first taught it to the wondering Spher^
This the first Essay, Man at last was taught,
He adds a Soul, and dresses it in Thought.
From thence 'twas handed down by rolling Years,
The allay of Grief and Enemy to Cares;
Homer the Ancient'st, freshest Laurel wore,
The first Refiner of the Noble Ore;
Thence many Bards commenced, and had their Reign,
From Latin Virgil to our English Ben.
But when great Cowley did the Age allure,
We feared a Zenith, and the Muse Mature;
But, Sir, We see, it is you are born t'improve,
The Pitch of Fancy, and The Extent of Love.
To you the Lover will his Altars rear,
Thank you in Incense for his soft'ned Fair,
And make you half his Adoration share.
Methinks I see the stubborn Celia glow,
And blush, and wonder, what you mean to do;
She fears each Line, yet still reads on and sighs,
She starts! and feels a coming Passion rise,
And sparkles happy Omens from her Eyes.
Smooth as the Strokes of softest Titian thows
Each Verse, when how Adonis looked, he shows.
With such a Style the Noble Ovid strove,
To charm the Heiress of the World to Love.
The Royal Beauty slights an Emp'rour's Frown,
TO admit a Laurel she contemns a Crown,
And does a Poet before Monarchs own.
With such soft Verse he won the mighty fair,
From Rival Scepters Verse, the Prize does bear
'Twas great, nor could Augustus this exceed,
Not Actium Conquest was a Nobler deed.
H' enjoys the Princess, and from Rome retreats,
And with a Muse like theirs he charms the ru^ged Gat^
Trinity College. H. Den^

To the Ingenious Author, now of the College in Dublin.
WHilst thy dear native Soil with smiling Face,
Puts forth her Arms to catch the first Embrace;
and thy gay Friends in joyful Tumults throng,
^o hear the well known Accents of thy Tongue;
We cannot but smile, when we new Pleasures find,
(...) this fair Offspring which you left behind.
(...) kindly bribed by thy resistless Wit,
We lose your Absence, and our Griefs forget.
Strange! that such tender Years so toughly wear,
So young your self, and yet so tall your Heir:
If forward Nineteen such a Ripeness show,
What Wonders will a well knit Thirty do?
Such was loved Cowley's Voice, so young his Pen,
When the fleet Youth assured a second Ben:
Such Thoughts did Ovid's angry Stars defeat,
Softening the Malice of the Cold retreat.
Such was your Force, so orderly it broke,
When your Friend loved, or drooping Count^ spok^
Pale was her Cheek and doubtful was her Look,
When Wars rough Arms the nodding Island shoo^
Now the full Streams of Joy around her flow,
Graced with their Charge, a welcome Peace a^ Yo^
Her withered Branches gladly sprout again,
Pleased to behold her Sons: A darling Train,
That guard her Beauty, and her Glory raise,
They crowned with Conquest, These adorn wi^ Ba^
John Norton.

ECLOGA. ^n Amici mei Carmina Amatoria.
O Cerebri foetus diversi! o aurea proles!
O linguae Numeri dulces! nitidique lepores!
^t Cantu vincit sylvam Philomela loquacem,
^esertam and Phaebo Noctem modulamine mulcet;
^ic victi Druidae dudum cessere Britanni,
^amoni nostro, Damon quo Carmine ludit!
^aud dubitant tenero laurum submittere vales
^amoni aetate primi praevertitur Ille
^ii! tamen and tardos longo prior Intervallo
^tevolat, dum pulchra ineunt certamina versu.
^le animi nobis luctus solatur acerbos,
^eve ullum attingit telum lethale dolorum,
^entire attoniti solum Damona videmur.
Perge modo Musis o ter dilecte Britannis,
^laude nec o Damon rivos, bella horrida, bella
Insidunt terris, late tuba vivida Martis
Intonat, and vastis clangoribus aethera complet;
Tu vero cantu potuisti tollere Curas:
Quod cecinit Damon tanta dulcedine captos
Nos tenet, ut Martis tuba jam non verberet aures,
Felices solum Damona audire videmur.
Perge modo, Musis o ter dilecte Britannis,
Quem mea Musa feret, semper donabere Versu.
Damona agrestes pueri, innuptaeque puellae
Cantabunt. Thyrsis coget pecus omne sub umbra,
Damona gracili long resonabit avena.
Narrabit sylvis teneros Amaryllis honores
Amplecti Damona ardens flagrantibus ulnis.
Incipient omnes Damona ambire puellae,
Perge modo, Musis o ter dilecte Britannis.
Culp. Tanne^
St. John's College.
ON K. CHARLES IId^'s. Restoration.
A Pindarick Ode.
I.
THAT Star whose sable mantle hurled,
Had muffl'd up in Clouds the Western world
Is risen now, and like the Planet Jove,
Having run out his hidden course above,
Visits our Gloomy Sphere once more;
But lo! what does this Herald bring?
It brings with safety home an Exiled King:
A King whom Heaven loved so well,
Spared nor a Miracle
To bring him to his Native Shore.
II.
For your Return all Nature seems to be
In one conspiring Jubilee;
It Is hard to know who is most content,
The People, or the Firmament.
The floating Castles on the Sea around,
Dance to their own Trumpets sound;
The Ships together with the Tide,
Swell with an unusual pride,
Whilst some unerring Angels hand
Moves and directs them to the Promised Land.
III.
Fair Albian stretching out her Arms to thee,
Implores thy Aid to cure her Leprosy:
To Thee the drooping heads of State draw nigh,
To bear them up as Atlas does the Sky.
Famine, Sword, and Fire,
The Great Triumvirate of Desolation,
Did with United Force conspire,
To Ruin and Destroy the Nation.
But the good Influence of Charles his wane,
Dispersed those Mists, and proved their final bane.
IV.
Return then Charles, with all the Joy that is due
To the Serenest Peace and You;
The Gomet's gone which over our Kingdom stood,
And drenched its Face in Royal Blood;
He that usurped your Crown is now no more,
As low in Fortune's Wheel, as high before:
The hungry Meteor shall no more feed
On the most precious Oil of Stuart's Head,
Who on the Wings of Martyrdom Sh'has flown,
And in Exchange of this got an Immortal Crown.
V.
The Isthmus which your Foes have made throw
And walk on Beds of Roses to your Crown, [down,
^ind Heaven did this sweet Seat of Rest prepare,
^o ease your Sorrows, and unbend your Care.
Since You are come
Triumphant Exile home,
Peace in her welcome Streams shall flow,
and kindly cheer the British World below:
No more the People shall deplore their Fate,
But only grieve this came too late.
The Dream that Night Limerick was surrendered.
ME thoughts I heard the charming Echo say,
Arise my Love, from hence, and come a-way;
Though the Waves roll, the mighty Tempest's done,
And all is concluding with the setting Sun;
I Am come to lead thee to thy Port again,
And place thee in the lost Jerusalem.
At this my feeble Pulse with Joy beat high,
To see my Ancient Paradise so nigh;
Then straight I hois'd up sail, and bore away,
As swift as Eagles when they find a Prey;
Here I presumed more solid Joys to find,
But Thoughts conveyed me back, though against the
[Wind.
On the Death of the Young Lady I. S.
AND is she gone? Unkind and Cruel Fate!
Thus to deny the best a longer date.
Old Age does your regardless Hand disdain,
Still begs to die, because't must live in pain:
Too partial Fate! the Noblest first decay,
And Youth the richest Spoil becomes your prey;
Curse on those Stars that did her Life surprise,
And drew the Curtains over her brighter Eyes,
Before the wrought, what Nature did design,
When at her Birth, Fate cried, the Work is mine.
Her Course scarce finished, but she is snatched away,
Yet so she finished, that she lived each day:
Too great a Blessing, to last long, was given,
Green in the Bud, and yet full ripe for Heaven.
But to what height can I my Temper screw?
To pay, what to thy Life, what to thy Death, is due.
Grief clouds my sadder Mind, when it should be,
As free as unconcerned, as calm as she.
So like a dying Swan she did expire,
The God's sent for Her to make up their Quire.
On Dr. G. refreshing himself (...) Morning in St. John's Walks.
WHEN Phoebus did his gilded Arms display
And shot the Phython with the Darts of Day,
The Skies were frightened, and the People run
To see the Conquest of the Newborn Sun;
Even so the Cambridge Vapors at thy Sight,
Clear up awhile, and change their grosser Light.
The Charming Sirens of the Air combine,
To elevate those nobler Thoughts of thine:
From Noise, from Trouble, and from Business free^
Scorning the World, though it admires thee;
Happier than Kings in this secure retreat,
Free from those Troubles that attend the great;
Here thy serenest Breast no Tumult finds,
Calm as Elysium which is void of Winds.
In such blessed Solitude of Old as this,
Jacob was honored with a Scene of bliss.
The smiling Violet, and the Lawrel-Tree,
Think it an Honor to be plucked by thee;
For since from thee they Life and Vigor have,
They don't repine thy Hand should be their Grave.
Thrice happy! For if Angels were to change their Bliss,
They Would scorn a spangl'd Grown, but value this.
The Good Fellow.
I.
Let Us drink and revel whilst we may,
And wisely prop our nodding Fate;
The eager Minutes fly away,
And then alas! 'twill be too late.
II.
Egypt is fruitful still the more
The Channel of their Nile runs high,
But when she leaves the beaten shore,
The Meadows seem to ^ine and die.
III.
Nature is constant still in this,
The very Gods themselves would think
Their Life but an imperfect bliss,
Had they not nobler Wine to drink.
IV.
The Indian Princes scarce are found
But in their drunken Fits to play,
Like their great God they still go round,
And rise much fresher every day.
On a Friend who desired me to make a Copy of Verses on his Name.
HAD I the Pencil of Vandike to grace
Each killing Feature of thy lovely Face,
The Piece should speak the Dictates of my Mind,
To better Rules of Art, than now confined.
But why should I wish for his Pencil here?
Poets with Painters in this Office share.
Thy very Looks whilst I gaze on control
All the Joint Powers of my wavering Soul,
Whilst you but smile and in your Chair sit still
The Members disobey the Master's Will;
For where such Clusters of Perfections sit,
Each would suffice to raise the Ghost of Wit.
Than this what can a better Topic be,
To convince Atheists there is a Deity?
Return my Muse and let thy Crystal Stream,
Flow to the Fountainhead from whence it came;
Stop not so soon, but with a Noble Grace
Describe the Hero's Name as well as Face;
Jove's Ganymed let down from Beams on high,
To tell us, that the Poets did not lie;
So graceful in Discourse, as that you would swear
He Would brought the Manners of the Angels here;
So amorous, so gay, his Life does prove,
You Would think him brought up in the School of Love*
'Twas never known at once that Nature meant
To mould a Subject, and an Accident.
Thy Name and Nature do so well agree,
Thy Name another Nature seems to be,
And as we read we make it out in thee.
The Letters to the Humour's so well set,
They show the brightest in the Alphabet.
Names may be changed, and many often do,
But to change thine's to change your Nature too*
Thy Name and Nature constitute a Bliss,
Nothing but Love sure had a hand in this;
Thy Name by mortal Man was never given,
But in a New-years-gift was sent from Heaven.
An Allusion to Claudian's Epigra^ on Archimedes's Sphere.
WHen Jove beheld the vast aetherial Worl^
In the small Compass of a Machin^ hurl'^
He smiled, then turning to the Gods, said he,
The Apish World pretends to copy me;
The Laws of Nature so exactly given,
As if that Man had traveled once in Heaven.
Against Knowledge.
I.
IF none but Fools which are in Error blessed,
Can truly here be said to hope for rest;
Why do I then pursue, and try
To read the Volumes of Philosopy?
I say they are gaudy Nonsense all,
And do like Flowers in the Autumn fall;
There is no Knowledge in this World below,
For all we have read, we scarce our selves can know.
II.
The thoughtless Man is never wracked by Cares,
Though the Storm rise he entertains no fears,
On any thing he can take hold,
He cares not for the sparkling Gold,
He never does the Metal slight,
So that his Caesar's Image be on it;
Although the Bark's but small, the Bottom's sound,
And though he sleeps, she will never run aground.
III.
The Man that did to high raised Sense pretend,
Confessed that after all it had no End,
So much deceived, he did repine,
So lavishly he would spent his time,
Vowing that nothing here below,
Brought so much Sorrow, as this thing to know,
But we, as foolish Gamesters use to do,
Still know the Trick, yet still are cheated too.
IV.
The Stagirite who knew all Nature's Laws,
Proved the first Martyr in this silly Cause;
But thou my Soul, with what thou'st seen
Sit down, never go behind the Screen
Of Nature, for the Cause of things,
TO observe the Motions, and the hidden Springs:
Aspire not too high; if you will improve
^our Time, be sure to spend it all in Love.
Translated from the Italian Poet Sannazarius.
WHen Neptune saw the Virgin Venice stand
Fixed in the Waves, and give the Sea command,
^ow, Jove, says he, shall Rome compare with this?
^ome which you brag's the Worlds Metropolis;
^ook first on this, proud Jove, then that of thine,
that built by Men, this built by hands Divine.
An Apology for Rome in Answer to that from Venice, translated from a Latin
Copy.
WHen Rome had brought the neighboring Kingdoms down,
And made the Empire of the World her own,
The Sea to Tybur did Obedience pay,
And Rome her self the Universe did sway:
It Is scarce worth bragging to relate she stands
Secure, first founded by Diviner hands;
This rises to a Pitch more high, to say
The Gods themselves durst not but Rome obey.
A Morning's Thought.
I.
WHY should I grovel here below?
Mistake that hopeful Bliss to come?
At shadows grasp, as Heathens do,
And never think of future Doom?
II.
No, I will break this House of Clay,
Which clogs my fleeter Thoughts and Mind,
My Guardian Angel bids away,
Where I Eternal Bliss may find.
III.
While like the Lark I upwards fly,
And leave this cloudy Magic Sphere,
A Weight of Joys I there descry,
And Streams of Happiness appear.
IV.
^riumphant in this State I Will be,
Enjoy the Mansions of the Blessed,
^ll gaze upon the Deity,
The very inmost Point of Rest.
To Mr. J. C. sometime Schoolmaster in Dublin.
WIth how much Wisdom you correct o^ Crime^
Laying in ^ore against the future Time^
You pluck those Weeds which in our Garden gro^
Then Seeds of Virtue you begin to sow;
What greater Gifts could be bestowed and given?
At once you both oblige our Earth and Heaven;
You Have Conquered all the Science that is below,
You study now to make us Live and Know.
Melancholy.
WHen all was silenced, and in Peace w^la^
When even Revenge some Rest did ent^ta^
The God of Sleep did then my Soul surprise,
And covered with a Veil my wearied Eyes,
The happiest Minute of Repose to me,
Which from this living Death could set me free.
But when Apollo re-salutes our Sphere,
^riving his Chariot through the traveled Air,
My Pains that slept awhile, begin to rise
And every Ray that is darted, wracks mine Eyes.
^he loathsome Light my active Globes consound,
and every rising Sun renews the Wound.
^he fettered Slaves the Light are glad to see,
which for awhile diverts their Misery,
^re then the World was made for all but me.
^y poignant Pains do on the Sun attend,
^o whatsoever Tropic he does bend,
and though my dismal Thoughts like Planets rove,
^et in one Vortex with the Sun they move,
^s Influence creates new Pains, new Woe,
(...) the Moon makes the Waters ebb and flow.
^t when Sol's Coursers do begin to cool
^eir flaming Nostrils in the Crystal Pool,
^y Flames abate and to the Waters run,
^at they with greater Vigor may return.
Oh strange! how much dismayed I am to see,
A Chain of Miseries entailed on me,
That glorious Light which all the World does prize
Does cast a Cloud of Sorrow on my Eyes;
The worst of Adam's Sons, the only Heir,
Born to be tortured by the Weight of Care.
On a Be.
I.
THou pretty sweet laborious Be,
That suck'st the blooming Flowers fair
By intellectual Chemistry,
And by thy Notes can ease thy Care.
II.
Did but the whole World copy thee,
And search the Secrets of thy Art,
In thee 'twould find a Treasury,
Beyond what Logic can impart.
III.
This stately Edifice of thine
Where Nature and her Sweets do stand,
(...) so transcendent and divine,
It speaks an overruling hand.
Pre-existence.
Condemned in this dark Prison must I here,
Watch till the Trumpet strike mine Ear?
Must I never know thy Goodness and thy Love,
because I did transgress thy Will above?
Must Clouds and Vapors still obscure my Mind?
Must I to this dark Sphere be thus confined?
^o, no, I will launch out, and wing away,
unto the Regions of a brighter Day.
^ome Glances of a State that is past I find,
^ake up the Corners of my thoughtful Mind,
^s covered Embers when they are blown, create
(...) Flame, and represent my former State.
The Flashings of such Joy do strike so strong
My Temples, that I cannot endure it long,
I must dissolve and in these Thoughts expire,
And like the Prophet's Coach ascend in Fire.
The Enjoyment.
I.
Watered with Heavens Dew I sit and sing,
Laughing at those who are over-whelm with Car^
Of bliss I have an inexhausted Spring,
Which makes me young, as Age my Life impai^
II.
I neither pine nor languish in my Rage,
Though I have scarce one single Spot of Ground;
Some with vast Lands drag on a sullen Age,
And their proud Thoughts no Limits ever h^
[fou^
III.
That Pearl which Cleopatra swallowed down,
Crowding whole Kingdoms in one single [draught,
Advanced not Anthony to the Roman Crown,
But poyson-like Death and Destruction [wrought.
IV.
^ho' they ^y prostrate on the Beds of Sense,
Yet Stings like Vipers on their Bosom lay,
that sucked out all which Nature did dispense,
Till they consumed and wasted quite away.
V.
^iches like Spirits when we grasp, retreat,
Pleasure's a Blossom of the glorious Morn,
Throne's a gilded Trifle, Honors Seat,
These are the Blessings which the World adorn.
VI.
^t since these swift winged Creatures make away,
And I from all the World no pleasure have,
Since they play Tricks, I Will like a Wiseman say^
There Is no Enjoyment found this side the Gra^
VII.
The younger Brother's in a happy State
Did he what Part he was to act but know;
Sleep on my Stars for I can rule my Fate,
And be a King if I Will but think it so.
On a Fly that was drowned in a Lad^ Mouth.
HOW durst thou leave thy little home,
Presumptuously to dare thy doom?
Or would thou revel in the Air?
Half drunk with sipping Flowers fair,
And seek out for a Place of Rest
Until the Morn, to ease thy Breast;
Was it thy Pride to mount so high?
To perish bravely in the Sky?
Or did thou think to rival all?
To outdo Phaeton in his fall?
'Twas nobly done, and thou shall be
Talked of by Posterity:
Thy fellow Creatures that survive may have
Ignoble life, but thou a Noble grave.
On the River Came.
WIth what sweet Streams the River Came does glide,
And clasps his Daughter in on every side;
Others perhaps by Traffic, Riches vent,
But this brings Peace the sweetest Ornament:
Some do advance the natural Strength of Towns,
And are like Battlements to falling Crowns;
Yet this does flourish in a glorious State,
When they lie conquered by the Hand of Fate.
^n Winter you supply our Wants, and now
Pay Tribute to the Muse's pleasure too.
The Trees do flourish in such Order here,
As they were placed by Orpheus's tuneful Lyre;
And if the Sun his scorching Beams display,
Here is a Refuge from the Heat of Day;
Had Phoebus ever Cam's great Virtue known,
He Would fix^d his Muses in the Neighboring Town;
Came is the greatest Blessing in our Eyes,
He makes us happy, and he makes us wise.
The Retirement.
I.
HAil ye dear Groves, and silent Plains,
Void of loud Tumult, Care and Strife;
Here let me leave the last Remains,
The Burden of a troubled Life.
II.
Lodged by the Murmurs of a Stream,
Let my loose Thoughts be scared away,
Bent on no idle wandering Theme,
But to refine this House of Clay.
III.
Let Visions of Seraphick Light
My soaring Fancy entertain,
Raised to a much more noble Height,
Of Pleasure from so blessed a Scene.
IV.
Flushed with the Prospect of that State,
Let me despise the World's decoys,
Those formal Idols of the great,
And fix upon more solid joys.
On Music.
Among all the Blessings that on Life attend,
Amongst all the Blessings that the Gods can send,
No Joy, no Bliss, my sullen Heart can find,
Music alone inslames my drooping Mind;
Nay, she would mount her Wings, and fly away,
Not be confined to this dull Lump of Clay,
Did not the Charms of Music most divine
Unite, and things so wide, so close combine.
I wonder where is the Fountain of this bliss,
If Heavens Joy be here on Earth, it is this.
Nay, without this the very Gods would be
As much dissatisfied with Life, as we.
What complicated Wonders in thee shine!
The Godhead is by thee made more divine.
Could the Gods secret Whispers reach mine Ear,
When I at their Tribunal should appear;
My panting Breath with Music should keep tim^
And with her latest Breath I Would yield up mine;
I fear I should dissolve for very Joy,
For Bliss it self o'er-charg'd can Life destroy.
On the Preservation of the Library i^ Dublin-College.
WHen all was buried in one common Fat^
And made a Victim to the Popish Stat^
Some kinder Angel there did Centry stand,
And with his Sword did guard the Muses Land;
Land which no Tribute to her Monarch pays,
But that of Homage, Reverence and Praise.
How often did these destructive Men conspire,
To set the Temples of the Gods on fire?
But some preventing Wonder still came in,
Which blasted the Design, but not the Sin.
Often the Jesuits did their Lords address,
They might obtain our Wits Metropolis;
Another Party full as strong put in,
And claimed as theirs, our Learnings Magazin;
But held by hands Divine, our Pantheon stood,
And bravely rode between two Seas of Blood.
The French as often strove to steer this Ark,
Where all the Irish Science did Embark
To their own Coast, but all they did in vain,
Some Eastern Wind still drove her back again;
And having now escaped the intended Doom,
In pomp Sh' out-braves the Vatican of Rome.
Tu ne quaesieris, out of Hor. Paraphrased.
SEarch not how far wise Homer's Chain can go,
Whose Motion rules the infant World below
On this the Fabric of the World depends,
And when Jove speaks, our Life begins or ends.
Pray use no Spells, nor on the Planets call
To tell you when the hopeful Tree may fall;
The Gods don't think it fit that Man should look
Into the Leaves of Fates mysterious Book;
Be wise, I say, take off that Glass of Wine,
The Sun perhaps again may never shine;
Live whilst you may divest your Life of Sorrow,
And trust not to the Fool's Put-off to Morrow.
The Meditation.
I.
WHen Reason with her Robes ascends the Throne,
And wisely all my scattered Thoughts calls home*
The Messenger is so divine,
Unto her Laws I must resign,
For should I let these Thoughts but rove
They Would fix upon Tyrannick Love;
They Would transcend all the Bounds of Air,
And like a blazing Comet would inflame my Sphere.
II.
The main Spring of my Passion's raised so high,
I fear 'twill break, ever 'twill-comply;
Some pure aetherial Flame
Must melt this haughty Frame;
For should I like the Earths bold Son
Aspire, the Gods would send me down;
In this low Element I Would rather die,
Than suffer shipwreck in the floating Sky.
III.
I know that Pride's the bane of things,
And buries in the Earth the Crowns of Kings;
The Angels fell by this,
From that Eternal bliss.
Babel by this was built so high,
As 'twould the lofty Clouds outvy,
And thought the Heavens to have scaled,
But with those Mountains poorly failed.
IV.
When Moses did the flaming Mount ascend,
Diviner powers did his Frame defend;
But if you should presume
Too soon you would find the doom;
Those dreadful Flashings hinder thee,
The Light of that Felicity,
Since you the Threatenings which attend you, know,
Come down, the Scene is more transparent here below
V.
Suppose I could command the Bridle of the Sun,
And round this mighty Globe of Pleasure run;
Suppose I Would Liberty to see
What Is written in the Leaves of Destiny;
Or knew I when the Weights of Time,
Would tumble, and this World decline;
Yet after all, what would my purchase be,
Should I be lost for ever in a sad Eternity?
VI.
^arewel Ambition and your gaudy Train,
I Will never climb to be thrown down again;
Whatever Vanities may lay,
As Nets of Pleasure in my way,
Like Hannibal
I Will tread them down, and cut through all:
For since no Pleasure can be found
In the most beauteous Spot of Ground,
By humble Thoughts my Fate I Will prove,
Which leads me as a Star to the blessed Seats above.
On the Popish Conspiracy.
OH dismal Scene! the Fiends and Furies now
Are Doves in Treachery compared with you:
What but the Spawn of Hell could thus design,
Our Worlds great Ruin with the Royal Line?
Had not that Eye, and Heavens peculiar Care
Brought forth to Light what cunning Jesuits dare,
Had this proved well their Malice struck so high,
They would endeavor to invade the Sky.
The Poets dream'r, and 'twas a Dream, as old,
The Northern World was still benumbed with cold
But to our cost we find, though there is small Sun,
Yet Streams of Heat do through her Bowels run;
Here do the Popes the Devils Chemists play,
And blow the treacherous Fire night and day,
Which springs from pious Zeal which warms them so
And yet keeps Commerce with the World below;
Who'd think the Popes that sit in Peter's Chair,
Should open Hell to send the Furies here?
'Twas to repay their Master's vast Arrears,
Who served their Interest for many Years;
And bravely done, it shall through Age to come
Stand sacred in the Lists of Hell and Rome.
On the Shortness of Man's Life.
I.
THE Lamp of Life decays each Minute more,
The better Substance's so far gone,
The Flames the outward Case feed on;
Who then can our lost Oil restore?
Time does and will on all things prey,
^o hungry that at last, 'twill eat it self away.
II.
^ome matter still the blazing Sun supplies,
And satisfies that greedy Flame,
Though he still wastes he is still the same,
Feeding on all the adjacent Skies;
But when Man's pressed below the Line,
^e never sees again his Native Clime.
III.
^wift as the Wind his Life runs fleeting on,
Hurried by the Bent of Tide,
In Charon's Boat to the other Side,
Before he knows his Life is gone;
So bad his Inn, so short his Age,
He doubts if ever he would been upon the Stage.
IV.
It Is vain to boast with Pride, he is Fortunes heir,
That strength and power from her is giv'^
To bribe the Messengers of Heaven,
Seeing the fatal Day's so near:
So with these Fools blind Fortune plays,
And whilst she smiles, unravels all their days.
V.
He lives a Nestor's Age, who lives this Day,
And with each setting Sun
His Stage in doing well has run,
And trifles not his Time away;
The best the longest Livers prove,
And he is best who spends it most in Love.
A Dialogue between Reason and the Inferior Powers.
Reason. WHat Tumult's here within? what Storms are these?
I fear they are my home-bread Enemies
I scarce have leisure to bewail my Fate,
The unruly Faction presses on the Gate:
Was ever Monarch so disturbed as I?
My Thoughts so dark, I Am sure some Storm is nigh;
What Rebel leads this stubborn Faction on,
Guards, Guards, or else I Am lost and quite undone?
Where Is Man's Prerogative? his best defense,
Alas, must truckle to the sway of sense;
I Am like a Captive Monarch bound in Chains,
I bear the Title, but the People reigns.

^ife. If you're unhappy, overcharged with Woe,
Blame your own Choice, not us, that made you so;
If you let loose to Pleasure and Delight,
You rob your self of your undoubted Right;
If you with Prudence would your Power maintain,
We should live happy, and you happy reign:
But you dissolved, melting in Pleasures lie,
And like the Phoenix in your Spices fry:
On your account our State to Ruin goes,
And sinks much faster than it ever rose.

Reas. Alas! Suppose I have not governed well,
Must you on that take Arms; and then rebel?
Princes are not confined to Laws, not I
For every thing I do shall tell you why;
My Power is from Jove's transcendent Throne,
My Patent's good; I Will rule and act alone.

Infe. See how the haughty Monarch swells with Pride
Thinking all Power to his Crown's allied;
Nay, we our selves, and our Commission too
Derive our Power from Heaven as well as you
Though Monarch of the lesser World you be,
Yet we are Brothers of that Family,
And when the Elder's mad, or proves a Drone,
It Is fit that we should step into his Throne.

Reas. I Am now well satisfied why you complain,
You think you're injured 'cause you cannot reign:
You're only envious at the Crown I wear,
You fain would revel in a higher Sphere:
But I Am resolved I Will curb your Faction so,
Like Joseph's Slaves hereafter you shall bow;
And where so ever my Man of War you see,
Be sure you lowre your bending Flag to me.

Contentedness.
I Thank the Gods that in a Sphere I move
Secure, but subject to the Darts of Love;
I soar not on those Heights where Envy reigns
But with Humility I court the Plains.
Must I complain the Stars prove cross to me,
'Cause I was born in such a low Degree?
Must I expect a Tribute from the West,
'Cause Alexander conquered all the East?
Methinks I see Sejanus in the Clouds,
Thronged for awhile by the adoring Crowds;
Upon the waxen Wings of Fame he flies,
And darkens with his Train the glorious Skies:
Thus like a Vapor he ascends in pain,
But like a condensed Cloud falls down again;
The great 'cause, Fortune's blind, her Power despise,
But in her Kingdom she has Argus Eyes.
The Call.
I.
PEace ye imperious Charms of Love,
Peace ye sweet Sirens of the Air,
Not all your melting Notes can move
My fleeting Soul, or keep it here.
II.
Diviner Eccho's bid me go
To the refreshing Fields of Light,
Although the Air is gross below,
Yet nothing shall retard my flight.
III.
Lo! now I mount, and as I rise,
Successive Scenes of new Delight
Prepare my weaker Mortal Eyes
To gaze on the Eternal Light.
From the Italian Poets. The Birthday.
BRing me Aurelius, bring me Wine,
Roses about my Temples twine,
Make me a shady Grove which may.
Damp the too powerful Heat of Day;
I hate a splendid House, a Noble Seat,
These are the Trappings of the Great;
Come let us sit along the Ground,
And let the Glass go freely round:
So when I Have fairly drank my share,
In slumbers I will drown my Care;
Thus I Will carouse and banish Sorrow,
Who knows if he shall live to Morrow?
It Is wise to revel whilst we may,
Since Youth and Beauty fly away.
The Indifferency.
Who Is Emperor, who is Pope, I Am not concerned,
I care not how the Helm of State is turned;
The Planet of my Days did never design
A Crown for me, then why should I repine?
Nay, were we born insulting Monarchs all;
For something more unto the Gods we'd call?
Grant that they would our Vows complete, and say,
Choose every Man and ask now when you may;
On greater Terms these fickle Men would stand,
No place can fill their Minds, but Jove's Right Hand.
O Vanity so weak that mounts so high,
That must as surely fall as you and I!
The partial Sea wracks their poor Ships alone,
They prosper scarce abroad, and scarce at home:
For whilst on Pinacles of great Renown
They sit, they are seen awhile, then tumble down,
In building Monuments they spend their days,
And then gape for, the Poet's Manna, praise.
Methinks against the Gates of these I see
Death coming on with her Artillery,
Whilst the Famed Scipio walks in his own Fields,
Improving by his Art, what Nature yields;
So taken up with these, that it is in vain,
To strive to hale him to his Crown again.
Learn then my Soul, on Heaven to fix your Eye,
Resolve to live, as you resolve to die;
Ask of the Gods what is meet, that you may have
A quiet Cottage, and a silent Grave;
Venture not far into the dangerous deep,
But on the Land an Equal prospect keep;
The Ship is weak and small wherein we sail,
And at the Mercy of each conquering Gale:
The Umbrage of a Middle-state I Will prize,
In peace I Will live, in peace I Will close my Eyes.
The Hermit.
I.
AWay from me ye fulsome Joys, away,
Make to some outward World, I say,
I Am cloyed, I Will see your Face no more,
You're Idols all, your Cheats I Will never adore.
II.
I Am now so well acquainted with you all,
I Will never listen to your Call;
I Will like Ulysses stop mine Ears,
And never hear the Syren's Charming Prayers.
III.
My eager Spirit longs to disengage
Her Powers from this worldly Cage,
I Will for no Heavenly Convoy stay,
But fly and hasten on the Wings of Day.
IV.
No blessed Contentment can withold my Mind,
Eden it self is less refined,
Were all the Universe my Seat,
'Twould never please me, tho'it made me great.
V.
To some dark silent Vault I will repair,
Black as these Thoughts and Sorrows are,
Where Monarchs are in Peace laid down,
Conquered by Burdens that attend a Crown.
VI.
Here Hell it self shall not my Soul molest,
Nor fill with anxious Cares my Breast,
From Noise and Trouble here I Will cease,
And keep one Sabbath of Eternal peace.
On the King's landing at Harwich, after he had been exposed to many Dangers in
his Voyage to Holland.
AS the glad Persians, so the Britains run
To pay their Homage to the Rising-sun;
While Streamers and the swelling Sails foretell,
Our dread Augustus is both safe and well:
See on the silver Billows how they ride,
Having so great a Charge they swell with Pride,
Hoping some Midwife land would come so near,
To take their Lord, and ease their Pious fear.
With what full Joy does the glad Court embrace
The Kingdom's Glory, and the Nation's Peace?
Our Lives, our Fortunes, at your Seat we throw,
A Complement to some, a Debt to you.
The sacred Wishes which we kept in store,
Contribute nothing to your Welfare more;
Loud in your Praise the well-throng'd People show,
The Gods attend our Caesar here below.
When first he to the welcome Shore repaired,
He bravely dared that Death which all else feared;
And when the Tempest rose, there was no place
For vulgar Paleness in a Kingly face:
Dark was the Covering which the Seas o'er-spread,
The Stars his Lamps, the restless Waves his Bed;
Though Nature showed the ugliest Face of Night,
His very Looks supplied the absent Light.
Go on Auspicious Prince, thy Life will raise
An Everlasting Monument of Praise,
And where thy Standards shall in pomp display,
Thy Enemies shall tremble, fear, obey:
Peace, Happiness, and all the Gods can send,
Shall on your Kingdom, and your Court attend;
Your Counsel is from Jove's transcendent Throne,
By which you rule, and conquer all alone.
On Dr. G. Reducing the Years to Terms, which were requisite for them who took
their Bachelours Degree.
Pindarick.
I.
BE gone dull lazy Fame, why do thou stay?
Exalt him on the Wings of day;
Speak with as many Tongues, as there shall be
Kingdoms or Nations to be taught by thee;
Inform the World what is done,
What Course is taken here at home,
To stock the World with learned Men,
Tell it them over and over again.
Here Solomon is born once more,
Who shall our lost and sleeping Wit restore;
And if a Proselyte shall from a-far,
Point to the West, be thou his leading Star.
II.
Since the unhappy Fall
A Curse has been entailed on all,
Like younger Brothers we are obliged to share
The Estate of Learning, though the whole's but small;
But to our great Professor's Chair
All Learning is allied, and claims the Throne,
As a vast Species alone.
Happy I am that I was born to see
The Phoenix, sitting on his spicy Tree.
Noah restored the deluged World,
Who suffered Shipwreck in their Houses, hurled
By one common Fate, but Gower alone is he
Who Paradise when lost, restored the Tree;
The Tree of Knowledge mighty fair,
As what is engrafted on, must surely bear.
III.
Before you came the Oracles were silent all,
None ever by this way did call;
Wit in Consumption was, and every Clown
With Liberty could wear a Scholar's Gown.
A Soldier could enlist his Name,
And fly to Wars from which he lately came,
A Lure could call them all away,
'Twas four Years space at last that Crowned the day
But you, Lycurgus, like do now restore
Much more than what we ever lost before;
You are our Athen's Prop, our Muses's Friend,
A happier Gift the Gods could never send.
The Golden-Age.
IN pious Times of Old, in Saturn's Reign,
Wherein no Strife, no Envy, no Disdain,
Defaced the Color of that Candid Throne,
Where Innocence unrivald sat alone;
Where no forced Laws were in his Kingdom found,
Before Ambition did divide the Ground:
Virtue did then her brightest Light bestow,
And swayed the Motions of this World below.
But since she did her Face unkindly shrowed
Behind the Curtains of a sable Cloud:
Then Envy sprung those Vipers which did prey,
On Innocence and Virtue Night and Day:
Then she gave Laws to all the World beside,
Taught Avarice to flow with every Tide;
Into the Bowels of their State, which then
Debauched the wisest and the best of Men;
The World in Sin grew older every Day,
And upstart Lights new Converts did convey
To unknown Lands, where as they came and spread,
Vice did in Triumph show her daring head:
I long to see the Threads of Time full spun,
Hoping the Golden-Age may then come on;
But oh, it is vain to think 'twill ever fall out,
Till Plato's mighty Year shall wheel about.
The Recantation.
I.
I Now, good Sir, present my humble Muse,
Clad in those Mournings which her self did choose,
The fittest Garment for so foul a Sin,
Her treacherous Bosom once conceived within;
But though she Mourns, she thinks her Penance due,
And courts her Sentence if it comes from you.
II.
A speaking Sadness in her Looks she wears,
And like a frantic Sybil writes in Tears;
Whole Clouds of Grief around her Temples play,
And damp the Fierceness of the rising Day;
Like tortured Men upon the Wrack she stands,
Begging a swift Reprieve from your kind Hands.
III.
Ah foolish Creature now thy Wit's betrayed,
The unhappiest Sally that you ever made;
How durst you strike at an Almighty's Throne,
Hurled by some Evil Genius of your own?
For the forced Praises of a Worthless she,
To rob the Treasure of Divinity.
IV.
Had you been wise and coasted well the Shore,
You might with Safety seen already over;
But when you strive to shoot the Gulf, you find
A Chain of Dangers wait and stay behind;
It Is hard upon the floating Waves to stand,
Unless supported by the Almighty hand.
V.
I might have traveled in this Sea of Pride,
Had you not checked the Waves, and stopped the Tide;
By your wise Counsels I am warmed within,
Like Ordeal-fire they have purged my Sin;
So when benighted Pilgrims lose their way,
They bless the Star that ushers in the Day.
VI.
I know the Blackness of that ugly Piece,
Struck much more high than ever Rome or Greece;
I Will stand my Post, and never more submit
To the vain Tyrannies of foolish Wit:
And all that is lost I shall retrieve again;
For when the Act of Folly's finished clean,
What should the Poet do, but shift the Scene?
From Sannarius. On a Trojan Lady.
STop whosoe'er thou art that passest by,
Poor Maximilla in this Vault does lie;
With her the Beauty of the World expires,
Her amorous Passions, and her gentle Fires;
The fatal Clotho did this Tomb prepare
To ease her Troubles, and interr her Care:
The Fates her Friends no Nuptial Favors gave,
But the sad Cypress that attends the Grave;
You see, my Friend, all is subject to decay,
And you perhaps must the next Call obey:
All the rare Beauties that invest the Ball,
Must in their timely Autumn flag and fall;
Here the Original of Sweetness lies,
Her Body fades, her Virtue never dies;
Lamented by the amorous Boy,
Lamented by the Maids of Troy.
On the unhappy State of Ireland, by reason of the Civil War.
Pindarick.
I.
UNhappy Kingdom how you are tossed about,
Since the first Sailors found thee out!
That Peace which did the World forsake,
And thither did her private Voyage make,
Hoping to build her Nest
In Privacy and Rest,
Is now disturbed and doomed to be
Like wandering Cain, shut out of all Prosperity.
II.
How art thou changed unhappy Isle!
Now all thy Tenants are become Exile;
In Plagues more fruitful than the River Nile:
Surely Another Aaron's Rod,
Moved by the Anger of a Hebrew God;
Threatens the Kingdom's Fate, at whose Command
Obedient Evils overflow the Land.
III.
The Riches of the World beside
Of old flowed in to thee with every Tide,
As high as Egypt's Pyramids in Pride:
Learning and Force did thee compose
As Soul, and Body us;
But yet thy Noble and Majestic State,
Made thee an easier Prey for Fate,
I fear too soon thy Ruin, and thy Rise too late.
IV.
Thou like an Empty hulk at Sea,
Void of a Pilot do the Winds obey,
Thy valued Lading thrown away:
Pitied by thy Neighbors all,
Thou floatest and wandrest on the watery Ball;
Sad as the Place where Vulcan fell,
Doomed only by the Gods to make a Hell.
V.
But since you are sunk so low into the Main,
May Phoebus raise his Delos once again:
May all the Powers above,
Make thee once more the Isle of Love:
May no Egyptian Darkness rear
Her sooty Wings to cloud this Air;
May all thy Cares and Storms dissolve away,
And rise thou bright and happy every Day.
Discontent.
THE twinkling Stars that gild the Night,
And chequer Blackness with their Light,
Are in their State more blessed than I:
They can revel in their Sphere,
And in their Rounds take pleasure there,
Whilst here I pine and die.
The Jolly Sun at every stage,
With Liquor does his Thirst assuage,
And in his State's more blessed than I:
Alike he rises every Day;
Buxome, pleasant, fresh, and gay,
Whilst here I pine and die.
Fair Cynthia never goes to bed
Without Endymion at her Head,
And in her State's more blessed than I:
Fresh with the Joys of Love,
She re-salutes the Stars above,
Whilst here I pine and die.
The Consolation.
PIne not too much, my Soul, nor mourn,
'Cause in this World you're left alone;
Hereafter you will have,
A much more noble Prize than they,
Who only on their Pleasures prey,
A Crown the other side the Grave.
The vain Desire to be great,
Is real hunger, but delusive Meat;
They never stand to see
The Precipice that is coming on,
Till they are lost and quite undone,
And buried in Eternity.
These common and vexatious Cares,
Which trouble and enlarge our Fears,
Can never the good annoy;
For should that sink into the Main,
There Is one can buoy thee up again,
And crown thee with Eternal joy.
On the Death of the most Renown'^ Pierce Brackenbury Doctor (...) Physic,
and Senior Fellow of S^ John's.
Pindarick.
I.
AS Persians when their Monarch dies,
Provide no cheap Solemnities;
On Piles as Noble as his old abode,
The Embalmed Body of the Prince is laid,
Conveyed in spicy Atoms to the Skies,
And there adored like the great Sun their God;
So we, great Soul, dare not profane,
With common Elegies thy sacred Name;
In such high Strains we ought to sing,
As Cowley did the Glories of the Hebrew King;
Strains which the Muses owe,
For all the good you 'mparted here below,
A Tribute which is due,
Since we received our second Birth from you,
Our Athen's Healer and Instructor too.
II.
Pale envious Death could you not spare awhile,
The Aesculapius of the British Isle?
But she was Conscious, if You Would lived much more,
You Would bauk'd her Appetite in every Prey,
Which she expected to have snatched before,
(Growing much wiser every Day;)
So well acquainted with our State below,
I dare not say you have Addition now:
Nor was your Care and Labor less,
You did your utmost Skill engage
To prop the ruins of decaying Age.
Had you in former Times been known,
When Gods did frequently come down
To visit, and to talk with Men,
On every Altar you had seen,
Which the more Zealous People raise,
Continual Vows and Offerings of Praise.
III.
Methinks I see the Angels bear
Thy Soul a-long the liquid Air,
Whither St. Luke, and all the Rings
Of Seraphins in Robes of Light appear,
Rejoicing you at last are come
Unto your blessed Ancient home:
And if Physicians cannot bear the Load
Of Flesh, but struggle still to get away
From the Confinement of this Cage of Clay,
Why should this Place be our Abode?
Can we not borrow Wings
From Virtue? Aiming at things above,
Where we shall feed on Angel's Manna, Love;
Surely the Place is fine, since he,
Though he could cure his own Defect,
Yet out of cold Respect
To Earthly joys, forsakes the Realms of our Mortality
On the Earl of Danby's courageous Enterprise at La-Hogue, who set the French
Ships on fire.
REturn with all the Triumph that is due,
Great Sir, to the most welcome Peace and You:
Not young Augustus with more manly Rage,
The numerous Fleet at Actium did engage;
Than you the French, who proudly, though in vain,
Claimed the Dominion over the British Main:
But when the most illustrious Danby came,
(His Canon less commanding than his Name)
Darting his awful Powers, they soon gave way,
And shrunk like Spirits at the sight of Day:
So when great Jove of old resolved to quell
Earth's stubborn Sons, that vainly did rebel;
Himself engaged in a more Tragic Play,
Calls for Alcides to decide the Fray:
They might have been destroyed ever this, it is true,
But the kind Fates reserved that Work for you,
England's Mecenas, and Agrippa too.
We read the Famed Achilles never would go
But armed with Vulcan's Shield to meet his Foe;
Whilst your more noble Soul scorned all Defense,
But that of Virtue and of Innocence;
Scarce had our Cannons-mouths begun to roar,
But the Pale French steer to the Gallick shore;
And the brave English Courage led by you,
Eager as Falcons to the Quarry flew;
Where in Confusion the thronged People stood,
Your Men still pressing on, and you the leadin^ God
And in compassion to those Men that fell,
Gave them bright Tapers in their way to Hell;
Here mighty Heaps of vulgar Souls did stand,
Waiting to perish by so brave a hand;
But you retired when the great Work was done,
Whose brighter Flames eclipsed the gazing Sun;
Let the famed Caesar and his Romans be
^t Dwarfs in Courage, when compared to Thee;
^o less a Hero could their Fury tame,
^ewis himself trembles to hear your Name:
^ow we despise the worst Assaults of Fate,
^ou guard the Sea, Carmarthen guards the State;
^illiam rides conqueror over the vanquished Ball,
and Mary's powerful Charms subdue us all.
The Consummation.
Heavens King drives hard, the Writs are sealed
By Mercury to call a Parliament, [and sent
^h' officious Angels post away,
and at their sight the towering Clouds give way;
The Patent's passed the Seals, Great Jove will have
One common Coffin, and one common Grave.
Their Looks speak Terror, and their dreaded Hands,
(...) Triumph bear their Master's great Commands:
Thus whilst they speak, the World is at an end,
And mighty Thundrings do the Scene attend:
The fatal Clock has struck, and sounds all over,
Time shall reverse its Wheels, and be no more;
The Elements shall jarr, the Stars shall fall
Upon the Surface of this Earthly Ball;
The sweaty Clouds shall to the Center shake,
And afterward one blazing Comet make;
Phoebus shall of his rigid Fate complain,
And never shall number out one Stage again;
But when he sees this World inflamed he will run,
And grasp the Bridle of this Earthly Sun.
The End of the First Part.
Love-Verses, SONGS AND TRANSLATIONS, By the same Hand.

The Second Part.

Ad mea formosoe vultus adhibete Puellae
Carmina, purpureus quoe mihi diceat Amor.
Ovid. Lib. Amor 2. Eclog. 1. Destined to Love.
I.
PErhaps I shall be censured by the Wise,
For feeding thus mine Eyes;
Alas, it is Fate, I must adore,
Each time I gaze on her much more, and more;
From her bright Looks arise,
Effluviums so well refined,
As can almost restore the Man that is blind.
II.
For ought I know these Wise Men cannot see,
The Happiness which we
Hourly enjoy, they look a-seue,
Scarcely discerning what is false from true:
But what is this to me?
I know that had I Argus's Eyes
To view so blessed a sight, they would scarce suffice.
III.
Oh, could I love enough, I Would split each Vein,
Till Nature filled 'em up again:
Those do the greatest Monsters prove
Of all Mankind, who are but Dwarfs in Love;
All other things are frail, and vain,
But Love is in it self complete,
Love in excess can make us wise and great.
IV.
Nor all the Endeavors of a well stored Brain,
Can ever break Lov's Chain;
I sooner could reverse my Fate,
And by what Thread my Soul is joined relate,
Than never love again;
This is the Star that rules my Days,
This is the Dove which brings my morning Bays.
A SONG.
I.
COrinna keep those Globes of Light,
Within their proper Sphere;
Reserve those brighter Stars for Night,
What business have they here?
II.
The Gods did never yet design,
Two Lights should rule the Day;
Draw then the Curtains over thine,
And when Night comes, then sport and play.
III.
Whenever I shall reel with Wine,
And scarce can find my Way;
Be sure Corinna then you shine,
And turn my Night to Day.
IV.
But if I Am gone, and scarce can stand,
Bind thou my roving Head;
Embrace me with thy softer Hand,
And lay me safe in Bed.
The Management.
I.
EAch Day I Have lived, I Have spent it all in Love,
Each Day I Have lived, I Have courted three or four*
Before one Foot into the Grave I move,
I hope to love at least Five Hundred more.
II.
Extremes in other things I cannot endure,
I hate to go beyond wise Nature's Laws;
But no Man can in Love be Epicure,
I Am sure in this the World will plead my Cause
III.
Some travel round the mighty Globe in vain,
Change their Religion with their Native Climes,
Flushed and encouraged with the Hopes of Gain,
They dive in Waters, and they dig in Mines.
IV.
But some Misfortunes still these Men o'er-take,
Before they touch upon their Native Lands;
Their well fraught Ships does either spring a leak,
Or else they fall into the Pirate's Hands.
V.
^ll spend my Time in Love as I begnn,
What though my Mistress never should prove true?
Yet still so ill a Race I cannot run,
These lost their Labor, and their Riches too.
The Farewell.
I.
AND shall I bid adieu,
My Dear, to you?
Shall these full Streams which from our Fountains flow,
For ever in divided Channels go?
No, no, I hope at last they will be,
United in the Ocean of Eternity.
II.
Ah my blessed Star said I,
Where do thou fly?
When ever the happy Fates shall seal my Doom,
And call me to my blessed Ancient Home;
I will be sure to ask for thee,
Of those blessed Guards that come to convoy me.
III.
Now thou art rocked asleep,
It Is vain to weep;
It is no matter who must go before,
We all at last shall reach the expected Shore;
But some perhaps this side the Grave,
May not as you so calm a Voyage have.
Love Stifled.
I.
THese seven long Years with all my Skill,
I Have strove to hide my growing ill;
The Magic Cures of Love I Have often tried,
And healing Plasters to my Wounds applied;
For should these Flames break out, they may
All my Designs to her betray.
II.
Should I inform her that I love,
Perhaps it might my Ruin prove;
It Is better like Aeneas first to shroud,
Love's glorious Visage in a Cloud;
And then with open Arms to run,
As Phaeton embraced the Sun.
III.
But when the Gods for me shall call,
Without request I Will tell her all;
As some mistaken Zealots when they die,
Reveal to Priests all their Impiety:
But if she dart one pleasant Beam,
I shall be vigorous again.
Her Nakedness.
I.
HAD I Briarius Hands, and Argus Eyes
To view the Noonday Sun, they would scarc^ suffice
Convey her hence, excessive Light does cloy,
I Am overwhelmed in these deep Floods of Joy:
She than the Woody Queen more stately walks,
And bigger than the Heavenly Goddess talks;
So glorious her Body seems to be,
The very Shade it casts, enlightens me.
II.
Love in those twinkling Spheres does sit and play
Sweet Kisses on her Lips for ever stray;
Amongst the sweet Meanders of her Hair
love walks, and keeps his Living dwelling there;
about her Neck the God of Love does twine,
^oft as Embraces of the curling Vine;
Here Cupid in his Mothers Arms lies down,
And Envies not the Prince that wears the Crown.
III.
Bless me what snowy Arms she has, as fair,
As beautiful as Wings on Angels are;
O that these spreading Branches I could see,
Unto Eternal Ages clasping me;
On those soft pliant Globes I fain would lie,
Not only sleep, but with Content I Would die:
Two Noble Worlds I Would boast my Love had won,
And laugh at him who thought there was but One.
Translated from the Italian Poets.
To Celia.
WIth so much Passion Celia I adore,
No Youth can love a beauteous Mistress more;
And I believe my Celia loves me too,
As Virgins their Admirers use to do;
When-e'er I saw her dart her Eyes around,
As if too willing to impart a Wound;
The Minute I improved, and pressed it home,
That she would be mine for all the Years to come:
At this she blushed, and as she gazed, said she,
Can I resist those Charms that spring from thee?
No, no, and as thus spoke the trembling fair,
Twisting the Locks of her divided Hair,
Mixed with the Charms of Gold; her Eyes conveyed,
Tokens as great as those her Hands had made:
Accept, said she, this sacred Pledge of mine,
To you, I with it, do my Soul resign.
Take it, and try if it has power to tame,
The Unruly Flushings of a Lover's flame:
Alas, cried I, what have you, Celia, done?
As well might Mortals their Meridian Sun
Look in the Face, and scorn the baffled Ray,
As this drive Fire from my Heart away.
How can my Weakness bear the Hot Extremes?
Fire's ill applied to quench my living Flames:
Let these unhappy Spells be doomed to Fire
More hot, than ever was my fond Desire;
On them let the corroding Burnings prey,
For they have even eat my Soul away:
But Celia, let the living Looks of Hair,
Thrive as sweet Roses in a Southern Air;
And be not angry that I Have burnt your Hair,
Though I dread Burnings, I adore the Fair.
The Disappointment.
I.
WHen I arrived at my long Journeys end,
Some waiting Joys, said I, my Toils at tend*
Whose gentle Hands my wearied Eyes might close*
Soften my Troubles, and my Cares compose.
II.
But I perceived when to the Goal I came,
My Queen was fled with all her glorious Train;
I fear I cannot over-take her more
Than this Night can the Night that went before.
III.
In vain I strive to drive the Wheel so fast,
She leads the Van, and I must still be last;
And though in the same Wheel we are both turned round,
Alas, she always keeps the foremost Ground.
IV.
Like the fixed Stars we move about the Frame
Of Nature, yet the Distance's still the same;
For whilst the one does mount the Eastern Sky,
The other in the Western part must ly.
V.
The wandering Planets of the middle Air,
Do sometimes meet, and in Conjunction are;
But our two Spheres will never 'gree,
Unless united by a Sympathy.
My Wish.
WHat grateful Pleasures fill my rising Veins?
What Agonies of Bliss my Soul contains?
Where shall I fly to snatch some sacred Fire,
TO allay the Fury of my warm Desire?
I see that wished for Star in whose bright Rays,
Fain would I bask, and wanton out my Days;
As deep as Hannibal, I swear I Am he
Who Will never make a peace in love with thee:
But if I might my pleasing Thoughts reveal,
Like wanton Jove into thy Lap I Would steal;
On thy Transporting pleasures I would ly,
And in those Raptures the whole World outvy;
Life's a dull sottish thing if this be took away,
Let me die every Night, as I live every Day.
All for Love.
I.
I Frown not at the Planet of my Days,
That she cannot still these troubled Seas;
I don't repine, because I know,
The Gods that rule the Waves will have it so.
II.
Why should I rail at the Almighty Powers,
'Cause they will not send me golden Showers;
I Am not as wretched Midas bold,
To wish that all I touch may turn to Gold.
III.
I blame not Nature for her scanty Frame,
I cannot, with Alexander, hunt for Fame,
A smaller Point will make me blessed,
Give me Love's Kingdom, and take all the rest.
Translated from the Italian Poets.
Corinna and Celia.
COrinna frowns, but Celia's kind and gay,
One looks like Night, the other looks like Day;
Time's Lesser Messengers they seem to be,
One rises still, the other sets with me.
My DREAM, sent in a Letter to a Friend.
AS on my Bed last Night I pensive lay,
Wearing in Thoughts the tedious Night away,
I dreamed the Image of the Saint we know
Presented its fair self to me and you;
Decked in that Evening Dress which Virgins prize,
To satisfy and please their Lovers Eyes.
About her Lips ambrosial Sweets did flow,
And as we reaped successive Joys did grow:
At last methoughts she did her Rays display,
And Drove the Horror of the Night away;
The Bed around reflected Light just so
As when the naked Winter's clothed with Snow;
What followed did our Pleasures most inhance,
We lodged a while in Ecstasy and Trance:
So mimick Fancy then with me did play,
What the Night gave, the Day now takes away.
A SONG.
I.
LET the ambitious Courtier be
Promoted to the Helm of State;
That Pill can never go down with me,
It Is real slavery to be great.
II.
Let Kings puissant Armies raise,
And speak like mighty Sons of Jove,
Whilst I improve and spend my Days
In the soft quiet Hours of Love.
III.
Let me have Venus and the Bays,
These only are my chief Delights;
The one can give me happier Days,
The other yields me softer Nights.
On a Lady who always carried a Looking-Glass with her.
WHat Incantations, and what wanton Spells
About my conquering Gloriana dwells!
So beauteous, so kind, so wondrous fair,
She with the Queen of Heaven may compare,
And this she knows so well, herself's dismayed
To see the God-like Part so well displayed.
With every Feature so much pleased and charmed
And with her own inflaming Beauty warmed,
She falls in Love with her own taking Frame,
And doats and feeds upon her amorous Flame.
Had she an Emblem of Narcissus Fate
Before her Eyes, her Pride would soon abate;
He to the crystal Fountain often went,
At last himself down to the bottom sent.
No more about thee that false Mimick bear,
Lest it reduce thy Beauty to despair;
For should the Glass's Power once fade, and show
A Form less wounding than we thine do know,
The Traitor then against the Ground you would fling,
Who from your Face no truer News could bring:
Then only in my Eyes your Beauty view,
For there yourself you would find, and please me too.
The VISION.
I.
I Dreamed, and lo, the lovliest Sight
That ever pensive Thought could frame,
Did in ethereal Robes of Light
My mimick Fancy entertain.
II.
Me thought she swept the flowery Plains,
Clad in a Garb of luscious Charms,
My eager Soul, t'allay her Pains,
Hugged the Idea in her Arms.
III.
Lodged in the noblest Trance of Bliss,
Possessed of all her Joys I lay,
I said there was no Heaven but this,
Could I enjoy it every Day.
IV.
But when the exalted Powers of Love
Began to flag their Wings and die,
A cheating Vision it did prove,
Which I before thought Ecstasy.
V.
Strange we no solid Joys can find,
Except in Dreams our Fancies rove,
We still must wink and still be blind,
To 'wake unto the Joys of Love.
The Incurable.
I.
TO what fair Doctress in the World shall I
With Courtiers soothing Arts my self apply,
To get for wounded Love a Remedy?
II.
I bleed, and all the Sluices of my Soul
Cannot the Deluge of my Blood control,
I wallow'd in my Gore, and in the Torrent roll.
III.
I Am too far gone, consumptive like I pine,
I Have made my Will, and now my Life resign,
But not to her who did my Death design.
IV.
It works like lingering Poison in the Womb,
And each Day brings me nearer to my Tomb,
My Magazin's consumed by this unlucky Bomb.
V.
Medea now, nor all the Gods above,
Can sift the Poison that is mixed with Love,
Death the best Remedy at last must prove.
VI.
If ever I expect a longer Date
Of Life, I must reverse my rigid Fate,
And, like a God, another Frame create.
On a Lady who slighted my Love.
SO when all is calm, and no Clouds blind the Day,
The Pilot hoises Sail and puts to Sea;
But when he is gone, and lost the Sight of Shore,
The Winds rise high and he is seen no more.
I thought such sweetness in a Face, like thine,
Would like the fixed Stars Splendour, ever shine;
Such beauteous Order in thy Face was found,
'Twas that first drew me to the Fairy Ground,
In that fair Spring I thought to quench my Fire,
Fev'rish I came, more fev'rish I retire.
Those former Wounds which I received from you
At your Disdain gush out and bleed anew:
The Arrows of your Love stick fast in me,
You shot them in, and you must make me free:
I Have got within the Circle of your Heart,
Th'enchantment must be broke e're I depart.
From Love's destructive Brink I will retire,
The Child once burnt still wisely dreads the fire.
To what shall I this wicked Love compare?
Mistress of endless Sorrow and despair;
But justly I my ill laid Plots may blame,
With too much fierceness I pursued the Game:
Had I hood winked this metl'd Love of mine,
E're now I Would seen the trembling Dove resign;
But Love is like the Cockatrice's Eyes,
If it first strikes it kills, if struck it dies.
A SONG.
I.
HAD the too tender Gods first made
Men's Hearts as hard as Steel,
Their Weakness never had been betrayed
By every stroke they feel.
II.
Scattered by Cupid's Darts we lie,
And yet still call for more,
Happier we every minute dye
Than e're we lived before.
III.
Surely the generous Gods above
Have Hearts as well as we,
Nay they must passionately love,
If we in Form agree.
IV.
But they alas more Pleasures find,
Fixed to no World they rove,
Whilst we are here to one confined,
They pick and choose their Love.
The Despair.
I.
ENtangled in my Thoughts, I laid me down,
And dreamed I saw the Furies frown,
Envy me thoughts advanced near me,
The worst of all that Company,
Me thoughts a knotted Whip she bore,
Her Hands were stained with Streams of Human Gore.
II.
Her Threats like Peals of Thunder shook my room
The Heralds of my dismal Doom,
So black the Air, so dark the Sky,
I thought the utmost Day was nigh,
So heavy Nature seemed to be,
I dreamed the Fields and Floods did copy me.
III.
My Sighs, like Elegies of sad Despair,
Were always echoed through the Air;
The Waters that were rocked asleep,
For my hard Fate began to weep;
The Friendly Birds o're-heard me cry,
Ah wretched, wretched Youth am I!
IV.
Thus strangled in my Mind, I lay as dead,
And wondered where my Soul was fled;
But when the Frenzy went away,
Which did about my Temples play,
I paused a little while, and then
I found my Soul returning home again.
V.
Ah fleeting Fool! said I, could you not be
Pleased with the Charms of Liberty?
When you were freed from this dull Cage,
The Stings of Youth, the Dregs of Age,
Why came you back to me again?
The Slave deserves much Stripes who loves his Pain.
Her Influence.
I.
I Vow that thou alone art she,
Who can revive the Sparks of Love in me;
They in the inward Chambers of my Soul
Lurkt for a while, till the reviving Beams,
Did, like the Moon, my toyling Blood control,
And made it rise in higher Streams,
To drown thee all in Poetry.
II.
That Star that carries Time within his Arms,
And with its Morning Blush the World alarms,
Strikes not so deep; when you begin to shine
My World receives new Light from thine,
And like a Planet moves about her Sphere;
'Twould fain, but yet durst not be meddling there^
Lest, through the bold Assaults of Love,
We both one blazing Comet prove.
III.
Oh let me every Day
Some beauteous Object find,
Who in a pleasing fit may say,
Write on and I Will be kind;
The Charms of Beauty so effectual prove,
My Lines with her would sympathize in Love:
So the great Sun that visits all,
That sees and pierces through this earthly Ball,
Unsullied with the Stage he run,
With Peace does in the Waters lay him down,
So pleased with that which Nature did display,
He runs the same Stage over every Day.
Translated from the Italian Poets.
ODE XXIV. To Marullus, who having forsaken his Studies, takes up with his
Mistress Corinda.
I.
Farewell Apollo, and your sacred Train,
Since I have tasted of the Sweets of Love,
I Will never see your Face again.
II.
To None but Venus I Will Obedience pay,
Who from a feeling Sense of my hard Fate
accepted me the other Day.
III.
(...) vain you tell the Joys that Learning yields,
^ne Glance of here is transports me more
than all Pieria's flowery Fields.
IV.
Before my Spirits and my Warmth decay
Some Hours with her I fain would spend,
and with the pretty Graces play.
V.
Do you, Marullus, to your Prince's Praise
(Big with infusion of Apollo's Fire)
some Panegyric Altars raise;
VI.
Whilst I in softer Numbers shall declare
What powerful Spells I Have used to gain
Corinda most divinely fair.
Her Presence.
I.
THe Gods of old, which to our mortal View
Came down, and stayed, could do no more than you,
Myriads of Blessings then were shed
Upon th'astonisht People's Head;
No less your Presence I am sure can do,
You are my Doctress and my Medicine too.
II.
One touch of Yours stops the fierce flux of Pain,
One piercing Glance baffles the strongest chain;
In your Bright Looks I fairly see
Th'exactest Emblem of Divinity.
If I gaze long, my Parts cannot hold entire,
Like melting Wax they drop before the Fire.
III.
In vain from Books can I expect Relief,
Philosophy's dull Rules cannot cure my Grief,
Like Oy! put to my raging Fire,
They but increase my vain desire;
These cheat me all; but in their Looks I see
My Fate resolved, and I will follow thee.
A SONG.
I.
FEel Phillis if my Pulse beats high,
Loves Poison runs through all my Veins:
Let it have vent or else I dye
A Lovers Death, the worst of Pains.
II.
No Blushes in my Face appear,
The lovely Graces all are fled;
No Cupid wantons in my Hair,
But all is as dismal as the Dead.
III.
Oh quicken soon this Mass of mine,
Dart through the gaping Chinks of Nature:
No less than Miracles divine
Can change or make me a new Creature.
The second Elegy of the Fourth Book of Tibullus, translated: Sulpitia's praise.
To Mars.
THe amorous Youths this Festival design,
To consecrate with Mirth and Airs divine;
Quit Heaven a while, if you are wise, to see
Sulpitia in a glorious pageantry:
But have a Care lest her diviner Charms
Melt down the Powers of your flagging Arms;
Where'ere her killing Eyes are cast around,
The Gods he conquered, and confess the Wound.
Her Walk is so majestic and divine,
A thousand Graces on her Carriage shine;
If Nature looser in her Hair should play,
Sulpitia's still most beautiful and gay;
And if they are modeled in a better Frame,
Adorned with Art, Sulpitia's still the same.
If clothed in Scarlet, she adorns the Plains,
If clothed in white, she still the Victory gains.
Vortumnus so a thousand Shapes on high
Assumes, yet not more grateful to the Eye
Than those in which she is pleased to grace Mortality.
Now all ye Nymphs confer on her what is due,
Poetic Strains, and you Apollo too.
Conclude the Day with Singing, and a Ball,
I Am sure Sulpitia does deserve them all.
A Description of Mrs. E. T. as I saw her in the Exchange.
WHen I did first this charming object view,
Her Image in my Mind took Root and grew;
So rare a Piece and so divinely fair,
I wished the best of Painters had been there:
As piercing lightnings when they strik the ground^
The Steel consumed, the Scabbard Safe is found,
So did she glide along my purer Veins,
My Body's safe, my Soul still full of Pains;
Her Hair as black as that which Angels prize,
Before the Throne, veiling their weaker Eyes;
Her Brows were black, declining like the Bow,
Which Cupid, when he smiled rejoiced to show;
In lovely Spheres her Globes of Light did roll,
And Man the strongest Planet did control;
About her Cheeks ten thousand smiles did play,
Fair as the Beauties of the rising Day;
About her milky Neck and snowy Arms
There flowed continual Rivulets of Charms;
So soft her Hands, so long, so charming white,
As might the chastest God from Heaven invite;
Here you might see her Soul in Raptures pass,
Clear as the Lily in the Crystal Glass;
Each Atome of her Body was so fine,
In every part it had the Stamp Divine.
The Greek that strove to make a piece so high,
As might the Works of Nature's self outvie;
From all the rarest Patterns which he knew,
The best Perfections, which they had, he drew:
But after all it proved so ill, he swore,
He Would never strive to perfect Nature more;
Had he but seen that Piece that stood by me,
He Would looked no further for Divinity.
The FEVER.
I.
THE sparkling Embers of my hot desire,
Though they were drenched in Waves, will not expire,
The very Sea itself some Oil contains
Which makes them rise again in greater Flames.
II.
The northern Zone is not too cold for me,
Go where I will, Love will my Dog Star be;
There like a Globe of Light he spreads his Rays,
And turns my Winter Nights to Summer Days.
III.
Yet still I would not want this pleasing Pain,
Of which to every listner I complain,
The very Wheel of my short Life would stand,
If not turned round by Love's Almighty Hand.
IV.
Nor would I that it should Abatement find,
Love is the pleasant Frenzy of the Mind;
So Frantic Men in their mad Actions show
A Happiness which none but Madmen know.
A SONG.
I.
STay thou seraphick Creature, stay,
My Soul is in her melting Strains,
So very fond to get away,
She puts me to a thousand Pains.
II.
Trembling as Needles when they move,
And only in the North can rest,
So when she meets with thee, my Love,
She Is fixed and infinitely blessed.
III.
Sweet Angel, though you cannot create,
Yet you alone my Life can save;
Your Sight's as prevalent as Fate,
Then grant me that, it is all I crave.
IV.
My heavenly Bliss to antedate,
For no base earthly Love I plead;
For Souls have power to penetrate,
And on diviner Substance feed.
The BOLDNESS.
I.
ITs not the mighty Alps, though clothed with Snow
Shall stop or hinder me from loving now:
Resolved I am, I Will cut through all,
I Will love as deep as Hannibal:
Though this at last should prove my Doom,
Yet I the more will venture on.
He is an Ass who dares not fight
For amorous Love, a Spark so bright:
I Will stand my Ground, here shall my Colors be,
I durst engage the stoutest Enemy.
II.
I Will found a Charge, among the Stars I see
Castor and Pollux, Signs of Victory.
Why do I stay? I must be gone,
Cupid's Breast Plate I Will put on,
His poisoned Arrows I will bear,
Stuck in the Bow he is used to wear;
Clad with the Down of Cupid's Wings,
The World shall hear of mighty things;
For in my Hand as sure and fatal proves
The Dart of Love, as Thunder shall in Jove's.
III.
The boisterous Billows of the raging Sea
Roar as they will, their Voice I Will nere obey;
Although Leander's Corpse I view,
Gushing out Blood anew;
Although the dismal Voice I hear,
Repeating still, forbear, forbear:
The weeping Seas should not prevent
My traveling in that Element;
For the great Power of Love's Almighty Wand
Divides the Waves as well as that in Neptune's hand.
IV.
Should my winged Love fly to the Stygian Lake,
The moving Harp of Orpheus I would take;
The Harp I mean, whose mighty Strings
Can at a Touch work mighty Things;
When e're this Sound should strike her Ear,
In spite of all the Devils there,
I Would force her to this World again,
Reverse the Sentence of her pain;
And if these Charms by mortal Art could move
The Woods, the Stones, what cannot the Force of Love?
V.
Or if Astraea, like my Darling Love
Should fly unto the utmost Worlds above,
I Would build a Monument so high,
The Clouds beneath me as I fly;
Or else I would like the Earth's bold Son
Have Mountains heaped, and built upon,
And if the angry Gods with Fire
Should quash the Motions of my vain Desire,
In the same Flames I Would to my Love ascend,
To thee, as Load-stones to the North, I Would bend.
VI.
But some poor Fools, in whose dull lump of Clay
A spark of Love divine yet never lay.
To tread the Depths, they think's too bold,
For fear their puny Love take cold:
I Am sure they are out, for beauty's Ray
Can soon dissolve this Ice away;
I Will never so false-hearted prove,
There is no Medium between me and Love,
Chill Neptune's Realms shall nere my Courage tame,
For the Hellespont did once create a Flame.
The Fourth Elegy of the Fourth Book of Tibullas, translated.
To Phoebus.
COme now Apollo, give the Virgin ease,
Whose Soul's afflicted with a sad Disease:
Make haste, I say, I Am sure you will never repent,
There Is scarce a prettier in the Firmament;
Prevent th'encroaching Evils of the Grave.
Let her the same commanding Sweetness have,
Let all her Pains, and her successive Cares
Be swallowed up, together with our Fears.
Give her a Dose, and by some skilful Art,
Stave off the Terrors that infect her Heart.
Pity Cerinthus too, who'd fain appease
With constant Vows the angry Deities;
In doleful Strains he does his Fate deplore,
And curses Heaven, that she should be no more.
But lay aside those Fears, and still be true,
Cerinthus still love on, as she loves you,
And then no Angel will from Heaven destroy
The Bands of Love, or interrupt your Joy.
But now some noble Sacrifice to you,
Who at a Touch could save two Souls, is due,
At once the Lover and the Mistress too.
Let Grief dissolve into the Shades of Night,
And rise thou brighter by Sulpitia's Light:
Tears can do nothing here, but when you find
The fair Sulpitia's cruel and unkind.
Now great Apollo you may dance and play,
Before their Altars they both Incense pay.
That powerful Art they so admire in you,
Each God would wish himself Apollo too.
The DISCOVERY.
I.
THrough whatsoever part of Heaven we pass
We find the Marks of Galilaea's Glass;
Sol's Motions are so clearly known,
As if 'thad been his ancient Home;
He knew where every Planet lies,
And traced them through the Chambers of the Skies.
II.
I Will then be gone, I dread to stay at home,
With Drake's Ship rigged, about the World I Will roam;
I will discover something more
Than what has been known heretofore;
Wings for my Journey I Will prepare,
I Will search the unknown Waves, the Earth, the Air.
III.
I Will touch each Pole, I Will cut the burning Line,
I Will search the Limits of the utmost Clime,
Till Loves great Kingdom I descry,
Which in some hidden World must lie:
Cowley Loves first Columbus was, and he
Who best can trace his Footsteps next shall be.
IV.
Thus whilst I sail, my Hopes increase to see
The presence of some gracious Deity,
Who might his Influence bestow
To steer my Vessel here below;
Through various Seas my Ship must ride,
Propitious Love rule thou the Winds and Tide.
V.
But after all my Search, suppose I found
The way that leads me to this happy Ground;
Grant her Metropolis I see
Swimming in Pride and gayety;
Yet after all, what are my Gains,
Should I like prying Spies be bound in Chains?
VI.
There Beauty's always fresh and cannot decline,
Her Form defies the eating Moths of Time;
No Tyrant in their Kingdom reigns,
None there of Falsehood e're complains,
All Lovers are united there,
And dance and revel in that blessed Sphere.
VII.
What Bliss is this? what would I give to be
A priviledg'd Member of this Society?
This consummates a Lover's Bliss,
If there be Elyzium, sure its this:
But yet I fear my Fate will be,
Ive searched this Place for others, not for me.
Translated from the Italian Poets.
To his Ring.
THou little Ring, dearly beloved by me,
Kissed by my Spouse as often as I kiss thee,
Although you are nobly decked with sparkling Pride;
Rich with the Relics of the Indian Tide,
Yet I on this account esteem thee more
That she first wore thee on her Hand before,
And when she first designed this Gift for me,
^ighing, she said, scarce can I part with thee;
Oh! I will always have thee in my Sight,
and for her Sake I Will kiss thee Day and Night;
When ere I wash my Hands, my Breast shall be
^he only Place that I think fit for thee.
A SONG.
I.
WHilst on those blushing Cheeks I gaze,
I tremble and am all on Fire,
In pleasures of so blessed amaze,
Thy Glances do but fan Desire.
II.
Pity my Fault, dear Girl, if I
Eager to grasp thy sunny Frame,
Like an ambitious Meteor fly,
To perish in so bright a Flame.
III.
Surely some Noble Hero fell
In that most precious Sea of thine,
And to reward his Courage well,
Venus has made him there to shine.
IV.
Nor can this Beauty fade away,
For want of any new Supplies,
Regardless of the scorching Day,
Fed by those living Springs thine Eyes.
The Third Elegy of the Fourth Book of Tibullas, translated.
Sulpitia to Cerinthus.
YE Savage Beasts, whom Nature entertains
In the by-Lodgings of the Desert Plains,
Pity my Boy, bent on some noble Prey,
And thou kind Cupid at his Elbow stay.
Perhaps, by Passion hurled, he is led so far,
He Will want the Guidance of some gentle Star.
Curse on the Woods and all that fordid Game,
Let the Dogs faulter, and never find again:
Why are you fond to visit every Cell,
Where Death, with Fury charged, stands Sentinel?
Prithee forbear, see how the Briars hide
Their crooked Heads in your most tender Side;
But if I might Cerinthus chase with you,
I Would be content to bear the Burden too:
The hated Woods would please me then, if I
By the same hunting Nets with thee could lie:
No Lion then would dare to threaten thee,
He Would lose his Rage, as he still gazed on me,
My very Eyes sufficient Charms would prove
To melt his Springs of Fierceness into Love.
But still remember poor Orion's State,
Be chaste, and never boldly tempt your Fate.
If any one should strive to disposess
Our Souls of this Platonic Happiness;
Let her for breaking of Diana's Laws,
Fall a sure Victim to the Lion's Paws:
But in the mean, my Boy, give over that Game,
And on my Breast quench your unruly Flame.
Platonic Love.
I.
I Courtier-like did once that Beauty prize,
Which had no comely Shape or handsome Eyes;
I valued any Love but that which came
From Plato's great seraphick Brain:
I wish the Vulgar did agree
The Sensual was the Deity;
But when I found the Cheat, I changed the Scene,
And set up for an Isra 'lite again.
II.
I once obeyed the imperious Charms of Love,
My weaker Needle to that Point did move;
But when the Transports of Diviner Light
Did with some Pleasure entertain my Sight,
I said, I Would never obey
False Love's tyrannick sway,
My Soul shall to Heaven aspire,
And join the Element of Fire
III.
This vicious Passion, 'll nere feed,
But by the Roots I Will pluck the Weed;
I Will quench her Fury with the Darts of Love,
That bring their Power from the Seats above.
Like bold Prometheus I will fly,
And match the Fire from the Sky:
To give Man Life he stole this Flame,
But I to purify my Frame.
IV.
By Methods of Ascent aspire my Soul,
And to this End thy Haughtiness control;
Leave pleasing Sense to Epicurus Train,
And be thou Plato's Proselyte again.
Be gone, and stretch thy Pinions wide,
Swim with the Current of th'etherial Tide,
And then let them ascend above,
A Place fit for platonic Love.
The Fourteenth Elegy of the Second Book of Propertius, translated.
Blessed be the Night, blessed be the Bed where I
Enclosed with Pleasures, did securely lie;
When all was silenced, when the very Sea
In softer Murmurs did the Night obey,
Her jar's the Prologue of ensuing Love,
I to my private Pleasure did improve;
Sometimes she touched me with her downy Breast,
Which my more wanton Fingers often pressed;
Sometimes she stroak'd mine Eyes, and asked me why
Did I so lazy and unactive lie?
This moved me too, and fired my youthful Rage,
Tho sure to lose, yet eager to engage.
I kissed her Lips and rifl'd her all over,
So fierce my Sallies, I could kiss no more.
Its said of old, so Paris died away,
When in his Arms the Grecian Beauty lay.
Come lay aside this useless Garb of thine,
It stops the Combat which I now design;
Come now, my Dear, let us revel whilst we may,
Perhaps we never shall live another Day.
I wish the Fates could by some sacred Tie
Join us so close, that we should never dye.
The harmless Doves when e're they meet, they pair,
Tied to no Laws their soft Embraces are.
He Is out, who thinks my Love shall cool, my Love
Is as immortal as the Gods above:
The Sun shall sooner change his Stage, and be
Lost in the Ocean of Eternity;
The lesser Springs, and Tybur's flowing Tide
Back, with Confusion, to their Head shall glide,
Before I Will leave thee: Witness Heaven that I
Will only on this Altar live and dye.
Oh could I always have such Nights as these,
Fit for the Business of my Love and Peace,
I Would bath my self in this immortal Flood,
And be each Night as happy as a God:
If all, like me, could their whole Time improve,
Spend all the Day in Wine, the Night in Love,
You Would hear no Wars, no dismal Prisoners Cries,
Would daily echo Pity through the Skies.
Temples sometimes, and Towers Jove's Thunder tears,
But like himself always the Lover spares.
Translated from the Italian Poets.
ODE XXXII.
MY Dear, if my unruly Lips have pressed
With amorous Rage thy snowy Breast,
Impute it unto every Grace,
Thy killing Eyes, thy charming Face:
But if you're loath to pardon me,
Let me repair the Injury;
Let me embrace and kiss again,
That surely will inhance my pain;
The Kisses which I stole away,
On my racked Soul like Vultures prey;
Lifeless, alas, and pale I grow,
I Am just now going to the Shades below.
But if you will kiss again, then I
Shall surely pine away and die:
Come now, my Soul, let us kiss again,
Its that will put me out of Pain;
Its fit that I should live no more,
For what I stole from thee before.
The Captivity.
I.
IF Wit, annexed to Beauty's Charms,
Could in a God create Desire,
When Celia clasps me in her Arms,
No wonder if I Am all on Fire.
II.
I must resign against my Will,
My Pow'r's too weak to keep the Place,
By every Smile she conquers still,
Those fiery Arrows of her Face.
III.
If Beauties then such Conquests have,
Surely their Charters are divine:
I now submit to be thy Slave,
Dear Celia, and for ever Thine.
Her Government.
I.
WE know, Great Love, thy gentle sway,
Thy sovereign Word we all obey;
Kings at thy sacred Feet lay down their Crowns,
And triumph to be Vassals to thy Frowns;
Great Alexander wished to be
Conqu'rour of Worlds, but Slave to thee.
II.
So great's thy share, thou claim'st a part
In the most rigid Stoick's Heart:
And though he disallows thy Deity,
The Tithes of all his Fruits he pays to thee:
But we, as old Rome used to do,
Own thee our Queen and Goddess too.
III.
Tribute to thee, as free we pay,
As Indians Homage to the Day:
Tax on, great Love, in taxing still be kind,
Pray ease our Purses, to enrich our Mind:
Like Martyrs we are in Love with Pains,
We kiss and reverence our Chains.
My Love fled.
I.
HOW can I choose but weep and mourn all
(Day,
Since she who fondly did impart
A warmth and Vigor to my Heart,
Has falsely borrowed Wings and flown away?
II.
Every fair Object brings her to my Mind,
And when I drop a Crystal Tear,
Methinks I see her Image there,
Beauteous and gay, if Love itself ben't blind.
III.
How shall I drag the future Autumns on?
The Embers of my dying Fire;
Do now successively expire,
Since the Preservative of Life is gone.
IV.
Poor Ariadne cried, when left alone;
But a God came to give Relief;
The like would stop my flowing Grief,
Would a fair Goddess my Addresses own.
The Advice.
I.
CHloe be kind, I say,
Beauty has Wings as well as Time;
To suffer either pass away
Without Advantage, is a Crime.
See, Heaven itself with conscious Smiles approves
The future Union of our tender Loves.
II.
Then why, my Dear, should you
So fatal to your Beauties prove?
Pay unto Nature what is her due,
And then you will never refuse my Love:
Take my Advice, preserve that Vestal Fire,
When it is doubled, it will never expire.
III.
Sweet Chloe, hear my call,
And think to live no more alone;
Though Man was born as Lord of all,
Himself but odly fills a Throne;
Eden was not composed of That or This,
Woman and Man made up the Paradise.
The VANITY.
I.
POor fading Pleasures to pursue,
I know it is base, as well as you;
But whilst this Lump of Flesh I wear,
From doing so I cannot forbear;
The old deceiving Serpent still
Corrupts and vitiates my Will.
II.
From her blessed Heart there flows a Line,
Which Nature made, and grapples mine.
Secret as that which ties the Mind,
When to the Body it is confined:
If I love on, blame me no more,
Can I with Nature run in score?
III.
When I reside in Egypt's Fields.
My Soul must taste on what it yields;
But when to Canaan I shall come,
Canaan the lovely wished for Home,
On nobler Objects I shall rove,
And feed on a Diviner Love.
The Council.
I.
AS some wise lesser Prince, who goes
With all his Strength t'ngage his mightier Foes,
Considers how, and when, and where he may
Draw up the Battle in Array,
On this the coming Fate of War depends,
The Kingdom is by this made up, or ends.
II.
Even so a Council I must call,
^f I must love her much, or not at all,
^n Reason's Balance I am bound to weigh
Whether I should obey
Her Royal Will, and then lay down my Arms,
Or else assault this rich Peru of Charms.
III.
Should I but love her in extremes,
She Would rather still increase than quench my Flames,
'Twould please her cruel Vanity to see
A Lover plunged in Misery;
Instead of cooling my incensed Desire,
With formal Smiles sh'd blow my wretched Fire.
IV.
And sooner I could change my Nature
Than not adore and hug that lovely Creature.
Propitious Stars tell me what Course to steer,
Sylla is there, Charibdis here:
Virtue consists in Mediocrity;
But Love is always in Extremity.
V.
Well, to Leucadia I Will repair,
Where miserable Lovers lose their Care;
Sad Cephalus did first this Place approve,
And quenched the flaming Torch of Love.
Than this what can a better Council be?
Here Love is swallowed up in Victory.
The CHASE.
SCorcht by the Heat one Day, I found a Shade,
Which some kind Poplar and a Myrtle made;
Stretched here at length, in Ease my Body lay
Swelled with the Hopes of some luxurious Prey;
Casting my Amorous Eyes around the Plain,
Wild to possess, I spied a lovely Dame,
Thrice I saluted her, and thrice I said,
Peace to the lovely Nymph, peace to the lovely Maid:
She, so surpised at this, made no reply,
But still surveyed me with a scrnful Eye;
Jealous at last, turning away her Eyes,
She calls for Help, but finding no Supplies,
Takes to her Feet, and almost out of Breath,
She scrietcht like Leverets in the Pangs of Death.
Big with expectance of this nimble Prey,
I spurred my Passion on, and made away;
Swift as Desire, I leapt the strongest Fence,
Having in Sight the noblest Game of Sense.
Ere long I caught my Celia by the Hair,
Whose wanton Locks perfumed the beaten Air*
O Heavens! what Charms her Beauty did inspire,
Conquered at once with Wonder and Desire.
Weary, we both sat down, and breath'n our Loves,
Soft as the Whispers of two wounded Doves;
Coucht on her Breast my Fancy sporting lay,
And strove to scare her pensive Thoughts a way:
Thus blessed, sometimes I profer'd her a Kiss,
Hopeing thereby to gain an after Bliss;
Often my furious Hand did strive to know
How was the glorious Valley spread below.
Hot in pursuit, often I said, My Dear,
Ah shall I, shall I but inhabit here?
The Land is fruitful, grant me this one thing,
And I Will be happier than the happiest King.
No, cried she, no, prithee, kind Youth, forbear,
The Crop's but small that you will gather here;
And will you, will you do this pleasant Sin?
Hereafter it will Torture you within.
But all her Art such faint Resistance made,
Herself was almost by herself betrayed;
With so much Doubt and modesty she strove
To give mine room she did her own remove:
But when this usual Ceremony ceased,
How was I glutted with the Sight, and pleased!
Pleasures so great and tempting, that they could
Even almost win to her Embrace a God.
Oh, could I find such Objects every Day!
I Would even Hunt and Chase my Life away.
The Looking-Glass.
I.
OH happy thing! what would I give to be
My Mistress's Glass, instead of thee?
Thou see the Glorious Image every Day,
For which I hourly pine away.
II.
By thine own Light thou scarce her Form can view;
Thy very Light and Essence too
Proceeds from her, as Phabus's borrowed Ray,
Reflects the Image of the Day.
III.
Would she but cast such quickening Beams on me,
I should her living Image be;
Look when she pleased, her Picture she would find
Deeply imprinted in my Mind.
IV.
The faithless Glass ten thousand Forms does bear,
When she alone should revel there,
And, Courtier-like, to every one can say,
Thou art the Beautiful and Gay.
V.
Be false to all the rest, be only true
To her, and this I Would have thee do,
Preserve the Idea of my Saint in store,
'Till I shall see thy Face once more.
VI.
Then to thy Shrine a Reverence I Will pay,
Like zealous Romans every Day;
I Will hug the Relick with a Pious Fear,
Because I know the Goddess's there.
VII.
But if she is charged thee, thou should not trace
The least Discovery of her Face,
The strict Injunction never shall trouble me,
Seeing you are both Hypocrisy.
A Letter to a young Lady, who sent me a Box of Pills, when she heard I was ill.
IF any Thanks from a Sick State are due
To its Restorer and Supporter too,
Then I, dear Madam, am obliged to you.
If fair Aurora could obtain of Fate
For her young Lover's Life a longer date;
If the chaste Wishes of the Good and Fair
Can pierce the Clouds and make the Heavens hear;
Then I may hope, as you are kind, to live,
Not by what Heat I have, but what you give.
Now let the Monarchs of the World repine,
Their Guardian Angels have less Power than mine;
Let them bewail their short-lived State below,
That all their Pomp to Destiny must bow.
Let the Terrestrial Gods blaspheme, while I
So well upheld, must ask your leave to die.
But tho your Baisom kindly cured my Wound,
Tho my whole Body's safe, secure and sound,
Yet let me tell you, You have shot a Dart,
And made me mortal in my better Part;
So would I have it, if you first designed
The Pills should cure my Body, you my Mind,
And can you not, dear Life, to both be kind?
O yes, I know you will; so you will approve
Your self one System of Angelick Love:
So the kind Sun never vouchsafed a Ray,
But Light and Heat, involved, together lay.
On a beautiful Lady who was going to kill herself, when she was at Supper, had
she not been accidentally prevented by one of the Company.
I.
O Stop that Hand! kind Heavens forbid the Blow!
See the Stars lurk behind the Screen of Night
Unwilling to behold so sad a Sight,
Lest we should tax them to have been guilty too.
No Comets in the Firmament,
By bodeing Symptoms to thy Death consent,
All is serene and gay,
And can that Beauty, which out shines the Milky Way,
Add a dark Blemish to the Day?
What cruel Passion boiled within thy Veins?
What Legion harbored in thy Breast,
That dispossessed thy Soul of Rest,
And put thee to Hyperboles of Pains,
That thou should vent such Accents of Despair?
Void of all pious Fear,
And then thy Cruelties display,
Resolved to baulk Death in so rich a Prey,
And make a quicker Passage for thy Soul away.
II.
For thy approaching Grief
A speaking Sadness sat in every Eye,
All strove to give Relief,
As if they feared some Storm was high:
Thy very Eyes their coming Fate confessed,
And their Resentment for thy Fall expressed.
Thy Soul retired to her inmost Room,
Dreading the Pressure of the Stroke to come:
But see, Heavens peculiar Care
Saves and protects the Fair;
And often is at the Expense
Of Miracles, to save such Excellence:
So many Thoughts great Jove it cost
To make a Piece most exquisitely Fine,
He would not have the Copy lost
By Death's unruly Hands; much less by thine.
III.
Was Love the Cause of this?
Forbid it all ye Powers above,
No Lover yet despised his Bliss,
So as to jilt the Monarchy of Love.
No Youth by thee could ever yet pass by,
But still thou had the Tribute of his Eye:
Thou'st Charms enough to set the World on Fire,
And in the coolest Stoic raise Desire:
So dear no Monarch ever prized a Crown,
But to procure your Life would lose his own:
What Passion then could blow that Flame,
To vent your Anger on the noblest Frame?
Perhaps too cruel you have been
To some more Amorous Swain,
Who now lies Sighing, Gasping, Dying,
Because you will not ease his Pain;
And having now received the utmost Blow,
You Would fain embrace him in the Shades below.
A SONG.
I.
THo the Mountains should shake, and Apollo look dim,
Tho the Planets should tumble on the Ruins we stand;
Tho the Globe of the Earth in the Ocean should swim,
Without Hopes of ever arriving at Land.
II.
The Comets in Chariots of Diseases should ride,
And burst on our Heads like Grenades on fire,
Yet they should not move me, but I Would stand by thy Side,
Dear Phillis, and in thine Arms gladly expire.
III.
Believe me it is true, for the Powers of Love,
Like Martyrs Opinions, persevere to the End;
They grapple so close, 'twill be hard to remove,
Tho dismantl'd of flesh, yet to thee they will bend
IV.
And can you then, Phillis, be unkind to such truth?
See what Vows I have made, I Will for ever be thine,
Do you but consent to the Pleasures of Youth,
And vow the same Vows, that you will ever be mine.
V.
Then in spite of the Fates we shall both be secure,
No Isthmus shall part of much Kindness and Love,
Tho the World be expiring, yet our flames shall endure,
And feed on each other in the Mansions above.
A SONG.
I.
IT grieves me, Celia, when I think,
That all those Glories of thy Face
Must into Ruins sink,
And never Return into their ancient Place.
II.
The Lilies have more Springs than one,
They rise and perish every Year,
But when thy Beauty's gone,
Alas it never will again appear.
III.
All pluck the Roses whilst they may,
For if some ruder Breath of Wind,
Should kiss their Life away,
They leave no Tokens of their Place behind.
IV.
It Is Time then, Celia, to improve,
Because your Life's more short than theirs
To taste the Joys of Love,
And with an Hour's Bliss to poize an Ages Cares.
Translated from the Italian Poets.
To his Mistress.
WHen the Nights Beauties that surpass the Day,
The watchful Virgins shall invite to play,
To thee, through Guards of Dangers I Will advance,
Armed with a Glass of Wine, I Will baffle Chance;
But let the Door, the Entrance to our Joys,
Be just so ordered, that it make no Noise:
And when I shall approach with silent Fear,
To crown my Joys, Corinna wait you there;
As the fond Ivy round the Beech does twine,
So let my Arms, dear Life, be clasped by thine.
You cannot go amiss, oh let your Arms
At every touch convey a thousand Charms.
Let luscious Kisses and incentive Sips
Of Pleasure, fasten on our balmy Lips.
Let us in Kissing no dull Order show,
But let successive Tides of Pleasure flow,
As loath from us in so much haste to go.
With faint Resistance my Requests deny,
Pleased with an eager Importunity;
With doubtful struglings and a modest mien,
Seem to despise what you do most esteem,
And in the midst of these delightful Wars,
Wound me with harmless and with gentle Scars;
Let every part b'employ'd, and let me rove
Through all the hidden Mysteries of Love;
Let our glad Eyes, sparkling with hot Desire,
Portend, as Omens, we are both on Fire;
And when you see my Passions all inflamed,
Willing to conquer, that they may be tamed,
Then open all your little Cheats to me,
Th'Ingredients of a pleasing Fallacy:
When I Am unwilling, urge me to be kind;
When I am eager, show an adverse Mind;
Shed now and then a counterfeited Tear,
And say, I cannot let your Hands be there;
Then let me see you dart a pleasing Beam,
As if you wholly not denied the Game;
Then let a thousand Raptures spring and rise,
Till a soft Slumber sits upon our Eyes,
And when in Dreams our Thoughts more free shall rove,
We Will act again the Comedy of Love.
The FAREWELL.
I.
LEave, wretched Hawkshaw, leave
Thy self with airy Fantoms to deceive;
There Is no such thing as Love,
Except it be amongst the Gods above;
It Is an Empty Noise of Air,
Whose Echo brings back nothing but Despair.
II.
It Is a Lottery of Care,
Wherein ten thousand Blanks, few Prizes are:
And yet so mad are we,
We hazard all at this poor Vanity;
And commonly it happens so,
We Are cheated of our Time and Money too.
III.
Let Us at another's Cost be wise;
Poor Cowley ran, and yet never won the Prize,
And yet his Feet were made
By the best Artist of Apollo's Trade;
All his soft Words proved vain,
Instead of breaking, they confirmed his Chain.
IV.
A thousand Plots I Have laid,
But never could get the Virgin's Heart betrayed;
Who ever yet could say,
He Would brought his Love in Captive-chains away?
So dismal now I prove,
I am become a Skelleton in Love.
V.
Leave, Hawkshaw, leave once more,
Court not the Wasp that sting'd thy Heart before;
Use neither Spell nor Art,
To bring the Tyrant back into thy Heart;
Shake off the Chains of Love,
No God in Heaven does thy Fate approve.
VI.
Let not thy Army fall in vain
Before a Place which you will never gain;
The Bombs which you shot in
Will never consume her well-stor'd Magazin;
Though Cannon be brought down,
Yet I am sure you never will take the Town.
The Contents of the First Book.
ON King Charles the Second's Restoration, Page 1 The Dream that Night
Limerick was surrendered, 4 On the Death of the Young Lady J S. 5 On Dr. Gower's
refreshing himself each Morning in St. John's Walks, 6 The Good Fellow, 7 On a
Friend who desired me to make a Copy of Verses on his Name, 8 An Allusion to
Claudian's Epigram on Archimedes his Sphere, 10 Against Knowledge, 11 A
Translation from the Latin Poet Sannazius, 13 An Apology for Rome, in answer to
that for Venice; translated from a Latin Copy, 14 A Morning's Thought, ibid. To
Mr. J. C. sometime Schoolmaster in Dublin, 16 Melancholy, ibid. On a Be, 18
Pre existence, 19 The Enjoyment, 20 On a Fly that was drowned in a Lady's
Mouth, 22 On the River Came, 23 The Retirement, 24 On Music, 25 On the
Preservation of the Library in Dublin College, 26 Tu ne Quaesieris, from Ho.
Paraphrased, 28 The Meditation, ibid. On the Popish Conspiracy, 31 On the
shortness of Man's Life, 33 A Dialogue between Reason and the Inferior Powers,
35 Contentedness, 37 The Call, 38 A Translation from the Italian Poets, the
Birth day, 39 The Indifferency, 40 The Hermit, 42 On the King's Landing at
Harwich, after he had been exposed to many Dangers in his Voyage to Holland, 44
On Dr. G. Reducing the Years to Terms, which were requisite for them who took
their Batchelour's Degree, 46 The Golden Age, 48 The Recantation, 49 A
Translation from Sannazius, on a Trojan Lady, 52 On the Unhappy State of
Ireland, by reason of the Civil War, 53 Discontent, 56 The Consolation, 57 On
the Death of the most renowned P. Brackenbury. Dr. of Physic and Senior-Fellow
of St. John's, 58 On the Earl of Danby's Courageous Enterprise at La Hogue, 61
The Consummation, 63
The Contents of the Second Book.
Destined to Love, 67 A Song, 69 The Management, 70 The Farewell, 71 Love
stifled, 73 Her Nakedness, 74 A Translation from the Italian Poets, 76 The
Disappointment, 78 The Wish, 79 All for Love, 80 Corrinna and Celia, translated
from the Italian Poets, 81 My Dream sent in a Letter to a Friend, 82 A Song, 83
On a Lady who always carried a Looking-glass about her, 84 The Vision, 85 The
Incurable, 87 On a Lady who slighted my Love, 88 A Song, 90 The Despair, 91 Her
Influence, 93 A Translation from the Italian Poets, Ode XXIV. 95 Her Presence,
96 A Song, 98 The Second Elegy of the Fourth Book of Tibullus translated, 99 A
Description of Mrs. E. J. as I saw her in the Royal Exchange, 100 The Fever,
102 A Song, 103 The Boldness, 105 The Fourth Elegy of the Fourth Book of
Tibullus translated, 108 The Discovery, 110 Translated from the Italian Poets,
113 A Song, 114 The Third Elegy of the Fourth Book of Tibullus translated, 115
Platonic Love, 117 The Fourteenth Elegy of the Second Book of Propertius
translated, 119 Translated from the Italian Poets, Ode XXXII. 121 The
Captivity, 123 Her Government, 124 My Love fled, 125 The Advice, 126 The
Vanity, 128 The Council, 129 The Chase, 131 The Looking-glass, 133 A Letter to
a Young Lady, who sent me a Box of Pills when she heard I was ill, 135 On a
Fair Lady who was going to kill herself, when she was at Supper, had she not
been accidentally prevented by one of the Company, 137 A Song, 140 A Song, 141
A Translation from the Italian Poets, 143 The Farewell, 145
FINIS.

