A SERMON Dissuading from OBLOQUIE AGAINST Governors; Preached on Sunday
December. 7. 1662. in a Solemn AVDIENCE; And now, at the request of diverse that
heard it, made public.

By WILLIAM HAYVVOOD, Doctor in Divinity, Chaplain in Ordinary to His MAJESTY,
and Rector of S. Giles's in the Fields.

2 Pet. 2.10. -- (...).

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for R. Royston, Bookseller to His most SACRED
MAJESTY. 1663.

ACTS 23. ver. 5. -- For it is written, Thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler
of thy people.


I Have read you a Text, which, if duly considered and made conscience of,
might help to abate much the vehemence of those Fires which lately threatened
the common safety. For betwixt wicked Thoughts against our Rulers, (Thoughts,
the fountain of Sedition) and rebellious Deeds (Deeds, the flame that
accomplish Sedition, and consume a Kingdom) Words are the readiest
Instruments; Words the bellows that kindle the Sparkles; Words the wind that
ventilate the Flame: were it not for which, the Fire might easily languish and
expire of it self. So that no little good service might be done, in quieting
first the Tongues of the Multitude, that their Hearts and their Hands might
return to a better temper.

To which purpose I have chosen this Scripture, as a means to convince the
consciences of numbers, touching the heinousness of evil speaking against
their Governors. For nothing more undoeth the common sort, then an opinion
that such talk is but light prattle; no great danger or crime in it. Hence such
clouds, such swarms of lies and flanders, which, like the Flies and
Grasshoppers of Egypt, have covered some parts of this Land, till they have
darkened it again, and made it noisome. Though all sins abound; yet so as
detraction and spightful lying, not any abounds. Of all enormities least
conscience is made of Slander; and of all slanders, least of slandering our
Rulers. As if there were utterly no Law for the Tongue; as if Slander were not
the crime that hunted Christ to his death, and his most faithful Servant our
late Sovereign: As if there were no curse on the Whisperer and double-tongued;
or as if the greater and higher any fame were, the more men's mouths were
privileged to bark against it. So free, so licentious all of all sorts, in a
manner, to vent their gall at their lips, that in no one respect more those
words of the 14. Psalm appear verified; Their throat is an open sepulcher, the
poison of aspes is under their lips: their mouths full of cursing and
bitterness, etc.

Now though diverse Scriptures might be found to curb this mischief, yet I have
thought on this, as in sundry respects effectual. 1. Because it takes strength
from both Testaments, the Old and the New, being found here, and in Exodus
22.28. and so not to be rejected by Jew or Gentile, Christian or Mohammedan. 2.
Because Saint Paul quoteth this Text as forcible against himself, in behalf of
Ananias the High Priest. Ananias a wicked man, Saint Paul a holy man; yet not a
holy man allowed to reproach a wicked man in authority. 3. Because Saint Paul's
reprehension was just, and such as toward an equal might be warranted; yet not
to be defended toward the high Priest, a chief Ruler of the people. To which if
ye shall add, that Saint Paul was grossly injured, and multitudes of our
Railers never injured; Saint Paul one that had power to curse, our Revilers no
power; Ananias not a lawful Governor, ours both lawful and highly meriting;
Saint Paul's ill language true, and defendable by Scripture, our peoples false,
and utterly against Scripture: These things considered (one would think) might
assuage much this popular disease of railing upon Dignities, the liberty
whereof has once already, and may, who knows how soon? again (if God in
mercy prevent it not) overturn this Kingdom.

We proceed to a division of the words, which appear to branch themselves into
three main parts: 1. An abuse forbidden, Evil speaking: 2. The parties toward
whom forbidden, Rulers of the people: 3. The persons forbidden to speak evil;
Saint Paul applies it to himself, Thou shall not speak evil; and if S. Paul may
not, then not any man. To handle these in the plainest order, will be as the
words stand in the Original; and begin first with the Parties against whom evil
may not be spoken, by pointing out, 1. Who are these Rulers of the people: 2.
Who the Parties that may not speak evil; neither Saint Paul nor any man: 3. The
Abuse it self, by showing what this evil speaking here is, and why forbidden.
And of these, by God's help, in their order: beginning first with the parties
against whom evil may not be spoken, viz. The Rulers of the people.

No such difficult Charge this a ppeares: First, in that it is laid Negative.
Negatives are easier obeyed then Affirmatives: for not to do, requires no
labor. Then, that it is a Negative, not of Thoughts, or Deeds, but of Words.
Words are not hard to refrain. Little can he do, that cannot hold his tongue.
Nor, thirdly, a Negative of good words, Psalm. 39.3.
such as David thought it grievous to forbear ( I kept silence even from good
words, but it was pain and grief to me:) but a Restraint of bad words only,
Thou shall not speak evil. Nor that Restraint general, speak evil of none: but
special, not of our Governors, which are but few, and the world wide enough
besides, for our tongues to be bold with; Thou shall not speak evil of the
Ruler of thy people.

The Ruler, who is he? The Text in Exodus has two several nouns joined with
two diverse Verbs: Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor curse the Rulers of thy
people. By the Gods some would have meant Ecclesiastical Governors, and by
Rulers, the temporal Magistrate: but the Text favors not this; for S. Paul
takes the latter Noun, which they say signifies the temporal Magistrate, and
applies it to the High Priest; Thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler. So that
Ruler is verified indifferently of both. Some would have them differ as
Princeps factus, and Princeps natus, Rulers that were made Rulers, and Rulers
born so. Made Rulers; such were the Judges: Judges and Officers shall thou make
thee in all thy gates, Deuteronomy. 16.18. Rulers that were born Rulers; such were the
Princes of Israel, eldest in descent from the Patriarchs, called Heads of the
houses of their fathers, Princes of the tribes, Nu. 7.2. Ye shall find these
born Rulers first mentiond Exo. 16.22. and those made ones two Chapters after,
Exodus 18.25. And whether of these were superior it greatly matters not.
Sufficient it is for us to know, they were both under Moses the supreme
Governor; both to be reverenced in their degree, and evil tongues to walk
against neither: neither against inferior Judges, made Rulers by their Office;
nor against the Heads of the Tribes, born Rulers by descent: neither against
Ecclesiastic Governors, the Priests and Levites, who were among the Jews a
kind of born Rulers; nor against the secular Magistrates, appointed to bear the
Sword under the Supreme Power; and much less against the Supreme power it self.
It Is hard to sever these in honor or in dishonor, in a well-framed Community.
It Is an injury toward the Superior to vilify his Deputy; a reproach to the
King himself, to say He has evil Counselors about him. And he that
disparageth a Prince, as weak and unable to judge of good Counsel, through him
disparages his chief Counselors and Officers; yea, and all the people under
his Government, inasmuch as the disgrace of the Head redounds to the whole Body.

Both are injured by such evil speaking: but of the two, they most that sit
highest; specially they that are both ways Rulers, by descent and by office,
Principes nati and Principes facti both, who have supreme oversight of both
Powers, Ecclesiastic and Secular, as Moses had; from whom lies no appeal, and
upon whom the cares of all are laid. These, above all, are exempted from the
fury of bad tongues: Speak not evil of these in any wise.

Neither of these, nor yet of their inferior Officers, even for their sakes:
For as they help to bear the burden with their Sovereign, they make but one
body, and draw one common yoke. Neither higher therefore nor lower Powers may
be reviled; no not the Priests and Levites, as far as they are interested in
regimine, in ruling the people. And some way they are interested: for Saint
Paul calls them Leaders of the blind, Lights of them that sit in darkness,
Instructers of the foolish: and speaks it even of Jewish Teachers, Romans 2.19.
Less then whom we cannot imagine the Disciples of Christ to be, whom our
Savior terms the light of the world, Mat. 5.14. And though some of late days
will not abide to hear they should have any rule, yet we know where Saint Paul
charge Christian Congregations, Obey them that have the rule over you, Heb.
13.37.
and submit your selves, Heb. 13.17. After which presently follows, For they
watch for your souls, as they that must give an account, etc. And who are those
watchmen over your souls, but the Clergy? Let a man so esteem of us as the
Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 4.1.
Stewards, I trow, are Rulers. If any doubt it, hearken to Christ himself; Who
then is that faithful and wise steward, whom his Lord shall make ruler over
his household, to give them their meat in due season? Luke 12.42. I contend not
for their power, (though Saint Paul speaks of power which the Lord had given
him for edification, and not to destruction, 2 Cor. 13.10.) But if I plead for
their immunity from railing and evil speaking, the Text, I suppose, will bear
me out in that.

Especially for the higher order of the Clergy, who succeed the Apostles: who
have the oversight, not of the people only, for whence their name Episcopi; but
of the Clergy too, and therefore termed Praelati: who are more then Rulers of
the people, even (...), Rulers of their Rulers also. I hope I may intercede in
their behalf, that evil tongues may have less liberty to rail against such; for
such the Text aims at directly. It was a High Priest whom Saint Paul reviled
here: and he intimates clearly he would not have done it, had he known his
eminence, that he was a Ruler of the people.

Upon which two words, Ruler and People, so joined, we have to observe, It
excuses not any to say he is none of my Ruler whom I reproach, he has no
power over me. Ananias had none over Saint Paul properly; Saint Paul rather, as
an Apostle from Heaven, had power over Ananias. Yet if he be a Ruler of the
people, spare him for the peoples sake. They that in foreign Countries rail
upon Christian Princes beyond the Seas, may do well to think upon this, as
occasion serves.

And think also, if the Prince would be forborne for the peoples sake, then the
more people he has under him the more to be forborne: And the more removed from
the people such a Prince is, as being of nobler Birth, more excellent
Education, Knowledge, Experience, Wisdom, and Virtue, the more like God such a
Ruler is; and the less like one of the people, so much the less to be traduced
and reproched by any of the people: yea, were the Reprochers Rulers themselves,
they may not speak evil of their Fellow-Ruler, much less of their Sovereign
Ruler; for none of any sort may be allowed to revile him. That will appear by
the next point of our Division, viz. Who are the parties restrained that may
not speak evil. Non maledices tu, (says the Text) Thou shall not speak evil;
that is, neither thou Paul, nor any man.

Not any man first: For this Non maledices is but a branch of Non dices falsum
testimonium, which is the ninth Commandment, Thou shall not bear false
witness: and that is as universal as Thou shall not kill, or steal, or commit
adultery. So thou shall not deprave or dishonor thy Ruler by bad language,
whoever thou art. Non reliquit hominem, says the 105. Psalm, Psalm. 105.14.
speaking of them that meddled with the Patriarchs, He suffered no man to do
them wrong, etc. He will suffer no man to speak wrong neither of those that
succeed the Patriarchs. Touch not mine Anointed in that place binds up all
hands. Psalm. 105.15.
And Non maledices Principi, in this place, tieth up all tongues. Quis mittet
manum, says David, 1 Samuel 26.9. Who can stretch forth his hand against the
Lord's anointed, and be gudtlesse? Quis mittet linguam is as true also here,
Who can put forth his tongue against supreme Authority, and not be guilty of
violating this precept? Non maledices, etc.

Not any, be he never so holy in the eyes of multitudes; much less they that
are holy in their own eyes only. Precise, sanctified, illuminated brethren, so
highly in favor with Heaven (as themselves imagine) that they have a
privilege to censure every body else; as if they, forsooth, were the only
Saints pointed out in that spiritual man, 1 Cor. 2.15. who judges all things,
but he himself is judged of no man. Not any of these, how pure soever in their
own sight, are warranted to censure their equals, much less their betters.
Speak not evil one of another, Jam. 4.11.
brethren, is S. James his precept to all men; Romans 14.4
and, Who art thou that judge another man's servant? Saint Paul's demand to
any man. And if thou may not judge another man's servant, thou may not
judge thine own Master, I am sure, nor speak evil of that supreme Power which
God has ordained to judge thee. Take heed: Let every soul be subject to the
higher powers, Romans 13.1
will infer, Let every tongue be subject also.

Was there any degree of men permitted to speak evil against Moses? nay, from
the highest to the lowest, God testified his indignation against any that dared
it. Not Jannes and Jambres, those counter-working Sorcerers, but for their foul
tongues were plagued with foul botches, Exodus 9.11. not Corah, a Levite, nor
Dathan and Abiram, Princes of the Congregation, but as they misled others by
their example, Numb. 16.32.
so were themselves made examples by no common judgments. Not any of the
people, were their complaints never so urgent; not those that lacked water at
the wilderness of Sin, Numb. 11.34.
nor those that lusted for Flesh at Kibroth Hattaavah, Numb. 11.3.
nor those that complained of their way at Taberah; not any of these, were they
few or many, escaped judgment: no, not all the many, all the Congregation
gathered as one man against Moses and Aaron, Numb. 14.10.
deceived by the timorous spies, Number. 14.2. but did their penance for it in
Pestilence, in Fire, in the stings of Serpents, in sundry kinds of death, till
they were all consumed, even more then 600000. men, excepting only Caleb and
Joshuah. Numb. 14.30.
To omit those that murmured upon the destruction of Corah (whose plague found
no stop but the atonement of Aaron; Numb. 16.50.
) not Aaron himself, though the brother of Moses, Numb. 12.4.
not Miriam, though his sister, might be allowed so much as to whisper against
Moses, but straight a cloud, a terror, and a kindling of the Lord's anger.
Number. 12.8. How is it, that ye were not afraid to speak against my servant
Moses? So true is that of Zach. 2.8. He that touches you, touches the apple
of mine eye. God will not endure a whisper, nor a muttering, nor the breath of
an unsavory mock to come near his Anointed.

Now if not the highest, if not Dathan, nor Corah, nor Miriam, nor Aaron, may
open their lips against Moses; how much less the son of Lev. 24.11.
Shelomith, one of the meanest of the people? If neither Nabal, 1 Samuel 25.10.
1 Samuel 15.3.
nor Achitophel, nor Absalom may speak evil of David, 1 Samuel 15.31.
how much less 2 Samuel 16.7.
Shimei a Benjamite, or 2 Samuel 20.1.
Sheba the son of Bichri? How ill befits it to hear the worst revile the best?
base Thersites to rail upon royal Agamemnon? Acts. 19.16.
Demetrius the Silver-smith to mutter against venerable Paul? John 3.10.
Diotrephes, a pragmatical Sophister, to prate against Saint John? Ignorance to
deprave Learning? Rudeness Experience? Youth to censure Age? illiterate Idiots
to teach reverend Prelates? the offscouring of the Rabble, the scumme of the
Rout, to belch against God's Anointed, the Head of the Princes of the Tribes of
Israel? Proh dolor! Quis talia fando temperet a lacrymis? What eyes can hold
water? what ears endure the hearing?

Intolerable this Abuse, doubtless; but especially intolerable in two sorts of
men, the worst and the best: The worst, in regard of their meannesse, provoking
indignation; and the best, in regard of their eminence, easily gaining belief.
In the former sort it argues desperate Presumption; in the latter sort Envy
and Malice, siding with Ambition. For Shimei to reproach David brings certain
vengeance on Shimei, 1 King 2.46.
be David never so merciful: For Achitophel to whisper against his Sovereign,
brings unavoidable ruin upon Achitophel, 2 Samuel 17.13.
and upon Absalom missled by his Council, 2 Samuel 18.14.
be David never so low driven.

Now though great the sin of both, yet greater Achitophel's, as one able to do
more mischief; one to whom more credit is given; one more obliged, and in his
Master's bosom, able by revealing his secrets more to weaken him, and by his
wisdom to manage armies against him: fouler in Achitophel then in Shimei. And
so it is in all Courtiers of the King's Family; in whom is fulfilled, Psalm.
41.9.
The man that did eat of my bread has lifted up his heel against me. And
fouler yet, 1 Kings 1.7.
if Abiathar should fall off and side with the despisers of David in his old
age, drawing a scandal on the Priesthood to boot, and seducing numbers under
color of Religion. Certainly let bold Levites, the sons of Thunder, that love
to make the Pulpit a School of Rebellion, pretend what they will, no warrant
have they from Heaven to traduce the Lord's Anointed. And so much greater is
their crime, by how much more it concerns them to dissuade all men from such
things. It is not the example of Nathan reproving David, 2 Samuel 13.9.
nor of Elias threatening Ahab, 1 Kings 21.21.
nor of Daniel terrifying Belshazzar, Dan. 5.23.
will bear them out: nay, when they can show power to discover Secrets, as
Nathan did, to do Miracles, as Eliah, to foretell things to come, as Daniel,
then let them be bold with Princes, as they were. Meanwhile, look here upon S.
Paul; S. Paul, that had greater Commission then they can pretend any, that
could do as much as Elias, or Daniel, yet here acknowledging he went too far
against Ananias. The case is worth insisting on a little, and the order of our
Division now leads us to it.

None may speak evil of Rulers, no, though he be S. Paul. Why? Did not S. Paul
speak evil? Was not his answer to Ananias a plain Curse, with a Contumely to
boot? God shall smite thee: Is not that a Curse? Thou whited wall: Is not that
a Contumely? The standers by thought it so, who presently took up the Apostle,
Revilest thou God's High Priest? And we do not hear S. Paul denying that he
reviled, but rather that he knew whom he reviled; I wist not, brethren, that he
was the High Priest. So an offense if it were in him, it was for lack of
knowledge; as he says elsewhere of his persecution of the Church, I obtained
mercy, because I did it ignorantly, 1 Timothy 1.13.

But then, may Ignorance excuse in such a case? or can it be thought indeed,
that Saint Paul was ignorant, so as not to know the High Priest? S. Paul, that
was bred at the feet of Gamaliel, expert in all Laws and Customs among the
Jews, he to be such a stranger to his own Nation, as not to know who ruled the
Synagogue? Yes: It Is likely (says Calvin) the Apostle knew what the Jews
called Ananias: But because the High Priesthood of Aaron was now expired, 'twas
void, and rested in Christ; therefore S. Paul answers like one that knew not
Ananias, nor his Authority, intimating him but a private man. And therefore no
such peril in reviling one who was now no Ruler of the people.

But this had been a worse scorn then the other: and had S. Paul discovered any
such meaning, he had much more incensed the standers by, whom now he pacified;
and therefore, in likelihood, carried not himself as one that meant to bereave
Ananias of any honor, but to excuse himself rather in not discerning his
honor: he appeared, therefore, as one repenting and craving pardon; as if he
should say, Had I known him to be the High Priest, I would have known my duty
better, and given him no such language.

Excuse S. Paul, therefore, as one truly ignorant who Ananias was: nor marvel
if he were ignorant of him by face, though happily not by name. For S. Paul had
now been many years absent from Jerusalem; and this meeting was not in the
Synagogue, where he might distinguish the High Priest by his order of sitting,
but in the Castle, where the chief Captain kept his Garrison; and in
likelihood, the Jewish Rabbines stood not upon formalities there: So the high
Priest by his sitting S. Paul might not know. But, I pray, how could he choose
but know him to be one of his Judges notwithstanding? One of his Judges he
himself confesses him: For, Sit thou here to judge me according to Law,
and command me to be smitten contrary to the Law? How is this then? May a
Judge on the Bench be reviled, and not a High Priest? whereas the Law says
plainly, Thou shall not curse the Gods, that is, the Judges. And we have
concluded neither superior nor inferior Magistrates subject to our reviling.
Which way will ye excuse the Apostle then from transgressing the Law?

Diverse defenses of S. Paul are here used by diverse: but one of the best is S.
Chrysostom's, That Saint Paul's answer to Ananias was not meant as (...), but
as (...) not as Reviling, but a kind of free speaking. To which liberty of
speech S. Paul was constrained, for Lysias the chief Captain's sake, there
present. The day before, when the chief Captain went about to scourge him, Act.
22.25.
S. Paul pleaded his privilege as a Roman. Now when the High Priest commanded
so basely to smite him, should he that would not take scourging at the Romans
hands, take beating so patiently at the hand of the Jews, who were underlings
to the Romans, the chief Captain might well have thought him foolish and
slavishly abject to the will of the Synagogue. Needful therefore for his
credit's sake, S. Paul should answer stoutly; and so he does, directing his
reproof not to them that smote him, but to him that commanded him to be
smitten. Howbeit, such a reproof, as though it did not become him toward the
High Priest, toward an inferior Judge might become him well enough. S. Paul
therefore being made to know his error, is not ashamed to let the standers by
know his ignorance, and that such freedom of speech he would not have used,
had he known the dignity of him to whom he spoke, as being not ignorant that it
is written in God's Law, Thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy people.

Diverse moral inferences might hence be gathered, which we have not time now to
insist on. As, That though Rulers forget their Duty, we are not to forget our
Reverence. 2. That toward supreme Magistrates supreme Honor is required. And
That freedom of speech, which toward an inferior Governor were but (...),
Tongue-liberty; toward a Superior may be (...), flat Contumely. 3. That it
will not suffice to say, he was no good man, no lawful Ruler we reviled, when
we are judicially convented before him, and the people esteem him so. 4. That
Scripture-plea will not bear us out. S. Paul might have defended, God shall
smite thee, from Psalm. 3.7. Thou smitest all thine enemies upon the cheek-bone:
and, Thou whited wall, from Christ's own resemblance of the Pharisees to whited
sepulchers, Mat. 23.27.
etc. Yet he alleges no Scripture for Contumely. S. Paul knows a stronger and
a plainer Scripture against Contumely to Governors, namely, Non maledices
Principi. 5. That if we have exceeded, through Passion or Ignorance, in
intemperate speeches, we should be ready to acknowledge our error, with
Nesciebam, fratres, I knew not what I did. 6. That evil speaking, such as
scandals the hearers, in audience of the very same hearers would be recanted:
and That scandal is enough to make our speeches evil, though otherwise in
themselves true and justifiable. But this touches upon the nature of evil
speaking it self; and so leads us to the 3d. general of our Division. Having
heard against whom evil may not be spoken, and the parties forbidden to speak
evil: come we in the next place to Evil speaking it self, the abuse here
forbidden, that we may show what it is, and why forbidden.

First, What it is: And though evil speaking be of many kinds, as Cursing,
Railing, Slandering, Depraving; yet none are so directly here intended as those
evil speakings which imply the party we speak of to be evil. Dicere Principem
malum, hoc est maledicere Principi, (says one) To utter words, such as infer
our Rulers to be evil, this is properly to speak evil of Rulers.

Why, but in so saying, perhaps we say true: And may we not speak truth of our
Rulers, affirming them to be as they are? Has not the Prophet a Woe for them
that call evil good, or good evil? Admit he has; yet no warrant have we, for
all that, to call that evil which is evil, unless charity lead us to it. For, ^
Cor. 16.14.
Let all your things be done with charity (says the Apostle;) and charity will
seldom lead us to speak evil of our Neighbors, but of our lawful Governors
never: For the very scandal of such speaking, though it be true, will outweigh
the benefit of knowing such truth. Better it were by far for those under
authority, falsely to believe and speak well of those in authority, so they do
it ignorantly, then to believe or speak evil of their Rulers never so knowingly.

The reason of which appears grounded upon two of the ten Commandments, namely,
the Fifth and the Sixth. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, first; and thy Ruler
is a Father. In reference to his dignity, speak not evil of him, though he
deserve it: For a Father, be he never so bad, ought not by his own children to
be dishonored. And then, Do no murder: ye cannot speak evil of a Magistrate
but ye help forward to Sedition, and Sedition is manifold Murder.

But not to fall upon the reasons why no evil speaking, till ye have seen what:
note, that evil speaking in general is by some divided into Judicative and
Optative; Judicative, affirming evil, and Optative, wishing evil: both are in
S. Paul's answer to Ananias. Some divide it into evil speaking in presence;
that is Contumely, 2 Samuel 16.7.
as Shimei to David, Come forth thou man of blood: and evil speaking in
absence, as Miriam spoke against Moses; Number. 12.1.
that is Detraction.

The fittest division for our purpose seems drawn from the Text, as it stands
in the old Law, Exodus 22.28. Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor curse the
Ruler of thy people. Where the former Verb (...) signifies Vilifying, or
Detracting; and the latter (...) Railing, or Cursing. Which two seem to point
us to the two Fountains from whence all evil speaking proceeds, viz. Wrath, or
Envy: Vilifying or Detracting, the fruit of Envy; Railing and Cursing, of Wrath
or Malice. One of these two moves in evil tongues, either Wrath, because we
have received some evil from our Rulers; or Envy, because we think they receive
too much good. And as Envy is more frequent then Wrath, so Detraction more
abounds then Railing or Cursing.

To touch upon them in order. Railing or Contumely seems that which S. Paul is
charged with here: his reproching Ananias appears as proceeding from sudden
Wrath in his own vindication. Now from Wrath are numbered four kinds of evil
speaking, viz. Contumely, Malediction, Whispering, and Slandering: The two
former, Contumely and Malediction, proceeding from Wrath in the heat of it,
furious at first kindling; the two latter, Whispering and Slandering, from
Wrath cooled and digested into Hatred and Malice.

Contumely is defined to be a reproching any to his face, by words or deeds
disgracing his honor; as the Pharisees to Christ, John 8.48.
Say we not well thou art a Samaritane, and have a devil? and the Princes of
Judah to Jeremie, Jer. 4^.2.
Thou speak falsely, the Lord our God has not sent thee; but Baruch the
son of Neriah sets thee on. No light crime such Contumely; for the least
degrees of it are heavily sentenced in the Gospel: Whosoever shall say to his
brother, Raca, shall be liable to a Council; and he that shall say, Thou fool,
in danger of hellfire. Contumely differs from Malediction, because it may be
real as well as verbal; in deed, no less then word: as the Psalmist describes
some wagging their heads at our Lord's Passion, Psalm. 22.7.
shooting out their lips, gaping with their mouths; and yet that was Contumely.
Whereas Malediction is defined to be a vehement wishing of evil with words of
imprecation, in the bitterness of soul; and so is but in word at most, if it go
farther then the heart. Besides, Malediction aims at the Person, but Contumely
strikes at his Honor. And of the two, Contumely is the fouler crime, as it is
abler to do more mischief: for Malediction (take away Scandal) cannot hurt him
much on whom it is bestowed, if he deserve it not; inasmuch as Curses causeless
light upon the head of him that utters them, and wound the party cursing more
then the party cursed.

Both these, as well Contumely as Malediction, are ten-fold worse against our
Superiors then against our Equals: insomuch that Shimei for his contumely
against David, 1 Kings 2.46.
was justly rewarded with capital punishment at length: And, whosoever revileth or
curses father or mother, let him die the death, says the old Law, Exodus 21.17.

But it will be said, Neither of these are much to be charged upon our times. I
would they were not, and that in the most wicked manner. A Contumely there is
by Libelling, as Schoolmen note: For three kinds of it there are in all. 1.
Contumely by word in audience of the party reviled; as when the children
reproched Elisha, 2 Kings 2.3.
Come up thou bald head. 2. Contumely by foul language in the ears of such as
may carry it to the party reviled; as when Rabshakeh railed upon Hezekiah in
the hearing of the Jewish Counselors. 2 King. 18.29.
3. Contumely by Libelling; as when Sanballat sent an open Letter to Nehemiah,
taxing him with an intent to be King, Nehem. 6.6. Of the three this of
Libelling is the worst kind of contumely in many respects: for it spreads
wider, wounds deeper, lasts longer, smarts sorer, and is both Contumely and
Detraction mingled in one. Inasmuch as the Author hides his head, it is
Detraction; as it comes to the libelled parties ears, it is Contumely: So it is
allied to Malice and Envy, to Murder and to Theft both. What shall be said to
this impudent, yet cornercreeping villainy.? this murdering worth and honor,
as it were by the shot of a Pistol in the dark? this stealing the jewel of a
good name by a hand invisible? but what the wise man says of a friend turned
enemy, Ecclus 37.3.
0 wicked imagination! whence came thou in to cover the earth with deceit?
Doubtless, if it be so heinous to speak evil of Rulers by detraction in
absence, it is much worse to speak evil to Rulers by contumely to their face;
and worse yet to write evil of our Rulers, which is doing evil as well as
speaking, and was seldom punished in any well governed Monarchy with less then
Death or Mutilation.

Nor may we excuse our Times from the other crime of Malediction; only whereas
Cursing is esteemed a fruit of Wrath, by way of Revenge for Injury, Experience
in some of our people shows it is otherwise now and then: they can curse
gratis, and heap with Maledictions the best of Governors, for no injury at all
ever done them; fulfilling that of Psalm. 109.5. Thus have they rewarded me evil
for good, Psalm.69.4:
etc They that hate me without a cause are more in number then the hairs of my
head. It Is true, that Cursing is properly a fruit of Wrath rather then Malice.
But what say we to Wrath ingendered of Malice and Hatred? and that Hatred upon
no ground but Envy? such as the Pharisees hatred and wrath against our Savior,
who never did them evil? Such wrathful and spightful Malediction is, without
doubt, the worst that can be.

To leave Contumely and Cursing: there follow Whispering and Slandering; fruits
of Wrath too, but of Wrath cooled and digested into Malice. Of the twain, the
Whisperer is somewhat worse then the Slanderer: For the Whisperer wears the
habit of a friend, and under that visor deprives us of our friends. A
smooth-faced Murderer, a forked-tongu'd Serpent, a two-edged Sword, as Bernard
calls him, relating to one friend what may most exasperate him against another,
and so poisoning them both: Licking and biting, stroaking and wounding,
sometimes in one breath. Ecclus. 28.13.
Curse the whisperer and double-tongued, says the son of Syrach; for such have
destroyed many that were at peace. Ver. 16.
Whosoever hearkens to it shall never find rest, nor ever dwell quietly. Amongst
those whom God hates, the chiefest is he that sows discord amongst brethren,
Prove. 6.19. If he that robs us of our Fame or Honor be such a hateful enemy;
how much more he that bereaves us of our Friends, for whose sake we desire Fame
and Honor? Abandoned therefore above all other be the Talebearer and the
Whisperer, whose words are as the piercings of a sword. Take away the
Talebearer, and Contention will cease, Prove. 26.20.

Next after the Whisperer goes the Slanderer; a vice near allied to the Devil:
from whence Satan's name Diabolus, viz. from false accusing and slandering the
Brethren. Upon the Slanderer all the people were to bestow a general curse.
Deuteronomy. 27.24. Cursed be he that smites his neighbor secretly. And God himself
in Deuteronomy. 19.16, etc. smites him notably; If a false witness rise up against
any, to testify what is wrong, inquiry shall be made, and ye shall do unto
the false witness as he had thought to have done unto his brother. Thou shall
not raise a false report, nor join hands with the wicked, to be an unrighteous
witness, Exodus 23.1. A most pernicious evil, whereby the fairest Virtue in the
world may be blasted at a distance, undone in secret, and not know who hurts
it. If it spread in multitudes, it quickly makes up that threefold Evil the
Wiseman so trembled at, and prayed against, viz. The slander of a City, The
gathering together of an unruly multitude, and a false Accusation: All these
are worse then death, Ecclus. 26.5. The Slanderer differs from the Whisperer,
in that he is fouler mouthed, and appears more like an enemy, and commonly has
the Whisperer for his forerunner. Let the Whisperer aggravate a true matter,
and blemish it with an odious color; the Slanderer shall blacken it more with
lying, and augment it with manifold addition. Let the Whisperer say to day,
Moses favors an Ethiopian woman; the Slanderer will say to morrow, Moses
despises his own Nation, and prefers in his love any before them.

This for evil speaking from Wrath and from Malice. But more abundant are
Obloquies from Envy, which in general are fourfold also; that is, Detraction
and Murmuring, Complaining and Derision; whereto some add Depravation. Two of
which are more common against all sorts of men, viz. Detraction and Derision:
and two more peculiar against Governors, to wit, Murmuring and Complaining.
None of these are so properly the fruits of Envy, but that they proceed also,
many times, from Hatred and Malice.

For Detraction first; it is one of the most reigning vices in this last age of
the world, and most properly condemned in this Text, which is read in many
Translations, Diis non detrabes, Thou shall not detract from the Gods, nor
revile Rulers. Detraction is by Aquinas defined to be Denigratio famae alienae
per verba occulta, A blackening or bespotting our neighbor's fame by
clandestine speeches in his absence; called therefore Backbiting: And differs
from Slander, inasmuch as Detraction is always in absence; but Slander may be
in presence. Slander is evermore false; but Detraction may report but what is
true. And five ways, as Aquinas notes, may Detraction go to work. 1. By
inventing a Slander or false Report: As the Pharisees, Mat 9.34.
when they affirmed our Savior to cast out Devils by Beelzebub. 2. By
aggravating a true matter: Genesis 31.1.
As Laban's sons of Jacob; Jacob has taken away all that was our Father's, and
from our father has gotten this glory. 3. By revealing an Error before
hidden: Genesis 9.^2.
As Cham, when he discovered his Father's nakedness. 4. By depraving an action
well meant: As Doeg, when he traduced the High Priest for relieving David. 1 Samuel 22.9.
5. By diminishing or concealing the good things in our neighbor, and uttering
only what we think bad: As Ahab of Micaiah; I hate him, 1 Kings 22.8.
because he never prophesies good unto me, but evil.

These are the usual ways of Detraction: And by this, ye may perceive it
comprehends not slanderous and false rumors only; but such as are true
likewise, if uttered with an intent to hurt our neighbor's fame. For, as the
ninth Commandment is broken by uncharitable witness, as well as false witness,
because Charity is the fulfilling of the Law: so the Detractor, in spoiling his
neighbor's same, is not excused, though he say true, for we are not allowed to
hurt any by word any more then deed. And is Defamation no hurt, think ye? What
wise man esteems not his Fame more precious then his Wealth? And is he a Thief,
that robs his neighbor's purse; and he none, that robs him of his good name?
Plead not truth therefore in defaming our brethren; but remember Truth and
Peace ought to go together. zach. 8.19.
Love the Truth and Peace (says Zachary.) And Peace will never abide
detracting from our equals; much less our Superiors. Charity will hide such
truths; 1 Pet. 4.8.
for Love covers a multitude of sins.

After Detraction follows Murmuring: A vice too frequent in the common sort
against their Governors: As fast as any Calamities befall them, their Rulers
bear the blame of it presently. Let any Scarcity, or decay of Trade, any
Contagion or Plague from God's hand, or through their own misdemeanour, light
upon them, all is laid instantly upon the score of their Leaders. If the
Israelites want flesh, or any varieties they long for, who but Moses and Aaron
hear ill for it straight? Numb. 20 5.
Why have ye brought us into this evil place? Here is neither fields nor
vineyards, and our soul is dried away with this light bread. Yea, though no
evils befall us, if others receive as much good, it sets a murmuring tongue
abarking very often. Thus the Laborers in the Vineyard murmr against the
good man that hired them; Mat. 20.12.
These have wrought but one hour, and thou have made them equal to us, etc.
Luke 15.29.
And the Prodigal's elder brother; So many years have I served thee, and thou
never gave me a kid. A servile vice this Murmuring; and therefore so frequent
in servile and vulgar dispositions. It is the property of bad servants to be
always murmuring: and it is the justice of good Masters to afflict them the
more for it. So God deals with murmuring people, and never fails to scourge
that Nation where this sin abounds.

To Murmuring ye may add Complaining; Jude 16.
S. Jude well couples them together: These are murmurers, complainers, walkers
after their own lusts, etc. The difference between both is, That the Murmurer
takes on in his own behalf, because somewhat is wanting to himself: but the
Complainer he is zealous in behalf of others; finds fault That Honors and
Offices are not bestowed upon such as deserve them best; That able Preachers
are undone for Ceremonies, while men of worse Gists and Lives are countenanced.
As if disobedience to Supreme Authority were not so much the greater, by how
much the smaller the things, and on slighter reason refused. Or as if those
that swallowed Oaths of Non-adherence and Covenants of Rebellion without
scruple of conscience, were to be regarded while they pretend conscience
against Uniformity. Others complain, that old servants are forgotten, and they
that have suffered most are least regarded. It Is hard pleasing men of this
humor. Remember, Lord, (says David) how I do hear in my bosom the rebukes of
many people, where with thine enemies have blasphemed thee, and slandered the
footsteps of thine Anointed. Let such complainers have the guidance of affairs
in their own hands, and they would speedily take away all Grievances, and mend
all that is amiss. Yea, just like the Reformers in Germany, or some others in
this Kingdom that took after them, who pretending Reformation, instead of one
abuse rectified, quickly brought in an hundred.

Worse then the Complainer is the Derider, or Depraver, the fourth and last
sort of evil speakers, that can turn the most venerable things into matter of
scorn; can scoff at the sacred Ceremonies of Religion, as Michal scoffed at
David dancing in his linen Ephod. 2 Samuel, 6.20.
The eye that mocks at his father, Prove. 30.17.
and despises his mother, let the Ravens of the valleys pick it out, and the
young Eagles devour it. How these kind of sins provoke the patience of heaven,
ye may see by those children that mocked Elisha. 2 Kings 2.24.


Together with the Derider ye may set the Depraver, who interprets all
occurrences in the worst sense: 1 Samuel 18.29.
like Saul the Tyrant, who imagined David's Victories over the Philistines, so
many secret steps to the Kingdom of Israel; David's courteous and affable
demeanor, 1 Samuel 18.15.
his art to win the hearts of the people; 1 Samuel 20.30.
His obsequiousness to Jonathan, a kind of cunning to save himself, and
discover Readiness projects. Like Depravations abound with some of our people, who
interpret Uniformity of Divine Worship, a stinting the liberty of the Spirit;
Appointing a convenient length of public Prayers, a Devourer of Preaching;
Reviving ancient and decent Ceremonies, a step to bring in Popery. We owe the
beginning of all our late bloody Wars to Depravations of this sort. Let such
kind of false glosses and abusive paintings be allowed, ye may see by the
common practice of subtle Lawyers, how easy it is to deform the fairest face,
and to make the best cause look like the worst. There cannot be a worse
Requital of the great pains of our Governors, and their care for our safety,
then thus to mis-construe their endeavors for our good; and while we enjoy
peace and plenty under them, for bread, on this manner, to return them stones.

Ye have seen this Evil speaking against Rulers what it is, and which be the
usual kinds of it. Add now some reasons why it is forbidden, and we have
done. And we need go no farther then our Text to begin. They are called in
Exodus (...), because they bare the burden of the people: Number. 11.14.
I am not able to bear all this people alone (says Moses.) Do they bear, with
so much love, our infirmities? and shall we, full of so much spite, heap them
with calumnies? Then they are called (...) Gods, as executing his judgments,
sitting in his Throne, and placed nearest to him, as his Deputies. So that
whereas Railing against one of the people is but Obloquy; speaking evil of our
Rulers is a kind of Blasphemy.

And marvel not at it. Romans 13.2.
For if he that resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God, he that
depraves lawful Powers, depraves God's Ordinance too. Hence is it that Moses
tells the rebellious, Your murmurings are not against us, Number. 16.11.
but against the Lord: And what is Aaron, that ye murmr against him? Thou and
all thy company with thee (o Corah) are gathered against the Lord. And so are
all that combine against their rightful Governors. If Rebellion of the hand,
if Resisting be damnable; neither is Rebellion of the tongue, nor Depraving
excusable. Against the Ordinance of God they are both alike.

Against the Ordinance of God? Yea, and against Nature too. For what more
unnatural, then to repay evil for good? and where all the Honors and Rewards
we can devise are but a scant Compensation, there to return ill language,
Disobedience and Contradiction? to wound their Honor and Renown, in whose good
report consists our own? to render for benefits inestimable, wounds incurable?
For no art nor diligence can make amends for defaming Magistrates. Private
Obloquies may be recanted, and some restitution made: But Detractions against
Rulers spread beyond all power of recalling, and fly into foreign Countries,
and blemish their reputation, not only during life, but after death; deceiving
not the present age alone, but posterity also; and making whole Nations, by
their own tongues, instruments of their own miseries.

The Defamers therefore of Rulers are not only hominum, but humanitatis
hosts, as one calls them; not enemies of men alone, but enemies of all
mankind. For every Reproach of those in Authority is a pushing against
Authority; and every pushing against Authority, a step to bring in Anarchy; and
Anarchy is the worst kind of Tyranny, turning a peaceable Order of men into the
Confusion of wild beasts.

No wonder if contempt of Magistracy therefore be indicted as a breaker of all
God's ten Commandments. Of the whole first Table. For who shall restrain
Atheism against the first Commandment, keep out Superstition against the
second, punish Blasphemy and Perjury against the third, or uphold the public
Worship of God according to the fourth, when Magistracy is down? And of the
second Table no less. For if public Fathers of the Country lose their honor,
how can private Parents expect any from their children, according to the fifth
Commandment? Who shall punish Murder against the sixth, Adultery against the
seventh, Thest against the eighth, or Slander against the ninth? Nay, what
greater Thest, then by Slander to rob Magistrates of their power, and our
Country of their protection, both at once? Who shall defend private men in
their right and property, and keep off him that against the tenth Commandment
covets and would invade his Neighbor's possessions, when Princes cannot be
quiet in their own possessions?

So of all the Commandments in both Tables, the depraver of Magistrates is
guilty. Guilty also of the destruction of multitudes, of kindling Wildfire, of
spreading Leprosy, of dispersing Pestilence. For no such Wildfire as the
tongues of Detractors kindle: No such Leprosy as proceeds from their foul
breath: No such contagious Pestilence as their mouths scatter: No such
Egyptian darkness as they would bring in. The good name and virtues of
Magistrates shine like a Lamp far and near; like the Moon in a clear night, or
like the Sun in the firmament. The obscuring of their light by foul Aspersions,
is like eclipsing the great Luminaries of Heaven, casting horror and amazement
on the world.

Add to this the woeful Consequences, too freshly bleeding in late experience;
no conscience made of reviling Rulers, and shortly none of rising against
Rulers; none of Rapine, Sacrilege, Oppression, Murder; plucking the Sword out
of the Prince's hand, and sheathing it in one another bowels. All through the
mischief of virulent tongues, which with their pestilent air smother the Truth,
overwhelming both Prince and people in a dark storm of Sedition, and
insatuating the Common sort with rage and Madness; not caring, like mad dogs,
whom they snarle and snap at, whom they mischief or undo; persecuting
Innocence many times to death, and after death; not thinking it enough they
have murdered good men in their Persons, unless they murder them in their
Fame also to all posterity.

Rightly therefore are perverse tongues compared to teeth, and the Detractor
called a Back-biter. Call. 5.15.
But if ye bite and de your one another, take beed ye be not consumed one of
another. Elsewhere David terms such a tongue, Psalm. 57 4.
spears, and arrows, and a sharp sword. For nothing cuts like it, nor any such
ready instrument of Murder. The tongue of Detractors it was that nailed Christ
to his Cross. 1 Samuel 22.18.
The tongue of Doeg, that murdered fourscore and five Priests in one day.
Though Doeg's hand were bloody also, Psalm. 52.2.
yet David complains of the tongue, says nothing of the hand. Number 21.6.
The tongues of murmurers, Number. 16.33.
that called in fiery Serpents. The tongues of Corah, Dathan and Abiram, that
made the earth open her mouth. Observe what a fearful judgment, and how all
the four Elements seemed to abandon those Revilers of Magistrates! Below the
face of the Earth they sunk, that they might not pollute the very ground they
trod on. From the Air they were excluded, that their breath might not poison
the air. Beneath the Waters they descended, that their carkases might not
defile the waters. Below the earth and the depth of it, down to the center they
were plunged, down to hell it self, that the earth might not be dishonored
with their grave. O the horrid guilt of mutinous tongues, that could deserve
such a judgment! What need more be added, when Christ brandeth the Pharisees
slander with sin against the Holy Ghost, Mar. 3.29, 30.
and makes the foulest of all crimes but a sin of the tongue; the only sin
that shall accompany the damned in Hell, where they shall blaspheme, and rail,
and curse themselves, and the higher Powers, when they can do no more.

Let all these things move us to beware of so ungrateful, so unnatural a sin,
as to revile and speak evil of those whose whole care and study day and night
is only to do us good; to blast and deprave their good names, who defend us
and our names, and all we have else, from injury. Be so far from evil-speaking
of such, that we neither endure to hear evil of them from others, nor to think
or imagine any in our hearts, or give credit to ill rumors we hear with our
ears: But inure our selves quite contrary, to think and speak the best, to put
the fairest colors we can upon all that our Rulers do; to defend their
Reputation, and honor them as our Parents; ever blessing and praying for them,
That God would deliver them from the peril of all wicked tongues, and more
wicked hands; And though undeservedly sometimes they hear ill, that they may
never be discouraged from doing well; nor by the unthankfulness of some few
envious people, be withdrawn from loving and caring for all their people: But
that Rulers and people may be happy one in another, and being mutually praised
and blessed one of another, may receive the blessing of Peace internal and
external here, till they be received into the blessing of Peace eternal
hereafter. To which, etc.

THE END.

