ARCANA PHILOSOPHIA OR, Chemical Secrets, CONTAINING The noted and useful
Chemical Medicines of Dr. Will. and Rich. Russel Chemists, viz. I. Species
Vitae, alias Universalis. II. Tinctura Regalis, called Scorbutic, etc. III.
Species Coroborativa, alias Pleuretica. IV. Species Proprietatis. V. Species
Minor. VI. A Pestilential Cordial, called his White Cordial.
AS ALSO Several Curious Chemical Processes and Spagerick Preparatio^^ of
Natural things for the use of Medicin, and many other things of great use and
virtue in Eradicating the most Stubborn Diseases; Likewise Four curious small
Treatises, viz. the I. of Fevers, the II. of the Jaundies, the III. of Madness,
and the IV. of Diarrhaeas, Lientries, etc. By the Renowned and most Approved
Dr. Aurelius Philipus Theophrastus Paracelsus, of Hoheneim.

Published by John Headrich, Philo-Chymicus, and formerly Operator to Dr.
Richard Russel.

LONDON, Printed and Sold by Henry Hills in Blackfriars, the Publisher, at the
Blew Ball in Hogsden, over against the Crooked Billet, near Shoreditch Church,
and the Booksellers of London, etc. 1697.

To his Worthy Friends, Mr. Gabr. Hubart. M. D. and Mr. Tho. Tryon, Merchant.
(...).
Gentlemen,
WHen first I designed to Publish this small Treatise, I thought no Persons so
fit to dedicate it to, as such, on whose Judgment and Capacities the World
might rely; upon which account it is that I make no scruple to prefix your
names here.

I cannot likewise but promise to my self encouragment from Others, acquainted
with this Art, in that not only your selves, but many besides, of the most
Ingenious, seem to desire an Essay of this Nature^ For as for the Modern
preparations I know their usefulness cannot but be inviting; in that they have
been made use of by diverse of the greatest Persons of the times; and One in
Particular, by that discerning Monarch K. Charles the II.

Gentlemen, I know Experimentally the unvaluable good producible from our Art;
and I need not blush to say, that were it brought to perfection, (of which I
cannot but despair upon the Grounds that some Chemists proceed) it would prove
of the Greatest and most Noble benefit to Mankind. I am satisfied that the
Ordinary Methods of Physic cannot cure so expeditiously, as some Medicines I
have heard off, that were produced from the Noble Art of Pyrotechny, and I may
without boast aver, that my Modern discovery contains some of that Nature.

And this I Assert to a Physician, who himself has given me encouragment
sufficient for this Publication; who as he was Physician to the Prince above
mentioned, so he may well be presumed to be a Considerable Judge in the matter.

Nor can I imagine, but that a Person, who wants only the name and practice of a
Physician, does likewise approve of this assertion; because he well knows, all
Arts and Sciences, (how ever inprov'd by the Present Age) are as yet impart
imperfect; and I believe, we may take his Judgment in a greater matter, then
either what I Publish, or what I assert in relation to the excellency of our
Art.

I cannot indeed assert a possibility of finding out such Compendious ways, as
would cure all kinds of Diseases, which were much to be wished, but I verily
think, if any humane Art or Science could work such Miracles, Chemistry would
Effect it: But as for several Distempers, which the Common Method of Physic
are slow in, Chemistry has done More than is yet Public.

I cannot hope ever to see those of this Art to be Incorporated, for were they
so, and a due encouragement added to it, as likewise due care taken of them and
their Medicines, I cannot but think, it would be the greatest blessing to
Mankind.

But I shall not insist on this Topic here, though I suppose all good Men; and
particular the most ingenious Physicians, will join issue with me; because it is
the most desirable of all others. All that can be objected is, that I have
added Paracelsus, which makes up so conciderable apart of the Book; but no
ingenious Man can dislike that Author, as here Methodiz'd; since were he duly
followed by other Chemists of this Age, it would much better the Art.

You will excuse me, Gentlemen, for this harangue for our Art, and veniam
prolaude peto; though I know not, whether you will think it necessary, since it
may prove a defensatory prevention against all Cavils, that may be made to this
Essay: However it will justify my design for the Public good in this
Publication, and You in accepting of it from, Gentlemen,

Your most Effectionate and humble Servant John Headrich.

TO THE READER.
AS to the Title of these Chemical Preparations, none can question its
property, as being so well adapted to those uncommon and compendious ways of
Cure, discovered in this Treatise; in which Artful Methods the great Hermes
Tr^^megistus and Paracelsus lead the way, of whom, because no Man can doubt of
their Merits, I shall say little of in this Preface.

And as to the excellency of the Modern Preparations, Discovered to the World
in the first part, I need not say much; because the Names of those two Famous
Chemists Mr. Will. Russel (of the Little Minories, but lastly of Goodmans
Fields) and his brother Richard Russel are deservedly known to most Ingenious
Men; such Persons knowing their usefulness to the Public, can spare me the
labor of an Encomium, either on the Authors, or their incomparable inventa, in
so much that the World must own, they have gained themselves a lasting memory
among all ingenious Artists of both kinds, as well as with the Chemists.

That which I find most Necessary in their Case is, to vindicate their
Medicines from Scandal occasioned by pretenders after their Death; for which
end I have produced these Genuine Ones, as invented by Themselves; in doing
which I promise to my self to be useful to the World, and do Justice to the
Authors at once: For should I not do so, who would not see these two
inconveniences to follow?

First, the World is by such pretenders really bubled, both as to their
expectations in the Cures, and as to the expenses bestowed on them.

Secondly, The Authors are thereby much debased, as well as the Art, in that
the World does expect that real Benefit, as formerly they had, and still might,
were it not for the Art of Counterfiting; which indeed has much hindered the
use of these Medicines.

Now to Obviate both these Errors, and free both the Physician and Patient from
them, I found it necessary to publish this Treatise, as being the alone means
to prevent these abuses. And as I do freely own that these Medicines are not
mine but theirs, yet I again presume to have the alone true Original method of
preparing them.

And how I came by the knowledge of them, the World will soon disern upon
telling them, that I practiced their Operations, with one of the Brothers and
for his Widow, and my self about Twelve years past; and have taken great Care,
and still do, to give them there true and due preparation, according to the
Original Method; which none can do so exactly as my self, because I have been
so Conversant in their Operations.

I need not, I presume, make any Apology for this plainess, because I reckon
the ablest and most Ingenious Artists will count themselves Obliged; for since
these Medicines seem to be much desired, I have therein gratified the World,
and given them the true Key of these Secrets; in which I do assure all, that I
aim not so much at my own private interest, as that of the Public; partly that
these most Noble and Compendious Medicines, might not dye with the Authors, and
partly to avoid the above mentioned inconveniences.

And here at last I declare to the World the satisfaction I receive from this
Publication because I cannot in the least doubt of the desired event; by
reason, that all Men have here that real Method of these Preparations, as I
learned them my self: But if any one should be so obstinate as to proceed in
any other manner of preparing them, under pretense of bettering them, I cannot
but declare them Counterfits.

It cannot but be an honor, to the memory of Mr. William Russel, That that
discerning Monarch King Charles the Second to whom he was Chemist in Ordinary
made frequent Use of his Tincture; whereby His Majesty found such singular
Benifit, that he was pleased to style it the Royal Tincture: And I do Assure
the World that our Chemist was much valued by that Prince, insomuch, that he
was often in his Conversation, upon such grounds, as His Royal Prudence thought
reasonable: According to which Example, Persons of the highest quality in the
Kingdom esteemed his prepared Medicines, the Countesses of Darby and Ossery,
and no small number of Considerable Rank and Figure never being without them.

That I have added some Treatises of Paracelsus to our Modern ones, I shall not
make any Apology for it, for I find them so fit to bear one another Company,
that I thought best to make a Triumvirate of them.

Lastly, I question not, but this small Tract will have its Enemies, as well as
others of this Nature have had, but knowing it to be an usual thing with
upstarts, etc. not with solid Ingenious Men, it will the less Trouble me; only
I would desire such ^ersons to let it alone, and endeavor to mend it; and to
be so kind to the World, as to let them partake of some of their Curiosities
which they have gained by their profound knowledge, etc. But according as this
small Treatise shall be Accepted by the Ingenious, I may present the World with
several curious things of this Nature. In the mean while I Remain

Your Real Friend and Servant John Headrich.
From my House in Hogsden Town, at the Blew Ball, over against the Crooked
Billet, near Shoreditch Church.
A TABLE of Diseases Mentioned in this Book.
A
ABortion to prevent Page. 10.17. Acute Diseases to cure Page. 77. After birth
bringing away Page. 10 After pains cured Page. 10.15.17. Alopecia Page. 69.
Analen^y Page. 63. Apoplexia Page. 12. Asthma Page. 13.51.
B
BE^^^ ^ound Page. 9. Birth to hasten Page. 10.17. Black ^aundi^s (...) Page.
105. Bloody Flue to cure Page. 9. Blood Stagnized Page. 13. Bone^ splinterd
Page. 5^. Brain pained Page. 78. Breath ^hort to help Page. 13. Breasts sore or
Ulcer^ted Page. 11. Bunches to cure Page. 33.
C
CAncers Page. 25.28.35.48.49. Cancers to close Page. 84.85. Catalency Page. 63
Child in the Womb to stay Page. 17. Co^l^^k passion to cure Page. 8.19.
C^^tilla's Page. 71. Conception to strengthen Page. 14. Conservation of Sanity
Page. 51. Consumptions to cure Page. 14. Convulsions Page. 9.14. Coughs to cure
Page. 13 Cruent Page. 40.
D
Depraved Tentigo Page. 26.27. Diarrhaea Page. 31.32.41.42.85. Diarrhaea how
caused Page. 123. Diarrhaea of Urin Page. Idem. Diarrhaea of Vomiteing Page.
Id. Diarrhaea its signs Page. 126. Diarrhaea cured Page. 125.125. Dropsy Page.
72.88. Dycentry how caused Page. 122. Dycentry Page. 31.32.52.59 85.127
E
EPilepsy to cure Page. 12.4^.49.63, 64. Est^hiomenes cured Page.
25.28.35.41.47.49. Ethica Page. 77.80. Eyes blemished Page. 33. Eyes pore bl^nd
Page. 59. Eyes pained Externally. Page. 66. Eyes white and Cloudy Page. 33.
F
FEvers of the Blood Page. 92. Fevers acute, Epidemick, Intermitting, or Putrid
Page. 8.16.60 77.80.89. Fevers of the Reins Page. 92. Fevers of the Reins cured
Page. 95. Fevers of the Stomach Page. 89. Fe. Ibid their Sign Page. 90. Fevers
of the Liver Page. Ibid Fevers of the Liver cured Page. 95. Fevers of the Blood
cured Page. 96. Fevers their cure Page. 94. Fevers of the Reins their
description whether Quotidion, Tertian or Quarten Page. 96. Fistulas Page. 48,
49.70.71. Fistulas to close and dry Page. 84, 85. Flesh to create Page. 86, 87.
Floudings to stop Page. 10. Freckles in the Face Page. 13.
G
GOut cured Page. 12 Green sickness Page. 10.13. Gravil Page. 12. Griping in
the Guts Page. 9, 19. Gutta Page. 63.
H
HEad heavy or pained Page. 14. Heart Tremb. Page. 59.60.76. Hemrrhoides Page.
10.30 31.70. Herpes Running Page. 41.40. Hypocondraical Malencho. Page. 13.
Heat of the Reins Page. 92. Heat of the Reins cured Page. 95. Heat of the Reins
describ. Page. 96.
I
JAundies Page. 9.15.26.28.38.72.80, 81.98. Jaundies black Page. 99. Jaundies
blew or pallid Page. 99. Jaundies Red Page. Ibid Jaundies Yellow Page. Ibid
Jaundies their Signs Page. 100. Jaundies of the back bone Page. 111. Jaundies
of the brain Page. 113. Jaundies of the Gall Page. 114. Jaundies of the Heart
Page. Ibid Jaundies of the Lungs Page. Ibid Jaundies of the Reins Page. Ibid
Jaundies of the Spleen Page. Ibid Ja. Principle member Page. 110. Ja. External
member Page. Ibid Imposthumes acute Page. 51. Imp. Internal or External Page.
9.
L
Legs pained Page. 75. Leprosy Page. 21.23.88. Lethargies Page. 14.69.
Lientery Page. 32.85.122. Lientry of the Urin Page. 123. Liver Obstructed Page.
13. Liver pained Page. 78. Lost Complexion restore Page. 13. Looseness to stay
Page. 8.52. Lungs Diseased Page. ^7.80.
M
MAdness Page. 113. Matrix pained Page. 77.80. Matrix precipitated Page. 112.
Mat. suffocated Page. 63.65.11^. Men. stop Page. 13.30.40, 41.54.70. Menstrues
to bring down Page. 79. Milk to increase Page. 57, 58, 59. Mouth sore Page. 13.
Morphew Page. 13.2223. Muscels pained and Numbed Page. 8.
N
NO^ses, etc. Page. 55. Neuth^ Page. 66^
O
OBstructions Page. 10.13.15. Overflowing of the Menstrues, see Menstr. to
stop.
P
PAlsies Page. 12.64.69.76.88. Palpitation of the heart See hearts Trimbling.
Pallid Jaundies, See Jaundies Blew or Pallid. Persian Fire Page. 27.29.38.
Piles Page. 10. Plague a preservative Page. 19. Pleurisys Page. 9.16.75. Pox
Page. 13. Precipitation of the Matrix, see Maitrix precipitated. Pus^les Page.
88.
Q
QUalms of the Stomach Page. 19.
R
REd Jaundies, see Jaundies Red. Rein^ to Open and cleanse Page. 13.
Restriction of the Blood Page. 30. Rheumatisms Page. 12. Ring Worms Page. 13.
Running Herpes, see Herpes Running.
S
SCabs, Scales, Spots Page. 13.37. Scrophulas Page. 72. Secrets to cure the
Jaundies, etc Page. 109. Scurvy Page. 8.12. Sides pained Page. 8. Siphita
Stricta Page. 63. Small Pox Page. 9.19. Spleen to clanse and open. Page. 13.
Spleen pained Page. 78. Splinters to draw forth Page. 57. Stomach Concerned
Page. 7. Stomach pained Page. 8. Stomach to strengthen Page. 11.14. Stone,
Stranguary Page. 12. Surfits Page. 11.13.18. Synthena Page. 59.76.
T
TErms Obstructed Page. 10.13. Tetters Page. 13. Tumors to assuage Page. 18.
Tympany Page. 55.
U
Venom Page. 55. Vertigoes Page. 8.12. Vomitting to stop Page. 8.17.19. Ulcers
Page. 23.24, 35.37.47.69.82.83. Ulcers Cavernous Page. 68.75. Ulcers in the
mouth Page. 83, 84. Urin to provoke Page. 14.75. Urin sharp Page. 14. Urin to
stop Page. 52. Usnea Page. 43, 44.
W
WItchraft Page. 54. Wolf Page. 40. Women's labor hasten Page. 10.17. Womb
diseased Page. 10. Womb to Cleanse Page. 17. Womb to strengthen Page. 10. Worm^
Page. 9, 81.83, 84. Wounds Page. 22.24.26.28.35.40.47.82.83.84 86.
Y
YEllow Jaundi^s Page. 108.
A TABLE of Medicines and Preparations contained in this Book. Note, signifies
Russels Arcanums which I have added.
A
Chap. I. ANtimony Page 21. Ant. pre. in Leprosy Page Ibid in Morphew Page 22.
in Wounds Page Ibid in Ulcers Page 23.
Addition of Antimony in the Leprosy Page Ibid in the Morphew Page Ibid in
Wounds Page 24. in Ulcers Page Ibid

Chap. III. Arsnick prepared into Mummy Page 45. into Balsam Page 46. into
Liquor Page Ibid
Addition for Arsincal Mummy Page Ibid of the Balsam Page 47. of the ^^quor
Page Ibid

Ch^p. IV. Aurip^gment pre. for ^ist. Page 48. for Cancers Page Ibid for the
Esthomenes Page 49.
Addition for ^estulas Page Ibid in Cancers Page Ibid in the Esth^omene^ Page
Ibid

Chap. V. Aqua P^stilentialis Page 5. Aqua Regis Page 79.

B
BAl^am of Arsni^^ Page vide A^sni^al (...). Page 47.
C
Chap. VII. CAlaminaris prepared for Players Page 36. for Unguents Page Ibid
for the Eyes Page 37 for the Persian fire Page Ibid
Addition in Ung^^nts Page Ibid in Colliriums of the Eyes Page Ibid
Chap. I. Treat. III. Corals prepared for restrening the Menstrues Page 52, 53.
against Venom Page Ibid against Noyses Page Ibid against Witchcraft Page 54.
Addition in the Menstruse Page Ibid against Venom Page 55. in Noyses Page Ibid
in the other 4 SpeCies Page Ibid
Chap. III. Treat. III. Crystals Reverberated Page 58. Crystals Calcined Page
Ibid Sublimed Page Ibid Distilled Page Ibid

Chap. IV. Treat. V. Copper prepared in Ulcers Page 82. in Wounds Page Ibid in
Worms Page 83. in Ulcers of the mouth Page Ib.
Addition in Ulcers Page Ibid in Wounds Page 83.84. in Worms Page Ibid in
Ulcers of the Mouth Page Ibid


E
Chap. V. Treat. IV.Entali prep. in Fluxes Page Ibid
G.
Chap. I. Treat. V. GOld prep. in the Palsy Page 76. in Fevers Page 77. in
Dolours of the Matrix Page Ib.
Addition in the Palsy Page Ibid in Fevers Page Ibid in Dolours of the Matrix
Page Ib.
Gold purged Page 78

H
Chap. I. Treat. II. HEmatis prep. in Sanguinolent Ulcers Page 39. in immature
Flux^s of the Menstrues Page 40. in the L^xate Diarrhaea Page Ib. in the
Diarrhaea Page 41.
Addition in Sanguinolent Ulcers Page Ibid in the Menstrues Page Ibid in
immature Fluxes Page 42. in the Dysentery Page Ibid in the Diarrhaea Page Ibid


I
Chap. V. Treat. V. IRon prepared in Stiptick virtue Page 84. in Constrictive
Page 85. in Exiccative virtue Page Ib.
Addition in Stiptick virtue Page Ib. in Constrictive Page 86. in Exiccative
Page Ibid


K
Chap. IV. KAkimia prepared in the Dyscentery Page 31. in the Diarrhaea Page
Ibid in the Lyentery Page 32.
Addition in che Dysentery Page Ib. in the Diarrhoea Page Ibid in the Lyentery
Page Ibid.


L
Chap. V. LEthargary prepared in the Cancer Page 25. in the Esthiomenes Page
Ibid in the Red Jaundies Page 26. in Wounds Page Ibid in depraved Tentigo Page
Ibid in the Persian fire Page 27.
Addition in the Tentigo Page Ibid in the Esthiomenes Page 28. in Wounds Page
Ibid in the Cancer Page Ibid in the red Jaundies Page Ibid in the Persian fire
Page Ibid

Chap. VI. Lead pre. for incarnative Page 86.
M
MArcasite prepared Page 29. in restriction Page 30.
Marcasites pre. in Hemrrhoide^ Page 30. Addition in restrict^on of Blood Page
Ib. in the Menstrues Page Ibid in the Hemrrhoides Page 31.

Chap. II. Treat III. Magnet prepared in Juged Wounds and Ulcers. Page 56.
Addition in aforesaid Wounds and Ulcers Page 57.
Chap. VII. Treat. I. Mercury prep. for Incarnatives Page 87. in Laxatives Page
Ibid


P
Chap. IV. Treat. IV. PLumose Allom prep. in Palsy Page 69. Addition in the
Palsy and Lethargick Diseases Page Ibid
Pills of Laudanum Page 95.

R
Chap. I. REmarks on the Species Vitae Page 2. Regulus cum it is Page 3. Roch
Allom prepared ^n Ulcers Page 68.

S
Chap. II. Treat. II. SA^ifra^ prep. for Gravil Page 43.44. Additions for the
same Page Ibid.

Chap. V. Treat. II. Sulphur prep. in acute Diseases Page 50. in Asthma Page
Ibid in Conservation of Sanity Page 51.
Addition in acute imposthums Page Ibid in the Asthma Page Ibid in Conservation
of Sanity Page Ib.

Chap. VI^ Treat. IV. Sal^ Anatron prepared in Fistula^, Cintilla and Scrofulas
Page 71. Chap. VII.Salt G^m prepared for the Dr^psy and other preparations Page
72, 73. Chap. IX. Salt Nitre prep. in the Pleurisy Page 75. in Cavernous Ulcers
Page Ibid
Additions in the same Page 75.
Chap. II. Silver prep in Dolours of Brain Page 7^. in r^^^^tion of Fluxes Page
79.
in all the aforesaid Effects Page 80. Species Vitae Page 1. C^roborativa Page
5. Proprietates Page 5. Minor Page 6.


T
TInctura Regalis Page 3. Tutia prep for Blemishes Page 3^. in the Alb^go Page
Ibid in Bunches Page Ibid
Additions in the same Page 34.
Chap. VI. Talk prep. in Wounds Page 35. Additi^ for the same Page Ibid Tin
prep. in the Jaundies Page 8^^ in the As^^i^es Page Ibib in Worms Page 8^
Additions for the same Page Ibid

U
USe, Dose of the Species Vit^^ Page 1 Vitriol Treat IV. Chap. I. Page 62.
Vi^riol prep. in Species of the Falling Evil, as in the Analer^* Page Ib.
Vi^riol prep. in Suffocation of the Matrix Page 63 Vi^riol prepared in the
Gut^a. etc. Page Ibid
W
Chap. II. WHite Vitriol prepared in (...) Dolours of the Eyes Page 6^. White
Vi^riol prepared in the Neutha Page 6^^ Additi^ns for the same Page Ibid

Errata. Page 3 line 12. read throw. P. 16. l. 1. r. Pleuretica. P. 18. l. 17.
r. Dose from 6. gr. to 8. gr. P. 18. l. 26. r. and in a shorter time. P. 59. l.
16. r. Hemopt^^^ or Poreblind.

Species Vitae, etc.
CHAP. I.
THE best and purest Crude Platiophthalmon, Q. S. melt it in a large Crucible
with a strong fire till it bo^ls, then take it out, and cast it into a Tub
filled with fair Water, there will happen a great denotation; do thus several
times until you have melted a sufficient quantity of it: Now is your Mineral
divided into four Principles or Substances.

The first Substance is a Red volitile Sulphur, that swims on the Superficies
of the Water, which must be taken clean off, filthered, dried, sifted and
preserved for use.

Having thus far proceeded, and your Water quiet and clear, draw it out with a
Tap placed within four or five Inches of the bottom of the Tub; otherwise you
may take it out with Pans: Now you will find the true Species or Sulphur, which
is the second Substance lying spread all over the Superficies of your
Platiophthalmon, which separate, S. A. wash clean your Granulated Mineral with
fair water, then mix it with your other which you separated before, filther it,
dry it, sift it through a fine S^arce and keep it for use: So do you leave your
washed Mineral as a third Substance.

But your fourth Principle or Substance is that which flies away in a Fume,
(that is so hurtful to the Artist) which might be gathered into Flowers, if the
Artist would be at the charge of making along Machine, in form of Alludels or
Subliming Pots, with a Cover to his Tub, and a hole in the midst thereof to fix
his Machine, not forgitting a hole to be made in the Cover as Reason will
direct, to cast in your melted Minerel.

Remarks.
You must be sure to avoid the Fumes as much as you can, they being very
Hurtful and Injurious to the Operator: In melting of a hundred weight of the
Platiophthalmon you will find your true Sulphur of a very Red Color, after you
have washed and dried your Granulated Minerel, melt it a second time, you will
find your Sulphur not much alterd in Color, do thus five, six or seven times,
and you will see your Species considerably altered, it being of a blacker or
darker Color, little in quantity, and not so strong in quality; having thus
far proceeded mix all your quantities of Species which you gained in each
melting together, to bring it to its true Color; which Color cannot be
discribed, but a sample must be had of it: The Red Volitile Sulphur is mixed
sometimes to make your dark Species of a more brighter Color; or to make it to
work more stronger, which may be given in a lesser Dose if the Physician thinks
convenient.

CHAP. II. Tinctura Regalis (Alis) Mettalorum.
. OF lbj. put it into a Crucible, place your Crucible in a Wind-furnace, make a
good Fire about it, when the is red-hot, throw into it lbij. of in powder;
cover your Crucible, and continue a great Fire; when the shall be in perfect
fusion, through into it gradually six ounces of Salt Peter, a denotation will
follow, and the will melt, and when there do rise no more sparkles, pour out
your matter into an Iron Mortar, warmed and greased with Suit before hand, then
strike the sides of the Mortar with a hammer, to make the Regulus fall to the
bottom; when it is cold separate it from the Dross with a Hammer; melt it
again, and cast into it by little and little, three Ounces of Salt Peter; when
the denotation is over, pour it out into your Mortar warmed and greased, as
before, strike the sides to make the Regulus fall to the bottom, and when it is
cool, separate it from the Dross; repeat melting the Regulus twice more, each
time casting Salt Peter into it, you must observe to melt it well, before you
cast the Salt Peter into it, that the Star may appear, which is a sign of its
purity.

Take of this Regulus ix. powder it very fine, mix with it v. of Venus and
lbij. of Salt Peter pulverized; put it into a large Crucible, which must be
red-hot with a cover upon it beforehand, but you must mind to put it in, one
Ladleful after another ( i. e.) after the denotation of one Ladleful is over
you may put in the other, and so Continue until it is all in; shut up your
Furnaces mouth, and let there be an indiferent strong Fire about your Crucible,
and it will ly and flux heaving up and falling down for the space of one hour,
and when you see it fall to the bottom of the Pot, and will rise no more,
augment your Fire to the last degree: When it is melted, and the Net appears
upon it, pour it out into an Iron Mortar warmed and greased, and when it is
cool beat it grossly, and put it into a Bottle which you must stop close; so
have you your matter prepared.

. Of this matter, what quantity you please, put it into a Glass body, pour
thereon of the best Spiritus Vini enough to cover it two or three Inches above,
close the mouth of your Glass very firm, then shake it about a quarter of an
hour afterward, place it in your Athanor, and in the space of two or three
Days your Tin^ture will be Extracted, which keep for use.

CHAP. III. Species Coroborativa alias Pleuretica.
. SUlphuris lbj. Mummiae ij. Olibani ij^ Myrrhae elect j. Mastick ss. Sublima
omnia Simul, and Gummis remanentibus add Sulphuris lbj. and Iterum Sublima,
Tunc quibus duodecim uncijs, add ij. Mummiae pulverisat, and Cribrat and ad
usum serva.

CHAP. IV. Species Propietatis.
. CInabrium (alias) Vermilion, Cristallos Tartari pulverise it, also. Scammony
and Powder it, when your Cinaber and Cristols of Tartar is sifted, mix about
one hundred drops of Oderiferis oil, then add Scammony ana lbss.

CHAP. V. Aqua P^stilentiales.
BUtter-bur, Virginia stake root, Ele^ampane, Zedoary, Scorzonara, Cinnamon,
Bayberries, Myrrh, Gentian, Velerian, Ditta^y roots ana ij. Scabious,
Devils-Bitt, Plantain, Marygoulds, Bawm, Rosemary, Rue, Sage, Cardus
Benidictus, wild Camomil, Pimpernal, Germander, Scordium, Celendine, Wormwood,
Red Roses, Marum, St. John's-wort ana Mij. Juniper Berries, Jug-berries or
Leaves, Sem. Lovage, Sorrel, Basil, Citron, Annis ana iss. Spiritus Vini two
Gallons, Infuse all in it for twelve hours, then distill in Baln. Mariae to a
dryness; keep your Spirit to mix with a Cordial, S. A.

CHAP. VI. Species Minor.
. ANtimony and Sal. Armoniack ana, mix them and sublime them S.A. Gather your
Flowers, wash them with fair Water several times until you have taken all the
Agrymony off it, then dry it, sift it and preserve it for use.

CHAP. VII. His other Cordial.
. SEmen frigid Mayor and Minor ana j. Rad. Aristolochiae, long. rotund. ana j.
Cassia Lign. Cor^ Winterani. ana ij. Sem. Annis. Carvi Cardamum ana ij. Sem.
feneculi Mill. Solis Saxifrage ana j. Sem. Cymini iv. Sasafras Santal omn. ana
j. Sem. Dauci j. Infuse them twelve hours in two Gallons of Brandy, then distill
from them one Gallon; to each quart add six quarts of Postern Water, one pint
of Tincture Mettallorum, and one pint of spirit of Tansy with Saccha. lbij. to
dulcify it.

The use of the Species Vitae.
IN the beginning of every Disease (known or unknown) where the Stomach is
concerned, it is Expedient to give the Powder first, which, though it may not cure
(as in Apoplexies) yet it is more safe than any other Common known Remedy,
either of the Shops, or of any modern Physicians; because it is not only
subservient to Nature in preventing the formation of Diseases, but is also (if
timely taken) sufficient to Enervate, or Nullify there Existance when formed.
For in the Primary assaults of any Disease (that is upon the first perceivance
of Illness) being once or twice taken, it e^ther wholly prevents the growth and
Increase of that Disease, or renders it fit to be more easily cured with other
Medicines.

In Diseases arrived to some height, as of two or three Days or longer
continuance, especially if undeterminate: This Powder sometimes solely and
alone works (being taken at first twice or thrice a Day, and afterward Morning
and Evening) unto perfect Recovery; but in Intermitting Fevers I always give it
an hour before the Fit, in every Epidemic, Putrid or acute Fever, it answers
the Regular Intention of Nature, because it sometime Vomiteth, Purges, and
provokes Sweats (without the help of Clothes more than usual) and other while
stays Vomiting and Looseness arising from Natures Error, or Debility of
Parts, or Organs rectifying her Error and strengthening the Parts. Also it
stops those Morbifick Sweats that arise from Languishment, or alters such
Sweats, as are forced by Diaphoreticks, unseasonably used contrary to the
Intent of Nature.

In Vertigoes and all Dolor of the Head, Stomach, Back, or Sides; it is a
Medine of general use and service.

In the Iliack and Collic Passions, in Numness and all pains in the Muscles,
that happen from the Scurvy, or in any other congealed Distemper, or what may
be Comprehended under the name of Congelation; this Powder proves it self a
power ^^ll Remedy; because if taken in hot Posset drink, Sweats usually follow
the taking thereof. Also in every Scorbutic Distemper it is very available,
and acts as variously as the Scorbutic form is various ^ for in all
Fluctuations, or Diseases of Resolution, it is no less serviseable, then in
congealed Distempers; because being a Medicine truly Natural, Nature can use it
either way to her own benifit.

In Pleurisies, Bruises, and all Imposthumes inward or outward, it will
completely answer the Desire of a good Physician* for it powerfully resists
Putrefaction and though it cannot always prevent Impostu^^tion, or hinder
Putrefaction when begun, yet it ripens the matter begun to be Putrefi'd, and
afterward expels it when perfectly digested.

In the Bloody Flux it is a certain and speedy Cure even to admiration: Also in
the Griping of the Guts, attended with vehement Vomitings and a continual
Looseness, it effects so much beyond the power of other Medicines, as is
scarcely credible; yet the same Powder, in extreme Costiveness accomplisheth
the work by loosening the Belly.

In the small Pox, taken in the beginning of the Disease: It causes Vomiting,
Purging* or Sweats, and then binds the Body (as is fit) and brings out the
small Pox; fortifying the life as far as it is gifted for that work.

In the Jaundice no Medicine exceeds this, for it extirpates the Diseases Root
and Branch.

This Powder frequently taken, prevents the Formation of Worms in the Body,
where matter of Worms is made, it expels that; and if Worms be really formed,
enableth Nature to cast them out Alive or Dead

In Convulsions it is highly serviceable; for if it be given to Children new
born, and for sometime used, it prevents such fits, by carrying of those
Crudities Children bring with them into the World.

In all highly Malignant and Pestilential Diseases, it proves it self a true
succor to Nature, if taken every four hours, for in such cases it acts
vigorously toward expelling all Venomes.

In Femenine Diseases, all Intemperancies, Inordinancies, and Distemparatures
of the Womb, it is a certain and speedy Remedy.

If Women with Child take the Powder upon any sense of Illness; or where a
Tendency to Abortion is, it prevents the Danger thereof by strengthening the
Womb. In the Birth it brings on Pains, and hastens the Labor with safety, but
if the Natural time of Delivery be not near, it restrains Pains until that time
comes. It stops Floudings, facilitates the Birth and Cleanses as is fit,
curing the after Pains; and in Women Lying in, answers the Necessities of the
Patient either in Cleansing or Strengthening.

Likewise, the Monthly Flux is by this Remedy brought into due Order; i^
^^ordinate, it Checks that Inordinancy; if too little or not at all, it brings
down the same in due time and order, being taken at certain times of the Moon,
with respect had to the Age of Women or Maids, therefore in the Latter (with
other small helps) it sometimes cures the Green sickness alters the Inordinacy
of the Appetite, and brings them to a due state of Health and right Color of
Complexion.

In the Piles and Hemorrhoids it is a Medicine of singular Use; for it opens
the Piles or Dissolves them, it opens also the Hemrrhoids and cures them when
opened preventing Ulcers in the Parts.

Also in the Sore or Ulcerated Breast of Women, this Powder is of great service.

It strengthens a week Stomach enabling it to retain the Food and digest it;
especially if taken so soon as the party have Eaten. And in all weakness of old
Age so far as the first Digestion is concerned, it is of great Use.

In Surfeits contracted from excesses of Meats, Drinks, or over great Labor it
is singularly useful, because it either causes Vomitings, Stools, or provokes
Sweats powerfully, thereby to clear the first Digestion, or resolve the
congelation caused by those Excesses.

The Dose to a Man or Woman full grown is j. to a Child newly born 7 or 10
Grains, and so proportionably to all Ages between the Birth and full groth, it
is to be repeated once in 4, 6, 8, or 12 hours according to the manner of its
Operation, and the necesity of the Sick. The Vehicle may be taken in Beer, Ale,
Wine, or Mace-Ale as the Patients best like, or the Necessity of the Disease
require.

Note, In the use of this Powder let the following General Rule be always
observed, whether it works by Vomiting, Purging, Sweating, or Urin, so long
as any such Operation lasts it ought to be continued; so likewise in
restraining diseasy Sweats, Contra-natural Vomiting, or Purging continue the
Use of the same, until it be clearly seen, that Nature has no further need
thereof in that Exigency.

The Use and Dose of the Tinctura Regalis.
IN Apoplexies, Palsies, Vertigoes and Epilepsi^s, Rheumatisms, Gouts, Stone,
Stranguries (too frequent issues of the Scurvy) and other Distempers, that have
there Propagation from things Congealing or too much Acrimonious, infering
Pains or Numness, etc. It has been by Experience found, this Tincture to be of
General use and service, if taken in the following order, considering most of
the Diseases above named, are either Hereditary or of long continuance, or
both: It is Necessary in all the aforesaid Cases, that this Tincture be taken
daily four times a Day (in Beer, Ale, or Wine) Twenty Drops at a time when the
Stomach is most Empty; but Especially, let it be taken in the Morning fasting,
and at Night going to Bed, without mixing the same with any Specific, or
direct-working Medicine; tho it must be understood, that the Tincture must
never be taken but in some Liquor or another.

In Scorbutic Affects, appearing in other forms than above described, use the
Tincture in the same manner, until the Disease be abated, never using any other
Medicine with it (Except my Powder) only the Dose must sometimes be increased,
as it must also in tendencie^ to Stagnization, whereof Chilness, and Coldness
are forerunners.

In all Impurities of the Blood of what kind soever, whether Pox, Surfets,
Scabs, Tetters, Scales, Ringworms, Spots, Freckles, Morphews, Sores in the
Mouth or other parts, if constantly taken (in manner aforesaid) for a month
together, viz. fourtimes a Day' or as often as the Afflicted Party drinks, and
the External parts washed, with his or her Urin every Morning and Evening* it
will prove it self a very Effectual Remedy.

In the Green sickness and Femenine obstructions, this Tincture is of singular
Use, if taken three or four times a Day in drink; for it restores their lost
Complexion, and opens all obstructions of the Spleen and Liver^: Also it
cleanses the Spleen and Reins, eases the Dolours of the same; and is of
admirable service, in Hypocondraical Melencholly. But in these Distempers it
must be taken in all Drinks, or Liquid Meats the Patients Use, viz. fifteen
Drops at a time, and constantly every Day until their Afflictions are altered.

In the Distempers of old Age or declining Age, as Asthma's, Coughs, etc. that
arise from the debility of the Transpirative faculties; by reason of which,
they Labor under shortness of Breath, and troublesome Phlegm, it is
benificial: For although this Tincture cannot wholly take of these Distempers
from Aged Persons, yet it does much alleviate them; provided it be frequently
taken, and that in a large quanty, viz. Forty drops at Night going to Bed, and
also every Morning fasting.

In Suppression, Difficulty or sharpness of Urin it is an Effectual Remedy, if
twenty drops be taken Morning and Evening in Mace-Ale, or in a decoction of
Mallows if they design Ease, or Parsley roots if they intend Expulsion.

In Convulsions, Lethargies, great Pains, Weights in the Head it is profitable
if taken four times a Day twenty Drops at a time.

Against Pains in the Stomach, and Weaknesses thereof, it is very Efficatious if
thirty or forty Drops be taken at a time, twice or four times a Day in drink,
when the Pains begin to invade, and the use thereof continued till the Dolor
ceases. Only in this case let the Partys so grieved be sure to take care, never
to Eat or Drink, until they are assured, that what they Eat and Drank before be
well Digested.

In imbecility of the Generative faculty, or in Weakness, Coldness, and
unaptness to Conceive, this Tincture is very profitable if twenty Drops at a
time be taken in Sack, three times a Day, viz. in the Morning fasting, one hour
before Dinner, at four a Clock after noon, and the fourth time at Night going
to Bed, in mace-Ale, especially if the Powder be used with it. This method must
be continued for a Month together.

For Recovery of Srength in Consumptions, where the Lungs are not Ulcerated,
this Medicine ought to be given, by ten Drops at a time, as often as the
Patient takes any thing Liquid (whether Broth, Milk, Gellies, or Emulsions of
any kind) as also in all his or her Drink.

In the Jaundies it is no less Effectual; if thirty or Forty Drops be taken at a
time in what drink the Afflicted party best likes, in the same manner as
before, and the use thereof continued, till the Urin be clear as it was before
the Disease invaded.

Against after pains in Child bed, and to open Obstructions, this Medicine
yields Relief, if ten Drops be given to Women in that condition (in their usual
Candle) every time they drink it.

A Child of a year old may take two drops in two spoonfuls of Breast milk, and
so proportionably.

Note, In taking or administering this Tincture, it is very convenient not to
suffer your Selves, Friends or Patients, to be over persuaded by any Arguments
whatsoever, to take Purging or Solutive Medicines. although your Friends or
Patients Bodies seem to be somewhat Costive: For so doing you will much retard
the benifit which would naturally accrue from this Tincture, by its
Transpirative virtue. And let this be a caution to All, in every kind of
Distemper where this Medicine is used, not to take or intermix any other things
(except as is above in this Treatise described) with the same.

The Use and Virtue of the Species Pleureticum.
IN the Pleurisy it is a speedy Remedy, for if one Paper of it be given at
first, and another twelve hours after, or at Night, and a third in the Morning
fasting, it totally carries off the Pleurisy let it be never so violent, with
out Phlebotomy.

In all old Bruises where the blood is Coagulated or Clotted, this Powder is an
excellent Remedy, being taken Night and Morning for five or six Days together,
it dissolves those Clots, and gives the blood its true Circulation, puts the
Body into a fine breathing Sweat.

It preserves from Pestilential Air, if half a Paper be taken in a Morning
fasting.

In Fevers it is of great Use, if half a Paper (which is ss) be taken Night and
Morning in such Liquor as the Patient best likes. The full Dose to a Man or
Woman is j.

The Use and Virtue of the Species Propietatis.
THe use of this I have not my self experienced, but as I learnt from one that
has used it, it is a gentle Purge, rarely Vomiting and Gripes not. The Dose
from twenty to thirty Grains.

The Use and Virtue of his Cordial.
WHatsoever (almost) can be said of the Powder, may also be truly averred of
this Medicine, which is as general as that. In Distempers of Women (because
pleasant to take) it proves more serviceable than that, by reason of the nice
Palats of most Women: It prevents Abortion, stays the Child in the Womb (if the
Ligiments happen not by some Accident to be broken) unto the full time of
Delivery, when that is come it hastens the Birth as is fit, and after the Birth
cleanses well, and either prevents or cures the Afterpains; but more readily
if the Powder be taken in it so soon as the Woman is laid. This I have very
often proved by my proper Experience. In Women's Distempers the Powder cannot be
taken in a more proper Vehicle than this Cordial. To Men also where Wine is
abhorred, I give it both as a Vehicle for the Powder, and also to comfort them.
If a Vomiting Potion, or a common Cathartic be given to the prejudice of the
Patient, this Cordial either st^ays the Vomiting, or makes the matter move
upward with much more ease. Also, if the Purg cause urgent Pains and works not,
this given (if not too late) with the Powder produces a Laudable Evacuation to
the saving of Life, as I have sometimes seen, etc. The Dose from one Spoonful
to three or four as need shall be.

The Use and Dose of the Species Minor.
THis Powder is very serviceable and Effectual in the King's Evil (as I know by
experience) for in all Tumors arising from the Evil it certainly asswageth, or
else brings them to Suppuration and breaks them, and all other Tumors of what
kind soever, it will either Break or Dissolve them: It Is also a sovereign
Medecin in all manner of Surfits; if a Dose be taken in the Morning fasting in
any Liquor as the Patient best likes, for it frees the Body (both upwards and
downwards) of the matter offending, and causes a good Appetite. The Dose about
ten or twelve for a Man; much more might be written of this Powder, but let the
Ingenious find them out.

Headrich] If it be so benificial in the curing of Tumors, it would be very
serviceable to Surgeons that have stubborn Tumors in hand: For being such a
Potent Medicine of it self inwardly given, What would it be when Asistance is
also applied outwardly? It must certainly facilitate the Cure with more ease in
a shorter time.

A Medicine for the Colic aded by the Publisher.
. AQua Milissae, Aqua Vitae, Suc Chelidonum ana iij. flos alb. iss. mix and
digest them for twelve Days, Dose ss.

The virtue of the Aqu^ Pestilentiales.
IT is not only good in the Plague, but a great preservative against Malign and
Epidemical Distempers.

It is a very good Cordial to prevent any sickness coming from Cold if two or
three Spoonfuls be given at Night going to Bed, for it will expel the Malignity
by Sweat; if a Sponful be taken in the Morning fasting it preserves from ill
Air and causes a good Apetite.

It drives forth the small Pox, if two Spoonfuls be taken at the assault of
the Disease.

It is good to allay Qualms of the Stomach if a Spoonful be taken Morning and
Evening, and stays Vomiting.

It is a present Remedy in the griping of the Gutts.

Theophrastus of Preparations.
CHAP. I.
Of Antimony, Silver Marchasite. Of White, and Red Cachymia. Of Talck fluid,
and Thick. Of Tutia Calaminaris, Lythargiry.
Of Antimony.
The Virtues of Antimony are in Morphew. Leprosy. Elephantia. Wounds. Ulcers.


The Preparation of Antimony in Species of the Leprosy, is thus.
. OF Antimony very well beaten lbj. of Distillate lbiv. of Crude white Tartar
lbss. reduce all to a very subtle Powder, which distill by Retort, and a red
Oil will come forth.

Antimony has also another process, for i^ it be used for the Cure of another
Disease, another Preparation is also required; viz. One in Wounds, another in
the Leprosy, and so of^ the residue. For you would exceedingly Err, if you
should use Antimony in Wounds, as in the Leprosy.

The Preparation of Antimony in the Elephantia, is as in the Leprosy.

The Preparation of Antimony in the Morphew.
. Antimony well beaten, lbss. Tartar calcined, Allom, of each as much; make Lay
upon Lay, put them in Fire of Reverberation heightened to the fourth Degree;
then distill, and and a Red thick Oil will come forth par se.

Lay upon Lay, or S. S. S. is, when there is one Lay of Allom and Tartar mixed,
and then upon that another Lay of Antimony, upon which Allom and Tartar etc.

The third Preparation in Wounds.
. Antimony, Tartar calcined, of each lbss. Alcohol of Wine one Kissed. make a
mixture, which distill by Alembeck to the resolution of the matter. Of this
dissolved matter,. j of Alcohol of Wine, iv. dry the mixture by Coagulation,
then reduce it to an Oil upon a Porphirie.

There is not a more excellent Cure in Wounds (excep wounds of the Head) then
is from Antimony.

The Preparation of Antimony in Ulcers, is this.
. Antimony, Colcothar, Flowers of Brass of each what quantity you please, make
S.S.S. and Reverberate them according to the degree of Reverberation. Then
Extract with Red Wine, and reduce into an Alcali. Reduce this Alcali to an
Unguent with Oil of Olive, and therewith anoint round about the Ulcers,

Additions of Antimony in the Leprosy.
. Of this Antimony j. Oil of the feces of Wine j. Oil of bitter Almonds to the
weight of all; make a mixture. If there be no Hoarsness of the Voice, anoint
with this once, or twice a Week. But if Hoarsness be, this Unguent will be
ineffectual.

Addition in the Morphew.
. Of this Antimony j. Alcohol of Wine 1 Kissed. Tragacant ij. Mucilaginy of Regal
Confound, Seed of Flea-wort, Gum Arabic, of each ij. make it up like an
Unguent.

In the Alopecia, and Morphew, one Process is thus. The Patient must be
anointed with this Unguent once, or twice a Week in an Hott house. So, a Crust
will arise, which being fallen off, you must absolve the Cure with the
foollowing Unguent.

. Of Sperniola, Campher of each i.ss. Oil of Ceruss iij. make an Unguent.

After the Crust is fallen off, anoint the place with this Unguent for eight
Days.

Addition in Wounds.
. Of this prepared Antimony vij. of the Juice of Tartar candid, of Oil of
Mirtils of each v. make a mixture, use this once every other Day, and no
Accidents will be to be feared.

Note, In the Summer you may add what Campher you please.

Addition in Ulcers.
. Of this prepared Antimony iij. of Colcotharine Oil ss. Lentiscine Oil
iij.ss. make an Unguent. With this anoint round about the Ulcer. So it cures
both the Cancer, Elephantia, and Estiomenes.

Oil of the rindes of mountain Siler, is Lentiscine Oil.

CHAP. II. Of Lithargiry.
The Virtues of Lithargiry are, in Cancer, and Fistula. Deparaved Tentigo.
Estiomenes. Red Jaundies. Persian Fire. Wounds.


The Preparation of Lithargiry in the Cancer.
. LIthargiry beaten lbss. Water of Salt, Allom of each lbj. White Vinegar lbiv.
mix all, and over Coals evaporate to the Consumption of these Waters. Of this
Lithargiry. what you please, and with a like quantity of Fountain Water,
extract the Colors for a Night, then dry the Extract.

Lithargiry after this manner prepared, is also profitable for Fistula's.

The Preparation in the Esthiomenes.
. Lithargiry lbj. Tartar Calcined lbss. of Aquafortis, or Water of Soot of each
q s. common Salt melted, Roch-Allom of each vj. In fire of the fourth degree
Reverberate these, with the aforesaid Water, and reduce in manner of an Alcali.

Water of Soot, is a Water distilling from Sooty Tiles in a rainy Season.

The Preparation in the Red Jaundies.
. Myrrh, Frankincense of each j. Lithargiry iv. most strong Vinegar lbss. make
a Decoction.

The Preparation in Wounds.
. Lithargiry four times whitened with Vinegar lbss. Juice of Featherfew, of the
Lesser Comphry, of Round Aristolochy of each a like quantity; make a mixture
with Mucilaginy of Earthwormes.

The Preparation of Lithargiry for the depraved Tentigo.
. Lithargiry washed lbj. Roch-Allom lb^.ss. make a mixture, which being
perfectly well ground, Reverberate in Fire of the ^ourth degree, for four hours
space, then E^^ract the Alcali with Fountain (...) remaining Lithargiry, and a
(...) of Roch-Allom, proceed as (...) the Lithargiry be all extracted.

The preparation is made, when the Lithargiry is put in Roch Allom for four
hours. Then. of this disti'd Alcali, of the Waters, of the Fountain, and of
Soot of each lbss. mix altogether.

The Preparation in the Persian Fire.
. OF Lithargiry lbj. of Red Realgar ij. Sal Armoniack lbss. mix them, and put
the Mixture into a Sublimatory; from which sublime it ten or twelve times, then
pour on hot Water, and the Lithargiry will be separated.

An Addition in the depraved Tentigo.
. Of this Lithargiry j. of common Realger j. of the Juice, or Water of
Celandine, q. s. make it up in manner of an Unguent.

With this anoint a Cloth very thin, and apply it four or five times. So the
Skin will wax Red, and the Stink begone. Afterward use this Receipt.

. Of this Lithargiry j.ss. Mucilaginy of Fenugree, Earthworms of Nitree of each
q. s. make an Unguent.

Note, Earthworms of Nitre, are Worms found in Dung.

An Addition in Wounds.
Of this Lithargiry iv. Oil of Campher j. Crocus Martis iv. Reduce all to the
form of an Unguent.

This must be used in Wounds, every Day anointing them very well, once or twice
there with.

An Addition in the Estiomenes.
. Of this Lithargiry iv. Oil of Campher j. Powder of Celandine, and Galls of
each ij. make a Powder.. of this Lithargiry iij. Mucilaginy of Comphry,
Mucilaginy of Earthworms of Nitre, Oil of Myrtles of each q. s. This in the
form of an Unguent, Cures.

An Addition in the Cancer.
. Of the Juce of Horehound, and Arsmart of each j. Lithargiry prepared ij. Oil
of the Yolks of Eggs q. s. reduce those to an Unguent.

An Addition in the Red Jaundies.
. Of this Lithargiry prepared ss. Roch-Allom ij. Water of Salt j.ss.

An Addition in the Persian Fire.
. Choice Vitriol, iv. Galls ss. Frankinsense j. Lithargiry prepared, the weight
of all in Wine, and Vinegar q. s.

While any burning is, so long must this be used. And the more the Foot Burns,
the better it is.

CHAP. III. Of Marcasite.
Gold or Silver Marchasite, is angular like a Dye.

The Virtues of Marchasite are, in Restriction of the Blood, of the Menstrues,
and Hemroides.

Preparation of Marchasite.
. OF Marchasite iv. Pitch, Colophony of each vj. Rosin of the Firr, the weight
of all: Reduce these to a Calx.

Note, This reduction into Calx is made, by burning the matter in a Crucible,
that it may flow as Wax, two or three times until it be very Hot, etc.

The Preparation in Restriction.
. Of Marchasite very well beaten ij. Oil of Linum vij. when these two are
conjoined, you must set the mixture on fire, then what remains is the true
matter.

Preparation in the Hemroides.
. Marchasite ss the most pure Alchol of Wine lbj. mix them, etc.

An Addition in Restriction of Blood.
. Of this Marchasite j. Corals ss. Plantane seed ss. make a subtle Powder.

This must be streued on, and into Wounds, or mixed with Vinegar, bound below
the Wound, so it will cohibit the same.

They who by a fall Spit Blood, must drink the same Powder.

Addition in the Menstrues.
. Of this Marchasite ss. Oil of Sandarach q. s. reduce it to the form of an
Unguent.

In the immoderate Flux of the Menses, the Navel must be anointed twice or
thrice.

Addition in the Hemroides.
. Of this Marchasite iij. Salt Gemme, Mummy of each j. make a Powder.

The swelling Hemroides being first cut, this Powder must be strewed in.

CHAP. IV. Of Kakimia.
The Virtues of Cakimia are, in Dysentery. Diarrhaea. Lientery.


The Preparation in the Dysentery.
. OF Kakamia well beaten vj. the Rust of Iron ss. keep them in the second
degree of Fire, for six or seven hours, Afterward reduce the matter to an
Alcali.

The Preparation in the Diarrhaea.
. Of Kakimia prepared as above, Oil of Nutmegs enough to incorporate it, reduce
it to the second degree in form of a Bolus, [or, reduce it to the form of a
Bolus, by Fire of the second degree.]

Tte Preparation in the Lientry.
. Kakimia prepared as before, and Gum Arabic dissolved in Plantane Water; make
a Bolus as before.

Addition in the Dysentery.
. Of this Kakimia ss. of Pidgeon assat q. s.

Addition in the Dyarrhaea.
. Of this Kakimia j. Treacle iij. Terra Sigillata ss. make a Bolus. The Dose
from j to ij. ss. give it Morning, Noon, and Night.

Every third Day abstein; afterward repeat it, so doing thrice.

Addition in the Lyentery.
. Of Kakimia prepared j. Crocus Martis ij. Red Corals ss. Treacle q. s. make a
Bolus. Dose from ij. to iij. or iv. Morning and Evening every Day.

CHAP. V. Of Tutia.
The virtues of Tutia are, in Blemishes of the Eyes. Whiteness, and Nodes of
the Eyes. Bunches, or Crookedness.


The Preparation for Blemishes of the Eyes.
. OF Tutia j. white Vitriol, Juice of Eyebright of each a like quantity; make
it in manner of a Bolus, by the second degree of Fire.

Hence is made an Unguent profitable for the Eyes.

The Preparation in the Albugo, or Whiteness of the Eyes.
This preparation is made, by extinguishing Tutia in Milk, and afterward
infusing it in Rosewater for a Night. This Water put into the Eye, takes away
the white Cloudiness.

In Bunches.
. Of Tutia iv. Salt fuse, Calx vive of each vj. make, S. S. S. and reduce the
matter to an Alkali, by Fire of the fourth degree.

Addition in Blemishes of the Eyes
. Of this Tutia ss. Viscosity of Frogs ij. Oil of Tyles ss. make a Collyrium.

If blemishes, or spotts in the Eyes appear yellowish, and shine, they are
reverted.

Addition in the Albugo.
. Of this Tutia j. white Vitriol vij. Campher beaten j ss. make a mixture with
water of Roses, or Fennel.

All Animals that have Feet are obnoxiaus to this Disease.

The Albugo invades the Eyes in Goats, and other Animals as well as ^in Man. In
Men this Water must be adhibited with Campher, to prevent Inflammation.

Addition in Bunches.
. Of this Tutia j Salt Anatron, or ^ae^ Vitri, Salt fuse of each j. Distilled
Urin xij. make a mixture.

The Process is, to give this mixture to be drank by the strumose Persons,
Morning, and Evening, for three or four weeks together. This Medicine takes
away all Bunches except of the Aged.

CHAP. VI. Of Talk.
The virtues of Talk are, in Ulcers. Humid Wounds.


The Preparation in Wounds.
. TAlk, Ashes of Bones, Oats, of each equal weight; Reverberate them for a day
and a Night in Fire of the fourth degree, then wash and dry the Calx.

Talk dries the bottom, or Basis of a Wound, that it cannot pass into a
Fistula: So also in Ulcers it dryes powerfully: It must not be used above three
days.

Addition in Wounds and Ulcers.
. Of this Talk j. Liquor of Mummy, and Turpentine washed, of each enough to
deduce it to the form of an Unguent.

It cures the Esthiomenous, Cancrous, and other running Ulcers.

CHAP. VII. Of Calaminaris.
The virtues of Calaminaris are, for Plasters. Colliriums, and The Persian
(...).


Both in Ulcers, and in Wounds add Calaminaris; in Plasters where incarnating
is needful. For Colliriums, i^ neither the Albugo, nor Blemishes of the Eyes
be, as in Red, or Blood-shot Eyes, it is a Principal Experiment.

The Preparation of Calaminaris for Plasters.
. OF Calaminaris washed (that is pure) j. Colcothar, Sulphur vive of each,
j.ss. make S. S. S. give to it Fire of the fourth degree for one Day and Night,
then wash the Calx.

Preparations for Unguents.
. Of this Calaminaris prepared iij. Oil of the Yolks of Eggs j. make a Bolus
with Gum Arabic, administering Fire of the second degree; then wash the matter.

Preparation for the Eyes.
. Of this prepared Calaminaris j. distilled Vinegar vj. make an Extraction then
dry it.

Preparation for the Persian Fire.
. Of crude Calaminaris lb ss. Water of Water Lilly vj Plumose Allom ss. digest
these in a Glass for a Weeks space, then distill the digested matter.

This is the description of Geber; but Peter de Argillata errs in thi^
description; for it is a Medicament for the Pana^ition, and not to Combustions.

Preparation for the Persian Fire.
. Of the Apostolicon Plaster vj. Calaminaris ss. Campher j. make a Plaster.

In Unguents.
. Of the Agrippine Unguent iv. Unguent of Flos Aeris ss Calaminaris x. make a
mixture; this is excellent in Ulcers, Itch, and in the Scab.

Addition in Colliriums of the Eyes.
. Of Calaminaris j. Waters of Eyebright, Fennel, Roses of each iij. make a
Collirium, etc.

Addition in the Persian Fire.
. Of Calaminaris vJ. Water of Vitriol, and of Galls, some use Atramentum
Sutorium, both in the Persian Fire, and in the Jaundies.

Treatise the second.
CHAP. I.
Of the Stone Haematis. Of Saxifrage. Of Arsenick. Of Auripigment, and Sulphur.
Of Haematis.
The virtues or more principal Arcanums of the Stone Haematis are these, in
Sanguinolent Ulcers. Resolved Menstrues. Unripe profluxes of the Matrix* Laxate
Disenteri, and Diarrhaea.


Preparation in Sanguinolent Ulcers.
. OF Haematis iij. Lephanteous Clay (that is such Argilla, as small Cucurbits
are made of) Bole Armeni of each iij. make a Bolus with Tragacant dissolved in
Vinegar, Reverberate it in Fire of the fourth degree; afterward extract an
Alcali.

In Wounds, in the Wolf, in the Cruent, and running Herpes, this Stone is
exceeding profitable: It constringeth the Veins, that the Blood can no more
flow out; being strewed upon, and in them, or the affected parts.

Preparation in the Menstrues.
Of the Haematis iv. Mastick dissolved x. Amber j ss. make a mixture, and
ablution with the decoction of Water of Allom.

Those Menstrues are to be stopped, by which the Countenance is made pale; in
which the use of this is safe, and entirely heals. After the decoction has
continued for seven hours, of the Haematis, a Clay is made; of which Troches
are formed for the Menstrues.

Preparation, in immature Fluxes of the Matrix.
. Of the Haematis, j. Oil of Nutmegs, Oil of the grains of Acts, Oil of Peter
of each iij. make a composition, Dose j.

This must be administered in Rose Water boiled with Plantain Roots, or with
Plantain Water only: It stays the immature Flux, where no Torsions, or Colic
is; but if they be present, it is the Generation of the Stone.

Preparation in the Laxate Diarrhoea.
Haematis Red Corals, Spodium of each v ss. Tansey, to the weight of all, make
Troches with Mucilaginy of the Viscosity of Botin, Dose ss.

Preparation in the Diarrhaea.
. Of Icy Allom, Haematis, Crocus Martis of each a like quantity; make Troches
with Gum Arabic dissolved in Plaintain Water: Dose from j to j ss.

The Plantain Water is extracted from the Roots and Herbs.

The Stone Carniolus held in the hand stops the Flux of Blood, so does not the
Stone Haematis.

Addition in Sanguinolent Ulcers.
. Of this prepared Haematis ss. Galls ss* Seraphinum j ss. Oil of Cheyry or
Kerva, flowers of Violets, q. s. for incorporating; make an Unguent in acute
Ulcers.

Add Liquor of Mummy instead of Oil of Cheyry, so it will be in use of the
Herpes, Estiomenes, and Cancrena's.

Addition in the Menstrues.
. Of this Haematis j. Long Pepper, Nutmegs of each ss. As^es of Frogs folicul.
iv. make Troches with Mint Water; Dose from j. to ij.

Addition in immature Fluxes of the Matrix.
. Of this Haematis j. Tragina [one] Kissed, Water of Horehound, Juice of Baum of
each j. make a mixture: Dose from ss. to j ss.

Addition in the Disentery.
This is effected by Haematis prepared in Red Wine, and in it Iron is
extinguished; or it is given in Treacle.

Addition in the Diarrhaea.
. Of this Haematis iij. Pearls ss. Mummy liquefied, to the weight of all, make
a mixture, Dose from ij. to iij. or iv.

CHAP. II. Of Saxifrage.
It is a Stone expelling all Tartar, Usnea, Gravel, and Pruina.

The virtues of Saxifrage take away, Gravel. Usnea. Pruina. Grandines, and
other Tartareous kinds.


Saxifrage is properly a pale Crystal; and is called Citrinolus, or the Citrine
Stone: The Citrine Stone is a medium, between a Cristal, and a yellow Beril; it
makes a Liquor like Alcali: Dose ss. in good Wine.

The Preparation, for Gravel, Vsnea, etc.
. SAxifrage j. Borax ij. Salt Gem vj. Salt-fuse j. make S. S. S. and
Reverberate the whole in Fire of the fourth degree, from Sunrise to Sun-sett,
that it may be reduced to an Alcali; Dose ss. with white Wine.

The second Preparation, for Gravel, etc.
. Of this Saxifrage Reverberate it per se, in Fire of the fourth degree, of
this Reverberate. j. Ashes of the Roots of the greater Radish j. Alcali of the
Roots of Stone Parsley j. make a mixture per se, Dose from j. to iij. or iv.

The first Addition.
. Of this Saxifrage j. Milium Solis ij white Wine x. Dose from iv. to vj.

The second Addition.
. Of this Saxifrage j ss. Seed of Parsley, Rocket of each j. Medon. clarifi'd x.
Dose from iv. to vj. or vij.

It is to be administered against the Tartar so long, as until the Urin flow out
freely.

CHAP. III. Of Arsenick.
The virtues of Arsenick are, in Wounds. Ulcers, and other Apertions.


Arsenick is a Soot slowing from Metals, and especially from Lead; and it is
the Realgar, or Fulgor of Metals.

The first Preparation is the Reduction of Arsenick into Mummy: In Preparation
the Venom is to be taken away: Nothing heals Ulcers, and Wounds more
perfectly, than Arsenick preparld: Also it cures Syreons, and all Ulcers,
Cancrena's, and Fistula's.

Arsenick of Lead is the Best, Silver next, and in goodness next to it is
Arsenick of Tinn; after these, that which fumes from ^^on and is like to Copper.

The second Preparation of Arsenick, is the reduction of it into Balsam.

The third into Liquor.

Thus Arsenick has three Preparations, viz. into Mummy. Balsame, and Liquor.


The first Preparation into Mummy.
. WHite Arsenick vj. Salt fuse, Colcothar of each j ss. make a mixture
Reverberate it in Fire of the second degree for three or four Hours; which
expired take it from the Fire; grind the upper part of it* and again prepare it
as above, so doing five or six times.

The Preporation into Balsam.
. White Arsenick x. Talk iv. Calx vive, xv. make a Subtle mixture, which
Reverberate in Fire of the fourth degree for twenty four hours.

The Best is to be removed, (which is like Glass) from the Venom which adheres
to the bottom of the Calx. Therefore what is taken from the Top must be ground,
put into a glass and set in a Celler, where it will produce an Oil or Balsam.

Preparation into Liquor.
. Crude or White Arsenick lb ss. Salt Nitre lbj. Salt Gem. ss. make a Subtle
powder, which Reverberate in an open Reverberatory for twenty four hours.

These so mixed may be put in Fire of Reverberation, and the Arsenick burnt for
three hours; afterward melted when Liquefied, pour it into Water, and then
Coagulated in manner of an Alkali.

Addition for Arsenical Mummy.
. Of this Mummy j. Liquor of Mirrh, Botin of each ij. Reduce all to the form of
Oil.

This Oil is excellent in Ulcers, and in Wounds: For, whether they be
Estiomenes, or other Ulcers; this in them, is an admirable Mundificative, and
noble Incarnative.

Addition of the Balsam.
. Of this Balsam iij. Oil of the Yolks of Eggs x. Turpentine distilled j. make a
mixture.

Both the Mummy and Balsam are to be used every twelve hours.

Addition of the Liquor.
. Of this Liquor xv. Rinds of Granates vj. Bark of Frankincense ij. Mucilaginy
of Botin, to the weight of all; make a mixture.

CHAP. IV. Of Auripigment.
Auripigment is a Minera, Yellow as Gold.

The virtues of Auripigment are, in Fistula's. Canceres, and Esthiomenes.


The Preparation for Fistula's.
. OF Auripigment j. Tartar Calcined iij. make S. S. S. then Reverberate them
for twenty four hours in Fire of the fourth degree.

This so decocted will flow; wherefore it must be taken out and ground,
afterward poured into Water, so will a White Powder settle to the bottom: This
is Auripigment prepared, which if you put into a Glass, etc. will be converted
into Oil. This Oil you must inject into the Fistula, or else apply a Cloth
moistn'd in it: But the Powder must be strewed upon Ulcers.

The Preparation for the Cancer.
. Of Auripigment v. Soot ss. Salt Armoniack iij. Reverberate the mixture for
one day and nigt in Fire of Reverberation, and reduce it to an Alcali.

This Alcali is a principal Arcanum in the Cancer.

Preparation for the Esthiomenes.
. Of Auripigment iij. Allom calcined vj. Administer Fire as above, with
Extraction of Alcali.

Addition for Fistula's.
. Of this prepared Auripigment ss. Rosin of the Pine j. Wax to the wait of
both; make a Cerote.

This is to be put into Fistula's.

Addition in the Cancer.
. Of this prepared Auripigment v. Ashes of Pigeons Dung, Oil of the Yolks of
Eggs, q. s. to make an Unguent; which use for the Cancer.

Addition in the Esthiomenes.
. Of this Auripigment v. Liquor of Mummy ij. Oil of Roses j ss. Mucilaginy of
the Seed of Fleawort, to the wait of all: Reduce the whole to the form of an
Unguent or Cataplasm.

If the Sick complain of violent heat, you must first anoint with of Campher,
then apply the Remedy.

CHAP. V. Of Sulphur.
The virtues of Sulphur are, in Very acute Imposthumes. The Asthma.
Conservation of Sanity.


Very acute Imposthumes are, the Pleurisy, Pest, and such like.

The Preparation for acute Imposthumes.
. SUlphur vive lbj. Colcothar, Salt fuse of each lb ss. make a subtle Powder,
which sublime.

After it is once sublimed, take the Sublimate, and with a new addition, as
above, sublime it thrice.

Sulphur vive is that which co-heres in Fragments, but not when it is dissolved.

Preparation for the Asthma.
. Of Sulphur fuse lbj. Raspings of Red-Sanders, Cypress, and Pine of each lbj.
make S. S. S. first Reverberating, and then reducing to an Alcali. Of this
Alcali. x. Myrrh v. Sublime these as other Sublimates.

Preparation in Conservation of Sanity.
. Of Sulphur iv. Oriental Saffron, Chebul Myrabolans, and Bellirican Myrabolans
of each j. Oil of Juniper berries enough to incorporate. Sublime these with a
most gentle Fire.

Addition in acute Imposthumes.
. Of this prepared Sulphur ss. Oil of Nutmegs j. Water of Speedwel prepared, to
the weight of all; make a Potion.

Addition in the Asthma.
. Of this Sulphur ss. Thebanum (alias Thebaick Opium) corrected iij. Treacle
enough to make them up in form of a Bolus; Dose from j. to ij. or iij.

Addition in Conservation of Sanity.
. Of this Sulphur ss. Red Myrrh, Oriental Saffron of each ss. and j. Hepatick
Aloes, to the weight of all; Dose from ss. to j.

Treatise the Third.
CHAP. I. Of Perspicuous, and not Perspicuous Gemms.
Of Corals. Of Crystal. Of Sapphires, Of the Magnet. Rubes, and Granates.
Emralds, Jacinths, etc.
Of Coralls.
The virtues of Corals are, for The Menstrues, and Fluxes thereof. Venom
inwardly taken. Noise, or Rumbling of the Belly. Witchcraft, if any one be
bewitched. Dumpishness, if one be Maniack, or Brainsick. Fear, if one be
Timorous. Melancholy, when any seem to themselves to be Wise, and are Fools.


The virtue and substance of this, is one and the same.

Corals simple, without preparation, restrein the inordinacy of Urine, and
Seidg; and of the Menstrues also in a long time; But being prepared they
operate sweetly, and without danger.

Preparation of Coralls for restraining the Menstrues, etc.
. OF Corals ss. Oil of Myrtles j. Olibanum j ss. Salt fuse ij. Calcine them in
Fire of Reverberation for twelve Hours, or longer; afterward wash the Calx
with Plantain Water.

Corals (as is said) restrain the Urine, but not the Menstrues.

Preparation of Corals against Venom taken.
. Of Corals well broken ij. Water of Masterwort lb ss. Salt Gemme, white
Vitriol of each ij. digest them for a month in Fire of the second degree; take
the Redness and Coagulate it.

In Venoms, the Medicament must be without a Body; because Venom is
incorporeal: The redness which settles to the Bottom, is the Medicine for
Venoms.

Preparation in Noises, or Rumblings of the Intestins.
. Of Corals vj. Ashes of Roman Cumin, and Beans of each iij. Allom prepared, as
much as the weight of all; make a mixture, which digest with lb ss. of Alcohol
of Wine dried for the space of two or three days; then dry the matter.

This is all over yellow. This preparation of Corals must be used with
Diacumin: And the Bloody Color proceeding from the prepared Corals, Separated
and dried.

Preparation of Corals against Witchcraft, Dumpishness, Fear, and Melancholy.
. Of Corals iij. Viscus Quercinus (or Missletoe of the Oak) St. Johnswort of
each iv. Storax Calamita, Laudanum, Gum of each j ss. Urin distilled lbij.
make decoction in a close Vessel for one Day and Night; then distill, and
cohobate, afterward dry as above.

Corals thus prepared wax Red and very hard; therefore they must be first
pulveris'd before adhibited for use.

Addition in the Menstrues.
. Of these prepared Corals, j ss. Tansey, Plantain of each j ss. Long Pepper,
Nutmegs of each ss. Make a Powder; Dose j. in a rere Egg.

It must be Injected into the Egg with Salt, and so Eaten, otherwise it helps
not.

Addition against Venomes.
. Of the prepared Corals v. Treacle, ss. the greater Dock the weight of all,
Alcohol of Wine dried lb ss. digest them for a Week; Dose from xv grains to ij.

The party that has drank Venom, must drink this in jj. of Water of Prunella,
or Roses, Reiterating his draughts often, until he Sweet and have no more sense
of the Evil.

Addition in Noyses, etc.
. Of the same Corals ij. Species of Diacumin iv. the prepared Blood of an
Hircus, the weight of all, make Tablets with Sugar; Dose as you please.

Hircus with Spagyricks, is a Young Buck Cony castrate, and brought up with
Diaphoretick Herbs; then he is fit for use.

Addition in the other four Species.
. Of this prepared Coral ix. Ostrutium transplanted, that is, Angelica v.
Viscus Quercinus j ss. make a mixture with Water of St. John's wort; Dose from
ss.

This is also an excellent Medicament in the beginning of a Tympany.

CHAP. II. Of the Magnet.
The virtue of the Magnet, is in Wounds. Ulcers.
with Rases, or Jaggs, and Splinters remaining

The Preparation in such Jagged Wounds, and Ulcers.
. OF the Magnet i. Calx of Eggs ij. make S. S. S. and Reverberate it for one
Day and Night, in Fire of the fourth degree: Then remove the Calx of Eggs.

Another Preparation.
. Of the Magnet j. Calx of Eggs vj. make S. S. S. in a Crucible; and
Reverberate for one Day and Night in Fire of the fourth degree; then Extract
and it will be prepared.

Otherwise not being prepared, it in bruising loses the true Efficacy of
Extracting. But being first prepared, and afterward beaten, and mixed with an
Appodeltoch, it egregiously operates.

Addition in the aforesaid Wounds and Ulcers.
. Of this Magnet ss. Amber ij. make a subtle Powder, which incorporate with an
Oppodeltoch, or Apostolicon Plaster, stiring it strongly.

This Plaster applied, extracts Splinters of Bones, and Bullets out of Wounds
and other Ulcers. If you beat the Magnet before it is prepared, the virtues
thereof will be Lost, (as we above mention) for without preparation it is of no
effect.

CHAP. III. Of Gemms.
The Cristial has this nature, viz. being drunk by Women, it generates Milk in
them abundantly.

The Preparation of Gemms is fourfold; the First by Reverberation; the Second
by Calcination; the Third by Elevation; and the Fourth by Distillation.

One Woman has need of more then a pound of Crystal (unprepared) before she
can perceive the increase of her Milk: Therefore it will be very expedient to
prepare Cristal before it be exhibited.

Reverberation of Crystal.
. OF Crystial lbj. Water of Entali lbi^ make a mixture by Imbibitions; the^
Reverberate the whole for twenty four hours so, of lbj.iv. will be left; Dose
ij.

Calcination of Crystal.
. Of Crystal iv. Mastick, Colophony, Sulphur of each ij. Calcine the whole in
Fir^ of Athanar; Dose j.

Elevation of Crystal.
. Of Crystal j. Salt Armoniack iij. reduce them to Powder, which put into a
subliming Vessel, and give Fire of sublimation.

This Sublimation must be reiterated five or six times, and the Crystal always
taken out then,

. Of this elevated Crystal ss. Common Water distilled iv. reduce it to an
Alcali* Dose ss.

Distillation of Crystal.
. Of the elevated Crystal j. Water o^ Nitre and Allom (made) without
distillation of each ij. digest all together for three or four Days; then
distill, and what shall be distilled Coagulate; the Coagulum resolve.

Coagulation must be made over a gentle and small Fire: I this Coagulate be set
in a Cellar, it will resolve into Water, which is the Ultimate preparation of
Crystal; Dose j.

After this manner as is now showed in Corals, all other precious Gemms, are to
be prepared.

The greatest virtue of the Rubie is in the Dysentery, and its dose is j. it be
crude; But if Reverberated; then its dose is ij. If Calcined, the dose is j. If
Sublimed ss. And if distilled but j.

Also Granates so distilled make the most powerful Collyrium for the Eyes.

Emralds, if prepared by distillation, profit or Pore-blind Haemoptoicks.

Sapphires if prepared according to the Third, or Forth preparation; takes away
Trembling of the Heart, especially, if distilled (Dose, grans v.) they remove
the Synthena, and Palpitation. The like is to be judged of other Gemms.
Bartholomeus Anlicus, has writ more touching Gemms, and Precious Stones.

Additions, for increasing Milk by Crystals.
. Of this prepared Crystal ij. Sperma Caeti, seeds of Lettice of each iv ss.
make a Powder, which administer with Water of Almonds.

Addition of Granates, in the Haemoptoick passion, and Trembling of the Heart.
. Of Granates ss. Epatick Aloes iij. Sulphur prepared j ss. make a mixture with
clarified Sugar; Dose ij.

This Medicine must be used continually unto the Fifth Day, least the trembling
of the Heart return again.

Addition of the Saphyre.
. Of the Saphyre iij. Amber dissolved jss. Storax Calamita j. make a mixture;
Dose from j. to j ss.

The Emrald Comforts Women in their dolours; and is in those Distempers a
principal Arcanum; if prepared by distillation, as is showed of Crystal.

Its Addition is thus.
. Of this prepared Emrald j. Liquor of Bawm j. Sothernwood ij. make a mixture,
Dose from three to six drops.

Addition in the Prepared Jacinth.
. Of Jacinth prepared j ss. Laudanum, that is, Gum j ss. make a mixture. This
is an excellent Arcanum in Fevers arising from putrefaction of Water and Earth.

If Fevers of this kind be familiar; let the Patient drink five, or four drops
in the new of the Moon: Then he may be sure not to be molested with such a
Fever, if he use this twice a Year, and always in the new of the Moon.

Treatise the Fourth.
CHAP. I. Of Salts.
Of Salt Gemme. Of Salt Entalick. Of Travelers Salt. Of Salt Nitre. Of Salt
Anatron. Of Salt of the Earth. Of Alloms, Vitriols, and Alcali.
All Salts are from the Element of Water, as all are from the Element of Water
also.

Of Vitriol.
The virtues of Vitriol, are in Species of the falling Sickness. Suffocations
of the Matrix. Siphita Stricta, or Nightwalkings. Gutta, and Pl^thorick Bodies.


Preparation of Vitriol in Species of the Falling Evil, as in the Analency,
Catalency, Epilency, etc.
. VItriol of Copper lbj. separate the Phlegm there from; then revert its own
Phlem upon the proper Colcothar; distill it, and repeat the distillation in Fire
of the fourth degree; Dose from ss. to j. before and after the Fit.

If the Disease arise from the Element of Vitriol, the cure must be made by
Vitriol: The Falling Evil is in the Salt of Vitriol: Wherefore in the Day of
the Fit, and before the Fit come, the Medicine must be exhibited.

The Epilepsy is a Mineral Disease, and the whole cure thereof is also Mineral,
in Salts and Spirits of Vitriol, exhibited before and after the Fit: Before
the Fit the Body is in an Ebullition: After the Fit the Patients sleep;
therefore immediately after sleep, before that Ebulition be totally ended, the
Medicine is to be given: For when the Body is sound, that will be to no Purpose.

Preparation of Vitriol in Suffocation of the Matrix.
. Of Vitriol purged from its Phlegm, and Colcothar ij. Peneroyal iv. Alcohol of
Wine ss. distill them; Dose from ss. to a scruple.

This is a most powerful Medicament in Suffocation of the Matrix.

Preparation in the Gutta, and Siphita stricta.
In the Gutta.. Of the aforesaid prepared Vitriol ij. Alcohol of Wine ij.
Allom, Jamenum ss. Mix them and reduce the Mixture into Liquors by Fire of the
fourth degree; Dose Externally ss. but Internally, from six to nine grains.

Externally is upon the place of the Syntheoma; and that place is where the
Disease begins, that is, in the Pulse; this is the Syntheoma thereof: But if
the Sick walk in his sleep, the Medicament must be bound to his Neck, and
Wrists.

In the Lesser Siphita, this truly is a Medicine; but in the Siphita stricta,
or Chorea viti, it is not a Medicine in the Gutta, the Medicament must be
administered to the forepart of the Tongue: Therefore if the Palsy be
concomitant, the Medicine must be applied to the Mouth and Tongue: And this
will be an effectual Remedy.

Addition in the Epilency, and Species of the Falling Evil.
. Of this prepared Vitriol j. Liquor of Viscus Quercinus, and of Horizon of
each ss. and 3 grains, make a mixture.

The Syntheoma of the Falling Evil is in the Nape of the Neck: In young Men, to
anoint the Nape of the Neck after the Fit with fatness of Castor is very
profitable.

Addition in Siphita strictta.
. Of this prepared Vitriol j. Seed of St. Johnswort ss. Amber 6 grains, make a
mixture.

Seed of St. Johnswort removes the Siphita Stricta.

Addition in Suffocation of the Matrix.
. Of this Liquor of Vitriol gran. 7. Granes of Acts j. Alcohol of Wine to the
weight of all, make a composition.

The place is the Navel, therefore it must be there applied.

If the suffocation be attended with Vomiting, other Medicaments are also to be
used Internally, etc.

The best preparation of Vitriol is, that it be separated from its Colcothar;
then that Alcohol of Wine be add^d to it in equal weight. This being done, put
parched Bread ( viz. Bread so dried, and Hardened, as it may in a Mortar be
ground to Powder) into the Liquor of Vitriol, then digest both together in
Horsedung, for a Month Afterward by distillation separate the Vitriol from the
Bread. Lastly, separate the Alcohol from the Vitriol by a Baln. of the first
degree. If the Vitriol have lost its acidness, it is of no effect.

CHAP. II. Of White Vitriol.
The virtues of White Vitriol are, in The Exteriors of the Eyes. Neutha.


This when a little Skin grows either in the Eyes, or Ears of Children in the
Birth. Neutha, are little Skins in any part growing from the Birth, as in the
Face, the Matrix, the Mouth, the Eyes, ^c.

White Vitriol is a principal Medicament in the Neutha, and for the exteriors
of the Eyes.

The Preparation for Exterior dolours of the Eyes.
. OF white Vitriol v. Oil of Soot ss. Oil of Campher ij. putrefy these in
Horsedung for a Month; then distill per descensum.

Oil of Soot is made, by putting Soot upon a Red-hot Iron-plate; for then, a
certain fatness arises and is left on the Plate round about; this is the Oil
of Soot, for Exterior dolours of the Eyes very profitable. If a thin Skin from
the Birth grow over all, or any part of the Eye; then you must use, and most
exactly mix it with water of Eyebright, Roses, or Fennel; with these Waters
that Oil must be rarefyed.

Preparation of Vitriol in the Neutha.
. White Vitriol j. Oil of Tartar, vj. Oil of Tiles v. distill them together.

Note, no Corrosion, or Erosion of the Neutha must be used.

Addition for Exterior dolours of the Eyes.
. Of the prepared Vitriol j. Liquor of Eyebright ij. Red Poppy j. make a
Collyrium.

Addition in the Neutha.
. Of this prepared Vitriol ss. Liquor of Henbane ij. Oil of Nutmegs granes vij.
make a Collyrium.

CHAP. III. Of Roch Allom.
The virtues of Roch Allom are, in Cavernous Ulcers. Scab, and Itch.
Estiomenes. Putrid, and lascivious Ulcers. Humid Ulcers.


The first Preparation of Allom for all these Ulcers.
. OF Roch Allom lbij. white Vinegar lbss. Salt fuse, one verto (alias iv.) by
boiling make a mixture in form of a Coagulum, which distill.

If Cavernous Ulcers be washed with this prepared water, they are perfectly
cured; but if by this Remedy they receive not curation, they cannot be healed
by any other.

Another preparation for all these Ulcers.
* Of Allom lbx. Juice of Selendine, Plantain of each lbj. Featherfew lb ss.
distill all together. Then. of this distilled Water lbj. and of common Water lbx.
make a Lixivium.

The use of this is by washing therewith very hott the effected parts, either
in the Alopecia, Tinea, or Ulcers.

CHAP. IV. Of Plumose Allom.
The virtues of Plumose Allom are, in The Palsy. Lethargick disease. Stupefied
Members.


The Preparation of Plumose Allom in the Palsy.
. PLumose Allom vj. Colcotharine resolved iv ss. Salt Armoniack iv. Resolve
these.

An insensive virtue arises from Plumose Allom; therefore this is the best
Medicament in the Palsy.

Addition in the Palsy, Lethargick disease, and Stupefied Members.
. Or this prepared Allom j. Sanguis Draconis iij. Liquor of Mummy viJ. reduce
it to the form of an Unguent.

The place is in the Hinder part of the Head, in the Nape of the Neck.

CHAP. V. Of Entali.
Its virtues are, in Fluxes, and Hemroides.


The Preparation in Fluxes, and in Hemroides.
. COmmon Tartar, Entali of each ij. Amber j. Mastich ij ss. Reverberate them in
Fire of the second degree; then reduce to an Alcal^.

The Place of Fluxes is in the Navel; in the Hemroides the place is in the
Backbone.

Addition in Women's Fluxes.
. Of this prepared Entali j Bolus adust iij. Haematis corrected j ss. make a
mixture.

Addition in the Hemroides.
. Of this prepared Entali iij. of Corals prepared iv. Oil of Nutmegs enough to
reduce them to the form of an Unguent.

CHAP. VI. Of Salt Anatron.
This Salt grows in Rocks, and is very like Usnea: This Usnea if decocted
becomes a Salt, which is Fell Vitri, or Glasgal.

Its virtues are, in Fistula's. Cintilla. (Diarrhaea.) Scrophula's


Cintilla is from the Diaphragma, and the cure of it is pure Anatron.

The Preparation in Fistula's, Cintilla, and Scrophula's.
. ANatron vj. (alias j.) Ashes of Beans ij. Calx of Eggshells iij. Reverberate
these for twelve hours in Fire of the fourth degree; then extract an Alcali.

Anatron mixed with the grease of an Heart, is effectually against Cintilla^.

Anatron has in it self a volatil^ Mercury, which we ought to correct, for by
that correc^^^^ it is rendered much more efficaciou^: This ^^^rection is thus
made.

Addition in Fistula's, Cintella's, and Scrophula's.
. Of this Anatron ij. Crude Butter iv^ Pinguedo Murmetorum iij. make an Unguent.

There is not a better Unguent, then this, for Fistula's, Cintilla's, and
Scrophula's.

CHAP. VII. Of Salt Gemme.
Salt Gemme by Spagyricks is called, Salt granate, and Salt Lucidum.

Its virtues are Laxative of the acute Salt, that is of Collar, and tke like.
Coloquintidi. Curative of the Jaundies. Curative of the Citrine Dropsy, and
dolours supervenient from putrefi'd Blood.


The Preparation of Salt Gemme for the Dropsy, and Jaundies.
. SAlt Gemme, juice of Tithymalus, that is, the lesser Spurge of each j. Gumm
of Cherritrees, to the weight of both; make a Bolus, which Reverberate in Fire
of the third degree for two hours: Extract an Alcali, Dose from 8 grains to 12.

Instead of Diagridium, you may use and add Troches of Alhandal.

An Addition.
. Salt Gemm ss. Rebotium (that is, true Mummy) Liquor of Centory of each iv.
make a Composition, of which the Dose is from 4, or 5 grains to 10, or 12 in an
Egg.

Preparation of Salt Gemm in the other Diseases.
. Of this Salt Gemm j. juice of the greater Spurge ij. Wheat Flower iij. make
Bread of it, that is, Bake it, Dose from j to ij.

CHAP. VIII. Of Travelers Salt.
Its virtues are In comforting Digestion in the Stomach. Against Infection of
the Air. Against future Imposthumes.


The Description of Hermes.
. SAlt Nitre fuse, Salt Gemm of each j. Galangal, Mace, Cubebs of each j. make
a Powder, Dose 3 grains in the Morning.

He that uses this Salt on the Sea Vomits not, Also in the Aged it is
conducent to long Life

The Preparation of Travelers Salt.
. Of this Salt iij. Alcohol of Wine dried lb ss. Extract the Alcali. Of this
Alcali,. j. Liquor of Juniper berries one Kissed. Compound them, Dose one grane.

Thus have you the Preparation, and Addition of Travelers Salt.

CHAP. IX. Of Salt Nitre.
The virtues of this Salt, are in The Pleurisy. Cavernous Ulcers.


The Preparation in the Pleurisy.
. SAlt Nitre lb ss. Crud Tartar lbj. distill them by Alembeck, Dose from j. to
jss. in Fountain Water, or good Wine; Morning, Evening, and at Midnight.

It must be given often. It purges by Urin.

The Preparation in Cavernous Ulcers.
. Nitre, Allom of each lbss. Fountain Water lbij. distill it into a Water.

Addition in the Pleurisy.
. Of this Nitre ij Aqua Regis ss. Alcohol of Wine dried v. make a mixture, Dose
from ss. to jss.

Addition in Cavernous Ulcers.
. Water of Plantain, Selandine, Oak Leaves of each lbjss. make a Lavament for
the Legs, that is, for dolours of the Legs.

Treatise the Fifth.
CHAP. I. Of Metals.
Of Gold, Silver, Tinn, Copper, Iron, Lead, Mercury.

Of Gold.
The virtues of Gold are, in The Palsy, Synthena, Fevers, Trembling of the
Heart, Dolours of the Matrix, Ethica, Affects of the Lungs, and Acute Diseases.


The Preparation for the Palsy, Trembling of the Heart, and Synthena.
. GOld pure, and perfectly well purged ij. Water of Salt Gemm vj. Incorporate
them that they may be one, make separation with Alcohol of Wine. Then. of
Saffron ij. Alcohol corrected vj. make a mixture; Dose from 3, or 4 grains to 6.

Preparation in Fevers and acute Diseases.
. Of leaf Gold Liquefied with Water of Honey j. Alcohol of Wine ij. make
separation from the Honey; Dose from ss. to j.

Preparation in Dolours of the Matrix, Ethica, and Affects of the Lungs
. Of Gold extinct in Water of Selandine xiij. Indian, and Chebul Myrabolans of
each j. digest them for a Week, then separate the superfluous Wateriness; Dose
from j. to j.

Addition in the Palsy, Trembling of the Heart, and Synthena.
. Of this prepared Gold j. Water of Lavender corrected with Alcohol of Wine,
and Spike of each j. Dose j.

Addition in Fevers, and acute Diseases.
. Of this prepared Gold iv. Jucies of Centory, Sage of each i^ Dose from ss. to
j.

Addition in Dolours of the Matrix, Ethica, and Affects of the Lungs.
. Oil of Nutmegs ss. Oil of Cloves j. of this prepared Gold j. Dose from ss. to
j.

The Description of Water Salt Gem.
. Salt Gem lbss. Rain Water lbj. distill them by Retort until the whole
substance of the Salt be consumed.

Purgation of Gold.
. Gold ss. Antimony ij. or iij. melt them to a Regulus: This way the Antimony
assumes all impurity, and the Gold resides in the bottom purefi'd.

CHAP. II. Of Silver.
The virtues of Silver are, in Dolours of the Brain, Spleen and Liver.
Retentio^ of Fluxes.


Preparation in Dolours of the Brain, Spleen, and Liver.
. SIlver beat into small thin Plates iij. Salt Gem vj. make S. S. S. and in
Fire of the fourth degree, Reverberate for 24 hours, then extract the Alcali.

This Alcaly must be infused in Wine, sublimate (or rich Wine) for 3, or 4
Days; in which time the Silver will be like the Wine it self: Afterward
evaporate the Wine, and the Alcoli will reside in the bottom, which being (...)
into a Glass, and that set in a Cold place, (...) resolve into Liquor; Dose
from 5, or 6 grains to 12.

Preparation in retention of Fluxes.
. Silver filed j. Reduce it to a Calx with Aqua Regis of this Calx,. ij. of
Crude Tartar iv. then Reverberate in Fire of the fourth degree, and extract the
Alcali.

A Description of Aqua Regis.
. Nitre, Allom, Vitriol of each lbss. distill them to a sweet Water.

The way of Extracting the Alcali.
. Of this Silver, q s. Alcohol of Wine, Water of Selandine of each x. make
Extraction as above; Dose from j. to jss.

If the Flux come forth Red, or with it a Redness be, it is a sign it may be
retained; wherefore then j. of this Water is to be drunk by the Patient.

A Preparation of Silver, for all the Abovesaid Affects.
. Silver in thin Plates j. Sulphur purged iv. Rosin of the Pine ij. make a
Bolus, to which set fire, that it may burn, and with Fountain Water complete
the Preparation; Dose from j. to j ss.

This preparation is profitable in all the aforesaid: But the other is more
efficatious.

CHAP. III. Of Tin.
The virtues of Tin, are in The Jaundies. Asclitis. Worms.


The Preparation in the Jaundies.
. TIn calcined lbj. Salt vj. Ashes of Beans, lbss. Reduce them to a Lithargiry
by Fire of Reverberation. Of this Lithargiry. x. Alcohol of Wine lbss. After
resolution, reduce to an Alcali; Dose from 6 grains to 10, or 12.

Preparation in the Asclites.
Tin purged j. Antimony ij. Limatura Cineri iij. reduce to a Calx by
Reverberation for 24 hours. Then of this calcined matter. lbj. Alcohol of Wine
lbj ss. reduce to an Alcali; Dose from j. to j ss.

Preparation in Worms.
. Tin iij. common Salt iv. Asphaltum j. make a Powder with adustion; Dose from
ss. to iij.

Addition in the Jaundies.
. Of this prepared Tin iv. Alipta Muscata j. Bdellium ij. Dose from j. to ijss.

Addition in Asclites.
. Of this prepared Tin ss. Sanguis Draconis ij. Liquor of Mullein j. make a
mixture; Dose ss.

Addition in Worms.
. Of this prepared Tin j. Seeds of Coloquintida, Plantain of each vj. make a
Powder; Dose from j. to j ss.

CHAP. IV. Of Copper.
Its virtues are, in Ulcers. Wounds. Worms. Ulcers of the Mouth.


The Preparation in Ulcers.
. OF Copper lbj. unripe Grapes lbv. Vinegar lbj. digest them in a close Vessel
for a Month: Then wash the digestion, and reduce to a Salt Alcali.

This is Viride Aeris in Ulcers.

Preparation, in Wounds.
. Copper lb ss. Turpentine distilled lbj. common Salt j. Vitriol ij. make a
mixture in a close Vessel for three Months.

If you take thin Plates of Copper, and thus prepare them: Thence will be made
a most excellent Balsam; if afterward j. of Flos aeris, and j. of common Oil be
taken.

Preparation in Worms.
. Venus calcined j. Water of St. Johnswort, Centory of each vj Water of
Plantain, eager Wine of each iv. digest them for seven or eight Days, reduce to
Alcali; Dose from j. to iv. or v.

Preparation in Ulcers of the Mouth.
. Venus Laminate, or Cementate ij. Candid Allom burnt, Roch Allom of each vj.
distilled Vinegar lbj. make extraction of the Alcali for one Day and Night.

Addition in Ulcers.
. Of this Flos aeris j. Agrippine Unguent j. Earth Worms iij. make an Unguent
as the manner is.

Another Addition in Common Ulcers.
. Of this Flos v. Water of Allom xv. make a mixture in manner of Lavament.

Addition in Wounds.
. Of this prepared Flos j. Oil of Dill iij. Oil of Yolks of Eggs j. make a
mixture like an Oil.

Another in Wounds.
. Of this prepared Flos ss. Epatick Aloes j. Liquor of Comphry iv. make a
viscous mixture.

Addition in Worms.
. Of this Flos aeris j Sugar Taberzet, Juice of Liquirish of each ij ss. make a
Powder; Dose from ss. to j.

Addition in the Ulcers of the Mouth.
. Of this prepared Flos j. Water of Selandine iij. Water of Allom j. make a
Gargarism, or Lavament for the Mouth.

CHAP. V. Of Iron.
The virtues of Iron are, in Stiptick. Constrictive. Exiccative.


The Preparation in Stiptick virtue.
. FIlings of Iron lbj. common Salt lbv. Aqua Fortis enough for Incorporating,
digest all for a Months space; then by Reverberation reduce it to the Form of
Powder.

Incorporation is made by working the Iron, and Salt with Aqua Fortis, till the
whole be like a Poultis.

Preparation in Constrictives.
. Filings of Iron lbss. Water of Allom lbjss. Vinegar distilled lb ss. make
digestion for a Month.

Afterward, by ablution first, and then by Reverberation, reduce it to the form
of a Crocus.

Preparation in the Exiccative virtue.
Filings of Iron lbij. Water of Vitriol lbss. digest them for a Month, with
Reverberation to the form of a Powder.

The Stiptick virtue is that which closes, and dries Fistulas, and Cancers.

The constrictive virtue is in the Lientery, Dysentery, and Diarrhaea.

The Exiccative is beneficial in Phlegmaticks.

Addition in the Stiptick virtue.
Of this Crocus j. Bolus adust iij. Terra sigilata v. make a Powder.

This Powder may be administered for incarnating in all Ulcers, and Wounds. If
it be inwardly taken j. thereof may be drunk.

Addition in Constrictives.
. Of this Crocus Martis j. Myrrh ss. Oriental Saffron j. make a Powder; Dose
from ij. to iij. or iv.

Addition in Exiccatives.
. Of this Crocus iij. Flowers of Pomegranate j. Juice of Acacia, to the weight
of all, mix all into the form of an Electuary.

CHAP. VI. Of Lead.
Its virtues are, for Incarnating.

The Preparation.
. AShes of Lead, decoct it with Vinegar for three or four hours. This is the
first Preparation. It heales Wounds, Incarnates, and generates solid Flesh.

Ceruss is also made of Lead, if it be washed with Water, and set in the Sun.
Likewise of Ceruss decocted Minium is made. All Medicaments in Wounds and
Ulcers should be made, and prepared of Metals; for so they will be most
effectual.

CHAP. VII. Of Mercury.
The virtues of Mercury, or Quicksilver is Jncarnative, and Laxative.


The Preparation for Incarnation.
. OF Mercury prepared into Powder ij. Aqua Regis x. make distillation certain
times in Balu. until it be converted to an Oil.

It incarnates Wounds and Ulcers most spedily. But it has two Inconveniences,
viz. It excites Salivation, and generates Ceruss: Otherwise, it quickly, and
rightly consolidates.

Preparation of Laxatives.
Of Mercury coagulated with the White of Eggs j. Water of Allom vj. distill by
Ashes, and make a Powder; Dose from 3 grains to 4 or 5.

In Distempers which arise from Leprous humiidty, as in Pustles, the Palsy,
species of Gutta, and in the Humid Dropsy, it is a Potent Purgation.

Having now done with the Preparations of Paracelsus, I thought it not amiss to
add, his Judgment touching Fevers, Jaundies, etc. as also his Method of Cure.
And although many a Learned Pen has performed the same according to their own
Oppinion; Yet I hope I have not Erred in delivering the Oppinion of Paracelsus:
For it will be no great detriment to a Man to Read it over, and if it does not
agree with his Judgment, and Method of Cure, he can but lay it aside, etc. But
I hope not but that it will be both Axcepted, and Esteemed amongst the
Ingenious.
Of Fevers.
OF Fevers there are four Kinds, Viz. in the Stomach, Liver, Reins, and
Extraneus Fevers.

Touching Fevers of the Stomach, it is to be noted, that by their Oppilation,
and defect of Separation, occation to Putrefaction is given. This Generation is
the Infection of the Air. (of the Body) Now if the Body be infected by the
same, it suffers a Trembling; for since the Air bares not Putrefactions in it
self, unless it attempt an Egress, by the motion of the Body. (as of the Earth)

Therefore all Trimbling is from Putridness, and the motion it self by
infection of the Air. And the infection of the Air is Cause of the Fit.
Putridness of Tartar is the Feculency thereof. Those things which pass not into
Tartar, become Feces, from which the first Febrile Generation, and the first
beginning of all Fevers, have their existancy. Through vapors generated from
the Feces of Tartar, the Air of the Body is infected. And whilst the Air is
cleansing it self, the Fit continues, and this is sometimes for twelve hours.
But when the Air is not so strong as to expel the Infection, it recedes and
rayseth a Compression in the Stomach. Thence it is that the Sick say: the Fit
shakes me not but oppresses me.

But it may be said a Fever trembles every day, and not every other day, etc.
What is the cause? It is this, viz. because the Feces digest also, as well as
the Stomach, or Liver; and therefore, so soon as they begin to wax hot, a
vapor ascends, infecting the Air, as is said, thence is the Trembling. And
when the Feces (of the Tartar) are from Mercury, their digestion is in one day.
If from Salts, after the second day. And if from Sulphur, after the third day.
Accordingly is the Paroxysm.

Signs of Fevers from the Stomach, are these.
Compression of the Stomach, Nauseating, a Stinking breath, weakness of the
Head, and discoloration of all Members; also strong trembling, and raving after
the hot Fit.

Fevers of the Liver.
This Fever is an Oppilated Heat, generated from putrefyed Feces in the
Regions of the Liver. For this Oppilation is sometimes in the whole Region,
sometimes particularly according to the Place.

If of the whole part, then the Tumor is great, and long, and there is Heat of
those Members, Deoppilation, but after the stoppage is removed, then Heats of
(the whole) body is present. But if Locally, then the Trembling soon passes
into Heat, this Oppilation causes its own Stoppage, and by Trembling breaks
and Deoppilates, sometimes all Obstructions, and also sometimes but a few of
them. When it makes a general Deoppilation, then the Fever is more easy. When
but in part only, the Fever is more grievous, and undoubtedly is a preparation
to the generation of another Disease, etc.

But Oppilations are to be Considered: For if the Feces shall not be resolved
after the cold Fit, then is to be feared an Increase of these Oppilations, as
also a Disease of long Continuance, and a future Imposthum. Likewise, Swelling
of the External parts of the Body, tending inward to the Center, and pricking
dolours.

Signs of the Disease approaching are: Debility of the Members, Discoloration
of the Face, Extention and Rigor of the Members; then follows a gentle cold
Fit, but the second Fit is more strong, and the Third stronger, at no certain
hour, but before, or after the former; then the Heat is long, and the dolor
difficult, also the Body consumes, and in the end a Dropsy takes beginning (by
reason of the Liver) from Roch-Allom resolved; or the Jaundies is Ripened, by
reason of its Region and matter.

It very often happens, that the generation, and disease of the first Fever,
viz. of the Stomach, is followed with a second Fever, viz. of the Liver. Now,
if the matter of the Fever in the Stomach, was a Tertian, and that of the Liver
a Tertian also; these two make a Quotidian.

Fevers of the Reins.
Fevers of the Reins have beginning from the Feces of Tartar, by reason of
Digestion For their is a Trembling in the Reins like a Fever fit, which
assailes the whole Body, by reason of Oppilation. Every Oppilation is a motion
of the whole Body, and a consequent corporal Heat, by reason of Vapors passing
through all the Pores.

The Ancients called it the Passion, the Sciatica; others, an Erratick Fever;
others* a Motion or fit of the Stone, etc.

Extraneous Fevers, or Fevers of the Blood, etc.
A Fever is a putrefied Heat, with tremblings from its own Oppilation, by
reason of unsequestred matter (in the closed Pores) with a stiptick force.

These Fevers arise not from Nutriments.

The Heat of a Fever is not without Cold: For every Putrefaction gives Heat,
Conjoined with some Cold: Such a Cold, the Blood may also induce, when the
peccant matter adheres in the Principle members, then the Fit passes thoughout
the whole Body.

This is an Universal Fever; the Particular is, when one Vein only is Feverish.
Also from the Flesh, there is an Universal and particular Fever. It is possible
that Tertian, Quartan, Quotidian, and all other Fevers, may arise from the
Spleen, and other Principal members, as Heart Reins, etc. The Quartan is from
Sulphur; the Tertian from Salts; the Quotidian from Allom. Before the Fit
begins the Urin of the Sick is Red.

Every Material Putrefaction makes its own Oppilation from the Spirit of Salt,
with an ingenited Coagulation, passes by Digestion into Trembling.

By the Digestion it may be fore known, how long the Fever will dure. If the
Quotidian number concur with a white Color, six Weeks will be the Period
thereof, and sooner it will not be Cured: But, if it be exhibited with a green
Color, it will continue 19, 20, or 21 Weeks: If it comes with a Cough, it will
be protracted to 7, 8, or 9. Weeks: If it afflict with Tumors of the Feet, it
will abide 15 Weeks: If it changes the number of Fits, as when a Quotidin
becomes a Tertian, it will endure a Years spase: But when the number be
increased, as when a Quartan becomes a Quotidian, it will continue Ten months:
If the Sick have a good appitit to Meat and Drink, that is a sign the Fever
will not be long: But if the appetite of Meat and Drink be decayed, it more
inclines to a Quartan, as is said.

It sometimes happens, that (by reason of the Vehemence of the Fit) Blood
issues out of the Nosthrils, and goes forth by Urin, some Vein being broak:
This is not only a good sign, but is also a Cure of the Fever: But if a Fever
invade Diversely, now sooner, then later, that is Erratick, and the worst sign,
unless in the time of the Cure, then it is a good sign: When the Fit is
unequal, that is to be judged an Evil sign, because by its portended an
augmentation of the matter.

CURE.
Of Fevers of the Stomach, the Cure is two fold, viz. Purgation without
Digestion, and Pills of Laudanum, which should be administered before the Fit:
Touching which Purgations, it is to be Noted, that every Evacuative should be
disposed, not only downwards, but upwards also: These Purgations with Vomiting,
should be Arcanums, not Humorals: For this Tartar is a specific subject in
Arcanums, such are Centaury, Hellebore, Spurge, Praeciatus, Siler, Pulp of
Coloquiedia, etc.

A Description of Pills of Laudanum.
. Of Laudanum ss. Rue, Wormwood of each j. the best Treacle, enough for
incorporation; Dose v. granes and not more: Also in the beginning of these
Fevers Nectar should be administered with corrected Wine. etc.

Cure of Fevers in the Liver.
This Cure consists in Three things, viz.

First, In Deoppilating.

Second, In Cleansing, that is in Purging.

Thirdly, In Comforting the Member and restoring it.

For a Fever of the Liver, of what Species soever.. Samach, that is, Tartar,
etc. Distill and make an Oil. For Cleansing,. Centaury, Leaves of Hellebore,
etc. For Restoration,. Liquor of Laudanum, q. s.

Cure of Fevers of the Reins.
The Fever of the Reins is most Perilous, and from the Oppilations arise
Prickings in the Hip; Thence also wringings in the Belly, Dolours of the Head,
and Backbone, sometimes the feet Swell, the Spleen is affected, the the Urin
is altogether Red, and usually a Quartan Fever comes from the Reins. This must
be Cured by Purgation; but Purgation must not be attempted, unless with
Arcanums.

A Description in all Fevers of the Reins whether Quotidian, Tertian, or
Quartan.
. ALcoli of Snailes j Crystal well beaten and Calcined, ss. Mummy j. make a
Powder; Dose the whole.

Another.
. Liquor of Laudanum, j. Saffron gr. iij. (alias iij.) Epatick Alloes iij. make
Pills with Water of Wormwood; Dose gr. vij.

Another.
. Alcoli dissolved from the Calx of Absinthium ss. Oil of Colcothar, j. mix
these, minister all before the coming of the Fit.

Cure of Fevers of the Blood, or Extraneous Fevers.
FEvers arising from the Blood have their cure from themselves, viz. the Sick
are cured either by the bursting of a Vein, or by cutting a Vein, therefore,
when the Disease proceeds from the Spleen, the Vein Salvatella must be Cut.
When of the Heart, cut its Vein. When in the Lungs, cut the Vein of the Lungs,
and so of the Liver, etc. In a Quartan, if the Urin be White, make
Scarification in the Backbone, and when the Disease arises from the Reins,
cupping Glasses must be applied to the Legs. If the Veins of the Temples, and
the Pulses be anointed with Castor, Pepper, Ginger, etc. they Cure the Fever
of the Blood* But if the Fever be not cured by Phlebotomy, and the Patients
Legs swell, then proceed to the Following Cure.

. Of Alcohol of Wine dried, and prepared from the Ashes of Beans, q. s. Leaf
Gold as you will; digest these for a Month; of this Liquor give 3 gr. with j.
of water of Endive, or Purcelane, before, after, or in the Fit.

Another.
. Of white Corals ss. Alcohol of Wine dried x. digest these for a Month, of
this Liquor separated,. vj. or vij. gr. with the aforesaid Waters, before, in,
or after the Fit.

Another.
. Of Honey Liquifi'd xv. Leaf Silver ij. digest these for a Week; of this Liquor
separated from the Honey,. ss. with xv. gr. of Oriental Saffron before the Fit.

Another.
. Alcali extracted from Citrons xv. water of the White of Eggs iij. Pearls not
board ss. digest these for a Month; then of this juice separated, give vj. gr.
with water of Valerian before the Fit.

Tartarous Medicaments help not in these Fevers.

Alcohol of Wine dried, is when the superfluity of Wine is Removed, and the
burning Wine remains, etc.

Of the Jaundies.
THe Jaundies (as it is commonly called) in no wise draws its original from
Nature, but from a Compounded matter, nor are you to think, that there is an
Essential Citrine (o^ Yellow) color in Nature, or in the Humain Body; but much
rather, that this Commixion is borrowed from a threefold Salt, no otherwise,
then as the Aliment, which is compounded, receives its Blackness from Three
things, viz. from pure Vitriol, Entalick Salt, and Liquid Sulphur. Therefore,
when these three agree in one, they give beginning to the Jaundies, and induce a
new color.

Whence it highly concers a Physician to know, that such great defilings, and
discolorations of the Skin, come not from Nature, according to a Local sense.
For the Spearm it self, or the first constitution of Man, has not essentially
produced any such thing* I deny not, but that all Colors of every kind are
contained in the Humain Body, but so diffused, as I cannot grant, that they
visibly appear in their substance: Rather say, they are dispersed here and
there throughout the whole Body, so, as in that dispersion, none is wanting,
etc.

We utterly disown their oppinion, who imputes this Disease to the Gall, and in
their Books have dared to affirm, that in the Gall is so much purulency, as
that it should discolor the whole Man; For by the aforesaid it is sufficiently
evident, that neither Diseases, nor Colors have existance from the Gall, but
the Cause of the Disease, is rather from a Composition of the three Species
(aforesaid) which Color the Body, and this according to the subtilety of the
Color of every of them, etc.

First, The Citrine or Yellow) Jaundies has being from Vittiol, Entalick Salt,
and Liquid Sulphur.

Secondly, The Black Jaundies, from Entalick (or Mys^an Salt) Vitriol and
dissolved Sulphur.

Thirdly, The Red Jaundies, from all the six aforesaid.

Fourthly, the Pallid (or Bluish) Jaundies from (Allom) Scissum, Mercurial
Liquors* and white Vitriol.

Lastly, We believe (and it is in Natures power) that even from one Species, by
the power of Transmutation, all these Colors may be made. For we know the
wonders of Nature, in her Industry, and innate Artifice. Note, every Color is
Corrosive, and resolves whatsoever adheres to its Body; But the Entalick Salt
is sharp in the Blood.

Signs of the Yellow Jaundies approaching, are these, First, a most White and
Watery Urin, Then Redish, Lastly, Citrine.

Signs of the Black Jaundies are; Prickings in either side, a Skinny Urin,
after some days black, lastly, Totally dark.

Signs of the Red Jaundies are; Pains of the Head, Swellings of the Legs, and
a Red thick Urin.

Signs of the Bluish (which is most rare) are Chaps of the Body, a pallid
Urin, afterward aqueous, then the whole Body becomes Yellow, lastly, Bluish,
and this is followed with Leprosy.

The Jaundies is manifold, viz. of the Flesh, Blood, Bones, Marrow, Ligaments,
etc. yea of all the Principal Members.

Color of the Face is from the Liver. The Jaundies of the Liver Colors not
the whole Body, but makes the Face Pallid, causes pricking in the Sides, and
also infers thirst.

The Jaundies of the Gall, burns in the Stomach, and causes frequent Vomiting.

The Jaundies of the Reins, causes pains in the Thighs, in the Backbone, and
perpetual dolours in the Ossacrum.

The Jaundies of the Heart, does also burn in the Stomach, and the Heart both
Swells and Trembles.

In the Jaundies of the Brain, the Watery humidity, that drops from the
Nosthrils is Yellow: also if the Head be washed with Water, the Water becomes
Yellow.

The Jaundies of the Lungs causes difficulty of Breathing, Stink of the Mouth,
Cough, and a Spongy, Sharp and Yellow Spitting.

In the Jaundies of the Spleen, the left Side aches, and in running vehemently
pants.

In the Jaundies of the Blood, a particular vein Sweats, and the Sweats is
Yellow, the Blood also has Yellow spots.

In the Jaundies of the Bones, the Bones are pricked within, and feel as it
were the penetration o^ rigid (...), etc.

The Jaundies o^ the Marrow is the worst, but it is not a Flux o^ the Head, as
some say, yet generates internal dolours.

The Jaundies of the Ligaments, hinders the motion of that particular part,
which a Decoction of B^silicon applied to the Ligaments, will show, if it
Extract any t^ing of a Saffron Color, or if this ^inge the Skin ^ong wise, or
far about.

The Jaundies of the Flesh is more subtle* for it ^ingeth the Skin, etc.

Precipitation and Suffocation of the Matrix is no other, then the Jaundies of
the Matrix.

If Women have not labored with the Colic, and yet be Contracted; and if
they have dolours in the Back, and the Menstrues cease, that is from the
Jaundies.

In the beginning of the Jaundies, when it is Local, to remove the Color, use
the following.

. Century iij. Oriental Saffron j. Myrrh iij (alias ss.) Burning Wine xv.
(alias v.) Reduce these into an Essence; Dose from j. to iij. these draw the
Color to the Stomach; but Cure not the Disease.

Another Description.
. Juices of Celandine lbj. Viticella lbiij. St. Johnswort lb ss. pure Water
enough to make a Bath, by which the Color is extracted, but the Disease not
Cured, because the Species are not yet separated.

Another.
. The Juices of Celandine, Vervine, Sothernwood of each lbj. Artiplex lb ss.
Jassa vj. make a particular Lavament, viz. for one Member as the Leg or Arm.

The following do also extract the Color from a Member.
. Flowers of Celandine, Melilor, Oriental Saffron of each j. Oil of Myrtles xv.
make a mixture by Insolation, then with the same anoint the Member.

CURE. A Description for the Jaundies of the Brain.
. Anthera is the Cup or Socket in which the Flower is fixed.
ANthera's of Hermodactyles, white Lyllies, Dogsfoot of each j. (j.) water of
Betony lb ss, reduce these into a (...).

First shave the Head, then moysten a Cloth in this Essence and apply it; when
the Cloth is dry, it waxes hard, therefore the Labor must be repeated.

For the Jaundies of the Heart by which the Pain is removed but not the Tumor.
. Anthera's of Oriental Saffron, Rosemary of each ij. (alias iij.) Oil of
Angelica iv. Reduce these into an Essate Form, and with the same anoint the
Affected part.

For the Jaundies of the Spleen and Liver.
. Oil of Tamar (that is Tamarine) iij. Oil of Spike j. make a mixture.

For the Jaundies of the Reins.
. Anthera's of Crowfoot, Juniper, Calieta Calieta is a Mushrum of Juniper, and
is of a Clay Color.
of each ss. make a mixture by Insolation, and apply it to the part affected,
by a Cloth moistened in it.

For the Jaundies of the Lungs.
. Rubarb (alias Reupontica) Iringo (alias Flower deluce) Enula Campane of each
q. s. Reduce these into a Liquor; Dose j. and sometimes j ss. may be given in
Drink every Morning until the Spittle be amended.

Against the Jaundies of the Gall.
. Anthera's of Centaury, Celandine of each j ss. Lignum G^aiacum prepared iij.
Dose ss. Give this as long as the dolor endure.

The Cure of all the four Species, viz. Red, Black, Yellow, Pallid, or Bluish.
Cure of the Red.
. LIquors of Myrrh, Frankincense of each j. Juice of Centaury vj. Are Worms
breeding between Timbertrees.
Assalia's Numb. x. make a mixture in manner of an Electuary; Dose from ij. to
iv. there is but one only Paroxysm, before which Phlebotomy should proceed.
Narcoticks, Cold, Corrosive and Fat things must be absteined from, as also
Baths: Yet in declination of the Disease, a Fume may be made, of Dwar^e-Elder,
Purcelane, and Night shade.

For Extraction of the Color of the Red Jaundies.
. Liquors of Frankincense, Myrrh of each j. Wine lbiij. Vinegar of Roses lbj
Boil these to the Consumption of a fourth Part; dip Clothes in the Decoction,
and apply them hot, Repeat this Labor often, until the Swelling and Redness
vanish.

Cure of the Black Jaundies.
. Alcohol of Wine Corrected j Liquors of Myrrh, Frankincense of each j. Juices
of Sage, Time, Epithymon of each j ss. make a mixture; Dose from iij. to v.

Another.
. Juices of Tithymallus, Spurge of each gr. iv. Frankincense, Myrrh of each,
ss. good Treacle enough to make a Bolus; Dose from j. to j ss. before or in the
Fit.

For Extracting the Color.
. OF Genesten (or Broom) Anthera's of Crowfoot of each ss. Sejum, juice of
Centaury of each iij. Wine and Vinegar enough for the decoction: Proceed as in
the Red Jaundies.

Preservatives in the Red Jaundies.
. Of pure Laudanum ss. water of Red Corals, Spodium of each ss. Liquoris of
Frankincense, Myrrh of each iij. Mace, q. s. make a Mass for Pills; Dose gr. iv.

Another.
. Aloes Epatick, Souccotrine, Frankincense, Mastick of each iij. Alcohol of
Wine, Vinegar of Roses, Liquor of the Flowers of Mullein of each ij. Dose from
j. to i ss. these preserve for a Years space, not longer; Phlebotomy must be
avoided, because the Cramp Palsy, and Tetanus usually follow.

A Preservative in the Black Jaundies.
. OF the Lazurestone, Juice of Mountain Siler of each j. Laudanum prepared iv.
Oil of Nutmegs enough for Incorporation; Dose from ij. to iij.

Another.
. Sanguis Draconis, Tarra Sigilata of each Frankincense, Myrrh, of each iss.
Vinegar distilled vj. make a draught to be taken after the Fit.

A General Medicine of the Red and Black Jaundies.
. OF the an Earth Worm bread from Rains.
Worm Tassus iij. Anthera's of Saffron j. of Century j ss. Oil of Nutmegs iij.
make a draught.

A General Preservative of either kind.
. Liquor of Frankincense, Myrrh of each iij. Laudanum extracted, the Worm
Tassus of each ss. Oil of Nutmegs enough to make a Bolus; Dose from j. to ij ss.

For the Yellow Jaundies.
. Locust, Poplar, Pine, and Turpentine Trees of each lbj. Reduce this into
Viscosity, with Wine and Vinegar, then. of this Viscosity x. Anthera's of
Saffron, Centaury of each ij. mix these over a Fire; Dose iij. in water of
Celandine. This is to be taken thrice a day, for 6 or 7 days together, until
the dolor and Color pass away.

A Description of Celandine against the Yellow Jaundies.
. Celandine with the Roots, Anthera's of Oriental Saffron, Flowers of Horehound
of each a like quanty. Reduce these into a Liquor by included Distilation: Of
this Liquor,. iv. of Assalia's Numb. x (alias xv.) make a mixture; Dose one
third part to be taken 3 days together; if the Disease pass not away by the use
of this; Death is to be feared.

Another.
. Of the Worm Tassus j. choice Rubarb j ss. Yolks of Eggs Numb. 7. mix all into
the form of a Plaster and apply it to the Place, viz. to the Pit of the
Stomach.

Secrets for Cure of the Jaundies, and Fevers.
A living Spider enclosed in a Nutshel, and hung about the Neck as low as the
Pit of the Stomach, until the Disease pass away, which usually is in four or
five days, and then the Spider dies.

A Lizard enclosed in a bagg, has the same efficacy.

Also the Dung of a Lizard applied to the lower part of the Stomach in a Cotton
Cloth Waxed, takes away the Fever.

Likewise, Horsdung made hot in a Drying Pan, if the Patient piss thereon, and
the Dung and his Urin be put together into a Bladder, and hung up in the Smoke,
the Jaundies will be Cured.

All Dungs, or Excrements being drunk do Cure: So does Album Graecum.

Rubarb is an Arcanum in the Jaundies, if the same be Corrected and amended
diligently, in this manner reduce Rubarb (imbibed in Oil of bitter Almonds)
into a Bolus; which enclosed in a Glass, expose to the Sun for some time; then
it will be turned into an Oil, first Yellow, Afterward purplish; which
separate from the Feces by Expression; Dose j. every day once, for 3 or 4 days
together. So also the Rubarb may be macerated in the Waters of Prassium,
Horehound, Celandine, etc. and as before set in the Sun.

Cure of the Pallid or Bluish Jaundies.
. Antimony lbj. Tartar lb ss. Vinegar distilled lbvj. make distillation in B. M.
for 6, or 7 hours; Dose from j. to iij. once a day. If this remove not the
Jaundies, it turns to a Leprosy.

Cure of the Jaundies of the Principal Members.
. Of the Worms Tassus, Assalia's of each iij. Liquor of the Anthera's of
Centaury ij ss. Water of Celandine iv. or v. make a Potion to be drank. If
Sweat be Spontaneously provoaked, it is well; if not, add j. of Mithridate for
exciting Sweats. If the Disease recede not in two days, it is Confirmed.

Cure of the Jaundies of the External Members.
This Species of the Jaundies is usually attended with the following Signs,
viz. want of Appetite, burning of the Stomach, the Skin discolored and Members
contracted, as in the Colic; this you shall Cure with the following Unguent.

. Oil of Myrtles q. s. Gum Hederae j. Rosin of Botin ( viz. Turpentine) to the
weight of all, distill these by Alembeck into an Artificial Balsam, with which
anoint the Members Morning and Evening.

For Comforting the Members.
. Mastich, Mansgrease, Yolks of Eggs of each vij. Oil of Bay Berries x. distill
these by Alembeck, and anoint the Members, Morning and Evening therewith.
Bemontine Serpentina performs the same.

Cure of the Jaundies of the Backbone.
. Of Assellias lbj. distill these by Alembeck, afterward,. Oil of Myrtles, Dill
of each iij. make an Unguent without Wax, with it anoint the Backbone.

Cure of the latter Species of the Jaundies, viz. of Precipitation and
Suffocation of the Matrix.
. Grains of Actis (that is Elder berries) lbj. Wheat flower lbiij. of Nora iv.
make it up like Bread, and Bake it, when Baked; Dose from j. to j ss.

In Precipitation of the Matrix.
. Liquors of Amber, Lacca, Manna of each j. Tetra pharmacon ss. mix these and
make a Bolus; Dose from iij. to vj. or vij. to be taken Morning and Evening. If
these following cure not in three days* the Disease is confirmed.

Liquors of Xyloaloes ss. Cinnamon, Elder-berries of each ij. Seeds of Peony,
Rue of each j. make a mixture; Dose j.

In the Contracture.
Oils of Juniper Berries, Guaiacum of each vj. Marrow of an Ox, Fatness of
Mummy of each lb ss. Fox Ointment lbj. make these up into an Unguent.

A General Description, in Suffocation, and Precipitation of the Matrix.
. ALcohol of Wine vj. Pearls not bored j ss. (alias ss.) Red Corals j. Liquor
of Colcothar ij. make a mixture; Dose j.

In Precipitation of the Womb, Liquor of Dogs-tongue is an Arcanum, so likewise
is the water of Baum, and Baum applied to the Belly.

Of Madness according to Paracelsus.
Although Madness be one only Disease, yet many names have been given to it, both
by the Latins, and other Nations; and accordingly various Causes have been
assigned thereunto, none of which are consonant to (or agreeing with)
Experience, drawn from the very Light of Nature.

When a Man having Reason, is deprived and spoiled thereof, so, as he cannot
employ the same to those ends for which it was created, but furiously acts, and
inconsiderately tumultuates; then is that Man seized with Madness. Indeed many
Men are otherwise spoiled of their Reason, as the Possessed, Drunk, Fatuate and
Tyrants; which are not to be referred to this Classis. For they are not
deprived of Reason from a Disease, but from other Accidents: But those
Distempers, of which we now treat, are true Diseases, and naturally arise from
Morbifick Causes.

Now that we may explain the Cause, it is to be understood. The Reason should
be pure and Clean, such as the best Wheat in the Field is, without Cockle or
Darnel. But as among Wheat sown, Tares grow and increase; so also Darnel is
bred in the Intellect.

In a Natural manner Madness is thus caused, viz. When any thing is extended
beyond its Strength, and Nature, it is broaken. So the Eyes are blinded by
beholding the Sun. For unto every Member its bound and Office is assigned, pass
beyound these, it cannot, without damage.

To speculate beyond Humane Capacity, is to infringe and cast down Reason it
self.

But there is also another sort of Madness, which proceeding from Elements
hurts our Reason, no otherwise, then as you see Fire to rage, and become
furious in the Element of Water, and by that excited Ebullition, to cast forth
Bubbles, Froath, and Vapor: for our Reason is as a certain Liquid thing, and
so becomes that Element, in which the Fire exercises its power. But by what is
this Element broaken? viz. By Fire only: Therefore if, what breaks is Fire,
what is broak must be Water. Thus the Body of our Reason is a flying Water, the
highest subtilty of which is a boiling Dew. Therefore the Fire kindling, such
Operations are made, as from Fire and Water.

Besides these said two Causes of Madness, viz. One, a too great confidence of
Strength and Power; the Other, the Operation of Elements, many other Causes of
Madness may be added and commemora^ed by other Men; but these can neither find
weight, or place, in Philosophy or Astronomy, in which Physic is founded, Yet
I own there is another kind of Madness, which arises from Meats eaten, as
Lupines inflict Madness, etc. (See Paracelsus's Treatises of Madness; and of
Diseases of Mad-Folks.)

Also, trouble of mind even to Desparation, may cause Madness; for by this
disturbance, they enforce Madness on the Brain. Yet the cause hereof is hidden
and Obscure, etc.

In like manner some Diseases may induce Madness, etc.

But that an Imposthum should cause Madness, as the Humorists say, is utterly
false. For this Imposthum they never saw; and if any should at any time appear
outwardly, in a Person that is Mad, then judge, that the same thing, which
generated Madness, produced the Imposthum its forerunner: For the Imposthum it
self inferrs not Madness, but is equally produced by the same thing, which
induces Madness.

He, who suddenly degenerates from his nature, custom, and manners, and is
mutable according to the Affections of his mind, not having the use of Reason,
but hates and striks Men, cries out and Raves, acting many mad pranks, may
certainly be prounced Mad.

Also he, who museth and sits quiet and still, not having the use of his
Reason, may in like manner be termed Mad: Therefore the diversity of their
gestures and manners should be diligently observed, yea, and the Assendant of
every hour (which alone infuseth manners) exactly taken notice of, more then
those things which are in the Body.

Cure.
He, who endeavors Experimentally to cure this Disease, must let pass the
Syrups, Purgations, and prescribed Diet of Ancient Physicians; the chief of
which are Violets, Roses, Camomil, the Water Lilly and the like. This Disease
is familiarly cured by the Adjurers of Devils, although they themselves well know
it is otherwise; in the mean while, they give him other Remedies, by which they
expel the Madness, and then they glory they have cast out the Devil, when as
they have only cured that Madness, which afflicted the Man. By these Deceits
they gain more, then by their Medicine. Therefore let him, who is desirous of
Skill in these matters, learn of those Adjurers, not to cast out Devils, but to
cure Maniacks, with suitable Secrets.

Medicines taking away Madness are twofold; one Chirurgick, the other Physical.

Yet I would have all Men be advised, not rashly to undertake this Chirurgick
cure, unless by their proper Experience, they be well instructed and skilled in
all Accidents, etc.

Tke Chirurgick Cure is thus.
First, make an Apertion in that place, in which the Madness arises; But if
you be not certain of the place, then open all Extreamities in the Fingers and
Toes; in the Head also, as far as the Circle, or Circumference of the Center is
diffused.

This Apertion is twofold.
One takes away, and removes the Skin only, that the Flesh under it may be left
bear. The other makes an hole, out of which the Eschar falls, and the hole
remains.

But according to the Condition of the Disease, the following difference must
be observed.

If the Disease be vehement, and frequent, then the first Apertion of the Skin
only, is not sufficient for removing the Cause of Madness; but thete is need of
the other, which makes a more deep Ulcer. For every Hole has a certain power
and property of casting out, as an Emunctory. Therefore I here give you the
Receipts of Either Apertion.

A Receipt of the First Apertion.
. Root of Crowsoot, fresh, or imbibed in Vinegar, Flowers of Crowsoot, fresh,
or imbibed j. Fatness of S^ara^es ss. Cantharides v. Ferment (or Yest) Vinegar
of each q. s. Beat and sift what are to be beaten and sifted, and mix them into
an Unguent, which being spread upon a Cloth, apply it to the Fingers, Toes,
etc. And to keep the Cloth moist, moisten it often with Vinegar. Let this
Plaster abide on five, or six hours: Afterward remove it, and brake the
Bladders, and take away the Skin, that the flesh underneath may be bare.

Anothor more gentle to be made at such a time, in which the said Symples
cannot be had.
. Of the best Aquafortis, Sal-Armoniack sublimed ss. Mercury sublimed iij. mix
these three, and put them into a Glass, which set over a Gentle Fire, that all
may be resolved into the form of Water: With this wash the spaces of the
Extreamities five, or six times, afterward let them dry. This being done, the
Skin will be removed from the parts, like Dust from Flesh.

These Apertions are sufficient for taking off any Skin from the Flesh: And the
Blood which flows out in this Excoriation, does also help much to diminish the
Madness.

The Second Apertion.
Where the aforesaid Apertion is not Effectual, this Ulcerative may be used.

. Sublimate Mercury, pure Arsenick, Aquafortis of each equal parts; mix these
into the form of a Cerote, which apply to the Extremities, until they be
benumed, or rendered sense-less. Afterward moysten the parts with some Fatness,
that the Eschar's may come forth. Then use the following Attractive

. Galbanum, Opopanax, Serapinum, Bdellium, Ammoniack of each ij ss. Dissolve
these in Vinegar, then strein the Solution, and boil it to a just consistency:
Afterward mix the following Species, first beaten and findly sifted.

Mastick ss. Frankincense ij. Amber j. Herb Paris, Cruc. ungulae of each Mss.
the Magnet iij. Colophony ij. Fernisij (alias Vernix) v. mix all into a Cerote,
with which well fill up the holes of the Extreamities; and always renew the
dressings so long, as until the Madness be plainly altered, and removed:
Afterward consolidate, heal up the holes (with suitable Incarnatives.

But touching these Apertives, and Attractives, there is one thing remarkable
to be observed; and it is this, viz. that the Apertions of the Head ought to
be, and be made last of all; the Apertions in the Extreamities being first
healed up, and Skinned; For then, if necessity require, you may also open the
Center of the Head, and proceed in the aforesaid manner.

Also Note: The opening of Veins proper, may here likewise be very conducent.
For by such Blood le^tings the Madness is oftentimes expelled.

The Physical Cure.
Now we will speak of the Physical Cure, which is completed without help of
Surgery.

There is a twofold difference of this Cure. One by Cooling, congeals the
peccant matter of Madness; The other asswages and mortifies the same.

Of things Cooling and Congealing, we first speak. These are either Internal,
or external. Of Internals, you have the greatest part already described in Cure
of the Sea the Author's Treatises of Diseases of Madness.
Epilepsy (arising from Madness.)

Nevertheless here take this one Description, the like of which, we have
scarsly as yet found.

. Oil of Campher, Oil of Musk; mix them, and of the mixture give ss. at one
time in Drink. For this Medicine wonderfully takes away, and expels Madness,
extinguisheth the Burning heat of the Body, and allays the boiling of the
Blood; also it congeals, and compels the matter, no otherwise, then as Cold
congeals Water into Ice. Likewise this Oil may externally be used, by anointing
the Temples and Forehead.

Besides this, there are many other Arcanum's which take away Madness, as
Quintessences, etc. every of which per se, by reason of a singular property,
and an insited power of Comforting, may be sufficiently efficacious, for
expelling Madness* Of this Classes are, Qintessences, of Silver, Iron, Lead,
and Mercury. Solution's of Crystal, of Corals, etc.

But much more excellent are those things, which are given (as) appropiates
against Madness, such are:

Extractions of Campher, of Gold, etc.

The other way of Curing, is effected by those things which mortify the
Madness, and do moreover so still, and allay the peccant matter of the same, as
it thenceforth can no more be perceived. Of this Cure the Remedies also are
manifold, as well External as Internal; the best of which are those which are
prepared according to the Rule of Extracting Quintessences, as are: The Highest
Anodine, Qintessences of Poppy, Mandrake, Loliats, Opiats, and Henbane; Although
all these Remedies be strong and vehement, yet being so purged, and prepared,
have no Impurities left in them, by which the Body can be hurt.

The Dysentery, Lientery, etc. according to Paracel^us.
WHen any thing is Eat, Drunk Dissolved, and not well separated by the Stomach,
and so passes out by Urin, Seidg; or Vomiting, thence is made the Dysentery,
Lientery, and Diarrhaea, either of the Urin, Seidg, or Vomiting.

It is called a Disease from Dissolution, because it is dissolved in the first
Operation. Dissolution and Putrefaction are one Passion, separated from good
things.

Note, Dissolution is twofold, either by the Stomach, or by Minerals. When the
Stomach cannot Digest, then is a Dissolution of the Stomach. The other
Dissolution is when the Minerals in the Body are dissolved. For every watery
thing admits of resolution.

Of the first Species there are three Diseases of Dissolution, or of things
Dissolved, viz. Red, White, and Laxate.

What is digested and not separated passes out Red, as by the Fundament Clots
of Blood are often expelled. All these proceed from the evil digestion of the
Stomach, and the Blood issues not, from any Veins broke in the Body. When any
one pisseth Blood, and yet in pissing feels no pain, nor is pained in his
Loins, Groins, and Back, nor perceives any other Evil, then that he pisseth
Blood; that is a Diarrhaea of the Urin, etc.

When the Seidg or Stools are White, Froathy as Lime or Chalk, or else have the
Color of the Skin, and are Thin, Viscous, and Flatuous, that is the White
Dissolved Disease, and the Stomach is faulty. If by Vomit it pass out white, it
is a Diarrhaea of Vomiting. When the Urin is Milky, it indicates the Lientry of
the Urin; and when without pain, it is the Diarrhaea.

The Laxate Disease is, when the Archeity of the Stomach is infirm, and the
Stomach operates not, as it ought. When the Patient makes abundance of Urin,
and that appears now White, then Red, another time Turbid, and has no content;
then a Flux of the Urin is present. But when much Vomiting is excited, it is a
Flux of Vomiting.

Moreover, there are three dissolved Diseases (or Disseases of Dissolution) by
Urin, viz. Urin of Blood, a milky Urin, and Mandragorate or Aqueous Urin. Also,
there are three dissolved Diseases by Vomiting, as Vomiting from what is
digested, frequent Vomiting, Vomiting of the Thorax.

Mandragorate Urin is, when any one pissing has no sense at all of his Water
passing from him, and voids much Urin, yet feels not that Tickling at its
outgoing, which is common to all Creatures by Nature.

Vomiting from what is digested, is, when any one is compelled to Vomit an
hour, or two after he has eaten, and that as often as he eats. Frequent
Vomiting is, when a Man perpetually Vomits. Vomiting of the Thorax is, when any
one is constained to Vomit every eighth day, or every two or three days.

This Dissolved Disease is such, whether it pass out by Urin, Seidg, or
Vomiting.

The power and strength of this Disease, are the Accidents thereof. That
Species which passes out by the Fundament, has four Accidents, viz. the
Colic, Gripes, Dolours of the Hips, and Back. That which is by Urin has
three, viz. the Disury, Strangury, and Laxation. And in Vomiting the Accidents
come from the Stomach, as bitterness of the Gall, which is made of the great
dryness of the Stomach; but Sobbing (or the Hec-cough) comes from the Stomachs
Coldness.

Therefore the Cure of all these consists in Curing the Stomach, which should
be deduced to such a state, as it may digest whatsoever is eat, or drunk; for
this end the Archeity of the Stomach must be comforted. And such a Confortation
must be procured by Spagyrick Degrees, that the Pure may be separated from the
Impure. But in descending to the Cure, such things must be taken, as may
Coagulate the Dissolution

Of the seed and Locusts of Filix of each ss. Dragons-blood ^. Mustard, Crocus
of Iron of each ij. Tragacanth dissolved in Liquor of Plantain enough for
Incorporation; Dose from j. to j ss. Filix is Dill (alias Tansey). Dragon, is a
Coal burning of it self, such are found in Smiths Forges, and in Metallic
mines. These Coals are insignized with Red Lines, which are called
Dragons-blood.

Another Description, in the three Diseases of the first Species.
. Oil of Mars j. Liquor of Orizeus x gr. Liquors of Filix, to the weight of
all; Dose from one Goldweight, to one and a half.

By this Receipt the Occasion is taken away, and then all Accidents depart of
themselves. But if the Dysentry so long persist, as it becomes inveterate, and
degenerates into a Chronical Disease, then the Minerals must be comforted by a
Laudanum, of which this is the Description.

A Laudanum in dissolute deplorate Diseases.
. Of Orizeus foliat ss. (Leaf Gold) Pearls not bored ij. Asphaltum, Flowers of
Antimony of each ss. Oriental Saffron j ss. Roman Myrrh, Epatick Aloes of each
the weight of all. Reduce to a form; Dose from six, or seven, to ten Granes.

Of the Second Species, or, of the Dissolute Diseases from Minerals.
THe Disease dissolved from Minerals, draws its original from three Bodies; the
occasion is from Time, but the Cause from the Three first things.

The Occasion and Cause is present, when the Minerals are dissolved.

The Signs are these.
This Dissolved Disease beginning, the Patient is troubled with a continual Flux
of the Belly, and yet eats and drinks much.

He, who goes to Stool often, eats and drinks strongly, and waxes lean in
Body, does also suffer a dissolution of the Mineral.

When the Food is cast out by Vomiting, crude and undigested, that is a Sign of
a dissolved Disease from Minerals.

A Flux passing out, either by Urin, or Seidg, or Vomit, if no Gripe,
Strangury, or other like Sign be present, as in dissolution of the Stomach, nor
the bitterness of Gall, by Vomiting; it is a Sign the dissolution is from
Minerals.

In a Mineral dissolution, the Blood comes forth by the Fundament more Red,
then in the dissolution of the Stomach.

And this Red blood, when congealed, or clotted, passes out by Urin. For it is
congealed in the Bladder, and not before.

They who Piss congulate Blood, labor with this Disease. This Pissing is not
for a day, or two, but continually. Yet if Blood be not continually Pissed, it
is a Sign the Stone is present, which has broak some small Vein. For as the
Disease begins, ( viz. if any one have six Stools a day at first, the next he
has as many) so it continues, and cease not until it be cured.

Congealed Blood passes out by Vomiting, which also argues a Disease dissolved
from Minerals.

Every thing which comes to maturity obtains an Expulsive Virtue; and Minerals,
when dissolved, expel themselves. So, Aluminous Salt expels it self by
Vomiting. The Digestive virtue casts out the Entalick Salt, by the Inferior
Parts, etc.

In the Cure, care must be taken, to Coagulate the Salts by the following
Description.

A Receipt for Cure of the Dyscentery.
. Oils of Ben, Lacca, and Laca, Liquor of Manna of each ss. Leaves of
Serpentina vij. Reduce these to a Form; Dose from j. to j ss. in Oil of
Lentiscus.

Lentis^us, and Tamarisk are not one. Lentiscus is Mountain Silver: And what
Wood is taken from the Silver, before any Bark grows thereon.

The Disentery cannot be cured with Scammony: For the matter should be
coagulated, not purged and constringed. Yet the Stomach must not be coagulated;
but the coagulation must be directed to the Members, the Stomach in the mean
while resting, viz. until the Salt be coagulated in the Exterior Members. All
those things which are prepared of Metals, are Elementated, whether they be
Flores, or whatsoever goes forth from the Minerals.

These are the Principal in dissolved Diseases, especially they, which arise
from the Water, as Talk, Cachimia, etc.

These Cure the Dysentery, Lientry, and Diatrhaea.

Thus far Paracelsus.

Van Helmont says, that the German Soldiers infallibly cured the Bloody Flux,
or Dysentery, by giving an Hare dried in the Smoke. Also dipping a Towel in the
Blood of an hunted Hare, and when dried administering it by pieces in Wine, Some
Have cured the Dysentery.

FINIS.
The Conclusion.
I Had not any design to Publish this small Tract, especially the First Part
thereof, but finding (as the saying is) some to ready to thrust their Sicle
into another Man's Harvest, was one reason that moved me to it: For I never met
with one Man from the Artist to the Bungler, but what pretended to the Species
Vitae; if not to them all: But now they may with confidence pretend to them,
yet let me tell ye, it is not every Fop can be Master of them, and I am fully
resolved, never to alter or deviate from the Original method, but to prepare
them exactly and curiously, with faithfulness and diligence, and to keep large
Quantities by me, to oblige all those ingenious Men who are pleased to make use
of them.

Another reason that induced me to Publish this small Treatise was the
uncivility I received from some disingenious Persons (especially one in
particular) who was so Foolishly Envious as to insinuate into the heads of some
Men that I could not make any of these Medicines here delivered: But I think
they had more Wit then to believe them, because they knew better; but their
full design in so doing, a Man of a mean Capacity may easily disearn: Also I
did it in Respect to those ingenious Men, who daily make use of these
Medicines, that by knowing the method and manner of preparing them, they might
the better know their Nature and partly to Oblige the Sons of Art, who have
taken great pains, and made diligent search after those Medicines, Especially
the Species Vitae and Tincturae Regalis; but let me tell you the Species Minor,
and Pleura comes not an Inch behind them as to what they are apropriated to.

I hope these my small endeavors will be accepted, and received into the
favor and protection of the Ingenious as a Gift from one of the meanest of
its professors, which indeed is the least of my fear, being fully satisfied, of
the love such Persons bare to all Novalties, and instead of hindering things of
this Nature, they always applaud what ever may be of advantage to the Public,
For it will be very rare if the Reader cannot find something herein that may be
serviseable to him.

But some may object and say, that the Part of Paraoelsus, is no Novalty,
because we have it in the Latin.

I answer, It Is true, we have it in the Latin Tongue; but there is several
Ingenious Men that does not understand the Latin: For which reason I thought it
necessary to add them together, in doing which, I hope such will not be
offended at it, there being many a score of Curious Medicines in it; which I
hope the Ingenious will find of great use and service to them, to their desired
success and advantage. Thus much I thought to premise by way of Conclusion,
hoping this Tract will find a general acceptance amongst the Ingenious, which
will be an incouragment to me, and may cause me (if a Second Impression should
be) to add something that may be as acceptable as this, if not more. So
Gentlemen I leave it with you, wishing you success and prosperity both in your
Studies and Operations which is the hearty desire of him who is

Your humble Servant J. Headrich.

A Catalogue of such Medicine as I have always Ready prepared by me.
SPecies Vitae. Species Coroborativa ( alias) Pleuretica. Species Minor.
Tinctura Regalis. Species Proprietates. Aqua Pestilentialis.
Spiritus Vinosi.
Absintij. Baccar. Junip. Cochleariae Simp. Chohleariae Purg. Castorei. Crani
Humani. Lavandulae. Roris Marini.
Oleum Vegatabilium.
Absinthiae. Anisi. Aurantiarum. Guaiaci. Succini. Tartari distill. Tartari per
del.
Extracts.
Croci. Resina Jalapi. Resina Scam. Extract. Rutae. Extract. Menthae.
Salis Fixi.
Absinthij. Artimisiae. Tartari. Tartari Vitriolat. Vitrioli.
Salis Volatiles.
Cornu Cervi. Crani Humani. Succini. Urinae. Volat. Oleos.
Spiritus Animalium.
Corn. Cervi. Crani Humani. Sang. Humani. Sal. Armoniaci. Urinae.
Oleum Animalium.
Corn. Cervi. Crani Humani. Cerae.
Spiritus Acidvegatabilium.
Aceti. Fuliginis. Guaiaci. Succini. Tartari.
Spirit. Acid Salium.
Nitri Simp. Nitri Dulc. Salis Com. Salis Dulc. Sulphuris. Vitrioli. Aqua
Fortis. Aqua Regis.
Prepar. Antimonij.
Antim. Diaphoret. Crocus Metallorum. Regulus Antim. Sulp. Antim. Auratum.
Tinctures.
Antimoni. Benzoinij. Castorei. Croci. Cinnamon. Myrrhae. Succini. Salis
Tartari.
Elixirs.
Proprietates Tart. Prop. cum ol. Sulp.
Prepar. Sulphur.
Bals. Sulphur Anizat. Bals. Sulp. Succinat. Bals. Sulp. Terib. Tinct. Sulphur.
Lac. Sulphur.
Advertisements.
I Have, with diligence and care invented a Curious Purging Electuary, which is
wholly Chemical, and I am Certain, never known to the World before. It is
certainly one of the most noblest Antivenerial Medicine as ever yet, discovered
to the World, as I have experienced both on Men, Women and very young Children.
It is of a strange Predominating power in Correcting and B^^nting the edges of
the Venereal Salts, carrying of the Poison by Stool and Urin, without griping,
or offending the Bowels in the least, purifying the whole mass of Blood (with
the Assistance of the Tincturae Scorbutica) totally Eredicating the Venomous
ferment, causing a good Digestion and Complexion, and Restoring the Patient to
their former Vigor, its not Obnoxious to the Stomach, as most Commonly Clap
Physic is, but is very pleasant, etc.

Price 10 s. per Ounce.

I have also an Infalable Powder for the Cough, Fever, and Pleurisy, etc.

It is a most excellent preservative in the Pest, a Certain and Speedy cure in
the Pleurisy, and inposthumes of what kind soever: it is a Preservative in all
manner of Fevers, it is also, a present help in the Epilepsy, and a Curative in
every Cough of what Nature soever, whether it be newly taken, or inviterate,
etc.

Price 10 s. per Ounce.


