A SERMON Preached before the KING At Whitehall, November the XXX, 1673.

By Roger Hayward, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

By His Majesty's special Command.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Basset, at the Sign of the George, near St.
Dunstans Church, in Fleetstreet, 1673.

2 Epistle to the Thessalonians, 2 Chap. 10, 11. Verse. Because they received
not the love of the Truth, that they might be saved. For this cause God shall
send them strong delusion, that they may believe a Lie.


THough the words do relate to a Prophecy, yet I need not be so bold as to
rifle into the doubtful contents of it, to find out the plain sense of them;
Whatsoever Age or Place of Christendom this dreadful Comet foreseen by the
Apostle directly hung over, yet that it has an evil Aspect more or less upon
all, is evident from the evil influence it has every where scattered, and we
are not free from, which is described in the words that I have read.

Wherein we have these two things considerable,

1. The sad condition of some men, God shall send them strong delusion, that
they may believe a lie.

2. The reason of it; because they received not the love of the truth, that
they might be saved; And whatever offense the phrase of (Gods sending) may give
us, as if Darkness could flow from him who is Light, the reason assigned for it
will easily remove.

What the strong delusion here threatened is, the verse before my Text tells
us, The coming of Satan with powers, and signs and lying wonders; such as our
blessed Savior foretold, with this account of them, M^tth 24.24.
They would deceive, if it were possible, the very Elect. Ephesians. 4.14.
Diverse and deep have been the (...), the methods of imposture in Religion; but
the (...) its utmost effort, and choice masterpiece has been, the
counterfeiting those Credentials which God has ever given to his immediate
Messengers, Power and Holiness, it being contrary to his Perfections, and an
invincible bar to all belief, for him to send a weak or wicked person on his
extraordinary Errand; How far the first of these has been forged, as by Simon
Magus (the person supposed by some, ^iph, b^r. 2^.
to be primarily meant here) Apollonius Tyanaeus, and others we are told by
History; But the Devil has long since, at least among us, laid by that old
Engine, as being unfit to ensnare an inquisitive Age; But pretense of Holiness
will never be outdated, the Sheeps clothing will be a fresh and fashionable
disguise to the end of the world; yet neither of these delusions ever have
been, or can be so strong or subtle as to elude all means of discovery: For
though a lying wonder may be Mechanism or Conspiracy be so performed as to
puzzle a very curious enquiry into the matter of fact only, and a Sanctimonious
vizor may be so accurately made, as to startle an unwary admirer that gazes
only on the outside of it; yet a careful search into the integrity, charity,
and humility of the person, will certainly discover the forgery; counterfeit
power and purity taste always very strong of malice and pride.

But, thanks be to God, we cannot pretend the danger, nor plead the excuse of
such temptations; such is the honest genius of our Religion, that it dazzles
not our Eyes with any strange feats, nor deafs our Ears with unintelligible
sounds, nor amuses our Minds with uncouth severities, nor offers any other
Proofs for it self, then those its great Master has left it, save only the
strange success of them, against the will and interest of the greatest power
and policy in the world. We are then safe from this first evil, unless we will
be so humorous as to cheat our selves into the belief of lies, which is the
second part of their sad condition.

To rake up the ashes of old Heretics, would be here as useless, as unsavory,
and to rake into the wounds of our own Church, to seek the Lie, would be as
barbarous; Some Balsom we rather take from the words, for the healing of the
sore of the Daughter of Israel, if it be not yet incurable; viz, Every false
Persuasion does not amount to this emphasis of error, nor must we write on it
the doom in my Text, lest we fall under our own condemnation: A small mistake
may indeed, as it is menag'd, grow up to the dimensions of a gross error, let
the vehicle be never so innocent, the ingredients make it a deadly poison; But
a lie is an error which carries its contradiction in its face not at the end of
a long chain of consequences hookt artificially together; which is so thick and
palpable, that not Faith and Philosophy only, but even Humanity checks at it,
as being repugnant to that sense or testimony which is current through the
whole world; And of this nature there are too many extant: I will not search
into this or the other sect, or communion for them, only lay down some general
undeniable Characters, and whatsoever Doctrines or Propositions answer them, I
hope 'twill be no rudeness or affront to leave the lie at their doors.

1. Those that deny the being, or providence of God, cannot justly be angry at
that reproach, which they roundly put upon the whole world; All men Jews and
Heathens, yea their very Idols and Altars, and the whole Creation, do with one
consent condemn these; yea, so far do they contradict themselves, that they
give the making and menagement of the whole world to such a blind Power, which
they dare not trust with the care of that little pittance of it they call their
own; And however sportive men may, in the transports of their pleasures, be
with God; yet this argues the denial of him to be the greatest falsity, that it
needs so much confidence and wildness, and contempt of all things that are
venerable amongst men, to support it. Again,

2. Such Opinions as do violate his Perfections, or charge any thing that is
evil on him, that advance any Creature to his glories, or degrade him to its
likeness, cannot escape this evil name: Those that of old invaded his honor,
and gave it to others, Isa. 44.20.
are said by the Prophet, to hold a lie in their right hand; Romans 1.23.
and by the Apostle, to change the truth of God into a lie. And those that
represent him as cruel or unjust, as peevish and easy to be provoked, and yet
easy to be flattered, are not the Idea of the true God, but the mere Figments
and Idols of their own devising; or whether their own Images which they set up
in pomp, and then fall down and worship, Greg. Nazian(...)
(...); Evil men, since they must have a God, will have the making of him, and
then no doubt he shall be such an one as shall best serve their own purposes, a
mere imaginary Creature of their own.

3. Whatever destroys the evidence of sense in those things that fall properly
under its cognizance, or the sufficiency of moral motives to induce a firm
Faith in those things which do not, nor cannot, falls justly under this censure:
For greater assurance then these give us in their respective objects we cannot
have; and upon this men adventure all that is dear to them, even their lives;
and he that is so much Infidel to himself, as to disbelief his own sense, or to
the whole world, as to refuse that security which is universally accepted
amongst men, engages himself in invincible jealousies of all persons actions
and things whatsoever; he may as well suspect the Food on his own Table, as
adore that on Gods, and question any Record as well as that of the Bible; So
fair do Skepticism and Infidelity bid for the Lie, that they cut off all the
means, not of all faith in God only, but also in men; yea, of all knowledge and
civil correspondence.

Lastly, Whatever errors destroy a good life, and licentiate wickedness, such
for instance, as confound the difference of Good and Evil, that dispense with
subjection, truth, honesty and mercy, and the inseparable duties of Relations;
that decry the necessity of good works, that establishes a Religion void of
Virtue, a Faith without Obedience, Repentance without Amendment; all which do
not by a perplexed course of consequences, but by a direct force set up Iniquity
as by a Law: The common sense of Mankind (the universal Conscience) is the most
safe and steady ark and repository of Truth, firmer then Seths Pillars, or the
two Tables, which can never moulder away, in which all the virtues of a good
life are so deeply ingrav'd, that they are not to be eras'd without the
violation of it; Truth and Justice, Charity and Sobriety, are older then the
Laws of the Sons of Noah, and more durable then Mount Sinai; they are the same
yesterday, to day, and for ever; the Data of all Laws, the bonds of all
Societies, the hallowed soil all Religions have been built on, of which that is
the best, that is most exactly framed to them; all men approve and defend these
as their common Birthright, their (...), and are ready jointly to prescribe
him as a common enemy, that assaults them; The grosseness of any Error is not
in the little remote absurdities that Art may urge it with, (God forbid that
the misnaming or misplacing the terms in a Syllogism should be damnable!) but
in the immediate mischievous effects of it; if the next streams be deadly, we
may conclude the fountain to be poisonous, and whatsoever Doctrine authorizes
evil, we may boldly pronounce it to be a Lie; John 8.44.
A name so hateful for the relation it bears to the Devil, that I dare not
affix it to any errors, but such as stand anathematized for such by the truest
ecumenical council, even the common consent of the whole world.

And now it may be wondered how in so nice and squeamish an Age, such tough and
unsavory Untruths should be so greedily swallowed; and I might be thought
(were not such conceits too notoriously owned) to have devised some Monsters
to make sport with; how men whose understandings serve them well as to other
things, should yet be so stupid as to deny him that made them, or to make him
such an one as they please, or to turn Infidels to themselves and all men, or
lastly, to think real virtue, upon which their own and all other men's comfort
and security depend, to be but an old Heathen notion, a Levitical shadow, as
very a trifle in Gods account, as in their own; This may seem strange, but the
wonder will soon be over, if we will consider the second part of the Text,

The reason of this sad doom, Because they received not the love of the truth,
that they might be saved.

A sad charge, as heavy as the doom! That it imports more then bare Infidelity,
is plain from the words, which signify,

1. An unworthy reception of truth; they received not the love of it.

2. The defeating the design of it; were not saved by it.

There are too many that receive the Doctrines and Promises of a holy Life (for
that is the specifical sense of truth in the holy Scripture) with scorn and
contempt, who, disdaining the sneaking guilt of the triflers in my Text, aspire
to that of Blasphemers of Truth, for whom therefore a more dreadful judgment
then that here (if any can be so) is of old appointed, Because you have set at
naught all my Counsel, Prove. 1.20, etc.
I also will laugh at your Calamity, I will mock when your fear comes. Others
receive it with more civility, with an agreeable countenance and behavior, but
a cold indifferency, as they would a stranger; and if its approach, dress
Language, or arguing chance to please them, their civility may improve to that
gladness that Herod afforded the Baptist, and it is a welcome Guest for an Mark
6.2^
hour.

A third sort receive it with a zealous fondness, with Passions and Raptures,
yet not it, but the phrase, the tone, the action that conveighs it; For let the
same truth be read in a Lesson, in a lower key, and with a more composed
behavior, and it looses its warm entertainment.

And what is all this but flattery and falsehood? It may be the love of
something that is agreeable to the Ears, as sweet Accents or smooth Periods
are, let the matter be serious or frivolous; or to the Fancy, as such
discourses as sooth men's particular tempers, whether they are true or false; or
to the Understanding, as a well-fram'd Hypothesis of the motions of the
Planets; But all this, even the clearest notion of truth falls short of the
love of it; This admits it beyond all the chambers of imagination and
discourse, into the treasures the affections of the Soul, seats it there in
full power, casts out whatsoever is distastful to it, and subjects all things,
even its dearest inclinations to its Laws; and whatsoever is short of this, is
but being slightly pleased or instructed by it, not saved: which is the second
part of their charge.

That men look upon Salvation, as a bare Reversion, which has nothing of duty
or happiness in it on this side the Grave, as it argues a strong love of their
Sins, so it does a gross ignorance of the design of the Gospel, the only
effect of which, that should or can be expected from it here (as it every where
declares) is, Tit. 2.11, ^2.
that it save us from our sins, without which the strongest hopes of Heaven are
but the Dreams of a Fools Paradise; If therefore men will not be bettered by
it, if notwithstanding its plainest Precepts, highest Promises, and most
frightful Terrors, if in defiance to the strongest motives, the Blood of Jesus
and the Bowels of God, to invite them, and all the Aids of Heaven tendered to
assist them, and all the treasures of Love and Vengeance laid open to persuade
them, they will contin^e in their wickedness, and not be saved, with whatsoever
solemnity they receive, they do effectually but reject and baffle the truth.

This is their Charge, Romans 1.18.
Holding the truth of God in unrighteousness, or (as in the next verse to the
Text it is phras'd) not believing in the truth, but having pleasure in
unrighteousness, as if that pleasure were flat without the resistance of Truth
to keen the appetite, as if the ways to death were not plain enough without
the light of the Gospel to direct them thither, and 'twere a glorious conquest
through all the forces of Light and Love, Mercy and Vengeance, to do violence
to the Kingdom of Darkness, and storm Hell and Damnation.

This is the Charge, and how it fits men for this doom, and prepares them for
the grossest errors I am next to show.

The clearest Principles of Faith and Reason are not so convincing as the
Doctrines of a holy life, which, as the light, bring their own evidence with
them, and approve themselves at first sight to be holy, just and good; And the
grossest errors cannot be press't with such palpable absurdities, as any great
and wilful wickedness, which the conscience confutes, not by formal argument,
but with pain and shame and confusion of face, and leaves it no evasion, or
defense but that which amounts to a denial, extenuation: He therefore that is
grown so hardy as to resist the strongest convictions of his own conscience,
and to baffle the painful conflicts of his own spirit, who can hear and feel,
and despise his own condemnation, how easy a conquest will he make over the
weaker persuasions of his mind? The strongest sense we have implanted by
Nature, or renewed by Grace in our Souls, is, That of Good and Evil, which,
because it is the Guardian of our Innocence and Safety, therefore has God made
it so quick and apprehensive, The sense of True and False is much more weak and
languid, like the last faint returns of a dying echo; If that therefore be
grown stupid, how can this continue in its vigor? When once a man is grown so
senseless as to lay by all reverence and pity of himself, and to endure his own
torments and reproaches, he may easily despise the weaker chastisements of the
sharpest demonstrations. Besides, there is no great sin but is attended with
some proper mischiefs which touch the evil man in those parts wherein he is far
more sensible and tender, then in any the faculties of his Soul, with which
either his Body, or his Credit, or his Substance are weary and heavy laden; And
can we think the Articles of such a man's Faith can be dearer to him then his
Health, his Honor, or his Estate, which he so readily sacrifices to his Sins?
or, That a contradiction should trouble his mind, who has no compassion left
for these? Can the harshest discords give any offense to those Ears that have
been tuned only to cursing and calumny? or the most ill-shapt unproportion'd
objects to those Eyes that have delighted in the ugliest deformities of their
own natures? No more offense can the most inconsistent untruths give him, who
being past feeling, Ephesians. 4.19.
has given himself over to work all uncleanness with greediness. Thus does
wickedness harden and enure the mind for the grossest errors: and the more,

2. Because it exposes a man to all temptations, and makes him a ready prey for
any belief that comes armed with the same weapons, he has been so often
worsted with; If Pleasure, Honor, and Profit can make a man a Beast, a Villain
or a Knave, they may as easily, where they stand for it, make him an Infidel or
Apostate; If the smiles of a friend can strip a man of his Humanity, they will
shake his Creed, which sits not so close to him; He who abandons his Innocence
for a little Railery, would sure be quickly stormed out of his Faith;

But what speak I of temptation? He that persists in his wickedness in defiance
to truth needs no Tempter, being of himself propense to invent, or embrace the
grossest lies. For,

3. There are two great depths of darkness, whence all those Mists that
be-night men's Understandings do arise, an evil conscience and evil affections;
both which have their rise and growth from an evil life, and do beguile men
with a subtler sophistry, then all outward imposture, which borrows all its
force from them.

1. The evil Conscience works thus. To the native delicate sense of the Soul
the evil of guilt is very afflictive; The remembrances of Blood, Rapine,
Oppression, Cozenage, and the like, are not only frightful sights, but cruel
furies to a man; Something then must be done for his ease, he cannot live on
this wheel, nor lie down with this fire in his bosom, nor can he shift off
these Tortures that stick as close to him as the knowledge of himself does; The
common diversions of noise, jollity, and business will not always last, he
must sometimes be alone, and then the Tormenters return; Thus like the evil
Spirit in the Gospel, He goes about seeking rest, and can find none; The only
sure and Catholic Remedy of Repentance from dead works, (which by the Blood of
Jesus, and the Promise of the Spirit, we are assured will be successful) is
harsh and severe, and requires cutting off the gangrend Hand, and pulling out
the enflamed Eye, and other rigours he can no more endure then the distemper;
it is a long and heavy way to the City of Refuge, and when one is there it is but
an imprisonment. In this distress some Witchcraft must be sought to, some
easier arts found out to palliate the evil, and assuage the pain. And for this
he has heard much talk of a goodly and cheap Robe of Righteousness, and a
choice fucus of Faith, with which he may so cover and beautify the monsters,
that the all-seeing Eye of the most holy God shall not see sin in them; In this
disguise he presently puts them, and having thus concealed them, he apprehends
no terror in them; Thus thousands swallow this enthusiastic lie, for indeed
it is very delicious, and gives a great deal of ease to the vilest Sinner,
without the least trouble or distur bance to his Sin.

But if the man be frighted out of this fancy into a thoughtful mood, and
being arrested with the sense of God, sees his nakedness through these
Figleaves, and feels that for all his finery he is yet in pain, and something
must be done besides this mummery for his ease, he next casts about for what is
easy, not sure; And being told, that a slight exposing the evil, by a short
confession, a very little attrition, and a round satisfaction to the Church, by
the help of a few omnipotent words, and in the close of all, a little healing
unction, will infallibly effect the cure, and lay these terrors; Having so
venerable authority for it, he takes the opiate, which lulls him into a
pleasant slumber and giddiness; and now he cries, Soul, take thy ease, and
lust, take thy liberty, and whenever the terrors do return, it is but
repeating the remedy, Toties, quoties, and all will be well; But if the charge
of this (as the cheapness of the other) render it suspicious, if reason do
awaken the man, and persuade him that God cannot be imposed upon by such thin
devises; and after all his vain trials, he finds it is not possible by these
poor crafts to reconcile the sense of his God and his Guilt, so as they may
peaceably abide together; Having first resolved to live and die in his dear
wickedness, he then sees it is necessary wholly to discharge his mind of the
first great troubler of his rest, as that which he is most desirous, and will
cost him least to part with: And when he has well exorcis'd the sense of God,
and sinned himself into the hope that he is not, he applauds himself in that
ease and freedom that he has forced and abused his Soul into.

That this is the usual method Guilt puts men upon for a little temporary ease,
is a plain and frequent observation; It sets out at Enthusiasm, and ends in
Atheism, betwixt which how distant soever they seem, there is but one short
stage, viz. Superstition: Thus the grossest Lies become a needful Sanctuary, 1 Timothy 1.19, 20.
when Hymaeneus and Alexander put away their Conscience, they were forced to
send their Faith after it, which would have been very uneasy to them without
it; Thus when men have spent their Innocence in riotous courses, they must ( as
the Prodigal in the Gospel) set up some sordid way of living, serve Swine and
diet with them, to subsist.

2. The other things that so corrupt the mind, as to make it greedy of the
grossest Lies, are evil affections, which cannot be maintained nor gratified
without them. So are we framed that there is little dry light in us, our
apprehensions are deeply tinctured, if not formed by our affections; We believe
with the heart, is as true in Philosophy as it is in Scripture, for men's most
unconcerning speculations savor something of the love or reverence wherewith
they imbibed them, how much more their moral and religious persuasions? when
once therefore the affections of men are by their evil practices turned into
brutish, or diabolical, they change all things, their Gods, Religions, Creeds,
Commandments, Heaven and Hell into their own complexions; How exactly did the
Idols of the Heathen suit with their tempers, and the notions too many
Christians have of their God, with their own depraved dispositions? How
agreeable to a cruel and savage mind is the Mahumetan zeal, and their Paradise
to the Intemperate and Unclean? How proper is the temporal reign of their King
Jesus to the revengeful and ambitious? How greedily do they suck in the breath
that declaims against good works who are griping and niggardly? How welcome are
the new ways of Salvation by fancy or proxy to the delicate and lazy? How
tastful is the Doctrine against Spirits to a mind that is carnaliz'd? and the
news of no God to those who would have none of his Laws? Men fix their belief
where they place their happiness, and a little persuasion will serve to rid
their thoughts of that which obstructs their passage to it; Soon did the Indian
renounce his Baptism, when he found it obliged him to renounce his dearer
Paganism; But whatsoever story sooths and cherishes their lusts, that first
swells their wishes into hopes, their hopes into possibilities, and these into
lusty demonstrations that it is true; For this reason the Apostle St. James
requires us to lay aside all filthyness, Jam. 1.21.
and superfluity of naughtiness, before we can receive the engrafted word; And
'twas not by prophecy but experience the Apostle St. Paul said, 2 Timothy 3.4.
That men would heap up Teachers according to their lusts; the same experience
that taught the Philosopher that (...), pleasures corrupt men's principles; for
according to his rule, all things are nourisht by what they are made, the food
must be agreeable to the faculty, and men's evil lusts must pine and starve, 1
Pet. 2.2.
if they have nothing but the (...) honest truth to be maintained by; Thus
through the eager appetite of these men become not only receptive of, but
ravenous after the foulest trash, the grossest lies.

And now this plain account has saved me labor of Justifying our most
Righteous and Good God in this sad doom wherein it is said, God sends men, etc.

The great concernment that he owns, and must (as he is God) necessarily have
in all the affairs of the world, gives men occasion to lay all their burdens
upon him in the worst sense, that is, if they are blind, wicked, and unhappy,
they cry out presently (as he in the Tragedy) against, (...) yea, they cannot
be sloathful and poor, but anon Providence must be impleaded; For if they have
once got an unavoidable necessity, they are sure they have a good apology.

That God does by any positive act blind, or infatuatemen, as it is utterly
repugnant to his Perfections, who is Light and Love; So it is a foul Blasphemy
that has no color for it, but what some men's expounding Scripture and
Providence in the sense of their own evil nature gives it; But if he permit
imposture for the trial of our reason, as he does temptation for our integrity,
where is the cruelty? And if he suspend his Light, when men as the Sodomites
would commit outrages by it, where is the wrong? If he remove his truth from
them that resist it, where is the violence? To obtrude it where men withstand
it, that were violence indeed; Though he be a God full of compassion, slow to
anger, and of great goodness, yet he is not bound under any necessity of
exposing his Truth and his Goodness for ever to the scorn and contempt of
ungrateful and dirty Worms, and it is a mad and disingenuous temptation of him
to try by our obstinacy how long he can forbear; His Truth shall not always
contend in vain, if men will close their Eyes, and harden their Hearts, Matthew.
13^ 13,14,15.
it shall happen to them according to their own choice, as to the Jews of old,
seeing they shall not see, hearing they shall not understand. God does then no
more in this, then in all other his Judgments, fill the evil man with his own
devices. He delighted in darkness, and it is given him for a portion, and a sad
one it is, an entrance into the outer darkness, and wants only weeping and
gnashing of teeth, the dolorous and madding sense of it, to complete it. He
then knits the bands of his destiny, his sentence is not more severe to him,
then his own choice, Because he received not the love of the truth, therefore
he is given over to the belief of lies.

From what has been said of this, I shall raise three Conclusions.

1. Nothing so directly endangers our Faith, as an evil Life; It cannot indeed
be expected that they should have any hearty love for their Faith, that have
none for their Souls; For (however some look on it as no more then one of the
peculiarities of the Nation they live in, as their Language, their Habit, their
Laws and Customs are, yet) we know the great design of it is, to instruct and
encourage us in those things that may make us good and happy for ever, and he
that lists not to be so, cannot be a true Friend to that Faith which should
make him so. Yet we see that Education, Custom, Interest and Prae-ingagement,
implant even in the worst of men a very tenacious reverence of their Belief;
but I hope we value ours upon stronger motives; which though it be besides the
design of my Text to recompt, yet (that I be not too impudent a Beggar of the
Question) the Characters I have given of gross and damnable errors will acquit
if of the imputation of any such; Search and try if there be any thing in it,
that tends to the denial of God, the diminution of his Glory, the countenance
of Infidelity, or a bad Life, Then let it suffer in our esteem; But if it be so
tender of Gods honor, that it will not venture to parcel it out to others upon
the warranty of any critical distinction, if it be so fair and ingenuous as not
to impose upon our understandings and senses, but subjects it self to the
closest sober enquiries; if it have so much esteem for true Goodness, as to
prefer it before all outward Ritualities, and set it above the dispensations of
any Interests or Powers whatsoever, I hope it may find excuse, with all those
that are true Lovers of God, Reason and Virtue; But the great fault of our
Faith and the sum of all those particulars it is charged with, is, that it is
too stubborn and nice, and will not be commanded nor entreated beyond that
Rule, which the great Author of it has left us, and sure this should not be
its reproach but commendation to those whose great glory it is to have
transmitted the Holy Scripture to us; if it offend in this, it is certainly on
the safer side of a great modesty, and an humble deference to our blessed
Savior and his holy Apostles. Such an account of it as this, But from his
Royal lips, who spoke, and writ, and lived, and died best for it, (next to the
holy Jesus and his immediate Witnesses) rendered it so acceptable to a
professed Enemy of it (Pardre Rhohose Confessor to the Infanta, By the Ea(...)
Monmou^^ in the Hist the Civil wars of Ita^
as the story is well known and voucht) that he turned its Confessor, in this
honest acknowledgment; If this be your Faith, for ought I know, you may be
saved as well as I.

But (to return to my Text) whatever account has endeared it to us, nothing so
much hazards it, as a Pagan life and conversation; There are two things men are
commonly very fearful of in this case, The weakness of their own Understanding,
^ph. 4.14.
and the wiliness and cunning craftiness of those that lie in wait to deceive;
As for the first, however faulty simplicity, may be in other things, we have no
great cause to apprehend it so here; Yea, the itch of Knowledge which drew man
into the first fatal Error, has still continued to have the same evil
influence; whilst men are contented with that measure of knowledge, which is
fit for them, and answers the offices and necessities of their Lives, they are
safe within these bounds; But when they begin (...), to soar above St. John's
Epistles to his Revelations, and leave Charity to expound Mysteries, disclose
Prophesies, and model Polities, they enter into Clouds and Darkness, and no
wonder if they stray, Gnostick is the true name of every Heretic; Nor is the
craftiness of Deceivers so dreadful as men make it, For besides that, the truly
good man is seldom so idle or curious as to hearken to their Charms, so his
beloved Principles of humility, peacefulness, and submission make him abhorrent
of them; yea, there is an awfulness in goodness that checks their boldest
solicitations, but wickedness does invite them, as the luxurious Prodigal, the
Cheats; and though their good Words and fair Speeches may lead captive silly
Women, Romans 16.18.
2 Timothy 3.6.
yet, it is only such as are laden with Sins and led away with diverse Lusts; Let
us not then impute that danger to these that is only due to wickedness of
life, those do but assault the outworks, this strikes at the vitals of our
Faith, and creates those strong prejudices to it, which, were they not awed by
some outward regards, would soon break out into open Hostility; A sound Faith
and a corrupt Life may be found together, there are too many such monsters as
Orthodox Reprobates, men that hold the truth of God in unrighteousness; but
this they wholly owe to the restraints of the Divine Providence, not to any
inward friendship that maintains the union: Did not thou oh mighty God who
rulest the raging of the Sea, did not thou likewise stop some means
Principles from running out into their proper practices, and other men's
practices from settling in their proper Principles, what a deluge of Infidelity
and Barbarism would soon overflow thy poor Church; Yet by whatever outward bond
men's Faith is tied to them, if it be not ingrasted in their Hearts and Lives,
it hangs but loose, and lies at the mercy of any Engine to remove it that has
as much force, as that which upholds it; and let such ever bless God that they
were born under a most Gracious Defender of their Faith. God forbid we should
ever again be fooled with the old shoes and the moldy bread of the
Gibeonites, to create of foment any public jealousies, the Language of which
(we too sadly know) when they speak out is nothing but, Arm, Arm; yet there is
a godly jealousy the Apostle speaks of which we all ought to have of our
selves, 2 Cor. 11.2.
which would call down our eyes from a busy prying into aspects of the
heavenly bodies to behold the fatal Prognostics in our selves, which if we did
consider, would awaken such apprehensions as these in us; How have we seen
Truth approaching us with all the powers of reason, sweetness, and terror? with
all kind of demonstrations, but the miraculous ones of the spirit, and in lieu
of them, with the confirmed experience of sixteen hundred years? But what
reception, what success has it found? Let shame and sorrow answer! If it has
escapt our scorn we have been very merciful to it, and a cold patience has
been a high favor; and now how indifferent must we needs be for that which we
have treated so unworthily? How easily may the subtilty of wit, or the caresses
of friendship, persuade us from that which has been our continual burden,
which we have and do actually renounce?

2. The best expedient for the defense of Truth, and preventing the growth of
gross Errors, is, the enforcement of a good life by the precepts and practice
of it. How vain and fruitless have Dispute and Controversy been? how few
Converts have they made? and it is no wonder, there is a veil lies upon men's
minds which must not be rudely rent, but removed with a gentle hand; There is a
Laesum organum in the case, 2 Cor. 4.4.
The God of this world has blinded their minds, to the cure of which we must
first apply, for all the treasures of light opened upon a sore eye will but
more offend it; men's understandings are not to be immediately attacqu'd, nor
carried by storm, the more they are pressed, the more they resist; they lie
deeply intrencht in the affections, and are never to be gained but by those
fair representations and powerful applications of goodness, that may win these.
Though the holy Jesus spoke so as never man spoke, and did those mighty things
that none else could do; Yet had not his Lips been as full of Grace as they
were of Truth, and his Works of Benignity as they were of Power, he might have
astonished many, he had never proselyted any to him; The Primitive methods of
convincing were by letting their light so shine before men, Matthew. 5.16.
that they might see their good works, 1 Pet. 2.15
and by well-doing they did that, (which we find nothing else can do) they put
to silence the ignorance of foolish men; and we cannot imagine how any other
ways the (...), the things which were nothing in the worlds account should
have brought to naught the greatest, 1 Cor. 1.27.28.
and the foolish and weak have confounded the wise and the mighty: Yea, this is
the method of all Imposture and Temptation, they transform themselves into the
appearance of goodness, ^ Cor. 11.13.
and thus the Serpent winds himself there, where the teeth of the Lion could
not enter, Let us use some of the Viper in our Antidote, for Truth and Error,
Life and Death, make their entry the same way; Whilst railing confutes its own
best reasoning, and the keenness of the argument blunts it, and the curiousness
of art makes it suspected, and all the ways of wit and anger are unsuccessful,
then goodness infinuates it self, and melts down the iron sinew and the brow of
brass; For it is most certain, (...), nothing can be so spoken, but it may be
spoken against; but however men may put by the strokes of the strongest
reasoning, yet they cannot resist the charms of Charity, Purity, Meekness and
Humility, and Goodness and Truth are so everlastingly allied, that where men
meet with the one, they certainly expect the other; Which of you convinces me
of sin? was such a challenge as the Jews could not answer to our Savior; Joh.
8.46.
and, if I say the truth, why do you not believe me? was such an Assumption as
they could not object against; A good life therefore is the plainest and
highest commendation of, and would gain more Proselytes to our most holy Faith,
then all our Pleas and Apologies for it; Were we but as good as our Religion
is, and would have us be, our Enemies would flow into our Church, and we should
not need any, either Comprehensive Arts, or Colleges, pro propaganda side, to
bring the famed argument of universality on our side. Yet should this method
prove unsuccessful to others, it would return to our own profit, which is the

Last conclusion; An honest Obedience to the truths that are (universally
received,) or a good life (which never yet came into controversy.) is the best
security we can have from all dangerous and damnable Errors; To be secure from
these, is, I doubt not, the desire, study and enquiry of all, but it is too
usual for men to find a Dungeon where they looked for a Sanctuary.

Some fly to a Spirit they have heard much talk of, which without any thoughts
of their own, or the weak helps of Heathen Philosophy, Carnal Reason, or
Spiritual Guides, will by an immediate hand direct them, and when their fancies
are well impregnate with this pleasant conceit, lay by all further care of
themselves, commit their minds to the strange impulses of it, not doubting, but
under its conduct they shall be led into all truth.

And so, no doubt they would, were it the sweet and calm spirit of holiness and
sobriety, of a peaceable and good life; But if we expect this any other way,
then in the diligent use of our faculties, we may wait as long for it as the
Jews for their Messiah. Are all Prophets? are all Apostles? are all Evangelists
that they dream of Inspiration? Moreover, no Spirit is to be believed without
due trial, Joh. 4.1.
and that furious Spirit which has so haunted the World, and would turn all
things upside down, betrays its self, by its fruits, to be of an evil kind; its
fierceness and violence plainly speak it to be of kin to that in the Gospel,
That threw the poor man into the fire and water; Mat. 17.15
It Is no more, in short, then the force of men's own black and impetuous Lusts,
which by their strength they take for some omnipotent thing, and so suffer
themselves to be hurried by it into all the Labyrinths of Darkness.

By whose misfortunes others grown more sober and wary, retire to their own
reasonings, where having fortisi'd themselves with good sense, and great
suspicion, they think they are safe from the assaults of gross ties.

And so they were, were they not false to themselves, by leaving some weak and
indefensible places where the enemy may easily enter; For such as the man is
such is his reasoning, if he be soft and voluptuous, smcoth and sensual, errors
may surprise him; if cruel and revengeful, any bloody and fiery Doctrines will
take him; and how safe soever the man of argument thinks himself in it, yet if
he can live in a sin against which he can argue as well as any of those whose
trade it is, why may he not, on the same enducements, admit an error which he
can as well confute? Thus men of the greatest parts and improvements have
espoused the greatest Errors, Romans 1.2
prefessing themselves to be wise, they become fools. Which whilst others
observe, grown more fearful and modest by their fall; they think it safest to
trust themselves with some wise guide, and having heard of one that's
infallible, they cheerfully resign their understandings to his keeping, and
then they are safe.

And so surely they are, if it be but so; But first, they must be infallibly
assured of his infallibility, else they have nothing mended their condition;
For, if the proof of this admits of the least doubt (as the difference of those
that own it, where they should fix it, does confess) if they have not an
unquestionable evidence of the unfailing integrity and wisdom of him they have
entrusted with so great a treasure as their Faith and their Souls, Then,
instead of wisely ensuring, they may (for ought they know) only have tamely
enslaved them; And a shrewd suspicion there is that it is so, in that, men must
extinguish the Lamp of God in them, for their safer guidance, and to secure
their Faith, must abandon their Reason and Sense, of which there can be no use
nor need to him who is held by an infallible band, and cannot be misguided.

But sure the world has had proof enough of the danger of such Guardians of
their Faith, and it is to be hoped when men have run through all these mazes,
and are grown giddy and tired therein, they will be persuaded to repose
themselves (whither all men fly at their last distress) under the better
security of a good life; Not, that this excludes thoughtfulness or devotion, or
supersedes the necessity of Church Doctrine or Discipline, for the honest use
of those, and a modest teachable submission to these are great parts of a good
life; But it calms the Passions, purges the Affections, tunes the instruments
of Reason, and eases the Soul of all inward Disorders; And that this is the
best preparation even for Saecular Wisdom, all men do own, in that none go
reeking in Lust, wallowing in Riot, flaming in Passion, to any serious study,
Council or Action; they take their most virtuous moods for those, and do appear
the best men and Christians when they would show themselves the best
Philosophers and Counselors; But a good life does more then this to the
preserving us from deadly Errors, for it begets in us a quick sehse of
whatsoever is contrary to its self, as all such Errors still are; and though
the good man's art may fail him in small mistakes, yet his continual exercise of
goodness (as the experience of every Artist in his Trade, and the naturate
sagacity of every Creature in what is good or evil to it) makes him very
apprehensive of what is very false and dangerous.

But its greatest safety is in this, that it entitles us to Gods especial care
and guidance; who though he had not told us so often as he has, Psalm. 25.9.
That the meek he will guide in judgment, and teach his ways. If ye continue
in my words, Joh. 8.38 32.
ye shall know the Truth: He that hears my words, Matthew. 7.25.
and does them, is founded upon a Rock; yet (if our thoughts be not very
unworthy of him) we shall not dare to suspect, that he will ever abandon a true
Lover and Doer of his Will, who desires nothing but to be conformed to himself
by it, to be bewildred and benighted in the errors of the wicked that lead to
death; The jealousy of such a sportive cruelty, we should abhor to have of any
worthy Friend or Master, and it is beyond all expressions, base and unreasonable
of him who is Light and Love; Who, should he forsake a Soul wholly devoted to
his Laws, to wander and be misguided to its ruin, must forget, not only his
Promises, but his very Nature, his Truth and Goodness: and if once we call
these into doubt, we sink into bottomless Skepticism, where we shall not find
any surer footing for the certainty of our Senses then of our Faith; The same
foundations then that Heaven and Earth are built upon, the same is every good
man's Faith, yea Heaven and Earth may pass away, but the goodness of the Lord
endures for ever; Here therefore is the most firm and Chatholick security that
God has provided for men of all capacities, whereby the meanest Reasoner,
whose head aches at a hard argument, is as safe, if he be but as honest and
good, as the Scribe or the Disputer, or the man that is mighty at
demonstration; Let us therefore, as the Apostle St. Peter advises us, commit
the keeping of our Souls to God in weldoing, as unto a faithful Creator; and
pray ever as our Apostle has taught us in the end of this Chapter; Now our
Lord Jesus Christ, and God even our Father, who bath loved us, and given us
this everlasting consolation, and good hope, comfort our hearts and stablish us
in every good Word and Work, to whom be all glory given world without end. Amen.

ERRATA.
PAge 5. line 19. for their read meant, 20. for whether read rather, p. 6. l. 1.
for (...) read (...) disbelief read disbelieve, p. 7. l. 12. for prescribe read
proscribe, p. 18. l. 4. read (...), 11. after These, p. 24. l. 7. read the
before aspects, p. 28. l. 12. read its for their p. 31. l. 2. for read natural.

FINIS.

