TWO SERMONS PREACHED IN The Parish Church of St. Giles in the Fields, by way
of preparative upon the Articles of the Creed.

By William Haywood, Doctor of Divinity, and Rector of the said Church.

Published at the request of diverse the Inhabitants of the said Parish.

LONDON: Printed by I. O. for Henry Seile, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Fleet Street, over against Saint Dunstanes Churchyard. 1642.

TO HIS VERY LOVING NEIGHBOVRS AND BREthren in CHRIST; The Inhabitants of Saint
Giles in the Fields.
WHat was by me intended only for your bearing, is now at the request of many
of you, exposed to public reading. Wherein, as I have yielded to satisfy your
desire, even against mine own liking, so I trust, you will satisfy mine, in
testifying as occasion serves, how unwillingly I was persuaded to it. Not that
I envy the public benefit, or (hun to have known to all Congregations, what
I deliver in one; but that so many excellent works in this kind already extant,
makes me assured there is little need of mine, nor can I think these poor
weekly labors in any sort meet for so general a view as they are now offered
to; nor can I see in them wherefore they should be preferred before, other of
their fellows: yet lest I should be wanting in any thing that might further
your spiritual proficiencie, I have denied mine own judgment to serve yours,
beseeching Almighty God it may do that good to you and all Readers, which you
bele^ve, and I earnestly pray for.

Yours in Christ Jesus. W. H.

THE FIRST SERMON.
And now abides Faith, Hope, Charity; these three, but the greatest of these
is Charity. HAving in an Annual course gone through the several Epistles and
Gospells, well nigh for every Sunday in the year; I have thought it expedient
this present year to change my course, and to treat of the maine foundations
of Religion, consisting in the Articles of our Belief, the Lords prayer, and
the ten Commandments. An Argument necessary for the instruction of the more
ignorant, useful to confirm the faith of the more knowing; expedient to
edify, and regulate the manners of all. It has bin said by great Divines of
our own Church, that numbers of our people reap not the benefit of our
Preaching, they might for want of due Catechizing, and it has bin observed,
that Catechizing, where it has bin too low and child-like, without piercing
the grounds of divine Mysteries, without teaching the ordinary sort somewhat
more then they know, has bin as much despised; I shall therefore endeavor, so
to join preaching and Catechizing together, that the simpler sort may not be
neglected, but perceive plainly the substance of what they are to learn: nor
yet the more knowing sort forgotten, but instructed in things they ought ever
to remember, nor either sort left unedified, by dealing only with points of
Doctrine, and drawing nothing to application, but that the mysteries of faith
be so handled, that walso still extract out of them Rules of good life, and
precepts of good life also accommodated, that they may more and more serve to
build us up in our most holy says; in which enterprise I shall desire the
benefit of your Prayers to our heavenly Father to assist mine, that I may go
through with this intendment profitably, according to my desire. At this time I
have chosen by way of Preface, to treat of the three great Virtues in common,
whereupon Religion is founded: to wit, Faith, Hope, and Charity. Hereafter as
God shall enable me in particular of the sum of our faith in the Creed, the
sum of our hope in the Lords prayer, and the sum of our Charity in the ten
Commandments. But at present in general only, that ye may understand how
these three Virtues are connected together, and in what order of estimation to
be accounted; Now abide these three, Faith, Hope, and Charity; but the
greatest of these is charity.

The whole Chapter out of which this Text is taken, is nothing but a
commendations of Charity, from the beginning of it to the end. And this Verse
being the conclusion of the whole Chapter, seems to the highest reach of
commendations. For after the Apostle had commended Charity from the necessity
of it; Though I speak with the tongue of men and Angels, and have not charity,
I am nothing. And then from the excellent properties of it, Charity suffers
long, and is kind, etc. And thirdly, from the perpetuity of it; Charity never
fallcth away, etc. In the fourth and last place, he compares it with the
highest and most necessary graces belonging to a Christian, viz. Faith and
Hope, which only may seem (in any man's judgment) to challenge equality with
it. And yet here in this Verse he gives the Crown from them, and puts it upon
Charity alone. It is true, Faith, Hope, and Charity are all of a rank,
heavenly Virtues all, and all necessary to Christians, which Tongues, and
Prophe^ie, and Miracies are not and yet even among these, Charity has the
prcheminence. These three indeed surmount all other perfections; none (...) to
the dignity of these, and yet Charity carries away the dignity even among
these. Now abide (...), hope, and charity, these three; (...) the greatest of
these is charity.

In which words ye may note the proposition it self, and the reference of it.
The Proposition is a definitive conclusion for the greatness of Charity above
all other virtues whatsoever, and the Reference is that which follows
presen^ly after, in the beginning of the next Chapter, follow after Charity.
Which very well depends upon the end of the Chapter before, for thereafter the
Apostle had discoursed of several gifts, M^r^cles, healings, helps,
governements, diversities of Tongues, he concludes, Covet you earnestly the
best gifts, and yet show I unto you a more excellent way. That more excellent
way is Charity, which presently after follows in the beginning of this
Chapter, Follow Charity therefore rather then any, for all other gifts
whatsoever do but serve to and under Charity. They vanish and decay, but
Charity never fades: whether it be Prophesies, they shall fail; or Tongues,
they shall cease; or knowledge, it shall vanish; but love shall never fall
away: follow love therefore above all.

When the Apostle had thus preferred Charity above all the rest, he reflects
in the last place upon those things, that seem of the same nature with it.
Faith and Hope appear fully as necessary as Charity, and as long lasting. For
though Prophecy and Tongues last not, neither according to the act, nor the
habit, but are infused rarely, and particularly into some men, not into others;
at some times, and not at others: yet Faith and Hope are at all times, and in
all Christian men alike. None can be a member of Christ without these two, any
more, then without Charity. Nor can Charity consist without these two in this
world; so that take Faith away, take away Hope, and Charity falls to the
ground; and consequently all Christianity with them: Though therefore Charity
take place of all the rest, yet let it not be set above these. Let Faith and
Hope go hand in hand with Charity at least. Nay faith the Apostle, The
greatest of these is charity; That is, Faith and Hope must give place to
Charity, though all virtues else give place to them. It is true, they be all
necessary, and perpetual in this life, all three of them. No Christian can be
without every one of them, it is granted: All our labor tends to these three
and these are the samme of whatsoever perfection can be named. (...) now
therefore they abide abid as it were at the foot of the (...), having cast up
all other miraculous gifts and graces, here is the (...); take all in a little,
it is but Faith, Hope, and Charity which all among to. But even in this total
consisting as it were of three Figures, mistake not the quantity, Charity is
the greatest of the three.

As all other things tend to the building up of these; so two of these that is,
Faith and Hope it self, tend to the building up of Charity, and Charity is the
top of the building, Charity is the Crown of all the ^est; not only
surmounting other Graces, but these too. Surmounting them and outlasting them;
for though Faith and Hope last, and abide throughout all the course of this
life, as needful as Charity; yet in the next life, only Charity shall abide;
Faith and Hope shall then have no more place. And therefore let not faith and
hope (how fundamental soever) dildaine to yield to Charity. Charity is greater
then Faith and Hope, Charity is the highest of the three, and if it be so,
follow after charity; what ever perfection else ye attain, let all serve to
this, and let love be the end and scope, and measure of all.

This is the sum of the Apostles Doctrine, and it is sure no impertinent one
of ours for these times. Wherein, as if Charity were not the greatest virtue,
but the least of all, every man's gifts, and endowments tend to Charity in the
last place, each striving to rear up his own glory, or advance his own
profit, every one looking on his own things, and not the things that are Jesus
Christ's. Wherein, above all other heavenly fires, Charity is nearest to
cinders; zeal it may be burning, and desire and courage, and confidence all of
a flame; but the love of too many waxing cold. Never more needful sure for
Charity to be preached of, the World being so full of rents and divisions; the
Church so distracted with factions and Schism, while few regard the public,
so their private may be safe. Faith and Hope much boasted of, but little good
Works seen. Knowledge and Revelation of the Spirit mightily talked of, but
little peace and amity one toward another. If ever therefore it were
seasonable to have Charity commended and pressed upon us, I think never more
then in these last and worst days. Hear therefore the judgment of St. Paul,
St. Paul as full of miraculous gifts as ever any, as zealous for the honor of
faith as none more, as paineful in his labors for the Gospel, and as patient
in hope as all the Apostles beside: and yet preferring Charity above all. Now
abide these three, faith, hope, and charity; but the greatest of these is
charity.

Two parts we find in the words, one declarative, touching the eminence of
these three virtues. Now abide faith, hope, and charity, these three. Another
Comparative, touching the pre-eminence of Charity: or rather if you will both
of them Comparative. First these three preferred there all other virtues; Now
abide these three, faith, hope, and charity: And Secondly, Charity preferred
highest amongst them the grea^^st of these is charity. In the former of these
ye may observe, (...) the virtues themselves, and then what is aff^d of them.
The virtues themselves are these; Faith, Hope, and Charity. Then it is affirmed
of them that they are three, and that they abide so: Now abide these three,
etc. We shall first (God willing) survey the virtues themselves what they are.
Secondly, how they are three eminent above others, and connected between
themselves. And Thirdly, how Charity is preferred above the other two, the
greatest of these ^charity. Web gin with the virtues themselves, what they are:
Faith, Hope, and Charity.

For the first of them, viz. Faith, what that is, Saint Paul himself saves us
the labor, and seems to define that to our hands. Heb. 11.1. Faith is the
substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen. To understand
which, ye are to note the proper act of Faith, and that is to believe.
Believing is (as the Schoolmen define it) an assent of the mind unto
somewhat, the truth of which is not clearly perceived, but taken upon credit.
As that such and such Cities are in the World, Rome, and Venice, which perhaps
we have had never seen; such and such men have lived before our times; Tully
and Cato which we have never known. A great difference there is betwixt this,
and perfect science, as between this and weak conjecture. For perfect
science, is of things we either perceive by the sense, as that Snow is white,
and Fire is hot, and the like; or else see clearly by the light of the
understanding, as that every part is less then the whole, every whole double
to its half. Such things as these are more then believed, they are perfectly
known; those only are believed which are fully assented to, and yet not
perfectly known. So in Christ's healing the sick of the Palsic, the Apostles and
others that saw it done, they had perfect knowledge. We that have the story in
the Gospel, have only the belief of it; Infidels not so much as the belief.
I have insisted on this, the rather to show the meaning of the Apostle, how
faith is of things not seen. For if we have porfect knowledge, that is full
sight of what we believe, our belief is at an end: That is not faith, but
vision. Faith then is a belief, relying upon the credit of others, concerning
things we do not perfectly know.

But all this comes not home to Divinity. The faith the Apostle speaks of is
concerning some special things, and some special kind of credit; and that is
a religious belief of what God has revealed, and particularly of such things
as concern our salvation. So that Divine faith is properly an assent to divine
Revelation.

When we believe such and such things, because God has declared them; and thus
before any Scripture Abraham believed the promise of God concerning his
Posterity, and it was impated unto him for righteousness: And Noah believed
God, foretelling the Flood, and prepared the Arc for safety of himself and
his Household. Thus faith is more ancient then Scripture. But since the
Scriptures were written and the Canon finished, and Revelation ceased in the
mouths of the Prophets, and Apostles: Now all Divine Revelation is confined
within the Scriptures, and the written Book of the Bibles become now the
adequate object of faith, since no divine Revelation we know in these days, any
where save in Scripture. And yet all things in Scripture do not alike essent
ally belong to our faith, but chiefly those things that concern our salvation;
for, Faith (says St. Paul) is the substance of things hoped for: so that those
eternal blessings we expect and hope for in the world to come, those are the
principal matter of faith. Hence comes the applying and particular faith,
whereby we believe our sins remitted, our selves reconciled into Gods favor,
and all the promises made to the faithful in Scripture, particularly and
personally belonging to us.

I know there are many cavils betwixt our Writers and the Romish, about the
true nature of Faith. Bellarmine and his Crew would have Faith no more than a
bare assent to Gods revealed Truth, as that Christ is the true Son of God, that
he was made man, that he suffered, was buried, rose again, and the like.
Calvin, and those that follow him would have it more than a bare assent, namely
together with our assenting, an applying all the benefit of what we believe to
our selves, as that Christ died and rose again for me, that my sins are
remitted, that I shall be glorified in the resurrection of the body, and the
life everlasting.

But this is objected by Popish writers to belong to Hope. So Lapide, What is
Hope (says he) if this be Faith? If I must believe my self in the number of
the Elect, that I shall persevere to the end and be saved: Why Hope can do no
more? To salve this doubt, we must in the second place enquire into the nature
of Hope: and it is defined by the School to be, Expectatio boni ardui futuri;
An expectation of some great good to come. Here we may observe immediately no
small difference from faith; for the act of faith is to believe, the act of
hope to expect, or look for. Faith believes things good and bad, hell as well
as heaven, torments to come as well as blessedness: Hope fixes only upon that
which is good, we hope for no other things than those that concern our
happiness: Faith is also as well of things past, as of things to come; but
Hope is only of things to come. We believe that Christ died, and rose again,
by faith as well as that he shall come to judgment: we cannot hope that
Christ shall rise again, as we hope he shall come to judgment. So then as
Hessusius, Hessusius well notes, there is no such confusion betwixt our Faith
and Hope, as Lapide talks of; for by faith we believe all manner of good things
and evil things revealed in Gods word, be they past, present, or to come. But
by Hope we embrace only good things, and those neither past nor present, but
to come: and such as we earnestly desire and wait for. Consequently that my
sins are remitted, is not matter of Hope, but of Faith; for this is a thing
presant. That I am an elect child of God, not matter of Hope neither, but of
Faith; for it is a thing past, our election is from eternity. But that I shall
persevere and be saved, that is a matter as well of Hope as of Faith, because
it is a future good Herein only is the difference, that by faith I believe my
salvation to come, and assent unto it, as a sure thing; but by Hope I long and
wait for my salvation to come, and wish and pray for it, as a good thing. So
that faith is the ground of hope, and hope the perfection of faith. No such
confusion therefore betwixt a justifying faith and a religious hope, as our
cavilling Romanists imagine. By this you see how faith and hope differ; we come
in the next place to charity, which is defined by the learned, to be Habitus
quo diligitur Deus propter seipsum, and proximus propter Deum; A virtue whereby
we love God for himself, and our neighbor for Gods sake. This appears
immediately distinguished from faith and hope, for the act of faith is to
believe, of hope to expect but of charity to love. Again, faith believes
things absent only, and not seen, but charity loves as well what it sees, as
what it sees not. And hope looks only for things to come; but charity loves
things present likewise, so that charity is larger and fuller than either of
the other.

Nevertheless, it cannot be denied, though charity be larger, yet it proceeds
from the other; for faith is the root both of charity and hope too. He that
comes to God, must believe that God is (says St. Paul) and that he is a
rewarder of them that seek him; must believe first that God is, there is faith
then, and faith first of all. And secondly, that he is a rewarder of them that
seek him: there is the ground of hope, suppose which, and charity will
follow: for if I hope for reward from God, I cannot be so unnatural as not to
love him, if it be but for the benefit sake I hope to receive from him: Hope of
earthly benefits begets love, how much more hope of heavenly. But until faith
and hope have gotten place, I cannot love. For before faith comes there is no
knowledge of God at all, and if no knowledge, then sure no love; for, Ignoti
nulla cupido, We cannot love a thing we know not. And though we know and
believe there is a God, yet until we find somewhat to hope for from this God,
we cannot love him. Fear him we may indeed, and admire him, but not truly love
him, till we find in our faith the substance of things hoped for, that is,
some benefits received or expected from him; and then comes in love, which yet
is no true love, while it is but mercenarie, while it loves God only for hires
sake, for those blessings it looks after from God; for make the best of such a
love, it is but a mere concupiscentiall love, such a love as a hungry man
loves his meat with, or a needy man his money. Never is it right charity
indeed, till it come to Amor amicitiae, till we begin to love God as our
selves: nay, not then neither is it right, till we have attained to prefer him
above our selves, and to love of him better, then when we have made God the
ground and measure of our love, so that we love him in the first place, above
all things else, and our selves and other creatures in the second place, in and
for God, then our charity grows true and kindly indeed: plant such a love in
us once, and all the Commandments of God will be easy, then faith and hope
wax strong, and grow both the riper and the fairer by the heat of this love,
and so ye see in part what these three virtues are, which is our first
particular. In the next place we proceed to see what is affirmed of them.

Three things ye may here observe delivered of these three virtues in common:
First, their number, they are three: Secondly, their continuance, they abide:
Thirdly, the extent of their continuance, how long they abide, and that is
nunc, during the state of this present life. Now they abide, Faith, Hope, and
Charity, these three.

These three first that points to their number, and it gives us to note first
(says Cajetane) that they are not all one and the same virtue, and therefore
would not rashly be confounded. Some, upon the former words of the Apostle, at
the seventh verse of this Chapter, Charity believes all things, hops all
things, endures all things, are ready to conclude that these three virtues
grow at last into one, and all shut up in Charity; for as much as believing is
the act of faith, and yet the Apostle says, Charity believes all things; and
expecting, the act of Hope, and yet he says, Charity hops all things. It
should seem therefore, if charity execute the acts of faith and hope that
faith and hope are at length confounded with charity. But it is not so; the
Apostle tells us they are three still, and they remain three, though charity
at length get the pr^hemin^nc^, and command the acts of both the other.

Three they are then, and only three, as no less, so no more: no more virtues
truly called Theological or Divine, but these; that is, virtues which fix upon
God, as their immediate object. No? why is there not the Fear of God, and
Pietic, and Zeal, and Invocation, and Confession? And what is the immediate
object of these but God? Right says Aquinas, Other virtues may fix upon God
too, but it is mediantibus^stis, by the mediation of these. All other divine
virtues do but manifest our Faith, Hope, and Charity, or put them in
execution. Only Faith, Hope, and Charity join us immediately to God; other
graces join us to him by the means of these. As for example, What is
Invocation and Prayer to God, but an effect of our Faith? and therefore unites
us to the Almighty, because it is made in faith? so faith comes between prayer
and God. What is the fear of God, if it be a chaste and filial fear, but the
fruit of our love? We cannot love God dearly, but we must needs fear to lose
his favor. And if it be only a servile fear, then it is the fruit of our
faith; we fear the power and vengeance of God, because we believe him to be
Almighty. What else are Zeal and Piety, but fruits of our Charity likewise?
We obey God, we are zealous for him. Why? but because we love him, so love
comes between zeal and God. Patience and long suffering, what are they but
effects of our hope? Therefore we are patient, because we wait and hope for Gods
help; so hope comes between patience and God. These 3 then, and only these 3,
Faith, Hope, and Charity, are called virtues Theological, or truly divine,
because they fix immediately and wholly upon God; all other virtues but in and
through these. God is the measure (says Cajetane) the Formalis ratio, the
enti^e object of says, since what ever truth we believe by faith, we believe
only for Gods sake, because we believe God has revealed it. What ever
blessings we embrace by divine hope, it is for Gods cause too, who has made us
promises in his word to build our hope upon, who himself is hoped for, as the
true fountain of our bliss. What ever good we fix upon by our Charity, it is
for Gods sake also, God is the thing we love above all, and all things else but
for and under God. So that these three, and none but these are the three
virtues, properly and immediately divine, subordinate to no other. But are they
not also subordinate among themselves? Yes, that they are. And that makes such
a co^nexion between them, that where one abides, they abide all together: that
abiding is the next point of our division: next after their number, their
continuance. Now abide these three. Abide, how? why united and joined together,
as I told you, so that where one of them is, there must needs be the other. And
abide, that is uninterruptedly, continually, as long as we abide Christians;
we cannot be in the favor of God without all of them. First, united they
abide, where one is, there is the other. Where Charity is, there must needs
be Hope, for Hope is the ground of love; we cannot love unless we hope, to
partake some good by what we love. And where Hope is, there must needs be
Faith; expect any blessing we cannot, unless we first believe the goodness
of that we hope for a blessing from. So that Charity infers the rest: yea, and
so does faith also. For though it be true, there is Fides historica, a bare
historical Faith, such an one as the Devils believe and tremble by, as St.
James has it, a Faith without Love: yet that is not the lively and justifying
faith: true saving faith can be no more without love, than the body can be
without life; it is a dead faith that lives not by charity: and if saving
faith include charity, it must needs draw in hope too. For no charity can be,
unless it be founded in hope, as ye have heard already; so that take one of
these, and take all; where one abide, all abide; where one is wanting, all are
wanting. No marvel therefore the Apostle says, now abide these three, that
is, these three altogether. Take any one away, and the other fall to the ground.

And as they are thus necessary one to another, so they are assistant and
helpful each to the other: Faith assistant to Hope, and Hope to Charity, and
Charity to both, and every of them to one another. For he that believes in
God (says Haymo) hopes also for those things which he finds promised from God;
and the more he hopes, the stronger he believes: and believing and hoping
things so excellent, he cannot choose but love. The more he hopes, the more he
delights in his hope; the more he delights, the more he must needs love: for
delight cherishes love, as love still begets more delight. Hence is it, that
faith it self cannot stand, unless the delight of hope strengthen it and
support it, that it may not be weary of believing. Nor can hope it self
subsist, unless it be grounded in faith, as it were an anchor upon a rock:
nor can the rock long hold the anchor, nor the anchor cleave to the rock,
unless Charity like a strong cable fasten and pull both together: so that
each of these help one another to abide; and abide any one or two cannot well,
if the third be wanting. Thus you see their (...) nexion in abiding.

Next there follows their continuance in abiding, and that ye may observe in
the Adverb Nunc, the next point of our division. Now they abide, that is,
during the state of our Christianity, or if ye will, of our mortality.
During the state of our Christianity, they are so necessary that none can be
a moment without them, and abide in Gods favor. If his Charity be gone, if he
have lost his first love, his life is gone. Of such an one it may be said, Thou
have a name that thou live, but thou art dead. If his hope be gone, he is
wrapped in despair. The ship has lost her anchor, and who shall save her from
rocks or sands? if he have lost his faith, the very foundation of all is gone
then. He is somewhat worse than an Infidel, because he denies what once he
acknowledged. So that as long as well live, these three virtues must live in
us, or toward God we live not: and if these things be in us, they will make
us we shall not be barren, nor unfruitful, as Saint Peter says: For these
are the substance of all Religion, the ground and foundation of true
righteousness (says Musculus) both in the Old and New Testament: without
these all Ceremonies, all Sacraments, all outward worship is but dead.
Sacraments may vary, and Ceremonies may vary, but these thorowout all parts of
our life, and thorowout all ages of the world abide the same. There is but one
Faith, one Hope, one Baptism, (says St. Paul, Ephesians. 4.) consequently but one
Charity, as there is but one God, the mai^e object of Charity. Not only abide
then these three virtues do, but they abide still the same.

And abide now; that is, in the souls of the faithful, during the state of
mortality; for this Now points to our state of mortality, as appears by the
verse before our Text, Now we see through a glass darkly, but then face to
face. Now, that is, in the time of this life: Then, that is in the time of the
next. So now abide Faith, Hope, and Charity, that is, all the while we live
here: so do not miracles, so do not tongues and prophecy, and the gifts
spoken of before. For these are neither common to all the Elect, says
Musculus, nor remain to the end of our lives, nor yet necessarily include Hope
and Charity: not common to all the Elect, for many good men want those
miraculous gifts, nor abide to the end of life; for they that have them,
oftentimes are at a loss: the Prophets always prophecy not, neither do the
divinely-inspired always speak with tongues, but at set times, as the Spirit
moves them.

Neither do these include Charity, for we may understand all Prophecy, and
speak with the tongues of men and Angels; yea, and have the gifts of Miracles
too, to move mountains, and yet for lack of Charity come to nothing. Charity
therefore and Faith, and Hope, they abide to the last, so as none of the other
do. They continue the whole Nunc of our life, out to the end, and we cannot be
a moment without them; that is, without the habit of them. As for the act, we
do not perhaps always actually believe, actually hope, or actually love, our
weak frailty will not permit it; but yet we must always have these Graces in
habit, that is, stand ever prepared for the act, as occasion serves. And thus
they abide all three of them, necessarily and jointly, and uninterruptedly,
while we abide in this world: abide they do all three, but one of the three
has the advantage of them; for it not only abides in this world, but in the
next too. Nunc and in saecul^ saeculori^, That is Charity, and that is the
reason why it is preferred above the other. The greatest of these is charity.
Which brings us to the second general, namely, the comparative part; wherein
Charity carries the pre-eminence among the divine virtues themselves: Major
autem horum charitas, etc.

For the proof of which Proposition, observe first how Charity bears the sway
among the other. It commands, and moves, and (as it were) enlivens the rest:
Our love stirs us up to believe more and more, to hope more and more; and the
more we love the stronger we believe, the more earnestly we hope. As it were
the Soul over the members: so Charity commands all other virtues. All work,
all do their parts at Charities bidding; so that very well by the Schoolmen
she is termed the essential sorme of them all. For take Faith without Charity,
and it is a cold and heartlesse thing; no warmth, no spirit in it; we seele no
joy in such a says at all. Take Hope without Charity, and what is it but a
withering ^erbe in cold of winter; no sap, no juice in it: there is neither
delight nor feeling in either of them, till Love breath upon them and give them
a new life. Then Faith is able to stand all encounters, and Hope lifts up her
head in the forest trials; when Charity sweetens them all. Charity therefore
is the greatest and highest of all virtues, so much better then Faith, and
Hope, as the building is better then the foundation; as the fruit is better
than the stalk that bears it.

Nay Charity, it is like the Sun among the lesser Plannets, says Lapide. It
gives light and vigor, and soul to all other graces. It is like the fire
among the Elements, like Gold among other metalls; like the Empyraean Heaven
above the lower O^b^s: like the Seraphims among the lesser Angels. For Charity
is indeed the (...) Celestial fire that inflames the hearts of Gods chosen.
Charity the true Gold wherewith in a sort we purchase heavenly Merchandise.
Charity the true Empyraean Heaven, wherein dwells God and his Angels; that
Heaven which enlightens, inspires, and regulates all the rest, Charity is the
Seraphicall virtue indeed, which makes the Seraphims themselves ardently
burning, from whence they have their name. The same that the Sun is in the
World, the Magistrate in his City, the Mariner in his Vessel is Charity in the
heart of a Christian. Without the Mariner the Vessel slotes at random, and
perishes; Without her Magistrate, the City falls to confusion; without the
Sun, the whole World were dark: and without Charity, our very life it self
has scarce any life in it. For Love is the life of life, Love is the soul of
the World; so that God himself is called by the name of love. 1 John 4. Nor
wonder at Saint John for it, for of all the virtues in the World, none so
nearely joins and unites us to God as love does; Consequently Charity must be
the greatest of all divine virtues, as Aquinas notes well. For among moral
Virtues, that is the greatest which comes nearest to the rule of all virtue; to
wit, Right reason That does Prudence, which touches the rule as near as near
may be, being it self nothing but the view of right reason. Consequently
prudence is the greatest moral Virtue, because it is next the Rule. And by the
same reason is Charity the greatest of all divine virtues, and moral too; for
the Rule of divine virtues is not reason, but God that made reason, who is the
Rule of reason it self. Consequently that virtue which touches nearest upon
God, the prime Rule of Rules, must needs be the greatest virtue that may be
imagined, and that does Charity. Charity joins us close to God, unites us as
it were, and makes us one thing with him; fixes upon God as God is in himself
which neither Faith nor Hope in this life can do. For Faith fixes upon God
indeed, but as he is under the veil of Revelation.

There lies a cloud betwixt the eye of Faith and her Maker; Hope fixed upon
God, as upon a thing at distance a thing that will be enjoyed he^ca^er, but is
not yet. There lies an Intervallum, a kind of long reach betwixt Hope and the
object of it; while we hope, we have not yet attained. But love fixes
immediately and totally, and ^n^e^arably upon her object. In my love, God is
present to me, and with me, and in me: He in me and I in him, and I am as it
were in the joys of Heaven already while I am in the act of love: it twines
about and embraces, and ^ea^es and unites us together with what we love, never
to be severed from it. No wonder therefore that God and Charity are so nearely
afsianced, that one bears the name of the other. And much less wonder, that
Charity should be the greatest virtue, drawing nearer to God, then any
perfection whatsoever. Charity it is that makes us rightly Sons of God (says
Haymo) Sons of his love, as God the Father of ours, nay makes us as it were
demy-Gods upon earth, Light of Light, Spirit of Spirit, partakers in a manner
of the divine nature, says St. Peter, yea, by the happy Incarnation of Christ;
Bone of his bone, Flesh of his flesh; the very Mystical members of his Body,
says Saint Paul, For we are members of his Body, of his Flesh, and of his
Bone. All this Charity makes us. What Grace or Virtue in the World therefore to
compare with Charity?

Yes, Faith you will say justifies us, and only Faith. If only Faith, then
not Charity. And Faith is as it were the hand that lays hold of our salvation.
It is our Armor, our Shield against all temptations, the Shield of Faith Saint
Paul calls it. It is our victory whereby we overcome the world. Haecest
victoria, says St. John, even, even your faith, It is that which first adopts
us Sons of God, by which we are Regenerated. For Faith is the beginning of
all acceptance, the Baptism of Baptism it self, without which it is
impossible to please God, says the Apostle. Moreover, Faith is the foundation
of Charity, the very cause and root of Love. Add to this, that Faith is in
the understanding part, which is the more noble^ but Charity in the will and
affections, which are more ignoble; And therefore in all these respects, Faith
may do well to challenge place of Charity, at least march even with it, not
come behind it, in so unseemely rank, as it were the Mother behind the
Daughter.

To all which Objections the Commentators frame diverse answers; To go
backward with them. Whereas it is alleged, Charity is in the affective part
the Will; which is the more ignoble, but Faith in the intellectual part: viz.
the understanding, which is more excellent. Aquinas answers well, that the
understanding is indeed more excellent then the Will, because it inlightens
and directs the will; but yet, it follows not for all that, but that the will
may have a more excellent perfection belonging to it, then any the
understanding can have. To which purpose note; that things are in the
understanding in a spiritual and resined way: but the Will fixes upon things
as they are in themselves. Consequently earthly things, sensible objects, are
in a more excellent way in our understanding, then they are in their own
natures (says Saint Austine) but Divine and Heavenly things are more
excellently in their own nature then they are in our understandings. Whereupon
it follows, that the knowledge of earthly matters, and things below us, is
better then the love of them; as the knowledge of pleasure, and honor, and
riches; better then the love of these things, etc. but the love of Heavenly
matters, and things above us, is better then the knowledge. So then, Faith and
Charity being about the most excellent of heavenly things, viz. God himself,
it follows Charity, which contains the love of God, must needs be better then
Faith, which contains the knowledge of him only. To the next, that Faith is
the Mother of Charity. It is true, and yet Charity may be Proles major parente,
a Daughter greater then the Mother. As the fruit is more excellent then the
bough that bears it, and as the House excells the foundation; so does Charity
excel Faith. Faith is the beginning of all acceptance, it is right; and that
which first initiates us to be Sons of God. But not Faith without love, that
is certain. For in our Baptisine we not only profess our Faith, but enter
into Covenant with God, that we will forsake the Devil, and keep his
Commandments. That is Charity, and never are we Sons indeed, till we love
our Faither; Faith is the shield of a Christian against temptations, we grant
it: Put Charity is the very arm that bears this shield, when Love is once
planted in the Soul, it moves and commands all other powers. And Faith is the
hand that lays hold of Christ, but Charity is the very heart that gives life
to this hand. As for the point of Justification, that requires some more exact
decision, let us hear therefore learned Divines of both sides discuss that.

Faith only justifies, ergo not Charity. Stay there says Genevensis, the
Adverb only may sometimes mean principally; as, only virtue is true nobility
it excludes not other kinds of nobility, but only puts them behind. One thing
have I desired of the Lord, says David, one thing above other, though many
other besides. Against thee only have I sinned, says the same Prophet; that
is, against thee principally, though he sinned also against B^hshabe, and Vr^ah
as well as God. So Faith only justifies, that is Faith principally, rather
Faith then Charity; because Faith goes before Charity in our Justification,
though Charity comes after and justifies more perfectly. Ye may perceive by
the sound of his Doctrine, of what strain this man is. Saint Paul says
plainly, By says we are justified, and not by the works of the Law: that is,
not by Charity, for what is Charity but keeping the Law? And this man says,
yes, by the work of the Law, and by Faith both: is not this, plainly to give
the Apostle the lie?

Much better answers Calvine. Faith though it be less then Charity in most
regards yet in some respects it may be greater. As a more ignoble matter may be
fitter for some uses, then a more precious. Gold is better then Iron, and yet
to make a weapon of Iron is better then Gold. A King is better then a Mariner,
and yet to guide a Ship a Mariner is better then a King. A man is better then
a House, and yet to run a Race a Horse is better then a man. Thus though
Charity be better then Faith, yet for this particular use of Justification,
Faith may be better then Charity.

Upon this comes in Salmeron very much, deriding Calvin, and tells us the
comparison is quite out of square, for every thing is to be taken in his own
kind. A Mariner and a King be clean of diverse kinds. And though a King be
never so excellent a King, yet a Mariner shall still be a better Mariner, that
is, fitter to rule a Ship, though not to rule a Kingdom; but the comparison is
to hold in eodem genere. Peter is a better footman then John, therefore Peter
runs better: John a better Scribe then Peter, therefore John writes better. So
Faith is a better virtue then Charity, therefore it justifies better; it is a
proper argument says Salmeron, for justifying is the proper work of virtue.

But here Heshusins very well unites the knot, and states the matter beyond all
further controversy, replying again upon Salmeron singularly well, that he is
deceived to say justification is the proper work of virtue. True indeed if
justification, were by any merit of ours; if it were possible to be justified
by any works of the Law, then Charity might challenge the first place, because
Charity is the fulfilling of the Law. But because no man is able to keep the
Law, therefore in very truth no virtue justifies; neither a small virtue nor a
great virtue, nor the greatest of all. For by the work of the Law, no flesh
shall be justified. Romans 3. But it is by applying the righteousness of
another, which has fulfilled the Law for us; that is our way of justifying
now. Being justified freely by his grace, says the Apostle, through the
redemption that is in Jesus Christ. Romans 3, 24. This kind of justification
depends not upon any virtue, or any merit of man, but only upon the mercies of
God, and the merits of Jesus Christ.

Nor does Faith justify by any worth, or efficacy of its own, but merely as
an instrument, which God has ordained for us, to lay hold of his promises in
Christ Jesus by; as it were the hand stretched out, whereby we draw to us the
promises of the Gospel, and the benefits of the Mediator, like some Cord to
keep us from sinking. It is not the length of our arm, to reach to the bank;
nor the strength of this hand to lay hold, but the mercy of God casting the
Cord to us, by which we are saved: but unless we take hold by this hand, we
sink notwithstanding. So Faith, is the hand whereby we apprehend the means of
our salvation; and therefore it is the instrument of our justifying only, and
not Charity. But in the mean time, Charity though it be not the hand, may be
as the neck, or a nobler member, that joins the whole body together: which
though it cannot lay hold as the hand does, yet must of necessity partake of
the salvation of the whole body.

Well then, in this respect grant Charity inferior to Faith, because Faith
rather justifies. But then there follow other respects again, that set Faith
as much behind Charity, in which regard the Apostle preferres Charity. As
first, that Faith benefits none but him that has it: but Charity extends to
the whole Church, and to the benefit of others. Faith is like Seed hid in the
ground, it appears not outwardly: it is locked up in the heart. But Charity
shines ad extra it is app^ant, it is beautiful in the eyes of men. Faith is
but an imperfect thing, it is a believing of things which we do not know; so
is Hope, it is an expectation of things we do not yet enjoy. But Charity is a
kind of present enjoying of what we love, and so implies perfection. Add to
this, that Faith distinguishes, and disjoynes us from Infidels. So does Hope
likewise: but Charity combines and unites us with all men. In fine, Charity and
Hope, though they do abide, yet is it but nunc; for this present life, and no
further; but Charity never fails, that abides for ever. In the next World it
shall accompany us no less then in this, and be far more perfect and more
delightful.

In this point. Charity passes all other virtues that can be named, none that
can abide for evermore as Charity does: and therefore charity is doubtless the
greatest. Faith and Hope, how great how comfortable soever here they have their
period. Beyond this life they cannot go, for they both imply absence of that
thing they fix upon: when therefore we shall come in presence of what we
believe and hope for; Faith and Hope shall vanish. The Husbandman while he
ploweth, ploweth in hope (says Musculus) and by Hope he is sustained and held
up, till his frui^es be gathered into his Barn: but when the Harvest is in
his hands, what should he further hope for? The like it is of Faith, He that
has heard of a gracious Prince but never seen him, believes well; but when
he comes to see and know perfectly his belief cease: Vision then takes up
all in all. And so it shall be hereafter, when we shall come to see the great
King of Heaven and earth in his glory, which now only we believe, and to
enjoy that happiness in his presence, which now we hope for: Faith, and Hope
shall then have an end, and Vision and Fruition shall take up all in all.

In stead of believing and expecting, we shall then see and enjoy. But even
when we see and enjoy, we shall love never the less. The less, nay the more a
great deal says Catharinus, if we loved so dearly that good we knew not, how
strong shall our affection be, when we shall come to know and see what we love?
Never can the soul be wearied with that blessed sight, never enough filled
with that sweetest love. For things eternal are much dearer belooved when we
enjoy them, then while we desire them, says he. It is not so with temporal
things. These we love dearly, while we long after them; but when we have once
got them, we grow quickly weary of them. So shall it not be in heaven. Those
Celestial joys shall prove much sweeter in the enjoying, then now we can
fancy in the desiring. In them shall be the fullness of joy, and pleasure for
evermore: such a fullness as shall never cloy us, and yet such a one as shall
always content us: such pleasures as shall ever more delight us, and yet never
weary us, nor decay in the delighting. The longer we enjoy them, the more we
shall be ravished with them; the fuller we are filled, the more we shall still
desire to be filled; and yet feel no emptiness at all. O blessed and
unspeakable happiness, to which that we may aspire, beseech we him, who is
himself the way, the truth, and the life, to direct our steps aright, that
following him in the paths of Faith, of Hope, and Charity while we abide here,
we may at length attain that fullness of vision and fruition, and delight,
which abide for ever in his presence hereafter. Amen,

The end of the first Sermon.
THE SECOND SERMON.
Hebrews the 11. Chapter, the 6. verse. For he that comes to God must believe
that he is, and and that he is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him.

BEing indebted by my promise to handle particularly the Articles of the Creed
which is the sum of our Christian faith, I have chosen this Scripture to
begin with, which is the sum of the whole Creed, and of all the Articles in
it. As Faith may be called the Groundwork of Religion whereupon Hope and
Charity, and all other Virtues are built: So this Scripture contains the
groundwork of faith it self, the very foundation of that on which all
Christianity is founded. For as no Christian can be saved without faith, so no
faith possible, except we be persuaded of thus much before hand: namely, That
God is, and that he is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him.

Which sentence I deemed so much the more necessary, to handle by way of
preparative before the Articles of the Creed, because it appears of more
antiquity, and more universality then the Creed, and all the Articles of it:
yea, more ancient then Scripture it self, out of which the Creed is taken. For
thus much before any Scripture was written, was necessary for all men to
believe, as appears by the Apostles instance in this place. Saint Paul is
discoursing here of the faith of the Patriarchs, and particularly of Abel and
Enochs faith, Enoch (says he) was translated that he should not see death. And
he was translated by faith. By says he was translated, because he pleased God.
And without faith it is impossible to please God, upon which conclusion if any
shall demand what says had Enoch, or what faith Abel, that lived so long
before any Scripture was written? why this faith they had faith Saint Paul,
this at least, without which no says is imaginable, nor any coming to God
possible, namely that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that seek him.

This faith they had, and this as it should seem, was enough to please God,
and to save them, as the world went then; but this is not enough for us now. We
have more Revelations from Heaven, even abundant ones, in many ages, and many
successions, in many writings of the Prophets and Apostles; and all these are
necessary for us to believe now: Even all the written books of the Bible, and
every thing contained in them: for we are to acknowledge them to be Gods Word,
and if Gods Word, then to embrace and believe them, and to doubt of nothing in
them: So that the whole Scriptures are now become necessary for every Christian
man of ripe reason, on peril of salvation to believe. To believe I say, but
not particularly to know or remember; that is not necessary to salvation: for
that is business enough for a learned Divine that has nothing else to do: to
understand particulars of Scripture, and remember them. But all must be
believed, though believe I by the most ignorant, and all received upon the
credit of Gods Spirit, as Gods Word whether known particularly or no.

And yet though all particulars need not (by men of mean capacity) be
known, some must; some particulars of Scripture known explicitly, and
believed expressly, or no salvation for men of ripe judgment possible. And
those are the heads of Christianity summed up in the Creed, which is a short
confession of our Faith, comprised by the primitive Fathers of the Church to
that end, that every (...) might have it ready, as an abstract of all that was
necessary. And this they did, not to make Laymen careless or lazy, that they
should not care to know more, but to direct young beginners; and to leave all of
all sorts without excuse, that would not know this. Because (says Aquinas)
Faith is the substance of things hoped for. And those things only belong
essentially to saving faith, which concern our Hope, and the means of
salvation. And because many things contained in Scripture pertain not so
directly to these, as that Isaac had two sons, that Jacob was in Egypt, and
the like; therefore are those points that directly concern men's salvation, and
the means of it, summod up in the Creed: so that all men are now necessarily
bound to know and believe thus much at least, how much soever they know more.
Thus then the Scripture is now the rule of Faith, and the Creed is the sum of
Faith, so much as is essentially necessary to every ones salvation. But of old,
before the Scripture was written, this groundwork sufficed. This may be called
Abels and Enochs Creed, which is the preparative also to ours, and all men's
else; namely, that God is, and that he is a Rewarder of them that seek him.

The words being a conclusion, by way of Analysis, seem to imply not only the
sum of our Faith, but of our Hope and our Charity too, that is the substance
of all Religion. For our Charity; that ye have touched in the first words, He
that comes to God; Comes to God, that is, desires to come ne^re him, to be
joined and united to him, says Estius, and such a coming is the very act of
love. Then for our Hope, that ye have in the last words, namely, that God is a
Rewarder of them that seek him, that grounds our Hope. For our Faith, it is
the very heart of the Text, that which the Apostle would infer: He that comes
must believe, believe that God is, and that he is a Rewarder, etc.

So that upon presupposall of the necessity of our love, St. Paul here grounds
our faith and our hope too; or rather shows that our love is to be grounded in
faith and hope, or else it can never be a right love: Love is the top of the
building, as ye heard last Sunday, Love the goodly Tarias, the beauty, the
Crown, and superstructure of all. Well, but Cogitans ^dificium charitatis
necesse est pona^ fundamentum fidei, says a Father, He that would build up
this goodly Tower of Charity, must lay the foundation low and strong in a sure
faith. Oportet accedentem credere, He that comes, that is, he that would draw
nigh to God by his love, must first approach by his faith: He that comes to
God, must believe that he is.

That the Apostles way of arguing is thus analyticall, appears by what goes
before. There St. Paul tells us of Enochs translation at the first verse;
translation to heaven, that is, glorification; glorification presupposes
sanctification. Before he was translated, Enoch had this testimony, that he
pleased God: Please God, how could he? except he came to him, that is, except
he loved him. For as glorification is the end of our way, and implies an
arrival to, and an union with God. So Sanctification, which is by Charity, is
the course of our way, by which we still get ground, and come nearer and
nearer. Now impossible we should reach the end of our way, and be joined to
God, except we come along the way, and draw toward God. Impossible to come,
unless we first believe. So that here is a concatenation of duties (as Estins
notes) one hanging as it were in a chain upon another: no glorification, no
union with God, except we first please him: no pleasing him, unless we come
to him by love: no love, no coming, unless we take faith in our way, unless
we first believe: and no belief possible, no faith, not the least grain of
it, except we believe this; namely, that God is, and that he is a Rewarder of
them that seek him.

So that here ye have love, and faith, and hope, all knit together: here ye
have likewise all three degrees of faith, namely, Credere Deum, Credere Deo,
and Credere in Deum; To believe that God is, that we have in express terms,
He that comes to God, must believe that he is: Credere Deo, To believe or give
credit to God and his word, that is employed in the act of believing; for if we
must believe that God is, whom shall we believe about it? whom shall we give
credit to that this is so, to whom but God? As he that comes must believe that
God is, so he must believe God, and none but God revealing of this, since God
only is fit to be relied on; and then Credere in Deum, to believe in God, that
is employed in the last words, to wit, that God is a Rewarder of them that seek
him. He that believes God a Rewarder, puts his trust in him for his salvation;
so here is the perfection of faith in all three kinds. To believe that God is,
to believe God concerning this, and what ever he reveals else; and to believe
in God, that he will reward and save us while we diligently seek him.

We proceed to the handling of the words, which consist as it were of four
steps or degrees of drawing nigh to God. The first coming, He that comes: The
second believing, without which no coming, He that comes must believe: The
third, beleese of Gods being, without which no believing at all; for it is the
first groundwork of all belief concerning God; He that comes must believe
that God is: The fourth, belief of his providence or gracious dealing, that
he will reward us when we seek him, without which no comfortable believing:
For little joy or encouragement in well-doing, to believe that God is, except
we believe also that he is a Rewarder of such as diligently seek him.

To take these in order, we begin with the first; Accedentem, He that comes: by
which phrase what should be meant, need not much trouble us to enquire, sure
we are it can be no corporal coming; for God is neither a corporal thing,
nor corporally or locally distant from his creatures, He fills all places,
lerem. 23. Nonne Coelum and terram impleo? And whither shall I go from thy
presence? says David. In him we live, we move, and have our being, says
Saint Paul. No great way need we to go after him, for he is not far from every
one of us, Acts 17. But as he says in another place, The word is nigh to
thee, even in your hearts, that ye may know it, and do it: So here God is
nigh to us, if we would seek him, even in the midst of us, in our very
hearts, if we would return to our hearts by love, Redite pravaricatores ad
cor, says the Prophet, Return ye sinners to your own hearts. Return not
passibus ped^m, but passibus affectuum, says a reverend father. Not with the
steps of your feet, but by the steps of your affection. For they are indeed the
souls feet, and this is the way of coming to God, namely, by setting our
hearts upon him, by loving, by affecting, by longing after him. Thus Christ
invites you to come, Come ye that are weary and heavy laden: thus David.
Come ye children, hearken unto me, I will teach you: thus Isaiah, chap. 1.
verse 16. Come now and let us reason together, says the Lord, etc. If your sins
were as red as scarlet, they shall be white as snow.

So that coming to God, it is indeed by turning the course of our affections
toward him, that is, by loving him. Turn to the Lord with all your heart,
says Joel. And why will ye dye, o house of Israel? turn rather and live,
says Ezechiel. Now two things this turning or coming to God requires; One,
Aversio, a turning away from the creature, a de^ying, a forsaking our selves:
and then Conversio, a turning toward, an approaching, or drawing nigh to God.
The turning away from our selves, that is, forsaking our, own ways, as the
Prophet Esaias has it: If we come to God we must come out of the wrong way, and
come into the right, or else no coming. And then the turning toward God, that
is, right coming to him, and that is by love. Then indeed we come to God,
when we give over the love of ourselves, and begin to love God and his
Commandments better then our selves. If ye love me, keep my Commandments,
says Christ. To come to God therefore, it is to make God the end of our
actions says Estius, to set him always before our eyes, and to propose him
and his glory, the mark and scope of all that we go about. To draw nearer to
him d^ily by growing more and more like him, in a holy life: according to that
of St. James, Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh ^ you. James 4. Chap. and
8. verse. Thus have I looked for thee (...). Psalm. 63. to bend our mind upon
him. Psalm. 34. They had an eye unto him and were lightened to long for him and
wait for him, I have waited for thy salvation O God, Genesis 4.9. I have longed
for thy saving health O Lord. and ^^thy Law is my delight. O God, my heart
lusts for thee my flesh longs after thee. Psalm. 63. to esteem his favor
above health or riches: For thy loving kindness is better then life, in the
same Psalm, The Law of thy mouth is dearer unto me then thousands of gold and
silver. Briefly to desire to be joined to him, Whom have I in Heaven but thee,
Psalm. 73. My soul has desired thee in the night: Like as the Heart pants
after the water Brooks, Ps. 42. When shall I come to appear before the
presence of God? All these are so many several expressions of our love, so
many forms of coming to God. But come to him, how shall we except we enter
into his way? And no entering possibly into that unless we believe, for Faith
is the first step of the way. If Love and Charity be the building, Faith is the
foundation, as I told you. If the service of God, and Sanctification be the
way, why believing, it is the door of that way; the first entrance, the first
beginning of it. No wonder therefore the A postle adds faith presently upon it,
as a thing without which no love, no approaching, no coming to God possible.
Oportet accedentent credere, He that comes must believe. Which brings us on to
the next gradation namely, believing.

He that comes must believe, says St. Paul, and it is no weak conclusion, for
no small necessity lies in the connection of these two. He must indeed,
whosoever intends to come to God, unless he will stand stock still, and not
put forward one foot in the way; believe, and submit his judgment to God,
before he can begin to come. For faith is the first step of all possible motion
to Godward faith Aquinas. If our coming to God be a mental coming not a
corporal; why belief is the very first act of the minds approaching, the very
first thing that the mind can do about God, is to believe, For impossible the
will, or any other faculty should make toward God, till the understanding have
done his part. And impossible the understanding should comprehend any thing
concerning God, unless believing lead the way. Oportet discentem credere, is
the Philosophers Rule; He that learnes any humane Science, must take diverse
things upon trust at first entrance, and believe some principles before he sees
reason for them: And shall not God expect as much obedience at our hands in
learning his divine Mysteries, which so far surpass our Reason? yes sure, if
the perfection of all our learning be to know God good reason this great
perfection should begin in in perfection: that we should first believe, what
we know not; I will hearken what the Lord God will say concerning me says
David. Teach me O Lord the way of thy Statutes O learn me true understanding
and knowledge, for I have believed thy Commandments. Mark that, there is the
way to learn, namely by believing. Everyone therefore that has heard and
learned of my Father, comes unto me says Christ. How learned ye, but by
believing his Teacher?

Yea, but Christ himself he learned without believing. Ye will say, And if
believing were not necessary for Christ, how is it for us? yea, but Christ was
head of the body, in which is the perfection of all Senses. In Christ were bid
all the treasures of wis^dome and knowledge In him dwelled the fullness of the
Godhead bodily. He was the true light, that lightens all men else, no need
therefore of his believing; for believing is necessary for them that walk in
darkness but in Christ was no darkness at all. We wa'ke as in an obscure
must, we see through a Glass darkely, says Saint Paul but so did not Christ.
He saw face to face. And therefore he had more then belief of divine things,
he had perfect knowledge and San light. Nay, he himself was the Sun light,
the Son of Righteousness, which lightens every man that comes into the
World. And when we shall come where Christ is, and be united to the beams of
his glory, we shall then have Sun-light too. But as yet we have but
Candlelight, or Starlight, as Saint Peter calls it. The Word of Prophecy,
whereto you do well to give heed, says he, as to a light shining in a dark
place, till the day dawne; and the day star arise in your hearts. Till that
day dawne, and the morning break of eternity in the next life shine forth upon
us; well are we, if we nay enjoy this Candle light, if we may be directed by
the beams of divine Revelation, and walk by faith, not by sight.

Mean while let us not grudge, that we have not so clear a Vision of God and
heavenly things, as we would wish at first. It is necessary we should grow by
degrees, that the knowledge of divine things, may grow the more pleasant with
us, the more we are still enlightened: Happy are we that we enjoy the least
perception of God in any degree that we have the smallest spark of his
knowledge in the dimmest way. For as the foolishness of God is wiser then men:
so the very darkness if I may so call it of Gods wa^es, is brighter then men:
Better is it to have an obscure belief of his Mysteries, then the clearest
knowledge, the most perfect science of other matters and let us content our
selves so to know our Maker, as he pleases to be known, not go about to
square his deep Counsels to our shallow judgments, sufficient to us to know
that he has said, without says it is impossible to please God. Whatsoever is
not of faith is sin. By says we are justified, and not by the works of the
Law. Romans 3. It is God that justifies the circumcision by faith and the
uncircumcision through faith: The life that I now live is by faith in the Son
of God. He that believes and is Baptized, shall be saved, but he that
believes not shall be damned.

Yea, but yet a reason though may be rendered (one would think) for Gods
Counsel in this; why he would tie all n^en that desire to be saved, to this
one means of believing. Reasons indeed may be rendered for this oportet many a
one; but still the best reason of all is Gods Will: because he pleases to have
it so: oportet, it is expedient, that he who comes to God should believe. Why?
first for Hu^^lities sake such Estius, because as by pride of our reason, and
thirst of knowledge we took then our fall: so by submitting our knowledge to
God, and by denying our own reason in the obedience of faith we night rise
again. Expedient thus to make good our Saviors Doctrine, Except ye become as
l^le Children, ye cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. Expedient for Gods
glory that we might owe all our knowledge of God to Gods own teaching by his
Word revealing it to us, according to that of the Prophet Every one shall be
taught of God. Expedient that thus the obedience of our faith might be more
glorious in the eyes of Infidels, for what praise were it to do any thing for
Gods sake, if we were led to it by perfect knowledge. There is no honor of
faith says Gregory, where we have manifest reason to induce our good working.
And therefore that our love may be more apparent let our knowledge be obscure.
Let us love what we see not. Let us sustet and die for Gods Truth, before we
have the perfect vision of it. Herein is the miracle of faith, that we can
forgo things temporal before our eyes, for the desire of things eternal as
yet not known. Thus the strength of God is perfected in weakness, and thus
the foolishness of our preaching goes beyond all the wi^edome of Philosophers;
that whereas they by all the shength of their reason, could never persuade an
unlearned man for virtues sake to part with his goods. Divine faith as weak as
it is, will teach the simplest Christian for his belief ^ake to part with his
life. Thus also men are trained up to obedience before they know, and attain
still to know more by their progres^e in obedience, according to that of our
Savior, If any man will do my Fathers Will he shall know of my Doctrine
whether it be of God or no. And therefore expedient it is every way both on
our part and on Gods part for our debasing and Gods exalting; for our
proficiency and his excellency: for the conviction of Insiders and the
edification of one another that our apprehen on of things divine, should not
be science, but credence; not knowledge, but faith only. A strong Oportet it
is therefore, and a reasonable one, He that comes to God must believe; and
believe God himself revealing himself to him. And this is Credere Deo, he
must believe; but what ye will ask? what is he to believe? many things else
that concern his salvation: But this one especially, which is the ground of
all others; namely that God is: which brings us to the third gradation touching
the belief of Gods essence, which is Credere Deum: He that comes to God must
believe that God is, etc.

Two points of belief we have here lying before us, one concerning Gods
existence that he is. Another concerning his providence, that he is a Rewarder
of them that seek him: Both very necessary to be taken in our way to all other
points of faith: for all other in a manner depend on these. Necessary it is
(says Calvine) who ever proposes to himself the service of a divine power
that he should first believe such a power there is; without which there were
nothing to be sought. And secondly, that he should persuade himself somewhat
were to be gained by his service, that this power would reward those that
sought to it; or otherwise all seeking were vain. The first intimates a
Treasure as it we^e to be found, which may invite our labor: A God there is;
he has a certain being. And the second puts us in hope we may attain this
Treasure, our labor shall not be without success. We shall ^nde this
Treasure, and be enriched by it; for God is a Rewarder of them that secke him.

These two comprehend the two maine drifts of all reasonable counse^s and
motions of the World. For every motion guided by reason (says Aquinas) must
have a Term whereto, and an^ end wherefore, it is undertaken. The former is
known by the question Quo? whither tend we; the latter by Quamobrem, to what
purpose? as for example. The Merchant goes forth on his adventure: quo,
whither? to such a Port. Quamobrem, to what purpose? to Trade and get gain.
The Husbandman rises early and gets him forth, whither? to his field. To what
purpose? to Sow or Reap, and the like. So here, he that intends a religious
life, begins his progress by faith, whither tends he? toward God; that is the
Term of the motion. He must believe first that God is, Then quamobrem, to
what purpose tends he? that he may obtain an eternal reward, that he may find
mercy, and be saved; that ye may have in Deum Remuneratorem in believing: That
God is a Rewarder of them that seek him.

And these two, virtually also contain the whole Creed (says Aquinas) and
consequently, all that is essentially necessary to salvation. For (if ye mark
it) the Creed either teaches to believe what God is in himself; or what he is
toward us. Either it contains, Finem ad quem; or media per quae, says one,
either the being of Gods divine Majesty (which is the end of our heavenly Race)
the mark whereto we tend; or the means to arrive at this mark, the way that
leads to God. The way that leads to God, is none but Christ the Redeemer. He
himself calls himself the way, the Truth, and the life. So that all the
Articles of the Creed, they pertain either to the Deity, or the Humanity says
Aquinas. The Deity, which implies the end whereto; and the Humanity of Christ,
which implies the way whereby. The former of these, belongs to the first part
of our Text, viz. our believing that God is. And the latter belongs to the
second, that God is a Rewarder of them that seek him.

To the first head of Gods being ye may refer the first Article of the Creed,
touching the unity of God, and his Omnipotence shown in the worlds Creation.
As also the second touching the Deity of Christ. And the eight touching the
person of the Holy Ghost, whereunto some add the twelft and last touching the
life everlasting, which consists in the vision of the Deity. But more properly
that belongs to the second head, touching our belief; that God is a Rewarder:
For life everlasting, is indeed that blessed Reward we hope for from God. To
this head likewise belong all other Articles that concern the way to eternal
life. As the Articles of our Saviors Incarnation his Passion, Resurrection,
Ascension, and coming to Judgment. The Articles that concern the Catholic
Church, the forgiveness of sins: and lastly, the Articles which contain the
Reward it self, as the Resurrection of the Body, and the life everlasting. So
that in these two points, namely, that God is, and that he is a Rewarder. That
God is the thing to be sought, and that Christ and his benefits are the way to
seek him by; that God in himself is the fountain of bliss, and that God (to
reward those that seek him) has set forth in Christ the means of this bliss,
is the sum and substance of the whole Creed: and consequently (if thus
interpreted) enough as Salmeron thinks, to save them that had no other
Revelation.

To touch upon these two points in their order: First, that God is, Oportet, It
is necessary, says Saint Paul, that whosoever comes to God, should believe in
the first place that God is; for this is Primum credendum, the first thing we
can apprehend possibly concerning God, that he is, that he has a being; so
that believe not this, and believe nothing. As there is no coming to God then,
except we believe, so no believing in the least degree, except we believe thus
much touching Gods existence, quia est, that he has a true being: for an sit,
whether a thing be or not, is primum quarendum, the first question about any
object that can possibly be made. Consequently this point, it is not so much an
Article of the Creed, as a preamble to it (says one) as the maine groundwork,
whereupon the whole Creed, and all the Articles of it lean.

That God is: note it well (says Chrysostom) but not what he is. The Apostle
says not He that comes must believe what God is, and be able as it were to
define him. No: that is not inter prima credenda, among the first things to be
believed, but among the last rather: a thing (in a manner) beyond our
apprehension, while we are in this would, to perceive perfectly what God is,
and reserved rather for our hope in the next world (says Tena.) For all the
knowledge we have in this world, it is but only from the effects of God, his
goodness, or his power, or the like. But it is not any of Gods effects, nay,
it is not all of them put together, will make up a perfect demonstration of
Gods essence, to show us what he is, but that he is. That he has a being,
that any of his effects will suffice to show. Thus therefore in the first
place, to be believed, quia est Deus, that God is.

And let us not make light of this (says Calvin) because the matter seems
small: a poor degree of faith to apprehend but this, that God has a being.
The smaller it is, the more shame for their insidelitie, that can stick at
this; for their impudence, that dare call this in question (says he.) And let
us learn thus much at least by it, That even this fundamental point touching
Gods being, it is a point of faith, and comes from grace; it is Gods gift, and
Gods mercy to us, that we believe thus much: and did not his hand support us,
we should be quickly roady to dou^t of this maine principle, to overthrow the
foundation of faith, and to say in our hearts with the fool in the Psalm,
There is no God.

But it is not so small a matter neither (says Tena) as one would think at
first, to believe that God is; for we must believe him rightly, believe him a
God at least, that he is before and beyond, and above all other things, and
indeed the original of all. For to have a gross conceit of God, as the
foolish Heathen, to make an Idol of him in our fancies, to believe him any
corporal, mutable, or passible thing, is indeed to destroy his being, an^ to
imply contradiction, to make him be and not to be; for that is not God, which
is not the perfectest of all things else; yea which is not perfection it self,
says he. So that in this point of Gods being, there is included in a manner
Gods eternity and O^nnip^tence, so Aquinas, That God is, and most truly is, is
before all things olse; and all other things are, because he is.

Briefly, four differences (as Tena notes) there are betwixt Gods being and
the creatures, which unless we apprehend rightly concerning God, we do not
believe that he is: First, where is the creature had first non esse, and then
esse; first was not, and then at Gods pleasure began to be. God is from all
eternity, never can we imagine time whe^in God was not. Secondly, whereas the
creature depends in his being, upon such and such causes that produce it, upon
such and such helps that su^^aine it; God is altogether independent and
absolute, beholding to no other cause, sustained by no other help: Himself the
cause of all causes. Thirdly, whereas all creatures are variable, either in
whole, or in part; the very Heavens themselves subject com^tion, and not in the
same posture to day that they were yesterday; God is yesterday, today, and the
same for ever, subject to no motion, ly^le to no alteration, in whom i^ neither
variablenes, nor shadow of change, says St. James. Fourthly, whereas eve^ie
creature has more in it of non Entitie, than of Entitie: It is in it self
this or that, but it is no other thing: God is the fullness of all Entitie,
has the being of all other hings united and comprehended in himself, but in a
more excellent manner; so that what ever being, or goodness is in the
creature, the same is transcendently in God, and better in God than in the
creature. Add to this, that though some creatures remain for ever, yet it is
possible they should not be; at least suppose them taken away, yet the rest of
the creation might stand without them: but God, ye cannot take him away, but
ye must take all things with him. All things in him live, and have their
being; all things depend on his goodness: so that remove that, and remove all
the world. Nay, let the world and all be removed, yet the being of God remains
still, God can be well enough without his creatures, as he is before them. So
truly he is that he is, what he is, Exodus 3.11. is, was, and shall be for
evermore. Nay, is at all times in the Present Tense; neither was, nor shall b^
properly; but only is what he is, without beginning or en^ng: Indeed one and
the same thing with his own essence, to whom esse and existere; to be, and to
manifest being: to subsist, and to continue his subsistence, are the same. All
this, whosoever believes that God is, ought to believe too, if not explicitly,
yet vertually, or he knows not what he believes; because he does not believe
God, rightly distinguished from all his creatures.

But here arises small objection. All this in a manner may be found out by
natural reason; If by natural reason, what need is there of faith? How, says
the Apostle, He that comes must believe that God is; when it is possible by
argument to demonstrate him, belief pr^suppose, want of knowledge, we cannot
know and beleeve^ oath at one time that God is. To this Commentators frame
diverse answers; as namely, that belief may stand with some kind of knowledge,
if it be but knowledge, a p^sterini from the effects, as the knowledge of God
is; so Sam ^on Others, that the Apostle lives the necessity of believing, not
so much upon this point, that God is, as upon the l^tter, that God is a
Rewarder of them that seek him: because that is harder to demonstrate. Others
that the Apostle supposes not the belief of this necessary to all men; but
only to beginners: for it is he that comes to God must believe, that is, in
his first coming before he be able to prove it: and others, that he must
believe habitually, that is, have the habit of faith to believe Gods being,
though he had gotten the knowledge too. As the Disciples which saw Christ
crucified before their eyes, and so had perfect knowledge of his passion, yet
might have habitual faith of it likewise, that is, roady to believe this
Article also, if they did not know it ^s we at this day believe it.

To leave these devices, let us hearke^ to Saint Augustine, who in my mind
gives the true answer, telling us; that though there be a natural knowledge
touching this point, that God is, yet it is far from a right knowledge: Nature
can never attain to a perfect apprehension of this without faith; for nature
can go no further than nature, to show God the Author of natural good things,
and consequently natural blessings, and no other to be expected from him; but
that is the least part of saving knowledge, to apprehend only that God will be
sought and acknowledged by us, Author of natural blessings. N^, we must
conceive him the fountain of supernatural and eternal blessings, and not of
temporal only, which is a thing beyond Natures skill to teach us: Nature
knows no other life but this, and perceives neither reward nor punishment
after death. But faith teaches us this in the first place, and to look upon
God as our eternal portion in another life, that is not as the giver of
natural only, but supernatural blessings.

It is but a vain objection therefore, God may be known by Nature; ergo, no
need of faith. Nay sure, to know the very being of God rightly we must be
beholding to faith: for natural knowledge is full of errors; our reason is
dim and blind, since our fall taken in Paradise, and with much labor we do
find out things before u^ (says the wise man) but the things that are in
heaven, who has searched ou^? If God himself reveal not such things to us,
we may grope long enough in the dark, and find nothing.

Add to this; that admit of Natures knowledge, yet what are most part of men
the better for that? It is so long in learning, that not one of a thousand is
the nearer for natural knowledge. How many years must be spent? How many
books turned, before we can attain one poor Science? And when we have
attained all, we are far enough yet from attaining the knowledge of God,
without a long circuit of demonstration? So i^tricate are things divine (says
one) that in Natures search those principles stand last, which in the Doctrine
of Faith are the very first. Besides, what is it that Nature knows? That God
is without beginning or ending, the Maker of the world, and the like, why what
is that to our faith? Where is the apprehending of God, as the Father of our
Lord Ie^us Christ? As our Father by adoption? As our happiness and Hope in the
next life. As the sole object of our worship? As a Rewarder of those that seek
him? All this is far from Natures sight. And therefore, blessed be God, for
this help; that he has given us the light of Faith to direct us, and not laid
it upon every one to know, but to believe; Hoe thnt comes to God, must
believe that God is.

By this means now, all of all sorts, ignorant and skillful, learned and
unlearned, shall be delivered from all laborious search of this great
principlt, and have it ready to their hands, says Cajetane: by this means
none shall need stick at it, or make any controversy about it now. For Faith
has this advantage above Science (says he) that of things which may be
demonstrated by reason, we may venture to doubt and discourse: But of things
established by Faith, no disputing, no doubting. Moreover, let Science be never
so clear, yet few men would venture their lives upon Science; for it argues
some presumption upon our own skill: but upon Faith it is glorious to jeopard
our lives. For the truth of God it is honorable to dye, no pride in that, but
abundance of humility, and selfe-denyall And therefore, to make men courageous
in defense of this maine truth, and willing to dye in it; let it be a matter of
faith, let it ^elve on Gods credit, not on our reason; let it be, not he that
comes must know, but he that comes to God must believe that God is: Yea, but
what shall he be the better for his belief, ye will ask, to what purpose is
his coming? To purpose enough, it ye mark the next point, and join that to
it, for that makes it a gainful coming: Then we come with hope and
comfortable persuasion indeed, when we come not only believing that God is, but
that he is a Rewarder of them that seek him, which is the fourth gradation,
and the last point of our Division.

We are now upon that which supports and strengthens the weight of all our
labor, without which our Faith would quickly hang down her head, and our
knees be feeble: For did we only believe that God is, and no more, what are we
the nearer? The ninth sphere is too, but so far from our reach, that we cannot
communicate with it. Indeed, supposing God the best of all things, we might
undertake to seek him; but finding no reward, no advantage to be got by it, we
should quickly be weary of seeking. Reward, it is that animates all industry in
the world, that encourages all Trades, nourishes all Sciences, and holds up all
Professions: upon hope of reward all depend, take which away, and none will
abide a fruitless pains long. If the Husbandman plow not in hope, and sow in
hope, if he expects to reap nothing, ye need not persuade him to be still;
Reward it is that gives life to all endeavors: necessary therefore that he
that comes to God, should believe this too, as believe that God is, without
which he would never come: so believe, that God is a rewarder of them that
seek him, without which he would soon be weary of coming.

Thi^ part (as I told you) pertaines to Gods providence, and it is that indeed
which makes our faith truly saving. For to believe only the being of God, as
some vain Philosophers did, and not to believe that he has a care of humane
affairs, what can more tend to profaneness and licentiousness? Such men Job
describes, Job 22.12. Is not God in the height of heaven? And behold the stars
how high they are; and how then does God know, can he judge through the dark
clouds? Thick clouds are a covering to him, that he sees not; and he walks in
the circuit of heaven: What is the Almighty to us, that we should fear him?
And what profit is there, if we pray to him? Job 21.15. Whom David is feign to
instruct better; Take heed ye unwise among the people, O ye fools, when will
ye understand? Psalm 93.3. He that planted the care, shall he not hear? Or he
that made the eye, shall he not see? It is he^ that teaches man knowledge,
shall he not know us, seeing he knows all our ways? Thou art about my pa^h,
and about my bed; for lo there is not a word in my tongue, but thou O Lord
know it altogether. And as he knows, so^ce tries, so he^ consider^ and
rewards: His eyes behold the people, and his eyelids tries the children of
men, that he may reward the proud after their deservings, that he may deliver
the poor from him that is too strong for him. I the Lord search the heart, and
tr^e the reins, that I may give to every one according to his works, J^r^m.
17. By this faith we learn to lay hold on God, as the rock of our salvation,
to call on him, to put our trust in him, to love him, to cleave to him, without
which no possible coming to him. And therefore he thet comes to God must
believe this, or he is never the better for believing that God is; namely, that
God is also a Rewarder of them that seek him.

But what kind of Rewarder, ye will ask? There be those that think a Rewarder
in a temporal way, by secular good things, will serve turn: As God rewarded
Abraham, Isaac and Joseph, yea and Iehu, and Cyrus too: the reward of honor,
long life, health, posterity, and the like. These some think enough to entitle
God a Rewarder; and so they are: but these are not the rewards of his children,
these are not the things he has taught us to build our faith upon; it is not a
Rewarder in this sense, that the Apostle means him, when he says, He that
comes, must believe God a Rewarder; for this is too unworthy a subject for
faith to rest upon: If faith be a divine and supernatural thing (says
Aquinas) sure it must look for more than earthly and natural blessings. And
therefore though God be a Rewarder in this kind too, as he has promised
Reward to a cup of cold water, yet this is not the principal reward in Saint
Paul's intendment.

Not this; for this way God rewards not those whom he loves best, not those
that seek him most: For who sees not how unequally temporal rewards are
dealt? The ungodly for his own lust does persecute the poor, says David,
they corrupt others, and speak of wicked blasphemy; and yet their eyes swell
with fa^nesse, and they do even what they list: Lo these are the ungodly, and
these prosper in the world, Psalm. 73. What shall we say then? If these were
the rewards that faith looked after, we were in a poor case. If in this life
only we had hope in Christ, we were of all men most miserable, says Saint
Paul. No, it is the eternal and incomprehensible reward of the next life, that
is it we are to look for; and that is a thing worthy of our faith indeed, and
a thing always rightly distributed. None but those that seek God are so
rewarded; none are capable of that reward, but such as come by a true faith to
this Rewarder.

Such a Reward (I say) is worthy of our faith; for this is no less, nor no
other, than God himself: As hunselfe says to Abraham, I am thy shield, and
thy exceeding great reward: The Lord is my p^r^iun, whom have I in heaven but
thee? and there is none on earth that I desire in comparison of thee. He that
gives the hire, he is himself the hire: And that he is so, appears by the
very last words of the Text, for he is a Rewarder (says the Apostle) of them
that seek him. Seek him? why then he himself is the Reward they are to seek
for: and so he is sure. And that makes our faith truly divine, that makes it a
saving faith indeed; for a saving faith is that that relyes upon God for our
salvation, says Calvin. Our salvation, what is that? or wherein lies it, but
in God himself, and the enjoying of him? God is the end of our salvation, and
God is the means too; for the very way to this salvation, it is by God the
Redeemer, by him that is God and Man, Christ Jesus. And if we believe God a
Rewarder, and believe him so by faith, we cannot leave Christ out, says Tena:
For he that hopes for reward from God, must hope also for the removal of all
impediments that make him incapable of rewarding; sin is the maine impediment,
and unless sin be removed, no possible pleasing of God, no possible
expectation of reward. Now sin, it is taken away by none, but God the Redeemer;
there is no other name given under heaven, whereby we may expect salvation,
but the name of Jesus Christ: Consequently all that look for reward from God,
in, and through him, they must look for it, and looking for it through him, our
faith taking Christ in, thus it becomes a saving faith indeed, thus it takes in
the whole Creed, both concerning the end and the means, the Deity and
humanity, the essence and the providence of God, the substance and the way of
salvation. And therefore no marvel the Apostle lays it down for a strong
conclusion, that no coming to God, but thus, no arriving to him sure, but by
both these; namely, that by our faith we believe that God is, and that he is a
Rewarder of them that seek him.

And now to turn to a word of application, and so conclude: Three ways we may
make benefit of this Scripture, toward a good life, that is to say, by way of
admonition, by way of reprehension, and by way of consolation.

By way of admonition first, here is a caveat for Hypocrites, that boast only
of their faith, and have no care to show it in their works. The Apostle here in
this Text aims (one would think) at faith, and faith only: it is a kind of
definition of faiths foundation, this sentence, and yet here in the very
foundation of faith, is an implication of good works: For here is first, He
that comes to God, and that coming is (as I told you) by charity and good
life; so belief is not enough there must be coming also. And then here is
seeking of God, God is a Rewarder of none, but them that seek him; it is not a
Rewarder of them that believe in him only; note that the reward belongs to
seekers: Seek the Lord while he may be found, Seek the Lord and his strength,
Seek his face for ever, Psalm. 105. They seek him that draw near unto him in
good life, says Anselme. Nay, it is more than seeking, if ye note it: The
Translation has it, a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him: rightly
answering the Original, (...), which signify properly a studious and earnest
enquiring and searching him ou^; a searching for him, as Solomon wishes the
young man to search for wisdom: If thou seek for her as for silver, and
search for her as for hid creasure, Prove 2 4. Sure it must be a seeking him,
and him for himself, says Lapide, not a seeking God, and other things; or God
for by-respects, for temporal ends, to serve our own: turns, join these
together with ou^ belief; namely a coming to God, a seeking him, a diligent
seeking him, a seeking God himself, for hin self, and not other things with
him: and then ye are in a fair way to your Reward; then you may believe the
Reward belongs to you.

Secondly, for them that presume too much on their good works here is an
admonition likewise. The Papists they catch hold of (...) Text to bolster out
their opinions of merit by works. Mark (s^ they) God is a Rewarder of them that
seek him; yea, and all that come to God are bound to believe this; Erg^, God
is a Rewarder of merit: For seeking implies merit, and reward is a thing so
properly belonging to merit, that no merit, and no reward: The Reward and
Desert are Correlatives, say they: Nay, not so, may there not be a reward of
grace, as well as of desert? as God sends his rain upon the just and unjust,
and rewards many wicked men with good for evil? yes dou^lesse we know,
finding of God is properly the reward of seeking him. And yet the Prophet
says, I was found of them that sought me not; I was made manifest unto them
tha^ asked not after me This was a Reward of grace sure, and not of ^esert, and
so may the Reward of our seeking be. May? n^y, so it must be; for impossible we
should seek God without his grace impossible we should offer to come to him
unless he give us the will: For we are not able to think any thing as of our
selves, says Saint Paul. As God therefore gives reward to them but seek him,
so he had need give power likewise to seek, that he may have whom to reward;
for except he given us, we cannot seek. It is well observed therefore (by one)
that the words are not, God is a Rewarder of men, propter quarendum, for their
seeking; but God is a Rewarder quarentium, of them that seek: Seek we may,
and by his grace only and his help, seek, why not? and so God be a Rewarder,
not of our deserts, but of his own girts in our seeking.

This for admonition. For reprehension: many kind of offenders, we may take
good occasion to tax. To let go those incredulous wretches that dare call
these great principles in question, and doubt whether there be a God or no, or
whether he be Rewarder of those that seek him; I suppose many others that
profess these points with their mouths may be justly blamed, as disagreeing
from them in their lives. And if it be the lives of men must prove their
faith, I pray how do they prove their faith of Gods being that yield him no
manner of reverence in his House, nor any where else? That set light by his
Word, by his Ministers, by his Sabbaths, by his Service; If they did believe
there were no God at all, could they do more to confirm it to the World?
could they be more profane then many now adays are? If I be a Father, says
God, where is my honor? If I be a Master where is my fear? If there be a God,
where is our outward acknowledgement of this God, in our Worship, in our
Reverence, in our respect to his Ministers? in our Tithes and Ofterings, and
the like? To let go these. What say ye to those men, that come to Church
sometimes and yet live worse then Insidels? lie, defraud, steal, forswear,
privily consume, and devour their Brethren? Do these believe that God is,
think ye? They do not live as if they did sure. In the third place, set your
presumptuous insolent young Gallant, that scorns all Laws, despises all
government, makes a mock of all wholesome order and triumphs in the contempt of
all, as if he knew none above him. How near is this man in his life to saying
there is no God? In the fourth place ye may set the curious disputer; he that
will measure all grounds of faith by his reason; and believe no more then can
be proved by demonstration. Let him remember that St. Paul here requires, this
evident principle so often proved among Philosophers by reason viz. that God is
to be embraced of us Christians by faith, and not by science; he that comes to
God must believe this: It is not expected he should prove it. And this for
oftenders against the first point, touching Gods essence.

Against the second touching his Providence; That God is a Rewarder, how many
more seem delinquents, and in their example appear too much to forget this?
First murmurers, and repiners, so much blamed, Psalm. 37. that grieve at the
prosperity of the wicked, that fret to see the unequal distributions of things
Temporal, as if God had no better blessings then these; do not these seem to
charge the Justice and Providence of God, as if he had forgotten to reward them
that seek him? Next unto whom ye may join the backslider; he that begins to
do well, and then gives over; as if his labor were not enough considered: As
if he should say, What prosit is there in serving God? Sure I have cleansed my
heart in vain etc. Nor may we omit the politic worldling, he that thinks to
contrive all events whatsoever, and bring things to pass by his own wits, as
if there were no providence to be acknowledged. And the miserable niggard, he
that will not part with any thing to the poor: that is, will not trust God
with a half penny. Is it likely these believe God, a Rewarder of them that
seek him? Nay sure, if they did, they would be more liberal and more pious.
In the last place set the lazy Christian, that seeks after nothing at all; but
loyters, and lies abed, trisles out his time and takes his case: Does this man
(think you) persuade himself there is a Reward, belonging to seekers, that
will not take the pains to seek any thing for his souls health, nor his
bodies neither? That seldom or never prays, never reads nor meditates nor
thinks on God. Nay sure, if this man believe any reward from God, it is a
doubt, but it is certain he does not greatly desire it.

Last of all for consolation very fruitful both Doctrines are. First, that God
is, it ministers abundant comfort to us, in all the chances, and changes, in
all the distresses and troubles of our life; that however other things vary and
change, God varies not. How ever other helps, other friends decay and perish,
yet God abides still. Not so any comforts besides him. Riches are now, but
shortly they will not be: Health is here to day, but happily gone to morrow.
Thy Father and thy Mother, thy Husband, thy Patron are but for a time: shortly
there will be a time when thou may say of these things they are ^ot. But
God, though all other things vanish and perish, yet he is still. He is a sure
friend, an everlasting comfort. There is our joy that though all other helps
be taken away, God can never b^ taken away. He is still where he was. Nay
though ourselves be taken away, yet he is our hope, even in the midst of death,
In him we l^ve, we move (...) are st^ll even when we are not.

Secondly from his providence aboundan^ comforts more. That though none else
regard our godly living, our patient and painful working, yet God will not
forget it; we have a sin^ rewarder of him. God is not unrighteous, to forget
your work and labor of love, etc. And yet though we be not by and by rewarded,
or recon^sed in these temporal things, let us not grieve as if we were
unrespected. For it is Estius his note, the word here signifies rather future
then present: not so much that God is, as that he will be a Rewarder. Though he
tarry, therefore wait for him. For certainly God will not forget his promise.
And though he recompense not in temporal good things; yet remember he has
better Rewards in store for us, and such as are worthy our faith indeed such as
he has chiesly taught us, to expect from him. That Reward is his own self,
which how ever other things may fail us, shall be sure in the last place not
to fail us: but to make us blessed for ever, in the vision and fruition of him
who is for ever. To which blessed vision and fruition etc.

FINIS.

