A (...) OR, A Philosophic Discourse CONCERNING MAN.

BEING THE ANATOMY Both of his SOUL and BODY. WHEREIN The Nature, Origin,
Union, Immaterality, Immortality, Extension, and Faculties of the one, AND THE
Part, Humors, Temperaments, Complexions, Functions, Sexes, and Ages,
respecting the other, are concisely delineated.

By. S. H. Student in Physic.

-- Quod Medicorum est.
Pertractent Medici, tractent fabrilia fabri.
London, Printed for Stebhen Foster, at the Sun and Bible on London Bridge.
1680.

TO Sir John Hartop Baronet.
SIR,
THis little and unpolished Tract (by reason of its Authors pensive Thoughts,
concerning its Entertainment among the Critic Censurists of this Carping Age,
and his careful Solicitude, to whose Patronage he dare presume to commit it) is
just like a small Vessel tossed up and down in the midst of a turbulent Ocean,
and buffered by the swelling Waves of an unruly Element, having its Sails
lacerated by the boisterous Assaults of an unmerciful Wind, and not knowing to
what Port or Haven it had best betake it self: For when I seriously reflect on
my own Unworthiness and Insufficiency, for a Work of this Nature, I am ashamed
to think of exposing the Weakness and Imperfection of my Juvenile Labors to
Public View, much more when I contemplate on the Dignity and Grandeur of your
Person, the multitude of your Natural and Acquired Accomplishments, the
Profoundness of your Judgment, and the Accuracy of your Discerning Faculty, am
I Astonished, and even stand Aghast at the thoughts of appearing at the open Bar
before so Discerning a Judge. But yet on the other side, when I conside you
Candor and Clemency, the Natural Result and Product of such a Genuine
Disposition, as inclines you to Pardon and Overlook the common Frailties of
Mankind; the Weight and Argument in this last Consideration, to publish it,
proeponderates that of the two former to keep it dormant: so that now having
resolved to strike Anchor at the safe Harbor of your Name here prefixed, my
fluctuating Thoughts are already reduced to Calmness and Serenity of Mind; and
I value not the inconsiderable Puffs and Blasts of a thousand Censurists but
can Laugh at all their Taunts and Jeers, and Calumnies. Or shall I compare it
to a Ship embarked with Goods (tho very ordinary) intended for a long Voyage,
and foreseeing a multitude of Storms and Tempests, which it must unavoidably
venture through, yet having a Skilful and Successful Pilot to steer its Course, is
not much concerned at those Perils, which otherwise would undoubtedly cause a
Shipwreck?

Shall I also compare it to an Infant, which in the very Exit from the close
Confinement of its Mothers Womb, and in the midst of its Pangs, wants a
Skilful Midwife to hasten its Delivery. Thus Sir (to apply the Allegory) if
this Partus, freed from the teeming Womb of its Authors Brain, wherein it was
conceived and ushered Naked into the open World, does but live, being Received
and Embraced by suck as are Well-wishers to those good Intentions that begat
it; it must acknowledge its Life and Entertainment in the World, to be solely
derived from you who would so Heartily Vouchsafe to obstetricate it.

Therefore Worthy Sir, presuming upon your Benignity, I shall wholly devote it
to your Patronage, and must assure you, that tho it be not a spurious Brat, yet
I dare not acknowledge to be its Parent or own it to be my Legitime Offspring,
unless you will deign to make it yours Adopted.

And tho it may be rather called an Embrio than a perfect Partus, it being
Fraught with many Imperfections, by reason of its Parent's Infirmity, yet I
hope the Consideration of this will rather excite you to Commiserate it than
cause you to Disdain to Look on it; for certainly it had ere this proved
Abortive had it not continued to this (small) Maturity, merely being sustained
by the hopes of your Readiness and Willingness to render your Aid and
Assistance in the extremity of its Exit, and in the necessitous time of this
its Delivery.

Sir, It is not because I think any Benefit will accrue to you by your
Inspection into this Discourse, or that it will any way add to your Knowledge
that I present it to you, but knowing that you have a Genius which inclines you
to such Studies as these, as well to more sublime ones, I cannot but hope that
you will Encourage the same, where you see it in others, and by a kind
Acceptance and a candid Resentment of these my Endeavors, manifest the same.

Besides your willingly Patronizing somewhat of my Fathers (tho on another
Subject) some years since, was a great inducement to make me hope and expect
the same unparell'd Favor from you; which humble Request, if you will
condescend to grant* you will for ever oblige him who really is

London, Jan. 29th. 1679. Sir, Your Devoted Servant Samuel Haworth.

THE EPITSLE TO THE READER.
Candid Reader,
KNowledge was ever worried with the reproachful terms of Pride and Profaneness,
by some ignorant and blinded Zealots; And although in these clearer and brighter
days, it has obtained many Choice and Pious Patrons, yet cannot that vindicate
it from being slurred and branded with the most shameful and blemishing Titles;
some do so illy resent what favors of it, that one would imagine that they had
a secret Antipathy to it, lurking in the very frame of their Natures: Some damn
it as Irreligious and Antichristian, and deem it wholly inconsistent with
Gospel Simplicity; because it sometimes discovers the Darkness of that Light
that they fancifully pretend to. Its wonderful to see how many are continually
puffing at this Light; some with the more vehement blasts of Rage anf Fury,
others with the gentle ones of Scoff and Derision, but each equally designing
its Final and Fatal Extinction. Revealed Knowledge, is to the Apprehension of
some, a thing Dull and Irrational, Natural, with others is Sordid and
Atheistic. Either of those Lights are much too Glorious for the vitiated Optics
of such Brutish Sensualists. Nothing gratifies them but what accords with their
Humerous Dispositions, and is tempered into a sutableness to their Corrupted
Phancies: Its strange Men should so much oppose their own Happiness, disown
their clearest Faculties, and without the least shadow of Provocation, be
content to place themselves in a lower Rank than God and Nature has allowed
them. To talk of the Immortality of the Humane Soul, to vindicate its
Difference from Material Substances, to assert its Divine Origin and
Production, is now become sufficient to entitle a Person to the Malignant
Scoffs of some Prophaner Wits: For Sensuality is so much their Element, that
they are not easily persuaded to be Wise beyond it, neither can they be induced
to think those things to have a proper Existence, which are not capable of
being confined to that Praedicament. So that whatever is declared of things
Spiritual (things of a more Noble and Sublime Extraction than what is Corporeal)
is by such no otherwise esteemed than impertinent Babbling. All that we hear
from them of these Matters, is only that constant Clamor, that to assert
Immaterial, and Spiritual Beings is unintelligible Nonsense. But it were
unworthy any Person of Ingenuity to be concerned, whenas the Purity of our
Faculties, and a serious Reflection on their refined Nature, is Argument enough
to convince any of the most prodigious unreasonableness of such Frantic
Surmises: Should we to gratify some perverse Humorist, resolve all our
Knowledge into Sense, we must be forced to confess that we understood scarcely
any thing of our owu Natures; that we exerted Actions, which we could no more,
nay less account for, than the Flux and Reflux of the Ocean; and whose Fountain
and Original would be as undeterminable as that of Nibe, As for the reducing
those Acts of Will and Understanding, or those siner Reflex ones, to the
Arietations and Fortuious Jumblings of insensible Atoms, is a Notion
exceedingly gross and absurd: For the most exquisite Motion of the smoothest
and smallest parts of Matter is utterly incompatible with the subtle and
refined Operations of a Spirits Faculties: So ridiculous does the Hypothesis of
the Atheists seem to be, that I cannot imagine any should adopt it, unless he
were swayed by Interest, or biased by some secret thoughts of his being
capacitated to maintain any thing against the most violent Assaults of his well
accomplished Adversaries. Let the Atheistic Tribe brave it with never so much
Confidence and Presumption, yet any Reasonable Person may at an easy rate be
informed of its groundlesness, and the Weakness of its support. Strong
Confidence ought to be built on weighty Reasons and confirmed Truths, or the
Superstructure will become the Object of Men's Scorn and Derision: And whether
the Confidence of some Atheists be any better founded, I think the following
Discourse may in part evidence to any impartial and dis-interested Mind: I am
persuaded that this piece will be acceptable to any to whom Knowledge is dear
and delightful, but I judge it will be far otherwise to those that affect
Ignorance, and Glory in their own Blindness and Stupidity, that like the
Negro's think nothing Beautiful but what discovers it self in their own Native
Blackness: But it were apparent Folly to manifest any Resentment of their
Censures, who endeavor to lessen the distance between Man and Brutes, as is
evidently visible by their earnest and vehement Attempts to casheir that
Knowledge that makes the difference the more wide and conspicuous. The Subject,
of the ensuing Discourse (as the Title Page assures us) is Man, the Compendium
of the Universe, and a brief summary of all Natures Works; so that indeed a
Treatise on this Subject, is as it were a Commentary upon the whole Book of
Nature: For that there is something In Man Analogic to all the Parts of the
Harmonious Structure of the World, is that which the Treatise in its very
Entrance represents by a very curious and exact Delenation: It describes Man in
almost all his Postures and Appearances, discovers the Noble Extraction and
Origin of his Diviner Part; clearly manifests the sublime Nature of the
Properties and Faculties of that Incorporeal Being; gives some probable
Conjectures of its Condition, both Antecedent and Consequent, to its state of
Union: Opens the Nature of the Affections, shows the Difference occasioned by
the Terminations of the Irascible and Concupiscible Appetites on the Variety of
Objects. Then it evidences to us the Souls Immortality and detects the Vanity
of Atheistic Cavils against so famous and irrefragable a Truth: It also
presents us with a delightful View of the curious Frame of the Humane Body, and
thence raises us to the Contemplation of the Ineffable Goodness and Admiration
of the Stupendous Wisdom of the Deity, visible in the erecting so Amiable and
Harmonious a Fabric. Then MAN in the differing circumstances of Age, Sex, and
Complexion, is offered us as the Object of our Speculation: So that the Author
has traversed all the various Regions of the Microcosm, and has notably
described the most remarkable Occurrences in that intellectual System. The
Design of which, without all Controversy, is no other than to guide us in the
practice of, and show us the Comprehensiveness of that Ancient Sentence, Know
thy Self. The Discourse aims at the Knowledge of our Selves, at clear and
distinct Apprehensions of our own Natures, at a view of our whole Frame and
Module: And although nakedly considered it be speculative, yet it is directly
levelled at Practice, namely, to assist us in the regular Ordering and
Governing our Lives and Actions: it were then undeniable madness or
conceitedness, to frown at, or show a dislike of the Endeavors of others
advantaging us in a larger Prospect of our own Beings: If we blame others, and
disparage their Labors designed for our Benefit, it is an apparent
Demonstration we maintain an over-winning Fondness of our own Abilities; what
others may object against this Treatise, I am not able to conjecture, neither
shall I be solicitous to enquire; but this I dare promise my self, that such as
are acted with generous and ingenuous Souls, will be candid and favorable: But
as for such as applaud themselves for their admirable Faculty in Obtrectation
and Raylery, and such like disingenious Foolery, it were absurd to regard them.
It is usually said, and I wish it were more considered, That its much easier to
quarrel at Men's Discourses, than to frame one of a more even and methodic
Composure. To censure Treatises of squable with them is no desperate
difficulty, but to write others that shall in all respects wonderfully surmount
them, is a Matter of no great Facility. I confess a complete measure of
Considence may accomplish a Man for Drollery and Invectives; but there must be
other Ingredients to make him deserve the Denomination of truly Learned: And to
such as shall look on what the Author here Exposes to the Public, with an Eye
of Disdain and Contempt, its my humble Request they would recommend to us
something of their own on the same Subject, more worthy our Inspection and
Perusal, by which thing I am persuaded, they will highly gratify the Author
and please others. If Reader, the Authors Judgment and thine, may interfer (as
its highly probable they may) let not that be cogent with thee to move thee to
a dislike of what he offers thee. Thou perhaps judge thy Opinions to be
founded on the plainest and clearest Evidence, when as on the contrary, the
Author presumes, and that it may be not rashly, that his Sentiments are
enforced with as convincing Demonstrations as any. It were therefore unbecoming
to precipitate thy Sentence of the Treatise, either in a way of Commendation or
Detraction, till thou have deliberately weighed and considered the Design,
Matter, and Method of it. Let it be but admitted to plead at the Bar of Reason,
and I am confident the Author will be content to submit to any thing, that
shall certainly be determined by that High Court of Judicature. What remains is
only to recommend the following Discourse to thy Candid Perusal, hoping it may
be of some Benefit and Advantage to thee. Vale

G. W.

On the AVTHOR.
Begone faint Limners, with your vain pretense,
Of Plainly Representing Man to Sense;
Your Art's defective, you cannot Pourtray
This Lively Image, vain is your Essay,
By Lines, and Lineaments, his Shape to Express;
That makes not Man, which is his Garb and Dress:
The Soul's the Man, your Colors are too Dark,
To give the Features of that Heavenly Spark.
Learn then of the Author for he it is that knows
To Draw the Man as well as Paint his Clothes.
W. B.
THE CONTENTS.
The Introduction Page 1 THE Creation of the World Ib. Of Light Page 2 Of the
Firmament Page 5 Of Water Page 6 The Cause of the Saltness of the Sea Ibid. How
it is made Fresh Ibid. Of the Motion of the Sea Ibid. Of the Generation of
Plants Page 7 Of the Heavens and Celestial Luminaries Page 8 Of the Suns
Motion, with the Motion of the Earth Page 9 Of Living Creatures Ib. Of the
Creation of Man Ib. Man's Analogy with the Great World Page 10.
CHAP. I.
THe two Parts of Man, and the Division of this Discourse into its Two Parts
Pneumatology and Somatology Page 12
CAHP. II. Of the Nature and Definition of the Soul Page 14. AN Introduction to
this Chapter Ibid. That the Soul is not the Form of Man Page 15 But that Union
is the Form of Man Ibid. Reasons to prove the Soul not to be a Form, Page 16,
17, 18 Aristotle's Definition of the Soul ridiculous and pedantic Page 19, 20
The true Definition of the Soul. Its Essence consists in Cogitancy Page 21
Cogitancy has no dependence upon the Body Page 23
CHAP. III. Of the Origin of the Soul Ibid. THat the Soul does not prae-exist
Page 24 Neither is it propagated ex tracude Page 25 Several Arguments against
the Souls propagation Ibid. The true Origin of the Soul, That it is immediately
Created by God Page 27
CHAP. IV. Of the Union of the Soul to the Body Page 28 THat Spirits stand in
need of Bodies to Act in Ibid. etc. That the Soul is not united by the
Mediation of the Corporeal Soul, evinced by several Quaeries Page 32 Neither is
it only united to the Glandula Pinealis, and thence influenced by the Body Ib.
But by its extention through the Body, it actuates all its parts Page 33
CHPP. V. Of the Immateriality of the Soul Page 34 THe Souls Immateriality
proved from its Activity Page 35 From its Largeness and Discursive Faculty Ib.
From Cogitation Page 36 Mr. Hobbs his Objection and Evasion Ib. Its Solution
Page 37 A Digression concerning the Souls of Brutes Page 38, 39 That Brutes
have not Material Souls Page 40 Neither are they insensible M^^^^ns Page 42 But
that Brutes also have Immaterial Souls Page 44 An Objection Page 45 The Answer
Page 46, 47
CHAP. VI. Of the Immortality of the Soul Page 48 THe Immortality of the Soul
proved Ibid. From its Nature Ibid. From its Origin Page 50 From its Union Ibid.
From its Immateriality Page 51 More Mediums to evince the same Page 52 The
State of the Soul after Death Page 53 That it does not Sleep Ibid. That Souls
assume Vehicles after their Dissolulution from their Bodies Ib. Three Arguments
to prove the same Page 54 The same evinced by the Testimony of the Ancient
Fathers Ibid. The same implicitly evidenced from Scripture and from Moses and
Elias appearing upon the Mount, and from all other Apparitions Page 55, 56 Of
the Resurrection and new Modification of the Body Page 57
CHAP. VII. Of the Extension of the Soul Page 58 AN Objection aganst the Souls
Extension, Page 59 The same answered Ibid. Arguments to prove a Vacuum Page
Ibid. A Vacuum demonstrated by experience Page 60 The true Nature of Space Page
61 Another Objection against the Souls Extension, Page 62 An Answer to it Ibid.
Wherein the Nature of Extension does consist, Page 63 A Distinction between
Divisible and Discerpible, and that the Soul is mentally Divisible, the
actually indiscerpible Ibid. That the Soul is not Totum in toto and totum in
qualibet partae Corporis, as the Peripatetics assert Page 64 Neither is the
Soul in an Indivisible point Page 65 Its Extension hence undeniably
demonstrated Page 66
CHAP. VIII. Of the Faculties of the Soul Ibid. WHat the Faculties of the Soul
are Ibid. How the Understanding and Will differ Page 67 The Number of the
Faculties Ibid. The Understanding its Formal Object Truth Page 68 The Nine
Intellectual Habits Ibid. The Will its Object Good Ibid. The Conscience no
distinct Faculty Ibid. The Affections not distinct from the Will Page 69 How
Love is caused Page 71 Love the Chief Affection of the Soul Page 72 The Memory
Page 73
CHAP. IX. Of the Parts of the Body Page 74 ANatomy: Its Subject Page 75 The
Division of the Parts of Man's Body Page 76 The Principal Parts Ib. The less
Principal Parts Page 77 The Simular Parts Ib. The Dissimular Parts Ib. The
Division of the Body into its Three Venture and Four Artus Page 78 The Lower
Venture its Parts Ib. and Page 79 The Cuticula Page 80 The Cutis Page 81 The
Pinguedo, or Fat Ib. The Muscles of the Belly Page 82 The Peritoneum Page 83
The Omentum Ib. The Stomach Ib. The Intestines Page 84 The Pancreas Ib. The
Cause of Agues according to Sylvius Ib. The Liver, its Figure and Connection
Page 85 Its use, to secern the Bile Page 86 To concoct the Lympha, and
impregnate it with a Volatile Salt Page 87 Its Ducts and Meatus Ib. The Spleen
Page 88 Its Use Ib. Helmont's Opinion false Page 89 Walaeus the Inventer of its
true Function Ib. The Reins Page 90 The use of the Capsulae Atrabilariae Ib.
The Vreters Page 91 The Bladder Page 92 An Experiment touching the Coction of a
humane Bladder with some Liquors Ib. The Vessels and Organs of Generation, why
we omit insisting on them Page 93 The Middle Venture, or the Thorax Page 94 The
Breasts and their Parts Page 95 Some Conjectures how Milk is generated Page 97
The Diaphragm Page 98 The Cause of Sardonian Laughter Page 99 The Ribbs Page
100 The Pleura, the Seat of the Pleurisy Ib. The Mediastinum Page 101 The
Pericardium Ib. Whence proceeded that Water that issued out of our Savior's
Side Page 102 The Heart Ib. That is not situated on the left side, as some
imagine Ib. The reason why it beats more on the left side then on the right Ib.
How Cordials help the Heart in Syncope's Page 103 The use of the Heart Ib. The
Pulse Page 104 Its Systole and Diastole Ib. and Page 105 The Circulation of the
Blood Page 106 How often the Blood circulates through the Body in an hour Page 107
The Vessels belonging to the Heart Page 109 The Lungs Page 110 Their use Ib.
The Aspera Arteria Page 111 The Larynx its Muscles Page 112 The Tonsils Page
113 Why Women have clearer Voices than Men Page 114 The Neck Ib. The Upper
Venture, or the Head, its Divisions Page 115 The Pericranium and Periostium Page
116 The Dura Matter and Pia Matter Ib. The Ventricles of the Brain Ib. The Motion
of the Brain, consisting of a Systole, and Diastole Page 117 Thae Glandula
Pituitaria Page 118 The Infundibulum Ib. The Corpus Callosum Page 119 The
Plexus Choroides Ib. The Glandula Pinealis its use Page 120 Eight Reeasons why
it cannot be the Seat of the Soul Ib. and Page 121 The Forehead and Eyebrows
Page 123 The Eyes Ib. Its Muslces, Tunics, and Humors Page 124, 125 The Ears
Page 126 The Nose Page 127 The Cause of Sneezing Page 128 The Mouth Ib. The
Tongue its Ligament Page 129 A pernicious Custom among Mid-wives Ib. The Artus
Ib. The Hand and its Parts Ib. The Foot with its Parts Page 130
CHAP. X. Of the Humors, Complexions, and Temperaments Page 132 THe great use
and benefit of the Knowledge of the Temperaments Page 133, 134, 135 Their
number according to Galen Page 136 What Heat is and what Cold Page 137 What we
are to understand by Moisture and Dryness Ib. The Temperaments rightly
distinguished according to the number of the Four Humors Page 138 The Sanguine
Corstitution described Page 139, 140, 141 The Choleric Constitution Page 142,
143 Signs of the Phlegmatic Temperament Page 144 How to distinguish when the
Melancholy Humor is predomina^t^ Page 145, 146, 147 The Doctrine of the Four
Humors reconciled with that of the Five Chymic Principles Page 150, 151, to
Page 154.
CHAP. XI. Of the Functions of the Body Page 155 THe genuine Distribution of
the Functions Page 156 The Nutritive Function Ib. How Nutritition is performed
Page 158 Chylification, or the First Concoction, how this is done Page 159, 160
Sanguification, or the Second Concoction Page 161 How Chyle is transmuted into
Blood Ib. The true Instrument that Nature makes use of in making Blood Page 163
The Excrements secerned from the Blood, and how Page 164, 165, etc. The true
Rise and Origin of Splenetic and Hypochondriac Affects Page 167, etc.
Assimulation, Membrification, or the Third Concoction Page 172 The Vital
Function Page 173 What Vital Spirits are Page 174 The Archaeus of the
Pseudo-Chymists a mere Fiction Ib. Pulsation how performed Page 175 Respiration
its Parts, Inspiration and Expiration Page 176 The use of Respiration in Eight
Particulars Page 177 The Sensative Function Page 178 The Number of the Senses
Ib. What things are requisite in every Sensation Ib. The Loco-motive Function
Page 179 The Enunciative Function Ib. How a strong and weak Voice is caused Ib.
The generative Function Page 180 The Nature and Origin of Seed Ib. Conception,
the Manner of it Page 183 Seven manifest Signs of Conception Page 184 The
Position and Situation of the Infant in the Womb Page 186 The Manner of its
Birth Page 187 In what Month the Birth commonly happens, Page 188
CHAP. XII. Of the Sexes. Page 189 THe Distinction of Man into two Sexes Page
191 The Male Ib. His Natural Diffirence from the Female Ib. When a Male and
when a Female is generated Ib. The Female Page 194 The Praise and Encomium of
that Noble Sex, both as to their Beauty and Fantasy Page 195 The Excellency
of Marriage Page 196 Reflections on them that speak against and calummate Women
Page 199 What befalls them, who abhorring Marriage, contaminate themselves with
polluted Women Page 199
CHAP. XIII. Of the Ages of Man Page 201 THe Division of the Ages of Man Page
202 Childhood, the Character of an Infant, Page 203, 204 Youth his Character
Page 206 The Consistent Age Page 208 Old Age Page 209 The Distempers with which
Old Age is attended Page 210, 211 The Conclusion Page 212.
The Reader Courteous Correction of these, with other small faults that have
escaped the Press, is humbly desired.
PAge 2 line ult, r. Privative; p. 9 l. 18 r (...) p. 16 l. ^ r. Crany; and l.
17 and l. 1^ r. Ma^iner; p 17 l. 12 r. Disinguens ab omni alio; p. 18 l 14 r.
identity; p. 20 l. 19 r. convenerit; and p. 21 r. Medetur; l. 3 r. Mehercule;
p. 22 l. 10 r. a higher; p. 23 l. 2 r, for verfited (...) manifested; p. 29 l.
ult. r. there p. 47 l. 24 r. do; p. 59 l. 3 f. Ascension r. Extention; p. 60 r.
Sectator; p. 69 l. 21 r. Elicit; p. 88 l. 10 r. Habet; p 104 l. 2 f. ^dly r.
2dly; p. 105 l. 12 r. Arteria; p. 125 l. 12 r. an Artery; dele Comms; and l. 21
r. it p. 129 l. ult. r. Hand; p 130 l. 13 r. Cubitu^; p. 135 l. 1 r.
Preservative, and l. 23 r. Contaminate, p 130 l. 25 r. Maladies; p. 143 l. 28
r. Eysipela's; p. 15^ l. 7 r. Congener; p. 162 l. 28 dele by; 165 l. 20 r.
brought; p. 181 l 8 r. do; p. 182 l. 5 r. Volatility.

A DISCOURSE CONCERNING MAN.
A Proemial Introduction.
WHen God the Supreme Being (within the boundless circumference, of whose
Omnipotence is the possibility of effecting all things) in the beginning of
time; The Creation of the World.
by the Energy of his Puissance produced the Fabric of this World out of
nothing, and caused this Visible Structure to Emerge out of a confused Chaos.
He first animated that inert Matter, which he had created with the Mundane
Spirit, which Vivifies the united Members of this Uniforme Globe; he caused the
Vigorous Active Soul of the World to move upon the Surface of the Waters, and
to agitate the Glideing Particles of that Fluid Element: This Universal Soul by
its ^nergetic and Efformative Efficience Permeating, and Inhabiting all things,
was continually fluctuating and never quiescent, till it had reduced its
inordinate Domicil, to so harmonious an Order, to so regular and consonant a
Situation, and to so elegantly Organized a Contexture as we now see it
Beautified with. This is that (...), that Plas^ic Principle, which by its
Prolific Virtue preserves the Species of things, and multiplies their
Individuals determinates the Forms, Shapes, and Configurations of the same in
their Generations. After this, Of Light.
he caused the glorious Light to shine forth out of private darkness; hereby
the substances of Bodies were rendered visible, Des Carts Princip.
Philosophiae.
and their Colors, Shapes and Figures, made conspicuous. This is caused, says
a Learned Philosopher, by the Conatus of the Globules of the second Element,
gathered together about their Center, to recede there from. These Lucid
Corpuscles, at their first Creation, were equally expanded through the Regions
of the Air; but now they flow and stream forth in a perpetual Current from
their Center, or Fountain; these Rays or Emanations of Light by the
Intervention of any Opace Body are reflected, by the Interposition of a
Semidiaphanous Body are refracted, and they are contracted, and united into a
Body of Fire, when they penetrate the ^ores of a Burning-glass tending to a
Conic Figure; to this Light God gave the Denomination of Day, and Darkness the
Privation hereof, he called Night: When the Superfice of all things was
apparent, and when those minute Lucid Corpuscles did penetrate the transparent
Body of the Air, then the Coruscant, ^plendid, and Effulgent Glittering of the
Day was present. But when these Rays, which are certain tenuious streams of
igneous Particles, in a continued Fluor, and ineffable pernicity, succeeding
each other in direct Lines, either immediately from their Fountain, or
mediately from solid Bodies, reflecting toward the eye, and sensibly affecting
the same; I say when these are obstructed by the interposition of any Opace
Body between us and their Fountain; that Light that is between us and the thing
interposing, does presently fall down to the Earth, tending thereto by its own
gravity, just like a Conduit, or Water-cock sending forth a stream of Water;
when we apply our hand to the Orifice, the Water falling down toward the Earth
does disappear: Thus the Earth whose gross Body cannot be permeated by the
subtle beams of Light, when it intervenes between us and the Sun, it causes
the obumbrating Shadows of the Night to appear. But to proceed in traceing the
Footsteps of the Divine Architect in the Works of Creation, till we come to
that part we have designed for the Subject of this little Treatise. The next
thing that he did, was his commanding the Heavens to be Expanded like a
Curtain, and Extended into a (...) an Expanse or Firmament; Of the Firmament.
before the Word of Command was gone forth, the Matter whereof this. Firmament
does consist, lay dormant in the (...). Tohu or Chaos, that Dense receptacle of
all Corporeal Beings; where all Material Substances were, Blended together: But
when Omnipotence gave the Word of Command (Let there be a Firmament) there was
suddenly made a great rarefaction, and some of that gross Matter was quickly
t^ansubstantiated, and turned into an Aetherial Substance; then those oelestial
Orbs were wheeled about by the hand of Providence, continuing their regular
Circumgyrations to the end of the World. The next thing that was done, was the
gathering together the Liquid Element of Water into its proper receptacle the
Sea; Of Water.
it was then, the Water was incorporated with those Saline Particles, The cause
of the Saliness of Sea water.
and impregnated with a Salt, which is Congenite and Concreate with it; but
when this Water is Percolated or Cribrated through the Sandy, How it is made fresh.
Nitrous, and Luteous Glebes of the Earth, or rarefied and evaporated by the
warmth of the Subterranean Fire, it relinquisheth the Salt, which is nothing
but the thicker and longer Particles of the Water, and so hereby is reduced to
that subdulcid Sapor, whereof our Fountain Waters do relish.

It was then that those Limpid Waves began to fluctuate, then the flux and
reflux of the Sea had its first beginning, not being caused by the Attractive
Virtue of the Sun, nor by the Magnetic Influence of the Moon, Of the Motion of
the Sea.
as some imagine; neither by the Estuation of the Subterranean Fire, causing in
it an Ebullition, like the Boiling of a Pot, as others fictitiously conjecture;
but by the Motion of the Earth turning round upon its Axis once in a Natural
Day; hereby the Water is agitated just as Water in a Vessel, the Vessel being
shaken.

After this he commanded the Earth to fructify and to yield its Vegetables:
then the Prolific Sperm, Of the Generation of Plants.
contained within the Clods of the Earth, began to ferment; and hence Plunts
began to germinate. Now the creeping Mouse-ear shoots forth its hairy Leaves;
now the venomous Crow foot begins to spread its Claws; now the flourishing
Alchimilla, or Ladies Mantle, adorns the Mountains of the Seprentrional
Regions, and now the wild Tansie expands its Stems, beautified with Silver
Leaves; now the Shepherds Purse dilates its Pouches; now the Scurvey-grass
abounds with its Antiscorbutic Leaves; and now the refrigerating Hounds Tongue
begins to blab; now the Dandelyon exhibits its crooked Teeth, and Horse-tail
extends its Knotty Brissles; and the soporiferous Poppy is replenished with its
narcotic Juice; now the Fields are every where invested with their verdent
Apparel, for Botanists to recreate themselves with: and now the Phytologists
may write Volumes of Botanology. I shall not here present the Reader with a
Catalogue of Plants, it being too great a Digression from our present business,
but refer him to those Learned Botanic Authors, who have already sufficiently
done it, as Johan Bauhin, Casper Bauhin, Gerard, Parkinson, and Mr. Ray in his
late Elaborate Compendious Catalogue; neither shall I here descend into the
Anatomy of Vegetables, nor penetrate into the Bowels of Plants, nor yet
delineate the curious Contexture of their parts, it being a work, besides our
present design, and socing it is already so elaborately performed by Ingenious
Dr. Grew.

We come therefore now to the next Operation, Of the Heavens and Celestial
Luminaries.
performed by God in Building the Fabric of this World, and that is, the
Creation of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, those Celestial Luminaries, those fixed
and Erratic Lights, then those transparent Crystal Spheres, in which the fixed
Stars are fastened, were whirled about by the Primum Mobile; or rather those
Lucid Bodies, and Globulous Flames began to swim in the Fluid Ether: The Sun
performing its Annual course, moving round the Eclyptic in the space of a Year,
and the Lunar Globe in its Monthly Circuit, performing the same in a little
more than Twenty seven days; while the Earth, the Center of the Universe, where
the more feculent and drossy parts do reside, Of the Suns Motion, with the
Motion of the Earth.
is turned about upon its Axis in the space of Twenty four hours, a (...) or
Natural day.

After these things were fin shed, Of Living Creatures.
he Created the Living Creatures; those Machins curiously Fabricated by the
chief Opifex of Nature, the Fishes of the Sea, the Fouls of the Air, the Beasts
of the Field, and every creeping Vermin, and Minute Insect.

Now God having thus replenished the World with all its materials, Of the
Creation of clan.
beautified and adorned it with all its requisites; the Morning Stars sang
together, and all the Sons of God shouted for joy, while he was making Man a
Creature not much inferior to them: Here he Epitomized those Mighty Volumes he
before had elaborately wrought; this is that little World, wherein all the
parts of the Macrocosm did concenter; this is the Compendium of the Universe,
the Wonder and Miracle of Nature, the Mirror of Divine Wisdom, a Heavenly Coal
blown up by the Divine Sparks of Infinite Prudence. What a perspicuous Analogy,
what a congruous Parrellellism, what an exact Similitude has Man with the
whole World, Man's Anagoly with the great World.
both in his Angellic, Heavenly, and Sublunary parts? The Soul, that Queen
Regent in the Palace of the Brain, is the Anima Munduli, and represents the
Soul of the World; the Spirits represent the Heavens, the Subtle and Aetherial
parts of the Universe; the Four Humors bear a great Analogy with the Four
Elements, Choler, that hot Sulphurous and Raging Humor, is like the furious
Element of Fire, the calmness of the Blood is compared to the Serenity of Air,
the dullness of Phlegm, to the Hebetude of Water, and the Adust Melancholy is
like the Feculent Earth: Hairs represent the verdent Vegetables; Bones and
Stones in the Reins and Bladder, represent Rocks, Stones and Minerals; the
Veins and Arteries, the Rivers and Caverns of the Earth; the Circulation of the
Sanguine Liquor, is a representative of the Motion of the Marine Waters, and of
the Waters in the profound Abysses of the Terrestrial Globe: Dew is represented
by Tears, Hail By Concocted Phlegm, Rain by the Humors that fall into the
Throat, See Crook's Body of Man.
Thunder by Fury, Heat, Rumbling, Belching, and Winds by exhaled Crudities,
Hissing, Singing and Ringing Noises in the Ears, etc.

Now if the consonant Order, harmonious Structure, and regular Composure of the
greater World, be not enough to confute an Atheist, here is enough to astonish
him; if the Contemplation of the Works of Creation, in reference to the
Macrocosme, will not lead him to the acknowledgment of a Deity and first cause;
here is that which will make it as Visible and Conspicuous as the Sun in its
Meridian glory. Having cleared the way by this Brief Introduction, I shall
without any further Remora come to the intended Scope of this Design.

Chap. I. Of the Distribution of Man into his Two Essential Constituring Parts.
ANthropology. The Two parts of Man.
or that Doctrine which Treats concerning Man, may rightly be divided into Two
parts, viz.

Pneumatology, which gives an account of his Soul, and Somatology, which is the
Anatomy of his Body.

Man being defined a Substance, consi^ing of a Spiritual and Rational Soul, and
of a fitly composed Body; in order therefore to the description of this noble
Creature, we shall first Treat of his more sublime and ruling part, his Soul;
we shall endeavor to unfold the hidden Treasures, and Unlock those choice
Curiosities that are cloistered up in the Cabinet of this Pneumatic Science,
and that this might be done after a Methodic manner I shall first discourse
concerning the Nature of the Soul. Secondly, concerning its Origin. Thirdly,
concerning its Union to the Body. Fourthly, concerning its Immateriality.
Fifthly, corcerning its Immortality. Sixthly, concerning its Extension; and
Lastly, concerning its Faculties.

CHAP. II. Of the Nature and Definition of the Soul.
An Introduction to this Chapter.
Seeing the Soul is a Being, whose: Nature is far above the reach, of Sense,
invisible to the most acute Acies of Corporeal Eyes, Intrectable by the most
sensible Organs of Touching; it is most evident that nothing can penetrate into
the Bowels of this Golden Mine, or explicate the hidden Mysteries therein
contained, but the Soul it self; she who is immaterial her self, can best by a
reflex-speculation explicate the Nature of a Spirit, and truly this Work must
be set upon by the Soul, not with Rashness or Temerity, but with diligent
Rumination, serious Deliberation, profound Contemplation, and sedulous
Industry: For what Pedantic notions of the Soul have been abstracted from the
Brains of some (tho counted very judicious) by reason of their Incogitance,
others through Critical C^^iosiry have broached some Notions as ridiculous as the
former through Inadvertency. What a silly Fiction is that, That the Soul is the
Form of Man? And how unprofitable are the Distinctions and Disputes of the
Schoolmen, concerning Forms, That the Soul is not the Form of Man.
in Order to the Abettment of this Hypothesis, is evidently manifested by that
never enough praised Person the Honorable Robert Boil. For it is most
agreeable to the Canons of Reason, that Man being an Animal compounded of Two
distinct parts, a Rotional Active and and Cogitant Soul, and a fitly Adapted
and Organized Body, each of which have their proper and particular Forms, has
no other Form ( quatonus compositum) than the Union between the Soul and Body.
But that Union is the Form of Man.
Plato was greatly deceived in Imagining the Body to be no part of Man; but
that Man was nothing but a Soul, making use of a Body as its Domicil, wherein
it is Incarcerated: But of all Opinions a more ridiculous could not have been
invented than that the Soul is the Form of Man. Certainly this cracked the
Cranny of him that found it out, else he would never have vented such
Crack-brained Notions so frequently, one after another; yet such was his Estime
and Credit, that many will still, although with as little Reason as the Author
himself, endeavor to abett this Assertion, That the Soul is the Form of Man,
not the Forma Informans, say some of them, but Forma Assistens, as they call
it; just as a Mariner in a Ship? yet who will be so arrogant to assert that a
Mariner is the Form of a Ship. But that I may a little demonstrate this
Diametrically opposite Sentiment of mine, That the Soul can in no wise be
imagined to be the Form of Man: Reasons to prove the Soul not to be a Form.
I shall show upon what Foundation this Assertion is established; and first, I
say the very Notion and Definition of a Form cannot in the least be
appropriated to the Soul; and it is agreed upon by all, Cui non convenit
definitio, ei neque definitum, beside the Peripatetic and pretended Definition
of a Form, viz. Forma est per quod res est id quod est, is no more a Definition
of a Form. than Oculus est per quod al quis vidit, is a Definition of the Eye.
But a Form may be thus rightly Defined, Forma est ens incompletum materiam
informans, unum per se cum materia constituens and distinuens ab omni a^os. It
is an incomplete Being, informing Matter, and constituting one Essential. Being
with the Matter, and distinguishing it from every thing else. Now, First the
Soul is not an Incomplete Being; for an Incomplete Being is some Mode or
Accident which cannot subsist unless coexistent with a complete Substance, but
the Soul is a complete Being subsisting of it self. Secondly, the Soul does not
inform Matter, if so, it would be the Form of the Body; for then there would be
an Intrinsic Communication of Essence and Essential Properties. We will grant
there is a Presence, a Contact, a Diffusion, an Union, and an Actuation, yet
none of these come under the Notion or Title of Information; and although the Soul
does Actuate the Body, yet it does not Communicate every Action to the Body,
but performs many A^tions without any dependence thereupon; as Cogitative,
Intellectual, and voluntary Actions: But now a Form depends upon Matter in
every (if any) of its Operations. Again Thirdly, the Soul is not one with the
Body, neither in Indentity as a Substantial Act according to the Peripateric
Philosophy) is the same with the ^ubstance; not by inclusion or inherence, as a
Mode or Accident is one with its Subject, but only in Composition, as Two
United Parts are one, which still retain their proper Essences, and can exi^t a
part: So that the Soul is an Essential part of the Composiu^um, and not the
Form thereof. Lastly, it is evident that the Specific difference and
distinction of Man is taken as well from one part as from the other: Man
differs from Angelic Beings in his Body, in his Soul from Inanimate Creatures;
yea in his Soul there is something which distinguishes him from Angels, and in
his Body, whereby he differs from other Bodies: And as these two parts are so
fitly composed and ordered, that they make one complete Being, there are some
particular Forms, Properties, and Modes, which discriminate him from all other
things in the whole System of this habitable Orb; as, Os homini sublime dedit
coelumque tureri
Jussit and erectos ad sidera tollere vultur, etc.


Now the definition which Aristotle gives of the Soul is far from explicating
the Nature thereof, Aristotle's Definition the Soul, vidiculous and Pedantic.
neither is it any way satisfactory, but Ignotum per ignotius explicans,
explaining an unknown thing, by a thing abundantly more unkown; and that is
this. Anima est (...), sive actus corporis Physici and Organici vitam habentis
in potentia: The Soul is an (...), or an act of a Physical; and Organic Body,
having Life in Power. An unintelligible Coacervation of Nonsense, for who can
interpret the meaning of Aristotle's (...) I cannot Imagine, unless he do as
Hermolaus a Famous Barbarian did, who when he had got some Society and Colloque
with the Devil, the Devil demanded of him, What he should do for him? He said
he desired nothing more than that ^e would explain unto him the word (...) in
Aristotle's Definition. Yea, I can truly say concerning this, with a Late
Author, in ^a re nemo crassius Aristotele peccavit qui talem protulit anima
definitionem quae omnibus plene rebus corventr^t, and veluti commune
emplastrum, vulueribus, omnibus inedetur, praeterea quid nobis distincti per
actusvocem innotescit, nihil amplius me Hercule, quam si quis lucem definiat
actum corporis lucidi and, calorem actum corporis calidi. In this thing no body
has more grossly erred than Aristotle, who brought forth such a Definition of
the Soul, which is applicable almost to all things, and as a Common Plaster
heals all Wounds: Besides what would he have us to understand by the word Act?
Nothing more truly than if anv one should define Light to be the Act of a Lucid
Body, and Heat the Act of a Calorific Body. How manisest an Ambiguity (says a
Learned Writer) and how great an Obscurity is there in the word Act, or (...),
which some translate perfection? Such definitions as these, are so far from
augmenting our Knowledge, and increasing our Literature, that they detrude us
into inextricable Laby rinths, and obnubilate those things which in themselves
are evident. Having thus laid down the reason why we cannot Assent to the
Definition of Arstoile, it is now incumbent upon us to produce the true and
genuine definition of the Soul; The true Definition of the Soul. Its Essence
consists in Cogitancy.
which is this: The Soul is an Incorporeal Cogitant Substance, or a Substance
of a Spiritual and Incorporeal Nature, whose Essence consists in Cogitation.
This Definition is very comprehensive, and very intelligible. The genus here
ascribed to a Soul is al Substance, it is not a Model, an Accident, a Form or
Quality; but a Being of a self-subsisting Nature: It is a Spiritual and
Incorporeal; Substance, not an Igneous, Fiery, Flammeous, Avery, Aetherial, or
any blementary Substance, but a Substance of higher Nature: It borrowed not its
Origin from Matter, nor derived its Rise from any Corporeal Being; its very
Essence and formal Reason is Cogitancy: It never cease from perfo^ming the
Action of thinking, be the Body never so profoundly Dormant, be tho Animal
Spirits never so Entoxicated, be the Brain never so much Stupefied, the Soul is
still Active, Cogitating, Ruminating or ^ontemplating; it may be troubled, and
diverted from being intent in it, Conceptions, but the Act of thinking can
never be impeded; neither can any thing put an end to its Cogative Operations:
There is no Narcotic Dose can cause the Soul to sleep, nor any Anodyne Medicine
to Eutoxicate an Active Spirit: No, for when the Ventricles of the Brain are.
Obstructed by Opium, the spissified, Juice of Soporiferous Poppies, or when the
Spirits are Locked up by Laudanum, a more refined and rectified Medicine, the
Soul is so far from being attached by the Narcotic. Virtue thereof, that it is
hereby rendered more intent in its Operations abstracted from. Matter. When the
Body is quiescent, Cogitancy has no dependence upon the Body.
it is not so diverted by sensible Objects, as it is in vigilance, when some
External Objects do always present themselves to the Organs of Sensation.

CHAP. III. Of the Origin of the Soul.
HAving laid down the true Definition of the Soul, and rersised the falsity of
Aristotle's Desinition, proved it to be spurious and illegitimate in the
precedent Chapter: We now proceed to in Rye and Origin; and here we have to
deal with a twofold Antagonist Teh First are, Those that suppost the Soul to
prae-exist, that is was created in the beginning of the World, and so had a
Subsittance long before it was united to the Body. The others are those that
ussert that the Soul is propagated, extraduce, or generated of the Soul of the
Parents. If the first Hypothesis were true, That the Soul does not praexest.
the Soul would have some remembrance of its former condition, the things which
it had cognizance of before it was incarcerated in the Body (as the Platonists
imagine) would certainly be now recorded: for the Memory is a faculty of the
Soul, and essential to the same. And although the Artcients did judge it
altogether incongruous to bring God upon the stage perpetually; Cudworth's
Intellectual Systeme of the Universe.
and make him immediately interpose every where in the Generation of Men, by
the miraculous Productions of Souls out of nothing; yet if we well consider, we
shall find that there may be very good reason on the other side for the
successive Divine Creation of Souls; namely, that God did not do all at first
that ever he could or would do, and put forth all his Creative Vigor at once in
a moment; ever afterward remaining a Spectator of the consequent results. God
might also for other good and wise ends, unknown to us, reserve to himself the
continual exercise of his Creative Power, in the successive production of new
Souls: The other is, Neither is it propogated Extraduce
that the Soul is propogated Extraduce from the Soul of the Parent, but the
absurdity of this Opinion, is evident enough from these following reasons.
Several Arguments against the Souls Propagt 1977.
(1). This Hypothesis supposes the Soul of the parent to be Discerpible, and
so to Communicate its own. Essence to the Constituting the Soul of the Foet us,
which can be granted to no Incorporeal Being. (2) It supposes multitudes of
Souls daily Created, which never come to perfection, as in Abortions, and
Effluxes of Seed, and this suppofition cannot but too much derogate from the
Wisdom of the Divine Architect. (3) Such is the Genesis of any thing as is the
Analysis; but this is the Analysis of Man, that the Body should return to the
dust whence it came, and the Spirit to God that gave it; so that seeing the
Spirit had its immediate Origin from God at its Creation, doubtless at its
Dissolution; it does immediately retuen to him. (4) Were the Soul Generated
Extraduce, it must either be from the Soul, or from the Body of the Parent, not
from the SOul; because nothing can be Generated of a thing Incorporeal,
Incorpireal Beings do not come under sch alterations; not from the Body (quia
nil dat quod in se non habet) Because no Incorporeal Thing can be produce out
of a Thing Corporeal: Not from both, for then the Soul of the Partus would
certainly participate of the Nature of them both, and so become a Substance
partly Corporeal, and partly Incorporeal. (5) The only Way and Method of its
being done, were it possible it could be done, is enough to Induce us to
believe the contrary; for then the Soul would be a Substance Compounded of Two
pieces of a Spirit, the one abstracted from the Spirit of the Male, the other
from the Soul of the Famale Parent, and these Two Pieccs or Paris Blended
together into one, to Compose a Rational Soul; which supposal, how Irrational,
Fictitious, and Ridiculous it is, any Rational Creature may presently apprehend.


The true Origin of a Soul viz. That it is immediately Created by God
It reamins then that we lay down the true Origin of the Soul; which is, that
it was immediately created by God, and infased into the Body This Opinion,
though it be ancient, yet several considerable reasons do incline me to believe
it as Orthodox and Genuine, and the verity of it may easily be manifested, not
only by the Confutation of the Two former Opinions; but from the Testimony of
Sacred Writ. viz. he formed the Spirit of Man within him.

CHAP. IV. Of the Union of the Soul to the Body.
THe Soul being a Substance of an Active and Vigorous Nature, God who is its
Prime Parent, being the Father of Spirits, deemed it requisite to bestow upon
it a Body dilicately Fabricated; not only that this might be its Domicil
wherein it should lie Incarcerate That Spirits stand in need of Bodies to Act
in.
(as the Platonists would have us believe) but he really intended that a part
of a Spirits felicity should consist in its Union to some body or other, which
it might make Use of, as a completely Organized Machin, whereby the better to
perform its Actions; therefore to Angelic Spirits he gave Ethereal, Lucid,
and Star-like Bodies; to the Souls of Men, while they continue in these Lower
Regions, Terrestial Bodies; yet curiously Fabricated and fit for their Motions
and Operations; but when they are divested of these by the assaults of Death,
then he orders them to enter into Aerial Vehicles, that so the easier they may
Soar into the invisible Regions of the Celestial Habitacle, and to retain
these till the Resurrection, when they shall reassume their former Bodies
Transformed and Modified into the Nature of Angelic ones. But I shall refer a
further Procedure upon this, till I come to the Immortality of the Soul, and
shall here treat a little of the manner of its Union to these our Bodies; This
is a thing so sublime, that it transcends the reach of humane intellect to
conceive; so capacious that it exceeds the limits of Reason to comprehend, so
abstruse and difficult, that it puzzels the Wits of all Philosophers to
demonstrate how Two Substances, the one Spiritual, the other Corporeal, things
of a quite contrary Nature should constitute but one Compositum; what Medium
these can be found for their Union; by what means the more principal part does
Vivifi^ and Actuate the part more inferior; what moving Virtue it does Exert
and Communicate to the Body, and by what kind of contact this is done? Surely
these are things that none but he that is the Sole Author of these Phoenomena
can demonstrate how, or in what manner they are performed; yet that they are
performed is very apparent, and such is the curiosity of that busy and
Pragmatic Creature Man, that he cannot contain himself from Prying into the
Causes of those things; the effects whereof declare them so to be, tho they are
never so abstruse: He thinks there is nothing so locked up in the Cabinet of
Nature; but by his diligence he may find the Key, or that there are no Rareties
Treasured up in the Magazine of this Created World, that he by a diligent
Scrutiny cannot find out: Some therefore will tell us, That in Man there are
Three Essential parts, a Body, a Soul, and a Spirit; the Body say they, is a
Substance made of the Grosser Matter, viz. Flesh, Blood, Bones, Nerves,
Cartilages, Veins, Arteries, etc. The Soul is a Substance tho Material, yet of
an AEtherial and Subtilized Nature, Fiery and Flammeous, Participating both of
the Nature of a Body and of a Spirit, and the Spirit which is their Third
ingredient in their noble Composition, is altogether Incorporeal United to the
Body, by the mediation of the Corporeal Soul.

Others will affirm that the Soul being the Ruling part, The Cartesians.
sits like a Queen in the Palace of the Brain upon her Throne the Conarion,
which is a little Glans^lous Body almost in the midst thereof; there she
Contemplates of the Regions of her Kingdom, and the Members of that
Commonwealth, being always attended with her Viceroy the Animal Spirit,
whereby she does at Pleasure send an Embassy into the most Remote Parts of this
little World through the nerves. But how well the Authors or Abetters of these Two
Opinions have hit the Mark. I leave to the Credulous Reader to determine;
concerning the First, I shall only Query a few things; That the Soul is not
United by the Mediatioc of the Corporeal Soul evinced by several Queries.
(1) Whether it be sense to say a Meterial Soul? (2) Suppose it be, whether
there be any such thing as they imagine by it in the Body of Man? (3) Whether
Body and Spirit be not things of a quite different Nature? (4) Whether
Rarefaction or Subtilization make a Body to be less a Body, or more a Spirit,
than it was before? (5) Whether a Red-hot Iron have any nearer Approximation to
Life than it had before, or the Flame of a Candle, than the Extinguished Snuff
or Tallow of it? (6) Whether this Corporeal Spirit be Semicorporeal and
Semi-spiritual? As for the Second Opinion, let me Query: Neither is it only
United to the Glandula pinealis, and thence Influences the Body.

First, why the Soul should sit upon the Glandula pinealis more than upon any
other part of the Body, and whence it appears that it does? (2) Whether or no
it be extended through every part of the Conarion, or is only one point of it? If
extended through every part, then why not as well through the whole Body? If in a
point how it Acts and Insluenceth the Body? (3) Whether this Virtue which the
Soul does Exert and Communicate in its Operations, be the Essence of the Soul
or no? Now these Two Opinions seeming to disagree with the Canons of Reason and
True Philosophy; it will not I hope be unkindly resented, if I exhibit another
to the deliberate perusal of the unprejudiced, which although at the first it may
seem a little Uncouth; yet I am persuaded after some Consideration, it will
appear to be attended with lesser Inducements, to make any Wise Man Incredulous
of its verity than either of the former, But by its Extension through the the
Body, it Actuates all its parts.
and that is this, that the Soul is United to the Body by its Extension through
every one of its parts; that the Soul is Extended, is not my busienss here to
Demonstrate, having designed a particular Chapter for it, to which I shall
refer the Reader, and where I shall endeavor to remove the difficulties
wherewith this Truth may seem to be burdened: If this then be proved, how
easily may we Imagine an Union of the Soul with the Body, to result from its
Extension, and Diffusion through the parts thereof?

CHAP. V. Of the Immateriality of the Soul.
THe Immateriality of the Soul is a Truth so Undubitably certain, and so
generally believed, that those who have arrived to that height of Audacity as
to deny it, are justly looked upon to be no better than Atheists; for whoever
is become so grossly erroneous, as to believe his own Soul to be material, is
consequently reduced (may I say Blasphemously) to Averr the Nullity of A Deity.
O Incredulity not to be parallelled! O Atheism, absurd and abominable! the
Immateriality of the Soul may be evinced, First from its Activity, In-activity
is a property pertinent to Matter, for Matter can exert no action of it self,
no not so much as Local Motion, unless it be agitated by some External Cause,
there being no such thing as Natural Motion, Matter being a Thing Naturally
Inert and Passive, but a Spirit which is of a Nature far transcending Matter,
is always Active, and therefore Plato called. it (...), self-moving, it is an
imprevaricable Law with all Bodies, that nothing whatsoever can move, unless it
be moved by another; and hence it follows that the Soul that moves without
being excited by any thing else; Acting and Operating from its own Intrinsic
Power and Faculty, is of a higher Race than they, From its large Capacity and
Discursive Faculty.
and consequently Incorporeal. (2) The large Capacity and Discoursive Faculty
of the Soul Demonstrates its Spirituality, when we consider the multitude of
things that are at once contained in the Soul; as likewise its Power of
Exerting those Notions and Apprehensions, which it had Imbibed in Discourse,
how can we Conceive any otherwise than that she is Spiritual in her Essence.
(3) Its Simplicity, Uniformity, Immortality, Self-reflection and Perfection,
are Infallible Manifesto's of its Incorporeity; we may also add Cogitation, a
Property only Essential to a Spiritual Being; From Cogitation.
for as we said before, Matter cannot move it self; how much less then is it
able to perform that excellent Operation of deeming and thinking? I am not
Insensible how some do endeavor to evade this Argument, for a Late Author does
pretend to Solve the manner of Cogitation, Mr. Hobbs his Evasion.
without recourse to an Incorporeal Principle; for faith he, the very Motion of
Reaction of one part of Matter on another, or at least the Continuation of this
Reaction, can easily effect this; for we find by experience, when we are
Occupied in serious Meditations, or diligently incumbent upon our Studies, a
great Commotion in our Heads, and a kind of Confusion in the Parts of the
Brain, which would not happen, except Perception and Cogitation did depend on
Matter, and were made by the Motion and Agitation of the Particles of the Brain.

There might be some probability in this, Its Solution.
if the Author could drive us to believe that there was nothing else but Matter
in the whole Universe; but seeing this is altogether impossible, we shall
condemn the other as false and ridiculous; for if this were true, why may not
also the Bodies of Men, when defunct, be endued with the same Power of
Cogitation? For they are then no less capable of Reaction, or Susceptive of
Corporeal Impressions; besides if we divide Matter into Monads, or Minute
Physic Particles; I Query, whether these Monads being separated one from
another, may be capable of Perception and Cogitation, or only the Compositum
resulting therefrom? Now I think there is no one so a Friend to Atoms, that he
should think them to have Intelligence; for who can believe that the smallest
Particle of Matter is endued with Sense and Perception? But if it be the whole
Compositum, what can be the Reason that out of Insensible Things, should Emerge
Things capable of Sense and Apprehension? How is it possible that from the
various Coition of Atoms, which are Senseless and Incogitant, should be
produced a Cogitant Animal?

Having thus proved the Immateriality of the Soul, A Digression concerning the
Soul of Brutes.
I must crave leave here to make a little Digression concerning the Souls of
Brutes, whether their Souls be Immaterial or no? Concerning which, I shall
Nominate Three Opinions, all which have been very plausibly received by many:
Bacon, Dr. Willis and Gassendus, who who do thus Philosophize; viz.

That Brutes have a Corporeal Soul, which being of an Ignite and Fiery Nature
does move the Organized Bodies of these Animals: For this See Willis de Anima
Brutorum, Du. Hamel, de Corpore Animato: Bacon's Natural History, and Learned.
Mr. Gales Philosophia Generalis.

Secondly, The Hypothesis of Renowned Des Carts, viz.

That Brutes are nothing else but Machins curiously Fabricated by the chief
Opifex of Nature; being Acted and Moved by no other than a Mechanic Motion,
having neither Sense nor Perception in them; and this Opinion, says Monsieur
Fernelius, seems to be taken from the Philosophy of Moses, where the Blood is
said to be the Life of Brutes. Le-Grand also in his Book, De Carentia sensus
and cognitionis in Brutis, has endeavored to defend Des Carts, and prove
that Brutes are nothing but Natural Horologies, or Organs of Clock-work, being
altogether as void of Sense, as Clocks performing their Motion the same way.

The Third is the Hypothesis of Famous Derodon, Dr. More, and Dr. Cudworth,
viz. That Brutes are Acted by an Incorporeal Soul, not differing in kind from
Man's, but only in degree.

That Bruits have not Material Souls.
From the First of these I must needs acknowledge my Dissent, or contradict my
self in what I said before; (yet still retaining that Reverence and Adoration I
bear to the Learning of its Authors.) For I have already declared that there is
contrariety between Matter and Spirit; so that a Material, or Corporeal Spirit,
is a contradiction, and I have already said, that Matter of it self is Inactive
Senseless and Inert: Dr. Cudworth's System of the Universe.
Neither can the Souls of Brutes, says a late Learned Philosopher, be imagined
to be Flame and Fire; for Flame and Fire is nothing but such a Motion of the
Insensible Parts of a Body, as whereby they are violently agitated, and many
times dissipated for begetting those Flames of Light and Heat in the Animals:
Now there is no difficulty at all in conceiving that Insensible Particles of a
Body which were before Quiescent, may be put into Montion; this being nothing
but a new Modification of them, and no Entity really distinct from the
Substance of the Body; as Life, Sense, and Cogitation are; and therefore it is
but a crude Conceit of Atheists and Corporealists, That Souls are nothing but
Fiery and Flammeous Bodies; for tho Heat in the Bodies of Animals, be a
necessary Instrument for the Life and Soul to act by in them, yet it is a thing
really distinct from Life. We might also add, That according to this Hypothesis
the Souls of Animals could not be Numerically the same through the whole space of
their Lives, since that Fire, that needs a Pabulum to prey on, does not always
continue one and the same Numeric Substance; the Soul of a newborn Animal
could no more be the same with the Sold of that Animal Seven years after, than
the Flame of a new-lighted Candle is the same with that which twinkles in the
Socket; which indeed are no more the same, than a River or Stream is the same
at several distances of time: Which Reason may be farther extended to prove the
Soul to be no Body at all, since the Bodies of Animals are in a perpetual Flux.

Neither are they Insensible Machins.
Concerning the Second Hypothesis, which is the Cartesian, give me leave to say
with an Ingenous Author, Nec demum negaverim, inquit, animalium corpora esse
Machinas miro artificio coagmentatas, sed nihil esse quam Machinas, qua nihil
sentiant, nihil agant ac pulsu tantum agitentur alieno, id vero adduci non
possum ut credam; at que eos qui contradicunt appello, an nullam in cane
Venatico cum per compendia viarum leporem insequitur nullam in leporibus cum
per varios flexus canes insequentes cludunt, nullam in bestiis quae preda
vivunt, aut cognitionem immo and caliditatem and varios ut it a dicam arts
animadverterunt?

I will not deny, says he, but that the Bodies of Animals are Machins by
admirable Artifice compacted together, but that they are nothing else but
Machins without Sense and Action, and only moved by Extern Impulse, is a thing
I can never be reduced to believe; and I challenge those that contradict me, to
tell me, Whether in a Hungting Dog that follows the Hare the shortest way, or
in a Hare indeavoring to delude the Dogs by her various turnings, or in those
Beasts that live upon the Prey, they have not observed some Cognition,
Sagacity, yea may I say Various Arts? What do these Mechanics intend; who do
not only deprive Brutes of Cognition, but also of Sense? O absurdity contrary
to common Experience! Do we not daily see Brutes (I mean the more perfect ones)
to receive Sounds in their Ears, and thereby excited to Labor, Meat, Drink,
and diverse Actions? And who will deny that a Dog, a Cat, or an Ape, do discern
their Food by Smells? And certainly this Hypothesis was not dreamt on when this
Distic was made: Nos Aper auditu, Linx visu, simia gustu,
Vultur odoratu: praeceelit Aranea tactu.


That Brutes are Senseless, and Inanimate things can no way be conceived; how
then could Spiders so Geometrically weave their Cobwebs, and Bees so exactly
form their Cellula's of an Hexagonic or Sexangular Figure? How could Foxes by
that craft and cunning catch Birds, and deceive the Dogs that pursure them? etc.

But that Brutes also have Immaterial Souls.
The Third Hypothesis then is that which seems to be most Genuine and Rational:
For if the Soul of Brutes be not Incorporeal, the Soul of Man can never be
proved to be Incorporeal; for either all Conscious or Cogitative Beings are
Incorporeal, or else nothing can be evinced to be Incorporeal Those very things
which we menrioned before to prove the Immateriality of the Soul of Man, are
apparently to be seen in Brutes, as Activity, Discoursive Faculty, Uniformity,
Cogitation, Cognition, and Sagacity, and the Actions we daily see performed by
them, seem more like the Actions of Rational Souls than of Dead and Senseless
Matter; as Doubting, Resolving, Inventing, etc. as is evident in Hawks, Dogs,
Jaccals, Foxes, etc. and then by the Docility of them, and certain Continuate
Actions of a long Tract of Time, so orderly performed by them, that they seem
to argue Knowledge in them, rather than to proceed from Brutish Matter: Nay
more, in some Beasts there is Prescience of Future Events and Providence, the
Knowing of Things never seen before, and such other Actions observed in some
Living Creatures, which seem to be even above the Reason that is in Man
himself. upon us, That this Hypothesis supposes also the Souls of Brutes to be
Immortal; which is a Notion dangerous and destructive (say they) to the Rules
of Christianity.

To this I answer, That there seems to be no great Reason why it should be
thought absurd to grant Perpetuity of Duration, to the Souls of Brutes, any
more than to every Atome of Matter or Particle of Dust in the whole World; so
that this Objection has nothing of validity in it; for they are Durable,
whether Corporeal or Incorporeal: For Heaven and Earth, and all the parts
constituting the same, will never be annihilated, but metamorphized and
changed: And so the innumerable Company of Souls that were created by God, may
very well be supposed to survive their separation from the (...) which they
actuate; and so continue in a State of Immortality: being continually preserved
by the Almighty Concourse of Him that created them. Not that I think the Souls
of Brutes to be capable of that Felicity or Misery the Souls of Men are; but we
may either suppose them to proceed from the Anima Mundi, or Soul of the World;
which may also be supposed to be Immaterial, and so return to it at the
Dissolution; or rather, that when they are divested of their Bodies, they take
to themselves Aereal ones. Some there are that will not admit, but explode
Aereal Vehicles; who suppose, That the Souls of them surviving Death, does so
continue in a State of Inactivity, Insensibility, Sleep, Silence, and Stupor,
until by a Transmigration they reassume new Bodies to act in: for while
Spirits are divested of Bodies, they cannot exert any Action. But this
Supposition would destroy our own Assertion alrady laid down concerning the
Active and Cogitant Nature of the Soul. But least I should exceed my bounds, in
too long a Digression, I shall now come to the next general Head proposed in
Order to treat on; and that is, The Immortality of the Soul.

CHAP. VI. Of the Immortality of the Soul.
The Immortality of the Soul Proved
FRom what has been already alleged concerning the Nature, Origin, Union, and
Immateriality of the Soul, may with great facility, and by necessary
consequence be gathered its Immortality also; and the fore-precedent things may
serve for Topics, whence we may raise so many Arguments clearly to evince the
same.

From its Nature.
The Nature of the Soul is so evident a Demonstraitve of its Immortality, that
whoever understands the one, cannot but easily apprehend the other. Is not
Spirituality a plain Manifesto of a Durable Existence; and Activity, and
Cogitancy, and inseparable Concomitant of Immortality? How undeniably does
Plato, the Mirror of the Mirror of the World for Learning, demonstrates from
the Souls being (...), Self-moving; that it is also; (...), Ever-moving: Is it
probable that those inestimable Creatures (whose very Essence declares them to
be made for a high or end), were created for nothing but to actuate these
Bodies; for a momentary space, and then to return to nothing? Shall those Pious
and Divine Souls, who for hopes of the Fruition of the endless Pleasures of
another Life, have which great alacrity and content of mind undergone the
difficulties of this Mortal Pilgrimage, find nothing at the end of their
Journey for their reward but a final annihilation? And shall the malevolent
Slaves of the Devil, who have lavished their Patrimony, and spent their days in
serving the God of this World, and in doing Obeisance to their Lusts and
Debauched Appetites, be discharged from the Penalty of their horrid Crimes by a
Cessation of their Essence? What can prove a greater Derogation from the Equity
of a just Creator, than so gross and Supposition? Will He, From its Origin.
who has formed a Creature so like himself, so soon destroy it? What can be a
greater Reflection on his Wisdom? Shall that puff of Divine Breath, which had
its Rise from Gods Immediate Inspiration, subside, vanish, and become a Non
entity? Certainly That hand that could immediately produce a Being out of
nothing, can by an Immediate Concourse preserve it from relapsing into nothing
again; neither are there any Motives to persuade him that can do this, to will
the contrary: Were the Soul generated from the Parent, it might then be
corruptible, but it has its Origin from a higher Principle, it must needs the^
be of a Nature more lasting, permanent, and durable.

From its Union.
Its Union also is another Test o^ its Immortal Existence, if it were united to
the Animal Spriit by in near Approximation to the Nature of it, or if fixed and
fastened to the Pineale Glandule, this might be a plausible Pretext to make us
entertain some thoughts of its Mortality and Perishing with the Body; whereby
it is so much influenced: but seeing its Union is caused by its permeating the
Body, and extending and diffusing it self through every part thereof; and so by a
vigorous Energy actuating the same, certainly all such Imaginations conceiving
it Mortal, are now banished and exploded.

Our Fourth Topic is not likewise empty of proof to demonstrate this Truth.
From its Immateriality.
Were the Soul a Substance compounded of the Four Elements or Five Chymic
Principles Blended together, we should have little reason to plead for its
Immortality, because all Corporeal Things are subject to Corruption, and have
that within the verge of their own Essence, that in time will cause a
Dissolution in them, Nam contraria contraiis destruuntur. For Contrary Things
are destroyed by their Contraries, and all Mixed Bodies have within themselves
Qualities (may I call, them so) repugnant one to another; but the Soul, as has
already been proved, being of an Immaterial Nature, is not obnoxious to any
such Cause of Mutability: And Nature it self teaches us, That whatsoever has
a Being, will be possessed of it, until it meet with something to destroy it:
But now what contrary Principles, opposite Elements, or repugnant Qualities,
can Psycotomists or Anatomists of Souls (I mean those that hold them Material
and so Mortal) find in the Analysis of Spirits? There are masty more Arguments
of undubitable Verity and undeniable Evidence, to evince the Souls Immortality;
as its Infinite Desire of, More Mediums to prove the same.
and its Solicitude about an Immortal State, in Dissatisfaction under all the
Felicities of this Life, and vehement Appetite and Desire after Eternal
Beatitude; the Fear of Death, the Remorses and Stings of Conscience which all
Men fall under upon the Sense of Guilt. But the Largeness of the Subject, and
the intended Brevity to which I have limited myself, will admit only of a
Transitory Glance upon every Thing that occurs to our Speculation. Of the Stale
of the Soul after Death, that it does not sleep.
Having therefore proceeded thus far, I shall add a little concerning the
Manner of the State the Soul remains in immediately after its Dissolution from
the Body, and that it, That I do not believe, as some do, That it remains in a
State of Sleep and Stupor, till the Resurrection, but that it takes up an
Aereal Vehicle, and hereby its Motion is made Feasible; which if the Soul were
devoid of a Body, it would be impossible to perform. If the Soul, immediately
after its Separation from the Body, pass not only into a State but a Place
either of Eternal Misery or Everlasting Happiness, it is contrary to the Laws
of Nature it should be carried thither without a Body; That Souls assume
Vehicles after Death.
for Loco motion is a Property of Bodies, and no way to be performed by Spirits
separate from Bodies.

Besides (to argue for Vehicles) it is a Privilege proper only to the Deity,
to live and act alone without Vital Union with a Body.

It is Natural to a Soul to inliven a Body, and therefore it is not probable
that it should be kept so long in an Unnatural State of Separation.

Again, It is more than probable from Scripture, That the Souls of Wicked Men
after Death have Punishment of Sense and Pain, besides Remorse of Conscience.
But lest some out of prejudice should condemn this Opinion of Vehicles, as an
Opinion newly feigned and foisted into Phylosophic Books, more out of Novelty
than Probability; or as an Assertion dangerous or inconsistent with true Faith
and Religion; Vehicles owned by the Ancient Fathers.
I shall produce now the Testimonies of some of the Ancient Fathers, who were
the Abettors of this Hypothesis.

Tertullian and Irenaeus were of this Persuasion, Origin also was of the same
mind: Viz.

That Souls after Death have certain Subtle Bodies, retaining the same
Characterizing Form which their Terrestrial Bodies had; and that the
Apparitions of the Dead, are the Souls themselves surviving in a Luciform Body.
Augustine also grants, That Souls after Death cannot be carried to any
Corporeal Place, or locally moved, without Bodies. Nor is it conceivable how
Imperfect Beings could have Sense or Imagination without Bodies, says Origin:
For, Origin contra Cells.
says he, It is the nature of an Incorporeal Thing, always to stand in need of
a Body suitable to the Place wherein it is. And although I must confess Origin did
maintain some things contrary to the Doctrine of the Church, yet his Authority
is no less Authentic for this thing than the Authority of the rest; because
this was never reckoned in the Catalogue of his Errors.

Let me add likewise, I That our Savior's bidding his Disciples feel him, The
same implicitly evidenced from Scripture, and from Moses and Elias appearing
upon the Mount. And from all other Apparitions.
and telling them a Spirit had not Flesh and Bones, that is, no Solid Body,
seems to imply that they have Thinner Bodies, which they may visibly appear in:
And also Moses and Elias visibly appearing upon the Mount, argues, That they
had real Visible Bodies.

Hereby likewise we may very easily solve the Phenomenon of the Apparitions of
Men and Women after their death, without imagining that they take up their
Bodies when Defunct, and walk about with them; or that these Bodies are
actuated by the Devil; for then they would become Objects of the Sense of
Feeling: but those that have seen such Apparitions, do declare the contrary,
finding no resistance when they strike at them: Likewise their vanishing and
seeming to penetrate Doors or Walls, shows they are not those Bodies; and
certainly they cannot be supposed to be the Souls themselves ^ separate from
all Body; for they are never visible. But if we will admit this Hypothesis of
Vehicles, we may easily imagine how they retain their Visibility, by causing
only a Reflection of Light, and lose their Tractability by reason of their
Tenuity and Rarity.

Now at the Resurrection, Of the Resurrection and New Modification of the Body.
these Souls which have dwelt thus long in Vehicles, do reassume those very
Numeric Bodies which before they deposed; yet not such gross corruptible ones
as they then were: For the happiness of Souls consists not in their
Conjunction with such gross Terrestrial Bodies as these we now have; Scripture
as well as Philosophy complaining of them as a heavy: load and burden to the
Soul but the Soul at the Resurrection will assume a Body Immortal,
Incorruptible, Glorious, and Lucid, Star-like and Spiritual. Heavenly and
Angelic, not this Fleshy Body gilded and varnished on the outside only, but
changed thro-out: Our Souls are Strangers and Pilgrims in these Terrestrial
Bodies, their proper Home and Country is their Heavenly Body; these very
Bodies we now carry about with us, shall then be transformed and modified into
a Heavenly Form; and this is very agreeable with the Principles of Nature; for
according to Philosophy, the Grossest Body, may by mere Motion be reduced to
the Rarity and Tenuity of the Finest Ether; and if thus, what then cannot the
Wise Fabricator of Heaven and Earth perform?

CHAP. VII. Of the Extension of the Soul.
HAving already asserted the Extension of the Soul through the Body, it is
requisite I should a little demonstrate, or at least explicate, my meaning in
this my Assertion; then if I remove those Difficulties which this Hypothesis
may seem to labor under, and manifest the contrary Assertion to be attended
with far more and greater difficulties, I hope I shall have performed my
promise. As for the Objections against the Souls Extension, I know but two that
have any thing of validity or cogency in them; nor they neither, when rightly
considered. The First is this, viz.

That this supposes the Soul to be Material, for say they, Extension is an
Essential Property of Bodies, Carts Princ. Phil. Pars 1. Sect. 4.
and applicable to no other Creature; yea says Carts, The very Nature and
Essence of a Body consists in nothing else but Extention.

To this I answer, That both Reason and Experience attest the contrary; for
were Extension a Property only pertinent to Matter, then the Notion of a
Vacuum, proved by unanswerable Arguments, Arguments to prove a Vacuum.
and demonstrated by visible Experiments, must be quite exploded: Are not Local
Motion, Rarefaction, Condensation, Levity, and Ponderosity, the Corporeity of
Light, and its Expansion through the Air, Rational Grounds to induce us to believe
that there are certain Disseminate Vacuola in Bodies? Which Mediums you may see
exceedingly well promoted by Renowned Gassendus, Gassendus in Epicurum.
a Learned Senator of Epicurus, and Eminent Dr. Charleton, Charleton's
Philosophy.
a Proselyte of Gassendus; but if Reason will not evince, let Experiments
demonstrate. The Torrecellian Experiment, so often mentioned in the Elaborate
Works of the Royal Society, is an infallible Proof hereof: And has not the
Honorable Robert Boil, Boyle's Physico-Mechanic Experiments.
made it indubitably certain by his Excellent Instrument the Air Pump. How this
Experiment is performed by it, you may see in his Physico-Mechanic Experiments.
Also the Experiment of the Aeolipile does plainly evince it: And surely Dr.
Henshaw, Dr. Henshaw's Aerochalinos.
Member of the Royal Society, does suppose the being of a Vacuum, when in his
Aerochalinos he lays down a Method of Building of a Domicil to change the state
of the included Air, A Vacuum demonstrated by Experiments.
by letting it out and in at pleasure. This is so evidently demonstrated by our
late Ingenuous Philosophers, that I think none now (but those who through
prejudice are resolved to penetrate no farther into the Bowels of Nature, or
make no deeper Scrutiny into the Mysteries of Philosophy, than is consistent
with the Old Philosophy, or than the Ancient Libels lead into) can be so
Irrational, as to deny it: I shall therefore also, as the Writers of this Age
do, take it for granted, and make this my Medium to beat down the Pretended
Maxim; viz. That Extension is a property essential to Matter; for if there be a
Vacuum, then undoubtedly there may be Extension without a Body; and then
Extension is no less congruous to Incorporeal than to Corporeal Beings. These
Corporealists are quite mistaken in the Notion of Space, for by it we do not
mean Superficies corporis ambientis, The true Nature of Space.
as Aristotle feigned, and whom Carts seems to abett in his Princip. Phil.
Part. 2. Sect. 15. Nor as Carts really expresses, Sect 11. a thing not really
different from a Corporeal Substance; but a real Entity, distinct from all
other Beings: for En^ being the most General Genus, is not so narrow, as to
admit of a Division, but into two parts; viz. Substance and Accident: but the
genuine Division of En^ is into Substance, Mode, Space, and Time; which two
last are more general than the other, and can no way be comprehended under
either of them. Having thus manifested the fallacy and invalidity of the
forementioned Objection, I shall now proceed to the other, which is,

That if the Soul be extended, it is then divisible; for, say they, if it be
extended, it is constituted of parts; and whatsoever is so, may be divided. Now
to suppose the Soul to be divisible, is very Absurd and Irrational.

To this I also answer, That by Extension I do not mean a rendering a Thing
liable to actual division, but a real amplitude of Essence. Extension is not
the Ratio formalis of Bodies, Wherein the Nature of Extension does consist.
but only as Dr. Glisson in his Book De Natura Substantiae Energetica, says,
An Accidental Property; which belongs to all Substances both Material and
Immaterial: Besides, I grant that Spirits are divisible Intelectually, but
Physically Indiscerpible; for what is Intellectually divisible, may be
Physically Indiscerpible; as it s manifest in the Nature of God, whose very
Idea implies indiscerpibility; the contrary being so plain a Contradiction. A
Dif^nction between Divisible and Discerpible, and that the Soul is Mentally
Divisible, tho Actually Indiscerpible.
By Intellectual Divisibility, I mean nothing but that Spirits being extended
through a divisibile Space, with the Division of the Space there may be a Mental
Division of the Spirits in it; but Discerpibility is, when a Thing may actually
be separated one part from another; this is no way congruous to a Spirit. So
that a Spirit may be divisible, although Indiscerpible; which may serve for a
sufficient Solution to this Objection.

The Difficultes that attend the other Hypothesis are unanswerable; That the
Soul is not Totum in toto and totum in qualibet part Corporis; as the
Peripatetics assert.
If the Soul be not extended, we must either suppose it to be, Totum in Toto
and Totum in qualibet part corporis, The whole Soul in the whole Body, and the
whole Soul in every part of the Body; as the Peripatetics imagine it to be: Or
else, That it exists but in one particular Point, and then virtually actuates
the whole Body: Which Supposals, how contrary to Reason they are, need not much
Demonstration. As for the First, there is no contradiction I ever yet heard of,
can parallel it; for it is as much as to say, That One and a Thousand, are one
and the same number: For we will suppose the Body to be constituted of a
thousand parts (which it may very easily be divided into) and that if a whole
Soul can be essentially in every one of these parts, we must needs then suppose
there to be a thousand whole Substances; and how these thousand whole
Substances should be but one whole Substance, is not only inexplicable but
irrational and inimaginable: If the whole Soul (that is, every thing of the
Soul) be in the little finger, who can possibly imagine any thing of it, much
less its total Substance, to be in any other part of the Body; unless they will
also affirm, That Spirits have a peculiar power of being present in many places
at one and the same instant; and so rob God of the Attribute of his
Omnipresence: making Spirits to participate of the same.

The next Supposition, Tho an immediate consequence of the Non-Extension of
Spirits (for if they are not extended through a Space Divisible, they must needs
be limited to an Indivisible Point) is not much less absurd; Neither is the
Soul in an Indivisible Point.
for how then can it be united to the Body, and as I said already, how can it
exert any action upon the Body? They will say, Perhaps, it operates upon the
Body virtually, by causing a virtual Impulse upon the Organs of it; but this
virtue must be either something of the Essence of the Soul, or something
distinct from it: If it be the Essence of the Soul communicated to the Body,
then its Extension is granted; Its Extension hence undeniably demonstrated.
but if it be something distinct, I answer, Nill dat quod in se non habet. Some
of the Assertors of the Souls Existence in a Point, are possessed with such
merry Conceits of Spirits, as to imagine that a thousand Souls can dance upon
the point of a Needle at one and the same time, See Dr. Move's Divine
Dialogues; p. 1.
and have room enough to tread their Paces.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Faculties of the Soul.
BY the Faculties of the Soul, What the Faculties of the Soul are.
we are not to understand things really distinct from the Humane Soul, nor each
from other; as the Aristoteleans would have the Understanding and Will to be
but only different Modes and Ways of the Souls Operation, specified by their
Formal Objects and Acts. Thus as it forms Idea's and Notions of Things, it may
be termed the Understanding; but as it is allured by the goodness of the
Object, and thence moves toward it, it may be termed the Will. How the
Understanding and Will differ. Gale's Philos. Generalis.
The Understanding is conversant about its Object, as true, the Will about its
Object, as good: As the Soul does contemplate, deliberate, judge, discourse,
and conclude, it may be termed the Understanding; but as it chooses,
prosecutes, or avoids an Object, so it may be termed the Will. Now the several
distinct Modes of the Souls acting, are commonly reduced to five Heads; which
make the same number of Faculties: The Number of the Faculties.
and they are the Understanding, the Will, the Conscience, the Affections, and
the Memory.

The Understanding is called by the Sacred Philosopher, Prove. 20.27.
The Candle of the Lord. This is it that governs the inferior Faculties, The
Understanding.
especially the Imagination and the Fantasy; the Formal proper Object of the
Intellect is Truth, Its Formal Object Truth.
which as one very well asserts, is congeneal and nearly allied to the Mind: It
has Nine Intellectile Habits, Opinion, Experience, Imitation, Faith, Sapience,
Intelligence, Science, Prudence, and Art; to which, some add Cognition; which
is (...), a Representamen of a Thing in the Intellect.

The Will by Plato is defined, The Will.
(...), a Desire with right Reason, or (...), a Rational Appetite.

The Action of the Will is twofold, the one consists in effectu, the other cum
affectu; from which Distinction that Common Distribution of Voluntary Humane
Actions into Elicit and Imperate, had its Origin, the Object of the Will is
Good, The Object of the Will good.
and that which terminates and bound^ its Appetite finally is the chiefe^ Good
and last End.

The Conscience no distinct Faculty.
The Conscience is a Reflection of the Understanding upon Man's Actions, together
with a Sentencing them to be either Good or Evil according to those
unquestionable Pinciples already received; Dr. Ames.
or it is the judgment of man concerning himself; as it is subjected to the
Judgment of God. So that properly the Conscience is no distinct Faculty from
the Understanding; this is that, Prove. 22.27.
Search that which is made by that Candle of the Lord in the lower parts of the
Belly. It is called a Judgment, that thereby it may be distinguished from a
naked Apprehension of the Truth; for it always contains in it a firm consent;
and we do not take Judgment here for an Habitual only, but also for an Actual
Judgment.

The Affections not distinct from the Will.
The Affections also do not properly make a distinct Faculty from the Will, the
Voluntas in affectu, or the ellicit root thereof; God being the Object of the
Will, having many Kinds and Degrees, according to the different manner of the
Souls consideration of it, it excites different Affections in the Will; and
first of all, when any thing good or convenient, or at least so apprehended by
us to be, is represented to us; it presently excites in us the Passion or
Affection of Love to it, Carts.
that we prosecute it with a desire, that it may either be united to us, or
remain with us; but on the contrary, when any evil or noxious thing is exposed
to us, it immediately stimulates us to Hatred the opposite Affection: to Love
as it is an Affection of Union with present Good is often joined Joy, and to
Hatred Sadness; and when there is a full and perfect possession of this desired
Good, then there is pure Love, and solid and sincere Rejoicing; but when there
is not a perfect Fruition of the thing beloved, then Desire is joined with
Love, and Sadness is mixed with Rejoicing. Likewise, with a desire of Absent
good there is mixed Hope and Fear, according to the probability of a good or
evil Event, Issue, Effect, or Consequence of the matter; which Hope, if it be
very great, is called Faith and Confidence; but when small or no hope is mixed
with abundance of fear, it degenerates into those spurious Affections of
Unbelief and Despair. These Affections, especially Love and Desire, do vary and
differ much, according to the Opinion we have of the value of the Object; for
when the intrinsic or inward perfection and pulchritude of the Object is only
looked upon, then there is a Love of Complacency, and the Object is properly
said to please; to this is opposed an Aversion from an Object, by the
consideration of the contrary Imperfection and Deformity, but when we consider
of this Perfection as convenient for our selves, and see it agreeable with our
Nature; How Love is caused, its several kinds.
this Love of Complacency is turned into a Love of Concupiscence, which is
another Affection of the Soul, and properly another kind of Love. Again, When
the Lover has a less esteem of the Object than of Himself, there thence
arises a simple Propension, which is called Benevolence. Thus we love a Flower
or Bird, etc. When we love an Object equally with our selves, thence springs
Friendship and Charity, and such is the Love of Parents to Children, and
Conjugal Relations one to another; but when there is a higher Valuation of the
Object than of our Selves, as we all ought to have of God, our Prince, City,
Country, Parents, and Friends, that are ^eminent in Virtue and Merits, this
kind of Love is called Devotion. Among all the Affections and Passions of the
Soul, Love bears sway; Love the chief Affection of the Soul.
for the several Affections of the Will, are but various Forms and Shapes of
Love, which gives swift Wings and strong Legs to the Soul, to pursue what it
loves. There is no Affection of the Soul but Love has it at command; the Will
governs all inferior Faculties of the Soul; but she is governed by Love. Plato
makes Love to be the great Hero that governs the World, so universal is its
Empire and Dominions. If the Object beloved be absent, then Love fixes the Will
with ardent desires after it; if the Absence be attended with Difficulties or
Affronts, than Love goes forth by Anger and Fear, to conflict therewith; and
Hope with Courage, for the attaining the Object beloved. If the Good be
present, then Love embraces it with Complacence and Delight; if lost, then it
bewails its loss with Sorrow, and according to the Nature and Measure of the
Love, such will be the Nature and Measure of the other Affections that issue
from it: But we will say no more of the Affections.

The Memory.
The Memory is that Faculty of the Soul, whereby it treasures up those things it
has received; this is the Magazine of Notions, it is the Souls grand
Repository, wherein it reconds its Riches, and draws them forth according to
Pleasure.

CHAP. IX. Of the Parts of the Body.
HAving thus far considered Man in his more Sublime, Superior, and Celestial
Part, we now descend to that Part which is Inferior, and more Terrestrial; viz.
The Body.

And indeed it is not a Work, much less difficult, accurately to delineat^ the
Parts of the Body, than to explicate the Nature of the Soul; the the manner of
acquiring Knowledge in both these Parts is much different. For the one is done
by Profound Contemplation, the other by Ocular Inspection; the one by a Mental
Notional Penetrateing into the Bowels of a Spirit, the other by a^ Actual and
Manual Dissection of Bodies. As for the Doctrine of the first, which is (...),
Pneumatology, we have already handled it* We come now to the Somatologio Part,
which is strictly called, Anatomy: Anatomy its Subject.
Anatomy then is a Science which has the Body of any Animal for its Subject,
whether Terrestrial, Volatile, or Aquatile; yet among the number of Animals,
the Body of Man is to be preferred, both because of the Pefection of its Parts,
and because endless would be the Dissection of other Animals; they being almost
innumerable: and likewise because of the incredible Conducement of Anatomizing
Humane Bodies, both for preserving and restoring the Health of Man: But seeing
the Bodies of Men defunct are not always at hand, it has been a Custom of
Ancient standing, even among the Learned, to Dissect the Bodies of other Living
Creatures. Democritus by his frequent Dissection of diverse sorts of Animals, is
said to have first found out the proper Seat of the Bile. Galen also accustomed
himself to the Dissection of Apes and Monkies. Severinus, Castellus, Bronzerus,
Panarolus, and many others, were wont to Dissect the Bodies of dead Dogs: But
Asellius, Dr. Harvey, Walleus, Bartholine, Pecquet, De Graaf, and others, did
frequently cut open Dogs, while they were alive, and hereby found out the
Lactean Veins, the Circulation of the Blood, the Thoracic Veins, the
Lymphaducts, the Ductus Pancreaticus, with its Acid Juice, and many other
useful Inventions, by their diligent Scrutiny and Autopsy. But our Discourse is
to be limited to the Humane Body, having chosen Man to be the sole Subject of
this Treatise. The Body of Man therefore, as it is a Totum Quantitativum seu
Integrale, is divided by Galen and Hypocrates into Continentia, The Division of
the Parts of Man's Body.
Contenta, and Impetum Facientia; that is, into Solid Parts, Humors, and
Spirits. The Body of Man may also be divided either Ratione Finis or Ratione
Materiae. Ratione Finis. The Principal Parts.
They are either Principal Parts, or less Principal Parts: The Principal Parts
are the Liver, the Heart, and the Brain; and the Vulgarly received Opinion is,
That the Veins have their Origin from the Liver, the Arteries from the Heart,
and the Nerves from the Brain; which they say are the Vessels that convey the
Natural, Vital, and Animal Spirits through the Body.

The less Principal Parts, are either necessary, The less Principal parts.
which are those without which an Animal cannot live, as the Lungs, the
Ventricle, the Intestines, the Vesicula Bilaria, the Porus Bilarius, the Vesica
Vrinaria, etc. Or not necessary, as Caro Simplex, in respect of the other Parts.

Ratione Materiae, the Parts are either Simple, Homogeneous, and Simular; or
Compound, Heterogeneous, and Dissimular.

The Simular Parts are Ten. The Simular.
The Bones, the Cartilages, the Ligaments, the Membranes, the Fibers, the
Nerves, the Arteries, the Veins, the Flesh, and the Cutis. The Dissimular.
The Dissimular Parts are the Members of the Body, consisting of various
Simular Parts. They are also called Parts Organicae seu Instrumentales. But
the Modern and most Rational Division of the Body is into its Venters and
Artus. The Division of the Body into its Three Venters and Four Artus.
The Venters are Three, the Infimus, the lower Venture, or the Abdomen, which
contains the Liver and the Natural Parts, the Medius Venture, or the Thorax,
which contains the Heart and Vital Parts; the Venture Supremus, or the Head,
wherein is contained the Brain and Animal Parts.

Having given the Division of the whole Body, The Lower Venture its parts.
we shall now begin with the Lower Venture; and this is all that Cavity, which
within is distinguished from the Thorax, by the Diaphragm, circumscribed by the
Cartilago Ensiformis, the Os Pubis, Coxendicis, and the Os Sacrum, the
Vertebrae of the Loins, and on both sides by the Bastard Ribs; the Forepart of
this is called Epigastrium, the Lateral superior Part of which is called
Hypocondrium, which is next to the Inferior Cartilage of the Costae.

The Middle is Regio Vmbilicalis, the two lateral Parts of which Aristotle
calls (...), a Laxitate; and Galen (...) Inania. The Lower Part is
Hypogastrium, which descends from the Regio Vmbilicalis down to the Regio
Pubis, the Lateral Parts of which are called Ilia, and in Flexu Femoris ad
Pubem Inguina, or the Groin.

Now this Venture consists of Exterior and Interior Parts.

The Exterior or Continent Parts, are either Common, which belong also to other
Parts of the Body, as the Cuticula, the Cutis, the Pinguedo, with its Membrane,
the Panniculus Carnosus and the Membrana Musculorum propria; or Proper only to
this Venture, as the Muscles of the Abdomen and the Peritoneum.

The Interior or Contained, are those that serve either for Nutrition or for
Procreation.

Those that serve for Nutrition, belong either ad (...) to Chylification, as
the Ventricle, the Omentum, the Pancreas, the Intestines, with the Mesentery,
the Lactean Veins, with the Common Receptacle and the Lymphatic Vessels; or ad
(...) to Sanguification, as the Meseraic Veins, the Vena Porta with its
branches, and the Vena Cava, the Liver, the Vesicula Bilaria, the Spleen, with
the Vas Breve and the Hemorrhoids, the Arteria Celiaca, the Veins, the Capsulae
Atrabilariae, the Ureters and the Bladder.

Those that serve for Generation are Vasa Spermatica, the Corpora Varicosa or
Parastatae, the Testes, the Vasa Deferentia, the Prostatae, the Vesiculae
Seminariae and the Penis, in Women the Vasa Ejaculatoria and the Vterus.

Having thus divided the Lower Venture, we come now to speak of each of its
parts in particular; and the first is the Cuticula (...), The Cuticula.
this is a thin and close Skin, void of Life and Sense, without Blood, made of
unxious, crass, and viscid Vapors, condensed by the Circumambient Cold, to
cover the Cutis, it is thicker than the Cutis, least there should be too great
an efflux of Spirits and Heat; it is generated of an Excrement that has its
beginning in the Womb, and afterward its perfection, and this is the reason
why Infants newly born look so red as they commonly do. In Moors and
Aethiopians it is black.

Next to this is the Cutis, The Cutis.
which is the Common Covering of the Body, generated of Seed and Blood, the
Instrument of Touching and the Defense of the Parts that are under it; it is
perforated in various places, for the ingress and egress of that which is
necessary; those Perforations that are conspicuous, are the Mouth, the Ears,
etc. The Insensible are the Pores, in this ther^ are observed several Nervous
Filaments, which Learned Cartesius calls the Organs of Sense, Carts de Homine.
which being moved by External Objects, do accordingly make an Impression upon
the Brain.

Under the Cutis is subjected the Pinguedo or Fat, The Pinguedo, or Fat.
which is a Simular Body without Sense, made of unxious Blood concreted by the
Cold of the Membranes for the defense of the whole; it is not in those parts
where it would hinder a convenient complication, as in the Brain, the
Palpebrae, the Penis, the Scrotum and the Testium Membranae; its Vessels are
the three Veins of the Abdomen, the Mamillary Veins, the Venae Epigastricae and
elumbis emergentes, its use is like a Garment, to keep the Body warm, to fill
up the spaces between the Muscles, the Vessels and the Skin, to make the Body
even, smooth, and round; hence Lean Persons, Old, and Withered, are Deformed.
Next is the Membrana Carnosa, which is connexed to the Cutis by many Veins and
Arteries: The Membrana Musculorum propria is a thin Skin connexed to the
Muscles by small Filaments, its use is to cover the Muscles and separate
between them.

Next appear the Ten Muscles of the Belly. The Muscles of the Belly.
A Muscle is an Organic Part, consisting of diverse small Fibers, an Instrument
of Motion, the beginning of a Muscle is called a Ligament, the middle part is
fleshy, and the end is called a Tendon; every Muscle is furnished with a Nerve.
Of the Ten Muscles of the Abdomen, two of them are obliquely descending, two
obliquely ascending, two right, two transverse, and two pyramydal, thus
nominated from the position and situation of their Fibers. Under these Muscles
is the Peritoneum, The Peritoneum.
which is a Membrane of an Oval Figure, investing the Bowels; it has its
Origin at the Spine, and the first Vertebra of the Loins, its use is to contain
the parts, and to shut the Orifices of the Veins; among the parts contained,
there is first the Omentum, The Omentum.
placed immediately under the Peritoneum, its use is to increase the heat of
the Stomach; this being taken away, the Ventricle and Intestines appear. The
Ventricle is an Organic Part situated immediately under the Diaphragm in the
Epigastrium, The Stomach.
it is the Instrument of Chylification; it has two Orifices, the first is in
the upper part of it, and is called the Stomach; this when the Food is taken
in, remains shut, that so Fumes and Vapors may not fly up, and so disturb and
molest the Head. The Lower Orifice is called Pylorus, it remains shut till the
Food assumed be concocted; it is also shut when we vomit. The Intestines.
The Intestines or Guts have many Anfractus or Bendings, least the Aliment
contained in them should pass away before a perfect Concoction be made; they
have three Tunics and Fibers of all kinds, they are six in number, the
Duodenum, the Jejunum, the Coecum, the Ileon, the Colon, and the Rectum. The
next Part we are to take notice of, is the Mesentery, in which are the Meseraic
Veins and Arteries, the Lactean Veins, and several Glandules.

Having taken off these Parts, The Pancreas.
the Pancreas or Sweetbread, becomes apparent, and in it is the Pancreatic
Duct and Succus Pancreaticus, found out by Regnerus De-Graaf, a late French
Physician, who held this to be the Seat of Agues, or intermitting Fevers, that
the Minera of that Distemper, which is called, The Cause of Agues.
Opprobrium Medicorum, the Disgrace of the Physicians, is there to be found,
viz. When this Acid Liquor is vitiated, and the Lateral Ducts of the Pancreas
s^opt^, Francis. De La Boe Sylvius.
by some pituitous or flegmatic and viscid Matter, there adhereing, causing
hereby a stagnation of that Juice, and so a more violent effervence and
tendency to a far greater and corroding Acidity. Thus much for the Organs of
the first Concoction, which is Chylification. We come now to those of the
second, viz. Sanguification, and among these the Liver was commonly reputed to
be chief; The Liver its Figure and Connection.
this is situated on the right Side of the lower Venture, just under the
Diaphragm; it is connected by three strong Ligaments. First to the Abdomen, by
the Vena Vmbilicalis, which in the adult waxes dry and degenerates into a
Ligament. The Second to the Diaphragm on the right Side, by a broad thin
Membraneous Ligament from the Peritoneum, which is called Ligamentum
Suspensorium. The Third also to the Diaphragm on the left Side, by another
round and strong Ligament; its substance is red and soft, like concreted Blood;
hence it is called (...), Man's Liver is very like the Liver of an Ox or Cow,
and does differ from it neither in consistence, color, nor taste; whence our
Flesh also is far more similar to the Flesh of those Animals than to the Flesh
of Swine. It is from hence the Veins are said to derive their Origin, because
the dispersed Roots of the two greatest Veins, viz. Cava and Porta seem to be
fastened there; tho the Lactean are thought to arise from the Pancreas, and the
Vena Arteriosa does really proceed from the Heart: The true use of the Liver is
not to be the Organ of Sanguification, as several Reasons and late Discoveries
manifest, but as Pecquet says, it does percolate and secern the Bile from the
Blood, Its use to Secern the Bile.
as the Spleen does an Acid Juice, and as the Reins the serose Part thereof.
The manner how this is done, is well explained by Doctor Charleton in his
Oeconomia Animalis; it also affords heat to the Stomach, to concoct the
contained Aliment.

It does likewise separate from the Blood and aquose, or watery humor, by a
kind of filtration.

It helps to concoct the Lympha, To concoct the Lympha, and impregnate it with
a Volatile Salt, etc.
and impregnate it with a Volatile Salt and Acid Spirit, drawn forth out of the
Nutriment; hence when this Part is evilly affected, a Dropsy will ensue. Dr.
Franciscus De La Boe Sylvius will have it not to separate but join together
Humors; not to secern, but to mix and unite; but this is no better than
ficticious. On the right and concave part of the Liver, there are two Meatus's
for the receiving the two sorts of Bile, the Vesicula Bilaria, and the Porus
Bilarius, the Vesicula Bilaria, Folliculus Fellis, Its Ducts and Meatus's.
or (...), is an Oblong Vessel in the shape of a Pear; it has two parts,
Fundus and Cervix, it lies under the Vena Porta, receives the thinner Bile, and
exonerates into the Intestines: This is the Balsom of the Blood, as Helmont
calls it, and it is this that renders the Feces fluxible.

The Porus Bilarius, is an Oblong Vessel arising from the Liver, it is united
with the Meatus Systicus into the Ductus Communis, this transfers the grosser
and thicker part of the Bile.

In the left Hypochondrium is placed the Spleen; The Slpeen.
Insects want a Spleen, and those Creatures that have no Bladder; as a
Chameleon and many others; and it is a false Assertion, Habte and Musca
Splenem. It has often been taken out of Dogs and Cats, without any great
detriment to them, or peril of Life; for then the Pancreas supplies its defect:
It has many Fibers woven together, after a wonderful contexture, to confirm
and strengthen the lax, spongy, and paremchymous substance of it, least it
should be broken by the impulse of the Blood flowing from the Arteries; also,
that hereby it may be able to contract it self, and compress the Blood that is
in its lax Cavities into the Vena Splenica, and so help the Pulse of the
Arteries. Its use.
Its use is not to secern the Melancholy Homours from the Blood, as the
Ancients held; neither is the Opinion of Van Helmont probable, Helmont's
Opinion false.
who destined it to more noble Actions; namely, to be the ^eat of his Archeus,
and the immediate Organ of the Sensitive Soul, and to determinate the Actions
of the Vital Soul, resident in the Stomach, and so the Seat of the Intellect,
in which Conceptions are formed of Sleep and Dreams, of Venery, and of diverse
Diseases; which to others are evident to be the effect of the Brain and the
Thorax; as an Astma, a Plurisie, an Apoplexy, an Epilepsie, a Vertigo, and an
Incubus. But the true Opinion of its use, is that of Waleus, Waleus the the
Inventer of its true Function.
grounded on Autopsy, and certain Reasons, which is, that it does receive the
more Acid part of the Blood, no otherwise than we see an Acid Spirit separated
from Things by a Chymic Distillation. This Acid Liquor (which you may, if you
please, call Melancholy) is mingled with the Blood in its Vessels, and with the
Chyle, to attenuate and make them more dilute; whence the Spleen being once
obstructed, there does presently ensue a coacervation of gross Humors in the
Body; not because these Crass Humors are not drawn from the Blood by the
Spleen, but because the Spleen cannot communicate that attenuating Acid Liquor
to the Blood and Chyle; what of this Acid Liquor is unprofitable for Nutrition,
is excerned by Urine. We come now to the Reins or Kidneys, The Reins.
They have their Situation under the Liver and Spleen, near the Spine, upon the
Muscles of the Loins; they have two Caruncles like Glandules, through which the
Serum of the Blood is cribrated, and two Venters, one at the end of the
Emulgent Veins, and another at the Origin of the Ureters, its use is to
separate the seros^ part of the Blood, and evacuate it through the Ureters into
the Bladder, and thence through the Meatus Vrinarius. To the exterior Membranes of
the Reins, do adhere two small Vessels, called, Capsulae Atrabilariae; The use
of the Capsulae Atrabilariae.
these receive a crass, excrementitious, and bilose Humor, separated from the
Blood, either by the Liver, Heart, or Spleen; but more especially, that which
is elaborated in the Spleen, and is here reconded, being not able to penetrate
the angust Passages of the Reins. Hence Urines do look black, when these
Vessels are too replete; where often is the Seat of some Morbific Cause,
especially in Melancholy Effects. The Ureters.
The Ureters are long Vessels or Channels, arising from the Reins, implanted
into the Bladder; they are commonly two in number. Riolan relates he saw two on
each side of a Woman, that had the Venereal Distemper. Solomon Albertus takes
notice of one that had three on one side and but one on the other. I my self
saw a Woman opened at St. Thomas's Hospital, who had two Ureters on one Side,
having two distinct Originations in the Kidneys, and were also in two distinct
places inserted into the Bladder, one in the Neck of it, and the other in the
Fundus; these are often obstructed by Stones and Gravel, and very acute Pains
are hereby created. The Bladder.
The Bladder or Vesica Vrinaria, is situated in the Hypogastrium, between the
two Tunics of the Peritoneum, in that Cavity that is made by the Os Sacrum,
Coxendicis and Pubis, as in a proper Venture and separate Abdomen; it has a
Constrictive orbicular Muscle in the Neck of it, called Sphincter, An
experiment touching the Coction of a Humane Bladder, with some Liquors.
which hinders the involuntary emission of Urine, Borrichius observed of the
Bladder, this curiosity, That if it be boiled in Acid Things, it presently
turns to a Mucilage or Jelly; if in Salt Things it is incrassated; in
Oleaginous Things, as also in Liquors that have an Alkali in them, a^ Salt of
Tartar, or incinerated Herbs, it is neither incrassated, nor turned to a
Mucilage; but is burnt up as if it were laid upon live Coals, and quikly is
worn to Power; from which it is apparent with how much peril to the Bladder,
either Acid Salt or Oleaginous Things are injected to dissolve or break the
Stone. The Vessels and Organs of Generation; why we omit insisting on them.
We should now come to the Spermatic Vessels, and the Organs of Generation, but
modesty will not permit me to expose them to the captious and ignorant Vulgar
in their Native Language; thinking it no way convenient that those empty Heads
that have not arrived to that small degree of Literature, as to read a Latin
or Greek Author, should in their Mother Tongue have a prospect of those Things
which both Nature and Reason endeavor to conceal from such shallow brained
Medicastors; I mean those Pretenders, who style themselves the Sons of Art; and
make their brags that they have ascended to the very top and (...) of this
Noble Faculty; when alas no Name becomes them so well as Quacks and Emperics,
who have picked a few blind Recipe's out of some silly pedantic Translation,
such forsooth as Culpepper, that Stargazing Astrologic Coxe-comb, who laughs at
Learning, derides the Works of all the Grave and Learned Men, and Nicknames
our ablest Physicians, or The Author of, Little Venus Unmasked, or the Pocky
Doctor. See his Reflections on several of the worthy Members of the College of
Physicians, in the Lord Moons Case.
Gideon Harvey, that conceited Emperic, or that illiterate Pseudochymist, the
Author of Medela Medicina. But I shall refer the intelligent Reader to the
Learned Treatise of De Graaf de Organis Virorum and Mulierum.

We come then now to the Middle Region of this Microcosm, the middle Venture or
Cavity, which is called the Thorax or Breast: The middle Venture or the Thorax.
this is all that Cavity that is circumscribed above by the Clavicles, below by
the Diaphragm, before by the Sternum, and on both Sides by the Ribs; as the
lower Venture contains the Natural Parts, so this contains the Vital. The Parts
of this are either the Containing or the Contained, and these are either Common
or Proper; the Common are the same with those of the Lower Venture; the Proper
Parts are the Mammae Papps or Breasts, the Diaphragm, the Pleura and the
Mediastinum. The Contained are the Viscera and Vasa; the Viscera are the Heart
with the Pericardium, the Lungs and part of the Aspera Arteria. This Venture
has 44 Muscles, to guard and defend it, and to dilate and contract the Breast,
22 on each side, of which 11 are external, 11 internal.

The Mammae or Breasts, The Breasts and their Parts.
are placed in the middle of the Thorax, under the Pectoral Muscle, both for
their vicinity, and nearness to the Heart, that Fountain of Heat; for the
convenience of giving Suck, and for the adding to the Beauty and Pulchritude of
the Body. I speak of the Mammae of the Female Sex, they are scarce perceptible
in those that are young, but when the Natural Heat of the Body has obtained a
due augmentation and begins to invigorate the Parts of the Body, then these
begin to tumify at the same time when the Menstruums begin to flow: In Old
Women they grow flaccid and nothing apparent but the very Nipple, the Fat and
Glandules being all consumed. The parts of this are the Papilla and the
Mamilla: the Papilla is an extuberance in the Center of it, called the Nipple,
the ends of the Nerves and Arteries do concenter in it; which is apparent from
its exquisite Sense and Red Color: Hence it is compared to the Glans of the
Penis, for it may be erected by Contact and Suction; and does afterward become
flaccid. Cancers, and other Tumors about this part, by Chyrurgeons are
determined to be pernicious. Hyppocrates tells us, That if in a Woman
with-child, her Nipples turn upwards it is a Male, if downwards a Female, that
she bears; but the confession of Women has not yet confirmed it: It has a
Circle round about it, called Areola, which in Virgins is of a pale Color, in
those that are big and give Suck brown; in Old Women black. It has many little
perforatons in the middle, for the Milk to come forth; its use is to enter the
Mouth of the Infant, that it might suck: There is also a titillation in it,
whereby Mothers and Nurses, by a pleasing kind of tickling, and some sense of
pleasure, are enticed to exhibit their Breasts to the Infant.

The Mamilla is all that part beside the Nipple that swells and rises above
the circumjacent; it has many Glandules; which in Virgins are more hard; in
those that are big and give Suck, they are more swelled; their use is for the
preparation of Milk, there is a great consent between these and the Womb; hence
as soon as ever the Infant is Born, the Blood is no longer carried to the Womb,
but to the Breasts, and thence Milk is generated; hence those that give Suck
have very seldom their Monthly Terms; and sometimes the Children draw forth
Blood instead of Milk; yea, which is matter of greatter admiration, the
Menstruous Blood sometimes has been observed to come from the Breasts, and
Milk carried through the Womb, and thence evacuated: How Milk is generated, it is
not easy to determine, and I will not stay here to debate the Controversy;
whether it is carried with the Blood by the Thoracic Arteries, Some Conjectures
how Milk is generated.
and secern'd therefrom by the Glandules of the Mammae, or whether the Chyle
ascends to the Breast through the Milky Veins from the Mesentery, or whether, as
the Learned Dr. Wharton thought, a peculiar Juice drawn from the Nerves, and
added to the Chyle, does make Milk. The use of the Mammae first is to be a
defense to the Heart, hence Men of a Colder and more Effeminate Constitution,
have great Breasts, and Women that are almost de^^itute of them, have Manlike
Voices: Secondly, They serve for the Generation, Segregation, or Depuration of
the Milk for the Nutrition of the Infant: Thirdly, For the Adorning and
Beautifying the Body.

The Diaphragm is the partition between the Lower and Middle Venters, The
Diaphragm
it is a singular Muscle of a different Figure and Action from all the rest;
its Situation is transverse, and something oblique, declining downwards; its
Figure is circular, its Substance fleshy, but in the middle nervous and
membranous; for the Center appears to be a thin Skin and a nervous Circle
instead of a Tendon; if this be wounded, Death ensues. The use of this is to
cause a free respiration, to help the Muscles of the Abdomen in the expulsion
of Excrements and the Foetus, to promote the distribution of the Chyle, to
distinguish the Vital Parts from the Natural; to which some add that this is
the Seat of Laughter, because the Nerves of the Diaphragm have several
ramifications in the Muscles of the Lips and the Cheeks; hence in the
percussion of that part, the Muscles of the Face being contracted, and Lips
with the Cheeks moved, Laughter arises; The Cause of Sardonian Laughter.
but this is not true Laughter, but only that which is called Risus Sardonius:
for the Spleen is the proper Seat of Laughter, according to that Distich: Cor
ardet, Pulmo loquitur, Fell commovet Iras,
Splen ridere facit, cogit amare Jecur.


The Heart does burn, the Lungs do speak, the Gall does Anger move,

The Spleen does laugh, the Liver stirs up Love.

Hence Melancholy and Splenetic Persons are more prone to laugh than others.

In the forepart of the Chest is the Sternum, at the end of which is the sharp
pointed Cartilage, called Cartilago Ensiformis, and on both sides are placed
the Ribs, The Ribs.
which are commonly twelve on each side. Melancton says that Adam had
thirteen, but it is greatly to be questioned. Fallopius says he saw two
several times thirteen, and Riolan once. The upper seven are called Verae, true
Ribs, because they reach the Sternum; the five lower ones are called Nothae, or
Bastard Ribs, because of their shortness.

The Pleura is a thin Skin investing the inward parts of the Middle Region, The
Pleura the Seat of the Pleurisy.
as the Peritoneum does the Lower; this is that part that is affected in the
Pleurisy, tho Late Writers demonstrate that the effect of this part does only
secondarily happen in that Peracute Distemper.

The Mediastinum is a Skin of the same kind, The Mediastinum.
dividing the Cavity of the Thorax and the Lungs into two distinct parts. To
this is joined the Thymus in the Throat or upper part of the Thorax, between
the division of the Subclavian Veins and the Arteries; this is of a glandulous,
spongy, soft, and white Substance in Children newly born it is distinguished by
a threefold and large Glandule, but in the adult it is extenuated by heat for
want of moisture: Its use is to be a prop to the Vessels that ascend by it,
viz. the Vena Cava, the great Artery, and their branches spreading into the
Arms and Scapulae, and to defend them lest they should be hurt by attaching the
Bone. The Pericardium, The Pericardium.
otherwise the Chamber Chest, or Pannicle of the Heart, is a Membrane
incompassing the whole Heart; so far distant from it as may suffice for its
motion, and the containing that Liquor which is found within its cavity. Its
use is to be the Domicil of the Heart, and to contain in it a Whey and Watery
Liquor, not unlike Urine, to moisten and refrigerate the Heart, and so render
its motion more facil: Whence proceeded that Water that issued out of our
Saviors side.
This is that Liquor that came forth out of the Side of out Blessed Savior;
when pierced, mixed with Blood; for it is said, Out of his Side came forth
Water and Blood.

The Heart is one of the principal Parts of an Animal, The Heart. It is not
situated in the left side as soine imagine.
the Fountain of Life; it is situated in the middle of the Body, that so the
Blood and Spirits might fitly be distributed through the whole Body; it is of
every side encompassed by the Lungs, yet its Motion is perceived most on the
left Side.

1st Because the great Artery is on that Side, The reason why it beats more on
the left side, than on the right.
and the Cavity of the left Ventricle far exceeds that of the right, and in
this the Vital Spirit is contained: Hence it is vulgarly reputed, although
erroneously, That the Heart has its residence on the left Side, and some
Practitioners apply Cordial Epithems only to the left Side.

2dly, The Vena Cava being on the right Side, and there ascending through the
Thorax, the Heart cannot conveniently decline that way. It is of a Conic
Figure, the upper part is called the Basis or Radix of it, the lower Mu^ro,
Vertex, Apex, or the Cone of the Heart; its primary Action is to be the
Fountain of Heat: this is manifest by that Disease called a Syncope and other
defects of the Heart, where its Heat is intercepted: for then the Members of
the Body destitute, do faint and lose their brisk Activity, wherewith they were
before actuated. Hence Cordials profit in such Affects; How Cordials help the
Heart in Syncope's.
by exciting the almost extinguished Heat; and stirring up the drooping Spirits;
this Heat is not caused only by the Motion of the Heart, as the Car^e^ians say
it is; for there is implanted Heat in the Heart, before its Motion, and Motion
is only the Preserver, and not the Producer of Heat in the Heart: but this Heat
is excited by an Ebullition, whereby the Blood dilating it self, requires a
more ample space; and so breaks forth, just as the mixture of Lime and Water
produces an Ebullition; and Flower of Brimstone mingled with Spirit of
Turpetine; and Salt of Tartar with Aqua fortis causes a great Fervescency.
3dly. Another great use of the Heart, is to turn Chyle into Blood, to be the
Organ of Sanguification, and to perfect and renew the depauperated Blood, that
returns in the Veins in its Circulation. Another use of it, is to move
continually: Hence it keeps the Blood from Putrefaction, makes it more
elaborate, kindles that Vital Flame that is in it, and disperses it as a
Nutriment adapted to every part.

This Motion is called the Pulse, The Pulse.
which is continual and never ceasing, stirred up by the Blood flowing into it,
and the Pulsive Faculty resident therein; this consists of Systole, Diastole,
Its Systole, Diastole, and Perisystole.
and Perisystole. Systole the proper and natural motion of the Heart, is a
Contraction of it into a narrow compass, that so the contained Blood might be
forced from the right Ventricle through the Arterial Vein into the Lungs, and from
the left through the Arteria Aorta into the whole Body. The Diastole, which is
Accidentary, and not so properly called a Motion as the Systole, because it is
a Passion rather than an Action; is a Dilatation of the Heart, that it might
draw in the Blood through the Vena Cava into the right Ventricle, and through the
Arteriae Venosa into the left.

Perisystole is the space of rest between the two preceding Motions.

In every Systole the Heart does plentifully receive the Blood, and in every
Diastole it plentifully expels it.

After Dr. Harvey had found out the Circulation of the Blood, laying down such
evident and infallible Demonstrations as compelled all to believe it, yet many
ignorant of the Fabric and Motion of the Heart, thought that a few Drops, a
Scruple or a Dram at the most of Blood, was thrown out of the Heart at every
Pulse, and so imagined that the Mass of Blood in the Body is many hours, yea
some days, circulating through the Body. Yet I must acknowledge my Self to be a
Proselyte of that Learned and Famous Physician Dr. Lower, Dr. Lower De Cord.
who has wrote an Excellent Book of the Heart, and also of Exquisite Dr.
Charleton, The Circulation of the Blood.
the Author of Oeconomia Animalis, That the whole Mass of Blood, does not only
once or twice, but very often pass through the Heart in the space of an hour. For
if we compute how much Blood flows into the Ventricles of the Heart when it is
dilated, how much emptied out of it when it is contracted, how many Pulses
there are in an hour, how much Blood there is contained in the whole Body, we
shall easily evince this Assertion; for by Autopsy it appears, and by the
experience and testimony of Renowned Harvey, that in a Healthful Man the left
Ventricle of the Heart will at once contain two Ounces, and so much is thrown
out at every Systole; and that there are Two thousand Pulses in the space of an
hour, which is the least Computation of all; for Waeleus and Regius, have
numbered Three thousand, and in some Four thousand, Plempius 4450, Slegelius
4876, Rolfincius 4420, and Bartholine on his own Wrist 4400. tho these differ
according to the Age, Temperament and Diet, etc. And suppose that in a Man
there are Twenty five Pounds of Blood, which is a greater quantity than is
granted either by Nature or Anatomists; for the quantity of Blood contained in
a Humane Body, seldom exceeds Twenty five pound, and is seldom under Fifteen:
If we suppose two Ounces of Blood received and thrown out at every Pulse, and
Two thousand Pulses in an hour, How often the Blood circulates through the Body in
an hour.
the number of Ounces that pass through the Heart in that space, make up Three
hundred thirty two pound: Hence it necessarily follows, that the whole Mass of
Blood circulates through the Body thirteen times every hour; but seeing so great a
quantity of Blood is seldom found in the Body of a sound Man, and so few pulses
in the space of an hour, Vid. Dr. Lower de Cord.
it is very congruous to reason that the Blood passes through the Heart more than
Thirteen Times in an hour.

At the Basis of the Heart there are two Processes called Anricula, their use
is to receive the Blood and Air, least it suddenly rush into the Heart and
cause a Suffocation; there are also on both sides two large Cavities, which are
called the Ventricles of the Heart, of which the right receives the Blood from
the Vena Cava to supply the Lungs and sends it into the left Ventricle, to make
the Vital Spirit and Arterial Blood of that Blood prepared in the right
Ventricle and transmitted through the Septum and the Lungs, and of the Air drawn
in through the Mouth and Nostrils prepared in the Lungs and sent through the Arteria
Venosa with the Blood into the left Ventricle of the Heart. The use of both
these Ventricles is to generate and perfect the Arterial Blood, to receive the
Venal Blood, make it more perfect, and expel it through the Arteries into the
extreme parts of the Body, and that they may thereby be nourished. Between
these two Ventricles there is an Interstitium or Partition, called Septum; it
has several Meanders, Caverns, Windings and Perforations in it, to admit the
thinner part of the Blood from the right into the left Ventricle of the Heart.

The Heart has many Vessels, The Vessels belonging to the Heart.
the chief are the Vena Cava, and the Vena Arteriosa inserted in the right
Ventricle, and the Arteria Venosa and Arteria Magna in the left Ventricle;
opposite to which, within the Ventricles, there are eleven Valves or little
Doors, which when they are open receive the Blood, when shut, stop it from
coming back again. The Vena Cava has a membraneous Circle at its Orifice to
strengthen the Heart, which is divided into three membraneous Valves; called,
Tricuspides. The Vena Arteriosa, also has three Valves, which united, give the
similitude of a Bishops Mitre. The Arteria Magna, likewise has three Valves,
like those in the Vena Arteriosa exactly shut, called also Sigmoides.

The Lungs,
The Lungs are divided into the right and left part by the Mediastinum, that so
when one part is shut, the other might perform its Office; both these parts are
subdivided into two Lobes about the fourth Vertebra of the Thorax, the upper of
which is shorter than the lower; their substance is lax, spongy, and soft, that
they may easily be extended and receive the Air.

Their use.
Their use is to ventulate and refrigerate the Heart, and free it from that
fuliginous excrement which it carries off with the Blood, through the Vena
Arteriosa; it exhibits Breath to Men to make, an articulate Voice, and to
Brutes to make an inarticulate one: Sylvius adds, that it condenseth the Air
taken in, and so represseth the rarefied Blood in the right Ventricle of the
Heart, and so hereby does allay the aestuation that is excited in it; but this
is as much as to say, the Air taken in does temperate the heat of the Heart,
Dr. Henshaw's Aero-Chalinos.
which is no more than has been acknowledged by Sylvius's Predecessors.
Pecquet will have its use to be to distribute the Chyle and detrude it into the
Intestines and Lactean Veins; but Dr. Henshaw, no contemptible Author, a Member
of the Royal Society, says, That the principle use of respiration is, to be
instead of a tonic Motion to free the Lungs from Blood, whereby they would be
overflown, did they not drive it back again to the Heart, as the tonic Motion
does in all the muscular parts of the Body.

The Fistula Pulmonum, The Aspera Arteria.
Aspera Arteria, Trachaea, or Windpipe, is carried straight from the Mouth to
the Lungs through the Neck, and at the fourth Vertebra of the Thorax, is divided
into two parts, both of which enter into the Lungs; those are also subdivided
into two more, and these again into two others, till at last, at the superfice
of the Lungs, they end in very small ramifications. The lower part of the
Aspera Arteria is called Bronchus, the upper Larynx; it is invested with a
twofold Membrane, the one External the other Internal; it serves both for
Inspiration and Expiration, to receive and let out the Air as through a Pipe.

The Larynx, its Muscles.
The Larynx, or the Head of this, is the proper instrument of Voice, its Figure
is almost circular; it has thirteen Muscles, four common and nine proper. The
first pair of the common is called Sternothyroides from the Sternum, the second
pair Hyothyroides, which has its Origination from the Os Hyoidis, the first
pair of the proper is called Crycothyroides, or rather Thyrocricoides. The
second pair Crycoaritenoides posticum. The third pair Ctycoaritenoides
laterale, the fourth pair Thyroarytenoides; and the ninth Muscle Arytenoides;
the Cartilages of the Larynx are five, the first is called (...), or
Scutiformis, the second (...), or Annularis, because it is round like a Ring;
the third and fourth, which some make but one, is called (...) or Guttalis; it
has two processes in its superior part, which joined together make a little
Rimula to modulate the Voice, which by some is called the little Tongue or
Glottis; the fifth is called Epiglottis, which shuts the Larynx, that so the
Meat and Drink may descend the right way: In the upper part of the Larynx there
are two Glandules called the Tonsils, The Tonsils.
which are of a spongy substance to receive the moisture of the Brain and
convert it into Spittle; whereby the Fauces, the Larynx, the Tongue and the
Oesophagus are humected: Dr. Wharton assigns more noble uses to them, viz. To
be the Organs of Taste, and to promote the Concoction of the Ventricle, by a
kind of fermentative Virtue, because they contract Acidity; but the Tip of the
Tongue tastes before gustible Objects reach the Tonsils, and when these are
evilly affected the Taste remains also, when these are inflamed the Stomach
nevertheless does concoct. At the lower end of the Larynx there are other
Glandules, called by Dr. Wharton Thyroides, on both sides one, through which the
Veins are disseminated from the extern jugular; their use is to irrigate the
Larynx, with a fat and viscous, not fluid Humidity, that the Cartilages might
^o more apt to move; and the Voice become sweeter; Hence Women have a clearer
Voice than Men, Why Women have clearer Voices than Men.
because in them those Glandules are larger, and so afford more of this
oleaginous and smooth moisture: As the Aspera Arteria ^s the Pipe of the Lungs,
so the Oes^phagus is the Pipe of the Ventricle or Stomach; its beginning is at
the Mouth, where it is called Pharynx; and hence it descends straight to the
Ventricle under the Windpipe, it consists of three Tunics, it has four
Muscles, the first is called Oesaphagus, the second Sphenosparyngeus, the third
Stylopharyngeus, the fourth Cephalopharyngeus; by these Muscles is performed
Deglution or Swallowing, which is the proper Act of the Oesopha^s.

An appendix to the middle Venture is the Neck, The Neck.
which is a medium between the Thorax and the Head, its use is to serve the
Oesophagus, the Windpipe and the Lungs: Hence those Animals which want Lungs
as Fish, also want a Neck; it also affords Nerves to the foreparts, as the
Shoulders, the Cubits, the Hands, and the Diaphragm; for those Creatures that
want these Parts have no Neck. Thus we have briefly delineated the parts of the
two lower Regions of the Body, namely, the Abdomen and the Thorax; we come now
to view the upper which is the Head.

The upper Venture, or the Head its Division.
It is divided into two parts Capillata and Facies; Capillata is that part upon
which Hairs do grow, the fore part of which is called Synciput, from the Frons
to the Coronal Suture; the hinder Part is called Occiput, from the beginning of
the Sutura Lambdoides to the first Vertebra of the Neck; the middle Part
between these which is Gibbose is called Vertex, the lateral Parts between the
Eyes and the Ears are called Tempora, the Temples; the superior part of the
Face is called Frons. The Inferior Parts are the Eyes; the Nose, the Ears and
the Mouth, in whch is contained the Tongue and other Parts.

The Pericranium and Periostium.
We shall begin with the Pars Capillata, or hairy Part of this Venture; the
extern Membranes of this are two, the Pericranium and the Periostium, which
encompass the Cranium. The inward Membrances, which enclose the Brain under the
Cranium, are the Dura Matter and the Pia Matter; The Dura Matter and Pia Matter.
the Dura Matter, o^ Carssa Menynx, divides the Cerebrum from the Cerebellum,
and the Brain into its right and left Parts, and so constitutes four Sinus's o^
Ventricles, the receptacles of Blood and Spirits; besides these four Sinus's
there are three more, one at the bottom of the Calx the other two lateral ones.
Their use is to receive the Arterial Blood, The Ventricles of the Brain.
which is superfluous in the Nutrition of the Brain, and the generation of
Animal Spirits; and from these proceeds that Blood that is evacuated at the
Nostrils. The outward part of the Brain is called Cortex, the inward Medulla.
The Cortex is soft but of on Ash Color, which some think arises from the
innumerable Veins there disseminated; the Medulla is more hard and compact of a
white Color; it has two Parts, the one Globose, which has three Cavities or
Ventricles, the other Oblong, called Medulla Oblongata, where is the fourth
Ventricle, in which the Animal Spirits are generated; and here is the Origin of
all the Nerves; as this Part descends down to the Spine, so it is called,
Medulla Spinalis.

The Motion of the Brain, consisting of a Systole and Diastole.
The Brain is observed by some to have a Motion consisting of a Systole and
Diastole, in its Diastole or Dilatation it draws in the Vital Spirits, with the
Arterial Blood and Air through the Nostrils: In its Systole or Contraction, it
forces the Animal Spirits, therein elaborated, into the Nerves.

The Cerebellum has the same Substance, Color, Motion, and Use, with the
Cerebrum, only it has several circular Gyrations in an exact Order, which the
Cerebrum has not; it has two Processes, called, Processus vermi-formes, whose
use is, that the Calamus Script^rius, being pressed by the Cerebellum, might
not be obstructed thereby.

The other Parts observed in the Brain, are the Rete Mirabile, the Glandula
Pituitaria, the Infundibulum, the Corpus Callosum, the Fornix, the Plexus
Choroides, the Glandula Pinealis, etc.

The Rete Mirabile, or Plexus Retiform^s, is at the Basis of the Cerebrum; it
consists of Carotid and Cervical Arteries, brought up from the Heart to the
Basis of the Brain, and bring in them Blood and Vital Spirits to this Rete, for
the first preparation of the Animal Spirits.

The Glandula Pituitaria.
The Glandula Pituitaria, is of a harder and more compa^^ Substance than other
Glandules, it receives the Excrements of the Brain through the Infundibulum, and
throws them out upon the Palate.

The Infundibulum.
The Infundibulum is an Orbicular Cavity, made of the Pia-mater; it has four
little Channels, says Riolan, which distill the flegmatic Serum through their four
Foramina, or little Perforations; it has two Glandules or Protuberances of the
Brain, through which the Infundibulum receives the Serum from the Ventricles; they
do also stop and impede the great Impulse of that Matter that is carried to the
Infundibulum, least it should thereby be too much dilated or broken.

The Corpus Callosum.
The Corpus Callosum is in the Medulla of the Brain, where its Substance is
harder, and where the two anterior Ventricles make two Extuberances; it is
distinguished by a thin lax, and wrinkled Membrane, called, Septum Lucidum,
because when extended and exposed to the Light it is Pellucid, the inferior
white part of it, where the two Ventr^^^^ are joined together is of a
triangular Figure.

Between the first Ventricle and the Fornix, The Plexus Choroides
is formed the Plexus Choroides, its Contexture is of Veins and Arteries, its
use is the same with the Rete Mirabile.

The Glandula Pinealis its use.
The Glandula Pinealis, is a Glandule of a conic Figure, it is called by the
Greeks (...) Conarion, by others the Penis of the Brain, its use is the same
with that of the other Glandules, but especially to distribute the Vessels of
the Brain.

Carts and his Followers imagined the Soul to reside in this part of the Brain.
Cartesius and his Followers, Regius; Hogelandus, and Meyssonierius, say, that
this Glandule being placed in the middle of the Ventricles, which are always
distended with Spirits, does receive the Motion of all Objects, and the Soul
being placed here, does by these Motions apprehend all sensible Species, or
rather external Idea's, which proceed from the five Senses, and as it were in
the Center of them, discerns them all; and then by the help of this it sends
the Spirits to the Nerves, just as all things that are conspicuous in a large
Field, are in their Order represented in a little Spheric Looking-glass. This
therefore, according to Carts, is the common Seat of Sense and Imagination;
but because many of the Cartesian Sentiments of the Soul contrary to our
Hypothesis depend upon the verity of this Assertion, I shall here take occasion
to manifest the falsity of it: For 1. This is too exile and obscure a Body to
represent the Species of all things clearly, Eight Reasons why it cannot be the
Seat of the Soul.
for the Species of one thing would impede and hinder the Species of another,
it being of too small a Magnitude, and therefore the Cartesians being conscious
of this, to make their Hypothesis more plausible, make it a great deal bigger
in their Cutts and Pictures than really it is. 2. The Species of all the Senses
cannot arrive hither, because the Nerves do not touch this Glandule. 3. It is
situated in the place of Excrements, where they are excern'd through the third and
the two anterior Ventricles; and certainly here the Species would be greatly
contaminated, which Le Forge a Cartesian is forced to grant. 4. There then
would be a great Confusion of different Ideas in this Corpuscle, for the
Species must remain there, otherwise there would be no Memory. 5. There is no
Duct or Passag^ from this Glandule to the Nerve^ neither any communion with the
Nerves of the extern Senses. 6. This Glandule is bigger i^ those Animals, which
the Cartesia^ will have to be void of reason. 7. It is sometimes found to b^
full of Sand and little Stones, without any hurt to the Reason: sometimes it is
black and infected, how then can it be capable of performing such noble
Operations. 8. There was never any prope^ Motion seen in it but only violen^
either of the whole Brain, its Concussion, or some extern Flatulencie^ for it
wants Muscles, those Orga^ of Motion, and it adheres firm^ to the Brain;
neither is it fille^ with Spirits, for it is not hollow and those Tubili
Cerebri, are imaginary things, invisible, and invente^ by them to defend their
Hypothesis so fictitious and irrational, the the preceding Reasons may suffi^
to convince any judicious Person


The Forehead and Eyebrows.
Having done with the Pars Capillata of the Head, we come to the Pars Glabra,
which is the Face; its upper part is called Frons, the Forehead; the Skin of
the Forehead often moves, for it has Muscles, which Platerus calls Musculos
Significativos, because they signify the effect of the Mind; these move the
Supercilia or Eyebrows, where they are thicker: These Muscles have straight
Fibers, and therefore they are not to be cut transversly by Surgeons, least
the elevation of the Eyebrows be hindered, but upwards according to their
Longitude.

The Eyes.
The Eyes are the Instruments of Sight, made up of Humors, Tunics, Muscles, and
other Parts, they are two in Number, their Figure is round, somewat Oblong,
like a Bulb, each of them having two Angles, called Acanthi; the one extern the
other intern: The Parts are various, both in the Eye and about it, for some are
without the Eye for Defense, as the Palpebrae, the Cilia, the Supercilia, and
the Caruncles in the corners of the Eye. The intern Caruncle, or Punctum
Lachrymale, contains a Humidity to moisten the Eye; the extern is called
Caruncula innominata, in the small Angle of the Eye, destined, according to Dr.
Wharton, for the Expurgation of the Brain, and the Succus Nutritious of the
Eyes: The Parts that constitute the Body of the Eyes, are the Adeps, the
Muscles, the Vessels; the Membranes, and the Humors.

The Adeps or Fat of the Eyes does help to the Calefaction, Humectation, and
more facile Motion of the Eyes, and to make them of equal Figure; the Muscles
of a Humane Eye are six, because there are so many different Motions, four
right and two circular.

Its Muscles.
The first is called Attolens and Superbus, whereby we look upward.

The Second Deprimens and Humilis, whereby we look downward.

The Third Adducens and Bibitorius, which draws the Eye inwards toward the
Nose.

The Fourth Abducens and Indignatorius this turns it outward, and causes that
Aspect of Envy and Disdain.

The Fifth Obliquus, it turns the Eye obliquely downwards, toward the extern
Angle.

The Sixth Troclearis, which turns it round toward the inward Angle, found out
by Fallopius.

The Vessels of the Eye are a Vein from the Jugular Artery, from the Carotid
Branches, Lymphatic Vessels, and two Nerves, one the Optic Nerve, the other
Oculi Motorius.

Its Tunics, with its Humors.
The Tunics of the Eye are the Adnata, which Hypocrates calls the White of the
Eye, it ends at the circle of the Iris, and is the outward-most of all; its
joins the Orbite of the Eye, to the interior Bones, like a Ligament; it has
exquisite Sense, it has also Veins and Arteries dispersed about it, which are
not conspicuous, but in an Efflux of Humors, when they swell and become
exceeding Red, as in an Opthalmia; of which Effect this Tunic is the Seat. The
next Tunic is called Sclerotica, the Forepart of which is called Cornea,
because of its horny Substance; next to this is the Choroidis, its Forepart is
called Wea, perforated for the ingress of Species; the Limb or Border of this
has various Colors, whence it is called Iris, a Rainbow: The third is
Retina, or Amphiblestroides; it encompasses the Humor Vitreus and its Tunic;
this farther is called Aranea, o^ Christalloides, the proper Tunic of the
Christalline Humor.

The Vitrea Tunica contains the vitreous Humor, and seperates it from the
chrystalline; the Humors of the Eyes are the watery, glassie, and chrystalline.

The Ears.
The Ears are the Organs of Hearing, they are either extern or intern; the
extern are called Auriculae, they are of a semicircular Figure; the upper part
of these is called Pinna or Ala, the lower Lobus, or the Lobe of the Ear; the
outward Ambit of the Ear is called Helix or Capreolus, the inward Scapha or
Anthelix, in the midst of it there is a large Cavity by the Meatus Auditorius,
where that bitter and yellow Excrement is thrown out; it is called Alvearium:
The Auris Interna has several Parts contained in the Os Petrosum, as the
Tympanum, the congenite Air, the Muscles and Vessels. In the Concha there are
three little Bones, called Malleus, Incus, and S^apes, the Hammer, the Anvil
and the Stirrup: These are the Proxime Organs of Hearing, which render the
Sound distinct.

The Nose.
The Nose is the Organ of the Olfactory Sense; this is also divided into the
intern Part and extern Part, the intern Part has Bones and Nerves with the
Mamillary Processes. The Extern has an upper Part which is called Dorsum, the
Ridge of which is called Spina, and a lower part cartilaginous and moveable,
called Globulus-Nasi, the lateral Parts are called (...) Pinnae or Alae; it is
divided within by its Septum into two Nostrils, both which are divided about
the middle into two Parts, the one ascends up to Os Spongiosum, the other above
the Palate into the Jaws: Hence Drink sometimes flows out through the Nostrils.

The cause of Sneezing.
The Tunic about the Nostrils is from the Dura Matter, of an exquisite Sense, and
hence when it is excited it causes Sneezing.

The last part belonging to the Head, is the Organ of Taste; viz. The Tongue;
but here we are first to consider, of the extern parts about the Mouth, and the
in^ern within it: The extern are the Pomum or Circulus Faciei, under the Eyes
between the Nose and the Ears, called also Pudoris Seeds; the part under this
is called Bucca, the extern part of the upper Lip Mystax the cavity in the
middle Philtrum.

The Mouth.
The Mouth consists of parts partly bony, as the upper and lower Mandible, with
the Teeth, and partly fleshy, as the Lips, the Muscles of the lips, the Buccae
and inferior Mandible: the intern parts contained in the Mouth are the Gums,
the Palate, the Uvula, the Fauces, the Os Gutturis, or Hyoidis.

The Tongue its Ligament.
The Tongue is of a fleshly, lax, soft, and spongy substance, to receive in and
imbibe Sapors; it is tied down by a strong Ligament, which in very many Chidren
newly born, does so bind the Tongue, that it is a custom among Midwifes, A
pernicious Custom among some Midwives.
tho a pernicious one, and in no wise to be permitted, to tear it asunder with
their Nails, that it might not hinder their sucking and future speaking; but it
ought to be done by a Chirurgic Instrument; it has Veins and Arteries, and
also Nerves, both motory and sensitive, and five pair of Muscles.

The Artus.
Thus we have endeavored briefly to run over all the three Venters, we come now
to the Artus, which are the Hands and Feet.

The Hand and its parts.
A Hand in the signification of Galen and Hypocrates, is that part from the top
of the Shoulders to the extremities of the Fingers, and is divided into the Arm
and the Hands, strictly so called, or the extreme Hand: The Arm is again
divided into the Humerus or Shoulder and the Cabitus. The Humerus is that part
from the top of the Shoulder to the Elbow, and the Cubit is from the flexure or
bending of the Elbow to the Wrist; the extreme Hand is divided into the Carpus
or Wrist, which is that part between the Cubit and the Palm of the Hand; the
Metacarpus, which is that part between the Wrist and the beginning of the
Fingers, and the Fingers; the intern part of the Metacarpus, is called Vola, or
the Palm of the Hand; the extern Dorsum, or the Back of the Hand; the Fingers
are five, the first is called Pollex or the Thumb, the second Index, the third
Digitus Medius, the fourth Annularis, the fifth Anricularis.

The Foot with its Parts.
The Foot is that part which reaches from the Nates to the extremities of the
Toes; and just as the Hand it is divided into the Femur, the Tibia, and Pes
Parva; the Pes Parva is also divided into Pedius, Metapedius, and the Toes: As
for the Muscles of the Artus, I shall refer the Reader to those that treat of
them, as Bartholine, Riolan and Spigelius.

Having ended the Divisions of the whole Body, there yet remain some other
things that do respond both the Venters and the Artus, already treated on, and
they are the Veins which arise from the Liver, and so answer to the lower
Venture; the Arteries from the Heart, which answer to the middle Venture; the
Nerves from the Head, which serve the upper Venture; and the Bones, which
respond to the Artus. But I doubt I have been already too tedious in this
Chapter, and therefore I shall at present omit them; and so, although something
abruptly, end this Chapter.

CHAP. X. Of the Humors, Temperaments, and Complexions.
HAving thus far done our endeavor in delineating in their proper Colors,
those things we promised in the Front of Title Page of this Discourse, now
those that remain do offer themselves in their proposed Order to our
Consideration and Explication, and they are the Humors, Temperaments,
Complexions, Sexes, and Ages, of Mankind; to begin with the first, we shall
join three of them together; being terms almost of a Synonimous Signification,
or at least their Explications very much depending one upon another; only
first in a prefatory way let me advertize or re-mind both my self and the
ingenious Reader of the great usefulness and benefit of the knowledge of them,
that so I may be more diligent in performing my part, and the Reader hereby
instigated to give greater attention to what is here exposed to his candid
perusal.

The great use and benefit of the knowledge of the Temperament^s.
It is not enough to have an Idea in our Head of the solid parts of the Body, in
order to a complete knowledge of that Microcosm, but also it is very requisite
to note the fluid parts; and truly the Anatomy of that which some call the
Sanguine Liquor (I mean that fluid Substance continually circulating through the
Veins and Arteries, and purging it self through its proper Emunctories, those
Vessels destined for Secretion) is no less conducing to the defense of Humane
Sanity, and the restoration of it when its lost, which is the only end aspired
after by the generous Sons of Aesculapius, those standing Pillars and Columns
of the Medicinal Faculty; those absolutely necessary Ministers of Nature, and
under God preservers of Mankind, in their daily Practice and Labors, both in
their Acts of Charity and Deeds of Mercy; in those things for which they only
expect a recompense from God, and in those for which they are sufficiently
gratified by Men: I say this is no less conducing to the Health of Man than the
dissection of Bodies. What particular part of Learning can contain in it more,
both of profit and pleasure, than to know the Principles or ingredients that
compose this Balsom of Life, and to see what a close coherence there is between
the Actions both Natural, Vital, and Animal, and Passions, Gestures, Habits;
the Qualities of the Body, as Heat, Cold, Moisture and Dryness, Color of the
Skin and Hair, and the Temperaments of the Body, and what an intimate
dependence they have one upon another; how the Health of Man consists in the
regularity and order of the Humors, and Sickness in their ataxy and
irregularity; and how by a prospect into the Complexion of a Body, Sickness
impending may be foreseen, and effectual preservations being in time applied,
the fatal end of such surprising enemies may easily be prevented? and certainly
the best method a Physician can use to restore a Person, almost overcome by the
assaulting violence of morbific tyranny; either when the Particles of his Blood
are violently agitated in a continual Fever, that vehement Conflagration and
boiling Ebullition of the Crimson Juice, or when the more solid parts,
especially the Vital and Intestine, are almost drowned, when immersed in the
deluge of a Dropsy, that flood and inundation of watery Humors in the Body,
or when by the Obstruction of the Pores, the Gall a feculent and
excrementitious part of the Blood, does regurgitate and mingle it self with the
pure Blood, and hereby contuminate it and give it that unhandsome tincture of
the Yellow Jaundice: I say what can be more effectual to rout and profligate
these direful Symptoms, than to reduce the Blood (from the vitiation of which
Liquor these and a thousand more sad and dangerous effects have their first
rise) to its pristine eucrasie, and also the Humors of the Body to their
wonted eutaxie; for Sublata causa tollitur effectus, Take but the Cause away
and the Effect soon cease; so that hereby the state of those Bodies so
afflicted with these tormenting Maladies is soon meliorated, a good Crisis
first appearing and afterward Nature having received due and proper Auxilaries
from some of her skilful Ministers (I mean those Physicians (tho no other
deserve the Name of Physicians) that are well skilled in the Complexions and
Temperaments of Bodies, and accordingly, Methodically, not Emperically, apply
their Remedies) does throw off that morbific Matter, whereby she had so long
been burdened and molested; upon which all those Malidies do like Spectrums
vanish and disappear.

The Temperaments, The number of the Temperaments, according to Galen.
according to the Opinion of Galen and the Ancients, are Nine; four of which
are simple; as the Hot, the Cold, the Moist, and the Dry Temperament; four
compound, Hot and Moist, Hot and Dry, Cold and Moist, Cold and Dry, and one
Moderate, which they call Temperamentum (...). But our thoughts concerning Heat
and Cold, and the other Qualities, cannot but be repugnant to the Opinion of
the Ancients, they holding that these four first qualities, Gassendus.
as they call them, are essential to, and deduced from the four Elements; but
we from the Magnitude, Figure, and Motion of Atoms; as Hot or Colorific Atoms,
are those that are Exile in Magnitude, Sphaericin Figure, and Swift in Motion.
What Heat is and what Cold.
Cold or Frigorific Atoms, are not so Exile in Magnitude, of a Tetrahedic or
Pyramidal Figure, consisting of four Sides or equilateral Triangles, which is a
Figure most opposite to a Sphere, and they are slow in Motion. What we are to
understand by Moisture and Dryness.
Moisture is but a Species of Fluidity, which consists in the smoothness of the
Parts and the interspersion of Inanity, for Quicksilver and melted Lead are
Fluid Bodies, yet not Humid; and Siccity or Dryness is a mere Privation of
Humidity. I shall not therefore treat of the Temperaments according to those
Qualities, but according to the number of the Humors; tho there also we cannot
in all things agree with the Ancients, as I shall hereafter declare.

The Temperaments rightly distinguished, according to the number of the four
Humors.
The Humors are four, Blood, Choler, Phlegm, and Melancholy, and in whatsoever
Persons any of these Humors are predominant, their Temperament has its
denomination thence; so that from hence we learn that there are four sorts of
Temperaments.

The Sanguine wherein Blood, the Choleric wherein Choler or Bile, the
Phlegmatic wherein Phlegm, the Malancholic wherein Melancholy, has the
predominancy. I shall now lay down the Characters of every of them, whereby any
intelligent Person, by a diligent perusal of the following Specimen, and a due
reflection upon himself, may easily be informed what Constitution, Temperament,
or Complexion he is of; I shall begin with the Sanguine.

The Sanguine Constitution described.
The Sanguine has the pre-eminence before any of the rest; those of this
Complexion are hot and moist, the habit of their Body is Fleshy and well
Compact, not Fat neither too Lean; for the heat does not emaciate and make Lean
the Body, being alone predominant, and so consume the Body, but it is qualified
with a proportionality of Moisture, which serves for Fuel for the vivifying
Heat; neither is the Body made gross and fat by the abundance of Moisture which
affords Vapors, by which Fat is generated; it being well tempered with a
sufficient quantity of Heat, which dissipates the abounding Humidity; the first
of which effects always happens in the Choleric Complexion, which is hot and
dry, and the other in Phelgmatic, which is quite contrary to that, viz. Cold
and Moist.

The streams of fluid Blood that circulate in the Veins and Arteries, are
briskly agitated by the penetrating particles of Fire; and these ignite
Particles are kept from causing a Conflagration in the mass of Blood, by the
Moisture whereby it is duly moderated, so that the Heat actuates and enlivens
the Moisture, and the Moisture supplies the Heat with a sufficient Pabulum;
hence for the most part the Color of their Face is fresh and flourishing, the
delicate Sanguine Liquor flowing through its proper Vessels, causes the Cheeks to
be tinctured with a Crimson Red; their Hair also, which is an Excrement
resembles the predominant Humor, for it is either of a bright or light Color,
which by its glistering Eradiations, manifests the Body from which it results
to abound with Spirits, or else it is Red, the very color of the Humor
whereof it is generated. They are very Active, Brisk, Lively, Vigorous,
Spirituous, very Cheerful and Merry, and of a smiling Countenance, by reason of
Spirits, wherewith they of this Complexion do most of all abound; their
Imagination is very pregnant and comprehensive, because impressions are easily
made upon things that are Moist, tho not so long retained; hence they are very
subject to Oblivion and Forgetfulness; yet some do frequently commit Actions
which manifest Stolidity, as immoderate Laughing and Impudence, in others too
much Bashfulness, and others Actions of Folly. In Discourse they are commonly
very free and liberal; they have an extraordinary Propension and Inclination to
Love, being very much influenced by Venus and Cupid, and have very impetuous
desires after Venereal Pleasures, tho not so much as those that are Choleric,
by reason of the acrimony of the Seed in that Constitution. They sleep
indifferently well, not so much as those that are Phlegmatic; they are nimble
in Motion and Exercise, but soon weary; they have a moderate Appetite, unless
Humors abound whereby it is clogged and satiated, also a moderate Thirst; their
Pulse is great, yet slow; they have frequent and copious Evacuations of Blood
at Nose in the Haemorrhoids, and Women through those passages which Nature has
destined to carry the Superfluity of Humors that abound in that moist Sex in
their periodic or monthly Evacuations. Their Urine, as to its quantity, is very
copious; as to its quality, it is of a laudible Color and good Consistency.
Their Skin to the touch is hot and soft, their Vessels are very large and Veins
very conspicuous; they are very subject to a Plethora, and very obnoxious to
Fevers and other Acute Distempers. These are the Signs of the Sanguine
Complexion, the next is the Choleric, which is the hot and dry Complexion.

They of this Constitution are always Lean, The Choleric Constitution.
Pale, or Yellow, especially under their Eyes; their Hair is Yellow, imitating
the Color of Bile, ^^metimes blackish, where the Choler is more adust; they
are soon Bald, by reason of Siccity, which is here the predominant quality;
they are of a sharp Wit, very solert and crafty, of an expedite Ingeny; they
are prone to Anger, Fury, Rage, Audacity, Boldness, Boasting, Bragging, and
desire of Revenge. They sleep very little; they dream of Fires, Burnings,
Scoldings, Fightings and Tumults; they have exquisite Sense, and are very quick
in Hearing, their Pulse is great and quick; they have very little Appetite,
sometimes loath eating, especially in the Summer; they love those Meats most
that are cold, but they find great prejudice by fasting; they have an
insatiable Thirst, and drink frequently; they grow apace and quickly wax Old,
because their radical Moisture is soon consumed by the abundance of heat; they
have a wonderful proclivity to Venery, because of the acrimony of their Seed;
they are very much injured by the immoderate use of it, because their Spirits
(...) easily dissipated by reason of their tenuity. They are prone to all
bilose Distempers, as Tertian Agues, Phrensies, Pleurisies, Vomitings,
Diarrheas, Erisipala's, Shingles, Pushes and Pimples on their Faces.

The next is the Phlegmatic Constitution; they of this Temperament are Cold and
Moist, Signs of the Phlegmatic Temperament.
the color of their Skin is white, they are fat and obese, yet not fleshy,
their Hair is brown and straight, they are cold to the touch, especially their
Hands and Feet; they have a tolerable Imagination; and indifferent good
Perception, but a very shallow Memory; they are dull and blockish, of a very
slow and obtuse Ingeny; they are very placable and soon reconciled, extremely
devoted to sleep; they dream of Cold, Waters, Floods, Ponds, Seas, Rain, Snow,
Drownings, and white Things; their Pulse is little and slow; they have a small
Appetite; little or no Thirst; they grow Old very slowly, and have very little
Inclination to Venery, but in the moderate use find much benefit, because by
stirring up in them the Natural Heat, which is almost Dormant, the Phelgm is
concocted, and the Body made more temperate. They are better in fair Weather
and always worse in cold and rainy Weather; the Distempers ^^at they are most
addicted to, are Catarrhs, Coughs, Dropsies, Cachexies, Lethargies, Palsies,
Appoplexies, etc. They excern a crass, white, and insipid Excrement through the
Mouth and Nostrils; their Urine is white and thin, and Women of this Complexion
are often troubled with that which they call the Whites, which is an efflux of
a thin white Humor through the Vterus, either continually, or at least in no
Order or certain Period. The last of the Four Complexions which yet remains is
the Melancholic.

How to distinguish when the Melancholic Humor i^ predominant.
Those of this Constitution are cold and dry; their Color is brown or somewhat
black; they are of a lean habit of Body, their Veins are very straight and
narrow their Hair is black, hard, rough, or crass, slowly increasing and soon
hastening to the Canities of Old Age; they are very obnoxious to ^ear and
sadness, and that sometimes without any known or manifest cause, yet they are
prudent cautious, wary, constant and ingenous: but where this atrabilous Humor
is adust, they are treacherous and unfaithful; they are very difficult to be
moved to Anger, but when they are, they are almost implacable; they have a very
strong Memory, by reason of Siccity; they are very wakeful, and sleep very
interruptedly and disquietly; they dream of black Things, Murders, dead
Bodies, Graves and the Devils, etc. They have a very uncertain Aspect and sad
Countenance; their Pulse is tardy and hard; they have for the most part a good
Appetite, because of the Acidity of this Humor, which is prepared for the
concoction of Food in the Ventricles, and stirring up of Cold; yet sometimes,
through the Vitiation of this Humor, the Appetite is very much dejected; they
have but little Thrist, because of the Serum and Spittle which abounds in this
Constitution; they have often sower Belchings, which arise from those Crudities
wherewith Melancholy Persons do abound; they are very tardy in the performance
of Venereal Acts, and receive very much injury from the frequent use of them;
yet those are more prone to them that abound with Flatulencies, and are hereby
often excited to Venereal Actions; they are very subject to Tumors and
hardnesses of the Spleen and Hypochondriac Affects, to Tertian Agues,
Leprosies, Warts and Haemorrhoids, etc. They often vomit and spit frequently:
Hence Melancholy Persons are often called Sputatores, they are commonly
Costive, and their Excrements are blackish; they also avoid black Blood through
the Haemorrhoids; their Urine is thin and white, sometimes crass and livid.

Thus we have given a brief Specimen of the Four Constitutions, let me now
subjoyn that I would not have the Reader think me so much devoted to the trite
old Galenic way, as to think that the Blood is a Composition of these Four
Humors blended together, or that I am so strict a Chemist as to explode and
utterly reject the Notion of the Four Humors as a useless and unprofitable
Fiction, and only adhere to their Doctrine (tho very ingenuous) of the Five
Principles: But our Apprehensions are, that tho it be utterly untrue that there
are in the Vessels Four distinct Humors, Dr. Castle's Chemical Galenist.
for whatsoever is contained in the Arteries and Veins, is either the stale
deflragrated Blood, or the Alimentary Juice fresh come into the Vessels, or
else the Serum or Whey returned by the Lymphaducts, or else some particles of
Nitre, and other Bodies received in by the Lungs and Mouths of the Veins from
the Ambient; and tho the Blood differ in several Bodies, only as to the
abundance or defect of Natural Heat, yet Men are not improperly said to be of a
Melancholic, Choleric, or some other Temperament; insomuch, as by how much the
more vigorous or remiss the Bowels and Entrails are, by so much the more weakly
or powerfully Concoctions are performed, Willis de Fermentatione and Febribus.
and consequently the Blood apt to be overcharged with stale and adust, or else
crude and phlegmatic Excrements, in which the Person either way disposed, is
not improperly said to be of a Phlegmatic or Choleric Temper; and if the adust
or raw Excrement be not rightly and duly separated out of the Mass, by the
effervescency of the Blood, I see no reason why I may not say, A Man abounds
with a Melancholic Phlegmatic or Choleric Humor, and it so, than the Notions
about Pharmacy aiming at an evacuation or else alteration of the Humors, are
not framed amiss, nor without good reason; for I suppose it alters not much the
case as to practice, whether we suppose there is too great a redundancy of one
of the Humors in the Blood, or whether (which is the right Notion) we
apprehend the Blood depraved with a phlegmatic or raw Juice, or a bilose
Excrement, consisting of Salt and Sulphur, or the Melancholic, in which the
Caput Mortuum, or earthy part is predominant; for either of these Notions will
direct us (when the Blood is unable to fine it self) to assist it with those
Alteratives, which time and experience has recommended to us, as proper in
those cases; and those Purgers which have been long observed more particularily
to make separation, either of the Pituitous, Choleric, or Melancholic Parts of
the Blood; for tho it be irrational to think that Purgers do, with a certain
knowledge or choice, lay hold of one Humor rather than another; yet is that
distinction of Purgers into Cholagoga, Phlegmagoga, Melanagoga, and Hydragoga,
of very good use, and founded upon Observation and Experience; insomuch as the
several Purgers, by causing very different Fermentations, and variously
agitating the particles of the Blood, may with good reason cause different
Seperations, and so one Purger to evacuate that sort of Excrement, Barm or Lee,
which another cannot.

The Doctrine of the Four Humors reconciled with that of the Five Chymic
Principles.
Thus our Doctrine of the Four Humors, does not destroy that of the Five
Principles; for although it is apparent that in the Blood there are five
Principles; as

Spirit, which is the Subtle and Volatle part of it, whose Particles being
always expanded, endeavoring to take their flight, do agitate the gross
Corpuscles of the other Principles, wherein they are ininvolved, and so keep
them in that continual Motion of Fermentation,

Sulphur, which is a Principle of a Consistence somewhat more crass than
Spirit, and next to it most active; from this Principle arises the variety of
Colors and Smells, the pulchritude and deformity of Bodies, and the diversity
of Tastes in a great measure; that this Principle is copious in the Blood, is
evident from this, that we are for the most part fed with Fat and Sulphurious
Things: From the solution of this it is very probable that the Crimson Tincture
of the Blood arises, for sulphurous Bodies do above all others tinge their
dissolving Menstruums with a red Color; and when, by reason of Crudity, the
Sulphur is not dissolved, the Blood becomes pale and watery, and will scarce
make red a Linen Cloth that is dipped in it. The Mass of Blood thus impregnated,
with a considerable quantity of Sulphur, together with abundance of Spirits,
becomes very fermentescible.

Salt (which is a principle of a Nature, more fixed than either Spirit or
Sulphur, neither so disposed for Volatility) is that which makes Bodies compact
and solid, also ponderous and durable; it promotes the coagulation of Bodies
and Retards their Dissolutions, resists Corruptions and Inflamability, and
because Spirit and Sulphur are too Volatile, it fixes them by its embracing
them; that this Principle is in the Blood is manifest by its Gusto; when the
saline Particles in the Blood, are not enough exalted, by reason of a bad
Digestion, but remain crude, and for the most part fixed, the Blood hence
becomes thick and unable to perform its due circulation; so that from hence
arise Obstructions in the Bowels and solid parts, and hence Serous Crudities
are abundandantly generated; but if by reason of the Deficience and Depression
of the Spirit, the Salt be too much exalted and reduced to a fluor, a sharp
austere Diathesis does then accost the Blood, such as is observed in Scorbutic
Persons, and in those that are attended with Quartian Agues.

Phlegm or Water, which is the Vehicle of Sulphur and Spirit, and the Medium to
unite them together with the Salt; for the other Principles being dissolved, or
at least diluted in this, are kept in motion, but without it they become stiff
and congealed; it is upon this Principle that the Fluidity of the blood
depends; hereby also its Conflagration and Adustion is restrained and its Heat
tempered.

Earth, is that which gives Consistency and Magnitude to Bodies, by this the
too great Volatilization of the Blood and its Accension is hindered.

Now tho these Principles are those whereof the Mass of Blood be composed, yet
this does not at all destroy our former Assertion of the four Humors; for
while the Blood is circulating in its containing Vessels, some of its Parts do
continually wax old, and new ones do supply their Deficience; hence, either by
Crudity, or too much Concoction, something of necessity must become useless and
Excrementicious, which by the Fermentation and Effervescence of the Blood (as
in the Effervescence and Depuration of Wine) it is secerned and separated from
its Mass: Thus that watery Humor that is percolated in the Cavities of the
Stomach and Intestines, is called Phlegm; those Particles of Salt and Sulphur,
and and some other adust ones secerned in the Liver, and received by the Vasa
Choledocha, is that which they call Bile or Choler; and the Earthy Feculencies,
sometimes in the Spleen, is that we call Melancholy. But these things I shall
more fully handle in the subsequent Chapter, where I shall Discover something
of the Depuration of the Blood.

CHAP. XI. Of the Functions of the Body.
NOt to tread in the footsteps of the Ancients farther than their Sentiments
are agreeable to the Canons of Reason and Experience, I shall not here confine
my self to proceed in their Method, it being inclusive of some particulars,
altogether ridiculous and exploded by all the ingenious; for whoever will so
devote himself to all their Tenants, must of necessity restrain his mind from
believing not only Maxims of undeniable Verity, but also demonstrations of
infallible Experience: Thus those that conform their Opinion to theirs, about
the Subdivision of the Nutritive Faculty into the Attractive, Retentive,
Concoctive and Expulsive, must necessarily thwart their own Experience, at
least nullify the constant Rules of Nature, in imagining new and fictitious
ones; viz. By the attractive Faculty they would have us conceive that in the
parts of this Body there is resident some charming Virtue, whereby the Proxime
Aliment is allured to them, or that they by a kind of Magnetic Influence, do
effectually draw unto them the adjacent Nourishment.

By the Retentive they would have us believe that the parts of the Body finding
this Aliment so agreeable and consimular to their Nature, are so enamored with
them, as to retain them by voluntary Embraces.

The Genuine Distribution of the Functions.
The Genuine therefore and Legitime Distribution of the Functions are into these
seven, viz. The Nutritive, the Vital, the Sensitive, the Locomotive, the
Enunciative, and the Generative.

The Nutritive Function.
First the Nutritive Function, forasmuch as Animals can perform those Actions
which their Nature is capable of, while they continue in that state in which
they were first formed; the God of Nature has ordered that a Nutrition should
succeed, which might dilate and amplify their slender Fibers by interweaving
and assimulating so many more congeners to them as might reduce their Bodies to
a convenient magnitude, besides, which is a great end aspired after by Nature
in this necessary Function; this greatly conduces and almost solely serves for
the Conservation of the Animals, for since the primary Principle of Life in
every Animal, is a certain vital Flame and indegenary Heat (such as is the
rectified Spirit of Wine upon Ascension) which penetrates and briskly agitates
the fluid parts, continually feeding upon them, as its proper Pabulum or Fuel,
which Sulphurous and Oily Particles afford Aliment to that lamp of Life; this
(...) or innate Heat at first kindled by the Vegetative Soul, or rather the
Plastic Spirit in the Blood, constantly burning in the Heart, as in its
Fountain or Primary Focus, and thence by Diffusion of it self through the
Arteries, warming, enlivening, and cherishing the Parts, would soon consume and
dissipate all its soluble Particles, had it not a constant supply and continual
Reparation or Renovation of those decays it causes to exhale and evaporate by a
substitution and assimulation of equivalent Particles in the room of those
dispersed and absum'd; and so at last a Marasmus or Consumption would
immediately ensue, and the fluid parts being quite exhausted or dispersed, and
the vital Flame being quite destitute and devoid of Sustenance, Life would
totally be extinguished, but to anticipate such sad Effects and that this
Principle of Life might not become our intern mortal Enemy so soon to destroy
us; our Mother Nature has constituted this noble Function, How Nutrition is
performed.
which, how it is performed, is now incumbent upon me a little to explicate;
and that this may be done in a regular procedure, we must subdivide the
Nutritive Faculty into its three Branches, Chylification, Sanguification and
Membrification or Assimulation, that so we may the better understand the
Processes of Nature in these Operations.

Chylification the first branch of this Function, called the first Concoction,
how it is done.
First we must enquire into the method of Chylification: This, which is the
first Concoction, is thus performed. When the Food is sufficiently chewed in
the Mouth, by the Dentes molares, those Grinders appointed by Nature for
Mastication, it is detruded into the Ventricle or Stomach (for Deglution is
made by Detrusion) wherewith the Stomach being replenisht (the Appetite being
satiate) it does dilate it self; and being also endued with a power of
Contracting its Membranous Tunicles, according to the proportion of the Food
received, it does closely and strictly embrace the same on all sides, and then
shut both its upper and lower Orifice; the upper, that Vapors may not ascend
to the Brains, and that Concoctions might be more perfect; the lower lest any
of the Meat should descend into the Guts before it be converted into perfect
Chyle: The Meat thus received into and embraced by the Stomach, is by and by
moistened and diluted, partly by the drink received with it, and partly by an
Acid Humor, the Relicts of the last Concoction; which being endued with an
Incisive Penetrating and Dissolving Faculty, does as it were cut and dissolve
the Solid Meat into very small pieces, and like an excellent Menstruum,
extracts a Tincture from its more Laudible and Alimentary Parts: This Mixture
being advanced, Vsque ad Minima, to the least Particles, there presently
succeeds a Fermentation, whereby at last the whole Mixture is brought to a new
Consistence and Color, not much unlike the Cream of Barley, and is that which
Physicians call the Chyle. The Chyle being thus perfectly concocted, is by the
Gradual Contraction of the Stomach, detruded into the Guts; where the Guts by a
Peris^alti^ Motion contracting them downwards; and this passing by the
Intestines, its more pure and defecate parts are distributed through the Milky
Veins, and the excrementitious and unprofitable parts are excluded by Stool:
These Lactean Veins, carry the Chyle into the Common Receptacle called
Receptaculum Commune, and from hence it is transmitted through the Ductus
Thoracici, to the Subilavian Branches of the Vena Cava near the extern Jugular
Veins; their being mixed with the Blood, it is by the Ascendent Ttrunk of the
Vena Cava, soon imported into the right Ventricle of the Heart.

Sanguification, or the Second Concoction.
The next Branch of the Nutritive Function, is that of Sanguification; it is in
this Concoction that the Chyle receiving yet farther Exaltations by a greater
Solution of the more Noble and active Principles, once again deposites its old
Color and Consistence, and so at length becomes perfectly changed into that
true Liquor, How Chyle is transmuted into Blood.
which is called Blood; for as soon as the Vena Cava has committed the Matter
of Nourishment into the right Ventricle of the Heart, the Ferment therein
contained, working suddenly and throly upon it sets the Active Principles at a
great freedom, and so inducing a new motion and effervescence into the Blood,
does happily impregnate it with Vitality; hereby its Nature is exalted, and
those Natural Spirits contained in it are advanced into Vital or more Sublime
and Active ones; while the Vital Spirits pre-existent in the Ventricle of the
Heart, do enkindle the same Heat, and cause the same diffusive or expansive
motion in the Natural, which they themselves have formerly acquired. As for the
Primary Agent or Efficient occupied in the Office of Sanguification, it is not
the Liver, as Galen and his Sectators fictitiously conceived; nor the Veins, as
some Anatomists have dreamed; nor truly the Heart, as Aristotle and his
Disciples, with several late Judicious Writers, have asserted; but by the Vital
Heat residing in the Blood: for the Heart borrows all its Activity merely from
the Vital Blood contained in its Ventricles, The true Instrument that Nature
makes use of in making Blood.
and distributed into them by the Coronary Arteries; of which Vital Influx were
the Heart deprived some few moments, It would surcease its Activity and desist
from its Sanguifying Function; yea it would become as Torpid and Motionless as
any other part of the whole Body: so far is it from exalting the Chyle into so
Noble a Nectar as the Blood is by any Simular Action of its own. Yet we must
acknowledge the Heart to be the Center and Chief Place of Residence for this
Vital Flame, and may notwithstanding be still properly styled the Fountain of
Life. As the Chyle in the first Concoction was separated from its Faeces, so in
this second Concoction the Crimson Juice is depurated from its unprofitable
Excrementitious Parts; for the blood being an Heterogeneous Substance,
consisting of several different Principles, when those Parts which are most
prone to Volatility, are dissipated and consumed, and when the Sweet and
Inflamable Spirits are exhausted, certainly the remaining Mass must needs
become useless and incommodious to Nature, and so degenerating into Excrements,
ought as soon as may be to be sequestered from the Pure Mass of Blood; ^ which
wholesome Liquor those Excrementitious Parts are no longer deemed fit to remain
Ingredients.

The Excrements secerned from the Blood.
The Excrements that are separated from the Blood, are Choler, Phlegm, and
Melancholy; to which we may add or under these compehend Urine, Sweat, Tears,
and the Lymphatic Liquor.

Choler is a bitter Excrement, generated of the Saline and Sulphurous Parts of
the Blood, exalted by Adustion, and separated from the Blood through the
Parenchyma of the Liver by a kind of Percolation, and thence conveyed by its
proper Vessels into the Intestines, there rendering the Excrement of the first
Concoction fluxile; being excluded with them. This Bilious Excrement is also in
a small quantity effused out of the Capillary Arteries and collected in the
Meatus Auditorius, or Cavity of the Ears, and there appears under the Form of
that thick, yellow, and bitter Excrement we call Ear-wax.

Phlegm is a Cold and Moist Excrement, as for its Sapor it is sometimes Salt,
sometimes Sweet, and sometimes Acid; to which we may add its Insipidness as
another; and as for its Consistence it is sometimes thin and serous, sometimes
thick viscid and mucilaginous; and then it is called Glassy Phlegm; and when it
putrifies and corrodes, it becomes Salt and Eruginous; it is separated from the
Blood while it is wrought through the Branches of the Celiacal Artery terminated
in the Stomach, and there by Transudation immitted into the Cavity of it; where
it is found endowed with some Acidity: It is also spewed forth out of the
Mesenteric Arteries into the Substance of the Guts, and transmitted into their
Cavity by insensible passages; here it is insipid, without any Taste at all. It
also distills from the Brain, being excern'd from the Blood either by the Palate
or Nostrils; likewise it falls from the Pituitary Glandules situate about the
Basis of the Brain, and is also separated by the Glandulae Sublinguales and
other Spongy Parts of the Jaws and Mouth, and so becomes Spittle.

Melancholy is a Cold and Dry Sediment of the Blood, in color Black, in Taste
sour and shar^ separated by the Parenchyma of the Spleen; for the Blood
brought hither by the Celiacal Artery, and passing through many turnings and
windings, and as it were percolating through the Parenchyma, does leave behind
some salt and earthy parts, which after they have undergone some alteration by
their mutual Action one upon another, by their attrition and justling in their
passages through the several Cells, Cavities and Pores of the Parenchyma, are by
the fresh Blood which continually flows thither by perpetual Circulation
carried back through the Veins into the Mass of Blood, in which they serve for a
most useful and effectual Ferment; and whatsoever of this Acid Humor is unfit
to ferment the Mass of Blood, it is sent out and discharged with the Serum by
Urine; and tho this Hypothesis of the Spleen, being the Receptacle of
Melancholy, be by many Anatomists exploded, yet Bartholine, Waleus, and
Highmore, do still assert it: viz. That as the Liver does secern the Bile, so
likewise the Spleen does separate a certain Acid Liquor from the Blood, which
may be called Melancholy.

When this Ferment once grows too Sharp and Acid, The true Rice and Origin of
Splenetic and Hypochondriac Affects.
and acquires parts apt to provoke, irritate, and prick the sensible parts of
the Body, and the Fixed Salt becomes Fluid, it presently infects the whole
stream of Blood, puts it into violent and disorderly Motions, vellicates the
Nervous Parts, fixes the Spirits, puts all the Humors into strange confusion,
and makes them apt to congeal and stagnate; and hence those Hypochondraic
Affects which usually molest Melancholy Persons have their Rice and Origin; for
in those that labor under these Distempers, all the Fixed Salts of the Blood
which circulate through the Spleen, are there made Fluid, and at length come to
prevail over the other Principles of the Blood, and turn the whole stock of it
into a Liquor as sharp as Vinegar or Spirit of Vitriol; by which means all the
Spirits are depressed and kept under: Sour Belchings and Vomitings ensue,
violent and irregular Motions and boiling Ebullitions of the Blood; which
direful Maladies are soonest cured by those Medicines, which abounding with
Fixed Salts, do precipitate the Blood; as those extracted from Steel, Tartar,
Vitriol, and all Testacious Bodies, as likewise Diuretic Remedies; for we find
by experience that these Medicines do sweeten all sharp Liquors and abate their
pungency; for the Acrimony of Salt is not blunted by Sulphurous but Saline
Bodies, by reason that Fixed Salts by an intimate and close Union to the Fluid
do obtund their points and edges; thus the corroding sharpness of the Spirit of
Vitriol is taken away by Salt of Tartar or Wormood; and says Fonseca, Salt of
Tartar has a great power in allaying the turbulent Acrimony of Melancholic
Humors; for by an intrinsic property in attracts all their sharpness: Thus if
we distill an Ounce of Tartar with two quarts of the strongest Vinegar, a Water
will arise without any Acidity. And truly it is very probable that the reason
why Melancholy Persons find so much benefit from Medicines of Tartar, is that
by sweetning the Blood and Juice in the same manner as that dulcifies Vinegar;
the Tartar frees the Body from those inconveniences which are caused by their
pungency and acrimony; The way and manner how the Blood does degenerate from a
sweet and balsamic Constitution into a Liquor altogether sharp, harsh, and
unpleasant; and how this alteration is effected, ought a little to be enquired
into. As long as the small passages in the Spleen remain free and open, and the
Substance or Parenchyma of it is not grown so hard and earthy as to alter the
Natural Position and Shape of the Pores, the supply of a well prepared Ferment
is duly and regularly performed; but if either from a Natural or Melancholic
Constitution, or Errors in Diet, the Substance of the Spleen be rendered too
compact and solid, and the Pores and Spaces are altered from their Natural
Figure and Magnitude, the Saline Particles in their percolation through the
Spleen, are so worn and grinded, that they are not only separated from the
Sulphur and Phlegm which is necessary for the making of a Ferment, but likewise
forcibly disjoined from the Earthy Principle, without which they cannot remain
fixed, but presently become fluid; and then instead of a Ferment which should
maintain in the Blood an orderly and moderate Ebullition, a sharp, eager, and
pungent Liquor is sent into the Blood, which puts in into irregular and
tumultuous Fermentations, and renders the whole Frame and Crasis of the Body
disorderly. If we consult the Symptoms of Hypochondriac Persons, first their
Appetite to Meat, by reason of the sharpness of the Ferment in the Stomach, is
often too extravagant; yet the Meat is ill digested, and much of it turned into
sour Water; and hence the Stomach being provoked and convelled by the gnawing
Acidity of its Menstruum, these persons are troubled with continual Spitting,
sometimes loathing and vomiting; they are usually Costive, and their Faeces
very black, by reason of the Vitriolic Acidity which produces that Color:
their Urine is generally high-colour'd, like a strong Lie, because the Salt not
being sufficiently volatilized and breathed out through the Pores, is sent down in
the Serum, through the Urinary Passages: they find also about their Breast a great
Oppression, Straitness, and Difficulty of Breathing, and sometimes fall into
Astmatic Paroxisms: Moreover, They complain of a great trembling and
palpitation of the Heart, of a great weight and oppression of it; which
Symptoms proceed partly from the sharpness of the Nervous Juice, which grate^
and vellicates the Nerves, and is apt to stagnate in them, and partly from the
Blood, which is not well and regularly fixed in the Heart; hence proceed acute
and wandering Pains about the Mediastinum and Shoulders, and sometimes such as
imitate the Cholic and Nephritic Passions.

Thus tho this Acid Juice, according to Helmont and Sylvius, may be very useful
in some parts of the Body, and tho it may serve for a useful Ferment, yet too
great a quantity of it in the Blood, may cause a Disease and indicate an
Evacuation; but it is now high time for me to return from this Digression.

Assimulation, Membrification, or the third Concoction.
We come now to the third Concoction, which is the third Office in the Nutritive
Function, and that is Membrification or Assimulation; this is performed when
the Nutritive Juice is sufficiently prepared, and by the Impulse of the
conveying Vessels is brought near to the parts that are to be nourished, and
there by an Apposition^, Agglutination, and Transmutation, all which must in
order succeed each other, is united to them. The Material or Constitutive
Principle of this is now commonly reputed not to be the Blood (tho Aristotle
greatly contended for it, and the School of Physicians has given its Suffrage
to verify this Tenent) but a certain sweet, mild, and balsamic Liquor,
analogous to the White of an Egg, out which a Chicken is formed.

The next is the Vital Function; The Vital Function.
this is that whereby Vital Spirits are generated in the Heart for the
Conservation of Life in the whole Body: Life primarily consisting in the
procreation of Heat and Spirits, and their due Contemperations with the Blood
and Members of the Body, and hereby vivifying them, it is most necessary a
living Body should be furnished with them; and seeing that they are dissipable
and soon ready to be spent, the Body would soon be left in a state altogether
inactive and liveless, were it not supplied by a continual Generation of Vital
Spirits. By Vital Spirits I mean nothing else but the more fine, What Vital
Spirits are.
volatile, aetherial, sublimed and subtiliz'd part of the Blood; by which the
Fermentation and Intern Motion of the Particles in that Liquor is maintained,
and that in its Circular Motion preserved from Stagnation and Coagulation; and
when the Body remains in a state of Health a separation is continually made of
all Immiscible and Heterogeneous Bodies, which are either taken in with the
Aliment, or else come in the Blood from the Ambient. The Archeus of the
Pseudochymists a mere Fiction.
This is that Vital Flame I before mentioned, and it is nothing else that the
Pseudochymists do understand by that great Term, their Noble Archeus, that Vox
and praeterea Nihil.

To the Conservation of this Lamp of Life, or the Generation of Vital Spirits,
there are two Actions or Motions subservient, viz. Pulsation and Respiration.

Pulsation how performed.
Pulsation is not made a Motive Faculty inherent in the Blood, either in
respect of its Ebullition and Rarefaction, or Vection and Attraction, but
partly by the Influx of the Blood distending the Ventricles of the Heart, and
partly by that pulsific Faculty residing in that Fountain of Life; this
Pulsation consists of three parts, the Systole, the Diastole, and the
Perisystole, or intermediate rest.

The Systole is the Contraction of the Heart to a narrower compass, expelling
the Blood contained in the right Ventricle through the Vena Arteriosa into the
Lungs, and that contained in the left into the great Artery; and so into all
the parts of the Body. Hence we may see the reason why the Motion of the Heart
is most sensibly perceived on the left side, without imagining the Heart to be
more situate on that side than on the other.

The Diastole is a Dilatation of the Heart to receive the Blood in the right
Ventricle out of the Vena Cava, and into the left out of the Arteria Venosa.

The Perisystole is a certain quiet or short rest between the Systole and
Diastole; but of this see more page 108.

Respiration its two parts, Inspiration and Expiration.
Respiration is an Act of the Lungs and Thorax, consisting of two contrary
Motions, alternately successive, Inspiration and Expiration.

Inspiration is caused by the Dilatation of the Lungs and Breast, that so the
Ambient Air might be received.

Expiration is the Contraction or Compression of those Parts, whereby the same
Air is expelled; just as the Air is received in and expelled by a pair of
Bellows.

The use of Respiration is not as has been vulgarly held by the Ancients, to
refrigerate or cool the heat of the Heart, for we see Air blown out of a pair
of Bellows, does not any way extinguish, but promote the accension of Fire; but
the use of Respiration is as Dr. Charleton says, 1. The use of Respiration in
Eight particulars.
To subtilize the Blood, and by the admistion of Air make it more convenient
Fuel for the Lamp of Life and matter of Vital Flame. 2. Or as Dr. Henshaw
ingeniously supposes, To perform the Office of a Tonic Motion, which is
wanting in the Lungs: for says he, In all the Musculary Parts of the Body,
there is a Natural Contraction of the Fibers, whereby the Blood proceeding from
the Heart, and diffusing it self through these parts, is expelled thence, and
caused to recede to its Fountain again; now the Lungs being a lax, spongy, and
Parenchymous part, is devoid of this Motion, and certainly did not Respiration
supply its defect, it would soon be overwhelmed with the redundancy of Blood
coming upon them, and so a Suffocation of the Animal would immediately ensue.
3. It serves for the Creation of Voice, whether Articulate or Inarticulate. 4
For the distribution of Chyle, both out of the Stomach and Guts, through the Venae
Lactea into the grand Receptacle, and out of that Receptacle into the Ductus
Chyliferi. 5. For the Exclusion of Excrements. 6. For Smelling. 7. For
Coughing, Sternutation, Excretion, and Emunction. 8. To assist the Body in any
strange violent Motion.


The Sensitive Function.
The next is the Sensitive Function; this is that whereby a Man does exercise
his Sense: Whether or no Sense be performed by the Influx of Animal Spirits, I
cannot here determine, there being so many, almost inextricable difficulties on
both sides. The Senses are commonly known to be five, The number of the Senses.
The Visive, Auditive, Tactive, Gustive, and Olfactive, or Seeing, Hearing,
Touching, Tasting, and Smelling; each of which Senses have their proper Organs.
In every Sensation there are these four things requisite: What things are
requisite in every Sensation.
First, An Instrument well disposed. Secondly, A proportionate Object. Thirdly,
An adapted Medium. Fourthly, A convenient distance between the Object and the
Instrument.

The Loco-motive Function.
The next Function in order, is the Loco-motive, whereby a Man performs local
and voluntary Motion; the Instruments that Nature has supplied a Humane Body
with for the performance of this are Muscles, Tendons, Ligaments, and the
Junctures of the Bones.

The Enunciative Function.
The Enunciative is that Function whereby a Man expresses the Sentiments of his
Mind by his Voice; the Organs of this Function are the Lungs, the Aspera
Arteria, the Mouth: that the Voice might be at pleasure, either intended or
remitted the Tube of this Artery is furnished with Ringy Cartilages, the lower
of which, if when contracted, the attracted Air does meet, How a strong and a
weak Voice is caused.
there is instantly caused a strong percussion: and hence a great Voice
results, but by the uppermost a smaller re-percussion is made. And hence an
acute and squeeking Voice arises; and that the sound after it is modelled in
the Larynx might be articulated, Nature has given us a Throat, Tongue, Lips,
Teeth, and Nostrils.

The Generative Function.
The last of all the Functions is the Generative, this was appointed for the
multiplying of Mankind; it is from the mutual Congress of two Sexes, the
prolific Seed, being emitted from both, and treasured up in the Magazine of the
Females Womb, that the first Rudiments of a tender Foetus do emerge. There
being abundance of Natures Curiosity under this Head, I shall take occasion a
little to amplify hereupon, and shall treat of, 1. The Nature and Origin of
the Seed. 2. The Manner and Signs of Conception. 3. The Formation of the Child
in the Womb, and its Position. 4. The Manner of its Exit or Coming forth.


The Nature and Origin of Seed.
The Seed is a Humid and Spirituous Substance, elaborated in the Testicles from
the residue of the third Concoction, or from the Arterial Blood, having a
prolific Virtue and concurring to the procreating of the Foetus, not only
Virtually but also Materially.

The Efficient cause of Spermification is the Parenchyma of the Testicles;
these by their hot and moist Temperature, and also an Intrinsic Specific
Propriety, does convert the Arterial Blood into Sperm, which after it is here
prepared, is reconded in the Seminary Vessels; and if there be a redundancy,
that which abounds is either carried back through the Spermatic Veins to the
Heart, or goes to the Nutrition of the Testicles, or else is excern'd through the
Lymphaducts; for without the Testicles Seed is not, unless extraordinarily,
generated; for it is from them that the Seed receives both its Form and Color;
and if a Conception happen from one that is castrated, it is by reason of some
Seed before the Amputation of them, prepared and reconded. Women also do emit
Seed, and have likewise for that purpose Testicles given them by Nature. In the
Seed there are two parts, The Spirituous part, and the Colliquament. The
Spirituous Part is that which causes in the Seed a Turgency and Frothiness, by
reason of the extreme Mobility and Volability of the Spirits. The Crass
Colliquament is that moist and watery Substance which manifestly appears when
the Spirits vanish and evaporate; for it then lays down its Whiteness and
Spumosity.

This fruitful Liquor by its prolific Virtue, after the Spermatic Contact in
Coition, does so affect the Vterus of the Female, as to impregnate it with
Fecundity, and make it also become Prolific; which having received this Plastic
Generative Power, communicated to it from the Male, does put this Power into
exercise, and so procreateth its own like; and truly the Virtue proceeding from
the Male, does so largely fructify the whole Female, that it produces a thoro
Change and Alteration, as well in the Frame of their Minds, as Constitution of
their Bodies.

2. The Manner and Signs of Conception: Conception the Manner of it.
The Vterus of the Female, by the previous Converse she has had with the Male,
and his Incitements which he uses to entice her, as also by Natures own
Inclination and Tendency, is adapted for Conception; which preparaion of the
Vterus consists in this:

First, The Vterus appears thicker and more fleshy, and afterward in the
interior Superfice, which is the place where the future Conception is to be
received, grows more tender, answering in Lubricity and tenderness the intern
Ventricles of the Brain: in some places it has little Knobs, which do swell
inward and become exceeding soft; the Vterus thus reduced to a state of
Maturity, and Coition immediately succeeding; the Seeds of both Sexes being
effused at the same time, the Males into the Neck of the Vterus, and the
Females into the Cavity of her own Matrix, the Womb being endued with the
property of attracting and drawing to it self the Virile Seed, it greedily
sucks it in, and there the Seed of both Sexes being exactly mixed together and
strictly contained within the Confines of the Vterus, the whole Body of the
Womb does contract it self, and the intern Orifice of it becomes so closely
shut, that the Point of the sharpest Needle cannot be admitted; the two sorts
of Seed there reconded are cherished by the Heat of the Vterus, and thereby
their Heat and Spirit stirred up, and the Plastic Virtue, which before lay
Dormant there, is now reduced into Act, and hence immediately Conception
ensues. The Signs of which are these: Seven Manifest Signs of Conception.
1. A kind of horror and trembling after Coition, which is caused by the
Contraction and drawing together the Womb. 2. Retention of the Seed, If the
Seed fall not out again we may Conjecture there is Conception. 3. A close
Occlusion of the Orifice of the Vterus. 4. A Suppression of the Natural
Courses. 5. A Swelling, Hardness, and Pain in the Breast. 6. A Languid Appetite
and Desire of Venery. 7. A Nauseating and Loathing of Meat.


3. The Manner of the Formation of the Foetus and its Position in the Womb. The
Efformative Virtue being now excited by the Heat of the Womb, does wrap up the
whole Seminal Matter into two Membranes or Tunics, the one is called Chorion
and the other Amnios, and in seven days time after the Conception the
Lineaments of the Spermatic Parts begin to appear; for if a Geniture after the
seventh day suffer an untimely Exit, and be cast into Water, there will appear
in it three little Bubbles, which are the Rudiments of the three Principal
Parts, and abundance of little Filaments, which are the Threads of the other
Spermatic Parts. All the Spermatic Parts are perfected in Males in the space of
Thirty Days, in Females in Forty; the fleshy Parts in Males are perfect in
Three Months, in Females in Four, and then the Foetus begins to be quick. The
Spermatic Parts are generated of the Seed of both Sexes, but the Fleshy Parts
of Menstruous Blood, which has an Influx thither till the whole Structure of
the Foetus is completed.

The Position and Situation of the Infant in the Womb.
The Situation or Position of the Infant in the Womb, is commonly found to be
thus; His Knees drawn up to his Belly, his Thighs bent backward; his Feet
hanging down, his Hands elevated to his Head, whereof one is placed about his
Temples or Ears, the other upon his Cheeks; in which Parts there are white
spots discovered in his Skin; as Signs of Confrication; his Spine or Backbone
bent-round and his Neck being inflected, his Head hangs near his Knees; the
Embryo is situated with that Position of Parts wherewith we commonly apply our
selves to rest, with his Head uppermost, and his Face directed toward his
Mothers Spine; but a little before his Birth, his Head being bent downwards, he
dives toward the Bottom and Orifice of the Matrix, as if he were seeking his
way out.

Lastly, The Manner of its Birth.
The Manner of its Exit or Birth: After the Foetus has acquired its due
Conformation, Nutrition, and Augmentation, not finding a sufficient Aliment,
and wanting Air to Ventilate the abounding Heat, begins to seek a larger Space;
and being irritated, distends the Membranes of the Vterus: and endeavors to
extricate himself out of that Prison, wherein he is so confined and
incarcerated; and hence results a double Motion, one of the Foetus striving to
get out, and another of the Vterus it self endeavoring to exclude the Foetus:
All things being thus arrived to a Mature State, and the Matrix being near
Delivery, does bear down, grows soft, and opens its Orifice; the Waters
also, as they commonly call them, are gathered, that is a certain part of the
Chorion, in which the aforesaid Humor is contained, does usher in the Foetus,
and slide down from the Matrix into the Vagina or Sheath of the Womb; and the
Neighboring Parts also are loosened and ready to distend, and the Articulation
of the Os Sacrum, and the Share-bone to the Hanch-bone (which Articulation is
by Synchondrosis or a grisly Ligament) is so softened and loosened that the
aforesaid Bones do easily give way to the parting Infant; and by gaping open,
do amplify the whole Region of the Hypogastrium or lower Belly: and when these
things are in this condition, it is certain the time of Birth is at hand. As
for the time when the Birth happens, In what Month the Birth commonly happens.
although it be regular in almost all other Animals, yet in Women it is very
enormous; for sometimes it happens in the Seventh Month, sometimes in the
Ninth, sometimes in the Tenth or Eleventh, seldom in the Eighth; if it does,
the Infant seldom lives: the Cause of which Astrologers attribute to the
unhappy Influx of Saturn, which they say rules on the Eighth Month. The
ordinary Computation of going with-Child observes that time which our Blessed
Savior, the Perfectest of all Men did fulfill in the Virgins Womb; namely from
the Day of Annunciation, which is in March, to the Blessed day of His Nativity,
which is celebrated in December; and according to this Rule the Sager Matrons,
keeping their Account (while they cast in the wonted day in every Month wherein
they were accustomed to have their Purgations) they are seldom out of their
Reckoning; but Ten Revolutions of the Moon being expired, they are delivered,
and reap the fruit of their Womb upon that very day; whereon were it not for
their Pregnation their Purgations would ensue.

CHAP. XII. Of the Sexes.
NAture (or rather the God of Nature) after the large and stately Theater of
this World was erected and perfectly finished, began to contemplate what kind
of Creatures might be best adapted to Act upon this lower stage, and therefore
Man being a Creature endued with Reason, was chosen to be the Chiefest Actor;
and that the Comedy might be carried on with more Variety. Nature the Disposer
of it, thought it requisite that the Persons whom she would cause to Act their
several distinct and different Parts in various Scenes and several
Circumstances, might be discriminated one from another, not only by the
difference of their magnitudes, complexions, ages, or physiognomies, but also
of their sexes; and that they might not only be invested with different
Apparel, but that their Souls might be Clothed with Bodies of different
composures: Thus She has contrived that the Spectators might be pleased with
the Varieties of Men and Women, and that the Rules of Oeconomics in visible
practice and the Actions of Lovers might be the better represented in their
proper Scenes. Here may be seen how the Diligent House-wife is busy in her
Domestic Affairs, while her Careful Husband is sedullous abroad, in getting a
supply. Here also in another Scene we may behold how the Amorous Glances of an
Atracting Beauty do Captivate the Affections of the Nobler Sex, how a doteing
Lover Courts his Mitriss, while She at first requites him with nothing but
Coyness and Aversness; but at last being overcome with the restless and
unwearied Expressions of his Love, she breaks forth into a career of Love, and
professes he has won her Affections and elevated her Mind into such a
passion, that it is now impossible for her to restrain from breaking forth into
the most ardent Raptures and pathetic Expressions of an undoubted Love; now her
former pretended Coyness is turned into amorous Embraces, and her wonted
seeming Aversness to the Caresses of entire Amity; and modest Kisses become
Badges to discover those flames of pure Love, which she couched under the
surface of an incensed Breast. Strangeness is now turned into Familiarity,
small Acquaintance into Conjugal Society, and former Separation into a close
Union of two Minds, and a mutual Enioyment one of another.

The Distinction of Man into two Sexes.
It being our business to consider Man in all manner of such like circumstances,
we shall here take occasion to exantlate something concerning the Sexes
appropriated to Mankind, and they are generally known under the Names of Male
and Female.

The Male his Nature and Difference from the Female.
The Male (on whose Masculine Soul Nature has conferred a Body in Strength and
Vigor almost adequate to it) is of a hotter and drier Temperature than the
Female; for if we can give credence to our common Anatomists, Whena Male and
when a Female is generated.
the Seed whereof the Male is generated, is of a hotter Nature than that
whereof the Female; because, say they, it descends out of the right Side from
the Trunc of the Vena Cava, while that which affords Matter for Generation of
the Female, proceeds out of the left Side from a branch of the Emulgent.

Their Native Heat invigorating their Bodies, makes them robust and more fit
for Labor, and gives them a vehement Pulse and Respiration, and causes in them
a strong and Man like Voice, exhales and dries up the relicts of Humidity,
which Nature cannot dispose of for Nutrition, and leaves nothing at all
superfluous; and hence the abundance of Vapors, which this insulting Heat
causes to be emitted through the Pores of the Body, some of them there at their
very Exit thence are condensed by the Extern Ambient Cold, and there remain in
the Form of Hairs, for (which is very observable) Nature has given a Hair to
every Pore, unless those which are constituted in those places, where by
Attrition Mhey are continually worn off, ^or their Generation impeded; hence it
is that Men are more Hairy than Women, even in the whole Superfice of their
Bodies, these innate colorific Particles, do by their agitating Virtue, cause
the Blood more briskly to ferment and circulate with more velocity; they
amplify the Veins and other Vessels, and make the whole Structure of the
Muscles more compact and solid; as for the influence this has on the Soul, or
what different Operations it causes in the Mental Faculties; we may only take
notice that they of this Sex have a more profound judgment than those of the
other, tho not so acute a Fancy; their Wills are more stable and resolute,
tho they are so full of Affection.

The Female.
The Female (the Character of whose generous Sex I know not how to delineate,
least by attempting it I should too much derogate from their Worth and
Excellency) is of a colder and moister Constitution, yet of a more delicate and
finer Contexture than the Male; yea, some of this Sex, both in the Beauty and
exquisite Contexture of their Bodies, and in the Pregnancy and Acuteness of
their Fancy, do far excel any of the other.

When we consider how he who is the Sole Creator of all things (from the Center
of whose Munificence all His Creatures derive their beings) has displayed the
effulgent Rays of his Benevolence, The Praise and Encomium of that Noble Sex,
both as to their Beauty and Fantasy.
and manifested the Resplendent Beams of his Inimitable Work-man-ship, in
making so Glorious a Creature as Man out of such Corruptible Principles and
such Fading Elements; how can we but stand and admire Him? But when we take a
view of some of this Noble Sex, whose Bodies He has framed into so Beautiful
Composures, how can we but be astonished at such products of His Efficience?
Such lively Features and such a Delicate Structure of Body is sometimes
represented to our Sight, as Charms the Affections of the most Morose and
Rigorous Stoic, and where the Man is not biased to the Admiration of the
Creator, the very aspect of this makes him indulge it to admire the Creature;
yea some are so smitten and astonished at one glance, that they stand aghast,
and think that the Beauty of the Universe is therein Epitomized, and that the
whole force of Natures Puissance did combine in the exertion of its Power for
the production of so Curious a Creature. But all this is but vanity which soon
decays, it is the other Excellency, often to be found in Women, that is far
transcendent, and that is Fantasy; tho this often becomes too extravagant:
The fine contexture of their Brain makes their Invention far more acute and
pregnant, and its moisture adapts it to take impression. How exceeding quick
and ready are the wits of some Women? How will they sometimes puzzle and
nonplus the wits of Intelligent Men? And how Facetiously will they write,
especially when their Fantasies are elevated with Love-Passions.

The Excellency of Marriage.
Having considered both the Sexes apart, let us now consider them in that
blessed Bond or Matrimonial Contract which God has instituted to unite them.
There is certainly in each of these Sexes a very impetuous inclination given
them by Nature to this Union, and this doubtless is as Natural to them as to
have an Appetite to their Food; nay, I do not question but the Function of
Generation, is attended with no less Incitements to the exercise of it, than
any other Function of the Body; yet such is the depraved state of Mankind, that
still his Sensual Appetites are almost insatiable, and his Carnal Desires
boundless and irregular; not only in desiring absolutely forbidden Things, but
also in craving an immoderate measure of those Things that God has indulged
him moderately to use; and therefore God has in his Infinite Wisdom thought it
requisite to confine and limit every Man to his own Wife, 1 Cor. 7.2.
and every Woman to her own Husband; and that there is more Comfort and
Felicity to be found in this Union, where there is a happy Congruity, none
unless contradicting Reason, Experience, or Natural Inclination, or thwarting
the Laws of Nature and the Institutions of the Divine Creator, can deny; and
justly may those persons be deemed Fools, who for some small pretended
inconvenience of that Life, will rashly and inconsiderately hurry and
precipitate themselves to the actual commission of such horrid Crimes as make
Nature it self ashamed and blush with an angry regret, and invocate the plagues
of an incensed Deity; contemning the instituted Laws of Nature, and commiting
Actions contrary to it.

Reflections on them that speak against and calumniate Women.
Others there are, who out of a Morose and Currish Humor, do not only derogate
from the Praise due to the Creator, but also abuse that whole Noble (tho
Inferior) Sex; universally calumniating all Women, and superciliously
insulting over their imperfections, when alas, these pragmatic conceited
persons, have either by their dogish and currish Tempers and devilish Pride,
enraged themselves with a passion of Envy at the Love and Respect which is
civilly paid them, by Men of a better Disposition than they, or else they are
guilty of such hellish Enormities, as divert their Affections from all Lawful
Objects, causing them insatiably to pursue those things that are wholly
illegitimate, and prohibited by the Divine Legislator. Let none then, indulging
in themselves that Squint-eyed Passion, contemn and despise the Institutions of
God and Nature; for certainly whosoever so do, give great Suspicion to the
Intelligent World, that they use unlawful means to suffocate their lawful and
regular Affections. Some are grown so audacious and impudently wicked, as with
a Brazen Forehead, wholly abjuring the Rules of Chastity, and violating the
Rules of Common Modesty, confronting the face of many, and openly protesting
there is nothing in the Marriage Bed, but what the Pleasures of Whorish
Embraces do far surpass: But at last, What befalls them that abhorring Marriage,
contaminate themselves with polluted Women.
how are these Men deluded, when their whole Bodies, infected with the
Contagion of Whorish Carcasses, break out into Venereal Borches or Pocky
Bubo's, are perplexed with Virulent Gonorrhea's molested with Nocturnal Pains,
and having their Throats or Noses exulcerated by the corroding particles of a
desperate Contagion communicated to the whole Mass of Blood; and this they
receive as a small inconsiderable reward for their former brave Exploits, while
on the other side they are sacrifising their infected souls to the Altars of
Satan. Certainly then it is now evident that the Comforts and Pleasures that
are to be enjoyed in a Married Condition, must far transcend such impure
promiscuous Congresses as wholly invert the established Canons of Mother Nature:
Yea truly, I verily believe that this State does surpass a tiresome Life of
Solitude, neither would any other continual Society be so satisfactory, or in
the least parallel to it.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Ages of Man.
HAving cursolarily sailed over the wide Seas of this Microcrosm, both as to
the Soul, and as to the Parts, Temperments, and Functions of the Body, and also
in respect of the difference of the Sexes: We come now to enter upon our last,
Voyage, which when we have finished, we shall draw in our Lacerated Sails, and
enter into our last Port and Haven, where we hope to find a successful Harbor.
Here then it is incumbent on us to describe Man being a Creature not consisting
of one Simple, Homogeneous, and Elementary Matter, but composed of several
distinct and somewhat contrary Principles, and that not in equal proportion,
but one always having predominance over another, it cannot be expected he
should always continue in such a State and Crasis of Body as he was born with;
for the Natural Heat making use of the Primogenial Moisture, cannot but by
degrees consume and waste it, it self also by its continual motion and the
reluctance of some Principles hardly combustible, is very much debilitated and
diminished; hence the habit of Bodies is rendered fluxible, and Man passes in a
short time, as it were out of one Crasis and Constitution of Body into another,
so that the space in which such like mutations as these are made, is properly
termed an Age: ^iverius.
Or the true Notion of an Age is that space of Life, in which by the action of
the Native Heat upon the Primogenial Moisture, the Constitution of the Body is
manifestly changed.

The Division of the Ages of Man.
The Ages of Man (not to divide them according to the Rules of Lawyers and
Astrologers, but as is most consistent to the Canons of Physic, and most
redounds to the use of Physicians) are Four; Pueritia, Childhood, Juventus,
Youth, Consistens Aetas, Middle-Age; Senectus, Old Age: Before I particularly
handle each of these, I will only take notice how Nature takes delight in her
Quaternary changes. The Constitutions of Men are distinguished by Four Humors
and Temperaments, every Disease by its Four Parts, the Beginning, the
Increment, the State, and the Declension. A Year is divided by its fourfold
Mutation into so many Quarters, and the Ages of Man neither exceed not fall
short of this number.

Pueritia, or Childhood, Childhood.
is from the Birth (or very Exit of the Partus, from the confining Cubicle of
its Mothers Womb, into the ample Pavilion of a capacious World) to the 25th
year of its Age. This Age is, for the most part, hot and moist; it is again
distributed into Four Parts, the first is Infancy, which is extended to the
Fourth, or according to others to the Seventh Year. The Second Pueritia,
strictly so called to the Fourteenth. The Third Pubertas to the Eighteenth. The
Fourth Adolescentia, to the Twenty fifth.

The Character of an Infant.
When the feeble Infant first enters upon the Stage of this World, how exactly
does it act the Part of a bewildred stranger, and imitate some wandering
Pilgrim, arrived at some strange and unknown Haven, or one that is banished out
of a comfortable Region, where he could indulge himself in what most of all
delighted him, into some exotic and destitute Country; or like a Person very
well clothed, who in an instant, he knows not how, is stripped Naked, and so
exposed to the Eyes of them whom he never saw before: Thus the Infant, after
its exclusion from the Womb, looks on this side and on that side, and in the
midst of Friends sees no Friend, and then by its Countenance seems to express
(or at least it is legible in its Face) what Aristotle, when among his Friends,
vocally pronounced, (...), O Friends no Friend! and because it cannot express
its own Sentiments, or manifest its wants in the unknown Language of that
strange Land, which it is now by force and compulse reduced to inhabit, it
begins to utter its Complaint in its own proper Tongue; and bewails its forlorn
Condition with Ehu's; and such like deplorable Interjections; but at last
finding a necessity of its abiding here, it endeavors to acquaint it self with
the Modes and Fashions of the place wherein it is, and to imitate their Customs
and Practices; it is pleased with Toys and Baubles, and the Rattles of Infancy
then arride it; and thus he spends the two former parts of his Age in Folly and
Vanity, and truly the third little better; but when he arrives at the Fourth,
which is Adolescentia, he divests himself not only of the Swaddling Clothes of
his Infancy, but also of his Childhood Apparel, and then puts on his Manly
Gown; he abjures the Trifles he so long retained, and throws away all such
silly Buffoonries, and betakes himself to those things that have more Solidity
in them.

Youth his Character.
The next Age to this is Youth, which is Hot, and somewhat Dryer than the Age
before described; now the Heat becomes Vigorous and Intense, and precipitates
the Blood adapted for Motion, into a more than ordinary Fermentation; it
excites the Appetites to pursue the things they desire with a strange kind of
Impetuosity, and hurries them to satiate those Cravings and Concupiscible
Appetites. Now the Body is most robust, and the vigorous Spirits are almost
indefatigable; now Passions are on every side ready to accost the Man, and
sometimes the violent Impulses, excited in his Body, make a great impression on
his united Mind, and cause such a strange influence upon his Soul, that he
finds it very difficult to abstract his Thoughts from those assaulting
Representations injected into his extravagant, or too inordinate Fantasy; and
thus the Mind does too often consent to those Peccaminosities, to which Youth
is too much addicted: And hence it is very requisite and becoming Youth, for
them to use a Bridle to all those unruly Passions, that they fly not out into a
career of those (whch they think Heroic) Pranks that their Juvenile Age is so
inclinable unto; or so far transcend their Sphere or exceed their Limits, as to
indulge themselves in such Hellish Debaucheries, as always inhanse a future
shame.

I do not conclude but Passions are lawful, and where they are regular, none
can malign them; the forbidden Object, or the undue measure of the Passions
themselves, is that which makes them sinful; for such is the Contexture of a
Humane Body, and such is the brisk fluctuating Motion of the Sanguine Liquor,
that Man is always disposed for one Passion or other. For when an Object
obviously presented to the Mind, is apprehended by it to be of a Nature Evil
and Noxious, the Soul is thereby presently stimulated to the Passion of Hatred,
and thence excited to an ireful Revenge; but when a pleasing and delectable
Object is represented, the Soul immediately caresses it: Hence arises the
Passion of Love, the Body in the mean time finding a great Congruity between it
self and the object beloved, complies to embrace it; and thus it is also in
respect of the other passions of Youth. This Age continues to the thirty first
Year, some will have it last to the Fortieth.

The Consistent Age.
The Third is Aetas Consistens, which begins where the other ends and continues
to the Forty-fifth or Fiftieth Year, it is called the Consistent Age, because
those that are in this age do seem to stay, stop, continue, or consist in the
same state; for tho the strength in this Age does begin something to be
diminisht, yet this mutation is not evident or perceptible in the habit or
actions of the Body. This Age is commonly cold and dry, and hence more
inclinable to Melancholy than any other.

Old Age.
The last is Senectus or Old Age, which continues to the very extremity of Life;
this is subdivided into three parts. Prima Senectus from the Fiftieth Year to
the Sixtieth, Aetas Ingravescens from the Sixtieth Year to the Seventieth, and
Decrepitude from the Seventieth Year to the end of Life. Now Man having past
through the Spring of his Infancy, the Summer of his Youth, and the Autumn of his
Middle-Age, bids Adieu to the pleasures of them all, and now has nothing else
to enjoy but the hardship of a sharp and troublesome Winter; now Baldness with
a Ca^ities of some still adhering locks, is his Heads best Ornament, and while
he walks leaning on his Staff he sensibly experiences the latter part of
Sphynx's Riddle. An universal lassitude now seizes the Members of his Body, and
a thousand maladies accompany him to his Grave. Old Age it self is a compound
disease attended with numerous direful Symptoms as Cachexies, Imbecillities of
the Stomach, dejected Appetite, Obstructions, undue Concoctions of the Blood
both as to its Serum, Bile and Melancholy, Constriction of the pores,
Costiveness, and a very tardy deposition and exclusion of the foeces, Anxieties
of the Mind, Nocturnal Inquietudes and Pains in the Head. Now the Nerves are
contracted by painful Convulsions, or on the contrary loosened by Paralytic
Affects, now the whole tone of the Parts is vitiated, Respiration impeded, and
the flesh made arid. He is now perplexed with a continual Catarrh, and the
perpetual distillation of Phlegm upon his Lungs, causes a difficulty of
breathing; also by reason of the exsiccation of the Aspera Arteria and
induration of the Cartilages of the Larynx there is caused either a total
abolition or at least a depravation or diminution of the voice; in fine all
manner of loathsome Diseases are here accumulated, and the whole Gang of
cruciating dolors are here in concatinated: For Febre caret Sola, circumsilit
agmine facto
Morborum omne genus.


There is scarce any Infirmity incident to Man except a Fever that is not
predominant in Old Age, he is beset and surrounded with a troop of Diseases
when he is altogether unable to resist a single one.

The Conclusion.
Thus Man having lived out this Age also, at last dies and becomes a victime to
his last, but Fatal Enemy. Now his Pulse is stopped, and that which Physicians
call Facies Hypocratica is Excellenty Delineated in his Countenance; he now
resigns himself up a Captive to Death, and acknowledges him the Conquest.

Thus we have in a very short Discourse concluded the whole Description of Man,
both as to his Spiritual and Corporeal Part, as to his Constitutions and Sexes,
and likewise from Head to Foot, and from his first Conception to his last
Dissolution.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
WHEREAS part of the Noble Faculty of Physic, consists in preserving the
Health of Man, when present, as well as restoring it when it is lost and
wanting; the Author of the foregoing Discourse has thought fit to advertise
those into whose hand this small Treatise may accidentally fall, that, to
prevent those Maladies that often times insesinbly accost the Body, he has
prepared most excellent and effectual Tablets, of a very pleasant and grateful
Taste; two or three of which being dissolved in the Mouth, in a Morning, after
the manner of Lozenges, and fasting an hour or two after, is an excellent
Preservative of Health, expelling from the Body the cause of those Distempers,
which for want of due and timely care in using such Preservatives, do at last
so triumph over the Body, that the Force and Virtue of more Herculean and
powerful Medicines can hardly suppress them. They resist all manner of
Putrefaction, and are an effectual Antidote against whatsoever Contagion, they
preserve the Lungs and free the Stomach and Intestines, from those Crudities
that so often precipitate the whole Mass of Blood into such violent Ebullitions
and undue Fermentations, as either and in Agues, Fevers, or some Acute
Paroxisms; or else either extinguish the Native Heat and Vital Spirit, or cause
to be exhaled the Natural and Primogenial Moisture, and so bring upon the whole
Body a Combination of such Chronic Distempers as are very difficult to be
cured; which before, by such a safe Medicament as this, might have easily been
prevented. They keep the Body soluble, and purge very gently, and prevent
several Indipositions that proceed from Costiveness; neither are they
altogether Preservative, but likewise Restorative; for they are very good
against the Scurvey, Dropsy, Jaundies, Griping of the Guts, Cachexy, or an ill
Habit of Body, proceeding from undue Concoctions; they open all Obstructions of
the Liver, Spleen, and Bowels, and remove Pains of the Heart, Head, and
Stomach; in short, they so rectify, alter, and qualify the whole Mass of
Blood, that they exceedingly help Nature, in throwing off almost whatsoever
Morbific Matter oppresses her, and may safely be used in whatsoever Maladies
of the like Nature; one or two of them may also be dissolved in a Dish of
Coffee or Tea, and have the like Effects.

He has also invented an approved Tincture, of a curious purple Color,
grateful both to the Taste and Smell, which has almost the same Operation with
the forementioned Tablets; especially it is very successfully used, both to
prevent and remove that grand Enemy of Mankind, the SCURVEY, with all its
direful Symptoms, by preserving the Economy of Nature in the Humane Body, in
its due Order and Eutaxy, viz. Causing in the Blood, a proportionate
Fermentation, and reducing it to its regular Circulation, opening Obstructions
in those Parts which Nature has destined and appointed to secern and throw off
the Excrements of the Blood, and so expelling those useless and unprofitable
Parts which Nature has no longer deemed fit to remain Ingredients of that
wholesome Liquor and Balsom of Life: Hereby it takes away Pains and Aches in
the Limbs, Pustle and Breakings-out in any part of the Body, Pimples and
Flushings in the Face, Rheum in the Head and Eyes, etc. Three or four Spoonful
of it being taken Night and Morning, for a few days together, and for the more
speedy, expedite, and effectual profligating the insulting force of the
forementioned Maladies, the Tablets may be taken with it at the same time.

The Tablets are sealed up in little Boxes the whole Box at Two Shillings, the
hall Box at one Shilling.

The Tincture is also sealed up in half pint square Glasses, at 2 s 6 d and are
both to be sold at the places hereafter mentioned, viz.

Mr. Fosters at the Bible and Sun on London Bridge, Bookseller. Mr. Flagets at
the Atlas in Cornhil, Stationer. Mr. Bates at the Three Black Birds in
Red-cross-street Tinman. Mr. Whites at the Three Cups next door to the
Horn-Tavern in Fleet Street, Cutler. Mr. Landers at the Corner of the Old
Bailey near Newgate Tinman. And at the Authors Lodgings next door to the
Dolphin in Sighs-lane, near Budge-row.


